Ancient Indian Scientific Thought
and Modern Theories


  
Samīkṣikā - 14
General Editor
Pratapanand Jha
The Samīkṣikā Series is aimed at compiling the research papers 
presented by the distinguished scholars and specialists in the 
seminars organized by the National Mission for Manuscripts. 
The seminars provide an interactive forum for scholars to present 
to a large audience, ideas related to the knowledge contained in 
India’s textual heritage.


Ancient Indian Scientific Thought
and Modern Theories
– An Overview –
Editors
Dhirendranath Banerjee
Sanjit Kumar Sadhukhan


  Cataloging in Publication Data — DK
[Courtesy: D.K. Agencies (P) Ltd. <docinfo@dkagencies.com>]
Seminar - Ancient Indian Scientific Thought vis-à-vis Modern
	
Scientific Theories, Discoveries and Development (2017 : Kolkata, 	
	
	
India)
	
Ancient Indian scientific thought and modern theories : an overview / 
editors, Dhirendranath Banerjee, Sanjit Kumar Sadhukhan. 
	
	
	
pages cm      (Samīkṣikā; no. 14)	
 
	
	
“... proceedings of a three-day Seminar – Ancient Indian Scientific 	
	
	
Thought vis-à-vis Modern Scientific Theories, Discoveries and 	
	
	
Development – held during 25-27 March 2017 in Kolkata, organized 
	
by the Sanskrit Sahitya Parishad, Kolkata, and sponsored by the 
	
National Mission for Manuscripts” – Foreword.
	
	
1. Science – India – History – Congresses.  2. Science, Ancient 
	
Congresses.    I. Banerjee, Dhirendranath, editor.  II. Sadhukhan, 
	
Sanjit Kumar, editor.  III. Sanskrit Sahitya Parishat (Kolkata, India), 
	
organizer.  IV. National Mission for Manuscripts (India), sponsoring 
	
body, publisher.  V. Title.   
LCC Q127.I4S46 2017      |      DDC 509.54     23
Papers presented at a national seminar on “Ancient Indian Scientific 
Thought vis-à-vis Modern Scientific Theories: Discoveries and 
Development”, held at Sanskrit Sahitya Parishad, Kolkata, during 25-27 
March 2017.
ISBN: 978-81-904029-6-5   (Samīkṣikā Series)
ISBN: 978-93-80829-66-1   (Hardbound)
First published in India in 2019
©  National Mission for Manuscripts, New Delhi
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopying, recording or any information storage or retrieval system, 
without prior written permission of both the copyright owner, indicated 
above, and the publisher.
Published by:
National Mission for Manuscripts
11, Mansingh Road, New Delhi - 110001
Phone: (011) 2338 3894; Fax: 2307 3340
e-mail: director.namami@nic.in
Website: www.namami.nic.in
Co-published by:
D.K. Printworld (P) Ltd.
Regd. Office: “VedaœrÁ”, F-395, Sudarshan Park
(Metro Station: ESI Hospital), New Delhi - 110015
Phones: (011) 2545 3975; 2546 6019; Fax: (011) 2546 5926
e-mail: indology@dkprintworld.com
Website: www.dkprintworld.com
Printed by: D.K. Printworld (P) Ltd., New Delhi


Foreword
The National Mission for Manuscripts (NMM), New Delhi, is 
making an untiring effort to retrieve hidden literary treasures 
across different disciplines and making serious attempts to 
disseminate such knowledge for the benefit of the entire world. 
Through seminars and conferences, the seed of the concepts takes 
the shape of a tree, before it is taken for publication. 
The volume in hand is the proceedings of a three-day seminar 
– Ancient Indian Scientific Thought vis-à-vis Modern Scientific 
Theories, Discoveries and Development – held during 25-27 March 
2017 in Kolkata, organized by the Sanskrit Sahitya Parishad, 
Kolkata, and sponsored by the National Mission for Manuscripts.
The Western misconception is that India lacked in scientific 
advancements in her past, and her literature provides no or very 
little clues to substantiate her claim of scientific and technological 
discoveries. This in spite of the sincere efforts of some well-
known Western scholars like Sir William Jones, Albert Einstine 
and Frits Staal heighlighting India’s significant contributions 
in the development of science and technology, especially with 
her contribution of zero, and foothold on astrology, astronomy, 
Āyurveda, chemistry, natural sciences, physics, surgery, and so on.
 The National Mission for Manuscripts is pleased to present 
this volume as it bears testimony to the fact that Indian sages, 
philosophers and scholars had a grip on all the topics that the 
modern-day scientists deal with, including complicated surgery 
and quantum physics. Our Vedas, Upaniṣads and other literary 
works were the storehouse of scientific wisdom, though the 
prevailing socio-religious conditions of the past impeded its 
widespread dissemination. It is my hope that the topics discussed 
here will pave the way for further researches that will unearth 
India’s hidden ancient wisdom and knowhow. 
Pratapanand Jha
Director
National Mission for Manuscripts


Contents
	
	 	 Foreword	
	
v
– Pratapanand Jha
	
	1.	 Introduction 	 	
1
– Dhirendranath Banerjee
– Sanjit Kumar Sadhukhan
	
2.	 	Inaugural Address: Freedom in ideas	
5
– Dilip Kumar Mohanta
	
3.	 Astrology versus Astronomy 	
9
– Amalendu Bandhyopadhyay
	
4.	 Scientifc Outlook in Ancient Indian 	
15
	
	 	 Academic Tradition
– Ramkrishna Bhattacharya
	
5.	 Ancient Indian Cosmology vis-à-vis Modern 	
21
	
	 	 Scientific Cosmology
– Dhirendranath Banerjee
	
6.	 The Concept of Matter : A Philosophy–Physics 	
41
	
	 	 Interface
– Raghunath Ghosh
	
7.	 Zero : An Eternal Enigma 	
51
– Parthasarathi Mukhopadhyay
	
8.	 Scientific Thoughts in Indian Philosophy 	
69
– Sanjit Kumar Sadhukhan
	
9.	 The Asiatic Society and the Initiation of History 	
75
	
	 	 of Science
– Jagatpati Sarkar


  viii  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
	
10.	Astronomical Manuscripts in Oriental Libraries	
81
	
	 	 	of India: Ninth Century Onwards
– Somenath Chatterjee
	
	 	 Contributors	
	
97


Introduction
Dhirendranath Banerjee 
and 
Sanjit Kumar Sadhukhan
This volume, the proceedings of a three-day seminar “Ancient 
Indian Scientific Thought vis-à-vis Modern Scientific Theories, 
Discoveries and Development” held in Kolkata during 25-27 
March 2017 contains nine scholarly papers, including the Inaugural 
Address of Prof. Dilip Kumar Mohanta, the first Vice-Chancellor 
of the Sanskrit College and University, Kolkata. 
Prof. Mohanta, in his Inaugural Address, makes one revisit 
the development of Indian science and technology in varied fields 
since the Vedic period and suggests that we have a living tradition 
which is very dynamic in nature, inheriting at the same time 
claiming freedom from the past. Our understanding of heritage 
needs to be philosophical. Knowing is an ever-enlarging arena, 
which is subject to change and modification. No word is final and 
sacrosanct in the realm of knowledge; it is always open-ended. 
One has no adequate reason to believe in any qualitative difference 
between scientific pursuit and philosophical pursuit. Inheritance 
is to be analysed, modified, corrected and made alive with fresh 
thinking and vitality of the age.
In his paper, “Scientific Thoughts in Indian Philosophy”, Sanjit 
Kumar Sadhukhan states that it is absurd to think that the literature 
of India is totally devoid of scientific phenomena, thoughts or 
results. The Indian poetical and philosophic works provide 
enough details about the development of science and technology 
in ancient India. One gets to know of the enough discussions of 
there in the Vaiśeṣika and Yoga schools of Indian philosophy. 


2  |
Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
While the former deals with such concepts like dravya (substance), 
guṇa (quality), and karma (motion) and the cause of different types 
of motion, the latter talks about the yoga and its health benefits. 
The physical postures and meditative practices of yoga actually 
developed through thousands of years of intensive study of the 
body’s responses to particular postures and meditations. The 
modern world approves of its benefits in health management. 
Dhirendranath Banerjee, in his paper “Ancient Indian 
Cosmology vis-à-vis Modern Scientific Cosmology” makes a 
detailed analysis of both the ancient and modern cosmologies. 
He delves deep into the Indian philosophical systems, especially 
Samkhya, Nyāya–Vaiśeṣika, Mīmāṁsā and Vedānta, along 
with the Buddhist and Jaina philosophies, and brings forth 
the varied theories of creation, concepts of time and atom. He 
presents a detailed classification of the theories of cosmology 
under different headings like philosophy, religion and modern 
scientific developments. The cosmological understanding of the 
Babylonians, Greeks, Romans, Chinese and Christians is also 
featured. From the scientific point of view, the paper deals with 
Pythagoras’ theory of cosmology, geocentric theory of Aristotle, 
Ptolemy, Claudius Ptolemicus, Nicolaus Copnicus, Tycho Brahe, 
Johanese Kepler, Galileo Galilee and Isaac Newton.
Surgical study on corpses and empirical methodology of the 
Cārvākas/Lokāyatas were decried in the Dharmaśātras. To save 
their science, even doctors had to pay lip service to orthodoxy. 
Same was the case with astronomers as they had to submit to the 
Vedic view on the causes of the solar and lunar eclipses. Āryabhata 
was misinterpreted for his geokinetic hypothesis, against the then 
current geostatic view, and of late Āryabhaṭīya was tampered. 
Orthodoxy did severely affect the growth of science from the 
academic point of view. This is the limelight of Ramkrishna 
Bhattacharya’s paper “Scientific Outlook in Ancient Academic 
Tradition”. 
In “The Concept of Matter: A Philosophy–Physics Interface” 
Raghunath Ghosh concentrates on the concept of matter in Indian 
tradition and its dynamic character. There is an eternal dispute 


|  3
Introduction
between the spiritualists and the materialists for supremacy. There 
are varying approaches to physics, especially matter, in Indian 
philosophical systems. Sri Aurobindo respects the claims of both. 
According to him, matter is nothing but the non-manifested sat-
element of the spirit called Satchidānanda. The paper discusses 
about the views of many a scholar on the concept and the views 
of those who deal with Quantum Physics.
Zero is the greatest gift of India to the world. Without it 
the present prosperity of modern civilizations through various 
scientific achievements would not have been possible. In his paper 
“Zero: An Eternal Enigma”, Parthasarathi Mukhopadhyay talks 
about the genesis of zero and its application among some of the 
oldest civilizations of the world such as Egyptian, Babylonian 
(Akkadian), Mexican (Maya), Peruvian (Inca), Chinese, Greek and 
Roman. It makes one travel through the Egyptian hieroglyphics, 
via Babylonian clay tablets and grotesque-looking Mayan glyphs, 
the ingenious Inca quipu, and the great Greek civilization and 
mighty Roman Empire.
Amalendu Bandhyopadhyay in his paper “Astrology versus 
Astronomy” discusses the relation between both the sciences. 
Astrology is indeed a part of astronomy. Recently astrology has 
made fast inroads into the minds of the Indian people. Astrology 
is based on the classical concept of earth-centric universe, while 
astronomy is solar-centric. There is thus a fundamental difference. 
Horoscopes are prepared based on the astrological calculations 
and many a time such predictions fail. Most of the astrological 
predictions on natural calamities have failed. 
Jagapati Sarkar in “The Asiatic Society and the Initiation 
of History of Science” deals with the quintessential role that 
the Asiatic Society played in propagating the literary, cultural 
and scientific enquiries of ancient India. By its firm focus, the 
Society has become the cultural focus of the country. The paper 
discusses the role of Sir William Jones in building the Society up 
and enlarging the focus from languages, literature and culture to 
natural sciences, of late. It takes one through the dedicated efforts 
of the Society and its published works.


4  |
Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
Manuscripts on astronomy, especially those in Sanskrit, are 
basic historical evidences which can stand as a proof of our history. 
There are hundreds of such manuscripts preserved in Oriental 
libraries. Somenath Chatterjee takes us to many such storehouses 
through “Ninth Century Onwards Astronomical Manuscripts in 
Oriental Libraries of India”. Traditionally the local rulers and the 
rich men were the collectors of these manuscripts. However, of 
late, there were efforts to collect, catalogue and preserve them in 
the Oriental libraries.


 
Freedom in Ideas
Dilip Kumar Mohanta
Respected Chairman of this inaugural Session Professor Sadhan 
Chandra Sarkar, the Secretary of the Sanskrita Sahitya Parishad, 
Professor Dhirendranath Banerjee, distinguished scholars and 
professors on the dais, respected members of the Executive 
Committee of Sanskrita Sahitya Parishad, guests and friends, 
I feel proud and privileged as being invited here to inaugurate 
the Three-Day National Seminar on “Ancient Indian Scientific 
Thought vis-à-vis Modern Scientific Theories, Discoveries and 
Development”, sponsored by National Mission for Manuscripts, 
New Delhi. I congratulate both the organizer and the sponsor 
for making it possible here in Kolkata at this Heritage Institution 
of Indological Studies. Today we may take effort to revive the 
Indological studies not only for inspiring our youths about our 
glorious past but also for new lights on some of our modern issues. 
We understand that a scientific enquiry must proceed in an orderly 
manner, adopting only those procedures that are trustworthy, and 
subject to verification and correction. In ancient times Indians 
were pioneers in Mathematics, Chemistry, Physiology, Plant and 
Consciousness Studies, Origin of Life, Medicine, etc.
We know that Acharya Prafulla Chandra Roy’s Hindu Chemistry 
(vol. 2) contains an appendix. It contains an introduction by 
Acharya Brojendra Nath Seal. This later on became the concluding 
chapter of his magnum opus The Positive Sciences of the Ancient 
Hindus (TPSH). There he deals with the various scientific methods 
that were developed and employed by the Hindus in their scientific 
works and in their philosophical analysis.
Inaugural Address 


6  |
Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
Seal observes: 
Philosophy in its rise and development is necessarily governed 
by the body of positive knowledge preceding or accompanying it. 
Hindu philosophy on its empirical side was dominated by concepts 
derived from physiology and philology, just as Greek Philosophy 
was similarly dominated by geometrical concepts and methods 
. . . criticism and estimate of Hindu thought must take note of 
the empirical basis on which the speculative superstructure was 
raised. 	
	
	
	
	
          – TPSH: iv
The progress of Indian Algebra (mainly in southern India) after 
Bhaskara, parallel to the developments in China and Japan, is the 
subject that remains for future investigation.
In today’s academic activities – either in philosophy or in 
the history of science in India – the Hindu’s inductive method or 
methods of algebraic analysis and scientific ideas: 
... have deeply influenced the course of natural philosophy in 
Asia – in the East as well as the West – in China and Japan; as 
well as in the Saracen Empire. A comparative estimate of Greek 
and Hindu science may now be undertaken with some measure 
of success and finality. 	
	
	
          – Ibid.: vi
This observation is extremely important today because of the claim 
motivated by the biased effort to prove the religious customs of 
Hindus with the help of scientific explanations. There is much 
enthusiasm to claim that all the recent discoveries and inventions 
in science were known to the Hindus from the Vedic age onwards. 
On the other hand, there is another extreme claim that Hindu 
civilization is basically mystical and there is no sign of scientific 
and rational thinking. In the midst of this extremely perplexing 
situation, rereading and researching of ancient Indian scientific 
thought and its comparison to the development of modern science 
are important. Because this interdisciplinary study of ancient 
science of India might allow us to get rid of the exclusive and 
absolute claims and also enable us to see where we are correct and 
where we are wrong. Keeping parity with the open-endedness and 
flexibility in learning as visualized by the Vedic seers, “let noble 


|  7
Freedom in Ideas
thought come to us from different directions” (ā no bhadrā kratavo 
yantu viśvataḥ – R̥gveda I.89.101) and in spite of being admirers of 
Sanskrit, we should not be “orthodox” in our attitude and should 
not live within the boundary of the past as wrongly understood 
and argued by some “ill-informed” scholars of Indology. What is 
old is not necessarily good and what is new is also not necessarily 
bad. The greatest bondage is the slavery of thought, and therefore, 
for our betterment we are to enjoy freedom in ideas. As cautioned 
by Kālidāsa:
iqjk.kfeR;so u lk/q lo± u pkfi dkO;a uofeR;o|e~A
lUr% ijh{;kU;rj‰tUrs ew<% ijçR;;us;cqf¼%AA
purāṇamityeva na sādhu sarvaṁ na cāpi kāvyaṁ navamityavadyam A
santaḥ parīkṣyānyataradbhajante muḍhaḥ parapratyayaneyabuddhiḥ AA
This attitude makes us free from our total and blind obedience to 
scriptures (Śāstra). By the word “tradition” I do not mean the sense 
of “orthodoxy”. There cannot be a system of living philosophy if 
it is confined to “orthodoxy”. “Orthodoxy” suggests a lifeless, 
finalized structure. But a living tradition, as we see in Indian 
philosophical heritage, is always dynamic; it inherits the past 
as well as claims freedom from the past. Through interpretation 
and reinterpretation in view of the changing and new contextual 
development of ideas we can keep our philosophical tradition 
alive. Our understanding of heritage is desired to be philosophical 
in the sense that it upholds the view, “straight is the way, narrow 
is the lane that leadth unto truth”. Our understanding is to be 
guided by the attitude of  “traditional–modernity”or to use Martin 
Heidegger’s phrase “distancing nearness in the sense in which 
we inherit the past as well as we claim freedom from the past”. 
I am sure in the forthcoming different academic sessions there 
will be Paṇḍita-vāda (scholarly debate) on different dimensions 
of the main theme of the National Seminar. Because, the arena of 
knowing is ever-enlarging and it is always subject to change and 
modification. There cannot be any final and sacrosanct word in the 
realm of knowledge; it is always open-ended. So unfinalizability 
always characterizes our scientific and philosophic enterprise 
in the context of knowledge. And whatever number of value we 


8  |
Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
assign to our explanation of the nature of the world, it is not the 
final explanation. We cannot ignore the knowledge of science 
and history of our time. I do not see any adequate reason to 
believe in any qualitative difference between scientific pursuit 
and philosophic pursuit. It is possible to have a bridge between 
the information and insight provided by scientific discoveries and 
philosophic adventures of thought.
But before concluding my speech I wish to quote philosopher 
Bimal Krishna Matilal. What Matilal in the concluding part of 
an essay titled n'kZuppkZ vks Hkkjrh; efgyk has written in Bengali is 
important for us today for doing philosophy in a meaningful way:
vkekj eus g; l`tu'khy nk'kZfud fpUrkj/kjd tU;s Hkkjrh; 
lukruh n'kZufpUrkj vUrf‘ xzg.k djs ikpR;n'kZusj vk/qfud /kjkj 
fopkj&fo'ys"k.k djk iz;kstu] , fu;s fcfHkUu fnd Fksds fordsZ l`f‘jvks 
ç;kstuA rcsb gcs thcUr/kjkj l`f‘A vk/qfudkys vkeknsj ns'ks laLÑrK 
if.Mrjkvks ,•uvks ukuk fcpkj&fcrdsZ va'kxzg.k djsu cVs fdUrq rkj 
lXs vk/qfud fpUrk/kjkds es'kkrs gcsA
	
	
	
   & uhfr;qfDrvks/eZ] i`- ûöü] ûýùÿ cXkCn
I think, we need examination of modern trend of thoughts of 
Western philosophy with inner sight of the thoughts of Indian 
classical philosophy in order to promote the trend of creative 
philosophy. There is also a need of initiation of debate from 
different sides in this regard. Only then, there will be birth of a 
living trend. In modern times, the Sanskrit paṇḍits participate in 
various debates, in our country, still now, but there should be a 
mixing of modern philosophical thoughts with it.
Today inheritance is to be analysed, modified, corrected and made 
alive with fresh thinking and vitality of the age.
I sincerely thank all those who are either directly or indirectly 
associated with this seminar. With these few words I inaugurate 
this National Seminar. I wish success of this seminar. Thank you 
all once again.


3
Astrology versus Astronomy
Amalendu Bandhyopadhyay
Astrology is one of most popular of all the fringe areas of science 
and appears to be gaining in popularity. Since many consider 
astrology to be a science – indeed a part of astronomy – there 
is good reason for everyone in the astronomical community to 
become familiar with the scientific evidence of astrology. The term 
is most often used to signify a purported science that describes 
relationship between specific celestial configurations and human 
affairs. The basic concept of astrology is that the position of the 
heavenly bodies at the time and place of an individual’s birth, 
influence or is correlated with his or her personality, physical 
characteristics, health, profession and future destiny. Classical 
astrology regarded the Earth as the centre of the universe, with 
the planets, stars, Sun and Moon orbiting around it. The heavenly 
bodies were originally considered divine and possessing magical 
characteristics. Thus Mars thought to be of red colour, represented 
the god of war and signified courage and aggression. Venus was 
thought to be soft and white and was the goddess of love and 
beauty.
What does science have to say about astrology? First, modern 
astronomy has negated its key principle that the Earth is the centre 
of our solar system. We now know that the planets circle the Sun, 
that our solar system is on the outskirts of a galaxy, which itself 
is only a part of an expanding universe which contains millions 
of galaxies. According to astrology there are nine planets, Sun, 
Moon, Rahu, Ketu, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn. It 
is now well known that the Sun and the Moon are not planets. 
The Sun is a star and the Moon is a satellite. Moreover, Rahu and 


10  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
Ketu are non-existent, as they are intersection points of the ecliptic 
and the lunar orbit. Thus out of nine planets which form the very 
basis of astrology, two are not planets and two do not exist at all.
According to Laplace’s theory of solar system formation, 
our solar system was once a very large gas cloud, extending well 
beyond the reaches of our present solar system. The gas of this low 
density nebula would have been initially at a vey high temperature, 
the temperature being so high as to prevent immediate collapse 
due to gravitational forces pulling the mass together. As this 
nebula gradually cooled, Laplace considered that it should begin 
to contract and that rings of gas would be successively shed by 
the parent nebula. Laplace then expected that these rings, under 
their own gravitational influences, would break up into separate 
condensations and the beginnings of the planets would thus occur. 
Hence planets were once formed part of the solar nebula, according 
to science. How such planets which are huge lumps of matter 
situated millions of kilometers away can be intruders in the affairs 
of man, boggles one’s comprehension. Moreover, it is ridiculous 
to attribute all kinds of human qualities to planets. According to 
the theory of astrologers, depending on its positions, a planet can 
be benevolent, malevolent, friendly, furious, revengeful and so 
on. It is really unfortunate that the crude and false ideas which 
entered into the minds of our ignorant ancestors continue to have 
powerful sway on the mind of man living in this age of science 
and technology.
The horoscope has astrology as its basis. The horoscope of 
a person is written depending on the positions of the planets at 
the time of his birth. According to astrologers, all the landmarks 
in the life of a person are assumed to be safely deposited in that 
document. Is it not meaningless to believe that the position of 
a planet will have a say in educational attainment, profession, 
marriage, foreign travel, accidents, death and so on? Planets are 
assumed to play a very important role in matrimonial connections. 
Before the fixing up of any marriage, the horoscopes of the bride 
and the bridegroom are critically examined by the astrologer who 
gives the final green signal. It is a common knowledge that not 


|  11
Astrology versus Astronomy
all marriages performed even after scrupulously matching the 
horoscopes of the brides and the bridegrooms have been found 
successful. Such was a case with the famous writer Bankimchandra, 
author of our national song, “Vande Mataram”. The wedding 
ceremony of the daughter of Bankimchandra was performed after 
“exceptional matching” of horoscopes by astrologers, but within a 
very short time after the marriage she became a widow. Thereafter, 
Bankimchandra lost all his faith in astrology. In this connection, it is 
very interesting to note that more than 90 per cent of the people in 
the world do not have horoscopes and their marriages are as happy 
or unhappy as those of others and as such astrology, not having 
universal validity, cannot claim the status of science. Moreover, it 
is a common knowledge that generally no two astrologers agree 
with each other and it appears as though each has got his own 
way of forecasting and yet astrology is claimed to be a science.
Again, the critical analysis of natural calamities delivers 
another mortal blow to astrology. Let us consider the unfortunate 
victims of a plane crash, an earthquake, a cyclone, a volcanic 
eruption and  so on. Should we come to the conclusion that the 
horoscopes of all such unfortunate victims tell the same fate for 
all of them? Certainly this is absurd. It is equally preposterous to 
believe that all the horoscopes of such natural calamity victims 
will reveal the same date of death.
One of the most widely held beliefs about lunar effects is that 
there are many more human births at the time of full moon than 
at other times of the lunar cycle. The belief is even widespread 
among nurses in maternity wards and among some gynaecologists 
as well. George Abell and Benneth Greenspan examined all births, 
live and dead, from the records of the UCLA Hospital maternity 
ward in the US, during the period 17 March 1974 to 30 April 1978. 
Their analysis of the nearly 12,000 live and dead births occurring 
at the UCLA Hospital in an interval of 51 lunar months from 1974 
to 1978 reveals no correlation between the numbers of births and 
full moon or any other phase of the Moon. The role of the Moon 
as the principal raiser of tides on the Earth has been known for 
many hundreds of years and was first explained in terms of 


12  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
gravitational theory by Isaac Newton in the seventeenth century. 
But several pieces of evidence at hand suggest that many of the 
incredible claims about the influence of the Moon on man are 
simply not facts at all.
It may be appropriate to cite that in the field of science, if 
something goes wrong then a thorough investigation would 
be made to know the exact causes of the failure so that suitable 
remedial measures may be taken. This is not done in astrology. 
Moreover, the sciences provide an internal check on each other. 
The findings in psychology, for example, are consistent with the 
findings in other sciences. In the case of astrology, however, its 
claims run counter to what we know in physics, biology and 
psychology. Although all scientific theories have some problems, 
astrology is beset with so many anomalies that only by denying 
all the other sciences could it continue to stand.
A very important prediction made by astrologers, which was 
proved to be totally false, may be cited here. Indian astrologers cried 
hoarse from the roof tops and gave a severe warning to the public 
that on the occasion of the conjunction of eight planets (ạṣtagraha 
sammelana) on 10 March 1982, there would be a catastrophe and 
disastrous effects on the Earth. This was well publicized nationally 
by Indian astrologers and even internationally by Western 
astrologers. But that day was as uneventful as any other day. It was 
shown in advance by the astronomers that this configuration could 
have no perceptible effect on the Earth as the tidal force exerted 
by the other planets on the Earth was only 1/25,000th part of the 
force exerted together by the Moon and the Sun.
Remarkable vagueness of political forecasts made by late B.V. 
Raman, the doyen among the Indian astrologers, can also be cited. 
We all know that the January 1980 Lok Sabha elections brought Mrs 
Indira Gandhi back to power. This completely belied the confident 
predictions of almost all top Indian astrologers including B.V. 
Raman. In the Astrological Magazine (July 1979), the astrological 
prediction made by Raman was: “There is no indication of the 
Government or the Janata Party collapsing. Jupiter in the ascendant 
saves the situation.” The sceptics of astrology are indeed grateful 


|  13
Astrology versus Astronomy
to Raman for obliging them by departing from his characteristic 
evasive vagueness in predictions. Moreover, no astrologer can lay 
claim on having predicted the most dramatic and momentous 
decision of Mrs Gandhi to declare national Emergency in 1975; nor 
did any astrologer predict the assassination of Mrs Gandhi in 1984.
Astrological features concerning weekly planetary influences 
on human life are regularly published in most of the newspapers 
of repute. Even astrologers admit that these features in newspaper 
columns have little reliable basis for prediction of the day’s or 
week’s events. Why then do so when many people believe that 
astrology works?
We have also the problem that the most popular house systems 
used by astrologers do not work in certain circumstances. As the 
astrophysicist Jean-Claude Pecker, writing in the interdisciplinary 
journal Leonardo, points out that a large number of human beings 
live in the southern and the northern polar regions of the Earth, 
where it is impossible to see any planet at any time during several 
months of the year. For example, the inhabitants of the large 
town of Murmansk in the Soviet Union spend about six months 
of the year without seeing the Sun, without seeing a sign of the 
zodiac and without seeing a planet. The people who are born in 
Murmansk during these “unfortunate” months, therefore, have no 
horoscope at all in an astrological sense. Nevertheless, they may 
become good scientists, excellent doctors, competent carpenters 
and even horrid criminals.
Then there is the time-twin problem – that is, the dissimilarity 
of individuals born at the same time. Many people also ask why 
astrologers assign significance to the time of birth rather than to 
the time of conception. If the planets affect me all my life, why 
did they not affect me before birth? If the force, whatever it is, 
can make itself felt over millions of kilometres of interplanetary 
space, are we to believe that it can be stopped by two inches of 
abdominal wall? As long as the astrologers continue to ask for 
the moment of birth instead of the moment of conception, they 
reveal that they have not thought about the consequences of their 
position. And even the moment of birth is suspect. When does it 


14  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
occur? When the head appears, or the whole body? And how does 
one determine the moment of birth in a Caesarian section? What 
is the moment of birth of a frog who was incubated in a test tube? 
And furthermore, what happens if my mother falls down the stairs 
in the last week of pregnancy, and I am born several days earlier 
than I am supposed to be? How do the planets adapt to this? Or 
was my mother’s fall preordained or row managed somehow, in 
order that I might be born at the right moment?
Conclusion
In our country the uneducated and the half-educated account for 
nearly 95 per cent of the population. Quite obviously, a scientific 
mentality has eluded them. They fall prey to superstitions at every 
step, but do not feel the urge to prove the existence of sound logic 
behind these. However, those who consider themselves modern 
and highly educated also do have belief in various superstitions. 
Many a time I have seen university professors and highly literate 
scientists professing tremendous faith in astrology – a faith that 
is proudly displayed by three or four gemned rings on their 
fingers. How strange and sad! Those who themselves teach 
science compromise with pseudo-science and evil science. You 
teach science and strongly believe in astrology – this is nothing 
but living on falsehood. There is no doubt that such perverted 
behaviour on the part of our educated people is a grave obstacle 
to the development of our society. From what we have discussed 
so far, it clearly emerges that astrology is incapable of any change 
or rectification.
	
	
	
	


4
Scientific Outlook in
Ancient Indian Academic Tradition
Ramkrishna Bhattacharya
The topic I have been asked to speak on is so vast that it is 
impossible to do justice to even one of the aspects that constitute 
the “Ancient Indian Academic Tradition”. It is not just a question 
of time allotted to the speaker in a seminar; every discipline 
cultivated in India except ritual literature and theology will have 
to be taken into account to evaluate the topic. Therefore, I have 
decided to confine myself to the following areas: (a) What is meant 
by “scientific outlook”? (b) How was it developed in ancient India? 
(c) How was its application to therapeutics and surgery thwarted 
by forces opposed to science?
Referring to an aphorism in the base text of the Cārvāka/
Lokāyata, Bimal Krishna Matilal observed: “This empirical 
methodology might have been the precursor of scientific thought 
in India” (1987: 165). The aphorism reads: “As the power of 
intoxication (arises or is manifested) from the constituent parts of 
the intoxicating drink (kiṇva, such as flour, water and molasses)”.
Scientific outlook demands conviction in the materiality of 
the world and a method of ascertaining truth preferably by sense-
perception, and if that is not possible, with the help of comparison 
(inference by analogy), but never is the “evidence” of word (śabda, 
verbal testimony) derived from religious texts, such as the Veda. 
Hence the motto of the Royal Society (the UK): “We take nobody’s 
word for it” (Nullius in verba).
Scientific outlook implies rejection of all āptavākyas, even if 
they come from established scientists. The other maxim, “Let the 
experiment be made on a worthless body” (fiat experimentum in 


16  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
corpore vili) is also relevant in relation to the art and science of 
surgery in particular. One of the basic instructions in the Suśruta 
Saṁhitā is:
Different parts of the body cannot be correctly described who 
is not versed in anatomy. Anyone who desires to acquire proper 
knowledge (niḥsaṁśaya jñāna) should prepare and carefully 
observe by dissecting it, and examine its different parts. A 
thorough knowledge can only be acquired by comparing the 
accounts seen in the Śāstras (text of anatomy) with direct 
observation. 	
	
	
— Bhisagratna edn 3.5.49
Detailed instructions are provided as to how the body is to be 
studied.
Now the attitude of the authors of the Dharmaśāstras to the 
corpse was exactly the opposite (the examples that follow are taken 
from Chattopadhyaya 1982: 85). Āpastamba decrees:
One must not study scripture in a village in which there is a 
corpse or in such a one where the cāṇḍālas reside. One must 
not study where corpses are being carried to the boundary of a 
village.	
	
	
	
	
        – 1.3.9.14-16
Gautama, another religious law-maker, provides a list of impure 
persons:
On touching a cāṇdāla, a woman impure on account of her 
confinement, a woman in her courses, a corpse, and on touching 
persons who have touched them, the person must purify himself. 
. . .	 	
	
	
	
	
         – 14.30-32
And Manu states:
When a man has touched a cāṇḍāla, a menstruating woman, an 
outcaste woman in child bed, a corpse, or one who has touched 
a corpse has to purify himself by bathing.	
	
  – 5.85
This being the attitude towards “purity”, it is too much to expect 
that the profession of a surgeon would be treated with honour.
It is not necessary to refer to the legends found in the Yajurveda, 
particularly the Taittirīya Saṁhitā (TS). There are stories about the 


|  17
Scientific Outlook in Ancient Academic Tradition
Aśvin brothers vis-à-vis the gods who ostracized them, for they 
were impure and moving among humans as physicians (apūtau vā 
imau manuṣyacarau bhiṣajau iti). The text finally declares:
Since the physician is impure and unfit for sacrifice, a brāhmaṇa 
should not practise medicine (tasmāt brāhmaṇena bheṣajaṁ na 
kāryam, apūtā hi eṣaḥ amedhyaḥ yaḥ bhiṣak) – Taittirīya Saṁhitā 6.4.9
There are similar stories in other recensions of the Taittirīya Saṁhita, 
the Vājasaneyī Saṁhitā (the White Yajurveda), the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa 
and in the Mahābhārata. (For a fuller treatment, see Chattopadhyaya 
2014: 211-31.)
We have already seen how important was the study of anatomy 
from human corpses. Prafulla Chandra Ray, the first historian of 
Chemistry in India (which he called, following the then custom, 
“Hindu Chemistry”) observed:
According to Suśruta, the dissection of dead bodies is a sine 
qua non to the student of surgery and this high authority lays 
particular stress on knowledge gained from experiment and 
observation [Ray quotes from the Suśruta Saṁhitā, Śārīrasthāna, 
5.43-45, 48]. But Manu would have none of it. The very touch of 
a corpse, according to Manu, is enough to bring contamination 
to the sacred person of [a] Brāhmin [Ray refers to the Laws of 
Manu, 5.64, 85, 87].	
	
	
         – Ray 1903: 192-93.
What was the outcome of Manu’s fiat? Ray writes:
Thus we find that shortly after the time of Vāgbhaṭa, the handling 
of a lancet was discouraged and Anatomy and Surgery fell into 
disuse and became to all intents and purposes lost sciences to 
the Hindus. 		
	
	
      	
	
    – Ibid.
Not only surgery, but also therapeutics suffered from a strange 
anomaly. The two great medical compilations, the Caraka Saṁhitā 
and the Suśruta Saṁhitā, having been redacted and revised over 
many generations, have come down to us in a strange shape: both 
science and its opposite appear to coexist. The Caraka Saṁhitā (CS) 
is full of praise for gods, cows, brāhmaṇas, preceptors, elders, 
adepts and teachers (1.8.18 and passim). People are warned not 
to speak against the brāhmaṇas, nor to raise a stick against the 


18  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
cow (na brāhṁaṇān parivadet, na gavāṁ daṇḍa udyacchet) (1.18.25). 
The premonitory symptoms of a particular form of exogenous 
insanity is said to be caused by the anger of the gods and others 
(2.7.11). What are the symptoms? They are the proclivity to hurt 
the gods, cows, brāhmaṇas and ascetics (2.7.11). There are so many 
other examples proclaiming the holiness of the cow in the Caraka 
Saṁhitā (see Chattopadhyaya 1982: 210-11).
Nevertheless, beef is found to be recommended as the diet 
of the patients suffering from “the loss of flesh due to disorder 
caused by an excess of vāyu, rhinitis, irregular fever, dry cough, 
fatigue, and cases of excessive appetite due to hard manual labour” 
(1.27.79-80).
This is only one of the many instances in which the flesh 
of cows, and of buffaloes, horses, goats, and even of elephants, 
are prescribed (see CS 6.1.183). It is curious to observe that the 
learned authors of A Review of “Beef in Ancient India” (Gita 
Press, Gorakhpur, 1971, enlarged second edition Shree Krishna 
Janmasthan Seva-Sansthan, Mathura, 1983) have taken no notice 
of the prescription of beef for patients in the Caraka Saṁhitā. The 
book is purported to be a refutation of Rajendra Lal Mitra’s essay 
mentioned in the title. The omission of beef in dietetics cannot 
but be deliberate.
How could the recommendation of beef in the dietetics and 
the veneration of the cow on a par with the gods, brāhmaṇas 
and others be reconciled? One may speak of the special capacity 
inherent in the culture and civilization of India for admitting 
all discord and turn them into concord. Such a mystical quality, 
however, is not found when the powers that be dealt with what 
they consider to be heretical, heterodox, or downright non-Vedic. 
So long as there is relative peace and prosperity, opposition to the 
mainstream ideas is, or rather, can be, tolerated, at least up to a 
certain extent. The extent will be decided by considering the threat 
such opposition poses to the varṇa and āśrama system, the model 
of social system in India formulated in the Kauṭilīya Arthaśāstra 
(fourth century bce). But when the ideas are irreconcilable, such 
as protection of the cow and the recommendation of her flesh 


|  19
Scientific Outlook in Ancient Academic Tradition
in the diet of a patient, the situation becomes precarious. The 
doctors could save their science only by paying lip service to 
orthodoxy, as did the astronomers. They too had to submit to the 
Vedic view regarding the causes of the solar and lunar eclipses. 
Brahmagupta and Varāhamihira are cases in point. The worst was 
the fate of Āryabhaṭa. He had proposed a geokinetic hypothesis, 
as against the current geostatic view. Later writers on astronomy 
not only misinterpreted him; they also tampered the text of the 
Āryabhaṭīyam, thereby making him say what he had never said (for 
a fuller discussion, see R. Bhattacharya 1990-91: 35-47).
Acknowledgements 
Thanks are due to Amitava Bhatacaryya, Gopa Basu. Siddhartha Dutta 
and Sunish Kumar Deb. for their support. The usual disclaimers apply.
Works Cited
Bhattacharya, Ramkrishna, 1990-91, “The Case of Āryabhaṭa and His 
Detractors”, The Indian Historical Review, 17(1-2): 35-47.
Bhishagratna, Kunjalal (tr.), 1981, The Suśruta Saṁhitā, vol. II, Varanasi: 
Chowkhambha Sanskrit Series Office (first published in 1911).
Charakasaṁhitā, The, ed. P.M. Mehta et al., Jamnagar: Gulabkunverba 
Ayurvedic Society, 1949.
Chattopadhyaya, Debiprasad, 1982, “Case for a Critical Analysis of the 
Caraka-Saṁhitā”, in Studies in the History of the Science in India, vol. 1, 
ed. Debiprasad Chattopadhyaya, New Delhi: Editorial Enterprises.
Chattopadhyaya, 2014, “Science and Society in Ancient India, Kolkata: K.P. 
Bagchi (first published, 1977).
Matilal, B.K., 1987, “Cārvāka”, in Encyclopedia of Religion, vol. 3 New 
York: Macmillan.
Ray, P.C., 1903, History of Hindu Chemistry, vol. 1, 2nd edn, Calcutta: The 
Bengal Chemical and Pharmaceutical Works.
Suśruta Saṁhitā, ed. Ambikādatta Śāstri, Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit 
Sansthan, 1987 (first published in 1953).


 5
Ancient Indian Cosmology
vis-à-vis Modern Scientific Cosmology 
Dhirendranath Banerjee
In comparison to the vast and endless universe (presently called 
multiverse) our mother earth is simply one of the tiniest particles of 
the whole creation. It is still a mystery how and when and why did 
it come into existence. Long long ago intelligent man (homo sapiens) 
started questioning about the origin of creation including the 
earth, the sky, the sun, the stars and as a whole about the universe 
around him. This concept is now known as cosmogony, cosmology 
or creation science. But human interest on this subject is as old as 
human civilization and has been discussed in all ancient writings 
of the world. How did this world come into existence? This was 
one of the fundamental questions of human mind and discussed 
throughout 4000–5000 years. In Sanskrit language it is known as 
sarga or creation (sr̥ṣṭi-tattva, i.e. the theory of creation of the world). 
In English it is cosmology, i.e. kosmos, world, logos study (study 
on the origin of the universe). Many scholars value cosmology as 
a “historical science” or the “most ancient science of the human 
race”. Metaphysical cosmology has put man and his identity in 
relation to all other entities of the universe around him. Physical 
cosmology deals with the structure of the universe, constituents 
of the universe – planets, stars, galaxies along with elementary 
particles like dark matter and dark energy. Cosmology is the 
science of origin and evolution of the physical world. Present-day 
scholars have classified the different theories of cosmology into 
various classes. Cosmology is chiefly concerned with the world 
as totally the whole of space, time and every phenomenon. The 
two principal divisions of cosmology are metaphysical cosmology 
and scientific cosmology. The first one is chiefly concerned with 


22  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
philosophical method and differs from religious cosmology which 
is mainly God-oriented though sometimes a few atheistic religious-
philosophical schools are purely materialistic in their approach. 
At present metaphysical cosmology is chiefly concerned with the 
following: 
	 (a)	 How did the universe come into being?
	 (b)	 What is the ultimate material component of the universe?
	 (c)	 Does the universe have a purpose?
	 (d)	 What is the first cause in the origin of the universe?
	 (e)	 Is it possible to know the whole mystery of the universe?
	
(f)	 Is there any conscious being behind the creation?
	 (g)	 Can we explain metaphysical truth through cosmological 
reasoning? 
In the Upaniṣads we come across such questions: Is Brahman 
the first cause? Where do we come from? By whom we have been 
living in this world? How do we live between good and evil, pain 
and pleasure?
The titles of two Upaniṣads are interesting – Kena (meaning “by 
whom”) and Praśna (meaning inquiry/controversy/debate). The 
Annapūrṇā Upaniṣad begins with some fundamental questions of 
philosophy – Who am I? Why does this world come into existence? 
What is the nature of cosmology? Why do life and death both exist? 
In the Upaniṣads different views about the creation of the 
world have been given and these are as follows:
• 	 Prajāpati (the Creator) desired progeny. He practised tapas 
He created male and female (mithuna) (Praśnopaniṣad 1.4).
• 	 In the begining it was asat (void). Then sat (matter) came out 
of asat. From this all things were created (Taittirīya Upaniṣad 
7.1).
• 	 In the beginning it was ātman or Supreme One, Self-existent 
Consciousness and the Uncaused Cause. There was no other 
thing except that (Aitareya Upaniṣad 1.1.1).
• 	 But how is it that sat came into existence from asat? It was, 
therefore, sat in the beginning (Chāndogy’opaniṣad 6.2.2)


|  23
Ancient and Modern Cosmology
• 	 It was neither sat nor asat, but sad–asat. The gradual 
development is as follows: sat–asat 
 darkness (void) 
 
elemental universe sky 
 wind 
 heat 
 water 
 earth 
(in the form of an egg, i.e. brahmāṇḍa/hiraṇyāṇḍa 
 divided 
into two parts – earth and the sky.
Ultimately Paramātman/Brahman (the Supreme Soul) has been 
proclaimed as the summum bonum of this material world and the 
ultimate goal of our life is to know him and thus emancipation 
comes through union with Brahman.
In Biblical Genesis, God created the universe out of nothing 
(creatio ex nihilo). In ancient Indian six traditional philosophical 
schools and other athesitic schools like Jaina and Buddhist schools 
different theories of cosmology are to be found. Vedānta school 
proclaims purely divine cosmology, while Nyāya–Vaiśeṣika gives 
a theory of semi-divine cosmology. According to Nyāya, atoms 
of four elements are eternal like God Himself, and due to God’s 
desire there starts a reaction among the atoms, and finally the 
material world comes into being. The Sāṁkhya, Jaina and Buddhist 
proclaim materialistic theory of cosmology. In the Śvetāśvatara 
Upaniṣad we come across the materialistic theories prevalent 
during that period. In this Upaniṣad the number of questions 
put before the preceptor is as follows: “Is Brahman the cause of 
creation?”, “Whence do we come from?” and “How do we live?”
To this question the teacher refers to the following theories: kāla 
(time), svabhāva (nature of things), niyati (destiny), yadr̥cchā (chance) 
and bhūta (four elements). According to Nyāya–Vaiśeṣika, time 
and space (kāla and dik) are eternal, but Vedānta does not accept 
this theory. These are the anti-theories of Divine Creationism. 
The Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad just refers to these theories casually and 
does not explain such terms. In the second verse of 6th chapter 
svabhāva and kāla (nature and time) theories out of these five have 
been referred to and also criticized the folly of their followers. The 
Vedānta does not accept time or atom as eternal. Some Western 
philosophers (both ancient and modern like Xeno, Plato, Spinoza 
and Hegel) did not accept time as eternal.
According to Aristotle, the ever-changing nature of things 


24  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
is the real concept of time. Time is both linear and circular. The 
concept of time in modern scientific concept and the ancient theory 
is quite different and it is the simple equation T = O. According to 
the Big Bang (or expanding theory of universe) theory, the concept 
of time and space is relative.
According to the svabhāva theory, the nature of things has 
been the cause of this creation. Niyati means fixed order of things, 
i.e. necessity or destiny or fate. Yadr̥cchā (chance/accident/chaos/
randomness) means that this universe is an accidental creation out 
of void and there is not any kind of Intelligent Design. For some, 
asat means “primeval state before creation, undivided mass with 
all discontent” or “elements congested in shapeless heap”. Ancient 
Greek philosopher Leucippus believed in atomic theory. But he 
admits some kind of chance or accident in the reaction of atoms. 
Thus he says:
The cosmos then became like a spherical form in this way: the 
atoms being submitted to a casual unpredictable movement 
quickly and instantly. The matter by virtue of its own active 
force, moves and acts in a blind way. 
Therefore, according to him, this cosmos is really an accidental 
creation and it is absolutely useless to seek any logic or reason 
behind it. Darwin in his famous work Origin of Species through 
Natural Selection also gives importance to chance in the origin 
of life in this world. Niyati is fixed order of things, destiny or 
fate. Destiny and fatalism are sometimes the same. In the Vana-
parva of the Mahābhārata Yudhiṣṭhira explains the theories of 
Svabhāvavāda, Daivavāda and Karmavada (Inherent Nature 
of Matter, Destiny and Action). Due to their pitiable condition 
Draupadī casts aspertion on God for his indifference towards the 
good people and brings the common complaint against the so-
called omnibenevolent God – God does not care for the good but, 
on the contrary, favours the corrupt. Then Draupadī refers to the 
popular atheistic views: “Some say that in this world everything 
happens because of its own nature.” “Others say that it is destiny 
or fatalism.” To this, Yudhiṣṭhira replies: Oh Draupadī, you are 
speaking like an atheist (nāstikyaṁ tu prabhāṣase). The sceptics decry 


|  25
Ancient and Modern Cosmology
God due to their stupidity. They do not accept other  arguments 
and discard them.”
Again in the Anuśāsana-Parva Bhīṣma, while advising 
Yudhiṣṭhira on different topics of ethics and morality, refers to 
daiva, puruṣakāra, svabhāva, kāla, etc. and remarks in this context 
that all such theories are false and only the heretics do not believe 
in God and do not accept the arguments of the theists. According 
to Jaina and Buddhist schools, creation starts with matter. This 
may be called atomism or quantum cosmology at present (atom/
proton/electron/positron/quark).
Theory of material cosmology has been classified as:
	
(i)	 Scientific materialism,
	 (ii)	 dialectical materialism,
	 (iii)	 physiological materialism, and
	 (iv)	 vulgar or popular materialism.
From ancient to the modern times we come across different 
theories regarding the origin of the universe. In religious and other 
classes of wisdom literature, this branch of knowledge is known 
as cosmogony or cosmology or creation science. This is one of 
the fundamental questions of human mind – how did this world 
or universe (at present multiverse) come into existence? Almost 
all scriptures and religious codes and works on astronomy and 
other branches of ancient science deal with this question in their 
own way and there is close similarity in the scrutiny of human 
thought-process. Ancient Indian literature – the Vedas, Purāṇas, 
the Mahābhārata and Smr̥tis  – had raised this question. Among the 
five principal features of Purāṇic literature the following three are 
concerned with cosmology – sarga, pratisarga and manvantara (i.e. 
creation, temporary annihilation and start of new creation after 
the end of one phase of creation in a certain period of 15,70,00,000 
years). Creation and destruction (sr̥ṣṭi and pralaya) are the two 
features of this phenomenal world and there is no end to this 
existence and thus it is ad infinitum.
Different theories of cosmology may be classified under the 
following heads:


26  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
	
1.	 Divine creationism 
	
2.	 Semi-divine creationism 
	
3.	 Material creationism 
	
4.	 Quantum creationism. 
In other way, we may classify the theories thus:
	
1.	 Sceptic/agnostic theory 
	
2. 	Theistic/atheistic theory 
	
3.	 Materialistic theory. 
Some modern scientists have given another class of division:
	
1.	 Religious-cum-mytho-physical cosmology
	
2.	 Dialectical cosmology 
	
3.	 Philosophical cosmology 
	
4.	 Historical cosmology. 
Almost all religions of the world share the view that God, the 
Eternal, Supreme Infinite, the Omniscient, is the creator of this 
world. Out of his own will he created everything through his divine 
power. In ancient Indian tradition the concept of cosmology has 
many different theories starting from divine to material creationism. 
The six schools of traditional Indian philosophy propounded 
their own views which are not similar and also contradictory. The 
Vedānta, Nyāya–Vaiśeṣika, Sāṁkhya and Mīmāṁsā schools have 
their own separate theories. The Vedānta accepts boldly the theory 
of divine creationism. The Nyāya theory may be called semi-divine 
in nature. But the Sāṁkhya theory does not accept God or any such 
Supreme Being as the authority of the universe. The theory of divine 
creation is very simple and based on belief in the Almighty; thus it 
says that God created everything according to his own power and 
will with the elements of his own.The Biblical theory in Genesis is 
also formulated in very simple way – God created this phenomenal 
world along with all sorts of creatures and last of all human beings 
in his own image (creatio ex nihilo, i.e. creation out of nothing). 
In Nyāya–Vaiśeṣika it is claimed that atoms of four elements are 
eternal like God and even after pralaya (annihilation of the world) 
atoms remain dormant since these are the indivisible particles of 
the elemental world and again form into matter by the willpower 
of God. The various theories of cosmology in given in Table 5.1.


|  27
Ancient and Modern Cosmology
 Table 5.1: Classification of the Theories of Cosmology
Classification	
Author/Literature	
Classification	
Feature
	
Date
Vedic/Upaniṣadic	 3000–800 bce	
Cyclical/	
Divine 	
	
	
	
oscillating	
action
Jaina Cosmology	
Jaina Āgamas	
Loka (universe)	 Automatic
	
Teachings of	
is self-created	 Infinite, no	
	
	
Mahāvīra	
	
beginning or end
	
	
   (599-527 bce)	
Buddhist 	
Teachings of	
Self-existent	
ad infinitum
Cosmology	
Buddha, Bauddha/		
Material
	
Āgama literature	
	
creation
Babylonian	
Babylonian	
Flat earth	
Infinite waters
Cosmology	
Literature	
from water 	
earth and hevean
	
(3000 bce)	
creation	
state of choas
Eleatic Cosmology	 Parmenides	
Finite and 	
Infinite, uniform
	
	
spherical	
perfect, not void
Biblical Cosmology	Genesis	
Earth floaing	
Earth and  heaven
	
(c.10000 bce)	
 	
form a unit, while	
	
	
	
firmament forms
	
	
	
a separate unit	
Atomic Universe	
Anaxagoras	
Infinite 	
Earth made of 
	
(500–428 bce)	
	
indivisible atoms.
	
Hindu	
	
All objects 
	
(600– ce)	
	
decay, but new 
	
	
	
creation starts, 	 	
	
	
	
Everlasting atom
Atomic	
Creation	
Cause and	
Through some
	
	
effect	
unknown cause,
	
	
	
not chaos
Pythagorean	
Pythogoras	
Central fire	
The sun, the moon 	
theory	
(570–495 bce)	
burning for	
and other planets	
	
	
	
ever revolving
	
	
	
round the central
 	
	
	
fire	
	
De Mundo	
(350–200 bce) 	
Two regions: 	
Total five regions 
	
	
a variety of 	
constituted of five
	
	
Aristotelian 	
elements: earth,		
	
	
theory	
 water, air, fire
	
	
	
and ether	
Cont.


28  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
Table 5.1: Cont.
Classification	
Author/Literature	
Classification	
Feature
	
Date
Stoic Theory	
Ancient Greak	
The great 	
Cosmos 	
	
	
scholars	
island	
surrounded by
 	
	
	
infinite void, 		
	
	
	
world in a state
 	
	
	
of flux, pulsating
	
	
	
and undergoing 	
	
	
	
changes
Aristotelian	
(384-322 bce)	
Geocentric,	
Earth is spherical,
Cosmology	
	
steady state,	
universe eternal
	
	
finite extent	
and changeless, 	
	
	
	
four known	 	
	
	
	
elements
	
	
	
plus ether
Aristarchean	
Aristarchus	
Heliocentric	
Earth rotates on
Model	
(c.280 bce)	
	
its own axis and
 	
	
	
moves round the
	
	
	
 sun in a circular
	
	
	
way. The stars
 	
	
	
and planets are 
	
	
	
fixed centring
	
	
	
the sun
Ptolemaic	
Ptolemy 	
	
Earth remains in
Model	
(100-170 ce)	
	
centre. Stars and
	
	
	
planets are 	 	
	
	
	
moving round
 	
	
	
the earth in
 	
	
	
circular  epicycles
Āryabhaṭa	
Āryabhaṭa	
Geocentric	
Earth rotates on
Model	
(476–550 ce)	
	
its own axis. 
	
	
	
Planets move in
	
	
	
elliptical orbits
	
	
	
round the earth 
	
	
	
or sun	
Medieval	
Philosophical:	
	
Ancient theory of
Period	
Christian/	
	
philosophers
	
Islamic 	
	
discarded,
	
	
	
Biblical genesis
	
	
	
supported finite	
	
	
	
and fixed earth


|  29
Ancient and Modern Cosmology
Classification	
Author/Literature	
Classification	
Feature
	
Date
Nīlakaṇṭha	
Nīlakaṇṭha	
Geocentric/	
Planets rotate 	
Model	
Somayaji	
heliocentric	
round the sun.
	
(1444–1544)	
	
Sun moves round
 	
	
	
the earth	
Copernican	
Copernicus	
Heliocentric	
Planets move	
	
Model	
(1473–1543)	
universe	
round the sun
Tycho Brahe	
Tycho Brahe	
Geocentric/	
Planets orbit 	
 	
	
(1546–1601)	
heliocentric	
the sun, the sun 	
	
	
	
orbits the earth
Bruno Model	
Giordano Bruno	
Infinite space	
All objects made
	
(1548–1600)	
and time	
of void filled with
	
	
	
ether, the planets
	
	
	
and earth consist	
	
	
	
of same property
Kepler Model	
Johannes Kepler 	 Heliocentric 	
Based on 
 	
(1571–1630)	
	
mathematical 	 	
	
	
	
physical theory, 	
	
	
	
elliptical
	
	
	
planetary orbit
Newton Model	
Isaac Newton	
Static and 	
Infinite universe,
	
(1643–1727)	
evolving	
all particles
 	
	
	
mutually 
 	
	
	
attracting,  matter
	
	
	
uniformly
 	
	
	
distributed
Einstein Model	
Albert Einstein	
Static and	
Space curved
 	
(1879–1955)	
finite	
and spherical,
	
	
	
expanding
	
	
	
universe
De Sitter Model	
William de	
Steady state	
Expanding space,
 	
Sitter	
	
based on 	
	
	
(1872–1934)	
	
Einstein’s
	
	
	
general theory 		
	
	
	
of relativity
Big Bang Theory 	
Alexander	
Expanding	
A super-dense 
 	
Friedmann	
universe	
atom got burst
	
(1888–1925),	
	
and followed by
	
Georges Lemaitre	 	
a two-stage
 	
(1894–1966)	
	
expansion. 


30  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
Divine cosmology is very simple in theory. With firm belief it 
proclaims:
The unchanging, infinite, immanent and transcendent reality 
which is the divine ground of all matter, energy, time, space, being 
and everything beyond this universe, that is the one supreme, 
universal spirit, – the highest universal spirit, – the highest 
universal principle, – the ultimate reality in the universe, the 
material-efficient-formal and final cause of all that exists. 	
– According to Paul Deussen in the English translation of Upaniṣad
The theory of creation as propounded in Genesis of the Old 
Testament has been discarded by some modern scientists as 
simply “Biblical nonsense”. But in the same vein we cannot declare 
Upaniṣadic creationism as absurd, because there is some sort of 
scientific outlook in some of their hypotheses. For example at least 
one view may be quoted: God 
 sky 
 wind 
 heat 
 water 
 
earth (gradual development of cosmos). God’s divine creation and 
intelligent design is ignored by modern scientists as “omnipotent 
paradox”. Although there is some sort of unitary thinking and 
logical approach among the Upaniṣadic views some mythical and 
folk elements are also amalgamated. Following the Vedic tradition 
the Mahābhārata, the Purāṇas, Smr̥tis, astronomical works and 
other sorts of various texts have discussed the theories of creation 
and mainly the Vedic–Upaniṣadic theories as well as the theories 
of six philosophical schools have been taken into consideration. 
Out of five principal features of Purāṇa the first two (i.e. sarga 
and pratisarga or primary creation and secondary creation) are 
directly connected with cosmology. It is interesting to note that all 
the Purāṇas (Mahā Purāṇas and Upa Purāṇas) have accepted the 
Sāṁkhya theory of creation (i.e. in brief creation started through 
the combination of matter and spirit). In the Nāsadīya SŪKTA OF 
the R̥gveda (X.2.129), the Vedic seer expresses sceptic views about 
the origin of the world:
There was neither asat nor sat in the beginning; there was no 
particle, nor the endless sky; neither death nor non-death; there 
was darkness enveloped in deep darkness; everything was 
immersed in abyss of water.


|  31
Ancient and Modern Cosmology
Then he asks: 
“Who really knows it”? (i.e. how the creation started)? How did 
this material world come into being? Even the gods are later 
creations. Then who knows whence does this material world 
come first? He who is the Supreme Lord in the eternal space 
may or may not know this.
In this hymn two main questions of cosmology are asked:“Whence” 
and “how” did the universe come into being?
If we consider the Vedas as a whole, divine cosmology is the 
foundation of Vedic philosophy. In the Upaniṣads different theories 
have been propounded and they bear some unity among them. 
The views of the Upaniṣadic scholars are as follows:
Prajāpati (the Creator) desired progeny; he practised penance 
and created male and female. 	
          – Praśnopaniṣad 1.4
Otherwise in the beginning it was asat or void, thereafter sat 
came into force, i.e. creation started. Creation began when Ātman 
himself pressed himself into the work of creation.
	
	
	
	
	
  – Taittirīya Upaniṣad 7.1
In the beginning it was Ātman, the One and only One. Besides 
him nothing remained. Then he desired – let me create the 
worlds.	
	
	
	
 – Aitareya Upaniṣad 1.1.1
In the beginning it was only sat, the One singular state. But others 
say that in the beginning it was asat, the One and only One. 
From this asat, sat came into existence. – Chāndogyopaniṣad 6.2.1
In all these views there are three fundamental principles – sat, asat 
and creator God. So the Upaniṣadic cosmology is fundamentally 
divine cosmology, a mixture of theological and metaphysical 
concepts. There are many other views based on divine creationism. 
But some scholars think that the real cause of the origin of creation 
of this universe is shrouded in mystery and even today, in an 
advanced stage of astrophysics and astronomy, some scholars 
claim that the state before the Big Bang or the cause of Big Bang 
cannot be scientifically ascertained.


32  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
One fundamental question of creation in science is: is this 
world eternal, i.e. without beginning or end? Or is this creation 
temporary, i.e. it has beginning as well as end? In different 
traditions of religious–philosophical creationism, end of creation 
or annihilation has been explained through different time factors. 
In Indian Vedic–Purāṇic–astronomical concept, end of creation 
has been conceived as temporary and eternal (khaṇḍapralaya 
and mahāpralaya). Different theories of temporary or permanent 
annihilation are as follows:
Indian: In one kalpa (eon), i.e. 10 × 8.64 years complete one cycle.
(According to the Sūrya Siddhānta, Kali era started in 3102 bce. 
After 420,000 years total annihilation will be completed.)
Babylonian: one cycle = 12,690,000 years.
Greek: eternal creation (neither beginning nor end). 
Roman: one cycle = 1,000 years.
Chinese: one cycle = 23,639,000 years.
Christian: one cycle = 6,000–7,000 years.
Some special features of ancient Indian astronomical 
cosmology are as follows:
Īśvara 
 Hiraṇyagarbha/Prajāpati/Brahmā 
 viśva
(Supreme God
 Creator God 
 universe).
The theory of geocentric universe was almost common to all 
ancient civilizations of the world (India, Greece, Mesopotamia, 
China) and this theory was prevalent up to the Middle Ages.
In India Āryabhaṭa (fifth century ce) established the theory of 
motion of earth (i.e. Bhū̄-Bhramaṇa-Vāda or the theory of moving 
earth; but it was not accepted by later scholars of astronomy 
barring a few.
The position of earth and other planets like sun, moon, etc. 
was calculated by Indian astronomers:
Earth 
 Sun 
 Moon 
  Stars 
 Venus 
 Jupiter 
 Saturn 
 Saptarṣi pole star. 
Their mutual difference between each other is 100,000 yojanas 


|  33
Ancient and Modern Cosmology
(1 yojana= 2.5/4/5/9 miles).
On the basis of distance the position of planets from the earth 
is estimated thus:
Moon 
 Mercury 
 Venus 
 Sun 
 Mars 
 Jupiter 
 
Saturn.
In modern astrological calculation planets in relation to the 
sun are situated thus:
Sun 
 Mercury 
 Venus 
 Earth 
 Mars 
 Jupiter 
 Saturn 
 Uranus 
 Neptune 
 Pluto.
Different theories of creation science are given in brief with 
model graphs.
Pythagoras’ Theory of Cosmology
Pythagoras (578–495 bce) believed that the sun, moon, earth 
and other planets have been moving around a great central fire. 
All these are enclosed in a hollow sphere or vast globe where 
innumerable stars are hanging.
Geocentric Theory of Aristotle (384-322 bce)
and Claudius Ptolemqeus (150 ce)
Earth lies in the centre of the universe. The sun, moon and other 
planets are moving around earth in circular orbits. Ptolemy 
believed that each planet moves in a small circle or epicycle, the 
centre of which, the deterent itself, moved round the earth in a 
perfect circle.
Aristarchus (310–230 bce) proposed heliocentric theory for 
the first time. But it did not get much support due to the popular 
geocentric theory formulated by Plato and Aristotle as well as 
Roman Church.
Nicholaus Copernicus (1473–1543) assumed that the sun is 
in the centre. Due to this new idea many problems of the theory 
of Ptolemy were removed. But Copernicus supported the idea of 
circular orbits.
Tycho Brahe (1546–1601) proposed a new theory in which he 
tried to establish that the earth lies in the centre of the universe 


34  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
and the planets are moving around the sun in a circular way. He 
collected many valuable information about cosmology when 
telescope was not invented.
 Johanese Kepler (1571–1630) interpreted Brahe’s data and 
developed a few empirical laws by which the behaviour of the 
planets could be ascertained.
Galileo Galilee (1564–1642) for the first time used telescope and 
studied the sky for several years and made important and critical 
observations by which heliocentric theory was unanimously 
accepted.
Isaac Newton (1643–1727) discovered some physical laws 
which explained the reason behind the moving of the planets 
around the sun.
 Heliocentric Universe: Here we see eleven planets placed in 
their position in relation to the sun in distance – Mercury, Venus, 
Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, Pluto, Makemake 
and Eris. Broken parts of some ancient planet burst due to strong 
gravitational force believed to be scattered on the vast space 
between Mars and Jupiter. 
Solar system: Planets moving round the sun elliptically.
The sun: The sun is the nearest star visible from our planet 
earth during day time. Its distance from earth is 149,597,870.7 
km. Diameter= 13,93,000 km. Temperature = 15 × 106 ºc  (on the 
core), 600  ̊C on the surface). It is 109 times greater than our earth. 
Constituents = 90 per cent hydrogen and 24.8 per cent helium. 
Mass = 1.981 × 1030 kg (i.e. 2.91 × 1027 ton). Age = 5 billion years.
Our mother planet Earth is moving round the sun elliptically 
in a speed of 1,700 km per hour. The moon is the only a minor 
planet orbiting the earth.
Nine planets – Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, 
Uranus, Neptune and Pluto – orbit the Sun elliptically.


|  35
Ancient and Modern Cosmology
Introduction to Different Models of the Universe/Multiverse
fig. 5.1: Geocentric and heliocentric theory
fig. 5.2: Aristotles’s universe (geocentric model)


36  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
fig. 5.3: The most common theory prevalent in ancient China, 
Greece, India, Mesopotamia et al.
fig. 5.4: Ptolemaic model of geocentric theory


|  37
Ancient and Modern Cosmology
fig. 5.5: Solar system model of our universe 
introduced by Galileo Galilee (1643–1727)
fig. 5.6: Heliocentric model (sun – the nearest star 
from our Earth along with other planets, plus recently 
discovered 2-3 planets)


38  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
fig. 5.7: Geocentric/heliocentric model (Somayaji, Giordano 
Bruno, Isaac Newton, Albert Einstein)
fig. 5.8: Local universe (elliptical planetary orbit based on 
mathematical/physical theory)


|  39
Ancient and Modern Cosmology
fig. 5.9: Model of infinite universe (infinite void/ether, 
particles mutually attracting)
fig. 5.10: Expanding universe (De Setter, Albert Einstein, 
Alexander Friedmann and others): Big Bang/multiverse


6
The Concept of Matter
A Philosophy–Physics Interface
Raghunath Ghosh
This paper concentrates on the concept of matter in Indian tradition 
and its dynamic character. There is an eternal dispute between 
the spiritualists and materialists regarding the supremacy of 
matter and spirit. The spiritualists emphasize that spirit is real 
while matter is unreal. The materialists demand that matter is 
real and spirit is unreal. Sri Aurobindo is of the opinion that 
both are correct. In fact, what is called matter is nothing but non-
manifested sat-element of the spirit called Saccidānanda.1 Before 
this amalgamated theory, some of the Indian thinkers believed 
and propagated the dynamic character of matter which can create, 
destroy and sustain the whole universe. Among these thinkers 
Cārvākas are the forerunners who are of the opinion that matter 
(bhūta) is of four types – earth (kṣiti), water (ap), fire (teja) and air 
(marut) – which constitute human body. The consciousness has no 
separate existence apart from the amalgamation of the four just 
as red colour is manifested out of the amalgamation of lime, nut, 
etc.2 That is why a dead body is dissolved in the elements. From 
this it is proved that elements or bhūtas have an in-built power to 
create something.
	
1	 The Complete Works of Sri Aurobindo, vol. 21: The Life Divine, pp. 8-29, 
Pondicherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram, 2005. 
	
2	 Sāyaṇa Mādhava, 1996, Sarvadarśanasaṁgraha, Cārvākadarśana, tr. 
Satyajyoti Chakraborty, Kolkata: Sahityashri, p. 1 (text portion only):
tatra pr̥thivyādīni bhūtāni catvāri tattvāni A
tebhya eva dehākārapariṇatebhyaḥ kiṇvādibhyo madaśaktivat 
caitanyamupajāyate AA


42  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
In the Vaiśeṣika philosophy it has been accepted just like 
Quantum Physics that the world was originated as a result of 
combination of atoms, which is called Paramāṇukāraṇatāvāda 
as opposed to Brahmākaraṇatāvāda admitted by the Advaita 
Vedāntins. At the initial stage, two atoms were conjoined  resulting 
in the formation of dyadic compound (dvyaṇuka). Three dyadic 
compounds gave rise to a triadic one called trasareṇu and in this 
way a gross object was originated. A question arises how two atoms 
that are matters or unconscious become conjoined without any 
conscious force.3 To Sāṁkhya the atoms have got energy of their 
own leading to their combination. Conjunction in case of creation 
and disjunction in case of dissolution occur spontaneously due to 
having in-built power in an atom. Both are taken to be the sports 
of Nature possible through its auto-generated nature. Hence there 
is no need of admitting any other force or God-particle in the 
phenomenon of conjunction and disjunction of atoms.4
Hence no tension can be entertained among the physicists, 
specially in Quantum Physics, regarding the acceptance of some 
conscious principle. That a metallic object has got in-built power is 
evidenced from the following experiment. When a hot metal work 
from a blacksmith is found having yellow colour or orange colour, 
it is visible due to the visibility of the thermal radiation emitted 
by high temperature. Everything else is glowing with thermal 
radiation as well, but less brightly and at larger wavelengths 
than the human eye can detect. When it is cold, such object looks 
perfectly black, because it absorbs all the lights that fall on it and 
emits none. Consequently, an ideal thermal emitter is known as a 
black body and the radiation it emits is called black body radiation.5
	
3	 Vedāntadaśanam (Brahmasūtra with Śāṅkarabhāṣya), Tarkapāda adhyāya, 
tr. Swami Viśvarūpānanda Cipananda, vol. II, Kolkata: Udbodhan, 
1996, pp. 272-300.
	
4	 Ibid., pp. 215-40.
	
5	 L. Mondel and E. Wolf, 1995, Optical Coherence and Quantum Optics, 
chap. 13, New York: Cambridge University Press; D. Kondepudi and I. 
Prigogine, 1998,  Modern Thermodynamics from Heat Engines to Dissipative 
Structures, chap. 11, New York: John Wiley and Sons. 


|  43
Concept Matter: A Philosophy-Physics Interface
When three constituents of Prakr̥ti are in the state of 
equilibrium, there is creation. If this equilibrium is disturbed 
due to overpowering of one constituent, creation starts. Change 
is the mark of existence as envisaged by the Buddhists – yat sat 
tat kṣaṇikam and arthakriyākāritvalakṣaṇam sat.6 If pradhāna is not 
transformed (vikārī), there is no change or creation. Change occurs 
automatically in Prakr̥ti due to its dynamic character (svayambhū). 
Creation needs activity and motion among the guṇas. Without 
opposition, which is possible through disturbance in equilibrium, 
no creation is possible. That is why, thesis, anti-thesis and syntheses 
are taken as methods of creativity (cf. sakal dvanda-birodha-majhe 
jagrata je bhalo).
A.B.N. Seal has explained the three constituents – sattva, rajas 
and tamas – as essence, energy and mass. The first is the cause of 
self-illumination and others’ illumination, second is the cause of 
action and the third is the cause of obstruction (bādhakasvarūpa). 
The illuminating character is transparent and useful in any 
disinterested pleasure. The third is a balancing factor capable 
of controlling others. These three cannot remain in a separate 
manner and hence they are called guṇas (binding factors). In the 
case of immovable matter tamas is patent, rajas is latent and sattva 
is sublatent. In the case of movable matter rajas is patent, tamas is 
latent, sattva is sublatent. An object may seem to be the cause of 
happiness, misery and infatuation to someone due to having three 
elements in Prakr̥ti.7  It is just like a girl who creates happiness to 
someone whom she loves, becomes the cause of misery to some 
whom she left and becomes indifferent to someone whom she 
does not know. Nature becomes balanced due to harmonization 
of three constituents of it just as our body becomes balanced due 
to having three constituents – wind (vāyu), bile (pitta) and cough 
(kapha) in a proportionate way. The Sāṁkhya philosophers have 
taken another metaphor to point out this truth. Just as a lamp 
keeps burning due to having mutual cooperation among three 
	
6	 Sāyaṇa Mādhava, 1996, Sarvadarśanasaṁgraha, Bauddhadarśana, p. 6.
	
7	 Seal, Brajendranath, 2001, The Positive Sciences of the Ancient Hindus, 
Kolkata: Sahitya-Samsad, p. 2 (henceforth Positive Sciences).


44  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
factors – light (agni), wick (vartti) and oil (taila), Prakr̥ti can work 
with mutual cooperation of three constituents. A girl becomes 
such due to different situations and difference of person. It is the 
nature of sandal to provide happiness, but it may not seem to be 
so if other factors are not favourable to it. It may become the cause 
of unhappiness if it is applied in the winter. A camel can enjoy 
thrones and hence it is the cause of happiness to it. But to other 
animals thrones become the cause of unhappiness due to having 
different type of skin, etc. Natural qualities are not manifested due 
to having some impediment (pratibandhakatā).8
Among the three constituents (guṇas) sattva is the balancing 
factor. One who is overpowered with sattva quality is called sāttvika. 
According to the Sāṁkhya system, rajoguṇa makes an individual 
fickle-minded and lunatic while tamoguṇa makes one infatuated 
leading him to the world of inertia and frustration. Both tamas 
and rajas are the factors which make an individual imbalanced. 
That is why sattva guṇa alone makes a man tranquillized and 
calm. Under this stage a man can have artistic creativity, aesthetic 
enjoyment and exercise his creative (kārayitrī) and appreciative 
(bhāvayitrī) genius (pratibhā). The glory of such sattva guṇa is found 
in the emotional mood involved in grief which gives rise to the 
realization of joy. How is joy realized from the painful situations? 
In this situation our mind is absorbed in the performances and 
this absorption depends on the equilibrium of mind. When our 
mind is disturbed due to the non-equilibrium of three attributes 
of sattva, rajas and tamas, the pain follows. If our mind remains 
in the state of aesthetic experience, there is something which 
forcibly snatches our mind and keeps it in a state of complete 
rest (viśrānti) (... rajastamovaicitryānuviddha-sattvamaya-nija-cit 
svabhāva-nivr̥tirśrānti-lakṣaṇah ...).9 At this stage an individual’s 
mind attains real rest, which is characterized by the taste of its 
own blissful consciousness dominated by the sattva quality along 
	
8	 Sāṁkhyakārikā with Tattvakaumudī, kārikā 11, tr. Nararyan Chandra 
Goswami, pp. 146-50, Kolkata: Sanskrit Pustak Bhandar, 1982.
	
9	 Dhvanyāloka with Locana, in Hindi by Acarya Jagannath Pathak, p. 193, 
Varanasi: Chowkhamba Vidyabhavan, 1965, henceforth Dhvanyāloka 
(with Locana).


|  45
Concept Matter: A Philosophy-Physics Interface
with the association of rajas and tamas. In other words, one can 
enjoy the taste of his own blissful consciousness or self due to the 
prominence of sattva quality. When there is prominence of sattva, 
it may provide a real mental repose (viśrānti). From this it does 
not follow that other qualities, i.e. rajas and tamas, are not there. 
The prominence of sattva quality along with the association of 
others in a non-prominence stage gives rise to the taste of own self 
as bliss-generating aesthetic pleasure. It is the aesthetic pleasure 
which only can do this thing. This joy is endowed with such type 
of mystic power by which the audience can enjoy this bliss even 
out of painful situation, but in our practical life human nature is 
found averse to the experience of pain (evam hi sati tadduḥkhena 
so'pi duḥkhita iti kr̥tvā rasasyātmateti niravakāśam bhavet).10 This pain 
is an impersonal one, but not personal. Had it been personal, the 
experience of pain would have arisen in the sage himself. Personal 
pain makes a man crippled while impersonal pain empowers 
him in creativity (nirmāṇa-kṣamatva). This empowerment through 
impersonal pain leads Vālmīki to create a poetry:
 mā niṣāda pratiṣṭhām tvamāgamaḥ śāśvatīḥ samāḥA
yat krauñcamithunādekamavadhīḥ kāmamohitamAA
That is, Oh Fowler, you will never receive establishment in 
your life, as you have killed one of the pair of cranes who were 
engaged in sexual pleasure.
Hence, Viśvanātha, the celebrated rhetorician, has said that 
poetry is a peculiarly unworldly phenomenon, an extraordinary 
creation of supernatural supernormal genius and hence it cannot 
be governed by the rules of ordinary human intellect. In ordinary 
life sorrow arises from sorrow, fear follows fear, but in the world 
of poetry we find pleasure deriving from the painful, horrible and 
terrible situations.
hetutvam śokaharṣādergatebhyo lokasaṁśrayāt śokaharṣadayo loke 
jāyantam nāma laukikah A Alaukikavibhāvatvam prāptebhyaḥ kāvya-
saṁśrayāt sukham sañjāyate tebhyaḥ sarvebhyo ‘piti' kā kṣatiḥ AA
	
	
	
	
	
 — Sāhityadarpaṇa, 3.6-7
	 10	 Dhvanyāloka with Locana, p. 88.


46  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
Optics is the branch of Physics which involves the behaviour 
and properties of light including its interactions with matter. 
Optics usually describes the behaviour of visible, ultraviolet and 
infrared light. For, light is an electromagnetic wave other forms 
of electromagnetic radiations such as X-ray, microwaves and 
radiowaves exhibit similar properties.11 In fact, the glory of light 
is always admitted both in physics and philosophy.
Optical physics is the study of matter–matter and light–matter 
interactions on the scale of single atom and molecules. Optical 
physics tends to focus on the fundamental properties of optical 
fields and their interactions with matter to the microscopic realm.
The main source of light on earth is the sun. Sunlight provides 
us energy that green plants use to create sugar mostly in the form 
of starches, which release energy in the living things that digest 
them. This process of photosynthesis provides virtually all the 
energy used by living things.
The Indian philosophers also believe that optics or light or 
energy remains in matter. When energy is found in water, trees, 
even garbage, it is called vāravānala (hydel power), dāvānala 
(energy received from forest trees) and power from garbage 
respectively. The power remaining in different material objects 
has to be extracted from them. In modern physics it is admitted 
that the sunlight gives energy to the green plants. Plants give 
more sugar which again releases energy for the living beings. 
Energy in human body can help our body to associate it with the 
power of digesting. In Indian philosophy four types of energy is 
admitted – divine energy (divya teja), worldly energy (bhauma teja), 
energy remaining in our stomach (udaraja teja) and energy of the 
matters remaining in mine (ākāraja teja).12 The energy remaining 
in stomach is responsible for our digestion. The place where 
	 11	 McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Science and Technology (5th edn), McGraw-
Hill, 1993.
	 12	 viṣayaścaturvidhau bhauma-divya-udarya-ākāraja-bhedāt A bhaumam 
vahnyādikam A avibandhanam divyam bidyudādi A bhuktasya pariṇāmahetuḥ 
udāryam A ākārajam suvarṇādi. – Tarkasaṁgraha with Dīpikā, tr. 
Aurobindo Basu, p. 58, Kolkata: Mitram, 2010. 


|  47
Concept Matter: A Philosophy-Physics Interface
this energy remains for digestion of food is called pākasthalī (the 
place where something is being cooked or digested). If there is 
less energy which is not sufficient for appropriate digestion, it 
is called agnimāndya (weakened digestive fire) in the stomach 
(jaṭharāgni) due to the less flow of digestive juice. The disease is 
medically called dyspepsia. In the Śrīmadbhagavadgītā and the 
Manu Saṁhitā the science of optics is also eulogized. It is said that 
light of the sun gives rise to the accumulation of rain through 
evaporation and rain in return provides us eatable crops through 
which human beings can survive in this world (ādityajjāyate vr̥ṣṭiḥ 
vr̥ṣṭerannam tataḥ prajāḥ).13 The rains again come down in this 
earth through downpour producing bumper crops (annādbhavati 
bhūtāni parjanyādannasambhavaḥ).14 It is known from the above that 
there is a chain system in nature which starts with the science of 
light. This light is always taken as a metaphor signifying freedom 
or liberation or any form of relief while the state of bondage is 
symbolized as darkness as evidenced in the Upaniṣadic statement: 
tamaso mā jyotirgamaya. 
From the above it is known to us that there is a chain system 
for protection of environment particularly the protection of plants 
and living things. Through the same light and energy Prakr̥ti’s 
sattva element overpowers the other constituents, rajas and tamas, 
and allows us to have goodwill to protect the whole environment 
after reducing anger and greed from us.
Like Vaiśeṣikas the physicists believe in five elements or 
matters like earth (kṣiti), water (ap), light (tejas), air (marut) 
and space (ākāśa). Vallabhācārya, a great philosopher in Indian 
tradition, in his Nyāyalīlāvatī has glorified earth (kṣiti) having 
weight (gurutva). As an earthly object has got some weight, it is 
natural that it will be drowned in water. But Vallabha is of the 
opinion that there is a tendency in certain object to float or to come 
to the surface of water without going inside water due to having 
some sort of impediment on the way of drowning (jalādhogamanam 
jalena dhāraṇam patanaprativandhonmajjanam, etacca jalasya yogasya 
	 13	 Manu Saṁhitā 3.76.
	 14	 Śrīmadbhagavadgītā 3.14.


48  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
kasyacideva patanaprativandhasamarthyāt).15 Vallabha talks of a 
particular resistance to sinking or gravity exercised by water, 
which explains the tendency in certain objects to float or to come 
up to the surface of water. Vallabha was perhaps not aware of the 
formula of Archimedes at that time which tells that body loses its 
weight if immersed in water and the weight it loses is equivalent 
to weight of the volume of water displaced by it.
The five essential elements for the protection of our body are 
also mentioned in the Caraka Saṁhitā. The roughness, liquidity, 
moving force, vital force and vacuum of the body are gathered 
from the physical elements like kṣiti and ap.16 It is also mentioned 
that all the above-mentioned characters of human body are 
easily understood with the help of tactual sense organ (lakṣaṇam 
sarvamaitat sparśanendriyagocaraḥ).17
First, let us suppose that space and time are continuous. 
Zeno presents two paradoxes to show that, on this supposition, 
motion is impossible. The Racetrack Imagine that we are trying 
to move from point A to point B. Suppose C is the midpoint of 
the distance from A to B. It seems that we have to first get from 
A to C, before we can get from A to B. Now suppose that D is the 
midpoint between A and C; just as above, it seems that we have to 
first get from A to D before we can get from A to C. Since space is 
infinitely divisible, this process can be continued indefinitely. So 
it seems that you need to complete an infinite series of journeys 
before you can travel any distance – even a very short one! A flying 
arrow, according to Zeno, is at rest, i.e. occupying equal space.18
 In the like manner, the Naiyāyikas have shown a paradox in 
the concept of time (kāla). It is defined as the cause of verbal usage 
of the past, etc. is called time (kāla). It is said in the Bhāṣāpariccheda 
by Viśvanātha that time has to be accepted as a producer of the 
	 15	 Positive Sciences, p. 185.
	 16	 Caraka Samhitā XXVI.
	 17	 Ibid., chap. I.
	 18	 W.E. Abraham, 1972, “The Nature of Zeno’s Argument Against 
Plurality in DK 29 B I”, Phronesis, 17: 40-52.


|  49
Concept Matter: A Philosophy-Physics Interface
effects and as the substratum of the universe (janyānām jahakaḥ kālo 
jagarāmāśrayo mataḥ).19 In a word, the auxiliary cause of any type 
of effect (kāryamātram) is called time.20 Because, the usages like 
“Today a jar will be produced” (adya ghaṭo bhaviṣyati), “Yesterday 
a jar was produced” (śvaḥ ghaṭo bhavitā), etc. are possible due to 
the acceptance of time as the cause of the origination of such 
effects, and also as the cause of the origination of such awareness 
expressed in language.20 
In the foregoing discussion some paradoxes and defects may 
be shown in their arguments given by the Naiyāyikas.
First, if time were defined in terms of the cause of the usages 
like past and present, there would arise the defect of circularity 
or fallacy of mutual dependence (anyonyāśraya). For, time is 
understood in terms of the usages like past, while the usages like 
past, are understood in terms of time.
Second, it is very difficult to define past, present and future 
on account of the fact that there is “no cut-off time” in comparison 
to which an object is said to be existing in past or present. An 
incident occurred a moment before, may be taken as past and that 
occurred one hundred years back is also called past. What is the 
exact time that we can call “present” and in terms of which past 
and future may be determined? It is very difficult to determine 
a span of time, which we call “present”. The Buddhists would 
say that an incident occurring in a particular moment is present, 
but it is beyond conceptualization. It would take more than one 
moment to conceptualize “present”, and hence the question of 
past and future does not arise at all. Therefore, time defined as 
above is paradoxical.
If the “present” (vartamāna) is not determined, the “past” (atīta) 
remains undetermined. Because, the absenteeness existing in an 
	 19	 Bhāṣāpariccheda, verse 45.	
	 20	 adya ghaṭo bhaviṣyati, śvah paṭo bhavitā ityārdipratītestattatkāryotpattya- 
dhikaraṇatvena vyavahāraviṣayasya tasya kālasya tattadutpattihetutvāt . . . 
– Muktāvalīsaṁgraha on verse 45, by Panchanan Bhattacharya, p. 201, 
Calcutta, 1374 (bs).


50  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
absentee of the destruction occurred at the “present” is called 
“pastness” (atītatva) (vartamānakālavr̥̣ttidhvaṁśa-pratiyogitvama 
atītatvam). In other words, the absentee of destruction existing 
in the present (vartamāna) is called “past”. In the same way, 
the absenteeness existing in an absentee of the prior-absence 
occurred in the “present” time is the futureness (anāgatatva) 
(vartamānakālavr̥tti-prāgabhāva-prātiyogitvam anāgatatvam). In other 
words, something whose prior absence remains in the “present” 
is called future (anāgata).21 
As Zeno has shown paradoxes in space and time, the 
Naiyāyikas have shown paradoxes in conceptualizing time.
	 21	 atītatvam vartamānakālāvr̥ttidhvaṁśapratiyogitvam A anāgatatvam varta-
mānakālavr̥ttiprāgabhāvapratiyogitvam – Nirukti on Tarkasaṁgraha, ed. 
Satkari Sharma Bangiya, p. 19, Varanasi: Chowkhamba, 1976.


7
Zero : An Eternal Enigma
Parthasarathi Mukhopadhyay
Suppose you have two pens and I take one of those from you. How 
many pens do you have now? Of course, your answer will be “one”. 
Suppose further that I take the remaining pen from you as well. 
Now if I ask you again the same question as before, sure enough, 
you will say “none at all”! But observe that, while answering to 
an affirmative question, you chose to give a negative answer not 
by a number but through language! However, if you want to give 
an affirmative answer in this case, the number that you require 
is “zero”, the greatest gift of India to the world, without which 
the present prosperity of modern civilizations through various 
scientific achievements would never have been possible, so says 
many a great historian of science.
Though the exact timeframe of its origin is hotly debated, 
it is generally accepted worldwide that the decimal (i.e. base 
ten) system of enumeration along with the number “zero” (0) 
of our present day, was first thought of in ancient India, both 
philosophically and mathematically. It originated from the Sanskrit 
word śūnya, which was only one of the several synonyms used 
to represent the concept. One of its roles is that of a placeholder, 
where it allows the digits from 1 to 9 to take their own “places” in 
the decimal representation, so as to be able to distinguish between, 
say 12 and 10002. With passage of time, it eventually became an 
independent numeral, a number in its own right, for mathematical 
expression of “nothing”, as we use it today while writing 2 – 2 = 0.
We, the educated Indians, are in general aware of the fact 
that in some remote past, Indian mathematicians discovered the 
number “zero”, as is usually mentioned in our school books. Some 


52  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
even mention, though erroneously, that Āryabhaṭa discovered 
zero! But what really is meant by this “discovery”? Neither was it 
invented in a laboratory, nor excavated from somewhere! How did 
the ancients manage without zero, before the so-called discovery? 
How could they distinguish between, say, 101 and 100001? Why 
that method is not being followed now? 
Apart from India, there were various other glorious ancient 
civilizations that scaled fantastic heights in a variety of fields 
including mathematics. What were their enumeration systems? 
Did they know about “zero” as a number in its own right or at 
least as a concept representing void or nothingness? If any of these 
civilizations at all had the concept of some kind of “zero”, why 
their “zero” is not considered today as the forefather of our modern 
“zero”? To know these answers from the proper perspective, one 
has to scan a rich history of various early civilizations through a 
period of over 5,000 years. In this engaging tour of sociocultural 
history, the journey takes us through the Egyptian hieroglyphics, 
via Babylonian clay tablets and grotesque looking Mayan glyphs, 
the ingenious Inca quipu, followed by the great Greek civilization 
and the mighty Roman empire in the West, whereas we come 
to know about the lofty philosophy of void by ancient Indian 
seers along with their incredible mathematical achievements, 
clever Chinese enumeration system and industrious pursuits of 
wise Arabians of Baghdad in the East. Told with due rigour, this 
would explode to an epic proportion, for which this is perhaps 
not the right place. Hence, touching each of these facets, if only 
tangentially, let us try to place in a nutshell, the true genesis of 
modern “zero” in its proper historical footing – an ode to the 
Nothing – That Is!
Egypt
Egyptians (about 3000 bce), in their enumeration system, never 
used any symbol or concept like “zero” as a number in its own 
right. However, at a later stage of their civilization, they have 
sometimes used the hieroglyph n f r (which literally means 
“beautiful”) to indicate the base or ground level reference 
line towards constructing the higher base level of some of the 


|  53
Zero : An Eternal Enigma
pyramids to save the inner burial chamber from almost routine 
inundation by River Nile. From this base level they would measure 
the length in cubits (an unit of length, from tip of the elbow to 
that of the stretched fingers) both in upward and downward 
directions for the construction of the pyramid. Though they gave 
a definite importance to the numerical symbol for “ten” and its 
higher powers in their hieroglyphic enumeration system, their 
representation of a number was additive in nature, in the sense 
that the values of the numerical symbols written side by side were 
to be added to understand the number represented by them.
Babylon [Akkadian]
“Zero” in the sense of a placeholder (which looked like a “double 
wedge” sign, somewhat like two partially overlapping < one on top 
of the other) was used from around fourth century bce in Babylonia 
in their sexagesimal (i.e. base sixty, where two numerical symbols 
for “one” written side-by-side does not mean “1 times 10 + 1 = 
eleven”, rather it means “1 times sixty + 1 = sixty-one”) system of 
enumeration, as found in their numerous clay tablets, though the 
Babylonians never thought of this “zero” as a number in its own 
right, as ancient Indians regularly did, though we do not have any 
direct written evidence due to the oral tradition that prevailed then. 
Before their invention of this “double wedge” sign for “zero” to fill 
up the vacant place in a number, Babylonians used to leave a gap 
in the requisite number to represent occurrence(s) of zero. But that 
only added to the confusion. For example, in modern notations, 
if we write 11 and 1 1, can we be sure of how many zeros are to be 
inserted in the gap of the second number to understand it? This 
situation prevailed in Babylonia for over a thousand years, before 
some Babylonian genius came to understand that a gap-filling 
symbol is necessary to overcome this problem. This symbol may 
be considered as the oldest known symbol for placeholder zero in 
human civilization.
Mexico [Maya]
The Mayans of Mexico (200 bce – 1540 ce) used the number “zero” 
in their vigesimal system (i.e. base twenty, in which two numerical 


54  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
symbols for “one” written side-by-side does not mean “1 times 10 
+ 1 = eleven”, rather it means “1 times twenty + 1 = twenty-one”; 
and by the way, Mayans used to write numbers, not side-by-side 
but from top-to-bottom with the same interpretation). Their “zero” 
was not a mere placeholder, indeed it was a pure number in its 
own right. They had five different symbols or glyphs to represent 
their “zero”, one of which, the most common one, being a red-
coloured seashell. They developed some very advanced calendars 
for keeping time. In one of these calendars (called Haab) they had 
18 months (called winal) with 20 days (called kin) in each of them, 
(followed by a phantom month Uayeb of five days, to make up for 
their year, a tun), where the beginning day of each month was 
reckoned as the day zero and not day one! But still we cannot call 
their “zero” as the forefather of our present “zero”, since it lacks 
certain fundamental mathematical features as can be seen from 
their Long Count calendar. In this calendar Mayans kept record of 
their important historical events, by first counting the total number 
of days that has elapsed since their own understanding of Day 
Zero (13 August 3114 bce, with respect to our modern calendar) 
which was, according to them, the day of creation of the Universe. 
Then they used to subdivide this total number of days (kin) into 
several higher units of time, like month (winal = 20 kin), year (tun 
= 18 winal), and even further, much higher units like katun (= 20 
tun), baktun (= 20 katun), etc. and engraved them on a stone, now 
known as a stella. However, trying to keep the number of days 
in a year as close to the actual number 365 as possible, which 
seemed to be their priority of purpose, they had unknowingly 
destroyed the arithmetical pattern of base 20 place value system 
by putting 18 times 20 in the third place (1 tun = 18 times 20 kin, 
i.e. 360 kin), instead of mathematically required 20 times 20. This 
induced a serious drawback to the mathematical property of their 
“zero” in an otherwise brilliant vigesimal place value system. A 
truly commensurate “zero” in a properly organized place value 
system, when sits to the right of a given number, must refer to the 
number which is “11” times the original, where “n” is the base of 
that place value system. For example, in decimal (base 10) system, 
when we write 120 by putting a 0 to the right of 12, it becomes 


|  55
Zero : An Eternal Enigma
10 times 12 in value, or in binary (base 2) system, 110 (which 
stands for the decimal number 6), is 2 times 11 (which stands 
for the decimal number 3), similarly in ternary (base 3) system, 
110 (which now stands for the decimal number 12), is 3 times 11 
(which now stands for the decimal number 4), etc. Observe that 
according to the Mayan long count, their numeral “one zero zero” 
became representative of 360 (i.e. 1 into 18 times 20) rather than 400 
(i.e. 1 into 20 times 20), as would have been the case in a correct 
vigesimal system. Hence their “zero” cannot be considered as the 
true predecessor of our modern mathematical “zero”.
Peru [Inca]
The Incas (around 1500 ce) ruled Peru with brilliant arithmetical 
efficiency, though there was no written language at that time. 
However, a rigorous record keeping of taxes received, etc. was 
calculated and preserved through specially knotted strings called 
Quipu, a large number of which can be seen nowadays at various 
Natural History museums worldwide. It was a decimal (i.e. base 
ten) place value representation of numbers, where placeholder 
“zero” was represented by keeping a gap at the required place 
on the string.
China
Early Chinese civilization used a multiplicative–additive system, 
based on written decimal place value symbols put within 
successive digits with a special sign to represent absence of a digit 
in certain place, if necessary. For example, to write 13, they would 
write, from left to right, their symbol for one followed by that of ten 
and then put the symbol for three. Later they started calculating 
with the “rod numerals”, made with small bumboo sticks, an 
early form of abacus, where much like the Babylonians, a gap was 
used to represent zero (which they called “Kong”). From around 
eighth century ce, Chinese got the idea of filling up this gap, as 
some leading experts believe (Gupta 2015) from a Buddhist monk 
of India, Gotama Siddha by name, and started using “zero”, which 
was denoted by a thick dot (called bindu in Sanskrit). But of course 
there are other, minority views, arguing in favour of Chinese claim 


56  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
of origin of the concept of mathematical zero, as one may find in 
a relatively recent work by Meera Nanda (2016). She argues that 
the mathematical concept of zero originated actually in mainland 
China and it got transmitted through traders and mingled with 
Indian shape of circular looking zero somewhere at the Sino-Indian 
cross-cultural border regions of the then Buddhist Cambodia. 
However, an interesting point by point refutation of many of her 
claims may also be found in the article by Michel Danino (2016).
Greece
Much earlier, Greek mathematicians from fifth century bce 
were fascinated with Geometry and the concept of ratio among 
numbers, and thereby developed a fear and hatred of the number 
“zero”, as it threatened to destroy their much-cherished concept 
of ratio-based understanding of the perception of beauty in the 
universe, as the ratio of a number with “zero” is mathematically 
incomprehensible. So Pythagoreans, while hailed the dictum 
“All is number”, discarded “zero” as a number. For them, every 
number must have a shape, which can be created on the ground by 
arranging as many pebbles suitably, like triangular numbers (e.g. 
1, 3, 6, 10), square numbers (e.g. 1, 4, 9, 16), pentagonal numbers 
(e.g. 1, 5, 12, 22), hexagonal numbers (e.g. 1, 6, 15, 28), etc. They 
raised the question, “if zero means nothing, how can nothing be 
represented by something? After all, what shape can nothing have?” 
Moreover, Greek philosopher Aristotle had declared “Nature 
abhors a vacuum”. He was very influential in the society as he 
had given a “proof” of existence of God, by declaring Him as the 
Prime Mover, responsible personally for moving the seventh, i.e. the 
outermost celestial sphere, harbouring the seventh planet Saturn, 
as per their understanding of geocentric universe at that time. So 
Greeks decided that there was no zero and no infinity, everything 
in the universe must be finite. This unfortunate dictum, which kept 
the great Archimedes from almost discovering Integral Calculus 
about two millennia before its time, was then to be followed for 
about two thousand years in Europe, as Catholic Church at a later 
date accepted the Aristotelian doctrine. In due course of time, 
contesting Aristotle was tantamount to challenging the authority 


|  57
Zero : An Eternal Enigma
of the church, which in the Middle Age Europe could easily cost 
one’s life, even by being burnt alive at stake. Greek enumeration 
system was additive in nature and there were no separate 
numeral symbols; their alphabets written with a bar on top used 
to represent numbers, where the largest number was only ten 
thousand, called miryori, denoted by the letter M. At a later period, 
Hellenistic astronomers, while recording the angular positions 
of the celestial bodies, extended their alphabetic numerals into a 
base 60 positional system, much like the Babylonians, by limiting 
each position to a maximum value of 59 and including a special 
symbol for zero, which looked like an “o with a bar or dumb-bell 
on top”, believed to have come from the first letter of the Greek 
word Ouden meaning “nothing”. However, in the usual Greek 
alphabetic numeral system, this “o”, called “omicron”, stood for 
seventy! The Hellenistic zero was also used alone like our modern 
zero, more than as a simple placeholder. However, the positions 
were limited to the fractional part of a number (called minutes, 
seconds, thirds, fourths, etc.) – it was not used in the integral 
degree part of a number. This system was probably adapted from 
Babylonian numerals by Hipparchus c.140 bce. It was then used by 
the Greek astronomers of Alexandria like Ptolemy (c.140 ce) who 
backed the Aristotelian view of geocentric universe, Theon (c.380 
ce) and Theon’s daughter, Hypatia (who was brutally murdered 
in 415 ce on a street of Alexandria by a Roman mob as a result of 
her refusal to adopt Christian religious faith).
Rome
Thanks to Ptolemaic school of fortune telling, by this time most of 
the mathematician–astronomers were fortune tellers as well, and 
were generally hated in the society, as many of their predictions 
failed to match the reality. Primarily engaged in politicking and 
military expansions, the mighty Romans (27 bce – 1453 ce) never 
thought mathematics worthy of much attention. In Roman numeral 
system, to understand the meaning of a numerical symbol, one 
has to add, or sometime even has to subtract, the values of the 
respective individual symbols put side by side. For example, when 
the symbols V for 5 and I for 1 are put side by side as VI, it stands 


58  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
for 5 + 1, i.e. 6, but when you write IV it means 5 – 1, i.e. 4. However 
in this clumsy system, though C stands for 100, IC does not stand 
for 100 – 1, i.e. 99, for which you have to write XCIX, which depicts 
the number as ten (X) less than hundred and nine (IX) added to it! 
One can easily imagine the Herculean effort or specialist expertise 
that is needed to simply multiply or divide numbers written in 
this system. This system requires no “zero” as a placeholder, but 
more and more new symbols are to be introduced in the system 
for representing larger numbers. And since there is no “largest” 
number, so the requirement for newer symbols become unlimited! 
Famous historian A.L. Basham in his book, The Wonder That Was 
India, has aptly pointed out: 
Most of the great discoveries and inventions of which Europe 
is so proud would have been impossible without a developed 
system of mathematics, and this in turn would have been 
impossible if Europe had been shackled by the unwieldy system 
of Roman numerals. The unknown man who devised the new 
system was from the world’s point of view, after the Buddha, 
the most important son of India. His achievement, though 
easily taken for granted, was the work of an analytic mind of 
first order. ...”
India
Historical reconstruction of mathematical knowledge, that was 
likely to be prevalent in Indian antiquity, is much like arranging 
an enormous jigsaw puzzle, many pieces of which are missing. 
Competent historians of Mathematics, all over the world, are 
trying to rearrange the available pieces, according to their own 
respective stances, with an obvious intention to try and guess the 
picture it may suggest. And the job is anything but linear. Patriotic 
passion and pre-conceived ideas often come in the way of scholarly 
acumen, prompting one to misplace, perhaps subconsciously, 
one or two pieces here and there, or may be not to place them at 
all, distorting the figure to accommodate one’s “stance”, not to 
mention the most unfortunate intrusion of one’s personal political 
ideological belief. Some have decided a priori to make the picture 
look like the dancing Śiva, while few others seem to be determined 


|  59
Zero : An Eternal Enigma
to find a dancing monkey instead! Of course, there is a third group, 
carefully steering a discrete middle course, analysing objectively as 
far as possible, the available pieces of evidence or information and 
sometimes even the lack of information, trying to make a logically 
conceivable pattern out of it, with every new piece being found 
occasionally, as a new input to the jigsaw puzzle, one has to try 
and find its right place in the puzzle, sometimes destroying the 
existing pattern. And the journey continues.
The genesis of “zero”, a number that even a child so casually 
uses today, is a long and involved one. A good number of experts 
concerned with the history of its evolution, today accept that 
the number zero, in its true potential, as we use it in modern 
mathematics, has its root, conceptually as well as etymologically, in 
the word śūnya of Indian antiquity. However, the exact timeframe 
of its origin is still hotly debated. Furthermore, as we have already 
mentioned, some researchers try to suggest that a trace of this 
concept, if not in total operational perspective, might have had 
a Greek origin that travelled to India during the Greek invasion 
of the northern part of our country in the pre-Mauryan period. 
According to them, the “decimal place-value principle with 
zero as a hallmark”, was in actuality not an independent Indian 
achievement. The root of it presumably lies with the Babylonians 
(Akkadians), who by 300 bce had started using a queer symbol of 
two slanted wedges to denote an empty placemark in a written 
numeral on unbaked clay tablets, instead of keeping a “blank 
space”, as they had been doing before, for over a thousand years. 
Though these historians seem to give some concession to the 
decimal place-value system in favour of India, which according to 
them “was being employed in India, especially among the Jainas 
and Buddhists, towards the beginning of the common era”, as 
far as the inception of “zero” and its symbol is concerned, they 
opine to the contrary. Laying an undue stress on the “symbol” 
part of it, they claim that Greek (astronomical) Papyri of the 
period immediately preceding and following the beginning of 
the common era demonstrate that, they filled (the blank space) 
with an adaptation of the Akkadian symbol for zero (two slanted 
wedges); this adaptation looks like a circle with a bar over it. 


60  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
Earlier, this sign, often referred to as the “Hellenistic zero”, used 
by astronomers like Ptolemy and some of his successors, only in the 
fractional part of a sexagesimal number (called minutes, seconds, 
third, fourth, etc.) and not in the integral part, was thought to have 
emerged out of the first letter “omicron” of the Greek word ouden, 
meaning nothing. However O. Neugebaur dismissed this claim 
by pointing out the fact that omicron was already used to mean 70 
according to the Greek alphabetic enumeration system. 
Some other scholars like Robert Kaplan (2000) argue that 
possibly it came from obol, a contemporary coin of almost no value. 
They conjecture that the typical round sign evolved during the 
use of counters in sand-boards for arithmetical calculation. The 
impression left on sand when such a counter was removed to leave 
an empty column, perhaps gave birth to the symbol as a circle. 
Further arguments amount to the claim that, after the invasion 
of northern India, the Greeks came to India in large numbers, 
brought with them documents with such a symbol written there 
and while translating these documents into Sanskrit (with which 
the Indian mathematicians/astronomers like Varāhamihira are 
credited), the symbol for zero was taken as a circle (pūrṇa), the 
full moon, or a dot (bindu). The earliest such incident, according 
to David Pingree (Ifrah 2000), took place around 425 ce, the 
principal impetus behind the whole theory being “there is no 
certain evidence that a symbol for zero was in place (in India) 
before the fifth century ad”. These viewpoints however do not 
explain why the Greek mathematicians did not or could not use 
this so-called “zero” to the full mathematical potential. Due to 
their geographical location, they were the natural inheritors of 
Babylonian place value system; yet even after they were exposed to 
this more powerful system of enumeration, they apparently failed 
to judge the power of it, used it only in astronomical calculation, 
and that too not freely and arithmetically stuck to their own clumsy 
system of enumeration. Why is it that the genius of Archimedes 
or the galaxy of Greek geometrical giants could not recognize it? 
Some believe that it was perhaps due to their overemphasis on 
geometric ideas, trying to interpret the universe in tandem with 
their Pythagorean perception of geometry, and this perception did 


|  61
Zero : An Eternal Enigma
not approve of the concept of “zero” as a number. Or was it the 
Aristotelian dictum – Nature abhors vacuum – that stood in their 
way, raising a philosophical conundrum like “how can nothing 
be represented by something?”.
Leo Depuydt (2008), a noted historian of antiquity, observes: 
“History is, by definition, the period for which we have written 
sources.” Going by such a definition, one may easily be tempted 
to reach a conclusion as: 
Our current numbering system is Indian in origin and took 
shape during the period of cultural and intellectual splendour 
that took place along the valley of the Ganges from the mid-third 
century to the mid-fourth century ce. During this period, the 
Gupta dynasty reigned the region.
However, this definition cannot be of much help and needs to 
be taken with a pinch of salt, if one were to trace the genesis 
of mathematical knowledge in Indian antiquity, particularly in 
the pre-Christian era, perhaps dating back to several millennia 
further, owing to the complete unavailability of written documents 
pertaining to this period. Though, from the huge collection of 
available documents of later dates beginning from the early 
Christian era, where one may find regular references to ancient 
works of amazingly lofty philosophical thoughts, mingled with 
occasional flashes of extraordinary scientific sophistication, it 
goes without saying that the remote antiquity in India cradled a 
civilization of a very high order. The mathematical heritage of the 
Indian subcontinent has long been recognized to be extremely rich. 
Hundreds of thousands of manuscripts in India and elsewhere, 
mostly written in Sanskrit, attest to this tradition. It is with this 
background of the social context and ambiance of the Indian 
antiquity in mind that one must try to judge the possible potential 
mathematical developments, as testified passively by various 
apparently non-mathematical resources, in case of the absence 
of direct mathematical testimony. The philosophical concept of 
śūnya and the Sanskrit words akin to it, in their broader social 
and philosophical contexts, might eventually pave the way for 
the evolution of the corresponding mathematical concept of zero. 


62  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
In ancient India, much unlike Greece, philosophers of every 
school of thoughts seemed to have toyed freely with the concept 
of vacuum and investigated it inquisitively. In the Tantra, one 
finds the eternal divine creator Niṣkala Śiva, the undifferentiated 
formless emancipation of the God Śiva, who creates this whole 
universe from void and destroys his creation into the void again 
and again. From the Nasadīya Sūkta of the R̥gveda, where the 
Vedic seers are philosophically trying to imagine the nature of 
the vacuum before the creation of the universe, to the Śūnyavāda 
or doctrine of devoidness of the philosopher Nāgārjuna from 
Mahāyāna school of Buddhism, where the highest form of 
knowledge, i.e. prajñāpāramitā is attributed to the perception of 
everything phenomenal or worldly as śūnya, the pure void, and 
attaining this state of mind is defined as the nirvāṇa, it appears 
very likely that the thread of rich philosophical and socio-
academic ambiances of Indian antiquity was quite pregnant with 
the immensity of the concept of śūnya – a dichotomy as well as a 
simultaneity between “nothing” and “everything”, the śūnya (zero) 
of void and that of an all-pervading fathomless pūrṇa (infinite). 
In this society, when mathematicians declared the necessity of 
having a numeral for śūnya, the society at large never contradicted 
the idea or tried to resist it, as was the case in Greece. One may 
find several decimal nomenclatures in the R̥gveda, a reference to 
the number zero as kṣudra in the Atharvaveda as well. However, the 
most common parlance for zero in ancient India was  kha, which 
literally means the sky, also referred to as śūnya. This Sanskrit 
word is derived from suna [+ yat], which is the past participle of 
the root svi, which means “to swell” or “to grow”, and therefrom 
by semantic extension “hollow”. 
In the R̥gveda, one may find another meaning “the sense of 
lack or deficiency”. The two different meanings were fused to give 
śūnya a single sense of absence or emptiness with the potential for 
growth, a womb-like hollow, ready to swell. Early reference to zero 
is found in the Gopatha Brāhmaṇa as chidra (a puncture mark) or as 
randhra (a hole), in the Amarakoṣa, or as śūnya-bindu (zero dot), in 
the drama the Vāsavadattā by Subandhu (c.400 ce) which clearly 
refers to the possible shape or form of it, as was thought of at those 


|  63
Zero : An Eternal Enigma
time. Ifrah (2000) has given a reference of a Jaina cosmological text 
the Lokabibhāga (458 ce) with concrete example of zero being used 
as a placeholder. Another Jaina work the Anujogadvarasūtra of first 
century ce also reveals clear understanding of placeholder zero 
in a decimal place value system. Indeed, such list is too large to 
discuss here comprehensively (Mukhopadhayay 2009).
In the early Vedic society, veneration for Sanskrit exalted it as 
sacred speech – devabhāṣa – whose divinely revealed texts were 
meant to be recited, heard and memorized collectively rather 
than transmitted in writing. Naturally it gave rise to the necessity 
that such texts be composed in formats that could be easily 
memorized. It was done in two modes, either through condensed 
prose aphorisms, called sūtras or in verse form, particularly 
in the classical period, beginning in the late first millennium 
bce. Analysing the reasons behind the abundance of metrical 
verse-based resources of Indian antiquity and the consequent 
indispensable need for careful and systematic analysis of poetic 
metrics, A.K. Dutta (2009) concludes:
Ancient Indians had the perception that the metrical form has 
greater durability, power, intensity and force than the unmetrical, 
and hence recorded all important knowledge in verse form.
The Vedic seers attributed almost mystic significance to 
chandas, consequently, close attention was paid to the study of 
Chandaḥśāstra, i.e. the science of verse metres. Since no written 
mathematical treatise of remote Indian antiquity is extant, 
historians have turned their attention to the non-mathematical 
texts of that period, with an intention to find tacit mathematical 
clues, if there be any. The idea is to dig deep into the academic 
ambience of that period and analyse in the light of those works, 
the available social contexts, towards a possible unearthing of 
some threads of mathematical thought, which might have been 
prevalent during that period. If non-mathematicians are found 
to be at ease with novel mathematical concepts, for example, that 
of “zero” as a digit in its own right, in an arguably place-value 
system, it certainly strengthens the argument in favour of those 
people doing  gaṇita in that society, to have already mastered those 


64  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
concepts. Two such cases are certainly worth mentioning, one 
directly referring to the number “zero” of mathematics and the 
other tacitly applying a similar concept of placeholder.
In this regard, the Piṅgalacchandaḥsūtra, the rules of prosody 
for both Vedic and classical chanda given by Piṅgala, arguably 
sometime during second century bce, come into the limelight as 
an irrefutable landmark in the history of mathematics, particularly 
in connection with the priority in the inception of place-value 
notation, as in two of its sūtras, it formally mentions the term śūnya 
as a clear mathematical concept of “zero”, for the first time in 
the history of human civilization (as far as our present evidences 
stand), and discusses formulations for intricate combinatorial 
calculations towards, thanks to Van Nooten (1993), what is now 
recognized as binary arithmetic, going up to conversion of a 
decimal number to binary and vice versa – an extraordinary feat 
indeed. After a critical examination of all the 315 sūtras spread over 
the eight chapters of his work, one finds the sūtras 20-35 in the 
eighth chapter to be of immense mathematical potential. As usual, 
they are in keeping with the spirit of pithy and cryptic presentation 
of a sūtra, almost obscure to a non-specialist. However, thanks to 
the later commentaries, they can be relatively easily deciphered 
to produce an excellent account of combinatorial calculation as 
has been shown in details by S.R. Sarma (2003) among others. 
The sūtras 28-31 deal with the combinatorial question: How many 
different meters are there with a given length? That is, to compute 
the total number of possible arrangements of “long” and “short” 
syllables (respectively, the guru and the laghu), repetition allowed, 
without actually constructing the arrangement of all possible 
combinations of guru and laghu in a given metre (called the 
prastara, a bed or matrix in which the gurus and laghus are listed 
horizontally). The sūtras 29 and 30, rūpeśūnyam and dviḥśūnye by 
name, clearly mention the term śūnya. However to see them work 
as mathematical “zero”, one has to combine them along with the 
sūtras immediately preceding and immediately succeeding them, 
viz. dvirardhe and tavadardhe tadguṇitam. Four of them, put together 
in a row, and interpreted according to the commentators, give us 
the necessary rule of computation which clearly involves a notion 


|  65
Zero : An Eternal Enigma
of modern mathematical “zero”. Of course, wherever Piṅgala had 
referred to śūnya, he did it in language and not by any symbol. 
So whatever symbol for śūnya he might have had in his mind 
remains beyond us. But, his choice favouring the term śūnyam 
clearly indicates that during his time, a concept of mathematical 
śūnya was prevalent. Van Nooten (1993) observes that “we can 
be reasonably certain that his counting system was predicated 
on a base of ten”. He further points out that a system of notation 
that simply uses two symbols as markers of a place value does 
not necessarily produce a binary system. But if there is a system 
that uses two symbols in such a way that every string made with 
them has a unique decimal equivalent and it is shown how one 
may convert a decimal number into a string of those two symbols 
uniquely, then “indeed we do have a binary system. Piṅgala has 
done at least this much”. In the view of Needham and Ling (1959): 
Place value could and did exist without any symbol for zero. But 
zero symbol as a part of the numerical system never existed and 
could not have come into being without place-value.
Along this line of argument S.R. Sarma (2003) concluded that
the invention of decimal place-value system along with the 
concept and symbol of zero must antedate considerably Piṅgala’s 
mention of the zero symbol.
Passion for attaining perfection in grammar, recognized as a 
Vedāṅga, was of paramount importance in the Vedic studies 
in ancient India. Pāṇini, the great grammarian of arguably 
seventh century bce, author of the Aṣṭādhyāyī, an archetypal 
work thoroughly systematizing the Sanskrit grammar, exhibited 
extraordinary technical and descriptive skills.
Researches deep into the analysis of the Pāṇinian grammar, 
which has an inherent scientific “structure”, have been carried 
out by many scholars, both Indian and Western. One of them, 
from recent times, F. Staal (2010) opines that Pāṇini’s use of his 
grammatical or linguistic “zero”, viz. lopa, was used as a marker of 
an empty (śūnya) or non-occupied space or position. His relevant 
basic sūtra is adarśanam lopaḥ, found in the Aṣṭādhyāyī (I.1.60) 


66  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
which means “non-appearance is lopa”, a concept which can be 
rendered by the modern term “zeroing”. In this regard Bloomfield 
(1961) points out: “The Hindus hit upon the apparently artificial 
but in practice eminently serviceable device of speaking of a zero 
element.” In a later elaborate work of truly seminal nature, viz. 
Zero in Panini, M.D. Pandit (1990) comments:
The only technical principle that Pāṇini might have and has 
actually used is the principle of zero, which he perhaps borrowed 
from positional mathematics.
However, A.K. Dutta observes:
One does not know whether the mathematical zero existed by 
his time and whether he was influenced by it, or whether it 
was Pāṇini’s grammar which inspired the great mathematical 
invention.
But Pāṇini’s techniques of linguistic analysis do consist of some 
basic fibres of abstract universality, making one feel that they are 
comparable to those adopted in mathematics.
In the context of the discussion made so far, interpretations 
by D. Pingree (2003) and the co-sharers of his opinion seem quite 
untenable. The thread of rich philosophical and socio-academic 
ambiances of Indian antiquity seems to be quite pregnant with 
the immensity of the concept of śūnya, a dichotomy as well as a 
simultaneity between nothing and everything, the “zero” of void 
and that of an all-pervading “fathomless” infinite. It therefore 
appears more probable that Indians, even in pre-common era, were 
familiar with the mathematical perspectives of śūnya. Whatever 
symbol for this concept they might have used or thought at that 
early stage is, of course, not known to us.
Arabia
It was during the reign of Abbasid Caliph Harun Al-Rashid 
(eighth century ce) that Arab scholars of Bayt-Al-Hikma (House of 
Wisdom) like Al-Khwarizmi from Baghdad took śūnya and other 
decimal numbers from Indian works like the Brahmasphuṭasiddhānta 
of Brahmagupta and gradually through their translation it was 


|  67
Zero : An Eternal Enigma
introduced to Europe after the Dark Age, from where it eventually 
got spread throughout the world in their Latin translations after 
fighting against a stubborn resistance of the Catholic Church for 
about five hundred years. Initially Church was dead against the 
use of decimal system with zero, as they considered it to be Arabic 
in origin, and hence anti-Christian. However, with the gradual 
fall of Aristotelianism, through the epoch-making scientific 
works of Galileo, Torricelli, Pascal in establishing sustained 
vacuum in nature, and that of Copernicus, Bruno, Kepler in 
establishing the heliocentric model of the universe contrary to the 
geocentric Aristotelian model backed by the Ptolemaic theory of 
epicycles, while mathematician René Descartes put the number 
zero practically in the centre stage of his Coordinate Geometry 
establishing that curves from Greek geometry and equations from 
Arabic algebra are really like opposite sides of the same coin, the 
Church had to finally back out. But that story is far too long to be 
told here in detail. Today these numbers are recognized worldwide 
as the Hindu–Arabic numerals.
We put an end to this story with a befitting remark once made 
by G.B. Halsted:
The importance of the creation of the zero mark can never be 
exaggerated. This giving to airy nothing, not merely a local 
habitation and a name, a picture, a symbol, but helpful power, 
is the characteristic of the Hindu race from whence it sprang.
. . . No single mathematical creation has been more potent for 
the general on-go of intelligence and power.
References
Bloomfield, L., 1961, Language, p. 132, New York: Holt Rinehart and 
Winston.
Danino, Michel, 2016, “In Defence of Indian Science”, 13-14 October, 
The New Indian Express; \\http:www.newindianexpress.com/
opinions/2016/oct/13/in-defence-of-indian-science-1527495-1.html
Depuydt, Leo, 2008, “Review of the Book: Unexpected Links between 
Egyptian and Babylonian Mathematics by J. Friberg”, The Mathematical 
Intelligencer, 30(3): 72.


68  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
Dutta, Amartya Kumar, 2009, “Mathematics in Ancient India: Some 
Glimpses”, in Bharatatattva, Kolkata: Ramakrishna Mission Institute 
of Culture.
Gupta, R.C., 2015, “Who Invented the Zero?”, in Ganitananda: Selected 
Works of R C. Gupta on History of Mathematics, ed. K. Ramasubramanian, 
pp. 70-83.
Ifrah, G., 2000, The Universal History of Numbers, New York: John Wiley 
and Sons.
Kaplan, Robert, 2000, The Nothing That Is: A Natural History of Zero, New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Mukhopadhyay, Parthasarathi, 2009, “Concept of Sunya in Indian 
Antiquity”, Jour. Pure Math., 26: 15-49.
Nanda, Meera, 2016, Science in Saffron: Skeptical Essays on History of Science, 
Mohali: Indian Institute of Science Education & Research.
Needham, J. and Wang Ling, 1959, Science and Civilization in China, vol. 
II, p. 10, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pandit, M.D., 1990, Zero in Panini, Pune: University of Poona.
Pingree, David, 2003, “Zero and the Symbol for Zero in Early Sexagesimal 
and Decimal Place-Value Systems”, in  The Concept of Sunya, ed. A.K. 
Bag and S.R. Sarma, pp. 137-41, New Delhi: Aryan Books International.
Sarma, S.R., 2003, “Sunya in Pingala’s Chandahsutra”, in The Concept of 
Sunya, ed. A.K. Bag and S.R. Sarma, pp. 126-36, New Delhi: Aryan 
Books International.
Staal, Frits, 2010, “On the Origins of Zero: Studies in the History of Indian 
Mathematics”, in Culture and History of Mathematics, vol.  5, pp. 39-53, 
Delhi: Hindustan Book Agency.
Van Nooten, B., 1993, “Binary Numbers in Indian Antiquity”, J. Indian 
Philosophy, 21: 31-50.


8
Scientific Thoughts
in Indian Philosophy
Sanjit Kumar Sadhukhan
It is absurd to think that the literature of a nation is totally free 
from scientific phenomena or thoughts or results. As the daily 
life is somehow effected by some scientific events, the literature 
must record them however scanty they may be. A poetical work 
may not record a scientific event or thought in a direct manner 
but a philosophical work more or less involves a regular and deep 
investigation in its subject matter, and as for which a philosophical 
work may sometimes be considered as an introductory science 
book. And it actually happened at least in the cases of Vaiśeṣika 
and Yoga schools of Indian philosophy. I would like to present the 
scientific thoughts in these two schools. 
The nine main schools of Indian philosophy are divided 
into two broad sections: theistic and atheistic. Theistic section 
comprises six schools: Vedānta, Mīmāṁsā, Nyāya, Vaiśeṣika, Yoga 
and Sāṁkhya whereas the atheistic section comprises Cārvāka, 
Bauddha and Jaina.
Vaiśeṣika School  
The Vaiśeṣika philosophy, no doubt, is the earliest systematic 
thought on the nature of the physical world. The Vaiśeṣikasūtra of 
Kaṇāda is the first systematic work on the laws of physical matters 
along with many other epistemological knowledge. Later works 
like the Praśastapādabhāṣya and its commentary the Nyāyakandalī 
of Śrīdhara, the Kiraṇāvalī of Udayana and many other works 
followed it.
All objects of experience can be classified into six categories: 


70  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
dravya (substance), guṇa (quality), karma (motion), sāmānya 
(generality), viśeṣa (particularity) and samavāya (inherence). 
Later Vaiśeṣika (Śrīdhara, Udayana and Śivāditya) added one 
more category, abhāva (non-existence). The first three categories 
are defined as artha (which can be perceived) and they have 
real objective existence. The last three categories are defined as 
buddhyapekṣa (product of intellectual discrimination) and they are 
logical categories. Although the Vaiśeṣikasūtra of Kaṇāda has the 
six-category scheme of the padārthas, the seventh category abhāva 
is mentioned with its four varieties in the Sūtra.
DRAVYA (SUBSTANCE)
The nature of substance, qualities and motion has been elaborately 
studied. The substances are conceived as nine in number. They 
are: pr̥thivī (earth), ap (water), tejas (fire), vāyu (air), ākaśa (ether), 
kāla (time), dik (space), ātman (self or soul) and manas (mind). The 
first five are called bhūtas, the substances having some specific 
qualities so that they could be perceived by one or the other 
external sense. The qualities residing in the substances have been 
mentioned. Important among these is the investigation to search 
for the cause of origination of the material universe. Going back, 
the Vaiśeṣika philosophy speculates the existence of the atoms at 
the end. According to the Vaiśeṣika school, the tryaṇukas (triad) 
are the smallest (perceivable) particles. These are made of three 
parts, each of which is defined as dvyaṇuka (dyad). The dvyaṇukas 
are conceived as made of two parts, each of which is defined 
as paramāṇu (atom). The paramāṇus (atoms) are indivisible and 
eternal, they can neither be created nor destroyed. Each paramāṇu 
possesses its own distinct viśeṣa (individuality).
GUṆA (QUALITY)
The Vaiśeṣikasūtra mentions seventeen guṇas (qualities), to which 
Praśastapāda added another seven. While a substance is capable 
of existing independently by itself, a guṇa (quality) cannot exist 
so. The original seventeen guṇas are: rūpa (colour), rasa (taste), 
gandha (smell), sparśa (touch), saṅkhyā (number), parimāṇa 
(size/dimension/quantity), pr̥thaktva (individuality), saṁyoga 


|  71
Scientific Thoughts in Indian Philosophy
(conjunction), vibhāga (disjunction), paratva (priority), aparatva 
(posteriority), buddhi (knowledge), sukha (pleasure), duḥkha (pain), 
icchā (desire), dveṣa (aversion) and prayatna (effort). To these 
Praśastapāda added gurutva (heaviness), dravatva (fluidity), sneha 
(viscosity), dharma (merit), adharma (demerit), śabda (sound) and 
saṁskāra (faculty). Apart from pleasure, pain, desire, aversion, 
effort and some others, the qualities like colour, taste, saṁskāra 
[velocity (vega), elasticity (sthitisthāpaka)] and sound are no doubt 
important qualities discussed in science. The propagation of sound 
has been investigated in the Vaiśeṣika philosophy. It is like the 
series of the water ripples. The Nyāyakandalī the commentary on 
the Praśastapādabhāṣya (ed. Durgadhar Jha, pp. 692-94), elaborates 
it: The sounds occupy successive points ākāśa. The first sound 
causes the second one. As soon as the latter is formed, the former 
gets destroyed. This kind of production and destruction goes on 
in a chain and what is perceived by the ear is the last of the series. 
When a drum is stuck by a stick the impact is believed to  make 
vibrations as a consequence of which sound is produced in all 
directions. Ākāśa is the substratum of sound. The former is an 
eternal substance but the latter is a transient quality.
KARMA (MOTION)
There are five kinds of motions: upward movement (utkṣepaṇa), 
downward movement (avakṣepaṇa), contraction (āikuñcana), 
expansion (prasāraṇa) and locomotion (gamana).
THE VAIŚEṢIKA PHILOSOPHY INVESTIGATES
THE CAUSE OF DIFFERENT TYPES OF MOTION
Weight (gurutva) is the non-inherent cause of the initial falling 
motion of a body. Fluidity (dravatva) is the non-inherent cause 
of flowing. A moving body possesses, at each moment in time, a 
particular “motion”, which is to be thought of as a momentary, 
quality-like property of the body. “Motions” are defined to be 
the cause of conjunctions or disjunctions. A conjunction with a 
(stationary) body is brought about by displacement in space. We 
are thus to think of the motion of a body as being either identical 
with, or else the cause of, its displacement in space between two 


72  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
moments in time. A motion cannot be caused by another motion 
as that would lead to perpetual motion. A body is set in motion 
by its possession of a quality like “weight” or “fluidity”. It persists 
in motion by having a dispositional property, “velocity” or 
“elasticity”, which is the continuous cause of subsequent motions. 
It is brought to rest by coming into contact with other objects.
But answers to all the questions regarding motion are not got 
by the Vaiśeṣikas. The causes of the movement of an iron needle 
towards a magnet, the upward motion of flames, the movement of 
air and the initial motion of the atoms at the beginning of creation 
are not found out. They thought, there must be some “force” 
which initially gives rise to each of these motions, yet none of the 
“forces” so far isolated (weight/gravity, fluidity, elasticity) will do. 
The Vaiśeṣikas therefore speak of a new force, adr̥ṣṭa (the unseen 
force), alleged to account for such motions.
Thus, the Vaiśeṣika system has played an important role in the 
growth of the physical ideas in India. It had assumed a definite 
shape by the sixth century bce. In the history of science, sixth 
century bce has been regarded as the period which heralded the 
dawn of what has now come to be known as the Greek science. 
The Vaiśeṣika system contains in it the most important ideas 
on matter and motion, enunciated later by some of the leading 
Greek thinkers including Aristotle (from the beginning of the 
sixth century to the close of the fourth century bce). Among the 
Greeks there were distinctly separate views and explanations of 
the knowable world. But there appeared no single system of the 
type of Vaiśeṣika among the Greek thinkers.
Yoga School of Indian Philosophy 
Now I would like to come to the scientific thoughts in the Yoga 
philosophy. Yoga philosophy which prescribes the practice of yoga, 
i.e. controlling of the mental activities and physical movements, 
has been considered another source of scientific knowledge. It 
is amazing that yoga (physical and mental control) is considered 
as an important part of the medical treatment. Yoga is an ancient 
health science based on the experimental and experiential. The 


|  73
Scientific Thoughts in Indian Philosophy
physical postures and meditative practices of yoga developed 
through thousands of years of intent study of the body’s responses 
to particular postures and meditations. Many patients have already 
got on to yoga as a form of mental and physical self-care and 
preventive health. If we adequately understand yoga, we can have 
an opportunity to encourage the healthy thoughts and behaviours 
that our patients gain through yoga and to build upon them.
We the Indologists, having very scanty knowledge of the 
medical investigation in the yoga therapy, can only refer to the 
statement of the scientists in this field. So I would like to refer 
to the opinion and observation of Dr Timothy McCall, a board-
certified internist and editor of the Yoga Journal. He in his article 
“Yoga as Medicine” lists forty research-supported ways that yoga 
heals. Research indicates that yoga’s benefits include increased 
flexibility, improved range of motion, strengthening of muscles 
and improvement in balance. These effects help prevent joint 
injuries and falls, and enhance endurance and coordination. Yoga’s 
breathing techniques, combined with cardiovascular exercises, 
actually improve lung function; studies show increased vital 
capacity and peak flow in individuals who regularly practise yoga. 
Yoga also improves posture, which makes more space for lung 
expansion. These two effects combined explain why yoga has been 
shown to decrease the need for medications in mild to moderate 
asthma. Furthermore, yoga teaches breathing through the nose 
instead of the mouth, which helps to filter pollen and pollutants 
that set off asthma attacks. Avoiding mouth breathing may also 
improve snoring and sleep apnoea.
Different schools of Indian philosophy have contributed to 
the scientific knowledge. We may identify the fields more and 
more where scientific ideas are embedded. The ancient seers of 
Indian philosophy observed the nature of outer world and inner 
mind and noted them. We can reinvestigate on their claims and 
reinstate the findings to showcase the glorious heritage of India. 
Thus the vague ideas will fade away and the young scholars will 
be respectful towards the society they live in.
	
	
	
	
	


9
The Asiatic Society and
the Initiation of History of Science
Jagatpati Sarkar 
Set up in 1784 The Asiatic Society is not only the oldest institution 
of Asia but also is a cultural icon of our country. Primarily a colonial 
construct, the vision of the founder Sir William Jones had a wide 
concept in building up the Society. The Society took interest not 
only in languages, literature and culture in the beginning, but also 
in the natural sciences as they were related to India. There was no 
idea of establishing a museum as a part of the Society’s activities. 
But by 1796 it was found essential to erect a suitable building 
for housing antiquities of the Society. The Museum founded, 
developed under the care and guidance of Dr Nathaniel Wallich, 
a renowned botanist. The first three galleries like archaeology, 
zoology and geology were the starting point of the Museum of the 
Society. The science movement started from here. Actually when 
William Jones started his journey from England to India he noted 
down some important points to explore in India in which science 
was one of them. The points were:
	
1. 	The Laws of the Hindu and Mahomedans.
	
2.	 The History of the Ancient World.
	
3.	 Proofs and Illustrations of Scripture.
	
4.	 Traditions Concerning the Deluge, etc.
	
5.	 Modern Politics and Geography of Hindusthan.
	
6.	 Best Mode of Governing Bengal.
	
7.	 Arithmetic, Geometry and Mixed Sciences of Asiatics.
	
8. 	Medicine, Chemistry, Surgery and Anatomy of the Indians.


76  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
	
9. 	Natural Products of India.
	 10.	 Poetry, Rhetoric and Morality of Asia.
	 11.	 Music of the Eastern Nations.
	 12.	 The She-King or Soo Chinese Odes.
	 13.	 The Best Accounts of Tibet and Kashmir.
	 14.	 Trade, Manufacturing, Agriculture and Commerce of India.
	 15.	 Mughal Administration.
	 16.	 Maharatta Constitution.
One of the reasons why the Asiatic Society was eager to 
establish a museum was that by this time Englishmen had become 
aware of the cultural heritage of ancient India and of the importance 
of preserving and studying its remains. India had made known 
her progress in the physical science, especially astronomy, and 
it had drawn the attention of many Western scientists including 
Samuel Davis and John Playfair. Another English man keen of this 
study was William Hunter, who for sometime served as Secretary 
to the Society. During his stay in India, Hunter became interested 
in the Indian sciences and contributed seven papers to the Asiatic 
Researches. One of these was on the astronomical labours of 
Jaysimha, Rajah of Ambhere or Jayanagar. This provides the first 
detailed and scientific account of what are now known as Jantar 
Mantar, the unique astronomical structures built in the eighteenth` 
century by Astronomer statesman, Raja Sawai Jaisingh at Delhi, 
Mathura, Ujjain and Benares.
First of all the Europeans tried to explain the knowledge 
of science particularly Astronomy and Mathematics of India 
because they come aware that these two subjects are the mirror of 
civilization. The first European was Reuben Burrow who pointed 
out that the mathematical sciences were highly developed in 
ancient India. His paper on “A Proof that the Hindus Had the 
Binomial Theorem” was published in the second volume of the 
Asiatic Researches in 1804. He also tried to prove that although 
Newton was responsible for the application of the binomial 
theorem to fractional indices, the Hindus understood it in whole 
members to the full as well as Briggs and much better than Pascal. 


|  77
Asiatic Society and Initiation of History of Science
Sir William Cecil Dampier once told: 
The vast and imposing structure of modern science is perhaps the 
greatest triumph of the human mind. But the story of its origin, 
its development and its achievements is one of the least known 
parts of history. This has hardly yet found its way into general 
literature. Historians treat of war, of politics, of economics, but of 
the growth of those activities has hardly been mentioned. These 
have revealed the individual atom and opened to our vision, 
the depths of space, etc. These have revolutionized philosophic 
thought and given us the means of advancing our material 
welfare to a level beyond the dreams of former ages. Most of 
them tell us little or nothing. 
Gibbon believed that the best history could only be written by 
a historian philosopher, who distinguished those facts which 
dominate a system of relations.
Karl Marx once told:
England has to fulfil a double mission in India: One destructive, 
the other regenerating — the annihilation of old Asiatic Society 
and the laying of the material foundation of Western Society in 
Asia. The Europeans founded the Asiatic Society at Calcutta 
in 1784.
Voltaire, for instance, in his Ignorant Philosopher remarks:
It would be very singular that all nature, all the planets should 
obey eternal laws, and that there should be a little animal 5 feet 
high, who in contempt of these laws, could act as he pleased, 
solely according to his caprice.
An article on Hindu Astronomy by John Playfair is mentioned as 
being written in October 1792. This was received and published 
much later, in the 4th vol. of the Asiatic Researches. Jones had 
prefixed the 2nd vol. of the Researches with an “Advertisement” 
inviting learned European societies to transmit to the Secretary 
of the Asiatic Society in Bengal about a collection of short and 
precise queries on every branch of Asiatic History. He hoped that 
the society would gradually be able to provide answers to them 
which may prove in the highest degree beneficial to mankind.


78  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
John Playfair, Professor of Mathematics at Edinburgh, sent to 
the Society six questions with his own remarks on the development 
of the mathematical sciences in ancient India. Playfair was 
convinced that the Indians had in ancient times turned their 
attention to certain arithmetical investigations of which there was 
no trace in the writings of even the Greek scientist. He desired the 
society to find out if there were books on geometry and arithmetics 
in ancient India. He also suggested a complete translation of 
the Sūrya Siddhānta. He also suggested to draw up a catalogue 
of Sanskrit books on Indian Astronomy with a short account of 
each, and procuring descriptions of astronomical buildings and 
instruments of ancient India. He recommended that the skies 
should be studied together with an Indian astronomer to identify 
stars and constellations for which there were Sanskrit names. The 
Sūrya Siddhānta and a complete catalogue of Sanskrit MSS on 
Astronomy were published by the Asiatic Society, compiled by 
Professor A.K. Chakraborty in the year 2001.
The name of Bentley was also very popular in the history of the 
Society. He wrote an article “Antiquity of the Surya Siddhanta”. 
Bentley read one of the most controversial articles in the history 
of the Society. J.D. Pearson attempted the scientific basis behind 
Hindu mythology and traditions. He also tried to explain the 
attributes of Śiva and presented an article in the Asiatic Researches 
in 1803. The most important paper of 1810 was an essay on the 
early history of Algebra, read by Edward Strachey on 3 October. 
He presented his observations in original, extent and importance 
of Mathematics among the ancient Hindus and from the Persian 
translations of the Līlāvatī and the Bīja Gaṇita. This paper traced 
the origin of the description of algebra to India as a landmark in 
this branch of study. Colebrooke acknowledged this contribution.
The Museum of the Asiatic Society possesses the priceless 
and unique collection of manuscripts, archival documents both in 
English and Russian, rare printed books, lithographs, paintings, 
busts, photograph prints, coins and copper plate inscriptions, etc. 
Works of art include an Edict of Emperor Aśoka on grey-granite 
stone in Brāhmī Script, circa 250 bce Kharoṣṭhī Inscription of 


|  79
Asiatic Society and Initiation of History of Science
Copper Plate of first century ce, etc.
A Tantra MS named the Kubjikāmatam in later Gupta script 
and a printed book on Astronomy published from Venice in 1497 
are also in the Society’s present collection.
Lastly, a cursory list of History of Science of the Asiatic Society 
publication is appended here. They are as follows:
1.	 The Life and Works of Joseph Needham, ed. Sushil K. Mukherjee 
and Amitabha Ghosh, 1997.
2.	 The Endangered Earth, A.P. Mitra.
3.	 Subhankari, Santanu Chakraborty.
4.	 Studies in History of Sciences, Santimoy Chatterjee, M.K. 
Dasgupta and Amitabha Ghosh, 1997.
5.	 Rock Art Studies in India: A Historical Perspective, Somnath 
Chakraborty.
6.	 Rasarnava, ed. Prafulla Ch. Roy, Harish Ch. Kaviratna, revised 
and annotated by Baini Prasad (Work No. 175, repr. 1985).
7.	 Population Environment and Food Security,  M.S. Swaminathan.
8.	 Porlarisation of Ionospherically Propagated Radio Waves, S.R. 
Khastgir.
9.	 Papers on Ayurvedic Studies, ed. Brahmananda Gupta.
10.	 Meghnad Saha in Parliament, com. and ed. Santimoy Chatterjee 
and Jyotirmoy Gupta.
11.	 Life and Experiences of a Bengali Chemist, Prafulla Ch. Ray, vols 
I and II (repr. 1996).
12.	 Krisi Parasara, ed. and tr. Girija Prasanna Majumder and 
Suresh Ch. Banerjee, repr. 2001.
13.	 History, Science and Society in the Indian Context, ed. Arun K. 
Biswas.
14.	 History of Indian Medicine Based on Vedic Literature: Śatapatha 
Brāhmaṇa, Mridula Saha.
15.	 Gopal Haider: Sanskritir Rasaraupadrasta, ed. Sunil Behari 
Sensharma, Karunasindhu Das and Pallab Sengupta.


80  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
16.	 Gleanings of the Past and the Science Movement, A.K. Biswas.
17.	 Gaṇitāvalī, comp. Bibhuti Bhusan Bhattacarya, ed. Manabendu 
Banerjee and Pradip K. Majumder.
18.	 Ganit Shastre Smaraniya Janra (in Bengali), Pradip K. 
Majumder, vol. I in 1995.
19.	 Father Eugene Lafont of St. Xavier’s College, Kolkata and the 
Contemporary Science Movement, Arun K. Biswas, 2001.
20.	 Dawn of Modern Marine Science in India, comp. and ed. 
Jyotirmoy Gupta.
21.	 Collected Works of Mahendralal Sircar, Eugene Lafont and the 
Science Movement, comp. and ed. Arun K. Biswas.
22.	 Collected Works of Mahendralal Sircar, Eugene Lafont and the 
Science Movement, comp. and ed. Saradindu Sekhar Ray.
23.	 Collected Papers of Jnan Chandra Ghosh, vols I and II.
24.	 Bangla Bhasay Vijnan Charcha, ed. Sarabindu Sekhar Ray.
25.	 Aspects of History of Science, ed. Naresh Ch. Dutta and Tulika 
Sen.
The Asiatic Society has been continuing its venture on the 
study of History of Science by publishing different articles in its 
journal and organizing regular workshops on History of Science 
till date.
 


10
Astronomical Manuscripts
in Oriental Libraries of India 
Ninth Century Onward 
Somenath Chatterjee
India has inherited a large number of manuscripts in Sanskrit 
literature which are not edited or read. Astronomical manuscripts 
are included in this category. Astronomical manuscripts are 
categorized as Siddhāntic, Karaṇa, eclipses and star charts. David 
Pingree concentrated on this field for future reference.
Introduction 
Manuscripts are the product of intellectual activities of the 
past. Manuscripts inherited by a country are the identification 
on its intellectual past. India has inherited a large number of 
manuscripts on different subjects in Sanskrit, Persian and Arabic 
languages. In this paper only manuscripts of Sanskrit language 
are considered. The epics, Purāṇas and other texts are written in 
Sanskrit. Mahārājās, rājās and other rich men were the collectors 
of manuscripts. They appointed scholars or copiers to copy the 
manuscripts and preserved as their knowledge. Many scholars 
negotiated great distances to get a copy of the rare manuscripts. 
They deposited these MSS to libraries or stored in their own places. 
A large numbers of libraries were attached to the palace where 
manuscripts were preserved. Gift of a manuscript was considered 
highly meritorious.1 There are instances of manuscripts being 
copied by great scholars like Pakṣadhara Miśra and Vidyāpati 
	
1	 M.M. Anantalal Thakur, 2009, “Manuscriptology from Indian 
Sources”, in Aspects of Manuscriptology, Kolkata: The Asiatic Society.


82  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
Thākur of Mithilā. Varāhamihira collected five astronomical 
manuscripts and compiled them as the Pañcasiddhāntikā which 
is the first manuscript compilation in India. Today, scholars of 
history of astronomy suggest that the Siddhāntic texts which 
are compiled by Varāhamihira are the first documents found in 
India. Āryabhaṭa, the pioneer of modern astronomy in India, 
applied mathematical theory to solve astronomical problems. 
Now, in different oriental libraries, the copies of Āryabhaṭīyam 
are available. To compile a concise history of astronomy in Indian 
context, it needs to edit almost all the manuscripts related to 
astronomy. H.T. Colebrooke, G. Thibaut, Sudhakar Dvivedi, Swāmi 
Vijñānānanda, David Pingree and many others tried to collect 
astronomical manuscripts and critically edited those works. M.M. 
Haraprasad compiled large amount of astronomical works in the 
Asiatic Society. David Pingree published a detailed bibliography 
of astronomical manuscripts. S.N. Sen compiled A Bibliography of 
Sanskrit Works on Astronomy and Mathematics in which details of 
astronomical works are included.
Two Latin words manus and scriptus are the origin of the 
word manuscript. According to the Antiques and Art Treasure 
Act 1972 of India “any manuscript is a hand-written composition, 
which has scientific, historical or aesthetic value and which has 
been in existence for not less than seventy-five years old”. India 
has the oldest and largest collection of manuscripts that are to be 
preserved for next generation. The Constitution of India, under 
Fundamental Duties in Article 51A, states that “it shall be the duty 
to every citizen of India to value and preserve the rich heritage of 
our composite culture”. In this paper, I would like to concentrate 
on astronomical manuscripts conserved in Oriental libraries.
We have a large number of astronomical manuscripts in 
Sanskrit language from eighth century onwards and those are 
given in Table 10.1.
M.M. Anantalal Thakur states that an Indian scholar’s fond 
aspiration was to live among manuscripts. From the oldest times 
palm leaf was the major material for composing manuscripts. Birch 
bark was the next and the country-made paper began to be used 
from the twelfth century onwards. The oldest palm-leaf


|  83
Astronomical Manuscripts in Oriental Libraries of India
Table 10.1: No. of Manuscripts on Astronomy during
Eighth and Nineteenth Centuries ce
	
Era (Century ce)	
No. of MSS
	
9	
5
	
10	
4
	
11	
10	
	
12	
24	
	
13	
8	
	
14	
15	
	
15	
47	
	
16	
93	 	
	
17	
190	
	
18	
37	
	
19	
62	
	
Undated	
1,641	
	
Total	
2,1362	
manuscript as known till now is the manuscript preserved in the 
Tokyo Museum (600 ce) and the manuscript on medicine which 
can be placed in the fifth century ce is on birch bark lying in the 
British Museum.3 The oldest astronomical manuscript R̥k-Vedāṅga-
Jyotiṣa is found of 1370 bce.
Importance of Astronomical Manuscripts
The glorious past of Indian astronomical knowledge lies in the 
manuscripts especially in Sanskrit manuscripts. These are the basic 
	
2 	A. Rehman (ed.), 1982, Science and Technology in Medieval India: A 
Bibliography of Source Materials in Sanskrit, Arabic and Persian, New 
Delhi: Indian National Science Academy. 
	
3	 Dilipkumar Kanjilal, 2009, “Manuscriptology”, in Aspects of 
Manuscriptology, ed. Ratna Basu and Karunasindhu Das, p. 136, 
Kolkata: The Asiatic Society. 


84  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
historical evidences which can truly say our history. These cover 
a variety of approaches to explain contemporary astronomical 
events. These manuscripts were the controller of the society. 
All religious rituals were obeyed through these writings. These 
survived manuscripts for centuries have significance of antiquity.
It is important to edit a text critically and for this reason 
manuscripts found in different zones are to be studied properly. 
The lines of every manuscript are straight and the letters are of 
same height. 
samāni samapadāni samānasani samā śirāḥ A
akṣarāṇi praṣṭhistavyāni mr̥duni lalitāni ca AA	 	
	
	 	 	
	
     — Nandi Purāṇa
When any manuscript is being copied, three methods are followed:
	 (a)	 Copying the text with notes.
	 (b)	 One śloka and its explanation.
	 (c)	 Copying the text in the middle portion of the page and 
writing notes in empty place.
Copy of astronomical manuscripts that are found mostly 
followed the first method, i.e. total copy of the text with notes.
The characteristics of manuscripts are equal in astronomical 
manuscripts like pagination, punctuation, abbreviation and 
colophon. The scribes of these manuscripts were well trained in 
astronomy and this lengthy toilwork was done only when they 
were passionate about it. Many works they copied stated kaṣtena 
likhitaṁ grantha yatnena paripālayet. Here is an appeal to conserve 
the manuscripts which are written with care.
In astronomical texts numbers are expressed by words, as one for 
moon (candra), bhūmi, dharaṇī, earth (pr̥thivī), etc.; two for yuga, netra 
(eye), bhujā (arm), etc. A scholar of history of astronomy must learn 
how to read manuscript especially knowing word-numbers analogy.
In addition a scribe used to know that aṅkasya vāmā gatiḥ 
(numbers are counted from left side). From Āryabhaṭīyam (V.2):
vargākṣarāṇi varge ’varge ’vargākṣarāṇi kāt ṅmau yaḥ A 
khadvinavake svarā nava varge ’varge navāntyavarge vā AA


|  85
Astronomical Manuscripts in Oriental Libraries of India
The varga letters (ka to ma) should be written in the varga places 
and the avarga letters (ya to ha) in the avarga places. ‘(The varga 
letters take the numerical values l, 2, 3, etc.) from ka onwards; 
(the numerical value of the initial avarga letter) ya is equal to ṅa 
plus m (i.e. 5 + 25), the nine vowels should be written (one vowel 
in each pair of the varga and avarga places). In the varga (and 
avarga) places beyond (the places denoted by) the nine vowels 
too (assumed vowels or other symbols should be written, if 
necessary)’. 		
     — K.S. Shukla, Āryabhatiya of Āryabhaṭa
The Sanskrit alphabets are classified into five vargas; ka-varga, 
ca-varga, ṭa-varga, ta-varga and pa-varga. The letters are to bear 
numerical values 1 to 25 (Table 10.2).
The notational places are divided into the varga and avarga 
places. The odd places denoting unit’s place, the hundred’s place, 
the ten thousand’s place and so on are called varga places and the 
even places denoting ten’s place, the thousand’s place, etc. are 
called avarga places.
The importance of astronomical manuscripts is to make our 
past astronomical knowledge open to the world.
Types of Sanskrit Astronomical Manuscripts
The astronomical works of India are divided mainly into two 
categories, viz.:
Table 10.2: Classification of Sanskrit Alphabets
and Their Numerical Values
Varga                          Letters and Their Numerical Values	
ka-varga	
ka = 1	
kha = 2	
ga = 3	
gha = 4	
ṅa = 5
ca-varga	
ca = 6	
cha = 7	
ja = 8	
jha = 9	
na =10
ṭa-varga	
ṭa = 11	
ṭha = 12	 dạ =13	
ḍha = 14	 ṇa = 15 
ta-varga	
ta = 16	
tha = 17	 da = 18	 dha = 19	 na = 20
pa-varga	
pa = 21	 pha = 22 	 ba = 23	 bha = 24	 ma = 25
The avarga letters y to h bear the following value:
ya = 30, ra = 40, la = 50, va = 60, śa = 70, ṣa = 80, sa = 90, ha = 100


86  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
	
1.	 Siddhānta treatises, and
	
2.	 Kāraṇa treatises.4
The Sūryasiddhānta, the Āryabhaṭīyam, the Brahmasphuṭasiddhānta, 
etc. belonged to the first category. Several Kāraṇas were written 
on the basis of the Āryabhaṭīyam. The Kauṇḍakhyādaka (the 
kāraṇa written by Brahmagupta), the Kāraṇakutūhala (written by 
Bhāskara), and the Kāraṇaprakāśa (written by Brahmadeva Gaṇaka) 
are the main Kāraṇa books of Indian astronomy.
Before the classic era, Jaina astronomical thoughts were known 
to scholars as the Sūryaprajñapti and the Candraprajñapti. These 
manuscripts have been studied carefully and their astronomical 
concepts were not accepted later. Five-years yuga system known 
from Vedāṅga-Jyotiṣa was continued up to the Paitāmahasiddhānta, 
which was the first Siddhāntic text in Indian astronomy. David 
Pingree in his A Descriptive Catalog of the Sanskrit Astronomical 
Manuscript Preserved at the Mahārājā Sawai Mān Singh II Museum 
in Jaipur, India categorized his findings as Siddhānta, Kāraṇa, 
Koṣṭha and eclipse. It can be assumed that he got the manuscripts 
separately and numbered in such a way. Another important 
classification of Indian astronomical manuscripts is: (a) divine, 
and (b) pauruṣeya. Divine means, in manuscripts, the name of the 
writer is absent. In manuscripts before Āryabhaṭa, writers’ names 
are not found anywhere. Historians of astronomy assume the 
name from the next found anonymous manuscript. For example, 
in R̥k-Vedāṅga-Jyotiṣa, no name is found. But in Yajur-Vedāṅga-
Jyotiṣa the Sage Śeṣa noticed the name Lagadha as the writer of 
R̥k-Vedāṅga-Jyotiṣa.
Āryabhaṭa was the first person who introduced himself in his 
book Āryabhaṭīyam. The contemporary astronomer, astrologer and 
mathematician Varāhamihira wrote his own name and location 
where he lived, so it is easier to locate the writer for future scholars.
Cataloguing of Manuscripts 
	
4	 Bharadwaj, Sudhikant, 1991, Sūryasiddhānta: An Astro-linguistic Study, 
New Delhi: Parimal Publications.


|  87
Astronomical Manuscripts in Oriental Libraries of India
DAVID PINGREE’S EDITION
Cataloguing of manuscripts has been initiated in last century 
by mostly individual effort. Satkari Mukhopadhyaya started 
an extensive survey of the cataloguing of manuscripts in 2006. 
From eighth to nineteenth century ce astronomical manuscripts 
of different materials are found. 1,641 manuscripts are found 
without name of writers and date (Table 10.1). Yet, according to 
linguistic logic, historians detect a period when these manuscripts 
were written.
Sawai Jai Singh II was an astronomy lover. He collected 
manuscripts and preserved them in his own library. Father of Swai 
Jai Singh II, Viṣṇu Singh paid close attention to the education of 
his son. He sent Jai Singh to Benares for his education. He received 
progress report of his son’s education from paṇḍits and also by 
his trusted servants. Jai Singh learned Sanskrit and Mathematics. 
When he was only thirteen years old he copied two astronomical 
manuscripts which are still preserved in Maharaja Swai Man Singh 
II Museum of Jaipur.
Jai Singh favoured Hindu astronomer Jagannātha Samrāṭ. 
The name of Jagannātha’s father was Gaṇeśa. Jagannātha came 
in contact with the rājā at an early age. He was well versed in 
Sanskrit, Arabic and Persian languages as well as in Astronomy 
and Mathematics. When Sawai Jai Singh II initiated a vigorous 
programme in astronomical and mathematical works, Jagannātha 
translated the Almagest from Arabic to Sanskrit carefully. His 
approach and lucid style made the book popular. According to 
Jagannātha’s version, the translation was done in a style so that 
even “a novice can comprehend its contents easily”.5 Jai Singh 
employed a number of competent scribes for coping manuscripts 
for his library. They copied the manuscripts in Sanskrit language 
using the Devanāgarī script. Among the vast astronomical 
activities of Jai Singh, collecting and copying works had a prime 
place. Maharaja Sawai Man Singh II Museum was founded in 
	
5	 Sharma, Virendra Nath, 1995, Sawai Jai Singh and His Astronomy, Delhi: 
Motial Banarsidass.


88  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
1727 by Mahārājā Sawai Jai Singh II. With over 7866 hand-written 
manuscripts the Pothīkhānā archives of the museum is regarded 
as one of the best in India. A majority of the manuscripts are 
hand-written copies of different subjects like medicine, astronomy, 
philosophy, religion and mathematical tables.
David Pingree compiled astronomical manuscripts with five 
scholars. It was published by American Philosophical Society, 
Philadelphia in 2003. They divided the catalogue into ten sections.
	
A.	 Vedic
	
B. 	Siddhānta 
	
C. 	Kāraṇas
	
D.	 Koṣṭhakas
	
E.	 Eclipses
	
F.	 Star Charts
	
G.	 Geographical Tables
	 H.	 Astronomical Instruments
	
I.	 Translations
	
J.	 Miscellaneous
In the Preface of the book they said “there is a vast amount 
of unpublished manuscript material in Sanskrit, Arabic, Persian, 
and Latin, relevant to Mahārājā’s activities”.
The manuscripts belonging to the library of the Maharaja 
Sawai Man Singh II Museum, Jaipur  are divided into four separate 
collections:
1. The Khāsmohor collection,
2. the Puṇḍarīka collection, 
3. the Pothīkhānā collection, and
4. the Museum collection.
A few of the important astronomical manuscripts, which are 
	
6	 David Pingree (ed.), 2003, A Descriptive Catalogue of the Sanskrit 
Astronomical Manuscripts Preserved at the Maharaja Man Singh II Museum 
in Jaipur, India, Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society.


|  89
Astronomical Manuscripts in Oriental Libraries of India
listed in the book, are found in Khāsmohor:
•
• The Āryabhatīyam, Golādhyāya
•
• The Āryasiddhānta 
•
• The Br̥haspatisiddhānta
•
• The Brahmatulyasāraṇī 
•
• The Candrasūryagrahaṇādhikāra
•
• The Grahalāghava
•
• The Grahalāghavaṭīkā
•
• The Kāraṇakutūhala 
•
• The Kāraṇaprakāśikā
•
• The Pitāmahasiddhānta
•
• The Siddhāntakaustubhamañjarī
•
• The Siddhāntasaṁhitāsāra
•
• The Siddhāntaśiromaṇi
•
• The Siddhāntaviveka
•
• The Sundarasiddhānta (Siddhāntasundara?)
•
• The Sūryasidddhānta
•
• The Tripraśnādhikāra
•
• The Vāsanabhāṣyapātādhyāya
•
• The Yantrarāja
•
• The Yantrarājaṭīkā
Pingree and his associates did this tough job for future 
research. They separately listed the translation work, based on 
Islamic astronomy that Jai singh had acquired in the late 1720s. 
These are:
• The Ukrā
• The Jarakīlīyantra
• The Yantrarājasyarasāla
• The Vakramārgavicāra
• The Lunar Tables of the Ulakabegījīca


90  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
• The Hayatagrantha
• The Siddhāntasindhu
• The Yantraprakāra.
Pingree also categorized their works further to detect the category 
of manuscripts.
Siddhāntas
	
1.	 The Paitāmahasiddhānta from the Viṣṇudharmottara Purāṇa
	
2.	 The Sūryasiddhāntasāravicāra
	
3.	 Jagannātha’s Siddhāntakaustubha.
Kāraṇas
	
1.	 A full version of  the Rājamr̥gāṇka
	
2.	 Dāmodara’s Sūryatulya.
Koṣṭhakas
	
1.	 The unique manuscript of Moreśvara’s Markaṇḍaṭippaṇa
	
2.	 The unique manuscript of Harinātha’s tithi, nakṣatra and 
yoga tables
	
3.	 The unique manuscript of Goparāga’s Khagataraṅgiṇī.
Eclipses 
	
1. 		Observation and computations of lunar eclipses on 18 May 
1761; 17 April 1772; 23 March 1773; 30 September 1773; 15 
February 1775.
Star Charts
	
1. 	The star chart made by Mādhava Siṁha (1760 ce).
Geographical Tables 
	
1. 	Two geographical tables.
Miscellaneous 
	
1.	 Two manuscripts of Nandarāma Miśra’s Bhāgavata-
jyotiḥśāstra bhūgolakhagolavirodhaparihāra.
A few important astronomical manuscripts of Nāgarī script 
found in Oriental libraries are given in Table 10.3. 


|  91
Astronomical Manuscripts in Oriental Libraries of India
Table 10.3: Astronomical Manuscripts in Nāgarī Scripts in 
the Oriental Libraries
Works	
	
Details	
Manuscript Found at
Ābhiṣṭasāraṇī	
Astronomical table	
The Asiatic Society,
	
	
	
Kolkata
Agaṇitacāra	
Astronomical work containing	
Govt Oriental MSS 	 	
	
a set of astronomical tables,	
Library, Madras
	
yearly reckoner to calculate the	
(Chennai)	
	
movement of planets
Āpastamba-	
Containing 223 sūtras for	
1.	 Govt  Sanskrit College
Śulbasūtra	
the construction of sacrificial	
	
Library, Benares
	
alters	
	
2.	 Viśva Bandhu,
	
	
	
	
Hosiarpur
Āryabhaṭīyam	
Works on mathematics and 	
1.	 The Asiatic Society,
	
astronomy divided into four	
	
Kolkata
	
main parts	
2.	 University of Bombay, 
	
	
	
	
Mumbai (incomplete)
	
	
	
3. 	American Oriental
	
	
	
	
Society, New Haven, 	
	
	
	
	
CT
	
	
	
4. 	Calcutta Sanskrit
	
	
	
	
College, Kolkata
	
	
	
	
(incomplete)
	
	
	
5. 	Anup Sanskrit
	
	
	
 	 Library, Bikaner
Āryasiddhānta	 Siddhāntic work containing	
The Asiatic Society,
 	
18 chapters	
Kolkata
Āryabhaṭa-	
Commentary on Āryabhaṭīyam	
1. The Asiatic Society,
sūtrādha-	
of Āryabhaṭa I	
	
Kolkata
prakāśikā	
	
	
2. University of Bombay,
	
	
	
	
Mumbai 	
Bakhśāli MSS	
It was written in	
Archaeological 
(unknown)	
birch bark. Seventy leaves of	
Survey of India,
	
birch bark survived	
New Imperial	
	
	
at the time of discovery.	
Series, vol. 43, parts
Cont.


92  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
Table 3: Cont.
Works	
	
Details	
Manuscript Found at
	
It is a mathematical work.	
I-III.
Baudhāyana-	
It contains 525 sūtras and is	
The Asiatic Society,
Śulbasūtra	
divided into three chapters	
Kolkata
(Bodhāyana)	
Baudhāyana-	
Commentary on the	
Viśveśvarānanda Vedic
Śulbasūtravyākhyā	
Śulbasūtra of Bodhāyana	
Research Institute, 
(Dvārakānātha)	
	
	
MSS Collection,
	
	
	
Hosiarpur
Bhāgpañcāṅga	
Mathematical tables used for	
British Museum,	
(Dvārakānātha)	
computing the calendar from	
C. Bendall
	
a lunar time 	
	
Br̥hatsaṁhitāvivr̥ti	
Commentary on the	
Asiatic Society,
Bhaṭṭotpala I	
Br̥hat Saṁhitā of	
Kolkata
(966 ce) 	
of Varāhamihira	
Bhaumasāraṇī 	
Astronomical table 	
Panjab University 
(Bhaṭṭotpala II)	
containing the motion	
Lahore, 2 vols
(1099 ce)  	
of Mars	
Bhāva-Nighaṇtu	
An anonymous astronomical	
Govt Oriental
(Bhaṭṭotpala II) 	
work	
	
Manuscripts Library, 
(1099 ce) 	
	
	
Madras
Bhāvaprakāśa 	
An anonymous commentary	
Govt Oriental
(Bhavāniśaṅkara)	
on the Āryabhaṭīyam of 	
Manuscripts Library,
	
Āryabhaṭa	 	
Madras 
Bhūgola	
A description of the universe	
1.	 British Museum	
(Bhūdhara Sūri)	
as found in the	
2.	 Bombay branch of 	
(1572 ce)	
Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa	
	
the Royal Asiatic
	
	
	
	
Society
Brahmasphuṭa-	
Astronomical–mathematical	
1.	 Asiatic Society,
siddhānta 	
work containing twenty-four	
	
Kolkata (Bengali)
(Brahmagupta)	
chapters. This work influences	 2.	 Sanskrit College	 	
(c.628 ce)	
the renaissance of Arab	
	
Library, Benares
	
astronomy		
3.	 University of
	
	
	
	
Bombay, G.U.
	
	
	
	
Devasthali 
	
	
	
4.	 Viśveśvarānanda
	
	
	
	
Vedic Research
	
	
	
	
Institute, Viśva


|  93
Astronomical Manuscripts in Oriental Libraries of India
Cont.
Works	
	
Details	
Manuscript Found at
	
	
	
	
Bandhu, Hosiarpur
Brahmasid-	
Follows the Sūryasiddhānta,	
1. Asiatic Society, 	
dhānta	
contemporary astronomical	
	
Kolkata
(Śākalya Saṁhitā)	
concepts are included	
2.	 Sanskrit College
821 ce (approx.)	
	
	
	
Library, Benares
	
	
	
3.	 Calcutta Sanskrit
	
	
	
	
College
	
	
	
4.	 Govt Oriental MSS
	
	
	
	
Library, Madras
Brahmasiddhānta-	
Astronomical work	
Panjab University 
sāraṇī	
containing many tables	
Library, Punjab
Brahmasiddhānta	
Part of the 	
Sanskrit College 
(Viṣṇudharmotta- 	 Viṣṇudharmottara Purāṇa	
Library, Benares
riya)	
	
	
	
	
Brahmatulya	
A treatise of planetary	
1.	 The Asiatic Society,
siddhānta 	
motion	
	
	
Kolkata
(Bhāskarācārya)	
	
	
2.	 Anup Sanskrit
(1183 ce)	
	
	
	
Library, Bikaner
Cakrayāsa	
Astronomical work	
Panjab University
(Cakradhara)	
	
	
Library, Lahore 
Candrasūrya-	
An astronomical work for	
Rajasthan Oriental 	
grahaṇa	
calculating the eclipses of 	
Research Institute, 
	
the sun and the moon	
Jodhpur
Chedyakopapatti	
An astronomical work	
The Bihar and Orissa
	
	
	
Research Society,
	
	
	
Patna
Dhruva-bhramaṇa	
An anonymous work	
Udaipur
lokavidhi 
(Nārmadīyakr̥ṣṇa)	 	
Dr̥ggṇita	
Anonymous astronomical	
Govt Oriental MSS
	
work dealing with rules	
Library, Madras
 	
of computation for compi-	
	
ling calendars from direct
	
heavenly bodies
Gaṇakaprakāśa	
A manual of astronomy	
Royal Asiatic Society,
(Ekanātha) 	
containing nine chapters	
Bombay (Mumbai)
(c.1600 ce)


94  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
Table 3: Cont.	
	
	
	
Works	
	
Details	
Manuscript Found at
Dhrūvabhramaṇa-	
A commentary on	
Royal Asiatic Society, 
yantravyākhyā	
Dhrūvabhramaṇayantra of	
Bombay Branch	
	
	
Padmanābha	
	
	
Gaṇasūyakoṣṭaka	
Astronomical treatise	
Private library in
	
	
	
Gujarat
Grahalāghava	
An astronomical work in	
1.	 The Asiatic Society,
 	
14 chapters	
	
Kolkata (incomplete)
	
	
	
2.	 Sanskrit College
	
	
	
	
Library, Benares
	
	
	
3.	 CENSUS
	
	
	
4.	 Calcutta Sanskrit 	
	
	
	
	
College (University)
Grahalāghava-	
A commentary of	
1.	 The Asiatic Society,
vivr̥ti	
Grahalāghava	
	
Kolkata
	
	
	
2.	 Calcutta Sanskrit
	
	
	
	
College (University)
Gaṇitaviṣaya	
Astronomical work with	
Govt Oriental
	
tables and charts 	
Manuscript Library,
	
	
	
Chennai
Grahadarpaṇa	
Astronomical work based	
Durbar Library, Nepal
	
on the Sūryasiddhānta	
Grahasāraṇī	
An astronomical work	
Anup Sanskrit
	
	
	
Library, Bikaner
Hayanagrantha	
An astronomical work	
Oudh
Jaiminisūtra	
An astronomical work	
The Asiatic Society,	 	
	
	
	
Kolkata
Jyotiṣasiddhānta	
A collection of astronomical 	
Printed edn available
Saṁgraha	
works comprising	
by Vindhyeśvarī
 	
the Somasiddhānta,	
Prasād Dvivedi
 	
the Brahmasiddhānta,	
	
the Pitāmahasiddhānta and	
	
the Vr̥ddhavaśiṣṭhasiddhānta	
Jyotiṣasaṁgraha	
An astronomical work	
The Asiatic Society,
	
	
	
Kolkata


|  95
Astronomical Manuscripts in Oriental Libraries of India
Cont.
Works	
	
Details	
Manuscript Found at
Jyotiṣasāra	
An astronomical work	
The Asiatic Society,
	
	
	
Kolkata
Jyotiṣasiddhānta	
An anonymous astronomical	
Mysore
	
work	
	
Jyotiṣasūtra-	
An anonymous astronomical 	 Mysore
vyākhyāna	
work
Jyotpatti	
An anonymous astronomical 	 Oudh
	
work
Kālajñāna	
An anonymous astronomical	
The Asiatic Society,
	
work	
	
Kolkata
Kararṇapaddhati	
An astronomical treatise	
Govt Oriental MSS
(15 ce)	
	
	
Library Madras
	
	
	
(Chennai)
Karaṇaprakāśa	
An astronomical work	
1. Sanskrit College 	
(1092 ce)	
	
	
	
Library, Benares
	
	
	
2.	 University of
	
	
	
	
Bombay
Siddhāntadarpaṇa	
A short work on astronomy	
Govt Oriental MSS
 	
in 32 stanzas	
Library, Madras
	
	
	
(Chennai)
Siddhāntaśekhara	
A Siddhāntic work on	
1.	 Anup Sanskrit
	
astronomy containing 20	
	
Library, Bikaner
	
chapters	 	
2.	 Govt Oriental
 	
	
	
	
MSS Library, Madras
 	
	
	
	
(Chennai)
Siddhāntaśiromaṇi	
An astronomical work	
1.	 Anup Sanskrit
	
1. Gaṇitādhyāya	
	
Library, Bikaner
	
2. Golādhyāya	
2.	 Calcutta Sanskrit 		
	
	
	
	
College (University) 
	
	
	
3.	 Oudh
Siddhāntatattva-	
An astronomical work	
1.	 Calcutta Sanskrit
viveka	
	
	
	
College (University)
Somasiddhānta	
An astronomical treatise	
1.	 Sanskrit College
	
following the Sūryasiddhānta,	
	
Library, Benares
	
containing 10 chapters	
2.	 Mysore	


96  | Ancient Indian Scientific Thought and Modern Theories
Works	
	
Details	
Manuscript Found at
 	
	
	
3.	 Tanjore Maharaja
	
	
	
	
Serfoji’s Sarasvati
	
	
	
	
Mahal Library,
	
	
	
	
Tanjore
Sphuṭanirṇaya-	
An anonymous	
Govt Oriental MSS
yantraḥ	
compendium of astronomical	 Library, Madras
 	
calculations in 6 chapters	
(Chennai)
Sūrya-prajāpati	
A Jain astronomical work. A	
Asiatic Society, 	
	
	
descriptive catalogue of the 	
Kolkata
 	
Sanskrit Manuscript.
Sūryasiddhānta	
A standard astronomical	
1.	 Asiatic Society,
 	
treatise contains 14 chapters	
	
Kolkata 		
	
	
	
	
2.	 Sanskrit College
	
	
	
	
Library, Benares
	
	
	
3.	 Bishop’s College, 		
	
	
	
	
Kolkata
	
	
	
4.	 India Office 	
	
	
	
	
	
Library, London 	
	
	
	
	
	
Conclusion
It is very important to detect the astronomical manuscripts with 
the other ones existing in different Oriental libraries in India 
to get a clear history of astronomical knowledge of ancient and 
medieval India. An astronomer or a historian categorically makes 
his knowledge-base on his subject. He may or may not have 
expertise on languages like Sanskrit and Arabic. If a historian 
likes to read astronomical manuscripts written in Sanskrit then 
he should learn astronomy as well and Sanskrit. Our education 
system should be moulded in such a way that a student can read 
history, languages and science subjects simultaneously. It is the 
only solution to rediscover unread manuscripts on science subjects 
including astronomy.
Table 3: Cont.


Contributors
Amalendu Bandhyopadhyay, Professor and Senior Scientist, 
M.P. Birla Institute of Fundamental Research, Kolkata; formerly 
Director, Positional Astronomy Centre, Govt of India.
Dhirendranath Banerjee, formerly Secretary, Vangiya Sanskrit 
Siksha Parishad, Education Department, Govt of West Bengal.	
Ramkrishna Bhattacharya, Fellow, Pavlov Institute, Kolkata.
Somenath Chatterjee, Individual Researcher.
Raghunath Ghosh, Professor Emeritus, Philosophy Department, 
University of North Bengal, Siliguri, West Bengal.
Dilip Kumar Mohanta, Professor, Dept of Philosophy, University 
of Calcutta; formerly Vice-Chancellor, Sanskrit College and 
University, Kolkata.
Parthasarathi Mukhopadhyay, Associate Professor, Dept of 
Mathematics, Narendrapur Rama Krishna Mission Residential 
College (Autonomous), Kolkata.
Sanjit Kumar Sadhukhan, Associate Professor, Rabindra Bharati 
University, Kolkata.
Jagatpati Sarkar, Senior Catologuer, Museum Section, The Asiatic 
Society, Kolkata.
