Swami Vivekananda.
 1. Power comes to him who observes unbroken 
Brahmacharya for a period of twelve years. Complete 
continence gives great intellectual and spiritual power. Controlled 
desire leads to the highest results. Transform the sexual energy into 
spiritual energy. The stronger this force, the more can be done with it. 
Only a powerful current of water can do hydraulic mining.
 2. Swami Vivekananda attributed his phenomenal mental powers to 
a lifelong observance of brahmacharya.A few days ago, a new set 
of the Encyclopedia Britannica had been bought for the Math. Seeing 
the new shining volumes, the disciple said to Swamiji, “It is almost 
impossible to read all these books in a single lifetime.” He was 
unaware that Swamiji had already finished ten volumes and had 
begun the eleventh.Swamiji: What do you say? Ask me anything you 
like from these ten volumes, and I will answer you all.The disciple 
asked in wonder, “Have you read all these books?” Swamiji: Why 
should I ask you to question me otherwise?
Being examined, Swamiji not only reproduced the sense, but at places 
the very language of the difficult topics selected from each volume. 
The disciple, astonished, put aside the books, saying, “This is not 
within human power!”
Swamiji: Do you see, simply by the observance of strict 
Brahmacharya (continence) all learning can be mastered in 
a very short time — one has an unfailing memory of what 
one hears or knows but once. It is owing to this want of 
continence that everything is on the brink of ruin in our 
country. 


 3. His childhood friend: Whatever you may say, I cannot bring myself to 
believe in these words. Who can come by that oratorical power of 
expounding philosophy which you have?
Swamiji: You don’t know! That power may come to all. That power 
comes to him who observes unbroken Brahmacharya for a period of 
twelve years, with the sole object of realising God I have practiced 
that kind of Brahmacharya myself, and so a screen has been 
removed, as it were, from my brain. For that reason, I need not any 
more think over or prepare myself for any lectures on such a subtle 
subject as philosophy. Suppose I have to lecture tomorrow; all that I 
shall speak about will pass tonight before my eyes like so many 
pictures; and the next day I put into words during my lecture all those 
things that I saw. So you will understand now that it is not any power 
which is exclusively my own. Whoever will practice unbroken 
Brahmacharya for twelve years will surely have it. If you do so, you 
too will get it. Our Shâstras do not say that only such and such a 
person will get it and not others!
 4. The chaste brain has tremendous energy and gigantic will power. 
Without chastity there can be no spiritual strength. 
Continence gives wonderful control over mankind.
The spiritual leaders of men have been very continent and this is what 
gave them power.
 5. Every boy should be trained to practice absolute Brahmacharya and 
then, and then alone faith and Shraddha will come. Chastity in 
thought, word and deed always and in all conditions is what is called 


Brahmacharya. Unchaste imagination is as bad as unchaste action. 
The Brahmacharin must be pure in thought, word and deed.
 6. First of all, one must completely mould one’s religious life in solitude, 
must be perfect in renunciation and must preserve 
Brahmacharya without a break. The Tamas has entered into you 
— what of that? Cannot the Tamas be destroyed? It can be done in 
less than no time!
 7. What we want are Western science coupled with Vedanta, 
Brahmacharya as the guiding motto, and also Shraddha and faith in 
one’s own self.
 8. Knowledge should be acquired in that way, otherwise by educating 
yourself in the tol of a Pandit you will be only a human ape all your 
life. One should live from his very boyhood with one whose character 
is like a blazing fire and should have before him a living example of 
the highest teaching. Mere reading that it is a sin to tell a lie will be of 
no use. Every boy should be trained to practice absolute 
Brahmacharya, and then, and then only, faith — Shraddha — will 
come. Otherwise, why will not one who has no Shraddha speak an 
untruth? In our country, the imparting of knowledge has always been 
through men of renunciation. Later, the Pandits, by monopolising all 
knowledge and restricting it to the tols, have only brought the country 
to the brink of ruin. India had all good prospects so long as Tyagis 
(men of renunciation) used to impart knowledge.
 9. But whatever be the order of genesis, the celibate teachers of the 
Shrutis and Smritis stand on an entirely different platform from the 
married ones, which is perfect chastity, Brahmacharya.


 10. Founders of all good undertakings, before they launch on their 
desired work, must attain to the knowledge of the Atman through 
rigorous self - discipline. Otherwise defects are bound to occur in 
their work.
 11. Our motherland requires for her well-being some of her children to 
become such pure-souled Brahmacharins and Brahmacharinis.
 12. Teach the boys the system of Brahmacharya.
 13. In order to attain to ideal Brahmacharya one has in the beginning to 
observe strict rules regarding chastity. For minimum 12 years, one 
should keep oneself strictly aloof from the least association with the 
opposite sex as far as possible. When spiritual aspirants are 
established in the ideal of Sannyasa and brahmacharya, they will be 
able to mix on an equal footing with worldly men without any harm. 
But in the beginning 12 years, if they do not keep themself within the 
barriers of strict rules, they will all go wrong.
 14. People here (in USA) have found a new type of man in me. Even the 
orthodox are at their wit’s end. And people are now looking up to me 
with an eye of reverence. Is there a greater strength than that of 
Brahmacharya — purity, my boy?
 15. Describing the Indian ideal of Brahmacharya in the student’s life, 
Swami Vivekananda said: “Brahmacharya should be like a burning 
fire within the veins!”
 16. The Sanskrit name for a student, Brahmacharin, is synonymous with 
the Sanskrit word Kamajit. (One who has full control over his 
passions.) Our goal of life is Moksha; how can that be ever attained 
without Brahmacharya or absolute continence? Hence it is imposed 
upon our boys and youth as an indispensable condition during their 
studentship. The purpose of life in the West is Bhoga, enjoyment; 


hence much attention to strict Brahmacharya is not so indispensably 
necessary with them as it is with us.
 17. Obedience to the Guru without questioning, and strict observance of 
Brahmacharya — this is the secret of success.
 18. In his Raja Yoga, the Swami explains that through brahmacharya sex 
energy is converted into a higher form of psychic energy called 
‘ojas.’(Ojas, literally meaning the ‘illuminating’ or ‘bright’ is the 
highest form of energy in the human body. In the spiritual aspirant 
who constantly practises continence and purity, other forms of energy 
are transmuted into ojas and stored in the brain, expressing as 
spiritual and intellectual power). He says, “The yogis say that part of 
the human energy which is expressed as sex energy, in sexual 
thought, when checked and controlled easily becomes changed into 
ojas, and as the Muladhara (lowest of the six centers of 
consciousness) guides these, the yogi pays particular attention to that 
centre. He tries to take up all his sexual energy and convert it into 
ojas.
It is only the chaste man or woman who can make the ojas rise and 
store it in the brain; that is why chastity has always been considered 
the highest virtue. A man feels that if he is unchaste, spirituality goes 
away, he loses mental vigour and moral stamina. That is why in all 
the religious orders in the world which have produced spiritual giants 
you always find absolute chastity insisted upon. That is why the 
monks came into existence, giving up marriage. There must be perfect 
chastity in thought, word and deed; without it the practice of Raja 
Yoga is dangerous, and may lead to insanity. If people practise Raja 
Yoga and at the same time lead an impure life, how can they expect to 
become yogis?”


 19. Disciple: Do you think, sir, the same consummation would be reached 
through the way Mataji is educating her students? These students 
would soon grow up and get married and would presently shade into 
the likeness of all other women of the common run. So I think, if 
these girls might be made to adopt Brahmacharya, then only could 
they devote their lives to the cause of the country’s progress and 
attain to the high ideals preached in our sacred books.Swamiji: Yes, 
everything will come about in time. Such educated men are not yet 
born in this country, who can keep their girls unmarried without fear 
of social punishment.
