=== PAGE 1 ===

CONCEPT OF PSYCHOLOGY & THE MIND IN AYURVED 
Maheshkumar Nilkanth Chaudhari  
Dept. of Shalya-Tantra , Hon. AnnasahebDange Ayurveda Medical College , 
Ashta ,Sangli ( Maharashtra ) INDIA 
 
INTRODUCTION  
          Pitiable plight that the science of 
psychology holds prominent place in the 
medical field by now.  The statistical data 
regarding mental diseases states the 
increasing number of the patients in the 
dispensaries, clinics & hospitals. It is pitia-
ble because this age is declaredanage of 
scientific progress in each and every sub-
ject. According to cause and effect theory, 
the scientists, research workers and the 
concerned authorities need keen and deep 
introspection , why in this age patients of 
psychosis and psychopathy are so rapidly 
increasing ?  Among so many causes  in its 
reply, the prominent, cause is the negli-
gence of our ancient and eternal sciences 
by the modern world . One realises 
distinctness of the thought and action 
fundamentally in both the sciences the an-
cient and the modern. The Indian ancient 
sciences in general and Ayurveda in 
particular. There are three well known In-
dian Sciences prevailing in the world; 
Ayurveda , Yoga&the Adhyatma (Probably 
no synomymicalterm in modern languages 
to interpret it exactly, one can say – the 
knowledge of the self and the universe and 
the relation of them with the Almightly.) 
All of them are meant to achieve the su-
preme goal in the life; the „moksha‟ com-
pletely free liberal state. Dharma – reli-
gious virtues and the sustaining of 
constructive in the life , „Artha‟- acquire 
the wealth and prowess, „kama‟- perform 
efforts, valours and achieve greatness and 
„moksha‟. To ponder over these objects 
  Review Article           International Ayurvedic Medical Journal               ISSN:2320 5091 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
               Psychology is the most important subject in the medical field & day to day fastly 
changing life style & fast food intaking plays a majour role in development of psychology. 
The subject of Psychology are well described in Ayurveda .Ayurveda, Yoga and Adhyatma 
the three is the tripod of life . „Adhyatma‟ is the 3rd science of ancient India, which deals with 
and elaborates the non-material or spiritual side of the life . The entire Yoga science mainly 
deals with the subject of mind. Its purification and control on its fickleness and unsteadyness 
. Yoga advocates mainly the element „satva‟ or „mana‟ , thoroughly , Adhyatma science 
advocates & throws clear light on the supreme point consciousness or the soul i.e. Aatma . 
Ayurveda aims at the „moksha‟ through the basic need „Aarogya‟. The subject „ma-
nasvyadhi‟ is the basic subject of Yoga science .Modern world knows very little knowledge 
regarding mind & soul .To achieve Moksh through Yoga &Adhyatma . Now it is timely need 
to do the deep study of Psychology by different way of Ayurveda. So this article must be 
helpful to understand the concept of Psychology & the mind in Ayurveda. 
Keywords: Ayurveda, ManasVyadhi , Yog ,Adhyatma .

=== PAGE 2 ===

Maheshkumar Nilkanth Chaudhari : Concept Of Psychology & The Mind In Ayurved 
541 www.iamj.in                             IAMJ: Volume 4; Issue 03; March - 2016 
 
and their range, no any other medical sci-
ence has clearly stated such a supreme 
goal to achieve Ayurveda  clearly says : -
[1] We know, the writer of this dictum 
Vagbhata, is supposed to be an authentic-
ity in Ayurveda , Charaka, Sushruta, Ash-
tangaSangraha and others support this 
statement. To achieve „moksha‟ the 
highest object, the foundation of „dharma‟ 
(for the time being to comprehend the 
concept, let us use the well-established 
term religion) is a must. Dharma teaches 
and preaches the best moral conduct, 
which is the essence of the purity of mind. 
If there is a religious foundation of mind, 
the behavior and all activities of the man 
are also solely pure.  
 [2] Those persons, who have overcome 
their faultful and fluctuating mind, whose 
mind is free from the predominance of 
„Rajah‟ and „tamah‟ doshas, due to their 
hard penances, possess the real knowledge 
and wisdom of the past, present and the 
future. The science of „yoga‟ lays an 
emphasis on this point of mind.  
The entire Yoga science mainly deals with 
the subject of mind. Its purification and 
control 
on 
its 
fickleness 
and 
un-
steadyness.Indepth  study and the practice 
of Yoga creates steadiness of mind and so 
dispels off the „rajah‟ & „tamas‟ doshas. It 
is true and not a gossip such a mind holds 
so many striking and wonderful qualities, 
and potentials. It achieves the state of su-
per human powers eight in number called 
„siddhis‟. 
What more human life can expect?Such a 
surpassing thought is noted only in Indian 
ancient sciences . „Adhyatma‟ is the 3rd 
science of ancient India, which deals with 
and elaborates the non-material or spiritual 
side of the life.  
 [3]  Both these quotations from Charak 
clear up the concept of Ayurveda regard-
ing the human life and the external world 
which are the scope of Ayurveda. Not only 
the material form of the body, but along-
with it the mind , soul and sense organs the 
spiritual potentials in the body are also 
taken in to consideration while diagnosing 
and treating the patient. It is because , our 
Rishis - Munis assumed that life is not 
merely a material thing; the other elements 
like mind sense organs and the soul are 
also dominant factors inseparably con-
nected with the life. 
In the modernage ,specialization is prevail-
ing in every field . May it be the modern 
eye specialistis only concerned with his 
subject eye and the eye disease. He 
scarcely thinks of the concerned connected 
causes that exist in physiological disorder. 
Modern sciences have developed in a spe-
cialization of a subject as a separate branch 
of the body. Our medical sciences take it 
for granted, any branch is always insepara-
bly connected with the tree and the roots 
of it . As Ayurveda simultaneously thinks 
of “satvam – aatma – indriya – shariram-
cha / ” four points and their disorder, the 
modern emphacises only one – the body 
„Sharira‟ that is; only one fourth of Ayur-
veda ! 
As we see, Yoga advocates mainly the ele-
ment „satva‟ or „mana‟, thoroughly , 
Adhyatma science advocates & throws 
clear light on the supreme point conscious-
ness or the soul i.e.Aatma. The living ele-
ment „Aatma‟ (the soul) in the body, is as-
sumed as a potential part of all pervading 
supreme potential that exists in the (exter-
nal) universe. 
Ayurveda , Yoga and Adhyatma the three 
is the tripod of life. Each is contributory to 
the others . Amongst them Ayurveda deals 
with the material elements in the body.  
Ayurveda recommends and advocates 
„Panchashodhana‟ processes for cleaning 
the material substances or substantial mat-
ter in the body to make body-matter clean

=== PAGE 3 ===

Maheshkumar Nilkanth Chaudhari : Concept Of Psychology & The Mind In Ayurved 
542 www.iamj.in                             IAMJ: Volume 4; Issue 03; March - 2016 
 
and resistant. More over Ayurveda advo-
cates Yogic therapies also to stabilize the 
mind. Charak states yoga so nicely:      
 [4] Happiness & miseries are realized be-
cause of the contact of the soul with mind 
sense organs – and objects of senses . 
Happiness and miseries disappear when 
the mind is concentrated and is established 
well in the seat of soul. In this condition 
the mind attains super natural powers . 
This state of mind isstable ,stable with 
sense organs and their objects  and with 
the intellect, all become one with the soul, 
renders supernatural powers. These are 
nothing but „Siddhis‟  of Yoga. With a lit-
tle difference Charak quotes these „Sid-
dhis‟ are -   
 [5]When  mind attains thesupernaturalpow-
ers – (1) entering others‟ body, (2) be-
comes able to read the thoughts in other‟s 
body , (3) performs things at will ,  (4) gets 
super-vision 
(as 
in 
“Geetahadivyamdadamitechakshuha” ) , 
(5) can listen to any thing needed to listen , 
(6) obtains extra ordinary memory, (7) un-
common brilliance and intellect , (8) 
invisibility also of the self at will Ayur-
veda says : Yogic practicing obtains these 
and all. 
hing but „siddhis‟ of Yoga . With a little 
differencCharaka quotes these „siddhis‟ as 
: - 
 “Moksha” the liberation or state of salva-
tion , is says Ayurveda, nothing but abso-
lute detachment of all the worldly contacts. 
More over the means for attainment of 
„moksha‟ are also stated by Charaka. [6] To 
render services honestly with discipline to 
those noble personalities in the society, 
avoid contacts with ignoble, observe sa-
cred vows-fasts etc., observance of good 
conduct, observance of religious princi-
ples, obtain scriptural and technological 
knowledge, liking for living lonely some-
where in remote and serene areas, absolute 
control on the mind, desire to get away 
from mundane acts, be away totally from 
egoism and so on. Those who understand 
and undergo these rules and moral ethics 
are fully liberated, they never come back 
here 
in 
this 
world“Gatahanapunaragataha ||” 
It is worth contemplating, what Ayurveda 
has stated regarding the characteristics of 
the yogi – who has the stage of last 
embarkment or destination. [7] Thus , one 
understands it well, Ayurveda aims at the 
„moksha‟ through the basic need „aarogya‟ 
– maintaining health in general and mate-
rial health in particular, taking it as an inte-
gral part of the sound health and the life, 
Ayurveda advocates and recommends 
„yoga‟ and „adhyatma‟ as the sciences 
contributing the aim of achievaing „mok-
sha‟. By now, the treatment of any dis-
cease is administered only to relieve the 
patient from the pair and make the signs 
and symptoms of the disease disappear. On 
the other hand,Ayurvedic science treats 
him thoroughly. 
 [8] Not only the medicines, but alongwith 
it diet restrictions and „vihara‟ means good 
and beneficial behavior and conduct is also 
said, a must , good conduct and behavior 
includes not only the regimen of the pa-
tient , vaidya is expected to win the heart 
of the patient , convince him. Give proper 
guidelines to the patient. So that he may 
not fall a victim of „Pradnya-aparadha‟ 
(blash-phemy). It is wrightly said,  
[9] The teaching and preaching to the pa-
tient is thus said to be an essential quality 
of vaidya.Vaidya in real sense is not only a 
doctor for the patient, but a teacher, a 
guide a friend (Jivalag) also.  [10] The term 
„tatwa-smruti‟ is meant not for only the 
creation of memory, it implicits the 
particular memory of the past. The 
memory that inspires the patient to „mok-
sha‟ so that he remembers his origination

=== PAGE 4 ===

Maheshkumar Nilkanth Chaudhari : Concept Of Psychology & The Mind In Ayurved 
543 www.iamj.in                             IAMJ: Volume 4; Issue 03; March - 2016 
 
from the Almighty? That he is also a 
miniature part of the Nature and hence he 
should try and devote himself to the origin 
Almighty God. Because one with him to 
achieve the supreme  peace „moksha‟  – 
salvation .Such is the real concept pulsat-
ing in Ayurveda regarding the Chikitsa – 
treatment  , only medicine would not do, 
only dietary restrictions would not do and 
only the good conduct wouldn‟t do. All of 
these three points are simultaneously to be 
observed and vaidya is supposed to be the 
„Guru‟ of the patient . To eradicate the dis-
ease, no adverse effect should occur, 
uprooting of the disease should be to that 
extent, the patient should never commit 
mistakes & falls victim of any disease. The 
„Chikitsa‟ that uproots the disease for ever 
, is described by Charaka „Traikaliki‟ or 
„Naishthiki‟ chikitsa  . Unparallel thought 
of Ayurveda, in the entire field of medi-
cine. 
Even though such a treatment is stressed, 
even though „moksha‟ is recommended for 
non-birth or rebirth, „yoga‟ also achieves 
the same range of peace. Hence to distin-
guish „moksh&yoga ‟ :  Charaka cites - 
 [11]  When through „yoga‟ one achieves the 
extreme point  i.e. Samadhi, no ailment is 
left; when achieves „moksha‟the salvation , 
no ailment is left and Felt . What differ-
ence then between the yoga finality and 
achieve?The answer is „samadhi‟ in 
„yoga‟, being one stage or condltion, after 
a considerable time „samadhi‟ stage van-
ishes and the performer again returns to his 
normaly and starts feeling of the halpiness 
and sorrow . While in the „moksha‟, when 
one concursit ,never comes back. Becomes 
one with Almighty. The diseases and the 
ailments over come through recur come-
back, when the state-„samadhi‟ is overand 
the diseases and ailments over come 
through „moksha‟ never recur, never come 
back because the man – who is „mukta‟ 
doesn‟t come back . This distinctness is 
cleared in Ayurveda while the scope of 
mind - and soul is thoroughly discussed. 
There are eight branches of Ayurveda - 
„kaya-bala-graha-urdhwang-shalya-
danshtra-jaravrushtvam ‟-iti  / No men-
tion of „mental diseases  or „psychology‟ 
anywhere as a separate branch number 9th. 
Yet one comes across „manasvayadhi‟ and 
other terms in Ayurveda. The subject „ma-
nasvyadhi‟ is the basic subject of Yogasci-
ence. 
 
„Mano-vidnyanshastra‟ 
or 
„BharateeyamanasaShastra‟ is main sub-
ject of yoga, which includes: definition of 
„mana‟, characteristics of „mana‟ impuri-
ties of  „mana‟,  how to purify if, how to 
stabilise   it, how to control and improve 
the power of „mana‟ , the basic functions 
and how to enhance them the way of 
diverting the mind toward „moksha‟ and 
all that is naturally connected with the 
mind. Healthy mind  in healthy body is the 
subject  matter of yoga, which in the end 
inspires (not provokes) the mind is toward 
supreme point of moksha or salvation . 
One must keenly mark it, as Ayurveda 
aims at „Naishthiki - TraikalikiChikitsa‟ to 
achieve „moksha‟, yoga also aims at the 
same , Ayurveda introduces yoga and 
Adyatmaand elaborates speifically the 
„Bhoota-mayo dehah‟.  Same way yoga 
introduces Adhyatmaand elaborates mainly 
the next subject of „satva-mana‟ the mind . 
In the third place Adhyatma elaborates 
specifically the un-known potential in the 
body-the spirit - the soul- the conscious-
ness or the „Aatma‟ .Thus all of these three 
sciences: Ayurveda ,yoga and Adhyatma 
are contributory to one another and if 
deeply studied tried- observed practically 
the 
whole 
life 
of 
such 
a 
man 
beomesrepletelysuccesstul. All the dis-
eases disappear,   all sort of ailments eradi-
cated and unrootedfor ever and no recur-

=== PAGE 5 ===

Maheshkumar Nilkanth Chaudhari : Concept Of Psychology & The Mind In Ayurved 
544 www.iamj.in                             IAMJ: Volume 4; Issue 03; March - 2016 
 
rence of any   grief - pain and ailment , be-
cause such a man has no rebirth.  
Ayurveda is inseparably connected with 
the subject mind. Right from the very 
inception and upto the mark of  concluding 
the „Samhitas‟, we see the incessant flow 
of chaitanyaalongwith the mind surpasses. 
Just after introductory statement, 
[12] There one comes across the statement 
regarding mind : 
[13] Some type of statements in  Charaka , 
Sushruta, etc. The purest form of mind is 
„satva‟, and when it is in disorder form, it 
is afflicted by „Rajah and Tamah‟. While 
described in the seat of the disease – 
 [14] Disease have two seats ; they body and 
the mind. 
The medicine is also of kinds : 
                 [15] The medicament „shodhana‟ 
and „shamana‟ is meant for the disease of 
the material body; and awakening of the 
patient‟s intellect, firmness and boldness 
and knowledge of the self are the four 
pillers of the disease  ,which have the seat 
„mind‟ in the body for the disease of the 
mind , these four are lantens illuminating 
the entire sphere of “manasvyadhis”.  
Causes of ‘manasarogas’ in the view of 
Ayurved - 
[16] This aphorism imply much more 
mysterious meaning. Conjunction or con-
tact of sense organs with their objects of 
the three types. The wholesome or in nor-
mal and natural way it is conducive 
,healthy. Contact in less or no contact at all 
(“heena” ) and in excess or unwholesome 
way (is called “atiyoga” ) these create pain 
and damaging to the organ concerned. 
Again, we see, mind in Ayurveda, is termi-
nal „antahkarana‟ meaning the connecting 
internal organ . When organ external is 
damaged the internal organ is also dam-
aged. This causes the „manasa‟ disease . 
 „Pradnyaaparadha‟  is intellectual derail-
ment. This is intellectual blashphemy. 
When one already knows bad conse-
quences of any action and still one persists 
to do it, it is transgression against the intel-
lect. Such a tendency prevails at every step 
in the life.Allurements, lust, passions crav-
ing – all these are the intellectual blash-
phemy factors. “Chanchalam hi manaha 
” (“krushnapramathibalavatdrudham”) .  
The nature of  mind is originally to be 
fickle , unstable , changeable. Just like a 
butterfly mind flutters swiftly to and fro. 
In the whole world there we visualise 
every day thousands of crimes having the 
base of this draw back of mind = intellec-
tual blash-phemy. Present situation of the 
world is deteriorating rapidly, due to lack 
of the control on mind and the sense or-
gans. 
There are so many diseases which are 
completely related with “Pradnyaapara-
dha”.  
[17] , [18] Exogenous diseases produced by 
evil spirits, poison, wind, fire and external 
assaults all these are essentially the results 
of the draw-backs of mental faculty. Crav-
ing for, lamentation, fear anger, agony, 
self-conceit and hatred contemptuousness 
all these are said to be diseases of mind. 
„Trishna‟ is said to be the genuine and 
prime cause of any disease. The thought of 
Ayurveda is a significant salient feature of 
Ayurvedicconcept .Trishna could be trans-
lated as a desire in deep, willing , longing 
for something to obtain.  If one longs to 
have a particular thing, and doesn‟t get itor 
get it not to satisfaction, frustration, ten-
sion starts, ultimately it creates mental 
disorder and disease. Hence, one is ad-
vised to be away from will desire and 
longings. This thought of Ayurveda is ex-
actly 
similar 
to 
the 
thought 
in 
“BhagwatGeeta” , “ karmanyevadhikarste 
ma phaleshukadachan ||” . Cultivation of 
such a habit avoids hundreds of illnesses 
and helps to maintain sound health.

=== PAGE 6 ===

Maheshkumar Nilkanth Chaudhari : Concept Of Psychology & The Mind In Ayurved 
545 www.iamj.in                             IAMJ: Volume 4; Issue 03; March - 2016 
 
 [19] The body and then entire physiology 
follows the mind; accordingly if mind is 
pure such a man gets divine strength , ex-
traperceptory powers and what not? Same 
way, the mind also follows the body , if  it 
is  afflicted  by „ rajah and tamah ‟ doshas  
. Therefore , There we can visualise human 
beings have heavy enfluence of their type 
of mind. As in Ayurveda ,physiologically 
atominated constitutions are considered 
deeply, there are varities of mental facul-
ties also as; Satvikamental faculty, Rajas 
mental faculty and Tamas mental faculty. 
Mind and body being intimately involved, 
have their effects on each other.  When 
one is sick, the other has also to suffer. In-
spite of the diseases “lobha ,krodha, 
dvesha” and others mentioned above, there 
are some other mental diseases too as ; 
“Unmad” (insanity) and its various types, 
and – “Apasmar” (epilepsy) and its various 
types. 
Common Factors to recognize them:- 
- 
Contraction and blinking of eyes , 
- 
Excessive discharge of saliva and nose 
running , 
- 
Non inclination or excessive inclina-
tion for food , 
- 
Complaint of giddiness frequently , 
- 
Abnormal speech and behavior , 
- 
Instablity of fingers and feet , 
- 
Untimely anger and rath for the tri-
fles& some time shyness unnecessary , 
The treatment „mano-dosha&vyadhis‟ in 
general is :- 
 [20] As per specific requirements, of the 
condition 
of 
„manasvyadhi‟, 
strong 
elimination and alleviation therapies are to 
be employed. 
When such „manasroga‟ is associated with 
exogenous – extrinsic or external causative 
factors,alongwith 
intrinsic 
or 
internal 
mediacaments particular „mantras‟ (chant-
ings , etc.) also will be useful and not only 
oral medication. 
(This important point, „external associan‟ 
is elucidated later on ) 
[21] „Manasvyadhi‟ medicine/treatment is 
stated in this couplet clearly. Drug use is 
not mentioned here in this context, one 
must note this. 
On the disturbed mind of the patient, fol-
lowing points are to be inculated; im-
portance of the situation and the condition 
of the patient at present, possible turning 
point and the deteriorating condition in the 
near future, why and how the patient 
should search out for his betterment ? the 
three objects to  achieve in the life; the 
wealth and prowess with pure business, the 
climax of virtues and pure and plain mun-
dane life. The patient should be tought ren-
der his utmost and humble services to 
those who are worthy and deserving. To 
understand himself well and the situation 
around, he should be given good guide 
lines so that he may awake, know himself 
as an epitome or the smallest part of that 
Almighty. On this line, patient is to be 
congoled and convinced. 
These and such „manas‟ treatment is noth-
ing but some important and necessary 
moral ethics are to observed by the patient. 
All „manasvyadhis‟ fall under two catago-
ries;„ 
daivavyapashraya 
and 
yuk-
tivyapashrayachikitsa | ‟ Charak Su.11/54 
Our of three types of therapies, spiritual 
therapy and psychic therapy these two are 
associated with „manasvyadhis‟. 
Spiritual 
therapy 
: 
- 
 
is 
dai-
vavyapashrayachikitsa , chanting of vedic 
or some other  humans, talisman, “tait in 
Marathi” , drugs, gems, auspicious perfor-
mances, 
oblations, 
gifts, 
performing 
„yadnyas‟. Atonements („prayashchitta), 
fasts, scriptural rituals, salutations to the 
dignities and going on pilgrimages. 
All these and alike observances are 
contributory and helpful creating confi-
dence in the mind of the patients. There

=== PAGE 7 ===

Maheshkumar Nilkanth Chaudhari : Concept Of Psychology & The Mind In Ayurved 
546 www.iamj.in                             IAMJ: Volume 4; Issue 03; March - 2016 
 
are physical therapies intimately connected 
with their effect  on mind. These are in the 
modern view scientifically base-less. They 
remark this  way, because the scope of 
these is beyond the reach of modern sci-
ence . 
Satva-awajaya;is widrawal of mind from 
the objects which are causative factors of 
„manasvyadhis‟.  This treatment is a 
phycictreatment  prescribed by Ayurveda. 
Only the „pandit‟ well versed in yoga sci-
ence can administer it systematically. 
People in ancient ages, were quite con-
scious of their own. They were alert 
enough about the scope and limits of their 
own subject.  They did not discuss beyond 
their limits. 
“Atradhanvantariyanamadhikaraha 
,atahanauchyate / ”  Charak 
Same way the subject of mind is intro-
duced and elucidated in Ayurveda suffi-
ciently and not thoroughly as it is in yoga 
science. 
Medicinal treatment of ‘mind and men-
tal diseases -   
There are so many medicines which hold 
their source and resource in the material 
potentials. We can classify them in three 
groups ; those which alleviate „vata-
dosha‟, (nervous system ) , those which 
alleviate „pitta – dosha‟ (blood circulation 
system ) and those which alleviate 
„kaphadosha‟( lymphatic system ) .  These 
modern terminologies interpret the round 
about meaning of Ayurvedicterms. 
What so ever mental or „manasroga‟ it 
may be when there are signs and symp-
toms of vata. We may be characterisedas :  
He will most often dance , cry aloud, make 
a laughter, various gestures and will be-
come emaciated. For him - snehana‟ (inter-
nal oleation) of „til-tail‟ (sesam oil) and 
external „abhyanga‟ (massage) of the same 
or of some particular prepared oil having 
the equal properties as (NarayanaTail ,etc.) 
is a must. Along with this mild „shodhana‟ 
(Purgative or laxative) like castor oil , etc. 
is recommended. After this body-cleaning 
process for „vatadosha‟, some „vata‟ 
pacifying drugs are necessary. 
VataGajankush 
and 
VasantKusumakar 
Rasa or some other medicines are to be 
given. 
Dietary restrictions for Vata : - When 
needed, when the patient feels hungry : All 
normal diet. It should be processed mixing 
mit dry giner, garlic, black paper, paper 
longum etc. Water also warm and pro-
cessed with these same drugs. 
Activities recommended for Vata : -The 
patient is expected to go out by evening 
and morning for a walk . Yogasanas 
particularlyPadmasana, 
Baddhapad-
masana , Naulipawanamuktasana, deep 
breathing , etc. 
          For Pittaj and KaphajManasroga 
signs & symptoms and treatments, we can 
also refer the Ayurvedic original scripture 
like Charaksamhita . Most of the refer-
ences are collected &selected from ancient 
scripture of Ayurveda. Yoga &Adhyatma 
also from BhagvatGita . 
From above citations, it makes very clear 
that Ayurveda , the science of life is not 
only the science of treatment but also the 
science of Adhyatmaand very close rela-
tions between  the mind & the health . 
REFERENCES  
[1] & [12 to 15] SarthVagbhat – Sutra 
Sthan , Author – Dr. Ganesh K. Garde , 1st 
edition , Reprint 2003 ,  Anmol Prakashan 
, Pune . 
[2&3] & [16 to 18 ] CharakSamhita 
,VaidyaManorama –Sutra-Sthan , Hindi 
Vyakhya – Part- I , By AcharyaVidy-
adharShukla , Prof. RavidattaTripathi , 
Chaukhambha Sanskrit        Pratisthan , 
Delhi ,1st edition , Reprint . 
[4 to 7 ]& [ 9 to 11], [19],[21] CharakSam-
hita ,Vaidya–Chandrika - Sharir Sthan ,

=== PAGE 8 ===

Maheshkumar Nilkanth Chaudhari : Concept Of Psychology & The Mind In Ayurved 
547 www.iamj.in                             IAMJ: Volume 4; Issue 03; March - 2016 
 
Hindi Vyakhya – Part- II , By Dr. Brah-
manandTripathi 
,ChaukhambhaSurbharatiPrakashan 
, 
Varanasi ,1st  edition , Reprint 2001. 
 [3] 
SushrutaSamhita 
– 
Ayurveda 
TatvaSandipika – Hindi Vyakhya – Part-I 
& 
II , by Kaviraj Dr. AmbikadattaShastri , 
Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan  , 
Varanasi , 11th  edition 1997 . 
  [8 & 20 ] Madhav-Nidan                               
 
CORRESPONDING AUTHOR  
Dr. Maheshkumar Nilkanth Chaudhari  
Dept. of Shalya-Tantra , Hon. 
AnnasahebDange Ayurveda Medical 
College , Ashta ,Sangli ( Maharashtra ) 
INDIA 
E-mail :  nilvasu2010@rediffmail.com