=== PAGE 1 ===

“A Study of Ayurvedic Style of Cooking and It’s 
Influence in Day to Day Life” 
 
Authors 
Dr. Kiran Shende 1 
Associate Professor, AISSMS College of HMCT, Pune 
chefkiran1977@gmail.com 
Mr. Rahul Bhalekar 2 
Assistant Professor, AISSMS College of HMCT, Pune 
bhalekar.rahul@gmail.com 
 
ABSTRACT 
“Ayurveda” is a Sanskrit word which means “Science of Life”. It gives us an ideal way of living. Humans have 
transformed extensively during the nature’s evolution process. However, they are meant to live as per nature’s rules. We 
are aware that technology has brought a major change in our life style and we are carried away by the modern pattern 
of living. We have completely contradicted our ancestral lifestyle and created our own lifestyle.  
In the midst of this transformation from the Natural way of living to the modern life style, we have understood 
the need of going back to our traditional methods for attaining a healthy life style. As per the ancient scriptures the 
human body is considered as a Food Store or a thing which is made of food; it is obvious that, “We are what we Eat”. 
Hence, the need of changing our eating habits to bring a change in our health is correlated. 
 
Keywords – Ayurveda and Ayurvedic Cooking Styles. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Ayurveda is one of the ancient practices adopted for wellness originated in India about 5,000 years ago. Ayurvedic 
medicine seeks to create a healthy strong body through a series of diet, exercise and lifestyle practices, including sleep and 
mind-full living. https://www.verywellfit.com. 
There are many misconceptions about Ayurvedic cooking – that it is only a vegetarian meal or even that it is Indian Food. 
However the fact of the matter is Ayurveda does not tell us what to eat, in-fact it tells you when to eat and how to eat. The food 
automatically will fall under the category if it is fresh, seasonal and cooked consciously and in a loving manner.  
"Grounded in a Hindu system of medicine, an Ayurvedic diet instructs you to eat according to a dominant dosha 
(energy type). There is no scientific rationale for this style of eating, but experts agree the focus on unprocessed foods and 
mindful eating are both valuable takeaways." Chrissy Carroll, RD, MPH 
At present the life is occupied with a lot of activities that consumes most of the daily time, we are so busy that we forget to pay 
attention towards our health in fact we take our health for granted and in a compromised situation daily. To keep you healthy 
and away from illness we need to be careful about the meals which we consume to generate energy in our body.  
Ayurveda will clearly illustrate you with the knowledge about maintaining the health in a good shape at all times both 
physically and mentally. As this topic is related to food the authors would like to mention that Ayurveda has a detailed 
knowledge and information based on deep and detailed study of human body, mind and soul. The food that we consume on a 
daily basis and the method that we adopt to cook it to make the food more suitable for human consumption largely decides its 
health effects on our body. Hence Ayurveda is the greatest inherence or gift we have received from our Ancestors. 
This study would focus and realize that is it possible to follow the food culture and its way of processing food which 
could achieve healthy body, mind and soul. Hence, to understand the willingness of today‟s generation about practicing the 
Ayurvedic teachings, this might put a focus on the awareness about our own health. If required then approaching the sources to 
gain or acquire the necessary knowledge and skills to cook food the Ayurvedic way. 
In today‟s digital world social media and internet had made it possible to percolate and reach to the masses about our 
ancient valuable wealth “Ayurveda”. These platforms are generating more awareness about Ayurveda and how it acts as a key 
to live healthy and happy. However to acquire detailed information about the methods and requirements of Ayurvedic styles of 
cooking one has to refer so many books, search the internet and collect the required information which is a considerable hurdle. 
There needs to be a source which is easily available and affordable for them to approach and gain necessary knowledge, 
scholars in Ayurveda and experts from the culinary industry and academia can make it possible by scripting a course or a book 
for serving people in a better manner. The purpose of studying the feasibility of Ayurvedic way of cooking in our day to day life 
is to know the awareness level about it as well as the inclination towards learning and practicing it. 
 
 
 
 
ISSN NO: 1301-2746
http://adalyajournal.com/
ADALYA JOURNAL
Volome 8, Issue 8, August 2019
660

=== PAGE 2 ===

Need of the study 
Ayurveda is a very ancient wellness concept deals with the science of life and food is the major source for serving the 
nutritional body requirements, but with increasing modernization some of the traditional style of cooking are compromised. 
However, with the rise of working people with changing lifestyles and reducing affordability of sick care, in terms of time and 
money involved, are some of the forces that are presently driving people towards thinking about their wellness. Due to this fact 
there had been a significant rise in the interest of traditional cooking methods globally. Ayurveda, being the traditional Indian 
method has cooking styles which are beneficial for a human body. Although India has been successful in promoting the benefits 
of these cooking styles with more research and science-based approach, it still needs more extensive research and evidence base 
to generate awareness globally. 
 
Significance of the study 
The food which we consume has a direct influence on our health and wellness. The eating habits will vary from place 
to place and has a direct impact on the health of a human being. Further, the eating habits are influenced by the fresh food and 
cooking styles. The ethnic food of different regions of India have been developed by generations of people keeping in view of 
the nutritional needs of the common man right from the cradle to the grave. The ancestors have designed different types of food 
and methods of cooking keeping in view of the nutritional needs of people of different age groups such as growing children, 
youth, working class, pregnant and nursing mothers, the sick and the old.  
 
Statement of the Problem 
Food in Ayurveda is considered not only a substance providing essential nutrients to the body but also the one which 
provides nutrition to the mind. The quality of food and the cooking method used are one of the most vital elements to fulfill the 
energy requirements of an individual. But today‟s lifestyle demands fast and convenient food that is pre processed and easy to 
make, are putting all the traditional cooking methods are behind. The younger generation is forgetting the traditional techniques 
of cooking developed by our ancestors. Hence, keeping these facts in mind it is very important to generate the awareness about 
the Ayurvedia and Ayurvedic cooking styles to the coming generations. By adopting these cooking techniques in our day to day 
cooking will not only keep you healthy but also will spread the awareness about our traditional styles and keep them alive. 
 
Limitations of the Study 
1. This study is purely based on the information given by the faculty, students and professionals from the hotel industry.  
2. The study is conducted in the current scenario and the opinions, perception and expectations of the respondents may 
differ with time.  
3. The study does not differentiate respondents on basis of their demographic factors which may have an influence of 
their perception thereby identifying scope for further research.  
 
Definitions 
Ayurveda: It is the traditional Hindu system of medicine (incorporated in Atharva Veda, the last of the four Vedas), which is 
based on the idea of balance in bodily systems and uses diet, herbal treatment, and yogic breathing. 
Reference Google Dictionary. 
Ayurvedic diet: is an eating plan that provides guidelines for when you eat, what you eat, and how you eat to boost your health, 
prevent or manage disease, and maintain wellness. https://www.verywellfit.com/ayurvedic-diet-for-weight-loss-4154620 
Ayurvedic Cooking: The word used for food in both Ayurveda and Yoga is āhara. Āhara is derived from the Sanskrit root, hru, 
which has a wide meaning, it includes the earth, water, heat or fire, air and space, all of the five elements of this universe which 
support and benefit our growth. https://sadvidyafoundation.org/recipes/introduction-to-ayurvedic-cooking/ 
 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
The research had reviewed a number of relevant literatures to identify the important elements of Ayurveda, Ayurvedic 
styles of cooking and its influence on our day to day life. There are a number of researches, seminars and articles on the subject 
are a testimony to the importance of the topic. Apart from that below mentioned had also provided the valuable information. 
 
Books / Journals / Magazines / Newsletters 
 
Internet / Websites – Citation 
 
Yashwant Singh Rawal and Sandeep Singh Takuli (2017): the paper had highlighted about how food plays an important role 
in attracting tourists to a particular destination because as it reflects a region‟s culture and lifestyle. The paper had focused on 
the important connection between traditionally cooked food and tourism which cannot be ignored from tourism point of view. 
The traditionally cooked food which is rich in medicinal values and health benefits will always be an important factor and also a 
promotional tool for the development of tourism. 
 
Subhadip Banerjee, Parikshit Debnath, Pratip Kumar Debnath (2014): the authors had studied that food and drug goes 
hand in hand as food is consumed on daily basis and for all the time which maintains the health and the growth of human 
beings. Food interferes with the molecular mechanisms of a genome called „physiome‟. As food is consumed in large amounts 
than drugs and interacts with genome which effects towards the retaliation of the human body towards the diseases. Authors 
ISSN NO: 1301-2746
http://adalyajournal.com/
ADALYA JOURNAL
Volome 8, Issue 8, August 2019
661

=== PAGE 3 ===

have studied this approach of Ayurveda called Ayurgenomics, which is a personalized approach in the predictive, preventive 
and curative aspects of stratified medicine with molecular variability on the basis of the constitution. The authors had also 
introduced an emerging concept of Ayurnutrigenomics inspired by Ayurveda which can develop a novel concept of 
nutrigenomics research for developing personalized functional foods and nautraceuticals supporting for human beings genetic 
makeup. The concept of Ayurnutrigenomics has lots of potential for research which might establish smart and safe therapeutics 
in the near future. 
 
M. M. Pandey, Subha Rastogi, and A. K. S. Rawat (2013): the authors have illustrated the importance of traditional cooking 
and eating habits for human body, its growth and care. The importance of good health is also driving people globally to become 
aware about the traditional food and its cooking. It also mentions that how India is successfully promoting and nurturing 
Ayurveda. This review gives an overview of the Ayurvedic system of medicine and its role in translational medicine in order to 
overcome malnutrition and related disorders. 
 
Sanjeev Rastogi (2013): The author had stated the importance of food mentioned in the Ayurveda, which considers the 
food as only a substance providing essential nutrients to the body but also provides nutrition to the mind. Ayurveda has that 
much detailing about the food which describes the quantity and variety based on individual needs as per their „Prakriti‟ or body 
type it also put focus on the way we eat which has an impact on physical and psychological health as well. However he 
concludes mentioning that a proper scientific approach and support would revive this ancient wealth which is still practiced in 
millions of households.  
 
Malathi Sivaramakrishnanand Vimla L.Patel (2012): The research work carried by the authors amongst the Indian born 
educated and non educated mothers about the childhood diseases. The mothers were interviewed for their knowledge and 
awareness about traditional Ayurvedic system of health and disease practiced in India. Also they compared the practicing of 
both Biomedical and Ayurvedic in regards with cause and treatment of childhood nutritional deficiancies. The data was 
analyzed and the observation or the conclusion recorded by the authors is that the traditional and the biomedical knowledge are 
not integrated into a coherent structure in the selected group as sample. 
 
Pushpangadan, P.Dan, Vipin Mohan, Ijinu T. P, George, V (2012) the article highlights about the eating and drinking habits 
and their deciding factors on the various basis i.e. Culture, customs and beliefs which we have inherited over the millennia. As 
the study indicates that the eating and drinking habits are different from each other because of places, ambient biological wealth 
and environment and weather and climatic conditions as well. The Authors explored and emphasized on the Ayurvedic concept 
of Rasayana therapy which is now confirmed by the recent advancements in genomics, which mentions the holistic approach 
accepted by the Ayurvedicacharyas in concern with human health and the nutrition about the same. 
 
Hari Sharma and H.M. Chandola (2011): the study provides a useful information about the health disorders such as Obesity, 
Metabolic Syndrome and Diabetes Mellitus. They also brought to the attention the immense global impact of these disorders 
while considering human suffering and economic burden. This situation needs to be understood globally and worked upon for 
its management towards the human health. The Authors had suggested the effective, affordable and efficacious health care 
system Ayurveda which has a very detailed description of these disorders known as „Prameha‟. The effective management of 
„Prameha‟ is also stated in Ayurveda which could help in managing obesity, metabolic syndrome and diabetes mellitus in an 
efficacious and cost effective manner. This management is mostly based on the food that is consumed by a human being on a 
daily basis. 
 
Bhushan Patwardhan and Gerard Bodeker (2008): The article talks about Ayurvedas unique way of identifying the human 
population on the basis of physical constitution of each one, which is „Prakriti‟. These „Prakritis‟ are also grouped under 
principles of Vata (motion), Pitta (metabolism) and Kapha (structure) forming the „Tridosha Theory‟ in Ayurveda. The Authors 
had assumed that there is hereditary impact of genes on one‟s „Prakriti‟, to elaborate this point they had mentioned the 
correlation between HLA alleles (Human Leukocyte Antigen) which are the cell-surface proteins  responsible for the regulation 
of the immune system in humans and the Ayurvedic Tridosha theory of individual „prakriti‟ types, which can be said as part of 
and a catalyst for a considerable revolution in the scientific investigation of Ayurveda in India which are „Ayurvedic Biology‟ 
and „Ayugenomics‟. 
 
Amla Guha (2006): In this study the author has emphasized about Ayurveda and how it guides us about the impact of food on 
our body, mind and soul which are of most concern when we think about the healthy and happy life. The author had also 
explained how Ayurveda differs the variety of food on the basis of its biological properties, origin, environmental factors, 
seasons, preparation and freshness for each body type of human being. The research had also suggested the diet that needs to be 
followed accordingly. 
 
OBJECTIVES OF THE STUDY 
• 
To study Ayurvedic styles of cooking in daily life 
• 
To understand the concept and importance of Ayurvedic cooking 
• 
To study feasibility, adoptability and practicality of Ayurvedic cooking 
ISSN NO: 1301-2746
http://adalyajournal.com/
ADALYA JOURNAL
Volome 8, Issue 8, August 2019
662

=== PAGE 4 ===

RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
It is one of the most integral part of this study, to carry out this research study the insights of Ayurveda was studied in 
the first segment followed by its feasibility, adoptability and practicality in our day to day cooking was reviewed. The factors 
which tend to be found influencing were floated in the form of questionnaires and the feedback was collected on the basis of 
this survey. This questionnaire was circulated amongst mixed samples from all age groups and occupation levels. The sample 
types included students, salaried, self employees and retired respondents. This survey was specifically carried out to evaluate 
and fulfil the set objectives for the study. 
Type of Research: A descriptive research was used to study the various factors influencing Ayurveda and Ayurvedic styles of 
cooking and how it can be implemented in our day to day life and will also include surveys and fact finding enquiries of 
different kinds.  
Methods of Data Collection 
Primary data - was collected from the mixed sample of respondents‟ different age group and occupation levels. Primary data 
was collected through survey in the following ways: 
1. Personal Interviews: The answer was sought to a set of pre-conceived questions through personal interviews and the data 
was collected in a structured way. 
2. Questionnaires: Considering the Reviews, and the additional inputs, one questionnaire was prepared and distributed to 
various respondents. 
3. By observation: The data was collected by observing the non verbal behavior to understand dynamic behavioral process.  
Secondary data – was collected from published / unpublished literature on Ayurveda and Ayurvedic styles of cooking also the 
latest references available from the journals, newspapers, research publications and magazines, past records and and other 
relevant sources like internet. 
Questionnaire – Design and implementation: The questionnaire design was done with the aid of experts in statistical 
techniques and taking into account the measurement needs & objectives of the study. The questionnaire was administered to the 
sample population and sample size. 
 
Sampling Techniques: To conduct this study different respondent was selected from various age groups and occupational 
levels, this involved a minimum requirement of 100 samples. To achieve the minimum sample requirement a total of 150 
questionnaires were distributed and in return 121 were received. 
 
DATA ANALYSIS & INTERPRETATION 
The data collected was analyzed using basic and advanced analytical tools. This also includes the detailed analysis of the data 
which was conducted with the purpose of attaining the set objectives of the research. Mentioned below is the analysis which be 
presented graphically and in tabulated form for better interpretation. The Interpretation of the collected data was done by 
drawing inferences from the collected facts after the analysis of the study. 
 
 
ISSN NO: 1301-2746
http://adalyajournal.com/
ADALYA JOURNAL
Volome 8, Issue 8, August 2019
663

=== PAGE 5 ===

Inferences: According to the above chart majority of the respondent i.e. almost 47 % are from the age group of 18 – 25 years 
and the rest of the respondents are from the other age groups mentioned as above. 
 
 
 
Inferences: According to the above chart majority of the respondent i.e. almost 58 % were students from the age group of 18 – 
25 years and the rest of the respondents were belonging to the other occupation respectively.  
 
Table I – Frequency Analysis – Awareness of types of food categories on the basis of the body types mentioned in the 
Ayurveda which are Sattvik, Rajasik and Tamasik 
 
Frequency 
Total  
All 
One 
Two 
None 
42 
14 
25 
40 
121 
 
 
 
Observation: As per the above table and chart it is seen that 51 percent of the respondents who have agreed upon the parameter 
“All”, whereas the count of respondent for the parameter „None‟ 48 percent and the count for „One‟ and „Two‟ was 17 and 30 
percent respectively.  
Interpretation: According to the above observation Awareness of types of food categories on the basis of the body types 
mentioned in the Ayurveda which are Sattvik, Rajasik and Tamasik needs to be focused and made clear in understanding for 
ISSN NO: 1301-2746
http://adalyajournal.com/
ADALYA JOURNAL
Volome 8, Issue 8, August 2019
664

=== PAGE 6 ===

everyone in the society. This will initiate the acceptance of Ayurvedic Style of Cooking in their day to day life, leading towards 
the healthy and prospering society.  
Table – II Frequency Analysis – Ayurvedic way of cooking food is the requirement of today’s lifestyle 
Frequency 
Total  
Agree 
Neutral 
Disagree 
94 
26 
1 
121 
 
 
Observation: As per the above table and chart it is seen that a higher percentage i.e. 78 percent of the respondents have agreed 
upon the parameter, whereas the amount of disagreement was 1 % and the remaining respondents i.e. 21 percent were found to 
be neutral.  
Interpretation: According to the observation Ayurvedic way of cooking food is very much required for today‟s lifestyle and 
should be taken seriously into consideration. The chart above also supports the agreement as most of the respondents are also of 
the same opinion that Ayurvedic style of cooking is required for an healthy lifestyle.   
 
Table – III Frequency Analysis – Preference of food cooked with Ayurvedic ways over the daily food 
Frequency 
Total 
Always 
Occasionally 
On Recommendation 
Never 
32 
62 
23 
4 
121 
 
 
 
Observation: As per the above table and chart it is inferred that a higher percentage i.e. 50 percent of the respondents have 
agreed upon occasional use of Ayurvedic style of cooking over daily food, 26 % of the respondents always would like to 
ISSN NO: 1301-2746
http://adalyajournal.com/
ADALYA JOURNAL
Volome 8, Issue 8, August 2019
665

=== PAGE 7 ===

implement the style, 19 % are of an opinion of a recommended use and 5 % of the respondents says they would never like to 
adopt Ayurvedic style of cooking.  
 
Interpretation: According to the observation Ayurvedic styles of cooking food over the daily cooking style could be practiced 
on a regular basis as it has good health benefits. Majority of the respondents are occasionally following it because of the busy 
day to day schedule.  
 
Table – IV Frequency Analysis – Preference of including Ayurvedic styles in day to day cooking.  
Frequency 
Total 
Yes 
No 
Can’t Say 
May be 
57 
06 
24 
34 
121 
 
 
 
Observation: As per the chart and the table above it can be seen that majority of the respondents i.e. 47 % are agreeing to the 
parameter, 28% of the respondents says may be, 20 % of the respondents were found to be neutral as they can‟t say and 5 % of 
the respondents have refused by saying no to the parameter.    
 
Interpretation: According to the observation most of the respondents would like to include the Ayurvedic cooking styles in 
their cooking because of its health benefits and as the world is getting more diet conscious people are getting back towards the 
olden styles of cooking over easy and convenience foods.  
 
Table – V Frequency Analysis – Media Preference for Ayurvedic healthy home cooking guidelines and tips 
 
Frequency 
Total 
Recipe book 
FB Page 
Instagram 
Webpage 
Cooking Class 
36 
19 
27 
27 
12 
121 
 
ISSN NO: 1301-2746
http://adalyajournal.com/
ADALYA JOURNAL
Volome 8, Issue 8, August 2019
666

=== PAGE 8 ===

Observation: As per the chart and the table above it can be seen that majority of the respondents i.e. 47 % are agreeing to 
follow a recipe book for the parameter, web pages and instagram were found to be moderately used, where are 10 % of the 
respondent would like to join a cooking class to learn the art and 5 % of the respondents have shown their inclination towards 
using face book.  
 
Interpretation: According to the observation most of the respondents would still like to use a recipe book by good author. In 
today‟s digital world where people are more inclined towards social media platforms references books are found to be more 
effective than anything else.  
 
Table – VI Frequency Analysis – Like to attend a seminar or a workshop to learn more about Ayurvedic cooking. 
 
Frequency 
Total 
Yes 
No 
Can’t Say 
May be 
57 
06 
24 
34 
121 
 
 
 
Observation: As per the chart and the table above it is observed that majority of the respondents are of the opinion that they 
would like to attend such seminars or workshops if organized, 28 % can‟t say, 20 % are neutral and 5 % of the respondent have 
refused to attend such workshops and seminars. 
Interpretation: According to the observation most of the respondents would like to gain knowledge by attending a seminar or a 
workshop to learn more on the cooking styles and the health benefits of Ayurvedic cooking, on the other hand collectively the 
same percentage of respondents were not interested in attending.   
 
FINDINGS 
According to the analyzed data below mentioned are the findings. 
 
 
Majority of the respondent were students and belonging to the age 18 – 25 years respectively. 
ISSN NO: 1301-2746
http://adalyajournal.com/
ADALYA JOURNAL
Volome 8, Issue 8, August 2019
667

=== PAGE 9 ===

 
An Ayurvedic style of cooking food is very much required for today‟s lifestyle and should be taken seriously into 
consideration. The responses received are also strongly supporting the statement that Ayurvedic style of cooking is 
required for a healthy lifestyle.   
 
The awareness of types of food categories on the basis of the body types mentioned in the Ayurveda i.e. Sattvik, 
Rajasik and Tamasik needs to be focused and made clear in understanding for everyone in the society. This will not 
only initiate the acceptance of Ayurvedic Style of Cooking in their day to day life, but also will leading towards the 
healthy and prospering society.  
 
Ayurvedic styles of cooking food over the daily cooking style could be practiced on a regular basis because of its good 
health benefits. The adoptability and the practicality are seen occasionally because of the busy day to day schedule but 
on the other hand people would always like to use in daily cooking. 
 
As the world is getting more diet conscious people are getting back towards the olden styles of cooking over easy and 
convenience foods the inclusion of Ayurvedic cooking styles in the cooking is like a boon to the society.  
 
In today‟s digital world where people are more inclined towards social media platforms references books are found to 
be more effective learning tool. As per the findings people would like to use a recipe book written by a good author 
than any other digital platform. 
 
The respondents would like to gain knowledge by attending a seminar or a workshop to learn more on the cooking 
styles and the health benefits of Ayurvedic cooking. 
SUGGESTIONS and CONCLUSIONS  
 
More awareness should be generated amongst the youngsters on social media platforms as this will not only initiate the 
acceptance of Ayurvedic Style of Cooking in their day to day life, but also will leading towards the healthy and 
prospering society.  
 
Ayurvedic styles of cooking food should be included in the daily cooking styles on a regular basis because of its good 
health benefits. 
 
The adoptability and the practicality of Ayurvedic cooking styles should be followed regularly to avoid the future 
health issues. 
 
There should be more number of books written by renowned practitioners and authors to generate awareness, also there 
should be more seminars and workshops arranged. 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY AND REFERENCES 
A. Guha (2006), "Ayurvedic Concept of Food and Nutrition", SoM Articles. 25, http://digitalcommons.uconn.edu/som_articles/25 
 
B. Patwardhan and G. Bodeker (2008): Ayurvedic Genomics: Establishing a Genetic Basis for Mind–Body Typologies, Published 
Online: 19 Jun 2008, 
 
H. Sharma, and H.M. Chandola (2011) Ayurvedic Concept of Obesity, Metabolic Syndrome, and Diabetes Mellitus, The Journal of 
Alternative and Complementary MedicineVol. 17, No. 6Paradigms, https://doi.org/10.1089/acm.2010.0690 
https://doi.org/10.1089/acm.2007.0515 
 
M. M. Pandey, S. Rastogi, and A. K. S. Rawat (2013), Indian Traditional Ayurvedic System of Medicine and Nutritional Supplementation, 
Volume 2013, Article ID 376327, 12 pages, http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2013/376327 
 
M. Sivaramakrishnanand V. Patel (2012), Role of traditional knowledge in the explanation of childhood nutritional deficiency by indian 
mothers, Centre for Medical Education, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 1A3, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-
3182(12)80568-1Get rights and content. 
 
Pushpangadan, P.Dan, V. Mohan, T. P. Ijinu, V. George (2012), Food, Nutrition and Beverage, Jan-2012, Pg 26-34, 
http://hdl.handle.net/123456789/13417 
 
S. Banerjee, P. Debnath, P. Debnath (2014), Ayurnutrigenomics: Ayurveda-inspired personalized nutrition from inception to 
evidence,https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtcme.2014.12.009 
 
S. Rastogi (2013), Ayurvedic Principles of Food and Nutrition: Translating Theory into Evidence-Based Practice, ISBN 978-1-4614-9627-4, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-9628-1_1 
 
Y. Rawal and S. Takuli (2017): Atithya a journal of hospitality, Promotion of Culinary Tourism as a Destination Attraction - Uttrakhand 
Region, vol 3, issue 2, ISSN: 2394-6644 
 
 
 
 
ISSN NO: 1301-2746
http://adalyajournal.com/
ADALYA JOURNAL
Volome 8, Issue 8, August 2019
668

=== PAGE 10 ===

Websites: 
www.mapi.com 
www.verywellfit.com 
www.doi.org 
www.digitalcommons.uconn.edu 
www.hdl.handle.net 
www.sadvidyafoundation.org 
 
 
ISSN NO: 1301-2746
http://adalyajournal.com/
ADALYA JOURNAL
Volome 8, Issue 8, August 2019
669