=== PAGE 1 ===

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

\
DEPARTMENT OF ARCHAEOLOGY |

CENTRAL ARCHAEOLOGICAL
LIBRARY

3374

=== PAGE 6 ===

INTRODUCTION TO THE
DEVANAGARI SCRIPT

FOR STUDENTS OF
SANSKRIT, HINDI, MARATHI
GUJARATI AND BENGALI

=== PAGE 8 ===

INTRODUCTION TO THE
DEVANAGARI SCRIPT

FOR STUDENTS OF
SANSKRIT, HINDI, MARATHI
GUJARATI AND BENGALI
BY
H. M. LAMBERT, M.A.Cantab.
Senior Lecturer tu Marathi (Maharaja Gaektwad's Lectureship)
in the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London
WITH A FOREWORD BY
Prorsssor J. R. FIRTH, O.B.E., M.A.
Professor of General Linguirtics in the University of London

ecto,
(on,
1 ( New Delhi) 2
CALS ws
Nee Ee
NOs .
417.3 3374
——"——
Law

GEOFFREY CUMBERLEGE
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS

MUNS'/| RAM MANOHAR LAL
SANSKRIT & HINDI B00K-
NAL SARAK, DELHI,

=== PAGE 9 ===

Oxford University Press, Amen House, London B.C, 4
GLASGOW NEW YORK TORONTO MELBOURNE WELLINGTON
POMBAY CALCUTTA MADRAS KARACHI CAPE TOWN IBADAN

Geoffrey Cumberlege, Publisher to the University

First published 1953

CENTRAL ARCHAEOL Ox GAL
L Peeat! ipa D&UHL

ou. No,

aie, Oe 5s soerine

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN

=== PAGE 10 ===

dl

Iris a commonplace of linguistics to acknowledge the debt we owe to the ancient Indian
grammarians and to couple with it the name of Sir William Jones. It was he who first
set a proper value on the Devanagari and Arabic scripts in his dissertation as President
of the Asiatic Society of Bengal on the Orthography of Asiatic Words in Roman Letters.
; His chart of suggested symbols for the transliteration of the Devanagari, with the

addition of letters for Arabic and Persian, is the first presentation of what may be called
f a phonetic alphabet on such a scale. He finds the Arabic alphabet almost perfect for

\
=i FOREWORD
?

Arabic itself:—
‘Not a letter could be added or taken away without manifest inconvenience. The same may
indubitably be said of the Dévandgari system, which, as it is more naturally arranged than any other,
shall here be the standard of my particular observations on Asiatic letters. Our English alphabet
and orthography are disgracefully and almost ridiculously imperfect.’
) He aims at using diacritics common in Europe rather than new letters—and symbols from
‘fluxions’ or mathematics—so as to equal the Devanagari itself in precision and clearness.
A system of writing and spelling is the foundation of a system of grammar. Meillet
went so far as to say that the foundations of the science of grammar were laid by the
Indians. For all languages employing forms of the Devanagari script, the writing system
and the spelling carry implications of phonological analysis and statement. ‘They are at
once practice and theory and deserve the first attentions of all students. This is well
illustrated in Miss Lambert's work on the Devanagsi script, and it will be agreed that
the presentation of the phonological patterns, such as ‘j@nctions’ occurring in words or
arising out of ‘sandhi’ in Sanskrit, and other characteristic patterns in the modern
languages, is clear, systematic, and original, and particularly interesting in Bengali.
The treatment of conjunct characters in the third chapter of each section is new,
and apart from its intrinsic interest may be taken as an indication of what is lost when
the structure of the Devanagari system is superseded by the usual roman trans-
literations. In addition to this study of the writing system, attention is rightly given
here to calligraphy, for the practice of the hand is an obligation no less compelling
than that of the tongue and both are expressions not only of courteous relations but of
disciplined knowledge.
Miss Lambert has consistently applied the All-India Roman Alphabet to all- five
languages in order to make comparison possible whether the languages are known to the
student or not. This treatment could be extended to the Dravidian languages. By this

=== PAGE 11 ===

vi FOREWORD

means it has been found possible to make a systematic statement of the various conven-
tions governing the use of the Sanskritic writing system for the modern languages.

The Sanskrit and Hindi sections are published separately in one volume since they
employ one script and will presumably be more generally required, but the appeal of the
entire work is to those whose interests range from India through Further India to the
Indonesian Islands following the Sanskritic system of writing.

I have been acquainted with Miss Lambert’s work in Indian studies since 1937, first
in Western India and later as a colleague in London. It gave me great pleasure to be
asked to write this brief foreword to her work on a subject which I have always held to
be of high importance and the results of which are now offered to students of Sanskrit
and the four principal Sanskritic languages of India.

J. R. FIRTH

=== PAGE 12 ===

PREFACE

Goop writing, the understanding of the writing system and the formation of a good
hand, is as important a part of the study of the written language as good pronunciation
isof thestudy of the spoken language. Yet toolittle time is usually given to the teaching of
writing to students of Sanskrit and of the modern Indian languages ; writing is generally
left for the student to teach himself as best he can. The result is that many students
neither have an adequate understanding of the writing system and the difference between
a syllabic and an alphabetic method of representation, nor know how the characters of
the script are written and what features are important for the formation of a cultured
literate hand. It is hoped that this book will provide not only a guide to students learn-
ing to write the scripts which are described in each section, but will also give them a
fuller understanding of the special nature of the scripts and the adjustments which are
made in the Sanskrit system in order to use it for writing the modern languages of
northern India.

‘The notation used for the transcription of the scripts in this work is the All-India
Roman Alphabet devised by Professor J. R. Firth of the School of Oriental and African
Studies, University of London, and used already in several publications—A. H. Harley,
Colloquial Hindustani, T. Grahame Bailey, Teach Yourself Hindustani, and my own
Marathi Language Course. ‘The use of this transcription necessitates the use of certain
conventions, particularly that of the representation of the ‘inherent vowel’, in final
characters when listing the contents of each section of the work. The transcription of
the Sanskrit terms in the Sanskrit section is entirely systematic; but owing to the varying
realization of the characters of the script in certain positions in words in the modern
languages, it has been necessary to use in the Contents of the other sections certain con-
ventions which are discussed in the text. An example of such conventions occurs in the
writing of such Sanskrit terms, used by grammarians in the modern languages, as
‘antasth’ and ‘uugm’, in which the realization of the ‘inherent vowel’ of the final character
varies from a short glide-vowel to a full syllable. As it is beyond the scope of this work
to make a fine analysis of the varying realization of such final characters, it is necessary
to establish certain conventions with regard to the transcription of them. These con-
ventions are of necessity anticipated in the Contents.

Some degree of repetition has been inevitable in order to preserve the basic unity of
the description of the Devanagari system of writing while allowing for specialization

=== PAGE 13 ===

viii PREFACE
in each of the languages. While this repetition may at times seem irksome to the reader,
it has the advantage of facilitating comparison of one section with another.

The words given in each section to illustrate the writing and reading of the various
scripts have been selected in order to provide examples of every character or combina-
tion of characters which occurs in the language under consideration. Some characters
occur only in colloquial forms or in loanwords from other languages, including English.
In order to illustrate the use of all the characters, examples are drawn, therefore, from
the whole range of vocabulary, from colloquial forms occurring in modern speech to
learned Sanskrit loanwords occurring only in literary texts. Any word which occurs in
a standard dictionary is a word which the student may have to read and illustrates the
use of the characters of the script.

This study of the Devanagari script owes its inspiration to the suggestion and en-
couragement of Professor Firth, to whom my thanks are first due. But a work of this
nature could not have been accomplished without reference to experts in the languages
discussed, and I am greatly indebted to my colleagues of both the Department of India,
Pakistan and Ceylon, and the Department of Phonetics and Linguistics, of the School, for
their co-operation and guidance. I am especially indebted to Miss G. M. Summers,
formerly Lecturer in Bengali in this School, for her collaboration in the Bengali section,
without which the study of the Bengali script could not have been included in this work.
The two scribes who have written the script portions of the book, Miss W. Westover
and Mr. P. Pritchard, must also be given recognition for their careful and accurate work.

Finally I wish to express my appreciation of the great generosity of the School of
Oriental and African Studies for their subvention towards the publication of this book ;
and of the help and advice given by the Oxford University Press on all matters concern-
ing its production.

H.M.L.

=== PAGE 14 ===

CONTENTS

page
Foreword v
Preface vii
Introduction: The Devanagari Script 1
Notation 2
Calligraphy 5.
SANSKRIT SECTION

Chapter 1. Arrangement of the Syllabary 11
Sanskrit syllabary in roman notation 12
Sanskrit phonetic terms 13
Chapter 2. Characters of the Syllabary 15
1. Consonant Characters 15
4. Characters of the vergiiys group 16
4i. Charecters of the entehsthe group 18
1i1. Characters of the uugmen group, and Vedic |e 19
2. Vowel Characters and Vowel Signs 21
i. Vowel characters 21
14. Vowel signs 23
3. Modifiers 26
i. enusvereh 26
41. visergeh 30
4. The Complete Syllabery 31
2 Numerale 32
. Punctuation 32
Chapter 3. Conjunct Characters 33
1. Construction of Conjunct Characters 33
2. Contexts of Conjunct Characters 35
3. Classification of Conjunct Characters 37
Class 1. Two similar characters joined 38
Class 2. Two vergiiyo characters joined 39
Class 3. Characters joined with ontohstho characters 43
i. witn following ye 43
41. with following va uh
iii. with preceding or following ro 45
iv. with preceding or following le and le 47

Class 4. vergiiye characters joined with preceding
or following uugmen characters us
4. witn fo, s9 snd so 48
ii. with he 50
Transcription of reading examples 51

=== PAGE 15 ===

x CONTENTS

HINDI SECTION

Chapter 1. Arrangement of the Syllabary
Hindi syllabary in roman notation
Chapter 2. Characters of the Syllabary

1. Consonant Characters

Realisation of okar consonant characters

i. Characters of the vorgiiy group
ii. Characters of the entesth group
iii. Characters of the uusm group
2. Vowel Characters and Vowel Signs
i. Vowel Characters
ii. Vowel Signs

Realisation of characters in special contexts

3. Modifiers
i. enusvar and condr-bindu
ii. viserg

4. The Complete Syllabary

5. Numerals

6. Punctuation

Chapter 3. Conjunct Characters

1. Contexts of Conjunct Characters in Hindi
2. Realisation of Conjunct Characters in Hindi

3. Classes of Conjunct Characters
Class 1. Two similar characters joined
Class 2. Two vergiiy characters joined

Class 3. Characters joined with antosth characters

i. with following yo
il. with following vo

iii. with preceding or following ro
iv. with preceding or following lo
Class 4. vergiiy characters joined with preceding

or following uusm characters
i. with fe , so and so
ii. with ho

Hindi prose passage

Transcription of reading examples

page

=== PAGE 16 ===

CONTENTS xi

MARATHI SECTION

age
Chapter 1. Arrangement of the Syllabary E rH
Marathi syllabary in roman notation 92
Chapter 2. Characters of the Syllabary 9h
1. Consonant Characters 95
Realisation of okar consonant characters 96
i. Characters of the vergiiy group 96
ii. Characters of the entesth group 99
iii. Characters of the uugm group, and |e 100
2. Vowel Characters and Vowel Signs 102
i. Vowel Characters 102
ii. Vowel Signs 103
Modern forms of Marathi vowel characters 103
Realisation of characters in special contexts 105
Realisation of characters of the ce-verg 106
3. Modifiers 108
i. onusvar 108
ii. visorg 111
4. The Complete Syllabary 112
5. Numerals 112
- Punctuation tka
Rules of Marathi Orthography 113
Chapter 3. Conjunct Characters 118
1. Contexts of Conjunct Characters in Marathi - 118
2. Realisation of Conjunct Characters in Marathi 119
3. Classes of Conjunct Characters 119
Class 1. Two similar characters joined 120
Class 2. Two vergiiy characters joined 121
Class 3. Characters joined with entesth characters 122
i. with following yo 122
ii. with following ve 123
iii. with preceding or following ro 124
iv. with preceding or following le 126
Class 4. vergiiy characters joined with preceding
or following uusgm characters 127
i. with fo , so and se 127
ii. with he 128
Marathi prose passage 129

Transcription of reading examples 130

=== PAGE 17 ===

Chapter 1.

Chepter 2.

“chapter 3.

CONTENTS

GUJARATI SEOTION

Arrangement of the Syllabary
Gujarati syllabary in roman notation

Characters of the Syllabary

1, Consonant Characters
Realisation of okar consonant characters
i, Characters of the vergiify group
ii. Characters of the antosth group
iii. Characters of the uusm group, and le
2, Vowel Characters and Vowel Signs
1. Vowel Characters
ii. Vowel Signs
Realisation of vowels 'e' end 'o!
Realisation of characters in special contexts
Realisation of 'qe' and 'qho!
Orthography of "{' and ‘u!
3. Modifiers
i. onuever
ii. viserg
4. The Complete Syllabary
5. Numerals
6. Punctuation
Rules of Gujarati Orthography

Conjunct Characters

1. Gontexts of Conjunct Characters in Gujarati
2. Realisation of Conjunct Characters in Gujarati
3. Classes of Conjunct Characters

Class 1. Two similar characters Joined

Class 2. Two vargiiy characters joined

Class 3, Characters joined with ontesth characters

i. with following ye

11, with following vo
iii. with preceding or following ro
iv. with preceding or following le

Class 4, vorgiiy characters joined with preceding

or following uugm characters
1, with feo, ge and so
ii. with ho

Gujarati prose passage

Transcription of reading examples

=== PAGE 18 ===

CONTENTS xiii

BENGALI SECTION

page
Chapter 1. Arrangement of the Syllabary 173
Notation 174
Bengali syllabary in roman notetion 175
Calligraphy 177
Chapter 2. Characters of the Syllabery 179
1. Consonant Characters
i. Cheracters of the vergiiye group 161
Realisation of skar consonant characters 183
ii. Characters of the entesthe group 186
iii. Characters of the uugme group 188
Realisation of skar consonant characters in
verbal forms 190
2. Vowel Characters and Vowel Signs 192
1. Vowel Characters 192
ii. Vowel Signa 194
Realisation of consonant and vowel characters
in special contexts 195

a. Realisation of ekar consonant characters 195
b. Realisation of vowel charactera in

special contexts 197
Realisation of ontosths yo 199

3. Modifiers 20k
i. cendrs-bindu and snusvars 204

ii. visorgo 206

4. The Complete Syllabary 206
5. Numerals 207
6. Punctuation 207
Chapter 3. Conjunct Characters 208
1, Construction of Conjunct Characters 208
2. Contexts and Realisation of Conjunct Characters 209
3. Classes of Conjunct Cheracters 211
Class 1. Two similar characters joined 211
Class 2. Two vergiiye cheractera joined 212
Class 3. Characters joined with ontesthe characters 214

i. with following ye 21

ii. with following vo 21
A111, with preceding or following reo 218

iv. with preceding or following la 220

Class 4. vergiiye characters joined with preceding

or following uugme characters 221

i. with fo , gs and so 221

ii. with ho 223

Bengali prose passage 225
Transcription of Reading Examples 226

=== PAGE 20 ===

INTRODUCTION

Tne Devanagari Script

The script traditionally referred to as the Devanagari Script
is used in writing Sanskrit and, of the modern languages of northern
India, Hindi, Marathi and Nepali. The script used in writing Gujarati
is a slightly modified form of the Devanagari script, and the scripts
used in writing Bengali and Panjabi are related to the Devanagari
script, though this relation is apparent in only some of the charact—
ers. The writing system, based on the character representing the syll-
able, is the same for all these languages. However, in order to use
this system for writing the modern languages, which have each develop-
ed in their own particular way from the original Sanskrit, a number
of conventions have become necessary in reading from the script, con-
ventions which vary with the special features of each language. The
realisation of the characters as they are used for writing Hindi,
Bengali, Marathi and Gujarati, and the conventions which have become
established in each language, are described in the various sections
of this work. Though the Bengali script differs considerably from
the Devanagari script in the form of most of the characters, the
study of it is included in this work because the writing system is

the same as the Sanskrit writing system, and the conventions by which

=== PAGE 21 ===

2 INTRODUCTION

this system is edapted for writing Bengali heve much in common with
the conventions used in the other modern languages. An examination
of these conventions makes possible an interesting comparison both
between the writing of these four languages and that of Sanskrit,

and between the writing of the modern languages themselves.

The origin of the name 'Devanagari' is obscure. The shorter
form of the name is 'Nagari'(nagerii), which has been variously inter-
preted. It is thought by some to be the name given to the writing of
‘the people of the city'(nogorom, 'a city'); by others it is said to

derive its name from the Nagar Brahmans of Gujarat.

Notation

The system of roman notation used in this text for transcribing
the Devanagari characters is the All-India Roman Notetion?. Three
minor modifications have been introduced in this text in order to
adapt the notation for transcribing both Sanskrit and the modern

languages.

These modifications are :-

i. The use of the vowels i ('short' i) and ii ('long' ii) instead
of the vewels y and i ; and of the vowels u ('short’ u )
and uu ('‘long' uu ) for the vowels w and u.

ii. The use of the letter m instead of yn for representing the
mark of nasalisation known as the onusvar.

iii.The placing of a micrcn above the letter y in the diphthong oy ,
and above the letter v in the diphthong ov , thus: oy , ov.

1. See Preface.

=== PAGE 22 ===

INTRODUCTION

This mark distinguishes the transcription of the diphthongs from
the transcription of combinations of characters which are real-
ised in certain cortexts as o-y and a-v , not distinguishable
in ordinary speech, in the modern languages, from the diphthongs.
Besides these modifications, it is necessary to make certain
additions to the notation in order to represent characters used in
writing the modern langusges but not used in Sanskrit, and certain
modified characters used in Hindi and Bengali. The complete notation

used in the Sanskrit syllabary is this:

Vowels: 3 a i di u uu e oy ° ov
and Pr rr 1 1l , for the syllabic consonants.
Modifiers!: m (representing the enusvare) and

h (representing the viserge)

Consonants: k kh g gh y
c ch i jh p

th @ ah 4

th a dh n

Pp ph b bh m

y, r 1 aba s 8 h
|» used in transcribing Vedic Sanskrit

The additional letters used in the syllabaries of the modern
languages are these:
{ and rh for transcribing the modified forms of the characters

representing q and qh , in Hindi and Bengali, and for

1. For the use of this term, see Sanskrit section, Chapter 1.

=== PAGE 23 ===

4 INTRODUCTION

indicating the intervocallic realisation, in certain words, of

the Gujarati character representing q .
a,xX,¥,2 and f , for transcribing certain modified Devanagari

characters used in Hindi in writing Persian and Arabic loanwords.
ts , 2 and zh , for transcribing characters of the ‘palatal' class

in Marathi, when they are realised with alveolar articulation.

In modern spoken Gujarati and modern spoken Bengali, certain
vowel sounds occur which are not separately represented in the script.
For indicating the contexts in which such vowel sounds occur, the
three symbols € , 0 and @ are used.

The sign of nasalisation,™ , is used in transcribing the modifier
representing nasalisation! when it is realised, in the modern lang-
uages, as the nasalisation of a vowel and not as a nasal consonant.

This roman notetion is used for writing all the Sanskrit grammat—
ical terms referring to the syllabaries of Sanskrit and of the modern
languages, the classificetion of the characters and the phonetic de-
scription of their realisation. The names of the languages, the
scripts, and grammatical terms, such as 'sandhi'(sondhi), which are
in regular use in English, are written in their conventional English
form.

The Sanskrit syllabary, as arranged by the Sanskrit grammarians,
is given in the roman notation in the Sanskrit section?, and serves
as a standard with which the syllabaries of the modern languages can

be compared.

1. See Sanskrit Section, Chapter 2,3.i.a. onusvaro.
2. ibid., Chapter 1.

=== PAGE 24 ===

INTRODUCTION 5

Calligraphy

The writing of the Devanagari characters should be practised at
first with a reed or bamboo pen. Such pens sre still in use in many
parts of India, and in many schools Indian children are taught first
to write on a large scale with a broadly cut bamboo pen. Writing in
this way will train the eye to recognise easily details of difference
and will train the hand to write e standard form of the characters
with the broad and thin strokes in the right place and proportion.
These pens are cut in the same way as a quill pen, except thet the
point is cut to slant in the opposite direction frem that of the
quill used for English writing with the tilted axis. The English pen,
when cut for the tilted axis, looks like this from the back:

[cued writing thus: VNO Ce
The pen cut for the Devanagari neriate alogks like this ee the back:
‘= writing tms: JA O CA
The Ana should be held in such a way that the thin line, made by the
eut edge, falls from left to right at an angle of 45 degrees from a
line drawn horizontally across the page. The broad stroke then forms
a@ right-angle with the thin stroke and crosses the horizontal line of
the page at an angle of 45 degrees. Care must be taken not to change
the angle of the pen during the writing of curved or rounded strokes,
as this will change the shape and balance of the character.

Some of the typical strokes of the script should be practised
until good control of the pen, held at the right angle, is establish-

ed before the characters themselves are written. For example:

=== PAGE 25 ===

6 INTRODUCTION

The use of the broad pen should be continued until a good style
of handwriting is formed; the introduction of writing with an
ordinary pen, end without sufficient attention to the details of line
and form, often interferes with the formation of a good hand.

In the illustrations given below, which may be used as writing
exercises, the characters are grouped go as to show different combin-
ations of strokes, and to drew attention to similarities and to small
but important differences. It will be seen that some of the characters
have an upright stroke, others are curved or rounded, without an up-
right etroke; but all have the hesd-stroke, though it is not always
written right across the top of the character. The elignment of the
characters is made by thio head-stroke, that is, by the top of the
character, though there is an invisible alignment also by the bottom
of the character, For this reason, it is well to practice writing at
first between two lines; if one line is used, the characters should
be written from the line downwards, not on the line.

The general method of writing the characters is this: first,
the chsracteristic part of the character, usually on the left side of
the upright stroke; then the upright stroke, if there is one; and
finally the heed-stroke. The head-etrcke binds the whole character
together, as will be seen when vowel signs and other marke are added.
The general firection of making the strokes is from the top downwards,
and from left to right. But the order of the strokes in some charact—
ers, and their direction, differ from this general rule, and where
thie is so, the calligraphy of particular characters is illustrated

when these are introduced in the chepters which follow.

=== PAGE 26 ===

INTRODUCTION
Examples of Devanagari cheracters, showing the order in which the

strokes are writte

Break ren: “kk

Examples of similarity and dif fference betw characters:

gag zoeat Es

=== PAGE 27 ===

PSE AS Mo SaR ET

Sil caae he ge

ye 2

=== PAGE 28 ===

SANSKRIT SECTION

=== PAGE 30 ===

CHAPTER 1
ARRANGEMENT OF THE SYLLABARY

When the characters of the Devanagari Script, @@AT1N , are
arranged in the traditional order, they constitute a series of syll-
ables which may be regarded as the basis of the Sanskrit phonological
system. Each character represents a syllable, and is called Hat,
(ekgerem). The series of characters in the syllabary is called

aaa (vernemala), and consists of:-
Fourteen vowel characters,
Two modifiers and
Thirtythree consonant characters.
The syllabary used in writing Vedic Sanskrit includes one more con-
sonant character.

In enaine aloud from the script, a vowel character is realised
as a syllable consisting of a vowel, Se: (svereh), and a consonant
character is realised as a syllable consisting of an initial conson—

ant, SQ SAAF. (vyepjenem) followed by the vowel 9 - This vowel,

when realised with a consonant, is generally referred to in English
textbooks as the 'inherent' vowel. The term 'modifier' is used here
to refer to the two signs which indicate some modification in the
realisation of the character with which they are written. These two
signs are usually referred to individually, as the ‘onusvareh' and
the 'visorgoh', as there is no Sanskrit term which is used to refer

to them together.

=== PAGE 31 ===

2 SANSKRIT SECTION

Each character is referred to, for instance, in spelling, as the

syllable which it represents, and the particle @I< (karo)} for
example, @THIY (akare), AHR (ikaro), HAT (kekars), TTT (tokare).

The roman syllabary given below corresponds in arrangement and

classification with the Devanagari syllabary.

characters are discussed first in this work,

syllables is placed first in this syllabary.

As the consonant

the table of consonant

an 2 3 4 5
CONSONANTS with o Velar |Palatal| Cacum-| Dental] Labial
inal
@
A re Unaspirated ke eo te te pe
> Aspirated kho cho the tho pho
“A >
3 |g | Unaspiretea go je qe ao bo
Pe iS Aspirated gho jho qno dho bho
| Haoes ne pe ne no mo
Semi-vowels ye ro le ve
Fricatives fe se so
Aspirete ho
Lateral 12
= =~
VOWELS, associated with| o a eS Y TF re kh uuu
consonant-classes e oF Saoe
——
MODIFIERS Nasal 1 Aspirated -h

=== PAGE 32 ===

ARRANGEMENT OF THE SYLLABARY 13

The character represented by vo in the roman table is usually
realised with labio-dental articulation in reeding from a Sanskrit
text. ‘he retroflex lateral consonant |e occurs only in Vedic
Senekrit. The vowel ‘syllabic 11’ does not occur in Sanskrit, but the
cheracter representing it is traditionally included in the script
syllabary. :

The main feature of the syllabery is the arrangement of the con-
sonant characters in groups according to the position and the manner
of articulation of the sounds which they represent. The following
Sanskrit phonetic terms are used by grammarians in the description of
the cherecters as they sre classified in the syllabery:

4. The consonant characters are placed in three groups: characters
representing syllables with an initial plosive consonant, that is,

@ consonant articulated with ‘contect', Sas (sparsfeh,' touch") ;
characters representing syllables with an initial semi-vowel, that is,

‘neither a consonant nor s vowel’, Wa: (ontehsathe, ‘standing
between'); and characters representing syllables with an initial
fricative consonant, HT, (uugmon, ‘heat').

14. The five positions of articulation are: GUST (xonthye,'veler')
or fagyeitae ( jihvamuulityo,'root of the tongue'); alert
(talevys, 'palatal'); qdeq (muurdhenye,cacuminal'!); er
(dontyo, 'dental') and wis (osthye, "lebial’). Labio-dental
articulation is described as ara (dontetsthys).

1. This term refers to the area of the roof of the mouth with which
contact is made by the tongue. Consonanto of this clase are also de-
Scribed as ‘cerebral’. As the retroflexion of the tongue ie an import-
ant feature in the pronunciation of consonants of this class in the
modern languages, the class ic described so 'retroflex’ in the roman
tables of those languages. Cf. Hindi, p.59.

=== PAGE 33 ===

14

111.

ere realised is described in the following terms,

SANSKRIT SECTION

of plosive consonants the

voiceless, unaspirated

voiceless, aspirated

voiced, unaspirated

voiced, aspirated

nasal

1.

3!
4.
5.

The manner of production of the sounds by which the characters

and in each class

characters are arranged in thie order:

FG (ophogel), meryre
BGT (oghoge), Tem

WTA, (chopavet 4), sera
HIT (ehosevet), ARTwTT

waa (onunasixs5),

(elpaprane?)
(mahaprane3)
(alpeprane)
(mahaprane)

*without sound', or ‘voiceless’,

‘with little breath!

"nasal',

» or 'unsspirated',
with big breath', or ‘aspirated’,
‘with sound' or 'voiced'.

=== PAGE 34 ===

CHAP TER 2
CHARACTERS OF THE SYLLABARY

The characters of the script are described in this chapter in the
same order as that in which the syllables are placed in the roman
syllabary: Consonant Characters, Vowel Characters and Vowel Signs,
and Modifiers.

The general style of the characters varies from period to period
and from region to region. In the older editions of Sanskrit works
some characters are found that are now supplanted by newer and more
widely used forms; and there is sometimes a marked difference in the
style used in printing books in Bombay, Calcutta and other parts of
India. The most commonly used of the alternative forms of some of
the characters are given below, among the characters of each group.
The calligraphy of any chsracters which are not written according to
the general order of strokes given in the Introduction is illustrat-

ed when the characters are introduced.

1. Consonant Characters.

The consonant characters of the syllabary represent syllables
consisting of an initial consonant followed by the vowel o . Conson-
ant characters realised with the vowel oe are described as AOHIt
(ekare). If a character is to be realised as the consonant element
only of the syllable, this is shown by writing the mark known as
fas: (virameh) at the foot of the character. The writing of this

mark with a character is illustrated below, after the first table.

=== PAGE 35 ===

16 SANSKRIT SECTION
Characters written with the viramoh are described as Mad (holonte)

‘ending in a consonant’.

1. Characters of the vergiiyo group (avifa DES

The twentyfive characters of this group are arranged, as in the
romen table given above, in five classes, at (vergoh), representing
the five positions of teontact', STB: (sperseh) , used in the articul-
ation of the plosive consonants. Each class consists of five charact-
ers, arranged in order according to the manner of production of the

consonant of the syllable which they represent.

SS EQ Th TS
ke kho go gho n°
Se SS * SF
co cho je gho pe
a CoH Se SS -s- F
te the qe qhe ne
ae a 1 & aj |
te the ds dhe ne

q-a7:

pe-vergeh

a

phe be

q

3
4
|

The Bombay form of the character for jho is @ , and the forma

@G end R are found in older books printed in Calcutta. The Bombay

—=_—eeom~

=== PAGE 36 ===

CHARACTERS OF THE SYLLABARY 17
form of the character for no is OT . The Bombay forms of these
characters are used in Hindi writing, but the Hindi forms are not

used in Marathi writing, or in Sanskrit books printed in Bombay.

Calligraphy.

All the characters in the above table are written in the way
described in the introductory notes on calligraphy, except the
following three characters: ep viva WT

ay 5 hy tect co dq &

The writing of the virameh to indicate the realisation of a con-
sonant character a6 a consonant without the vowel @ is illustrated

by these characters:
ah a a
k- _ t- t- =

When writing words, which may be of one or more characters, each
character is written and completed with the head-stroke before the
next character is written. In the reading examples which are given
below, words which are usually written with the modifier known as
Rat: (vieorgeh)? ere written in the form in which they occur in
various contexts without this modifier. The visorgeh is written with
reading examples after the modifiers have been discussed. Verbal
roots, in the form in which they are given in grammars and diction-
aries, are included in the examples in order to illustrate the writing

of characters with the viramoh.

1. The first stroke in these characters is written from right to left.
2. See below, under 3. Modifiers, ii.
c

=== PAGE 37 ===

8 SANSKRIT SECTION
Reading examples?

1. One character words

et CLs cee ott eae Sl eee aD

co) 4 wT gq a a a a wa a
2. Two character words

ue ue at as Fo GU GU aa 42 ga

aq mT Ms me Ut a BT UG, we oT
3. Three character words

TAH TT BS RU oy aaa Uh Wh gua

Gon mys ATH TF, Hay BAH Wem
4. Four and five character words

BqAs. agar ACAy, HUA awa, HATE

TAs 4ST, GAAG AIAU, BUA,

ii. Characters of the ontehsthe? group ( WarewT )

qq z a q Bombay form rw
ye re le ve

le

Calligraphy
le : Hindi form c > ed GA Bombay form c7 MM OO BD

These four characters are associated with four of the vergeh, as
indicated in the roman syllabary, and with four of the vowels, thus:
7”q » ye, associated with the ce-vergeh, and the vowels i and ii
X% , re, associated with the te-vergeh, and the syllabic r and rr
@ , le, associated with the te-vergeh, and the syllabic 1 and aa

@ , ve, associated with the pe-vergeh, and the vowels u and wu

1. Transcription of examples is given on p.5l.

2. 'standing between.' 3, This stroke is written from right to left.
4. See below, under 2. Vowel Characters.

=== PAGE 38 ===

CHARACTERS OF THE SYLLABARY 9
These characters are all described as elpeprans and ghogavet.
@ =, vo , though associated with the labial cless, is realised with
labio-dental articulation, and described as araree (dentotsthye).
Reading examples?
1. One character words
a q Le a a a a a
2. Two character words
oa wa at ag, mT as at w as,
ay aa a ma Re e, UT at tT
3. Three character words
Ra may Aaa, was Fst aa BAT
TAT Bs TIS aad, bat bal aqaz meq

4. Words of four or more cheracters
qAad qaaF. maz Be (oS ote ff COC org

iii. Charactera of the uusmen? group aay)

YU Us &
Je Bo 89 he
Calligraphy

fo: Hindi form 2 Qt WT Bombay form 2 al al FT
haiti. *© @ E o it, $ OE

lan older form of WJ is W » & form still used in joining this

character to certsin other characters. This form is illustrated

later under Conjunct Characters?.

1. Transcription of examples is given on p.5l.
2. "hest’ 3. See Chapter 3.

=== PAGE 39 ===

20 SANSKRIT SECTION
The first three characters of this group represent syllables
consisting of a fricative consonant with the vowel o@ , and are
described ss oghose and mohaprans. The fourth character is realised
6 an aspirate followed by the vowel o , and is described as ghosevet
and mohaprans., The uusman characters are associated with the classes
thus: §] , Jo , with the co-vergeh; G , se , with the te-vergoh;
W =, se , with the te-vergeh; and & , he , with the ke-vorgoh.
The cheracter & is the last consonant character in the sylleb-
ary used in writing classical Sanskrit. In writing Vedic Sanskrit
one more character is used, & , 19 , realised ss a retroflex lateral
consonant followed by the vowel oa.
Calligraphy of GO: ¢ YF CO HO B
Reeding examples!
1. One character words
b, Ld a 7 q z z "a
2. Two character words
Rik] we we aa ea,
aT Ws aa ma Ta

\

wT wa ma Oe
a Re wT OF
3. Three character words

Ra SAT FET, wa ws aaa wa Ws

FIA We FAS wet RH WT WAT FAH

4, Pour, five and six character words
amg waa 8 869eaae FAeA, Waa, was
AST Fag THT S51 fa ba ba @ BAnaGa aaa,

1. Transcription of examples is given on p.51.

=== PAGE 40 ===

CHARACTERS OF THE SYLLABARY

2. Vowel Characters, with corresponding Vowel Signs.

A vowel which constitutes a syllable is written with a vowel
. character; a vowel which is part of a syllable with an initial con-

| sonent is written with a vowel sign added to a consonent character.
i. Vowel Characters.

There sre fourteen vowel charactera in the vornomala:

zm s $F$ TB

Tia a

The character | , and the other characters based on the same

form, 7 , ¥t ana Wt , and the characters WM, MR, and

BRA A

Both forms of these vowel characters are used in Hindi writing;

™ . have these alternative forms:
2 a

° bas

only the Bombay forms are used in Marathi writing.

wT, 0,16 &}.

An older form of
The order of writing the strokes in vowel
charsoters is illustrated by these exemples:

a a c.f e 8 + aA
a 2 & al BT ug 8 g

ro t+ H HE rt c©«c ror at &
es yu Y o WM Ml al FAT

1. See below, under 3,Modifiers,i.note c.

at

=== PAGE 41 ===

22 SANSKRIT SECTION

The vowel characters are referred to as WMMHl< , o-karo, AIHI »
a-karo, Sohly i-karo, and so on. They are related to the five posit-
ions of articulation as shown in the table of the roman syllabary.
The vowel 11 does not occur in Sanskrit words, but the character is

* traditionally included in the syllabary for the sake of symmetry.

The first ten vowel characters represent five pairs of 'simple'
vowels, each pair consisting of a character realised as a ‘short’
vowel, @*@, (hrosvo) and a character realised es a "long' vowel,

ad , (diirghe). The remaining four characters represent vowels
which are described as ‘compound’ or 'conjunct', aan » (somyukte).
In the system of modification and combination of vowels known as
"sandhi', aire: »(sendhih), as in the formation of compound words,
derived words, and the joining of final and initial vowels in con-

secutive words in a phrase or sentence, the vowels are grouped thus:

Simple vowels cE} a i di u uu r rr i
WE (gunsh) 2 a e ° or ol
afS: (vrddhin) a ey ov ar al
Examples*: ARH negerem -- aaa nagerike
fea dive Sa deve Eto deyvye
“ff bhuuti ss ates — vhovtike
B kr wT ker mre karyo
Sy xp QCA kelpena legs kalponike

1. See above, Ch.1., and below,3.i. for the modifier represented by m.
2. See below, ii, for the vowel signs used in these exemples.

=== PAGE 42 ===

CHARACTERS OF THE SYLLABARY 23

Reading examples of words with vowel cheracters:1

1. One character words
Te se BER M>- RTA
2. Words of. more than one character
mI oR st We UTTER
se va € sa WH WI SS BE ST
a oh Sy ate FE TT 4 ATA
aya Bere eT aa TUR STITT

ii. Vowel Signs

Each of the vowel characters, except @ , 2 , has a correspond—
ing vowel sign which may be added to a consonant character to re-
present a syllable consisting of an initial consonant followed by one
of the vowels a - e¥. As the vowel e@ is realised with every con-
sonant character unless it is either marked with the virameh or has
one of the vowel signs added to it, there is no sign for this vowel.

The vowel signs, added to the consonant character H , are:

a wm Hh HT HF F

(xe) ka ki kii ku kuu ‘
kr krr x1 x11?
ke key ko kev

1. Transcription of examples is given on p51.
2. See note on the vowel 11 under Vowel Characters, above.

=== PAGE 43 ===

4 SANSKRIT SECTION
Celligrephy
The order of writing the strokes when a vowel sign is added .to a
consonant character ie illustrated in the following examples:
ke ch och T m bh © &
od OC Kit ch chlo Al AT

at | oa of Of or 1 6 OR OR
we th oh koh cht oh] AT.

When the vowel signe are added to consonant characters which
have an upright stroke, the Superscribed signs are placed above the
upright stroke, and the subscribed Signs are written at the foot of
thet stroke. When vowel signs are subscribed to rounded characters,

they are written below the mid-point of the lowest curve, thus:

BSS baking eg
qu du

chu fu qhuu hun
Special forms
> eB 7) &
ru ruu ar fr hr

An older forn of @] is % 1, end ot & ie ¥

The vowel sign of WA «is not written with %&. The character
representing <4 with % ia written with the superscribed stroke
used to represent ¥ when it is to be realised before another con-
sonant character without an intervening vowel. This stroke is placed
over the vowel character WJ, as in faite » nirrti2,
Mark of 'seperstion’.

When an initial #f or @f occurs after certain finel vowele in
the preceding word, the mark S , known as WE: (avogrohoh)?is

1. See Ch.2,1.ifi. 2. See Ch.3,3.Clasa 3.ili.a, 3. ‘separation’.

=== PAGE 44 ===

CHARACTERS OF THE SYLLABARY 25
written after the vowel in which the final and initial vowels sre co-
@lesced,to indicate the presence of two words in the piece. The mark
is written once when the initial vowel of the second word is @ , and

twice when the initial vowel is #7 , 96 in these examples:

a wa asa a mA ashe Aa AIA AaISSTTT

yo - oyom yo-yom te- epi te-pi soda - atmon soda--tmonl

Reading examples”

1. One character words
* gq * goa f mm
= ff + = * & MW FE

2. Two character words
ez Wt a
kk sx ta 4

5. Three character words

afte fasta sma ana fqn tied Siar as
amt ome aft sia oie Sad kar
Req tea ae at afsar kot

4. Four, five and six character words

varies gfe fee staraa fayfaen thay
saat wgaifes «6 ata) saeifaa waar
sama strats 0 ast | gasfe | aasaaT

1, tH, tmo , the characters @ and 4 combined. See Chapter3,
Class 2. iii. 2. Transcription of examples is given on p.51.,

=== PAGE 45 ===

26 SANSKRIT SECTION
3. Modifiers

The two modifiers, known as WATE = (enusvarch) and faa:
(visergeh), are signs which may be added to a character to indicate
& modification in the realisation of the character. They are placed
in the syllabary after the vowel characters, and, as they cannot be
written alone, they are written with the character Bl. They may,
however, be written with any character, -

i. onusvareh, AIT 1

Thie modifier is written as a dot above the character of which
it modifies the realisation, thus:

Saws eS Rt t wt &

i i a a, en a CT

Sat fh Ht $ $ SB a Ft
ken kan kin kiin ku kuun ke koyn kom koty
Calligraphy

The enusvaroh is generally added to the character after the vowel

sign has been written and before the headstroke is written to complete

the character, It is placed above the middle of the character, or

over the last upright stroke if there is one, and to the right side of

eny superscribed vowel sign, for example;

kon ch hte hog &
gey aati Ti ag Bt OR ORT gen a}
ani ty AAR it AYRE ron gh

at kim.
Ah Ae ay.

1. ‘after-sound',

=== PAGE 46 ===

CHARACTERS OF THE SYLLABARY 27

The enusvereh is written with e character in various contexts,
and is realised in various ways sccording to the context.

a. When a word of which the final character represents the form-
ative particle W] occurs in any position except st the end of a line
of verse or m sentence, the character 4 is omitted before an initial
consonant character of a following word and the formetive particle is
represented by the anusvarch. This formative particle is usually writ-
ten as A only at the end of a line or a sentence. For example:

jet fat ah a ae fafa aT
yetan vibhuutin yogen ce... yetam vibhuutim yorem

b. The anuavarch may be written with an initial or medial
character followed by a vargiiyo character. In this context it is
reslised as the nasal consonant of the class to which the following

character belongs. Examples:

Be 3 fea

y-3 Ta
amke (enke) pumkhe (punkhe) limge (linge)

Oe ta aia, Fe,

pomes (pepes) vanch (vench) sims (sinj)
ee, Ho we fag

kuytho (kunthe) emqe (ande) pimde (pine)
tn aif 5g ag

famti (santa) imdu (indu) bemdhu (bendhu)
ren aT ay a

konpa (kempa) amjbu (embu) kumbho (kumbhe)

Another, more usual, method of representing @ homorganic nasal

is that of combining the appropriate nasal consonant character with

=== PAGE 47 ===

28 SANSKRIT SECTION
the vergiiye character that follows it, that is, & with characters
of the ko-vorgoh, a with characters of the ca-vergeh, and so on,
This method is used also when the formative particle oa I occurs before
an initiel vergiiye character in a sentence, where consecutive words
are joined in sandhi. The calligraphy of such combined characters is
illustrated later!. Formative particles, auch as Wied , -enti, and
aaa » ~ente, are usually written by this method and not with the
onusvareh.

The enusvarsh is sometimes written to represent -n or -m » in
compounds formed from the prefix aA, som-, and words beginning
with Foor  ; e.g. HAA  sonnote, and wate commoti.

¢, When the snusvarsh is written with a character preceding a
character of the ontehsthe or the uugmen group, the realisation of it
varies according to the position of articulation of the character
which follows it, end also with the custom of speakers in different
parts of India, The enusvareh preceding an entehsths character is
realised as follows:

Before WY, yo, e8 y,m,n or 9 3 Oke

eater Senyogs, Semyoge, senyoge or sefyogo
Before %, re,a8 N,m,n or @ ; eg.

WMT «= sonrage, semrago, sonrage or sovrage
Before M, 18,88 n,m,n or I ; eg.

$
WaT = sanloye, somloye, senlays or selleyo
Before @, vwo,a8 n,m,or ¥ 3 e.g.

WATS = senvads, somvade or sotvade

1. See Chapter 3, Conjunct Characters, Class 2.d.

=== PAGE 48 ===

CHARACTERS OF THE SYLLABARY 29
The enusvarch preceding an uugimen character is realised thus:
Before BT, fo, 88 7» M,n, or Vj 6-B-
aT onfe, omfo, onfe or ofa
Before @, 69 » 88 N,yM, nasalisation of the vowel, or ¥; &.g-
warfT «—snoviingi, hoviimsi, hevfisi or heviitsi
Before @, 82, a6 QDem,n, or Vj 6-8.
Wa «= sonsaro, somsara, sensare or sotsara,
or as nessliaation of the vowel, 6 in
fr hinsa, himse, hites or hisa
of punsi, pumei, pisi
Before @, he, 98 ),m >, Or V5 CoBe
tg sigh, simho, oinhe or oi?he
or as nasalisation of the vowel in ae » a3yhe
The sign ~ is sometimes written above a character preceding an
entehsthe or en uugmen character to indicate realisation by nasal-
ising the vowel of the syllable instead of by a nesal consonsnt
following the vowel. This sign ie called aan (onunasike?),
and it ie usually written, in preference to the onusvareh, in the
‘sacred syllable’ & + (om)?
Reading examples”
afk at ge wt am gy me wt eta
». fer aig am gf oF er aia ater
Wat wad wa TY Hes Se TA
amg gfe easter qe THAT |
fH wmsqaue aes fH Fa ora

1. nasal’, 2. See above, under 2.4. 3. For transcription of
examples, see p.52, . The lines a, b andc correspond to the notes
given above under 3.1. he GItagovindakavyam, sarge 3,v.6.

=== PAGE 49 ===

30 SANSKRIT SECTION

ii. visergeh , fay: 1

The visergoh is written as two dots; placed vertically, after ©
character,

es EG RR T i scclamial

eh ah iih uh uuh rrh eh ayh avh

wo on fi Be g BE % Rm a

keh kah kih kiih kuh kuuh krh keh ko¥h koh kovh
Calligraphy

The visergeh is usually added to a character after every other

Stroke has been made, including the head-stroke.

ech hl aT ah

The realisation of the visergeh varies in different parts of India

a. It may be realised as Strong aspiration following the realisation

of the character with which it is written, for example

a Trent: fe: Oe we YU: ara th:
deveh malah = kevih keveh guneyh bhanoh govh

It is realised in this way when it occurs medially, as in

G45, » duhkhom; or as the doubling of the following consonant,

as in Ghikce » tepehsu, tepossu.
b. It may be realised in final Position as h following the vowel of

the character with which it is written, and a very short repetition

of the same vowel after h , as illustrated by this transcription of

the examples given above:

deveh? malah® kevin guruh® ayene guneyhi phanoh® gown

1. ‘emission of breath’

=== PAGE 50 ===

- CHARACTERS OF THE SYLLABARY 31
Reading exsmples?
Se 8 Ss F Re BM GS BH ah =
aT: ofa: aTg: faa: qa: ag: Rig eu:
ba bas | aay aafh: fraraa: wud: Aa: AI,
Wag: ata: ae: wate: Fasten: acist:
aeaisgam: aaTarsarga: amacreastae eae
sagaueant: | feat wartsaigar at arg: |
wow wee my A TA Fa: 1?
aa ga aswa wa waa FT
qefa agie fase saat ceed casita |
wa gagaarey aq sadtr @& it
Wetaruksaataa aamnaaonagia |
qmaraaft Stenanhat ancitaiwaet >

4, The Complete Syllabary
The complete syllebary, arranged in the traditional order, is

given on the following page. The characters are further arranged in

a table in which the vowel characters, and the two modifiers added to
the character J , are placed in order at the head of a series of
columns consisting of every consonant character in the okare form,
each consonant character with each of the vowel signs and each of the
modifiers.© These two tables together show the order in which the
characters are placed as initial characters of words in dictionaries,
Characters with the enusvarch are, however, placed before characters

Without the onusvareh but followed by another consonant character.

1. For transcription, see p.52. 2. Bhagavadgita,ch.10,v.1.a.
3. ibid., ch.10,v.4.0d. . GItagovindakavyam, sargsa 1,v.6.
5. ibid., sarga 1.3,v.7. . Cf. the series of characters with

vowel signs given above under 2.ii.

=== PAGE 51 ===

32 SANSKRIT SECTION

WW ge se

Ae AT cence
ut wt
FZ:

a
HM WL Set eS
5 fete Janes rc ec
¢s¢ $$ @€¢ W
aq 4 §¢ @ F
As fo De TOG font pein]
22 Rae Cane FT
Sie Gere
i)
5. The Devanagari, Numerals
Hindi forms: 2s Ceo Ss NG iE 2 90)
et? shed cle 5G 17 abit aS eater
mete ke re CoS eR Gre. Neato
1 2 3 4 5 6 Y 8 9 10

6. Punctuation

In prose writing, the end of a sentence is marked with a vert-
ical stroke of the same height as the characters. In verse, the first
line of a stanza or couplet is closed with one vertical stroke, and
the complete stanza or couplet is closed with two vertical strokes
and numbered as illustrated in the verse examples given at the end of

the next chapter.

=== PAGE 52 ===

CHAPTER 3
CONJUNCT CHARACTERS

Consonant characters may be combined to represent two or more
consonants realised without any intervening vowel. A character

formed by combining other characters is called a conjunct character,
Qua, ( semyuktakgerem).

1. Construction of Conjunct Characters.

Characters may be combined in various ways, according to the
form of the characters to be joined.

i. The second character may be subscribed to the first:

Se B sh F EEE ATT
k- ke ko n- ke ke t-te tte a- vo ave

ii. If the first character has an upright stroke, this stroke may be
omitted, and the first part of the first character is joined to the
Second character by the head-stroke, thus:

Lt 2 TT FT qa sa ce is
n- de nde g- ge ego t- po tpe n- mo nme
The characters ca > B and wR are usually joined with following
characters in the forms @ , %F and F.

Some conjunct characters may be formed by either of these two

methods, for example: = Yor va Ta For wt
> co

c= co e j- Je jie

=== PAGE 53 ===

34 SANSKRIT SECTION

Some conjunct characters are formed by a combination of methods

i. and ii.; for example: gq = aa xy

d- dho ddho d-bhe dbhe
iii. If the first character is a rounded character, with no upright
stroke, it is usually written in full, and the second character is

joined with it in a modified form, for example:

au Gegy gq ey uo fe5 @

t- ye tye d- yo dyo h- yo hye h- mo hme
iv. Some characters are written in a special form when joined with

other characters, for example:

Sede eT: a Ren Te

J- ve fve r- the rtho g- ro gre f-re fre

The characters Gf (Hindi form) and &f (Bombay form), represent-
ing k-se , and the character ‘G{ , representing j-pe , have been in-
cluded in the syllabic series from a very early date, though no con~
junct characters are included in the syllabary. Calligraphically
“these three characters are not formed by joining two distinct charact-
ers, but they are considered in this work under the appropriate
classes of conjunct characters because they represent syllables con—
sisting of two consonants and the vowel o.

If any characters are not modifiable, and therefore cannot be
combined, by any of these methods, the realisation of them without an
intervening vowel is indicated by writing the first character with

the virameh, thus ah Ch = ce Kc} oa ar

t- ke tke q@-de qde a- bro dbre

=== PAGE 54 ===

CONJUNCT CHARACTERS 35

Characters combined with other characters in this way do not form
conjunct characters in calligraphy, ‘but they are included in this
chapter because they complete certain series in the classes of con-
junct characters.

Three, four or five characters may be combined to form a conjunct
character, for example:
Rect oc) et oc Glee Beeman em ce zy

t-m-yo tmyo > - dh - vo  Dddhve r-s-t-ye rstye

The general rules already given for the order of strokes in writ-
ing a character apply also to the conjunct characters. The vowel
Signs are added to the character before the headstroke is written.
Examples: ktyn & Gc o&c4 cy Fy

eerie ica.) (ea fee
rjyan wl val val vat

2. Contexts of Conjunct Characters.

Conjunet characters occur in the following contexts:
i. In words, such as
ote Fam: qa, sal: = at
iecha agnih ksipreh prehmen Slokeh strii
ii. In junctions arising from grammatical processes:
a. In words formed by the addition of suffixes to verbal roots,

Such as
se a TT FT AAT ee

bhej-te bhekte gem-ye gemye lebh-tva lebdhva

=== PAGE 55 ===

36 SANSKRIT SECTION

b. In derivatives of various kinds, such as

faa dean, aX aaa,

dive doyvyom Suure sSevryom
c. In words formed by the addition of prefixes or suffixes to

other words, as in

SEACH GAA fe a
ut-temo uttemo ut-gemeh udgemoh ebhi-asoh ebhyase

IW gin f-sie safe ara aeF
dur-guno durgune vi-adhih vyadhih yvac-meye vanmey?

iii. In compound words, in which the final character of one part of
the compound word, if it is a holonte character, is joined with the

initial character of the following part, as in

5¢- aT | WHT: Raa: = - HAG

set — masoh senmasoh re — vedeh rgvedeh
Sma, amaa tan wag Ta Arar
Sriimot - bhogevet - giita Jriimedbhegevedgiita

or more words, in which a conjunct
if it is

rd.

iv. In pieces consisting of two
character is written joining the final character of one word,

a helente character, with the initial character of the following W°

For example:

aa ff aac § faferead

jreyo hi jpanomebhyasajjnanaddhyanom vifsigyete,

SATA AHA CAT ECT SOMATA Ml BR "

dhyanatkermopheletyagestyagacchantironontorom. see

1. Bhagavadgita, Ch.12.v.12,

=== PAGE 56 ===

CONJUNCT CHARACTERS 37

The process of joining characters illustrated in ii. to v. above

is known as 'sandhi' of Coneonante.: The examples in ii.a. and ii.b.
illustrate the process of 'internal' sandhi, and those in ii.c-, iii.

and iv. illustrate that of ‘external’ sandhi.

3. Classification of Conjunct Characters.

The conjunct characters are arranged in this work in classes
according to the combination of consonants which occurs when the con-
junct character is realised in reading. The conjunct characters,

when arranged in this way, fall into four classes.

Class 1. Two similar characters joined.
Class 2. Two vergiiye characters joined.
Class 3. Characters joined with entehsthe characters in various
combinations:
i. Characters joined with qa
ii. Characters joined with 7
iii. Characters joined with
a. preceding RK 3 or be following &
iv. Characters joined with
a. preceding mee or b. following 1
Class 4. vergiiye characters joined with uusmen characters:
i. Characters joined with
a. preceding Pine Se or a 3; or b. following WT, ¥ ort
ii. Characters joined with
a. preceding a or b. following @

1. Compare reference to tgandhi' of vowels, in Chapter 2, 2.1.
2. The Vedic character OO, le» i8 included in this. class.

=== PAGE 57 ===

38 SANSKRIT SECTION

Clase 1. Two similar characters joined’.

Bo 4a. FM. Se oe

-kke -kkhe -ggo -gghe =nne? -cea -ccho -Jjje Jgno
Ge fe ee ee
-tte -tthe -dde -qqne -nne -tte -tthe -dde -ddhe -nne

wm wu sf sy

-ppe -ppho -bbe -bbho -mme

am gq oq WW ow

Same eaacpeesete ASIST see e ane oe
Alternative forms =y (OUST ve UUy 8
-eco -jje  -Jjho -me =lis

The characters SG, ¥ and F do not occur in this series. Te
second and fourth characters in each vergeh are formed by combining

the olpeprano characters with the corresponding mehaprane characters:

Reading examples’,

sage owe OSE oof 6 fagine «0 See: EET
wy owst outer ag at veer faye farm
san over. ste oie 6a Roe OTE
gsi af: we wo sae wed Ae
gaia (gata) sagg oagy) se UST

1. Conjunct characters which do not occur initially are indicated by
prefixing a hyphen in the roman transcription.

This character occurs only in the grammatical term given in the
reading examples.

3. This character occurs only in combination with preceding Rive
i. Transcription of examples is given.on p.52. ~

=== PAGE 58 ===

Class 2.

Two vergiiye characters

CONJUNCT CHARACTERS

vergeoh
Hat
ke - co
ans
ke - te
m- 7
ke - te
ea
ke - pe
mae Me
ce - te
BS Us |
co - pe
e-a
fe - te
REY ME
t= pe
ieee
ta - pe

I

-keo

Fe

-kte

a)

-kte

-{te

Cel
A

-tpe

rat

-tpe

aghoge

cH

-tke
oe)
-tke
th
-pke

ca

-tee
crt
=pee
tc
-tte
ao
-rte

a

-pte

Fo

-kche

FS

-kthe

ey
-ktho

FH
-kpho

tthe

Cay

8

-tphe

ton)

-tpho

cox

\

-tkhe

we

-tkho

wa

-pkhe

cS
-tehe
os
=pehe
co
-tthe
CS
-pthe
wy

-pthe

joinea.*

i. eghoge and ghogevet characters, excluding

wT
-gje
<3
-ede
TG
-gde

we

-goe

-qde

sa

<

-qpe

%

-dbe

anunasike characters:

ghogevet
= TA
-— -gjne
$ ard
-qge -gqne
$2.05
-dge -gdhe
st OT
-bge -gbhe
-qje a
ot aS
-bje a3
a =a
-dde -ddhe
ss St
-bqe = -qbhe
1-9 a
-bde -dbhe

-gghe

-dghe

og
-bghe
am
-qjhe

-bjhe

as

S
-dqhe

8G
-bqhe
3g

-bdho

39

1. Many of these conjunct ¢
2. This combination occurs

naracters occur
in the character co

only in external sandhi.
mbining ©» a. and < +
Sey

=== PAGE 59 ===

40 SANSKRIT SECTION
ii. Characters of each vorgeh joined with a preceding or following
enunasike character of the same vorgeh,

8. enunasike character Preceding.

EF 8 F

a I A SF

“pke  -nkhe = -ngo =ngho fee -pehe -pje -pjgho
ce MW W uw RT ee Seg! ey
“nt? -nthe = -ngo -nqhe “nto -ntho -nde -ndhe

> TH my xy

~mpe -mpho -mbs -mbho

Alternative forma sat Ve VWs Ue UG
“pio -nte—-nthe = -ngjo “nqhe
These characters, representing a preceding homorganic nasal
Consonant, are usually written in preference to the onusvaroh placed
on the preceding character, of which examples have been given abovel.
The following examples illustrate the contexts in which the onuavaroh
may be written, and in which it is not written:

petenti2? = vinomtih or vinontin3 lobhente2? emte or onte?

b. onunasike character following,

ae § | tee g aos

~epe = jpe-thno -dhne -tna  -thno ~dne# ~anno -pma = - bhme
The character 3 is not calligraphically a conjunct character,

and is found, from an early date, included in the Syllabic series of

characters’, In realisation, however, it belongs to this class of

1. Bee above, Ch.2,3.1.b, 2. Verbal forms. 3, Non-verbal forms.
He Jee combination Gi ~ * more usually becomes Win canant,
5. See ebove, Ch.2,1.411.

=== PAGE 60 ===

CONJUNCT CHARACTERS my
conjunct characters. In the order of words in dictionaries, words
beginning with #7 are placed between words beginning with AT ana
those beginning with Fa.
1ii. Characters joined with a preceding or following enunasike

character of a different vergeh:
a. onunasike character preceding.
2 2 RTT TT HK
-—pbho aT) -nge -ncot -njet -nphe -nbhe
Most characters may occur joined with preceding % » on account
of the frequent occurrence of formative particles ending in i .

SG, ne , also may occur with many cheracters in external sandhi.

bd. enunasiko character following.

ao
-kre -ene -bhne

7“ 5 www ¥ ® F

“ne

kno = -khno gne ghne ~pne ~bne -bhno

Se See HS
-kmo  -khma -gmo = -ghmo -oma -jmo -qme
a> a &

-tmo -dmo -dhmo
iv. Two onunasike characters of different vergeh.
aaa = = @ #
~pjne -yma -yne “Tyme nme “me mn
Alternative forms
formed with UT, e-g- TOT -ene FCT -vhno FUT -mmo UY -nmo.

of the conjunct characters in iii. and iv. are

Sn EE UEDS Tarr uEeeesmenreneet
1. It ie more usual to write ST before characters of the ce-vergeh.

=== PAGE 61 ===

e SANSKRIT SECTION

Reading examples!

 SAat ARES ya: aneafefe  aregter yeas
JERCHy AEE: wR -asdtaa ager aft: ganz
Stay Sra aga FATT ae age TUE
TERR -REMG- Ve gaye: aRseT WaT:
weeft: ver: west aon agreft Bea -HHenfeti-

Se 7G: Ue fea We: Em: apse ws: SRT

QWe: re: uftea qe: sme ues Wat See:

PT UR arare: = amc: WE:  steagT

“aS SR eat Bat wa eT aa aor
wa as fig

fie Baste: | aera SR ep

DT ey gem ahr aad af: fw

». Tegan aga gear? yaaa: ar, eu we

1. For transoription of examples, see p.52. Examples illustrating
characters which could occur in sandhi arising from the sequence of
words in 4 sentence are Placed between hyphens.

2. The first character represents dvi . See Clags 3-14.

=== PAGE 62 ===

CONJUNCT CHARACTERS 8

Clese 3. Cheracters joined with ontohstho characters.

i. Characters joined with following q-

ee a = = oe

kye khye ,gyo hyo -ny° eya -chye Jy?

aaa ae ama a

-tye -thye -qye -dhyo nye tye thye dye dhyo nyo

> a a

pya -phya bye bhys mye

a fF AaMeawm”|d

(yyo)2  =ryo? lye «0 weSsS¥@ 89 syo hye

Examples of conjunct characters of Classes 1. and 2. with 3.1.
ma ty a ved 1 aa wT

-nnyo -ttyo  -tmye -ptye -gahyo -dbhyo -biye

Reading examples.

ae fen ag aera THETA, Tera

ras: «= - AFaTH:
seco ateran, Heat srascafes: 9 ~- waaaaUssct—

qeamemeateaa- | Ae aa: gearareaa frersg:l?

l. See under Class 1. 2+ The superscribed stroke in thie character
represents r preceding another consonant. . Por transcription
haracter represents fle . See below

see p.53. 4. The first ¢
under CHa 5. NItidatakem, verse 3.0

=== PAGE 63 ===

4 SANSKRIT SECTION

ii. Characters with following @

M47 Bau yuw

kvo khvo gve ghvo -nve -eve -chvo jve jhve -_
-tve -thve -qve -dhve -nve tve -thvoe dva dhve nvo
wm - oq WT rr?
-pve --  -bva -bhva -mvo
aq tf «@ 4 @ ww &
yvo =ryo! lve (-vve) e Sve? sve svo hve

STand % do not occur in this series. @ preceding another
character occurs in OW, -vyo, @ ,-vno, GF, vro4 ana > vie”.
Examples of conjunct characters of Classes 1. and 2. with 3.i. and ii.

-— + BM wa wT st
-ttvo -rvvo -echva -ktvo -dvyo -bdhve -gdhye

Reading examples. 6

Ba va owed: «apaa: edt SHH BIS IST
ag area wea egy ama cake wdt sige eat:
ard arent aeaeas fea set: ayet wh wed aed
ere fa want sagem & Rea fete ge TT
Fa ae seat Ta vacen fans mew’ weaw:?
FFASSHYSs | ---Geapatelanghiear wat: BM: 18

1. For the superscribed stroke in this character, see below, in iii.a.

2. See -vvo in Class 1. 3. For this form of fa see Ch.2,1.iii.

4. See below, under iii.b. 5. See below, under iv.b.

6. For transcription of examples, see p.53. 7. The initial characters
in these words represent gra and pro.

8. From Bhagavadgita, Ch.6,v.41.a.

=== PAGE 64 ===

CONJUNCT CHARACTERS 45

iii. Cnaracters joined with preceding Re or following ¥ .-
a. RE preceding another character.

To represent Ba preceding another character a stroke is super-
seribed on the character before which r is to be realised. This
stroke is called Yo: » Tephoh, the name given to the character @ ut
rephoh in this form may be written with any character, but it does
not occur with SJ or @& .

% eS ne
-rke os = -rto -rpe -rye -rfo a
Some of the characters, particularly 7, YW, WZ, A>, Gg,
@, &, WA, A and @, are frequently doubled when written with
repheh. This practice is found in Hindi writing, but is not usual
in Marathi writing. Examples:
ff oot ¢ £ FF OG
-rgege -rjje -rtte -rddhe -rmme -ryye -rvve

Characters written with vowel signs and rephoh:

a & & $€ &€ & H

-rka -rki -rkii -rku -rke -rkey -rko -rkev
and with repheh and enusvareh:

et ££ & & e

-rkan -rkin -rkiin -rkun -rken -rkeyn -rkevy

The rephoh is placed above the upright stroke of 4 character, or
above the mid-point. It is always written to the right side of any
other superscribed stroke, as shown in the examples given below. It is

Written also with the vowel character *{. as in the word Prat:

1. repho, trough’; rephoh, 'a rough sound’.

=== PAGE 65 ===

46 SANSKRIT SECTION

Characters with repheh are written as shown in these examples:

sau (yagi Saee See oGibaca gale ar
rke ch b ae 5 rko = ah) at ar
rkinfh fh fh fh rkoim hl oY oht AT

In Bombay writing the character representing -rhe is sometimes
written as ~@, though the use of this stroke for repheh is more rare-

ly used in writing Sanskrit than in writing Marathi.

b. % following another character.
To represent ¥ following another character, a diagonal stroke
is placed against the upright stroke of those characters that have

one, or beneath the mid-point of the lower part of a rounded

character.
me - FT UV S Se a ae
kro -- gre -ghro -yre ~< «phere? fra => ==
ae Soo Ag Ae ae al
-tre? -- -qdre <2 oe tre thro dro dhro -nre

A eo a oF DB Erg

pro -- bro bhre mro vro rot sro hro

Examples of conjunct characters of Classes 1. to 3.ii. with 3.iii.

a ce ao @ 6 =a et

-ktro -tpre -rtya -drye -rdhve -rdre -ntrye -rdhnyo

1. See above, Ch.2,2.ii. Vowel signs.

2, This combination occurs in the character joining Sand ~€ -

5s, and ~ are combined in the character representing QY , @ andt-
h. For this form of ST , see Ch.2,1.1i1. S S

=== PAGE 66 ===

CONJUNCT CHARACTERS rv

Reading examples!

ee
ae wg ont gt sd ain wien gia afta

. emia, ania when wis ak gin owe aia

aia AP wef sem ad A aesiaress: FAT

iv. Characters combined with preceding @_ or following 2

a. 3 preceding another character.>

co wT oT Ch od oad oA

-lke -lge -lips -lpha -lbe -lbhe -imo
a vette «= OB
-lfe -lse -lhe -[he

b. @ following another character.

e F 3 a ZF 3

klo gle -chls -qle ple ble bhio
3 4 AorwW &
mle vie fle hle

Most of these characters may be written either by method i. or

by method 1i., described earlier in this chapter.

1, For transcription, see p. 53.

2: Por @ joined with ontohatho characters, see 1, to 111. above.
3, Vedic @ is included in this class.

4. See aboye, 1. Construction of Conjunct Characters.

=== PAGE 67 ===

8 SANSKRIT SECTION
Examples of conjunct characters of Classes 1, to 3.111. with 3.iv.
a x7 hi ong!
-tple -tkle -cchle -lbhys
Reading examples.
wat eet SIE
ESS RP NE rTeKH veg | age
ME
rae: ea: fe: RAT Te GEM aT
aia Saif wfafeansnied ag a
ware f Aq faufe gaa Haas
wee aod Faagfaaferafegr
age: wger faafiafia yoafa a a nqen”
uugmen cheracters.
i. Chareetera joined with Bf, QY or @.
a. a> 4 or a preceding another character.

The following characters occur in this series, some occurring

only in external sandhi.
rr a |

f-
-jke -fee -Jcho Jno -fpe Jme
See BS a oe
“eke = st? athe = -gne spo -spho = -pmo

ct a oa

ska askhe -sje ete sths sno epo sphe sme

1. For transcription, see p. 5h. 2. Vairlgyadatakam, v.62.
3. These characters may be written with either 3f or & :
‘ S

=== PAGE 68 ===

CONJUNCT CHARACTERS 99

db. B& . F or | following another character.

The following characters occur in this series, some occurring

only in external sandhi.

Tow Sy SI CT MT wT

fe
-kfe -nfe —pfe -tle -nfo -pfe
5 oor + aa* aw -y wy
kpo “ge -tse -nge -pse
A Si
-kss -tse -ns9 -tse “neo -pse

The character Gf has been included in the syllabic series from

an early date, and is not calligraphically a conjunct character.” In

the order of words in dictionaries, words beginning with Gf are

Placed efter words beginning with MH -
Conjunct characters of Classes 1, - 3- with Class 4.

a F F Ww Fw BH

-kpma = -atve -tetho -tene

stra -ptre -stve kpne
= ara mm Oe
etrye -temyo -rstye -rtsnye

Calligraphy: kge , Bombay form - & & a a

Reading examples 4

Se a CR MR I Ry
yeas, fea aor Jae arpa afer wet Hee fait ot
aay fone ra epi wen fen waa ee ag ada zAeasey
>. mitre, pase TST (ay) TeaeT WUT WR FAA,
fdey weet: gag feeas frog ae gai (greene) war
1. Bombay form. 2. This combination usually becomes za BS

3. Cf.note on @ , Cl.2.1i.b. 4. For transcription, see p. 54.
x

=== PAGE 69 ===

5° SANSKRIT SECTION
soe SRT Nea Wea AVA WAI SHEA Ia
fiaea sinoucgees TTS areas waaay,

ii. onunasike characters joined with preceding @ or following eS.

a. @ preceding Ww, A anda. & @ a
-hnp hne -hme
b. followi a a. - =
@ following & an te Se “Ee
-nho -nhe

Reading examples.

qe ag gt mem meget (ged) eee
afar gifs aaea sagas ek waaTAAA gn?
af: qhaitited qed a eat ve aaa wen?
aasafesaans: faqaa fraraar |
AAA ATTRA ea 86
aa: wavahatat gar Hara yd | 2
FAs MSHA ues? .
dq fareneehia get asta arafaa_ |
WE Va STM AAAS AIHA cil?
aarAtt wet seonat at spt fat a
Sanit agen 7 ge: rseaaT nara gc”

1. For transcription, see p.5h. 2. Rigveda, 1. 3. ibid., 2.
4. Bhagavadgita, ch.1,v. 26. 5. ibid., ch.3,v.25.
6. ibid., ch.5,v-8. 7. Nitigatakam, v.48.

=== PAGE 70 ===

TRANSCRIPTION st

Trenecription of Reading Examples

Chapter 2.
1.1. de dho te phe mo pe no co ¥. ge
ko bho je bo ghe oho the khe eo pe
bhete pede dhene keds mothe phens ghene khec dedh dame
oh jhege joqe phete potho bete choge peqdh ghets gone

gomeke jeget conoko methens gheteko patheke doemethe
dhstoko kepete bhejeke gonske kothom khejeke podoke

chadonom poenenem notonom kethonom Dhonenem jonopede
gomenem pethonom dhenemede jhone jnenom ghene jhenom

1.44. vo ye re le bo the kho te

leva jele khere vod ghero belo vere rene veth
lebh yovo dhoro leyo jhere rot rona = phe. rethe

teralo evens bhoyom dhevolo jethera ceren? jemers
nokhere logede cepale bhovet nayene vacere ‘@tebhe

yomevet voyanam gerolem podokemelo kepetovecensm
lili. go ho 88 fe pe qe re kho

fara sche 2 vofa hes jhoso reso vas fovea
sot Sethe Be kopo fos heye here jhoge bhegse

serelo kolefe jehot veyes Jepetho semeyo behele folabhe
yefes ferete sephele serese hereke porefe robhose heteke

deferotho Jeketom seveyos kelohem Sesonem fetefos
jeleceres novedsfekem sehegemenem komalevedoens defesetem

gate awe ow) 44 ua jo (ef 2 8 oF 2m

etha = 1, ut eke ine ot od eyse rah
uuh 2 iife uche otm ryo = suuha- ihe ug
ed ol ovm okh re oyne uden

em
liget ‘uuhonom rgobhe otgedhom Sieues’ upskerejem

2.44. nii bhuu go} or da ji gov poy me duu
kr chi no® hoy bhii frr fit dr hi hr

duure bhiite rama core ti dogo = frto dhrte = ruuqho
gojro) = krf petle klip drdho pure pheno motle krrt
pitr meru @uusi bhiiti hr guru vrthe fiju setu
otu ditt ete’ rtu iti .uuru rei enii file

3374

=== PAGE 71 ===

52 SANSKRIT SECTION

bhuugite vifese upaye veybheve pitrrn pevruge rucira bhotmike
kumarii jhnetiti fhalinii ruugite evgedhi keykeyii jhirika

vidhatru eyhike qhalin surebhi khodika helete

ekakin hrgikefe itihase ketfeleye viguucika povrenike
devonagerii enunasike oevpenigede upejiivika evpode fike
upenivefiko evpenayike ko-pi rte-pi yeso-peyese

3.1. kim mam sukhem herin mrtem tenum ohom even rgiinay
qimpe pamdqu lejmgem  qhumghi jrmbh jhomjha k: begs Nratmteye
Somyemone semvet mamse ‘omjyu  somruudhe soemliino emheti
tamohen hrdi somgetameni fon bhr fon romoyami

kin vone-nusorami tamiho kin vrtha vilopami

3.ii. keh cheh theh jhoh eyh oh uuh rh noth geh
ganeh dhrtih bahuh niteh nrpoyh viduh frnih purugeh
monehsu hivihsu dhenubhih vife teh emsoteh omtehkeronem
somoduhkhesukhoh SunohJSepoh jegotohitah meto-dhikeh tejom-seh
behovonm-buvegah yogomayasomavrteh  gemgatere \ohime fiikere siitelani
jeyedevopemqitekeveh ponditanan semaje-pemdqita mownem bhejeyuh
bhuye eve mehabaho frnu me peremem vecoh

sukhem duhkhe bhevo-bhavo bhoyem cabhoyomeve co

vohssi vepusi vifede vosone! jeledebhom hnolohetibhiitimiliteyommmabhem
kefeve dhrtsholodhereruups Hees jegediisoe hore

madhovikapsrimelolelite novemaloti jatisugemdhev
munimenosamepi mohonokarinii toruniikerinebemdhet

Chapter 3.
Class 1.

thokkureh kekkhoete arggocoroh vagghi tinnetin uccoyh iccha
rojjuh ujjhoti pottika letthe udqdins seqddha visenne visenne.
atiome utthite uddefoh buddhih bhinno pippeleh phupphuuseh ebbuh
ebbhogsh semmetih semmohsh Jfoyya ullekheh tecchrnu sennoddhe
duffiilo (duhfiile) fotayussu (Jatayuhfu) jesserajoh Jubhamllokan

Class 2.

i. vakeole vakcholom prthegjenoh vagjhotiti vaktiika setkone
setkhetokom vagqemboreh khodgoh vagqhovkete dvidghora bhektih utket?
tkthom utkhate hrdgeto soedgune degdho udghateke vekpetu
vakphelom kekupkhalu prthegbhaveh kekubguruh kekubghora getcereneh
getchevin geqjeh gsoqjhotiti epcersh kokupchovin kubje kokubjnetiti
geddevah soqdha setpeti tuptiika gsetphene geqbahu kokupthekkureh
ebqimbhe seqbhage kekubqhovkete utpenne setpholoh gupte udbodheke
udbheveh

Jebdsdh lebdho bhegevedgiita somyukto edbhute medbhokte buddhi-
yukto socchebdeh

=== PAGE 72 ===

TRANSCRIPTION 33

ii.a. onkeh fonkheh lingem sengheh sepceyeh vapehs epjiireh jhop jha
ghunteh kentheh penditeh qhunghih enteh pentheke sundere indheh
kempene gumphoti semben oh arombheh penktih erunddha

b. yacpa jnanom hethnati heqhnati retnem mothna budhnati papmen
tejneye soepjpa sen) jna visese dpe jijnasu

iii.a. udenbhih moehankevih d@runphuh drunbhuh

b. rkne rugne grbhnati J ‘eknoti cekhnutuh agnih vighno
mrdnati apnoti 92 nabhoh rukminii vagmin veemih ojmoh kuqmole
atmen pedma dhmato drbhmes dedhmet

iv. dinnageh vanmoeye dvinnaleh genmaseh jenmen remnati mnate

Class 3.

i. vekyem khyate veyragyom Slaghye udenyefeh cyute vanchye jyotis
ujjhyoti kapetyer Sathyem jaqyen evadhnye punyem tyajyo
pethye vidya dhyanem kenya apye riphyete ebyonih sbhyasoh

sovmyom dheyryem emuulye vyuudhe arfye menugyeh rehesye _hyes
seynyesyo

sennyaseh semnyasoh c: intye buddhya tej jyotis veyde, gdhyom mahatmyem
bhoktya kovbjyom sohrdbhyeh bhogevenvyektih evometodyetha--tthe
guhyemedhyatmesen jpitom ejpeh sukhomaradhyeh sukhe toremaradhyote
visesejnen
ii. kvecit pokkvannem akhvoh rgvedeh leghvii uc chvassh ujjvele ujjhve

letveh yodnetva geqvidhe a@rdhvem frnven tverite prthvii udvigno
dhvenih

envite apva ebvahenem ribhven comvoh yvagulii serve servve nelveh

iifversh vifve svekkete enusvareh hve vihvoele vidhvemseh dvondveh
tettvem

dugdhva lebdhva uktva davna eteddhva vlinati gravna pranveseh
tyoktva--tmo fuddhye punyekrtanllokanugitva fafvetiih semah
iii.a. terkeh muurkhe verger vergiiye Giirghe Jarnge cerca muurchite
arjuneh nirjhereh
darqhyem verneh kertr vyerthe durdeyvem erdhe monurname erpenjem dur-
belo gerbhite
uurmih kermmen dharmike peryente peryente suuryeh durlebhe puurve
servve derfonom
hergeh erhot kiirtih ohornifom uurdhvem verjye muurdhni muurdhnya-
dhayatmoneh noyrrtii
durbuddheyryuddhe Svetoyrhoyeyryukte vedoyo jnadhyayeneyrne
danoyrne co
b. vikromeh agrehoh Jiighro pranratrii krechre voejrom poevndreh
fetruh drevyom
dhruve proeyotneh premna pruve bhratr nemre vrejeh susfruuga srejva
hresve hresve
hroy himsro Jraddho ardro ardro daridryem daridryom somhriine
etecchrutva
digvretom settrinse yotpromarnem jombvamrele

=== PAGE 73 ===

54 SANSKRIT SECTION

iv. ulka pholgu svelpe elpeprane gulphite ulbe progelbhe
helfebdeh holsondhih volh pragolbhyom je]hu = mi] huge

klefoh glo¥ pleve pipluh oblingse kekubhlabhoh mlecchoh vlinati
Slokeh Slegeh sihloh hiladote uechloekhe utklefoh utpleve

peresan cetamsi pretidivosomaradhye bohu ha

prosadem kim net vifesi hrdeyo klefokelilom
presenne tveyyenteh sveyemuditecintamenigune

vimukteh senkelpeh kimobhilogsitem pugyeti no te

Class 4.

i.a. afcoryom profneh fmesfru pugkole Dbleskem sr; ih krgne
c r ae the ehyuuto
pugpem nigphole uugsmen flesma semskrte skholite bhresj stebdho
sthitih strii
entehsthe snigdhe sprste sphuurtih bhesme fresthotvor feyute drstva
demstra varsneye nemoste-stu

b. prakfires protyensfires tanfuka tanfuka setfastro roepfete okserem
tiryensu setsestih ksetrejno diksome litsu vetseh sugoensereti
sugentsereti ksma
Slekgne pa hota bheksyo motsyeh tetsthole ksvete opkrtsne kartsnyem
vibhresteschenne kermepholeprepsurlobdheh nobhehsprjom dharstyom
etotksetrom

ii. grhnati vehnih hnute brahmene pranhosteh pranghesteh igtanbhanhi

egnimiile tpedaeaae) yejnesye devomrtvi jon / hotarem retnedhatemem
egnih puurvobhorrsibhiriiqyo nuutenoyrute / se devam ehe vokseti

totrapofyoetsthitanparthoh pitrrnothe pi tamohan
acaryanmatulanbhrantrrputranpevtransekhims tetho

soktah kormonyevidvamso yotha kurventi bharoto
kuryadvidvamstotha-soktefcikiirsurlokesengrehem

noyve kimeitkeromiiti yukto monyete tottvevit
pesyensrrvensprfenjighronne Jnengecchonsvepen fvesen

ajpakiirtih palenem brahmanan danem bhogo mitrosomreksenem co
yesamete sedguna ne provrttah korthestegam parthivopasroyene

=== PAGE 74 ===

HINDI SECTION

=== PAGE 76 ===

GHA P TER 1
ARRANGEMENT OF THE SYLLABARY

The Devanagari Script is used in writing Hindi (fear ) and the
arrangement of the characters in the syllabary is the same as the
Sanskrit arrangement.1 Some of the characters are used only in writing
Sanskrit loanwords, but most of them may be found in literary texts.
Some of the characters are modified for representing sounds occurring
in Persian and Arabic loanwords.

The script is usually referred to as aiaatag (dalobodh), ‘that
can be understood by a child’. Each character is called Gt
(ekger), and the syllabic series is called aatarest (vernomala,
tcharacter-series'). The terms used by Hindi grammarians to refer to
the script are similar to those used in Sanskrit, but as the realisat-
ion of the characters in Hindi differs somewhat from the Sanskrit
system in respect of consonant characters realised with the vowel 9 ,
these terms are used in this section in the Hindi form, and are tran-
scribed in accordance with the realisation of the characters in Hindi.
The following examples illustrate the difference between the terms
used in the Sanskrit section and the corresponding terms used in this
section: Sanskrit Mata, (ekgerem), Hindi Malt (ekser)

faa: — (virameh), faa (virem)
waa:ta (entehsthe), WRTST (ontesth)

The table given below in this chapter shows the arrangement of

the Hindi syllabary in roman notation. The sounds occurring in Arabic

1. See Sanskrit, Ch.1.

=== PAGE 77 ===

58 i HINDI SECTION

and Persian loanwords, and the intervoealic realisation of the
characters realised initially as qe and qho , are represented in
the roman notation as follows:

aq , for the voiceless uvular plosive,

x , for the voiceless velar fricative, @

y , for the voiced velar fricative, 71

z , for the voiced dental fricative, WI.

f , for the voiceless labial fricative,
tT» [th , for the retroflex flapped consonants § and @
Nasalisation of vowels is shown by the superscript ~.

As the Devanagari system of writing is syllabic, and the charact-
ers in the syllabary represent syllables consisting either of a vowel
or of a consonant followed by the vowel o , the roman table shows
each consonant with this vowel. This vowel, when realised with a
consonant character, is usually referred to in English texts as the
‘inherent! vowell.

The series of vowels includes 'short' i and 'long' ii , 'short'
u and 'long' uu. These pairs of vowels occur in Hindi words, some
words being always written with the 'short' vowel and others with the
"long' vowel. There are certain pairs of words which are distinguish-
ed in meaning by the writing of the 'short’ or the 'long' vowel, and
other words in which the ‘short! or the 'long' vowel is written, but
mo distinction is made in speech. In transcribing examples, these
vowels are written as 'short' or 'long' in accordance with Hindi

orthography, and not in relation to 'length' of spoken vowel sounds.

1. See Sanskrit, Ch.1.

=== PAGE 78 ===

ARRANGEMENT OF THE SYLLABARY 59

Hindi Syllabary in Roman Notation

Dae aye ae qu 5
CONSONANTS with 9 Velar |Palatal| Retro-| Dental Labial
flex
a | Unaspirated | ke co te te pe
© =
le Aspirated kho cho the tho pho
“
= 2
a Unaspirated ge je qe" do bo
a if
m Aspirated gho jho qne* | dhe bho
2: EB) 4 |
Nasal (ye) (pe) ne noe mo
Semivowels yo re le vo?
| ab
fannie Voiceless xo® fe sot 8° oe
Fricatives
Voiced yee 706
|
Aspirate he
- 4
VOWELS eo ils! cit |ou kal, 61 9¥|pour et r!
MODIFIERS Nasal - m and ra | Aspirated -h °

Notes on the syllables marked 1-7 in the above table:
1. The character representing the syllable ke is modified to repre-
sent the uvular plosive, 49° -
2. The characters representing these two syllables are modified to

represent the medial and final realisation of these characters

=== PAGE 79 ===

3.

7

HINDI SECTION

as flapped sounds, written as f and fh in the transcription.
The characters representing no and pe are not written as
single characters in Hindi, but only in combination with other
characters, illustrated below in Chapter 3.

The two characters representing ne and ge occur only in
Sanskrit loanwords, and do not occur initially.

The character represented by vo is usually realised with labio-
dental articulation; or, initially, as a bilabial plosive.

These syllables are written by modifying other characters which
represent sounds somewhat similar in articulation:

x9 with the character for khe ; fe with the character for pho;
yo with the character for go ; zo with the character for jo

This vowel, syllabic r , occurs only in a few Sanskrit loanwords.

=== PAGE 80 ===

CHAPTER 2
CHARACTERS OF THE SYLLABARY

The characters of the Devanagari Script used in writing Hindi
are those given in the Sanskrit section, with the terma which sre used
by Hindi grammarians in referring to them and to the gsornds which they
represent. The method of writing the characters is that described in
the Introduction, and in the notes on the calligraphy of special
characters as they are given in the tables.

‘The characters, and the realisation of them in reading Hindi, are
discussed in thie chapter under the same headings a6 in the Sanskrit

section: Consonant Characters, Vowel Characters and Vowel Signs,

and Modifiers!.

1. Consonant Characters.

The consonant characters are arranged in three groups: ‘vorgiiy'
characters, ‘ontosth' characters, and ‘uusm' characters’, The conson-
ant characters, as they are given in the syllabary, are realised as
syliables consisting of en initial consonant, or semi-vowel, followed
by the vowel 9 . Characters realised in this way are described as
PAAIT (oker). The realisation of @ consonant character without this
vowel, that is, as the consonant element of the syllable only, is

4ndicated in the script by writing e diagonal stroke, known as the

1. See Sanskrit, Ch for the use of thie term.

2. See Sanskrit, Ch.2. References are given throughout this chapter
to the divisions and sub-divisions with the corresponding numbers
in Chapter 2. of the Sanskrit section.

=== PAGE 81 ===

62 HINDI SECTION

farsa (viram)? at the foot of the character this, H,k-, T,t-.
The realisation of okar consonant characters in reading Hindi
differs in some respects from the realisation of these characters in

Sanskrit. The following notes may be regarded as geneval guiding

principles to which reference may be made later, when the characters

are discussed in detail.

a. A final okar consonant character is usually realised with zero-
vowel, except in a few Sanskrit loanwords.2

b. A final okar character formed by combining two or more consonant
characters>, or a final ekar consonant character preceded by a
character written with the onusvar representing a nasal conson-
ant4, is usually realised with an o-glide.

c. A medial skar consonant character is realised with zero-vowel, or
with an o-glide, in certain contexts, as, for instance, when such
a character occurs as the second character of a word of three or
more cheracters and the following character is written with one of
the vowel signs). Other contexts are given later, when the
characters are discussed in detail.

d. When an skar consonant character is the final character of a
verbal base, it is usually realised with zero-vowel, or with an
e-glide, before the addition of formative particles consisting of
@ consonant character with a vowel sign.

In the transcription of examples-of Hindi words, final okar

consonant characters realised with zero-vowel, or with an o-glide,

1. See Sanskrit, Ch.2,1. 2. okar consonant characters realised with
zero-vowel, as deecribed below in notes a. - d. » are, however, not
written with the viram, which is used mainly in writing Certain
Sanskrit loanwords. 3. See below, Ch.3.

4. See below, 3.i.onusvar. 5. See below, 2.ii.

=== PAGE 82 ===

CHARACTERS OF THE SYLLABARY 63

are transcribed without 2, and medial okar characters realised in
this way are written thus, kt, t',p' , for guidance in reading.
Characters which do not occur in en initial position are indicated by

a hyphen prefixed to the syllable in the roman transcription.

4. Characters of the vergiiy group.

The first group of consonant characters consists of twentyfive
characters realised as syllables with an initial plosive consonent
followed by the vowel 9 ., These characters are placed in five class-
es, or at (vorg), according to the position of articulation of the
consonant in the syllable they represent, The characters are given in
the Sanskrit section.1 of these characters, Be ,no and BT, pe,
do not occur in Hindi words, and occur in Sanskrit loanwords only in
combination with other characters.* The character mM , ne , occurs
only in Sanskrit loanwords in literary Hindi. ‘The characters given 68
'Bombay' forme sre also used in Hindi writing, but less frequently
than those given in the tables. Some of the characters are modified
to represent certain sounds in Persian and Arabic loanwords and the
intervocalic realisation of & and @ -

a awww $ ¢F

qe xe ye z0 fe -re -phe
the characters & and @ occur only initially; § snd G sre
never initial, but may be medial or finel-

Reading exampleo.>
1. One character words, realised as 4@ consonant with the vowel 9--

a iJ a 3 s@7

1. See Sanskrit, Ch.2,1.1- 2, See below, Ch.3.
3. Por transcription, see page 65-

=== PAGE 83 ===

64 HINDI SECTION

2. Two character words, the final character realised with zero-vowel.
ma a a CP (SU be Of aq Wa me we
EF FS WT TH TH Fe BT aH AS

3. Three character words
WwW OTS OFAC CAH OTE OUGT
Wt We wes ach Fat BAF WaT Way

4, Pour character words, second characters realised with zero-vowel

or with an o-glide, final chseracters with zero-vowel.

aaaAd aaT ahs wage CHT mHeIe

ii. Characters of the enteosth group.

There are four characters in thie group, representing syllables
consisting of an initiel semi-vowel with the vowel o. The charact-
era are given in the Sanskrit section},

When the characters q , ye and @ , vo , occur initially, or
with one of the vowel signs, they are realised as consonants followed
by 6 vowel. When they occur medially in a position in which they are
realised with a following vowel, they are realised as consonants. When
they occur medially in positions in which an okar consonant character
is realised with zero-vowel, or finally, they are realised as semi-
vowels, forming a diphthong with the vowel of the preceding syllable.
Examples: aaa am aq ma

yomen vek bhoy lav

The character @ ia often realised initially or medially ss be.
1. See Sanskrit, Ch.2,1.i1.

=== PAGE 84 ===

CHARACTERS OF THE SYLLABARY 65

Reading examples.

1. One character wort.”

2. Two character words, the final character realised with zero-vowel,
m Wa at aa oS COR ical Rr at =O
R a Ba F aa a wo WH

3. Three character words, the final character realised with zero-vowel.
aga wat Ret maa mar a RT
Tet Gia aaa aay | oa WR qa

i

4. Four and five character words; second characters in four cheracter
words and third character in five character words, ypealised with

zero-vowel or with an o-glide, final characters with zero-vowel.

aa AES Font eae sana |= (Hee

444. Characters of the uugm group.

This group consists of three characters which are realised a8
fricative consonants followed by the vowel o , and one which is
realised as an aspirate followed by @. These characters are given
tn the Benekrit section?. ‘The charsoter Q , ge » coours only in
some Sanskrit loanwords used in literary Hindi. It is often realised
in ordinary speech as Joe. The lest cheracter in the Hindi syllabary
ie @ , he.

eee ee ee ee
1. For transcription, see p. 65.

2. This is the only entesth character which occurs 88 & word,

3. See Sanskrit, Ch.2,1-iii.

=== PAGE 85 ===

66 HINDI SECTION

In words consisting of okar consonant characters only, the real-
isation of @ , he , varies according to its position in the word.

a. When ® occurs medially preceded by an okar character, and is
followed by another consonant character, it is often realised in
combination with the vowel o of the preceding character as
aspiration accompanying the vowel (e), as in

Wet Tee wea aeat
Johor( fehr) pohor(pehr) rehen( rehn) leheson(lehsen)

b. When @ occurs as a final character following an ekar consonant
character it is generally realised in combination with the vowel
of the preceding character as (a). Examples:

AWS we Exceptions: YG ae We
tereh(tera) — jegeh( jega) yeh(yeh) veh(voh) seho

Reading examples.+

1. None of the uugm characters occurs as a word.

2. Two character words, the final character realised with zero-vowel.
oa R Br) aa eet Cos isa a eS

em wt AT a es UE. a ™m

s

3. Three character words, the final character realised with zero-vowel-
ay Ah Ry Bag Re Taz AAT
ea aS aaa BAH wat Fad Ra

4. Four character words, final characters realised with zero-vowel,
second characters with zero-vowel or with an o-glide.

Faas wat ESSE SCE RAT waar
acna Bnd Saat ARH Met

1. For transcription, see p.85.

=== PAGE 86 ===

CHARACTERS OF THE SYLLABARY 67

2. Vowel Characters and Vowel Signs.

i. Vowel Characters.

The vowel characters used in writing Hindi are the same as those
given in the Sanskrit section!, omitting the characters representing
syllebic rr and syllabic 1 and 11. The character @ occurs in
Sanskrit loanwords used in literary Hindi. The vowel characters are
usually placed first in the syllabary, and they are referred to as
okar, akar, ikar and so on. The Bombay forms of the characters are .
sometimes written in Hindi, put the forms given in the table are more
usual.

The general rules concerning the realisation of okar consonant
characters should be applied in reading all examples given below,
unless special notes are added.

Reading examples.2
1. Words consisting of vowel characters only.

= oe ONO TATE

2. Words consisting of vowel characters and okar consonant characters.

cae att) St ee AG am 3a
™ We
ae ook owe wa aR ger at ws

ii. Vowel Signs.
The vowel signs used in writing Hindi, corresponding with the
vowel characters and written with the okar form of the character & »

are given in the Sanskrit section.3 Each character represents &

1. See Sanskrit, Ch.2,2.i, 2. For transcription, see Pp. 85.
3. See Sanskrit, Ch. 2,2.ii-

=== PAGE 87 ===

HINDI SECTION
syllable consisting of a consonant followed by one of the vowels a
to o¥ . The vowel signs are referred to as BIA (matra), as in

q Al Arar ( ¢ kii matra , 'the sign of e').

Reading examples. 1

1.

1.

One character words.

at owt mam & %
a ft a wm +t
Two character words.
wom dw 3 wa dm 86

a om BT my ye wt we gf aT
fa ge ote ott OCT OR oom

Three character words.

aT gata AOR ART
qt sat sat Gar ofert gag aga
Words of four or more characters. Numbers in brackets indicate the
realisation of okar consonant characters with zero-vowel, or with
an e-glide, if the words are not to be read according to the rules
given above. Most words of more than four characters are compounds
in which the final character of the first part, if okar, is realis-
ed with zero-vowel.

AAql OHA aT a azar = a RIT
ae ostifer = wad jams | atenre | TT
FANACT £33 Fac 5 BRA 71 Raqaar 12,43

For transcription of examples, see p.85.

2. A Sanskrit loanword, with final qho .

=== PAGE 88 ===

CHARACTERS OF THE SYLLABARY 69

The following rules concerning the realisation of okar consonant

characters in words which have vowel characters and signs provide

some guidance for reading from the script, though the only reliable

guide is a knowledge of the spoken language.

cc.

When a medial okar consonant character, in @ three cheracter word,
ia followed by a final character with a vowel sign, it is usually

realised with zero-vowel, or with an o-glide, e.g.

res'mii ep'na lep'ke lek'ra per'da sod'rii
4. When a verbal base ends in an ekear consonent character, thie
character is realised with zero-vowel, or with an o-glide, before
formative particles which consist of a consonant character with

a vowel sign 6.&-

BR wR” aad aa aaa atar

sok- sok-na sok-til bol bol-te bol-te
44. When e verbal base consists of three or more characters, the
final and pre-final characters being okar consonant characters,
the realisation of these characters varies according to the form
of the formative particles which are added. This variation is
illustrated in the following exemples:

aa AAA waa FAFAT aaa
soma jh som' jha somo jh-tea soma jh-ker som' jhana
Mediel & , ho, fe , ni and = , hu are realised as follows:
i. Medial & » preceded by 8 consonant character with a vowel sign
is realised os aspiration of the vowel of the preceding syllable.

e.g. EAT feat gent seat eae

cahna mihnet tuhmet behter sohbet

=== PAGE 89 ===

Jo HINDI SECTION

ii. Medial fe » preceded by an okar character, may be realised in
coalescence with the vowel of a preceding okar character as oyh.

eg. Wise afer ates

pehila or poyhla behira or bayhra bohin or beyhn

iii. Medial € » preceded by an okar character, may be realised in

coalescence with the vowel of a preceding okar character as ovh.
eB. sgt west
behut or bovht pehur-na or pevhr-na
Reading examples, illustrating the above notes, and notes a. and b.

under 1.iii (uugm characters).

a. fasht gaa ga matt aust ast sacl HaaT
vo. Swat aodt faaa was wsadt was sama

c ae ee que wre wet vest seem Hat

3. Modifiers.

The modifiers, Aqeay (enusvar) and frat (viserg) are both

used in writing Hindi. These are given in the Sanskrit sections?

i. onusvar.

Both forms of this modifier are used in Hindi, the first form,
as in Bf , being called the onusvar, and the second form, as in®t,
the eondrebindu>. The onusver is usually written, in preference to
the condrebindu, with characters that have any superscribed stroke.

Suwe¢$¢ 3 St t wt a
ef) ayy wee uu e oy ny avy

in iin 3] oO

1. For transcription of examples, see p. 86.

2. See Sanskrit, Ch.2,3.i. and ii. 3. "moon and dot’.

=== PAGE 90 ===

CHARACTERS OF THE SYLLABARY n
The onusvar and cendrebindu are realised in Hindi es follows:

a. As the nasalisation of the vowel of the character with which it is
written. The condrebindu is preferred for representing a nasalised
vowel, except when the character has a superscribed stroke; €.&-

a 2 : wy, x
ator at aor AE it cs
ha mih thii mé néy

Reading examples. 1

a ot § Me a ot Se vis te oe
gin do oS gt at ai aft de ta
dq vim dea wt fh den nest tga
ager wit de aev sem ten gar
bp. As the nasal consonant of one of the verg. The enusvar written on
a character preceding a vorgiiy character is realised as the nasal
consonant of the same class as the following character, or as n
when the following character is of the co-verg. The condrebindu
is not usually written to represent a nasal consonant. When the
enusvar is realised as a nasal consonant before a final okar
character, the final character is realised with an e-giiae-.
qa = os Weg fea wag aga
penkh kenth perontu hindii sombondh kenjuus
In writing Sanskrit loanwords, there is an alternative and more
frequently used method of representing nasal consonants in this
context, by combining characters®. When the onusvar is realised
as a nasal consonant before & final oker character, the final

character is realised with an o-glide3.

1. For transcription, see p. 86. 2, See Sanskrit, Ch.3,3.Class 2.ii.
3. See above, 1. note b.

=== PAGE 91 ===

72 HINDI SECTION
In some words, this modifier may be realised as in a. or as in b.

The realisation as in b. is more usual when the character with the

-
enusvar is okar, e.g. aH ST
3k or onk rég or reng
Reading Examples.

wi we dees gag aie fie
sonyog sonrag sonlogn sonfoy ehinsa sinho

or sdyog sérag sdlogon sdfoy ohisa siho

enusvar before q , realised as m » the character @ being.

usually realised as. pb in this context, e.g.

wag aa Hart
Soemvad (sembad) varomvar (barombar) but Kfivarii
- For transcription, see p. 86, 2. See Sanskrit, Ch.2,3.i.note c.

3. The last character in thig word represents aig combined with a.

=== PAGE 92 ===

CHARACTERS OF THE SYLLABARY 3

ii. visorg.

This modifier is rarely used in writing Hindi. It occurs in some
Sanskrit loanwords used mainly in the literary language, and in a few
Hindi words. When written with a medial character, it is usually
realised either as strong aspiration after the syllable represented
by the character with which it is written, as in reading learned
words from a literary text; or, in less formal reading, as the
doubling of the consonant of the following character; for example:

GW, dubkho or dukkh Wq:HW, ontehkeren or ontokkeron
When the viserg is written with a final character, it is realised as
strong aspiration following the final syllable, for instance, in
learned words such as Y=: , punch, fYIWA: , vises'ton ; or it

may be disregarded, as in @: , che.

4. The Complete Syllabary.

The arrangement of the characters of the Hindi syllabary in the
traditional order is similar to that given in the Sanskrit section,
omitting the vowel characters % , @ and @.1 The table in which
all the vowel characters, except %, and the modifiers added to the
character A are placed at the head of a series of columns consist-
ing of every consonant in the okar form, with each of the vowel signs
and each of the modifiers, is called in Hindi the anes » baroh-
kherpii, the "twelve characters'. This table is often recited in

Schools by children learning to read.

1. See Sanskrit, Ch.2,4,

=== PAGE 93 ===

"4 HINDI SECTION

These two tables show the order in which the characters are
Placed as the initial characters of words in dictionaries, which is
the same as the order in Sanskrit. Words beginning with the modified
characters are placed in the series of words beginning with the
corresponding unmodified characters,

5. Numerals,

The numerals used in Hindi are given in the Sanskrit section.1
Both the 'Hindit forms and the 'Bombay' forms are used in modern
Hindi printing.

6. Punctuation.

In prose writing, the end of a sentence is marked with an up-
right stroke of the same height as the upright stroke of a character.
Other punctuation marks are used as in English. This system is
illustrated in the Hindi prose passage at the end of this section2.

The system of punctuation used in verse is the same as that used
in Sanskrit}.

1. See Sanskrit, Ch.2,5. 2. See end of Ch.3.
3. See Sanskrit, Ch.2,3.ii. Reading examples.

=== PAGE 94 ===

CHEAP TER 3
CONJUNCT CHARACTERS

Two or more consonant characters may be combined in writing Hindi
to represent consonants which are realised without an intervening
vowel. Characters formed by combining other characters are called

Sawa (senyuktakgor!) by Hindi grammarians. The construction and
calligraphy of conjunct characters are described in the Sanskrit sect-
ion?, The conjunct characters used in writing Hindi are classified
in this chapter in the same way as the Sanskrit conjunct characters.

1. Contexts of Conjunct Characters in Hindi.

Conjunct characters occur in Hindi in these contexts:

i. In Hindi words, that is, words not borrowed from Sanskrit or from

other languages; e.g.

ai (ts RT

becca ky6ki mokkhii
ii. In Sanskrit loanwords, either words commonly used in Hindi, or
learned loanwords used in the literary language; e.g.
at BSG
pustek strii feba

iii.In loanwords from other languages; e.g.

aw 4 = oa TT

deroxt hefta stefon

1. "joined character’. 2. See Sanskrit, Ch.3,1. 3. ibid. Ch.3,3.

=== PAGE 95 ===

76 HINDI SECTION

2, Realisation of conjunct characters in Hindi.

Conjunct characters are realised in reading as syllables consist-
ing of two or more consonants followed by a vowel. When an okar con-
junct character occurs as the final character of a word, it is usually
realised with an o-glide, as in aa » gupt’, eq, fastr'.1

The realisation in modern Hindi of okar characters with zero-
vowel in certain positions in words2 gives rise to a problem of spell-
ing. For instance, when a formative particle beginning with a conson-
ant character is added to a verbal base ending in a final okar conson-
ant character, the final character of the base is usually realised
with zero-vowel. This realisation of the consecutive characters is
similar to the realisation of a conjunct character. Similar problems
arise in other instances, where an okar consonant character is realis-
ed with zero-vowel before a following consonant character, and in com-
pound words in which the first part ends in an okar consonant charac-

ter, and the second part begins with a consonant character.>

3. Classes of Conjunct Charscters in Hindi.4

All the classes of conjunct characters given in the Sanskrit
section occur in Hindi, but in some of the classes only a few of
the characters are used. Those used in writing Hindi are illustrated
by the examples given in each class, which include some Sanskrit loan-
words which are commonly used in Hindi. More rarely used loanwords,
some of which may occur in literary Hindi, are included among the

examples given with each class in the Sanskrit section.

1. In the transcription of examples, this glide is not indicated in
words to which this rule applies. 2. See above, Ch.2,1. notes
a. tod. 3. Examples of such words are given below, with each
eless of conjunct cheracters, 4. See Sanskrit, Ch.3, 3.

=== PAGE 96 ===

CONJUNCT CHARACTERS 7

Class 1. Two similar characters joined.

The series of characters in this class occurring in Sanskrit is
given in that section!, Most of the consonant characters of the Hindi
syllabary occur in this class, but some occur only in Sanskrit loan-
words used in the literary language. The character representing -rre
is written as , the superscribed stroke representing xe when pre-
ceding another consonant?. The modified characters $§ and cy do not
oceur in this class, but FH, 199, FH , fe, and QT, 2z0 are
written in Persian and Arabic loanwords.

A character representing an aspirated consonant is not written
in Sanskrit as the first part of a conjunct character in this class,
but in writing Hindi the characters iq » khkhe and & » ththo
are sometimes used. The combination -mmo may be alternatively re-
presented by writing an onusvar with the character preceding 4, as
in grefrq oor Seta, umid. i

The following examples illustrate Hindi words in which two con-
secutive consonant characters, the first being okar, are realised in
ordinary speech in the same way as conjunct characters:

aa aAaT aA vat

sonn bon-ne? F yusse us-set

Reading examples”.

vel oo geet weet geet ESOT
Ce a
we at Ye BAA SBR PR fesdt
vere feesa wor oat feet wt feet

1. See Sanskrit, Ch.3,Class.1. 2. See below, Class 3-iii.a.
3. Verbal form. 4. Pronoun with suffix.

5. For transcription, see p. 86.

=== PAGE 97 ===

Bp HINDI SECTION

Class 2. Two vergiiy characters joined.

The conjunct characters in this class which occur in Sanskrit are
given in the Sanskrit section’. Some of the more common conjunct
characters of this class occurring in Hindi, mostly in Sanskrit loan-
words, are given below, with the addition of some conjunct characters
occurring in Persian and Arabic loanwords. Some of the examples given
in the Sanskrit section may be found in Hindi texts, in learned loan-

words in the literary language.

Ne ee ee

-kto -tke -gde -dgo -pte -tpe -bdo -dbo

wd sf ST Fd FI FH Wa sa

-xte -bje -bzo -qtea -qbo -afe -fte -bta

ii. Most of the characters given under ii.a. in the Sanskrit section

are written in literary Hindi, this method of representing a
homorganic nasal consonant preceding one of the vergiiy charact-
ers being generally preferred to the use of the onusvar, in
writing Sanskrit loanwords3. Among the characters given in the
Sanskrit section under ii-b., only FF, jpe and @ , -tno,
occur in Hindi. The character ST is not calligraphically a
conjunct character, and it is often included in the syllabic
series. It is usually realised as gyo » With nasalisation of the
following vowel4, In Hindi dictionaries, words beginning with this

character are placed after words beginning with wz? -

iii. These characters occur in Sanskrit loanwords:
ay a a | W
-kme -gne -ghne -tmo -dme -pne

1. See Sanskrit, Ch.3,Class 2. 2. The numbers i. - iy. correspond
to the arrangement of these characters in the Sanskrit section.
3. See above, Ch.2,i.b. 4. Cf. gyo , in Class 3.i. below.

=== PAGE 98 ===

CONJUNCT CHARACTERS 79

iv. Of the characters in this group, only Sa » “Qmo and =] , -nmo
occur in Hindi, in Sanskrit loanwords.

The following examples illustrate Hindi words in which consecut-
ive consonant characters, the first being okar, are realised in
ordinary speech in the same way as conjunct characters:

auifes aadt wT aaar wat mags

Sekti sok-tiit rebt deb-tal pedma ad'mii
Reading examples. 2

ai sad wenn aed gu aH Tada
eq wor Fa war era Teg AFT Ooh
fae wg wet Asm wer CIS mre arte
aren weg wed se fag ow ward
sft ga ome Wa aA oa

TH ASAT

Class 3. Characters joined with ontesth characters.

i. Characters joined with following 4 .

The series of characters in this class occurring in Sanskrit is
given in that section.3 Most of the consonant characters of the Hindi
syllabary can be combined with following 4 , though some of these
conjunct characters occur only in Sanskrit loanwords in the literary
language. Some of the examples given in the Sanskrit section may occur
in a Hindi literary text. Of the modified characters, Ya and

occur combined with following @ in Persian and Arabic loanwords.

1. Verbal form. 2. For transcription, see p.86.
3. See Sanskrit, Ch.3,3.Class 3.iii.b.

=== PAGE 99 ===

80 HINDI SECTION

Reading Examples,1

at wa vam neq oan ow sq asa
ard wet wet sa ya wa sae

ii. Characters joined with following @ .

The series of characters in this cless occurring in Sanskrit is
given in that section.* Only a few of the characters of the Hindi
syllabery occur combined with following @ , and those that occur are
mainly in Sanskrit loanwords. Of the modified characters, only @
ig combined with @ .

Reading examples.?
Wet wT var os oat Ogle fear
wrt wt omit ge er sa we

4ii. Characters joined with preceding Re or with following { -
a. st preceding.

Characters realised with preceding r , represented by the stroke
called YA (ref), are illustrated, with notes on calligraphy, in the
Sanskrit section. These characters occur in Hindi words, in Sanskrit
loanwords, and in loanwords from other languages. The examples given
below illustrate the characters of thie clase which occur in Hindi.
The characters WT, FW, @, @, A, A and q are often
doubled when written with ref,

1. For transcription, see p.86. 2. See Sanskrit, Ch.3,Class 3.i1.
3. For transcription, see p,8, 4. See Sanskrit, Ch.3,Clasea 3.iii-a.

=== PAGE 100 ===

CONJUNCT CHARACTERS &

The following examples illustrate Hindi words in which consecut-
ive consonant characters, the first being okar, sre realised in
ordinary speech in the same way as conjunct characters:

att | wHTaT wa arava et | -aeaer

korta kor-tal sorv dor'vaza dhorm dor'maha
A few words may be written either with XY followed by # consonant
character or with a character with superscribed ref ; e.g.

aa | gait wat wat at = off

dor'bar dorbar per'de porda dar'jii derjii
b. | following.

Characters realised with r following, represented by a short
otroke placed either against the upright stroke of the character or
beneath the character, are given in the Sanskrit section.” The
examples given below illustrate the characters of this class which
occur in Hindi. The majority of such words ere loanwords from
Sanskrit and English.

Reading examples.>

iv. Characters joined with preceding “or with following Mf .-
a. a, preceding.
The characters of this class which occur in Sanskrit are given in

that section. 4 The characters occurring in Hindi are illustrated by

. - , See Sanskrit, Ch.3,3-Cl.3.iii.b.
; Seen atony see p. 66. i. See Sanskrit, Ch.3,3-O1.3.iv.a.
6