=== PAGE 1 ===

o

Ga EREARELIN

seta ad ga

te PURANA

NOWWISNYEL HSITONG HLIM LX3L
VNVUNld VLUVAIVAVWHVad

IPeAN}O\
ysewny DAIDUOY
Aq Pey!p3

Edited with Exhaustive Introduction by
Acharya Ramesh Chaturvedi

Bs

=== PAGE 2 ===

TegrrereararaTT

> ia

TAT TT

(Gar-wepfa-ToTafaeTSy)
BRAHMAVAIVARTA PURANA
( Brahma-Prakrti and Ganapati Khanda )

TEXT WITH ENGLISH TRANSLATION,
VOL.I
Translated into English by
Shanti Lat Nagar
Edited with Exhaustive Introduction by
Acharya Ramesh Chaturvedi
Head, Dept. of Puranetihasa

Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri Rastiya Sanaskrit Vidyapeeth
New Delhi

PARIMAL PUBLICATIONS
DELHI

=== PAGE 3 ===

do AAGTEN TA:
Tada vert genavsy
Brahamavaivarta Purana

—______BrahmaKhandam

we weitseara:

Chapter-1

(Welfare recitation; introduction and
importance of Brahmavaivarta Purana)

yey wea wat Grae:
aeateninionteatr t
safer Sea: wort a faqu en
I bow in reverence to the all-pervading lord,
who is adored by Ganesa, Brahma, Siva, Indra,
serpent Sega, the gods, all the Manus, the sages,
Sarasvati, Laksmi besides Paravti and others.
a
font cifiaty were
WTS: wacrantt wast gat
fret wae wfe aera seni BH
The one who has the solid body of three
phases with universal form, in whose body
innumerable worlds reside, the one who is the
primeval person; the one who is engaged in the
creation of the universe and the one who resides
in the heart of everyone in a tiny form, the same
Brahman is adored by me.

art ARE: YAU BT arRTTT:
Ta: Ott wat aired a wyatt aren
em Taran + front fafeet frite
TERT RASTER PAT CATA

All the gods, humans, animals, Manus and the
ascetics or yogis, adore him attentively and
several of the  truth-seekers, adore him
performing hard tapas for several births, but are

unable to have a trace of him, the same lord is
adored by me, who has a beautiful dark
complexion.

ae Het yond wt wegd aa:

snferhyg: wepfraeferegigrarea: sit

I bow in reverence to lord Krsna who
represents the three gunas (elements), out of
whose body, Brahma, Visnu and Siva have
emerged.

aa weet argeara
aret erg at her TTT
Rat arent cared wat waar aut
Having been saluted to lord Narayana and
Nara, the most exalted being, and goddess
Sarasvati, one should recite the Jaya
(Mahabharata, Puranas etc.).
§ A or
sqferroraracdt careeat getel
afer gercadiag,
Friant frame rer germereaferea 2

The sage Vydsadeva conceiving Sarasvati as
the wish fulfilling cow and the Vedas as calf,
milked the nectar of the theme of the
Brahmavaivarta Purdna. Therefore, O
gentlemen, consume this invisible milk.

amet Afrarea ea: yiraTee:1
Freer Afaifrast sree farargy: STA BU
Tafa Whim AEA
word glen & factes eguerqu wit
In the holy place of Naimisaranya, the sacred

sages headed by the great sage Saunaka had been
performing their daily prayers seated over the

=== PAGE 4 ===

2

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

kusasana. At that point of time Ugrasrava, the
son of Sita, suddenly arrived there. He bowed in
reverence to all the sages, who offered him a seat
of the kusa-grass.

@ daearfafa vac vitrat fra:

Wes ayret wet wed: whofe qagn

Then welcoming the guest, the best of the
sages, Saunaka enquired about his welfare,
adoring him with devotion and delight.

amtarafars cat herr

afar adres Georat gerard gn

wt Preah yet gray

Agel APT @ U_eT ARATETTAI Ot

wdagenist a adder ARCA

walagetret a addarnt ToT CI

farang 2 het waa

wearNe eryattataadrq 811

ure gerd a gid yraafel

BaTHTST aaTUT FETT FaRTaTA RON

Getting free from the fatigue of the journey,
the sage was seated over Ausdsana.and smilingly
put a question to the sage Sita, who was well-
read in the Puranas and looked like the moon
among the stars. “The best of the stories, which
relates to Lord —_ Krsna, are pleasant to listen to,
O bestower of welfare, you are the abode of
welfare, the seed of all the welfare, the one who
showers grace always and removes all the
misfortunes, bestows all the riches, showers the
devotion of the lord, which always bestows
pleasure and moksa (salvation). He is the one
who imparts divine knowledge and the one who
ensures the increase of the family, sons and
grand-sons.

vires sara
Wert wad: Har He arene & fram
ferrera quatre EMT a Pel
sata weit vite fafegrmafera:)
Waar ad wareragqeatrerra etn

Target: yey yoo

weg a yauty Froonets ferent: nt 93 0

sitet aren afeedtdt wate practi

AAA RTT ATT ASAT Bx UI

Tired a mara adyehgeri

Wardhagnt Frsaeadi e411

wagatiaent dyugizatom

Gaara wha warecate vif ee

Saunaka asked: “Where are you going? Where
from have you arrived? We feel grateful by your
visit today. All of us are terrified because of the
Age of Kali and possess no special knowledge.
We are engrossed in the worldly affairs and are
desirous of redemption. This (is possibly) the
cause of your arrival here. You are noble,
immensely virtuous, well-versed in the Puranas,
have well-read all the Puranas and are full of
compassion. You better tell us about some
Purana, by which we might be able to achieve
some devotion to Lord Krsna, because, O Son
of Sita, the devotion of Lord Krsna is better than
even the salvation and it removes the worldly
fetters of the human being. It showers nectar
over the people who suffer from the
conflagration of the worldly ills and instils
pleasures in the minds of the people”.

ama wddist w WTEC

Tea PVE qed TAN gon

Bren at frat warereraray

farrrart a tage Tart fee a oTETTAN RCH

sara dora: fe at yrs aire

at wert dat at yg aS rafter eet

You recite the stories from such a Purana, in
the beginning of which the seeds of the entire
universe are enshrined and is also infested with
Parabrahman. It should also deal with elements
of Parabrahman in the creation of the universe.
We intend to enquire from you as to whether

Paramatma (the great soul) is having the visible
or invisible form; what is the true form of the

=== PAGE 5 ===

BRAHMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 1

3

Brahman? How to meditate on or adore the lord?
Whom do the ascetics or the yogis adore? What
is the deep fattva propounded in the Vedas?

veal Tore aa are Frater:

Yona Metut aa Aaa PAA oN

Metaatt aa wa dqusaclrq

alt feraciies aarerecattautar 8 ttt

ai a seat a aa we Freecom

SH Wea: Sr Waa: BH STAT WHA: WU

Frys sea aot or Sarat Sacitfiar

age: ayo sromat aftarafan 23

& ASM: MHASH chet: AT AT Bee: |

arai a afte ear yaretiared Yq Vet

“O Son, you tell me about the Purana in which
the form of nature has been described, besides
the symptoms of the virtues, the Mahat, the
Goloka, Vaikuntha Sivaloka and the heavens; the
arts and the amsgas. O Son of Stita, what are the
natural elements? What is nature and what is the
soul beyond nature, the gods and the goddesses
who are born on earth secretly, you tell us about
them besides the oceans, the mountains, the
rivers, their genesis and evolution. Which is
integral part of the nature? What are the arts?
Tell us about their character, the meditation,
adoration and the sacred recitations and the
Puranas in which all these details are enshrined.

Pierentinattantestont a aot

aaa Ulery Bae 4 1
Sraentifernresy aearnt @ aor

aut Gust aa Fa at fara VE
aei a sifaat weet aa Gury
sifest anit gererg arg u aig Von
Titer alot aera at Tet wate
Rerot aut weaaat w afeTAN 2c

You tell us the name of the Purana, which
enshrines the character of Durga, Sarasvati,
Laksmi and Savitri, besides the one which
contains the stories of Radhika. You also tell us

details about the hells achieved by the people and
the deeds by which one attains these hells and
the remedies to escape these hells. The places
which are sacred for the people and those which
are unholy may be told to us besides the deeds by
performing of which, one achieves a place in the
heaven or the hell; please tell us also the deeds,
which attract the particular type of ailments and
those lead one to salvation.

WAR erst arcing yest age

arat aa (urerararaay aa as 2 eit

“O Son of Sita, you tell us the name of the
Purana in which details about Tulasi, Manasd,
Kali, Ganga, Vasundhara, Prthivi and the one
containing the stories about the goddesses
besides the details about the humans having
different births. Which are the deeds, attracting
the ailments and the deeds which lead one to
achieve redemption, you please tell us.”

weer o eArt a Fran

ary aa at ata eatenifracorit 3 011

Tiree att aa aT at a

wareettararont Teri war aor 3 et

Tear WATE

wen wate aad ard aera 3 U1

aa aay fad quads a aa

uftgutarentt Ree TTA 113 BU

wT eT WS Tred Yod youa WA

Ba WaT car aT RT yore at 3 vl

srfada a agers: dt BAM

Trent fe Hea SAAT ATTA BG

areraracat ar wife erent A:

faera fee ar Oy a Tets WIAA 3G

“O Son of Sita, you tell us about the scripture
containing the stories of Saligrama, the Dharma
and the Sin. You also tell us about Ganapati, the
deep secrets connected with the god, details

about his life, his recitation mantras, secret
kavacas, the mantras and the surprising stories

=== PAGE 6 ===

4

connected with him. You tell us all about them in
detail. You tell us about the Purana enshrining
the details about the life of Krsna in (Bharata)
India. O sage, in which sacred place was he
born? Who was the chaste and virtuous lady who
gave birth to a son like Krsna? Where did he go
after his birth? Why did he leave the place of his
birth and what for? What did he do after leaving
that place? Then how did he return to his abode?
At whose request he relieved the burden of the
earth? What for did he establish the norms? Why
did he return again to the Goloka?

sierra Fuat gfigehry

shag tat aw wihrierarcorq 30

ATE VETTE ST YATATA

wet dares aT SaTETTAS PA 3c

foreageuys at carat get Ga:

7H AGe: Bat Set Saas A: TARR

The sages are unaware of the Purana in which
the entire details about Krsna are contained and it
is beyond their reach. This is the means to
cleanse the mind. Whatever good or bad question
have been asked by me according to my own
knowledge, you enlighten us over the issues
raised which would inculcate the sense of
vairagya. A good teacher explains the points on
which clarifications are asked for as well as those
over which no questions are asked.”

: ‘aferearet

ad ayrenrenes aarreraresiary
fagdererratsé aft ARUN ¥ ott
geen famagg a areng fern:

eo Attar youd aft ares en
aa faa ye agra erg te

7 erga weft wacraiearattn ye
eftataronstor yraraurafa qe

Gat worquerearanst efeafrorq ys 30
Ta YE Wt Paonia
reg UUNy garsaT ATTN yt

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

i ¢ der '

ehufamd aarreaarafaara v4
. Safaat arg Be GET w ATE

afm dorart wergereTera ye Ml

eraus wat weerracoTy

ened aire: wat Sora TITATTTN vol

aeorar atfirr: watt ta Firat vita

wearaftarena wate sift: ATTY CH

att wafer eager afer:

Soret ward HATTA: TTS

The son of Sita then said : “All is well (with
me) with the grace of your feet. I am coming
from the siddha-ksetra and shall go to the
Narayanasrama. I have arrived here in order to
pay my respects to the group of the Brahmanas
and to perform the pilgrimage of the sacred place
of Naimisaranya. The one who does not bow in
reverence finding a good, a Brahmana and the
teacher, he is consigned to the terrible hell and
has to remain there till the sun and the moon last.
Visnu roams about the earth in the form of a
Brahmana. Therefore a noble person bows in
reverence by the grace of Visnu to a Brahmana.
O Sacred Soul, whatever has been asked by you,
T have understood thoroughly. Brahmavaivarta is
the gist of the Puranas. This is the Purana, which
removes all the doubts about the Puranas and the
upa-Puranas. It bestows devotion of Hari and
develops the knowledge of all the elements. It
grants pleasure to pleasure-seekers and salvation
or truth to truth-seekers. It bestows the unfailing
devotion on the Vaisnavas and is like the
kalpavrksa for them. The eternal Brahman is
enshrined therein as a seed of the globe. The
yogis and Vaisnavas meditate on him. O
Saunaka, there is hardly any difference between
a yogi and a Vaisnaiva saint. The humans
become Vaisnavas or yogis on the basis of the
knowledge they possess. They gradually become
great yogis.

aaquag tari tatat whitey
aa: Wares a Sasi aie YANG ot!

=== PAGE 7 ===

BRAHMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 1

Waanifeora yiferratracurg
aa a We RH
start ag Hai ;

aitctecatds arat wares Pretty 20

Gade ged seat YAY

auts acer Tone HlerUT AA Bt

Thereafter follows the Prakrti-khanda, which
deals with the gods, the goddesses besides the
genesis and evolution of all the creatures of the
universe in addition to the sacred stories about
the female deities. It also deals with the deeds of
the humans and Sdligrama. The kavacas, stotras,
mantras and the methods of their adoration are
propounded therein. In the Prakrti-khanda the
symptoms of the nature, their amsas and the
stories related thereto are also narrated, besides
the glory and their influence on humans. It also
describes the merits and demerits one derives by
good or bad deeds. The hells which the degraded
souls achieve because of their misdeeds on earth
and the duration of stay in each hell have been
defined therein.

aat mates @ asa uftatfany
arfargdated gftaggetran 4 su
TteyHare WaeraSTOT

Freer ra RRAOOT & 4

This is followed by GaneSa-khanda which
contains the details about the birth of Ganega and
the precious stories related to his life. In the
dialogue between Ganega and Bhrgu, the life
events of GaneSa, which are quite secret in
nature are brought out. The secret kavacas of
GaneSa, the mantras and tantras are discussed
therein.

siporserans u Sift a at: TY
are Wass a signs ah Ty GH

aah arcaatot sitsratqgerhrery

wat Agfaart a varaus Freftr eo

36 8 afad far qoomat Te

ag: Gus: uftint daenifrerorg 4 cu

waunitfiad std watengolarany

wedads at Wabi TET 4 eu

fagt geared a Hurst aa PAH G on

wares 8 waar qatar: § eH

Thereafter follows the recitation of the Krsna-
janma Khanda (the part relating to the birth of
Krsna). It deals with the performance of Krsna,
to relieve the land of Bharata of the burden of the
evil people, the pleasure sports of the lord which
serve like a bridge for the noble people to cross
the ocean of the universe. This is the gist of all
religions. The Purana is adored by all and grants
them riches besides fulfilling all their desires,
earning for it the title of Brahmavaivarta. O
Saunaka, $11 Krsna has propounded the entire
philosophy of Brahman in it and this is also the
reason why it is called the Brahmavaivarta.

3é RUT YO at a get

Freed a ae BAT TATE ZI

nerd gent a ad aata gem

ator axt yar seat AreTaOTaT TG BU

Anat sarEgara weet sTgatATH & XI

ere: uur aera feayet FET!

wal eh frads quest wireTNE GN

wad ated gett Fryer

ware ae | ATA YATUTEHAIG G1

quatre aaRet He AT:

aemet HAN FMEA AAI g tt

In the early times, the brief of this Purana was
handed down by lord Krsna to Brahma.
Thereafter, Brahma narrated the same to Dharma
at the sacred place of Puskara. Dharma in tum
imparted the sacred knowledge to Narayana with
a pleasant mind, Lord Narayana recited this
Purana to Narada, who narrated the same to the
sage Vyasa at the banks of the Ganga. Analysing
the text further and developing it pleasantly,
Vyasa imparted its knowledge to me. The merit

=== PAGE 8 ===

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

am fadiaiseara:

Chapter-2

The Position of Goloka and its description
and the definition of the divinity of Sri Krsna

gine sara
forged ad wit ceaTayaayiTT
wd Hay HOTT FAGVSATAAAL BU
Saunaka said : “O Son of Stita, which is the
astonishing and the unprecedented Purana you
have come across? You better narrate the

Brahmakhanda in detail (to enlighten us on the
various subjects dealt with therein).

dilfreara
ae WT: Weal carrera: |
ait tartgoraar eabaed SAAT RH
aagt ara TERaVSAyTAT
SaRRaeafe araciet TAN 31
wiftsrgg were yedicract fest
qaatfend Peet fara x
crore a fenirensaifrestct Fed
Steer aterata wee 4
surgeries Fretacefasn
fratfedtarrard faeiol augerpfan 1
Teaeed renee we.
aqraatintt: caer get wet a dona:
at gate urdietad ay
onfrenferrergegirenhtfateratarare ¢ 1
maenfeareantet: utter
waa orga Vet Hearse ¢ 1

Sauti said ; “I bow in reverence at the feet of
the glorious teacher Vyasa. Then after bowing at
the feet of Visnu, the Brahmanas, I am going to
narrate the ancient religions, the sacred
Brahmakhanda which was recited to me by

:| Vyasa; it destroys the darkness of ignorance and

leads to the bright path of knowledge. O
Brahmana, there was a ball of light in the
beginning, after the dissolution, the lustre of
which resembled crores of suns. The same ball of
light was quite vast and had been the cause of the
universe. The light of the selfborn lord is full of
lustre. All the three worlds are enshrined in this
ball of light quite pleasantly. O Braéhmana the
Goloka is located above all the three worlds
which is eternal like the lord himself. It is spread
into crores of yojanas. It exists in the form of a
globe. It is quite illustrious and its land is
studded with gems. The yogis cannot visualise it
even in dream, while the Vaisnava not only
visualise it but also achieve it. The great soul has
held the best of the lokas with his yogic
practices. The Goloka is free from bodily
ailments, mental ailments, death, grief and terror.
Its grandeur it increased by innumerable gem-
studded vast mansions. At the time of
dissolution, Lord Krsna alone resides there.
During the normal times the place is crowded
with the cowherds and cowherdesses.
Feat afant wat wgrAeaorTT

agud feracithe y A YAATETA go!

arfeatafaettel aque noserefe:!

Below the Goloka and at the distance of fifty
crores of yojanas, Vaikuntha is located to its
south. Sivaloka is located to the west. Both the
Vaikuntha and Sivaloka are as beautiful as the
Goloka. Vaikuntha is located in a circular way
covering an area of a crore of yojanas.

aa yet o yet @ ett ea
aqast: niga: sereanfeafirrn

wel a frais o atfedraferegeran 22
aa yet a wel a aoeirenfary

=== PAGE 9 ===

BRAHMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 2

Tea Sea GHATS 83 Ht
TUN a WIAA

eared afta: yore ATATAT gx
Tareas Frereare WTTTA!
TaRifett wade GetrSTAN eh ut
qatrinavant TRagaTrarTg
mrctaarehargyntird aT 2G 1

During the time of dissolution, it remains
deserted and during the normal times Visnu and
Laksmi reside there attended by the four armed
attendants. Vaikuntha too is from death and old
age. To the west of it is located the Sivaloka
which is spread over an area of a crore of
vojanas. During the, time of dissolution, the
Sivaloka also remains un-inhabited and during
the normal times, Siva and Parvati have their
abode there. The Goloka possesses the divine
light which bestows pleasure on all. The ascetics
always meditate upon with their divine yogic
sight that light which is blissful, invisible or
having no form and represents the form of
Brahmana. The lord remains present in that light
in quite a pleasant form, having a dark
complexion like a new cloud. His eyes resemble
the red lotus. His spotless face shines like the full
moon of the winter.

aicarnteracd cere WaT
frost qietiedt afer tirarereri got!
BRNO ytd HAT
waifranaly aepiggerary 21
sara: arrears farang
aasraretfaafeantteqercaergn 2311
tafaereret a aarrenfayfary
AS WU Tel WaT TATA! 2 ol
werd wddtt watert we
fergie werertracrafererereng 2 gn

His beauty resembles crores of Kamadevas.
His beautiful form is the abode of divine plays.
He has two arms and holds a flute. He has a
smiling face and is clad with a yellow lower

garment. He is adorned with beautiful gem-
studded ornaments. His limbs are adorned with
sandal-paste, kasturi and saffron. His chest is
adorned with the Srivatsa mark. His head is
adorned with the Airita-mukuta which is studded
with gems. He is seated over the gem-studded
throne. He indeed is Parabrahman, the great lord.
He is self-born, the cause of the creation of all
the universe and the absolute Brahman. He
always remains in the tender age moving in the
form of a cowherd.

anfeqiigrinned aarpeatay

Frtte fafaert a uftqutad faye 2H

Tense wit Waa aT

Tget aged a Agel TASETN BH

Warr ot AeA

wafaadat wifafged a fate awn

wee: Weiter fof Frafarey

are FOU FoR TERT RG

Wet rates ot TERRIA

SAR Awa: YA: IR TAROT 2G I

ud we Ut faverTare Ua a!

fatter ret ard Wt far cast gi eH

He is endowed with the beauty of crores of
full-moons. He is compassionate towards his
devotees. He is spotless, unattached, complete
Brahman, omnipresent, remains present in the
divine dance, peaceful, RaseSvara, the one who
extends welfare to all, abode of welfare, seed of
blissfulness, truthful, indestructible, imperishable
or eternal, lord of all the achievements, the form
of all the achievements, beyond nature, Igvara,
formless, form of the great soul, calm and is the
refuge of all. The calm-looking Vaisnavas
meditate on him. Therefore it is one lord alone
who takes to many forms. He witnessed the
complete void everywhere at the time of
dissolution”.

oft steered rerquet difagiredare genes

aefreat are farttatseaa:u 20

=== PAGE 10 ===

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

wy qatatseaa:
Chapter-3
The universe emerges out of Krsna;
Narayana eulogies Krsna

‘diferearet

Set yard faa ties a eae

Prighnic at fat mraraqq en

gavteraymfatadrt fagarantey

Frofad o Ray feared fregut fas au

area wera Wats WaReTaaTA

BoM BTURA Be Vera: Ty aH

Sauti said : “O Brahmana, the self born lord
found the Goloka had been looking horrible, the
universe was a great void, devoid of all the
creatures and the water, terrible, covered with
darkness, deprived of trees, mountains and the
oceans; deformed and had been deprived of the
dust, metals, greenery and grass. The lord then
contemplating in his mind deeply started the
creation of his own accord.

srfadyg: antet gat aferoramia:1

ereRTeUTRTT AAT ATY YUT: HS

al HERA: THA Wa UI

RUTTEN TAA TART: GU

sifadyas auger ARTA: HY:

vari gar daaran arate ager g

QUT: WYENGR:|

THEEUNTED: wg SQ PAOT: Wo

atraccaan: stare: sift: sitfamret:1

MAGIA EGTA It Cl

BMVATATE RUA TST: |

ster: fuer gera a yeaa

All the virtues (elements) emerged at the
beginning of the universe, from the right side of
the great soul. The great fattvas, arrogance
Pajicatanmatras the form, taste, small, touch and

sound then emerged out of him. Thereafter
Narayana himself appeared having a dark
complexion, clad in a yellow lower garment,
having four arms holding conch, dies, club and
lotus, wearing a serene smile over the face,
adorned with the gem-studded ornaments,
carrying the divine Sariga-bow, wearing the
kaustubha gem and the Srivatsa mark on the
chest, beloved of Laksmi, glorious, adored by
Sri, the face having the lustre of the full moon of
the winter season, the body having the beauty of
the god of love, stood before the Lord Krsna and
started eulogising him with both the hands
folded.

ATT Sar

Rut AUT Saat ArH ATTUTATN Ro HI

TURE VATS T ATTA

BS AANA TATA HATSTTN VAM

Freamt arred a amet aeRO

ae weet Tac ATAGTAT FU

Aaet Aediet Sere WET

aed feat w adaefaat wu eu

Narayana said : “You are the best of all,
adorable, bestower of the boons, the cause of
granting the boon, cause of all the causes, form
of all the actions, form of tapas, the one who
always grants reward of the tapas, tapas and the
lord of all the sages, having the dark complexion
like the new cloud beautiful, free from desires,
form of all the desires, remover of the cowardice,
cause of the birth of Kamadeva (the god of love),
truthful, lord of all, form of all the seeds, the best
of all, the form of the Vedas, the seed of the
Vedas, bestower of the result of the reciting of
the Vedas, well-versed in the Vedas, well aware
of the provisions of the Vedas, besides being the
best of all the people well versed in the Vedas; I
bow in reverence to him.

BYR aNyMV W TATA AAA

=== PAGE 11 ===

BRAHMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 3

wouter TA TA: TTT RSH

aang Ha a: Waqgefed:|

freed a: WSfxet ort wee Ft fareran gg

Wait oat oF arated at fray

TOT ogTeT er aE ATT RG

SRO faugrd: SU Fea

Wrageat Wit af grat a dat yon

Saying this, Lord Narayana, seated himself’

over the gem-studded lion throne, at the
command of Lord Krsna. Whosoever recites this
stotra recited by Narayana with a devoted mind
in the morning, noon and the evening, thrice a
day, he is relieved of all the sins. By reciting this,
those desirous of getting a son, get the same; the
seekers of a wife get the same, the deposed kings
get back the kingdom and whosoever is deprived
of the prowers, gets the same. The person who is
overpowered. with miseries, is relieved of them
with the reciting of this prayer. The one who
recites this prayer for a year, is relieved of all
ailments.

ofa gerdadt anrauret sitet
Here ends prayer of Krsna, offered by
Narayana, in the Brahmavaivarta Purdna

‘atferearet
anfadya aeaarerert arraeda: |
Yarneadarm: usaeat ferrari ect
AAATAATENTENT BT: |
SAGTATTAT RAAT SNST MN 28H
fryprafsret waar: Te
vdfagan: fest arian Tirso
qerigteas year: fara:
WAP TAM TETAS: TT 3 A
olerrergeyegyat water:
AQUA TWAT: WTC TSTATAT 3 VU
steenge: fuer gore a yerefer:
qeanfgaaatg: weprisfeareg:n 23

9

Sauti said : “Then from the left of his back
side, five-faced Siva, having the lustre of a
crystal, appeared. He was adorned with matted
locks of hair having the complexion of heated
gold. He wore a serene smile over his face, wore
a crescent over his forehead, holding a trident in
his hands, served by the siddhas with the
garlands of victory, the teacher of the teachers
and the yogis, the one who overpowers even
death, bestower of welfare, blissful, possessor of
great knowledge, the best of all and the bestower
of the great knowledge, having the face
illumined with the lustre of the full moon,
pleasant to look at, the chief of the Vaisnavas
and emitted the divine light. He then stood
before Lord Krsna with folded hands and started
praying. His entire body was filled with
emotions; the eyes were filled with tears and his
voice was choked.

wat weet eae aT VU

faa farts a feet fever

ferorert a ferret faarenrcorenreOTN 2 & It

forerarct 7 faut faust oe

Wea Heat Wet MT THATATN FGM

Wiaed thie what ae

Mahadeva said : “You are the form of victory,
bestower of victory, cause of victory, the best of
those who bestow the victory. I bow before you,
O Lord. The one who is of the universal form,
the lord of the universe, the cause of the
universe, the support of the universe, pervading
of the universe, the cause of the universe, the
destroyer of the universe, the best of the seed of
the creation of the universe, the cause of the fruit,
bestower of the reward, form of the lustre, the
granter of the lustre and the best of all those
possesing the lustre.

seaqan Ft var tafser at
ANAC TA AAT SAT AT ACTA Vo!
sf siqgd wid a oa: daa: Waa)

=== PAGE 12 ===

10

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

wdfatgirres fast a ue wan zc
tad age fit erie a
ages ard arf gears gent ane

Saying this, he bowed in reverence and with
his permission, he took his seat over the gem-
studded in order to converse with Narayana. The
one who recites Nardyana’s stotra by Siva, with
concentrated mind, he achieves success at every
step and all his desires are fulfilled. There is
always an increase in his riches and the friends.
The forces of his enemies, his miseries and sins
get destroyed.

sfa gecad vig sitgeretay

Here ends prayer of Sri Krsna, recited by Siva.

tifieara

aifadya Tmargorer TTA

Teed Fas HUSA AZo

Yaa: Ysa: YararAyya:!

Shite: fafeornite: wefat serat 7s: 113 gH

. a a

eer faenat wat a gat a aes U1

art agit deri wer Farqufa:!

wrt: Weeitart: Getter sore 33H

storage: fare gera a gerafe:

yorarigeaatgt aferarerdet: 1 3 vil

Sauti said : “At that point of time, from the
navel of the Lord Krsna, the best and the
illustrious, Brahma emerged, holding a
kamandalu, seated over the lotus. He had white
teeth and bright costumes. He was the best of the
yogis, the lord of the artisans, creator of all, the
teacher, bestower of the reward for performing
the tapas, bestower of all the riches, the creator,
destiny, performer of all the actions, remover of
all the ills, holder of all, well-versed in all the
four Vedas, calm, the lord of Sarasvati, noble
and merciful. He stood before Lord Krsna and
offered his prayer to him. At that point of time he
felt emotional and his neck was bent in devotion
before the lord.

wetara

Rui aS YO Weta

werner Sah N3all

fergie gird thitert wee

qatrinevart aifearadeeq 3&1

Feared wemuserdfeaar

TWeat Waa TeeeTATAHT 301

Brahmi said : “I bow in reverence to Lord Krs
na, who is beyond all the virtues, is known as
Govinda alone, is indestructible, eternal,
omnipresent, appearing in the form of a cowherd,
appearing in tender age, calm, lord of
cowherdesses, good looking, beautiful to look at,
more beautiful than the lord of love, participating
in the celestial dance with the cowherdesses in
Braja, Rasesvara, the one who resides with the
celestial dance and always eager to enjoy
pleasure.

selaqeant f ara Tifeereat at

anTatrgt Py SATA TAA Fe

oft cert iti ore a: TST

wrant wer aah BF: YT MAT Ie

afentata mies sitgaitatirh

TET: TATA TAA FEU YON

Thus saying, Brahma, bowing before Sri Krs

na and with his permission took his seat besides
Narayana and Siva. Whosoever recites the prayer
offered by Brahma, all his sins vanish and the
bad dreams turn into good dreams and he
achieves the devotion of Govinda, which

increases the sons and the grand sons. His ill-
fame disappears and his fame lasts for lorig.

ia ceded weg sitgeredo

Here ends prayer offered by Brahma to Krsna
in the Brahmavaivarta Purana.

atfeart
anferdya Weegee: WATE:

afera: yeu: afgregacreanit Gert: gl

=== PAGE 13 ===

BRAHMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 3

11

adait a ada: wae adatom

aa: waa weet feararefeatarr us eH

edargat aut afaet elet vera

Ue afin qt UeeTET Hey 3

stigompa: fear wore eusaqufat

Fora wearer wast AcATTAAN sel

Sauti said : “Thereafter out of the chest of Krs
na, a divine figure of white complexion wearing
‘the locks of hair over his heads. He wore a
serene smile over his face. He was witness to all
the deeds of all the creatures, was the knower of
everything, who always remained unmoved,
having good nature, devoid of anger and terror,
filled with knowledge and Dharma, quite
religious, religion of the religious people and was
the great soul and the bestower of the reward, He
then stood before Lord Krsna and then prostrated
before him and started offering his prayer for
him.

shed sara

pai faa aged Tea

Wifes WOOTEN SG I

Wat a Aig tid ers far

Tani a Tet Tracasenfcor sg 1

es i vert yor

easter yard viet TATeTU Ys

Dharma said : “Krsna, Visnu, Vasudeva,
Paramatmé, Isvara, Govinda, extremely blissful,
one is imperishable and grants the reward. He is
lord of the cowherds, cowherd, protector of the
cows, omnipresent, Jord cf the cows and is the
one who resides in the home of the cow. He
bears the tails of the calves and lives amongst the
cowherdesses. He is the chief of all, the best of
the humans and the one who cannot be killed,

sinless, dark complexioned, calm and is pleasant
to look at I bow in reverence to him.

sqeant agar witaeredt at
TSA MATTE A SAT BUCH

agfaniarnt etacritamt a

UT: WSR BEA Beat se went

year Sain wer ere weleyay

TTR Re: Ur eftaret HATA Y ol

fret het ved ert agian

ugetteet qet racer TAG RH

4 ae adunfa verera wae a

creat aa grant darahrarer: 4 Bi

Saying this Dharma got up. Thereafter, with
the permission of the lord, he took his seat with
Brahma, Visnu and Siva. Whosoever recites the
twenty-four names of the lord spoken by
Dharma, early in the morning, he always attains
happiness and pleasure besides being victorious.
At the end he reaches the abode of the lord and
attains his devotion. He always achieves Dharma
and is never attracted towards sinful ways. He
achieves the four elements of Dharma, Artha,
Kama and Moksa. All the sins disappear at his
very sight as the snakes disappear at the sight of
Garuda.

ofa gedad ented sitqrareta
Here ends prayer of Dharma for Krsna, recited
in the Brahmavaivarta Purana

‘aitferearea

sifadys ater enter araurgda:

fered ararg fedtar aarerTeran & 31

sifadya qaTEA: TOR:

wet tat yecramt drorgercrenftoitnn 4 tt

alfequigyirent weagacinem

afayatgererr terqeoryfiat 4 4

Then Sauti said : “At that point of time a

beautiful girl emerged out of the left part of
Dharma who resembled completely with Laksmi.
She was known by the name of Marti.
Thereafter, a female with white complexion
emerged out of the mount of the lord, holding a

book and a lute. She had the lustre of crores of
suns. Her eyes resembled the lotus flowers of the

=== PAGE 14 ===

12

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

winter season. She had bright costumes and was
adorned with the bright gold ornaments.

afm gait yarn gato a gat

Ser ast wren fagut ert wT gH

annfaprecat at aitafaeeaam

YS F MITA ARATHIG ott

Tferager: fear seit sana: YET

Ta UTA atovaT AT AAT ANG 2

want at eatin wet et ga gy

aifa walter efton gera a yerefers ny eit

She wore a serene smile on her face and she
had beautiful teeth. She was the damsel of,
sixteen year’s age. She was the best of all the
beauties in the universe and all the srutis, Sastras
and the intelligence emerged out of him. She
controlled the speech, the goddess, of all the
poets, an incarnation of purity and was known as
Sarasvati with a peaceful look. Standing before
Krsna, she played on Vind and then danced. She
sang in praise of the lord, highlighting all the
chief events of his earlier incarnations.

aeeagara
TUS THT AAAS!
Tahaan THROAT & ot
Tat waa at Tartare
Tranfererged we ae crafattfarg en
Taranrafart werafaerttorg
Wagar weat art yet HATeTT GU
wong a afieqaan wewaeat at
SATA AT MATT TATA AIT BA
Bia arotted Birt were a: Usd
Ghanrerardists faraarqaarven § xi

Sarasvati spoke : “Being present in the divine
dance, anxious to enjoy the pleasure of the divine
dance, seated over the gem-studded throne,
RaseSvara and the performer of the divine dance,
the beloved of Radhika, lover of the divine dance
and the one who enjoys the divine dance, I bow

in reverence to him. The one who gets tired of
the divine dance, but is still anxious to perform
the divine dance. I bow in reverence to Lord Krs
na who is quite pleasant to look at. Thus bowing
before the lord, Sarasvati, with a mind filled with
pleasure, got seated over a lion throne. The one
who recites the stotra of Sarasvati, he would
achieve wisdom, treasures, riches, intelligence
and progeny.

gia waded wri HOTTA

Here ends prayer recited by Sarasvati, in
favour of Krsna in the Brahmavaivarta Purana

difarearea

safadys THe: OTR. TATA:

Want Set titrant toretearegfira § 41

Weaeraterr aferar verter

wéyalteeat ar addacrean

ert @ eenioreciier Toreretitar TTI g GI

Wt et: Yer: ferret wari

Fela More reat APA TATTTTH & 9 It

Sauti said : “A fair complexioned lady also

appeared from the mind of Lord Krsna, who was
adorned with gem-studded ornaments. She was
clad in yellow garments and wore a serene smile
on her face. She was the goddess of all the riches
and could grant all treasures. She was the gold
complexioned Laksmi and remained as treasure
with the kings. She stood before the lord and
bowed in reverence to him. She then bowed her
back in devotion and offered her prayers to the
Lord.

meres earl
aera I Aa MYST TANTS GC
Mahdlaksmi said : “You are the form of truth,
its lord, seed of the truth the very foundations of

the truth, knower of the truth and you are the
cause of the truth. I bow in reverence to you.

sqac siteft aet a dara Yara

=== PAGE 15 ===

BRAHMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 3

13

ARTA raat fee § <1

onferdye ATE FST TATA: |

walfesrgedt ar yenrphrtatiie ott

You have the lustre of molten gold and
illuminating all the directions with her lustre, the
goddess Laksmi then took her seat, bowing
before the lord. Thereafter Prakrti emerged out of
the body of the lord who is adored by all the
deities,

marae qatfeenmn

SUSTROTATR PRUETT 8

TRA Torco fAAT

Fagrqeoreyferarareereregreratteen: i119 21

arat a aderarrdtensfasrgea

srett wager gut grifartyrtie 30

STOTT: MRAM A AAT ST TT

faprimeng a aq:waReraiT Tox

agar & YTS USAT ot

ANU gered UK UYU TM

UN areut arg arad faadt adh

wore Wea: fren gore F garam gi

She having the lustre of the molten gold, was
putting to shame the lustre of crores of Suns. He
face wore the serene smile on her face. Her eyes
resembled the lotus flowers of the winter season.
She was clad in red costumes and was adomed
with the gem-studded ornaments. All other
goddesses like the goddess of sleep, lust, hunger,
thirst compassion, faith and forgiveness, owe
their origin to her, besides all other saktis. She is
of terrific form with hundreds of arms and is also
known as Durga who removes all miseries. She
is the strength of the soul and is the mother of the
entire universe. She holds a trident, a sword, a
bow, arrows, conch, disc, club, lotus, vajra,
kamandalu, ankuga, pasa, bhusundi, danda,
tomara, ndrdyandastra, brahmdstra, rudrdstra,
parjanyastra, varundstra,  agneydstra and

gandharvastra are held by her in her hands as
her attributes. She, the chaste one, stood before
Krsna and started reciting prayers to him.

wafteart
ag wphritera ween werafenit
TSCM FAT a MAATTTT 1911

Prakyti then spoke : “I am the nature, Isvart,
Sarvesvari, possessing all the forms and
omnipotent. The entire universe moves because
of me.

A YB A Waa aS WaT UAT:
afer Wet Bet a deat a Afar: ect
You are not the exclusive creator of this

universe, but you are its lord, the movement,
protector, creator, destroyer and its creator again.

ay aur a te deat aerat fate:
Torraet ai ee area
wayatraret o Tet: TAT TATU eH
wea wHTanget afi a: ava fas
quectoran faupate Way aco

For the creation, you become the creator, the
destroyer for distraction and even Brahma is
born out of you. I therefore bow in reverence and
pleasure to the blissful one like you. O lord,
Brahma fall from the grace with the fist
twinkling of an eye. The one who can create
crores of Visnu with the strength of his arms,
who would be able to recite the glory of such a
great personality like you.

armniy fedg tarcergira

ufger: aft ar Sait: eae wreney citer ¢ 8H

Similarly you are competent enough to create
innumerable moveable and immovable creatures,
Brahma and other gods, besides the goddesses
like me in the universe, quite playfully.

ufuind died ae urraydang
nethang aencigh feared fan
ae array f werertiaegc UH

=== PAGE 16 ===

14

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

You have the complete form and I therefore
bow in reverence to you. You possess the
universal form which is the base of the universe
in which resides the god of death. I bow in
reverence to the great soul like you.

aa wigremes safawpierarca:!

Aer xg w ah a ae a waa: TUN aI

The one whose prayers are beyond the
recitation of Brahma, Visnu, Siva, the Vedas and
Sarasvati and the one who is beyond the nature, I
adore the same lord with reverence.

aa fagai det: wig wees ceTT:

facta ah: ara: wily at Frits Tareq vi

Even the best of the well-read persons besides
Sarasvati are unable to recite his glory. The one
who is aimless and beyond attraction, who could

eulogise him. Therefore I bow in reverence to the
great lord.

seagea at ent wafaerat at

Bare eat stot Fega FAT e ei

Thus praying and bowing to Lord Krsna, the
goddess Durga took her seat over the lion throne.
Thereafter the gods eulogised the goddess Durga.

ofa gated et FORA TET:

a: Weare 8 wet ada: Gate g
gat cet Wg wraen Aa ania Bate
ware aerer aft arent stat: YTAIc ol

Thus the one who recites the prayer in the}:

morning, composed by the goddess Durga in
favour of Lord Krsna, at the time of adoration, he
achieves victory and pleasure everywhere. The
goddess Durga never deserts him. He attains
glory in the ocean of the universe and ultimately
he reaches the abode of Hari.
Ferars difairatare eetremit guia
ae Geitetseara: 1 31

=== PAGE 17 ===

14

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

wa ugatsera:
Chapter-4
Emergence of Kamadeva, Rati and others

‘atferearet

a arya ACPO CHAT: |

Uarntearctenre Sat cent wATET gi

Yacaariart watcteareyfie

faruct somata anfestt ar wetferaT 2

age W: feet wt ge wT

eraterre ated aimee 3 1

Sauti said : “Thereafter, from the tip of the
tongue emerged a beautiful goddess who was
spotless like the crystal, pleasant and quite
glorious. She was clad in white garments and
was holding a garland of victory in her hands.
She was known as Savitri. The chaste goddess
stood before the lord with folded hands and she
started offering her prayers to the lord with her
neck cast downwards.

wiagara
waa adda wat TERA: WATT!
rena yard fafa PSA
gga afer eat wafaeras at
sare state teat Gta gfe tt

Savitri said : “You are the seed of all the
creatures and are the flame of the eternal
Brahman. I bow in reverence to you. The one
who is beyond the reach of everyone, you are
dark complexioned and spotless, Brahman.
Saying this and smiling, Savitri the mother of the
Vedas, bowed before lord Hari, took her seat
over the gem-studded lion throne.

anfadys aeRO WATT: |

UAT QUARTET: 1G
Teh wenfe waar wget anftary
aan wea Ba wareha wfeT: oN

Thereafter, out of the mind of Lord Krsna, a
male deity having the lustre of molten gold,

=== PAGE 18 ===

BRAHMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 4

15

emerged, who could pierce through the minds of
all with his five passionate arrows. That is why
the well-read people call him the god of Love or
Kamadeva.

wer at arropatearrer anftrit am

ayardta cfr welt Brgenftatt ¢ 11

trys waat at apt afeat wi

aif Fa care waahe wea: gn

From the back of the god of love, an
extremely beautiful damsel who happened to be
a paragon of beauty emerged. She could attract
all the people. The mind of all the people felt
attracted towards that beautiful damsel. She was
therefore given the name of Rati.

aft et TM We Tsar RE TEI

Teaenes TA WRATH aA got

rat want dar Beret Bleoh TM

wat TSaoTarat faufa a1 au

amnifsera water erat aroraderat

Wa: Wa Wary Tyga 8211

va eer was Ya: Wat ay zt

Ta Tet Wea Te ATA 8311

Both of them bowed in reverence to lord Krs
na and thereafter they took their seats over the
gem-studded thrones. Kamadeva carried a bow
of flowers and the arrows which were known as
Marana, Stambhana, Jrmbhana, Sosana and
Unméadana. In order to test the effectiveness of
his arrows, Kamadeva shot all the five arrows at
the same time. As a result of this all the people
became passionate. Finding Rati there, the semen
of Brahma fell but Brahma, the best of the yogis,

concealed the same with his costumes out of
shame.

aed creat ae sacral: Tees
SiemreTaTy Aiea ASAT BEI
wurst opt waale: weitere
frearaargn are Wafers rR 84 1t

Thereafter that costume was flown by the lord
of fire with his rising flames like the tall tala
trees. Finding the flames of fire rising, Lord Krs
na created water with the mesas of his yogic
powers. He then started dropping the drops of
water with his breathing.

fate eraamre qaferguct fis

wa fefersaerant af@ grt aerrt BI REI
aa: maf caferdrnfsatorat ar
snfanit: qaramertetefitaant gett
Soe ATTA: YA ARNT: BT:
wenfeargediset weet areat afer: ett

© Brahmana, with the drops of water
emerging from his mouth, the entire universe
was submerged in water. A few drops of that
water extinguished even the fire. The fire was
extinguished with that water ultimately.
Thereafter with the touch of the water, the water
god appeared in person who was given the name
of Varuna. The water thereafter became the
abode of all the aquatic animals.

onfadya atet aegatrarda: 1
WT ware afeueti at waeha afaUT 1 eg
weara arate tar aya TT
aeureiife fawarar ears frat wittt Zon
Then a girl was born out of the left side of the
god of fire and was known as the wife of the god
of fire. She was known by the name of Svaha,
out of the left side of Varuna a girl emerged, who
was known as Varundni, the spouse of Varuna.
aya wear: sthaanitt-areargat
He MOTE Maat Aare RTR TH 8
wee aatainaratara ear aye
art: walt ata at aract afcaiticaring au
The wind god was born out of the breathing of
the lord who indeed is the life of everyone. The
air one inhales while breathing is reflects him
indeed. A girl also emerged out of the left side of
the wind god known as Vayavi, the spouse of
wind.

=== PAGE 19 ===

16

pore arrantts Ya: Wat ay Bl

Wet A aR Trae Yea eB
Tea gered ay Bl

wat wenenrg aR fate Wa Bi Ve
weacinfaat fete caftatt:
RUE: sft TEATTAA: TEM VGH

Thereafter because of the arrows of love, the
semen of Lord Krsna also fell but he placed the
same in the water in that assembly. After a
thousand years it emerged in the form of an egg.
From that egg a gigantic universal form came
out, which happens to be the base of the entire
Universe. His single hair-pit could accommodate
a complete universe. It is harder than the hardest
and nothing else is bigger than it.

Ba Wemyss Fores eA:
Weta: a aga: Waleare: VAT REI
Teta War: W Vary GM Wet

ayagett at eet rer aaotaeitquratu 29

It happens to be the sixteenth amsa of Lord
Krsna and is also known as Mahavisnu and who
happens to be the base of all. He reclines in the
waters of the ocean like the lotus leaf floating
over the water surface. From out of way of his
ears two demons were born.

at sored UyETa Tet Sayan

ARTaOT wat at aot Ben

aya Bet geen ered Fee wat:

ate ate feet at a tat HTT IH

Both the demons then intended to kill Brahma,
but Narayana placing them over his thighs and
killed them. The earth was bom out of their
bodies, earning her the title of Medini. She
accommodates the entire universe. She is also
known by the name of Vasundhara.

oft sttrardad wegen ganas dtferpiendtay

‘afefreatt

if AT Age seaa: ns nt

a

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

=== PAGE 20 ===

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

Be TAASeATT:

Chapter-5
Establishment of the routine of the Goloka
and emergence of Radha and other
cowherdesses

vite sare
Tnthanted weit fe fren: fe J afer:
wm dteterd ay SATA AET AH tH
Saunaka said : “Are the cows and the
cowherdesses also available in the Goloka or are

they imaginary? Please, tell me to remove my
doubts.

alfireara

walfagel wm: aeget: Were qeurefeerar:|

walfegteaat sare aifert fas 0

wa eae aye aw anraurmeath

were were eareat Feet at eepftiar aT gn

Sauti said : “O Brahmana, the cows, cowherds
and the cowherdesses reside in the initial
creation, as I have already told you and they
merge in the form of Krsna at the time of
dissolution. In the beginning of the universe,
only Mahesvara and Narayana alone are present.
Both of them with the nature remain at the time
of dissolution.

wale germerer Uftt afin fan

anrenaactt at waftentit stefan x

areanrerens aeres fafeeat ya

an OMe Geant sat af aN GN

aed Sai aot ao afetia ager

Farrer veutiengifged gt arg

O Brahmana, I have narrated first of all the
characters of the Brahmakalpa. 1 shall now
describe the Vardha-kalpa and Padma-kalpa.
You please listen to it. Because of the
differentiation of Brahma, Varaha: and Padma
there are three types of kalpa. As the four yugas

=== PAGE 21 ===

BRAHMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 5

17

like Satya, Treta, Dvapara and Kali move in a
chronological manner, similarly the kalpas too
move accordingly. A divine yuga consists of
three hundred and sixty yugas.

Teen 7 fart garter: |
agdsty ayy Tag Tat fern
A manvantara comprises of seventy-one

divine yugas. After the passing of fourteen
Manus, a day of Brahma is counted.

faye weateenierad a wenT:1

aot add feta hater ci

WHAT HOTA WATE: |

Tange wer: arefakarrarea: i git

After the expiry of three hundred and sixty
days, a year of Brahma is completed. Thus
Brahma is believed to live for a hundred and
eight years. The same period has been prescribed
by Lord Krsna. The people well-versed in the
scriptures have prescribed the age of Brahma,
equivalent to a kalpa.

Grae age vanes: AM:

AARC T AHVS AT TAT: Roll

There are several small kalpas known as
Samvarta. Markandeya is known to have lived
for seven kalpas.

wey feta a cet: ufvatfat:1
fata wafeeepraghratierq een

But this kalpa equates with a single day of
Brahma. Therefore in the seven days of Brahma,
Markandeya completes his age.

Teanrewsy 7a: ae Frafta:|
aor aargts werent Premera gz

There are only three kalpas known as Brahma,
Varaha and Padma. Now you listen to the
creation of each one of these kalpas.

wret a Bett apr ae Ble aa F:1
eeeretste Hear STAT WAT: 3M

During the Bradhma-kalpa, the earth was
created out of the bodies of Madhu and Kaitabha.

After the creation of the earth, the creator created
the creatures on earth with the permission of the
Lord Krsna.

fea TST SIT MTAATATTT: 11 BS

In the Varah- kalpa, the earth which had been
submerged in water after dissolution Lord Visnu,
taking the form of a boar, rescued the earth and
the world was inhabited thereafter.

wet fawiifiea aerate fatrin
facitat garciterai Frretteard fart 4 tt

Thereafter in the Pddma-kalpa the creator,
created the universe seated over the lotus
emerging from the navel of Lord Visnu. All the
three worlds up to Brahmaloka were created by
him and not the three /okas of the upper region.

Wy aeiwryh oferaTt
fafaferanot gb: fa qa: stgfresfan ggu

I have told this story relating to the creation of
the Universe. What else do you want to listen to?

vires sare
aa: Wi fs teat erararaat aft:
Waragr fs wear ay carergTefan yout
Saunaka said : “After this, what did Krsna do

and what other universe did he create? Please
enlighten me about the same.

‘atfrearea

wa: WEF Tete Teta wey:

URART STE Teh TTS

Wa: Baraca ae Ret

TRU ReTgATOT HAs aAETH

faaiet a gar gfe wosciiger ee

Sauti said : “Thereafter, Lord Krsna, the lord.

of Goloka, went to the place of the divine dance,

| after completing the above creation. The place of

the divine dance was located in the beautiful
grove of the kalpavrksas (or wish fulfilling
trees). The Rdsamandala was arranged in a

=== PAGE 22 ===

18

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

circular fashion and looked quite charming (from
a distance.)

PAT ERLAGET FHT
ahrerreparagatautafiegaa 2 011
Ugganbageh Taree: |
RARE Tae: VATA e aH
agen fatorusarat frenifefit: |
Tardtasafert: yorurferenfat: 12 211

It was decorated with the sandal-wood trees,
aguru, kasturi and vermilion. The curd, boiled
paddy, powdered barley and rice were showered
over it. The sandal leaves tied in silken cord were
serving as an item of decoration of the place. It
was decorated with the trunks of the banana tree.
Three crores of mandapas were decorated there
with the best of gems illumining the earth. The
lamps made of gems were lighted there. The
place had the fragrance of flowers and incense.

Terroirreargayeuratery
aitaeferarenrraergth: Teta 3 3 It
wa teat a a: aed Agare seat:
Ger we faferares aay rear 2x

A large quantity of cosmetics and perfumes
was stored therein. Lord Krsna arrived there with
all his companions. All of those present there
were immensely surprised at the sight of the
place.

aifadya ater pore arrada: |
enfacar qorariia earaet wit: Wan Van

At the same time, a girl emerged out of the left
side of the Lord Krsna. She rushed at once and
brought the flowers and she started offering them
at every step of the lord.

TR He Tete TT aes Se TEI

BA WaT TaTeATAT WTfeafsahESTAN 2 & It

O best of the sage, she was given the name of
Radha by the intellectual because she was born

in the stage of dance and had started running
about the lord.

mroerergeet AT BOTT WATT: |
anes wont: sropatstt wire V1
She became the lady of the life of Krsna and
she became dearest to him because she had
emerged out of his own body.
eat teyeniar zadtardgat
afeatyararn afera Ure Bei
She was youthful and of sixteen years of age.
She was clad in the garment of the complexion
of the molten gold. She was quite beautiful and
youthful and a smile over her face.

qareng afar gahy a Fai
gefaraanrat castorate 2 811
aapfafrarcagetereren

raf fararereq ahs area 3 ot
meardurntergriergEgVre
areetafeat Urey eager 3 Bit
@inegfatireareara wate
aulugafataa mesg @ fait au

She had extremely tender limbs. She was the
best of all the beauties. She had developed
breasts and the pelvic region. Her face was like
the flower and the lips were red. She had the
teeth like the pearls and her face possessed the
lustre of crores of moons. Her eyes were
beautiful and looked like the lotus of the winter
season. Her nose was more beautiful than the
beak of Garuda. Both her cheeks were shining
like a mirror.

eedt areatt o rarer
PATEL ArH AGA 3B
faafagigmgation wate

Beep Serargt wrevitareagferq 3s
rena Yat eect Ait

MTS wegri a fawn 3 yu

She was adored with all the gem-studded

ornaments which decorated her ears. The
cosmetics like sandal-paste, aguru, kasturi,

=== PAGE 23 ===

BRAHMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 5

collyrium etc., were applied on her face which
added to her beauty. Her well arranged hair was
decorated with the jasmine flowers. The
beautiful damsel had arranged her hair in a tuft.

Tet adit a a STE

RETARTATOT STATA HATE 3 & I

at drat wagragom

ARAN Wer YAANETTN 31911

aera suri

arimanttfaared Gat uftfawdti 3 ¢ 1

aa dare ifr tafaerat atl

sare aferar a: Wet PETZ V1

Her walking was graceful. She wore the
garlands of gems, the best of forest flowers, gem-
studded armlets and anklets and several other
ornaments of gems and precious stones. She
talked to Lord Krsna and with his permission

looking smilingly at the face of her lord she got
herself seated over the gem-studded lion throne.

weg cine: galt TACT:
sifadya Rio Sct a ATA YON

At the same time the cowherdesses emerged
from her body, who were as beautiful as she was.

meatcufiiia: yargearatar:|
dentate demat Aree After: Hy eu
They were crores in number. They were all

youthful. The intellectuals in Goloka have spelt
out the number of Gopikas like this.

wore Rs ell TTT BA
afer wir Aas a TATA

At that very moment, the cowherds also
appeared from the body of Lord Krsna, who had
a similar beauty and form.

fagentfenttfit: aerial wttet:1

tenfatge wert accra WT: gates

The srutis pronounce that the number of the
cowherds in Goloka is thirty crores.

pura caging: aaanfadea &1
aaTauit Toy weaaP AAT: es

19

At the same time several young cows also
emerged out of the body of lord Krsna.
acitaat: qeagy acer arte: YM:
aritactert: yarat seat & areas 4H
Which included the bulls and the cows of high
breed of the lineage of Surabhi, besides the
calves. Some of them were the Kamadhenu
cows.
Tarts acitad arfefaeet ae
forara wedt sot areara WTS TTI SI
Lord Krsna gave away a beautiful bull which
was quite strong resembled to crore of lions to
lord Siva, to serve him as his mount.
pongracet gaufshten
afadya wear eitgacraaferam x01!
Fares Tes Wea
areas cat Heat gerot a Aaa
Thereafter the geese were born out of the feet
of lord Krsna which included males and females.
Out of those, the one who was the most beautiful
was given over by the lord to ascetic Brahma.
arreutet faraRRO WTA: |
aor: DeRTOTTAT ENA WATT SN
Farts w dard eat areas a
edt trates thitear YTAAHEN Go
The white complexioned horses emerged from
the hole of left ear of the lord Krsna. The lord of
the cowherdesses, delightfully gave away one of
the white horses to Dharma, to serve him as his
vehicle in the assembly of gods.
aaah fares grata
anfanfar fareafSrtererere eran aT & RU
Thereafter in the assembly of gods from the

hole of right ear of the lord a group of lions
emerged which was very mighty and strong.

Barts eal Ho: WHT TTA!
Sree oat TafraTSaTTN 4 Bt

=== PAGE 24 ===

20

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

He handed over one of the lions to the goddess
Durga, besides a boon and a garland of precious
gems, in addition to a boon.

got ate arian wagaT
qarcrafratat waren wateTTN 4 31

Krsna, the lord of the yogis, created fine

divine chariots which were made of pure gems
and which moved with the speed of the mind.

adem a wet a ya

Pah aa maraaterpetarT 4 wil

Tare aaa STAA AT

wormetrerarront arteries fererarTN & & tt

The height of each one of them exceeded a
lakh of yojanas and the width was a hundred
yojanas. Each chariot had a lakh of wheels which
moved with the speed of the wind. Each one of
them had a lakh of sport halls, make-up rooms
and innumerable materials for consumption and
the beds were innumerable. They were adorned
with innumerable lamps and the horses.

aMifestataated Warne TITY

Toatonqared ying SeraTAt- 14 KU

afaqatyatryarnetfayfiery

TOR ERT ores TET ATTA 4 19 11

arranger aoa |

TRineniGia gets gery cI

They contained various types of paintings.
They were further adorned with charming
kalasas (vases), the mirrors of gems, ornaments
and the fly-whisks. Like the gold heated in the
fire, costumes, the illuminating astonishingly
beautiful garlands of gems, besides the gems,
decorated the place.

edt arrears dat we fester:
eH Sear Treas TAT PATA 4
O best of the Brahmanas, Lord Krsna then
handed over a set of gems and ornaments each to

lord Narayana and Radhika and the rest were
kept by him for himself.

a ery Fae Teer aa: WT

fagees gore: figetar mt: FENG oll

oufanfear oat area F year: BAT:

Us Var WHAT TIP RMIT G gi

Thereafter a Pingala purusa emerged out of the
private parts of lord Krsna, together with others
of his companions. Because of their birth out of
the secret parts of lord Krsna, they were known
as Guhyakas. The chief among them was later
known as the lord of riches as well as the
Guhyakas.

aye arent dar Hat arraeda:1
Rast a eat Gator wires Vit

A girl was born out of the left side of Kubera.
That beautiful lady was subsequently known as
the wife of Kubera.

yeiafryrrerey HoTVvSTeTATAT: |

Sarer fargrarereerfeeer PRATT: 1 3
aRueTaenftot safer:
Waeeanitart: we varreagysr: 1 & wil
fates: quefert wryuorafia:)
safer: unfaesr qeorer adh BANG It

The goblins, Pisacas, evil spirits, Kdsmandas,
Brahma-raksasas and Vetalas also appeared from
the secret parts of the lord. O sage, then some
attendants emerged out of the mouth of lord Krs
na. They all held conch, disc, club and locus; and
were clad in the yellow lower garment. They
were four armed and were of dark complexion.

All of them were adorned with the kirifa crowns,
Kundalas and the gem-studded ornaments.

aguarariaie edt arraore et
Taare yarsagTT TNE gH

Lord Krsna gave away the four armed
attendant to lord Narayana. Similarly the goblins,
Pretas, were presented to lord Siva, while the
Guhyakas were given over to Kubera.

faye: varrauiiy Sree aT: |
aes FTE Tat YET gol

=== PAGE 25 ===

BRAHMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 5

21

area Fagen calareiarers aer:)

anfanfer deren WS FOTTTAUT: 11 211

yerangeraatgt: argent: ATRET: |

anata: UreUeeaTe Ua TATAT: 11 & BU

Thereafter two armed attendants emerged out
of the feet of lord Krsna. They had dark
complexion and held the garlands of victory in
their hands. The best of these attendants always
were devoted to the feet of lord Krsna. Sri Krsna
entrusted them with the duties of attendants.
They emerged for faithfully serving the gods. All
of them felt emotional with tears flowing out of |
their eyes and their speech was choked. Their
minds were completely devoted to the auspicious
and tender feet of the lord.

snfeeyg: Orel waTaTEAZA: |

Fagerate erate ggTST: 1119 0 11

ferment Terarat Saerafraferarent:|

& drar weraem: feragessy Fara 0 gH

Terrific looking men holding tridents and patt
isa also emerged out of the right eye of Lord Krs
na. All of them possessed three eyes each and
were adorned with crescent type of crowns over
their heads. They were all of gigantic size and
had no costumes on their bodies and illumined
the place like dazzling fire flames. They were
called Mahakala Bhairavas and resembled Siva
in glory.

Raa eTHTOTEN safest: |

venraacargtaast Aat: BAT: Bh

Rudra, the god of death, destruction, time,
anger, terror, Mahabhairava and Khatvanga are
known as the eight Bhairavas.

aifadya Fora aaa!
fayerafgyrerprentra reat: 11193
feoratt wernraferarareat:!

aH Sorat werent Perot: ev

A terrific man was born out of the left eye of
lord Krsna. He held a trident, pattiga and a club.

He was clad in tiger’s skin. He was Digambara
and Mahakaya and possessed three eyes. His
head was adomed with the crescent crown and
was known as Igana. He happened to be the
jeader of the Dikpalas.

siete afr: Sauer: sea: |

anfadyg: qoorer arferenrferarteeit 9 4 tt

Thereafter Dakinis and Yoginis emerged out
of the nostrils of lord Krsna, besides hundreds of
Ksetrapalas.

quitanrfedwam fergie at:1

snfadyg: wea ya a yee: 0

Then three crores of gods emerged out of his
back side having the best and the divine
appearance.

pia stormrdad merge difaviireniae Teas

ate framat are WEeATSEATA: GU

=== PAGE 26 ===

BRAHMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 5

21

wy UETSeMT:

Chapter-6

Sti Krsna hands over Laksmi to Narayana
and spouses to other god

tifireara

arm Bit wereealt wat a ATT

ATION HEY TAS ATTA Bl Rl

wafer gent wrarghi ata areTy

Ta ara Brea HAT TATA 2

sen aT aT aepalt as eq: WyMAT:|

wet aed edt quent at Sued wera

aa: PearagT wae Afra TET

sara frenfierd yet: fagarteta xi

Sauti said, “Thereafter lord Krsna handed over

to Narayana, Laksmi and Sarasvati, quite
gracefully, adorned with all the ornaments
besides the precious garlands of gems and pearls.

Similarly he handed over Savitri to Brahma,
Marti to Dharma, Rati to Kamadeva and the

=== PAGE 27 ===

22

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

Beautiful Manorama to Kubera. Thereafter lord
Krsna handed over the wives of all the gods. The
one who emerged out of the body of a god was
given over to the same god. Thereafter lord Krs
na summoned lord Siva, the best of the yogis and
said to him, “you better accept the goddess who
rides on the lion.

sigora aa: sean vemdterctea:|

Bare vie: TOT: WTO SEPA ETAAN GN

Siva smiled on hearing the words of lord Krs
na and he meekly spoke to lord Krsna.

siimeat sara

aePISé a Tare weft wrpat ae

aaranacratedt crerarifanerieq & tt

Taal arrerafeeAry

Tphaorcerant w wana arAafEATAH 911

Lord Siva said, “Like an ordinary man I am
unable to accept (the goddess of) nature, because
she is going to detract my mind from your
devotion and would obstruct the path of serving
you. She can overshadow the true knowledge;
she is the door of the yogic practices, can.
suppress the desire for salvation. She is
passionate and could increase passion in a
person.

qraTsaent a reeatisary

TaaTTS Ut Fei Freeform cu

vategiart uglier

watgarrant a farranfaareinn <u

She can destroy the tapas, store of illusion;
she is the strong base of the terrific worldly
bondages; all leads to the evil ways, destroy of

the noble ideas, always deprived of the noble
path.

Fanta yfeuit wa at fe welt

wet agent Tet ager AAT Qo

Because of this I need no spouse. I am
desirous of seeking a boon as it suits my mind.
You may kindly grant it, because the lord always
grants the wishes of all.

meahafaet reat cera seas hry
Giada ATTA TTEAAT VA
My devotion for you is always on the increase.
I do not feel satisfied by serving you reciting the
name of Rama.

TATA UGA YOR WFAA
EO ATT PATTER 82H
While awake or asleep, I intend to recite your
name with all my five mouths and wander in the
universe.
arecrateate a aqueaaaTy!
atrantard a att aafs wr ean

For crores of kalpas I meditate on you. I was
therefore never attracted towards passion.

waaay TA st aera

wdafaatat a feat fact oq ew

eri She anya: staat a1

RTS ATTRA SAAN RH

ado arene fet Acer

at ate Mate Fae afer 8411

By serving you, adoring you, reciting your
name, I derive the divine pleasure. A short
detraction from your meditation unnerves me. O
Lord of the boons, in order to recite your
qualities and your name, japam, kirtanam and to
get engrossed in your beautiful form, to serve at
your feet, bowing in reverence at your feet and to
eat after offering you first, are the nine types of
Bhakti (devotion) which may be granted to me, ”

witeeeraecranite waciaany!

adhe ufgaai aie yet yfafat favitn gon

O Brahmanas, those who are well aware of
salvation and hell, to stay in the world, to
achieve a stage equivalent to the lord and to get
absorbed in him, are known as the six types of
salvation.

aaforer caferer safer: wena fear Ta
Stored w atgred a aderrerenfera C1

=== PAGE 28 ===

BRAHMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 6

23

ards qeraut RTT

anfeatg: augue’ ae deduteram eeu
arrest a wated frgatspreyt By:
atrenife atti arnt a aah an on
ay: atfecda: wet autores a
raat weiehy TTA TAN 2 aU
queat att wadtraavelerory,

art adagay aerinayiam 2 eu
Tard da ward faut a ot TEM
adshreeten aecttentt wht at 23
waletrat ade afaentt a aft a

wa afracigrs ett wef sregiqn est

To achieve the tiny or small forms, to attain
something, failure to express the desires, glory,
attain godhood, overpower, to become free from
all the desires, all knowledgeable, to be capable
of listening to the words spoken at a long
distance, vak-siddhi, getting all the desire
fulfilled, capability of creation and destruction,
to be eternal, to become the best or the foremost
of all are known as the eighteen types of
achievements. The yoga, tapas and all types of
charities, vows, glory, truthfulness, fasting,
visiting all the holy places and having a bath
there, adoration at other sacred place, worship of
Devas, cirucumambulation of the seven
continents seven times, to have a bath at all the
oceans, to visit all the heavens, the Brahmapada,
Rudrapada, Visnupada and the Supremepada and
all other things which are beyond the human
thought do not equate with even the smallest
particle of your glory.

ces cet aren Hore aifirtt ye

wWeeatlard gat Uet BATEMAN V4 I

On listening the words of the teacher of the
yogis, lord Krsna smiled and pleasantly spoke
the sweet words.

sthrreanrqaret
wdat ge we we wdfictan
acuaiferd aaqut wae REN

areufert @ a fagri aft am

Brat dona at YT aT TeTTU Vou

Lord Krsna Said, “O Siva, the best of the
intellectuals, you serve me regularly during day
and night, for a hundred crores of kalpas. O lord
of the gods, you are the best of the ascetics,
siddhas, yogis, intellects, Vaisnavas and the
gods.

aS TY We Ter AST TEM

wefatg a deer wad a AAT RCN

srreraenont urd citeran ar wate

areata RPA aorat aera fora 231

TUSAMT AAT HEAT AeTAT watt

MOAT IST TA RATT AAI OI

Overcoming death you became eternal.
Therefore with my boon you achieve all the
siddhis, knowledge of the four Vedas and the
knowledge of all the four worlds, with the boon
granted by one you would be able to witness the
fall of innumerable Brahmas. O Siva, from today
itself, you shall possess the intellect, glory, age,
prowess, valour and strength like me, because
you are dearer to me than my life even and there
is no other person more devoted to me than you.

raed afer B tated wet: ots

A wat Praha unftcar arte fererraT: 113 gH
Wert & aren aaeagigarath
aeratenard a aerate feat fran azn

You are greater than my soul even. No one
else is dearer to me than you. The sinners,
foolish and un-enlightened people who denounce
you, they suffer in terrific hell till the sun and the
moon last. O Siva, you will achieve Prakrti after
the lapse of a hundred crores of years...

metal a aet wer areal
eats ated a eta a3 gn
Tart a aared w Ter acafearal
Werat wets wnt feet ataeaen 31

=== PAGE 29 ===

24

OG ueea part afterfa a Hera:
a Raet ae eae weeny WERT |G
You therefore comply with my truthful words.

I shall not agree to your present request. O Siva,
you will obey my words and you will perform
according to your words when you accept Prakrti
as your spouse and enjoy the love sports and the
worldly pleasures with her for a divine thousand
years. There is no doubt about the same. You are
not a recluse alone, but you are an Igvara as well
like me.

alel Yet wees aN ora a1
BS F areaant aera sofort fea gai
weit cara goa a arf + afraan
wet Hef A Se Ser Heranferat 39 tt
aofa wert Reraqaer wi Uf
faahg: ufatiat cat qeratfiarqy ci
ufadisufadt ante auowpattseran

reper: Feary pike farina: 13 31h

ga at: ueivaes oft fre dary

areas a ar ogatt oft watson

Tes carton arg Sifeencd wate

saferan ar Foren vet wepttrefeel Ferany 211

The self born Isvara has to perform at times as
householder, a tapas and a yogi. The mental
agony you have stated in relation to dwelling
with a wife one gets only in company of the
degraded ladies and not the chaste one. The one
who is born in a well-established family, has a
spotless parentage and the one who abides by the
family norms, such a lady serves her husband
like a good son. Because for the ladies born in
the high families, the husband is the closest
relative, the lord and the god even though he
might be the degraded one, poor and the one
devoid of all the riches. While the ladies born in
the lower class whose parents are not good
nature, they become immoral indeed. Such
women always denounce their husbands. The
chaste lady who considers her husband even

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

greater than both of us, she enjoys the company
of her husband for crores of kalpas in the
Goloka, O Siva, the Vaisnavi Sakti shall bestow
welfare on you while remaining in your
company.

Taga a at areal wghafa ware a
per aihrge wateors atehyaRAT 2H
diet aget dye wer VETTE: |
wefirot dat a: Ufa AER
aifeeet a thee Het a FET Wel

ort att yartert fafracangaferorqu ws

3 eafrerea tieiere waetaat: AAI

qenantterpieusetrarysatshs ST ys

wren fers aaET aaenourgd fafa

Sarre fire rege RTT & I

ararghammng: frategreireraq

frafagrht war wit deta aq

weer Wa: Une feracirs a rsh von

With my command you accept that chaste lady
as your wife. Those who shall make the linga
and yoni_from the earth of the holy places and
worship the same, such people who have
controlled all their senses, adore them in the
prescribed style of Paficopacara, he resides with
me in the Goloka for a crore of years. He never
falls back from the Goloka and he ultimately
becomes like us. Thus by making the libga from
day, dust and ashes, collected from the holy
places, adores it, dwells in the heaven for ten
thousand kalpas. By adoring Sivalinga the noble
people achieve the people, land, knowledge,
sons, riches divine knowledge and salvation with
the adoration of Sivalinga even an unholy place
gets sanctified and even when a sinner dies at
that place, he is carried to the place of Siva.

werta verge were anes:
URTENAT HRTRAAATRATOTAAAT IY CH

By repeating the name of Mahadeva thrice or
the one who recites his name, all his misfortunes
vanish.

=== PAGE 30 ===

BRAHMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 6

25

forafa vexqeard wroerata at at:1
sfesanfsrararargey Gfen wenfet Awe

The one who breathes our repeating the name
of Siva, he is relieved of all the sins accumulated
for the last several births and achieves salvation.

foreenrarcraet aearat yfearerany
aerate a fret: afta: 0

The word Siva devotes welfare and welfare
leads to salvation. By reciting the name of Siva,
one achieves welfare or salvation. This is the
reason why Mahadeva has been given the name
of Siva.

fade eraent frre: stewart
Foret wreath crercrefgre ATG gu

At the lord of the treasure and the close
relatives, if the grief stricken recites the name of.
Siva he achieves welfare.

met ate finer oar qfeang we

urmedt wherat ort ferereta weathers 114
feretfer a fered are area afer waar
aafemanfart urd rea vate Farr 4 311

The word Siva consists of two letters which
means the destroyer of sins and which means the
one who bestows salvation. This is the reason
why Siva is called the bestower of welfare and
salvation. Those who always recite the name of
Siva, are deprived of all the sins earned by them
in the crores of births.

Bye Yes Hot ra Heads WAY!

ae BeEaraaeaTeAT 4 wt

Lord Krsna, thus speaking to Siva, the holder
of Sula, bestowed on him the hymn of
Mrtyufijaya (The one that overpowers death)
which was ‘ike the wish fulfilling tree. He then
spoke to Prakrti, Durga who rides the lion.

shterrarqara
oer fag act we theta aH fae
are afsreatat fore frag a FerarerrTN 4 QU

Lord Krsna, said “O Damsel, you remain here
with me for the present in the Goloka. After

sometime you will serve lord Siva who bestows
welfare on all.

aay wtarmnfings arn
deer Scrwates aferar wary fare &

You would appear from the tejas of all the
gods, you shall kill the demons and shall then be
adored by the gods.

Wa: Bourne a aed Teg VAR
safaar earn et ypiter vighfea yon
Wa: wet dene ay Aye Prem

erat errata afer wedi ay cn

Thereafter in Satyayuga in a particular kalpa
you shall be born as the daughter of Yaksa and
then shall become the spouse of Siva. Thereafter
you will end your life in the yajfia of Daksa in
protest against his denouncing Siva and shall be

reborn as Parvati from the womb of Mena, the
wife of Himalaya.

feat ataga a faeftata vim
ut aa: ade oS cifieafany en
You shall enjoy the company of Siva for a

thousand years. Thereafter, you shall always be
identified with your husband Siva.

aret Way fady were yt
safer afta a yrediar yeaft § ol
mig arte yfsa wea
wat afetctd Aaa UTEOTH & BIL
O Goddess of all the gods, every year you will
be adored at appropriate times by the people in
the winter season. You will be adored in all the

villages and towns and you will be known by
different names at different places.

Tarn fragrant

eifate faarent wat tga § Ui
afaate wert vata uftarar:!
antdarriernnt farses wernt: 1g 311

At my command, you will be adored with the
prayers and Tantras composed by Siva. I shall
arrange for stotras and the kavacas for your sake,

=== PAGE 31 ===

26

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM.

by which your devotees shall achieve great glory
besides achieving dharma, artha and moksa,.

a ai urifieata youd a ara
aati ame sites otart a asa gw
sean agit ae watarayer
Set Aaa AANA AAA G 4 HI
O Mother, those of the auspicious people who
will adore you in the sacred land of Bharata vars
a, their glory, popularity, devotion and riches
shall go on increasing. Saying this lord Krsna,
presented her and bestowed on her eleven

mantras together with kamabija. Each one of this
mantra is the chief of the mantras.

aaart fate cart sith AeATYHETAT

srorararrdtered eat Wah SETTING GH

aeatettrat wits wafers a are

afefopicngard a wel adh fay gon

The lord then advised her of meditating in a
formal way and thereafter the: ten-letter mantra
(or Dasaksara) was projected before her. Side by
side the things useful on earth like the Prowess,
all the siddhis, which fulfil all the desires, the
best of the knowledge of the elements, were also
bestowed on her.

waraenert wat grat wea STU:

wari citrated vremea wa fee C11

O Brahmanas, thus lord Krsna, gave away to
Siva the Trayvodasaksara mantra and also the
kavacas with the stotras.

ara ania @ wai fated dea a

ame age dea Has w aaa eH

ua gate at wares UT

fafa stare goad faangiafitta a: 01

Then the knowledge of accomplishment
(siddhi-jAdnam), the best of the knowledge of

Tantras and mantras were also given away to
Kamadeva, Agni, Kubera and the wind-god.

Thereafter mantras were also given away to
Kubera and others. Then lord Krsna, who
happened to be the creator of the creator,
commanded Brahma the creator, for the creation
of the universe.

add oat: Gen fet oe

ats He Tent fad arrfaat TTT BI

SQeT Tat Ha ett wet wT

ware aed MARTE STAN 2H

Lord Krsna said, “O Lord of destiny, by
performing tapas for me for several years, you
create various types of creature in the universe”.
Saying this Sti Krsna handed over a divine
garland of gems to Brahma, lord Krsna then left
the place accompanied by the cowherds and
cowherdesses under the shade of the sandal tree.

ofa strated verge difagireniane TeRavs

gfe Pracnt arr wetseTa: et

=== PAGE 32 ===

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

By WANTS:
Chapter-7

Creation of the Earth, mountains and
oceans etc. by Brahma.

‘aifaearet
Wal Ta aa: Het fates wer aaferary
WET Yfactiorat wachewreATH gH
Wee WAT WEAVE
garters ga: warren Fema 31
ie da dort werd a fearerag
sed Fase a Yao TTT BH
WARE Be aarehaferer aa:
aatis IEEE AAaTEM FreMTTT Yi
rate ranaatag emrematar
RTARTA fens TOTAAL 4H