=== PAGE 1 ===

Se

Brihat Parasara
Hora Sastra

MAHARSHI PARASARA

wate cere art
TRCAULIMAT ATT MITT

. YOLI

English translation, commentary,
annotation and editing

by
R. SANTHANAM

@

Ranjan Publications
16 Ansari Road, Darya Ganj, -}
New Delhi-1 10002 ot

_~e Ne

=== PAGE 2 ===

CONTENTS

Ch. Details - Page
Preface by translator - 10

1, THE CREATION 17
2. GREAT INCARNATIONS (OF THE LORD) 2

3. PLANETARY CHARACTERS AND DESCRIPTION ° 24
Names of planets, benefics and malefics, planetary
governances, cabinet, complexions, deities, sex, com-
pounds, castes, description of planets from Sun to
Ketu, Saptha Dhatus, Ritus, planetary tastes, stre-
ngths, trees, Dhatu, Moola & Jeeva divisions, exalta-
tion and debilitation, additional dignities, natural
Telationships, temporary relationships, Upagrahas,
effects thereof, calculation of Gulika etc., Gulika’s
exact position, Pranapada, etc.

4, ZODIACAL SIGNS DESCRIBED 48
Importance of Hora, Names of signs, Limbs of Kala-
purusha, classification of signs, 12 signs described,
and Nisheka Lagna,

5. SPECIAL ASCENDANTS 62.
Bhava Lagna, Ghatika Lagna, Hora Lagna, Use of
special asccndants, Varnada Dasa and effects of
Varnada.

6. THE SIXTEEN DIVISIONS OF A SIGN 67
Names of the 16 vargas, Rasi and Hora, Decanate,
Chaturthamsa, Sapthamsa, Navamsa, Dasamsa,
Dvadasamsa, Shodasamsa, Vimsamsa, Siddhamsa,
Bhamsa, Trimsamsa, Chatvarimsamsa, Akshave-
damsa, Shashtiamsa, Varga classification, etc.

=== PAGE 3 ===

4

7. DIVISIONAL CONSIDERATION

Use of the 16 divisions, Hora, Decanate and Trimsa-
msa effects, Vimsopaka strength, Vimsopka propor
tional evaluation, other sources of strength, Dasa
effects with Vimsopaka strength, names of bhavas,
indications from houses, etc. .

8. ASPECTS OF THE SIGNS
Sign aspects, planetary aspects, aspectual diagram etc.

9, EVILS AT BIRTH
Short life combinations, evils to mother, evils to
father, and about parents.
10, ANTIDOTES FOR EVILS

11, JUDGEMENT OF HOUSES

Indications of houses form Ist to: 12th, Prosperity or
annihilation of a house. .

12, EFFECTS OF FIRST HOUSE
Physical comforts, bodily beauty, other benefits,
coiled birth, birth of twins, to be nurtured by three
mothers, Moon equated to ascendant, decanates and
bodily limbs and affectation to limbs.

13. EFFECTS OF THE 2nd HOUSE

Combinations for wealth, and for poverty, loss of
wealth through the king, expenses on good accounts,
fame, effortless acquisition, eyes, truthlessness.

14, EFFECTS OF THE 3rd HOUSE
Female and male cobom, number of brothers and
sisters, adverse planets.

15. EFFECTS OF THE 4th HOUSE
Housing comforts, miscellaneous, relatives, long-

living mother, happiness to mother,’ quadrupeds,
dnmbriess, conveyances.

91

105

109

118
120

126

132

137

142

=== PAGE 4 ===

16.

18.

3

EFFECTS OF THE 5th HOUSE

Happiness through children, no offspring, death of
first child, difficult progeny, adopted issues, 3
mothers and 2 fathers, many children, obtaining
daughters, questionable birth, mean children. child
at the age or 30, 36, 40, 32, 33 and 56 and number of
children. .

, EFFECTS OF THE 6th HOUSE

Ulcerfbruises, relatives affected, facial diseases,
leprosy, diseases in general, timing of iltness, unfortu-
nate years, loss through enemies, inimical sons and.
fear from dogs.

EFFECTS OF THE 7th HOUSE

Sick wife, excessive libidinousness, death of wife,
many wives, miscellaneous matters, worthy spouse,
evils to spouse, loss of spouse, lack of conjugal

- felicity, time of marriage, timing of wife’s death,

19,

21,

three marriages and shortilved wife.

EFFECTS OF THE 8th HOUSE

Long life, short life, Saturn and 10th lord in fonge-
vity.

). EFFECTS OF THE 9th HOUSE

Combinations for fortunes, fortunate father, indigent
father, long living father, wealthy and famons father,
virtuous and devoted to father, fortunes, inimical to
father, begged food, combinations for father’s death,
fortunate periods, lack of fortunes.

EFFECTS OF THE 10th HOUSE

Paternal happiness, performing religious sacrifices,
royal patronage, carnal pleasures, ornaments, cessa-
tion of duties, learned, wealthy, lack of virtuous acts,
obstructions to activities, combinations for fame.

145

152

160

169

173

178

=== PAGE 5 ===

2,

23.

24,

26,

27.

28.

6

EFFECTS OF THE ith HOUSE 183
Many gains, income in Nishkas, no gains, wealth
through coborn,

EFFECTS OF THE 12 th HOUSE : 186

Expenses on good accuunt, beautiful houses and bed,
begetting a spouse, planets in visible and invisible
halves, going to hell, final emancipation, wandering
in the country, earning through sinful measures,
expenditure on religious grounds. .

EFFFETS OF THE BHAVA LORDS 189
Effeete of the 12 bhava lords in various houses (total

144 combinations), clues to sort out mutually contra.
dictory effects.

EFFECTS OF NON-LUMINOUS PLANETS 236
Dhuma in vatious houses, Vyatipata in various
houses, Paridbi in various houses, Chapa in various
houses, Dhwaja in various houses, Gulika in various °
house, Pranapada’s positional effects with

reference to natal ascendant,

EVALUATION OF PLANETARY ASPECTS 254
Planetary aspects, aspectval evaluations, Special rules

-for aspects of Saturn, Mars and Jupiter,

EVALUATION OF STRENGTHS 263
Sthaana bala, Sapthavargajabala, Ojhayugmarasi-
amsabala, Kendradibala, Drekkana bala, Digbala,
Kaaiabala, Paksha bala, Tribhagabala, Varsha-Masa-
Dina-Hora bala, Naisargika bala, Ayana bala,
Motional strength of Sun and Moon, Drighala,
planetary war, motional strength for Mars etc.,
Bhavabalas, Shadbala requirements, Bhava effects,
Eligibility to issue predictions.

ISHTA AND KASHTA BALAS . 289
Exaltation rays, Cheshta Rasmi, beneficial and malefic.

=== PAGE 6 ===

29.

30.

3L.

33.

34,

7

fays, benefic and malefic tendencies, nature of effects
due to digbala etc.; Saptavargaja bala and ishta
kashta, effects of a bhava.

BHAVA PADAS

Method of Pada calculations, special exceptions,
Padas for planets, Pada and finance, Pada and
financial losses, Gainful sources, 7th house from Pada,
General.

UPA PADA

Upapada calculation, effect of 2od from Upa pada,
wife from the 2ad of Upapada, about sons, obtain-
ment of many sons and many daughters, coborn from
Lagna Pada, other matters from Lagna pada.

ARGALA OR PLANETARY INTERVENTION
rormation of Argala, Argala effects.

. PLANETARY KARAKATWAS

Atmakaraka defined, importance of Atmakaraka,
other Karakas, Yogakarakas or mutual coworkers,
house significance.

EFFECTS OF KARAKAMSA

Karakamsa in various signs, effects of planets in
Karakamsa, Rahu-Sun in Karakamsa, Gulika in
Karakamsa, effects of aspects on Ketu in Karakamsa,
effects of 2nd from Kaiakamsa, 3rd from* Kara-
kamsa, 4th from Karakamsa, 5th from Karakamisa,
6th from Karakamsa, 7th from Karakamsa, 8th from
Karakamsa, 9th from Karakamsa, 10th from Kara-
kamsa, 11th from Karakamsa, 12th from Karakamsa,
planets in Sth from Karakamsa.

YOGA KARAKAS

Nature due to lordships of planets, natural benetios
and malefics, angular and trinal lordships, angular
lordship, Rahu and Ketu, Planets & Aries ascendant,

“292

303

3u1

316

327

340

=== PAGE 7 ===

35.

36,

37,

38.

39,

41.

8

Taurys ascendant, Gemini ascendant, Cancer ascen-
dant, Leo ascendant, Virgo ascendant, Libra ascen-
dant, Scotpio ascendant, Sagittarius ascendant,
Capricorn ascendant, Aquarius ascendant, and Pisces
ascendant, General,

NABHASA YOGAS

Formation and effects of Rajju, Musala, Nala, Maala
Sarpa, Gada, Sakata, Vihaga, Sringataka, Hala,
Vajra, Yava, Kamala, Vapi, Yupa, Sara, Sakthi,
Danda, Nauka, Koota, Chatra, Chapa, Chakra,
Samudra, Gola, Yuga, Soola, Kedara, Pasa, Dama
und Veena Yogas.

MANY OTHER YOGAS

Subha, Asubha, Gajakesari, Amala, Parvatha, Kahala,
Chamara, Sankha, Bheri, Mridanga, Stinatha,
Sarada, Matsya, Koorma, Khadga, Lakshmi,
Kusuma, Kalanidhi, Kalpadruma, Trimurthi, and
Lagnadhi Yogas.

LUNAR YOGAS

Adhiyoga from the Moon, Dhana Yoga, Sunapha,
Anapha, Duradhura and Kemadruma Yogas.

SOLAR YOGAS

Vesi, Vosi and Ubhayachari Yogas, effects of these
Yogas.

RAJA YOGAS

Kingly Yogas forming in various manners.

YOGAS FOR ROYAL ASSOCIATION

YOGAS FOR WEALTH

Yogas for affluence, effects of angular lord’s divi-
sional dignities, effects of 5th lord’s divisional digni-
ties, effects of 9th ford’s divisional dignities, angular

“387

366

384

386

387

399

402

=== PAGE 8 ===

42.
43,

45.

9

and trinal lords related, effects of divisional dignities
of the two planets related.

COMBINATIONS FOR PENURY

LONGEVITY

Pindayu, rectifications, deductions for planets in the
visible half, malefics in ascendant, ascendant’s contri-
bution, Naisargayu, Amsayu, ‘ongevity for other
living beings, full life span of various living beings,
choice of longevity, doubtful cases clarified, other
clues to longevity, further clarifications, rectifications,
special rules for Saturn aod Jupiter, increase and fall
in class of longevity, limitless longevity, supernatural
longevity, living till the end of yuga, living the life
span of a sage.

MARAKA (KILLER) PLANETS

Marakas based on lordship, maraka dasa, star groups
related to death, Rahu-Ketu as Marakas, 3rd house
and death, occupants of the 8th house, fate of the
corpse, serpent decanates, prenatal abode, ascent after
death,

AVASTHAS OF PLANETS

Infant state etc,, Awakening, dreaming and sleeping
states, Deepta and other 8 states, Lajjitadi avasthas,
calculation of Sayana and other 11 Avasthas, effects
of Cheshta ete. effects of Sayanadi Avasthas for
planets from the Sun to Ketu,

ERRATA

413

416

448

483

=== PAGE 9 ===

Preface

Presented herewith with pleasure is the first-ever English
translation of the full text of the available version of Maharshi
Parasara’s Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra. But for the blessings
of Loré Ganesa this would have been as uphill task for'me.

Sri Maha Vishnu is the god f gods. So is ParasaraHora—
the book of books in the field of astrology.

The work is in the form of a carritch between sage Parasara
and his disciple Maitreya who later himself became a worthy
sage. Parasara belonging to Vasishta’s lineage was Veda Vyasa’s
father. As could be seen in the course of progressing thorugh
the text, sage Saunaka was the preceptor of Parasara in the
inatter of astrology. Saunaka was one of the earliest sages and
was Garga’s disciple.

The date of Parasara could be attributed to be roughly the
eta of Dharma Raja of Maha Bharata. This can be understood
when the sage states “‘in the present Yuga, Dharma Raja is born
with the combination of...” He further states that Salivahana
‘will be born with the same combination...’ Further, the reader
could find statements relating to the horoscopic yogas of Maha
Vishnu, Prajapati, Swayambhu Manu etc. which statement
could possibly be made by no ordinary mortal.

Varaha Mibira in Brihat Sambita, Kalyana Varma in
Saravali and many such other illustrious authors gave references
of Parasara’s astrological statements.

Parasara Hora finds its translation in Bengali, Malayalam
etc. which translations however have not been seen by me, I
have with me the following versions.

1. Sri Venkateswata Press, Bombay, partly rendered in Hindi.
For a majority of slokas, one can find Sanskrit commen-
tary only.

=== PAGE 10 ===

1

2. Hindi translation by Suaram Jha. (Master Khelari Lal,
Varanasi edition)

3. Hindi translation by Devachandra Jha (Chaukambha
edition)

4. Hindi translation by Ganesa Datta Pathak (Thakur Prasad
edition)

After scrutinizing critically the four manuscripts, I have
for reasona of more credibility chosen the Sanskrit version
rendered by Sitararm Jha, The Chaukambha version is almost
the same as that of Khelari Lal’s.

Other versions that I have come across are :

1, Tamil translation by C. G. Rajan—for only 36 chapters,
without Sanskrit verses.

2. English translation by N. N.-K. Rao for only 25 chapters,
without Sanskrit slokas,

Thus, I have felta need to make the original version
available in English to the fullest possible extent. Our version
has 97 cbapters containing English translation and exhaustive
annotations and examples.

To handie the publication easily, we have divided the work
in two volumes. The present Volume—first volume—contains 45
chapters while the remaining 52 chapters have been put in the
second volume.

Chapter 1 and chapter 2 give some preliminary extra-
astrological information. From chapter 3, the astrological
information begins. .In this chapter, planetary descriptions,
benefics and malefics, planetary deities, complexions, sex,
primordial compounds, seasons, relationships, dignities ete. are
given. Methods of calculating the 5 Upagrahas like Dhooma
and Muburta Velas !ike Gulika are given. These are totally ten
and have their own say ona nativity, as the other nine main
Grahas have. So to say, these Upagrahas and Muhurta vela$
can alter in suitable proportions the effects due to Nava Grahas,

=== PAGE 11 ===

12

In the matter of calculation of Gulika, a different concept comes
to light from this oldest work. The later authors have given an
altogether variable in knowing Gulika’s position whereas
Parasara advised that it should be cast for the beginning of
Saturn’s Muhurta. Whoreas some suggest that it should be for
the ending Muhurta of Saturn.

In chapter 4, each Rasi is described from various angles.
Slokas 25-30 are the climax of this chapter, An unerring
method to find out the Nisheka Lagna (or the moment of
intercourse causing conception) from the time of birth is outlined.
Though the process of calculation is as simple as a school
student’s mathematical quiz, it has great truth in it which even
modern science could not discover. To prove the truth of the
statement in the sage’s instruction, a practical example has been
given by me. An assumed example cannot better solve the
problem. A practical case where the time of coitus is astrologi-
cally chosen is taken in hand; time of birth has also been got
accurately noted. From the time of birth, the time of Nishcka
(or of coitus) is traced which is not in variation, even to the
slightest extent, with the originally noted Nisheka time. Again
from the time of Nisheka, the birth time is traced in a forward
manner using only traditional rules of astrology. This exercise
proves three important points, viz.

1. The point of M.C. is to be found out in the natal boros-
cope and houses intersected accordingly. This is popularly
called Sripati Paddhati. Originally Parasara adyocated this
system, ‘

2, Gulika’s position should be found out for the beginning of
Saturn’s Muhurta only,

3, Lahiri’s Ayanamsa is the first best. The reader will find
that we have used Moon’s exact longitude in the above
process. Simple angular distance by any Ayanamsa will
not alter the solution, buta slight change in Moon’s
position will take us far away from the truth. With Lahjri’s
Ayanamsa, we can safely work out even Nadiamsas, which
change fast.

v

=== PAGE 12 ===

13

The method given by me in working out the future birth
time from the time of coition can very well help the astrologers
to foretell the exact moment of birth from the time of query.
Reseaches reveal that time of query has a perfect alignment with
the time of Nisheka.

Chapter 5 touches various special Lagnas, like Ghatika
Lagna, Hora Lagha and Bhava Lagna. The importance of these
ascendanss cannot be . underestimated. A final Bhava chart can
emerge after merging the different bhava charts caused by these
various special ascendants. This final bhava chart can only
reveal the extent of planetary effects when considered housew.se
whereas the bhava chart exclusively prepared on natal ascendant
alone can sometimes mislead. This is what the sage emphasises
in sloka 9.

Come to chapter 6, The zodiac is divided in to sixteen .
Vargas or divisions. These are called Shodasa Vargas. How to
find out such Vargas and their use are fully explained. These
are from Rasi down to Shashtiamsa. In the classification, the
vargas are made in four groups, i.e. 6 vargas, 7 Vargas, 10 Vargas
and 16 Vargas and special technical names have beon given for
the total number of desirable vargas a planet attained for easy
identification, For example ifa planet is said to be in Golo-
kamsa, it indicates that out of 16 Vargas, it is in 15 good Viigas.
These technical names appear in the gradation of Raja Yogas.

Each Varga finds a certain specific use in preference toa
planet’s Rasi position, For example, without considering the
Dvadasamsa chart no tangible resuits due to the native’s parents
can be known. In deciding one’s career, the Dasamsa positions
of the planets are of supreme importance, These are highlighted
in chapter 7. In this very chapter the sage enunciates what is
called Vimsopaka strength of a planet. He assigns a maximum

: of 20 points taking again differently the four Varga classifications,

viz. Shadvarga, Sapta Varga, Dasa Varga and Shodasa Varga.
‘The consideration here is whether a planet is placed in own sign,
friendly sign, enemy’s sign and the like in the concerned Varga
scheme. Then an evaluaton is done to get Vimsopaka strength,
This strength enables us decide the extent of auspicious effects a
planet will be capable of revealing in a dasa.

=== PAGE 13 ===

14

Chapter 8 deals with what is called Jaimini aspects on Rasi
basis. Maharshi Jaimini was the sage who expanded these
Parasari principles very extensively im Sutra form for easy
memorization and successful applicability. The original concept
is however from the pen of Parasara.

Childhood evils are discussed in chapter 9 whiie chapter 10
prescribes planetary combinations to combat such possible evils.

Basic information about the 12 houses could be found in
chapter 11 while specific attention may be given to slokas 14-16.
Thesc 3 slokas serve an important key in knowing how a Bhava
is going to give effects under various circumstances.

Chapters 12-23 give a variety of information and instruc-
tions in analysing the 12 houses of a horoscope in a systematic
manner. A closo study of these rules will tame one’s mind to
scientifically approach the horoscope for fruitful resuts,

Chapter'24 is again one of the most important chapters,
Here, the various effects of a Bhava lord being in a specific house
ate given, All the 12 lords are fully covered. How to sort out
asituation in case of contrary indications is given in slokas
145-148.

The bhava effects of Dhooma, Vyatipata, Gulika ctc.. are
narrated fully in chapter 25. Pranapada Lagna’s position vis-a-
vis natal ascendant also reveals certain special cffects as could be
seen in this very chapter.

Shadbala calculations, Ishta and Kashta phalas and other
related mathematical aspects are elaboratcly laid down in the 3
chapters, viz. 26, 27 and 28.

It is not in order if planets are studied with reference to
mere natal chart. Padas for various houses will further alter the
planetary effects, This is what is taught in chapter 29. Raja
‘Yogas, inter alia are best analysed through Arudha chart or Pada
chart. The sage suggests Graha Padas as well, but unfortuna-
tely he leaves it at that without adding much information.’

For still deeper research, Upapada will be more effective.
This area will give more clues particularly about marriage, finance
and-diseases, See chapter 30.

Chapter 31 entitled ‘Argaladhyaya’ though brief has worthy
information on planetary interventions, obstructions and effects
theredt.

=== PAGE 14 ===

15

Significance of planets is treated in chapter 32.

Karakamsa is the Navamsa Rasi occupied by Atma
Karaka. Plenets forming a certain relationship with Karakamsa
and their effects are narrated in chapter 33 extending to 99
slokas.

Chapter 34 is again one of the most instructive. Planets

-assume a certain tendency by virtue of owning a certain house.
The sage elaborately touches such roles for various planets for
all the 12 ascendants. He decides on such principles the Yoga
Karakas, Yoga Bhanga, Karakas and Marakas for each ascendant.
This will enable us understand whether planet will give bene-
ficial results or adverse effects. Death dealing planets or Mrakas
allow us to guess the period of one’s death,

” As the name implies, chapter 35 ists Nabhasa Yogas which
are available in most standard texts. Many new Raja Yogas
could be found in chapter 36, like Khadga, Mridanga, Chamara,
Kahala etc.. ~ oe

Chapters 37 and 38 deal with Lunar and Solar yogas which
are popularly known, Raja yogas in chapter 39, Yogas for
royal association in chapter 40, and financial combinations in
chapter 41 deserve Special mention, containing a variety of
authoritative information. .

Maraka or death dealing plancts bave a say on the finances
of the native apart from causing his end. These are tersely
enlightened in the 42nd chapter.

The chapter on Jongevity, bearing No. 43, is among the
most important ones. Pindayu, Naisargayu, Amsayu and the
like, and computations based on ascendant/planetary pairs
linking with movable, fixed and common signs contain instruc-
tive information. In the notes, I have taken Pindayu calculations
and worked outa fullfledged example touching all aspects of
computation. I have adopted a scientific method for deductions
for planetary contributions arising by placcment in bhayas 12
to 7. I. have simply not considered bhava positions
in these deductions but degree-wise positions of the various
planets. Ihave given one common formula covering the six
bhavas and the reader can work out the exact loss of longevity.
This can be usefully extencd to any loss of years as far as

=== PAGE 15 ===

16

bhavas 12to 7 is concerned in other systemias well. Other
longevity calculations have becn suitably annotated by me.

The reader will also do well to study chapter 44 concerning
Marakas before he takes a decision on longevity. Rahu/Ketu
have also been assigned Marakatwa roles.

The concluding chapter of Vol 1 is the 45th dealing with a
number of kinds of Avasthas of the planets. Out of these, the
12 Avasthas, known as Sayanadi Avasthas are of supreme impor-
tance. If one tries to interpret these Avasthas in proper spirit,
he willbe able to detect the diseases the native will suffer. I
have supported my views with the help of information from
Adbhuta Sagara of Ballala Sena and Hora Ratna of Balabhadra.
For example, if Mars is in Agamanavastha, one will suffer from
deep ear pains, , In the normal parlance, we consider only Jupiter
in the context of ear defects. Diseases of hand and foot are
assigned to Venus in Agamanavastha. If one conducts a scien-
tific research in the matter of diseases with the help of planetary
Avasthas, viz, Sayanadi Avasthas, one is bound to reach many
brilliant clues. .

The present work offers a vast scope for success in predic-
tive astrology. One can build up his own applied astrology
instead of theoretical astrology if he works on the lines suggested
by Maharshi Parasara.

A word of caution is necessary for the benefit of the reader,
In order to understand the hidden aspects of the various rules
given herein, what is required is a thorough understanding of
these principles. Skipping over fast to an ensuing chapter may
not convey the real idea of a ‘present’ chapter. To make the
reader’s Job easier, [ have explained every difficult aspect as
clearly as I understand based on my own experience and study of
other authoritative texts,

In the end, I would like to mention that my attempt to
translate this great work and annotate may not have been wholly
successful. I surely would have left some shortcomings unno-
ticed and unrectified. From the readers, I can only expect the
affection of forgiving me for any innocent lapses.

New Dethi ~- R, Santhanam
Vijaya Dasami 1984

=== PAGE 16 ===

sitmatera wa:
AT FCUTINCCTNAAT

BRIHAT PARASARA
HORA SASTRA
[net qentorfaticd  afreasequera4rcrerore t
sarga vtefaaresreel varie faretercareterery
I prostrate before the lotus-feet of Lord Vighneswata,
the offspring of Uma, the cause of destruction of sorrow,
who is served by Bhuta ganas (the five great elements cf the

universe) etc; who has the face of a tusker and who consumes
the essence of Kapiththa and Jambu fruits.]

AfeSwARAATEATA: ULM

Chapter 1

. The Creation

wine ghrics frertat  TeaTty!

greater waa: sfaq saute: en

anaq ! art get ger Farge

frend salfad. gro afer afetie gen
vacate faq sivst gf a gy!)

waren stgfireenit gar ae A we gn

‘ed aftefcd rat cma aa: HAH ?t

weari qferatat a ara ae freer Pett

1-4, Offering his dbeisance to all-knowing sage Parasara

and with folded hands, Maitreya said, “O Venerable, Astrology,
the supreme limb of the Vedas, has three divisions, viz. Hora,

=== PAGE 17 ===

18 Brihat Porasara Hora Sastra

Ganita and Samhita. Among the said three divisions, Hora or
genethliac part of astrology is still more excellent, I desire to
know of its glorious aspects from you. Be pleased to tell me,
“How this Universe is created ? How does it end ? What is the
telationship of the animals born on this earth with the
heavenly bodies ? Please speak elabcrately”’.

Notes : Maitreya was Parasara’s ardent: disciple. Sage
+Parasara was the illustrious father of Bhagawan Veda Vyasa.
Parasara Smriti, Parasara Samhita and the present work Para-
sara Hora are some of the immortal contributions made by
our sage.

Parasara’s preceptor was sage Saunaka, the reputed author
of Rigveda Pratisakbya and other vedic compositions, from
whom he took instructions in astrology. Saunaka was taught by
Narada, son of Lord Brahma Pitamaha in the matter of astro-
logy and others. Narada got direct instructions from Pitamaha.
These details are stated by sage Parasara in the concluding
cnapter of the present work.

The sage predicts im the course of his treatise that Saliva-
-hana willbe born in x yoga caused by relationship between an
angular lord and a trinal lor as both are in Simhasanamsa, vide
ch. 41 sloka 32, While the technicalities of the astrological
part of this statement will be understood by the reader as he
progresses with the study of this work, it will be evident that
Parasara was much before Salivahana. The era of-Sallvahana
commenced in AD 72, Since Veda Vyasa is reverentially referred
as Parasaratmaja, meaning the offspring of Parasara, Sage Paras-
ara lived during Maha Bharata era. .

Sage Maitreya’s name appears in Veda Vyasa’s Srimad
Bhagavata Purana. Maitreya was sage Kusaru’s offspring. Sage
Maitreya achieved a great deal of Knowledge in spiritual and
other topics. Vidura abandoned his kith and kin and met sage
Maitreya to achieve religious merits. :

As can be seen, our text is in the form of a carritch
between sage Parasara and Maitreya, the Master and the Disciple
respectively.

Astrology has three divisions, viz. Hora, Ganita and
Samhita. Hora deals with genethliac part while mathematical
aspects like planetary movements, strengths ec, are taught by
the Ganita branch, Samhita means a collection or compen-

=== PAGE 18 ===

Chapter 1 . : ‘ 19

dium of law, code and digest of any branch of learning, These
are like Rig Veda Samhita. Charaka Samhita, Vasishta Samhita
etc, Thus Samhita is not an original work. .

arg ose caat fax! atargagerfcor
wag wea we asa art gar an

qi ome ogenia | wagerfterom
ae Feat wat aeTgereg aq EN

mata gerry | adat | aorarfaat
anferara sarred aa: tat warenfa non

a 2a axfreqm arferera wera ati

wa sfafed ge mrad ae deat ust

5-8, Parasara answered, ‘O Brahmin, your query (so to say,
the desire to know of the intricacies of astrology) has an auspici-
ous purpose in it for the welfare of the Universe. Praying Lord
Brahma and Sri Saraswati, His power (and-consort), and the
Sun God, the leader of the planets and the cause of Creation,
Ishalf proceed to narrate to you the science of astrology as
heard through Lord Brahma. Only good will follow the teaching
of this science to the students who are Peacefully disposed, who
honour the preceptors (and elders) who speak only truth and
who are God-fearing. Woeful for éver doubtlessly will it be to
impart knowledge of this science to an unwilling student, to a
heterodox and to a crafty person. ,

Uelsramere faoerfa: rather:

qeaal smear frtofeaqatfiaa: ven

Fares: sitntafireer careers |

awit omead  queaaf ateraugon

fart wea tara aad acaafe) .
| feat corrt eae waar nee ;

aaaTermere faeqatgteeg tat

aeorerrerey fac: aufero: ez

=== PAGE 19 ===

20 . Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

:9-12. Sti Vishnu who is the lord (of all matters), who has
undefiled spirit, who is endowed witk the three Gunas although
he transcends the grip of Gunas (i.e. Gunatita), who is the
Author of this Universe, who is glorious, who is the Cause and
who is endowed with valour has no beginning. He authored
the Universe and administers it with a quarter of his power.
The other three quarters of Him, filled with nectar, are kno-
wable to (only) the philosophers (of maturity). The Principal
Evolver who is both perceptible and imperceptible is Vasu Deva.
The Imperceptible part of the Lord is endowed with dual powers
while the Perceptible with triple powers.

ererernfenfinger: seaastrafierny |

aerate stata —epaferer TAIT eat

anfereqettar ot screen aterent carerefirot ;

argtaraguisyeterat sft uarnewn

aeiwre oseeishrer eft gia.

remaster fereyta:  eierorfine: Wie vu

13-15. The three powers are : Sri Sakti (Mother Lakshmi)

with Sattwa Guna, Bhoo Sakti (Mother Earth) with Rajoguna and
Neela Sakti with Tamoguna. Apart from the three, the fourth
kind of Vishnu, influenced by Sri Sakti and Bhoo Sakti, assumes

the form of Sankarshana with Tamo Guna, of Pradyumna with
Rajoguna and of Anirudha with Satwa Guna,

sepa are mshreg: Mert yA:

Rey Sewtiessa: | weyrareagefer: neg

afream ei ot wengeregfiras:

wag eainferra earrasfirsat qa: upon

16-17, Mahattatwa, Ahamkcra and Ahamkara Murthi,
Brahma, are boru from Samkarshana, Pradyumna and Anirudha

Téspectively. All these three forms are endowed with all the
‘three gunas, with predominance of the Guna due to their origin,

agerferay = yeat | wea Acrafererca |
aferst ceremta | araaraagefa: ues

=== PAGE 20 ===

Chapter 1 21

ta anfernmmnadanifanin a,

mmareaay ait erdifa crcanteate: gen

18-19. Ahamkara is of three classes, i.e. with Satwik,
Rajasik and Tamasik dispositions, Divine class, sensory organs
and the five primordial compounds (air, earth etc.) are
Tespectively from the said three Ahamkaras,

starr afgett fre: gat ar wet
qT YRe wen atemeat fratsfe fe Qo

20. Lord Vishnu coupled with Sri Sakti rules over thé
three worlds. Coupled with Bhoo Sakti, He is Brahma causing
the Universe. Coupled wtth Neela Sakti, He is Siva, destroying
the Universe,

waiq a ootag qomen. frat
ad fe aft wey! feat fe cemreaf ugen
aq da ottg feigned ate t
Sekt pfs Torte: fir NEW
qafedt ug: ed agretafgetea:)
Gt art a aga: wearertenerfire: UR
eer | etdarmfasie: feared: |
erenitag areng tar sitatrenfire: nevi
21-24. The Lord is in all beings and the entire Universe
isin Him. All beings contain both Jeevatma and Paramatma
Amsas, Some have predominance of the former while yet some
have the latter in predominance. Paramatmamsa is Predominant
in the Grahas viz. Sun etc, and Brahma, Giva and others. Their

Powers or consorts too have predominance pf Paramatmamsa,
Others have more of Jeevatmamsa.

=== PAGE 21 ===

AATATMTHAAM CATA: WRU

Chapter 2

Great Incarnations (Of The Lord)

wegen & & waar TAT:
asia siteimegen: feat afe gfrerc! nen

1, Maitreya : ‘‘O sage, are the incarnations of Vishnu, viz.
Sri Rama, Sri Krishna etc, endowed with Jeevamsa ?

wr: pore wt far! afag: qecerat

gd gefeania at statrmfaar nau .

2. Parasara : “O Brahmin, the four incarnations, viz.
Rama, Krishna, Narasimha and Varaha are wholly with
Paramatmamsa. The other incarnations (than these, out of the
~ ten) have in them Jeevamsa too,

waareegtett | aa TRATEA |

siterat owaarat |owgedt | ada: 30

aenatt | waareta teat aeqaa

eeeeaTAat TEISMAT: WAT: BATT UNV

3-4. The Unborn lord has many incarnations. He has
incarnated as the planets (Nava Grahas) to bestow on the living
beings the results due to their _Karmas. He is Janardana. He
assumed the auspicious form of Grahas to destroy the demons
(evil forces) and sustain the divine beings.

TraSMNTT:  qaeT AAT AGATE: 1

qlee afagrer qe: atagrer quan

ama faqisaea arial wniaer a

eto nrencqaer  dfghaea | ye gH

Retstarrrreea A ATA Ashe Sea: |

arrests’ aq 8 aa Gaerfeat: wot

=== PAGE 22 ===

Chapter 2 : 23

. 5-7 From the Sun God the incarnation of Rama, from the
Moon that of Krishna. from Mars that of Narasimha, from
Mercury that of Budhdha, from Jupiter that of Vamana, from
Venus that of Parasu Rama, from Saturn that of Koorma
(Tortoise), from Rahu that of Varaha (Pig) and from Ketu that
of Meena (Fish) occurred. All other incarantaions than these
also are through the Grahas, The beings with more Paramatma-
msa ate called divine beings. -

Matriefest aq sitar 4 saitfea: |
qaifeed ateare  ceareiaeqa: isu

wep: ad gear wafa ai
waa & fasta ga: erataz aatuen

sttatafrqaretat Fe oat aaa: |
asf acta stead ascrat anafit fe neo

wa a ofed faa! ad afer wafafar
warafa afer waver afza: nee

feet assatfery area ard waiter wfghag |
wena = RreieT | Fasiea: UeRN

Tae: mena sitet wa fraft
tea ae qt are aRfr ean
8-13. The beings with more Jeevatmamsa are (mortal)
beings. The high degree of Paramatmamsa from the Grahas, viz,
Sun etc, did incarnate as Rama, Krishna etc. After completing
the, mission, the Paramatmamsas (of the Tespective) Grahas again
merge (in the "respective) Grahas. The Jeevatma Portions from
the Grahas take births as human beings and live their lives
according to their Karmas and again merge in the Grahas.
And at the time of Great Destruction, the Grahas as well merge
in the Lord Vishnu. One who knows of all these, will become
versed in the knowledge of the past, Present and future. Without
a knowledge of astrology these cannot be known, Hence every:

=== PAGE 23 ===

o4 . Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

one should have a knowledge of Astrology particularly the
Brahmin. One who, devoid of astrological knowledge, blames
this science will go to the hell called ‘Raurava’, and will be
reborn blind.

AT WETTCASATEATA: UR

Chapter 3

Planetary Characters And
Description

efad aaa tet ogra galt
dat greeted sia weet ge EN
1. Maitreya: “O Sage, you have affectionately explained

about the planetary incarnations. Now kindly detail their chara-
. ¢ters and dispositions.” .

sayy fier! scaeurfiy aingret afefeafary 1
arent aft geet satfefrearaten: vgn

dy omerteienft aetna erfifeg
eft aerratarft feqcerrreft orf t 131

2-3, Parasara : “O Brahmin, listen to the account of place-
ment of the heavenly bodies. Out of the many luminous bodies
sighted in the skies, some are stars; yet some are planets (i.¢.
Grahas). Those that have no movements are the Nakshatras (or
asterisms),

Notes ; Placed in the firmaments are many stars among
which we have, for astrological purposes, 27 stars and 7 planets.
Rahu and Ketu though recognised as planets for astrological
delineations are shadowy. These two are nodes of the Moons

=== PAGE 24 ===

Chapter 3 . 25

and are exactly apart 180 degrees mutually. Their positions are
formed when the Moon crosses the ecliptic from northern latitude
to southern one and vice versa.

meat wit aeha aad 2g Awe
waren anteede afearariz-aargar: wen

aqetanfaarmeg «grat Rarfaetaet: |
afaat uma: afa oerecalfcdaar: wx

uaitgadt ant aga afar t

wenit-faatireat wei fared wan EN

4-6. Those are called planets (or Grahas) that move
through the Nakshatras (or asterisms) in the zodiac. The said
zodiac comprises of 27 asterisms commencing from Aswini. -
The same area is divided in 12 parts equa} to 12 Rasis (or signs)
commencing from Aries, The names of the planets commence
from the Sun. The sign rising is known as Lagna (or the
ascendant), Based on the ascendant and the planets joining
and departing from each other, the native’s good and bad effects
are deduced.

Notes : Planets move in the zodiac through stellar man-
sions or Nakshatras. The names of the 27 Nakshatras are :

1. Aswini 2. Bharani . 3. Krittika

4. Rohini 5. Mrigasira 6. Arudra

7. Punarvasu 8. Pushyami 9. Aslesha

10. Makha 11. Poorva Phalguni 12, Uttara Phalguni
13. Hastha 14, Chitta 15. Swati

16. Visakha - _ 17, Anuradha 18. Jyeshta

19. Moola 20, Poorvashadha 21, Uttarashadha
22. Sravana 23. Dhanishta - 24, Sathabhishak

25. Poorvabhadra 26. Uttarabhadra 27, Reyvati

The names of the planets are given in sloka 10 of this
chapter.

The ascendant is a very importat point in the horoscope.
It is the sign that rises in the east, on the latitude of hirth, The
apparent rising of a sign is due to the rotation of the earth on its
own axis at 2 rate of motion causing every degree of the zodiac

=== PAGE 25 ===

26 : Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

seems to ascend on the eastern horizon. Approximately, two
hours are required for a sign to pass via the horizon, thereby
every degree taking four minutes to ascend, This duration,
however, is actually dependent on the concerned latitude. .

Actually the Sun has no motion. His is an apparent one
as viewed from the Totating earth. Other Planets including the
nodes have varied rates of motion. The average daily motions
of the planets, which are not, however standard, are as follows :

The Sun 7 1

The Moon 2 13--15°
Mars : 30—45°
Mercury ": 65—100'
Venus + 62—82°
Jnpiter > 515’
Saturn 2 2
Node : 3

With such different motions, a planet forms various aspects
with others. These aspects through longitudinal distances have
a great deal of utility in astrology. This is what the sage sugge-
Sts to be considered,

fiat aeragrerti dat: ataramena:t
Grgrengara — afrdeat gon
7. Details (of astronomical nature) of stars be understood

by eneral rules while [ narrate to you about the effects of
planets and signs,

Notes : Planetary movements can be fully understood from
astronomical literature and Samhitas, Narada Samhita, Garga
Samhita, Vasishta Samhita etc, are hinted at by Parasara, by
“general rules” or UIP WR. This May well mean other
ordinary literature devoted to stellar movements.

afena wre aa: dat aria qatar
ma Ga eqer: rat: fawerat eget feat et

eaeaaegaa: Med we Tegad: PRET
wart afer. dart orftecmeg nen |

=== PAGE 26 ===

Chapter 3 27

8-9, The positions of the planets for a given time be taken
as per Drikganita, And with the help of Rasi durations appli-
cable to the respective places, the ascendant at birth should be ¢
known. Now I téll you about the castes, descriptions and
dispositions of the planets.

wy Gat tara NAMA _qAATaT |
4
Oe we wt ag: Rgeta waver ugot
10, NAMES OF PLANETS : The names of the nine
planets respectively are : the Sun, the Moon, Mars, Mercury,
Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, Rahu and Ketu. .
Notes : {n the Sanskrit literature on astrology, the planets
are denoted by different names. Please see. ch. 2 of my English
translation of Horasara, for additional information in this .
regard.

ware: efteteg-erg-taa: |
wT, Haag atea:, RTE LAAT TA ULI

11, BENEFICS AMD MALEFICS : Among these, the
Sun, Saturn, Mars, decreasing Moon, Rahu and Ketu (the
ascending and the descending nodes of the Moon) are malefics
while the rest are benefics. Mercury, however, is a malefic if he
joins a malefic,

Notes : That decreasing Moon and increasing Moon are
respectively a malefic anda benefic is the view conveyed by the
sage, Yet some exponents and commentators hold the following
view : .

When the Moon is ahead of the Sun but within 120°,
she has medium strength. Between 120° to 240° she is very
auspicious, see Sfrmtret. From 240° to 0° she is bereft of

«strength. This is Yavanas’ view, vide P. 70 of my English
Translation of Saravall. This view is, however, related to the:
Moon’s strength or otherwise, while waning Moon (Krishna
Paksha or dark half Moon) is a malefic and waxing Moon
(Sukla Paksha or bright half Moon) is a benefic.

Should the Moon be conjunct a benefic or aspected by a
benefic, she turns a benefic, even if in a waning state,

=== PAGE 27 ===

28 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

-As regards Mercury, we have clear instructions from
Parasara, that he becomes a malefic if he joins a malefic. If
waning Moon and Mercury are together, both are benefics,

wait @ feararat aa: FATT: |
aed get gd: tet ae arvitsatam: wer

set = sragadt wytinarra:

safafa: srqat: taataaTaqra Hae uegn

12-13. PLANETARY GOVERNANCES ; The Sun is the
soul of all. The Moon isthe mind. Mars is one’s strength.

Mercury is speech-giver while Jupiter confers Knowledge and
happiness, Venus governs semen (potency) while Saturn denotes
grief.

Notes : The degree of benefic effects of the indications
mentioned above will be commensurate with the strength of the
concerned planet. If the Sun is strong, one will have a matured
soul and will make abundant spititual progress. Knowledge and
general happiness will be well acquired if Jupiter is well-disposed,
Grief will not be there, if Saturn is bereft of strength,

feat go canat Aare aad rca 1

ai cepa afaal geariat nevu

Seat vfagara Bar eanfggeget |

aa ster a fax! qaidta sfafaraa nex ;

14-15. PLANETARY CABINET : Of royal status are the
Sun and the Moon while Mars is the army chief. Prince-
apparent is Mercury. The ministerial Planets are Jupiter and
Venus. Satura isa servant. Rahu and Ketu form the planetary
army, .

ware france «ntkerrat frarec:)

meqEay: FH TR gafeart gaara ugg

wtorat geia: qe: saraeada a1

wens we gato mad freed! Wgvit

1. *—Leader of elephants, animals etc.

=== PAGE 28 ===

Chapter 3 29

16-17. PLANETARY COMPLEXIONS : The Sun is
blood-red. The Moor is tawny. Mars who is not very tall is
blood-red while Mercury’s hue is akin to that of green grass,
Tawny, variegated and dark are Jupiter, Venus and Saturn in
their order.

aqurafatasm fayfasts: afar feat
gafatat aartt a dar aay wT Tugs

18. PLANETARY DEITIES : Fire (Agni), Water
(Varuna), Subrahmanya (Lord Siva’s son following Ganesa),
Maha Vishnu, Indra, Sachi Devi (the consort of Lord Indra)

and Brahma are the presiding deities of the 7 planets in their
order,

Notes : The deities or Adhidevatas of the plancts as given
above may be invoked to get the respective planets’ afflictions
cured. For example, evils indicated by Mercury can be brought
under control by offering prayers to Sri Vishnu Bhagawan.

The names of the planetary deities are additionally emp-
loyed by Varaha Mihira in selecting a name for the child. The
consonants and vowels are attributed to the seven planets as
under,

ep Sun : The Vowels (12 in number from ¥ to att)
YuuuwuMoon : Semi Vowels viz. 4, % T and 4
: Sibilants viz. w, ¥ and 7
: Aspirate viz. z
Yost, Mars : Guttural viz. §, @, 4, 7 and =
Seer Venus : Palatals viz 4, 6, 4, and 7
{fledue tome Mercury : Cerebrals viz. 2,3, 3, @ and 4
{uden Jupiter : Dentals viz. a, 4, %, & and t
{weliou Saturn +: Labials viz. a, %, 4, Wand T . .

The name of the child can be selected with an initial letter
as above based on the stronger of the two, viz. natal ascendant
lord and Navamsa ascendant lord. For example, if Mars is
stronger, the name can have a guttural in the beginning appropri-
ate to the presiding deity. In this case, Subrahmanya is the
deity and the name can be Kumara (§4T%) or Guha (gg).
Similar deductions can be suitably made in other cases. If the

=== PAGE 29 ===

30 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

initial letter belongs to a planet without dignity, it will bring bad
luck, . .

Likewise, the Nakshatras too have presiding deities. Any

‘ affliction caused to natal star by way of malefic occupation or

by eclipses at birth_or ina future date, can _be warded_ off’ by

suitable _propitiation to the deity concerned. The 27 deities are

denoted below :

Aswini ‘Aswini Kumara
Bharani Yama

Krittika Agni

Rohini Brahma
Mrigasira Moon

Arudra Siva

Punarvasu Aditi

Pushyami Jupiter

Aslesha Raho

Makha Sun

Poorva Phalguni Aryama

. Uttara Phalguni Sun

Hastha Viswa Karma
Chitta Vayu

Swati Indra

Visakha Mitra
Anuradha Indra

Jyeshta - Niruti

Moola Varuna ©
Poorvashadha Viswadeva
Uttarashadha Brahma
Sravana Vishnu
Dhanishta Vasu (aa)
Sathabishak Varuna
Poorvabhadra Ajacharana
Uttarabhadra Ahirbudhanya
Revati Poosha

A_malefic_planct in_a particular star_will yield its evil
effects i lated ta For example, if Ketu

1s in Krittika in the 9th house, the evil effects due to father will
be given by Ketu in Sun’s dasa (related to Krittika). Hence
propitiation of Fire god will counter the ‘possible evil.

=== PAGE 30 ===

Chapter 3 : 31

Alternatively, Lord Ganesa representing Ketu may also be
pleased suitably. .

aatal ot teat a aadtgaq fra!)
aa: Wares fader angel al qeeraruren

19. SEX OF THE PLANETS : Mercury and Saturn are
neuters. The Moon and Venus are females while the Sun, Mars
and Jupiter are males.

afingiraetaaa: wrt fra!)
oo abrdtat agrnt a aeensitft carey uz0u
20, PRIMORDIAL COMPOUNDS : The Pancha Bhootas,

viz. fire, earth. ether, water and air are respectively governed by
Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn.

Tere faraot’ goreY afrat fra! 1

nfrratedt araecit eft: at fasta! eeu

2, PLANETARY CASTES : Jupiter and Venus are
Brahmins, The Sun isa royal planet while the Moon and

Mercury belong to commercial community. Saturn rules the
Sudras (4th caste).

siteqiaa: aed qaqat crea}
qagreigat | aamgfret few! un
22. Satwik planets are the Iuminarics and Jupiter, Venus

and Mercury are Rajasik while Mars and Saturn are Tamasik
planets.

Notes : The Satwa, Rajas and Tamasik natures of planets
will have a say on the disposition of the native. For further
information, see my notes, vide P. 51 of Saravali.

+ wafgraqandragee: fata ! 1
fresrpfest eleva garters? fir! negu

. - 23. DESCRIPTION OF THE SUN : The Sun’s eyes are ;
honey-coloured. He has a square body. He is of clean habits,
bilious, intelligent and has limited hair (on his head),

=== PAGE 31 ===

32 : Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

Notes : Much additional details could be gathered from
my notes in ch. 4 of Saravali and ch. 2 of Horasara, The native
will be influenced in appearance, disposition etc. by the strongest
planet or the ascendant lord or the Navamsa ascendant lord.

agaress: ‘seam = avagigea! 1

wae = aSany RIATAT: URW

24. DESCRIPTION OF THE MOON : The Moon is
very windy and phlegmatic. She is learned and hasa round
body. She has auspicious looks and sweet speech, is ficklemind-
ed and very lustful.

ae uta dhagetarenfe:
frompfan: ott oo garmeamafan! uaxn
25. DESCRIPTION OF MARS : Mars has blood-red

eyes, is fickle-minded, liberal, bilious, given to anger and. has
thin waist and thin physique.

agetss: frezarea  gftgierefanga: |

fare amar far! arearpfaera ure

26. DESCRIPTION OF MERCURY: Mercury is
endowed with an attractive physique and the capacity to use
words with many meanings. He is fond of jokes. He hasa
mix of all the three humours.

qgamat get feet qdaent
warp dla xéerenfarmea: nxt

27. DESCRIPTION OF JUPITER : Jupiter has a big
body, tawny hair and tawny eyes, is phlegmatic, intelligent and
learned in all sastras, .

get array ses: qatadt ait: gat
stared marfiredtsharea amet: WRN

28. DESCRIPTION OF VENUS : Venus is charming,
has a splendorous . physique, is excellent or great in disposition,
has charming eyes, is a poet, is phlegmatic and windy and has
curly hair,

=== PAGE 32 ===

Chapter 3 33

Notes : The word gat in the text has many purports like
happy, virtuous, charming etc, Since Venus is a charming
planet, the said meaning ‘charming’ has been used.. However,
I do not imply that Venus is not a virtuous planet efc.

sudhiag: wife  faggerafrerere: 1
equantseaa: aq: eeasat frst! uren
29, DESCRIPTION OF SATURN : Saturn has an emaci-

ated and long physique, has tawny eyes, is windy in tempera-
ment, has big teeth, is indolent and lame and has coarse hair.

gerarat oateagaaeatsie = aiat: |

arangtaat ata equtgecra: faret gon

30, DESCRIPTION OF RAHU AND KETU : Rahu has
smoky appearance with a blue-mix physique. He resides in
forests and is horrible. He is windy in temperament and is
intelligent. Ketu is akin to Rahu.

afea Teed ASAT eT wer aaag a!
erqrareares sta qutaat fw! vagn

31. PRIMARY INGREDIENTS (OR SAPTA DHATUS) :
Boncs, blood, marrow, skin, fat, semen and muscles are respecti-
vely denoted by the planets from the Sun etc.

Notes : The Sun and others upto Saturn rule the Sapta
Dhatus or primary ingredients of the body, as denoted above.
Their strength or weakness indicate safety or otherwise to the
‘Dhatu concerned. For example, if the Sun is afflicted at birth,
the native is liable to suffer disorders of bones, breakage of
bones, and the like. The native will incur disorders of blood if
the Moon is primarily ill-disposed. Similarly other aspects of
the Dhatus may be considered.

‘aareamad «=o afgaterdiat ata wt
Sree ara: Tatas: ATA NAAN
32. PLANETARY ABODES : Temple, watery place,
place of fire, sport-ground, treasure-housc, bed-room and filthy

ground ; these are respectively the abodes for the seven planets
from the Sun onward.

=== PAGE 33 ===

34 . : Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

Notes : The abodes denoted have varied uses, particularly
in horary astrology. If, for example, Mercury is related to the
recovery of a lost article, it will be near a sport-ground. If it
is Venus, it is in the bed-room, and so on and so forth,

TUTATARGRTATATAT fra li
qatatat waraiar fafade faster! 133n

33. PLANETARY PERIODS : Ayana, Muhurtha, a day
(consisting day and night), Ritu, month, fortnight and year:
These are the periods allotted to the planets from the Sun to
Saturn. :

Notes : The durations cited can be related to the maturity
of an event, particularly in horary astrology and in Dasa bhukti
judgements. Should the Sun, for example, be related to the
fruition of an event, it will be in about six months,

Ayana is the time taken by the Sun to complete one
course—northern or southern im the zodiac. This is about six
months. The Moon indicates Muhurtha, which is equal to
48 minutes. Ritu is approximately two months or the time
required for ths Sun’s transit of two Rasis.

The period indicated by Rahu is 8 months and Ketu
3 months (vide sloka 46 of this ch.). Also see sloka 18, ch. 4 of
Sarayali which states further use of these indications.

RE-ATT-ATT- AAAI -HTITHT:

sam aa fasta: aatatat tigen

PDR LANEGARY gf ASTES 2 Pungent, saline, bitter,
mixed, sweet, aciduous and astringent. are’ respectively tastes
lorded by the Sun etc.

Notes : The strongest planet will give the native a pen-
chant for the particular taste ruled by it. Alternatively, one may
like the taste denoted by the 2nd lord or the planet conjunct the
2nd lord. The planet jn the 2yd too has 2 say in the. matter.

many are thus related, the strongest one prevails,

qasat afet gd cfa-wtet a afert
afrak qagara feat adtaz ayn

=== PAGE 34 ===

Chapter 3 . 35

fama aftavaa-ga-dhr wafer fx oad
waar ay aot tat fee war festa! gen

eer gate: pu: alear shige: feet

ater dieagét wet grearaasat: uz0n
aderengdrati aad} after
waqqqacret = afadt «dtd: gc

35-38. PLANETARY STRENGTHS : Strong in the east
are Mercury and Jupiter. The Sun and Mars are so in the south
while Saturn is the only planet that derives strength in the west.
The Moon and Venus are endowed with vigour when in the
north. Again, strong during night are the Moon, Mars and
Saturn while Mercury is strong during day and night. The rest
(i.e. Jupiter, the Sun and Venus) are strong only in day time.
During the dark half malefics are strong. Benefics acquire
strength in the bright half of the month, Malefics and benefics
are respectively strong in Dakshinayana and Uttarayana. The
lords of the year, month, day and Hora (planetary hour) are
stronger than the other in ascending order. Again stronger than
the other in the ascending are : Saturn, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter,
Venus, the Moon and the Sun.

Notes : Indicated in the first instance are directional
strengths or digbala. The following are the directions related to
a horoscope,

East : ascendant g 4

North —_: 4th house or the Nadir > F
West : 7th house or the descendam *
South : 10th house or the meridian ©

These are to be reckoned only fromthe ascendant and not
from the Moon.

Jupiter and Mercury have Digbala in the ascendant. The
Sun and Mars acquire this strength in the 10th house; Saturn does
so inthe 7th, The 4th Bives directional strength to the Moon
and Venus. The planet gets no Digbala if it isin the opposite
sign with reference to its Digbala house. For example, Saturn
has no Digbala if he rises.

The. use of Digbala is : TJ i i jl

The pianet with Digbala_wi
direct the native fruitfully in its Dasa periods to_the Fespective

-

=== PAGE 35 ===

36 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

direction lorded by it, If Jupiter is in the ascendant, the periods
of Jupiter will give success in north-east, the direction ruled by
it. The directions of the planets may be understood as under :

The Sun — cast

Saturn = west

Venus — south-east

The Moon — north-west

Mars —— south

Mercury — north

Jupiter — north-east

Rahu — south-west

Conversely. if one_undertakes_living_in or_journeying to

the directio: bya planet without directional strength,
there will be obstructions and losses.

To understand other strengths, the reader is referred to
Sarayall, Past I, my English translation and notes thereof in
this context.

qat wrafa eqery gdnry aagae:t
aititatera wr: weary NTIBA: URE
gemet oa gat gest apart)

ateany qageea od dat: ear fea ! von

39-40, RELATED TO TREES ; The Sun rules strong
trees (i.e. tree§ with stout trunks). Saturn useless trees, the Moon
milky trees (like rubber yielding plants), Mars bitter ones (like
Jemon plants), Venus floral plants, Jupiter fruitful ones and
Mercury fruitless ones,

Note : Much information can be seen in Brihat Jataka
and Sarevali in regard to birth of trees.

ugrarsrmmfare =| guteraceaa4
faferratgeamt aceite emaqead weet
faxerat ooitaed Selftgaget fer!
ae uetttaafa: Batwa feotrera! vgn

=== PAGE 36 ===

Chapter 3 37
ge: dareat fat! qat: etki adaa
uRtatt arencer weal: aite fir fir! ua

qa porte g unaed gar at
wet fet wifag! qecaed ade given

41-44. OTHER MATTERS : Rabu rules the outcaste
while Ketu governs mixed caste. Saturn and the nodes indicate
anthills. Rahu denotes multi-coloured clothes and Ketu rags.
Lead and blue gem belong to Rahu and Ketu. Jupiter, Venus,
the Sun, the Moon, Mercury, Mars and Saturn in their order
govern saffron, silken, red silken, white silken, black silken, red
and multi-coloured robes. .

Notes : “Chandala’”’ is translated as outcaste, though it
additionally means one cruel in deeds (like a butcher, for
instance), It further means a Person illegally born to a Sudra
(4th caste in Hindu tradition of ancient days) father and
Brahmana mother. Ketu denotes a Person born through an
intercaste marriage. .

Some authorities hold the following view about Planetary
Tobes : .

The Sun—coarse, the Moon—new, Mars—burnt, Mercury
water soaked, Jupiter—of recent origin but not new, Venus—
durable, Saturn—torn, Rabu—multi-coloured and Ketu—much
tora.

qitgéeara goariier ute: 1

waet ant faatar weeda aa fare: vgn

arisht qehia: waeg fafa fir!
, areal araea craic: datafera fire! ven

45-46. PLANETARY SEASONS : Vasanta, Greeshma,

Varsha, Sarad, Hemanta and Sisira are the six Ritus respectively
governed by Venus, Mars, Moon, Mercury, Jupiter and Saturn.
Rahu and Ketu denote 8 months and 3 months respectively,

Notes : Since the Sun is the cause Of the seasons, he is
not specifically allotted any season. However, the Sun is a co-
tuler of Greeshma Ritu apart from Mars.

=== PAGE 37 ===

38 . Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

The durations of Ritus of seasons are as follows :

Vasanta — 20th March to 19th May
Greeshma — 20tb May to 19th July

Varsha — 20th July to 19th September
Sarat — 20th September to 19th November
Hemanta — 20th November to 19th January
Sisira — 20th January to 19th March

But in the matter of lost horoscopy, a different nomen-
clature is followed by many to ascertain natal Sun’s placement
by Ritu. For details, please see page 12 of my English render-
ing of Nashta Jataka.

wrgrdgaara = faviat ergetat: |
gaat qiqat are Siadaret: wren
41. DHATU, MOOLA AND JEEVA DIVISIONS : Dhatu
. planets are Rahu, Mars, Saturn and the Moon while the Sun and
Venus are Moola planets. Mercury, Jupiter and Ketu rule Jeevas.
Notes : The divisions of Dhatu (metals), Moola (roots,
vegetables etc.) and Jeeva (living beings) havea great use in
horary astrology, particularly to know the unexpressed query. If,
for example, Rahu is in the ascendant or is a significant planet in
a horary chart, then the query relates to a metal. For a fuller
appreciation, see Bhuvana Deepaka of Padma Prabhu Soori.

atg at adits smqq fanaa: 1
aatne oo agaara warfa faseres! eet
48, SATURN : Out of all the planets Saturn is the eldest
(i.e. with the highest age). He bestows maximum number of
years in Naisargika Dasa,
Aat aat at: wea wat AtaeaaT gar
waa sf | seaTTMT: vel
NTT Ta Hasca Teer sAAT AFT TAT: |
asary aaW att state: sentra Uyolt
49-50. EXALTATION AND DEBILITATION : For the

seven planets from the Sun on, the signs of exaltation are respec-
tively Aries, Taurus, Capricorn, Virgo, Cancer, Pisces and Libra,

=== PAGE 38 ===

Chapter 3 39

The deepest exaltation degrees are fespectively 10,3, 28, 15, 5,
27 and 20 in those signs. And in the seventh sign from the said
exaltation sign each planet has its own debilitation. The same
degrees of deep exaltation apply to deep fall.

Notes : Each planet assumes significance in a certain sign.
In the opposite sign therefrom, it is debilitated. Even in the
exaltation sign or the debilitation sign, it is very highly favourable
or highly detrimental as the case may be, ina certain degree.
For example, the Sun is exalted in Aries and is the most
Powerful on the 10th degree therein, In Libra he gets debilitat-
edand if be in 10th degree of Libra, he is worst affected,
Similarly suitable deductions be made for other planets.

As for the exaltations and debilitation of the nodes, there
are different views. Please see page 20 of my English translation
of Horasara for necessary information.

wa: fad. veined fattrag? eqaqs
seafiraty a — samfeastonretserm: uxen
aasstereg whrea famtagt -ett
Set Gary waqrargad Saari: uyRn
aa: TSaige: Mat fart cari
art amet sitaer feta? eaaq uyai
at qe faeimfastrr? ears
wal: Het Tatas fawtrage AA uyrit
51-54. ADDITIONAL DIGNITIES : In Leo the first
20 degrees are the Sun’s Moolatrikona while the rest is his own
house. After the first 3 degrees _of exaltation portion in
Taurus, forthe Moon the rest is her Moolatrikona. Mars has
thé first 12 degrecs in Aries as Moolatrikona with the rest there-
in becoming simply his own house. For Mercury, in Virgo the
first 15 degrees arc exaltation zone, the next 5 degrees Moolatri-
kona and the last 10 degrees arc own house. The first one third
of Sagittarius is the Moolatrikona of Jupiter while, the remain-
ing part thercof is his own house. Venus divides Libra into two
halves keeping the first as Moolatrikona and the second as own

house. Suturn’s arrangements arc same in Aquarius as the Sun
has in Leo.

=== PAGE 39 ===

40 ~ ’ Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra™

farstorrg carg-qa-ensradtanty cag gan: |
geal fevararea aralagaaon: nxn

55. NATURAL RELATIONSHIPS : Note the signs which
are the 4th, 2nd, 12th, Sth, 9th and the 8th from the Moolatri-
kona of a planet. The planets ruling such signs are its friends,
apart from the lord of its exaltation sign. Lords other than these
are its enemies. If aplanct becomes its friend as well as its enemy
{on account of the said two. computations) then it is neutral or
equal.

Notes : A simple formula is given in this sloka to compute
planctary relationships. From the Moolatrikona sign of a planet,
the 2nd, 4th, Sth, 8th, 9th and 12th lords are its friends. The
rest viz, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 10th and 11th lords from Moolatrikona
are its enemies, The exaltation sign’s lord is always friendly
even if he owns the 3rd, 6th, 7th, 10th or the 11th from Moola-
trikona. If, however, friendship and enmity occur simultanco-
usly none prevails but equality or neutrality.

Take for example the case of Mars. The Moolatrikona
for him is Aries. The 1\th Jord from there is Saturn and hence
he is inimical, But heis as wella friend, as he is the lord of
exaltation sign of Mars. Since we get enmity on one count and
friendship on the other, Saturn becomes equal to Mars. Take
again the relationship of Venus. He owns the 2nd and 7th from
the Moolatrikona of Mars, thus becoming friend and enemy
respectively. Hence he is ncutral to Mars.

See table below for an easy grasp of relationship :

Planet Friends Enemies Equals
Sun Moon, Mars, Jupiter Venus, Sat Mercury
Moon, Sun, Mercury - Mars, Jup,
. Venus, Saturn
Mars Sun, Moon, Jupiter Mercury Venus, Saturn
Mercury Sun, Venus Moon Mars,J upiter
Saturo

Jupiter Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Venus Saturn
Venus Mercury, Saturn Moon, Sun Mars, Jupiter

Saturn Mercury, Venus Sun, Moon, Mars Jupiter

=== PAGE 40 ===

Chapter 3 41

The Moon does not consider anyone as her enemy as per
the following statement of Parasara (Benares edition by
Chaukamba “aren arty <faaragatfina oat: HITTTATT: meanning
meaning further that the Sun and Mercury are Moon’s
friends while others are her neutrals. Saravali also has an
identical view.

As for Rahu and Ketu, the following may be of additional
interest.

Rahu : The Sun, Moon and Mars are his enemies.
Jupiter, Venus and Saturn are his friends. Mercury is his
neutral. .

Ketu : The luminaries are his enemies. Mars, Venus and
Saturn are his friends, while Mercury and Jupiter are his
neutrals.

SMa -aET RATT TRTCA
aaa faaat afia feats afeaat: nya

56. TEMPORARY (HOROSCOPIC) RELATIONSHIPS :
The planet posited in the 10th, 4th, ith, 3rd, 2nd or the 12th
from another becomes mutual friend, There is enmity otherwise,
(This applies to a given horoscope).

Notes : The hints given in sloka 55 are to understand the
constant relationship among planets. In the present sloka we
are advised of planets having a certain relationship based on

_ their positions, ice. for given moment. If two are mutually in 4th
and 10th, or in 3rd and 11th or in 2nd and 12th, they become
temporarily cordial to each other. Should they be otherwise,
there prevails mutual temporary enmity, This rule is very simple
and needs no explanation.

aaa @ frei a fat Aafefranqs

fad fawanad J wa: WATT NWN
an faafegea g waa cafraza :
ud fafeoa dad) oramea oe Faq UE

57-58, COMPOUND RELATIONSHIP : Should two
planets be naturally and temporarily friendly, they become
extremely friendly. Friendship on one count and neutrality on
another count make them friendly. Enmity on one count-

=== PAGE 41 ===

42 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

combined with affinity on ‘the other turns into equality,
Enmity and neutralship cause only enmity. Should there be
enmity in both manners, extreme enmity is obtained. The
astrologer should consider these and declare horoscopic effect
accordingly.

Notes : The final relationship, as a_ result of natural aod
temporary dispositions is called 5-fold relationship, or
aaat au, The same is shown below in an easy form: .

Speculum of Compound Relationships

One Another

relationship relationship Net relationship
Friendship + Friendship Extreme triendship *
Neutrality + Friendship Friendship .
Enmity + Enmity Extreme enmity
Neutrality + Enmity Enmity

Enmity + Friendship Neutral

It is understood that if there is friendship with enmity,
then also neutrality will prevail,

eatea Ya wet go faster qreafaay |

eadisd feat? og qari satfaay inven

Tan aad tet ay Aare |

aaqgeat aq me fae: Eol

59-60. RATIO OF EFFECTS : A Planet in exaltation gives

fully good effects while in Moolatrikona it is bereft of its auspi-
cious effects by one fourth. It is half beneficial in its own house.
Its beneficence is in one fourth in a friendly sign. In an equal’s
sign one eighth of auspicious disposition is useful. The good
effects are nil in debilitation or enemy’s camp. Inauspicious
effects are quite reverse with reference to what is stated,

Rinieufaeranieg aga: afgat <r: 1
ant aa nga: adadfaarae: ween

=== PAGE 42 ===

Chapter 3 43

eal wget: Wet eadtardsy saz:
aagdtss caddis: afeaatsiaataga Eat
afaascqaraaifesame = diaz:
fasdaraftearmzaram: § FgaritsTA: ug gn
amufaaa: Fg: | aageT: | TaTAA |
aaa TT ANAT: | AAT: UR
61-64. NON-LUMINOUS UPAGRAHAS {SUB-
PLANETS) : Add 4 signs 13 degrees and 20 minutes of arc
to the Sun’s longitude at a given moment to ‘get the exact
position of the all-inauspicious Dhooma. Reduce Dhooma from
12 signs to arrive at Vyatipata, Vyatipata is also inauspicious.
Add six signs to Vyatipata to know the position of Parivesha.
He is extremely inauspicious. Deduct Parivesha from 12 signs
to arrive at the position of Capa (Indra Dhanus) who is *
also inauspicious, Add 16 degrees 40 minutes to Chapa which
will give Ketu (Upaketu) who is a malefic. By adding a sign to
Upaketu, you get the original longitude of the Sun. These are
planets devoid of splendour which are malefics by nature and
cause affliction.
Notes : The Aprakasa Grahas or upagrahas are to be
calculated as under based on the above four verses :
1. Sun + 133°20' = Dhooma
2, Dhooma + 53°20" Vyatipata
3. Vyatipata + 180° Parivesha
4, Parivesha — 53°20’ = Indra Cahpa
(Indra Dhanus)
5. Chapa + 16°40" = Upaketu (Sikhi)
Upaketu, if increased by 30 degrecs, will reach the Sun’s
exact position at a given moment,
Let us assume that the Sun is in Taurus 10 degrees and
Calculate the 5 Upagrahas, as under :

Sun (40°)+133°20' = Dhooma == 173°20'
Dhooma (173°20')+ 53°20' = Vyatipata = 226°40°
Vyatipata  (226°40')+180" == ‘Parivesha = 406"40"
(or 46°40’)
Parivesha (46°40")— 53°20" = Chapa = 333"20°
Chapa (353°20")+ 16°40° = Upaketu = 10°
Upaketu (10°)+ 30° == Sum = 40°

=== PAGE 43 ===

44 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

Tt may be seen that by adding 30° to Upaketu, the last
calculated Upagraha, we reached the Sun’s original point which

is the basis for Upagraha calculations,

aa geratieaty aergatraery |
wit aafeatami fafa: TamiTAaaT NER

65. EFFECTS OF SUB-PLANETS : if one of these
afflicts the Sun, the native’s dynasty will decline while the Moon
and the ascendant respectively associated with One of these will
destroy the longevity and wisdom. So declared Lord Brahma,
the lotus-born,

Notes : If the Sun is afflicted by one of these Upagrahas.
the native’s dynasty will not spread, so to say there will be loss
of all sons or lack of sons. If the ascendant is afflicted short
life will come to pass. The Moon in the grip ofan Upagraha
will cause mental afflictions. Though the text denotes
‘conjunction’ of an Upagraha with the Sun. we better treat it
as ‘affliction’ for the Suh can never be conjunct any of the five
Upagrahas, except Vyatipata as can be seen from the example
calculation,

vrarefemaed afrare fare |
feaaraezat aacat artarg moray FATA USE
wernised facta: warRaraat aforreqa: 1
uPrrcaear gar areeny Tamfer: neon
moazerR: aust freafir: afeattora: 1
eda ofan: sitet cin: STATE: UEC
tate qequfzeet Fae mam: |
aeqintseingen: raraaatna: PEE: EEN
66-69. CALCULATIONS OF GULIKA ETC:: The portions
of the Sun etc, upto Saturn denote the Periods of Gulika and
others. Divide the day duration (of any week day) into eight
equal parts. The eighth portion is lordless. The seven port-

ions are distributed to the seven planets commencing from the
lord of the week day. Whichever jon is ruled by Saturn

will be the portion of ika. Similarly make the night dura-

=== PAGE 44 ===

Chapter 3 , 45

tion into eight equal parts and distribute these commencing
from the 5th weeklord. Here again the cighth portion is lord-
less while Saturn’s portion is Gulikg. The Sun’s portion is
Kala eT), Mars’ portion is Mrityu, Jupiter’s portion is Yame-
dhaftaka and “Mercury’s portion is Prahara. These
(durations) differently apply to different places (commensurate
with variable day and night durations).

Notes : Ardha Prahara, Yamaghantaka, Mrityu, Kala and
Gulika are the 5 Kala Velas. suggested by the sage. The day
duration according to latitude is divided into eight equal parts, _
The eighth portion is unlorded. The first portion is allotted to
the week day lord. Other portions follow in the order of week
day lords. We consider 5 planetary portions ignoring that of
the Moon and Venus. The portions of the Sun, Mars, Mercur
Jupiter and Saturn are respectively called Kala, Miityu, Ardha- .
prahara, Yamaghantaka and Gulika.

"Tn the case of night, the durations or 1/8th parts are allotted

in a different order. The first portion goes to the planet ruling
the 5th weekday lord counted from the day in question. The
others follow in the usual order. Here again, the 8th part is
Jordless. The planetary portions from Kala to Gulika are the
same in nomenclature, in the night also.
Guliks and Mandi are one and the same and not different,
- This is borne by the statement of Parasara (vide Brihat Parasara
Hora Sastra, ch. 4, sloka 15, Benares Hindi edition of Chauk-
hambha Sanskrita Sansthana), viz. ‘“Namantaram tu tasyaiva
Mandirityabhidheeyate”. This quarter is not available in our
version. In this connection, please refer to Prasoa Marga and
Jataka Parijatha. ” .
Keeranuru Nataraja of Jatakalankaram (Tamil version)
gives signs of dignitics for these Upagrahas and Gulika ete.
The same is as under :

——

Upagraha ExalItation Dehilitation Swakshetra
& Gulika ete. (own sign)
Dhooma Leo Aquarius Capricorn

Vyatipata Scorpio Taurus Gemini

Parivesha Gemini Sagittarius | Sagittarius (?)

=== PAGE 45 ===

46 . : Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

Indrachapa Sagittarius Gemini Cancer
Upaketu Aquarius Leo Cancer
Gulika caren . Aquarius ~
Yamaghantaka . + Sagittarius -
Ardhaprahara ae ‘ we 7 Gemini
Kala os Capricorn
Mrityu on wn Scorpio

—_———

From the Sun to Saturn, no one is exalted in the above-
mentioned exaltation signs, nor debilitated in the above
mentioned debilitation signs.

Out of the 5 Kalavelas, viz. Gulika etc. four except Kala
(related to the Sun) have own sign system in the respective signs
ruled by their fathers. Gulika, son of Saturn, has Aquarius as
own house. Jupiter’s son, Yamaghantaka, has it in Sagittarius.
Ardhaprahara, Mercury’s son, is in own sign if in Gemini,
Mrityu, son of Mars has Scorpio as own house. It is not known
why Kala, a son of the Sun shifted to Capricorn, a sign of his
brother (Saturn) leaving his father’s Leo. Obviously, Saturn
has given his Moolatrikona to his son Gulika while he gave
Capricorn (a secondary sign) to his ‘brother’ Kala.

Ufecermeaa eye aq carazeaqs
gfe Mead aeisarer GA AAT Voll

70, GULIKA’S POSITION : The degree ascending at tne
time of start of Gulika’s portion (as above) will be the longitude
of Gulika at a given place. Based on this longitude only, Gnlika’s
effects for a particular nativity be estimated,

Notes : The day duration or night duration as the case
may be for calculation the five Kalavelas, viz. Gulikacte. be
considered for the latitude of birth. Some authorities suggest,
to use the end of the period for ascertaining longitudes of these.
Sage Parasara’s view is correct in this respect, as exemplified in
the notes for slokas "25-30, ch, 4 infra. “Mandi” and “Gulika”
are interchanged in our own text to mean one and the same.

wiraat: — sriteacrersfiretorant |
vafecretard aged mime fe aT uogn

=== PAGE 46 ===

Chapter 3 47

ernie wales feared afer aaqt
aemfgadetse owt ae AAA TA UOR
eee sro aca aa fester!
rang fate gt a erst srrag aar Woy
aa wear farriterdaaretstt 7 t
araeaTy fort Ae KATA AA STATA ET Wow

11-74. CALCULATION OF PRANAPADA : Convert the
given time into vighatikas and divide the same by 15. The
resultant Rasi, degrecs etc. be added to the Sun if he is ina
movable sign which will yield Paranapada. If the Sun is in a
fixed sign, add 240 degrees additionally and if in dual sign add
120 degrecs in furtherance to get Pranapada. The birth will be
auspicious if Pranapada falls in the 2nd, 5th, 9th, 4th, 10th or
11th from the natal ascendant. In other houses, Pranapada
jndicates an inauspicious birth.

Notes : The calculation of Pranapada Lagna is exemplified
below, as per the above slokas :

Assume birth is at 16gh 25vi. When this is converted into
vighatikas, we get 985. Divided by 15, this yields 65.66. Rasi
which means 65 signs and 20 degrees. Expunging the multiples
of 12, we have 5s 20° or 170°.

The next step is to add this straightaway to the Sun’s
longitude if he isin a movable sign. Suppose the Sun is in
Aries 15 degrees, we gct 1704+15=185 or Libra 5 degrees as
Pranapada ascendant.

In the same example if the Sun is in a fixed sign, say Taurus
15 degrees, we have to add another 240 degrees, So to say, 45
(the Sun)+240+170=455 or 95 degrecs (Cancer 5 degrees) as
Pranapada asceadant.

Again, alternatively if the Sun is in a dual sign, say Gemini
15°, we have to add only 120 degrees in place of 240 degrees,
That is 75 (Sun’s longitude) +120+170=365=5° Aries is Prana-

pada Lagna.
Dear Reader

We are glad you are reading
this Unique Book.Some other
remaining chapters, which
contain very important
material,are given in its
IInd Part. Please write

=== PAGE 47 ===

aq UfMmeaeqeara: en

Chapter 4
Zodiacal signs Described

agrrmen so gafeaatare « ghasafinena 1
aq fear waste aa eH
arerannat fre: aeredd Targa: 1
meargtia fate et aartarfrcr: nen
1-2. IMPORTANCE OF HORA : The. word Hora (grt)
is derived from Ahoratra (ater) after dropping the first and
last syllables. Thus Hora (ascendants) remains in between
Ahoratra (i.e, day and night) and after knowing Hora, the good
and bad effects of a native be known. Sri Vishnu, the Invisible,

is Time personified. His limbs are the 12 Rasis commencing
from Aries.

aet qera faqa: sefag-geifcar i
a
gefasea agate geet diteaa: qeq gia
3. NAMES OF SIGNS : The 12 signs of the zodiac in
order are : Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra,
Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces,

witaiat =o aat ag aettemfeaeaa:
Jar wget a wees aan
went at car Aerqtan: witefza: aa
4-43. LIMBS OF KALAPURUSHA : The time personified
has his limbs as under with reference to the 12 signs respect
ively : Head, face, arms, heart, stomach, hip, space below navel,
Privities, thighs, knees, ankles and feet,
Notes : The limbs of Kalapurusha or Time Personified are
divided treating Aries as ascendant. For an individual, the
ascending sign will denote head, 2nd sign face and so on and so

forth. See the diagram given below in the case ofa Scarpio
native, for an easy grasp.

=== PAGE 48 ===

Chapter 4 49

(5) (6) (7) (8)

Stomach Hip Below Privities
navel
(4) (9)
Heart Thighs
(3) (10)
Anns Knees

(2) Asodt (12) (11)
Face head =| Feet Ankles
te

The use of the above is to know of the planetary influences
on the concerned limb. In the above case, if Rahu is in Scorpio
ascendant, there will bea scar etc. onthe head. Or when his
Dasa starts, if he is afflicted at birth, he will cause danger to
head. The limbs related to malefics will suffer defects and
adversities while the ones related to benefics will be beautiful,
strong and immune to danger. These are sthoola (broad)
scheme. For Sookshma (minute) scheme of limbs, the 36 deca-
nates are resorted to.

aefeucigeamrar: Reet Aefewat xu
frafrafaerazaratersia =| Rearea:

5-5. CLASSIFICATION OF SIGNS : Movable, Fixed
and Dual afé the names given to the 12 signs in order. These
aré again known as malefic and benefic, successively. Similarly
these are male and female. Aries, Leo and Sagittarius aré
bilious, Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn are windy. Gemini,
Libra and Aquarius are mixed while the rest are phlegmatic.

Notes : The 12 signs are divided into movable, fixed and
dual, Movable are Aries, Cancer, Libra and Capricorn. The
signs Taurus, Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius are fixed or immovable,
Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces are dual or common.

=== PAGE 49 ===

Bt) Brikat Parasara Hora Sastra

Aries, Gemini, Leo, Libra, Sagittarius and Aquarius are
mate si These are also known as malefic or cruel signs.
Tharus, Cancer, Virgo, Scorpio, Capricorn and Pisces are female
signs. These are beneficial or soft signs. —_——
“Aries and its trin bilious. Taurus and its trines are
windy. Gemini and its trines have a mix of all the three temper-
aménts, viz. bile, wind and phlegm, Cancer and its trines are
phiegmatic.

The temperaments of the signs have a épecific use in
Medical astrology. If, for example, a Pphlegmatic sign happens
to be the 6th house and is occupied by an afflicted planet with
phlegmatic temperament, tuberculosis, severe cough and other
pulmonary disorders will crop up. If a windy sign -is afflicted
by a windy planet, rheumatism, colics, paralysis etc, will trouble
the native. When a bilious planet affects a bilious sign, one will
be liable to premature grey hair, yellowish body, secretion of
bile, jaundice etc. If a mixed sign gets affected by Mercury, the
native will be predisposed to suffer many imbalances. The
planets have been described as windy, phlegmatic and bilious
as could be seen in ch. 3 supra.

cRrit aeqnraragermarfafarnt en
sae | qunfe: vier citi
yest arate Aererfie: | ified: wot

6-7. ARIES DESCRIBED : The sign Aries is blood-red in
complexion, it has a prominent (big) physique. It isa quadr-
uped sign and strong during night. It denotes courage. It
resides in the east and is related to kings. It wanders in hills
and predominates in Rajoguna (e7rz is the second of the three
constituent qualities and is the cause of great activity in living
beings). It rises with its back (a Prishtodaya sign) and is fiery.
Its ruler is Mars,

we: yaad dhivagerend dest
arete oTeat aferafint: quested? qa: nich
8. TAURUS DESCRIBED : \ts complexion is white, and
is lorded by Venus, It is long and is a quadruped sign. It has

strength in night and resides in the south. It represents villages
and businessmen. An earthy sign, Taurus rises with its back,

=== PAGE 50 ===

Chapter 4 51

mefeh afrqt amd a aatoreqs
sre ara farrat free oreerattsfaett nen
eerie gforcif  firqrrredt qenfira:

9-9}. GEMINI DESCRIBED ; The sign Gemini rises with
its head and represents a male and a female holding a mace and
Jute. It lives in the west and is an airy sign. Itis a biped sign
as well and is strong in nights. It lives in villages and is windy
in temperament. It has an even body with greengrass hue. Its
ruler is Mercury.

geet aaat & arerit fat shar ngon

agree: edteary: aeayet = weit

qssredt mace atentieti: eye: nee

10-11. CANCER DESCRIBED : The sign Cancer is pale-

red. It resorts to forests and represents Brahmins. It is strong
in nights. It has many feet (i.e. it is a centipede sign) and has a
bulky body. It is Satwic in disposition (seen in gods) and isa
watery sign, It rises with its back and is ruled by the Moon.

fee: qaifas: wet equa aft eth
aiatadt agqrranes: gaa aattary net
12. LEO DESCRIBED : Leo is ruled by the Sun and is
Satwic. It isa quadruped sign anda royal sign. It resorts to
forests and rises with its head, It has a large, white body. It
resides in the east and is day-strong.

qrédtart server | ufafareenfaat |
sitgfaat @ aeaim ferrareraet @ aT NER
-  Staeragtt frat feeranf safeattt
HA ART IAT ATHTATAT FNAB Aw
13-14. VIRGO DESCRIBED : This sign is a hill-resorter,
and is strong in day-time. It rises with its head and has a
medium build. It is a biped sign and resides in the south. It
has grains and fire in its hands. It belongs to business commu-
nity and is variegated. It relates to husricanes (wafsorft). It is

=== PAGE 51 ===

$2 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

a Virgin and is Tamasa (a disposition of demons). : Its ruler is
Mercury.

wieiedt qetateage: geet witgh

afradt yadt art at weagizmy ura

qprsfirtisa eaeatit agriqarerstt fireit 1

ateaedt ferdtatea: frit werqag: ure

Cereraishrcteosit qfrernrea genta: t

15-16}. LIBRA AND SCORPIO DESCRIBED : Libra is
a Seershodaya sign rising with its head and is strong in day time.
It is black in complexion and is predominant with Rajoguna.
It relates to the western direction and resorts to land. It is
destructive or mischievous (grfrq). It represents Sudras or the
4th Varna and has a medium build and is a biped sign. Its
lord is Venus, Scorpio has a slender physique and is a centipede
sign. It denotes Brahmins and resides in holes. Its direction
is north and is strong in day time. It is reddish-brown and
resorts to water and land. It hasa hairy physique and is very
sharp (or passionate). Mars is its ruler.

qth era opfeerrit @ enfers: ug

ferret fafteftatoa: qian: atfret fare t

ae AEE: AAT AAMT: gst

qdedt agurant awedt warn gat

17-18}. SAGITTARIUS DESCRIBED : The sign Sagitt-
arius rises with its head and is lorded by Jupiter. It is a
Satwic sign and is tawny in hue. It has strength in night and
is fiery. A royal sign, Sagittarius is biped in first half, Its
second half is quadruped. It hasan even build and adores
anarch. It resides inthe east, resorts to Jand and is splend-
orous,

ararfixreerstt wtet orete @ afer atdarg gen
qectedt agar: eq aaaT:
arat ager og fatal amy Aa: RON

19-20, CAPRICORN DESCRIBED ; Capricorn is lorded
by Saturn-afid has predominance of Tamoguna (a disposition

=== PAGE 52 ===

Chapter 4 : 33
seen in demons). It is an earthy sign and represents the
southern direction. It is strong in nights, and rises with back.
It has a large body. Its complexion is variegated and it resorts’
to both forests and lands. Its first half is quadruped and second
half footless moving in water.

Ber Feet al weet verging
aetat werreamedt | aracitifadt aa: uae
Wa: ofrradeen exit aarefe: aya:

21-21}. AQUARIUS DESCRIBED : The sign Aquarius
represents aman holdig a pot. Its complexion is deep-borwn.
Tt has a-medium build and a biped sign. It is very strong in

/@ay time: It resorts to deep water and is airy. It rises with
its head and is Tamasic. It rules Sudras, the 4th Varna and
the west, Its lord is Saturn, the Sun’s offspring.

at geqradect atrafaferrast uae
wel aeagreart ered wea frm: 1
aaa neqtgt a atraedd great negu |
gaeanifaaata ceitat afer ges
Faaqamrenermt & eqaqereart WussN

22-24, PISCES DESCRIBED : Pisces resembles a pair of
fish, one tailed with the head of the other. This sign is night-
strong. It is a watery sign and is predominant with Satwa guna.
It denotes resoluteness and isa water-resorter. It is footless
and has a medium build. It rules the north and rises with both
head and back. It is ruled by Jupiter. This is how the 12 Rasis
each of 30 degree extent are described to evaluate gross and
specific effects.

wate: aemaeay sya afrgae!
were oa aviter fda afeetadq uean
amg derenfa dita! af fara
aareara afer fade aderg aq uIgu
afera mat feat aaeten aTtaTATy |
rae Ted Tee THe WAT Ut

=== PAGE 53 ===

54 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
ararfe aferd ati ere: sre Frater 1
TETQTaTay Mea RTT T NR

weer Mrateaet witetey ydarerqqt
ReMeQarER aed THe faites: ue
Age vty Reitiad act eel
Ge fatwerttey ara iy eeRETATT RON

25-30. NISHEKA LAGNA : © excellent of the sages,
explalnéd now Is a step to arrive at the Nisheka Lagna when the
matal ascendant is known. Note the angular distance between

Mandi _(Gulika). Add this to the difference between
the ascendant Lagaa bhava (Madhya or cusp) and the 9th bhava
(csp). The resultant product in Rasis, degrees etc. will represent
the months, days etc. that elapsed between Nisheka and birth.
At birth If the ascendant lord is in the invisible half (i.e. from
ascendental cusp to descendental cusp) add the degrees etc. the
Moca moved in the particular Rasi occupled by her to the above-
mentioned product. Then the ascendant at Nisheka can be worked
out and the good and bad experienced by the vative fa the womb
can bé gaessed. One can also guess, with the belp of Nisheka
Lagna, effects like longevity, death etc. of the parents.

Notes : If birth time is accurately noted, we can trace
out the correct time and date of coitus that caused the concept-
ion in question, Adhana Lagna or Nisheka Lagna means the
ascendant that prevailed at the time of coitus and not the one at
conception. The Sanskrit word ‘Adhana’ or ‘Nisheka’ means a
sexual cohabitation, (Some texts call the first union between a

_ couple as ‘Adhaana’ and the later ones in the usual course as
‘Nisheka’.)

As per our present verses, we consider the birth chart of a
male child born on Friday, the 17th February 1984 at 22h 35m
IST at New Delhi. The birth time has been correctly noted
with a special request to the attending doctor. The time of
coitus was astrologically chosen and promptly noted down in
the records, And hence this case will serve as a foolpro of
example. The natus as per Lahiri Ayanamsa (i.e. 23° 37° 51")
is given below :

=== PAGE 54 ===

Chapter 4 3
Rabu
Sun
Ven
Merc
Asedt
Saturn
Jup Ketu Gulika
Mars

The longitudes of required planets and important cusps
are as given below :

Ascendant Cusp : 182° 23’ 06” 9th cusp : 64903" 13”
10th cusp or M.C. 94° 36" 06" Gulika : 208° 32° 06”
Saturn H 202° 45° 38” Moon — : 134° 17° 00"

Sidereal Time at birth : 8h Im 2Is
The longitude of Gulika is cast for the beginning of

Saturn’s Muhurta, as suggested by the sage in ch. 3 supra,
With the above data, we should be able to trace back the
Adhana date and time. The formula is :

Adhana Lagna=Date of birth and time minus “x”
where “X” is obtained thus= A+B+C

Now A, Band Care explained. “A” is the angular dist-
ance between Satur and Gulika at birth. ‘B” is the distance
between the cusp of the ascendant and that of the 9th house
counted in a direct order (i.e. via 4th and 7th cusps). “C”’ is
required if the ascendant lord is in the invisible half (i.e. ascen-
dant and descendant intersected by the nadir). Otherwise, “C”
is not required. In the example case, these are :

=== PAGE 55 ===

56 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastre
A = 5° 46° 28”
B == 241° 40° 07"
c == 14° IT 00"

X = = 261° 43° 35" = = 261d 43gh 35 vigh.

It will be noticed that 1 degree is treated as one day in the
above computation. That is, these are Savanamana (360 days
per year). To apply this to Gregorian Calendar (NS), we must
reduce this duration into Sauramana. Such tables are given in
my English translation of Horasara. From there we take the
correction figures so that we obtain an equal Sauramana duret-
ion, Those corrections are meant to know the difference between
Savanamana and Sauramana, When we reduce the correction
factor from Savanamana to obtain Sauramana, the figure so
obtained shal] have to be increased by the correction factors
excessively considered in the first mentioned correction factors.
Areader even with average intelligence will appreciate this
exercise, From the tables referred we obtain correction factors
for 26id.43gh 35vigh as under :

: d gh vigh Lip _——“Vilipta
200 days: 2 55 16 36 40
0 52 35 05 0
o 0 52 35 0s
o 00 38 00 00

3 49 22 36 45

te one

We can take the above figure to be 3d 49gh 23 vigh asa
round figure for convenience sake. When this correction factor
is deducted from 261d 43gh 35vigh, we get 2574 S4gh 12vigh,
This needs a slight increase due to excessive correction contained
by the above correction factor, 34 49gh 23vigh. From the same
table, we get a factor of 3gh 22 vigh which should be added to
2574 S4gh }2vigh. Thus we get 257d 57gh 34vigh. That is, the
Adhana ought to have been so many days behind the birth date
while the birth ison 17th Feb 1984 at 22-35 hrs. The time of

=== PAGE 56 ===

Chaptet 4 57

Adhana as noted is: 4th June 1983 at 10.40 PM, IST, at New
Delhi. (The last menses period, or LMP date, as recorded is
31-5-1983.) The duration between the two is shown below
month by month.

Month Days Hrs’ ’ Min
June 1983 . 26 ol 20
July 1983 31 00 00
August 1983 31 00 00
September 1983 30 00 00

. October 1983 31 00 = 00
November 1983 30 00 00
December 1983 31 00 00
January 1984 31 00 00
February 1984 . 16 22 35
Total gap 257 23 355

= 2574 59gh. 47.5 Vigh

The above duration in June 1983 devoid of 3d 22h 40m as
Adhana took place on 4th at the said hour. Similarly, in
February 84, the duration is considered only upto the moment
of birth, For calculation of ghatis, 12 midnight is treated as the
starting point as English dates begin at 12 midnight.

The reader will note that we got the actual duration bet-
ween birth and coitus counted backwards as 257 59gh 47 SVigh
whereas with the help of the rules, we coukd get 257d S7gh
34 vigh, having a difference of less than 2.5 ghatis. This
difference is not inexplicable. We have considered the longitu-
dinal difference of 1 degree equalling a day (of 60 ghatis). This
means one minute of longitude is one ghati. Since the birth time
and coitus time have been perfectly noted, the difference could
be attributed to not considering the fraction of second of arc in
the various longitudes. Thus 2.5 gh difference means 2,5 minutes
of arc. Please note that we have totally used the longitudes of

_ five positions, viz. ascendant, 9th house, Gulika, Saturn and
Moon. A small fraction of seconds of difference at every stage
-can well cause some difference,

=== PAGE 57 ===

58 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

Albeit the time of coitus (or Adhana) has been recorded
Properly and albeit we got the same by reverse process with the
help of birth time as per Maharshi’s principle, one may be yet
wondering whether it is a coincidence. To allay such a miscon-
ception, we make again an exercise to arrive at the birth date
and time ina forward manner with the help of coitus time
indicated above. In such a process, we consider only classical
rules as per standard books on Hindu Astrology, ignoring any
Suggestion from any ambiguous quarter.

Stage 1 : Firstly we find out whether the. delivery should
be before 273 days or after 273 days from Adhana. The relevant
Principle is from my translation of Nashta Jatakam which
Principle owes its acknowledgment to Manushya Jatekm and
Satake Sagaram. 273 days is the basis as the Moon takes 273.2
days to complete ten zodiacal revolutions The Adhana chart is
as per the time 22 40 hours IST for June 4, 1983 at New Delhi.
See the zodiac as under as per Lahiri Ayanamsa,

A ___ dy
fy
. Sun
c _ Mere |. Mars Rahu

Moon
g 29°15'36"

Ascdt
| 10°20'37"

| Ketu | Jup (R) | Sat (R)

The Adhana Moon is waning in state and is in the invisible
half of the zodiac. Should the Adhana Moon be waning and be
in the invisible half, or with increasing rays in the visible half,
then the birth takes place before 273 days from Adhana. So to
say, the transit Moon will not complete ten revolutions. Adhana

=== PAGE 58 ===

Chapter 4 $9

Moon with increasing rays in the invisible half or Adhana Moon
with decreasing rays in the visible half will cause the birth only
after 273 days. To wit, she will in transit exceed ten revolutions
of the firmaments. In the Adhana chart before us, the Moon is
decreasing (i.e. approaching the Sun) and is in the 2nd house
(ie. invisible half). Hence it suggests a possibility of delivery
before 273 days. The answer ig known to the reader in the‘
affirmative. .

Stage 2 : It is not enough if we state that the delivery will
be before 273 days. We must narrow down the period still
briefly. The Sun’s position at Adhana will tell us the possible
month of delivery. One of the rules in this context is from
Seka Jataka (vide p. 49 of my English translation of Hora Sara
stating that deilvery will be in the 9th, 10th or 1/th month acco-
rding to the Adhana ascendant being ina movable sign, fixed
sign or common sign. In the case cited by me, Capricorn, a
movable sign, is onthe east suggesting delivery in the 9th month -
(i.e. between 240-270 days).

Stage 3 : After the above step, our job isto dig out the
possible. Moon sign at birth. According to Kalyana Varma's
Saravali (ch.8, Verses 46-47), the natal Moon willbe either in
the 7th or in the 10th from her Adhana position. In the Adhana
chart before us, the Moon is in Aquarius and hence the natal
‘Moon should be Leo or in Scorpio. The reader will observe the
natal Moon in Leo.

Stage 4: Leo, as any other sign, is 30 degrees in length.
Then where should the Moon exactly be ? Is her birth position
justified vis a vis Adhana position ? This is known by the ascen-
dant at birth, =i a 2 q J we

The signs Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Sagittarius and
Capricorn are nocturnal signs as these are strong during night
time, The other six, viz. Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Aquarius
and Pisces are called diurnal signs being strong during day time.

~If the Adhana Lagna is a nocturnal sign, birth will be ina
day sign. If birth occurs in a night sign, then the ascending
sign at Adhana should have been a day sign. (In the Adhana
chart given, the ascendant is Capricorn—a nocturnal sign and
hence birth in Libra—a diurnal sign, is justified.)

Stage 5 ; Nocturnal sign can ascend in day time as well.
Similarly diurnal sign can ascend in night time also. If the

=== PAGE 59 ===

a . ’ Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

Adhana Lagaa is a night sign, birth will be in day time and ina
diurnal sigo. If the said Lagna isa day sign, birth will occur

in night time in a nocturnal ascendant. The fraction of si,
Ratally ascending will correspond to the Traction past in. the
“Kdhana Lagna,

In the Adhana chart given, the ascendant is Capricorn and
Portion past is 10° 20°37". We convert this longitude into
seconds of arc to have accuracyy The longitude thus is 37237".
Similarly, 30 degrees make 1,08,000 seconds of arc. The night
duration at birth in our example is 12h 50m 48s as the Sunrise
on 17.2 1984 isat 6h 59m 58s and Sunset 18h 9m 10s, for
New Delhi. Now see the process as under :

108000 seconds (30 deg.) = 46248 seconds of time
(or 12h 50m 48s) ~
37237” (or 10° 20°37") = 7
. == (46248 x 37237)/108000
. = 15945.711 seconds of time
= 4.429364] hours
== 4h 26m (4b 25m 45.71 sec)

So to say, 4h 26m have past from the Sunset, ie. from
18h 9m 10s. This denotes 22h 34m 55s which should be the
birth time. And we have the birth time recorded as 22h 35m.
This cannot be a coincidence or manipulation fora serious
student of astrology like me, but a meaningful and scientific
astrological process.

When the Adhana Moéon’s Dwadasamsa is known corre-
ctly, the natal Moon can be well checked. She, at birth, should
be in the same Dwadasamsa as she was at Adbana. Please note
this agreeability—Adhana Moon as well as natal Moon being
in Capricorn Dwadasamsa similarly. Hence our natal Moon is
just the correct one.

Another verification factor, which however need not exist
if the Moon’s Dwadasama coincides, is: Whatever the angular
distance is between Adhana Moon and Adbana Lagna will
Prevail between the natal Moon and natal ascendant, In our
example, the difference between Adhana Moon and Adhana
Lagna is 48°44’ whereas natal Moon and natal ascendant are
49°6" apart.

=== PAGE 60 ===

Chapter 4 61

The curious reader may note one thing. There are many
rules to note the birth month, natal Moon, natal ascendant ete.
with the help of Adhana (or prasna). And the correct ones
bringing the various possihitities to a coincidental manner should
be correctly judged without rushing to conclusions simply
theoretically.

Thus the reader will be convinced of the fact that Adhana
time noted is correct as we got back to the birth details from
Adhana and vice versa accurately without any ambiguity what-
soever,

From the said two processes based on accurately maintained
records for purposes of scientific research, J, rather we, firmly
can conclude the following without a shadow of doubt :

1. Gulika’s longitude will correspond to the beginning of
Saturn’s Muhurta only, as suggested by the sage, irrespective of
any other authority stating that it should be for the end of
Muhurta ruled by Saturn. In fact, I have not come across any
sage’s work stating contrarily to what Parasara stated in this
regard. Suppose we have calculated Gulika for the given
birth chart for the end of Saturn’s muhurta, the longitude of
Gulika would have advanced by 24 degrees. That would put
the Adhana still 24 days behind the noted date. Please note that
we have exactly reached the Adhana date as per the record
maintained without any variation. This proves that Gulika
should be at the beginning of Saturn’s Muhurta,

2. Accurate Ayanamsa is only that of Lahiri and that accur-
ate it is as to the seoond of arc. This contention is proved by
‘the fact that we have made use of the Moon’s longitude. Other
4 longitudes used by us in the process of getting back to Adhana
are simply angular distances which will not be affected by any
Ayanamsa. But the Moon’s longitude will vary plus or minus
according to the Ayanamsa, and Adhana time will be minus or
plus according to the variation, Whereas with Lahiri’s position
of the Moon, we did not experience any anamoly in the Adhana
computation. Similarly in progressing towards the birth date
from the Adhana date, Moon’s longitude played a significant
role. If for example with another Ayanamsa, the Moon goes to
Pisces in the Adhana, her natal position, will yet be in Leo but
inconsistent with Adhana position. Hence Lahiri Ayanamsa has
all the perfection required for calculation of even the Nadiamsas.

=== PAGE 61 ===

ay faa: ny

Chapter 5
’ Special Ascendants

wg oascagatft cava frwaerat |
Rea -aeTN  TTR Qe
1. Oh excellent of the Brahmins, I explain below again

some special ascendants, viz. Bhava Lagna, Hora Lagna and
Ghatika Lagna.

qated aareea ufermat og cara
sofa sR Mra ata fx URN
wet qeuifad wacat cafenifin wet |
aeanteas qa werent ese a aq an

2-3. BHAVA LAGNA : From Sunrise to the time of birth
every 5 ghatis (or 120 minutes) constitute one Bhava Lagna.
Divide the time of birth (in ghatis, vighatis etc.) from Sun-rise
by 5 and add the quoticnt etc. to the Sun’s longitude as at Sun
tise. This is called Bhava Lagna.

Notes : To work out the various ascendants, assume that
the birth is at 12gh 30vi and the Sun’s longitude as prevalent at
the time of Sun rise is 4s 12°. Find out the Bhava Lagna in the
first instance, as under :

When birth time is divided by 5 we get 2.5 signs or 75°.

This is to be added to. the Sun’s longitude as given which is
132°, We get 207° or Libra 27° as Bhava Lagna.

aa ondifgafemfaarattaarg frat 11
safe ora errr tere aerate
geucurfad fred weer writs aay)
eats wet greed eee fe aq yn

=== PAGE 62 ===

Chapter § . 63

45. HORA LAGNA : Again from Sun-rise till the time
of birth, Hora Lagna repeats itself every 2} ghatis (i.e. 60
minutes). Divide the time past upto birth from the Sunrise by
24 and add the quotient etc.. in signs, degrees and so on to the
longitude of the Sun as at the Sunrise. This will yicld Hora
Lagna in Rasi, degrees etc.

Notes : Let us find out the Hora Lagna for the same exa-
mple,

Birth time is to be divided by 2.5. When done so, we get
5 signs or 150 degrees. Add this to the Suu’s longitude as at
sunrise (ic. 132 plus 150=282°). We thus get Hora Lagna as
Capricorn 12°, ~

wera vette frermert
qataarg waren serararats TA NEN

wtwaferrrt ant ae arfens
wea ofemrrat =o efad  arcarfafi: not

cer adtqen:  catisfitiee:
aeaitafas writ acter eRe A aT ust

6-8. GHAT] LAGNA (GHATIKA LAGNA) : Now listen to
the method of working out Ghatika Lagna. This Lagna cuanges
along with every Ghatika (24 minutes) from the Sunrise. Note
the birth time in Ghati and vighatis. Consider the number of
ghatis past as number of Rasis or Ghatika Lagnas, The Vighatis
be divided by 2 to arrive at degrees and minutes of arc past
in the said Ghatika Lagna. The product so arrived in Rasis,

+ degrees and minutes be added to the Sun’s longitude as at
Sunrise to get the exact location of Ghatika Lagna. So say
, Sages like Narada.

a Notes : Let us find out the Ghatika Lagna in the above
example case.

Birth time is 12 ghatis which gives 12 Rasis. Vighatis left
are 30 which are to be divided by 2 and treated as degrees.
30 divided by 2 yields 15, ie. 15°. Thus, we note 12 signs

=== PAGE 63 ===

64 . Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

15 degrees to be away from the Sun (as at rise of the day).
When 12s 15° or 375° are added to the Sun (132°), we get 507°
which after expunging 360° results in 147° or Leo 27° as Ghatika
Lagna.

waaat qe aarat arenes gay feet
& ugh as a ax a cara Ufmeraagd ven

9. USE OF SPECIAL ASCENDANTS : Keeping the
planets at birth as it is, prepare various Bhava charts with respect
to cach special ascendant and analyse as done for the natal
ascendant.

Notes : This isa very important clue given by the sage.
We get the longitudes of the three special ascendants, viz.
Bhava Lagna, Hora Lagna and Ghatika Lagna. Apart from the
natal ascendant, the planets will remain in different bhavas
according to the special ascendant being considered. Thus we
get four different Bhava charts. If a planet remains in the
same bhava in all the four bhava charts, it will specially reveal
the bhava effects due to it. Otherwise, its effects are proprt-
ionately altered in respect of that bhava.

The Benares edition (Chaukambha series) has the following
special hints in this chapter respecting planets and bhavas,
thus : The planet on the cusp ofa house will give full effects due
to the bhava concerned, The one in Bhava Sandhi (end of
house) gives no results due to that bhava. (This does not mean
that the planet is wholly ineffective. It is, suffice to say,
ineffective as far as that bhava is concerned.) If a planet is ahead
of the Bhava sphuta (longitude) of the various Lagnas (i.e. Natal,
Bhava, Hora and Ghatika Lagnas) but within 15°, its effects due
to the Bhava concerned start diminishing. Conversely if it is
prior to the cusp but not beyond 15°, the effects proportionately
increase. Needless to mention that on the ‘cusp’, the effects are
more revealed. This gives usa clue that longitude arrived in
the case of Bhava Lagna, Hora Lagnaetc and Ghatika Lagna are,
the center points of those Lagnas, just as for the natal ascendant.

atargant wrt saga asa:
wea famarin = atarqdad Ga gol

Yee He rGLowomp |

=== PAGE 64 ===

Chapter 5 65

area = aartinte | FATA
AAAATTA AT ACTA: Uk
Reitrfe wa maa Att
ade steamed cfeat aa: TTA EAN
aerat ana Tat sa aie
afg det ator aoe q fetta ue gu
Redtnfer: cra ufa: ag ata
10-13}. WARNADA_ DASA _; I now detail-Varnada Dasa
just by knowing which, one can deal with the longevity ofa
native. If the natal ascendant is an odd sign count dirctly from
Aries to natal ascendant. If the natal ascendant is an even sign,
count from Pisces to the natal ascendant, in the reverse order.
Similarly, if the Hora Lagna is an odd gne, count from Ariesto *
Hora Lagna in direct order. If the Hota Lagna is an even one,
count from Pisces to Hora Lagna in the reverse order. If both
the products are odd signs or even signs, then add both the.
figures. If one is odd and the other is even, then know the
difference between the two products. Ifthe latest product, in
this process, isan odd one, count so many signs from Aries in
a direct manner; if an even one, count so many signs from Pisces
in reverse order. The sign so known will be the Varnada for
the ascendant;
. Notes : Take the case of a‘ native who has Libra (an odd

sign) as natal ascendant and Scorpio (an even sign) as Hora-:

Lagna. When we count from Aries to Libra (odd sign—hence
direct), we get 7. Again from Pisces to Scorpio (Hora Lagna, an
even sign—hence reverse) we have 5 signs. We have to add these
two figures, as they are of the same class, i.e. odd. We get 12.
This product is an even one. Hence we have to count 12 signs
from Pisces in a reverse manner to get Varanada for the Lagna.
Thus we get Aries. This is the Varnada Rasi for natal ascendant.

There is a suggestion from one quarter that longitudes
of natal ascendant and Hora Lagna be also taken into consid-
eration. In that case, the counting when done from Aries, is to
be done from zcro degree. And from Pisces, itis from the last
degree of Pisces, ic. the 30th degree of Pisces is the starting
point.

=== PAGE 65 ===

66

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
qaoried aver ya fear:
aerate | waa TAT UR
aden Bit AIT ATRIA JI
sereqeeraad = TET carat -QTaay gat
14-15. EFFECTS OF VARANADA : Now listen to tne

use of the above. Out of the two, viz. natal ascendant and Hora

- Lagna, whichever is stronger, from there Varnada starts. If the
natal ascendant is an old sign, the counting of Dasas is clock-
wise. Otherwise anti-clockwise. The Lagna dasa years will equal
the number of signs intervening between the natal ascendant
and Varnada. Similarly for other houses.

aragfie: rai} aviaer fairs

afa ena alg aarfvaded area stat ugg
ay. wderqdenfe = recat

ade oavicearis feet = Train ngoN
aiarafa wy fay | amafeata way!

qa THAT rae wTNTAfahaTaT Wes
CeTaUTATHET adtara = aalaa)

grea dae fearearquaqeteraa: ween
faqra vaatq arerargta fafaraaa 1
qaaferrat —-& samratafeernq Roll
16-20. Shoulda trine from the ascendant’s Varnada be

occupied or aspected by a malefic, the native will live only upto
the Dasa of the said Rasi. Just as the Rudra planet in Soola
Dasa is capable of causing evils, the above mentioned planets
related to Varnada’s trine be treated. The Varnada Lagna be
considered as natal ascendant while the 7th from Varnada_ will
denote the longevity of the spouse, the 11th longevity of elder
brothers and sisters, the 3rd longevity Of younger brothers and
sisters, the Sth the longevity of sons, the 4th longevity of mother
and the 9th longevity of father. The dasa of the Soola Rasi will
inflict greater evils.

Notes : Rudra planet is the one which has more strength

when the lords of 2nd and 8th are considered. The planet with

=== PAGE 66 ===

Chapter 6 67

Rudra designation normally features in Soola Dasa to know the
possible time of death. The Dasas of the Rasis are calculated in
direct or reverse order according to the natal ascendant being
odd or even. . °

Soola Dasa calculations are akin to that of Sthira Dasa.
But in the case of Sthira Dasa, Rudra’s counterpart is Brahma
Graha. The two Dasas are discussed in ch. 46 of the 2nd part
of our treatise, among various Dasas.

wd anfaaramt wdeat aviat am
qaasa owe aa afeat a marTaT nen
warrt acter aq ueitat acter ae
german ufaant smaada atau
qaartémig <= gat at sat atql
HAHA foraararcarafe uygu
erertmiqnd oan warerafagheua |
wregraferarat = atta afro een

21-24. Similar assessments be made with reference to the
Varnada of each Bhava commencing the first and the evils and
goods duc toa nativity be known. These Varnada Dasas_ are

only for Bhayas (Rasis) and_not the Occupants. The sub period
cach Dasa will be one twelfth of the Dasa and the order will
also be clockwise or anti-clockwise as explained earlier. The

natal ascendant is to be calculated according to birth place while
Bhava Lagna, Hora Lagna etc. are common to.all places.

aa Greranteata: ell

Chapter 6

The Sixteen Divisions Of A Sign

AT | TELIA TAT afer gr
Mafasmfa arart date FAT AT URN

=== PAGE 67 ===

68 : Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

1. O sage, I have known from you about the planets, signs
and their descriptions. I desire toknow the details of various
divisions of a sign, which please narrate.

anty sten arare we atefrarg: |

arag armeafa ata! saenfafa ua

at gre @ emmeqate: eaters: :

wait oo cantare gain: teats: gu

fentay adaare et winfetnimsea:.

eetateisntatn: sosu'mra Fa: ITA UYU

2-4. NAMES OE THE 16 VARGAS : Lord Brahma has
described 16 kinds of Vargas (Divisions) for each sign. Listen
to those. The same are : Rasi, Hora, Drekkana, Chathurthamsa,
Sapthamamsa, Navamsa, Dasamamsa, Dvadasamsa, Shodas-
amsa, Vimsamsa, Chaturvimsamsa, Sapthavimsamsa, Trimsamsa,
Khavedamsa, Akshavedamsa and Shashtiamsa.

weit wen zed Uetdt wer ATH: t
qaetieat cet at afrrttreq ux
farewaggitan” ter: qed | etfaa:

THe | wat oreaafenfa: eqat ul

aerfe areat gret afcafsd wa EN
5.6. RAS! AND HORA : The Rasi owned by a planet.is
” called its Kshetra (one sign). The first half of an old sign is the
Hora ruled by the Sun while the second half is the Hora of the
Moon. The reverse is true in the case of an even sign. Half
of Rasi is called Hora. These are totally 24 counted from
Aries and repeat twice (at the rate of 12) in the whole of the
zodiac.

Notes : The names of planets lording over the 12 signs

have been given earlier. The following table throws light on
lordships of Horas (15° each) of the 12 signs. .

=== PAGE 68 ===

Chapter 6 oo
Speculum Of Horas
Sign Hora lord Hora lord
(O—-15°) (i5—30°)
Aries Sun Moon
Taurus Moon ‘sun
Gemini Sun Moon
Caticer Moon Sun
Leo Sun Moon
Virgo , Moon Sun
Libra Sun Moon
Scorpio ; Moon Sun
Sagittarius : Sun , Moon
Capricorn Moon Suo
Aquarius Sun Moon
Pisces Moon Sun

afafrarn genre a catardticar: |
afcgfara dat Aart: were wag oN
eataranrat a otiat serra a1

arearsnfer-gater = teeretareretfirg uct

7-8. DECANATE : Oue third of a Rasi is called Drekkana
(decanate). These are totally 36, counted from Aries (to
Pisces), repeating thrice at the rate of 12 per round. The Ist,
Sth and the 9th Rasis froma sign ai. its three decanates, and
are respectively lorded by Narada, Agasthya and Dooxvasa.

Notes : Each Rasi has three decanates or Drekkanas. The
first one is ruled by the lord of the very sign. The second one

=== PAGE 69 ===

70 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

belongs to the planet that rules the Sth from the sign in
question. The lord of the 9th from the sign in question is the
Jord of the 3rd decanate. Each decanate is 10 degrees in length.
The 3 decanates along with the signs in which they fall are as
per table given belaw :

Speculum Of Decanates

(Note : The signs in this and other tables are indicated by
numericals, e.g. 1 is Aries, 2 is Taurus & C.)

Sign Ist decanate 2nd decanate 3rd decanate
Aries 1 5 9
Taurus’ 2 6 10
Gemini 3 7 11
Cancer 4 8 12
Leo 5 9 1
Virgo 6 10 2
Libra 7 * Il 3
Scorpio 8 12 4
Sagittarius 9 1 5
Capricorn 10 2 6
Aquarius 11 3 _ 7
Pisces 12 4 8

eautfcexraraeqatiar: Frarfcg 1
Pot. MO th Me eS MCG LAL

9. CHATURTHAMSA : The lords of the 4 angles from a
sign are the rulers of respective Chaturthamsa of a Rasi comme-
ncing from Aries. Each Chathurthamsa is one fourth of a Rasi.
The deities respectively are Sanaka, Sananda, Kumara and
Sanatana.

Notes : Each Chaturthamsa is one fourth ofa sign or
7° 30'. The ist, 2nd, 3rd and 4th Chaturthamsas are ruled
respectively by the same sign, the 4th, 7th and 10th signs there-
from. See the table given below :

=== PAGE 70 ===

Chapter 6 : nM
Speculum Of Chaturthamsas

Signs 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Py r'°2 3 4°5 «6 7 8 § 1 NM 12
15° 4 5 6 7 8 9 W-1l 12 I 2 3
2°30 7 8 «9 «0 11 12 1 2 3 «4 «5 6
30° «10 1b 12: «1~«2~¢3~¢4«~«S 6 7 8. 9

Example : The four Chaturthamsas of Aries are respecti-
vely ruled by Aries, Cancer, Libra and Capricorn.

araterecstarng | toreitat Farr: t
genet q feta: aermerifererarg ig ott
ACM FT TeaTedy TaAYTAAEAA: |
raqawaraty «| TA awTerTfear: UT N

10-11. SAPTHAMAMSA : The Sapthamamsa (one
seventh of a Rasi) counting commences from the same sign in
the case of an odd sign. It is from the seventh sign thereof while
an even sign is considered. The namcs of the seven divisions in
odd sings are : Kshaara, Ksheera, Dadhi, Ghritha, Ikshu Rasa,
Madhya and Suddha Jala. These designations are reversed for an
even sign.

Notes : Each sign is made in 7 equal parts of 4° 17 8.57"
which is called Saptamamsa. As far as odd signs are concerned,
the Saptamamssas fall in the successive signs commencing from
the odd sign in question, The counting in the same manner is
from the 7th sign thereof for an even sign. Example : For Aries,
these divisions are Aries, Taurus Gemini etc., while for Taurus
these are Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn etc. See the table
given below :

‘Speculum Of Sapthamamsas

Sims 12 3 4 5 67 8 910M 2

D -

I istDvn 1 8-3 10 5 12 7 2 9 4 11 -6
V2ndDva2 9. 411 6 1 8 3 10 5 12 7
I 3rd Dvn3 10 5 12 7 2 9 4°11 6 1 8
S4thDm4 11 6 1 8 3 10 5 12 7 2 9
I 5thDv5 12 7 2 9 4 11 6 1 8 3 10
O6thDmn6 1 8 3 10 5 12 7 2 9 4 nl
N-thDm7 2 9 40 6 1 8 3 10 5 12

Ss

=== PAGE 71 ===

Rn : Brihat Parasara Hora Sastea

aatearent meaert | araeafaa:t
sae aeiwantfels fared faaert:
der qeerereda wafeg TQ TURN
12. NAVAMSA ; The Navamsa calculation are for a mova-
ble sign from there itself, fora fixed sign from the 9th thereof
and for a dual sign from the Sth thereof. They go by designations
Deva (divine), Manushya (human) and Rakshasa (devilish) in a
successive and repetitive order fora movable sign, (Manushya,
Rakshasa and Deva are the order for a fixed sign while Rakshasa
Manushya and Deva are a dual sign’s order.)
Notes : Navamsa is 1/9th part of a sign or 3°20’. The
9 Navamsas in order commence from the same sign for a movable
sign, from the 9th for a fixed sign and from Sth for a dual sign.
For example ; the Navamsas of Aries are counted from Aries
itself; from Capricorn for Taurus and from Libra for Gemini.
These are fully shown in the table below :

Speculum Of Navamsas

Sins 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 $ 10 11 12

D ist: 110754 110 7 4-140 7 4
Tado2u 855 2H 8 5 2a4r 8 5
V 3d 3:12 9 6 312 9 6 312 9 6
I 4th 4 110:7 4110 741411 7
S Sth 5 2.8 5 21 8 $ 241 8
I 6th 6 3 12°99 6 312 9 6 3122 9
O 7th 7-4 1°10 7.4 110 7 4 1 40
N 8th 8 5 2:11 8 5 21 8 Ss 2
S 9th 9 6312963129 634

| Seater: erred Gy aerate eye: |
wer gatfafaseret | geat-sfit-ae-ereran: 2 git
weit osrereda | ga@teraqaon: 1
RAR HATA AA aT oqeN Tee

=== PAGE 72 ===

Chapter 6 : %

13-14. DASAMSA : Starting from the same sign for an
odd sign and from the 9th with reference to an even sign, the 10
Dasamsas each of 3° are reckoned. These are presided over by
the ten rulers of the cardinal directons viz, Indra, Agni, Yama,
Rakshasa, Varuna, Vayu, Kubera, Isana, Brahma and Anantha
in case of an odd sign. It is in the reverse order that ‘these
presiding deities ore reckoned when an even sign is given.

Notes : In the case of an odd sign, the Dasamamsas
(3° each) are successively counted from the same sign. The
counting is from the 9th in case of an even sign. See the table
belaw :

Speculan Of Dasamsa

Sigoss 1 23456789 WN 12

Ist 110 312 52749 61 8
‘D 2nd 211 4 163 8 510 7 12 9
Io3d 3°12 5 2749 6311 8B L. 0
Vv 4bo41 63 850 7122 9 2 W
IT Sth 35927 49 611 8 1 10 3 2
S 6th 63 8 510 712 9 21 4 1
I 7th 74 9 611 8 110 3 122 § 2
O 8th 85 10 712 9 2 4 16 3
N 9th 96 11 8 110 3 12 5 297 #4
$ 10h 10 7 12 9 28 4 1 6 3 8 5

Example : For odd sings, the Dasamsas are the 10 signs
counted successively therefrom. For even signs, these fall in
10 successive signs counted from the 9th thereof.

Tremteer mwa aeretonfafitintg 1

aerate: were asters: texte

15. DVADASAMSA : The reckoning of the Dvadasamsa
(one twelfth of a sign or 2} degrees each) commences (rom the
same sign. In each sign the presidentship repeats thrice in the
order of Ganesa, Aswini Kumara, Yama and Sarpa for the 12
Dvadasamsas,

=== PAGE 73 ===

14 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastara

Notes : Each Dvadasamsa is 2° 30’ and the 12 divisions
fall successively in the successive 12 signs from the sign in quest-
ion, The following table will show the details.

Speculum Of Dvadasamsa

Signs 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 I 12
rr i 2 35 4 5 6 F 8 9 10 WE 12
and 2 3 4 5 67, BO 10 2
Did °3'4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1121 2
14h 4 5 6 7 8 910 Il 12 1 2 3
voth 5 6 7 8 910 11:12 1 2 3 4
I 6h 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 2 3 4 5
S$ mh 7 8 9 10 11°12 1 2 3 4 5 6
18th 8 9 OM 1 12 1 2 3 4 5 6-7:
Ooh 9 0 1k 12 1 23 4 5 67 8
Ni0th 10 11 12 1 2 3 4 5 67 8 9
S itth I 12 23 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
th 12 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11

Example : ‘The Dvadasamsas in Arics in order are : Aries,
Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo Vireo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagitiar-
ius, Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces. Similarly, for other signs
these be known from the Table, : .

as-fagisfiadt aat steninrererfrg |
aa-faoy gt: Gat ate amy setae eg
16, SHODASAMSA : Starting from Aries for a movable
sign, from Leo for a fixed signand from Sagittarius for a dual
sign, the 16 Shodasamsas (16th part ofa sign i.e. of 1°52’ 30”) are
regularly distributed. The presiding deities of these repeat in the
order Brahma, Vishnu, Siva and Sun four times in the case of an
odd sign. Jtis reverse in the case of an even sign that these
ruling deities are understood.
Notes : Each sign is made into 16 equal parts of Shodas-
amsas of 1° 52’ 30°. The 16divisions for any movable sign -

=== PAGE 74 ===

Chapter 6 : rh)

commence from Aries and are distributed successively. Similarly
from Leo for all fixed signs and from Sagittarius for all dual
signs. See the table given below: :

Speculum of Shodasamsas (or Kalamsas)
_—_—_——
Aries, Cancer Taurus, Leo Gemini,

Signs Liora & Capri Scorp & Virgo, Sagi &
Aquarius Pisces
Tst/13th Aries Leo Sagittarius *
2nd/14th “Taurus Virgo - Capri
3rd/1Sth Gemini Libra Aqua
D 4th/16th, Cancer Scorp Pisces
v Sth Leo Sagi Aries
$ 6th Virgo Capri "Taurus
F 7th Libra Aqua Gemini
. 3 8th Scorp Pisces Cancer
9th Sagi Aries Leo
10th Capri Taurus Virgo
1th Aqua Gemini Libra
12th Pisces Cancer Scorpio

Example : The 16 Shodasamsas for Aries or Cancer, or
Libra or Capricorn (movable sigr.s) are distributed to the 16 signs
(12+4) commencing from Aries. Similarly for fixed signs fron
Leo and for dual signs from Sagittarius as shown in the above
Speculum,

aa fewfeatmrarafiat = agitfzar: |
fraveat feat any qitearz frererak upon

=== PAGE 75 ===

16 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

erat why gat eesitfrsar frre eat

at sareaTzet war afar sraTTAt ug

smafee wat tat aarit ae sat

faget qget afr feat ofefarntqugen

aacret zat Aer fepeitad frefertt |

qareat T AAR AAT AE-SCHTAAT UZoll

fryer qeget ater avert sort frat

qatat vet amy arrerfirre ueen

17-21. VIMSAMSA ; From Aries for a movable sign,
from Sagittarius fora fixed sign and from Leo for a common
sign—this is how the calculations of Vimsamsa (1/20th ofa
sign or 1°30° each) are to commence. The Presiding deities of the
20 Vimsamsas in an odd sign are respectively : Kaali (arett),
Gauri, Jaya (=a), Lakshmi, Vijaya, Vimala, Sati, Tara, Jvala-
Mukhi, Sveta, Lalita, Bagala-mukhi, Pratyangira, Sachi, Raudri,
Bhavani, Varada, Jaya (wat), Tripura and Sumukhi. In an even
Sign these 20 deitics respectively are ¢ Daya, Megha, Chinnasi,
Pisachini, Dhoomavathi, Matangi, Bala, Bhadra, Aruna, Anala,
Pingala, Chuchchuka, Ghora, Vaarabi, Vaishnavi, Sita (fiat),
Bhuvanesvari, Bhairavi, Mangala and Aparajita.

Notes : There are 20 Vimsam sas at the rate of 1°30"

degrees in the whole of a sign. See the speculum of Vimsamsas
given below :

Speculam of Vimsamsas

Signs Aries, Cancer, Taurus,Leo Gemini,
Libra & Scorp & Aqua Virgo, Sayi
Capri & Pisces
D Ist/13th Aries Sagi Leo
I
Vs 2nd/14th” Taurus Capri Virgo
I
S  3rd/15th Gemini Aqua Libra
I
O 4th/16th Cancer Pisces Scorp
N . .
Ss

Sth/17th Leo Aries Sagi

=== PAGE 76 ===

Chapter 6 71

6th/18th Virgo Taurus Capri
7th/i9th Libra Gemini Aqua
8th/20th Scorp Cancer Pisces
9th Sagi Leo Aries ~
10th Capri Virgo Taurus
11th Aqua Libra Gemini
* 12th Pisces Scorp + Cancer

EXAMPLE : For Aries and other movable signs, the
20 divisions are in order distributed from Aries; for fixed signs
from Sagittarius and for dual signs from Leo as could be seen
from the Table.

faahesrrafan: = fagrdtera? ott
wefqerat @2 era: cafetisme: uRan
frerwnt eit fiett aaitsernqeeet: |
aifaray weet dite: fergrat fae wera
watet aad wdherfrettr fafa naan

22-23. SIDDHAMSA : The Siddhamsa (1/24th part of a
sign or 1°15’ each) distribution commences from Leo and Cancer
respectively for.an odd sign and an even sign. In the case of an
odd sign the ruling deities repeat twice in the order of Skanda,
Parsudhara, Anala, Viswakarma, Bhaga, Mitra, Maya, Antaka,
Vrisha-dhwaja, Govinda, Madana and Bhima. Reverse these
from Bhishma {to Skanda) twice to know the deities for the
Siddhamsa in an even aign. .

Notes : Siddbamsa js also called Chaturvimsamsa, each
being of a length of 1°15’, (24 in number in the whole of a sign).
The successively distributed Siddhdmsas commence from Leo
for any odd sign and from Cancer for any even sign, as per the -
Table :

=== PAGE 77 ===

B

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

Speculum of Siddhamsa

rr et

Signs Odd Even
Ist/13th Leo Cancer
2nd/14th . Virgo Leo
3rd/15th Libra Virgo
P  ath/16th Scorp Libra
Y Sth/17th Sagi Scorp
f 6th/18th Capri Sagi
S 7th/19th Aqua Capri
S  8th/20th Pisces . Aqua
9th/21st Aries Pisces
10th/22nd Taurus Aries
+ Uith/23rd Gemini Taurus
12th/24th Cancer Gemini

whenfircr: meee ATTART: t

aed arficferott arfefaaet weet fare: UR wt
TUATRCACTTA VST A TITTAT: ’

frat eqaafatsamiadd — aeettseqy: nau
antsorrafegerm: gat aa netfee:
aaimed wit RerfearcrmT URE
24-26. BHAMSA (NAKSHATRAMSA OR SAPTAVIMS-

AMSA) : The Bhamsa lords are respectively the Presiding deities
of the 27 Nakshatras as under : Dastra (Aswini Kumara), Yama,

=== PAGE 78 ===

Chapter 6 ; "19

Agni, Brahma, Chandra, Isa, Aditi, Jiva, Ahi, Pitara, Bhaga,
Aryama, Surya, Tvashta, Marut, Sakragni, Mitra, Vasava, Raks-
hasa, Varuna, Visvadeva, Govinda, Vasu, Varuna, Ajapa, Ahirb-
* udhanya and Pusha. These are for an odd sign. Count these
deities in a reverse order for an even sign. The Bhamsa distri-
bution commences from Aries and other movable signs for all
the 12 signs.
Notes : One Bhamsa is of 1° 6° 40” of arc and there are
27 such divisions in a sign. See the speculum given below :

Speculum Of Bhamsa

Signs 12345678 9 10 il 12.

1st/13th/25th 1 4 710 1.4 710 1 4 7 10
D = 2nd/i4th/26th 2 5 811 25 8112 5 8 II
I 3rd/15th/27?th 3 6 912 3 6 912 3 6 9 12
V  4th/16th 47101471014 7 1 1
I 5th/17th 5 81125 8125 8 1 2
S  6th/18th 6912 36912 36 9 12 3
I 7th/19th 7101471014710 1 4
O 8sth/th- 81125 811 258 I 2 5
N  9th/21st 912 3:6 912 369 12 3 6
S  l0th/22md 10.1 4710 1 4710 1 4 7

1th/23rd 11 2:3 B11 25 8il 2 5 8

12th/24th 12 3 6 912 3 6 912 3 6 9

The Bhamsas (or Nakshatramsas or Sapthavimsamsas) are
distributed from Aries for fiery signs, from Cancer for earthy
signs, from Libra for airy signs and Capricorn for watery signs.
Ihave on P. 31 of my English translation of SARAVALI given
different calculation for Nakshatramsa: That source obviously
is defective and I would prefer Parasara’s version as given in our
present text.

farittaree faa geretsarantan: |
Tataqracamranniat aaa | AA NR

=== PAGE 79 ===

80 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

afg: wdterat a sad sear)
fast maa: mATAt frrdary nga
27-28. TRIMSAMSA : The Trimsamsa lords for an odd

sign are-Mars, Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury and Venus. Each of
them in order rules 5,5,8,7 and’5 degrees, The deities ruling over
the Trimsamsas are respectively, Agni, Vayu, Indra, Kubera,
and Varuna. In the case of an even sign, the quantum of
Trimsamsa, planetary lordship and deities get reversed.

Notes : For Trimsamsa divisions, see the table given below :

Speculum of Trimsamsas

—

Signs 1,3,5,7,9 Signs 2,4,6,8,10 and
and 11 12
D First 5° Aries First 5° Taurus
¥ Next 5° Aquarius Next 7° Virgo
5 Next 8° Sagittarius Next 8° Pisces
5 Next 7° Gemini Next 5° * Capricorn .
3 Next 5° Libra Next 5° Scorpio

aarmerfan feat fea
wat anet wo: eaeafareafaar: uzen
Farrar fare eqszt aren frat ef: |
aa wars weed: HTT TET TTT Rot
29-30. CHATVARIMSAMSA (1/40th part of a sign) : For
odd signs count from Aries and for an even sign from Libra in
respect of Chatvarimsamsas (each of 45’ of arc). Vishnu, Chan-
dra, Marichi, Tvashta, Dhata, Siva, Ravi, Yama, Yaksha, Gand-
harva, Kala and Varuna repeat successively as presiding deities
in the same order for all sings.
Notes : Chatvarimsamsa or Khavedamsa is a fortieth part
of a sign or 45’ of arc, These are successively distributed in the

various signs from Aries in case of any odd sign, and from Libra
in case of any even sign. See the table noted below ;

=== PAGE 80 ===

Chapter 6 . 81

Speculum of Chatvarimsamsa

Signs 12345 67 8 91011 12

Ist, 13th, 25th, 37h 1 721717171717
D 2nd, 14th, 26th, 38th 2 8 2 8 28 28 28 2 8
I 3rd, 15th, 27th, 39th 3 939393939 3,9
V 4th, 16th, 28th, 40th 410 410.410 410 410 410
I Sth, 17th, 29th 5151) SU 5 SH SI
S 6th, 18th, 30th . 612 612 612 612 612 612
1 7th, 19th, 31st TI 7TI717171721
O 8th, 20th, 32nd 828282828 2 8 2
N 9th, 21st, 33rd 939393939393
S 10th, 22nd, 34th 10 410 410 410 410 410 4
11th, 23rd, 35th Su Sil SU Sa SS
12th, 24th, 36th 12 612 612 612 612 612 6

As regards ruling deities Vishnu to Varuna repeat 3 times
while in the 4th round the rulership is only upto Tvashta.

aataazarrrarafirrreacet irate
feat faare fetarng fadtafaoraraz gen
fereqagetesr fata: feat fei
jar daantacat fadtat feweer 1g

31-32, AKSHA VEDAMSA (1/45th part of a sign) :
Aries, Leo and Sagittarius are the signs from which the distri-
butions respectively commence for movable, immovable azd
common signs. In movable signs, Brahma, Siva and Vishnu;
in immovable sings Siva, Vishnu and Brahma and in common
sings Vishnu, Brahma and Siva repeat 15 times the president-
ship over these Akshayedamsas,

Notes : Each Akshavedamsa is of 40° arc as a sign is
divided into 45 equal-parts. Aries is the starting point for all
movable signs, Leo for all fixed signs and Sagittarius for all dual
signs. The distribution is through in successive signs in each
case. Sce the Table given on the next page : :

=== PAGE 81 ===

$2. Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

Speculum of Akshayedamsa

—
Signs 12345 67 8 91011 12

Ist, 13th, 25th, 37th 1 5 9 159 159.1 5 9
‘2nd, 14th, 26th, 38th2 610 2 610 2 610 2 610
D 3rd, 15th, 27th, 39th 3 711 3 711 3-711 °3 744
T 4th, 16th, 28th, 40th 4 812 4 812.4 812 4 812
"V Sth, 17th, 29th, dist 59 1 5 9 1 591591
I 6th, 18th, 30th, 42nd6 10 2 610 2 610 2-610 2
S 7th, 19th, 31st, 43rd 71130711 3 711 3 7411 3
T 8th, 20th, 32nd, 44th 812 4 812 4 812.4 8 12 4
O 9h, 2ist, 33rd, 45th 9 1 59 15915 9 4 5
N 10th, 22nd, 34th §=610 2 610 2 610 2 610 2 6
S th, 23rd, 35th 13711 3711 3 711 3 7
12th, 24th, 36th 12 4 812 4 812 4 812 48

.

uta fag Gz froriurearntgg t
ae ae a aardein: seeder: ear: gan
Beet wernt a: gad ga-feet
ase: gat wet afgafar qvias: ax
aarerfenteeriva sta: aqinaeger: 1
ag: ate Borage Premade: Ay
jamY oosfrrara ferit-mmaret
gfeet aamara zrarfiivdae: ween
wa | ReEmgesAat =| quifamac: 1
fawaragarara grat AMAIA NAN
seararaatearen: stra: wtaerfiae: 1
wuedegaareat eet: STATA: ATH
wsqhaia: aha: giisfrettastsa: |
qadfirereroreat water aq: get
am 4 eqegatedar: gera ‘ster: setae:
werd renfireny attraerag: a uvon

=== PAGE 82 ===

Chapter 6 83

qaasediadgaa vet | ABANTT: tl
areca raged | atrafa | aatfeo: een

33-41. SHASHTIAMSA (1/60th part a of sign or half-a-
degree each) : To calculate the Shashtiamsa lord, ignore the sign
position of a planet and take the degrees etc. it traversed in that
sign. Multiply that figure by 2 and divide the degrees by 12. Add
1 to the remainder which will indicate the sign in which the
Shashtiamsa falls. The lord of that sign is the planet ruling the
said Shashtiamsa. In odd signs, the names of Shashtiamsas are :
1. Ghora, 2, Rakshasa, 3. Deva, 4. Kubera, 5. Yaksha,
6. Kinnara, 7. Bhrashta, 8. Kulaghna, 9, Garala, 10. Vahni,
11. Maya, 12. Purishaka, 13. Apampathi, 14, Marutwan,
15, Kala, 16. Sarpa, 17. Amrita 18. Indu, 19. Mridu,
20. Komala, 21. Heramba, 22. Brahma, 23. Vishnu, 24. Mahes-
wara, 25. Deva, 26. Ardra, 27. Kalinasa, 28. Kshiteesa,
29. Kamalakara, 30. Gulika, 31. Mrithyu, 32. Kaala,
33. Davagni, 34. Ghora, 35. Yama, 36 Kantaka, 37. Sudha,
38, Amrita, 39, Poornachandra, 40. Vishadagdha, 41, Kulanasa,
42. Vamsakshaya, 43. Utpata, 44. Kaala, 45, Saumya,
46. Komala, 47. Seetala, 48. Karala Damshtra 49, Chandra-
mukhi, 50. Prayeena, 51. Kalapavaka, 52. Dandayudha,
53. Nirmala. 54, Saumya, 55. Kroora, 56. Atisectala, 57. Amrita

* §8, Payodhi, 59. Bhramana, 60. Chandrarekha (Indurekha). The
reverse is the order for even signs insomuch as these names are
concerned. Planets in bencfic Shashtiamsas produce auspicious
results while the opposite is true in case of planets in malefic
Shashtiamsas.

Notes : The method of caleulating the ruling planet for
each Shashtiamsa (or 1/60th pat of a sign or 30’ of arc) is
advised in sloka 33 above. Assume that Venus is placed in
Capricorn 13° 25’. To find out the Shashtiamsa lord, ignore the
siga position and multiply the degrees and minutes by 2. Hence
13° 25’ x 2=26° 50’. The degrees i.e. 26 (ignoring minutes) be
divided by 12. The remainder is 2 which should be increased
by 1. Thus we get 3. Count 3 signs from Capricorn. The
resulting Shashtiamsa position is Pisces whose lord is Jupiter.
These positions can also be marked in a zodiacal diagram for
the planets and ascendant for an easy grasp.

The order of Shashtiamsas along with the meanings of

=== PAGE 83 ===

84

their designations are denoted below. These will be very help-
ful in delineation and to know whether a particular Shashtiamsa
is benefic or malefic in nature, (as marked against each Shash-

tiamsa).

Odd sign
0°-0° 30°
0°30-1°
1°-1°30°
1°30'-2°
2°-2°30"

~ -3°30'-3°

3°-3°30°
3°30'-4°
4°-4°30°
4°30'-S°

$°-5°30"
5°30-6°
6°-6°30"
630-7
PTO

7°30'-8°

8°-8°30"
8°30'-9°

9°-9°30"

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

. Even sign
1, Ghora (M)—aweful, violent. 29° 30'-30°
2. Rakshasa (M)—demoniacal. 29°-29°30'
3, Deva (B)—divine, spiritual side. 28°30'-29°
4, Kubera (B)—celestial treasurer. 28°-28°30°
5. Yaksha (B)—cclestial singer. 27°30'-28°
6. Kinnara (B)—a mythical being 27°-2T° 30°
with a human head in the form
of a horse, a bad or deformed man,
7. Bhrashta (M)—fallen, vicious. 26°30-27°
8, Kulagbna (M)—ruining a family, 26°-26°30°
9. Garala (M)—poison or venom. 25°30'-26°
10, Vahni (M)—fire, gastric fluid, 25°-25°30'
digestive faculty, appetite.

11. Maya (M)—deceit, jugglery. 24°30'-25°

12. Purishaka (M)—dirt. 24°-24°30'°

13, Apampathi (B)—the ocean, 23°30'-24°
Varuna, (the rain god). |

14. Marat (B)—the wind god. 23°23°30"

15. Kaala (M)—dark blue colour, 22°30'-23°

weather, Time considered as one

of the nine dravyas by the

Vaiseshikas, a person who

distils and sells liquor, Saturn,

Siva, a personification of the

destructive principle. .
16. Sarpa (M)—snake. 22°-22°30°
17. Amrita (B)—immortal, nectar. 21°30'-22°
18. Indu (B)—Moon, the number 1, | 21°-21°30°

camphor.
19. Mridu(B)—moderate, soft. 20°30'-21°

=== PAGE 84 ===

Chapter 6

9°30'-10°
10°-10°30°

10°30’-11°

11°-11°30"

11°30°-12°

12°-12°30"
12°30'-13°
13°-13°30°

13°30'-14°
14°-14°30°

14°30'-15°
15°-15°30°
15°30'-16°
16°-16°30'

16°30'-17°
17°-17°30"
17°30'-18°
18°-18°30'

18°30'-19°
19°-19°30"

8s

20. Komata (B)—tender, agreeable. 20°-20°30"

21, Heramba (B)—Ganesa, (the elep- 19°30'-20°
hant faced god), a boastful hero,
buffalo.

22. Brahma (B)—the Universal Father, 19°-19°30"
a missile, sacred knowledge.

23, Vishnu (B)—the second deity of 18°30°-19°
the sacred Triad, name of Agni, .
name of a lawgiver (author of
Vishnusmriti), a pious man.

24, Maheswara (B)—the third deity - 18°-18°30°
of the Triad entrusted with the
task of Great Destruction, also
name of Vishnu, a “great lord

(sovereign).
25. Deva (B)—same as S. No, 3 17°30'-18°
26. Ardra (B)—moist 17°-17°30"
27, Kalinasa (B)—destruction of  16°30'-17°

strife (according to some, this
is a malefic Shashtiamsa)
28. Kshiteesa (B)—ruler of the earth 16°-16°30°
29, Kamalakara (B)—a lake full of 15°30°-16°
Jotuses, an assemblage of lotuses.
30. Gulika (M)—Saturn’s son. 15°-15°30"
31, Mrithyn (M)—son of Mars, death. 14°30°-15°
32. Kaala (M)—same as S.No. 15 14°-14°30"
33, Davagani (M)—a forest confla- 13°30'-14°
gration. .
34. Ghora (M)—same as S.No. 1 13°-13°30"
35. Yama (M)—death personified 12°30'-13°
36. Kantaka (M)—thorn, any trouble- 12°-12°39"
some fellow to the state and
enemy of order and government.
37. Sudha (B)—nectar, ambrosia, name 11°30" 12°
of the Ganges.
38. Amrita (B)—same as S.No. 17 11°-11°30"
39. Poornachandra (B)—Full Moon. 10°30'-11° - -

=== PAGE 85 ===

86

Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

19°30'-20° 40. Vishadagdha (M)—destroyed by —10°-10°30"
° venom, consuuned by grief.

20°-20°30" 41. Kulanasa (M)—same as 8. 9°30'-10°

20°30'-21° 42. Vamsakshaya (M)—descent not 9°-9°30"
growing further.

21°-21°30" 43. Utpata (M)—a Portentous or 8°30'-9°
unusual phenomenon _ boding

. ‘calamity, any public calamity

like an eclipse, earthquake & C.

21°30'-22° 44 Kaala (M)—same as No. 15 8°-8°30°

22°-22°30° 45. Saumya (B)—rclating or sacred to 7°30'-8°
the Moon, handsome, auspicious,

22°30'-23° 46, Komala (B)—same as 20 1-730"

23°-23°30' 47. Seetala (B)—cold, Moon, camphor, 6°30'-7°
turpentine, sandal.

23°30'-24° 48, Karaladamshtra (M)—frightful 6°-6°30°
teethed

24°'-24°30' 49. Chandramukhi (B)—having the 5°30'-6°
beauty of the Moon, .

24°30'-25° 50. Praveena (B)—clever, versed in, 5°-5°30"

25°-25°30" 51, Kala Pavaka (M)—the destructive 4°30'-5°

. fire at the end of the world.

25°30'-26° 52. Dandayudha (M)—the staff held by 4°-4°30"
an ascetic (or by a Brahmin).

26°-26°30" 53. Nirmala (B)—resplendent, sinless. 3°30'-4°
stainless, virtuous,

26°30'-27° 54, Saumya (B)—same as S.No. 45 3°-3°30°

27°-27°30' 55. Kroora (M)—pitiless, mischievous, 2°30'-3°
bloody, disagreeable, terrible.

27°30'-28° 56, Atiseetala (B)—very cold. 2°-2°30'

28°-28°30' 57. Amrita (B)—same as S.No. 17 1°30'-2°

28°30'-29° 58. Payodhi (B)—Ocean. 1°-1°30'

29°-29°30' 59. Bhramana (M)—wandcring, 0°30°-1°

29°30'-30° 60. Chandra Rekha (B)—the digit or 0°-0°30"

streak of the Moon,

With the above interpretation of the names of the Shasht-

=== PAGE 86 ===

Chapter 6 . 87

iamsas, we will be wellguided in the matter of predictions. For
example, if a benefic planet i: in the 3rd house identical with a
benefic’s Rasi in ‘Yaksha’ shashtiamsa, the native will bave high
musical achievements. If Jupiter or the 2nd lord be in ‘Kubera’
Shashtiamsa, one will be very affluent. If a planet in the 8th is

. in ‘Payodhi’ shashtiamsa, fear from water may be expected. If
the 10th lord occupies ‘Bhrashta’ shashtiamsa, the native will be
wretched in profession. In this manner, many incidents can be
clearly estimated which may not be ‘visible’ to ordinary eye
from the horoscope.

Now, we have before us the details of all the 16 divisions
as dealt with by sage Parasara. One more minute division, the
minutest in Hindu Astrology, is Nadi Amsa or 150th part of a
sign which will complete the system of Divisionalisation. For
details, please see my works “Doctrines of Suka Nadi — Retold”
and “An Epitome of Nadi Granthas”.

avaamg wet aia! oa feat
agar: aaaniva feat qaadiar wean
wala ated sat fiewereat
ateat fiegnatat a fafaedoargead weg
wafaraated a out Iafata a)
agfa: goscatt: carqgered a aaha: ween
acaatsy = fara = onfcatrenfaetatat: |
afar wazgrarged = fafaesat enn
aafmitgered caret: fag aah
quad aq aefadadle a arate: vgn
agfaierined = aafis  WHATEAT!
fafia: aradla:  eaTea TSMR Uo
Fag aaaaareai fafa: ata FIARITA |
aqfartaged car cafe: wegETAAq vec
arared aaq aefa: acafa: wera |
wefaraaqrad = aafe: | qorarzeq wen

=== PAGE 87 ===

88 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
fafiweraire are ateirarafesitg
qaerd waq qifart: earfgererty uot
wefagrert oo méicite = fafafadaa
ya: atecrmed engal dzengar: yg
etteaqafzstorer rafal: qat |
eatearq Sexaravat anf orem: aeitaat ug
seine vefaar ate gaenra Fy
wenfanarter oo gear dearest: wan

42-53. VARGA CLASSIFICATION : Maitreya, explained
Dow are the sum effects of classifications of different divisions
(or Vargas so far narrated). These are four kinds, viz. Shad
Varga (6 divisions considered), Saptha Varga (7 divisions consid-
ered), Dasa Varga (10 divisions considered) and Shodasa Varga
{all the 16 divisions considered). In the Shadvarga classification,
the Varga designations are Kimsuka, Vyanjana, Chaamara,
Chatra and Kundala according to a planet being in 2to 6
combinations of good Vargas. Next is the Sapt avarga in which
these classifications continue in the same manner upto six
combinations of good Vargas, the 7th additional Varga getting
classified as Mukuta. In the Dasa Varga scheme, the designations
commence from Parijata etc. such as 2 good Vargas—Parijatha.
3. Uttama, 4. Gopura, 5. Simhasana, 6. Paaravata, 7. Devaloka,
8. Brahmaloka, 9. Sakravahana and 10. Vargas—Sridhama.
In the Shodasa Varga scheme the combinations of Vargas
go with designations thus : two good Varges—Bhedaka,
3. Kusuma, 4. Nagapushpa, 5. Kanduka, 6. Kerala, 7. Kalpa-
vriksha, 8. Chandana Vana, 9. Poornachandra, 10. Uchchaisrava,
- 11. Dbanvantari, 12, Suryakanta, 13. Vidruma, 14. Sakra-
simbasana, 15. Goloka and 16, Vargas—Sri Vallabha. In these
divisions, the divisions falling in the planet’s exaltation sign,
Moolatrikona sign, own sign, and the signs owned by the lord
of an angle from the Arudha ascendant are all to be considered
(as good Vargas), The divisions of a combust planet, defeated
Planet, weak planet and a planet in bad Avasthas like Sayana be
all ignored to be auspicious, for these destroy the good yogas,
Notes : Four kinds of summary of the Vargas or divisions
are suggested thus :

=== PAGE 88 ===

Chapter 6 ad

(a) Shadvarga (considering six Vargas) viz. Rasi, Hora,
Decanate, Navarasa Dvadasamsa and Trimsamsa.

(b) Sapta Varga (seven Vargas) adding Saptamamsa to the
Shad Varga.

{c) Dasa Varga (ten Vargas) adding Shodasamsa, Dasama-
msa and Shashtiamsa divisions to the Sapta Varga.

(d) Shodasa Varga (all the 16 Vargas so far narrated by
the sage).

The groups as above are as per slokas 17-20 of ch, 7 infra.

The Vargas to be considered (as good) are :

1. Exaltation divisions.

2. Moolatrikona divisions,

3. Own divisions.

4, The divisions of the owners of the four angles counted
from the Arudha Pada or Pada Lagna. ‘

* The first three are clear. The fourth one needs a clarifica-,
tion. In sloka 52 above, the word eeqeaiy’ (Swarudhath) has
been used which means from the Arudha Pada or Pada Lagna.
Hence the last quarter of sloka 52 hints at the “divisions of the

_ lords of angles from the Arudha Pada”.. (Similarly “Swamsa”’ or
tai means the Navamsa occupied by Atma Karaka i.e. Kara-
kamsa ascendant, vide ch. 33, infra.)

The sage suggests that the signs owned by the lords of
Arudha Lagna and of its angles are considered good for Varga
Division. This will bring many signs—sometimes as many as 8—
in the purview of this rule. It has been felt necessary to bring
this liberal approach contained in the sloka to the attention of
the reader. In my opinion, the truer strength of a planet lies
in its Moolatrikona, exaltation and own sign positions.

For the sake of brevity, the good Vargas in number in the
context of Shadvarga through Shodasa Varga are given special
designations as detailed below :

1€ Shadvarga scheme is considered two or more such good
Vargas are known thus :

2. Kimsuka 3. Vyanjana 4. Chamara 5, Chatra 6. Kundala.

Tf Sapta Varga scheme is used the same names upto six

good Vargas apply while seven good Vargas go under the name
Mukuta. ° .

=== PAGE 89 ===

9 7 _ Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

If Dasa Varga scheme is resorted to, the good Vargas in
number are called thus :

2. Parijata 3, Uttama 4. Gopura 5. Simhasana 6. Paravata
7. Devaloka 8. Brahmaloka 9. Sakravahana 10. Sridhama.

"The author of Sarvartha Chintamani designates 8, 9 and 10
respectively as Amara, Iravata and Vaiseshikamsas. In fact,
these three are popularly known with these names viz, Amara
etc. rather than with the ones given by Maharshi,

When Shodasa Varga scheme is wholly considered, the
number of good divisions are known as :

2. Bhedaka 3. Kusuma 4. Nagapushpa 5, Kanduka
6. Kerala 7. Kalpavriksha 8. Chandanavana 9. Poornachandra
10. Uchchaisrava 11) Dhanvantari 12 Suryakanta 13. Vidruma
14. Sakrasimhasana 15. Goloka 16. Sri Vallabha,

It may be noted that most of even the hoary authors have
not gone beyond Dasa Varga scheme. The sage has fully explai-
ned all the 16 Vargas involved so that a planet’s actual disposit-
ion is properly known.

As far as Hora or halfof a sign is concerned “good
Vargas” should be flexibly used as except the Sun and Moon,
none has rulership of Hora. Jupiter is in exaltation Varga if in
Moon’s Hora. Then, for Jupiter in Sun's Hora, and for other
four in any Hora, how do we classify the Varga? In my opinion,
we have to follow the hint given in sloka 13 of the next chapter
that Jupiter, Sun and Mars give effects if in Sun’s Hora (as far
as Hora is concerned) and the rest of the plancts except Mercury
in Moon’s Hora. Mercury is good in both the Horas. So to
say, these are good Horas for the coneerned planets. It follows
that Jupiter and Mercury are good in any Hora for Varga
classification. (There are further hints about Hora, vide ch.7,
sloka 13 onwards.) ,

Nextly, a bricf clarification is required about the Sun arid
Moon not having own Trimsamsas. The Sun cah occupy Aries
in Trimsamsas and the Moon can be in Taurus if Venusian
Trimsamsa. They cannot be in Leo or Cancer in Trimsainsa
charts. Hence only exaltation will apply to them in Trimsamsa.

Now, coming back to the Varga names, we will take up
some for clarifications, The word ‘‘Suryakantamsa” denotes

=== PAGE 90 ===

Chapter 7 91

that the planet or the ascendant, as the case may be, has obta-
ined 12 good Vargas in the Shodasa Varga or 16 divisions.
Similanly “qraaaie’ or Paravatamsa indicates six good Vargas
in Dasa Varga scheme. One can understand these terms on these
lines.

AA Ai ATHENA: tot

: Chapter 7
. Divisional Consideration

aa oatemadg fate a azremeq
wet age feat demi arqarfzamq ven
tomrt eras ded aati arafaaaqs
gaitatastat = farad acaming nen
aaa sant anaht aga!
aantt war faalfrrad stenint gn
gasqeea fama agai via a
saramat feed ated fanfare
fram aaa t sid da aansarqi
facie fers wait aq yn
aeaaine dq qe vishareterta 1

fe gaia arava: eeaseamefag: ven
ae areata ae at anidtat wet aa

a garft eesa: scimfaat: qa: wou
aa afara qferra anfdtat at gary

fe Mswanint aad sfaarfzat: ust.

. 1-8. USE OF THE 16 DIVISIONS : 1 now explain the
use of these sixtecn divisions. The physique from the ascendant,
wealth Irom Hora, happiness through coborn from decanate,

=== PAGE 91 ===

92 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

fortunes from Chaturthamsa, sons and grandsons from saptha-
msa, spouse from Navamsa, power (and position) from Dasamsa,
parents from Dvadasamsa, benefits and adversities through
conveyances from Shodasamsa, worship from Vimsamsa, learn-
ing from Chathur Vimsamsa. strength and weakness from
Bhamsa,cvil effects from Trimsamsa, auspicious and inauspicious
effects from Khavedamsa, and all indications from both Aksha-
vedamsa and Shashtiamsa : these are the considerations to be
made through the respective Vargas or divisions. The bhava
whose lord is in a malefic Shashtiamsa will diminish, so say
Garga and others. The bhava whose lord is in a benefic Shodas-
amsa (or Kalamsa) flourish. This is how the 16 Vargas are to be
evalpated.

‘Notes ¢ The Shodasavargas, apart from giving clues as to
the dignity of a planet, can be used to delineate various Bhava
¢ffects. The proper instruments are :

J. Ascendant for the wellbeing or otherwise of the

physique.
. Hora for wealth. -
Decanate for happiness through coborn.
Chaturthamsa for fortunes. .
Saptamamsa for dynasty (i.e. progeny etc.)
Navamsa for spouse.
, Dasamamsa for power and position (i.e. livelinoad etc.)
. Dvadasamas for parents.
. Shodasamsa for conveyances and related happiness.
%. Vimsamsa for worship, spiritual progress, religious
activities ctc.
{. Chaturvimsamsa for academic achievements.
12. Bhamsa for strength and weakness. .
13, Trimsamsa for evils.
14. Khavedamsa for auspicious and inauspicious effects.
JS. Akshavedamsa for all general indications.
16, Shashtiamsa for all general indications.

When, for example, considering the academic achievements
0 i Oe en
able Chaturvimsamsas, the subject will progress with educatign
ubhindered. Or if the Dasa lord related to education is digni-

PRIAWAWN

=== PAGE 92 ===

Chapter 7 . : 93

fied in Chaturvimsamsa, he will confer wide learning. Similarly
the other events be delineated accordingly.

Slokas 6-8 need a clearer approach. Take a_bhava owned
bya planet. If the said planct_is in a_malefic Shashtiamsa,
then the bhaya in question suffers a defect, ood and bad
Shashtiamsas have been specified earlier.

Another clarification is about the lord of Shodasamsa being
benefic. Ifa planet is in the Shodasamsa (Kalamsa) of a bene-
fic, then the house owned by the first-mentioned flourishes.
The word Ca" means “benefic” without reference to “good
Vargus” vide sloka 52 of the previous chapter. Why the sage
chose these exceptions is inexplicable.

varfeq oo wraq Geet WAG aT

aifemtre ater ay Fat yay nen

ware: aerrerfy | enifaeites aay t

aeq fearerin faqs gfeentaey go

nefarites ated qaigtat aarfcr)

emagred at qi med aeraafeat ug eu

9-12. After assessing the 20 point strength of the ascending

degree, other houses and the planets, the good and bad effects
be declared. I explain below the method of knowing the Vimso-
paka strength (20 point strength) just by knowing which an idea
of the results of actions of this birth and of former birth will
clearly emerge. The planets from the Sun on get full strength
when in exaltation or in own sign and are bereft of strength when
in the 7th (from exaltation), In between, the strength be known
by rule of three process. In the case of a planet owning two
signs, distinction of placement in odd/even sign identical with
own sign be made.

Notes : The method of calculating Vimsopaka strength is
given in slokas 17-27 of the present chapter. The sage instructs
that this strength will be highly suggestive. .

Other sources of strength are suggested in slokas 11-16.
These are related to assess a planet’s proper disposition.

A planet in exaltation is fully powerful while in debilitation
it is devoid of Vigour. If it is descending, i.e. leaving the exalt-

=== PAGE 93 ===

94 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

ation and transitting towards debilitation, degree by degree, its
strength diminishes and the planet becomes fully void in the
debilitation sign. Again when it climbs from.fall to exaltation,
gradually it gains attd becomes fully potential in exaltation.

- It is also stated that planets in own signs get full strength.”
Here a distinctioffis to be noted. Male planets in male signs and
female planets in female sings get full strength. Mars and others
each have two signs. Mars,a male planet, in own sign if in
Aries is better than Mars in Scorpio, a female sign. Venus in
Taurus is better placed than in Libra. Such inference may be
wisely made. These details are elaborately discussed in the rele-
vant chapters in the matter of calculation of Shadbala etc.

vefeafrantsta frvreafafrerat
aeadsqrreadt id attorreiviaa: uel

quran We aterea ya: t
arate fares ca reaeaR RANT: MRR

oad gel gard aa are aaae
wa: we oeagteet seid face ge
measqnard aaa Renwisit fafaaray
ae qaartfa aatemarafe | era gyn
aa: Swed at aniaed freafa:s
fantes fafardaaarit ead eT eg
13-16. HORA, DECANATE AND TRIMSAMSA EFFE-
CTS ; Jupiter, the Sun and Mars give (pronounced) effects in
the hora of the Sun. The Moon, Venus and Saturn do so when
in Moon’s hora. Mercury is effective in both the Horas. In
the case of an even Rasi the hora of the Moon will be powerful
in effects while the Sun’s hora in an odd sign will be so. Full,
medium and nil will be the effects respectively in the beginning,
middle and the end of a hora. Similar applications be made for
adecanate, Turyamsa, Navamsa etc. As for Trimsamsa effects
the Sun is akin to Mars and the Moon is akin to Venus. The
effects applicable to Rasi will apply to Trimsamsa.
Notes : The three male planets in Sun's Hora will be reve-
sling while Venus, Moon and Saturn are good in Moon’s Hora.

=== PAGE 94 ===

Chapter 7 95

Here again, Sun’s Hora of odd signs and Moon's Hora in even
signs are given preference. Now from this, it emerges that Sun,
Mars and Jupiter are highly powerful in the first half of an odd
sign and Moon, Venus and saturn are very revealing in the

_ second half of an even sign. Mercury is powerful io any Hora
whether an odd sign or otherwise,

The effects due to a Hora will be derived fully if the planet
is in the first one-third part of the Hora. The effects will be
medium or nil according to the placements being in the second
or third part of the Hora.

AUTH ATTAT ET aft.
fanivara ogant ay faster: sag ugot
wararfeadariiataa: erates |

aeranine ay faraet: da ataaT ues
aa: ME gt mgaar st ufsaaw:
eget Ge a aearg ated A AAT: gel

17-19. VIMSOPAKA STRENGTH : The Shadvargas (six
divisions) consist of Rasi, Hora, decanate, Navamsa, Dyadasa-
msa and Trimsamsa. The full strength, for each of the divisions
respectively are 6,2, 4,5, 2 and 1. This is the Vimsopaka
strength relating to Shadvarga division. Adding the Sapthama-
msa to the Shad Vargas, we get Sapta Varga, the Vimsopaka
strength for which is: 5, 2, 3, 2},44, 2 and 1. These are gross
strengths while subtle ones should be understood by exact
Positions,

Notes ; Vimsopaka strength is the 20 point strength obta-
ined by a planet in continuously occupying own Vargas etc. in
the various schemes like Shad Varga to Shodasa Varga. For
fuller appreciation, see the notes given under slokas 26-27 of the
current chapter.

anant fadatear: sete: sfecanret: |
wa aay faa dagsrunwer @URoll

20. Add Dasamsa, Shodasamsa and Shastiamsa to the said
Saptha Varga Divisions, to get the scheme of Dasa Varga (10

=== PAGE 95 ===

96 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

divisions) The Vimsopaka strength in this context is 3 for Rasi,
5 for Shashtiamsa and for the other 8 divisions, 14 each.

argearm: tarat ferret: ofeatferar
wa aed faddo wet faster uae
aaa eraTiat Falat TR FAR |
Rufariageart | Farrafra: FATA NARI
aainea gd tai at arineer a)
aa mg a fad gat: gor nHeT fe uy
agad q damit gtaq edtagegaqs
qt fanaa fam afer: eqiafafrat uae
fat daa sed ad ca satfaaqs
wal aatfamat a dafartas wa Uy
21-25, When the 16 divisions (Shodasa Varga Scheme) are
considered together, the Vimsopaka score goes thus : Hora 1
Trimsamsa I, decanate 1, Shodasamsa 2, Navamsa 3, Rasi 3},
- Shashtiamsa 4, and the rest of the nine divisions cach a half.
The Vimsopaka strength remains as 20 (in the above computat-
ions) only when the planet is in own house Vargas. Otherwise
the total strength from 20 declines to 18 in extreme friend’s
Vargas, to 15 in friendly Vargas, to 10 in equal’s divisions, to 7
in encmy’s Vargas and to 5 in sworn enemy’s Wargas. (These
figures are called Varga Viswa.)

aifreat: eafaracat: qafanfrarfsrat: |

fararnctaated aeasett weal 7 fe UREN

aged canned ahd mead ayaq!

faead qinad ated ad aarfeorg gon

26-27. VIMSOPAKA PROPORTIONAL EVALUATION :
Multiply the figure due to full strength for the division by the
Varga Viswa and divide by 20 to get the exact strength of the
planet. If the such total is below 5 the planet will not be
capable of giving auspicious results. If it is above 5 but below
10, the planet will yield some good effects. Later on upto 15 it

~ Gs indicative of mediocre effect. A planet with above 15 will

yield wholly favourable effects.

=== PAGE 96 ===

Chapter 7 97

* Notes ¢ Vimsopaka or 20 Point -strength is calculated for
Shad Varga, Saptha Varga, Dasa Varga or Shadasa Varga, which-
ever is being considered by the astrologer. These Vargas are
detailed in the earlier slokas. By being in own Vargas a planet
gets full points of strength allotted to it in the concerned scheme.
These are tabulated below for easy grasp :

rr nn

Varga Shad Saptha Dasa  Shodasa

Varga Varga Varga Varga
Rasi 6 5.0 “30 35
Hora 2 2.0 LS “1.0
Drekkana 4 3.0 . 1.5 1.0
Navamsa, 5 25 15 3.0
Dvadasamsa 2 45° 15. 0.5
Trimsamsa 1 2.0 AS” 1.0
Saptamsa _ 100 15. O85
Dasamsa_ 7 ay ‘15 0:5
Kalamso- on - 1.5 2.0
Shastiamsa od _ 5.0 4.0
Vimsamsa _ = _- 0.5
Chatur Vimsamisa = — ~ — 0s
Bhamsa - _- - 0.5
Turyamsa - - oo 0.5
Khavedamsa co - -— 0.5
Akshavedamsa _ _~ _ 0.5
Total - 20 20.0 20.0 20.0

eee caterrererrenees

=== PAGE 97 ===

98 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

The figure against each individual division is called
“Swaviswa”. For example, in Rasi Division under Shodasa
Varga, you find 3.5 which is the Swaviswa.

Varga Viswa is the total strength as shown in sloka 25 for
the various dignities like placement in own house, extreme
friend’s house etc.

- Ifa planet is continuously in own Vargas in the whole
of Shad Varga scheme or any other, it gets all the 20 Points
or full of Vimsopaka strength. This is always not possible. By
virtue of a placement in other than own house, the points
diminish. In this context, Panchadha Sambandha or compound
telationsbip is to be considered, as learnt by us from slokas 57-
58 of ch. 3, supra.

To arrive at the net Vimsopaka, note the following
formula :

Swaviswa x Varga Viswa
20

Now see the following horoscope of a native bornon
17-2-1984 at 2235 hrs. IST at New Delhi. :

ey

- Rahu .
a
Moon
Lag
Sat

Mars

=== PAGE 98 ===

Chapter 7 o. 9

. Let us consider the Vimsopaka strength for the ascendant
lord Venus. His Varga dignities and his relationship with each
of the Varga Lords: is noted simultaneously along with Vims-
opaka. The longitude of Venus is 9s 4° 32’ 30".

Division occupation Lord Relationship SV ¥V VS

Rasi Capricorn Sat. Adhimitra 6 18 5.4
Hora Cancer Moon Adhisatu = 2 5 0.5
Drekkana Capricorn Sat. Adhimitra 4 18 3.6
‘Navamsa Aquarius Sat. Adhimita 5 18 4.5
Dvadasamsa Aquarius Sat. Adbimitra 2 18 1.8
Trimsamsa = Taurus - Ven. Own 1 20 10

In the above table, SV=Swavisva, VV=Varga Viswa and
VS=Vimsopaka strength.

The rest of the points will be clear to the reader from the
above calculations, And the Vimsopaka strengths be estimated
accordingly.

Maharshi Parasara fixes broad guidelines to know the use
of this strength as under :

5 points : .Inauspicious results (or neutralisation

. of good effects)

. 510 points : Some good effects

10-15 points : Mediocre effects

“15-20 points : Wholly favourable effects.

In our example, Venus gets 16.8 points and hence he should
confer wholly favourable effects when Shad Varga scheme is .

“considered. I would, however, prefer use of all the 16 Vargas.
for a truer picture.

Minute evaluations of Vimsopaka are given on p. 101 for
a better understanding. .

wasqafe oaelish dag! @ fan
Ser: pie za: gaia acrae fea: urcu
were fanaa at adawrati
Reasgrant aie | a zareaferitew: uzen

28-29. OTHER SOURCES OF STRENGTH : Maitreya,
there are other kinds of sources as I explain below. Plan

in the 7th from the Sun will- be fully effective, One With an

=== PAGE 99 ===

“4 100 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

identical longitude in comparison to the Sun’s wil] destroy the
good effects. Rule of three process be applied to the planet in
between these positions.

Notes : A planet away from the Sun is immune to loss of
rays, and can express itself fully. This need not be literally
misinterpreted that the one not being inthe 7th from the Sun
will be ineffective. For example, we have Ubhayachari and
other yogas in which case,a planet other than the Moon is
related to the Sun by close positions. This does not mean that
these yogas will not fructify. Ifa planet is eclipsed in the Sun,
it proves impotent. This applies to Venus and Saturn as well,
against the common belief that these two do -not lose rays even
if combust and hence are free from Astangata dosha, This
suggestion is only for Ayurdaya calculations and rectifications
of planetary rays (or Graha Kiranas). Please see the following
table for degrees of combustion.

a ooo,

Planet Combustion in direct ‘Combustion in (R)
motion motion

Moon 12° - ,
Mars 1? \ 8°
Mercury 14 12°
Jupiter 1* 11°
Venus . 10° 8°

- Saturn 16 16°

Rahu and Ketu should not be treated as combust although
they may be longitudinally close to the Sun. For they are only
mathematical points. On the contrary, they eclipse or obstruct
the Sua. A basic phenomenon in combustion is the planet
combust does not heliacally rise during the period of combustion
but is set.

wifetrd ka women fri ft

meray ce maeaT mene sfewtferny uz otl

aifawtes =| @Tarqaaretma: ITT
get | quifagetenry ete fafererty gen

drt Hated arg eecterreaca ETT

meq neared exrererered cuifeata: U3 QU

=== PAGE 100 ===

Chapter 7 161
30-32. DASA EFFECTS WITH VIMSOPAKA STRE-
NGTH : Maitreya, after assessing the Vimsopaka strength thro-
ugh the various divisions, the rising and setting of the planets be
considered. The Vimsopaka strength is classified as uncer :
Poorna, Atipooma, Madhya, Atimadhya, Aeena, Atiheena,
Swalpa and Atiswalpa, Thus should be classified the Vimsopaka
strength and the Dasa period results declared accordingly.

Notes :; The sage uses 8 distinct terms to classify the effects
of Vimsopaka strength. I have, used she same original terms for
the sake of identity while the table given below with Percentages
of effects due to the various grades will enlighten the student as
to what these terms imply,

Grade Vimsopaka points Benefictal effects due
Atipoorna 17.5 to 20.0 87.5—100%
Poorna 15.0 to 17.5 75.0—87.5%
Atimadhya 12.5 to 15.0 62.5—75.0%
Madhya 10.0 to 12,5 ~ 50.0-62.5%
Swalpa 7.5 to 10.0 37.5—-50.0%
Atiswalpa 5.0 to 7.5 25.0—37.5%
Heena 2.5 to 5.0 12.5~25.0%
Atibeena 0 to 2.5 0—-12.5%

The percentages given by me are numerical assignments for
a comparative study so that an idea is gained of the gradations
originally suggested:
oenseaatt avait Atal yoy gaa!
eragateafamat 6 radiatfaniwa: aan
fadacraramt ofa grpafeay:
frocsanafeearmtannfetata fit Tuan
Rar daraaeg lore fad).
worcamarat = gdanfermedaer: ayn
aged gue sata friter |)
reeagraaatfy  frereercfit fr nag