=== PAGE 1 ===

THE

BRAHMANDA PURANA

Part I

MOTILAL BANA:RS1ID ASS
Delhi a Varanasi O Patna

=== PAGE 2 ===

First Edition: Delhi, 1958
Reprint: Delhi, 1974, 1978, 1982, 1988, 1992, 1995, 1998, 2002

Also available at:
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS

8 Mahalaxmi Chamber, 22 Bhulabhai Desai Road, Mumbai 400 026
41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004
236, 9th Main III Block, Jayanagar, Bangalore 560 011
Sanas Plaza, 1302 Baji Rao Road, Pune 411 002
8 Camac Street, Kolkata 700 017
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004
Chowk, Varanasi 221 00]

Printed in India
BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS,
A-43 NARAINA, PHASE-I, NEW DELHI 110 028
AND PUBLISHED BY NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR
MOTILAL. BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED.
BUNGALOW ROAD; DELHE 110 007

=== PAGE 3 ===

CONTENTS

Section I—PRAKRIYA
CHAPTERS

1.
2.
3.

4.
5.

Contents of the Brahm4nda Purana

The Legend of Naimisaranya

Evolution of the Universe : The Creation of
Hiranyagarbha

Constitution of the world (The Cosmic Egg)
Creation of the Universe

Section II—ANUSANGA

CHAPTERS
6. Kalpas and Manvantaras; their Duration
7. Knowledge About the World
8. God Brahma’s Mental Creation : gods, sages,
manes, and human beings created
9. Progeny of Rudra: Birth of Bhrgu and
Others
10. Magnificence of God Siva : Birth of Nila-
lohita : His eight Names and Forms
11. Creation of Sages
12. Race of Agni
13. Real Nature of Kala—Time: Seasons as Pitrs
(Manes)
14. Race of Priyavrata
15. Length and extent of the Earth : Description
of Jambidvipa
16. Description of Bharata
17. Varsas of Jambidvipa, Hari and Ilavrta
18. Jambidvipa; The Bindu Lake—
Its four streams
19, Plaksa and other Continents
20. Description of the Netherworlds
21. The Solar System. Movements of heavenly

Luminaries ; Division of Time

35.
57
65.
86.
93

101
109

113

120
134

141

149
162

165
174
192

198

=== PAGE 4 ===

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.
27.

28.

37.

38.

The Divine Luminaries, Varieties of clouds.
Divisions of Stratosphere, the Chariot of the
Sun-God

Information about Heavenly bodies. The
movement of the Polar Star

The arrangement of the Heavenly Luminaries.
The Sun, the source of Light to Luminarie s
Origin of the Epithet Nilakantha. Siva
swallowing poison

Origin of the Linga-image of Siva

Siva cursed by Daruvana sages. Installation
of Siva Linga—lInjunctions regarding Ash-
bath

Meeting of Pururavas and Pitrs. Performance
of annual obsequies on the New Moon Day
Cycle of Yugas. Characteristics of Yugas
Inauguration of the Sacrificial Cult. Fall of
King Vasu for denunciation of Sacrifices

The four Yugas : Castes and Stages of Life
Yugas and Classes of People. Lineage of Sages
Characteristics of Sages and of Mantras
Vyasa and his Disciples

Legends of Yajfiavalkya and Vyasa, Description

of Svayambhuva Manvantara

The Lineage of Manu, Manvantaras Milking
of the Earth

Caksusa Manvantara : Dynasty of Vaivasvata
Manu

The Vaivasvata Manvantara : The Marica
Creation

214
222

232

247
258.
265

277
287

296
301

313
325
331

338

361

381

386

=== PAGE 5 ===

PART I
SECTION I
PORVA-BHAGA-PRAKRIYAPA DA

=== PAGE 6 ===

CHAPTER ONE

Contents of the Brahmanda Purana!

{ Arrival of Sita Romaharsana at the sacrificial session at
Kuruksetra—Requested by sages thereof, to recite the Purana-
Sita recites the Brahmdnda Purdna beginning with its Contents.]

1, Qbeisance, obeisance to the Self-born deity consisting
of the quality of sativa on (the occasions of) annihilation,
creation or sustenance (of the universe). Obeisance to the self-
born deity of three-fold forms viz. Sativa, Rajas and Tamas.

2. Victorious is Lord Hari who sustains the worlds, who
is unborn, who is omnipresent and possessed of the (three)
qualities yet is (also) devoid of them.

1. ‘The present Puraya is called the Brahmanda (Bd.P.), as god Brahma
narrated it with special reference to Brahm&nda’, The term Brahmanda
connotes a mixture of ancient Indian concepts about Cosmography, Cosmo-
logy and Cosmogony. In the Narada Purdpa (NP.) 109.1, it is said to be an
ancient Purapa dealing with the events of the Adi-Kalpa. It contains a number
of verses and chapters common to the Vayu Purdpa (Va.P.) which led Kirfel
to propose a theory of common origin of the Bd.P. and V4.P. (Purdga Pafica-
Laksana). Perhaps the wording of the Adrma Purdpa(K.P.) 1.1.15 might have
led him to think so, but it misled M. Ali to believe that ‘The geographical
section of this Purana (Bd.P.) appears to be a late copy (about 1030 A.D.)
of the Vayu with slight alterations and modifications introduced by the co-
pyist.’ (Geography of the Puranas P.8.) But the statement in the Bd.P. and the
N.P. about the oral transmission of the Bd.P. makes it clear that this is an
independent work with Vayu as a narrator of this Purana and it need not be
confused with the VA.P.

The problem however will be discussed in the Introduction. But I must
acknowledge that the text of the identical and similar verses in VAP. and
Bd.P., helped me to emend or correct a number of printing mistakes in the
Bd.P. which would have otherwise remained obscure,

=== PAGE 7 ===

4 Brahmanda Purdna

3. (I seek refuge in god) Brahma, the creator of the
world, who is omniscient, unvanquished, who is the lord of
(everything) past, present and future and who is the real
Master of all.

4. Four things are to be resorted to by the good—namely,
the unparalleled knowledge and detachment, and super-human
power and virtue (found in full form in case) of the lord of the
universe.

5. The Lord (knowing) that these human dispositions
always consist of the good and the evil, (created) them again,
indeed, without hesitation (avifankah) for the sake of performance
of (religious) actions.

6. The creator of the world who knows full well the
reality about the world and is conversant with Yoga, resorted
to Yoga and created all living beings mobile and immobile.

7. Iam desirous of knowing the Puranic narrative and
so I seek refuge in the mighty Lord (the creator of the universe),
the witness of the worlds and the supreme all-pervading Ruler.

8. That Prajapati (Lord ofall creatures), Lord (Brahma)
recounted to Vasistha!, the entire Purana that is on a par with
the Vedas and the main theme of which is the real state of the
universe.

9. The holy sage Vasistha taught to his grandson, Paraé-
ara, the son of Sakti, this sacred (Purana) whichis the nectar
of the knowledge of reality.

10. The holy lord Paraéara, at first, taught sage Jatu-
karnya this divine Purana that is on a par with the Vedas.

1. VV.8-17 give the line of transmission of the Bd.P. as follows : God
Brahmi—sage Vasistha—Parddara—Jatukarnya — Dvaipiyana (Vyasa)—
Sata Lo(Ro)maharsana. An important point to note is the missing link of
Vayu here. N.P. 109.35 states :

Vydso sabdkod  tatas’ catiat

Prabhaitjana-mukhadgatam
That is according to N.P. Jdtukargya—Vayu or Prabhaiijana—Vyasa, is the
proper Parampard (line of oral transmission.). This lacuna is however indi-
rectly supplied in V.36b below where the Windgod (Matarifvan) is stated to
be a narrator. Another point is the emphatic claim of the Purana to a status
equal to the Veda. And the third point is about the main object of the Purdga
pce explain the real state or reality of the world (Lake-tata, VV 1-8, 12

=== PAGE 8 ===

L.1.1.11-17 5

11. After learning the Purana, the learned Jatukarnya*
transferred the knowledge of the supreme, eternal Brahman
to Dvaipayana’.

12. Dvaipayana was delighted thereby. That self-contro-
Iled sage passed on the kuowledge of that extremely wonder-
ful Purana the content of which was the knowledge of the real
state of the world.

13-14, For the sake of propagating it in the worlds, he
taught this Purana which is (highly esteemed) like the Vedas
and which contains many topics, to Jaimini, Sumantu, Vaisam-
payana, Pailava whowas the fourth among them and Lomahar-
sana the fifth.2 He (Lomaharsana) was (otherwise called ) Sita.
He was humble, righteous and pure, His modes of narration
were extremely wonderful.

15-17. After learning the purana, Lomaharsana became
humbler. He became extremely intelligent and virtuous. He
was approached and questioned by a sage like you (?) (regard-
ing matters of mythology etc.) He had the most excellent self-
control. Along with (the other) sages, he used to bow down to
the sages after circumambulating them. He was endowed with
great devotion. After acquiring learning, he became satisfied

1, Jatukarnya or Jatikarna was a self-controlled sage—a member of
Yudhisthira’s Court (Mbh.Sabha.4.14). One wonders why the Mbh. and
other Puranas do not furnish more details about him who taught this Purana
to Dvaip4,ana Vydsa. Secondly, Pardsara teaches this Purana to J ve
and not to his own son Vy4sa.

2. Dvaipayana—The son of Parasara and Satyavati, popularly oN
as Vy&sa (the arranger) due to his classification of the floating traditional
Mantras into four Vedas. He was named Dvaipayana as he was kept in an
island in the Yamuna.

nyasto dvtpe sa yad bdlas
tasmad Dvaipdyanah smytah
—Mbh. Adi 63.86

In the P4li canon also, we are told that one of the cight ways of naming
a person is his geographical residence.

3. Vyasa seems to have taught this Purana (presumably others also)
to his five disciples but Jaimini, Sumantu, Vaisampa4yana and Pailava
(Paila) took interest in the Veda, leaving the preservation of the Pur&nic
Lore to Sita Lo(Ro)maharsapa. According to V4.P.1.16, he is called
Romahargana as he made the hair of his audience bristle by his eloquent
narration.

=== PAGE 9 ===

6 Brahmanda Purana

and went to Kuruksetra.! He (humbly) approached the pure
sages who were performing the elaborate-sacrificial session.

18. The performers of the Satra met Romaharsana (i.e.
Lomaharsana) with great humility, He excelled them in intel-
lect (but) as laid down in the scriptures*, (he bowed down)
duly to them. :

19. On seeing Romaharsana then, all those sages were
extremely pleased. They were glad and their minds became
happy.

20. They worshipped him with all necessary requisites
of hospitality, such as Arghya (Materials of worship), Pddya
(water for washing the feet) etc. He paid respects to all the
sages. He received the permission of the king (?).

21. After permitting him, the sages enquired him of his
health. He approached all those sages (individually) (consider-
ing them to be) the eternal Brahman, the great splendour.
When the assembled persons indicated their consent, he sat on
a beautiful well-covered seat.

22-23. Whenhe had taken his seat, all the sages of praise-
worthy, holy vows, well-disciplined according to (religious)
rules, and of calm and concentrated minds, became delighted
and surrounded him who was an observer of great (religious )
vows. With deep love (and reverence), they spoke to him (as
follows) :

24. ‘Welcome to you, O highly fortunate one. How
glad are we, the residents of this place, to see you, the best of
sages, of excellent vows, hale and hearty, O intelligent one !

1. This Purana is (re-)narrated at Kuruksetra where sages held a
sacrificial session.

2. This Sita is not a Brahmin. He is the Pratiloma offspring of a
Ksattriya father and a Brahmin mother vide Gaut.Dh.S.4.15, Baudhayana
(1.9.9) and Smrtis of Manu (10-11), Yajiavalkya (1.98). Hence this for-
mality on his part. In V.21, the term of greeting him is andmaya and not
kufala used in the case of Brahmanas. According to Geutama Dharma Sitre
(Gaut. Dh.S.) VV. 37-38, guests of Brihmana, Ksattriya, Vaifya castes
should be respectively greeted with the words Auéala, andmaya and drogya.
Manu also (11.127) prescribes «

Brahmagank kufalam prechet Ksattra-bandhum gndinayam

=== PAGE 10 ===

I.1.1.25-37a 7

25. Thanks to you the performer of meritorious holy
rites. I no longer consider this earth a void, O Sita, you are the

disciple of that noble-souled sage Vyasa.

26. You are intelligent and you are always worthy of his
blessings. You are fully epuipped with the good qualities of a
genuine disciple. You are learned and educated. Since you are
worthy of being blessed, O holy lord, you have understood the
principles.

27. After having attained vast knowledge, you are free
from doubts in every respect. O wise one, it always behoves you
torecount to us, everything that we ask you.

28. We wish to hear the divine story of the Purana that
is on a par with the Srutis and that is full of righteous topics.
This has already been heard by you from Vyasa.”

29. On being requested thus by the sages then, the
excessively intelligent Sita, endowed with humility, offered an
excellent reply full of modesty thus :

30. ‘Whatever intellect I possess is due to the service I
rendered to the sage. It is certainly true that my (intellect)
should be utilised for serving (others) .

31. That being the situation, O excellent Brahmanas (I
shall recount) whatever is possible for me. It behoves you to
ask questions on any topic which you desire to know.”

32. On hearing his sweet utterance, the sages again
replied to Siita whose eyes welled with tears (of joy).

33. ‘You are particularly well-versed in the details (of
this topic). You have seen Vy4dsa personally. Hence you explain
the origin of the world completely.*

34, We wish to know who was born in which family. (We
wish to know the details of the family and ancestry of the
kings, sages etc). Kindly recount the wonderfully diversified
creative activity of Prajapati during the days of yore”’.

Thus was the excellent and noble-souled Romaharsana
requested after offering him due hospitable reception.

35-37a. That excellent-most Sita narrated everything
in detail and in due order.

1. This is indicative of the title ‘Brahmanda Purana’,

=== PAGE 11 ===

8 Brahmanda Purdga

Sita said :—

“O excellent Brahmanas,I shall recount in due order
that sacred story which Dvaipayana, who was pleased with me,
had narrated to me. O Brahmanas, I shall expound the
Purana that had been related by Ma&tarifvan! (the wind-god)
on being asked by the noble-souled sages of Naimisa forest.?

37b-39, A Purana is characterised by five topics®, Viz.
Sarga( Primary creation ), Pratisarga (Dissolution and Recreation) ,
Vams§a (Lineage of Kings etc.), Manvantaras (the regions of
Manus or Manu-periods) and VamSdnucarita (chronological
description of kings and sages).

The first pada (section) (ofthis Purana) is called Pra-
kriyd-Pada (section on rites). In this section there is the summing

1. It means the Wind-god did not teach it to Dvaipayana. Secondly
the present text is a rehash of the Purana narrated at Naimisaranya.

2. This is modern Nimsar at a distance of 20 miles from Sitapur and
45 miles to the NW. of Lucknow. The word Naimisa is derived from two
different words (1) Wimisa ‘the twinkling of the eye’ and (2) Nemi—the felly
of a wheel’. According to (1), this place came to be called Naimisa as Visnu
killed an army of Asuras within the twinkling of an eye at this place (vide
Sridhara on Bh.P.I.1.4 where he quotes V.R.P. as his authority). According
to (2) which is accepted here in infra 1.1.2.8, god Brahma, to ensure a sacred
place for a sacrifice for sages created mentally a wheel which went on running
till it reached the vicinity of the Gomati river near which its felly broke down
and it stopped. The sages who followed it to that place accepted it for their
sacrificial session. This popular etymology from emi is endorsed by V4.-
P.I.2.8, Devi Bh.P.1.2.28-32 where it adds that Kali cannot enter that place.

It was at this place that Rama performed his horse-sacrifice (V.R.
7.91.15).

Although there was another Naimisaranya in Kuruksetra (vide Chén-
dogya Upa. 1.2.13 and Képthaka Samhita 10.6) and although the Aryan expan-
sion was from the West to the East, the Naimisaranya on the Gomati appears
to be the ‘birth-place’ of Puranas.

8. The five characteristics of a Purana as found in V.37b and 38a
(which should have formed one continuous verse as is found in other Puranas)
are mentioned in AP.1.14, BS.P.1.2.4-5 BV.P.IV.133.6, GP.1.215.14,
KP.1.1.12, SK.P.VII.2.84 and VP.III.6.25. Amara Simba (5th Cent. A.D.)
has recorded this verse in his Amara Kosa 1.6.5. Although these characteristics
have been unanimously accepted as essential parts of the Puranas, ‘The Purana
Texts that have come down to us hardly conform to this definition” (The
Hist. and Culture of the Indian People Vol.III P.292). If the original Puréna texts
conformed to this description, the present texts of the Puranas must have been
revised or mutilated during their transmission.

=== PAGE 12 ===

1.1.1.40-47 9

up of the story; the other sections are Anusanga (Consequence),
Upodghata (Introduction) and Upasamhdra (Conclusion). Thus
the four sections are briefly mentioned by me.

40. I shall narrate them in detail later on and in the
proper order. At the outset, the Purana among the sacred
scriptures, was heard by Brahma.1

41, Thereafter, the Vedas came out of his mouths. Simi-
larly, the Vedangas (ancillary subjects), the Dharmaéastras
(Law codes), the sacred rites and holy observances (also came
out).

42. Then the decision? “I will create(the entire universe)
beginning with Mahat (the Great Principle) and ending with
Vifesa (the particular creations of worldly objects)” by the
unmanifest cause which is eternal and of the nature of Sat
(Existent) and Asat (Non-existent) .

43-44. The golden (Cosmic) Egg and the excellent birth
of Brahma. The Avarana (The covering ‘sheath’) of the Egg
(was) the ocean. The (covering) of the waters by the Tejas
(the fiery element). The (enclosure of the Tejas) by the gaseous
element. Then the encircling of the gaseous element by the
Ether. Its covering by Bhiattadi (Ego). The Bhittadi is encircled
by Mahat (The Great Principle) and the Mahat is encircled by
Avyakta (The unmanifest one).

45, The Egg itself has been described as situated within
the (enclosure of the) elements. The appearance of the rivers
and the mountains is described here.

46. There is the description of all the Manvantaras and
the Kalpas. The narration of the tree of Brahman. The birth of
Brahma is then recounted.

47. After this is the description of the creation of the

1. The Purana-writers claim their priority in creation and hence
superiority to the Vedas. That some tract of literature called Purdga existed
at the time of the Atharva Veda is clear from AV.XI.7.24, XV.1.6, but the
tall claim of being heard by god Brahma before he heard any Jdstras before
the creation of the Veda is historically hardly justifiable.

2. VV.42-44 treat briefly the evolution of the universe obviously on
the basis of Sankhya system. As the following topics are given as table of con-
tents their special explanations will be given in their respective chapters.

=== PAGE 13 ===

10 Brahmagda Purana

subjects by Brahma. Here the Avasthds (situations) are descri-
bed, of god Brahma whose birth is unmanifest.

48. The occurrence of the Kalpas; the stabilisation of
the Universe; Hari’s lying down in the waters and the uplift of
the Earth.

49-50. The particular (description) of the cities etc., the
classification of castes and stages of life. The positions of the
stars and the planets and their transit from one Zodaical sign
to another and the abode of the Siddhas and their distance in
yojanas in details and the allocation of placesin the heaven to
men of auspicious conduct.

51. The narration of (the different species of) trees,
medicinal herbs and creepers. The two paths viz. ofthe Devatas
(deities) and of the sages are (then) described.

52. The creation and manifestation of Mango and other
trees. The origin of animals and human beings is (then)
narrated.

53. The definition as well as its total components of
Kalpa are mentioned. Then the nine types of intentional
creations by god Brahma are described.

54. Three of the intentional creations (are mentioned
in details). The arrangement of the worlds. The origin of
Dharma etc. from the limbs of Brahma.

55. (The description of) the twelve that are born again
and again in the Prajakalpa; Pratisandhi (the period of transi-
tion) between two Kalpas is mentioned.

56. The origin of Adharma due to god Brahma’s enve-
lopment by Tamas and the creation of Purusa_ from his
(Brahma’s) body with preponderance of Sattva guna.

57. Similarly, (the birth of Sataripa) and the birth of
the two sons, viz. Priyavrata, Uttanapada as well as that of
the auspicious Prasitti and Akrti (Akiti) .

58. Those who had rid themselves of sins and are well
established themselves in the three worlds are glorified. After-
wards the birth of twins in Akiti from Ruci, the Prajapati.

59-60. The auspicious births of Daksa’s daughters from.
Prasiiti, Then the procreation by the great-souled Dharma
from Daksa’s daughters like Sabd& (rather Sraddh& as in.

=== PAGE 14 ===

1.1.1.61-69 1}

Vayu P.), a race characterised by Sattva-guna and was (as if)
the dawn (?) of happiness : As well as the race of Adharma
(Evil) from Hirnsa (Violence) characterised by Tamo-guna and
inauspiciousness.

61. The description of the creation of subjects by Bhrgu
and other sages, where-in the lineage of the Brahmana sage
Vasistha is recounted.

62. The birth of the progeny of Agni from Svaha is
recounted there. Thereafter, the birth of subjects of the two
types of Pitrs in Svadha (is also mentioned ).

63-64. In the context of the description of the line of
the Pitrs, the curse of Daksa by Maheévara, Sati and Bhrgu
and other intelligent ones, (is mentioned). So also the return
curse uttered by Daksa. The protest against the enmity by
Rudra of wonderful feats, because defects were seen is
described.

65. In the context of Manvantaras, Time (with its units)
is recounted in detail. The auspicious characteristics of the
daugher of Kardama, the Prajapati.

66. The details of the sons of Priyavrata are described
there. Their appointment on different continents and lands
severally (are recounted) .

67. The narration of the creation of Svayambhuva
(Manu). So also the description of the Varsas (sub-continents )
and rivers and their different types.

68. How thousands of the different continents com-
prise the group of seven Dvipas. The detailed description of
the Mandala (Encircling zone) of Jambiidvipa and the ocean.

69. The magnitude and extent of the Jambiidvipa, the
ocean and the mountains, is mentioned in the form of Yojanas
(‘Yojana= 12 Kms), The following seven mountains,! viz.

1. The mountain system of the Puranas as recorded here is repre-
sented under the following names today:

(i) Himavin—The great Himalayan Range.

(ii) Hemakita—Ladakh—Kailash—Trans-Himalayan chain.

(iii) Nisadha—Hindukush—Kunlun chain.

(iv) Meru—The Pamirs.

(v) Nila.

=== PAGE 15 ===

12 Brahménda Purana

Himavan, Hemakiita, Nisadha, Meru, Nila, Sveta and Sragin,
are glorified.

70-73. The distance between pairs of these, the girth,
height and extent of these mountains, all these are mentioned
is So many Yojanas. The inhabitants of these mountains are
recounted. Bharata and other sub-continents are described,
alongwith the rivers and mountains therein. How they are
inhabited by the mobile and the immobile living beings. Jam-
biidvipa and other islands (continents) are surrounded by
seven oceans, Thereafter the golden earth and Lokaloka
(mountain) is described. These worlds have definite extents
and magnitudes, consist of seven continents.

74. Riipa (form, colour) etc. are described because they
are also made alongwith the Prakrtas (effects of the Prakrti).
All these are partial transformation of the Pradhana.

75. The movement, extent etc. of the sun, the moon
and the earth are succinctly yet completely stated (without
leaving out anything of importance).

76-77. The dimentions are mentioned. The extent of
these is mentioned in so many Yojanas. Mahendra and other
splendid and sacred (mountains) on the summit north of the
Manasa lake (are described) along with the present beings
that are in possession of them and that identify themselves with
them.

The sun’s movement above these, like a firebrand moving
in a circle, has been mentioned. The characteristics of Nagavithi
and Aksavithi are mentioned.

78, The description of the two kasthas (kostha—a misprint)
quarters (or courses of winds), the two Lekhas, horizons (or
Lekhas—deities) and the zones in Yojanas; of the Lokaloka
(mountain) of the twilight, of the day and of the Visuvat
(Equinox) .

(vi) Sveta—Nura Tau—Turkistan-Atbashi chain

(vii) Srngin or Sphgavin—Kara Tau—Kirghiz-Ketman chain. (For
details vide M.Ali—Geog. of the Purdgas Ch.III)

The progressive contraction of Bharata up to 1947 A.D. blinds us to the
fact that a large part of what is Central Asia today was an integral part of the
Bharata of the Puranic world.

=== PAGE 16 ===

I.1,1.79-89 13

79. The Lokapalas (guardians of the quarters) who
stay on it in the four quarters are described. The southern and
the northern path-ways of the Pitrs (manes) and gods (are
described ).

80. (The goal) of householders and those who renounce
(i.e. sannydsins) dependent on Rajas and Sativa (is mentioned).
The region of Visnu where Dharma and others are stationed
is mentioned.

81. The movement of the sun and the moon as well as
that of the planets and luminariesis described. It has the
efficacy of according auspiciousness as well as inauspiciousness
to the subjects.

82-83. Thechariot of the sun built by Brahma him-
self for the sake ofa dwelling unto the sun is mentioned.
The chariot whereby the lord goes to his abode from the heaven
is presided over by the Devas, the Adityas, the sages, the Gan-
dharvas, the Apsaras, the Gramanis, the serpents and the
Raksasas.

84. The Rasa (juice) that exudes from the chariot
evolved out of the essence of the waters, is mentioned : The
waxing and the waning of the moon caused by Soma are
mentioned.

85. The movement of the chariots of the sun and others
begins from Dhruva (the pole star). The heavenly porpoise at
the tail end of which the pole star is stationed is also described.

86. All the constellations of stars along with the planets
wherein the gods of meritorious acts have their abodes are
described.

87. The thousand rays of the sun, the asylum of rain,
chillness and heat, the different classes of rays with reference
te names, functions and places of operation—(all these are
mentioned).

88. The magnitude and the movement of the planets
depending on the sun are mentioned. The origin of the ‘Mahat
(Great Principle) from the Pradhana, the characteristics of
which are compared to a dancing girl.

89. The narration of the greatness of Pururavas, the
son of Il4. The greatness of the Piiys of two types as well as
that of the dead.

=== PAGE 17 ===

14 Brahmanda Purdna

90-91. Then the Parvans (important days in the transit
of the moon such as first quarter, full moon, last quarter, New
moon) as well as the Sandhis (junctions) , of the Parcvans are
narrated. The great blessing of the two types of Pilrs by
means of Srdddha; the Pitrs who have gone to the heaven
and those who have had a downfall. Their number and extent
of Yugas as well as the Yuga called Krta are described.

92. The introduction and commencement of agricultural
Activities etc. as means of livelihood in the Tretayuga as a
result of the lowering of standards; the establishment of castes
and stages of life based on Dharma (duty).

93. Establishment of the institution of Yajfia*. The
conversation of Vasu and the sages; the downfall of Vasu—all
these are recounted **.

94. The penance is praised and so also the situations
of the Yugas entirely. The succinct description of the Dvapara
and Kali ages.

95. Manvantara is recounted and its number (of years)
is narrated according to human calculation. Thisalone is the
characteristic feature of all Manvantaras.

96. The past, present and future Manvantaras are
recounted. So also is the definition of Pratisandhana (Period of
transition between two Manvantaras).

97. The past and the future (reigning members) in the
Svayambhuva (Manvantara) are recounted. The movement of
the sages is mentioned. So also the way of the knowledge of
Kala (Time).

98. The extent of the number of Durgas (fortresses) and
the commencement and the different professions for livelihood
in the Yugas ; the birth and characteristic features of the
emperors in the Treta.

® This verse=Va.P. (Vayu Purana) 1.111, but it reads 2gjfa-Pravar-
tana. This is the proper reading and hence accepted, as Vajra-Pravartana is
baseless and hence probably a misprint.

¢* The text translated above: Sabdatvah ca Pradhandt tu Svdyambhuvam
¢te Manum is confusing. This verse== VA.P, }.112 which however gives a better
reading:

Prasndnish durvacastoamk ca sodyambhuvam ts Manum |. _

=== PAGE 18 ===

7.1.1.99-110 15

99. The birth of Pramati; the diminution by Angulas of

the living beings in the Kaliyuga—these are mentioned.
100. Theenumeration of the different Sakhas (Branches)

of the Vedas; the importance of the disciples ; the seven types
of Vakyas (sentences) and narration of the spiritual lines of the
sages.

101. The characteristic features of the sons of charioteers
and those of the Brahmanas (are described) in full. The classi-
fication of the Vedas by the noble-souled Vedavyasa (is also
given).

102. The narration of the Devas and the lords of subjects
in the Manvantaras ; the due order of the Manvantaras and the
knowledge of Kala (Time): all these are recounted.

103-104. The grandsons of Daksa ; the splendid progeny
of his beloved daughter; the children procreated by Brahma
and others and the children begot by the intelligent Daksa; the
Savarna Manus who had resorted to Meru are also recounted
here. The description of the creation of subjects by Dhruva,
the son of Uttanapada.

105. The creative activity of Caksusa Manu, the descrip-
tion of the prowess of the subjects; the act of milking the earth
by the lord (King Prthu), the son of Vena.

106. The special mention of the vessels, milks and
calves; (the fact) that this earth had already been milked by
Brahma and others.

107. The birth of Daksa the intelligent Prajapati from
the ten Pracetasas in Marisa as occurring through equal part
of everyone of them is described.

108. The lordship over the past, present and future
things of Mahendras is recounted. The Manusand others who
are covered with Manu narratives will be described.

109. The detailed creative activity of Vaivasvata Manu
is recounted. The origin of Bhrgu and others in the Vestures*
of Brahma and others is narrated.

110. As distinguished from the splendid Prajasarga
(creation of the subjects) of Caksusa Manu, the creation through

* @h4-P.1.128 reads Brakma-Sukrat ‘from the semen of god Brahma’.

=== PAGE 19 ===

16 Brahménda Purdna

meditation by Daksa in the Vaivasvata Manvantara is
recounted.

111. Néarada, the mental son of Brahma, engaged the
extremely powerful sons of Daksa in conversation and destroyed
them and was cursed (as a result).

112. Thereupon Daksa begot the well-known daughters
named Vairinas.* The birth of Marut inthe noble lady Diti
in the course of the continuous blowing of the wind.**

113. The seven times seven (49) groups of Maruts are
recounted here. They acquired Devatva (state of being Devas)
because of their staying along with Indra. Their residence is the
shoulders (?) of Vayu (?).

114-115. The origin of the Daityas, Danavas, Yaksas,
Gandharvas, Raksasas, ghosts and evil spirits, of the
Yakgas, birds, creepers etc. is recounted. The origin of the
Apsaras is narrated in great details. The entire sphere of the
sun is described and also the birth of the elephant Airavata.

116. The birth of Vainateya (Garuda) as well as his
installation as a King (of birds). The detailed narratives of
the (races of) Bhrgus and the Angiras are recounted.

117. The detailed description of the progeny of Kaés-
yapa, Pulastya, noble-souled Atri and sage Paraéara.

118. Three girls in whom the worlds are stabilised are
glorified. The detailed description of Iccha*** of Aditya (is
found) thereafter.

119. The story of Kinkuvitt is mentioned. The an-
nihilation of Brhadbalas by Dhruvat is mentioned. Iksvaku
and others are glorified briefly.

120. The creation of the king Nifi etc. is mentioned in
detail along with Palanduharana etc; the story of the king
Yayati’s race:
~~ ® begot from Virig!—VA.P.1.181.

** Va.P. 1.133, reads: Marut-Prasdda.

*¢®T> be amended as J/d as in Va4.P.1.141 as there is no person called
Icch4 in this context in the Puranas.

+ (Vidkukgi in VA.P.)

¢ Va.P.I.141b-142a reads: ‘The destruction of Dhundhu, Iksvaku
and others ending with Brhadhala are described ? Dhruva is not credited with
destroying Brhadbalas, vide PE. (Puranic sncyclepesdia on Dhruva & Brhadbala.)

=== PAGE 20 ===

L.T.1.121-131 17

121. The description of Yadu's race and the detailed
narration of Haihaya after Krodha.* Afterwards the details of
the race are mentioned.

122. The greatness of Jyamagha and his creation of
subjects is recounted. So also of Devavrdha, Andhaka and
noble-souled Dhrsti.

123-124. The lineage of Animitra; the false accusation
of the two Vaisyas;** The ascertainment and the acqui-
sition of the jewel by the intelligent Satrajit; in the course of
the creation of progeny hy the saintly King Devamidhvan,
the birth and story of the noble-souled Sira is mentioned.

125. The wickedness of Karnsa and the birth of
Vasudeva Visnu of unmeasured splendour in Devaki, due
to the unification of the families (?)***

126-127. Afterwards the creative activity of the sages;
the description of the creation of the subjects; when the war of
the Deyas and the Asuras started; a woman wag slain by Visnu
while protecting Sakra from death and a curse was obtained
by him from Bhrgu. Bhrgu resuscitated the divine mother of
Sukra.

128. Due to the concurrence of the Devas and the
sages twelve battles were conducted.! Narasimha and others,
the destroyers of sins are glorified.

129. The propitiation of Sthanu (Siva) by Sukra by
means of severe penance. Sarva eulogised by him who was cut
off (krtta) for boons.*

130-131, Afterwards the material activity of the
Devas and the Asuras is recounted. When the noble-souled
Sukra was attached to Jayanti, the intelligent Brhaspati,
assuming the form of Sukra deluded Asuras for which act
Sukra cursed Brhaspati.f

* This should be Krostu and not Krodha vide Va.P.I.144.,

** Va P. 1.146. (in identical verse) reads: Visyor dsnydbhifarh-
sanam, ‘The divine eulogy of god Vignu’.

#9 V4.P.1.148 reads: ‘ekdntena
1. Va.P.1.15] Caen with this verse) reads: Twelve wonderful

between gods demo
2. Va.P.1.152 reads: Varadénaugha-lubdhena ‘extremely desirous of getting

+ The corrupt text has resulted in this confused version. It should.
be as Va.P.1.159-154 reads:

battles

=== PAGE 21 ===

18 Brahkmigda Purdga

132-34. The greatness of Visnu is narrated. It is express-
ed at the birth (ie. incarnation) of lord Vignu. Tur-
vasu who was the younger brother of Yadu was the grandson
(of Sukra). Anu, Druhyu and others as well as their sons (who
were) the kings are described. The descendants of Anu were
noble-souled. Excellent kings among them are fully described.
They had plenty of wealth and their splendour was much.
Atithya (hospitality) to a Brahmanical sage is classified into
seven as resorting to Dharma.

135. There the curse of Brhaspati by the poets!(?) is
described. The fame of Hara’s (Hari’s) family is slightly tou-
ched. Santanu’s prowess is explained.

136. In the concluding portion, the future kings are
recounted. The description of the groups of lords, yet to come,
is given in detail.

137. The description of the annihilation of all, when
Kaliyuga expires at the end of the Bhautya manvantara (?).
The annihilation is divided into WNaimittika (at the end of a
Kalpa) Prakrtika (after two pardrdha years when Brahma dies
and Altyantika (when the individual soul merges in the
Brahman.)

138. The re-absorption and dissolution of all living be-
ings in various waysis described. Andvrsfi (absence of rain) and
the terrible Sarnvartaka fire of the sun (are mentioned).

139, (The description of Pradkytika Pralaya is described
in the Samkhya system of philosophy. Then Brahman (is ex-

FJayantyd saha sakte tu yaira Sukre mahatmani |
Asurdn mohaydmasa Sukrardpena buddkiman ||
Brhaspatis tu tanh Sukrah fafdpa sumahddyutibs ||

‘When the noble-souled Sukra was attached to Jayanti, the clever
Brhaspati, assuming the form of Sukra, deluded Asuras for which act Sukra
cursed Brhaspati’

The story of the love-affair between Sukra and Jayanti and her subse-
quent marriage with him are mentioned in other Purinas vide PE p. 355,
PCK yp. 365.

1, The corresponding verse in VA. P.1.158 is as follows:

Barhapetyiah tu surabhir yatra tapam ihinudat |
Kivtanash Jaknu-vatidasya Santanor virya-sabdanam ||

=== PAGE 22 ===

1.1.1.140-147 19

plained) particularly. The description of the seven worlds
beginning with Bhi.

140. The definition is explained by means of Para,
Parardha and Apara (?) of the Brahman. The fixation of the
extent and magnitude of Brahma(?) in so many Yojanas.

141. Here the hells of the sinners such as Raurava etc.
are mentioned. The ultimate sequel of all living beings is deci-
sively fixed.

142. The description of the worldly existence through
the Pratisamsarga (secondary creation) of Brahma. The move-
ment upwards or downwards as dependent on virtue or evil has
been mentioned.

143. The annihilation of great Bhiitas (elements )in every
Kalpa. The miseries are innumerable. Even god Brahma is
not eternal.

144. The wickedness of worldly pleasures, the pain in
the course of worldly existence.1 The inaccessibility of salva-
tion (except) through Vairdgya (absence of passion) because
defects are seen.

145. (One) abandons the Sattva (living beings) whether
manifest or unmanifest and is established in the Brahman.
Since multiplicity is seen, the idea of purity (of the world)
recedes.

146. Then (the devotee) becomes afraid of the three
types of Tapa (distresses) arising from Rffa and Artha (forms
and objects).* He then becomes Nirafijana (unsullied). After
obtaining the bliss of Brahman, he is not afraid of anything.

147. Again the creation by another Brahma as before, is
recounted. The Vikriyds (changes) of the universe such as crea-
tion and annihilation are described.

It was Surabhi (the heavenly cow) which uttered the curse; the
family of king Jahnu is glorified.

1. Satkhdra emended as Sarhséva, otherwise it would mean ‘Pain of
annihilation’.

2. The corresponding verse in V&.P. 1.171 gives a better reading:
tatas tapalrayaiito nirapékhyo nirafjanah | “Then he transcends three types of
miseries and he ig called formless and free from blemishes (pure)’.

=== PAGE 23 ===

20 Brahmagnda Puréna

148. The activities of the living beings that are born and
the fruits (they obtain) are described. Then the creation
of the groups of sages is described. It is destructive of sins.

149-150. The appearance of Vasistha and the birth of
Sakti. His grasping of the bone of Saudasa’ as brought about
by Viévamitra. The birth of the eminent Parafara from Adr-
fyanti. The holy lord, the great sage was born of Pitrkanya and
the holy sage (Paraéara).

151. The birth of Suka. The hatred towards sage
Visvamitra of the intelligent Parasara along with his son.

152-154. The collection of Agni (fire) by Vasistha with
a desire tokill Visvamitra. The (hindrance to it) by lord
vidhi (Brahma) who was the well-wisher of Visvamitra as well
as by the intelligent lord Girnaskandha® (?) for the sake of a
child.

With the blessings of Sarva (Siva), the saintly lord Vyasa
split one Veda of four quarters into four Vedas. Many
branches of the Vedas were evolved by his disciples and their
disciples.

155-159a. (Defective text) They did not tremble in mak-
ing practical use of the Vedas. When they were seen by Svaya-
mbhu (Brahma) those excellent sages desirous of Dharma and
wishing to get a holy place, asked him. Thelord who wished
for their welfare told them like this: ‘The nave of this wheel
is excellent. Its beauty and splendour is divine. It has seven
spokes. It is incomparable and praise-worthy. As it rolls down,
all of you follow it alertly, watchfully. Then you will reach a
place where this is broken. That place where the rim of this
wheel is broken is a holy land. It should be considered
sacred.’’®

1. Saudasdsthi-grahaSscdsya in this text is contrary to facts. It was Sau-
disa (King Kalmagapdda as a demon) who devoured Sakti (Vasi¢tha’s eldest
son) at the instigation of Viévimitra. Hence the better reading is in V4.P.
ip the corresponding verse 1-175a viz. Sauddsdn nigrahas tagya Vifodmitra-
kytena ca |

2. VA.P. 1.178a reads: Cid Skandena dhimaid ‘It (The Veda?) was
divided by the intelligent Lord Skaada for the sake of its continuity’.

3. A popular etymology of Naimisdragya vide note 2 p. 8.

=== PAGE 24 ===

1.1.1.159b-171 21

After saying this to all those sages, he became invisible.

159b-160. The sages of Naimiga forest performed a
Satra there taking only Yava (barley) as their food along with
the water of Ganga.

161. When Saradvan died, he was resuscitated, as the
sages of Naimisa forest were endowed with great kindness.

162. They made this earth boundless. They brought
Krsna as king. With great pleasure, and hospitality, the king
was received and honoured duly.

163. Svarbhanu, the cruel Asura, came within the Satra
and abducted the king. When the king vanished, the sages
followed him,

164. They saw him protected by a Gandharva and abid-
ing in the village named Kalapa.! Again the Yajfia was
begun by the great sages.

165. On seeing everything golden, he had an argument
with them in the Satra that lasted for twelve years and
performed by the sages of Naimisa.

166-167. Yadu was installed by:them even as they were
arguing. After the son of Yadu, Ayuta was born inthe forest.
They concluded the Satra and began to worship Vayu.

This is the ArtyasamuddesSa (enumeration of contents of
the Purana). The part of the Purana has been described.

168. The Purana comes to light in this order alone.
Even a great topic is understood easily if mentioned briefly.

169-170a. After mentioning the brief outline, I shallnow
narrate the details to you. Ifa person, after conquering the
sense organs, learns this first Pdda (section) very well, there
is no doubt about it that the entire Purana has been under-
stood by him.

170b-171. O Brahmanas, he who knows the four Vedas
with their ancillary subjects and the Upanisads must increase
his knowledge of Veda through Itihasas and Puranas. The

1. A village in the Himelayas near BadarikAgrama where Maru
and Devapi, the last kings of the Solar and Lunar races respectively performed
penance to reappear again as kings of Ayodhy4 and Hastinapur after Kalki.
—De, p. 74.

=== PAGE 25 ===

22 Brahmadada Purana

Veda is afraid ofa man of incomplete knowledge saying “O
this man will strike me.’’!

172-174. Repeatedly learning this chapter that had
been directly mentioned by the self-born lord Brahma one shall
never lose sense after getting into an adversity. He will attain
such a goal (hereafter) as is desired by him.

Since this had been (in existence) before also (Purd api),
it is remembered as Purdnam.? He who understands the ety-
mological interpretation of this, is rid of all sins.

Hence, listen to this summary. Narayana creates the world.
It is on that occasion of creation when he makes this entire
Purana. It does not remain at the time of annihilation.

CHAPTER TWO
The Legend of Naimisdranya

[Greedy King Pururavas killed while confiscating the
Golden altar : Prince Ayu installed as King: sages conciliated]

1-3. Those sages who considered the austerities as their
wealth asked Siita once again:—‘‘Where did that Sativa (sacri-
ficial session) of those persons of miraculous deeds take place ?
How long did it continue ? How was it performed ? How did
Prabhafijana (the Windgod) recount the Purana? Recount
it in detail aswe have great eagerness to hear it’’.

Thus urged, Sita replied the following auspicious words
(narrative) :

1. =Mbh. Adi. 1.267b-268a. This is the traditional stand of Puranas
regarding their indispensability. It is justifiable to some extent as they pre-
terve the unbroken Brahmanical tradition from the Vedas and are some-times
useful in interpretation as in Ahalytyai jarak (Satapatha 8.3.4.18) or Vifoarapan

somniesh (Satapatha 1.2.3.2 etc.
Seat lias @ dial Rees

=== PAGE 26 ===

1.1.2.4-12 23

4, ‘Listen to the narration as to where those self-
possessed ones performed the excellent Sattra, how long it

continued and how it was performed.
5-7. Desirous of creating the universe formerly, he

(Brahma) discharged (everything) to those who performed
the Yajiia. They performed the highly meritorious Sattra for
a thousand years.

Brahma himself became the Tapogrhapati (Lord of the
penance house). Ida accepted the status of the Patni (wife of
the sponsor of the sacrifice). The intelligent Mrtyu of great
splendour performed the Samitra rite (the act of killing the
sacrificial animal) in that Sattra of those noble souls. The
Vibudhas (Devas) stayed there for a thousand years.

8. The place where the rim of the whirling Dharmacakra
(wheel of righteousness) broke down became well known as
Naimisa' on account of that event. It is a place well-worshipped
by the sages.

9-10. It is the place where the holy Gomati river is
resorted to by Siddhas and Caranas. The Gomati had a
daughter in a trice and that is the Rohini.

Sakti became the eldest son of the noble-souled
Vasistha and Arundhati of excellent brilliance* (?)

11]. It is the place where King Kalmasapada and
Sakra** met Sakti. It is the place where enmity broke out
between Visvamitra and Vasistha.

12. It is the place where sage Pardgara was born of
Adrsyanii. Against his knowledge, Vasistha had to court
discomfiture.?

1. Vide Ch. 1, p. 8 note 2. It appears that the Bd.P. regards Nimsar
near the Gomati as the original Naimisaranya.
* The text: Sutdydtrddanam uttamatejasah is confusing, V4.P.2.10 in
identical verse reads:
Sakti-jyesthih samabhavan Vasisthasya mahdtmanah |
A atyah suté yatra Satam uttama-tejasah ||
‘There a hundred sons of excellent brilliance of whom Sakti was the
eldest, were born of the noble-souled Vasistha from Arundhati”
** VAP. 2.11 (identical with this No. 1l—verse) reads: ‘éaptah*
for Sakrap. It means: It is a place where king KalmAsapida was cursed by
ts.

2. Parifara, while in his mother’s (Adrsyant!’s) womb, was such a
rs eis scholar that he surpassed his Vasistha (Mbh. Adi-

=== PAGE 27 ===

24 Brahmanda Purdea

13, The expounders of Brahman thought ofa mountain
in Naimisa at that spot. Since they were born (rather—performed
sacrifice—Va.P.2.13) in Naimisa, they are remembered as
Naimisiyas.

14. The Satira of those intelligent persons lasted for
twelve years, when the Valorous Pururavas was ruling over
the earth.

15. We have heard the report that, even when he en-
joyed eighteen islands over the ocean, Pururavas was never
contented with the jewels, due to his covetousness.

16. Urged by a divine messenger, Urvasi made love to
him. He sponsored this Satira in the company of Urvagi.

17-19. While King Pururavas ruled, the sages of the
Naimisa forest performed the sacrificial session.* The Ganga
conceived a brilliant foetus from the Fire-god. She deposited
it on the mountain and it was transformed into gold. God
Visvakarma himself, the god of great imagination who evolved
the world, entered that sacrificial session of those sages of
unbounded (immense) lustre (and) transformed the premises
and enclosure of the sacrifice into a golden one.

20-21. Pururavas, theson of Ida came a-hunting to that
region. Seeing that extremely wonderful enclosed place of the
sacrifice made of gold, his wisdom was overcome (lit. struck
down) by avarice and he began to seize it. Thereupon the
residents of Naimisa became very much infuriated against the
king.

22-23. The angry learned ascetics (who were devoted
to penance) urged by the Devas hit him with Kufa grasses,
charged with thunderbolt. Pounded by the adamantine Kufa
grasses that king cast off his mortal body.! The son of Urvagi,

* satre emended as satram (as in Va.P. 2.17, an identical verse).

1. This account of Pururavas’ death recorded here appears to be correct
historically. Pururavas was a chief from trans-Himalayan region—ZJldvyta
varsa, the region round Mt. Meru bounded by Mt. Gandham&dana on the
west and Malyavan on the east. He established his kingdom at Pratisthana
(modern Jhusi near Alilahabad)and founded the famous Lunar dynasty. His
greed for wealth and his attempt to plunder the sacrificial session is recorded
in the Mbh., Adi.75.20-23. As he came there a-hunting (and not with an army

=== PAGE 28 ===

1.1.2,24-31 25

fought there on the ground.?

24-26. Ayus, the righteous ruler of the earth whom
they call the noblesouled father of Nahusa, obtained a high
priority among those who got purificatory bath in the principal
sacrifice of that sacrificial session. Having pacified the King
that way, the sages, the knowers of Brahman, who themselves
were the miirtis (idols) of the calves of the cow in the form of
the earth? (?), began to perform the sacrificial session. In
this sattra, the noble-souled ones observed celibacy.

27-31. They observed Brahmacarya as in the case of
Visvasrjs (creators of the universe) formerly, when they were
desirous of creating the universe. The king became endowed
with the lustre of the sun and the fire. He shone like Indra
with the sages and others around him, such as the anchorites
Valakhilyas fond of their friends, Maricis; the unborn sages’,
They worshipped the Devas with hymns of praise and houses
(?) and the Pitrs by means of the holy rites befitting the Pitrs.

for conquest), it is more probable that he was overwhelmed by the sages and
got killed in the scuffle. The sages’ curse and the bringing of fire from the
heaven etc. described in the Mbh. is obviously a white-wash by its author as
the episode concerned the founder of the Lunar dynasty to which Pandavas
belonged. The sages wisely installed his son Ayus who, like a farsighted states-
man trying to consolidate the newly-founded kingdom, extended his patro-
nage to the sacrificial session. The Bd.P. version is supported by V4.P.

1. The text: aurvaseyats tatas tasya yuddham cakre nrpo bhuvi, is syntactically
not correct. Moreover Ayu, the son of Pururavas and Urvaéi who succeeded
him is not known to have fought with the sages.

Va.P.2.23b (a corresponding verse reads:)

aurvaseyam tatas tasya putrarn cakrur nrpam bhuvi “Then they made
his sor. born of Urvasi the king over the earth’.

2. For Prthvi vatsdtma-miartayah in this text, cp. Va.P.2.26 (a correspond-
ing verse reads): (satram drebhire kartuth) yathdoad dharma-bhataye ‘according
to prescribed rites for the prosperity of Dharma’.

3. The reading of these stanzas in Va.P.2.27/29a. :

Vaikhdnasaih priya-sakhair Valakhilyair maricikaiR |
anyaifca munibhir jusfath silrya-vaisvdnara-prabhaif ||

(28b—the same as 28b in V4.P.)

Sambharais tu Subhair justam tair evendra-sado yatha |]

(The sacrificial session) was attended by Valakhilyas and other sages
brilliant like the sun, the fire and by auspicious (holy) multitudes of Pitrs,
Ci&ranas, as in the assembly of Indra).

=== PAGE 29 ===

26 Brahménda Purdne

They duly worshipped the Gandharvas and others in
accordance with their species. While propitiating, he remem-
bered the Gandharvas and others. Thereafter, in other
holy rites the Gandharvas sang Sdman hymns; the groups of
Apsaras danced; the sages spoke words of wonderfully
variegated letters and of splendid form.

32. The learned scholars chanted Mantras etc. They
defeated their opponents by means of copious objections.

33-34. The sages were great erudite scholars. They
were experts in words, meanings and logical arguments.
Nothing was seized from them. No Brahmaraksasas entered the
place and spoiled the Yajfia. Neither the Daityas nor those
with weapons with feather attached to them came there. There:
was no occasion for expiatory acts and there was no poverty.

35. Due to the combination of efficiency, intellect
and steady activity, the injunctions were duly carried out
resulting in blessings. Thus the Sattra (sacrificial session) of
those learned persons continued for twelve years.

36-38. That sacrifice of the sages residing in Naimisa
was like that of the thunderbolt-bearing Indra. The elderly
heroic and other Rtviks! performed the Jyotistoma sacrifices.
separately. Riding on the backs? (of horses?) , they concluded
all the sacrifices after distributing ten thousand (coins) as
monetary gifts. After concluding their Yajfia, all of them asked
Vayudeva (the wind god) the great lord of unmeasured
vitality, O Brahmanas, what I have been asked by you all.
Urged (by them) the lord mentioned to them, the matter of
his own race.

39. (Lord Wind) was the disciple of the self-born deity.
He has perfect control over the sense organs. He sees every
thing directly. He is endowed with the eight powers—Anima
(minuteness) and others. He is equipped with subtle limbs.

40. He sustains all the worlds by means of rains along
with the winds blowing obliquely. The branches, the seven

1, V4.P.2.36 reads: Bhrgvddyd rsayo dhiza: ‘intelligent & self possessed
sages like Bhrgu & others.
2. V&.P.2.36 reads: Prsthagamanam ‘who went after them’.

=== PAGE 30 ===

1.1.2.41-48 27

boughs, have been borne by him. (? the seven types of wind
are probably alluded to). He protects the mobile and the
immobile beings all round.

41-43. Inhisrealm the seven times seven (fortynine)
Maruts are stationed.

He is extremely powerful and he performs the Sattra of
the Sutas with three Vyihas! (circular or other types of arrays)

He holds the remedies of the fiery embodied beings. The
five functional organ airs, viz., Prana and others sustain the
body filling it with its innate activities. The wind has ether
(akdfa) as its source of origin. It has two qualities. It is end-
owed with the qualities of Sabda (sound) and Sparfa (touch).

44. He has been called Vacorani (source of origin of
speech like the Arani which is the source of fire) by persons
who are clever in the science of sound and phonetics. With
soft and gentle speech, he appeared to delight the sages.

45. O learned ones, conversant with the Puranas, O
Brahmanas, well disciplined in the knowledge of the Puranas,
the lord (wind) recounted the story in a speech befitting the
basis which is the Purana.

46-48. All these narrations, O excellent Brahmanas, are
in accordance with what had transpired. This is an excellent
great principle of the world of the sages. This Purana has
been formerly recounted by Brahma. It contains excellent
wisdom of the deities and the sages. It destroys all sins. I shalt
narrate it in detail its contents in due order.?

1. Va.P.2.41 reads: VyGhaérayanamh bhiténdsh—Bhitas (beings)
who depend on the Vyiha (body)’.

2. VV. 36-48 show that this Purina (Bd.P.) was formerly narrated by
god Brahmé originally. His disciple, the Windgod recounted it to sages of
Naimisaranya on the occasion of the Sattra of twelve years duration.

=== PAGE 31 ===

28 Brahmanda Purdna

CHAPTER THREE

Description of Evolution of the Universe ; The Creation of
Hirapnyagarbha

Sita narrated :

1. Listen to their divine story that rids one of all sins.
It is being narrated by me. It is wonderfully variegated. It has
many topics (undcr discussion) ; it is esteemed by the Vedas.

2. He who retains this (in mind) permanently or listens
to this frequently maintains his family (or propagates his race)
and he is honoured in the heavenly world.

3. Listen to the topic being recounted in the manner it
had been heard and it had occurred. Listen to the five Tards
(stars)* that are five in number. Listen to this narrative that
is conducive to the increase of the fame of the ancestors.

4. The glorification of all these persons of meritorious
deeds and of everlasting fame is conducive to wealth, fame,
longevity and heaven. It destroys enemies.

5-7. I bow down to Hiranyagarbha, the lordly Purusa
who is unborn, who is the first creator of subjects, who is the
most excellent one, through whom the Kalpa has been com-
petent to have its characteristics; through whom the fire has been
capable of being a purifying factor; and who is the self-born
Brahma administering all the worlds. After bowing down to
Brahma, I shall recount the excellent creation of living beings,
that begins with Makhat (the great First Principle) and ends
with Vifesa (special created things),! that has its own charac-
teristic features and _ diversities, that has five authorities
( testimonies) ; that calmly rests in the six ones (?) and that
which is presided over by Purusa.

8-9. Through concentration of mind, I shall describe to
you the excellent creation of Bhiitas. Avyakta (the unmanifest

* For the above reading (Visva-tard ca yd pafica), V4.P.4.7a (a corres-
ponding verse) reads : vistdrdvayavam tesdm ‘(Listen to the narration of) the
detailed parts (of the Purana).

1. The Satkhya theory of evolution of the universe is accepted in
Puranas. Compare the account of creation of the Brahmanda in NP.
1.3. 1-45; 42.1-115; Bh.P. ITI.20.12-58; KP.I.2.8 ff.; AP. 17.2-16.

=== PAGE 32 ===

1.1.3.10-18 29

one) which is of the nature of Sat and Asat (Existent and non-
existent) is the eternal cause. Persons who discuss and ponder
over the Principles (reality) call it Pradhana and Prakrti. It is
devoid of odour, colour and taste; it is without the qualities of
sound and touch.

10. It is the source of origin of the universe; it is the
great Bhita (living entity); the supreme and eternal Brahman.
It is the (cosmic) body of all living beings; the unmanifest one
has become so.

11. The Brahman has neither beginning nor end; it is
unborn and subtle; it has three Gunas, it is the source of origin
and place ofultimate merging and rest. It is Asdmpratika (does
not belong to the present time), it is Ajfieya (i.e. cannot be com-
prehended. It is the Brahman which is beyond Sat and
Asat. .

12. This entire dark world was pervaded by his Atman
(soul). As the Gunas were in a state of equilibrium, this world
full of darkness had not yet been evolved.

13. At the time of creation, Pradhana is presided over by
Ksetrajita and since the Gunas become uneven (due to loss of
their equilibrium), the great Principle (Mahat) was evolved.

14. That Mehat (Great Principle) is subtle and at the
outset it was enveloped by Azyakta. The Mahat wherein there is
a predominance of Sattva Guna displays Sativa guna alone.

15. Itshould be known as Mahat on account of its
Sattva quality. That is remembered as its sole reason. The
Linga (Sarira) (i.e. the internal body or the psychic mechanism)
alone is evolved and it is presided over by Ksetrajfia (individual
soul) .

16. Samkalpa (Wishful thought) and Adhyavasdya (Deter-
mination) are remembered as its two functions. With a desire
to create he who is beyond measures, creates the great creation.

17-18. (Defective Text)! Virtue etc. and the elements
are the causes of the principles of the worlds. The mind in the

1. The text from verse 17-28 is corrupt and the corresponding text
of the Va.P. Ch.4 has little in common with these verses and is of no help in
interpretation. Hence reconstruction of emendations could not be hazarded.
But Va.P. 4.76b-79 bear some correspondence to Bd.P,I.i.3.24-27. The Va.

=== PAGE 33 ===

30 Brahmanda Purdna

great Atman is Brahman. The discrimination of wicked know-
ledge is through Ivara (Lord). The Prajfiasandhi (the junction
of intellect) is everything that is under possession. He considers
all living beings through Sankhydyatanarasmis (?) (the rays that
are the abode of the number ?). Therefore the lord attains the
desired fruit.

19-20. The Manas (Mind) is called Bhoktr (Enjoyer) and
Tratr (Protector) and it remains as separated soul. (The Mahat
is so called) because it falls within the collection of principles
and it is great in magnitude. The Mahat principle is remem-
bered as one having physical body that is greater than the
remaining Gunas and Tattvas (Principles). The mind is called
Manas because it thinks or considers the division (or
separateness) or it is thought of as a part.

21-22. The (individual soul) is remembered as Purusa
because of its relationship with Sat (the Existent i.e. the
Brahman) by way of enjoyment of worldly pleasures. Also the
supreme soul is called Brahman because it is Brhat (very huge)
and because it causes all the living beings to increase in size
(Brrnhanatva). (It is possible) because it is the basis of every-
thing. It is defined as Brahma because it causes the living
beings to increase in size and because it fills all the bodies with
blessings.

23. The Purusa understands all the Bhavas (beings and
things) separately. It is through it (i.e. Purusa) that the Brah-
man achieves all its tasks (lit. doing of the work) at the outset.

24. Know that the Prdkrta (the creation of Prakrti) is
the Vivaria (transformation) (of Brakman).1 The Ksetrajfia is on
a par with Brahman. Indeed it is called the first embodied
being and Purdpurusa (the ancient person).

P. verses may be summarised here as follows: ‘The Ksetrajfia called Brahma
who awoke in the egg of Prakrti (Cosmic egg) is the first embodied being and
fhe is called Puruga (one lying in the abode of the cosmic egg.) This god
Brahma, the first creator of Bhifas (elements or beings) existed first. This
four-faced Hiranya-garbha appeared at first in this (cosmic egg). Both at
the time of creation and re-creation (after destruction), he is the Kyctrajiia
called Brahma.

1, This purdna supports Vivarta-vdda as distinguished from Parigdma-
adda in explaining the Brahma-world relation.

=== PAGE 34 ===

1.1.3.25-33 31

25. That Brahma is the primordial creator of the living
beings, that existed at the outset.!

26-27. That Hiranyagarbha with four faces appeared in
the Anda (Cosmic egg). In the primary creation as well as in
the secondary creation, the Ksetrajfiais ona par with Brahman.
The (Individual souls) are asked alongwith the Karanas (sense
organs). They abandon (them) alongwith the dissolutions.
Again they assume physical bodies during the junctions of the
yugas.

28. (Defective text) Those five (?) who are enlightened
may take away the water of the depression (pit) of that noble-
souled one who uplifts the golden Meru. (?)

29-31. .These seven worlds are well established in this
cosmic egg; the whole earth along with the seven continents,
the seven oceans, the great mountains and thousands of rivers
are established in the very same cosmic egg. These worlds are
Situated within (the cosmic egg). This universe is within the
cosmos. Everything is established in that cosmic egg—viz. the
moon and the sun along with the stars, planets and the wind
as well as the mountain Lokaloka.

32.* The waters are externally surrounded by the Tejas
(fiery element) ten times as big as themselves. The Tejas is
externally surrounded by Vdyu (wind) ten times as big as
itself.

33. Vayu is externally surrounded by the Nabhas (Ether)
ten times as big as itself. In the same manner the entire ether
is externally surrounded by Bhitadi (the Ahamkara or ego),

1. From this verse onwards the Prdkrta sarga, the first creation of god
Brahma, is described. It takes place without pre-planning or is unpremedi-
tated (abuddhipdrva)’ like the sudden flash of lightning’ as the Bd.P. puts it.
While the Vaikrta creations (five in number) are planned—buddhip droaka.

* From this verse the elemental sheaths that envelop the cosmic egg
are enumerated. As verses 29-38 in Bd.P. here and V4.P.4.81-91 are identical,
we can substitute the missing line in Bd.P.32. by V4.P. 84a as follows:

adbhir dasa-gundbhis tu bdhyato’ udarh samdurtam |

‘The cosmic egg is enveloped from outside with (the sheath of) ten
times (larger) water’.

This additional line is essential to make up the number seven of these
Prakrtic sheaths mentioned below in verse 34 as:

ebhir dvarapair andar saptabhik prakrtair vytam |

=== PAGE 35 ===

32 Brahméada Purana

34. The Bhiitddt is envelopcd by Makat and the Mahat is
enveloped by Pradhdéna. The cosmic egg is thus enveloped by
the seven Avaranas (coverings) pertaining to the Prakrti.

35-37, Thus willingly these Prakrtis (evolutes of Prakrti)
are stationed ready in destroying mutually. They stand ready
at the time of creation; they sustain mutually and they devour
mutually. Those Vikdras (effects) abide in the Vikdrins (causes)
by way of the supporter-supported relationship. The Avyakta
(the unmanifest one) is called Kysetra and Brahman is called
Ksetrajiia.

Thus the Prakrta Sarga (creation of the Prakrti) (has
been explained ). It is presided by Ksetrajiia.

38. This is the first creation and it is unpremedited. It
appeared just like the lightning. Undoubtedly he who factual-
ly understands this birth of Hiranyagarbha shal] become long-
lived, famous, blessed and intelligent.

CHAPTER FOUR

Constitution of the world (The Cosmic Egg)

[The creation due to disequilibrium of guras—the three states of
the self-born god Brahma—Description of Kalpas]

Sita said ;

1. When the unmanifest one is stationed within itself
and when the effect (universe) had been withdrawn, the Pra-
dhana and Puruga remain with their similarity of characteristics
(retained ).

2. These two have Tamas and Sattva gunas. They are
stationed on a par with each other. Hence they are said to be
mutual pursuers. They are not excessive (in the manifestation
of the Gunas).

=== PAGE 36 ===

1.1.4.3-1] 33

3. Laya (Dissolution) should be understood to occur
when Gunas are in equilibrium. It is called creation when
there is predominance (of one Guna over the other. )

The Sthiti (Sustenance) was at the time when Sattva was
predominant. Certainly, the lotus is stationed at the top (?)

4. When Rajas closely follows and stations itself in Tamas
and Sattva, it is the Rajas that causes the other things to
function in the same way as in the case of the water causing the
seeds to function.

5. The Gunas assume inequality and they become stabi-
lized casually. It should be known that three (divinities) were
born out of the Gunas which are agitated.}

6. They are eternal, extremely mysterious; the souls of
everyone and embodied; the Sattva qualily is Visnu; the Rajas
is Brahma and the Tamas is Rudra, the Prajapati.

7. Visnu the enlightener and revealer of the Rajas
becomes Brahma, and attains the status of the creator. It is
from him that being of great vitality that the variety of creation
of the worlds, takes its origin.

8. Visnu asthe enlightener and revealer of the Tamas
stands separate in the from of Kala (Time).

Visnu as the enlightener and revealer of the Sattva stands
separate as sustenance (i.e. one who sustains).

9. These alone are the three worlds; these alone are the
three Gunas; these alone are the three Vedas; these alone are
the three sacred fires.

10. These have mutual inter-association; these are
mutually attached; they exist by mutual help and they impel
inter se.

11. These are mutually coupled; these are mutually inter-
dependent; these do not become separated even for a moment;
they do not abandon each other.

1, Though this Purana accepts the Sankhya theory regarding the crea-
tion of the universe being due to the imbalance of the three Guyas, the personi-
fication of the Gunas in Brahm4 (Rajas), Visnu (Sattva) and Rudra (Tamas)
is the puranic way of presentation for the understanding of the process by the
masses,

=== PAGE 37 ===

34 Brahmanda Purdna

12. Asa result of the unevenness of the Gunas, the Pra-
Ghana begins to function at the time of creation, At the outset
it begins to function (from that Avyakta) of the nature of Sat
and Asaf and presided over by Adrsfa (the unmanifest) .

13, Fhe pair Brahma and Buddhi (Cosmic intellect) took
their origin simultaneously from that (Pradhana) of the nature
of Tamas and unmanifestness*. The Ksetrajiia (and) that
which is (also) named Brahma (was born from that pair).

14. Fully equipped with Karya (effect?) and Karana (the
instruments; the sense-organs) Brahma appeared (existed) at
the outset. He was unparalleled in lustre, intelligent, unmanifest
but excellent enlightener (revealer ).

15. (Defective text). He is the first embodied being
stabilised in retention. He is endowed with unequalled know-
ledge and absence of passionate attachment.

16. On account of his being unmanifest and because he
had kept (everything) under control, since these are three
Gunas and because all evolved beings are interdependent,
(Brahma attains) whatever he desires mentally.

17. The self-born deity has three states : He has four
faces as Brahma; as Kala (God of Death) he is Bhava, the
destroyer; (as Visnu) he is the Purusa with thousand heads.

18. As Brahma, he creates the worlds; as Kala, he
annihilates them; as Purusa, he is indifferent : these are the
three states of the selfborn deity.?

19. As Brahma, he possesses Rajas exclusively; as Kala
he has Rajas and Tamas and as Purusa (i.e. Visnu) he is
exclusively Sattvika;—this is the position of the Gunas in the
case of the self-born deity.

20. Brahma has eyes like lotus-petals*; Kala has the
lustre ofcollyrium ever since his origin. Purusa is lotuseyed with
the form of the supreme Atman.

* V4a.P.».23: From that (Pair of Brahma & Buddhi) was born Ksetrajiia
designated as Brahma, full of tamas and unmanifestness,

}. he trimity of gods carrying out the functions of creation, susten-
ance and destruction of the universe but the three states of one and the same
selfitbora deity.

* Komalapatraksa should be emended as Namalapaiedbha aa in Vi.P.5.
Sib, as it is the description of the complexions of three deities,

=== PAGE 38 ===

1.1.4.21-29 35

21. He is single. He is two-fold. He is three-fold. Again
he is multifold. The lord of Yogins makes and un-makes the
physical bodies.

22. The physical bodies adopt different kinds of shapes,
activities, colours and features. Since he has the pastime of
remaining threefold in the world, he is called Triguna' (one
that has three Gunas) .

23-24. Since he is divided into four, he is glorified as
Caturvyfiha (one with four arrays). Since at the end of a Parar-
dha, the lord lies down (sleeps) ; since the lord enjoys the
pleasures of the world, since all living beings always take rest
(lie down) normallyand comfortably in him, he is defined as
Atman, He is Rst because he goes everywhere and since the
lord enters the physical body.

25. He is Sarva (all), because he is the master of all;
he is Visnu because he permeates everything. He is Bhagavan,
(since) he devoured the Bhavas (living beings). He is Naga
because no Agas (i.e. sin) abides in him.

26. He is Parama, because he is extremely delighted.
Since he has Devatva (state of being God), he is remembered
as OM. He is Sarvajfia (omniscient) because he knows every-
thing perfectly. He is Sarva because everything originates from
him.

27. Brahma causes the sleep (i.e. perfect rest) of Naras
(men), hence he is remembered as Narayana. He functions
after dividing himself into three. He is Sakata (having the full
complement of digits and parts).

28. By means of the three (Gunas), he himself creates,
devours and protects. The Prabhu (Lord) himself became
Hiranyagarbha at the outset and manifested himself.

29. Indeed he is Adya (First, foremost) and Svavasa
{having himself under control). He is remembered as Aja
because he is not born. Hence he is defined as Hiranyagarbha in
the Puranas.

1. The author of Bd.P. seems to be fond of giving popular etymologies.
The etymologies of Trigupa, Caturvyiha, Atma, Rsi, Visnu, Narayana etc.
are interesting. Some of these are however grammatically correct ¢.g., Vignu
—wié—'to pervade’, rti—z ‘to go’.

=== PAGE 39 ===

36 Brahmanda Purdna

30. He is selfborn and receding (?), he is Kala and the
foremost among all the castes. It is not possible to specify him
exclusively in the course of hundreds of Manu’s years, *

31. The Parardha of Brahma is remembered as being
reckoned is so many Kalpas. He has another period of the same
duration and he wakes up at the end of that period.

32. Thousands and crores of years that had been the
abode of Kalpas have passed by. As many are yet to come.

33-34. The Kalpa that is current now, is Varaha, know
ye all. It is the first Kalpa and it is the present Kalpa. The
Kings should govern till thousand Yugas are completed.

CHAPTER FIVE
The Creation of the Universe

[The Boar incarnation of Visnu—Primary and secondary crea-
tion—creation of gods, sages and their dissolution ].

Sri Sita said :

1. At the beginning, the waters were present everywhere,
on the surface of the earth. When this (visible world) had
been annihilated and when the winds had become quiet,
nothing could be known.

2. In that vast ocean-like expanse of water,} when the
whole world consisting of mobile and immobile beings had

* For Varndgratas, Va.P.5.46b reads Varsdgrajas. If this is accepted as
emendation, the verse would mean: “It is not possible to calculate even with
hundreds of Manvantaras as a unit of the time etc.

1. Ekérgava—Also called Mahérgava, agddha stabdha salila, or Salila
only, Yugdnta-toya in Mt. P., HV., Bh.P. VP. and other Puranas. This pri-
meval watery flood expresses the infinite unmanifest cause—the Karapa Brah-
man as explained by Nilakantha (on HV.P. 3.9.1-4) 1/2 from which all life

=== PAGE 40 ===

1.1.5.3-10 37

perished, the only entity present there was that lord Brahma
with thousand eyes and thousand legs.*

3. At that time Brahma named Narayana lay asleep in
the waters. He hada thousand heads. He was the Purusa with
golden colour and was beyond the ken of the sense-organs.

4. Prohibited* (?) on account of the excess of Sattva,
he saw the empty world. In this context, as regards Narayana
they cite this sloka (verse) .

5. Waters are called Ndras (because) the waters are
indeed the children of (Vara) (Man) ; the waters are his place
of resort. Hence, he is remembered as Narayana.

6. (Defective text). He remains meditating for a period
equal to a thousand Yugas. He performs meditation on a
(Jotus) with golden petals in order to reach the ideal state of
Brahman.**

7. Like a glow-worm at night during the rainy season,
Brahma moves about here and there in the water, stooping down
with his face turned downwards.

8-9. After knowing that the great (universe) had gone
deep into that vast expanse of water, he thought of uplifting
the earth with steadiness of composure. Then he thought of the
other eightfold cosmic body (as evolved by) Omkara, in the
beginnings of Kalpas as before. Then the great soul thought of
his divine form.

10. On seeing that the earth had sunk into the water
he thought—‘what form shall I assume and _ uplift the
earth ?”

comes into being. VP.I.2.22 states that this Ekarnava doctrine is very ancient
and Brahma-vddins have elaborated it to explain the process of creation and
dissolution. Mt.P. 182 identifies Narayana with Mah4rnava.

1. Cf. Purusa-sikta (RV.X.90.1).

* nisiddha in the text is illogical. V4.P.6.4 (an identical verse) reads:
Prabuddha ‘awakened’ by the dominance of Sattva.

2. The usual derivation of Narayana found in other Puranas also but
for a different derivation vide supra 4.28.

** Vi.P.6. reads : naifam kalam updsya sah |

Sarvaryante prakurute Brahmatvarh sarge-kérapat ||

‘Having passed the night-time in sleep, at the end of the night, creates

god Brahma for the creation of the universe’.

=== PAGE 41 ===

38 Brahmanda Purana

11. He remembered the form of a Boar! that is suitable
for the aquatic sports. It was invisible* unto all living beings.
It is of the nature of speech termed Brahman.

12. {ts girth was ten Yojanas (1 Yojana=12 Km) and
the length was a hundred Yojanas. It resembled the dark
cloud, in complexion. It had a rumbling sound like that of
the clouds.

13. It had a huge body like a great mountain. It had
curved fangs, white, sharp and terrible. It bore resembl-
ance (in lustre to) lightning and fire. Its brilliance was like
that of the sun.

14. It had thick long and round shoulders. It used to
walk with the (steady) steps of Visnu. The region of its hips
was raised up (well-developed ) and stout. It was honoured with
the characteristic features of a bull.

15. Assuming this inimitable form ofa boar, Hari entered
the nether worlds for uplifting the earth.

16-22. (The description of Yajita-vardha).2 The conclu-
sion on the Diksd (initiation) and Jsfi (sacrifice) were his
curved fangs, the Kratu (sacrifice) was his tooth. The Juha (the
crescent-shaped wooden ladle) was his mouth; the fire was his

1. VV.8-11 remind of Tait.,Brahmana 1.2.1.3 which states
dpo vd idamagre salilam asit |
tasmin prajapatir viyur bhited
acarat | sa imdm apafyat | tam
vardho bhatva'harat |]
Puranas elaborated this statement in the full-fledged description of the Boar-
incarnation of Visnu. Vide Bh. P. III.13 17-33, Mt.P.Chs. 246-248; VP.I.4.
1-52, Mbh. Sabha 37.29 ff. and Bd. P. infra Ch. 8. 1-10.
* adhrsyam ‘unassailable’ in Va.P.6.11.
2. This poetic description of the Divine Boar in Yajfia terminology is
40 beautiful that not only Purana-writers but writers on Smrti works, Tantra
works and even Sankara adopted it. For example, vide Va.P.Ch.6 (a number
of verses identical with Bd.P.), Bm P. 213.33-42; Bh.P. ITI.13 84-39, Visnu
Smyti 1.3-12; Sankara on Visnu-sahasra-nama verse 118 on YajAldnga.
Though it is a self-explanatory translation some expressions are explained
briefly.
3. Mt.P, 247.68 reads differently.
Veda-pado Yape-damstral: Kratu-dantes Citi-mukhal

=== PAGE 42 ===

1 1.5.16-22 39

tongue;? the Darbha grasses were his hairs,* the Brahma (one
of the four Rtviks employed at a Soma sacrifice or vedic
knowledge of great penance was his head.* The Vedas were his
shoulders; he had the fragrance of the Havis. The Havya, Kavya
etc. were his vclocity;* Prdgvamsa (the sacrificial room facing
the east) was his body;® he was brilliant; he was equipped with
different kinds of Diksds (initiations); he was the master of
Yoga with Daksina for his heart; he was the lord full of Sraddha
(faith) and Sattva (good quality) ;*° he had Updkarma (extra
study of the Vedas by way of expiation) for his Ruci? (lustre or
taste); he had Pravargya (the ceremony preliminary to Soma
sacrifice) as his Avartabhisana® (ornamental whorls of hair on
his chest), the way of the different Cchandas (Metres) was
his pathway; the Upanisads with their esoteric doctrines consti-
tuted his seat. He was assisted by Maya in the capacity of his
spouse; he had the height of the peak of a mountain; he had
the day and the night as his eyes;® he had the ancillary subjects

1. A Vedic concept. Agni (fire) is the tongue of gods with which they
eat the food (offered in sacrifices), cf. RV.IV.57.1.

2. darbha-romd. The darbha-grass spread on the altar is compared to
the shaggy hair on the body of the boar.

3. Brahma-Sirsah—Brahma means also the Vedic knowledge and natu-
rally its position is the highest viz. the head.

4. It is difficult to understand why the velocity of the Divine Boar is
compared to the Havya and Kavya rites meant for gods and Pigs. Probably
Agnihotra and Srdddha and their association with the sacrifice may be the reason.

5. Praguamsa-kéya—Prdgvamsa also means ‘a room in which the family
and friends performing the sacrifice assemble.’ This body (Kéya) of the Yajfta-
Varaha is so much spacious as to accommodate many people.

6. Va.P.6.21. gives a better reading viz. mahd-sattra-mayo : Mahd-
sattra is a long (and great) Soma-sacrifice continuing for 13 to 100 days.
Varaha has assumed the form of a great Soma sacrifice.

7. The Mt.P. and Sankara read updkarmostharucakah : Whose pendant
lower-life was updkarma (recitation of the Vedas). Can we take ruci for rucaka?

8. The whorls of hair on the front of horse’s chest is regarded as orna-
mental. The same on the chest of the boar would be beutifying.

The Pravargya ceremony is introductory to the Soma sacrifice. In this,
fresh milk is poured into a heated vessels called Mahévfra or Gharma, or into
boiling ghee (MW.P.693.ii). The vapour-fumes coiling up from the gharma
is imagined as circular whorls of the Boar’s hair.

9. Day and night represent the Sun and the Moon. They are the two
eyes of this Divine Boar.

=== PAGE 43 ===

40 Brahmanda Purdna

of the Vedas as the ornament unto his ears, He had the odour
of the Ajya (ghee-offering; in the sacrifice) ; the Sruvd (the sacri-
ficial ladle) was his snout; he had the loud pitch in chanting
of the Sdman hymns as his voice; he was glorious, an embodi-
ment of truth and virtue; he was honoured by the exploits
of his actions; expiation was his claw; he was terrible; he had
the knee joints of the animals; he was the great sacrifice in-
carnate; Udgat@ was his entrail;! the Homa was his Linga
(symbol) ; he had fruits and seeds as great medicinal herbs*(?)
Vadyantara’ (Another disputant) was his own Sastra (sacrifice)
(?). Absence of egotim as well as Soma juice was his blood.

23. [The text in Bd.P. is corrupt. The corresponding

verse in Va. P. 6.23 is as follows :]
bhiitva Yajiia-varaho vai antah sa pravisat prabhuh/
adbhih safichaditam utrvirm sa tam aSsnan prajapatih
upagamyojjaharasu apas tag ca sa vinyasan //
‘It is reported that he verily became Yajiia-varaha and the
Lord entered the waters. That Prajapati found that earth
which was covered over with waters. Removing (displacing)
those waters, he seized and quickly lifted it up.’

24. He allocated the waters of the ocean in the oceans
and those of the rivers in the rivers. After making them
separate and equal, he gathered the mountains on the earth
for its stability.

25. These mountains had been burnt in the previous
Sarga (period of creation) by the Samvartaka fire (i.e. fire of
destruction at the time of universal annihilation). Along
with that fire these mountains had got merged in the earth
completely.

1. It is the length of the Sama song sung by the Udgatr which resemb-
les the long entrail of the animal.

2. Phala-btja-mahausadhih. This reading though accepted in the trans-
lation is obscure. Mt.P.,Bm.P., Visnu Smr. read Bijausadhi-mahdphalak. Mahé-
phala is the scrotum. The idea seems to be that the herbs and plants which
produce the seed are comparable functionally to the testicle of the Boar.

8. This is obscure. The reading in Visnu Smr.(I.6) is Vedyantardtmd.
It means the Vedi, the altar of the sacrifice was the heart of the Boar.

=== PAGE 44 ===

1.1.5.26-32 41

26. (Defective text). In that vast expanse of water [due
to cold (faitydt—Va. P.)], they became stored up by the wind.
Wherever this (water solution with burnt mountains) was
sprinkled, a mountain cropped up in each of those places.

27. After they had been scattered, Vifvakarman divided
the worlds, oceans and mountains. He divides like this again
and again at the beginning of every Kalpa.}

28. He created again and again this earth consisting
of seven continents along with the oceans and the mountains.
He (also) created again the four worlds beginning with Bhi
(earth).

29-31. After creating the worlds, Brahma, the self-born
lord began the creation of Prajas (subjects). Desirous of creat-
ing different subjects (creatures), he created them in the
same form as had been created before. As he meditated and
pondered about (the forthcoming) creation preceded by
(cosmic) intellect, Avidya unfolded itself into five forms simul-
taneous with Pradhdna? (?). These five forms were Tamasika.
They were darkness, delusion, great-delusion, pitch darkness
and blind darkness.

32. Thus Avidya had five joints (Parvan).? It manifest-
ed itself from the great-soul. Thus the creation remained
five-fold even as he was meditating over it and identifying
himself with it.

1. The Puranic belief about the new creation of the universe at the
beginning of a new Kalpa is that, despite the annihilation of the universe at
the end of every Kalpa, god Brahm re-creates the universe on the same
model of the former universe. It is succinctly stated as

Dhaté yathapirvam akalpayat |

2. This is the translation of Pradhdna-samakdle in the Text. The unfold-
ment of the five Parvans of Avidya simultaneously with the Sankhya principle
called Pradhina is confusing. Va.P.6.36 gives a better reading viz. Pradhyana-
sama-kdlam “simultaneously with i.e. while he was meditating, there manifes-
ted Avidya of five knots or Parvans’’.

3. The five joints (Parvans) of AvidyA are enumerated in 31b viz.
Tamas, Moha, Maha-moha, Taémisra and Andha-tamisra. These are rendered
as ignorance, delusion, desire of enjoyment, anger and fear of death. vide
‘Com. on VP.1.5.5). The concept called Avidyd is very complex. With Yoga,
it means “undifferentiated consciousness” (J.H. Woods); Vedanta equates it
‘with Maya. Here the cosmic aspect of Avidyd is implied.

=== PAGE 45 ===

42 Brahmdnda Purana:

33. It is surrounded everywhere by Tamas like the seed
and the creeper within a pot.* Within and without, it is devoid
of lustre as well as devoid of consciousness.

34. Since they have (well) made intellect, miseries and
sense-organs, the Nagas (i.e. trees, creepers, plants) are glorified
as Mukhya (Principal) creations.1 Their selves have been

covered up.

35 Brahma, the self-born lord, was not fully satisfied in
his mind even after seeing the evolution of Mukhyasarga
(principal creation). He thought of creating (a fresh type of
creation ) then.

36. Even as he was pondering over it, another creation,
the Tiryaksrotas®? (oblique-currented creation, i.e. the animal
world) took its origin. It is remembered as Tiryaksrotas, because
it functioned in oblique (in non-straight) ways.

37. On account of the excess of the Tamas quality, they
are remembered as Ajfdnabahula (abounding in ignorance).
They are Utpadyagrahinah** (comprehending what should be
produced). They fancy themselves wise, despite their ignorance,

38. They possess egotism. They are proud of themselves.
They are of twentyeight types.? The sense-organs are of eleven
varieties, The soul etc. are of nine varieties.

* For Bd.P.—bija-kumbha-lata-vrtah

(translated here) Va.P.6.37b reads:

dipak kumbhavad durtah

‘just as a lamp lighted in a pitcher cannot emit light outside due to the
opaque wall-like cover of the pitcher. This simile in V4.P. is the traditional
and more appropriate one here. For more discussion vide note 2 on P.57
of the translation of KP (MLBD. )

1. This ‘meditated’ (Vaikrta) creation by Avidya was characterised
by ignorance as it included immobiles (Ndaga)-like mountains, trees. Hence it
is also called Mukhya. As verse 55 below explains Mukhya means Sthdvara
(immobile).

2. VV. 36-40 describe the second type and stage of ‘meditated’
creation viz. Tiryak-srotas. It is not that the creatures in this creation always.
move in oblique direction. But, as verse 56 below and VP. I.5.9-11 and 22a
explain, it includes birds and beasts which are by nature mostly ignorant and
hence taking to wrong-ways and egotistic. This is the second stage in volution
after the immobile one.

** Va.P.6.43a reads: utpatha-gréhigah ‘taking to wrong ways’—a better
ing.

3, The text reads astdvithSad-vidhdtmikah and the reading is supported
by V&.P.6.44. But VP.L.5.lla reads: asfivisniad-vadhdimikah.

=== PAGE 46 ===

1.1.5,39-47 43

39. The Tarakas and others are of eight types, their des-
truction of power is remembered (?). They have inner light
and all of them are again externally enveloped.

40. They are called Tiryaksrotas. They have their selves
under control. They have three appellations.

41. After creating the second universal creation; the
Tiryaksrotas and having observed that type of creation, the
(following) idea occurred in him :

42. Even as he was pondering, the final creation of the
Sattvika type was evolved. This third creation is Ordhvasrotas
upwards currented,! It is based upwards.

43. Since they returned upwards they arecalled Ordhva-
srotas. They are ofa pleasant nature with much of gaiety. They
are not enveloped within or without.

44-46a. They are brilliant within and without. The sub-
jects of Ordhvasrotas are remembercd as nine, They are Dhata
(? creator) and others. They are remembered as wise ones of
contented mind. This third creation, the Urdhvasrotas, is remem-
bered as Daivika (Divine) i.e. pertaining to gods).

When the divine creations of the Urdhvasrotas type had
been created, lord Brahma became pleased. Thereafter, he did
not ponder over anything else.

46b-47. (Later on) the lord was desirous of creating
another set of created beings that would be Sadhaka (aspirant
after spiritual achievement).

Even as he was pondering over creation and since he
was of truthful (effective) conception, the Bhautasarga (creation
of Bhitas, i.e. living beings) manifested itself. It was down-

The reading is worth noting as the verses concerning the creation in VP.I.5,
Va.P.6 and Bd.P. text under translation are common and the word Vadha
in asfdvirhsad-vadhdtmakah in VP. is a technical term in Sankhya. It means
‘weakness.’ Iivara Krsna’s Sdnkhya-Karikd enumerates them as follows:
ekddaSendriya-vadhah saha buddhi-vadhair aSsaktir uddista |
sapta-dasa-vadhd buddher viparyaydt tusfi-siddhindm |/49//
1. VV.42-46a describe the third Vatkrta Creation called Urdhoa-
srotas or Deva-sarga, creation of heavenly beings.

=== PAGE 47 ===

44 Brahmdnda Purana

ward-——currented (arvdk-srotas)! as well as competent to achieve
the goals of his life.

48. Since they function downwards (i.e. on the earth,
below heaven) they are (called Arvdksrotas. They abound in
brilliance but were contaminated by tamas and dominated with
rajas.

49. Hence they have excess of misery. They make re-
peated attempts. They are enlightened within and without.
They are the mortal beings capable of achieving their goal.

50. They are arranged into eight classes with hellish
characteristics (i.e. such characteristic features as are conducive
to hell). Those men with souls of spiritual achievement are
similar in characteristic features to the Gandharvas.

51-52. The fifth creation, the Anugraka Sarga (creation
of blessings) is arranged into four classes, viz. i) Viparyaya
(Loss of consciousness), ii) Sakti (Efficiency), iii) Siddha (of
achievement ) and iv) Mukhya (Principal).

They are born again and again, they recede and they
(come back) to be present. The sixth creation is said to be of
Bhiutadi (elements or creatures) etc.

53-55A. Those creatures should be known as _ character-
ised by tendency to eat and obtain or grab.

The first creation of Brahma should be known as that of
Mahat (the great principle). The second creation is that of
Tanmdatras. It is called Bhitasarga.*

55B. The third Vaikarika creation is called Aindriya
Sarga (creation pertaining to the sense organs). These are the
Prakrta (of Prakrti) creations that are evolved with consciousness
and foreknowledge.

1. VV.46b-50 describe the fourth creation called arvdk-srotas—down-
currented i.e. who function on the earth below the heavenly region. It is called
Manusyasarga in verse 49 and in VP.I.5.23.

2. There seems to be confusion in the present text. Here Bhitadi
or Bhita-sarga is called the sixth Vaikyta Creation. But in the recapitulatory
verses below (VV.52b-58) Bhata-sarga is given as the Second Prakrta Creation
(V.54a) and Vaikrta sargas are stated to be five in number

Paficaite vaikrtak sargdh—

=== PAGE 48 ===

1.1.5.56-62 45

The fourth creation is Mukhyasarga. The immobile
creations are remembered as Mukhyas.

56-57. The fifth one is Tiryaksrotasa creation. The
Tiryagyonis (i.e. the lower creatures and animals) constitute it.

The sixth creation of Urdhvasrotas is called Daivata (per-
taining to divine beings).

Thereafter, is the seventh creation, that of the Arvaksrotas,
the human beings. The eighth creation is Anugrahasarga. It is
Sattvika as well as Tamasa.

58. These (latter) five creations are the Vatkrta (Medi-
tated) creation. The first three are remembered as Prakria (per-
taining to Prakrti) creations. The ninth creation called the
Kaumara (brought about by Kumara i.e. Sanatkumara etc.)
sarga. (The eight creations mentioned before are) Prdkrta and
Vatkrta.

59. (Defective text)* The three Prakrta creations are
Buddhipfiroas (created with consciousness and foreknowledge).
The Vikrta creations function Buddht-Apfirvas (without consci-
ousness and foreknowledge). Their classes pertain to the
Brahman (?)

60-62. Understand all of it even as it is being recounted
in detail. He abides fourfold (in four groups) in all the liv-
ing beings, viz by (1) Viparyaya, (2) Sakti, (3) Buddhi (intellect
and (4) Siddhi (see verse 51 above). He is stationed among
immobile beings by means of Viparydsa (i.e. Viparyaya—contra-
riety or loss of consciousness) ; in the lower creatures by means
of Sakti (physical power); the human beings are with souls of
spiritual achievement; there is Pusfi** (? nourishment) wholly
among the Devas.

* The text is defective and hence the translation is confused. The
corresponding verse in V4.P.6.

Prakrtds tu trayah sargdh krtds te’buddhi-piroakap |
Buddhi-piroam pravartante saf-sarga Brahmapas tu te |/

‘The three Prakrta creations were brought about wituout planning or
pre-meditation (abuddhi-pérvakah). But the six creations of god Brahma4 came
out pre-planned (with previous meditation).

** tusfi ‘contentment’ in V4.P.6.69.

=== PAGE 49 ===

46 Brahmdada Purdna

Thereafter, Brahma created mental sons on a par with
himself.

63-65. Those (sons) of great splendour and strength
became Niorttas (i.e. renounced the world) on account of their
knowledge pertaining to Vivarta (unreal appearance caused by
Avidya e.g. the world instead of Brahman). All the three of
them (?) addressed the name (? of the world and ceased (their
activity) without creating the (primary) creation of the sub-
jects or the secondary one. When they were found Viraktas
(Devoid of passionate attachment) Brahma wishing to create
other Sadhakas created those Devas who took pride in their
positions and identified themselves with the same. Then there
is the command of Brahma once again. Understand from me
those Sthdnins (deities in different positions) who were in the
condition of non-creation (Abhitasrsti) .

66-68. They are the waters, the fire, the earth, the wind, the
intermediate region between the heaven and the earth, the ether,
the heaven, the quarters, the oceans, the rivers, the vegetable
kingdom, the souls of medicinal herbs, the souls of trees and
creepers, the winding plants, the units of time suchas Kasthas,
Kalas, Muhirtas etc., the twilights, the nights, the days,
the half-years, the months, the Ayanas (the period of the tran-
sits of the sun from north to south and vice versa), the years
and yugas.

They take pride and identify themselves with their
positions and currents. They are remembered as having the
names of their respective positions.

69. After creating the souls of different Sthdnas
(positions), he created other beings, the Devas and the Pitrs
by whom these subjects flourished.

70. He created nine mental sons, viz., Bhrgu, Angiras,
Marici, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Daksa, Atri and Vasistha.

71. These are decisively termed nine Brahmas in the
Purana because they wese just like Brahma (in regard to the
creation) of all Brahma Yogins their sons.

72, Thereafter Brahm4 created Rudra form qut of his

=== PAGE 50 ===

4,1.5.73-82 47

anger. He then created the Samkalpa* (conception) and Dharma
(virtue) of all in all directions.

73. Then Brahma created Vyavasdya (Energetic effort)
the creature of the nature of pleasure. From the Samkalpa of
the creator whose source of origin was the unmanifest one
Sarnkalpa was born.

74. From the Prana Daksa was created and he (Brahma)
‘created Marici from the speech and the eyes. Sage Bhrgu was
born of the heart of Brahma whose source of origin was water.

75. Angiras was born of the head and Atri from the ears.
Pulastya was born of the life-breath called Udana and Pulaha
from the Vyana.

76. Vasistha was born of life-breath Samdna. He created
Kratu from the Apana. These are remembered as the twelve**
excellent sons of Brahma.

77. Dharma and others should be known and they are
remembered as the first born sons of Brahma, Bhrgu and
‘others who were created (later), were not expounders of
Brahman.

78. These twelve sons of Brahma are to be known as the
ancient householders. O Brahmana, these are born along with
Rudra.

79. Kratuand Sanatkumara, these two lived in perpetual
celibacy. In the previous birth*** they are elder to all.

80. Inthe seventh Kalpa, these ancient Sddhakas of the
world had already passed away. They shine (refulgently) in
this world by means of the splendour of their own souls.

81. Both of them were Yogins by nature. Those two, of
great power, carried out the duties of subjects and love by
superimposing the soul (on the supreme soul) by means of the
soul.

82. He continues to be in the same state as he was in,
when he was born. So he is called Kumara. Thereupon, his
name Sanatkumara became well established.

* Sarhkalpa and Dharma born before all.
** Dharma, Sathkalps, Rudra and nine sages 12.
*e* Tf the reading is Aarcatpannau ‘They were born before’.

=== PAGE 51 ===

48 Brahmaénda Purana

83. Their twelve races are divine and are endowed with
the groups of Devas; they performed holy rites; they had
progeny and they had great sages ornamenting the race.

84. After seeing those twelve Satwika beings born of his
vital airs, the lord created the Asuras, the Pitrs, the Devas
and the human beings.

85. He created the Devas from his mouth; the Pitrs
from his chest; the human beings from his organ of generation
and he created the Asuras from his buttocks.

86. Carrying on his creative activities during the night,
the lord of the Devas created souls of human beings from the
moonlight. He created the Pitrs from the nectar.

87. After creating the Mukhya (prominent) and Amukhya
(non-prominent) Devas and Asuras, he created from his mind
the human beings and the great Pitrs who were like their own
fathers.

88. He created the lightning, the thunder and the
clouds, the red coloured rainbows, the Rks, the Yajus Mantras
and the Saman songs for the fulfilment of the Yajfias.

89. The living beings, high and low, were born of his
splendour. The creation of subjects by Brahma comprises of
the Devas, the sages the Pitrs and the human beings.

90. Again he creates living beings, the mobile and the
immobile ones, the Yaksas, the Pigacas, the Gandharvas and
all the Apsaras, all round.

91. Hecreated men, Kinnaras, Raksasas, the birds, the
animals, the deer and the serpents. He created the two types,
the mobile and the immobile, as well as the Vyaya (perishable)
and the Azvyaya (Imperishable) .

92-94. They attain those activities created formerly by
the self-born lord. Though created again and again, they
betake themselves to those alone (Viz. their own previous
characteristics) such as violence and nonviolence, softness and
cruelty, virtue and evil as well as what is done and what is
not done.! They know the three (entities) are not separate,
though born of them alone as separate (?). This is thus, and
not thus; this is neither the pair (thus and non-thus) nor the

1. This is the inexorable Law of Karman. Even after Kalpanta,
the Karma follows its doer immediately after the new creation of the world.

=== PAGE 52 ===

1.1.5.95-103 49

non-pair (of thus and non-thus).! People who cling to Sattva-
guna and who view with equanimity say that Karman has
itself as the object.

95-97. That great lord created these five by mcans of
the word Diva (Dw—to shine, the heaven that sparkles).
He caused the extension of the created five elements by way of
names (?).

The lord gave them names pertaining to the sages. He
gave names to those creations among the Devas that are
not born during the night. Thus for the reasons cited above,
the creation of the worlds by the self-born lord was effected.
The evolutes ofthe Prakrti beginning with Mahat and _ ending
with Vifesa (particularised creations) were thus evolved

98-99. The cosmos has the lustre of the moon and the
sun; it is embellished by planets and stars; it is equipped with
thousands of rivers, seas and mountains. It consists of different
kinds of beautiful cities and flourishing principalities and
territories. In this forest of Brahma, the unmanifest onc, the
omniscient Brahma wanders.

100-1032. This grove of trees of Brahma is born of the
seed viz Avyakta or Prakrti (the unmanifest one). It is stationed

1. This reminds us of the stance of Safijaya-Belatthi-putta in Sdmaftfta-
phala-sutta (para 32) of Digha Nikaya (p. 51 of the Nalanda Edt.)

2. VV.100-103 give an allegorical description of the universe or
Samsara as the forest tree of god Brahma. The comparison with the tree and
the universe is as follows.

The Tree The creation or Samsara
The Seed Avyakta (Prakrit)
Stem Buddhi (Intellect)
Inner hollow Sense-organs

Branches (SakAd) in the Bd.P. The Mahabhiitas (elements)
(but atkura or sprouts in Va. P.)

[PrakdSa in Bd.P. is probably

a misprint for Prafakha in

Va.P. ]

Leaves (paira) Visesa (sense objects or particular
categories )

Flowers Virtue (dharma)
Evil (a-dharma)

Fruits Pleasure and pain

=== PAGE 53 ===

50 Brahmaada Purdaa

under its blessing. It is full of stems and branches in the form
of the intellect. The sense-organs are the inner hollows; the
great Bhitas (elements) are its luminaries;* it possesses leaves,
in the form of the Vifesas (particularised categories) orthe
objects of senses), Virtue and Evil are its beautiful flowers;
pleasure and misery are the fruits (of this tree) ; this eternal
tree of Brahma is the sustenance of all living beings. This
forest of Brahma is constituted by and belongs to the trees of
Brahma. The eternal, Avyakta (unmanifest one) of the nature
of Sat and Asat is the cause thereof. Persons who think of the
Tattvas (categories) call it Pradhana, Prakrti and Maya.

104. Such is the Anugraha! creation. It is remembered
as one with Brahma as the cause. The three creations pertain-
ing to Prakrti are the creations of Brahma without the back-
ground of consciousness or meditation.

105-106. The six creations beginning with Mukhya are
the Vaikrtas (pre-meditated ones) and they have been created
with the background of consciousness.

They function by way of Vaikalpa (i.e. through excite-
ment). They are identified with the Brahman (?)

Thus nine creations? are remembered including the
Prakrias and Vatkrias. These are the creations originating
through mutual contact. The reason thereof has been
remembered by the wise or learned.

107. It is that Actntyaiman (incomprehensible soul) who
is the maker of all living beings. They (the learned) say that
the Vedas are his head (?); the firmament is his navel; the
sun and the moon are his eyes; the quarters are his ears, know
that the earth constitutes his feet.

* The word Prakdfa is inapplicable to Bhitas. The reading: mahd-
bhita-prasakha ‘The tree bas big branches in the form of Mahabhitay’ in the
Va.P. is better.

1. This is called Anugraha creation as it is caused or created through
the favour of Avyakta or Prakrti as noted in V.100 above (tasya=ayyakiasya
anugrahe sthitah)

2. As noted above three are Prdkria sargas and six arc Vaiksta ones.
‘This makes the total of nine creations.

=== PAGE 54 ===

1.1.5.108-118 3}

108. It is from his mouth (face) that the Brahmanas
were born. From the front part of his chest the Ksatriyas
were born. It is from his thighs that the Vaisyas were born
and the Sidras from his feet. All the castes were born of his
jimbs.1

109. Narayana is greater than and beyond the Avyakia
{the unmanifest one); the cosmic egg is termed Avyakta, god
Brahma himself is born of the cosmic egg; the worlds have been
created by him.

110. *After staying there for ten Kalpas they go again
to the (world of) Satya. (Those who reach) the world of
Brahma attain the goal from which they never return.

111. With the exception of overlordship, they are on a
par with him in regard to AzSvarya (prosperity, power to
control etc.) They become equal to Brahma as far as form
and object are concerned.

112. There they stay endowed with pleasure and
accompanied by themselves (and their possessions). On
account of the inevitability of the matter, it (he) expands the
Prakrta (creation) himself.

113-114. Then, purified on that occasion, they are to
be directly connected with the diversity. Just as, while one
is asleep the faculty of understanding functions without intel-
lectual consciousness. So also their knowledge functions when
purified on that occasion, through the withholding of
differences, but not so in the case of Susmins (?) (lustrous or
powerful ones) .

115-116. The causal relations between cause and effects
function alongwith them in regard to the residents of the
world of Brahma, who see the diversity; whose aberrations had
receded and who stand by their own duties. They are Siddhas
of similar (equal) characteristics, of splendid souls and are
free from sullied state.

117-118. As an effect of Prakrti, they possess sense-
organs and organs of action. They are well arranged in their
own souls, After establishing the soul, the Prakrti, that appears

1. An echo from the Purusa Sikta (RV.X.90)
* Obviously some lines are missing from the text.

=== PAGE 55 ===

52 Brahmdada Purdna

in multifarious forms, and that seems to be different from
Purusa, does not function. Thereupon begins to function the
creation of those things of the nature of existing cause.

119. The contact of the Yuktas (sages of Yogic practice),
the seers of reality should be known as Prakrti. It is the cause
of their Apavarga (salvation) of those persons who goon a
never to return journey of those who are not reborn.

120-122. Due to Abhdva (Absence of rebirth) they
go once again to Satya-Loka as though the flames have subsided.
Thereupon, when those persons of joyous souls have gone
above the three worlds, they by whom the Mahar-Loka was
not reached, go along with them. When the Kalpadaha (the
burning of the universe at the end of the Kalpa) is imminent
their disciples stay here.

They are the Gandharvas and others, the Pisgacas, the
human beings, the Brahmanas and others, the animals and the
birds and the immobile beings alongwith the reptiles.

123. While on that occasion the residents of the surface
of the earth are staying there,! the thousand rays of the sun
perish (?). They become seven rays and each one of these rays
becomes a sun. Gradually they assume a hundred times in-
creased magnitude and burn the three worlds.

124-125. They burn the mobile and the immobile beings,
the rivers and all the mountains : they had already been dry
due to drought and absence of rain. Now they are heated by
those rays. Then they are completely burnt by the sun’s rays
and they become helpless. These mobile and immobile beings,
as well as Dharma and Adharma etc. become completely burnt
by the sun’s rays.

126-129a. With their bodies burnt and with their sins
completely washed off at the end of the Yuga, they become
well known (?). They are freed of their distress. (They are
blessed) by the auspicious (stage of boundlessness). Then, after
the night of Brahma, born of the unmanifest one, has dawned,
those people become joined with the people of similar forms

1. Description of the end of a Kalpa.

=== PAGE 56 ===

1.1.5.129-141 53

and in the subsequent creation they become the mental progeny
of Brahma.

129b-132. Thereafter, when the people living in the
three worlds have become merged with the people, when all
the worlds have been completely burned by the seven suns,
when the earth is flooded by the rain, both in the secluded
places and in the seas, the oceans, the clouds, the waters of
the earth proceed ahead flowing fast like arrows. They are as
though mountains called by the name Salila (water) ; when
much water came on like this and covered this earth it became
what is called Arnava (sea) .

133-135. (Defective text). (Water is called Ambhas, why
is it so?) Since it shines (Abhdti) it is called Ambhas. The
word Bhd is used in the sense of lustre and illumination.! The
expanse of water has spread over everything and got into
touch with all. It is known by its own lustre.

Since it stuffs the entire earth all round within itself and
makes it extend, it is called Apatanu.2 The root Tanoti means
to extend. The waters are therefore called Apatanu.

The word Séra indicates that which is Sirpa (shattered).
It is a root having various meanings. In that vast expanse of
water, the waters are not shattered. Hence they are called
Naras.8

136-138. In thc waters, at the end of a thousand Yugas,
when the day of Brahma comes to a close, when it is his
night of the same duration within the waters, when within the
waters the earth has lost all its fires; when it is darkness all
round with not even a glimmer of light, when the wind has,
subsided—the lord Brahma by whom the portion of the world
is presided over desired once again to make the division of
this world.

139-141. In that vast expanse of water, where the
mobile and the immobile beings had perished, Brahma lay
down, Brahma of thousand eyes, thousand legs and thousand

1. Bd.P. interestingly traces ambhas ‘water’ to bhd—‘to shine.’ It
is merely a popular etymology.

2. MW. does not give a word like Apatanu or Upatanu.

3. Nara na+Sirga=waters, is beyond linguistics.

=== PAGE 57 ===

54 Brakmanda Puréna

heads, the Purusa of golden colour, Brahm&4 named Narayana
who was beyond the ken of the sense organs lay asleep.

He became awakened due to the emergence of Sattva.
He woke up and surveyed the cosmos that was a void, With
the narration of this, the first Pada (section) of the Purana has
heen related.

=== PAGE 58 ===

SECTION TWO
ANUSANGA-PADA

=== PAGE 60 ===

CHAPTER SIX

The Kalpas and Manvantaras!
Thetr Duration

Siita said :

1. On hearing the first Pada (section) the main theme
of which is the Prakrti, thus recounted, Kapeya (Kagyapeya in
Va.P.) who was delighted had some doubts.

2-3. After propitiating the Sita by means of words
(and desirous of hearing) another story for that purpose, (he
said) — “Hereafter O Sage conversant with the Kalpa,
recount Pratisandhi to me. I wish to know this, viz. : the interim
period between the two Kalpas i.e. the Kalpa that has passed
and the Kalpa that is current. I wish to know the Pratisandhi
(the period of transit) between these two. Indeed, you are
sufficiently well-versed.”’

4. On being thus requested by Kapeya, Sita, the most
excellent among eloquent men, began to narrate the origin of
the three worlds entirely.

Siita said :

5. Now I shall describe factually, O men of holy vows,
the Kalpa of the past and the Kalpa of the future and the
period of transit that is between these two.

6. (I shall also describe) O men of holy rites, the dif-
ferent Manvantaras in the Kalpas. The Kalpa that is current
now is Varaha—anauspicious Kalpa.

1. Description of Manvantaras is one of the main characteristics of a
Purana. We have a description of these Manvantaras in Bh.P. VIII.1.1-29.
KP.1.51, NP.I.40-17-37, VP.III. 1.1-9 and others. But this chapter like V4.P. 7
describes the Kalpas and the interim period joining the Kalpas. A number of
verses are.common to V4.P.7 and this chapter.

=== PAGE 61 ===

58 Brahmanda Purdne

7. Understand the intervening transitional stage between
this Kalpa and the old (ancient) Kalpa that preceded this and
passed away.

8. When the previous Kalpa recedes without a Prati-
sandhi (intermediate period), another Kalpa begins again with
Janaloka and others.

9. Two (consecutive) Kalpas have a transitional stage
separating them mutually. All beings are completely annihilat-
ed at the end of a Kalpa.

10a. The Period intervening between the end of that
Kalpa is called* Pratisandhi.1

10b-11. In a Manvantara, the junctions of those periods
of time called Yugas are unbroken. The Manvantaras function
with interconnections of the Yugas. The previous Kalpas have
been recounted briefly (?) in the Prakriya-pada. '

12-14. Each Kalpa has a Pfirva-Ardha (former half) and
Para-Ardha (latter half). Therefore, when a Kalpa passes by,
its latter half is followed by the former half of the next Kalpa.
The other Kalpas also will follow suit with their latter halves
increased(?). O Brahmanas, the Kalpa that is present now
is the first among them. It has a Péirva-Ardha and a Para-Ardha.
The second one is called Para. This is the period of sustenance.
It is remembered that the period of dissolution is thereafter.

15. Prior to this Kalpa was the ancient Kalpathat had
passed by at the end of a thousand sets of four Yugas along-
with the Manvantaras.

16-18. When the Kalpa comes to aclose and the time
of universal burning arrives (?), the Devas moving about
in the aerial chariots, the stars, planets and the constellations,
the moon, the sun etc.—all these meritorious souls were twenty-
eight crores in number. Their number in all the fourteen

* The reading: na vidyate ‘The Pratisandki does not exist between the
past and the present Kalpa’ is obviously wrong. Hence the reading of
Va.P. 7.9 (=this verse in Bd.P.) is accepted.

1. This is the definition of Prati-sandhi. In Manvantaras, the yuga period
connecting two manvantaras 1s unbroken but at the end of the Kalpa, the
universe gets destroyed as described in VV.16 ff below.

=== PAGE 62 ===

1.2.6.19-27 59

Manvantaras is the same. Therefore their total number in all
the Manvantaras together was (14x 28 =) 392 crores.

19. Further, in everyone of the Kalpas, the Devas moving
about in aerial chariots are remembered to be seventy thousand
more.

20. In the fourteen Manvantaras there were the Devas,
the Pitrs and the sages imbibing nectar (Amrtapas) in the
firmament and heaven.

21. They had their servants (followers), wives and sons.
At that time, the Devas in the firmament were beyond the
discipline of the Varnas (castes) and the Aframas (stages in life).

22. Thereafter, when the annihilation of all living beings
along with objects approached, all of them became persons
of equal position and condition with those that had attained
Sdyujya (the salvation of merging with the divinity).

23-25. Thereafter, due to the inevitability of the re-
currence of the intellect* of the soul (?) the Devas, the
residents of the three worlds, become persons identifying with
and taking pride in the different positions here.

When the time of sustenance was complete, when the
Pascimottara (the latter and later period) was imminent, when
the annihilation arrived, the enthusiasic Devas in the last days
of the Kalpa, partially abandoned their abodes.! Thereafter,
they became excited and directed their minds towards the
Maharloka.

26. (Defective text). They practise Yoga and make use
of the great (thing) in the body** (?) All of them abound in
purity. They have achieved the mental Siddhi (achievement).

27. The Mahar-loka was attained by Brahmanas,
Ksattriyas, Vaigyas and other people born of them, alongwith
those residents of Kalpa.

* Va.P.8.23 (=Bd.P. present verse) reads buddhwd ‘Having under-
stood the inevitability.’

1. VV.24-31 describe the progress of gods upto Satya-loka, the region
of god Brahma.

** The first line in the corresponding V4.P. verse (8.26) reads:
te yukta upapadyante mahasi-sthaih Sartrikail’ |

with their bodies stationed in mahas (Maharloka) they practise etc.

=== PAGE 63 ===

60 Brahmanda Puréna

28, After going to Maharloka, the fourteen groups of
the Devas become agitated. Thereafter, they directed their
mind towards Janaloka.

29. In this order the residents of the Kalpa mutually(?)
proceeded for thousands of Yugas according to the reckoning
of the Devas.

30. All of them abounded in purity. They have achieved
the inental Siddhi (achievement of spiritual powers), the Jana
(Loka) was attained by those residents of Kalpa together.

31. After staying there for ten Kalpas, they go to the
Satya (Loka) once again. After going to the world of Brahma,
they attain a goal from where there is no return.

32. Except the overlordship, they become equal to
Brahm4.! They are equal to Brahma in regard to features and
object (of the sense organs) (i.e. Visaya).

33. There they stay with pleasure in the Sarnyamas”
(? worlds of that name). After attaining bliss from Brahman,
they become liberated along with Brahma.

34. In view of the inevitability of affairs concerning
(the course of) Prakrti, they remain (bound along) with
honour, worship etc. as is produced at the same time.**

35, Just as in the case of a sleeping person the faculty
of knowledge functions without (clearcut) perceptions (Abuddht-
piirvam) , so also when they are purified and rendered service,
the bliss begins to function.

36. (The bliss begins to function) by the withholdings
of differences. These are different in regard to lustrous
ones. Along with them their effects and instruments (sense
organs) also develop.

37-38. Of those residents of Brahm4’s region who observe
multiplicity (and separateness) and whose authority has been

1. Cf. Brahma-siitra 1V.4.17-18 where the released soul is stated to have
all the Lordly powers except the power of creation of the universe. The
powers of the released soul are not unlimited.

* Vi.P.8.33b reads: Prasamgamat—‘due to their close contact (with
Brahma)’.

** They remain (bound) in their separateness produced (retained)
at that time.

=== PAGE 64 ===

1,.2.6.39-48 61

withdrawn and who abide by their righteous duties. Those
Siddhis have similar characteristics. They are of pure souls and
are unsullied. In their Prakrta form they are equipped with
sense organs but they are stabilised in their own souls.

39. Afier proclaiming itself (or the soul), the Prakrti is
factually observed as different from Purusa and as multifarious
and as such it functions.

40. Again when the creation begins to function,
Prakrti should be known in its connection with the liberated
(?) souls who perceive reality and who are identical with the
existent causes.

41. There, those persons attaining salvation do not
return by the same path (of Samsara). There non-existence
had been caused once again like that of the blazing flames
that had been extinguished.!

42. While those noble souls had gone far above the
three worlds along with these, the Maharloka is not occupied
by them.

43. When the burning of Kalpa is imminent, the
Gandharvas and others, the Pisacas (vampires) , the Brahmanas
and other human beings become their disciples.*

44-45. (So also) the animals and birds, the immobile
beings and the reptiles. While those residents of the surface of
the earth stand there at that time, the thousand rays that
manifest themselves become (combined and concentrated into)
scven rays and each one of the rays becomes a Sun.?

46-48. Rising up gradually, they burn the three worlds.
The mobile and the immobile beings, the rivers and all
the mountains that had already been dried up due to absence
of rain are inflamed and afflicted by the suns. Completely

1. Cf. the concept of Brahma-nirvaua in the BG. VV.24-26.

*  Sisyah in Bd.P. is probably a misprint for Sisféh ‘remaining ones’
(found in Va.P. in corres. verse 8.43b).As this is description of the Kalpanta,
Sista is a better reading.

2. VV, 43-60. This description of the Kalpa-daha and the end of the
universe is a verbatim repetition of VV.121-138 of the last chapter.
The popular etymologies of ambhas, salila, Nara ot Néara all meaning ‘water’
and the derivation of Narayana have been noted there.

=== PAGE 65 ===

62 Brahmanda Purana

burnt by the rays of the suns, they become helpless. The
mobile and the immobile beings of the nature of virtue as well
as evil get their bodies burned. In the interval between the two
Yugas, they get rid of their sins,

49. They are well known* and freed from the sunshine
by the auspicious (rain) that has great continuity shower-
ing incessantly. Thereafter, those people are joined with
other people of similar forms and features.

90. After staying there during the night of Brahma born
of the unmanifest one, they become the mental sons of Brahma
at the time of subsequent creation.

51-56. Then, when the residents of the three worlds had
become proper**(?) (or equipped) with people, when the
worlds had been completely burned down by the seven suns,
when the earth had been flooded with rain, when the seas
had become desolate, all the waters of the oceans, clouds
and the earth move ahead scattered (like arrows). They have
the name Salila. They followed (one after the other). That
flood of water gathered together in abundance. When that vast
sheet of water covered the earth, it became known by the name
Amava (sea). This water is called Ambhas because it shone and
spread. The water reached everywhere. The root «/Bhda has the
sense of Vydpti (spreading) and Dipti (shining).

Since it spread over the entire earth all round within
itself, water is remembered as Tanus. The root 4/Tan is used in
the sense of extension. The root +/Sar i.e. Sr has different mean-
ings. It means ‘“‘to become shattered or scattered’’.

57-62. In the vast sheet of water, the waters are not
quick in motion (Sighrdh) therefore, they are called Ndras. At
the end of the thousand Yugas, when the day of Brahma had
come toa close, when the night of so much ( =the same) dura-
tion had been present within the watery expanse, when the

* Yonyd tayd hyanirmukidéh ‘freed from that species’ in Va.P.7.49 is a
better reading.

** apravrttesu (V4.P.7.52a) ‘when all the people, residents of the three
worlds are extinct’. This reading is more suitable in the context than upapan-
nesu of the Bd.P. here.

=== PAGE 66 ===

1.2.6.63-68 63

surface of the earth had become lost within that water, when
all fires were extinguished, when the wind had become totally
calm and motionless, when there had been darkness all round
without any light, this (universe) had been presided over by
this person. He is Brahma, the lord. He wished again to divide
this world. In that vast sheet of water where the mobile and the
immobile beings have perished, Brahma becomes a person with
thousand (i.e. innumerable) eyes, thousand feet, thousand heads
one who has conquered all the sense-organs and one with
golden complexion.

@  Theycite this verse regarding Narayana in this connection.

“‘The waters are Naras. We have heard that they con-

stitute his bodies. They are being filled in. Since he stays therein,
he is remembered as Narayana.

63. The first Prajapati (lord of subjects) is a person of
good mind.! He has a thousand heads, a thousand feet, a
thousand eyes, a thousand faces (mouths) anda thousand arms.
He performs a thousand acts. He is explained as a person
identical with the three Vedas.

64. He has the lustre and colour of the sun. He is the
protector of the universe. ‘He is single. He is the first Virdt
(cosmic personage). He is Hiranyagarbha of noble soul. He is
beyond the Ken of mind.

65. In the beginning of the Kalpa, the Lord abounds in
Rajas quality and after becoming Brahma. he brought about the
creation of the world. In the end of the Kalpa, he abounds in
Tamas, andafter becoming K4la, he devoured it again.

66. It is reported that in the cosmic ocean, Narayana
with the preponderance of Sativa guna divides himself threefold
and abides in the three worlds.

67-68. By means of the three (qualities or forms), he
creates, devours and sees or protects (the world). In the vast

1. Cf. Purusa Sikta (RV.X.90). The Vedic concept regarding
Virdj, Hiranya-garbha here identified with Brahma or Purusa of the Purusa-
sikta are the different stages in the evolution. That Purusa is credited with
three gupas for the creation, sustenance and destruction of the universe.

=== PAGE 67 ===

64 Brahmanda Purana

sheet of water, when the mobile and the immobile beings have
perished, at the end of a thousand sets of four Yugas, when
(the earth) is covered on all sides with water, Brahma named
Narayana shines himself in the universe.

69. All the subjects of the four types (i.e. Svedaya, Andaja,
Udbhijja and Fardyuja) are covered with Tamas, due to the
Sakti of Brahma. In the Maharloka, the great sages see Kala
(God of death) sleeping.

70. At that time the great sages referred to above are
Bhrgu and others.! The great sages, when the Kalpa comes to
a close, are the eight sages, Satya and others. The great thing
that is surrounded by them when they revolve is the Mahat* (?)

71. The root »/Rs has the sense of Gati(movement). The
above name (i.e. Rsi) is derived from that root.? Since they
move about with their Sattva and since they are great, they
are called Maharsis (Great sages).

72. The sleeping Kala was then seen by those seven
great sages, viz. Sattva (? Satya) and others who are stationed
in the Maharloka in the previous Kalpa.

73. Thus Brahma (continuesto function) in thousands
of nights. The great sages who were brought by him then saw
the sleeping Kala.

74, Since, in the beginning of the Kalpa, Brahma evolv-
ed fourteen assemblages (worlds) (?) of diverse forms, it is
defined as Kalpa.®

75. He is the creator of all living beings again and
again, in the beginnings of the Kalpas. The great lord is both
Vyakta (manifest) and Avyakta (unmanifest) . This entire universe
is evolved by him.

1. The concept of Saptarsis (seven sages) ursa major is astronomical in
the Vedic period. Varahamihira in Brhat-samhité also treats them from astro-
nomical point. In the Mbh. and the Puranas, their status as “mind-born
sons” of Brahma becomes prominent. But their survival after deluges as stated
here, hints at their original astronomical aspect.

2. A correct etymology.

3. Definition of Kalpa; cf. Va.p.7.77.

* This verse is obscure. The correspondence V. in Va.P.8.83 reads:

=== PAGE 68 ===

1,2.6.76-77—7.1-5a 65

76. Thus the inter-relation between two Kalpas has been
recounted. The present has become the antecedent state in
between the two.

77. Everything has been recounted briefly in the
previous Kalpa in the manner as it was factually. Now I shall
recount the current Kalpa. Understand the same.

CHAPTER SEVEN

Knowledge About the World

(Geographical divisions of the earth—Four Yugas and
their duration—Geography of continents—continents, towns
and villages—Flora and fauna—people—castes and stages in
Life) .

Sita said :

1. He passed a period of time equal to a thousand Yugas
as his night. At the end of the night, Brahma creates the
universe through the cause (potentiality) of creation.

2. At that time, in that vast expanse of water, Brahma
became wind and moved about (in that ocean) enveloped in
darkness when the mobile and the immobile beings had
(already ) perished (and became non-existent ).

3-4a. He flooded the surface of the earth all round with
water. When the elements had been stationed in Satya* (truth)
along with their divisions, he moved about like the glowworm
during the nights in the rainy season.

4b-5a. He was moving about quickly as he pleased.
thinking by means of his intellect, about the means of stabiliza-
tion.

* Va.P.8.3 samantédt—all round.

=== PAGE 69 ===

66 Brahmanda Pudrna

Sb-8a. He was searching for the earth. He realized that
the earth was within the water. After knowing that one of
them was blind (?) the lord who was capable of lifting up the
earth assumed the truthful form of a boar as remembered in
the beginnings of the previous Kalpas. Then he entered the
water. That lord of subjects wished to contact the earth
covered with waters. He lifted up the earth and placed it again
along with its child* (Reference to Naraka ?).

8b-9a. He deposited the waters of the oceans in the
oceans and the waters of the rivers in the rivers separately. After
levelling the earth he picked up and gathered the mountains.

9b-11. As the previous creation was being burned for-
merly by the Samvartaka fire, the mountains of that period
had been melted by that fire. They were then scattered by the
wind. Due to chillness, they became solidified. Wherever the
(molten rocks) were spilt there arose a mountain. They are
called Acalas! (not-moving or immobile) because their ridges
were immovable. They are remembered as Parvatas because
they had Parvans (or joints).

12-14, They are (called) Giris because they had been
swallowed. They are Siloccaya because they had moved about
(Ayana) .

Then, after lifting up the earth from within the waters,
the lord created seven times seven subcontinents in its seven
continents. After levelling the uneven grounds he created
mountains all round by means of rocks.

There are only fortynine sub-continents in those con-
tinents.* As many mountains (i.e. 49) are situated at the
borders of the sub-continents.

ed

* Va4.P.8a reads: apas tdsu tu vinyasan ‘He deposited the waters
(over the surface of the earth’.

1. These verses give ‘etymology’ of the synonyms for a mountain.
This Purana is full of semantic etymologies i.e. etymologies based on the mean-
ing of the word and not its form. Sometimes, they are grammatically (even
as phonetic derivation) correct, but that is none of the concern of the Purana-
writer. Thus acala ‘a mountain’, giri-gri—is understandable but ayandt tu
Siloccayal: ‘the mountains are called Stloccaya because of their movements’ is
phonetically not defensible.

2. Every continent has seven sub-continents. Thus the number of sub-
continents becomes 7 x 72=49. Their list is described later in chs. 18 and 19.

=== PAGE 70 ===

1.2.7.15-24 67

15-20. In heaven* etc. they are enveloped in splendour
naturally and not otherwise. The seven continents and oceans
encircle one another. They are situated after surrounding one
another naturally.

The four worlds are the Bhiiand others. As before, Brahma
created the moon and the sun along with thc planets as_ well
as the immobile beings all round, as Brahma created the
Devas of this Kalpa, who were Stkdnins (persons occupying the
abodes). He created the following things as well):— the
waters, the fire, the earth, the wind, the firmament, the heaven,
the Dyaus (the ethereal world), the quarters, the oceans, the
rivers, the mountains, the souls of medicinal herbs, the
souls of trees and creepers, the units of time such as Lavas,
Kasthas, Kalas and Muhiirtas, the twilight, the nights, the days;
the halfmonths, the months, the Ayanas (transits, one in the
six months), the years and the Yugas. He created the abodes
and (the dwellers therein) who take pride in the abodes
separately by laying claims to them.

21. After creating the souls for the abodes, he created
the period of Yugas namely Krta, Treté, Dvapara and Tisya
(i.e. Kali).

22. At the beginning of the Kalpa, he created the sub-
jects at the outset. Those subjects of the previous Kalpa have
been recounted to you by me.

23-24. In that Kalpa that was being dissolved (i.e.
terminated), thesubjects were burnt by the fire. Those that had
not reached Tapo-loka and those that remained on the
earth, return at the time of the subsequent creation for the sake
of being visible.1 Those subjects who stay there for being
visible, do so for the sake of subsequent creation.

* Va.P.8.15 reads—sargddau sannivistas te ‘They (mountains) were
assembled there at the beginning of creation’. This reading is better than
that in the Bd.P. here as Svarga (Heaven) is not relevant in the context.

1. VV.23 ff. This is the inexorable law of Karma. There may be the
dissolution of the universe at the end of a Kalpa, but the beings whose Karmas
have not been exhausted (i.e. who have not attained Moksa) are reborn
in the subsequent Kalpa. This idea has been emphatically repeated in this
Purana.

-

=== PAGE 71 ===

68 Brahmaada Purana

25. Being created, they exist for the sake of their pro-
geny. They are regarded as having achieved the four Purusa-
rthas viz. : Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksa.

26. The Devas, the Pitrs and the human beings (are
created) in order; thereafter, they equipped themselves with
penance; they filled the abodes at the outset.

27. Indeed, those human beings become Brahmanas and
souls of spiritual achievement. Due to their Karman con-
taminated by the faults of hatred and too much of attachment*

they went to heaven (7)
28. While returning in an embodied state, they are born

in every Yuga. With the remnants of the fruits of their Karman,
(they are born again and again) ; they are well known as Tadd-
tmakas (? Identified with them).

29-30. The people bound by the advent of (a new)
Kalpa are born from the Janaloka. That which is their cause
in the waters is indicated by meansof the Karman**(?). From
the Janaloka, they are born through auspicious and inauspicious
Karmans. They assume physical bodies of diverse forms, in the
different species.

31. The subjects beginning with the Devas and ending
with the immobile beings are born (influencing) themselves
mutually. Their pure (or sanctified) Karmans usually pre-
dominated.

32. Therefore, they attained only those names and
features (which they had before). Again and again they are
born with names and forms in the (different) Kalpas.

33-34. Thereafter, is the creation of Brahma who is de-
sirous of creating the Upasrsji (subsidiary creation) . Even as he
was meditating on those subjects, since he was of truthful med-
itation, a thousand couples came out of his mouth. It is but
natural that they were people of great brilliance with the
Sattva quality predominant.

* For dsango-dvesa-yukiena, Va8.P.8 reads: sangddvesa- a ‘(acts)
motivated by non-hatred.’
°* For apsu yah kdranarh tesdm bodhayan karmand tu sah | Va.P.8.30a

reads
afayah kéraparh tatra boddhanyank karmapdh tu sah |
*Place of residence should be known as its cause’ etc.

=== PAGE 72 ===

1.2.7.35-43 69

35. Hecreated another thousand couples through his
eyes. All of them had the Rajas quality predominant. They
were Susmins (lustrous ones) and Amarsins (intolerant).

36. Hecreated a thousand (couples) of Asats (not good
ones) from his arms. Dominated as they were from Rajas and
Tamas, they are remembered as grha-Sila* (attached to houses).

37-38. The couples alone gave birth frequently till the
end of their lives. Kajakas (? deceitful ones) and Ak&fakas (non-
deceitful) are born (of those couples) who are mortals (about
to die). Since after generating the family, they abandoned their
bodies. Even since then there is the occurrence of copulation in
this Kalpa.

39. In the Krta age,! it is by mental meditation that
pure objects of senses such as Sabda (sound and others) each
of which is offive characteristics (became available) .

40. Thus with mental emotions, those subjects without
progeny stay dear** (?) So also the families were born with
which this universe was filled up.

41. They resort to rivers, lakes and oceans as well as to
mountains. Then those subjects have very little pleasure in
that war(?) but they move in it.***

42. They say that the earth with Rasa (juice, water,) is
their food. Desirous of mental siddhis those subjects move
about as they please.

43. In the Kytayuga, the subjects {human beings etc.)
had equal length of life, happiness and beauty. In the first Yuga,
at the beginning of the Kalpa, there was no Dharma and
Adharma.

* tha-Sila (indulging in desires) in Va.P.7.39.

1. VV.39-57 give a rosy picture of the Krta Yuga.

«* The corresponding verse viz. Va.P.8.46a reads:

ityevam mdnasi piroam prak-srstir ya prajapate |

‘in this way formerly the preliminary creation was mental (after that it
was born of copulation. The whole world is filled with that).

*** Yuddhe in the text is strange; it should be Yuge. The corresponding
verse in Va.P, (8.47b) reads:

tad& ndtyambu-Sitognd yuge etc.

‘They wandered (lived) in that Yuga when there was no excess of heat,

cold or rain’.

=== PAGE 73 ===

70 Brahmanda Pudraa

44-45a. In every Yuga, they were born with their res-
pective rights and authority. They say that the Krta yuga at the
beginning, had four thousand years in accordance with the
reckoning of the gods. The two periods of junction consisted of
four hundred years.

45b-46a. There were thousands of subjects of great
repute. They had no hindrance anywhere. There were no
mutually clashing opposites. There was no Krama (one gradually
succeeding another).

46b-47. Those subjects had no regular abodes and
resorts. They were residents of mountains and seas. They were
immune from sorrow. (The quality called) Sattva was predomi-
nant in them. The subjects were exclusively happy. They
always moved about as they pleased. They were always delight-
ed in their minds.

48. There were neither animals nor birds. There were
no reptiles then. There were no plants etc. There were no
drunkards, mad and furious persons. This is the manner of
Dharma.

49, For their sustenance, there were flowers and fruits
alongwith bulbous roots. The time was entirely and exclusively
pleasant; it was neither too hot nor too chill.

50. Whatever they desire is achieved everywhere and for

ever. By their meditations, everything grows up from the
nether worlds through the earth.

51. (The vegetation) caused strength and fineness of
complexion unto them. It destroyed their sickness and old age,
Those subjects had stable (everlasting) youth with their bodies
not requiring purificatory rites.

52. In their case, even without copulation subjects (pro-
geny) are born through mere mental conception. The birth and
features are the same (in regard to everyone). They are on a
par (with one another) and they are pleased and happy.

53. At that time, there is truthfulness, absence of greed,
satisfaction, happiness and self-control. In regard to beauty,
longevity, aesthetic accomplishments and other activities, all of
them are devoid of any mutual difference.

=== PAGE 74 ===

1.2.7.54-64a 71

54. The sustenance of the subjects was (abuddhipiirvika)
without any conscious intellectual effort. Since the door is
open* (i.e. there are facilities to auspicious and_ evil
activities) theie is lack of conscious effort.

55. At that time there was no systematic classification
of castes and stages of life. There were no thieves. They used
to deal with one another without any intimate desire or
hatred.

56. In the Krta yuga, all the subjects are born with
equal beauty, features and span of life. They are devoid of in-
feriority and superiority. Usually they are happy, they are free
from sorrow.

57-58. They have neither gain nor loss; neither friends
nor enemies; no likes or dislikes. Since they are devoid of
desire, their sense-object functions mentally. They do not
violently injure mutually nor do they favour one another then.

59. In the Krtayuga, knowledge is the greatest thing.!
In the Treta, it is said to be the institution of Yajiia (sacrifice)
(as the greatest thing). In the Dvapara, war began to function;
and in the Kaliyuga, it is stealth alone.

60. The Krta Yuga is characterised by Sattva quality;
the Treta Yuga by Rajas quality, the Dvapara by (a mixture
of) Rajas and Tamas qualities, while the Kali, (only) by Tamas
quality. Thus the situation of the Gunas in the Yugas should
be known.

61-64a.2 This is the time in the Krta Yuga. Understand
(the period of) its junction. Four thousand (divine) years con-
stitute the Krta Yuga. The parts of its junction are eight
hundred years, according to divine reckoning. It comprises of
four thousand human years. (?) Then, among them there are

* V4.P.8.6la (a corresponding verse) reads:

....kytayuge karmapoh for Krta-dvdre karmayai in the Bd.P. which is
obscure: The verse means : “In the Kyta Age, there was no inclination both
to pious and impious deeds’.

1. VV.59-60 give a comparative statement of the special features of
four Yugas.

2. VV.61-71 describe the state in the period intervening between
Krta and Treta.

=== PAGE 75 ===

72 Brahménda Pur&ga

neither sudden clamour and outcry, nor contrarities (7). Then,
when that Krta yuga along with the part of the junction has
passed, the entire Yugadharma (Duty etc. characteristics of the
Yuga) becomes reduced toa quarter.

64b-65. That is the time of junction of the Yuga, the
Sandhya (transitional period) of what has passed off. Thus
when the Sandhyddharma( Duty characteristics of the transitional
stage from Krta yuga) is reduced to a quarter (?) it vanishes
within the Krtayuga without any vestige*.

66. When the junction has passed away, there was
mental progeny. The achievement of spirituality was in another
Yuga called Treta, next to Krta.

67. The eight mental Siddhis that had been recounted
(as existent) by me in the beginning of the creation, become
reduced gradually.

68. In the beginning of the Kalpa, there is one single
mental Siddhi, in the Krta Yuga, in all the Manvantaras in
accordance with the division of the four Yugas.

69. The origin of Karmasiddhi (achievement of Karman)
in Krta is brought about by the conduct of the people of
different castes and stages of life (?). The Sandhya (junction) of
the Krta is reduced by a quarter (?)

70. These parts of the junctions of Krta take up the
three (? other parts) and those Yuga Dharmas as well as penance,
learning, strength and longevity decrease and decline.

71. When the Krta yuga and its transitional part
have passed, O excellent sages, it is the beginning of Treta
yuga along with its parts.

72-73. When the part of Krta yuga has passed off and
those seven (? siddhis) remained lingering at the beginning
of the Treta yuga that had begun to function in the early part
of the Kalpa, the (one remaining) Siddhi perishes due to efflux
of time and not otherwise; when that Siddhi disappeared
another Siddhi was born.

* The corresponding verse Va.P.70b-7la:

“When at the end of the yuga, when even the transitional period also
expires, the quarter of the dharma characteristic of this transitional period of
the yuga, remains.”

=== PAGE 76 ===

1.2.7.74-84 73

74. (Defective) Parts of waters returned (to the firma-
ment) in the form of clouds. From the thundering clouds the
showering of rain began to function.

75. When the surface ofthe earth had been perfected
(watered) by that rain occurring only once the subjects came
into being. Thereupon, the trees became designated as their
abodes.

76. All kinds of worldly enjoyment of those subjects
emanated from them (the trees). In the beginning of the
Treta yuga, the subjects maintained themselves with them.

77. (Defective) then, after the lapse of a great deal of
time, due to theirown change, they had a sudden emotion in
the form of a great desire for close contact.

78. In the case of women (of the modern days) mens-
truation occurs till the end of their life (?) But then (i.e. in
the Treta yuga), that did not take place on account of the power
of the Yuga.

79. But in the case of those women (of later days), the
menstrual flow began to function month by month. Asa con-
sequence thereof, sexual intercourse also takes place then.

80-81. They had the physical contact every month
because of their emotional feelings at that time. When there is
no menstrual flow at the proper time, the conception took place.
On account of their contrary nature (?), all those trees designa-
ted as their abodes and evolved at that time, perish thereafter.

82. When they had perished, the subjects became be-
wildered and agitated in all their sense-organs. They began to
meditate on their Siddhi. They were truthful in their meditation
then.

83-84. Those trees designated as their abodes appeared
in front of them. They yielded clothes, fruits and ornaments.
Similarly, honey of great potency of metaphysical* significance
was produced in every leafy cup. It was accompanied by the
juice of the Gandharvas(?).** [Gandharvépdm rasdnvitam in Bd.P.
It should be Gandha-varya-rasanvitam. ]

© dnpiksikem in Bd.P. should be amdksikam (‘with no flies in it).
7 po ee ee rints. The original verse seems to be as in
&.P.8.90:

=== PAGE 77 ===

74 Brahmdada Purdna

85. Those subjects maintained themselves with that at
the beginning of Tretaé yuga. With that Siddhi they became
hale, hearty and well-nourished. They were free from feverish
ailments.

86. Thereafter, on other occasions also, the subjects
became overwhelmed by greed thus, once again. They seized
the trees and took by force the nectarand honey.

87. On account of this misdemeanour on their part
brought about by their covetousness, the Kalpa trees (wish-yield-
ing trees) perished here and there along with the Lord *(?)

88. When that achievement (Siddhi) was reduced to a
very little quantity with the passage of time, they maintained
themselves with this. Their Dvandvas (rivalries or mutual
opposites) rose up tremendously.

89. The chillness, the wind and the sunshine were severe.
Therefore they were much tormented. Being afflicted by the
mutually opposed pairs of feelings and reactions, they bewailed
their wounds** (?)

90-93. (Defective) they had been vexed in their minds
when formerly they had no abodes. They were wandering
about as they pleased. After building houses to remedy the
(evil effects of) Dvandvas (like heat and cold), they stayed in
the abodes as they pleased as they could secure. (When they had
no abodes) they resorted to difficult passages in mountains and
on rivers(?) dripping with honey***, in plains and even in
(hilly) regions where water was available. They lived as they
pleased and as much as they could enjoy. They began to build
those abodes in order to ward off cold (blizzards) and hot
(winds). Thereafter, they built hamlets and cities.

Tesveva jdyate tdsdm gandha-varna-rasdnvitam |
amdk;sikam mahdviryam putake pufake madhu |/
The honey was endowed with good flavour, colour and taste and had
no flies in it.
* Va.P. 8.93b madhund ‘along with the honey’.
** Va.P.8.95 cakrur dvarandni ca ‘created shelters and covers’
*** =madhu-dhuavatsu in the text is absurd in the context. Va.P.8.97 (a
corresponding verse) appropriately reads: marudhanvasu—‘in sandy deserts
and wildernesses’.

=== PAGE 78 ===

1.2.7.95-103 75

94-95. They built villages and cities with their due shares,
extent and dimensions and built other settlements as well, in
accordance with their knowledge. After measuring with their
own fingers (in the beginning) , they made thereafter other units
also for the sake of measurement.!

96-100. (Defective) with Angulas (finger-width) as the
basis they made the units, Pradefa, Hasta, Kisku and Dhanus. Ten
joints of the fingers (Angulas) constitute what is called Pradesa.
The space delimited by the tips of the extended thumb and
index finger is called Pradefa. The same with (the tip of the
extended) middle finger is remembered as Tala. The same with
(the tip of the extended) ring finger is Gokarna. The same with
(the tip of the extended) small finger is called Vitasti. It has
twelve Angulas.

Twentyone Arigulas make the unit Ratni. Twentyfour
Angulas make one Hasta. Two Raénis or fortytwo Angulas inake
a Kisku. Four Hastas make one Dhanus or(?) Danda. The same
is a pair of arrows (Nalikas). ‘Two thousand Dhanus make one
Gavyiitt. This had been made by them then.

101. Eight thousand Dhdanus make one Yojana as determin-
ed by them. With this Yojana (asthe unit of measurement)
settlements (i.e. colonies) were made thereafter.

102. Among the four (types of) fortresses, three are
natural and the fourth (type of) fort is artificial. I shall men-
tion its decisive features.

103. It has a thick elevated rampart (esp. a surrounding
wall elevated on a mound of earth) with cavities (or openings) .

1. VV. 96-101 give the units of measurements of distance as follows.
Angula= Finger-breadth.

10 Angula = Pradeéa

12 Angulas = Vitasti

21 Angulas = Ratni

24 Angulas := Hasta

2 Ratnis or

42 Angulas = Kiksu

4 Hastas = Dhanus or Danda (?)
2000 Dhanus = Gavyiti
7000 Dhanus = Yojana

=== PAGE 79 ===

76 Brahmanda Purage

It is surrounded with a moat on all sides. It has a beautiful
front-door and a gynaeceum in which girls are kept.

104. (Defective text)* The moats two Hastas in
breadth are excellent in the case of the Kuméaripura. The
total breadth of the current of water in (the moat) may be
eight, nine or ten (7).

105-106. (I shall mention)? the girth and length of ham-
lets, cities, and villages entirely as well as those of the three
types of (natural) forts viz. mountains, waters (i.e. rivers) and
waste-lands such as deserts etc., and the artificial forts as well.
The diameter shall be half a Yojana. Its length shall be one
and one eighth Yojanas.

107. The extent ofa Pura (city) shall be half of the
maximum lIcngth(?). There must bea river(?) flowing to its
east or north. It should be divided into a hypotenum and seg-
ments. It must be laid out in the shape of a spread fan.

108. Accity that islong, diamond-shaped or circular is
not praiseworthy. A city endowed with the symmetrical parts
and quadrangles and heaven-like, commendable was made
by them.

109. The Vastu (site of a building; dwelling place) that
is not more than twenty four Hastas is short; that of one hundred
and eight (Hastas) is great. In this matter they praise the
middle one and the short one which has no (wooden structure) .

110. The chief settlement should be eight hundred Kiskus.
The hamlet should be of half the diameter of the city. The
Pana** (? Drinking place) shall be above it(?).

111. The hamlet shall be a Yojana (about 12 km) from
the city and the village shall be half a Yojana from the hamlet.
The outermost boundary shall be two Krogas (1 Krosa=3 kms).
The boundary of a field is four Dhanus.

* The corresponding verse in Va4.P.8.110 runs as follows:
srotasi samhata-dodram nikhdtam punar eva ca |
hastdstau ca dafa Sresthd navdsfau vd’pare matat |/
Different opinions about the breadth of the moat in front of Kuméari-
pura are given here as 2, 8, 9, 10 hastas, the last being the best.
1. VV.105-116 delineate the ancient ideas of town (and village) planning.
e* Va.P.7.116b (in the corresponding verse) reads : grdmam for
Pdnamh of the Bd.P. It means: a grdma should be beyond that’.

=== PAGE 80 ===

1,2.7.112-120 77

112, The pathway along the quarters (i.e. East-west and
North-south ) was made twenty Dhanus wide by them. The road
in the village was also twenty Dhanus (wide). The path in the
boundary was only ten Dhanus (wide).

113. The glorious royal road was made ten Dhanus wide.
The movement of (traffic of) men, horses, chariots and elephants
(shall be) without any hindrance.

114. The branch-streets were measured by them (and
made) four Dhanus (wide). The roads joining the high-ways
shall be three Dhanus (wide) and their branches two Dhanus
wide.

115. (Defective text) The Janghdpatha* (? the thigh-
road) has four Padas width; the passage between rows of houses
is three quarters (wide). Dkrtimdrga** (? path of courage) if
more than one sixth. The Padika (Foot-Path ?) is remembered
thus in due order.

116. The enclosure for excrement is a quarter all round.
After those places have been made, the houses and dwellings
(should be constructed) .

117. They thought over it again and again about the
trees designated as their houses as to how they were before,
and began to build like them.

118. The branches of trees have gone down. Others have
gone this way. Still others have gone up. In the same way,
some have gone obliquely.

119. With their intellect, they have observed carefully
how the branches have gone. Apartments were constructed by
them in the same way. Hence they (the apartments) are re-
membered as Sdlds.

120. Thus Salas (apartments, dwellings) became well-
known from the branches. So also the abodes. Therefore they
are remembered as Salas. That is remembered as their Salatva*
(state of being a Sala).

*janghd-patha i ‘misprint’ for “ghapta-patha” ‘a bell-road’
i.e. the chlet toad reat a altame one highway. Pad 15 fingers’ breadth.
*© Vriti-marga in Va.P.8.121.

1, VV.LI7-121 refer to construction of buildings. It is interesting to
note that the Sdla tree played an important part in ancient ideas of housing.

2. Popular but important etymology of Sala ‘an apartment or dwel-

nh

=== PAGE 81 ===

78 Brahmanda Purana

121. Since people are delighted therein (Prastdanti) ,
they are designated as Prdsddas (palaces). Therefore, the abodes,
apartments and palaces are designated as Prasadas.4

122. When the wish-yielding Kalpa trees perished along
with the honey,(the subjects) attached by the Dvandvas (mutual
opposed pairs of feelings etc.) began to think about the
means of agriculture and other occupations for livelihood.

123. The subjects created were seen agitated due to ex-
haustion and sorrow. Thereafter, the Siddhi appeared in front
of them in the Treta yuga.

124. Another (type of) rain became the means of achiev-
ing all objects for them. The waters of the rain were sweet and
were as much as they wished for.

125-126. Thus a (new) way of life and conduct began to
function during the creation of the second type of rain.
Due to the contact of the earth with the small collections
of water that gathered together on the surface of the earth, the
medicinal herbs began to grow. Those medicinal herbs began
to put forth blossoms, roots and fruits.

127. The fourteen (types of lands in) villages and
forests (began to flourish) without being ploughed and without
the seeds being sown. The trees and the bushes put forth flowers
and fruits at the proper seasons.

128. Inthe Treta yuga, medicinal herbs and plants
began to appear themselves on the earth. In the beginning of
the Treta yuga, the subjects sustained themselves with those
plants and herbs.?

129. Thereafter, due to the inevitability of affairs
and due to the Treta yuga those subjects began to have passion
and covetousness for ever.

130. Then, they forcibly seized rivers, fields, mountains,
trees, bushes and medicinal herbs as much as they could (in
accordance with their strength) .

1. Etymology of Prdsdda ‘a palace’.

2. WV _ 128ff show the prevalence of food-gathering economy in the
Treté yuga. The evolution of four Varnas is another sociological feature of this
Yuga.

=== PAGE 82 ===

1.2.7.131-141 79

131-132. Previously I have already explained to you
about the spiritually enlightened souls in the Krtayuga. They
were born as mental sons of Brahma and they had come here
(to the earth) from the Janaloka. They were quiescent
lustrous Karmins (devoted to the pursuit of holy rites) and
(unhappy and dejected). Returning from there (i.e. Janaloka),
they were born again in the Treta yuga.

133. In the previous births, due to the glory of their
auspiciousness (i.€. meritorious acts) as well assins they were
conceived as Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas, Sidrasand mali-
cious people.

134-135. Then (among them some became) powerful,
truthful in conduct, non-violent, devoid of greed and persons
who had conquered their selves. They used to abide by those
that were remembered* (? Smiti texts ?). They never accepted
charity. Their tasks were carried out by those who were weaker
than they. They (these weaker people) approached them
speaking to them (?)

136-137. Those others who were less brilliant than they,
remained serving them. Thus when they were mutually related
and also resorted to each other, due to that fault the medicinal
herbs diminished much then. Like sands they perished on being
held in the fists.

138-139. Then due to the power of the Yuga, the
fourteen (types of people, animals etc.) villages and forests
began to pluck (and destroy) the flowers, fruits and roots (of
those trees). Then, when they perished the subjects became
perplexed. All of them were overwhelmed with hunger; then
they went to the self-born (deity i.e. Brahma).

140-141. In the beginning of Treta yuga, those subjects
desired for some means of livelihood. The  self-born lord
Brahm4 knew their desire. He pondered over this (situation) by
means of his vision that can see everything directly. He under-
stood, that the medicinal herbs have been devoured (i.e.
drawn within) by the earth. He made them grow once again.

* VA.P.8.141 reads: sma teu vai for Bd.P. text here: smrteyu vai. As
the question of memory or smrti text does not arise here V4.P. reading is better,

=== PAGE 83 ===

80 Brahmdada Purdna

142. After making the Sumeru mountain (as) the calf,
he milked this earth in the form of a cow that yielded seeds
on the surface of the earth in the form of the milk.

143. The lord made those seeds grow as the medicinal
herbs (and other plants) that ended when the fruits became
ripe. (That is, the plants yielded fruits but once and then
they perished) they are the group of seventeen.

144-145. The following types of seventeen grains and
pulses constitute the group of seventeen, viz., Rice, barley,
wheat, Bengal-gram, gingelly Priyangu (Long pepper), Uddra
(?), Koradusfa (a kind of grain eaten by the poor people i.e.
Kodrava), Vdmaka (?), the black gram, the green gram, the
Masta (dal), Nivdra (rice), the horse-gram. the Harika* (?)
and the Caraka*(?).

146a. Thus these were remembered as the species of
rural medicinal herbs (Grdmya-Osadhi) .

146b-147. Sydmaka (a variety of rice), Nivéra (another
variety of rice), Jartila (wild sesamum), Gavedhuka (?) Kuruvinda
(a king of barley), Nenuyava (Bamboo seeds, Tamatirkataka(?) **
etc. are remembered as the fourteen types of medicinal herbs of
the villages and forests.

148. All these fourteen varieties (of medicinal herbs and
plants) peculiar to villages and forests grew at the beginning
of the first Treta yuga. They are not grown by ploughing.

149. The trees, hedges, creepers, winding plants, spread-
ing creepers and (various) species of grasses yielded roots,
fruits, *** shoots etc. unto them. They plucked their fruits.

1. This is the Puranic presentation of the ancient Vedic concept of
milking the Viraj cow recorded in AV.VIII. Sakta 10. Purdna-writers
used this motif later with god Brahma, king Prthu etc. as the milker. Funnily
enough Mt.P. 10.25 makes Vararuci as the milker and the science of Drama-
turgy (Natya-Veda) as the milk.

Here god Brahma milked seeds of medicinal herbs and plants. Men
gathered food from them for their livelihood.

* Va.P.8.152a reads :

‘adhakyas canakas$ caiva’ which means:

‘The pulse cajanus Indicus spreng as well as chick Peas.

** a misprint for tathd markataf ca ye). Cf. Va.P.8.154 as MW.
Bives no word like taméatirkitaka. markafake is a species of grain.
*¢© Vi.P.8.149 reads: puspaih for pus{ah.

=== PAGE 84 ===

1.2.7.150-158 81

150. Those seeds which were milked out of the earth
formerly by the self-born lord, began to grow as medicinal
herbs putting forth flowers and fruits at the proper seasons.

151. When the medicinal herbs created before did not
grow and flourish again, he made means of livelihood for them
by means of agricultural occupations.

152. The self-born lord (blessed them) with the power
of working with their own hands and achieving great results.
Thenceforth, the medicinal herbs became Krstapacyas (ploughed
and grown).

153. After achieving his purpose in the matter of agri-
cultural occupation, the Prajapati (lord of the subjects i.e.
god Brahma established the bounds of decency by means of
which they protected one another.

154. Among them some were very powerful and they
seized the realm. He established them as Ksatriyas and it
was their duty to protect others.

155. (Defective) .? All those subjects who had been
created will be worshipping you. ‘Tell the truth in accord-
ance with the fact’. Those (subjects) who said this were the
Brahmanas.

156-158. Some stood by in the activity of protecting
others who were weak. They destroyed Kitas (worms). They
were established on the earth. The people call them Vaié-
yas and cultivators of soil. They were the achievers of liveli-
hood. Those who were engaged in the service (of others),
those who ran errands and served others, were devoid of bril-
liance and deficient in virility. (Since they were deficient
they served others). He called them Sidras. Lord Brahma
ordained and prescribed their respective duties and holy
rites.

1. VV.151fF described the transition from fvood-gathering economy
to the food-growing one by the introduction of Agriculture. This stage crysta-
lized the four-fold classification of the society with their specific duties (vide
VV 161-165 below).

2. Va.P.8.162a gives a better reading:

upatisthanti ye tan vai ydvanto nirbhayds tathd |
*So long all those who worship or respect and obcy thuse Kyattriyas, they are
free from fear’.

=== PAGE 85 ===

82 Brahmaénda Purdna

159. Although the establishment of the classification
into the four castes had been made by him (Lord Brahma), the
subjects, out of delusion, did not conform to those rules.

160. The subjects who lived in accordance with the
duties of the (different) castes became antagonistic to one
another. Lord Brahma understood everything factually.

161-162. He ordained that meeting out punishments,
maintenance of armies and waging wars should be the means
of sustenance for the Ksatriyas. Performance of Yajfias, teach-
ing of the Vedas and acceptance of charitable and monetary
gifts—lord Brahma prescribed these as the holy duties and rites
for those Brahmanas. Breeding of cattle, carrying on trading
activities and cultivation of the soil—he granted these to the
Vaisyas.
163-165. Again he ordained that arts and crafts should
be the means of livelihood for the Sidras.

To the Brahmanas, Ksatriyas and Vaisyas he prescribed
the common duty of performing Yajiia and studying the Vedas
as well as giving charitable gifts. To the others the common
duty ordained was performance of their duties for livelihood.
After prescribing these duties and holy rites, the lord
ordained their abodes in the other worlds above :

The Prajapatya (that belonging to Prajapati or Brahma)
world is remembered as the abode of the Brahmanas who _per-
formed their holy rites and duties.

166. The world belonging to Indra is the abode of
Ksatriyas who never flee from the battlefield. The abode of the
Vaisyas who sustain themselves by their respective duties is the
Maruta world (i.e. the world belonging to the wind god).

167. The abode of the Sadras who abide by their duty
of rendering service is the world belonging to the Gandharvas.
These are the abodes (after death) of the people of the differ-
ent castes who remain goad and maintain the conduct of life
befitting their respective station in life.

168. When this mode of disciplined life of the four castes
had been well-established, the people of the different castes
strictly adhered to the duties of their respective castes because
they were afraid of punishment otherwise. Then, after the
castes had been established, he stabilised the stages of life.

=== PAGE 86 ===

-1.2.7.169-178 83

169. The Lord established as before the following four
Aframas! (stages in life) viz. the householder, the celibate _reli-
gious student, the forest hermit and the ascetic.

170. (Defective text) the people of the four castes _per-
formed the duties of the respective castes. After doing their
duties they erected their residences and maintained their stages
of life and then enjoyed themselves.

171. Brahma established those Aframas. He directed and
guided those who swerved from these and recounted righteous
virtues to them.

172-173, He instructed them in the methods of self-
restraint, observances, and controls of sense-organs etc.

Among the four castes, the stage of the life of a house-
holder stood at the outset because it was the source of origin
for the sustenance of the other three Aframas* (stages of life).
I shall mention (the duties) in due order along with the holy
vows and observances.

174. The following are the duties of the houscholder in
brief : Marriage, maintenance of sacrificial fire,- hospitability
to guests, performance of Yajiias and continuation of his race
(procreation).

175. The duties of the religious student are as follows :
He must wear the girdle (of the mufja grass) and hold the
staff. He must wear the skin of an antelope. He must sleep on
the ground. He must serve his preceptor. He must beg for
alms. He must be eager to acquire learning.

176. These are the duties of the forest hermits; wearing
barks and leaves or skins of antelope (forclothes), maintaining
themselves by means of roots, fruits and medicinal herbs found
in the forests, bathing both at dawn and dusk and performance
of Homa.

177-178. The duties of the mendicant (recluse) are as
follows : He must beg for alms when the noise of pestles has
died down. He must not steal. He must maintain cleanliness,

1. VV.169-189 describe the duties of the four Agramas or stages in life.
2. C£. tesdm grhastho yonir aprajanatudd itaresdm—Gaut.Dh.S.111.3.

=== PAGE 87 ===

84 Brahmanda Purdsa

He must not err or be elated. He must refrain from sexual in-
tercourse. He must have mercy on all living beings. He must
have forbearance. He must listen to the instructions of the
preceptor. He must serve the preceptor. He must be truthful.
This righteous conduct of ten items (as enumerated above)
was laid down by the self-born lord as the duty of a recluse.

179. Five of them pertain to Bhiksus viz. : begging,
knowledge (of vedas) and religious vows.*

He mentioned their abodes after death as well as Agusmi
(absence of lustre) (?)

180. There are eightyeight thousand sages who live in
perpetual celibacy. The place remembered as their is alone the
abode of those who live with their preceptor (i.e.
(Brahmacarins).

181. The place remembered as the abode of the seven
sages (the great Bear) is (assigned as) that of the forest-dwel-
lers. The world of Prajapati is the abode of house-holders and
Brahma’s abode is that of the ascetics.

182.%* (Defective text)The abode of the Yogins has not
been created (?) without conquering them, it does not exist (?)
Those abodes of the persons of different stages of life are in-
deed in the abode of Brahma.

183. Only four paths have been created as Devayanas
(paths of the Devas). Only four paths are remembered as
Pitryanas (paths of the manes).

184. Formerly, in the first Manvantara (these had been
created) by Brahma who administered the worlds. Ravi (the
sun) is remembered as the entrance to those paths that (are
known as) Devayanas. The moon (Candramas) is mentioned as
the entrance of Pitryanas,

185-186. Thus even though the castes and stages’ of life
had been clearly defined, the subjects adhering to the duties of
the different castes did not flourish. Then, in the middle of

* Probably a misprint for amusmin.
** Va.P.8.196 (corresponding verse) reads as follows:
yogindm amrtam sthdnam ndnddhindm na vidyate |
“Immortal (amrtam) is the abode of Yogins which 4s not meant for non-

Yogins.

=== PAGE 88 ===

1,.2.7.187-195 85

Tret&é yuga he evolved another mental creation from the
bodies of his own self and similar to himself.

187. In that first Treté yuga, when it gradually reached
its middle period he began to create mental progeny other than
(what was before).

188. Then the same lord created the subjects with pre-
dominating Sattva and Rajas qualities. They had the pursuit of
virtue (Dharma), wealth, love and liberation and they accom-
plished their professions for livelihood.

189. They were the Devas, the Pitrs, the sages and the
Manus (i.e. human beings ?) In regard to their characteristics
they were in accordance with the respective Yugas. By these,
the subjects (in the universe) flourished.

190-195. (Defective) Formerly, I had mentioned to you
about those people who in the previous Kalpa resorted to
Janaloka. As when he meditated upon them, all these created
beings, approached him forthe purpose of being born (again).
In the course of Manvantaras, they were first junior-most* (?)
They were well-renowned by the people of their race (?). They
had all the faculties of cleverness or otherwise, unimpaired.
They had minor calamities due to the defect of the fruits of
their own activities. Those who were present consisted of
Devas, Asuras, Pitrs Yaksas, Gandharvas, human beings, Raksa-
sas, Pisacas, animals, birds, reptiles, trees, worms of hells
etc. For the sake of food of the subjects, he created Vidat-
mans* (knowing souls) (?)

; * V4.P.8.209 reads: ddhindrthan prajdndm ca dimano vai vinirmame, ‘for
the controt-of the subjects, it is reported that he created himself’.

=== PAGE 89 ===

86 Brahmanda Purana

CHAPTER EIGHT

God Brahmda’s Mental Creation : Gods, sages, manes, and human
beings created

Siita said :
1, Even as he was meditating, the mental progeny were

born along with thosc causes and effects arising out of his
body.

2-4. There cropped up Ksetrajfias (Individual souls) of
the Ksetra (Cosmic body) of this intelligent person i.e. Brahma).
Thereafter, he was desirous of creating thousands and thou-
sands of the four groups of living entities viz. the Devas, the
Asuras, the Pitrs and the human beings, Prajapati engaged him-
self therein and meditated upon the creation. While meditating
thus, an effort arising out of his Tamas constituent was involv-
ed. So, at the outset the Asuras were born as his sons from
Prajapati’s loins.

5. Asu is considered by scholars as the vital breath.
Therefore, those who were born of it were Asuras.! He discarded
that physical body whereby the Asuras had been created.

6-7a. That physical body discarded by him immediately
became Night. Since that physical body had the Tamas ele-
ment predominant, the night too consisting of three Ydmas
(watches of night of the duration of three hours each) became
Tamobahuld (one in which darkness prevails).

Therefore at night the subjects (people) are themselves
enveloped by darkness.

7b-9. After creating the Asuras, he adopted another
body that was unmanifest, with the Sattva element predomi-
nant within it. Then he engaged himself with it. As the lord
joined himself to it, he felt very happy. Thereafter from his
shining face the Devatés (gods and goddesses) were born.
Since they were born of the refulgent face (Divyatah) they
are glorified as Devas.

(1) A noteworthy derivation of esura as contrasted with the usual
a+ Sura.

=== PAGE 90 ===

1.2.8.10-20 87

10. The root «/“Dtv”’ is used in the sense of ‘‘to play’’.?
Therefore, the Devas were born of his divine (lit. ‘“shining’’)
body (and called Devatds) .

11. After creating the Devas, he discarded that divine
body. That physical body discarded by him became ‘“‘day’’.

12. Therefore, people worship the Devas with holy rites
performed during the daytime. After creating the Devas, he
adopted another body.

13-14. He adopted another body that was solely consti-
tuted by the Sattva element and engaged himself therein. The
lord meditated upon those sons considering them like father (of
fatherly nature). The Pitrs were born of that body in the
juncture of night and day; therefore those Pitrs are Devas.
That state of being Pitrs is declared about them.

15. He discarded that body whereby the Pitrs were
created. The body that had been discarded by him forthwith
became the twilight.

16. Hence, the daytime is considered as belonging to the
Devas and the night is remembered as belonging to the Asuras.
The body that belongs to the Pits and that is in between those
two isthe most important.

17. Hence the Devas, the Asuras, the sages and the hu-
man beings, while practising Yoga, worship that body which
is in between dawn and morning (day-break) .

18. Hence, Brahmanas perform sandhyd atthe junction
of the night and day. Thereafter, Brahma engaged himself
in another body of his.

19. That body which the lord created mentally was
solely constituted by the Rajas element. They (the progeny so
created) are his sons through the mind. Since they were begot-
ten (Prajananat) , they became Prajds (subjects) .

20. Since, he meditated (before creation) (Manandat) ,
they are called Manusyas (Men); they became wellknown as
Prajas because they were procreated. After creating the subjects
again, he discarded his own body.

1, «Correct etymology —divz—means both ‘to play’ and ‘to shine’.

=== PAGE 91 ===

88 Brahménda Purdue

21. That body discarded by him became the moonlight
immediately. Hence, the subjects become delighted when the
moonlight comes out.

22. Thus these physical bodies discarded by that noble-
souled person immediately became night, day, twilight and
moonlight. ;

23. The moonlight, the twilight, and the day these three
are constituted solely of the Sattva element. The night is cons-
tituted of Tamas only. Hence that is Niydmika* (that which
checks, restrains and restricts) .

24. So, the Devas were created by means of the shining
divine body with pleasure and sportiveness through the face
(mouth). Since their birth was during the day time, they are
powerful during the day time.

25. Since the lord created the Asuras at night from his
loins through the vital breaths, and as they were born during
the night, they are invincible during the night.

26-28a. These following, viz.: the moonlight, the night,
the day and the twilight—these alone become the causes (of
origin) of allfuture Devas, Manes, human beings along with
the Asuras in all the Manvantaras that had passed by and that
have not yet come. Since these four spread and shine there,
the water is called Ambhas. The root ,/bha is used in the sense
of spreading and shining.®

1, VV. 22-27 summarise the four main creations from god Brahma’s
body and their other features as follows:
* He emended as triydmtkd ‘consisting of three Yamas’ as in verse 6
above, V4.P.9.22 (an identical verse) also reads triydmikd.

Creation Born from Brakma’s — When discarded His Prevailing
part of the body Body transformed into guras.
i. Asuras Loins & vital Night Tamas
breath
ii. Devas Shining face Day Predominant
Sattva.
iti. Pitys. Mind juncture of day and Pure Sattva,
night

iv. Human mind moonlight (but dawn Rajas.

beings. in other Puranas)

2. Popular derivation of ambhas.

=== PAGE 92 ===

1.2.8.28b-37 89

28b-29a. After creating the waters, the lord created the
Devas, the Danavas, the human beings, the Pitrs and various
kinds of other subjects.

29b-30. The lord discarded (that body) the moonlight
and attained another physical body predominently constituted
of Rajas and Tamas. Thereafter, he engaged himself therein
(he united himself to it.). Therefore, he created in darkness
those who were overwhelmed by hunger.

31-34, Those created beings, overwhelmed by hunger,
attempted to seize the waters. Those among them who
said—‘‘we shall protect these waters’, are remembered as
Raksasas. Those night-walkers (demons) who felt hunger with-
in themselves and who said ‘Let us destroy the waters, let us
be delighted in our mutual] company’’, became Yaksas and
Guhyakas of ruthless action due to that work. The root +/raky-
is considered to have the meaning “‘toprotect.”’ The root 4/‘‘ksi”’
has the meaning “‘to destroy’. Since they protected (Raksa-
nat) they were called Rakgasas. Since they destroyed( Ksapardt) ,
they are called Yaksas.}

35-36. On seeing them (the ruthless Yakgas), the intel-
ligent self-possessed lord became displeased. Due to this dis-
pleasure, his hairs became shivered. Those shivered hairs moved
up and ascended again and again. Those hairs that dropped
off from the head moved and crawled up. They are considered
Vydla, because they were (originally) Bdlas or Vdlas (hairs).
Since they drooped off (Hinatudt) they are remembered Ahis
serpents) .?

37. They are Pannagas® because they moved and wrig-
gled. The state of being Sarpas is due to the fact that they
crawled. Their abode of repose is in the earth under the
sun, the moon and the clouds*.

1. Puranic etymology of rdksasa and Yaksa,

2. Another derivation of Vydla—vdla and ahi—hi—generally chi is
derived as follows : a—han—in sa ca dit dno hrasvasca—Apte Sk. Hindi Koga
P.134.

3. VV. 37-41 describe the creation of various tribes of demi-gods and
gives popular etymologies of Pisdca and Gandharva.

* The text sérydcandramasau ghandf is obscure. Va.P. (in an identical
~verse reads. .sirydcandramasoradhah ‘below the Sun and the moon!’

=== PAGE 93 ===

90 Brahmanda Purdne

38. The terrible fiery foetus born of his (Brahméa’s)
anger entered in the form of poison in those serpents who-
were born along with them.

39. After creating the serpents out of his anger aset of
terrible beings whose diet was flesh and who were furious by
nature were created. They had the tawny colour.

40. Since they had becn born (Bhiitairat) , they are remem-
bered as Bhiitas; and as they ate flesh (Pisitasandt), they were
called Pifdcas. Even as he (Brahma) was singing words, the
Gandharvas were born as his sons.

41. The root Dhay is recited by poets in the sense of
‘drinking’. Since they were born drinking the (musical)
words, they are remembered as Gandharvas.

42. Aftercreating these eight divine beings, he created
the Cchandas (Prosody, Vedas) as he pleased (Cchandatah). He
created the birds through his age (? Vayasd).

43. After creating the birds, he created the groups of
animals. He created goats out of his mouth and the sheep out
of his chest.

44-45. Brahmacreated the cows from his belly and the
horses, donkeys, Gavayas (a species of ox), deer, camels, boars
and dogs along with the elephants from his sides as well as.
feet. Other species of animals too were created. The medicinal
herbs (and plants and creepers) with fruits and roots were born
out of his hairs.

46. Formerly, at the beginning of this Kalpa, at the
advent of the Treta yuga, he created the five types of medi-
cinal herbs and then engaged himself in the sacrifices.

47-48. The cow, the goat, the man,! the sheep, the:
horse, the mule and the donkey—these are remembered as.
seven rural (Grdmya) domesticated animals. There are other
seven forest animals, the beasts of prey, the tigers. the elephants,
the monkey, the birds as the fifth of the set, the aquatic animals
as the sixth ones and the reptiles as the seventh ones.

49. The buffaloes, the Gavaya oxen, and the camels, the-
cloven-footed animals, the Sarabha (the eight-footed fabulous

1. Strangely enough the Purana includes the human species among:
domesticated animals.

=== PAGE 94 ===

1.2.8.50-58 9

animal), the elephant, with monkey as the seventh of this set,
are the forest animals.

50. Through his first face (mouth), he created the
following,! viz : the Gayatri, the Rk, the Trivrtstoma? and
Rathantara® and Agnistoma among the Yajiias.

51. Through his right-hand (southern) face (mouth),
he created the Yajurveda hymns, the Traistubha metre, the
fifteenth Stoma (hymn) and the Brhatséman hymn. -

52. Through his backward (western) face (mouth), he
created the Saman hymns, the Jagati metre, the seventeenth
Stoma (hymn), the Vairapya and Atiratra (part of Jyotistoma)
sacrifices.

53. Through his fourth face (mouth), he created the
twentyfirst (stomai.e. hymn). The Atharva-Veda, the Aptor-
yama* and the Anustubh metre along with Vairaja.

54. Itis wellknown that after creating the great cloud
wellknown as Parjanya, the holy lord created lightning, thunder-
clouds and the red-coloured rainbows.

55. He created the Rk, Yajus and Saman Mantras for
the accomplishment of Yajfias. The living beings both high and
low were born of the limbs of Brahma.

56-58. The Prajapati (Lord of the subjects) who was
creating at the outset the fourfold set viz.: the Devas, the
sages, the Pitrs and the human beings, created the living beings
both mobile and immobile. After creating Yaksas, the Pisacas,
the Gandharvas, the Apsaras, the human beings, the Kinnaras,
the Raksasas, the birds, the animals, the deer and the
serpents, he created the Avyayas (changeless ones) and Vyayas

1. VV. 50-53 give the creation of Vedic literature, Vedic metres and
special sacrifices from the mouths or faces of Brahma.

2. Trivrtstoma—A three-fold stoma (in which at first, the three Ist
verses of each Trca of Rv.IX.11 are sung together, then the 2nd_ verses
and lastly the 3rd_ verses).

3. Rathantara: the verses to be sung according to Sama-music are
RV.VII.32.22-23 abhi tod Sita etc.=S.V. ILA.

4. Aptorydma is a Soma sacrifice—an amplification of Afirdtra sacrifice.
According to Tandya Br.XX 3.4-5, it is so called as its performance secures
whatever-one desires.

=== PAGE 95 ===

92 Brahmagda Purana

(the changeables) as well as the mobile and the immobile
beings.

59-60. Even when created again and again, these beings
adopted only the Karmans that had been committed before.!
The previous natures and features such as violence and non-
violence, softness of heart and ruthlessness, virtue and evil as
well as truth and falsehood—all these were adopted by them
(in their later creations). Hence, they are liked by them.

61. It was Brahma, the creator himself, who ordained
the diversity in the great elements and their allotment to
different physical bodies afflicted by the  sense-organs
(Indriydrtesu) *.

62. Some men say that the manly endeavour (is the sole
cause of achievement). Some men say that it is the Karman
(previous actions). Other Brahmanas say that it is the destiny.
The Bh&tacintakas (those who think about the elements—perhaps
the Carvakas) say that it is nature and latent instinct.

63. (But real thinkers) know that there is no difference
or superiority among the manly endeavour, previous action and
the destiny. The same is understood through the nature of the
outcome of fruits (of actions etc.)

64. (Some say )* this is thus and not thus—this is both nor
is it both. But persons abiding by Sattva and having impartial
vision say (that the Universe) is the object of its own activity.

65. It is only through the words of the Vedas that the
great lord created at the outset, the different forms and features
of the living beings and the development of the created ones.

1. As noted above this Purana emphasizes the law of Karman. The
end of a Kalpa does not destroy the Karma of an individual.

* If the reading Jndriydrthesu is adopted the meaning is ‘‘and their
allotment to different physical bodies and the objects of the various sense
organs.”

2. Apparently the view (aniscitatdvdda) of Safijaya Belatthi Putta
in Sémaifle-phala-sutta—Digha Nikdyo p. 51 (Nalanda Ed.): when asked
about the existence of the other world he states:

eoath ti pi me no, tathd ti pi me no, aRfathd ti pi me no, no ti pi me no, no no

ti pt me no.

But I think the Purana probably voices the view of Syidvada.

=== PAGE 96 ===

1.2.8.686—9, 1.6 93

66. The names pertaining to the sages and the visions
belonging to the Devas—these, the unborn lord assigns to
those who are born at the end of the night.

CHAPTER NINE

The Progeny of Rudra : Birth of Bhrgu and others

Sita said :

1. By means of his mind, the lord then created five Kartrs
(doers or agents of creation). viz.: Rudra. Dharma, Manas
(mind), Ruci and Akrti.

2. All these are mighty-armed and they are the causes
of the sustenance of the subjects. When the medicinal herbs
decline again and again, it is Rudra who sustains them and
revives them.

3-4. By those who seek benefits, the Lord was well wor-
shipped with whatever fruits and medicinal herbs were available
(to them). He (that God) is called Tryambaka! as in times of
(impending?) extinction of medicinal herbs etc., sacrifice is
offered to him by sages with three Kapalas (plates or potsherds
containing ) of cakes sacred to him (Rudra).

5-6. It has already been mentioned by me that the three
Vedic metres, Gayatri, Tristup and Jagati are the sources of
origin of the Ambakas (i.e. Kapdlas) along with the Vanaspati
(i.e. the medicinal herbs). These three metres join together and
assume unity (i.e. when they are used in Mantras at the time
of the consecration of the Purodafa offerings). That Puroddfa is
infused with the virility of each of these mantras. Hence the
Purodafa is remembered as Trikapdla (having three vessels to
hold it). Therefore the Purodafa is Tryambaka as well. Hence

1. Tryambaka means ‘one having three eyes’ and is an epithet of Siva.
Here it is identified with Purodafa.

=== PAGE 97 ===

94 Brahmanda Purana

the lord (to whom this Puroddfa is offered) is remembered as
‘Tryambaka.

7. Dharma sustains all the subjects, Manas is remembered
as that which caused knowledge. Akyti is the form of splendid
beauty. Ruci is remembered as one who inculcates Sraddhd
(faith).

8-9. Thus these protectors of the subjects are the causes
of the sustenance of the subjects

Even as he continued the creative activity for the sake of
the multiplication of the subjects, those created subjects did
not increase at all by any means. Therefore, he racked his
intellect that should arrive at a decisive conclusion.

10. Then he saw the Tamaselement moving within
himself. Thanks to its own action, it had abandoned Rajas and
Sattva and was existing by itself.

11, Thereupon, due to that sorrow, the lord of the uni-
verse felt grieved. He pushed out the Tamas element and after-
wards covered it with Rajas.

12. That Tamas pushed out by him gave birth to a pair.
On account of his unrightcous conduct, Himsdé (Violence) and
Soka (grief) were born.

13. When that pair in the form of Varapa ( covering up),
was born, the lord became delighted. He resorted to this,

14, From a half of the body of the lord who was delighted
within himself thus, a woman conducive to great welfare, and
charming and fascinating to all living beings, came out.

15. That beautiful looking lady was indeed created from
Prakrti by him (as he was) desirous (of progeny) and was
called Satariipa. And she was again and again called so.

16. It was then that the subjects were born of that noble-
souled being in the middle of Treta yuga as has already been
mentioned by me to you in section-I Prakriydépdda.

17, When those subjects created by that intelligent self-
possessed being did not increase in number, he created other
mental sons similar to himself.

1. Cf. Manu 1.32.

=== PAGE 98 ===

1.2.9.18-29 95

18-19. He created these nine mental sons! viz.: Bhrgu,
Angiras, Marici, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Daksa, Atri and
Vasistha. In the Purana, these are decisively called the ‘nine
Brahmas’”’ (because they were like) Brahma (the creator) unto
all beings of controlled souls, having the Atman as their source
of origin.

20. Then Brahma created again Dharma who was
dclightful and pleasant unto all living beings; as well as the
Prajapati Ruci. These two were the eldest of all ancient ones.

21. He created from his intellect, Dharma who was
delightful and pleasant unto all living beings. He who is named
Ruci was born of the mind of (the Jord of) unmanifest birth.

22-24. Sage Bhrgu was born of the heart of the lord
whose source of origin was water. Brahma created Daksa from
his vital breath and Marici from his eyes. He created Rudra
(also known as) Nilalohita in the form of Abhimdna (prestige,
honour). He created angiras from his head and Atri from the
ears. From his Uddana (?) vital breath (prana) he created
Pulastya and Pulaha from Vydna. Vasistha was born of
Samana and he created Kratu from Apdna.

25. Thus these twelve arc remembered as the sons of
Brahma at the beginning (of creation) of subjects. Dharma
was the first-born among those Devatas.

26. Bhrgu and others who had been created arc remem-
bered as Brahmarsis (Brahminical sages). They are the ancient
housc-holders and Dharma (virtue) was initially established by
them.

27-28a. In the Kalpa, these twelve give birth to subjects
again and again. Their twelve races are divine and equipped
with Divine qualities. They perform holy rites and have (i.e.
procreate) progeny. They are adorned (honoured) by great
sages.
28b-29. When the progeny created by Dharma and other
great sages (who themselves) had been created (by him) did
not multiply, the intelligent and self-possessed lord became
slightly enveloped by Tamas and afflicted by grief.

1. Cf. Manu I.35 also VP.I.8.4-6.

=== PAGE 99 ===

96 Brahmanda Purana

30. Just as Brahma was enveloped by Tamas elements,
80 also in the case of his sons too another Tamas element issued
forth.

31-32. Adharma is in the nature of return flow (?) and
HirhsA (Violence) is inauspicious by nature. Then when he
was obstructed and the nature of the covering was manifest,
Brahma discarded his own shining physical body. After dividing
his own body into two, he became a man by one half.

33. By (another) half he became a woman and she was
Satariipa. She was the Prakrti,! the mother of all living beings
(and manifested thus) because the lord was creating out of
desire.

34-36. With her grandeur, she pervaded the firmament
and the earth and remained steady. That was the former body
of Brahma whostayed enveloping the firmament. The half that
was created as a woman became Sataripa. That divine lady
performed a very difficult penance for a hundred thousand
years and obtained Purusa of brilliant fame as her husband.
Indeed, he is called Manu, the Purusa, the earlier son of the
self-born lord.

37-38a. Seventyone sets of four Yugas constitute what
is called his Manvantara (reign ofa Manu), After obtaining as
his wife, Satariipa who was not bornof any womb, the Purusa
sported with her. Hence it is called Rati (sexual dalliance) .

38b-40. The first union took place in the beginning of
the Kalpa. Brahma created Virat (the immense Being). That
Virat became the Purusa. He, accompanied by Sataripa, is
remembered as Vairaja, Manu and Samrat (Fmperor). That
Purusa, Manu, the Vairaja created subjects (begot progeny).
From Vairaja, the Purusa, Sataripa gave birth to two heroic
sons.

41. They were Priyavrata and Uttanapada. These two
sons were the most excellent sons that persons possessing sons
could expect. (She gave birth to) two daughters also of great
fortune. From them these subjects were born.

1. The Sankhya pair of Prakrti and Purusa are represented here as
Satardp& and Manu. The terms Vairaja, Purusa, Manu (and Samrat) are
used ag synonyms.

=== PAGE 100 ===

1.2.9.42-55 97

42. They were the divine lady named Akiiti and auspi-
cious lady Prasiiti. Both of them were auspicious. The lordly
son of the self-born lord gave Prasiiti to Daksa.

43. He gave Akiti to Ruci, the Prajapati. An auspicious
pair was born of Akiti as the progeny of Ruci, the mental son
(of Brahma).

44. They were the twins Yajfia and Daksina. Twelve
sons were born to Yajfia and Daksina.

45. They were the Devas named Yamas in the Svayam-
bhuva Manvantara. They were the sons of twins, viz : Yajfia
and Daksina. Hence they are remembered as Yamas.!

46. (?) Two groups of Brahma are remembered viz :
Ajitas and Sukras. The Yamas who have the appellation Divau-
kas (heaven-dwellers) circumambulated the former.

47. Lord Daksa begot of Prasiti, the daughter of
Svayambhuva Manu, twenty-four daughters who became
mothers of the world.

48-49a. All of them were highly fortunate. All of them
were lotus-eyed. All of them were wives of Yogins and: all of
them were Yogic mothers. All of them were expounders of
Brahman and all of them were the mothers of the universe.

49b-50. Lord Dharma accepted (the following) thirtcen
daughters of Daksa as his wives, viz: Sraddha, Laksmi,
Dhrti, Tusti, Pusti, Medha, Kriya, Buddhi, Lajja, Vasu, Santi,
Siddhi, and Kirti as the thirteenth.

51-52. These door-ways of his (creative activity) were
ordained by theself-born lord. The others that remained were
the eleven younger daughters of beautiful eyes. viz: Sati,
Khyati, Sambhiti, Smrti, Priti, Ksama, Sannati, Anasiya.
Orja, Svaha and Svadha.

53-54. Other great sages accepted them (as wives).
They were Rudra, Bhrgu, Marici, Angiras, Pulaha, Kratu,
Pulastya, Atri, Vasistha, Agni and Pitrs. He gave (in marriage )
Sati to Bhava and Khyati to Bhrgu.

55. To Marici, he gave Sambhiti, and Smrti to Angiras,
To Pulastya he gave Priti and Ksama to Pulaha.

1. Derivation of Yama, the gods of the Svayambhuva Manvantara.

=== PAGE 165 ===

162
Brahmdntfa Pur&na
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
Vardas ofJambUdvipa,
Kimpurusa , Hari and Il&vrta*
The sages said
:
1
.
Recount to us the sub-continents of Kimpurusa
and
Harivar$a
as
actually
they
are
really. The sub-continent of
Bharata has already been recounted by you.
SUta said
:
2.
Listen attentively, O Brahinanas,
to what
you
are
•desirous of hearing. There
is a very large grove of Plak$a
trees
in the sub-continent Kimpurusa.
It can be compared with
the
{heavenly) Nandana park.
3.
It is remembered that the span of life
in
Kimpurusa
is for ten thousand years. The
men
have
golden
complexion
and the women are comparable to celestial damsels.
4.
All people there, are free from ailments and
sorrows.
They
are
perpetually joyous
in
their minds. They have the
lustre of hot glowing gold.
5.
In the holy sub-continent of Kimpurusa, there
is
an
auspicious tree oozing out (exuding) honey. All the Kimpurusas
drink its excellent juice.
6.
They say that the sub-continent Harivar?a
is beyond
Kimpurusa. The people there are bom resembling gold in
the
colour of their complexion.
7.
All the people in the sub-continent of Harivarsa
are
those who have been dropped down from the Devaloka (Region
of the Devas). All of them have the characteristics
and
racial
features
of the
Devas.
They
drink the auspicious sugarcane
juice.
8.
In the sub-continent Harivarfa,
alt
the
people
live
for eleven thousand years without any ailment. All of them are
joyous in their minds.
940.
Old age
does
not
affect
them nor do they die
prasnaturdy.

=== PAGE 166 ===

3-2.17.11-20
163
The
middle
land
which had already been described by
me, is known by the name I14vrta. The sun does not blaze very
hot there. The men do not become aged- In Ilavrta, the moon
and the sun as well as the stars are not very bright.
1
1 .
Men
are
born
there
with
the
lustre of the lotus.
They have the colour of their
complexion
resembling
that
of
the lotus. They have eyes like lotus and
fragrance like that of
the lotus petals.
12.
Their diet consists of the fruit
and juice of the rose-
apple. They do not have
sweat
trickling down
from
their
bodies. They arc sweet-smelling.
They
are
intelligent.
They
enjoy all sensual pleasures, and the fruits
of
their
meritorious
actions.
13- 14a.
They are fallen down
from
the
world of the
Devas. They have golden garments. The excellent men who live
in the sub-continent Ilavrta have a span
of
life
extending
to
thirteen thousand years.
14b- 15.
It (Ilavrta) extends to nine thousand (Yojanas)
in every direction from the Meru.
Its
overall area
is
thirtysix thousand
Yojanas
square*
It
is situated like a platter.
16-17.
The Gandhamadana mountain
is
nine
thousand
Yojanas away from the Meru on the western
side- It extends
to
thirtyfour
thousand
Yojanas from north to south.
It
extends
as
far as the Nila and Nisadha mountains. Its height above the
ground level
is fortythousand Yojanas.
18.
It goes down a thousand Yojanas deep into the earth.
Its girth also
is the same. The mountain Malyav&n
is
to
its
(i.e.
Meru’s)
east
and
its
dimensions
have
been
already
recounted
(as the same).
19.
The Nila mountain is in the south and
the Nisadha
is
in
the
north.
The
Mahameru
is well established in their
midst with its dimensions.
20.
In the case of all these mountains, the girth
is
the
.s&nie
as the extent to which they go deep down into the earth.
It is remembered that their total length
is a hundred thousand
Yojanas.
ii

=== PAGE 167 ===

Brahmd?i$a Purdna
21*.
(?) Their outward appearance is circular ( spherical)
like the earthem sphere (within
the
enveloping)
ocean. The
lengths dwindle down and they are then remembered (more or
less) equal to a square.
22 .
There
is a river composed of the
juice
of the
rose
apple. It flows through the middle of the oblong-shaped Ilavfta
dividing
it (into two). It has the colour of the fresh collyrium.
23.
On the southern side of the Meru and to the
north
of
the
Nisadha,
there
is
an
ancient eternal Rose-apple tree
named Sudar£ana.
24.
It
is perpetually laden with blossoms and
fruits.
It
is resorted to by Siddhas and Caranas. The whole continent is
called Jambudvlpa after the name of that tree.
25.
The height of that noble-souled lordly
tree
is
one
thousand and one hundred Yojanas. Everywhere
it touches the
firmament on all sides.
26.
The thickness (diameter) of
its
fruit
is
calculated
by
the
sages
with
visions
of principles
( of reality)
as eight
hundred and sixty one Aratnis (I Aratni
18-20 Gms.)
27.
As they fall on the ground, these fruits make a loud
sound. The juice of the
fruits of that Jambu (Rose apple)
tree
flows as a river.
28.
This river circumambulates the Meru and penetrates
into the ground deep down at the root of the Jambu tree. The
delighted (inhabitants) of Ilavfta always drink the juice of the
Jambu.
29.
When the juice of the Jambu
is drunk neither
old
age
nor
hunger,
neither
weariness nor
death
nor
languor
oppresses them.
30.
A type ofgold named Jambunada is produced there.
It is a glowing ornament of the gods.
It has the resemblance of
Indra so far in lustre.
31.
The auspicious juice of the fruits
of the
respective
representative
trees
of all
the sub-continents is hailed by all.
*
V&JP.46.21b and 22a
is found combined here
as Bd.P.I.
2.18.21*
This being the translation of JkLP., the text of the Bd*P.
(though slightly
confusing)
is
followed.

=== PAGE 168 ===

1.2.17.32-37—18.1
165
When
it
(the juice) becomes scattered
over
it
( the
alluvial
remains of it) become shining gold, an ornament
fit
for
gods.
32.
It
is due to the grace of god that their
( —
of the
inhabitants)
urine and
faeces scattered over all directions as
well as bodies of the dead are swallowed up by
( absorbed
in
)
the earth.
33.
It
is declared that the
Raksasas,
PiSacas
and
the
Yaksas—are
all
the
residents
of
the
Himavat. It should be
known that the Gandharvas live on the Hemakuta
along with
the groups of the Apsaras.
34.
§e$a, Vasuki, Tak^aka— (yes) all the serpents
(live)
on the
Nisadha. The
thirtythree
(groups
of)
Devas (gods)
authorised to partake of the shares in the
Yajfia,
sport
about
on the Mahameru.
35.
The Siddhas and the Brahmanical
sages
devoid
of
impurities live on the Nila full of Vaidurya
(Lapis Lazuli). It
is
mentioned
that the mountain Sveta belongs to the
Daityas
and the D&navas.
36-37.
The
excellent mountain Srhga-van
is the place
where the Pitrs frequently move about. Living beings—both the
mobile
and
the
immobile—are
settled
in
these
nine
sub-
continents with their different divisions duly situated.
Their prosperous growth, both divine and human,
is seen
in diverse ways. It cannot be adequately enumerated. It should
be believed by those who wish to be*
(?)
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
The Description of the JambUdvipa
The Bindu Lake—source of the Gaflgd
:
Its four streams
Suta said
;
1
.
In
the
midst
of the Himalayan
ridges,
there is a
*
¥&.P.46.38b—•mububhOfata— (be believed) by one desirous to com-
prehend.

=== PAGE 169 ===

166
Brahm&oia Pur&qa
mountain named Kailasa. 1 The glorious and prosperous Kubera
lives there along with the R£k$asas.
2-3.
The king, the overlord of Alak&,
rejoices
(there)
with the celestial damsels attending on him. The sacred splen-
did
and
chill
water
originating
from the foot of the Kailasa
mountain has formed a lake named Mada2 (Manda,
in
Va.P.
47.2).
It
abounds
in
white lilies and it resembles a sea. The
auspicious river MandakinI3
(the Ganga)
rises from that divine
( lake)
.
4-5.
On its banks there
is the great divine
park
called
Nandanavana. To
the
North-east of
the Kailasa, in front of
that divine mountain of all medicinal herbs, the mountain
full
ofjewels
and
minerals,
the
powerful mountain of wonderful
mysteries, there
is
a
mountain named
Gandraprabha. 4 It
is
perfectly white and
it resembles splendid jewels.
6.
At its foot there is a great divine lake
named
Svac-
choda. From that divine lake rises a river named
Svacchoda.
7-8a.
There
is a great splendid divine park on its banks
called Gaitraratha. On that mountain lives Manibhadra along
with his followers. He is
the
ruthless
lord
of
the
armies
of
Yaksas. He is surrounded by the Guhyakas.
1.
The description of mount Kailasa, though a poetic one, shows that
the Puraga writer was conversant with
the
topographical
features of the
Manasa-sarovara basin.—vide M.
Ali.
op.cit ., pp.
55-58.
2.
For understanding the Puranic presentation of the
ancient
river-
system, the following points are to be noted:
(1 )
According to Pur&pas, a river normally originates from a lake either
over-ground or under-ground and is associated with a mountain.
(2)
They
believed
that
rivers can penetrate through
subterranean
channels, mountain-ranges and can flow in more than one current,
if intervened by ridges.
(3 ) A river with all its tributaries is sometimes treated as one river.
3.
Unless mentioned otherwise all the references are to M. Ali’s Geog.
of Purdpas.
Probably this is the river Um& and the Zhong Chhu which flows through
G&urf Ku$da on the eastern flank of Kailasa into the Rak^asa Tal (the twift-
lake of M&nasa Sarovara)—M. Ali, p. 65.
4.
This
is probably the Surange La, the north-east range of Kail&sa
from which water flows into Lake Kongys Tso or Lake Gounchc—M. Ali. p.65.

=== PAGE 170 ===

1.2.18.8b-18
167
8b-9a.
The holy rivers the Mandakim
and
the
Svac-
chodaka enter the great ocean through the middle of the sphere
of the earth.
9b- 10.
To the south-east of the Kailasa, in
front of the
mountain abounding in medicinal herbs and auspicious animals
,
the divine mountain of diversified and wonderful
components,
the mountain
full
of red arsenic, there is the great mountain
Suryaprabha (having the lustre like that of the sun). It
is
red
in colour and
it has golden peaks. 1
11.
At its foot there
is a great divine lake named Lohita.
The great holy river named Lauhitya rises from that
(lake).
12-1 3a.
On its bank
is the great park named Dev&ranya
which is devoid of sorrow. On that mountain lives Manidhara*
the
Yaksa
of good
self-control. He
is
surrounded
by
the
Guhyakas who are gentle and highly virtuous.
13b- 14. To the southern side of the Kailasa
is the moun-
tain abounding in medicinal herbs and cruel, wild animals. In
front of the three peaked Afijana that originated from the body
of Vrtra, there
is that very great mountain Vaidyuta
2
possess-
ing all
sorts of minerals.
15.
At its foot is the holy lake
Manasa,
frequented by
the Siddhas. From it rises the holy river
Sarayu
that
is
well
known
in all the worlds.
16-17.
On
its banks is
the
well-reputed
divine
forest
named
Vaibhraja.
There
lives
the
son
of Praheti, who
is a
Raksasa of self-control, a follower of Kubera, and of unlimited
exploits
(but)
who
is Brahmapeta
(far
removed
from
the
Vedas). He
is surrounded by hundreds of Yatudhanas (demons)
who are very terrible and who can traverse the skies.
18.
To the west of the Kailasa
is the mountain
aboun-
ding
in medicinal herbs and auspicious animals, Arana® (Pink
1.
This
red-coloured
mountain
is Kanglung
Kangri
(a
south-east
range of Kail&sa) and the river Lauhitya is the Brahmaputra. From a small
lake at the foot of the mountain, the Brahmaputra enters Tamchok Khambah,
the headwater of the Brahmaputra. —M. Ali.—p.66.
2.
This
is the peak Gurla M£ndhit&,
since Lake M&nasa Sarovara
lies below its northern face and the river Kamali (Map Chhu of Tibetans)
a major
tributary of the Sarayil rises here—M.
Ali.—p. 66.
3.
This is the Ladakh or Leh range— {Ibid),

=== PAGE 171 ===

168
Brahm&nia Pur&pa
in colour)
the splendid and excellent mountain full ofgold and
minerals.
19.
This
glorious
mountain
is
a
favourite
resort
of
Bhava.lt resembles clouds(in colour)
.
It is covered with splen-
did clusters of cliffs of gold.
20.
The mountain Mufijavan
is highly divine.
It
ap-
pears to scrape the heaven by means of its hundreds of golden
peaks.
It
is
very
difficult
to
climb or pass through as
it
is
enveloped by show.
21-22.
There stands Girisa (King of mountains), called
Dhumra-locana1
( of
smoke-coloured eyes)
. The Lake named
Sailoda
2
is
at its foot.
It
enters
the
briny sea
in between the
(rivers) Caksus
and
Sita.
23-24.
On
its
banks
is
the
well known divine forest
‘Surabhi’.
To the left and to the north of the
Kailasa is
the
auspi-
cious mountain abounding in medicinal herbs and animals. In
front of the excellent mountain named Gaura, full of Haritala
(yellow orpiment)
there
is
the mountain
Hiranmaya. 8
This
mountain
is
divine, very great and full of precious gems and
jewels.
25-26a.
At
its foot is
the
highly
divine,
splendid
and
charming lake named
Bindusara.
4
It
has
golden
sandy
bed.
1.
This is Nanga Parbat.
(For details vide M. Ali.
Op.
cit. p. 66-67.
2.
The lake Sailoda seems to be the Wular lake which once covered
the whole of Kashmir valley. The river Siloda is the Jhelum which still flows
through it and runs towards the west between the Indus and the Sutlej
(the
Cak$u and Sit& in the Pur&na)—M. Ali. p. 67.
3.
Gaura,
Hiranmaya and Soma
(mentioned
later
in v.27 and in
V&.P.) are the Tibetan ranges north of Kailasa and are called now Tanglha,
Aling Kangri and Nychenthangla—M. Ali.
(p.68 )
.
4.
Bindusara can be explained in two ways:
(1 )
a collection ofdrops of water: The basin between Mt. Aling Kangri
and Kailasa Tanglha is dotted with innumerable small and large
lakes.
a
-
(2 )
a lake of frozen particles of snow. In the past
, the basin Aling-
Kangri and Kaimsa—Tanglha was an extensive
snow-field. The
Fur&$a writer must have known itthruugh hearsay etc. According
to De (p.38) it is on the Rudra Himalaya, two miles south of Gan
gotri.

=== PAGE 172 ===

1.2.18.26b-34
169
For the sake of getting the Ganga, king Bhaglratha, the saintly
king spent many years near it.
26b.
He thought—“My ancestors will go to heaven on
being
bathed in the waters of the Gang&.” After determining
thus, he
performed
penance
with
the
concentration
of
his
mind in Siva.
27.
The divine river
Tripathaga (the Gang&)
(lit.
the
river
with
three
courses) was at the outset established
there
as the deity. That river originating from the foot-hills of Soma
flows in seven channels.
28.
Golden
sacriflcial posts
studded
with jewels
have
been
scattered
there. Sakra performed a sacrifice there along
with all the Devas and attained Siddhi( spiritual enlightenment).
29.
The luminous Milky way that is seen at night in the
firmament
near
clusters
of
stars
is
the
divine goddess,
the
Tripathaga 1
( the Ganga )
.
30.
Sanctifying
the
heaven
and
the
firmament,
the
celestial river fell on the head of Bhava
(god
Siva)
and
got
blocked up by means of his Yogic Maya.
3 1
.
The lake Bindusaras was formed by those few drops
of water that
fell from the infuriated Ganga. Therefore
it
is
remembered as Bindusaras.
32.
Being
impeded
smilingly
by Bhava
(Siva),
the
river goddess mentally thought of hurling down Sankara.
33-34.
“I
shall
pierce
(the
earth)”,
she thought
(to
herself), “and enter the netherworlds taking Sankara too along
with my current”. He
understood what
she
was
desirous of
1 .
Are the three ways of Ganga its three stages ?
(1)
Milky way in the sky,
(2) Snowy or glacial Ganga.
(3)
Fluvial
Ganga.
These are the three stages of the formation of that river which are symbo-
lised
in
the legend of the descent of Gafigi
(Gaftg&vatara$a) • The heavenly
Ganges (Akaia Gangi)
is a poetic name for the galaxy in the north. But the
blocking up of the Gang& in the tresses of Siva (mentioned in V.30 and 35
)
is the Snowy or glacial stage and the melting of the snow-fields and glaciers is
the release of the Ganga. The legendary part played by king Bhaglratha in
bringing the Gafiga to the scorched plains of northern BhiLrata is still shrouded
in mystery.

=== PAGE 173 ===

1 70
Brahrrtffyia Pur&na
doing and having realized her cruel intention, he intended
to
conceal (absorb)
the river within his limbs.
35-38.
He blocked the river on his head as it fell on the
ground with great force and
velocity.
In
the
meantime he saw
the king
(i.e. Bhagiratha)
in
front of him, weary with protruding network of veins
and with
all his sense-organs overtaken by hunger. Then he remembered
the boon granted to him. He thought—“I have been propiti-
ated by this king earlier for the sake of the
river
(Ganga)”.
Then he recollected the words of Brahma
that he had heard
“Hold the celestial river”;
thereupon he controlled his anger.
On being propitiated by means of severe penance, he set
river
free for the sake of
Bhagiratha. He released the river that had
been blocked by his own prowess.
39-41.
On being released,
the river
began to
flow
in
seven channels. 1
Three of them flowed
towards
the east
and
three to the west. The river Ganga
flows through seven
chan-
nels. The NalinI,
Hradini
and
Pavani
are those which flow
towards
the east.
The Slta, the Caksus and the
Sindhu flow
towards the west. The seventh among them followed
Bhagira-
tha towards the south.
42.
Hence
that river is Bhagirathi.
It
joined the
salt
sea. All these seven (channels,
rivers)
sanctify
the sub-conti-
nent named Hima.
43-45.
Originating from the lake Bindusaras,
those
seven
splendid
rivers
flow
over
different climes almost all of them
being the lands of the
Mlecchas
(Barbarous tribes) and reach
the place where Vasava
(Indra) showers, namely the
lands
of
Sillndhras,
Kimtalas,
Cinas,
Barbaras,
Yavanas.
Andhakas,
Pu$karas,
Kulindas and
Aficoladvicaras * (?).
After dividing
1.
M. Ali.
(p. 69)
identifies NalinI, Hradini and Pavani—the
east-
flowing rivers—with the Yangtse, Mekong and Salween, the rivers flowing to-
the west, viz. the SUa, the Caksus and the Sindhu with the Yarkand, the Shyok
and the Indus, while the southern river Bhagirathi is the Ganga. De however
identifies
Sita with
the Jazartes
(p. 181 ) and the Gakfus with the Oxus or
Amudaria
(p. 43).
*
A figa-loha-vwr&i cay*, in Va.P.48, 43a.

=== PAGE 174 ===

1.2.18.46-57
171
the land of simhavan in three parts,
the river Sita flowed into
the western ocean.
46-4 7a.
The river Cak$us flows over the following climes
viz.
Cinamarus,
the
Talas, the Camasamulikas, the Bhadras,
the Tusaras, the Lamyakas, the Bahiavas, the Paratas and
the
Khavas.
Then
it
falls into the sea.
47b-49a.
The Sindhu flows over the following
territor-
ies,
viz.
the
Daradas, along with the Ka£miras, the Gandha-
ras,
the Raurasas, the Kuhas, the Sivasailas, the
Indrapadas,
the
Vasati,
(?)
the
Visarjamas*
(?),
the Saindhavas,
the
Randhrakarakas,
the
Samathas,
the
Abhlras,
the Rohakas,
the Sunamukhas and the tJrddhvamarus.
49b-52.
The Gariga sanctifies the
following
praiseworthy
countries (climes)
viz. the lands of the Gandharvas, Kinnaras,
Yaksas,
Raksasas,
Vidyadharas and the Nagas, the
residents
of Kalapagrama,
the Paradas,
the
Tadga^as
(their
cousin
tribes),
the Khavas, the Kiratas, the Pulindas, the Kurus,
the
Bharatas, the Paficalas, the Kasis, the Matsyas, the Magadhas,
the Angas, the Suhmottaras, the Vangas and the
T&mraliptas.
Thereafter, obstructed by
the Vindhya
(?)
it falls
into
the
briny sea.
53-55.
Then the sacred Hradini
flows
towards
the east
flooding the banks on either
side, the territories
of the
Naisa-
dhas, the Trigartakas, the Dhivaras( fishermen)
, the R§ikas, the
Nilamukhas
(bluefaced)
the
Kekaras,
the
Au?trakarnas, the
Kiratas,
the Kalodaras, the Vivarnas (outcastes), the Kuma-
ras and the Svarnabhumikas* *
(the golden grounds)
that had
been covered up to the extent as
far as the sea
shore
on
the
east.
56-57.
Then, the river PavanI too flows towards the east
flooding the Supathas, the Indradyumna lake, the Kharapathas
and the Vetra£ankupathas. Through the middle of JanakI***
it flows over
the
Kuthapravaranas.
It
enters the ocean of
Indradvlpa, the briny sea.
*
VS.P.48.45
reads:
vaddUrhica
visarjayan
/
**
Va.P.48.52:
Svar$abhujit&n, ‘who are beautified with
gold
orna-
ments.
**•
V&.P.48.55a. Madhyenodydna-makar&n

=== PAGE 175 ===

172
BrahmBftia Purina
58-61 a.
Then the
river Nalini flows rapidly towards the
east sanctifying the countries of the Tomaras, the Harnsam&rgas
and the Haihayas ; piercing through the mountains in various
places it flows over various eastern
territories. After reaching
the Karnapravaranas,
it flows over the Svamukhas because they
are contiguous. After flowing over desert regions abounding in
sand dunes,
it flows over the Vidyadhara lands.
It
enters
the
briny sea after flowing through the mountainous territories.
6 lb-62.
These rivers have
hundreds and
thousands
of
tributaries. All of them flow there where Vasava showers. There
is a well-known fragrant
(Surabhi) forest on the banks
of the
Vasvaukasa
(?)
63.
The scholarly Kauberaka
(son of Kubera)
of great
self-control stays on Hiranyagrriga (Golden Peak).
He practi-
ses
the performance of
Yajflas. He is very great and valorous
and his strength and splendour cannot be measured.
64.
He is surrounded by those scholarly Brahma-Rak§a-
sas who stay there.
It is declared that these four
followers
of
Kubera are on a par with one another.
65.
The
prosperity
of the residents
of
the
mountain
should also be known in the same manner.
In regard to virtue,
love and wealth each is double than the former (?)
66-67a.
On the top of the Hemakufa
there
is
a
lake
named Varcovan.1 Two rivers
viz.
the ManasvinI
and
the
Jyotismati rise from it and they flow on either side falling into
the eastern and the western seas.
67b-68a.
There
is a lake named Visnupada2 on
the ex-
cellent mountain Nisadha.
Two rivers rise from it.
They are the Gandharvi and the
N&kulx.
68b*69a.
There is a great deep lake at the
side
of
the
Meru called Candra-Prabha.
1 .
Noted
as Lake Sayana or N&ga in other Pur&oas is the Lake ‘Nik
Tso* which with Pangong Tso forms an extensive water-sheet—M.Ali.p.7 1
.
2.
Modem Lake Ghakmaktin, the source of the Wakhan
river which
flows west in the land of Gandharvas.
It is in the Wakhan region that Meru
and Ni$adha come closest to each other. —M. AH.
(p. 71).

=== PAGE 176 ===

1.2.18.69b-77
173
The
sacred river Jambu rises from
it.
It
is remembered
that Jambunada (gold)
is obtained from it. (The gold obtained
from
it
is called Jambunada).
69b-70a.
The lake Payoda1 is on the mountain Nila.
It
is very clear and
it abounds in lotuses. Two rivers rise from it,
viz. the Puncjarlka and the Payoda.
70b-71a.
The sacred Sarayu flows
from
the
mountain
Sveta.
It
is indeed from the Manasa
lake
that
the
two
rivers
Jyotsna and Mrgakama have originated
.
7 1 b-73.
In the Kurus is
the lake well known as Rudra-
kanta. 2 It abounds in lotuses,
Ashes
and
(aquatic)
birds—It
is created by Bhava. There are twelve other deep
lakes
here.
They are well known by the name Jaya.
They abound
in
lot-
uses, Ashes and (aquatic) birds and they are like seas.
From them two rivers, the Santa
and the Madhvi
have
originated.
74.
In the sub-continents Kimpurusa
etc., the lord does
not shower rains. Excellent rivers flow here
with
waters
that
pierce through the ground.
75.
The following three mountains of great knotty ridges
extend towards the east. They are immersed under
the
briny
sea. They are the Rsabha, the Dundubhi and the great
moun-
tain Dhumra.
76.
The mountains of great lofty cliffs—the Candra, the
Kaka and the Drona extend towards the
north.
In
the
nor-
thern end they are immersed under the salt
sea.
77.
The mountains
Somaka, Varaha
and
the N&rada
extend
towards
the west where
they
have
entered the briny
sea.
1.
M.Ali.
(p.71) identifies it with the Kara Kul of northern Pamirs.
It is a twin-lake mentioned as Payoda and PuijwJarika
(like lakes M&nasasaro-
vara and Rak?asa Tal in the Kailasa region).
2.
These
are lakes in Siberia. It shows that the Puranic authors had
some idea tha* there were big lakes in that region. I doubt Ah's identification
of the Balkash and the Baikal with the Jaya lake.

=== PAGE 177 ===

174
Brahm&vfa Pur&ta
78.
These great mountains—the
Cakra,
the Balahaka
and the Mainaka, extend towards the southern sea.
79-8 1
.
In between the Cakra and
the
Main&ka
in
the
south-east
quarter,
there
is the
fire
named
Samvartaka.
It
drinks
the water. This sub-marine fire is known by
the name
Aurva.
It has the face of a mare.
These twelve mountains had
entered the briny sea formerly because of
the
fear
of getting
their wings chopped. They were terrified by Mahendra. This is
’seen in
the white (i.e. circular moon on the
full Moon night)
moon in the shape of a black rabbit
( or deer and a rabbit)
.
82-84.
The different divisions of Bharata have been
re-
counted. They are nine.
What has been narrated
here is seen
elsewhere too. The sub-continents
vie
with
one
another
in
regard to good qualities, health, span of life,
piety,
love
and
wealth.
The
living beings
are endowed
with merits. In the
different sub continents different
classes of people live
in
the
different parts. Thus this earth sustains
the cosmos
stationed
in the universe (i.e.
the whole of this
universe)
.
CHAPTER NINETEEN
The Description of Plakfa
and
other Continents
SHta said
:
1 .
I shall succinctly recount
(information
about)
the
•continent
of Plak^a
1
in the manner
it
really
is.
Listen
to
this, O
excellent
Brahmana
even
as
I
speak
about
it
factually.
2.
Its width
is
twice
the
width of Jambudvipa. Its
round girth (perimeter)
is twice
its width.
I.
This daipa is next to JambQdvipa.
Its name Plak$a(a fig tree) indi-
cates a land of warm temperate dimate.
M.Ali,
4without hesitations', identi-
fies this with the basin of the Mediterranean
(Geog. qf PurSquu, p. 41). The
name Plak*a still persists as Ftada, a town in Myria.

=== PAGE 178 ===

1.2.19.3-14
175
3.
The
salty
sea
is
encompassed
by
that
continent.
There the Janapadas (the countries or
rural
regions)
are
all
sacred. People do not die for a long time.
4.
Whence is the fear of famine there ?
(i.e. there is
no
fear
of famine there).
Whence
is
the
fear
of old
age
and
sickness ? There too, there are seven holy mountains bedecked
in jewels.
5-6.
They are the receptacle
of
precious
gems.
There
are rivers also.
I
shall
mention their
names.
In
those
five
continents, viz.
: Plaksadvipa and others, there are seven
long
and straight Varsaparvatas (mountains belonging
to
the
sub-
continents)
stationed
in
every
quarter.
I
shall
mention
the
seven
extremely
powerful
(sub)
continents
in
the
Plaksadvipa.
7.
Here the first mountain
is Gomedaka.
It
is
like the
clouds.
It
is on account of its name that the
sub-continent is
also named Gomeda.
8.
The second mountain
is the Candra, which is endow-
ed with all types of medicinal
herbs.
It
is
from
here
that
medicinal herbs were collected by
the brothers
(Asvins)
for
the sake of Amrta
(Nectar).
9.
The
third mountain
is
high and
unscalable.
It
is
named Narada. It
was
on
this
mountain
that Narada and
Parvata were bom formerly.
10-1 la.
(Text
partially
defective) The
fourth
moun-
tain
there is named
Dundubhi.
It
was
on
this
mountain
that
the
Asura Dundubhi, who had the boon of having death
as
he
pleased,
was formerly overpowered by the Devas. This
demon had
a
great desire for swinging
in a rope-swing on
a
Salmali
(silk cotton)
tree and this brought about
his death.
llb-12a.
The fifth mountain is named
Somaka,
where
nectar was formerly collected by the Devas. It was also brought
by Garutman
( Garu<Ja ) for the sake of his mother.
12b* 13a.
The sixth leading mountain
is
called by the
name
Sumanas.
It was on this mountain that Hiranyak$a was
killed by the divine Boar.
13b- 14.
The seventh mountain there is Vaibhr&ja.
It is
luminous.
It
is very lofty. It is
crystalline. Since it shines with
its rays2 it is remembered as Vaibhraja.

=== PAGE 179 ===

176
Brahmdn^a Parting:
I shall mention their sub-continents in due order and
by
their names.
15.
The first sub-continent is Gomeda. It is remembered
by the name Santabhaya (having all fears subdued). The sub-
continent of (the mountain) Candra
is named Si£ira.
That of
theNirada
is Sukhodaya.
16.
Ananda is the sub-continent of the Dundubhi.
Siva
is remembered as the sub-continent of the Somaka.
Ksemaka
is the sub-continent of the leading
mountain
( Sumanas)
and
Dhruva that of the Vaibhraja.
17.
In
all
these
(sub-continents)
the Devas, the Gan-
dharvas and the Siddhas play and sport about along with
the
Caranas.
They are being seen along with them.
18.
There are seven rivers in every one of the
sub-conti-
nents. They flow into
the
seas.
I shall
mention
these
seven
Gangas by name, O ascetics.
19.
The following are
the
seven
excellent
rivers,
viz.
the Anutapta,
the SukhI, the Vipa£a, the Tridiva, the Kramu,
the Amrta and the Sukfta
.
20.
Those rivers grow towards those places where Vasava
(i.e. Indra) showers (rains). They have plenty of
water
and
(swift)
currents. Thousands of other rivers flow into them.
21-22.
The delighted people of these
territories
always
drink
(the
waters
of)
these rivers. Those
people, viz.
the
splendid Santabhayas, the joyous auspicious Saisiras, the Sivas,
the Anandas, the Sukhas and the
Ksemakas
along
with
the
Dhruvas. The subjects who have
settled in them are endowed
with
the
disciplined
conduct
and
behaviour
of the Varrias
(castes) and Airamas (stages
in life).
23.
All the subjects were strong and free from
ailments.
They are devoid of sickness.
Among them
none deteriorates
and no one goes high up in arrogance (or there is no evolution-
ary and involutionary eras. 1
1.
The terms
Utsarpipf and Avasarpinl are the Jain terms to indicate
timecycles.
Utsarpipi
is the ascending cycle and Aoasarpipi
is the descending
cycle. They are divided into six stages each viz. good-good, good, good-bad,
bad-good, bad, bad-bad (MW p. 105), The use ofJaina terms like those
of
tta Buddhists in a Brahmanical work is not impossible. The next verse ex-
gfSains this by assuming the existence of a perpetual Treta yuga.

=== PAGE 180 ===

1 .2 . 19 .24-34
177
24.
There
is no peculiar state of affairs as pertaining
to
the Yugas, conditioned by the four Yugas. A period like Treta
yuga
is perpetually present there.
25.
These are the things to
be understood
in
the
five
continents,
Plaksadvlpa
etc. The
assignment of
period
is in
conformity with the conditions of the region.
26-27.
It should be known that the people in these conti-
nents
beginning with Plaksadvlpa and ending with Sakadvlpa,
are
handsome,
well-dressed,
strong
and
free from sickness.
They possess adequately happiness, long span
of life,
strength,
handsome features,
health
and
virtuousness. Men
live upto
five thousand
years.
28-30.
The continent of Plaksadvlpa
is
prosperous
and
vast.
All round,
it
abounds
in
wealth and
food-grains.
It
abounds in
divine
medicinal
herbs and
fruits.
It
possesses
all types of medicinal plants
and herbs.
Thousands
of rural
and wild animals
of
all
varieties
surround
the
regions. O
excellent
Brahmanas,
in its
middle
there
is
a
great
tree
named Plaksa.
It has
been
reckoned on a
par
with
the
Jambu tree
(in the continent Jambudvipa)
.
The continent
is.
named after that tree. In a place in the middle of the inhabited
*
country,
it is worshipped
by all the people.
31-32.
That continent of Plaksadvlpa
is surrounded by
a sea of sugarcane juice. 1
This sea is equal
to
Plaksadvlpa in
length and extent.
Thus
the position of Plaksadvlpa
has been
recounted
to
you all succ nctly and in the
proper
order. Now
understand
the continent Salmala.
33-34.
Thereafter,
I shall (now) recount the third excel-
lent continent Salmala. 2
The ocean of sugarcane juice
is encompassed by the con-
tinent Salmala that is twice as much as Plaksadvlpa in
extent.
It should be known that there too are
seven
mountains
that are the sources of precious stones.
1.
The Ik?u is the river Oxus. The river
is taken as a sea(De, p.179)^
0*"
it be regarded as a boundary surrounding Plaksadvipa ?
2.
Puranic description of £&lmala dvipa leads,
M. Ali to identify
it
with tropical Africa bordering on the Indian ocean, including Madagasgar.

=== PAGE 181 ===

1 78
Brahm&nia Purtya
35.
In those seven sub
continents
even
the
rivers
are
sources of precious gems.
The first mountain is named Kumuda.
It resembles
the
sun in brilliance.
36-37a.
It stands with lofty
peaks
full
of all minerals
and rugged with clusters of cliffs.
The second mountain here is well
known
by
the
name
Uttama.
It encircles the firmament with its peaks full of Hari-
idle (yellow orpiment)
.
37b-38a.
The third
mountain there
is
well
reputed
as
Balahaka.
It encircles the firmament
with
its
peaks
full
of
natural collyrium.
38b-39a.
The fourth mountain
is Drona and
it
is
here
that the great medicinal herbs Vtfalyakarani and Mrtasahjivini
(are
found )
.
39b-40a.
Kanka
is the
fifth mountain there.
It rises up
magnificently.
It is perpetually endowed with flowers and
fruits.
It
is
surrounded by tree and
creepers.
40b-41a.
The sixth mountain
there
is Mahisa. It
is like
a cloud. On it the water-originating fire named Mahisa lives.
4 lb-42.
The
seventh mountain
there
is
called by the
name Kakudman.
It
is there that Vasava saves duly from the
subjects many precious gems and keeps them
to
himself and
approaches Prajapati with them.
43.
Thus,
these are
the
seven
mountains
in
the
Sal-
mala continent. They are bedecked in jewels.
I shall
mention
their
splendid
sub-continents.
They
are
only
seven
(in
number )
.
44-48.
The sub-continent of
the mountain Kumuda
is
remembered as Sveta ; that of Uttama is Lohita ; that ofBalahaka
is Jimuta; Harita is
remembered
as
(the
sub-continent)
of
Drona.
The
sub-continent
of
Kanka
is
named
Vaidyuta
and that
of Mahi§a
is
Manasa. The sub-continent
of
the
Kakudm&n
is
Suprada
by
name.
These
are the seven sub-
continents and
(the connected)
mountains.
Understand
the
riven in them.

=== PAGE 182 ===

179
They are thejyoti, S&nti, TustS, Candra, Sukra, VimocanI
and Nivrtti the seventh among them. They are remembered
as
the rivers in the different sub-continents. There
are
hundreds
and thousands of other rivers flowing
near them. No man
is
capable of counting their number.
Thus the situation of the
continent
Salmala
has
been
recounted to you.
49.
In its middle there is a great
Salmali
(silk
cotton)
tree reckoned on a par with the Plaksa tree.
It has large
bran-
ches. The continent
is named after the tree.
50.
The Salmala continent
is surrounded on all sides by
the sea of liquor that is equal to Salmala in extent.
51.
Listen to the subjects in the northern continents, O
sages
conversant
with
piety.
Understand
them
even
as
I
recount properly in the manner I have heard.
52-53.
I shall recount the fourth
continent
Kusadvlpa 1
succinctly.
The
sea
of
liquor
is surrounded
on
all
sides
by Kusadvlpa
that
is
twice as much as Salmala
in
extent.
Understand
the
seven
mountains
there
as
they
are
being
described.
54.
It should be known that the mountain Vidruma
is
the first mountain in the
Kuiadvipa;
the
second
one
is
the
mountain Hema.
55.
The name of the third mountain is Dyutiman.
It
is
a mountain resembling clouds. The fourth mountain is named
Puspavan and the fifth one is Kuse$aya.
56.
The sixth one is Harigiri by name and the
seventh
is remembered as Mandara. The word
(Mania means
‘waters’
and the mountain
is
called Mandara
because
it
pierces
or
splits
water.
57.
Their internal diameter
is
twice
as much
as
the
cross-section
(Pravibh&ga)
.
The first sub-continent is Udbhida and the second one
is
Venuma^ala.
1 .
After
detailing the main features of Kufa dvipa M.
Ali concludes
that
it
is identifiable with the tropical grass-lands viz. Iran, Irac and the
fringing lands of hot desert, op. dt.
(pp. 40-41 ).

=== PAGE 183 ===

180
BrahmQ$$a Purdna
58.
The third sub-continent is Rathakara and the fourth
one is remembered as Lavana. The fifth one is Dhjtimad Var$a
and the sixth Varsa is Prabhakara.
59.
The seventh one
is named Kapila. In al) those (sub-
continents)
the Devas
and
the Gandharvas
are
the
sancti-
fiers of
the
Varsas and
the
subjects*
are
the lords of
the
universe
(?)
60.
They play and sport about everywhere in great
de-
light.
There are neither
robbers
nor
Mleccha
(barbarous)
tribes in them.
61-62.
The people are
mostly
white-complexioned and
they pass away in the due order
(i.e.
the younger ones only
after the older ones)
.
There too
the
rivers
are
seven. They are—Dhutapada,
Siva, Pavitra, Santati,
Vidyut,
Dambha
and
Mahi.
There
are hundreds and thousands of rivers other than these. They are
not well known.
63-64.
All those flow to that place where Vasava showers
:
Externally the Kusadvipa is incircled by the sea of ghee
( clari-
fied butter). It should be known that
the sea of ghee
is equal
to Kusadvipa in extent.
Thus the situation and position
of Kusadvipa
has
been
recounted to you
all.
65.
Hereafter, I shall
recount
the
extent
of Kraufica
dvipa. 1 It is remembered to be twice as much as
Kusadvipa in
extent.
66-69.
The
sea
with
ghee
as
its
liquid content is in
contact with Krauficadvlpa.
In that continent, the excellent mountain Kraufica is the
first
mountain.
Beyond
the
Kraufica
is
the Vamana and
beyond Vamana
is
the Andhakara. Beyond Andhakara is the
mountain named
Div&vrt . The excellent
mountain Dvivida is
*
Va.P.49.54a. reads prabhdsu
(they are like the lords of the universe)
in brilliance. A better reading.
1.
M. Ali examines the description of this Dvipa from different
sources
and concludes that ‘the Kraufica dvipa of the Pur&pas is represented by the
basin of the Black Sea.
(op. cit. pp. 45-46)

=== PAGE 184 ===

1.2.19.70-79
181
beyond Divavrt. The
great
mountain
Puntfarika
is
beyond
Dvivida. The
Dundubhisvana
is
mentioned as the mountain
beyond Pun<JarIka.
These are the seven mountains of the continent Kraufica-
dvlpa. They are full of precious gems.
70.
They are covered with different kinds of
trees and
creepers endowed with plenty of flowers and
fruits. They
are
twice
as much
as
each
other
in extent. They increase the
delight of residents.
71-74.
I shall
recount
the
sub-continents
thereof by
name. Understand them.
The land
(i.e. Varsa) pertaining
(adjacent)
to Kraufica
is Kusala;
that
of Vamana is Manonuga; Usnais mentioned
as the
third
Varsa
and
it
is beyond Manonuga. PIvaraka is
beyond Usna and Andhakara is beyond Pivara. Munide^a (land
of the sages)
is remembered by
the
learned men
as
the
land
beyond Andhakara. Dundubhisvana is
mentioned as the
land
beyond
Munidesa.
The land
is
populated
by
Siddhas and
Caranas. The people are remembered
as
mostly
white com-
plexioned.
There
too
the
rivers
are remembered as seven in
number in every sub-continent. They are splendid.
75.
The
seven
rivers
Gaurl,
Kumudvatl,
Sandhya,
Ratri,
Manojava,
Khyati
and Pundarika are remembered as
Ganga.
76. There are thousands of other rivers flowing near them
and approaching them (i.e. flowing into them like tributaries)
.
They are large with plenty of water.
77.
The
glorious Kraufica
Dvipa
is surrounded on all
sides by the sea with curds and whey as its liquid content. This
sea is equal to the Kraufica Dvipa in extent.
78-79.
The Plaksadvipa and other continents have been
succinctly recounted.
It is
impossible to describe in due
order
the natural features of all these continents in detail even in the
course of hundreds of years according
to divine
reckoning.
It
is difficult to describe in
detail the
creation
and
annihilation
of the subjects therein.

=== PAGE 185 ===

182
Brahm&Qia Purdna
80.
I
shall recount Sakadvipa1
definitely
as
it
exists.
Listen even as I recount factually and realistically.
81.
Its
extent
is
twice
as much
as
that of Kraufica
Dvlpa. It stands encircling the sea with curds and whey as
its
liquid content.
82.
There the territories of the general public
are
very
sacred. The people die after a long life. Whence is there famine
among
them
? (i.e. they do not experience famine). Whence
is the fear from old age and sickness ?
83.
There too there are only seven
splendid
mountains
bedecked in jewels. The seven rivers
are
sources
of origin
of
precious gems. Listen to their names from me.
84.
The
first mountain Meru is said
to possess (i.e. to
be inhabited by) the Devas, the sages and the Gandharvas. The
mountain named Udaya is golden and it extends towards the east.
85-86.
The clouds take their origin
there
or
go
there
for
the
sake of
rain.
To the west of it is the extremely great
high
mountain Jaladhara
from
which Vasava
perpetually
receives
a
large supply of water. Therefore,
it pours
showers
among the subjects during the rainy season.
87.
To the north of it is the Raivataka, where the
con-
stellation Revati is perpetually established in the firmament as
ordained by Lord Brahma.
88.
To
the
west
of
it is the extremely great mountain
named 2§yama. Due to
it,
it
is
said,
that
the
subjects
here
attained darkness of complexion formerly.
89.
To
the
west
of
it,
it
is remembered,
is the great
silvery mountain A§tagiri. To the west thereof is the “impossable
mountain”
(Durgafaila ) ,
the
great mountain
belonging
to
Ambika
(Ambikeya ) (but Ambikeya in Va.p. 49.83)
90.
To the west of Ambikeya is the beautiful
mountain
Kesarin equipped with all medicinal herbs. It is from this that
Vayu, the Prajapati, became possessed of Kesara* ?
1
.
' Strangely enough, two scholars come to different conclusions about
the location of S&kadvTpa. M. Ali identifies
it
with the Monsoon lands of
Asia where teak abounds viz. Malaya, Siam, Indo-China and southern China,
while De identifies it with Tartary including Turkestan in central Asia
(pp*
172-173).
*Va.P.49.74 reads
: sa caiva Keicarityukto yato Vtyuh praodmU. ‘That moun-

=== PAGE 186 ===

1 .2 . 19 .91-100
183
91
.
The first Varsa (sub-continent)
is (away)
from
the
mountain Udaya.That great Varsa is remembered
as ‘Jalada*.
The second (Var$a)
ofjaladhara
is remembered
as Sukumara.
92 .
The (Varsa) of Raivata is Kaum&ra; that of Syama
is Manivaka. The splendid sub-continent of the Asta mountain
should be known as Kusumottara.
93-95.
The sub-continent of the mountain Ambikeya
is
Modaka and that of Kesara
is
Mahadruma. The
dimensions
.
of the continent such as narrowness, length etc.
is to be reckon-
ed
in
accordance with the Krauftca Dvipa. The
great
tree,
the emblem of that continent is &aka by name and it has great
height.
It has
great following
(?)
It
deserves
worship*.
The
territories of the rural folk are holy. They
are
endowed
with
the system of Cdturvarnya (having the four
castes). The
rivers
too are extremely sacred
(like)
Ganga.
They
are
of seven
varieties
(i.e. they are seven in number).
96.
They
are
:—Sukumari,
Kumari,
Nalirii,
Venuka,
Iksu, Venuka**
(?)
and the seventh one Gabhasti.
97.
There are other rivers too, thousands of
them with
sacred
waters and
cool
currents. They
are
splendid
rivers
flowing in the places where Vasava showers.
98.
Neither
their
names
nor
their magnitude can be
adequately understood
or fully
enumerated.
Those
excellent
rivers are very holy.
99.
The delighted folks of the
clime, O
Samsapayana,
drink the (waters of those) rivers. This continent is vast and is
situated in the form of a wheel.
100.
It
is
covered
with
the
waters
of
the rivers and
mountains that resemble clouds,jthat are wonderful and variegat-
ed by means of all sorts of minerals and
that are
embellished
with jewels and corals.
tain is designated as Kesarin, whence
the wind blows
(all over
the world).
*
Va.P.49.77b
reads
:
Tasya pUjdm prayunjate
for
Bd.P.’a Uuya pujyd
mah&nug&h .
**
Though the
list of the seven rivers of this continent
is somewhat
different in Va.P. 49.91-94., the reading Dhenukd from that list may be accept-
ed here to avoid repetition of Vqurfcd in the list of seven riven in this text.

=== PAGE 187 ===

184
Brahm&nia Purdna
101.
It
is
endowed
with
different
kinds of cities and
flourishing rural territories. The trees therein
are
laden
with
.flowers
and
fruits
all
round
(the
year) and
the continent
abounds in wealth and food grains.
102.
It
is surrounded
on all sides by the sea with milk
for
its
liquid
content.
The
sea
is equal
to Sakadvlpa in
its
extent.
103.
Therein, the rural regions, the mountains,
and
the
rivers are splendid and sacred. The lands
(sub-continents)
are
fully inhabited by persons following the discipline of
the
four
castes and
the
stages
of life. They
(the sub-contincnts), are
seven in number.
104.
In those sub-continents there is no clash
of castes
or mixed castes. Since Dharma
is
practised
unswervingly, the
subjects enjoy exclusive happiness.
105.
There
is
no
greediness
amongst
them
nor
the
eagerness for deception as a
result
of
rivalry and
jealousy.
There
is
no
adversity among
them. Everything is extremely
natural and timely.
106.
In them
there
is
no
acquisition
(imposition)
of
taxes. There is
neither punishment nor persons worthy of being
punished.
They
are
conversant
with virtue and piety. They
protect one another by means of their adherence to
their own
respective duties.
107.
Only this much can be described in regard to
that
continent. Only this much need be heard
in regard to the resi-
dents of Sakadvlpa.
1 08-1 11.
I shall describe Puskara1 the seventh continent.
Understand
it. The
ocean
with
milk as
its liquid content
is
externally surrounded on
all
sides by
the
continent Puskara1
which
is
twice
as much as the Sakadvipa in extent. There
is
only one glorious mountain with huge rocky cliffs.
It possesses
peaks,
clusters
of
cliffs
of
various
(sizes and shapes),
full of
precious jewels.
It
is extremely
lofty
and
it
has
variegated
1.
Puskara
is identified by M.
Ali with Japan, Manchuria and
the
South-eastern Siberia op. cit.
(pp. 42-44), while
De
identifies
it with
a
portion of central Asia from the north of the Oxus including Western Tartary.
Puskara
is a Sanskritisation of Bhushkara or Bokhara, op.
cit.
(p. 163).

=== PAGE 188 ===

1.2.19.112-122
185
ridges.
This
great
mountain
has
diversified
ridges
in the
eastern half of the continent.
It is very extensive—of twentyfive
thousand (Yojanas)—with a number of ridges.
It rises up from
the ground level upto thirtyfour thousand
(Yojanas)
.
112.
The mountain range Manasottara
covers
half of
the
continent.
It
is
situated near the sea-shore just like the
rising moon.
113.
It rises upto a height of fifty thousand Yojanas.
Its
circular extent allround
is also the same (number of Yojanas.)
114.
The same mountain is known
as
Manasa
in
the
western halfof the continent. There is only one great mountain
of inherent strength situated in two
parts.
115.
The continent
is surrounded on all sides by the sea
with sweet water as its liquid content.
This sea
is as extensive
on all sides as the continent of Puskaradvlpa.
116-117.
It is remembered that there are
two
splendid
and sacred countries on that continent. They are
opposite
to
the two ranges of the
mountain
Manasa.
The
sub-continent
Mahavlta
is
outside
the
Manasa mountain range. It
is said
that Dhatakikhancja is on its inner side.
1 1 8.
The men there live for ten thousand
years.
They
are free from sickness. They have plenty of pleasurable experi-
ences. They have attained mental powers (to a great extent).
119.
The span
of
life and the handsome features of all
the
people
in
both
the
Vardas are declared to be the same.
There is no
distinction among them
as
superior
or
inferior.
They are equal in features and conduct.
1 20.
There
is neither a robber nor an oppressor. There
is no jealousy nor the fear of malicious envy.
There
is neither
seizure nor the meting
out of punishment.
There
is
neither
covetousness nor (secret) acceptance
(of gifts).
121.
There is no (such distinction as)
truth
and
false-
hood
or
virtue and
evil
(i.e.
all are truthful and virtuous)
.
There
is no agricultural activity or breeding of cattle or trade
routes.
122.
The three Vedas, the (fourteen) Vidyas, the system
of
civil
and
criminal administration, the desire to serve and
arts and crafts—all these are not present in either
of
the
two
sub-continents of Puskara.

=== PAGE 189 ===

186
Brakm&ntfa Purfya
123.
There is neither rain nor (the flow of) rivers. There
is
neither
chillness
nor
hot atmosphere. There are no water
fountains breaking
through
(the ground)
here. There are no
mountain cascades or springs.
1 24.
The season there is just the same as in the northern
Kurus. The people are well pleased and
contented
in
all
the
seasons. They are devoid of the onslaught of old age.
125.
Thus the entire mode of
activity
and
life
in
the
Dhatakikhanda and Mahavita in the continent of Puskara has
been recounted in
the due order.
126.
The
continent
Puskara
is surrounded by the sea
with sweet water for its liquid content.
This sea
is
equal
to
Puskara in extent and circumference.
127.
Thus, the seven continents are surrounded by
the
seven
seas.
The
sea
that
is
immediately after a continent is
equal to that continent.
128.
Thus, the mutual increase in size, of the continents
and
the
seas should
be understood. The sea
is called Samudra
on account of the Samudreka 1
(the state of being
plentiful)
of
the waters.
129.
The sub-continent is called Var$a2 because the four
types
of
subjects enter
( Viianti
)
or live
(Nivasanti) in
it and
also because it accords pleasure unto the
subjects.
130.
The root yYs means “to sport about” and the root
yVrs means “to strengthen.”
Since the sub-continent
enables
the people
to
sport about
and
to
stengthen
their power for
sexual dalliance,
it is called Var$a .
131.
The sea is always
filled
( is
in
flow-tide )
in
the
bright
half
along
with
the increase in the size of the moon.
When the moon wanes and decreases in
size in the dark
half,
the sea
also subsides.
132.
It
is
natural
that
the
sea
gets
filled when
it
fills itself. When it becomes
reduced
it
gets
reduced
(with-
drawn)
in
itself.
1.
A popular etymology of Samudra 'a sea’.
2.
Var?a
*a
sub-continent*
is traced to —vii—‘to enter',
ni—vas,
'to
live*, —j*s—‘to sport* and —v|*$—‘to strengthen*.

=== PAGE 190 ===

1.2.19.133-144
187
133.
Just as the water in the boiler appears to increase
due
to
its
contact
with
fire,
so
also the water in the great
ocean becomes increased by
itself naturally.
134.
During
the
bright
and
dark fortnights when the
moon rises and
sets,
the waters in the sea increase and decrease
in a quantity that is neither more nor
less than usual.
135.
The
increase
and
decrease
in
the
quantity
of
water of the sea in accordance with the increase and
decrease
in the size of the moon is five hundred and ten Angulas.
136.
During the Parvan days the increase
and
decrease
of the waters of the ocean
can
be
seen.
The
continents
sur-
rounded everywhere by water are remembered as Dvipas because
of Dvirdpkatva
(i.e. the state of having water on either side.
137.
The sea is called udadhi1 because
it
is the
ultimate
res t (Ayana) of water (Udaka). 1 Mountains without knotty ridges
are remembered as Giris and
those with them are Parvatas.
138.
The mountain Gomedain the Plaksadvlpa
is there-
fore called Parvata. The Salmali (Silk-cotton tree)
is
worship-
ped
by
persons
of great holy rites
in the continent Salmala-
dvlpa. 2
139.
In the Kusadvlpa, the stump of Kusa grass
is (wor-
shipped) and it is called after
its name. In
the
Krauficadvjpa
there is the mountain Kraufica in the middle of the clime.
140.
The main tree in the Saka Dvlpa is Sdka and
it
is
called
after
its
name.
In
the
Puskaradvlpa,
the JVyagrodha
(holy
fig tree)
is bowed to by the inhabitants therein.
141.
The great lord Brahma, the overlord
of
the
three
worlds is worshipped there. Brahma, the Prajapati, lives in that
(sub-continent) along with the Sadhyas.
142.
There, the thirtythree Devas perform
the
worship
along with the great sages. That lord, the most excellent of
all
the Devas
is worshipped there by the Devas.
243-144.
Different
kinds
of jewels
and precious gems
originate (are quarried)
in Jambudvlpa.
1.
Etymology of udadhi ‘a
sea*.
2.
VV 138-140 explain why particular continents arc named Salmala,
Kraufica, etc.

=== PAGE 191 ===

188
Brahm&nia Pur&na
In all these continents, the size of the subjects is
respect-
ively tw ice those of the earlier ones on account of the span
of
life and state of health,
their
adherence to celibacy, truthful-
ness and control of the sense-organs.
145.
The self-born lord protects
the
subjects
both
the
sluggish as well as scholarly in the two sub-continents that had
been mentioned in the Puskaradvipa.
146.
Raising up his rod of
chastisement,
lord
Brahma,
the overlord of the three
worlds,
protects
the
subjects.
That
lord
is the Minister of Visnu. He
is the father and grandfather.
147.
The subjects always take in the meal
that
approa-
ches them( automatically) by itself. The meal has great nutritive
value and it consists of all the six tests.
148.
The
great sea with sweet water as its liquid content
envelops the halves ofPuskara. The sea encircles
it allround.
149.
Beyond
it, appears the existence of a
great world.
It
is
golden. The entire ground
is like a single rocky slab. It
is
twice as large as the sea.
1 50.
Beyond that world
is a mountain that is circular
at
the terminals.
It
is partially visible and partially invisible. It is
called Lokaloka.
151.
On this side of
that
Mountain
is
all
brightness
and
beyond
it is
all darkness.
Its height is remembered as ten
thousand Yojanas.
152.
Its extent is also that much.
It can go
over
the
earth as he pleases. The Aloka (brightness)
is in
the
midst
of
worldly activities and the absence of brightness (i.e.
darkness)
is beyond the mundane.
153.
All the worlds are included in the half that is bright
and the dark regions are external ones. The
( region having the
absence of brilliance outside extends all round to the extent
of
the worlds within.
154.
It is circumscribed
all
round.
It
is
encircled by
water. (That portion) beyond the brilliant region stands encircl-
ing the cosmic egg.
155-156.
These worlds and
the
earth
consisting
of the
seven continents are within the cosmic
egg. The worlds
are
, Bhurloka, Bhuvarloka, Svarloka, Mahas, Jana, Tapas and Satya

=== PAGE 192 ===

1.2.19.157-168
189
lokas. This much constitutes the group of worlds.
This
much
alone need be known about the ultimate end of the worlds and
the great expanse beyond.
157.
In
the
beginning
of the bright half of the lunar
month the moon appears as though
it rests on a pot
( i.e.
is
cre-
scent-shaped)
in the western quarter. The body of the cosmic
egg too is like that.
158.
It should be known that
there
are
thousands and
crores of cosmic eggs like this, above, below and sideways. The
cause of origin thereof is the unchanging Atman.
159.
Each
of
these
is
encircled
by seven Dharanas* 1
(? Varanas—coverings) evolved of the Prakrti. In groups of ten
or more (?), they sustain one another.
160.
All of them are encircled mutually and are evolved
mutually. Ail round this An<j.a
(Cosmic
egg)
is
situated
the
Ghanodadhi—sea of solidified waters.
161-163.
It stands, on being
held
all round
by
Vanoda
(? Mistake for Ghanada)
, solidified water.
The circular zone of the solidified water stands on
being
held by Tejas (fiery matter) all round, sidways and above. This
fiery matter is like a ball of iron. It has a circular shape.
It stands oil being held all round by
solidified
air.
Simi-
larly,
it
is the ether that holds and sustains the solidified air.
164.
The BhUtddi (the cosmic Ego) holds the ether
and
Mahan ( the great principle) sustains (supported) by the Infinite
principle, the Avyakta (the unmanifest one)
.
165-168.
It
is
endless
and
unmanifest.
It is subtle in
ten ways
(?).
It is boundless.
It
is
non-selfpossessed.
It
has
neither
a
beginning nor
an
end. When compared with the
supreme Being,
it is non-permanent.
It is Aghora (not terrible)
.
It has no support. It
is free from ailment.
It
is many thousand
Yojanas
away. It is non-concealed.
It
is darkness itself.
It has
no brilliance. It is unlimited. It has no space
(or support).
It
is unknown even unto the Devas. It
is devoid of all
activities.
It
is well known as the extremity of darkness. It
is non-brilliant
Va.P.49.152b
reads
K&ravaih
‘By
causes*.
1.
This
is
the Puranic concept of protective ‘sheaths* round the uni-
verse (Brahmauda). The influence of Sankhya categories is obvious.

=== PAGE 193 ===

190
BrahmB&ia Pur&na
at the extremity of the ether. It
is within the
limit.
It
is
the
great abode of the lord.
169-1 70.
The Sruti says that that divine abode is inacces-
sible
to the Devas. The regions well-known to the learned ones
are called ‘Loka’s. They
are
situated
within
the jurisdiction
of the great lord of the Devas. The regions which are
beneath
the Moon and
the
sun,
are called the worlds of the universe,
by the wise.
171.
The nether-worlds beneath the Ras&tala are
seven
in number and those above them are also seven in number. O
Br&hmanas,
there
are
seven
Skandhas
(layers) of the wind
along with the Brahmasadana (abode of Brahma)
.
172.
Its movement
is five-fold from the Patala
(Nether-
world) to the heaven. This is the extent of the
universe.
This
is the ocean of worldly existence.
173.
The Living beings, originating
from many species
go about
( here and there)
, They are beginningless and endless.
The
Prakrti
stationed
in
(resting
on)
the Brahman
is the
cause of the universe. It
is mysterious and variegated.
174.
The creation
of
the
lord
is
extensive.
It
is not
comprehended even by the Siddhas , of great fortune and
nobi-
lity who can understand things beyond the pale of sense-organs.
175-176.
O excellent Brahmana, there
is neither decline
or decay nor transformation, nor end of the earth, water,
fire,
wind, ether,
darkness,
mind
and
the
infinite
body.
This
is
endless everywhere. So
it is cited in wisdom.
177-179.
Previously
his
name
has
been mentioned by
me while recounting the names
(of deities).
It is he who
has
been
wholly
glorified
by
the
name
of Padmanabha. He is
omnipresent. He is worshipped in all abodes, viz.
on the earth,
the
nether-worlds,
the firmament, the wind and the
fire.
Un-
doubtedly He
is worshipped
in all the seas and
in the
heaven.
This
self-same
Lord
of
great
splendour
is
worshipped
in
darkness as well, it should be known.
180.
Lord
Jan&rdana is a great Yogin.
His
limbs
are
divided in many ways. This lord of the worlds
is worshipped in
all the worlds in diverse ways.
181.
Thus the worlds born of each other
are
sustained
mutually.
These
Vik&ras
(products
or effects) of the Avik&rin

=== PAGE 194 ===

1 .2 . 19 . 182-191
191
( that which docs not undergo change or distortion) are sustain-
ed by the relationship of the supporter and the supported.
182.
The earth etc. are the Vik&ras
(effects). They
are
restricted by each other. They are superior to
each other
and
they have penetrated mutually.
183.
Since they have been created mutually, they have
attained stability. In the beginning they were
without
ViSefas,
They are called Vtie$as because they qualify
others.
184.
The three (Elements) beginning with the earth and
ending
with
Vahni
(fire)*
are
limited
ones.
In view of the
essence of the increase of qualities, they have Pariccheda
(exact
determinateness, concrete state) in particular.
185.
The
accurate
decision
or judgement
about
the
remaining
principles
is not perceived, owing to their
subtle-
ness
(Saukfmya).
That earth
is remembered as Vy&lokd (some-
thing that has a special
brilliance?)
beyond
all
these
other
elements.
186-187.
All the
BhUtas
(elements)
arc
circumscribed
on all sides (and hence accommodated) in the space
(or firma-
ment) just as in a big vessel smaller
vessels are accommodated
and due to their mutual support become smaller (to each other).
Similarly, the different elements are
considered ensconsccd
in
the lustre of the firmament.
188.
The whole of these four
elements
are
bigger
and
superior to
one
another. As
long
as these elements exist the
period of creation lasts to that extent.
189.
It
is as though like an interturning of threads that
the different elements are considered enmeshed into one another.
There can be no generation of an effect if Bhutas (elements) are
excluded.
190.
Hence, the differences which are
of
the
nature of
effects are declared to be limited. The differences such as Mahat
and others are of the nature of cause.
191.
Thus, O Brahmanas, the real
situation comprising
of the seven continents, oceans etc. has been
recounted by me
topic by topic as it
exists—
(realistically)
.
*
The reading in the printed text
is uddyanta which
is
meaningless.
It should be vahnyanta in view of the mention of three elements.

=== PAGE 195 ===

192
Brakmtyda Purdtia
192.
The partial transformation of the Pradhdna with the
cosmic form has been mentioned in detail. The zones have been
enumerated.
193.
This entire universe is presided over by the glorious
Lord.
Thus
the
seven
groups
of elements
have
mutually
penetrated
.
194.
Only
this much of the situation
(of
the
universe)
can be recounted by me. Only this much has to be heard
(i.e.
listened
to
and
understood )
in regard to the situation of the
earth and things connected with it.
195.
These seven Prakrtis sustain one another.
I am
not
*
able
to enumerate
them
with
reference to their extents and
dimensions.
196.
The Prakrtis are innumerable, above, below
and
at
the sides. The situation of the constellations is in firmament
in
different zones and regions.
197.
The
situation of the earth is thereafter in the form
of circle or globe.
Henceforth, O clever ones,
I shall recount
the
situation
of the earth.
CHAPTER TWENTY
Tha Description of the Netherworlds *
Sdta said
:
l-2a.
Understand the details of the earth, the wind,
the
ether,
the
water
and the
fire which is the
fifth one—that are
being recounted later on, that had been recounted earlier along
with the proofs thereof.
•The Cosmic Egg consists of fourteen worlds
arranged vertically
as
follows;

=== PAGE 196 ===

1.2.20.2b-4a
29S
These elements are proclaimed as
constituted
of
infinite
ingredients and they are all-pervading.
2b-4a
The earth is the mother of
all
living
beings.
It
sustains all animals and living beings. It is
full ofmany kinds of
rural regions and territories. It consists ofmany towns and places
of shelter. It possesses many rivers, streams and mountains. It is
crowded with many species of living beings.
The
earth,
the
divine
goddess,
is sung about as infinite
and extremely extensive.
Continued
I.
The
Upper
Regions
:
Satya Loka
III.
Tapo-loka
JJ Loka
Mahar Loka
sJ Loka
I
Bhuvar Loka
The Middle Region
:
The
Earth
The
Lower
Regions or Nether-worlds:
i
Atala
Vi tala
Sutala
T alatala
Rasatala
Maha-tala
Patala
All these are supported by Lord Sesa, the Serpent-King.
These lower regions are not dark or devoid of sunlight. They' are full
of light and have the affluence and comforts of the world of gods.
Gf. Bh.
P.V.24, VP.V.2. Va. P.
50.1-54.
Baladeva Upadhyaya makes out a
plausible
case
for
identifying
the
Nether-worlds with
the continent of America,
(vide
:
Purd^a-Vimaria, pp.
43-49).
r

=== PAGE 197 ===

194
Brahm8%$a Pur&Qa
4b.
The waters also should be understood
as
infinite
the waters contained in the rivers, streams,
oceans
and
small
receptacles
such
as
ponds and puddles, those situated on the
mountains and in the firmament and those within the bowels of
the earth.
5.
Similarly, the element of fire pervades all the worlds. It
is cited as infinite, all-pervasive and originating from everything.
6.
Similarly, the Ether is
remembered
as
unscrapable,
beautiful, and accommodating
all
or
various
objects, endless
and
infinite.
7.
The Vayu (wind)
originated
from the Ether. The
waters are
stationed
within and above the earth. The earth is
established on the water.
8.
The Ether or the sky is that which has
nothing
else
greater than
it. Then the earth and then the water. This
is the
opinion that there is no state of being endless in
regard
to
the
Bhautika
( objects evolved of the elements) *
9- 10a.
Understand that
the
earth
becomes
developed
due to the interaction
(of the elements), The
sequence—the
earth, the water and the Ether
is well known. In the
seventh
(Netherworld) Rasatala this
is the situation
(?)
10b- 1 la.
The nether-world called Rasatala has the
land
portion extending to ten thousand Yojanas. It has been reckon-
ed by noble-souled persons
that
each
of
the
netherlands
is
more extensive than the former.
lib- 13a.
The first one is Atala by
name.
Thereafter
is
Sutala. The next one, one should know,
is
Talatala.
Atala
(?
or Vitala)
is very extensive. Beneath that is the
world named
Tala
(should
be
Mah&tala?)
and
beyond
that
is Rasatala.
Beneath
all
these,
it is remembered, is the seventh world, the
P&tala.
13b- 15a.
The first portion of the ground is
glorified
as
one with black soil.
The second world has pale white
coloured
ground. The
third one has blue soil. The fourth one has yellow soil and
the
fifth one has a gravel-covered soil.
*
The text is a
bit obscure. Va.P.50.9
(corresponding
verse)
reads:
4oam
onto
tymantasya
bfumtikasya na vidyate. ‘In this way, there is no end to the
•objects evolved from bhtitas—as they are infinite.'

=== PAGE 198 ===

I.2.20.15b-31
195
The sixth world should be known as
(consisting of) rocky
grounds and the seventh one
is remembered as one with golden
ground.
1 5b-20a.
The well-known palace of the lord of the Asuras
Namuci,
the enemy
of Indra
is
in
the
first
nether-world.
The
following
abodes too
are
in
the
first nether
world, viz.
the
abode of Mahanada, the
city of Sankukarna,
the
palace
of Kabandha,
Niskulada’s town
fully inhabited by delighted
(jolly) people, the abode of the demon
Bhlma,
the
abode
of
Suladanta, the city ofLohitaksas and
Kalingas,
the
town
of
SvapaHa,
the
city
of Dhanaftjaya
and
of the
noble-souled
Nagendra (Lord of serpents) ,
the city of
Kaliya
the
serpent
and
that
of Kau£ika. Thus
it should be known that there
are
thousands of cities (and abodes) of the serpents, D&navas and
Raksasas in the first Nether-world with black soil.
20b-25a.
In the second nether-world Sutala, O Brahmanas,
are the abodes of the following, viz. the city
of the
first lord
of the Daityas and Raksasas
i.e. of Mahajambha, the palace of
Hayagriva, Krsna and Nikumbha, the city of the Daitya named
Sankha and
that of Gomukha, the abode of the
demons
Nila,
Megha
and Kathana,
the
abode
of Kukupada
and that of
Mahosnisa, the city of Kambala the serpent
and that
of A$va-
tara and the city of Taksaka the
noble-souled
son
of Kadru.
Thus
there
are, O Brahmana, thousands of cities belonging to
the serpents, Danavas and the Raksasas in
the second
nether-
world of pale white coloured soil.
25b-31.
In the third nether-world
is the well known city
of the noble-souled
Prahlada, Anuhrada and Agnimukha,
the
city of (the Daitya) named Taraka, the city of Trifiras, the city
of
Sisumara
the
city
of Tripura, the demon Puraftjana’s city
full of commotion,
due
to
the
gay,
well-nourished
people,
the palace of Gyavana the Raksasa, the city of Kumbhila and
Khara the leading Raksasas, the city of
the
ruthless
Viradha
with
fire-emitting mouth,
the
city of Hemaka the serpent as
well as that of Pariduraka, the city of Manin&ga, the palace
of
Xapila,
the
palace
of Nandaka the lord of the serpents, and
that of Viialak^a. Thus
there
are
thousands
of
cities
of the

=== PAGE 199 ===

196
BrahmdQtfa PutSqq
serpents, D&navas
and
Rak$asas, O
Brahmanas in the third
netherworld with blue soil.
32-34.
In the fourth netherworld is
the city ofKalanemi
the
lion among
Daityas,
that of the noble-souled Gajakarna,
the city of Kufijara, the vast and extensive city of
Sumali
the
leading Raksasa, the abode of Mufija, Lokanatha and
Vrka-
vaktra and the city of Vainateya, that extends to many Yojanas
and
that
is
crowded with many
birds. AH these are in the
fourth netherworld.
35-38.
In the fifth netherworld that is covered with sand
and full of gravel
is the intelligent Virocana,
the
lion among
Daityas,
the
abodes of Vaidyuta, Agni-Jihva and that of Hir-
anyaksa, the city of the
intelligent
Vidyujjihva,
the
lord
of
Rak?asa,
the
city
of Sahamegha,
that of Malin, the leading
Rak§asa, the city of the serpent Kirmira and those
of Svastika
and
Jaya.
Thus
there
are thousands of cities of the serpents,
Danavas and the Raksasas in the fifth netherworld full of gravel.
This should be known
(as the situation)
for ever.
39-42a.
In the sixth netherworld
is the excellent
city of
Kesari, the lord of the Daityas, the cities of Suparvan, Puloman
and Mahi$a, and the city of the noble-souled Sure$a, the leading
Raksasa. It is there that
&ata£irsa
the
son
of Surama
lives
joyfuUy. The king of serpents named
Vasuki, the affluent and
glorious
friend
of Mahendra
( stays
there)
. Thus
there are
thousands of cities of the serpents, Danavas
and
the
Raksasas
in the famous sixth netherworld, Rasatala with
rocky ground.
42b-46a.
It should be known that the city of Bali
is
in
the seventh and the last netherworld Patala. It
is beyond every
world. It is gay and full of men and women. It is fuU of Asuras,
serpents and the happy and joyous enemies of the Devas. There
itself is the great city of Mucukunda, the Daitya. It
is teeming
with innumerable great cities of Daityas full of bustle and com-
motion, thousands of the brilliant
cities
of
the
serpents,
the
great
rising ( flourishing)
cities of the Daityas and the Danavas
and the many flourishing abodes of the Raksasas.
46b-47. O leadingBr&hmanas, at the extreme end ofPat&la
that extends to many Yojanas
resides
£e$a
the
noble-souled
(king of serpents). His eyes are like the red lotus. He
is devoid

=== PAGE 200 ===

1 .2.20.48-58
197
of death and old age. His body is as white as
the
inner part
of well-washed Sankha
(conchshell ) . He
wears
blue
clothes.
He
is very powerful.
48-49.
His physical body
is huge. He
is
lustrous
and
mighty.
He
wears
garlands
of variegated
colours. He has a
thousand faces (hoods) with mouths
shining and brilliant and
resembling the golden-peaked (mountain)
in
purity
(lustre).
He has
single Kundala
(Ear-ring). He appears splendid with
his thousand faces. He is refulgent, due to a
series
of tongues
emitting sparks of waving flames of fire.
50-54.
With his two thousand eyes that have the reddish
splendour of the rising sun and with his body that
is white and
glossy,
he
appears
like
the
mountain
Kail&sa
surrounded
by
clusters
of flames.
He
has
the
white
complexion
like
the
Moon
as
well
as
the Kunda flowers. Hence the cluster
of
his
eyes
shines like the cluster of midday suns on the peak
of the white Mountain (Sveta Parvata).
He has
a huge
terrible
body.
With
i t
( resting ) in his
reclining pose on his couch, he appears like a
thousand-peaked
mountain of vast dimensions (resting) over the earth.
This (enormously)
huge lord of serpents, himself of great
splendour, is being attended upon by extremely wise and noble-
souled great serpents of huge physique. He
is
the
king
of
all
serpents. He is Ananta, &esa, of excessive brilliance.
55.
That is the commandment
( or act)
of Visnu.
That
is the final established boundary
(of the Nether-world).
Thus
the seven
netherworlds
that could
be
discussed
have been
recounted.
56-58.
They are always
inhabited by
the
Devas,
the
Asuras, the great serpents and the Raksasas. Beyond this is total
absence
of light.
It
cannot
be traversed by the Siddhas and
the S&dhus (good people). It is unknown even
to
the
Devas.
With
a desire to expatiate on the general position, O excellent
Brahmanas, the greatness of the earth, water,
fire,
wind
and
the
ether
is
undoubtedly
narrated
thus.
Hereafter,
I shall
recount the movement of the sun and the Moon.
i

=== PAGE 201 ===

198
BrahmQQ&a Purtbia
CHAPTER TWENTYONE1
The Solar System . Movements of Heavenly Luminaries
:
Division of Time
SUta said
:
1.
As long as the Sun and the Moon
revolve, they
are
elevated by means
of their lustre and brilliance through their
discus.
2-3.
(? ) The space covered by
the
brilliant
refulgence
of the sun and the moon
is the extent of the seven seas and the
continents. The light falls over half the extent of the earth and
the
other
side
remains
external. The
sun
and
the
moon
illuminate the area around facing them.
In extent and magnitude the heaven
(i.e. the firmament)
is remembered as equal to that of the Earth.
4.
The
root \/av means
illumination and
protection.
Revolving
all
round,
the
sun
illuminates and
protects
the
three worlds. Hence, on account of illumination and protection,
he is remembered as ‘Ravi.’ 2
5-6.
Hereafter, I shall recount the magnitude of the moon
and the sun.
The word Mahi (earth)
is
(arbitrarily) assigned
to
this
sub-continent because of its state of being honoured ( Mahitatvdt
)
The Solar disc is as extensive as the diameter of this
sub
con-
tinent
of Bharata.
Understand
that
in Yojanas* (1 Yojana =
12 km.).
7.
The
extent
of the
disc
of the sun
is nine thousand
Yojanas. Its girth is three times the extent.
1.
The present chapter~~deals with the ancient astronomical ideas in
the pre-telescope agc.fSixnilar information about the stellar region regarding
the size of the planets and other stars, movements of the Sun, the Moon etc.
are
found in other Pur&Qas like the Bh.P. V Chs. 21-24, Mt. P. Ghs. 124-128,
V.P. II Chs. 8-12 and V&. P. 1.50. 57 to Ch. 53—the last being textually the
same as the Bd. P. and was useful in correcting the misprints in the present
text. The astrological aspect of these planets etc.
is found in GP. 59-64
and
AP. 121 etc. Some of these^ideas regarding the distances, positions and dimen-
sions of planets are outdated due to advance of modem astronomy.
2.
The author of this Purina
is fond of giving popular etymologies.
Thus Ravi ‘the Sun*
is normally traced to \/ru—according to Upddi IV
138
Ujjvaladatta, but here the author traces it to \/av—“to protect*’.

=== PAGE 202 ===

1 .2 .21 .8-19
199
8.
In diameter as
well
as
girth
(Circumference), the
moon is twice as much as the sun.
Now I shall recount the extent of the earth in Yojanas.
9.
The extent and
girth
(circumference)
of the
earth
consisting of seven
continents
has
been reckoned
in
proper
measure in the Puranas.
10.
I shall recount that, after enumerating the
current
Abhimdnins
(Deities
etc. who
preside
or
have
the
sense of
possession etc.). Those Abhimdnins who have gone by are
on
a
par with the current ones.
1
1
.
The Devas who have gone by are on a par with the
current ones in forms and names. Hence,
I
shall
describe
the
surface of the earth through the current Devas.
12.
(I
shall
recount)
the
situation
of
the
heavenly
world entirely through the current
(Devas).
The entire Earth is remembered as fifty crores
( of Yojanas)
in extent.
13-16.
Its situation from an upword measure
(?)is as far
as
the
Meru. Half the extent of the earth is stated in terms of
Yojanas.
The
extent
of
the
earth
towards
all
the
sides
(quarters) from
the middle of the Meru
is remembered as one
crore and
eightynine lakhs (of Yojanas) and fifty thousand*.
Hence, the extent of the circular section of the earth
is roughly
eleven
crores and
thirtyseven lakhs. This
is reckoned
as the
extent
of the
surface
of
the Earth.
17-18.
(This
is reckoned as
the
extent
of
the
earth)
namely as much is
the extent in the firmament of the
fixation
of
constellations, so much is the
situation
of the
revolution
as far as the sphere of the earth. By the measure of the Pary&sa
(Revolution, Rotation ) ,
it
is remembered that
the
firmament
is
equal
to
the
earth.
This
is recounted as the abode of the
seven continents.
19.
The situation of the spheres of the worlds is one over
the other with the girth gradually
reduced
falling
within
the
previous sphere.
*
It
is considered as the radius of the circular zone.

=== PAGE 203 ===

Brakm&Qia PurOya
200
20.
The entire situation has
been
laid down
thus and
in them the creatures stay. This magnitude of the bowl
of the
Cosmic Egg has been recounted.
2 1 -22.
These worlds as well as this earth with
its
seven
continents are within this cosmic Egg. The worlds are Bhurloka
Bhuvarloka,
Svarloka,
Maharloka,
Janaloka, Tapoloka and
Satyaloka. These seven worlds have been created and they are
arranged in the shape of an Umbrella.
23-24.
They
are
held
by means of
their own subtle
coverings
individually.
These
sources
of origin
are exterior
coverings and they are ten times more than
(what
they
enve-
lope). They are filled with
special
characteristics
originating
mutually.
All
round
this
Cosmic Egg
is present (as a fixed
envelop) the solidified ocean. 1
25.
The entire sphere of the Earth is held by the
solidi-
fied
water. The
solidified ocean is held by a greater solidified
fire.
26.
The solidified
fiery element
is surrounded
on
all
sides externally, sideways
and
upwards
by a
solidified
wind
element. Being held thus it rests stabilized there.
27.
The solidified wind is surrounded by the firmament.
The entire firmament is enveloped by the Bhut&di
( i.e. Ahamkara
—Ego). The BhUt&di
is enveloped by the
(principle called)
Mahat.
28.
The Mahat is enveloped by the Pradh&na that is
infi-
nite and it is of immutable nature.
I shall mention in due order the cities of
the
guardians
of the worlds.
29-32.
(It is being mentioned)
for
the
achievement
of
the proof of spreading the qualities of the luminary bodies* (?)
[ Rather
: The extent of the movements of the host of luminary
bodies will now be described.]
1.
Puragas believe that this cosmic egg is protected by sheaths consis-
ting of solid
{ghana) gross elements, the earth being covered by the sheath of
solidified water and the sheath of water being enveloped in the sheath of
soli-
dified fire
(ghana-tqja
)
and so on. These sheaths of gross elements are progres-
sively
protected by
sheaths of Ah&ftkara
Mahat and
Pradh&na.
Sankhya
influence is evident on this belief.
*
The text
is corrupt here. The line in V&.P.50.86b
is as follows
:

=== PAGE 204 ===

1.2.21.33*41
201
To the east of Meru and on the top of the Manasa
is the
city of Mahendra.1 It
is the excellent abode of Vasus (of whom
Indra
is the head). It is decorated with gold.
To the south of the Meru and on the top of the Minasa
itself, lives Vaivasvata Yama, (Yama the son
of the Sungod)
in the city called Samyamana.
To the west of the Meru and
the top
of the Manasa it-
self, is the beautiful city named Sukha.
It belongs to the intel-
ligent Varuna. Varuna, the lord of the aquatic beings,
lives in
the city named Sukha.
33.
To
the
north
of the Meru,
on
the
top
of
the
Manasa itself,
is the city of Soma,
named Vibhavari.
It
is on
a par with the city of Mahendra.
34.
It is for the stabilization of Virtue
(Dliarma)
and
for
the
protection
of all
the worlds that the guardians of the
worlds
(i.e. quarters) have stationed themselves in
all the
four
quarters on the top of the Manasa.
35.
Understand the movement
of
the
sun during the
southern
transit,
as he goes to that quarter. His movement is
above all the guardians of the quarters.
36.
During his southern transit, the sun
rushes
forward
like an arrow that is discharged.
He
revolves
always,
taking
the circle of luminaries with him.
37-38a.
When the sun is in the
middle
(of
the
firma-
mant) at Amaravatl
(city of Indra) his rising is seen in Sathya-
mana belonging to Vaivasvata
(i.e. Yama)
.
At Sukha it shall
be
the
middle of the
night and
the sun (appears to)
set at
Vibha (i.e. Vibhavari).
38b-39a.
When the
sun
is in the middle
( of the firma-
ment) at Samyamana belonging to Vaivasvata (i.e. Yama), he
is seen rising at Sukha belonging to Varuna. At Vibha
it
shall
be
the middle
of the
night
and
(the sun appears to) set at
Mahendri (Amaravatl, the city of Indra)
.
39b-41.
When
it is afternoon for the people of the south-
east (or the South and the East),
it is mentioned as forenoon for
JyotAT-ga#a-pr<H&rasya pram&pam parivakjyate.
The
translation
is given
in
the
bracket, in
this
verse
above.
1.
CfV. P. II 8.9-11.

=== PAGE 205 ===

202
Brakm&ntfa Purify*
the people of the South-West
(or, of those who
are other than
the people of the south). It
is the
latter
part
of the night for
them who are in the north. It
is earlier part
of
the
night
for
the people of northeast. It
is in this manner alone that the
sun
shines in the northern worlds.
42.
When the sun is (in the middle of the
sky)
during
midday at Sukha,
(the
city)
belonging
to
Varuna,
he
(the
sun) (appears) to rise in Vibha, the city ofSoma.
43-44.
It is midnight at
Amaravati
and
it (appears to)
set at Yama’s city.
When the sun is (in the middle of the
sky) during
mid-
day
at Vibha
the
city
of Soma,
the
sun appears to rise at
Amaravati ofMahendra. It is mid-night at Samyamana
( Yama’&
city) and the sun sets at the city belonging to Varuna.
45.
The sun revolves rapidly like the whirling firebrand.
Moving about, the sun traverses the revolving constellations.
46.
Thus the sun thereby moves to the south among the
four quarters. The sun rises and sets again and again.
47.
The sun warms
two
Devalayas (abodes of gods
i.e.
those
of Indra
and
others)
in the forenoon and two
(other)
Devalayas in the afternoon. During the midday also,
he blazes
with his own rays.
48.
After rising up the sun blazes and increases in warmth
by means of his own rays
till
the
midday. Thereafter, with his
rays decreasing (in warmth) the sun sets.
49-50.
The two
quarters
of
the East
and West
are
remembered by means of sunrise and sunset.
While
it blazes in
front,
( the heat
is felt) behind as well as at the sides.
Where the sun appears rising, it
is remembered as sunrise
to the people there-of, where the sun vanishes, it is called sunset
in regard to the people there.*
51-54. The Meru
is to the north of all and the Lokaloka1
is in the south.
Gf. Ait. Br. III.44 which clearly states that there is rising or setting
of the Sun. Also VP.II.8.16. Contrast the Greek idea of having a new sun
every
day.
1.
This
is a mythical mountain surrounding the outermost border of
the world.
It is so called as it divides the visible world from the region of dark-
ness. For
its description vide W.
104-107 below.

=== PAGE 206 ===

1 .2*2 1 .55-64
205
Due to the
far distant
position
ofthe sun and due to his
being
covered
by
the
line
(horizon ) of the earth, the rays of
the sun disappear (obstructed from sight). Hence
it
(the
sun)
is not seen at night.
The setting and rising of the
planets, stars and the moon
should be understood through the magnitude of the
altitude of
the sun. So also their rising and setting.
The fire and the water have a white glimmer
(?),
while
the earth has a dark shadow.
Since the sun is far off,
it has no
(fiery)
rays even when
it has risen. Its redness
is due to the fact
that
it
has
no
rays
and the absence of heat is due to the redness.
55.
Wherever the sun
is seen occupying the
line
(hori-
zon), it is seen more than a hundred thousand Yojanas
above.
56.
When the sun sets along with
his
rays,
the
lustre
of the
sun
enters
the
fire
at
night.
Hence it shines from a
distance.
57.
The heat of the fire enters the sun when
it rises up.
The sun blazes during the day time
on
being
united with the
fire.
58.
The lustre and the heat are the brilliance of the sun
and the fire. They shine and
flourish
day
and
night,
due
to
their mutual penetration.
59.
In the
northern
as
well
as southern
halves of the
earth, the night enters the water when the sun
rises.
60-64.
Hence due to the penetration of the night during
the day, the waters are cool
then. When
the
sun sets, the day
penetrates the waters. Hence the waters are warm
during
the
night due to the penetration
of the
day.
Both
in
the south-
ern half and
the
northern half of the earth,
it is in this order
that the
day
and night
enter the waters when the sun sets or
rises.
That
(part
of
time)
is called ‘day* when there
is
sun-
light and the night
is called
TamasI
(full of darkness).
The
night
is well
defined
due
to
this.
The day
is remembered
at that ( period of time ) which is dependent on the sun.
Thus, when the sun traverses the
middle
of the
sky,
it
passes^ through parts of the earth in
the course
of a Muhurta

=== PAGE 207 ===

204
Brakmtyia Purd&a
as
it were (?) Understand the number of Yojanas here
in
the
course of a Muhurta.
65-67.
It
is
one
hundred
and
eightyone
thousand
Yojanas. This is the speed of the sun in a Muhurta.
When the
sun
proceeds
to the
southern
quarter with
this
velocity,
it
covers the
middle
and
the extremity of the
quarter.
Then during the
D&ksinayana,
it whirls in the middle of
the firmament.
68.
Understand that it traverses in
the southern quarter
in the mountain Manasottara. The Visuva
( Equinox)
is
in
the
middle (?)
69.
The circumference of the sun is estimated to be nine
crores of Yojanas as well as
fortyfive
hundred thousands
(i.e.
9,45,00000 Yojanas).
70-72.
This is laid down as the movement
(? total
dis-
tance traversed)
of the sun in the course of a day and a
night.
When the sun, after returning
from
the
south, remains
in the
equinox,
it
traverses
the northern regions of the milk-
ocean.
Understand
its girth
in
Yojanas.
It
is estimated that
during
the
equinox
it is
three crores and eightyone
hundred
(3,81,00000).
73-74.
When the
sun is
in the
(constellation) Sravana
and Uttarasadha it traverses the regions (quarters) to the north
of the sixth (continent) Sakadvipa. O Brahmanas, the magni-
tude of the northern
quarter
and
the
sphere
(? of
the
sun
therein)
is estimated to be a crore of Yojanas.
75-77a.
The
divisions
of
the
planetary
system
are
:
N&ga-aM&f, 1 the northern one and
Ajavithi,
the
southern one.
These
divisions comprise
three
asterisms each. The
constel-
lations
Mula,
Purvasa<jha
Uttarasadha
are
the
points
of
rising in the Ajavithi while the contellations
ASvini,
Bharani
(lit.
that
of which Yamais
the deity) and
Krttika are
the
1.
According
to Var&hamihira's Bfhatasamhitd,
Vithi
is
a particular
division
of the planetary sphere comprising
of three
asterisms. Thus
the
division
comprising
asterisms
MiUa,
P&rv&$&dh&
. and
Uttari?&<JhS
constitutes the Aja-Vlthi, while Aivini, Bharagi and Krttik& form the Ndgor

=== PAGE 208 ===

1.2.21.77b-91
205
three points
(constituting) in
the
Nagavlthi. The magnitude
of the
northern
orbit as
well
as the southern orbit is eighty
hundred thousand and five thousand eight hundred Yojanas (?)
(or 80+58 — 138 lakhs of Yojanas.)
77b-79a.
I shall henceforth mention
the
distance
bet-
ween the quarters in Yojanas.
This distance is
eight
hundred thousand
four
hundred
and thirtythree Yojanas (?)
Thus the distance between the quarters has been mention-
ed in Yojanas.
79b-80a.
I shall mention the distance between
the
two
quarters and Meridians,
the southern as
well as the northern,
in Yojanas. Understand
it.
80b-81.
The exterior and the interior distances between
the quarters and
the
meridians
are
seven
million
and
one
hundred and seventyfive thousand Yojanas.
82.
During Uttarayana the sun goes round the
internal
zones.
During
the
Dak?inayana
it
goes round the external
zones always in the due order.
83.
There are one hundred
and
eightythree
zones
in
the north. In the south also the sun traverses that much.
84-85.
Understand the magnitude of the zone in Yojanas.
It is seventeen thousand two
hundred and twentyone Yojanas
( in magnitude)
.
86.
This magnitude of the zone has
thus been recount-
ed in so many Yojanas.
The diameter of the zone is laid obliquely.
87-88.
Everyday the sun traverses those (zones)
in
due
order. Just
as
the
outer rim of the potter’s wheel comes back
quickly
(i.e. revolves)
, so also the sun functions quickly during
his Southern
transit.
Hence,
he
traverses a major portion of
the Earth in the course of a shorter period.
89-91.
During Dak$inayana,
on account of his rapidity,
the sun covers thirteen and a half constellations in the course of
a day of twelve Muhurtas. He covers the same number of cons-
tellations during the night of eighteen Muhurtas.
Just as the central
region
of the
potter’s wheel
whirls
slowly so also, during his
northern
transit
the
sun
traverses
with less rapidity. Hence, during his northern transit,
the
sun

=== PAGE 209 ===

206
Brahm&ntfa Purfya
traverses with less velocity. Hence, he covers a
lesser portion of
the earth in the course of a greater period.
92-93.
After
the
advent
of
the
northern
transit,
the
day consists ofeighteen Muhurtas, the sun ofslow speed traver-
ses thirteen and a half constellations during the day. He covers
the same number of
constellations
during the night of twelve
Muh&rtas.
94.
The Potter’s
wheel whirls
still
more
slowly at the
"Navel. In the same manner, like the lump of clay in the middle,
the pole star (Dhruva) revolves.
95-96.
They
say
that
the
day and the night together
consist
of
thirty
Muhurtas.
Whirling
in between
the
two
quarters, Dhruva revolves
in
circles.
Just as the navel
of
the
potter’s wheel
remains
there
itself, so
also,
it
should
be
known that Dhruva whirls there
(without changing its place)
itself.
97-99.
It (pole star)
whirls in circles in between the two
quarters. The movement
of the sun
is slow by day and quick
at night.
Dur ng the
northern
transit
the movement
of the
sun by day is slow and very quick by the night.
During the southern transit the movement of the sun by
the day is quick and that by the night
is slow.
100.
Thus, by means
of regular
and
irregular move-
ments and
proceeding
along
its
orbit, the
sun divides days
and nights.
101.
These guardians of the four quarters are
stationed
on the Lokaloka mountain. Agastya (the star Canopus) quickly
traverses over them.
102-106.
Day
and
night he
undergoes
these
diverse
motions to the
south
of the Nagavithi and to the north of the
Lokaloka.
Outside
the
path
of VaiSvanara, he
is the extender of
the worlds.
As long as the lustre of the sun shines from behind, there
is brightness in front of and at the sides of the Lokaloka.
The mountain
is
ten thousand
Yojanas in height. It is
partially lighted and partially not lighted
(in darkness). It
is
circular all round. The stars, the moon and the sun, along with

=== PAGE 210 ===

1.2.21.107-116
207
the planets and
the groups of
constellations
shine within
the
boundary of the world encircled by the mountain Lokaloka.
The world
is only this far. Beyond this
is darkness.
107-111.
This (mountain) has the illumination on
the
side of the world. Beyond the worlds,
it
is devoid
of illumina-
tion. The
inter-space
between
U$a
(Night
or Dawn)
and
Vyupfi (Morning) joins the Lokaloka accepted by the
sun*(?)
Therefore, they call
it Sandhyd
(Twilight). U$a
is
remember-
ed
as
night and
Vyusfi
is remembered
as
the
day, by the
Brahmanas
The demons were bent on devouring the sun and the
fire
at the time of dusk.
A curse was cast on
these wicked persons
at the instance of Prajapati.
(They had) Akjayalva (the state of imperishability) of the
body but they were made to die.
Three crores of demons are
well
known
as
Mandehas.
Every day they
seek
the
rising
sun. These evil-minded ones
wish to devour the sun that blazes.
112-113.
A terrible battle
ensued between
the sun-god
and those demons. Thereupon, the Devas,
the
most
excellent
Brahmanas and god Brahma
performed
the
Sandhya-prayer
and poured water charged with the Mantras of Gayatri
along
with Omkara (the symbol of) Brahman.
114-115.
With a sudden flash of splendour then the
sun
shone with fierce rays. He became excessively resplendent
with
great
strength and
valour.
Protected
by the Brahmanas, he
rises a hundred thousand Yojanas upwards and proceeds ahead.
Protected
by
the
sages
Valakhilyas
and his brilliance along
with his rays (he
is held aloft.)
116.
Fifteen
Nimesas
constitute
one
Ka$tha.
Thirty
Kasfhas make
one
Kala.
Thirty Kalas make a Muhurta and
thirty
such
Muhurtas make
a
full
day
consisting
of
day
and night.
*Va P. gives a better reading
: sdryah parigraham i.e.
It
is the sun who
joins and therefore the period is called Sandhy& (the joining period).
Or
: As it joins together Lok&loka which surrounds the sun,
it is
called
SandhyA (the connecting link between light and darkness). It is the
interim
period between us as (dawn) and the morning.

=== PAGE 211 ===

Brahmtyifa Purina
117-123.
The shortening or the lengthening of days by
means
of units of time happens duly. The Sandhya (junction
)
spreads over a period of a Muhurta.
It
is remembered
as
the
limit for the shortening or lengthening of the days.
Rising from
the
circle
of
the
horizon, when
the
sun
traverses
for
a
period
of
three
Muhurtas,
that
is
remem-
bered as Forenoon.1
It
is a fifth of the
daytime. The
period
of time of three Muhurtas after the forenoon is
called
Safigava,
The
period
of three
Muhurtas from Safigava is called Madhy-
dkna ( Midday ) . The period of three Muhurtas from the midday
is remembered
as Apar&hna
(Afternoon). A
period
of three
Muhurtas alone is remembered by scholars as the unit of time,
(A
period
of
three
Muhurtas)
after
the Apardhna is called
S&y&hna (Evening). There are only three (sacred
?)
Muhurtas
in a day of fifteen Muhurtas. It is remembered
that
an
equi-
notical
day
has fifteen Muhurtas. During the southern transit
and the northern transit,
the
nights
and
days
increase
and
decrease.
The
day
swallows the night and the night swallows
the day.
124.
The equinox is expected to be
in
the
middle
of
the Autumn
and the Spring. The moon has equal number of
KaUts in the night and day.
125.
A period of fifteen days is
mentioned
as
a
Paksa
(fortnight). Two
Paksas make a month and two solar months
make a season.
126-129.
Three seasons
(make one
Ayana),
and
two
Ayanas make a solar Year.
(Defective Text). Nimesas are Vidyutas2 *. Fifteen of them
make a
Kasfha. Thirty
Ka?thas make a Kala (?)
It
consists
of one hundred and sixty Matras.
Thirty Matras increased by two and seven consist of thirty-
six of the latter (?). With
sixtytwo and
seventythree
Matras
constitute
Kala.
It
has
forty
thousand
and eight hundred
m
~
~
• mimi
.
.
-
"
1.
These verses state the five parts of the day, each part being of three
Muhfirtas in duration.
2.
It appears that a new term called Vujyut is introduced in the units
of Time here.
•V&.P.50.179 reads :ntmtfddl kfiafc Kdlafi ‘The time covered
by twink-
ling of the eye
‘etc*.

=== PAGE 212 ===

1.2.21.130-137
Vidyuts. They
are
seventy
(?)
Know for certain that they are
ninety.
They
say
that
there
are
four
hundred
and two
Vidyuts (?)
130.
This
should be
considered
as the excellent part.
Na<Jika Ghap
( 24 minutes) is the cause hereof. The five (units of
time beginning with
Samvatsara
are
diversified,
due to
four
measures 1 (?) (See verse 137).
131-132.
The decisive
basic
unit
of
all
time is called
Yuga (Age). 2 The
first
year
is
Samvatsara. The
second
is
Parivatsara.
The third
is
Icjavatsara. The
fourth
is Anuvat-
sara.
The
fifth
is Vatsara, Their period of time is called Yuga.
133-134.
In a solar Yuga, there shall be three
thousand
(lit.
thirty hundred)
Parvans
(junctions)
and
one thousand
eight hundred and thirty risings of the sun
(i.e. days.)
There shall be
thirty
Rtus and
ten Ayanas
(Defective
Text). There are
three hundred
and sixtyfive
days (5+300
+60)
in a solar year.
135.
Thirty
units
of days and nights make
one
solar
month. Sixtyone such days make one Rtu.
136.
The extent of a solar Ayana
is
one
hundred
and
eightythree days.
137.
The following arc the four measures (for calculating
time)
viz.: Saura
(Solar), Saumya (Lunar), N&k$atra
(sidereal)
and Savana (based on Savana calculation of days
from
sunrise
to
sunset).
These
measures
are
decisively mentioned in the
Puranas.
i
1.
V.
137 gives the four measures of system! in calculating time
(or
year) viz. Saura
(Solar), Saumya (Lunar), N&kfatra
(sidereal).
2.
This Pura^a records the age-old
tradition that
the
Yuga period
consisted of five years. Even in the Vedic times Yuga was of five years and the
names of those five years
(with a slight variations in the name l<fdvatsara viz.
I4&-I4u—Vatsara) are the same as given here
(vide Tai.S.V.7.1-3, VSj.S.27.45,
Atharva VI 55.3).
Tai. Br.
I. 4. 10.1 identifies Sarfwatsara, Parivatsara etc. with
god Agni, Aditya etc. Kautilya in ArthaJd itra II Ch. 20 in measures of time
declares “A Yuga
consists of five
years”
(Paftca-Sarhvatsaro
Tugam),
This
Puraga Records the same.

=== PAGE 213 ===

210
Brahm&nfa Purana
138.
There is a mountain named Srngavan
towards
the
north
of
the
Sveta.
It has three peaks which appear to touch
the surface of the firmament.
139.
That mountain
is
said
to
be
Srngavan,
due
to
those peaks.
Its girth and sectional diameter are equally
glori-
fied
( ? are the same )
.
140.
Its middle and eastern peak
is golden. The southern
peak has crystal-like lustre and it
is made of silver.
141.
The
excellent
northern peak
is full of all kinds of
jewels.
Thus,
due
to
the
three
peaks,
the
mountain
is
well known as Srngavan.
142.
During
the
time
in
between
the Autumn
and
the Spring, the sun proceeds
with
a medium speed
and
he
resorts to its eastern peak.
143.
Hence, the dispeller of darkness makes the day and
night equal. Divine green-coloured horses are yoked to his great
chariot. They appear
as
though
they
are smeared with
the
rays red as lotus.
144.
To the close of Me$a and Tula , the duration of
the
day from sunrise to sunset is
fifteen Muhurtas.
The
night
is
also equally long.
145.
When the sun enters the first degree or part of
the
constellation Krttika ,
it should be known that the moon
enters
the fourth part of the constellation Viidkha .
146.
When the sun moves through the third part of the
constellation ViSakha,
it should be known that the moon
has
occupied the top of the constellation Krttika.
147-149.
The great sages say that one should know that
time as Vi$uva (Equinox). One should understand
the
equinox
through the position of the sun and should see the time through
the moon. When the day and the night are of
equal duration,
it shall be the Vifuva. Then during
the
equinox, religious
gifts
should
be
offered
to
the manes and to the Brahmanas parti-
cularly because
it happens to be the face of gods.
1 50.
(The following are to be known in connection with
the
various
units
of time)
:
they are Onam/Lsa (month of a
shorter duration), Adhimdsa (Intercalary lunar month),
Kala,
Ka${ha, Muhurtaka, Paurnamasi
(full moon)
, Amavasya (New

=== PAGE 214 ===

1.2.21.151 154
211
moon), Sinivall, Kuhu (different kinds of new moon), Raka and
Anumati (kinds of full moon day). 1
151.
The months of Magha, Phalguna, Caitra, Vaisakha,
Jyestha and Asatjha constitute Uttarayana
(Northern transit).
The months ofSravana, Bhadrapada, Alvina, Karttika, Marga-
slrsa and Pausa constitute Daksinayana. 2
152-154.
The five years called Artavas
should be known
as the sons of Brahma.
Hence, the Rtus should be known. They
are remembered
as
Artavas on
account of
the
fitus. Hence, from
this Parvan,
Amavasya should be known as having Jjjttus as
its face.
Hence,
from this Parvan, the Vifuva should be known.
It
is always con-
ducive to the welfare of the Devas and the
Pitrs. One
should
not lose sense regarding rites concerning the Pitrs and the Devas,
after knowing the Parvan.
1.
The Amavasya
(the new moon day)
mixed with
the
14th
Tithi
is Sinivali and that which merges with the
1st Tithi of the next fortnight
is
Kuhu.
It
is treated as a divinity and invoked
for wealth and
Sons.
(vide
Atharva VII 47.1). According to Nirukta XI 29, Paur^amasi
(the full moon
day) mixed with the 14th tithi is Anumati, while that mixed
with the
1st day
of the next fortnight is Raka. In vedic times it was woi shipped for a rich and
famous son.
2.
This verse records the ancient names of the months with
which
modern names Caitra, Vaisakha came
to be
identified. For
the convenience
of readers the modem names are given
in
translation.
The
correspondence
of ancient and modern names of the months is as follow:
Old Term
New Term
Tapas
Magha
Tapasya
Phalguna
Madhu
Caitra
Madhava
Vaisakha
Sukra
Jyestha
Suci
Asatfha
Nabhas
Sravana
Nabhasya
Bhadrapada
I*u
Asvina
Orja
Karttika
Sahas
Margasir?a
SaHUsya
Pau?a

=== PAGE 215 ===

212
Brahm&ntfa Purana
155.
Hence, Vijuva that is present everywhere (?)
is
al-
ways
remembered
by the subjects. The (mountain) Lokaloka
is called so because the world is remembered on account of (?)
its being illuminated (by the sun).
156.
The guardians of the quarters are stationed
in
the
middle of the Lokaloka. Those four(?)
noble-souled guardians
remain
till the annihilation of all living beings.
157.
They are Sudhama, Vairaja, Kardama,
Sarikhapa,
Hiranyaroman,
Parjanya, Ketuman and Rajasa. (Perhaps they
are in pairs and hence called four ? )
.
158.
They are free from
Dvandvas (mutually
opposed
pairs) and false prides. They are boundless and free from
pari-
grahas (acceptances of [gifts from others).
These guardians of
quarters are stationed on the Lokaloka in all the four directions.
159.
To the North of the star Agastya* and to the south
of Ajavithi
is
the
pathway called Pitryana.
It is outside the
path VaiSvanara.
1 60.
There stay the sages who are endowed with progeny
and who perform Agnihotra sacrifices. Those who stay
in
the
path
of
pitrydna
are
those who continue the series of worlds
(who perpetuate the lines or race of the worlds).
161.
The southern path
is
of those who,
being fitviks,
commence
the work
of procreation
of living beings by their
blessings and are desirous of the world*
162*
In every
Yuga,
they
establish Dharma
that goes
astray. They
perform
austerities. They strictly adhere to the
bounds (of decency) and pursue the art of learning.
163.
Here, in this world the
predecessors
are
born
in
the
houses
of
the
successors
(those who come after) and the
successors are born on the death of the predecessors.
164. Repeatedly being born
thus, they
remain
till
the
annihilation
of
all
living
beings. These sages who are house-
holders are eightyeight thousand in number.
165- 168a.
They resort to the southern path of the
sun
as long as the moon and the stars are existent. This is the total
*
Tadapastasya is
wrong. V&.P. 50.209a
reads
correctly yad Agastasya
<of the
star
Agastya’.

=== PAGE 216 ===

1.2.21. 168b-176
213
sum (i.e. 88000) of those persons who perform
holy
rites and
who resorted to the cremation grounds. Their routine activities
in the
world
consist
of
creation
of living
beings,
activities
prompted by desire or hatred, indulgence in sexual intercourse,
activities induced by lust and resorting to sensual objects.
Those Siddhas (persons
with
spiritual attainment) who
resorted to cremation grounds on these or similar grounds
and
those sages who seek progeny
are
(re-born
in
the
Dvapara
age.
168b- 169.
The pathway that
is
towards
the
north
of
Nagavithl
and
to
the
south of the group of seven sages (i.e.
the Great Bear) is the northern path of the sun.
It
is remem-
bered
as
Devaydna . Those who stay there are Siddhas of great
celibacy, free from impurities.
170-173.
They
contemptuously
hate
progeny. Hence,
death
is conquered by them. These sages of sublimated
sexual
urge
are
eightyeight thousand in
number. They closely cling
to the northern path,
till the annihilation of
all
living
beings
Due to their association with the
world, avoidance
of
sexual
intercourse, abstention from desires
and
hatreds, eschewal
of
creation
of
living
beings,
non-lustful
contacts and
seeing
defects in sound etc.
(i.e. sensual objects),
they
have become
Siddhas. And also due to various other reasons also. Hence they
became immortal. Immortality is considered to be
(the
attain-
ment) of those who stay till the annihilation of all livingbeings.
174-1 75a.
They
approach
their
wives once
again
for
the
sustenance of the three
worlds.*
Others
of
sublimated
sexual
urge are
sinners
as well
as
meritorious on
account
of their killing the child
in
the womb
or
performing
horse
sacrifices. They wither away
at
the
end
of
annihilation
of
all living beings.
175b-76.
To the north
and
above
the
worlds
of
the
sages,
where Dhruva is remembered to be present, is the divine
region ofVi$nu, the third one in the firmament. It is the shining
*
This
is
strange of those Crddhua-retas
sages. V&.P.50. 222a
reads:
Trailokya-sthiti-k&lo'yam apunamdrgagdminah
/

=== PAGE 217 ===

214
Brabndfy&a Purtya
world on reaching which no one is affected by sorrow or
pain.
It is the greatest region of Visiju where Dharma, Dhruva and
other Sadhakas of the world stay.
CHAPTER TWENTYTWO*
The Description of the Divine Luminaries
Varieties of clouds: Divisions of Stratosphere
:
The chariot of the Sun-God
Suta said
:
1.
All the Antaras
(i.e. Manvantaras) during the creation
of Svayambhuva have been recounted.
I shall recount all
the
future ones in due order.
2.
On hearing this, the sages asked Romaharsana about
the movement of the Sun, the Moon and the planets.
The sages said
:
3-4.
“How do these
luminaries
revolve
in
the
strato-
sphere without any clash or confusion or without any structural
formation?
Does
any
one
make them revolve or do they re-
volve of their own accord? O excellent one, we wish to
under-
stand this. Narrate this unto us.
SUta said
:
5.
This is something that
confounds
all
living
beings.
Understand
this even
as
I tell you.
Although
this
is visible
and directly perceptible, it perplexes the people.
6.
The star that
(diffuses
light)
in
the
four
quarters
and
is established at the tail of the Sifum&ra (i.e. a collection of
stars resembling a dolphin or a Gangetic porpoise)
is Dhruva,
This chapter corresponds to V&.P. Ch.
51.

=== PAGE 218 ===

1.2.22.7-15
215
the son of Uttanapada. 1 He is, as though,
the main
pivot
to
which all the stars and planets are attached.
7.
It
is reported that it is he who perpetually makes the
moon and the sun revolve along with the
planets.
As
it
(the
sun) revolves
like a wheel, the stars also follow
it.
8.
The group of luminaries, the sun and the
moon,
the
stars and
constellations along with
the
planets move about,
at the will of Dhruva. 2
9-10.
They are fastened to Dhruva by means
of
bonds
in
the
form of rows of winds. Their junction, difference, time,
movement, rising and
setting,
portentious
phenomenon,
the
southern and northern transits,
the equinox and the colours
of
the planets (?)—all these function, due to Dhruva.
1 1
.
Rain, heat, snowfall, day, night,
the
twilight,
the
welfare
and
woes
of the subjects—all these take place due to
Dhruva.
12.
Presided over by Dhruva, the sun
takes
up
water
and
showers
it. 3 This sun whose rays are ablaze,
is the fire of
the destruction of the
universe.
13-15.
In the course of
his
revolution, O
Brahmanas,
he
illuminates
the
quarters.
With
the
mass
of his rays and
accompanied by the wind
ail round,
the
sun
takes away the
water
of
the entire world, O excellent Brahmanas. The moon
transmits the entire water drunk
by
the
sun.
The
torrential
current
of water (Downpour of rain) functions through Nd(}is
(veinlike vessels)
accompanied by the wind.
The
water
that
oozes out of the moon remains in the food
(i.e. plants and food
crops )
.
1.
For a better and detailed description how all the stars and constel-
lations are located
as different parts of the body of this heavenly porpoise
(iSiium&ra ) vide Bh. P. V. 23.4-7. This system of heavenly luminaries is poeti-
cally compared to the body of a porpoise and Lord Vasudeva is
stated therein
to have assumed the form of the Siium&ra.
2.
Bh. P. ibid V. 2 attributes the power of setting in motion this stellar
system to the Almighty Kala (Time) and not to Dhruva.
3.
VV
12-17
describe
the ancient concept of the water-cycle. Their
belief in the indestructibility of water (V.17)
is surprisingly modem, but the
later description from
19b
ff shows old climatological concepts.

=== PAGE 219 ===

216
Brahmdn<jla Purtyia
1 6.
Being
obstructed
by
the
wind,
the clouds scatter
water over the earth. Thus
water
is
continuously
thrown up
{i.e. turned into vapour) and dropped down.
1 7.
There
is no total distruction
of water.
The
same
water gets transformed.
It
is
for
the sake of
sustenance
of
all the worlds that this cosmic Maya has been created
(by the
lord )
.
18-1 9a.
The three
worlds
along
with
the mobile and
immobile
beings
are
pervaded by this Maya. The sun
is
the
lordly creator of the worlds. Endowed with a
thousand
(innu-
merable eyes) he
is
the
lord of the universe. He
is the mighty
lord of the subjects, the creator of the entire universe.
19b-20.
The water that has fallen down from
the moon,
from the sky,
is conducive to the welfare of all the worlds.
The
entire
universe
has
the moon as
its
support.
This has been
truthfully recounted. The U$na
(hot virility) oozes
out
of
the
sun, and the Sita
(chill virility) functions from the moon.
21.
These two, viz. the moon
of cool
virility
and
the
sun
of hot virility,
sustain the world by means of their combi-
nation.
The river Ganga with the Moon as support,
is
holy.
Its
waters are free from impurities.
22.
(The Ganga), the great rivers beginning
with Bha-
drasoma and
the waters (humids) that flow within the bodies
of all living beings mobile and immobile,
become
smoke
(i.e.
vapour).
23.
When the mobiles and
immobiles get
heated (and
burnt) they spread everywhere as vapour.
24.
Clouds
are
formed
thereby. It is remembered that
the abode (waters)
is
full of clouds
(or,
is
in
the
form
of
clouds).
With his rays the sun takes up water, the very splendour,
from all living beings.
25.
In combination with the wind, the rays (of the sun)
carry the waters from the
ocean
that
water
(then)
becomes
the nectar-like life-giver unto the plants.
26.
Then, as the season approaches at the
proper
time,
the sun changes
(the saltish water into sweet water) and
gives

=== PAGE 220 ===

1.2,22.27-34
217
water to the
clouds
by means
of
his
white and
non-white
rays.
27.
The waters stationed in the clouds
fall
down when
they are
wafted by the wind. Accompanied by the wind (they
spread everywhere), for the welfare of all living beings.
28-29.
Then for six months
it continues to rain
in
order
that all living beings may flourish. The thundering
sound per-
tains
to
the
wind
and the lightning originates from fire. The
Megkatva (the state of being a cloud)
is indicated through
the
root y/Mih (to pour down), since the cloud showers (rain ) . The
wise people know the cloud as Abhra because the waters do not
fall down
( na bhrarfifyanti). 1
30.
The origin of the clouds
is
threefold. 2 They
are of
different
kinds
in
view
of
their
sources of origin. They arc
Agneya
( fiery ones)
, Brahmaja
( born
of Brahma)
and
Pakfaja
(born of Wings).
31.
The three kinds of clouds have
been
enumerated.
I
shall mention the manner of their origin.
Agneyas are said to be originating from heat. They produce
smoke (vapour)
.
32.
Gold
winds
and winds
on
cloudy
days
are their
characteristics. They take the
shapes
of
buffaloes,
boars
and
intoxicated elephants.
33.
Assuming
these
forms,
they come
to
the
Earth,
sport about
and
wander
here
and
there.
They
are named
JimUtas .
Living beings
are born of these clouds.
34.
They
are
devoid
of
lightning
streaks. They hang
down with
torrents
of water. They are silent clouds of huge
bodies. They are under the control of Avaha (A kind of wind)
.
1.
This
is a fanciful derivation of Abhra
‘a cloud*. Normally Abhra
is derived
from \/abhr
h suffix
ac
(i.e.
a)
or
from
ap + bhf—suffix
a,
meaning “bearer
of water.
2. W. 30-46 give the pseudo-scientific classification of clouds as believ-
ed by
the
ancients. Some of the poetic flashes of imagination
herein
are
interesting. Avaha,
Pravaha,
Vivaha,
Udoaha,
Sarhoaha ,
Parivaha
are
wind-
bearing clouds of different types and functions.

=== PAGE 221 ===

Brakm&ntfa Pur&na
35.
They shower rain
from
within one and
a half
to
three
kilometres. They
shower rain on the tops and ridges of
the mountains and roar out.
36.
Those
clouds named
Brahmajas
are
bom
of the
breath ofgod Brahma. They cause
impregnation
of
the white
cranes and they sustain their young ones in the womb.
37.
Indeed they are endued
with
streaks
of
lightning
and reverberations of thundering
that
are
pleasing. Due
to
their
continuous
rumbling
sound,
the
earth expresses horri-
pilation in the from of (plants and trees ) sprouting from
it.
38.
Like a queen who has been installed
(on the throne
of)
a kingdom, she attains the freshness of youth
once
again.
Strongly
attached
to the
rains,
she becomes the source of the
life of beings.
39.
Those clouds depend on Pravaha ,
the second type of
wind.
These
clouds
(shower
rain)
from
within
twelve
to
eighteen kilometres.
40.
Those clouds named Pu$karavartakas are born of
the
Wings. Its conception
is threefold.
The shower is
glorified
as
continuous downpour.
41.
The wings of very powerful mountains
that had
in-
creased in size and who used to go wherever
as
they
pleased,
were chopped off by Indra who wished
to
secure
the
welfare
of all
living beings.
42.
Those
clouds named
Pu$kara (were
born of those
wings). They increased in size competing with the waters.
For
the reason, they are termed Pu$karauartakas (revolving Pu$karas).
43.
They assume many forms.
Their
thundering sound
is very terrible. They are the creators of the
torrential rain at
the end
of
the
Kalpas.
They
control
the
Samvartaka
fire
(which burns down the universe then)
.
44.
These (clouds)
shower
rain
at
the
close
of
the
Yugas. (Thus) those third
(sets of clouds) have been
recount-
ed.
They
have many
forms,
configurations and aggregates.
They
fill the Earth.
45-46.
They carry the wind ahead. On
being
resorted
to, they
conclude
the
Kalpas.
Atiifa-Kap&las are the pieces of
the shell of the
cosmic
egg
( evolved
out of Prakrti)
which

=== PAGE 222 ===

1 .2 .22 .47-58
219
were formed when the egg was broken and the four-faced, self-
potent god Brahma
was
born
therein, —those
very pieces of
the cosmic egg are all known as clouds.
47-48.
Smoke
is
conducive
to
development
of
all
of them without any
distinction.
The
most
excellent among
them
is Parjanya . The Elephants
of the
quarters
are
four
in
number. (Although)
these are separate,
the
source
of
origin
of elephants,
mountains,
clouds and serpents
is the same and
water
is remembered as that origin.
49.
On being directed
to make
the
plants and
trees
flourish, Parjanya and the Diggajas
(Elephants
of the quarters)
shower snowdrops
during Hemanta
(early
winter),
born
of
cool virility.
50-52a.
The sixth wind named Parivaha
is their support.
This powerful (wind)
holds up the Ganga
of the
firmament,
the holy divine river of exquisite nectar-like water. The Ganga
is situated in the path of Svdti
(i.e. firmament)
in
three
cur-
rents. With
their
huge
trunks,
the
elephants of the quarters
receive the waters
oozing
from
the Ganga and scatter them in
the form of water spray. That is remembered as dew-drops.
52b-53.
There
is the
mountain remembered as Hcma-
kuta in the southern
region. To
the
north
of
the Himalaya
mountain, there
is
the
extensive city mentioned by the name
Pundra stretching from north to south.
54-56.
The rain that falls over
it
has
originated
from
snow-drops. Thereupon the
wind named Vaha flows over the
Himalaya, sprinkling the great
mountain with water.
It brings
the mountain
under
its
control by means
of its own effort.
After crossing the Himalayas
it
utilises
the
balance
of rain-
water for the development of the western region.
(Thus) two types of
rain
for
the
purpose
of develop-
ment of two types of vegetation have been recounted.
57.
The clouds and their activity of causing the develop-
ment (of various
things) — all these have been recounted. The
sun alone is mentioned as the creator of showers.
58.
The rainfall has
its
root (source)
in the sun water;
proceeds from
(functions on
account of)
the sun.
It
is
after
being presided over by Dhruva that
the sun works for rain.

=== PAGE 223 ===

220
Brakmd$ia Pttrdna
59-60.
The
wind presided
over by Dhruva withdraws
the shower once again.
The planet comes out of the sun, wanders throughout the
entire assemblage of the
stars
and
constellations
and
in
the
end enters the sun presided over by Dhruva.
Henceforth, understand the structure of
the
chariot
of
the sun. 1
61-62.
The
sun-god
proceeds by
means
of a golden
chariot that has
a
single wheel
with
five
spokes
and
three
naves, and a single rim with
six phases.
Its horses are
green.
The whole chariot embellished with gold, shines brightly.
63.
The girth and
the
extent of
the
chariot
is
ten
thousand Yojanas (1 Yojana=12 km.) In magnitude,
its pole-
shaft
is twice the central cockpit.
64.
His chariot
is divine and
golden.
It
is yoked with
horses as
swift
as
the
wind.
It has no impediment anywhere.
It was for a specific purpose that
it was created by Brahma.
65.
The
Cchandas
(Vedic
Metres)
have
assumed
the
forms of horses and are stationed in the direction of the wheel.
The chariot has characteristics similar to those of the chariot of
Varuria.
66.
It is by means
of
this
shining chariot that the sun
traverses the firmament.
Now (know)
that the following are the
different parts of
the chariot of the sun.
67-68.
The
parts
are duly
constituted by the parts of
the year.
The day is remembered as the nave of the single wheel of
the solar chariot. The
five Artavas
are
the five spokes. The six
seasons are remembered as constituting the rim. This is remem-
bered as the inner seat of the chariot. The two Ayanas (transits)
are the two poleshafts.
69.
Muhurtas and Kalas are remembered as the beauti-
ful trappings and
fittings.
Kastha
is remembered
as
its
nose
and the Kfana (Moment)
is its axle.
1.
VV. 61-62 give a symbolic description of the Chariot of the Sun.
The significance of each part of the chariot, the horses yoked etc.
is given in
W. 67
ff below.

=== PAGE 224 ===

1.2.22.70-82
221
70.
The Nitne$a
is its axle tree at the bottom. The Lavas
are remembered
as
its
shaft. The night is its wooden fender.
Dharma
is its flagstaff that has risen up to (a great height)
.
71.
Artha
(Wealth)
and Kama (Love)
these
two
are
remembered as the tips of the yoke and the axle.
The Vedic metres in the form of the
seven horses
carry
the yoke by the left.
72.
The seven Metres are
Gayatrl,
Tristup,
Anustup,
Jagati, Pankti, Brhati and Usnik.
73.
The wheel
is fixed
to
the Axis and
the axis is laid
on Dhruva. The Axis whirls along with
the wheel and Dliruva
whirls
(?) along with the Axis.
74.
Propelled by Dhruva, the great wheel
whirls along
with the Axis. Thus
is the structure of
his
chariot
in
view
of
specific purpose.
75.
Similarly, by
means
of
combination
the
shining
chariot has been evolved. By means
of that
shining
chariot,
lord sun-god traverses the firmament.
76.
There are two rein- cords fixed
to the extremities of
the yoke and the axis of the chariot.
Those two
rein-cords
re-
volve in Dhruva (and perform the function) of a pair of wheels.
77-78.
The
extremities
of the yoke and the axis of the
chariot that move in circles in the firmament are
caught hold
of by Dhruva. Both the rein-cords whirl on the
axis and they
follow Dhruva who too revolves.
79.
The
extremities
of the
yoke
and
the axis
of the
chariot revolve
all
round
along with
the
rein-cords like the
rope fixed
to a peg.
80.
During Uttarayana the
rein-cords become
reduced
(in length) as they move
in
circles. During the Daksii^&yana
they increase in size.
8 1
.
The two rein-cords of the chariot fixed
to the extre-
mities of the yoke and the axis are caught hold of by Dhruva
and the two rein-cords lead the sun.
82.
When presided over by Dhruva, those two reincords
are dcagged, the sun revolves in circles within (the orbit).

=== PAGE 225 ===

222
Brahmdrida Purdna
83-84.
The
intervening distance between
the quarters
is eight thousand circles (?) When the rein-cords are released by
Dhruva,
the
sun
once
again
revolves in circles outside
( the
orbit). It moves round in quick circles.
CHAPTER TWENTYTHREE
Information
about
Heavenly
bodies
(Stars, Planets etc . )
: The movement
of the Polar Star
SUta said
:
1 .
That
chariot
is
occupied
and
presided over by the
Devas, Adityas,
sages,
Gandharvas, Divine damsels, GrOmanis,
Serpents and demons. 1
2-5a.
These abide
in
the
sun
for
the
period
of two
months each in due order. 2
The
following
reside
in
the
sun
continuously
in
the
months of Madhu and
Madhava
( Caitra and Vaisakha)
viz.
(gods) Dhatr
and Aryaman;
(sages)
Pulastya,
Pulaha,
the
Prajapati; (serpents) Airavata, Vasuki, Kariisa. Bhima; Ratha-
kft, and
Rathaujas—these
two are cited as Yaksas; (Gandh-
arvas)
Tumburu,
Narada;
(divine
damsels)
Susthala
and
1.
This sublime concept of the Solar chariot
is based
on
Tajurveda
15.15.19. Here Devas, Sages and Gandharvas represent light and immortality-
the actinic portion of the solar spectra. The serpents, Gr&manis and
Rak$asas
signify heat or death or the Thermal field of the spectra. This Heptad of the
sun signifies the mutual difference in the different “Wave lengths*’ of the seven
colours. This may be called the Puranic VIBGYOR.
2.
These verses
(2-24) enumerate the names of the
different devas,
sages
etc.—the heptad who occupy the
solar chariot every month. These
verses are common to the description of the Solar chariot in
other Puri^as
e.g. the Mt. P. 125.
1-34, V&. P. 52. 1-26 with slight differences in the names
of the occupants of the chariot.

=== PAGE 226 ===

1.2.23.5b-23
223
Pufijikasthala, (protector-demons), Heti and Praheti
these two
are cited as T&tudhanas.
5b-8a.
The
following
reside
(in
the
sun)
during the
months
of
Suci
and
Sukra
(Jyes^ha
andAsadha);
(Gods)
Mitra and Varuna;
the
sages cited being Atri and the famous
Vasisjha;
(Apsaras)
Sahajanya,
Menaka;
Pauru$eya,
and
Vadha who are
cited as
Raksasas,
the Gandharvas Haha and
Huhu; Yajfia
(probably Yaksa and not Yajfta): Rathasvana,
Rathacitra, another named Nagasaksaka
(rather Naga
called
Taksaka) and Rambhaka.
8b- 1 1
-
Other deities also
reside
in
the sun. The follow-
ing group
( of Devas and others)
resides
in the sun during the
months of Nabhas and Nabhasya (Sravana and
Bhadrapada)
viz.
(Gods)
Indra
and
Vivasvan;
(sages)
Arigiras,
Bhrgu;
the serpents: Elapatra and
Sahkhapala; (Gandharvas)
Visva-
vasu and Ugrasena, Sveta and Aruna ;
(the two Apsaras)
well-
known
as
Pramloca
and Anumloca and the two Yatudhanas
(demons) Sarpa and Vyaghra.
12-15.
Other
pure
deities and sages reside
(in the sun)
during the autumn
( Asvina and Karttika)
; (gods) Parjanya and
Pusan;
(sages) Bharadvaja along with Gautama; Paravasu and
Suruci the Gandharvas; Visvaci andGhrtacI the two (Apsaras)
of splendid characteristics; Airavata and Dhananjaya the well-
known serpents
and Syenajit
and
Susena who
are
Senanis
(commanders) and Gramanis (or Yaksas)
. Apas and Vata these
two
are
cited
as
Raksasas—All
these always stay in the sun
during the months of Alvina and Karttika.
16-19.
The following stay
in
the
sun
during the
two
months of Hemanta
( Early Winter)
; they are the
two
(Devas)
Am£a and Bhaga; (the two sages) Kasyapa and Kratu; the two
serpents
Mahapadma
and
Karkotaka;
the two Gandharvas
Citrasena
and
Ornayu;
the
two celestial damsels Urvafi and
Purvacitti;
Tarksa and
Aristanemi who
are
Senanl
(com-
manders)
as Yaksas
and
Vidyutsphurja and Satayu who are
cited as
Yatuhanas
(demons)—these reside in the sun in the
months of Saha and Sahasya (Marga£Irsa andPausa).
20-23.
The
following
reside
in
the
sun
during
the
months ofSisira (late winter). They are
(gods) Tvasfr, Visiju
(sages^ Jamadagnya, ViSvamitra;
the two
serpents
Kambala

=== PAGE 227 ===

224
Brahmd^ia Purdna
and ASvatara who are the sons of Kadru; the two Gandharvas
Dhrtar£sjra and
Suryavarcas;
(the
two
celestial
damsels)
Tilottama and Rambha; the demon Brahmapeta and the other
wellknown demon Yajfiapeta, and Rtajit and Satyajit who are
cited
as
Gandharvas* (rather Yaksas)—all these, O excellent
sages, reside in the sun during the months of TapasandTapasya
(Magha and Phaiguna.)
24.
Making the
Pitrs,
Devas
and Human beings well
nourished, O Brahmanas,
Savitr the
cause of days and nights
goes on revolving.
25.
These Devas reside
in
the
sun
for periods of two
months in due order. These twelve groups of seven (or heptads)
identify themselves with their place of office and residence.
26.
By means of their splendour they increase the
excel-
lent splendour
of the
sun.
By means of words (and prayers)
composed by themselves, sages eulogise the sun.
27.
The Gandharvas
and
the
Apsaras
serve
him
by
means of songs and dances. The Gramanis, Yaksas and Bhutas
perform the worship of his rays.
28.
The serpents carry the sun, the demons follow him.
From
sunrise
to
sunset,
the
Valakhilyas
surround
the sun
and lead him on.
29-31.
The sun who is the lord of
all these, blazes with
his brilliance in accordance with the virility, austerities, virtues,
contacts, realities and strength of these (Devas etc.)
Thus,
these
stay
in the
sun
for periods of two months
viz.
the sages,
the
Devas,
the Gandharvas, the serpents, the
groups of celestial damsels, the Gramanis
(or groupleaders) or
the Yaksas and especially the demons.
32-33.
These blaze, shower rains, shine, blow and create.
On being glorified they dispel the inauspicious demerits
of all
living beings.
These remove
the auspicious merit
of
evil-minded men.
In some respects they remove the sins of men of good character
and conduct.
Dus is wrong as the pair of Gandharvas is already cited. The reading
should be GrOmatyau as in Va.P.52.22.

=== PAGE 228 ===

1.2.23.34-43
225
34.
All these followers of the day revolve along with the
sun. They shower rain
on
the
subjects,
they scorch them and
they delight them
(too)
.
35-36.
They protect
all the living
beings
till the
desti-
nation of the
Manus. In the Manvantaras of
the (Manus) of
the past and future as well as
those
who
arc
present,
this is
the abode of those who identify themselves.
Thus those fourteen sets of seven reside in the sun
in the
course of the fourteen Manvantaras.
37.
The sun releases heat energy
during
the
summer.
He
scatters
rain
during
the
rainy
season and snow (during
winter)
. He is the maker of day and night.
He
keeps
up
his
movement
in
accordance
with
(the
changing)
seasons
and
gratifies the Devas, the Pitrs
and
the human
beings with the
rays suitably adapted.
38.
By means
of
the
(ray)
named Susumna, the sun
develops the moon in the bright half day
by day
and makes
it complete (on the fiill moon day)
. He propitiates
the Devas
by means of the nectar. The
Devas
imbibe it during the dark
half.
39.
When the nectar of
the
moon
is drunk, the moon
loses all his digits except one
during
the
dark
half.
At
the
close of it, the moon does not ooze out nectar from
its rays. The
Devas,
the pitrs, the Saumyas
and
the
Kavyas
imbibe
that
nectar.
40.
Men conquer
(satisfy) hunger
by means
of
food-
stuffs and beverages and medicinal herbs developed
by means
of rain, with waters lifted up and released by means
of his rays
by the sun.
41.
It
is during the bright half that the Devas
are pro-
pitiated by means of nectar and the pitrs (are done so) during
the dark half (of the month). (The sun)
perpetually
sustains
the human beings by means
of food. He holds them well by
means of his rays.
42.
The sun is being led by green horses. At that time,
he removes (evaporates) water by
means
of his
green rays .
At the time of discharge
(of water), he
releases
the water.;
Thus the sun sustains the mobile and immobile beings.
43.
The sun is being
led by
green
horses. He
drinks

=== PAGE 229 ===

226
Brahmin$a Purina
water by means of thousands of green
rays.
Being carried by
green horses, the sun releases it. 1
44.
Thus the sun traverses the quarters by means
of his
swift chariot with one wheel. The horses are
splendid but they
do not have the usual pace*
(? Akramaih )
.
45.
In the course of a day and
night, the sun traverses
the
earth
consisting
of
the
seven
continents and oceans by
means of his chariot with a single wheel.
46-48.
The
chariot
is
yoked with only
seven horses.
They are the Vedic
Metres
that have
assumed
the form of
horses. They are stationed towards the place where
the
.wheel
is fitted.
They assume the forms as they wish. They are green,
imperishable; they (?
are
accompanied)
by
tawny-coloured
masters expounding the Brahman.
In
the
course
of a
year
those horses traverse eightythree hundred circles.
It traverses the external as well
as
the
internal
circular
zones, in the course
of days. They
have
been yoked
in
the
beginning of the Kalpa and they continue to bear
till the anni-
hilation of all living beings.
49.
Surrounded by Valakhilyas, they wander both night
and day. The sun
is
eulogised
by
great
sages
by means
of
words (and prayers) of
the
highest
order
and composed by
themselves.
50.
He is served by Gandharvas and groups of
celestial
damsels
by means
of songs
and dances. The lord of the day
(i.e. the sun)
thus revolves and
wanders by means of horses
that gallop and that are as swift as birds.
51.
The chariot of Soma
(the Moon) has three wheels.
2
His horses have the lustre of Kunda
(white Jasmine ) flowers.
They are ten in number and they are yoked to the left as well
as to the right. The moon traverses by means of this.
52.
They traverse the
stars
supported by the Vithi (the
path of the firmament).
They
gain
velocity
by means of the
1.
This verse practically repeats V. 42
in different words.
*
The
text
is
defective. The corresponding verse
in
the VaP.
52*
43b reads: bhadrais fair akfctiairaivaih sarpatt
9sou divi kfaye
/’ with those auspi-
cious unbroken horses he proceeds in the region of the sky.
2. W 51-79 describe the mythological description of the chariot of
the moon.
Its scientific significance L not clear.

=== PAGE 230 ===

1.2.23.53-65
227
support of Dhruva. The shrinking
and lengthening
of its rays
are remembered as being like those of the sun.
53.
It should be known that the chariot of the moon has
three wheels with horses on either side.
The chariot
is
born
(i.e. evolved) out of the womb of the
waters
along with
the
horses and the charioteer.
54.
It has three wheels with hundred spokes. It is yoked
with ten excellent white
horses.
Thev
are
slim and
divine.
4
They are unimpeded and they have the swiftness of the mind.
55-57.
They are yoked but
once and
they continue to
bear it till the elapse of
the
Yugas.
In that compact chariot,
there are
white
serpents
encircling
the chariot (?) Horses of
the same colour, having
the
lustre
of
conchshells
carry him
(the
Moon).
The
names
of
the
ten horses of the moon are
Yajus, Candamanas,
Vrsa,
Vajin,
Nara,
Haya,
the
famous
horses Gavisnu, Hamsa, Vyoma and Mrga.
58.
These
(horses)
carry
the
Moon-lord
with
great
dedication
(and
respect).
The moon
traverses
(its
orbit)
surrounded by the Devas and the pitrs.
59.
At the end of the dark half and at the beginning of
the bright half, when the sun is steady in the opposite direction,
the moon
is
filled up,
and
as
days pass
by
(the digits are
reinstilled )
.
60.
When
the
(nectarine)
body of the moon has been
imbibed by the Devas,
it becomes exhausted
on the
fifteenth
day. Then, with a single ray the sun makes
it well developed.
61.
By means of the ray called Susumna
(the sun)
fills
a
part
(of
the
moon)
(digit
by digit) every day. On being
replenished thus by the Susumna (ray), the
white and
bright
digits increase.
62.
During the dark half, the digits become reduced and
they are developed (replenished) during the
bright
half. The
moon is thus developed, due to the power of the sun.
63.
On the full Moon day, it appears bright
in a com-
plete disc. In the bright half, the moon is thus fully replenished
day by day.
64-65.
From
the
second
day
of the
dark
halfto the
fourteenth
day,
the Devas imbibe the nectar of the moon that
is of th€*nature of the essence of the waters and that is
wholly

=== PAGE 231 ===

228
BrahmdQ&a Pur&Qa
juicy.
Drinking
this
liquid
nectar of
the moon, the Devas
become delighted. It is due to the splendour of the
sun
that,
this nectarine juice has been collected together in the course of
half a month.
66.
The nectar of the moon is for
their food
(consump-
tion). It is resorted to for a single night on the full moon day by
all the Devas and Pitrs along with
the sages.
67.
On being imbibed gradually
by the
Pitrs and
the
Devas at the beginning of the dark
half, the digits of the moon
which face the sun become reduced gradually.
68.
Thirtythree,
three hundred
(?) and three and three
thousand and three Devas imbibe (the juice
of) the moon.
69.
On being sucked thus, the black digits of the moon
increase. Hence, the white digits become reduced and the dark
ones become increased.
70-72.
Thus,
the moon
is
sucked
daily by the Devas.
After imbibing it for a period of
half a month,
the
excellent
Devas
go away on the New Moon day. The
Piljrs
(thereafter)
resort to the Moon on the New Moon day. Then on the fifteenth
day when the digits are left over
a
little,
the
groups of Pitrs
resort to the last remanant
(of the digits)
in the afternoon. For
a period of two Lavas, they imbibe the Kalas
(of the
moon)
that are left over.
73.
The nectar of Svadha oozes from its rays on the New
Moon day. After drinking that
Svadha
for their own satisfac-
tion
(to
the
full)
for
the period of a month, those (Pitrs) go
away.
74.
The moon is scorched by the sun
(i.e. sunlight) that
is present in the Susumna.
Similarly,
the
nectarine moon
is
imbibed by the Devas in the dark half.
75.
They
are of
three
(varieties),
the Saumyas,
the
Barhisads and
the Agnisvattas.
Those who are mentioned as
Kavyas are all Pitrs.
76.
The Kavyas are Samvatsaras, those who are remem-
bered by the Brahmarias as Pancabdas (the five years)
. Saumyas
should be known as the Rtus and Barhisads are remembered as
the Masas
(Months).
77-78.
The Agnisvattas are the Artavas, O
Brahmarias,
these are the creations of the Pitrs. On
being
drunk
by
the

=== PAGE 232 ===

229
Pitrs
on
the
fifteenth
day,
the digit of the moon that is one
fifteenth part becomes reduced on the New moon
day. Then
in the next fortnight
it becomes replenished.
79. The increase and decrease of the moon are remembered
(as occurring) on the sixteenth day at the beginning of a fort-
night.
It
is
thus that the
increase and decrease in the moon
occur on account of the sun.
80.
Again
(i.e.
henceforth),
I
shall
describe
the
chariots of the stars, planets and Rahu. 1
The
chariot
of the
son of the Moon (Budha)
is bright
and full of the splendour of water.
81.
The chariot ofBhargava (the Venus)
is glorious and
it resembles the sun in splendour. It has the rambling sound of
the
cloud.
It
is equipped
with
banner,
flagstaff and other
paraphernalia.
82-83.
It
is
yoked
with
various
excellent
horses
of
different colours born of the earth. It is fitted with the following
ten
horses, viz. Sveta, Pisanga, Saranga, Nila, Pita,
Vilohita,
Krsna, Harita, Prsata and Prsni. They are
of great
grandeur.
They are not
lean. They have the speed of the wind.
84-86.
The excellent chariot of the Mars also is glorious
and golden.
It has eight horses. With
unimpeded
red
horses
born
of
fire
and
capable
of going
everywhere,
the
prince
(i.e., the Mars) goes about. They
have straight movement
as
well as those curved
clockwise and curved anticlockwise ones.
The Jupiter (Brhaspati) of
the
family
of
Angiras,
the
scholarly preceptor of the Devas, moves about in golden chariot
by means of eight grey horses born of water. They
are
divine
horses with the speed of the wind.
Staying for a year in a constellation, he goes ahead along
with Vedhas * (Brahma)
( ?)
87-90a.
Riding in a
chariot of black
steel (iron)
fitted
with strong horses born of
the firmament,
the Saturn proceeds
ahead very slowly.
1. W 80-92
describe
the
chariots of other planets such
as Budha,
Sukra
etc.
*
Sarvagah ‘one who can go everywhere and anywhere* in V&.P.52-87.

=== PAGE 233 ===

230
Brahm&n<}a Purdna
The horses of Rahu are eight in
number,
and
black
in
colour. They have the speed of the mind.
His chariot is full
of
darkness.
The
horses are yoked
but once and
they draw
it
(to the end).
Having come
out
of
the
sun, Rahu goes to the Moon
during Parvan days
( the Full moon days).
90b-91.
The horses of the chariot of Ketu
are
eight
in
number and
they
have
the speed of the wind. They have the
colour of the smoke of straw. They are strong. They are tawny-
coloured like donkeys.
Thus these horses of the planets along with
the
chariots
have been
described.
92.
All of
them
are
fastened
to Dhruva by means of
gaseous rays. They are fully
developed. While
whirling
duly
they blaze as well.
93.
(Repetition)
They
are
fully developed
due
to
invisible
gaseous
rays.
Being bound
( to Dhruva ) by means of
these,
the
moon,
the sun
and
the
planets
revolve
in
the
firmament.
94-95.
Those
groups
of
luminaries follow Dhruva that
whirls. Just as the boat
is carried on along with
the
(current
of) water
in the river, so also these abodes of gods (?
planets
etc. ) are carried by the gaseous rays. The groups of gods mov-
ing about in the firmament are not seen.
96.
There are as many bonds of gaseous rays as there are
stars. All of them are fastened
to
Dhruva.
They
whirl
them-
selves and they make others also revolve.
97.
Just as the oil-rollers whirl and cause the wheel also
to whirl so also do the luminaries
fixed
(to Dhruva)
on
all
sides by means of gaseous rays.
98.
Urged
by
the
whirlwind,
they move about like a
firebrand.
(Since the wind) carried the luminaries,
(the
wind
is remembered as Pravaha.
99.
Thus
the group
of planets
attached
to Dhruva,
moves about. This Gangetic porpoise and Dhruva
should
be
known
as made up of constellations in the firmament.
100-107.
If a sin is committed in the day,
it
is dispelled
by seeing it (Dhruva) during the night.

=== PAGE 234 ===

1.2.23.108
231
He lives as many or more years as there are stars support-
ed by the Gangetic porpoise in the firmament.
The heavenly Gangetic
porpoise should
be known
with
its parts (P). 1 (The various limbs of this porpoise are mentioned
subsequently)
.
Auttanapada (Dhruva the son of Uttanapada) should
be
known as its upper jaw. Yajfia should be known
as
the
other
(i.e. lower jaw)
. Dharma is based on its
head,
(i.c. constitutes
its head).
Narayana should be sought for in the heart and the
pair
of Alvins in the forelegs. Varuna and Aryaman
are
its
hind
thighs.
Its
penis
is
Samvatsara
and
Mitra
clings to the Apana
(anus), Agni, Mahendra, Marlca, Kasyapa and Dhruva are in
the
tail.
The four stars in the milky way do not set.
The stars, the moon, the
sun and the planets along
with
the constellations are fixed in the heaven, some with the
faces
up, others with faces turned away and all of them curved. They
are
presided
over
by
Dhruva. They go round Dhruva who is
the central pivot in the heaven and who
is an
excellent
lord.
Dhruva is remembered as the fourth and the last one after Agni,
Indra and Kasyapa.
108.
On the top of the Meru
Mountain,
single-handed
he
whirls when
he
pulls them with face down.
He
observes
Mcru at the border and circumambulates it.
1. W
100-104
describe
the
various parts
of the heavenly
(stellar)
poipoise (Sisumara).

=== PAGE 235 ===

232
Brahmdnda Purdna
CHAPTER TWENTYFOUR
The arrangement of the Heavenly Luminaries
:
The sun f
the source of Light to Luminaries
SUtasaid
:
1
.
On hearing this, the sages who were
in
doubt
asked
Romaharsana once again the answer (for the same).
2.
What has been described
in
details by
your
honour
is about the abodes. Now describe to us how may be the abodes
of gods and how are the luminaries.
3-6.
Mention everything decisively, the
facts concerning
the Luminaries.
Vayu
( The Wind god) said
:
On hearing their words, Sula of great
concentration and
mental purity, delivered the most excellent speech that dispelled
their doubts.
S&ta said
“I shall mention to you the
origin
of
the
sun
and
the
moon, the
details
as
mentioned
by
the
wise and intelligent
sages
of
great wisdom.
I
shall
recount how
the
sun, the
moon and the plants came to be remembered here as Devagrhas
(Divine abodes, abodes of the Devas )
.
Thereafter, I shall recount the origin of the three
types
of Agni1
(Fire)
viz. the divine one,
the terrestrial one and the
one born of water
(i.e. lightning)
.
7.
When the night of Brahma, born
of the
unmanifest
one, dawned,
this (visible comet)
that had not been manifested
and developed was completely enveloped by the darkness of the
night.
1.
Agni
(the fire god) was regarded as a very great deity by the Vedic
Aryans and different names according to its functions were given to it in the
RV. The Puranas amplified the tradition. The fire is given the credit of move-
ments of the Sun which is regarded as the source of all the planets—nay even
of the three worlds.
It is the fire who through the different Nadis or rays of the
sun evaporates water and causes seasons—the
summer, the rainy
season and
the winter. Cf. Mt.P.
128.4-23.

=== PAGE 236 ===

1.2.24.8-18
233
8-9a.
When this universe rema ned in the form of all the
original BhUtas (Elements )and the specific particularities (distinc-
tions) had been destroyed
(i.e. had
not been
developed),
the
self-born lord who manages the activities of the universe, moved
about
like
a Khadyota (glow-worm)
i.e.
he who
illuminates
firmament) with a desire to manifest himself.
9b- 10.
At
the
beginning
of
the
world he saw the
fire
supported by the Earth and Water. The lord encased
it for the
purpose oflight and divided it into three
parts.
The fire
that
is
sanctifying in
this world
is called the Pdrthiva
(Terrestrial
fire)
.
1 1 .
That which blazes in the sun
is remembered
as
Suci
(pure).
Abja
(born
of water)
should
be
known
as Vaidyut
(Lightening etc.)
I shall recount their characteristics.
12.
The
fires
born
of water
are
three, viz.
:
Vaidyut
(Lightening) Jathara
(gastric)
and
Saura
(Solar).
It
is on
account of this, that the sun blazes in the heaven after drinking
water by means of his
rays.
13.
The
(fire)
Vdr$ya (originating from
Var,\d
or
rain)
contained
in
lighten ng,
does
not become cool by means of
water. The fire that abides within the stomach of human beings
does not become cool by means of water.
14.
Hence,
the
solar
fire,
the
Vaidyuta
fire and the
gastric fire are fires that have water for their fuel.
Some among the waters are considered Tejas (fiery splen-
dour) and some are seen as having wafer for their fuel.
15.
The Nirmathya fire
(i.e. the
fire produced by
churn-
ing or friction ) has wood for its fuel. That fire
is brought under
control by means of water.
The Pavamana fire (sanctifying fire) has sparks and flames
and the gastric fire is remembered as devoid of lustre.
16.
(The
same
is
the case with) the
fire without heat
that is in the zone (of the sun)
.
It is while and
it illuminates.
When the sun sets along with
its
rays
(i.e.
withdrawing
all the rays), the solar lustre enters
fire during night. Hence
it
glows from far
off.
17-18.
The heat of the fire, of the terrestrial
fire,
enters
the smi
as
it
rises
with
its
rays. Hence the fire blazes. The

=== PAGE 237 ===

234
BrahmUntfa Purdna
power of illumination and heat are
( respectively) the
solar and
fiery splendour.
19-20.
By permeating each other, they make each
other
nourish and develop.
In the northern hemisphere as well as in the southern one,
when the sun rises, the night enters waters. Hence, waters become
hot during the day
and
cold on account
of
the entrance and
permeation by the night.
21.
When the sun sets,
the
day
enters waters.
Hence,
during the night, the waters are seen white (and sparkling).
22.
It is in this order that in the southern and
northern
hemispheres,
the
day
and
the night enter water at the times
of sunrise and sunset.
23.
The sun that blazes imbibing water by means
of his
rays, is remembered as the divine Suci (pure)
fire that
is
com-
bined with the terrestrial fire.
24-27.
This
fire
Suci
has
a
thousand
feet (rays).
It
resembles one holding a
pot.
With
a
thousand
JVadis
(vein-
like rays) spread all round,
it
takes up the waters of the rivers,
oceans, wells, canals etc. both blowing and stationary.
Its thousand rays exude cold showers, snowfall as well
as
hot
ones. Among
them,
four hundred
veins have variegated
forms and they shower
( rain)
.
These veins that cause downpour of
rain
are
named
as
follows
: Candanas, Sadhyas, Kutanas, Akutanas and Amrtas.
28-31.
There
are
three hundred
rays
other than these
and they exude snow. These Veins that
bring
about
snowfall
are by name Dr^yas
(visible), Meghas, Yamyas and
Hradinls
( Rumbling ones )
.
Those rays of limited lustre are called Candras by
name.
The white (pure) rays that cause heat are
three hundred
in
number
and their names are Suklas, Kuhakas, Visvabhrts.
The sun brings about the satisfaction of human
beings,
Pitts (Manes) and Devas
after
distributing them
impartially
among them.
He gratifies human beings by means of medicinal
herbs,
the manes by means of Svadha-offerings and all the Devas by
means of nectar.

=== PAGE 238 ===

1.2.24.32-40
235
32-33.
During Vasanta (spring)
and
Griyma
(summer),
the sun blazes by means of three hundred rays.
During the rainy season and autumn he showers
(rain) by
means of four hundred rays.
During Hemanta (early winter) and Silira
(later winter),
he scatters snow by means of three hundred rays.
(The twelve suns) are Indra Dhatr, Bhaga, Pu^an, Mitra,
Varuna, Aryaman, Amlu, Vivasvan, Tvastr, Savitr and Visnu.
34-35.
The sun during the month of Magha is Varuna;1
Pusan in Phalguna; lord Amsu
in
the
month
of Caitra and
Dhatr in the month of Vailakha. Indra
is the sun in the month
m
ofJyestha and the sun in the month of Asa^ha
is Savitr.
36-37a.
Vivasvan is the Sun in the month
of Sravana,
•
*
Bhaga is remembered as the Sun in
the month
of Prsfhapada
(Bhadrapada). Aryaman
is
the Sun in the month of Alvayuja
(As'vina) and Tvastr is the sun in the month of Karttika.
Mitra
is the sun in the month of Margasirsa
and Visnu,
the eternal
one,
is the sun in Pausa.
37b-40.
In
the
activity
as
the
sun, Taruna
has
five
thousand rays. Pusan blazes with six thousand rays and
Lord
Amsu
blazes
with
seven thousand
rays;
Dhatr with
eight
thousand and Indra with nine thousand rays.
Savitr moves
(about) with ten thousand rays and
Bhaga
with
eleven
thousand rays. Mitra blazes with seven thousand
rays and Tvastr blazes with eight thousand rays.
1.
This tabular statement shows
the inonthwise
distribution
of the
sun-gods and
their capacities and functions:
Month
Name of the ruling Sun
Rays
Caitra
Amsu
7000
VaiSakha
Dhatr
8000
Jyestha
Indra
9000
Asadha
Savitr
m
10000
§rava$a
Vivasvan
9000
Bhadrapada
Bhaga
11000
Alvina
Aryaman
10000
Karttika
Tva?tr
8000
Margalirsa
Mitra
7000
Pau?a
Vi?^u
6000
M&gha
Varuiia
5000
Ph&lguna
Pusan
6000

=== PAGE 239 ===

236
Brakmd$4a Purtina
Aryaman moves about with ten thousand
rays and Vivas-
van
(not Parjanya as in
the
text)
blazes
with nine thousand
rays. Visnu scorches the earth by means of six thousand rays.
41-42.
During the Vasanta
season,
the
sun
is tawny-
coloured i
1 during the Grlsma season, the sun has golden lustre:
•during the Varfd (rainy) season, he is white in colour and during
autumn, he
is yellowish white in colour.
During Hemanta (early winter) the sun is copper-coloured.
During SiSira (late winter) he is red in colour. Thus the colours
of the sun
caused
by
the
seasons have
been
( traditionally)
proclaimed.
43.
The sun infuses strength in the medicinal
herbs;
he
makes the Pitrs
(stronger)
by
means
of Svadha;
he
infuses
nectar in the Devas. Thus he gives three things to the three.
44.
In this manner the thousand rays of the sun achieve
the requisite things of the people of the world. They differ inas-
much as they exude snow, rain or hot rays.
45.
Thus,
is the white resplendent sphere named
sun. It
is the foundation and source of origin of the stars, planets and
the moon.
46.
All these, viz.
the moon, the
stars and
the
planets
should be known as originating from the
sun. The moon is the
lord of all stars and the sun is the king of planets.
47.
The remaining five
planets should be known as gods
moving about as they please.
48.
Understand the sources of origin
of
the
remaining
planets
being described well. Skanda,
the commander-in-chief
of the army of the Devas,
is cited as the planet Angaraka
( the
Mars)
.
49-5 1
.
Scholars conversant with
the
Vedic
knowledge
call Narayana by the name Budha
( the Mercury)
.
Yama (an incarnation of) Rudra, the son of Vivasvan and
m
the lord of the world, is the great planet SanaiScara ( the Saturn)
who is the most excellent among Brahmanas and who
orbits
very slowly.
1.
W.41-42 give the traditional seasonwise colours or complexions of
the sun.

=== PAGE 240 ===

1
.2 .24.52-60
237
The two resplendent great planets are
the
preceptors of
the Devas and Asuras.
Both of them viz.
Sukra (the Venus) and Brhaspati (the
Jupiter) are the sons of Prajapati.
There is no doubt that the entire unit of the three worlds
has the sun as its root
( source)
.
52-54.
The entire universe including the
Devas,
Asuras
and
human
beings
originate
from
the
sun,
O,
leading
Brahmanas.
All the brilliance of Rudra, Upendra
( Visnu), Indra and
Gandra (the Moon), the dwellers of the heaven, the brightness
of
all
luminaries,
the entire
splendour
of all the worlds
(is
that of
the
sun).
He
is
the
soul of all; he
is the lord of all
the
worlds;
he
is
a great god; and
Prajapati the lord
of the
subjects). The Sun alone
is the root of the three worlds. He
is
the highest deity. It is from him
that
everything
is born and
everything gets merged in him alone.
55.
The existence and non-existence of the worlds have
formerly
emanated
from
the
sun.
The
plant
that
should
be understood by the
whole
universe,
O, Brahmanas,
is
the
brilliant sun of great lustre.
56-57.
(The units of
time)
Ksanas,
Muhurtas,
days,
nights, fortnights, the whole months, the seasons, the years and
the Yugas get merged into this and are born
again and
again.
Hence, there is no reckoning of time without the sun.
58-60.
Without the reckoning of time,
there
is
neither
(the study of) scriptures,
nor
(religious)
initiation
nor
the
daily
routine
of
religious
duties.
If the seasons are not well
defined, how can there be flowers, roots and
fruits ? How
can
the crops or fruits of trees come out ? How can medicinal herbs
and grasses grow?
Without the sun that blazes in the universe and who robs
(evaporates) water, there will be
complete cessation and non-
existence of all sorts ofhuman activity and the activity of other
creatures both in the earth and in the heaven.
He alone is the 'Time*. He is
the Tire’.
He
is the lord
of the subjects. He has twelve
souls
( in
the
form
of twelve
Adityas
(the sun god).

=== PAGE 241 ===

238
Brahm&ntfa Purdna
61.
He scorches the three worlds inclusive of the mobile
and immobile beings, O excellent Brahmanas.
He
is the mass of splendour that
dispels the
darkness
of
the entire world.
62.
After resorting to the excellent path of the wind,
he
gives heat to this entire universe by means of his rays,
at
the
sides, above and below, nay, at
all
sides.
63-64.
Just as a bright lamp suspended in the middle of
a house dispels simultaneously the darkness at the
sides, above
and below, so also the sun who has a thousand
(innumerable)
rays, who is the lord of planets
and the
universe,
illuminates
by means of his
rays
the
entire
universe
everywhere
on all
sides.
65.
The most excellent among the thousand rays of
the
sun cited by me before, are the seven rays
that are the
sources
of origin of the planets. 1
66-68.
They are declared as follows
:— Susumna,
Hari-
kesa as well as Visvakarman; Visvasravas
(and again another
ray) Sampadvasu, Arvavasu and Svarat.
It is the solar ray Susumna that causes the
nourishment
of the Moon that wanes. This Su?umna
is glorified as one that
spreads sideways and upwards.
Harikesa, that
is in front,
is
glorified
as
the
source
of
origin of the
stars.
69-72a.
Visvakarman, the ray to the south,
right,
nur-
tures Budha (Mercury). Visvasravas the ray to the west, behind,
is remembered by learned men as the source of origin of Sukra
(the Venus)
.
The ray Sampadvasu is the source of origin
of
Lohita
(the Mars.)
1 .
This is a peculiar way of associating the particular ray of the sun as
the source of origin of particular planet:
Name of the ray of the sun
Su$umna
Harikesa
Vi svagravas
Sampadvasu
Arv&vasu
Svarat
Visvakarman
Name of the planet or star so introduced
The moon
stars
in
general
Sukra
(The Venus)
The
Mars
The Jupiter
The Saturn
Budha
(Mercury)

=== PAGE 242 ===

1.2.24.72b-78
239
The ^ixth ray Arvavasu
is the source of origin
of Brhas-
pati
( the Jupiter)
.
The ray Svarat
causes
the
development
of Sanaiscara
(the Saturn)
.
Thus,
it
is
due
to the power of the sun that the planets,
stars
and
constellations
remain
in the firmament. Nay,
this
entire universe
is sustained.
72b-73.
The stars are termed Naksatras because they do
not become reduced
(jVb-not Ksiyante become reduced). 1
These Ksetras (abodes) happen before on account of
the
rays (?) The sun, the creator of the star, takes up their abodes.
74-76.
The
stars
are
so
called because
they
redeem
( taranat
)
those persons who have crossed the planets by
means
of merit and who have
resorted to them
(once again) at the
end of the merit
(i.e. when merits had been enjoyed fully.)
They are Tdrakas because they are white and sparkling.
The sun is named Aditya because
it takes
up (a-y/da-
‘to
take*) and dispels the
splendour
and
darkness
pertaining to
the heaven, earth and night
(Addndt ).
The root y/Suy/ Savatia
is
considered
in
this connection
in the sense of Syandana (flowing) .The sun is
considered
Saviir
because
it
causes
the
exudation
of
waters
and
sparkling
splendours.
77.
The root y/Cad is cited so as to mean
“to delight”.
It
is considered to mean
‘‘to
be
white”,
“to
be
nectarine”,
and “to be cool”.
78.
The
divine
spheres
of the
sun and the moon are
sparkling and
white.
They
arc of the form
(or full of) of fire
and water. They move about in the firmament. They resemble
auspicious round pots.
1. W.
72-77. Our author
takes
interest
in
popular
etymologies.
Here are
some
specimens:
(i)
Nakfatra ‘a star
*—na kfiyante ‘Those which do
not
get
diminished*
but grammatically
it
is y/nak§a— + tran.
(ii)
Aditya is normally Aditi—qya=ya
(the son of Aditi)
but
here
it
is traced to & +
.%/d£ — ‘to take*.

=== PAGE 243 ===

Brahm&Q<fa Purina
240
79. The sphere of the moon
is remembered to be consist-
ing
of dense water. The white and brilliantly sparkling sphere
of the sun
is composed of dense fiery splendour.
80-83.
All the divine ones enter these abodes completely
during all the Manvantaras.1 They resort to the
stars,
planets
and the sun.
They
are
the
abodes
of the divine ones and are called
after them respectively.
The sun enters the
Saura
Sthdna
(the
Solar abode) and
the moon the Saumya Sthdna (the Lunar abode)
.
Sukra (the Venus) enters
the abode pertaining to Sukra
that
is very brilliant and has sixteen flames.
Brhaspati (the Jupiter) enters Jaiva (intended for Jupiter)
abode and Lohita (the Mars) enters the Lauhita abode.
Lord Sanaiscara (the
Saturn)
enters the abode pertain-
ing to the Saturn. Budha (the Mercury) enters the abode meant
for Budha, and Svarbhanu (Rahu) stays in the abode pertain-
ing to Svarbhanu (Rahu).
84.
All the stars enter
the Nak$atras (abodes meant for
constellation) and stars. All these are
the
luminary abodes of
those who are pious-souled and meritorious.
85.
These (abodes) have been created by
the self-born
lord (Brahma) at the beginning
of a Kalpa and
they
have
begun
to
function
since
then. These
abodes remain
till the
annihilation of all living beings (at the end of the world).
86-87.
In all the Manvantaras, the same are the abodes
of all the Devas. The Abhimanins ( those who identify themselves)
abide by these divine abodes. The
past ones
live
along with
the past ones and the future ones along with the future Devas.
The
present
ones
live
along with the present Sthanins (those
who identify themselves with the abodes)
and
Devas. In this
Manvantara the planets are remembered as
Vilitdmkas (pertain-
ing to Sacrifices)
.
1. W. 80-92. The idea is that what we see as stars or planets are the
abodes, the occupants of which change per Manvantara. In this Manvantara*
the occupants have got their position due to performance of sacrifices and hence
they are called
Vaitdnikas. The names of the present gods occupying
these
planets are also given e.g. Vivasvan
(the present sun god), Vasu, son of Tvi?i
(the
present moon
god).

=== PAGE 244 ===

1.2.24.88-99a
241
88.
Vivasvan, the son of Aditi, is the sun in
the Vaivas-
vata Manvantara. The
lord Vasu named
Tvisi,
the son
of
Dharma,
is remembered as the moon.
89.
Lord Sukra,
belonging
to
Bhfgu
clan,
should be
known as the performer of sacrifices on behalf of the Asuras.
The lordly son of Angiras, of massive splendour is remem-
bered as the preceptor of the Dcvas.
90.
Budha
is fascinating to the mind. He is remembered
as the son of Tvisi. Sanai^cara
(the Saturn)
is the
ugly son of
Samjfia and Vivasvan.
91.
The youthful
lord
Mars
was
born of
Vikesi
and
Agni.
The stars that are named Rksas
arc remembered
as the
»
•
daughters of Daksa.
92.
Svarbhanu (Rahu)
is the
son
ofSimhika. He is an
Asura causing distress to all living beings.
Thus
the
Abhimanins
(those who
identify themselves)
with the moon, the stars,
the planets and the
sun
have
been
recounted.
93.
These are mentioned as the
abodes
and those who
occupy the abodes are deities.
The abode of Vivasvan
(the Sun)
of a thousand rays is
&ukla (white and resplendent) and fiery.
94.
The abode of Tvisi of a thousand
rays
is white and
sparkling and consists of water.
The abode of
Manojfia
(i.e. the Mercury)
of five rays*
is remembered as dark in colour as well as Apya (watery)
.
95.
The abode of Sukra
is a
lotus among
the
sixteen
rays. It is watery, white and sparkling.
The Lohita (red) abode of Bhauma (the Mars)
is watery.
96.
The big abode of Brhaspati is green and
watery.
It
has twelve rays. The abode of Manda
(the Saturn)
is said
to
be black and watery.
It has eight rays.
97-99a.
The abode of Svarbhanu
is Tamasa (dark).
It is
the abode of those who cause the distress of all living beings.
All the
stars should be known as watery and they have a
single ray each.
They are the shelters unto those of meritorious
fame.
In
colour they are perfectly
white.
They should be known as full

=== PAGE 245 ===

Brahmdntfa PurUna
of dense water. They have been created even
at the
beginning
of the Kalpa. They are remembered
to be
intrinsically lumi-
nous due to the contact with the rays of the sun.
99b- 103.
The diameter of the sun is remembered as nine
thousand Yojanas. 1 The extent of its sphere is three times that.
The area of the moon’s
sphere
is
remembered
as
twice
the
area of the sun.
Svarbhanu is equal to them both. It moves beneath them.
It has been
created
after taking out the shadow of the Earth
and has a spherical shape.
The third large abode of Svarbhanu which is full of dark-
ness, comes out of the sun during Parvan days
(i.e. New Moon,
Full Moon etc.) and goes towards
the
moon.
During
Solar
Parvans
it comes back to the sun from the moon.
It is called Svarbhanu because
it
pushes away
( Nudate
)
the heaven (Sz;ar) by means of its splendour
(Bh&sd).
104.
The diameter and extent of the sphere of Bhargava
( the Venus)
it laid down as one-sixteenth of that of the moon.
105.
Bphaspati (the Jupiter) should
be known as one-
fourth
less than the Venus
(i.e. three fourths of
its size).
The Mars and Saturn are remembered to be three-fourths
of Jupiter in extent.
106-107.
In
diameter
and
extent,
Mercury
is
three-
fourths of either of them.
The forms of the
stars
and
constellations are similar
to
those of
Mercury. Those that have bodies are equal
in
length
and extent to Mercury.
A man
conversant
with
reality
should know that the
stars are usually in conjunction with the moon.
108.
The stars and
constellations differ
in
extent from
one another by five hundred, four hundred, three hundred and
also two hundred Yojanas.
1 09.
The spheres of the stars are lesser than the
earlier
ones. There is no star smaller than
the ones
with
one and a
halfYojanas.
1.
VV. 99-126. These are the ideas of the ancient Indians about the
locations, dimensions and ^movements
of
planets and
the heavenly bodies
in the pretelescope days. Cf Bh. P. V.
22. 8-17.

=== PAGE 246 ===

1.2.24.110-123
110.
Three planets among them
which
orbit
very far
away and above all are the Saturn,
the Jupiter and the Mars.
It should be known that they orbit very slowly.
111.
The great
planets
beneath
them are the four fast
moving ones, viz.
the
sun,
the moon,
the Mercury
and the
Venus.
112.
There are as many croresof stars all round as there
are
constellations. The movement
of these constellations has
been duly regulated by god Brahma.
113-116.
The movement
of the
sun through
them
in
accordance with the Ayanas (Solar
transit)
is
high
and
low.
When (the sun)
is in the northern transit,
the moon
is
seen
moving fast
during
the
Parvan
days with
its
rays, not very
clear. This is because it
is very high
(?
)
When the sun is in the southern
path,
it
resorts to the
lower
path.
It
is always
surrounded by
the line of Earth (?
horizon) during the New Moon and the Full Moon days.
It
is
not seen at the regular time and
it sets quickly.
Hence, on the new moon day, the moon stationed in the
northern path is seen in the
southern path; but
it
is not seen
so regularly.
117.
Hence, in view of the movements of the luminaries,
the sun and the moon
set and
rise
at
the same
time
(every
day) during the equinotical days.
118.
In
the
northern
paths,
the
times
of
rising
and
setting
are
different.
During
the
new moon and
full moon,
they should be understood as following the circle of luminaries.
1 19.
When the sun orbits through the path of the south-
ern transit,
it does so beneath all the planets.
120.
Making its sphere vast and wide, the moon
orbits
above
it. The entire galaxy of stars orbits above the moon.
121.
The Mercury orbits above all the stars. The Venus
orbits above the Mercury. The
Mars does so above the Venus
and the Jupiter above the Mars.
122.
The Saturn is above it and the sphere of the seven
sages (Great Bear)
is
above
it.
Dhruva
(the
Pole
Star)
is
situated above the Great Bear.
123.
The intervening
distance
between
the
stars and
the planets high above
is two hundred thousand Yojanas.

=== PAGE 247 ===

Brahm&nfa Pur&na
124.
The planets, the moon and
the
sun
orbit
in the
firmament with
divine
splendour.
In their regular movement,
they duly come into contact with the constellations.
125.
The
planets,
the
stars and
the sun may be low,
high or straight during their mutual contact
or when separate,
yet they look at the subjects simultaneously.
126.
These are
situated
face to
face.
They come into
contact mutually.
That their
mutual
conjunction
is without
any confusion should be understood by learned men.
127-128.
Thus
is
the
regulated
arrangement
of the
Earth, the luminaries, the continents, the oceans, the mountains,
the sub-continents,
the rivers and those who stay in them.
The planets have their origination in these constellations.
129.
Vivasvan, the
son
of Aditi,
the
first among the
planets, the sun-god, was born in the constellation ViSakha
in
the Caksusa Manvantara.1
130.
Tvisiman, the son of Dharma, the lord moon god,
the son of Vasu, the
cool-rayed
cause
of nights was
born in
the constellation Krttika.
131.
Sukra
( the Venus ) who is endowed with sixteen fiery
flames
(rays)
and who
is
the son of
Bhrgu and who is the
most excellent among stars and planets
was bom
in the star
Tisya
(Pu$ya)
after the sun.
132.
The planet Brhaspati (the Jupiter) who has twelve
fiery flames (rays), who
is
the son
of Angiras and who is the
preceptor of the Universe, was born in the Purvaphalguni.
1. W.
129-137 give the stars
(or constellations) under which these
planets were
‘bom*.
Name of the Planet
The star of birth,
( i ) The Sun god, the son of Aditi
ViSakha
(ii) The moon god, Tvisiman, the son
of Dharma
Krttika
(iii)
Sukra (the Venus) the son of Bhrgu
Tisya
(Pu§ya)
(iv)
Brhaspati (Jupiter) the son of Angiras Purva-Phalguni
(v)
Mars, son of Prajapati
Purva§adha
(vi)
Sanaifcara, son of the Sun god
Revati
(vii)
Budha
(Mercury)
son
of the moon
god
(viii)
Ketu, son of Mrtyu
(ix) Rahu
Dhani?tha
Asle$a
Bhara^i

=== PAGE 248 ===

1.2.24.133-141
245
133.
It
is mentioned in the Sruti that the planet (Mars)
of nine fiery flames, who has a red-complexioned body and who
is the son of Prajapati was born in the constellation Purvasadha.
134.
§anai£cara
(the Saturn)
, the son of
the
sun, was
born in the constellation Revati. He has seven fiery flames.
The
planet Budha
(Mercury),
the son of the moon was
born in the constellation Dhanistha. He has five fiery flames.
135.
Sikhin (i.e. Ketu) who
is
full of
darkness, who
is
the sun of Mrtyu, who causes the annihilation
and
decline
of
the subjects
and who
is
a
mighty planet that destroys every-
thing, was born in the constellation of A^lesa.
136-138.
The
daughters of
Daksa
(i.e.
the
27
stars)
were born in their respective stars named after them.
Rahu who
has
a
naturally
dark
sphere, who
has
the
virility of the Tamas quality and who is the planet attacking the
moon and the sun, was born in the constellation Bharani.
These
stars and
planets
beginning with
Bhargava (the
Venus) should be comprehended because they become
devoid
of goodness at the time when the
constellation
of
nativity
is
being harassed. They are affected by that defect (and are redeem-
ed), due to the devotion to the planets.
139.
The
first among
all
these
planets,
it
is
said, is
Aditya
( Sun)
. 1
Sukra
is (the first) among
the
stars and the planets and
Ketu is the first among meteors.
140.
Dhruva
is the pivotal peg among the planets scatter-
ed about in all the four quarters. Srav $tha
i.e.
Dhanistha
(is
the first ?) among the stars and
the northern transit is the first
among transits.
141.
The first among the five Var$as
(years)
is remem-
bered as Sarhvatsara.
Siiira
(late Winter)
is
the
first among
seasons and Magha is the first among the Months.
1. W. 139-144 give what is the 'first’ or the most important one among
the stars, divisions of time etc.
It is worth noting that M&gha is regarded as
the first month of the year (probably due to
Vasanta Sampata therein) and
Sisira as the 1st Rtu (season) and not the spring. The second point of impor-
tance is the emphasis of the Yuga being a period of five years beginning with
Dhanistha and ending with £rava$a Nak?atra.

=== PAGE 249 ===

246
Brahm&Qfa Purina
142.
Among fortnights, the bright halfand among Tithis
( lunar fortnightly days ) Pratipat is the
first. The day is glorified
as the first among the divisions of day, night etc.
143.
The first among the
Muhurtas
is
that which has
Rudra as its deity. The unit of time K$ana has nimefd as
its first,
O excellent ones among those who know Time.
144.
The Yuga
(Era)
consisting
of five
years begins
with Dhanistha and ends with &ravana.
’ Due to the peculiar movement of
the
sun,
this revolves
like a wheel.
145.
The sun is hence remembered
as Kala (Time) by
those who know that (i.e. time).
He
is
the lord.
It is he who
makes the four
types of
living
beings function or desist from
action.
146-147.
The venerable lord Rudra himself is the cause
of the functions of Time. Thus
is the regulated arrangement of
luminaries as
conditioned by
the
affairs
( of the
world)
.
It
is
evolved by
the Lord
(God),
for
the
sake
of
regular
functioning of the world.
This
is
compressed
(?) in
Dhruva by means of Uttara-
Sravana* (?)
148.
It
is extensively spread
all round among them. He
is situated in
the
form of a circle. He
is made to function in-
telligently at the beginning of the Kalpa by the Lord.
149.
He
is the support. He
is
the
Abhim&nin
(one who
identifies himself) with all. He
is
the
soul
of the
luminary
bodies. He is the miraculous transformation of Pradhana of the
Cosmic form.
150.
It is impossible for all human
beings
to
compre-
hend factually
the movements
both
inward
and outward, of
the luminary bodies, by means of their physical eye.
151.
The learned man
should comprehend and retain
in belief,
by means of
scripture,
inference,
perception, and
reasoning after testing intelligently and carefully.
*
V&. P.53.1 19a reads: utpamafi bravavendsau
:
'It started by Srava^a'

=== PAGE 250 ===

1.2.24.152—25.5
247
152. O Brahmanas of
the most excellent
intellect these
are five expedients ( means ) to comprehend the group of lumin-
aries viz.
:
eye, scripture, water, picture and
calculation.
CHAPTER TWENTYFIVE
The Origin of the Epithet Nilakanfha1
Siva
swallowing poison .
Sula said
:
1.
After recounting this
(astronomical
information
in
the last chapter)
Lord
Vayu
(The Wind
god) of very great
intellect and who
is (always) engaged
in what
is
conducive to
the welfare of the world, commenced the Japa (muttering in an
undertone the Mantra)
that was
to be chanted when the sun
reached the middle of the sky.
2.
All those sages who had assembled there and who had
perfect control over
their own
selves,
stood
up
with palms
joined in reverence.
3.
The Wind god prayed
: “O
Nilakantha,
obeisance
to you who ought
to be
worshipped
at
the
end
of religious
observances, and who are the lord of all
living beings, anima-
ting them
all.*’
4-5.
On hearing this, those sages of pure souls, of Praise-
worthy
religious
observance
and
famous
as
Va akhilyas,
eightyeight
thousand
in number, who,
of sublimated sexual
impulse, walked by the side of
the
sun
(as his associates) and
subsisted on
leaves
(of trees),
wind
and water, submitted to
Vayu as follows
:
1 .
This popular story as to how Siva’s throat became blue due to drink-
ing the deadly poison Kalakufa appears in the Mbh.
(Adi. 18.4 1-43) and other
Puranas. The text of this chapter from V. 6 onwards is the same as that of the
Va. P^4.10
ff.

=== PAGE 251 ===

248
Brahm&ntfa Purdna
6-7.
“O
excellent
Wind-god, O
most
excellent
one
among those
conversant with meritorious
things, we
wish to
hear (more about) what
is mentioned by you as “Nrlakantha”.
It is the most meritorious thing among sacred ones. O excellent
one, recount
that unto
us. O
Prabhafijana
(Wind-god), by
your grace, we wish to hear everything.
8.
What is the
reason
whereby the neck of the lord of
Ambika
(i.e. god Siva) had
become
blue? O
lord, we wish
to
hear
this
particularly
from
your mouth
(i.e. as directly
mentioned by you)
.
9.
All verbal utterances are impelled by
you, O Vayu.
The
function
of speech
is
dependent on
Varna
(sound
of
letters) and Sthana (place of articulation).
10.
The intelligent enthusiasm is activated by you.
It
is
(only) when you sanctify them that the remaining
Varna
s
be-
gin to function.
1 1 . The existence of the Varnas is
only due to you, from
whom the utterances recede and
wherein
the
colours
of
the
body
are
rare. O
Anila
( wind
god)
,
you are always omni-
present (and have access everywhere).
1 2.
Excepting you, O Samlrana
( wind god)
, there
is no
one who
pervades
everything.
This
living
world
is directly
perceptible to you from
all sides, O Anila (wind-god)
.
13.
You know the lord
of
speech,
Isvara,
the
leader
(controller) of minds. Tell
us
wherefore
(for what)
is
there
an aberration of the colour and feature in the region of his neck
(throat) .”
14.
On hearing the words of
those
sages
of
sanctified
souls, Vayu who
has
great splendour and who is revered by
the world, replied.
1 5.
“Formerly, in Krtayuga, there was a Brahmana called
Vasistha who was extremely interested in deciding the
(mean-
ing of)
Vedas. He was a righteous soul. He was the mental son
(of Brahma). He was a Prajapati.
16-19.
He asked Karttikeya who has a peacock
as
his
excellent
vehicle.
He
had
stolen
the
collyrium from
the
eyes
of the
wives of the demon Mahisa
( i.e.
he made
them
widows
by
killing
Mahi§a). He
is a
noble
soul (named)
Mahasena, whose voice resembles the rumbling
sound
of
the

=== PAGE 252 ===

1.2.25.20-40
249
clouds. He appeared to see the joyous
ebullitions of the mind
of Uma,
by assuming
the false form of a
boy. He took away
the life of Kraufica, and
delighted
the
heart
of
Gauri, (He
submitted)
: “O
excellent
one,
what
is
this
radiant thing,
resembling collyrium, seen in the neck
(of
Siva)
which
is
as
(white
and)
lustrous
as
the
Kunda
flower and the Moon ?
How has
it happened so ? Narrate this to me, a suppliant who
am brilliant, devoted
and have perfect self-control.
20.
O extremely fortunate one,
it behoves you to
detail
everything without excluding anything. Narrate
this auspicious
and sacred
story
that
destroys
all
sins.
Please
tell
us
this
story for my delight.”
'
21.
On hearing those words of that noble-souled Vasi$tha,
Skanda, the extremely resplendent
destroyer
of the army
of
the enemies of gods
(i.e. Asuras)
, replied:
22-23.
‘‘Listen to these words repeated by me, O
most
excellent one among eloquent persons,
(I am repeating)
what
has been heard by me before,
as I sat on the lap of Uma.
This
is
the
conversation of
the
noble-souled Sarva
(Siva)
with
Parvati.
I shall recount that, O great sage, for your delight.
24-40.
On the beautiful peak of the
Kailasa
mountain,
lord Siva the destroyer of the body of Madana (God of Love)
was seated
comfortably on a rocky slab covered with gold and
bedecked with pure pearls, jewels, and gems.
The beautiful peak of the Kailasa is variegated on account
of
different
kinds
of
minerals.
It
resembled
the
sun
at
midday and had the lustre of molten gold.
It had stairs built
of
diamonds and crystals, with steps of rocky surfaces of variegated
forms.
It was
full of gold
and was
divinely
variegated on
account of the different kinds of minerals. It is interspersed with
various kinds of trees and creepers laden with different kinds of
flowers
and
fruits.
It was
filled
with
Harhsas
(swans) and
Karandavas (ducks)
. It was beautified by Cakravaka birds (Rud-
dy geese). Many bees were singing (humming) at a high pitch
there.
It was resonant with the continuous sound of water-falls.
Its caves were resounded with the sounds of intoxicated peacocks
and Kraufica birds. It was filled with bevies of
celestial
dam-
sels.
It was beautified by Kinnaras. The chirping sound of the
different
varieties
of Jivamjivaka
birds (a mythial bird with

=== PAGE 253 ===

250
Brahmdnia Purdna
two heads) spread
everywhere
in
it.
In many
places,
the
cooing sound of the cuckoo-birds was heard.
It was frequented
by Siddhas and Caranas.
It had the sound of oxen whose sound
resembled the rumblings of clouds. There were other sounds
as
well. The elephants were agitated on account of Vinayaka and
they
left
their
caves.
There
were
sounds
of
the
musical
instruments like Vina (lute) and
other
(musical instruments).
They were fascinating to the ears. Groups of people were swing-
ing by means of
Dolds (swings).
It
was
resorted
to by
be-
vies
of
ladies.
It
was
echoing
with the sound of
the
bells
fitted to the swings suspended from the
flagstaff.
There
were
many
musical
instruments
such
as
the
Vallakis (lutes) and
Venus (flutes).
It was as much
resounded as though there were
thirty peacocks (crying). The caves were filled with the sounds of
vocal
music,
drums,
musical
instruments which were played
upon and which were beaten and also with (hurryings for play)
and disputes (arguments). Swans, pigeons and royal cranes were
happily perched there. The lord of the Ganas (i.e. Vighnaraja)
was sporting about with various kinds of fixations
(poses)
,
of
the body. The lord of the Bhutas
( Spirits ) was surrounded
by
Bhfitas of various sorts. (For example) some had the faces of lions
and tigers. Some
were
producing
terrible
cries.
They
had
terrific
speed.
Others
had
the faces of deer, sheep, elephants
and horses
Others were hideous with faces of cats
or form
of
foxes. Some were short, some were tall;
some were very lean.
Some had protruding
bellies ;
some
had
huge
bellies ;
some
had
short-shanks;
some had
lips
hanging
loose; others had
huge palm-like shanks. Some had the ears of cows; some had
a
single
ears ; some had huge ears ; some had no ears ; some had
many feet;
some had huge feet; some
had
single
foot; some
had no
foot;
some
had many eyes; some
had
large
eyes;
some had
a
single eye; some had no eye; some had
a single
curved
tooth;
some
had
huge
curved
teeth;
some had
many
curved
teeth;
some
had
no
curved
tooth
at
all.
Some had huge
heads ;
some had
many
heads ;
some
had
no head at all. Some had
a
single tongue ;
some had
huge
tongues; some had many tongues; some had no tongue at all.
The daughter of the King
of mountains
spoke
thus
to
lord Siva.

=== PAGE 254 ===

1.2.25.41-52
25?
41-43.
“O lord, Master of the past and
the
future, O
lord
whose
authority has been marked by a bullock
(i.e. bull-
bannered one), there is something sparkling
in
your
neck, O
great lord, resembling a cloud. O lord, O destroyer of the body
ofK&ma, what is this that shines in your white neck ? It is not
very deep and manifest. What
is
the
cause ? What
is
the
reason that your neck is bluish, O lord? Narrate
all these duly
(as I have got curiosity and)
I am eager (to
hear
it)
44.
On
hearing
the
words
of
Parvati,
the
lover of
Parvati,
Sankara,
recounted
the
story
fully endued
with
auspiciousness.
Mahefvara said
:
45.
Formerly, when
the milk-ocean was being churned
by the Devas and
Danavas for
the
sake
of Amrta
(nectar) y
a terrible poison as sparkling as the dark fire cropped up.
46.
On seeing, O lady of excellent face,
the multitudes-
of Devas
and
Daityas became
dejected.
All of them appro-
ached Brahma.
47.
On seeing the
frightened groups of Devas, Brahma,,
of great splendour, asked
: “O highly fortunate ones, why
are
you frightened? Why are you dejected in the mind?
48. Three-fold prosperity and power has been conferred by
me on you all, O excellent Devas. By whom has your prosperity
been turned off?
49.
You are the lords and masters of the
three worlds*
All
of you
are
free from ailments. In the creation of subjects-
there is no one who dares to transgress my behest.
50.
All of you move about in aerial chariots. All
of you
go
about
as
you
please.
(All
of you are very competent) in
regard to spiritual things, worldly beings and providential ones
for ever)
.
51.
You are competent to make all the subjects function
in accordance with the consequence of their
previous
actions.
Hence, why are you
all agitated due
to
fear
like
the
deer
harassed by lion
?
52.
What is your misery? What is your distress? Whence
has fear befallen you? It behoves
you
to
explain
quickly
all
these things duly”.

=== PAGE 255 ===

252
Brahmdnia Purdna
53.
On hearing the words of Brahma, the supreme
soul,
those Devas, leading Daityas and Danavas
accompanied
by
the sages said
:
54-59a.
“O Pitarnaha (Brahma, the grandfather)
when
the
ocean
was
being churned by
the
Devas
and
Asuras,
a
terrible poison had turned up.
It resembled serpents and
black
bees. It was like the blue cloud. It had the sparkling lustre of the
Bamvarta fire
( the
fire that burns down the
universe
at
the
-end
of a Kalpa).
It had cropped up like the god of death and
destruction.
It had the fiery splendour of the sun at the end of
the Yugas.
It had
the
brilliance of the sun capable of annihi-
lating the three worlds.
It spread
all round.
Janardana of reddish
white
body had
been rendered
black on
being scorched by that poison whose lustre
is on a
par with the dark fire of ultimate destruction.
On seeing Janardana of white reddish limbs being render*
ed black by its burning, all of us
became
frightened
and we
sought refuge
in you alone”.
On hearing the
frightful
words
of the Devas
and
the
Asuras, Brahma
of great
splendour,
the
grandfather
of the
worlds replied:
59b-63.
“O
Devas,
sages and ascetics,
listen all of you.
The poison that has the lustre of the
dark
fire
of destruction
and what we all know as KdlakUfa has appeared while the great
•ocean was being churned. Immediate by its
very
appearance,
Devas lost all lustre
and
they
did not
shine
the moment
it
cropped up. Neither Visnu, nor I nor all the leading Devas can
bear
the brunt of its attack excepting god Sankara”.
After saying
this,
Brahma who
had
the
lustre
of the
interior
of a
lotus,
whose
source of origin
is lotus, who was
not born of any womb and who was the foremost among
those
who were
canversant with
the
Vedas, remembered Orhkara
and meditated on the divine lustre
(that
is present all
round.
Thereafter god Brahma, began to eulogise.
Eulogy of God Siva:1
64.
“O Virupaksa (Lord ofuneven-three-eyes) obeisance
1.
In Pur&oas
it is customary to attribute die highest epithets to the
deity eulogised. Sometimes it results in a string of names or adjectives. Here

=== PAGE 256 ===

1 .2 .25 .65-72
25$
unto you. Hail to you of divine eyes. Salute unto the lord with
the
Pinaka bow
in
his
hand*
Obeisance
to the god with a
thunderbolt in his hand.
65.
Obeisance to the lord of the three worlds. Salute
to
the lord of all living beings. Bow to the slayer
of the enemies
of the Devas. Hail to the lord with the moon,
the sun and the
fire for his eyes.
66.
Obeisance unto thee who are Brahma,
Rudra and
Visnu. Bow to the Samkhya;
to
the Yoga.
Obeisance
to
the
assemblage of all spirits
(incarnate)
.
67.
Hail
to
the
destroyer
of the
body of Manmatha
(God of Love ). Obeisance to the
lord with
Time
( kdla)
for
his back. Obeisance
to Rudra of excellent semen. Bow
to
the
lord of the Devas and to the Vehement one.
68.
Obeisance to Kapardin (one having matted hair)
,
to
Sankara the terrible one. Hail to Hara, the bearer
of
a
skull,
one of hideous features,
Obeisance
to
Siva
the
bestower
of
boons.
69.
Obeisance to the destroyer of the
three
cities
(of
demons).
Bow to
the
destroyer
of the
sacrifice
(ofDaksa).
Hail to the lord of the mothers. Obeisance to the
Vrddha
(the
ancient god)
;
Obeisance
to
Suddha
(the
pure
one),
to
the
Mukta
( Liberated one )
; obeisance to the mighty one.
70.
Obeisance to the sole hero among the
three
worlds*
to
the
moon, to Varuna; to Agra
(the foremost one), to Ugra
(the terrible one); to Vipra (knower
of
the
Vedas)
of many
eyes.
71.
Obeisance to Rajas, to Sattva
;
obeisance unto you of
unmanifest origin. Bow to the Eternal one;
to the
non-eternal
one; and to the eternal-cum-non-etemal one.
72.
Hail to the manifest one, to the Unmanifest
one,
as
well as
to
the
manifest-cum-unmanifest
one.
Obeisance
to
god Siva
is regarded as equivalent to the Para Brahman and in addition to
his mythological exploits, epithets applicable to the Para Brahman are included
in
this
eulogy.
We find Siva so glorified in Tai. Samhita IV.5 (Rudradhyaya ) and the
Mate Ndr&yaxftya Upa. X
17*21. The Sahasranamas
(garlands of a thousand
epithets)
of these
deities
is a
Purapic
development.
The
Visgusahasra-
n&ma in the Mbh.
is perhaps the earliest example of this.

=== PAGE 257 ===

254
Brahmdnda Purdtia
the
Cintya (one who
can be contemplated upon ; obeisance to
the Acintya
(one who is beyond contemplation)
; Obeisance
to
the Cintya-cum-Acintya one.
73.
Obeisance
to
the
dispeller
of distress
of
all
the
worlds ; Bow to the lord who is fond of Narayana ; Obeisance to
*§arva, the lover of Uma, Hail to the lord marked with the face
of Nandin ?
( nandi-vaktrdnkitdya)*
74.
Hail to (the lord
identifying
himself with)
Pak$a
(fortnight), Mdsa
(Month)
and
Ardham&sa
(half a month);
obeisance
to
(the
Lord,
the
identifier with) the season and
Saihvatsara(yea.v)
; Bow to the lord of many forms, to
the
lord
with shaven head, to the lord bearing a staff, to the lord wearing
a mailed armour.
75.
Obeisance to the lord with the
skull
in
his
hand;
Bow to the god having
quarters
for
his
raiment
( the
naked
one)
; to one with a tufted head; Obeisance to the lord
with a
bow and a chariot, and to the celibate god with self control.
76-78.
Obeisance to the embodiment
of Rk, Yajus and
Samaveda;
obeisance
to Purusa, the supreme lord. Bow unto
you who are worthy of being eulogised by prayers composed like
this.”
After eulogising like this, O lady ofexcellent face, Brahma
bowed down (and praised once again).
“O lord Rudra, (even)
after knowing my devotion as well
as that of the Devas, you do not manifest yourself. Though you
had released your (matted) hair and got
it
splashed with
the
waters of the Ganga, (yet) you are too subtle, to be contemplat-
ed upon, on account of your supreme Yogic power”.
Thus I was eulogised formerly by lord Brahma, the creator
of
the worlds, by means of various kinds of hymns originating
from the Vedas and Vedangas
( ancillary parts of the vedas).
Thereupon, I
spoke
to Pitamaha Brahma
in important
words
:
79-80.
"Olord of the worlds, O lord of the past, present
and
future, O lord of the universe, O Brahma, what should
be
done by me unto you. Tell me, O lord of holy rites”.
*Va.P.55.76 reads
: nandi-cakrd fdnt&ya ‘marked with the cakra of
Nandi
9

=== PAGE 258 ===

1.2.25.81-91
255
On hearing these words, the lotus-eyed Brahma replied.
81-82. “O lord of the past, present
and
future,
let
this
be
heard, O
lord,
(cause
of everything), O lotus-eyed lord,
when the ocean was being
churned by the
Devas and Asuras,
a terrible poison resembling[clouds appeared. O lord, It appeared
like blue clouds. It had a
lustre
similar
to
that
of Samvarta
fire.
83.
On seeing
it, all of us were frightened
and
agitated
in the mind. O great lord,
swallow
it up with a desire for the
welfare of the worlds.
84.
You alone are competent to swallow it. There
is no
one other than you O
great
lord,
to bear
the
brunt
of
its
advance”.
85-8 7a.
On hearing these words
of Brahma
the
Para-
mesthin, O lady
of excellent
face,
I
accepted
the
proposal
saying, “so be it.” Then I began to drink the poison that was
like
the
god of death.
Even as I drank the extremely
terrible
poison
that accorded
great
fright
unto
the
Devas, O
lady
of
excellent
complexion,
my
throat
turned
black
imme-
diately.
87b-88.
On seeing
it, which had the lustre of the
petals
of
lily,
which
appeared
like a serpent clinging
to my
neck
and which was like Tak$aka the king of serpents, who had risen
up and
begun
to
lick
with
his
tongues, Brahm&
of great
splendour, the grandfather of the worlds spoke thus:
89-90a.
“You shine splendidly O great lord of excellent
holy rites,‘with this (such) neck”.
On hearing his words, O daughter of the most
excellent
one among the mountains, the terrible poison was held by me
in the throat
itself.
Therefore,
I became Nilakai^tha
(Blue-
throated god).
90b.
I drank it even as the groups
of Devas, Daityas,
Yaksas, Gandharvas, Bhutas, Pisacas,
serpents
and
Raksasas
were looking on, O lady of excellent face.
91.
That Kalakufa, the
poison
of terrible action, was
retained by me in my throat. On
seeing
it
being
contained
thus,
the
groups
of Devas
and
Daityas became
extremely
surprised.

=== PAGE 259 ===

256
BrahmSnfa Pur&na
92.
Thereafter, O lady of the
gait
of
intoxicated
ele-
phant, the groups of Devas along with
the
Daityas,
serpents
and Raksasas said thus with palms joined in reverence.
93. “O how wonderful are
your
strength,
virility and
exploit, O
lord.
Your body
and
Yogic
power
are
simply
wonderful.
94.
O lord of the Devas, your supremacy
is
extremely
wonderful, O destroyer of the body of Manmatha.
You
alone
are
Visnu. You
are
the
four-faced
(lord
Brahma); You alone are the god of death. You alone
are
the
bestower of boons.
95.
You alone are the sun and
the moon.
You
alone
are the manifestation of this
world
of mobile and
immobile
beings.
You
alone
are the (element called)
fire. You alone are
the element wind.
You alone are
the (element called) earth.
You alone are the water
( you constitute all the elements).
96.
You alone are the creator and sustainer of the entire
world
of mobile and
immobile
beings.
You
alone
are
its
annihilation
(i.e.
annihilator)
*’
After saying these words, the leading Devas bowed down
their
heads.
Taking Soma
(
? Nectar, Moon) with them, they
went away by means of aerial chariots with a
speed
equal
to
that of Wind,
till they
all reached the Meru,
the great moun-
tain.
97-98.
Thus the highly meritorious and extremely
holy
(story about the name)
Nilakantha
has
been
recounted.
It
is well known in the three worlds.
This story that destroys
sins has been
directly recounted
by the self-born lord (Brahma)
himself.
99.
I shall mention the extensive benefit acquired by the
person who retains in memory this splendid narrative proclaim-
ed by Brahma.
100.
O lady of great beauty and excellent hip,
all
poi-
sons whether mobile or immobile
(solid or liquid?) are immedia-
tely destroyed on coming into contact with his body.
101.
It
subdues
all
terrible
inauspicious
features.
It
dispels
and
decreases
(the
effect of) evil dreams. The person

=== PAGE 260 ===

1.2.25.102-113
257
attains the
state of a lover
unto women
and
an
honourable
person in the council of the king.
102.
He wins
arguments. He
becomes
victorious
in
battle. When travelling,
he does
so
with safety
and
welfare.
His house
is full with perpetual prosperity.
103-105.
O
lady
of excellent
face,
I shall describe the
mode of attainment
of
his
body. 1
His moustache
becomes
reddish brown. His throat becomes blue. His hair is beautifully
marked by the moon. He has three eyes and he wields a trident
in his hand. His vehicle
is
a bullock.
He holds
Pinaka bow
in his hand. He is
prosperous
with the
strength
and
exploit
equal
to
that
of Nandin.
At my
behest
he
traverses
the
seven worlds.
His
gait
(movement)
is unimpeded like that of
the wind in the
sky.
106-107.
Acquiring a strength equal to that of mine, he
stands steady
till the annihilation of all living beings.
I shall mention the
goal of those
persons who devoutly
listen to my story, O
beautiful
lady,
I
shall
mention
their
destination here and hereafter.
The Brahmana acquires. Vedic
knowledge. The Ksatriya
conquers the earth.
108.
The Vaisya acquires profit. The Sudra shall attain
happiness. The sick man
is rid
of
his
ailments.
The fettered
one is released from imprisonment.
109.
The pregnant woman obtains a son; the virgin gets
a good husband. Every one
obtains
the
lost
wealth here and
hereafter.
110.
By hearing this
divine
story
a man
obtains
the
same benefit or
merit
as
that
obtained
by
duly
offering
as
gift a hundred thousand cows to the Brahmanas.
111.
He who retains
in memory a
foot or half a foot, a
quatrain or a distitch (of this story) goes to the world of Rudra
for ever.
112-113.
He who
reads
this
entirely
with
the mind
directed towards me, in the presence of deities and Br&hmanas
1.
This
is the attainment of Sdrupya ‘Similarity of appearance* with
god
Siva.

=== PAGE 261 ===

258
Brakm&ntfa Purdna
attains the world of Rudra. He should have faith and
devotion
for ever. O goddess, the man should always
read devoutly and
make others read so.
114.
A prayer greater than this, there
never had
been
before nor will
ever
be. Neither
the Yak§a$, nor the Pigacas,
neither the goblins nor Vinayakas (spirits creating impediment)
shall bring about any
obstacle
in
the
house
of
that person
where this prayer
is kept.
115.
O lady of
lotuslike
eyes,
the
greatness
of
this
prayer
has
been
mentioned by me to you as I am delighted.
It is
destructive
of multitudes
of sins.
It
is accompanied by
the merit of holiness. It
is sung by the four-faced lord himself.
116.
After recounting this story endued with the fruits of
meritorious deeds
to the goddess,
the lord
whose
matted hair
has been fixed
with
the
moon
and who
is
fond
of Guha
(Karttikeya) went to Kailasa cave on
the
back
of
his
Bull.
He was accompanied by Uma.
117.
This
story
that
dispels
sins
has
been
heard by
me from Prajapati.
It
is recounted to you.
After learning this entirely along with all the
character-
istics, the excellent Brahmana proceeds
to
the
region
of the
sun.
CHAPTER TWENTYSIX
The Origin of the Linga-Image of Siva1
The Sages said
:
1.
“We wish to hear
completely about the
greatness of
Mahadeva, the lordship of that
noble
soul
and
the details of
his excellence in supremacy.”
1 •
The story of how the Linga of god Siva appeared is told in different
.Pur&Q&s like LiAga, 17; KP II 38; V&.P.55. The Linga of Siva is not the phallus

=== PAGE 262 ===

1.2.26.2-1 2a
259
Stita said
:
2.
“This
has
been
declared by Vi$nu formerly in the
course of his conquest of the three
worlds
after
binding Bali,
the lord of the three worlds, of great prowess.
3-5.
The
consort of SacI (Indra)
was
delighted when
the Daityas were destroyed. Thereafter, all the
Devas came to
see the eternal lord. They came to the place where the
lord
of
cosmic form
abides
near
the
milk
ocean. The Siddhas, the
Brahmana sages, the Yaksas,
the Gandharvas,
the
groups of
divine
damsels,
the serpents, the
divine sages, the rivers and
the mountains
approached
the great
soul
and
the supreme
Being, Hari and began to eulogise him.
6.
“You are the supporter and
the maker
(of the uni-
verse) O
Lord,
you
create the
worlds.
It
is due
to your
grace, that the three worlds attain ever-lasting welfare.
7-8.
All the
Asuras have been defeated.
Bali has been
imprisoned by you”.
On
being
thus
addressed
by
Devas
(gods),
Siddhas
and the
great
sages,
Visnu,
the supreme Man,
replied
to
the Devas.
“O excellent Devas, let this be heard. I shall
explain
the
reason.
9-lQa.
I have attained Siddhatva
(state ofa great Siddha)
due to the grace of that lord who is
the
creator of
all
living
beings, who is the
personification of
the
destructive principle
and who is the lord and cause of Time, by whom
the
worlds
and
I have been created along
with Brahma, by means of
his
Maya.
10b- 12a.
Formerly,
when
the three
worlds
had
been
swallowed
(enveloped) and merged in the darkness and all was
unmanifest, and while I, with all the living
beings
within my
belly, lay there alone, I had a thousand
heads,
eyes and
feet
and had
the conch, discus and the club
in
my
hands,
I was
lying on the pure expanse of water.
but a column of fire, the beginning or the foot and top of which could not be
probed by gods Vi?uu and Brahma. The Lihga-worship is
a Puragic
trans-
formatioiiftjof Vedic
fire-worship.

=== PAGE 263 ===

260
Brahmdnfa PurSna
12b.
In the meantime I
espied
the
lord
of unlimited
lustre, from afar.
13.
He resembled a hundred
thousand suns. He shone
by means
of
his own
splendour. He was a four-faced person
( Purufa ) of great Yogic power and golden lustre.
14.
He was a lord wearing a skin of black antelope, and
he was adorned with a Kamantfalu
(waterpot). This excellent
person (Brahma) reached me in a trice.
15-16.
Then Brahma who
is (reverently) bowed
to by
the worlds, spoke to me
:—“Who are you ? Whence have you
come ? Why
do
you
stay here ?
Tell me, O lord.
I am the
creator
of
all
worlds.
I
am
selfborn.
I
have
faces
all
round.”
On being addressed thus by Brahma, I spoke to him
:
17-18.
“Indeed I am the creator of the worlds
and
the
annihilator as well again and again.”
Conversing thus, we desired to
conquer each
other. We
saw a
flame
blazing
to the north of
us. O
sinless ones,
on
seeing that flame then we were surprised.
19-20.
At the splendour and power of the lustre of Siva,
we remained with palms joined in reverence. We saw the mass
of splendour increasing in
size.
It was excessively miraculous.
Brahma and I hastily rushed towards that massive flame. That
circular
mass
of
flames
stood
up
piercing
heaven
and
earth.
21.
In the middle of that massive splendour, we saw the
extremely resplendent Linga of the size of a mere span.
It was
unmanifest (?) yet endowed with extensive lustre.1
22.
That (Linga) in the middle was neither of gold nor
of silver nor was
it made
of rock.
It
could
not be specified.
Nor could
it be contemplated upon. It was visible and invisible
again and again.
23.
It was richly endowed with thousands
of sparks.
It
was
surprisingly
mysterious.
It
was endued with great reful-
gence and it was increasing in size tremendously.
1.
The identity of Rudra and Agni(the fire-Rod)
is stated in {IV.
II.
1.7, the Satapatha
Br.
Ill 3.1.10; VI 1.3.10; the Taittarlya Br. I.
1.5. 8-9.,
The TMya Br. XII 4.24.

=== PAGE 264 ===

1.2.26.24-36
261
24.
Clusters of flames spread everywhere. It was fright-
ful to all living beings.
It was extremely terrible in its features.
It appeared to pierce heaven and Earth.
25.
Then Brahma told me,— “You go
quickly beneath.
Let us find out the end of this noble-souled Liiiga.
26.
I shall go upwards until
its end
is seen.”
After making
this stipulation, we went
upwards
as well
as beneath.
27.
Thereupon, I went far below
for a thousand years,
but I could not find its end. I became frightened thereby.
28.
Similarly, Brahma went upwards, but he too did not
reach
its extremity. He too
returned
along with me
to
that
vast expanse of water,
29.
We were surprised and frightened ofthat great soul.
We were deluded by the Maya of that great
Being.
Our
con-
sciousness got lost and we stayed there
(helplessly).
30.
Thereupon, we meditated on the lord with
faces on
all sides, the imperishable lord who is
the source of origin and
the cause of dissolution of all
the worlds.
31.
We made obeisance, with palms joined in reverence,
to
the
trident-bearing
Siva
{Sarva)
,
the
lord
of extremely
terrific voice, of terrible features and curved fangs, to that great
unmanifest
lord.
32.
“Obeisance to
you, O
lord
of worlds and Devas.
Salutations unto you, O lord of Bhutas, O highly noble soul.
Obeisance
to you, O
lord who have achieved
perma-
nent Yogic powers.
Hail
to
you, O
Lord
established over
the universe.
33.
You
are
Paramesthin
(the
highest
deity)
f
the
supreme Brahman, the
imperishable great region; you are the
eldest one. You are Vamadeva, Rudra, Skanda and Lord Siva.
34.
You are Yajfia ; you are Vasafkara ; you are Omkara
;
you are the subduer of enemies ; you are
Svahakara, the obeis-
ance, the consecration of all holy rites.
35.
You are Svadhakara, Yajfia, holy rites and
observ-
ances, the Vedas,
the worlds,
the Devas—the
lord alone
is
everything all round.
36.
You are the quality of sound of the firmament ; you
are the source of origin and cause of dissolution
of
all
living

=== PAGE 265 ===

262
Brahmdntjia Pur&na
beings, you are the quality of smell in the earth,
the quality of
taste in the waters and the colour in Tejas
(fiery element) , you
are the great lord.
37. O lord of the
Devas,
you are
the quality (called)
touch in Vayu
(wind)
; you form the body of the moon.
38. O Lord of the Devas,
you are knowledge in the in-
tellect; you are the seed of Prakrti.
39.
You are
the
annihilator
of
all
the
worlds;
you
are Kala identical with the god of Death, the cause of destruc-
tion. You sustain
the three
worlds, O Lord,
you alone create
them.
40.
With
your
eastern
face you assume
the form of
Indra; with your southern face you withdraw the worlds again.
41.
With your western face you are stationed in Varuna
undoubtedly. O
excellent one among
the
Devas,
with your
northern face you are Soma.
42-45.
In one way
or
in many ways, O Lord, you are
the source of origin and
cause
of dissolution of the worlds. O
Lord, from you are
born
these
viz.
:
the Adityas, the Vasus,
Rudras, Maruts,
the Alvins,
the Sadhyas,
the
Vidyadharas,
the Nagas, the Caranas, the ascetics, the Valakhilyas and others
who have performed good holy
rites and many others.
O lord of Devas,
from
you
are bom these
viz.:
Uma,
Sita, Sinivali, Kuhu, Gayatri,
Lak?mi,
Klrti,
Dhrti,
Medha,
Lajja, Kanti, Vapus, Svadha, Tusti, Pusti, Kriya, Sarasvati, the
goddess of speech, Sandhya and Ratri (Night).
46.
O Lord endowed with
the
potential
strength and
influence of ten thousand sets of ten thousand
suns,
obeisance
be to you, O lord, as white
as
a
thousand moons.
Obeisance
be to
you who
hold
Vajra
(thunderbolt)
and Pinaka bow.
Obeisance be to you, O
lord, with arrows
and bow in
your
hands.
47.
Obeisance
to
you,
O
lord,
whose
limbs
are
embellished with Bhasma
( sacred
ash)
.
Hail to
you, O lord>
the destroyer of Kama’s body.
Salute
unto
you, O
lord
Hiranyagarbha ;
obeisance
unto you, O lord of golden raiment.
48.
Bow
to
you, O
lord of golden womb.
Obeisance
to you, O lord of golden navel; Hail to you, O lord of golden

=== PAGE 266 ===

1.2.26.49-58
263
semen. Obeisance be to you, O lord,
mysterious with
a thou-
sand eyes.
49.
Obeisance be to you, O lord of golden colour. Salute
to you, O lord of golden hair; obeisance be to you, O
lord
of
golden
heroism*
(?);
obeisance
be
to
you,
the
lord
who
distributes gold.
50
Obeisance be to you, O lord and
master
of gold;
Bow to you, O
lord
with
the sound
of gold.
Obeisance
to
you, O lord with the Pinaka in your
hand; salute
to
you, O
bluethroated Sankara”.
51.
On being eulogised thus, the
lord of great intellect
appeared before us. The lord
of
Devas,
the
source
of origin
of the Universe, who had the lustre of ten million suns.
52.
Mahadeva of great lustre became
filled
with
pity.
He spoke to us as if he was about
to
swallow
the
sky with a
thousand crores of mouths.
53.
His neck was like a conch-shell in shape.
His belly
was well shaped He was bedecked
in different
kinds
of orna-
ments.
His
limbs were variegated
on
account
of
different
jewels. He wore different kinds
of
garlands and had
applied
different kinds of unguents.
54.
The
lord
had
Pinaka
in
his hand;
he
held
the
trident; he was worthy of being worshipped
by the Devas; he
had serpents as the sacred thread ; he was the cause
of freedom
from fear unto the Devas.
55.
At that time, he burst unto a laughter, the sound of
which was similar to that of Dundubhi
(a
big drum)
and
was
comparable to the rumbling sound
of
the
cloud. The
sound
filled the whole universe.
56-57.
We two
were
frightened
at
that
great
sound.
Then Mahadeva
said,—“O excellent ones among the Devas, I
am delighted. Both of you see the great Yogic power. May
all
fear be eschewed. Both of you are
eternal
and
are
formerly
born of my limbs.
58.
This
Brahma,
the
grandfather of the worlds is my
right hand. Visnu who
is never defeated in any
battle,
is my
left hand.
Va.P.55.
hiravya-rtra
‘of golden
dress or garments*.

=== PAGE 267 ===

264
BrahmAftia Pur&ya
59-60.
I am pleased well
with
both of you. I shall give
unto you the boon as you
please”.
Then, delighted in our minds we bowed down at the feet
of the lord.
We said to Mahadeva who was standing
in
front
of
us
with grace.
“O lord of the Devas, you are delighted; if a boon has to
be bestowed by you, let us be devoted to you for ever.”
The Lord of gods said
:
“O
highly
fortunate
ones,
let
it be so. Create subjects
extensively”.
After saying so, the lord vanished there itself.
61.
Thus
the potentiality
of
that
intelligent
lord has
been recounted to you. This
is
the
greatest
knowledge. The
unmanifest one is termed Siva (Auspicious).
62-63.
Only those with the vision of knowledge see
this
subtle
Being who cannot be contemplated upon. We shall make
obeisance to that lord of the Devas.
t40 Mahadeva,
Obeisance
be
to you, O Mahesvara, Salute be to you.”
Sdta said :
64.
“After hearing
this,
all
the Devas
went
to
their
respective abodes, paying homage and
respects
unto Sankara
the great soul.
65.
He who recites this hymn
unto the
lord,
the great
soul, obtains all desires and gets rid of all sins.
66.
All this was narrated to them by Visnu,
the power-
ful one, due
to
the
grace
of Mahadeva,
about
the
eternal
Brahman. Thus everything regarding the
power of Mahesvara
has been described to you.

=== PAGE 268 ===

1 .2 .27 . 1-9
265
CHAPTER TWENTYSEVEN
Siva cursed by Ddruvana sages
i 1
Their repentance
and Prayer
: Installation of Siva Lihga—The In-
junction Regarding Ash-bath
The sages said
:
1
.
Recount once again, O
Suta of great
intellect,
the
greatness
of Mahadeva. Wc are
eager and curious to listen
to
it.
2.
How did the lord assume
a
loathsome
form
in
the
forest Daruvana resorted to by the groups of divine sages? The
great sages gained wisdom thereby.
3.
On knowledge that it
was Mahadeva,
they
became
excited and confused.
In order
to
propitiate him
they
wor-
shipped him
but Bhava (Lord Siva)
did
not become pleased
with them.
4.
All these activities
of
the
lord
of
the
Dcvas may
kindly be recounted to us in number as they
took
place.
You
are the most excellent one among intelligent persons.’’
Suta said
:
5.
“Let this righteous activity be heard while
I recount
it, O
alert
ones.
It
is,
due
to his
compassion
towards
the
devotees, that
this
had
been
carried
out by the lord of the
Devas.
6.
(This
happened) O
Brahmanas,
formerly on
the
splendid and auspicious peak of the Himalayas
in
the
Krta-
yuga. There
is a forest of Devadaru
trees which
is
beautiful
and full of many trees and creepers.
7-9.
Many sages perform austerities
here and
carry on
holy ascetic rites. 2 Some of them
had
only Saiv&la
(moss)
for
1.
This story how and why Siva was cursed by sages in the Daru-Vana
and how they subsequently adopted the Siva
Lihga
for worship is narrated
in the LP, KP, VA. P, mentioned above. The Daru-Vana mentioned here is
in the Himalayas
(vide V 6 below) and not in Maharashtra as given in De
53-54.
2.
VV. 7-9 illustrate the different vows observed
by
sages
while
per-
forming^ penance.

=== PAGE 269 ===

266
Brahm&ntfa PurSna
their food. Some of them lay
within
water. Some ofthem had
the ethereal space
(for
their
stay).
Some of them supported
themselves on the tips of their big toes. Some had
their
teeth
serve the purpose of Ultikhala
( threshing
Mortar,
i.e. they ate
the grains of corn chewing them with their teeth )
; others were
ASmakutlas (who pounded their grains on rocks before eating).
Some remained seated
in heroic
postures
( Virdsana)
.
Others,
followed
the way
of
life
of
the deer. All those sages of great
intellect spent their time in severe penances.
10-12.
Then
the
lord came
to
that forest
in order to-
confer
grace
on them.
His limbs were
grey due to the appli-
cation of Bhasman
( ashes)
. He
was
naked.
He had
hideous
features. His hairs were dishevelled and ugly.
His
teeth
were
terrific. His hands eagerly got
hold of a firebrand.
His
eyes
were reddish
brown.
His
penis
and
scrotum
resembled red
chalk. His face was beautified by reddish white colour.
1 3.
At some places he laughed boisterously and terribly.
At some places he showed surprise and began to sing. At some
places
he
began
to dance
expressing amorous sentiment. At
some places, he began to cry again and again. 1
14.
Deluded and enchanted by him the wives of the sages
immediately
prevented him from
dancing.
After
coming
to
the hermitage as a guest, he began to beg again and again.
15.
He created a wife unto himself,
similar in form and
bedecked in ornaments. He roared and bellowed like a bull and
brayed like a donkey.
16.
He began to befool
them making all the embodied
ones laugh.
Thereupon, the
sages became angry.
They were
over-whelmed by fury.
17.
Fascinated by
his
deluding
power
(Maya)
they
approached him in order to curse him. “Since you sing (bray)
like a (donkey) you will become a donkey.
1
.
These verses describe the Pa&ipata way of behaviour or
penance.
Vide PcUupata Sutra’s
(with Kaun<Jii?ya’s Com.) Ch. Ill sutras 1-19.
Pft£u-
patas are instructed to behave in such a way whereby the practitioner of the
Vrata
is insulted
(avamatah ). The strange behaviour of Siva described in this,
and subsequent verses
is found prescribed in P&kipata-Sutrav.

=== PAGE 270 ===

1 .2,27.18-27
267
18-19.
Or you
will be
Raksasa, PiSaca
(Evil spirit) or
a Danava.” As they
pleased,
those infuriated sages cursed him
with different kinds of curses. They
cursed
that
lord
of the
universe but the
powers
of austerities
of
all
of them were
repelled and made
futile against Sankara.
20.
Just as the stars in
the
sky do not shine on account
of refulgence
of
the sun
so
also
their
splendour (power of
penance) (became ineffective) on Sankara.
21.
It is heard that
the full-fledged Yajfia,
the cause of
all prosperity of Brahma, the noble soul, met with destruction
on account of the curse of sages.
22.
On account of
the
curse
of Bhrgu, Visnu of very
supreme prowess and splendour had to take ten births and was
made miserable for ever. 1
23.
Formerly, the penis of Indra along with his scrotum*
O sages conversant with Virtue, was made to fall down on the
earth by the infuriated sage Gautama.
2
24.
The Vasus were
forced
to
stay in
the womb on
account of a curse. It
is on account of the curse of sages that
Nahusa was turned into a serpent. 8
25.
It was
by Brahmana
that
the
ocean of milk was
rendered unfit
to
be
drunk.
Dharma
(God
of Death)
was
cursed by the noble-souled Mantfavya.
4
26.
These
and many
others underwent much torment
excepting
Mahesvara,
the
lord of the Devas
with
uneven
(three) eyes.
27.
Thus, enchanted by him,
they
did
not
recognize
Sankara. Thereupon, all those sages spoke to each other.
1.
VR VII 51.11-16
states
that Bhrgu
cursed
Vi?nu
as
he
killed
Bhfgu’s wife
Puloma.
2.
This punishment was meted out
to Indra for
his
adultery with
Gautama's wife Ahalya, vide VR 1.48 17-28.
3.
Mbh. Udyoga.
17, 14-18 states how Nahu$a was cursed by Agastya
when he goaded him with his foot to carry his
palanquin
quickly to
Saci’s-
palace.
4.
The sage Man^avya was wrongfully impaled by god Yama. He
therefore cursed him tg be a §udra.
(And he was bom of Vidura)—Mbh.
Adi*
Ch.
107.

=== PAGE 271 ===

Brahm&n$a Pur&tia
268
28.
“This
is
not
the right code of conduct laid down
for
us householders. Nor
is it the rite of those engaged in the
vow of celibacy or the forest-hermitages.
29.
This
is not
seen
as
the Dharma
of recluses.
This
is
great
injustice
and
misdemeanour whereby
this
person is
deluded, O Brahmanas.
30.
Make his Linga drop down.
This is not the Dharma
(a code of conduct) of sages and ascetics. 1 Speak
sweet words.
Resort to
(at least) one Garment.
31-33.
When the Linga is abandoned (dropped) by you,
you will be accorded due worship.
On hearing these words of the sages,
lord
Sankara,
the
•destroyer of the eyes ofBhaga, said in polished speech, as though
he was laughing boisterously.
“This Linga of ours cannot be made to fall down forcibly
by all the gods beginning with Brahma. How then be the other
ascetics. O excellent Brahmanas,
I shall make this Linga
fall
down.”
34-36.
They uttered the sentence “Stay in the hermitage
or go away”.
On being spoken to thus, lord Mahadeva became delight-
ed
in
the
activities
of the sense-organs. Even as all of them
were observing, the
lord vanished there itself.
When the lord vanished and Bhava
( God Siva) was trans-
formed into a Linga, there was no
appearance
of any
living
being in the range of the three worlds. Everything was agitated
and nothing shone.
37.
The sun did not shine ; the
fire became
devoid
of
lustre. The
stars and
the
planets became contrary
(to
their
normal state).
38.
The Kratus (sacrifices?) of the sages who had
plenty
of resources and who were engaged in
activities
conducive
to
the birth of children and who
used
to
approach
their
wives
only at the permitted period after the days ofmenstruation, did
not function properly.
1 .
The sages were obviously ignorant of the Pasupata way of life.

=== PAGE 272 ===

1.2.27.39-49
269
39.
Without the sense of My-ness
( mamatva
)
and devoid
of egotism,
they
tried
to
perform
the holy rite once again.
(But)
all
their
potentiality
and
all
their splendour became
lost.
40.
At that time their mind did not become concentrated
in Dharma (holy rites etc.). All of them gathered together and
went to the region of god Brahma.
41.
After going to the abode of Brahma and on seeing
the Lotus-born
deity,
at
his abode
all
of them
fell at
his
feet and narrated the account about Siva.
42.
“He
is formidable and
frightful.
His
hair
is
stiff
and
rough.
His
teeth are terrific. His hands are eager to
get
hold of an owl* (?)
43-44.
His
penis
along with
the
scrotum
is red
and
embellished
(painted) with red chalk. He was always
(found)
remaining
at
the
sides of our daughters-in-Law and daughters,
particularly those who had their
babies
(?)
with
them.
(He
was found) staying near them with an unnatural desire. Taking
him to be a mad fellow, we insulted him.
45.
He was scolded and beaten. His Linga (? penis) was
taken out. It
is to
alleviate
his
anger
that we
have
sought
refuge in you.
46-48.
We
do
not
know
this
matter
(thoroughly)
.
Explain it to us, O grand -father”.
On
hearing
these
words
of
the
sages Lord
Brahma
meditated
and found out that it was tiarva
(god Siva)
.
Then
with great concentration, he replied thus:
“This is lord Mahadeva. He should be known as the great
lord. His great region is not attained
easily.
Heis
the
lord of
the gods, sages and manes.
49.
At the end of thousand
Yugas,
when
there
is
the
annihilation
of
all embodied beings, this lord MaheSvara be-
comes Kala (God of death) and destroys (everything).
*
Probably ultnukd
* fire-brand* and not ulQkti as in the text. In V. 11
above he is stated to have a firebrand in his hand.

=== PAGE 273 ===

270
Brahmdn$a Purdna
50.
He alone creates all subjects
singly
and
by means
of his own vigour. He alone
is the discus-bearing
lord (Vi$nu)
'whose chest
is characteristically marked by Srivatsa.
51.
He
is called Yogin
in the Krta Yuga and Kratu
in
the Treta Yuga. In the Dvapara, he is remembered as
Kalagni
and as Dharmaketu in the Kali age.
52.
Three forms of Rudra should be known and realized
by learned men. The Tamas form
is
Agni,
the Rajas
form
is
Brahma and Sattva
is Visnu, the illuminator.
53.
One
form of his is remembered as having the
quar-
ters for his garment
(i.e. naked)
. It is named Siva. It is in him
that the Brahman endowed with Yoga resides.
54-55. Hence, O leading Brahmanas, after subduing your
anger and
controlling sense-organs propitiate the lord
Isana,
the imperishable lord, the lord ofthe
Devas.
After
making
a
Teplica
of the Linga of the great soul in the same form as was
seen by you, resort
to Lord with the trident in his hand.
56.
Thereupon, you will see the lord of the Devas who
can rarely be seen by
ignorant and foolish
persons who
have
not mastered their own selves. On seeing him, all ignorance and
evils shall be destroyed.”
57.
Thereupon,
they
circumambulated
Brahma
of
unmeasured vigour. Becoming devoid of all grief, they returned
and settled in the forest of Devadaru
( Himalayan
cedar)
trees
once again.
58-59.
They began to propitiate the lord in the manner
described by Brahma in the various dry lands, on the mountains
of variegated forms, in the caves and on
the sandy
banks
of
rivers splendid and variegated.
Thus when a
year
elapsed
completely and
the
spring
season arrived, the lord came to that forest assuming
that very
same form.
60.
The
great God
entered
that
penance-grove
and
forest wherein many trees and creepers had put forth
flowers,
where
that
part of tract had been resonant with the drone of
swarms of bees and which was filled with the sweet notes of the
cuckoo.

=== PAGE 274 ===

1.2.27.61-73
271
61-66.
Then all
those sages
eulogised
him
with
great
mental purity and concentration and worshipped him with waters,
different
kinds of garlands, incense and fragrant
scents. Those
highly fortunate ones worshipped him in
the company of their
wives, sons and attendants. With gentle words they spoke thus
to
Girisa.
“It behoves you to forgive all
our
actions
(of omission
and
commission)
whatever
has
been
perpetrated
mentally,
verbally and physically due to our ignorance of the lord of
the
Dcvas. O Sankara, the conduct of
life
of Brahma
and
other
Devas
is
mysteriously
esoteric,
elaborate,
inscrutable
and
difficult to comprehend. We do not know how
to welcome you.
We do not know at all any of your movements.
O Mahadeva,
O lord of the universe, you
are
as
you
are, obeisance be to
you.
Only
noble-souled
ones
eulogise
you,
the
lord
of
the Devas, the great lord.
67.
Obeisance
be
to
Bhava,
Bhavya
(splendid
one),
Bhavana (sanctifier) andUdbhava (source of origin)
. Hail
to
the lord of spirits, the lord of infinite strength and
virility.
68.
Bow to the lord
of tawny-complexioned
body
the
destroyer,
the
imperishable
one,
the
changing
one.
Obei-
sance to the lord, to
the
supporter
of the
current of Ganga
water. Bow to the lord who
is the support;
salutations
to
the
soul of good qualities.
69.
Obeisance
to Tryambaka
( the
three-eyed
lord)
.
Hail
to
the lord who wields the excellent trident. Bow to you
(identical with) Kandarpa.
Obeisance
be to you the Supreme
Soul.
70.
Obeisance to Sankara, the bull-bannered one. Hail to
the
lord of Ganas (groups of
goblins, the attendants of Siva).
Obeisance
to Kalawith the staff in his hands; obeisance to the
lord with the noose in his hands.
71-73.
Obeisance to the
lord
who
is
the main
deity
in
the Vedic Mantras; and to you of hundred tongues. What-
ever is there in the world, the past, the present, the future,
the
mobile
and
immobile
beings—all
the
visible
worlds
have
originated from your
person. O Sambhu, welfare unto
you,
protect us.
Therefore be
pleased
with
us.
Whatever man

=== PAGE 275 ===

272
Brahm&ntfa Pur&rut
dots, whether out of ignorance
or
knowingly,
it
is
the
lord
alone who does
it by means of his Yogic Maya.”
74-76.
After eulogising thus with
delighted minds,
the
sages
requested
the
lord
:
“Being endowed with the power of
penance, we may
see you
as
before.
May your
Linga
be
stationed in the normal posture as before.
Obeisance to the Digvdsas (the naked one) having garland-
like clusters of Kinkinis
(bells in the trinkets).
Salute
to the hideous one,
to
the
terrible
one,
to
the
lord
of
frightful
face. Obeisance
to
you who
are
devoid of
form, who have excellent form and who have multiforms.
77.
Obeisance be to Katamkata
(golden-formed
one),
obeisance to Rudra ; obeisance to Svahakara.
Hail to
you,
the
embodiment
of
all vital airs;
Salute
to
you
the
lord with
the Gunas for his bodies.
78.
Obeisance
to
Durgandha
(foul-smelling
one),
to
Sugandha
(fragrant one); Salute to the lord with the trident in
his hands ; Obeisance to lord Srlkantha with the dark-blue tuft.
Hail to Nllakantha, the lord who has applied the ashes in
the
cremation ground for unguent.
79.
Obeisance to the
lord
identical
with
the
trio
of
Gunas. Hail to you the Vi$va (one identical with the universe),
the Vedhas (Creator), Bow to the lord who
resides
always
in
the cremation ground; Obeisance to the lord of the form of the
Preta (Departed Soul ?)
80.
You
are Brahma among
the Devas 1
and
Nilalo-
hita among the Rudras.
The soul of all living beings, you
are
called Purusa by the Saiiikhyas.
81.
You are the great Meru among the mountains
and
the Moon among the stars. Among the sages you are
Vasistha
and Vasava (Indra) among the Devas.
82.
You
are
Oiftkara
among
the
Vedic
Mantras,
Jyesthasaman among
the Saman
Mantras. You are the
lion
among
the
beings
of
the
forest.
You
are
the
supreme
Isvara.
1.
God Siva
is
the
best one among
all gods etc. Cf. Bh. G. for such
a
list of excellences and every such excellence
is His part
:
Tad
yad
oibh&timat sattuam ....
mama
tejomiasambhaoam
/
Bh. G. X 41
.

=== PAGE 276 ===

1.2.27.83-95
273
83-86.
You are the Bull among
the
domestic
animals.
You are the
lord worshipped
in
all
the
worlds.
Although
you
exist
in
all ways and
manners, we see you alone in the
beings that come up in front of us as narrated by Brahma.
Lust, Anger, greed, distress and
arrogance,
we
wish to
check these, O Paramesvara (be pleased)
.
When the Mahasamharana (the
great
ultimate
annihi-
lation)
arrives,
fire
is created by you, O lord, who are of self-
governed spirit, by pressing
the hand
against
the
forehead.
At that time all the worlds are surrounded all round by flames,,
on account of that
fire.
87-88.
Hence, all these are on a par with the fire. There
are many hideous
fires.
All
the
living beings,
mobile
and
immobile,
all animals are burned by the fire originating
from
you. O lord of Devas, be the saviour of
all of
us
as
we
are
being burned.
89-91.
For the
welfare
of all the
worlds you sprinkle
(with nectar)
all
the
living
beings; O lord of great fortune.
O Mahegvara, the onlooker
of
auspiciousness.
Command
us
O lord, we shall
carry
out
your behest. We
are
unable
to
find any possible limit
to your millions and millions of forms.
O
lord, obeisance unto you”.
Thereafter, the lord and Master said these words
:
92-93.
“No
learned man
shall
speak
insultingly unto
those persons who are devoted
to my Bhasman
(holy Ashes)
,
who have burnt all their sins by means of ashes, who carry out
everything they say, who have control over their
sense-organs
and who are Brahmanas engrossed in meditation. No one who
desires welfare both here
and hereafter,
shall
transgress them
nor shall they speak words unpleasant to them.
94.
The man
of deluded mind who
censures
them*
censure*
Mahadeva. He who
worships them always worships-
Sankara. Act like this. Welfare unto you all.
You
will obtain
(achievement of) spiritual power from me.”
95.
After understanding the unparalleled and
excellent
holy rite that
is destructive of the great darkness ( of ignorance
)
and that had been recounted by
Siva,
those people got rid of
their fear, greed, delusion
and
anxiety. They
all
fell
( at his
feet), simultaneously and bore (them) by means of their heads.

=== PAGE 277 ===

274
Brakm&nfa Purdna
96-97.
Then those delighted Brahmanas
began
to per-
form the ablution of lord Mahesvara who
assumed
his
usual
Prakrtika form by means of very pure scented water mixed with
Kuga grass and flowers. They began to sing
with various kinds
of esoteric Hurikaras in sweet notes
:
98.
“Obeisance unto you, O
lord with the quarters for
your garments
(i.e. naked); Bow to the lord wearing Kinkinls
(small tinkling ornaments or bells)
; Salutation
to the lord half
of whose body
is female. Obeisance to the lord who
promul-
gated Samkhya and Yoga.
99.
Bow to the lord dark in colour, with
the
clouds for
his vehicle;
Obeisance
to
the
lord
wearing the hide of
an
elephant as his garment. Salute to the lord wearing the skin of
an antelope
as
the
upper
garment.
Obeisance
to the
lord
having a serpent for his sacred
thread.*’
100.
Obeisance be unto Sankara who has well
construc-
ted
and wonderfully variegated ear-rings. Bow be to you with
well-wreathed garlands for ornaments. Hail
to you
with
the
excellent hide of a lion for garment, O
lord
wielding a huge
axe”.
101.
When the Linga
was installed
once
again with a
desire for the welfare of all
the
worlds,
those
excellent
sages
devoted to the duties of the different castes carried them out.
102.
Then the great God who
was
pleased,
replied to
those sages
:—“O sages
of
excellent
holy
rites, I am pleased
with your penance. Choose the boons.”
103-105.
Then those sages viz. Bhrgu, Arigiras, Vasistha,
ViSvamitra, Gautama, Atri, Suke$a, Pulastya, Pulaha,
Kratu,
Marici and Kagyapa, all of them endowed with great penance,
bowed down to Mahadeva and said these words
:
O lord, we wish to understand
these—Ash-bath,
naked-
ness, Vamatva
(left-handed
ritual),
Pratilomata
(contrary
action ) and Sevydsevyatva
( state of being worthy of being served
and of being unworthy of being served)”.
The Lord said
:
1
106.
“I
shall explain this to you. 1
shall
mention
the
1. W. 106-128 describe Pa^upata Vrata according to the
author
of
this
Puraajia.

=== PAGE 278 ===

1.2.27.107-117
275
entire
story
(i.e.
details)
now.
I am
Agni accompanied by
Soma. Soma has resorted to Agni.
107.
They say that
all the worlds have
resorted
to
the
fire made and unmade
(i.e. artificial and natural).
The whole
world, mobile and immobile,
is burned many times by fire.
108.
Everything can be
achieved
through Bhasman .
It
is excellent and sacred. He
(the devotee)
sprinkles the
living
beings after assimilating the power and essence of ashes.
109.
It is only after performing
the
holy
rites
in
fire
that one will perform the rite of Try&yufa
(trebling the
span of
life). One
is rid of all sins through Bhasman
(ashes)
which
is
my vigour.
110.
Bhasman is so called
because
it illuminates
(every-
thing)
auspicious
and
renders
it
fragrant.
It
is
glorified
as
Bhasman because
it instantaneously destroys all sins.
111.
The Pitrs should be known
as
D$mapQs
(Imbibing
heat);
the
Devas
are
born
of Soma
(the Soma juice or the
moon)
. The entire universe consisting
of
the mobile and
the
immobile beings
is constituted by Agni and Soma.
112.
Iam Agni of great splendour. This my Ambika,
is
Soma; Agni, Soma and I form ourselves the Puru$a with Prakrti.
113.
Hence, O highly fortunate ones,
Bhasman
is spoken
of as my vim and vigour. The position is this that
I
retain my
own vigour by means of my own body.
114.
Ever since then,
it is through Bhasman
that
safety
is assured in the lying-in-chambers.
It is through
Bhasman that
protection is sought in the world in inauspicious circumstances.
115.
A devotee whose
soul
is
sanctified
by means of
Ash-bath, who
has
conquered
anger and who has subdued
his sense-organs does not go back (i.e.
is not born again)
after
coming near me.
116.
The holy
rite Pasupatais
(not
inferior
to)
Yoga;
the holy rite ofKapala is based on Yoga.
This
Pasupata
rite
is laid down before.
It is most excellent
117.
All the remaining Aframins (persons of various stages
in life)
have
been
created
afterwards
by
the self-bom lord
(Brahma)
. This creation which is of the nature of bashfulness,
•delusion and fear, has been evolved by me.

=== PAGE 279 ===

276
Brahmdnfa Purdna
118.
Deities and the sages are born only naked.
Others,
the human
beings
in
the world,
all of them are bom without
any garment.
119.
Even the persons
who
are
covered
with
a silken
garment are (no better than) naked,
should
the
sense-organs
be unconquered. They are
well hidden
(covered)
if they
are
duly subdued. It is
not
the garment
that
is
the real reason
(about nudity and non nudity).
120.
Forgiveness,
fortitude,
non-violence,
absence
of
attachment to all (worldly
things)
and
equal
indifference to
both
honour and
dishonour—these
constitute
the
excellent
covering garment.
121-124.
He who
smears
his
limbs
(body)
with the
Bhasman and renders them grey
in
colour,
he
who mentally
meditates on Bhava (Siva), he who takes his
bath with Bhas-
mariy (becomes free from sins)
. Even if a person commits thous-
ands of misdeeds and takes an ash-bath, the Bhasman burns
all
the sins, just like fire that burns a forest by means of
its
reful-
gence. Hence,
if a
person
exerts
himself always and
takes
Ash-bath three times a day, he
attains
Gdnapatya
(the state of
being a follower of Ganapati)
. After
performing
all
kinds
of
Kratus (sacrifices), after taking
in the
excellent nectar
if the
people meditate on Mahadeva,
if they
merge themselves (in
him) and are
sanctified
by
identifying
themselves with him,
they
shall
attain
immortality
(.Mok$a
)
through the northern
path.
125-126.
Those who, through the Southern Path, resort
to the cremation ground, attain
all these
supernatural powers
viz.
Animd
(minuteness), Mahimd
(greatness) Laghimd
(light-
ness)
, Prdpti
( ability to reach
things)
, Garimd (heaviness) , the
fifth quality, Prdkdmyam (freedom of will) , Ititva (Masterliness),
Vatitva (ability to control) and Amaratva (immortality)
.
127-129.
Indra
and
other
Devas
performed
Kdmika
(conducive
to
the
attainment
of desires)
holy
rites
and
became persons of well-known splendour after attaining great
Aiivarya (prosperity and power).
All of you be
free
from
arrogance and
delusion and
devoid of passion;
let your conduct be free from the defects of
Tamas and
Rajas.
Understand
this
excellent
holy
rite
that

=== PAGE 280 ===

1.2.28.1-6
277
attacks all sins. Perform this vrata which is
a
great
favourite
of Pasupati
( Siva)
.
If anyone reads this with purity, faith and control
of the
sense-organs he shall become purified in soul and rid of all sins.
He goes to the world of Rudra.
CHAPTER TWENTYEIGHT
Meeting of Pururavas and Pitrs
Performance of annual obsequies on the
New Moon Day
The sage said
:
1.
O Suta
! King Pururavas,
the son of Ila, used
to go
to the heaven on
the New Moon
day
in every month. How
was it ? How did he propitiate the Pitrs
(Manes)
.
Suta said
:
2. O Sam£apayani,
I
shall
narrate his power.
I
shall
narrate the contact of the noble-souled
son of Ila with the sun
as well as with the moon.
3-5.
I shall
tell you about the increase and the decrease
in the size of the moon that
has
its essence within, during the
two fortnights, the bright one and the dark one.
I
shall
state
the decision in regard to one with the Pitrs (Pitrmatah ) as well
as to one belonging to
the
Pitrs
( Pitryasya ).
I
shall
narrate
the acquisition of nectar
from the moon as well as the propi-
tiation
of the
Pitrs; I shall mention the sight of the Pitt's viz.
the Kavyas, the Agnisvattas and the Saumyas.
I
shall mention
how Pururavas propitiated the
Pitrs. I
shall mention all these
in due order as well as the Parvans.
6.
When the sun and the moon come into contact with
the star,
they
stay
in Am avasya (New Moon) for a night in
the same zone.

=== PAGE 281 ===

278
BrahmQnfa Pur&na
7.
Then during every new moon day,
he
(Pururavas)
goes to see the
sun-god
and
the
moon-god, his
natural and
paternal grandfathers.
8.
After paying respects to them, he waits there
biding
his
time. He
waits
for
the exudations of
nectar
from
the
following moon, for the sake of the
Pitrs.
9.
With a desire to perform the monthly Sraddha, Puru-
ravas, the
learned
son
of
Ila,
worships
Soma
(the Moon)
Pitrman (one with the Pitrs ) , after resorting to the heaven.
10-11.
He considers both Kuhu (the
New Moon merged
with the
1st
Tithi
of the next fortnight)
and SinTvall (New
Moon mixed with the 14th Tithi). He
worships Kuhu
when
there are two Lavas* of it
as balance. He worships Sinivali in
accordance
with
the magnitude
of
the digit
(of the moon)
.
After worshipping it, he bides his time and surveys.
12-14.
He imbibes the nectar oozing out from the moon
for the sake of satisfaction for the whole month,
by means
of
fifteen
exudations
of
the
nectar.
During
the dark fortnight
when
his
arms get burned by (the Sun’s) rays**
(he pacifies
them) by means of honey
exuding
from
the moon
immedi-
ately. During the fortnights when there are no winds* **(?)the
leading king
propitiates the Pitrs in the heaven, in accordance
with the injunction pertaining to the rite for Pitrs.
15.
He propitiates
the
Pitrs
viz.
Saumyas, Barhisads,
Kavyas and Agnisvattas. 1
*
Lava—a minute division of time
(—the sixth part of twinkling of
the
eye).
*
Here
Bd.P.V.13a
reads:
krfiia-pak?e bhujam prityd dahyamdnam tath&mfubhih
/
This is obscure
(to say the least). For this line Va.P.56.12a reads:
*
krtfia-pakfe
tadd pttvd duhyamdnam
tathdmiubhih
/
'Then, in the dark half of the month, having drunk
(nectar) as it was
being milked by the rays in that manner’.
***Bd.P.
14. a reads
nirv&te$vatha pakfefu
'In
windless
fortnights'
is
meaningless.
Va.
P.
56.13a
reads instead:
nirvdpaoartham
dnttena
'given
as
oblation
to
(for the propitiation
of)
Piters.
1.
In Satapatha Br. II 6.
1.7, those who
performed a Soma
sacrifice
are Somavantah Pitarah (probably Saumyas here-of) ; those who offered cooked
oblations
like Cam were Barhi?adah Pitarah ;
those who offered no sacrifice

=== PAGE 282 ===

1.2.28.16-22
279
Rtam* (means) what is mentioned
as
Agni.
It
is con-
sidered to be Samvatsara.
16.
The fttus (seasons) were born of it
(i.e. Samvatsara
—the year)
. The Artavas were born of
the
Rtus. The
Artavas
are what are called Ardhamasas
(half
months
or
fortnights)
.
(Hence) the Pitrs are the sons of &tus.
1 7 .
The #tus are
grand-fathers.
The
Masas
(months
)
and
Ayanas
(transits of the sun) are the sons of Abda
(year).
The Devas are the great-grand-fathers ; the
( group of) five years
arc the sons of Brahma.
18.
The Saumyas should be known as born
of the moon
( Somaja
)
. The
Kavyas
should
be
known as the sons of Kavi
(§uk ra).
Upahutas
are
remembered
as
Devas.
Somajas
are
remembered as Somapas
(Imbibers of Soma)*
1 9.
Ajyapas ( Imbibers of oblated ghee)
are remembered
as Kavyas.
The
classes
of Pitrs
arc
three. They are of three
classes namely Kavyas, Barhisads and Agnisvattas.
20-22.
Those who
are householders
as
well
as
Tajvds
(performers of sacrifices) are certainly Jltus and Barhisads . Those
who are householders but are not
Tajvds
( performers of sacri-
fices)
are the Artavas and Agnifv&ttas. The Kavyas are
Asjaka-
patis
(lords
of
Astakas
or
the
eighth
day
of
the
lunar
fortnights for three months in which Pitrs are to be propitiated).
Now understand the five Abdas thereof.
Their Samvatsara
is indeed
Agni
and Surya (the Sun)
is-
Parivatsara. Soma
(the Moon)
is mentioned Idvatsara and Vayu
but were consumed by fire in cremation after death were Agnisvattafr Pitarah.
Cf. Va. P. 30.
6-7.
Later, during the Smrti period, the classes of Pitrs increased and had
different connotations. Thus here
in VV.
18-23
Saumyas are sons of Soma
and
imbibers
of Soma. Householders
performing
sacrifices
are
R.tus and
Barhisads.The non-performers of sacrifices are Artavas and Agnisv&ttas .
It adds
one more division viz. Kavyas, the sons of Kavi (Sukra?) who imbibe ghee vide
W.
72-73
below.
For more details of this classification vide infra II.
iii 10 VV. 53, 75, 93-
and 96.
*
The reading xturagnis tu in V& P. 56.14.a is
preferable
to
ftamagnis
tu hereof, as rtu
(seasons of the year) are considered as
Pitr
(vide
Taittirlya
Brdhmaoa
1.4.10.8.

=== PAGE 283 ===

*280
BrahmSn^a Purina
is Anuvatsara. Rudra
is
Vatsara unto
them.
Those
five
Abdas
constitute a Yuga.
23.
Those
( Pitrs) who imbibe the nectar in the heaven
every month on the new moon day, are remembered as Kavyas
t}?mapas and Divaklrtyas.
24-25.
As long as Pururavas was
alive,
he
propitiated
them with the nectar, since it
exudes
from
the moon
every
month and it delights them,
it
is
nectar unto the Somapayin
Pit^s,
(those who imbibe Soma—the moon)
.
Thus
it
is called
Saumya Amrta
(nectar pertaining to
the
moon)
,
Sudhd
and
Madhu (honey)
.
26.
Thirtythree
Dcvas
(who
are
called)
Cchedanas*
(Those who cut
off ?)
drink
the
fifteen
digits of the moon
gradually
in
the
dark
fortnight,
(after
turning
them) into
watery form.
27-30.
After drinking the nectar for half a month, they
go away on the Caturdasi
(fourteenth)
day.
On being drunk thus by all the Devas, the moon
reaches
a point on the New Moon day when
it
remains
with only a
fifteenth part. On
the New Moon
day,
it
is developed by
Su$umna duly. 1 Then, for a period of two Law, the Pitrs drink
the nectar. With a
single ray (i.e. the Susumna) the sun deve-
lops the moon when it becomes reduced on being drunk. Again
the Somapayins drink it. When
all the digits are
exhausted (the
sun) develops the moon once again.
31.
Day by day, in
due order, a
part
(a digit) of the
moon
is developed by the Susumna.
The
black digits become
reduced and the white ones develop it.
32.
Thus the body of the moon developed by the vigour
of the
sun,
appears sparkling, white and perfectly circular on
the full Moon day.
33.
Thus, such is the achievement of the Moon
during
the two halves, the dark
and the
bright
ones.
It is
in
this
manner that the Moon is Pitrman (one with the
Manes). He
is remembered as being Idvatsara,
*
Cf. Va.
1 .
Probably a misprint for Charufa-jdh ‘bom of Chandas, Vfda or prosody*.
P. 56.25a.
Vide Supra ch. XXIV, W. 67-68.

=== PAGE 284 ===

1.2.28.34-44
281
34.
He
is shining and resplendent with his fifteen exuda-
tions of nectar.
Henceforth, I shall recount the Parvans
(days of changes
of the moon) and the Sandhis (meeting points) of Parvans.
35.
Just as there are knotty joints in the Sugarcane and
bamboo, so also there are dark and bright Parvans in the lunar
fortnights.
36.
The differences between the full Moon and the New
Moon are the knots and joints. The lunar days beginning with
Dvitiyd constituting the fortnight are the Parvans .
37.
It is on the
first of
the
fortnights
that
the rite of
Anvadh&na is performed. Hence, the Pratipat is at
the beginning
(the first) of all Parvans.
38.
The period of two Lavas in the evening at the begin-
ning of Anumati
( the
1 5th day—the
Purnima mixed
with
the
14th Tithi)
is
called
Lvilava, When
the
Purnima
is mixed
with the Pratipad—the next Tithi, the period
of two Lavas on
that Full moon night* should be known as Apardhna.
39.
The period of evening after Aparahna that has elapsed
on
the
first
day
of the dark half,
is also accepted as part of
Paurnamasi (Full Moon?)
40-4 1 .
When the sun
is stationed at
a deviation of half
meridian (?)
line,
at
a
distance of a Yuga (Yoke) and when
the meridian of the moon has
risen by the
distance of a Yoke
(Yuga)
that period
is
called Vyatipata. This is because (the
sun and the moon) glance at each other
after the elapse of the
full Moon (period)
and
at
that time
they are on a par with
each other. 1
42.
On seeing
that
period indicated
by
the sun, (the
worshipper) moves towards enumeration
( ?) That
is the period
for Vasatkriya. The period
is laid down immediately.
43-44.
The junction at
night
in the full fortnight of the
full moon is also PUntimd
( full Moon)
. Hence, during the night
*
rak&ydh (of the Raka ) of Va.P.56.35 for r&k&y&m here-of is preferable.
1.
The text is a bit obscure but Suryasiddhanta XI. 1-2 defines Vyatipata
more clearly: “When the moon and the sun are on opposite sides of either
solstice and
thei) minutes of declination are the same,
it
is Vyatipata, The
sum of their longitudes is half a circle
i.e. 180°. Normally there are 13 vyatt-
pdtas
in
a.
year.

=== PAGE 285 ===

282
Brahm/Brjifa Purdqa
of full Moon, the moon becomes very reddish or ( pleasing (?)
Virajyate )
.
Since during the after-noon when the Vyatipdta is
full,
the
moon and the sun in full-fledged
form glance at each other,
it
is called Purriima.
45.
Since the Pitrs along with the Devas approve
of it,,
the period
previous (?)
to
the
Purnima
(i.e. the
14th Tithi
with which
it is mixed)
is remembered as Anumati.
46.
The full Moon day
is
called Rdkd
because
at that
time the moon shines very splendidly in
the
sky.
Wise people
say that
it
is Rdkd because of the
delightful
nature (Rafijandt
)
of the Moon.
47.
When the moon
and
the sun stay in the same star
together (amd—close
to,
near by )
on the fifteenth night from
Rdkd
( the full moon day)
it
is regarded as Amavasya.
48.
After ending
or separating
(?) that Amavasya day,
the sun and the moon see each
other
after
coming
together.
When this happens it is called DarSa (the New Moon day).
49.
(Defective Text upon 59)
.
On the Amdvdsyd (New Moon) day the period
is
of
two
Lavas
in
the
junction
of the 15th and the 1st day of a lunar
fortnight.
It is of the
duration
(of pronouncing)
two
letters
Ku-hu. There are three periodic changes of the moon. *
50.
The period when the moon
vanishes
is Amavasya
and
it
functions from the midday. The moon reaches the sun
in halfa day and the night.
51-52.**
Along with the
sun
it
goes
to
the
Samudra
period which
is in between Kuhu
and
sinivdli in
the
morning.
The
periods
of
contact
are
two.
Invariably
it
occurs
a
Midday (?).
53.
On the Pratipat day
of
the
bright
half, when
the
discs of the sun and the moon are being separated, it is the time
for Ahuti (oblating of ghee
into
fire)
and
the
Vapafkriyd
of
*
amdvdsyd which mixed with the pratipad of the next fortnight is called
Kuhu.
•*
The text
is defective and obscure, sadgama in V.51b
is probably
Sadgava. 'the second division of the
day*. Va.P.46b
(if taken for 51a hereof)
reads suryma sahasd
muktarh gatvd Pratastanotsavau .

=== PAGE 286 ===

1.2.28.54-67
283
Daria
(the New Moon).
Amavasya should be known as the
fttumukha (the face of the season) of this Parvan.
54.
When the moon wastes away during the
dark
half,
Amavasya is a Parvan by day time. That
is why
the
sun
is
eclipsed
( Grhyate—is
caught)
during
the day
time
on
the
Amavasya day.
55-56.
It is eclipsed during the day. Therefore, Amavasya
becomes
reduced
by
day
(?).
The
names
of
the
days
of the lunar
fortnight
have
been
fixed
by
the
scholars
in
accordance with the increase of the
digits
of
the
Moon
of
watery
nature.
Then both the moon and the sun reveal them-
selves.
57.
By
that
path alone
it
(? the moom) comes out
of
the solar sphere gradually.
The moon
touches
(remains
in
contact with) the sun for the whole of the day and night except
for a period of two Lavas .
58.
That period
of Daria
is
the
time
for
Ahuti and
Vafafkriya offering of oblation with the utterence
vasat.
The
period comes to an end
(within which) the cry Ku-hd
is uttered
by a cuckoo.
59.
Amavasya measured by
that
time
is
declared
as
Ku-hU.
The magnitude
of Siniv all
is that period of the moon
which remains after the moon has decreased in size.
60-61.
The sun enters the
Amavasya.
Therefore,
it
is
remembered as Siniv&li. The
period
for these except Ku hu
is
a period of two Lavas for Anumati, Raka
and
Siniv&li . Ku-hu
is
remembered as having
( only the time necessary for the cuckoo
to utter)
Ku-hu.
62.
When,
in
the
middle
of Purnimi. the
Vyatfpata
(deviation)
of the moon and the sun has come
together,
it
is
accepted as
Pratipat.
It is a period of Parvan extending
to
the
M&tr&s. That is also the period
in
the middle
of Ku-hu
and
Siniv&li which is called S&mudra
( spot or mark)
(?)
.
63-67.
(Partly defective text). The period of Parvan
in
the
sphere
of
the sun and the fire and the moon is on a par
with the digits
(Kal&sama — (?) when the digits are equal).
* mJCaldirayah ‘dependent on Kalis’ in Vi P. 56.58.

=== PAGE 287 ===

Brakm&nijla Purdna
284
Thus in the bright half, during the night, at the joints
of
the
parvans
the
glorious moon in a perfect circle
is eclipsed.
Since the moon is replenished,
the PurnimSi is on the
fifteenth
digits
added on
gradually day
by
day. Hence, fifteen digits
( are acquired) by
the
moon
and
the
sixteenth
digit
is
its
own.
Hence,
the
(complete) wastage of
the waters
(?) of the
moon takes place on the fifteenth night.
Thus, there are the
pitrs,
Devas,
Somapas,
Somavard-
hanas, Artavas and Rtus. The nourishing and prosperous Devas
worship them.
Henceforth, I shall describe the Pitrs who
are
the
par-
takers of the monthly Sraddhas.
68-70.
(I shall also describe)
their movement and
the
acquisition of the Sraddha along with its principles.
It is not possible to understand
the movement,
to
and
fro,
of the dead persons even by means of well-known austeri-
ties.
How
then
can
it
be
understood
by
means
of
the
physical eye ?
These Laukika (worldly) Pitrs are remembered
after
the
Devapitrs (divine Manes).
The Devas are Saumyas, Kavyas, Ayajvans and Ayonijas. 1
All those Pitrs are Devas. The real Devas make them speak.
7 1 .
The human Pitrs are those other than they and they
are remembered as Laukikas namely
father,
grandfather
and
the great-grandfather
72.
Those who
perform
Yajfias by means of Saman
Mantras are remembered
as
Somavants. Those who
perform
Haviryajfias are remembered as Barhi$ads.
73.
The Homins (those who
perform
homos)
who
per-
form
Yajfias
on behalf of Aydjyas (those unworthy of Yajfias)
are remembered
as
Agnifvdttas. The
Sdyujyagos
(those
who
attain the salvation of complete identity ) are also remembered
among them by the Brahma^as on account of the similarity
in
Dharmas
(holy rites)
.
1 .
As per V&. P. 56-64, these classes of Pitrs are not bom from a womb
(ayohijo)

=== PAGE 288 ===

1.2.28.74-87
285
74.
Those who are well-versed in the paths of the
holy
duties pertaining to
their Aframas
( stages in life)
and
are
en-
dowed with faith in rituals do not become weary and exhausted
in the end
(i.e. at the times of death).
75-78.
If the devotees are engaged in
these
holy
rites
till
their
death
in seven ways viz. penance,
celibacy, Yajfta,
progeny Sraddha, learning
and
charitable
gifts,
they
go
to
heaven
and
rejoice
there along with those Devas, Pitrs, Suk-
smajas
(subtle-borns)
and
Somaydjtns
(those who
perform
Soma
sacrifices)
.
They perform
worships
like the
Pitrs.
If
water libation
is offered by
the members
of
their
families
and
their
kinsmen,
(the
Pitrs
known
as)
Somalaukikas
partake of monthly Sraddhas and
become
contented.
These
(Pitrs) who
partake
of monthly
Sraddhas
are
Manu$yapitr$
(Human Manes).
79-86.
There are some Pitrs other than these. They
are
entangled
in
births
due
to
their Karmans. They only have
dropped off from the duties
of
the ASramas;
those who
are
devoid of Svadha and Svaha; wicked souls with bodies pierced;
those who have become ghosts in the
abode
of Yama;
those
who
bewail
their
evil
actions
after
reaching
the
place
of
torture;
long-lived
ones; extremely
dried
ones;
those
with
moustaches;
those
without
garments;
those who
are
over-
whelmed
with
hunger
and
thirst;
those who run about here
and there;
those who wish
to
approach
rivers,
lakes, tanks
and
wells ;
those who are desirous of taking away others’ food-
stuffs; those who are being taken away to different places; those
who are being made to fall in different places;
those who un-
dergo tortures again and again in the following hells viz. Salmala,
,
Vaitaranl, Kumbhl-p&ka , Karamb havdluka, A sipatra-vana
and
5 iId-
Sampe$ana due
to
their own previous actions. These miserable
Pitrs remaining there do not perish.
If three
Pindas (Balls
of
rice) are given to them on Darbha
grasses not by the
left
(i.e.
by the right) by
their kinsmen on the ground by reciting their
names and Gotras (lineage) they delight
those Pitrs who are
stationed in the places of ghosts.
87.
Those who do not reach the place of torture,
those
who
fall
and
drop
down
in
five ways
attain
the
state of

=== PAGE 289 ===

286
Brahmtaiia Purd$a
immobile beings. At the end
of
that
they
are bom
in
low
families on account of their own actions.
88-91.
They
are
born
in wombs
of
different forms in
the animal kingdom or they are bom in a manner
unapproved
in
religious
texts. If they offer &raddha in the different Births
by means of those articles of diet which they themselves subsist
by, that Sraddha becomes fruitful. Wherever the creature lives,
it acquires food in accordance with what had been
offered
(as
£raddha
previously)
at
the
proper
time,
duly
to
deserving
persons. 1
Just as the calf finds out its mother-cow
even when
the
cows
are
lost
(i.e.
when many cows are tethered together) so
also the Mantra takes
to the Pitrs the food-stuff offered
in the
Sraddha.
It
is
in
this manner
that
&raddha
duly and faithfully
offered by means of Mantras is not fruitless.
92-
Kumara
(god
Skanda)
recounted
these
different
things after seeing them with his divine eyes. He
is
conversant
with the departures and arrivals of the dead ones
as
well
as
the acquisition of Sraddha by them.
93.
They are
remembered
as
Bahlikas, Usmapas and
Divakirtyas. The dark
fortnight is
their day
and
the
bright
fortnight is the night for their sleep.
94.
Thus these Pitrs are Devas and the
Devas
are
the
Pitra. The
Rtus
(seasons),
Artavas
and Ardhamasas
(half
mopths)
are remembered as Pitrs mutually.
95.
Thus these Pitrs,
Devas and human
Pitrs
become
pleased when the holy rites are accompanied
by
faith. When
they are pleased the descendants
also are pleased.
96.
Thus this search for and investigation into the nature
ofthe Pitrs who imbibe Soma (has been completed). It
is
this
principle of trie Pitrs that has been decisively recounted in
the
Puranas.
97-100.
The
period
of
the
Full Moon
and the New
Moon and the place of torture have been succinctly recounted
to you. This
is the eternal creation.
1. W. 88-91 justify the performance of Sriddhas.

=== PAGE 290 ===

! .2.29. 1-4
287
The Universal
form
of
creation
has been
mentioned
only partially. It is impossible to enumerate
in
full.
It
should
be trusted faithfully by one who wishes
for prosperity.
Indeed, this creation of Svayambhuva Manu
has
been
begun by me and narrated in detail and
in
accordance
with
the sequence.
What more shall I describe to you ?
CHAPTER TWENYNINE
Cycle of Tugas
: Characteristics of Tugas1
The sage said :
1.
I wish to hear about
the
nature
and
principle
(or
reality)
of those sets of four Yugas, which were before in
the
Svayambhuva Manvantara.
SQta said :
2.
What I
have
already
described
in
the
context
of
(the
description
of)
the
Earth
etc,
the set
of four Yugas
is
among them. I shall recount
it.
(All of you listen and) under-
stand.
3-4.
There are six aspects
to be
mentioned
in
regard
to the set of four Yugas. viz.
Yuga,
the
difference
of Yugas,
1.
Though
this Purana followed the vedic
tradition and regarded a
Yuga-period as consisting of five years (vide Supra ch. 21.131-132
and
Note
thereon), here
the
author
follows Manu
1.61-74,
79-86.
According to
him the
1st Yuga, Krta extends over 4000
years
of
gods
with a
twilight
period
(sandhyd ) of 400 Divine
(of god's) years before its actual advent and a
transitional period
to the next Yuga
(Sandhyam£a)
of 400
celestial
years.
The three other Yugas viz Treta, Dvapara and Kali consist respectively of a
period of 3000, 2000 and 1000 divine years preceded
by
and
followed
by
Sandhyd and Sandhydmia each extending over a
period of 300, 200
and
100
gods* years. This theory is adopted by Pur&nas e.g. KP. 1. chs 51 and 53, NP.
I. ch. 41, Mbh. Vana chs 149, 188, VP. I. 3, Va. P. chs 21, 22, 57, 58.

=== PAGE 291 ===

288
Brahmdntfa Purina
Yugadharma (peculiar characteristics of the Yuga), Yuga-Sandhi,
(the junction of Yugas
)
,
Yug&mtoka (the part of
the
Yuga)
and the Yugasandhdna (joints of two Yugas).
I
shall
narrate
these factually in details. I shall enumerate every thing and
I
shall
indicate the exact number
( where necessary )
.
5.
After
calculating
the
human
year
by means
of
worldly reckoning, I shall mention the set of four
Yugas
cal-
culating the same by means of human years.
The smallest unit of times is equal to the
time taken for
a winking. 1 The time for the utterance of a short syllable should
also be understood the same.
6.
Fifteen
Nime$as make
one Ka$th&.
Thirty
Kdffhds
make a Kald. Thirty Kalds shall be a
MuhUrta.
The
day
and
the night together consist of thirty MuhUrtas and they are equal
to each other.
7-8a.
It is the sun who divides the human and
worldly
day and night. There, the day
is meant for holy rites and other
activities and
the night is intended for sleep.
8b-9.
A night and a day of the Pitrs make
a
(human)
month. Their further division is as follows
: The dark fortnight
is
their day and the bright fortnight is their night fot the
pur-
pose of sleep. Thirty human months make one month of Pitrs.
10.
Three hundred and sixty human months make one
year of the Pitrs.
1. W. 5-21 give the divisions of Time adopted
in calculating
Yugas.
The smallest unit of time is the period required for winking of the eye and is
called Nime$a\
15 Nime?as=»Ka?tha; 30 Kashas==Kala
30 Kalas— Muhurta ; 30 Muhurtas= Day and night
30 days=A Month;— One day
(and night) of Pitfs
30 Human months— 1 Month of Pitrs
360 Human months=1 Year of Pitrs
Human
Uttardyapa
(6 months ) =Day of the Devas
Human
Dakfipdjyana
(6 months ) = Night of Devas
1 Human year= a complete Day (day and night) of Devas
30 Human years=a month of Devas
360 Human years=One year of Devas
3030 Human years— 1
Saptar$i year
9090 Human years== 1 Dhruva year
360,000 Human years= 1000 Years of gods.

=== PAGE 292 ===

1.2.29.11-24
289
11-1 2a.
A hundred years according
to
human
calcu-
lation are considered to be equal to three years and ten months
of the
Pitrs.
12b- 13. What
is remembered as one human year accord-
ing to worldly calculation
is one day and night of the
Devas.
It has been
so decided in the scriptural texts. The divine
day
and night make one year. Their further division is as follows:
14.
The northern transit (of the Sun)
is
the
day and
the southern transit is the night
(of Devas). The
further
cal-
culation in regard to the divine night and day is as follows:
15-16.
Thirty human years are remembered as a divine
month. A hundred human years should be
understood
to
be
equal
to three
divine months
and
ten
divine
days. This
is
remembered as the divine reckoning. Three hundred and
sixty
years according to human reckoning are glorified as one
divine
vear.
4
17.
A year of the seven
sages
(Great
Bear)
is
consi-
dered to be equal to three thousand and thirty human
years.
18.
The year of Dhruvais remembered as equal to nine
thousand and ninety years according to human calculation.
19.
Thirty six thousand years according to
the human
reckoning should be known as equal to a hundred
years.
This
is remembered as divine reckoning.
20-21.
Three hundred and sixty thousand human
years
constitute a thousand divine years—so say the people who are
conversant with numbers and calculation.
22.
It is thus that the sages sang about the
divine
cal-
culation. Now
(I shall narrate) the reckoning of the number of
Yugas according to the divine calculation.
23.
Wise persons and sages have said that there are foul
Yugas
in
Bharata
subcontinent. 1
They
are
Krta,
Treta,
Dvapara and Kali.
24.
The
first
one
is Krtayuga by name.
Thereafter,
Treta
is
mentioned.
Then Dvapara and
Kali. One
shall
reckon these as the Yugas.
1.
It
is strange that Yugas should be restricted to
India
(Bharata)
only.

=== PAGE 293 ===

290
Brahmdnd a Buraya
25-28.
They say that Krta Yuga consists of four thousand
years. The Sandhyd (junction or transition period ) consists of so
many
(i.e.
four)
hundred
years.
The
part of the junction
(with
the
next Yuga
or Sandhy&rhSa)
is equal to
the Sandhyd
period.
In the other three Yugas also along
with
their
Sandhyas
and SandhydmSas the thousands and the hundreds function under
the same principle.
The extent of
Treta
and
Dvapara
is
three
thousand
and two
thousand
years
in
due
order.
Three hundred and
two hundred years constitute the Sandhyas and
the
Sandhyama-
Sas are also equal to them. Excellent Brahmanas say that Kali
Yuga
consists
of a thousand years. Its Sandhyd is one hundred
years and SandhyamSa
is equal to Sandhyd.
29.
Yugasankhyd
(the total number of years
in
all
the
four Yugas together)
is mentioned as twelve thousand (divine)
years for the four yugas viz. Krta, Treta, Dvapara and Kali.
30.
In
this
connection
the
years
are
found
to
be as
follows in accordance with
the human
calculation: 1
I
shall
mention the number of years in the Krta Yuga. Understand
it.
31.
The Krta Yuga consists of one million four hundred
and forty thousand human years.
32.
The duration of the Treta Yuga is one
million and
eighty thousand human years.
33.
The duration of the Dvapara Yuga is seven hundred
and twenty thousand human years.
34.
Similarly, the duration of the Kali Yuga
is
three
hundred and sixty thousand human years.
1.
According to this Purana the period of Yugas is as follows:
Yuga
Tears
Krta
1440,000
Treta
1080,000
Dvapara
720,000
Kali
360,000
Total
3600,000 Years
with Sandhyd and Sandhy&mias 4320,000
years.

=== PAGE 294 ===

1.2.29.35-46
291
35-36.
( Partially defective text )
.
Excluding the periods of Sandhayds and
Sandhy&mias
the
duration of the fourYugas
is three million six hundred thousand
human years.
Including the Sandhyas and
the Sandhy&iii§as
the
duration
of
the
four Yugas
is
four million three hundred and twenty
thousand years according to human reckoning.
37.
Thus the sets of
four Yugas numbering
seventyone
are called Manvantara.
38-40.
Understand the number
of
years
in
the Man-
vantara. There are three hundred and six million seven hundred
and twenty thousand years according
to human
reckoning
in
a Manvantara. It is not more. This reckoning of Manvantara
is
remembered
by
Brahmanas
conversant
with
calculation.
Thus the duration of a Manvantara has been
recounted
along
with the Yugas.
41.
The natural* (?) Krta Yuga
is
endowed
with
four
thousand years
(?)
. I shall mention the balance of Treta as well
as Dvapara and Kali.
42.
No matter can be mentioned in
two
ways
simulta-
neously
(?) Though it has
come
traditionally
in
due order,
#
these two Yugas have not been recounted to vou before.
43-46.
It was not
recounted
because I was
too much
engrossed in the description of the line
of sages.
In the beginning of the Treta Yuga, 1 Manu and the seven
sages expounded the various Dharmas.
The seven sages expounded the following
holy
rites
viz.
Srauta Dharma(the holy rites mentioned in Srutis) recommend-
ed by Brahma, such as concerning taking a wife and perform-
ing Agnihotra. They expounded matter mentioned in Rksamhita,
*
Probably Prathamam ‘The
first* as in Va.P. 58.38.
1. W. 43-92 describe the Yuga-dharma of the Treta Yuga:
Vedic Mantras and Siddhis of the previous Kalpa which were
‘lost’ at
the end of that Kalpa manifested themselves to sages. The Vcaas formed only
one undivided Samhita. God Brahma
(re-) established the duties of various
castes
and
stages in
life (Varna^rama-dharma ) . The institution of kingship
was firmly rooted.
It was a covetable picture of a happy society. Cf Mt.
P.
<3h. 142.

=== PAGE 295 ===

292
Brahmd$ia Purdna
Yajussamhita and
Samasamhita.
These
are
the
holy
rites
characterised as Srauta Dharma.
Svayambhuva Manu expounded the traditional holy rites
characterised
by
customs and
conventions.
These
rites
are
connected
with
the
conduct of life of the people of different
castes and stages of life. He expounded them along with truth-
fulness, celibacy, learning and austerities.
47-48.
In the first Treta Yuga,
those Mantras alongwith
Tdraka
(i.c. Orhkdra
)
and other examples manifested themselves
without any conscious effort or previous
knowledge,
unto
the
seven
sages
and
Manu. That
is because of the penance per-
formed by them and their saintly endeavour.
49-50.
Those Siddhis (spiritual powers and achievements)
which appeared before the Devas in the
first
Kalpa,
of
their
own
accord
(appeared
before
these also
i.e. seven sages and
Manu). When the original Siddhis ceased to exist, others began
to function. Thousands of those Mantras which
existed in
the
Kalpas
gone by
manifested themselves in their intellect once
again.
51.
The Rk, Yajus, Saman and Atharvan Mantras were
uttered by the seven sages and Manu expounded
the
Smarta
Dharma (Dharma as laid down in Smrtis).
52.
In the beginning of Treta,
the
undivided compact
Vedas
alone were
the bridges
(i.e.
the
sole authority)
unto
Dharma. But owing to the contraction in the period
of longe-
vity they are abandoned in ihe Dvaparas.
53.
It is by means of their penance that the sages study
the Vedas during Dvapara, etc. The Vedas are devoid of beginn
ing and end. They are divine. They have been evolved by
the
selfborn lord before.
54.
Though they are the same in meaning, righteousness,
holy rites and ancillary subjects, they undergo changes in every
Yuga.
55.
The Ksatriyas have
Arambhas (enterprises) as their
Yajfla (sacrifice) ; the VaiSyas
have Havis
(offerings of ghee
etc.)
for Yajfla; the Sudras have
service for Yajfia and
excel-
lent Brahma^as have Japa (chanting of Mantras)
for Yajfla.
56.
Then, in the Treta Yuga, people of
all
castes
were

=== PAGE 296 ===

1 .2 .29 .57-68
293
joyous (because) they were well-protected by
Dharma.
They
regularly performed holy rites, and were happy and prosperous.
57.
Ksatriyas obeyed the Brahmanas. The Vaisyas obeyed
the Ksatriyas. The Sudras obeyed the Vaisyas.
The people co-
operated with one another.
58.
Their activities were auspicious; so
also were
their
castes and stages of life. They were pure
in
the
thoughts
of
the
mind,
in
the
utterance
of words and
in
their physical
activiry.
59-60.
In the Treta Yuga, the
initiation of all activities
was
never
fruitless.
It became
fulfilled. In the Treta Yuga,
span
of
life,
intelligence,
strength,
beauty,
health
and
piety were common to
all. At that time, Brahma
established
different castes and stages in life.
61.
Again,
the
subjects
out
of delusion kept up those
Dharmas(but) with mutual antagonism. They then approached
Manu.
62.
Svayambhuva
Manu,
the
Prajapati
(lord
of
the
subjects) saw the
reality
of
situation.
After
meditation,
he
begot two sons of §atarupa.
63.
They were Priyavrata and Uttanapada. They
were
the
first kings.
Thereafter, kings were born. They wielded the
staff of Law and Order.
64. Those kings were called Rdjans because they delighted
and pacified
the subjects. Those with hidden sins could not be
controlled by those kings.
65.
Yama, king of Dharma and son
of the
Sun-god
is
remembered as their chastiser. The classifications of
castes
are
said to have been begun in the Treta.
66.
It was then that Mantras
were
gathered
together
by the sages who were the sons of Brahma. It was
only
then
that the Yajfias were initiated by the gods.
67-68.
In the Svayambhuva Manvantara, the Yajfta was
formerly
initiated
by
the Devas by means of
all
requisites,
gathered by Yama and Sukra along with Vi£vabhuj and Deven-
dra
of
great
prowess.
Truthfulness, chanting
of
Mantras,
penandS and charity constitute Dharma in the Treta.

=== PAGE 297 ===

294
Brahm&n<}a Purdna
69.
At the end of a thousand Righteous
activities,
the
Dharma
of
nonviolence
begins
to
function.
It
is then that
heroes are born with great strength and span of life.
70.
They had renounced punishments.
They
were
ex-
tremely fortunate and
highly righteous. They were expounders
of Brahman. Their
eyes
were
extensive
like
the
petals
of
a lotus.
They had broad,
wide chests and
their
limbs
were
well-knit together.
71.
The sovereigns of the world in the Treta Yuga were
capable of agonizing even lions; they were extremely
vigorous.
Their mode of walking was
like that of intoxicated
elephants.
They were great wielders of bow
( great experts in archery)
.
72-73.
They were fully equipped with all good
charac-
teristics.
They
were
JVyagrodhaparimanfalds . The
word Nyag-
rodha
denotes
the
two
arms.
Hence, Hyagrodha means Vydma
(Extended
arms). He
whose
height
extends
as much as a
Vyama, he whose girth and height are equal, should
be known
as Nyagrodhaparimantfala
( a well-built man)
.
74.
The following seven things viz. a discus,
a
chariot,
a
jewel,
a spouse,
a treasure, a horse and an elephant—these
are considered to be the seven jewels of emperors. 1
75.
They say that the following seven are the inanimate
jewels of the sovereign over the world, viz. a discus, a
chariot,
a jewel, a sword. The excellent shield
is the
fifth, the flag and
the treasure.
76.
(The
seven jewels
of an Emperor) having life are
mentioned as follows
: The Queen,
the family priest, the com-
mander-in-chief, the chariot-maker, the minister, the horse and
the elephant.
77.
These
jewels
are
divine
ones.
They
have
been
(naturally)
acquired by the noble-souled ones. These fourteen
(jewels) should be assigned to all Emperors.
1. W. 74-77 describe two lists of seven ‘jewels* of an emperoi
{Cakra-
cartin). Here 14 jewels are mentioned. A similar
list of royal jewels is found
in Pali
literature. The representation of the 2nd cent B.C. of a Cakravartin
at Jagayyapetta shows these
‘jewels' and one more feature—at the touch of
CakravartVs hand above (towards the sky)
it shows gold coins.

=== PAGE 298 ===

1.2.29.78-89
295
78.
In
all
the
Manvantaras
of
the
past and future,
emperors are born on the Earth
from a part of Visnu.
79.
Emperors
are
born
in
the
Treta Yuga of all the
Manvantaras of the past, present and future.
80.
The
following four
shall
be
very
wonderful and
excellent in regard to those kings
:—viz.
strength
(or
army),
Dharma (virtue, piety), happiness and wealth.
81.
Wealth, dharma, love, fame and victory are acquired
by the kings on a par with one
another and
without coming
into conflict.
82.
They
over-power
even
the
sages
by
means
of
Anima (minuteness) and other AUvaryas y the power of lordship,
learning and penance.
83.
(They
overpower)
Devas,
Danavas
and human
beings by means of strength and
austerity.
They
are
also
born
with
superhuman
characteristic
features present in their own bodies.
84-86.
The hairs are soft and
glossy; the foreheads
are
high; the tongue is one that wipes off clean. The
lips and
eyes
have
the
lustre
of copper;
(their
chests)
are marked with
Srivatsa scar ; the hairs are lifted up.
The arms extend as far as the knees; the hands are copper-
coloured. They are slim in the hips;
their girth is
as much as
the
extended
arms. They
have the shoulders of the lion and
they urinate like lions.
Their gait is
like that of lordly elephants; they have large
chin-bones; they have the lines of wheel and fish on
the
soles
of the feet and those of conch and lotus in the palms.
87-89.
The kings
are eightyfive
thousand
in
number
and they shine without ageing.
The movements of the sovereigns in four viz.
the sky,
the
sea, the subterraneous regions and
in mountainous region,
are
unobstructed.
Sacrifice,
charity,
penance
and
truthfulness
are men-
tioned as the Dharmas specially
significant in the Treta.
At that time Dharma (Righteousness)
begins to function
with the classification of castes
and
stages of
life.
Dandaniti
(Polity, administration
of law
and
order)
functions for the
establishment of the bounds of decency.

=== PAGE 299 ===

296
Brahmdntfa Purana
90-92.
All the subjects are delighted and well built. They
are
free
from
ailments.
Their
minds are
full
(i.e they are
joyous)
.
It is remembered that there was only one Veda with
four
feet
(parts)
in
the
Treta
Yuga. At that time men lived upto
three thousand years, endowed with sons and grandsons. They
used to die in due order. This
is
the
characteristic feature
of
Treta
Yuga.
Understand
the Treta Sandhya
(the transition
from Treta Yuga or junction)
. The characteristic features
are
reduced by one-fourth in the Sandhya from the main Yuga and
still further reduced by one-fourth in the
Sadhydmfa
from
the
Sandhya .
CHAPTER THIRTY*
The Inauguration of the Sacrificial Cult
Fall of King Vasu for Denunciation of Sacrifices
&drillap&yani said
:
1.
How could Yajna begin to function
formerly
in
the
Svayambhuva Manvantara, at the beginning of the Treta Yuga.
Narrate
it factually to me.
2-4.
When the Sandhyd (the period between two Yugas)
elapsed along with the Krta Yuga, when
( the time unit ) called
Kala
[kala] began
to
function at
the advent of Treta Yuga,
when the creation of rain had taken place and
(the plants and
)
the
medicinal
herbs had grown, when
the practice
of
culti-
vation
and
agriculture
had been
fully established, when the
people devoted to the stage
of life of a householder established
the classification of castes and stages
of life with keen insight,
then how was Yajfia initiated after
gathering
together
all the
requisites ?”
This Chapter corresponds
to Ch.58.76
ff. of V&.P.

=== PAGE 300 ===

1.2.30.5-16
297
5.
On hearing this Suta said
:
Let this be heard, O Samsapayani, how in the beginning
ofTreta Yuga, Yajfta started functioning.
6-9.
I shall recount
in the
proper
order
(how Yajna
began) formerly in the Svayambhuva Manvantara.
When
the
Sandhyd the transitional-period
(or junction)
elapsed along with Kt ta Yuga, when
the
period
called
Kala
began to function at the advent ofTreta Yuga,
when the crea-
tion of rain had taken place and (the plants and) the medicinal
herbs had grown, when the practice of cultivation and
agricul-
ture
had
been
fully
established,
when
the
people became
devoted to the life of householders
and
after
establishing
the
classification of the castes and stages of
life, they arranged the
mantras
into
a
well-knit
compendium,
they
included
those
Mantras in holy rites (for the sake of welfare) here
and
here-
after.
At
that
time lord Indra
(the enjoyer of the universe)
initiated the Yajfta.
10.
(They started the Yajfta)
alongwith
all
the
gods
and with all
the requisites gathered together. The
great
sages
came
to
his
horse-sacrifice
which
was
being
lavishly
performed.
11-16.
All
those
who had come
asked
him even
as
he was performing the Yajfta with the animals worthy of being
sacrificed.
When
the
Rtviks
(sacrificial
priests) were
busy
with
their ritualistic fire-worship as the
activities concerning the per-
formance of Yajfta; when the priests
(authorised in) singing the
Saman Mantras had begun their sweet notes ; when the leading
Adhvaryus (sacrificial priests)
had
quickly
started
their
pro-
ceedings ; when all the flocks of the animals (procured for and)
worthy of being sacrificed had been cut and
struck,
when
the
Havis
offerings were
being poured into the fire by Brahmanas
performing Agnihotra; when all the Devas the
partakers of the
Yajfta, had been
invoked in the due
order—those Devas who
are of the nature of Indriya (the presiding deities of sense-organs)
were the partakers of Yajfta—they worshipped those Devas who
existed at
the
beginning
of the Kalpa—the great
sages, the
Adhvaryus*,
rose up at the time of squeezing and crushing
( of

=== PAGE 301 ===

298
Brakmdnda Purdna
the Soma juice )
. On seeing the miserable flocks of animals, the
great sages collectively asked
Indra— * “What is the
procedure
of your Yajfia ? l
17.
This
is highly unrighteous and sinful. It
(this
sacri-
fice) has been spread (performed) with a desire for rites involv-
ing
violence
to
life).
In
your
Yajfia, O excellent god,
the
killing of animals
is involved.
18.
An evil thing has been started for the
destruction
of
Dharma
on
account
of this injury
to the animals. This
is not
Dharma;
it is Adharma
(sin)
. Violence is not called as Dharma
(Righteous)
.
19.
If your
honour
wishes to perform
the
Yajfia
in
accordance
with the scriptures, perform the
Yajfia
by means
of Dharma that does
not infringe established institutions.
Per-
form the Yajfia according
to
the
injunctions
laid
down
(in
scriptures )
.
20-21.
O excellent god
!
(sacrifice should be performed)
with sacrificial seeds which are
kept for a maximum
period
of
three years and which do not
put
forth sprouts. In them
( such
seeds described above) no violence (to life)
exists (is involved).
O highly intelligent one, this is the Dharma laid down
former-
ly by Brahma”.
Thus Indra, the enjoyer of the Universe, (was
asked)
by
the sages who perceived reality.
22.
Then a great argument took
place
between Indra
and
the
great sages—”
By what means should
the Yajfia be
performed—by mobile
(living)
beings or immobile articles
?”
23.
After stating the
principle
the great
sages
became
dejected on account of the argument. After
coming
to
terms
with
Indra, they asked Vasu who was moving about
in the
firmament.
24.
“O king of great intellect, how (what)
is
the proce-
dure
for
Yajfia found out by you. O lord, son of Uttanapada^
explain and dispel our doubts”.
25.
On hearing their words,
Vasu, without
considering
the pros and cons recollected the
Vedas and
Scriptural
texts.
1. W.
16-21 record the
Brahmanical
protest
against
animal-sacri-
fices. They
state
that
the
seeds
which are 3
years
old and
incapable of
germination should be used instead of animals in sacrifice.

=== PAGE 302 ===

1 .2.30.26-35
299
He then explained the principle of Yajfia.
26.
“Sacrifice
should
be performed
with
whatever
is
duly brought’’ said the king.
‘Sacrifice should be performed by
means
of animals
worthy
of
being
sacrificed or by means of
seeds and fruits.
27-29.
Violence is but natural to a
sacrifice—such is mv
9
(opinion) as well as what is mentioned
in
philosophical
texts
and
scriptures.
Just
as
the
Devatas, so also the Mantras, are
symbols of violence. This is said by great
sages
endowed
with
austerities over a long period, through
their philosophical texts
and Taraka and other
( Mantras)
. This has
been
said
on
the
basis of their authority. Hence,
it behoves you all to achieve
it
provided those Mantras and statements are considered authori-
tative by you, O Brahmanas, so,
let
the
Yajna
be
continued
and allowed
to function. Otherwise, your words will be other-
wise
(false)”.
30.
After being answered
to in this manner, those
saints
with souls united with Brahman of unified
souls,
realized
the
inevitability and hence restrained their speech.
31.
Immediately
after
saying
this,
the
king
entered
Rasatala (nether worlds)
. After being a traverser of the
upper
regions
Vasu
(now)
came
to
be a
traverser of the nether-
worlds. 1
32.
By means of that statement he had been
a
resident
of
the
(nether)
surface
of the
world. King
Vasu who
tried
to dispel doubts in regard to Dharma, went down.
33.
Hence,
even
though
one
may be conversant with
many things, one should not express anything by way of clari-
fication of doubts when alone and single-handed.
Dharma
has
many an opening.
Its way
is subtle and
it goes a long way.
34.
Hence,
nothing
definite can be stated by anyone in
the matter of Dharma including the Devas and the
sages
but
excepting Svayambhuva Manu.
35.
Hence, nonviolence has been declared by great sages
I.
The fall of king Vasu for supporting animal sacrifices showed how
that
institution of animal
sacrifice
became condemned
at the time of this
PuranS:

=== PAGE 303 ===

300
Brahm&ntfa Pu&nia
as the gateway to Dharma. 1 Thousands and
millions
of sages
have gone to heaven by means of their own austerities.
36-38.
Therefore, the great sages
do
not
praise
either
charity
or
Yajfia.
By
giving
roots
and
fruits or greens and
vegetables gleaned by them
or
waterpot
in
accordance with
their capacity, many ascetics have
become well-established
in
the heavenly world.
Non-hat assment, absence of greed, penance, mercy to the
living
beings,
control
of
j.cnse-organs, celibacy, truthfulness,
tenderness, forgiveness, fortitude—these
are
the
roots
of
the
eternal Dharma, but they are very difficult
to achieve.
39-41.
It
is
heard
(traditionally)
that
many
sinless
Brahmanas, Ksatriyas and others have achieved spiritual power
by means
of
penance.
They
are
Priyavrata,
Uttanapada,
Dhruva,
Medhatithi,
Vasu,
Sudhaman,
Virajas,
Sankha,
Pandyaja,
Praclnabarhis,
Parjanya,
Havirdhana
and
other
kings. These and many others have gone
to heaven
by means
of their
austerities.
They are
saintly
kings of great inherent
strength whose reputation has been firmly established.
42.
Hence, by all reasons, penance
is superior to Yajfia.
It
is due to his penance
that
this
whole
universe
had
been
formerly created by Brahma.
43.
Hence, Yajfia does not follow it (penance) anywhere.
This (world)
is regarded as based on penance.
Articles
(of
sacrifice) and
Mantras
are
the
bases of
Yajfia. Penance is of the nature of non-intake of food.
44.
One
attains
the
Devas
by means
of Yajfia and
Vairaja
by
means
of penance.
Brahminical
holy
rites
(are
achieved)
by means
of renunciation
and
the
victory
over
Prakrti through Vairagya (absence of passionate attachment).
45-48.
One attains Kaivalya (salvation)
through
know-
ledge. These are declared as five goals.
Thus great argument took place between the
Devas
and
the sages in connection with the functioning of the
Yajfia
for-
merly during Svayambhuva Manvantara.
Thereafter, on seeing him (Vasu ?) struck down by means
of the power of Dharma, all of them ignored the words of Vasu
1. W. 35-48 establish the superiority of JA&na marga over Karma-
m&rga, including animal
sacrifices.

=== PAGE 304 ===

1.2.31.1-6
301
and
went away
as
they
came.
When
the
groups of sages
departed, the Devas concluded
the
Yajfta.
It was
thus
that
Yajfta was initiated in the Svayambhuva Manvantara.
There-
after, this Yajfta has been modified along with the Yugas.
CHAPTER THIRTYONE
Narration
of the Four Tugas
:
Castes and Stages of Life
SUta said
:
1.
Henceforth,
I shall recount the position
of
the Dva-
para Age once again
1
. When Treta Yuga
passes
by,
Dvapara
Sets
in.
2.
The Siddhi that the subjects had in
the
Treta Yuga
becomes defunct
along
with
the
subjects, when Treta Yuga
elapses at the beginning of Dvapara.
3.
In Dvapara the mixture and combination of the castes
begins
to
take
place among
the
subjects.
All activities are
affected adversely (and get inverted).
4.
The main activity in Dvapara is declared as
a
com-
bination of Rajas and Tamos with
all these
viz.
the
emphasis
on Yajftas*, administration of justice, pride, arrogance, forgive-
ness and strength.
5.
The Dharma that had been in existence
in
the
first
Krta Yuga continues to function in Treta Yuga. After becoming
agitated and intensely affected in Dvapara,
it becomes
extinct
in the Kali Yuga.
6.
In
that
Yuga,
there
is
utter
destruction
of
(the
classification of) the castes.
Similarly, the
different
stages
of
1 .
This chapter depicts the state of the society, religion, religious texts
etc. in the Dvapara Age. The deterioration and confusion of
social, religious
and other conditions provide a back-ground to the Chaos in the Kali Age.
*
Va.
P.
58.4
reads y&cM
oadhah paqo
‘Begging,
killing,
gambling*
instead
of yqjHdvadhdrafuttn
in
this
text.

=== PAGE 305 ===

302
Brahmd$$a Purdm
life get jumbled and mixed up. The Sruti and Smrti come to
be at variance with each other in that Yuga.
7.
Owing to the difference between Sruti and Smrti no
definite
conclusion
can
be
arrived
at.
Because
of
the
absence
of
definiteness,
there
is
no
(clear-cut) principle of
Dharma.
8-10.
Owing to the
absence
of
(a
specific)
Dharma,
there is difference of opinion even among
friends.
Owing
to
mutual
difference and
confusion
in the points
of view there
is no definite conclusion such as “This
is Dharma. This
is not
Dharma.”
The confusion in the points of view results from ambigui-
ty and uncertainty of the causes,
inconclusiveness
in regard to
the effects (or decisions)
and
difference of opinion among the
people.
Hence, utter confusion and contradiction is brought about
in the scriptural texts by persons with different points of view.
11.
It
is
laid down
that there
is only a single unified
Veda with
four
feet
(i.e. sections, books)
in the Treta Yuga.
In view of the fact that there
is reduction in the span of life, the
Veda is distinctly classified in the Dvapara age.
12-13.
The Samhita texts
of Rk, Yajus and Saman are
recited
by
the
great
sages
differently
with
changes
in
the
settings (arrangements) of Mantra andBrahmana portions and
alterations
in
the notes,
accents
and
letters.
Changes
are
brought about due to the changes in the (presiding) sages
and
Mantras and confusion in the view-points. They
are similar in
certain
places and
altered
utterly
in
certain
places due
to
•difference in the points of view.
1 4.
The Brahmanas, Kalpa-Sutras and Mantra Pravaca-
nas (different scriptural texts) and
other
texts as well have a
similar plight. Others follow
these
but
some
oppose
it and
stand apart.
15.
They begin to function in Dvapara Age and recede
during the Kali Yuga.
There was only one Adhvaryava (Yajur Veda)
but later it
split into two.
16-18.
By means of common and contradictory
matters,
the whole scriptural text has been confounded.

=== PAGE 306 ===

1.2.31.19-28
303
With the schools
of Adhvaryava
(Yajur Veda)
confused
and confounded in various ways,
with
alternative readings in
Atharva,
Rk and Saman Mantras,
there
was
a lot of unrest
(confusion)
in
Dvapara. They
had many divisions and sub-
divisions and alternatives. They began
to function in Dvapara
and became extinct in Kali.
19.
Effects of these contrary happenings
take
place
in
Dvapara—effects
such
as
absence
of
rain,
then
death
and
sickness and other calamities.
20.
On account of miseries verbal, mental and physical,
they have
despondency
and
absence
of
interest
in
worldly
matters. Due
to despondency
and
dejectedness,
they begin to
ponder over modes of relief from misery.
21.
Through
the ponderings they
attain
disinterested-
ness in
worldly
affairs
and
absence
of attachment. Through
this detachedness they beginto see defects. Through
the
sight
of
defects
there
is
the
possibility
of Ajriana (ignorance)
in
Dvapara.
22.
To
those
Ajnanins
(ignorant
persons)
in
the first
Svayambhuva Manvantara
in
the
Dvapara Yuga, enemies of
the scriptural texts crop up.
23.
There are uncertainties and
indecisive
alternatives
in the science of Ayurveda, in the Angas
(ancillary subjects),
in the Jyotisa (Astronomy and Astrology)
in
the Arthasastra
(Economics) and in Hctu-Sastra (Science of dialectics).
24-26.
There are
similar
alternatives
in
the
Bhasyas
(commentaries) and Vidyas
(learning)
of the
Prakriya Sutras
and Kalpa Sutras (scriptural
texts)
. There arc different Smrti-
sastras (Law
Codes
etc.) and
there
are
separate
Prasthdnas
(Schools
and
Systems).
These
occur
in
the
Dvapara Yuga
because of the difference of opinion among men.
It is with very great difficulty that agricultural and other
professions
flourish
(due to the
efforts)
mental,
verbal and
physical. In the Dvapara,
it is preceded by great physical strain
of all living beings.
There
is greediness
(in the people). The
professional activity is primarily commercial.
There
is no defi-
niteness in the principles.
27-28.
There
is the composition of scriptural tracts based
on Vedas (but)
there
is mixing and mingling of Dharmas. The

=== PAGE 307 ===

304
Brahm&nfa Purdna
discipline of the classification of
castes and stages of life come
to nought. Lust and anger flourish in Dvapara.
Passion, greed
and murder begin to prevail in Dvapara. It is in Dvapara that
Vyasa1
classifies the Veda into four sections.
29-30.
When
Dvapara
comes
to
a
close,
its Sandhyd
(twilight
or
transitional
period
between Dvapara
and Kali
Yugas) too functions in
the same
manner. The characteristic
feature of Dvapara, devoid of good qualities becomes establish-
ed. In the same manner the Sandhydrhia also functions.
(Now)
Understand
(the
details)
of Kali Yuga2 on the
basis of what remains of Dvapara.
31-33.
The acceptance
(of
characteristic
features
etc.)
of
the
Kali
age
is
based on the residue of the Sandhyamia of
Dvapara. Violence, jealousy,
untruth, Maya
(deception) and
murder
of ascetics—these
are
the
characteristic
features
of
Kali age. (Of course) the subjects achieve (certain things) and
that
is the entire Dharma. Dharma
declines.
It
is
doubtful
whether agricultural
activities
flourish
despite
the
activities,
mental,
eulogistic
and
physical. There are fatal sicknesses in
the Kali age and there
is
the
perpetual headache
of hunger
and fear.
34.
There is terrible fear of drought.
There are calami-
ties
in
all
the
countries.
In the
Kali age, the
Smrti has no
authority
(i.e.
is
not
regarded
as
an
authority)
over
the
people.
35.
In
the
Kali
age,
the
subjects
die at various ages
Some one dies even as a child in the womb. Another dies in the
prime of youth. Some people die as old men while some people
die during
their childhood.
1.
Vy&sa, ‘arranger*
(of Vedic Mantras into different Samhitas)
is a
designation. Every Dvapara
has
a
different
Vyasa. Pura$as
mention
28
Vyasas.
2.
Almost all Puranas depict a gloomy picture of the Kali Age. Vide
Mbh. Vam ch.
188,
190, Br. P. chs
229-230, Mt. P.
144. 32-47, Bh.P. XII.
1-2, VP. VI. 1.
It appears that that was probably the state of the society when
these Puraiias came to be written, though unfortunately
much of that
des-
cription applies even today.

=== PAGE 308 ===

1.2.31.36-47
305
36.
There
is danger
and
fear unto
the subjects owing
to wrongly performed sacrifices, negligent studies (of the Vedas),
evil actions, misleading religious texts and
the
faults
in
the
holy rites performed by the Brahmanas.
37.
Violence, deception, malicious jealousy, anger, envy
and intolerance occur in men in the Kali age. There is
passion
and greediness everywhere in every creature.
38.
After reaching the Kali Yuga a
great
excitement
is
aroused
At that time,
the maximum
age is when a thousand
years are completed* (?)
39.
The twice-born people neither
study the Vedas nor
worship by Yajfias. Men are annihilated, the Ksatriyas and the
Vaisyas in due order.
40.
At that
lime, the kings are mainly Sudras who set
in vogue all sorts of heresies. The subjects become
devoid
of
good qualities.
41.
Alliances and associations of the Sudras
and Antya -
yonis (Lowest-born) with Brahmanas
take
place
in
the
Kali
Yuga, in regard to bed, seats and food-stuffs.
42.
Span of life,
intellect, strength, beauty and prestige
of the family dwindle down and become
extinct. The
Sudras
take to the conduct of life of the Brahmanas and the Brahmanas
behave and act like Sudras.
43.
Thieves adopt the customs and conventions of kings,
and kings behave and
live
like
thieves. When the close of the
Yuga
is
mminent,
it is only these servants who survive.
44.
At the
close
of
the
Yuga, O
excellent
sage, the
women become false and
unfaithful.
They
misbehave. They
become addicted to liquor and meat and become deceitful.
45.
At the
close of
the Yuga, O
excellent
sage,
the
faithful wives do not survive.
Beasts
of prey
flourish and the
cattle decrease.
46.
Know
that
at
the close of that Yuga, good people
turn back and keep aloof. Dharma of great consequence rooted
in the pious act of charity,
is very rare then.
47.
Dharma in which there is no
strict adherence to the
system of four stages of life (but slackness therein)
will prevail.
*
This Line is not found in V4.P.56.37 which is otherwise identical with.
this
verse.

=== PAGE 309 ===

306
Brahmdnia Purina
In some places the land will
yield but very little but in some
other places
it may be excessively fruitful (fertile).
48.
The kings will not be protectors but
the enjoyers of
their share in the offerings (taxes etc.). At the close of the Yuga,
they will be eagerly devoted to the act of protecting themselves.
49.
Kings
will cease to be
protectors.
Brahmanas
will
be dependent on Sudras.
All
excellent
twice-born
ones
will
make obeisance to the Sudras.
50.
The common people begin to sell boiled and cooked
rice;
the
Brahmanas
begin
to sell the Vedas. Young women
begin
to
sell
their
bodies
when
the
close
of the Yuga
is
imminent.
51.
In this
Kali
age,
even
excellent Brahmanas
be-
come the sellers of the
benefits
of
their penance and perform-
ance of sacrifices. Many people will turn into ascetics.
52.
They say that the close of the Yuga
is
then, when
the lord (Indra)
begins to shower mysteriously in diverse ways.
In the basest of the Yugas, everyone will become a trader.
53.
People will begin to sell merchandise
through false
weights and measures. The whole society
will
be
surrounded
by hunter-like people and heretics of evil habits
and
conduct
of life.
54.
When the close of the Yuga
is imminent, men will
be in a minority and there will
be majority
of women. People
will be begging of one another many times.
55.
When the Yuga wanes away there
will not be any-
one who helps
in return
for another’s help. There will not be
any one who
does
not injure and spoil others,
whose
words
are not harsh; who is straight-forward and who
is not malicious.
56.
When
the close of the Yuga
sets in, its characteris-
tic feature is
apprehension of danger etc. Then the earth will
be void without wealth.
57.
Rulers will not be protectors
though
they are
(ex-
pected) to be protectors. They
will
take away
jewels
(and
valuables) of others and molest their men’s wives.
58.
People will be
lustful
in their
minds. They will be
evil-minded,
base and
fool-hardy,
addicted
to criminal and
reckless
acts.
They
will
be
roguish with
all good activities

=== PAGE 310 ===

1.2.31.59-67
307
destroyed. They
will keep their hairs loose and untied. They
will not be sympathetic.
59-63.
At the close of
the
Yuga, men less than sixteen
will be
begetting
and women less than sixteen will be giving
birth to children.
When
the
close
of the Yuga
is imminent Sudras with
perfectly white sparkling teeth
wearing
ochre-coloured robes,
with
clean shaven
heads
will
subdue
their sense-organs and
practice piety. 1
There
will be thieves
stealing
plants and
corn,
clothes
and garments. Some thieves will rob other thieves. There
will
be a robber taking away valuables from another robber.
When knowledge and holy
rites have disappeared, when
the whole
world
has
become
inactive
(in religious matter),
worms, rats and serpents will be attacking and harassing men.
Welfare,
health
and
capability
will
permanently
be
difficult to obtain.
Countries
afflicted by
hunger and
fear
will be eagerly
waiting for Kausikas
( persons
who can find out hidden trea-
sures)
.
Affected
by misery,
the maximum span of life will be
only hundred years.
64.
In the Kali Yuga, all
the Vedas are seen
and
not
seen
(i.e. not read and understood
clearly).
Yajflas
afflicted
only by sins and evils, become spoiled.
65.
After the advent of
the
Kali
age,
many
types
of
heretics crop up. They may be Buddhists wearing ochre-coloured
robes, Jainas, Kapalikas and others who
sell
the
Vedas.
Still
others are those who sell holy centres of pilgrimage.
66.
There are others who are the enemies
of the system
and discipline of the castes and stages of life. All these heretics
are born when the Kali Age steps
in.
67.
Then Sudras become
experts
in interpreting affairs
concerning religious activities and they study the Vedas. Kings
1.
Probably a reference to Buddhist bhikfus. There
appears
to be a
dominance of Buddhism when
this Purana was written. This
is confirmed in
W.
65-66
infra.

=== PAGE 311 ===

308
Brakmdntfa Purina
born
of
Sudras* wombs
begin to worship and perform horse-
sacrifice.
68.
Then the
subjects accomplish
something either by
killing women, children and cows or by killing one another or
by robbing one another.
69.
The conduct and activity in the Kali age
is declared
as a Tdmasa activity because of too much of affection for sinful
deeds. People are short-lived with
constant
narrations
of their
own
misery.
Their
bodies
are
short
and lives too are short
owing to sickness.
70.
At that
time
the
practice of killing children in the
womb comes into vogue due
to
enmity.
Hence, span of
life,
strength and beauty
become
reduced
after the advent of Kali
Yuga.
71.
At that time, men attain Siddhi within a short time.
Blessed and excellent twice-born ones will
practise
piety and
devotion at the close ofthe Yuga.
72-73.
These excellent Brahmanas practise the holy rites
laid down in the Srutis and Smrtis. They practise without any
malice or envy.
In the Trcta,
the Dharma practised for the whole of the
year
bears
fruit.
It
is
declared
that
the
same
Dharma
practised for a month in Dvapara
bears
fruit. The intelligent
devotee practising the same for a day, attains
the desired fruit
in the Kali Yuga. 1
This
is the condition
in
the
Kali age. Understand (the
state of affairs) in the
Sandhyamsa
(the transitional
period
between two Yugas)
.
74-76.
Siddhis prevalent during
the
Sandhyds
of Yugas
become reduced to three-fourths in the following Yugas. Siddhis
prevalent in the Yugas become reduced
to
three-fourths in the
following Sandhyds. The
characteristics
of the Sandhyds become
stabilised in the Sandhydrhfas after being reduced to three-fourths.
Thus when the period of Sandhyarhia at
the end of (a set
of four) Yugas
arrives,
(the
lord appears)
as their chastiser.
1.
This is a relieving feature of the Kali age.

=== PAGE 312 ===

1.2.31.77-89
309
He rises up
for
the
purpose
of
slaying
the
wicked Bhrgus.
He
is called Pramati1 and he belongs to the Lunar race.
77-80,
In the previous Svayambhuva Manvantara,
he
had been born of a part of Madhava
(Visnu )
.
For a
full period of twenty
years, he wandered over the
Earth taking with him an army along with horses, chariots and
elephants. Surrounded by hundreds and thousands ofBrahmanas
wielding weapons, he killed all the
Mlecchas all round along-
with
all
those
kings, the heretics born of Sudra women. The
lord exterminates those heretics. Everywhere he kills
all
those
who are not scrupulously religious.
81-84.
The lord who was strong
and who annihilated
all the Mlecchas slew
these
also—People who
were
born
of
parents of different castes, those who
depended on
them, the
Udicyas (Northerners), Madhya
DeSyas
(Persons
of middle
lands), Parvatlyas
(Mountain-dwellers) Pracyas (Easterners),
Pratlcyas (Westerners), those who walk about on the ridges of
the Vindhya mountains, Daksinatyas
(Southerners)
,
Dravi<Jas
along with
Simhalas
(Ceylonese),
Gandharas,
Paradas,
Pahlavas, Yavanas, Sakas, Tusaras, Barbaras, Ginas (Chinese)
,
Sulikas, Daradas, KhaSas, Lampa-karas, Ka takas and different
tribes of Kiratas.
The
powerful
lord wielding the discus slew
all these barbarous people.
85-86.
Invisible to all the
living
beings,
he
wandered
over the whole earth. The
lord was born
of a
part
of
lord
Madhava.
In
the former
birth he
was
very
valorous
and
he was well known by the name of Pramati.
In the
first Kali
Yuga, he was born in the Gotra of the moon.
87.
He began
(the victorious march) when he was aged
thirty-two. For twenty years he continued
to
slay men and all
other living beings everywhere.
88-89. Annihilating every thing by his ruthless activity, he
made only seeds to remain on the earth. He managed to subdue
the Vfsalas who were generally sinful, by making them angry
1.
This incarnation of Vi?Qu re-established order
at the end of Kali
Age. Elsewhere (in Mt. P. ) he is said to have been bom in the Lunar race in
the Kali Age in Gik$u$a Manvantara. See W. 85-86 below.

=== PAGE 313 ===

310
Brahm&ntfa Purdna
with one another on sudden provocations.
Thereafter, in
the
region between
the Gariga and the Yamuna, he established his
camp of rest along with his followers.
90.
Thereafter, when the Kalpa elapsed, he
went
back
to his eternal abode along with
his army
after exterminating
Mleccha kings by thousands.
91-92.
When the period of Sandhy&mla
arrived
towards
the end of the Yuga,
only a few
subjects remained
here and
there. They were unfortunate fellows with
planets
adverse
to
them. Many
of them were greedy and they collectively struck
and injured one another.
93.
There was anarchy. When the close of the Yuga was
imminent, the subjects were afflicted by mutual fear.
94.
They were agitated and bewildered.
They
left their
houses, wives and relatives. They
never
cared
for their lives.
(They were not hopeful
about
their
ability
to survive)
. Even
without reason, they became very miserable.
95.
When the Dharma based on Sruti and Smrti became
extinct, the people killed
one
another,
devoid
of bounds
of
decency, affection, shame and fiiends and allies.
96.
When virtue ceased to exist, the
people
were afflic-
ted
and they were reduced to a size of twentyfive
(as against
52 Afigulas in height)
. Agitated and distressed
they found their
sense-organs out of gear. They had to forsake their children and
wives (and run away).
97.
People oppressed by drought
had to abandon their
agricultural activities. They were miserable. Leaving their own
native lands they began to stay
in the bordering districts.
98.
They
were
compelled to
resort
to
rivers, marshy
places,
near
the
seas and
mountainous
regions.
Extremely
miserable, they
sustained
themselves by means of meat, roots
and fruits.
99.
They
used
to wear
leaves, bark-garments or hides
of antelopes. They observed no holy rites. They had abandon-
ed their families. They had fallen off from the
systematic dis-
cipline of the castes and stages of life. They had been adopting
the
terrible practice
of Safikara (mixing of castes by means of

=== PAGE 314 ===

1.2.31.100-110
311
indiscriminate inter marriage etc.). They
had
reached such a
plight. Only a very few such people survived.
100.
They
were
oppressed
with
old
age,
sickness and
hunger. Owing to misery, they reached a
stage of abject dejec-
tedness. From this
dejected
state,
they reached
the state of
pondering
over
the
same. Pondering
took
them
to a state of
equanimity.
101.
Through the
state
of
equanimity,
they
had
the
realisation of the Atman. Through this knowledge, they acquir-
ed
piety
and
devotion.
Thus
those who
survived
the
last
stage of the Kali
age,
acquired
tranquility and
control
of
sense.
102.
When
the close of the Yuga was undergoing trans-
formation, they became quiescent as though they were asleep or
inebriated day and night after making the mind enchanted
( and
insensible).
103-106.
Owing
to
the
power of the inevitable future,
the
Krta
Yuga
set
in. When
the
holy
Kfta Yuga began to
function, the subjects pertaining to the Krta Yuga were born of
those who
survived
from
the
Kali Yuga. Those Siddhas who
remained then, began to move about invisibly. They established
themselves there along with
the seven sages. The
Brahmanas,
the Ksatriyas,
the Vaisyas
and
the
Sudras were
those, who
were remembered
as
seeds. (They
were
intended
to be the
nucleus for
the
succeeding
generation).
At
that
time
they
became identical
with
those who
were
born in
(the closing
stages of) Kali. They were devoid of any difference. The seven
sages recounted Dharma to them as well as to others.
107.
That
(Dharma)
is
equipped with the conduct of
life of the different castes and stages.
It is of two types
:
Srauta
(as laid down in the
Vedas) and
the Smdrta
(as laid down in
the Smrtis). The
object
in the
Krta
age
remained thus
as
persons with holy rites.
108.
When the Dharmas
of Srauta and Smdrta varieties
had been pointed out to the people of Krta Yuga, some of them
remained
till the close of the Yuga for the sake of establishing
Dharma.
109-110.
The
sages remain
in authority over the whole
of the
Manvantara. The
grasses of the forests are burned by

=== PAGE 315 ===

312
Brahm&nfta PurUna
the forest fires but their
roots
are
unaffected.
Just
as fresh
shoots of grass grow from these roots so also the people of Krta
Yuga grow from the people of the Kali age.
111. Thus there
is an uninterrupted series ofYugas, with
the connection of a Yuga with another unbroken,
till Manvan-
tara comes to a
close.
112.
Happiness,
span of
life,
strength,
beauty, virtue,
wealth and love—these are reduced to
three-fourths in each of
the succeeding Yugas.
113.
The achievement of piety of the Yugas becomes re-
duced
in
the
Sandhy&msas. Thus
is
the
Pratisandhi (transition
between
the two Yugas)
that- had
been
mentioned
by me
(before)
, O Brahmanas.
114-119.
By means of this
alone should
all
the sets of
four Yugas be reckoned.
This
repetition
of
sets
of
four Yugas
multiplied
by a
thousand constitutes what is called a day of good Brahma. The
night too
is declared as extending
to this much
period.
Here
thei e
is straight-forwardness and state of being insentient in all
living beings
till the end of the Yuga.
This alone is remembered as
the
characteristic feature of
all Yugas. The sets of four Yugas multiplied by seventyone and
gradually transformed
is called Manvantara. 1 Whatever occurs
in one set of four Yugas happens in the others also in the same
manner and in the same order.
In the same manner, differences also are produced in every
creation. They are restricted to thirty-five and they are remem-
bered
as neither
less
nor more.
So also the Kalpas have the
same
characteristic
features
as
the
Yugas. This
alone
is the
characteristic feature of all the Manvantaras.
120.
Just as the repetitions
of the Yugas had come into
vogue
since
a
long
time
owing to the intrinsic nature of the
Yuga, so also the living world (world
of
living
beings)
being
transformed
through decrease and
increase
does not remain
(the same permanently).
1.
71
sets of four Yugas constitute a Manvantara. The
verses
that
follow constitute an elucidation of Dhdtd yathapuroam akalpqyat.
(The creator
arranged or created everything as before.)

=== PAGE 316 ===

1.2.31.121-32.1
313
121-124.
Thus the characteristics of all
the Yugas,
past
and
future
in
all
the Manvantaras
have
been
mentioned
succinctly. Know that, by means of the (discription of) a Manvan-
tara, all the other Manvantaras have
been
explained
and also
one
Kalpa
is
described
by means
of
(the
description
of)
another.
Similarly
in
the
future ones,
inference
should
be
carried
out by
one who knows. In
all the Manvantaras past
and future,
all
the
beings are
of
equal
identifications in re-
gard to names and forms.
125.
The Devas of eight classes who are
the lords in this
Manvantara,
the
sages and the Manus—all these are equal in
regard to the purpose (served by them).
126-127.
Thus the lord always
evolves
the classification
of castes and stages of life in the former Yugas and arranges the
intrinsic features of the Yugas.
The
classifications
of castes and stages of life, the Yugas
and the Siddhis of the Yugas have been recounted
as necessary
consequence.
Now,
understand
the
creation
of
the
Srffi
(Creation of the living beings)
.
I shall mention the situation in the Yugas in detail and in
due order.
CHAPTER THIRTYTWO*
Tugas and Classes of People
: Lineage of Sages1
Suta said
:
1 .
Learn
from me
the
different
subjects viz.
Asuras,
Serpents, Gandharvas, Pisacas, Yaksas and Rak§asas, that are
born in (different) Yugas.
*
This chapter corresponds to V a.P.Ch.59.
1.
This chapter records the belief that there has
been
a continuous
deterioration in height or physical built and other capacities of all the subjects
of creation, be they gods, men or serpents. Archaeological excavations have not
substantiated
this
belief.

=== PAGE 317 ===

314
Brahmdtytfa Pwr&na
2-4.
Understand in which Yuga their nativity takes place
and how long do they live.
The
Pi£acas,
the
Asuras,
the Gandharvas, the Yak$as,.
the Raksasas and the Serpents who are born in the Krta Yuga
have their height and girth equal.
The
height
of
the joyous
divine
beings
is
ninety-six
Angulas
according
to
the measure of their own figures.
It has
become so
due
to
the
nourishment (?)
It
is
taken as their
natural measure.
5-7.
Human
beings
existing
in
the
Sandhydmfaka
are
shorter by
seven
times
seven Angulas than the height
of the
Devas and Asuras
(?)
The
height
of Devas and
Asuras
in hundred and
fifty
eight Angulas
is remembered
by
those
born
in
the Kali
age.
It
is remembered
by
persons
born
in
Kali
(that their
height) from
head
to
foot
is
eightyfour Angulas of their owa
fingers.
8.
This height of human beings becomes
reduced in the
Tugdrhfaka
(transitional
period
between two Yugas) in all the
Yuga periods past and future.
9- 10a.
Man
is
regarded
to be eight spans high with his
own fingers as unit.
He who
is
nine
spans
high
from head to foot and has
arms
extending
as
far as
the knees is worshipped even by the
Devas (gods).
1 Ob-1 la.
By means of the same activity* (?)
the increase
and
decrease
in
the
different
Yugas
of the
height of cows,
horses,
elephants,
buffaloes
and
immobile
beings, should be
understood.
1 lb-1 2a. The hump of the cattle
is
seventy-six
Angulas-
high. The height of elephants
is declared as hundred and
eight
Angulas in
full.
1 2b.
The height of trees
is
remembered
as
a thousand
Angulas without forty Angulas and fifty Yavas.**
*
For Karma&aitena
hcrc-of,
VS.P/59- 10
reads KramepaiUna
‘in
this
serial
order.’
**
One Yava=l/4 Ahgula.
Therefore
the
height
of
trees= 1000 — 40+ 121=947$
Angulas.

=== PAGE 318 ===

1.2.32.13-23
315
13- 14a.
The
constitution of the
bodies of the Devas
is-
similar to that of the body of human beings.
It
is realised, ifwe
ponder over reality.
The body
that
has
nothing
else to excel it in intellect
is
called the body of the Devas. So also that which has something*
to excel it
is called human body. Thus have been described the
living beings divine and human.
14b-15.
The body
of Devas
is
said to be endowed with
the excellence of intelligence.
Similarly,
the
body
of human
beings
is
also
possessed
of excellences
(of intelligence
and
others)
.
16-19.
The beings—animals,
birds and immobile ones
are useful ones. For example—the
cows,
the
goats,
the
sheep,,
the horses,
the
elephants,
the
birds and the trees—these are
useful in holy rites.
Hence, they are worthy of Yajftas in every
respect. They
are
born in the abodes of gods. Hence, they are
of the same form.
The auspicious forms of the Devas are such as could enjoy
as
they
wished. They
became
happy with those
charming
beings mobile and immobile and
befitting
their own forms and
magnitude. Henceforth,
I
shall
narrate
the
remaining
ones
called as sats and S&dhus (good ones )
.
20.
The word
Sat indicates the Biahman. 1 Those who
possess
it
are
called
Sants due to
their
similarity
with
the
Brahman .
21
Those who neither become
angry nor are too over-
joyed in regard to those ten objects of (ten)
sense-organs
(i.e.
five
pertaining
to
the
sense-organs and
five to the organs of
physical activity)
and
eight
varieties
of
causes—are
called
jit&tmans
( those who have conquered their own selves )
.
22.
Inasmuch
as Brahmanas,
K$attriyas and
Vaisyas
are engaged
in general
religious
rites
as
well
as in
special
rites, they are the twice-born castes.
23.
One who adheres
to the religious duties prescribed
for one’s caste and stage of life and one who is happy in practis-
1. W. 20-26 give the characteristics of saints, s&dhus and knowers of
Dhangs.

=== PAGE 319 ===

316
Brahm&nia Pur&na
ing
the
path
to heaven (?)
is
called
a knower of Dharma
{ Dharmajfia) due to his knowledge of the Dharma as enjoined in
Sruti (Vadas) and Smrtis.
24.
A religious student who works for the welfare of his
preceptor is called S&dhu (good one) because he
strives for the
achievement
of
learning. A
house-holder
is
called
S&dhu
because he gathers together the requisites for his house-hold.
25.
A Vaikh&nasa
(forest-hermit)
is
declared
as
S&dhu
because he achieves
power of penance in the forest. The striv-
ing recluse
is remembered as S&dhu because he accumulates and
achieves Yogic power.
26.
Thus
the
religious
student,
the
householder,
the
forest-dwelling hermit and the recluse are
all
called
as S&dhus
because they achieve the Dharmas of their respective
stages
of
life.
27.
Neither
the
Devas
nor the Pitrs, neither the
sages
nor the human beings understand the point “This is Dharma —
This
is not*’, because of different points of view (?)
28.
The words Dharma and Adharma
mentioned
here
refer to the rites.
1
Auspicious rite
is remembered as Dharma.
Inauspicious rite is declared as Adharma.
29. The root y/Dhr is used in the sense of Dharana ( Hold-
ing,
Sustaining)
and (Dharma means that which sustains us).
In the
sense
of Adh&raya
( non-sustenance ) and Amahatva (Non-
greatness) the word Adharma is mentioned.
30.
That Dharma which takes us to what we desire (and
what is good for us)
is taught by
the
preceptors.
It
is
also
taught by the preceptors that Adharma has adverse and undesir-
able fruits.
31.
They
call these persons Acaryas* (preceptors)
viz.
old men devoid of greadiness, Self-possessed
persons devoid
of
arrogance and straight-forward
persons who have
been
edu-
cated and well disciplined.
1. W. 28—30 and 33-36 explain the
concept of Dharma
and what
is Srauta and Smarta Dharma ? A detailed elucidation of various virtues consti-
tuting Dharma are given in VV. 43-57.
2. W. 31-32 mention the qualifications of an Ac&rya (preceptor).

=== PAGE 320 ===

1 .2.32.32-43a
317
32.
He himself practices
( Dharma ). He
establishes
the
code of good behaviour and he
gathers together (and masters)
the various scriptural texts—he
is therefore, called Acdrya.
33-34.
Two
types
of Dharma
have been laid down by
Brahmanas conversant with Dharma viz. Srauta and Smdrta .
Srauta Dharma pertains to marriage rites as well
as (adop-
tion of) Agnihotra worship.
The
Smdrta Dharma
pertains
to
the
conduct
of life of
people of different castes and
stages of life, Tamas
(controls of
the sense-organsJ and
Niyamas
(observances).
After learning
from
the
previous
persons
( or
after instructing the previous
ones)
the seven sages expounded the Srauta Dharma.
35.
The Rk, Yajus and the Saman constitute
the
Sruti.
They are the limbs of the Veda.
It was after remembering
the
code of conduct of life in the previous Manvantara
that Manu
expounded his Smrti.
36.
Hence, Smdrta Dharma
is
declared
as
the Dharma
that
differentiates the castes and stages of
life. These different
types of Dharma are called Siffdcdra.
37-39. The word
Si$ta
is
derived from
the word
$e$a
(Remainder).
They
call what remains by the word
*$' iffa.
Those righteous persons who survived in the Manvantara
and continued
to
stay
were
Manu and
the
seven
sages.
They remained
there for sustaining
the
worlds.
Those who
remain for the sake
of Dharma
are
called
£i$J:as.
In
every
yuga,
this Dharma has been practised very well by
the &i$fas
(survivors)
viz. Manu and others who have already been
refer-
red to by me before.
40.
The study of the
three Vedas,
agricultural
opera-
tion, administration of justice, performance of sacrifice,
special
duties of
the people
of different
castes and stages of life are
practised by £iffas
again and again.
41 -43a.
Since they have been practised by the previous
persons they are Siffdcdra and righteous activity as well. 1
The following eight meritorious activities also are charac-
teristically Siffdcdra viz. charitable offerings, truthfulness, auste-
1. W. 37-43 give a peculiar definition of $i?tas
and explanation of
Sift&c&ra. The
identification
of Siffac&ra with Dharma
is
in V.
57. Manu
XII.U19 and Vasi?tha. VI.
143 define Hftdcdra differently.

=== PAGE 321 ===

318
Brahmdntfa Pur&na
rity, knowledge, learning, sacrifice, renunciation (of the world)
and departure from one’s household and
sympathy. Since
the
Siffas
( the remaining ones, or the well-disciplined ones) , Manu
and the seven sages practise these in all the Manvantaras, they
are, therefore, declared as Siff&cdra.
43b-44.
It
should
be
known that a Dharma
is
called
•Srauta if it
is traced to the Sruti. It is called Smarta if it is traced
to the Smrti. That which refers to sacrifice and Vedas, is called
Srauta Dharma and
that which
concerns
the
activities
and
•duties of the people of different castes of life
is called Smarta.
I shall mention the characteristic features of Dharma with
regard to each part.
45.
This
is
the
characteristic sign
of truthfulness viz.
After seeing an
event and
on
being asked, he (a person) does
not conceal the fact and states it exactly as
it has happened.
46.
Celibacy, chanting of Mantras, vow
of
silence and
observance of fast—these constitute the form of Tapas (Penance).
It
is extremely terrible and very difficult to achieve.
47.
The collection of
sacrificial
materials,
Havis (ghee)
offerings, Rk, Saman
and
Yajur
Mantras,
Rtviks (sacrificial
priests)
and
Dakfinds
(monetary
gifts and
fees)
is
called
Yajfia.
48.
The perfect vision
of impartiality
between
oneself
and all living beings whether for welfare or distress—is remem-
bered as Dayd
( Mercy , Sympathy )
.
49.
If a person, on being
scolded
or
struck
does
not
*cold or strike in retaliation either verbally, mentally
or phy-
sically—this attitude is
remembered as
Titikfd
(forbearance)
and K?ama
( patience )
.
50.
Refraining from taking other man’s belongings
well
protected by their owners but abandoned in
their
excitement,
is glorified as Alobha (absence of greed )
.
51.
Non-indulgence in
sexual
intercourse,
absence
of
thought thereof, avoidance of prattling about
it, receding from
all activities (connected with it is Brahmacarya
(celibacy)
.
It is
Tr
called a penance without any vulnerable point.

=== PAGE 322 ===

1.2.32.52-61a
319
52.
If man’s sense-organs do not function
falsely
either
for
his own
sake
or
for others’ sake that
is the sign of Sama
(Quiescence and Restraint of passions).
53.
If a person is obstructed (and
hence
disappointed)
in
regard
to
the object of sense-organs (i.e. five sense-organs
and five organs of action) or eight-fold causes, but he docs not
become
infuriated,
he
is
considered to be Jitdtman
( one who
has conquered his own
self).
54.
If a person feels that he
must
give
away
unto
a
deserving person whatever is desired most by him, or the money
that has come down to him duly and justly, that
is the
charac-
teristic sign of Dana (charitable offering)
.
55-56a.
Dana is of three
types, Kani^ha
(base)
Jyeffha
(superior) and Madhyama (middling). Among them, that which
is
conducive
to
salvation
is
the superior one. That which
is
only for the sake of achieving ones’ own
selfish ends is the base
one. Sharing (of one’s possessions) with all living beings out of
sympathy is the middling.
56b-57a. The Dharma regarding the discipline of the four
castes and stages of life is laid down by the &rutis
and
Smitis.
What
is
not
antagonistic
to
Si$td,c&ra
(the
practice of well
disciplined cultured
people)
is
also
Dharma,
approved
by
good learned men.
57b-58.
Absence of hatred toward what
is not
liked by
one, approval of what
is
(desirable and ) desired,
and turning
away
from
pleasure,
excessive
agony and distress
is Viraktatd
(absence of passion).
Relinquishing of all
committed
actions
along with
the
•omitted ones is called
Sanny&sa (Renunciation).
59-6 la.
(Defective Text). Giving up of both auspicious
and inauspicious activities is called JVy&sa or (Relinquishment.
Unmanifest particular things
are
Vikaras
(Transformations)
in the matter of insentient objects
(?)
Perfect
understanding
of the distinctness of the sentient and the insentient
is
called
Jhdna (Knowledge)
. These are remembered as the characteristic
features
of
different parts
of Dharma by
sages
conversant
with
the
principles of Dharma, in the previous Svayambhuva
Manvantara.

=== PAGE 323 ===

320
Brahmdnda Purdna
6 1 b-62.
I shall describe unto you the procedure of Man-
vantara as well as Cdturhotra and Cdturvidya
( Holy rites)
.
Different Sruti is assigned to
different Manvantara.
63-65a.
Rk, Yajus and Saman (are assigned to
different
Manvantaras)
in
the
same manner
as
deities are assigned.
In
spite
of
the
procedure
of
annihilation
of
all
living
beings,
Satarudriya ,
the
procedure
of
Hotra as well as Stotra
(Hymn, Prayer) function as before.
The Stotra
is
of
four
types
:
Dravyastotra
(Eulogy of
materials), Gunc-Stotra (Eulogy of quality) Phala-stotra (Eulogy
of fruit)
and
the
fourth one
Abhijanaka-Stotra
(Eulogy
of
Abhijanas)
.
65b.
In ail the Manvantaras, Brahma sets in motion the
four types of Stotras in regard to the Devas even as
they come
into being. Thus the origin of the collections of Mantras
is
of
four types.
66-68.
As the sages perform the
severe and
extremely
difficult penance,
the
Mantras
of different Vedas—Atharva,
Rk, Yajus and Saman appear before them severally in the same
manner as in the previous Manvantaras.
They appear
in
five
ways viz.—owing to non-contendedness, owing to fear, owing to
misery
( pain)
, owing
to happiness and owing
to
grief.
69.
These Mantras
appear
before
the
sages
casually
because
of the
(supreme)
vision
of
the sages named Taraka
(that
which
redeems).
I shall
state
the faitva (state of sage-
hood) of the sages along with the characteristics.
70.
Among the past and future ones,
it
is
said
(that)
there
are five types of sages. Hence, I shall recount the origin
of the sages. 1
71-73.
When the Gunas were in (a state of) equilibrium,
when there was
the annihilation of everything, when there was
no
classification
of
the
Vedas,
when
everything was full of
darkness and it could not be indicated or
specified particularly
(the firadhdna)
unintelligently functions for
the sake of
Cetana
(Sentient one).
It functions through the intellect of the sentient
one and through consciousness (?) Both of them
function
like
1.
The following verses (W 71-73) describe the process of evolution
of the universe to explain how sages (the Seven Sages
Saptarfis) came into
being in a new Kalpa.

=== PAGE 324 ===

1.2.32.74-82
321
the fish and the water. The
Sattva*
(? Tattva) presided over by
the sentient one functions in the nature
(Gunns).
74.
On account of the cause,
its effect functions
in the
same
way. The
object
functions
due
to
the
subject.
The
Artha (meaning)
functions
due to
its
(state of
possessing an
Artha)
.
75.
Within the time
(?) when
it should take
place
the
Bhedas (differences)
of
the nature
of Karana**
(sense-organ)
become
realised. Then
Mahat and
other principles manifest
themselves gradually.
76.
The Ahartikara (Ego) was evolved out of Mahat and
from it the BhUtas
(Elements) and the
Indriyas
(sense-organs)
were born. The different BhUtas were mutually born out of
the
elements.
77-82.
The effect and the cause***
(sense-organs)
sud-
denly
get
transformed
itself.
Just
as the sparks and particles
come out of the fire-brand simultaneously, so also the Ksetrajhas
( Individual Souls) come
out of
their
Material cause
at
the
same time.
Just as the glow-worm is suddenly seen in blinding dark-
ness so also the transformed (Ksetrajfta) from
the
unmanifest
shines like the glow-worm.
It
is great and embodied. The (all)
knower became stationed there
itself
at the entrance
to
the
Dvaraf&ld
(Hall
of entry)
where
the great and embodied one
was present. Beyond the vast expanse of darkness,
the
Mahat
is
perceived
on
account of its
disparity.
The
Sruti says
“He stationed himself there.
The
learned
one
( the
knowing
one) was stationed at the end of Tamas (darkness) *\
When it (the Avyakta) transformed itself, Buddhi (Intellect)
appeared in four ways viz. Jn&na
(Knowledge)
Vair&gya
(Ab-
sence of attachment),
Aiivarya
(Prosperity, masterliness) and
*
Va.
P. 59.66b reads
tattv&ni ‘the principles’.
**
The obscurity of the verse
is due to the reading Karaxidtmaka, If
emended as K&rao&tmaka as
in the
identical
verse in Va P.
59.68a, it means
‘differences of the nature of cause' became explicit etc.
**
Karana emended as K&rai^a as in V& P.59.69c.
The word Karova
‘Sense-organs’ obscures the meaning implied in the next
line.

=== PAGE 325 ===

322
Brahmd#4a Purdna
Dharma (Virtue)
. These should be known as
conducive
to
the
final emancipation of man.
83-86.
He is called Mahdtman (the great Soul) by
good
people, because it is the transformation of the body* (?)
Since
he
lies
within
the
body,
he
is
called
Puru$a .
Due to his knowledge of the
K$etra
(field,
body) he
is called
K$etrajna. Since he lies within intelligently he
is of
the nature
of consciousness. The non-sentient Vyaktfi-Vyakta (manifest-cum-
nonmanifest)
is encompassed for the sake of achievement
( ?)
.
Thus the
Kfetrajna
(individual
Soul)
is
Vivrtta
(trans-
formed one) and it
is equipped with the knowledge of the Kfetra
(field, i.e. the body).
Simultaneously with
Vivrtti (transformation)
the Rsi him-
self excessively activises
( Param ar$ayate) Avyakta
(the
unmani
fest one)
. Therefore, it has the Paramar$itva (the state of being
a great sage).
87.
It
is from the root \/rs that means “to go”
that the
name has been derived at the outset. It is considered that
it has
rfitd (the
rtn-hood)
as it is self-born. 1
88-90.
They are born of God himself, they are the mental
sons of Brahma.
Since on being born, the great Mahat principle was
sur-
rounded by them, since those self-possessed persons went round
the Mahat principle by means
of
their good
qualities,
hence
they are called Maharfis. They are the supreme viewers (seers)
of the Buddhi
(Intellect) . They are the sons
of
Ifvaras
(gods)
both mind-born as well as bosom-born. They
go beyond
(or
get
under
control)
Ahatfikdra
(Ego)
and
penance.
Hence
they are (ifis.
91.
Hence, the seven sages are called sages because they
see the principle of BhUtddi
( Ahafikara ). The feikas, the sons
of
sages, are those bom of the womb
after sexual intercourse.
92.
The
Tanmdtras
(subtle
elements)
and
Satya
(the
reality) are also realised by those sages of great prowess. Hence,
those seven sages are the seers of the ultimate truth.
*
A comparison of Bd.P. W. 75-85 hereof with V5 P.39.69-77 shows
that the lines in the Bd. P. are confused and disconnectedly mixed up. Hence
the
obscurity.
1 . W. 87-90 give the derivation of the term
and
(roahar?i’

=== PAGE 326 ===

1.2.32.93-106
323
93.
They are the sons of R$ikas. They should be known
as sons of sages since they realise
(fcanti) the
ftta
(The great
truth of the cosmos ) and
the particularities
( Vitejas)
factually.
94-95. 1
Hence, those seven
sages
also
are called sages
because they see the vast extent of the Sruti. The following are
the five classes of sages having the
knowledge of the particular
Atmans
viz.
( 1 ) Avyaktatman (the Unmenifest Atman)
( 2 ) Mahan
Atman (the Soul called Mahat) (3) Ahamk&r&tman (the Atman
of
the cosmic Ego)
(4) BhUt&tman (the Atman of the living
beings
or elements) and
( 5 )
Indriy&tman
( The
Atman
of
the
Sense-
Organs ) ,
listen to them by their names.
96-97.
Bhrgu,
Marici,
Atri,
Angiras,
Pulaha,
Kratu,
Manu, Daksa, Vasistha and Pulastya. These ten were mentally
born of god Brahma. They are themselves masterly and power-
ful ones. Since they are cons dered as supreme as well as sages
they are Maharsis.
98-100.
The
following
sages
are
the sons
of Ifvaras .
Understand them. Kavya(Sukra), Brhaspati, Kasyapa, Cyavana,
Utathya, Vamadeva, Apasya, USija, Kardama, Vi$ravas, Sakti,
Valakhilyas and Arvata. These sages are said to have
attained
the state of sages by means of penance. Understand Rsikas,
the
sons of sages born of womb.
101-103.
Vatsara,
Nagrhu,
Bharadvaja,
Dlrghatamas,
Brhaduktha,
Saradvata,
VajaSravas,
Suci,
Va^yasva,
Para£ara, Dadhlca, Samgapa, Raja
(King)
VaiSrvana—these
are called
ft$ikas. They attained sage-hood on
account of their
truthfulness.
They
are
remembered
as
Isvaras,
Rsis and
Rsikas.
•
104-1 06. 2
All these are the composers (seers) of Mantras.
Understand them entirely;
Bhrgu, Kavya (Sukra),
Pracetas,
1.
VV. 94-103 give the various divisions of Sages as Maharfis, Rfikas,
Ifvaras .
2. W. 104-122 give
the
list of the Sages who are composers or seers
of Mantras. They are divided according to their families viz. that of Bhrgu
(19) Angiras
(34) Kafyapa
(6) Vasistha
(7)
Kusika
(13).
Three Brahm-
isthas
(viz. Agastya, Df<Jhayu and Vidmavaha), two K?atriya Kings
(viz.
Manu and Pururavas ) , three Vaifya^
(viz. Bhalandana, Vatsa and Sazhkila).
It may be noted that these seeis of Mantras are
Brihraagaa, Kfattriyas and
Vaiiyas and their number
is 93 and not 90 as given in V.J22*

=== PAGE 327 ===

324
Brahm&Q'ia Purina
Rcika, Atmavan, Aurva,Jamadagni, Vida, Sarasvata, Ar$fisena,
YiidhSjit,
Vltahavya,
Suvarcas,
Vainya,
Prthu,
Divodasa,
Badhya£va,
Grtsa
and
&aunaka.
These
nineteen
sages
are
Bhrgus
(i.e. the descendants of Bhrgu)
. They are expounders of
Mantras.
107-111.
The following are
the
thirty-three
excellent
members of the
family
of
Angiras
viz.
Angiras, Vaidyaga,
Bharadvaja, Baskali, Rtavaka, Garga, Sini, Sankrti, Purukutsa,
Mandhata, Ambarisa, YuvanaSva,
Paurakutsa,
Trasaddasyu,
Dasyuman, Aharya,
Ajamidha,
Tuksaya,
Kapi,
Vrsadarbha,
Virupasva,
Kariva, Mudgala, Utathya, Sanadvaja, Vajasravas*
Ayasya,
Cakravartin,
Vamadeva,
Asija,
Brhaduktha,
Dirghatamas and Kaksivan.
112-114.
All these are
composers of Mantras. Under-
stand
the
Kasyapas.
(Sages
of Ka£yapa group)
: KaSyapa,
Vatsara, Naidhruva, Raibhya, Asita and Devala—these
six are
the expounders of Brahman.
Atri, Arvasana, Syavasva, Gavisthira.
Avihotra, Dhiman
and Purvatithi—these are
called
Atris.
They are
great sages
and composers of Mantras.
115-116.
Vasistha,
Sakti,
PaiaSara,
the
fourth
one
Indrapramati, the fifth one Bharadvasu, the sixth one Maitra-
varuni and the seventh one Kun<Jina—these seven members of
the
family
of Vasistha
should be known
as expounders
of
Brahman.
117-122.
Visvamitra,
(the
son
of Gadhi)
,
Devarata,
Udgala, Madhucchandas the learned, the other sage Aghamar-
sana, Astaka, Lohita, Kata, Kola, Devasravas,
Renu, Purana
and Dhanaftjaya— these
thirteen
righteous persons should
be
known as the excellent members of the Kugika family.
Agastya, Drtfhayu and Vidhmavaha—these three sages are
Brahmi§thas
(fully engrossed
in
the meditation
on Brahman
and having excellent penance and of excellent reputation.
Manu the son of Vivasvan
( Sun )
and
King Pururavas
the son of Ua, these two excellent K$atriyas should
be known
as expounders of Mantras.
Bhalandana, Vatsa and Samkila—these three are composers
of Mantras and are
remembered as
the most excellent
ones
among Va&iyas.
-

=== PAGE 328 ===

325
Thus the Mantras composed by the sages are
said
to
be
ninety. The
sages
are
Brahmanas,
K$atriyas and
VaiSyas.
Understand the fciputras (sons of sages)*
CHAPTER
THIRTYTHREE
Characteristics of Sages and of Mantras
Sdta said
:
1
.
The sons of Rsikas should be known
as
the
sons
of
the sages. They
are the expounders of the Brahmanas. (Scrip-
tural texts). Understand them by names.
2-4.
The $rutar$is (sages distinguished by
knowledge
of
the Vedas)—the most important among them—are
mentioned
briefly.1 They are Bahvrca, Bhargava, Paila, Sankrtya,
Jajali,
Sandhyasti,
Mathara,
Yajftavalkya,
Parasara,
Upamanyu,
Indrapramati,
Mantfuki,
Sakai i,
Baskali,
Sokapani,
Naila,
Paila, Alaka, Pannaga, Pak$aganta (and others). The Srutarsis
are eighty-six in number.
5-6.
These Brahmanas are the
most
important among
Bahvrcas who are distinguished for their knowledge of Vedas. 2
1.
This
is a confused statement of the
traditional learners of
Bohvfc
an epithet of the RV as it consists of the biggest number of Rks.
Bh.
P. XII.
6-54-60 gives a somewhat different genealogy of the Teachers of RV. In
this
Purana the genealogy of Vedic Teachers from Paila is given infra Ch.34.24-33.
Mahidasa’s Comments on CVS accepts the academic genealogy of
Sages of
the Rgveda though many names in our text are not included here. Our
text
states that there are 86
S'rutarfis out of whom selected Rgveda Scholars are
mentioned
in VV.2-6
here.
2.
The lines in the printed text appeared to be mixed up. Bh.PXII.6
quoted in the Com. of Mahidasa on Saunaka’s
CVS. states that Vaijampa-
yana was taught Yajur-Veda by Vyasa. That the Yajur-Veda had 86 branches
(bhedas) is accepted in our text as 86 £rutar$is. And a few selected sages have
been named in the Yajur-Veda group.

=== PAGE 329 ===

326
Brahm&ntfa Purdqa
Vaigarfipayana, 1 Lauhitya, Kafljhakala, Avasavadha(P) Syama-
pati, Palandu, Alambi and Kamalapati. Their disciples and the
disciples of their disciples constitute the eighty-six $rutar$is.
7-8.
O Brahmanas, these Brahmanical
sages
are
called
Adhvaryus
of the Garaka
Branch
of Black
Yajurveda1
:—
Jaimini, Bharadvaja, Kavya, Pausyafiji, Hiranyanabha, Kausi-
lya.
Laugaksi,
Kusumi,
Langali,
Salihotra,
Saktiraja
and
Bhargava.
9-11.
The preceptor of those who sing Saman
Mantras
is King Pururavas, the son of Ila.
2
Forty-six other sages, together
with their disciples are also $rutar$is.
Kau&ti, Kahkamudga, Kundaka,
ParaSara,
Lobhalobha
the pious-souled, Brahmabala, Kranthala, Madagala and Mark-
andcya who is conversant with Dharma—these
ninety
should
be as Hotravad Brahmacdrins
(? i.e. Religious students performing
Homas)
.
12- 14a.
After
the
expounders
of Mantras
and Brah-
manas, the Adhvaryus of the Caraka branch of Black Yajurveda
(are to be understood). 8 Calubhi, Sumati, Deva-vara, Anukrsna,
Ayus, Anubhumi, Pri$a, Krsasva,
Sumuli and
Baskali—these
are
prominent
Adhvaryus
of Carakadhvaryakas.
They
are
Brahmacarins
( celibate ones)
worthy of being paid obeisance.
I4b-17a.
Suka the learned son of Vyasa, Lauki,
BhuriS-
ravas, Somavi, Atunantakya (?), Dhaumya and Kafyapa, The
forest-dwellers viz. Ilaka, Upamanyu, Vida, Bhargava, Madhu-
ka,
Pinga,
Svetaketu,
Prajadarpa,
Kahoda,
Yajftavalkya,
Saunaka, Ananga and Niratala—these arc Madhyama
Adhvaryus .
1 7b-20.
The following are the ladies capable of expound-
ing the Brahman
: Aditi the
mother
of the Devas,
Jalapa,
Manavl,
the
two
splendid
celestial damsels
viz. Urva& and
1.
The list of the 12 Carakas in the CVS is totally
different from that
given in
this Pur&Qa. Thus CVS states the 12 classifications
of Carakas
as
follows
:
Caraka,
Ahvaraka,
Katha,
Pr&cya-Katha,
Kapi$thala-Katha,
C&r&ya^iya, VSrayaniya, Virtfintaveya, Sveta^vatara,
Aupamanyava, P&ta$-
daniya and Maitr&yanlya.
2.
This
is not known to CV$.
3. W. 12-170 give a
list of prominent Adhvaryus of Caraka Branch
of Black Yajurveda.

=== PAGE 330 ===

1.2.33.21-32
327
ViSvayosa, Mudgala, Anujlvi, Tara of great fame, Pratimedhi,
Marga,
Sujata, Mahatapa
(of great penance)
,
Lopamudra
who is conversant with Dharma and
Kau£itika.
The celestial
damsels are of approved beauty.
Thus the important children of the sages have been men-
tioned by me.
21-22.
They are the founders of the branches
of
Vedic
Schools. Therefore, they are regarded as sages. They arc known
by
these names also—ISvaras
(Masters),
expounders
of
the
Mantras,
Rsis and
Rsikas. The sons of the sages are the ex-
pounders of Kalpas (Ritualistic texts) and of Brahma$as, along
with the sons of l£varas, Rsis and Rsikas.
23-32.
Similarly, understand the statements
as
to their
visions of the Mantras. 1
The
Mantra, which is that which is equipped with com-
mand
(? authoritative)
is advaita
(non-dualistic), that has deep
resonant sound
is Dipta. The Mantra named
LiAgu
(Symbol)
is perfectly direct perception. What
is called Pariddna
(Devo-
tion )
is that which has become
the soul of all living beings.
They know
that the statement which indicates the mean-
ing mentioned in the Nirukta
i-
(semantics, one of
the
ancillary
subjects of the Vedas) as Svdy&Tnbhuva.
Whatever
is
associated
with
some Mantra
is along with the case endings of substan-
tives (?)
That which is directly spoken
is
considered
to
be
the
statement of Rsis.
It mostly consists of different words from the
Nigamas (Vedas)
and Nipatas
(Particles,
indeclinables, excep-
tional forms of words).
That which
is a great
statement
is remembered
as
the
statement of Rsikas.
That in which the words are not very clear, that in which
there are many doubts is the
statement
of Rsiputras. All
of
them are lamentations
( or all lamentations also are such)
.
That which mainly consists of Hetu (Reason) and Drst&n-
ta (example) is
(called)
Citraiabda (one
with diverse words).
1. W.23-32 explain many technical terms such as
Mantra,
Nirukta,.
Nipata, Hetu, Dr?tanta and others. The statement of R?is is in Vedic, those
of Rfikas are great, clear or emphatic while those of Rsiputras are dubious.

=== PAGE 331 ===

328
Brahmd?j4a Purdata
That which has no sense, that which is
not
praised
by
anyone
and
that
which
is
feeble—this statement
is Manusa
( human)
»
(Persons) well-known as Misras attained
the status of the
sages on account of their prowess. For the
sake of
prosperity
they are born of different castes (?) by means
of drawing and
attraction
(?)
They
have
the knowledge of the past, present
and future. They cure the misery of birth.
Those
statement of Misras
is capable
of activising the
strength of the preceptor.
The who are composers of scriptural texts,
those who
go
every-where, due
to
their
greatness, and
those who
possess
the
intensity
of
very great
penance are
considered as sages.
They are Bjhaspati, Sukra, Vyasa and Sarasvata.
33-35.
Vyasas are those who compose
scriptural
texts.
They are remembered as Vedavyasas,
Since, although they are
born later
(i.e. younger in age), they are superior to the earlier
ones
in
their
intellect;
since they are richly endowed with
prosperity, they
are,
therefore,
remembered
as
Rsis
(sages)
.
In the matter of
the
conception
of a
sage
neither
the
period nor the age is the authoritative criterion.
A
(younger)
person
is some
times seen superior-most in
intellect,
since
even
a
boy who
is
elderly
(i.e. mature) in
intellect is a learned sage. 1
36.
They call this Rk
Mantra
:
viz.
the
same
foot
in
the middle is used with the full complement of words and their
end
is properly distributed.
37.
They call this Yajus Mantra
:
viz.
the
Mantra
is
not measured by means of syllables in
the foot but by means of
Karana
(Rhythmical pause) and
its end
possesses syllables
in
excess.
2
38-39.
The following seven adjuncts of a Saman Mantra
are
called
Sapta
Vindhyas8
viz.
(I)
Hrlmkara
(2) Prastava
1 .
This
Subhasita
glorifying wisdom and
intelligence
as superior to
the age is found in Pali and Prakrits also. The word *bala* here is a misprint
for
*bdla\
2.
This applies to Yajur-mantras in prose and not to metrical ones.
3.
Vindhya is a technical term indicating a part of a Sama Stanza. The
parts are enumerated in W 38-39. Prastava is beginning of the hymn, Prati-

=== PAGE 332 ===

1.2.33.40-48
329
(beginning)
(3) Pranava
Omkara)
(4)
Gita
(Song)
is the
fourth
one
(5)
the
fifth one
is
Prati-Hotra. (6) They
call
the sixth one Upadrava (7) Nidhana (? end). Without Hrlmkara
and Pranava it is called Paficavindhya.
40-41.
(Defective text) On saying “Brahmane Dharma”
(Dharma
is for the sake of the Brahman), that which
is implied
and indicated then
is considered Asasti
(Blessing). Paridevana
is lamentation. Narration of a question out of anger or hatred
this
is
laid down
as the
characteristic
sign
of the
Mantra
among all Vidyas.
42-43.
Mantras characterised as Rk, Yajus
and
Saman
arc said to be
nine
types:
MUrti
(form),
Nindd
(censure),
Pra.iarhsd 9 (praise),
AkroSa
(scolding),
To$a
(contentedness),
PraSna (question), Anujhd (permission) and Akhydna
(narrative
and modes of blessing)
.
I shall mention
the
different
types of Mantras
falling
into twentyfour classes.
44-46.
The
following
are
the
twentyfour
types
of
Mantras
:
(1) Prafamsa
(Praise)
.(2)
Stuti
(Eulogy)
(3)
Akroia
(Rebuking) (4) Nindd (Censure)
(5) Paridevana (Lamentation)
(6) AbhiSdpa (Curse)
(7)
Viiapa
(Revocation
of a
curse)
(8)
Praina (Question)
(9)
Prativacas (Reply)
(10)
AHs
(Blessing)
(11)
Tajha
(Sacrifice)
(12) Ak$epa (Reviling) (13) Arthdkhydna
(Narration of the meaning) (14) Sarhkatha
(Conversation)
(15)
Viyoga (Separation) (16) Abhiyoga
(Attack)
(17) Kathd (Story)
(18)
Samsthd
(Situation)
(19)
Vara
(Boon)
(20)
Prati$edha
(Denial)
(21) Upadda
(Advice)
(22) JSfamaskdra
(Obeisance)
(23) Sprha (Desire) and
(24)
Vildpa (Lamentation).
Thus the twentyfour types of Mantras are mentioned.
47-48.
Ten
modes
or
formations
of
the
Brahmanas,
which
had
been
laid down formerly by the sages conversant
Hotr is the response or supporting tune by the assistant Hot?, Upadrava
is the
fourth of the
five
parts of a Saman
Stanza.
(Saya^a on §a4avim£a
Br.).
According to that Brahmaija, a Saman Stanza has five parts. Hrirhkara and
Omkara
appear
subsequent
additions.

=== PAGE 333 ===

330
Brahm&nfa Purify*
with the principles of
Yajfla, are
as follows
Hetu
(Reason
)
Ntrvacana
(Specific
explanation)
Nindd
(Censure)
PraSasti*
(Praise)
Sarhiaya (Doubt), Nidhi (Deposit)
Pur&krti
(Previous
action),
Purakalpa
(Previous
Kalpa)
,
Vyavadh&rana-Kalpand
(Conception of ascertainment ) , Upama (Comparison).
49.
This is the characteristic feature of a
“Brahmana**
in regard to persons of all
(vedic) branches.
Hetu is derived from the root Hati
( y/han-). It
kills what
is spoken
( argued ) by others.
50.
Or it can be
derived
from the root Hinoti meaning
“to go” when the meaning has been arrived at. Nirvacana means
determination of the meaning of a statement.
51.
Preceptors
call
it
nindd where there
are words of
censure in finding fault.
Praiasti is derived
from
the
root
( 's/Sarhs-) Sarhsati with
the preposition Pra. Praiasti or Praiarhsd means praise on account
of good
qualities.
52.
‘‘This is this. This
is not
this”.
Where there is in-
decision like this, there
is
Sarrifaya
(Doubt).
“This
should be
done
like this”. This
is called Vidhi (Rule, Mode).
53.
“This
is
the
utterance
of so and so
(Lit. of others
and others) ”. This is mentioned by learned men
as Pur&krti (?
Precedent). This object
that
is
completely
out
of view
(in
distant past)
is called Purdkalpa (A story of the past).
54-56.
The word
(Purd
9 indicates what
has gone by.
If
due to its being over
in
the
days of yore the story of the past
is
decisively
fixed
by means
of Mantras,
Brahmanas,
Kalpas
(Ritualistic texts) and Nigamas (Vedas)
of pure
expanse
it is
called
Vyavadh&rana
Kalpand
(conception
of ascertainment)
.
“Just as this,
so also that”,
“This
is like
that”
this
is called
Upamd (comparison).
This
is the
tenth
characteristic
feature
of the Brahmana.
Thus,
at
the
outset,
the
characteristic
feature of the
Brahmana has been laid down by learned men.
57-58.
The
commentary
of
that
Mantra
as pointed
out by the Brahmanas who know it, has been
mentioned word
by word. The
application
of Mantras
is duly laid down in the
holy rites. The word Mantra is derived from the root Mantrayati

=== PAGE 334 ===

1.2.34.1-6
33 L
and Brdhmana
(scriptural text)
is
derived
from
the word
Brahmana
(Bptihana ?)
Those who know
Sutra
(aphorism) say that
it must be
brief with
very
few
words,
unambiguous,
full
of meaning
and comprehensive. It must not
contain any unwanted
inter-
polation. It must be free from blame.
CHAPTER THIRTYFOUR
Vy&sa and the Line of his Disciples
Controversy between Tdjhavalkya and Sdkalya
Vayu said
:
1.
On hearing his words, the sages asked Suta thereafter
“How were the Vedas classified once again, O
highly intelli-
gent one, recount that to us.”
Suta said
:
2.
In
the Dvapara Yuga
that
had gone before in the
Sv&yambhuva Manvantara, god Brahma said to Manu
:—“O
highly intelligent one, protect
the Veda.
3.
The Yuga has changed, O dear one.
The twice-borns
have become deficient in energy and vigour. All
of them have
been duly enveloped by the defects of the Yuga.
4.
Due to the Yuga,
its extent
is
seen
to have
been
reduced.
What
has
been
spoken
in
the
Krtayuga has been
reduced to a ten-thousandth part.
5.
The vigour, the splendour and
the
strength—every-
thing has become
very much
diminished. Everything perishes.
The
Vedic
rites have
to be performed. Let there not be the
destruction of the Veda.
6.
If Veda meets with destruction,
the Yajfta
(institute)
will be destroyed. When the Yajfta
is
destroyed the Veda will
(automatically)
be destroyed. Then everything perishes.

=== PAGE 335 ===

332
Brahm&nda Purdna
7.
The original Veda had four feet
and
it extended to
a
hundred-thousand
(mantras).
Again
the Kfsna
(the black
Yajurveda) was ten times that
(in
extent)
.
Indeed
the Yajfia
was the yielder of all desires."
8.
On being told thus, Manu who was engaged
in what
was conducive to the welfare of all the worlds, said “So be it.
99
Then the lord divided the Single Veda of four feet
into
four
divisions.
9-10.
It was at
the
instance of Brahma as well
as with
a desire for the
welfare of all the worlds (that he divided
the
Veda)
. Therefore, I shall
narrate
to you
all the classification
of the Vedas in accordance with the current
Manvantara. It is
by adopting the mode of inferring what
is beyond perception
by means of what
is
(actually)
perceptible,
that we decide
things of the past. O excellent ones, understand that.
11-13.
In
this Yuga, Vyasa,
the
son
of Paragara,
the
scorcher of enemies, who was well known
as Dvaipayana was
the eternal part of Visnu.
12.
Urged by Brahma, he began
to
recount
the Veda
in
this Yuga. For the purpose
of
(preserving the
continuity
of)
the Vedas, he took
four
disciples viz.
Jaimini,
Sumantu,
Vai^ampayana and Paila the fourth one.
There
was
a
fifth
(disciple) also along with these viz. Lomaharsana.
14-16.
With due
formality,
he
accepted
Paila
as
the
listener
(i.e.
disciple)
unto
the
Rgveda, O
Brahmana,
Vaisampayana as the expounder
of the Yajurveda; he accept-
ed Jaimini as
the
disciple
for the Samveda and the meaning
( of its mantras)
. Similarly, he accepted Sumantu, the excellent
sage,
as
the
disciple
for
the Atharvaveda. The saintly lord
accepted me as the disciple
for
Itihasas,
Puranas and Kalpa-
vakyas.
17.
The Yajurveda
was
one and
whole.
He
divided
it into
four. There was
Cdturhotra1
(four
types
of
sacrificial
duties)
therein, and he ordained Yajfia thereby.
18.
He
ordained
Adhvaryava
(the work
of
the
priest
Adhvaryu) by means of Yajur-Mantras and
the
Hautra
(the
1 .
For duties to be performed by four Chief Priests viz. Hot?, Adhvaryu,
Udgatr and Brahm& in a sacrifice, vidt the next verse.

=== PAGE 336 ===

1.2.34.19-24b
333
work of the priest Hotr) by means ofRk Mantras; he perform-
ed Audg&tra (the work of the priest Udgatr) by means of Saman
Mantras
and
the
duty
of Brahma
(the presiding priest) by
means of Atharvan Mantras.
19-20.
Thereafter, by picking out the
Rk. Mantras, he
composed the Rgveda.
By
selecting Hotrka Mantras, the lord
of the Universe composed the Yajurveda. He
composed Sama-
veda by means
of the Saman Mantras and thereby he got the
work
of Udgatr
performed. He performed all the rites of the
king by means of the Atharvaveda.
21.
By means of narratives
and
subsidiary
narratives,
folksongs, utterances from Kalpa
texts
etc. Vyasa who was an
expert in the meanings of the Puranas composed
the
Purana
Samhita.
22.
Whatever remained he included
it in the Yajurveda
and associated Yajfta with it. This is the definite
conclusion in
the scriptural texts
that
it
(came
to be called) Yajurveda on
account of Tajana (Sacrifice)
.
23-24a.
Since the feet (of mantra verses) are excessively
long, the
Yajur Mantras
are
very intricate. This Veda with
excessive vigour is utilised
by a hundred Rtviks who have per-
fectly mastered the Vedas. It
is with this that the
horsc-Sacri-
fice
is fully developed.
24b.
Taking up the
Rk-Mantras,
Paila classified them
into two groups. 1
After composing
two
Samhitas the eminent
1.
VV.24b-33
describe the
divisions of the Rgveda along with
the
principal
teachers
thereof
Paila
Indra-Pramati
Baikala
(4
branches
)
fl )
Bodhya
(2 )
Agnimatr
(3 )
Parasari
(4 )
YAjhavalkya
M&o4ukeya
(complete Rgveda)
Satjsravas
(Gont.)

=== PAGE 337 ===

-334
Brahrntyfa Purtya
preceptor handed
them
over
to
his
two
disciples—one
to
Indrapramati and
the other one to Ba?kala
.
26.
The excellent
Brahmana,
Baskala composed
four
Samhitas and taught his disciples who
were
eagerly
engaged
in serving him and who were desirous of his welfare,
27.
The four Samhitas are as follows
: The first branch
is Bodhya;
the
second
branch
is
Agnimatr;
the third one is
Paralari and the last one is Yajfiavalkya.
28.
Indrapramati,
the
excellent
sage
taught one
(un-
divided) Samhita. He taught the highly fortunate
and famous
Mandukeya.
29-30.
That sage
of
great fame
taught
his eldest son
•Satyalravas.
The renowned
sage Satyasravas
taught
his son
Satyahita.
Satyahita
taught
his
son SatyasrI who was noblc-
souled and who was eagerly devoted to truthfulness and piety.
31.
Satyalrl had three disciples who had great brilliance,
-were learned, and were eagerly devoted to
the
clear grasp
of
the scriptural texts.
32-33.
Sakalya was
the
first among them. Another one
was
Rathltara
and
the
third
one was Bharadvaja the son of
Baskala—these
were
those
who
made
the Sakhas
(of that
Veda)
function
( and flourish)
.
Sakalya (also known
as)
Devamitra was
haughty
and
arrogant on account of
his
knowledge. O Brahmana, he was
slain during the Yajfta ofJanaka.
S&ridapayana enquired
:
34-35. How was that sage who was haughty and arrogant
on account of his knowledge slain during the
horse-sacrifice of
Janaka? How did the argument
begin? Why
did
it
start
at
^ Cont.)
Satyahita
c
I
Satya-iri
Sakalya
or
Devamitra
Bharadv&ja
(Son of Ba$kala)
Rathltara

=== PAGE 338 ===

1.2.34.36-45
335
all? With whom was the argument done ? Mention ail these as
they had happened as
it is known to you.
1
SUta said
:
36.
There was a
great
assemblage
(of
learned men)
during the horse- sacrifice of Janaka. Many thousands of sages
came there.
37-38.
All of them were desirous of watching that Yajfia
of
the
saintly
king
Janaka. On seeing
the Br&hmanas who
arrived,
he
had
his
curiosity aroused—“Who
is
the
most
excellent
Brahmana among
these ? How
can I come to that
decision ?” After thinking thus, the king hit upon an intelligent
plan.
39-41 a.
He brought the following
articles (as gift)
viz.
A thousand
cows,
plenty
of gold,
villages, jewels and maid-
servants. The king then announced to
the
sages, “O
sages of
excellent fortune, I bow down my head unto
all of
you.
The
wealth that has been brought here
is for the most excellent one
among you. O excellent
Brahmanas, know
that my wealth
is
for you.”*
4 lb-45.
On hearing the words of Janaka
and on seeing
the most valuable wealth, those sages well-versed
in the Vedas
became greedy. They were desirous of seizing the same.
They challenged one another in their height of arrogance
due to
Vedic
knowledge,
with
their mind
dwelling on the
riches displayed. They began to quarrel and claim thus—“This
wealth (ought to)
be
mine.
This
is
mine
and
not
yours”.
Another said
: “Say, why do you swagger”.
Owing
to
the
fault
of wealth,
they began to argue in
various ways.
1 .
The story how Sakalya lost his life as a result of his discomfiture in
his disputation with Yajftavalkya
is based on the dispute
recorded in the
Brhaddravyaka Upa III.8.
12-26. The difference between the stories
is that in
the Bxhad-Upa it was after Gargi that Sakalya accepted YSjnavalkya's challenge.
This is a good picture of disputations held in royal courts, the appoint-
ment of referees and the methodology of disputations in ancient India.
*
For me vittam vittam dvijottamah
/ of the
text Va.P.60.38b
(identical
verse) reads:
(tasmai tad upanitam) hi vidyd-vittam dvijottamdh
/ This is brought
as the prigp for scholarship
9 etc.

=== PAGE 339 ===

336
Brahmdn$a Purdna
But there was another scholar there who was a great seer
and also the son of god Brahma,
called
Yftjftavalkya. He was
endowed with great splendour ; he was a great
ascetic and was
the most excellent among
those who
had realized Brahman.
Yajftavalkya who
was
born of a part of Brahma, proclaimed
loudly
:
46.
He said to his disciple who was
the most excellent
among the knowers
of Brahman,
“Take
this wealth, O dear
one and
take it home. There
is no doubt
about
it that this is
mine.
47.
I am the sole arguer in all arguments. No one else is
equal to me. If any learned man is not pleased
( with
this )
let
him challenge me without delay.”
48.
Then the vast expanse of
the
ocean-like crowd
of
Brahmanas became agitated like an ocean in the deluge. There-
upon, Yajftavalkya who was absolutely calm
and
normal said
smilingly
:
49.
“O learned men, do not get angry.
All
of you are
speakers of truth. Let
us speak (i.e. argue) in accordance with
our capacity, trying
to understand each other”.
50-51.
Thereafter, their
arguments
were accepted with
many words and thousands
of splendid meanings
originating
from
subtle
vision
(of Branches
of Philosophy)
. There were
examiners engaged by the king. They were endowed with good
qualities,
embellished
with places of spiritual learning both of
the worldly matters as well as in the Veda
(i.e. they had com-
petence in secular as well as religious topics for discussion)
.
52.
The arguments between
the
noble-souled
scholars
began for the purpose of winning the wealth. All the sages were
on one side and Yajftavalkya was on the other.
53.
Thereafter, all those sages were individually asked by
the intelligent Yajftavalkya.
They
did not reply.
(They were
unable to reply)
.
54.
After
conquering all the sages, that (sage) of great
intellect, a mass of Vedic
wisdom, suddenly spoke to Sakalya,
the originator of arguments.
55.
<fO Sakalya, speak
out what
is
relevant. Why do
you remain
(silent) meditating. The stake has been
deposited

=== PAGE 340 ===

1.2.34.56-64
337
by the Yajamana
(i.e. the King on
whose
behalf
they are to
perform
sacrifice
etc. )
and
has
been
taken away and
held
by me”.
56.
On being attacked thus, his
face
and
eyes became
red like copper due to anger. In the presence of
the
sages
he
spoke
to
Yajfiavalkya
accompanied
by
his man
(i.c.
the
disciple*).
57.
‘ ‘Slighting us as well as other excellent
Brahmanas
like
blades
of
grass,
you wish to seize for yourself the gift of
wealth of great value, as a prize for learning”.
58.
On
being
spoken
thus
by
Sakalya,
Yajfiavalkya
said to him,—*'Know
that
the
strong
point
of
Brahmisfhas.
( persons engrossed in the meditation on Brahman)
is the vision
(insight) of the principles of learning and objects
of
reality.
59.
Love or desire has its association with wealth. Hence
we love
wealth.
Brahmanas
are
Kdmaprainas
(those who can
ask whatever they wish). Hence, we speak out the
question as
we please.
60-61.
This
is the reward of the saintly king. Hence, the
gift of wealth has been taken away by me”.
On hearing these words
(of
Yajfiavalkya),
Sakalya
be-
came extremely infuriated. In order to ask the
question
as he
pleased, he spoke these words to
Yajfiavalkya—‘’Now
reply to
me factually whatever question
(I am pleased to ask) pointed
out by me.”
62.
Then a
great
argument
took
place between those
two
knowers
of Brahman. More
than a
thousand questions
were put then by Sakalya.
63.
Even as the other
sages
listened—Yajfiavalkya
re-
plied everything. &akalya had no further argument or question.
Yajfiavalkya spoke to him.
64.
“Answer at least one question put by me, O Sakalya
as I please.
In this disputation
with
the stake of (the wealth offered
*
For sa-purufam of the text, Vi P. 60.51b reads
tarii parufam
(spoke
harsh words
to him)—a
better
reading.

=== PAGE 341 ===

338
BrahmSn4a Purina
by Janaka as
bait)
or instantaneous death here
(if you fail to
reply*).
65.
Which
is well associated
with the subtlest of know-
ledge—Sankhya or Yoga? which
is more important, the path of
spirituality or the path of meditation?”1
66.
Then the question was put forward by the intelligent
Y&jfiavalkya. Unable
to know it (and reply)
, Sakalya had to
court death.
67-68.
Thus,
it
is remembered
that
Sakalya became
distressed in the course of his explanation of the question.
Thus a great dispute took place among (the sages)
seek-
ing
wealth.
There
were
arguments
between
the sages and
Yajfiavalkya.
Yajfiavalkya took away the gift of wealth
after
establish-
ing
his own
fame.
Surrounded by his disciples
(that learned
sage) of great self-control went home.
CHAPTER THIRTYFIVE
The Legend of Tdjnavalkya's receiving the Veda from
the Sun-God
;2 Legend of Vy&sa
: Description of
Svayambhuva Manvantara
S&ta said
:
1.
Sakalya
(otherwise known as) Devamitra, an intelli-
gent noble-soul, a
leading Brahmana who was the
foremost
*
Vfi P. 60.58b reading
is more
explicit:
i&pah
papo’sya
vddasya
abruvan
mftyum
dvrajet.
1.
The last question of Yajfiavalkya
to
Sakalya
in
the
B(had. Upa
was about Aupanifada Puru$a and
not
about
the
superiority
of
the path of
S&ftkhya (spiritual wisdom)
or Yoga (path of meditation) as In this Pura$a.
2.
The Legend
that Yajfiavalkya received a
new Veda
(the white
Yajurveda) from the Sun-god
is as old as the Mbh. Sinti 318.6-12. But this
chapter in the Mbh. does not mention his guru’s order to recant the Yajurveda
learnt by Y&jdavalkya from him due
to
his
insolence
and
uncharitable
remarks about his class-mates' capacity to perform that penance.

=== PAGE 342 ===

1.2.35.2-9
339
among those who were
conversant
with the Vedas, composed
five Samhitas. 1
2.
He
had
five
disciples
viz.
Mudgala,
Gokhala,
Khaliyan, Sutapas and the fifth his dear
( child ) Saisireya.
3.
The
excellent
Brahmana
(?)
expounded
three
Samhitas viz. Saka, Vaina and Rathitara. He composed a fourth
(work) the Nirukta.
4.
He had four disciples viz. Paila, Iksalaka, Satabalaka
the intelligent and Gaja, O excellent Brahmanas.
5.
Bharadvaja, son of Baskala, expounded three Samhitas.
He had
three
noblc-souled
disciples
endowed with
good
qualities.
6.
They were, Tvapanapa the intelligent, Pannagari the
wise one and the
third
one
Arjava.
All of them were praise-
worthy, of holy observances due to the power of penance.
7.
They were devoid of passion. They had great splend-
our. They were perfect masters of the Samhitas.
Thus have
been
described
the
Bahvrcas by whom
the
Samhitas were made to function.
8-9.
The disciple of VaiSampayana composed Yajurveda.
Eightysix splendid Samhitas2 were expounded
by him. He gave
1.
In continuation of note
1. p. 333 the spiritual or academik genealogy
of Paila from Sakalya onwards is as follows
:
Sakalya
|
Mudgala
Gokhala
Khaliyan
Sutapas
Saisireya
'Composition
of
three
Samhitas
and the Nirukta
(Son of Sakalya)
Paila
Iksalaka
Satabalaka
Gaja
Baskala
Bharadvaja (expounded 3 Saihhit&s)
Tvapan&pa
Pannagari
Arjava.
2.
Cf. yajurvedasya fadaiiti bhedd bhavanti CVS P.31.

=== PAGE 343 ===

340
Brahmdn$a Purdna
them to his disciples and they grasped them in accordance with
the injunctions. One of them, Yajfiavalkya
of supreme power
of penance, was excluded1 (? by the preceptor).
10.
There were eightysix
disciples,
the
propounders of
diverse Samhitas and there were
three different kinds in every
one of them.
1 1.
The three kinds in the splendid last variety of Veda
are the
(1) Northern
(2) of
the
middle
region and (3) the
eastern one.
12-13.
Syamayani
became
the
leader
of the
Udicyas
(Northerners). Asuri
is remembered as the first founder of (the
Vedic branch) of the middle
region.
Alambi
is the foremost
among
the
Prdcyas
(Easterners).
There are (thus) the three
regional heads. 2
Thus
the
Carakas ,
the Brahman
expounders
of
the
Samhitas have been described.
The sages said :—
14.
Why are
they
(called)
Carak&dhvaryus ?
Tell
the
reason factually. What is the
(rite )
observed
(by them) ? For
what reason did they attain the status of Caraka .
S Uta said
:—
15.
The
sages had
some work
to
do, O
excellent
Br&hmana. After reaching the top of the
Meru, they conferred
with one another as follows
:
16.
“If any excellent Brahmana does not
turn up
here
within seven days,
he shall (have to) perform (expiation
for)
Brahmaria-slaughter (Brahma-Hatyd)
. This
is proclaimed as our
stipulated condition.”
17.
Thereafter,
all
of them
excepting Vaisampayana
went to the place where the assemblage
had been fixed. (They
attended along with all the members of their groups).
1.
It
is not clear whether Yajfiavalkya was not taught Yajurvcda or
was made to vomit
it and hence became Veda-less one.
In other words,
Vaisampayana must have taught Yajur-Veda to Yajftavalkya.
2.
As stated in the footnote on Gh. XXIII,
the list of Carakas is differ-
ent
in
the CVS.

=== PAGE 344 ===

1.2.35.18-27
341
18.
At
the
instance
of
the Brahmanas, he performed
(the
atonement
for)
Brahma-Hatyd.
After calling together all
the disciples he said
:
19.
“Perform
(the
expiation
of) Brahma-Hatyd
on my
behalf, O excellent Brahmanas. All of you gather together and
utter the words conducive to welfare, as desired.
Tdjhavalkya said
:
20.
“I shall perform
it single-handed.
Let
these
sages
stand by.
Purified
by my
own penance,
I
shall
lift it up
with my power”.
21.
On being
told
thus,
he
(VaiSampayana) became
angry and expelled Yajfiavalkya. He said
“Return to me every
thing that has been learned by you”.
22.
On being
told
thus,
(the sage)
the most excellent
one among the knowers of Brahman,
vomited
out
the Yajur
Mantras that had perceptible
forms
and had
been
smeared
with blood.
23.
Thereafter, the Brahmana
meditated upon the sun-
god and propitiated him. The Veda
that
had come up
went
over to the sun and stayed there.
24.
The
sun-god who was pleased with him gave unto
Brahmariti
(i.e. Yajfiavalkya who had the fund of Vedic know-
ledge)
those Yajur Mantras
that
had
gone up
to the
Solar
sphere.
25-27.
Martan<Ja (the Sun) gave those Yajur-Mantras to
the
intelligent
Yajfiavalkya who
had
assumed
the form
of
horse.
1
(Some) Brahmanas study those Yajur Mantras by some
means or the other. The Mantras had been given to (Yajfiaval-
kya) who had assumed
the
form
of a
horse. Hence, those
Brahmanas became Vajins. Those by whom
( the expiation for
)
Brahma-Hatyd had been observed
are remembered
as
Carakas
because they had performed
{Carand
t
) the atonement. The dis-
ciples ofVaisampayana are detailed as Carakas)
.*
1.
As contrasted with the Mbh and other Puralias, here
it
is Yajfia-
valkya who assumes the form of a horse and not the Sun-god, while receiving
the new Veda.
2.
The Brahmanas who performed penance for warding off the sin of
Brahma-hatya of their guru are called Carakas—a popular etymology.

=== PAGE 345 ===

342
BrahmSaiia Purdna
Thus these Carakas have
been
recounted. Now
under-
stand the V&jins.
28-30.
There are fifteen Vajins. They are
the
disciples
of Yajftavalkya viz. -Kanva, Baudheya Madhyandina,
his son,
Vaidheya, Addha, Bauddhaka, Tapaniya, Vatsa, Jabala, Kevala,
Avatl, Pundra, Vainoya and Parasara. 1 These are mentioned as
Vajins. They are fifteen excellent men. The branches of Yajur
Mantras should be known as one hundred and one.
31.
Jaimini taught his
son Sumantu. 2 Sumantu taught
his son Sutvan.
1.
Cf. the list of disciples of Yajnavalkya in
CVS. p.
32
as
that
list
somewhat differs from the
list in the Bd. P.
2.
VV. 31-55 give the genealogy of Samaveda Teachers.
It is different
from that in CVS. Our text gives it as follows:
Jaimini
I
Sumantu
Sutvan
Sukarman
(studied
1000
Samhitas)
|
(One thousand disciples, one per Samhita
|
(But these were killed
by
Indra as noted in CVS. p. 43
)
Pausyanji
King
Hiranyanabha
alias
(Studied 500
Saifthitas)
Kausalya (Studied 500 Samhitas
and
Eastern
Samagas)
Prince Kfta
(Udicya (Northern) Samagas)
Laug&k$i
Kusumi
Kusidi
Laiigali)
(Kuthumi
in Vd.P.)
School of Laugak$i
N&dayaniya
Tandiputra
Anovaina
Susahas
Sunaman
School of Ku£umi
Aurasa
Parasara
Nabhirvitta
Kauthuma, son of Parasara had six followers—Langalas alias Sdlihotras viz.
Halini, Jyamahani, Jaimini, Lomagayani, Kapdu and Kohala, these expound-
ed
6
Samhitas.

=== PAGE 346 ===

1.2.35.32-38
343
32-33.
Sutvan
taught
his
son
Sukarman.
Sukarman
quickly studied a thousand Samhitas and expounded
them
to
a thousand disciples who had the splendour of the sun. As they
were studying during
the
days
(when
they
should
not
be
studied)
Indra slew them.
34.
Thereafter,
for the
sake of his disciples he perform-
ed Protest
fast
unto death
(Prayopave$ana). On seeing him
furious, Indra granted him a boon.
35.
‘'You
will have
two
disciples
of great vigour and
unequalled
splendour.
Let
those
two
extremely
intelligent
(disciples)
study the thousand Samhitas.
36-38.
O
excellent Brahmana,
these
highly
fortunate
gods (Devas) have become
furious”.
After saying this to Sukarman of great fame, the glorious
Vasava
( Indra) saw that the anger of the Brahmana had calmed
down and
(so)
the lord vanished suddenly. His
disciples
were
King Hiranya-nabha
I
Prince Kfta
Composed 24 Samhitas (taught one to each student
)
Senior disciples
1.
Radi
2.
Radaviya (Mahavlrya in Va.P.)
3.
Paftcama
4.
Vahana
5.
Talaka
6.
Manduka (Pandaka in Va P.)
7.
Kalika
8.
Rajika
9.
Gautama
1 0.
Ajabasta
1 1 .
Soma-rajaya na
12.
Pu§tf
13.
Parikrsta
14.
Ulukhaiaka.
Junior Disciples
1.
Sail
(Vaisala
in
Va.P.)
2
Anguliya
3.
Kausika
4.
Salimanjari
5.
Paka (Kapiya in Va.P.)
6.
Sadhiya
7.
Kanini
8.
Parasarya
It may be noted that the number of disciples is 22, to make it 24, we must
add their teachers Hiranya-nabha and Kfta.
Lastly this Purana differs considerably from the CVS in names of teachers
of the S&maveda
(vide CVS, pp. 43-46).

=== PAGE 347 ===

344
BrahmBxi$a Purdna
(1) The intelligent and highly
excellent
Brahmana Pausyaftji
and the second one (2) Hiranyanabha alias Kausalya who was
a king.
Pausyaftji taught half a thousand
(i.e. 500) Samhitas.
39.
The splendid disciples of Pausyaftji were known by
the name Udicya
Samans.
Kausilya
studied
five
Samhitas
called Sattvas*
(?)
40.
The
disciples
of Hiranyanabha are remembered as
Pr&eya Samagas. The four disciples
of
Pausyaftji were
Laug-
aksi,
Kugumi,
Kusldi
and
Langali.
Now understand
the
different branches of these.
41.
The different branches of
(the school
of) Laugaksi
i
are - Natfayaniya, Tantfiputra (son of Tantfi), from him a fine
scholar named Anovaina, Susahas son of Sakoti, and Sunaman.
Understand these as the members of the
different
branches
of
the school of Laug&ksi.
42-44.
Kusumi had three disciples viz. Aurasa, Parasara
and the brilliant Nabhivitta. Thus,
the Kausumas arc remem-
bered of three types.
Saurisu and Srngiputra ( son of Srngi)—these two observed
holy rites for a long time.
Ranayaniya and
Saumitri
were
experts in Sama Veda.
Srngiputra of great penance expounded three Samhitas.
45.
Vaina,
Praclnayoga and
Surala
were
excellent
Brahmanas. Kauthuma ParaSarya
(son of Parasara) expounded
six Samhitas.
46.
Asurayana and Vaisakhya were devotedly
attached
to the elderly Vedic scholars.
The intelligent Pataftjali was the son of Pracina Yoga.
47.
The
branches of
(the school of) Kauthuma, son of
Parasara are remembered as six. Langala (otherwise known as
)
Salihotra expounded
six Samhitas.
48.
Halini, Jyamah&ni,
Jaimini,
Lomagayani, Kantfu
and Kohala—these
six
are
remembered
as
the
followers
of
Langala.
49.
These were
the disciples
of Langali
and Samhit&s
*
Sattv&ni pafica in the text is wrong, as Kausalya studied five hundred
Saihhit&s. Va.
P.61.35 correctly reads tiatdm pafica.

=== PAGE 348 ===

1.2.35.50-58
345
were founded and promulgated by them. One alone, a prince
Krta (was made) the disciple of Hiranya-Nabha.
50.
He
composed twentyfour Samhitas.
The foremost
among bipeds expounded
them
to
his disciples.
Understand
their names.
51-55.
Radi»
Radaviya,
Paficama,
Vahana,
Talaka,
Manduka, Kalika, Rajika, Gautama, Ajabasta,
Somarajayana,
Pusti, Parikrsta and
Ulukhalaka
(were
the elder ones)
. The
younger ones were Sail, Angullya, Kausika,
Salimafijari, Paka,
Sadhlya, Kan ini and
the
virtuous
soul
ParaSarya—Thus
the
Samagas have been recounted.
Among all the Samagas,
Pausyafiji and Krta are declar-
ed
as
the
most
excellent
ones.
They
were
expounders of
Samhitas.
O Brahmanas
! Suinantu divided Atharvan into two and
gave them to his disciples. 1
56-58.
He gave Kabandha the black
(Atharvan Man-
tra). That scholar Kabandha classified it into
two even
as he
listened to
it and passed them on, one to Pathya and the second
to
Devadarsa.
That
lordly
sage
classified
it
into
four.
Devadarsa’s four disciples were Moda, Brahmabala, Pippalada
and Saulkayani was the
fourth
one. He was
conversant with
1. W. 55-62 give the
list of
branches and
teachers of the Atharva
Veda.
It is different from the information in CVS, pp. 46-49. The genealogy
in this Purana is as follows:
Sumantu
Kabandha
(received Black Atharvan)
Pathya
Devadarsa
Moda
Brahmabala
Pippal&da
&aulkkyani
Jajali
Kumudadi
Saunaka
Babhru
Saindhav&yana
or Muhjakejya

=== PAGE 349 ===

346
Brahm&nija Pur&na
Dharma and he was established (and
engrossed)
in
penance.
All these four disciples of Devadarsa were firm observers of holy
rites.
59.
Know
that
the
further
excellent
classification of
Pathyas
is three-fold.
(The disciples
were)
Jajali, Kumudadi
and the third one is remembered as Saunaka.
60.
Saunaka divided the Sariihita into
two and handed
over one toBabhru. The intelligent sage
transferred
(taught)
the second Samhita to (a disciple) named Saindhavayana.
61-62.
Saindhava
(otherwise known
as)
MufijakeSya
split into two the Sariihita already divided into two.
The
excellent
divisions1
of Atharvan
Samhita
are
as
follows
Naksatrakalpa,
Vaitana, the
third one
Samhita-
Vidhi,
the fourth one the Kalpa of Ahgiras
and
the fifth one
Santikalpa.
63-65.
O excellent sages, Khadga*
(?)
expounded
the
Purana along with me. 2
The
following
are
said
to
be my
disciples who cling
closely
to
the
Puranas
viz.
Atreya,
the
intelligent Sumati*
Kaiyapa,
Akrtavrana,
Bharadvaja,
Agnivarcas,
Vasistha,
Mitrayu,
Savarni,
Somadatti,
Susarman and
Samsapavana.
Three Saihhitas were composed by three of them.
66.
KaSyapa, Savarni and Saririapayana are
the com-
posers of Sariihitas. My Samhita shall be the fourth one. These
four are the original (purana) Samhitas.
67.
All of them have four Padas
(feet/sections). All
of
them have the same import. In the alternate reading,
they are
futile in the same way as the branches of the Vedas.
1.
The divisions of the Atharva Veda are five
:
(1) Naksatra-Kalpa,
(2) Vaitana, (3)
SarhhitS-Vidhi
(4)
Ahgiras-Kalpa
(5)
Santi-Kalpa. Pro-
bably
(2)
is the Vidhana-Kalpa and
(3) is the Sariihita-Kalpa as in the CVS,
p.
46.
*
This reading
is meaningless. Vi P.61.55 reads $a*Jah
{krtvd ) ’ divid-
ing in six parts’. O excellent sages
! Having divided in six parts the
Purana
has been assigned by me
(to my pupils).
2.
W.63-69 sum up the position regarding the Purana
tradition en-
trusted to Romahargana, the Suta. Although he had six disciples, the Puranas
were composed by Romaharsana
(the original Sariihita), Kasyapa, Savarni
and S&msapayana. These Puranas consisted of four Padas
(parts) each and of
4000
verses in each Pur&na
(except that of &&xii£apayana).

=== PAGE 350 ===

1.2.35.68-75
347
68-69.
AH
of
them
comprise
four
thousand
verses
except
§am€apayanika. Laumaharsanika
is
the
original
one.
Kafyapika is the next one. Savarnika is the third one embellish-
ed with straight-forward statements and
themes. The
§am£a-
payanika Samhita
is
embellished
by impressive and inspiring
themes.
70. 1
There are altogether eight thousand and six hundred
Rk Mantras. There are fifteen, ten and
ten more
Rks
( 35 i.e-
altogether 8635).
71-73.
2Along with the Valakhilya
and Suparna hymns
they are stated to be seven* (?)
The Saman
Mantras
altogether
are eight thousand and
fourteen. The Samagas sing this along with the Aranyakas and
“Ho-Ha” **.
The Adhvaryava consists of twelve thousand
verses 2
and
Yajur Mantras. Vyasa composed as many Yajur and Brahmana
Mantras along with Grdmya
(rural)
, Aranyaka
(Forest) and re-
citation of sacred texts
(scriptural divisions).
74.
Henceforth, there is the qualifying
adjective Purva
(former)
for
the
Kathas
(Stories)
(?). The Rk,
Brahmana
and Yajus
are
remembered
as
containing
Grdmya ,
Aranyaka
Mantras
(?).
75.
So also the additional hymns
known as Khilas and
Upakhilas of the disciples of Hari-dru. Similarly, the additional
1.
VV. 70-72
: According to
this text
the Rgveda
consists of 8635
BJts, but actually the number
is 10552 of the §&kala Samhita according
to-
Satvalekar’s Svadhyaya Manual edition—a figure supported by
(V.S. p.
17.
The Sama Veda
is
said to be of 8014 mantras, though actually the present
Sama Samhita consists of 1810 mantras out of which only 75 are
of
Sama,
the rest belong to the RV. The CVS. com., however, supports
our
Puraija
as follows:
Affau
S&masahaff&pi
sdmdni
ca
caturdafa .
2.
The number of mantras of Adhvaryava
is given as 12000
Yajur
mantras,
(12330 in Svadhyaya mantjUl edition).
*
The text
is obscure. Va P. 61.62b reads,
vdlakhUy&l}
sahapraifdh
sa-savarnah
prakirlitdh
/
*Valakhilyas along with Savannas and with assistant Priests’—But there,
this line is a continuation of previous two lines which are identical with V. 70*
hereof.
**
—iSahomam ’along with homa'
in V& P. 61.63.

=== PAGE 351 ===

348
BrahmQntfa Purdna
Mantras of Taittiriyas
are remembered
as
Parakfudras (every
short verses like Ksudra sukta)
.
76.
In the Veda of Vajasaneyakas, the total number
of
R.k Mantras
is reckoned as one thousand nine
hundred.
The
JBrahmana portion is four times
that.1
77.
The total number of Yajur Mantras and Rks is eight
thousand eight hundred and eighty, along with Sukriya ( Samas
belonging
to
Pravargya
and)
Khila
(Additional)
Mantras
according to) Yajftavalkya.
78-81.
Similarly,
listen
to
(the number
of
verses)
of
Carana Vidyas (a school of AtharvaVeda) along with its extent
(number).
The total number of Rks (according
to
various Sakhas)
is said to be
six
thousand
twenty-six. 2
Yajur
Mantras,
it
is
said, are somewhat more than
this.
There are eleven thousand ten Rks.
There are ten thousand and eighty Rks.
There are one thousand and thirty Rk Mantras according
to the authorities.
This much is the extent of Rk Mantras.
Another thing about Atharvan Mantras.
It
is the conclu-
sion
that according
to
Bahvrcas the Atharvan Mantras are
five thousand.
82.
It
should
be known by the sages that there are
a
thousand more
excepting twenty
(i.e.
nine
hundred
and
1.
This verse
is a quotation from Katyayana
as per com. of CVS,
p. 39. The number of verses in Vajasaneyi Samhita is 1900 as per our text and
Katy&yana. But V. 77 states that the total no of Yajur mantras, RKS along
with &uki iya
(i.e. Vajasaneyi Samhita. Ch. 36-40 or the Pravargya section of
<S&man verse and Khila mantras
is 8880 according to Y&jnavalkya.
2.
VV 78-81 give the extent of the Atharva Veda.
According to our
text the number of Rk (mantras ) in the Atharva is 6026
but
the Svadhyaya
.Manual edition gives 5977 mantras.
I believe the
plural CdrapamVidy&n&m
in
V. 78a should be interpreted to include the nine
schools of
the
Atharva
Veda such as Paippala, Saunaka, D&nta and others mentioned in CVS. But
the CVS,
later
states that the
five Kalpas viz. Nak$atra, Vidh&na, Vidhi-
Vidh&na, Samhita and S&nti each
consists of 500
{Patica-Sat&ni)
mantras,
but the total of these
is given twelve thousand (CVS, pp 46-47).
It appears
that our Puraga writer gives traditional round figures without verifying (and
counting the mantras in) the original Saxhhit&s.

=== PAGE 352 ===

1.2.35.83-89 a
349
eighty)
. What is said here is
in
accordance
with
Angirasas.
1
They have Aranyakas also.
83.
Thus, the number is reckoned. The different branch-
es are mentioned.
The
originators of the
branches
and
the
causes of difference (are also mentioned).
84.
There are differences of branches
( ofVedic schools}
in all the Manvantaras in
this manner. The
Sruti
(as
uttered
by) Prajapati
is eternal. These are remembered as
their
alter-
native recensions.
85-86.
On account of
the
fact
that
the Devas are not
eternal, the Mantras originate, again and
again. 8
The differ-
ences
among
the
Srutis during Dvapara Yugas have
been
recounted.
Thus, after classifying the Vedas and handing them
over
to his disciples, the godly excellent sage went to the
forest
for
performing penance.
87-89a.
These different schools of Vcdic
branches
have
been evolved by his disciples and the disciples of his disciples.
There are fourteen VidyAs
(Lores) viz. the six Vedangas-
( Ancillary subjects), the four Vedas, the Mlmamsa and Nyaya
Vistara (Logic), Dharma£astra and Purana (Mythology).
Four more
lores
viz.
Ayurveda
(Medicine)
,
Dhanurveda
(Science of archery)
Gdndharva (Musicology),
these three to-
v
gether with Artkaidstra (Economics, Political economy) constitute
(along with the former ones) the eighteen lores.8
1.
The old name of the Atharva veda
was
Atharvangirasa.
The
Atharvan mantras were auspicious while the Ahgiras mantras pertain to black,
magic. According to this Purana the number of such mantras (including those
in the Brahmana portion)
is 980.
2.
It
is a pet theory of
our author that Devas are not eternal
but
mantras are so, and they manifest themselves again and again in the new world-
order on new creation of the universe.
3.
Traditionally there are fourteen vidy&s
(lores or
sciences) but by
adding four subsidiary Vedas, they are regarded as eighteen. CVS, p. 47 gives-
the following
relations between
vedas and
upavedas.
Veda
Upaoeda
The Rgveda
The
Ayurveda
(Science
of
medicine)
The Yajurveda
The Dhanurveda
(Military
Science)
The S&maveda
The Gandharvaveda
(Music)
The Atharvaveda
The Artha Sistra
(Economics,
Politics,.
Administration, Architecture.

=== PAGE 353 ===

350
Brahm&nia Pur&na
89b-90a.
It should
be known
that Brahmarsis
are
the
earliest ones,
thereafter the Devarsis and
then
the
R&jarsis. 1
Thus the sources of origin of the sages are three.
90b-91.
Expounders of Brahman (or Veda) arc born in
the five families viz.—KaSyapas, Vasisthas,
Bhrgus,
Arigirasas
and Atris.
Since they approach (rsanti) Brahma, they are remember-
ed as Brahmarsis.
92-95.
The
Devarsis
are the sons of Dharma, Pulastya,
Kratu, Pulaha, Pratyusa, Deva (Prabhasa
as
per Va.P.)
and
Kasyapa. Know them by name.
The Devarsis (divine sages) Nara and Narayana
are
the
sons of Dharma; the
Valakhilyas
are
the sons of Kratu ; Kar-
dama is the son of Pulaha; Kubera is the son of Pulastya; Dala
is the son of Pratyusa ;
Narada
and
Parvata
are
the
sons
of Kasyapa.
They are remembered as Devarsis because they approach
the Devas.
96.
The
kings born
of the family of Manu, the family
of
Pururavas,
the scions of the families of Iksvaku and Nab-
haga—these should be known as Rajarsis (saintly kings).
97.
Since they approach
the
subjects
befriending and
delighting them, they are called Rajarsis.
Brahmarsis devoid of impurities are remembered
as
those
who are well established in the region ofBrahma.
98.
The splendid Devarsis
should
be
known
as
those
who are well established in the world of the Devas.
All
Rajar$is
are
considered
to
be those (who are) well
established in the world of Indra.
99-103.
I shall tell the characteristics of
those
who,
on
account of their nobility of birth, penance
and ability to
utter
(compose
and
recite) mantras, are proclaimed
as
Bramhar§is
(Brahmanical
sages),
divine
sages
i Devarsis)
and
Rajarsis
(Royal sages)
.
They have the knowledge of the past, present and future
;
they invariably utter the
truth;
they
are self-contented,
self-
l.
W.89-103 define the terms Brahmar?i, Devar?i,
Rajargi,
enume-
rate their names
and describe their powers, competence etc.

=== PAGE 354 ===

1.2.35.104-1 12
351
enlightened and famous on account of their penance
; they are
able to
realise everything even while in the womb; they
com-
pose and recite Mantras, are able to go everywhere on account
of their masterly super-power; they are Devas, Brahmanas and
Kings—those who have acquired all these arc considered to be
sages.
Seven of them with seven characteristic good features are
remembered as the seven Sages. 1
104-106.
They
are
long-lived;
they compose Mantras;
they have divine vision acquired from Isvara (God)
; they have
started their own lineage ; they are perpetually engaged
in
the
enlightenment
and
can
perceive
things
directly;
they
have
six holy rites; they
are
modest
householders;
they
deal
with
every one impartially,
faultlessly and
in
a manner
that they
cause good religious acts. They sustain themselves
by means of
tasty
exudations
prepared
by
themselves and
not
all
base;
they are
intelligent
householders;
they
live
deep
inside
the
forests.
107.
In Krta and
the
other Yugas,
at the very outset
the establishment of the four castes and stages of
life
is
carried
out by all of them.
108.
In
the
early
years
of
the
advent of Trcta-Yuga
again, these seven sages introduce and establish
the division of
social classes
( Varnas ) and stages of life everywhere.
109-1 10. Heroes and warriors are born again and again in
their
lineage.
The
father
begets
a son
and the son later on
becomes a father(?). Thus the line continues without a break
till
the end
of the Yuga. The number of
these
householders
is
said to be eighty eight thousand.
111.
These (householders) resort to the Pitryana
to
the
South of Aryaman
( Sun ) . They take wives unto themselves and
perform Agnihotra sacrifices and they are remembered as causes
of progeny.
112.
The householders are innumerable.
They
resort to
cremation
grounds.
Eightyeight
thousand of them are placed
in the Northern path.
1. W. 104-108 describe
the
special
qualifications and
characteris-
tics of Saptar?is (Seven Sages) as it is theirjob to create law, order and dharma
at the beginning of a Yuga and establish a well organised society.

=== PAGE 355 ===

352
Brahmdn$a Purina
113.
They are the sages with sublimated sexual impulses
and it is reported that
they
have
reached heaven. Composers
of Mantras and Brahmanas
are
born
at
the
end
of the
Yuga.
114-115.
Thus, they are repeatedly reborn in the Dvapara
Ages. They are the composers of Kalpa texts (Ritualistic Texts)
and
different
scriptures and
treatises on Arsa-Vidya*
(Lores
pertaining to the Sages).
Vedic rites are put into practice by them again and
again
in the Dvapara Yugas in the Vaivasvata Manvantara.
1 1 6.
The vedas were classified twenty-eight times by the
great sages.
1
During the first Dvapara, the Vedas were classified
by the self-bom lord himself.
117.
During
the
second
Dvapara,
Prajapati
was
the
Vedavyasa
(classifier
of the
Vedas). In
the
third
Dvapara,
U£anas was the classifier and Brhaspati (was such arranger)
in
the fourth.
118.
Savitr was the classifier in the
fifth Dvapara; lord
Mrtyu
is
remembered
(as the Vyasa)
in the sixth Dvapara.
Indra
(did
the
same)
in
the seventh
and
Vasistha
in
the
eighth.
119.
Sarasvata in the
ninth,
Tridhaman
in
the
tenth;
Trivarsa in the eleventh and Sanadvaja (was the Vyasa) there-
after
(i.e. in the 12th)
.
1.
As mentioned before,
Vydsa
is
the
designation of the sage who
classifies the mass of Vedic mantras in four Saihhitas in Dvapara Yuga. The
list of such Vyisas is given in VP. Ill 3, Bh. P. 1.4. 14-25, KP I. 52. The follow-
ing were the 28 Vyisas in each of the various Dvapara Yugas according to
our
Purina.
1. The
Self-bom
god (Svayambhu )
2.
Prajapati,
3.
Usanas,
4. Brhaspati,
5.
Savitr*
6. Mrtyu,
7. Indra,
8.
Vasistha,
9. Sarasvata,
10.
Tridhiman
11. Trivarga,
12. Sanadvaja,
13. Antarik?a,
14. Dharma,
15
Traiyaruni,
16. Dhananjaya,
17. KrtaAjaya,
18. Rji§a,
19. Bharadvaja,
20. Gautama,
21. Uttama,
22. Haryavana,
23. Vena.
20. Vajasrava^a
25. Somamukhyiyana,
26. Tr^abindu,
27. Tataja,
28.
Sakti,
29. Parasara
30. Jitukanja 31. Dvaipayana, 32. Future Vyasa V Drauni (ASvatthaman).
It is strange that 31 Vyasas should be mentioned instead of the prescribed
no. 28. Moreover, there are discrepancies in the lists ofVyasas in other Puranas.
For example KP. 1.52 gives the following different names ofVyasas
1 1 . Rfabha,
12. Sutejas,
14. Sucak?us,
22. N&r&ya$a,
24. Valmiki.
*
bhd&a-vidy&s ‘Commentatorial Lores’ in Vi P. 61.3.

=== PAGE 356 ===

1.2.35.120-131
353
120.
Antarlksa (was Vy&sa)
in the thirteenth; Dharma
in the fourteenth; Traiyaruni in the fifteenth and Dhanafijaya
in the
sixteenth.
121.
Krtafijaya
in
the
seventeenth;
Rjisa
in
the
eighteenth;
after
Rjisa,
Bharadvaja
was
the
Vyasa and
Gautama (was so) after Bharadvaja.
122.
After Gautama
it was Uttama;
Haryavana is rem-
embered (as Vyasa) thereafter; Vena was after Haryavana and
VajaSravas
is remembered (as Vyasa)
thereafter.
123-124.
Somamukhyayana
was
after
VajaiSravas and
Trnabindu thereafter. After Trnabindu
it was Tataja; Sakti
is
remembered (as Vyasa) after Tataja; Parasara
(was so)
after
Sakti. Jatukarna came thereafter and Dvaipayana is remember-
ed (as the Vyasa)
thereafter.
125-126.
Thus
twentyeight Vedavyasas are the ancient
ones. In the future
Dvapara, when
Dvaipayana
Vedavyasa
passes away, Droni of great power
of penance,
shall
become
Vedavyasa.
In
the
future also there will be the classifications
of branches (of Vedic Schools).
127-128.
Brahma had acquired Brahman
(Vedic know-
ledge) that is imperishable by means of penance. Holy
rite
is
also acquired by means of penance and fame by
the holy
rite*
Again,
truthfulness
is
acquired
by
splendour
and
the
imperishable
Bliss
is
acquired
by
truthfulness. The
pure*
immortal
Brahman,
the
imperishable
Bliss,
is
enveloped
and pervaded by
Satya
(Truth). Brahman
alone
is called
Amrta
(nectar immortal)
.
129.
It is eternal, determined as
this
one-syllabled Om
alone. It is designated as the Brahman on account of its
great-
ness or (inconceivable) vastness and its quality of firmness.
130.
Obeisance to that Brahman that is
established
in
Pranava
(i.e.
Omkara)
;
that is remembered again and again
as Bhur, Bhuvafr, Svafc in the Vedas—the Atharvan, Rh, Yajus
and Saman •
131.
Obeisance to that excellent Brahman
that is desig-
nated
as
the
cause
of
annihilation and
origination
of
the-
Universe and that is the esoteric secret beyond Mahat.

=== PAGE 357 ===

354
B rahmdn4a Purdya
132.
It is unfathomable, unlimited and imperishable or
inexhaustible.
It
is the source
of
origin
of
delusion
of the
Universe.
It
gets
the aims
of human
life
realised through
illumination and activity.
133.
It is
the
firm support
of
those who
have the
knowledge of Sankhya system ;
it
is
the
goal
of
those who
have perfect control over their minds
and
sense-organs;
it
is
mentioned
as
Avyakta
( unmanifest one)
; the Brahman is the
eternal material cause Prakrti.
134.
It
is
indicated
and
extolled as (by means of the
following terms)
: Pradhdna
(chief)
,
Atmayoni
(source
of
the
origin of the self), the mysterious secret Being or Consciousness;
Avibhdga (undivided), Sukra (pure), Ak$ara (imperishable) and
Bakudhdtmaka
(that which appears as multiformed )
.
135.
Perpetual
and
repeated
obeisance
unto
that
Supreme Brahman. In the Krta Yuga (as) there
is no religious
rite, how
can there be persons who have not done their reli-
gious duties?
136-142.
Whatever is done once in the world, that which
is committed and omitted, what should be heard
and
what
is
heard,
whether
good
or bad,
what
should
be known and
pondered over, what should be touched and eaten, what should
be seen or heard or smelt somehow
( is Brahman itself)
.
What is shown by it
is understood by the Devarsis. Who
is competent
to
seek and find out what has not been pointed
out ? It is God alone who has declared all things, everything and
every one. Whenever anything is done by
anyone,
he
identi-
fies himself with it.
What is done here before, is not spoken about by another.
When something is done by some-one, somewhere and somehow,
it is done by it alone
(i.e. Brahman). The act (merely) appears
to be that of the doer.
Virakti
(Absence of passion),
Atirakti
(too much
of
passion ) , knowledge and ignorance,
pleasure and
displeasure,
dharma and adharma (virtue and
evil),
happiness and
sorrow,
•death and immortality, the
state
of being
above, below
or
at the
sides—all
these
belong
(to that Brahman) that is the
•cause of the unseen (destiny).

=== PAGE 358 ===

1.2.35.143-153a
355
143-144.
They
belong
to the
self-bom lord, the eldest
Brahma Parame$thin
(the
highest
Deity)
.
During
the
Treta
Yugas, again and again
it becomes
understandable
to
every
one. What
is to be understood as one (the State of being a Single
Veda)
is divided and classified
during Dvapara Yugas
again
and
again.
Brahma communicated
these Vedas at the begin-
ning, during the Vaivasvata Manvantara.
145.
Sages are repeatedly born in the Yugas again
and
again. They compose various Samhitas as they are born of each
other.
146.
Eighty-eight thousand Srutarsis
are
remembered.
So many Samhitas are repeated again and again.
147.
In every Yuga,
those Sakhas are
classified again
and again by those who
resorted
to
cremation
grounds
and
the Southern path.
148.
In all the Dvapara Yugas, the Samhitas (are classi-
fied)
by the Srutarsis. These Sakhas are in
vogue
again
and
again in their Gotras (families).
149-150.
The &akhas are the same
and
the
composers
too are the same. This
is true
till the
end
of
the
Yugas.
In
the same manner
should
be understood everything in all the
Manvantaras of the past and the future.1
151.
There
are
classifications
of
Sakhas
in
all
the
Manvantaras. They have passed by in the past
Manvantaras;
they exist in the current Manvantara.
Whatever
is
going
to
take
place
will
take
place
in the future Manvantaras. The
succeeding one should be
understood by means of the preced-
ing one, and
both
should
be
understood by means of the
current one.
152-1 53a.
The decisive (knowledge) regarding the Man-
vantara is in the same manner. Thus the Devas, the Pitfs,
the
sages and the Manus go up along with the Mantras and
return
along with them.
1*
This pur&oa repeatedly emphasises the belief that everything
takes
place in the manner by
the same persons as in the
previous
Manvantara
vide
ftV X. 190.3
Dh&td yathd-purvam
akalpayat.
There
is
little
that
is
absolutely unprecedented
and
new.

=== PAGE 359 ===

356
BrahmAzia Pur&na
153b-156.
All the gods go to and from Janaloka
again
and again for ten Kalpas. When
the
time
for
return
arrives,
they come
into contact with the inevitability of death. There-
after, they perceive birth full of defects and
preceded by
ail*
ments. So they return. Their
return
at
that
time
is due to
their
seeing
the defects. Thus they move to and fro ten times
in the course of many Deva Yugas.
From the Janaloka they go*
to Tapoloka, from where they do not return.
157.
Thus thousands of Deva-Yugas
have
passed
by*
They face death in the Brahmaloka along with the sages.
158.
It is not possible to describe
them
in detail
and
in due order because time has no beginning and numbers
(are
endless )
.
159-163.
Manvantaras
have
elapsed
along
with the
Kalpas, Sages, Pitrs and the Devas. They
are
created
at
the
due period. The Yugas come and go. In this manner hundreds
and thousands
of Kalpas
and
Manvantaras
have
gone
by
along with
the
subjects. At the end of a Manvantara there
is.
annihilation and at the end ofannihilation there is creation.
It
is impossible to describe in due order the creation and annihi-
lation
of
the
Devas,
Sages, Pitrs
and Manvantaras even in
the course of hundreds ofyears. 1
Understand
the
number
of
years of Manvantara
in
human reckoning.
164-166.
The extent of Manvantaras has been calculated
by persons who are experts in calculation. Every
Manvantara
extends to three hundred and six
million
seven hundred and
twenty thousand years without the
extra
years
(of Sandhyas
and
Sandhy&m$as) .
This
calculation
of Manvantara
is
in
accordance
with
human
reckoning.
I
shall
mention
the
Manvantara in accordance with the divine reckoning of years.
167-168.
In accordance with
the
divine reckoning
the
Manvantara comprises ofeight hundred and fifty two thousand
years.
Fourteen times this period is called Abh Qtasamplava
(the
annihilation
of
all
living beings)
. A thousand
sets
of
four
Yugas are proclaimed as a day of Brahm&.
1.
This is another way of stating the eternal nature of time.

=== PAGE 360 ===

1.2.35.169-180
357
169-170.
After that all the living beings become
burned
by the rays
of the
sun. Keeping Brahm& at
the
head and
accompanied by the Devas, Sages and the D&navas, they enter
lord Nar&yana, the most excellent among
the gods.
It
is
he
who creates all living beings again and again, at the beginning
period of all Kalpas.
171.
Thus this is considered to be Sthiti Kdla
( period
of
Sustenance) along with
the
Devar$is.
Understand the
Prati-
Sandhi (Intervening periods) of all Manvantaras.
1 72.
What is called Yuga
has been
recounted by me
before, O
sinless ones. The period comprising of Krta,
Tret&
etc.
is declared as Catur-vuga (a set of four Yugas)
.
1 73.
The lord has said that the period of Manu’s
reign
consists ofseventyone sets of four Yugas along
with the
extra
years
( of the Sandhy&s and SandhyamSas )
.
1 74.
Thus, the characteristic feature of all the Manvan-
taras past and
future
has
been
described by
means
of the
present (current) one.
175.
Thus, the
creation
of Svayambhuva Manu
has
been recounted to you. I shall mention its Pratisandhi as
well
as that of the other.1
1 76.
A Manvantara duly repeats itself as
before along
with the sages and the Devas on account of the
inevitability
of events.
177-1 79a.
The lords of the three worlds, the seven sages,
the Devas, the Pitfs and the Manus who had been in
existence
earlier in
this Manvantara,
realise
the imminence of
their
death at the time when the period ofManvantara
along
with
the extra years becomes complete. They know that their reign
has come to an end. On realising this,
they
become
sad
and
all of them are eager to go to Maharloka.
179b- 180.
When
that Manvantara comes
to
a
close,
when the period of existence
is
complete,
those Devas may
stay on for the period of a Krta Yuga. Then
the
future
lords
of the Manvantara are bom.
1 •
VV.
1 76 ff. describe the pratisandhi—the
transition
from one Yuga
to another and from one Manvantara to another.

=== PAGE 361 ===

358
Brahmdnia Purdna
181 -186a*
So also the Devas, the
Pitrs,
the
sages and
Manu.
When the Manvantara comes to a close, when,
similarly,
the Kali Yuga also comes to an
end,
the Krta Yuga
sets
in
even when
the KaliStffas (Persons who survive the final
stage
of Kali) are present.
Just as the continuity of the Krta Yuga i9 remembered as
preceded by Kali Yuga by learned men, so also
the beginning
of Manvantaras is preceded by the
ends of Manvantara.
When the previous Manvantara has come to
a close and
another one has begun, at the
beginning
of
the Krta Yuga,
the seven sages and Manu who have
survived,
remain there
biding their time. Their
sages who
have
become
exhausted
wait
for the (incoming) Manvantara in order to celebrate the
advent of the new Manvantara and for the sake of progeny.
When the creation of rainfall begins they begin to function
as before.
186b-189.
When mutually opposed
pairs
start function-
ing, when the medicinal herbs have begun to
grow, when the
subjects devoid ofabodes have begun to stay
here and
there,
when
the
agricultural
activities
have begun, when piety and
virtue
have
subsided, when
the
whole
world
is
devoid of
gaiety, when the mobile and the immobile
beings
are
ruined
(i.e. those that had been ruined before had not been revived),
when
(the
whole
society)
beginning with the
villages and
ending with the towns has become devoid of the
discipline
of
classification
of
castes and
stages
of
life,
those
righteous
men,
the seven sages and Manu who have
survived
from the
previous Manvantara, remain ready for their progeny.
190-191.
Even
as
they
perform
penance
extremely
difficult
to be
performed
for
the
sake
of
progeny,
the
Devas,
the
Asuras,
the
Pitrs,
the
sages,
the
serpents,
the
ghosts
and
goblins,
the
Gandharvas,
the
Yaksas and
the
R&k$asas
are bom
as
before on
the
death
of the
earlier
persons.
192.
Then those who have
survived among
them
viz.
the seven sages and Manu begin to expound the behaviour and
conduct
of
life
of good
men
at
the
beginning
of
the
Manvantara.

=== PAGE 362 ===

1.2.35.193-203
359
193-194.
Men begin to perform
holy
rites
along
with
the Devas. By means of the vow
of
celibacy
they repay
the
debts
unto
the
sages.
By
means
of progeny they repay the
debts unto the Pitrs, and by means of sacrifice they
repay
the
debts unto the Devas. They abide by the Dharma consisting of
the discipline of conduct for (different)
castes
for
a
hundred
thousand years.
195.
After establishing the three Vedas,
the
process
of
agricultural operation, administration of
justice,
pious
rites,
duties and the practice of all castes of stages of
life
and
after
building
hermitages
(for
penance), they thought of departing
to the heaven.
196.
When the earlier Devas were thus eager to proceed
to
heaven
all of
those
gods
who
established
themselves
perfectly in religion stayed perfectly virtuous.
197.
When the Manvantara has passed
by,
they
leave
off all their abodes and go along with Mantras to
the Mahar-
loka that
is free from ailments.
198.
They
had
returned
from
their
authoritative
positions. They had
acquired mental
Siddhis.
With perfect
control over their sense-organs,
they remain
waiting
for
the
total
annihilation
of
all
the
bhUtas
(i.e.
the end
of
the
universe)
.
199-200.
Then, when
the
earlier
Devas
have
passed
away, when the abodes of
the Devas have become
vacant in
all
the
three worlds,
other
Devas who are heaven-dwellers
become present here. Thereafter, those who are endowed with
the power
of penance fill their
(vacant)
abodes.
201-202.
They possess truthfulness, virtue, vow
of
celi-
bacy and learning. The
passing away of
the
seven
sages,
of
Manu, of the Devas, and of the Pitrs, of the
past and
future
(has been mentioned) from the beginning. There is no break
in
the
line
of
their
progeny
till
the
termination
of the
Manvantara.
203.
It is in this same manner that the
Sthiti
(continu-
ance m life) of those persons
is
also
in
the
same
order
as
before in all the Manvantaras
till
all
the
living beings
are
annihilated.

=== PAGE 363 ===

Brakmdn&a, Pur&ya
204.
The characteristic feature of the transitional
stage
of the previous Manvantaras of the past and
future
has
been
mentioned by Svayambhuva (son of
the
self-born
lord)
i.e.
(by what is mentioned about the Svayambhuva Manvantara)
.
205.
The
achievements
(happenings)
of
the
future
Manvantaras depends upon the past Manvantaras.
Thus,
the
unbroken
line
of progeny continues
till the annihilation of all
living beings.
206.
(Defective Verses)
. The
changes of the Manvan-
taras are invariably continuous in the Maharloka. The
people
of the Mahar and Jana worlds proceed to
(and
establish
in)
Satya-Loka.
207.
By the vision of the (future) happenings there
and
by the knowledge of the evident manifoldness,
those who
are
established in Satya Loka remain steady there
on
account
of
its permanence when there is a change in the period of transi-
tion of Manvantaras.
208.
With the changes of the Manvantara, they leave the
Satya-loka in ultimate end (?). Then on
account
of
earnest
devotion and abandonment of Vi$ayas
(objects of
sense)
they
enter lord Nar£tya$a alone.
209.
In all the
repeated changes
of
the Manvantaras
that have been functioning for a long time, the world of
living
beings does not remain (still or the same) even for
a moment.
It is due to the
characteristic
feature
of
the
Fate
that
the
world of living beings undergoes
change by way
of decrease
and increase.
2 1 0-2 1 1 .
Thus are the Manvantaras of those Manus
of
righteous souls and
divine
vision who
are
eulogised
by
the
sages.
Obtain
these directly as composed by Vayu, by means
of a happy mixture of detailed explanation and
brief conden-
sation. The Manus have divine power.
All
the
Manvantaras
contain saintly kings, divine sages, Brahminical
sages,
Devas,
and serpents. The Manvantaras are duly endowed with the lord
of Devas, Seven Sages, Lord of the subjects and Pitrs.
212-215.
It is meritorious to glorify the I §varas (Gods).
They are
born of noble
and
liberal-minded
families.
They
have great fame. They have
flourished
on
account
of
their

=== PAGE 364 ===

1.2.36.1
361
•excellent
intellect. They
are
honoured and
worshipped on
account of their reputation, lustre and renown.
This
(story)
is
conducive
to
the
attainment
of
the
heaven, it is very holy; it is a great esoteric secret; it is
condu-
cive to the birth of a son. This excellent story should be recited
during the great Parvan days. It quells misery and it bequeaths
longevity.
May the
lord
of
subjects endowed
with Yogic power
hestow Siddhi on me, because I
have
glorified
succinctly
the
famous progeny ofAja (the unborn Lord Brahma) that is holy
and that mainly consists of kings, divine
sages
(or Devas and
Sages) and Manu.
Thus the Svayambhuva Manvantara has been recounted
in detail and in due order. What shall I describe again ?
CHAPTER THIRTYSIX
The Lineage ofManu
: Manvantaras1
Milking of
the Earth
^dmiap&yana said
:
1 .
I wish to hear about the remaining Manvantaras1
in
"the proper sequence and also about the rulers of
the Manvan-
taras as well as
those whose
leaders
are
Sakra
(Indra)
and
(other) Devas.
1 .
The description of Manvantaras is one of
the five essential
Charac-
teristics of a Purapa. Puranas like Bh. P. VIII. 1.29, NP. 1.40.17-37, VP.III.
•Chap.
1 and
2, KP.
1.51, Va. P. 62 describe the
various umuvantaras. Each
Manu presides over the world for seventy-one cycles of four Yugas. He has
his separate set of Indra, gods, Saptarfis etc. There is a general agreement of
Pur&Qas about the names of the first seven Manus (including the present one
viz. Vaivasvata). But there are some differences in the names of future Manus
but most of them are bracketed under a common name S&varpi such as Dharma
S&varni, Rudra Savanju
etc. Our Pura$a, however,
gives
some
different
.names such as Raucya, Bhautya of the future Manus.

=== PAGE 365 ===

362
Brahm&^ia Pur&na
Suta said
:
2.
Understand even
as
I
recount
succinctly and
in
detail about those Manvantaras which have gone by and which
are yet to come.
3-5.
The following six are the Manus
of the
past
viz.
Svayambhuva Manu at the outset; then Svarocisa Manu, then
Uttama, Tamasa, Raivata and
Caksusa.
I shall
mention
the
eight (Manus) of
the
future
(four
of whom
are)
Savarni,
Raucya, Bhautya and Vaivasvata.
I shall narrate
these
(later
on) before Vaivasvata Manu. The
five Manus
of the
past
know them to be Mdnasas ( Ment al Sons )
.
6-7.
I have already recounted to
you
the
Manvantara
of Svayambhuva Manu. Henceforth, I shall mention succinctly
the creation of the subjects by the second
noble-souled Manu
Svarocisa. 1
In the Manvantara of Svarocisa the Tusitas were
the gods.
8-12.
So also the scholars Paravatas. Thus
two
groups
are remembered.
The sons of Kratu (also known
as)
Svarocis
were
born
ofTusita. The Paravatas were Vasisthas
(? Sons of Vasistha).
Two groups are remembered (each consisting of) twelve. These
twentyfour Devas are considered as Chandajas .
The Tusitas are—Divasparsa, Jamitra, Gopada, Bhasura,
Aja, Bhagavan, Dravina of great
strength,
Aya
of
powerful
arms, Mahaujas of great virility, Cikitvan who was well-known*
Am£a and
IJ.ta the twelfth among them. These are glorified as
Tusitas.
1 .
Just as in the
1 st Manvantara, Svayambhuva (the son ofgod Brahma )
was the presiding Manu, Yamas were the gods, Yajfia, the incarnation
of'
Vi?^u officiated as Indra and the seven sages were Marici,
Atri,
Angiras,
Pulaha, Kratu, Pulastya and Vasijtha were the Saptarjis, W. 6-20 describe
the 2nd Manvantara in which Sv&roci$a was the Manu,
the twelve Tusitas
and 12 P&ravatas were the gods (Devas), Vipaicit was the Indra and the seven,
sages
(the descendants of the seven sages of the previous Manvantara)
viz..
'Oija, Stamba, Pr&$a, R$abha, Datta, Niicala and Arvariv^n were the Sapta-
r?is and Caitra, Kimpuru$a and other nine sons of Manu Sv&roci$a.
Thus we find such sets of gods, sages, Indra etc. in each Manvantara in.
the following
verses.
It may be noted that there are some variations in the names of these gods,
and sages in different Pur&nas.

=== PAGE 366 ===

1.2.36.13-27a
363
These were
the
sons
of Kratu. They were
Somap&yins
( Imbibers of the Soma juice)
.
13-15.
The Paravatas were as follows
:
Pracetas
the
shining
one,
Visvadeva,
Samaftja,
the
famous
Ajihma, Arimardana,
Ayurdana, Mahamana, Divya-
mana, Ajeya of great fortune and grandeur, Yaviyan
(younger
one) of great strength, Hotf and Yajvan. Thus the
Paravatas,
have been recounted. Thus these were the Devas in the Svaro-
cisa Manvantara.
16.
The
twentyfour
gods
were the Somap&s (Imbibers,
of Soma juice)
then. Their
Indra
then
was
VipaScit,
well-
known all over the worlds.
17-18.
The seven sages were— ( 1) Orja son of Vasisjha,.
(2) Stambha son of Kafyapa,
(3)
Prana
son of Bhrgu,
(4)
Rsabha son of Angiras, (5) Datta son of Pulastya,
(6) Niscala
Atreya son of Atri and (7) Arvarlvan son ofPulaha.
19-20.
The following are declared as
the
nine sons of
Svarocisa Manu,
viz.
Caitra, Kimpurusa,
Krtanta,
Vibhrta,
Ravi, Brhaduktha, Nava,
Satu and
Sruta.
They
were
the*
perpetuators of the
line of lord Manu.
They have been
thus
enumerated in the Puranas. This
is the second Manvantara.
21.
These four viz. Manu, the seven
sages,
the
Devas.
and the Pitrs—constitute the root (the basis)
ofa Manvantara*
and their descendants are the subjects.
*
22.
The following is
the
conclusion
in
the
scriptural
texts—The deities are the sons of the sages;
the Pitrs
are
the
sons of the Devas, and the sages are the sons of the Devas.
23.
The Ksatriyas and the VaiSyas (were born) of Manu>
and the Brahmanas of the seven
sages. Thus
the Manvantara.
has been recounted succinctly and not in details.
24-25a.
The details of the Svarocisa Manvantara should
be known from that of the Svayambhuva Manvantara. It
is noft
possible to describe it in details even in hundreds of years,
on
account of the repeated multiplicity of
the
subjects
in every
family.
25b-27a.
In
the
third Manvantara
of Uttama,1
five;
4> W. 25b-41 describe the 3rd Manvantara called Uttama.

=== PAGE 367 ===

364
Brakm&nfa Pttrdna
.groups of Devas arc mentioned.
I shall mention them. Under-
stand.
They are Sudhamans,
Vafavartins,
Pratardanas,
Sivas
- and Satyas. Each of these groups consists of twelve Devas.
27b-28.
The twelve Sudhamans
are
called
(1 ) Satya,
(2) Dhrti, (3) Dama (4) Danta
(5) K$ama
(6)
K$ama
(7)
Dhvani (8) Suci (9)
I?a
(10)
Urja
(11)
Sresfha
and
the
twelfth one Suparna by
name.
29-3 1 .
The Vamgavartins (Vagavartins) are mentioned as
follows
: Sahasradhara, Vigvayu,
the
two Samitaras,
Brhat,
Vasu,
Vigvadha,
Vigvakarman,
Manasa, Virajasa, Jyoti and
Vibh&sa.
The
Pratardanas
are
glorified.
They are—Avadhya,
Avarati,
lord
Vasu,
Dhisnya,
Vibhavasu,
Vitta,
Kratu,
Sudharman, Dhftadharman, Yagasvija, Rathormiand Ketuman.
32-33.
There are twelve other (Devas) worthy
of
par-
taking of their shares in the Yajfia viz. Hapisasvara, the liberal-
minded
Pratardana
and
YaSaskara,
Sudarxa,
Vasudana,
Sumafijasa,
Visa, Yama,
Vahni,
Yati,
Sucitraand Sutapas.
They are to be known as Sivas.
34-36.
Understand the names
of the
Satya group
of
gods
as
they
are
viz.
Dikpati,
Vakpati, Vigva,
Sambhu,
Svamrdika,
Divi, Varcodhaman, Brhadvapus, Agva, Sadagva,
Ksema and Ananda. These twelve Devas who
are worthy of
partaking of their shares in the Yajfia are recounted as Satyas.
Thus these were the gods in the Manvantara of Uttama.
37.
They were the sons of Uttama,
the
Prajapati,
the
. Angiras ( ?) . The Indra (leader) of those Devas was well-known
by the name Su&nti.
38.
Vasi?tha had
seven
sons
well known as Vasifthas.
All those were the seven sages in the Manvantara of Uttama.
39-40.
Uttama
the
nobie-souled Manu
had
thirteen
sons viz. Aja, Paragu, Divya, Divyau$adhi, Naya, Devambuja,
the unequalled Mahotsaha,
Gaja,
Vinxta,
Suketu, Sumitra,
Sumati and Sruti.
41 .
These were the progenitors of the race of K$atxiyas.
'This is the third
Manvantara.
Thus the creation
of Uttama
lias been recounted along with that of Svaroci§a.

=== PAGE 368 ===

1 .2.3642-54
365*
42-43.
Understand
the
creation of Tamasa1
in
detail
and in due order. In
the
fourth Manvantara of T&masa,
the
Manu,
the
sets
(of
Devas)
proclaimed
are
viz.
Satyas,
Surupas, Sudhis and Haris. Those Devas in the Manvantara
of'
Tamasa were the sons of Pulastya.
44-48.
Each
of those sets of Devas consisted of twenty-
five
(Devas).
(Defective
text)
In
that Manvantara
the
Indriyas (? sense-organs) are remembered as
the
Devas.
It
is
through
the sense-organs that people
understand
things. The
sages affirm (about the sense-organs).
They
have
their
testi-
monies.
Manas
(the Mind)
the
eighth
one (?)
is
that
at
the head.
Sibi of great exploits,
is the
Indra
of
those
Devas.
O'
excellent ones, understand those seven sages who were
in
that
Manvantara. They were—Kavya the son of Angiras, Pfthu the
son of Kaiyapa, Agni the son of Atri, Jyotirdhaman the son of
Bhrgu, Caraka the sonofPulaha, Pivara the son of Vasisfha and
Caitra the son of Pulastya.
49-50.
The
following were
the
sons
of Tamasa,
the
Manu viz. Janujangha,
Santi,
Nara,
Khyati,
Subha,
Priya-
bhrtya,
Pariksit,
Prasthala,
Dnjhesudhi,
Kr£aiva
and
Krtabandhu.
Understand the groups of Devas mentioned
in
the
fifth
(? second) Manvantara of Svaroci$a.*
51-54.
They were Amitabhas,
Abhutarayas,
Vikunthas
and Sumedhas.
Varisthas
were
the
splendid
sons
of
Vari${ha the
Prajapati
,|,,,, (?).
There were fourteen very brilliant Devas in
each
of the
four Ganas ( sets of gods )
.
The following
fourteen
are
remembered
as
the
Devas.
called Amitabhas
in
the
Svarocisa
(Carisnava in Va. P.)
Manvantara viz. Ugra,
Prajfia,
Agnibhava,
Prajyoti, Amrta,
Sumati,
Virava
(? Vavirava) , Dhaman, Nada, Sravas, Vftti^
Rati, Vada and Sahara.
1. W. 42-50 detail the fourth Manvantara Tamasa.
*
Some misprint, as the order of Maavaataras is confused here.
* *
Va. P. 62-46 reads “the sons of Caii?Qu” for ^Vari^thas’ hereof.

=== PAGE 369 ===

-366
Brahm&ntfa Purina
55-56.
They know that the names
of the
set
(called)
Abhutarayas
are
as
follows
:—Mati,
Sumati,
Rta,
Satya,
Edhana, Adhrti, Vidhrti, Dama, Niyama, Vrata, Vi§nu, Sahas,
Dyutiman and Su£ravas.
57-60.
Vr$a,
Bhettr, Jaya, Bhima, Suci, Danta, Ya$as,
Dama, Natha, Vidvan, Ajeya, Kr$a, Gaura and Dhruva. These
*have been glorified
as Vikuntha (class of gods).
Understand
the
(gods
called)
Sumedhas.
They are
Medhas, Medhatithi, Satyamedhas, Prsnimedhas, Alpamedhas,
Bhuyomedhas the lord, Dipti-Medhas,
Yaso-Medhas,
Sthira-
medhas, Sarvamedhas, Sumedhas, Pratimedhas, Medhajas and
Medhahantr
.
61-62.
Vibhu of great exploits and manliness
was
their
Indra.
In
the
Raivata1 Manvantara
the seven
sages
were
Devabahu the son (or descendent) of Pulastya; the descendant
-of Kasyapa named Sudhaman ; Hiranyaroman
the descendant
of Angiras, Veda^ri the descendant of Bhrgu, "Ordhvabahu the
descendant of Vasisjha, Parjanya
the
descendant of Pulaha,
-and Satyanetra the descendant of Atri.
63-64.
The sons of Raivata were
:—Mahavlrya, Susam-
bhavya,
Satyaka,
Haraha,
Suci,
Balabandhu,
Niramitra,
Kambu, Srnga and Dhrtavrata.
This is the fifth Manvantara.
65.
Svarocisa, Uttama, Tamasa and Raivata—these four
Manus are considered as belonging to the family of Priyavrata.
66-67.
In the sixth Manvantara
2
viz. Caksu?a Manvan-
tara, the five sets of Devas are remembered viz. Adyas, Prasutas,
Bhavyas, Prthukas and the Lekhas of great majestic lustre. All
•of them were heaven-dwellers. They are called after
the names
•of their mothers
( ?)
.a
1. W. 51-65 describe what is generally known as
Raivata Manvan-
tara but is wrongly called Sv&roci?a in this text. V&. P. calls this C&ri??ava
.Manvantara.
It is in W. 61-62 that
our text corrects
itself and calls this
as Raivata Manvantara.
2. W. 66-81 give the outline of the 6th—Glkw Manvantara.
3.
Does the author want to suggest the existence of matriarchical society
an the 6th Manvantara ?

=== PAGE 370 ===

1 .2.36.68-82
367
68.
They were the grandsons of Aranya
( ?)
the
Praja-
pati, who
was
the
son
of
Atri.
Each
of
these
groups
is
remembered as comprising of eight Devas.
69.
Antarik$a, Vasu, Havya,
Atithi, Priyavrata,
Srota,
Manta and Anumanta—these are glorified as Adyas.
70-72.
Syenabhadra, Svetacaksus, Mahaya£as, Sumanas,
Pracetas, Vanenas, Supracetas
and
Muni
of great
inherent
strength—these arc mentioned Frasutas.
Vijaya, Sujaya, Mana, Syoda
(?)
(Udyana
in
Va.
P.)
Mati,
Parimati,
Viceta’s and
PriyaniScaya—these Devas are
remembered as Bhavyas.
Understand now the Prthukas.
73-74.
Ojistha,
god
Sakuna,
Vanahfsja,
Satkrta,
Satyadrsti, Jigi?u, Vijaya and Ajita of great fortune—these are
the heaven-dwellers (named)
Prthukas.
I
shall
mention
the
(group of gods called) Lekhas also by name. Understand.
75-76.
Manojava,
Praghasa,
Pracetas
of great
fame,
Dhruva, Dhruvaksiti, Acyuta
of
great
vigour,
Yuvanas and
Brhaspati—(thus) the Lekhas have been
gloriously
recounted.
Manojava of great virility became their Indra then.
77-78.
The
following
were
the
seven
sages
in
the
Cak§usa
Manvantara
viz.
Uttama
the
son (descendant) of
Bhrgu ; Havisman the son of Angiras ;
Sudhaman
the
son
of
Kafyapa;
Virajas
the son
of Vasistha; Atinaman the son of
Pulastya; Sahisnu the son of Pulaha
and Madhu
the
son
of
Atri.
79-80.
The
following
ten
were
the
sons
of Cak$u$a
Manu born of Nadvala viz. Oru,
Puru,
Satadyumna, Tapas
vin,
Satyavak,
Krti,
Agnisfut,
Atiratra, Sudyumna
and
Abhimanyu the tenth. This is the sixth Manvantara.
81.
His creation is reckoned on the basis of Vaivasvata
Manvantara the current one. 1 hus the Manvantara of Cak$u?a
Manu
( has been recounted)
in detail and in the due order.
The sages said
:
82.
Whose successor and heir was Caksuga
?
In
whose
family was
he
born
?
Recount
factually
unto
us
all
other
persons bom of his family.1
1. W.
82-102
trace
the genealogy of C&kfufa Manu from
Atri
Utt&napada Dhruva
etc.

=== PAGE 371 ===

368
Brahmdntfa Purtya
SUta
said
:
83.
Listen to the
succinct account, O Brahmanas
of
the creation of Caksusa in whose family was bom
Prthu
the
valorous son ofVena.
84-86.
There
are
other
lords
of subjects
(such
as)
Daksa, the son of Pracetas.
Atri, the
Piajapati,
accepted
Uttanapada
as
his
son.
Since the Prajapati was a king, he became his adopted son. He
was given in adoption by Svayambhuva Manu to Atri
for some
reason, after the advent
of the
sixth
future
Manvantara
of
C&ksu?a.
With
this as introduction
I
shall
recount
it, O
Brahmanas.
87-88.
Sunrta, the beautiful lady of excellent
hips,
the
daughter of Dharma, gave birth to the four
sons
of Uttana-
p&da. That lady, well-known by
the name
Sunrta, was
the
splendid mother of Dhruva. That lady of sparkling
smiles was
born of Lak$mi, the wife of Dharma.
89-90a.
Uttanapada begot the
sons Dhruva,
Kirtiman,
Ayusman and
Vasu. He
begot
two
daughters
of
sparkling
smiles
viz.
Svara and Manasvinl. The sons of these two ladies
(have already been) mentioned.
90b-93a.
In
the
first Treta Yuga,
the grandson of
Svayambhuva (Manu), Dhruva of great
virility, performed
a
penance without taking in food for ten thousand years accord-
ing to the divine reckoning. He was
desirous
of
( and prayed
for ) acquiring great fame. Praying for great fame, he practised
all the Yogic
rites. Brahma who
was
delighted with him,
bestowed on him the excellent abode among the
luminaries. It
is divine and devoid of rising and setting,
till the total
annihi-
lation of all living beings.
93b-95.
On seeing his
great
grandeur and
prosperity,
USanaa,
the preceptor of the Daityas and the Asuras sang this
verse
:
‘O
! How
wonderful
is the power of
his
penance’ ! O
(how
commendable
is)
his learning
! O
(how
great is) the
holy rite, whereby the seven sages stand by,
after
keeping
this
Dhruva above them.
The heaven
is attached to Dhruva. He is the master and
lord of the heaven.

=== PAGE 372 ===

1.2.36.96- 107a
369
96.
Bhumi
(the queen of Dhruva ) gave birth to the two
kings, Sfsfi and Bhavya,
(the sons of) Dhruva.
Lord Sr?ti, told his own shadow, “Become a woman’*.
97.
Since he was a man of truthful speech,
the
shadow
became a woman immediately with
a
divine
body.
She
was
embellished with divine ornaments.
98.
Srsti begot of Chaya (His spouse, the shadow)
five
sons devoid of sins viz. Pracinagarbha, Vr$abha, Vrka,
Vykala
and Dhrti.
99-100.
Suvarca, the wife of Pracinagarbha,
gave
birth
to a son named Udaradhl who was Indra in his previous birth.
This lord attained the status of Indra by practising Yogic feats
for the period of a Manvantara, by taking food once at the end
of a thousand years.
101.
Bhadra gave birth to Divafijaya, the
son of Uda-
radhi. Varangi gave birth to Ripu (the son)
of Divafijaya who-
was a conqueror of his enemies.
102.
Brhatl gave birth to Caksus with all
splendour
(as
the son)
of Ripu. Manu, the great scholar, who made
the
race'
of Brahmanas and Ksatriyas function,
was
his
son.
PuskarinI
(otherwise known as) VarunI gave birth to Gaksu§a Manu.
The sages said
:
103.
Wherefore is the
daughter of
Prajapati, O sinless
one,
is called VarunI ? Mention this along with the
underlying
fact.
Indeed, you are an adept in detailed narration.
SUta replied
:
104.
Udaka, the son of Aranya,
attained
the
status
of
Varuna. Therefore,
she
was known
as
VarunI.
She
became
well-known thus, on account of her brother.
105.
Ten splendid sons were born of Manu and Nadvala,
the daughter
of Vi raj a,
the
Prajapati.
They were
of great
vigour and vitality.
106- 107a.
They were Oru, Puru, Satyadyumna,
Tapas-
vin, Satyavak, Krti, Agnisfut, Atiratra, Sudyumna (these nine)
and Abhimanyu the tenth. These were the sons
of Manu
and.
Nadvala.

=== PAGE 373 ===

370
Brahmdn$a PurUna
107b- 108,
Agneyi gave birih to Oru’s six sons
of great
splendour viz.
Ariga,
Sumanas
of good
reputation,
Gaya,
Sukra, Vraja and Ajina.
Sunltha gave birth to a
single
child
of Anga
(named)
Vena.
1 09.
There was a great commotion on
account
of
the
fault and crime of Vena. For the sake of a progeny,
the
sages
churned his right hand.
110-112.
When his hand
was
churned,
the
handsome
Prthu was
born.
After
producing
his
son
Prthu
of famous
valour,
the sages said—“O subjects (be) joyous. This
is your
king. He
is born with an armour, wielding a bow. He appears
( as if) burning on account
of
his
splendour.
This
king
will
bestow sustenance on you all”.
Prthu,
the
son
of Vena,
the
ancestor of all Ksatriyas protected all the worlds then.
113.
That
king was
the
first among
those who
were
crowned and anointed after the Rajasuya sacrifice. Two
clever
bards
Suta, Magadha
were
also
born
for the
purpose
of
eulogising him.
114-115.
This cow (viz. the earth) was
milked
by
that
intelligent great king
(for
the
sake
of)
vegetables
for
the
subjects who were desirous of sustenance. He was accompanied
by the Devas, the groups of sages, the
Pitrs,
the Danavas,
the
Gandharvas,
the
groups
of celestial damsels, the serpents, the
Punyajanas
(the demons and goblins), the mountains, the trees
and the creepers.
116.
Being
milked
in
the
different
vessels,
Vasun-
dhar& (the Earth containing rich deposits) yielded them
milk
as desired by them. The subjects sustained their lives thereby.
$&m$apdyana requested1
:
117-121.
O
sage of great noble rites, recount the
birth
(and life-story) of Prthu in detail, how formerly the Earth was
1 . The story of Prthu and his milking of the earth
is a Purarxic transfor-
mation of the Vedic conception of milking of the Viraj cow. The Virdj Sdkta
(AV. VIII
10) forms the basis of the Puranic legend. This puragic legend
records the right of the sages (public leaders) to do away with a wilful tyrant.
'This
Pj-thu,
the
son of Vena is a Vedic king and is recorded to have worship.

=== PAGE 374 ===

1.2.36.122-126
371
milked by
that noble-souled
(Prthu), how
(he was
accom-
panied)
by
the Devas, the Nagas
(serpents) the Brahman ical
sages,
the
Yaksas,
the
Raksasas,
the
Gandharvas and
the
celestial damsels formerly, how and by what means (he milked
them). Even as we ask,
tell
us
about
their
different
special
vessels, the milker,
the milk,
as
well
as
the
different
calves
used
by
them.
Tell us in due order the special types of milk
(yielded by her).
For
what
reason was
the
hand
of Vena
churned
formerly
by
the
infuriated
great
sages
of
yore
?
Mention that reason unto
us.
SUta Narrated
122.
I shall recount to you, O Brahmanas, the
birth of
Prthu, the son
of
Vena.
Listen
to
it with concentration and
purity of mind, O excellent Brahmanas.
123.
This Brahman (i.e. the story as sacred as the Vedas)
should
not
be
communicated
to
one who
is not pure, to one
who
is a sinner, to one who
is
not
a
disciple,
to one who is
antagonistic
and
under no circumstances to one who does not
observe holy rites.
124-125.
The
origin
of Prthu
the son of Vena
is con-
ducive to the acquisition of wealth, fame, longevity and merit.
It is on a par with the Vedas.
It is an esoteric
secret mention-
ed by the sages. If any person who
is free from jealousy listens
to this story or recounts this to others
after
making obeisance
to the Brahmanas, he will never have an occasion to repent over
his omissions and commissions of acts.
126.
There was a king named Aiiga. The
lord
was on a
par
with Atri
and was born
of the family of Atri. He was a
Prajapatl and a zealous protector of Dharma.
ped the Aivins in his
sacrificial chambers (AV. XX.
140.5). The milking of
Virdj cow by Prthu with the earth as a milking pail and Vaivasvata Manu as
the calf is recorded in AV. VIII 10.24 (but here Cik$u?a Manu
is made the
calf see V.
202).
The whole episode is a development of an ancient Vedic legend and has
been depicted in various Puranas as in Bh. P. IV. 18, Mbh.
Sdnti
59.98-128
Mt. P. ch.
10.
1-35, V&. P. 62. 103-197
(to mention
a few). The
different
motifs introduced here show how social order was established by Prthu who
was the first crowned and anointed king. The ideal kingship and the happy
condition of subjects here
is covetable even today.

=== PAGE 375 ===

372
Brahm&ntfa Pur&na.
127.
Vena was his son. He was not
very much devoted
to pious activities. This lord of the subjects was born ofSun!th&
the daughter of Mrtyu.
1 28.
That Vena was the
son
of the daughter of Kala
(god of death). Hence, on account of a
(hereditory)
default
of his
maternal
grandfather,
he
turned
his back on Dharma
(Virtue) and
carried on
his
activities
in
the
world
as
he
pleased.
129.
That
king
brought
to
a
standstill
(prohibited)
holy rites and devout practice. Transgressing the (injunction of
the)
Vedas, and
scriptures he
became
engaged
in
sinful'
activities.
130.
He
was
devoid
of
practice
of
self-study
of
the Vedas and the chanting of Vasatkara. While he was
ruling
over the kingdom, the gods never drank the Soma juice in great
Yajfias.
131.
“No Yajfia should be
performed. No monetary or
other gifts should be offered”, this was
the
cruel solemn
dec-
laration of that Prajapati, when his
( utter) ruin was imminent.
132.
(He
declared)
“I
should
be worshipped and
honoured in the Yajfta by the
gods and
the
twice-born ones.
Yajfias should
be performed (untome) and Homas should be
offered on my behalf (i.e. with me as the object of woiship)”.
133.
As he exceeded
the
bounds of decency (because)
he had many heroic acts to
his credit,
all the great sages with
Marici as their leader spoke to him then.
134.
“O king we
are going to initiate a religious rite
lasting for a hundred
years. Do not
commit
any sinful deed.
This is not the eternal Dharma
.
135.
You are born
in the family of the god
of death.
Undoubtedly you are a Prajapati. Formerly, you had
entered
into a contract stipulating, “1 shall protect the subjects.”
1 36- 1 39.
As all those Brahmaga sages
said
thus. Vena,
of evil intellect, laughed and said—“Who else
is
an expert on
account
of the
things
understood
by me? Who
else is the
creator of the dharma whom (whose words)
should
I
listen to
(obey) ? Who is equal to me on the Earth in regard to heroism,
power of penance
and
truthfulness? You are all slow-witted
souls. Certainly, you do not know me factually. I am the source

=== PAGE 376 ===

1.2.36.140-150
373
of
origin
of all the worlds and
particularly
of
all righteous
acts .
If I so wish I may burn the entire Earth or flood it with
water.
I may
create
or swallow
(destroy)
it. No doubt need
be entertained in this respect”.
140.
Vena was thus defiled
excessively
on
account
of
his ignoble behaviour. When he
could
not be dissuaded from
his arrogance, the great sages became infuriated.
141.
Even as he was struggling, the extremely infuriated
great sages seized him by means of both the arms. They twisted
and churned the left hand of that very powerful king.
142.
It is reported that at the outset an
extremely short
person was born of that hand that had been crushed and churn-
ed. He was dark in colour too.
143.
He was extremely
frightened.
With
all his
sense-
organs in utter confusion, he stood there with joined palms. On
seeing him distressed and bewildered
they said—‘‘Nislda”
(sit
down).
144.
He became
a
person
endowed with
endless
ex-
ploits and established the community of Ni§adas
(tribal people,
hunters). Moreover he created
the Dhivaras (fishermen)
origi-
nating from the
sins of Vena.
145.
Other tribal people who have their abodes
on
the
Vindhya,
viz.
the
Tamburas,
the
Tuburas,
the Kha£as and
others
with
special
interest
in
sinful
activities—Understand
them as persons born of the sins of Vena.
146.
Again the infuriated
great
sages
whose anger had
been aroused, churned the right hand
of Vena
as
though
it
was the Araiii ( the piece of wood
used to kindle the sacred fire
by means of attrition).
147.
Prthu was born of that hand that resembled a lotus.
He was called Prthu because he
was born of the
big
( Prthu )
palm of hand.
148-150.
He shone with his body (as if) blazing like fire.
He wielded the primordial bow of loud report named Ajagava.
For the sake of security and protection, he held arrows
and the
coat of mail
of great
lustre. When he was bom all the living
beings everywhere became extremely delighted. They approach-
ed the
great
King. Vena went to heaven (like a)
saintly
king
•on account of the birth of a noble-souled good son.

=== PAGE 377 ===

374
Brahmdn$a Purdna
151-152.
That tiger among men was saved from the hell
named put by his noble son. Rivers and the seas took gems and
jewels as well as water for the sacred
sprinkling
(at the time)
of coronation and
all
of them approached him. Lord Grand-
father (god Brahma) came along with Ahgiras and the immor-
tal ones (gods).
1 53-1 54a.
All
the living beings,
both mobile
and
im-
mobile
approached
the
ruler
of men,
the
son of Vena, the
protector
of
the
subjects,
of great
splendour, with Supreme
sovereignty* and sprinkled him with the sacred water.
154b- 1 55a.
That great king was
anointed
(as a sover-
eign) by gods, the sons of Ahgiras. Valorous
Prthu, the son of
Vena, was the first (primordial) king of great fortune.
155b.
His subjects
had been
antagonized by his father
but they were conciliated and kept satisfied by him.
156-159.
Thenceforth, he was named Raja
(king)
on
account of
his
Anurdga
(Affection, love). When he wished to
march against
the
ocean,
the
waters became
stunned
and
paralysed. Even the
mountains
crumbled
down. But (none of
his) flagstaffs got broken. The Earth bore rich
harvest without
being ploughed. The cows yielded plenty of milk
as desired by
everyone (or yielded everything desired).
There
was honey in
every cluster of flowers.
At the very same time, while he was
performing
a sacri-
fice, while the Soma juice was extracted, Suta was born of the
Sautya day (i.e. the day on which the Soma juice was extract-
ed ) . After he had been born thus, Magadha
(bard ) was born. 1
1 60.
He was born while
the
Samagas
(those who sing
the Saman hymns very well ) were singing and when Subhanda * *
(?) pertaining to the ViSve-Devas
had
arrived.
Hence
he
is-
called Magadha.
*
Rajaraja or
Kubera
is inappropriate
in the
context.
Hence the
emendation
raja-r&jyena
is adopted from V&.P.62. 135.
1. W.
156-173.
As usual the authoi gives the popular
etymologies
of Suta and Magadha, and records the duties allotted to them. The relation,
between Magadhas and their homo-land Magadha is clear but not so
about
SQta and Anupa
(south Malwa).
**
misprint for srug~bhd(i<ja ‘vessel containingwooden ladles’ vide Va.P.
62.141.

=== PAGE 378 ===

1 .2.36.161-173
375
161-162.
The Havis offerings of
Brhaspati
got mingled
with those of Indra. He invoked
Indra by means
of thc Daiva
(divine) Mantra.
It
was
then
that Suta was born. Thereby a
default occurred there
and therefore an
expiation
too
in the
holy rites (became due). For the Havis offering of the precep-
tor got mixed and therefore over-powered by the Havya of the
disciple.
163-165.
On account of the (mingling)
activity of
the
lower and the upper, the progeny became
one mixed in caste
as in the
case
of one
born of the womb of a Brahmana lady
from a source of origin belonging
to a
lower caste
viz.
from
a Ksatriya. The Suta has similarity
with
the
previous
earlier
one and hence it
is mentioned that he has
the same
duties
as
the previous one (i.e. the Brahman)
. It
is
the
middle dharma
of Suta, the duties of Ksatriyas. (He has these duties also) viz.
looking after and
maintaining
chariots, elephants and
horses.
Practice of medicine
is the lowliest duty. It was for
the sake of
eulogising Pi thu that both of them
wt;re
called there
by the
great sages
166.
All the sages told
those
two—“Let
this
king
be
eulogised.
This
is a job befitting you and this
ruler
of men is
a deserving person”.
167-168.
The Suta and Magadha
thereafter
said
to all
those
sages,—“We
shall
please
the
Devas
and the sages by
means of our activities. But we do not know anything about the
performance,
characteristic
features and
reputation
of
this
king. Wherefore
can
we
eulogise
him ? Then the
brilliant
Brahmanas spoke
:
169.
“This
(king)
is always
devotedly
engaged
in
his
duty. He is truthful in speech. He
has
perfect control over his
sense-organs. He is habituated to the wise pursuit of knowledge.
He is
liberal-minded
and
charitably
disposed. He
is
never
defeated in battles.
*
170-173.
Those
two
(i.e.
Suta
and
Magadha)
were
engaged by the sages (with the following instructions) viz. “Let
him be eulogised for his future activities”.
Suta and
Magadha eulogised him by
composing
songs
about the past achievements of that
powerful
king
Prthu.
At

=== PAGE 379 ===

376
Brahm&n$a Purdna
the end of that encomium, Pfthu the
lord
of the subjects was
highly pleased. He gave the land of Anupa
(South Malwa) to
Suta and Magadha to Magadha. Ever since then
the
rulers of
the Earth are eulogised by
Sutas
and
Magadhas.
They are
awakened
(in the morning)
by
Sutas, Magadhas
and
bards
through words and expressions of benediction. On seeing
him
the subjects were extremely delighted. The great sages said
:
174.
“This ruler of men, the son of Vena, shall offer you
means of sustenance”. Thereupon, the subjects eagerly rushed
to the highly fortunate son ofVena.
175-176.
“Give us the means of sustenance as
per pro-
mise by the great sages”. On being
approached (and request-
ed) thus
by
the
subjects,
the mighty ruler with a desire for
the welfare of the subjects, seized his bow and arrows and rushed
at the Earth.
Thereupon, afraid of the son of Vena, the Earth
assumed the form of a cow and began to
flee. 1
177-179.
Taking the bow with him,
Prthu pursued
her
(i.e.
the
Earth
in
the form
of a cow)
as she ran. Afraid of
the son of Vena, she went to Brahma’s world and other worlds
as well (but eventually) saw the
son
of Vena in front of her
with the bow in his raised hand. He was shining brilliantly on
account of the
refulgent
sharp
arrows. He never failed in his
aim
(in
hitting
the
target). He was noble-souled with great
yogic power. He
could not
be
assailed even by the immortal
ones. Unable to get succour from elsewhere, she resorted to the
son ofVena himself.
180-181.
She who was worthy of always being honoured
by
the three worlds, joined her palms in reverence and said to
the son ofVena
:—“You are not able to see any sin in
killing
a woman. How can you sustain the subjects who had been
nur-
tured and brought up
by me ? O king,
all
the worlds
are
stationed in me. This universe
is being supported by me.
182-183.
The subjects who have been
nurtured by me
should
not
perish
for my
sake, O king. It does not behove
you
to
kill
me. You
wish to do something conducive to the
1.
See note 1, p. 370
above. As
stated
therein, this is an
elaboration
ofa Vedic legend.

=== PAGE 380 ===

1.2.36.184-193
377
welfare of the
subjects. O
protector of the
Earth, listen to
these words of mine. All enterprises begun
methodically
with
proper means become fruitful.
184.
Even after
killing me, Oking, you cannot protect
the subjects
(If you
kill me,
you will become incompetent to
protect the subjects)
.
I shall be
present
within. O
lustrous
one, get rid of your anger.
185.
O
protector of the Earth, they
say that
females,
even from among the lower categories of animals,
should
not
be killed. It does not behove you to abandon
righteous
beha-
viour, in the case of living beings”.
186.
On hearing these diverse statements
of the Earth
the magnanimous
noble-souled
king controlled
his anger and
spoke to the Earth thus
:
187.
“If anyone were
to
kill one or more for the sake
of one whether
it be
himself
or
another,
then
his
action
is
sinful.
188.
But O gentle,
splendid lady, in case many flourish
happily when a single person
is killed, there
is
neither
major
nor minor sin in the act of his killing.
189.
Therefore, O Vasundhara (Earth),
I will
kill you
for
the
sake
of
subjects, if you do not carry out my
request
that
is conducive to the welfare of the world.
190.
If you turn your face
against my
behest,
I
will
kill you presently with a single arrow. Establishing my prestige
thus, I shall myself sustain the subjects.
191.
In
compliance
of my
instructions, O
the most
excellent one among the up-holders of Dharma (piety), enliven
and nourish the
subjects perpetually. Indeed, you are capable
•of it. There is no doubt about it,
192.
Adopt also the status of my daughter. In that
case
I shall withdraw this terrific-looking arrow which I have raised
up for slaying you”,
193.
Thereupon the
Earth who had
been
told
thus,
replied to the son ofVena
:
“Undoubtedly O
t
King,
I
shall
carry
out
all
these
behests.""

=== PAGE 381 ===

378
Brahm&rttfa PurUna
1 94.
Find out that calf unto me whereby
I
shall
pour
out
milk
out
of
affection. O the most
excellent
one among
the upholders of Dharma, make me flat and
level
everywhere
so
that
the
milk
that
flows
out
shall
spread everywhere
equally”.
S uta said :
195-200.
Thereupon, he removed the heaps or collections
of rocks everywhere. The son of Vena removed
with the tip of
his bow all the mountains that had risen
up.
In the Manvan-
taras that had gone by, the Earth had been uneven. (Now)
all
her uneven parts became even naturally. In the previous
crea-
tion when the surface of the Earth was uneven, there had been
no distinction between cities and villages. There were no
plants
or crops. There was neither agriculture nor breeding
of
cattle.
There was no market place or trade route. Such had
been
the
condition formerely in the Caksusa Manvantara. All these had
been
possible
(or
created)
(only)
in
the
Vaivasvata
Manvantara.
The
subjects
lived
in
those
places wherever there was
level ground.
Initially
the
diet of the
subjects
consisted
of
fruits and roots.
201.
We
have heard that at that time
their sustenance
was maintained
with
great difficulty.
Everything
was made
available
in
this
world
even
since
the
days
of
the
son
of Vena.
202.
After
adopting
Caksusa Manu
as the
calf, lord
Prthu milked plants and vegetables from the Earth on
its own
surface.
203.
Those virtuous subjects began to sustain themselves
by means
of that
food
ever
since
then.
It is heard that the
Earth was once again milked by the sages.
204-206.
Soma (The Moon) was the calf in their
case.
Bfhaspati
(Jupiter)
was
the milkman.
G&yatri
and
other
(Vedic) Metres carried out the function
of the
Utensil
(milk-
pot). Penance and
the
eternal Brahman
(Vedas)
was their
milk (the yield)
.
Again it is heard that the Earth was milked by the groups,
of Devas with Purandara (Indra)
as
their
leader,
taking
up>

=== PAGE 382 ===

1.2.36.207-217
379*
(with him) a golden vessel. Maghavan was the
calf and lord
Savitf was
the
milkman.
Orja
(Power, energy,
Procreative
energy) and honey was the milk. The deities sustain
themselves
by means of that.
207-209a.
It
is heard that the Earth was
again
milked
by
the
Pitrs by means
of a
Silver
Vessel.
The
yield was
Svadha and it was conducive to their
immediate contentment.
Yama the valorous son of Vivasvan was their calf. The power-
ful god Antaka
(the god
of death)
was the milkman of the
Pitrs.
209b-212a.
It is heard
that
the
Earth was once
again
milked by the Asuras with an iron vessel and the all round yield
was the power of Maya (deception, illusion). Virocana,
the ex-
tremely famous
son
of
Prahlada,
was
the calf unto
them.
Rtvikdvimurdha
(?) the son of Diti was
their
milkman. With
the
(different
types
of)
Maya
for their milky yield all the
Asuras became Mayavins
(experts
in making
use
of Maya).
Those persons of great
virility
sustain
themselves by means of
Maya. That
is their great source of strength.
212b-2l5a.
After adopting Taksaka as
their
calf,
it
is
heard, that the Earth was once again milked by
the
serpents,
with
a
pot
of ground
( or
bottle-gourd)
as their vessel and
poison
as
their
milk. O
excellent Brahmana,
Vasuki,
the
valorous
son of Kadru, was the
milkman
unto
those N&gas
and Sarpas
(different
varieties
of Serpents)
.
Those
terrible
beings
sustain themselves by means of that alone (i.e. poison).
They are excessively poisonous. They have that
as
their
food.
They are active on account of it. That is their source of vigour.
They solely depend on it.
215b-217.
In a pot
not
annealed
properly,
the
Earth
was once again milked by the Yaksas and the Punyajanas
after
adopting as their calf VaiSravana who was fond of Antardhana
(becoming invisible). The milkman was Rajatanabha who was
the father of Manidhara. The son of Yaksa was
extremelv res-
•
•
*
plendent and he was endowed with great
reputation. He had
perfect control over (his sense-organs)'.
This
is
perfectly
true
because they sustain themselves by means of it (? i.e. becoming
invisiEle)
.

=== PAGE 383 ===

Brahmin4a Purina
380
2 1 8-220a.
The Earth was once again milked by Raksasas
•and PiSacas. Their milkman wasKubera. That of Brahml was
Brahm&* The powerful Sumali was the calf. The milky yield was
blood. The Earth was
milked
in Kapala-Patra
(skull-vessel).
Antardh&na
(the power of becoming
invisible)
was milked by
the Raksasas. In
all respects the
Raksasas
sustain themselves
by means of that milk.
220b-222a.
Then the Earth was milked by the Gandhar-
vas and the
groups
of
celestial
damsels
with
lotus as
their
vessel. They made Citraratha their calf. The milky yield was pure
fragrant scent. Their milkman
was Vasuruci1
.
( ViSvavasu in
Va. P the splendid son of a
sage
(? of Muni) , the extremely
powerful king of the Gandharvas, the noble-souled one resembl-
ing the sun.
222b-224a.
It is heard that the sparkling goddess Vasun-
dhara (Earth) was
again
milked
by
the
mountains.** The
milky yield was as follows
: the medicinal herbs having
embo-
died
forms and
different
types
of precious gems and jewels.
Himavan was the calf and Meru the great
mountain
was
the
milkman. The vessel was a mountain itself. Hence, the moun-
tains are all well-established.
224b-227.
It is heard that
the
Earth
was
once
again
milked by the trees and the creepers after
taking up
as
their
vessel the
(leafy cup of) Pala£a tree that grows again and again
when cut down or burnt. The Plaksa tree, the
tree
of prolific
blossoms,
was
the
calf
of these
fa mous ones
( i.e.
trees and
creepers)
.
It yielded the milk they desired.
The
Earth
was
thus a milch cow
that
yielded
every-
thing
they
desired.
It made
the
living
beings flourish. She
*
This is obscure—Va. P. 62 reads Brahmopetas tu dogdhd ‘Rakgasa called
Bfahmopeta was the milkman*.
1.
Mt. P.
10. 25 reads here Vararuci
for Vasuruci as the milk-man
and Natya Veda was the milk:
Dogdhd Vararucir ndma odtya-vedasya p&ragah /
In other words a new discoverer or inventor is the milkman and the
contribution to that science or lore is the milk.
**
K&lidisa in Kum&ra-sambkava
1.2 has ditto echoed
this.

=== PAGE 384 ===

1.2.37.U12a
381
alone was the Dh&tri and Vidh&tri ( one who
created
and
laid
down rules and shaped the destiny), the
Vasundhard
(one who
holds riches) was the supporter (ofevery one). We have heard
that the Earth (of such potentialities ) , the source
of origin
of
all the worldly things
mobile
and
immobile,
the
foundation
of the Universe, had been milked by Prthu
for
the
welfare
of
worlds.
CHAPTER THIRTYSEVEN
Cdkfupa Manvantara
; Dynasty of Vaivasvata Manu
Snta said
:
1.
As per traditional report,
the Vasudhi
(the
Earth)
was extended here with oceans as
its limits.
It
is
glorified
in-
songs as Vasudha because it holds
(within
its bowels)
riches
( Vasu)
.
2.
Formerly,
it
was
completely
inundated
with
the
Medas (fat, suet) of (the demons) Madhuand Kaitabha. Hence
by etymological derivation
it
is called Medini by
the
expoun-
ders of the Brahman.
3.
Thereafter, on
its
attainment of the
status of
the
daughter of the intelligent king Prthu, the son of Vena, it came
to be cited as Prthivi.
4-5.
The division of the Earth also was formerly accom-
plished by Prthu. The Earth consisting of a series of towns and
mines (of various natural products) and inhabited by the people
of four
castes
was
protected by that intelligent
king. King
Prthu the son of Vena, was a person ofsuch power and influence,
O excellent Brahmanas.
6- 12a.
He
is
worthy
of being bowed down
to
and
*
honoured by entire living beings all round.
Prthu alone is worthy of being
offered of obeisance
by
Brahmanas of great dignity and splendour, and
experts
in
the

=== PAGE 385 ===

382
Brahmdntfa Puffina
Vedas and the Vcdangas
(ancillary
subjects
of the Vedas),
^ince he is ancient and had Brahman as the source of origin.
Prthu, the primordial king,
the
valorous
son
of
Vena,
should
be bowed down
to by the highly fortunate kings who
seek great reputation.
Prthu alone, who
was
the
first
formulator of Military
service, should be bowed down to by warriors in
the
battlefield
desirous of obtaining victory in the war.
The warrior who glorifies
king Prthu
and
then
proceeds
to the battlefield
returns
safely from
the
terrible
battle and
attains glorious fame.
The saintly king of great fame,
Prthu
alone,
should
be
bowed down to by Vaigyas too who strictly abide by the duties
-and activities befitting the Vaisyas, since
it
was
he who
had
offered them sustenance.
Thus the different types of calves, milkmen,
milk and the
vessels—all these have been recounted by me in due order.
12b- 15a1
.
At the outset, the Earth
was milked
by
the
noble-souled Brahma after making the wind god the
calf.
The
seeds on the surface of the Earth were the milky yield.
Thereafter, in the Svayambhuva Manvantara
( the
Earth
was milked)
after making Svayambhuva Manu
the
calf.
Ail
types of plants were the milky yield.
Thereafter, when the Svarocisa Manvantara arrived, the
Earth was milked after making Svarocisa, the calf. The
plants
and food-grains were the milky yield.
15b- 16a.
In the Uttama (Manvantara)
the
earth
was
milked by intelligent Devabhuja*
after making Manu the best
•calf and the (milk-yield was)
all crops.
16b- 17a.
Again
during
the
fifth
Manvantara
called
Tamasa, the earth was milked again byBalabandhu after makiny
Tamasa
( Manu ) as the calf.
17b- 18a.
It
is reported that when the sixth Manvantara
of
Carisjava
(Cari§nava
in
Va.
P. )
arrived, the Earth was
milked by Purana for the calf Caristava. (carisnava)
.
*
Va P. 63.15 reads Devabhujena *by Devahhuja* instead of Dev&nujtna
hereof.
1. W.
12b-20
give the
list of persons who “milked” the earth in
each Manvantara. In a way each “milking”
represents
advancement
in
human
civilization.

=== PAGE 386 ===

1.2.37. 18b-29
383
I8b-19a.
When
the
C&ksusa
Manvantara
arrived, in
that Manvantara, the Earth was milked
by
Purana
( ?)
after
making Caksusa, the calf.
19b-20a.
When the
Caksusa Manvantara had
elapsed
and the Vaivasvata Manvantara arrived,
the Earth was milked
by the son of Vena. How
it was milked
has
already
been
re-
counted to you by me.
*
20b-22. The Earth was thus milked in the previous Man-
vantaras by these viz.—the Devas and
others,
the human
and
other living beings too. A similar situation should be understood
in the Manvan taras of the past as well as
of
the
future.
The
Devas
reside in heaven throughout a Manvantara.
Now listen to the progeny of
Prthu.
Two very
valiant
sons were born to Prthu.
They were
Antardhi and
Pavana.
23-24.
Sikhantjinl gave birth to Havirdhana
(the
son)
of Antardhana (same as Antardhi).
Dhisana, the daughter of Agni (Agneyi) gave birth to six
sons of Havirdhana—viz. Pracina-Barhis, Sukla, Gaya,
Krsna,
Praja and Ajina.
Lord
Praclnabarhis
was
a
great
Prajapati
(Lord of the subjects, or sovereign
ruler)
.
25.
On account of his strength,
learning,
penance
and
virility, he was the sole
monarch
of
the
Earth.
His Darbha
grasses had their tips towards
the
East. 1 Hence, he was known
as Praclnabarhis.
26.
After a great penance, that Prajapati married Savarna
the daughter of the ocean.
27
Savarna, the daughter of the ocean, gave birth to ten
sons of Praclnabarhis. All of them were masters of the
Science
of archery. They were called Pracetas (collectively).
28.
Performing pious rites
( collectively)
without
being
separated from one another,
they
underwent
severe penance
for
ten
thousand
years
lying down within the waters of the
ocean.
29.
While they were performing the penance,
the
trees
1.
Cf. Vp. I 14.4. This speciality is attributed to the king's performance
of many
sacrifices.

=== PAGE 387 ===

384
Brakm&rida Purdna
«
encompassed
the Earth
that was
not being
protected. Then
there was the destruction of subjects.
30.
This
happened
when
the
Cak$u$a Manvantara
passed by. The whole firmament became enveloped by the trees
and hence the wind was unable to blow.
31-32.
For ten thousand years, the subjects were unable
to carry on their
activities. On
hearing
about
it
all,
those
Pracetas equipped with the power of penance,
became
infuri-
ated and they created wind and fire out
of their mouths* The
wind uprooted the trees and dried them up.
33-35.
The fire burned them. Thus there was a
terrible
destruction of trees. On
coming
to
know
of the
destruction
of the trees and when a few
trees remained,
King Soma
( the
Moon god) approached these Pracetas and
said—” Now that
you have seen the purpose
realised, O Kings, sons of Praclna-
barhis, get rid of your anger for
the
continuity
of the world.
The
trees
will
grow on the Earth. Let the fire and wind be
calm.
36.
This fair-complexioned daughter
of the
trees
has
become the crest-jewel of all women. This girl
has been
held
(and nurtured ) in the womb by me, as I had already known the
future events.
37.
She is Marisa by name, and has been created by the
trees themselves. Let this girl who has been
nurtured
in
the
womb of Soma
( the Moon-god ) be your wife.
38.
With half of your splendour and with half of mine,
the scholarly Prajapati, Dak§a will be bom of her.
39*. He is on a par with fire. He will make these subjects
flourish once again, the subjects who have been
mostly
burned
down by the fire of your splendour”.
40.
Thereafter, at the instance of Soma,
those
Pracetas
controlled their anger and as per religious
procedure accepted
from the trees, the girl M&risa as their wife.
*
Alternatively
:
On account
of
the
fire
consisting
of
your
fiery
brilliance,
he
(Dak$a)
will be just like
fire. But he will make the subjects multiply and
flourish again—the subjects most of whom are consumed by fire.

=== PAGE 388 ===

1.2.37.41-52
385
41-42.
Thereafter, they mentally
impregnated
M£ri?&.
Prajapati Daksa was born of Marisa as the son of
all
the
ten
Pracetas.
He had excessive
splendour on account of the part
of Soma
( the Moon god)
. He was vigorous.
In the
beginning
Daksa
created
subjects mentally
and
later
on
(he
created
them) through sexual intercourse
.
43.
After mentally creating
the
mobile and
immobile
beings
and
the
bipeds
and
quadrupeds,
Daksa
created
women.
44.
He gave
ten
daughters
to
Dharma;
thirteen
to
Kafyapa and twentyseven (daughters) who were
suitable
for
passing (calculation) of the time (i.e.
the
Constellations)
to
(the Moon) god.
45-46.
After giving
(the daughters)
to
these,
he
gave
four others to Ari$tanemi ; two to Bahuputra and two to Angiras.
He gave one daughter to KrsaSva. Children were born of them.
This is sung about as the Sixth Manvantara of Gak?usa Manu.
47-48.
The Vasus, the Devas, the birds,
the
cows,
the
Nagas (Serpents, elephants)
, the Daityas and the Danavas,
the
Gandharvas and the Apsaras as well as other species were born
of Vaivasvata Manu,
the
seventh among Manus,
who
was
Prajapati (a patriarch or Lord of the
Subjects).
It was
only
after that, that the subjects were
born
of sexual
copulation.
The
creation
of
the
former
subjects,
it
is said, was through
thought,
(will),
sight, and touch.
The sage asked
:
49-51.
Formerly,
the
auspicious
origin of the
Devas,
the Danavas, the Devarsis
(divine Sages) and the Noble-souled
Daksa was narrated by you. The birth of Dak$a from the vital
airs of Brahm& was mentioned by you. How did
the Daksa
of
great penance attain the state of being the son of the
Pracetas
again ? O Suta, it behoves you to clarify this doubt of ours. He
was the
soYi of the daughter of Soma
(Moon)
. How
did
he
become his father-in-law ?
Suta explained
:
52.
Creation and
annihilation, O
excellent
ones,
do
happen perpetually among the living beings. The sages and those

=== PAGE 389 ===

386
Brahm&nda Pur&ga
people who possess Vidya (Learning) do not become
confused
in
this matter.
53.
All these,
Daksa
and
others,
are
born
in
every
Yuga. They are annihilated again. A
learned man
does
not
become confused in this matter.
54.
The state of being elder or yonder also
was
present
in them, O
excellent
Brahmanas.
But
penance
alone was
weighty. Prowess was the reason thereof.
55.
He who comprehends this creation of C&ksusa
con-
sisting of the mobile
and immobile
beings,
shall become
one
endowed
with
progeny.
He
shall
cross
the
life-span.
He
will be honoured in the heaven
(after his death)
.
56-57.
Thus the creation of Caksusa has been succinctly
recounted. Thus these six types of creation,
of
the
nature
of
the
Manvantaras
beginning
with Svayambhuva
and
ending
with
C&ksusa,
have been concisely narrated in the due order.
These are the creations as
described
by
wise men
who were
excellent Brahmanas.
*
58-60.
Their detailed explanation should be
understood
through the creation of Vaivasvata (Manvantara).
All
these
creations of Vivasv&n are neither deficient nor
superfluous
as
regards health, longevity, magnitude, virtue, wealth and
love.
He who reads this without jealousy attains all these good quali-
ties.
I shall narrate (the creation of the noble-souled Vaivasvata
the current Manu, both succinctly and
in detail. Understand it
even as I recount.
CHAPTER T*
ITYEIGHT
Vaivasvata Manvantara
:
The Mdrica Creation
SUta said
:
1
.
During the Seventh Manvantara of Vaivasvata Manu,
the Devas and the great sages were born of Kafyapa, the
son
of Marlci 1
b
This explains the Title “The Mirica Creation**.

=== PAGE 390 ===

1.2.38.2-13
387
2.
The following are remembered as the eight groups of
Devas
: (1) Adityas
(2)
Vasus (3)
Rudras
(4)
Sadhyas
(5)
ViSvedevas (6)
Maruts
(7) Bhrgus and
(8) Angiras.
3-4.
The Adityas, Maruts and Rudras should be known
as the sons of Kafyapa. The three sets (of gods)
viz.
Sadhyas,
ViSvedevas and Vasus are the sons of Dharma. The Bhrgus
are
the sons of Bhrgu and
the Devas
( called)
Angiras are the sons
of Angiras. In this Vaivasvata Manvantara, these are considered
to be Chandajas
( born of Chandas)
.
5.
All these too will meet death after the efflux of time.
Thus the current splendid
creation should be known as that of
the son of Marlci.
6-8. At present, their brilliant Indra
is Mahabala (greatly
powerful) byname.
The Indras of
all the
Manvantaras of the
past, present
and future should be known as having
equal
(similar)
charac-
teristic features. All of them are the lords (of everything) past,
present and future.*
All of them
are
bountiful
and
crested
(eminent )
and
wield
the
thunderbolt in their hands.
All of
them have severally performed a hundred sacrifices.
9-12.
There Indras have overpowered
all
living
beings
whether mobile
or
immobile
in
the
three worlds,
by
their
Dharma
(and
other
special
reasons),
by
their
brilliance,
penance, intelligence, might, learning and exploit. I shall explain
to you in details why (and
how)
these mighty
ones
are
the
dominant
lords
and
masters
of BhUta ,
Bhavya and
Bhavat,
(try
to)
understand me
as
I
recount.
It
is
remembered
by the Brahmanas that BhUta , Bhavya and Bhavat are the
three
worlds. This
BhUrloka
(Earth)
is remembered as
BhUta
;
the
Antarik$a
(Atmosphere)
is remembered as
Bhavat . The Diva
(Heaven)
is remembered as Bhavya. I shall mention their means
( of derivation )
.
13.
While meditating upon the names
(i.e. what names
should be given to the
worlds),
this
(name
viz.
bhuh)
was
uttered
at the
outset by god
Brahma.
As
the word
Bhu(i
*
See W. 12-20 below for the special meaning of bh&ta, bhavat and
bhavya.
i
«

=== PAGE 391 ===

388
Brohm&$4a Pur&na
was
spoken
at
the outset
the BhUrloka
(Earth)
came
into
existence.
14-15.
The root BhU—is
remembered
as
one meaning
‘existence*.
It also means ‘appearance of the world*. Hence this
first world became BhUrloka because of its ‘coming
into being*,
(BhUtatva) as well its being visible (Dar£ana)
. It is remembered
by the Brahmanas as ‘Bhur* because of
its
being
bhUta.
After
this had come into being, the second word Bhavat
was uttered
by Brahma.
16.
The word Bhavat is used when
something
is
being
produced. Bhuvarloka (atmosphere)
is mentioned by this word
because of its being produced
(Bhavana .)
17-20.
The atmosphere
( anlarik$a)
being bhavat
(is
the
process
of being
produced)
.
The
second world is, therefore,
called Bhavat.
When the second world had
been produced
the
word
Bhavya was uttered by Brahma. Therefore,
that world
became
Bhavya world . The word Bhavya
is
considered
in
the
case of
what has not yet come
into
existence
( or happened)
.
Hence
this BAa&ya
is remembered
by
the
name
Tridiva
(Heaven).
The Earth
is remembered by
the
word
BhU.
The
Antarik$a
(Atmosphere) is remembered disBhuvah. The heaven is remember-
ed as Bhavya , This
is the decision in regard to the (names of the
three worlds. Three Vy&hrtis
(utterances)
took
place
(while)
speaking about the three worlds.
21-22.
There
is
a
root
viz.
Nath—This root
is rem-
embered
by
persons who know (grammar)
in
the
sense of
‘protection*. Since they are the protectors of the
three
worlds
namely the BhUta >
Bhavya
and Bhavat,
they
are
declared as
Indras by Brahmarias. Devendras are the Chief ones and
the
meritorious ones.
23a.
In the Manvantaras those who are
the Devas
are
participants in (the oblations etc. in) sacrifices are
called
the
protectors of the three worlds by the Brahmapas.
23b-25.
The Yaksas, the Gandharvas, the Raksasas,
the
Pi£aca$, the Serpents and the human beings are remembered as
(effects of the) glory of the Devendras. The Devendras are
the
elders, protectors, kings and the Pitfs (Manes).
The
excellent

=== PAGE 392 ===

1 .2.38.26-33
gods protect these subjects righteously. Thus the characteristic
features of the Devendras have been succinctly recounted.
26-29.
I shall mention the seven sages who have current-
ly resorted to the heaven. They are
( 1 ) The
intelligent
sage
Vi£v&mitra of great penance, who was the
son
of Gadhi
and
who
belonged
to
the
family
of Kusika.
(2) Jamadagni, the
valorous son of Aurva and the
scion
of the
family
of Bhrgu.
(3) Bharadvaja of great reputation who was the son
of Brhas-
pati. (4) The righteous and scholarly
sage named ‘Saradvan*
who was the son of Utathya and who
belonged
to
the
family
ofGotama. (5) The holy lord At ri son of the
Selfborn
lord
is
the fifth one. He is (otherwise known
as) Brahmakoia
(having
Brahman as the protective covering).
(6)
Vasuman
the
son
of Vasi$tha is well known in the world. He
is the sixth one (7)
Vatsara born of the family of Ka£yapa.
These seven sages are honoured by good men.
30-33.
These seven sages enumerated now
exist
in
the
present Manvantara.
The following nine are the righteous sons
of Vaivasvata
Manu
: Iksvaku, Nrga who was impudent, Saryati, Narisyanta,
Nabhaga who was famous, Di$(a, Karusa, Pfsadhra and Pam£u
who is remembered as the ninth. They have
been
glorified
as
very
religious. This
present Manvantara
is the Seventh one.
Thus, O
Brahmanas,
the
Second Pada
(quarter)
has
been recounted by me in detail and
the
proper
order. What
more shall I recount.?