=== PAGE 1 ===

, THE
BRAHMANDA PURANA

PART II

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS
PRIVATE LIMITED e DELHI

=== PAGE 2 ===

First Edition: Delhi, 1958
Reprint: Dethi, 1974, 1978, 1982, 1988, 1992, 1995, 1998, 2002

Also avatlable at
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS

236 Sri Ranga, 9th Main HI Block, Jayanagar, Bangalore 560 O11
41 UA Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007
8 Mahalaxmi Chamber, Warden Road, Mumba: 400 026
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Chenna: 600 004
Sanas Plaza, 1302, Baji Rao Road, Pune 411 002
8 Camac Street, Calcutta 700 017
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001

PRINTED IN INDIA

BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS,
A-45 NARAINA, PHASE I, NEW DEI.HI 110 028
AND PUBLISHED BY NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED,
BUNGALOW ROAD, DELHI 110 007

=== PAGE 3 ===

CONTENTS

PART Il

Section II] UPODGHATAPADA

CHAPTERS
l.

qn

OOD

— poms
pomees (-)
e .

12.

13.
14.

15.
16.

17.
18.

Creation of Sages—Birth ef Seven Sages:
Race of Bhrgu and_ Angiras

Progeny of Prajapxti : Race of Daksa

Race of Dharma : Three Attributes of the
Self-born God. Creation of Gods and Sages
Pronunciation of. Curse on Jayas

Nrsimha Incarnation. Hiranyakasipu slain :
Race of Hiranyakasipu : Birth of Maruts
Glorification of the Race of Danu

Different Dynasties Enumerated

Race of the Sages : Atri and Vasistha
Propitiation of Pitrs

Birth of Skanda

Offering Rice-Cake to the Manes : Feeding
Brahmanas. Establishing Fire

Rules regarding Sraddha Rituals. Five Maha-
yajiias

Enumeration of Holy Spots for Sraddha
Purification Rites; Sraddha Ritual; Sight of
a Nude Ascetic to be avoided

Test fora Brahmana deserving for Sraddha
invitation

Praise of Charitable gifts in Sraddha
Appropriate Tithis for performing Sraddha
Performance of Sraddha under different
Constellations

Qualifications of a Brahmana for Sraddha
Gifts; Merits of Sraddha performance at
Gacred Places

395
407

410
422

426
435
438
477
486
494

505

517
521

537
949
557
563

566

569

=== PAGE 4 ===

20.

21.
22.

23.
24.

25.
26.
27.
28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.
34.

35.
36.
37.

39.
40.
41,
42.
43.

Seven Classes of Pitrs : Rites of Propitiating
them
A Dialogue between Aurva and Parasurama

Parasurama’s Penance

Penance of Paragurama (Continued)
Penance of Parasurama : His acquisition of
the Knowledge of Astras

Parasurama protects a boy from a tiger
Karttavirya visits the Hermitage of Jamadagni
Haihaya Arjuna’s Reception and Halt at night
Haihaya ill advised to confiscate Jamadagni’s
Kamadhenn

A Quarrel over the Cow : Jamadagni murder-
ed : The Cow disappears

Lamentation of Renuka : Paragurama’s vow
to slay all Ksatriyas. Jamadagni resuscitated
Parasurama advised by Brahma to approach
Siva about Haihaya

Parasurama’s Penance: Receives inissiles from
Siva

Protective Mantra for World Conquest

Story ofan antelope and his beloved : A
hymn eulogising Krsna

Parasurama visits Agastya’s Hermitage
Agastya recites the Hymn Krsnamrta

The Narrative of Bhargava Parasurama

Narrative of Bhargava Parasurama (Continued )

Story of Bhargava Paraguraina (Continued)
King Karttavirya slain

Story of Bhargava Paragurama (Continued)
Story of Bhargava ParaSurama (Continued )
Story of Bh4rgava Parasurama (Continued)

579
581
588
597

604
611
620
626

633

643

650

654
660

664
669
675
683
687
692
698
704
709
715

=== PAGE 5 ===

PART It

SECTION IIr

ANIANTIFAY ABHIAGA
UPvPOpDWcr Ar VvrAPADA

=== PAGE 6 ===

CHAPTER ONE
Creation of Sages

Birth of Seven Sages : Race of Bhrgu and Angiras

Now begins the Madhyabhiga (middle section) of the
Brahmanda Puréna.

SamSapdyana requested :

1. ‘*The Second Pdda (section) has already been narrated
to us along with its appendix (Anusanga). (Kindly) recount in
details the Third Pdda along with its Introductory Part
( Upodghéta).”’

Siita said :

2. ‘I shall narrateto you all the Third Péda (called)
Upodghata in details and in aggregate, O Brahmanas. Under-
stand it even as I recite.

3. Listen to the present creative activity of the noble-
souled Vaivasvata Manu in details and in the proper order, O
Brahmanas.

4-6. It (the present Manvantara) has already been
reckoned before as consisting of seventy-one sets of four Yugas.

After paying obeisance to the Sun-god (Vivasvan) I shall
narrate to you the creative activity of Vaivasvata Manu right
from the beginning of Manu to the end of ‘Prophecies of the
future’ (Bhavisya). The narrative consists of many episodes of
the groups of Devas, Sages, Danavas, Pitrs, Gandharvas,
Yaksas, Raksasas, Bhiitas (Evil Spirits), great serpents, human
beings, animals, birds and immobile beings.

7-9a. The seven great sages, who were the initiators of
creation formerly in the first Manvantara namely Svayambhuva
Manvantara, passed away. When the Caksusa Manvantara was
over and the Vaivasvata Manvantara set in, owing to the curse
of Lord Siva, there was the re-birth of Daksa and those (spiri-

=== PAGE 7 ===

396 Brahmanda Purdna

tually) mighty seven sages like Bhigu and others whowere then
(existent) in that Svayambhuva Manvantara.

9b-!10a" Again the seven sages who were re-born thus,
were accepted as his mental sons by the self-born god (Brahma)
himself.

10b-12. The creative activity was duly made to function
as before by those noble sons who evolved a continuity of
progeny. I shall describe the progeny of those (sages) of pure
knowledge and holy rites. I shall narrate in details or in_ brief
(as warranted by relevancy), in a serial order, factually as
before. This cosmos consisting of mobile and immobile beings
and adorned with planets and stars, has become filled up again
completely by persons born of their race.

The sages said :—

13. O excellent one! Please narrate (explain) to us
how the seven sages, who were previously born as mental sons
of god Brahma, were made his own sons (again by Brahma).

Siita said :—

14-15. Those seven sages who had been mentioned as
existing in Svayambhuva Manvantara, became overwhelmed
by the curse of Bhava (i.e. Siva) when they reached the Vaivas-
vata Manvantara. They were unable to attain the (previous)
power of penance. They lingered after reaching the Janaloka
from where they could return but once.

16-17 Those great sages began to tell one another con-
stantly in the Janaloka—‘‘We shall be born as these noble
souls, when the holy sacrifice of Varuna will be elaborately
performed during the Caksusa Manvantara. We shall all be
born as the sons of Pitamaha (i.e. Brahma). That shall be
conducive to our great renown’’.

18-20. After saying thus, they, who had been cursed by
Bhava in the course of Svayambhuva Manvantara, became
born in the Caksusa Manvantara, for further creation.
They returned from Janaloka and were born here once
again. They were born in the sacrifice of the great lord who
had assumed the physical form of Varuna. This has been heard

=== PAGE 8 ===

2.3.1.21-26 397

by us that the sages had their second birth, even as Brahma,
with a desire for begetting children, was performing the Homa
in the fire by means of his semen.

21. There were the eight sons of Brahma'—viz. Bhrgu,
Angiras, Marici, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Atri and Vasistha.

22-23. In _ his elaborate sacrifice all the Devas had
arrived and were present. So also the various ancillaries of
sacrifice. Vasatkara was there in an embodied form. The Saman
Mantras and thousands of Yajur Mantras were there in an
embodied form. The Rgveda embellished with the specific
order of words called Xrama? also appeared there.

24. Yajurveda endowed with (relevant) metres brilli-
ant with Omkara as its mouth (face) was stationed here along
with the Siktas, Brahmanas and Mantras and intermingled
with the Arthas (objects, purposes) of the Yajiia.

25. Samaveda endowed with relevant metres and with
all mantra-songs (which could be sung) at the head was present
there along with Visvavasu and other Gandharvas.

26. The Brahmaveda (Atharvaveda) was (present there)
accompanied by terrible rites. Due to the accompaniment
of Pratyangirasas, it appeared as if it had two bodies and

heads.?

1. Apart from the discrepancy in number (here actually eight sons of
Brahma are enumerated instead of seven under Saptarsis), the names of the
Saptarsis of this Manvantara as given Supra I. ii 38. 26-29 are different viz.
Visvamitra, Jamadagni, Bharadvaja, Saradvana (of Gautama gotra), Atri
alias Brahma Koga, Vasum4n (son of Vasistha), Vatsara (son of Kasyapa).
V. 30 thereof states: these seven sages enumerated now exist in the present
(Vaivasvata) Manvantara (ete Saptarsayascoktd vartante sdmprate’ntare | )

This previous list tallies more closely with VP. III. 1. 32 if the names
there-in are taken as gotras of the sages.

2. Kyrama is a peculiar method or manner of reciting Vedic texts. It is
so called because the reading proceeds from the Ist member, either word or
letter to the 2nd, then the 2ad is repeated and connected with the 3rd, the
3rd is repeated and connected with the 4th and so on.

3. The AV consists of two sets of Mantras : the auspicious one
(Atharvans) and the terrible ones connected with imprecations for the
destruction of enemies (Angiras). Hence AV. is said to have two bodies
and . heads.

=== PAGE 9 ===

398 Brahmdnda Purana

27. The following (technical details about thé recitation
~ of Veda) were present (in their bodily forms) : Laksand (use of
a cognate word for another), Vistara (extension, elongation),
Stobha (chanted interjection in a Saman), Nirukta (etymologi-
cal interpretation), Svarabhakti (phonetically inserted vowel-
sound ) asraya, Vasatkdra, nigraha and pragraha (vowel not subject
to sandhi-rules) .

28. (The following divinities were present in person thcre)
The goddess Ila (the Earth) of brilliant form, the quarters
and the lords of quarters, celestial girls (devakanyd), wives and
mothers of gods.

29. All these, in their beautiful embodied forms arrived
at the sacrifice when god Varuna assuming a physical body
was performing the sacrifice. They were all endowed with
beauty and splendour.

30. On seeing them the semen of the self-born lord
fellon the ground.! There is no doubt about this that this
took place on account of the dispensation of the inevitable
fact, the birth of Brahmanical sages.

31. Pitamaha held it with both the hands and performed
the Homa. He held it by means of the Sruva (sacrificial ladle)
and performed the Homa as it oozed out. He performed the
Homa chanting the Mantras (simultaneously) .

32. Then Prajapati (Lord of the subjects) created,the
collection of Bh&tas (Living beings or Elements). From his
lower fejas (Brilliance), the Taijasa Brahman was born in the
worlds.

33. (Defective Text) The Apyatva (Liquidity) is possible
by means of Tamas, Sativa and Rajas. He held his own semen
in the Ajyasthali (Ghee-pan) and performed the Homa.

34. When the Homa was performed by means of semen
the great sages manifested themselves. They shone with
brilliant bodies. They had their own inherent good qualities
and potentialities.

1. The story of the births of Bhrgu, Angiras and Atri is bas¢d on Brhad
devatd V. 97-101 and the etymologies of these names follow that text though
grammarians offer different derivation. *

=== PAGE 10 ===

2.3.1.35-46 399

35-36a. When the semen was once poured into the
fire by way of Homa, Kavi came out of the’ flame. On seeing
him coming out after splitting the flame, Hiranyagarbha (i.e.
Brahma) said—‘‘You are Bhrgu’’. Since it was said, so he
became Bhrgu.

36b-37. Mahadeva then appeared and spoke to Brahma-
“‘O lord, I had been desirous of a sonand had been invited by
you, O lord. Let this boy who is born at the outset be my
son, O lord’’.

38. Saying ‘‘so be it”, Mahadeva was consented to by
the Self-born Jord. Then Mahadeva adopted Bhrgu as his son.

39. Hence Bhrgus are Varunas (those pertaining to the
race of Varuna). That lord is his child.

(For a) second (time) the lord performed Homa over the
burning charcoal (a#gdra) by means of semen virile.

-40. The limbs of Angiras were firmly united together
over the charcoals (angara). Hence, he is (knownas) Angiras.
On seeing his nativity, Vahni (the fire-god) spoke to god
Brahma.

41. ‘It was I who bestowed the semen upon thee.
Hence, let this second one be my (son).’ “Let it be so’’, thus
Sadasaspati (the fire-god) was replied to by Brahma.

42-43. Agni (the fire-god) accepted (him as his son),
We have heard that the descendants of Angiras are Agneyas.
The semen virile was further divided into six by Brahma, the
maker of the worlds and deposited into the fire by way of
Homa. It is mentioned in the Vedas that Brahmas were born
of it.

Marici rose therefrom at the outset from the rays.

44 In that Xratu (sacrifice), Kratu the sage was born.
Hence he is (called) Kratu. The sage Atri was born (saying)
“I am the third (Aham-Trtiya)”. Hencc he is named as Atri.

45. (The fourth sage) was born with overspreading
hairs. Heuce he is remembered as Pulastya. (The fifth sage)
was born with long hairs. Hence he is remembered as Pulaha.

46. (The sixth sage) was born from among the Vasus
and was himself self-controlled and master of Vasu (wealth).

=== PAGE 11 ===

400 Brahmanda Purana

Hence, he is called Vasistha by the expounders of the Brahman
(Veda) who are conversant with reality.

47 Thus, these are the six great sages, the mental sons
of Brahma. They are the cause of the continuance of worlds. It
is because of them that these subjects flourish and grow.

48-49. The sons of Brahma are cited as Prajapatis (the
Lords of subjects or creation) also. Others named Pitrs have
been procreated by these great sages; (they have created ) seven
groups of Devas* well known in all the seven worlds. They
are the Ajeyas (those who could not be conquered). They are
seven in number and they are well-known in all the seven
worlds.

50-51. They are well-known as Maricas, Bhargavas,
Angirasas, Paulastyas, Paulahas, Vasisthas and Atreyas. They
make the worlds of the Pitrs flourish. Thesc have been succinct-
ly recounted. There are three more groups.

52. They are Amartas, Aprakasas and the renowned
Jyotismants. Their king is Lord Yama who has got rid of all
sins by means of Yamas (the famous ten qualities of restraining
influence such as_ celibacy, non-violence, non-stealth etc.
(Brahmacarya, Ahimsa, Asteya, etc.)

53-54. There are other Prajapatis. Listen to their
(enumeration) attentively. They are Kasyapa, Kardama,
Sesa (?), Vikranta, Sugravas, Bahuputra, Kumara, Vivasvan,
Sucivrata, Pracetas, Aristanemi and Bahula.

55-56. These and many others are Prajefvaras (Lords of
subjects). Kugoccayas and Valakhilyas have become great
sages. They had ‘the velocity of the mind. They could go every-
where. They could enjoy all kinds of pleasures. Another set of
Brahmanical sages have been born of Bhasman (sacred ashes) .
Thcy are respected by other groups of Brahmanical sages.

* Va.P. 65.49 reads rsi-ganas ‘groups of sages”. In view of the next
verse (No.50 in Bd.P) which cnumcrates the groups of sages, rsi-genas is a better
reading.

1. There is a variation in the lists of Prajapatis in different Puranas.
Thus though V4. P. and our text agree about the names and number of Praja-
patis, the lists in Mbh., Mt. P or Garuda differ from our text and inéer se.

=== PAGE 12 ===

2.3.1.57-69a 401

57. The groups of sages (called) Vaikhanasas are earn-
estly devoted to penance and higher Vedic learning.

The two (Devas) Agvins whose beauty is widely appre-
ciated were born of his nose.

58. They know that the birth of Rksarajas was from
the movement of his cyes. Other Prajapatis were born of his
cars.

59-60. (Some) sages were born of the pores at the roots
of his hairs. (Some) were born of his sweat-dirt.

The two Ayanas (transits of the Sun), the scasons, the
months, the half-months (i.e. fortnights), the junctions of fort-
nights—(all thesc were born of him). Years are his days and
nights. The Fyotts (Luminaries?) are his terrible bile* (?).
They call his blood Raudra (pertaining to Rudra). His blood
is remembered as Kanaka (gold) (?)

61. That is said to be Tayasa. The smokes are remem-
bered as animals. What came out as his flames were Rudras.
Similarly, the Adityas (i.e. twelve suns) came out.

62-63. Sparks of divine and human (naturc) were gene-
rated from the charcoals. Then Brahma, the preceptor of the
Devas (gods), was propitiated by the Devas. They spoke these
words :—‘‘You are the Primordial one in this world. You are
Brahma born of Brahman. You are the bestower of all desires’’.

64-66. These lords of subjects will procreate subjects.
All of them are Prajapatis. All of them are sages who have
performed austerities. These holy rites will sustain these worlds
due to your grace. They will cause your family to flourish.
They will make your splendour increase for ever. All those
born of prajapati will become scholars in the Vedas. All of them
will be masters of speech. All of them will be holders of Vedic
Mantras.

67. Let all of them resort to Brahman, the truthful and
the greatest penance on the Earth. All of us and these are, O
lord, your own progeny.

68-69a. Thinking that, Brahman, the Brahmanas, the
worlds consisting of the mobile and the immobile beings, the

Va.P. 65.59 reads Pitryam—‘ancestral’ (light ?) for Pitta of this text.

=== PAGE 13 ===

402 Brahmadnda Purana

Devas and the sages with Marici as their first one. (leader),
are your own progeny. We desire for your progeny.

69b-70. The Devas and the sages of great honour, who
were present in that Yajfia were born of your race. They
identify themselves with the places and times (of their duty).
These subjects will establish themselves in your own form.

71. The Brahmanas shall thus establish the beginnings
and ends of the Yugas’’.

Thereupon, the preceptor of the worlds spoke thus after
due reflection.

72. It is after deciding like this that these great sages
born of your race have been created by me. There is no doubt
about this.

73. Of them, I shal] narrate at the outsct the race of
the noble-souled Bhrgu who was the first Prajapati. T shall
narrate it in detail and in due order.

74-76. The two wives of Bhrgu were of excellent
nobility of birth. They were unrivalled and splendid. (One of
them) was the daughter of Hiranyakagipu, well-renowned by
the name of Divya. The second was Paulomi, the daughter
of excellent complexion, of Puloman.

Divya give birth to the son of Bhrgu. He was the most
excellent among those who are conversant with Brahman
(Veda). He was Sukra, the preceptor of. the Devas (?) and
the Asuras. He was the planet, the most excellent of the wise
sages. Sukra himself was Usanas. He was always known by the
name of Kavya.

77. The mental daughter of the Manes named Somapas
(imbibers of the Soma juicc) was well-known by the name of
Gau. She became the wife of Sukra and gave birth to his four
sons.

78. They were Tvastr, Varatrin, Sanda and Marka. In
splendour they resembled the Sun and in prowess they were
as good as god Brahma.

79. The following were the sons of Varatrin viz.—
Rajata, Prthu, Rasmi and the scholarly Brharngiras. They
were the priests performing the Yajfias of the Daityas. They
were extremely skilled insacred knowledge. «

=== PAGE 14 ===

2.3.1.80-92 403

80. In order to destroy the holy rite of [jy@ (sacrifice),
they approached Manu and began to perform Yajfias (ina
distorted manner). On seeing Dharma vitiated, Indra said to
Manu. ;
81. ‘I shall make these people alone properly perform
your Yajfia’’. On hearing those words of Indra, they (the sons
of Varatrin) slipped away from that place.

82. When they disappeared, Indra came to Manu’s
wife who had become senseless and freed her from the evil
planet. Then he pursued them.

83. Thereafter, those sages began to strive for the des-
truction of Indra. On seeing those vicious persons come,
Indra laughed derisiveiy.

84-85. Then, becoming furious he burned them in_ the
southern half of the sacrificial platform. There they began to
resist him along with their Salavrkas (dogs, wolves). Even as
they resisted him thus, their heads dropped down and became
date-palms. It was thus that the sons of Varatrin were killed
by Indra formerly.

86-87. Devayani was born of Jayanti, as the daughter of
Sukra. Trisiras alias Visvaripa was the great (elder) son of
Tvastr. He was born of Yasodhara, daughter of Virocana.
He became very famous. He who is remembered as_ Viésvakar-
man was the younger brother of Visvarupa.

88. Divya gave birth to a daughter, the younger sister
of lord Sukra (Kavya). Twelve resplendent (godly) sons were
born to Bhrgu and they were known as Bhrgus (or Bhrgu gods).

89-90. They were Bhuvana, Bhavana, Antya, Antyayana,
Kratu, Suci, Svamirdhan, Vyasa, Vasuda, Prabhava and
Avyaya. The twelfth one is remembered as Adhipati. These are
remembered as Bhrgus. They are Devas (shining ones) worthy
of Yajfias.?

91-92. Paulomi gave birth toa son engrossed in Brahman
He was a Brahmana of perfect self-control. (While he was in
the womb) in the eighth month, he was swallowed by a cruel

1. Mt. P. gives a different list of these 12 Deva Yajiiika Bhrgus in the
list of Gotras and Pravaras.

=== PAGE 15 ===

404 Brahmanda Purdna

Raksasa. He slipped off and is therefore known as Cyavana.
He is Pracetas as well, because he was conscious’ and alert.
Cyavana alias Pracetas burned the man-eaters (demons)
due to anger.

93. That scion of the family of Bhrgu begot two sons
of Sukanya. Those two sons, viz. Apravana and Dadhica were
honoured by good people.

94. Sarasvata the son of Dadhica, was born of Sarasvati.
The mighty virtuous Rci, daughter of Nahusa, was the wife of
Apravana.

95. The sage Aurva of great renown was born of her
after piercing through the thigh. Rcika was the son of Aurva.
He shone with a brillance equal to that of fire.

96. Jamadagni was born ofsatyavati as the son of Rcika,
formerly when the Carus (sacrificial offering) pertaining to
Rudra and Visnu (? prepared by) Bhrgu were interchanged.

97-98. Jamadagni was so called because he devoured the
fire pertaining to Visnu. Renuka gave birth to Rama the son of
Jamadagni. He had unlimited splendour. He had the valour
on a par with that of Indra. He had the inherent character-
istics of both Brahmanas and Ksatriyas.

Aurva had a hundred sons beginning with Jamadagni.

99-100. Due to inter-alliance, the families of Bhargavas
had thousands of sons. External Bhargavas, it is remembered,
are born amongst other sages also. They are many such as
Vatsas, Vidas, Arstisenas, Yaskas, Vainyas, Saunakas and the
seventh group the Mitreyus. These clans are to be known as
Bhargavas.

101. Now, listen to the family of Angiras, the intelli-
gent son of Agni. It was in his family that Bharadvajas along
with Gautamas were born.

1. In Mbh. Adi 177 we are told that when Haihayas tried a genocide
of Bhrgus, Bhrgu women fied to hills. But while running Cyavana’s wife Arusl
concealed her foetus in her thigh. When informed of this, Haihaya warriors
arrested her to execute her but the child—a son—broke through her mother’s
thigh and blinded all the Haijhayas by his supreme brilliance. As this child
broke through his mother’s thigh, he was called Aurva (one born out of the
thigh).

=== PAGE 16 ===

2.3.1.102-117 405

102-104a. The most important Devas belonging to the
family of Angiras are the Tvisimants of great prowess.

Three girls became the wives of Atharvan viz., Surupa,
the daughter of Marica, Svarat, the daughter of Kardama,
and Pathya, the daughter of Manu. In them were born the
heirs and successors of Atharvan. They uplifted the family.
They are sanctified by means of great penance.

104b-106. Brhaspati was born of Suripa. Svarat gave
birth toGautama, Ayadsya, Vamadeva, Utathya and UsSiti.
Dhrsni was the son of Pathya. Sarnvarta was the mental son.
Kitava was the son of Ayasya. Saradvan was born of Utathya.
Dirghatamas was born of Usi (i.e. Usiti ?) Brhaduktha was
born of Vamadeva.

107. Sudhanvan was the son of Dhrsni. Rsabha was
the son of Sudhanvan. Rathakaras (? Charioteers) are remem-
bered as the Devas. They are well renowned as Rbhus.

108. Bharadvaja of very great fame, was born of
Brhaspati. Gods junior to Brhaspati are known as Angirasas.

109-113a. They are the bosom-born sons of Angiras born
of Suripa viz. Adhari, Ayus, Danus, Daksa, Dama, Prana,
Havisyan, Havisnu, Rta and Satya. They are ten in number.

The groups of families of Angiras should be known as fifteen
in number viz. Ayasyas, Utathyas, Vamadevas, Ausijas, Samkrtis,
Gargas, Kanvas Rathitaras, Mudgalas, Visnuvrddhas, Haritas,
Kapis, Riksas, Bharadvajas, Arsabhas and Kitavas.

Many external Angirasas, it is remembered, are born
amongst other sages also.

113b. I shall narrate the family of Marici consisting
of excellent men.

114-115. It isin his family. that the whole universe
consisting of the mobile and the immobile beings, was born.
Marici loved the waters. Witha desire for progeny, he began
to contemplate and ponder over them. Thinking ‘‘Let a son
endowed with all good qualities and having children for himself
be born” He engaged himself in Yogic union. The holy
lord was sanctified by means of penance.

116-117. Thereupon, all the waters were struck. The
holy lord procreated a son in them whose soul had been en-

=== PAGE 17 ===

406 Brahmdanda Purana

grossed (in meditation). The son was unequalled. He was a
Prajapati, Aristanemi by name. Marici who was engaged in
penance, got the son who performed a penance amidst waters.

118 Desirous of a son, he stationed himself in water
contemplating on the chaste Vak (speech). He stayed there for
seven thousand years. Hence, he became unequalled.

119. Kasyapa was ona par with Savitr. He was equal
to Brahma in brilliance. He was ascholar. In every Manvan-
tara, he is born by means ofa part of Brahma.

120-121. When Daksa was over-bearing in his speech in
regard to his daughters, the holy lord became angry. Then he
drank Kaya. Liquor is called by the name Kafya.

The word Kast should be understood to have the sense of
Hasya (Humour, wit). The speech and mind are mentioned by
the word Kaya. Liquor is remembered by Brahmanas by means
of the word Kafya. The sage is called Kasyapa due to his
drinking liquor.!

122-124a. Since the name Kafa* (? whip) was cruelly
uttered (? by him) and since he became angry on being cursed
by Daksa, he became Kasyapa, therefore. For the same reason,
on being suggested by Brahma Paramesthin, Daksa the son of
Pracetas gave him his celebrated daughters (in marriage ). All
of them are the mothers of the world.

124b-125. Thus, he who knows the creation of the sages,
the holy one pertaining to Varuna, shall be meritorious and
pure. He will enjoy long life. He will experience perpetual
pleasure. By remembering this or by even listening to this
(chapter) , one is rid of all sins.

1. A funny derivation : The sage Kasyapa is so designated as he was a
drunkard (Kafya—wine) and whip-like (Xasé—a whip) harsh in speech.

* V4.P.65, Karoti ndma yad vdco etc. ‘Inasmuch as he uttered harsh
words’ etc. .

=== PAGE 18 ===

2.3.2.1-11 407
CHAPTER TWO
The Progeny of Prajdpatt : The Race of Daksa

Sita said :—

1. When the sixth creation of subjects i.e. that of
Caksusa (Manvantara) had been (annihilated and) withdrawn,
Daksa was commanded by the self-born lord himself—‘‘Create
the Subjects’’.

2. He (i.e. Daksa) created all the living beings, the
mobile ones as well as the immobile ones. At the outset, the
lord created mental living beings.

3. He created (mentally) the sages, the Devas, the
Gandharvas, the human beings, the serpents, the Raksasas,
the Yaksas, the Bhittas (goblins), the Prfacas (ghosts, evil
spirits) the birds, the animals and the cattle.

4. When those subjects created mentally by him did
not multiply, they were cursed mentally by the great intelligent
lord of great splendour and dignity.

5-6. Desirous of creating the diverse subjects by means
of copulation, he married Asikni, the daughter of Virana the
Prajapati. She was endowed with great power of penance. She
was the sustainer of the worlds. It was by her that this entire
universe consisting of the mobile and the immobile beings was
held up.

7-9. In this connection they cite the following verses as
regards the descendants of Pracetas:—

As Daksa was formerly wedded to his wife Asikni the
daughter of Virana, one million proud black serpents followed
lord Daksa who never got entangled in the rivers and moun-
tains, ,

On seeing him it was said by the sages that the first
Daksa will establish the subjects here. As for the second Daksa
—he himself is the creator of the subjects.

10. Thereafter, the one million serpents went away in
due course. Daksa, the son of Pracetas, married Asikni the
daughter of Virana there.

11. Thereafter, lord Daksa, son of Pracetas, begot a
thousand sons of Asikni, the daughter of Virana. They had
unlimited prowess.

=== PAGE 19 ===

408 Brahmanda Purana

12-14. On seeing them, that (Daksa) of great splendour
became desirous of causing the subjects to multiply.

Narada, the son of Brahma, was delighted in the con-
versation with the divine sages. He spoke certain words
the result of which was their destruction and curse unto himself.
( Defective text), Narada was the mental son of Paramesthin.
On account of the curse of Daksa, he became the mental son of
KaSyapa for the second time.

15-16. ‘That Narada had formerly been born of Parame-
sthin. Daksa’s sons well-known as Haryasvas were wholly des-
troyed for the sake of Dharma (?) There is no doubt that all of
them were destroyed by fate. The infuriated lord Daksa
prepared himself for cursing him.

17-18. Accompanied with Brahmarsis (Brahmanical
sages) ahead of him, he was requested by the highest god
Brahma. Thereafter, Daksa came to a stipulated understanding
with Paramesthin ‘Let Narada become your son, through my
daugher.’’ Thereafter, Daksa gave his beloved daughter to
Paramesthin. Hence, sage Narada was reborn on account of the

fear of his curse.

Samsapdyana said:—
19. ‘*How were the sons of Prajapati formerly destroyed
by the divine sage Narada? I wish to know this factually (in

details) .”’

Siita said :—

20. Haryagvas, the sons of Daksa, were desirous of caus-
ing the subjects to flourish. Those sons of great virility assembl-
ed. Narada spoke to them.

21. ‘Alas, all of you are childish. You do not know the
surface of the Earth internally nor do you know the space
above or below. How will you create the subjects?”’

1. According to Mbh. Adi. 75. 7-8, Narada instructed this first batch
of 1000 sons of Daksa in Sankhya philosophy. There-by all of them became
recluses leading to the frustration of Daksa’s mission of populating the world.
Here (VV. 20-27) Narada advised them to know the magnitude of the earth
and diverted two batches of Daksa’s sons—the Haryasvas and SabalAévas
elsewhere (Bh. P. VI ch. 5). Being frustrated in his plan of populating the
world, he cursed Narada to perish and reborn again.

=== PAGE 20 ===

2.3.2.22-32 409

22. On hearing his words, they went away in all direc-
tions. Till today they have not returned like the rivers that
have fallen into the Ocean.

23. When theywere lost, lord Daksa, the son of Pracetas,
once again begot a thousand sons of Vairani.

24, These sons (known as) Sabalagvas, were desirous of
causing the subjects to flourish. They were told once again by
Narada the same words uttered by him before.

25-26. They said amongst themsclves:—

‘What the sage says is true. There is no doubt about
this that the path of our brothers should be traversed by us.
We shall easily create the subjects after understanding the Earth,
We have been duly instructed. After the clarification and
illumination of our minds we shall become peaceful and normal.

27. ‘They too went in alldircctions along the same path,
desirous of getting at the magnitude and extent of the Earth.
They have not returned till today.

28. Thereafter, if a brother goes in scarch of his (lost)
brother he perishes himself quickly. That should not be under-
taken by a person who knows this.

29, When the Sabalasvas too perished, lord Daksa be-
came infuriated. He cursed Narada thus—‘‘Become perished.
Stay in a womh.”’

30. When they were destroyed, that noble-souled lord
Daksa begot of Vairani herself sixty well known daughters.

31. Kasyapa, Dharma, Soma, the lord (Moon) and other
great sages took thosc daughters as wives.

32. He who knows factually this creation of Daksa
entirely shall become blessed, well renowned and _ long-lived.
He shall have progeny.

=== PAGE 21 ===

410 Brahménda Purana
CHAPTER THREE

The Race of Dharma: Three Attributes
of The Self-Born God
The Creation of Gods And Sages

The sages said :—
1, ‘‘Narrate in detail the origin of allthe Devas, Danavas

and Daityas in the Vaivasvata Manvantara.”’

Sita said:—

2-3. ‘I shall narrate the progeny of Dharma himself.
Listen to it and understand.

Daksa, the son of Pracetas, gave ten of his daughters as.
wives unto Dharma. They were Arundhati, Vasu, Jama, Lamba,
Bhanu, Marutvati, Samkalpa, Muhirta, Sadhya and Visva.

4. Twelve Sadhyas were born as the sons of Sadhya and
Dharma. Those conversant with the Devas affirm that they are
superior to other Devas.

5. These are the gods called Jaya, created from the
mouth of Brahma* with a desire for progeny. All are remem-
bered as Devas with Mantras as their bodies, in all the
Manvantaras.

6-7. The names of the (special) Yajfias of these (twelve
Devas) are well-known viz. Darsa, Paurnamasa, Brhad Rath-
antara, Vitti Vivitti, Akiti, Kati, Vijnatr, Vijiata and Yajfia.

8-9. Due tothe curse of Brahma, those were born as
Jitas in the Svayambhuva Manvantara, as Tusitas in the
Svarocisa, as Satyas in the Uttama, as Devas named Haris in
Tamasa Manvantara and as Vaikunthas in the Raivata Man-
vantara. In the Caksusa Manvantara, they were born as the
Devas named Sadhyas out of their own will.?

10-14. The twelve Devas of great dignity and splendour,
sons of Dharma and named Sadhyas, were to have been born in

* For Brahmana here-of, the reading Brahmano as in Va.P.66.5 is accept-

ed here.
1. VV. 8-14 emphasise how the same persons (gods, sages etc.) are born

in every Manvantara with a difference in their names.

=== PAGE 22 ===

2.3.3.15-25 411

the Caksusa Manvantara. In the Svarocisa Manvantara, they
were the Devas of great prowess named Tusitas, They spoke to one
another—‘“when there is a little balance of Caksusa Manvantara
(?) (rather Svarocisa?), we shallenter this lady of noble dignity
(of the) Sadhya herself and shall be born in the (Caksusa)

Manvantara. That will be conducive to our excellence (and
beatitude) ’’. After saying thus, those twelve Devas were born of
{Sadhya) and Dharma, the descendant of the self-born lord.

Nara and Narayana were also born once again therein.

15. They had originally been Vipascit and Indra, as well
as Satyaand Hari. Formerly, in the Svarocisa Manvantara, they
were the sons of Tusita.

16-17. These names are mentioned when Tusitas had
become Sadhyas viz. Mana, Anumantr, Prana, Nara, Apana of
great virility, Viti, Naya, Haya, Hathsa, Narayana, Vibhu and
Prabhu. Thus twelve Sadhyas were born.

18. This had been in the Svayambhuva Manvantara (?)
formerly. Again in the Svarocisa Manvantara the following
were the names of the Tusitas. Understand them.

19. Prana, Apana, Udana, Samana, Vyana, Caksus,
Srotram, Rasa, Ghrana, Sparsa, Buddhi and Manas.

20-21. These former names ofthe Tusitas are remembered.
The Vasus were the sons of Vasu. They are remembered as the
younger brothers of the Sadhyas. The following are glorified as
the eight Vasus viz. Dhara, Dhruva, Soma, Ayus* Anala, Anila,
Pratyiisa and Prabhasa.

22. The sons of Dhara were Dravina, Hutahavya and
Rajas. O dear one, the son of Dhruva was Kala who impels
the worlds. ( Lokaprakdlana).

28. The five sons of Soma (the Moon) were lord
Varcas, Budha, Graha Bodhana, Dharormin and Kalila.

24-25. Thesons of Aya (i.e. Ayus) were Vaitandya,
Sama, Santa, Skanda and Sanatkum4ra who were born, due
to a quarter of his brilliance.

* (Ayus in V.24 is mentioned as Aya).

=== PAGE 23 ===

412 Brahmdnda Purana

Svaha gave birth to the son of Agni, viz. Kumara envelop-
ed by glorious splendour. Sakha, Vaisakha and Naigameya
were his younger brothers (literally: born after).

26. Siva was the wife of Anila. Her sons were Manojana
and Avijfiatagati. Anila had two sons (only).

27. They know that the son of Pratyiisa was the sage
named Devala. Devala had two sons who were forbearing and
intelligent.

28. The sister of Brhaspati was Bhuvana, the expounder
of Brahman. She had achieved yogic power. She was never
attached to the world, but she traversed the entire universe.

29. She who was the wife of Prabhasa the eighth one
of the Vasus and Visvaka‘inan, the lord and master of all
Prajapatis, as her son.

30-31. ‘The ten famous Visvedevas were born of Visva
(i.e. the wife of Dharma). They were Kratu, Daksa, Satya,
Kala, Kama, Muni, Puritravas, Mardravasa and Rocamana.

These splendid Devas were born of Visva as the sons of
Dharma.

32. It is remembered that the Marutvants were born of
Marutvati; The Bhanus were born of Bhanu (wife of Dharma) ;
the Muhirtas were born of Muharta! and Lamba gave birth to
Ghosa. *

33. The erudite Samkalpa was born of Samkalpa. The
nine Vithis (orbits) that had resorted to the three paths were

born of Jama.

1. This verse and VV. 35-54 contain ancient astronomy. The literature
on Muhirta is enormous as it means “‘time fit for performance of auspicious
acts” and as such is of vital importance to everyone. Names of muhiartas in
Brahmanas and Smrtis are different. ‘The names 15 muhidrtas of the day and 15
muhurtas of the night as given here in VV. 39-46 agree with the list in V4.
P. 66.40-44. Out of these Brahma is Abhijit of which he is the presiding deity.
Prajapatya is Rauhineya as Prajapati is the presiding deity of Rohini. Mt.
P. 253.8-9 mentions only eight auspicious muhdrtas for beginning a work.
Puranas regard muhartas as deities probably because every muhiirta has a pre-
siding deity.

* For ghosa-lambd hyajéyata of the text, the reading in V4.P. 66.33.

Ghosarh Lambé Vyajdyata is accepted. m

=== PAGE 24 ===

2.3.3.34-46 413

34. All the objects on the Earth were born of Arundhati.
This is the scholarly permanent creation of Dharma. It has been
thus narrated.

35. O sages of excellent holy rites, I shal] narrate the
Muhirta along with the substitutes of the Tithts (lunar days).
Even as I mention them by their names, understand them.

36. The division of day and night has the stars for its
basis. The Muhirtas and_ the constellations cause the
divisions in days and nights.

37. More than eightysix Kalas of the day and night
are remembered. They occur in all the seasons, every day,
due to the special movement of the Sun.

38. Therefore, those who are conversant with the vedas
accept this movement during the Parvan days (full moon, new
moon, etc.). If no apparent peculiarity is perceived in the
periods, it should be known on the basis of Sun.

39-41. The Muhirtas are :—Raudra, Sarpa, Maitra,
Pitrya, Vasava, Apya, Vaisvadeva and Brahma. These Muhirtas
cover the period till. midday. The Muhtrtas—Prajapatya,
Aindra, Indragni, Nirrti, Varuna, Aryamna, and Bhaga cover
the period during the day (afternoon). These muhirtas called
Dinamuhirtas are caused by the Sun. They should be known
in accordance with their magnitudes by means of the particular
shadow of gnomons.

42-46. The fifteen Muhirtas of the night are—Ajaikapat,
Ahirbudhnya,* then the muhartas having the following presid-
ing deities viz.—Pisan, ASvin, Yama, Agni, Prajapati, Soma,
Aditya, Grhapati, Visnu, Tvastr, and Vayu. These shall be
the Muhirtas of the night. They are fifteen in number.

The movements and risings of the Moon should be known
from the Nadikas from the beginning.

These Muhirtas are the different periods of time. They
are remembered as Devatas.

Thereare only three places laid down for all the planets.
They should be known as 1) the southern one, 2) the northern

_ * The ‘line qjaikapédahirbudknya in the text aceds emendation. V4.P.
66.43 reads=aqyjas tathdhirbudhnafca ‘Aja as well as Ahirbudhna’.

=== PAGE 25 ===

414 Brahmanda Purdna

one and 3) the middle one. The place Jaradgava is the middle;
the place Airavata is the northern one and the place Vaisvanara
has been indicated as the southern one factually.

47-51a. The constellations Agvini!, Bharani and Krttika
constitute the famous Nagavithi. The constellations Rohini,
Mrgasiras and Ardra are termed Gajavithi; the constellations
Punarvasu, Pusya and Aslesa are considered to constitute
Airavati, Vithi. These three Vithis (orbits) are mentioned as
Uttara Marga (Northern Path) *.

The Constellations Magha, Pirvaphalguni and Uttara
Phalguni are remembered as constituting the Arsabhi Vithi.

The constellations Hasta, Citra and Svati are termed
Govithi.

The constellations Vigsakha, Anuradha, and Jyestha are
considered to constitute the Vithi of Jaradgavi. These three
Vithis are mentioned as Madhyama Marga (Middle Path).

51b-53a. The constellations Mila, Pirvasadha and
Uttarasadha are termed Ajavithi.

The constellations Sravana, Dhanistha and Satabhisak
constitute the Margi (Vithi) .

The constellations Parva Bhadrapada, Uttarabhadrapada
and Revati are glorified as Vaisvanari Vithi.

These three Vithis are called the Southern Path (Daksina
Marga).

53b-54. Daksa gave twenty-eight (? twentyseven) of
his daughters (in marriage) to Soma (Moon).

55. All of them are glorified in Fyotisa (Astrology-Astro-
nomy) by the names of constellations. Children of unmeasured
splendour and brilliance were born of them.

1. The enumeration of Naksatras from Aévini shows that this portion
(if not the whole Purdna) should be dated in the A.D. 300-400 as Vedic list
of Naksattras starts from Kyttika. Also vide the comparative table of the lists
of Naksatras in Vedic Samhitas, their deities, modern names etc. in H.D.
V.1.pp.501-504.

2. VV. 47-53 give the distribution of different naksatras (constella-
tions) to different Vithis (divisions of planetary sphere comprising of three
asterisms e.g. Afvini, Bharani and Krttika constitute Ndgavithi; Rohini;
Mrga; Ardr&A make Gaja-vithi etc.

=== PAGE 26 ===

2.3.3.56-64 415

56. Fourteen other girls of great nobility and fortune,
KaSgyapa accepted as his wives. All of them are mothers of the
worlds.}

57-60. They were:—Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kastha, Arista,
Anayu, Khaga, Surabhi, Vinataé, Tamra, Muni, Krodhavasa
and Kadru* the mother of the serpents. Understand their
progeny.

O dear one, there were twelve excellent Devas in the
Svayambhuva Manvantara. They were born as Vaikunthas
(in the Raivata Manvantara and they became Sadhyas in the
Caksusa Manvantara.

When this Manvantara of Vaivasvata was imminent, they
were propitiated by Aditi. They assembled together and said to
one another, “In this Vaivasvata Manvantara, we shall enter
this noble lady Aditi by means of our yogic power and utilizing
half ofour brilliance we shall be her sons. That will be conducive
to our excellence and beatitude.”’

61-62. After saying this, all of them were born as the
twelve Adityas (sons of Aditi) from Kasyapa, sons of Marici in
this current Manvantara.

Satakratu and Visnu were born once again in the
Vaivasvata Manvantara as Nara and Narayana.

63. It is mentioned that even those Devas have birth and
death in the same way as therising and setting of the Sun in
this world.

64, Since they were attached to (the worldly objects
such as) sound, etc. of the worldly as well as Vedic tradition,
and since they were entangled in the eightfold (Super human
powers) like Animd (minuteness) etc., those Devas were reborn.

1. VV. 55 give credit to Kasyapa for the creation of beings from his
fourteen wives—all daughters of Daksa. This is another way of classifying
the beings in the world in 14 classes or categories.

It will further be noticed that all these gods etc. in the present Man-
vantara are the same as in the first to sixth Manvantaras with changes in names
only and they confer together at the beginning of a new Manvantara and then
take birth. Every body, even gods, have births ard deaths, rebirths etc. due
to attachment to the world.

* Bd.P. text enumerates only 13 wives of Kafyapa and not 14.

=== PAGE 27 ===

416 Brahmanda Purana

65-69a. Thus, the attachment to the worldly pleasures
is remembered as the cause of rebirth. The Devas ,narhed Jayas
were born as Jitas in the Svayambhuva Manvantara due to the
curse of Brahma. They were bornas Tusitas in the Svarocisa
Manvantara; Satyas in the Uttama Manvantara. Those Devas
were born as Haris in the Tamasa Manvantara; in the Man-
vantara Aristava (Raivata), they were born as Vaikunthas; as
Sadhyas in the Caksusa Manvantara, and as Adityas in the
seventh (i.e. Vaivasvata) Manvagntara.

The following were the twelve Adityas, the sons of the
holy lord Kasyapa:-—Dhatr, Aryaman, Mitra, Varuna, Améa,
Bhaga, Indra, Vivasvan, Pisan, Parjanya who is remembered
as the tenth, Tvastr and then Visnu. Visnu was born as the
last one but not the least (in importance).

69b. Eleven Rudras were born of Surabhi as sons of
KaSsyapa.

70-72. They were born due to the grace of Mahadeva.
The chaste lady had been sanctified by means of austerity and
penance. The eleven Rudras were Angairaka, Sarpa Nirrti,
Sadasaspati, Ajaikapat, Ahirbudhnya, Jvara, Bhuvana, Ivara,
Mrtyu and he who is well known as Kapalin. Due to severe
austerity and penance, Surabhi gave birth to these eleven
Devas, Rudras who are the lords of the three worlds.

73. The noble lady, Surabhi, gave birth to two
daughters also, viz. Rohini of excellent loveliness and Gandharvi
of great reputation.

74. Four daughters well-known in the worlds were born
of Rohini. They were Suriipa, Hamsakal?, Bhadra and
Kamadugha.

75. Kamadugha gave birth to cows. Suripa gave birth
to two sons. Hamsakali gave birth to buffaloes and species of
sheep were born of Bhadra.

76. Horses of great splendour are the reputed sons of
Gandharvi. They are Uccaigsravas and others. They have the
velocity of the mind and they traverse the sky.

77. The horses with Gandharvi as their mother (source of
origin) are said to be the vehicles of the Devas. They are white,
red, tawny, spotted, green, and grey in colour.

=== PAGE 28 ===

2.3.3.78-87 417

78-79. Aglorious bullock, Candraprabha (having the
lustre of the Moon) was also born of Surabhi, with garland,
hump and brilliant lustre. He was born of the abode of nectar
(?). With the consent of Surabhi, he was given as the emblem
of MaheSsvara.

Thus, these sons of Kasyapa viz. Rudrax and Adityas
have been glorified.

80-82. The Sadhyas, Visvedevas and Vasus are remem-
bered as the sons of Dharma.

Just as the same fire becomes many, due to the fuel
added, so also Pitamaha is alone but he has diverse forms.

The same form is that of Brahma, Antaka (annihilator)
and Purusa.

These are remembered as the three physical bodies of the
selfsame self-born lord. They (these bodies) are remembered as
Brahmi, Paurusi and Kalakhya.

83. The body that is Rajasi (having the Rajas Guna)
is that which creates the subjects. That which is called
Kalakhya is considered to be annihilator of the subjects.

84. The body Paurusi which is Sattviki (having Sattva
Guna) is remembered as Palika (that which protects). Kasyapa
the son of Marici, became that body of Brahma which is
Rajasi.

85. That part of the body which is Tamasi (having
Tamas Guna) and Antakrt (causing destruction) is called
Visnu*.

86. Those three bodies of the self-born lord, it is
remembered, exist in the three worlds. He adopts different
forms and situations of his Kalas. with the various purposes in
view.

87. He creates, blesses (i.e. maintains) and annihilates
the subjects. Thus are remembered the three bodies of the self-

born lord.

“Destruction is not the function of Visnu but that of Bhava or Rudra.
Hence, the Bd.P. text tadanmfo vispurucyate is obviously wrong. The V4a.P.
‘66.105b reads instead tadarfendbhavad Bhavah ‘Bhava (Rudra) was born out
of that (Tamasa) part.’

=== PAGE 29 ===

418 Brahmanda Purdne

88-89. They are three in number viz. 1) Prajapatya
(belonging to Prajapati, ic. Brahma), 2) Raudra (Belonging
to Rudra) and 3) Vaisnavi (belonging to Visnu). These shining
bodies are cited in the ancient Dharmaéastra by sages who
perceive the reality, who are intelligently engaged (in the
practice of) Samkhya and Yoga, who perceive the same _ object
separately (i.c. analytically and synthetically) and who are
conversant with prowess and nobility of birth.

90. These subjects are the same with the divine bodies)
by means of unity and difference due to separateness. Those
who perceive the different objects say “This is great (or
different). This is not the same’’.

91. Some say that Brahma is the (ultimate) cause, some
say that it is Prajapati. Some call Bhava the greatest of all
and ethers call Visnu so.

92. The persons (thus engaged in philosophical specu-
lation) are influenced by their knowledge. They are confused
in their minds as they are attached to unlucky omens* (?)
They say these things after observing the Sattva (inherent
strength), Kdla (time), Defa ( place), Karya (effect) and Karman
(activity ).

93. These deities are remembered as the cause of the
different affairs. A person who praises one, praises all.

94. He whocensures one censures all. Hence, no one
who knows these, should have hatred towards the deities.

95. Iévaras (gods) who are well established in their
prowess and majesty cannot be understood perfectly. From
unity (the lord) assumed three forms and confounded the
subjects.

96. People try to find out the difference amongst these
three. Those who are desirous of knowing wish ( for knowledge).
They are attached. They are vicious. They are confounded in
their minds.

97. They see diversity because they say, ‘“‘This is
different. This is’not’? (the same) in their overeagerness and

* The line is obscure. V4.P.66.112b reads instead:
avijfiidnena samsaktdh saktd ratyddicetasd
Due to lack of discerning knowledge, they are confused and attached, with.
their mind inclined to sensual pleasute, etc. .

=== PAGE 30 ===

2.3.3.98-108 419

excitement. They are demons and spirits in particular. There
is no difference (?)

98. (The supreme lord) is one but remains separate
deluding the subjects by means of his bodies consisting of the
Gunas.

99. He who worships one among them, worships all the
three. Hence, these three Devas (i.e.deities) are well establish-
ed closely without difference.

100. Hence, who is competent to note in them, separate-
ness or unity, number or absence ofnumber, arrival and depar-
ture or the state of being too little or too many?

101. Hence, he creates, blesses (i.e. protects) and
swallows in all respects. He is, therefore, called one when there
is no identification with the Gunas.

102. Brahmanas call that lord who is only one by
various names such as Rudra, Brahma, Indra, guardians of
worlds (quarters), sages, Manus, and Narayana.

103. The three bodies viz. Prajapatya, Raudri and
Vaisnavi recur again and again in different Manvantaras.

104-106. Ksetrajfias too are born due to this great
lord’s blessings. They (the Ksetrajfias) (Individual Souls) are
born on a par with him in regard to brilliance, glory, intellect,
learning and strength. Understand them (properly).

Kasyapa, the son of Marici, was born on account of the
Rajasi part of Brahma.

Kala Rudra is said to have been born on account of the
Tamasi part of Brahma.

Yajfia Visnu (i.e. Visnu identified with the holy sacrifice)
was born on account of the Sdtiviki part.

107. O Brahmanas, these bodies of Brahma again and
again re-appeared for the purpose of creation (etc.) in all the
three units of time (past, present, future), here in different
Manvantaras.

108. All the subjects, both mobile and immobile, are
born once simultaneously at the beginning of the Yugas in all
the Manvantaras and they continue to stay till their destruc-
tion and withdrawal (at the time of Pralaya) .

=== PAGE 31 ===

420 Brahmanda Purdna

109. Whenever the Kalpa comes to an end, Rudra
annihilates the subjects. It is after becoming Kala again that
Rudra, the soul of the Yugas, annihilates the subjects).

110. When the end of the Kalpa arrives, the sun of
seven rays assumes the form of Sdmvartakdditya (the sun of
final annihilation) and burns down the three worlds.

111. Visnu protects the subjects always. He is the
bestower of blessings on the subjects. In different situations,
he causes the (requisite) reasons to be produced (for the
same).

112-115a!. He is born at the outset on account of the
part of that body of Brahma which has a predominance of
Sattva Guna and which is called Paurusi. He was mentally
born of Akiti during Svayambhuva Manvantara.

When the Svarocisa Manvantara arrived, that lord was
born of Tusita as Ajita along with the other Tusita Devas.

In the Auttama Manvantara, lord Ajita was born of Satya
as Satya, along with the excellent Devas named Satyas.

115b-117. In the course of the Tamasa Manvantara
that lord became Hari born of Harini along with (the other
Devas) Haris. In the Vaivasvata (Raivata?) Manvantara,
Hari was once again born by the name Vaikuntha along with
the Devas who have shaken all Rajas qualities. Visnu was born
of Aditi (as the son) of Kasyapa son of Marici.

118. By means of three steps, Lord Visnu incarnated
as Trivikrama, conquered all these (three worlds) and handed
them over to Indra accompanied by all the Devas.

119. Thus these bodies were born seven times in the
course of the seven Manvantaras that have passed by and the
subjects have been protected by these bodies.

120-123. It is from Visnu that this entire universe is
born and it gets merged in him again. It is from Visnu’s part
that all the immortal ones, the lords of the three worlds are

1. VV. 112-123 give‘ the different incarnations of Vignu in different
manvantaras and his accomplishment as Trivikrama.

The synthesization of the Trinity (Brahma, Visnu and Rudra) is a
favourite subject of Puranas.

=== PAGE 32 ===

2.3.3.124-131 421

born. They flourish in brilliance, intellect, learning and
strength. Understand that whatever is endowed with prosperity,
whatever being is glorious and powerful, is born of a part
of the splendour of Visnu.

Some men wish (to believe) that he is born by means of
a part of himself. A few dispute this and they explain (their
stand-point) by means of examples.

There is no difference among these three occupants of
heaven (i.e. deities )

124-126. The lords are born on account of their Yogic
Maya. By means of their parts, they delude others. Hence
there is nothing proper or improper in their movement and
activity. They are the first among those who approve the Bhitas
(living beings). They are in the midst of those who expound
the Bhatas (Elements, living beings). All the three (deities) are
attached to those who approve the Bhitas and those who ex-
pound them. After examining the (merits) they bless the
people. ‘They themselves restrain and exterminate the rogues
themselves.

127. They are anterior tome (i.e. Suita). Hence, they
are more potential lords. Just as the persons who point out the
Truth, so also they make use of these bases (?).

128. They are the lords of the Universe. They are Devas
of Devas. They make others function. They are the achievers
of great tasks.

129. They are glorified by persons conversant with the
Vedas, on account of these four reasons (?). Those persons who
are puerile do not comprehend the deities in all their aspects.

130-131. In this context they cite the following verse
in regard to Yogesvara.

The Yogegvara (Master of Yogic practice) performs
everything after acquiring the Yogic potency. With all of them
the great yogin wanders (everywhere). He may enjoy worldly
pleasures. Again he may perform penance later on. Again he
should withdraw (within Himself) like the Sun who (controls
and: withdraws) the groups of luminaries.

=== PAGE 33 ===

422 Brahmanda Purdna
CHAPTER FOUR

Pronunciotion of a Curse on Fayas?

Siita said :—

1. The Devas (called) Jayas were created by Brahma
out of his mouth, due to a desire for progeny. All of them
are remembered as having Mantras for their bodies in the
different Manvantaras.

2-3. ‘The following are the twelve Yajfias viz.—Darsa,
Paurnamasa, Brhat, Saman, Rathantara, Citi, Suciti, Akiti,
Kuti, Vijfiata, Vijfiatr and Manas. Perform these sacrifices
after taking a wife unto you, maintaining the Agnihotra
fire.””

4. After telling them (i.e. Jayas) thus, the lord vanished
there itself. Thereupon, they did not approve of these words of
Paramesthin.

5. After observing defects in the Karmans (holy rites
etc.), they discarded Karmans as well as the Vasands (desires or
unconscious impressions) born of Karmans. They began to
adhere strictly to Yamas (Restraints, self-controls, etc.).

6. They observed the fruit of Karmans as attended
with excess of destruction ‘and deterioration. They entertained
contempt for progeny. They became WNissattvas (free from in-
born nature or natural characteristics) and Nirmamas (free from
the desire of possession ).

7. Desirous of Liberation (literally absence of birth,
cessation of birth), they got rid of them after observing the
defects (in Karmans). They abandoned Artha (wealth),
Dharma (customary observances of castes) and Kama (Love),
and stabilised themselves on Moksa, the last Purusartha).

1. The object of this chapter is to state that the same set of gods is born
and presides in each Manvantara. To explain the cause of this, the author
tells us that the Ist set of gods (called here Jayas) in the Ist Manvantara did
not take to their assigned task of procreation but to the path of Moksa and
were hence cursed by god Brahmi to be reborn seven times in egach Manvantara
till the present one viz Vaivasvata.

h Thus we have the following sets of gods in each Manvantara (brackted

ere) : ;
Jayas—1. Yamas as per Puranas (Svayambhuva); 2. Tusita (Svaro-
ciga); 3. Satyas (Uttama); 4. Haris (Tamasa); 5. Vikugtha (Raivata);
6. Sadhyas (Caksusa); 7. Adityas (Vaivasvata),. ;

=== PAGE 34 ===

2.3.4.8-19 423

8. They adopted the great knowledge and established
themselves very well after condensing (assimilating) it (?). On
coming to know of their intention, Brahma became infuriated.

9. Thereupon, Brahma spoke to those Devas lacking in
enthusiasm :—‘‘It is for the sake of progeny that you have been
created by me and not otherwise.

10. Moreover, I have already told you formerly this—
Procreate in plenty and perform sacrifices. You disregarded
my instruction and adopted Vatrdgya (detachment).

11-12. You hated your own birth and did not relish
progeny. You did not practise Karmans because of your desire
for immortality (Moksa). Hence, you will have repetition (of
birth) for seven times.”

On being cursed thus. by Brahma, those Devas, the
Jayas pacified him. "

13. “O great lord, forgive our faults of the nature of
ignorance.”

Brahma then spoke to them as they prostrated before him.
He spoke to them in a conciliatory tone.

14-18a. ‘‘Everyone shall enjoy (everything) in the world
(subject to limitation). Who deserves freedom (from the shac-
kles of Karmans) ? Everything is pervaded by me. How can
the living beings take inauspiciousness or otherwise without
my will ?*

Whatever there is in this world, whether it is conducive to
welfare or not, is permeated by me in the form of intellect (?)
Who can transgress me in the world ? Everything is known to
me—that which is desired by the living beings, that which is
thought by them and that which is perpetrated by them. This
entire world consisting of mobile and immobile beings has been
bound by me by means of the shackle in the form of the rope
of Agi (Hope and ambition), Who will be eager to cut it off ?

18b-19. Since the haughty man carries everything and
none else (otherwise) he desires to get salvation by not begin-
ning to perform holy rites (?)’’

* VaA.P. 67.20 reads ko ms for Kdmam in the Bd.P. text. If this be accept-
ed the line means ‘Who in the world can get liberation at will from me with-
out beginning to perform Karma.’

=== PAGE 35 ===

424 Brahmanda Purana

After saying this to those Jayas of spiritually inclined
minds, he observed that those (Jayas) certainly wer€ worthy
of being punished. Prajapati said thus.

20-21. ‘‘O Devas, without referring to me, renunciation
etc. was carricd out by you so the activity pursued by me is
(also) extensive.* Let it be resulting in your happiness. Let
it be born with a divinity.

22-23. O excellent Devas, your birth will be in accor-
dance with your own desire. In the seven Manvantaras you will
manifest yourselves as Siddhas (persons of great spiritual achi-
evement). In those Manvantaras beginning with the Sviyam-
bhuva and ending with Vaivasvata.

After saying thus a verse of great antiquity was also
sung by Brahma.

24-25.** The lore of three Vedas, the progeny in the form
of Brahman (?), Sraddha, Penance, Yajfia, granting of gifts—
the lord abides by these along with the Rajas of perpetual
nature (?). The lord occupies the other praiseworthy thing (?).
After explaining the meaning of the verse he spoke to the Devas,
(called) Jayas ‘*You will come back to me when the Vaivasvata
Manvantara passes off.”

26. Thereupon, the lord who has no fear from anywhere
vanished after adopting the original Dharana accompanied by
yogic power.

27. Then those twelve Ajitas were angrily cursed by
him. Thus those who were called Jayas were rendered just the
opposite* ** (i.e. the ‘Victorious ones’”’ were ‘defeated’ ).

* The text is obscure here. Va.P. 67.25 reads :
Yasmat sa viphalo yatno hyépdras tvesa yah kttah
_ “Inasmuch as that attempt of yours (at renunciation) has become
futile’ etc.
_** Probably due to misprints this verse has become obscure. The
reading in V4.P. 67.28 is as follows:—
Traytm vidyath brakmacaryarh prasitim Srdddham eva ca |
Jajfiam cawa tu dana ca esdmeva tu kurvatém |
sa hi sma virajéd bhiitud vasate 'nyaprasamsayad
He who studies Trayi vidyd (three Vedas), observes celibacy (the
first stage of life) and in the second stage of life as a Grhastha or howebolder)
procreates children, performs Sraddha, sacrifice as well as gives religious gifts
—such a performer becomes free from sin or rqjas and lives praised by others.
*** Visannibha—not like, i.e. opposite of unconquered.

=== PAGE 36 ===

2.3.4.28-37 425

28-29. When the Svayambhuva Manvantara passed off,
those Suras were born as Tusitas in the Svarocisa Manvantara.
Then, they were born as the sons of Satya, (wife) of Uttama
the Manu. Therefore, those Devas in the Auttama Manvantara
are remembered as Satyas.

30. All those twelve Devas (called) Tusitas were born
of Harini then, Those Devas in the name of Haris became the
partakers of Yajfia.

31. When the Aristava Manvantara (? i.e. Raivata)
arrived those excellent Devas called Haris were born of
Vikuntha.

32-34. They are the Devas named Vaikuntha in the fifth
Manvantara; when the Caksusa Manvantara arrived, those
Devas called Vaikunthas were born as Sadhyas.

When the Caksusa Manvantara passed off and the
creation of Vaivasvata Manu began, those Sadhyas out of
their parts were born of Aditi and Kaégyapa, the son of
Marici. In the current Manvantara those Suras were born as
the twelve Adityas.

35-36. When these twelve immortal ones were born in
the Caksusa Manvantara, they had been cursed by the self-born
lord and they were known as Sadhyas.

The man who hears this shall always attain victory. He
shall be endowed with faith in the Jaya Devas. He shall go over
every chapter* (?)

37. Thus are the seven Vritis (activities) characterised
by the births of the Devas. That account has been narrated to
you today. What else do you wish to hear?

* pratyadhydya in the text is a mistake. Va.P. 67.46 reads pratyavdya
‘impediment, sinfulness, decrease’ and can be rendered accordingly. ‘He
shall cross over every impediment’.

=== PAGE 37 ===

426 Brahmanda Purdna
CHAPTER FIVE

Nrsimha Incarnation : Hiranyakasipu Killed :
Race of Hiranyakasipu : Birthof Maruts :

The Sages requested :

1-2. ‘‘Please explain to us in detail the origin and
death of Daityas, Danavas, Gandharvas, serpents, Raksasas,
cobras, ghosts, vampires, Vasus, birds and creepers.’ On being
asked thus, Siita replied to the excellent sage :

Siita said :

3. ‘Two sons and a very powerful daughter were born
to Diti. Those two sons of Kasgyapa are remembered as the.
eldest of all.

4-5. On the day of Sautya (i.e. the day on which the
juice of Soma is to beextracted) , when the sacrifice Atiratra
was to be performed, KaSyapa was seated in a separate seat
wellknown as Hiranyakasipu at the time of Asvamedha (Horse
sacrifice). The son came out of Diti’s Garbha (womb) and sat
(near Kasgyapa’s golden seat) in different places all round.*
Due to this activity, he is remembered as HiranyakaSipu.”’

The Sages said :
6. ‘O holy lord, narrate in detail the name, nativity
and prowess of the noble-souled Daitya HiranyakaSipu.”

Sita said :

7. In the holy place of pilgrimage named Puskara,
Kaéyapa performed a horse-sacrifice. It had been adorned by
their presence by the sages, Devas, and Gandharvas.

8. When the horse was duly let loose for roaming about,
when the rites of Akhydna (Narration) etc were to be duly
performed, five golden seats were kept ready.

9-12. Three of them were Kulaspadani (the basic emblems
of his family**), the other two were the Kérca ‘(bundle of

* This is strange. Va. P. 67.58 tells us that the child from Diti’s womb
occupied the gold seat meant for the sacrifice
** V4.P. 67.55 reads Kusa-Padtani ‘ ‘sanctified by: Kuéa grass.”

=== PAGE 38 ===

2.3.5.13-20 427

Darbha grass) and Phalaka (wooden plank). Among these four
one was set apart for the chief Rtvik. A seat made of gold was
separately kept ready for the Hotr. That womb (the newly born
child) occupied that gold chair meant for the Hotr. He recited
the narration (Akhyana). Seeing this the sages gave him an
additional name (?). He was remembered as HiranyakaSipu,
on account of that activity... Hiranyaksa was his younger
brother and Simhika was his younger sister.

13-15. That gentle lady was the wife of Vipracitti and
the mother of Rahu.

Hiranyakasipu, the son of Diti, performed very great
penance for a hundred thousand years without taking in food
and keeping his head downwards, When Brahma was pleased
he sought the following boons : Viz. Sarvdmaratva (the state of
being or assuming the form of all the Devas and non-destruction
from all living beings). He conquered Devas by means of
his yogic power and assumed S.arva-Devatva (the state of
being all the Devas).

16-17. He said :—*I shall be endowed with strength
and virility and I shall carry out the activities of Isvaras
(Devas). Let Danavas, Asuras and Devas become subject
to my control along with Caranas. They must be near
me (i.e. wait on me) and they must take food only after
me. I must not be killed with any weapon wet or dry. I must
not be killed during daytime or at night.”

On being told thus, Brahma granted the boon with all
his heart.

Brahma said :

18-20. ‘‘O dear one, O son of Diti, the boon sought by
you is very great. Come on. The promise shall now be thus
alone.”

After granting him what he wished for, he vanished there
itself.

1. A popular etymology of Hiranyakasgipu. It is endorsed only in Va.
P. 67.51.

=== PAGE 39 ===

428 Brahmanda Purdne

“The son of Diti pervaded the entire universe consisting
of mobile and immobile beings by means of his greatness. The
conqueror of foes he could assume many forms.

He used to assume the form of the moon and the sun and
blazed in the sky.

21. He alone became the wind and blew continuously all
over the world. He alone was the cowherd, shepherd and
farmer.

22. He was the knower in all the worlds. He was the
expositor of the Mantras. He was the leader, the protector. He
was the person who kept other persons in protective hiding. He
was the initiated person and also the perforincr of sacrifices.

23. Allthe Devas and Asuras became the imbibers of the
Soma juice through him. This Daitya had such a power.
Learn further about him.

24. All made obeisance to him, He alone was the person
worthy of being worshipped. Formerly, this verse was sung by
the Daityas about Hiranyakasipu.

25. ‘The Devas along with the great sages made obeis-
ance to that quarter to which king Hiranyakasipu looked at.

26-27a. It was Visnu (in the form of) Narasimha (man-
lion) who brought about the death of that (Daitya) formerly.
Since the lord had the form of Nara (man), he is being sung
about as Narasimha by those who expound the Vedas.

27b. The lord stood aloft by means of his penance on
the shore of the sea. The body of that lord was that of all the
Devas. That mightydeity was famous by the name Sudargana.

28. That infuriated lord split that leader of the Daityas
of great strength by means of his nails (claws) in the course of
his hand-to-hand fight. For, the nails are neither wet nor dry.

29-31. The sons of Hiranyaksa were five. They were
very strong and valorous. They were Sambara, Sakuni,
Kalanabha, Mahanabha and Surasantapana who was extremely
valorous. These sons of Hiranyaksa were unassailable even to
the Devas.

32. Their sons and grandsons along with their clans are
remembered as Daityas. Hundreds and thousands of those
Daityas were killed in the Tarakamaya (i.e. the fight against
Tarakasura),. 7

=== PAGE 40 ===

2.3.5.33-46 429

33-34, Hiranyakasipu had four sons of very great
strength viz. Prahlada the eldest among them, then Anuhrada,
Samhrada and Hrada. Understand that Hrada had two sons
Sunda and Nisunda.

35. Those two great heroic demons were destroyers of
Brahmanas. Mika too was a heir and successor of Hrada.
Marica, son of Sunda, was born to Tadaka.

36. He was killed in the Dandaka forest by Raghava
the powerful (king of Ayodhya). Mika was killed by Savyasaci
(i.e. Arjuna) at the time of his encounter with Kirata (the
hunter in whose guise Siva came before him).

37-39. Nivatakavacas were born in the family of
Sarmnhrada, the Daitya. They were themselves sanctified by
means of great penance. ‘They were the enemies of the gods.
There were four leaders of Daityas viz. Jambha, Satadundubhi,
Daksa the Asura, and Canda. These were the sons of Baskala.
Listen to the names of the sons of Kalanemi. They were
Brahmajit, Kraiujit, Devantaka and Narantaka.

40-41. These were the scns of Kalanemi. Listen to the
progeny of Sambhu. King Aja and Goma are glorified as the
sons of Sambhu.

Virocana had an only valorous son, Bali. Flundred sons
were born to Bali. All of them were kings.

42-44, Four of them were very prominent, valorous and
very powerful viz. the thousand-armed Bana, the valorous
king was the eldest (or the most excellent one) Kumbhagarta
who was merciless and Bhoja. There were others also such as
Kufici etc. Sakuni and Pitana are remembered as the two
daughters of Bali. Bali’s sons and grandsons were hundreds
and thousands. They are well known by the name of Baleyas.
They were a clan of demons whose manliness and valour are
well known.

45-46. Indradhanvan (the son) of Bana was born of
Lohini. '

Diti whose sons were killed (by the Devas) propitiated
KaSyapa. On being propitiated very well, KaSyapa was de-
lighted in his mind and he made her choose a boon as she

=== PAGE 41 ===

430 Brahmanda Purana

pleased.} She thereupon chose the boon.

47-48. On being requested again the holy lord granted
her the boon. When the boon was verbally conferred, Diti
was pleased and so she spoke to him. The g.ntle lady spoke to
her husband KaSsyapa, the son of Marici with palms joined in
reverence :—

“© holy lord, my sons have been killed by Adityas, your
sons,

49. Iwish for a son who will kill Sakra (Indra) and
who will be obtainca by me due to long penance. I shall
perform the severe penance. It behoves you to make me
pregnant.

50-51. It behoves you to grant me a son capable of
slaying Indra.”’

On hearing her words, Kafyapa the son of Marici, of
great splendour replied to Diti. He was extremely grief-stricken.

“O gentle lady, let it be so, but remain pure and clean
during your pregnancy, O lady of rich penance.

52-54. If you remain pure for a full period of thousand
years, you will give birth to a son who will kill Sakra in battle.
You will give birth to a son beautiful like Manmatha (the god
of love), the most excellent one in the three worlds.” After say-
ing thus the (sage) of great splendour remained (ready to
receive her). After embracing her the holy sage went to his
abode. When the husband had gone, Diti, the gentle lady who
was delighted much, went to Kufgaplavana and performed a
very severe penance.

55-59. Lord Sakra had heard about their conversation.
He went over to Kusaplavana and spoke these words to Diti :—

‘I shall carry out your behest and serve you. It behoves
you to grant me permission. I shall bring sacrificial twigs,
flowers and fruits.”

1. VV. 45-81 tell the story of the birth of Maruts when Indra during
the impure state of Diti entered her womb and split his prospective killer
foctus into 49 parts. Cf VP. I. 21. 32-41, Mt. P. Chapter 7.

This is however a Puranic development of a Vedic concept where the
seven Maruts are the seven Pranas (Sat. Br. 9.3.1. 7) Indra is the main
Prana controlling the Maruts.

=== PAGE 42 ===

2.3.5.60-70 431

On hearing his words Diti said :—
‘© dear one, be engaged in serving me as you think.
Be clever and diligent in all the holy rites and perform what is

conducive to your own welfare.”
On hearing these excellent words of his mother, Sakra

became delighted. With a fraudulent intention .n his inner
mind, he became engaged in serving her. Sakra became
devotedly attached to her always.

60-61. Sakra was steady in his resolve. He used to bring
fruits, flowers and sacrificial twigs. At the time of alleviating
weariness, he used to message her limbs. Sakra rendered
service to Diti on all occasions. When the period of her holy
rites was almost over and the balance remained but a little,
that delighted noble lady said to Sakra :—

62. ‘I am pleased with you, O excellent one among
the Suras. O dear son, only ten more years remain, welfare
unto you. Thereafter, you will see your brother.

63. {shall place him at your service even as he is
desirous of victory on your behalf. You will enjoy the conquest
of the three worlds along with him, O my son.

64-65. Do not I know, Omy son, that your mind is
eagerly devoted to ine ?”’

After saying this to Sakra, the noble lady was over-
powered by slumber when the sun reached the middle (of the
sky). Placing her head over her knees and the tresses of her
hair over her feet that noble lady went to sleep.

66. Everything that is below the navel is remembered as
unclean. Hence, considering her to be unclean, he thought that
to be the befitting occasion (for his own action).

67. Having considered the whole reason, this thought
struck him that a defect was seen in the noble lady (giving
him an opportunity) to destroy the child in the womb.

68-70. Then Vrsan (Indra) entered the belly of Diti
through her vaginal passage. After cntering, Indra saw the
child of great prowess in the womb. He became afraid and so
split that foetus, his own enemy. On being split by the thunder-
bolt of a hundred spikes, the foetus trembled again and again
and squealed in a deep and awful note.

=== PAGE 43 ===

432 Brahmanda Purana

Sakra then spoke to the foetus :—‘‘Do not cry’ Do not
cry (M4 roda).}

71. Indra split the foetus into seven parts and each of
them into seven more parts by means of his thunderbolt. At
that time Diti woke up.

72. Diti said thus—‘‘He (the child in the womb) should
not be killed. He should not be killed.” Thereupon, Indra
jumped out, out of deference to his mother’s words.

73-74. With the palms joined in reverence along with
the thunderbolt, Sakra spoke to Diti :—O noble lady, you
were sleeping unclean with the tresses of your hair spreading
over your feet. Seizing that opportunity I reached the foetus
that was to be my slayer in the fight and split it into many
parts It behoves you to forgive me.”

75. When that foetus became fruitless, Diti was extremely
distressed. She thereupon spoke to the invincible thousand-
eyed lord Indra in a pacifying note :—

76. “Ifit was due to my default that this foetus was
rendered ineffective by you, it is not your fault, O lord of the
Devas, O son of great strength.

77-78. There is no fault in killing an enemy. You need
not be afraid, O lord. I wish that something pleasing (condu-
cive to the happiness) is done. Otherwise whence is the
felicity unto my child in the womb. Let there be seven abodes
of my sons inthe heaven. Let my sons traverse these seven
Vataskandhas* (pathways of wind).

79-81. They will be well known as Maruts. They will be
seven groups of seven each (7x 7=49). The first Skandha should
be known as being present on the earth, the second in the sun,
the third should be known in the moon, the fourth in the
group of luminaries, the fifth in the planets and the sixth in
the zone of seven sages (the Great Bear), the seventh in

1. This popular etymology of Marut is emdorsed by other purdnas
also e.g. V.P. I. 21-39; Mt. P. 8.62.

2. This puranic classification of seven strata or levels of the higher
atmosphere or space and the assignment of the Marut-gods to each is psuedo
—scientific but is found in other puranas also.

=== PAGE 44 ===

2.3.5.82-99 433

Dhruva (Pole star). Let my sons traverse these seven
Vataskandhas on different occasions.

82-89. Let my sons be the lords of Vétaskandhas and’
traverse these paths. The first Vataskandha is on the earth. It
extends upto the clouds It is Avaha (by name). Let my seven
sons belonging to the first set traverse this first path.

The second Vataskandha is above the clouds upto the sun.
It is Pravaha by name. Let the second set of my sons traverse
this second path.

The third Vataskandha is above the sun and beneath the
moon. It is remembered as Udvaha. Let the third set of my
sons traverse this third path.

The fourth Vataskandhais above the moon and beneath
the stars. It is Samvaha. Let the fourth set of my sons, O lord,
traverse the fourth path.

The fifth Vataskandha is above the stars and it extends upto
planets. It is called Vivaha. Let the fifth set of my sons
traverse this path.

The sixth Vaélaskandha is above planets and extends
upto the seven sages. It is Anuvaha. Let the sixth set of my
sons traverse this path.

The seventh Vaétaskandha is above the sages. It extends
upto the abode of Dhruva. The pole star is glorified as Partvaha.
Let my sons stay there. Let my sons traverse all these paths
at different occasions.

90-92. Let these be Maruts, thatname having been given
by you. Understand the names of my sons, O Satakratu
separately, as befitting their activities of that nature.

The first set of Maruts is as following:—1) Sakrajyoti 2)
Satya 3) Satyajyoti 4) Citrajyoti 5) Jyotisman 6) Sutapas
7) Caitya.

Understand the second group : .

93-99. (Partially defective text) 1) Rtajit 2) Satyajit
3) Susena 4) Senajit 5) Sutamitra 6) Amitra 7) Suramitra.
‘This is the second group. Understand the third set : They are:—
1) Dhatr 2) Dhanada 3) Ugra 4) Bhima 5) Varuna 6) Abhi-

=== PAGE 45 ===

434 Brahmanda Purana

yuktaksika 7) Sahvaya. Understand the third class’ mentioned
by me :*

The fifth set is as follows:—1) Idrk 2) Anyadrk 3) Sarit
4) Druma 5) Vrksaka 6) Mita 7) Samita.

The sixth class is as follows:— 1!) Idrk 2) Purusa
3) Nanyadrk 4) Samacetana 5) Sammita 6) Samavrtti
7) Pratihartr,**

All other men and _ subjects performed Yajfias and
eulogised. ‘Thus these seven scfs of seven Daityas-cum-Devas
have been mentioned.

Thus the forty-nine Maruts are remembered by their
names (?). They were enumerated by the two i.e. by Diti and
Sakra.

100. After giving these names, Ditisaid to Indra, Let
these brothers, my sons, traverse these Vataskandhas.

101-102. Welfare unto you. Let my sons traverse (these
paths) along with the Devas.”’

On hearing these words, the thousand-eyed Purandara
spoke with palms joined in reverence —‘O mother, let it be so.
There is no doubt about this that everything will happen as
spoken by you.

103. By becoming as said by you, these noble-souled
bachelors (?) will be honoured by the world. Along with the
Devas they will participate (have theirshare in the oblations)
in the Yajfias.

104. Hence, these Maruts are Devas. All of them were
excellent younger brothers of Indra. All those powerful and
speedy sons of Diti should be known as immortal ones,”

105. Those two, the son and the mother came to this
agreement in the hermitage. They went to the heaven delighted.
Sakra became freed of all worrics and pains.

106. He who listens to the auspicious birth of the Maruts
or he who reads this, shall attain victory in argument. He shall
regain his lost soul.

* The fourth division of maruts is not enumerated.
** The names of the Maruts belonging to the seventh set are not
mentioned.

=== PAGE 46 ===

2.3.6.1-14 435
CHAPTER SIX

Glorification of The Race of Danu

Sita said :

1. The sons of Danu were great Asuras well known in their
race. The most important among them was Vipracitti. They
possessed unimaginable exploits and valour.

2. All of them were persons who had performed great
penances and had obtained boons. They were truthful, aggres-
sive against enemies and cruel. They were experts in the use of
Maya.-

3. They possessed great strength and were swift in move-
ment. ‘They were engrossed in the study of the Vedas
(Brahmistha) and maintained holy fires. Understand them even
as they are being glorified in accordance with their prominence,

4-13. The following are glorified as the prominent
members of the family of Danu :—Dvimirdhan, Sambara,
Sankuratha, Vibhu (or lord), Sankukarna, Vipada, Gavistha,
Dundubhi, Ayomukha, Maghavan, Kapila, Vamana, Maya,
Marici, Asipa, Mahamaya, Asiras, Bhrsi, Viksobha, Suketu,
Ketuvirya, Satahvaya, Indrajit, Dvivida, Bhadra, Devajit,
Ekacakra, Mahabahu, the extremely powerful Taraka, Vaié-
vanara, Puloman, Prapana, Mahasiras, Svarbhanu, Vrsaparvan,
Purunda the great Asura, Dhrtarastra, Sirya, Candramas,
Indratapana, Sitksma, Nicandra, Cirnanabha, Mahagiri,
Asiloma, Sukega, Satha, Milakodara, Jambha, Gaganamirdhan,
Kumbhamana, Mahodaka, Pramada, Adma, Kupatha,
ASvagriva, the valorous, Vaimrga, Viriipaksa, Supatha, Hala,
Ahala, Aksa, Hiranmaya, Satagriva, and Sambara (the
second).

Sarabha and Svalabha are remembered as the sun and
the moon of Asuras. They are influential against the Suras as.
well.

The sons and grandsons and later descendants of these
are endless. They cannot be numbered.

14. Thus the Asuras, Daityas and Danavas have been
recounted.

=== PAGE 47 ===

436 Brahmanda Purdna

The Daityas are remembered as Sutvats (soma drinkers?)
and the sons of Danuare remembered as Asutvats (non parti-
cipants in drinking soma juicc).

15-17. These are remembered as the followers of the
family or those of the family of the sons of Danu.

The following are remembered as those of the family of
the sons of Danu:—

Ekaksa, ASvaprabharista, Pralamba, Naraka, Indrabadh-
anakesi, Purusa, Sesavan, Uru, Garistha, Gavaksa, Talaketu
the valorous. They cannot be killed by human beings. They
were born of the inter-alliance of the Daityasand the Danavas.
They are of terrible exploits.

18. The following fourteen* great Asuras are called
Saimhikeyas. They were born of Simhika as the sons of
Vipracitti:—

19-20. Sala, Salabha, Savya, Sivya, Ilvala, Namuci,
Vatapi, Supufijika, Harakalpa, Kalanabha, Bhauma and
Kanaka. Rahu_ the suppressor of the sun and the moon is the
eldest among them.

21. These sons of Simhika were unapproachable (in-
vincible) even to the Devas. ‘Their family itself was very awful.
All of them were cruel and slayers of the Brahmanas.

22. The groups of Saithhikeyas are remembered as
consisting of ten thousands, They were killed by the powerful
Bhargava (Parasurama) son of Jamadagni. |

23. Prabha was the daughter of Svarbhanu; Saci was the
daughter of Puloman; Upadanavi was the daughter of sada
and Sarmistha of Vrsaparvan.

24. Vaisvanara had two daughters viz. Puloma and
Kalika. Nahusa was the son of Prabha and Jayanta the son of
Saci.

25. Sarmistha gave birth to Piru and Upadanavi to
Dusyanta. Vaisvanara’s daughters were these two viz. Puloma
and Ka4laka.

26. Both these daughters had many children. They were
the wives of Marica. Both of them had between them sixty
thousand children. They were the leaders of the Danavas.

The list in VV. 19-20 names only thirteen sons and not fourteen.

=== PAGE 48 ===

2.3.6.27-39 437

27. There were fourteen thousand more, those of the
residents of Hiranyapura. Paulomas and Kalakeyas were Danavas
of great strength.

28-29. They could not be killed by the Devas. They -were
slain by Savyasaci (Arjuna) . Six children, five sons and a daughter
were born of Rambha and Maya. They were very powerful.
The sons were Mayavin, Dundubhi, Mahisa, Kalika and
Ajakarna. Mandodari was the daughter.

30-31. Thus the creation of Daityas and Danavas has
been stated,

It is remembered that five very powerful sons were
born of Anayusa—Araru, Bala, Vitra, Vijvara and Visa.

Tne son of Araru, a crueland great Asura named Dhundhu
was killed ina cave by Kuvalaéva at the instance of Uttanka.

32-33. Nikumbha and Cakra-varman were the sons of
Bala. Both of them were unrivalled in brilliance. They had great
virility. Of these two the latter was Karna in his previous birth.
Vijara had also two sons—Kalaka and Khara.

34. Vrsa had four sons of very cruel activities. They were
Sraddhada, Yajiiaha, Brahmaha and Paésuha.

35-36. Anayusa’s sons have been recounted. Understand
the sons of Vrtra too. Very awful and powerful Raksasas named
Bakas were born to Vrtra who was fighting with Indra. A
hundred thousand of them are remembered as the followers
(servants) of Mahendra.

37-39. All of them were knowers of Brahman (Veda).
They were gentle and devout (righteous). They had subtle forms.
All of them moved about among the subjects in their subtle
forms. They lived always enveloped in anger.*

Krodha gave birth to unrivalled sons, very excellent in
singing. They were ten in number. These Devagandharvas were

* Krudhaoztdh in the Bd. P. This is discordant with the list of their
virtues. V4.P, 68.36 reads Sudhdrmikah “extremely religious.’’ This adjective
is in consonance with the previous virtues in that line (39 b) and hence accept-

table.

=== PAGE 49 ===

438 Brahmaénda Purana

the sons of Krodha. They were Siddha, Purna, Bahvi, Pirnaméa
the vigorous, Brahmacarin, Sataguna Suparna the _ seventh,
Vigvavasu, Bhanu and Sucandra the tenth. Thus the sons of
Krodha have been recounted.

CHAPTER SEVEN

Different Dynasties Enumerated

Siita said :—*

1-4. The Gandharvas and the Apsaras were the childern
of Muni.? Know them (by their names). They are Bhimasena,
Ugrasena, Suparna, Varuna, Dhrtarastra, Goman, Suryavarcas,
Patravan, Arkaparna, Prayuta, Bhima and Citraratha who was
wellknown as the conqueror of all and as one who had kept his
senses under perfect control, Salisiras the thirteenth, Parjanya
the fourteenth, Kali the fifteenth, and Narada the sixteenth. Thus
these divine Gandharvas, childern of Muni, have been recounted.

5-9. They had _ twenty-four splendid younger sisters
named Apsaras:—viz. Aruna, Anapaya, Vimanusya, Varambara,
Miérakedi, Asiparnini, Alumbusa, Marici, Sucika, Vidyutparna,
Tilottama, Adrika, Laksmana, Ksema, the divine Rambha,
Manobhava, Asita, Subahi, Supriya, Subhuja, Pundarika,
Ajagandha, Sudati and Surasa. Her brothers—Subahu, the
celebrated Haha, Hihiu and Tumburu—these four are remem-
bered as excellent Gandharvas. Thus these Gandharvas and
Apsaras, the children of Muni have been named.

1, This chapter enumerates the prominent members of clans of Gan-
dharvas, Apsaras, birds, serpents, Yaksas, Raksasas, Pisacas, Yatudhanas and
other species with super-natural powers.

2. VV. 1-29 enumerate the children of Muni, viz the clans of Gan-
dharvas and the 14 groups of Apsaras with their sub-groups like Laukika,
celestial, their kins and descendants. It is note-worthy that ten Apsaras were
the expounders of Brahman and were Pafica-ciigas (having five plaits of
hair). Apsaras born of different gods are enumerated in VV 20-24.

=== PAGE 50 ===

2.3.7.10-24 439

10. The following are remembered as Laukiki Apsaras
(i.e. Earthly Apsaras) viz. Hamsa, Sarasvati, Sita, Kamala,
Abhaya, Sumukhi, and Hamsapadi.

11-12a. (There are nine more Gandharvas(?) Viz.
Hathsa, Jyotistama, Acara, Daruna, Varitha, Varenya,
Vasuruci, Suruci the eighth among them and then Visvavasu.

12b-13. The extremcly fortunate Rista who had been
honoured by the Devas and the sages, gave birth to three
(daughters) Viz. Arupa, Subhaga and Bhasi.

Manuvanti and Sukesi were the splendid daughters of
Tumbaru.

14-15. One should know that these ten (celestial
Damscls) are Pafica-cidas(having five plaits of hair).

They are Menaka, Sahajanya, Parnini, Pufijikastala,
Krtasthala, Ghrtaci, Visvaci, Parvacitti who is wellknown
as Pramlocé and Anumloca. They are thus ten.

16. Urvasi is remembered as the eleventh. She had been
born of Narayana who has neither a beginning nor an end. Her
limbs are free from blemishes (i.e. extremely beautiful) befitting
a noble family.

17. Menaka the daughter of Mena was born as a beauti-
ful woman in every limb. All these are remembered as expoun-
ders of Brahman and extremely fortunate.

18-20a. The meritorious groups of Apsaras are wellknown
to be fourteen viz.—Ahrtis, Sobhavatis, Vegavatis, UOrjas,
Yuvatis, Sruks, Kurus, Barhis, Amrtas, Mudas, Mrgus, Ruks,
Bhirus and Sobhayantis.

20b-24. The Ahrtis are the mental daughters of Brahma.
The Sobhavatis are the daughters of Maruts, The Vegavatis
are the daughters of Rista. The Orjas are born of Agni (fire-
god). The Yuvatis are born of rays of the sun. They are very
splendid. The auspicious Kurus are born along with the rays of
the moon. The (Apsaras) named Sruks were born of
Yajfia (sacrifice). The Barhis were born of KufSavati. The
Apsaras born of Amrta and (therefore) they are remembered
as Amrtads. The Apsaras named Mudas were born of
Vayu (wind). The Mrgus were born of the earth. The

=== PAGE 51 ===

440 Brahmanda Purana

Apsaras named Ruks were born of the lightning. The Bhirus are
the daughters of Mrtyu. The Sobhayantis (were the daughters)
of Kama. The fourteen groups (of Apsaras) have been
recounted,

25. These brilliant groups of Apsaras numbering many
thousands are the wives and mothers of the Devas, and the
sages.

26-29. (Text partially defective.) All these Apsaras are
equally fragrant and free from excitement (.Nispandaéh—Steady) .
Except Hara, everyone from among the Devas and the sages
had contacts with them on account of Kama (God of love),
since they were common to all.* Parvata and Narada were born
of them. But since they were born of divine sages, Parvata and
Narada are included among sages. A third is also remnembcred
as younger to them viz. Arundhati.

Aruna and Garuda were the sons of Vinata.

30. The (vedic) metres are those beginning with
Gayatri. The birds are born of Suparna (Garuda )

31-37. Kadru gave birth to thousand serpents! who
support the earth. They have many hoods. They are
noble-souled and they are able to traverse through the sky.
Since they are innumerable (all the names are not mentioned
here). Learn the names of the most important among
them.

The most important among the serpents are Sesa, Vasuki
and Taksaka. (The other important serpents are) Akarna,
Hastikarna, Pifijara, Aryaka, Airavata, Mahapadma, Kambala,

* For Bd.P. text V.26b and 27a. Va. P. 69-63 reads:
Samprayoge tu kdntena mddyantt madirdm vina |
Tdsdm apydyate sparsdd dGnandasca vivardhate ||
When contacted by (their) lover, they become inebriated and inflamed
with passion without (embibing) spirituous liquor. |By their very touch one
feels satisfaction and the joy enhances.
30b is obscure. For : Vyavahdrydni sarvdni rju-sannthitani ca but VAa.P.
69.67 reads:—Havyavdhdni sarvdpi diksu sannihitdni ca. “Fires are deposited
in all quarters.’
1. VV. 31-37 enumerate the children of Kadru viz. serpents.

=== PAGE 52 ===

2.3.7.38-47 44]

Aévatara, Elapatra, Sankha, Karkotaka, Dhanafijaya, Maha-
karna, Mahanila, Dhrtarastra, Balahaka, Karavira, Puspa-
damstra, Sumukha, Durmukha, Sinamukha, Dadhimukha,
Kaliya, Alipindaka, Kapila, Ambarisa, Akriira, Kapitthaka,
Prahrada born of Brahman Gandharva, Manisthaka, Nahusa,
Kararoman and Mani. These and others too, (sons of Kadru
have been recounted.) Understand the sons of Khaga.

38. Khasga gave birth to two deformed sons of very
rough modes of life; the elder was born at dusk and the
younger at dawn.!

39-42. Khasa gave birth to the elder son with the
following characteristics :—Oneofhis ears was very red. He
had four arms and four legs. He was faltering and unsteady
while walking, swaying on either side (? Duitdhdgatim). He had
hair all over his body. Ifis limbs were stout. His nose was
splendid. He had a large belly, His head was very clean. He
had large ears. His hair appeared like Mufija grass. He had
great strength. His mouth was small but the tongue was long.
He had many curved fang-like teeth, His chin was large. His
eyes and feet were reddish tawny in colour. He had thick eye-
brows and a large nose. He was mysteriously secretive
(Guhyaka). His neck had a bluish tinge. His feet were long
and his face was big. Khasa gave birth to such an extremely
terrible son.

43-47. Khaga gave birth to his younger brother, her
second son, at the close of (the night) at dawn. He had _ three
heads, three feet and three hands. His eyes were black. His
hair stood upright (on his head). His moustache was green in
colour. His body was as hard as rock. He had long hands. His
voice was loud. His mouth (appeared like a groove) cut up to
the ears. He had a strong and big (protruding) nose. His lips
were thick. He had eight curved fang-like teeth. His face was
irregular in shape. He was spike-eared. His round eyes were
tawny in colour. His hair was matted. He had twin globular
(masses of flesh). His shoulders were big and broad. His chest

1. VV. 38-72 describe how the clans of Yaksas and Raksasas came
into being from Khaga.

=== PAGE 53 ===

442 Brahménda Purana

(too) was broad. The ridge of his nose was large. His belly was
thin. His neck was not stout. It was red in colour. His penis
and scrotum remained hanging down. She gave birth to such a
younger son.

48. Immediately after their birth, they increased in
size. All their limbs became efficient in their respective
functions.

49. With their limbs grown in size and power imme-
diately after their birth, they began to dragtheir mother. The
elder one of the two was very cruel and he pulled his mother.

50. He said—‘‘O mother, we are tormented due to
hunger. In order to save ourselves we shall devour you’’. But
the younger one attempted to forbid him.

51. Seizing him (i.e. the elder one) with his pair of
hands, he spoke to (his brother in front of) his mother—‘‘Indeed
you are the person to render service to your ancestors and
preserve their welfare. Protect (at least) your own mother.”’

52. Atthat very instant, their father appeared before
them. On seeing both these (children) of deformed features, he
spoke to KhaSa.

53. On seeing their father the two sons became frighten-
ed and became one. By means of their Maya, they became
merged into the limbs of their mother.

54. Then the sage said to his wife—‘‘What is it that you
have been told by these two boys ? Report to me everything
factually. This is your own transgression.

55. A son or a daughter will be like the mother,* at
the time of their birth. Ason will have the same (character
and habit) as his mother.

56-58. Indeed watcr will have the same colour as the
ground (on which it flows). Due to the defect in the conduct of
the mothers, as well as due to their qualities, forms and
features, the children are extremely influenced. But all the
children become different from one another on account of

their own renown.”

* Va.P. 69. reads : Matulam bhajate putrah, Pitrn bhajati kanyakd. “The
son takes after his maternal uncle while the daughter does so after the

father.”

=== PAGE 54 ===

2.3.7.59-68 443

After addressing Khasa like this, that incomparable holy
lord gently called his sons and accorded names unto them,

Then Kha&a told him everything that had been commit-
ted by them both in regard to her.

59. He gave them those names the root meaning of
which befitted their activities as reported by their mother,
and as inferred by him independently.

60. Theelder one had said ‘O mother, we shall eat
(you).”” (The root Yaks) is used in the sense of chewing and
eating. Hence he became Yaksa.

61-62a. The root Raksis understood to mean “to
protect’. Since your other son said ‘‘Protect this mother of
yours” he will be known by the name Raksasa.!

62b-64. After observing such a peculiar action on their
part towards their mother and after understanding the (inevi-
table) future affair (? the sage fixed these names).

The sage of cultured intellect was surprised on seeing both
of them hungry. The husband of Khasa assigned blood and
suet as their diet.

On seeing them hungry the father bestowed this boon on
them.

65-67. ‘Due to the touch of your hands, currents of
blood shall wholly become blood, flesh or fat as you desire
to cat.

You shall have your meals, sports and pastimes during the
night. Your prey shall be Brahmanas, Devas etc. You shall be
very powerful during the night, but very weak during the day
time. —

Protect this mother of yours. This is the Dharma
recommended unto you.”

After saying this to his sons Kasyapa vanished there
itself.

68. After their father had departed, those two cruel
(brothers) who are terrible by nature indulged in all kinds of
adverse activities. They were ungrateful and they harassed all
living creatures.

1, Etymology of Yaksa and Raksasa,

=== PAGE 55 ===

444 Brahmanda Purdga

69. They were extremely powerful and” had great
inherent vitality. They had huge bodies and were unassailable.
They were conversant with Maya (power of illusion or witch-
craft). They could be invisible. Both of them could vanish even
as they were moving about.

70. Both of them could assume any form they desired.
They were terrible by nature and free from all ailments. They
roamed about with all sorts of activities befitting their forms
and features. They harassed everyone.

71-72. They were eager to swallow Devas, sages, Pitrs
(manes) , Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Pisacas (vampires), human
beings, serpents, birds and animals. They used to roam about
during the night. They watched even the followers of Indra
becoming excited.*

73-76. (Defective Text) Once that Raksasa! (i.e. the
younger one of the two brothers) was moving about desirous of
getting some food to eat, he followed his prey by means of
their sound. He was moving about like a lord during the mid-
night. Two Pigacas (vampires, goblins, fiends) named Aja and
Sanda came across him. They were the sons of Kapi. They had
great virility and strength. They were like white gourds (in
shape). They were the ancestors (of all goblins). Their round
eyes were tawny in colour. They were terrific. Their hairs.
stood upright. They were accompanied by their daughters.
They wanted to find a (suitable) husband for them. Both the
girls could assume any form they desired. The Pigaécas accom-
panied by their daughters were hungry. They wanted to eat
the Raksasa.

77-79. They saw in front of them the Raksasa who could
assume any form that he desired. All of them looked at one
another. Each wanted to seize the other. The fathers (i.e. the
Pigacas ) said to their daughters, ‘‘He is faltering at every step.
Catch hold of him alive and bring him here soon.”

* V4.P. 69.111 states that Indra gave them boon of not killing and

kept them.

1. VV. 73-101 describe the marital relation between Pisdcas and
Raksasas and their progeny out of 8 forms of marriage. Paisaca is the
lowest form.

=== PAGE 56 ===

2.3.7.80-90 445

Thereupon the girls chased him and caught hold of him.
He was held firmly by the hands and brought in front of their
fathers.

80-82. On seeing the Raksasa seized (and brought
near) by their daughters, the Pigacas asked him—‘(Who are
you ?) Towhomdo you belong ?” And he told them everything.

On hearing the activities and the lineage of that Raksasa,
Aja and Sanda handed over their daughters to him. Being
pleased with his activities, they gave him their daughters (in
marriage) .

83-84. Even as the girls were crying, the Raksasa
married them in accordance with the marital rites called
Paigaca (pertaining to the Pisacas).

Aja and Sanda then proclaimed the assets and riches of
their daughters.

Sanda spoke (first)—‘This splendid girl who is conducive
to your welfare is Brahmadhana (having Brahmanas as her
wealth ?) by name. Brahmanas constitute her greatest (staple)
diet.”’

85. Aja then announced the assets (of his daughter).
‘This girl with the insects clinging to all the limbs like hair is
Jantudhana by name. She is capable of seizing the riches of
all creatures.”

86. The girl who was called Jantudhana had profuse
growth of hair all over her body. She was capable of producing
a great roar. She gave birth to a girl Yatudhana.

87. The girl who was called Brahmadhana was red in
colour. She was bereft of hair. She too was capable of producing
a great roar. She gave birth to Brahmadhanas (or Brahma-
dhana).

88. Thus the two daughters of Pig&cas gave birth to
children. Know them asI recount their creation of progeny.

89-90. Yatudhand had these ten Raksasas as her sons viz.
Heti, Praheti, Ugra, Pauruseya, Vadha, Vidyutsphirja,* Vata,
Aya, Vyaghra and Sirya (? Sarpa in verse 97).

. e Vidyut and Sphirja are given as separate persons in verse 95 below.
But then the number of Yatudh4n4’s sons becomes eleven and not ten. .

=== PAGE 57 ===

446 Brahmaénda Purdna

Know that Malyavan and Sumali were ‘the sons of
Praheti.

91. Another son of Praheti was very prosperous. He
was wellknown by the name Puloman. Another son was the
extremely fierce demon Madhu and Lavana was his son.

92. He was endowed with great yogic power. He
devoutly worshipped Mahadeva.

Ugra’s son was valorous and well known by the name
Vajrahan.

93-94, Pauruseya had five very powerful sons who were
cannibals (man-eaters) namely Kréra, Vikrta, Rudhirada,
Medasa and Vapaga. They have thus been recounted with their
names. Vadha had two sons of vicious activities viz. Vighna
and Samana.

95. Vidyut’s son was a Raksasa of vicious activities and
was Called Rasana. Nikumbha a Brahmaraksasa was born of
the wife of Spirja.

96. Virodha was the son of Vata and Janantaka was the
son of Aya. Nirananda was the son of Vyaghra. He caused
abstacles in sacrifices.

97. Cruel serpents and Raksasas were born in the
family of Sarpa (mentioned as Surya in ‘V. 90). Yatudhanas
have been narrated in full. Now understand the Brahmadhanas.

98. The sons of Brahmadhana were nine viz. Yajfiapeta,
Dhrti, Ksema, Brahmapeta, Yajiiahan, Svata, Ambuka, Keli
and Sarpa.

99-100. The following were the sisters of these Brahma-
dhanas. They are terrible Brahmaraksasis viz.—Raktakarni,
Mahajihva, Ksama and Istapaharini.

The Brahmaraksasas were bora on the earth in the family
of these (Brahinaraksasis ).

Thus the Raksasas have been recounted in full. Now
know the descendants of Yaksa.?

101-104. Yaksa loved Kratusthala, one of the ten
Apsaras of the class called Paficactidas.* He was desirous of

1. VV. 101-131 describe the progeny of Semi-divine clans Yaksas,
Punyajanas, Guhyakas.
* Vide V. 15 above.

=== PAGE 58 ===

2.3.7.105-117 447

getting her. Pondering over the means thereof, he searched all
the celestial gardens viz.—Vaibhraja Surabhi, Caitraratha,
Visoka, Sumana and Nandana the most excellent grove. His
desire and longing having been whetted he searched many
beautiful and fascinating spots. Ultimately he saw her in
Nandana seated amidst the other Apsaras.

In spite of his ponderings and anxious worries for acquir-
ing her, he could not find a proper means for the sare. in _ his
form and features he was defiled (ugly), spoilt and corrupt in
his activities.

105. He thought thus—‘‘All living beings resent me
because 1 am noxious and hurtful. Hence, how shall I acquire
that lady of fascinating limbs ?”

106-107. Hie hit upon a plan. Having found a means, he
hastened to put it into practice. He assumed the form of Vasu-
ruci, the Gandharva. Then that Guhyaka (i.e. Yaksa) scized
Kratusthala from the midst of the Apsaras. Thinking that he
was Vasuruci, she heartily and willingly accompanied him.

108-109. Even as he was being watched by the groups of
Apsaras he clasped her closely and had sexual intercourse with
her for the sake of a son. Although he was being observed (by
them) he did not hesitate, because he was eager to obtain the
celestial damsel. Thereupon a son was immediately born. He
had all the limbs and sense-organs in full-fledged form.

110. He increased in size immediately in height as well
as girth. He shone by means of his brilliance. ‘(I am Nabhi(?)
and I am a king,” he said and saluted his father.

111. The father said to him in reply, ‘‘You are Rajatana-
bha.”? A son is born resembling his mother in forms and features
and his father in vigour and strength.

112-113. As soon as the child was born, the Yaksa assumed
his form. Yaksas and Raksasas, even when they are in disguise,
resume their original form while asleep, when they are angry,
frightened or extremely delighted. Then the Guhyaka smilingly
said thus to the Apsaras.

_ 114-117. “O lady of excellent face, welfare unto you.
Come to my house alongwith your son.”’ After saying this, the

=== PAGE 59 ===

448 Brahmaada Purana

Yaksa suddenly resumed his own form. On seeing it, all the
Apsaras became bewildered and fled together. As she (i.e.
Kratusthala) was going on, the son followed her consoling her
by means of gentle words. He took her to the midst of
Gandharvas and the Apsaras and returned. On observing that
she was the origin of species of Yaksas, the groups of Apsaras
said to Kratusthala—“You are the mother of Yaksas.’’ There-
after,the Yaksa went to his own abode accompanied by his _ son.

118. The holy fig tree well known by the name Rohina
is the place where Guhyakas lic down. It is remembered that
the residence of the Yaksas is on the Nyagrodha (Holy fig tree)
named Rohina.

119-120. The Yaksa Rajatanabha is the grandfather (i.e.
Ancestor) of the Guhyakas.

He married Manivara, the gentle daughter of blameless
limbs, of Anuhrada, a Daitya (demon). Manivara, with perfect
control over his sense-organs, was born of her. She gave birth
to Manibhadra who was equal to Indra inexploits and valour.

121. The two splendid sisters named Punyajani and Deva-
jani, the daughters of Kratusthala became their wives.

122-126. The splendid lady Punyajani gave birth to
twentyfour sons of Manibhadra viz. Siddhartha, Siryatejas,
Sumana,Nandana, Mandika, Rucaka, Maniman, Vasu,Sarvanu-
bhita, Sankha, Pingaksa, Bhiru, Asoma, Diirasoma, Padma,
Candraprabha, Meghavarna, Subhadra, Pradyota, Maha-
dyuti, Dyutiman, Ketuman, Darganiya, and Sudargana. These
twentyfour sons were born to Punyajani. Born as the sons of
Manibhadra, all of them had meritorious characteristics. The
splendid Yaksas and Punyajanas are their sons and grandsons.

127-132a. The splendid lady Devajani gave birth to
Manivara’s sons viz. Pirnabhadra, Haimavan, Manimantra,
Vivardhana, Kusu, Cara, Piganga, Sthilakarna, Mahamuda,
Sveta, Vimala, Puspadanta, Jayavaha, Padmavarna Sucandra,
Paksa, Balaka, Kumudaksa, Sukamala, Vardhamana, Hita,
Padmanabha, Sugandha, Suvira, Vijaya, Krta, Pirnamasa,
Hiranyaksa, Sarana and Manasa. °

=== PAGE 60 ===

2.3.7,132b-146 449

These Yaksas, the sons of Manivara are remembered as
Guhyakas. They have fascinating forms and features. They are
exquisitely dressed. They wear garlands. They have pleasing
appearance. Their sons and grandsons are.in hundreds and
thousands.

132b-136. Khaga had other sons too, the Raksasas who
could assume forms as they pleased. Those who are important
among them are being described. Listen to their names.?
They are:—Lalavi, Krathana, Bhima, Sumalin, Madhu
Visphirjana, Brhajjihva, Matanga, Dhimrita, Candrarkabhikara
Budhna, Kapiloman, Prahasaka, Pidapara, Trinabha, the night-
walker Vakraksa, Trigiras, Satadamstra, Tundakoga the Rak-
sasa, ASva, Akampana and Durmukha the night-wanderer. Thus
these excellent Raksasas are valorous. They constitute the
Ganas of Siva.

137-139. They can traverse all the worlds. Their proce-
dure is like that of the Devas. She had other children also viz
seven daughters. Listen (to their names) in order viz. Alamba,
Utkaca, Utkrsta, Nirrta, Kapila, Siva and the extremely fortu-
nate Keéini. These are remembered as the seven sisters who
created progeny from whom Ganas were evolved. It was from
them that group of Raksasas was born—R4aksasas who were
ferocious in battle and destroyers of the congregations of
people, as well as the splendid groups of Raksasas.

140-146. The group (of Raksasas) called Alambeya is
ferocious and cruel. Similarly, the group Autkaceya (is also
cruel), The groups Autkarsteya and Saiveya are the most ex-
cellent groups of Raksasas. Similarly, the group named
Nairrta had been procreated by aservant of Tryambaka, the
most excellent leader of Ganas. The Nairrtas are Deva-Raksasas.
They are valorous and richly endowed with heroism. Their
leader is one who is endued with Yogic power, well reputed by
the name Viriipaka. They are haughty and noble-souled and

I. VV. 132-151 enumerate the leading figures in Raksasa clans such
as Alambeya, KApileyas and others (born from Khaéa’s daughters). Some
clans are followers of god Siva.

=== PAGE 61 ===

450 Brahmaénda Purana

they form hundreds of groups and armies. Generally these
(Nairrtas) follow Sankara the lord of the Universe.

The groups of Daitya-Raksasas called Kapileyas have
been procreated by the noble-souled king of Daityas (named)
Kumbha. They have huge bodies. They are endowed with
valour, vigour, enormous strength and exploit. Another group
of Raksasas (named) Yaksaraksasas have been procreatcd by
Kapila a powerful Yaksa in Keéini.

147-148. There was an insignificant Raksast (demoness)
named Nila. She was the daughter of Kesini. The numerous
Raksasas well known as Nailas have been procreated by
Surasika (A person of excellent taste) belonging to the group
Alambeya. They are unconquerable and are of terrible exploits.
They have divine and earthly forms and features. They roam
about the entire earth.

149-151. Since their creation is multitudinyus, it cannot
be detailed (completely). The Raksasi (demoness) named
Vikaca was the daughter of Nila. Her sons, the Vikacas, have
great inherent strength and valour. They have been procreated
by Viripaka the Nairrta here, The subjects so procreatcd were
very terrible. Listen to their names in the proper order.
They are very terrible on account of their curved fangs. ‘They are
hideous with large cars and big bellies.

152-156. Their group names are, Harakas, Bhisakas,
Klamakas, Reravakas, Pisacas, Vahakas, Trasakas and others.
These arc Bhiimi-Raksasas (earthly demons). They are slow-
witted but harsh and tough in their exploits. They assume
different sizes and shapes on different occasions. They roam
about in places hitherto never seen. Such of them as have _ exccl-
lent strength and inherent vitality are remembered as Khecaras
but they traverse the sky only toa very limited extent. They
merely aim at flying. This universe is pervaded by hundreds
and thousands of these Bhimi-Raksasasand all sorts of insigni-
ficant Raksasa hordes. Different regions are occupied all round
by different kinds of Raksasas.

Briefly mentioned, there were cight Raksasa mothers.

157-158. Their eight clans have been described in the
proper order. Certain clans are called Bhadrakas (gentle) caused
by the outcome of ignorant ones. They are hundreds and.

=== PAGE 62 ===

2.3.7.159-167 45!

thousands in number. They have Putana as their common
mother (?). They are terrifying unto all living beings.

159-161. The Grahas are the cause of the death of children
inthe human world. They are Skandagraha viz. Hasyas,
Apakas, Trasakas and others.

Those (varietics of insignificant Raksasas) should be
known as Kaumaras, They stay in the abodes of children.
There are groups of deceitful (Mayikas) varieties of Skanda-
grahas. There are Lokavinayaka (those who create obstacles
to the worlds), goblins named Pitanas. Thus thousands of
groups roam about on this earth.

162-163. Yaksas (are of two kinds) : those named
Punyajanas and those who are remembered as Purnabha-
dras.

The king of Alaka became the overlord of Yaksas,
Raksasas, all the Nairrtas and those who were called Paula-
styas and Agastis.

The Yaksas drink and devour the blood, suct and flesh of
human beings by means of their eyes.

164-166.! The Raksasas (drink blood etc.) by entcring
(the bodies of victims), The Pisacas (drink blood etc) by
means of squcezing and harassing (victims) .

Speaking succinctly, Daivatas (i.e. Devas) are equip-
ped richly with all characteristics.? They are brilliant, powerful
and imasterly. They can assume any form they desire. They
cannot be assailed. ‘They are valorous. They are bowed to by
all the worlds. They are subtle, vigorous, and pure. They
bestow boons. They partake of Yajiias. These foregoing
characteristics pertain to the Devas as well as the Asuras.

167. It is remembered that the Gandharvas and the Apsa-
ras are inferior to the Devas by threefourths (of their qualities,

1. VV. 152-166 enumerate the different clans of Bhimi-Raksasas
and of Kaumara Grahas.

2. VV. 166-170 describe the gradations (in descending order) of
the divine and semi-divine beings.

(i) Devas and Asuras.

(ii) Gandharvas and Apsaras.

(iii) Guhyakas (Yaksas) and Raksasas.

(iv) Pisacas.

=== PAGE 63 ===

452 Brahménda Purdna

Strength etc.). The Guhyakas are inferior to the Gahdharvas by
three-fourths (of their qualities etc) .

I68-169. The Pigacas are inferior to the Raksasas in
affluence and power three times (?) (powers, affluences to one-
third of Raksasa).

In the same manner (the different species of living
beings) are inferior to one another by three-fourths in regard to
wealth, beauty of form, span of life, physical power, virtue,
affluence and mastery, intelligence, power of penance, learning
and exploits.

170. These four species beginning with the Gandharvas
and ending with the Pisacas belong to the species of the
Devas.

Welfare unto you. Hereafter, listen to the progeny belong-
ing to the family of Krodhavasa.

171. Krodha gave birth to twelve daughters born of her
own bosom. They became the wives of Pulaha. Understand
them through their names.!

172-173a. They were Mrgi, Mrgamanda, Haribhadra
Iravati, Bhita, Kapisa, Darhstra, Rsa, Tirya, Sveta, Sarama,
and Surasa. They were all well renowned.

173b-174a. The sons of Mrgiwere the species of deer
and antelopes such as Harinas, Mrgas, Saas (rabbits), Nyankus
Sarabhas, Rurus and Prsatas (spotted antilopes).

174b-179. The following were born as sons of Mrga-
manda viz. Rksas(bears), Gavayas (a kind of oxen), buffaloes,
camels, boars, rhinoceros and Gauramukhas (species of
buffaloes).

The following were the sons of Hari (i.e. Haribhadra)viz.
various varieties of monkey such as Haris, Golangilas, Vanaras,
Kinnaras, Mayus and Kimpurusas, the hyaenes, the lions, the
tigers, the dark blue-coloured oxen, the Dvipins, Pythons,
crocodiles, cats, mice, frogs, mongooses and Valkakas(?) found
in forests.

1. VV. 171-179 describe the creation of the‘ animal-world through
the daughters of Krodha.

=== PAGE 64 ===

2.3.7.180-193 453.

The splendid lady gave birth to these sons of Pulaha viz.
the first Harnsa (swan), Ranacandra, Satamukha, Darimukha,
Harita, Harivarman the terrible and one with splendid
characteristics, Prathita, Mathita, Harina and Langali.

180-181. Ten heroic leading monkeys were born to
Sveta viz. Urdhvadrsti, Krtahara, Suvrata, Vinata, Budha,
Parijata, Sujata, Haridaésa, Gunakara and the powerful
Ksemamirti. All of them were kings.

182-183. Their sons and grandsons were very powerful
and irresistible. They could not be conquered in battle by the
Devas, Danavas, human beings, Yaksas, Bhiitas (goblins) ,
Pigacas (ghosts), Raksasas and good (powerful) serpents.
Their death is ‘not brought about by means of fire, weapons
poison or other means.

184. Their movement is not obstructed on the earth,
sky, Patala (Netherworlds) , water or in the wind. All of them
are indestructible.

185-188.1 The numbers of the quick and mighty monkeys
are many. (Some of them) are ten thousand crores in number.
Others are thousand Arbudas* in number and others thousands
of Mahapadmas (A very high number) and hundreds of
Mahapadmas. Some are ten Arbudas in number; others are
hundred thousand crores. Others thousands of Niyutas (Ten
thousand crores), others are Nikharvas**, others ten crores of
Arbudas. Others sixty crores‘in number, others a hundred thou-
sand Arbudas, others a hundred crores; others ten Padmas***
and still others nine Mahdpadmas in number. These monkeys
belonged to very noble families.

189-193. All of them are brilliant, brave and powerful.
They can assume any form they desire. They have divine
ornaments and dresses. They are devoteesof Brahman. They
maintain sacrificial fires; they perform all kinds of Yajiias,

1. VV. 185-273 give again the special treatment of V4naras
(monkeys) in 319-323. It shows the influence of RamAyaya as the history of
Vali and Sugtiva is narrated succinctly here.

* Arbuda—One hundred millions.

** Nikharva—One thousand millions.

¢#* Padma—One thousand billions.

=== PAGE 65 ===

454 Brahmdanda Purana

and distribute hundreds and thousands by way of monetary
gifts (and sacrificial fees). They are embellished with crowns,
earings, necklaces and upper arm bracelets. They are scholars
in the Vedas and Vedangas. They are cxperts in the science of
polity, indischarging missiles and withdrawing them or in the
activity of killing. They have preference for divine Mantras,
they are honoured on account of divine Mantras; they are effi-
cient, powerful and heroic. They strike by means ofall kinds of
weapons. They are gentle, they can assume divine formsand are
devoid of old age and death. There are ten thousand families of
such noble-souled monkeys.

194-195. Abodes were made for them by Visvakarman
himself in the mountains and caves on the four sides of mounts
Meru, Hemakita, Himalaya,the Nila mountain, the Sveta
mountain, the Nisadha mountain and the Gandhamadana
mountain—well in all the seven continents.

196-200. ‘They are bedecked (endowed with) cities of
various sizes and shapes. They are equally charming during all
the seasons. There are gardens and parks all round. In the
grounds of their abodes and in their couches exudes pleasing
fragrance of flowers. They have different kinds of unguents
and divine embellishments. They are bedecked in all kinds of
jewels and have mental (and spiritual) achievements. Those
monkeys embellished in divine ornaments (enjoy life) drinking
honey and wine in the company of she-monkeys. ‘Their liquor
was accompanied by nectarine dict too. They are full of
activities. They rise in power like the community of gods in
the heaven. Indeed, they are the sons of important Devas and
Gandharvas. They indulge in happiness and pleasure. They
are righteous. They are excessively’‘proud on account of their
boons. They are experts in war. They are very powerful.

201. Among all animals they have no mean or insigni-
ficant position. They are devotedly attached to the Devas and
Brahmanas. They never become pale and faded. They are
truthful. They speak volubly on many matters.

202-204. Those who are endued with forbearance
and those who strictly adhere to established custom, usage and
conduct of life speak with restriction. They have been created
by Brahma himself to be an ornament unto the forests.

=== PAGE 66 ===

2.3.7.205-216 455

This incarnation of monkeys is the cause of devotion in all
the worlds; it is virtuous in regard to Rama’s affiairs; it destroys
all sins.

It is meritorious and conducive to wealth and fame. It is
fascinating and it brings about happiness. I shalt glorify the
same. Listen to it with alertness and attention.

205-206. A powerful son named Vyaghra was born to
urdhva-drsti. Wyaghra had five brothers and five sisters. The
sisters were given in marriage by the brothers to the
monkeys who were purified in mind and who were suitable to
them. He found befitting wives for his brothers as well.

207-208. .Sarabha, well renowned in the worlds, was
born as the son of Vyaghra. Sarabha’s brothers were also
great scholars. They were honoured for their vigour and vitality.
‘They were kings of monkeys. They were well-established in all
righteous activities. Sarabha’s son named Suka was very strong
and intelligent.

209-210. His son too, named Rksa, born of the belly
(womb) of Vyaghri was very powerful. He was an unassailable
empcror. He was the leader of the herds of all monkeys. He had
great splendour. He wasa persistent slayer of enemies. He was
a master of the technique of wielding all sorts of missiles.

211-212. Viraja, the Prajapati, handed over (in marriage
his gold-bedecked daughter endowed with many good qualities
to him (i.e. Rksa) because he was such a specially gifted one.
Rksa the leader of the herds of monkeys married her.

213. That girl of charming smiles was very beautiful to
behold. She had limbs free from blemish. On_ seeing that girl
of pleasing appearance Mahendra began to love her.

214. Vali of great valour and manliness was born as
her son due to her union with Mahendra. He was as valiant
as Mahendra himself.

215. Similarly, the sunsgod too begot of her in secret his
son, a part of himself. He was Sugriva the leader of the herds
of monkeys.

216. On seeing both the sons endowed with strength,
beauty of form and glorious splendour, Rksa, the leader of the
herds of all the monkeys, had a great deal of delight.

=== PAGE 67 ===

456 Brahmanda Purana

217-219. He crowned his eldest son Vali who had
golden garlands (necklaces). Crowned thus and followed
by Sugriva, Vali administered the kingdom like the lord of
Devas in the heaven.

Susena’s daughter named Tara was the wife of that noble-
souled (Vali). She was highly intelligent and her face resembled
the lord of stars (i.e. the moon). She gave birth to a son Angada
who had golden Angadas (ornaments of the upper arm).

220. <Ason of terrible exploits was born to Angada in
the eldest daughter of Mainda. His name was Dhruva. He
earned great renown.

221. Ruma the splendid daughter of Panasa was the wife
of Sugriva. Three sons of great renown were born to him.

222. After finding out very beautiful wives for them the
powerful Sugriva stayed beside Vali along with his monkey
followers.

223-227. The fierce (Sugriva) stayed with his brother
for many years like a Deva (a god).

Kesari married the daughter of Kufijara named Afjana.
That lady of great purity and good fortune went to a park named
Purhsavana. Vayu (the wind-god) made advances to the lady
who was proudof her youth. Hanuman was born of her by
her union with Vayu the (source of) life into the entire
universe. The sons of Kesari were well known here as well as in
the heaven.

The eldest among them all was Hanuman. Matiman is
remembered as the son after him. Others were Srutiman
Ketuman and the intelligent Dhrtiman. All the brothers of
Hanuman were well established along with suitable and befitting
wives. The sons were thus established by their father. They
were blessed with sons and grandsons.

228-230. Hanuman was a Brahmacarin (observer of the
vow of celibacy), He was not joined in wedlock with any woman.
He was like another Garuda in speed and extensive expedition.

Nala the powerful and unconquerable son of Agni was
born of the wife of Kanakabindu. He wasa leader of monkeys.

There are other powerful monkeys of great fortune and
grandeur. Of them the most important leaders of the leading
monkeys should be known.

=== PAGE 68 ===

2.3.7.231-249 457

231-237. They are Tara, Kusuma, Panasa, Gandha-
madana, Ripasri, Vibhava, Gavaya, Vikata, Sara, Susena,
Sudhanu, Subandhu, Satadundubhi, Vikaca, Kapila,
Raudra, Pariyatra, Prabhafijana, Kufijara, Sarabha, Dasnstrin,
Kalamirti, Mahasukha, Nanda, Kandarasena, Nala, Varuni,
Cirava, Karava, Tamra, Citrayodhin, Rathitara, Bhima, Satabali,
Kalacakra, Anala, Nala, Yaksdsya, Gahana, Dhimra,
Paficaratha, Parijata, Mahadipta, Sutapas, Balasagara,
Srutayus, Vijayakanksin, Gurusevin, Yatharthaka, Dharmacetas
Suhotra, Salihotra, Sarpaga, Pundra, Avaragatra, Caruripa,
and Satrujit.

238-244. (The follegwing also are very important
monkeys) viz. Vikata, Kavata, Mainda, Bindukara, Asurantaka,
Mantrin, Bhimaratha, Sanga, Vibhranta, Caruhasavan, Ksana-
ksanamitahara, Drdhabhakti, Pramardana, Jajali, Paficamu-
kuta, Balabandhu, Samahita, Payahkirti, Subha, Ksetra,
Binduketu, Sahasrapat, Navaksa, Harinetra, Jimita, Balahaka,
Gaja, Gavayanaman, Subahu, Gunakara, Virabahu, Krtin,
Kunda, Krtakrtya, Subheksana, Dvivida, Kumuda, Bhasa,
Sumukha, Suruvu, Vrka, Vikata, Kavaka, Javasena, Vrsakrti,
Gavaksa, Naradeva,Suketu, Vimalanana, Sahasvara,Subhaksetra,
Puspadhvamsa, Vilohita, Navacandra, Bahuguna, Saptahotra,
Mariciman, Godhaman, DhaneSa, Golangila and Netravan.

245. Thus these monkeys have been enumerated in view
of their real importance. Since the names are many, they
cannot be described in full.

246-247a. Each of them had the strength of ten crores of
elephants.

Vali, the scorcher of foes, was the king of all the hosts
of monkeys stationed in all the seven continents. He himself
stayed in Kiskindha.

247b-248a. That powerful Vali once defeated Ravana.
He caught hold of him with his left hand. Placing him at his
side, he pressed him hard and went on meditating.

248b-249, In the course of a Muhirta he went to the four
oceans, the southern, the eastern, the western and the northern,
touching meanwhile all the four sides. He had the speed of
the mind and the wind but he was not exhausted. (He did
not feel strain of the long travel) .

=== PAGE 69 ===

458 Brahmanda Purdna
250-252. Vali of great vitality thus defeated Ravana
who had made the worlds cry. As Ravana became delirious
and unconscious, he released him from the grip of his arms
and placed him at the root of a tree. Haughty, on account of
excessive strength, he sprinkled cold water on Ravana from his
head to his foot. When Ravana regained consciousness, Vali
pretended to be surprised. The lord of monkeys then spoke to
the king of Raksasas who was very fierce in battle.

253-260. ‘O king of Raksasas, having exploits cqual
to those of Mahendra, you have conquered innumerable
armies in hattle and defeated Yama and his ministers. Varuna,
Kubera, the moon, the sun-god, groups of Maruts, Rudras,
Adity1r, ASvins, Vasus, Daityas, Kalakeyas, Danavas of very
great power, Siddhas, Gandharvas, Yaksas, Raksasas, serpents,
excellent leaders of birds, the planets, the stars, constellations,
goblins, ghosts, proud of their specially increased strength,
and hundreds and thousands of kings of human beings. In spite
of having all these achievements and qualifications (you have
been defeated by me).

In speed you are on a par with the mind and the wind.
You are capable of moving the Meru. You are unconquerable
like God of death. You have routed all the heroes in
the worlds. You are the conqueror of the cities of enemies by
means of armies (with the striking power) of the thunderbolt.
You have levelled mountains by means of your armies as power-
ful as thunderbolt. You have agitated and stirred up the seven
Oceans seven times. You are a Mahdratha (a great hero who
can withstand the attack of thousands of archers). You are free
from excitements and are cager to gain Victory. You are proud
of your strength. In spite of that, you, a powerful warrior, have
becn overwhelmed by me, a weak one and a monkey in
particular.

261. How is it that you, in spite of being an unconquer-
able powerful hero, have been condenined to sucha plight as
this. Tell me, O leading Raksasa of Brahmana caste, what is

the reason hereof ?
262-264. Freedom from fear has been given unto you by

me. Rest assured, You have nothing to fear.”

=== PAGE 70 ===

2.3.7.265-275 459

On hearing the words of Vali, the ten-hcaded Raksasa of
great valour said these words in a conciliatory tone, because he
was flurried and excited on account of fear :—

‘‘Undoubtedly, all the Devas and the Asuras have been
defeated by me in battle. But a powerful man of this sort (i.e.
like you) I have never come acrossanywhere. Therefore, I wish
to have a friendly alliance with you, devoid of fear of every
sort.

265-266. O heroic warrior, never will a fight ensue
with you, from my side.”

On being requested thus Vali said—‘‘Your words shall be
truce.”

Having entered into the treaty (agreement) with V4li at
the outset, Ravana went to Lanka along with his hordes. His
inner soul became extremely delighted.

267-273. After defeating the lord of the Raksasas at
Puskara in battle, the powerful Vali performed many Yajnhas
where food and drink were supplicd in plenty and in which
hundreds and thousands of monetary gifts were distributed in
an increased scale. He performed Agnistomas, Asvamedhas
(horse-sacrifices) , Rajasiyas, Nrmedhas (human sacrifices) and
all kinds of sacrifices, accompanied by all kinds of charitable
gifts. He propitiated the Devas and Devendra by means of
many offcrings. He propitiated Brahma by performing Homas
in the fire for many years. He was happy in the company of
his younger brother Sugriva. He had nothing to fear from any
quarter. He looked after the kingdom of monkeys. He was devot-
ed to the Brahmanas. He considered Brahman to be the supreme
one. He was (as it were) a bridge of righteousness. He was
engaged in holy rites. He was conversant with all sacred scrip-
tures. He sported about and enjoyed life for many years.
During his Sacrifices, Narada the celestial sage, sang this verse
of praise.

‘‘Neither in offering oblations in sacrifices nor in charit-
able gifts norin quick action and exploits is there anyone in
the three worlds equai to Vali the wearer of gold necklaces.”

Sdnsapayana said :—
274-275. O1! how powerful and excessively efficient

=== PAGE 71 ===

460 Brahmdanda Purana

was Vali the son of Mahendra. He had performed thousands of
Yajfias. He was extremely unconquerable. Vali has been des-
cribed as a highly intelligent cmperor by you. Recount to us
how Mairtanda came to be known so. O holy lord of very
sacred rites, explain its etymologial derivation factually.

Sita said :—

276-278. While the living beings were being created,
Prajapati himself brought the greatest splendour in the three
worlds and deposited it within the heart of Aditi since he had
great yogic power.

In the beginning, the holy lord had created an egg with-
in her belly. The powerful foetus was within the egg.

279-283. It increased excessively. The Devas became
devoid of splendour on coming to know that the foetus had
becn evolved wholly out of their own brilliance which had been
taken away. They became afraid and said to Prajapati—‘‘How
shall this be to us, (What will become of us) ? O lord, the
strength and brilliance of this (foetus) evolved by you is ex-
cessive. How can we exist? O perpetual one surely we shall be
finished. There is no doubt that all living beings here,
both mobile and immobile will become burnt before long. O
excellent Brahmana, consider over this (point), withdraw the
strength and splendour deposited within the egg so that it will
be conducive to our welfare. The renown and potentiality of
the splendour burns all round rapidly.

284-288. After reflection, the lord Prajapati pulled it off.
He infused strength in the egg. Then the child was within the
egg. They say that what was the infused strength is the egg (?)
The brilliance is considered to be the child. When it was taken
out of the belly it resembled a dead lump. Thereupon, Prajapati
examined it, and split the egg into two. Placing the two pieces
(side by side), he saw in one of them the foetus overwhelmed
by weakness. It was however full of brilliance. At once he
lifted it up and placed it in the lap of Aditi. He said—‘He has
the state of being born of Aditi. Since he was born dead (Mrta)
as an egg (Anda) Savitr (the sun) is called Martanda by

=== PAGE 72 ===

2.3.7.289-300 461

the learned men.!

289. Prapitamaha (the great grandfather, Brahma)
created more brilliance in it. It is considered that what were
the two egg-shells, had got very great powet (i.e. the strength
of the egg-shells was great).

290. The lord placed them separately in her navel and
gave them to Iravati. With a wish for procreation, he stuffed
them into her belly.

291. Thereupon, four lordly elephants were born to
{ravati. They were very powerful and they became the befitting
vehicles of Devas. They were honoured by the worlds.

292. They were Airavana, Kumuda, Afijana and
Vamana. I shall describe them unto you in detail later on.

293-296. Lord Savitr (sun) who directly blazes with his
rays, is very important in this world on account of his superior
and unlimited strength and brilliance. It is Savitr who illumi-
nates this universe that had been devoid of light.O Brahmanas,
the exterior of Lokaloka is enveloped in darkness. The proof
for this has been fully stated by me factually O excellent
Brahmanas. This had been heard by me from the holy noble-
souled lord Vyasa, the son of Paragara. Formerly, this had
been narrated by Sanatkumara as well as Vayu. After reflecting
deeply, this has been recounted by others too in different ways.

297. The merit that one acquires after listening to the
nectar-like Puranas is conducive to the achievement of all
objects. (He who listens to it) roams about fearlessly even after
undergoing a hundred transmigrations into other species.

298-299a. If the story of the birth of Martanda is in
anyone’s house, if the story is narrated in anyone’s house, under-
stand that he is one who has no equal. His children will never
die prematurely.

299b-300.2 Rksa was the sister of Rksa a very powerful
monkey. She gave birth to the renowned Jambavan as a result
of her union with Prajapati. He was accepted as one among
themselves by herocs. He was a highly intelligent king of bears.

1. This explains how the sun came to be called Martanda.
2. VV. 299-304 enumerate the important members of the Species

of bears.

=== PAGE 73 ===

462 Brahmanda Purdna

301. His daughter Jambavati was born of Vyaghri. That
lady of lotus-like eyes was given in mariiage to Vasudeva (i.e.
Srikrsna) by her father.

302-304. Other children too, very powerful sons were
born to the king of bears. They were Jayanta, Sarvajfia,
Mrgarat, Sankrti, Jaya, Marjara, Balibahu, Laksanajfia,
Srutarthakrt, Bhoja, Raksasajit, Pig4ca, Vanagocara, Sarabha,
Salabha, Vyaghra and Simha. They had hundreds and_thou-
sands of sons and grandsons.

305-307. Only the group of the Rksas (bears) is honour-
ed by the Devas and the Danavas.

Marjaras (cats) are (were), the extremely powerful sons
of Marjara and Vadi (?) They are (were) hundreds and
thousands in number. All of them are (were) endowed with
virility. They are the preceptors of Sarabhas and_ other beasts
of prey. They have great strength. They taste the flesh of mice,
birds, Prsatas (spotted antelopes) etc. They are engaged in
moving quickly and leaping about. They harass all animals.

308. They stay in villages, parts of forests, hollows of
trees, caves, houses and inner apartments of abodes.

309. They move about by means of different modes of
walking; they are clever, they are seen in villages; they move
about in forests. They stay (in both the places) naturally.

310a. They can move about during days and nights as
well as in twilight.

310b-311. They are (of various colours. Some are) of
the colour of blue (black) clouds, some brownish red in colour;
some are red and some are squint-eyed. Some are black in
colour, some are tawny in colour. Others are of various colours
with lines (and spots) .

They are terrible with claws and curved teeth for their
weapons, They can utter cries like peacocks.

312. Two sons were born to Sarama. They were brave
and extremely unbearable. They were Syama and Sabala.
They are remembered as the attendants of Yama.

313. Their sons were unassailable. They were blessed
with sons and grandsons. Their race became well renowned for
ever among Sarameyas (Dogs). -

=== PAGE 74 ===

2.3.7.314-324 463

314-318. At present, the animals of the same species are
very strong. They have hideous forms. They give trouble to men
belonging to every caste and community. They can have a
residence attached to the villages also (i.e. they can be domesti-
cally trained and keptin villages).

He who listens to the origin of the animals with
curved teeth and he who narrates the same, need not have
any fear from animals with curved fangs nor from thieves, nor
from anything else. The decision is (i.e. it is certain) that death

will come to them immediately (and not in a lingering

manner) .
He does not get involved in imprisonment. He does not

get an ignominious birth. He does not get mixed up with other
castes. He attains the merit based on the Vanaprastha stage in
life (i.e. of the forest hermit) resorted to by sages. He will be
richly endowed with divine wealth and strength. He does not
err from perfect wisdom and knowledge. He is bornin the divine
wombs (becomes a god).

319-320. There are eleven species (varieties of monkeys)
viz.—Dvipins, Sarabhas, Sirnhas, Vyaghras, Nilas, Salyakas,
Rksas, Marjaras, Loharhnsas(?), Vanaras and Mayus. These
are considered to be the eleven species of monkeys. The leader
of all these is the valiant king Vali.

321. In the course of the battles between the Devas and
the Asuras, he was the violent slayer of the terrible and powerful
Asuras who would rather get slain (than submit), because they
were perpetually self-respecting.

322-323. It was for the destruction of the haughty hordes
(or, the strength of the haughty) that this host (of monkeys)
had beencreated formerly by the noble-souled Brahma, the
sustainer of the worlds. This group had been intended by him
as one that would render help to Mahendra.

Thus the monkeys have been recounted. Understand (the
progeny) of Iravati.

324.1 Bhauvana (i.e. Visvakarman, the architect of the
gods) brought together the two egg-shells of the sun. Holding

1. VV. 324-358 describe the different types of elephants, their cha-
racteristics and their favourite haunts.

=== PAGE 75 ===

464 Brahmanda Purana

them with both of his hands, he sang the Rathantara {a Saman
Mantra).

325. Even as the Saman mantra was being sung, Bhau-
vana hastened to Iravati and gave them to her for the purpose
of sons.

326. Since he was the son of Iravati he is remembered
as Airavata. Since he was the vehicle of the king of the Devas
that king of elephants was the first and the foremost.

327-333. Airavata the glorious elephant has the lustre of
white clouds. He has four tusks (teeth) (Here the text is defec-
tive). Afijana is an elephant with golden colour. It has only a
single tusk (?) Bhadra the vehicle of Bali has six tusks.

The she-elephant of Airavata is Abhramu. They had four
sons viz.—Afjana, Supratika, YVamana and Padma the fourth
one. Abhramu gave birth to four powerful sons who became
the elephants of the (four) quarters( who belong to the species)
of Bhadra, Mrga, Manda and Sarhkirna varicty. Ile is the
vehicle of Yama. Supratika belongs to the Bhadra variety. He
is the vehicle of the lord of waters (Varuna). Padma belongs to
the rnanda variety. He is white in colour. He is the elephant
(vehicle) of Ailavila (i.e. Kubera). (Vamana) is dark-coloured
and belongs to the Mrga variety. He is the vehicle of Pavaki
(? Karttikeya). Eight sons were born to him. Viz—-Padma,
Uttama, Padmagulma, Agaja, Vatagaja,, Gaja, Capala and
Arista (lit. one whose name is Arista). Elephants equipped
with lofty stature are born in his family.

334. Those elephants are tawny-coloured with white
hairs and nails. They have various other colours also.

I shall recount in due order other elephants also born of
Saman.

335-336. Kapila and Pundarika of good name and fame
were born of Rathantara Supratika and Pramardana became well-
renowned after them both.

Elephants belonging to his race are remembered to be
very strong and suspicious of others. They are heroic (brave) .
Their head and teeth (tusks) are very big. Their hairs and nails
are very pure (white). ;

337. Puspadanta was the son of Brhatsaman( ?) Saddanta

=== PAGE 76 ===

2.3.7.338-348a 465

(having six tusks), Padmapucchavan and Tamraparna were his
sons. They move about in herds. They have tusks.

338. Elephants with lips hanging down, beautiful to
behold, are born in his race. Their skin, tongue and trunk are
dark-coloured. Their faces (heads) are large and stout.

339. Vamadeva, Afijana, Syama and Vamana were born
of Saman. His wife is Afijana and Nilavan and Laksana are
the sons.

340. Elephants of the following type are born in his
family. They are very enormously big and fierce. Their necks
and heads are beautiful. They are broad-chested and swift. They
are fettered from below (i.e. by means of fect).

341. With the removal of his deformity Supratika attain-
ed the same form as that of Saman. He had three sons viz.—
Prahari, Sampati, and Prthu.

342-343. Elephants of the following type are born in his
family. They are lofty. They have long palates and lips. Their
hairs are well arranged. In sexual intercourse they are extremely
gentle.

Through (the power of) Saman, Afijanavati gave birth to
Afijana the son of Afijana. They had two other sons also re-
membered as Pramathi and Purusa.

344-345a. Elephants of the following type were born in
his family. Their heads are remarkably divided into two (Here
partition of the head is referred to). They resemble the glossy
clouds. They are pleasing to look at. Their bodies are well-built.
They have the luster of lotus. They have proportionate girth of
the body, globular in shape. They are brave and they have stout
and large faces.

345b-347a. Through the power of Saman, Kumudadyuti
(one having lustre of lily) gave birth to Kumuda, the son of
Candramas (the moon-god ).

His two sons Mahapadma and Urmimalin were born of
Pingala. Understand that the elephants born in his race are of
the following type :—They resemble mountains and clouds.
They are excellent and powerful. They are enlightened (intelli-
gent). They are fond of fighting with other elephants.

347b-348a. For the sake of their victory in the battle

=== PAGE 77 ===

466 Brahmanda Purdna

between the Devas and the Asuras the Suras made usesof these
elephants. When their purpuse was served, the elephants men-
tioned before were let off by the Devas. They then went in
different directions.

348b-349a. The Devas gave unto Lomapada the king of
Anga and the author of Sitras (Aphorisms) such of those
elephants as are born in the family of these and are well-trained
and tamed.

349b-351. The etymological derivation of the various
names of elephants is as follows :1 The elephant is called Dvirada
because it has two tusks (Rada); the word Hastin is derived
from Hasta (hand i.e. the trunk) ; the word Karin is derived from
Kara (hand i.e. the trunk). The word Dantin is derived from
Dantas (tusks); the elephant is called Varana because it defends
and guards (Vérandt) the soldicrs in the battle; it is called Gaja
because it trumpets (Garjandt); it is called Kufijara because it
roams about among the hedges and bushes (Kuiijas) ; it is called
Naga because there is nothing which it cannot reach (Na-
Agamya) ; it is called Matanga because it runs about intoxicat-
ed; it is remembered as Dvipa because it drinks by means of
the two hollows in its trunk (the mouth). It is called
Sdmaja because it is born of Séman. Thus is the procedure of the
etymological derivation.

352-353a. The turning away of their tongues (i.e. inabi-
lity to speak or cessation of the power of speech) has been
mentioned as originating from the curse of Agni (firegod). The
fact that an elephant cannot be aware of its own inherent
strength and that its scrotum lies hidden within its body—these
two should be known as resulting from the curse of the Suras.

353b-354. Elephants of diverse inborn strength are born
ofthe daughters of Devas, Danavas, Gandharvas, Pisacas,
serpents and Raksasas through their union with the Dinnagas
(elephants of the quarters). Hence is the existence, nativity and
etymological derivation of their names. This should be under-

stood.

1. VV. 349-351 give the etymologies of various names of the ele-
phants.

=== PAGE 78 ===

2.3.7.355-370 467

355-356a. The king of these (elephants) is Abhramu. It
should be understood that the habitat of Afijana of a single
tusk (Ekamila ?) is that forest region north of the Kausiki and
the Ganga extending as far as the ocean.

356b-357a. The;region to the north of the Vindhya and
south of the Ganga along with the Keru (Karusa) region
where the Ganga bifurcates the domain of Supratika.

357b-358a. The region west of Utkala and the area west
of the Kaveri is remembered as the forest of Vamana son of
Ekasika (?)

358b-359a. The region west of the Lohita, the area west
of the river Sindhu as far as the mountain nearby is mentioned
as the forest of Padma.

359b-370. Bhiita gave birth to the Bhitas (goblins) who
are the attendants and followers of Rudra. They are (i.e. the
following are their various characteristic features) stout, lean,
tall, dwarfs, short ones, upright ones, those with hanging ears,
those with suspended lips, those with long dangling tongues,
those with small bellies, single-eyed, ugly ones, those with
hanging hips, those with stout calves, black ones, white (fair)
ones, blue ones, white-faced ones, red-faced ones, those of tawny
colour, those of assorted colours, smoke-coloured ones, those
who have reddish noses, those with hairs like Mufija grass,
those with hairs standing on ends, those with serpents as their
sacred thread, those with many heads, those with no feet, those
witha single head, those with no heads, fierce ones, hideous ones
of disproportionate limbs, those with matted hairs, hump-back-
ed ones, crooked ones, those of dwarfish stature, those who
resort to excellent lakes, occans, mountains, rivers and their
banks, those with single ear, those with large ears, spike-eared
ones, those with no ear, those with curved fangs, those with
claws, those without teeth, those without tongues, those with
single hand, those with two hands, those with three hands,
those without hands, those witha single leg, those with two legs,
those with three Iegs, those with many legs, those with great
Yogic power, those with great inherent might, those with very
good minds, those with great power, those who can go any-
where, those who have no obstacles, those having the know-
ledge of Brahman, those who can assume any form they wish,

=== PAGE 79 ===

468 Brahmdnda Purdna

terrible ones, cruel ones, pure ones, those who consider liquor
very pure, very virtuous ones, those with false teeth, those with
big tongues, those without hair, those with deformed faces,
those who eat with their hands, those who gulp down with their
mouths, those who eat with heads (?) those with skulls, those
having bows, those who wield hammers, those who hold swords
and spears, those who have only the quarters for their clothes
(i.e. naked ones), those with variegated dresses, those with
garlands and unguents of diverse kinds, those who take in rice,
those who habitually eat meat, those who drink liquor and
those who drink Soma juice.

371. Some of them are very terrible and they walk about
during twilight hours; some of them are very gentle and they
walk about during the midnight, the terrible ones among them
stalk at night.

372. All of them meditate upon lord Bhava as the
greatest God, in their minds. None of these has a wife or sons.
All of them are celibate. They have sublimated their sexual
instinct.

373. There are hundred thousand Bhitas with yogic
powers in their souls. They are the attendants of Bhava.

(Thus) all the Bhitas! have been mentioned.

374. Kiismandas? were born of Kapisa again and again
in the form of twins. They are Pisacas with tawny colour.

375. On account of their tawny colour (we can_ infer)
that all the Pigacas are flesh-eaters. These pairs (of Pisacas)
have the Sodaga (sixteen) variety as their first set. Their family
exists (even today).

376-380. I shall mention their names and the features of
their family. (The following are the sixteen pairs,* one male
and the other female) Chagala and Chagala; Vakra and
Vakramukhi, Duspiira and Parana; Siici and Sicimukha;
Vipada and Vipadi; Jvala and Angaraka; Kumbhapatra and

1. Belief in goblins and the concepts about their 16 tribes are described
in VV. 359-373.

2. VV. 374-384 describe the goblins called Kiiym4ndas. They are
mixed up with Pigacas, .

* Actuully cighteen pairs are mentioned.

=== PAGE 80 ===

2.3.7.381-389 469

Kumbhi, Pratunda and Pratundika, Upavira and Vira; Uli-
khala and Ulakhali; Akarmaka and Karmaki; Kusanda and
Kusandika; Panipatra Panipatri; Parhsu and Parhsumati;
Nitunda and Nitundi; Nipuna and Nipuni; Balada and Kesa-
nadi and Praskanda and Skandika.

381-383. The sixteen* groups of the Pigacas are men-
tioned. The sixteen families are, viz :—Ajamukhas, Vakra-
mukhas, Piranas, Skandins, Vipadas, Angarikas, Kumbha-
patras, Pratundakas, Upaviras, Ulukhalikas, Akarmakas,
Kusandikas, Pamsus, Panipatras, Naitundas, Nipunas, Sici-
mukhas and Ucchesanadas. These are the sixteen families.

384. Thus the members of the families of Kiismandas
have been recounted. Those male Pisacas and the female
Pigacas are born in the family.

385. Infinite is their series of sons and grandsons. They
are loathsome and _ hideous. Henceforth understand the
characteristic features of those Pisacas.

386. Those Pisgacas! called Ajamukhas have hairs all
over their body. Their eyes are round. They have curved fang-
like teeth and clawlike nails. Their limbs are crooked and
oblique. They diffuse harshness.

387. The Pisacas called Kusandikas have no ear. They
are devoid of hair and garments. They (sometimes) wear skins
and hides as garments. They are fond of food that always
consists of meat.

388. It should be known that Pisacas called Vakras can
assume any form they wish. They walk crookedly. All their
limbs, hands and feet are bent and crooked. Their habits and
opinions are fradulent.

389. The Pisacas called Nitundakas are portly and pot-
bellied. They have snout-like noses. Their bodies, heads and
arms are very short. Their staple diet is gingelly seeds. They
relish blood.

* As above, eighteen groups of Pigdcas are given here.
1. VV. 386-400 describe the various tribes of Pisdcas mentioned in
VV. 381-383 above.

=== PAGE 81 ===

470 Brakmdnda Purdga
390. The Pisacas called Arkamarkas (or Akarmakas as in
V. 379 above) have the forms of monkeys. They are garrulous.
They move about leaping and galloping. They are fond of

eating cooked rice and staying on trees.
391. The PiSacas called Pamésus discharge dust from

their limbs. They keep their arms lifted up. Their hairs stand
up erect. Their eyes appear as though they have been taken out.
They take to anything as their abode.

392. The Pisacas called Upaviras have their permanent
abode in burning grounds. They resemble bees. They are dry.
They are armed with tridents and wear bark garments.

393. The Pisacas called Ulikhalas have motionless eyes
and large tongues with which they constantly lick the sides of.
their mouth. Mortars constitute their ornaments. They are
roguish. They scatter jewels as if in a continuous stream.

394. The Pisacas called Panipatras have the -oblations
offered by peopleas their food, They have stout heads like
those of elephants and camels. Their calves are plump and
curved.

395. The Pisacas called Kumbhapatras eat invisible food-
stuffs. They are subtle, hairy and tawny-coloured. They walk
about sometimes visible and sometimes invisible.

396. The Pisacas called Nipunas move about without
associates (i.e. singly). Their mouths appear to be divided
extending upto their ears. Their brows hang down and their
noses are thick.

397. The Pigacas called Piranas are fond of vacant
horses and apartments. They are stout and short in stature.
Their hands and feet cover up their snouts. Their eyes are
directed towards the ground.

398. The Pisacas called Baladas frequently resort to the
lying-in-chamber. Their hands and feet are directed backwards.
They have the velocity of the wind and they run backwards.

399. The Pisdcas called Vipadakas drink blood during
battles, They arenaked. ‘They don’t have any abode. Their
penis, scrotum and the calves hang down dangling.

400. The Pisacas called Skandins and others called
Ucchesanadins (those who habitually eat food remnants)

=== PAGE 82 ===

2.3.7.401-410 471

are also to be known). Thus the sixteen varieties of Pisacas
have been recounted.

401-406a.1 . Observing the Pisacas of these sorts in such a
pathetic condition, Brahma, out of mercy and sympathy,
granted some boons to those mean-minded ones, They can
vanish among the subjects (i.e. common people). They can
assume any form they wish, They can move about at dawn and
dusk (the two periods of twilight). He assigned to them abodes
as well as means of sustenance. Houses that tumble down, vacant
houses, houses with very little water, houses that are demolished,
houses occupied by persons of improper conduct, houses that
have not been swept, houses that have not been scrubbed clean
and smeared (with cowdung); houses that are devoid of con-
secratory rites, the highways, the side-streets, the parks, the
quadrangles, doorways, the attics and upper storeys, the exits,
transit passages, roadways, rivers, holy centres, the trees in
chapels and monasteries and trunk roads— (these are assigned
as their abodes by Brahma). The Pisacas occupy all these
spots.

406b-408. Persons devoid of virtue and righteousness
have been laid down as their means of sustenance by the gods.
The Pisacas are the presiding deities where (fraudulent) activi-
ties are pursued by the people of mixed castes and stages of
life, blacksmiths, sculptors and other artisans who indulge in
fraudulent means and (illegal) distillation (of liquors), thieves,
traitors guilty of breach of trust and many others who (wish
to) earn by illegitimate means.

409-410. The following are mentioned as the oblations
and offerings to these during the junctions of Parvans (i.e. dawn,
dusk etc. of festival days (viz—honey, liquor, meat, cooked rice
mixed with curd, powdered gingelly seeds, wines and other
intoxicating beverages, incenses, cakes made of turmeric powder,
food-stuffs made of gingelly seeds and cooked rice mixed with
jaggery, black cloth and continuous (permanent) incense mixed
with flowers.

1. VV. 401-411 describe the then current superstitions about
Pigacas,

=== PAGE 83 ===

472 Brahmanda Purdne

411. After assigning all these to the Pisacas,* Brahma
gave all the goblins and Pisacas an overlord viz—the trident-
bearing Girifa.

412. The beautiful lady, Damstra gave birth to lions
and tigers as her sons. Leopards and other carnivorus beasts of
prey are also her sons.

413. Understand completely the creation of progeny of
Rsa also. She had five daughters. Listen to their names from
me.

414. They should be known as follows :—Mina, Amina,
Vrtta, Parivrtta and Anuvrtta. Listen to their progeny.

415. Crocodiles with thousand fangs, the species of fish
known as Pathinas, Timis and Rohitas, these and others are
mentioned as Maina group (i.e. children of Mina). They are
very vast (in number).

416. Grahas (Alligators) should be known classified into
four groups viz—Madguras, Sankus, Ugras and Sisumdras. It was
Amina who gave birth to these.

417. Vrtta gave birth to (different species of) tortoises
and many other aquatic creatures and diverse kinds of conchs.

418. Anuvrtta gave birth to the various forms of frogs,
of black does and Sambitkas (bivalve shells and noxious insects) .

419-420. Parivrtta gave birth to various products of
oyster shells, cowrie shells, conchs, geese, sparrows and varieties
of leeches.

Thus the race of Rsa with its five branches has been
recounted.

421. They say that there is an extensive line of living
heings procreated by Tirya. They are the products of sweat
(or warm vapour).

422, O Brahmanas, lice, nits etc are born of the bodies
moistened by sweat. The creatures called USana are born of the
dirt and residue of human sweat.

423. There are many groups of ants of different species;
there are worms with many feet; there are varieties of products
of conchs and stones smaller than pins.

424. These and othersare the numerous groups of earthly
(creatures) born of sweat. Many of these creatyres are born of
waters heated by the sun etc. as well as from rain.

=== PAGE 84 ===

2.3.7.425-437 473

425-426. Many of them are born of the bodies of deer
and other animals also. The flies and other slimy creatures
are born of slimy marshy regions, The Tiéfiris (? Partridges)
and Puttikas (white ants) are born of dirt. They are blue and
variegated in colours. They are vast and extensive (in number).
These creatures arc born of waters as well as sweat.

427. The creatures Valadas (? varieties of shrimps) of
many feet are the worms born of the water stagnating near the
roots of the Kaa grass. They are stated to be of three kinds—
Simhalas, Romalas (hairy) and Picchilas (Slimy).

428. These and other groupsand species are remembered
as born of water as well as sweat. Similarly, worms are born
from the pods of black gram and green gram and other pulses.

429-430. Creatures are born of the fruits Bilva, Jambi
(Rose apple), Amra (mango), and Piiga (areca palm). They
are born of green gram, jack tree and rice. They are born
of grains placed in the hollows of trees and allowed to dry

there. They are born of other things also but not always or
even for a long time.

431. Creatures are born of horses etc. and poisons etc.

If cowdung is put (into pits etc) and left there for many days
creatures are born of it.

432. Worms are born, O Brahmanas, wholly from

timber and wooden logs. Scorpions are born of dry cowdung,
produced by sweat.

433-435. Creatures are born of cows, buffaloes and other
animals. They are born of fishes too. Creatures of diverse kinds
are born of heaped rice. Various species of creatures are born
of the pack of quails etc. Similarly, leeches and other subtle
species of creatures are born. Subtle Siikas (poisonous insects)
are born of pigeons and ospreys and other ‘birds too. Other
species of worms are born as the products of flies.

436. Offsprings of mosquitoes and black bees generally
live in stagnating water and slushy mud.

437. Clusters of seven varietics of nits (? Putitkd-Putra
saptakas) are born of cows. (Defective text). Vyalas (? serpents)
are remembered as Manicchedas (?). Thus insects produced from
foetus with no enveloping membrane have been recounted.

=== PAGE 85 ===

474 Brahmfada Purdna

438-439. Indeed, the offshoots of Sataveri (? sorrel) are
born of dry cow-dung. Thus the numerous groupsf Samsvedaja
(i.e. born of sweat) have been succinctly mentioned by me.
This is remembered as being born as a result of acts in the
previous birth. As for the other beings born of Nairrti they
are remembered as upasargajas (born of paroxyson due to
poison by devils).

440-441. Some Bhitas (living beings) are born of the
womb (sexual reproduction). Someare remembered as Autpatti-
kas (?) It should be known that almost all the Devas are usually
Upapattyas. Some Devas are born of the womb. Some Devas are
born of some cause.

Sarama gave birth to two sons viz.—Dullolaka and
Laloha.

442-443. Thefour ones Srmara and others should be
known. as their chijdren.,

Dullola’s eight children are Syamas (dark-coloured),
Sabalas (of variegated colours), Lohiias (red), Afijanas (black
as collyrium), Krsna (black), Dhimra (smoke-coloured), Aruna
(pink in colour) and Kadrukas (tawny-coloured ).

Surasa gave birth to the hundred serpents having more
than one head.

444-447, Taksaka is the king of Sarpas (variety of
serpents). Vasuki is the king of Nagas (snakes) .

Thus this set belonging to the family of Krodhavaésa is
mostly of Tamasa quality.

This is the bosom creation of Pulaha, Understand (the
creation) of Tamra.

Six well known daughters were born of Tamra. Viz.—
Grdhri, Bhasi, Suki, Kraufici, Syeni and DhrtarAstrika.

From Aruna, Grdhri gave birth to two sons of great
strength and vitality, viz—Sampati and Jatayu the most
excellent ones among birds.

Vijayas, Dvirasyas and Prasahas (?) were the sons of
Sampiati.

=== PAGE 86 ===

2.3.7 .448-462 475

448-454. Jatayu’s sons are theherons, Vultures, Karnikas
{? variety of vultures) .

The wives of Garuda were the other five viz.—Bhasi,
Kraufici, Suki, Dhrtarastrf and Syeni. I shall recount to you
the children born of them.

Suki gave birth to six well reputed sons of Garuda, viz—
Snukha, Sunetra, Visikha, Suriipa, Surasa and Bala. Their sons
and grandsons number fourteen thousand. They are noble-
souled and very great devourers of snakes. A number of places
have been pervaded (inhabited) by them because of the expan-
sion of the race, due to the creation of sons and grandsons.
I shall mention them in due order. They are—the whole of
Salmali Dvipa, the mountain Devakita, Manimanta, the lord
of mountains with a thousand peaks, Varnamala, Sukeéa the
mountain with a hundred peaks, the Kaurara with five peaks
and the mountain Hemakita. The peaks of these mountains
have been thickly inhabited by those noble-souled sons of
Garuda who have the velecity of violent gusts of the wind and
who shine brilliantly due to numerous rubies.

455-456. The following are remembered as the sons of
Bhasi Viz.—Bhasas (vultures), owls, crows, cocks, peacocks
doves, partridges, different types of birds of preysuch as Vadhri-
nasa, Kraufica, Syena, sparrows and cranes and also other birds
that eat fiesh.

457-460. Dhrtarastri, the beautiful lady, gave birth to

swans of various types, the ruddy geese and all types of aquatic
birds.

O excellent Brahmanas, Syeni gave birth to a number of
sons. Her sons and grandsons areinfinite in number. The sons of
Garuda have heen mentioned. Now li ten to the progeny of Ira.

Ira gave birth to three lotus-eyed daughters. They became
the mothers of plants, trees and creepers. They were Lata,
Alata and Virudha.

461-462. Lat& gave birth to plants that bore fruits
through flowers. Alaté gave birth to big trees that bear fruits
by means of blossoms,

=== PAGE 87 ===

476 Brahmanda Purane

The children of Virudha are hedges, creepers, winding
plants, grasses and varieties of bamboos. The race stops here.

463. These scions of the family of Kasyapa consisting of
the mobile and immobile beings, have been explained. The
whole universe is stretched (i.e. thickly covered) with their
sons and grandsons, |

464-465a. This part of a section of creation has been
mentioned by me. The Creative activity pertaining to Marici’s
son (i.e. Kasyapa) has been succinctly recounted to you.

It is impossible to explain (the creation) in full detail
even in hundreds of years.

465b-466. Aditi was habitually righteous. Diti was
habitually strong.

Surabhi was habitually a performer of austere
penance. Danu habitually practised Maya (whichcraft and
magic of illusion). Muni habitually smelt fragrant things.
Krodha was habitually studious.

467. Arista habitually indulged in singing. Khaga habit-
ually followed cruel pursuits. Kadri was habitually fiery in
temper (and indulged in angry outbursts). Krodha habitually
engaged herself in cleanliness.

468. Vinata was habituated to moving about on vehicles.
Tamra habitually indulged in slaughter. Ira was obliging in
nature (and indulged in activities of blessing. Anayu was engag-
ed in eating.

469-470. These were the habits of all those Lokamdtrs
(mothers of the worlds). The sons of lord KaSsyapa were more
or less like their respective mothers since their birth. In virtue,
habit, intellect forbearance, beauty of form, and strength, they
closely resembled their mothers. They were righteous or other-
wise (on the same basis). They had Rajas, Sattva and Tamas
qualities predominant in them (as mothers).

471. They were Devas, Asuras, Gandharvas, Yaksas,
Raksasas, serpents, Pigacas, animals, deer birds and creepers.

472-473. Since the Devas and others were born of the
daughters of Daksa who were human beings, they know that
Devas and others have their source of origin in human beings.

=== PAGE 88 ===

2.3.7.474—8.2 477

Since the entire birth of the Devas is in human beings in
all the Manvantaras, human beings are the most excellent ones.

474-475. Men are those who aspire for virtue, wealth,
love and salvation, Therefrom are born Suras and Asuras who
are the category Arcdksrotas (in whom current of nutriment
flows downward). They are born among human beings again
and again for the achievement of specific objects. Thus the
origin of the different races has been enumerated in detail.

476-478. The (story) of Suras, Asuras, Gandharvas,
Apsaras, Yaksas, Raksasas, Pigacas, Garuda, serpents, birds,
tigers, peacocks, herbs, worms, insects, locusts, minute creatures
aquatic beings, animals, and glorious Brahmanas, is charact-
erised by merit. It causes prosperity. It contributes, to welfare
and happiness. It must be heard always and comprehended by
persons devoid of malice and jealousy.

479. He who regularly reads about the race of the noble
souls in the honouréd assembly of Brahmanas attains good
progeny, plenty of wealth and splendid goal after death.”’

CHAPTER EIGHT
The race of the sages ; Atri and Vaststha

Sita said :

1-2. ‘After all the progeny, both the mobile and the
immobile, had been created and well-established by the noble-
souled KaSyapa Prajapati, he began to assign them their
respective domain after crowning the chiefs of them’ in over-
lordship.?

-1. VV 1-21 enumerate the chiefs or heads of different kinds of crea-
tion. One is reminded here of BG X—the Vibhatiyoga in a different context.

=== PAGE 89 ===

478 Brahmauda Purdga

3. He installed as king Soma, in the kiggdom of
Brahmanas, creepers, constellations, planets, Yajfias and
austerities.

4. He gave the overlordship of all the Angiras to
Brhaspati. He anointed Kavya (i.e. Sukra) as the ruler over
the kingdom of Bhrgus.

5. Thenhe made Visnu, the leader of the Adityas,
Pavaka (fire-god) as the leader of Vasus, Daksa chief of the
Prajapatis and Vasava (Indra), as the head of Maruts.

6. He made Prahlada, the delighter of Diti, the king of
Daityas, Narayana, of the Sadhyas and the bull-bannered god
as the king of Rudras.

7-8. He directed Vipracitti to become the: king of
Danavas; he commanded Varuna to rule over the kingdom of
waters; he made Vaisravana, the king of kings, Yaksas and
wealth; he installed Yama the son of Vivasvan in the kingship
of Pitrs.

9. He made the trident-bearing Giriga, the lord ofall
Bhitas (goblins) and the Pisacas (ghosts); mount Himavan;
the leader of all mountains and the ocean, the king of rivers.

10. He made Citraratha the overlord of Gandharvas,
and crowned Uccaissravas as the king of horses.

11. He made Sardila (tiger) the king ofall deer or
animals in general, and Govrsa (Bull) the king of all animals
having humps. He made Garuda, the most excellent one among
those who fly, the king of all birds.

12. He made Vayu the most excellent of all powerful
ones, the leader of fragrant smells, Maruts and unembodied
living beings who have (however) great strength at the same
time.

13. He made Sega the leader of all those who have fangs,
Vasuki the leader of Nagas (snakes) and Taksaka the leader of
Sarisrpas (reptiles), Sarpas (Cobras) and Pannagas (serpents).

14. He installed Parjanya, one of the Adityas, as the
lord of oceans, rivers, clouds and the showering rains.

15-17a. He made Kamadeva the lord of all groups of
Apsaras. *

=== PAGE 90 ===

2.3.8.17b-29 479

He tmade Sanvatsara (the year) the lord of the Rtus
(seasons), months, Artavas (product of the seasons), fortnights,
Vipaksas (days of transition from one half of a lunar month to
another) Muhiirtas, Parvans (festival occasions of particular
periods in the year) Kalds, Kas thds etc. (i.e. the various units of
time), of the transits of the sun, of its movement, of Gantta
(Mathematical calculations) and of the Yoga (combination of
stars ).

17b-21. He crowned Sudhanvan, the well renowned
son of Virajas the Prajapati, as the king in the eastern
quarter.

He installed as king Sankhapada the son of Kardama the
Prajapati in the southern quarter.

He anointed Ketuman, the unerring noble-souled son of
Rajas, as the king in the western quarter. He crowned Hiran-
yaroman, the invincible son of Parjanya the Prajapati, in the
northern quarter.

He made Manu, the son of Vivasvan the overlord of all
human beings.

22. This entire éarth consisting of seven continents and
along with the cities is being protected righteously by them
within their respective territories.

23-25a. They were formerly crowded in Svayambhuva
Manvantara by Brahma. Those who become Manu are anoin-
ted as kings. In those Manvantaras which have gone by, these
kings had ruled and had gone away. When another Man-
vantara comes, others will be crowned. All the rulers (of Man-
vantaras whether) gone by or yet to come are declared as the
overlords of the Manvantaras.

25b-26a. Prthu the excellent among men, was crowned
in a Rajasiya sacrifice by these as an overlord in accordance
with the injunction seen (i.e. prescribed) in the Vedas. He
was very powerful.

26b-27. After procreating these sons for the purpose of
perpetuating the line, the lord of the subjects, the holy lord
Kasyapa of great grandeur, performed great penance with a
a desire for his own lineage (Gotrakama).

28-29.. “Let two sons be born unto me, two who will
perpetuate my lineage.” As the noble-souled Kafyapa was ¢on-

=== PAGE 91 ===

480 Brahmanda Purana

templating thus, two sons, the parts of Brahma, appeared in
front of him. They were extremely powerful. They were Vatsara
and Asita, both of whom were expounders of Brahman.

30. Nidhruva was born of Vatsara. Rebhya of very great
fame was also born of him.

Raibhya should be known (as the son) of Rebhya. Under-
stand the son of Nidhruva.

31. Cyavana’s daughter Sumedhas was born of Sukanya.
It was she who became the wife of Nidhruva and the mother
of Kundapayins (A set of ascetics drinking water from the holy
consecrated pitchers in particular ceremonies).

32. Devala of very great fame was born of Ekaparna
(as the son) of Asita. He was highly prosperous and devoutly
attached to Brahman. He was the most excellent one among
Sandilyas.

33. Nidhruvas, Sandilas and Raibhyas—these are the
three branches of the line of Kasyapa. The thunderbolt-wield-
ing Indra and other Devas are among the children (of
KaSyapa).

34. (Their birth took place) when the Dvapara Yuga
began to function after the eleventh set of four Yugas of Manu,
the lord of the Manvantara had elapsed. ,

35-36. Narisyanta was the son of Marutta and Dama
‘was his son. His son was Rajyavardhana whose sons were
Sudhrti, Nara and Kevala. Bandhuman and Vegavan were
Kevala’s sons. Budha was his (? Vegavan’s) son whose son was
King Trnabindu.

37. He became king in the beginning of the third Treta-
yuga. Ilavila born of the womb of Alambusa was his daughter.

38-40. ViSsravas, the cause of the flourishing family of
Paulastya, was born of her. Brhaspati of big fame has been
glorified as the preceptor of the Devas.

Visravas married Devavarnini the daughter of Brhaspati,
Puspotkata and Vaka the daughters of Malyavan and Kaikasi,
the daughter of Malin. Listen to his children begot of these
wives. Devavarnini gave birth to Vaisravana the eldest son.

41-43. He was endowed with divine ways (or injunctions)
and saintly learning. He had the form of Raksasas, strength
of Asuras (demons). He had three legs, a very huge body, a

=== PAGE 92 ===

2.3.8.44-54 481

stout head, a large chin, eight curved teeth, green moustache
and pike-like ears. He was bright red in colour. His arms and
forearms were short. He was reddish brown and very terrific.
He was richly endowed with the knowledge of Vivarta (the sky
or illusory nature of the world ?) He was enlightened ever
since his birth.

44-46. On seeing him, his father said ‘“‘This is Kubera’”’
(ugly-bodied one). The word ‘Ku’ is an epithet used to
indicate contempt. The body is called Bera. He was Kubera
on account of his deformed body. He was thus marked by this
name. Since he was the son of Vigravas and also because he was
like Visravas due to resemblance, he would be known by the
name Vaisravana.

Kubera begot of Rddhi his well-renowned son Nalaki-
bera.

47. Kaikasi gave birth to Ravana, Kumbhakarna and
Sirpanakha, a daughter. Vibhisana was the fourth among her
children.

48-50. Ravana had pike-like ears and ten heads. He was
tawny-coloured. His hairs were red. He had four legs and
twenty hands. He was very powerful with ahuge body. He
resembled collyrium of an excellent type. He had fanglike
curved teeth. His neck was red. He had the form, strength
and inherent vigour of a Raksasa. He could defeat Yaksas and
other Raksasas by means of his physical strength and keen
intellect. Terrible by nature Ravana was extremely cruel. He
‘could rout his enemies.

51-54. In his previous birth Ravana was Hiranyakasipu.
That Raksasa ruled as king for thirteen sets of four Yugas. The
period (ofhis rule) reckoned in years in accordance with human
calculation comes to fiftysix million one hundred and sixty
thousand years. * O Brahmanas, he could give terrible sleepless
nights to the Devas and sages. In the twentyfourth Treta-
yuga, the power of penance of Ravana was exhausted and

1, VV. ‘47-54. The author is familiar with the traditional Rama
‘story but his description of Ravaga is peculiar.
* One set of four Yugas=4320000 years.
43820000 x 13 = 56160000 years.

=== PAGE 93 ===

482 Brahmanda Purana

dwindled down. Coming into contact with Rama, she son of
Dafaratha, he met with destruction along with his followers.

55-56. Mahodara, Prahasta, Mahaparfva and Khara
were the sons of Puspotkata. She had a daughter (named)
Kumbhinasi also Trisiras. Disana and Vidyujjihva the Raksasa
are remembered as the children of Vaka. There was adaughter
also named Anupalika.

57. Thus these ten Raksasas, the descendants of Pulastya,
were of very cruel activities. They are of very terrible pursuits
ever since their birth. All of these were unassailable even to the
Devas.

58-62. All of them had acquired boons. They were
heroic and they were accompanied by sons and grandsons.

Aidavida (i.e. Kubera), the descendent of Pulastya, who.
was Savyapingala ( ? Tawny-coloured in the left side) became
the king of all Yaksas, all those Raksasas who were the des-
cendants of Pulastya, and of all those cruel Brahmaraksasas
belonging to the families of Agastya and Vigvamitra who still
carried on the study of the Vedas and who performed regularly
penances and holy rites.!

The other three groups of Raksasas were the performers
of Yajfias. They were Yatudhanas, Brahmadhanas and Vartds(?).
They were moving about during the day time and they were not
nocturnal wanderers like other demons. Their four groups are re-
membered by the wise (learned men). They were Nisdcaras) moving
about at night). They were Paulastyas (descendants of Pulastya),
Nairrtas, Agastyas and KauSikas. Thus it is remembered that
there were seven classes (communities) of those Raksasas. I
shall describe their form and features inherited by them
naturally.

63-69. They are tawny-coloured and have round eyes.
They have big bellies and huge bodies. They have eight-curved
fanglike teeth and pikelike ears. Their hairs stand upright.
Their mouths appear as though slit open upto the ears (on
either side). Their smoke-coloured upright hairs are like the
Mufija grass. They have large thick heads shedding bright

1. VV. 60-70 enumerate and describe the seven tribes of Raksasas.

=== PAGE 94 ===

2.3.8.70-76 483

lustre. Their thighs and foreatms are short. Their faces are
copper-coloured. Their tongues and lips hang down. Their
brows appear dangling. Their noses are thick. They have blue
(black) limbs with red necks. Their eyes are majestic and they
appear terrible. Their voice and tone are extremely terrible.
Their calves are hideous and rolled up. They are stout and
have prominently protruding noses. They are firm and have
sturdy bodies like rocks. They are cruel and terrible ever since
their birth. Generally they are consistent in their activities.

They put on (ornaments like) earrings, armlets and
coronets. They bedeck themselves in diverse kinds of ornaments.
They wear many kinds of garlands and use alltypes of fragrant
scents and unguents. They are remembered as habitual eaters
of cooked rice, meat and even human flesh. Thus is remembered
the similarity in forms and features of demons by learned men.
They are unequalled in strength, intelligence and ability to fight
using the deceptive power of Maya (or black magic).

70-73. The sons of Pulaha were the beasts, all (kinds of)
serpents and tigers with curved fangs, the goblins, the cobras,
the Pisacas, the reptiles, the deer, the elephants, the monkeys,
the Kinnaras, the Mayu (? a kind of monkey?) and the
Kimpurusas. These creations belonging to the family of
Krodhavasa have previously been recounted by me.

In this Vaivasvata Manvantara, Kratu is remembered as
issueless. He has neither wives nor sons. He remained check-
ing his sexual impulses and potency.

I shall recount the family of Atri the third Prajapati
(among sages).

74. He had ten beautiful wives who were very chaste.!
All those ten were the children of Bhadragva begot of Ghrtact
the celestial damsel.

75-76. They were Bhadra, Sidr4, Madra, Salabha,
Malada, Bala and Hala. These seven (were very important)
and the others like them viz. Gocapala, Tamarasa and Ratna-

kita.

1. VV. 74-86 describe the descendants of Atri, the 3rd Prajdpati
sage.

=== PAGE 95 ===

484 Brahmdanda Puréna

Among their sons perpetuating their linese was (the
scion) named Prabhakara.

77-80. He begot of Madra the famous son Soma (the
moon). When the sun was hit by Svarbhanu (Rahu), when he
was falling down to the earth from the heaven and when
this world was overwhelmed by darkness, it was by him (i.e.
Atri) that light was made to function. The sun who was falling
was also told ‘Welfare to you.” Due to the utterance of
that Brahmanical sage, he (the Sun) did not fall from heaven
on to the earth. It was Atri, the sage of great penance, who
initiated the spiritual lines (of Atreyas). It was he who brought
about the prevention of death of Suras in the course of Yajfias.
He begot of those (ten Apsaras) sons equal to himself.

81-84. The holy lord sanctified by means of very great
penance begot those ten sons. Those sages well known as Svast-
yatreyas have mastered the Vedas. Among them, two were
extremely renowned. They were devoutly interested in the
Brahman and were of great spiritual power.

Datta is considered to be the eldest, Durvasas was his
younger brother. The youngest of all was a lady who expounded
the Brahman.

In this context the persons well-versed in the Puranas
cite this verse.

Persons conversant with the Puranas say that the noble-
souled son of Atri (named ) Dattatreya is the body (incarnation)
of Visnu. He is tranquil in his mind and free from sins.

85. Among the descendantsof his (i.e. Atri) four are
well renowned on the earthviz. Syavaévas, Mudgalas, Vagbhi-
takas and Gavisthiras.

86. The following four (also) are remembered as be-
longing to the side (family) of Atris. They are of very great
power. They are Kasyapa, Narada, Parvata and Arundhati.

87. These were the mental progeny (of Atri). Under-
stand (the progeny) of Arundhati.

Narada gave Arundhati in marriage to Vasistha.

88-89. Narada of great splendour was of very great
sublimated sexual potency due to the curse pf Daksa. Formerly,
at the time of the battle between the Devas and the Asuras, on

=== PAGE 96 ===

2.3.8.90-102 485

account of the Demon T4raka’s depredations, the whole world
had been overwhelmed by drought. The entire universe was in
an excited state. It had been in turmoil along with the Suras.

90. By means of his penance the intelligent Vasistha
enlivened the subjects by making the medicinal herbs.

91. Vasistha! begot his son Sakti of Arundhati. Sakti
procreated his bosom-born son ParaSara of Adr$yanti.

92. The holy lord Krsnadvaipayana was born of Kali,
by (her union) with Paragara. From Dvaipayana, Suka,
equipped with all good qualities was born of the Arani (the
holy wooden stick used ro produce fire by attrition).

93-96. The following six were born of Pivari as the
children of Suka viz.—Bhirifgravas, Prabhu, Sambhu, Krsna
and Gaura the fifth (i.e. all the five were sons. The sixth was a
daughter). A daughter was also born viz.—Kirtimati. She was
the mother of yogic power. She maintained all the holy rites.
She was the wifeof Anuha and mother of Brahmadatta. The
descendants of Paragara were the following eight viz.—Svetas
Krsnas, Pauras, Syamadhiimras, Candins, Usmadas, Darikas
and Nilas.

The eight Paksas of the noble-souled Parafars have been
recounted. Hereafter, listen and understand the progeny of
Indrapramati.

97. The child named Kuni who was born of Kapifijali
(Taittiri bird) Ghrtaci is called Indrapramati.

98. Vasu, born of the daughter of Prthu, was his son.
Upamanyu was his son. It was from him that Aupamanyus
took their origin.

99-100a. Kundineyas are reputed to have been originat-

ed from Mitra and Varuna, Ekarseyas as well as others are
well-known as Vasisthas. Thus these eleven sections of Vasisthas

are declared.

100b-102. Thus the eight well-known mental sons of
Brahma have been recounted. They were brothers of very

1. VV. 90-100 describe the race of Vasistha.

=== PAGE 97 ===

486 Brahmésda Purdne

great fortune. Their races were well established. It is they who
sustain the three worlds full of the groups of Devas and sages.
Their sons and grandsons were hundreds and thousands.! The
three worlds are pervaded by them as by the rays of the sun.

CHAPTER NINE
Propitiation of Pitrs

(Rules and Regulations regarding the Ritual concerning
Pitrs).

The Sages Said :

1. Bhavani had been Sati in the previous birth as the
daughter of Daksa. Haw was she born for the second time as
Uma ?

2. The king of the mountains begot her of Mena, the
daughter of the Pitrs, Who are these Pitrs of whom Mena
became the mental dayghter ?

3-4. Who are those beings called Pitrs whose grand-
son was Mainaka and whose granddaughters were Uma,
Ekaparna, Ekapatala and Ganga the most excellent one
among the rivers ? Who was the eldest of all the daughters of
Himalaya ? All this has been desired to be pointed out by
you. Narrate it to us.

5-7. Good fortune to you. I wish to hear the excellent
injunction regarding Sraddha.* Who are laid down in Smrtis

1. Acomparison of the race of sages with those given in other Pyragas
(for example) the Matsya shows many dissimilarities in names, though some
of the gotras and pravaras are common.

2. Chs. IX to XX of the present Purana describe the Sraddha -Kalpa
or the procedure of ancestor-worship in ancient India. It jis an important
topic and forms an integral part of Hindu Dharma Sastra. It is rooted in the
belief in after-death survival of the deceased ancestors and fhetr residence in s
particular region or world called Pity-loka. This belief is pre-Vedic as it dates

=== PAGE 98 ===

2.3.9.8-16 487

as their sons and how are they Pitrs (manes). How were they
born ? What were their names ? Of what nature are they ? Are
these Pitrs who are deities unto the Devas, in heaven ? Thus I
wish to understand the excellent creation of the Pitrs and how
the Sraddha performed by us propitiates the Pitrs.

8. What is regarded (in Smrtis) as the reason why they
(Pitrs) are not visible ? What (type of) Pitrs stay in the heaven
and what type in the hell ?

9-12. How do these Sraddhas pees! | to the Pitrs, the
Sraddhas that are offered after uttering the names of the father,
father’s father and great-grandfather against the three Pindas
(Rice-balls) ? How are they if stationed in the hell, capable of
bestowing benefits ? Who are these beings named Pitrs ? Whom
shall we worship again ? We have heard that the Devas also
worship the Pitrs in the heaven. I wish to hear in detail al-
though it has been heard of many times and the designations
are also very clear. It behoves you to recount it.

Sita Said :—

13-15. I shall tell you in detail in accordance with my
intellect and what has been heard by me. The Pitrs, the sons of
the Devas are born in (all) the Manvantaras. Those who have
gone and those who are yet to come are the seniors and the
juniors respectively. Those Pitrs have gone by, along with the
Devas inthe other Manvantaras. I shall decisively recount to
you those (Pitrs) who exist now. It is Manu the Sraddha-
Deva! the presiding deity of Sraddhas who will initiate the
ceremony of Sraddhas unto them.

16. Thinking that they (gods) will worship me that lord
Brahma created the Devas.! But they forsook him and worship-

from the Indo-Iranian period (vide S.B.E. Vol. IV, p. 262), for the Iranian
lei of Yima-Yama Ancestor-worship for continuation of one’s race and
rosperity is found in the RV. The Grhya Sitras and old Smrtis (like Manu

ra nd VAjbavalkya) prescribe the ae ale igo of Sraddha which is generally
followed in Puranas. For le, The spuadie y yre is found in
taferont Puranas acch an AP. 163.243, G.P.1.210, K.P.II 22.20-62, N.P. Ch.
28, Va.P. Chs. 71-80.

It is aoteworthy that in V.V. 5-12 all questions, dowbts etc. ahout the
performance of Sriddha ane raised.

1, The proper name of Indra in this Manvantara.

=== PAGE 99 ===

488 Brahmanda Purana

ped themselves because they were desirous of the fruits (there-
of).

17. They were cursed by Brahma—‘‘You will become
deluded and devoid of consciousness. Hence, you do not know
anything. Become deluded in the worlds.”

18. Again and again all of them bowed down to him
and requested god Brahma (for pardon). In order to bless the
worlds, the lord spoke to them again.

19. ‘*Make atonement as a sin of transgression has been
committed by you all. Ask your sons. Therefrom you will
acquire knowledge and wisdom.”

20. Thereafter, desirous of comprehending the (mode
of) atonement (and to perform it) they asked their sons in
secret with their selves duly well controlled.

21. To them the sons conversant with. virtue and piety
and possessed of complete control of their souls, explained the
different kinds of atonement of sins originating from the mind,
words and actions.

22-26. Regaining their consciousness the delighted heaven-
dwellers spoke to their sons—‘‘Indeed, you are our Pitrs (fathers) !
because we have been enlightened by you in regard to virtue,
wisdom and disinterestedness in the worldly pleasures. What
boon should be given to you ?”’

Again Brahma spoke to them—‘‘Indeed, you are truthful
in speech. Hence, what has been mentioned by you shall be so
and not otherwise, This is what is uttered by you—your own
sons have been mentioned as your Pitrs (fathers) .”? They will
become (your) Pitrs. Let this boon be given to them. On
account of these words of Brahma, the Paramesthin, the sons
attained the status of the fathers (Pitriva) and the fathers attain-
ed the status of the sons. Hence, those sons are the Pitrs. This is
the status of Pitrtva declared about them (in Dharmaiastra) .

27, After declaring in this manner the sons to be the
fathers and fathers to be the sons, Brahma said once again
to the Pitrs for the development of their selves.

1. V. 22 explains the paradox why Pitrs who were the Sons of
gods became the ‘fathers of their own fathers’. Manu III. 201 differs from this
text and states that Pitrs sprang from Sages and from the Pitrs were born gods
and human beings. “

=== PAGE 100 ===

2.3.9.28-37 489

28. “If anyone were to perform the Sraddha rites with
undesirable Pitrs, the Raksasas and the Danavas will attain the
fruit thereof.

29. On being developed by means of the Sraddhas, and
strengthening further the imperishable moon day by day, all
the Pitrs will increase.

30. Soma, the moon god, strengthened and developed
by means of the Sraddhas, will develop the people too and
the entire world along with the mountains and forests,
surrounded by the mobile and immobile beings.

31. If men, desirous of nourishment and development,
were to perform Sraddhas, the Pitrs will always bestow on them
nourishment and progeny.

32-33. Those Pitrs and Pra-pitamahas (great grand-
fathers) to whom (the younger members of the family) offer
three balls of rice in Sraddha against the utterance of (i.e.
mentioning) their Gotras and names are present everywhere.
They strengthen the subjects (their progeny) by that offering
of Sraddha. Such a bchest had been formerly declared by
Brahma the Paramesthin.

34. Thereby all these viz. charitable gift, self-study of
the Vedas and power of penance can be achieved. There is no
doubt about this that the Pitrs are the bestowers of wisdom on
you all.

35. Thus‘these Pitrs are the Devas and the Devas are
the Pitrs. The Devas and the Pitrs are mutually the Pitrs
(fathers) of one another.

36. On hearing these words of Brahma from Sita who
had completely understood the Brahman (Atman), all those
sages once again asked Siita as follows.

The Sages said :—

37. How many are the groups of Sages* (Muni-gandh*) ?
At what time did those groups (come into existence ?), They

* This should be Pitrgapéh as in Va.P. 71.36.

=== PAGE 164 ===

2.3.15.29-34
553
who knows the six ancillary subjects or Aflgas of Vedasy a person
who meditates, a
person who practises
Toga,
Sarvatantra
(one
who has mastered all the
systems
of Philosophy ) and Tdydvara
(a vagrant mendicant or saint).
29-32.
He who is conversant with the Srdddhakalpa sancti-
fies by his joining (the row of
diners)
. One who has mastered
at least one out of the fourteen Vidyas
(Lores), those who duly
fulfil their duties—all these sanctify the row.
Undoubtedly the
Saupanias1
, those who maintain five sacred fires, those who sing
iSdman hymns,
the Brdhmana who
duly undertakes the
pilgri-
mage by walking
for
twelve
years,
Trindclketas,
2 Traividya
(a
person
' who
knows
and has kindled three
Naciketd
fires and
mastered three Vidyas, the Brdhmana who learns works
of piety,
the Brdhmana who has mastered the great scriptural text written
by Brhaspati—all these are cited as sanctifiers of the rows.
33.
If a Brdhmana who
had been invited for a
Srdddha
feast indulges in sexual intercourse with a
woman, the Pitrs lie
down in that semen virile for the whole of that month
(?)
34.
Charitable gifts should be given to a
person strictly
engrossed in meditation or one who is sympathetic and one who
is intelligent. One should
feed a
recluse or a Valakhilya in the
Srdddha rite.
learning etc. purify excommunicated or such unedifying members of the society,
by participating with them by sitting in their rows for dining or even by their
beneficent
look has been prevalent in India even before the time of Dharma
Sutras,
vide Apastamba
Dh.S.II.7. 17-22,
Strangely
enough, Gautama
(15.28),
Baudhdyana Dh.S. 11.8.2, Manu III. 185-186,
Ydjflavalkya 1.219 use
the
same
words about these sanctifiers of diners
(PaAkti-pdvanas ) . We get a long list of
such
sanctifiers
in Mbh.
AnuSdsana
90.25-31,
Mt.P.16.7-23,
KP.II.21.-1-14,
Va.P.79.56-59, 83.52-55. These lists are practically the same as those in VV.
28-32
hereof—
1 .
Sauparpas or Trisuparpakas are the knowers of Trisuparpa viz the three
Anuvdkas beginning with Brahmametu mdm etc.
(Tait.Ar.XAl -50.)
2.
Tripdeiketa
is alternately explained as:
(i
A person who knows the Naciketa
fire.
(ii)
A person who has thrice kindled the Naciketa fire.
(iii)
One who has studied the Artuvdka called
Vtrqjas
(Tait.Br.lll.-
11.7-8) which describes the N&ciketa fire and the story of Naciketas*

=== PAGE 165 ===

554
Brahmdnda PurUna
35.
If the Sr&ddha is performed
for
a
forest-hermit, he
becomes
satisfied by
the worship alone.
If a
person feeds a
householder, the Vtivedevas are honoured thereby.
36.
Sages are honoured
through
worshipping
a forest-
hermit, Indra is honoured through the Vdlakhilyas. If the worship
of
Sannydsins
is
performed,
Brahmd
is
directly
worshipped
thereby.
37-38.
That
stage
of
life which
is a mixture of all is
called the fifth
Airama.
It is not sanctifying. The four Abramas
should be honoured in
the
Srdddha
rite
as
well
as
the
rite
pertaining to the Devas.
39.
No charitable gift should be given to
those who are
outside the
limits
of
the
four
ASramas. A person beyond the
pale of the four Airamas may remain with only
air
for his diet
and perform
a
penance,
but, since he does not belong to any
Afratna, one should not invite him there
(i.e. in a Sraddha ).
40. 1
There
are
certain persons possessing
obnoxiously
severe
penance;
others
profess
to know much and argue in
various ways, still others censure the Brahmanas—But
all
these
are defilers of the row
(of diners).
41.
The Aupavastas
(certain
people
over-obsessed with
fasting), the Sdrfikhyas , the atheists, those who
find
fault with
the Vedas, those people who censure meditation—all
these are
defilers of the row (of diners).
42.
Those who purposelessly shave off their
heads, those
who
aimlessly
keep
their
hairs
matted and
all .those who
maintain themselves by carrying sacred waters,
are
defilers
of
1.
W.40-56 give a
list of persons who are defilers of row of
diners
(PankH-dufakas) . These
lists are common to Sm^tis and Purdyas such as Mam
HI.151-166,
rd/fl.£mr.I.222-224, Bjhad Tama
Smr. II 1.34-38, Mbh.
AnuS&sana
90.6-11,
Mt.P. 16.14-17, BM.P.
220.127-135, NP.
1.30-41, KP
11.21.27-46
to mention a few. Apart from the textual similarity,
the lists are interesting
from the point of social history as they
reflect what persons, vocations, ways
of life were looked down up9n by the
elites
of those times. Here sects who
insist on long
fasts
(e.g. Jamas),
S&ftkhyas
(these were originally
atheists),
non•Brakmanical mendicants
like Bauddhas, Jamas,
Saioa
sects
like
Kdrukas,
persons not following the vocations of their castes etc. are regarded as unworthy
for being invited to Sriddha or to receive gifts.

=== PAGE 166 ===

2.3.15.43-56
555
the row. One shall avoid
all those persons
who are
merciless,
who break the
rules
of good
conduct and who eat anything
and everything.
43.
One
should not
feed
the
following
persons
with
oblations meant for gods or Pitrs
:
viz.
Kdrukas
(a Saiva sect)
and others not abiding
by
rules
of good
conduct, those who
are excommunicated from the ordinary society
as
well
as
the
Vedic one, the professional singers and those who sell the Vedas
as means of subsistence.
44.
He
who
has
social and other contacts with these,
attains
black
complexion
(taint). He
who
takes food along
with a Sudra
is a defiler of the row.
45.
Ploughing,
tilling,
killing
of animals, agriculture,
marketing,
breeding
of
cattle and serving the enemy or any
one except
the preceptor—all
these
activities
are
forbidden
to Brahmanas .
46-48.
One should
avoid
all
those persons who
have
false heretical views and who
are
illbehaved. The
following
too should be avoided in the Sraddha rite:—the person who puts
in a false plaint, a person who censures
others,
the
talebearer,
the hypocrite or haughty, persons guilty
of minor
sins,
those
who arc particularly guilty of sins, those who employ others to
study Vedas on their behalf, those who arc greedy and deluded,
those who
seek
(their own)
benefit
and
those who sell
the
Vedas. There is no provision for
substitutes in the study of the
Vedas ; he who employs any such substitute is a sinner.
49-50.
The speaker (i.e. the teacher to such a substitute)
shall fall off from the benefit of the Vedas and the donor from
the benefit ofcharitable gifts (in the above case of substitution)
.
A person hired to teach the Vedas and a person who
is taught
by such a person (hired one)—do not deserve being invited to
a Sr&ddha rite. A Brahmana who
maintains
himself by buying
and selling (also does not deserve invitation to a Sraddha
rite).
Buying and selling for the sake of subsistence are despicable.
51-56.
This is the profession of a Vaifya but a sinful
acti-
vity in the case of Br&hmana. He who
studies
Vedas by means
of hiring charges (charging
tuition
fees) and he who makes a
living through the Vedas—these two do
not
deserve
Sr&ddha

=== PAGE 167 ===

556
Brahmdnda Purdna
invitation. The son-in-law also does not deserve fir&ddha invita-
tion. The person who approaches his wife in vain(?), the person
who sacrifices in vain
( ?) , these two
do
not
deserve
Sr&ddha
invitation. One shall
not
feed in Srdddha
a Brdhmana who is a
usurer, those persons whose wives love others, those persons who
love other persons* wives and those who
are too much fond of
wealth and sex.
Those who are opposed to the specific duties of the differ-
ent castesand stages in life, those who are against all holy rites,
a thief and a person who performs
Tajfia
on behalf of
all and
sundry—all those are defilers of the row.
If a Brdhmana eats like
a
pig,
or
if the Brdhmana cats off
(from) his palm or
if he
takes
food
hearing
rebukes
(?)
the
Pitrs do not partake of that food.
The leavings of food
from a Sraddha should
not be given
to women or Sudras.
57.
If any one out
of delusion
gives
it away like that,
the food does not
reach
the
Pitjrs. Hence, foodstuffs and other
remnants of a Srdddha site should not be given away.
58.
Whatever remains except
curds and ghee should be
given to the son and not
to
others. The
remnants
should be
given—particularly the cooked rice and other food-s tuffs.
59-62.
In the end
they
may
be
satisfied
with flowers,
roots and fruits and depart.
The Pitrs partake of the food as long as they
are
cooked
( ? ) , as long as the heat is retained and as long as the Brdhmanas
take their food silently.
( In a Srdddha
)
the following rites should
be performed
in
such
a manner that they do not pass on
to
the Asuras :— the act of giving away, the acceptance of mone-
tary gift, the Homa, the feeding, the oblation
and
the
offer
of
Padya (water for washing the feet ) along
with
the thumb
(?).
These are the ways of giving all types of charitable
gifts—the
performer should sit dawn (keeping the hands) in between the
knees.
Similarly, while
performing
the
Acamana rite also one
should sit thus.
One should avoid persons
with
tonsured
head,
persons
with matted hair and persons with
ochre
robes
in the Sr&ddha .
rite.

=== PAGE 168 ===

2.3.15.63—16.1
557
63.
Those who always abide
by
good
conduct,
those
who have perfect knowledge, those who
meditate, the devotees
of the lord and noble-souled one shall
sanctify even by
mere
sight.
64.
Offers of gifts
should
be made
to those who have
tufts, who have attachment to
the
essential
ingredients and
who have the three staffs
:
The entire region of the three worlds
is
always pervaded
by masters of the Togic cult. 1
65-66.
Hence, they see every thing that is in the universe.
They keep the manifest and the unmanifest under their control.
They understand that which is
greater than every
thing else.
The truth and falsehood have
been
perceived
by those noble
souls. They have seen the Sat and the Asat. All types
of means
of acquiring knowledge and absolution
have
been evolved
by
those noble souls.
67-68.
Hence, he who is always devoted to
them attains
excellent 2 benefit.
He who knows the Rk Mantras knows
all the Vedas;
he
who knows the Tajus Mantras understands
the
Yajna
;
he who
knows the Sdman Mantras knows the Brahman , he
who
knows
Mdnasa
( the mind ) knows everything.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Praise of Charitable gifts in Sr&ddha
Brhaspati said
:
1.
“Henceforth, I shall recount
the
various
charitable
gifts and the rewards thereof. 2 It
redeems all living beings and
makes the path to heaven happy and comfortable.
1 .
People of those periods had a deep faith in the powers of Togins.
2.
Although
ancient works
insisted upon avoidance of laviahness in
expenditure on Srdddha, later Purdgas encourage profuse expenditure on Srdd-
dhas e.g. Pd.P. $rfti-Kh<m4a 9.179-181. Variha P.13.50-51 and VP.III.14.22-
i
23. Pitrs are reported to have sung two Gdthds expressing their desire to have a

=== PAGE 169 ===

558
Brahm&nifa PurUna
2.
Everything that is
the most
excellent in
the
world
and whatever is pleasing
to
oneself—should
be
given
to
the
Pitrs by one who seeks only their command (support
?)
3.
The donor of cooked rice obtains eternally
a
golden
divine
Vimana
(heavenly
car)
refulgent
like
the sun, full of
celestial damsels and never diminishing in
its splendour.
4.
He who gives (cooked rice)
along
with
condiments
(side dishes)
in the Sraddha rite unobstructedly, obtains longe-
vity, brilliance, affluence and splendid beauty.
5.
The knower of Yajfias who
gives
the sacred
thread
at the time of §raddha obtains that
benefit of Brahmadana (gift
of Vedic learning) which sanctifies all Brahmanas.
6.
If at the time of Sraddha
a person
gives
the
Brah-
manas a
full Kamandalu (water-pot),
it
will
reach the donor
along with honey, milk, ghee and curds.
7.
He who, at the time of §raddha
gives
a Kamarujalu
fitted with wheels
(?) obtains a divine cow that can be milked
easily and that yields plenty of milk.*
8.
He who at the time of Sraddha rite gives two sandals
coushioned with
cotton
obtains a splendid vehicle. The com-
fort of his feet increases.
9.
By giving a Brahmana a fan made of palm
leaf after
duly honouring
him,
one
obtains
all types
of
soft
fragrant
flowers.
10.
By giving a pair of shoes to the Brahmana at the time
of &raddha,
the
learned man always
obtains a vehicle yoked
with horses.
11.
If, at the time of Sraddha a person gives an umbrella
along with a garland of flowers,
it becomes an
excellent palace
i
and follows him as he goes
(to the land of death)
.
12.
By giving at the
time
of Sraddha a
platter full of
jewels along with bed and meal, to Tatis (Asceties) , the learned
man is honoured in the heaven.
descendant who would bestow on Brahmanas
(for
the
benefit of the
Pitfs )
jewels, clothes, land, costly vehicles. Our text also echoes th
same tendency
of encouraging lavish gifts in Sr&ddha
(vide w. 16-20, 23-25 etc.) The reward
promised is happiness in heaven
(ivide w. 13-15).
*
K&ma-dohinS “wish-yielding” in V*. P. 80.7.
*

=== PAGE 170 ===

2.3.16.13-25
559
13-15.
He obtains all these things
:—Pearls, Lapis Lazuli
,
robes,
different
kinds
of jewels, divine vehicles, millions and
millions
in
number. He
gets
a great,
meritorious
heavenly
chariot which can pass through the sky,
is equipped with every-
thing desirable and which resembles the moon
and the sun. It
will not diminish in value.
It will
be
surrounded
by
celestial
damsels.
It can go wherever
one likes
to go.
It
will have
the
splendid
speed
of
the
mind. He
will
stay at the top of the
heavenly chariot being eulogised by people
all round. He
will
be surrounded by divine flowers. Learned rnen say
that
this is
thek greatest of all charitable gifts.
16-20.
One should
offer golden
vessels
of very
glossy
brilliant surface in Sraddha. Then divine juices and
beverages
along with food -stuffs and good fortune will approach him.
He who gives the Brahmanas gingelly seeds and sugarcane
(pieces)
in the Sraddha rite gets friends in the world and very
great bliss in women.
He who
gives
fascinating
metallic
vessels
along
with
Sraddha meals, becomes the object of affection
and the proud
possessor of beauty and wealth.
If a person gives silver
or
gold
during the Sraddha rite
he obtains as a result
of that
charitable
gift
everything,
he
desires as well as brilliance and wealth.
If at the time of Sraddha, a person gives a cow
that
has
given birth to only one calf and
that
yields
a pot full of milk;
cows and good nourishment will approach that man.
21.
A man who with great efforts gives during the winter
a
fire with plenty of wood,
obtains the brilliance of the fire of
his body, splendour and good fortune.
22.
If, at the
advent
of the winter, a man gives
fuel to
the Brahmanas he always becomes victorious
in
battle. He
is
reborn, richly endowed with glory.
23-25.
One shall welcome,
honour
and
worship noble
souls and deserving persons in the Sraddha
rite and offer them
fragrant garlands of sweet
scent.
Different
kinds of pleasures
and
chaste young
ladies approach
the
donor with scented
garlands.
He who, at the time of Sraddha
ceremonies
offers
these

=== PAGE 171 ===

560
Brahmdn^a Purina
things such as beds, seats,
carts and
vehicles,
shall
obtain the
benefit of a horse sacrifice.
#
26-28.
At the
time
of the Sraddha
ceremony when a
Brahmana of good qualities has
arrived if a
person
gives him
an article that he desires, he shall obtain good power of memory
and intelligence.
One shall
honour
(deserving
persons)
in
the Sraddha
ceremony and give them vessels filled with
ghee. He shall enjoy
the benefit of offering many cows
that had given birth to only
one calf and that will yield pot full of milk.
In a
Sraddha,
if one
gives
whatever is desired (by the
recipient), one obtains the benefit of the Pundarika sacrifice1
.
29-33.
By giving a
grove
fully equipped
with
flowers
and fruits one enjoys the benefit of Gosava sacrifice.
By giving wells, parks, lakes,
fields,
cowpens and houses
the donor
rejoices in heaven for ever as long
as the moon and
stars exist.
If a person
gives
a
well-covered
bed
embellished with
jewels at the time of Sraddha ceremony his Pitrs become
satis-
fied and he enjoys the heavenly worlds.
In this world he gets
a
richly equipped
chariot. He is
honoured with eight good vehicles. He increases in wealth and
a gain.
After feeding theBrahmanas in accordance with the injunc-
tions
the
following
things
should be offered to them
:—Gar-
ments of leaf, silk and wool, bedsheets and
blankets,
antelope
skin, gold band, Praveni (coloured woolen cloth) and fur of the
deer.
34-36.
A man
of great
faith
obtains
the
benefit
of
Vajapeya sacrifice. Many
beautiful
wives,
sons, servants and
attendants remain
under
his
control.
All
the living
beings
remain under
his
control in this world. He becomes free from
ailments.
1.
The promise of the fruit of sacrifices for ddna
(religious gifts) must
have resulted as a dis-incentive for performing sacrifice, and these Brahmanical
writers get the dubious credit of adversely affecting the ancient Vedic institution
of sacrifice.

=== PAGE 172 ===

2.3.16.37-47
561
He who gives at the
iSraddha ceremony
silken
cloth
or
cotton
cloth
obtains all excellent and desirable things. These
destroy Alakpni (lack of brilliance or poverty)
like
the
sunrise
that destroys darkness.
37-38.
On the top of a heavenly
chariot,
he shines like
the moon among the stars. In all rites pertaining to the Devas,
clothes have been praised by all the Devas.
In
the absence of
clothes—neither
Yajfta
nor
charitable
gift nor penance—is
possible. Hence,
clothes
must
always
be
given
at the time
of Sraddha ceremony.
39-40.
By
giving them
(clothes)
in
a
iSraddha a man
obtains all those things.
He who is pure and devoted should
give
(clothes) in the
daily
Sraddha
rite. He shall then obtain everything he desires,
the kingdom and heaven also. He enjoys the benefit of a Yajfta
richly endowed with every desirable thing.
41 -42a.
He who gives the following things
shall obtain
the benefit of Agnistoma
:—well cooked
foodstuffs,
Svastika
(a
kind of cake) etc. along with sugar, Krsara*, honey, ghee, milk,
milk pudding, and every type
of eatable
having smooth oily
nature
(fried in ghee or oil.)
.
42b-44. By giving curds and milk products without mixing
them (with other eatables)
and
different kinds
of edibles in
iSraddha, one does not feel aggrieved during
the
rainy
season
or when Magha star
(is in ascendancy).
One should feed the Brahmanas with ghee and
shall pour
(a few drops) of ghee on the ground.
By giving in Sraddha during Gajacchdyd
(when
the sun
is in Kanya)
, one does not feel aggrieved.
By giving cooked rice,
milk pudding,
ghee, honey
roots
and fruits and different kinds of eatables, one rejoices here and
hereafter.
45-47.
Beaten
rice mixed
with
sugar and
milk
is of
everlasting benefit.
*
A dish consisting of sesamum and grain
(mixture of rice peas with
a few
spices—MW
p. 308.
ii.
row.)

=== PAGE 173 ===

562
Brahmintfa Purina
The satisfaction shall last for a year, through
greens and
juices of flesh (? gravy), Saktu (flour of fried grains), Liji
(fried
corn)
, sweet rice peas, pulses
with
various
side
dishes—(all
these
yield pleasure to the Pitrs). One shall mix curds with all
eatables fried in
ghee and
feed
(the Brahmanas with
them)
.
He who gives all these things at the Sraddha ceremony obtains
the treasure Padma
( of Kubera)
.
48.
He who gives
in
Sraddha,
fresh
plants
after duly
and
scrupulously
honouring
(the
Brahmanas)
attains
all
worldly pleasures and
is honoured after he goes to the heaven.
49-52.
Food stuffs are of various kinds : those that should
be chewed and eaten, that should be drunk like liquids,
Cosyas
where the juice
is
sucked
up
as
in
the case of mango fruits,
Lehyas which should be licked up.
(All these variet cs
of
food-
stuffs must be given in §raddha).
The performer shall stand
with
palms joined
in
rever-
ence after giving the
prior
place
of
sitting
to the guests. He
shall then obtain the excellent benefit of all Yajnas and Kratus.
One shall feed a hungry man immediately. The rice shall
not be overcooked.
It shall
be
offered along with pickles and
side dishes.
It
shall
be smooth and glossy.
It shall be served
after honouring him scrupulously and lovingly.
A person who gives cooked rice obtains an
aerial
chariot
that shines like the midday sun and that
is
drawn
by
swans.
He obtains crores of virgins also. There
is no greater charitable
gift than the gift of cooked rice. 1
53.
It is from the cooked
food
that
the
living
beings
are bom.
They
live on
account
of it. They arc powerful on
account of it: There is no greater charitable gift than the gift of
life.
54.
Worlds are stabilised on account of cooked food.
Its
benefit
is that of the gift of the world. Cooked food
is Prajapati
himself. All the visible worlds are pervaded by
it.
55-57.
Hence, a charitable gift on a par with the
gift of
cooked food has never been before nor will
it be in future.
1.
Cf. Va.P.80.54-57. In
fact
the whole of that chapter
in V&.P.
is
textually identical with
this
text.

=== PAGE 174 ===

2.3.16.58—17.4
563
A man who is devoted to the
Pitrs
obtains immediately
whatever jewels there are on the earth, all the vehicles and
all
women
(?)
If a person stands with palms joined
in
reverence and
offers
asylum
(house,
shelter
etc. )
to
the guests, the Devas
wait for and welcome him with thousands
of divine hospitable
activities.
He who
gives
all
these
things
shall
become
the sole
monarch over the earth.
58-59.
One shall be happy by offering three or two
or
even one charitable
gift.
Charitable
gifts
are
considered
of
the greatest virtue. It is honoured and respected by good people.
The
overlordship
of
all the three worlds is certainly available
through Dana. A non-king obtains
kingdom. A man
without
wealth
obtains
excellent
wealth. A man devoted to the Pitrs
always regains his lost longevity.
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
Appropriate Tithis For Performing Srdddha*
Brhaspati continued :
1
.
“Henceforth
I
shall
describe
the
three
types
of
&raddhas. Viz. the Ajasra
(i.e.
the
Jsfitya
or
daily
one)
the
Naimittika
(the
conditional or occasional and the Kdmya
(i.e.
one performed
with some
desirable
object
in
view)
.
These
ISraddhas are honoured ones.
2-4.
The
three Astaka
Sraddhas1
are
performed
for
the
welfare
of
sons
and
wives.
They
are
performed
*
This chapter
is textually identical with Ch. 81 of the V&.P. with
a
few
variants.
1.
The
word
Affakd affan according
to
Vdrttika 9 on Pdpini VI 1.3.45
means ‘a rite with Pitrs as deities.
Aivaldyana Gr.S.II.4.1
states that the 8th
day in the dark halves of seasons Hemanta— and Sitira are A^akas i.e. there
are four A?tak£s. But most other Grhya Sfltras differ and regard the 8th day

=== PAGE 175 ===

Brahmdnfa Purdga
564
on the 8th day in the Dark half of the
lunar
months
Marga-
sirsa
Pausa Magha. The
first
one is the most excellent one
with Akhandala (Indra) for its deity. The second
one is Praja-
patya (with Prajapati for
its deity) The third
one
is
Vaisva-
devika
(with Visve Devas as deities) Theiirst one is always to
be performed with sweet rice peas. The second one should
al-
ways be
performed with
meat. The third one should be per-
formed with greens (and vegetables).
This
is
the
injunction
regarding the articles (used
for Sraddha). In this connection it
is laid down that the Nitya Srdddha is desired by the Pitrs.
5-6a.
The other one, that is the fourth
type
of Srdddha
on a new moon day (? ) should be performed always with special
care. A learned man performing Sraddha in all
these
( Tithis )
even
by
sacrificing
his entire possession, immediately attains
welfare and rejoices both here and hereafter.
6b-7a.
The Pitrs
are
the
presiding deities during the
Parvan days (new moon days) and the Tithi days (i.e. 7th, 8th
and 9th days). These persons go to
(all the places of
Srdddha)
like the cows going towards the trough of drinking water.
7b-8.
If they are not duly honoured during the
Affakas
they may return at the end of the month. His hopes and wishes
(i.e. the wishes
of the person who does not
perform
Srdddha )
become fruitless everywhere, both here and hereafter. There
is
progress
and
welfare to those who worship; there is downfall
unto the atheists.
9-10.
Those who give (the donors) go to the Devas and
those who do not give go to the lower strata of animals. Those
who perform worship on these Tithis enjoy
in
full
everything
such
as
nourishment, power of memoiy, intellect, sons, glory
and riches.
in the dark halves of M£rga£ir?a,
Pau?a and Magha as Astak& days.
Our
. text does not follow Ahral&yana Gf.S. Gfhya Sutras differ about the offerings
on these A^fakas and the deities for which they are meant, though the Vdrttika
mentioned above regards Pitrs as the devatd on these days.
But according to
our Pur&oa, Indra
is the deify of the
1st Atfaka, Praj&pati of the 2nd and
Vilvedevas on the third and not the Pitr*( !).
When A$tak& was to be performed in one month, the 7th, 8th and 9th
days after the Full Moon day of M&gha are to be taken.

=== PAGE 176 ===

2.3.17.11-16
565
lrrhe Pratipad (the first
day
of the
lunar
fortnight)
is
conducive to the acquisition of wealth (if Sraddha is
performed
on that day. Whatever is acquired by him does not perish.
11.
He who performs (Sraddha) on the second Tilhi shall
become the overlord of all bipeds.
To
those who seek excellent things Trtiya (the third day
of the lunar fortnight)
is the destroyer of enemies and sins.
12.
He who performs {Sraddha) on the fifth
day
attains
great glory and splendour.
13-14.
One who
performs
Srdddhas
on
the
sixth day
shall be worthy of respect due to his effort.
The man who always performs
Srdddhas on
the
seventh
day attains the status of the ruler of the Earth. He shall be the
chief of Ganas
( Groups or followers of Siva)
.
The man who performs Srdddha on the eighth day attains
complete richness and perfect affluence.
15-16.
Sraddha should be performed on the ninth day by
one who desires affluence and lordly glory as well as women.
A man who performs Sr&ddha on the tenth day shall attain
the magnificence ofthe Brahman. He shall also
attain
(mastery
over)
all the Vedas and be on a par with Brahmanas.
(The performance of Sraddha and)
the offering
of
great
charitable gifts on the eleventh
Tithi
yields
perpetual
lordly
affluence.
1.
VV.9-20
state
the
fruit
of
performance of Sr&ddha
on each
Tithh
(Lunar day) from the 1st to the 15th day. Apastamba Dh. S II 7.16.-22,
Mbh.
Anui&sana 87, Va. P.81.10-19, BM.P.220.
15-21, KP 11.20.17-22 state the re-
ward a man gets for performance of Sr&ddha on
these
Tithis. The rewards
so promised
in
these works
differ. For example
the
following comparative
table of rewards on various Tithis for such performance as
given in our Text
and KP shows little co-relation:
The Tithi
Reward as per our Text.
1
Acquisition of wealth.
2
Over-lordship on bipeds.
3
Destroys enemies and sins.
4
Not mentioned.
5
Great glory and splendour.
6
Great respect.
The list need not be extended.
Reward
as per KP
II.20.
Auspicious sons.
Begets daughters.
Gets animals.
Gets small animals and things.
Splendid sons.
Lustre and good cultivation.

=== PAGE 177 ===

566
BrahmQnia Purdna
17.
(One who
performs
Sraddha)
on
the
twelfth day
acquires
victory, kingdoms, longevity, wealth,
increase in the
progeny,
cattle,
wealth,
intellect,
freedom
and
excellent
nourishment.
18-19.
One who performs
(Sr&ddha
)
on
the
thirteenth
tithi attains long life and lordly affluence.
Srdddha should be performed on
the
fourteenth
day
to
those persons in the house who happened to die while young or
who had been struck down dead by means of weapons.
One shall
always
be
pure and
endeavour
to perform
Srdddha on the new moon day.
20-22.
He attains all desires and enjoys infinite heavenly
bliss.
Similarly, in the case of all those who were born as
twins
and those who were born under unfavourable
(stars)
Srdddha
should
be performed on the new moon day. One shall
(there-
by)
attain all that one desires.
One who performs
Srdddha
under Magha
constellation
shall attain all desires. It will be as though the Pitrs are directly
worshipped as Pitrs are the presiding deities of the Magha
con-
stellation, the Sraddha rite performed under it
is remembered as
yielding everlasting benefits.’
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
Performance of Srdddha Under Different
Constellations
Brhaspati said :
1.
“Listen
from me to the
details of the Sraddhas that
should
be separately performed under
different constellations.
These had been recounted to Sasabindu by Yama.
*
This chapter
is adopted from Mbh.
Anuidsana ch. 89 with
slight
variations in words. V&.P. Ch. 82
is practically
(textually) identical with this
Chapter.
This
chapter
is
incorporated
from
Mbh. Anuidsana Ch.
89.
It
is
probably Vifou Dharma Sutra (78.8-15) which first mentions the fruits obtained

=== PAGE 178 ===

2.3.18.2-9
567
2.
The man who always performs the Sraddha under
the
Krttika
constellation
after gathering the sacred fires, shines in
the heaven. He must strictly adhere to the
obervances of these
holy rites.
3.
He who desires children should perform Sraddha'under
Rohini constellation.
He who
performs
&raddha
under Saumya
constellation
(i.e. Mrgasiras) becomes brilliant.
One who performs Sraddha
under Ardra
constellation
is
usually one who commits cruel acts.
4.
By performing &raddha under Punarvasu constellation
one inherits a share in fields
(agricultural lands)
and becomes
blessed with sons.
The man who
desires
nourishment
should
perform
Sraddha under Tisya
(i.e. Pusya) constellation.
5.
One who worships
the
Pitrs
under
Ailesa
constel-
lation shall attain heroic sons.
One who performs §raddha under the Magha constellation
becomes the most excellent of all castes.
6.
The man who worships the Pitrs under Purva Phalguni
constellation obtains good fortune.
He
who
performs under
Uttara Phalguni constellation
becomes habitually charitable and endowed with children.
7.
By worshipping
the
Pitrs
under
the
constellation
Hasta, one becomes the chief man in the assemblies.
He who performs Sraddha under Citra
constellation
will
beget handsome sons.
8.
He who performs §raddha under
Svati
constellation
shall acquire profit in trade.
’ A man who seeks sons should desire to
perform Sraddha
under Visakha constellation.
*
^
9.
One who performs Sr&ddha
under
the
constellation
Anuradha shall be able to exercise the sovereignty of a realm.
He who always performs Sr&ddha
under Jyestha
constellation
shall acquire excellent overlordship.
by performing Sr&ddha under different constellations from Krttika to Bharani.
Yajflavalkya
Smr. 1.265-268, MK.P.30.8-16, BM.P.220.33-42, KP.II.20.9-15,
Va P Ch. 82 deal with the same topic though
there
is some
disagreement
about the rewards so promised.

=== PAGE 179 ===

568
Brahmdntfa PurSna
10.
They who
wish
for
freedom
from
illness should
perform Sr&ddha under Mula constellation.
Those who perform Sr&ddha under Purvasatjha constellation
gain great fame.
The
man who
performs
Sr&ddha,
under
Uttarasacjha
constellation shall be free from grief.
1 1
.
By performing Sraddha under
Sravana
constellation
one attains the greatest goal in the worlds.
One who performs Sr&ddha under Dhanistha
constellation
inherits a share in kingdom and vast amount of wealth.
12.
By performing Sr&ddha under the
constellation
per-
taining to Varuna (i.e. constellation &atabhisak) one
conquers
the worlds by means of the Sraddhas, attains
(the mastery
of)
the
Vedas
along
with
the ancillary subjects and obtains the
greatest achievements of physicians.
1 3 .
One who performs Srdddha under Purva-Prausthapada
(Bhadrapada,)
constellation
shall
obtain many
ways
and
means of sustenance.
By not transgressing
(i.e. by performing
Sr&ddha)
under
the
Uttara-Prausthapada (Bhadrapada)
constellation one gets
thousands of cows.
14.
One who
performs
Sr&ddha
under
the
excellent
constellation
Revatl acquires much wealth by means
of metals
other than silver and gold.
One who
is
a
devotee
of
the
constellation Asvayuk
(ASvim)
obtains horses.
One who
performs
Sr&ddha under Bharani constellation
becomes the most excellent among good men.
15.
By performing Sr&ddhas,
.in
accordance
with
these
injunctions
regarding Sraddhas ,
Sa£abindu acquired the
entire
earth through his prowess with ease
(lit.
without
any
strain)
and ruled over it.

=== PAGE 180 ===

2.3.19.1-4
569
CHAPTER NINETEEN
Qualifications ofA Br&hmana for Sr&ddha Gifts
:
Merits af Sraddha performance at
. Sacred Places
Samyu said
:
1. “What, O excellent one among the
eloquent persons,
when
offered
to
the
Pitrs,
yields satisfaction (unto them)
?
What
shall be beneficent for a long time ? What is conducive
to infinite bliss ?”
Brhaspati explained
:
2. Listen from me
to
all
those
offerings which
those
who are conversant with the ritualistic details ofSraddha know.
Listen to their due benefits as well.
3.
If gingelly seeds, grains of rice, barleys,
pulses,
water
libations, roots and
fruits were
offered in Sraddha the grand-
fathers are pleased for the period of a month. 1
4.
They
are
satisfied
for
two months,
if Sraddha
is
offered with
different
kinds
of
fish.
They
are
satisfied
for
three
months,
if the
Sraddha
is offered with venison (deer’s
flesh)
.
1.
VV
3-11
give the vegetarian and non-vegetarian
articles of
food
liked by and
therefore recommended
to serve to Brahmins while dining at a
Sraddha. The Apastamba Dh.S. (600 B.C.) prescribes flesh-eating as obliga-
tory at Sraddha and enumerates the animals the flesh of which gratifies Pitrs
for what period e.g. the flesh of a cow offered in Sraddha
gratifies
the
Pitrs
for a year
(Samvatsaram gavayena prltih ) and for other animals
etc.
see Apas-
tainba Dh.
S. II. 7. 16.25;
II.7.17.3. A
refusal to accept non-vegetarian food
at
Sraddha
is punished by going to hell
(Visyudharmottara
1.140.49-50,
also
Manu V
35;
KP.II.17.40).
Manu III 267-272, Yajnavalkya I, 258-60, Mbh. Anuidsana ch.88, Katya-
yana’s Sraddha-Sutra
(Kandika
7-8), KP. 11.20.40-42,
Mt.P.l 7.31-35, Va.P.
83.3.9, VP. III. 16. 1-3 and such other Puraj^as specify the length of the periods
of time for which Pitrs are gratified by the flesh of certain animals served at a
Sraddha. There are differences in the period of gratification, but as Hem&dri
notes the greater the period,
the greater the
satisfaction
{iha
sarvatra
pritya -
tiiayo
vivakfitah
/
Sraddha,
p.590).
In southern
India,
strict vegetarianism
in Sraddha meals
i&
observed
though neither Mitak$ar& nor Kalpataru state that
flesh diet
is totally
pro-
hibited
at
Srdddha.

=== PAGE 181 ===

570
JBrahman4a Purana
i
They
are
contented
for four months, if rabbit’s flesh is
offered in the Sraddha.
They are pleased for five months, if bird’s flesh
is offered
in the Sraddha.
5.
They are pleased for
six months if Sraddha
is
per-
formed with boar’s
flesh.
The flesh of a goat yields satisfaction
to
Pitrs
for
seven
months.
The flesh of a mountain goat is said to
yield
satisfaction
for eight months.
6.
The grandfathers are delighted
for n’ne months
with
the flesh of Ruru variety of deer.
The
satisfaction
of
the
Pitrs
lasts
for
ten
months
if
Sraddha is offered with the flesh of Gavaya (a type of ox)
.
7.
The
satisfaction
lasts for
eleven months
if sheep’s
flesh
is
offered
in the
Sraddha. O Brahmanas,
cow’s
milk
offered
in the
Sraddha, yields
satisfaction
(to the Pitrs) fora
year.
8.
The
flesh
of the
rhinoceros
shall
be conducive
to
infinite bliss in the abode of
the
Pitrs. Milk
pudding
offered
along with honey and ghee at the time of Gajacchdya 1 yields per-
petual satisfaction.
9-1 1
.
There
is
perpetual
satisfaction
if
the
flesh of a
black
goat
is
offered.
In
this
connection
there arc certain
gdlhds
( traditional
verses) sung
by the Pitrs as recounted by
those/conversant with the ancient lore.
I shall mention them to
you factually; understand
them
from me
:
“Will
there
not
be
such
a
one
(descendant
coming
to
our
family
as
would
offer
Sraddha on
the
thirteenth
day ?
Will
there
not
be
such a one
in our
family as would
offer Sraddha during the rainy season or under Magha constel-
lation with the flesh of a goat wholly reddish in colour ?
1.
Gajacchdya or Kuhjaracchdyd is the conjunction that occurs when
the
Moon
is in the Magha constellation, the Sun is in Hasta and the Tithi is the
13th in the rainy season.

=== PAGE 182 ===

2.3.19.12-19
571
Many sons should be sought so that at least one would go
to Gaya, one shall marry a girl of the Gauri type
(i.e. of
eight
years or one who
is a virgin)
or one shall discharge a Nala* (?
lean like a red)
bull.*’
Samyu said
:
12.
“O
dear father,
recount
to me who ask,
the
fruit
of Gaya etc; mention fully the merits
to the donors**.
Brhaspati said
:
13.
“The Sraddha at Gaya
is of everlasting benefit. So
also
the Japas,
Homas,
the
penances.
It
is
in the abode of
the
Pitrs, O son, and therefore the Sraddha there is remember-
ed as yielding an everlasting benefit.
14.
The
son
begot
of a Gauri type of a girl after
she
had
completed
her
twentyfirst year shall perform great sacri-
fices.
(?)
This
is remembered as
its fruit.
I
shall
mention
the benefit of discharging a bull. Even
as I mention
it, understand
it. 1
15-19.
The discharger ofthe bull sanctifies ten preceding
and ten succeeding generations.
After discharging the bull and gettingdowninto the river
water whatever portion of water he touches,
is cited as yielding
an everlasting benefit unto the Pitrs.
There is no doubt
that
it will yield an everlasting benefit
unto the Pitrs if the
bull touches the
water
with any
of
its
limbs,
tail etc.
If the bull scratches or scrapes a
part of the ground with
its horns or
hoofs
continuously
it shall constitute a channel of
honey unto the
Pitrs.
By discharging a bull it
is said to accomplish such a satis-
faction to the Pitrs as is obtained by diggingalake with sides of
a thousand Nalvas (one Nalva * 400 cubits) according
to
the
&ruti (Vedas).
*
Misprint for ftftla vide V&. P. 83.12.
1.
W.14-19 describe the reward one gets by discharging a bull on the
occasion
«f

=== PAGE 183 ===

572
Brahm&ntfa Purdna
20.
If a
person
gives
during the Sraddha rite gingelly
seeds mixed with jaggery, honey,
or something
myced
with
honey—everything becomes everlasting in yielding benefits.
21.
(Charitable
gifts)
should
always be given by men.
One should not
test
the Brahmana.
It
is heard
(i.e.
it
is laid
down in the Vedas)
that a Brahmana
is
to
be
tested
in
rites
pertaining to the Pitrs and gods. 1
22-26.
The Brahmanas who
have
performed ablutions
after observing
the holy,
rites
prescribed
in
the
Vedas
are
those who sanctify the row
(of Brahmana diners)
.
Those
who know
different
languages,
those who
are
engaged in
(the
study
of) grammar,
those who study
the
Puranas and
sacred
scriptures,
one who maintains five sacred
fires, one who possesses Sauparna Mantras, one who knows the six
Ahgas (ancillary
subjects),
the son of Brahma Dcva (one who
has Brahman as his deity)
, one who has understood Vedic pro-
sody, one who
habitually
sings
the Jye$fhasaman 2 hymns, one
who has taken
a
holy
dip
in
the sacred waters, one who has
observed
holy rites, those who have taken Avabhrtha
(i.e.
Vale-
dictory) baths after all sacrifices, those who are devoid of anger
and
those who have no
greed
at
all one shall invite all such
Brahmanas
for
the Sraddha
rile.
What
is
given
to
these,
yields never-ending benefit; these are indeed the sanctifiers
of
rows of diners.
27.
If a person honours those who are
well established
in
yogic
rites
and Brahmanas worthy
of
being
invited
for
Sraddha rites, the three deities Brahma, Visnu and Mahesvara
are thereby worshipped by him.
1.
VV. 21-28 mention the qualifications of Brahmanas
to whom gifts
may be given. The Togadharma was regarded as the foremost among Dharmas
and hence naturally Yogis got a preference.
2*
Jyeftha-Saman
is interpreted
differently according to
the &akhas of
the Sama-Veda:
(i) Talavakdra Sakha: Sama sung on udu tvam
(RV.I.50.1 ), citram
devd-
ndm
(RV.I.1I5.I)
(ii) Ch&ndoga S&khd
: The Samans sung on Murdhdnam divo (RV.VI.7.1)

=== PAGE 184 ===

2.3.19.28-36
573
28-29.
The man who worships these Brahmanas attains
the same world as that of the Pitrs.
The Yoga Dharma is mentioned as the first and
foremost
among
all Dharmas.
It is the
most sacred of all sacred things
and most auspicious of all auspicious things.
I
shall
mentiou
those who
are
not
worthy of (being
in)
the
row
(of diners) 1
. Understand
them
even as I recount
them.
30.
A rogue, one who drinks liquor, one who keeps
ani-
mals, one who has
been
banished,
one who
works
as
the
common
servant of
all the
villagers,
one
whose profession
is
usury, one who does business in
the bazar.
31.
One who burns
houses,
one who
gives
poison, a
Sudra, a common priest of the village performing a Yajna (on
behalf of anyone and everyone),
a Kandapr^ha
(a Brahmana
who lives by making arrows
and
other weapons), a Kundasin
( a pander, a pimp)
,
one who
imbibes
liquor,
one who sells
Soma juice.
32.
One who
has gone overseas, a person who works as
a servant,
a
back-biter, one guilty of perjury, one who
argues
with his father, one who keeps his wife’s
paramour
in his own
house.
33.
An AbhiSasta
(a wicked and cursed
fellow), a
thief,
one who
maintains
himself by
means of arts
and
crafts,
a
panegyrist, a cook and one who deceives friends.
34.
A one-eyed fellow, a lame man, an
atheist, one who
has discarded
the
study of the Vedas, a mad fellow, a eunuch,
one who has killed a child in the womb, a
person who
defiles
the preceptor’s bed.
35.
One who maintains himself with the help
of a physi-
cian, a
glutton,
one who
commits
adultery,
one who
sells
Brahminical
holy
rites and
observance*—all
these
are
the
defilers of rows.
36. What is offered to an atheist shall become lost. What
is handed over to one who spoils holy rites and what is offered
1. W. 29-35 give the
list of persons unfit for invitation
to
Srdddha
Cf.
KP.1I.2 1.25-43.

=== PAGE 185 ===

574
Brahm&ntfa Purana
to
a
trader
shall not be
(beneficial) here or hereafter
( in the
other world). 1
37-38.
What
is
given
to the
following shall
be
of no
avail
here
and
hereafter
viz
one who
misappropriates
a
deposit,
one who is ungrateful, one who is devoid of the Vedas,
one who plays on the musical instrument Panava,
a
craftsman
and a person who
is
devoid
of piety.
( The same is the case
)
with one who
buys
or
sells
those
commodities the buying or
selling of which is prohibited as well as one who encourages such
activities by
praising
them.
A
trader may
have
mental
peace elsewhere
but he
does not
deserve
(invitation
to)
a
Sraddha.
39-43.
What
is
given
to
the
son of a widowed woman
who
remarries
is
futile like the Homa performed on the ashes,
O
Brahmana. A
one-eyed
man
(if invited
for
Sraddha)
destroys sixty merits of the donors; a eunuch destroys a hundred
merits;
a
man
suffering
from
white
leprosy
destroys
five
hundred merits; one who suffers from sinful ailments destroys a
thousand merits of the donors. The donor who is
childish
falls
ofT from the benefit thereof.
If one takes food with his head covered
(with a cloth), if
one takes food facing south, if one takes food with
shoes on,
if
one makes a charitable gift without due
honour—Brahma
has
ordained that the benefit in
all these cases shall go to the
chief
of Asuras.
A dog or the slayer of a Brahmana should never
see
( the
materials of Sraddha). Hence, one should
offer Sraddha
after
scattering
cooked
rice
surrounded
by
gingelly
seeds.
The
gingelly seeds and cooked rice surrounded by them are said to
ward off demons and dogs. 2
1.
VV. 36-42 enumerate peisons who are unworthy of receiving dana
(religious gift at the time of Sr&ddhd).
2. Since very early times—since the period of Dharma Sutras (600 A.D.)
—food for Srdddha and other sacred purposes was
not allowed
to
be polluted
even by sight by certain animals and classes of persons such as dogs, Candalas,
the committers of Mahapatakas, women in menses or sonless women or by a
person suffering from white leprosy. When our author gives a
list of such
unworthies in W. 43-44, he
is echoing Gautama Dh.S.
(15.25-28), Manit
IH239-242, and Purarias
like KP.
11.22.34-35, Va.
P.78. 26-40 and VP.
III. 16-12-14
to mention a
few.

=== PAGE 186 ===

2.3.19.44-53
575
44.
A
pig
destroys
(Sraddha)
merely
by seeing it; a
cock destroys it with the wind from its wings. The
Sraddha
is
destroyed by
the
touch
of a woman in her menses.
It is also
destroyed if the person offers
it in angry mood.
45.
The grandfathers arc pleased with what
is given on
the beautiful banks of rivers, on lakes and in secluded
places.
46-47.
One should not allow
the right knee to touch the
ground; a person practising Yoga should not utter words. Hence
one should propitiate the parents after duly wearing the Darbha
grass round the ring finger
and
after
being surrounded (? by
gingelly seeds.)
. Thus he pleases
the
Pitrs. After
getting
the
consent of the Brahmanas at the outset, one should duly perform
rites in the sacred lire Called Agnau-Korana.
48.
One should make
offerings
unto
the
Pitrs
on
the
ground or
in
the
open
sunshine or on Darbha grasses spread
like a bed.
One
should
duly
perform
Sraddha
in
the
forenoon
during the bright fortnight of the Lunar month.
49-50.
One must
not
transgress
(? pass
beyond) the
ninth muhurla
of
the day
(called
Rauhineya)
in
the afternoon
during
the
dark fortnight of
the
Lunar month, for &raddha
performance.
Thus, these noble-souled Pitrs of great Yogic
Power and
great potentiality should always be
worshipped when the place
and time
is propitious.
It
is
only
through
devotion
unto
the
Pitrs
that
a
man
achieves
the
Yogic
power which
is
very
difficult
to
achieve.
51-53.
(Defective
text) One
shall attain M6k$a
(libera-
tion from Samsara) through
meditation after discarding
(the
merits and
demerits)
of the
acts
both
auspicious and non
auspicious.
But for the sake
of sacrifices (being performed)
and by
deluding the world that way, Brahman was
(as if)
taken over
and
kept concealed in
the cavity (of the heart)
. Then by the
great-souled
Kalyapa,
that immortal
or
nectarine
esoteric
principle was drawn up
( and made explicit)
. This Yoga, the

=== PAGE 187 ===

576
Drahmdntfa Pur&na
superior
one among
the
Yogas, was
expounded
by Sanat-
kiimara.
It
is
the
region
of
the
highest Brahman
which is
the top-most secret doctrine of the Devas and the
highest
goal
of the sages.
54-55.
Through devotion to the Pitrs and personal efforts
this yoga
is achieved by
learned
men.
In
brief,
one
who
is
devoted to the Pitis, one who keeps
the
Pitrs before and after,
shall definitely attain
all
these things without efTort.
Brhaspati said
:
56-o 7a.
All
these
have
been mentioned
to
you along
with a brief resume (summary)
viz. to whom are the Sraddhas
to be offered, which one, if offered yields great benefit, the holy
centres and the caves wherein the Sraddha becomes everlasting
in
its benefits and the places where one
attains
heaven
(after
performing Sraddha)
.
57b-58a.
After
hearing
these
rules
and
regulations
regarding
Sraddha,
if any man does not perform it,
lie
is an
atheist and he shall
fall
into
the
terrible
hell
enveloped in
darkness.
58b-59a.
Slandering and reviling should not be indulged
in especially in the case of Yogins. 1
By indulging
in
such
reviling one becomes a worm and
whirls and whirls there itself (in the hell).
59b-60.
One who censures and reviles at yogins, medita-
tors and those who desire Moksa, shall fall into a terrible
hell.
There is no doubt that
even
he who
listens
to the same
falls
into the hell of terrible appearance and is enveloped in darkness
all round.
By
reviling
at
leading
Yogins
a man
never
goes
to
heaven.
1.
Since the
times of Vasistha Dh.S.
(XI. 17), Tatis
(recluses), Yogis
had a special place of honour among the invitees to Sraddha . During the Purana
period the honour became a blind faith.
As stated in Supra 9.70, feeding a
yogi came
to be
regarded
as more
meritorious than
feeding
thousands
of
Br&hmapas. Hence, here in VV.58b-64 even speaking ill of Yogins is prohibited
as a
sin.

=== PAGE 188 ===

2.3.19.61-67
577
61.
One who listens
to
the
abuse
of
leading Yogins
who
are
sclf-controllcd,
will
become
immersed
in
hell
for
a
long
time.
There
is
no
doubt
in
this
matter.
They
will
be
roasted
in
the
hell
Kumbhlpaka
again
and
again.
Their
tongues
shall
be
cut
again
and again.
62.
Those men
will
undergo
disaster
like a lump
of
clay
thrown
into
the
sea.
One
should
avoid
all
types of
#
hatred towards yogins, mentally, verbally and
physically.
He
enjoys infinite bliss here in this world.
63.
A person who has mastered
(various
subjects) docs
not
gain
mastery
over
himself. Due
to
his own
actions, he
wanders within the three worlds. Even one who
has
mastered
the Rg
Mantras,
Yajus
Mantras, Saman
Mantras and their
various ancillary subjects does not attain the Brahman
devoid
of changes
and aberrations and
therefore becomes distressed.
64.
One who
has
mastered
all
created
things,
the
products of Prakrti
(the nature known as Avidya)
, one who has
mastered
the
good
features
in the three Vedas, one who has
mastered
the three Gunas
(Sattva
etc.)
and
one who
has
mastered
the twentyfour principles
is the person who has cross-
ed
the
sariisara to
the
other
shore and
is
the
master
of
academic studies. 1
65. One who is devoted to
the Brahman duly and wholly
attains it.
Similarly,
he
comprehends
the
state where
every-
thing is merged into the
soul.
The Brahmana who does not take to the
path of Yoga
cannot become the master of everything that
comes under the
purview of order by knowledge.
66.
The
knower
of Yoga
obtains
i.e.
comprehends
everything that has to be comprehended in the Vedas and that
which
has to be realized i.e.
the Brahman.
Those who
have
known Vedas call him master of the Vedas.
67.
One who has understood
the Vedas and everything
that has to be understood remains in the normal state,
(i.e. the
1.
The belief in the omniscience of Yogins is still found all over
India.

=== PAGE 189 ===

578
Brahm&nia Pur&na
state of Brahman, realized by those who are the
real
knowers
of
the
Vedas. The
others
have simply gone
to
the end
of
the Vedas (verbally).
68.
There is no
doubt
that
the
devotee
of
the
Pitrs
obtains
Yajfias, Vedas, other
desirable
things,
different
sorts
of penance, longevity and progeny.
69.
He who
regularly
studios
this
Sruddha
Kalpa with
faith
achieves
all
these as well as the benefits of visiting holy
centres and
offering charitable gifts.
70.
He
is
the
sanctifier of the rows of diners. He shall
partake of the feast at
the
head
of
Brahmanas.
One who
is
obedient to the Brahmanas and who serves them shall attain all
desires.
71-72.
If a person
listens
to this always, ifaBrahmana
expounds
this to
others, if he
is
free
from jealousy, if he has
conquered anger and if he has rid himself of greed and delusion
he
attains
the benefit
of visiting holy centres
etc.
as well as
giving charitable gifts etc and the
excellent means
of heaven
and Moksa undoubtedly. Here, he attains the greatest nourish-
ment. Hence, one shall always perform Sraddha.
73.
If a
person reads
this procedure (of Sraddha) with
alertness, concentration and mental purity in the
assembly
(of
scholars)
during
the junctions
of
festive
occasions, he
shall
obtain children. With
the
greatest
refulgence
he
attains the
same world as the heaven-dwellers.
74.
Obeisance
to that selfborn Lord by whom this trea-
tise
has been recounted.
I bow down
always
to
the great
leaders of the Yoga
cult.

=== PAGE 190 ===

2.3.20. l-9a
579
CHAPTER TWENTY
Seven Classes of Pitrs
: Rites of Propitiating them
Brhaspati said
:
1.
Thus,
these
Pitrs 1 are
Dcvas; they are the deities of
even the Devas. These Pitrs who have no change or decay
are
always stationed in seven abodes.
2-3.
They are the sons of Prajapati. The first group
of
all these noble-souled ones,
is conducive to the regular increase
of the Yogic power of the Yogins. The second group is the
set
of Pitrs for the Devas; the third group is
that
of
the Danavas
and others.
It should be known that the remaining ones belong
to
the members
of
the
four
castes. Thus
all
of them have
been recounted.
4.
The Devas worship these Pitis who abide by all kinds
of knowledge. The four Asramas (stages oflife)
worship them
in the due order.
5.
All the four castes worship them in
accordance
with
the scriptures. Similarly, persons of the mixed castes as well
as
the Barbarians worship them.
6-7.
The Pitrs give delight
to him who
worships them
with great devotion.
The Pitrs and the Pitamahas (grandfathers) give nourish-
ment, progeny and heaven to the person who desires nourishment
and
progeny.
The
sacred rites of the Pitrs
excel the rites of
the Devas.
8-9a.
It is laid down in the Smrti that the
Pitrs
.should
be
propitiated before the Devas. Indeed the subtle movement
of the Yogic power of the Pitrs is
not comprehended
by men
even
by
means
of well-reputed penance.
What
then by
means of the Physical eye ?
1.
Pit^s were
originally
three generations of ancestors
in
the Vedic
times. But later on in Puranic times Pitrs were divided
as heavenly
viz. Vasus,
Rudras and Adityas and humans (laukika) viz. father, grand-father and great-
grand-father. In later Puranaa the number of classes of Pitrs increased to seven
as here. Our text echoes the division of Pitrs
as given in V&.P.73, VarSha P.
13, 16
ff, Pd.P. Sr?ti 9.2-4.

=== PAGE 191 ===

580
Brahmdn^a PurAna
9b- 11.
To
all, whether the Devas or the Pitrs, the silver
vessel
or
one
coated with
silver accompanied
by
silver
is
mentioned as excellent and sanctifying. The
relatives give
the
Pindas three in number, in that
vessel mentioning their names
and Gotras. The Pindas are
to be offered on
the ground
also
by covering
it
with
the
Darbha
grass
in
accordance
with
the
injunctions. While
placing them
they
are
to be placed
wearing the sacred thread on the right shoulder; kept anywhere
the Pindas please the Pitrs.
12-13.
The food offered to the
Pitrs
becomes
his
own
food.
Just as the lost calf obtains the mother at the cowpen
so
also the food
offered
to
the Pitrs
reaches them. The Mantra
takes it to the place where the Jantu
stays.
The
utterance of
names and the Gotras and the Mantras take the food offered
to
the Pitrs.
14-16.
Satisfaction
follows
them
even
if they
were to
take a hundred births.
It
is thus
that
the
power
of Brahma
the Paramesthin
exists in the first creation of the
Pitrs who seek the everlasting
state of the worlds.
Thus these Pitrs, their worlds, daughters,
grandsons and
the sponsors of the sacrifice
have
been recounted
by
me, O
sinless one. O son, the Pitrs have been
recounted
to
you
in
due order.
Samyu said
:
17.
“The divine creation of the Pitrs has been recounted
by
you, O dear father. Their worlds, their daughters and their
grandsons have been heard.
1 8.
The charitable
gifts and
their
benefits have been
glorified along with the purificatory rites. The state of its being
of
everlasting benefit1
has been
cited. The Brahma^as have
been mentioned. From today onwards
I
shall perform
these
duly”.
1 .
As a matter of fact the theory of Karman and re-incarnations
(Punar-
janma ) weakens the basis of the performance of Sr&ddha . Hence this belief is
propagated in Puranas and other works on Dharma Sastra.

=== PAGE 192 ===

2.3.20.19—21.4
581
Brhaspati said
:
1 9-2 1
.
“Thus said the holy lord Angiras
to
the
sages.
On being asked to clear
their
doubts he said to
the
sages
in
the assembly of men formerly in the extensive Satra
(sacrifice)
lasting a
thousand
years.
In
that
Satra
the
Sadaspati
(the
Presiding Lord) was Brahma the lord of Devas.
Five
thousand
years have elapsed since then.
In this
connection
verses have
been sung by the sages who expounded the Brahman.
22.
Formerly, in the Sattra, Brahma the great soul took
the
initiation. There
itself
excellent
food was
given
to the
Pitrs who seek everlasting benefit of the worlds.”
Suta said
:
23.
“On being
asked formerly
by
his
intelligent
son,
Brhaspati thus
recounted
the
creation of
the
Pitrs.
It
has
been
cited now by me.”
CHAPTER TWENTYONE
The Dialogue between Aurva and Paraiurdma
Vasif\ha said :
1.
As the noble-souled Jamadagni of immense
strength,,
went on working like this, O king, several years elapsed.
2-3.
Rama (i.e. ParaSurama)
also,
the
most
excellent
one among those who uphold dharma> who mastered the essential
principles of the Vedas and
the
auxiliary treatises concerning
the
Vedas and who was
an expert in all
scriptures, who was
polite and of a well-disciplined
nature and who
was
highly
intelligent, served his parents, O leading king. By his
activities,
he heightened the pleasure of others.
4.
Working
like this, O king, Rama, the most
excellent
one among
intelligent
men,
spent
a number
of
years
in
rendering service to his parents.

=== PAGE 193 ===

582
Brahm&ntfa PurUna
5-
On
one
occasion, O
king,
as
destined by
Fate
(Providence), that sage ofgreat splendour,
planned* to go
to
the house of his grand-father.
6.
Touching the feet of his parents with his
head,
that
noble
scion
of the
family of Bhrgu, with his palms folded
in
reverence, addressed these words with great humility.
7.
“O dear father,
I wish to
submit a
certain matter
now
to
you
and
mother.
It
behoves both of you to hear it
from me.
8.
For a long time I have been eager to see my
grand-
fat her. Hence, with your permission,
I shall go to him.
9.
My loving grand-mother wishes
to see me.
She
has
invited me eagerly many times through various persons.
10.
Indeed,
seeing
one’s
parents
and
grand-father is
very pleasing. Hence, permit me to go to him.”
Vasutha said
:
11.
“On hearing
these
words which
he
uttered
with
emotional excitement, both ofthem became extremely delighted.
Their eyes became filled with tears of joy.
12.
They embraced
that
highly
fortunate
(dignified)
son
and
lovingly
sniffed
at
his
head.
After
blessing
and
congratulating their dear son, they said thus:
13.
“Dear
son, go
to
your
grand-father’s
house
with
pleasure
for
meeting and
delighting
your
grand-father
and
grand-mother.
14.
After going there stay in their house for some
time,
serving them duly and delighting them, O dear son.
15.
O highly fortunate
one, do
not stay
there
for
a
very long time. With their permission come back safe and sound.
Of course, you will be eager to see us again.
16.
We cannot remain even for half a moment
without
seeing our dear son. Hence, do not stay in
your
grand-father’s
abode for a very long time.
17.
Or
even
if
you
go
to
your
great-grand-father’s
presence at his
( your grand-father’s) bidding, return quickly in
due course but certainly with his permission.”

=== PAGE 194 ===

2.3.21.18-28
583
Vasiffha said;
1 8-20.
On being told
thus,
the
highly
intelligent
son
Rama
circumambulated and bade good-bye to
them.
There-
after, he went to his grand-father’s
house. Rama
entered
the
hermitage of the
noble-souled Rcika,
the
most
excellent one
among the descendants of Bhrgu.
The hermitage was rendered
beautiful
by
the
gracious
presence
of
the
$age
and
his
disciples.
Everywhere
it was
resonant with the high-pitched sounds of the
recitation of
the
Vedas.
It
was
charming on
account
of the various kinds of
animals
which
lived
there with their natural animosity com-
pletely suppressed.
21.
After entering the fascinating hermitage O
leading
king, Rama saw in front of him, Rcika
his
grandfather
sitting
on his seat.
22.
On account of his penance, he was shining brilliantly
like the sacred fire in its sacrificial place. He was accompanied
by Satyavati like the sacrifice or yajna accompanied by Daksina.
23.
On observing Rama
who was
approacking
them,
the
two
saintly
souls
critically gazed at him
as
though
he
was a totally unknown stranger who had never been before.
24.
“Who is this boy honoured
(i.e. endowed with)
all
the requisite auspicious
characteristics. He
appears
to
be
a
huge mass
of
austerities. Although
still a
boy,
he
appears
to
be
very
powerful, due to his majestic demeanour coupled
with humility.”
25.
Even
as
they were thinking thus with delight
and
curiosity
in
their
hearts, Rama slowly came to
their vicinity,
full of perfect humility.
26.
The
intelligent
sage Rama reported his name and
lineage. With great joy, he touched the feet of his grand-father
and grand-mother with his head, as well as the hands and paid
respects to them thus.
27.
Then both of them were
delighted
in
their
minds.
They
lifted up
the excellent grandson and showered him with
blessings. They congratulated him severally.
28.
They embraced him and made him sit on their laps.

=== PAGE 195 ===

584
BrahmUntfa Purfina
Their eyes were flowing with tears ofjoy. Looking at
his lotus-
like face, they felt great delight.
29.
When the scion of their own family was comfortably
seated, the elderly couple enquired about his health.
30.
ct Dear boy, we
hope your
parents
are
quite
well.
Arc
your
brothers
quite
well? We hope you sustain yourself
without any undue strain.”
31.
He
replied to everything that he was
asked
about,
O dear
king, everything
concerning
himself
as
well
as
the
activities of his parents and brothers.
32.
Thus, O great king, Rama stayed
in
the
house
of
the parents of his father delighted at the good things that issued
forth, due to the affection of those two elderly persons.
33.
He stayed there for a few months
giving
delight
to
the minds and
eyes
of
all
loving
beings
and
spending
time
rendering
service
( to
his
grand-father
and
grand-mother)
eagerly.
34.
Thereafter, the noble-minded scion
of the
family of
Bhrgus took leave of both of them, O king, and desired
to go to
the
hermitage
that
was the resort of the parents of his grand-
father.
35.
He
was
congratulated
and
blessed
by
those two
delighted
( grand-parents ).
He went towards the hermitage
of
Aurva along the path indicated by them.
36.
After
duly
prostrating
at
the feet of Cyavana 1 ?)
(Rama) of excessive austerities went to the hermitage ofBhrgu
on being permitted by him
(i.e. Cyavana) with great delight.
37.
After proceeding ahead
he saw
the
penance-grove
of Bhrgu the chief of all sages surrounded by sages
of
tranquil
minds.
38.
He
was
delighted
(to
see
the
penance-grove)
over-grown with trees which offered
plenty of cool fescinating
shade; which were blessed with the (inequalities (and products) of
1 .
Parasurama is shown to have visited all his forebears
in
a
serial
order thus:
(Jamadagni’s hermitage) :—Rcika—Aurva—Cyavana—Bhrgu.
A
line
indicating
Parasurama’s
stay
with Aurva and departure to
Cyavana’s hermitage appears to be missing. Hence
the
question-mark
after
Cyavana.

=== PAGE 196 ===

2.3.21.39-47
585
all the seasons and that had been endowed with exquisite
fruits
and flowers.
39.
It was resonant everywhere with
different
kinds
of
pleasing
sounds
of
recitation
of
the Vedas and
the
chirping
sounds of various kinds of birds all pleasing to
the minds
and
ears.
40.
The hermitage had been rid of all kinds of
sins
due
to the fragrance of smoke arising from
the
sacred
fires; while
Ahutis (ghee-offerings) were being oblated
to
the
accompani-
ment of chantings of Mantras during the performance of Homos.
The
fragrance was
wafted
everywhere
within the forest (by
gentle breezes thus wiping out all sins thereof).
41.
On all sides, O king, the pcnancc-grovc was rendered
splendid by
the
handsome
sons
of sages who were
fetching
sacrificial twigs and Darbha
grass
and
who were
embellished
with their stavas, girdles and antelope skins.
42.
Here
and
there
the
daughters
of sages
could
be
seen
moving about with vessels (and baskets) filled with water
and flowers and rendering those places beautiful.
43.
Herds of hinds along with
their
fawns
were
taking
rest in
the
shade
of
trees
bordering
the
court-yard
of
the
huts.
They
were
free
from
fear about
their
safety,
due
to
their faith and confidence
in the sanctity of the penance grove.
44.
Peacocks and pea-hens
of sweet
notes
had
begun
graceful
dances
even
as
the
herds
of Rsya deer indulged in
chewing die cud and stood as witnesses. The peacocks gave them
great pleasure.
45.
Bits of Nivdra
(a kind of rice)
grains
were
scattered
about in that penance-grove and heaps
of Nivara
grains were
being dried in the sun as well as in shade. They were not
eaten
by the young ones of the deer moving about nearby.
46.
In that penance grove, Homa was
being
duly
per-
formed
in
the
sacrificial
fire
at
the proper time.
Groups of
guests were being honoured duly.
Recitation
of Vedic
hymns
was being practised. What
is mentioned
in
the
Agamas
(scrip-
tures) was being pondered over.
47.
All the Smrti texts
were being
read. The meanings
of the Sruti texts were being discussed. The worship of the Pitrs

=== PAGE 197 ===

586
BrahmdQ$a Purdna
and
the
Devas had begun. The penance-grove was fascinating
for all living beings.
48.
The grove was inhabited mostly by sages performing
penance. It was not at all resorted to by the wretched contemp-
tible fellows. It was
holy
and
conducive
to
the
progress
of
penance.
It was
an
abode
of happiness
to all
living beings
(including animals).
49.
It was highly delightful to the ascetics. It was another
world of god Brahma, as it were.
It was
resounded
with
the
humming of bees which hovering over fragrant flowers
echoed
everywhere.
50-52.
Breezes of various kinds
(i.e. of varying
velocity)
blew
there.
Surveying
such
an excellent hermitage endowed
with
the qualities mentioned
above,
Rama, an
humble
dis-
ciplined
soul,
entered
it like a meritorious person getting into
the
abode
of Devas. After entering the penance-grove, O king,
he
saw
his great-grand-father (i.e. Bhrgu). He was surrounded
by hundreds of sages who were his disciples. He was
seated
on
a
seat
of Darbha in the centre of the dais intended for
expla-
natory discourses. He appeared radiant with white
moustaches,
beard and matted hair as well as with his sacred thread.
53-56a.
(Defective text). He was seated cross-legged
with
the right leg supported by the left shank (from ankle to the knee)
and vice versa. The leading sage had got his body covered with
Togapaffa (the cloth used to cover the body of ascetics
while
in
abstract meditation). The right palm was brilliant like
a
lotus
expressing Mudrd
(Gesture)
of explanation by means of
the
Angers
and
the
palm. His
radiant left hand had been placed
above
the
Togapaffa . The
subtle
meanings
of
the
Aranyaka
(Upanisadic)
texts
were
being
explained
to leading sages by
the ascetic.
56b-57a.
On seeing
his
father's
grand-father, O great
king, Rama slowly approached the noble-souled sage.
57b-58a.
On seeing him come, O king,
the
sages
were
overawed
by
his power
even
from a distance. They began to
have misgivings as to who he was.
58b-59a.
In the
meantime,
Bhrgu of incomprehensible
soul, was
delighted by his
arrival. Stopping
his
discourse, O
king, the sage remained gazing at him.
-

=== PAGE 198 ===

2.3.2 1.59b-73
587
59b-60a.
Approaching him with his
head
bowed down
due to humility, Rama duly saluted him like Upendra
offering
salutations to Vedhas
(God Brahma).
60b-61.
After paying respects
to Khyati
(Bhrgu’s
wife)
Rama endowed with humility, paid due obeisance to
the sages
in accordance with their seniority by
age. He
was
extremely
blessed by all of them gleefully.
62-63a.
With
their
permission,
the
intelligent
sage
(Rama)
seated himself on
the ground . After Ram’a had been
seated and duly congratulated and blessed, Bhrgu looked at him
again and asked him about his health and happiness.
63b-65a.
“I hope you are happy, dear boy.
I hope your
parents are free from ailments, so also your brothers
as well
as
the parents of your father. Wherefore have you come here
now
to my presence? Have you been
directed by anyone? Or
have
you come of your own accord ?”
65b-68a.
Thereupon, Rama reported to him
everything
without
leaving out anything
that
had
been asked
by
that
noble-souled sage (Bhrgu) viz. the news regarding his father and
mother, the happiness of his
noble-souled
brothers
as
well
as
that
of the
parents of his father, with humility and joy. Rama
mentioned to Bhrgu the fact that he had paid a visit
to
them
and every other
details. He
told him
what
he
himself had
•
«
tivdl I vLl •
68b-69a.
On hearing
these
statements
of Rama
and
particularly on seeing him, O king, Bhrgu was delighted and he
congratulated him.
69b-70a.
Rama stayed in his hermitage
for a few
days,
pleasing
his
(great-grand-father)
by means
of
his
excellent
activities, O king.
70b-7la.
Then once, the excellent sage (Bhrgu)
said
to
him ‘‘Dear boy, come’
9 and called him to a secluded spot.
71b-72a.
Rama approached
the seated sage with
palms
joined in reverence and paid him his respects. He stood in front
of him with a highly delighted mind.
72b-73.
After offering his blessings with delighted mind,
Bhrgu looked at R&ma with respect as he
stood
there without
being overwhelmed by awe and
suspicion and
said—“Dear
boy, listen to my words that I am going to tell you now.”

=== PAGE 199 ===

588
Brahm&n$a Purfina
74.
You have to go to the great
mountain Himav&n
for
the welfare of all the worlds, for your own
sake
as well as for
our sake.
75.
It
is my behest, dear son. You must start now
itself
from
this
hermitage
with
your mind bent upon penance. Go
there, O
highly
fortunate
one, and
set up
an
auspicious
hermitage.
76.
With
due
observance
of
holy
rites
propitiate
Mahadeva by means of penance.
With
a
devotion not
to be
found elsewhere, cause pleasure unto him ere long.
77-78a.
You will attain great
bliss
and
felicity
before
long.
There
is no doubt about it. With your devotion, Sankara
will become delighted quickly. He will do
whatever you
wish
in your mind.
78b-79.
When Sankara who is the lord of
the
Universe
and who
fondly
loves
his
devotees,
is
propitiated, dear son,
request him for
all sorts of weapons as you desire. This difficult
task must be performed by you for the welfare of all Devas.
80-81.
There is a lot of work
awaiting you
which can
be
accomplished
only
through
weapons
on many occasions.
Hence, you propitiate Sankara, the lord of the
lords
of Devas.
Being
endowed
with
great
devotion, you
will
surely
obtain
your desire.
CHAPTER TWENTYTWO
Parafurdma's Penance
Dialogue between Paraiurama and Siva—the Hunter
Vasiffha said :
1 .
On being advised by Bhrgu thus, Rama bowed down
to him saying, “so be it.” He was permitted to do
so
by
him.
and so he decided to go.

=== PAGE 200 ===

2.3.22.2-12
589
2.
He
duly circumambulated
Bhrgu
and
Khyati and
bowed to them. He was embraced and
greeted with
blessings
by both of them.
3.
He bowed down to those sages and was permitted
by
all of them. With a determination to perform penance, he went
out of that hermitage.
4.
Thereafter, at the behest of his sire, Rama of exalted
mind,
went
to the Himavan, the most excellent among moun-
tains, along the path mentioned by Bhrgu.
5.
He crossed different countries, mountains,
rivers and
forests. He gradually
passed by
the
residences
of important
sages.
6.
On the way he
halted
and
stayed
at
the abodes of
sages here and there. Or on other
occasions
he
stayed
in
the
holy
centres
and
shrines of great importance. Thus, he went
along slowly.
7 .
Passing over and surveying many pleasing
territories,
he
reached
the
excellent Himavan, the most important of all
mountains.
8.
After
reaching
that
place,
he
saw
the
excellent
mountain abounding in different trees and creepers. It appeared
to scrape the sky by its huge
peaks.
9.
It was embellished with various spots rendered lovely,
due
to different
minerals. All round,
it was rendered splendid
by the brilliant jewels and medicinal herbs.
10.
In
some
places
the
forests
were
blazing due
to
the
fire
originating from
the
friction of dry
trees
clashing
together on account of violent gusts
of wind. The
flame was
further enhanced due to the blowing winds.
11.
In some places, the sun-stone came into contact with
the rays of the sun and began to
emit
fires. Due
to these fires
the snow and bitumen got melted and
the water
thus
formed
quelled the forest fires.
12.
In some places, the forests
got
illuminated
through
beams of light
reflected from crystalline collyrium,
silver and
heaps of gold through the rays of the sun. Their mutual rays of
1.
VV.8-43 constitute a beautiful description of the Himalayas.

=== PAGE 201 ===

590
Brahmd,n$a Pur&na
light came into contact with one another and a
brilliajit gleam
spread everywhere.
13.
In some places, the forests were brightened by groups
of Siddhas who had been wet due to snowfall and so were
bask-
ing in the early morning sunlight over the rocks, at the
feet
of
the mountain.
14.
In
some
places, the
borderland was brightened up
by Yaksas who were
seated
on
golden rocks
over which fell
the rays of the sun and so the Yaksas appeared to enter fire.
15.
In some places, the caves were filled with the piteous
cries
of herds
of deer
that had been agitated when hyaenas
jumped up after coming out of the caves.
16.
In some places the huge shining
rocks
and
sloping
sides of the trees had been scraped suddenly when
the
leaders
of the herds of boars and tigers fought each other.
1 7.
In some places, the slopes of rocky
ridges had
been
scraped
and
dug up
by the hoofs of the Gavayas (A species of
wild ox) as they were chased by
the
elephants attracted
by
the
resemblance of their own youn*
ones . [The idea seems to be
this
the Gavayas were mistaken to be the young cubs of elephants by
their mother elephants. Hence, they pursued the Gavayas .]
18.
In
some
places
the
forests
abounded in smashed
pieces of rocky boulders, because the
highly
excited
elephants
in
their
rut
had
been fighting
one
another for the sake of a
female elephant.
19.
In some places, the rocky slabs
had
been
split by
the claws of lions treading upon
them,
as
they
pursued
the
elephants, when
their anger had
been roused on hearing the
roaring trumpeting sound of those elephants.
20.
In some places, the forests were filled with
the
loud
lamenting cries of elephants whose temples had been pierced by
the claws of the lions suddenly pouncing upon them.
21.
In some places,
there were
deep
caves,
the
rocks
ofwhich appeared to be split by the terrible cries
of
the
lions
whose
manes had
been
violently
pulled by the
eight-footed
( fabulous animal ) Sarabha.
22.
In some places,
the
rocks
and
pebbles
had
been
broken upas the excited and infuriated hosts ofSabaras (hillmen)

=== PAGE 202 ===

2.3.22.23-32
and
the
leaders
of
the
herds
of
bears had been engaged in
mutual struggle.
23.
In some places,
the
female
elephants
and
tuskers
were
found
sporting
about
in
the
bower-like
bushes on the
mountain. In some places the excited elephants in rut were seen
pursuing the she-elcphants throughout the forests.
24.
The mountain Himalaya had hundreds of caves filled
with gusts of wind formed by the breaths of sleeping
lions.
In
the forests of that mountain deer wandered
about despite
their
great fear being suspicious of danger.
25.
Herds
of Camari dear moved about here
and
there
very
slowly
while
sporting,
because they were afraid
of their
tail
getting split as a result of being entangled
in
the
thorny
bushes.
26.
The entire face of all the quarters was filled with the
utterances
and
the
sounds of beating time
by
the
Kinnaris
residing
in the caves of the mountains.
27.
The ground had been marked
by
the
red-lac-dyed
wet feet of the sylvan deities moving about here and there.
28.
All round activities of dance had
been
initiated by
groups of peacocks and pea-hens,
whose
notes were
musically
sweet and whose plumes had been raised up and spread.
29.
It appeared
that
the
mountain
was
being fanned
gently by the breezes in the forest, which were extremely
pleas-
ing to the bodies and which shed showers of flowers blooming in
water as well as on the ground.
30.
The
region
bordering upon
the
mountain
had
been
abounding
in
the Mango
trees and
they
were
filled
with
the
tumultuous
cooing
of male cuckoos
that had
be-
come
excessively
elated by
tasting
the
juice
of
the
season
Spring.
31.
The mountain had been resonant
with
the
musical
notes
of
bees that had
been maddened
by imbibing nectar
from different kinds of flowers. The
forests therein had become
deafened, due to the chirping sounds of many birds.
32.
The surface of the ground
had
become
filled
and
thickly bedecked with a number of fresh flowers wet with honey.
They had been blown therein by the breezes of the
forest
and
scattered about;

=== PAGE 203 ===

592
Brahmdn<fa Purdna
33.
The
region all round had been deafened by the loud
sound
of
springs
and
water-falls
that
cascaded down
from
great heights upon narrow defiles abounding
in
rugged rocky
pebbles.
34-39.
The
forests on
the mountain abounded
in
all
the following trees
viz. Patala (Bignonia
Suaveolons)
, Kadamba
(anthocephalus indicus)
, Nimba
(the Necm
tree),
Hintala
(the
marshy date tree)
, Sarja
( Vatica
Robusta)
,
Bandhuka
(Penta-
petes
Phoenicea)
9
Tinduka
(Diospyros
embryopteris')
,
Kapittha
(Feronia Elephantum)
, Panasa (the bread-fruit tree), Asoka,
the
mango tree,
Iriguda
( Terminaiia
catappa—a
medicinal
tree),
Asana
( Terminaiia
Tomentosa),
Naga,
Gampaka,
Punnaga,
Kovidara
( Kacandr in Hindi)
, Priyahgu
( Setaria
italica
Beatiy,
Hindi-Kangun)
Priyala (the tree Buchanania Latifolia
)
, Nlpa
(a
tree ofKadamba family) Bakula , Ak$a 9 Tamalaka y the grape vine,
Madhuka
(JBassia
Latifolia)
, Amalaka
( emblic
Myrobalan )
,
Jambu
(Engenia Jambolana) Kankola, Rose
tree,
Bilva
(Aegle
marmelos gorr, Fam, Rutaceae) ,
Arjuna, Mango
tree,
BIjapura
(citron
?)
,
Picula,
Ambastha
(oxalis
corniculato) ,
Kanaka,
Vaikankata,
Sami,
Dhava,
Putrajiva
(H. Jiyapota)
, Abhaya
(A fragrant grass)
, Arista (The soap
berry-tree), Loha
(aloe
wood),
Udiimbara
(Ficus glomerata ),
Pippala (H. Pipal) and
other trees.
It was beautified on
all
sides by
other
trees
of
various
kinds.
Their
innumerable branches spread all round.
They grew so close together
that
they
appeared
to
be
over-
lapping one another.
40a.
The leaves too clustered together
without
leaving
any gap in between.
The surface of
the ground
on
all
sides
was
inaccessible' (due to the impenetrable thick leaves) to
the
rays of the sun.
40b-41a.
Hundreds of rows of jungles were occupied and
as if trembling with monkeys who grew
fat
and
strong
by
eating different kinds of ripe fruits.
41b-42a.
Here and there hundreds of
rivulets
could
be
seen gushing out of the
rocky
crevices. They were
extremely
charming, O king, as they produced roaring sound
in
view
of
their falling over rugged rocky basin.
42b-43a.
It was beautified all round by Excellent
large

=== PAGE 204 ===

2.3.22.43b-54a
593
lakes adorned with lilies and lotuses
and
resonant
(with
the
cries of)
different aquatic birds.
43b-44a.
After
reaching
the
lordly
mountain,
the
mountain
with
its peaks
capped
with
snow*
the
excellent
(descendant)
of Bhrgu climbed on to it immediately with great
joy.
44b-45a.
After entering
the
dense
forest
full
of
trees
growing in
the
open
spaces, Rama
of noble
miild,
walked
about slowly to a tree grown in the open spaces, O King.
45b-46a.
As he moved about in
the
different
quarters,
he was glanced at on all sides with suspicion and
awe by
the
female deer, with lovely eyes. Being glanced at thus, he became
delighted.
46b-47a.
Being fanned by
the
sylvan
breezes
fragrant
due
to
the
sweet
smell
of
diverse
flowers
and
seeing
the
splendid sylvan glory, he became delighted.
47b-49.
The descendant of Bhrgu
carefully
scrutinized
different spots and moved
about.
Seeing
the
mutually
anta-
gonistic
things
(such
as
heat,
cold
etc.)
as
well
as
the
minerals,
he
thought
thus
“O
this mountain
has
been
crowned as the overlord of all mountains by Brahma.
It
is but
proper that he has been made a
partaker
of
the
benefits
of
Yajfias. The fact
that
this
mountain
is
the
overlord
of
all
mountains is obviously demonstrated.
50-5 3a.
He has rendered the whole forest sweet through
the whistling sound of the hollow bamboos.
Through the clusters of snow drops clinging to its
ridges,
this
mountain
appears
as
one
who
has put on and covered
himself with a white cloth.
Due
to
the
thick
clusters of snow-flakes sticking
to
its
top,
this mountain
appears
like one who
has
covered
his
limbs with an upper garment of diverse colours.
With his body bedecked with sandal paste, fragrant
aloe,
•camphor, musk, saffron etc.
he
clearly
looks
like a
graceful
elegant sensualist.
»
53b-54a.
Piles of big pearls are scattered all round, from
reheads of lordly elephants struck down by lions and
this
to the beauty of this mountain.

=== PAGE 205 ===

594
Brahm&ntfa Purdna
54b-56a.
Its
tops
are embellished
with the
flowers
of
various
trees,
creepers and winding
plants. He
is adorned
by means of the canopy of closely
spread
layers and
layers of
beautiful clouds.
His body
is
variegated by means of different minerals.
He is bedecked in all sorts of gems and jewels.
56b.
The Kailasa peak
serves
the purpose of the white
4
umbrella and
renders
it
splendid. He
is
surrounded
on
all.
sides by herds of elephant-faced
and
horse-faced
semi-divine
beings.
57-58.
His palace is a rocky cave with a great
gs te-way
illuminated by gems and jewels.
He resorts
to
his
throne
in
the middle of his abode which is an isolated cave with the trees
all round, performing in due order,
the
duties
of
the
mace-
bearers. Like an imperial Majesty he
could
be
seen
by
the
people, but
is inaccessible to them.
59-60.
The royal
insignia
of the
fluffy
Camara-hair
is
being waved aloft by the Camari deer moving
about here
and
there. He shines on being served by
many
types
of animals
by the peacocks who dance
in his honour and by the
Kinnaras-
who sing his praise.
It is
clearly
manifest
that
this
(moun-
tain)
is
installed
in
the
office
of
the
overlord
of
lordly
mountains.
61 -62a.
After occupying the Earth, he enjoys
the entire
glory by means of his powers.
Thinking thus, Rama who was
extremely delighted, moved about for a long time in the forests
and caves of the mountain Himalaya.
62b-64.
The scion of the family of Bhrgu, O great
king,,
reached an excellent lake in that extensive forest.
The lake was vast and its waters were
free
from
impuri-
ties.
It was beautified by
lilies, lotuses and clusters of Kalhara
flowers,
( a variety of white lotus)
.
It
was rendered
splendid
all round by red and yellow, white and blue lotuses, lilies and
other kinds of aquatic plants.
65-67.
It
was
vibrant and
resonant
on
account
of
hundreds of aquatic birds and
insects,
birds
such
as
swans,
Sarasa birds,
water-crows,
K&ranfavas
(a
variety
of ducks),
Jiva-Jivakas> Cakravdkas, ospreys and
bees.
It
was
served by
gentle breeze.

=== PAGE 206 ===

2.3.22.68-74
595
It appeared to be dancing about
as waves and
ripples
were produced within them when shoals
of
Saphari and
other
types of fish swam about here and
there. The
most
excellent
scion of the family of Bhrgu reached that excellent lake.
68-69a.
It had rendered melodious the quarters through
the chirpings of different birds.
Rama the
most
excellent
one among
intelligent
men
made a
splendid and
spacious hermitage
on
its
bank and
decided to perform penance.
69 b- 70.
Invariably, he sustained
himself on a
diet
of
greens, roots and fruits. He had perfect control on
his
sense-
organs. Keeping the lord of .Devas
in
his own mind,
he per-
formed
penance along the path
initiated
by
Bhrgu. He was
endowed with great devotion.
71-72a.
He
worshipped
the
lord of
Devas, O
king,
with intense mental concentration. During the rainy season he
had
neither
abode
nor
a
shelter.
During
the
winter
he
resorted to chill water. During the summer he
stayed
among
five fires
(i.e. four
fires
on
four
sides and
the
blazing
sun
above) . He
performed
penance
in
this manner for a long
time.
72b-73.
He vanquished Kama (Lust) and other enemies.
He discarded
Ormifatka 1
(sixfold
distress
and
anxiety).
His
intellect
was
not
stirred
up or
agitated
by
the
Dvandvas
(mutually antagonistic pairs of
feelings,
heat-cold,
pleasure-
pain
etc)
. He was little excited by the defects of Tdpa (heat or
agonizing experience). He had his
physical
body
as
well
as
mind purified by means of Tomas (five moral restraints in Yoga)
and Niyamas (observances prescribed in Yoga)
.
74.
The sage of
great
self-control
rendered
the
vital
airs steady within the
physical body by means
of PrdQ&ydma
(Breath-control). He was able to seat himself in the lotus pose
with great ease. He observed perfect silence. The
great
sage
kept his mind steady and stabilised.
1.
The
six
distressful
‘waves*
in
the life are: hunger,
thirst, decay,
death, gnef and illusion (MW 222.3)
. &KD.I.282 enumerates the
following
‘waves of existence'
viz. old age and death
(of the
body) ,
greediness
and
vision of the mind and hunger and thirst (of life).

=== PAGE 207 ===

596
Brahmdnia Pur&na
75.
Devoted to the practice of Praty&hdra
(withdrawing
the sense-organs from external
stimulii,
sensual
feelings and
objects), he
controlled
the
sense-organs.
Self-possessed
that
he was, he could stabilise the usually unsteady mind
by means
of Dh&raqd (Retention of
perception
of the
supreme
deity)
.
76.
He had
the
vision
of Parameivara,
the
lord
of
Devas, by means of meditation. His inner mind was in a stable
quiet state. He was a Maitra ( an
exalted
Brahmana who had
arrived at the highest state of human
perfection
due
to
close
contact with the supreme Being). He was free from all sorts
of
obstacles.
77-78.
After perceiving
the
preceptor of
the
universe
(i.e. Supreme Lord) in his
contemplation,
he pondered
over
the
lord
of
Devas. The supreme
soul
stayed
in
his mind
as
an object of meditation His senses and the
physical
body
became motionless.
m
Performing the
repetition of
the mantra of the lord of
the chief of
Devas and
meditating
on him
in accordance
with his own
intellect,
he
remained
through
the
duration
of penance
motionless like a lamp in
a place where there
is
no wind.
79-81.
That sage of unmeasurable soul
propitiated
the
lord stationed in
all living beings.
Thereafter,
he
meditated,
upon the Ntfkala, the whole
form
of the
lord
which
is
un-
sullied, the greatest luminosity
which
cannot
be
thought of
clearly, the excellent one
that
could be
meditated upon
by
the Togins, the eternal one, the pure one that which is tranquil
forever; that which is beyond
the
pale
of the
sense-organs;
that which is incomparable and
is
solely
comprised
of
bliss;
that
which
is
steady,
that which pervaded the
entire
living
world,
the mobile and immobile.
82.
The scion of the
family
of Bhrgu meditated upon
that
aspect
of the lord
of the
Devas, O mighty
king.
For
a long time he had the feeling “I am He
(i.e.
the Supreme
Lord.)”

=== PAGE 208 ===

2.3.23.1—12
597
CHAPTER TWENTYTHREE
Penance ofParaiurima
the son ofjamadagni ( Contd.)
Vasiffha said
:
m
1 -4.
The great sages Bhrgu, Atri, Kratu, Jabali, Vama-
deva and Mrkandu, all
of whom
had
got
rid
of their
sins
through penance, were extremely
advanced
in
their wisdom,
righteous
activities and age, whose holy rites had been praised
by all, heard that Rama was performing a penance of a mystic
nature in a lonely spot, attained
perfect concentration
of
his
mind
in
Lord Siva and that he invariably maintained regular
observances of holy rites.
Being
eager, curious and desirous of
seeing him, they went over to his hermitage.
5.
The great sages who resided in holy places came from
a great distance
to
the
hermitage
of Para€urama who
was
performing penance.
6.
Having praised his most
arduous
penance
and
his
knowledge of the highest order in the world,
they returned
to
their respective hermitages.
7.
While Rama was engaged
thus, O
excellent
king,
lord Siva became excessively pleased at heart with Rama.
8.
Desirous
of knowing
the depth of his devotion unto
him, Lord Sankara, assumed the guise of a
hunter
of deer O
king, and went near him.
9.
He
assumed
the
guise
of a
youthful
hunter who
had the lustre of broken (heap of) collyrium, whose wide
eyes
were red in their extremities, who was very tall with his body,
hard as adamant and who held bow and arrows.
10-12.
His chin was raised up and his arms and
shoul-
ders were mighty and lifted up. His moustache and
hair were
tawny. He had the stinking odour of suet
and raw
flesh. He
appeared to be the destroyer of
all
living
beings.
The whole
of his body had been scarred with wounds due
to
the
contact
with the thorny creepers and shrubs. He was
found
to chew
frequently a piece of flesh dripping with blood.
His
neck was
slightly bent with the weight of two pieces
of flesh
suspended
from
it. While passing by, he brushed against groups of
trees,
forcibly with his thighs.

=== PAGE 209 ===

598
Brahm&nia Purina
13-14.
Like a mountain walking
on
foot,
he
came
to
that spot. After reaching the bank of
the
lake
atfounding
in
trees with plenty of blossoms, he placed the
burden
of pieces
of flesh
at the foot of a tree. Resorting to the shade of a
tree,
he sat there for a while.
15-17.
He saw the scion of the family of Bhrgu standing
on the bank of the lake. Thereafter, he stood up
hastily
and
approached Rama. He made
obeisance
to Rama
with palms
joined in reverence, even as his
hands
held
the bow
and
the
arrows. He spoke thus to the bravest among the
descendants of
Bhrgu, with a voice deep
and resonant like the thunder-clap of
clouds
full
of water with a voice that seemed come up from a
deep cave.
“I am
a
hunter
named
Tosapravarsa.
I am
staying
here in this great forest.
18.
I am
the
lord
of this region along with
the living
beings, trees and creepers therein. I move about here
with
the
flesh of different animals for my diet.
I am
impartial towards
all in this region viewing everyone
equally in my mind.
19.
I am
equally
kind to all living beings.
I
have
no
one related to me such as parents and others. I do not pay
any
attention to any of the objects
desired
by me whether
they be
unworthy of being eaten or drunk or whether they be unworthy
of approach.
20.
Nor do I
devote
any
particular
attention
to
rites
worthy of being pursued or not. I do not tolerate the
approach
and stay of any one in this forest.
21.
With my strength, I do not
permit even
Indra
(to
come here)
. There is no doubt about it. All the people know this
since this region is dependent upon me.
22-23.
So, no one comes here
without my
permission.
Thus my history has been entirely recounted to
you. You
too
tell me every thing about you factually. Who are
you ? What
have you come here for ? Why
have
you
established
yourself
here ? Are you ready to go elsewhere ? What is
it that you are
desirous of doing ?”

=== PAGE 210 ===

2.3.23.24-34
599
Vasiffha said
:
24.
On being addressed thus by
him,
Rama,
of great
splendour, stood, for a
while
smiling
silently. With
his
face
bent down, he thought thus
:
25.
“Who is this unassailable man with a deep resonant
voice like the thunder-clap of clouds full of water ?. He speaks
excessively in words lull of
clarity
in
meaning,
sounds
and
letters.
26.
But his body causes great doubt in me,
because
it
belongs to a low caste,
just
as
shafts
though
beautiful
are
deadly.*’
27.
Even
as Rama thought thus, good omens occurred
both on the ground as well as on his person (such
as
throbb-
ings of the right arm)—omens which were
portentous
enough
to grant him his desired object.
28.
Thereafter,
the
leading
descendant
of Bhrgu
mentally
pondered
over and over again and slowly addressed
these affably courteous words to the hunter.
29.
“I am the son of Jamadagni, called Rama. I am
a
descendant of Bhrgu. Welfare unto
thee.
I
have now
come
here to perform penance at the bidding of my preceptor.
30.
For a
long
time,
I
have
been
endeavouring
to
propitiate the lord of all
the
worlds
by
means
of
penance,
devotion, and holy observances.
31-32. Hence,
I shall propitiate by means ofmy penance,
Sankara, the lord of all the worlds, the refuge unto
everyone,
the bestower of freedom from fear,
the
three-eyed
lord, who
suppresses sin, the lord endearing to the
devotees,
the
omnis-
cent
lord
who
destroyed
the
Tripuras
(the
Triple-city
of
demons )
.
I have taken up holy observance in this hermitage on the
bank of this lake.
33.
I have decided in my mind
that
I
will
stay
here
until Lord Hara who
takes
pity
on
his
devotees,
manifests
himself to me.
34.
Hence,
it is proper for you
to go
away
from
this
place to some other place. If not,
it
is detrimental
to
me,
to
my holy rites and to my observances.

=== PAGE 211 ===

Brahmdn<jia Purdna
35.
Or I deserve respect from you with devotion
as
I
am a guest from another land. I am an ascetic and a sage and
have come to your place of residence.
36.
If I live in your vicinity it will
be
conducive
only
to
sin.
Resorting
to my
vicinity
will
result
only
in
your
unhappiness.
37.
Hence, leave off loitering about in the
precincts
of
my penance-grove. Be happy thereby in both the worlds.
Vasiffha said
:
38.
On hearing these words, the hunter became agitated
with
his eyes assuming copper colour due to anger. He replied
thus to the leading scion of the family of Bhrgu whose eyes
too
were red (due to excitement).
39.
“O Brahmana, why do you now extremely hate and
shun my staying near you, like that of an ungrateful fellow ?
40.
Have I done any disservice to you or
to
any
one
else
anywhere in this world
? Who will despise and
disrespect
a man of control over
his
sense-organs who
has
never com-
mitted any sin ?
41-42.
Ifmy very presence
is to be avoided, O
leading
Brahmana, if seeing me, staying with me and
conversing
with
me
is
to
be
shunned, my
long-lived
brother
should
go
away from the hermitage now itself. Hungry that I am
where
shall I go leaving off my own resort ?
43-44.
How can I, urged by you, go
to
another
place
forsaking my own residence ? I will never go far off from
this
place specially.
If you wish, you
may go
or
stay
behind.
I
cannot be driven off from this place by any means.*
Vasiffha said
:
45.
On hearing his words, O king, the leading
scion of
the family of Bhrgu became a bit
angry and
told
him
these
words.
46.
“The very
tribe
of hunters
is
ruthless.
It
strikes
terror into all living beings.
It is always
engaged
in
wicked
activities. Hence, it is despised and
held
in
contempt by
alt
living beings.

=== PAGE 212 ===

2.3.23.47-58
601
47.
You are bom of that tribe. You are a
sinner. You
harm and harass all living beings. Why then, O
evil-minded
one, do you not deserve to be shunned by good people ?
48.
Hence, comprehend this that
. you
belong to
a
low
caste and soon get away from here to another
place. You
are
not to hesitate in this respect.
49-50.
You are considerate to your body. You want
to
protect
it. Hence, you do
not
go
anywhere near thorns and
other things. You cannot
bear
the
pain
thereof.
Understand
that in the same way,
life
is dear to
all
living
beings.
Every
one who is hit or hurt feels the pain just like you.
51.
Non-violence unto
all
living
beings.
This
is
the
eternal virtue
(dharma)
.
It
is because you act contradictory
to
this dictum that you arc despised by good men.
52.
For sustaining your own
life, you
will
not stop to
kill all other living beings. How can you prevent yourself being
considered censurable by good people ?
53.
Hence, go soon, O basest one among all men, there
will not be dereliction of duty on my part and the
subsequent
loss thereof, on account of you.
54.
If you do not go away from here yourself,
I
shall,
by using force, generate in you the inclination to move away.
55.
O sinner, your stay here even for half a moment
is
not conducive to your welfare.
How can a hater of virtue,
a
person who
always
acts
contradictory
to
the
dictates of
Dharma attain welfare
?**
Vasiffha said
:
56.
On
hearing
the
words of Rama, lord Sankara, the
wielder
of
the Pinaka bow, who had assumed the form
of a
hunter
said to him
these
words
as though he was infuriated,
despite the fact that he was delighted.
57.
“I consider all this endeavour on your
part
to
be
futile. How
is it that you are the
first
wise
man,
whence
Is
Sambhu and whence is the penance ?
58.
O
muddle-headed
fellow, why do
you
take the
trouble of performing penance now 7
Certainly
Safikara
will
not be pleased with you, since you are of misguided conduct.

=== PAGE 213 ===

Brahmdntfa Purdfia
602
59.
Sambhu
(god Siva) has activities
contradictory
to
the ways
' of the world, O
evil-minded
one.
Excepting
you,
which unwise man will perform penance for propitiating him ?
60.
Or my departure
( from this place )
is
undoubtedly
relevant after honouring you in the
capacity
of
the worship-
per. There is (proper)
association between you and Sambhu.
61.
Only he
is
worthy
of
being
worshipped
by
you
because he is engaged in the
universe (?)
You
are the quali-
fied worshipper. There is no necessity for pondering over this.
62.
By cutting off the head of Brahma, the I*arame$thin
the grand-father of the worlds,
Sambhu
incurred
the
sin
of
Brahm in-slaughter.
63.
It is most probable, O
Brahmana,
that
you
have,
been instructed by Sambhu who has been
overwhelmed by the
sin of Brahmin-slaughter to do the same thing. Otherwise how
could you hive acted in this manner ?
64.
I think, O
sage,
that
within
a
short
while
the
fulfilment of penance has been achieved by you now on account
of the identity of qualities between you and Rudra.
65.
By killing your own mother, you have been
repudi-
ated and expelled by almost all the people of the world. Under
the pretext of performing a penance, you confine
your
activi-
ties to the dense forest devoid ofpeople.
66.
It is for dispelling
the
sin
arising
from
Brahmin-
slaughter, the murder of an elderly
lady
(your mother)
that
you are performing this
penance
but
it
won’t
be
destroyed
on account of this penance.
67.
There are means
of expiation and
atonement
for
other types of sins. But understand that there
is no
expiation
(from sin)
to those who injure and hurt their mothers.
68.
If, O Rama,
the main
characteristic
feature of
virtue is considered to be non-violence by
you, why
did you
cut off the head of your mother with your own hand ?
69.
After committing the terrible murder of your
own
mother,
( a sin)
despised by all the worlds, you profess to be a
righteous man and you censure others as you please.
70.
Without knowing one’s own positive
(irremediable)
fault
(sin) and by seeing and laughing (on your part), I regard
it incompetent for you to criticise the faults of others.

=== PAGE 214 ===

2.3.23.71-81
71.
If I were to forsake my duty
(dharma
)
and
remain
care-free without fear from any quarter, then you can
yourself
mentally scrutinize and despise me as you please.
72.
It is for the
sustenance
of my
parents,
sons
and
others that destruction of living beings
is carried out by me
as
a part of my duty.
73.
Along with my family, I sustain myself day by
day
with meat because
it is my duty. This is the avocation formerly
laid down by the creator for me.
74.
If I kill (more animals
and
have
with me
more)
meat than what
is sufficient to nourish my parents and
others,
then
I may incur sin.
75.
We cannot be
censured
for
killing
to
the
extent
necessary for sustenance. Praise or censure me
after
reflecting
over
this.
76.
Whether it
is good or bad, whatever duty had been
prescribed before should be carried out by all, by every means,
even during adversity and calamity.
77.
Carefully examine
with
your
own
intellect,
the
difference between you and me. As for me, I am engaged in the
sustenance of my parents and others whole-heartedly.
78.
But you have forsaken your aged father and
killed
your mother. Still you profess to be
righteous
and you
have
come down here to perform penance.
79.
Those who know
the
root
cause,
those who
have
clear vision about things are
not
able
to move
their
tongue
to give expression to what they desire at will.
80.
I know perfectly
well
every
thing
about
you, O
scion of the family of
Bhrgu. Hence, enough
of
your
futile
penance.
81.
If you desire happiness, O
Rama,
leave
off
this
penance
that
causes
pain
and
distress
to
your
body. Go
elsewhere, O Rama where people do not know you.

=== PAGE 215 ===

604
Brahmdnrfa PurUna
CHAPTER TWENTYFOUR
Penance of ParaSurdma
; His acquisition of the knowledge
ofAstras
Vasifpha said
:
1. On being told thus by him, O Protector of
the Earth y
Rama,
the most
excellent
one
among
intelligent
persons,
scrutinized
and
pondered
over
him and
inquired of him in
surprise.
Rama enquired
:
2.
“Who
are
You, O extremely fortunate
one,
tell me.
You are indeed no barbarous
person.
Your body
appears
to
be equipped, as
it were, with the grandeur and majesty of Indra .
3.
Your
speech sounds to be very charming as though it
were that of the omniscient Lord.
It is enriched, by
words
of
diverse meaning having
the
qualities
of
lucidity,
clarity and
depth and majesty of the highest class.
4.
Are You Indra, Vahni
(the fire-god), Yama, Dhdtr (the
Creator), Varuna, Kubera the lord
of wealth,
ISdna> Tapana
( the Sun)
, Brahma y Vayu
(the Wind
god),
Soma
(the Moon-
god), Guru
(Jupiter) or Guha (Lord Skanda)
?
5.
Due
to your grandeur and majesty, you deserve to be
almost one of these. But your caste (low birth) causes doubt in
my heart.
6.
Lord Visnu, the most excellent among
all persons,
is
reputed to be a Maydvx (one who wields illusive powers)
. Who
are you that have come
here with such a body a$ this ? Please
do tell me.
7-8. Or you deserve to be Lord Siva, the omniscent Lord
of the worlds, the supreme
lord, the supreme soul, bom
of the
Atman,
the
eternal
Atmdrdma
(one
that
rejoices in one’s own
soul)
, the lord who moves about as he pleases, and
is identical
with
the
entire
Universe who
has equipped himself with this
body (of a hunter).
9.
In this world, a body equipped with such potentialityand
influence cannot belong to any one else. Your speech
is endued

=== PAGE 216 ===

2.3.24.10-21
605
with elegance, aptness and a sense of very high order.
It
is
full
of depth of meaning, lucidity and
clarity.
10.
I believe that out of feelings of endearment
towards
his devotee, lord Hara has become visible with this body. There
is no doubt that he has come to test me.
11.
You are not a mere hunter. Those hunters will not have
such
a shapely
figure
as
yours.
Hence, obeisance to you. So
reveal your real excellent form.
1 2.
Be
pleased
to reveal a body befitting your greatness
whereby my mental doubts of diverse kinds can be got rid of.
13.
Be pleased now and destroy the delusion of my intellect
in every respect, by assuming your original form.
14. O highly fortunate one, I pray unto you, bowing down
my head several times. Who
are you please ? Reveal
yourself.
Here I have joined my palms in reverence to you”.
15. After saying this to that highly exalted one and being
desirous
of comprehending
him,
the
scion of
the
family of
Bhrgu sat on
the ground
and began
to
meditate with
great
concentration.
16. He seated himself in the lotus pose. He became silent.
He controlled his speech, body and
mind.
He
restrained
the
movement of the
vital
airs.
Thus
the
sage
of high
intellect
meditated for a long time.
1 7.
After restraining the
group of his sense-organs,
after
keeping the mind withdrawn
within
the
heart,
he
meditated
and
contemplated upon the lord of the Devas, the preceptor of
the Universe.
18. By means of his
inner
eye
in combination with the
soul, he beheld the lord of the universe who
had
assumed
the
form
of a
hunter of deer and who confers blessings upon his
devotees.
19. Thereafter Rama,
the descendant
of Bhrgu,
got up
quickly and opened his eyes. He saw the lord standing in front
of him in the self-same physical body.
20-21. On
seeing
the
lord who
endears
himself to -his
devotees, and who is the refuge unto all come in
front
of him
for blessing him, O great king, Rama
was
thrilled.
His
hairs
all over
his
body
stood on end. His eyes welled up with tears

=== PAGE 217 ===

606
Brahmdn^a Pur&na
of delight. The
sage
of
great
intellect
fell
at
his
feet
with
great devotion.
22. With words choking his throat and
faltering due
to
excitement, O
king,
he
uttered
several
times “O Sarva, O
Sankara, be refuge upto me.”
23. Then
lord Sambhu who assumed his form
on
being
satisfied at his devotion, lifted up Rama who had bowed down
in obeisance on the ground.
24. Raised up by the creator of the universe
himself with
his own
hands, the
scion of
the family of Bhrgu eulogised the
lord of the chiefs of the Devas, standing in
front
of him with
palms joined in reverence.
Rama prayed
:
25. Obeisance to you the lord of the
Devas,
to
Sankara
of primordial
form.
Obeisance
to Sarva,
the quiescent oney
obeisance, obeisance to the eternal one.
26. Hail to you the blue-throated Lord, one in
the form
of Nilalohita
(the bluish-red god)
. Obeisance
to you the
lord
of
the
living
beings.
Bow
to
you,
the abode of all
living
beings.
27. Obeisance, obeisance to the
great
lord
of manifest
and unmanifest form. Obeisance to the most bountiful,
to Siva
of many forms. Obeisance to the three-eyed God.
28. Be my
shelter and
refuge, O
Sarva
I am
your
devotee, O
lord
of
the
Universe.
Mostly, you alone are the
greatest
and
ultimate
resort
of
those
who
have no other
support.
29.
Unknowingly, O lord, I
have misbehaved
towards
you. O
Sankara, I have uttered evil words. O lord,
it behoves,
you to forgive it.
30.
O
lord
of
all,
your form
is
incomprehensible
to
others. Which
person
other
than you,
is capable of knowing
well, your existence ?
31.
Hence, O
Sankara,
be
pleased
with me in
every
respect.
I have no other goal to reach. Obeisance to you. My
repeated obeisance, bows unto you again and again.”

=== PAGE 218 ===

2.3.24.32-42
607
Vasisfha said
:
32.
On
being
eulogised
thus,
Lord
Siva
who
was
delighted
in
his mind
and
who has permeated the Universe
said to Rama who was standing
in
front
of him
with
palms
joined in reverence.
The Lord said
:
33.
“I am
pleased
with
you, O dear one. O the most
excellent one among the descendants of Bhrgu,
I am
delighted
with
this penance as well as your devotion that has no
blemish
whatsoever.
34.
I shall give you
everything
you
desire and
every-
thing
solicited
by
you.
You arc the greatest devotee of mine.
There
is not
ot in this respect at all.
35.
V*
; atever is lingering in your heart has been under-
stood by me
Hence, carry out unhesitatingly what I am going
to tell you.
36.
There
is no adequate power in you today,
dear one,
in grasping the
terrible miraculous
weapons. Hence,
perform
still more severe penance.
37.
After traversing the entire earth and
purifying
your
body by
taking
holy
baths
in
all the holy centres in the due
order, you will acquire all the miraculous weapons.**
38.
After
saying
thus,
even
as Rama was watching, O
king, the omnipresent lord, the dispenser of the
destiny
of the
universe, vanished with the self-same body, within a moment.
39.
When
the
lord
of the universe disappeared, R&ma
bowed
down to Sankara and decided to perform holy baths
in
sacred places, after roaming all over the Earth.
40.
Thereafter, he traversed all over
the
earth
in due
order.
Self-possessed
that he was, he took holy baths in all the
sacred places in accordance with the injunction.
41.
In all the holy centres, in all the
important
shrines
and
sacred
temples,
he
untiringly
propitiated
the Pitrs and
Devos duly.
42.
Duly performing such holy
rites
as
fast,
penance,
homos, japas, holy baths etc. in the holy
centres he travelled all
over the earth.

=== PAGE 219 ===

608
Brahmdntfa Puraria
43.
By performing holy dips in the sacred centres in due
order,
and
slowly
circumambulating
the
earth,* O
king, he
became purified in his body.
44.
Having
traversed
thus
all
over
the
earth
at
the
behest of god Sainbhu, the descendant of Bhrgu went
again
to
that land where he had been living before for penance.
45.
After going there, O king, and
staying
there
itself,
he devoutly worshipped lord Umapati (the spouse of Uma)
by
means of austerities and holy observances.
46.
It was
in
the meantime, O king, that a long-drawn
war took
place
between
the
Devas and
t lie Asuras
causing
horripilation.
47.
Thereupon, the excessively powerful Asuras defeated
the gods and acquired the glory and riches of the Devas.
They
had nothing to fear from anywhere.
48.
The Devas
who had
been
defeated in
the war
Vasava (Indra) and all the others whose assets and magnificent
glory
had
been
seized
by
their
enemies— sought refuge in
oankara.
49.
After propitiating the lord of the universe by means
of obeisances and
eulogies
about
his
victory,
the Devas re-
quested the Pinaka-wielding lord
(Siva)
to destroy the
Asuras.
50.
Thereupon, O king, Sambhu, the bestower of boons
on the Devas, promised to them the slaughter of the
Danavas,
and spoke thus to Mahodara.
51.
“In
the southern sector of Himalayas, a
sage’s
son
of great penance, named Rama,
is performing penance directed
towards me. He is very brilliant.
52.
Go there now itself, O Mahodara and convey my
behest
to
him.
Even as he
is performing penance, let him be
brought here without delay”.
53.
On being ordered thus, Mahodara bowed down
to
the lord after saying “So be it”, and went with the velocity
of
the Wind to the place where Rama was settled down.
54.
After reaching that spot and seeing Rama the
great
sage performing penance, he humbly spoke these words.
55.
“O
excellent one among the descendants
of Bhrgu
lord
Sambhu wishes to see
you.
I
have come
here
at
his
behest. Hence, come to the presence of his lotus-like feet”.

=== PAGE 220 ===

2.3.24.56-68
56.
On
hearing
his
woids,
Bhargava
got up quickly,
received his behest approvingly with his
head
(bowed down),
and replied—“So be it’*.
57.
Thereupon, Mahodara with
great
speed
led Rama
immediately to a place by the side of Sambhu on the
Kailasa,
the excellent mountain.
58.
The
most
excellent
scion
of
the family of Bhrgu
saw Sankara who endears himself to his devotees, accompanied
bv
the goblins as well as
Indra
and
other immortal
beings
(i.e. gods).
59-62a.
The
lord was being eulogised
by Narada
and
other
ascetics
whose
wealth was
penance.
He
was
being
attended
upon by
the Gandharvas who were singing, and by
the groups of Apsaras who
were
dancing.
The
lord
of
the
Dcvas
had
the
hide of an elephant for his garment and had
smeared the entire body with the
holy
ashes.
The
three-eyed
moon-crcstcd
lord
had
the
tawny-matted hair over
his head.
He had adorned
himself with serpents serving
the
purpose
of
ornaments. His
lips and
arms
were
long. He was gentle. His
lotus-like face appeared delighted. O king, he was seated
on
a
golden slap in the midst of the assembly of the Devas.
62b-65a.
The most excellent one among the descendants
of Bhrgu, approached the lord of the Dcvas with
palms joined
in reverence. His
entire body had hairs standing on end as a
result of his vision
of Srikantha. He went near Hara with
his
•
body drenched in tears of joy.
He was excited due to delight,
he
uttered the words, “Obeisance to you, O lord of the Devas”
several times.
Finally he
fell down at the feet of the enemy
of
the three Puras (i.e. god Siva)
.
65b-66.
Amidst the groups of the Devas who were
look-
ing on, ’the delighted lord
Siva
lifted up
the most
excellent
scion
of the
family of Bhrgu. With an enthusiastic smile and
eagerness he spoke these sweet words to Rama whose lotus-like
face appeared
pleasant.
67.
“These
Girvanas (Devas) have been attacked by the
hosts
of Daityas.
They were
dislodged from
their
abodes.
Unable to kill them they have approached me.
68.
Hence, at my behest
as
well as with a desire to do

=== PAGE 221 ===

610
Brahm&ntfa Purdna
something pleasing to the Devas, O Rama, kill the entire hosts
of Daityas. You are considered capable of it by me*.
69.
Then Rama bowed down to
Sarva. Even as
all
the
Devas
stood
listening, Rama spoke these words very humbly,
with palms joined in reverence.
70.
“O lord, you are omniscient. You are the immanent
soul
of
everyone.
Hence,
is
not
(what
I am going to say)
known
to you (already)
?
Still, listen to
the words
I
submit.
71.
If it is impossible for Sankara and
other
Devas
to
kill the asuras how can they be killed by me singlehandedly ?
72.
I am ignorant of miraculous missiles, O lord of
the
Devas.
I am
not an expert in warfare. How can I kill all the
enemies of the Devas without any weapon whatsoever ?”
73.
On being told by him thus,
the
lord
of the Devas
transferred
to
that
noble-souled
Rama
white
lustrous
splendour of Siva, full of miraculous missiles, as brilliant as
the
fire of Death.
74.
After handing over his own axe that could overpower
all other weapons, the Lord delighted within
himself,
said
to
Rama even as the Devas stood listening.
75.
“Due to my
grace, O
gentle
one, may
there be
sufficient
power
in
you enabling you to kill all the enemies of
the Devas, and be unassailable to all your enemies.
76.
Go
ahead
with
this
weapon
alone and fight with
your
enemies.
You
yourself
will
duly
come
to know
and
possess the skill in war.”
Vasiffha said
:
9
77.
On being instructed thus by Sambhu, Rama bowed
down
to him, and accepted the axe
pertaining
to
Siva,
and
was bent upon the slaughter of the enemies of the Devas.
78.
Thereupon, Rama who
was born
of
a
part
of
splendour of Visnu and who was equipped with
devotion
to
Rudra, shone like the splendour of the sun accompanied by his
brilliance.
79.
Permitted
by the three-eyed lord and accompanied
by
all
the Devas
he went ahead
to
slay
the
Asuras.
He.
resolved to fight with them till the end.
*

=== PAGE 222 ===

2.3.24.80—25.1
611
80.
Thereupon, once again there broke
out
the war of
the Devas with the Asuras, O
king. They were endeavouring
to conquer
the
three
worlds. Hence
the war was extremely
terrible.
8 1 .
Then Rama of mighty arms became
infuriated
in
that excessively terrifying battle. He
killed
the great Asuras
with his axe.
82.
Killing the Daityas in thousands by means of strokes
resembling the thunderbolt, the infuriated Rama moved about
in the battlefield like another god of Death.
83.
After killing all the
Daityas
in a
trice, Rama the
most excellent one among those who
strike
(with
a
weapon)
exterminated them and gratified all the Devas.
84.
Everyone among the Daityas and the Danavas was
being struck
at by Rama. '.Those who
survived
the
slaughter
saw Rama everywhere and became frightened.
85.
When
the
entire
hosts
of the Asuras were either
killed or routed, the Devas took leave ofRama and went again
to the Heaven.
86.
After killing the sons of Diti and bidding farewell to
the
Devas, Rama
resorted
to
his
hermitage
with
his mind
attached to the activities of penance.
87-88.
That sage of great intellect made the image
of a
hunter of deer representing Sambhu and devoutly
worshipped
it in his hermitage, with perfect
self-control. He
duly
propi-
tiated him with
fragrant
incense,
beautiful
flowers,
food
offerings, obeisances and eulogies.
CHAPTER TWENTYFIVE
Paraiurdma protects a boy from a tiger
Vasts(ha said :
1 .
Thereupon, the lord of the Universe was delighted in
his mind, due
to the Yoga of devotion of Rama.
Hence, he
became visible to him along with
the groups of Devas.

=== PAGE 223 ===

612
Brahm&ntfa Purdna
2-3.
On
seeing
the
three-eyed
lord of the chief of the
Devas, the moon-crested lord with a lordly bull as vehicle, god
Sambhu, accompanied by
crores
of
goblins,
the
scion of the
family of Bhrgu got up with great excitement. His
eyes became
dim on account of tears due to
delight.
He prostrated
on the
ground to Sarva with great devotion.
4.
Rising up and bowing ^'down
his head several times,
Rama eulogised the lord of the universe with
palms
joined
in
reverence.
Rama said :
5.
“Obeisance
to
you, O
lord
of
the
chiefs of
the
Devas. Hail to you O
Paramesvara.
Obeisance
to
you, O
lord
of
the
Universe.
Bow
to you, O destroyer of the
three
Puras. 1
6.
Salute
to
you O
lord
presiding over every
thing.
Obeisance to you, O lord
endearing
himself to
his devotee s.
Hail to you O lord of all living beings.
Obeisance
to
you, O
bull-bannered lord.
7.
Obeisance to you
the overlord of everything. Bow to
you, O merciful lord. Obeisance to you, O abode
of everyone,
Obeisance to you, O Lord of bluish-red complexion.
8.
Obeisance to the trident-bearing
lord,
the
destroyer
of
the hosts
of
the enemies of
the
Devas.
Salute
to
you,
Kapalin (one
holding the
skull), the sole
protector of
all the
worlds.
9.
Obeisance to the lord who
resides perpetually in the
cremation ground; obeisance
to
the
lord who
dwells on the
Kailasa
mountain.
Obeisance be to you, the
wielder
of the
noose; Bow to the lord who swallowed poison KalakUta .
10.
Obeisance to the all-pervading lord worthy of being
saluted by the Devas. Hail to you, the self-born lord, obeisance
to &ambhu who is the witness to
the
activities
of
the
entire
universe.
1.
The three cities of gold, silver and iron in the sky, air
and
earth
were
built
by
Maya
for
demons. These were burnt down along with the
demon-residents by god Siva.
**

=== PAGE 224 ===

2.3.25.11-19
613
11*
Obeisance to the lord with the crescent moon on his
crest, shining on account
of the
white foams
of the Ganga.
Bow to Siva, the Supreme Soul, having huge
serpent-chiefs as
garland.
12.
Obeisance
to the
lord
whose body
is covered 'with
the holy ashes. Salute to the lord who has the sun,
the fire and
the moon
for
his
eyes.
Hail
to you, O Kapardin
(one with
matted hair) , obeisance to you the
suppressor
of the demon
Andhaka.
13.
Obeisance
to
the
destroyer
of
the
three demon
cities. Obeisance to the annihilator of Daksa’s sacrifice ;
obeis-
ance to the lord whose broad
chest
is dyed
with
the
saffron
from the breasts of the daughter of the mountain Himalaya.
14.
Hail to the great lord Mahadeva;
obeisance
to you
that have the elephant hide,
for your robes. Bow to Siva whose
form is meditated upon by the
Yogins.
Obeisance
to the lord
of inconceivable refulgence.
15.
Obeisance to you
that
abide
in the middle of the
pericarp
of the
lotus-like
heart of your own devotees. Bow to
you that have the main principle, and essence of all
the Vedas
(and Agamas)
as your form.
16.
Obeisance to the awakener
of
the
leading
Yogins.
Hail to the
nectar-souled
one,
obeisance
to
Sankara whose
grandeur pervades everything. Bow to the Supreme Soul.
17.
Obeisance to Sarva the quiescent lord. The Brahman
having the cosmic form.
Obeisanee
to the lord without begin-
ning, middle and end; obeisance to the eternal lord of unmani-
fest form.
18.
Hail to the lord whose form
is
both
manifest and
unmanifest.
Obeisance
to
the
lord
of gross as well as subtle
nature. Bow
to the lord who can be comprehended
through
the Vedantas. Obeisance to
the
lord with the universal know-
ledge for his form.
19.
Obeisance to the
lord whose
feet
are worshipped
with flowers (as well as)
heads
of groups of Suras and Asuras.
Obeisance
to Srlkanfha, the creator of the universe. Repeated
obeisance unto the maker of the worlds.

=== PAGE 225 ===

€14
Brahmdnfa Purdna
20.
Obeisance to you, the lord with the Rajas Guna in his
heart while creating the Universe in the formofHiranyagarbha.
Obeisance to Hara the primordial
(lord and
the cause of) the
universe.
2 1
.
Obeisance to you, the soul
of
the universe. Hail to
you the cause of the sustenance and activities of the world. Bow
to you whose
form
is
Sattvic
knowledge,
Obeisance
to
the
lord identical with the supreme soul as well as
the
individual
soul.
22.
Obeisance to the lord who
assumes transformation
of the Tamas Guna while performing the duty of the annihilation
of
the
Universe.
Obeisance
to
the lord who has the form of
Rudra
at
the end
of the
Kalpa. Obeisance to the
lord who
knows tht para and Apara (the great and
non-great
or remote
to proximate).
23.
Obeisance to the eternal lord without any change or
transformation. Obeisance to the lord of the nature of Sat
and
Asat. Obeisance to the lord who awakens
every
intellect. Hail
to the lord who causes changes in the intellect and sense-organs.
24.
Repeated obeisance to that lord by
whose Maya the
Devas have diverse minds
[forms(?)]
such
as
the
Vasus, the
Adityas, the Maruts, the Sadhyas, the Rudras and the Asvins.
25.
You have an unborn, eternal subtle form that has no
aberi ations and that
is incomparable. Even the Yogins who are
always devoid of impurities do not know that.
26.
It
is
because
they do not comprehend you, the in-
comprehensible one, that Brahma and
others have indeed
( to
wander in) the worldly existence. They do
not
have
for long
the same activity (?)
27.
Whether a scholar or an irrational person, one conti-
nues
to wander in the worldly existence
as
long
as one does
not
approach
your
feet
since you alone
are the destroyer of
ignorance.
28.
He alone is clever, he alone
is
fortunate;
he alone
is a sage, and a scholar by whom the intellect has been stabiliz-
ed at your lotus-like feet.
29.
On account of its being extremely
subtle, your exist-
of the
nature
of the
three Vedas
is due to its
extreme

=== PAGE 226 ===

2.3.25.30-38
615
subtlety too deep even
to the learned ones. How
is
it
to
be
known by me, deluded that I am.
30.
Your greatness is beyond the purview of words. Now
I am incapable of eulogising
it
adequately
well, because I am
dull-witted.
31.
Hence, though out of ignorance
(i.e. Ignorant though
I am) you have been eulogised by me with (genuine)
devotion.
O lord of the Devas, do become
pleased.
Indeed
you are fond
of your devotees and endear yourself to them”.
Vasiftha said
:
32.
On
being
eulogised
thus
with
great
devotion by
Rama, Sankara spoke to him smilingly
with
words
deep
and
resonant like the rumble of the cloud.
The Lord said
:
33.
“O Rama, I am extremely
pleased with the heroism
you
possess,
your
penance,
your
devotion
towards me
and
particularly with this eulogy.
34.
Hence, do
choose
your
boon.
Whatever
you wish
mentally
I shall bestow it upon you, without keeping back any
thing’*.
Vasiffka said
:
35.
On
being
told
thus by
the Lord of the Devas, O
king, the leading member of the family
of Bhrgu bowed down
to him. With palms joined in reverence he spoke thus
36.
“O lord if you are pleased and if I
deserve
a boon,
then I wish to be endowed with all the miraculous missiles from
you.
37.
Due to
your favour,
there
should
not
be anyone
superior to me in miraculous missiles, weapons and in the sacred
scriptures. There should not be
anyone
in
all
the worlds
to
defeat me in battles.
Vasiffha said
:
38.
After saying “So be it”, Sambhu who was
delighted
gave R&ma missiles and weapons in their
entirety in
due order
along with their Mantras.

=== PAGE 227 ===

616
Brahminda Purina
39.
Sankara who stood in
front
of him with satisfaction
made Rama take up the four types of miraculous weapons along
with the modes of their discharge as well as their withdrawal.
40.
Sankara gave Rama an
excellent chariot of unobs-
tructed speed and
velocity,
with
white
horses
and
beautiful
banner. He gave him two inexhaustible quivers of arrows.
41.
He gave him
an
unaging
(ever-new)
unbreakable
divine bow (named) Vijaya, with firm bowstring. He gave him
a costly wonderful coat of mail that can withstand
all
types
of
weapons.
42.
O
king, he
granted
him
invincibility
in
battle,
heroism without a parallel on the earth and the ability to
hold
his vital
airs as long as he wished.
43.
By means of a Bijamantra (incantation) in
his
name,
he
granted
him
renown
all
over
the
.vorlds. He
granted
Bhargava great potentiality for his austerities.
44-47.
He granted Rama proper and
relevant
devotion
towards
himself.
Thereafter, the
moon-crcsted
lord Sambhu,
Hara, soon vanished with the selfsame body accompanied by all
the goblins and the Devas.
After
obtaining
everything that he
desired, Rama
became
satisfied. When Sarva (Siva) became
invisible
he
spoke
to Mahodara
:—“O Mahodara, it behoves
you to preserve all these things, the chariot, the bow etc. for my
sake when I have some task to be performed through these, you
will be remembered, by me. On being remembered by me you
will send them to me”.
Vasiffha said
:
48.
Saying “So be
it”, Mahodara
departed. The most
excellent one among
the descendants of Bhrgu felt satisfied (in
having fulfilled his duty) and desired to go to see his elders.
49.
As he proceeded ahead, Rama who was induced by
his previous actions controlling
his
future,
entered
a
cave
in
the Himalaya mountains in a dense forest.
*
50.
There he saw a boy, the son of a Brahmana, crying
like one who was extremely
frightened as he was
chased by a
tiger. He was (as
if) holding his vital airs (with great difficulty).

=== PAGE 228 ===

2.3.25.51-62
617
5 1 .
On seeing him, Rama had
his
heart overwhelmed
with sympathy and he became excited
due
to
his eagerness to
save him. Saying “Stop, stop” loudly, he pursued that tiger.
52.
Chasing him with great speed, the scion of the family
of Bhrgu, caught up the
extremely
terrible
tiger in
the
forest
after a long time.
53.
That Brahmana boy who
was
pursued by the tiger,
fled with great fright for his life. He fell down
near
a
cave
in
the
forest.
54.
Rama had his eyes turned red due to anger.
With a
desire to redeem the Brahmana boy he took up a small blade of
grass and chanted mantras over it
as though
it
were a missile
of Kusa grass.
55.
In the meantime
the hyaena (tiger) of great power
ran after
the
Brahmana boy. On seeing him
fallen, he roared
loudly making the heaven and earth tremble.
56.
With the fire of his
missile,
he burned the tiger who
was
striking
with
the
tips
of his claws. He thus released the
Brahmana boy who was not at all wounded.
57.
That sinful (hyena)
whose
body
had been burned
completely due to
the
Brahminical
fire, assumed the body of a
Gandharva.
Rising on
to the sky, he spoke thus to Rama with
great respect.
58.
“O
sage,
formerly,
as
I had
been
cursed by
a
Brahmana I attained the state of a tiger. Redeemed now
from
the effects of that curse, I am going to heaven”.
59.
When he went away
hastily after saying thus, Rama
who was
wonderstruck
sympathetically
lifted
up
the fallen
Brahmana boy.
60.
Sitting near the Brahmana boy he said the following
words—“Do not be
afraid”, O
king.
Slowly
he
stroked
his
limbs, reviving his life (and spirits).
61.
Lifted up
thus by Rama, he opened his eyes and
looked
around. He saw
the
most
excellent
one
among the
members of the family of Bhrgu in front of him.
62.
He became
surprised
on seeing the tiger reduced to
ashes.
With
his
fear
dispelled
he said thus—“Who are you,
please ? How did you come here ?

=== PAGE 229 ===

618
Brahmti%4a Pur&tia
i
63.
By whom was this tiger reduced to ashes/ the
hyena
of terrifying shape and size, who almost
appeared like another
god of death and attempted to kill me ?
64.
My mind
is highly deluded and excited due
to fear,
O
sage
of
great intellect. Although it has been killed, all the
quarters appear to be filled with the tiger even now.
65.
I
consider you
to be everyone—my father, mother,
friend and preceptor since you brought me back
to life when I
had met with the greatest of mishaps.
66.
There was a certain
excellent
sage of great penance
called Santa. I am
his son.
Desirous of visiting holy centres, I
went to the village of Salagrama. 1
67.
From there I proceeded to
the
mountain Gandhar
madana, desirous of visiting the holy penance grove ofBadarika
resorted to by many groups of sages.
68.
Desirous of going further,
I
lost my
way
on
the
Himalaya mountain. Entering a fascinating
forest,
I
got con-
fused while viewing the different regions.
69.
I went a distance
of a Krosa (three Kms) towards
the east. As
ill luck would
have
it,
I was
afflicted
with
fear
and I had to run.
70.
When I had fallen down
I have
been lifted up now
from the ground with great love and
mercifulness
by you like
a son, by his father. Thus my story has
been
wholly narrated
to you”.
Vasiffha said
:
71.
On being asked thus by him, O leading king, Rama
narrated his story entirely to him in due order.
72.
Mutually conversing thus they
were
delighted very
much. He did not stay there
for a long
time thereafter. Ihen
he desired to proceed ahead.
73.
Followed by him, Rama came out of that cave with
great joy and started towards the residence of his parents.
1.
A place near the source of the Ga$4aka where
Bharata and
sage
_
i
Pulaha performed
penance
(De. 174).
The place abounds in sacred stones
called §&lagr&ma.

=== PAGE 230 ===

2.3.25.74-86
619
74-75.
Since he was not wounded although he was caused
to
fall
on
the ground
by the tiger and since he was saved by
Rama who killed the tiger,
the name of
that
Brahmana boy
became well known on the Garth as Akrtavrana (not wounded),
O leading king.
76.
Ever since then, he became a
great
friend
and
fol-
lower ofRama in every situation like a shadow
on
the ground
when there
is sunlight.
77.
Followed by
him, O
king, Rama came
to
the
presence of Bhrgu. He saw Khyati, approached her and bowed
down to her humbly.
78.
He was
blessed
and
congratulated by
those
two
delighted persons. In order to please them, he
stayed there for
a few days.
79-80.
After that,
with
their permission, he went to the
hermitage
of
the
great
sage
Cyavana.
The
sage Rama
of
noble mind saluted sage Cyavana who was surrounded by the
groups of his disciples, whose mind was quiescent and who had
controlled
the
internal
sense-organs,
as
well
as
bowed
to
Sukanya, Cyavana’s wife.
8 1
.
Congratulated
by both
of them who were delighted
he went to the hermitage of Aurva desirous of seeing the sage.
82.
The
highly
intelligent Rama
paid
his respects to
him and was
congratulated
and
blessed
by
him, O
king.
Due to Aurva’s affection, he remained there for a few days.
83.
After being
permitted to
go
by
him
very slowly,
Bhargava of great glory, accompanied by Akrtavrana, joyously
started towards the abode of Rclka.
84.
After bowing down
at the
feet of the parents of his
father,
separately he saluted them.
They two, O king, blessed
him with their good wishes, due to his delight.
85.
On being asked by them, O leading king, the liberal-
minded
sage Rama
narrated
his
entire story in due order in
the manner it had taken place.
86.
After staying
there
for a
few
days he went to the
abode
of his
parents with
their permission. He was delighted
extremely.

=== PAGE 231 ===

620
Brahm&nda Furtiga
87*
Approaching his
parents who
were
seated
within
their excellent
hermitage,
the
delighter of the members of the
family of Bhrgu, bowed down duly at their feet.
88.
When he bowed down at their feet, they eagerly and
respectfully
lifted him up, embraced him and
sprinkled
him
with tears from their eyes.
89.
They congratulated
him with
blessings. They kept
him on their laps. They looked
at
his
face
again
and again.
Stroking his limbs, they derived great joy.
90.
They
asked Rama—“What
has been done by you,
dear
son,
so
long
? Who
is
this
boy ?
Where
were
you
staying ?
9 1 .
How did you live
with
him ? How has he come ?
O dear one, let this be completely and truthfully reported to us
both by you
5 ’.
CHAPTERTWENTYSIX
King K&rttavirya visits the Hermitage ofJamadagni
Vasiftha said
:
1.
Then, on being
asked thus by them
both, O
king,.
Rama,
with
palms joined
in
reverence,
mentioned to them
everything that had been done by himself.
2.
He told them in
due
order how he performed pen-
* ance
on
being
directed by
the
oldest living member of his
family (viz. Bhrgu) and how he
performed
the
pilgrimage of
holy centres at the behest of Sambhu.
3.
He told them about the
slaughter of the Daityas on
behalf of the Devas and
his meeting
with Akftavrana, due
to the grace of Hara.
4.
All these as well as whatever
else has been
carried
out by himself, Rama narrated to his parents who felt delighted
to hear it.

=== PAGE 232 ===

2.3.26.5-16
621
5.
On hearing
everything mentioned by him
and
the
details of his activities,
both
of them were delighted, O king.
Both of them attained the acme of happiness.
6.
Rendering^
service
thus to his parents, O great king,
the leading member of the family
of Bhrgu remained obedient
to them
as
well
as
to
his
brothers, without
differentiating
between them.
7.
In the meantime,
the
lord
of Haihaya once desired
to go
on
a
hunting
expedition
accompanied by his army of
four
constituents
(i.e.
elephants,
chariots,
horses
and foot-
soldiers )
.
8.
The sky was rendered red all round
by
the
rays
of
the Sun, that deprived the
clusters
of
stars of their brilliance,
which had a reddish tinge like that of the Bandhuka dowers.
9.
The early morning breeze was blowing
gently touch-
ing the lily pond and shaking the clusters of Ketaki bushes.
10.
The birds taking shelter
in their
nests on the
trees
growing on the banks of
the Narmada were chirping, making
chaotic notes, pleasing to the ears and the mind.
1 1
.
Groups of sages had gone to the holy centres on the
banks of the Narmada and standing in the waters
that
dispel
sins they were chanting hymns eulogising the eternal Brahman.
12.
The chiefs of sages habituated
to
the
performance
of holy rites,
were
going
back
to
their hermitages returning
from the banks of the river,
after
duly
answering
the calls of
nature.
13.
Every one of the wives of the
heroic
soldiers (vira-
patniftt, probably muni-patntsu
€wives of sages’ (?)
eagerly engag-
ed
in
the
domestic duties. The cows
were being milked for
the purpose of Homa, by the daughters of sages.
14.
The sons of sages
were
taking
milk to the proper
places. The
people were eager to perform Agnihotra. The tinje
was pleasant to all living beings.
1 5.
The lotuses were blossoming. The
bees
were hum-
ming sweetly. The birds
flew
out
of
their nests and began to
chirp all round.
16.
Due
to
the gentle
breeze, the time was conducive
to
the
increase
of
delight
in
the body
of
those who were

=== PAGE 233 ===

622
Brahm&ntfa Pur&na
leisurely moving about on elephants
in rut
or on jiorses or in
chariots.
17-18.
People taking flowers and water near the penance
grove were proceeding ahead along with many
sages
dressed
in
deerskin
garments
and
experts
in
their
self-study of the
Vedas.
Mantras of high and
low
order
were being chanted
very well. The
invocatory
Prai$a hymns
were
being chanted
and the sacred fires were being utilized for Homos .
19-20.
The holy rites
duly
mentioned in
the scriptures
regarding
Mantras
(Holy
words)
and
Tantras
(esoteric
gestures)
were
performed
everywhere.
The
sun which
appeared like blazing fire was rising up with dazzling splendour.
It dispelled darkness. It covered
the
entire
quarters
and the
earth (with light) and
the darkness of the night perished.
21-22.
When the stars vanished and the quarters became
brightened up, the king, the lord of Haihaya
clan,
concluded
all his morning duties such as answering the calls of nature etc.
and started from his city accompanied by the family priest and
all the armies including horses, chariots and elephants.
23.
The glorious lord was accompanied by his ministers
and other kings of the same age as his. He made the
surface of
the earth cave in due to the great weight of his armies.
24-27a.
With the rumbling sound
of
his
chariots, the
king made
the
quarters
resound. He went
ahead
covering
the sky with the dust particles of the ground trodden under the
feet of the hosts of his armies. The sky appeared to be
crowded
with hundreds of aerial chariots.
The
excellent
king
entered
the
terrifying
forest of the
Vindhya mountains and stirred
it up
through
the hosts
of his
armies.
Encircling that forest by means
of
his
soldiers, the king
killed different kinds of beasts of prey with his sharp arrows.
27b-31a.
There fell down some tigers whose bodies were
cut, pierced (and wounded)
by
means
of sharp
arrows
dis-
charged
by
the
warriors who
drew the bowstring upto their
ears.
Some of the leaders of the boars fell down
on
the
earth
drenched with
blood, because their bodies had been cut off by
the swords of the foot-soldiers ofenormous spied.

=== PAGE 234 ===

2.3.26.31-43
62^
Herds of deer whose
foreheads were pierced through by
the
javelins
hurled
by
powerful
experts in the discharge of
javelins, fell down on the ground like mountains.
Lions,
bears,
the fabulous eight-footed Sarabhas
etc.
all
the limbs of whom had been
pierced
through
by
shafts
lay
scattered over the earth wet with blood.
31b-33a.
As
if
it
was
the
end
of a Yuga, the
forest
appeared to be extremely agitated and chaotic
as
some
of the
deer
fell into the nets, some were
about
to
fall,
some
were
pursued by the hunting dogs, some were fleeing and some were
distressed
and
groaning
aloud,
because they were frightened
and were afraid of danger to their very lives.
33b-37a.
With sharp weapons the soldiers
killed many
animals
such
as
boars,
lions,
tigers,
porcupine,
broods
of
rabbits,
Camari ,
deer,
Ruru
deer,
foxes, Gavayas (a variety of
wild oxen), bears, wolves,
Krsnasdra
deer,
leopards,
the red
rhinoceros,
etc.
They
killed deer (or beasts) having bodies of
various
colours and
other
varieties
Nyahku
antelopes. Some
were
young
cubs
sucked by their mothers. Others were youth-
ful ones. Some were old. They killed couples
of
animals
too.
Whatever animals they killed were worthy of being
killed with
weapons
(i.e. their slaughter is not prohibited
by
scriptures).
After killing almost all the terrible beasts of prey,
the
soldiers
of the king became overwhelmed with great fatigue.
37b-40a.
When the
sun reached
the zenith
in the sky,
the king who was distressed by
the
heat
alongwith
his army,
felt thirsty and went slowly to the Narmada.
The king who was afflicted with hunger and thirst
enter-
ed its splendid waters along with his army and horses.
After taking bath
and
drinking
pleasantly
cool water,
he munched
and
crunched
the
shoots of lotuses white and
tasty.
40b-43a.
After sporting about
in
the
waters for a long
time, the king came out along with his army. He
took
rest on
the banks adorned with groves of trees.
When the sun came down in
the
firmament,
the
king
accompanied
by
his army and other followers started from the
caverns and forests of the Vindhya mountains in order to return
to his capital.

=== PAGE 235 ===

€24
Brahminda Purina
Even
while
going
ahead,
he saw the hermitage of the
noblc-souled
sage
Jamadagni
of meritorious
disposition and
conduct.
It was situated on the banks of the river Narmada.
43b-44a.
Thereupon, the king
sent
back the army and
made them camp a
little away from the place.
Accompanied by a few
of his attendants
he went to the
hermitage.
44b-46a.
After going to the charming hermitage accom-
panied by
his
priest, the king approached the noble sage and
bowed down to him.
After congratulating him With blessings, Jamadagni duly
honoured
the
excellent
king
by means of Arghyas (materials
of worship), Pidya
(water
to
wash
the
feet),
Asana
(seat)
and other things.
46b-49.
After welcoming
that honour
accorded then by
the sage, the king sat on
a
white splendid seat in front of that
great sage.
The sage, seated on a seat of Kusa
grass asked the excel-
lent king who also had occupied
his
seat, about the health and
happiness of his sons, friends, relatives and others. The excellent
sage conversed with the king for a short while and then invited
him to be his guest. Thereupon, the
king who
was extremely
pleased with him addressed to Jamadagni.
50-53a.
“O great sage, grant me
permission.
I shall go
to my city.
Since
1 am
having
the
full complement of my
vehicles and armies, O
great sage,
it is impossible for you to
extend hospitality, because you sustain
yourself in
the
forest
only with the products of the forest.
Or,
even
if you can extend hospitality by means of the
power of your penance now, it behoves you to permit me
to go
to the city.
Otherwise, O excellent sage, there may be great
trouble
to the ascetics bringing
about
disturbance
to
their
religious
observances
on
account of the
indisciplined behaviour of my
soldiers.”
Vasiftha said
:
53b-55.
On being told thus, the sage said
to him—“Be
pleased to stay a while.
I
shall
provide
for the hospitality to

=== PAGE 236 ===

“2.3.26.56-62
625
you along with your followers”. After saying
this he called his
holy cow and said
:
“This
is my guest. He has come
to me.
So, let the due
reception be carried out
by
you.” On being told thus by the
sage,
the
holy cow
yielded
everything
necessary
to
extend
hospitality to the
king
( and
what
was
befitting
the
sage)
,
due to the greatness of the sage.
56.
Thereupon, the hermitage of the leading member of
the family
of Bhfgu,
became
resplendent like
the abode of
the king of the Devas. 1 Due to the power of the
holy cow,
it
assumed
a
form
that
could not be imagined. On account of
the different
articles of richness
it was
something
that
could
not have been achieved by anyone else.
57.
Far above,
it was
surrounded
by
haloes
of
light
arising from various wonderful plates
of
gold illuminated
by
many
jewels.
Within,
it
was
entirely
filled with groups
of
palaces and mansions whose tops were touching the
full moon
and white clouds.
58.
It shone with various abodes made
of the following
things severally or by amalgamating two or more of these viz.
bellmetal, brass,
brass with copper, gold,
silver,
plaster
and
mortar,
bricks,
wood
and mud.
They
were pleasing to
the
mind and the eyes.
59.
There were
golden
daises
and
platforms
shining
brilliantly on account of
extremely
valuable gems and jewels.
There were pleasure groves. There were steps
leading
to pin-
nacles with rest-houses in the middle. They shone with
sloping
beams, rafts, doorways,
bolts,
walls,
thresholds,
terrace halls
and courtyards.
60-62.
His
hermitage
shone
resembling a huge city on
account of Valabhis (the upper parts of buildings) , Alindas (the
yard in front
of doorways) ,
quadrangles, beautiful archways
and portals and courtyards with
ample
expanse. On
pillars
and walls
there were
wonderful
pictures
and
paintings
of
1. W.56-62 and W. 1-19 of the next chapter form one piece. They
contain description of the city created by Jamadagni*s holy cow. The
whole
chapter
is so beautiful that it can pass as a part
of
classical
Sanskrit
epics
of
the Gupta
era.

=== PAGE 237 ===

626
Brahm&ntfa Purdna
various colours. They were
studded
with
gems.
Tjiey shone
with golden thrones, stools etc. of different
heights,
high and
low, and having excellent
gems. There were
various kinds of
foodstuffs and beverages in various vessels
in
different
places.
The houses were richly equipped with all luxuries befitting
the
Devas. They were pleasing to the eyes and
mind with lasses of
fascinating beauty and charm.
CHAPTER TWENTYSEVEN
Haihaya Arjunas Reception and Halt at Night
Vasiffha said
:
1
.
In that city the grandeur of which was comparable to
that of the city of the lord of the Devas, the
holy
cow of that
excellent sage created afterwards groups of men and women in
those houses befitting them.
2.
The women had bedecked their bodies with different
kinds of dresses, ornaments, flowers, fragrant
scents
and
silk
garments. They were endowed with Havas
(coquettish gestures
etc.
to excite amorous behaviour), Bhdvas
(feelings
of
love),
magnanimous behaviour and
conduct,
splendour,
brilliance,
beauty and good qualities.
3.
They had surpassed the lustre of the moon by means
of their lotus-like faces illuminated by the
clusters
of rays
of
their
teeth, throbbing gently. Their words in sweet voice
were
(as if)
filled with inebriating liquor of fresh youth. They
had
the sweet way ofogling with side glances lingering with love and
affability.
4.
Their
hearts
were
delighted
with
pleasure.
They
looked extremely brilliant. They were adorned with the flowers
of the divine wish-yielding tree (in the form) of the
sentiment
of love. They were richly endowed with and delighted by good
fortune, youthful
beauty,
graceful charms, bfeauty and sweet*

=== PAGE 238 ===

2.3.27.5-10
627
ness of comely shape comparable
to
those of
the
heavenly
ladies.
5.
Their waists bent and stooped
slightly
due
to
the
weight of the pairs of plump breasts comparable to the pots
of
heated gold.
The
nails
of their toes were
rendered
red
by
means of the red juice of lac resembling blood and
therefore,
they appeared to be filled with exhaustion
due
to
the
heavy
burden
of their buttocks.
6.
They were bedecked
in
armlets,
necklaces,
jewels,
bangles, golden
necklaces,
and
blemishless
(sparkling)
ear
ornaments. Garlands kissed their tresses and locks of hair. They
had girdles and anklets with tinkling bells.
7.
They had ample
experience
and
opportunities
of
training themselves in such gestures and behaviour as pretended
anger, consoling, jocular and witty giggling, playful
teasings,
sweet speech, reviling and provocation of
anger.
They were
clever in
totally
dissembling
the
limits
of composure
and
gravity of persons near and dear to the king himself.
8.
Their voice was gentle and
fascinating. It was com-
parable to the note from the strings of a lute
of a Gandharva.
When they spoke their voice was distinct but sweet. The fingers
and their palms were extremely
proficient in
playing
on
the
Vina .
They were
anxiously eager in indulging in speech both
serious as well as kind and flattering.
9.
The
ladies
were languid on account of inebriation.
They were excessively efficient in exhibiting coquettish gestures.
They were capable of making
the minds
of
their
lovers
get
confused.
They were proficient
in the practical demonstration
of amorous dalliance. They were never wanting
in
riches and
they
were
endowed
with
liberal-mindedness,
beauty,
good
qualities and nice behaviour.
10.
They were innumerable. Although their minds were
eagerly engaged
constantly in the various duties and activities
of the household, they continued to serve
them ( the
followers
of the king)
. The houses were
filled with
men
too who
had
such beauty and splendour
as
befitted
their
good
qualities.
They were
brilliant.
They moved
about
in the houses here
and
there.

=== PAGE 239 ===

Brakm&ntfa Purina
1 1 .
Citizens having every kind of luxurious # assets and
good qualities, with
their desires wholly fulfilled, occupied the
Royal Highways, the bazaars,
the palaces, mansions, flights of
stairs, temples, and quadrangles all round
:
12.
There were innumerable groups of palatial buildings
having nothing comparable to
them. They
were of various
colours, dimensions and features. There were many
sheds and
abodes
suitable
for
garrages,
chariots,
horses,
elephants,
mules, camels, bullocks, cows and goats.
13.
There were separate houses allotted to the king,
his
generals, elephant-drivers, horsemen, foot-soldiers,
lieutenants
and chiefs of armies, the Brahmanas and others, the charioteers
and chariot-attendants as well as the bards and poets, heralds-
and
panegyrists.
14.
There were many big
streets,
market
places
and
quadrangles of wonderfully distinguished features. Many articles
were bought and sold there. There were
the
splendid
houses
of courtezans, which were well built and equipped
with great
wealth, furniture and other appurtenance
of daily household
needs.
1 5.
There were high templegates, minarets
and
towers
brilliant with gems of great value. There were also kennels
for
dogs, cages for falcons and vultures as well as halls for dancing
entertainments.
There
were
flags,
banners
and emblems of
various colours. There were canopies of white cloth spread very
far above the ground as well as pavilions.
16.
There were many beautiful
lakes,
tanks
and
vast
excellent expanses of waters rendered fragrant by means of the
pollen powder of Kalhdra (a variety of white lotus)
and other
lotuses,
lilies white and red and lilies that bloom by night. They
were resonant with the various cackling, crowing and chirping
sounds of the ruddy geese, swans, ospreys, cranes,
storks
and
water ducks.
17.
There were many trees with water basins' made
at
their feet such as the mahgo, the Priy&la
(the
tree Buchanania
latifolia), the jack
tree,
the Madhuka
(Bassia
latifolia), the
Jambu
( rose apple) , and Plak$a ( ficus religiosa). Along the banks
of the lakes beautiful trees were grown such as N&ga
( the mesua

=== PAGE 240 ===

2.3.27.18-26
629
Roxburghi)
, the Ketakl
( Pandanus
odoratissimus)
,
the Punnaga
(nutmeg) and Campaka (Michellia champacca)
. These trees were
frequently resorted to by birds.
18.
There were many trees bearing
fruits
and
flowers
such as Mandara
(the coral trees ?), Kunda (jasmine), Kara-
vira (the Oleander),
the
fascinating Yuthika
(a
variety
of
jasmine) and Jati (another variety ofjasmine) etc. The
place
was rendered splendid by means of groups of pleasure
gardens
visible all round. They had a wonderful charm and beauty.
19.
The gardens had the fragrance experienced
in
the
different
seasons
( all
together
simultaneously)
. The
gently
blowing breeze (appeared
to)
threaten
the summer
season.
Thus, O leading king, the city had clearly a
rich complement
of the luxurious pleasure and means of enjoyment
fascinating
unto the Suras as well as Asuras.
20-21.
After creating such vast means of enjoyment and
good fortune instantly, the sacred cow of the sage informed him
about
it. On coming to know that everything necessary for the
warm
reception of the king had been procured together by the
sacred cow of the Brahmana
the
excellent
sage
immediately
called one of his disciples who had
all
good
qualities, O king,
and despatched him towards the Ha ihay? king Arjuna.
After approaching the king promptly, the son of the sage
spoke to him with great humility
:
22.
“This
is
the
request
of our
family head that the
materials of hospitality which have been provided by
us
may
please be immediately honoured and accepted by the king.”
Thereupon,
after being permitted by the excellent sage,
the king entered that excellent city
created for
his sake.
23-24a.
Accompanied by his entire army,
the
excellent
king entered the city which
was
the
abode
of all enjoyable
pleasures and which indicated the capability of the sacred cow
of the sage. He surveyed the
luxurious
prosperity
of the
city
that fascinated the entire world. His face was extremely delight-
ed out of pleasure. Though the king himself was a liberal donor
and was excessively self-possessed, he was then struck with great
wonder along with his army.
24b-26a.
The handsome form of the king was so striking
that even the celestial women never ceased to look at him with

=== PAGE 241 ===

630
Brakm&nia Pur&na
admiration. Their eyes were drinking in the comely, features of
the king even as the bees were drinking in the
nectar
(within
flowers). While proceeding ahead along
the
Royal
high-road
of the city, the lord of the Haihayas rejoiced much
like
Indra
at the abode of Kubera along with all the Devas.
As he proceeded ahead along
the Royal
high
road,
the
ladies of the city who were on the mensions all round showered
him incessantly with bunches of flowers and
handful
of
fried
grains drenched with sandal-perfumed water expressive of hearty
reception.
26b-28a.
The king was showered with
handfuls of white
fried
grains
that dropped down from the
lotus-like
hands
of
the ladies of the city, eager to welcome and honour the
guests.
Bunches of white
flowers
reverberating
with
the
humming
sounds
of
the bees were showered on the king at every
step.
These flowers had been plucked from pleasure gardens rendered
(still more)
fragrant by means of sandal
pastes and safForn. He
was showered at every step also with genuine gems
ahd jewels
and pearls belonging
to the womenfolk staying in that city.
On being showered thus the king shone like the Mandara
mountain
showered
with
the
bright
rays
of
the
moon
allround.
28b-31a.
On seeing that
luxurious
glory
of
the
city,
which was really the potential
glory
of
Brahminical
penance
of excellent good qualities and which was beyond
the compre-
hension
of
ordinary
people—Glory
that
was
extremely
unattainable in all the worlds
and
the
splendour
of which
was covctablc—the lord of the subjects praised
it
mentally
as
well as verbally, O king.
The king of Haihayas thought thus—“This
is
really very
rare on this earth. All the fascinating luxury and richness of the
Ksatriyas
together
is not
powerful
enough
to be capable of
being
compared
even
to a hundredth part of the Brahminical
glory that
is
honoured
even
by gods
in
heaven. He care-
fully observed in the heart of the city the prosperity and afflu-
ence attained by the people of the
city. He
proceeded ahead
along with the priest, minister and other
followers. As he
was
being honoured by the people of the city, he was rejoiced when

=== PAGE 242 ===

2.3.27.31-37
631
a mansion of bright colours was pointed out to him
by
one
of
his
aides.
31b-32a.
(Defective text) On being told—“O
king,
be
pleased to accept the honourable reception that is extended by
the excellent sage and that
is appropriate
to or
becoming
to
your dignity. Be pleased to accept the same
along
with
your
followers’*—On being requested thus, the king turned back with
ease and proceeded towards* the residence specially
built for his
sake.
32b-33a.
The citizens
gathered
together with
various
articles in their hands to indicate their adoration
of the
King.
All round along the path, they paid respects to him with great
joy
by means
of their palms folded in reverence. At every step
he was
honoured with loud shouts of victory and loud notes of
various
kinds of musical instruments that deafened
the
various
quarters.
33b-34a.
The
king
slowly
passed
beyond
three
inner
apartments in succession even as the chamberlains therein exhi-
bited their agitation and
the crowds of common
people
who
had thronged there had been
kept
back.
Finally,
supported
respectfully with
his hands
by the minister,
he
entered
(his
main)
apartment.
34b-36a.
(Some)
lovely women
of
the
city
gracefully
came
out of the inner apartment of the king with
(the
follow-
ing auspicious articles)
viz. lighted lamp, (a vessel
of)
curds,
mirror, sweet scents, fragrant flowers, Durva grass
Ak$ata (raw
unbroken Rice grains) and other things and delighted the king
with (the demonstration of their)
reverence. A
seat
covered
with
exquisite
gold was immediately made ready by them. It
shone with many brilliant rays of excellent
genuine gems
and
jewels. A thin (cloth) of fine texture covered
it. The
king
of
splendid renown occupied that charming golden seat.
36b-37a. O king, when that king was comfortably seated
in that inner apartment, the elderly respectable matrons of that
household
enhanced
the
exquisite
pleasure
( of the king) by
means of musical instruments etc. and different kinds of articles
of adoration such as ornaments, sweet
scents,
fragrant
flowers,
means of embellishment, garments and other things.

=== PAGE 243 ===

632
Brahm&nia Pur&nct
37b-40a.
The lord of Haihayas performed
all
the
holy
rites
in
accordance
with
his own religious beliefs, the holy
rites prescribed for the day and time, in that
apartment
itself.
Thereafter, he spent the whole of the remaining part of the day
by means of different kinds of talks, witty remarks,
sports
and
pastime of diverse kinds and survey
(directed all round). Then
the king performed all those rites befitting the close of the day.
Followed by his chief minister
and
other
ministers,
the king
immediately hastened to his assembly where the
darkness had
been completely dispelled by the numerous lamps held
in
their
hands by the servants standing near him all round.
Being attended upon by his priests, ministers,
vassal kings
and hundreds of generals, the king occupied a seat in the assem-
bly of the (vassal)
kings like Indra accompanied by the groups
of the Devas. He was delighted with
different
kinds
of pas-
times.
40b-42a.
Afterwards he sat there for a long time
listen-
ing to
different
kinds
of musical
instruments,
indulging
in
different kinds
of pastimes,
seeing
different
kinds
of dances,
cracking
several
jokes
and narrating many stories. The witty
remarks, smiles, graceful dalliance etc. ofthe courtesans delighted
his mind.
Thus,
till midnight, the
overlord of the
subjects
stayed
experiencing the luxurious pleasure of different kinds
of sports
and amusements. He then made his vassal
kings and
followers
go
back
to
their
residences. Then
he
himself went
to
his
apartment.
42b-44a.
The entire army ofthe king rejoiced sufficiently
well
in
their
abodes
wherein
every
article
of luxury and
necessity had been provided
befitting
their own
status,
their
heroism, their
vigour,
their wealth, potentiality and greatness.
They had valuable garments, garlands, ornaments
and
other
things in plenty.
All the soldiers of the king stayed in that city of
the king
fully satisfied like groups of the Devas in the heaven. They had
plenty
of
foodstuffs
and
edibles,
beverages and
liquors of
various kinds. They had meat, curds, milk etc. They had every-
thing necessary for their pleasure and enjoyment.

=== PAGE 244 ===

2.3.27.44—28.5
633
44b-45.
The followers of the king who were thus delight-
ed by their experience of different kinds of
essential
pleasures
spoke to one another thus—“Of what avail are our own houses
and property and the like ? Let us all stay here
itself”.
B
The king performed every rite prescribed
for
the
night >
returned to his excellent bed in his
apartment and
lay on
it,
which was highly resplendent, due to many a gem
and jewel,
O
king.
Delighted
in
his
heart
he
had
a
long
dreamless
sound
sleep.
CHAPTER TWENTYEIGHT
Haihaya Ill-advised to Confiscate Jamadagni's Kdmadhenu
Vasiptha said
;
1.
At the close
of the
night,
the
heralds,
bards
and
panegyrists approached the sleeping king undistracted and sang
aloud in order to awaken the king.
2.
Their voice was sweet, praiseworthy and
pleasing
to
the ears
of everyone.
It
mixed harmoniously with the sound
of stringed musical instruments and
clapping
of hands
along
with
the sweet notes
of Vina (The Indian
Lute) and
Venu
(flute).
3.
They were sweet-throated (in voice) and they sang a
very fascinating song as indicated by the clear MUrcchands (the
harmonious rise and fall of sounds) in the gamut. The song had
cadence and melody along
with
the
Tara
(high
pitch)
and
Mandra ( low sound)
(as required by the occasion)
.
4.
Desirous of awakening him slowly from his sleep, the
heralds and the
bards addressed the
noble-souled
king
these
words of diverse kinds.
5.
“See, 'O leader of kings,
this
moon
is setting now.
Indeed
it
is because
he
(the moon) has
been
defeated by
the
splendour
of
your
lotus-like
face
that
continues
to
increase.

=== PAGE 245 ===

634
Btahm&nia Purdna
i
6.
As if being desirous of viewing your lotus-like face, O
lord,
the
sun
has come
to the Udaya mountain (in the East)
dispelling the darkness now.
7. O
king,
the
crest-jewel
of
all
the members of the
Lunar race, please abstain
from
further
sleep.
Be
pleased to
wake up now.
8.
Hearing these words of those bards, the
lord
of
the
earth woke up in the same manner as the lotus-eyed lord
( Visnu
)
did from his serpent-couch (Sesa)
in the milky ocean.
9.
When his eyes got rid of their sleep,
he
got up
and
performed duly and respectfully the daily rites of Japa (Repeti-
tion of holy names) etc. with great concentration and care and
omitted nothing.
10-11.
Decorating himself with
divine
garlands,
scents
and
ornaments,
he
worshipped
the
deity
of his choice. He
observed the customary rite of touching such
auspicious
things
as the Durva grass, collyrium and mirror. He distributed charit-
able
gifts among the suppliants. He bowed down to
the
cows
and Brahmanas. Coming out of
that
city,
he
performed
the
worship of the sun.
12.
By that time,
all
the
ministers,
vassal
kings
and
generals approached him. With palms joined
in
reverence, O
king, they bowed down to the excellent king.
13.
Thereafter, surrounded by them the king bowed down
at the feet of the sage with his crown having
the
brilliance of
the sun.
14.
The leading sage congratulated and blessed the king.
As he bowed down
with
humility
he
gently
told him— “Be
pleased to sit”.
15.
When the king occupied his seat, the great sage who
was delighted in his mind said—“I hope, O king, that the night
has dawned unto you with pleasure. (You had happy sleep all
the night).
16.
It is possible to put up with anything and everything
only by us, O leading king, because we live in the forest main-
taining ourselves with the things
found
in
the forest and
(in
a way ) we
are
on a par with the deer £pr animals in
t he
forest).

=== PAGE 246 ===

2.3.28.17-30
635
17.
The stay of the citizens in the forest is very
unbear-
able. Indeed, O leading king, everything that one is not accustom-
ed
to,
is very difficult to do.
18.
The
fact
that
your
majesty had
to undergo the
sufferings of a residence in the forest along with your followers,
several times, certainly enhances your dignity’*.
1 9.
On being addressed thus with great pleasure by that
sage, the king replied once again to him smilingly.
V
20.
“O, what avail are these words, O holy Brahmana ?
Your real greatness has been seen by us. The
entire
world
is
surprised at this.
21.
My
soldiers
who
have
been overwhelmed by
the
luxurious provisions procured by your miraculous power, O great
sage, do not wish to go away from this
place.
22.
It
is due to
the
potentiality
of the
austerities of
people like you, O holy lord, that all the worlds
are
supported.
Indeed the Brahmanical splendour is incomprehensible.
i
23.
There is no wonder in
this, O holy
lord,
that
your
holiness is capable of bringing about by your penance, the three
states in succession (i.e. creation
sustenance and annihilation)
unto all the worlds.
24.
The great achievement
of your
penance
has
been
observed
by
us
quite
well and it is adored by the world. O
Brahmana, I
shall now go
back
to my
capital. May your
honour be pleased to permit me.”
Vasiffha said
:
25.
On being respectfully told thus by that king Kartta-
virya, the sage honoured him perfectly
well and (he
permitted
him) saying ‘yes’—so be it.
26.
On being permitted by the sage, the king set off from
that
hermitage surrounded
by
his
soldiers
and
proceeded
towards his city.
27.
While going on his way, the king thought in his mind
thus—“Wonderful is the achievement of this sage by means of
penance. It makes the entire world wonder-struck.
28-30.
“It is due to
the
power of penance,
that
such
a cow as this, the most
excellent one among
all
divine cows

=== PAGE 247 ===

636
Brahm&nfa PurAna
from which whatever one desired
could
be
milked,
has been
acquired by the sage.
<cOf what avail
is my entire kingdom as well as the
yogic
power which is by itself not very
insignificant ? Of what
avail
is it if this jewel of a cow continues to be
in
the
possession
of
that excellent sage ? Certainly the wealth and
luxury
of even
the heaven-dwellers has been created by this cow. I
think
that
even
the
office
of Indra
which
is manifestly prosperous and
honoured by the three worlds, does not deserve even a sixteenth
*
«
part of the potencies of this cow.”
31.
Even
as the king was
thinking
thus,
his
minister,
Candragupta approached him from behind and said with palms
joined in
reverence.
32.
“O mighty
king, why
are you
returning
to
the
city? Of what
avail to you
is your kingdom
or
the
capital
city, though it be well protected ?
33.
As long as the jewel of a cow does not find a
place
in your abode O lord,
your kingdom
cannot be
considered
prosperous. It is a void.
Ob
34-35.
Another miracle was seen by me, O
king.
Listen
to
it. The charming abodes and mansions, the fascinating ladies,
the palaces of different shapes and
sizes
and
the
wealth
the
destruction of which could never have been foreseen—all
these
merged in a
trice within that cow even as
I was watching.
36.
Those things, O excellent king,
have now got trans-
formed
into the selfsame Penance grove. What can be difficult
to achieve for a person who possesses that cow which has such
miraculous powers ?
37.
Hence
that cow should be
accepted
by
you,
since
you have that good capacity of deserving to
possess
a
jewel
:
If this
is considered permissible by you, what
should
be
done
by those who depend on you for
their sustenance, may kindly
be commanded”.
The king replied
:
38.
“I do
not
consider this matter in this manner, be-
cause
it is improper. The property of a Brahmana should
not
be taken away. Hence, my mind is afraid."
*

=== PAGE 248 ===

2.3.28.39-48
637
39.
To the king who spoke thus,
his
preceptor
Garga,
the
most
excellent one among
intelligent persons, spoke. He
appeared to be censuring
(those who advocated removal of the
cow per force)
. (He said :) “O king !”
40.
“The property of a Brahmana should by no means
be confiscated by force, even in
emergency.
There
is
nothing
like the
property
of
a Brahmana,
which
is
difficult
to be
digested.
41.
A poison destroys the person who
used
it
and
who
has been aimed at as the prospective victim, O king of
Haiha-
yas. But
the
fire
from the Arani wood in the form of property
of a Brahmana burns the
entire family along with
its roots.
42.
The property of a Brahmana, Oking,
is a poison with
no antidote in this world.
It cannot be digested. It
yields
the
fruit of destruction
of one’s sons and
grandsons.
Its
conse-
quences are bitter.
43.
The mind of ill-natured lords is
deluded on account
of their wealth and affluence. What
is it that an
evil mind does
not do, when tempted and led astray by the eye which
is
also
evil.
44.
(Defective Text)
. Who else other than you is capable
of knowing the evil consequences of your misdeeds
? O
excel-
lent king, you are thinking
about
Adana
(taking
away)
from
Brahmana and not Ddna
(charitable gifts to
them). Who
else
except you will desire such a thing ?
45.
O king
of mighty arms,
you
are
a good
person
like
this ; please do
not commit
a
sinful
act condemned
by
good people, Indeed, that will
lead to the loss of your reputa-
tion.
46.
You are born of a great
family of munificent
and
generous kings. Do not destroy your reputation now by means of
this despicable act.
47.
Alas
! There are some dependent
servants prone
to
an evil course of conduct.
Being
conceited due
to
the
king’s
gracious favpur, they make him sink in the ocean of distress.
48.
A king who is
being
spoilt
by
his
affluence, who
becomes insensitive to the matter
of duty and
thought
ab'out

=== PAGE 249 ===

638
B rakm&ntfa Purtina
it and whose activity is in accordance with the
advice
of such
a person, falls into distress immediately.
49.
Like a boat made of iron, the wicked-minded minis-
ter who
is not familiar with good
policies and courses of
con-
duct will sink into the ocean of evil himself and will make the
king too sink in
it.
50.
Hence, O
mighty
king,
it
does
not behove you
to follow the opinion of
this
extremely
evil-minded
minister
who is deluded and confused in regard to the path of good and
just policies.”
51.
Even as he was addressing these words conducive to
the welfare of his king,
the
minister
insulted
the
priest and
spoke to the king once again.
52.
“This Brahmana
looks
only
to
the
benefit
of
the
persons of his own caste. Great affairs of the king and the state
cannot be comprehended by Brahmanas.
53.
The affairs of the state can be understood only by a
king by means of his own intelligence. A Brahmana
does
not
get (into his head) any matter
(of importance) except taking
food and accepting monetary and charitabte gifts.
54.
A Brahmana
should
not
be
insulted. He
should
always be
respected and given monetary and charitable gifts.
More than this nothing
is accomplished anywhere.
55.
Hence, O
king,
go
back
to
your city only after
making that cow your own. If not, abandon your kingdom and
go to the forest for the sake of penance.
56.
Fobearance (is a quality)
of
the
Brahmanas
but
power
(of chastisement) that of a Ksatriya, O king. No sin can
befall you in taking away anything by force.
57.
If you see any defect in forcible confiscation, O king,
let the cow of the sage be taken possession
of after
giving
its
price (in the form of) other cows, horses etc.
58.
Indeed, that cow should be made your own by
you,
because you are the one that
deserve
jewels.
Wherefore
can
the ascetics have the desire for collecting jewels ?

=== PAGE 250 ===

2.3.28.59-68
639
59.
This ascetic is really weak and calm. He
is pleased
with you, O king. Hence, on being requested, he
will,
by
all
means give you the cow.
60.
Or he will exchange that cow after taking in lieu of
it
(other) cows, gold etc., or a big sum of money of whatever
else he desires.
61.
A great gem should never be neglected nor
treated
with indifference by a king who desires prosperity. This is my
thinking (advice). What does your Majesty think?”
The King replied
:
62.
“O my
dear
Minister,
be
pleased
to go to that
Brahmana, yourself. Propitiate him with
special service. Bring
that cow after giving him whatever
is desired by him.
Vasiptha said
:
63.
On
being
told
thus
by
the. king,
that minister,
induced by fate, returned and hastened
to
the
hermitage
of
Jamadagni.
64.
After the king had departed, Rama too accompanied
by Akrtavrana, had
started
towards
the
forest
for
bringing
sacrificial
twigs.
65.
-
It
was
after
that,
that
the Minister reached the
hermitage
of Jamadagni, accompanied
by
the
army.
After
bowing down to the sage,
he spoke these words
:
Candragupta said
:
66.
"O holy Brahmana, it has been ordered by the king
thus
:—On this earth the king is the person who
has
to
take
charge
of gems.
That cow of yours
is the most excellent one
among all cows yielding milk. Hence,
it has become a gem.
67.
Hence, mention the price of that cow whether it be
(ordinary) gems and jewels or gold. It
behoves
you
to
give
me
this
jewel
of
a cow
after
taking any reasonable price
Jamadagni replied
:
68.
“This
is my sacred cow for the purpose
of Hama .
It

=== PAGE 251 ===

Brahm&n$a PurAna
640
cannot be given away to any one. The king himself^ is a muni-
ficent donor. How does he covet the property of a Brahmana?”
The minister said
:
69.
“In virtue of his being
the
legitimate
possessor of
a gem
( the best in everything)
, the king desires the Cow, but
only in exchange for
ten
thousand ordinary
cows. Hence
it
behoves you to give
it to him.”
Jamadagni answered
:
70. “By no means have I ever been a seller or a purchaser.
Hence,
I am not inclined to dispose of this cow that
provides
me with requisites of holy offerings.”
The minister said
:
71.
“O holy Brahmana, give away this
single
cow
in
exchange for half of the kingdom or for the entire possession of
the kingdom. That will be conducive to your welfare.”
Jamadagni replied
:
72.
“As long as I am alive, O evil-minded
one,
I
will
never part with this cow even
to
Indra
even
if I am
to
be
requested by his
preceptor
Brhaspati. How then
can
I
give
this to your king at your instance?”
The Minister advised
:
73.
“It
is better that you, in a friendly manner
volun-
teer to give the cow to the
king.
If it were to be taken away
by force, what will you do ?”
Jamadagni said
:
74.
“It is the king who gives gifts
to
the
Brahmanas.
If he himself were to take away what can I, a mere Brahmana,
do, except giving it up
(as if) willingly.”
Vasiffha said
:
75.
On being told thus, that infuriated minister of
sin-
ful nature began to remove the sage's cow by
force.

=== PAGE 252 ===

2.3.29.1-11
641
CHAPTER TWENTYNINE
A Quarrel over the Cow
: Jamadagni Murdered
:
The Cow disappears
Vasif (ha said
:
1.
With
great
anger Jamadagni
spoke
to him once
again—‘‘The property of a Brahmana should not be taken away
by a sensible person.
2. Taking away the cow from me by force, Q evil-mind-
ed one, you will incur
sin.
I
think
your
life has come to an
end. Otherwise you would not have done this.
3.
What
you
wish
to take away by force
is impossible
anyway. If the cow itself were to join the fray the king
will be
ruined.
4.
Instead of making gifts, the forcible
removal (of the
property) of Brahmana ascetics
is being pursued. What person
desirous
of
continuing
to
be
alive
will
desire this, except
Arjuna who professes to live for a hundred years ?”
5.
On being told this by him,
that
infuriated powerful
minister, urged by god of Death, bound the cow
firmly
with
ropes and dragged.
6.
Urged by his previous actions
with
their
inevitable
future results, Jamadagni furiously
resisted him
with
all
his
might, while he was dragging the cow.
7.
“As long as I am alive, I will
not
leave
this
cow”.
Thinking thus the great sage whose anger was aroused held on
to the neck of the cow steadfastly with his hands.
%
8.
Then Candragupta who was extremely
ruthless
and
who was
overwhelmed
with
anger, commanded his
soldiers
thus :— ‘‘Take him away* *
.
9:
At the behest of their lord, the servants of
the
king
surrounded the sage and seized him with force, though he was
unassailable in the world.
10.,
They hit him with
sticks,
whips,
long
poles
and
their own
fists and
removed
him
very
far
away from the
presence of the cow.
11.
Though he was being struck in that manner, though
he
was
pained
much,
yet he did not become infuriated. He

=== PAGE 253 ===

642
Brakm&nfa Purdna
continued to retain his forbearance. Indeed, not
to
give
vent
to anger is the greatest asset of good men.
0
12.
He was capable of
annihilating
or
defending
the
entire universe by
the power of
his
penance.
Thinking
that
there would be the
loss
of
power
of
penance,
he
did
not
give vent to his anger.
13.
Formerly, Jamadagni used to
get
extremely
over-
whelmed with anger. But he had been consoled
by Rama
on
behalf of his mother. Thereafter the sage of great penance had
been always calm and quiet.
14.
When that sage of great splendour was hit and hurt
very much, his limbs, bones and joints were shattered. He
fell
on to the ground and lost consciousness.
15.
When
the
sage
fell
senseless
the
evil-minded
minister
was
beset
with
fear.
He
ordered
his
servants
to
bring the cow quickly with force.
16.
Then they bound
the cow
along with
its
calf by
means of ropes, O king. They hit
it
with
whips and
desirous
of taking
it away dragged
it.
17.
On being dragged by many of them
and
on
being
hit and hurt with whips and poles by them, the cow gave
vent
to
its anger.
18.
Pained by too much wippings,
it became
extremely
furious. It tugged at the tight
ropes and
cut
them.
Thus
it
released itself.
19.
It got itself released from
the binding
ropes
but
it
was surrounded everywhere by the soldiers. Making
the sound
of Hurfihd
(i.$. bellowing sound),
it rushed at everyone angrily.
20.
Hitting and lashing at everyone all round by means
of its horns, hoofs and tip of the
tail, the infuriated cow routed
the entire army of the king and his minister.
21.
After
routing
all
the
servants quickly, the sacred
cow
went
up
to
the
sky,
even as all living beings remained
looking on.
22.
Thereafter,
those
ruthless
soldiers who had
been
foiled in their attempts (to remove the cow), whose limbs were
broken and bodies wounded, bound its calf by
force and
went
away with it.
*

=== PAGE 254 ===

2.3.29.23—30.6
643
23.
Taking the calf alone without the
cow,
that
sinner
(minister) came to the presence
of the
king along
with
the
servants.
24.
After approaching the king and bowing down to him
the
sycophant
minister narrated everything
to
him
feeling
greatly agitated and afraid.
CHAPTER THIRTY
Lamentation ofRenukd
: ParaSurdma's
Vow
to
Slay all Kfattriyas , Jamadagni Resuscitated
Vasiftha continued
:
1.
On
hearing the
report of the murder
of Jamadagni
and similar
events,
the
king
became
very much distressed
in his mind. He thought about the various matters
concerned.
2.
“Alas I have been very wicked in the events concern-
ing
both
the
worlds.
Firstly my
desire
to
take
away the
property
of a
Brahmana
and
secondly
his
(Jamadagni’s)
extremely censurable murder.
3.
Deluded in mv mind and devoid of shame, I
did not
0
*
0
pay heed
to
the words
of this sensible Brahmana, my Jamily
priest. In that case
I
should
have
avoided
such
a
difficult
situation.”
4.
Thinking thus with a grief-stricken heart, he returned
to his city along with his army and followers.
i
5.
When the king went back towards his city along with
his
attendants,
O
king,
Re^iuka
suddenly rushed
out
of
hermitage.
t
6.
Thereupon, she saw her husband who was lying in a
pool of blood, with all his
limbs wounded and who had fallen
motionless on the ground.

=== PAGE 255 ===

644
Brahm&nifa Purdna
7.
As her husband lay senseless, she thought that he had
been killed. Thereupon, she fell down on thegrouna and fainted
as though struck by a thunderbolt.
8.
After a long time, she got up from the
ground.
She
became more distressed and miserable. Falling down and getting
up again and again, she wept loudly.
9.
With her
body
becoming dusky-white
coloured on
account
of
the
dust
from
the ground, with her
face covered
with flowing
tears, she lamented
much.
Fallen into the sea of
sorrow, she became all the more pitiable.
10.
“Alas dear lord, fully familiar with all religious rites,
ocean of the nectar of civility and
courtesy,
Fie
upon
over-
quiescence. No one shall desire such a quietude as this.
11.0 bestower of honour, where have you gone ? Coming
out of the hermitage, you have cast me suddenly into the deep
ocean of distress, and rendered me lordless and forlorn.
12.
Friendship and intimacy
of good
people
is said to
be
Sdptapada
(produced
when
one
accompanies
another
taking seven steps together or when one talks seven words with
another)
. In regard to this,
I have
been
cheated
along
with
you. It behoves you to take me
too to
the place where you are
going alone now.
13. O highly
fortunate
Lord
!
My heart
is
not
torn
asunder immediately after seeing
you
in
such a plight as this.
Indeed, women are hard-hearted”.
14.
She lamented thus. She wept again and again. Over-
whelmed
with
ocean
of excessive
misery, she cried out “O
Rama, O Rama.”
15.
In
the
meantime, Rama
too
returned
to
the
hermitage, from the forest, accompanied
by Akrtavra^a
and
bearing the burden of the sacrificial twigs.
16.
On the way he
had
seen many
ill
omens
indica-
ting fear from danger. On seeing them, he had become distres-
sed
in
his
heart. The holy
lord then came to th$ hermitage
immediately.
1 7.
On
seeing him
coming,
the weeping lady became
more distressed. With her sorrow
renewed,
Renuk&
lamented
again.
*

=== PAGE 256 ===

2.3.30.18-32
645
18.
Extremely
afflicted on
account
of her
separation
from her husband, she beat
her
belly
(?)
with
both
of her
hands, in front of Rama, O king.
19.
Rama
had
already come
to
know
the
report
in full on the way itself. Seeing his mother dejected on account
of sorrow like a female osprey, he too became miserable.
20.
Though overwhelmed by
misery
and
sorrow,
the
intelligent sage
(i.e. Rama)
regained his courage. With both
the eyes filled with tears, he stood on the ground with
his face
directed downwards.
2 1 .
On seeing Rama in such a plight, Akftavrana
said
thus
:—“What is this, O you the noblest among the descendants
of Bhrgu ? This
is not proper and suitable for you.
22.
Nowhere do people like you, O highly fortunate one,
bewail too much. Great men with fortitude are never miserable
over a
loss.
23.
It
is
sorrow
that
brings
about
emaciation
and
withering up of all sense-organs. O sage of long powerful arms,
get rid of this sorrow.
People
like you
do not deserve
to
be
subjected to
it.
24.
Certainly, it is sorrow alone that prevents all affairs
of consequence both in
this
world and in the next. How
is it
that you give room to
it in your heart ?
25.
Hence, be pleased to regain
your wealth of courage
and console your mother who is weeping profusely, because her
mind is upset by the suspicion of immediate widowhood.
26.
An object that has passed
off never returns. Hence,
forget everything
that
has
taken
place
and
think about
your duty.”
27.
On being appeased by him thus, Rama steadied
his
soul by his own efforts, slowly.
28.
Overwhelmed by sorrow and misery,
Renuka wept
again and again. She beat her belly
(?)
twentyone
times with
the pair of her hands.
29.
Meanwhile with tears welling up in his eyes, Rama
came near
her and
consoled
his weeping mother,
saying
“Enough, mother”.
30-32.
Relieving from her misery
his
mother who was
overwhelmed with her sorrow
for
her dead
husband. R&ma

=== PAGE 257 ===

Brahmdntfa Purdna
646
said thus:—“Since you beat your chest twentyone times, I shall
exterminate the entire Ksatriya caste as many timos,
wherever
they may be on
this earth.
I am speaking the truth unto you.
Hence, get rid of your sorrow and assume courage now. Certain-
ly what has gone is gone for ever, never to return”.
33.
On being consoled thus by
him, Renuka
regained
her courage with great difficulty despite her inordinate misery,
and said “So be it” in reply.
34.
Then, along with his brothers, Rama of long power-
ful
arms,
made
preparations
for
the
cremation
of
his
father’s body by means of fire, in accordance
with the
injunc-
tions, O king.
35.
Renuka
of steadfast
holy
rites,
whose
body
was
overwhelmed
with
sorrow
for her husband,
called
all her
sons together and spoke these words
:
Renuka said
:
36. O my
sons,
I
wish
to
follow your father who has
gone to Heaven and who was by nature meritorious.
It behoves
you all to allow me
to do so.
37.
The misery of widowhood
is
unbearable. How can
I endure
it ?
I
will
be
hated as
I am bereft of my husband.
How can I carry on my activities, thus ?
38.
Hence,
I shall follow my beloved husband so
that I
shall proceed along with him without
interruption
for ever
in
the other world.
39.
By entering this burning pyre, I will be slightly after
a long time, the dear guest of my husband in the world
of the
Pitrs (Manes).
*
40.
If you wish to do what
is pleasing to me, dear sons,
nothing else should be expressed by
you
by
taking
a united
stand against me, except your concurrence and
support in this
act of my self-immolation to fire.
41.
After saying these words with firm decision, Renuka
decided to follow her husband by entering the fire.
42.
At that very juncture an incorporeal speech uttered
thus, addressing Repuka along with her sons.
43.
“O Renuka, listen
attentively
to my words, along

=== PAGE 258 ===

2.3.30.44-53
647
with your sons. Do not do anything rash and reckless, O gentle
lady, I shall tell you something pleasing to you.
44.
No rash and
reckless
act
should be committed by
anyone who desires his own welfare. You must not die.
If one
continues to live, one is sure to see happiness.
45.
Hence, O lady of bright smiles, sustain your asset of
fortitude. Bide your time screening yourself
behind
an inevi-
table cause.
46.
Ere
long
your husband
will regain consciousness.
O splendid lady, when he
is resuscitated you will realize
your
desires. You will
be
the
recipient of much weal lasting for a
long time.”
Vasiffha said
:
47.
Having heard those words (of the incorporeal speech)
Renuka regained
fortitude. Out
of
respect and high value of
that
(Divine speech), the sons became delighted.
48.
Thereafter,
• they took
the body
of the
sage, their
father, to
the
inner apartments of the hermitage. Laying it in
a place sheltered from the wind, they sat all around
it.
49-50.
As they
sat
there
with
their soul and the mind
submerged in gloom
(lit. not much delighted), they saw many
important and
splendid omens whereby they were consoled a
little, in their minds. The
leading
sages
sat
there along with
their mother, eagerly expecting the revival of their father
back
to life.
5 1 .
Meanwhile, due to the power of destiny, O
king,
sage (Bhrgu)
, the
intelligent progenitor
and
sustainer of the
line of Bhrgus, came there by chance.
52.
He was the creator
(i.e. composer)
of
the Atharvan
mantras. He was thoroughly conversant with
the Vedas and the
Veddngas (ancillaries to the Vedas). He knew
the
meanings of
all scriptures. He was highly
intelligent and
respected by the
Asuras.
53.
He knew the
mystic
lore
of MrtasaHjivini1 whereby
1.
Generally
it
is
Sukra,
Uianft
Kavi, who is credited to have the
sole mastery of Safijlvanl Vidyi and
the
treatise
on
politics
Svkra-nUi-sira
is also ascribed to $ukra. Here
Sukra's
father
Bhrgu
is credited with
the
knowledge of both of these.

=== PAGE 259 ===

648
Brahm&n$a Pur&na
he
could resuscitate the Danavas who died on being struck by
the Dcvas. This secret lore was inaccessible to other sages.
54.
It was he who composed the treatise on politics call-
ed after him AuSanasa
or Sukra-niti-sara
which
enabled
kings
to regain their lost kingdom.
Even today
all
the kings follow
it and rely on it.
55.
That
great
sage
arrived
at
the
hermitage. On
entering it he saw them all in
the
same miserable plight over-
whelmed with sorrow.
56.
On seeing Bhrgu, the
original
sire of
their
family,
they joyously stood up, honoured him and offered him the most
excellent seat:
57.
The great sage congratulated
and
blessed them all.
He asked them—“What has happened here
?**
They narrated
everything to him.
58.
On
hearing
it,
Bhrgu who was
conversant
with
Mantras, immediately took some water. Repeating the
mantra
of Sahjivini Vidyd lie sprinkled (Jamadagni’s) body and
chanted
this.
59.
“If the prowess of my performance of sacrifice and
Tapas (penance)
is auspicious,
let this
(sage Jamadagni) come
to life thereby. Let him get up like one who had gone to sleep”.
60.
As soon as
this auspicious statement was
uttered by
Bhrgu of perfectly righteous
activities,
the
son
of Rclka
(i.e.
Jamadagni) got up like another Bfhaspati himself.
61.
On seeing Bhrgu, his own
respectable
grandfather1
standing there, O king, he bowed down to him devoutly. With
palms joined in reverence he said
Jamadagni said
:
62-65.
I am blessed. I have realized the fulfilment of my
duties. My life
is fruitful as I am able to see your feet to which
Suras and
Asuras
offer
obeisance O
holy
lord,
bestower of
honour. What service shall I render unto you ? O holy lord, be
1*
The word Pitdrnaha ‘grandfather*
is
rather
loosely
used
here,
as
Bhrgu is Jamadagni’s grandfather’s
(Aurva’s) grandfather. His genealogy
in
brief,
is as follows:
Bhrgu—Cyavana—Aurva—Rcfka—Jamadagni.
*

=== PAGE 260 ===

2 .3 .30.66-73
649
pleased to sanctify your own family by means of drops of water
from your own feet.”
After saying this, he joyously applied the Arghya brought
by Rama
immediately
to wash his feet.
With
devotion,
the
noble-minded Jamadagni bent
down
his neck
and
sprinkled
that water on his head along with the members of his family.
66-67.
After
honouring
him
duly
he
humbly
asked
Bhrgu
:
“O
holy
lord,
why
the
sin
has
been
committed by
that wicked king—that king to whom
I
extended my
hospi-
tality perfectly well in accordance with the injunctions thinking
that he was a good man? O highly intelligent one, why did the
wicked man did so
?
Vasistha said
:
68.
On being asked thus, O
king,
the
intelligent sage
Bhrgu,
the omniscient holy lord, meditated and thought
for a
long time and explained the reason.
Bhrgu said
:
69.
Listen, O highly fortunate and dear one,
listen to the
cause of this act whereby, O sinless one, he committed an evil
offence towards you, the omniscient one.
70.
He had been cursed
formerly by
Vasistha1
for the
sake
of
his
destruction
as
follows
:
‘‘O
deluded
one, your
power and vigour will be destroyed on account of your
offence
against a Brahmana”.
*
71-73.
Therefore, how can the
sage’s words
be
'other-
wise
?
This Rama
will
attack
that
leading
king
of great
vigour,
forcefully, O
sage of long
powerful
arms. He
has
already vowed
thus—“O
mother,
since,
being overwhelmed
with sorrow, your chest has been struck by you twentyone times
1 .
This
is Apava Vasistha. He is different from Vasistha, the narrator
of the Parasur&ma Legend in this text. He was an ancient sage. Kirttavirya
helped
the fire-god to burn a forest in which the sage Apava Vasistha had
built
his hermitage. When K&rttavirya and the fire-god burnt his hermitage,
he cursed K&rttavirya as a
result
of
which
the
event
of
carrying away
Jamadagni’s cow took place—Mbh .
49,41-47.

=== PAGE 261 ===

650
Brahm&nfa PurUna
in front of me, I shall make
the
earth
rid of K$atriyas twenty-
one times**.
74.
Hence, though he may be warded
off continuously
by you, his father, O bestower of honour, he will surely carry
it
out with
all his might, due to the force of the inevitable future.
75-76.
That king
of great
fortune
had been a devoted
servant of old people. He is of great intelligence having
acquir-
ed his wisdom from
Dattatreya,
a
part
of Lord Visnu. The
noble-souled
king
is a direct devotee of Lord Vi?nu
too. There
will be sin in killing him.
After saying thus, O great king, Bhfgu, the son of Brahma,
the great scholar went back
the way
he
had come (awaiting)
the revolution of time in the future.
CHAPTER TH1RTYONE
Paraturdma advised by Brahma to approach Siva
about Haihaya
Sagara enquired
:
1. O highly fortunate son ofBrahm&, recount unto me the
activities of Paraiurama. What did that highly vigorous sage do,
when he got extremely enraged by the act of the king ?
Vasiftha said
:
2.
After that highly fortunate sage Bhrgu had
departed,
the
infuriated
sage Rama who
was
devoted
to
his
father,
spoke thus, having hevy sighs again and again.
Paraturdma said ;
3.
Alas, see the foolishness of
king Karttavirya who has
strayed to the
evil
path.
Deliberately he
has committed an
attempt to murder a Br&hmapa.
*

=== PAGE 262 ===

2.3.31.4-14
651
4.
I believe that the Fate
is
very powerful, for the em-
bodied
beings
are
deluded by
its
influence and
all of them
thereby commit good and evil actions.
5.
Let all
the
sages
hear
(as witness)
the vow that
is’
taken by me. I shall avenge my father by killing Karttavirya
in
the battle.
6.
Even
if the
king were
to be defended by Indra and
other Devas as well as by Danavas,
I
shall certainly
kill him.
It won’t be otherwise.”
7.
On hearing
the words
thus
spoken
by Rama,
the
noble-souled sage Jamadagni said to his
son who had
spoken
so boldly and daringly.
Jamadagni advised
:
8.
Listen Rama.
I shall
recount
the
eternal
virtue
of
good men. On paying heed to this, all men become virtuous.
9.
Good
persons
of exalted
fortune who are desirous of
ultimate freedom from
the
worldly
existence,
do not become
excessively furious with anyone, although
they
are condemned
and beaten.
10.
Those ascetics of exalted fortune exercise full control
over their sense-organs. To such men of perpetual
good actions
are the worlds of never-ending pleasure.
11.
He who
is
beaten
with sticks and other things and
who is reproached by words by wicked men
does
not become
agitated,
is
glorified
as
a
Sadhu
(i.e.
a
good
and
great
person )
.
12.
He who retaliates by beating a person who beats him
is not a S&dhu. He is a sinner. We are S&dkus and Brdhmanas who
have attained a venerable status, due to forbearance.
13.
A very great sin may
result
if the
king is slain, O
dear one
: Hence, I restrain you
now.
Accord forgiveness and
perform a penance.”
Vasiffha said
:
14.
After understanding fully what had been commanded
thus by his father, O prince,
Rama, the suppressor of enemies,
spoke to his father habitually inclined to forget and forgive.

=== PAGE 263 ===

652
Brahmdn <Ja Purdna
Paraiurama replied
:
15.
O dear father of
great
intellect,
listen now
to my
humble submission. Peace and restraint have been advocated by
you for
iSadhus of noble souls.
16.
That procedure of peace
and
restraint
should
be
directed
towards
good men, men
in
pitiable conditions and
elderly men by
people
who
consider them as godly. But this
restraint cannot be om*
that
yields
happiness when
directed
towards men of evil actions.
17.
Hence, Karttavlrya should be
slain by me. O vener-
able
one,
permit
me.
Let me
fulfil my enmity
(let me take
proper revenge) .**
Jamadagni replied
:
18.
“Listen to my words attentively, O Rama, O highly
fortunate one. You shall act in accordance
with
the inevitable
future. It cannot be otherwise at all.
19.
Go to god Brahma from here. Ask him, O
dear one,
what is conducive to your
welfare
and
what is not. You shall
do what that holy lord says. There
is no doubt in this.”
Vasiflha continued ;
20.
On
being
told
thus,
that highly
intelligent sage
bowed down to his father and went
to
the
world
of Brahma
where ordinary people have no access at all.
21.
He saw the
world
of Brahma made of gold.
It had
the ramparts of gold.
It
was
embellished
with pillars studded
with jewels.
22.
There he saw Brahma of unmeasured prowess,
seat-
ed on a beautiful throne set
with
gems and
jewels.
He
was
adorned with ornaments set with gems and jewels.
23.
He was surrounded by
leading
Siddhas
and
sages
engaged in meditation. He was
gaily and
smilingly watching
the dance of Vidyadhara damsels.
24.
He saw Brahma, the
giver
of benefits
of penance,
the
lord and
creator
of the worlds, meditating on the perfect
Brahman, with perfect mental control.

=== PAGE 264 ===

2.3.31.25-36
653
25.
He was continuously expounding the
secret
yogic
science
to the groups of devotees. On seeing that
unchanging
lord, the leading member of the family of Bhfgu devoutly bowed
down to him.
26.
On seeing Rama with
his
head
bent
down,
he
congratulated and blessed him and enquired
about his happi-
ness—“O dear child, what have you come here for ?”
27.
On being asked by
the
Creator, Rama
recounted
everything from the beginning,
the
interlude
of
Karttavirya
and
his noble-soulcd father.
28.
On
hearing
everything, O
bestower of
honour,
Brahma who had already understood everything,
spoke to
the
highly righteous Rama something that would
ultimately
lead
to happy consequences.
29.
“Difficult
to accomplish
indeed
is
the vow
that
you have
taken
out
of anger. O Brahmacarin, this creation
originates, due to the grace of the Lord.
30.
It was
with very great
stress and
strain that
the
Universe was created by me at His
behest. The vow that you
have taken is destructive of the same.
31.
You wish to make the Earth rid of kings twentyone
times on account of the fault of a singleking, as
well
as
the
discomfiture of your father.
32.
The eternal
creation along
with
the
Brahmanas
Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and
Sudras
has
come out of Hari and
merged into him again and again.
33-36.
Your vow will be non-futile on account
of
this
early
law of
the Universe* Or
if
you
think
that you are
to achieve your object with your own endeavour, go
to Siva’s
world and take
the permission of Siva. On
the
Earth
there
are many kings who are the followers of Sankara. Without the
permission of the great god who
is
powerful
enough
to
kill
them as they wear the coat of Mail, have Saklis
(divine jave-
lins)
inaccessible
to
others.
Strive
to
attain
the
seed of
victory conducive
to
happiness.
If
the
right means is to be
used all endeavours become successful.
Possibly the idea seems
to
be this
; — there can
be annihilation
of
all the subjects twentyone times in twentyone Yugas.

=== PAGE 265 ===

654
BrahmArttfa Purdna
37.
O
dear
boy,
take
from
your
preceptor Hara,
a
Kavoca1 (coat of mail)
having
the
Mantra of Srlkrsna. The
splendour of Vi snu is
difficult
to
be
transgressed
but Siva’s
power will conquer it.
38.
The Kavaca named Trailokya-Vijaya
(conquest of
the
three worlds) is extremely miraculous and wonderful. By pleading
and entreating to Sankara somehow try to
get
this
{Kavaca)
which
is difficult to be obtained.
39.
Delighted by your good qualities,
the compassion-
ate
lord
who endears himself to those who are in a wretched
condition, will definitely give even the divine Pasupata missile
without any doubt.
CHAPTER THIRTYTWO
ParaSurama s Penance
:
Paraiurama Receives Missiles from $iva
Vasiffha said
:
1.
On hearing the words
of Brahma,
Rama
became
much
delighted
in
his
mind.
After
bowing down
to the
preceptor of the Universe, he went to Siva’s region.
2.
It was a hundred thousand Yojanas
(1
Yojana— 12
km) above the world of Brahma. It
was
different from
it.
It
was difficult to explain
or
describe
it
clearly.
It
could
be
approached only by Togins and was greater than the greatest.
3.
Vaikunfha was to the right of it
and
the
world
of
Gauri was to the left. The world
of Dhruva was beneath
it.
It was higher than all the worlds.
1.
Mantra
though
derived
from
y/man
by Nirukta.
(vii. 12) later
on came
to
be
traced
in
Tantra works to two roots —man—'to think* or
'meditate* and —trot—'to protect*. Thus mantra
is
that
formula
of
letters
which
on
being
meditated upon protects
( Vide PrapaHca-sdra and Kuldrvaoa
Tantras( 17.54)
. Kaoaca
is a variety of mantra which was believed to work as
a coat of mail to the reciter* Here infra II.iii.33.3-4 the Ktfva
mantra
of
10
syllables,
viz. :
Gopi-jana-oallabhdya
sudhd
is
given. While the Kaoaca called
Tratlofpa-oijqya, also based on
i» stated in w. 0-27 there.

=== PAGE 266 ===

2.3.32.4-14
655
4.
Rama who could go there due
to the
power
of his
penance, saw the world of Siva which was unparalleled and
which
was
full
of many
things
generating
curiosity
and
wonder.
5.
Leading Yogins, Siddhas, auspicious and holy Pasu-
patas (Devotees ofPasupati i.e. Siva)
etc.
live
there. So
also
people of quietude, devoid of enmity and having the meritori-
ous benefits of austerities of ten million Kalpas.
6.
It was rendered splendid by p&rijata and other
divine
trees as well as wish-yielding cows, the K&madhenus. It had been
created by Sankara, the Yogin, by means of his
yogic
power,
out of his own will.
7-8.
It was so wonderful
that
it
had never been
seen
even in his dream by Visvakarman,
the preceptor of all artisans
and craftsmen. It was rendered splendid by hundreds of divine
lakes beautified by rubies.
It was very beautiful,
being
equip-
ped with altars studded with gems and surrounded by golden
rampart wails.
9.
It was very lofty touching even
the
sky.
It was
as
white
and
clean
as
milk.
It
had
four
gateways.
It was
rendered splendid by gem-set altars and daises.
10.
It was
endowed
with gemset *
(lit. red)
flights of
stairs, and gemset pillars and doors having different wonderful
paintings. It was beautified by various fascinating
articles and
fittings.
1
1
.
There was a beautiful abode in the middle, rendered
splendid by the principal gateway. Rama of virtuous soul saw
it. He appeared to have come across something very wonderful.
12-14.
He saw two gatekeepers of terrifying forms there.
Their teeth and mouths
(or faces) were
very
frightful. Their
eyes were deformed and
reddish
in
colour. They
resembled
mountains that had been burnt (and
hence black)
. They had
great strength and exploit. They had bedecked themselves with
holy ashes. Their garments were the hides of tiger. They held
Triidlas
(tridents) and Pa[(ifas (spears with sharp edges)
. They
*rakta
is probably a misprint for raina-

=== PAGE 267 ===

656
Brahman4a Purana
were
brilliant with
Brahminical splendour.
Ore
seeing them
he felt a bit afraid in his mind. He spoke thus humbly
15.
“I bow down to you two, O
Lords.
I
have
come
here
to
see
lord Sankara.
It
behoves vou
to let me in after
4
obtaining the permission of the Lord.”
16.
On hearing his words,
those
two
followers
of the
lord went
in and
got
permission
of
Siva. Then
they gave
him permission to go within.
17-18.
On getting their permission, he joyously
entered
the harem. The Brahmana saw a
beautiful assembly hall filled
with groups of Siddhas. On seeing this hall of the
lord
filled
with many fragrant
scents,
he was surprised
and
awestruck.
There
he
saw
Siva,
the
quiescent moon-crested
lord
with
three
eyes.
19.
His hand appeared rendered splendid by a
trident.
He had excellent garment of tiger’s skin. His limbs were smeared
with holy ashes and made beautiful. A serpent served
the pur-
pose of sacred thread.
20.
He was delighted in Ilis own self. All his desires had
been perfectly realized. He had a lustre equivalent
to that
of
ten million suns. He had five heads and ten arms. His
person
was ever eager to bless the devotees.
21.
He
was
expounding
true
knowledge
and
yogic
principles
to
the Siddhas by
means of the Tarka-Mudrd
(i.e.
esoteric gesture by means of fingers to indicate arguments)
. He
was joyously being eulogised by leading Yogins and Pramathas.
22.
He was encircled by Bhairavas, Yogins as
well
as
Rudras.
On
seeing
Him,
Rama
bent down
his
head
(in
reverence) with very great joy.
23-24. On seeing Karttikeya to His
left, Ganesvara (i.e.
Ganapati) to the right, NandHvara, Mahakala and
Virabha-
dra
in front of him and the hundred-armed Durga on his lap,
he bowed down to
| her
too.
Thereafter,
the
scholarly
sage
began to eulogise the lord in faltering convulsive speech (over-
whelmed with emotions)
:
25.
“I bow down
to
Lord
Siva,
Isana,
the eternal
( imperishable)
all-pervasive lord, lord Ugra with serpents
for

=== PAGE 268 ===

2.3.32.26-32
657
his ornaments,
the
lord
dazzling with the garland of human
skulls.
26.
I know you as that
lord
of
all
the
worlds,
who
creates,
sustains and
annihilates
the
worlds,
who
assumes
the
forms
of Brahma and others, who
is the eldest of all and
who
is an ocean of mercy.
27.
I bow down to that lord who
is beyond ,the pale of
speech and mind; whom even the Vedas
are
not
competent
to eulogise; who cannot be
realized
through
knowledge and
intellect and who has neither form nc* shape.
28.
I
bow
down
to
that
lord who is greater than the
greatest
and whom
Indra
and
other Devas,
the
sages, the
Manus and the Asuras do not understand in reality.
29.
I bow down
to
that lord who is identical with the
Universe, by whose minutest part all the worlds
consisting
of
the mobile and immobile beings are created, and
in whom
all
of them get merged once again.
30.
I bow down to Kara that
great
lord
from whose
slightest anger
bursts forth that
fire which burns down every-
thing
including
the upper
worlds
as
well
as
the Nether
worlds.
31.
The
following
eight
Murtis1
(forms of Siva) are
worthy of being worshipped by the entire world viz. the Earth,
wind,
fire,
water,
ether,
Yajvan
(sacrificial
priest), moon
and sun. I bow down to that
Yajna
( the
lord
identical w'ith
Yajfia)
.
32.
I seek refuge in that lord who has the form of Kdla
(Time, god of death), who
is
the
primordial
creator of
the
Universe
in
the
form
of Kdla ; who
is the protector (of the
Universe) by assuming a separate form and by being identical
with the universe, and who in the end annihilates
everything
by assuming the physical
form of Rudra.”
1 .
These eight forms of Siva are comprised of ( 1 ) the elements
(bhGtas)
constituting physical man,
( 2 ) Pr&pa and Apana symbolized by the sun and
the
moon.
These
constitute
the
vital
man,
( 3 ) Mind or monos called by
various
names
like
Hot?,
Yajvan
(Yajam&na),
Dik?ita
etc.
Kalidasa
in
Sakuntald
1.1
pays
obeisance
to
this
eight-formed Siva. These are called
-eight Vasus in Vedic
literature as
they make
all
creatures
manifest
in
•concrete form(&i. Br. 11.6.3.6).

=== PAGE 269 ===

658
Brahm&ntfa Purdna
33.
After
saying
this,
sage
Bhargava joyously and
enthusiastically fell down near his
(Siva’s)
feet.
The
ocean of
mercy (the lord) sportingly lifted him up with his left hand and
placed his right hand on his head.
34.
He
eagerly
congratulated and
blessed
him.
He
placed him in front of Ganesa. With his eyes wet with compas-
sion, the lord who fulfils the desires of everyone, glanced at his
wife Uma and spoke.
Siva said
:
35.
“O boy, who are you? In
whose
family
were
you
bom ? What
is
the
purpose for which you have come here ?
Tell us about
it. Delighted by your devotional attitude,
I
shall
grant whatever you have in your mind.”
36.
On
being told thus eagerly by the able-souled Hara,
the dispeller of the distress of the whole Universe,
(the scion of
the family of) Bhrgu, once again bowed down to the lord of the
Devas,
the preceptor,
the ocean of mercy
and
spoke
imme-
diately.
ParaSurdma said
:
37.
O
lord,
I am born
as the son of Jamadagni in the
family of Bhrgu. My name is Rama. I
seek refuge in you, who
are worthy of being honoured by the whole universe.
38.
O lord of the Universe,
fulfil my
cherished desire
for the work of which
I have come to your presence, O lord.
39.
Jamadagni, my father, O lord, accorded hospitable
reception
to
king
Karttavirya who had been on a hunting
expedition.
40.
Out of greed that silly and foolish king struck
that
sage down
by using force. On seeing him killed, the cow went
away to the
world of cows.
41.
Without
feeling any
remorse
for the death of my
innocent father the king returned to his
city.
Afterwards, my
mother lamented very
bitterly.
42.
On coming
to know
of
it,
our
great-grandfather
Bhrgu who is aware of the events of the world, came
there, O
great lord. Indeed I too came back from th^ forest.

=== PAGE 270 ===

2.3.32.43-54
659
43.
After consoling the extremely distressed brothers of
mine along with me and my mother,
that
sage who
is
con-
versant with Mantras resuscitated my father back to life.
44.
Before
the
arrival
of Bhrgu,
I
had been highly
infuriated by the grief of my mother. Consoling my mother, O
lord, I had taken a vow.
45.
Since her chest had been
beaten
twentyone
times
by my mother,
I
will
rid
the
earth
of
Ksatriyas as many
times.
46. This is the vow. Lord of the Universe, Mahadeva will
fulfil it. Hence, O lord, I have come to your presence.
Vasiffha said
:
47.
On hearing these words of his and glancing
at
the
face ofDurga, Hara remained absorbed in thought for a moment
with his face bent down.
48.
In the meantime surprised as she was, DurgS, laughed
a lot, O great king and said to
Bhargava who
was
bent
on
wreaking revenge.
49.
‘‘O ascetic, O son of a Brahmana, out of anger you
wish to make this Earth devoid of kings twentyone times. Great
indeed is your daring rashness, O boy.
50.
Without any weapon you wish to
kill
Arjuna,
the
king
with
a
thousand
arms, by whom even Ravana was con-
temptuously discomfited by a sportive knitting of his eyebrows.
51.
To him the coat of mail of Lord
Visnu
had
been
given as also the Sakti
(Divine
javelin)
of
excessive
poten-
tiality. How do you aspire to kill him?.
52.
Lord Sankara, the ocean of mercy is
competent
to
make it otherwise. None other than Sankara,
dear
son,
can
carry out a noble deed.”
53.
Thereupon, after obtaining the consent of the
god-
dess (by the previous hint) Lord Sambhu, the ocean of mercy
addressed these gentle words to the son ofJamadagni.
Siva said
:
54.
From today onwards O Br&hmana, you shall be like
Skanda to me. O highly intelligent one, I shall give
you
the
divine coat of mail and teach you the mantra thereof.

=== PAGE 271 ===

660
Brahmdnffa Purdna
55.
Due to its favour, you will
sportingly
kill
Kartta-
virya and make the earth devoid of kings, twentyone times.”
56-6 1
.
After saying this, Sankara taught him the Mantra
(esoteric formula)
that is extremely difficult
to obtain and the
following weapons
etc.
viz.—extremely
miraculous
coat
of
mail named Trailokyavijaya
, the NdgapdSa
(Serpentine
noose),
(missiles
like)
the
Pasupata,
the
Brahmastra which
is very
much inaccessible, Narayanastra, the Agneya (Arrow with the
firegod as deity)
, the Vayavya (of the wind god)
,
the Varuna
(of
Varuna
the
ocean-god),
the
Gandharva,
the
Gambia,
the extremely wonderful weapon Jrmbhanastra, the
mace, the
Sakti, the Paraiu (Axe)
the
trident and
the
excellent
Dan$a
(baton).
On receiving all these weapons Rama became delighted.
After bowing down to the quiescent Siva, Durga,
Skanda and
Gancsvara and circumambulating
them Rama
went
to
the
excellent holy centre Puskara. 1 After mastering the
technique
of the Mantra conferred
by
Siva and
Kavaca
(the
excellent
coat of mail, )
the scion of
the
family
of Bhrgu
fulfilled
his
task. After killing Karttavirya along with
his
army
and
the
entire family he
returned.
The leading member of the
family
of Bhrgu went to the abode of his father.
CHAPTER THIRTYTHREE
Protective Mantrafor World Conquest *
Sagara requested
:
1.
Everything glorified by you, O holy lord, O excellent
sage has been heard.
Recount to me
the Kavaca
(Protective
Mantra)
which
grants
the
conquest
of
the
three worlds,
everywhere.
1 .
A holy place six miles from Ajmer
( Rajasthan)
.
There
are
three
Kun^as called Jyestha, Madhyama and Kanistha. The Sarasvatl is
credited
to
have
filled
these Kundas' for
her
father Brahmadeva vide infra ch. 35.
38-44.
•This chapter
as
well
as
the
next
is an
obvious
interpolation
as
Parafor&ma as an Apatdra
of VifQu
preceded R&ma and Kr?pa came after
R&ma.
49

=== PAGE 272 ===

2.3.33.2-11
661
Vasi$(ha said
:
2.
Listen, O dcarcne,
I shall
recount
to
you
the
ex-
tremely
miraculous Kavaca.
I shall teach you the Mantra
also
that bestows
spiritual
attainment
and which
always brings
happiness
to those who aspire
to achieve
it and
practise
it.
3.
At the end of the word Gopijana one
shall
utter
the
word Vallabhdya. Ending with Svdhd, this
great Mantra
(viz.
Gopijana-Vallabhaya Svdhd meaning
‘Svaha unto
the
lover
of
cowherdess folks’ ) of ten syllables
is
the bestower of worldly
pleasure as well as salvation.
4.
The sage of this Mantra is Sadasiva. Paiikti
is
cited
as the metre with ten syllables in
a
quarter)
Krsna
is
men-
tioned as the deity. Its
utilization
is
for
the achievement
of
everything.
5-6.
The sage
of
the Kavaca
named.
Trailokyavijqya is
Prajapati. The metre is Jagati (a metre with twelve
syllables)
.
The deity
is Rajesvara himself.
It is proclaimed that its
utiliza-
tion
is in
the attainment
of the conquest of the three worlds.
Let
the
Pranava
(i.e.
Orhkara)
protect my head. 1 Obeisance
to Srikrsna always.
7-8.
Let
him
ever
protect
my
forehead.
Svdha
unto
Kr^na. O Ki sna, let this
protect
my
eyes.
Let
(the Mantra)
Kfsnaya svdhd
(protcet)
the
pupil
of
the
eye
eHaraye namah'
(Obeisance to Hari), let this ever protect my brow.
Orh Govin -
ddya Svdhd , let this always protect my nose.
r
9.
‘Obeisance to Gopala;
let this Mantra always protect
my cheek. ‘Klim, obeisance to Krsna’.
Let
the
wish-yielding
Kalpa-tree protect my ears.
10.
‘Srim, obeisance to Krsna’, let this
always
protect
the pair ofmy lips. Om Svaha unto Goplfa,
let this protect the
row of my teeth.
11.
Let this Mantra of
three
syllables
viz.
‘Srikrsna’
1 .
VV.6-2 1
are
technically known
as NySsa.
In
this,
the devotee
mentally assigns various parts of his body to
deities
(here various
forms
or
aspects of Lord Ktfpa)
.

=== PAGE 273 ===

662
Brahmdn<fa Purina
always protect the cavity within
the row
of my
Jeeth*
(Let
the Mantra)
*Svdhd unto Srikr$na * protect my tongue always.
12.
‘ Svdhd
unto Rdmefvara
(prob.
Rdsefvara) .*
Let this
always protect my palate.
‘ Svdhd unto
Rddhikd's
lord\ Let
this
always protect my neck
(throat)
.
13.
6 Obeisance to the
lord of thegroup of cowherdesses’. Let
this always protect my neck. ‘0m Svdhd unto the lord of
the
cow-
herds',
let this always protect my shoulders.
14.
‘ Obeisance to the Lord in
the
guise of
a
boy ;
Svdhd
(to
Him),
(let
this Mantra)
protect my
back.
* Obeisance
to
MukundcC
;
let this Mantra always protect my belly.
15.
'Hrim Srim Klim, Svdhd
unto
Kr$na ;
let
this
always
protect my hands, ‘Om
obeisance
and
Svdhd unto Vi$nu\
let this
protect the pair ofmy arms.
16.
‘0m Hrim, Svdhd unto the
Lord
;
let
this protect
the
row ofmy nails.
‘ Obeisance
to
Narayana'
;
let
this
protect
the
cavity beneath the nails of mine.
17.
'Orh Hrim Srim obeisance unto
Padma-nabha; let
this
protect always my navel. 'Om Svdhd unto the lord of all',
let
this
always protect my hairs.
18.
‘ Obeisance
to Kr$na , Svdhd
{ unto him)
9
,
let
this
even
protect the Brahmarandhra
( the aperture on the crown
of
the
head, the outlet for the soul at the time
of
death).
‘ Orh Svdhd
unto Madhava\ let this always protect my forehead.
19.
‘0m Hrim Srim obeisance to the
lord of Rasikas*
(those
who appreciate beauty and enjoy
pleasure)’,
let
this
always
protect my waist.
* Obeisance to the lord of cowherdess-folk
9
. Let this
always protect my thighs.
20.
'Orh, obeisance to the destroyer of the Daityas, Svdhd {unto
Him)
*
let this (Mantra)
protect my
knees. Let
the
Mantra
'Unto the son of YaSodd ending with Namah
{obeisance)
protect my
calfmuscles.’
21.
Let (the Mantra) ending with
‘ Svdhd unto the
person
who
is fond of beginning the Rasa dance ’ protect my modesty and
bashfulness. Let (the Mantra), 'Svdhd unto
the
lover
of
Vrndd
*
protect my limbs.
22.
Let Kr$na wholeheartedly protect me always in the

=== PAGE 274 ===

2.3.33.23-32
663
East. Let the lord of Goloka (the world of the
cows)
himself
protect me in the South-East quarter.
23.
Let (the lord)
in
the
form
of
perfect
Brahman
protect me in
the
South-West.
Let
Hari protect me
in the
West.
24.
Let Govinda protect me
in
the
North-West.
Let
Rasikesvara
(Lord
of those
who
enjoy
aesthetic
pleasure)
protect me
in the North. Let the lord who
sports
about
in
the forest ofVrndavana protect me always in the North-East.
25.
Let the intimate beloved of Vrnda protect me always
from above. Let the extremely powerful destroyer of Bali protect
me always from below.
26.
Let Nrsimha (Man-lion) protect me always in water,
ground and the atmosphere. Let Madhava himself protect me
during sleeping and waking hours.
27-28.
The immanent soul of everyone
is
unattached
let that lord protect me from all sides.” 1
Thus, O king, the Kavaca named Trailokyavijaya ofthe great
lord has been recounted to you. It destroys all
sins.
This
has
been heard by me directly from Siva.
It
should
not
be men-
tioned
to any ordinary person.
29.
He who,
after
duly
worshipping
the
preceptor,
wears the Kavaca
(i.e.
this amulet) round
his neck
or on
the
right arm, is undoubtedly Visnu himself.
30-32.
Wherever
the
aspirant
devotee of
the
Kavata
lives, goddess of speeeh and goddess of fortune
too stay there.
If a man attains
this perfect Kavaca he
is undoubtedly a Jivan-
mukta (a soul liberated while alive). Surely he
shall obtain the
benefit of worship performed for ten million years.
Thousands of Rajasuya sacrifices, hundreds of Vajapeyas,
all types of great charitable gifts and the circumambulation of
the entire Earth do not deserve
even a
sixteenth part of this
Trailokya-vijaya .
1.
Just as various parts of the body are protected by assigning them to
different forms of the deity, the devotee is protected by Kavaca-mantra on all
directions and at all times and places. This appeal for protection
is stated in
vv.22-28.

=== PAGE 275 ===

664
Brahmdntfa Purana
33.
Holy rites,
fasts and
other
religious observances,
the self-study of the Vedas, the repetition of the Vedic Mantras
and the holy dip in all pilgrim centres and
sacred
rivers do
not deserve even a fraction of this
{Kavaca )
.
34.
If a person attains the
Kavaca
perfectly,
he
shall
certainly attain everything viz.
the
status
of
a
Siddha,
im-
mortality and the status of an attendant of Srihari.
0
35.
He who reapeats the Mantra a
million
times
shall
achieve the mastery of the
Kavaca .
If one
has achieved
the
mastery of the Kavaca he shall certainly be victorious.
36.
A kingdom may
be given away, even head may be
dispensed with, the very vital airs may be given over, O King.
But, O dear one, this Kavaca should not be given away even
in
an emergency.
37.
Understand this, O Sun of the family, that
this
has
been revealed to you for the purpose of protecting all these (?)
and also because you have
carried
out my
behest.
Be
an
Emperor by wearing this Kavaca .
CHAPTERTHIRTYFOUR
The Story ofan antelope and his beloved
: A Hymn
eulogising Krpna
Sagara said
:
1.
“O
highly
fortunate
son’ of
Brahma,
great
is the
favour done to me because this Kavaca, devoid ofany deficiency,
has been revealed to me.
2.
I have been blessed by Aurva because
it was through
his favour that I learnt how to discharge missiles. Now, O holy
lord, I have become the object of your grace.
3.
O preceptor, recount to me in detail how the heroic
king Karttavirya was slain by Rama, the leading member of
the family of Bhfgu.

=== PAGE 276 ===

2.3.34.4-16
665
4.
That king enjoyed the favour of Datta and Rama that
of Siva. How did these two heroes come together in the
battle,
O preceptor?
Vasiffha said
;
5.
“Listen O king,
I shall recount to you
the
story
of
king
KArttavIrya
and
the
noble-soulcd Rama— the story that
dispells sins.
6.
After receiving the Kavaca and the
Mantra
directly
from the preceptor, Rama began to practise the same with great
devotion.
7.
Rama stayed at Puskara for a hundred years regular-
ly sleeping down on
the bare ground,
devoted to the
perform-
ance
of the Sandhya prayers and bath three times
a day, and
never remaining languid.
8.
Everyday, O
king,
Akrtavrana,
brought
materials
of worship such as
sacrificial
twigs,
flowers,
Kusa
grass
etc.
from the
forest and gave them to Rama,
the member
of
the
family of Bhrgu.
9.
Rama, the most excellent one among intelligent per-
sons,
was
continuously
absorbed
in
meditation.
He
thus
propitiated lord Kisna the destroyer of sins.
10.
As he
continued
his
worship
and
his
perpetual
meditation, O king, a hundred years elapsed.
11.
Once, O great
king, Rama the
great sage went to
the
middle
Puskara
for
taking
bath.
There
he saw an
excellent miracle!
12.
A stag came there running accompanied by a
hind.
He was being chased by a hunter. He was extremely
afflicted
and distressed by the heat.
13.
He was thirsty, O highly
fortunate
one,
and
was
eager to drink water. Even as Rama was watching, he came to
the bank of the lake.
14.
The hind came afterwards. She was
frightened and
her
eyes were
tremuious due to
fright.
Both of them drank
water with auspicious minds.
15-16.
By that time, the hunter also came there holding
up the bow and having an arrow in his hand. On seeing Rama,

=== PAGE 277 ===

666
Brakmdntfa Purdna
4
the delighter of the members of Bhrgu’s family remaining there
along with Akrtavrana, he stood there with his
eyes
fixed
far
off. Afraid of the scion of the family of Bhrgu, he then thought
thus.
17.
“This Rama is a great
warrior. He
is
capable
of
destroying wicked persons. How can I kill the stag and the hind
hunted by me, when he is within sight.”
18.
Occupied wi th this
thought, O
excellent
king,
he
remained
there
itself frightened
in
his mind on account of
Rama.
19-22.
On
seeing
the
pair of deer drinking water as
though terribly frightened, the intelligent Rama began
to con-
jecture. “What is the cause of fear here ? There is no roar of a
tiger here, nor is the hunter in sight. What is the reason where-
by these two are anxious and afraid and
have tremulous
eyes
due to fright.
Or the very species of deer has by nature tremulous
eyes
due to fright. Therefore, these two even
while drinking
water
look around with roving frightened eyes.
There
is no reason here sufficient enough
to make them
agitated, but they are trembling with fear and sorrow
because
all their limbs are exhausted and
fatigued and
they
appear
shaking and
trembling.”
23.
On thinking thus, Rama the intelligent sage
stood
in
the
middle
Puskara
lake
accompanied
by
his
disciple,
while they too continued to stand there.
24.
After drinking water they resorted to the shade of a
tree. Even as they continued to look at the noble-souled Rama,
they carried on their joyous dialogue.
The hind said
:
25.
‘‘Darling, we shall continue to stay here as long
as
Rama stays here. In the presence of this heroic warrior, we need
not have any fear.
26.
Even if the hunter were to come here and
strike
at
us, he will be reduced to ashes on being merely glanced
at
by
.
the sage.”

=== PAGE 278 ===

2.3.34.27-40
667
27.
When
these words
were
uttered by the hind who
was pleased to see Rama, the stag too
was delighted. He said
to his beloved.
28.
“O highly fortunate and graceful ‘lady,
what you
say
is true.
I too know the potentiality of the extremely noble-
souled Rama.
29.
That disciple Akrtavrana who
is
seen
at
his
side
has been fortunate enough to be protected
from
tlie
clutches
of a tiger by this Rama. He
had
been
greatly agitated
due
to the terrorising tiger.
30-31.
This Rama, O
highly
fortunate
lady,
is
the
youngest son ofJamadagni. On seeing his
father insulted
by
Karttavirya, he had become infuriated. He took then the
vow
of exterminating kings. In order to get it fulfilled, he had
for-
merly gone to the world of Brahma.
32.
Brahma had commanded him, “Go to the region of
Siva.” On
receiving
his
behest,
this
sage
went
to the pre-
sence of Siva.
33-34.
He recounted to him all the
incidents
concern-
ing the king and his
father.
Mahadeva,
the
merciful
lord,
honoured the scion of the family
of Bhrgu and
gave
him
the
excellent Mantra and ihe
unbreakable
Kavaca
of Krsna,
his
•
•
*
own pa£upata missile
as well
as other sets of missiles too.
35.
He joyously bade farewell to him,
after
giving
the
weapons eagerly and with due regard. O gentle
lady,
he
has
come here eager to practise the Mantra.
36-37.
This
righteous
sage
of good
intellect
repeats
(the Mantra of) Krona’s
Kavaca
everyday.
Thus, this
noble-
souled sage has spent a hundred years
practising
the Mantra.
But, O gentle lady,
it has not been fully mastered. There is one
adequate reason in his matter.
The quality of Bhakti (Love of God)
is considered
to be
threefold
:
38-40a.
The three types of devotion are
(1 ) Uttamd (the
highest) (2) MadhyamU (the middle one) and (3) Kaniffhd (the
lowest). O lady of tremulous eyes.
The devotion of the following
persons
is of
the
highest
type viz. Siva, Narada, noble-souled Suka,
saintly king Amba-

=== PAGE 279 ===

668
Brahmdn<ja Purdna
risa, Rantideva, Maruti (i.e. Hanuman)
, Bali, Vibhisana, noble-
soulcd
Prahlada,
Gopis
(i.e.
cowherdcsses
of
Vrndavana)
and Uddhava.
40b-42a.
The devotion of the middle
type, O
lady of
splendid eyes, is that of the leading sages such as Vasistha and
others, as well as Manu and
others.
In regard
to other people, it is of the lowest type.
Rama has only this middle type of devotion, though
he
is always devoted to the control of
all sense-organs and
wor-
ships the
lord of
cowherdcsses.
Hence,
he has
not
realized
the Mantra.”
Vasistha said
:
42b-43.
“On being told thus, that hind
who
had
been
delighted
in her mind, immediately asked her husband about
the characteristics of devotion that yields love.
The hind said
:
“Well done, my darling, O
highly
fortunate
husband,
your words are divine. How did you get such perfect knowledge
as this. Tell me that now.”
The slag said
:
44-46.
“Listen, O my beloved of high
fortune. Perfect
knowledge
is
caused
by
meritorious deeds.
That
merit has.
accrued to me today, due to the
vision of Bhargava.
This scion of the family of Bhrgu
is a
meritorious
soul.
He
is a devotee of Krsna. He has conquered the sense-organs.
He always serves his preceptor. He has enthusiastic
eagerness,
in the performance of the holy rites—-Mitya (daily) and Naimit-
tika (occasional)
. Hence, on seeing him today, 'O lady of brilli-
ance I have attained perfect knowledge.
47-48.
This
knowledge
indicates
the
auspicious
and
inauspicious
aspects
of
all the living
beings
existing
in the
three worlds. The story of noblesouled Rama became known to
me only today. It yields merits unto
those who
listen.
It dis-
pels their sins. Whatever Rama
is
going to do is also known
to me.
*

=== PAGE 280 ===

2.3.34.49—35.3
669
4 9.
Even in millions and millions of years,
the
Kavaca
will not be realized along with its Mantra without
the
Uttama
(highest)
type of devotion that has been mentioned by me.
50-51.
If this scion of the
family
of
Bhrgu, O
gentle
lady, gets the blessings of Agastya, he can understand the Stotra
{Prayer) named Kr$na-Premamrta which accords excellent
devo-
tion. After understanding
it, he will attain the spiritual result of
the Mantra and the Kavaca . That sage has
already understood
the real
inner meaning.
He
is merciful and accords freedom
from fear. He will surely
instruct
him
in
the
knowledge
of
reality that yields joy.
52-55.
Through the
prayer named
Kr$napremdmrta
in
which the whole life-story of Srikrsna
is
told
through names
and which he will learn from this sage
(i.e. Agastya) of great
intellect,
Rama
can
realize
the Kavaca and Mantra .
Having
realized
it, he will kill the ruler ofHaihaya along with his sons,
ministers, friends, armies and vehicles. O beloved, he will make
the earth devoid of kings twenty-one times.”
Vasiffha said
:
After saying this, O king, to the hind the
stag
stopped.
Then he
knew
the
reasons
for
his
own
status of being a
stag.
CHAPTER THIRTYFIVE
Parahirdma
visits Agastya's Hermitage
Sagara said
:
1-3. O sage, the knower of the great reality,
expert
in
the matters concerning meditation
and
spiritual
knowledge,
minds engrossed
in
devotion
to
the
lord
have been blessed
by you, because you narrate good stories, O
highly
fortunate
one. Recount to me in
detail what
the hind asked
her
lord
after hearing directly from the stag Bhargava’s entire activities

=== PAGE 281 ===

670
Brahmdntfa Purfata
in
the
past,
present and
future
along
with
the
story
of
Narayana.
Vasiffha said
:
4.
Listen, O king,
I shall narrate the great story of
the
stag. The knower of the real principle that he was, he explained
to her everything asked by her.
5.
After hearing the story of the noble-souled
scion
of
the family of Bhrgu, she, out of reverence, asked
her husband
once again, matters and principles of perfect knowledge.
The hind said
:
6.
uVery very excellent, O
highly
fortunate
one.
Un-
doubtedly you have realized your desires because by seeing him
(i.e.
Bhargava)
you
have
acquired
perfect
supra-sensuous
knowledge.
7.
Therefore, tell me everything concerning yourself and
me. O
lord,
tell me
the
reason,
the invisible result of our
actions whereby we have been born
in
the
species
of lower
animals.”
8.
On
hearing
this
speech
of
his
beloved, that stag
himself
narrated
in
detail
the
life
story of
the hind and
himself.
The stag said
:
9.
“O my beloved of great fortune, hear how we attain-
ed the status of a deer. In this world, O highly fortunate one,
it is our innate
disposition
that is the
cause
of
our
worldly
existence.
10-11.
It
is the cause of the worldly existence
of a Jiva
(living being) and that comes into the path of Remembrance
due to the activities whether good or bad (done in the previous
birth)
. Formerly, in the land of the Dravidas, in
a
family of
Brahmana
endowed
with different kinds of luxurious
assets,
I was born. They belonged to the Gotra (spiritual
lineage) of
Kausika. My father was &ivadatta by name. He was an expert
in all sacred lores.
*>

=== PAGE 282 ===

2.3.35.12-21
671
12-1 3a.
Four of
us
were born
as
his
sons. We were
excellent Brahmanas. The eldest was Rama, his younger brother
was Dharma and his younger brother was Prthu.
I was born as the fourth son,
darling.
I was well known
as
Suri.
13b-14a.
Sivadatta of great fame, performed
the sacred
thread ceremony of all
in due
order.
He taught us
all
the
Vedas
along
with
their
ancillary
subjects
and
esoteric
doctrines.
14b- 15a.
All the four of us were eagerly devoted to the
study of the Vedas. We were
absorbed
in
the
service
of the
preceptor. We were enthusiastic in acquiring knowledge.
15b-16a.
Every day it was our duty to go
to
the
forest
and
fetch
fruits, water, sacrificial twigs, Kusa grass and clay.
After fetching them, »we handed them to
our
father and
then
started our study of the Vedas.
16b- 17a.
Once,
all
of us
came
to a mountain named
Audbhida, in the forest.
It was situated on the banks
of
the
river Krtamala, O lady of tremulous eyes.
17b- 18a.
Early in
the morning, we all took our bath in
the
great
river.
With
delighted minds, we
offered
water
libations,
performed
Japas
(chanting
of
holy names)
and
climbed the excellent mountain.
18b-20.
It was full of these trees
:
viz.
Salas
(i.e.
the
Sal tree)
, Tamalas {Xanlhocymus
epictorius),
Priyakas
(Chironjia
sapida) 9 Panasas (the jack
fruit
tree),
Kovidarakas
(Baukinia
variegata)
, Saralas (pine
trees)
Arjunas
(terminalia
elatagabra)
,
Pugas (Areca palms), Kiiarjuras (Date Palm
trees), Narikela-
kas (Coconut trees)
, Jambus (Rose apple), SahakSras (A kind
of mango trees ) , Katphalas * Brhati trees (a medicinal tree) and
many other trees of various kinds, trees that gave everything to
others, that had cool shades and that echoed with the chirping
sounds of different kinds of jovial birds.
21.
The mountain was frequently resorted
to by
tigers,
lions, bears, rhinoceroses, musk-deer, very
big
elephants,
the
*
*
*
* Name
of
a
tree
with
aromatic
bark
and
medicinal
seeds MW
p.
244 called ‘kSyphal* in Marathi.

=== PAGE 283 ===

672
Brahmdn$a Purana
fabulous
eight-footed
animals, Sarabha and others lurking in
their dens.
22.
It had many flowering plants such as Mallikd
(jas-
mine), Pdfaid (the trumpet flower), Kundo. (another
variety
of
jasmine), Karnikaras, Kadambakas (Nauclea cadamba) and other
flowers—all sweet-scented having their pollen-powder scattered
everywhere by the wind.
23.
The mountain appeared to be scraping
the
sky out
of curiosity, by means of its peaks, blue, yellow, white
and red
in colour, on account of the various gems and jewels scattered
there.
24.
It was as
it were roaring
with
the
loud
rumbling
sounds of its
springs arrd rivulets which, coming out
of
their
hollow
crevices,
fell down from very
great
heights.
It
was
infested with various animals such as
tiger etc.
25.
There, our eyes were
attracted
by diverse
curious
scenes and we the brothers did
not remember
even ourselves.
We
got separated from one
another.
26.
In the meantime, O
darling, a
thirsty hind
came
there,
desirous
of drinking
water
at the top of
the water-
fall.
27.
Even
as she
was
drinking
water,
an
extremely
terrible tiger came there by chance and seized that
frightened
hind.
28.
Seeing the seizure of that hind,
I became frightened
and I fled. The place being rugged and steep I
fell down and
died remembering the hind (at the time of death)
.
29.
That hind too died and was born again
as
you, O
darling. Remembering you,
I was reborn as
a stag.
I
do
not
know where my elder brothers have gone.
30.
This story concerning you and myself has come
to
my memory. Listen, O gentle lady,
I
shall
tell you
the
past
and the future.
31.
The hunter who pursued us so closely but kept back
far away being afraid of Rama, has now been
devoured by a
lion.
32-33.
Having given up his life, he
will go
to heaven,
due to his act of refraining from killing us. Water has been drunk
by us both here in the middle Pu$kara. This
scion of the family

=== PAGE 284 ===

2.3.35.34-44
673
•of Bhrgu, who has directly assumed the form ofVisnu, has been
seen
by
us.
Therefore, the sin committed
in many births has
been destroyed.
34.
We shall see Agastya and hear prayer that yields our
goal.
Hence, we
shall
go
to
those
auspicious
worlds after
reaching which one will never
bewail
(i.e.
one
is
free
from
sorrows and miseries)
.
35.
After saying this to his
beloved
hind
that
stag
of
pleasing appearance, stopped talking. Looking at Rama without
any agitation, he became delighted in his mind.
36-37.
In the company of his disciple,
Bhargava
heard
what was being recounted by the stag. He became surprised, O
leading king. He decided in his mind
to go to the hermitage of
Agastya,
accompanied by Akrtavrana. Being much delighted
he
started
immediately
after
taking
bath and
performing
the daily round ofroutine duties.
38.
While going
along
his
path,
the hunter was seen
lying dead
at
the
attack
of the
lion,
by
the
noble-souled
Rama who was surprised.
39.
After going more than half a Yojana
(1
yojana*- 12
Km.) towards
the lower
Pu§kara,
he
took
bath
and
per-
formed the midday Sandhya rites with great joy.
40.
Even as he was pondering over what was conducive
to his own welfare as mentioned by the stag,
the pair of deer
too came closely behind him.
41.
Drinking
water at the Puskara lake
and
sprinkling
water over their bodies, the stag and the hind came in front of
the hermitage of Agastya even as Rama was glancing at
them
with surprise.
42.
Seeing
Puskara
involved
in
bad
condition(?) the
lofty-minded Rama concluded his Sandhya rites and proceeded
toward Agastya’s hermitage.
43-44.
After going
(to the holy spots such
as)
Visjiu’s
steps, the Kun^a (sacrificial pit) of the N&gas
(serpents,
ele-
phants)
established
by
the
seven
sages
(?),
he
performed
Acamana rite with its pure waters and went to Agastya’s abode
where, O king, the Sarasvati
(? river) , the daughter of Brahma

=== PAGE 285 ===

O' 4
Brahm&nda Purdria
came in order to
fill the three Kundas for the
performance of
Agnihotra by
god Brahma.
45.
There, on its banks, Bhargava saw the
wonderfully
auspicious and meritorious hermitage of Agastya resorted to by
many sages.
46-48.
It was resorted
to
by
deer and
lions
coming
together
with calm
minds
(forgetting
their mutual
innate
enmity)
.
The
following
trees
abounded
there
viz.
Kutaja
(wrightia anti dyscnterica), Arjuna (terminalia Arjuna), Nimba
(Margosa)
, Paribhadra (pine tree), Dhava (grisleaTomentosa)
Inguda
(Terminalia
(atapha)
Khadira
(Acacia
Catbhu),
Asana
(? Terminalia Tomentosa) Kharjura
(Date palms) and
Badari (jijube)
.
Accompanied by Akrtavrana, Rama entered the hermitage
and saw the
tranquil-minded sage Agastya
seated
there. He
was meditating on the eternal Brahman (and looked) like a lake
with the water still and devoid of ripples.
49-50.
In a hut made of tender leaves
and
sprouts,
he
was seated on a silken Brsi
( the particular seat of a
sage)
and
was wearing a deer-skin.
Uttering his name, O great king he bowed down to him
“I am Rama, son ofJamadagni.
I have come here
to see
your
holiness. Be pleased to know
it
by
means
of my
obeisance
obeisance unto you, O sanctifier of worlds”.
51.
When Rama said
this,
he
opened
his
eyes
slowly
and looked at Rama. Uttering words of welcome, he
requested
him to take seat.
52.
He caused Aiadhup&rka ( material of hospitable recep-
tion) to be brought through a
disciple. The leading sage offered
it to Rama and enquired of him the happiness
in his family
as
well as the excellence of his penance.
53-55.
On being asked by him, Rama said
to Agastya—
“O holy lord, I am happy
in
every
respect, due to the
plea-
sure of seeing
you.
But
I have a
small doubt which please
clarify through your nectar-like sweet words. A
stag was
seea
by me, O holy lord, in
the middle
Fuskara
lake.
Everything
concerning me both past and future, was narrated by him. I was.
surprised on hearing
it. Hence I have sought refuge in you.

=== PAGE 286 ===

2.3.35.56—36.4
675
56-57.
Protect me
mercifully, O holy
lord. I am prac-
tising
the great Mantra taught by Siva. The Kavaca of Krsna
too was granted by Siva and
I have been
practising
it. More
than a hundred years have elapsed. But I have not attained the
spiritual result thereof. Kindly mention (the reason thereof)”.
Vasistha said :
58-59.
On
hearing
this
question
of
the
noble-souled
Rama, the sage meditated for a moment, O
great
king, and
mentally understood what the stag had said. He understood that
the stag
had come to his hermitage
along
with
the
hind
in
order .to hear
the
prayer
• “Krsnamfta”.
The sage pondered
over the
reason
thereof and
consoled
Bhargava by means of
nectar-like words.
CHAPTER THIRTYSEX
Agastya
recites the Hymn Kr$namrta
Vasiflha said
:
1.
After comprehending the
entire
reason
thereof,
the
pot-born sage Agastya became delighted in his mind
and
said
to Rama, the scion of the family of Bhrgu.
Agastya said
:
2.
Listen, O Rama of great fortune, I shall tell you what
is
conducive
to
your
welfare,
whereby
you will attain, ere
long,
the spiritual attainment and
assimilation of the Mantra.
3.
If a person knows the characteristic features of devo-
tion that is of three types, O highly
intelligent one, and
strive*
for it, he will realize
it quickly.
4.
Once, with a desire to see Ananta,
I
had been to the
Netherworlds, rendered splendid with great joy by
the leading
royal serpents.

=== PAGE 287 ===

Brahmdn<Ja Purfina
€76
5-7a.
There, O Brahmana of great fortune, great men of
spiritual achievement were seen by me all
round Viz.
Sanaka
and others, Narada, Gautama, Jajali,
Kratu, Rbhu,
Hamsa,
Aruni, Valmiki, Sakti and Asuri. These and many
other great
Siddhas beginning with Vatsyayana1 were sitting near the lord
of serpents and worshipped him for the sake of knowledge.
7b- 10.
O Brahmana of great forune,
this our goddess
of
earth
who
bears
all
living beings was seated in front
of him
assuming her own form (of a goddess), listening continuously to
those stories. Whatever the goddess
of
earth
asked
Sesa,
the
direct support of the Earth, the sages sitting there
could
hear,
due
to
his
blessings.
The
auspicious hymn Kr$napremamrta
was heard by me there, O dear one.
11-12.
I shall expound to you that hymn
of prayer
for
the
sake of which you have come here.
The goddess of Earth had already
finished
hearing
the
incarnation of the boar etc., the story
that
destroys
sins,
that
accords pleasure and salvation and that is the
cause of know-
ledge and
perfect wisdom.
After hearing everything, O dear one, the goddess of Earth
bowed down once again to Dharadhara
( i.e. Sesa,
the support
of the Earth) with delight and spoke to
him in order to know
the activities of Krsna.
Dharanl said
:
13-15.
Lord Krsna had embellished the birth
(life)
of
all men who had their abodes in the Vraja
(Cowherds* Colony)
belonging to Nanda. He had assumed the physical body sport-
ingly. He has many
names
caused and
conditioned
by
his
(various)
conquests (appended with
the word ‘victory to*)
.
I
have been desirous of hearing the most important names among
them for a long time. Hence O Vasuki
(
? £e$a ) mention those
names of the son of Vasudeva. There
is
nothing
more
meri-
torious than this, in
the, three worlds.
I.
This Vatsyayana
is
probably
different
from
the
author
of
the
lC&ma-sutras.

=== PAGE 288 ===

2.3.36.16-24
677
&e$a said
:
16-1 7a.
O
goddess
Earth
of great
beauty, there is
(a
prayer composed
of hundred and
eight
names.
It
bestows-
salvation upon the people. It
is
at the acme of all auspicious
things. It confers eight-fold spiritual attainments beginning with
Anima
( minuteness)
.
17b- 18.
It destroys millions and millions of great sins. It
endows
the
listener with the merits accruing from
all
holy
centres. It accords the fruits of all Japas and Tajhas.
It
is
des-
tructive of all sins. Listen O gentle lady,
I shall recount
it.
19.
By
a
simple
repetition,
a
single name
of Krsna
yields that fruit which
is yielded by repeating
three
times
the-
thousand holy names.
20.
Hence, this prayer is more meritorious and destructive
of sins. 1
O beloved
lady,
I
myself am
the
seer
for
these
one
hundred and eight names. The metre is Anu$tup
(eight-syllabled
one) and the deity is Yoga that is a favourite of Krsna.
The Prayer :
21-24.
(1)
Srikrsna,
(2)
Kamalanatha
(Lord
of
the
goddess of fortune)
,
(3)
Vasudeva
(son
of Vasudeva),
(4)
Sandtana (The
Eternal one),
(5)
Vasudevdtmaja
( Vasudeva *s
son),
(6) Punya (the meritorious one), (7) Lild-Mdnu$a- Vigraha
(one who has assumed human body out of the sportive
spirit),
(8)
Srivatsa-Kaustubha-Dhara (one who has
the
mark
called
Srivatsa and one who wears the gem Kaustubha)
,
(9)
Taiodd-
Vatsala ( the darling child of Ya$oda)
, (10) Hari, (11) Caturbhu-
ja tta-Cakrasigadd-Sahkhddyayudha (one who has
taken up
discus,
sword,
mace,
conch and other weapons lifted
up
in
his
four
hands),
( 12) Devakinandana (the delighter of DevakI), (1 Z)$rtfa
(the consort of Sri), (14) Nanda-gopa-Priydtmaja.
1.
The ensuing prayer mainly contains references to
incidents
in
the
life of Kr?na as described in the tenth Skandha of the Bh. P. with a sprinkling
of some Vedantic terms to indicate the identity of Kf?ga with Para-Brahman
and Vi?nu.
Thus Mantrajapa, Kaoaca and stotra conclude the Tantric way of Kf?Qa
worship.

=== PAGE 289 ===

Brahm&n&a Purdna
678
(the
beloved
son of
the
cowherd
Nanda),
(15)
Yamund-
Vegasarhh&rin
(one
who
has
curbed
the
current
of
the
Yamuna)
,
( 16) Balabhadrapriyanuja
(the loving younger brother
of Balabhadra),
(17)
Putana-jiva-hara
(one who
has
taken
away the life of Putana),
(18) Sakatasurabharijana (one who
shattered the demon who assumed the form of a cart)
.
25.
(19) Nandavraja-Jananandin
(one who
delights
the
people
in
the
cowherds’
colony belonging
to Nanda),* (20)
Sacciddnanda-Vigraha
(one whose
person
is
constituted
of
ex-
istence, knowledge and bliss)
,
(21 ) Navanitaviliptdnga (one who
has smeared
all his limbs with butter)
, (22)
Navanitatiafa
(one
who dances for the sake of butter),
(23) Anagha (sinless).
26.
(24)
Navanitalavah&rin
(one
who
takes
in
a
bit
of
butter),
(25)
Mucukunda-Prasddakr
t
(one
who
conferred
grace on Mucukunda), (26) Stdato-strisahasreSa (Lord of sixteen
thousand ladies), (27)
Tribhangi (one who has assumed tribhanga
pose)
,
(28)
Madhurdkrti (one whose
form
or
features
are
sweet).
27.
(29)
Sukavdgamrtdbdhindu
(one who
is
the moon
arising from the ocean of nectar in the
form of Suka’s speech
i.e. the Bhdgavala Purdna), (30) Govinda, (31) Goviddmpati (Lord
of those who know Gau (cow or speech), (32)
Vatsapalatiasaiicarin
(one who moves about
protecting
calves),
(33)
Dhenukasura-
mardana
( one who suppressed
the demon Dhenuka)
.
28.
(34)
Tmikrtatrnavarta
(one
who
rendered
demon Trnavaria as
powerless and
despicable
as
a
blade
of
grass);
(35)
Yamalarjunabhanjana
(one
who
uprooted
the
twin Arjuna trees; (36)
Uttdlatdlabhettr (one who
broke the tall
palmyra tree) ,
(37)
Tam&l&Syamal&krti
( one
whose
figure
or
complexion is as dark as the Tamala tree).
29.
(38)
Gopagopiivara
(Lord
of
the
Cowherds
and
Cowherdesses ) ,
(39)
Yogin,
(40)
SUryako [isamaprabha
(one
having
the
lustre
equal
to
that often
million
suns),
(41)
Ildpati
(Lord
of
the
Earth),
(42)
Pararhjyotih
(the supreme
splendour),
(43)
Yddavendra
(Lord
of
the
Yadavas),
(44)
Yadddvaha (Leading scion of the family of Yadu)
.
30. (45)
Vanamdlin
(one
having
garlands* of
sylvan
flowers),
(46)
Pitavdsas
(yellow-robed), (47) Pdrijdtdpahdraka

=== PAGE 290 ===

2.3.36.31-36
679
{one who brought away the divine Parijata
tree)
(48)
Govar-
idhanacaloddh&rtr
(one who
has
lifted up the mountain Govar-
dhana),(49)
Gopdla ,
(Protector of the cows)
, (50)
Sarvapdlaka
(Protector of everyone
and everything)
.
31.
(51) Aja (The unborn), (52) Nirafijana the unsullied)
(53)
Kdmajanaka
(father
of
cupid)
i.e.
Pradyumna,
(54)
Kanjaloc'ma
(the
lotus-eyed),
(5.5)
Madhuhan
(the
slayer of
demon
Madhu),
(56)
Malhurandthci
(The lord of Mathura),
(57)
Dvarakdnatha
(the
lord
of Dvaraka),
(58)
Balin
(the
powerful).
32.
(59) Vrnddvandntasaficdrin
(one who moves
about
at
the outskirts ofVrndavana),
(60) Tulasiddmabhu$ana
(one who
is bedecked
in Tulasi garlands) (61)
Syamantakamaner-hartr (one
who has taken away the Syamantaka jewel), (62) Narandrayand-
tmaka (one who
is identical with Nara and Narayana).
33.
(63) Kubjdktftambaradhar
a
(one who
was
attracted
by
the hunchbacked
lady and
one who
wore
the garments
(brought by her), (64) Mdyin
(one who wields
the
power
of
illusion), (65) Paramaptiru$a (The supreme person), (66)
kamra-Caniira-Mallayuddha-viidrada (one who was
an
expert
in
the wrestling bout with the demon Mustika and Canura)
.
34.
(67 ) Sathsdravoirin (one who puts an end to the worldly
existence), (68) Kamsdri
(the enemy of Kamsa)
,
(69)
Murari
(the enemy of Mura), (70)
Narakantaka
(the slayer of demon
Naraka), (71) Anddibrahmacarin (one who
is an eternal celibate
or
a
religious
student)
(72)
Kr^navyasanakar^aka (one who
dispelled
the
distresses
of Krsna
i.e. DraupadI).
m
35.
(73) Siiupdla-Hracchetlr (one who cut off the head of
Si£upala),
( 74) Duryodhanakulantakrt (one who
put
an
end
to
the
family
of Duryodhana),
(75)
VidQrakrUravarada (one who
bestowed boons on Vidura and Akrura)
(76)
Vth&r dpapradariaka
(one who revealed his cosmic form).
36.
(77)
Satyavdk (of
truthful
speech),
(78)
Satyasaih-
kalpa
(of
truthful
will),
(79)
Satyabhdmdrata (one who
is
devoted to Satyabham&), (80) Jayin (victorious), (81) Subhadrd
Pdrvaja ( Elder brother of Subhadra)
(82)
Vi$nu (All-pervading)

=== PAGE 291 ===

680
Brahmantfa Purdna
(83)
Bhipnamuktipraddyaka
(one who bestowed
salvation
on
Bhisma)
.
37.
(84) Jagadguru (the preceptor of the universe),
(85)
Jagannatha
(the
lord
of the
universe), (86)
VenuvadyaviSarada
(one who
is an
expert
in
playing on
the
flute-pipe),
(87)
Vr$abhasuravidhvariisin (one who destroyed the demon Vrsabha in
the form of a bull, (88) Bakdri
(one who
is the
killer
of the
demon Baka), (89) Bdnabdhukrt (one who cut
off
the arms of
Bana)
.
38.
(90)
Tudhi$thiraprati$thatr
(one
who
established
Yudhisthira (on
the
throne),
(91)
Barhibarhdvatarfisaka
(one
who adorned himself with peacock feathers),
(92) Parthasdrathi
(the charioteer of Arjuna), 93) Avyakta The unmanifest
one),
(94) Gitamrtamahodadhi (The ocean of the nectar
of Gita- -the
song celestial.
39.
^95)
Kaliya-phanimanikyaranjita-Sripaddriibuja
(one
whose glorious lotus-like feet were brightened and
coloured by
the
Manikya
(ruby)
stone
on
the
head
of)
the
serpent
Kaliya,
(96) Damodara
(one who had been tied with a rope
round his belly),
(97)
Tajhabhoktr
(one who
partakes of his
share in the Yajna), (98) Ddnavendravinafana (The destroyer of
leading Danavas).
40.
(99) Narayana, (100) Param Brahman
(the
supreme
Brahman)
(101)
PannagaSanavdhana
(one whose
vehicle
is
Garuqla, the devourer
of
serpents),
( 102) Jfllakri#dsamdsakta-
Gopivdstrapahdraka
(one who
removed
the
garments
of
the
cowherdesses
who
were
enthusiastically engaged
in
aquatic
sports).
41.
(103) Punyafloka (one whose renown is meritorious),
(104)
Tirthapada (one whose foot is itself a
holy
spot),
(105)
Vedavedya
(one
who
can
be
comprehended
through
the
Vedas),
(106)
Daydnidhi
(Storehouse
of
mercy),
(107)
Sarvatirthdtmaka (one who is identical with all holy spots),
( 108)
Sanagraharupin (one who has the forms of all planets), one who
is greater than the greatest.
42-43.
Thus
is
the
prayer
of one
hundred and eight
names of Lord Krsna. This prayer
which
delights Kr^a had
been composed
by Krsna (Dvaipayana
Vjj&sa)
who
was a

=== PAGE 292 ===

2.3.36.44-52
devotee
of Lord Krsna after hearing
the
nectar
of the Gitd
formerly.
This
has been
heard by me from him. Its name is
Kr$napremamrta.
It bestows the greatest bliss.1
44-45.
It destroys the misery of the greatest harassment.
It
enhances
the
greatest
longevity. Whatever one does in this
birth such as charitable gifts,
holy
rites,
penance,
pilgrimage
to holy centres etc.
shall
be fruitful
millions
and
millions
of
times, if one reads and listens to this. This grants sons to
those
who have no sons.
It bestows the
correct
goal
to
those who
are helpless.
46.
It brings wealth to the poor people. It brings victory
to those who are desirous of yictory. It increases the merit
and
bestows nourishment of children and herds of cattle.
47.
It
suppresses
infantile
ailments and evil planets or
spirits etc.
It causes calmness. In the end, it bestows the memory
ofKtsna. It dispels the three types of distresses in the
worldly
existence
.
'18-‘i0.
It
achieves
what
has
not
been
achieved, O
gentle
ladv.
It
provide >
material
for Japa
for
our
souls2
[MantrnJ
‘‘Obeisance
to
Krsna,
the
leader of the Yadavas,
to the Yogin whose Mudra (gesture of esoteric
significance)
is
perfect
knowledge,
to
the
lord.
Obeisance
to
the
Lord
of
Rukmitu. Obeisance to one who understands Vedanta.”
One should repeat this Mantra, O gentle
lady, day and
night. He shall have the blessings of all planets; he
shall
be a
favourite unto all. He shall be surrounded by sons and
grand-
sons.
He
shall
be
prosperous
with
all
achievements.
After
enjoying
all
worldly
pleasures,
he
shall
attain
the Sayujya
(Merging with the Lord) withKrgga/’
Agastya said :
51-52.
“After saying this much, lord Ananta who is that
form
of the
lord
(Vis$u)
named Samkarsarta, who supports
1.
VV. 44-47
give
the
benefits
accruing
from
the recitation of this
stotra.
2.
VV. 48-50 state another Kf$Qa mantra and its phalairuH
(benefits-
accruing from it).

=== PAGE 293 ===

Brahmdnfa Purdna
the Earth and the worlds, and who
is the bestower
of honour,
pointed
out
this
prayer
once
again
and
stopped. Then
all
those who
had
been
eager
to listen
to
the
tales
and who
were seated all
round
him
viz.
Sanaka
and
others
became
immersed in the ocean filled with delight. They honoured
that
lord of Serpents.
The Sages said
:
53.
“Obeisance, obeisance to you
the
sanctifier
of the
entire universe. O
lord of the nature of no change and
loss, O
dispeller
of
distress
of
the
devotee who
resorts
to
you,
Obeisance to the supporter of the Earth, to the ocean of mercy.
Obeisance to Sesa the lord of the universe.
54.
O lord, we have been made
to
imbibe
Kfsnamrta
by you. We have been made rid of all sins by you.
People
like
you, O lord, arc sympathetic with the wretched ones. Undoubt-
edly. you uplift your own people who bow down to you.”
55.
After bowing down to the feet of the lord of Serpents,
after directing the mind to the feet that fulfil all our desires and
after circumambulating the supporter of
the
Earth,
all of
us
went to our respective residences.
56.
Thus, O Rama, the prayer named Premdmrta of
lord
Kr$na, the perfect one, the lover of Radha, has been recounted
to you. It bestows all achievements upon the listener.
57.
This extremely rare prayer has
been
heard directly
from lord Sesa who was recounting the tales ofthe lord, O Rama
of great fortune.
58-61.
All the Mantras, prayers and kavacas that are
in
the three worlds can be realized and
assimilated by
practising
this.”
Vasiffha said
:
“After saying this, O
great
king,
after recounting
the
prayer
Kr$na-Premdmrta mo
sooner did the sage cease to speak
than an aerial chariot came
there.
It
was followed
by
four
wonderful Siddhas who could
assume any form
they
desired
and who had the speed of the mind. The malg and
the
female

=== PAGE 294 ===

2.3.37.1-6
683
deer bowed down to the feet of Agastya, galloped and
joyously
climbed the chariot.
Even as all the living beings, Agastya and Bhargava were,
watching, they assumed divine bodies marked with
conchshell,
discus etc. They then went to the world of Visnu bowed down
to by all the Devas.
CHAPTER THIRTYSEVEN
The Narrative of Bhargava Parafarama
Vasi$tha
said:
1.
On seeing that extremely wonderful
miracle,
Parasu-
rama narrated everything
concerning those
two
deer
exactly
as he had heard
it.
2.
On hearing
it, the pot-born
sage
Agastya who
was
the Lord himself, joyously spoke to Bhargava who
was
sitting
in front of him.
Agastya said :
3.
“Listen, O
highly
fortunate Rama who are expert
in discriminating between what has to be done and what should
not be done.
I am going to tell you now what
is
conducive
to
your welfare. Do
it with concentration and mental purity.
4.
Far
from
this place
there
is a great and very rare
holy
centre
of Visnu.
It
is
that place where could
be
seen
the footsteps imprinted by the great noble-souled Visnu.
5.
At the time of subduing
and
binding down of Bali,
the noble-souled Vamana
covered the worlds by means of his
steps. It was from the tip ofone of these toes that Ganga began
to flow.
6.
Go
there
and
recite
this prayer for
a month regu-
«
larly without thinking about anything else. Have perfect control
over your sense-organs and be restricted in your diet.

=== PAGE 295 ===

684
Brahmdntfa Purina
7.
The Kavaca
(mystical
protective formula or mantra}
that
had
been
practised
by you
formerly with
a desire for
its full accomplishment thereof
in
order
to
kill
the enemies,,
will yield the benefit to you.”
Vasiffha said :
8.
“On being told thus by Agasi ya, Rama, the destroyer
of his enemies,
bowed down
to the quiescent sage and
went
out of the hermitage.
9.
Again
along
that
self-same
route, O
king, Rama
quickly reached that spot where the celestial river had come out
from the last foot-step of Visnu.
10.
There
this
sage
built his abode
in the company of
Aki tavrana
and
began to
practice
the
divine
prayer
called
Krfiiapremdmrta
(nectar in the form of Krsna’s love)
.
11.
He practised
the
recitation
of that
prayer of
the
lord of the
Vraja
viz.
Krsna, every day. Hari became pleased,
O
king,
and
revealed
himself
to
the
view
of
the
son
of
Jamadagni.
12-13.
Srlkrsna, the direct lord of the four Vyuhas
(i.e.
manifestations
such as
Samkarsana, Pradyumna, Aniruddha),
the lotus-eyed one, shining brilliantly
with
his
crown
having
the refulgence
of
the sun and the two ear-rings. His chest was
brightened with the lustre of the
jewel Kaustubha. He
wore
yellow
robes.
His
complexion was
like
that
of the cloud.
He was
engaged
in
playing on his flute. He had a fascinating
form.
14.
On seeing the Lord, the son
of Jamadagni
gleefully
got up at once ; he prostrated himself on the ground like a
staff
and then eulogised the lord
with
perfect control
( on his sense-
organs)
.
Paraiur&ma said :
15.
“Obeisance,
obeisance
to one
whose
body
is the
cause of the universe;
to one who
protects
those who
resort
to him;
who
dispels
the
distress of gods and
is
eulogised by
gods the chief ofwhom were Brahma
l£a,
Visnu,
Indra
and
others. I bow down constantly to the supreme Lord.

=== PAGE 296 ===

2.3.37.16-23
685
16.
I sana and others
have been
incompetent to specify
your nature through the Vedic arguments of diverse kinds. You
are
the
unborn lord who cannot be pointed out and specified.
I worship you the ancient, infinite Lord. Be merciful unto me.
17.
You are the only Lord who bestow what one
desires.
You assume different kinds of bodies among the Devas, human
beings,
lower animals
and
the aquatic beings in order to pre-
vent inordinate burden
unto the
Earth
and
to sport about to
protect the worlds.
18.
I
worship
you
who
love
devout
people, who are
extremely unattached even to the Goddess of Wealth (Laksmi)
and others and whose heart
is bound
in love even
with
those
ladies
(? the
Gowherdesses)
whose
minds
are
difiled
by
the
defect of infidelity and transgression in your own presence.
19.
O lord, the delighted
Asuras,
Suras, human beings
along with the Kinnaras,
the
lower
animals and
even
Ayonis
(those not born of a womb) have shed of! their sense of posses-
sion
as “my-ness** with regard to their
bodies, wives, children
and properties and everything and have resorted to your person.
20.
I have attained with respect, that lord of the
Devas
who grants whatever
is desired by those who
worship him, who
is
devoid
of
desire,
and
(being
transcendental)
is bereft of
Gunas
(the
three
attributes
of
Prakrti),
is
inconceivable,
unmanifest, annihilator of sins and a store-house of love.
21.
Some
people
subject
their bodies to different kinds
of tortures
(i.e. austerities); others worship by means of various
Tajnas. But, O
lord,
those whose
inclinations and desires are
bound up with worldly affairs never see your super-natural form
even in their dreams.
22-23.
Those who have become disgusted and dejected
due to the tedium and exhaustion
of worldly
existence,
and
therefore
duly
remember
your
feet,
those who
devoutly
worship
and
bow down
to
them, those who describe them to
one another
in
the
assembly,
those whose minds
are
intent
and eager to dispel the (accumulated)
dirt that is the outcome
of many births
and
those who are
mentally. attached to your
lotus-like feet cross the ocean of worldly
existence and
enable

=== PAGE 297 ===

686
Brahmfiftia Purina
others also
to cross it. Indeed, O lord, your name is an antidote
against worldly existence.
It is nectar itself.
24.
I am, O
lord,
one whose mind
is bound with love
and desire. I have been
propitiating
you,
the
noble
one,
by
means of various
efforts. O lord, you are
aware of it. What is
there
in
the world
which should be specifically mentioned to
you ?
Vasisfha said
:
25.
“When the son ofJamadagni
eulogised like this and
bowed down to him in front
of
him,
lord Krsna
spoke
in
a
deep
voice
as
though he was
fascinating
every one by means
of his Maya.*’
Krsna said :
26.
O Rama of great
fortune,
your
excellent work has
been achieved. Understand that
it
is due
to
the
power
of the
Kaiaca (Protective hymn) and the eulogy.
27.
After killing Karttavirya,
the haughty-minded king,
and
after
avenging
your
father, make
the
Earth
devoid of
K$atriyas.
28.
Indeed, Karttavirya
is the incarnation of my discus>
on the surface of the
Earth.
He
has finished his assigned task,
0 excellent Brahmana. Finish him, O bestower of honour.
29.
From now onwards you will be moving about in
this
world charged with a part of mine
energy. You
will
do and
undo everything at the proper time. You yourself
will
be
the
lord.
30.
In the twenty-fourth
set
of four Yugas, in the Trcta
Yuga, O
dear
one,
I
shall
be
born in the family of Raghu
under the name Rama.
I
the
eternal
lord
with
four Vyuhas
(manifestations
e.g.
Samkarsana
etc.),
shall
be born (along
with the three others)
.
31-33a.
I shall be born of king Dasaratha as the delight-
er of queen Kausalya. At that
time, O
sage
of great
fortune
1 will be going to the great city ofJanaka alongwith Lak$mana,
after getting the Yajfla of Kau£ika (Vi^vamitra) concluded.
I will be breaking the bow of I$a (god Siva) and
marry-
ing the daughter'of the king of Videha
(i.e. Jaijaka).

=== PAGE 298 ===

2.3.37.33—38.8
687
Then, while going back to Ayodhya, I will take away your
proud brilliance and splendour.
Vasistha said
:
33b.
After
instructing
thus
the son of Jamadagni, the
veritable
store
of penance,
Lord
Krsna
vanished even as the
noble-souled Rama was watching.’
CHAPTER THIRTYEIGHT
The Narrative ofBhdrgava
(continued )
Vasistha said
:
1.
“When Krsna
vanished, Rama of very
great fame
considered himself enhanced in power, due to Krsna*s
majestic
lustre.
2.
Blazing like a well-kindled fire, (Rama)
the
scion of
the family of Bhpgu accompanied by Akrtavrana, came
to the
city of MahismatL 1
3.
It is the
place
where
the
sacred Narmada, the dis-
peller of sins, the most excellent among the
rivers, sanctifies by
means of its mere vision even the sinful living beings.
4.
It
is
the
place where formerly, O ruler of the Earth
endeavour was made
for
the
destruction of
the
Tripuras b y
the noble-souled Hara who entered
it.
5-8a.
How
can
the
merit
of men
thereof,
who had
the form of the Devas, be adequately described
?
After
seeing
Narmada, O
king,
Bhargava, the delight*
er of his family, became highly pleased.
Eager
to
contain
his
enemies, he made his obeisance.
i
1.
Mahismatl—mod.
Maheivara
or
Mahesh,
on
the right bank of
Narmad&, 40 miles to the south of Indore.

=== PAGE 299 ===

Brahmdn$a Purdtja
688
“Obeisance be to you, O Narmada, born
of the body of
Hara. Destroy my enemies quickly. O
splendid one, be a best-
ower of boon on me.”
After offering oleisance
thus
to Narmada, the destroyer
of sins, he despatched a messenger to Karttavlryarjuna.
8b- 12a.
“O sinless messenger,
what
I am going to tell
you should be conveyed to the king by you. No suspicion
need
be entertained by you. Nowhere
is a messenger bound.
“What
is your
strength or
army depending on which
O deluded king, you have
insulted
sage Jamadagni ?
His
son
has come to fight, O
dull-witted one,
come
out
quickly
and
fight Rama
in
return.
Coming into clash with Bhargava, go
speedily to the other world.”
‘•After conveying this message
to
the
king,
listen to his
words
in
reply.
Return
soon.
Welfare unto you. No delay
is
advisable in this matter.”
12b- 14a.
On being told thus by him, the messenger went
to the king of Haihayas and
conveyed
to him in the assembly
everything mentioned by Rama.
That
king
of great
strength
and
exploit, a devotee of
Atrcya (Datta) became angry on hearing
that
statement. He
conveyed his reply to the messenger.
Kdrtt avirya replied
:
14b-16.
“It was by
the
prowess
of my arms, granted
by
Datta,
that
the Earth was conquered by me after binding
the kings by force and bringing them to my city. That prowess
may still be in me. I shall fight you now.”
After saying
this,
the
king
of Haihayas
dismissed
the
messenger
immediately. The
king,
the
most excellent among
the eloquent speakers, called the commander-in-chief and said
:
17.
“Get my army, O highly
fortunate
one,
honoured
by heroes.
I will fight with Rama
of
the family of Bhrgu. Let
there be no delay”.
18.
n On being told thus, the commander-in-chicf, of great
exploits, got the army consisting of four
constituents ready and
informed him.
1 9.
On hearing
that
the army was ready, O lord of the
subjects,
king
Karttavirya joyously climbed
on to his chariot
brought by his charioteer.

=== PAGE 300 ===

2.3.38.20-30
689
20.
All round that king, his vassals and the rulers of the
various zones stationed themselves along with many
Ak$auhinis
(big divisions of armies consisting of
all
the four
sections
viz.
foot-soldiers, horses, elephants and chariots)
and were ready to
serve him.
21.
In that army resembling an ocean, there were crores
of
elephants,
horses,
chariots
and
foot-soldiers.
They were
innumerable.
22-27a.
Kings born of different families, were seen there.
They were great warriors of huge bodies. They were
experts in
different kinds of warfares. They were clever in wielding differ-
ent kinds of weapons and
missiles. The kings
were
seated
on
various kinds of vehicles.
The innumerable elephants were in their rut
embellished
with ichor. They were equipped with various ornaments. They
were
directed
by
the conductors of elephants. Thus shone the
elephants in many ways.
Horses that had been bom of
different
breeds,
that had
the speed of the wind and that had
been
well-trained
by
the
horsemen, O king, appear very splendid galloping about.
The chariots were pretty long ones with swift horses yoked
to them. As
their
wheels
rumble, they were comparable with
the clouds in the rainy season.
The
foot-soldiers
holding
swords
and
shields, O king,
shone as they vied with one another
saying
“I
shall go ahead
iirst, I shall go ahead
first.’'
27b-30a.
When the army of Karttaviryarjuna moved on,
the sky and the ten quarters were covered with dust.
The entire atmosphere, O king, was filled with the sounds
of different kinds of musical
instruments,
the neighing sounds
of the horses and the trumpeting sounds of the elephants.
The leading king, O
ruler
of the
Earth, saw on his way
omens adverse to him and
indicating
to him
the
message
of
Death.1
1 .
VV. 30-34 enumerate omens predicting death. Belief in omens
is
a
characteristic of primitive societies. These beliefs were later formulated
in
a
‘science of omens'
( Nimitta-S&stra)
and
treatises
by
Brahmanical
writers
like Garga and Jain writers like Bhadrabahu, Dharasena were composed
in

=== PAGE 301 ===

690
Brahm&rtijla Purdtj^
3Gb-34. He saw a woman who had dishevelled hair, whose
nose was cut off, who was almost naked except for a black loin-
cloth and who was weeping.
He saw a man with grief-stricken mind whose clothes were
in rags, who was
fallen and
broken,
who
was
almost
naked
except for an ochre-coloured
strip
of a
cloth and
who was
devoid of certain limbs.
He saw an iguana, a rabbit, hedgehog, an
empty
pot, a
reptile, cotton,
a
tortoise,
oil, salt, a piece of bone, a fox pro-
ducing a terrible howl to his right side, a sick
Pukkasa (a man
of very low and mixed caste) a bull, a vulture and a hare.
Even after seeing
these
he
went ahead in order to fight,
because he was forcibly dragged
by
the
noose
of the god
of
death with which he was bound.
35-36.
Rama was
seated
in the shade of a banyan tree
on the banks of the river Narmada, accompanied by Akrtavrana.
He saw the excellent king Karttavlrya coming accompanied by
a hundred crores of kings and a thousand Aks'auhinis
(big regi-
ments). On seeing him he became delighted.
37.
“On this day has been
realized my
task cherished
for
a
long
time,
because
the wretched king Karttavlrya has
come within my vision.”
38.
He rose up
after
saying
this. Seizing his weapon,
the axe, he stood up to his full
height ready for the destruction
of his enemies just like an infuriated lion.
39.
On seeing Rama in
readiness
for the destruction of
the soldiers, all embodied beings
trembled
excessively
(afraid
of) death as
it were.
40.
Wherever the infuriated scion of the family of Bhigu
moved about with the velocity of the wind and hurled
his
axe,
the
elephants, horses and the heroic
warriors
fell down
with
their arms, thighs and necks cut off.
41.
Just as a big
elephant
in
its
rut runs all round and
tramples down the cluster of reeds, so also Rama
of the speed
the early centuries of this era. The common
interpretations
of
omens
by
Brahmanical
and
Jain
writers show that the Indian society inherited these-
beliefs from their common primitive forebears.

=== PAGE 302 ===

2.3.38.42-51
691
and prowess
of
the mind and the wind, destroyed the army of
the king.
42-43.
On seeing Rama, the
most
excellent among the
wieiders
of weapons,
striking
with all his might in the battle,
the king of Matsya country climbed on to a great chariot, lifted
up his bow, strung it
well,
and
drew it
mightily.
Showering
volleys of arrows as powerful as fire, he came to Bhargava.
On seeing him coming,
the noble-soulcd Rama
took up
his huge and
terrible
bow. Overwhelmed
with
anger that he
was, he warded off
the
heavy
down-pour
of king
Mangala’s
arrows and discharged his own
missile
with wind-god for
its
deity.
44-46.
That
intelligent
king
of
great
potentiality dis-
charged the Parvataslra
(Missile with mountains
for its deities)
at Rama. That king who was an
expert
in discharging missiles
and arrows arrested the powerful
missile
with wind-god for
its
deity by means of his own Parvatastra.
Coming
to understand that the king
of Matsya land was
really
very
powerful
and
was sending volleys after volleys of
different kinds of excellent
missiles,
Rama, violently
released
Narayana missile duly charged with the requisite Mantras .
O king
! when the Narayana missile was
discharged
by
Rama, the scion of the
family
of
Bhrgu,
for slaying the king,
all
the
quarters
dazzled
exceedingly
with its brilliance. The
king of Matsya-land trembled.
47-48.
On observing his tremulousness, Rama
killed his
horses with four arrows. The
noble-souled Rama
cut
' off his
banner-staff
with
a
single arrow
and
his bow
with
two
arrows. He
toppled
down
to
the ground the charioteer with
another arrow, despatched with great
force.
With
three other
arrows he hit the chariot.
49-5 1 .
Mangala (the
king
of Matsya land)
abandon-
ed the
chariot
and
came down
to the ground. With his axe
Rama struck him on
his
head. When
his head was broken he
shed
blood
copiously. He
became
unconscious
and
died
instantaneously.

=== PAGE 303 ===

692
Brahmdnja PurUna
i
His army was burnt down by the missile.
It was destroyed
and reduced to ashes in a
trice.
When Mangala, the most excellent king, bortf of the lunar
race, fell down and died, Rama was delighted.
CHAPTER THIRTYNINE
The Story ofBhdrgava Parafarama
(<continued )
Vasiffha said
:
l-4a.
“When the king
of Matsya-land
fell,
the
king
Karttavfrya who had great strength and who was
an expert
in
war despatched many other leading kings to fight.
Brhadbala, Somadatta, Vidarbha,
the
lord
of
Mithila,
the ruler of
Nisadha, and the king of Magadha
came
to
the
battlefield, O king, in order to fight with the leading
scion
of
the family of Bhrgu. At the
behest of the
king
of
Haihaya,
all of them who were experts in different kinds of warfare
and
who took pride in their heroism
began
to
shower
volleys
of
arrows.
4b-6a.
With the Pinaka bow in his hand resembling the
flame ofa blazing fire, the scion of the family ofBhrgu discharg-
ed the
excellent arrow Nagapdia
( noose of
the
Serpents)
after
invoking the Mantra thereof.
With the missile charged with Garu(la Mantra, Somadatta
of great strength cut off that
missile
hurled
by
the
leading
member of the family of Bhfgu, during the battle.
6b-8.
Then the infuriated Rama
of great
fortune,
the
slayer
of
enemies
killed
Somadatta
by means of trident
granted by Rudra.
With his mace he killed Brhadbala, with his
fist he killed
Vidarbha, the lord of Mithila with his iron club,
the
ruler
of
Nisadha with his javelin and the king of Magadha
by
kicking

=== PAGE 304 ===

2.3.39.9-23
693
him with his foot. He killed the soldiers by means of volleys of
missiles.
9.
After killing the entire army in the battle, the son
of
Jamadagni,
of great
strength, rushed at Karttavlrya like
the
fire at the time of final annihilation.
10-13.
On seeing him coming
to
fight,
other
kings
of
great heroism who were aware ofwhat should be done and what
should not be done, hid Haihaya behind their back and fought
with Rama, demonstrating thereby their friendship. There were
hundreds of kings such as those of
the
states
of Kanyakubja,
Surasira and Avanti. They created a network of arrows all round
Rama. When he was covered with the network of their
arrows
during the
battle, R&ma was not
at
all
visible, O
leading
king.
Then Akrtavrana remembered the details of Rama’s
life
as recounted by the stag.
14-15.
The sage
(Akrtavrana) entreated
Hari for
the
welfare of the leading member of the family of Bhrgu.
In the meantime, Rama who was a great expert in
mira-
culous missiles and weapons destroyed the
net work of arrows
by means of the arrow with
the
wind god
for
its deity,
as he
knew the Mantras
thereof. He stood
up
ready
for
renewed
battle like the sun coming out of the mist.
16.
Rama, the powerful warrior, fought with them con-
tinuously for three days. By means of his exploit,
it was easy for
him
to cut down twelve Akfauhinis of soldiers in no time.
1 7.
As if they had been a grove of plantain trees, Rama
with
his most excellent weapon, the axe, chopped off the groups
of kings and their great armies.
1 8.
On seeing the army exterminated by the noble-souled
Rama, Sucandra of great valour, born of the solar
race, came
to the
battlefield.
19-23a.
He was
accompanied
by
a
hundred thousand
princes and seven Ak$auhinis of soldiers.
Many
of
those
great
heroic warriors were roaring like thunderous clouds and shaking
the earth, O king. They fought with Bhargava.
The valorous leading member of the family of Bhrgu, O
king, destroyed in a trice the weapons and the great miraculous,
missiles discharged by them.

=== PAGE 305 ===

Brahmdn$a Purdna
694
Taking up his divine axe, comparable to the god ofdeath,
Yama the destroyer, and wielding it up against the entire army,
the delighter of the family of Bhrgu mopped
it up.
Just as a farmer in the field
wholly
reaps
the
rice
and
cuts off all the grassy weeds with his sickle, so also was done by
Rama.
23b-27.
On seeing that army
of
a
hundred
thousand
princes slain by Rama, king Sucandra fought in the
battlefield,
O king.
Both of them were great experts
in
the use
of different
kinds of weapons and miraculous missiles and both were
exces-
sively agitated.
The leading sage and the leading king, both ofthem great
warriors, fought with each other.
Sucandra, a man of great achievement in the art of war-
fare, cut off all those weapons and
miraculous
missiles
which
Rama hurled against him.
Rama was infuriated thereby
in the course of the
battle.
He understood that king Sucandra was
fully
conversant
with
everything
to
be
done
to
attack aggressively
or
to
with-
stand
or
to
retaliate an attack, he performed Acamana rite with
water and fitted
( to
his
bow
the
arrow
(charged
with)
the
Narayana missile that could never be checked.
28.
On
seeing
that
missile
which
had the lustre of a
hundred suns hurled by the
intelligent
Rama,
Sucandra
got
down from his chariot and bowed to it.
29.
That missile evolved
by
Narayana
and
worthy
of
being worshipped by all other missiles, left him
undisturbed
as
he bowed down thus, and went to the presence of Narayana.
30.
On seeing that great missile ineffective and the king
quite hale and hearty, Rama, the slayer of enemies
in
battle,
became surprised.
31.
Then, out ofanger, Rama
hurled
the
javelin,
the
iron rod, the iron mace and a spear with sharp edge,
the
club
and the axe at the head of the king,
32-34*
Sucandra caught hold of all
of them
sportingly.
When Rama hurled SivaSUla (Siva’s trident) at
the
king,
that

=== PAGE 306 ===

2.3.39.35-38
695
trident was turned into a garland of flowers round the neck
of
the king.
He saw in front of him
Bhadrakall,
the
mother
of
the
universe, wearing a garland of skulls. She was hideous. Her face
m
was terrific.
She
was
seated
on
a
lion. The
threc-eyed
goddess was holding an excellent trident.
35a.
On seeing the goddess, Rama cast off his
weapons
and
missiles. Bowing
down
to
the
goddess,
he
eulogised
thus
R&ma said
:
35b-36.
Prayer
:
“Obeisance
to
you
the
beloved of
Sankara,
to
the
mother of the
universe, to the goddess
with
different kinds of ornaments, to the goddess
moving
about on
lion7 to the one who always endeavours to
protect
those who
retort
to her,
to the daughter born of Daksa,
to
the
goddess
born
of the
Himavan,
to the goddess who
occupies
half of
the body of Mahesvara.
37.
Bow
to
Kali, to the goddess who holds
a
digit
of
the Moon—i.e.
the crescent moon—the lord of the
digits,
to
the
beloved
of
the
devotees,
to
the
sovereign
of
all
the
worlds.
To
the
goddess
invoked
by
the
name
‘Tara’ 1
( the
redeemer)
,
to
the
goddess
eagerly attached
to Siva,
to
the
goddess whose sandals are worshipped by the leaders of
Ganas.
38.
To one who
is
greater
than
the greatest,
to the
bestower of boons on
Paramesthin
(i.e. god
Brahma), to the
goddess who
is
thinking about the ways
of annihilating
the
three types of Tdpas ^distresses), to the goddess who has hurled
the three Puras for the welfare of
the universe, to the goddess
named Tripura and (who has assumed the form of) Bala etc.
1 .
This Buddhist Goddess was accepted and assimilated
in Brahmanic
pantheon
as
goddess Durga by Tantra-writers. Thus we have Brahmanical
Tantra works
like
TArd-Tonira
(Gauda
Granthmalii No
1,
1913),
Tdrd-
rahasya of Brahmananda (pub. Jibananda 1896).
The identification of Tripur&, B&15, Lalit& etc. with Durga in the
next
verses shows the influence of Tantras.

=== PAGE 307 ===

696
Brahmintfa Purina
39.
Obeisance
to
the
bestower of grace and charm of
good learning,
to the mother of the
universe;
to #the
goddess
who has killed all enemies, to the
goddess having the face of a
stork,
to the bestower of vast
happiness,
to
the goddess who
killed different types of Asuras and Danavas.
40.
Hail to the goddess whose
creeper-like hands
are
embellished (by
the gestures of) granting boons and
freedoms
from
fear ;
to the goddess who
is bowed down by
all
the gods
(i.e. Devas); to the goddess who has yellow robes, who goes as
fast as the wind, who bestows splendid things and who is eulo-
gised by oiva.
41.
Bow
to
the goddess who
goes
about
on
a
lion
(lit. the enemy of an elephant), who imbibes the juice
of
the
fresh sugarcane, who has shining briliance in her
limbs
resem-
bling the blue mountain, whose steps are
quick, who
has
the
name Lalita, who
is the suzerain of the Devas and
who
is
an
ocean of mercy.
42.
Obeisance
to
the
goddess who has tremulous eyes*
who
is devoid of destruction, whose lotus-like
feet
are
beauti-
fied by means of red-lac juice, whose name
is Rama,
who
is
deeply enamoured of Rati (sensuous pleasures), who dispels all
ailments and who has created everything.
43.
Obeisance
to
you who
bestow
kingdoms, who is
eager to meet her lover, who has
lustre
of jewels
and
whose
robes
are
fascinating.
Obeisance,
obeisance
to
you in front,
obeisance
to you at the sides, beneath and above. Obeisance to
you from all sides.
44.
Repeated obeisance
to you
everywhere
and
at
all
times. Bows to you whose body
is identified with
everything, O
goddess of the Devas, be pleased O Bhadrakali, keep my
vow
taken formcily (see
that
it
is realised)
.
45a.
You alone arc the mother, you alone arc the father
of the three worlds. Obeisance, obeisance to you.”
Vasiffha said
:
45b 46a.
“On being eulogised thus, goddess
Bhadrakali
of great might and courage spoke to Bhargava. She was extre-
mely
delighted,
she
considered
granting
boons
as
a festive
occasion”

=== PAGE 308 ===

2.3.39.46-53
697
Bhadrakali said :
46b-47a.
“Dear Rama, O
highly
fortunate one, I am
pleased with you now. Choose from me any boon that has been
cherished in your heart.”
Rdma said
:
47b-49a. “O mother endearingly attached to your devotees,
if any boon
is to be given to me by you, let me conquer Sucan-
dra,
in battle, Sucandra the object of your favour. O Goddess,
with a delighted mind carry out what has been said by
me,
in
any
manner whatsoever. Obeisance
to you, O mother of the
Universe.”
Bhadrakali said
:
49b-f>0a.
“ Despatch the leading king
Sucandra
to my
abode, by means of
the
miraculous missile having the fire-god
for
its
deity. This
is
highly pleasing to me. Let him be my
attendant.”
Vasiftha said
:
5Ob-5 2a. ‘‘On hearing this statement, the leading scion of
the
family
of Bhrgu
began
his
endeavour
to do something
pleasing to the goddess. He restrained his
breath and performed
the Acamana
rite. Then he fixed
the arrow
to
the bow
with
Sucandra in view. O king, that missile, discharged by Rama for
slaying the king, burned his physical body
quickly and led him
to the world of the supreme deity.
52b-53.
Bhadrakali, the primordial maker of the Universe
was prostrated by Rama. She then vanished. The son ofJama-
dagni remained there in
the
battlefield
eagerly awaiting
the
slaying of the king.”

=== PAGE 309 ===

698
Brahm&ii<jia Purana
CHAPTER FORTY
King Karttavirya slain
Vast$fha said
:
1.
“When the crest-jewel of leading kings, Sucandra fell,
his son Puskaraksa came forward to fight with Rama.
2-3.
On seeing Rama who
was
extremely
terrible in
battle and who was comparable
to Kala,
the annihilator,
that
warrior of great vigour who
was an expert in
all kinds of wea-
pons and miraculous missiles and who was seated in the chariot,
discharged a volley of arrows and created a network with them
all round the leading member of Bhrgu’s
family. For
a
short
while, the son ofJamadagni became covered with arrows.
4.
After
suddenly extricating himself from the bondage
of arrows,
the
extremely
powerful
leader
of
the family
of
Bhrgu, surveyed all round, O
great king.
5.
On seeing Puskaraksa the son of Sucandra, Rama was
filled with rage, and he
resembled
the
fire
that would
burn
everything.
6.
Filled with great anger,
he
discharged
the Varuna
missile (i.e. one with Varuna for
its deity). Then
clouds
rose
up rumbling and roaring with terrible noise.
7.
Flooding the Earth, O king, with heavy
down-pours
of water,
they
showered
continuously.
Puskaraksa
of great
vigour discharged the
Vayaviya missile (one with the wind-god
for its deity).
8.
Thereupon, the clouds vanished
immediately.
Then
extremely infuriated Rama discharged the Brahma missile (one
with Brahma for its deity)
.
9-13.
Puskaraksa of great vigour and
prowess
pulled
it
up with the same missile
(i.e. another Brahma missile).
On seeing his Brahma missile
restrained,
Rama became
furious
like
a
serpent struck with a stick. He seized- his terri-
ble axe and rushed against him taking deep breaths. As Rama
rushed against him, Puskaraksa
lifted up
his bow
and
fixed
five arrows resembling serpents with mouths giving out flames.
With these arrows he pierced the heart, head, the left arm, the

=== PAGE 310 ===

2.3.40.14-22
699
right arm and the
tuft of Rama in order. This Rama stunned
and agitated much.
On being thus afflicted by Puskaraksa
in
battle,
Rama,
stood for a while and then rushed against him*. He hit his head
with
his
axe. He
split
Puskaraksa
into
two
from head
to
foot.
14.
When the pieces fell down, at that time,
great
sur-
prise was caused to men who were watching
it as
well as to the
heaven-dwellers in the firmament.
13.
After slaying Puskaraksa of
great
strength,
out
of
anger he burned down his army like the furiously
blazing
fire
that burns down the forest.
16.
Wherever the leader of the members of the family of
Bhrgu rushed with the prowess and
velocity of
the mind and
the wind, striking with his axe,
horses, chariots,
elephants and
men fell down in their hundreds with their limbs cut
off.
1 7.
Being struck with the axe there in the
battlefield by
Rama
of great
power,
the
soldiers
began
to scream loud,
“Ah father. Ah mother”.
Shattered
to smitherens
they
were
reduced to ashes.
18.
The entire army of Puskaraksa
consisting of many
families of kings and nine Aksauhinis of
soldiers,
was
struck
down
within
a
short
while
by Bhargava.
It became highly
distressed with all the leaders
killed.'
19.
When Puskaraksa fell, Arjuna
( the son of Krtavlrya)
himself,
of
great
power and
vigour came there seated on a
golden chariot.
20.
It was laden with many kinds
of weapons.
It
had
all its
parts
studded
with
jewels.
It had a magnitude of ten
Nalvas,* O king, and a hundred horses were yoked to
it.
21,.
Having a thousand hands wielding different kinds of
weapons,
he
shone
like
a
meritorious
person
desirous
of
ascending to the heavenly world at the destruction of the body.
22.
His hundred sons were extremely powerful and great
experts in warfare. They arranged the armies in different Vytihas
(battle-arrays)
at the behest of their father and stood by in the
battlefield.
•Nalva**400 cubits.

=== PAGE 311 ===

Brahmdnrfa Pur&tia
700
23.
On seeing Rama
equipped
with
the
brilliance
of
Yama, the god of death and destruction
(at
the ^nd
of
the
world ) in the battlefield, Karttavirya, the powerful king, began
to fight
in earnest.
24.
Bent on vanquishing the leading scion of the
family
of Bhrgu, he held up five hundred arrows in the right hands and
five hundred bows in the left hands.
25.
O
heroic king,
he
showered
volley
of arrows
on
Rama, just as the cluster of clouds pours down on a mountain.
26.
Being honoured
in the battlefields by that shower of
arrows, the delighter of the family
of Bhrgu
seized
his own
divine bow and discharged showers of arrows.
27.
Both
of them
viz.
Bhargava
and
Haihaya
were
equally proud (of their ability in) battle and they
were
enga-
ged in an unparalleled tumultuous fight that
caused
horripila-
tion to the beholder.
28.
For killing the leading scion of
the family of Bhrgu,
that powerful king holding all kinds of weapons and miraculous
missiles, fitted the Brahmastra
(the
miraculous
missile
having*
Brahma for its deity).
29-3 la.
Rama performed the ceremonial
rite of sipping
air
(as a substitute for water)
and
fitted
another
miraculous
Brahma missile against the previous Brahma
(of Karttavirya)
.
Thereupon, both the missiles came
into
collision, O
ruler
of
men. They increased in their brilliance like the blazing
sun in
the
horizon. On
seeing
that
wonderful
spectacle,
the
three
worlds including the Nether worlds became distressed as the two
miraculous missiles
continued
to
blaze. The
worlds
eagerly
wished for their
restraint.
31b-34a.
On
seeing
the imminent
destruction
of
the
universe, Rama remembered
what
had
been' spoken
to him
by Lord Kr§ruL Rama then thought thus—“Protection
should
be accorded
to
the
world.
This
miraculous
missile
should
be restrained. Destruction
to
the
world
should
be
prevented
by me who hold within myself the part of the Supreme Lord* \
After deciding thus, the holy lord of fierce
splendour drank up
both the miraculous missiles by means of his pair of eyes. There-
by he rendered the universe charming. Thereafter,
the
noble-

=== PAGE 312 ===

2.3.40.34*44
701
souled sage remained
meditating
for
a
short
while.
Due
to
the
power
of
his meditation,
both of the miraculous Brahma
missiles
were
rendered
bereft
of their
potentiality. They fell
down and immediately, the entire world regained normalcy.
34b-35a.
The son of Jamadagni was
the greatest among
great men. He was capable of creating,
protecting and destroy-
ing
everything.
Still,
in
order
to
conceal
his
supernatural
power,
he
carried
on the
usual
activities
of the
ordinary
people.
35b-38a.
He was a wielder of bows. He was the greatest
among heroes. He was the possessor of splendour. He was
the
leader of good men. He was
- the speaker of facts in an assembly.
He had put in sufficient efforts in the realm of
fine
arts,
lores
and sacred
literature. He
was
a wise scholar conversant with
the
injunctions
(of sacred
scriptures).
Thus
he
spread
his
name, fame and intrinsic ability in the mortal world.
After suppressing and rendering
the
pair
of miraculous
missiles calm and ineffective, Rama
once
again
resumed
his
activities towards the destruction of the leading member of the
family of Haihayas, in the battlefield.
38b-39a.
He took a pair of arrows from
his
quiver. He
fixed the feathered portions of the arrows to the
bowstring. He
was desirous of cutting
off
his
crcst-jewel
but aimed at
the
pair of the ears of the king which he thereafter cut off.
39b-41a.
The
noble-souled
king
who had
formerly
defeated all the heroes of the universe, had his ears cut
off now
and
he
realized
his prowess
lost and destroyed, O lord of the
Earth,
as he was humiliated by Rama. In a trice, O king,
the
body
of
the
king became faded and pale with all its dignity
and
splendour
vanished.
It was
perceived like a picture ofa
person much distressed in mind and painted by a good
artist.
41b-44a.
Then the king began to reflect
on
his
earlier
glory and prowess which he had acquired by defeating Paulastya
( i.e. Ravana) and others and which exceeded that
of any one
in the entire world and bewailed his
lot.
Desirous of victory,
the
king
closed
his
eyes
again and
meditated on Datta, the
beacon
light
of the
family of Atri. It was due to the blessings
of this powerful personality that he was able to
repudiate and
slight all other kings by means of his vitality.

=== PAGE 313 ===

702
Brahmdn$a Pur&na
When respectable Datta of great
power
and
proficiency
did
not come within his view,
the king became mifth
distress-
ed
in his heart and had
recourse
to
the
path
of meditation
over and over again.
44b-46a.
Even when meditated upon, O king, Datta did
not come
within
the purview
of his mind. The lord did not
come so because the king had committed
evil
actions. He had
harassed a saint of perfect restraint of the sense-organs, a good
man without any sin.
46b. Thus, when the noble-souled son of Atri was not seen
by the king through the path of meditation, he began
to grieve
with great sorrow. Due to grief he became
deluded
too. The
noble-souled Rama who could see through the mind of everyone
spoke thus to the king who was grief-stricken—“O king, do not
be distressed. Men of great magnanimity
do
not
grieve
over
anything.
47-49a.
It was I who incarnated in the primordial Sarga
(creation)
for the purpose of granting you
boons. Now I have
come to kill you. Take
courage
in
your mind.
There should
be
no
discussion
at
all
on
grief at
the
time
of
battle.
All the people experience
good and bad
effects
of
their own
actions brought about by fate, when
the
fruit
of
the
actions
become ripe. No one can bring about any
reversal of this good
and evil, O Ruler of men.
49b-52a.
Since you acquired much merit in
the
course
of many births, you became one who deserved the boons granted
by Datta. Now experience the fruit of your evil deeds acquired
by yourself.
My father had been
maltreated
by you.
Hence,
I
have
chopped off your
ears. Now you
can
see me taking off your
crestjewel by means ofmy vigour, after destroying your renown”.
After saying thus, the noble-souled scion of the
family
of
Bhrgu, fixed an arrow and
drew
the bow. He
discharged
it
against the king. With great rapidity and readiness
the
arrow
cut off the jewel and returned to Rama.
52b-55a.
On seeing this action of the
son
of
the
sage,
Arjuna, the upholder of the family of Haihayas, prepared him*
self to kill that Brahmana in battle—the
Brahmaria who
was
his enemy. He lifted up his weapons.
*

=== PAGE 314 ===

2.3.40.55-66
703
With different kinds of weapons such as
trident,
jevelin,
iron club, discus, sword, Paftifa and Tomara
(different
varie-
ties of iron clubs) he hit the son of the Br&hmana.
With great alacrity and alertness Rama, by means
of his
arrows,
cut
off
those
tridents
etc. hurled by him just in the
middle itself (while they darted at him)
.
55b-57a. The king sipped
air
(in lieu of water) ceremon-
iously and discharged the
excellent Agneya
(having
the
fire-
god as its deity)
missile
which Rama
suppressed
quickly by
means of Varuna (having Varuna for its deity) missile. The king
then discharged the
Gandharva
missile
(having Gandharva
as its deity) which the holy lord (Rama)
struck by means of a
Vayavya
(having wind god for its deity) missile.
57b-38.
Rama cut off the Naga missile (having serpents
for its deity ) by means of the Garuda (having Garuda
for its
deity)
missile, O King.
Thereafter,
for
slaying Bhargava in the
battle the king
took up the trident
that had been given to him by
Datta and
that had never been futile. He took
it up with due chanting
of
mantras.
That trident had the lustre of a hundred
suns.
It
could
not be checked by Suras or Asuras.
59.
Aiming it at Rama,
he
hurled
it
with
his
entire
strength. The trident fell on the head
of Bhargava, O lord of
the Earth.
60.
Due to the impact that he was
hit
by
the
trident,
Bhargava became pained. He became unconscious, O prominent
king, remembering Hari.
61.
When Bhargava fell
there,
all
the
Devas
became
agitated due to fear. Keeping Brahma, Visnu and
Mahe£vara
in front they all came there.
62.
Lord Sankara who has great knowledge and who
is
the conqueror of Death, himselfresuscitated Bhargava by means
of the Sahjivatii Vidyd .
63.
Regaining his consciousness, Rama saw the Suras in
front of him. O leading king, he bowed down to Brahma
and
other suras with devotibn.
m
64-66*.
On being eulogised by the leading member ofthe
family of Bhrgu, they disappeared immediately. After
sipping

=== PAGE 315 ===

704
Brahm&n<jla PurUna
air (in lieu of water)
ritualistically, Rama chanted
the Kavaca
mantra.
He got up with great fury. He appeared to burn everyone
by means of his eyes.
After recollecting the Pa£upata
missile
granted by Siva,
Bhargava immediately slew Karttavirya of great power.
That
king
who
was
a
devotee
of
Datta,
entered
Sudar£ana,
the discus of Visnu. His body became reduced
to
ashes, O son of Bahu.
CHAPTER FORTYONE
The Story of Bhargava
( continued )
Vasiffha continued
:
1.
On seeing
the
terrible
killing
of
their
father,
the
hundred sons of Karttavirya hurriedly resisted the
excessively
terrible
Bhargava
severally,
by
means of
their
respective
armies.
2.
Extremely infuriated at the death of their
father
all
those
sons who had an Aksauhini each and who were extreme-
m
ly ferocious in battle, offered a tumultuous fight.
3.
On seeing his herioc sons who were proficient in battle,
Rama took up his axe and fought
with them in battle.
4.
Within a short period of only two Muhurtas* , Rama
hurriedly slew that army consisting of a hundred Akfauhitiis * *
5.
On
seeing
their
armies
sportingly annihilated with
his axe by Rama, all of them of highly esteemed valour, fought
with Rama.
*Muhflrtac=48 minutes*
**A division of army consisting
of 21870
chariots,
as many
elephants,
65610 horse and 10350 foot-soldiers.

=== PAGE 316 ===

*2.3.41.6-14
705
6.
Striking
with
different
kinds
of
divine
weapons,
those sons of great valour
and
prowess
encircled
the
noblc-
souled Bhargava.
7.
The powerful holy lord Rama, stationed in the middle
of their circle, shone like the navel of a wheel.
8.
While the hundred princes were encircling him, R&ma
(facing each of them)
shone as if dancing
in
the' battle
like
Lord Krsna in the midst of Gopls
(cow-herd girls
of Vpida-
vana at the time of Rasa dance), and they
appeared
glorious
like the Gopis adance around Krsna.
9.
Then
the
Devas
with Brahma as their leader came
there seated in their respective aerial chariots.
They
showered
Rama of no unabated vigour, with garlands of flowers from the
Nandana garden in the heaven.
10.
The sound produced by the clash of weapons mingled
with
Huriikaras
(sounds
of Hum)
reached
the
firmament
like that of the triple symphony. The
wounds
caused
by
the
arrows appeared like those caused by nails and teeth.
1 1.
Those who had been wounded and injured
with
the
weapons began to scream like experts in vocal music who sang
at a high
pitch.
The
Devas
with
eyes
expressive
of great
wonder surveyed the battle zone of the
kings
that
proceeded
like this.
12.
Desirous of killing the sons of the king in battle
by
means
of
different
kinds
of excellent
missiles, Rama,
the
powerful lord wielding his bow, separated the stronger ones from
the group and formed a new line.
13.
He killed those heroic warriors one by one. Out
of
the hundred, five fled losing
all
courage
viz.
Sura,
Vrsasya,
Vr$asena, Surasena and Jayadhvaja.
14.
With their minds filled with great fright and desirous
of protecting their lives, those princes went into
the
forests
at
the foot of the Himalayas severally (Each entering
a
separate
forest). None of those afflicted and unhappy
ones
was
seen
afterwards.
1.
The
propriety
of comparison
in w. 7 and 8 as well as in w. 10
and
1 1 deserves reconsideration.

=== PAGE 317 ===

706
Brahmdntfa Purdna
15.
After slaying the other kings
also who had gathered
there to assist king Karttavlrya, Rama, accompanied by Akrta-
vrana joyously came to the river Narmada and took his bath.
16.
After taking bath, performing
his
daily
rites
and
worshipping the bull-emblemed lord, O lord of the
Earth,
he
set off in order to visit Lord Siva,
the resident of
the
Kailasa
mountain.
1 7.
He wanted also to meet Uma,
the
consort
of his
preceptor and Skanda and Vinayaka
their
sons.
This
noble-
souled sage
accompanied
by
Akrtavrana went
on
with
the
speed of the mind.
18.
After completing his task, he rejoiced much. Reach-
ing the Kailasa mountain instantly, he saw the great city named
Alaka.
19.
It was rendered beautiful by the mansions and pala-
ces studded with different kinds of precious
gems
and
jewels.
It appeared
splendid,
due
to
the
Yaksas who had assumed
various forms and who had ornaments of different and wonder-
ful types.
20.
It was full
of groves, parks and gardens
abounding
in many types of trees.
It was rendered beautiful by very large
lakes and tanks.
21-24.
It was externally surrounded by the Alakananda,
also called Sita (a branch of the Ganga)
.
There
the
elephants,
even when
they
are
not thirsty,
joyously drink
waters
turned
tawny
in
colour,
due
to the
saffron mixed into
it when the celestial damsels bathe in
it.
Here and there musical notes are heard,
produced
jointly
for ever by the Gandharvas and the Apsaras.
m
On
seeing
the
city, O
king,
Bhargava
rejoiced
excessively.
He went to the peak above it where
there was
the
great
abode
of
Siva.
Thereafter, O
leading
king,
he saw a great
Banyan tree with cool shade.
25. Beneath it, there was an excellent abode that was con-
nected
with
the
Siddhas
and
that
was worthy of residence.
There he saw a rampart wall extending to a hundred Yojanas.

=== PAGE 318 ===

2.3.41.26-40
707
26-30.
It was studded with different
kinds
of precious
stones and
jewels.
It was beautiful with four gateways.
It was
filled with Ganas. He saw
Nandisvara,
Mahakala,
Raktaksa,
Vikatodara,
Pingalaksa,
Visalaksa,
Virupaksa,
Ghatodara,
Mandara, Bhairava, Bana, Ruru who was very terrible, VIraka,
Virabhadra,
Canda
Blirngi,
Riti,
Mukha,
leading Siddhas,
Nathas, Rudras, Vidyadharas, the great
serpents,
the
Bhutas,
kretas,
Pisacas,
Kusmantjas,
Brahma-raksasas
Vetalas
leading Danavas,
leading
Yogins
with
matted
hair, Yaksas,
Kimpurusas, Dakinis and Yoginis.
On
seeing them he became glad and with the permission
ofNandin he entered
it.
31-32.
There he saw
Siva’s
palace
surrounded
by
the
world.
It extended to four Yojanas. At the eastern entrance he
saw Karttikeya and Vinayaka seated.
The former was
on
the
left
side
and
the
latter on
the
right
side. On seeing them,
Bhargava bowed down to both of them whose valour and exploit
were like that of Siva.
33.
The excellent Parsadas (attendants of Siva) and the
Ksetrapalas were
stationed
there.
They
were
adorned
with
bejewelled
ornaments
and
were
seated
on
thrones
set with
precious stones and jewels.
34.
Vinayaka enquired of Bhargava as he
was
entering
Siva’s palace and said—“O great Sir. stay for a while.
35-3 7a.
Mahadcva
is sleeping now
in
the company
of
Uma.
I shall go in, take the permission of the lord
and
come
back within a moment. Then I shall enter along with you, dear
brother. Stand here now.”
On hearing these words of Vinayaka, the delightef of the
family of Bhrgu began to speak to Gariesa in a hurry.
Rama said
:—
37b-40.
Dear brother,
I shall go into
the harem, bow
down to
Parvati and
Sankara, the
sovereigns of the Universe,
and shall immediately return to my own abode.
Karttavirya, as well
as
Sucandra along with their sons,
relatives
and
the
armies,
thousands
of other
kings
of the
Kambojas, Palhavas, Sakas, Kanyakubjas, lords of Kosalas and
others who were extremely powerful and who were
experts
in

=== PAGE 319 ===

708
Brahmfoyia Purdna
the use of Maya (power of illusion) —all these had been
killed
by me, due to the favour of Sambhu. Hence, I shall bow down
to him and go back to my own house”.
41.
After saying this, Bhargava stood
there
in
front
of
Ganapati. The lord of Ganas then spoke these sweet
words
to
Bhargava.
Vindyaka said
:
42-43.
“Stop for a while, O highly fortunate
one.
You
will
certainly
see
the
lord.
Now, O
brother, the lord of the
Universe
is in the company of Bhavanl.
He who spoils the pleasure of a man and a women seated
together in the same seat, shall surely go to hell.
44
Especially this is definitely decided that a Brahmana
shall never see his father, preceptor or king, enjoying privacy.
45.
Whether
out
of carnal
desire
or
otherwise,
if
a
person sees another person inclined to sexual intercourse, he shall
have
to suffer certainly separation from his wife
in
the
course
of seven births.
46.
He
is a
base
man—he who looks at the buttocks,
*
breasts and face of another man’s
wife,
his
mother,
sister or
daughter”.
Bh&rgava said
:
47.
O,
unusual
and
unprecedented
words have
been
heard
from
your mouth.
Have
they come
out due to your
mistake or have you uttered them jocularly ?
48.
The
restriction
from
the
scripture
cited
by you
refers to lovers and passionate ones prone to aberrations. There
is no fault in case of an infant or a person devoid of passionate
feelings.
49.
I will get into the harem brother.
What have
you
to
object
to
in this matter, O boy.
Stand by.
I shall do in
accordance
with
what
is
seen
and what
is
relevant to the
occasion, there.
50.
It
is
there
that our mother and father are
present
as
observed
by you and they are the parents of all the worlds,
Parvatl and Paramesvara”.

=== PAGE 320 ===

2.3.41.51—42.1
70S
51.
After saying this, O king, Bhargava attempted to go
in. Vinayaka got up in a hurry and restrained him.
52.
There was a wordy warfare between them and then,
a
tug and pull
at each other's hands. On seeing this, Skanda
became bewildered and wanted them to realize their mistake.
53.
He seized both of them with his
hands
and pushed
them away from each other.
Then
the
infuriated
Bhargava,
the
slayer
of
heroic
enemies, took up his axe and attempted to hurl it at Gane£a.
54-55.
The elephant-faced lord (Ganesa)
saw
that
the
excellent scion
of the
family
of Bhrgu was about to hurl
his
axe against himself with great rapidity due to his anger. There-
fore, he lifted
Bhargava
by
means
of
his hand quickly
and
took him
to
the
different worlds
viz. Bhurloka, Bhuvarloka,
Svarloka,
Maharloka
above
it, Janaloka,
Tapo-Loka
and
Satyaloka and then brought him to Vaikuntha.
The son of Isa
(i.e. Siva’s son) then showed
the
Goloka
to the excellent scion of the family of Bhrgu. Then he
let him
fall
down
to
the
seven
nether-worlds and showed them also.
He then lifted him up
once
again
and
hurled
him
into the
midst of the waters rapidly.
This
made
Bhargava
frightened
and he became desirous of protecting his own life. Then Ganesa
brought him to the same place where he was standing before.
CHAPTER FORTYTWO
The Story ofDhdrgava
(continued)
Vasiffha said
:
1
.
On being whirled thus, O lord of the
Earth,
by
the
Chief of Ganas, Rama became overwhelmed
with
joy
(at
his.
final return to Kailasa ?) and
grief, considering his own
defeat
and discomfiture.

=== PAGE 321 ===

710
Brahmdntfa Pur&ria
2.
On seeing
Ganesa
stationed
there
unaffected
and
unconcerned in front of him, Rama
became much
infuriated.
He hurled his axe at him.
3.
Perceiving that the axe had been giv^n to him
by
his
father, GaneSa became desirous of maning
it not to go in
vain.
Hence, he received
it with his left tooth
(tusk)
.
4.
Chopped off by the axe, the tusk fell on
the
ground,
covered
with
blood
like a mountain
that
fell on the ground
when struck by Indra’s thunderbolt.
5.
The
Earth
consisting
of
oceans,
continents
and
mountains was tossed up due to the fall of the tooth, O protec-
tor of the Earth.
It shook
and
trembled.
All
people
became
frightened.
6.
There was a great hue and cry among the Devas who
were
watching
it
from
the firmament. Karttikeya and others
became afflicted very much and cried aloud.
7.
On
hearing the
crashing
sound
of the
fall
of the
tooth
as well as the chaotic uproar of the people raising a hue
and
cry, the sovereigns (of the world)
Parvatl
and
Sankara
came there.
8.
In front of her, Parvatl saw Heramba
(i.e.
Ganesa)
with bent snout and single tusk. She asked Skanda
the
reason
thereof, saying—“What
is this ?”
9.
On being asked by
his
mother,
the Commander-in-
chief of the Devas Skanda mentioned detailsjfrom the beginning
to his mother, even as Rama was
listening
to
it.
10.
On
hearing
the
detailed
report of the
incident
wholly, O king, Parvatl, the mother of all the worlds,
became
angry. She spoke to Sankara, her dear husband
Pdrvati complained
:
11-13.
“O Sambhu, this
is your disciple Bhargava
who
was treated on a par with your sons. Olord,
it
was
from
you
that he acquired Varman
(i.e. Kavaca—coat of Mail
or
esoteric
Protective Mantra) of great splendour and capable of conquer-
ing the three worlds. He defeated Karttaviryarjuna, the power-
ful king, in battle. After achieving his own object, he has now
given you the requisite fees viz. he has chopped
off your
own

=== PAGE 322 ===

2.3.42.14-23
711
son’s tusk with his axe and let it fall. Undoubtedly you will be
satisfied with this state of affairs.
14.
Protect
this
Bhargava,
your
excellent
disciple, O
Sambhu. He will execute all the tasks of
yours,
his
excellent
preceptor.
15.
I shall not stay
here, O
lord,
since
I
have
been
slighted and dishonoured by you.
I shall go
to the
abode
of
my own father accompanied by both of my sons.
16- 17a.
Good men
treat
even
the
son
of an enslaved
maid servant on a par with their own son. But even
your own
son has not even orally been consoled by you. Hence, I am
dis-
tressed.
I shall go away”.
Vasiffha said
:
17b- 18.
On
hearing
these words of Parvati, lord Bhava
did not utter any word good
or bad, O lord of the Earth. He
mentally remembered lord Krsna, the destroyer of
the
distress
of those who bow down to him, the lord of Goloka,
the lord of
the cowherdesses, an
expert
in
different
kinds
of appeasing
tactics.
19. Even as he was remembered , lordKesava, the destroyer
of the distress of those who bow down to him,
the
lord
of
all
who submits Himself to the control of his
devotees,
the
ocean
of kindness, came there.
20.
He was as dark as the cloud. His
face was
splendid
and bright. He had armlets and necklace studded with
precious
gems.
His
garments
sparkled
like
the
lightning. He wore
earrings resembling
sharks and
crest-jewel
embellished
with
peacock feathers and studded with jewels. A gentle smile played
over his face. The
lord
of
the
cowherdesses had
Kaustubha
sparkling
on
his
chest.
His
good renown
was
loudly
pro-
claimed by everyone.
21-23.
The glorious unvanquished lord was accompanied
by
Radha
and
Sridaman.
The
ocean
of knowledge,
he
surpassed
the
splendour
of everyone
by means
of
his own
splendour.
On seeing him come Siva became delighted in
his
mind.
After duly bowing down to him, he worshipped the visitor.

=== PAGE 323 ===

712
Brahmdnfja Pur&ru*
Ushering the lord accompanied by Radha into
the
inner
apartment, he made him seated on a
beautiful
throve studded
with gems and jewels along with his wife.
24-27.
Then goddess
Parvati went
there
accompanied
by her sons. Along with her sons she bowed down to
the
feet
of the god and goddess with great joy.
Rama too went there. With his neck bent down,
he
fell
down near the feet of Parvati, his mind utterly agitated.
When Parvati did not welcome Bhargava who had bowed
down in front of her, the lord of the Universe said thus delight-
ing her with his words.
&ri Krsna said
:
•
•
•
28.
O daughter of the mountain, O
goddess
of
infinite
good qualities, O lady of beautiful face that surpasses
in beauty
the
moon, keep
this son ofJamadagni on your lap. Let your
lotus-like hands be placed on his head.
29.
O
goddess
who
removes
the
fear
from
worldly
existence, O gentle lady with whom Sambhu
sports
about, O
destroyer of sins O beautiful lady with the gait of an elephant,
protect (Rama) who has ever fallen at
your
feet.
Grant him
boons even if he has committed sins.
30-32.
O gentle lady of great fortune, listen to my words
as the words of the Vedas. On hearing them you will undoubt-
edly become delighted. Vinayaka your son,
is a noble soul. He
is greater than the greatest.
Neither lust nor anger, neither agony due
to
frustration
nor fear enters his mind
at
any
time. O
beautiful
lady,
his
meritorious names have been recounted by
noble
souls
in
the
Vedas, Smftis, Puranas and the Samhita texts.
I shall
mention
them all as they dispel
all sins.
33.
There are groups of Pramathas who are very strong
and who
have
various forms and sizes. Since your son
is the
lord of those groups, he is glorified as GaneSa .
34.
All
the
cosmic
eggs
( Brakm&ntfas )
of the
past,
present and future are m him. Hence, he
is called Lambodara,
35.
Since his head, O
gentle
lady,
had
been
cut
off
accidentally and
the
head
of an
elephant
had
been
fitted
therein, he
is declared as Gaj&nana .

=== PAGE 324 ===

2.3.42.36-44
713
36.
The moon that rose up on the
fourth
day
(of
the
lunar fortnight)
was
cursed
by
Darbhin.1
Hence
he became
sick. But he was held up by this son of yours on
his
forehead.
Therefore, he is remembered as Bhdlacandra.
37.
Jatavcdas (the fire-god) was formerly cursed by
the
seven
sages
and
he
was
completely
extinct.
He
was
then
kindled
by
your son
by
flapping
his
ears
?.
Hence he
is
Surpakarnaka.
38.
Formerly, on
the
eve
of
the
battle
between
the
Devas and the Asuras, he was
worshipped
by
the
groups
of
heaven-dwellers. He dispelled the obstacles
of
his
worshippers.
Therefore, he
is remembered- as Vighnandiaka .
39.
Today, O gentle lady, he has
been made
Ekadanta
(Having a single tusk) by
this Rama after making the tusk
fall
off accidentally.
40.
O beloved
one
of Hara,
in
a
future
creation
of
Brahma, his snout shall become bent. Hence, he is remembered
by
scholars as Vakralunda.
41.
Thus there are many names of your son, O
Parvatl.
On being remembered, they dispel sins of
the
three
units
of
time (past, present, future).
42-1-4.
Prior
to
this
thirteenth
Kalpa,
in
the
tenth
creation
(Kalpa ), a boon had been granted to him by me—that
of being worshipped before all other Devas.
There
is no doubt in this that all tasks can be accomplish-
ed by
one who
worships
Gajanana
in
all
these
rites
viz.
Jatakarman
(the
consecratory
rite
at
the
time of birth) and
other holy rites,
Garbhddhdna
etc.
(holy
rites
in
connection
with
conception)
, Tdtrd
(journey),
Vdnijya
(Business
trade),
Tuddha
(battle),
the
auspicious
rites
of
worshipping
the
Devas and in adversities. One shall
then worship
Gane£a
for
1.
He was an ancient sage who created
a
sacred
spot
called Ardha-
klfa in Kuruk$etra. A person performing
a
thread
ceremony
or
fast at
it,
became
the
master of
Mantras.
Once Darbhin brought four oceans to this
holy spot {Mbh. Vana 83-154-57) But his cursing the moon is recorded
only
in this text.

=== PAGE 325 ===

714
Brahm&ntfa Purana
t
the achievement of the cherished desire. There is no doubt that
all his undertakings become successful. 1
Vasiffha said
:
45.
On hearing these words uttered by the
very
noble-
souled Krsna, Parvati, the goddess of all the
worlds,
the
lady
of splendid face, became surprised.
46.
When Parvati did not offer any
reply
in
the
pre-
sence of Siva, goddess Radha, identical with the
eternal
form
of Siva spoke thus.
Sri Radha said
:
47-48. “The Prakrti and the Purusa—these two are inter-
dependent.
In this
world
they
appear
as
though
they
are
split into two.
You and
I are one. There
is
no difference
between
us.
You are Visnu and I am Siva who has duplicated in form.
49.
In the heart of Siva, Visnu has assumed
your
form
and in the heart of Visnu, Siva has assumed my form. 2
50.
This Rama, O highly fortunate
lady,
is a
Vaisnava
(form of Visnu) transformed into a Saiva (form of Siva)
.
This
Ganesa is Siva himself transformed into Visnu.
•
•
•
51-52.
No
difference
is
really seen
between
us
both
and between the two lords”.
After saying this, Radha placed
Gajanana on
her
lap,
sniffed at his
head
and touched
his
cheeks
with
her
hand.
Immediately
after being
touched,
the wound
in
the cheek
healed completely.
53-55a.
On being appeased
by
Radha,
Parvati became
delighted. With her hand, she lifted up Rama who
had
fallen
at
her
feet.
Parvati
placed him
on
her
lap
and
became
extremely pleased after sniffing at his head.
1 .
It shows that the custom of Gapeia-worship
before
the
beginning
of an auspicious act, was prevalent at the time of Bd. P.
2.
Like
other
Pur&nas,
Bd. P.
advocates
the- identity
of
Siva and
Vi*nu—a sort of a rapproachement between Vaifpavism and Saivism.

=== PAGE 326 ===

2.3.42.55b—43.3
715
On seeing the honour accorded to Rama
and
Ganesa,
Krsna pulled Skanda towards him and lovingly placed him
on
his own lap.
55b-56.
Sambhu too who
was
delighted and who
was
the bestower of honour,
greeted
lovingly Andaman who
was
standing nearby and placed him on his lap.
CHAPTER FORTYTHREE
The Story of Bhargava
{Continued)
Vasiffka said
:
1-2.
While they remained thus with
affectionate
hearts
and minds, O lord of the Earth, Rama got up from the
lap
of
BhavanL With palms joined
in
reverence,
self-restrained
and
with
purity
of mind, he eulogised devoutly the Supreme Lord
that has no particular features
as
though
it
has
them, who
(though) non-dual, has
attained
duality
and who
(though)
a quality-less entity has become possessed of qualities.
Rdma prayed1
:
3.
This Universe
is born of the products of Prakrti
(i.e.
of the seven
Principles
beginning
with
Mahat). How much
enlightenment or capacity do I have tp make
it or
to measure
it ? The person whose body and name are unknown
(i.e. Siva)
has become the sole abode and support
of
all
desired
objects.
Hence*
let the beloved of god Siva
i.e. goddess Parvati who has
fulfilled all desire* protect me.
I.
The alliteration of certain syllables
(e.g. nam and
ta(i in v.4a and 4b
and of £{ in v.5,
si and no in v.6a and 6b are worth noting.
In
this
omnibus prayer,
Parasurama
eulogizes
the
important mem-
bers of Siva's family, Radha and K.r?Q* who helped him out of
the
impasse
after smashing down Gapeia's tusk.

=== PAGE 327 ===

716
Brahmdn <Ja Purdna
4.
The fact that Pradhana
( the primordial
principle
of
Prakrti)
is glorified as one
whose
qualities
become
manifest,
one that evolves
( units of)
time and number
one who
is
the
primary cause of Samsara. O mother, let the fail of your vision
(i.e. glance) which makes artificial
falls, protect me now.
5.
Let that god who eats with six mouths (i.e. Karttikeya)
protect me always—that god who destroys the race of demons,
who dispels the distress of the Devas*; who
develops the
race
of the Pramathas (Siva’s attendants), who reveals all
lores, who
made the city of Ka£! all on a sudden, who grants all
blessings
to the devotees and who conquered Varuna.
6.
Let not (Vighnesvara) be
the
person who
destroys
fame— (Vighnesvara) who habitually stays near Hara
(Siva),
who does the graceful work of serving Krsna,
who
makes
the
people who bow down to him, shine, who makes the cowherdess
lasses laugh, who
is
respected
even by
Hara, who
is single-
minded by being devoted
to
the
lord
of Gowherdesses
(i.e.
Krsna) and who has understood many types of expedients.
7.
Krsna deserves to forgive my offence though it be too
much
grievous,
Krsna who
has
restrained
his
mind
and
directed
it towards the lord
(Supreme
Lord—;Siva), who
has
dispelled
the
obstacles
of his
devotees, who
has
removed
Multitudes of sins, who
is the bestower ofknowledge upon those*
who have no wealth, who possesses
all weighty
good qualities
and who lies in the lap of Radha.
8.
Let that leader protect me
as
I bow
dovyn
to
the
leader who is glorified as Radha, who is propitiated by the people
at the
times of outcome,
maintenance
and
annihilation
of
the Universe, who makes
others understand
the word
that
is
conducive to the appreciation of the
nectar
of
love
exuding
from
the mouth of the Lord, who is the sovereign of the Rasa
dance,
who
is
the
goddess
oi
the
Rasikas
(who
have
aesthetic sense)
and who delights persons belonging to her
fold
by means of her strict adherence to the heart of her lover.
9.
Let her ever be pleased, she from
whose womb was
born the Ativirdf
(extremely
Superior
Being)
and
of whom,
*Emended
as
Ukha-t&pa-praodfi
for
Ukha-p&t&vin&il
as
the
text
is
obscure.

=== PAGE 328 ===

2.3.43.10-16
717
Vir&f forms but a
part.
This
entire
world
consisting
of
the
mobile and
immobile
beings
is
created
by Brahma who
was born of the lotus coming out of the navel of the
Lord
and
who had been instructed in a secluded spot. The
cosmic Eggs
shine
in the pores of the hairs of the body of
the
Lord.
Let
her who is the mother of that lord be pleased always.
10.
Let Krsna be merciful to me, Kr$na who
is the lord
#
of the Universe consisting of the mobile and immobile
beings;
who
is all-pervading; who is the ocean of Existence, Knowledge
and Bliss, and who
gracefully
manifests himself along
with
Radha, who is blind due to love. Let Kfsna who is perfect
and
complete be merciful to me whereby
I shall become meritorious
and shall be able to get myself merged in Bliss.”
Vasiffha said
:
11.
After eulogising thus the Supreme
one,
the
son
of
Jamadagni stopped. He who had understood the
meanings
of
all principles had the hair of his body standing
on
their
ends
w
as though he had realized his wishes.
12.
Then the 'lotus-eyed Krsna who was delighted in
his
mind said to Bhargava who bowed down to him devoutly, who
deserved his sympathy and stood in front of him.
Kr$na said
:
13. O prominent member of the family of Bhfgu
f You
are now a spiritually accomplished
person,
due
to my
bless-
ings. Now onwards, O dear one, be the
most
excellent
person
in this world.
1 4.
Formerly, at the penance grove of Visnupada, boon
had been granted to you by me. O holy
lord,
everything
will
take place in the course of many years.
15.
Kindness should be shown
towards
the
miserable
and the wretched ones, by one who wishes for excellent welfare.
Yoga should be practised and
the
destruction
of
the enemies
should be done as well.
16.
There is no one equal to you in this world in
regard
to splendour and physical strength. By means of knowledge and
renown too, you are the most excellent one among all*

=== PAGE 329 ===

718
Brahmdn^a Purina
17.
After reaching your
house,
render
service
to your
parents; perform penance at the proper time. Thereby achieve-
ment of the spiritual goal shall be within your reach’*.
18.
The lord of Rad ha
then lifted up Ganesa from the
lap of Radha, embraced him closely and made him
friendly
to
Rama.
19.
At
the
behest
of Krsna, O Suppressor of foes, both
Rama and Ganesa, of excessively great fortune became
highly
delighted.
20.
In the meantime, goddess Radha, the chaste beloved
of Krsna, rejoiced and granted
boons
to
both
of them
with
pleasure evident in her face.
Rddha said
:
21.
Your
two
sons
shall
be
worthy
of reverence
of
all the worlds as
well
as
their
delighters.
You
will
become
invincible. Particularly you will be my devotees.
m
22.
If anyone utters your names and begins any task,
he
shall achieve success in that task. Everything
shall
be due
to
my blessings”.
23-24.
Then Bhavan!, the beloved of Bhava (Siva),
the
mother of the Universe said
:
“Dear Rama, I am delighted with you. What boon
shall
I grant you ? Mention that O highly fortunate one, after giving
up your fear.”
Rdma said
:
Grant me this boon that I shall become
the
devotee
of
*
Krsna and his beloved as well as of Bhava and his
beloved,
in
the thousands of future births that I may
be
destined
to take.
I shall
see
no
difference
between
Krsnas
(i.c.
Krsna and
Radha) and Bhavas (Bhava and Bhavani) .” 1
Pdrvati said
:
25.
“Let it be
so, O highly fortunate one. You
are
the
devotee of Bhava
( Siva)
and
Krsna. Due
to my
blessings,
O sage of holy rites, be long-lived.”
1.
This Puraria
specifically
tries
to
bring
together
Vai?pavism and
Saivism. The boon sought and granted here emphasizes this.

=== PAGE 330 ===

2.3.43.26-32
719
26.
Then
the
delighted
lord
of
the
mountain >
the
husband of Uma, the
lord of the Universe said to the
leading
member of the family of Bhrgu,
who bowed down
and who
deserved a boon.
Siva said
:
27.
“O dear one, O Rama, you
are my devotee.
The
boon
that
I
have
granted
you
already
shall
be
entirely
fruitful in your case. Truth has been mentioned by me.
It
shall
never be otherwise.
28.
From now onwards there
shall
be no
one
in
this
world stronger than you or possess more splendour than you.”
Vasiffha said
:
29.
After taking
permission of Siva and
the
daughter
of the mountain, Uma, Kf?na
went
back
to Goloka
accom-
panied by Sridaman and Radha.
30.
Then the righteous Rama, worshipped Bhavan! and
Bhava. After prostrating he circumambulated them.
3 1 .
After bowing down to and
taking
leave
of Ganesa
and Karttikeya, O lord of the Earth, he set out for
the
house,
accompanied by Akrtavrana.
32.
Setting
out, Rama
was bowed down
to
by
the
Ga^as chief of whom was Nandlsvara, and O
king,
he went
home with great joy.