=== PAGE 6 ===

THE
BRAHMANDA PURANA

PART V

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS
PRIVATE LIMITED @ DELHI

=== PAGE 7 ===

First Edition: Delhi, 1959
Reprint: Delhi, 1999

Also available at:
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS

41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007
8 Mahalaxmi Chamber, Warden Road, Mumbai 400 026
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004
Sanas Plaza, 1302, Baji Rao Road, Pune 411 002
16 St. Mark’s Road, Bangalore 560 001
8 Camac Street, Calcutta 700 017
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001

UNESCO COLLECTION OF REPRESENTATIVE WORKS—Indian Series.
This book has been accepted in the Indian Translation Series
of the UNESCO Collection of Representat:ve Works
jointly sponsored by the United Nations.
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) and the Government of India.

PRINTED IN INDIA
BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS, A-45 NARAINA,
INDUSTRIAL AREA, PHASE I, NEW DELHI 110 028 AND PUBLISHED BY
NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE,
BUNGALOW ROAD, DELHI 110 007

=== PAGE 8 ===

CONTENTS

PART V
LALITA-MAHATMYA
(Continued)
CHAPTERS
31. Manifestation of Seven Chambers and the

32.

33.

34,

35.

36.
37.

38.
39.
40.
41.
42.

43.

44.

daughters of Matanga

Manifestation of the guardian deities of the
seven chambers of Tripura in Srinagara
Seven Chambers beginning with Topaz
rampart and ending with the rampart of Pearls
The Region of Siva and of the guardians of
quarters

The preparation of materials of worship in
Mahapadmatavi

The Inner Chamber of Cintamani
Description of other inner Apartments in
the Royal Chamber

Procedure of Practising the Royal mantra
Glory of the Goddess Kamaksi

Greatness of Kamaksi .

Propitiation of Goddess Kamaksi

Various Mudras, Mystical Gestures with the
fingers

Types of Initiation and the True Service of
the Preceptor

Meditation on the Goddess

ILLUSTRATION : Sri Cakra
INDEX

1227
1237
1244
1253

1261
1271

1280
1289
1299
1311
1324

1334

1336
1349
1365

1367

=== PAGE 10 ===

LALITA MAHATMYA
(Continued)

=== PAGE 12 ===

CHAPTER THIRTYONE
Manifestation of Seven Chambers and the daughters of Matanga
Agastya said :

1. Whatis this called Sripura ?? Of what form and nature
is it? By whom was it built at the outset formerly. Narrate
everything to me.

2. What is its extent ? What is its colour? Tell me, O
holy lord. You alone are the veritable sun for drying up the
mud of doubts.

Hayagriva said :

3-4. Lalita Paramesvari who was born out of the great
sacrificial fire, carried out the playful activity viz. of marriage
(with KameSvara). On being requested by Brahma and others,
she (secured the chariot Cakraratha endowed with all the
characteristics mentioned before) and defeated the Asura named
Bhanda who was thorn (a source of trouble) for the whole
world.

5. Thereupon, Devas beginning with lord Mahendra
attained great satisfaction. They, therefore, were eager to
build a splendid mansion for Kameévara and Lalita, fully
furnished with all the objects of daily utility and enjoyment.

6-7 Brahma, Visnu and Maheévara, the sons of Lalita
devi, invited Visvakarman! the carpenter of the Devas, skilled
in all mechanical arts and crafts as well as Maya, the
architect of the Asuras, who was ‘a great expert in employ-
ing Maya. At the behest of Lalita, they received them duly
and said.

Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, the Authorized officials Said :

8. O Vigvakarman ! Conversant with all arts and crafts,
O Maya of great prosperity, you both are well-versed in all

1. The present chapter deals with the construction of the capital of
Sri-Lalité and her consort Kameévara. The trinity of gods—Brahma, Visnu
and Maheégvara, the sons of Lalita Devi, commissioned Vigvakarman
and Maya, the architects of Devas and Asuras to build the cities Sripura
or Sri-nagari.

=== PAGE 13 ===

1228 Brahmanda Purdne

sciences (of engineering and architecture), you are experts in
the process of building up and creation.

9-10. By mere conception and imagination, you both
can evolve wonderful constructions of great artistry. Sri-Nagaris
should be built by you both for the sake of Lalitadevi who is
the great ocean of eternal wisdom. They should be embellished
with different kinds of jewels. They must be in the centres of
the sacred spots of Sodagis and should be sixteen in number.

11. It will be there that Lalita Paramesvari after divid-
ing herself into sixteen (distinct forms)! for the sake of protect-
ing the universe, will stay permanently.

12. This is pleasing to us. It is pleasing to the gods too.
It is also pleasing to all the worlds. Let it be built under that
name itself.

13. After listening attentively to these words of
Karanadevas (Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, executive officials among
gods in charge of specific activities such as creation, sustenance
etc.), Visvakarman and Maya bowed to them and spoke—
“Let it be so’’.

14. After bowing down once again, both of them asked
the Karanapurusas —‘“‘In which sacred spots should the
Srinagaris of great prosperity be built?”

15. On being asked thus, Brahma and others spoke to
those artisans once again, assigning the divisions of the sacred
spots in a befitting manner.

Karanapurusas said:

16-17. The earthly (terrestrial) sacred spots are nine. The
first one is on the top of Meru mountain, then on the Nisadha
mountain, on mount Hemakita and on the Himalaya. The
fifth one ison the Gandhamadana. The other four (sacred
spots are) on the Nila, Mesa, Srngara (v.l. Spiga) and the

1, The number sixteen has a special significance in this Mahatmya.
The letters of Lalité’s full Mantra are sixteen, so are her forms and as
shown below (vv.16-20) the same number of sacred spots—nine mountains
on the carth+seven occans—are the sacred sites for building Sri-nagaris.

=== PAGE 14 ===

Lalita-mahdtmya 31.18-29 1229

great mountain Mahendra. These are known as the, nine
terrestrial sacred spots.

18-20. The Aquatic sacred spots are declared as seven.
They are in the seven oceans, viz. the salt sea, the sea of
sugarcane juice, the sea of liquor, the sea of ghee, the sea of
curds, the sea of milk and the seventh one the sea of pure water.

Thus nine great mountains have been mentioned before,
afterwards seven oceans have also been mentioned. Adding
together there are sixteen sacred spots for building the Sripura
of Amba. You are artisans and craftsmen skilled in erecting
buildings of divine workmanship. In those sacred spots, you
do build the divine mansions of Lalita of great prowess.

21. The names of the mansions of Devi who killed
the great Asuras shall be famous certainly by the names
of the Nitya deities.

22. That supreme Deity by her Nitya form pervades
Kala. The goddess controls the whole of the world by her
power of subduing.

23-24. She is the great quecn of the Nitya deities.
Hence she is Nitya. There is no difference between them.
Hence the different cities are famous by the respective names
of the Nityas such as Kameévaripuri, Bhagamalapuri, Nitya-
klinnapuri etc., These names are well-known.

25. Hence, both of you build the excellent city in
accordance with the great principle of architecture (begin-
ning) on an auspicious and suitable day, (on the day fitting
with the initial letter of the name ?)

26. On being told thus by Brahma, Visnu and
Mahefvara, who were the leaders entrusted with the work of
causation (i.e. creation, sustenance and annihilation) both
of them built Sripuris in the different sacred spots.

27. Further, I shall mention the extent of Sripura and
the deities presiding over the cities. Listen attentively, O
husband of Lopamudra.

28-29. The mountain Meru? is the support of everything.
It is many Yojanas in height. Its body passes through all the

1. The Verses 28ff describe Sripura on mount Meru, Though
Pamirs are identified with Meru, the mountain described here is fictitious.

=== PAGE 15 ===

1230 Brahménda Purdga

fourteen worlds. It has four peaks in the east, in south-west,
in north-west and in the middle. Their height is being
mentioned.

30. The three peaks mentioned in the beginning are
each hundred Yojanas in height. There are three Lokas (worlds)
there.

31. They are Brahmaloka, Visnuloka and Sivaloka. I
shall narrate how the abodes are arranged in these worlds on
another occasion.

32. Listen to the extent and height of the peak in the
middle. It is four hundred Yojanas in height and extent.

33. It was on that great peak that Sripura was
built by the artisans. O Pot-born sage, it extended to four
hundred Yojanas.

34. The various divisions therein are being pointed out
to you severally.

It is said that the first (outermost) fort-wall was built
of iron.

35. Its circumference was a thousand and sixteen
Yojanas. It had gateways in the four directions. Its height
was four Yojanas.

36. The girth of the root of the chamber (i.e. at the
bottom) was, O sage who drank the ocean, ten thousand
Yojanas. Two Krogas beneath the top, separate windows were
made.

37. The height of the doorway of the chamber was a
Yojana. In every gateway there were two door panels each half
a Gavyiti wide (i.e. one Kroéa).

38. Every door frame was a Yojana in height and was
made of iron. The bar for fastening the two door panels was
half a Krofa long.

continued from previous page
This Sripwia had seven ramparts and enclosures, The walls were made of
iron, bronze, lead, copper, silver, gold and within each enclosure the
garden of heavenly trees viz. Kalpa, Santana, Hari-Candana Mandara,
P&rijata etc. The palace of Mantrini had a park of Kadamba trees.

‘The structures e.g. Gopuras show that the Mahatmya was composed
bya South Indian. Constant reference to Kaiicl Kamakostha etc. confirms
this theory.

=== PAGE 16 ===

Lalita-mahatmya 31.39-50 1231

39. Thus everything was the same in all the four door-
ways. I shall mention the situation regarding the principal gate
(Gopura) , O Pot-born sage.

40-43. (Partially defective text). At the foot of the
enclosure mentioned before, a distance of a Yojana is left in
the middle. On either side, two Yojanas are taken and the
whole edifice is erected.

The width is also the same with the doorway in the middle.
Two Yojanas on either side and one Yojana of the
enclosure in the middle. Together O sage, the extent
comes to five Yojanas. The two sides (? side-domes etc.) were
two and a half Krogas wide; each together the width comes to
five Yojanas (? Krogas). It was thus, O sage, that the Gopura
(ornamental gateway) was built.

44. Hence the total girth at the bottom of the Gopura
was twenty Yojanas (i.e. a square of sides each five Yojanas
in length). The higher we go up the Gopura the girth
decreases.

45. The height of the Gopura is mentioned as twentyfive
Yojanas, At intervals of a Yojana each there were beautiful
doorways with doors.

46. The storeys were alsoas many. The higher one
ascended the narrower they became. The extent of the top of
Gopura was one Yojana.

47. The length also was the same. But three crowns
(domelike structure) were fixed there. The extent of the dome,
O Pot-born sage was a KroSa.

48, The height of each crown was two Kroéas, the
tapering feature, O sage, was the same as in the case of
Gopura, The space within the crown (or between two crowns)
was measured as half a Kroéa.

49. On the Gopura of the southern gateway the crowns
were arranged from west to east. On the Gopura of the wes-
tern gateway the crowns were arranged from south to North.

50. It is said that the crowns on the northern gateway
were arranged as in the case of the southern gateway. The
arrangement of the crowns on the Eastern gateway was the
same as in the case of the western gateway.

=== PAGE 17 ===

1232 Brahmanda Purdna

51. Within the enclosure (chamber) named Kalayasa
(ie. one made of iron) at a distance of seven Yojanas was the
Karsyasala (bronze enclosure). Within the enclosure of bronze
the arrangement of Gopuras etc. was in the same way as
before.

52. The girth of the enclosure at the bottom is describ-
ed as before. This enclosure of bronze too had doorways in the
east and other quarters.

53-54. There were Gopuras on every gateway with the
characteristic features of steps (or storeys). The annular space
between the iron enclosure and the bronze enclosure, O Pot-
born sage, was a big park with various trees. Whatever
Udbhijja (sprouting and germinating species i.e. plants and
trees etc.), (was in the world) was also there.

55. There were thousands of trees with perpetual blos-
som flowers and fruits. They possessed the splendour of tender
sprouts for ever. They were endued with perpetual fragrance.

56-64. There were thousands of trees* such as mangoes,
Kankolaka (a plant with waxy aromatic berries, Piper cubela),
Lodhra (symptocos racemosa Roxb), Bakula (Mimusops elengi) ,
Karnikara (cassia fistula Linn) , Simsapa (Dalbergia sissoo Roxb),
Sirisa (Acacia sirissa), Devadéru (Himalayan Cidar) Nameru
{Elaeocarpus Ganitrus), Punndga Nagabhadra, Mucakunda (Ptero-
permunt suberifolium), Kajphala (Kayphal in marathi, for
description MW.), cardamons, cloves Takkola (Pimenta
acris), camphor trees, Pilu (salvadora Persica), Ka@katunda
(the dark Agallochum) , Sdlaka (N. of a tall tree), Asana (the
tree Terminalia Tomentosa), Kdiicana (a plant akin to Premna
spinosa), Ara (A kind of plant) , Lakuca (Artocarpus Lacucha—
akind of bread fruit tree), Jack-fruit tree, Hingula, Pdfala
(Bignonia Suaveolens—tree bearing trumpet flowers), Phalini
(a species of plant Priyaigu), Twisted Ficus oppositifolia,
Ganiké (=sakuranda,N. of a plant), Bandhujiva (Pentapetis
Phoenticea—a plant with redflower) Pomegranates, Asvakarna
(the tree vatica roburta, has leaves like horses-ears) Hastikarna
(Butea Frondosa) Campaka (the campaka tree Cdapta in

*The botanical terms for plants mentioned here are taken from MW.

=== PAGE 18 ===

Lalita-mahdtmya 31.65-71 1233

Marathi) Kanaka-druma (A thorn apple and many such plants
like carria sophora) Yathikd (a kind of Jasmine), Tdlaparnt
(Anethum graveolens), Tulasi (the holy basil plant), Sada-
phala (Ficus Glomerata or coconut tree), Palmyras, Tamdla,
Hintdla (a variety of Palm), data Palms, Saccharum Sara
(used for arrows), a Barbura (a species of ocimum Villosum),
sugarcane, different species of trees of Ficus, genus, cordia
Latifolia, Terminalia Belerica, the yellow myrobalan trees,
Avdkpuspa (trees with blossom turned downwards, Ghonjdli (the
jujube tree), varieties of plants with heavenly perfumes, the
marking-nut plants, Khadira (Acacia catechu), Sakhota
(Trophis Aspera) , sandal trees, aloe wood trees, Kdlaskandha
(Diospyros embryoptcris), Tamarind trees, Banyan trees,
varieties of racemosa, Terminalia arjuna, Ficus religiosa, Sami
trees, Dhruva trees, Rucaka (the citron tree), Kufaja (wrightia
antidosenterica),  Saptaparnd (Alstonia scholaris) Kytamdla
(Trees cassia fistula) , Kapittha (Feronia Elephantum), Tintini
(Trees with sour fruits) and thousands of other trees.

65. For the sake of causing and enhancing the romantic
feelings of the goddess, the specialities of all the different
blossoms were present on those trees. There were excellent trees
of various heights.

66. Within the bronze enclosure, at a distance of seven
Yojanas, there was the square-shaped copper enclosure. It was
seven Yojanas in height.

67-69. The space in between these two is called Kalpa-
vajika (A park of Kalpa (i.e. wish-yielding tree). Those
trees bore abundant fruits which were exquisite with golden
outer rinds and which had seeds like precious stones and gems
emitting the fragrance of camphor. ,Divine yellow (silk) gar-
ments were the tender sprouts and shoots on their branches.
Nectar was the honey juice exuding from them and ornaments
‘were their flowers. There were many such glorious wish-yielding
trees there.

70. This is the second chamber named Kalpavdpi (? Kal-

_pavaji—N.): Within the copper enclosure was the Nagaéala
(v.1. Sisa-Sald, tin or lead enclosure) .

71. The place in the oblique direction situated in bet-

ween these two extended to seven Yojanas. The park there-in

=== PAGE 19 ===

1234 Brahmanda Purana

was Santdnavdti having the same shape and features as Kalpavdpt
(Kalpavaft) .*

72, The space in between them is called Haricandanavdfika.
It is of the same shape and features as Kalpavati and was full
of fruits and flowers.

73. In all these enclosures the arrangement of doorways,
Gopuras and the crowns on their tops was as before.

74-75, The measurement of the openings in the Gopura.
and that of every doorway and door panels wasalso the same
as before. Within the brass enclosure (Arakita. If the reading
Nagasdlasya is taken—the lead (tin) enclosure) and seven
Yojanas from it was the enclosure made of five metals and it
was of the same (size and) shape as the previous one. The
space in between them is called Mandaradrumavdjika. (A garden
of Mandara trees).

76. Within the enclosure of five metals and seven Yoja-
nas from it, it is said, was the enclosure of silver endowed with
all the characteristic features mentioned before.

77. The space in between them is called Pdrijdtadruma-
vdtika (Garden of Parijata trees). It was filled with divine
fragrance and it shone with heavily laden fruits and blossoms.

78. Within the enclosure of silver was the golden enclo-
sure. It was said to be extending to seven Yojanas. It was.
rendered splendid by means of doorways as before.

79, The space in between them is said to be Kadamba-
taruvdfikd (A garden of Kadamba-Nuclea (cadamba trees). There
were many divine Nipa (Kadamba) trees two Yojanas in
height.

80-8]. Liquor flowed down from them always. Those
trees sparkled on accountof plenty of closely blossomed flowers.
Those Nipa trees from the garden yielded a splendid liquor
named Kdadambari which yields pleasure even to Yoginis and.
which appealed to Mantrini always. They had excellent shade.
They had plenty of leaves and shoots. The spaces between the

*The five trees in Paradise are: Kalpa-vpksa, Mandira, Parijata,
Santana and Haricandana (yellow Sandal). There are parks or gardens of*
each of these celestial trees in the text.

=== PAGE 20 ===

Lalita-mahatmya 31.82-90 1235

trees were always filled with the humming sounds of swarms of
bees eagerly desirous of fragrance.

82-84. The beautiful mansion of Mantranatha was there
itself. In the intermediate points of the quarters beginning with
south-east (i.e. S. East, S. West, N. West and N. East) four
lofty mansions were built by the primordial Architect. The
extent (area) of each of them was five Yojanas by five Yojanas.
Their situation was in the shape of a square, In the other
intermediate points of quarters there were Priyaka trees (i.e.
Nipa). This is glorified as the city of abode of Syama.

85-86. There was another city for the stay of the army
in the region of Mahapadmatavi. If her residence too were to
be there itself, many Yojanas away it would have been impos-
sible for Mantrini to serve Sridevi every day. Hence, in the
vicinity of the Cintamanigrha too, a mansion of Sriman-
tranatha was built by the architect of Devas as well as by
Maya.

87. What person even if endowed with two thousand
tongues will be able to describe the so many (innumerable)
good points of the mansion of Mantrini-devi in Sripura.

88. The honoured daughters of Matanga sport about
and sing here with the lute of sweet notes, whose eyes have
become reddish on account of (imbibing) the tinge called
Kadambari.

Agastya enquired :

89. Who is this sage called by the name Matanga ?*
How is it that his daughters perpetually serve Mantraninatha
though they are lazy and slow due to, intoxication by means
of liquor ?

Hayagriva said :

90. There was a great ascetic, a mass of austerities (as
it were) named Miatanga. He was richly endowed with great
prowess. He was keenly interested even in creating a world,

1, This Matadga sage is Lalita’s devotee and is different from the
onein VR or referred to in PE, pp. 492-93.

=== PAGE 21 ===

1236 . Brahmanda Purdna

91-93. By means ofhis intellect invigorated by the power
of penance, he could press his power of command into service
everywhere. His son Matanga of courageous mind propitiated
Mudrini (the deity having the signet ring) Mantrinayika, by
means of severe austerities. On being served for a long time by
the son of sage Matanga, Mantrini went over to him and com-
manded him “Choose your boon”. Matanga the most excellent
one among the sages, the storehouse of penance said to Syama-
lambika who manifested herself before him.

Matanga the great sage prayed :

94. O goddess, merely by remembering you all the
Siddhis beginning with Anima (minuteness) and all other
glorious assets and powers have been realized by me.

95. O mother, in all the three worlds there is nothing
which I have yet to attain because I have realized all desires
and I have been fortunate enough to remember your activities
always in my memory.

96. Still, your presence here shall not be fruitless. I
shall request for only this, O mother. Fulfil this boon.

97. Formerly, I had intimate association with Himavan,
being friendly with him and cracking jokes with him. Playful
and haughty he swaggered with words improper to be uttered.

98. “I am the father of Gauri’’, so boasted he. That
statement was not liked by me, because he had more of good
things in him.

99. When two friends have the same quality (and _posi-
tion) and if one of them gets something more for any reason,
it is natural for the other to covet the same.

100. Though I have realized all my desires yet O Man-
trininatha, I have performed penance to get the glory of
being the father of Gauri. Hence be my daughter.

101. Thereby and undoubtedly you will become well
known thro ugh my name”.

On hearing these words uttered by Matanga, the great
sage, she said, ‘“‘So be it’ and vanished. The sage becaine
pleased.

=== PAGE 22 ===

Lalita-mahatmya 31 102—32.2 1237

102. In the course of a dream, she gave the great sage
Matanga, with great joy, a bunch of Tamila flowers as
ornaments for the ears. .

103. Due to the power of that dream, the wife of
Matanga named Siddhimati conceived Laghusyama in her
womb.

104. Since she was born of him, she is glorified as
Matangi. She was called Laghugyama, because Syama was her
root cause.

105. Crores and crores of beautiful daughters of Matanga
along with the groups of Laghusyama, MahaSyama and Matangi
attained the status of subsidiary Saktis and they serve Priya-
kapriyd (Mantrini fond of Kadamba i.e. Nauclea cadamba).

106. Thus the origin of daughters of Matanga has
been mentioned, O Pot-born sage. So also the seven chambers,
the enclosures made of iron etc. are mentioned.

CHAPTER THIRTYTWO

Manifestation of the guardian deities of the seven chambers of Tripura
in Srinagara}
Agastya said :
1. There are deities guarding the seven enclosures
beginning with that made of iron. O wise one, mention their
names, so that my doubts can be cleared.

Hayagriva said :
2. Mahakala, the devourer of the worlds, having a

dark-coloured body stays, O Pot-born sage, in the great garden
of many trees.

1. Though the present chapter proposes to enumerate the guards of
seven chambers, actually, only two—Mahakala in Mahd-Kéla-Cakra, (vv.
7-41) the protector of the first garden and the Cakra of Vasanta (vv.44-60)
are described fully. Thus every season—Grigma (Summer), Varsé (rainy
season) etc. have their cakras and the duty of protecting the gardens
or parks in the remaining enclosures (vv.58-66). Thus (Mahdkala +6.
seasons=) s¢ven guards are appointed to these seven enclosures.

=== PAGE 23 ===

1238 Brahmanda Purana

3, He wears a dark-coloured jacket. His eyes are red on
account of intoxication. He continuously drinks the tonic
beverage called the universe with which the cup of cosmic
egg is filled.

4, Seated in his throne of the nature Kalpdntakalana
(comprehending the end of Kalpa), he looks at Mahakali
whose complexion is as dark as the cloud and who has become
tender-hearted, due to the action of the god of love.

5. He constantly meditates on Lalita. He is even eager
to worship Lalita. Through devotion to Lalita, he enhances
his longevity. He is served by the servants the most important
among them being Kala and Mrtyu.?

6. Mahakali and Mahakala carry out the orders of god-
dess Lalita. They stay in the first path (enclosure). They seize
and impel the entire universe.

Kalacakra :

7. The Kalacakra (circle of Mahakala) of Matanga (?)
forms his seat. It has four Avarapas (outer coverings) and is
rendered beautiful with the Bindu (point) at the centre.

8. The four Avaranas are (1) triangle, (2) pentagon, (3)
lotus of sixteen petals, (4) lotus of cight petals or spokes
(radii), Mahak@la is in the centre.

1, The concept of Time has two aspects in this Purana (i) as the
destroyer ofevery thing and (ii) the calculator or enumerator. The so-
called Kala-cakra represents this complex concept. The Tantric outline of the
Cakra—with Mahakala as the centre and the figuresof a triangle and a
Pentagon and Lotuses with sixteen and eight petals—appears mystical. But
the contents are descriptive of the concept of Kala: Thus the thrce Sandhyds
{twilights) are the Saktis, in the triangle; parts of the day from dawn to
noon are the Saktis in the Pentagon, days and nights and the special days
such as the full moon and new moon days are the Saktis in 16 petals
while units of time such as Kéla Ka;/ha etc. are the 16 Saktis in the petals
while names of years in Vedas are the 8 petals of another lotus.

Kala or Mahakala as the presiding deity of this Cakra occupies the
central position and is depicted as deterrent, black-coloured, inebriated and
boisterous with a suitably terrific spouse Mahakali.

=== PAGE 24 ===

Lalita-mahatmya 32.9-22 1239

9. In the (vertices of the) triangle three great deities,
the Saktis of Mahakala, viz. : Mahakali*, Mahdsandhya (great
Dusk) and Mahdnisé (great night) are stationed.

10. There itself in the vertices of the Pentagon are
stationed the five Saktis, viz.: Pratyfsa (Dawn), Pitrprasu
(Twilight) when Pitrs are abroad), Prdkga (Fore-noon),
Aparahya (Afternoon), Madhydhna (Noon).

11-13, Then, O sage, listen to the Saktis stationed in
the lotus of sixteen petals. They are (the various parts of time
such as Dina (Day), Nisa (Night), Tamisrd (Dark Night),
Jyotsni (Moon light Night), Paksipt, Pradosd, NiStthd, Prahara,
Parnima, Raka, Anumati, Amdvdsyd, Sintvdli, Kuha, Bhadra, the
sixteenth Upardgd. Thesc are remembered as the sixteen Saktis
stationed in the sixteen petals.

14-17. (The units of Time, such as) Kald, Kasthd, Nimesa,
Lava, Ksana, Truti, Muhirta,Kutapa, Hord, Suklapaksa, Krsnapaksa
Ayana, Visuva, the thirteenth. Samvatsara, Parivatsard and
Idavatsard—these are remembered as the Saktis stationed in
the lotus of sixteen petals.

Years forming a yuga in Vedic works such as Idvatsard,
Induvatsaré (N. Udvatsara) , Avatsard and Tithi, Vara, Naksatra,
Yoga and Karaya—these Saktis are stationed in the lotus with
eight petals.

18. Kali, Kalpa, Kalana and Kali, these four are the door-
keepers of the shining Kalacakra.

19. All these deities of Mahakala are the wives of Kala.
Due to intoxication, they have laughing faces. They hold
goblets of red lustre filled with liquor. They are dark-com-
plexioned.

20. They are always absorbed in worshipping, eulogising,
meditating upon and repeating the names of Lalita. They serve
Mahakala seated in Kalacakrasana.

21. Then, O Pot-born sage, the (guard) of Kalpakavafi
is Vasanta—the spring season : (Vasanta) of great splendour,
the favourite servant of Lalita.

22. He is seated on a flowery throne. He is reddened due
to intoxication by the liquor extracted from the honey of

*Mahbikalyé (great Dawn)

=== PAGE 25 ===

1240 Brahmanda Purana

flowers. Flowers are his weapons and ornaments. He appears
splendid with a flowery umbrella.

23*, Madhuéri and Madhavagri—these two deities are
the wives of thatshining lord (Vasanta) *. Both of them are
inebriated through the spirituous liquor extracted from flowers.
They are ardently desirous of the god of Jove having flowers for
his arrows.

24. The defender of Santdnavatika is Grismartu (the
summer season) of fiery eyes. He is the servant of Lalita, con-
tinuously carrying out her commands.

25** Sukrafri and Sucifri are remembered as his two
wives.

Haricandanavati, O sage, is occupied by Varsartu (the
rainy season) .

26-28a. That Varsartu has great splendour. Lightning-
streaks are his tawny eyes. He is highly resonant with thunder-
bolt as his boisterous laughter. He has haughty clouds for his
vehicle. He is covered with clouds like coats of mail. He holds
a jewel-set bow. He is absorbed in worshipping, eulogising,
meditating upon and repeating the names of Lalita. He is, O
conqueror of Vindhya, one who gives great delight to all the
three worlds.

28b-29. His Saktis are said to be twelve, viz.*** Nabhafri,
Nabhasyasri, Svarasd, Svara-(N. Sasya)-Malini, Amba, Duld,
Nirali (N. Sarasa), Abhrayani, Meghayantrika, Varsayanti,
Cibunika (N. of astarin Kyttika) and Varidhard. They shower
rain. They have eyes reddened duc to inebriation.

*The season spring consists of two months Madhu (Caitra) and Médhava
(Vaisakha) ; Naturally Madhugri (the Beauty of Caitra and Mddhavatrt (the
beauty of Vaisakha) are his wives.

**The season summer (Grisma) consists of two months Sukra (or Jyestha)
and Suci (or Asadha). Hence his two wives are Sukratrt and Sucifre (the
beauties of these two months).

***In the list of Saktis of the Rainy Season (Varsartu) the first two are
the names of the Month Wabhas (Sravana) and Nabhasya (Bh&drapada)
which constitute the Rainy season. Others are the deified natural phenomena
in the rainy season.

=== PAGE 26 ===

Lalitd-mahatmya 32.30-42 1241

30-32. Alongwith those Saktis, Varsartu (the Rainy Season)
always worships Lalita, the supreme goddess, with clusters of
flowers raised by himself. He repeats her names. He adorns the
countries of the devotees of Lalita by means of his wealth. He
always torments the land of her enemies by means of drought.
Such is the rainy season, the servant of the goddess.

33. Saradrtu (the Autumn) stays permanently in the
grove of Mandara trees and protects that chamber. He is splen-
didly glorious. He delights the mind of the world.

34. I[sasri and Orjafri* are the beloved ones of that
season. They gather water and with clusters of flowers raised
by himself, he worships the empress, the consort of Srikame-
§vara.

35-36. Hemantartu (Season of early winter) of great
splendour has his physical body as cool as snow (cool on
account of snow). His face is always delightful. He is the favou-
rite servant of Lalita. By means of clusters of flowers raised by
himself, he worships the supreme goddess (Paramesvari). He
defends the park of Parijata. He subdues even fire. Sahahsri and
Sahasyasri are his two excellent consorts.**

37-39. The guard of the grove of Kadamba Trees is
Sifirartu (the season of winter) of cool features, O excellent
sage born of pot. Therefore, the entire surface of the land of
that chamber is rendered cool by him. Therefore, Syama, the
deity residing there is also of cool nature and features. His
two excellent consorts are Tapahsri and Tapasyafri.*** Along
with them he worships Lalita, the mother who sanctifies the
universe.

Agastya said : .
40-42. O Gandharvavadana (Hayagriva) O glorious
one, among the seven chambers (and parks) consisting of

*Months Jsa (Afvina) and Orja (Karttika) cover the season called
autumn. Hence they are treated as his wives.

**Sahas (Margasirsa) and Sahasya (Pausa) are the months which
constitute the season Hemanta, Hence these months are given feminine forms
and are said to be his spouses.

***The months Tapas (MAgha) and Tapasya (Phalguna) form the season
called Sifira and hence they are treated as the wives of the season Sifira,

=== PAGE 27 ===

1242 Brahménda Purana

different kinds of trees Mahakala, the guardian of the first
Park has been heard by me. His Cakra (wheel or group) has
been glorified by you as having four outer coverings. It is also
heard from you that the guardianship of the Kalpaka and
other parks belonged to the six seasons. But the deities of the
Cakra are not heard (in respect of the seasons). Hence, recount
in the proper order the protecting deities ( Avarana deities) of the
outer coverings of the Cakra of vasanta and others, since O
holy lord, you are omniscient and great.

Hayagriva said :

43-45. Listen, O excellent sage, to the (enumeration of
deities stationed in different Cakras (mystical circles).
Kalacakra has been mentioned before. Vasantacakra (the mystical
circle of spring season) is being described. It has seven outer
coverings, viz. : (1) Triangle, (2) Pentagon, (3) Lotus with
eight petals, (4) Lotus with sixteen petals (? Spokes), (5)
Lotus with ten petals, (6) The same and (7) a square. In the
centre of all, the deity of the spring season, of great brilliance
is stationed in the Bindu (point) of the Cakra.

46-48. Both the consorts Madhusrt and Méadhavasri are
seated on his lap. Vasantartu (has four hands). With two of
his hands he holds fast the breasts of his consorts, one of the
breasts of one with one hand and one of the breasts
of the other with the other hand. With the other pair of his
hands, he holds the goblet of wine rendered fragrant with
flowers and a piece of meat. The mental representation
of the personal figure of all the Rtus (Seasons) should be carri-
ed out in this manner, O suppressor of Vindhya. In the
course of mental representation of Varsartu (Rainy season),
it should be known that the first two Saktis (viz.: Nabhabért and
Nabhasyagrt) are seated on his lap and the other (ten) are close
to him.

49-56 Now listen to the enumeration of deities
stationed in the circle of Vasanta. (There are altogether sixty
of: them, thirty are Tithis pertaining to Madhufri and thirty
(Tithis) pertaining to Madhavafri). The deities (of Madhuéri)
are Madhusuklaprathamika, Madhusukladvitlya, Madhuésu-

=== PAGE 28 ===

Lalitd-mahatmya 32.57-63 1243

klatrttya, Madhuéuklacaturthika, MadhuSuklapaficami,
Madhusuklasasthika, Madhuguklasaptami, Madhuéuklastami,
Madhufuklanavami, Madhuéukladagami, MadhuSuklaikadaéi,
Madhusukladvadasi, Madhusuklatrayodasi, Madhusuklacatur-
dasi, MadhuSuklapaurnamasi, Madhukrsnaprathama, Madhu-
krsnadvitiya, Madhukrsnatrtiya, Madhukrsnacaturthi, Madhu-
krsnapaficami, Madhukrsnasasthi, Madhukrsnasaptami,
Madhukrsnastami Madhukrsnanavami, Madhukrsnadasami.
Osuppressor of the Vindhya, Madhukrsnaik&dasi, Madhukrsna-
dvadafi, Madhukrsnatrayodasi, Madhukrsnacaturdafi, and
Madhvama (vasya). These are to be known as the Saktis (of
Madhusri).

57-58. In this manner, there are thirty other Saktis
stationed above Madhavasri beginning with Suklapratipat (i.e.
Madhavasuklaprathamd etc.), These two together numbering
sixty are well known as Vasantasaktis.

59-61.! The seats (of sixty deities in the seven outer
coverings (dvarana) of Vasantacakrardja should be worshipped in
the Cakra in accordance with the injunctions with their
respective Mantras. There are sixty deities stationed in those
sixty Bhitmis (seats). They are to be worshipped separately
with their respective Mantras by the Sddhakas (Aspirants of
spiritual enlightenment).

Such is the Vasantacakra. The same is the case in the
other three*. But the deities are different according to the
difference of Sukragri, Sucifri, etc. Thus there are gloriously
splendid sixty Saktis in the Grismacakra.

62-63. In the same manner (understand) the different
(Saktis) belonging to Nabha and Nabhasya in the circles Varsd-

1. Vasanta-Cakra (vv.49-60) is said to have sixty deities abiding in it.
But the deities are different Tithis of the bright half and of the dark half
both of Caitra and Vaidakha which constitute the season Vasanta (Cakra).
Similar Cakras for the remaining seasons (rtus) each having sixty deities (15
tithis of bright half +15 tithis of the dark half per month. A season consists
of two months. Hence 30 Tithis per month x2 months constituting the season
=60 Saktis.)
*Thereading Ca trisu is wrong. N. 28.176 reads Cartusu (Ca rtugu) ‘and
in other seasons’, *

=== PAGE 29 ===

1244 Brahmanda Purana

cakra etc, There are sixty Saktis in each of the Cakras. Afraid
of making the description voluminous, I am refraining from
enumerating them.

64. These are the Saktis pertaining to the Rtus (Seasons).
They bestow happiness on the devotees of Lalita. They are
absorbed in worshipping, eulogising, meditating upon and
repeating the names of Lalita.

65-67. They move about in the Cakras of Kalpavatika
etc, They are lazy and gracefully slow due to inebriation. They
propitiate the great goddess Lalita through the honey produced
in their own respective flowers.

All of them together number three hundred and sixty.
In the same manner there are deities, the guardians in the
seven enclosures.

They are being recounted to you by mentioning the
names also since you have asked. I shall take up the cases of
other enclosures also to complete the description. Listen
attentively. I shall give details and names of Saktis also.

CHAPTER THIRTYTHREE

Seven Chambers beginning with Topaz rampart and ending with the
rampart of Pearls!

Hayagriva said:

I. The characteristic features of seven enclosures
built by the artisans have been recounted. Now the enclosures
studded with jewels and precious stones are being glorified.
Listen attentively.

1. This chapter describes the seven concentric chambers or enclosures
built of precious stones—each enclosure built exclusively of the following
precious stones—Topaz and gold, rubies, Gomeda (a gem of four colours

=== PAGE 30 ===

Lalitd-mahatmya 33.2-9 . 1245

2. The intervening space between the enclosure of gold
and the enclosure of Topaz is mentioned to be only seven
Yojanas.?

3. Itis there that the Siddhas and Siddha-women sport
about in their excitement due to inebriation, with tasty juices,
tonic beverages, swords and cosmetic ointments applied to the
feet.

4, They are endowed with devotion to Lalita and please
the great people. They stay there and imbibe different kinds
of juicy liquor.

5. The arrangements of the doorway of enclosures
built of topaz and other gems, are as before. The panels of
doors, bolts and Gopuras, it should be known, ‘are made of
topaz etc. sparkling like the moon and the sun at the height
of their lustre.

6. The space in between the circular golden rampart
and that of topaz is also remembered as made of topaz.

7. In all the great enclosures and chambers described
subsequently, the birds and lakes have the same uniform
colour.

8-9. The waters of the rivers are also of the same colour.
The bejewelled trees too have the same colour. Those among
the Siddha castes who had formerly worshipped the goddess in
diverse ways and had passed away are born as the Siddhas
here, along with their women. They repeat the Mantras of
Lalita and they are exclusively devoted to the procedure of
worship of Lalita. All of them devoutly repeat the names of
goddess Lalita.

found in the Himalayan region), diamonds, Lapis-Lazuli, Sapphires and
Pearls. One wonders whether pearls were regarded more valuable than
diamonds, sapphires in those days. The special feature of these enclosures
was the uniformity in colour etc. of the Plant-world, nay even of water, birds
etc. in each enclosure; thus in describing the diamond enclosure, the water of
river Vajra is to liquefy diamond and those who drink it have adamantine
Physique (vv-29-31). Wine flows liberally in Lalita-mahatmya and the
residents of these whether Siddhas, Saktis etc. are inebriated but are
devotees of Lalita, repeat her Mantra, epithets etc.

1, VV.2-9 describe the enclosure of gold and topaz. The residents of
this enclosure are Siddhas (male and female).

=== PAGE 31 ===

1246 Brahmagda Purbpa

10. Within the great enclosure of topaz and seven Yojanas
from it is the square enclosure made of ruby.

11. The ground too is paved with rubies. Gopura and
other structures also are made of rubies. It is there that those
who formerly stayed in the region of Caranas and had sub-
sequently attained Siddhis due to the destruction of former
bodies, stay serving the lotus-like feet of the great queen:

12. Womenfolk of the Caranas have beautiful limbs.
They are desirous of getting inebriated. They frequently sing
the musical compositions eulogising goddess Lalita.

13. There itself, they occupy the platform amongst the
Kalpa (wish-yielding) trees. They move about along with their
husbands and drink sweet wine.

14. Within the great enclosure of rubies and seven
Yojanas from it, is the great enclosure of the gem called
Gomeda* (a gem from Himalayas, of four colours).

The extremely lofty chamber of diamonds with the ground
paved with diamonds, is in between them.

15. Itis there, O Pot-born sage, that the leading
Gandharvas who had worshipped the goddess in their previous
births stay along with the groups of celestial damsels.

16. By means of notes on the lutes, they sing about
the good qualities of the empress. They take excessive interest
in the sole enjoyment of amorous pleasures. Their bodies
resemble the body of the god of love. They are gentle-natured.
They have great devotion towards Sridevi.

17. The chamber of Gomeda gem is of the same shape
and features as the previous one. In the middle of it there are
crores of Yoginis and Bhairavas. They serve mother (goddess)
Kédlasankarsani there with devotion.

* 18-22. Within the great enclosure of Gomeda gems,
seven Yojanas from it, live the celestial damsels such as Urvafi,

1. VV.10-13 describe the enclosure of rubies. It is inhabited by
Caranas.

2. VV.14-26 describe the enclosure of gomeda. It is populated by
crores of Yoginis and Bhairavas. Its special feature is the residence of Apsaras
(Heavenly courtesans) and Gandharvas all drunkards but meditate upon
Lalita. VV. 24-26 enumerate the fourteen sources of origin of these divine
damsels.

=== PAGE 32 ===

Lalita-mahdtmya 33.23-31 1247

Menaka, Rambha, Alambus&, Mafijughosa, Sukesi, Purvacitti,
Ghrtaci, Krtasthala, Visvaci, Pufijikasthala, Tilottama and
other celestial harlots like them. Along with the Gandharvas
they drink fresh liquor from the Kalpa-trees. They meditate
upon Lalitadevi again and again. In order to enhance their
own great fortune, they repeat her Mantra. All the Apsaras
ladies originating from fourteen places stay there itself wor-
shipping the goddess with joyous minds.

Agastya enquired :

23. O holy lord, recount the fourteen sources of origin
of those Apsaras (celestial damsels), O highly intelligent one,
O great storehouse of all lores.

Hayagriva replied :

24-26. The heart of Brahma, Kama, Mrtyu, Orvi (the
Earth), the wind god, Sun’s, Moon’s rays, Vedas, the fire-god,
lightning, nectar, daughter of Daksa and water.* Learned men
consider these as the causes of birth of divine harlots, with
dazzling riches of blessedness and grandeur. Along with the
Gandharvas all these worship goddess Cakrinf.

27. The Kinnaras and the Kimpurugas, O sage, have
resorted to the region of diamond.! They are accompanied by
their womanfolk and they are maddened with inebriation.

28. They getrid of all their sins by repeating the
Mantra of the empress (Lalita). O Pot-born sage, they stay
there dancing and singing.

29-30. There itself, on the ground studded with diamonds
flows the river Vajra, O sage. It shines with trees on either
bank, thickly grown and having the form and features of
diamonds, The sand particles of this river are solely diamond
pieces. Verily, the water is liquefied diamond. That sanctifying
river flows all round that region.

31. Those excellent men who are devotees of Lalita
Paramesani and drink its water, attain adamantine physical

*Thicteen sources are enumerated here. The ocean of Milk is the
fourteenth source.

1. VV.27-33 describe the enclosure of diamonds, Its residents are
Kinnaras and Kimpuruyas.

=== PAGE 33 ===

1248 Brahmanda Purdna

bodies, O Pot-born sage. They become long-lived and free from
sickness.

32. When the thunderbolt hurled by him was dissolved
and melted by Bhandasura, Satakratu (Indra) performed
penance with great devotion towards Vajredi.

33. The goddess rose from its waters, gave the thunder-
bolt to the enemy of Vala (i.e. Indra) and vanished once
again. Gratified thereby he too went back to the heaven.

34. Within the enclosure of diamond and seven Yojanas
from it is the lofty Vaidiryasala (Enclosure of Lapis Lazuli.1).
It has Gopuras as mentioned before. The land there is also
made of Lapis Lazuli. It has sparkling features.

35. Those residents of Patala who had been aspirants
for spiritual enlightenment and worshippers of Sridevi reside
there in the forms of Siddhas with abundant happiness.

36-38. Sesa, Karkotaka, Mahapadma, Vasuki, Sankha,
Taksaka, Sankhacida, Mahadanta, Mahaphana and many
other Nagas like these stay there. So also their womenfolk.
The class of virtuous and devout Daityas, the chief of whom is
Bali, stays there along with the Nagas as well as its own women
folk. They habitually repeat the Mantras of Lalita. They are
initiated in the sacred lore of Lalita. They are the perpetual
worshippers of Lalita. Thus the Asuras and serpents reside
there.

39. There, in the chamber of Lapis Lazuli. the rivers
have icy chill waters. The waters in the lakes have sparkling
lustre free from dirt. The lakes are adorned with cranes, swans
and lotuses.

40. The mansions are divine and embellished with Lapis
Lazuli gems. Those serpents and Asuras play there along with
their womenfolk.

41. Within the great enclosure of Lapis Lazuli andseven
Yojanas from it, there is the enclosure of sapphire? like another
circle.

1, VV. 34-40 describe the enclosure of Lapis Lazuli. It is inhabited by
the denizens of Patala viz. great Nagas like Sega, Karkotaka, Bali and pious
Daityas.

2, VV. 41-49 describe the enclosure of Sapphire.

=== PAGE 34 ===

Lalita-mahatmya 33.42-53 1249

42. The ground in the middle of it, O sage, is paved
with sapphire gems. The rivers there are sweet and the lakes
pleasantly cool. There are different kinds of tasty and juicy
objects of pleasurable enjoyment.

43. Those people of earthly world who had attained
mastery over Lalita’s Mantra attain the chamber of sapphire
on giving up their bodies and stay there.

44-46. They enjoy divine objects in the company of
their womenfolk. They drink sweet wine and dance with great
devotion. They sport about in those lakes and rivers, O Pot-
born sage, in beautiful bowers and arbours and mansions of
great prosperity. They repeat the naines of Sridevi always and
recite her good qualities. Those highly fortunate people reside
there surrounded by their women.

47. When their Karmans become exhausted they go
back to their human bodies on the earth. Enduced with the
previous Vdsand (imprints of former actions) they once again
worship Cakrini. Again they go to the great enclosure of
sapphire in Srinagara.

48-49. On account of continued contact with that
region, Osage, men are always endowed with dark emotions
and feelings arising from Rdga (attachinent) and Dvesa (hatred ).
Those who gain knowledge and wisdom, those who devoid of
adverse effects of mutually opposed pairs and those who have
subdued their organs of sense, O sage, possess surprising powers
and they merge into Maheévari.

50-53. Within the enclosure of sapphire and seven
Yojanas away there is the enclosure of pearls. It has Gopuras
as mentioned before. The ground in between the two, O sage,
is very pure and extremely refulgent.’ Everything is studded
and set with pearls, very cool and highly pleasing. The great
rivers Tamraparni, Mahaparni, Sadamuktaphalodaka and

1. The description of this inner-most enclosure is important. It
mentions the fame of the river Tamraparni for pearl-fisheries. The mention
of the rivers of Tamiinad only confirms the author’s native Province. It
gives the distribution of eight quarters to traditional Dik-Pdlas (guardians
of the quarters) such as Indra, Agni, Yama etc. Under Yama’s jurisdiction
are hells which too are enumerated.

=== PAGE 35 ===

1250 Brahmanda Purdpa

others like them flow in that great region. On their banks live
all those residents of Devaloka who, in their previous births
had successfully practised the repetitions of the Mantra of
Sridevi.

54. In the eight directions beginning with the east are
the worlds of Sakra etc. with their doorways unitedly facing
the pearl enclosure along its periphery.

55-56. To the east of the central region between the
gateways of pearl enclosure and sapphire enclosure is the
world of Sakra and in the corner thereof is the site of the world
of the fire-god (i.e. in the south-east). To the south is the city
of Yama. There the lord stays holding his staff and (moves
about) everywhere repeating the Mantras of Lalita. He is of
impetuous and dreadful nature.

57. His assistant official Guha implements the Law and
Order of Sridevi through the soldiers of Yama with Citragupta
as their leader.

58-62. At the bidding of Sridevi of great prowess, O
Pot-born sage, he makes the sinners fall into the terrible
painful hells. The sinners are as follows: Those who
are cursed by Guha, who commit vile deeds, who cause hatred
to Lalita, who show fraudulent devotion, who are fools, who
are excessively haughty, who steal Mantras, who repeat evil
Mantras, who possess evil lores, who resort to sins, who are
atheists, who are habitually sinful, who aimlessly cause injury
to living beings, who are hostile to women, who are disliked
by the entire world and who give protection to heretics. O
Pot-born sage, the hells into which they are cast are Kalasitra,
Raurava, Kumbhipaka, Asipatravana, the dreadful Krmibhaksa,
Pratapana, Lalaksepa, Sicivedha, Angarapatana and many
other painful hells like these.

63. To the west of it (i.e. in the south-west corner)
is Nirrti who holds a sword. Resorting to the Raksasa_ world,
he worships Lalita.

64-66. To the north of it (ie. inthe west) in between
the two gateways, Varuna stays permanently resorting to the
Varuna world. He is excited and inebriated by tasting
spirituous liquor. His limbs are fair and pure. His vehicle

=== PAGE 36 ===

Lalita-mahdtmya 33.07-74 1251

is fish (shark). He always repeats Sridevata Mantra, He
practises procedure of worship of Sridevi. With his nooses he
binds those who dislike SridevatadarSana (the philosophic system
pertaining to Sri or Srividya) and takes them down. He sets
free all devotees from bondage.

67-69. Inthecorner north of it (i.e. North-west) is
the world of Vayu. It has great lustre. There are Siddhas,
divine sages, others who practise (retention of) air and other
Yogins the chief of whom is Goraksa! stay there. They have
gaseous bodies. They have perpetual bliss and prosperity.
They are eagerly devoted to the practice of Yoga. The glorious
lord Marutefvara stays there, O Pot-born sage, along with
those mentioned before. He has great inherent strength. He
has different forms, different in every respect.

70. The Saktis of Marutanatha* are three viz.: Ida,
Pingala and Susumna. They are always lethargic in their
inebriation due to wine.

71-74. He holds a flag in his hand. He is seated on his
great vehicle, anexcellent deer. He is absorbed in worshipping,
eulogising, meditating upon and strictly adhering to the pro-
cedure of worship of Lalita, He is surrounded by other Saktis
too with all their limbs filled with blissful sensations. That
lord Maruta of great glory always performs the Japa of Cakrini.
At the end of Kalpa, by means of his inherent strength, he
reduces the three worlds including the mobile and immobile
beings, to the state of power in a moment and delights himself
thereby. In order to achieve the requisite strength, for the
same, he worships and meditates upon the goddess Lalitesvari.
He is adorned with all types of ornaments.

1. .Mention of Goraksa or Gorakhanath as ‘the chief of Yogins’ shows
that Goraksa became a legend by the time of Lalita-mdhdimya. One wonders
why his teacher Matsyendra is not mentioned as the pair Matsyendra and
Goraksa is still indissolubly popular. The mention of Goraksa shows that
this Mahatmya was composed after the 10th Cent. A.D.

2. The epithet ‘Natha’ to the wind god shows the influence of Yogic
Natha Cult. Here instead of mentioning five Prinas as his Saktis, the Yogic
flow of breath ir the‘right and left nostrils is noted as his Sakti. Even the
chief officers of Lalita are mentioned as ‘Mantrini natha’ and Danda-natha.
This may be due to the influence of the Natha cult.

=== PAGE 37 ===

1252 Brahmdnda Purdna

75. Kubera, the Lord of Yaksas, of great lustre and
glory, resides in Yaksaloka situated to the east of his (Vayu’s)
world. He is in the middle of the two gateways.

76. He is accompanied by Saktis : Rddhi, Vrddhi etc.
nine Nidhis (treasures). By means of wealth and assets, he
fulfils the desires of devotees,

77. Along with Yaksis of charming features and obedient
activities, he worships Cakrini with different kinds of wine.

78. There are Yaksa generals such as Manibhadra,
Pirnabhadra, Maniman, Manikandhara and others like them
in that place.

79. To the east of his world (i.e. North-east corner) is
the world of Rudra of great prosperity. He is bedecked in very
valuable jewels. He is the presiding deity.

80-82. He has fiery brilliance always due to wrathfulness.
A big quiver is always kept fastened to him. He is always
surrounded by many Rudras who are on a par with him,
who have great inherent strength, who are efficient in maintain-
ing the worlds, who have kept their bows well strung and
who are stationed in the sixteen outer coverings. By means of
his faces, he continuously repeats the Mantra of Sridevata. He
is richly endowed with the practice of meditation. He is eager to
worship Sridevi. The places near him are embellished by
groups of many crores of Rudranis.

83. All of them have highly refulgent limbs. They are
proud of their fresh youthfulness. They are engrossed in the
meditation of Lalita. They are perpetually lethargic in their
inebriation due to wines.

84. The glorious Maharudra who holds the trident is
‘served by other Rudras, the chief among whom is Hiranyabahu.
He is accompanied by those Rudranis too.

85-86. With the tip of his trident, he pierces those
persons who have neglected visiting Lalita, who are haughty,
and who are reproached by elderly people. He burns them by
means of fierce fires originating from his eyes. He destroys
their wives, children and servants. He is the great hero who
obediently carries out the behest of Lalita.

87, He stays thus in the extremely beautiful Rudraloka,

=== PAGE 38 ===

Lalitd-mahaimya 33.88—34.1 1253

O Pot-born sage. The attendants of that Maharudra, O sage,
are the Pramathins.

88-96. These Rudras are numerous. Who is competent
to enumerate them (in full) ? There are thousands and
thousands of Rudras over the earth. Those who stay in
heaven are thousands and thousands. There are Rudras_ whose
food is arrow, whose vital breaths are arrows and whose showers
are arrows. They are brilliant. They have tawny eyes. They
stay inthe ocean and in the firmament. They have great
prowess. They have matted hair and they hold wine goblets.
They are blue-throated and red in complexion. They are
above all living beings. They have arrows and Kapardas
(Matted hair kept in the form of a crown). There are Rudras
who pierce those people who drink wine in the vessels of
their food. There are Rudras who act as chariots in the paths.
There are Rudras residing in holy spots. There are others,
thousands in number having Srkas (arrows) and WNisangas
(quivers). Rudras have spread far and wide in all quarters
spreading the commands of Lalita. All of them are noble souls.
They can bear three worlds in a moment. They are merci-
ful and they protect those who are very clever in meditation
on Sridevi, who regularly repeat the Mantra of Sridevi and
who are the devotees of Sridevata. They resort to the Cakra
of sixteen outer-coverings in the enclosure with the rampart
wall of pearls. They worship Maharudra of great prosperity
with his face blazing with fury. The chief among them is
Hiranyabahu.

CHAPTER THIRTYFOUR
The Region of Siva and of the guardians of quarters
Agastya said :
1. What is that Cakra (circle) with sixteen outer cover-

ings and with Rudra as the presiding deity ?! Who are the
Rudras stationed there ? By what name are they glorified ?

1. As this verse suggests, this chapter (main portion at least) describes
the Cakra of sixteen Avaranas with Rudra (or Mahdrudra) as the central,

=== PAGE 39 ===

1254 Brahmanda Purana

2. Inwhich circular outer coverings and with which
designation do they stav ? O storehouse of mercy! Mention
their names with their derivative as well as conventional
meanings.

Hayagriva said :

3. There the abode of Rudra is said to be made out of
cluster of pearls. It is rendered splendid. It is five Yojanas
long and five Yojanas wide.

4-6. It has sixteen outer coverings. It is very splendid
and pleasing with a Piha (stool, seat) in the middle. On that
central Pijha, O sage, Maharudra sits permanently, blazing
with anger and having bow ready strung. He keeps his hand
always over it. He has three eyes. In the Trikona! (Triangle
and first covering) O Pot-born sage, three Rudras are mentioned
(as seated), viz.: Hiranyabahu, Senani and Digampati.

7-9a. The Rudras stationed in the hexagon are Vrksah,
Harikes4h, Pasupati, Saspifijara, Tvisiman and Pathinampati.

The Rudras in the octagon are Babhrugah, Vivyadhi,
Annapati, Harikesa—upavitin, Pustanampati, Bhava and
Heti.

Qb-lla. Inthe decagon the first one is Jagatampati
the others are Rudra, Atatavin, Ksetrapati, Sita, Ahammanya

presiding deity. He is always alert with his bow. In the enclosing triangle are
three Rudras viz. Hiranyabahu, Senani and Disdm Pati. The names of
Rudras in different Avaranas (sixteen in all) show the palpable in-
fluence of Satarudriya from which they (i.e. the epithets) are borrowed and
arranged around Maharudra. The meanings of the names of different
Rudras make it clear how the Rudra was given benevolent and malevolent
epithets and as such the concept was complex in those times. Traditional
duties of Trinity, of creation (Brahma), maintenance (Visnu) and
destruction (Rudra) are a simplistic (and inadequate) presentation.

These Rudras stay in the NE of the Pearl-chamber and protect the
devotees of Lalita (vv.1-52)

1, An analysis of the Mahérudra Cakra shows the following distribution
of Rudras : I Avaraga, a triangle—3 Rudras posted; II Avarapa, Hexagon 6
Rudras; III Octagon—8 Rudras; IV Decagon 10; A wheel (Cakra) with
16 spokes—16 Rudras. After this merely Avarapa number and the names of
Rudras posted there are given. In 16 Avaragas 258 Rudras are posted.

My sources do not possess such a figure of Rudra Yantra.

=== PAGE 40 ===

Lalita-mahdtmya 34.11-24 1255

(Ahantya in N.), Vanapati, Rohita, Sthapati and Vrksa-
nampati. These have kept their bows in readiness.

1lb-14a. In the Duodecagon (Twelve-sided figure) the
Rudras are Mantri, Vanija, Kaksapati, Bhavanti, (is the
fourth), Vagvibhu (is the fifth), Osadhinampati, (is the sixth) ,
Uccairghosa, Akrandayan, Patinampati, Krtsnavita, Dhava
and Sattvanampati. This is the fifth outer covering.

14b-15. The following should be known as the deities
Rudras of the sixth outer covering. viz.: Sahamana, Nirvyadhi,
Avyadhinampati, Kakubha, Nisangi, Stenanampati and
Niceru*

16-19a. The following sixteen are the residents in the
sixteen-spoked Cakra viz** Deity in the previous outer covering.
The first is Paricara, Aranyapati, Srkavisa, Jigharnsantah,
Musnatampatayah, Asimantah, (afimantak in N.), Suprajfia,
Naktaficarah Prakrtinam-pati, Usnisi, Giregcara, Kulufica-
nampati, Isumantah, Dhanvavidah, Atanvana, Pratipirva,
Dadhanaka and Ayacchata (Ayacchantah).

19b-22a. In the eighth outer covering there are eighteen
sets of deities. viz.: Visrjantah (those who forsake), Asyantah
(those who throw), Vidhyantah (those who pierce), Asinah
(those who are seated) , Sayanah (those who are lying down),
Yantah (those who go), Jagratah (those who keep awake),
Tisthantah (those who stand), Dhavantah (those who run),
Sabhyah, SamAdhipah, ASvah, ASvapatayah (Lords of horses),
Avyadhinyah (devoid of sickness), Vividhyantah, Ganadhya-
ksah, Brhantah (Big ones) and Grtsa (O suppressor of Vindhya
mountain.

22b-24. The following eas are the deities of the
ninth outer covering :—

Grtsadhipatis, Vratas, Vratadhipas, Ganas, Ganapas,
Visvaripas, Virdpakas, Mahantah, Ksullakas, Rathins, Arathas,
Rathas, Rathapattyads, Senas, Senanis, Ksattaras, Sangrahitrs,
Taksanah, Rathakaraka and Kulala (Various artisans are
deified as Rudras) .

*These are seven and so the outer covering may be a heptagon.
*eThe text Adhak parivaro etc. should be ddyah paricaro as in N.

=== PAGE 41 ===

1256 Brahmanda Purana

25-28. The following are the Rudras in the tenth outer
covering. viz.: Karmaras, Pufijisthas, Nisadas, Isukrdganas,
Dhanvakaras, Mrgayus, Svanis, Svanas, Agvas, Aévapatis, Bhava,
Rudra, Sarva Paéupati, Nilagriva, Sitikantha, Kapardi,
Vyuptakesa, Sahasraksa, Satadhanva, Girifa, Sipivista, and
Midhustama.

29-32a. The following twentyfour Rudras are mentioned
as occupying the eleventh Cakra (outer covering) :—Isumin,
Hrasva, Vamana, Brhan, Varsiyan, Vrddha, Samrddhi, Agrya,
Prathama, Agu, Ajira, Sighra, Sibhyaka, Urmyavasu, Anyarudra
Srotasya, Divya, Jyestha,Kanistha, Pirvaja,Avaraja, Madhyama
Avagamya and Jaghanya. All of them are very mighty.

32b-35. The following twentysix deities are remembered
as stationed in the twelfth outer covering :—

Budhnya, Somyarudra, Pratisarpaka, Yamyaka Ksemya,
Uvocava, Khali, Slokya, Avasanyaka, Vanya, Kaksya, Srava,
Pratigrava,ASusena, Aguratha, Sara, Avabhinda, Varmi, Varathi,
Bilmi, Kavaci, Sruta, Sena, Dundubhya, Ahananya and Dhrsnu.
They have huge bodies. They are very mighty.

36-40a. Listen, O sage, the following are the Rudras
stationed in the thirteenth outer covering °:

Prabhrgas, Ditas, Prahitas, Nisangins, Isudhiman,
Yudhitaksnesu, Svayudha, Sudhanva, Stutya, Pathya, Kapya,
Natya, Siidha, Sarasya, Nadhamana, Vegantah, Kupya (?)
Avadhavarsya, Avarsya, Medhya, Vidyutya (?) Ighri, Atapya,
Vatya, (?) Resmya (N), Vastavya, Vastupa, and Soma. All of
them are very powerful.

40b-43. The following are mentioned as the Rudra
deities in the fourteenth outer covering, O sage. :

Rudra, Tamraruna, Sanga, Pagupati, Ugra, Bhima,
Agrevadha, Direvadha, Hanta, Haniyan, Vrsa, HarikeSaka,
‘Tara, Sambhu, Mayobhi, Sankara, Mayaskara, Siva, Sivatara
Tirthya, Kulya, Parya, Aparya, Pratarana, Uttarana, Atarya,
Labhya, Sastha (?) (Saspya in N) and Phenya.

44-48. The following thirtytwo Rudra Devatas, O
intelligent one, stay permanently in the fifteenth outer covering
with their weapons:

Sikatya, Pravahya, Irinya, Prapathya, (Osage), Kiméila,

=== PAGE 42 ===

Lalita-mahatmya 34. 49-57 1257

Ksayana (thereafter), Kapardi, Pulastya, Gosthya, Grhya (as
also), Talpya, Gehya, Katya, Gahvarestha, urudipaka (Hradayya
in N.), Nivestya, Pantavya (Parhsavya in N.), Rathanya,
(Rajasyaka in N.),Sukya (uskya in N.).Hariti, Alothas (Alohya
in N.), Lopyas, Urya, Sirmya, Payeya (Parna in N.), Parnasa,
Vaguramanaka, Abhighnanasidu (Abhighnan and Akkhidan
in N.), Prakhidan, Kirika and Devanambhrdaya.

49-51. In the sixteenth outer covering the following
(four) blazing deities staying in the doorways in the cast etc.
worship Maharudra :—Viksinatkas, Vicinvatkas, Nirhatana-
makas and Amivaktras. Thus Maharudra is served by the thou-
sands of Rudras stationed in the sixteen outer coverings. He
carries out the behest of Lalita. He stays there in the north-east
corner of the pearl chamber for the prosperity of the worlds.

52. Enumerated in the Satarudriya scripture, these
Rudras of great strength protect day and night all those who
are richly endowed with devotion to Lalita. These (deities)
put obstacles in the path of those who are not the devotees of
goddess Lalita.

53. In this manner the guardians of the quarters,
beginning with Sakra resort to the pearl-chamber and perform
service unto Lalita Paramesgvari.

54. Within the pearl chamber and seven Yojanas from it
is the chamber of emerald. It is four Yojanas in height.

55-57. It is rendered very splendid by means of the
proper arrangements of the Gopuras etc. as before. Four
Mansions belonging to Dandanatha are built there in the
intermediate corners between the quarters beginning with
southeast. They are as spacious and large asthe abodes cf
Mantrini.

Those deities who were stationed on the steps of the
leading chariot Giricakra during the great war with Bhandasura
stay here (always) alert and watchful. All the grounds here
are well paved with rows of emerald stones. They are very
splendid.

1. VV.54-65 describe the emerald chamber of Dandanatha.

=== PAGE 43 ===

1258 Brahmanda Purdna

58-61. They are full of groves of golden palms. They
are equipped in plenty by all the requisite things. There, all
the deities have the same splendour and magnificence as
Dandanatha. They move about, playfully whirling and shaking
ploughshare and pestle, The palmyra trees are innumerable.
They are as wonderful and bright as fresh gold. Their trunks
are a Yojana in height. They have very broad and large leaves.
Their barks are golden. They are very glossy and smooth.
They have good shade and they are fully laden with fruits.
From the top to the root many pots of liquor are kept hanging
down from those palmrya trees. All these have been made by
the artisans for pleasing Dandanatha.

62-64. Drinking the palm juice continuously, the Cakra
deities Jrmbhini and others, the Bhairavas beginning with
Hetuka, the seven Nigraha deities, Unmattabhairavi and
Svapnesi—all these are fully intoxicated. In that excitement
of inebriation, they dance about all round in the various
quarters wherever Dandini happened to glance at. All these
deities have the same splendour and magnificence as the
goddess.

65. The residence of Dandanatha (here) is only for her
prestige. For the purpose of serving (Lalita), she has another
residence in the MahapadmAtavi region. Since her mansion is
far from the chamber, she has another mansion assigned to her
for the purpose of serving (Lalita).

66. Inthe emerald enclosure, seven Yojanas away from
it is the rampart wall of coral as pink-coloured as the morning
sun.

67-69a. There the entire ground is paved and beauti-
fied with corals. Here Brahma sits in his lotus seat. Brahma who
resembles coral in his complexion always comes there
from Brahmaloka along with all leading sages for serving
Srilalitadevi. He is always active and alert in this respect. O
Quaffer of the ocean, he remains there along with the creators
of subjects beginning with Marici+

1. VV.66-70 Coral enclosure—residence of god Brahma.

=== PAGE 44 ===

Lalita-mahatmya 34. 69-83 1259

69b-70. At the command of goddess Lalita and for
the prosperity of the worlds, the great fourteen lores, thousands
of subsidiary lores, the sixtyfour fine arts—all these assume
physical bodies and resort to Brahma’s residence in the coral
enclosure.

71-72. Within the coral enclosure and seven Yojanas
away from it is the world of Visnu.! In all directions it is
surrounded by ruby Mandapas (raised dais with canopies etc.)
Eager to serve Lalita, Visnu assumes different forms four, ten
or twelve and the eternal lord Madhava always stays there.

73-75. The deities of ten incarnations who rose up
from the nails of Sridevi in the course of great battle with
Bhandasura reside in the Mandapa made of ruby. The only
difference in this chamber from the previous ones is this that
the surface is covered with that of ruby stones (here). There
within the chamber the lord holding the conch, discus and mace
divides himself into twelve forms and accords defence in the
quarters beginning with the east.

76-83. Kegava of golden colour holds discus and
protects the east. Narayana resembling the black cloud holds
conch and protects west. As dark as the petals of blue
lotus Madhava possessing honey (?) protects (everyone).
The great lord Govinda holds bow and has the lustre of
the moon, He protects the right (i.e. the southern side).
Visnu who resembles the filaments of the lotus holds the
ploughshare and protects the north. Madhusiidana who has
the lustre of the lotus and holds Musala (pestle) protects
the southeast; Trivikrama who has the refulgence of the
fire holds sword in his hand and protects southwest.
Vamana who has the brilliance of the mid-day sun holds
thunderbolt and protects north-west. Sridhara who has
the lustre of Pundarika (lotus) and has the sharpedged spear
for his weapon protects the north-east. Hrsikesa who has the

1, VV.71-84 describe the region of Visnu with ruby Mandapas. The
first Twelve names of Visnu uttered at the beginning of a Sandhya (morning
or evening prayer) viz. Keéava, Narayana, Damodara are regarded as the
forms of Visnu with which he protects the world.

=== PAGE 45 ===

1260 Brahmanda Purana

lustre of lightning and holds the club protects in the southern
quarter (or in the lower region). Padmandbha_ whose reful-
gence isequalto that of a thousand suns holds the Sarnga
bow in his hand and surrounds the ruby dais ina clock-wise
direction. Damodara who has all weapons, who is omni-
potent and omniscient, who has faces all round, who resembles
Indragopa (glowworm), who holds the noose in his hand, who
is never defeated, who is the soul of everything and who is full
of devotion to Lalita surrounds the ruby dais in a anticlock-
wise direction.

84. Thus by means of his twelve bodies the lotus-eyed
Lord shines in the Visnuloka occupying the ruby dais.

85. Within the enclosure of diverse kinds of gems and
seven Yojanas from it there is a charming dais named Saha-
Srastambhaka! (thousand-columned).

86-87. It is set with and beautified with different kinds of
gems. There isenclosure (chamber) there which is very high
and which is built of differentgems. There is a row of
thousand columns transversely. (?) There are many such
rows in the four directions.

88. The covering above is as before by means of blocks
of gems and jewels. It is there that Siva’a world stands aloft
with sparkling splendour.

89, It isremembered that the twentyeight Saiva-agamas
(scriptural texts of Saivite philosophy) are present there in
embodied form. There are excellent persons there, the chief of
whom are Nandin, Bhrngi and Mahakala.

90-94. There are thousands of elephant-faced lords.
There are deities of twentysix Tattvas in that excellent
Sivaloka on the hall of thousand columns. [sana, the moon-
crested lord is the knower ofall lores. He carries out the
orders of Lalita and abides by them. He repeats the Mantra

1, VV. 85-94 give the description of a thousand-pillared hall and the
residence of Siva. This Siva is Sridevi’s devotee (on a lower level). Mention
of 28 Saiva Agamas in V. 89 does not clarify whether the Advaita or Dvaita
theory is advocated by them,

=== PAGE 46 ===

Lalita-mahatmya 35.1-2 1261

of Lalita continuously. He is always delighted in his mind. By
means of his benign vision special to him, he illuminates the
power of intellect which has the form of great refulgence of his
devotees. He does so for the sake of enabling his devotees to
achieve the Mantra of Lalita. The power of intellect can
thereby be competent to dispel the dense darkness within and
without. Mahadeva who stays in the thousand-columned hall
is omniscient. He does everything. He is full of devotion to
Sridevi. O Potborn sage, he stays there resorting to
different enclosures.

CHAPTER THIRTYFIVE

The preparation of materials of worship in Mahdpadmatavt*

Hayagriva said :

1. Henceforth, we shall recount different chambers
of Vapitraya (three tanks) etc. Merely by listening to these,
great prosperity can be attained.

2. Within the thousand-columned enclosure and seven
Yojanas away is the great chamber named Manah. It is
wonderfully built and beautified with all kinds of gems and
jewels.

1. The description of the Mahdpadméjavf shows that it is a yogic

allegory. It is beyond the “great Halls” of Mind (vv 2-23), Buddhi ‘Intellect’—
(vv. 24-33), Ahankdra ‘Ego’ (vv.34-40), the sun-god (vv.41-50), the moon-
god (vv.51-58) and of Sngéra ‘love sentiment’ (vv.59-69), the last being
the most difficult to cross. The ‘waters’ of tanks (Vdpis) are stated to be
Amrta (nectar), Ananda (Bliss, delight) and Vimarsa (discrimination?). The
whole description suggests that this must be a figurative description of the
Yogic process to the realization of goddess Lalita, the Cit-sakti.
A further point to be noted is the Buddhist influence. The deities Tara, the
chief navigator in Amrta vdpt (vv. 12-17) and Kurukulla, the chief of boats
(NaukeSvart) in Vimarsa-vépikd, are Buddhist deities adopted in the Lalita
cult,

=== PAGE 47 ===

1262 Brahmanda Puraya

3. It has Gopuras. gateways, panels and bolts as before.
The entire space within that chamber (enclosure) is a nectarine
lake.

4-5. There isa certain Rasdyana (tonic beverage) by
imbibing which Yogins and Siddhas become very powerful
persons. Their bodies become as hard as adamant. They be-
come very wise and intelligent too. That same Rasdyana has
become the water of this lake of nectar. By inhaling its smell
alone, one can become the master of beautiful ladies in the
form of Siddhis.

6-7. O suppressor of the Vindhya mountain, even without
touching it (by inhaling alone), a person gets all his sins destroy-
ed. Along the sides of both the enclosures, on the banks of
the nectarine lake, there are many small ponds, all squares of
sides halfa Kroga each. The Lottom of the lake is four Yojanas
deep.

8. Avseries of steps in the lake are wonderfully paved
with different kinds of gems and jewels. The swans and cranes
in the lake are golden and gem-coloured.

9-12. Moving slowly and gently the ripples and waves
dash against the two banks. By drinking the water therein, O
Suppressor of the Vindhya Mountain, which is full of tonic
beverage, the birds get rid of old age and death there. By
means of their perpetual chirping, the Karandava (A species of
duck) birds appear to be performing the Japa of the Mantra of
great potentiality of goddess Lalita. As the region is entirely
covered with numerous ponds, there is no other way of
approaching that place without a boat. Moreover, without the
permission of Mantrini and Dandanatha, no one can enter the
region. There is a great Sakti named Tara working there as
the deity in charge of the portals.

13-14, Tara has many female attendants. They are dark
in colour like the blue lotus. With thousands of gemset boats,
they sport about in the waters of the lake, playing on their
lutes, glutes, drums etc. They go to and fro between the two
banks frequently.

15. The boat-women of Tara are crores in number. They
are all in their fresh bloom of youth. They dance and repeated-
ly sing the meritorious glory of the goddess.

=== PAGE 48 ===

Lalitd-mahatmya 35.16-28 1263

16. Some of them have oarsin their hands. Some have
horns filled with water in their hands. They drink the nectarine
water of that lake. They move about in hundreds of rafts and
boats.

17-18. Mother Tara who is the chief among those Saktis
who row the boats and whose complexion is dark, does not
permit even the three-eyed lord to sail in the waters of the lake
without the permission of Mantrini and Dandanatha.

19-2la. The group of Saktis in charge of the boats and
rafts of Tara is very beautiful. They sing and sail about in boats
rendered beautiful by means of gems and jewels. At every step
they recite instances of the great munificence and exalted
state of the empress. They steadily drink wine in goblets of
rubies. In every boat there is a jewel-studded abode of fascinat-
ing features where they live.

21b-23. Some boats are made and beautified by gold,
O sage, some are made of gems and precious stones. Some
boats are in the shape of sharks and crocodiles. Some of them
are deer-faced Some boats have leonine faces and some are
elephant-faced. Surrounded thus by boats of wonderfully varie-
gated forms, Mother Tara shines splendidly. She possesses her
own huge boat.

24. Rowing continuously in the waters of the lake, both
clockwise and anticlockwise directions, Vara guards this
enclosure.

25. Within the enclosure of Manahsala (Chamber of
mind) and seven Yojanas away from it is the enclosure well-
known as Buddhisala (Chamber of Intellect). It is four Yojanas
in height. ,

26. The entire space inthe middle of that chamber is
occupied by Anandavapika (the lake of Bliss). The great divine
wine rendered highly fragrant by the Bahula (Mimusops
elengi) flowers and having the lustre of heated gold serves the
purpose of water in that river.

27. The depth etc. of the lake of bliss are recounted as
before. The structure of the series of steps etc. and the nature
and features of the birds—everything is as before.

28. By frequently drinking the water therein viz. : wine,

=== PAGE 49 ===

1264 Brahmanda Purana

the Saktis stationed on its banks become mad with inebriation
and play about. They become excessively red (in their faces)
due to intoxication.

29. The goddess Varuni herself is the official in charge
of the fleet of boats. They call her Sudhamilini and also
Amrte$vari.

30. She is surrounded by an army of Saktis stationed in
the boats studded with gems and jewels. By her mere glance,
she makes the three worlds perfectly inebriated.

31-33. She resembles the midday sun (in refulgence).
Her cheeks become red on account of intoxication. Her tresses
are exquisitely embellished with garlands of Parijata flowers with
which they are tied. She holds the goblet filled with wine whcre
lotus fowers move to and fro. In another vessel set with jewels,
she holds well-cooked piece of meat. Thus Varuni, the leader of
the fleet of boats, shines. Only at the bidding of Mantrini and
Dandanatha does she give permission to anyone to cross the
lake and _ not otherwise, even in the case of the three-eyed lord.

34, Then within the great enclosure of intellect and seven
Yojanas away from it, is Ahamkdra Mahasdla (thegreat chamber
of Ego). It is fitted with Gopuras as before.

35. The entire ground, O sage, between those two cham-
bers is occupied by the pond named VimarSavapikd (the lake
of deliberation and consideration). It isin the form of the Nectar
of the Nerve Susumna (or of the Susumna ray of the sun).

36. Within the great Yogins, in their inner mind, there
is wind filling it. In the hollow of the bonelike nerve Susumna
there is the most excellent Amria (Nectar).

37. The same is the water in that lake, O ascetic. It is
‘remembered that the series of steps from the banks, birds,
fleet of boats everything is as before.

38, The gentle lady, the deity of the boats is well known
as Kurukulla. She has dark complexion and features like Tamala
tree. She wears dark-coloured bodice.

39. She is surrounded by other deities of boats, all on a
par with herself. Her hands are placed on a jewel-set oar. She
is perpetually in a state of intoxication.

40. Seated in her jewel-studded boat, O sage, she moves

=== PAGE 50 ===

Lalita-mahatmya 35.41-50 1265

about allround. The depth of water in the lake is mentioned as
before.

41. Within the enclosure of ego and seven Yojanas away
from it is the Saryabimbamahdsala (the great chamber of the
solar disc). It is four Yojanas in height.

42-43, The space in the middle of that chamber is filled
with Kuruvindakas (the fragrant grass called cuperus rotundus).
Formerly, the rising Aruna (charioteer of the sun) was greater
than the sun (in refulgence). The great goddess Lalita stays*
(?) there where the early morning sunlight spreads. The sun
performed a great penance and secured that lustre.

44, The groups of planets, the constellations and stars—
all these performed penance here and attained the power of
illuminating the worlds.

45. Martanda Bhairava is present there, O sage, in twelve
different forms. He is accompanied by Saktis of fiery refulgence
numbering crores.

46. He is Mahdprakasaripa (having the form of great
radiance). His eyes are pink due to inebriation, He is eagerly
engaged in perpetual sports among the groves of Kankola (piper
cubeb) trees, O suppressor of the pride of the Vindhya moun-
tain. He is wholly absorbed in it.

47, His great Sakti is Mahaprakasa by name. Caksusmati
is another Sakti. The deity Chaya? is remembered as another
(Sakti) .

48. Thus he is surrounded by three beloved Saktis. He
continuously repeats the Mantras of Lalita MaheSani mentally.

49-50a. He illuminates the sense organs of her devotees
and makes them refulgent. He exterminates the dense darkness
within and without. There in the regio of Baldtapodgdra (where
the early morning rays of the sun spread) Martanda Bhairava
shines.

*N, does not mention Lalita. It simply states ; “‘O sage, there is always
the spreading of the early morning light.”

1, Itis strange that Sarnjiia, the legitimate wife of the sun-god, is not
mentioned but her shadow (Chdy@) whom she left with her husband and
escaped (till the Sun-god’s lustre was modified) is mentioned as ‘beloved
Sakti’ of the Sun-god. For Sarhjiié and Chaya vide VP.III. also PE p.182.

=== PAGE 51 ===

1266 Brahmanda Purana

50b-51. Within the great enclosure of solar disc and
seven Yojanas away fromit, is the chamber of Lunar disc. It is
four Yojanas in height. It is endowed with Gopuras, doorways,
panels and bolts or before.

52-54, The entire space within it is called Candrikd@dvdra
(the doorway of Moonlight). It was here in Candrikddvdra that
the Moon-god performed a severe penance and attained his
splendour and was born of the eye of Atri. Here he stays with
the name Somandtha. He has pure form and features. He
shines as the destroyer of darkness in all the three worlds.
He enables the world to function properly.

55. He drinks the nectar of moonlight in gobletfuls.
He is surrounded by the Saktis of twentyseven constellations.

56. Lord Sagi stays there itself in Candrikadvara
always in his full form. He has his own form and features and
is devoid of black spot.

57. The moon spends his time there in Japas, meditations,
eulogies and hundreds of worships of Lalita, along with Agvini
and others (i.e. constellation Saktis)

58. There are thousands of other Saktis named T4ras.
They stay near him. That chamber is filled with them.

59. Within the chamber of Moon’s disc and seven
Yojanas away from it, is the chamber named Srngara (toilette.)
It is four Yojanas in height.

60. It is made of Kaustubha jewels in the form of dressing
chambers.

Inits centre the entire space is called Mahdsrigdra Parikha
(moat of great amorous sentiment).

61. Within the encircling Parikha (moat) filled with
Srngararasa (the essence of the sentiment of Love) there are
Srigara Saktis. They sparkle in their diverse kinds of jewels
and ornaments.

62. Haughty with intoxication, they move about in
thousand boats. They always worship and serve the flower-
weaponed lord (Kama) who is also intoxicated and who is
seated in his boat.

63. Subject to the control and commands of Lalita he
enchants all the worlds, entire universe by means of his

=== PAGE 52 ===

Lalitd-mahatmya 35, 64.71 1267

arrows beginning with Sammohana (that which fascinates and
deludes).

64. Those who are enchanted by his power go to
the region of Mahapadmatavi in order to honour and worship
(Lalita). They take up and assure pure guise and garments,
They are full of devotion to Lalita. With great concentration
in their minds they proceed towards the region of Padmatavi
(Park of lotus flowers).

65. But neither Suras nor human beings nor the
celestial Siddhas become competent to go there. But Brahma,
Visnu and Mahefa, who are naturally pure in their minds go
to the region of Mahapadmafavi at her bidding.

66-67. Men of worldly inclination, those who are blind
with passion, those who indulge in wishful thinking and too
much of fanciful imagination, men excessively excited, those
who are dusty and dirty due to doubtful and indecisive knowl-
edge, men whoare deeply immersed in passionate attachments
—all these are not competent or clever enough to cross the moat
of Mahdafrngaraparikha which causes delusion even to the mature
people.

68-69. The officer incharge of Mahdfrngdraparikhd is
Smara (God of Love) who enchants even the three worlds.
Therefore, no one becomes powerful enough to go to Maha-
padmatavi after going beyond all his (army)* that causes
fascination and delusion even to the great.

70. Then, within the chamber of Srngara and seven
Yojanas away from it, isthe great abode of Cakrardja named
Cintdmanigrha (the abode of Philosopher’s stone).

71. The entire ground in its centre is embellished with
jewels and precious stones. It is called Mahapadmatavi.! It
bestows all good fortune, exalted grandeur and great felicity.

*N, reads Sattvam for Sarvam in our text.

1. V.71 and onwards are devoted to the description of Mahapadma-
avi proper. Here every thing is set in a magnified form. Thus the vessels for
‘Arghya in the eastern portion of that chamber are Yojanas in dimension.
The following gods have maintained the Arghya vessel along with their
Kalas or Saktis to serve. The Fire-god (vv.79-83), with his ten Kalas, the
Sun-god with his 12 Kalas (vv.84-87), the moon-god with his 16 Kalas,

=== PAGE 53 ===

1268 Brahmagda Purana

72. There are Gopuras in the chambers (beginning with)
Srgara and ending with Mahakala, O sage. The arrangement
of Gopuras, in all the four directions is like this.

73. It ismentioned that in all the quarters, there are
altogether a hundred Gopuras, O sage. The chambers are
splendid and it is mentioned that they are twentyfive in
number.

74. I shall describe the region of Padmatavi which
extends to one Yojana and which is the root of all the cham-
bers, O sage, listen attentively*.

75. An intervening space of six Yojanas is entirely paved
and beautified with Ratnas (jewels and gems). All round the
place there are Sthalapadmas (Dry land-lotuses) of huge stalks.

76. The stalks are one Yojana in length covered with
soft thorns. The length of the leaves is equal to the height of
ten palm trees.

77. The filaments of the lotuses have a length equal to
the height of five Talas (Palm trees) .The pericarps are reputed
to be as high as ten palms.

78. There are many crores and crores of lotuses here.
They are very tender and in perpetual bloom. They have
very agreeable fresh fragrance and wide petals.

79-80. O Pot-born sage, in the eastern portion of the
Mahapadmatavi chamber is the base of the Arghya vessel (vessel
for materials of worship to venerable persons). It is fiery by
nature and a Krofa high. It is circular in shape extending toa
Yojana. It is endowed with ten Kalas, O Pot-born sage.

81-83. All round that base there are Saktis with blazing
bodies. The chief among them is Dhimrarcis. They are the

“ten Kalas of Vibh4vasu (Fire-god). They have radiant youth-
ful splendour. They are adorned with different kinds of orna-
ments. They are gracefully lethargic due to love. They stay all

(vv. 88-93), Brahma (v. 94) and Vignu (v.95), Rudra (v.96), livara
(vv. 97-99), Sankara (v.99) with their respective Kalas.

The description is continued in the next chapter.

*N.B. : The idea seems to be this : All the chambers are connected
with Padméatavi, the intervals of their joints being one Yojana cach.

=== PAGE 54 ===

Lalita-mahatmya 35, 84-93 1269

round the fire-god in close embrace, the fire-god of great glory
who constitutes the base (of the Arghya vessel). The following
are mentioned asthe ten Kalas of Vahni (the fire-god) who
stays in the form of the base, viz.: Dhimrarcis, Una, Jvalini,
Visphulingini, Sufrih, Suripa, Kapila, Havyavaha and
Kavyavaha.

84. The sun-god assumes the form of a vessel and
occupies that base, the sun-god whose rise is well reputed as the
destroyer of darkness of the three worlds.

85. That vessel constituted by the sun is one and a half
Yojanas in height and its bottom is a square of length and
breadth extending to a Yojana each. It is excessively
refulgent and radiant.

86. There are twelve Kalds of extremely sparkling rays
with their bodies in contact with that vessel all round like
dolls.

87. They are:— Tapini, Tapini, Dhimra, Martci,
Jvalini, Ruci, Susumna, Bhogada, Visva, Bodhini, Dharini and
Ksama.

88-91. The Arghya intended for the worship of Lalita is
kept in that vessel. It is the cause of great bliss. It is the most
excellent Amrta. It contains the extract and essence of all
medicinal herbs. It hasan extremely agreeable fragrance. It
is rendered sweet smelling continuously by never fading blue
and white lotuses of very exquisite scent. It is heartily cool
and free from impurities. Its desirable, gentle ripples, hundreds
in number, add to its grandeur and splendour It has sparkling
appearance with pleasing sounds arising from the moving ripples.
It is said to be nectarine Arghya constituted by the Kalas of the
Moon. There are many tiny boats mdde of jewels and gems. The
splendid Kalas of the Moon, in their fresh youthful bloom
occupy those boats and sport about.

92-93. The following are the Kalas, (digits) of the
Moon-god:— Amrta, Manada, Pigna, Tusti, Pusti, Rati,
Dhrti, Sasini, Candrika, Kanti, Jyotsna, Srih, Priti, Angada,
Parna and Pirpamrta. These are the Kalas of the Moon god.
They are in full bloom of fresh youth.

Their faces are always beaming with laughter.

=== PAGE 55 ===

1270 Brahmanda Purdna

94. The following Kalas of Brahma play there viz.:
Pusti, Rddhi, Sthiti, Medhd, Kanti, Laksmi, Dyuti, Dhrti,
Jara? and Siddhi.

95, Hari’s Kalas are as follows, Sthiti(Jara in N.) , PAlini,
Santi, I$vari, Tati (Rati, in N.), Kamika, Varad, Hladini,
Priti and Dirgha.

96. The following Kalds of Rudra are also stationed
there : Tiksna, Raudri, Bhaya, Nidra, Tandra, Ksut, Krodhini,
Trapa (Kriya in N). Utkari and Mrtyu.

97-99. The Kalas of the lord Isvara are mentioned as
four in number with the colours yellow (bright), white, pink
and (pale) white. They are [fvara’s Kalas. Sankara’s Kalas are
following sixteen, O suppressor of the Vindhya mountain :
Nivrtti, Pratistha, Vidya, Santi, Indira, Dipika, Recika,
Mocika, Par4, Siksma, Siksmamrta, Jianamrta, Vyadhini,
Siksmakala, Vy4pini and Vyomaripika. These Saktis sport
about there.

100. Thousands of Vidyds seat themselves in Rudra’s
boats and in the form of Saktis and play about here and
there.

101. They have been employed by Paramesthin to
cleanse and purify the Arghya. After drinking that nectarine
Arghya, the Saktis are always elated.

102-103. The Saktis staying in Mahapadmatavi and
Mahacakra always drink this Arghya when they are fresh and
rendered fragrant. They fill thousands of gem-set pots and
crores of golden pots with that great nectarine Arghya
and distribute it among others.

104. The Saktis attending upon those who stay ia the
abodes of Cintamani are proud and intoxicated. They offer
this Arghya to Anima and other Saktis.

105. Thus the preparation and other arrangements of
Arghya in the eastern portion of the chamber Mahdpadmdjant
have been mentioned. Other things also inthis matter will be
mentioned afterwards.

1, Sthird in N, The list of god Brahma’s Kalfs in N. is as follows :
Srsti, Buddhi, Smrti, Medha, Kanti, Laksmi, Dyuti, Sthir&, Sthiti and
Siddhi. $1-101.

=== PAGE 56 ===

Lalita-mahdtmya 36. 1-11 1271
CHAPTER THIRTYSIX
The Inner Chamber of Cintdmani*

Hayagriva Said :—

1, (Defective Text) To the South-east of Chinta-
mani mansion is Kundamanaka. It is a Yojana long, wide and
high (with moat a Yojana broad around.) *

2. At the bidding of Lalita, a sacred Cidvahni (fire of Cit
i.e. knowledge and consciousness) blazes there. It is honoured
and adored by hundreds of nectarine currents. It is the cause
of the greatest prosperity.

3, Without fuel, the fire of consciousness blazes with
great flames. It is kindled by means of Sudhd (Nectar). It
has the lustre of tender shoots of Kankoli—(a plant with
aromatic berries.)

4. There the Hotri (female priest) is the great goddess
and the great Hotr (male priest) is Kamesvara. Both of them,
the permanent Hotrs, protect the entire Universe.

5. Lalita functions without anyone superior to herself
and without depending on anyone else. Urged by Lalita and
Sankara, Kama functions,

6-lla. To the South-West of the prominent mansion of
Cintamani, in the lotus-grove, stands the excellent chariot
Cakraraja. It is very high. It has nine steps. It isset and beauti-
fied by all kinds of gems and jewels. Its length and breadth are

*If the reading Khdtaka (N) for Cdtaka be accepted.

1, VV.1-32 of this chapter state the position or distribution of places to
various deities in Lalita's paraphernalia, The’following are their location :

(1) South-East—cid-vahni : Fed with nectar.

The Priestess and the Priest—Lalita and her consort (vv.1-15)

(2) South-west in the Lotus-grove—chariot Cakrardja (vv.6-10)

(3) North-west of the mansion—Geya Cakra-ratha.

(4) North-East—Kirl-Cakra of Danda-nathd (vv.11-13)

(5) Palaces of Visnu, Ganapati etc. are detailed in vv.14-32.

The break-up of Topics and their consistent inclusion under specific
chapters is not properly followed in this edition. Hence the distribution of
the places of residence and their cakras are half-done here and the same
topic continues in chapter 37.

=== PAGE 57 ===

1272 Brahm&gda Purdna

four Yojanas each and its height is ten Yojanas. As we go up, its
area becomes gradually reduced. The pole to which the horses
are yoked is very thick and sparkling. The four Vedas are its
great wheels. The four aims in life Virtue (Dharma), Wealth
(Artha), Love (Kama), and Liberation (Moksa) are its great
horses. It is adorned with chowries (in the form of serving
(functioning) Tattvas (Principles). It is endowed with all
characteristic features mentioned before. It is rendered splendid
by the pearl-studded umbrella. In the course of the great battle
with Bhandasura, it had displayed its adventurous exploits.
Thus the excellent chariot stands there sanctified by Sridevi’s
‘seat,

I1b-13. To the north-west of the mansion of Cintamani,
in the lotus-grove itself at the border, is parked the leading
chariot of Mantrini, namely Geyacakra.

To the north-east ofthe mansion of Cintamani, in the
lotus-grove itself, stands the great chariot Kiricakra, the
favourite chariot of Dandanatha. It should be known that like
deities presiding over different parts of the body, these three
chariots are on an equal footing in the whole of the sacred
places of the series of Sripuras.

14. There is an ever-blazing sacred fire-pit in the
South-East. If penance is performed here, it is as efficacious
as the penance with the Gayatri Mantra. It bestows freedom.
from fear.

15-16. Behind that are the sun (named) Ghrni, the
temple of Ormkara, the deity Turiyagayatri (Fourth Gayatri)
and Caksusmati, O Sage—

Then the king of Gandharvas, Parisadrudra (Rudra
of the Assembly) and goddess Tarambika are stationed behind.

17, Lord Hari, expressible in the great Mantra of the
three names, has resorted to the South-Eastern part of the leading
mansion of Cintamani.

18. Mahaganapati resorts to hisabode to the North of
it. Still further north is Siva who is expressed by the Paficaksari-
mantra ( Mantra of five syllables viz. Sivdya namah).

=== PAGE 58 ===

Lalitd-m&hdtmya 36. 19-31 1273

19. Mrtyufijayefa who is expressed by the Mantra
of three syllables ( Tryambaka),1 Sarasvati who is called (by the
name) Dharana, reside to the north of his abode.

20. The mansion of Matrka whose body is constituted
by the letters beginning with the letter ‘4’ and ending with
the letter ‘KSA’ is to the northof her, O suppressor of
Vindhya mountain.

21. To the north is Sampadesi as well as Kalasankarsani.
(Thereafter) is Srimahasambhunatha, the cause of the
manifestation of the goddess.

22. The following deities have their mansions built
consecutively to the North viz. Sri, Paramba (the great
Mother goddess), Visadajyotsna (of clear moonlight) and
Nirmala-Vigraha (of a body devoid of impurities) .

23. The following four deities have their mansions
successively to the north viz.—Bala, Annapirna, Hayaridha
and Sripaduki.

24. From the ground which is to the north-west of the
majestic Cintamani mansion in the great park of lotuses itself,
there are other deities who have taken up their abodes.

5-27. Unmattabhairavi, Svapnavarahika, Tiraskarani-
kamba, then another deity and then the fifth one all these
deities have taken up their abodes as before. They are endowed
with great prosperity.

These two excellent deities viz. the great goddess Sriparti
and Srimahapaduka have also taken up their abodes as before.

All these Vidyds (lores) explained by Lord Sankara in
the treatise, Sagamndyasdgara, do stay in the region of Mahapad-
matavi.

28. In this manner, there are great mansions of
Srirasmimala. They are made of jewels and gems. O ascetic,
they have flags fluttering very much high above. The chambers
are huge and lofty with stair-cases.

29. In the eastern gate of the Palatial Cintamani
mansion, O quaffer of the ocean, on the right hand side is the
great abode of Mantrinatha.

30-31. On the left hand side is the abode of Danda-
natha, made of gems and jewels. It is to the east of the place

1. The mantra of three syllables : Or Fah Sak

=== PAGE 59 ===

1274 Brahmanda Purdna

of Arghya that the abodes of Brahma, Visnu and Mahefa are
situated. They all illuminate the entire region of quarters
by the rays of gems and jewels. All these deities are full of
devotion to Lalita. They perform Zapas solely of Lalita. They
worship Sri Devi thus.

32. The place of Arghya and the preparation of Arghya
materiais mentioned before are, it is remembered, the same in
all the entrances beginning with the Southern one.

33. Now I shall describe in detail the abode of Cintamani.
Listen, O great sage. It is situated in the centre of Sripattana
and it extends to two Yojanas.

34-37. Its wall made of the philosopher’s stones extends
toa Kroga (two miles). The projected coverings above are also
made of Cintamani slabs. They are very tall in the form of
peaks in different places. The walls of the mansion are four
Yojanas in height. Its higher storeys and floors extend to twenty
Yojanas (?) It becomes narrower as it rises up. It has three
large crowns with which it appears very radiant. These crowns,
Osage, are forms of Iccha (will), Kriyd (action) and Jidna (know-
ledge). They are always brilliantly refulgent and are solely
made of Cintamani stones.

38, Everything in the mansion of Cintamani is remem-
bered as evolved out of Cintamani stones, It has four doorways
each half a Kroga in width.

39-40. The width of the panels is a quarter Kroga, O
Sage. Within the mansion of Cintamani in every doorway, the
same (measurement) is mentioned. The form of Lalita Devi is
concealed (?).* It appears like the ocean of redness of Lalita’s
complexion which has the lustre ofa thousand midday suns
but cool like the Moon. O great sage, it extends frequently
in the form ofa current.

41. The Eastern doorway is glorified as being constituted
by the Parvdmndya (one of the Sacred Treatises). The Southern
doorway is characterised by Daksindmndya scripture.

*For pihita in this text N.32.42 reads Pinditah. It means : “The oceans
of redness (of the complexion) of goddess Lalité were (as if solidified and)
enmassed there,

=== PAGE 60 ===

Lalitd-mahatmya 36. 42-48 1275

42. The Western doorway is characterised by Pascima-
mndya, The northern doorway is characterised by Uttardmndya
scripture.

43. Within the royal abode there are sparkling gemset
lamps with their handle fixed on the walls. They have the
splendour of ten million suns. They are fixed in various places
all round, brightening the whole of the interior of the
Mansion.

44, In the splendid central area of the mansion of Cinta-
mani in a part of the altar is the great and lofty Bindu Cakra
(Circular spot) .

45. The space in between the lofty wall of the mansion
of Cintimaniand Birdu is after leaving offa Kro§a occupied
by the wall cited to be three Krogas (in width) .

46. In that section (extending to) three Krofas are their
own rays of (Siddhis like) Apimd etc. If we reckon the entire
length of the three Krogas in Hastas (Cubits) it is said to be
consisting of twentyfour thousand Hastas.

47, From Bindu to the Pithega, there are fourteen different
(sections). In the portion thus differentiated, the number of
Hastas is being mentioned by me.

48. The interior of the mansion of Cintamani, O Sage,
is twenty Hastas above the level of the ground of the lotus grove.
The Anima and other (Siddhis) abide there.

1, In vv. 48 to 96 the places of different deities according to their
importance are fixed and their residences at a higher altitude accor-
dingly. The deities within a particular Antara form a group—a cakra with a
Presidiug deity (cakrigi?) anda protecting deity—generally a Mudra. The
cakra is given a designation. The ladder-like hierarchical positions of all deities
are not completed here. Some cakras follow in the next chapter :

Name of Cakra Presiding Deity Malint, Protectress—Sarva-mahankusa
Sarvajiia 10 Yoginis like Sarvajiia

(vv.81-96)
Name of Cakra Presiding Deity Sri-Cakrint, Protectress —Sarvonmadana

Sarvasiddhiprada Mudra, Antara of Yoginis like Sarvasiddhiprada
(vv.86-90

Antara of Protectress—Mudra Sarva-Vasya
Sarhksobhini 14 Saktis under Sarnksobhigt

(vv.79-85)

=== PAGE 61 ===

1276 Brahmanda Purdpa

49. The extent of (the plot of the abodes of Animd etc. is
four Nalvas, Four hundred Kiskus make one Nalva. By the word
Kisku it is a Hasta (cubit) that is mentioned.

50-54. In the space within are made the abodes of
(Siddhis beginning with the East. They are Animd, Mahimé,
Laghima, Garimd, ISitva, VaSitua, Prdkdmya and Mukti (Libera-
tion) , Zech, Prdpti and Sarvakdma—there are excellent Siddhis.
(Or the Siddhis called the acquisition of whatever is desired
and of all desirable things are excellent ones.) There are
many Siddhis including eight Siddhis mentioned below
and many others honoured by Yogins viz.—Rasasiddhi,
Moksasiddhi, Balasiddht, Khadgasiddhi, Aftjanasiddhi, which is
Padukdsiddhi, Vaksiddht, Lokasiddhi and Dehasiddht thereafter.

All these serve Parame$vari within that space. There are
crores of Siddhis, O Sage, in that space between Animd etc.

55. They are full of fresh youthful bloom. Their lotus-like
faces beam with smiles (for ever). Their hands (palms) are like
radiant Cint4mani gems. They are always sixteen years in age.
They have noble and highly exalted nature. They play about
in their excitement due to inebriation.

56-57. Above the plot (of abodes) of Animd etc. is
the plot of abodes of (Divine Mothers like) Brdhmi etc. It is
very beautiful. Its level is twenty Hastas above the previous

continued from the previous page

A cakra
Sarva- Presiding Deity Sundart, Protectress—Mudré Akarsanika
Sarhkyobhana 8 Powerful Saktis like Kusumi

(wv.74-78)

Acakra under Presiding Deity Sarodsapirika, Protectress—Mudra Dr dvigika
SarvidapOrika

(v.78)
Acakra under — Presiding deity Tripurest, Protectress—Sarhksobhigt
Tripur& (v. 65)
Abodes of MAtr-devatas like Bhim! etc.
(vv.50.59)

Abodes of Siddhis 20 Hastas above the level of the
Ground of the Lotus-grove (vv.48-55)

=== PAGE 62 ===

Lalitd-mahdimya 36. 58-68 1277

level. Its extent is four Naloas. There are stair-cases in all the
four quarters. Listen to the Devis stationed there.

58. They are eight : Brahmi, MaheSvari, Kaumari,
Vaignavi, Mahendri, Varahi, Camunda and Mahalaksmi.
These have built their abodes here.

59. They are armed with different kinds of weapons.
They have different Saktis as their retinue. Beginning with the
East, they have got their abodes built in a circle.

60-63. Then above it and on its exterior, O Pot-born
Sage, the space is said to be Mudrdntaram. It is twently Hastas
above the level of the previous plot. Its extent is four Nalvas.
The following Mudrds have their abodes made there. They
are ten* :—Sarksobha, Drdvana, Akarsa, Vasya, Unméda,
MahdnkuSa, Khecari, Bija, Yoni and Trikhanda. These
Mudras are established in the quarters beginning with the East.
They are extremely beautiful in their features. They are restless
in their fresh bloom of youth. With their agreeable refulgence
they fill the interior of the above. Thus, O tiger among sages,
they serve Lalita Paramegvari.

64. These three <Antaras constitute Cakra (Wheel)
that fascinates the three worlds. Those who are Saktis among
these have been recounted with their names expressed.

65. The presiding deity of these is Tripura the leading
deity of Cakra. The protectress deity of that Cakra is the
Mudrd of the nature of Samksobhana (Agitation) .

66. Above the Antara of the Mudrds is mentioned the
Antara of the Nityd-Kalds, It is twenty Hastas above the level of
the previous Antara. Its extent is four Nalvas. The stair-case and
steps are one above the other.

67-68. In that Nityd Kaldntara, the deities beginning with
Kamdakarsanika have made their abodes all round. They are of
the nature of sixteen Kalds (digits) of the Moon. With their
cool exudations of nectar, they propitiate the quarters all round.
Listen attenively to their names from me, O Pot-born Sage.

*Although the Mudras are female deities, they are translated here as if
of a masculine gender implying ‘the capacity to do the particular job like
sarnksobha ‘Agitation’ etc. done by that Mudra viz. Samksobhigi, though
noted here as Sarhksobha.

=== PAGE 63 ===

1278 Brahmaénda Purana

69-73a. The Nitya Kamakarsanika, Buddhyakarsanika,
Nitya Ras&karsaniké, Kala Gandhakarsanika, Nitya Citta-
karsanika, Kala Dhairy4karsanika, Nitya Smytydkarsanika,
Kala Namakarsanika, Nitya Bijakarsanika, Kala Arthakarsa-
nika, Amitakarsani and Kala Sarirakarsani—These are Gupta
(invisible) Yoginis. Tripuregi the ruler of Tripura is Cakrini,
is also called Sa: vasapirika who is the presiding deity of the
Cakra. The protectress in this Cakra is the Mudra named
Dravinika. .

73b-76. The plot of abodes above the Antara of the
Nityakalas is exquisitely beautiful. It is twenty Hastas above the
level of the previous Antara. It extends to four Nalvas. It is
called Sarvasamksobhana. It has staircase as before. There are
eight very powerful Saktis with their eyes reddened due to
inebriation. They are haughty on account of their fresh youth-
fulness. They serve Parameévari.

The eight Saktis are—Kusuma, Mekhala, Madana,
Ma danatura, Rekha, Vegini, Ankusa and Malini.

77-78. They have crores of attendant Saktis beginning
with Ananga Sakti. This Cakra is called Sarvasamksobhana. The
presiding deity thereof should be known as one with the name
Sundari. She is remembered as more concealed (Guptatard).
The prcetectress of that Cakra is remembered as the Mudra
Akarsanikd.

79. Twenty Hastas above the level of the Antara of
Anangasakti, O Pot-born Sage, is the Antara of Samksobhini and
others. It extends to four Nalvas. It is the bestower of all good
fortune and felicity.

80. Fourteen proud Saktis, chief of whom is Sarvasamks-
‘obhini, live there. Listen to their names from me.

81-85. They are :— Sarvasamksobhini, Sarvavidravini,
Sarvakarsant, Sarvdhladant, Sarvasammohini, Sarvastambhava,
Sarvajrmbhinika, | Sarvavafamkari, Sarvaraitjand, Sarvonmddani,
Sarvdrthasddhika, Sarvasampattipiirini, | Sarvamantramayi and
Sarvadvandvaksayartkari. These are (collectively known as)
Sampraddyakhyds residing in the city of Cakrini. The Mudras
called Sarvavasyds are considered the protectresses in that Cakra.
There are crores of Saktis there proud of being their servants.

=== PAGE 64 ===

Lalita-mahatmya 36. 86-96 1279

86-90. Twenty Hastas above the level of the Antara of
Samksobhini and others, O pot-born sage, is the mansion of
Sarvasiddhipradé and others. It extends to four Nalvas and is
called Visgya (2) [ Dhisnya in N. 32-94].

The deities are—Sarvasiddhiprada, | Sarva-sampat-prada,
Goddess Sarvapriyamkari, Sarvamangalakérini, goddess Sarvakdma-
prada, Sarvaduhkhavimocani, Sarvamrtyupragamini, Sarvavighnanivd-
rini Goddess Sarvdngasundart and Sarvasaubhagyadayini. These
goddesses are raised upwards from amongst the Kalas. They are
remembered by the names Yoginis.

Sri shonld be known as Cakrini (Presiding deity of the
Cakra), The Cakra is conducive to the achievement of all objects.
The Sarvonmddana Mudras are the protectresses of the Cakra.

91-96. Twenty Hastas above the level of the Antara of
Sarvasiddhi and others, O Pot-born Sage, is the Antara of
Sarvajna and others. It extends to four Walvas. The Cakra is
divine and big; it is remembered as Sarvaraksdkara (Protective
of everyone).

Sarvajfid and others are recounted (below). They are
Sarvajftd, Sarvasakti, Sarvaisvaryapradayini, the goddess Sarva-
Jidnamayi, Sarvavyddhivindsini, sarvadhara-svaripad Sarvapapahari,
the goddess Sarvdnandamayt, Sarvarakska-svaritpini and Sarvepsita-
prada.

These leading Yoginis are devoid of arrogance. Malini
is mentioned as the presiding deity of the Cakra and the Mudra
is Sarvamahankuéa.

Thus a few Cakras have been described in the mansion of
Cintamani upto the Antara of Sarvajfid and others. Listen to the
others also, O Sage. .

=== PAGE 65 ===

1280 Brahmdgda Purdgpa
CHAPTER THIRTYSEVEN

Description of other inner Apartments in the Royal Chamber’

Hayagriva said :—

1-2. Twenty Hastas above the level of the Antara of
Sarvajfia and others is the Antara of Vagini and others. It extends
to four Nalvas. The stair-case and apartments should be known
as before. That Cakra is well known by the name Sarvarogahara
(Destroyer of all diseases) .

3-4, Vaéini and other goddesses are stationed there in
due order from the East etc. The first one is the goddess Vasini.

1. This chapter describes the remaining Antoras of other deitics and
concludes with the poetic description of Lalita and her consort.

The following are the Antaras in the upward direction. The last one in
the last chapter is taken as the base :

Bed or Couch of Sri-Lalita—-36 Tattvas as stair

Bindu-Pitha

(vv.45-67)
Assumes forms of 50 Pithes
Antara of Anga-devis (denoting parts of Lalita’s body.
‘The Abode of Sodasi : NityA (Lalita): Bindu Cakra.
Bindu Cakra The Nity4-devis dwell with 15 Iévaras
Antara of 15 Nitya deities (Lalita is the 16th)

(vv.31b-39)
Antara of 4 Nathas—Influence of Nath Cult and Gurudom.
(vv.25-30)
Antara of Samayedis
Antara of Kamedi, Vajreél, Bhagamala, Sridevi (Lalita) the
4th Devi (vv.19-24)
Antara of weapons (in person) of Kamefvari
(vv.10b-18)

N. of the Cakrint (Presiding deity) : Siddhd, Protectress : Khecarf (v.9);
cakra:  Sarvaifvary4 (Ya etc.) (v. 6); Kaulini (Sa and the rest) (7);
Serva- Pradharana (v.5) (Ta-Varga), Jayini (5) (Pa-Varga)
roga-hara (v.4) Kamefvari (Goddess of speech accompanied by Ka-varga
Medini (v. 4) (Ca-Varga) ; Vimala (v.5) ( Ta-varga)
Antara of Vaéini and other goddesses like KAimeévarl etc,
(vv. 1-10a)
The Antara of sarvajiid as in chapter 86

=== PAGE 66 ===

Lalita-mahatmya 37 .5-15 1281

The goddess of speech named KAmeévari comes thereafter.
She is accompanied by Kavarga (Gutturals). Modini the
goddess ofspeech accompanied by Cavarga (Palatals), is the
third one.

5. Then comes the goddess ofspeech named Vimala who
is embellished by the Ta-varga (cerebrals). The fifth one is the
goddess of speech called Pradharana accompanied by Ta-varga
(Dentals).

6-7. The sixth one is Jayini invigorated by Pa-varga
(Labials). In the square of letters beginning with ‘YA’ is the
goddess of speech called Sarvaigvarya etc. Kaulini accompani-
by the six letters beginning with ‘SA’ is considered as the
eighth one. All these goddesses are embellished with pearl
ornaments. They are engaged in performing Japas.

8. They are considered to be fondled by the spontaneous
flow of prose and poetry. They stay there, O Pot-born Sage,
delighting and amusing Sri-Devi by means of sweet lyrics and
dramas pleasing to the ears,

9-10a. O scorcher of Vatapi, these deities have been
famous by their secret names. The presiding deity of this Cakra
is glorified by the name Siddha.

Khecari is considered as the protectress of this Cakra.

10b-11. O Subduer of the Vindhya mountain, Twenty
Hastas above the level of the Antara of VaSini is the Cakra
called Astra, Its extent is four Nalvas.

12-14. The five arrows of KameSvara are the five
goddesses of Baza (arrow). The two goads of the primodial man
and woman are very brilliant. Then there are two bows, O
enemy of the Vindhya mountain. These nine weapons are con-
ceived in the nine lotuses. Including the pair of nooses of
brilliant lustre there are four weapons, O Pot-born Sage. Four
belonging to Kameévari and four to Sri Maheéa (i.e. arrow,
bow, goad and noose). Put together there are eight blazing and
shining weapons.

15. These divine weapons are extremely gratified by the
blood of the wicked Danavas that was drunk by them in the
course of the great battle with the Asura Bhanda. Those divine
weapons are active and alert now.

=== PAGE 67 ===

1282 Brahmanda Purana

16. Among other weapons there are supplementary
weapons of these weapons. Their number runs into crores.

17-18. Vajra-Sakti (Thunderbolt—Adamantine lance),
Sataghni (a rocket-like missile capable of killing hundreds,*
Bhusundi (A missile perhaps a fire-arm), Musala (a mace)
Krpana (a sword), Pattifa (A sharp-edged spear), Mudgara
(An iron club), Bhindipdla (A sling for throwing stone).
Thousands and thousands of weapons like these serve with
intoxicated excitement the great Saktis of the eight weapons.

19-21. Twenty Hastas above the level of the Antara of
weapons, O scorcher of Vatapi, is the abode of the three
Samayeiis. It is considered to extend to four Nalvas. There the
three deities beginning with Kameéi and a fourth one also
reside. She alone is the Goddess Lalita, the mother of the entire
universe. Listen to the names of the three goddesses. Kamesi
is the first. (The other two are) Vajresi and Bhagamala.
Thousands of Saktis serve them.

22. All those different kinds of deities remembered as
pertaining to all the systems of philosophy serve the great
goddesses there beginning wish Kamei.

23-25a. Sri Devi is the deity that completes the number
when these deities as well as the deities named Nityas, Cakrinis
and the Yoginis are reckoned. Mother Lalita who reclines on
the lap of Lord KameSvara is the fourth one in the group of
Kamesi and others. She is the sixteenth among Nityas.
She is glorified as the ninth one among Yoginis and Cakra
Devis.

25b-28. O slayer of Ilvala, twenty Hastas above the
level of the Antardla of the Samayesis is the abode called
Nathantara. It extends to four Nalvas. It is embellished with
stair-case as before. The great Devis (Goddesses) there are
Nathas who have founded and popularised the Yogasastra.
They are the instructors in Mantras for everyone. They are
verily the great oceans of all lores.

*Or a cylindrical piece of wood studded with iron pikes—MW, p. 1049a.

=== PAGE 68 ===

Lalitad-mahdtmya 37. 29-39 1283

There are four Yoganathds for the protection of the
worlds. They had been created by lord Kamefa. Listen to their
names.

29-3la. Mitrau (? two Mitras) , Sodisa (?) and Carya.*
For the sake of protection, O Pot-born Sage, many persons of
the nature of Pddukds (Sandals) have been created by them.
Those are persons with divine knowledge of the lores, groups of
human beings, groups of Siddhas, Suratdpasas (Celestial asce-
tics) etc. They have attained Siddhis of Sdalokya (having the
same world as that of the god-head), Sdripya (having the same
form) and Sdyujya. (having complete identity). They are
great teachers. Many serve the Gurus ( preceptors) .

31b-35a. Twenty Hastas above the Antara of Nathas
is the excellent abode called Nitydntara. It extends to four
Nalvas. There are fifteen Nityas (eternal goddesses). They
are Nitya Kamefvari, Nitya Bhagamlini, Nityaklinna, Bher-
unda, Vahnivasini, Mahavajresvari, Dati, Tvarité, Kulasundari,
Nitya, Nilapataka, Vijaya, Sarvamangala, Jvalamalini and
Citra.

35b-39. All these Nitya deities have the form of
Goddess. They are extremcly powerful and valorous, They
have assumed the status of the lunar days beginning with Pra-
thamd (the first of those days). They pervade the three worlds.
They have the forms of the three unitsofTime (Past, Present
and Future). They are adepts in Kdlagrésa (consuming even
Kala ie. Time or god of Death), At the bidding of Devi
(Goddess Lalita) they stay assuming the forms of hundred
(years of) longevity of every one beginning with Brahma who
lives for a very long time.

They are always active and devoid of agony. They
are born of the excellent body of Sri, For the prospe-
rity of all the worlds, they serve Lalita who is in the form of
Cit, Fifteen brilliant ISvara have undergone the status of being
their abodes. It is considered that the abode of Sodafi (i-e.
Lalita considered as the sixteenth one inthe group of Nityas),
is the Binducaksa of special creation.

*N. gives the names as follows :
Mitrega Uddisa, Sasthiéa and Carya.

=== PAGE 69 ===

1284 Brahmanda Purdna

40-42. Then, O Pot-born Sage, twenty Hastas above the
Antara of the Nity& deities is the Antara of the Aaga Devis
(Deities of various limbs), It is said tha: it extends upto four
Nalvas. The staircase and apartment are as before. O Sage,
the Saktis beginning with Hydaya Devi (Deity of the heart)
are in it. They are mentioned to be six in number viz. Hrddevi
Strodevt (Deity of the head), Sikhddevt (Deity of the tuft),
Varmadent (Deity of the armour), Drsfidevi (Deity of the
vision) and Sastradevi (Deity of the weapons),

43. They are very close to Lalita, the consort of
SrikameSvara. All their limbs are full with the freshness of
youthful bloom and beauty. They are very attentive, They hold
weapons.

44. Haughtily they move about both within the Bindu-
Pitha and all round too. They carry out the order of Lalita.
They are the close companions and confidants of the Vafis.

45-47, Then, ten Hastas above the Antara of the deities
of the limbs, is the great Pitha (Pedestal seat) named Bindu
Nada, It extends to eight Nalvas. It resembles the rising sun.
This should be known as Bindupitha, Mahdpitha, Sripitha, Vidya-
pitha and Anandapitha. It assumes the forms of fifty Pifhas.

48-52. There the excellent couch of Srilalita Devi is
placed. It is pervaded by five Brahmans (i. Brahma, Visnu,
Mahedana, Iévara and the Supreme Brahman). It is very great
and is the cause of the three worlds, It is mentioned that the
four Pddas (legs) of that couch are ten Hastas high and three
Hastas in girth. They are in the forms of Brahma, Visnu,
Maheéana and Igvara. They have attained the status of Saktis
too on account of perpetual meditation on Sri.

. One of the legs of the couch resembles the Japakusuma
(The China Rose). It should be known that it is of the nature
of Brahma. It is inthe South East.* The fourth leg of the couch

*Here there is an omission of the description of two more legs in the
South-East and North-West and of the forms of Visnu and Mahesvara.

The omitted lines as ascertained from N are as follows :

The second leg of the couch has the splendour of a big sapphire. It
should be known as of the nature of Visnu and it is in the South-West
direction.

The third leg of the couch is as spotless as pure crystal. It should be
understood to be representative of (lit. of the nature of) Rudra and it is in
the North-West direction.

=== PAGE 70 ===

Lalit&-mahatmya 37. 53-64 1285

has the splendour of Karnikara (the pericarp of a lotus). It
should be known that it is of the nature of Iévara as it is in
the North-East.

53. All these have weapons with them. They are adorned
with all ornaments. Above and below, they have the forms of
pillars. They have personal forms in the middle.

54. They keep their eyes closed in meditation on Sri.
Their limbs are steady withoutany movement due to medita-
tion on Sri. Above them, the plank of the couch is Sadaéiva.

55. It has the splendour of a full-blown pomegranate
flower. The plank is six Walvas long and four Nalvas broad. It
is continuously sparkling and refulgent.

56-57. Beginning from the Antara of the Angadevis and
ending with the plank of the couch, O Sage, stair-cases in the
form of the Tattvas shine. They are made of Cintamani stones.
They are thirtysix in number.? We shall mention the stairs in
the ascending order.

58-60. They are :— Earth, water, fire, wind, ether,
smell, taste, colour, touch, sound, sexual organ, anus,
feet, hands, organ of speech, nose, tongue, skin, eyes, ears,
ego, intellect, mind, prakrti, Purusa, niyati (fate, destiny),
Kala (Time), Raga (attachment) Kala (Arts), Vidya (lore),
Maya, the pure Vidyd, Iévara, Sakti, Sadagivagakti and Siva.

61. Thus the rows of stairs numbering thirtysix have
been recounted. The entire row of stairs is on the eastern
side of the couch.

62-63. Then over the couch is the bed made of the
down and feathers of swan. Its height is only one Hasta. It
extends to four Nalvas. There are brilliant pillows, both for the
feet as wellas for the head. Itis further rendered splendid by
sixtyfour golden vases and water-jars with pink colour.

64. The sheet spread over it was made of saffron colour-
ed fabric, pure and soft with the lustre of ruby.

1, Both Saivas and Saktas believe in $6 Tattvas but of these the first
12 are imaginary as S.N. Dasgupta puts it, while the remaining 24 are the
same as in Sathkhyas. The list of Tattvas is given in 58-60. For tabular
systematic presentation vide Sir John Woodroffe’s The Garland of Letters 2nd
Edt. pp.252-253.

=== PAGE 71 ===

1286 Brahmanda Purana

65-67. It is on this that the primordial Lord Siva,
Kamefvara stays (permanently). He sits facing the East. He is
endowed with sympathy and mercy. He is very handsome in
his romantically loveable dress and guise. He is perpetually
sixteen years old. He has the lustre of the disc of the rising
sun. He has threeeyes and four hands, He is adorned with
necklaces, bracelets, coronets, bangles and other ornaments. An
exquisite smile spreads entirely over his cheeks like the moon-
light. Thus the lord sits there alert and watchful.

68. (Description of Goddess Lalita) .1

Goddess Lalita is seated on his lap. She is reddish saffron
in colour like the mid-day sun. She is always sixteen years old.
She is proud of her fresh youthfulness,

69. She has the lustre of unpolished ruby stone. The
splendour of her nails is like that of sandal paste and lotus. She
has redness in the soles of her feet regardless of application
of red lac.

70-71, Anklets and other ornaments on her feet produce a
charming tinkling sound. The sound of her bangles is very
charming. Her shanks (leg from ankle to knee) subdued the
pride of excellent quiver of arrows of the god of Love. Her
thighs shine like the trunk and the forearms of an elephant or
like the stem of the plantain tree in complexion. Her hips and
loins are beautified by a red silk cloth very thin and smooth
to touch. She is refulgent with well developed hips and
buttocks.

72. The knot of her garment comes upto the middle of
her thighs. She shines with a girdle set with gems and jewels.
Her navel is depressed like a great whirl-pool and the three
wrinkled folds spreading over it appear like a river of light
and gleam.

73. She has worn a number of pearl necklaces swinging
to and fro over her breasts. Her slender waist appears to be
breaking due tothe weight of her plump breasts.

1. The description’ of goddess Lalita is certainly romantic. But the
words ‘Bindu Pitha’, ‘The Screen of MahamAya’ (e.g. v.93) scarcely veil its
spiritual content despite poctic fancy.

=== PAGE 72 ===

Lalita-mahatmya 37. 74-85 1287

74-76, Her hands are as soft as the glossy petals of
Sirisa flower (Acacia Sirissa). Allher four hands were embellish-
ed with a number of armlets, bracelets and bangles. The
fingers have rings round them. Her beautiful neck which is
close by her husband is very beautiful. Her face is circular and
lustrous like a mirror with beautiful chin with gentle curves.
Her lips are red in colour. The row of her sparkling teeth is
neatly set. They shine like the (thirtytwo) lores. They have
the refulgence of buds of Kunda flowers (Jasmine). She
appears to be radiating (lit. displaying) moon-light through her
teeth.

77. She shines with many ornaments set with pearls, Her
eyes are as large and long as the inner petal of the Ketaka
flower.

78. Inher forehead as charming as the crescent moon
the forelocks have been neatly arranged, Her ears are adorned
with different kinds of ornaments and ear-rings of ruby.

79. The betel-leaf preparation that she chews is always
rendered fragrant by camphor and musk. Her face is as sweet
and charming as the moon in the autumn.

80. Her beautiful coronet is well set with the fine
pieces of Cintamani stone. She shines with her third eye in
the forehead sparkling like a gemset Tilaka mark.

81. Her tresses are dark and thick-set like the dense
darkness. She shines with the mark of saffron applied in the
middle of her head like a line.

82. The crescent moon shines like a diadem. Her eyes
move to and fro due to inebriation. She possesses all romantic
dress and make-up exciting love. She is embellished with all
ornaments, .

83. She is the mother of the entire world, She increases
bliss perpetually. She is the source of origin of Brahma, Visnu,
Giriga, Ifa and Sada fiva,

84, She delights exeryone with the stream of sympathy
exuding from benign side-glance. Thus that holy goddess
Lalitambika, the destroyer of sin, appears replendent.

85. People know that the benefit of worship of other
deities is the opportunity to worship her. Hence, the benefit
of her worship is the opportunity to worship her.

=== PAGE 73 ===

1288 Brahménda Purdna

86. How can I then describe Goddess Lalita adequately.
Even in the course of a thousand crores of years, a fraction of
it cannot be described.

87. She who is tc be described is in the form which is
beyond (the ken of) specch. How can (my) words have access
to her? (She is that ultimate reality) from where words recede
without reaching her along with the mind.

88. Of what avail is profuse utterance ? Listen to this
fact. This is not being spoken by me out of partiality, love or
delusion.

89-92. Oascetic, let the branches of the Kalpa tree be
pens. Let the seven oceans be ink-pots. Let the Earth
which extends to fifty crores of Yojanas become the paper.
Let the time for writing be more than a Parardha (1 followed
by 17 zeroes) of years. Let the people in the world write
each of them having a crore of hands. O Pot-born Sage even
if all the speakers be as eloquent as Brhaspati, it is impossible
to adequately describe a thousandth part of the lustre of a
toe-nail of the lotus-like foot of Sridevi. Or (it is enough to say)
that all activities will be in vain in the matter of eulogising
her.

93. All round the Bindupftha a handsome and symmetri-
cal curtain hangs down. It is the Mahdmdydjavanikd (screen of
Mahamiaya) and is dark in colour.

94-95. The numerous ornaments and embellishments
obtaining there are the rarest ones. Desirous of describing them
my power of speech is struck down (stifled) at the throat itself
due to shame, Above the goddess about forty Hastas from the
ground level, a chandelier and canopy are kept suspended.
, They are rare in all the three worlds.

96. She alone knows everything regarding the good
features obtaining there. Her exalted grandeur and felicity is
far beyond even our comprehension. By whom can it be
described ?

97. Thus for the sake of slaying Bhanda, the great
Daitya, Lalitambika.has manifested herself from the Cidanala.
(the fire of knowledge and consciousness). She has entirely
burned all Danavas.

=== PAGE 74 ===

Lalitd-mahdimya 37.98—38.3 1289

98. Presiding over Srinagara which had been built by
celestial artisans and craftsman and which has sixteen holy
establishments, she protects the Universe continuously.

99. There are other Sripuras also in this manner. In the
arrangement there is no difference among them. The differ-
ence is only in the name,

100. Those who recount the story of Sripura beginning
with the garden of many trees attain the greatest goal.

101. The men too who listen to it, who ask about it, who
search for it and who hold the book thereof attain the greatest
goal.

102. Those devotees who get a replica of Sripura, made
through craftsmen, with the different parts of the same duly
represented and build a huge temple of Sridevi, do attain the
greatest goal.

CHAPTER THIRTYEIGHT
Procedure of Practising the Royal mantra

Agastya said :

1. The great narrative such as the great manifestation
(of the goddess), the slaying of Bhandasura and the stay at
Srinagara of the goddess have been heard.

2. Now,I wish to hear the means of practising her

Mantra and the characteristics of her Mantras. Please recount
all this.

Hayagriva said :—

3. The verbal product orthe word is greater than all
other objects. Of all words and utterances, O sage, the
collection of the Vedic hymns is the greatest.1

1, VV. 3-10 give a gradation of Mantras in importance and decide that
Lop&mudra Mantra i.e. the mantra beginning with Ha and the KAmaraja
Mantra that is the mantra beginning with Ka—are the most efficacious. Shri

=== PAGE 75 ===

1290 Brahmanda Purdna

4, Ofall the hymns in the Vedas, the Vedic Mantras
(spells and secret formulae) are greater than the rest. The
Mantras pertaining to Visnu are greater than all other
Vedic Mantras.

5. The Mantras pertaining to Durga are greater than
those ( Visnu Mantras) , O sage in regard to vigour and efficacy.
O sage, the Mantras pertaining to Ganapati are greater than
those (of Durga).

6. The Mantras of the Sun-god are greater than the
previous ones and those of Siva are still greater than these.
The Mantras of Laksmi are more powerful than those (of Siva)
and the Mantras of Sarasvatiare more excellent than those (of
Laksmi).

Alawani the local Tantrika whom I used to consult on such matters, told me
that ‘“‘Ha Sa Ka La Hrim, Ha Sa Ka Ha La Hrti, Sa Ka La Hrim"” is Lopa-
mudra mantra. And “Ka F I La Hrimh, Ha Sa Ka Ha La Hrim, Sa Ka La
Hrin” is the Kadi or Kamaraja Mantra. When I inquired about the meaning
of these disconnected syllables, he refused to disclose to an uninitiated person
like me. But I found Laksmidhara saying the same about Kédi mantra in his
commentary on Saundarya Laharf verse 32, the verse may be translated as
follows :

“The letters (or Mantras) indicated by

I Siva (Ka), Sakti (E) Kama and Ksiti (La).

II by Ravi (Ha), Candra (Sa), Smara (Ka) Harnsa (Ha), and Sakra
(La).

Ill by Para (Sa), Mara (Xa), Hari (La) when joined at the end of
each Pada with the particle Hrim, O divine mother. They form the limbs of
certain aspects of Thine’’.

So the Mantra is deduced as follows :

1 Ka E I La Hrin|

Il Ha Sa Ka Ha La Hrim|/

Ill Sa Ka La Hrim/

This mancra of 15 syllables is the keystone of this cult. This is the
Kadi Vidya, Kaivalyasrama interprets this very verse as Hadi Vidyd as follows :

I Ha Sa Ka La Hrim

II Ha Sa Ka Ha La Hrim

III Sa Ka La Hrim.

The only difference between Kadi and Hadi mantras is only of three sylla-
bles viz. Ka, E, J. These are known as ‘Male seeds’ and these are used for
the I Pada in Hadi Vidyé (Saundarya Lahari Verse 33).

The symbols used in vv.12-14 toexpress the “seeds” of the Mantra are
different than those given in Saundarya Lahart.

=== PAGE 76 ===

Lalita-mahatmya 38.7-16 1291

7. The Mantras of Girija (Parvati) are greater than
those (of Sarasvati). The Mantras of various kinds handed
down by sacred tradition (Amndya) are greater than those (of
Parvati). Of all traditional Mantras, the Varaha Manus
(Mantras pertaining to goddess Varahi) are more excellent
than the above.

8. The excellent Mantras of Syama (Rajasyamala or
Matangini) are more splendid than the rest. O slayer of Ilvala.
The Mantras of Lalita of ten different types are greater than
they.

9. Among (those ten), O suppressor of the Vindhya
Mountain, two leading Mantras are more efficacious. They
are well known as Lop4mudra and Kamaraja.

10. That (Mantra) which begins with ‘Ha’ is Lopa-
mudra. That which begins with ‘Ka’ is Kamaraja. The great
Iévara, Kamaraja is expressed by Harhsa and other words.

11. Goddess Sri Lalitambika is expressed by the words
Smara etc. The difference between Hadi (beginning with Ha
and Kadi (beginning with Ka) Mantras is caused by three
Varnas (letters). Of these two, the Kamaraja Mantra is the
‘bestower of Siddhis on those who are devout.

12-14. The leading Mantra of Harhsa etc. (i.e. of
Mahe§vara) is expressed by three sets of five (Paficatrika) namely
[I set] by Siva, Sakti, Kama, Ksiti (Earth) and Maya. [II set]
by Harsa (Mahesvara or swan), Bhrgu, Kama, Sasimauli
(Moon-crested Siva) and Sakra. [III set] by Bhuvanega (the
lord of the universe), Candra (the Moon), God of love, Ksiti
and Hrllekha (line of the heart). The leading Mantra of Kama
etc. (ie. Sri Lalitambika), having Smara as the source of
origin is expressed in the mouth of Sri,

15. Those highly fortunate ones who worship* (with)
Paficatrika Maha-Vidya (the Mantra expressed by three sets
of five ice. 15 letters) which describes Lalitamba will have
siddhi everywhere.

16. After receiving from the great good preceptor the
Mantra sanctified and consecrated by Tripaficarna (Three x five

*v.1. Japanti (N) ‘perform the Japa of”

=== PAGE 77 ===

1292 Brahmanda Purana

letters= Fifteen letters), the learned devotee should practise
it very well in the manner expressed below.?

17-18. I shall mention itin due order. O sage, listen
attentively. The devotee should get up early in the morning
and think about of having in his head a brilliant lotus having
the splendour ofa thousand petals, fine filaments and good
pericarp. He should meditate upon his noble and exalted
preceptor who is kindly disposed and merciful, as stationed
in that lotus.

19-20. Thereafter, he should go out and carry out routine
cleaning activities. After returning, he should anoint his body
with scented oil. He should take bath in hot and pure water
and apply unguents and perfumes over his body.

Water is sacred and pure by nature. What then when it
gets into contact with fire and is heated.

Hence, one should take bath in hot water. If that is not
available, any available water may be used.

21. Heshould then wear clean clothes red or brown in
colour. He should then perform Acamana (ceremonious sipping
of water). With great purity (in mind and body) the learned
devotee should mentally meditate upon the great Ambika
(Mother-goddess).

22. He should putsacred marks on his forehead in the
manner to which he is accustomed, viz. Orddhva Pundra (in the
shape of capital U), Pajicavardhana (in the shape of the leaf
of castor oil plant) Tripundra (three parallel and horizontal
lines) or Agastyapatra— shaped (like the leaf of Agasti Grandi-
flora). Pure in soul (mind) he should perform Sandhya Vandana
in a secluded spot.

23. He should offer Arghya (water-oblation) along with
Darbha grass. raw rice, flower and sandal paste in a vessel of
the shape of the leaf ofan Afvattha (Ficus Regligiosa) tree.

24-25. Since she too is a deity deserving Arghyas, he
should offer three Arghyas to Lalita. 1n accordance with his
ability he should perform (for propitiating her) the Tarpana
rites to goddess Lalita with the Mila-Mantra at the beginning,
and later to the Devas, the sages and the manes in accordance

1, VV.17-32 describe the procedure of Sddhand for getting “mastery”
over the Lalité mantra.

=== PAGE 78 ===

Lalita-mahatmya 38,26-33 1293

with the injunctions, He should then worship the Sun god as
well as the Goddess as stationed in the disc of the Sun.

26a. Silently and pure in heart, he should enter the
sacrificial chamber.

26b-28a. He should apply over his body excellent
camphor, musk, sandal paste and other ungunents. He should
adorn his limbs with ornaments. He should dress himself beauti-
fully and lovably. He should embellish his hair with fragrant
flower garlands. In the matter of ornaments (there are no
strict rules to be followed) he can have ornaments in accor-
dance with his wealth or he can have ornaments in Sankalpa
(imagination).

28b. He should then perform the Nydsa rites (Assign-
ment of the parts of the bodies to various deities) mentioned
subsequently in the section on worship. He should perform
rites in due order. He should be seated ona smooth and soft
seat. He should then meditate on the great Srinagara.

29-31. He should meditate on the divine Srinagara
beginning with the park of different kinds of trees and ending
with Lalita. He should be pure within and without. Unembar-
rassed and undismayed, he should perform worship along
the path (procedure) mentioned in the Paya Khanda (the
Section on worship). He should take up rosary rendered
fragrant by means of camphor and musk. Seated facing the
north or the east, he should perform Japa of the goddess
seated on the throne. If the devotee performs the Japa three
million six hundred thousand times, the Vidya would reveal
herself into him gladly.

32. Hota should be oneventh (of Japa), i.e.
three hundred and sixty thousand, The Tarpana shall be one-
tenth (ofthe Homa) i.e., thirtysix thousand. The feeding of
the Brahmanas is expressed as one-tenth of the same, i.e. three
thousand six hundred.

33. After having achieved the mastery over the Mantra,
the devotee should continue Japa for other purposes desired
by him.? By performing Japas, a hundred thousand times,

1. VV. 33-62 described the “fruits” or powers one achieves after
performing specific quantity of Japa of mantra.

=== PAGE 79 ===

1294 Brahmanda Purana

he can control all human beings.

34. By performing Japas two hundred thousand
times, he can fascinate and win over women. By performing
Japas three hundred thousand times, he can control all beings
and win them over,

35. When the completed Japas come to four hundred
thousand times, the daughters of serpents become excited
in love for him. When the Japas reach five hundred thousand
times, the women of Patala become excited for him.

36. The entire group of beautiful women of the Bhaloka
(Earth) shall be won over by performing Japa six hundred
thousand times. The fawn-eyed beauties of the Svargaloka
(Heaven) become excited by seven hundred thousand (Japa).

37. All those who are born of the race of Devas can be
won over and subdued by means of eight hundred thousand
Japas. One shall win over all gods by means of nine hundred
thousand Japas*

38. One can win over and subdue Brahma, Visnu and
Mahesvara by means of one million one hundred thousand
Japas. One can achieve the eight Siddhis (Super-human
powers) by means of one million two hundred thousand Japas.

39. It was through this Mantra that Indra, achieved
Indrahood, Visnu his Visnuhood, Siva his status as Siva.

40. Indu (the Moon-god) achieved his moonhood by
means of this, Bhanu (The Sun-god) achieved his solar status
through this. Understand that the different refulgent mystic
powers of all Devas have been acquired by this prominent
Mantra.

‘ 41. The person who performs Japa of this Mantra
shall be rid of all sins. He shall have the most handsome
features in all the three worlds. He can enchant and fascinate
even the god of love.

42. He shall be endowed with all Siddhis. He shall

*Venkt. ed. deletes the line :
dasa-laksena Sakradidikpalan vasamdnayet]
He can control the guardians of quarters like Indra by one million
Japa.

=== PAGE 80 ===

Lalita-mahdtmya 38.43-54 1295

be omniscient and shall be worshipped by all. Merely by his
sight he can fill the inner (heart ?) of all others.

43. He shall be equal to Vacaspati (Preceptor of
Devas) in eloquent speech. In glory and magnificence, he shall
be equal to the wind-god. In steadiness and firmness, he will
be like the Himalaya mountain.

44. In loftiness he will be equal to Meru. In depth and
majesty he shall be like a great ocean. Within a trice he can
cause excitement in villages, rural settlements, cities, etc. by his
personality.

45-46. By slightly bending his eye-brows, he can stun the
evil-minded ones, cause yawning them, dispel them, enchant
them and even kill them. He will possess the punitive
powers got by black magic.

47. His speech is sweet like the current of Ganga.
O Pot-born sage, there is nothing unknown to him among
the scriptures.

48. Heis competent to expound and refute all systems
of Philosophy. He knows the entire range of Tattvas. He
becomes omniscient.

49. His heartis soft and tender with kindness towards
all creatures. The three worlds are incapable of being an object
of his fiery rage.

50-53. At his sight, fawn-eyed ladies become excited and
experience the following— the knot of their garments round the
waist becomes untied or loosened ; their girdles slip down. On
account of cluster of drops of sweet, they appear to be adorned
with pearls; on account of excessive passion their eyes rove;
rows and rows of their bangles set with jewels slip off from
their lotus-like hands ; they become motionless due to the stiff-
ness of their thighs; due to bashfulness their faces are bent down;
their pudenda muliebra exude liquid secretions, hairs on the
body standing on their ends serve the purpose of ornaments.
By the activities of the god of love, they appear to have
completely changed forms.

54. Clusters of flames of excessive passion make them
blaze as it were. They appear to be burned by showers of fiery
arrows of the god of love.

=== PAGE 81 ===

1296 Brakmagda Purana

55. They are afflicted by anxiety; they seem to suffer on
account of the fever of love; they are dried up due to
bashfulness.

56-57. They have forsaken (the sense of dignity of
their) family caste, (ethical) conduct of life, shyness, retinue,
fear of the world, fear of kinsmen and fear from the other
world too, and they earnestly request him in their heart of
hearts. Those beautiful ladies rush a him wherever he stays
in the forest, in the city, or in the temple or in other place.

58. Just as a drop of water when blown about,
moves up and down on a lotus leaf, so also the minds of
beautiful ladies become restless on seeing him.

59.* (Partially defective text). He is humble and modest.
Driving away the rude and impolite persons is the greatest
achievement. Rows and rows of all lores serve him.

60. When Triloki Lalana (the three worlds in the form ofa
woman) shines with the discs of the moon and sun as
her two breasts, begging to love him at his very sight, then, O
ascetic, what need be said about other women more wretched
and pitiable ?

61. There is the holy proclamation of his fame and glory
in all cities, streets, quadrangles and in parks perpetually.
It acts as the heavenly tree (kalpaka tree yielding everything
that we wish for).

62. At his very sight the signs of sinners perish.
Only his good qualities are proclaimed everywhere by leading
poets.

63. Those who meditate on the great goddess ( Mahddevi)
by means of different letters, weapons, different vehicles and
ornaments attain the respective super-human powers (Siddhis)

*The Venkatesvara Press Text reads :
Vinitdnavanitandm vidrdvapamahdphalam|
The text is defective—vinitd should be emended as Vanitd.
N. (Nirnaya Sagar) text reads :
Vanitdnavaniténdm vidrdvaya-mahdnalam|
‘He is the veritable huge fire who melts the butter in the form of ladies.
(He is so exceedingly seductive) .

=== PAGE 82 ===

Lalitd-mahdtmya 38.64-68 1297

relevent to them (i.e. the letters used in Japa. The form of
goddess meditated upon etc.).

64, The first part of the Mantra has the fine white
lustre of the jasmine and the Moon. That should be thought
and pondered over at the root of Ahafcakra, (Wheel of the
day) *. It has blazing flames.

65. The second part of the Mantra is like the glow-
worm. It should be observed in the AhaScakra as one with
shining flames till the tip of the hair (on the head) **

66. The third part that dispels all sins should be observed
in the follow of the two-petalled lotus placed inside the
lotus of Bala and others.***

67. For the sake of salvation, Ambika with white
complexion and feature like the Moon-light should be meditated
upon.

In the rites for winning over and subduing others (the
goddess should be meditated upon as having the red lustre of
the dusk.

68. For the acquisition of all sorts of wealth, the goddess
with dark complexion is thought of.

For making others silent and dumb, the blue-complexioned
goddess is meditated upon. In the rites for making others
benumbed, stiff and paralyzed, the yellow-complexioned goddess
is meditated upon.

*The text reads ‘ahascakre’. It should be emended as ‘d-hrecakram’ upto
the plexus—yogic cakra—at the heart’.
Nirnayasagara text confirms this emendation.

**The text is corrupt. It should be as in the Nirnayasdgara text :
vibhavantyo hrecakra dphdlantam jualacchikhah.
‘It should be observed at the yogic plexus in the heart (lustrous) like
a fire blazing with flames’.
***The Venkatesvara Press text reads:
baladipadmastha
The Nirnayasagara text gives a better reading :
Lalata-pattastha
‘That which is at the fore-head’
The yogic plexus is of two petals.
1, VV. 67-71 Various Dhyanas of Lalita for different objectives or
fruits,

=== PAGE 83 ===

1298 Brahmanda Purana

69. For the acquisition of power of composing poems,
Lalitambika with white complexion, free from impurities and
sparkling like crystal, should be meditated upon.

For the acquisition of wealth, Lalitambika with golden
complexion is contemplated.

70. Those who meditate upon her as a great mass of splen-
dour refulgent like a ruby-lamp from the Malddhdracakra to the
Brakmarandhra (the aperture on the crown of the head) shall
achieve all siddhis (Super-natural powers) .

71. Thus, O Pot-born sage, those who observe and
meditate upon Sridevi by means of various types of Dhyanas
obtain great glory and wealth. This is attained only by good
people, never by bad people.

72. Only, they, by whom severe penance has been
practised, do perform meditation. He who meditates has no
subsequent birth. He who is not Sankara himself, never gains
Mantra Vidya of Lalita Paramesgvari).

73. If this Mantra is possessed by anyone in a family,
the members of his family shall be gratified and liberated.
There is no doubt about it.

74. This is decided in all the scriptures, that this lore
about the goddess is concealed and hidden. Her Mantra is the
greatest of all secrets.

The Vedas and the scriptures eulogise Lalitegvari.

75. She alone is the supreme Atman. She alone is the
greatest destination. She alone is the greatest holy place of
pilgrimage. She alone is the great fruit and result.

76. Sages sing about her who gives five types of
Siddhis. Sanaka and others meditate on her. The excellent
gods beginning with Brahma, worship her.

77-79. She is not attained by any of the following types
of people—persons of despicable conduct, accused ones, men of
crooked minds, who are against Devas, those who indulge
in futile arguments, those whose intellect wanders in vain, the
spoiled ones, those who have no good habits, those who live
upon the leavings of others, those who have been dropped
down from their families, cruel ones, those who hate systems of
philosophy and cults of religion, persons of sinful practice, those
who censure good conduct and custom, haughty fellows, those

=== PAGE 84 ===

Lalitd-mahétmya 38.80—39.1 1299

who speak arrogantly, hypocrites and those with excessive pride.
To people like these, men as well as Devas, she is inaccessible.

80. It has already been said, O Pot-born sage, that she is
worthy of being worshipped by Devas.

It is for the purpose of slaying Bhandasura that she
manifested herself from Cidagni (the fire of knowledge and
consciousness) .

81. The form of Maha-Tripurasundari is of extensive
splendour. Lalite$vari was eulogised by Brahma as Kamaksi.

82. The goddess is designated Lalita (the coaxed deity)
as she was caressed by the mind of god Siva while he was
meditating upon Lalitambika with utmost devotion.

83. Whatever exploits she did, have been recounted. In
another Section I shall mention the injunctions regarding the
mode of worship as mentioned in scriptures. I shall mention
her miraculous elegance and charm.

CHAPTER THIRTYNINE
Glory of the Goddess Kamaksi*

Agastya said :—

1. “We honour and meditate about that great splendour
which is without beginning and end, is unmanifest (yet) the
prime cause of all manifested things and which is the sole essence
of Bliss and knowledge.

1. The goddess Kamaksi glorified here+is different from the famous
Kamaksi near Gauhati in Assam. ‘That goddess represents the generative
organ of Sati, Siva’s first wife, which fell down as Siva was carrying her
dead body. Kamaksi in this chapter is the famous goddess of KAjici near
Madras. As Ka (goddess Sarasvati) and Ma (goddess Lakgmi) were
produced from her eyes (Aksi) she is called Kamaksi (vv.67-74). She is
Tripura Sundari the Primordial Goddess who manifested there at Kaiici
due to the Penance of god Brahma was installed on Kamakostha.

The whole chapter is in a way a Ksetra-Mahétmya of Kaiici as to how,
why and where great god Brahma, Visnu, Siva settled at Kaiici and partici-
pated in the celebration of the marriage ceremony of Kamaksi etc.

=== PAGE 85 ===

1300 Brahmdnda Purana

2. O Hayagriva of excessive intelligence, O greatest one
conversant with Vedas and Vedintas, this highly meritorious
and excellent narratative of Lalita has been heard by me.

3. It has been mentioned by you that Tripura, the
greatest deity is worthy of being worshipped by all. Her four
arms are equipped with noose, goad, bow and arrows.

4. Her Mantra* also has been mentioned. So also the
Sri Cakra which has nine outer coverings and the mystic circles
as its ornaments. (You have mentioned that) Isani is the
presiding deity of Sripura.

5. In this city of Kafici which is sacred and which is an
ornament of the entire sphere of Earth, there shines the blessed
and illustrious deity well known by the name Kamaksi. Who is
she?

6. She has only two arms, Her slim creeper-like body
shines magnificently and gracefully in every respect. Her beauty
is something never seen before. She is the greatest deity in the
form of great refulgence.

Sita said :-—

7. “On being addressed thus by Agastya, the noble-
hearted Hayagriva became delighted. In honour of that
refulgence, he closed his eyes and meditated on that brilliance.
After meditating upon and bowing down (to that refulgence),
he spoke to Agastya:—”

Haygriva said :—

8-14. “I shall explain to you a great secret, O husband
of Lopamudra, listen. The first one who is subtler than the
subtlest is the greatest Cit (consciousness). She is the primordial
cause. She is also called as cause of dissolution too, by means of
her own form**, by persons who ponder about the reality of
principles.

Thereafter, the second deity (called Suddha-pard) manifes-
ted herself. She is the purest and greatest deity. She is endowed

*N, reads Yantra and is a better reading with reference to Sri-yantra.
** Trayiprokta- Svar ipa ‘Whose form is described in the three Vedas N.

=== PAGE 86 ===

Lalita-ma@hdtmya 39.15-22 1301

with two arms, By her right hand she shows the Yogamudra
(Mystical gesture) and there is a book in her left hand. Her
body has the lustre of snow, jasmine, moon and the pearl.
(This deity is called Suddhapara).

The third one is Parapara (greater than the greatest).
She (Her lustre) is on a par with ten thousand rising Suns.
She is bedecked inall ornaments. In her right hand she holds
lotus. She has kept her left hand on the left thigh. A crown
as well as the crescent moon is the ornament on her head.

Afterwards that Tripura became manifested with four
arms. She is ‘‘Para Aruna”. In her hands she gracefully holds
noose, goad, sugarcane and five arrows.

She is Lalita. She alone has manifested herself as Kamaksi
in Kafici. Sarasvati, Rama and Gauri worship that primordial
deity alone.

15-18. The two cities Kasi and KA&fici are the two
eyes of God MahefSa, It is well known holy shrine of Visnu
causing the presence of Siva too. It was at the shrine of
Kafici that formerly, Brahma, the grandfather of all worlds
performed an austere and difficult penance for the sake of
having a visit of Sridevi. He was engrossed in meditation
of the union of souls, O sage, and was performing holy rites.
LaksmI, the deity greater than the greatest, with a lotus in her
hand appeared before him. She was in the lotus seat and was
accompanied by Visnu, the conqueror.

19. She was dressed in all lovable and graceful garments
and adorned by all ornaments. She was well-known as
Simhdsanesvart (the ruling goddess of the throne).

20. She had a wonderfully exquisite beauty. She was
the greatest deity in the form of a gréat splendour. She was
renowned as Adilaksmi (Primordial Laksmi) . She was stationed
in the heart of everyone.

21, They call her Tripura herself, the mother of Brahma,
Visnu and Isa. She was famous by the name Kamaksi. On

seeing her, he eulogised her with full devotion.

Brahma prayed :
22. “Be victorious, O goddess, O mother of the Universe,

=== PAGE 87 ===

1302 Brahmanda Purana

Be victorious, O Tripura-Sundari, O sister of Srinatha, be
victorious. O Sri auspicious to all.

23. Be victorious, O mass of glory and mercifulness. Be
victorious, O heroine of sentiment of Love. Be victorious, O
goddess of devotees with many Siddhis. Be victorious, O goddess
saluted by leading Yogins.

24. Bevictorious, be victorious, O mother of the Universe,
O goddess of eternal form. Be victorious, be victorious, O
goddess, the bestower of happiness to all the people who praise
and extol. Be victorious, O goddess worthy of being glorified
by the Himalaya Mountain. Be victorious, O beautiful, consort
of Sankara in the from of Kameévara.

25. Repeated obeisance to that goddess who frequently
carries out creation, sustenance, annihilation, concealment
and blessing of worlds simply by her volition.

26. By means of very sharp arrows and missiles, she
annihilates now all those sinful people who create confusion
and chaos in the discipline of castes and stages of life.
Obeisance, obeisance to that goddess.

27. Obeisance obeisance to that goddess who is self-
comprehensible and not known even to Yogins through Agamas,
through Vedas or through other scriptural texts.

28. Obeisance, obeisance to that goddess who is extolled
and glorified as the supreme Brahman by the leading Sages,
by those conversant with Principles, by the secret Amnayas
(Sacred literature) and by the Vedantas ( Upanisads).

29. Obeisance, obeisance to that goddess who is not
perceived by anyone though she abides in the heart itself of
everyone, and who has the form of the subtle and perfect
knowledge.

30. Obeisance, obeisance to that goddess on whom
Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, Iévara and SadaSiva meditate and in
whom they are solely engaged.

31. Obeisance, obeisance to that goddess who is the
deity of imperial prosperity. Indra and others are the devotees
of that goddess and they abide by her behest.

32. Obeisance, obeisance to that goddess (about whom
it is said) that the Vedas constitute her vital airs, that the five

=== PAGE 88 ===

Lalitd-mahdimya 39.33-43 1303

elements are her glances and that the entire Universe consisting
of mobile and immobile beings is her smile.

33. Obeisance, Obeisance to that goddess at whose
bidding the thousand-hooded leading serpent (Sesa) supports
the Earth, the base of all people.

34. Obeisance, Obeisance to that goddess who is the
embodiment of knowledge and power and at whose bidding the
fire-god blazes, the Sun-god shines and scorches and the wind-
god blows.

35. Sages say that the twenty-five Tattvas and the five
sheaths (coverings) of Maya are identical with her. Obeisance,
Obeisance to that goddess,

36-37. Obeisance, Obeisanee to that goddess (about
whom it is said) that Siva, Sakti, [svara, Sadagiva of pure
consciousness are her different outward manifestations. Simi-
larly, the preceptor, Mantra, deity and the fivefold vital
airs are her diffusions. Obeisance, Obeisance to that goddess who
shines in the form of Cit (consciousness) .

38. She is the inner-most soul of all souls. She is Bliss. in-
carnate. She is remembered as Srividya. Obeisance, Obeisance
to that goddess.

39. Obeisance, Obeisance to that goddess (about whom
it is said that) the learned men know that all Darganas
(Systemes of philosophy) are her limbs, She has the forms of
different religious observances.

40. Obeisance, Obeisance to that goddess who shines in
all worlds in the forms of mystic jewel, Mantra and medi-
cine and whose form is the instruction in the Tattvas.

41. Obeisance, Obeisance to that goddess who shines in
the form of different objects whethet space, time or other ordinary
objects in the manner in which they exist.

42. Obeisance, Obeisance to that goddess who is
antagonistic to the Daityas (?), who habitually possesses all
auspicious qualities and who is called Visvottir”d (one who
is transcendental to the Universe)’.

43. After eulogising Mahadevi thus, Brahma the grand
father of all worlds bowed to her again and again and
suddenly sought refuge in her.

=== PAGE 89 ===

1304 Brahmanda Purdga

44. On seeing Brahma bowing down then, that goddess
became pleased. She the bestower of boons on all the worlds
commanded him saying ‘Choose your boon”.

Brahma said :

45. “There is no doubt in this that I am blessed and
gratified by your vision due to my devotion. Yet I pray for
something with a desire for getting a blessing unto the world.

46. In this world which is the sphere of holy rites and
devout services, the people are mostly deluded. Kindly be
present here always in order to bless them”.

47, Saying “So be it’”’ she fulfilled that desire of Brahma.
Thereafter, Brahma allotted to her a place of residence.

48. After bowing down to the lotus-eyed Acyuta, the
brother of Sridevi, he earnestly pleaded for his prepetual
residence at Kafici.

49. Thereupon, Janardana said to him, “I shall do so”.
Then the creator of the Universe who was satisfied said to
Mahefvari once again:—

50-51. ‘Due to your love, let Siva too be present here
itself”. Thereupon the great Igana, Kamefvara, lord of all
lores, lord of all embodied beings, Mahadeva, the hero of
the sentiment of love manifested himself on the right side of
§ri Tripura.

52. Thereupon, from the benign glance of the eye in the
forehead of Sri Kamaksi, a certain young girl manifested

"herself. She was excessively refulgent and white in complexion.

53-57. She possessed all the requisite dress and make-up
of romantic life of love. She was a treasure-house (mine) of
great beauty. Eagerly and respectfully and in the company of
‘Brahma, the lotus-eyed lord performed the marriage of the
primordial male and female. The Devas beginning with Indra,
the deities beginning with Vasus and Rudras, Sages beginning
with Markandeya, Vasistha and others, the leading Yogins
beginning with Sanaka, the celestial sages beginning with
Narada, the living liberated souls as VAmadeva, Suka and
others, Yaksas, Kinnaras, Gandharvas, Siddhas, Vidyadharas
and Serpents, Mahaéasta, the leader of Ganas, Durga and
other mothers—all these deities and others seated in aerial

=== PAGE 90 ===

Lalita-ma&hatmya 39.58-72 1305

chariots and excellent seats bowed down to Paramefvari with
palms joined in reverence.

58-60. A wonderful city was mentally created by god
Brahma in the middle of which was the splendid and beautiful
temple of Paramesani accompanied by Vasudeva, the brother (of
the goddess). MaheSvara came there. While lord Mahegvara
married Gauri near the sacred fire, the divine Dundubhis were
sounded and showers of flowers fell.

61. Who is competent enough to describe the auspicious
celebration of marriage of the (divine) couple, the presiding
deities of the worlds, even if he (the describer) has a thousand
tongues ?

62. To the North-West of the temple of the primordial
Sri is the extensive excellent abode of MaheSa. It had been
built by Paramesthin.

63. To the South-East of the abode of Sri is the
wonderful temple of Visnu. Thus those three deities are always
present there.

64. After circumambulating those great deities the
couple, Brahma and Vigsnu reached the Sambhdvandgara (the
hall of Reception) .

65. After coming there they joyously accorded welcome
duly to the members of the assembly by reciting the Vedic
Mantras.

66. The primordial Adilaksmi, Sri Parameévari, in front
of all, glanced at Brahma with her right eye and at Hari with
her left eye.

67. It was at that time that goddess of speech
named ‘Ka’ and Kamala (Goddess of Wealth) named ‘Ma’
—both of them like encased masses of splendour manifested
themselves. .

68. Both ofthem (Brahma and Visnu) stood there bend-
ing down their heads to Sridevatd, with palms joined in rever-
ence. They said “Be victorious, O Kamaksi O Kamaksi” and
bowed down to her,

6-72. The rivers Ganga and Yamuna came there for
serving her in their embodied form. The three and a half
crores of presiding deities of holy spots came there for the
purpose of serving Tripuramba. Holding the Camaras with both

=== PAGE 91 ===

1306 Brahmanda Purana

hands Bharati (Goddess of speech) and Sri (Goddess of
wealth), fanned with them and served Sri Devi ina befitting
manner. On sceing the two deities Bharati and Sri born of the
eyes of Adigri, the two deities with their creeper-like hands
adorned with ornaments studded with invaluable gems and
jewels and fitted with tinkling bells. All the assembled folk
were particularly struck with wonder. Ever since then Kalyani
(goddess Tripura) got the name Kamaksi. Merely by repeat-
ing this, Sri Devi bestows welfare.

73-74. The three syllables Ka-Ma-Ksi are the causes of
all auspiciousness. Thereafter, the goddess of the Universe
directed Sarasvati thus—‘O deity who have mastered the
Vedasand Vedangas, be present in Brahma perpetually.

Even as Devas stood watching, goddess Sarasvati
entrusted the Cadmaras in the hands of Ganga and entered the
mouth of Brahma.

75-78. On being directed by the delighted Mahalaksmi
(i.e. Tripura), Indira (goddess of wealth) obeyed her behest
by means ofher head and joyously went over to Visnu’s
chest for the sake of stay worthy of her.

With great devotion the couple Rama and Visnu bowed
down to Tripurasundari and requested her once again for the
status of deing the ‘Protective’ deity Avarana Devata.

Saying ‘So be it’? Tripurasundari granted the boon to
both of them. Then Padma and Acyuta obtained the status of
protective deities.

The charming Reflection of Mahagauri came there and
placed Padma and Acyuta to the north of his own pitha
(pedestal). He himself stood to the right (to the South). He
.said to Mahagauri “Assume another form’’.*

79. He had thesame shape and size as those of Maha-
gauri with a shining divine body. He had a pair of feet shining
brilliantly like the full moon with all its beauty.

*Description of the reflection of the goddess. He (it) had all the
characterisic features of the goddess. ‘It’ is translated as ‘he’ as the SK
word is in the Masculine génder.

=== PAGE 92 ===

Lalitd-mahatmya 39.80-88 1307

80. The bangles and anklets went on tinkling as
though a partridge* had been made the pedestal (?) His
charmingly beautiful girdle set with jewels shone as brilliantly
as lightning and tinkled sweetly.

81. The pair of his arms shone with gem-set bangles and
armlets. His excellent waistband was set with pearls, Lapis
Lazuli and ruby.

82. He shone with the waist refulgent with the three
Valis (folds of skin on the stomach regarded as mark of beauty).
He was adorned witha navel that appeared splendid like the
whirlpool in the river Ganga.

83. The breasts (in the reflection) were brilliantly
adorned and beautified by means of sandal paste, camphor and
saffron. The jacket worn over the breasts was exquisitely
embellished with pearl ornaments.

84. A good chain hung suspended from his waist just for
the purpose of diversion. He was adorned with rings set with
pieces of ruby.

85. In his right hand there was a lotus resting within and
he looked elegant, refulgent and charming thereby. A divine
garland along with a number of ornaments shone there extend-
ing upto the forepart of the foot.

86. The cluster of rays from gems and jewels of
brilliant ornaments brightened the faces of quarters. He
was rendered splendid by means of gems round his neck fitted
to fine heated gold.

87, His neck had the red colour due to the rays of
gems and jewels in the Mangalya Sitra (Holy thread indi-
cating conjugal bliss). He was adorned with large ear-rings
made of rubies to embellish the ears.

88. He had lovely lips which were like tender sprouts
and which had the beauty of the China rose and coral. He
appeared splendid with a row of teeth having the lustre of the
pomegranate fruit.

*Titirtkrta in our text. But Pifjari-kyta “‘made good-coloured” in N. is
better.

=== PAGE 93 ===

1308 Brahmanda Purana

89. He had pure and tender cheeks glittering with gentle
smiles, He was very charming in his nose-ring of matchless
beauty and exalted splendour,

90. He had a lifted up nose of blameless beauty with the
sparkling splendour of the flower of sesamum indicum. His
eyes had the sweetness and beauty of the blue lotus about to
bloom.

91. The lovely and graceful eyebrows shone like the
flowery bow (of Kama). His forehead could be compared to the
crescent Moon. His face had the sweetness and charm of the
full Moon.

92 He was shining gorgeously with the sacred mark

(on the forehead) made of musk richly endowed with agree-
ably intense fragrance. In his lotus-like face with graceful
forelocks it appeared as though the inebriated swarms of bees
hovered round it.

93-94a. The tied up braid of hair had init garlands of
Parijata flowers. The head was beautified by a crown abund-
antly inlaid with gems and jewels. He was the abode of every
aspect of beauty, the very storehouse of splendour of grace
and charm.

94b-96. Siva, Visnuand the great pcrsonages present
there realized the identity of reflection as well as that of
the goddess. In front of all the Devas who were looking up to
her as their support, MaheSani who could freely do as she
pleased, entered the reflection. On seeing her who created
reflection and stayed within it after entering it, Brahma bowed
down to her once again and requested thus :—

. 97. “OQ Tripurasundari of great power, the perfect
supreme spirit well known by the name Sri Kamaksi,
obeisance to you day by day. I am submitting something to
you now. Kindly listen to it.

98. For the prosperity of worlds and the opportunity
for heaven-dwellers to serve you, O Sri Devi of perpetual
bliss and felicity, the marriage of both viz. Mahagauri and
Mahefa should be celebrated every year here itself.

99. Let the foolish and confounded people of this Earth,

=== PAGE 94 ===

Lalita-mahatmya 39.100-109 1309

O great goddess, attain the greatest goal by seeing her and
bowing to her devoutly”.

100. The greatest goddess replied hereto by the
ethereal voice ‘So be it’. She permitted all of them to
return to their respective abodes,

101. Remembering again and again this wonderful
nature and activity of the goddess, they all bowed down to
her and went from there in the manner they had come.

102. Along with Mukunda and Siva, the delighted
grandfather of the world i.e. Brahma installed her in the
temple Srimandira fully equipped with the Mantras. After
propitiating her through the Vedic Mantras, he bowed down to
her with all the eight limbs touching the ground.

103-109. Then by the ethereal voice the goddess
addressed thus to Brahma :—

“With great concentration, O Brahma of a steadfast mind
instal Visnu and Siva in their respective abodes and serve and
worship them there every year. Serve also the Kamagiri-
pitha (the pedestal of Kamagiri) which has manifested itself
here, which is accompanied by Srisa (Visnu), Mitra (the sun-
god), Iga (Siva) and Amba (Mother) and which is present
in the middle of Sripura itself. It is accompanied by Laksmi
on the left side and served by Visnu elsewhere (i.e. on the
right-side), which has the form and features of Cit (conscious-
ness) and Ananda (Bliss), which is the presiding deity of all
pithas and which duly held an unmanifest and invisible (phy-
sical) body.* On an auspicious day with good constellation,
for the prosperity of the worlds, you do worship it with
refulgent and invincible (?) petal buds and pieces of
diamonds and gems, O Brahma, duly and joyously. You
should make the entire mystical diagram too.** Thus you pro-
tect your world”.

*N reads Sarvddyam drddhaya yathdvidhi ‘Propitiate according to due
procedure the invisible form which is Primordial of all.’

**N. shows that some lines are omitted after V.108. The translation of
omitted lines is as follows :—‘‘On a day with an auspicious constellation
(Naksatra) people will worship by means of plantains and coconuts. Hence,
for the increase in prosperity and felicity of the people... (Read verse 109
in our text).

=== PAGE 95 ===

1310 Brahmagda Purana

110. On being told thus, lord Brahma did so. He kept
the goddess and her utterance in his heart (i.e. remembered
them devoutly). Then he went to his abode.

111. Thus, O Pot-born Sage, the wonderful activity of
Kamaksi has been factually recounted unto you, Consider her
as Mahalaksmi herself.

112. There is no doubt about this that worldly pleasures
and salvation are within the reach of that person who always
listens to this and who recites this with great purity.

113-114. He shall become equal to Brhaspati in intel-
lect. He shall be the lord of all learning.

The glorious primordial lord Narayana who is kind to
his devotees was propitiated by me formerly by means of pena-
nce for a long time. Out of compassion he granted me, his son,
the liberation of Sdriigya (having the same form as the lord).
He then taught me the greatness of Mahatripurasundari.

115. It is on account of this that I know something and
I shall say and not otherwise. I shall mention the secret
Mantra, Listen to it with great concentration and mental
purity.

116. Neither Brahm4nor Visnu nor Rudra knows this.
These three are deluded by Maya of the Goddess. Even the
fourth lord Igvara, Sadagiva does not know it. How can the
ordinary deities know about it ?

117. It is due to her blessing that Sadasiva who is
the immanent soul of every one and who is the embodiment of
existence, knowledge and bliss, is able to do, not to do or to
alter anything.

118. Mahegvara who always considered thus—‘‘I am
that alone” but deluded by her Maya became helpless and
assumed the form of Sava*

119, Really it is she whoalone is the cause of origin
and dissolution of all these deities. But there is a particular
thing, a special feature here. There is an element worthy of
being mentioned. Listen to it.

*Siva devoid of Sakti (symbolised by-i-in Siva) is no better than Sava
(a dead body ). Such is the greatness and power of Sakti.

=== PAGE 96 ===

Lalita-mahaimya 39.120—40.2 1311

120. The fourth one Iévara is the lord of the three
(deities) beginning with Brahma. Sadasiva is the primordial
maker of all the four.

121. This secret has been mentioned. Her wonderful
conduct of life has been recounted. I shall say something more.
Listen with great attention.

CHAPTER FORTY

Greatness of Kamdksi
Agastya said :

1, What are the different sportive and gracious activi-
ties of Mahatripura-sundari who is installed on the pedestal
of Kamakostha and who is well-renowned as Kamaksi ?

2. That goddess Mahatripura-sundari who is Mahefvari
herself is well known as Srikamaksi. She is stationed in the
terrestrial sphere. What are the activities of this goddess? O
most eloquent one, recount to me her divine life.”

1, This chapter gives the following stories about the greatness of
Kamaksi.

(i) Parvati sportingly closes the eyes of Siva and commits the sin of
dislocating the religious life of the world. She is made toatone for it by
penance on the Kampa. Siva, in his loneliness—under EkAmra tree
performs Penance at Kajfici. Due to Kaméaksi’s blessings to both, they are
united forever (vv.19-45).

(ii) Quarrel between Brahma and Vignu about Personal Superiority—
Siva's appearance as column of fire—Brahmadeva’s arrogance to Siva for which
Bhairava plucks Brahma’s head—Bhairava relieved of his Sin of Brahmahaty&
through KamAkgi’s grace (vv.46-86)

(iii) Birth of Sons to Dafaratha, King of Ayodhy& (vv.87-137)

This story has no basis in Valmiki Ramayana; the first two stories have
some basis in other Puranas, but here (as expected) our author changed
them to glorify Kamaksi

=== PAGE 97 ===

1312 Brahminda Purdga
Hayagriva said :

3. ‘Although she is stationed here (on the earth) O Pot-
born Sage, she abides in the heart of everyone. She bestows the
fruit of acts on all embodied beings in accordance with their
different activities.

4. Whatever happens in the world is the result of her
activities. One may think something, but she disposes of it
freely in accordance with her will.

5-7. The Saktis beginning with Tripura are her own
incarnations. She hersclf was Mahalaksmi. She created three
eggs formerly. Those eggs were the abode of the three great
Devas aswell as the thre Saktis. From one egg were born
Ambika and Purusottama; from another egg were born Sri
(goddess of wealth) and Virifica (Brahma) and from the other
the third, were born the goddess of speech and Siva.

MuheSsvari united (in marriage) Indira (the goddess of

“ wealth) with Mukunda (Purusottama). She joined Param-
eé4na with Parvatiand Pitamaha with Sarasvati.

8. She employed Brahma in the task of creating the
worlds, Vasudeva in the task of sustaining and the three-eyed
lord (Siva) in the task of annihilation,

9. All these stay in Brahmaloka, Vaikuntha and Kailasa
(respectively) always meditating on Mahalaksmi, the bestower
of welfare.

10. Once goddess Parvati was sporting about on the
splendid peak of the Kailasa. She then closxd the two eyes
of Mahega.

11. Since the Sun and the Moon were his two eyes, the
whole of the three worlds became enveloped in darkness, It was
devoid of light all round.

12, Then the people in all the worlds abandoned the
rites pertaining to the Devas and the manes. They were con-
fused as to what they should do. They could not comprehend
anything.

13. On seeing it, lord Rudra spoke to Parvati thus :—
“Sin has been committed by you,O gentle lady, by closing
my eyes.

=== PAGE 98 ===

Lalita-mahatmya 40.14-27 1313

14, The sages have abandoned their penances. The
followers of the Vedic injunctions have dropped their
SandhyéA rites (Vedic prayers and rituals). OQ Ambiké, all the
Vedic rites have been ruined by you.

15. Hence, for the expiation of the sin, perform the
difficult task of penance. Go to Kasi and perform holy rites
and observances there for some time.

16. Go to Kaficipura afterwards. There you will see
Kamaksi. Propitiate this eternal deity Siva who destroys all
sins.

17. Keep the Holy basil Tulasi plant in front of you,
perform penance on the banks of Kampa’’.

After having directed her thus, Mahadeva vanished there
itself. ;

18-19. Iéani who wished to follow the instructions of
her lord, acted accordingly. By the penance of long duration,
she became afflicted but her heart did not turn towards any-
thing else. Kamaksi manifested herself in front of Siva and
spoke these words :—

“Dear child, O lady of good holy rites, I have become
sufficiently pleased with your severe austerities”

20-23. Afterwards Parvati opened her eyes and saw the
goddess Ambika stationed in front of herself. She had the
refulgence to ten thousand rising suns. She was bedecked in all
types of ornaments such as crown, necklace, armlets, bangles
and other types of jewellery. Her hands shone with noose,
goad, sugarcane bow and the five arrows, The crescent moon
shining on the top of her crown served as the ornament.
It was she who engaged Brahma,»Hara, Rudra, Iga and
Sadasiva in their positions. They call her Saguza Brahman. She
is designated as the highest goal. She was the creator of two
Universes.

24-27a. On seeing the great imperial Divinity, she
became highly delighted. Hairs stood on their ends all over
her body. On account of pleasure her eyes beamed. Along with
her friends such as Candika, Mangala and others, she suddenly
circumambulated her and fell (at her feet) with eight limbs
(touching the ground). With the palms joined in reverence,

=== PAGE 99 ===

1314 Brahmanda Purdga

she bowed down once again to the goddess who was identical
with herself. Mahatripurasundari looked at her kindly and
lovingly and after embracing her with both of her arms, said to
her thus ;

27b-30. ‘‘Dear one, obtain Rudra as your husband as
desired by you mentally. For the sake of defending everything
in the world follow my instructions. Where is the difference
between you and me? Undoubtedly you are I myself. What sin
can there be in your case, O lady of great felicity ? Indeed you
are the destroyer of sins. Leading Yogins consider you alone
as the deity, in the form of Brahman. O dear one, this is but
a sport, a great fascination unto the entire world”.

As the great Empress said thus, Sarvamangala bowed
down to her. By looking at her she attained great pleasure.

31. Even as Parvati was eulogising her, the other deity
entered the heart of the delighted deity (Parvati) O great
sage.

32. She was struck with wonder and pondered over the
incident again and again—‘Is this a dream that has been seen
by me ? Or is it a misconception and illusion ?”’

33. After pondering thus she glanced all round. There-
upon, she saw her smiling friends Jaya and Vijaya. As they
bowed down to her she became delighted and said to them.

34. ‘O dear ones, where had you been so long? Did you
sec Kamaksi seen by me?”

35. On hearing her words their eyes beamed with ecstatic
delight. After placing the flowers intended for worship in
front of her, they said :—

36. ‘It is true that the great goddess has been seen now
by both of us. It is neither a dream noran illusion. She
directly went into your heart”.

After saying this, both of them bowed down humbly and
sat beside her. .

37. At the root of the sole mango tree, the lord (Siva)
who was in agony due to separation from Bhavani, control-
led his sense-organs and meditated on Kamaksi for the sake of
acquiring Gauri.

=== PAGE 100 ===

Lalita-mahdtnya 40.38-51 1315

38. The great presiding deity Srividya was present there
also. Delighted very much she kindly spoke to Siva who was
steadily meditating on her :—

39-41. “Stop your meditation, O destroyer of arro-
gance of the god of Love. At my behest, accept once again the
God of love who too abides by my directions, Stay here
perpetually on my Piftha named Ekdmra, O deity of holy rites,
by coming to my vicinity voluntarily for pleasing me.
Do bless Gauri who resides on the banks of the river
Kampa. Eschew two-fold distress that arising from your
Yogic activities (i.e. penance etc.) as well as that arising from
her Viyoga (separation)”’.

After saying this the great goddess Ram4 vanished there
in his heart.

42-45. Siva, the intellgent one, immediately got up after
getting her blessing. Siva who was attended upon by all
Devas became delighted in his mind, He boldly got up suddenly.
He meditated upon Mahatripurasundari from whom the two-
fold world consisting of the mobile and immobile beings
rises up and in whom it merges. He accepted Siva who was
adorning the river Kampa and whose mind is filled with sympa-
thy. He accepted Siva in accordance with the (religious)
injunctions regarding marriage alliance. He took her with him,
rode on his bull and went to the peak of Kailasa.

46. Listen to another thing, O Pot-born Sage of great
intellect. O sinless one, I shall tell you the power of the primor-
dial Laksmi,

47-48. The three deities went to the assembly of Brahma
and sat there. The guardians of the’ quarters, all Suras,
Yogins beginning with Sanaka, the celestial sages beginning with
Narada, Vasistha and other ascetics-—all these gathered together
there. Both Brahma and Siva had five faces. Hence they
could not differentiate them.

49-51. They asked one another—‘“‘Who is Brahma? Who
is Sankara ? Even as they were discussing among them-
selves, Siva vanished immediately.

Then an argument rose between the five-faced Brahma
and dark-coloured Vigsnu—‘“O ignorant one, you are born