

=== PAGE 1 ===

THE
BRAHMANDA PURANA

Translated and Annotated by

DR. G.V. TAGARE

PART IV

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS
PRIVATE LIMITED ¢ DELHI


=== PAGE 2 ===

First Edition: Delhi, 1984
Reprint: Delhi, 1999

© MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED
All Rights Reserved

ISBN: 81-20&0357-4

Also available at:

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS

236 Sri Ranga, 9th Main II Block, Jayanagar, Bangalore 560 Oil
41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007
8 Mahalaxmi Chamber, Warden Road, Mumbai 400 026
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004
Sanas Plaza, 1302, Baji Rao Road, Pune 411 002
8 Camac Street, Calcutta 700 017
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001

UNESCO COLLECTION OF REPRESENTATIVE WORKS—Indian Series.

This book has been accepted in the Indian Translation Series of the UNESCO
Collection of Representative Works, jointly sponsored by the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) and the Government of India

PRINTED IN INDIA

ENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS,
A-45 NARAINA, PHASE 1, NEW DELHI 110 028
AND PUBLISHED BY NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED,
BUNGALOW ROAD, DELHI 110 007

BY JAI



=== PAGE 3 ===

PUBLISHERS' NOTE

The purest gems lie hidden in the bottom.of the ocean
or in the depth of rocks. One has to dive into the ocean or
delve into the rocks to find them out. Similarly, truth lies
concealed in the language which with the passage of time has
become obsolete. Man has to learn that language before he
discovers that truth.

But he has neither the means nor the leisure to embark on
that course. We have, therefore, planned to help him acquire
knowledge by an easier course. We have started the scries of
Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology in English Translation.
Our goal is to universalize knowledge through the most popular
international medium of expression. The publication of the
Pur an as in English translation is a step towards that goal.


=== PAGE 4 ===

PREFACE

The present volume contains the Brahmanda  Puraia,
Part IV (comprising chapters 1-4 of the fourth section,
Upasathhara and 5-30 of the Lalita Episode) in English Trans-
lation. This is the Twenty-fifth volume in the Series which
we have planned on Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology.

The project of the Series was envisaged and financed in
1970 by Lala Sundar Lai Jain of Messrs Motilal Banarsidass.
Hitherto twentyfour volumes ofthe Series (comprising English
translation of Siva, Liriga, Bhagavata, Garuda, Narada, Karma and
Brahmania Puranas) have been published and released for sale.

The present volume (Ch. 1) opens with the description
of Cosmic deluge {Upasamhara) which starts after the completion
ofa Kalpa, lasts as long as the night of Brahma and _ dissolves
whatever had been evolved during the day of Brahma. Here, as
usual, Sita is the chiefspeaker who on enquiry from the sages
describes in detail the process of Abhuta-Satnplava—the annihila-

tion of the universe.

As in the other Puranas, here too, the process of evolution
as well as of involution is treated in the way of Safkhya: the
evolution starts with the disequilibrium ofGunas : Sattva, rajas
and tamas, whereas the involution u brought about by their
equilibrium. The opening chapter explains the three types of
dissolution viz Naimittika (Occasional, pertaining to Brahma),
Prakrtika (pertaining to Prakrti) and Afyantika (the Ultimate,
due to the dawning of perfect knowledge). Ch. 2 describes
Bhuvanakosa or the different regions of the universe and the
abodes of their residents during the period of annihilation.
In the total annihilation, only the residents of Siva-loka
escape, for they enter into lord Siva himself who being the
subtlest Anu is indestructible. The Puiana declares that the
dissolution is wrought by the supreme being through the
medium of Prakrti. Ch. 3 describes the process of involution of
Tattvas atthe expiry ofa Kalpa. Ch. 4 explains the process
of Re-creation of the Universe after the period of dissolution.


=== PAGE 5 ===

It describes how the world evolves through the disequilibrium
of Gunas and how it is destroyed when the Gunas attain
equanimity.

The Upasamhara concludes the Brahmanda Purana. The
concluding verses of Upasamhara are compared in the form
ofepilogues of the other Puranas—a fact which proves conclu-
sively that the Brahmanda ended with the end of Upasarhhara.
Moreover, the four Padas—Prakriya, Anusanga, Upodghata
and Upasarhhara—cover the five main topics ofa Purana, viz.
Sarga, Pratisarga, Vamsa, Manvantara and Varhsanucaritaand
there is no scope for addition, but, as it stands, the Upasamhara
is followed by the episode of \*a\hk{Lalitopakhyand) which proves
intrinsically that the episode was appended to the Purana by
the devotees of Sakti to give it the Sakta colouring. That the
Lalita story begins with a fresh benediction (marigalackra) and
that it starts with the different set of interlocutors—sage Agastya
and Hayagriva—shows that it was quite an independent work
which was added to the Brahmanda text. It may also be noted
that the Lalita episode ends abruptly, without the characteristic
mark of an epilogue.

The Episode is a comprehensive treatise. It consists of 40
chapters, of which thirty are included in the present volume.
The remaining ten are included in volume 26 that is the next.

The Episode is put in the Uttarabhaga together with
Upasamhara. It is strange that the episode takes the serial
numberof chapters from Upasamhara. The Upasamhara consists
of four chapters, the episode which follows starts with ch. 5, that
is, in continuation of the ch. number of the Upasarhhara,
evidently to show that it was a part of Brahmanda Purana.
Moreover, the arranger of the Purana had to observe the part-
wise uniformity in the serial order of chapter numbers. To
illustrate, Part | {Piruabhaga) consists o' chapters 1 to 38. Part
Il (Madhyabhaga) chapters | to 74; and part I11 (Uttarabhaga)
chapters | to 44. Thus in regard to the numbering of chapters,
the Purana maintains a partwise consistency throughout.

The scene ofthe episode is laid in Kaficit (mod. Kaiijee-
varam, SW. of Madras), the abode of Siva and Visnu. The
town is divided into two parts : the Eastern and the Western,
called the Visnu-Kafici and the Siva-Kafici. The presiding deity


=== PAGE 6 ===

( « )

of Siva-Kaiici is lord Siva known as Ekamranatha. His consort
is Kamaksi. The episode seems to have a Dravidian background
as Kafici is mentioned several times.

Lalita is the Sakti of Lord iva represented by the
symbol %. Without her, Siva is Sava (a corpse). The
episode opens with the worship of Sakti and the eulogy
ofher glory (ch. 5). Gh. 6 narrates the episode of Indra
and Durvasas, how Durvasas cursed Indra for his arro-
gance when the latter dishonoured the garland of flowers
which the goddess had offered to Narada and which Narada
passed on to Indra as a mark ofendearment. Ch. 7 relates to
the sins accruing from theft and drinking and illustrates how the
merit ofgood actions from the theft of property is distributed
among the parties concerned. It also records different types of
sins current in ancient India, permission to non-Brahmins,
both men and women todrink but prohibition to Brahmanas
even for worshipping ‘mothers’. Ch. 8 relates to agamyagamana
(carnally approaching a forbidden woman) and cites the esoteric
fifteen-lettered mantra of Para Sakti for releasing sinners from
all sorts ofsins, both majorand minor (mahapatakas and upa-
patakas). Ch. 9 narrates how Indra killed his preceptor TriSsiras
or Visvajit on the suspicion of his complicity with Daityas.
Mention is also made ofthe joint venture of Suras and Asuras
for churning the milky Ocean. Ch. 10 gives the list of jewels
that were churned out of it. Lord Visnu is said to have
assumed the form of Mohini while Siva impassioned by
her charm dropped semen giving birth to Mahasasta. The
chapter introduces the Supreme Goddess Lalita, traces her origin
and mentions the purpose of her birth, viz. the killing of Asura
Bhanda. Chs. 11-12 recount the birthof Bhanda and the building
of Sonitapura for his residence. On the instructions of Narada,
Indra propitiates Para Sakti, while on the advice ofSukra
Bhanda creates disturbance in Indra's penance.

Ch. 13 isan eulogy of Lalita by Devas. Sridevi promises
to kill Bhanda herself. Chs 14-15 describe the marriage of
Lalita and Kamesvara and theircoronation. Chs. 16-18 describe
Lalita's march ofarmy against Bhanda. Ch. 19 names deities
slationed on the chariot Cakraraja, mentions the procedure of
appeals to Lalita through Mantrini. Chs 20-24describe Deities


=== PAGE 7 ===

ae)

stationed on the chariot Kiricakra, record the boasting of Bhanda,
slaughter of Durmada, Kuranda and other asura generals. Chs
25-28 record how Nitya Saktis repulsed the surprise attack of
asuras on the rear. It recounts the slaying of Bhandasura's
sons, the exploits of Gananatha, the son of the Goddess, the
slaying of Bhanda's brothers : ViSukra and Visanga, the effects,
of missiles used by the asuras and those of the counter-missiles
used by Saktis. It mentions Saktis' drinking of wine and its
after-effects. Ch. 29 describes the discharge of various missiles
and their wonderful result, the slaughter of Bhanda, the burning
of Sunyaka and the total annihilation of the asura army. Ch.
30 deals with the resurrection ofthe cupid, his subjugation of
Siva, Siva's marriage with Parvati, the birth of Mahasena
Karttikeya who later on became the general of the army of Devas
and killed the mighty asura Taraka. The chapter ends with
the return of Mahasena Karttikeya to Sripura to serve Lalita
goddess.

Acknowledgement of Obligations

It is our pleasant duty to put on record our sincere
thanks to Dr. R.N. Dandekar and the UNESCO authorities for
their kind encourgement and valuable help which render this
work more useful than it would otherwise have been. We are
extremely grateful to Dr. G.V. Tagare for his critical Introducr
tion, lucid translation and comprehensive annotations. We thank
Shri T. V Parameshwar lyer for his valuable assistance in the
preparation of this work. We also express our gratitude
to all those persons who have offered suggestions for improving
the same.

—Editor


=== PAGE 8 ===

CONTENTS

Publishers' Note

Preface

Abbreviations

PART IV

SECTION IV : UPASAMHARA

CHAPTERS
1. Dissolution of the Universe
2. The city ofSiva
3. Dissolution of the Universe
4. Re-creation ofthe Universe

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
13;

16.
17.
18.
19:
20.
21).
22%
23.

LALITA MAHATMYA

Agastya's Pilgrimage to sacred places
Manifestation of Visnu

A Dialogue between Agastya and
Hayagriva. The Nature of Violence etc.
The Sins of Theft and Drinking

Sexual Crime

Churning ofthe ocean for Nectar
Manifestation of Mohini

Appearance of Asura Bhanda
Manifestation of Lalita

A hymn in praise of Lalita

Manifestation of Kamesgvara

Festivities in honour of the

marriage of Lalita with Kamesvara
March of Victory along with the army
March ofthe army of Syamala

March of the army of Lalita Paramesvari
Deities stationed on the Chariot Cakraraja
Deities on the Kiricakraratha

Boasting of Bhandasura

Durmada and Kuranda slain

Five Asura Generals slain

Vii
xiii

957
978
1008
1020

1031

1035
1042
1050
1057
1065
1073
1077
1084
1088

1091

1097
1100
1105
1107
1116
1125
1133
1142


=== PAGE 9 ===

24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

( «i )

Seven generals beginning with Balahaka slain
Flight of Visanga

Bhandasura's sons slain

Exploits of Gananatha

Visukra and Visafiga slain

Slaying of Bhandasura

Resurrection of Madana (god of love)

1151

1159
1168
1178
1187
1197
1211


=== PAGE 10 ===

ABBREVIATIONS

Common and self-evident abbreviations such as ch(s)—
chapter(s), p—page, pp—pages, v—verse, w—verses, Ftn—

footnote, Hist. Ind. Philo—History of Indian Philosophy are
not included in this list.

ABORI Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute, Poona.

AGP S.M. Ali's The Geography of Purinas, PPH,
New Delhi, 1973.

AIHT Ancient Indian Historical Tradition, FF. E.
Pargiter, Motilal Banarsidass (MLBD),
Delhi.

AITM Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology Series,
MLBD, Delhi, 1972 onwards.

AP Agni Purina, Guru Mandal Edition (GM),
Calcutta, 1957.

Arch. S. Rep. Archaeological Survey Report.

AV Atharoa Veda, Svadhyaya Mandal, Aundh.

Bd. P. Brahm&nda Purihfa, MLBD, Delhi 1973.

BG Bhagavadgita.

Bh. P. Bhagavata Purina, Bhagavat Vidyapecth,
Ahmedabad.

Br. Brihmana (preceded by name such as
Salapatha).

Bs. P. Bhavifya Parana, Vishnu Shastri Bapat, Wai.

By. P. Brahma Vaivarta Purina, GM , 1955-57.

GC Caturvarga Cintamani by Hemadri.

CVS Carana Vyiha Sutra by Saunaka; Com. by
Mahidasa.

DB Devi Bhagavata, GM, 1960-61.


=== PAGE 11 ===

De or GDAMI

Dh. S.

ERE
GP

GS

HD

IA
1HQ,

KP

LP

Manu
Mbh.

MKP
MN

Mt. P.
MW

NP

PGK

Pd. P.
PE

( « )

The Geographical Dictionary of Ancient and
Mediaeval India, N. L. De. Orienta
Reprint, Delhi, 1971.

Dharma Sutra (preceded by the author's
name such as Gautama).

Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics—Hastings.

Garuda Purana, Ed. R. S. Bhattacharya,
Chowkhamba, Varanasi, 1964.

Grhya Sutra (Preceded by the name of the
author such as Apastamba)

History of Dharma Sastra by P. V. Kane,
G.O.S.

The Indian Antiquary.

The Indian Historical Quarterly.

Kaufiliya —_Arthaiistra.

Kirma Purana, Venkateshwara Press Edt.
Bombay, also Kashiraj Trust Edt.,
Varanasi 1971.

Liga Purana, GM, 1960; also MLBD, Delhi,
1981.

Manu Smrti.

Mahabharata, Gita Press, Gorakhpur, VS
2014.

Markandeya Purana.

Mahabharata’) Namanukramani, Gita Press,
Gorakhpur, VS 2016,

Matsya Purana, GM, 1954.

Monier Williams + Sk. English Dictionary
MLBD, Delhi, 1976.

Naradiya :or Narada Purana, Venkateshwar
Press, Bombay.

BharatavarsiyaPracina Caritrakosa, Siddheshwar
Shastri, Poona, 1968.

Padma Purana, GM, 1957-59.

Puranic Encyclopaedia by V. Mani, English,
MLBD, Delhi, 1975.


=== PAGE 12 ===

JP

PR or PRHRC

RV

Sat. Br

SC or SMC
SEP

Purina (Journal of the Kashiraj Trust),
Varanasi.

Puranic Records on Hindu Rites and Customs
R. C. Hazra, Calcutta, 1948.

Rg Veda, Svadhyaya Mandal, Aundh

Satapalha Brihmana,

Smrti Candriki—Devanna Bhatta.

Studies in Epics and Purinas by A. D. Pusalkar
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan(BVB), Bombay.


=== PAGE 13 ===

i UTTARABHAGA

SECTION IV

UPASAMHARAPADA


=== PAGE 14 ===

CHAPTER ONE

Description of the Dissolution of the Universe’

1. After hearing the third Section recounted by the
intelligent Stta, the excellent sages asked him about the
fourth Pada.

The sages said :—

2. "Out of tenderness and affection for us, the third
fore-gone Section has been covered by you. Describe in detail
the fourth Section called ‘annihilation’ (Samhara).

3-4. Recount to us all the Manvantaras, the earlier
ones along with the others (i.e. future ones). Narrate to us the
details of all the Saptarsis (seven sages). In the present
Manvantara, mention all the partsin detail about the Creation
ofthe Great Soul. Mention everything to usin detail and inthe
proper order."

Suta said :—

5-6. “I shall narrate to you this Fourth Section along
with (the description of) annihilation. O excellent sages, |
shall mention everything asit is.

Listen, O Brahmanas, to this creation of Vaivasvata Manu
who is the current Manu ofnoble soul. Listen to his creation in
detail and in the proper order.

1. Although the title signifies the 'merger of the entire three worlds in
their constituent elements during the period of a complete day (i.e. day and
night) of Brahma (vide VV. 236,237), it contains much more material from
the description offuture Manus or rather Manu-periods and the ultimate
dissolution of everything after god Brahma's 'merger' into the ‘equilibrium
of three gunas'.

The influence of Saikhya theory of involution of the universe is obvious
under the Puranic way of description of dissolution.


=== PAGE 15 ===

958 Brahmantfa PurSya

7. Understand, even as | recount, the summary of the
Manvantaras along with the future seven (Manvantaras) a&
well as the dissolution of the worlds.

8. These Manvantaras have been recounted perfectly.
The subjects (i.e. creations) in the seven Manvantaras have
also been recounted.' Listen to the brief description of the
future Manvyantaras from me.

9. Ishall mention the details of Savarna the future
Manu and son of Vivasvan (the Sun god). Understand briefly
the future® (details).

10-13. The future great sages are remembered as seven
in number. They are Galava of KauSsika family, Jamadagnya
(i.e. ParaSurama) of Bhargava family, Dvaipayana of Vasisfha
family, Krpa of Saradvata family, Diptiman of Atri family,
RsyasSrniga of KaSyapa family and ASsvatthama, the son of
Drona, of great renown, of Bharadvaja family. These are the
noble-souled seven great sages of the future.

There will be three groups of Devas named Sutapas,
Amitabhas and Sukhas. Each of these groups of Devas is
remembered as consisting of twenty Devas. I shall mention
their names separately. Understand the same with attention,
andconcentration.

14-l6a. The twenty Devas of the Sutapa group are
Rtu, Tapa, Sukra, Krti, Nemi, iPrabhakara, Prabhasa,

1. For the general information about Manu-Periods (Manvantaras).
aide supra 1. ii. 35-150-215, Ibid chapters 36, 37, 38.

2. As stated in Bh. P. XII.7-15, in every Manu-Period there are five
types of officers : (1) Manu, (2) A group of seven sages, (3) A group of
gods, (4) Indra or the chief of gods, (5) Sons of Manu. There it some
variation in the details ofnames etc. ofthese officers in different Puranas.
In this Purana also the information about these office-bearers etc. is given in.
arather confusing way that it is somewhat difficult to prepare a tabular
statement for each of the Manus with the names of special office-bearers of
each category under him even though the information here is more detailed
than in other Puranas like VP.

The future saptarsis (Seven great Sages) etc. mentioned in W. 10-22
belong to the 8th Manu, Savarna. Cf. VP. II]. ch. 2.14-19.

The author states that ‘due to the multiplicity of repetitions’, he has
curtailed details (V. 37 below.)


=== PAGE 16 ===

3.4.1.16-26 959

Masakrt (? Bhasakrt), Dharma, Tejas, RaSmi, Kratu, Virat,
Arcisman, Dyotana, Bhanu. Yasas, Kirti, Budha and Dhrti.
Thus the twenty Sutapas have been glorified with their
names.

16b-17. The twenty Devas of the Amitabha group
are:—Prabhu, Vibhu, Vibhasa, Jeta (Jetr), Hanta (Hantr),
Ariha, Rtu, Sumati, Pramati, Dipti Samakhyata, Mahas,
Mahan, Dehi, Muni, Ina, Posta (Post*'), Sama, Satya and
Visruta. These are the twenty Amitabhas. They have been
duly recounted.

18-19. The twenty Devas of the Sukha group are:—Dama,
Dani, Rta, Soma, Vitta, Vaidya, Yama, Nidhi, Homa,
Havya, Huta, Dana, Deya, Data (Datr), Tapas, Sama,
Dhruva, Sthana, Vidhana, and Niyama. These twenty
are mentioned as the groups of Devas called Sukhas in the first
(future) Manvantara of Savarna.

20-21. They are the sons of the noble-souled Kasyapa,
the son of Marici. In that Manvantara (the above-mentioned)
sixty Devas will be born to KaSsyapa who is the present one.

Nine sons will be born to Manu Savarna.

22. They will be Virajas, Arvarivan, Nirmoka and
others. I shall mention the nine sons in the other Savarna
Manvantaras.

23. Other Savarna Manus will be the future sons of
Brahma. They are four, endowed with divine visions such as
Merusavarni etc. (or from Merusavarni).

24. They are the grandsons of Daksa, the sons of
Kriya, his daughter. They have equipped themselves with
great power of penance on the ridge of the Meru. They
have great prowess.

25. They are begot by Brahma and others as well as_ by
the intelligent Daksa. On passing away, they go over to
Maharloka. They will resort to Meru and become the future
Manus.

26. Those persons endowed with dignity and splendour
were formerly born in the Caksusa Manvantara. They them-
selves will be bornin the future Manvantaras


=== PAGE 17 ===

960 Brahmanfa PwSaux

27. Of those Manus who are the grandsons of Pracetasa
Daksa, five are named Savarnas and four are born of great
sages.

28. One Savarni is the son of Samjiia, born of Vivasvan
(the Sun-god). The eldest son of Samjfia is lord Manu, son
of Vivasvan.

29-30. Their excellent manifestation is at the advent of
Vaivasvata Manvantara. Thus these fourteen Manus, who
cause the increase of reputation have been glorified in the Vedas,
Smrtis and Puranas. All of them are the mighty ones with great
potentiality. All of them are lords of subjects as well as_ those
of living beings.

31. The entire Earth including the cities and
consisting of seven continents is to be protected by those rulers
of men for the full period of a thousand Yugas.

32. Their detailed description along with that of their
progeny and power of penance will be stated. These creations
of Svayarribhuva and other Manus,. it should be known, are
fourteen. -

33. They hold offices ofauthority in the Manvantaras
(only) once.- After the expiry of the tenure of their office they
resort to Maharloka.

34. (?) Ofthem six have passed on and the rest are
eight in number. The lord Manu reigns by himself in the
case of the previous ones as well in the current one

335. 1 shall recount those who yet remain along with
the Devas, Sages and Danavas. O Brahmanas, | shall mention
to you all the- future ones along with the creation oftheir
progeny.

36. Their details should be known through the example
of creation of Vaivasvata Manu, because all of them are
neither inferior nor superior to Vivasvan.

37. Due to the multiplicity of repetitions, I shall not
recount the details of the future as well as past Manvantaras.

38. Hence the creations in the different families should
be understood partially for the realization of their details and

proper sequence.


=== PAGE 18 ===

3.4.1.39-54 961

39. A virtuous daughter of Daksa is well-known by the
name Suvrata. She was the most excellent ofall the daughters
and was the eldest daughter of Virini.

40. The father took his daughter of Brahma. Vairaja
(i.e. Brahma), was seated there attended uponby Dharma
and Bhava.

41-44a. Brahma spoke to Daksa who was seated near
Bhava and Dharma. This, your daughter Suvrata, will pro-
create four sons who will be splendid Manus establishing the
discipline of the.four castes.

On hearing the words of Brahma, Daksa, Dharma and
Bhava, the three of them along with Brahma mentally approach-
ed that girl.

Immediately that girl gave birth to four + sons similar in
appearance and form to them because they were oftruthful
conception.

44b-46. Even as they were born, they were prepared for
carrying out their duties, They were endowed with splend-
our, with physical bodies produced immediately and capable
of experiencing and enjoying.

On seeing them born by themselves and uttering Vedic
hymns, they (Brahma and others) became excited. They
pulled them saying "My son, My son". Meditating upon them
as born of themselves, they spoke among themselves.

47-49. “Heshall take unto him as his son, the one who
is similar to him in physical form, who is similar to him in
physical features, size and prowess. Welfare unto you, let him
take the one who is of the same complexion (as his son).
Certainly, the son always conforms to the form and feature of
his father. Hence, the son is equal to his father and mother in
prowess".

After arriving at this argument among themselves, all of
them took their respective sons.

50-54. After the Caksusa Manvantara had elapsed and
the Vaivasvata Manvantara had arrived, ason named Raucya
was bornto Ruci, the Prajapati.

He who was begot of Bhutti as the son of Kavi, was
named Bhautya.


=== PAGE 19 ===

962 Brahmania Purana

In the Vaivasvata Manvantara two Manus were born of
Vivasvan-.

One is well known as Vaivasvata Manu and the other
is reputed asJ§ayarna.
i The learned lord Vaivasvata Manji should be known = as
-tke-soiLjQf_.Saihjfia. Another (fet-ivasvetta*Manu is remembered
as the feon of Sjyvarna.

Those Savarna Manus, the four born ofgreat sages, have
equipped themselves with the power of penance. They will be
persons achieving all their tasks as Manus in their respective
future Manvantaras.

55-56. In the first (future Manvantara) three groups of
Devas will be born when Merusavarni', the son of Daksa, is
the Manu. They will be Paras, Maricigarbhas and Sudharmans.
Each group consists oftwelve Devas. Those noble-souls have
all been born in the Vaivasvata Manvantara as the sons of
Rohita, the Prajapati, the son of Daksa. They will be the
future groups of Devas.

57.  AiSvara, Vaku, VarhSa, Rahu and (the othereight)
Grahas (planets) should be known as Paras. Understand the
others.

58-59. The following are the twelve Marlcis  viz.—
Vajipa, Vajijit, Prabhiti, Kakudmi, Dadhikr~van, Vipakva,
Pranita, Vijaya, Madhu, Utathya and two Uttamakas (?).

I shall mention the Sudharmans by name. Understand
them.

60-61. Varna, (?) Athagarvi*, Bhuranya, Vrajana,
Amita, Asita, Dravaketu, Jambha, Aja, Sakraka, Sunemi and
Dyutaya. The Sudharmans are glorified thus. Then their Indra
will be the future one named Adbhuta.

62-64a. This (Adbhuta) is Skanda, the son of Parvati
(otherwise known as) Karttikeya and Pavaki. The seven sages
in the Rohita Manvantara are Medhatithi of the family of

1. VV. 55-65 give details of the office-bearers, gods, sages etc. of
Meru-Sayarni who is otherwise known as Daksa-Savarni. Cf. VP. III.2.20-23.
Our text gives more detailed information about these categories or groups
of office-bearers than in VP.

eAnga and Visva as per Va. P. 100.64.


=== PAGE 20 ===

3.4.1.64-76 963

Pulastya, Vasu of the family of KaSyapa, Jyotisman ofthe
family of Bhrgu, Dyutiman ofthe family of Angiras, Vasina of
the family of Vasistha, Havyavahana ofthe family of Atri and
Sutapas of the family of Pulaha.

64b-65. The following are declared as the nine sons of
the first Savarni:—Dhrtiketu, Diptiketu, Sapa, Hasta, Niramaya,
PrthuSravas, Anlka, Bhiridyumnaand Brhadyasas.

66-68. In the tenth recurrence of Manvantara, the
Manu will be the second Savarni', the son of Dharma. In_ that
future Manvantara, there will be two groups of Devas
namely Sudhamans and Viruddhas.

All of them are effulgent and they equally number a
hundred. The hundred Prinas mentioned by the Sages in
Purusa will be the Devas (during the reign) of the Manu, the
*son of Dharma.

69-7la. Their Indra, it is said, will be the future
learned Santi.

The seven great sages will be the glorious Havisman of
the family of Pulaha, Suklrti of the family of Bhrgu. Apomiurti
of the family of Atri, Apava of the family of Vasistha, Apratima
of the family of Pulastya, Nabhaga of the family of KaSsyapa
-and Abhimanyu of the family of Angiras.

71b-72. It is proclaimed that the following will be
the ten sons of Manu :—Suksetra, Uttamaujas. Bhtrisena,
Viryavan, Satanika, Niramitra, Vr?‘sena, Jayadratha,
Bhitridyumna and Suvarcas.

73-76. In the eleventh Manvantara ofthe third .Savarna,
the groups of Devas will be the following three, namely
Nirvanaratis, Kamagas (? Vihangama in Verse 75) and
Manojavas. These three sets ofnoble-souled Devatas are well-
known. Each of those groups of heaven-dwellers consists of
thirty Devas. The thirty days of the month, the poets know, as
the set of Devas named Nirvanaratis and the thirty nights are

1. Although the specific name ofthis second Savarni is not mentioned
here, it is Brahma-savarni. vide verse 81 below. VV. 66-81 stale the names
of groups of gods, sages etc. during this tenth Manu Period. In V. 81 this
.Manu is called Prajapatya (i.e. Brahma-savarna).


=== PAGE 21 ===

964 Brahman 4a Pur day*

Vihangamas (Kamagas)'. Manojavas who had been mentioned
as the third set of Devatas will be the Muhurtas. Thus the
Devas have been recounted.

77. These are remembered as the future mental sons of
Brahma. Their Indra is Vrsa by name. He will be the future
king of Suras.

78-81. Understand their seven sages too being recounted:
They are Havisman oT the family of KaSyapa, Vapusman of
the family of Bhrgu, Aruni of the family of Atri, Naga of the
family of Vasistha, Pusti who should be known as_ belonging
to the family of Angiras, NiScara of the family of Pulastya and
Atitejas of the family of Pulaha.

The Devas in the eleventh Manvantara (have been,
mentioned). The nine sons ofthe Savarna of Prajapatya (i.e.
Brahmasavarna) are Sarvavega, Sudharma, Devanika,
Purovaha, Ksemadharma, Grahesu, AdarSa, Paundrakaand
Maru.

82. In the twelfth Manvantara Marni will be Rudra's
son. The fourth Savarna will be Rudrasavarna.' Listen to
the Devas during his Manvantara.

83-85A. Thefuture Devas (of this Manvantara) are-
said to be of five groups. They are Haritas, Rohitas, Sumanas,
Sukarmans and Sutaras.

The following ten are remembered as Haritas viz. Vidvan,.
Sahasrada, Parvata, Anucara, Aparhgsu Manojava, Urja, Svaha,
Svadha and Tara.

85b-86. The following ten Devas are remembered as-
Rohitas viz. Tapa, Jani, Mrti, Varcas, Bandhu, Rasa, Raja,
Svarnapada, Pusti and Vidhi.

87. Those thirty-three Devas who have already been
mentioned, beginning with Tusita, should be known as
Sumanas.

Understand the Sukarmans: They are Suparva, Vrsabha,
Prsta, Kapi, Dyumna, Vipascit, Vikvama, Krama, Vibhrta and
Kanta. These Devas are-Sukarmans.

1. VV. 82-95a state the names of Saptarsis,.Devas, etc. under the-
twelfth Manu Rudra-Sayarna (-Savarni).


=== PAGE 22 ===

3.4.1.88-100 965

88-90, Understandthe Sutaras: They are Varsa, Divya,
Afijittha, Varcasvl, Dyutiman, Kavi, Subha, Havi, Krtaprapti
and Vyaprta the tenth. The Devas called Sutaras have been
glorified with their names.

91-93. The highly glorious Rtadhama should be known
as their Indra. The following are the seven,sages of great
achievement during the Manvantara of the last of seven
Savarnis viz.—Dyuti the son of Vasistha, Sutapas belonging to
the family of Atri, Tapomirti belonging to the family of
Angiras, Tapasvi of the family of KaSyapa, Tapodhana of the
family of Pulastya, Taporati of the family of Pulaha and
Tapodhrti who is the seyenth among them and should be
known as belonging to the family of Bhrgu

94-95a. The following are the sons of the twelfth Manu
viz.—Devavan, Upadeva, Devasrestha, Vidhtratha, Mitravan,
Mitrasena, Citrasena, Amitraha, Mitrabahu and Suvarcas.

95b-96. In the- future Raucya Manvantara, which is
the thirteenth Manvantara.' only three groups of Devas have
been mentioned by Svayambhu (Brahma). All those noble
souls are the mental sons of Brahma.

97-100... Sutramans and Sudharmans, Sukarmans, these
three are mentioned as the future groups of Devas who will
imbibe Soma juice (Somapayins).

Of them, the sutramans are three. They are the thirty-
three Devatas who should be worshipped separately by the
Yajnikas (people who perform Yajiias). Understand that they
are to be worshipped separately by means of Ajya (ghee) and
Prfudajya (ghee mixed with coagulated milk) alongwith
Graha-Sre$fha (the most excellent one among the planets i.e. the
Sun). The Sutramans (are also known as) Prayajyas. They are
those who take in Ajya now. The Sukarmans are also called
Anuydjyas because they are those who consume Prfadajya. The
Sudharmans are Upayajyas.

I. VV. 95-105 give the detailed list of Devas, Saptarsis, Manu's sons,
etc. of the thirteenth Manu called Ruci. Raucya i> the name of Manvantara
after Manu Ruci.


=== PAGE 23 ===

966 Brahmanda Puraiux

Thus the Devas have been mentioned.

101. Divaspati of great inherent prowess will become
their Indra. The sons ofthe son of Pulaha should be known as
Ruci's sons.

102-103. (The Seven Sages,in the thirteenth Manvan-
tara are as follows) Dhrtiman of the family of Angiras, Avyaya
belonging to the family of Pulastya, Tattvadarsi ofthe family
of Pulaha, Nirutsuka ofthe family of Bhrgu, Nisprakampya of
the family of Atri, Nirmoha of the family ofKaSsyapa and
Sutapas of the family of Vasistha—these are the sages in the
thirteenth Manvantara.

104-105a. In the thirteenth Manvantara, the following
will be the sons of Manu Raucya. They will be ten (in
number). Theyare Gitra-Sena, Vicitra, Naya, Dharma, Dhrta,
Bhava, Aneka, Ksatraviddha, Surasa and Nirbhaya.

105b-107. Inthe fourteenth Manvantara of the Manu
Bhautya, it is said that there will be five groups of Devas. The
following five groups of Devas are remembered namely,
Gaksusas, Pavitras, Kanisthas, Bhrajitas and Vaca-Vrddhas.

108-109. There are seven Svaras (Notes in the Gamut
ofIndian Music) beginning with Nisada. Understand them as
the Seven Gaksusas. The seven Saman-Mantras beginning with
Brhat are the seven Kanisthas. The seven worlds are the Pavi-
tras and the seven oceans are the Bhrajitas. Understand those
sages as Vacavrddhas“those sages who were inthe Manvantara
of Svayambhuva Manu.

All the Indras ofthe Manvantaras should be known as
having similar characteristics such as splendour, power of
penance, intellect, strength, earning and exploits.

110-114. These Indras overpower all the living beings
in three worlds by means of their qualities (irrespective of
whether the living beings are mobile or immobile. The Indras
(? or Devas) are Bhiitapavadins, Hrsjas, Madhyasthas, Bhita-
vadins and the Bhutabhavadins. The three Vedas are competent
in respect to Pravadins (those who argue and expound).

The seven sages of the Bhautya Manvantara are Agnidhra
of the Kasyapa family, Mdagadha of the family of Pulastya
Agnibahu of Bhrgu family, Suci of Angiras family, Sukra of


=== PAGE 24 ===

3.4.1.115-125 967

Vasisfha's family, Mukta of Pulaha's family and Svajita who is
said tobe of the family of Atri.

Now listen (to the enumeration of) the sons of Manu.
They are Uru, Guru, Gambhira, Buddha, Suddha, Suci, Krti,
Urjasvi and Subala. These are the sons of Bhautya.

115-116. These four Savarna Manus are the sons of
Brahma. A son of Vivasvan is (also) called Savarna Manu.

The Manus Raucya and Bhautya are considered to be
sons (or descendants) of Pulaha and Bhrgu.

During the reign of Bhautya’ the Kalpa will shortly be
completed.

Suta said:

117-120. When all the Manvantaras pass by at the end
of many Gaturyugas, when everything is annihilated it is
called Samhara. At the end of Manvantara all these (?)
seven Devas ofthe family of Bhrgu (?), after enjoying the period
ofseventyone Caturyugas while being stationed in the three
worlds (pass away too).

When the Manvantara passes byalong with the Pitrs and
Manus, the entire space ofthe three worlds will be devoid of
support.

The splendid abodes of Sthanins (the super-human
beings presiding over various worlds) fall off on being
separated from stars, constellations and planets.

121-125. After passing away, the lord of the three worlds
goes over to Maharloka where the fourteen groups of Devas,
Ajitas and others are present. These Ajitas are long lived ones.
They are Kalpav&sins (staying alive throughout the Kalpa).
They are indeed the fourteen groups of Devas in all the Man-
vantaras. It is reported that they go over to Janaloka along with
their followers and with their physical bodies.

When the Devas have gone over to Janaloka from Mahar-
Loka, when the Bhitadis (the Ahamkara and other prime causes

1. VV. 106-116 state the office-bearers in the regime of the last Manu
Bhautya. Our text omits the name of Indra of this Manvantara. VP. III.2.41
informs us that Suci was the Indra then. He seems to be different from
Suci, the son of this Manu (in V. 114).


=== PAGE 25 ===

968 BrahmOnda Purana

of the Universe) alone remain, when all the immobile beings
have come to an end, when all the Lokasth&nas (the abodes of
worlds) beginning with Bha and ending with Mahar have
become void and when the Devas have gone up, it is the
period when the Kalpavasins (those who remain alive throughout
the Kalpa) attain their Sayujya (salvation).

126. After withdrawing (i.e. annihilating) gods, sages,
Pitrs and Danavas (demons), god Brahma, on visualizing the
end ofhis day at the end of Yuga, verily puts an end to his
creation.

127. Persons who know that the day of god Brahma
terminates at the end of a thousand sets offour Yugas and that
his night ends with a thousand sots of four Yugas are called the
conversant ones with the day andnight (of god-Brahma).

128. The Pratisaficara’ (Dissolution awd reabsorption) of
all living beings is of three types viz. Naimittika (Periodical),
Prakrtika (Pertaining to Prakrti) and the Atyantika (the ultimate
one).

129-131. The Naimittika reabsorption (of the living
beings) is the burning at the end of the Kalpa caused by
Brahma (?) It is his Prasarhyama (withdrawal and Restraint) of
all beings. The destruction of Karanas (instruments and" means)
of the living beings during Pratisarga (Reabsorption into
Prakrti) is called Prakrta.

The dissolution due to dawning of Jiana (Perfect know-
ledge) is said to be Atyantika (the ultimate one) as it renders
causes (of Sarhsara) impossible.

At the end of his Prahura (a watch or 1/8 part of a full
day) Brahma annihilates Devas, the residents ofthe three
worlds and again starts the creation. When he is desirous of
sleeping, lord Brahma annihilates the subjects.

1. After stating what happens after the day of god Brahma is over,
the author explains the three types of dissolutions viz. Naimittika (Periodical),
Prakrtika (Pertaining to Prakrti) and 4tyanlika (The Ultimate one, resulting
from spiritual knowledge) vide VV. 128-132.


=== PAGE 26 ===

3.4.1.132-144 969

132. At the end of a thousand sets of Caturyugas,
*when the period of annihilation of the Yuga arrives, the
Prajapati (Lord ofthe Subjects i.e. Brahma) begins to make
the subjects abide in him (i.e. reabsorb in him).’

133-136a. Then a continued drought lasting for a
hundred years takes place. On account ofit, only those living
beings deficient in strength or having very little potentiality
on the surface of the earth become dissolved and get mingled
with the dust.

The sun rises up with his seven rays for his chariot. The
lord with raysof unbearable heat begins to drink water by
means of his rays. As he blazes, his seventy brilliant green rays
whirl again and slowly pervade the sky.

136b-140. The worldly fire burns wood and fuel along
with water (when water boils-many solids are dissolved in it).
Hence, when thesun takes up water, it is said that it blazes. The
sun is sprinkled when there is drought (i.e. when the sun blazes
water becomes vapour); when there is drought the sun has a
glow. Therefore, the sun blazes with water. Seven rays ofthe
sun that blazes in the sky sucking up water, drink water from
the great ocean. Being illuminated with that intake seven suns
are evolved. Then those rays that have become suns, burn the
four worlds in the four directions. Those fires burn up the entire
Universe.

141. With those rays, the seven suns move up and down.
They blaze burning up (everything) like the fire at the close
of the Yugas.

142. Kindled by the waters, those suns with thousands
of rays envelop the firmament and stay on, burning the Earth.

143. Being burned by their brilliant flames, the Earth
including mountains, rivers and oceans becomes bereft of
moisture andj/jscidity.

144. Being restrained by those rays ofthe Sun, that
burn brightly, that move about in a continuous series and that
have variegated colours, the Earthis enveloped entirely, beneath,
above and on all sides.

1. VV. 132-178 describe the deluge that pervades the universe after
the completion of Brahma's day. The description is common to all Puranas.

Jizy S*ituy Adkizivi “i /nLlty


=== PAGE 27 ===

970 Brahmanda Purana

145. The multifarious fires of the sun become expanded
and augmented and then mingle with one another. They then
form a single unit—a single flame.

146. It will be the destroyer of all the worlds. That fire
takes a circuitous movement and enveloping the set of four
worlds burns it up by means ofits fiery splendour.

147. When everything mobile and immobile becomes
dissolved, the Earth devoid of treesand (even) grass may seem
like the back of a tortoise.

148. Everything filled with its flames blazes like a solid

ball of fire. The entire universe appears like a frying pan.

149. Whatever be the animals and living beings-on the
surface ofthe Earth or within the great oceans become annihi-
lated and dissolved and turned into dust (ashes).

150. The continents, the mountains, the subcontinents
and the great ocean—all these will be reduced to ashes by that
universal fire, the soul of everything.

151. The kindled fire resorting to the earth blazes and
drinks up water from the seas, rivers, nether worlds completely
from all sides.

152. Increased in its dimensions, this enkindled Sarhvar-
taka fire, of terrible form transcends the mountains and planets
and annihilates the worlds.

153. Thereafter, it breaks through the Earth and dries up
Rasatala. After burning up Patala completely, it burns up the
world of wind in the end.

154-157a. After consuming the Earth from below it
burns the firmament above. The innumerable flames and
tongues of that Sariivartakafire rise up into thousands, millions
and trillions of Yojanas.

The excessively ignited fire burns Gandharvas, Pisacas
and Raksasas along with the great serpents. It burns entirely
the globe of Bhiloka, Bhuvarloka, Svarloka and Maharloka.
The horrible fire ofdeath'thus burns the four worlds.

157b-159. When all those worlds are pervaded by the
fire above and on the sides, the terrible. Samvartaka clouds rise


=== PAGE 28 ===

3.4.1.160-173 971

up. Getting the fiery splendour transmitted to it, the entire
universe slowly assumes the form ofa huge block of iron and
shines thus. Thereafter, the terrible Samvartaka clouds rise up
in the sky. They are of the size and shape of huge herds of
elephants. They will be adorned with lightning streaks.

160. Some of them are dark in colour like the blue lotus,
some resemble the water lilies. Some appear like Vaidirya
(Lapis Lazuli). Others resemble Indranila (blue Sapphire).

161. Other clouds appear white like conch and jasmine
flowers as wellas dark like the black pigment. Some clouds
are smoke-coloured and some are yellow.

162. Some clouds have a shining lustre like the colour of
a donkey. Similarly, some resemble the colour of the lac exuda-
tion. Others appear like the Manalisila (Red Arsenic) and
other clouds have the colour of doves.

163. Some clouds resemble the glow-worm. Some are
like the red orpiment. Some resemble the wings ofthe blue jay.
Clouds like these rise up in the firmament. \.

164. Some of the clouds are ofthe size of an excellent
city. Some can be compared to herds ofelephants. Some clouds
shine like huge mountains. Some clouds appearlike an extensive
flat ground.

165. Some clouds resemble the hall ofgames. Some can
be compared to shoals offish. The clouds have different forms.
They are aweful in appearance and make terrific thundering
sound.

166-169a. Then the clouds fill the entire area of the
firmament. After that, these clouds, producing terrific rumbling
sound group themselves in seven, identifying themselves with
the- Suns, and they extinguish the fire. Then those clouds shower
rain in huge torrents. They destroy'the whole of extremely
terrific and inauspicious fire. With the waters so profusely
showered, the universe becomes filled up with it. With its
splendour attacked and subdued by the waters, the fire enters
into the waters.

169b-173. Drenched by the shower, the fire is subdued
and destroyed. The clouds arising from those fires permeate the
entire universe with huge torrents of water-currents. Urged by


=== PAGE 29 ===

972 Brah.mB.nda Purina

the self-born Lord, they fill this universe with currents of
water. Otherclouds attack the seashore with huge columns
ofthe downpour. A vast expanse of the ground including
mountains, continents and the intervening spaces, being (as_ if)
swallowed up, stand submerged in water. Then the water from
the sky falls down on the Earth. A violent wind of terrible
nature envelopes it all round in the sky. When everything
mobile and immobile becomes dissolved and destroyed in that
single terrible vast expanse of water, when thousand Catur-
yugas are completed it is said that the Kalpa has come toa
close.

174-178. When the world is covered by Ambhas' (water),
learned men say that it is Ekarnava (a general inundation of the
sea). When the fire is destroyed, when everything is blinded,
nothing is observed clearly whether Earth (land) or water,
Ether or wind. AH the products of Earth and the waters of the
ocean as well as Daivyas (those of celestial origin) become entire-
ly immobilised. Without any movement they attain the state
ofa single unit and are designated as Salila (water). Then that
Salila is remembered as one devoid of to and fro movement.

Thatwater which is called Arnava (ocean) covers this
Earth. The word Bha is used in Vyapti (pervasion) and Dipti
(illumination). This water pervades the entire mass of ashes
and becomes illuminated. So it is called Ambhas.

179-181. The root ar (i.e. r) is used in the sense of
multiplicity and quickness. In that single expanse of Sea
(EFkarnava) the waters are not quick (i.e. they are stationary).
Therefore they are Naras.

When a day of Brahma consisting of a thousand Catur-
jiugas passes by, the universe becomes Ekarnava for an equal
period oftime. Thenall the activities of Prajapati cease.

Thus when everything mobile and immobile is dissolved
and destroyed in that single vast expanse of sea, Brahma
becomes an entity possessing thousand eyes and a thousand
feet.

1. Our author is fond of giving etymologies some ofwhich are funny,
vide the etymologies of ambhas ‘water’, salila ‘water’, aryava and Nara.


=== PAGE 30 ===

3.4.1.182-196 973

182. The first Prajapati (creator) who is expressly
declared as a Person in the form ofthe Trayi, i.e. the three
Vedas, is one with thousand heads, thousand feet, thousand arms
*nd a gracious disposition.

183. He has the brilliant complexion of the Sun. He
is the protector ofthe Universe. He is unparalleled, the only one
(without a second), the first, quickly overpowerer (of the
mighty), a cosmogonic power (lit. born of a golden egg), the
Supreme Person, the great one. It is recited (in the scriptures)
that he is beyond the quality called Rajas.

184. At the end of the thousand sets of four Yugas,
when all space is flooded with water on all sides, the lord be-
comes desirous ofsleep. As he does not wish for light, he creates
the Night.

185-188. When all the subjects (creatures) of the four
types (i.e. ovoviparous, bornofsweat etc.) are dissolved in him
and lie within him, the seven sages see that Noble-souled Kala
(God of Time—God of death). These seven sages have acquired
(divine) vision due to penance and they have reverted to the
Janaloka. They are the noble souls beginning with Bhrgu and
their characteristic features have already beenexplained. They
can see with their eyes, the seven worlds beginning with Satya.
During the period of the nights of Brahma they always see
Brahma.

The seven sages see Kala who sleeps during his night.
Since he abides beyond the Kalpas heis cited as Adya (the
Primordial one).

189-190. He is the creator ofall living beings repeatedly
during the beginnings of Kalpa. Lying down thus, the Prajapati
of great splendour takes up everything and keeps it within him-
self. He, the maker ofall, stays in the waters ofthe single vast
expanses of the Sea in darkness during the night.

191. When the Night comes to a close, Prajapati wakes
up. He becomes induced with a desire to create. He then once
again applies his mind to the activity of creation.

192-196. Thus, when Prajapati becomes calm after creat-
ing everything including the worlds, when the Naimittika
(periodic or occasional) dissolution pertaining to Brahma occurs,-


=== PAGE 31 ===

974 Brahmanda Pur Una

it is remembered that all living beings get separated from their
bodies.

When all the living beings are burnt by the rays of the
Sun, when the excellent Devas, sages and Manus (are submerg-
ed) in that watery flood, all those living beings beginning with
the Gandharvas and ending with the Pisacas, perish too.

Those that are not burned up resort to Jana-Loka (world)
at the beginning ofthe Kalpa. The living beings of the lower
strata of animals and those beings. that have fallen into the
hell—all those become burned up. All of them will be rid of
their sins. As long as the universe is flooded by water, those
beings too become submerged in water.

197. Whenthe night becomes dawn, all those living
beings are born again from Brahma ofunmanifest source of
origin.

198. The Sages, the Manus and the four types of living
beings—all these are born again. It is mentioned that even,
those Siddhas do have birth and death.

199. Just as the rising and setting of the Sun in this
world happens regularly, so also (it should) be remembered
that the birth and death of all living beings are happening;
regularly.

200-203. The re-birth after the annihilation ofall living
beings is called Samsara.

After the rainfall, all the immobile beings (i.e. trees etc.)
are reborn (i.e. germinate and grow). In the same manner alt
the subjects regularly (take their origin) in every Kalpa.

Just as the. different seasons, the various characteristic
features of the seasons do manifest themselves in various forms
in their due order, so also are the different happenings in the
course of the days and nights of Brahma. All the living beings
mobile and immobile enter Brahma, the Prajapati, the lord
of Time in the process of dissolution. They come out of him
at the time of creation. He .is the great lord of great Yogic
power.

204. Heis the creator ofall living beings repeating the
process at the beginnings of Kalpas. The great lord is both
manifest and unmanifest. To him belongs this entire Universe.


=== PAGE 32 ===

3.4.1.205-214 975

205-207. (Partially defective Text). It is he by whom
the waters are at first -created, the waters that reach the surface
of the Earth along the path taken before. They go back again
along the same path tothe heaven. Thus theygo up and down,
due to the Sun. In te same manner, human beings go up
and down, due to the*r auspicious and inauspicious activities.
They move about here <and there in the course of their trans-
migrations from body to body.

There are Devas, Manus, Lords of Subjects and Siddhas
who reach heaven. It ison being evolved and created by
them that the virtuous beings take their birth (in the various
species) in accordance with their fame.

208-209. Henceforth, I shall recount the time of Abhita-
samplava' (the annihilation of all living beings). The Manvan-
taras that are yet to be. have been explained, O Brahmanas.
by me, along with the creations of subjects and also along
with the Devas. Altogether there are fourteen Manvantaras and
they extend to a period ofa thousand Caturyugas.

210. When two thousand Caturyugas are completed
it is called Visesa Kalpa (? Special Kalpa). This should be
known as the day of Brahma under its calculation.

211. A matra has been made equal to a Nimesa’ (winking
of the eye) by a_ person at leisure. Fifteen winkings of
human eyes make one Kaffha.'

212. (Defective Text) (?) Nine winkings make a Ksana
or five winkings make one Asana. Twenty winkings make one
Kastha. Three Kasfhas make one Prastha (?). Seven  Prasthas
make one udaka (?). One more (i.e. Eight Prasthas) make one
Lava.* (2)

213. It should be knownthat thirty Lavas make once Kali.
Thirty Kalas make one Muhurta. Thirty Muhurtas make one day
and night. This is the position.

214. One day and night consists of more than six hundred
Kalas (30 x 30=900). These should be known in accordance
with the movements ofthe moon and the Sun.

1. The units of time are re-stated here to give the idea of the time of
Abhiita-samplava.

°Prob. "Lava" meaning -A Lava consists of five Ksanas*.


=== PAGE 33 ===

976 Brakmanda PurOno

215-216. (2?) Fifteen Nimesasmake one Kaspha. Thirty
Kasfkas make one Kala. Thirty Kalas make one Muharta. (Accord-
ing to another calculation) Kala is remembered as one tenth of
a Muhurta. Fortyfive Kalas make what is termed as one Muhurta.
Thus Muhurtas and Lavas are reckoned by those conversant with
measurements.

217. In the same manner thirteen Palas of water con-
stitute a Jalaprastha according to Magadha reckoning.

218-219 Four Prasthas filled with water make one (?)
Nalikoccaya. It contains four holes totally extending to four
Arigulas. Each hole is as big as a Masa of gold (?) During, the
days when day and night are ofequal duration two Nalikas
(a period of twentyfour minutes) make one Muhurta. This
calculation is always in accordance with the peculiar movement
of the Sun.

220. What is mentioned as aday having more than six
hundred Kalas should be known as human day. The stellar day
comprises- ten more.

221. This is remembered as a year according to Savana
calculation and this constitutes one day and night according to
divine reckoning.

222-224. Months, Ayanas (transits ofthe Sun) and years
should be calculated on the basis of this day. The knowledge
and terminology is based on that. The measure of the digits
is mentioned as Kala. What is mentioned as one day of Brahma
consists ofa crore, twenty lakhs and ninety thousand tiays
according to the calculation ofthe Devas.

225. On learning this the sages (become) surprised.
They considered it wonderful. Then they sought the knowledge
regarding the division of the number ofdays.

The sages said :—

226. We wish to hear the measurement and calculation
according to human reckoning. Let it be brief with very few
letters and words. Human calculation alone is in accordance
with our opinion.

227. On hearing their requests, the wind-god engaged
in what is beneficial to the worlds, said succinctly as follows


=== PAGE 34 ===

3.4.1.228-239 977

He could do it because he is endowed with divine power of
vision.

228. "The night and day (ofgod Brahma) have been
recounted before. I shall calculate the number ofdays in a year
through mundane measure and mention the extent of dura-
tion at the close ofa day of Brahma.

229-231. Four hundred and _ thirtytwo crores eight
million nine hundred and eighty thousand human years
(4328080POO years). This is the period ofextent of the period
ofannihilation. It has been so calculated by the Brahmanas.

When all the worlds are burnt-down by the seven suns
all the four types ofcreatures get merged in the Mahabhitas
(Great Elements).

232-236a. When the world is flooded with water, when,
everything mobile is dissolved and destroyed, when the activity
of annihilation is concluded, when Prajapati becomes quiescent,
when there is no light, when everything is burnt down and
enveloped in the nocturnal darkness and when it is presided
over by iSvara—that is the time when a vast expanse of Sea
comes into being. The extent of duration of the vast expanse of
Sea is as much as that ofthe day ofthe lord. The night is the
period when there exists the Salila (motionless water). The
period when it recedes is remembered as the daytime.

His days and nights come one after the other successively.
The day and night of the lord is remembered as _ Abhita
samplava.

236b-238. It is called Abhita-samplava because whatever
living beings there are, whether mobile or immobile in the
entire range of the three worlds become merged in the Bhitas
(Elements).

All the subjects, of the past, present and future get
merged like this.

Divine calculation ha? been reckoned as subservient to
Parardha (the number one followed by seventeen zeroes). The
ultimate longevity is declared as extending to twice the period
(of Parardhas)

239. This much is the period of existence of Aja, the


=== PAGE 35 ===

978 Brahmanda Purana

Prajapati. At the close of existence there is the Pratisarga
(Reabsorption) of Brahma, the Paramesthin.'

240. The burning wick of the lamp becomes extinguished
by a violent gust of wind. In the same manner Brahma becomes
quiescent due to Pratisarga.

241-243. Brahma gets merged in Mahat etc., the great
ISvara, created by himself. This Mahat gets merged in Avyakta.
Thereafter, the Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) regain their
equilibrium

Thus Abhitasamplava has been recounted unto you by me.
This withdrawal by complete washing with water is a_ periodic
{Naimittika) reabsorption carried out by Brahma. It has been
briefly recounted. What eke shall I describe unto you ?

Ifany one retains this always or listens to this frequently
or glorifies this or describes this, he shall attain great spiritual
achievement.

CHAPTER TWO
The Description of the City of Siva*

Vayu said :—

1. Special holy rites have been duly performed by persons
ofacute discernment and ofextraordinary habits and practices,
with the residue of what is consigned to the sacred fire in the
form of Homa and also with other things.

2-5. Along with the Devas, those persons stay behind as
the residents of the world called Mahar. Fourteen Manus
who cause increase in reputation have been glorified. Devas,
Sages, Manu and Pitrs of the past, present and future

1. VV. 239-243 describe what happens when the life of god Brahma

terminates.

2. Although the title ofthe chapter leads to believe that it must be a
description only of Siva-loka (the region of Siva), it is a description of
Bhuvana-koia or different regions (lokas) constituting the universe. Siva's region
comrs at the end.


=== PAGE 36 ===

3.4.2.6-10 979

who have been recounted, are mentioned by me as
persons ofthe past who had resorted to Maharloka, along with
Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, VaiSyas and other virtuous persons
accompanied by the Devas. They are accompanied by
persons with Sraddha (faith and composure of mind) who
perform (holy rites etc.) in the same manner (as is expected)
and who are not arrogant. They closely adhere to the religious
rites of four castes and stages in life as ordained in the
Srutis and Smrtis. When the Manvantaras come to a close, they
retire from their authorized offices.

The Sages said :—

6-7. "O Wind-god what is established there in that world
which has been mentioned as Maharloka by you? What thing has
been laid down there among the rites to be carried out in
very world.”

The wind-god conversant with the JZatta (reality)
:spoke the (following) sweet words in accordance with the
facts :—

Viyu said :—

8. "Only fourteen Sth&nas (abodes) have been created by
the great sages. They are those that are called Lokas' (Worlds)
where men stay.

9. They say that Seven of them are Krtasand Seven are
Akrtas. The seven worlds beginning with Bhth and ending with
Satya are the Krtas.

10. The Akrtas are only seven. They are the abodes that
are Prakrtas (evolved by Prakrti). These Sth&nas have been

1. VY. 8-40 describe the seven worlds viz 1. Bhur, Z. Bhuvas, 3. Svar,
4. Mahar (in details) 5. Jana, 6. Tapas and 7. Satya. These seven are called
krtas. The location of 1-4 is (1) The earth, (2) The space between the earth
and the sun, (3) The space between the sun and Dhruva (The Polar Star)
*(4) the space between Dhruva and Jana-loka is Mahar-loka (V V. 39-40).
VV. 22-25 explain the terms jfana-loka (causing birth of people like Manu),
Tapas (Region for performers of Penance) and Satya ( = SaUamatra, - of pure
existence, the region of Brahma).

The intervening verses state who stay in each of these Jokas (regions).


=== PAGE 37 ===

980 Brahmanda Purina

created as holding fast to- the Sthanins (Persons presiding over
the Sthanas), created along with them.

11-12. The Earth, the firmament, the heaven and what
is remembered as Mahar—these four Sthanas are remembered as
Avarnakas (? Avaranakas : ‘Sheaths of the worlds’). It is said that
they are teeming with excellent abodes and some are without
them. Those that are Naimittikas (evolved by a cause), remain,
steady till Abhutasamplava (annihilation by merging into the
Bhitas i.e. Elements).

13. Jana, Tapa and Satya—These three worlds are
Ekintikas (exclusive ones). They remain steady till the Prasam-
yama (Ultimate Re-absorption).

14-l6a. I shall clearly recount these seven Sthanas. The
Bhurloka is the first among them. Bhuvah is remembered as_ the
Second. This should be known that Svar loka is the third
one. Mahah (Mahar) is remembered as the fourth one. Jana is
the fifth world. Tapah is considered as the sixth one. Satyais the
Seventh world. Beyond that there is absence of light. Lis i

16b-19. Formerly, at the utterance of the word Bhih
the Bhirloka was evolved. When the second word Bhuvah was
uttered the firmament was evolved. When the third word
Svah was uttered the heaven manifested itself. Brahma evolved
the Universe by means of these three Vyahrtis (Utterances).
Therefore Bhah is the terrestrial world: the Antarik$a( firmament
is declared as Bhuvah. Svarloka is heaven. This is the conclusion
arrived at the Purana (literature) .

Agni (the fire-god) is the overlord ofthe Bhita (i.e. that
which has come into existence). Hence, he is remembered as-
BhUtapati.

20. Vayu (the wind-god) is the overlord of Bhuvah.
Therefore Vayu (is called) Bhuvaspati. Sirya (the sun-god) is
the overlord of heaven. Therefore, Strya (Sun) is called
Divaspati.

21. Due to the utterance of Mahar the Maharloka
came into existence. The abode ofthe Devas whose tenure of
office has come to an end is there.

22. Jana is the fifth world. It is from it indeed that
Jonas (people) are born. (It is called) Jana because it causes
the birth of the subjects Syayambhuva (Manu) and others.


=== PAGE 38 ===

3.4.2.23-34 981

23-24. Svayambhuva and others who have been glorified
before perform penance in this Kalpa in this world. (Therefore
that world) is called Tapas. Rbhu, Sanatkumara and others
have sublimated their sexual urge. Therefore, that world is
called Tapas. Or there are persons there who have sanctified
themselves by means of penance. Therefore that world is called
Tapas.

25. The word Satya is that of god Brahma. That is
remembered as sattamatra (Pure Existence alone). Hence,
Brahmaloka is Satyaloka. It is the Seventh world. It is very
lustrous.

26-28. All the Devas, Gandharvas, Apsaras, Yaksas,
Guhyakas along with the Raksasas, Bhitas (spirits, goblins),
Pisacas (Ghosts), Nagas) along with human _ beings—all
these reside in Svarloka, Maruts, Matarisvans (These two are
Wind-gods), Rudras and Asyvinidevas are the residents of the
Earth. The persons who do not have any (permanent) abode
have the Bhuvar-loka (as their abode).

Adityas, Rbhus, Visvedevas, Sadhyas and Pitrs are
heaven-dwellers.

29. The sages Angirases resort to the Bhuvarloka. Those
persons i.e. the Devas who reside in the constellations and
planets are (called) Vaimanikas.

30-31. (7) Those beginning with Sukra and ending
with Caksusa who have already passed away resort to the
Bhirloka (?) (svar-loka). They are sanctified mutually and they
begin by means of Tanmatras.

Mahar is the fourth among the worlds. They stay in that
world throughout the Kalpa (or those who stay throughout
the Kalpa reside in that world). Thus these worlds evolved
out of the utterances of Brahma have been recounted in their
order.

32. The worlds having Bhurloka as the first and Mahar
as the last, are proclaimed thus. Those seven Stryas (at the
time of ultimate dissolution) burn all those worlds by means of
their flames.

33-34. Marici, Kasyapa. Daksa, Svayambhuva, Angiras,
Bhrgu, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and others—these are all


=== PAGE 39 ===

982 Brahmanda Purina

Prajapatis. They remain there along with Rbhus etc. They are
devoid of possessions and the attitude of "My-ness". They
have sublimated their sexual urge. Rbhu, Sanatkumara and
others are the sages called Vairajas (? free from passion (or
Sons of Viraja—Prajapati).

35-37a. (Defective Text) The sixth world viz. Tapas is
the world remembered as the place causing return of all the
fourteen Manus in the course of Manvantaras including
those of Savarnas.

Then it is said that they retain in their soul their Yogic
power, the power ofpenance and inherent Sattva quality and
return to the sixth world on account of the reverse process
(i.e. Reabsorption and withdrawal) .

37b-39. Satya is the seventh world. It is the world for
those who never return along the path (traversed by them i.e.
those who are on the way to their dissolution, Brahmaloka with
its characteristic feature of Apratighata. (Absence of repulsion
and hindrance) has been recounted.

Bharloka is declared due to its measure of rotation. The
distance between the Earth and the Sun is the firmament and
it is remembered as Bhuvarloka. The distance between the Sun
and Dhruva is remembered as Divah the heavenly world.

40. Thespace between Dhruva and the Jana Loka is
called Maharloka.

All the seven worlds have been explained. I shall mention
their Siddhis-(Spiritual achievements).

41-43. All those who reside in the Bhurloka subsist by
eating food-grains and imbibing juices.

All those who are in the Bhuvarloka and Svarloka are
Somapis (imbibers of Soma juice) and Ajyapas (those who drink
ghee). Those who resort to the Maharloka and stay in that
fourth world have. it should be known, the mental achievement
‘df five characteristics.

Everything that they desire mentally is produced instantly.
These Devas worship mutually by means of all kinds of
Tajiias.


=== PAGE 40 ===

3.4.2.44-57 983

44-45. These Devas are of the past, present and
future. The first and the last are indicated through the
present.

When the group of Devas goes beyond Tapas (world)
their relationship also recedes. Their Siddhi (achievement) is
mental (even when) their tenure ofoffice ceases.

46. Their mental achievement should be known as very
pure on account of mutual interaction.

The four worlds have been recounted and the details of
Jana too, O Brahmanas, have been mentioned by me. I shall
repeat it once again for your sake."

Vayu said :—

47-48. "Marici, KaSyapa, Daksa, Vasistha, Angiras
Bhrgu, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and others—Formerly these
are born here mentally from god Brahma.

49-50. Thereafter, they establish the subjects and
resort to Janaloka’ itself. On those occasions of burning at the
end of Kalpas, when the worlds beginning with Bhuh and
ending with Mahar are pervaded by fire completely, the flames
of the Samvartaka fire overlap them along with the V&sanas
(impressions of activities etc.)

51. All those groups (of Devas) Yama and others who
reside in Maharloka resort to Janaloka itself when the Maharloka
is ablaze and “burnt up.

52. All those who are the inhabitants ofthat place are
persons with subtle bodies. These (Yama and others) acquire
the same ability or equal potentiality as the inhabitants (of
Janaloka) and they are equipped with a physical form similar
to that of those persons.

53-57. They move about in the Janaloka. The Samvarta
fire sweeps over the Universe.

When the night of Brahma whose source of. origin is the
unmanifest one, dawns, at the beginning ofthe day, they are

1. In VV. 47-68, Vayu describes how gods etc. resort to Janaloka
when Maharloka suffers from the samvartaka fire at the end of the world.
He states how the time is endless; and how in the same process of the same
gods, sages etc? taking re-inecarnation time continues (ad infinitum).


=== PAGE 41 ===

984 Brahmanda Purana

born as before in the same order. All those Sadhakas (Aspir-
ants after spiritual attainment) beginning with Svayambhuva
and ending with Marlci are born like that. They are Devas
and on their passing away the Yamas and others are successively
born as the younger brothers of Prajapati. The earlier ones are
born earlier and the later ones later. In the family of the Devas
the Devatas are remembered asseven Sambhutis (Births). These
seven Sambhitis are born along with the Kalpas and they have
passed away. Three others yet remain. All ofthem are in the
same order (or successively) reborn.

58-61. They have these repeated rapid successive births
ten times. All these Ganas (groups) perceive transience in the
Bhavas (all created things). Due to the force of inevit-
able future as well as that of their meritorious reputation, all
of them as well as the gods staying here resort to Vairaja.
They go to him after forsaking the worlds. Thereafter, in the
course of this period, the Tapasvins (sages) who are Nityamuktas
(eternally free i.e. those who have attained salvation) are born
in their race atthe instance of Dharma. After being born here
they fill those Sthanas (abodes).

62-63. (The Sthanas may be concerning) the states of
Devas, Sages and human beings.

Thus all the groups of Devas take repeated births, ten
times and when they resort to Vairdja Lokas (the regions of
Brahma), they stay there for a period of ten Upaplavas.
(Secondary dissolutions). As the Kalpas come to a close, they
stay there in the Vairajaka and again revert to Brahmaloka in
their due order of priority.

64-66a. When a Kalpa of Vairajaka (i.e. pertaining to
Brahma) passes by in the world of Brahma, the Vairaja (?
Brahma) allots the SthSna in the Avyakia (Unmanifest one)
Thus they (Devas etc.) in accordance with the posteriority
and priority obtaining in the "Brahmaloka_ resort to the
Vairajalokas after going and returning ten times.

66b-76. Thus thousands of Deva Yugas have passed by.
It is impossible to recount all details in the proper order of
sequences of those persons who have attained death in the
world of Brahma along with the sages. This is because Time is


=== PAGE 42 ===

3.4.2.77-83 985

without a beginning and it is difficult to count everything
completely. It isso. There is no doubt in it. It has been men-
tioned by me as it exists.

On hearing this statement, the sages became worried
with doubts. They said to Sita who was conversant with the
Puranas, who had great intellect and who was a disciple of
Vyasa.

77-79a. They abide in the body of Brahma from which
it is impossible to return. After reaching that world full of
meditation, they attain the Supreme Bliss of Brahman.’ Thereby
they gain immortality.

Brahmaloka is mentioned as existing beyond and over
the Vairaja worlds at a distance of six times, (their extent). It
is the place where Brahma, the Purohita (one who has been
put incharge beforehand) stays.

79b-83. All of them are Pranavatmans (those who have
fixed their souls in the mystic syllable Orhkara). They exist
with clarity and purity of intellect. After realizing the Supreme
Bliss of Brahman, they attain Amrtatva (immortality). They are
never overwhelmed by the Dvandvas (pairs of mutually confli-
cting apposites such as heat, cold, happiness and sorrow etc.).
They are devoid of three Bhayas (states of existence such as
Past, Present and Future). Those persons of great spiritual
prowess and splendour are on a par with god Brahma_ except
his power of overlordship. They are endowed with majestic
lustre (Prabhava). Vijaya (Victory) Aiivarya (divine faculties
of omnipotence etc.), Sthifi (continuous Existence), Vair&gya
(non-attachment) and Dargana, (Vision) . All those denizens of
the world of Brahma attain the goal ofnon-return to Samsara
(i.e. Moksa) along with Brahma and Devas.

At the advent of Pratisaficara (Re-absorption into Prakrti),
during the end of Tamas (darkness) they cease all their
activities. Those learned persons are then in an enlightened

1. VV. 77-89 descibe the condition of the persons who reach Satya
(=Brahma) Loka. This Purana supports the state of Liberation described in
Brahma Sutras IV. 4.17-21 in that the Liberated soul has all the advantages
and specialities of Brahma except his power to create the world ete (vide
VV. 80-83).


=== PAGE 43 ===

986 Brahminda Purana

state. They are Ksanadarsins (persons who observe the mom-
entary nature of the world). All ofthem get merged in the
Avyakta (the Unmanifest one) .

84. Thus the Devas and Sages partake of i.e. worship
the Satra (the sacrificial session in the form of) Brahman. The
Satra i.e. Brahman is eternal (Sanitaria), immortal, res-
plendent, over-existent, imperishable and immutable.

85. They are Urdhvaretas (those who have sublimated
their sexual energy). They do not have anything which can
slay them again (i.e. they are deathless). Their faith evolved

aa holy rites is indicated in the Vedantas (Upanisads
ete.).

86. There, they engage themselves inthe practice of
Yogic union (with the Supreme Brahman). They worship the
highest goal. They abandon their physical body, the cause of
all sins and proceed ahead for their immortality.

87-89. They are devoid of passionate attachment. They
have conquered their anger. They arerid of delusion. They are
truthful in speech. They are calm and tranquil with their
minds in concentration. They are compassionate. They have
conquered (i.e. controlled) their sense organs. Those who
have attained the identity with the Brahman, are remembered
as pure persons above (defiling) contacts. Those Viras (heroic
persons i.e. those who realized Brahman) who have burnt their
sins by austerities unconnected with lustful desires, will attain
the worlds from which they shall not: fall off They are
remembered as persons ofimmeasurable (infinite) happiness’.

This is the divine region of Brahman. It is superbly
resplendent in the most exalted firmament. After attaining it
along with Brahma, the Amaras (Immortal beings) cease to be
worried and sorrowful (i.e* attain the Moksa stage)".

The sages enquired :

90-91. "What shall be the Parardha ? What is it that is
called Para ? We wish to know this. O excellent one, mention
that to us."

I". VV. 90 ffgive the units oftime to tell about the life-span of god
Brahma. The technical terms ofnumerals in VV. 100-103a are worth noting.


=== PAGE 44 ===

3.4.2.92-104 987

Sila replied :—

Listen from me _ to the reckoning of Parardka as well as
Para.

92. The main numbers are one, ten, hundred and
thousand. All numbers till thousand should be understood. Ten
Sahasras (thousands) make one Apyuta.

93. One hundred thousand is mentioned as Miyuta by
learned men. Ten times a hundred thousand is called Prayuta.

94. An Ayuta of ten thousands is called a crore*. Ten
Kofis (crores) make one Arbuda. They know that a hundred
Kofis make one Abja.

95. Learned men say that a thousand Kofis make a Kharva.
They know that ten thousand crores make a JVikharva.

96. A hundred thousand Kofis make what is called Sariku.
A thousand of thousand Kofis is called Padma.

97. A thousand thousand Kofis multiplied by ten, is called
Samudra (or Jaladhi) by persons well-versed in reckoning.

98. A hundred thousand multiplied by a thousand’ Kofis
is called Antya. A million multiplied by a thousand crores is
called Madhya.

99. A Kofi multiplied by a thousand crores is declared
as Parirdha. Parardha multiplied by twois called Para by the
learned men.

100-103a. They call hundred by the name Parivrijiha and
thousand by the word Paripadmaka. The other numbers (Each is
multiplied by ten to get the next number) are Ayuta, Niyuta,
Prayuta, Arbuda, Nyarbuda, Kharbuda, Kharva, JVikharva, Sanku,
Padma, Samudra, Antya, Madhya and Parardha—Parardha multiplied
by two makes Para.

Thus numbers upto eighteen digits have been named by
great sages for the purpose of counting. One should know these
numbers beginning with hundred.

103b-104. The (period extending) to a. Parardha (?) years
is remembered as the period of creative activity of Brahma
during the Kalpas. A periodextending as much also remains.
At the end of it he takes rest (?). Para and Parardha have been
calculated and reckoned by me.

*©10,000—10,000 (It should be DaSasahasrafiam Sahasram 10,000<-1000.)


=== PAGE 45 ===

988 Brahmanda Purana

105-107. Since his prowess is the greatest, his longevity
is the highest, his power of penance, strength, virtue or Dharma,
learning, fortitude, knowledge, realisation of Brahman and
faculties such as omnipotence etc. are ofthe highest magnitude,
there is no living being which is greater than Brahma. He is
established in the highest position. Sohe is the greatest of all
objects.The greatest Brahma has been reckoned by me (as Para).
Half ofhis is Parardha,

108. The countable and the uncountable are always
based on Yantras (Scientific Treatises). The countable is
observed through numbers. It is spoken of upto Parardha.

109-110. (Defective text). When a heap is seen no
specific number is observed. That is the characteristic feature
ofthe countlessness. In sand heaps etc. unlimited number is
observed. That is also its characteristic quality. Ability to count
the sand particles is seen in fevaras (powerful and potential
lords) equipped with divine vision which is due to their
purity. Brahma sees everything because he is well established
in knowledge.

111-113. On hearing this, all those ascetics of the Naimisa
forest had their eyes bedimmed with tears of joy. Their
words were choked due to delight. All those expounders
ofthe Vedas asked Matarigsvan (the wind-god):— "O_ holy
lord, how far off is the world of Brahma ? What is its extent ?
How is this calculated in Yojanas ? What is the unit ofmeasure-
ment ? How much is a Yojana as well as Krosa. We wish to
hear ofit as it is in actual reality.

114. On hearing their utterance full of humility, Matari-
Svan (the Wind-god) uttered the following sweet words (ex-
plaining everything) in the proper order and in the manner
seen by him.

Vayu said :—
115.' "I shall mention this to you. Listen to what is

1. In VV. 115 ff Vayu states the units ofmeasuring distance to deter-
mine how long was the world of Brahma (from this world). The distances
and locations of the Sun and other Planets (VV. 129-135) are imaginary
though supported in other Purana works. W. 138-145 state the distance and
locations of the higher worlds like Maharloka and others.


=== PAGE 46 ===

3.4.2.116-125 989

desired to be expressed by me. The manifest part evolving out
of the unmanifest one is gross and it is called Mahan (Mahat).

116. There are ten parts of the Mahat. The gross part
is called Bhitadi (i.e. Ahamkara or Cosmic Ego). The magnitude
of Bhitadi is more than a tenth part (?).

117-118. Paramanu (Atom) is very subtle. It can be
mentally conceived but it cannot be seen by the eyes. What
cannot be further broken up in the world should be known as
Paramanu (atom). When the rays of the sun come through the
window, minute dust particles are seen. The learned men
Call that particle a Paramanu. \t is the first in the series of
Unit! of measurement.

119-120. When eight Paramanus join together it is said to
be ofthe size of the pollen dust ofthe lotus (Padmarajas) and
it is called Trasarenu.

The combination of eight Trasarenus is proclaimed as
Ratharenu. The combination ofeight such (Ratharenus) is remem-
bered asBalagra (hair-tip) by the learned men.

121. Eight Balagras make one Liksa (the egg of a louse) .
Eight Liksas make one Taka (a louse). They call the combina-
tion of eight Yakas one Tava (a grain of barley). Eight Tavas
make one Afigula (finger-breadth).

122. Twelve Argulaparvans (finger-joints or finger-breadths
il called a Vitasti (a span). It should be known that twentyone
finger breadths make one Rati (acubit) (the distance between
the elbow and the closed fist).

123. Twentyfour Afgulas make one Hasta (cubit—the
distance between the elbow and the tip of the middle finger).
Two Ratns or forty two Angulas, it should be known, make one
Kisku.

124-125. Learned men call ninetysix Afigulas, a Dhanus.
It is remembered that the unit Dhanus is taken up in calculating
Gavyitis. A dhanus consists of two Danias with the fingers placed
like a tubular vessel (?) Persons who know calculation call
three hundred Dhanus units a Nalva.

*From Va. P. 8°106 NalikS seems to be a measure but Lexicons like
MW., SKD. dp not support it. If 'Nalika' isa measure, it is equated here
with a couple of Dhanu-stafts.


=== PAGE 47 ===

990 Brahmanda Purana

126. Two thousand Dhanus units make one Gavyuti. Eight
thousand Dhanus units make one Tojana.

127-128. The measurement of the distance ofa Tojana is
based on this unit of Dhanus. It should be known that a thousand
of these Dhanus make the distance called SakrakoSa* (2?) It has
been reckoned so by the experts in the knowledge of calculation.
Listen to the distances of worlds in the creation of Brahma
with this Yojana as the unit.

129. The sun is more than a hundred thousand Yojanas
from the surface ofthe Earth. The moon is two hundred thousand
Yojanas above the Sun,

130. The entire stellar zone shines a full hundred thousand
Yojanas above the moon.

131. The distance between the planets above the stellar
zone istwohundred thousand Yojanas. Each of these worlds
(planets) is so much above the one below.

132. The planet Budha (Mercury) moves beneath all
the stars and planets. Sukra (Venus) moves above this. Lohita
(Mars) is above that.

133-135. Above that, is Brhaspati (Jupiter) and Sanais-
cara (Saturn) is above that. A hundred thousand Yojanas above
Sanaiscara shines the entire zone of the Seven Sages (the Great
Bear). It is mentioned that a hundred thousand Yojanas above
the Sages (The Great-Bear) is the son of Uttanapada namely
Dhruva who is stationed in a compact divine Vimana in the
firmament constituted by the stars. Dhruva (Pole Star) has
become a post (to which the planets are tied as it were).

136-137. The height oVthe three worlds has been explain-
ed by me in terms of Yojanas. It is presented for the people
of different castes and stages in life in the three worlds to per-
form Tagas to the Devas in the course of Manvantaras.
Whatever Yaga is performed in this world is remembered as the
cause of sustenance ofall beings born of divine wombs.

138-141. The three worlds have been explained. Hence-
forth understand the following :—The Maharloka where the
Kalpavasins (i.e. those who stay alive throughout the Kalpa)
stay is above (the position of) Dhruva. It has been decisively

Probably KroSa as it is a distance ofone thousand Dhanus.
