=== PAGE 1 ===

ae aaaTEMt AA:
sechererytiote
weaaigaat age stqonsraTEy

Brahamavaivarta Purana
Srikrsna-janma-Kh andam

BY WRIST:

Chapter - 1
The praise for Visnu and Vaisnavas
ano Tae Te aa ATTA
Sel area care oat TARTAN aU
Offering salutation to Narayana and Nara the
best of the humans, the goddess Sarasvati and

Vyasa, one should thereafter recite the Jaya
Purana.

ARG Sart

qa youd! Terreraus wireTy
FANT FATA SAIS AU VI
area ware Tarheta

apt wpfras a yaravsrert FAH 31
Aat MUG: GUSTEVSHa GSAT]

TR ga wet citet fates stghreofn xn
SaaS T aA: Gost FOIA
watt wdarart atet efeafe 4 it
et arene wat

SU AfenaaAT aTSTEATTT TTA I
aatqannt Gost a TART
PFOA ATTAIN 9 Ut
Sted derart @ arat Wat TTY

ag faeart at are fret a ereomramitc tt
er OT wife: GU SANTA WET
watgita water uftquian: eae

Narada said- O Brahman, I have seen listened
to the astonishing story of Brahma-khanda from
the mouth of Brahma, thereafter with his
permission I went to him and also listened to the
Prakrti-khanda which was nectar-like sweet and
thereafter I listened to the Ganapati Khanda
which removes the cycle of birth and death for
humans, But my unstable mind has not been
satisfied. I therefore. intend to listen to some
special type of story relating to the birth of Krsna
in the form of Krsna Janma-khanda. Therefore
you please narrate the same to me. It removes the
cycle of birth and death among the humans and
bestows salvation and the devotion of the gods. It
is instrumental in developed attachment and also
removes the disease of involvement in the
worldly pleasures. It is the seed of redemption, is
like a boat in the ocean of the universe, removes
the ailments of several births after bearing the
result of the same, serving at the form of the
medicine. It serves as the step for the
achievement of lotus-like feet of lord Krsna and
is the purifier of the entire universe. I happen to
be your pupil having taken refuge with you.
Therefore, you narrate the same to me quite
extensively. At whose request did lord Krsna
appear or earth in all the arsas.

an ar wifaa: gon qrarssfadya z
ayedises We: SH aT St aT aT Baa gon

In which yuga did he appear and for what
reason and at which place on earth? Who was
Vasudeva his father and Devaki his mother?.

ae ee Hel VA Ta Bfasarry
fae Gert BATT HA BOT aT SAT VA

In whose rays was he born with this illusion?
And what were the deeds performed by him in
which form.

=== PAGE 2 ===

SHH Tgpet Sa Blan TET
wee HATTA Ha AT RT
O sage, (it is leant) that being afraid of Karhsa,
he disappeared from the labour room and was
carried to Gokula but Karnsa happen to be like a
small insect for him and he could appear in a
dangerous form then was he afraid of Karnsa?

eftat areetor meet fer wea eI
Beat Trargareres ferent sereafe: 1 23 nt

The lord of the universe, arriving in Goloka
what type of deeds were performed by him in the
form of a cowherds? Where did he perform the
divine dance with the cowherdesses?

ae at Target & ar arate arerafir: |
at ST aytter at Ae: fee aT Yost wa I Vv
wet TET quae Sat iether
a aT aaa a aya Pad Stn ea
Who were the cowherdesses? Who was the
child Gopala? Who were Nanda and Yasoda?
What merit did they earn as a result of which the
lord was born as their son? Why was the virtuous
Radha, the dweller of the Goloka descended in
Vraja and became the beloved of Krsna?.
we Teh gees Horgiat we
eet TT WATT ITT WOT YT VEN
How could the cowherdesses achieve the lord
who is difficult to get even with devotion, as
their spouse. Why did the lord leave Goloka and
went to Mathura?

anTart Hen fee fears se a: 1
RATT WENT YUaTATTATAA VOI

O Brahman, you have listened to auspicious
words and also recited them; therefore, O
virtuous one, you kindly tell me that the lord who
had actually incarnated on earth to rid her of the
burden of the evil people, what did he actually
do.

Agee eftaeat aati erat
Praninfrreactrederetq 8c 1

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

Witerra eet sacraigrantia

Wai grant afesrafatearnferiqu eeu

af aolgarcat vaarreaieri

Te ware foreara ard Sfe GaP yon

The auspicious story of the lord is quite
inaccessible and serves as a boat to cross the
ocean of the universe including the flatters of the
deeds and removal of the pain. It serve as a
burning wood for the sins and also destroys like
fire many of the sins performed in the earlier
births. It serves like nectar for the ear and
relieves one of all the pain. O merciful one, you
kindly enlighten a devotee like me who happens
to be your pupil as well as.

aaengerngfueat desir

DUIS MECCA ICE E SA

darn: waaay wench Ae AT

Weil WaT seri Tefal AKHETTN 2 il

Because one earns merit by performing tapas,
recitation of the name of the lord, performing
great charity, visiting of the holy places on earth,
listening to the recitation of the Vedas, fasting,
vrata, adoration of the gods and performing of
various yajfias; all these do not compare even

one sixteenth part the listening to the glory of the
lord.

fiensé dfadt ararerra va BPEL
Pare Mwy aa ais racer freaten VAN

My father has asked me to seek the divine
knowledge from you. After reaching the ocean of
nectar who will seek the ordinary water.

are SaTT
wat araisfe erect queen: area

wolfe gaot crarafag Hera 2s

Sri Narayana said- O purifier of the race, you
are quite graceful, meritorious and quite an
intelligent one. I am do realise this for purifying
the universe you move around here and there on
earth.

=== PAGE 3 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 1

Sant eed Wa: Yor aa A

fread went Beat aes areas fT aN AGH
Wa da u aata wart enssate fara
zat afifn faerat wad wet oN EN

With the speaking of a few words, the mind of
a person becomes clear. One know the mind
through the pupil, the wife, the daughter, the son
of the daughter brother, son, grandson, speaking,
influenced wife, misery, elevation, enemy and
learnings.

staaqetsta Yret Your Taya:

pate wetter walert ayTTAN 2911

You are free from birth and death, are quite
spotless and are the devout follower of lord Vis
nu, the holder of gadd. You are purifying this
earth with the dust of your feet.

Wife ctarvais eafareastary

Gage efteai a4 i sightrofan en

You remove all the miseries the people by
appearing before them. Because of this you are

getting interested in listening to the story of the
lord which provides prosperity.

Wa PUR: Uhr ata Wagan:
met rasta daift Ffenh au zen
Whosoever listens to the story of lord Krsna or

recites it all the gods, sages, ascetics and all the
holy places reside there.

SOT: Sea SATA Faia BAA PTET

wate aft datht ag Gora: YT y ol

Ra: POTS TAT FAT VF ATL

BET Frat yas Afar Ferg wl

After listening to the sacred story of the lord
and after his completion, the noble people
achieve the infallible place of the lord. Wherever
the story of lord Krsna is recited the place is
turned as the sacred one. The one who recites the
story of lord Krsna he redeems a hundred
generations.

WOT Y META Yael FTAA: |

Sta TAMU Taget KAMAL 3 Vt
VATA YT HAE ATT AA!
ati aaa wens Seat ef 3 3

The one who puts a question about the same
purifies his race with the putting of the question
and the listener purifies his entire race together
with the brothers and other relatives. After
performing tapas for a hundred births one is born
in the land of Bharata to enable him to be
successful in his births after listening to the story
of the lord.

anh oat Way: Gara aI

BRUT att yeagorTaoTai fer as

fredet wea ere TaarafeacerTy

alfa Wat Wet Faas aT ATTN BGA

Performing the adoration of the lord and the

reciting of his mantra, performing pijd reciting
of his name always, performing kirtana, listening
to his virtues with complete surrender serving as
a slave or performing the nine types of adoration

of the lord. O Narada, performing all these acts, a
person becomes successful in life.

7 u fast wader wert vate

3 fet AEYe: Sete Sav HAT 3

Such a person never has to face obstructions
and his life span never gets waisted and the god
of death gets terrified from him like the serpent
getting testified from Garuda.

a were wate a art wea aft: ray

safaaha got wafirnfcafrga: 1301

The lord never leaves him alone and all the

siddhis like anima and others, automatically
reach him.

geet wate wea wr fen
pam a tered a aT fe aT | ci

At the command of the Jord, his Sudarsana-
cakra always hovers round his devotees and as
such no one can do any harm toys.

a aha aeaitd a eacist anfesat:1

=== PAGE 4 ===

rere BAT ART PTT TART TAUB Si
erent farce: gitar fren a wena ay
a ane arate a Teas ott

As the fire-flies do not approach the place
were the fire bums in flame, similarly the
messengers of Yama never approach such a
person even in dream. O sage, the diseases,
misfortune, grief, obstructions never approach.
him and because of the fear of destruction even
the death avoids him.

mena ya: fara: dager: Wace:

Wa ada Prey: Yat HOTTA: yg

The sages, the ascetics, siddhas and the gods
remain always pleased with him. Because of the

grace of lord Krsna, he moves about fearlessly
with comfort.

wa Horenarai a vraatreat Fen
wrees tare fe wo fafa Pa 2H

You have always been far attracted to the
listening of story of lord Krsna. Truly the nature
of the father is inherited by son.

fais an wettest 3 geal
Ter aa Hel SAT aafereegalt MAU 3

O Indra among the Brahmanas, how shall I
praise you, you are mind-born son of Brahma.
The race from which one is born, he inherits the
intelligence of similar type.

fan faeren set: FerarereTeaa
fret aif a: yaraerafaeeToNT ss

Your father became the creator of the universe
by the grace of lotus-like feet of lord Krsna and
he always remains devoted his lotus-like feet.

Va: erat w TEAR:

wht fact ata wom: afer gas vq

The intelligent people call only such a person
as the true devotee of lord Krsna who remains
attracted towards the listening to the story of lord
Krsna with tears flowing from his eyes in
emotion and he remains engrossed in the same
position always.

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

yrarafech wa arta stethehen

SST AAT TET A es: Hea GA we a

He treats with action, thought and behaviour,
his son, wife and the entire family as having
blessed by the lord. Such a person is considered
to be a true devotee of the lord.

frott deka fragt & ygetsfera:1
art mosis sete a Sora: 1sion

The one who devote himself at the lotus-like
feet of lord Krsna at the lonely places as well as
the sacred places, he is called the true Vaisnava.

waster wehttag ad Gort aT
at srafa wernt w aeat dona wast

Those who are merciful on all the creatures,
visualise the entire universe like Krsna himself.
Such great intellectuals are known as a Vaisnava
devotee of the lord.

vere art rahe yor wat Saft

apf erot ara arafar As feaerar: yet

create aeght wag ea Fat

pl cer at oe oT mE aT NG on

One who recites the name of the lord besides
his virtues, reciting of the mantras performing
|japam and listens to the sacred story of the lord,
he is indeed considered as great Vaisnava. The
one who offers the things desired by him to the

lord with pleasure, such a devotee is considered
to be best of the intellectuals.

wart efrere et at fearhrery
yaeratmint a afer sa aerra: 114

The one whose mind is always engrossed in
the lotus-like feet of the lord throughout the day
and night whether in sleeps or awake and who
places the reward of the deeds performed by him
in earlier births outwardly in an attached manner,
he is called the true Vaisnava.

Tereneaprat aa aot fare
a dered wang wera waifior 14 2

=== PAGE 5 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 1

The one in whose ear the mantra of the lord
enters through mouth of his preceptor, he is
called the great Vaisnava.

Yalan ware we Tra eeTT
Mayaraae: KY FT YTTANY 311

He redeems the earlier as well as the future
seven generations of his parents and the maternal
parents beside the relatives, the mother and
mother of the maternal grandmother.

aed eaai ay fred dig
faoateatdageteora: Tat si

Such a Vaisnavas redeems his wife, the
daughter, brothers, pupils, son of the daughter
beside the male and female servants.

Fal aeahe dite aereeastagin

Uttara went Sat Avatar AAA GG

All the holy places remain anxious in order to
have a look at the true Vaisnavas and with their

contact all the sins of the sinners of those places
get vanished.

aererent areas fawha Sorat:
Wa Tefen aft arate 4 GUL

At which ever place a Vaisnava remains up to
the time of the milking of the cows all the holy
places reached that place.

qa aa ga: ont yet aft BT: A
ade ArIgTENES UTEP AIM kon

The people who die at such places are
redeemed instantaneously and proceed to the
abode of the lord, in the same way as a person at
the time of death recites the name of the lord Krs
na or a person reciting the name of the Ganga,
meets with his death and achieves the abode of
the lord.

qettart TB sigoraet wa
genes sitet Aeheady ar gay cn

The forest of Tulasi plants, abodes of the
cows, the temples of lord Krsna, Vmdavana,
Haridvara and other sacred places are considered
to be quite auspicious and whose dies at such
places surely reaches the abode of the lord.

unnft wifiat ata deere
Fer Uren Ayah AoreerstaTAATH & it
a fe eng weqata wrta geht a
saererh oer fast yenttin fe gout ag ot
The sinners are relieved of the sins after taking
a bath at the sacred places. Their sins vanish with
the touching of the air with the bodies of the Vais
nava. The sins cannot sustain like the dry leaves,
are sure to bum in the fire flames.
we ant meat 8 Qayater wa:
aerate Fat Avaha FferTH & gil
Such of the people who have a look at the
devotees walking on the road, the sins
accumulated by them in the past seven births get
destroyed with the casting of the glance at the
devotee of the lord.
& frafa witast aah gorafior
veornfard god Fat ayate Pfs g 2
Such of the people who denounce the
meritorious devotees of the lord, the merits

earned by them during the past hundred births
get. destroyed.

3 vert wena gaits wart

wf: sede arerearsiearett & 3H

Ultimately they fall into the _ terrific
kumbhipdka hell and remain there till the time of
the sun and the moon and the insects eat them
up.

me agar que sata Pfr

Tigi warren wat ear ver ferarenqeafan e wn

All the merits disappear at the sight of such
people, such a person is purified after bowing in
reverence to the sun taking bath in the Ganga.

aorereryieaer eat waft Ua!

TET UOTE Bae RATA TET: 1G Gt
Fad alae few feet:

age sitetaiar Frater aerara Fug G11

But the sinner is purified at the very sight of a
Vaisnava because such a Vaisnava is always

=== PAGE 6 ===

6

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

devoted to lord Madhusidana and all his sins get
destroyed. O Brahman, a thus | have narrated to
you the virtues of Visnu and Vaisnavas now I am
going to speak to you about the birth of lord Hari
which you please listen.
ofa strated wergumn sitqpersraraus AAT
farmpaoreratfornetenreatrercratt

1 ATA MOATSEATA: 11 QI

=== PAGE 7 ===

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

ary fgdraiseara:

Chapter - 2

The cowherds Viraja turns to the form of
river

ARTA Sart

am at wnat: Gen sre wee

4 faere get @ sere waren feng: gu

areata geri a sete

ad & aaftentt gird faa

Narayana said- I shall narrate to you at whose

prayer lord Krsna incarnated on earthy the deeds
performed by him in the universe, the efforts
made by him to relieve the earth of her burden,
besides killing of the wicked people.

SET Twente Ate gt:

Ten ware 2a Frater aernft Au gu

The arrival of lord Krsna in the form of a
cowherds in Goloka and the reason for
incarnation Radha as a cowherds, is going to
narrated by me, You please listen to it.

i ud dtareafird 1

wen argfaeard Frater aerenfit Fs

I had briefly spoken to you about the killing of
Sarnkhaciida, I am now narrating the same story
in considerable details. You please listen to it.

shares: aoesla aya Tere Wel
SEU VIET MOTT SYA SIG Hl
Once the cowherd named Sridama quarrelled

with Radha as a result of which the latter had to
be born as Sarhkhaciida on earth.

Tat were stern aig att a ATTA
BT wong year farrees Tete EN
Sridama also pronounced a curse on Radha to

be born as a human being and to remain Vraja as
a female roaming about in that place.
shen sterrerarcan spent wyatt FI
aitecr afereentit sitqrar at yea Biot
aya aftenta aq at sagt
wren fear aert aftenta casita c
Thereafter with the curse of Sridama, Radha
was afraid who spoke to Krsna, "O lord, I shall
have to be bom as a cowherds because of the
curse of Sridama, you tell me the remedy for the
same, because without you how can I be reborn."
arora & gerert aret ae waar faa
wghaafarerater WaT AA et
eardurergnt Geryaiad aa.
are werent fraser Rot
warren Y ma: woTt Senet aerATA
‘afeeiteer weed sitet wet eT ee
O lord, without you a moment will be spent by
me like yugas. Even separation from you of the
twinkling of an eye disturbed me immensely. I
actually consume the nectar-like the full moon of
the winter season representing your glory, day
and night like the partridge bird. You are toy soul
and my life though I move about with this body.
Therefore you happen to be my eye-sight, my
eyes and the treasure of my life.
waa an afew: erat ENG
aa ares fat are a Starts arut fart eau
I always adore you while sleeping or awake
and always meditate upon your lotus-like feet. O
lord, O virtuous one, I cannot remain alive even
for a moment without serving you.

PUR gent seas YI

crafty tere Great arene fdat w aM g3n
wélaet aitenfa arte aT aT

var are sprart war asf Frafarqu wit

=== PAGE 8 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 2

7

On listening to the words of Radha, lord Krsna
to convince her. He embraced his beloved and
reassured her variously saying, O beautiful faced
one, in the Vardha-kalpa. 1 shall walk on the
surface of the earth and you will also be born
with me at that time.

at reat at Sf faeftenta arm
we wroriferent et er et fas BA Fea gunn

O goddess, we shall be born in Vraja and roam
about in the forest, you are dearer to me than my
life therefore why do you get afraid when I am
there.

aaftegarar efter facet sore:
ard Satshraret Sears aeateETTN ge I

Krsna, the lord of the universe; kept quiet after
thus speaking. Because of this the lord of the
universe went to Gokula.

fe a ret we STRATA A
manent srt Tere go
farmer war aed areas fara a:

we Targets wfaarareraTa UH gett

The lord who removes the fears of others, how
could he be afraid of Karhsa? Displaying his
illusory fear he went to Radha and for the

fulfilment of this words the performed the divine
dance with Radha and other cowherdesses.

Tero MA: FON: WATT WETETT!
ATA Feat WaT eaters Asn Vet
At the request of Brahma, lord Krsna

incarnated on earth and relieved her of the
burden and then went back too his abode.

ane sara
stares: aereda oxi at Tea Tel
darealad ys dearer Sera 2 ot
Narada said- Earlier you had mentioned about

the dispute of Radha and Sridama briefly but
currently you speak out to me the same in detail.

ARTA Tart
Weer wea aed tetas stele: ear
ferment TerToey FAY TRUSTE 2 aH

Sn Narayana said- Once lord Krsna was
roaming about in the secluded place in
Rasamandala of Goloka.

uften gawinngg’ 4 wah wT

pen faert stporearnggr faera an 2 Vit

ifteat feerat ogra sre Bt

qereng a farce Qe UleearTAT 23

Engrossed in the love sport with Radha, he
was filled with illusion, that is why after
performing of the Jove-sport, he left Radha and
was engaged in the same play with a cowherds

named Viraja. She happened to be as beautiful as
Radha herself and lived in Vindavana.

Wet Fae: Peat ahitat weaawteas
Peororonerean weet aa HPA a Afar VU
Tafaerrren a cast eftafam

weet steftert a greens 2411

She had a hundred crores of beautiful
cowherdesses as female friends. She happened to
be dearer to Krsna than his own life. She was
seated on the gem-studded lion-throne and found
lord Krsna approaching her, who looked at her
face which was shining like the full moon of the
winter season.

tet aferat a Tea area
Wal Weenie mifearaatarrg 2g tt
Taciangirent yfiat yacrarram
yeanigaaatt araaronmitfsarqi got
Er at sitefcequf fawrere wart wat
oraet wares AY TaAUSTIN Ve

She was smiling and casting side glance and
was of tender age of sixteen, quite truthful,
adomed in all the beautiful ornaments, wearing
white garments. He was feeling emotion and
passionate at the same time. Looking at her lord
Krsna enjoyed conjugal pleasures with her on the
flowery bed in the secluded orchard.

TRetvar frat Fory_Ratyard
pen sate wore Aiea Ve

=== PAGE 9 ===

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

wa ae eRe a TanVSTafeRTT

er a Uhraras apat a aes ol!
arat @ aert grat Gera a GANT Fl

ae wae or Sat TRAE UH

A sare weet att eelfae ara:

af wet ya ya war weed weresa 3 UH!
aaftenta wet ther: gers a setter
at taeise vere afe wife wefan 3 an

She enraged Krsna who appeared beautiful
like crores of gods of love and enjoyed his
company variously getting ultimately fainted.
The Jord however remained with her in the gem-
studded mandapa. The female friends of Radhika
looked at this performance of lord Krsna and
reported the same to Radhika, On hearing the
words of the female friends, Radhika was
enraged and she started crying and her eyes were
tumed like the red lotus flowers. The great
goddess then spoke to her female friends. In case
you are telling me the truth then get along with
me and show me the place, shall punish the
cowherds together with lord Krsna appropriately.
T shall see who protects them from my ray.

sitrarraneaas war ard aft freq
apace wferi a fauged gaaqn yx
wares wary a aT AF ae

ee TUS Teh ANT MUTATING & I

O friend, you bring before me the cowherds
and Krsna here who happens to be wicked from
with in but as a smiling race, filled with poison
but coated with nectar. A few people will not be

able to bring him here therefore let us move to
the beautiful mandapa and protect him.

Utrenrerert eat amrfarerett wrenfat:
at: Ba: Ayereay safewTaTATST: 113 GU
ayy: yea: ferret wat wa frat wit gon
On hearing the words of Radhika all the
female friends get terrified thereafter all of them

appeared before her with folded hands and
meekly standing said to Radhika.

aes Sy:
ad & exifrart frorrafed fay
Wai a set ear TET Hat
Serre red ai feafeerefirereranteva: 8 ¢ 1
Taare afeqenmy
ufterareefert amore fremfefin: i 3 ¢ 1
aft fenificirertierafrarn
BRR Waa WATETLN Yo
aftranfaattas ated: gunfire
arnfeafateta aed: gratis en
fargrercafintinierest fargfiit:1
vaphratets wemdtafat: i an
ayrtraffadtsrrverantat: |
Faagaferteredtateaas ferret
enfant wrantatatia:|
aforarcenatéay vifina aren fatter: uw
Th ae Rae 3 qv aT ATTTT
amen SexereaPaaA 64
vifint Tagranht taurreerarr
Sfenuiat Aart ager ware ye Nn
The female friends said- we will show you no
doubt Viraja and lord Krsna, On listening to their
words, the beautiful Radha mounted the chariots
with sixty three hundred million cowherdesses
and departed from that place. The chariot was
studded with the best of gems and was shining
like crores of suns emitting the lustre. It was built
with the best of jewels and had three crores of
kalaSas decorating it. It had lines of paintings
and the banner and a lakh of wheels, it could
move with great speed, looked quite charming
and had crores of pillars studded with gems,
various types of arts were displayed in the same.
It was quite pleasant. It was studded with rubies
and on the wheels there were artificial lions
decorating. There were four lakhs of paintings
including those of Citraghanté and the other
dolls, it had beautiful horses which looked like
the paintings and the doors were studded with

=== PAGE 10 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 2

gems, besides several pleasure houses and the
kalasas with shining peaks. There were several
materials and cosmetics, the bed of gems, vases
of jewels and the stools made of different types
of gems and jewels.

serait a Arerrefeterfery
wrth: Bregher wa: wate veil
warphrrancrat packer Getter
‘FarrenrrrarRirferferertartererraTerrN ¥ 2 L
Tae ara
pretrged @ apart 68
There were several steps studded with rubies
and shining like saffron and other gems
including the artificial lotuses, from the
astonishing type of forests, steps-wells besides
the pitches made of gem. It was a hundred
yojanas in height and was ten yojanas in width.
Uitreargat wreratfefeanirry
arent archon gfranrat wae ay ott
Garena a arte wtet:
Uipeart arerdiat wreatat gaferrq 4 et
BEM a Hemi warder fray
Rear wrens fara VU
faaquierret artes fergie
aaat Sra a ME aTgaS TET G BH
It had crores of garlands of Parijdta flowers
besides other flowers like Jasmine, Campd,
NdagakeSara, Mallika, Malatt and fragrant
Madhavi besides kadamba. There were garlands
of thousand pettaled lotus flowery, several
orchards, stream, tanks and forest. It was the best
of all the chariots and could move with the speed
of the wind.
ara atrentet THT
Team UTTAR wreTaar WATT GY
Sramrardtadayginintary
Tk

warpeaniigguaatat
UfireErant afeacafentry

Stferueranrgrh verenrentfefiryern 4 & 1

Tarerearanfefiee fareraftest:

warmamant Fete faraixtn yon

qererrdigh: syareretfirerry

aariegtet: Geta fayfiany ou

wayergergureree effi

SEMA TEA Bat J TaHVSt FANG St

It was covered with the best of fine garments

and had a hundred lakh mirrors of gems, a crores
of fly-whisks with handles of precious stones.
There were sandal-paste, aguru, kasturi and
saffron besides crores of flowers of Périjdta
spread on the beds’ besides crores of bells,
banners beds made of gems and strings of pearls
and flowers besides the pillows, it had several
atticles of cosmetics placed in abundance, some
of which were never heard of even. O sage, thus
descending quickly from the chariot, Radha the
beloved of lord Krsna, at once reached the gem-
studded mandapa.

an Fark eget erat wey

rat: ufigd BerrrateEs got

Tht stererart sitqgpentrafeacy

ayaa BAT Sat THAT g gt

Tes Tt wes gt threrefaat

algett wert arat yeni aaraeTN & U1

She saw there a_ beautiful gate-keeper

surrounded by a lakh of cowherds and had a
smiling face. He happened to be Sridama, the
best of the servants of Sri Krsna. He found
Radha burning in anger and her eyes setting red
like red-lotus flowers. She said to him, "O
servant of a passionate lord, you remove yourself
from this place to enable me to have a look at the
beloved of your lord who is important then me."

Users sat Fg: Yet: fet:
atta ech weg Seranforterarct: ig 311
qt a oftarcas siqrrt afaam
aert Wrararg: ares apftarert: 1g vt

=== PAGE 11 ===

10 BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

On hearing the words of Radhika, holding a
cane in his hand, he prevented Radhika from
entering the pleasure orchard. He stood there
fearlessly. Thereafter, the female friends of
Radhika forcibly removed the servant of Krsna
from that place. At that point of time the lips of
all the cowherdesses were fluttering.

gen Srorert we Threat ef: AT
aero aaftat Terrtabt aa Bg 4H
faron Uftrarrereralt etait

SBT Tet earat ae aeet wratias BEAT GH

On hearing the of the cowherdesses and
finding Radha in great anger, the lord disappear
from the scene. Viraja too listened, to the enrage
words of Radha and finding Krsna having been
disappeared ended her life with the application of
yogic practices.

WER BGT Tet Ta Bl

eat o agetart Far eis ang oN
afedirtaeiel wetstatrena a
def eerqui ure ARTaTHRt TANG CH

Thereafter her body was converted into a
stream which flowed around Goloka. It was the
crores of yojanas and width quite deep and In
length it was ten times more. It possesses various
gems and was quite beautiful.

fa sttargio Ugo SGU ANEATo
fararereraautt arm feiratseara:n 20

=== PAGE 12 ===

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

10
at qataiseara:
Chapter - 3
Pronounce of mutual curse between Radha
and Sridima
ARTA Sarat
Ten teryg wear a east eft AN

farat a afegat apr tg wars ATU at
, Sti Narayana said- O sage, on her entry into
the pleasure chamber Radhika could not find the

lord and finding Viraja having been turned into
the form of a stream she returned to her abode.

sigan ferent apr afigat frat wi

sat wate ferret Frere BH

Tf wanes Feit wt at

wae ferrisé gut ae stanfir Gefen 31

Thereafter lord Krsna finding that his beloved

having been tured into a stream, he started
crying seated on its bank and said, "O best of the
beloved, you come to me immediately, O
virtuous lady, O beautiful one, how shall I be
able to remain alive without you"?.

srerftrentr Sfer va war ferent att

marssferat Baad Batt afeat aT st

ydeure deranigertt gam wat

Yuet write 8 afeqayrafin Gn

Wengen asses fears aTATAT

aot fargrtar eat: yeah WaT gl

You become the best of the streams on earth.

O beautiful one, with my boon you become a
beautiful damsel. As a matter of luck you be
more beautiful then your original figure because
your earlier body has been turned into the
stream. Therefore with a beautiful body you
emerge out of the water of the stream. O
beautiful one, with that and in view I have
bestowed upon you all the siddhis (success.

pore a fers faera ayATATT

ATT RT TAGS FTI 911

Thereafter with the permission of lord Krsna,
Viraja emerged as Radha herself and stood
before Krsna.

Waeertern Serrated

Uyedt WORT a UyaRit aRETTT CH

Wearing a yellow lower garment and a serene
smile on her face, the lotus faced damsel stood
before Krsna and started looking at him with
side-glances.

Prreashfirarcat ddraaratern
Tee mA a TT en

=== PAGE 13 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 3

il

wet Get = een wren a ata

SRAM Waa ATT AT gon

waaferdrenafSrriiem

WUT UTET ATE He 8H

wqifaga ard fargeergyfiam

SRSTAH YATE garenatige Bz

Taqusersen yf TATA

rare femenaTeNTaAT BemTeTeeereTA STATI 83 tt

THAT GRA

Fea femutsTeTeTeR TSM TAHT BY

She was carrying the weight of the heavy

pelvic region besides the developed round
breasts. She walked like a cow-elephant. She was
a best of the beautiful ladies and most virtuous
one, she had the complexion of beautiful
campaka flower and her lips were resembling the
ripe wood-apples. Her teeth were beautifully
arrange like the pomegranate. Her face was
having the lustre of the full moon of the winter
season and her eyes were like blossoming lotus
flower. She had a red spot of kasturi on her
forehead and she had beautiful hair on the head
which was designed in an attractive manner. She
wore the ear ornaments studded with gems
beside the rosary of jewels. She wore a jewel in
the nose and the necklace of jewels adorned her
neck. She wore the armlets and wristlets of gems
besides the ornaments of conch. The anklets
worn by her produced the dazzling sound.

at a euadt apr iigererafa:!
mearasstergt got qara a ygg:n gat
Finding the beautiful damsel there, the lord of |

the universe embraced her lovingly and kissing
her at the same time.

aramareyart fantteantea fry:

tafe Ree weg arent a A: WAI gH
facet at witget gat deta
wat aye ata oan mat at got

The lord enjoyed her company in a secluded
place and also enjoyed the conjugal pleasure

with her again and again. Thereafter the chaste
Viraja bore the semen of the lord and was
impregnated.

art whiter feet aig a a

We: YS Ta PARTE WAST RoI

She bore the divine semen of the lord for a

hundred year and thereafter she gave birth to
seven sons.

WAT AT MAGA sitgroreR fret ah
meat at geardtar ard yaar aap eet
Then the beloved of lord Krsna became the

mother of seven sons and she started dwelling
there with her sons.

Tae efor ad gars a Fer

fersrere YA: Area TATA HATTAM 2 0 Hd

waferaat ar AY: IS STATA gl

array urgt: wfsdt fram 2 a

Getting attracted towards the make-up she

again wandered with the lord in the secluded
Vmdavana. At that very moment the youngest
son rushed towards her getting afraid from his
brothers and sat in her lap.

sha waar opr aeant at paar:

WS TAN aet BT Het TENTS TAUB

wales aet Ur Treat T camifass fray

FaTeNG Yet AA TATATGAATTATN 2 311
The merciful lord finding a son looking fearful
disowned Virajé. She picked up the child in her
lap and lord Krsna retired to the abode of Radha,
after consoling the child and pacifying him
Viraja again came to the spot but could not find
his beloved Krsna there remaining dissatisfied in
the conjugal pleasure, she started crying.
Wee wag arora wfacafar
waisted at Gafera cofeeatere Siifert: 261
She then cursed her small son. You become

the ocean of saline water as a result of which no
one would be able to drink your water.

Wee aeaAais Arg Yet AeKTeTT
repeal a wet Ye gent Wier 4 I

=== PAGE 14 ===

12

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

feafitienr gore: wfereafer yereryeregi

Be a ferher qe fey gyfer: Wem 2gn
Srenridie ae seg For

wairar HrgyTTETT ererUiet AS Fil RoI

She then cursed her other sons also saying,
"All of you should proceed to the earth, on
reaching the present Jambidvipa, you cannot
remain at one place, you remain in seven
continents separately and live there quite
comfortably you will remain in the secluded
place and shall enjoy , ourself in the waters of
the rivers of the respective continents." Thus the
youngest son of Viraja became the ocean of|
saline water because of the curse pronounced on
him by his mother.

Be: SISTA AGM FT ATA

ang figat: ae AUT TATE RCI

get faerot we warapiattarery

wore eeat aTgeifenrarerTTa: 1 38 it

Thereafter the youngest son came to his

brothers and apprised them about the curse of
their mother. All of them felt painful and came to
the mother and all of them bowed in reverence to

her in devotion and started moving towards the
earth.

RARITY BA TAT: |

ahargardst faqut faut Fang ont

wet guratitagenreratan: |

weet a wet peat wear a afereaan 3 en

O sage, thus all of them were lodged in the
seven continents surrounded by seven oceans.
Thus the area of each one of them was doubled.
All of them became the oceans of saline juice of
sugar-cane, wine, ghee, curd, milk and water.
The waters of these oceans would be particularly
use for the crops on the earth.

SIRT: WYRM: Bde Talat TPATTT

wegateran: aa mTgUTE yes fara: 113 BU

All the seven oceans covered the earth having
seven continents thereafter all of them started

crying getting separated from the brothers and
the mother. Viraj4 on the other hand getting
separated from her husband as well as her sons
started crying and she ultimately got fainted.

eee o yet wet yaeadearr
qeatrara phat yarott gta a3 an
at ytenarnt wat faare uferenraft:
BARAT PART: STATA SE: 3 VI
Finding her so grief-stricken lord Krsna the

beloved of Radhika arrived at that place wearing
a smile, on his face.

eet ett ar aeant vis Tarte aI

SRSA TT SET Bret AYA BGM

want steft we fase Bra

at a qaufternt efteqer aya gu zen

Finding her lord there she stopped crying and

also shed away the grief. She was engrossed in
the ocean of bliss, because of her getting
passionate she held the lord in embrace. The lord
on his part felt delighted over Viraja who had
been deprived of her sons.

at wed eet Ser wea:

art fet ca wrarfrenta Freq on

mer Ten aera we Afeeafea frat wa

Gara fret ch racer WaT CH

Lord Krsna then expressing pleasure from his

face and eyes delightfully spoke to her, "O
damsel, I shall surely visit your place daily
withour fall." You are equally dear to me like
Radha and with my blessings you will always
have a look at your sons.

saat sige aaxt faith

Ber Tera Sree 3 8
ear Se at Ret Gears wrt
Uaferarat great sere aise ¥ oH
a are ultra sfterat He ATA
Taat aft opr eBrara find Tey en
Tra SgaT:arAT Tete AAA F SU

=== PAGE 15 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 3

13

af avai afer wer fH was S
When lord Krsna was so speaking to Viraja,
the female friends of Radha again went to her
and informed her about the union of Krsna and
Viraja. Radha was immensely enraged and, went
to chamber of anger burning with rage. In the
meantime lord Krsna also carried before Radha.
O Narada, Sri Krsna was standing at the door of
Radhika with Sridama, Radha the goddess of
divine dance finding them there started speaking
in anger, "O lord Hari, you have many of the
damsels ‘in the Goloka who are dear to you like
" Therefore, you go to them, you will no
more be concerned with me.

fart dadt ara afiga aya

3g ware aH warensht aie at wan

aa aft ear fs fas a ane ary

wa aya ot a a ae waquefa ssi

Fee FN Ore I AAT TUaTATAT

waar wert sift: wey AT Far yy

Your beloved Viraja getting afraid of me
turned herself into the stream and is quite dear to
you because you still to sit her. It would have
been better if you had constructed a temple
beside her abode and remain, there with her. Or
in case of her becoming a stream you also
become a river because the confluence of the
rivers with streams is always beneficial and at
the time of going to bed or eating with the like
minded people, the develops love.

zaemty: stst ten aat IA
TER: Bega: gen wat wfewafern veut

Alas, you are enjoying love-sports with a
stream being the lord of all the gods, on hearing
this the noble people will laugh at you.

a wai aha waist & fe aha aaa:
araradyaren vat ate firesfan wien

Do all the people who claimed to you be their
lord, will truly adore you now? Because
becoming the soul of all the creatures the lord
intends to enjoy the conjugal pleasure with the
stream.

Beye Teen Sat ferret earsFara

Arenal ofirreararitereraatera ¥ 6 11

erage Srey: |

STATS RTT STATO STS SU

afadgat: aire: |

athegEs WHEAT 4 oN

TATA THAT: |

Arata er: eatarcen face BAA AATEAT: 11 RL

Thus speaking Radhika kept quiet. Because of

her being in rage, he fell down on the ground and
did not get up. She was surrounded by a lakh of
her female friends and the attendants, some of
them started moving the fly-whisks, some of
them were holding the fine cloth in their hand,
some of them were offering the betels or the
rosary, scented water, lotus, vermilion,
beverages, gem-studded omaments collyrium for
the eyes while some of them held flute and vind
or the combs in their hand.

RTA TACK TE
qafatereetes Se MTSAAAT: NG UU
BUNA: SRST FEI
are RT Tet TERT TERT UG 3
hahygon: enfant:
wise: wager HAN 4 x
qarat: aiseliionn: wa:
Awereqen: aertsrenfarear core feta: 1 & &

Some of them held colours, yantras, cosmetics
and scented oil; some of them held karatdlas in
their hands while others held the balls, some of
them held double drums while others could play
on the flute. Some of them were well-versed in
playing flute, dance and music while others were
well-versed in dancing, some of them held
honey, nectar vase, pedestal and special articles.
Some of them were serving at the feet.

yeraferan: anfgrerantreg fer at:
uel eofafaen: aia uftreargeat BN RI.

=== PAGE 16 ===

14

afecaiam: arireatfer: afer: wen

wiieenhgees sare sanitary ont

PTA Wy TF agaleafen:|

yofead t motgt wer great ar

ARUN Y SI

Crores of slaves were standing at the main
gates while some of them held the canes in their
hands and were of comparable age serving as a
door keepers. All those gate-keepers prevented
Krsna from getting in. Finding lord Krsna there
Radha again starts speaking harsh words which
were not proper and should not have been
spoken being in proper.

ufeeararet

3 yon fara eS WEN et
weet Safe wi atter cera & ent
BIA STATS AT BAOTINAAAT TST Go 1d
Radhika said- O Krsna, O lord of Viraja, you
leave this place and get out of sight, O Hari, you
are unstable and the thief of love-sport, you are
quite a degraded one. Why do you want to tease
me? You immediately proceed to Padmavati,

Manorama, Ratnamala or immensely beautiful
Vanamiaila.

3 adtart tam tart o yi
WAT WASH AF TTT WES TASS ATTN & VN
O lord of the steam, O lord of the gods, O
teacher of the gods, I have known you fully well.
Therefore it will be in your interest to leave this
place.
YON WYATT eT SAAETTET OTE!
creat aga att Teter ATEN G 2H
& getter & vanaf ref
frardat a qaise fares water § 311
Because you had been always behaving like a

degraded person. Therefore you leave this
Goloka at once. And dwell on earth as a human

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

being. O Susilé, O Sagikalé, O Padmavati, O
Madhavi, you remove this cheat from here. What
has he to do here?.

Urea seat ayia efi

fed vet a fare rt anf gv
matargfafta et res wT aToTT
TART MATTE TATU G GI

On hearing the words of Radhika, the slave
cowherdesses spoke to Krsna, the words which
were beneficial truthful, meek and were quite
appropriate, suiting the occasion. Some of them
said, "O Hari you move to some other place for
sometime and after the anger of Radhika is
subsided, we shall come to bring you back."

aafrgafefa wicat ator Tes YEraey!
wade afeier cen at fart a a aaa g gn
Some one said lovingly, you move to some
other place for a moment because Radha’s anger
has risen to extreme heights because of you.
Therefore to whom shall she speak out her mind.

aitrggfta toon ufrerat aft yt

Ut erat Tes TATATAATARTI G9 11

afsferggiet a ufteramt aa:1

TTT Ta TAT: HE BHU G CA

O sage, some of the slave girls said to the lord,
fill such time Radha is brought round you better
go to Vmdavana. Some of the cowherdesses
spoke jokingly to the lord, "O great lover, you
better remove the anger of Radha with
devotion.".

martafedtet tafe arent aa

irre at ater afters wetter & 1

Some of them said, you better go to the other
damsel. O lord, how shall be able to welcome a
greedy person.

aurtafta eft afar ya: ferry
Tea WATYATT AAT FEI oN)
Some of them said smilingly to the lord. You
better go to her and lifting her up, you remove
her pride.

=== PAGE 17 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 3

werttafttt wort wet gare

GS: AA: Vind aE Uirangarary 9 ei

eertgttfe fy at wrt et

UAT Be FART FAN 2

Some of them spoke to the lord quite harsh
words, "Who would be competent enough to
look at the lotus-like face of the queen." Some of.
them said to the lord, "O Hari, you go to some
other place for a moment and you come back
again when her anger subsides.".

aartghedtd wer: weather:

ad wat arefaarat 3 Genie JerTTAN gn

anfasfrarcarargatert waentat:1

faraet u aay crerTTT own

Thereafter some out-spoken cowherdesses
spoke to the lord, we shall stop your entry into
the chamber otherwise you go to your place.
Some of the indiscreet cowherdesses removed
the lord from that place and did not allow to
move forward but the lord regained peaceful
without anger, wearing a smile on his face and
moved from that place.

TNifiratdarct @ srrearcorercot

mengane stare et Aer WANG N

aruigare siterat Utat wear

TRU Set THASTeT ATT g Ht

When the cowherdesses did not allow the lord

to enter the chamber of Radha, lord Krsna went
to another palace but Sridima was immensely
enraged. He went to Radhika and spoke to her,

though she was immensely angry and her eyes
had become red like the red lotus flowers.

stertara
ae cafe weed agared meaty)
fart farr af wafe wa gain
Sridama said- O mother, why have you
addressed my lord with such harsh-words. O

goddess, you have scolded him unthoughtfully
without any reason.

WEA SATA

auitrenrerarramaditet & Frforgiie ct

waranet gular athe a farsa

dari wat a a fate wer Baa 9eH

wet wena welenitadt wa

wa Senta seater fears agit: CoN

The one who is the lord of Brahma, eternal
Siva and the gods and happens to be the cause of
all the causes and is served by the goddess of
speech, Laksm!, Maya and Prakrti, the one who
is Nirguna and always remains with the soul,
why do you show such a disrespect to the lord
who fulfils the desires of all. He is the one by
serving whom you will become the best of the
goddesses and by serving at whose feet you have
become the great goddess. O goddess of welfare
are, you not fully aware of him. Can | at any time
be able to recite his glory.

qagcieren gensag yes wafer:
aren: atest tered a aenfe Prefer c tH
With his side-glance lord Kysna can create

crores of beautiful damsels comparable to your
beauty. Are you aware of his personality.

agus stetre wUmgatTy)
waft Set: wast: dat afeydaqc Un
aradt a wat: quobitgaget:)
wert Bitlet Twa a TET TTT CB

Laksmf the goddess of fortune rinses the feet
of the lord with her hair and serves him with the
utmost devotion. Sarasvati adore him offering
prayers which have soothing effect on the ears
like a nectary, are you not aware of such a lord.

stat a wpfratar adat dtorafioh

aad wif & wera da arate me wn

Prakrti who happens to be the seed of all,
always praise him with devotion. Proud damsel
are you not fully aware of him.

Wate wad aat niga: wey Sey

aastt 4 faarata at 3 aorta snfataic yi

=== PAGE 18 ===

16

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

aataghrd gen dari ara fery:1

wilt Rat a Heat agua cg

vier: wafided: wife a aft ye:

arquut: agers: Vad ATTA cen

Ue: WeaaSt: TET

ware weet a aT Bae ALOMGATTN ¢ 21

et: Urata aaa welt a sera af:

TRH T GON Vad Tat Fae

Sagara a: war fey: cae: fey:

weaves aa Ss aasaart WAN 8 ol

qugapitae wat arat gar:

dart F fe wyata ashe aeorgarqe et

fad te uftasg oe TENG B1

afadafta ange

All the Vedas recite the glory of the sixteenth,
part of the lord but are unable to know about his
reality. O damsel, are you not aware of him. O
goddess, Brahma, the creator of the Vedas go on
reciting his glory with all the four mouths and
serve at his lotus-like feet. Siva the lord of yogis
with his five mouths always recites his glory and
also serves at his lotus-like feet and with his
mind filled with emotion he serves as his lotus-
like feet. Sesa recited his glory with thousands of
his moths with devotion and also served at his
lotus-like feet. Dharma protects all besides being
the witness of all he also serve at his feet being
the lord of all. Visnu the resident of Sveta-dvipa
who is all-pervading happens to be an amsa of
the lord and has taken to the eternal form. All the
gods, demons, sages, ascetics, intellectuals and
humans continuously serve at his lotus-like feet
but are unable to visualise him even in dream,
you must serve at the lotus-like feet of lord Hari
shedding away your anger because he can reduce
the earth to ashes with a simple side-glance.

Pare TaN: Wet TAT
meafeatsmamtagata: weacatian g Bit
wares aig:

va Ot ase aT Te wetaasisfaerq evi

With the twinkling of an eye of the lord,
Brahma vanishes and with the spending of single
day of the lord twenty eight Indras disappear. O
Radha, he is the one having the age of hundred
and eight years, the entire universe and the
goddesses are being controlled by the same lord.

Seah set en sat AEST
Wey ST A GaGa AYATA ENG
Teat afehar aqaree Far
BRT geateet cena eeeH EAT gE It

O Brahman, on hearing the words. of Sridama
which were quite harsh, Radha the beloved of
lord was immensely enraged. At that point of
time burning with rage her lips were uttering, the
hair was dishevelled, the eyes became red like
red lotus dower. She then came out and spoke
very harsh-words.

afaatara

VX sree werqs sy] erMefereRTI

wa a orate ate a rants actA G01

adore sigan 7 erent sae

aoa sere iif wer Prefer rere cu

Radhika said- O degraded one, a food and

servant of a thief, listen to me. You are well
aware of everything I am not aware of your lord.
O degraded one, lord Krsna happens to be your
lord alone and not of we people. Therefore, you
get lost from here J am quite well-aware that you
always praise your father and denounce your
mother.

wasyua fam fret feta dar

en frafe ai ye AeRITAT Fae eH
ate senssyd aft meter afetar
TAISE VaT yews areat Tega: tt Qo ott
Tread afr gary fora a

Sere: Vaart TAHA: 1 go eH

O foolish one, as the demons always denounce
the gods similarly you have always been
denouncing me. You will therefore, become a

=== PAGE 19 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 3

demon. O cowherd, you will fall from Goloka
and will be born as a demon on earth. O foolish
one, I have pronounced a curse on you. I shall
see who comes to your rescue, Thus sneaking
Radha, the goddess of the divine dance kept
quiet and when she went to sleep her female
friends started moving the fly-whisks with the
handles decorated with gems.

gen a cet mem: wars wpa:
were at St stare Sora Be ATAUTAN Ro RH
But on the other hand on hearing the words of

Radha, the lips of Sridama also started uttering,
he also cursed her to be born in a human race.

strenirara

ATEN ga BITS Te TET afer

safaeafar + Weer war pat TAPER Ro 311

Brat werT aise wean aes

Yer raat wat aaafat were Ro %N

Sridama said- O mother your anger is like an
ordinary human being Therefore, with my curse
you will also be born as a human being on earth.
There is no doubt about it. With the shadow of
the eternal force you will appear on earth but the
foolish people will call you as the wie of
Rayana. Vaisya, who will be born of the Goloka
of lord Krsna in Vindavana.

Tam: stetieh deat Gerat gH

afaafe wera caret Wa

gel wea a Get ferefteaha AA 20411

Because of the curse of Radha he would
become a Mahdyogi in his mothers womb and
shall be reborn as such. Thereafter you will

achieve lord Krsna Gokula and shall roam about
with him in the forest.

afaar a ated faredet eftor wei
WA: wre ate a Teena A 20 Gt
Thereafter you will be separated from the lord

for a hundred years and thereafter getting united
with him you would return to Goloka.

17

afireqeran & Arar a ST we: GTI

TAT WOTTT sHG MUTGIAYATS Fil Foil

Thus speaking to her and bowing before her
Stidama went to the lord. He bowed in reverence
to him and narrated to him the incident of the
pronouncing of the curse.

anggeaty werd wile a yet A)

Bare & Fat BS eS aTUiETTN Qo

a ae 8 faye agit afaeafar

Bret VTE Be raAT ATTA Ro Sil

omfrafa wares x aarsferett

siigoores wea: grat TATA Yeats PAT: Rott

wahetied ai a aafas afteafar

sega state aeean Serra Tavera: 11 Vee

He started crying again and again. At that
point of time the lord said to him. Now you
proceed on to the earth. There will be no other
demon in the three worlds to over-power you.
You will be the king of the demons and in due
course of time you will meet with your end with
the striking of the trident of Siva and come back
to Goloka. I am going to bless you that you will
remain there for fifty yugas. On hearing the won
of lord Krsna, Sridama felt grief-stricken and
spoke to him, I accept your command but you do
not deprive me of your devotion on earth at any
time. Thus speaking he bowed before the lord
and came out of his dsrama.

waranny aT Set wile TA: FA

awe anf aetieerred fererene yt AAT RAI
sHamnstt a at zat wite tufage:

We Maes aye geretata: 11 Veal

Radha also started following him and started
speaking while weeping bitterly. O son, where
are you going? Thus speaking she lamented
again and again. Sridama also bowed in
reverence to her and cried aloud for a long time.
Ultimately he became Sarhkhactida and husband
of Tulast.

=== PAGE 20 ===

18

Te state at aat sorta afiny
wd Frequrara eft: wequt eat ees
At the departure of Sridama, Radha also went
to lord Krsna and narrated the entire story to him.
The lord then spoke to her.
viene a at Het deamre Tai
GGST HT TTT THAT GH
Finding Radha engrossed in grief lord Krsna
consoled her variously. In due course of time

Sarnkhaciida again became the attendants of the
lord.

Ter TTT EU ara Vitor Tel
POTTS HAT He rgET BU LAU

O sage, Radha went to the earth at the time of
Varaha incarnation of Visnu and was born in
Gokula in the house of Vrsabhanu.

seid aafert ad stp
waat afsed art fa ya: sitghtresfan geen

Thus I have narrated to you the entire story of
lord Krsna which provides welfare in all the
times and all the people desire to listen to it.
What else do you want to listen from me?

ft sige Ueto sipUTAAEo ANeATO
RASTA TTT aT AT PATS ATA BA

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

=== PAGE 21 ===

18

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

am agaiserrt:
Chapter - 4
Detailed description of Goloka

ang Jara
ar at wie: gett wet a aa BET
BROTH saat ag aeferat IT gH
Narada said- O best of these well versed in the
Vedas, et whose request lord Krsna who happens

to be the lord of the universe appeared on earth
in human form and what was the reason for it.

ARTA Far
We arreeey At ATARAT TRTT
yet aye Marat genet reat aati FH

Narayana said - In earlier times during the
Vardaha-kalpa, the earth was disturbed with the
lord of the wicked people and was grief-stricken.
She then went to Brahmi to take refuge with her.

Gargeningeeard:
at tet int a ser Sere: HTN AH

Having been terrified immensely by the
demons, the goddess earth accompanied with the
gods, reached the inaccessible court of Brahma,.

seat aeat 2aei Scena gare
mise pita fess: Sfet gens

And found Brahma the lord of the gods there
illumining; with divine lustre and surrounded by
a Rsis, sages and siddhas delightfully.

wate a usa afer yen
Trratat w wid grad HET GN
Ut UT Te POT SANTA!
aacrssaaryyut a qerenfgafarer

Wearing a smile on his face, he was
witnessing the dance of the  apsaras,
accompanied with the music by Gandharvas. He

was reciting the two latter name of Krsna, his
eyes were filled with tears because of his

{devotion and the entire body had become

sensational.

wan a fret: aed wore a_TATT

ad raat wh serrata BAUott

egg ayer Gera B ate a

AUST SST ae athe Tf ct

aera ax ag wk Hea

Bf wa aearfit wa fs 3 of fate

O sage, the goddess Prthvi together with the

gods bowed to the four faced Brahma and told
him the story of his suffering at the hands of the
demons. Thereafter, getting emotional her éyes
was filled with tears and while crying she started
offering prayer to Brahma. Looking at her
Brahm the creator of the universe said, "O noble
lady, why ace you crying and offering prayer at
the same time"? How have you arrived here?

=== PAGE 22 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 4

19

Tell me at once. Surely you will meet with
welfare, O prosperous one, why are you feeling
panicky? You be composer.

arene ylret gen FaraTss wETT!

weet at gears we PAE got

TaN ae gen tar Hy: waver

ATH BT AYA TATA Fa WAT Ven

waa erat rer vie A Pepe se

afaerran at watadia ageefan 920

igen 4 artor yet fare

aa Ta gsaraterarcetut FEN e311

Thus assuring the goddess of earth variously
Brahma asked the gods respectfully, "O gods,
why have you arrived here"? You tell me the
reason for it. On listening to the words of.
Brahma the gods spoke to Prajapati thus, O lord,
the earth is suffering because of the weight of the
demons and the people also suffering at the
hands of the demons. You happen to be the
creator of the universe and therefore you
urgently search for a remedy for her. O Brahman,
O grandsire, you are the only source for us;
therefore you think of the ways and means to
free ourselves from the torture of the demons
since the goddess earth is suffering with the
weight of the demons. He are also suffering at

the hands of the demons therefore you kindly
remove her burden.

Bart sent spear Une at Seta fer: 1

gies wa at ge fas ware evn

wat arergra wea Aig tare

arent F as ug J afar gern ey

Te A aa Yen AyaTa watisryI

titfsat aa Att waaaararoT eg 1

Listening to the words of the gods, Brahma

told them O goddess earth, you get relieved of
the terror and be happy. I do something to relieve
you of your misery. O lotus eyed one, I shall

surely removed your burden and you will meet
with prosperity. O noble lady, I shall surely

move in the direction which brings welfare to
you. On hearing the words of Brahma, the
goddess earth narrated to him details of her
sufferings with a smiling face.

fafreara
STUY ait weaenfa kaehtat were SATA
fern af afaard art afagaefin gon
ettnferacn yraxaiter waery he: |
srerenfagie atest Pr ec

Prthvi said- O lord, no one can speak out his
heart a trusted persons. Therefore I am rising to
narrate detail of my Sufferings to you kindly
listen to me, a female is considered to be
helpless; therefore she is protected by the father,
the husband and the son in all times. Her
protection by anyone else has been denounced.

PAM YET STATA AT Tra wee WA

Fat art: cifeensé sqeat serena eet

You are the father of the universe and are
asking me. Therefore the people with the weight
of whom I am suffering, I am going to tell you

about them. Because I will not feel shy in
narrating my tale to you.

porate & Ya aaearear:|
Bat erarafeTT rH ATATEA 2 oI

Those who are deprived of the devotion of
lord Krsna and those who denounce his devotees,
lam unable to bear the load of such people.

antarémt & fragrafeatiran:|
sere aay at ator wifsAT 2 gh
fagagyeeion eo yaratera:1

a Hef Sat a a MT ATTATST 2 II

Those who do not follow their dharma,
perform no good deeds, having no faith in the
Vedas. I am troubled with the weight of such
people. Such of the people feed do not feed or
maintain their parents, teacher, wife, son and
other dependants, I am unable to bear the load of
such people.

=== PAGE 23 ===

20

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

& fremrenfereme carecaferatsra: |

Freer Jeter Fat ator Misa Bau

frase Gere feareeareres:|

feroraett sareeat aat ator WifsaTn Vent

O lord, such of the persons who speak

falsehood, who are deprived of mercy and truth,
denouncing the Vedas and the gods cannot be
carried by me and I am suffering because of
them. Those who betrays the friend are
ungrateful give false evidence betray the faith of
others, misappropriate the trust their load is
unbearable by me.

aeIUTgEanh alta

waht ferret & Saat ator fsa qt

Those who sel] away Kalydna-sikta of the
Sdmaveda and also the name of the lord which
provides welfare, they troubled me the most and
I am unable to bear their load.

Sitaart eset arrest a yee:

waardt Ypulse dat ator tifsarn gen

Those who kill the creatures, betray the
teacher, performed yajrias from village to village,
the terrorists, those burning the dead bodies of
the Sadras and consuming their food, I am
unable but bear their load.

Weragitvareneaenta fafeentr a

Ua gor freaeaat ator feat Vout

Those who destroy the pid, yajria fasting and
several other vratas fee] suffering because all
them.

wer fasta & wren tifargrawrary

aft eftenat af Fat ator HiSAM 2201

vigréht a ator difsasé var fae

watsfrarat Sear aitor ufedifsatn 2 eH

Such of the people who are envious of cows,
Brahmana, gods, Vaisnavas and the devotees of
the lord reciting its glory, I am unable to bear
that load. O creator of the universe, I am unable
to bear the atrocities of Sarhkhaciida and I suffer
much more at the hands of other demons. I am
unable to bear their weight.

sea aft wd caw Faery

waar ate qareansg weiteart ge WIZ ott

O lord, I have thus narrated to the details of
my sufferings and in case I am your true devotee
then you kindly think of some remedy for the
same.

qaaqaen ager wie a Teg!

Ben aget BET agar SerPater: 13 gu
ant wartents cearTgUTaa: |
sorta araifir fag agat 3 UH

Thus speaking the goddess earth started crying
before Brahma again and again. Listening to her
cries Brahma said, O goddess earthy | shall try
my best to remove your sufferings and
simultaneously remove the demons from the
earth. Because one meets with success only by
making efforts.

Se UTTetat aafteafa WebaT:|
wed Ugg @ feraferg a FEATS BU
tga oat o agit digi
UPUsHaNS w UMass TTT aN
Set aati igre
mrerarafgrent wig gore wferat Se 3 4
Wg waterrat a fremeal a aftzar
Finted ta Feet eftgutnfin wer 3g
ater a yet a fs mitre a Zo
quordfgat fe edt weg wet
wad aan da vate Tata B39 cH
Beast debit met eerie
wate & wnofacata yout gah 3 ei
werd erga § auforagd gaqu yo!

The great lord will surely remove your
suffering at an appropriate time. O beautiful one
the person who will place mantra the pitcher of
welfare, Sivalinga, vermilion, Jethimadhu,
sandal, kastari, earth from the sacred places,
soul, horn of Rhinoceros, crystal gems, rubies,

=== PAGE 24 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 4

21

sapphire, Stiryamani, Rudraksa, KuSa-grass,
Salagrama, Samkha, Tulast, image of the gods,
water-conch buming lamp, adorable stone, bell,
Siva, naivedya, the gem, the yajfopavita, mirror,
fly-whisks, gorocana, jewels, ruby, Puranas, fire
camphor, battle-axe, silver, gold, coral, gems,
water of the sacred places, cows milk, curd,
ghee, cowdung and sows urine, on the ground
shall have to spend ten thousand years in the
kalasitra hell and keep on suffering there.

wen yet wararer Sacnfirerar Tel

SHUT Se TAT SET PRATT ¥ RA

Thus Brahma the creator of the universe
assuring the goddess earth variously went to lord

Siva accompanied by other gods. They reached
Kailasa.

Treat Tart Tet at vient fair:

AATANTAS I Ta: BATAAN Vil

cmmentatert earanfenprory

fageniceret wget freer san

area: uftgd ahirgrorafear

ufidiscrcat yet uyart alert Yates

fort a atid : ,

Uyerdt wedi area Upaat aaEATI YG HI

art ugaeaor gtltanger

Tratferiteardtorrreran yoramnfg rq ¥ G1

Reaching there Brahma spotted Siva who was
seated under the everlasting banyan tree grown
on the bank of the Ganga of the heaven. He was
rearing tiger’s skin and the ornaments of the
bones of Sati, the daughter of Daksa. He was
holding a trident. He had five faces, three eyes
surrounded by several of siddhas and yogts,
wearing a serene smile on the face and was
witnessing the dance of apsaras accompanied
with the music of Gandharvas. The goddess
Parvati was lovingly at him and he also was
looking at her with the side glance. With his five
faces he was reciting the name of the lord which
provides welfare. He was feeling joyful, wearing
the garlands of lotus flowers from the Ganga.

nfsrarat gen erat we:
yfror Ure ae wort: vio
At that very moment Brahma appeared before
Siva together with all the, gods and bowed in
reverence to him.
sett viet: sit were ag array
Fare Wetter eae TAY SI
warden: we vient RITE
WOT UT HET ASSAM FAM SEU
At the sight of Brahma, Siva the teacher of the
universe, with his mind filled with devotion at
once got up to receive him and offered his
salutation to him. Thereafter, he received his
blessings as well. All the gods then started
offering their salutation to Siva, who blessed
them variously.
Bard aerarara Urdetet watrafe:
at waa via AACA IG ON
Thereafter Brahm, the creator of the universe
narrated the story of the earth to Siva the lord of
Parvati, hearing which Siva bowed his head
downwards beings the one who loved his
devotees.
sented ward wreath
ayaget g:ardt atearara at fafisny en
Both Siva and P&rvati on hearing the
sufferings of his devotees felt painful at heart. At
this, Brahma tried to salute him.

al TaN NeMET YraragaTT
YS WANTS PATS AAT

Thereafter Brahma and Siva asked the goddess
earth and the other gods to go to their respective
abodes reassuring them.

adt Seatauianrs adatar

we 8a anette warplad STG gH
agus vei am cerTget Te

aE ardarot a genvergeayaTA & YI
aifeaorged a gecirarcernrry

=== PAGE 25 ===

22

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

aubire 7 afatatated vafatierg 4 4
wanrifoatet werritfengiier

& atten: wel torget WAT gH
Bet: Ye men egy: Heft Ya:
Tafaereret B TATRA TTT 91
FTE ECOERICOL
TRRUSAT UAT MUSTANG CH
Waaerrtert ararenfayfiay

wet atetiart certgarergarg 4 eit
aitarqiciemt ferred apf
Braraage: MATa g ott
wrehferaals qraygenry
TRAST TW WG TSATTSTN & Vil

a walq: Gtaer wae Fareat WAI
TEA: WAT aT ARTA: 11 § BU
Wearrereral: yerennfagerferret: 11 § 311

Both Brahma and Siva went to the abode of
Brahma and consulted him variously thereafter
all of them combined went to Vaikuntha which is
the great abode of Visnu and is beyond the birth
and death and is situated beyond the globe,
floating in the air. This eternal abode of Visnu is
situated beyond a crore of yojanas from the
earth. It is built in gems, is beyond the
comprehension of the poets where the rubies and
sapphires are freely used on the path ways. The
gods who could move with the speed of the mind
reached there in am instant and had a look at
Laksmi Narayana in the inner apartment, who
was seated at ease on the gem-studded lion-
throne, adored with the gem-studded
ornaments, gem-studded armlets, wristlets and
anklets. Besides the neck ornaments of gems, he
was wearing yellow lower garments the long
garland of forest flower was quite peaceful lord
of Sarasvati, served by Laksmi at his feet
possessing the lustre of crores of gods of love,
having a smiling face, four armed and

surrounded by his attendants like Sunanda,
Nanda, Kumuda and several others. All his limbs
were plastered with the sandal-pastes. He had the
beautiful crown studded with gems on his head.
He is blissful and the one who always had been
merciful on his devotees. Such a type of lord Vis
nu was seen by Brahma and other gods who
offered their salutation to him, with devotion. All
of them meekly stood their offering prayers. At
that point of time all the gods were feeling
blissful and their body was filled with emotion.

gelara

anf auerert yi were

Se TT HAT SHEA MTHATA FTG VI

Tray Pras WME ATT:

RATHI ATA YATRaAT FST 4

Brahma said- O lord of Kamala, O peaceful
one, I bow in reverence to lord Acyuta who
happens to be the lord of all you happen to be
your own lustre and all the gods also have
emerged from your rays O spotless one all the
sages, the ascetics and the humans appear on
earth together with all the moveable and
immovable creatures emerging from your rays.

:

waa aT Sree)

smrfemizarraatia aaeaftorg § & I

afirnizafagrt arut adarcory

fated fafag fataed a: Kigiatn gon

Siva said- O lord, you are indestructible
imperishable, all-pervading, visible and invisible,
blissful and possessed all the siddhis like anima
and others. Because of this, you are known to be
the bestower of all the success and the form of
success therefore which one of us could be
competent enough to recite your glory.

et sara
aS Frafad ag aula faaart:1
ae fderit wafadyh oa: arte

=== PAGE 26 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 4

23

wefatie wart fama wtf Feforqug eu

wendrfne wird vegeta weTgy

Vise gerd guigised a AAT: 119 011

tani wat gen agate eft: <a

Weichert Ga w aft wafer Teno a

sareaat at at dadtarenferh

UW areata wets aor Fat eri Wn

SRT WH Ure et athe TAT:

wat Faun a wsrereata Fafa 3

Dharma said- The men with letters have
described the one, who has been highlighted in
the Vedas. But the one who was of the elements
which are beyond the description of the Vedas
who can offers prayer to him? Whatever sins are
possible for anyone, they are considered to be the
virtues, which appear in the form of their prayer.
They are spotless and are visible as well as
invisible, how can such a lord destroy. O great
sage, whosoever recites the six verses composed
by the gods in favour of the lord, such a person is
relieved of all the miseries and always meets
with the success. On hearing the prayer of the
gods, Visnu himself spoke to them. All of you
should go to Goloka and shall also follow you
with Laksmi. Nara-Narayana the, dweller of
Sveta-dvipa and Sarasvati will also follow you.
My vast illusion, Karttikeya, Ganega and Savitri,
the mother of the Vedas will also follow us.

was fae: Het atitt Tear we

ATE SHAY: YAATCATATTA: N19 81

I reside in the Goloka having two armed in the
form of Krsna with Radha and. other
cowherdesses and at this place I reside with
Kamala and other courtiers.

An FUse SaeharaHA
wager: Gent: WS Fat TAMA: TAT: Ht
Narayana the dweller of the Sveta-dvipa and

Krsna are one and the same. I happen to be
Brahma and all the gods happen to be my rays.

HAMHAUMSAM TIGA:

Tieié ora qa uw arifatenifaeaano su
ad wsrenfiena: weafrehagal
seen a aurea fare aft: ATVI

The gods, demons and human beings also
represent my rays. All of you should go to
Goloka and you will surely meet with success.
Thereafter all of us will also reach there for the
fulfilment of the desires of all. Thus speaking in
the court the lord kept quiet.

wore fam: Wal weAicearayT

fafest wed ara TITATEt WTA C1

Thereafter all the gods bowed in reverence to
him and proceeded to Goloka which is
astonishing in nature beyond the birth and death
and happens to be the eternal abode.

wed aquadisiet warreantfearry

arpn arturo 3 fafad aecar fenit:9e

mafia a tart wertegan:|

a etenfier: we dargfararteT ¢ ot

Ger tat: Ufedtt frend wet aq:

Yaunteatiart yfereiol wareTq ce

Tarnfireanaafararaaar

Porgueftamaforatafernirerqn ¢ 2

This abode of the lord is beyond fifty crore
yojanas from Vaikuntha and is floating in the air
and was created as per the desire of the all-
pervading lord. All the gods then started with the
intention of reaching Goloka which is beyond
descriptions the gods who could move with the
speed of the mind reached in an instant on the
bank of the river, the gods were surprised since it
was spotless like the crystal gems. It had mines
of rubies, sapphire, gems, besides the various
types of gems including those having black,
white, green and red colour.

warengryad gataryrrery
TTT ARATE aT PTTTN ¢ 31

=== PAGE 27 ===

24

Because of the sprouting of the coral rods, the
best of the mines of gems could be seen at
several pieces.

farqraerd Fiserantry
eRe Safer cv
O sage, it was quite surprising for Brahma to

look at such a scene. There were several other
mines were the rubies and sapphires, emerald
gems were found and at some places there were
the mines of Syamantaka gems and the treasures
of gold.

afr wracenauirrarary

PATH HA PAAR Sl

aetcantt afore

Tarent afer qafarargqureargi ¢ Gi

gardetart woitarret wy

ganferqataxraaererenyaT ¢ wit

At places there were the valuable gems of.
yellow colour and at certain places the gems
were available in heaps. At some places the
kaustubha gems were found in abundance and at
some places there were mines of gems which
were beyond description. At some places, there
were orchard for strolling.

ae g Tred aerate:

SEY: Vas wreyy: WATT ct

Ufararant & arafafanirry

meget: tad aft amagiinne eu

The gods were surprised at the sight end
getting flabbergasted, the gods reached the other
bank of the rivers where they found a graceful
and charming mountain with hundred peaks
which had the forest of Pdarijdta trees besides
kalpavrksas and the Kamadhenu cows.

afetoryed a def eequine
Vemreraftnd warereRteaTTN g ott
wanrennaa frat wars
aprttarferettant agerenregerg < et
yorearagent yfrat Yar
ape Ham TRA TARTAN SU

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

It was a crores of yojanas in height and was
ten times its width; its peak was spread over an
area of fifty crores of yojanas that mountain was
surrounding the entire Goloka like a boundary
wall, at the peak of the mountain there was the
Rasamandala which was spread over an area of
ten yojanas and was circular in shape. It was
abounded with orchards of thousands of fragrant
flowers and with group of black-wasps.

grape ufad tanhet:!

Taos rAat Beat TATA g 311
Ta BRAC A

sferotat eres vif a vif ext

It was filled with the articles required for the
lover-sports and also had many of the decorated
pleasure houses. it had a thousand crores of steps
studded with gems and filled with the pitcher
made with best of gems and the pillars studded
with rubies and sapphires.

fagractafinflr: uftt: whats a

oe erierrattigsat wt ral] s4ull
Tamrarcdgnafonteferafarrm

wit: wuredgtargitee ferafarrmn @

The gems of vermilion colour were studded
for the purpose of decoration, it had the pleasant
boundary walls studded with beautiful gems and
the doors were also studded with various types of

—_—— Taree aa:
vita: maciereragesr waar e911

It was filled with the trunks of banana trees.
The trunks of banana tree tied with strings and
the mango leaves were tied in strings adorning
the place.

yarerauisretnergaigaraan
Neen
Sted tears aye: safest FT
Torctaredges varrrenferaiaa sg el
Ta TTT TAA |
THRUST TOSI: Ro ot

=== PAGE 28 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 4

25

O sage, the white paddy, the net of leaves, the
fruits, the tender Durvd-grass, the sandal-paste,
aguru, kasturi. and the saffron, besides
beverages were available in abundance there.
Crores of cowherdesses were found there who
were adorned with the gem-studded ornaments
and their garlands of gems. They were wearing
the armlets, anklets and wristlets of gems besides
the pall of ear ornaments studded with gems.

Talacitactertd erate:

Tae SRO RN

afat Taya: aaagqeTat: |

TATA ETTAAT: HI Ro TH

fergefergar urinerana: waeiteraet: |

urerraiitereagerafet tt Ro 3 U1

They were wearing the rings of gems of all the
fingers of the hands as well as the toes. They
were adorned with all the ornaments including
the crown on the head and the precious gems as
the nose ornaments. They had the spot of
vermilion decorating their foreheads and their
hair-do was beautifully done. They had the lustre
of the beautiful campaka flowers and their limbs
were plastered with the sandal-paste.

aieeraraterstfereacret: |
PRATAP HHT ETA: 1 OWI
PRR eaateTTeTT: 1

req ieee: Varraeciseaet: 11 Rou I
MeerTeTAT TTT: HATTA: |

TE SMAQaTT WyeAMAT Ayer: 1 Yo GI
UTEUT THA TAGS ATHA: it Row
ag earycemferraa rae |
waaarfsrctamraafg acted: toc
Giaugynrerntaaraaytad: |
TAATUST TANTRA TAH! Fo 8 UT
Preraafertuiiaarerra:|
HAUT TATAT 11 RRO
ait: qohargrendtadayrrga:1

Uferenre cor THAT 228
Pat ayes viet Uttara
sateretrerant a water ufaheen geen
Taecilieta Vet: Tras:
Gaafatqurt aye: daet: wer Ves

They were wearing the yellow garments and
had the lips like the ripe wood-apples. Their
faces were like the full moon of the winter
season, the eyes resembling the full blown
lotuses of the winter season, kasturi, collyrium
applied to the eyes, had the garlands of fully
blossomed jasmine flowers round their necks
surrounded by the black-wasps which were
greedy for the honey. Their walking resembled
the royal elephant. They had the curved
eyebrows and serene smile on the faces. Their
teeth resembled the ripe pomegranate and the
nose resembled that of the peak of Garuda, the
beautiful breasts resembled the temples of the
elephants which made them uneasy because of
their weight, they had developed buttocks and till
pelvic regions they shattered the mind because of
the passionate advances and were anxious to
look at the mirror to find there reflection in it. All
these damsels were devoted at the lotus-like feet
of Radhika and served her Rasamandala was
quite well guarded by these damsels, which had
lakhs of the streams for water sports, some of
them had white, red and extremely red lotus
flower were the birds were issuing sweets notes
and the black-wasps, were producing hissing
sound.

qotrearrageor ghar ware

aifeqerpettar yorgrearanfat: it geet

arigermeangeaerige:|

wath: afte: Acree eeu Hh

fafeagerrrentit: shit enfind ga

a Wena apr ay wcdarafasn1 eget

There ware several of the blossoming orchards
containing the beds of flowers and the
Rasamandala was filled with crores of

hermitages. The appropriate things like camphor,
: *
betei, cloth, lamps of gems, white fly whisks,

=== PAGE 29 ===

26

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

mirrors and the garlands of different flowers
were available in abundance there. O sage,
looking at the Rasamandala the gods came out in
the open.

wal faraart Te egy: Gt AHI

aa erat ara cereal: freq eget

The gods also found Vrndavana which was the
favourite sports of Radha and Madhava which
was quite beautiful and charming.

‘sna wata seagate

fercardretrres: aaftat weaTghy: 1 eect

waigaaret: quid: guitar

AAU FTHAHUTTESA TTT 22

wa Sieracani aaa: arian

TERT aE HAR TAA AN Voll

Pigg ae goiter

SUT ATT STUTE UAT AH aT 2 alt

wgai aadtort a wae ferret n 92 2H

They also had a look at the pleasure sports of
Radhamadhava which had a number of kalpavrks
a. At the bank of river Viraja, the cool breeze
which was blowing slowly disturbs river water,
the lotus flowers were decorated with kasturi
which appeared in bundles, issuing fragrance and
the cuckoos which were perched on the tender
Jeaves of the lotus flowers were issuing sweet
notes. At certain spots of kadamba trees served
as the best sporting places. It had a number of
Mandara, campaka trees besides the sandal-
wood trees and the fragrance of the flowers
pervaded everywhere. There were several trees
of mangoes, jack-fruit, ta/a, coconut, silk fruits,
silk-fruit, jujube and palm trees in large numbers.

Tareraraarat A TAT A ATAL

apeeiiat sttawerat erst watt: 323

queancrign: ayes frat

frost a wreraaerat wat TH gest

Frart mrenciat a fasta a git

amet Teter dae: Peel Tam VW

O Narada, besides the above there were the
trees of betel nuts, Myrobalan, lemon banana,
wood-apple, pomegranate, blossoming with ripe
fruits. Besides there were trees of long-pepper,
the fig tree, neem tree, teak-wood trees, silk-
cotton trees and tamarind trees.

ufta: raga TeqefaahrTy

fren Ter gre aAAAT ATTA: 1 82 GU

Wat & aes Beanie: ware

TER aHAL: TareTatfefingn eon

vardtudttas gt quliga:1

STRAT aa ATATAAA: RSM

SA: Gaeta aaaa

ayer arcrerecar MAE TN gy 8

Tariargireitiges Stir

Tarerentfetit cart Urata 23 01

All round, there were clusters of kalpavrksa
besides the creepers of Mallika, Malati, jasmine
and creepers of other fragrant flowers. O sage,
there were fifty crores of cottages in which the
lamps of gems remained burning, besides there
were fragrant essence cosmetics and fragrant
breeze, having the scent of sandal-paste. The
beds were decorated with flowers and garlands
which were surrounded by the black-wasps
producing the hissing sound, These cottages
were surrounded by beautiful cowherdesses
adorned with all the ornaments studded with
gems. Thus at the command of Radhika, the
place was protected by fifty crores of
cowherdesses.

aaa aa wet Te WET
Serer PRATT 83 8
In that Vrndavana there were thirty-two

forests which were quite charming, beautiful and
served as ideal secluded places.

PRTG HAGAN FA

Tent a vat da ayes wafer 23 eH
yataragen yaaa gare
REegurant ayer waAaTN 3 BN

=== PAGE 30 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 4

27

arerentfentari facrder feats

srpungereunt axayfoadat:n eax

GBr Tareat wet agile:

ube agenert areata 83411

O sage, it was filled with best of ripe and
delicious fruits beside the cows and the abodes of
cows, the blossoming fragrant flowers in
thousands gardens in which the black-wasps
becoming greedy of the honey, always roamed
about. There were fifty crores of cowherds who
were as beautiful lord Krsna himself and were
adorned with the gem-studded ornaments.
Vrndavana was a place of exquisite beauty and
enjoying the beauty of natural environment of
the place, the gods reached Goloka which was
circular in shape and was spread over crores of
yojanas.

_ fafard BRN

ara a ayes arTUet: TAP ATAH 23« Ut

O sage, it had the boundary walls in which the
gems were studded and had four entrance gates
guarded by the cowherds as door keeper.

arat tarafadaaninrrarad: |

Tart FaUrycarat wereratfefigau 93 011

art ee: wreratfel:

aaisfrergfareit: aamtaddaru 3 cu

ara: Uden a ads frenfercartt: |

arypararefad: agra wrrenfefir: 1 93 8

UNerattont w sitqreracenftorg

anat: afer axa fatihiasn exon

The cowherds who always remain-in
attendants of lord Krsna had the abodes which
were decorated with gems and having various
items of pleasures the number of such houses ran
into the fifty crores. Besides them, there were a
hundred crores of the abodes of the groups of the
cowherds, the construction of which was more
beautiful then the earlier houses. All of them

were studded with the best of gems, such of the
abodes which were decorated with the best of

gems belonged to the courtiers of the lord and
their number was ten crores. The foremost of the
courtiers }ook like lord Krsna himself and they
have a crore of beautiful dwelling places built in
gems to serve as their residence.

Ulrargarrart ata:

agerhart fectetaereanfefiegar gx gu

arat @ faagttort a wat: gerttets

vforenfaxtad: yitfind qeranfefir: i eset

Such of the cowherdesses who, were
immensely devoted to Radhika had thirty-two
crores of divine abodes. These were also
constructed using the best of gems of very high
quality. Their servants also had the abodes built

with precious stones which looked quite
beautiful and they were crores in number.

PTAA: YA ea AT ATTA afer

Bhai & a aifratorenrcentsn eval
we an gah Alas WI
ergata gare warra ferry ess
Fat stqgamrart Fart: qattet:1
aaerafarratatatareinereratart st x4
RU PATETTATATT TTA: |

Tere torytrresre ea foreaat aa 1 86K IL
aPC TAR Aa: |
Brearerahet: dah wtafefits newt

O sage, such of the devotees of the lord born
on the sacred land of Bharata performed the
severe tapas for a number of years and getting
devoted to the lord and are relieved of the fetters
of performing of deeds end they always recite the
name of the lord while sleeping or awakes during
the day or the night. For such devotees of lord
Kysna, the impressive structures were been built,
which are filled with many articles of dally
consumption. They had enough of flower beds,
flower garlands many of white fly-whisks,
mirrors of gems and other jewels. They also had
valuable kalagas in large numbers decorating the
tops of the houses and the certain were made of

=== PAGE 31 ===

28

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

fine cloth. The number of such houses also into a
hundred crores.

aarerrgt ae faraagt wan

ware Tet VENTS eS
usanntaniotged aefgqot yA
EAE A AM ATA MTA ATA RY 8

Brahma, Siva and other gods, roamed about
with a delightful mind. They walked up to some
distance and came‘across a beautiful banyan tree
which was eternal in nature. That tree was spread
into five yojanas ar | its height was ten yojanas.
It had thousands of branches which looked quite
charming.

Taree witfind Tate hit:
FOSSA STYSPTST AL V4 oll
Waar hararaterAAATT
erage erer gre TTOTTATATTU Rk QU

It had a large number of ripe fruits of red
colour besides several pedestals. They saw a
number of children resembling Krsna playing
under the tree who were clad in yellow lower
garment and were playing delightfully with their
limbs plastered in the sandal-paste and their body
were adorned with gem-studded ornaments.

aqyera Bae: wderaerg: |
aasfagt cay Tart wae TN RG UI
fargerarcatintiy: uftat tft a
Batre: wareitateas wearer Ny Bt
Pfiatefings vcd canosery
ATTRA TGR BU ¥
afrquionamerpagaigaray
qeraaargesitarermen err gy 4M
THEETTeS F_MTHlaTTT
ARATTS AMS: HTP Tea 1 RY EI
wereeratet |
afta: qerrenfia: Tred: afoyferTN gy iont
afters ages stents AfeaT
DCR CERCHINEICCOE (EOP

The gods found theirs the courtiers of lord Krs
na. O sage, at a distance from that place, they
came across the royal road which was built with
red rubies emitting the lustre of vermilion. In its
background there were several pedestals made in
gems and jewels. On all the sides of the road,
there were gem-studded resting places. There
were a sprinkling of the scented water of sandal-
paste, aguru, kastiri and saffron. There were
thousands of the trunks of banana trees besides
the tender leaves, fried paddy, fruits, flowers,
Durva-grass, fruits, flowers, which were tied in
very thin cord which decorated the space in
between the trunks of banana trees. The saffron
was sprinkled over all of them, the marigala-
kalasas made of gems were consecrated at
several places. The fruits and branches besides
the fresh tender leaves decorated the kalasas.
The saffron, fragrance, vermilion and sandal-
paste were applied to them. These trees were
decorated with the garlands of flowers which
added to the grandeur of the royal houses. The
cowherdesses in playful mood surrounded the
road. Beautiful steps of gems were constructed
there.

afestaiga wa: Sraraettt:)
Taavafatetes urea act ararTt 84 8H
arevrarcdqenrarcaretsy Tea
ufta: uftargaranreana teary 26 0

ATRL A MRAP

Tere eeBT F SAT AAT: 1 NE RU
wry: vite feaggt egy: gat at:
ora Uferenreres Teeter ARAN 8G 2H
Renita whist areata
MUUNTPReRTE: GUT TAZSTHATETAN VG
walfrherit w aftedt frafirg
Fareaerart werregfaraToTET 86 wi
wararige safer Tatra
ayPRerartont watered TTT ke 4H
geeantichinte: ufenie: yenfra

=== PAGE 32 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 4

aeergah: ubegt yoterrryrATrTTT 28 & I

Qeraatamant: wafer

aaaafaergenaea alter Taiz Ran

In all, there were sixteen entrance gate which
were decorated with beautiful fine garments
purified by the fire and had the white fly-whisks,
mirrors, gem-studded beds and flower garland’s.
Several of the gate-keepers guarded the place.
There were deep valleys around them and there
were surrounded by boundary walls of red
colours, after looking at such beautiful places,
the gods proceeded further and they walked quite
swiftly for some distance and came across the
abode of Radha, the goddess of the divine dance.
O Narada, the abode of Radha, the primeval
goddess of the gods, the best of the cowherdesses
and the beloved of Krsna, was built quite
beautifully, the use of the divine material in the
construction of that abode had added to its
elegance. Everything of that place was
inexplicable for all. Even the best of the
intellectual were unable describe its beauty. That
elegant place was built in a circular manner
spread over an area of twelve kosas. There were
several buildings in it. It had astonishing types of
dsramas which continued shining with divine
gems, it was created using the best of the gems.
It had a number of inaccessible and deep valleys.
The place was surrounded by the kalpavrksas
from all the sides and had a number of pleasure
gardens in the same. The dsrama was surrounded
by the boundary walls built with precious stones,
it had seven entrance gates and had elegant
pedestals made of gems.

dark tated fafaddge FA

VAAAAA: HAT: HART FAURE CU

wadistt ares temarcdgary

Rar ABI a want TeerTerepATTN 2G SL

ARRAS: YATE:

wate Foret Tat wet faert ay: gol

The doors were studded with astonishing type
of gems and also contained several types of
paintings. After passing through the seven gates,

29

one had to pass through sixteen other doors. The
gods saw, its boundary wall had a height of a
thousands bows and had a number of small-
kalagas adorning the boundary wall. The sight
delighted the gods immensely.

aa: wafers faaggt aygati

Wat memat Fat wa ATR: | 9 UI

Tharat wifteart a aqyTssATATTY

STRATA eraser EPA TA Vo 2H

aot agi & uftat thot ada

Tifa aret ar Ta Td Ae FATN BOB

Tieits Fiftact GET gory ag: YT!

aes agetant Tat Gelat STH Yow

BY: Wey w aeatefarery

farat at wader eq: YaAa aU vou

aranent o Mele UREA

Sareotatratot Ure Ga ATTN 9 « I

ah wea: eat Sach wee

yet AqYR Saey ETT Quen

Wr aredhid vearpernaAT

gee veda yeotary: YT YAN woo

Going round the place delightfully they moved
forward for some distance. While doing so, they
left the Gsramas behind, thereafter they came
across the abodes of cowherds and cowherdesses
which were studded with gems. They were
numbering a hundred crores. Thus visualising the
abodes of cowherds, cowherdesses, the entire
asramas and new elegant spots-they went round
the entire universe. Visual is the Goloka, their
bodies were thrilled. They went wound the
circular and pleasant Vmdavanas. The mountain
with hundred peaks had the river Viraja flowing
besides it. After crossing the Viraja, they found
everything deserted. The astonishing Goloka was
constructed with gems and was floating in the
air. It was built at the command of Radhika with
the approval of lord Krsna. It was the place of
prosperity and had thousands of rivers. O sage,

the gods also witness the pleasant dance
accompanied with sweet music and the reciting

=== PAGE 33 ===

30

the name of Radha and Sri Krsna. Listening to
the songs, the gods were fainted.

QO taal wre % Sat: FEAT: |
Say: Tere wart Uy wHETTI Boe
Sayin: wat arraafeenteret:1
STARTS ARTETA AT: Root
SUAS BLATT: WT:
UTTAR RT TATUM: RS RH
arateeteotorereres vifear ae:1

RT TRP ST FANAATAT:A Re VL

Yawnfien arisemtrerat a after:

POTN: BATMAN: WT Re BH

wirddiafaen: arafergret:|

aTSTerenT AT GBT PRAT TTA PAT: Re SU

In a moment, they regained consciousness and
mentally reciting the name of Krsna, they came
across charming scenes at every step. They came
across several cowherdesses clad in different
type of costumes, some one was playing on
double-drums and some one was playing on
vind. Some one held the fly-whisks in her hands,
while other sounded the karatala. Some of them
were holding musical instruments, while others
produced dangling sound with the anklets worn
by them. The waist-bands studded with gems
worn by some of them, were producing sound
which resembled the sounds of bells. Some of
them carried pitchers filled with water and were
displaying various dance postures. Some of the
cowherdesses were clad in male costumes white
others served as the spouses; some of them
appeared in the form of Krsna while others
appeared in the form of Radha, some of them
were getting separated per chance while others
were embracing each other and still others were
engaged in love-sports. Lord Visnu smiled
looking at them.

wrap: faaqgt aqysisssarag
Tereat eit WAT B ATRAH Vs GI
wile qita aio dear a

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

dhareata aren ugyiat a aa Sn eee
mafagerenes Ulterees mite: 1
aarfacteites rat ae a UN eco

O Narada, after covering some distance they
came across several dsramas which serves as the
dwelling places of the chief female fiends of
Radha all of them were equal in beauty, virtues,
costumes youthfulness, fortune and age. There
were thirty three cowherdesses who we of the
same age as Radha was. Their costumes, were
beyond description. You listen to their names.

aettet & eigenen aya Hraat Titi
SOSA Heit FT Teal A TAHA Vee

aayat a wat meat yt Yan

wane Ufcerat TT a TaAATN RS eH

aarferent ane Gut art a aCe

uigisfracer HgHdt waren a BIT ee ott

Porter wit da ahead AAT a

Wt: Gat: agatha Tlererhrat: 11 Ve gu

Ura wre Tang fafarrary

arairenreferror FataeragarreT 28 2H

aerate racine

ARTA g TAM RVR

Their names were Susila, Sasikala, Yamuna,
Madhavi, Rati, Kadambamala, Kunti, Jahnavi,
Svayarhprabha, Candramukhi, Savitri, Gayatri,
Sumukhi, Sukha, Padmalaya then Parijdta,
Gauri, Sarvamangala, Kalika, Kamala, Durga,
Bharati, Sarasvati, Ganga, Ambika, Madhumati,
Campa, Aparna Sundari, Krsnapriya, Sati,
Nandini and Nandana. All of them had similar
type of beauty and form as compared to Radha.
Their auspicious abodes adorned with gems and
others inetals. Because of different types of
paintings they looked quite attractive. Their
peaks were adorned with beautiful vases of gems
which have divine lustre. They were created
from best of gems.

Taweafeed o aft cage:

=== PAGE 34 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 5

wal yard wed teat Oita AN ge xt

TRENT: WHA aa: Ya a

Wear Set TAHT AAG ITAA FBG

weve agafesr we wet Frymm ee eH

Goloka stood beyond the globe and above it,
There is no other place above the same. Above
that, it is all void there. There happens to be the
end of the creation beyond the seven neither
worlds, since there is only darkness and water
below them and the place is inaccessible and
nothing can be seen there. You listen from me
the things, which one comes across, up to the
globe and beyond it.
‘ofa stereo Ueto sige AREAS TtetrRUht

ara ugafsearastt su

=== PAGE 35 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 5

31

By VARS:

Chapter - 5
Ode of Sri Kysna

ATAU Sate
Tieité fafaet apr Jaret oat:
WRU TANT: NETSTAT TH gt
Narayana said- Enjoying the view of the
Goloka, the gods delightfully again reached the
gate of Radhikas palace.
aaaafiniate ateargerigay
sfigrearcafirn aaafatiet au Rn
arertatirrannted faufiay
ant fagrs equdfeaguyargn 311
Tafeerel utara
Qaeatiert aaqgesaerg xi
It was built with the best of gems two seater
pedestals, It was studded with the gems of
yellow colour besides jewels and the precious
stoned They came across a door-keeper name
Virabhanu who was quite graceful. He was

seated on a gem-studded lion-throne, adorned
with ornaments studded with gems, clad in

yellow garment, with a gem-studded crown
adoring his head,.

ah faafafeso fafa wrarge

ad faded upeat cafes Fama

agate enue Frvics Frege

wre fernssyear weg arg Tinea: gu

The doors of the palace were painted with
beautiful paintings and all the gods narrated to
the gate-keepers the cause of their arrival there.
On hearing them, the gate-keeper fearlessly
spoke to the gods, you I cannot let you in without
the permission of the lord.

faarvanra sige a

Rega dara act wy GaP

a dere ogden fat age

adtstié fated a gat getter ct

O sage, he sent the messengers to lord Krsna
and got his permission. Thereafter he allowed the
gods to enter. The gods after getting permission,
moved forward and came across another door
which was equally beautiful having astonishing
type of painting drawn over it.

at fig eqyerny a are!
feyit yaraet arerquldaat aT gn
Tafagraret a tayeuryfia
ura a AERA TRENT VTA Ron
O Narada, Candrabhanu was serving there as
the gate-keepers who was of tender age, of dark
complexion and holding a staff of gold seated on
the gem-studded lion-throne. He was adorned
with all the gem-studded ornaments and
surrounded by five lakhs of cowherds.
a dere agdaragdta ergy
waist firt sacred aftrtcrarn gen
Meeting him, the gods reached the third gate
which was more beautiful then the previous ones.
It had beautiful paintings and the gem-studded in
it were issuing lustre.

art figr agg: arg a AT

=== PAGE 36 ===

32

fags quotes fayit varrgeT ez

afirrseyT aire

Taauaent Sed Red caret: THT gH

Fac Turi fet a zea!

a dre wagered arta au ext

inet facert cat - gate aftr

aergt fafas yfad quater eat

an Fg aqydgay aarp

fait Garat aforgusat TEN RI

O Narada, they found the gate-keeper named
Saryabhanu there, who was two-armed and was
holding a flute in his hand. He was of tender age,
having dark complexions, wearing a couple of
kundalas in the ears and had beautiful cheeks. He
was holding a staff of gems in his hand, he was
the servant of Radhamadhava <ccompanied by
nine lakhs of cowherds and was looking like a
great king. Informing him the gods reached the
fourth gate which was more beautiful then the
earlier three and having the lustre of the gems, it
was quite large, astonishing and studded with
various types of jewels which were quite
pleasant to look at. They came across the gate-
keeper named Vasubhanu there, who looked like
the lord of Vraja, quite tender in age, beautiful
one and held a gem-studded staff in his hand.

Tafaeraret a Tamar

wearer a afer YatteTq gon

a dune agdan: wat gta a

aafufaftediafataasdiod wep cn

He was seated on a gem- studded lion-throne,
adomed with all the gem-studded ornaments,
having the lips like the wood-apple fruits. He
wore a serene smile on the face and was quite
pleasant to look at. Informing him the gods move
forward and reached the fifth gate, which was
built in the walls of precious stones and had
beautiful paintings on the door.

arated & eqyeauny war ah
orefaeraret a Tayoryfir een
aaritergs a tamrenfayfiary

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

HAPTAAHAAGUSH NAT 2 0 it
rR ARTA TY
Feed o epee een

It was guarded by the gate-keepers named
Devabhanu who was seated on the gem-studded
lion-throne, adorned with all the gem-studded
ornaments, wearing a crown of peacock feather
adomed with the garland of gems. He wore the
beautiful Aundalas decorated with the flowers of
kadamba. His body was plastered with the paste
of sandal, aguru, kastiri and saffron. He, was
surrounded by ten lakhs of cowherds and
appeared like the lord himself.

4 aaanfit teney agdar yersfera: 1
fart gue farafaferafararn 2 au
aafafagarats yorreafeniaa

ant Page aqy: Yar TTT 3H
ariciaregtared TAREE
TAUSTAT THAT HUSAIN FI
pt quet dre ayeht a aT
arivant fet a aeeaanfafarereror gi 24 tt
at Fath aq waned at: fiery
arenas: gorrren fara 2 & tt
ated qadt waifincarrtat:1i Von

Getting permission from him, the gods
reached the sixth gate which quite surprising and
had several lines of paintings. There were the
walls of precious stones al} round the place and
the garland of lowers were decorating the wall,
the gate-keeper was known as Sukrabhanu who
was adorned with various types of ornaments and
surrounded by ten lakhs of cowherds. He wore
the kundalas resembling the tender leaves of
sandal-wood. Informing him accordingly, gods
moved on to the seventh, gates which was
astonishing built and its workmanship was better
then all the earlier six gates. The gate was
guarded by Ratnabhanu, who was the loving
gate-keeper of the lord. All his limbs were
plastered with the sandal-paste and was adorned
with the garland of flowers and the ornaments of
beautiful gems.

=== PAGE 37 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 5

33

tirtalarentes wars uf

Tafagrerel a STTATET CII

a aaeet Gores aggre yen

fafa at weatsfit fereraror yn 2 8H

He was surrounded by twelve lakhs of

cowherds and appeared like a great king seated
on the gem-studded lion-throne, wearing a serene
smile on the face. Informing the gate-keeper, the
god, moved ahead and reached the eight gate

which was more astonishing than the earlier
seven.

dans & egy: gad Grier
Uferd Getat strausfaerataaeTyN 3 ot
Tapieete a tagusciieny
walciearginred taeusat ATH 3 tH
They came across the gate-keeper known as to
Suparsva and who was smiling gracefully. He
bore the tilaka on his forehead, had beautiful lips,

adored with gem-studded ornament and held the
staff of gems.

trtgiaventa fayitter aura

aa: Bite agdar Fat ereitftaraq 3 2H

aaenetied agaicentary

arp fera eter arerrarretfercarerqt 3 311

erat & aqy: Fact aferarpry

ANeUrgTed yO WAST |

aialagentes doth Grtec

F BUS eed MT YT A AAI 34H

fats aera apr t farerd aq:

walfrdate arena 73 e HN

He was surrounded by twelve lakhs of young
cowherds. Speaking to him, the gods moved on
and reached the ninth gate which was standing
on the four pedestals made of gems and jewels
besides various types of garland of flowers
decorating it. The gate-keeper named Subala

having the charming appearance was standing
there, who was adorned with various types of

gems and surrounded by twelve lakhs of
cowherds, holding a beautiful staff in his hand.
With this permissions the gods reached the tenth
gate which was specially built. Looking at the
gate, the gods were immensely surprised. O sage,
the gate was beyond description and unheard of.

aqyataet a Yani a yar

area @ Honged wet ROI

efapfreero Wye: Uitte

4 qusedt Ba argh Gage

A —~ 1

BRU Baas SET SHIT SH

Uftergaged a Warareor afi

arapatenfarataertearg ¥ 0 1

aerenaingiin GriteTy

PATTER E A ferafara ¥ gH

MSTA ATE AKASH ATT

area frafatrarerarer 2

spent: Falpafiry

fama: uftadt Tera WU

The gate was guarded by the cowherd named
Sudima having astonishing beauty. He
resembled lord Krsna in beauty and was
surrounded by twenty lakhs of cowherds, holding
a staff in his hand. Meeting him the gods reached
the eleventh gate which was also quite
astonishing in structure and was guarded by the
cowherd named Sridam, as the gate-keepers. He
was like the son to Radhika and was clad in
yellow garment and adorned with best of
valuable gems, seated on a lion-throne which
was studded with precious gems. His body was
plastered with pleasant sandal-paste, aguru,
kastiri and saffron beautiful ear ornaments of
gems appeared in his ears. He was also wearing a
crown on his head, the garland of blossoming
jasmine flower adomed his body and was
surrounded by a crores of cowherds.

a tren agelt gremret YT FEM

aprrantadatcanta: waa Ye

=== PAGE 38 ===

34

Informing him the gods moved on to the
twelfth gates, which was built with the pedestals
made with beautiful gems.

Sat caht F iW
aufafifent fat Gat Gare yy

O sage, the walls were constructed with gems
and several paintings were pained on them,
which were quite inaccessible in nature, beyond
vision and unheard of.

wre Paget aqydar aera aT:
ere rTM AT TATUNG
Gaerartern: aattaregfaa:|
gafernenitarensnet: aalgyfear: 1 wot
THREAT TCA TTOTA:|
Fagseegey Tasers: USE

31
asics Frvarefe: usen
Thi wearer Ser: Far Teh
nde aifest apr yaa faerd agsny on

The gods came across the cowherdesses who
were deputed there and were quite youthful,
adorned with all the gem-studded ornaments clad
in yellow lower garment, having beautiful hair
on the head and wearing the garland of fragrant
jasmine flowers, their bodies were adorned with
gem-studded ornaments like armlets, anklets,
wristlets and the kundalas, of gems, their bodies
were plastered with sandal-paste, kastérl, aguru
and saffron. They had developed pelvic region as
well as the breasts, their number was a hundred
crores and were the best in all respect being
beloved of lord Krsna. The gods were surprised
at their sight.

‘waver aT Yet Beat Ayal PA

weer Ae fam fag arty aa a4 gH
TRAM seer egy: YAAET:1

Bett ee AT TT TAT TTT MAT 114 RU
wat: aharagener afer: firey a1
afar yet wea: ifr y Bn

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

O sage, getting permission from him, the gods
moved forward with a pleasant mind. O
Brahmana, thus they came across further these
cowherdesses on three more gates, who were the
best, beautiful, graceful and were fortunate one
and were quite close to Radha. They were
adorned with beautiful ornaments and their
youthfulness was merging out of their bodies.

Wa aaa GE AATgaTATA!
repartee ereatrect ferererdt: 4 x
aren: trey tara fafina agit:
freer Bre WreeTeE TETANY QU
watat @ vari a aired agar:
fara Fats Fag
aarafadestaataryorraad: |
waters acter nye
ceatatgunardecrg wuen
TagSry meswefaniat:|

Wee Tera erro char Rea 4 SU
menu wt ORS SA:
URSA ATETSTET SABA G ot
wearers SAATATEE |
waaarfsaciontir: eiftdaafstr: ng en
areaaaniiterarp ayy

Tan ferenggemferaiferennfartererfart 1 & BN
Ginepri weft a
TAUSH STP TATATATAT: IG 3H
Weeifonras ygeaeara:1

Peete Sar are A SEY AT YU

Thus all the three gates were seen by the gods
like a dream and were quite astonishing unheard
of, quite beautiful and could hardly be described
by the intellectuals. Looking at them and talking
with the beautiful damsels, the gods were
surprised and ultimately they reached the

sixteenth gate which happened to be the main
gate of the inner apartment of Radha, it was the

=== PAGE 39 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 5

best of all the gate and was guarded by only the
cowherdesses. The thirty cowherdesses of the
age comparable to that of Radha, were guarding
the gates their costumes and ornaments were
beyond description. They possessed many good
qualities besides beauty, youthfulness and were
adorned with gem-studded ornaments including
the armlets, anklets and wristlets of gems. Their
waist-bands were decorated with the best of
small-bells their ears were adored with beautiful
ear-ornaments. The garlands of blossoming
jasmine flowers were adorning their breasts.
Their faces resembled the full-moon of, the
winter seasons the beautiful Parijata flowers
were inserted in their hair-do on the heads. They
were adorned with various types of ornaments;
their lies looked like the ripe wood-apples and
wore a serene smile on their faces. Their teeth
resembled the ripe pomegranate fruit which
added to their beauty. All of them had the
beautiful fair-complexion like the campaka
flowers. All of them were slander-waisted and
their noses were adorned with pearls, Their noses
resembled the beak of Garuda and their breasts
were stiff like the temples of the elephants, their
hips were quite heavy and their mind was
attracted towards lord Krsna. For a moment the
gods looked at the cowherdesses.

arantires afar

storia eer wae: Had TAT GG

farqrrarcafintiteqeretteratate:1

Taf aTAAT ArerTatTe af & & 1

anteayriaane wa qoiige

er carmerd Utaatt YA gon

sponser: |

am: tomer ay: vine yorennfgratemer: 1g cH

waaay: feaftramreraett: |

NTT SAYA WANA ATTN EV

The gate was built on the pedestals of precious
gems and there were several pillars of rubies,
diamonds sand the red jewels. The gate was

decorated with the P4rijdta flowers and the
breeze was blew touching those flower carried

35

their fragrant with it. After looking at the gate of
the palace of Radha, all the gods mentally bowed
at the feet of lord Krsna and their desire for
having an audience with him, around All of them
entered the palace with the permission of the
friends of Radhika, the hair on their body stood
at ends. Their minds were filled with devotion
and their eyes were filled with tears, their faces
as well as the shoulders were bent down.
Thereafter they had a close look at the inner
apartment of Radha.

RRO a eet ag Met WET

APPA ATT ATT Tet TEAN9 ot

eae RAAT q TTA
UfeaaT gaat aremaTetfarafsrT io Bn

Among the temples, they found is square
house. It was decorated with the precious stones.
Besides the beautiful diamonds, gems and jewels
were also studded on the pillars in it and
decorated with the garlands of Parijata flowers,

Teragenifined: dereracedtt: 1
SPRATT servtferd BAU BH
UEaaragrararsuarat:
aftrererageas TamrguregiaTis 3 1

O sage, pearls, precious stones, white fy-
whisks, mirrors, precious gems were used in the
kalasas of the house. Besides the tender leaves of
sandal-wood trees were tied intermittently in the
silken cord which decorated the place.

WAT ea RIAA 1
eee ee Wow
weg vag: reve Woyn
wearbtterane: waa yatta & 1

It had the heaps of sandal-paste, aguru,
kastart, saffron, white paddy, white flowers,
coral, fruits, rice, Durvd-grass, scented with
fragrant flowers. vermilion, saffron, garlands of

=== PAGE 40 ===

36

Parijata flowers. which filled the entire

atmosphere with fragrance.

Tayreryg feat: —— wecn

The articles which were available there, were
beyond description, difficult to get in the
universe and inaccessible but were available in
that house. There was a bed made in gems and
look-quite beautiful. It was covered with a fine
silk on cloth. .

afer tapers Taman ARI
arya a arefir daiter fengfierqu 9 <1
APNEA seraTe tery
aura dronfinitithiergayr ¢ ott
Tied arrays gag a aT!
Tari Fongeaat wy: afcarfeaTH c
Tera ania gegen
TETPENTTC RAAT ATT ¢ BW
watt apr aygfafert: gT:!
waetgt ta aqyPTANC BI

wa TY: YA: Vs ara:
vafaerert Tat aqyfererat: | ¢ ¥ 1
aq: waar a uted agerphery
ARAYA ATCT AAPAT TI St
fagnicanquiararayiadry

va te: aye w qatferamMTc kU
wren safert wermerinecgry
TROT AeA MATT C191
aaige a weet wermafaaterry
dente wdc watered Wee cn

O Narada, the house was decorated with
crores of invaluable and beautiful kalasas of
gems and diamonds decorated with vases of
gems and the sweet sound of music was
emerging from the same. The vind and other
musical instruments were being played upon

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

with the beating or the double drums and their
sound was quite pleasant. The songs relating to
the glory of Radha and Krsna were being recited.
All the gods felt surprised with the logk of this
astonishing type of houses they listened to the
sweet music there and witnessed the best of the
dance. All the gods stood there attentively and
they felt attracted towards the sound of the
music, Thereafter the gods spotted a gem-
studded beautiful lion-throne which was as vast
as a bow. It looked circular from all the sides.
Various types of small vases made in gems were
fixed to it. The astonishing types of puppets, the
flowers and the artificial forests were painted in
the same. O Brahmana, they witnessed an
astonishing type of the mass of lustre which
resembled the lustre to crores of suns, it was
shining like the divine flames and its glory was
spread on the height of seven tdla trees. The
mass of lustre could snatch away the tejas of all
and was pervading the entire dsramas, it was all-
pervading, the seed of all and could dazzle the
eyes of all.

Spr ta: wae oF at art:

MOY: WAT Maa AAR TATATEET: 11 C811

warradarmagyuifacieat:|

Yrranigeaatat areargutrateat: 11 ¢ ott

seat Sat: Fae a eT Frege:

TROT AAA: WAT RTT: YEN

At the sight of the blissful one, the eyes of all

the gods were filled with tears and hair on this
body stood and ends. They could have a glimpse
of the success ahead. All of them bowed before
the mass of lustre. Thereafter all of them got up

and went closer to the mass of lustre and looked
at it quite carefully.

eqrad amrat erat aya ayersfer:1

afarat viet Gear art ent a ARN e I
VEQRAAYRTS AHA: |

TUR Yor Tea TTTN g 3

O Narada, while looking at it carefully the

hands of Brahma, the creator of the universe
were automatically folded, He made Siva to

=== PAGE 41 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 5

37

stand on his right and Dharma to his left and with
their mitd filled with devotion, all of them
started offering prayer to the lord, who is beyond
the comprehension of everyone and is the great
soul.

aelara
at ated ard areri @ arUTH
erat weyers Aether AeA ew
Brahma said- I bow in reverence to the form
of lustre who happens to be the best, bestower of
the boons, the cause of the boons and the cause
of all the creatures.
Ae AAA a AAT ARCATA
Sree Baie TATATAN 8 4 1
He is the one who happens to be the prosperity
for all the prosperities, bestower of prosperity

and the base of all of them. I bow in reverence to
the same lustre.

fort waa faferrmenad Trey

Patenfaaed a tained saree &

The one who is all-pervading, uninvolved, the
form of Atmana and beyond the comprehension
of all, indifferent and the subject of discussion
for everyone. I bow in reverence to that lustre,

ari Prfor ger varied WaT

arant & frat aaiet AATATTTN G91
wafer a armmeTnaa

rand aded Tait TAA ect

The one who is of visible and invisible
Brahman, the form of flame, eternal and ever
lasting, having no qualities as well as possessing
all the qualities, I bow in reverence to such a
type of lustre. The one who is manifesto beyond
description and unmanifest, the supreme one, the
one who moves at will and is the form of all. I
bow in reverence to such a type of lustre.

TDaafaarna wast TA.
were 3 get: we fee TAFT a: TENG eH

He is the one who takes to three forms because
of the three qualities (sattva, rajas and tamas).

All the gods have emerged from your rays. You
are beyond sruti and therefore no one can be
aware of your true form.

valent wdedt adders)
walrranraat o tated TATAAETI Ro oll
Therefore the one who is the base of everyone,
the form of everyone the cause of everyone's
without seed and is the cause of end of everyone

and is beyond measures I bow in reverence to the
divine lustre like this.

wet eored w aubtte fewer:

fax arotenfia cat ao Seiad AMTETETN Ro RU

anit fargatatd aadtamy

meaner. watenfat Aaihet TATATTN Yo Vt

You are the from of all the qualities, the only
goal, are discussed by the people of wisdom
always but how can I describe your invisible
form? I bow in reverence to such a form of tejas.
You are formless as well as with form, having
the organ of senses and without them, you have
no witness but you serve as a witness of all. 1
therefore adore the form of tejas.

TaTeTg aeay: weary

wea aay AeiteSs TATTSTN Go BU

You move at several places without feet, you
can see everything without the eyes and can eat
without the hands and the mouth, I bow in
reverence to that lustre.

ae Rrefad ag wat: wens aforgyy

Resfrafert aaasined TATA go wi!

waet serie arwalig vente aq!

waleranrrtat aeaiEAd TATRA Ro GN

The intellectual are unable to truly visualise
the form described in the Vedas but even the
Vedas as conceived him beyond description. I,
therefore, adore the form of that tejas. You are
the one who is the lord of everyone and is
otherwise also, the one who happens to be the
beginning and end of everything, who happens to
be the soul of everyone and also behave
otherwise, I adore the form of that fejas.

=== PAGE 42 ===

ae faerat aot Seri wr: ATT
Uret erat eat wat Ri weer AT Ssfir AAU GUI

Iam myself the creator of the universe and the
Vedas, the protector of Dharma and the destroyer
of the universe therefore there is no one else to
offer prayer to you.

tam ve anisd wert a frefia.

Tarssqet a deat rat are FrafeAigo 111
frsniafrenisé aearsteeaan

aftr werenaT a et RBTAT A A: MYR

Dharma was deputed only to serve you. Siva
was entrusted at your command to serve as a
destroyer for the prescribed period and I have
become the creators of the universe because of
my serving at your lotus-like feet. Because of
you I bestow the reward for the deeds. Therefore
you happen to be the lord of the devotees like us.

wang farragett yar faafaat aay
va aafafaen: what Ferry Baa: 11R0 81

We are attracted towards the worldly elements

in this universe like the word-apple. Similarly

there are innumerable devotees of your sin the
other globes.

war 3 ten Topi vat FarmviTarT

adi sree aed wig aH aratggoit

Uhacinfaat rasta

wade reat faut: Seppe Agee

Since the particles of dust and atoms can never

be counted similarly the number of your
devotees cannot be counted but the one who is
the creator of everyone's who can be competent
enough to offer prayers to him because the
Mahavisnu one in whose hair-pit a complete
globe is enshrined happens to be only the
sixteenth part of your rays.

ered aif: ad adagaifee
ARTA: VAT OMEGA
All the yogis meditate upon your present, form

and with their mind filled with devotion, your
devotees always serve at your feet.

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

TAT ee a apa TT gga

Fareed ware ae

fast yiotest afin Geter eee

nairesgs a mrenitsremfrsrt

RAT OR HARTA ITN ge HI

+ aegeracra)

ampere feretfen reqgpesrarerd 8K I

WPM WTA AT

Ue fare GETS TATATT ee!

Um Talfsnate cs trrTETy

Rettacrayet a Ferd TaTTATSTI RCI

TMitaeateaaay Tarawa.

We aifsoret 3 AE at aT TegH gee!

Therefore, O Jord, you appear before us in
your tender, beautiful and attractive form, which
is like the new clouds and has dark-complexion,
clad in yellow lower garment, having two
holding a flute in the hand, wearing a smile on
the face, quite harming and the best, wearing a
peacock father over the head, decorated with
garlands of jasmine flowers, having the sandal-
paste plastered over all the limbs. The sandal-
paste, kasturi, aguru, and saffron are applied
over all the limbs and you are adorned with all
the ornaments studded with gem, wearing a kirit
a-mukufa on the head, having the face of the
fully blossomed lotus flowers of the winter
season and the lips resembling the ripe wood-
apples. You are the one having the teeth like the
ripe pomegranate seeds, standing under the
kadamba tree anxious to perform the divine
dance with the cowherdesses, glancing at your
smiling face, the one in whose chest Radha
always dwells. Who will not be anxious to have
a look at such a charming face of yours?.

seaqacan fearge MOAT YA: WAI

Ua BIT Era Tash viet: TATUM
FaTH ye yaar Erguuifaciraa:1
frariisft ya: what wempfeaeyara 1122 a

=== PAGE 43 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 6

SaATeRATSSTY wa shepETTATAT BA
wearing Fart werrenifia: GTN VW
Wararet ata win a: wal
agehe gat alee Parett creat gaa
qugupiam geht qrata a1
afornfeafatg a areieafeaquar exit
Thus speaking Brahma the creator of the
universe, started bowing before him again and
again. Similarly, Siva and Dharma also offered
prayers to him with their eyes filled with tears
and bowing before him again and again. The
gods also offered their prayer remaining there. O
sage, in that dsrama all the gods were influenced
with the lustre of lord Krsna, whosoever will
recite this stotra of lord Krsna recited by
Brahma, Visnu and Dharma after offering puja,
with devotion daily, he will achieve the
inaccessible and deep devotion of the lord.
sea femygras ferena: yfrit gem
afeaigiatates wares gfiirrmieean
This is inaccessible to the gods, the demons
and the sages and if one gets the slavehood of the
lord, all his siddhis including anima and Salokya
and all the four types of salvation are achieved
by him. He is adored in the universe like Visnu
and becomes famous like him. He attains success
in speech as well as mantras.
yas fern afaet ferent are TATE
Veit afta wrest ype YP: WaT:
aatftes farareion eet Gamba TA URgel
He achieves all the fortunes sound health and
his glory spreads in the universe. He achieves
sons, knowledge, poetry and the indestructible
riches. The goddess Laksmi always resides him.
He becomes chaste and noble and all his people
becomes stable. His glory pervades the universe
for a long time and ultimately he achieves the
abode of lord Krsna.
Bf staan Ugo sipUTETE. TWeATS Tieteauhy
SPOTS AT USPHS ETAT 4 A

39

=== PAGE 44 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 6

39

BN UBISEATT: |

Chapter - 6

Emergence of Si Krsna and Radha from
the mass of lustre

ARTIUT SAT

erent eet a fase fared Asa: Fe
qe wet writ arrtaam a
Temsiganht afar qaery
Winged Bt TetaaeTTSTTNT
TSA ANAT Ta HUSA
BRATS we aot TST

afaqeefaerrraatantrr

afore carton Rreoratgenatie: is

uafiet quot teagitta yf:

farteqreigeiarrercrteet 1

Narayana said- Standing before the mass of
lustre the gods offered there salutations and
prayers and soon after that they found a human
body inside the lustre which was having the
complexion of the clouds filled with water, quite
graceful, wearing a serene smile on the face.
Immensely charming, blissful, the one who could
attract all the three worlds, wearing makara-
kundalas in the ears gem-studded ankicts wom
over the lotus-like feet, pure like the fire and was
clad in yellow garment, was adomed with best of
ornaments studded with gems and rubles holding
a flute, pleased all having the lips like the ripe
wood-apples.

WHATS HAAS

Rae yfecntgrnaelt: MATING

He was looking at the gods delightfully and
was anxious to do good to his devotees. He had a
vast chest which looked like the doors of the box
illumining everything.

BR UTa ARATE TATA ATA

aa date ards equ Uttar Nl

weed afta ard Uparit aT

TRaTehatahrdaeauehenfearai ear < 1

=== PAGE 45 ===

40

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

Sagara Page
meer Uren rae aATE TS
aRphamrgerntgarerrayry
orga wrerguferiararg go

The best of kaustubha gem worn by him was
illuminating the environment. The gods also
found Radha with beautiful figure within the
mass of lustre. She was looking with her side-
glance with a smile on her face towards his
beloved. She had the line of teeth which could
put even the jewels to shame. She was pleasantly
smiling with grace! her eyes resembled the lotus
flowers of winter season, her face had a glory
before which the moon of the winter season of
no consequence. She looked quite graceful, she
had beautiful lips which could steal away the
beauty of the flowers at noon. Her mouth was
looking charming, she was adorned with the
anklets which produced the dangling sound.

Ting warieretfatsratsreart

FH MATTE g RI

RTA TTA OA TAT)

ReernfarqatyenyravatertsrerT 82H

Teruitganan fafguimerd zany!

THAR HUTTE 23 1

Tan faratteiaerHUSey|

wuitahe wuigront aubyroreyerer gi gy

She had beautiful nails which were shining
like the gems. The soles of her feet were tainted
with saffron and were emitting beautiful shine.
She was wearing the waist-band which was made
of the best of gems and her pelvic region
appeared quite graceful. She had the element of
having been clad in the fine and valuable
garment purified by fire. Her tinkling ornament
was studded with the best of gems. She was also
wearing the garland of gems besides the armlets
and wristlets. The gem-studded Aundalas worm in
the ears added to her glory, she had also the par
ornaments studded with gems adorning her ears.

GiiaepgHrarraraitfnet aa
Tree SHR RTATATALN RH

Her nose resembled the beak of Garuda and
her nose was decorated with the pearls. In her
curly hair, the garland of jasmine flowers were
decorated.

Tree BRR gt sat wTeTy MATA
TATA ATCT STOTT RG I

Her breasts were decorated with the rosaries of
the best of diamonds. With the decoration of the
garland of Pdrijdta flowers, her costumes
appeared more graceful.

Tagrtafat: aagietagtiary

fernigiaantee ferramfengfie: 12011

qergaat Tahffeat vgyett:

TRA fecnTT ATMA RCH

WTAE UT RLTETA

Preresiftreterat dreary 88 11

The fingers of her hands were decorated with
the gem-studded finger rings, she also wore the
best of the ornaments of the conches which were
entwined in the silken cord. By interweaving the
gem in the red silken cord it appeared as if they
had put themselves to shame. She was clad in
spotless garments having the colour of the
molten gold. Her body was looking quite
charming. She appeared like a figure of elegance
from the pelvic region. Because of the stiff
breasts, the costume was folded.

afta qact: wa: dieefor fargfad:1

faternferayn: wet apt antiga ae,

FSIS Yu: wes oeyuheta: 112011

She was looking beautiful adorned with all the
ornaments. All the gods felt surprised having a
look at, the goddess. Thinking in their mind that
they were successful in their mission, they
started eulogising her.

getara
aa BUTS WASATCH
wag waiter Paneer wet

qarfaweninmarrynaitvera
qeequituaat ef aft a arearqie ii

=== PAGE 46 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 6

4

Brahma said- O lord, the black-wasps of my
mind who always roam about around your lotus-
like feet and you bestow your devotion which
should enable us to remove the sufferings
emerging out of the riches of the universe and
provide us; to remove the sufferings emerging
out of the riches of the universe and provide us
peace and your slavehood.

vat Sara
venctataaigearia wctat
aaa waraferaerga
CEpr| a Fal et Vleet -
mara wat wife fe warfare 2H
Siva said- My mind like the fish is floating in
the ocean of the universe. Therefore removing
the condemned action of the destruction of the

universe and relieving me from the same, you
bestow the devotion of your lotus-like feet.
ad sara
aa faororrerd Soret adhe
wag favreerset degen:
Wa MOT TAATTHeY-
Safe waft wat Ufe craft gu
Dharma said- O my lord, you bestow me a
sharp sword which could destroy the fetters of
worldly attractions and enjoy the company of
your devotees. It happens to be the only way to
serve at your feet. You bestow the devotion of
your lotus-like feet in each one of my births.
seed wet Great ufequlaarat:!
STAT Yea eTE AT TTEETTA: 112 1
Thus offering prayers, having their desires
fulfilled, all the three of them stood before Krs
na, the spouse of Radhika.
quant wert grat ayara sara:
fat cet o aed Brera !S AGH
On hearing the prayer of the gods, the
compassionate lord Krsna with a smiling face
spoke to them, the beneficial and truthful words.

stan sara
fawarsstreme Yer wera AA AT:
frrarrarot aeret WE Ya A ATTA E
fafgeren wart ar fern at af fer
feutisé westag weeisé KAA au01
Lord Krsna said- O gods, you are my people
there is no doubt about it. Therefore you come
along and have your seats. Such of the people
who has takes refuge with lord Siva, it would not
be proper to enquire about their welfare, is such
you be rest assured at this place. How can you
have any cause of worry when I am there. I
pervade all the creatures, but I appear in person
only after salutations.
yere anhires ad arate Pfs
wage w aed art ay vferafaneci
IT am quite well-aware of the purpose of your
arrival here. One gets the reward of good and
bad deeds at the appropriate time.
TERR aed wd arerad YT:
QS ae a wa: hem: Ym: Tame
O god, the big or the small appears, according
to the time. The trees blossom according to the
time.
uftuaanen: areisaret Weaenfaa:|
FS 32 faucivedtenferarqergyrqy ott
eainetg a adarisqufany
a fg wee fra: at on fafa at srrerag en
wet arlagead wacarter: fira:1
Tart wre: yet ger gente 4113 21
antueraad was aay TAT:
Berane Sa Hee Teh TTS BH
yao watia we wert TAT
Bal: Wa Mares SagvETTTISTATIIa v1
At proper time they bear fruits and at proper
time they have unripe fruits. The pleasure, pain,
misery, wealth, grief, worries, good and bad
appear before a person according to the result of
his own deeds at suitable times. In fact, there is

=== PAGE 47 ===

42

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

no one liked or hated in the universe. It happens
according to time, that the unliked person is also
liked. You have observed the conduct of the
people like Manus and the kings. Bearing the
results of their own deeds, all of them proceed to
the heavenly abodes. The moment you have
spent in the Goloka presently, during the same
period on the earth seven manvantaras have
elapsed, seven Indras have spent their times and
currently the eighth Indras is in position.

arora gaa weet a fear

SAT AMAT MT: We BTTATRT TATU AN

My wheel of time rotates always; therefore
even Indra, Manu and kings disappear according
to the time.

afd: yeoat quana sereraranifarg

aepiste & Ua serge whee: gH

At present only their glory, virtues, and the
stories of their noble deeds are known on earth.
Even now there are a number of kings who are
wicked and denounce lord Hari.

ayqdedt wat weraereaeee:|
ad areata Ua: SAAT TTT 1!
There had been several valorous kings on
earth but all of them had ultimate to leave for the
heavenly abode.

safest areiist ardt arf Fea
afadefa gave aula wmssHaTg C11

The time Is present even at the moment. With
my command the wind always blows, the fire
burns and the sun emits the heat.

ened: Ufa Bey Bevel ayy!
aaa Sere: WA SAT WATS TAT BH
O gods, the ailments appear in the bodies at
my command, the death is influencing all the
creatures and the clouds pour rain at my
command.
prawatrer famrge warereraert: |
went getter aera AFT: 1¥ 01
The Brahmanas are engaged in their respective
duties, the ascetics are engaged in tapas, the

Brahmarsis are engaged in search of Brahman
and yogis are engaged in yogic practices.

a ad Wea: anteriaert:|

wanted Fa-grgr aaifaelerenrca: 1 U1

All of them are engaged in their respective
dharma getting panicky from me, but my

devotees who destroy the karmas are quite free.
tan: arora arentsé faera engta a
Harceng: Meat UY: WaT TUT BN
O gods, I am death for the death, the creator

for the creator and destroyer of the destroyer,
besides being the protector of the protector.

WUUSSHASS Weal AAT AA eT: BAT:

wa fayage afpedt: wat ive WOMANS 31

Siva became destroyer at my command that is
why he is called Hara. You are the creator of the
universe being the cause of the universe and
because you protect them you become the
protector of dharma.

senfagurrdst welaraettgat:|

erarincrertsé arifaforana: ee 11

I happen to be the lord of everyone, starting
from Brahm to a straw. I bestow the reward of
ones own deeds and uproots the deeds.

ag utefenta aeraraty xfer

amd wfefaentit dat wat a Ish aT xu

Who can protect the creatures who are to be
killed by me? Who could protect the creatures
who are to be destroyed by me.

welaraf teat wer wraTseaa ay

aie wrnye sara Hert Facaafear sg

I happen to be the creator, the preserver and
the destroyer of everyone but I am unable to
destroy the devotees who have achieved the
eternal body.

aT HAG Frermreararlaaat: |

BE Te MPATAT WUT

The devotees always remain engaged in the
adoration of my feet. Therefore, they follow me
and I always remain with them for their
protection.

=== PAGE 48 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 6

43

wd avaha menos swat yt: WA:

ai om: woata feggiys frome tt

In the universe everything ms destroyed again
and again, reemerging at the same time, but my
devotees never get destroyed but remain quite
hail and hearty and freely roam about in the
universe.

art fanfgad: wd aret asoka at amy
2 at ares warert aaesat ao aise: ve!

Therefore all the intellectuals aspire for
achieving my slavehood and they do not aspire
for any other boon. Graceful are the person who
aspire for my slavehood and other people are
deprived of it.

WATTS T TAMA

arti aftorafea 3 weart a afefaqy ot!

Thus the birth, the death, the old age, ailment,
fear and the torture of Yama are meant for other
people and not for my devotees.

sre 7 ferent: arty quay wdanfitor:1

we Gif dato aig hiry a

BE WOTGET AAT ART: TOT TATA

erat 3 a at fet arerafateentrergiy 2

as Geek aa dtewré Eto

aaa: Cemigtists afer way sifagny git

aa Y Tera seat werchtiifeaary

7 rared Fa sift anf dai ao WARY s1

Because my devotees are never involved in
sinful ways and always engage themselves in
noble deeds and as such I surely destroy the
result of their deeds, I happen to be the life of the
devotees who daily meditate upon me while I
myself recite their name daily. The Sudarsana-
cakra with sixteenth spokes is very sharp and
one-sixteenth of its lustre can destroy the entire
universe, I don't feel satisfied; by giving away
the cakra for the protection of my devotees.
Therefore I myself remain with them always.

FR eared o agus Tete clara
a feat rene aaferarere TTT GU

I don't feel stable in the Goloka or with Radha
as much as | do by remaining with my devotees
whenever they stay.

writer: dad rer feats feanfrery
ae wronferenr crattt & opener fire & 11

Though Radha is dearer to me than my life
and she dwells always on my chest. But you
devotees are much dearer for me than Laksmi.

wma a raged vase qevaT: |

armed areata ga qgadt aft: ATTUG ot

O lord of the gods, I lovingly accept the
offerings made ray devotees with deep sense of
devotion but whatever is given by a none-
believers to me is not accepted me at all. Such
offerings are consumed by Bali himself.

eipresnicacar eared arehtery

qentagra afaed crane 2 11

The devotees do not care for their wives, sons
and others members of the family and spend
towards the time only in adoring me. Therefore
leaving you all, I always adore such of my
devotees.

ger aa 8 seat gaat Tarafan

aE tant a feat afar Fafsry eit

meisfat 8 avaha gar agt gouty aI

a mista caren aut aa earuheraig of

That is why in case the wicked people troubles
my devotees, Brahmanas, cows, yajfias and gods,
they get destroyed like the straw which in the

fire. Such people cannot be protected by anyone
till Tam there.

arent yfadt Rat ara at eae

qa dairetn vit esa YATE BN

Been Sat ae areaTga ira:

sare wet ated wed Teeter V1

Therefore, O gods, I shall incarnate on earth
but all of you should return to your respective
abodes. I shall incarnate on earth from my
Goloka. Having been thus spoken to the gods,
the lord of the universe, called for the cowherds

=== PAGE 49 ===

44
and cowherdesses and talked them
appropriately according to the time.

thor where Yop art east TT
AUT ye fant was cant TARE SU

He said, "O cowherds and cowherdesses listen
to me, you go to Vraja on earth and O Radhika,
you proceed to the abode of Vrsabhanu."

geargiiren aed saree

GAT YA A HIATT AAG YI

fagui art aan aan wen a afeary

We Galea: MUSA. 1 TAT TT TBE GH

Te ye oH oe vind Feast aa

AUT STRUT TEU HATTIE 1

Vrsabhanu has a loving queen known as the

chaste loving queen known as the chaste
Kalavati who happened to be the daughter of
Subala and was born out of the amsa of Kamala,
she was the mind born daughter of the manes and
is considered to be quite graceful among the
ladies. In earlier times she was born in Vraja
with the curse of Durvasa. O louts faced one, you
go and take your birth in that house. Therefore,
you go to Vraja of Nanda, I shall own you there
from my childhood.

va & wrote ce wa womens
3 fafacrertfitatang wea fegon

O Radha, you are dearer to me than my life
even and J am like the same to you. There has
been no point of separation or difference
between us. Both of us have one and the same
form.

grea after aa ete Wafagem

uit agyaannat goed RANE CH

O sage, on hearing this, Radhika getting
infatuated with love kept on crying and started
starring at the face of the lord with her eyes.

aetna Worga Treg yaeiaen

Torrgaant @ abet ret yAE et

O cowherds and cowherdesses, you are also to
be born on earth in the divine houses of the
cowherdse

to

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

vafaraat wd egy WATT!

afirrarartor ereehor ferefFearqii9 01

vararreren find eto:

aaa aaySr yea eit

WeaHA ST MESO Yethrry

Ufterargarat aremaretferTI 9 VI

udaratgad waged yy

Aa: SERUNge PATTI 81

In the meantime all of them found a divine
chariot there which was built with precious gems
and studded with rubies. It had a Jakh of white
fly-whisks, ten thousands mirrors, fine clothes,
sanctified by fire, having thousands of pitchers
built in gems, having large number of garlands of
Parijdta flowers and had a number of the best of
courtiers. It was like gold, auspicious, possessing
lustre and had the glory like hundreds of suns.
i yet vant yt awh '

Vp tarat ays!

fatfet quater armrentenghinry

RATT Ra AMAA HAA N9 I

ug aaa wager

TAUTLAATNT ATRTAUTTATAIN & 1

In that a human being was seated having dark-

complexion, with charming appearance, holding
Samkha, cakra, gadé and padma. He wore
yellow lower garments, kirifa crown, kundalas
and the long garland of forest flowers. His body
was plastered with sandal-paste, aguru, kastiri
and saffron. He had four arms and had a smiling
face and was anxious to shower his grace on his
devotees. He was adorned with all the ornaments
studded with gems.

Sat cama Vai Yara wey
Tarangire if Teaa4reraniei9i
reno PIAA
weaferaetat a Sega TTT C

To his left there appeared a fair complexioned
goddess who was adorned with all the ormaments
and was clad in the yellow lower garment. She

=== PAGE 50 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 6

45

had the face resembling the full moon of tie
winter season, the eyes resembling the lotus
flower of the winter season, the lips resembling
the ripe wood-apple, wearing serene smile on her
face and appeared quite elegant.

Aue wee AT

faenfiargedt a arreat areas gn

She was holding vind, a book and a flute in
her hands. She was anxious to shower her grace
over the devotees, she happens to be goddess
Sarasvati, the all intelligent one and the goddess
of learnings.

art afantt Tat yea

verantantat aferat Gate. ott

There was another goddess standing to her
rights who was having the lustre resembling the
crores of moons. Her complexion was like the
molten gold. She had a smile on her face and
looks quite charming.

Tragusenal wy qatefantrary

PASAT AT YAN. BH

Her beautiful cheeks were illumining the fustre

of the gems. She was adorned with the best of
omaments and valuable costumes.

TIAA TRUM ATTL
TAA HOTTA ATTN. Ul
4 1

muirafafguigemerteranraara
URATAM TART ATTA ATTA 311
She was wearing gems which added to her

glory. She wore anklets on her feet which
produced dangling sound. She had a waist-band
tied around her waist with small bells dangling in
it. The garland of Parijata flowers was falling on
her breasts.

WASeTaTAMTAT A y MHS A TTA
PETIT SaT eA AAT ¥
Her hair was decorated with the garlands of
jasmine flowers, her beautiful face was snatching
away the beauty of the moon.

afaneeeafecaefrcrenferara

FATT AATEC I

Her forehead was decorated with the spots of
kastart and saffron, her eyes resembled the fully
blown lotus flower of the winter season and the
collyrium was applied to them.

ARMA AAT HATTA ATT

areata uyat ayaa SARE G11

She was holding a lotus with thousands petals,
she was casting a side-glance over Narayana who
was looking at her.

wae Tat wears: BeUTia:!
TT a TAT TAT newn
Surrounded by his wives and the courtiers, the

lord descended at once from the chariot and
reached the court of cowherds and cowherdesses.

Rar erga Tarver TY: WHAT Ye

amaaraeaar He a AAA ci

All the cowherds and cowherdesses welcomed
the lord with folded hands while the sages recited
the passages from Samaveda adoring him at the
same time.

Ta ANU Sat Fach: Fonts

qe u weed 8 ad fers ages

Narayana after reaching that place, merged his
body into the body of lord Krsna which surprised
all those present there.

Uaftrartt aa MARSTTATATT

wae we faa: wat a rat WAG Olt

ans ugatgerarentenyiet: |

Garaen: starafera: GarreTqe el

In the meantime descending from the chariot,
lord Visnu the preserver of the universe also
descended from the chariot of gold. He had four
arms and was decorated with the long garland of
forest flowers. He was clad in yellow lower

garment, graceful and wore serene smile on the
face.

waters: qatern:)
SAYS TF GBT TST: WoT BANg BH

=== PAGE 51 ===

46

He was adorned with several ornaments and
had the lustre of hundreds of suns. O sage,
looking at him all the people got up to welcomed
him and meekly offered the prayer to him.

a anfa ciate afer fame
B apr wearverd ferared wed ays118 311

He also merged himself into the body of lord
Krsna the spouse of Radhika. The sight, further
surprised all the people.

fees Stee: aagtaRrenfah
waferaat goles wrahad:11¢ vi
Yaurieadargt ae dato: wa:
meayiat yea: wer 8 GH

After the merging of Visnu, the dweller of
Sveta-dvipa in the body of lord Krsna, a person
named Sarhkarsana arrived there who had a fair
complexion like the crystal gems. He had a
thousand heads and the lustre of hundreds of
suns.

amr Jaq: wes apr at faopfereny
WEUSSTR AHA GSTS TAPATTNG & I
Finding Sarhkarsana having arrived there
resembling the body of Visnu, all the people
offered prayer to him. He also arrived before lord
Krsna, the spouse of Radhika an adored him.

Weagel wae F WORTT a ANE!
arat a enigat gt TATA g ott
cittsé HONEA BY GIT AT:
wegaeniva Tepes wa ag ci

O Narada, he bowed in reverence to the lord
Krsna with all his thousands heads. Thereafter
both of us known as Nara and Narayana also
reached there, I merged himself into the feet of
lord Krsna but Nara incarnated himself in the
form of Arjuna. Thereafter, Brahma, Siva, Sesa
and Dharma stood side.

Uaferant tat egy WATT

wauharfarant @ arareraftarerig cut
frgarciget afeyatyeraan
yarernragat yficd HUTgA: 120 of!

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

aaerarcncrerarges feat

PCAN GARH Bee: YHA go BUI

meena Wena

Formenganivemmtat ATTN BN

TaMnftraaaaant wet WYATT

feagaicreagerat: arrafatami go 31

In the meantime all the gods sighted a divine

chariot which was built with the best of gold and
several types of the best of gems were studded in
it. It had the best of jewels and precious stones,
the clothes sanctified by fire white fly-whisks
and mirrors, having a number of kalasas built in
gems, a large number of garland of Padrijdta
flowers and had a thousand wheels. It could
move with the speed of the mind and was quite
pleasant to look at. The lustre of the mid-day sun
or the winter season was of no consequence
before the same. It had a large number of rubies
and diamonds shining in it. A large number of
puppets, flowers, streams, forests, were adding to
its astonishing grandeur.

tart eran a wri vat FA

aar venoiean Fahd fayaartom yo x11

O sage, the chariot was far bigger than the

chariot of the gods and the demons. It was built
by Visvakarmi for the sake of lord Siva.

arrived w aqaisnfaaay
aqeragge: wifid eaaFet: 12041

It was fifty yojanas in height, four yojanas in
width and had a large number of pleasures
houses, as beautiful as the damsels themselves.

area aqydat tarciareyfiary
METEOR WATATTHTETAATT Fo G11
Wa: eget yopferitgata
TERA G A WATT AAT Fo 91
Segraraaral TAA

TOS IAA A ALAGUSHI SAAT 20 6 tl
TaeaTaaU ATA
TuitataeT EEA MATT go 8 Ht
RATA HMC
TAO RT: PITTA 8 20 UT

=== PAGE 52 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 6

47

Proaafartni trraageranry

PRG aT Rafer RR

SRT TATA TSA

SAT eH Li ferareafayfaATTU gg

Farapiiarmtprecgenaary

Ferafgrre Tater sta

WHC ATCT AHA ATT RLSH

The gods found Malaprakrti in that chariot
who was adorned with all the omaments studded
with g: ns and had the complexion resembling
the molten gold and the lustre of the diamond.
The goddess possessing great lustre had
thousands of arms in which different types of
attributes were held by her. She wore smile on
her face and happened to be quite graceful to her
devotees. She wore the best of the kundalas in
the ear. She wore anklets which produced
dangling sound and were quite beautiful. She had
the waist-band of gems decorating the middle
part of a body. Her hands were adorned with
wristlets and armlets made of the best of gems
and a beautiful garland or Mandara flower was
falling on her breasts, her pelvic region was well-
built and her breasts were well developed; her
face resembled the full moon of the winter
season. The collyrium was applied in her eyes
which resembled the lotuses of the winter season.
The sandal-paste, aguru, kastiri were painted in
her body. Her lips resembled the lustre of the
flowers which blossom during the mid-day; her
teeth resembled the luster of gems; she was
wearing the blossomed jasmine flowers in the
hair and was losing quite graceful.

U
afaysigarntasataat WyRATTU gee
Faeqearract ganat afeat yan
sae Waal sigh WOT TUR RG I

She had the nose resembling the beak of,
Garuda and she wore the pearl in the nose, she
was clad in beautiful garments were emitting
lustre and were sanctified by fire. She was seated
over the back of the lion with a pleasant mind
together with her sons. She got down at once
from the chariot and bowed before Sri Krsna.

garai afga eat ayaa aera

WOT: Saree ea Foot TTATTN RE

The goddess got herself seated together with
her sons. Both GaneSa and Karttikeya bowed
before eternal Krsna.

aaa vient eta aacieaH

STYMTT Sar BT at Freeat ego

anfgrd a egdat arearargefatch

Anat Ge Hare wRSA YalaAT- geet

AEeaT Bae Saws Yea ts

art trerge ageit ay feheraTHeT:112N 11

sara are FT: NTA:

a res dorayé AAT APaAT ez oll

deat set ort or ef aaa

wa wfot materi wens spftst afeiig? a

Thereafter, she bowed in reverence to Siva,
Dharma, Ananta and Brahma. Looking at both
the gods, all the gods welcomed her with sons.
All the gods blessed them variously and making
them sit besides the lord, they started conversing
with them. All the gods took their seats in the
court which surprised all the cowherds and
cowherdesses. Thereafter, lord Krsna spoke to
Laksmi smilingly, "O eternal goddess, you go to
the abode of king Bhismaka which is filled with
various types of gems and you be born there
from the womb of Vaidarbhi. O chaste lady, I
myself reaching the Kundina city shall accept
your hand in marriage.

at tea: wad apr gene rata:

Tafeierat Ta areaTaTy ieee ee UI

All the goddesses got up looking at Parvati

and they made her sit’on the charming gem-
studded lion throne.

fas weddicettamfegad:!
wep at Teer a weteRTTN 2 BH
O Brahmana, Parvati, Laksmi and Sarasvati
seated on the lion-throne started conversing with
one anti others.
arya Seay: Sata TAT: |
syitatean: arveryer arat a detest

=== PAGE 53 ===

48

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

sign: welt aa agare soreaft:

Rfer rarirRtT Sr TEST YANG

SRT apart: Beat Tetra

Bt Sr weTeTe afeetereamfefim gg gt

The daughter of the cowherds talked to them
quite gracefully. The cowherd decease also felt
delighted taking their seats besides them. There-
after Krsna the lord of the universe said to
Parvati, “O goddess you go to Vraja be born
from your amsa in the house of Nanda. O
goddess of great illusion, you can destroy the
universes you be bom from the womb of Yasoda
from Nanda representing the image of welfare.

amt at a Yat & arfaent ye

Fe waa war aity yg Ae!

wateergedt wat qafeata arat:1

serinhateetdtertige yarsFaat: 192 cl

I shall make you the goddess, who will be
adored in every village. The people will adore
you as the chief goddess in houses and in the
forest with devotion everywhere; they will offer
you the divine articles for consumption.

raqufireasiartor afar] fare
feat wi aa Heeger waft Lee
O Siva, as soon as you will touch the earth,
my father will consecrate me in the labour room
and he will take your in my place.
saan afafe frarra
ATAATOL Sra SATA TAMA 83 oH
At the sight of Karisa you will go back to Siva
and I after relieving the earth of her burden shall
retreat to my abode.

saan stefquiqana @ wer
steretror aca wat nfereafis eTAETTN NG VU
araaenya WH a oe TAT ETAT

ae am: Tat meg aviator gs VN
arent aftents agarara Parr
Sagar Ulead fererat at 23 311
megdarya Serge tier wrap A

Uaferaat gen ATTA et: YT
yarafestrenrngara farratad:1193 ¥11

Thus speaking the lord immediately spoke to
Karttikeya, "O best of the gods you reaches the
earth from your amsa and he born as a son from
the womb of Jambavati. All the gods should go
to the earth and be bom from their amsa on the
land, I shall surely relieve the earth of her
burden. Thus speaking, the lord of Radhika was
seated on the lion-throne. Thereafter, the gods,
goddesses and the cowherdesses also took their
seats. In the meantime Brahma stood before the
lord with folded hands and started speaking to
the lord of the universe in humble tone.

velrara

wart ae fenit farater Feary

SA HS ASNT HET Ga wet BFA Ng ai

wat Urahgrenat Vaart Wy: aN

BY: dar aH Sea HAA TIE

& tat: Ga wt fora aera wa

ga aed a fad a Wetec e301!

wet aert gen weyara seTeae: |

Ua Teme eT sperenhe ferent: 1123 C11

Brahma said- O blissful one, you kindly listen
to a request of mine. O lord you give me your
command as to who would be lodged and where
on earth? The lord always feeds his servants,
protects them and redeems them also, such a
servant is always called the devotes and he
always obeys the command of the lord. You
kindly tell me which one of the gods and
goddesses would be born as which place on the
earth and by which one of the rays of the gods or
the goddess? In whose abode would they be born
and what will be there names? On hearing the
words of Brahma, the lord of the universe
replied, "I am going to tell you appropriately the
places were each one of them would be lodged."

sien sara
marred fear vantaradt ait
WATE Ye ATTEN HPFTATIN gS 8

=== PAGE 54 ===

<RSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 6

49

a re ght fan aasfreg va a

aret piftragt arongat sfeeafen es ott

oped Raattraistfectet srreate:

ran aterenatarear eeRtUT: MY 1 ail
aaferet alarean WRIST Weta

sateter genet meq TeaTAT eS

aafeet Seana a ae arated att

agent Berra vom Set area gw 31

Uigoh fafa a afar we

Geach TAMIA TTS ge ST
Tare Beiter @ efewaren: Ferd za
Giignatsaraadt afedtort ayer yA eeu tl
aaiger vega ag aaa TET

Sere vente TAY Wea FTI walt
seorernfirt faa yaagtorrentary

anfergt Sfe ara safes Stet TAISsTATI vot

Sri Krsna said- Kamadeva would be born as
he son of Rukmini, he would be married with
Mayavati, the daughter of Sambrasura, who
vould be the reflection of Sati. You will be the
‘on bor to her and will be known by the name
of Aniruddha, Bharati would be born as the
jaughter of Bandsura in Sonitapura. The lord of
he universe would be born from the womb of
Rohini, he would be known also with the name
of Sathkarsana because the foetus would be
irawn from the womb of DevakI and
ransplanted in to the womb of Rohini by means
of illusion. In the land of Bharata Kalindi, the
laughter of Sarya would be born out of the rays
of the Ganga. With half of her amsa, Tulasi
would be born as princess Laksmana. Savitri the
nother of the Vedas would be born as the
jaughter of Nagnajit and would be known with
he name of Satya. Vasundhara would be born as
3atyabhama and Sarasvati would be born as
Saivya. Rohini would be born as the princess
iamed Mitravinda, Sanjiia the wife of Sirya
would be born as Ratnamala by her ray or
Ratnamala of Jagatsvami. Susila would be born
of the amsa of Svaha besides nine other ladies
neluding Rukmini. Durga would be born from

half of her amsa as Jambavati. These would be
the ten chief queens the names of whom are
given by me. Parvati from half of her amsa
would proceed to the house of Jambavan. This
had been ordained by Siva himself at Kailasa for
Parvati. He had said., "O damsel, you provide
your embrace to lord Visnu who had arrived at
Kailasa from Sveta-dvipa. If you do so at my
command, you would not earn any sin.

werart
weet Foran ai Set aya Ufa
farott: erect ye yaadtaPanfaa: eset
Brahma said- O lord of Radhika, in earlier

times how did Siva commanded Parvati to do so
in favour of Visnu the dweller of Sveta-dvipa.

sitrrenryart
yu mig ae w weg: Adda:
peererareceret Faeyr PMTCT ge 8
The lord said- In earlier times all the gods

reached Kailasa to have a look at the child
GaneSa. Visnu also arrived from Sveta-dvipa.

gem wet get: yaa Waray
Wer aay: we Setteattey agg ot!
ferifed qoefert Garant ary

Bat varrad w Tater TTT eG aH

WAT RR EAT TTT
Tore aTNT Se TATA EST LG

He was immensely pleased while looking at
Gane§a and comfortably took his seat. At that
point of time all the people present there had a
glance of the face of lord Visnu which could
attract the entire universe, he was wearing kirifa-
crown, kundalas and clad in yellow garment. He
was quite youthful, having dark complexion and
his body was plastered with sandal-paste, kastiiri,
aguru and saffron and he was adomed with gem-
studded omaments. He wore a smile over his
face.

vafterere o ond: uftafiam
aafredt a yt: wa: firerr yar TAUCK AU

=== PAGE 55 ===

50

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

He was seated on a gem-studded lion-throne
and was surrounded by his courtiers. All the gods
offered their salutations to him. Siva also adored
him performing piija.

a ger weet fou maaeteroT
Taureated wa area deat Wit gy wit
ote Gat BH aet eet YA: YA

wast qemarecsrer Prteetgar way GH
wergaad a aferat aaa

FSA TYS YoreRTSeTAT gy A

Looking at Visnu, the mind and eyes of
Parvati were filled with delight. At this Parvati
felt shy and covered her face with a piece of
cloth but she looked at the charming face of Vis
nu again and again and covering her mouth with
a piece of cloth, she then looked at Visnu
delightfully with a side-glance and wearing a

smile on her face, she was engrossed in bliss and
her hair of the body stood at end.

at cee wsared yuact fetter

fagereisyet aateteger e401

art cast yard ataret o feet

age ditaret srrorenfaryfaerg es ct

wa Far Gand at Prefer

SAT aS AT aT BRAT FAOPATTAT 4 8

In a moment she looked at Siva having five

faces and fair complexion, with three eyes,
holding a trident, paftisa and looked more
beautiful than the crores of the gods of love.
Then in the next moment she had a look at Visnu
who was dark-complexioned having a single
face, two eyes, four arms, clad in a pitambara
and wearing a long garland of forest flower
round his neck. Looking at him, she started
thinking in her mind, "Brahma is one but he had
created different types of figures". Thus thinking
the passion in the mind Parvati was aroused.

weeps va ar TeafrmpasAT:|
ameritentarared stg: RAUNT: RK 11

She thought that in spite of the fact that
Brahma, Visnu and Siva, all the three of them

had emerged from her amsa, in spite of that Vis
nu happens to be the most superior and preserves
sattvaguna in him.
qeat at wad vaca yoranfaafaren
TT Wray Tear Raa
Looking at him Parvati felt emotional and she
adored the lord with great devotion.
gubrafiord o gga viet: wT
ater wrartatet STEFAN Re BH
But feelings of Durga were well understood

by Siva himself, who was the lord of world and
living in the heart of all creature.

grt feinaga agave et: aq
aeamra fafa fet werrafosaqn ee 311
Thereafter, Siva called for Durga in a secluded
place and spoke to her ben-ficial, truthful and
uncontradictionable words.

yet Sart
faded watt a Frat tetera
wart She ag 3 eee Teg x
org ven a feoqea wee a ATT
Saat Terfedy fast wittew 17g 4H
Vat weft: waat Ma a Ufa
eee aroit ce pesitahraoirera 98 G1
wa aafa gui a Patenssentoré ate
Forres wert yer TYaTT FTPAT RE oH!

Siva said-O daughter of the mountain, you
listen to my request, you provide the conjugal
pleasure to lord Visnu, because myself, Brahma
and Visnu represent the everlasting Brahman.
The god are without differentiation and the
worldly pleasures create difference in the form.
Prakrti happened to be the one for all. You
happen to be mother in all the forms. You
happen to be Sarasvati in the heart of Brahma,
Laksmi in the heart of Narayana and Durga in
my heart. Therefore, O chaste lady, you listen to
my divine words. On hearing the words of Siva,
Parvati the goddess of all them spoke.

=== PAGE 56 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 6

51

Sraat quiet aa arp He

Bfet aren oral ares STAT TATUNG CH

west fat aa a aftergrefar

orinenttegt arat wr aT ae APATIE SH

Parvati said-O lord of the down-trodden, you
are the ocean of mercy but why do you shower
disgrace on me because I achieved you in the
form of a husband after performing tapas for a
long time. Therefore, O lord, you do not disown
a slave like me. O MaheSvara, you never indulge
in such in proper words with me.

Wa ari Werte afta We

Rert wat creat afsrenft Vf eT gwort

O Mahadeva, O Siva, I shall obey your
command but I shail serve Visnu in an other
birth taking a new form.

gets ae gen faces waza:

sedvigrarrag: weed ured eat go et

aeaTUTCTATS Uda ATATTTE!

afinafa aqateten araadt watge en

On hearing this Mahesvara kept quite.
Thereafter lord Siva laughed aloud and provided
protection to Parvati. O Brahman, in order to
honour ‘to the words of Siva. Parvati would be
born in the house of Jambavan in the name of
chaste Jambavati.

welara
sph stated qt diet okt se
Bre wa eT FART Te TN RN
Brahma said- Why did, Parvati take a birth in

a degraded race of bears, when there were many
royal families on earth?.

sign sara
Traant Sarat taierpa septa
ferreraieh ecg atearatara fait: 11 go ¥ 11
Tree ater farts fir qa:
alfefeigacreart ferred a Were N94 UI

Lord Krsna said- In the Trefdyuga, at the time
of incarnation of Rama, all the gods as had to

appear on earth in various forms. Out of them,
from the amsa of Himalaya, my servant named,
Jambavan was also born, he enjoyed long life
because of the boon of Rama. He was quite
virtuous, possessed great prowess and had a
strength of crores of lions.

fagierge gut seats yer

wd yee gar afar wo ETN aN

At that time Parvati having an Goloka of her
father emerged on the earth. Now you listen to an
earlier story in this connection for my mouth.

waa a Gut f aon TERY yA

FUyaT wearer wafer wr feat goin

The arigas of all the gods would be born on
earth and becoming princes participate in the
war.

BUH Bat Hey WAST:
wafet afaata azar a demieecn
From the amsa of Kamla, all the princesses

were to be born to become my wife numbering
sixteen thousand. ‘

quiseigretar wogyay yfatet:1

areata: a asi EAA: TNs!

Age: Weave weaiayeah

gai: autdtepa fage: aH: ANRC oN

From his arisa Dharma would be born as
Yudhisthira, Bhimsena would be born of the
amsa of Vayu, Arjuna would be born as the
amsa of Indra, while Nakul and Sahadeva would
be born from the amsa of Asvinikumara. The
valorous Karna would be born from the arsa of
Siirya and while Yama would appear in the form
of Vidura.

Gates: wert: wagteTEA VAT:!

Brea vreiytt Rit aera ge Vt

Rai wrarRgE”eh wera:

uaigiseaiirrgga verde aR ye BH

aged: ayauigismigcion a ait

areas eertraye ayia ayant ee 30

Duryodhana would be born of the aritsa of
Kali, Santanu would be born from the avsa of

=== PAGE 57 ===

52

ocean, ASvatthama would be born from the amsa
of Siva while Drona would be bom of the ansa
of the god of fire. The great warrior Dhrst
adyumna was born from the amsa of Hutasana
while Abhimanyu was born of the arsa of the
moon; Bhisma was born of the amsa of Vasu
while Vasudeva was born of the amsa of
Kasyapa. Devaki was born of the arisa of Diti,
the cowherd Nanda was born from the amsa of
Vasu and his wife Yasoda was also born from
the amsa of Vasu.

Wd suction a aagUSAy RAT
gaat vessign Saeatntawa: ge vt
From the amsa of Kamala, Draupdi emerged

out of the fire altar; from the womb of Devaki,
Subhadra was born from the arisa of Satartipa.

aan rapy yfadhige arena:
wort Faunaye Tag yferirerec it
Thus in order to rid the earth from her burden

all the gods and goddesses appeared on earth
with their respective arhSas.

Bergan wrenracs & AR
ad Frarcat geet aattara waTaAT NAC
O Narada, thus speaking the lord kept quiet.

Or hearing these words, Brahma came back and
took his seat.

wOrea aT area afarct eee
gett tam: wat: urdet enf areaniecion
aired trees afta cen aera
Uaferarat a a agar Havant

Narada, Sarasvati was lodged to the left of
lord Krsna while Laksmi stood to the right, all
the gods were facing him besides Parvati.
Radhika was enshrined in the heart of cowherds
and cowherdesses. In the meantime Vrajesvari
Radhika said to the Jord.

‘ufearareat
Wy Wes want faentaert wit

sro cafe aaraTteratet FAA Rs TH

aati agererat aa eet

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

veer fara seat ser areas ereoitererN ee ot
Radhika said-O lord, you kindly listen to a
small servant like me. O lord my life is buming
all the time and the mind is unstable. I am unable
to separate from you even when close my eyes or
even winking there for a moment. how shall I be
able to move on to the earth alone without you?
feat tert 3 at Fel
wrirgert fe wet fereacrer TigpeT Te aU
O lord of my life, tell me truthfully the period
after which both of us would unite in Gokula.
fae a gue afaar 3 rar fart
& pean wa arent at at at crerfereatrn <2
waar feratsé wroter fereranfix 1 aerTN ge Bu
Without you a moment is like a yuga for me.
Whom shall I look at on earth. Where shall I go?
O lord of my life, with you I never bother about
my mother, my father, my relatives, my brothers,
my sister and even the son.
aedfe area wal wi Vere YAH
fereqat faa erat aed F pret FaURe vu
sega wee aera REET
wily whut fret oration Targa eeu
aa way ae at art wea wafaan)
et ee Ure are Het area TST eG
O lord of illusion, in case you want to send me
to the earth with your illusion, then you give me
a solemn promise, O Madhusiidana, let the
black-wasps of my mind always roam about
around your lotus-like feet to extract the money.
Wherever and whenever I am born in any form,

you would always own me and provide me your
slavehood.

pored uleatsé a eharaaraat:

a fererafir quit @ fe wet at TTT eel
WNT FA AE WOM: Wat SAA AEl
wassaania ag efe wal at fertige cus

Even after descending on earth you as Krsna
and myself as Radhika should never separate of

=== PAGE 58 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 6

53

forget each other. You kindly bestow the boon
on me. O all pervading one as the life follows the
body and the shade also follows the same,
therefore, both of us should be born together.
This is the boon which I desire from you.

ayhitefeset afaar assaanffan
Tasstente garfe Se wat at wie eH
O lord on arriving the earth, there should be
no separation between us even for a while. You
kindly grant this boon to me.
WH whee aq: SA aT BRUT St
SIRT Brera WTA aT Fahafticti1g o ott
feraafafam: aft yea at Year:
aifeaeparitenra STAT PAT AT ATER © R11
O Hari, your body should remain alive with
my life. The flute should be made of my body
and your feet should be made by my mind. There
are several people in the universe who adore
each other but there is no other damsel equal to
me in glory and prowess on earth.
wa enharia &a arse fatafian
Matassaaay Tee FAA
Who has created me from half of your body,
there is therefore no difference between us and
my mind always remains devoted to you.
TASS ATS WOT Hea TM
FASSTATTRNTOT AT aT SPRAATEAATIR © 311
My mind, my soul and my life always remain
devoted to you, similarly your mind, life and soul
should always remain devoted to me.
ardt Friufarergerifdactat 7:1
went wad wom cafe ferteqdteowi
Therefore even a moment's separation disturbs
me. With the very hearing of the separation from
you, me life gets disturbed.

seaye a sat waa Geralel
at gat waeredrar TEOMA? o GI

Thus speaking, in the assembly of gods,
Radhika fel. on the feet of the lord and started
crying aloud.

RS Hea J at Ho yes dyes aa

aera fafeet wed wet fed Fa 2ORI

Thereafter, lord Krsna took her in his lap and
rinsed her face with a piece cloth. He then spoke
soft beneficial, and truthful words consoling her
at the same time.

srearferen Ut aT weet BT

wy ata went aris a ge oI

Lord Krsna said- I am going to reveal before
you the best of the divine yoga, which removes
mental agony and is beyond the reach of the
great yogis, you listen to me.

smermaat: ad gerd wa Fase

MOAT AIT BAA Io C1

werent F Yor A yor FT Tecray
HUTT Ueeraa: THAMES: TAATNQO VI

O beautiful one, the entire universe has been
divided between the one who takes the shelter
and the place of shelter. In both of them, there
could be no possibility of any difference from the
one who takes refuge and the base of such
refuge.

The base of fruit is the flower and the base of
the flower is the tender leaves, the base of the
tender leaves or and the base of branches is the
tree itself.

FAAS HATTA Siagfranfat:

af ransy TAFT SME THT Ro Ul
Be ageran: erent fe wav:

AAS HATTA STATATTESAS AN VII
TASsaTaEM S ala froth winery

ato vinegar o yormpfetteadtin ez

wa witaeusfa fironercefioi

marssmUsé Friteva Meraivea AAT WEN v3!

Sprouting is the base of the tree which
produces the life in the tree. The seeds is the base
of sprouting and the base of the seed happens to
the earth. The base of the earth is the Sesa and
the base of Sesa is the tortoise, the base of
tortoise is the wind and the base of wind is in me

=== PAGE 59 ===

54

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

you happen to be my base, because I always
remain in you. You happen to be the cluster of
strength and also the great goddess known as
Milaprakrti. You appear in human form and are
also the base of all the three gunas. I happen to
be your soul and coming in contact with you I
get activity.

Teugdqad daisiafita a

waTarcea a area wpa: BEM evi

The semen emerges from the man and from
the semen emerges the progeny and the woman
happen to be the base of both of them
representing Prakrti.

farreea satsserea aayriht fertssert
wars a waléfafern wateaigd wang ean

There could be no soul without the body and
without the soul there could be no body. O
goddess though both of them have their own
importance but the things of earth cannot move
without both of them.

a Harenssaaiat Ta Warita:|
aarsseat aa Se a Tet ferrers faae 2g
war ait a eracd urfear a gat

spit watt wet Pret aa wafer BAe feafa:112 Vo
qaraguaited aigarcadem
AAMT afer AeA SAR REA
var fan a fieifar arggaitsé eat fart
vant fart aa aagaret Galt Pfr e een

O Radha, in the form of seeds there is no
difference between both of us wherever there is
the soul there is the body. Both of them cannot
be separated from each other as the whiteness
which is integral part of the milk, the power of.
burning is an integral part of fire, coolness is the
integral part of the water; similar is the case with
both of us. As the whiteness cannot be separated
from the milk, the power of burning cannot be
separated from the fire, the earth cannot be
separated from fragrance, ccolness cannot be
separated from water and are integral part of
each other, similar is the case with both of us. O

beautiful one, you remain in active in my
absence and without you, I also remain invisible.
It is also sure that without you, I cannot indulge
in any activity of the universe.

fern ger we ag ae ae Heres:

fart waut equtaritisctart amATA 112 Voll

As a potter cannot make a pitcher without the
clay and the goldsmith cannot make any
ornament without the gold, similarly [ become
helpless without you.

warren aan Freee i waft: ATI

aderineargent Pata GATT TN

TH MUTE wetttatot a wae

serrate wt F wronfirear frame Bau

witren st ad gu tery Tis

watswafiren at Seat aer wret TAN? 2311

As the soul is eternal, similarly you as Prakrti
are also eternal. You are the base of all the
strength and are everlasting. Laksmi, Sarasvati,
Parvati, Brahma, Siva, Sesanaga and Dharma are
all like my life but you are dearer to me then my
life. O Radha, all these gods and goddesses live
with me. Had you not been dearest to me than all
of them, then how could you reside in my heart.

mater we wit a eRe ale

feaera vient Frys FONTS TANI

Therefore, O Radha, you stop shedding tears
and get yourself relieved of the illusion.
Therefore you go to the house of Vrsabhanu
fearlessly.

BOAT WSt UA Fa Baht

art yearn wmf Tere ATTATN V4

Bert Ma after yet

Tarerat Utes forgst fart a2 2G 1

argh art aret aera: ata:

apt faerie vfccar Date gaye Vl

O beautiful one, reaching there you enter the
womb of Kalivatf and remain there for nine
months, shedding your form you take to the form
of Visnu and then appear before the universe. At

=== PAGE 60 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 6

55

the time of birth you emerge from the womb of
Kalavati in the form of an infant without robes
and start crying.
watfrivanr et a aferar meet af
watfriudtsé o assethhafeati ne wou
O chaste lady, you appear in Gokula and
having been born without any human contact. I
shall also be born without human contact. It is
not possible for both of us to remain in the
womb.
yfirepenra at ritget wrafaeaian
aa Rani Fear SATs FETT VI
As soon as | incarnate on earth my father will
carry me to Gokula because of the fear of Karhsa
I shall surely go to Gokula for your sake.
aptamer at a ured AAAI
fred seafe aearfin massyerruraang 2 3 011
O virtuous one, you will meet me there in the
house of Nanda where I shall the present in the
form of the son of Nanda and you would also
meet me there.
pyferet afaat arer ator Ta TER
aed faaftentt Fret Ferat F123 Al
O Radha, with my boon you will remember
me at the proper time and I shall enjoy your
company in the forest of Vmdavana.
faaaerreantdtfinittitintige ant
waferrgaentt: geitenfafita aga
warg tafe Arise wa al
ar orryaret watetger firrar we enfin 3 BH
Therefore, O noble lady, you incarnate on
earth with in Gokula with your thirty three
female friends and twenty one hundred crores of
cowherdesses. In Gokula you have an equal
number of cowherds and you should assure them
with your nectar like words in Gokula properly.
wé trrerged: weararta afer
ageart uperearenta wa Tea WH
O Radhika, I myself shall move on to Mathura
keeping all my cowherds friends in Gokula. In

Mathura I shall meet my father Vasudeva in his
abode.

wat arg sated eH Ft frente:

SETS YS TT HAT MTT Z GM

All my dear cowherd friends will move along
with me and go to Vraja and should be born in
the houses of crores of Gopas there.

seayaem stot far a AR

sysatva Serge thor aera aa gE

O Narada, thus speaking lord Krsna kept
quiet. Thereafter all the gods and goddesses
besides the cowherds and cowherdesses also
stayed there.

gegEnivea sgt t wT
FATTATAGS: WAT FANNY BOH

Brahma, Siva, Dharma, Parvati, Laksmi and

Sarasvati offered prayers to lord Krsna
delightfully.
rere Targa erga Ferret: |

wa Wega sitet wot: WafemeM 3 CH

Feeling grieved because of separation all the
cowherds and cowherdesses started offering
prayers to lord Krsna with their minds filled with
devotion.

wrote fit art tergultery

UfegetsraquaT fATSTaTHTTTATNR 3A

aeqgunifadta a apr wat TATRA!

waa weTgae ai eft: ATTN

Radha also adored her husband who was
dearer to her than her own life and could fulfil
the desirous of all. Lord Krsna then spoke to
Radha who was feeling panicky because of the
separation with her eyes filled with tears. She
looked quite meek and was upset because of fear.
Lord Krsna assured her with truthful words.

sitgon sara
wronferes werefa feet war ret Tas
wan ed a mansé oo am fern & ofa fetes eit

Lord Krsna said-O great goddess, you are
dearer to me than my life; therefore you remain

=== PAGE 61 ===

56

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

healthy, shedding all the fears. As you are so am
I, therefore why should you feel afraid when I
am there.

fe 9 8 aafaenth fafagarengery

autor gach yor wafeedet wer WEUNRw VU

stem abit geht

afereeetre TTT AAS RM

Off-course, I am telling you something which
is unpleasant, "We shall be separated from each
other for a hundred years". O beautiful one,
which could happen because of the curse of
Sridama. During that period I shall remain at
Mathura.

wa aaett fare

TeTereqaraperert a MITT Y SI

arafeat @ tat qggraer Heong

arearaya Frater cergaer aera 4 UI

See WHat Wea w Tse

eynferererrente eg St FATS EN

featvetut da arrorenge ee74

BRS FSM TA GON YAFATTN VI!

wafers etat wercennifor anf er

mort dictate yPrianaeiage xe!

daraat a aa aaeeTet fag:

rant pre wat ae weshaeeen

atten a ata ifrert @ ai

qantas sat YA: Wet AT Fel

fearfrerafers]at war WelAT ATTN Y ot

Living there I shall be relieving the earth of
her burden and remove the fetters of my parents.
I shall redeem the gardener, a tailor and hunch-
back lady. Destroying a Yavana, redeeming
Mucukunda and constructing the city of
Dvaraka, I shall, thereafter, attend the Rdjastiya-
yajfia of Yudhisthra. Marrying sixteen thousand
princesses I shall destroy a hundred and ten
enemy. Restoring Sudéma my friend to a
graceful position, burning the city of Varanasi,
supporting Siva defeating Bandsura, forcibly
removing the tree of Parijata and accomplishing

all other tasks, I shall go on pilgrimage with you
Thereafter, we will meet the great sages talk witl
the relatives, completing the yajfia of my father
then I shall meet time you in an auspicious anc
all the cowherdesses.

cofeeaf rare aed GUT aa

ware ferbqand aahmi pra af ey gn

fret wietert wae ufareafer era Tel

We ATA SRATT AT  ATTNG VI

weal menace Biter

cafaeaft yaaa at WHEAT TENA

Thereafter, I shall bestow the divine anc
truthful knowledge to you and shall keep yor
always with me. Thereafier you will alway
remain with me and shall never get separated.
shall return to Vraja with you thereafter. O dea
one, during the time of separation of a hundrec
years from you, both of us will always meet it
the dream daily. Getting separated from you an
reaching Dvaraka all the important tasks will b:
performed by me from the arisa of Narayan:
during all these hundred years. This is certain
Thereafter, we shall again engage ourselves i
the divine dance at Vmdavana.

WF: fiatea thiat veda wey

HAT ATTA FAUT FANG I

wr walle tists Thafit| a

AA ARTA ATV URTAT ABU GH

aqua wa fever TTA: |

yard eitreterat a afacafen 4 gu

Thereafter, relieving the parents and th
cowherdess of their grief and removing th
burden of the earth, accompanied with you an
the cowherdesses, I shall come back again to th
Goloka, O Radha, the amsas of Narayana in m:
shall accompanied with Laksmi and Sarasvati t:
Vaikuntha and Visnu and Dharma gettin;
separated ftom my avisa shall revered to Sveta
dvipa.

tant da tdtanign areata rau

Wi: Afeafada Mets Bazar WENA

=== PAGE 62 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 6

57

Such of the gods and goddesses who had
emerged from amsas from the gods would also
revert to their respective abodes. Thereafter we
shall all remain in the Goloka.

wad afi wd wfeet a yur
Tat Frefint aarart Se Frarte gett

O damsel, I have now narrated to you all the
future pleasant the unpleasant happenings and
whatever I have told you can never be otherwise.

waaqean signer: Feat Tat waa
walt weg: Ga: ae ravage faferaTs 4st
Thus speaking lord Krsna embraced Radha

and al] the gods and their spouses were surprised
at this.

vara steftgareat a ara

Rar reaa arate carers farretferTAN eg ofl

Tres Walt Ser Yanai eather Tel

wat frathat at aed aaret sfereafinn 2 gu

Thereafter Sri Hari spoke to the gods and
goddesses, "You go to your respective place for
the accomplishment for the future task." O
Parvati, you go back to Kailadsa with your
husband and both the sons. Whatever have I
spoken about the accomplishment of the tasks, it
would surely happen.

wfaer ert wa aaat a Aaah

Qarnt da neat Sat erattat fae UU

O goddess of Vraja, excepting Ganesa, all the
gods and goddesses from their amsas should
appear on earth.

worey sitet tar: tater wager

peat Cea aT MOTT TRATTTTNT GBI

fton afar ant ag aon wet ag:

vat Frefid wrt carafe ge Ev

Thereafter all the gods delightfully bowed in
reverence to lord Krsna and Sarasvati with
devotion and went back to their respective
abodes. Whatever tasks had been prescribed by
the lord were to be established by them and for
that purpose they emerged on the earth. Because

the place prescribed by the lord was inaccessible
even to the gods.
sare Ure Fat TeTGTE ss
eitiraqera we Warren gg GN
wg arenfs att aqearert Fa
Reape Ta AAPA GG
Then Sri Krsna spoke to Radha first of all you
go to the house of Vrsabhanu, together with the
cowherds and cowherdesses. O dear one, J am
also appearing in the house of Vasudeva;
thereafter I shall reach you in Gokula on the
pretext on the fear from the Karhsa.
TE MOTT sitpent Tatar
ast wie yea: WafersearaT Goi
Thereafter Radha having the eyes like red
lotus become anxious bitterly before him.
ward wea safari Wear Wat YA: YA:
WA: FH: Barres ast ast SUSAN c
wdt agraannat friaisa wit
mrendurergnrgargel mate 7 § @1
She walked slowly for some distance and
again come back and stood before the lord. She
enjoyed looking at the moon.
aa: wefaoiteret wre wera
MUTE ART et PARTY S FTURVott
Thereafter the goddess Radhika went round
the lord seven times and ultimately stood before
Hari.
anmpifvart a fargratea:
SRAM a Mart aye: aAferwrTs29 gn
At that point of time seventy three crores of
cowherdesses and a crore of cowherds arrived
here.
Turi afreari a we: we There
A: wore af Te aa Tet aT ARAN BN
wafamerentninttt: we Gatti
That a wyeea wor weet HEANOR
O Narada, Radha again stood before the lord
with the cowherds and cowherdesses and then

=== PAGE 63 ===

58

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

stared at him. On the arrival on the thirty three
female friends of Radhika, she bowed in
reverence to the lord and then moved on
accompanied with cowherd and cowherdesses.

efoon aifart ert sempre

sage Tar We ITE BA ow

They arrived in Gokula of Nanda. Radha
appered in the house of Vrsabhanu and the
cowherdesses appeared in the houses of other
cowherds.

Wa Tara Tera wrdifit: we Ted:
aya steht: wa: yfaat mrgaE: uN
Thus Radha descended on earth together with

cowherds and cowherdesses. The cowherds also
got ready to reach the houses of other cowherds.
tang taritive fraea aizantfin
Waa WTA ST HTT BAT QR
Thus speaking to the cowherds and
cowherdesses and deputing them variously, the
lord of the universe incarnated in Mathura.
yd waqued uw taatageaat:
Ya WIAA: YA WIT FUR
Karhsa had killed all the six children born of
Devaki one by one.
Veigt wad WH araaIssHea Teper
Fara Ofgoiens soe assqar Foe
At the command of the lord Yogamaya
extracted the foetus from the womb of Devaki
which happen to be that of Sesanaga Ananta and
carried the same to Gokula transplanting in the
womb of Rohini.
ofa sitealo Uglo ANGHTo sigURTE

UBISEATA NGI

=== PAGE 64 ===

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

wa AAAS:

Chapter-7
Story of the birth of Krsna
AN sary
Fite cam
FE HAT STAT AGATA RA
aged: SS Ya: SE aa a zat
St agdaat ar at faaré dreratdauan
wel TIT HARA FT STRUT:
after sia stgftrenti aera: 1311
Narada said-O lord, you kindly narrate to me
the story relating to the birth of lord Krsna which
is quite auspicious, the best and destroys the
birth, the death and the old age who was the
father of Vasudeva and who was the father of
Devaki? Who was Devaki and Vasudeva in their
earlier births? You kindly tell me how were they
married? How did the terrible Karhsa kill their

six sons and when was lord Krsna born? I would
like to listen to it in detail.

Aa Sart

wyatt ageava fauna w faa!

yayuamctta wag: aiteft gas

Raiterafara ages wer

mettee ade areas gy

SAS a Wee: stews a TT

Wt: PAAR SST SANG

Sti Narayana said- Kasyapa appeared in the

form of Vasudeve and Aditi, the mother of the
gods was born as Devaki. They got the lord as
their son because of the merits of their earlier
births, Vasudeva was born from Devanitdha as
father and Marisa as the mother. At the time of
their births, the gods were rejoiced who rounded
Dundubhis and beating of drums besides playing
on other musical instrument. That is why in the
ancient time Vasudeva the son of the lord was
also known as Anakadunbubhi.

=== PAGE 65 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 7

59

ER Ya: HATPAga MARA: |
tat Wry TT SM W Raat!

In the race of Yadus Sriman Deva happened to
be the son of Anaka who was the ocean of
knowledge. Devaki happened to be his daughter.

ait agaenend: dered EAT Te
Jam: arama fairer waterC 1

Garga the family priest of Yadus, married
Devaki with Vasudeva, according to the
scriptures,

Terigederdt agqea: Ye awh

Bae Saat aah tae: meat fete

At the time of marriage, Vasudeva was
decorated with coat of arms. At the time of
marriage her father gave away his daughter
Devaki to Vasudeva.

Seat a AeA MATA aT Bay aT

erat aie waht Petit Ago

arafaenta zentor tort fafaenft a

afiennht contin xactqrafor are g gn

O Narada, Devaka gave away in marriage to

Vasudeva thousands of horses, hundreds of
elephants, hundreds of ornaments, beautiful slave
girls and several typed of beverages, besides the
gems, diamonds, jewels and vases of gold.

erayital sat grea

Feet aa wrat Sei a Afar

aaerrarat a wifegaraatay 231

at yee TW Gar Wena Taq

wat ge: Wert afrgqaeatfini eu

we wade ae Teshe wert

wee daler wet areangererafeoin gy

ad weisfa WIR YY wet sat ferry

Raa we wit yaeqeraa feneen

The girl who was adorned with all the

omaments had the lustre of hundreds of moons
and could attract all the three worlds towards
herself. She was quite graceful in the ladies and
was the ocean of virtues, wearing a serene smile
on her face and looking with side glances. She

was best suited for love-sport and was quite
youthful. After marriage she was made to sit in
the chariot with Vasudeva. But when they were
about to start, Karhsa also accompanied them
delightfully, feeling joyful after the marriage of
Devaki. When Karhsa was accompanying
Devaki, at that very moment there was a divine
voice from the sky, addressed to him "O best of
the kings, why are your getting over-joyed? You
listen to the truthful and beneficial words. The
eighth child of Devaki would be the cause of
your death.".

gtd Jaa Ba: WETER wera:

RAAT SYTENT: 11 YO

On hearing this, the valorous Karhsa took out
the divine word he felt panicky, getting enraged.
The sinful person got ready for the killing of
Devaki. .

at equa apr agea: quite:

areca sfiferit ifergresfergrree 112211

Vasudeva on the other hand finding Karhsa
getting ready to kill Devaki, spoke to him

appropriate words which were well-suited to the
times and since Vasudeva was well-versed in the

scriptures.
ayes art
Tae + ante go A aed fey
ayrent @ anal wetted aretha et
Vasudeva said-You are unaware of the royal

practices. You listen to my words which are
beneficial, glorious, remover of the sins and are
strictly according to the scriptures,

ore Waren wat pega yfia
Baw wear Sean aaa ca AE: GTN
O king, in case Devakt's eight child is going to
be the cause of your death then why to you
indulge in undignified and sinful action of killing
her and earning disgrace in the universe.

aa a agai feaari w uftsa:t
eretaah WAIST YRS MSTA Bl

Because a killer when kills the insignificant
creatures he gets relieved of the sin after giving

=== PAGE 66 ===

60

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

away in charity, even a counter feet coin at the
time of death.

atereart ygrot aa: weyot gay

wrafvert Weare afar wenF Te BH

A fafresgat wards @ sr:

Ta: Meo une Fafveat ATTA a

By killing the non-ferocious animals, one has

to performed repentance, hundred times more
then killing a terrific creatures. This has been
ordained by Brahma. By killing special creatures
and the animals and or by deliberately killing
them, one earns hunared times more sins. This
has been ordained by Manu.

want ewe aT MTU Ta:

TOM a wart ST wet aT aN YI

Pa HA  a TATE TT FANG

PRR PTA wae HT a

meander at tireioeer Ffrergn G 1

Tat Set Ue reTUTET ae TaTY

fargraret Und Mita SAA ATU

fathead fe aftr wren a groan

eae eT HACEA AT FMLA

at ad a at a pe ides

femnt strat St antl Het FANVVU

wergagaand waged wt way)

upata aad watt od Haft WeTA:13 oN

aftt coat afte eacdereanmat

ger: afefaer: aha aerat yeaah zINy e

He earns hundred times more sins by killing a

persons of mleccha race and the sin one earns by
killing a mleccha, the same amount of sin is
earned by him by killing a Stdra; the sin one
eams by killing a Sidra. The sin one earns by
killing a hundred Sadras is equal to killing of
arrow. One earns ten times more sins by killing a
cow; the sin earned by killing a Brahmana is
equal to killing of ten cows. The sin of killing ten
Brahmanas would be equal to killing of a
women. The situation as further aggravated when
the lady happens to be your own sister or the one
who is dependent on you or the one who has

taken refuge with you. O king, you are therefore
sure to earn hundred times more the sins of
killing a woman in case of killing Devaki. The
intelligent persons performs tapas, recitation,
gives away charity, performing of pija, visiting
holy places, offering food to Brahmana and
performing of sacrifice for achieving heaven.
The noble people consider the entire universe to
be like the bubble of the water or like a dream,
having no essence and illusory and therefore
move on the righteous path. O religious minded
one, You are the son of your race like the lotus.
Therefore you free your sister, O king there are
many types of intellectuals available in your
court.

weagdarent mat genet afaeaa

wah get werennfit 34 F fe MeN UH

awe aaa Tart MET AT

aif walter erenfirearn: at X at: fira:1331

afrit ea wg aeageat frat wan

frerrarert afdaragat Weng v1

Whatever child is born from her womb on the

eighth time J shall hand him over to you. He will
be of no consequence to me. O best of the
intellectuals, I shall hand over of the born to
DevakI you because there is no one else dearer to
me then you. O best of the kings you kindly
leave alone your sister who is quite dearer to you
like your own daughter. You have brought her up
offering sweet food, bets and various types of
eatables.

agtaaa: grat aca Afiett za:

ages: frat eat srt FaraFatin3 4

On hearing the words of Vasudeva, the king
left Devaki. Thereafter Vasudeva went to his
abode together with Devaki.

PATI U Vea A ATE!

edt wet ay: Beare TET HAT ANA GU

O Narada, One after the other six sons were
born to Vasudeva but as per his words Vasudeva
handed over each one of them to Karhsa who
killed them one after the other.

=== PAGE 67 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 7

RaeM: TAT Ww Bar wat eet fia

UguttsSt Arar TAHT TAT ANZ

Thereafter Karhsa variously protected the
seven conception of Devaki but Yogaméya with
her illusion extracted the foetus from Devaki and
transplanted it in the womb of Rohini.

War: aeanphiarat aye zl

TETRA AAT HATO: HYLINY SA

The gate-keeper informed Karnsa that Devaki
had met with an abortion. A child was born from
the womb of Rohini who was given the name of
Sarnkarsana.

TEM Waren mit argu aye zl

SCOR UCR ERC MrOC TERS

qe at a wi @ araradayia:

wee Bret Vat Balai Aisat aA ont

aye ead: Gat a agen

sat Saat HA: MES TAG TUTTI RI

aor wearer a arenfiea fey ZT

waferat deft cer ger yfteitfirens 2H

geal angtaye fared wet aah

sreramigued a yy wa aes

Thereafter the eighth son of Devaki was born
when her womb was filled with the wind. After
the completion of nine months, there arrived the
tenth month and the lord had to appear from that
womb. Devaki herself was the best of all the
beautiful ladies and with the very look of the lord
she became four times more beautiful than
before. At that point of time Devaki with the
developed face and the eyes looked at Karisa,
she was illumining all the ten directions with the
lustre of Yogamaya. She looked like the mass of
lustre. Looking at Devaki, Karhsa the king of
demons was totally surprised. He thought the
child born of her womb would be the cause of
his death.

saga Sapa eat wat TIT |

Raat aged a AEN Tat ANSI

Thus speaking Karhsa carefully kept a watch
over Vasudeva and Devaki. He lodged them in
an abode having seven gates.

61

yet a amt mat mt: quit aya zg
AYA AT AANA ASST FARES
O Narada, after completion of the tenth month,
the period of conception came to an end. She
then walked slowly and became inactive.

aM oat yo fate rafal
ROTA Fae HAH TAT BSE

The conception was completed with the wind
and the lord resided in the heart of Devaki.

wi fagcromt @ abated

FATE WSS UW FAA FS ZIV!

sare @ ai Set rorya Fret

art cate wed aot tafufa aa Sse

geal w saat vit aysa ETAT:

wafers arean went efedtgarrs 81

vandtadigad ufet qaatet

TT GF THE Te FATT ot

wat a at da agueitiarger:t

faatdt arent da vet aap ATETTNY gH

At the time of the arrival of the lord of the
universe in the womb of Devaki, she felt
suffering with pain and became inactive. In a
moment she used to sit and next moment she got
up. In a moment she walked and in another
moment she went to sleep. At the same time
Vasudeva looked at Devaki and finding that the
time of delivery had arrived, he started reciting
the name of the lord of the universe, in that
beautiful abode having the lamp of gems. He
immediately brought the sword, iron, water and
the fire, getting terrified. He summoned the
people well-versed in mantras, the wives of his
borthers, learned Brahman as and other relatives.

Unferant reat wet wed rit

art wr Ba: eorgfranPat 4 UU
agra araayeer aghtsi a war: |
srafearya way gat sa feet: 14 311
ferent aa ussorgfaeryat:|
Seaton whet weAPAT TY vi

=== PAGE 68 ===

62

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

In the meantime at the dead of night, the sky
was over-cast with clouds. The pleasant wind
started blowing and all the guards went to sleep
as if they had lost their consciousness. They lay
on the floor as if they were sleeping in bed. At
the sametime Brahma, Siva and Dharma arrived
there and started offering prayers to the lord.

tat Hy:
WPA TASAT US A
waft: aaah era: TOT Fafott WETTIG 41

The gods said-You are the place of birth of the
universe but you are yourself without the place
of birth; you are beyond measures, imperishable,
the form of sight, sinless, having qualities, and
without qualities, besides being the great lord.

srargeterraranet Prevent Frege: |

Fret Ffacnent femgt Freuga: nu gn
Fremfirga fateiat Fritet Ferra:
Taran: volar ffi Fret Wa AUG wit
wear: weg: wd: wdqurea

qed gaat git irra wa Tuyen
Ban git aredt gamete:
aeagra Serpe Aeret aefafey: 114 eH

Being invisible you appear in definite form for
the sake of your devotees, you are unconcerned,

oving at will, the base of all without any doubt,
without any trouble, without any attribute
uninvolved, indifferent, death for the death,
roaming in your soul, the one who fulfils the
desires of all, eternal the one who moves at will,
the cause of everyone the form of everyone, the
abode of all the virtues, bestower of pleasures
and the pain, quite deep, uninvolved, destroyer of
the wicked people, fortunate and unfortunate,
short spoken, difficult adore, inaccessible, the
cause of the Vedas, the form of the Vedas and
post-Vedic literature and well-versed in the
Vedas being all pervading.

weagaeT targa wR TEyg:!

wager: wd aay: HET Ag oll

Thus speaking the gods bowed before the lord
again and again and with their eyes filled with
tears, they showered the flower.

fauenftgramnht sree a: Wd

Got fed Stabe cad areas HeTTNIG gH

Bela Mad Heat fares waters BY:

aya wergiaga Freter weTyaiig UH

anrrentfast aya aie wa

Ta waged F TET aga B11

aafafiagas watese yr anit

Wes efaqaaseage UTE wil

adres aya Ufevarredifaat

werdtatrigad anbagied Fg 41

Gea GET erat aes iter: Yalgaerati

TRY HAQeEA WA YAR: 11g G1

Quaat vel: wa aygera die:

Uae MeN a YE TTgUTAG oN

aayya seen Agata: yyitten:!

gaaal a vlad wearge fag eee cu

sana wares aarredferT:|

Rar Reaver yfger AaParaTeTOT: 118 ¢ 11

wphearadt faeneriva are!

War Gaga waqraraat Yetwott

Agggeat are anssrarga wT:

Uttara Herafrdya siio gt

wre ofrarté arihed fara y:1

TERE: Vga eftereat TY gio I

Narayana said- Thus praising the lord, the

gods returned to their respective abodes. O sage,
the entire city of Mathura seemed to have been at
a stand-still because of heavy rain. It was pitch
dark during the night. O sage, the period of seven
muhirtas was spent and the cight one arrive,
when at the dead of the night, the best of the
auspicious time arrived it was the time
inaccessible by anyone accept the Vedas. At that
point of time all the planets were having the
auspicious sight, the unfavourable planets were
not there as a matter of chance, Jayanti-yoga was
accomplished. O sage, when the crescent arose,
all the planets in the sky including the sun,

looking at Jagna. Reached the mina-lagna. All
the planets arrived there getting delighted. At the

=== PAGE 69 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 7

63

command of the lord all the planets assembled in
the eleventh house delightfully. It started raining
and the cool wind started blowing, the goddess
earth was quite happy together with all the ten
directions, the sages, the Manuvrnda, Yaksas,
Gandharvas, Kinnaras, the gods, the goddesses
were all delighted. The apsards started dancing
while lord of the Gandharvas and the
Vidyadharis started singing and playing on
musical instruments. O Narada, all the rivers
started flowing gleefully; the fire was ignited and
the Dundubhis were sounded in the heaven with
the other musical instrument. The rain of
Parijata flowers started falling. The earth taking
to the form of a female reached the labour room.
The slogans of victory were shouted, the conches
were blown and the name of Hari was recited.

Waferatt aa wort Saat Ait

faa @ agg Seats TAT: 19 311

waa wagon feeread fear a

FeRAM Bfrafadya sow

arta att a rit GateT

Faun qeelteet wEr REG USeTTING I

Sagres Weare TAGTEAATING Gt

varrirayant vifit tiarration

Bra Ra LEAT ALT

WRT Urge faaTTAATETHNG C11

uqufasgs wu agaygeaeT

frageranet a armrenfafrarqii9 <1

starraant ureahgna faafarary

fayicard yet art gaat: WAN of

At that point of time Devaki fell down on the
ground and the wind fell from her womb.
Thereafter lord Krsna taking to the divine form
appeared from the womb of Devaki. His body
extremely beautiful and charming. He had two
arms and was holding a flute in his hand, his
ears, were adorned with makara-kundalas and he
wore a serene smile over the face, bestowing his
grace over the devotees. The gem-studded
ornaments were adding to the beauty of his body

and he was clad in yellow lower garments,
having a complexion of new clouds. His body
was plastered with sandal-paste, aguru, kasturi
and saffron. His face resembled to that of the
face of full moon of winter season and his lips
resembled the ripe wood apple which added to
his charming beauty. He had a peacock feather
adoring his head together with the gem-studded
Kirja crown. The divine lustre of Srihari was
illumining the place. He stood in Tribhangi pose
and wore long garland of forest flowers round his
neck. The Srivatsa mark appeared over his chest
which was emitting lustre. In the chest, there
appeared a golden line over which the kaustubha
gems was shining and looked quite beautiful. He
was of tender age and quite peaceful, lord Hari
was dear to Brahma as well as Siva.

zest ageara taatgeat yy

qera wen ware frerd wet aatic gH

grrafeyet yer aferareraat:

meget: agerat Faear a ferat wee 2H

O sage, Vasudeva and Devaki looked at the
lord and were surprised with the same. Vasudeva
and Devaki started offering prayer to the lord
with their eyes were filled with tears and the
body felt emotional. They bowed in reverence to
him and started offering prayer with folded

hands.
aged sare

wamifarrennman frfu fay

eqrrenat a adat WaTeTpaTq NS 31

fafetet wot ger dora STATA vt

RMT SATA

feud aderittg wlerarrqyraie 4

Wet: WHAT WAM WAM: TTC EI

wast ade o walTETIOTTY

vatert froart Freie <ift fa fayqucen

Vasudeva said-You are beyond the organ of

senses, invisible, beyond description, without

=== PAGE 70 ===

64

qualities, pervading everywhere, beyond the
reach of any one, the great soul, the great lord,
moving at will, the form of all, the one who takes
to any from at will, the great lord uninvolved
eternal Brahman and the eternal form of the seed;
you are harder then the hardest, pervading
everywhere, smaller then the smallest, invisible
one, dweller in all the bodies as a witness,
invisible one, taking to human from, the treasure
of virtues, the form of Prakrti and the lord of
Prakrti beyond Prakrti and the form of all. What
type of prayer can be offer to you?.

ST: PIS HRRS TERT Bat ATTA

a ot ayy Wasa: USAT CII

ugyat aaaat a witquarr: wen

Tite + adver aria PAPE Ft

sara Saargda gaara:

ad Faragyd ware fei Wafer Mg ol

gaa: wreasyren: fae ata ferafeet:1

fag watt a aret vfagaefanie e

We are unable to offer prayer to you because
even goddess Sarasvati, Siva with five faces,
Karttikeya with six faces are unable to do so.
Even four faced Brahma and the creator of the
Vedas is unable to recite your glory. Even lord
Ganeéa is unable to do so. You are the teacher of
the teachers of yogis, Rsis, the gods, sages,
Manus and the human being. You do not appear

evening their dreams. Therefore removing this
form you appear in the form of a child.

ageagd wis firdet a: wat:

fet cremrarchtt stteroreUMgag V1

faforega oat efter onary

tad Frettguf geen wert 31

Whosoever recites the stotra recited by
Vasudeva, thrice a day, he achieves the
slavehood and the devotion of the lotus-like feet
of Krsna. He achieves great merit and the
devotion of lord Hari besides the son. All his

miseries are over, without any difficulty and he is
relieved of the terror of all his enemies.

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

aa Sara

Agta: gear Tyas et: TTT
WAAAA: SAPS ATTA: 118 Ut
Narayana said- On hearing the words of
Vasudeva, lord Hari who bestows grace over his
devotees then spoke to him.
sige sara
quai oo welta Ptse wa Tin
at quite ag 3 afaeafe a Megat
ye aaftart Fe: Yrared waa:
Wet & yfgrarett a ares aerate & I
Yat weagyrera Gear wi a gat ga:
WaT eet TTS Tera aferay YA: 1g wt
Sti Krsna said- 1 have become your son
because of the result of your tapas. You will
meet with all the welfare, there is no doubt about
it. In earlier times you had been a great tapas and
Prajapati named Sutapa. Prsni was the name’ of
your wife, both of you adored me with your wife
and having an audience with me you asked for a
boon that you should get a son like me. I
therefore bestowed a boon to you saying, "You
will get a son like me.",
Beat Get at ata Wraiseiea fataa:
aeaat afer yar Gasé Ba BANG ct
O respectable one after bestowing the boon to
you I thought in my mind that there is no one
else comparable to me in the universe, therefore I
became your son.
aaet a wera ae APT: TTT
yar Sanrtenfafirger aferaaTg 311
oat ayatiged age: fiat wa
Raat artanferteTa TAM | go 0 11
Because as a result of the tapas you become
KaSyapa and she became Sutapa, the mother of
Aditi. Now you have appeared as Vasudeva from
the amsa of Kasyapa becoming my father and
Devaki has appeared from the amsa of Aditi, the
goddes of the gods as my mother.
eatisterat anrisé qaeiset tra:
at uftquiisé Yat TINT HEMI Ro BI

=== PAGE 71 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 7

From you, I was also born as Vamana as your
son and because of the result of your tapas
presently I have appeared again as your son.

Ui at rt yaa WENA aT YA:
Ti wretisfa Herma staat freA Qo BH

O virtuous one, you will be freed from the
cycle of birth and death, by getting me as a son.

ayant vii ai yéter at aan
WNT TA OT AT AAT PATTI Ro 31

O respectable one, now you carry me to the
abode of Yasoda immediately in Vraja. Keeping
me there you bring Yogamayé here.

Beara siteftersa ater aya

ae yet wart a aapt FaTae YAN o v1!
Fea a Meth aa Tact apa

f& a ae a tara GrarTET Rou

Thus speaking the lord turned himself into the
form of a child; finding the son of dark
complexion sleeping over the floor and getting
influenced with the illusion of lord Visnu,
Vasudeva spoke about the child who was the
eternal Brahman, With his birth the labour-room
was illumining.

sya ayaa acter fexat wet
RMA Aeth WS SHAT TAT HTN Ro KU

Thus speaking after consulting his wife, he
picked up the child in his lap he proceeded
towards the city of Gokula.

Tren east vine fear yiraryEr
‘aext waaferet agitat: frgaisFaar owl

Reaching in Vraja of Nanda he immediately
entered the labour-room and found Yasoda
sleeping on the bed.

fafad ae a wd wr We fer

aeMt anfetent Tear AARTSTAPITTN Ro CU
saprat waarent wyatt YeaTT

at apr ageaya frend wet aahigogi

Finding Nanda in sleep and all other members
of the house also enjoying th€ sleep, he looked at
the girl who was without robes and was having

65

the lustre of molten gold. She had a smiling face
and was starting of at the ceiling. Looking at her,
Vasudeva was immensely surprised.
PANS aI YAW SAAT Wary
WT FEA WE: AAT TSA ROU
Leaving the male child there he picked up the
girl and proceeded towards, Mathura. Thereafter
he reached the labour-room delightfully before
his wife.
aT wa HeTAAT a aTfeTaTy!
TRAM aa BT wer a Baateeen
He then placed the girl who was indeed
Mahamaya on the bed and she started crying
aloud. Devaki felt delighted on looking at her.
Vetta T ae Aaa War!
Bee Tete: BT aT aaferent TGHT|T NIN
Taen wfeai ta wer: sade
ware Saat UPA ASAT HTH NT UL
The girl child woke up the guards with her
cries. All the people got up at once and picked up
the child. They took her to Karhsa and placed her
before him. Thereafter, Vasudeva and Devaki
followed them with painful hearts.
gem B aerat Hat afaeet we
tearm Healt cea a TYs BAB
O great sage, Kaiser could not be happy at the
sight of the girl but at the same time he could not
be compassionate on her when she was crying.

at yee TWAT SF ad Yareury
Bard aya Sas UTATATTN RRA
at tt: aa Feats Afaresfayee
Prater are wet a fgad WAT Rg
He was going to strike her on the stone slabs.
Both Vasudeva and Devaki spoke to the terrible
king at that time, "O best of the kings, O Karsa,

you are well aware of the scriptures you kindly
listen to my truthful and appropriate words.".

wens: aaah Far & safest area
SEAT ares wt oaferarAaeT TAN AON

=== PAGE 72 ===

66

O brother, you never displayed compassion by
killing six of our sons. Currently from the eight
conception this daughter has been born.

wet wa ferityeret safereater meter
watt wqraet fee ar corifingecu

What type of fortunes would you achieve on
earth by killing her. Can the helpless woman be
able to snatch your royal treasures?.

seraqacn df aydaat ao ware

BUS PARA HARI FUE

HAAG: Fe AYA FTA

Thus speaking both Vasudeva and Devaki
started crying in the court of the wicked king
Karhsa. The wicked Karhsa listened to the words
of both of them then spoke.

Wy art wel wo Frater aterent

gar ude wef Wray erat aT aT!

wmtea feteerget wera wat Tem

Foy a erat ee IATA: 182 UL

Wea a Wat Hoga yy

Wed SR Se Rat a HATER IN

afer a wet Ae afe Yeager a

Warae aaaree fares TEAM GR VU

Karhsa said- You listen to my words. I am
going to make you understand, before you listen
to me and accept them. The destiny can destroy a
mountain with a small straw. Similarly it can get
a powerful lion or a tiger killed through and an
insect, a huge elephant could be got killed by it
with a mosquito, a child could defeat a great
warrior, a gigantic aquatic animal from a petty
equatic animal, a cat could be killed by mouse
and a frog could kill a serpent. It can get the
father killed from the son, a huge devoured could
be devoured by a petty devourer, fire from water,
a dry straw could destroy the fire, it is surprising
that a single Brahmana a Jahnu and drunk the
water of the seven oceans.

arpifatdtaa g gar yea

aan anferan ae at aut afaeafanee sn

anferat a afeentt art erat frac

see Sava Tera Mes TAM

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

Syaarareayqaa aye
aan féfarrarrrate arat FaAe zen
7 regen ferret: SEIGSt weTPT
dara ata areanqgarerofiain eget
3 ae ef at ye 4 fama ett
paferafaeenster aret onat afaeafirn eget

Therefore, the moves of the destiny are quite
astonishing and beyond comprehension in the
three worlds. As the move of destiny this girl
child could also be able to kill me. Therefore I
will surely kill her. There is no need of further
thought in this case. Thus speaking Karhsa
caught hold of the girl child and as he was about
to kill her, Vasudeva said, "O king up to now
you have uselessly resorted to killing. O
compassionate one, you give this girl child to
me." O great sage on hearing this Karhsa was
delighted. At that point of time a divine voice
from the sky addressed Karnsa, "O foolish
Karhsa, whom are you going to kill without
coming to know about the moves of the lord. The
one who is going to kill you has already be born
and who would appear at the appropriate time."

grata Faaruit w aeant ae FT:

ageat Saat a ararera yarfat ge etl

song: wag at a arat rar waar

wenfira ya: wren rendre eat EINE oN

Listening to the divine voice the king spared
the girl child. Both Vasudeva and Devaki
delightfully carried her to their abode. Vasudeva
on the other hand distributed riches among the
Brahman as getting back the girl-child, who had
been on the verge of death.

ae abet fas ore WATER:

Terisiet Fareara Uae RATI RS UH

age grea y efanrggreaiin

eet gated warm entity wien: 193 21

Te Frnfed ad pos

weraftet yas yous FAY 3H

O Brahmana, that girl child happened to be the
elder sister of Kysna who was born of the arisa

=== PAGE 73 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 8

of Parvati. The girl was given in due course of
time the name of Ekdnamsad. Vasudeva gave
away that girl in marriage to Durvasa who had
appeared as the arisa of Siva at the time of the
marriage of Rukmini. O sage, I have narrated to
you the story relating to the birth of Krsna which
relieves one of birth, death and old age and
makes one earn great merit.
fa sitgero Wel FUTAATTo AAC
AAAISEATT: 1911

67

=== PAGE 74 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 8

BY TSASATA:
Chapter-8

The fasting of Janmastmi and the merit of
the same

ANG Saray
weretiod ofe sat TATA
weet eR are MT TITAN UL
Narada said-In all the vratas Janmastami-vrata
is considered to be the best of all. You kindly let

me know the result of the combination of Jayanti
with the same.

Bl ST StasorenTa AAT aT ATT

sree fer at recat ae YAATTN

O great sage, you kindly let me know the sin
earned by not performing the vrata or by eating
something on that day. What is the reward for
fasting at the time of Jayanti.

ad wanfaart a dearer a TNT

srarearnat: Yferard ae ATR

O lord, your kindly enlighten me on the vrata,
the method of adoration, the discipline the
fasting and ending of the fast quite carefully.

ANT saves

Fen eae waa wad: WT TM

sreniqaderal ayaa Wseas

we: Het Aaaa erat HaeTATEAT

wiraraarsersitpnera gay

67

Narayana said- On the Seventh day of the
moon one should consume the left over of the
yajfia and with a disciplined mind and on the
next day, the eighth day of the moon, one should
get up early in the morning and take a bath.
Therefore he should take a vow for performing
the vrata by fasting, he should take samkalpa, “I
am performing the vrata and fasting for the
pleasure of lord Krsna".

warfeead wa wench ATA:
wet TRUST waratequi fee nt

O Brahamana, by performing the vrata on the
eight day of the black fortnight, one gets the
merit of crores of times more than one could
ordinary get for performing ordinary vratas.

weal feet cafes fag a: wash
Tears Be BA Yared AA ATT: H9

On that particular day whosoever offers
simple water to the a man is equated with
performing of the srdddha at Gaya for a hundred
years. There is no doubt about it.

reat frafeat grat fate gfraryey
aewrcafearcdad wrmdga ict

wa yet agiad afreeray
arthersut ard wae: waTTagGa 11
TeRenfar refer Ararafor seg
werael u firertt qoruae fe Ago tt
wnitaet a agiel afer sitmet Tage
afta uw quad wT Yareay
aredt aed wet aqua wa ae
aol a arid get wa

DOR RECOM CLECULULEDT

After taking the bath and getting free from the
daily routine, one should build up a labour-room
in which the iron, the sword, fire, the attendant
and various types of materials should be kept,
besides the scissors, and a mid-wife. O Neared,
after performing sixteen type of pijjd one should
provide eight types of beautiful fruits, seeds,
beverages, nutmeg, karitkola, pomegranate, wood
apple. Coconut, lemon, melon, best of costumes,

=== PAGE 75 ===

68

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

sana, clothes, water madhuparka, arghya, water
for sipping, water for bathing, the bed, fragrance,
flowers, naivedya, betel, fragrant paste, incense
and ornament. These are the items meant for use
in the sixteen type of adoration.

guatt quot & digartiva aise

Tremaert Fear Tear ate aT aTATATUNA

area aset ferent taferaraydang!

weestant Hen WyT wos SAAT GI

Thereafter washing the feet, wearing clean
costumes, one should be seated on the dsana,
sipping the water at the same time. Thereafter
reciting svastivacana, the pitcher should be
consecrated adoring other gods at the same time.

We Batet Grea sitgat Waa

aged taat a agitat Teta TKI

Vigor acres a wate age

Visor grat Sa sett wReaATT von

BRAM WE afet FTAA faviteury

wt UYU wagers YG RCH

acess Gel ar GHahateran

yore eae eT eae

Lord Krsna should be invoked in the pitcher

water. Thereafter all the gods including
Vasudeva, Devaki, Yasoda, Nanda, Rohini,
Baladeva, goddess Sasthi, earth goddes, a
Brahmana lady, asfami, local god, ASvatthama,
Bali, | Hanuman, Vibhisana,  Krpacarya,
Parasurama, Vedavyasa and Markandeya should
also be invoked. Placing the flowers on the head,
the devotees should performed dhydnam.

eam a umadtert yy sent are!
wero alert Yel FATT ARTA ott
O Narada, 1 am going to enlighten you about

the dhydnam which has been prescribed in the
Sdamaveda. Y ou listen to it. In the earlier time the
same was told by Brahma to the great sage
Kumara.

weer: airafaerdt: Haar we ay

arreniggtrmga: fagdicened
1 RTT HASTA RI
I adore Balamukunda who had the complexion
of blue lotus flower and is extremely beautiful
and who bears a serene smile always over his
face. Brahma, Siva, Sesa and Dharma always
adore him, he cannot be achieved by dhydnam
alone. And is also beyond the reach of the best of
Rsis, sages, the siddhas and the human being. He
is beyond the comprehension even of the great
yogis. He happens to be best of all and is the
witness of everyone.
reat yes a erat a aad o Paar
wa ot ot Gategy tae FINAN
aret advivred agantintatta
fated a fafeaor yeuat yn BUN
O sage, thus meditating upon, one should offer
the flowers to him. Thus the devotee should
perform the vrata. Now I am going to recite the
mantra of same, you please listen to me. O lord
Hari, you posses all the glory. You kindly accept
the dsana which is studded with the best of
gems, jewels and decorated the flowers and
creepers,
aed afavird a fait fayaatom
werachatad fafad qeaat sug wi
O Hari, I offer the costumes which are pure
like the fire, created by ViSvakarma and are
beautifully woven like the gold.
wera a euitrafent ser
fad frie ure ori o yeaat RN
O Hari, you kindly accept the pure water
contained in the vase of gold with the spotless
water for the sake of cleaning of the feet.
aganictett weirdgd a
waulmafent tat erred yet EM
O Hari, I offer you the honey, the curd, milk
and sugar combined in a vase for the purpose,
you are taking the bath.
qalet yacyet wreadraranfar
wanpeRatet Tent RUN

=== PAGE 76 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 8

69

O Hari, I offer Durva-grass, rice, white flower,
sandal-paste, aguru, kastiri mixed in the water
and arghya.

Fag ward w afad ream
Qearnnitt a peat WAAC

O Paramesvara, I offer the tasteful and
fragrant water for sipping.

Tega fawit tet Yarfaa
amen 34 da APS Yea SUI

O Visnu, you kindly accept the fragrant
material besides the fragrant oil mixed with the
juice of myrobalan for taking bath.

ageaforarter teat YATE Ty
wrfeat ETAT eat a TETAT FU ol

O Hari, you kindly accept this bed which has
been built with the best of gems and covered
with fine silken cloth.

aot a gateri yet xadgry
wepicadgedt wet a yeaa S13

O Hari, you accept this fragrance which is
mixed with the powder of many trees and their
roots besides kastari.

Ws qufaged a aged agen al
‘afrt wdcart wind Jeu Fg BH

O Hari, I offer you the fragrant flowers
together with saffron which are liked by all the
gods.

Jeu waferarat u firegerentary
quaaneigat tae yeaa U3 at

O Hari, I offer you the sweets and the
naivedya together with the beautiful ripe fruits.

megd ed da aft: att qe aE
ward af aa Ade yeuat Baw
O Hari, I offer you the sweet balls, modakas,

and ghee, milk raw-sugar (guda), honey, fresh
curd and butter milk as naivedya.

aan frafeatire yeaah TeTATH R&I

O great lord, I offer you the tasteful milk in
which the sugar has been mixed and is quite
cold. I also offer the betel with devotion which
contains camphor and other fragrant materials.

TRATea REIT TTT
wratreget whet Yeah WTAE GH
O Paramesvara, you kindly accept the paste

consisting of sandal-paste, aguru, kastart, saffron
for apparition on the body.
wmetataaet wegmstat Tel
gira: watant qist yeauat Suze
O Hari, I offer the gum which has been
extracted from various types of trees mixed with
many fragrant material and is liked by all the
gods as incense.
BREEAM HERa YATA:!
yaar attend shitsa yeaa U3 c
I offer you the lamp which is the form of light
and removes all the darkness from the world you
kindly accept it.
ufast Frict drt antafeanrgam
Stes wastiamt ond yeaa et3 ei
O Hari, you accept this water for drinking
which is quite pure, spotless, sanctified by
camphor and happens to be the life of all the
creatures. You kindly accept it.
ARTgEaATget afert Yen GAT
waa wed a wfrTETATTN so 11
wat tant seater weitere a
arearfent get eee Fata Ts gH
You kindly accept this garland of flowers
which has been made from various flowers and
has been sewed in the fine cord and serves as an
ornament over the body. All other material be
offered and all the materials collected for the lord
should for adoration should also be offered to
him.
wenfs wedtntt carght yautir a
ayrghgenta yeaa WAP U1
O best of the lords, you kindly accept these
fruits which are quite tasteful, beautiful and
increase the progeny.

=== PAGE 77 ===

70

areanfeciva tava were yori
Bae feet SETTAB
Similarly all the gods who are invoked should
also be adored. All the gods should be adored
with devotion and thereafter three hand-cups
filled with flower should be offered.

rergyeriaritive ufrany

Toi aides @ gare a fire frames si

edt wait da feeweive were

Bi gest da uniques 1

ys wales yorg queaafa

wrenthaga tae seat carer eferoNe GI

Thereafter the cowherds named Sunanda,
Nanda, Kumuda and the cowherdesses named
Radhika should also be adored together with
Ganega, Karttikeya, Brahma, Siva, Parvati, Laks
mi, Sarasvati, Dikpdlas, nine planet and Sega,
SudarSana and the attendants of the gods. One
should offer reverence to them prostrating before
them. Thereafter, Brahmana should be served
with naivedya and daksind.

eat a Saree Wopararaad: |

Tal Heras feast Hahn Tihs

Thereafter one should listen to the story
narrated in the chapter of birth. On that very
night, the devotee should remain seated on the
seat of Ausd remaining awake for the night.

wart asta Sat Woes steht ger

mreoreiataen a arate ¢ i

Early in the moming getting free from the
daily routine, one should adore the lord with a
pleasant mind and serve food to the Brahmanas
reciting the name of Hari.

AR Jara

wearer a aah waaay

Aart a aurether difgat a yer 811

sree See we fas aT weet yA

fe a Ud wa qa ae aafaat gTMY on

Narada said- O sage, you are the best among
those well versed in the Vedas. You kindly let

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

me know the merit one achieves after performing
the vrata as prescribed in the Vedas, remaining
awake and by serving food to the Brahmanas.
You kindly tell me the same.

ana sara

arent aefigat want aff grat

HS FORAGE AA GT: TaN GU

Narayana said- At the dead of night, the eighth
day of the moon, in the Rohini constellation is
considered to be the time for the birth of lord
Krsna.

wa Yodo qed wae a dey

watater ad Great HAAG gay VU

watvare: aieisd war: wea:

fet Safaat arott Seger Sera FTG BH

The one who performs vrata at that time,
becomes victorious besides achieving merit. That
is why it has been termed as Jayanti also, the
intellectual should perform vrata keeping himself
awake. This is the time without controversy and
is agreed to by all. This is prescribed by those
well versed in the Vedas. In the earlier times, it
was so proclaimed by Brahma.

aa Ut Frat ayer ad UIA

witfesnfitarearargert At Wea: 14 v1

The one who keeps himself awake performing
the vrata, he is relieved of all the sins earned by
him during crores of births and achieves
salvation. There is no doubt it.

anita waert aenitafearse
UH Basie 3 ander wenirafeasediny 41

When Saptami and Asfami are combined one
should not perform the vrata during that time
even when the Rohini constellation is there.
Because lord Krsna the son of Devaki appeared
in the unimpaired Rohini constellation.

afegrat aaarat ardt cafe:
Federyata fats wgeariry § 1
wait Dieta ait gater wre
frat a eft apart grat fark gAt4on

=== PAGE 78 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 8

nn

UR Wet Yat ware

sraranpat a werd Fafgereoryny 211

This particular knowledge is not available in
the Vedas and the post-Vedic literature in spite
of its being quite of welfare nature and is quite
secret. One should break the fast after the Rohini
constellation is over at the end of the Astami-
tithi. One should adore the lord with devotion
and thereafter should break the fast which
removes all the sins of the humans and is the part
of the vrata and fasting it results in welfare and
provides success.

waeatrardg fear urcorfirert
SMT HRT: FATEH ATTUTATTTTNY SH
In all types of fasting, one should end the fast
during the day alone because if one does it
otherwise, the merit of the vrata is lost.
a tat unat Haig & Aievitaara
Frerat areot gratesiferen were oN
Except the Rohini vrata, the fast should not be
broken during the night, even if someone breaks
the fast in the night but he should never do it on
Mahdnisa (moonless night).
yategt weet wet grat fargeiy
aaat dnd Herge 4 TigoitarqG gH
After adoring the Brahmanas and the gods,
one should break the fast in the forenoon. The
fast should be broken after consulting all except
the vrata of Rohini.

gear sraxit afe cert
a galeniard a aa gear ad aatG IH

When . the Jayanti falls on Monday or
Wednesday and if one performs vrata on that day
he was never to be born again.

sed arent faiferwenit weet aie
agg MATT ATATIG 311
aft adgrnfa ovat at a waa

we aa at Halequi aie wyStTG wi
Font faa seen aarat STENT
apatararas wat wate wrTa: 11& 411

TaN AMET Weal AER a

weet Calf Qenfctardraaeeryne & 11

faamennqain: waeErayay

qalut fares @ erat ager weTTNG VN!

When Astami is there at the time of day break
and during rest of the period, the Navami-tithis is
there and Rohini Nakstra also is combined with
Monday of Wednesday, such a type of
combination is achieved after hundreds of years
but the one who performs vrata during that
period crores of his generations are redeemed.
Such of the people who are poor can achieve all
the merits by observing the fast alone and the
lord get pleased with them. One should adore the
lord with a mind filled with devotion remaining
awake during the night and the lord bestows the
reward of performing Jayanti-vrata to them. At
that point of time, whosoever gives away in
charity-without getting miser, he gets the best of
the reward. The one who behaves miserly he
achieves the reward only in fraction.

aremray dfgoai + Hater ye)

waged yod drearanteid were cit

If an intellectual is unable to break the fast on
the day of Asfami in Rohini constellation, he
loses the merit of the fasting performed by him
even in earlier births.

fatarequi eft vat a ago

Tense: qalfataarst Fe UTTOTTNG 8 Ht

The tithis destroy the merit to eight times and
the constellation deprive a person of the merit
four times. Therefore one should try to end the
fast by the close of the tithis or the constellation.

Terrerat ararat fared wer seq

qasie yrs wt Her FA: 01

O best of the sage, in the case the tithis end at
Mahanisa beside the constellation, in that case
the intellectual should break the fast on the third
day.

mugged eadia g Wada Werf

HUT TAS AT Yaa | ATTN Bu

=== PAGE 79 ===

2

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

O Narada, after the passing of six muhtrtas,
the time of Mahdnisa arrives in the night. The
one who takes food during that period earns the
sin of Brahmahatya.

Tntafnprad ange a wei FETT
qarved Yer a a FM I

The betel, fruits and water offered by him turn
into the flesh of cow, refuse and the urine. At
that point of time even the best of the food for
the humans becomes unfit for consumption, then
what to speak of the boiled rice.

fram weit mgETaaasse a UGEAy
cast agit wet feererercrafere io 3 11
Wea FT YS FAT ATT TAT
VTA CAA AA APT: 9%

Leaving aside the four dandas of the
beginning and the end, the period of night in
between them is called Triyamd, before and end
of the night there are two sandhyds (day break
and evening). Out of these, one is called the day
break and the other the evening. By performing
the auspicious Janmdstmi-vrata and remaining
awake, a person is relieved of the sin of a
hundred births. There is no doubt about it.

ware ot ysrargurer tact At:
aypatene Ter ad SET ATI I
aqaTey Tet AA ata aes aH

PATA EAT WT GMT NG

At the time of fasting during the auspicious
Janmdstami, one achieves the merit of
performing the Asvamedha sacrifice. Without
remaining awake and by performing only the
vrata, one is relieved of the sins performed by
him during childhood, teen-age, young age, and
old age. There is no doubt about it.

stoned aye yet ATT:
BaP aT TeSATGTG SHAT
mermaid you wer avafa Pfr
arevagia: weaee fet a aifotiiecit
oa TARAS arereraearat

pinta: yeqedve endive weft: eit

undt ae: AAMT A TAT Tee
ufgentagenttr faerat a afineaquic ot
Wwarfeagantor yeast Yet: |

yarde: PN WA: AA AT Te
aang Wives aay WATT!

wet sretatt year weTHat AUISAT: 112 VU
wat MaRS STMT TAT Ha

Te a waeERheya Yas 311

aT aT TRC AAT

at MARTA STRIP WANS YP 1c WI

Those who consume food during the birthday
of Krsna earn the sin of enjoying the company of
their mothers and besides earning the sin of
Brahmahatyd. Besides destroying the merits of
crores of their earlier births, they are considered
to be unfit for performing religious ceremony for
the gods and the manes and have to remain in the
kdlasatra hell, till the sun and the moon last. The
insect with sharp teeth bite them daily in hell.
Thereafter getting redeemed they are reborn in
the land of Bharata and serve as a cowherds for
sixty thousands crores of years, a pig for hundred
births, wild animal for hundred births, a jackal
for seven births, a snake for seven births, a crow
for seven births, and a deaf and dumb person
suffering from leprosy. He always remains
anxious thereafter. He is there born as an animal,
a wild animal, a snake charmer, a thief, a vulture,
a washerman and blacksmith and thereafter he is
born as a temple priest.

sarerrivaes fat a isa
maga at cergeadt faye wage 4

If anyone is unable to perform the fasting, one
should serve food to a Brahmana, besides giving
him the money which should suffice for him to
take food twice.

palqgeieraraad aqgt A

Thereafter, he should recite the Gdyatri-
mantra a thousand times performing Pranayama,
in this vrata one should recite the mantra twelve
thousand times.

=== PAGE 80 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 9 73

Bad alert aa qt Taaea:)
aararagart faarmngy ST ATcioli
I had heard this from the mouth of Dharma
and the same has been narrated by me to you and
T have also told you the fault one earns for not
observing the same.
sft sitgeto Ugo FORT ATeAIo
ATTRA: 16 11

ee oe a

=== PAGE 81 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 9

73

ae FaaseaTa:
Chapter - 9

Festivities of Nanda's son
AN Sart

Here ager Gut aeranhae ays!

Sra kaye He: farrene Yara

f& vent efter afratfett: wits

areaSrh Ter sate AT BAU

Narada said-Vasudeva placed Krsna in the

palace of Yasoda and returned to his abode.
Thereafter, how were the festivities for the birth
of Krsna performed and for how long? You

kindly narrate to me the story about his
childhood.

YU Sat AT where Wea THAT el
aeget Sar fate wftamnert Bg
In the Goloka the lord had promised to Radha
but then how could the lord fulfil that promise?.

aigpari am use fafeet az
Tetisi aermitst dorer aula WATS
O lord, the account of Vrndavana and the sight
of the divine dance there, you kindly describe in
detail, the Rasalila and the water-sports.

sreet: fi Tent aehet ae Dison
@: wd a afer: aa a ae TUG
tyrarenrernyd set: BT
fata: aferqaracd Fi ve WaNG I
wereuseisi aula wata aI
Wieraularenred were TeraorTA ION

What type of tapas had Nanda, Yasoda and
Rohini performed? Where was Balabhadra born
earlier to his becoming the brother of the lord
Krsna. The divine story of Hari has been
compared with the block of nectar. Particularly
by listening to the story of lord Hari from the
mouth of the poet, one is infested with devotion
and it always appeals as new whenever one
listens to it. Therefore, you kindly describe the
divine dance performed by Krsna from your own
mouth in the poetic narrations, one listen to the
performance indirectly but wherever one listens
to the experience, ones witnesses with his own
eyes, it is considered to be the best.

sirponitgt warmeretirgront yenfe:
Maen: wa were Yar: aen

Because of your being the amsa of lord Krsna
you happen to be the teacher of the yogis. The
one who belongs to a particular anisa, he remains
happy with the same.

wade aftict wet facts g gat Bs
Menieteataia AH HEN
You are described about the lotus-like feet of
lord in which both of you had merged. Therefore
you happen to be the clean arisa of the lord of
Goloka and yourself also as great he is.
ARTA Sara
paeeefacte: Eat aiseta a
saya anfdcaye sitqgenigt ae Fa Rott
Narayana said- Brahma, Siva, Sesa, Ganega,
Karma, Dharma, myself, the Nara and Ka4rttikeya
happen to be the nine gods who emerged from
the arhSa of Krsna.
wat Tipteers afer a aod
a wat at faerie 3 Aer: fH faafeatsuee
Alas, who can describe the glory of the lord of
Goloka. | am myself not quite aware of him nor
do the Vedas know about him then, what to say
of the other intellectuals?.

Wat ann: afendtd: afteriivat
Wl ate: HeTpAs Wala ae FAULU

=== PAGE 82 ===

74

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

O sage, Varaha, Vamana, Kalki, Bauddha,
Kapila and Matsya also were the amsa of the
lord. Besides them, there are various other
incarnations who happen to be the amsa of
Krsna.

apt afeet wave yaaaiefaafeay:t

ufequiaa: get Aquos wee TANT

agus area ener:

eis tiget Tararisé faye: Gas

Karma, Nrsimha, Rama and Virat of Sveta-
dvipa are the amsa of lord Visnu. Lord Krsna
happen to be the great soul. He himself dwells in
the Vaikuntha as well as the Goloka. In Vaikunt
ha, he is known to be the husband of Kamala
having four arms and in Goloka he appears in the
form of Krsna having two arms only and is
known as the husband of Radha.

orda tat Fret a fart qaha afr
shat: Wenge Far: qarerafeay fermi gat

All the yogis always meditate upon the same
tejas. There could be no ¢ejas without a Tejasvi.
way fax avtenfs agtarearers:)
Digvaya ait BireqyeA SeFSTeE
agai watt Fat are Hroventters:|
Wer Toit et Bret ayitet ar aaPerti got!

O Brahmana, now I am going to highlight
about the tapas of Yasoda, Nanda and Rohini as
a result of which they could see the face of the
lord (in the form of a son.) you listen to me.
Nanda happened to be Drona who was the best
of the Vasus and his chaste wife known as Dhara
re-appeared on earth as Yasoda.

‘Digot wit @ agra wianfoh

Wat warahed Fate werent Mieen

Teme HT Tera wee TATA

quad ae ad thararrt at ut

wage aera autorrgd BA

signer a Fat gue? ot

Rohini happened to be the mother of the

serpents in earlier birth. Now I am going to
narrate the life stories of all of them, which you
please listen. O sage, once the chaste Dhara and

Drona performed tapas over the Gandhamadana
mountain in the dsrama of Gautama for ten
thousand years. They continued tapas on the
bank of the Suprabha river in a secluded place
for achieving lord Krsna.

a aaet aft Rot eer dar auf

prausfiagug aararerae wyatt gH

Thereafter both Drona and Dhara finding
themselves unable to achieve audience, became
unattached and prepared a fire alter to bun
themselves in the same.

at agent qpr a arayarritficin

eae: sttaft qecat met grefaur? 211

wat aye geet niet fay

eqrrereat a fagut gerdtat a aFarqe 3

Finding them ready to burn themselves there
was a divine voice from the sky saying. "O best
of Vasus, you will have an audience with lord
Krsna on earth in Gokula in the form of a son.
Even the yogis are unable to have a look at him.
He is beyond the comprehension of most of the
intellectuals and is adored by Brahma even.".

ai at : . \

Bea FANT BT GE Mat FTF w

On hearing this both Dhara and Drona
retreated to their respective abodes and in the
next birth they had the lord as their son.

aaerrcaita ated ated aa

Hes Femi a eoitafes WONG

Thus the stories of Nanda and Yasoda have
been narrated by me which are quite secret and
beyond the gods. Now I am going to narrate the
story of Rohini which you please listen.

Uae tame we yerafet wat

Faget STEN wa HAT FAUEA

Geren Gat kat wercianeyfir

wert at feat gest att FETUON

O sage, once during the menstrual period Aditi

the mother of gods sent a message to Kasyapa,
she clad herself in beautiful garments and
adomed herself with best of gems-studded

=== PAGE 83 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 9

75

ornaments after taking bath. Then looking at the

mirror, she decorated herself variously.
arqifaga ani frqagugay
TARVER TAMTOTPAAUN Cl
Tnitfendgad wart Gey
PROTA PTET BH
Tayi gat fafa
Taaafordiomeciftateratatarg 3 ott
wafers a afead gat wan
ada arid a yirafartter iy et
way FS gE Gat aye fe
upeait ufart a arraronritfsann 2)

Besides a spot of kastiri, she also adorned her
forehead with the vermilion, her ears with gems-
studded kundalas decorated herself variously and
also wore the pearl in her nose. Her face
resembled the full moon of winter season and her
eyes resembled the lotus flower of winter season.
She had curved eye-brows and collyrium was
applied to her eyes. She had beautiful teeth
resembling the seeds of pomegranate. Her face
was quite illumining. Her lips resembled the ripe
fruit of wood apple and with her serene smile,
she could attract the minds of sages. Looking at
her face in the mirror she was lodged in her
abode and suffering from passion started
anxiously looking towards the path from which
her husband was to arrive.

yaa aatafeft: avad ageqay
THRE TR ATTY FRAT 3

In the meantime she came to know that
Kasyapa was enjoying life with Kadri placing
his head on her breasts.

FA FANT UTE Ar Fare ecraTTT
RTT Uf Teo re THTATTNG SI
3 tarerraren aw after eanfert

at meg writen a aaa
SAA AT AAT MNT SAATATY!

wr ad wrt a arg wef srrganqg gu

Thereafter she felt disgusted but in spite of her
getting infested with passion, she did not

pronounced a curse on her husband but she
pronounced a curse of Kadri. "This lady well-
versed in the Dharma has not proved herself
worthy of a temple and had indulged herself in
the destruction of dharma, therefore, getting
deprived of the heaven she would go to the earth
and be born in the human race.” On hearing these
words from the mouth of messengers Kadri also
pronounced a curse on Aditi the mother of the
gods thus, "she also would be born on earth and
suffer from old age in the human race."

aad dears ay a aA

wet area vel a wat aE Yafeanizei

wat tif wer ye Rafe ste

WAAR PITT AT MHTTT ANY 211

Thereafter KaSyapa tried to convince Kadri,
the mother of the serpents, "O lady with a serene
smile, at the time you move on to the earth I shall
also accompany you. Therefore shedding all the
fears, you be happy." Because on earth, you will
be able to witness the lord in the form of your
son. Thus speaking Kasyapa went to the abode of
Aditi.

arot yor a ware war aay)

wait wa Weave ays TYR g eu

Reaching there Kasyapa fulfilled the desire of
Aditi as a result of which Mahendra was born out
of her womb.

afefagaat da ater a Ofeoi

HVAT AYLAPT AHAB HET o lt

The same Aditi appeared as Devaki on earth
and Kadrd the mother of the serpents was known
as Rohini. Kasyapa happened to be Vasudeva the
father of Krsna.

Tee tet wad fanfed gH
BT AAA TATA BT YIN
arr eee: WT:
Veoh agers watt a dete 2H

O sage, I have revealed the entire secret of
you. I am now going to narrate the story of the
birth of Baladeva, which you please listen. He

=== PAGE 84 ===

76

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

was Ananta, imperishable having thousands of
snake-hoods and the incarnation of the lord.
Rohini happened to the beloved of Vasudeva.

Sra Tigh Great Raa BA
deters wered aavitar wenfaais 31!

O sage, with the permission of Vasudeva for
the protection of Sarhkarsana from Karhsa, she
went to Gokula.

Rae: wat we Arar FTAA aT
Vfgoa west aa ATTATATA THeTS 1

At that point of ‘ime at the command of lord
Krsna, Yogamaya, extracted the foetus of Nanda
from the womb of Devaki and transplanted it into
the womb of Rohini.

ee a aa wy Sears BT WTA Bl
ferat afarad Deut FeaFatis yn

qua yt Honigt artanitgary

Sugred Weared saeret TAATATNY GI

After doing so the goddess went to Kailasa.
With the passage of time Rohini gave birth to a
son who happened to be the amsa of Krsna. He
had the complexion of the molten silver and
quite glorious. The lord himself had a serene
smile on the face and possessed the divine lustre.

aeta aaa at Wye Aen
wat ggeet Agra Fora vei

With the birth of Baladeva, all the gods were
delighted and big drums were beaten in the
heaven besides other musical instrument were
also played upon there.

warped wgre agar yasFamt:|
sat TST Grea rt aghad ehirsen

Getting immensely pleased the gods shouted
the slogan of victory, blowing on the conches at
the same time. Nanda on the other hand getting
delighted distributed enormous riches to the
Brahmanas.

fade wet art a arcana aT
sare Syepthea: wahrcorgfia:ny eu

With the severing of the cord by the mid-wife,
the child was bathed, the cowherdesses adomed
with all the ornaments started shouting the slogan
of victory.

Wye TAPAS WHET

wet ayer wheat sreranat eMt FAny o11

ernie argh tet fargta a

Fee chit sea a aTATT NG tit

wareart a efert dfguitatet aan

SEPT F aaa Tega YUNG BH

Nanda gracefully celebrated the occasion of
the birth of a son. Thereafter getting pleased,
Yasoda distributed riches to the cowherdesses as
well as the Brahmanas besides other articles like
oil, vermilion etc. O son, I have thus narrated to
you the story about the tapas of Nanda and
YaSoda besides the birth of Balabhadra, and the
story of Rohini. Now I am going to narrate to
you about the festivities following the birth of
Krsna in the house of Nanda. You listen it.

Gad tag at TaTTTET

Uge Hwrafed sonarat a vray BN

walguicrnst a afmered et:

sitet ageaye tare Tenet vi

yeren waferat wer wT Framer

watered afte wem: ge TATE PANG GI

The hearing of life-stories of Krsna bestows
pleasure, salvation, knowledge of  sattvas,
removes the cycle of birth and death besides old
age. They happen to be the life of Vaisnavas,
remover of all the misfortunes and bestows the
devotion of the lord. O sage, Vasudeva placing
Krsna in the abode of Nanda and carrying the
girl-child in her place, he returned to his abode
with pleasure. I have recited the story in detail
earlier and also about the girl-child.

aa gel Forefet Yo] ART

aged WE MI aylay FE Ts ANGE

age gfrarmt wart wera

weet i aftg adiricemriy ont

Presently you listen to the story of Krsna
while, he stayed in Gokula. After the departure
of Vasudeva, Nanda and Yagoda found in the
pleasant labour-room which happened to be the
home of victory, the child Krsna possessing the
dark complexion placed on the ground.

=== PAGE 85 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 9

77

oda Gat Tet upd Tea

wreardorergral Teta 11

eet a eat a aupanareT

Beed gloat Imad veraaK et

He was quite beautiful and without robes and

was looking at the kalasa placed at the top of the
house. The lustre of his face put to shame, the
lustre of the moon and both his eyes were life the
blue lotus flower. Some times he cried and some
times he laughed, the particles of dust were
found over his limbs. Both his hand were placed
over the ground and both his lotus-like feet
looked like the mass of love.

gear ve: fern ard aft wet ay a

ett & Piva iter aTeTERTNG 01)

fade aet arena eatgniaht wa ay:

BRTpiiitan: Wat FeapwravTerHay: 1G BW

afeenrra aerarra farucagea afr

anfert ggy: wat aqyators yatig 211

Looking at the lord, Nanda felt delighted with

his wife. Thereafter, the mid-wife bathed the son
with the warm water, the cord of the child was
severed the delightful cowherdesses started
shouting the slogans of victory. They had stiff
pelvic region, moving breasts and all the
cowherdesses assembled there. All the girls, the
female friends and the wives of Brahmanas
reached the labour-room and started looking at
the child. They delightfully started blessing him.

IS UR: WT TYR Ta
We: Weer: SAPS Heat ale wT areag B11
URers fate aa Wa ELA:

WAOTATATATS BRAT ARETE YI

aren arearare afavaga eat oH

aa aye ars STAN zal TTTNG YI

Some of the ladies carried the child in their lap

and started kissing him. Many of the
cowherdesses remained there. Nanda then took
his bath and was clad in new garments and
performed all the traditional rites with a pleasant

mind, fed the Brahmanas, the scriptures of
welfare were recited, the musical instrument
were played upon and the beggars were
distributed the riches. Thereafter Nanda with a
delightful mind gave away riches in charity to
the Brahmanas.

aaah varenfat ereanfir a arerq

fret vdarre qautgrad Ne G11

te orreci ae trees ETT

efi get want a raid gt AME

firert uociggand eight teats a

aft a adaerest arganiqggrargctt

argent a denft aat FEI aya Bl

vag atearnt aorarara ara 81!

O sage, he also distributed several precious
gems besides the diamonds and:coral. He gave
away in charity seven mountain like heaps of
sesamum, hundred heaps of gold, mountains of
paddy besides cloth a thousand of beautiful
cows, curd, milk, sugar, batter, ghee, honey,
sweets, best of sweet balls, tasteful modakas,
irrigated land, steed which could move with the
speed of wind betel and the oil. He also deputed
Brahmanas for the protection of the Jabour-room.

7a eae ear

Feige USAT Ra AARETTII oH

Thereafter deputing the Brahmanas well-
versed in the mantras and the old cowherdesses,
he arranged for the recitation of the name of Hari
which bestows welfare.

TAT BT TRIMER WraTaTS Sara:
aranferenrger Gary TeHrctere AAT: 19 811
SRR: BPA Ter: YoraaSeraferet: 1
TESA TAA SAPTAN9 V1

He also arranged the adoration of the gods
with deep devotion. Thereafter Nanda, arrived in
the palace whose mind was filled with delight
and be stood at the end, besides being blissful.

aiyitaté wqearar grea AqureT: |
PT: USMTPETANTeAPSTY 19311

=== PAGE 86 ===

8

The Brahmanas well-versed in the Vedas
holding flowers in their hands started blessing
the king who arrived there urgently.

aeafaerga torent Satta: wreaferereet:|
aifergr: Yermae snrapteatery tow

The people well-versed in astrology, who had
truthful speech, holding the books in their hands,
also arrived in the abode of Nanda.

afeaen famucarye aren: wife ae!
MnfereRT ATTRTA STAPSAPSTL N94 1

Many of the young maidens besides the old
ladies, the wives of the Brahmanas, the boys and
the girls also arrived there with smiling faces.

weaisht weed wi een fafaenf a
aeration thenfor wragentir Arar GN

Nanda on his part distributed several types of
riches, gems, costumes and a thousand cows.

Fe TaeFEA dart fers Yeti

anfert gay: wa. equator TANI!

wea ayaa ays Taya:

TUTd: HATTA RAAT YATYATN9 211

Nanda expressed his humility while bowing in
reverence to all of them, who blessed him
variously looking at the newly born child. Thus
Nanda the lord of vratas, collecting all the
materials, celebrated the birth of the son and the
astrologer highlighted the good and the bad
effect of the planets according to the child
horoscope.

wa weet aretya Yaeraet wat yreitl

ward weit da yeaa Hg: TAT Ht

aera Veoh wer aa yaeas YeM

defeat ot aet sah PN2 01

qrarssforave forefa aga & eared ag:

apitentiguiarengie qersfam: tice

Thereafter, the child started growing in the
abode of Nanda, like the moon of the bright
fortnight. In the abode of Nanda, Balabhadra was
sucking the breast of his mother, o sage, at that
point of time, Rohini also participated in the
festivities and also delightfully distributed oil,
vermilion, betel and enormous riches to the

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

ladies present there. All of them blessed the child
over his head and went back to their respective
abodes. Only Nanda, Yasoda, and Rohini
remained in the palace.
Pa sitelo Helo FORM. ATEHlo TayAtTal
ae FaISATA: 1g tt

=== PAGE 87 ===

8

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

BUT SMTATSeATA:
Chapter-10
Salvation of Pitana.
Ana sara
ae Sa: Ta auifigrfert:|
yore ard et EqaraeroaiT en
fe wife very fart aaa: He
We: wet acuat & fara TTT e ut
FR Wa Seal Yea HAA
SUT Tt ST erat ara Pera u3u
Narayana said- Thereafter, Karhsa heard the
divine voice from the sky while he was seated
over the golden lion throne, "O foolish one what
are you doing; think of your well-being. I king
your death has arrived on the earth and you think
of the ways for your welfare, Vasudeva has
changed his son with that of the daughter of

Nanda for your destruction and brought her here
clandestinely and handed her over to you.

Uraien aaa w argea: wat aft:

Wa Bet tiget a ade TaahetHe

This girl was born of amsa of Maya and the
lord himself was born in the house of Vasudeva
as his son. He will be the one who will kill you
and is growing up in the house of Nanda in
Gokula.

Rae: BE Tat aed TeMAAT
daa: Bet watz GaTarPT TATU 1
TATA wre a TguitSt feet

Wa WS Weig aeeA Tera: AG 11

The seventh child of Devaki too is growing up
in the house of Nanda, the seventh conception of

=== PAGE 88 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 10

Devaki was not aborted and that son is still alive.
Yogamaya extracted foetus from the womb of
Devaki and transplanted the same in the womb of
Rohini and Baladeva was born out of that.
age at a ade ret & Teaket
AAT TE TAT AYSUSATAAT: 9
FoRATTATT TEA AATETGAT: |
Wart a ward won: ert ac
sara aH Tat ware wo fafa
“Both Krsna and Baladeva will be the cause of
your death and are growing up in the house of
Nanda." On hearing this divine voice, the king
Karhsa started feeling panicky. He could not take
his food and he summoned Pitana, who was
dearer to him than his life and spoke to her in his
court which was attended to by many kings.
@a sara
Yat Tepe wes arate TanFaeTe
faured a ert Ger fered ef warty
wa wetrenfaet are Trarerreafereead got
Kathsa said- O Piitana, you go to the palace of
Nanda in Gokula for my sake and applying
poison to your breasts you insert them in the
mouth of the infant. O dear one, you move with
the speed of the mind. You are well-versed in the
illusion.
mrermead a faera ast aiff
galeat wart wer waarmee
acted feng wa grenisfa yufataa
SRT at HEMET Wars AANA
SAT YT HS Morey aTTEMTATUTT
AAO AAT 3 1
faut water mening
aeitagn gai frat cadt games
Tirana a cetera wep
dorey Te geet ATTA Aa
ufariviiintagcceaties afer
vied wetiecaifnd fageantom a
O Yogini, by means of your illusion you take
to human form and go there. O well established

79

one, you can move everywhere because of the
mantra you received from Durvasa and are also
competent to take to any form. O Narada, thus
speaking the king Karhsa, kept quiet. Bowing in
reverence to Karhsa, Pitana started from the
place. The glory of her limbs resembled the
molten gold. She was adorned with various types
of ornaments and the garland of jasmine flowers,
wearing beautiful hair do over the head. She was
having the beautiful spots of kastari on her
forehead, besides the vermilion creating sound
with her anklets and waist-band, she went on to
her path. Reaching Vraja, she looked at the
beautiful palace of Nanda which was difficult to
look at by others and was surrounded by quite
deep and dark revines which were difficult to
cross. It was constructed by Visvakarma with
stones.

saheriad: wenrigea afer
qaulactiicatvatad: grater: 112911

wrarthrairageicantad:!

GHeaEeHT ea FARM IIGE I FAT URE

It was decorated with sapphire, emerald lotus-
like gems, had the divine kalasas of gold and
astonishing type of the sikharas. The boundary
walls touching the sky and had four gates which
had the doors of iron. The gate keepers were
guarding the gates.

Benrenforerraest: yotcerfa finds: 1129 11

waularaeerarot wat aifefereraary

auta: fates Ae: waka 2011

aint a agar ante: afar

sferetenisert arett uferat GeTEATIe

The beautiful palace was surrounded by the
beautiful damsels and was filled with diamonds
and gems besides other riches. There were
enormous number of golden vases, crores of
cows, lakhs of cowherds, serving as attendants
who were fed there. There were thousands of
slave girls who were engaged in different types
of works. The chaste Pitana entered in such a
type of palace in a beautiful form, wearing the
serene smile over her face.

=== PAGE 89 ===

80

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

geal at waged o aret qeasqaet

fee ar caetan Bat Goat RS AATTATIN VI

sworgatficer tra: wneg: Geet a aT

wat Feared wre arerarareat Fa S12 311

WHS Hye MT WIM aeHeT a

sare aferet wrest wel STE MAN

Finding her entering in to the palace, the
cowherdesses as if Laksmi or Durga had arrived
to have a look at child Krsna all the cowherd and
cowherdesses bowed before her and enquired of
her welfare. They offered her a lion throne as a
seat and washed her feet. The chaste lady also
enquired of the welfare from the cowherdesses.
The beautiful damsel then sat there with a smile
on her face and accepted the offerings made to
her by the cowherds and cowherdesses quite
delightfully.

anggrifier: wat: ar eriivatt aim
caret aa fa are fe aise aot aT aaa

Thereafter, the cowherdesses enquired of her,
"O damsel who are you and where do you live.
What is your name? What is the purpose of your
arrival here? You tell us.".

arat a aert grat aIsTyaT WatETH
Tatreanfest tnt wine farenfri «1
aye wat are Te waa gen
geastasé t xemiet agutftaary
yaaa & apr ane sear eect
On hearing the words of the cowherdesses, she
spoke in beautiful words, "I reside in Mathura
and am a cowherds. Presently I am the wife of
the Brahmana. I have heard from a messenger
that Nanda and Yasoda have got a son in the old
age. On hearing it, I have arrived here to blessed
the child. You bring here the child, I shall revert
to my abode after blessing the child.".
wreuitaert year agile FeArTAT
wore Yet IS Sat TreOTAAAAT: 113 3 UL
On hearing the words of the Brahmana lady
the mind of Yasoda was delighted who bowed

before her and gave the child to the Brahmana
lady who carried him in her lap.
pea He Fa wet Gye a:
ee eat qardihh eft quae ading on
Carrying him in her lap, she kissed him again
and again; thereafter the chaste Pitana inserted
his breast into the mouth of Krsna.
waisyiisd aera Fat Age
quatraurant areitsafiegara g113 eH
wont fart diet aera aaa fea:
we: Wt: we Wat await Gefrag VU
She said to Yasoda, "O beautiful cowherdess,
this child of your is of astonishing beauty and
equates Narayana is qualities. Lord Krsna
sucking the breast of Patana coated with poison,
sat on her breasts and started smiling, he sucked
her milk poison, together with her life.".
TI Wer Meat MOAT TIT ZI
fagerearcacat aaaeAT BAU 3 Ut
wareg utara qereg fae aM
arte ta vii tranfafahionqa xi
undenaticadit gritet:!
waeerea vied carat: 113 4
afavitaa aan yaltor aft ae
arafaafatatye Utes 3 GI
Wai was o safer acre
wderedt Wh Great SSAA
O sage, the chaste lady shed away her life
leaving the child there and she fell down on the
ground. After the fall of her body her mouth look
quite terrific. She fell down with her face on the
earth and left her worldly body and entered the
ethereal body. She mounted on a gem-studded
chariot which was carefully built. The chariot
was surrounded with the divine courtiers having
beautiful banners in lakhs. It had a large number
of mirrors, garments purified by fire was the
best, having painting made of different types of
gems and had a hundred wheels. It* was
illumining with the lustre of the gems. The
courtiers carried her to excellent Goloka making
Pitan to ride over it.

=== PAGE 90 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 10

eal Mgd Clan Tifrervenfefeteran:
wa: get a ceed fareraya aya BIg cH
Beholding the wonderful act, the cowherd and
the cowherdesses felt surprised and hearing all
this Kanga too became dazed.

apier were ara WS yet |rt act
Agel arcerara fawant fereieag et
O sage, YaSoda then picked up the child and
took him in his lap and started feeding him with
her breasts. They also performed the welfare
ceremony through the Brahmanas for child.

wae 8 Tara Fe: Ta
eRe earer TTI ot
Thereafter, Nanda delightfully cremated the

body of Putana using sandal-wood, aguru and
kastirt besides others fragrant articles.

ARE ara
A aT oar Tara sa YOrat at
Ser oar a apr ae FoAPATTs at
Narada said- Who was that chaste lady in the
form of Pitana appearing as a demoness? By

what merit she had an audience with the lord
with and went to the abode Krsna?.

ATT Jar

aferast arena Ep we ETT

fa THM YAS TE TANS

TAM AS UH YAR AGM WAY

faaafe ert gon: wtf ¢ a aaa 3

Narayana said- In the sacrifice of Bali his
daughter named Ratnamila felt attracted towards
Vamana and desired to have him as her son. She
had thought in her mind that the son like him
should be fed by her from her breasts. "Inserting
the breast in to his mouth I shall make him sit
over my breasts.”.
; efteramd arent wil seat er

aah orga wet erry: UPA

The lord wpderstood her desire and therefore
he sucked hig breasts in the next birth. The
compassionate 1i~rd who fulfils all the desires,

81

gave her the position of a mother feeding himself
from her breasts.

at ferent got yet Tera

weer area ores stare fat Vf Gt

O sage, the demoness Pitané offered her

breasts for sucking by Krsna with devotion and
achieved the glory. Then why should I adore any
other god accept the lord who granted salvation
to Patana?.

yea afar fam sippy
US We Gaat wat wernt Fuse
O Brahmana, thus I have narrated the qualities
of lord Krsna which are sweet at every step. Now
T am going to narrate to you his qualities further
which are no doubt the best in the world.
Bia atgelo Welo FUTSANGo ARSATO YRATATH ATT
ARIST oN

=== PAGE 91 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 10

81

SaTERISEAT:

Chapter-11
Killing of Trnavarta
ATAU SaTT
Wane get eat ayiter Tate
Teatn tam Hear aret aaa
Narayana said- Once Yasoda, the chaste wife
of Nanda was engaged in some household work
carrying the child in her lap.
arearead Goradurreast a THT
strefeiren sear aga TT TURU
At that very moment a demon named
Tmavarta arrived there in the form of a storm in
Gokula. Lord Krsna realising the arrival of the
demon increased the weight of his body.
STA APA FT AIT Tee TAT
rey ere SATA TAT BANNAN
O sage, Yasoda finding herself unable to carry

the weight of the child, placed him over the bed
and herself went to the Yamuna.

=== PAGE 92 ===

82

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

Ultra aa araTuS ge!
are F wife wea a MAAN

In the meantime the demon in the form of a
storm carried the child moving him round and
round.

are gamed Braye a age
Sa Belt ATA YAR TOT BUG
argtstt efterniscmme eftaFar
Pat Wee Fear alert ATH
Wosaayieal Tat yrarggataatsgt:|
siporerureargtantets FATT Big

The demon uprooted the trees and broke the
branches and then created the dust storm
plunging the entire Gokula in darkness. The
illusory demon created all this storm in a
moment. He was then himself upset with the
weight of lord Krsna and fell down on the
ground. With the touch of lord Hari, the demon
also achieved Vaikuntha; all his deeds were
destroyed and mounted on the chariot, he
reached in the Goloka. He was the king of the
land and had turned into a demon with the curse
of Durvasa. With the touch of lord Krsna, he
reached Goloka,.

arearedt et Tita arerger waferger:|
FSBT ater AA Wa PAT AIC
we Fog: Ta aa wet virareT MATT
Sfaruirangea yegrenie Seg

O sage, after the departure of the demon, all
the cowherds and cowherdesses were terror
stricken, Finding the child missing from the bed
all of them felt panicky and while crying they
started beating the breasts. Some of them were
fainted and some Of them started crying.

oranat wget equator ast

ghagaraalgy gurantee got

The people started searching for the child and
they found him ultimately in the forest with his
body covered with dust he was lying in an
orchard of flowers.

areaney ataatt areanfaa
Upat WH MeaR(g at TAATATTU
He was found at the bank of a tank with deep
water. Getting panicky, he was crying looking
towards the sky.

Wehar aes FE: Heat aaa WATT
av ay ga wer wie w Yutshadneen
Nanda at once picked up the child and carried

him in his lap. Looking at the face of the child
he, started crying aloud.

aeiar diet sie EBT aret BNE a

per date agaat gees a ygdg:ig3 tl

U_el SAAT TTA Te!

wet eh PT as WATAS TUT SII

Thereafter, Yasoda and Rohini also started
crying looking at the child. Carrying him in their
Jap they started kissing his face again and again.
After performing the welfare ceremony the child
was made to bathe. Thereafter expressing delight
through face and eyes, Yasoda inserted her breast
in to his mouth.

ate Sart
at Wee gare: WUsaeyited FIA
Bfaard ag vafatrerd yor ek
Narada said- O Brahman, why did Durvasa
pronounced a curse on the king of Pandya

country? You kindly think over it care fully and
narrate the old story.

WUSTMTA THT ASAT: TATA!

ares wares BSH SAG

Tet PRA a wda eT

farmer Ta Yoder TATA Rott

Narayana said- Sahasraksa, the king of Pandya_
country was quite glorious, the king infatuajied”
with passion accompanied with » ‘sundred
damsels was roaming about in ja secluded place
over Gandhamadana mountain, he enjoyed
conjugal pleasured over thes’oank of the river, in

=== PAGE 93 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 11

the flower or chard located over the bank of the
river.

aMinanyert fartates ya:

ATA A TAA ATT ARS Ut

The king behaved pervertedly with the
damsels injuring them with teeth and the nails
while indulging in love-sports.

wen ultras a shits quite:

Pet Weaent a Aertst THT TNH

The competent king taking to a thousand

forms enjoyed the company of the damsel over
the land as well as in water.

wat faaet: Vat waryE Zora:

fagya YOURS WATE 1

Tater aa warard merge:

foreaed: aftgat werd vient wife en

Thus all the damsels were engaged in water-
sport with the king in the Puspabhadra river
getting unrobed. In the meantime, Durvasa

accompanied by a lakh of his pupils arrived there
on his way to a abode of Siva.

eal At were a FATA BI

ATT SRT TAT BT MTG T ATT BU

The intoxicated king did not show due respect
to the sage on his arrival. He did not get up to
welcome him nor did the express anything by
indication of hand or speech.

Gear yaarT Fake Mey RBA LAT:

sat wa fees are wet ys TANZN
ane Mead owed FTA

at sftugerpiqiicies areata gages

Finding the king in such a condition, the sage
was enraged and his lips started fluttering. He
then pronounced a curse, "O sinful one getting
deprived of the yoga you become a denion and
move on to the earth. O degraded human, you
will wander in the land of Bharata for lakhs of
years and thereafter you will achieve Goloka.
With the touch of the feet of lord Krsna.

a UM 3 alee GA HT ATT

83

THATS TepgrRfer TET GH

O queen, you will go to the land of Bharata
and shall be born in the houses of the people
there.

BYR g Pisa HT vee

Blerered ferergyer Fererdtar: Fara:

Thus speaking the sage proceeded on to the
abode of Siva. All the compassionate pupils of
the sage felt panicky.

aa PAS Tat wie a aR

Beg Trias TeV faTETGT: 2!

After the departure of the sage, the king was
seated over the bank of the stream and started
crying. All his beloved queens started crying due
to the separation from the king.

3 a TBagerd a: WA:

at fa a went a da a a
Pr EeaL

aa 7 faefterrecar ani geri

a afteate Ted iF Sree TE ATTN

They said, "O lord, the best in performing of
the love sport. Where shall we go without you
and where shall you go leaving us." Alas, you
shall not be able to enjoy the love-sport in the
secluded place any further. If you do not remain
the king, we shall not go to our abode.

WTR 7 FANT YS Ta

warttanat argeat arsafreart get: 113 oll

You shall not be able to look at your moon
like face of enjoy the pleasure or your embrace.

SYM Gey: Tal: Gra TakTT
ptrengyeet qa Ta: AACS

Thereafter remaining at the bank of the river,
the queen caught hold of the feet of the king and
fainted while crying.

TRisfrgqusnara AHA: TE AR!
aren eftuarsiist sacrafet Farag g113 U1
Blerart YU: we frapint fer:
separa deh a aeraATgN 3 31

=== PAGE 94 ===

84

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

O Narada, thereafter the king, together with
the queens entered into the fire alter reciting the
name of the lotus-like feet of lord. All the gods in
the heaven felt panicky at the sight. The destiny
is always powerful. This has been proclaimed by
the sages.

aU WM Waal sm afaferq
aged ana at oft ar arom x11

Thereafter the same king was tured to the
from of Trnavarta and ultimately achieved
Vaikuntha. His queen were also born in the land
of Bharata.

sad afad ad state
Trarot ara PATA GH

Thus, I have narrate the glory of Hari and have
also narrated the redemption of the king from
demonhood.

sf sttgeto Helo FUISATTS AEto Fada

ATARI SEAT: 1182

=== PAGE 95 ===

84

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

BE BEISEATT:
Chapter-12
Destruction of Sakatasura

ARTA Jara

Uma afat Teaueht wre

peal safe wifes get a eet aetna

Narayana said- Once Yasgoda the wife of
Nanda carried the child in her lap was feeding
him with her breast milk.

Wifaat area srypteaher

aera aerearyea afore MoT AT: 13H

ATS ares VG HaeT way Tat

WORT ayer atvahenfta Erg

tafrgumaci edt anat qasfam

freagght sentir qaonft o aifireniwi

In the meantime all the cowherds and the old

ladies together with boys and girls arrived in the

abode of Nanda. At that point of time Yasoda
placed the child who was still hungry over the

bed and delightfully with pleasure started giving
away the oil, vermilion, betel, sweets, clothes
and ornaments on the occasion of the birthday of
Krsna.

Witt gut wile gfe

Sefer wo aeui wreath area faye

Ward BUT Tes welt Pre TA

faryererareranted Ft Ys SGU

ausa wed grant aa a1

wart aft get a aerttt Yt AAuen

In the meantime hungry Krsna started crying.
In the meantime Krsna the lord of illusion placed
his foot with his illusion. His fort fell over the
solid cart in the court-yard. With the blow of the
foot of Krsna, the cart was shuttered into pieces
which were scattered everywhere. The card,
milk, ghee, butter and honey placed in the cart
started flowing.

qearsyerd tiftarga gggaters warq

aquiagacinenadt fergie

wasagg a ufad ag

infarar g arerhst were ates frag

urarfarraatg ofa apf ager

WH eat apter F eale T TRt FETIoM!

Looking at the surprise, the cowherdesses
went running to the child. They found that he
had been broken the cart into wooden pieces. All
the vases of cart had been broken resulting into
the flow of milk. With the remaining pieces, of
wood. Feeling panicky, Yasoda removed the
child from there, whose all the limbs were intact
with the influence of illusion. He was crying,
simply because he was hungry. The grief-
stricken Yagoda started crying and also fed the
child with her breast.

WrgaterariiT as Were SAT
fafasg 7 ware: wedia farrgT Re
seqgateran: we ator: Wot AET:I
STOTT TETAS Wee TATTNL
gen aaert Tor tieaga seqan

a fe org: wee @ feaegyas wat: 1e3 tt

=== PAGE 96 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 12

85

The cowherds enquired from the boys playing
there. "How did this cart be broken"? We don't
find any reason for it. All of a sudden how could
this surprise happen." On hearing this boys said,
"O cownerds, ou listen to our talk, the cart was
broken with the attack of Krsna by his feet." On
hearing this, all the cowherds and cowherdesses
started laughing delightfully, who could not
believe the same, the people of Vraja said that it
was all false.

feet: caer ard ageteorpranr:!

eet cet frets wars wad feign

Thereafter the welfare ceremony of the child
was performed by the Brahmanas. One of the

Brahmanas placing his hand over the head of the
child recited a kavaca.

safe aa fairs wert water
CeOR COR CE WE ccs TET
fife soda atet ao stererfata
stare wafrat a heritage

O best of the Brahmanas, I am going to
enlighten you about the kavaca with protects all.
Its knowledge was imparted in earlier times by
Yogamaya to Brahma when lord Visnu was
sleeping in the oceanic waters over the serpent
bed and was terrified by Madhu-kaitabha, he
recited the prayer to Yoganindra.

anifsart
gery qe wed ore fee F et feat
ferret af a serge fie areT go!
Yoganidra said- O lord of the universe, O
Brahman, be fearless shedding the fear why

should you be afraid when I and the lord are
there. Therefore, you live comfortably.

sitet: ug & wet Wer WAT:
sipervagt wg afaent aferenrafa: ec

Lord Hari should protect your face,
Madhusddana should protect your forehead, Sti
Krsna protect both your eyes. And the husband
of Radhika should protect your nose.

auignt a aud a aunt Ug AIA:

wile wy Mere: Seige Sera: AUR

Both the ears, the neck and the head should be
protected by Madhava, the cheeks should be
protected by Govinda and the hair should be
protected by Kesava.

setts wits ervefet weet:

TWayatya Tat TGs aret fery:uz ont

The lower lip should be protect by Hrsikesa,
the line of teeth should be protected by wielder
of gadd. The tongue should be protected by the
lord of Rasa (dance) and the palate should be
protected by Vamana the all-pervading one.

aa: Wg Yaraya wet ug eae

weet: Ug anf Ug fey EAT I

freagn qed a ag t gett:

waggrt arate: wg & adder faye zi

The chest should be protected by Mukunda
and the belly should be protected by the killer of
the Daityas, the navel should be protected by
Janardana, while male organ should be protected
by Visnu. The pelvic region should be protected
by Purusottma. The lord of Janaki should be
protected the knees.

weg gftera ug wa dae!

wegn aueya Ug % acta 3

Nrsirhha should protect both the hands during
all the dangers. Varaha born out of lotus should
protect the feet.

wed ATTA: Tg SITET: |

weet wg aotet: Wg et SMTETATNN eI

amie tig arat agus: wig Aah

areval argeaye Wal wet: TATA

The bust should be protected by Narayana,
while the lower portion should be protected by
lord of Kamala, the eastern direction should be
protected by Gopila or the south-east should be
protected by the killer of Ravana, the southern
region should be protected by Vanamali, south-
west should be protected by Vaikuntha while the
western should be protected by Vasudeva.

=== PAGE 97 ===

86

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

wag & dean arent farewsrar:
BAL Tel Ug AST HORTA NRE
terantvar: ug wg waa wah
WR We AR Fagrat Tg Waa: oi
North-west should be protected by Vist
arasrava. The northern direction should be
protected by the lustre of Kamlasana and north-
east should be protected by Isvara who should
conquers of the enemies. Raghava should protect
in the water land and the sky.
poly HUT et BATT YT WANA
O Brahman, this is quite and astonishing
kavaca the knowledge of which was bestowed
on me by lord Krsna in earlier times.

YS ve dad Freed areereth
Ter fara wa: wars AT NReH
Engaged in the terrific fight with Sumbha,
goddess Durga on receiving this kavaca defeated
the demon in no time.
wees Waa TAT UAT A:
yd atin & a Great Fs TATARANZ oN
We YN wifes: aurea)
Tretia wae ear Me HATA BIg Rt
With the influence of this kavaca he fell on the
ground after have been killed. In the earlier times
Sumbha carried on the war for a hundred years
remaining in the sky and after his death lord
Govinda while remaining in the sky bestowed
this kavaca together with the rosary. And he
went to Goloka thereafter.
SURE Gard Hua wale WA
TT TT HATA WATT 3
O sage, I have narrated to you this kavaca
with which no one gets panicky at any time.

alfeg: atfegit Aer WaT gargs Sra:
ag & atten aed wet aed ferret WaNg 3H

In every kalpa with the company of the lord, I
have seen crores of Brahmanas falling.

SGM Hert aT Aart Wa I

Fasugt afreanet wet wo aretea 31

Thus speaking handing over the kavaca, the
goddess disappeared. Thereafter Brahma
continued to dwell on the lotus emerging from
navel of Visnu.

qauiqiearat a Head wat WTA

aud ar afar argh aetrarer: Bet: Was

fanaa va aa 7 Sra

Be we arahey Fgrat werdtvat:113.& 11

This kavaca should be kept in gold and the
intelligent people should it over the right arm and
by doing so, one is relieved of the danger of
poison, fire, water and enemies. The kavaca
protect one in the waters on earth in the sky
while sleeping or awake.

dart ara a ferret saree

SATETUTRS TaN Fvigat TATUZ ON

During the time of war, fall of thunderbolt,
evil times and danger of death, one becomes
fearless with the reciting of this kavaca.

aad Hart wud viarfeagt Ye:
A ST TAA WAT CI

In the earlier times by reciting this kavaca
around his neck, Siva easily over-powered
Tripurasura and kicked him.

aged wad Greil Thats WEE A
weariet gerd fayd at fact saat
In the meantime holding this kavaca, the
goddess swallowed Raktabija and the Sesa with a
thousand heads bears the load of the universe
like the seed of sesamum.
orai wags chaelt a ahorg
BATT WHAT TAA TAT TATTN¥ol
Both of us (Nara-narayana), Sanatkumara,
Dharma witness of the karmas are always
victorious with the influence of this kavaca.
wet referent: aos wat Had feat:
BAA: Ha BUS TIT Tae BATU

=== PAGE 98 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 13

Thereafter Nanda, tied that kKavaca round the
neck of Krsna. Thus lord Hari was adored with
his own kavaca around his neck for protection.

waa: aad: wd: mae ST
arRreEgraa werenget ANY VA
O sage, I have narrated to you the influence of
the kavaca of lord Hari and I am also narrating to
the astonishing influence of lord Acyuta.
sft sitge@to Ueto FUNAANGo AAO
ema TR ATTA ATT RTSMASETA UN

87

=== PAGE 99 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 13

87

BY FASS:
Chapter-13

Annapragana and names giving ceremonies
of Sri Krsna

ANT Saray
ant Ferrera wy ferry
fercrfact wragt werqurRt TET RI
Narayana said- O best of the sages, you listen
to the glory of lord Krsna which removes all the

abstractions and the sins, besides being highly
meritorious.

Weel Feet a Prat Foy aeahay

auiftiererren o afar tert eaten

Tater aa fata: wart:

ga: Foeraqeva WaerTRATATIy I

iva 6 '
wal oR Yared: Wie: YaRTATATIs Il
Once Yagoda the wife of Nanda, seated on a

golden lion-throne was feeding Krsna with her
breasts. At that point of time a Brahmana arrived
there surrounded with his pupils and illumining
with the divine lustre he was holding rosary of
crystal gems and was reciting the name of eternal
Brahman. He carried with him a stuff and an
umbrella. Besides being clad in white garment,
his lines of teeth were looking quite charming.

sritctait ftutyer Secergare:

Uftfarsmereret THaTSETa TTY I

He was well versed in astrology as well as the
Vedas and post-Vedic literature. He was wearing
over his head the matted locks of hair, looking
like the molten gold.

wearers the: were:

Sri que: fever: YR MENyA:1G1

His face resembled the full moon of the winter
season. He had fair complexion and his eyes
resembled the lotus flowers. The great yogi
happened to be the pupil of Siva, besides being
the devotee of lord Visnu.

Seay: siinRoerrearreryen
aera afafaat gaia citeranien
ways ugdawerar ytaira
erreareaiians: frgrtenfaera: cit
atates: spares feat
stage fe fae: ada: adayiasnien

The great sage delight fully educated his pupil.
His one hand was held in Vydkhyanamudra,
which was clearly visible. He used to recite the
commentary on the Vedas variously with
pleasure. Looking at him, it appeared that all the
Vedas had appeared in him in person with all
their glory. The goddess of Sarasvati was
dwelling in his throat and he happened to be only
expert in the interpretation of the scriptures with
his mind always devoted at the lotus-like feet of
lord Krsna. He was free from birth, lord of the
siddhas and was all-knowledgeable.

a gr at awe ayer FORTH aI
Wd Ti Agua a TaUlftered action
Wiers wearers alert yen
frye ret GA Wor VfeN Re

Looking at him Yasod4 got up and bowed
before him. Then she offered him arghya, the
cows madhuparka and the gold besides offering
him lion-throne for sitting. She also delightfully
made her child to bow before the sage. The sage
on his part bowed in reverence to lord Krsna a
hundred times.

=== PAGE 100 ===

88

oufert vedt ven aerate firey

wore a forage & at gaqafererg ei

Reciting the hymns of the Vedas the blessed
him variously. Thereafter, Yasoda also bowed in
reverence to his pupils who blesses her variously.

forearrenfad warn wedl a yeeqea)

Bigrersst B weer AYA YETTA LGN

aye a we a yeeaferqat weit

TaRS Ores Hen AwHt Wes aM

Yasoda entertained the pupils of the sage
individually bowing before them offering padya
etc. Thereafter the sage together with his pupils
washed their feet and occupied their respective
seats. Thereafter the chaste Yasoda carrying the
child in her lap with her mind filled with
devotion got ready to ask something from sage.

Taran age a we safe a erat

erste rere are fered yearnhin aieTTINRG It

waergfsdtirn ee arg warséfan

Wea Hele See ara HahAT MTA! A

afgu asa arsfrat witfenifartsaant

ag: FR oT welt at Gores: YoralseTaM Von

gate: adaed at afget wt wa ani

Sriwed Fact ar aftett ar ers frye ut
PAAR: WAH: WAR A TATA:

aig: Wayne at canrgit: dake: fares
fayarfisa aretitar aregaisa ayaa:
‘dad: faqaet ot fH wet ot geefnyzon
Wy: Yaya wet AeaTTaUitsean

ifn: Were care: Reise SAHA Ne eH
WmUsa Says Hua: HATTA
arediat ar wirareerygy ferarasa 112 2
deere at yrateafita ai
witatsheertiya woger: ter Ua aes
uifinfrat aonet at peed: wT: |
aera unaftat grqdea wa aml
Ware BAAS AIR Wa Al
afereet feoreret BAT: SETTAT GH

BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM

srapingaisetiniaisa aferar

wears Sefer: egerotiser wibra:12 & 11

Wa Wuayetamt at warag F with

weutel ae Ses aera Vet!

She said, "Though I am not competent enough
to ask you about the welfare of my child, still I
am going to enquire about your welfare.
Therefore you forgive my short comings being a
foolish lady before you. The noble people always
forgive the sins of foolish people." The sages like
Angira, Atri, Marici, Gautama, Kratu, Praceta,
Pulastya, Pulaha, Durvasd, Kardama, Vasistha,
Garg, Jaigisavya, Devala or Svayarh-Vibhu,
Kapila,  Sanatkumara, Sanaka, — Sananda,
Sanatana, Vodhu, Pajicasikha, Asuri, Saubhari,
Visvamitra, Valmiki, Vamdeva, Kasyapa,
Sarvarta, Kaca, Brhaspti, Bhrgu, Sukra,
Cyavana, Nara-narayana, Sakti, Parasara, Vyasa,
Sukadeva, Jaimini, Markandeya, -Lomasa,
Kanva, Katyayana, Asttka, Jaratkaru, Rsyasmga,
Vibhandaka, Paulastya, Agastya, Saradvan, Giri,
Samika, Aristanemi, Mandavya, Paila, Panini,
Kanada, Sakalya, Sakatayana, Astavakra,
Bhaguri, Sumantu, Vatsa, Jabala, Yajiiavalkya,
Vaisampayana, Yati, Hansi, Pippalada, Maitreya,
Karusa, Upamanyu, Gauramukha, Aruni, Aurva,
Bharadvaja, Vedasira, Sankukarna or Saunaka
represent your glory alone. O lord, I am not
competent enough to enter into discussion with
you still I would request you kindly you suggest
to me the name of the boy.

far: feat aft wnat weciverr

@ wea darher: aH Tests dt famizcu

Only the male or female servants can put
questions to the lord. The one who serves the
lord daily, whom shall he ask for the removal of
his doubt.

cense FARASE TH Sia wT

PARTTOA TH CITIES TANIA

wradigeerniera: Yar Tq!

maISTTTHTUT Ata yaT HATHA: 113 oH

Tam quite youthful and indebted to you. My
life has met with success with the very touch of

=== PAGE 451 ===

406
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAT4AM
*<HcfHJcf,igjJ( тмГ гщЫч^то:1
4\eufaeh?i) ЧШ: ^iglilcl ЧЧТ 
o il
Similarly Dharma attracted a great curse from 
the daughter of Kedara, as a result of which he 
became very weak like the moon of the dark 
fortnight.
ЧШ ЬТЧГСЧ W4RT ir ^ 
ЧТО f |
(ччг^чдч Ь т щчт ч f^ifiifdii^ *11
ЧЧЧ1ТО ЧНГ ^TTSftr cfiHT-rt ЧЧ: $T4:I
ЧТШТО’ТКШ горгТО TORT ЩЩ fr o r -.ll^ ll
TOT TTO fM R ^ 4f{4uff.STOdJJ4:1
Чт|ч1ТТЙЧ 
Ч ^4: $14:113311
?l
ТОТ ЧЧ: w r«T -d ЧЧ: 
Т О 1113*11
After the end of the curse, in Satyayuga he 
became complete and healthy. In Tretayuga he 
had three feet only, in the Dvapara only two and 
in the age of Kali he had only one foot left and 
thereafter he 
completely disappears. 
Thus 
Dharma getting present in sixteen parts was 
immensely upset and started adoring at the feet 
of the lord. He was complete in the Satyayuga in 
all respects. Similarly he went on increasing and 
decreasing according to the yugas; as a result of 
the curse of the sage Mandava even Yama had to 
be bom in the house of Sudra and could be 
purified only after a hundred years.
dl*4) 
hwcgidl ЧТО TT:I
TOT Tpfe4 tfTOT ЧЧ: 
ЧТО TT:II34M
Samba attracted leprosy because of the curse 
of his step-mother. He after performing the vrata 
of Surya was purified again.
Ч^Г щЬтт$Ч ЩЩ Ч TOT: 1ЧЧЩТ
ЧТО щЫ ^КТЧ ЧЖЧЧШТ ЧТО TT:ll3hll
Infatuated with pride Candrama abducted 
Tara, the wife of Brhaspati as a result, he 
attracted the disease of consumption and his 
pride was shattered.
тот зчШ жто 
точЩчтч!
$<ч TOmrs^j fhfr тйиз^и
3Tgf%T <1ГнУТТ 
1ч чч T%:l
ч^чт чтчт t ^ 4 шчгг w t ччЫ зйп
Because of the pride of his lustre, Surya went 
after Sumall a devotee of Siva in order to kill 
him. The sun was performing the duty of 
illumining the universe day and night. Getting 
terrified by the sun, the demon took refuge with 
Siva.
TOf 
ЧГЗГТТО TOR 'ЩуАч 41
р
ч
^
 ч 
-g^i I ? 11
TOR 4T?4t ■55ЙЧ 
TOTtTOTT Tf4^l
TOltf T T 4 T O ? ^ R fa ^ 4 T O ? ll* < ’ ll
Ч1^1ЧсШ: trttt ТОШ рМшнч;|
3TRT4T4T ЧЩ^ЧГ # ч ч тч ш ТОТЧТ^П*5>11
О sage, finding Surya there Siva took up his 
trident to strike at Surya, as a result of which he 
was terrified and while running he left Kasl. 
Then Siva the lord of Kasl attacked Surya with 
his trident, as a result of which he fainted and fell 
down on the ground. And thus his pride was 
shattered. Thereafter the entire universe was 
plunged in to darkness. Finding this, Siva who 
gets pleased in no time revived the sun back to 
life.
тргтч t o r Tj4? Rf4TOtsf4 to r 41 
ччтГугч ч е тч ч г то фЧ|1ч{ч:и*^и
1что1ЪсЧШ ctf ччш RtTOT ЧТО
4fTTO4Tf4fTOTOf4TO4 411^^11
ТОЧЧТОГ Ч % Ч Ч т ! fR4T frot ЧТО 
ТШТЧЧ ТОЧГТ ^Ч ЧТТОПЧ чтчт1**п
Getting ashamed and terrified, Surya then 
adored Siva. The all merciful Siva delightfully 
pronounced his blessing on Surya and left for his 
abode. In earlier times the lord shattered the 
pride of Garuda in no time, with the breathing of 
Nandi who was serving as a mount to Siva. 
Garuda flew away at the time when Siva was 
intending to meet Narayana mounted on the back 
of Nandi.
4%£qf ^Tf: ЩТЧТсто£ч$ТГ ЧТО f I
TJTt: TOTO4f?Tun^f^4tf <tnjcr f u l f i l l

=== PAGE 452 ===

KRS^A-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 56
407
Similarly the pride of Agni was shattered 
because of the curse of sage Bhrgu and he 
became the consumer of everything; the pride of 
Brhaspati was shattered with the abduction of his 
wife Tara.
4 3 W а д 
I
ЧЗТЧГШКсРМ TO p : ЗГЗШ^:11ЧЯ11
сТёГ: 5Ччк^ёПГШ^ЩдЧт1ЫГ:11Ч^11
щ
 $Mft4d:l
ёш я Г^шТ^Шч%тзт wiiv^ ii
The pride of Durvasa was shattered because of 
the unbearable Sudarsana-cakra when he wanted 
to kill Ambarlsa a devotee of Visnu .
Ъ[цщ fepTPITfT T’b tf ЪШ ёТ:1 
clgithjldlfrldwift «ПЯЩЧч^Ч ёП|^\э11
The lord threw away his attendants Jaya and 
Vijaya from Vaikuntha with the curse of the 
Brahmana sage Sanatkumara and shattered their 
pride.
ff# u i ^ct: -RtsfT Rrw«sf^4sail
'fcb\ui %тпгц{^ cdlirldT rj ЧШ<йи*£11
In due course of time both Jaya and Vijaya 
were bom as the demons named Hiranyakas'ipu 
and Hiranyaksa. Out of these too Hiranyakas'ipu 
was killed by lord Nrsimha and similarly 
Hiranyaksa was killed by Visnu in the form of 
Varaha incarnation who rescued the earth from 
the deep water.
<|c(Ui: 
Pignl <1ч<ч1>пп:1
^•TMFdt W ЩВП WhT ЗПЙгРРТ тШ'йЯИ
% Р щ : фшга1ЧЦ cdlRTqTl 
ёщш чПччЪч зяйчнчои 
тртщ 
ёг |гцштт а д f ;
з щ т ш й т щ н ч ; | 1 Ч ^11
In due course of time both of them were bom 
as Ravana and Kumbhakarna and were killed in 
Lanka by the arrows of Rama. Brahma had 
already prayed for their killing in earlier times. 
Then in the third birth they were bom as Sisupala 
and Dantavakra who achieved heaven after 
having been killed at the hands of Sri Krsna. 
Thus lord Krsna created differences between the 
gods and the demons, shattered their pride in one 
way or the other.
The lord has also shattered your pride through 
Brahma because in the earlier times you 
happened to be Narada the son of Prajapati. With 
the curse of your father you became a 
Gandharva, son of a Siidra woman and in due 
course.of time you were reborn as Narada.
■ЦЦ ЩЦ fauMfafa 
а д
t згчтг 
а д г а ёш т ■r :ii4'*ii
ё! 
ёт ё! ч ш gifrfr f|l Iч Ч11
Once the god of love was also inflated with 
pride thinking that the entire universe was 
controlled by him. Then the lord got the god of 
love reduced to ashes through Siva and getting 
pleased, brought him back to life, since that time 
the god of love never tries to influence the 
devotees of the lord.
■c(chl< 
W c^tnt
Tot 
ТЩТЛМШ ё!114 ^ 11
Lord also shattered the pride of Laksmana in 
the battle-field when he had to face the trident of 
Siva which was shot by Ravana.
ттет dNiimijT TTRTh «сйч
«Г^уп^Ч ЧТТс^ИЧ'ЭП
О Narada, Rama offered prayer who himself 
had incarnated on earth and had forgotten his 
tme form because of the curse of Brahma. Laks 
mana was revived back to life.
ч^чт чттич^п
Praww чтщ
Tirf ёпт* шаМ 
ТГ: 114 9. 11
In the earlier times the lord shattered the pride 
of Kartaviryarjuna of the use of the battle-axe by 
Parasurama. The pride of Arjuna was also 
shattered with the death of the Brahmana boy,

=== PAGE 453 ===

408
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAiyAM
the abduction of the wives of Krsna and at the 
time of the battle between Kama and Arjuna.
'fT tW 
^ 
т а
 ТГ: 11 ^ о II
At the time of abduction of Osa, the lord 
himself cut off the arms of B&nSsura and 
shattered his pride. The pride of Bhrgu was 
shattered in the yajna of Daksa.
4^tl4W TFTFT 
Ffa W rf: l
^
 WTglTT grrf2R J:ll^ll
In the marriage of Rama when Parasurama 
met him on the way, his pride was shattered by 
him.
The pride of the Sumeru mountain was 
shattered with the breaking of its peaks by the 
wind. The pride of the ocean was shattered when 
Agastya drank its water.
dd^MtUl TJTTl
^gqckfW dRIIW ф(Щ- т а г 
In the earlier times the pride of enraged wind 
was shattered by the lord when he wanted to 
untimely destroy the universe by killing the sun.
34l?RU|-qH|iti ШсЬРТЧ} fUl
зтпгег ъ w Ы з ш rt 7 Щ IT: 11 $ * 11 
*TfqT HTsf ш щ т е ю т ш и
гТ^ГГЗТ IPRIT^f ёГ*ЩТЕГ:11^ЧИ
At the time of journey on the abduction of Us 
a, the lord left Dvaraka but by pronouncing a 
curse on Varuna who was abducting the cows of 
Banasura, his pride was shattered. At the time of 
quarrel between Ganga and Sarasvatl in the 
presence of Visnu he shattered the pride of 
Sarasvatl by disowning her.
3%Thi «г 
гг А4сЫ1
щ ч ^ 
rt "ttifl 
11 ^ S11
сЧ'мПЧсПЧ Ш 
dWT ^ «ГЧ3Г TT:l
Ш 
chit few r: 
f?rarar ^ r ii^ ii
Siva disowned the proud Durga, while living 
in Himalaya and reduced the god of love to ashes 
and he himself went for performing tapas. 
Thereafter, the goddess felt very much ashamed, 
after her pride was shattered she started adoring 
lord Visnu for getting back Siva as her husband. 
For this purpose she went to the forest for 
performing tapas.
ЯГО1 Tjfltt TTWT 
fabuftcftoi Щ\
<Н1(ЯЦМ56И
While performing tapas in Bharata for a long 
time, she achieved the eternal lord Siva as her 
husband with the blessing of lord Visnu.
cRIT ^Jc(T -fh 11S, ЯII
The goddess became quite fortunate and the 
beloved of Siva, besides being adorable by all 
the gods and the goddesses of the universe.
TRPJFfT JTT 
fw*t4 гГ1|\эо||
v f ^ Rft fgqtsSt ЦйЭТ F tTiFT cnlWrf^l
RollRm ~Ш fTCTccf ^ЯГ 
^liva^ll
О great sage, in the earlier times, MahalaksmI 
also was once filled with pride. Then he made 
Jaya and Vijaya to insult her, as a result of which 
her pride was shattered. She, after bestowing the 
boon on her devotees, was entering the door 
when the gate-keepers stopped her.
JHlfaRRT 4^14dll
тдщт 
тп р тти ^ п
The extremely proud and chaste MahalaksmI 
was enraged because her insult was about to end 
her life, devoting her mind at the lotus-like feet 
of the lord.
ЩП 
ШЗТТ: I
d!MR4i sr^C IP s^ll 
d p m 
tprar f e r o w . l
а д й з ^FRSFJTt |WT?R: IIi9* 11 
WRIT: TJRT: TJTTI
-^ ? « I т щ
| gH yffdFlw X n^m 1

=== PAGE 454 ===

KR§NA-JANMA-KHAiypA, CHAPTER 56
409
At that point of time all the gods like Brahma, 
Siva, Visnu, Dharma, Surya, Moon, Kamadeva, 
Vais'vanara, Kubera, the sages, the ascetic, 
Vinayaka, the Manus, Mahendra, Varuna, Vayu 
and Agni arrived before LaksmI while crying. 
They started eulogising the MUlaprakrti and 
Isvarl known as MahalaksmI.
The gods said- You forgive us О mother, О 
Bhagavati you are beyond everyone and have the 
form of spotless and sattva. You are beyond 
anger, forgive us.
ЭТЧ 
^T4t
cSRTT f5RT 
Jfdjpi Ef ftbM ^II^II
You are the best of all the chaste goddesses, 
adored by all the gods, without you the entire 
universe is like death and infructuous.
о? tepERRT: "R#!Ttfw:lltidll
You represent the fortunes of all, you happen 
to be the form of all, you are Rases'varl and the 
great goddess. All the women on earth represent 
was rays.
w ffi m et 
fa-ychichi i
ei
You are Prakrti in Kailasa, Sindhuputrl, 
MahalaksmI in the ocean of milk, SvargalaksmI 
in the heaven and MartyalaksmI on earth.
Adiuci ЕГ
тщ ^ 
^ rl 
116 о 11
Similarly in Vaikuntha you are MahalaksmI, 
Sarasvatl, goddess of the gods, Ganga, TulasI 
and Savitrl of Brahmaloka.
^onsnuirfydigt щ 
Tifirair ТЗЩ)
ТГ& 
Щ El <|^r <^l=A cftll^ll
In the Goloka you are the great goddess Radha 
who is dearer to Krsna than his life, Rasesvarl at 
the time of divine dance and Vmda in 
Vrndavana.
fTBJTfJTCT (Ef « f t EP^T
You are Krsnapriya in the Bhandlra forest, 
Candra in the forest of sandal-wood, Viraja in 
the forest of campaka flowers and Sundarl in the 
mountain of a hundred peaks.
чЧцс1и1 4<асй Wllft ч1« old-ll 
ej^cbn) «ji'ddA 
«bochlel'llld? II
You are Padmavatl of Padma forest, Malatl of 
the Malatl forest, KundadantI in the forest of 
lotus flower and Sus'Ila in the forest of Ketakl 
flowers.
^WIPIcTI Щ M ^^chR ^sfu ЕП 
ТНТРЩЧТ W t? 
II
You are Kadambamala in the kadamba forest, 
RajalaksmI in the royal houses, GrhalaksmI in 
every house.
-Ri дч4)г rhctpwti 
• ^ hf^TT: ^^d ted lrp S T : 11^411
Thus speaking all the gods, the sages and 
Manu bowed in reverence to her and started 
crying with their throats, lips and palates having 
been dried up.
^■fil cdit41*dc| трщ 
erit
: tT^dllcIb'WHI TT i ^
Thus whosoever recites this LaksmI stotra 
composed by gods early in the morning, surely 
gets everything.
згчга! ггчй w tf feqtat ei w t w Pf.1
16 11
TppfclcRt 
fcTilt cblMGi ERI^I 
4i-Av^4fcw Ei fastnc^
i ^ ч 11
ТЕГШ ЕГ 
I ч о 11
One who is deprived of a wife gets a very 
chaste, noble and charming wife having a sweet 
tongue besides grandsons and all the riches. He

=== PAGE 455 ===

410
BRAHM A VAX VARTA-M AHA PURAl^AM
gets a damsel of high family with tender limbs. 
The one having no son gets a Vaisnava son 
having a long life, possessing all the riches and 
the one who is well educated. The people who 
are deprived of their kingdom would get it back 
and regain the lost riches and the lost relatives. 
The pauper would receive enough of riches with 
glory.
■RsJufvK 
$>1)=ЬШ1Ч41УНЧ1
*11
Thus this stotra is quite beneficial, bestows 
welfare, destroys grief and always bestows 
dharma, artha, кйта and moksa besides good 
friends.
ffit 
'hijTo
4Uc(cp]U[cJoA
о ЗтТ0 
Н1Ч
:МЧ^И

=== PAGE 456 ===

410
BRAHM A VAX VARTA-M AHA PURAl^AM
m
 ^нчзвП^ГтПЙзашг:
The supreme lord is great and is alive for all. 
He is without qualities, is the soul of all, blissful 
and for him there is hardly any difference 
between a blade of grass and a mountain. 
Therefore the one who could by his simple 
frowning create lakhs of Laksmls and treat 
equally the wives of others as well as the 
servants, what is the use of serving him?.
dcdHldi MRT5? ftrWT SjfTUTTSpTI 
чГ<фЛч ^ШТМЦИ
^
 xf 
tfv^TT W Ж ЖЖТТПЯП
I am the foremost of all his wives, in spite of 
that the gate-keepers stopped me like him who 
happens to be the servant of the servants. I am no 
more attracted towards Krsna. Having been 
deprived of the fortune of my husband, I am 
desirous of the fire flames and intend to end my 
life in them. I can by doing so achieve the 
welfare which I did earlier.
Chapter - 57 
Detachment of Lak$mi 
оточат ш т
-ЩЦЦ $КЭ(Т гЧсРЩ ъ TtafT w h
ЗВПхГ ЧХЫТГЫ1 W'r-ИЕП ЧЬШ| ЧПСП1ЯМ
Narayana said- О Narada adoring the gods, the 
chaste LaksmI stopped crying who was pleased 
with their prayer.
s i ч э&шг дадащ Tiiy^i
MahalaksmI said- О gods, I am not ending my 
life because of detachment on anger. Therefore 
whatever has been resolved by me in my mind, I 
am going to tell you. You please listen to it.
хГ frjuti
ЖРгЧГч 
т е ftJi^ql:ll^ll
fqfvftvraT 
хГ ■гг: I
^
 ferat ж яж т % 
trw тга^тимп
■Щ Ш 
ITTStfbtrRTT хГ ТГ^ТТ: I
rR^RTT -Г tttsl 4jcH с)УТ1 |V911
ж*тт чт^т f e r n trwr 
1т^сьч,|
rrf?^ 
«FT ^
 
^tcftsSJcTTI 16 11
The woman who is deprived of the fortune of 
her husband, becomes unfortunate from all sides. 
She does not enjoy any pleasure in sleep and 
taking food and her life becomes useless. The 
one who cannot achieve love for her husband, 
her life is of no consequence. Therefore, the sun, 
riches, beauty, wealth and youthfulness are of no 
consequence to her.
q<£fdHffw 
xt 
4*1
Ш 5 ^ г4#ЧТ хГ Ч44 ак4[^о|ГйгГТ11<? n
The one who is not devoted lovingly towards 
her husband, becomes impure, devoid of dharma 
and is prevented from performing all the duties.
чЭ 
^ 
чЭ
y4wixxt TJT: w f r 4 TT: w f*R: 4T:ll^o|i
ftcn 
■pi дат fe ra
^ д а и т W it хГ ЖРТТ ^Tfddt р т:1 1 ^и

=== PAGE 457 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAJVDA, CHAPTER 57
411
Because the husband happens to be the true 
relative, the movement, the preserver, the god 
and the teacher and as such he happens to be the 
supreme lord. There is no other teacher better 
than the husband. О gods, the parents, the sun 
and brother can endow with the riches with 
difficulties but even to the foolish wives, their 
husbands provide them everything.
щОДсГ % 3TR#
Therefore only an immensely chaste lady 
could realise the true importance of her husband. 
Having been bom in a high family such a damsel 
is quite humble and follows the tradition of the 
family.
ЭТ f 
£пШят|
The one who is bom in a low family, 
possessing a hostile temperament, devoid of 
dharma, speaker of harsh words and becomes a 
loose woman, always denounces her husband in 
anger.
ЭТ ТЭТ Trifat tfe hit ffaufa Щ1
t p f a f a 
Tri qicfa^iy^dfalllTkll
ЭТТ hR W 
Т1ЭТ ЭТЭТ
Such of the women who is the best of all and 
becomes envious and her husband like Visnu 
who happens to be her teacher. She has to fall in 
the kumbhlpaka hell for a period of fourteen 
Indras. The woman who is not devoted to her 
husband, all her vratas, fasting, performing of 
charities, good deeds and the tapas performed for 
a long time, are reduced to ashes.
ЗЭТ: Ш ут! 
1ri§t
yiufKcil^lfa 14ШЭТ{11^11
Therefore I shall not speak out anything 
against my heartless husband who happens to be 
the lord and because of the sin committed by his 
servants, I shall end my life, 
gfaefa ^srarseft far ч ftg t
Эт 
этк:11^э|1
Because the immensely chaste woman does 
not utter harsh words to her husband even when 
he is at fault and in case she is unable to bear the 
insult she devotedly ends her life.
MfdAlcJI Щ ТЭТЭТТ xfarfaT xrt ЭТТ:1 
■qfd^cll fat f a : t r f w ^ T f r r ^ ll ^ ll 
gPrifai fa -m 
fafaq q : W Tt fafairil:
Therefore, it is incumbent on the women to 
serve their husband. The serving of husband is a 
great tapas. The serving of the husband is the 
great dharma and the serving of the husband is 
like the adoration of the gods, the serving of the 
husband is quite truthful and is the form of the 
holy places as well as the performing of the 
charities. Therefore, the husband of the woman is 
equated with gods. He has the form of the gods 
and has the auspicious form.
gfafal sRrfa:i
ЭТ f a t f a f a f a 'q fa t 4R«cb TRTliy о II 
ЩЭТ 
ftril с||о»Рт1 
: I
этт: Tfaffa ulrilPi 
gifa-ti
He is immensely chaste and happens to be lord 
Krsna in the form of husband. Therefore, such of 
the women who consume the food taken by her 
husband and sip the water of his feet, the gods 
are always anxious to have an audience with 
such women. With the touch of such women all 
the holy places are relieved of all the sins.
^ЭТЭТЭТ ЭТ тщттегй fafa ЭТ TJffag:
Thus speaking the immensely chaste Laksmi 
started sobbing again and again. Witnessing this 
Brahma spoke to her in great devotion.
ЩТГЭТЭТ
•Mfatqfd 
^ЭТГРТ ffariTTq ЭТ1
ЭТЭТ Ч Tpifat fa f a ffan4TTfafarill?3ll
m m эт f a s : ^чэт ч
Trifafat farTTq' Щ этт ЧТГ f a t f a l I ? * 11
Brahma said- О chaste damsel, you have not 
pronounced a curse on Jaya and Vijaya, taking it 
to be sinful, keeping in view the mind of the

=== PAGE 458 ===

412
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURA^AM
husband. Therefore those foolish people will 
never achieve salvation. If a noble person out of 
his merciful nature does not pronounce a curse, 
he surely meets with his destruction.
^
 тщ ч 
ч ^
 д ф тЫ т:1
т т т й g трй grff 
wffir 
r ч 11
In case he is unable to pronounce a curse and 
is also not in a position to give some punishment 
then in such a case the sinner is punished by 
dharma himself.
| m&lw -W fMlPrfcbqj
Tit Щ 
Щ Pul’l l ^gfgch^ruiiR^ii
Therefore О mother, whatever has happened 
you kindly forgive it and direct me who happens 
to be a devotee of your lord, in engaging myself 
in the task of the creation of the universe. You 
also better go back to your beloved.
eft 
TTTsf ^ч к < & :|
#$Г ^ПТРЯГ % u£ 
Rftf4)v=H:iR'9ll
Thus speaking Brahma in the company of the 
gods and the sages placing LaksmI in the fore­
front proceeded to Vaikuntha in order to offer 
prayer to lord Visnu.
ИЗГ 
gjTFTRR:!
On reaching there Brahma who was seated on 
the seat of lotus flower, started adoring the lord 
with all his four faces.
sRJTOT: W
 
дТ:ШЩ1
W t Hyc^Hiyciiri сьчн1ч(я:11?<?|1
The lord Kamalapati listened to the prayer of 
Brahma and also looked at LaksmI who was 
standing there lowering her head.
T !#: 'RertcRT Rc}4H<*:l 
ft4*llkll 
yqlfqehKUl 
o||
Lord said- О Brahma bom of the lotus, I know 
everything and happen to be the soul of all, I am 
the preserver of all, I control all and happen to be 
the cause of all. Thus I know everything.
ъ&к 
ъ тФя ичиг д а1
^
 xi йкттй
$T4 4I44TR1 хП Т^Г *lfa»yuM):ll^ II
I have a feeling of equality for my devotees, 
the wife of other relatives but the main thing is 
that my devotee is greater than my wife therefore 
the invincible gate-keepers who happen to be my 
great devotees and are your own sons, you kindly 
forgive their fault and also mine.
4cJ4fd>£°ff 
4 fairfo Wl
Т%ТГ tPT 
113 3 П
^c^ekqi ^Hkll 4Ttjt 
«hr4l ■wq^Rtl
W flw ЩТЧТН сПрЭТ^сГ xlll 3 * 11
m уФь 
й rPi ferari
3i: Щ 1Т Jl^5 9гШ55даТ: 1ЩЧ113Ч
A devotee of mine filled with my devotion 
never gets panicky from the valorous warriors or 
even the demons. By consuming the wine of the 
devotion, my devotees get intoxicated and they 
are protected always with my Sudarsana-cakra. 
Thus speaking the lord of the universe held Laks 
ml and embraced her. Thereafter he called for the 
gate-keepers and said to them, 'O sons, don't be 
afraid. Remain comfortable. You cannot be 
afraid of any one till I am there. Who else can 
rule on my devotees? Therefore, О sons, you be 
established nicely in your position.
ЛПГЕТ
О great sage, thus speaking lord Visnu kept 
quiet. Thereafter all the gods bowing in 
reverence to the lord of the universe retired to 
their respective abodes.
•iKiquicrq; 
£h4H <sqi4 rP^I
'ШгНсЬ^К:II^V3 II
On hearing the words of Narayana, the bodies 
of the gate-keeper were overwhelmed and their 
hair stood on end, they stood in devotion and 
said.

=== PAGE 459 ===

KR§NA-JANMA-KHA]ypA, CHAPTER 58
413
ЯПТ ЗЭТсТ
ят? 
Hsprt T4ftj|uii''W4iii
^^^гй<и||ч41;дап^ёья1ЯЧП4Т: из c u
Jaya said- О lord since I am devoted at your 
lotus-like feet with a stable mind, I am not afraid 
of LaksmI, the gods and the sages.
9ЙЩ!Го Ttflo ет^ШГЯ^Що 4R^4T° ЗЯ0 
ЯЛТ «НЧо€| i^iTiUl^smt: 11Ц \э 11

=== PAGE 460 ===

KR§NA-JANMA-KHA]ypA, CHAPTER 58
413
Chapter - 58
The Shattering of the pride of the Goddess 
Earth, Savitri, Ganga, Manasa and Radha
чпшпт ЗЗТсГ
щс? 
уттуъ n g fam s?^ wi 
?ргст хт 
ши 4(щ m%: 11 I
Sri Narayana said- Once the goddess earth 
was also filled with pride, thinking that she was 
the foundation of everything. Thereafter, the lord 
got her pride shattered through Prthu. 
tufcwl cl^MidlSjrifa xti
дпн т а г dvfl^i 
ar^fa^im i 
^TfraT 3ii Rraki^r wi 
irp jrr ^ ^
 щ н 
4f^r: 11 ^ 11
Then Savitri was filled with pride being the 
creator of the Vedas, the lord at once made her 
disappear along with her sons. Thereafter Ganga 
was filled with pride thinking that she was the 
only source for providing salvation to the people. 
The lord of the universe shattered her pride 
through the king Jahnu.
RW stf tpiflRT W Ф( 
fa-OllWd fiWt Яг^ТТОШ 
nf^RT TRPJ? ulMlfaf3ftdlRtiHI 
qledRcbiRi^M diQd t 
^гГ:11ЧП 
О sage, in the earlier times, the lord shattered 
the pride of Manasa through Durga. Once Radha 
denounced Krsna very badly finding him seated 
with Viraja and filled with pride she entered the
dancing hall and she had them beaten by the 
gate-keepers and the cowherdesses with canes . 
pM'd'did Ч(Щ Vikh 
FI 
^
 ЩУТ Е91Ш тМ^ЩРТШ ERI^IIS II 
-dldl сЬНИсц! W 4Ucfl 
'$WRd5y*|Sl4 'diRdUd^Hd cTlltsll 
^THTHcTt 4 ^ F ^ T f 4<d^d:l 
^ 1 Я : VT14fif5s^4TH4l4 ^TdtldMIill 
hd'^um dmiPdrdid сбчн1<^:1 
ЗШТЧТЧ^ЯТи Щ dT 'jfld'lfd яж и я и 
ш m t: w m ti w<mi?d ur*HH.i 
drfsnt 4l444< ^ddlftfall^oll 
m r w m w tt t ^r t
Ч^Г WdT ъ ЭДТ Ш
 tcPT: Ill’ ll 
dSIT hlmv'd 
^-dldd dTI
g r spf cfT сГ-*ГШ =Rtr 
fe p T il^ il
Thereafter Narada made Sudama who happens 
to be . his devotee, fo pronounce a curse on 
Radha. As a move of destiny getting her pride 
suddenly shattered, Radha had to be bom on 
earth leaving the Goloka. She was bom from the 
womb of Kalavatl the wife of Vrsabhanu. Lord 
Krsna also at her request went to the abode of 
Nanda on the pretext of the fear from the Kamsa. 
That is why I have been given the name of 
Nanda-nandana. In order to fulfil the provisions 
of the curse of Sudama Krsna who happens to be 
the lord of the universe again went to Mathura. 
This has been told to me by Brahma who was 
bom out of lotus. О Narada, immediately after 
birth why did he move from to Gokula to 
Mathura; no one could ever know about his 
intentions. I have thus spoken to you everything. 
Now you listen to me further. You listen from 
me the way Krsna the one who delighted the 
mind of Nanda went to Mathura, the way Yasoda 
and Nanda felt painful at heart, how the 
cowherds and cowherdesses of Vmdavana 
together with the cows started roaming about in 
the forest. By roaming about in the forest they 
became wild and only the forest dwellers could 
speak out smoothing about them .

=== PAGE 461 ===

414
BRAHM AV AIV ART A-M AH APURAN AM
cR ТЕГ cRICrg'lrfll 
cFfl
W iti спу?ч?тй m щ
 wfTRt ^ 11^11
0 sage, leaving aside the best of the orchards 
and pleasant groves they started roaming about 
living in one forest or the other, the cremation 
grounds or other places connected with the 
cremation grounds.
■ЩТГ ril^rcu cf ЁГЩТТ tlcRT5%cRT ^RPTI
^rot дгст w Yyfafa f^RR fsfcft дшщ;|
$ТПТ f£RRTT WcR ^ 8M W TY f tjs ftril^ ll
Deserting the villages they started roaming 
about. Sometimes they lost their senses and 
sometimes they regained the same, sometimes 
they 
separated 
themselves 
from 
all 
and 
sometimes 
they 
started 
offering 
prayers. 
Sometimes they took deep sighs and in other 
moments they were engrossed in the devotion of 
the lord, sometimes they lay on bed and 
sometimes they got up from the same.
ff?T ЗЙЩро ■RfTo sft^OTRRTtsTo ЗтТо ЧГЩЧТо

=== PAGE 462 ===

414
BRAHM AV AIV ART A-M AH APURAN AM
3T ^m fgW 582T R T:
Chapter - 59
The Prayer of IndranI to her teacher at the 
shattering of the pride of Indra
hri4|ui 3cfm
f^T ^Ч^ГЧШТ «Г
ч т ш 
?% в ч ■<у^Гг1н.п^п
■q^TPTlfqW: 
-НЧсЯЧ: i
«а
w fq 1 ж т smf "^irsT яг w rq 
1 ^ 11
Sri Narayana said- I have narrated to you 
about the shattering of the pride of all; now you 
listen to the story of the shattering of the pride of 
Indra in detail. Finding her teacher who was
always engrossed in Brahman, Indra did not 
welcome him, having been filled with pride he 
did not get up from the gem-studded lion-throne. 
Brhaspati felt immensely enraged at his insult 
and left the place. In spite of the fact that the 
immensely chaste teacher felt envious at that 
time still he did not pronounce a curse out of 
love for him.
fsRT ^11^4 
t>l
W Sfir IT W q * # «п Ы 
4TT^I
^ iT W
 ^ТТЧЖ 
ЕП Ш : 114 11
TTTW IW SRf 
Г €г№тг: I
ЙЧТЕГ^Щ 
sT^cqr 
Wlimi 
Ф пгещщ щ цщ ч 
ч -mtarrq;i
ш ч : 
^ fra n i ъ т а тг:11\эм
But even without pronouncing a curse by 
Brhaspati the pride of Indra was shattered. О 
Narada, in case someone does not pronounce a 
curse on a great sinner because his love for him 
or because of dharma but in spite of that the 
sinner has to reap the reward for the same and 
dharma destroys him completely. A religious 
person whenever he pronounces a curse on a 
sinful person, the sinner surely gets destroyed but 
the religious person is deprived of his dharma. 
Because of that sin Indra attached Brahmahatya 
and terrified with the same he left his kingdom 
and went to a lake and started residing in the 
lotus stalk in a tiny form.
TFrf 4 
W 4 i p j fawjmlcRiil
ч ш З ч 
cpiRsht^ iu ii
The lake which happened to be quite 
auspicious 
and 
delighted 
lord 
Visnu, 
Brahmahatya could not reach the lake. The same 
lake happens to be the prominent holy place of 
the people of Bharata.
тр гп лг # <jgT ifo ra it чтт% т: 11 11 
«1ИШ1?ТТ d'ti'H) Tgqt ТПТ У1Й<*:1

=== PAGE 463 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 59
415
ЧддкчУРШ IHIdchK^fbldl^lIHlI 
^eh>4Hi crt yjggf gggl g 
ggsf УШТ TI%3 : giTfo g^FfiT gil 
ЗдтдШЗУ: f^T T ^ ^ I d M <ШеЩП*У11
The ancient intellectuals term it as the Pus 
kara-tlrtha. When Indra was so dethroned from 
his kingdom, his place was forcibly taken by 
Nahusa who happened to be a great devotee of 
lord Visnu. Once she spotted Sack She had 
beautiful limbs and was without any children. 
She was quite charming, youthful and adorned 
with the gem-studded ornaments. She had a 
beautiful line of teeth. With a painful heart she 
was talking with her female friends and was 
moving towards Akasa-Ganga. Finding the 
chaste lady there,-Rajendra Nahusa's mind was 
filled with passion and he fainted because of his 
young age. On regaining consciousness, he stood 
before her and started talking to her in a very 
meek and amiable way.
ЧЦЧ <jcu-q
qkpffdfcfoqTS?! 4 glsqT g gdiqftilygil
fctfft ygfr 
дзГРТ 4<q|fafdl
yf^ft 
ШЧЧ: 11 W 11
Nahusa said- The movement of Brahma is 
quite surprising which remains unknown to the 
noble people. The one whose wife is so 
beautiful, still his mind was attracted towards 
other women and become greedy for the other 
woman and as a result of which he earned yonis 
on the entire body.
ЗТУдТ 3Ht g ШГ W
 eb)civil WT fdviVd'qil 
m дт йчт 
ш уддтшт chvf^dli iyqii 
сы^сы ypgyf ящдд! gwugg) mri 
т щ т ш т ъ т ъ т : 
чт#т ч г ^ Н 11^ 11
The apsaras like Rambha, UrvasI, Tilottama, 
Mena, Ghrtaci, Ratnamala, Kalavatl, Kalika, 
Sundarl, Bhadravatl, Campavatl are of no 
consequence before Sac! and do not compare to 
the sixteenth ray of the same.
fgiFT 
дет w f r RFgsft:l
3t<rHieb 4ll4dlSv4iV4 
fyf&dhj 15f311
It is surprising that foolish Indra is desirous of 
other women, disregarding his chaste wife. All 
my wives are surely like her maid-servants.
дт ядуд gyro? ypftgr gg fgjgjy^i 
ggr тетт g uIhI^j ^jWTg^rfg угя^и^и 
% n sn fg 
ggr 
ymggTl 
уг 
g^g giagsjfyniyy и
ддт Rfd%iqi&t) snfg^r.-wifWTi
gskrsqgg^fRiiyoii 
gsiT gfyAuiw w i^gyRT g g f t i 
w t дугой g gro удщт fgrF hiy yn 
gro yfr: дттч^% gro ч щ f r ^ t i 
grat: utql w g i g l g g i g ^ g f i f ^ f t i i y y i i 
ggTsfqfu^Hidi gg ^gsn?g grvggi 
дагт 
йчт f t^ g T g дтччтВ i у 3 11 
vi'iqmii ggisgy^ ggr шут ^
ччШ1 
^gfftvg gfgts-gggl ggniy#n 
tr! g утшАгд gggyft ggr ggn 
w яд тд утНтрдт rr g^rfyr ^gfy 11 у ч 11 
Thus thinking in his mind, he spoke to Saci, О 
damsel be compassionate on a servant like me 
and. adore me. As Radha adorned the chest of 
Krsna in Goloka or LaksmI adorns the lap of Vis 
nu together with Sarasvatl or BrahmanI adores 
the lap of Brahma or Mahasatl adores the lap of 
Dharma, LaksmI in the lap of Ananta, in the 
nether world, Pusti in the lap of Ganesa, Devsena 
in the lap of Karttikeya, VarunanI in the lap of 
Varuna, Svaha in the lap of the fire god, Rati in 
the lap of Kamadeva, Sanjna in the lap of Surya, 
the wife of Vayu in the lap of the wind-god, 
RohinI in the lap of the moon, Devamata Aditi 
your mother in-law in the lap of Kasyapa, Mena 
mind bom daughter of manes in the lap of 
Himalaya, Lopamudra in the lap of Agastya, 
Tara in the lap of Brhaspati, DevahutI in the lap 
of Kardama, Arundhatl in the lap of Vasistha, 
Satariipa in the lap of Manu, DamayantI in the

=== PAGE 464 ===

416
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
lap of Nala, similarly О beautiful one, you the 
virtuous one accept me.
7rafrS'$4>e|<: I
snt чг ^гпГчч\ «исм<Ч11че1п
I am more valorous than thousands of Indras 
and can shatter their pride. The wife adores her 
paramour more than her husband.
WbPlRchi tT 
TS:Wfl
f^STRT^i 
fchcd 
I
w 9j f ^ ущ 'чяч^пчгл! 
qlSHfld'Udft М А vHdcd^ni
гщгадгтччиччм
ydVIHsfdVuyiH rf 
^ 1
# Г 
^
 
g r ille II
i i i f t 
ч и т Ч И Т Ч ^ 4 ^ 1
i з я 11
fdT^lldF f^ F T WTT f4^4 4ft=T:1 * I
Rt 
fTS TfiT 5ЩЕР^щМсЩ.1
ygTUlW
I shall roam about on the peaks of the Sumeru 
mountain in your company which is quite 
inaccessible and is quite a secluded a place. Or 
otherwise we can visit the beautiful place of the 
sandal-wood forest at Malayacala which is well- 
known for enjoying the conjugal pleasures. 
Similarly we can move to Nandakavana, Pus 
pabhadra river, the mountain known by the name 
of hundred peaks, the banks of Godavari, where 
the pleasant cool breeze always blows or the 
river Campavatl and its banks, the attractive 
campaka forest, cremation grounds, the terrific 
cremation grounds, the pleasant and lonely 
forests, the deserted caves of the mountains, the 
mountains, the forest, islands and the places 
which are difficult of access, the rivers and 
rivulets devoid of all the acquit animals, the sea­
shores because at such places a competent person 
can really enjoy the company of a competent 
woman which is quite rewarding. We shall enjoy
the bed of flowers soaked in sandal-paste. You 
enjoy all your conjugal pleasures with me. О 
goddess, with the boon of Brahma, I am free 
from old age or death.
ЧТ 
4fiT 
f4^t
vhc4i4um^ iw rK cjyiR t^qj 
3tnidiij4vri Rut rdThcM
O virtuous one, my youthfulness is eternal and 
stable and therefore you accept me as your 
husband because I am clad in the best of 
garments, I am beautiful, patient, well-versed in 
the scriptures, possess a face like the full moon 
of the winter season and have been bom in the 
lunar race. When I was on earth then for 
enjoying the love-sports with me, UrvasI, herself 
came to me, but I discouraged her.
4' *T 
<cJT §tScfT cTt^TT '44:1
W wnqfacT 7<4WrmfeTT:ll3^ll 
зтгщ 
щтч^ч
W it % <2[H*nf4 У-bUIW *П1^ П
fqffoq 
^
4 
fegT Щ 
i^ ^ ii
4К4ШЙс) ?r 
f q ^ t Tit fqq>3T4l
*TU^RI4fH4ioiq<*UichK3)Ud^ll^41l
Щ’ччпррт щ 5 т^ п ^ч Ш ч ;м 'ко || 
diwi«ilc| 
f^ T sfd ^ H .1
^URfqfd^Vi 4 ^ 
1^411
fe4T ^ 4 sfcft 4t fiW ЗТ M^iwfdl 
ЯЧуЧНЯЙчМ тЬи|-Ч^<^Щс6^||^ЧП 
4IWI«llc| ш^г5ГГ f^r^TT tpJT q^eU^i
snsjdlq 
$ЧТЧ4|Ц1Г*ЗН
d4q4Rl<ldlj ЧТ Cbrhdb ^ 1 
ЗТЧ'Н<<Л ft qfщ- ^ q vi 
<rqqifq %ЛГ q^RTT ^
 fic^T ^ f c r q j 
^4чс^и чч1ё<н.и^чи 
R ^ iriq q M 'diwiRjii чт#чч1 
ЗТ^ЧШЙчМ ^ n t Ч1ЙЙФ*Ч1 W l

=== PAGE 465 ===

KRSIVA-JANMA-KHAiypA, CHAPTER 59
417
й сЫЧЧг*Ч1: шч %гат w hVwii 
*Ulcb4<H4ftHM eh4HHIW TptfTII'k'311 
f^T^TT fi^T xt dl^lfa ■g?^T xf cb4HI4fdH.I 
З^- 
<pfcnft хП I* <411
yif'd^ti'ra y^i-инГч frar ъ agiunmci 
T ^t чМ IFTFRTt q^TTyidliy'dr^lI* Я I1 
cnuflcHuii y^ira'ifa 
чшуишч,1
Ш
Ш
1 w 
I ц о 11
ф^НЧг-т <IWlfa
^'arg«wi я ^ : ш
 dHidiradim^ii
I have never been desirous of others' wives but 
on finding you today, my mind has been 
disturbed. Therefore I am prepared to discard all 
other women, clad in the best of gem-studded 
ornaments for your sake or I shall keep them as 
your slaves. О beautiful damsel, I shall garland 
you with the precious garland of gems by 
defeating Varuna with Brahmastra. By becoming 
victorious on the god of fire, I shall bestow on 
you the two divine garments. Therefore, О 
goddess you provide an opportunity for a slave 
like me to serve you. О beautiful one, after 
achieving victory on the gods I shall adorn you 
with the makara-kundalas worn by Aditi, which 
are made of the best of gems. By getting 
victorious on the moon I shall snatch away the 
inaccessible armlets of Rohini and give them to 
you or otherwise Candrama who is suffering 
from consumption and happens to be my 
ancestor, would give me the precious ornaments 
even without my fighting with him. О auspicious 
one, I shall beg from Siva who is always pleased 
with the prayers and is the lord of the devotees, 
is quite a compassionate one, is kalpataru\ for 
providing the anklets of Parvatl which creates a 
beautiful sound and I shall give them to you. О 
dear one, the couple of wristlets of Gaiiga which 
are studded with the best of gems are difficult to 
get. I shall get them for you today itself by 
waging a war. О gracious one, I shall snatch 
away the beautiful ornaments of Sanjna, the wife 
of Surya which is made of the best of gems and
shall give them to you. I shall get you the 
spotless mirror of Rati, the wife of Kamadeva, by 
winning the god of love. 0 beautiful one, after 
adoring lord Visnu I shall seek for the decaying 
lotus of LaksmI and give it to you. Thus I shall 
also by performing tapas take away the rings of 
Savitri from Brahma. I shall also give to you the 
vina of Sarasvatl who always sings, playing on 
the vina. Performing the vrata for Narayana I 
shall also give to you the ornaments of the toes 
of the wife of Kubera. Thus speaking Nahusa fell 
at the lotus-like feet of Indranl.
Terra-1 ?гхй згш TraRpfrd 34^1 
згам it 
дгат 
w t гатт ттгатга
Thereafter, getting nervous she lifted up the 
king holding him with her hands who had fallen 
on her feet on the royal path. At that point of 
time the throat, lips and palates of Indranl had 
dried up. Thereafter thinking of the feet of 
Brhaspati again and again, the chaste Indranl said 
to Nahusa.
Щ ЗгЯ ЩПТЗГI Ш W I 3RIIЦ 3 11 
mr тшт хт ттат хг mfdT 
Гчпп
хг w f ^TtsfTTim'mi 
^rt ттат тг ftiTT чМ1 згаттга frfgjdqj
4JWTt ЧМЧН1 ^<ЧЧН1 
ctf:ll44ll
fom ram feiuwH) 4jrarHl w mjpfti 
Гч^чн) щ т а
xf jtT: qr^T TO :I 
ra 4Tt 
ш
 й ^yqdiim ^ii
SacI said- О son, О great lord, О father, the 
remover of fear, you listen to whatever I am 
going to speak. The king saves everyone from 
the fears, being the preserver he happens to be 
the father of everyone. Presently Mahendra has 
been dethroned and you have taken over as the 
king of heaven. The king happens to be the 
father of the people, their protector and surely 
everything for them. The wife of the teacher, the 
wife of the king, wives of the gods, wife of the

=== PAGE 466 ===

418
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAI4AM
son, sister of the mother, sister of the father, wife 
of the pupils, wife of the servant, wife of the 
maternal uncle, co-wife, wife of the brothef, the 
mother-in-law, the sister, the daughter and the 
family goddess have been defined to be the 
sixteen mothers in the scriptures. You are a 
human being and I happen to be the wife of the 
god, therefore I also happen to be like your 
mother.
W ctcRlRfd Щ 
.ЯТсГЩ!
4 дая Ч1<^ПГЧЧГЧНЧ<Я1 
^ ччПи 
$П?!ПТГ дат: I 
ШТГ Я<=|Рп fPTU: <*?Я1: ЯН Я<4Пп rtliq^ II
яда*т ffg^t 
я я й ’ яндая4|1
Ч1Йс( Р|Ьф[?Г^Ч|[Чг41^ сЬЯН1^ :М ^ о 11
О son, in case you intend to enjoy the 
company of the mother then go to Aditi because, 
О son, there is a provision for repentance for 
every sin but the one who enjoys the company of 
his mother, no repentance has been prescribed 
for him. Such a person has to fall in the 
kitmbhipdka hell. Thereafter for seven births he 
suffers from leprosy and also the mlecchas. 
Therefore no remedy has been prescribed for 
him; this has been ordained by Brahma.
О king, therefore, according to Brhaspati no 
remedy has been prescribed for enjoying the 
women of the Brahman! Ksatriya, Vais'ya and 
Sudra. No such remedy has been prescribed in 
the Vedas as well.
IBsT uuiRiiii fpqi
тТ 
d4^c| гГЧ1ч^Ы1Н11^^ ||
WgFTTHT щ 9ГЩШГ яФ я hhtMcl да
c h M c tu jq q n ^ ll 
^burdMi fcJbUJ^frbNi ТГГЦ1 
let turn (CK1 JcmI ^
 uRht 
el«J|c(|: I It* 
I
For the people of the universe it is quite 
appropriate to enjoy the riches of the heaven 
which provides pleasure. Similarly the truth
seeker enjoys the achievement of moksa, tapas 
happen to be the pleasure for the Tapasvls. The 
aim of Brahmanas is to achieve Brahmanatva, for 
sages, it is incumbent to remain mum, for the 
people engaged in the learning of the Vedas, they 
have to be pleased with the putting into practice 
of the Vedic hymns. The poets enjoy the creation 
of poetry, the Vaisnavas enjoy the achieving of 
the slavehood of Visnu and the devotion of the 
lord. The Vaisnavas are never interested in any 
type of salvation except their devotion of lord 
Visnu.
Я<гП<йч^ W 
xri
дар- fgj 
дай да)тттт 
да да|i ^ ц 11
О saintly person, therefore you kindly let me 
know as to what type of pleasure one gets by 
enjoying the company of a damsel when the 
pelvic region is filled with dirt and watery 
substance.
TFp TfiTt 
^ ЯПЙ 
W R 
дапчт даздадап датшт 
тдатйдагсйярда^ зЙБцдаящятдат: 11 ^ V911
О great king, the light of the race, you have 
attained birth in the sacred land of Bharata after 
performing several noble deeds. You have been 
bom in the race of the CakravartI kings, in order 
to illumine the king of the lunar race possessing 
the lustre of lotus flower of the moon of the 
winter season.
я <fqwitM4iuii w тдатйдат дат: ят^| 
тда дайт яздаш :11^ п
Therefore the dharma of the dwellers of the 
hermitage have their own dharma and great 
glory. The people having been deprived of the 
dharma foolishly fall into hell, 
sllgruipq дада^Т 
^ :i
^сЧ'Г<|<сЬ^ЙЯ^Щ Щ 
<? II
It is the beauty of the Brahmana to adore the 
lord at least thrice a day and consume the water 
of his feet and naivedya which are more 
important than nectar.

=== PAGE 467 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 59
419
ЗТЧ feST ЧЕТ ■ЦТЧЙйш ^ф п 
ЯЧ^ПдсШ: ЧТЧ ФИТ^ГТЛТ ^
 Я'зРпрэ 011
О king, in case a Brahmana consumes food 
without first offering it to the lord it becomes like 
refuse and the water is turned into urine and the 
same Brahmana in turn is bom as a pig.
ЗП'отЫ 
[etui цсыад4и Ч 
'
^сг 
4jf4fecPi;iitmi
Even 
if the Brahmanas 
consume food 
throughout the year but on Ekadasi day they 
should not take food. Similarly on the birthday of 
Krsna, on Sivaratri day, they should not consume 
anything.
стагт ЧМНсрип- W ЧгЧсТ: чиччтчтч! 
дгщпттч! 
^ 11
Similarly on the day of RamanavamI they are 
prohibited from taking food. О king, this has 
been prescribed by Brahma for the Brahmanas.
9RT MfdsIdHi ^ ч1г14ТШ ЧЧ сПТ: I 
ччт чч: чтчГнЧч 
J'lfadiHji^n
Similarly the biggest dharma for the chaste 
woman is to serve her husband. It is the dharma 
of the women to look at other men like their own 
sons.
ММчРч ЧЩТ ЧТЧТ: ЧЧТГ: MdlftcfUt-U-fi 
MhlPRIii W ч^чРч ЧГЧТЧТ ЧШ ЧШП^ЭХП
The kings treat the people like the sons who 
are bom of their own wives and treat the women 
of the people of the kingdom as their mothers.
Щ fcff% fawiiiM ТЕРТ 
PlciRui rT <*tSHT 
MfdMHH4,ll^4H
srf: ^ЧЧТОТ Ч5ЙЧ1 Ч?ПЧТ TJ4TI 
enfu'PS4 ^ 4 3»Ч Н ’| W h f
They perform yajna, adore lord Visnu and the 
Brahmanas and also govern the wicked people 
and the noble people are also well looked after 
by them. This is the dharma for Ksatriyas which 
has been prescribed by Brahma in the earlier 
times. The Vaisyas have to manage the business 
which is their dharma.
fonteT Ъ ЧЧГ 44? fehildl
■HcS^IIWI ^ ЧТЧ srf: "ФчтШг g ^ l l ^ l l
чт4ч RHdvil ^ wbiunui чтетп^м 
chtlfd УЖТ f4c4 ^ 
4 fciaPtl
1чаптч rt 
ri сттч:1ьэ<? и
The dharma of Sudras is to serve the 
Brahmanas. О king, the dharma of the ascetics 
or mendicants is to disown everything. They are 
required to be clad in red gannent holding a 
danda and earthen kamandalu. They have to 
keep the feeling of the quality for all devoting 
their mind always at the feet of lord Narayana. 
They roam about always and do not stay in the 
house of anyone and do not part with the 
mantras for the sake of greed. 
чшРг 4tss# 4 faaj: 
чеччшчщ!
ch<l(d 
PimIs : 
Oil
The Bhiksus do not build their dwelling places 
and are relieved of all the desires and do not 
accompany anyone. Getting detached, they 
always avoid the company of others.
ч 
vTmTsq 
ч 
ч?ч{ч1
ч cufejd чдчччд чтчй Tjf%tri
They do not eat tasty food because of greed, 
do not look at women, never beg for eatables 
from a householder 
and 
always 
conduct 
themselves as those performing vratas. 
fffT 4И 1ГШТ srf 
*ЧН1^с|: |
^
 ^ ч Ш ЧЧ 
ш т чггщч=гч;| 1 ^ 11
ifojcMI W 
^ЧЧЧТЧ W ЧсЗРп
34TW 
Ч1ЧЧ 
шлгаш: 11 $ 11
This is the dharma prescribed for the 
mendicants by Brahma. О son, I have thus told 
you everything; now you can move with 
pleasure. Thus speaking the chief queen of Indra 
kept quiet. Thereafter king Nahusa turned his 
face towards her and said.
Я|[Ч ЧЧТЧ
<ЧЧТ 4rcfiM 
4l4 ЧтТ Р)ч4чн1
%^ЧЧ f4$№ cbyqiRt й||<£*11

=== PAGE 468 ===

420
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
Nahusa Said- О goddess, whatever you have 
spoken is just the reverse. Now I will tell you the 
real dharma prescribed in the Vedas, which you 
please hear from me.
Ф w f ЧшФГ 
$34114411
cfnff сь4Р<4^Ч1^|1й^М
О damsel, all the people don't have to reap 
their deeds in heaven or earth or Patala or 
islands. This has been ordained in the Vedas. 
Only the good or bad deeds performed in the 
auspicious land of Bharata have to reap the 
reward in other worlds. Because the one who 
performs the action has a binding for the same, 
he cannot remain without facing the reward for 
the same.
трф т хГ ЧШЩ1
Ф Ф Н 1МН1 
Ъ <T4:Wn{ll<ifcll
The area between the Himalaya and the ocean 
is known to be Bharatavarsa which is the best of 
all the regions and is the land of tapas for the 
mendicants.
Wt сТЭЕГТ 3RT З М dlW ) fgwWTWI
Vl^Orchiiffl fct4<4 [qgld 
Ф 116 6\\
After being bom on the auspicious land of 
Bharata, the Jlva is influenced by the illusion of 
lord Visnu and instead of serving the lord, he 
indulges himself all the worldly pleasures.
чФ wf?T 
fat чФ Ф|ф| 16 9. 11
But an auspicious soul earning great merit 
proceeds to heaven where it enjoys the company 
of various girls.
Ф Ф т Ф т Ф %ПТ RTmt гдч.1
о it
О beautiful one, the human being after his 
death arrives in heaven but look at my merit, I 
have arrived here with my human body.
ЗтФмРТтФг Ш5ШГ: чФФчЩЧ
f% Ф Щгф ф т й 
WII^
One achieves heaven with the performing of 
good deeds for many births but I know not as a 
result of which a real merit I have been able to 
meet you today and I am talking to you here.
ч % Ф н н Г ф ч Ф в т а н Ф тп 
Ф 
Ф Ф 1Н1 34И |Ф |Ф ггм^^и
ФтчФГ Ф|сН§ 4 ft сЦт| У^1 ■Hid I
T fw Ф^Т W ф т ф ф II 3 11
This heaven is not a land for performing 
deeds. This is a place for enjoying pleasure and 
of all the pleasures, to keep the company of the 
beautiful damsels happens to be the best. At the 
place which is meant for enjoying pleasures, it 
would not be proper to neglect the same at that 
place. You will be the one who would be 
attracted towards the feelings of passion and are 
to be used by the passionate people.
£<щц^|Гч4> ЧГЩ ф г гчФт ч ф Ы 
зФ чИу^ угчнП ф ф ?чг?ггтл1<?'*и 
W 
ф тгат р
 
ЧЧфЦ1 
чщгМ 
тфг ж Ф Ф 4rq;i IЧ ч 11
Only a fool disowns something which is meant 
for pleasure, in the absence of the lord. The one 
who disowns the pleasure which can be achieved 
without any obstruction would be treated as an 
animal. There is no doubt about it. Therefore О 
damsel, you come to my house and reaching 
there, adorn my beautiful bed which is quite 
charming, is placed in seclusion and is the best 
for the performance of the love-sport, 
ьтзт |ег tq трф 
cUdfulfai 
ч Ф 
ф * ггщ ч (ф м ^ 1 1
0 passionate damsel, you be firm in your mind 
and take a decision. О beautiful faced one, you 
enjoy pleasure with me in the best of the palaces.
34HkHK<j|HIHi W 4fuRMfd<lfadlHI 
рёГТ^Т cfTHIlfa
1 shall beg for the garment of gems which 
adorn the breasts of goddess LaksmI and offer 
the same to you.
H l% 
i-iHIlfa ^ fT ll^ ill

=== PAGE 469 ===

KR$NA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 59
421
■qfoRH 
ъ gt
■f^fK c[T| <IWlf4 фЭП ЧНГЧЩ^НН^Н 
^RT?I CsTTMt^i v~^ 
g ^O Jiqj
w
 gsterart щ ^и^ооп
3Tcft^ 
faycfiFS щ jpepni
faysHiuwi w m дщ <i^if4 Бгёдачн?*» vi 
ttwiPm rT 
Ф ш T^nmn^i 
ч дщ ^[4sM f«gT fspj н14>^ ^ ^ Ч .1 i?° ^ и 
зМ WFggnf g ддаг 
щ ^ \
rig щ -ibi^icbt
O beautiful one, the precious gem which 
illumines the hood of lord Ananta, can be 
snatched away by me which is difficult to get in 
the three worlds and shall be brought by me and 
presented to you. I shall snatch away the 
kaustubha gem adorning the chest of Narayana 
and give it to you. I shall get for you the crescent 
adorning the head of Siva which destroys old 
age, death and ailments, besides being quite 
competent, quite playful and inaccessible in the 
universe. I shall surely get it for you after 
performing tapas. О dear one, I shall get the 
precious gems from SUrya after adoring him with 
devotion which is difficult to get in the three 
worlds and bestows gold eight times a day and is 
beyond old age, death and makes one enjoy the 
best of love-sport.
3ft^ft*Rq?crr WTPT 4q)3<qj
The vase of gem of the god of love which 
always remains filled with honey and represents 
the precious gems, shall surely be brought and 
presented to you. 
afijriuafcqfui h 4 jp i g ttemn
ЙЧ?иГЧ>сАт*5ЧШ^оЧ11
fmfci w
r a rtfuHrafgtifatiHJ
р д щ ч Щ щ 
w ^ f t i i ^ о ^ 11
ЬЧ1ЖГШЧ $t£ 
tTW
fpt <pi Mtfttgnfa «j^T 4^1H ^m'^ ll^ot9ll
О beautiful one, I shall get you the invaluable 
gem-studded lotus seat of LaksmI which 
illumines like the sun rays and which is painted
variously and was built at the command of the 
lord, is spotless, circular, inlaid with lines of 
diamonds, is spread over an area of a lakh of 
hands, square in shape and is best of all, loved by 
LaksmI, the most difficult to get. The same will 
be presented by me to you.
4§*: f^TT
3T: ЧЧШ ЩР? yhullJtil %§$$:ПЧо£П
Thus speaking, Nahusa stood there obstructing 
the forward movement of SacI and started falling 
on her feet again and again.
fWT oRTT fc^T ■^-<*UdtydlcJ'*ll 
dhctra 
w t ШК ^ 
II
Listening to the words of Nahusa, the throat, 
lips and palate of SacI dried up but remembering 
in her mind the lord and the teacher, she said to 
him.
зй<ш д Tgsw
almima cbfofgKft eRgft ehlMIj'fW g n ^ o ii 
SacI thought in her mind- This foolish fellow 
getting passionate has lost his senses and has 
become unmindful of good and bad deeds. For 
how long shall I have to listen to further?.
■qfqw: ^НЧ-d: сЫ"Чч4| {g4<H:l
^
 4 
g tm ^ ч н ч н п ш н
The one who is intoxicated with honey or 
drinks, 
getting 
infatuated 
with 
passion,
unconscious and the one who is over-powered 
with voluptuous ideas, does not care for his 
death.
oSF3T ТЩЩ I ftrl 
THWTfibl
дат 
Ф щ 
m тзгеаш 
ferl^r f^nf Ф т 
Traf дали 
W
 
Ф : \
tit g 
щ щ
Thus thinking in her mind she spoke to the 
king, "O intoxicated one, I am like your mother 
and am in period, therefore you leave me. О king 
this is the first day of my menses and as such a

=== PAGE 470 ===

422
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAbJAM
woman in such a condition is treated as a 
cmdala. On the second day she is treated like a 
mleccha woman and on the third day like a 
washer woman and only with fourth day she 
becomes fit for her husband and not for the 
performing of the adoration of gods or the 
manes. But even on that day she remains like an 
unclean Sudra woman.
WPl' 
cbl-di 'Rf % ■|i*^5i,Ji^c|vil4.l
FP# 4T=T W T :ll^ 4 ll
Therefore, the person who cohabits with a 
woman in period on the first day, he earns one- 
fourth sin of Brahmahatya. There is no doubt 
about it.
tt т а ft 
gnffon
fe tft 
4iff ^
сБТРТ: qRqufe*! ттгрлт 
spui I 
11
зтгзтМ 4TfsrajTrV fqffenjraRri 
ЗТЧЧЩГ5'гЩТгТ:
Such a person becomes unfit for performing 
the adoration of the gods and the manes and 
becomes entitled to the denouncement and earns 
a bad name. On the second day of the menses of 
a women, who enjoys her company he surely 
earns the sin of Gohatya, he becomes unfit for 
adoring the Brahmana, the manes and the gods 
for the whole life. He earns bad name and in 
human indignities, this has been ordained by 
Brhaspati.
gtftf ft<4*| ^fTRT ^Tf %
ТГ R3T 
Ъ FTht ЧР Щ ВВН Ш Н
The one who enjoys the company of a damsel 
on the third day of the menstruation he earns the 
sin of killing foetus; there is no doubt about it. 
Ucfg^frra; ■Rteft 4 ^nt: ■ycjcbtpi
©4 
4 
\Э
^ f5 f| ч "n^w ^ ёщтпт: 11 
4Tft RT ТПНТ R5 
^11 ^ о 11
ftpft ptc 
cbfrboRt i 
^ггдггрг щрт 
яргг ^ ■w a iin ^ ii 
ашхг RfT W=rT: p r a t 
ysldl^l
t^ p ff ЩГ 
rF^f RTPT uftl I и 3 11
Having so fallen like the earlier cases he also 
becomes unfit to performing the auspicious 
deeds. The intelligent person should not cohabits 
with a women who is considered to be an 
untouchable 
even on the 
fourth 
day 
of 
menstruation. О foolish one, even if you intend 
to enjoy my company who is like your mother, 
then you can do so only after the period of 
menstruation. On hearing the words of chaste 
Sack Nahusa laughed and with peaceful and 
sweet words he spoke to her. The wife of a god 
is always pure but for a human being it is not so.
WTt •‘ТНЯ 
RFP ufTTl
ItracTBTT:
piftcKT rT 
tr Ш 
^
Ч «гЦшщТР тТ ЩёРТ ddlcM4tll
rarfo RTtfmmfr ш uroRt
w i i m n
At time of sleeping as well as taking food, for 
a human being the wife of god can never be 
impure. О beautiful one, the sin you have 
highlighted about cohabiting with a woman in 
menstruation is applicable only into the sacred 
land of Bharata and not to heaven. The results of 
the good or bad deeds performed in the 
auspicious land of Bharata getting illumined with 
the lustre of Brahma are not applicable to the 
Vaisnavas because as the blade of grass is 
reduced to ashes in the flaming fire, so all sins 
are reduced to ashes, with a Vaisnava. This is 
because the Vaisnavas are more illustrious as 
compared to Agni, Stirya and the Brahmanas. .
4 fPTRt 4 
chnPHT W chtfuiRJI^Ii
They are quite independent, because they are 
protected by the Sudarsana-cakra of Visnu as 
was done in the case of the intoxicated elephant. 
The Vaisnavas do not have to reap the reward of 
their actions nor do they have to think of any 
actions.

=== PAGE 471 ===

KR§NA-JANMA-KHAhll?A, CHAPTER S9
423
М Ы -Rifcr 
ЯТЯ ЩЦ
аня'ц>я я 5 ш Ф ( 
^М<*1япя?я
All these things are enshrined in the kauthuml- 
sakha of Sdmaveda. You can consult your 
teacher Brhaspati in this regard. We are the Vais 
navas of the lunar race and are well-known the 
world over.
Я Т *Я Я * Я Ы ? Я Т ф
 1ЯЯТ1
я! % ?щят: ^rfwfssrani^^ii 
fyaiJ44( Я ТЩТ^Г 
^ 4 T W I 
Я>1 ЯТ ч<(¥4 % TfcT Я' f? W W f <чч1 ЯЯНЯЗ°И
1 я $ Щ Я f q f v ^ Я W
R
 
h r i f l 
^ТЙШ'4 tit ЩГ Я т Щ - ^ ^ ^ 11^^11
Reaching there she found Brhaspati seated on 
the seat of kusa-grass and Тйга was serving at his 
lotus-like feet. He was illumining with the divine 
lustre. Tara holding a rosary in her hand was 
reciting the name of lord Krsna who is the 
supreme lord, all blissful, the soul of all, the 
great lord, without qualities, unattached, beyond 
Prakrti, moves at will, eternal Parabrahma, 
bestower of grace on his devotees and takes to 
human form for their sake.
The ksatriyas of the lunar race except the lord 
do not adore any other gods and goddesses. 
Having been bom in the high Brahmana or Ks 
atriyas race, the people having been deprived of 
the illusion of Visnu, do not receive Visnu- 
mantra. But for me there is neither any mantra 
nor a god. Even Yama cannot exercise his 
control on me.
ndW iw ■Rtrafag я^яядМ п^зяп 
■?ЕЯТ 
тщ ЯЯЭТ #5Г ±11ШГч
I myself alone, except Brahma, Visnu and 
Siva can govern the universe. Therefore, 
reaching your home, you adorn the bed. I shall 
reach there in no time.
ЩЯТЯ iifa я^ЯЯ 
ЯЯ5 ЖГОЧ1 
$rijckc|| Ч|ЯТ ТТЯТ Htyrlek$3PJT:U^||
тяган яяге^г яя! я^язтяячт 
я я ^ я т 
w m rg rP js ^ iim ii
"О beautiful one, I shall earn the sin of 
cohabiting with a woman in period. You don't 
have to lose anything. Therefore you go home." 
Thus speaking and with a delightful mind king 
Nahusa mounted on a gem-studded vehicle, 
proceeded to Nandana-vana and Saci instead of. 
going to her place, went to her teacher.
Я сЯ Т ^ И
Я - Ш
 Я 
Я i p
f e
l 
dKIPfydUT<|o5t 3SFRT ЯЩЯЯЯП1?3*11 
ЯЧЯТЯПЯЯ ^Т?ЯЯТЧЯГ
ятя ятягтя ятяящяяМщм^чи
ЯЯТЯЯЩ^Я Я ЯЯТЯ М я т ^Я!
W t ятяяят ят я я н й
1Я^я
дш я Ы т ТЯ^Я 
Я '$ ЧЙЧЙ^И 
d 11
She then looked at her teacher whose eyes 
were filled with blissful tears. Saci found the 
teacher getting drowned in the ocean of devotion. 
She bowed before him placing her head on the 
ground. Saci was drowning in the ocean of grief 
and feeling painful at heart, getting terrified, she 
started praising, the teacher who was all merciful 
and was engrossed in the adoration of Brahman.
?тярпя
T8J таг ЯЦЯТЯ я! ЯТЯТ щиняятн) 
гаяЬгат: чяяш! я Мпяг nilcbw'tiim ^ п
Saci said- О virtuous one, you are free from 
fear, you save your slave who is terrified and 
drowned in the ocean of grief and has arrived to 
take refuse with you, you save her. You are an 
all competent one.
зтяЫ Ы яятг ЯТ ЯЖЯТЯТ Я^М:1
т я М я я т я ? 'З Я Т ? Я М
я я Я Я Ц Т ^ т я : 11 ^
 0 11
You are competent to control the lord or the 
demon, the valorous or the weak, you are 
competent enough to control the wife and the 
sons of your pupils.
^ЯЯЯ: кПМЛЗЦ ТЯМЯ^Я фЯкЧЯТ!
М Ы я я 
ягаят5ящ

=== PAGE 472 ===

424
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAhlAM
Your pupil Indra has been deprived of his 
kingdom because of the sin committed by him; 
therefore you be merciful now.
зтчгат 
tit
i ^ ? 11
O ocean of mercy, I am helpless and an 
orphan, you take care of the city of Amaravatl 
which is devoid of the gods, the riches, besides 
my abode.
t n i t f 
f e p r o i
I am presently being terrified by the robbers. 
You kindly protect me and bring back Indra who 
happens to be your slave and grace him with the 
dust of your feet and pronounce your blessings 
on him.
xf -jp-mt 
qrt трв
% : пгптщт w
 fRtr w m
faril<idi 
?(м<1 бГочГтъ^:!
Щ 1 d4IVri W y y W : ?Ш*ртГ *р:11Г*Ч1
ЗТЧТГ cRTt J]b<d4-4!iix|l^fil'di 
Of all the teachers, the father happens to be 
the greatest of teachers, but the mother is 
hundred times more adorable as a teacher than 
the father who is all glorious, the teacher who 
bestows knowledge on someone is hundred times 
greater than the mother, the bestower of the 
mantras, the knowledge and the devotion of the 
gods, is more adorable than anyone else. The 
teacher with the reciting of the mantras makes 
them enter into the ears of the pupil which earns 
him the title of Guru. The other gurus are also 
adorable, while some of the teachers are only 
imaginary.
S^RfdflHT’STW irlMl^qi^TIdlefi'MIl
4R:II^V9ll
RtsTW 
fqfgRpi * I
гРЩТГ: fkf?r:lirtf<jii
I adore the teacher who has removed the 
darkness of ignorance from the eyes of his pupil, 
who has applied the collyrium of his knowledge 
in the eyes of his pupils. I bow in reverence to
the greatness of such a teacher. The one who has 
not received DTksa there does not seem to be any 
rescue for him. He is unfit for all the deeds, such 
an animal only falls into hell.
4R gj$f ч
•ffW : 
11^4011
The father who gives birth, the giver of food 
and the teacher of other kinds do not help in 
crossing the ocean of the universe on the teacher 
who bestows knowledge, mantra or education, 
can help one in crossing the ocean of the 
universe. The pupils are surely redeemed by 
them. He is like the lord and the lord is even 
greater than him.
iff: w m il?4 ?ll
Similarly Visnu is the teacher, Brahma is the 
teacher, Mahesvara is the teacher, Dharma is the 
teacher, Sesa is the teacher and the from of all 
the teacher, is without qualities. He is the refuge 
of all the holy places, the refuge of all the gods 
and is the from of all the Vedas, therefore they 
like the lord himself.
Tjfl 
T % TTrfiTrT T % 4;i 1^4^11
t i w t t t w i <c(5ll^un:l
vzfet тег 
15^
 ft ^
t:ii^4'«h
When the family god is annoyed, it is only the 
teacher who can save one from his wrath, but 
when the teacher is annoys the family gods 
cannot protect the person. The one who annoys 
all the planets, the gods and the Brahmanas, the 
teacher also gets annoyed on them. And the 
teacher himself is a god. 
ч Tjfpcr firayciisscRT4 tjt^ t fttri: -p.-i 
m fog- w ч -gfrf *r srraf i m сети i 
ч 11
No one is dearer on earth as compared to guru, 
neither the son, nor the riches or the wife.

=== PAGE 473 ===

KFtSNA-JANMA-KHAtfPA, CHAPTER 59
425
ч 
fyRt snff ч 
fsrg rPT:i
4 ^T ftR f&R R<R Ч JOR R i p h w g i * 4 ^ l l
Dharma is also not dearer than the teacher, 
neither tapas nor satya and there is no other 
merit greater than the teacher.
■gft: T3Rt Ч ?TTR!T R 4 f | 
R t:l
i*Rf ТГЗТГ R Vll«n R 'f^MTUTT R R^T ^р>:11?Ч^Э11
RTHRinHT 
dld^Kdl ? r ^ : I
тр;: ^тшт r fvibiumi yfcw^Pi R R f r ii^ n
There is no better ruler than the teacher, no 
better well-wisher than the teacher. For the 
teacher is always the god, the king and the ruler. 
The one who gives away food enjoys himself till 
such time as he provides the food, but a teacher 
rules on his people during many births.
RRT fefT тр^сг: M^vfwr RRT НЙГ:1
Like the husband, the mantra and knowledge, 
the teacher also is achieved by the performing of 
the good deeds of earlier births. Having been 
bound with the fetters of the Karma the teachers 
are placed in the highest position in every birth.
fttTT -rp^T cFST?^ RH *РФ *FR5:I
■jp^TS^ HRTRIHT'P?R
The father gives birth during this birth only 
and he is adored in the same births as a teacher 
also, the mothers as the teacher is also be 
considered like that but the teacher is adorable in 
all the births.
fyyiuii щ h R e ^r 
rm iw n4,i
w f w 
д Ш : R e S ^ u n ^ n ^ i i
O Brahman, you are the best of the 
Brahmanas, the most illustrious one among the 
ascetics, the one completely devoted to Brahma, 
possessing knowledge of Brahma, the best of all 
the religious people.
r r 
Rt r ^
 r rtot^ i 
R fR н £ ж т <^гг r r ^ t тщ&т: 11 ^ ч 11
Therefore, О best of the sages, you be pleased 
with me and Indra presently because if you are 
pleased with me all the gods will be pleased;.
RT ?IRt sRjPpnraft HTtR ?l
О Brahman, thus speaking Sac! again started 
crying aloud. On finding her crying Tara too 
followed her.
т е rr jI нш rtIr r ip :
зпггег s^rjpK R i 3b ^ s <jpnRHTRR^,*ii
Thereafter, Tara falling at the feet of the 
teacher started crying and said, "You kindly 
forgive the sin". Thereafter the teacher was 
pleased and said to them.
HR 
Ref R£ RfRbyfal
Ш : yi4Rfa Rdft R^RR^lfym TH ^kll
The teacher said- О Tara you get up, Sac! will 
surely meet with welfare. With my blessing she 
would surely achieve Indra.
R 
fHTRR R 4TTRI
т е RRJ* HTR 
RTp R| | ? 5 11
TjftRT R ?TRt НШ T O M R RtHStfRI 
Rtg*ll4IR fafagqibqiEMcbMjTiMHI I ^ l l 
¥l^<-hd ys^dld ^yiichlrl R R: 
i l W
I t i l ^ Rtpg: yfd<iF4Plll^<ill
О Narada, thus speaking the teacher kept quiet 
but Tara again fell on his feet and started crying. 
Thereafter, Tara embracing SacI, imparted her 
various types of divine knowledge. The one who 
recites the Guru-stotra composed by SacI 
regularly at the time of adoration, all his teachers 
get pleased with him in every birth.
«^dO^Kd R nftgbdivR RHHtfl 
RRTTf HTRRT?RR RRRT: R^W: R R Ill^ ^ ll 
jjbRldd 
Rlf^SH 
fJRRj
Reft ^
 RRHRT 4 R 
R^IRHII^>o||
The planets, the gods and Brahmanas always 
remain pleased with him. He always pleases his 
relatives and kings. He surely achieves the 
devotion of the teacher and Visnu obtaining all 
success; he is always delightful and is deprived 
of grief.

=== PAGE 474 ===

426
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAI^AM
jptraf нчй ш чт?М ггчй firing
jjuictrti Tffit ^ r i o j g ^ ll? V 9 ^ l l 
tritlcil y ^ 4 ti *1<11Ц<Ч«&1 
«(’tH iq J
The one desirous of getting a son, gets a son; 
the one desirous of getting a wife, gets a 
beautiful, virtuous, chaste wife who bears his 
sons. The one suffering from ailment is relieved 
of the same and the person in fetters is freed 
from them. The person having no glory becomes 
glorious and a foolish person becomes an 
intellectual.
11 ^ 3 11
f f Vchnz 
m ob ^ T : tr ^ n ^ v n
fawj*t(rM*U<s4l XT fTR4^T ^ с Щ И ^ Ч Н
He never has to suffer from the separation of 
his relatives, this is certain. There is always an 
increase of dharma and he always enjoys 
spotless glory. He achieves all the fortunes 
including sons and grandsons, enjoying all the 
pleasures in this world; he ultimately achieves 
the place of the lord.
Achieving the slavehood of lord Hari there, he 
is never reborn and he is always influenced by 
the devotion of lord Hari. He always consumes 
the nectar of the devotion of the lord Visnu 
getting peaceful and becoming free from birth, 
death, old age, ailment, grief and mental agony, 
ff tt ?Й$П>Го ТЩТо sfhjrSJFJrnTtsro ЗтТ° 4HcpTT° 
ч ^ < Ф м З 'Ус м и | y id iy n ^ iiR i ^
4 !^ t4 U fltm f5 S !JR r: 11 ч 4 11

=== PAGE 475 ===

426
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAI^AM
ЗТ8Г Ч%птГ58Цтгт:
Chapter - 60
Indra Relieved of the Bondage 
hkkiui шт 
ybftwti Ж 1ЩГ# цЩч\
Uft 7TRT: 9iMlfiKW ЯТС^ПЯН
Sri Narayana said- О Narada, after listening to 
the prayer of Sacl, Brhaspati was immensely 
pleased; thereafter quite peacefully he spoke 
sweet these words to her .
гШГ 
ЯЯ 
^ Rfa fw tl
W ЭпТОГ 
^ rWT ?сП# TTfoftl R 11
Brhaspati said- О daughter, you be free from 
all danger, you will face no danger as long as I 
am alive. О beautiful one, as I have my daughter- 
in-law, the son of Kaca you are like her.
ЯЯТ рГСШ f^T^fr 4
ihJuf 
ШгЙ yRdfqulll? II
Wsfb^RTT 
ЩТ fV(«17cf
cbUc)Vlltsll>4iyc(W eh4Hl<^o(:UVII
Because as the son serves the food, Pindadana 
and maintains the parents, similarly the pupil 
also does so. Therefore there is no difference 
between a son and a pupil. As the son performs 
the last rites, similarly the pupil also does so. 
This is certain and this has been prescribed by 
Brahma in Kanva-sakha. 
fbRTT ЯШТ TpwM П?1!Ц!№Н1*Ц«Л4Цс||:1 
v[m 1чсич№| ^rrg cti4Ht^ai:imii
■ггйштя 4 4bU||fd яздрт TRT
'ugHs 
ятсВ fqtTT hirqi
Brahma has ordained that the father, the 
mother, the teacher, the wife, the children and 
orphan relatives are to be served by the people.

=== PAGE 476 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 60
427
The one who does not take care of them has to 
remain infested with impurity, right from birth to 
cremation and is not considered fit to perform the 
adoration of gods or the manes; this has been 
prescribed by lord Siva. The one who illiterates 
his parents and the teacher, earns a bad name and 
has to face obstruction at every step.
R4*hi) 4: efiTtfr 
ЧТГФ4Ч1
З^ЕЩсЯЕ^Щ^ЕГ 
16 11
Getting intoxicated with riches if he insults his 
teacher, he surely meets with his destruction. 
This is certain.
et niyd4n<?n
3Ti gjrrfR 
ЕГ cTcf
^ ТЕГ
After finding my arrival at his court, Indra did 
not get up to welcome me from his lion-throne 
and presently he had to suffer for the same. I will 
surely protect you and also redeem Indra because 
the one who can rule and protect everyone of his 
pupils, only he is called the true teacher.
ч tryqfa тгаЫ et 
'Шя-л
iGRHt) factxAiyg 
ЧУ^ГИНИ
The one who becomes careless about his wife, 
who is spotlessly chaste and only thinks of his 
own selfish ends, several types of desires 
therefore arise in his mind and ultimately his 
dharma is destroyed.
«[fsnsqfa JWPret gMUllW m : ■Rfal 
vrepfamr Ф т et ^K dayrm w
^ii^
ii
O chaste damse.l, your influence would be like 
that of Durga and your glory would be like that 
of Laksmi.
yw rR i
'Л
^fRcT TTRT зШ: М1К11^ТО1У«4>||^||
Your fortune would be like that of Radhika 
and like her you would achieve love, glory, 
affection. You and I would always be devoted to 
Indra.
{ifcuuiyd ттт^тт f a n et vrrorhmri
■ypjr fTWTT 
W ll^ ll
You will be desirable by Indra like RohinI, 
would be adorable like Sarasvatl and would 
always be spotless like Savitrl.
TJdfaTERR 33 3TFT3T dgUI^LI 
ЗЗТЕГ 
ciicmcRlW} ШТ.’ПУЦП
^=ГЗЕПЕТ
3f%s ^ et # sr tet w w 
s%i
эт^т 
et Tiftr 
i ^ 11
In the meantime a messenger arrived from the 
house of Nahusa and feeling panicky, he spoke 
before Brhaspati. The messenger said- "O 
goddess, get up, Nahusa is waiting for you in a 
charming and lonely place in Nandana-vana for 
love-sport and you immediately move on to that 
place."
сссн Угч| ачзм «д^чгчГа: I 
cbfuidlddcT: «йч1*тЬЧфННЬм:11*&||
On hearing the words of the messenger, 
Brhaspati was enraged. His body started shaking 
and the eyes turned red the blood.
UbWIET
•O
ЗЗЗТ 33 
W<AlTh[ЧЕЗГШ
m ftm et jcf^j g- 
wR>ifETd)i ^
tthj 
dl4lbgl 4 ^ * 1 W
 chjMlfRII^ II
Brhaspati said- You go and inform Nahusa, 
"in case you intend to enjoy the conjugal 
pleasure with SacI, then you come at night 
mounted on an unprecedented vehicle. Or 
otherwise you come in a palanquin carried by 
Saptarsis clad in beautiful costumes."
ciicmrlcf'eM 3pET ■Mccjjqi’d 
ddll 
fTT^T cfER SpET y^WlclW fcbditH^irR о 11
On hearing the words of Brhaspati, the 
messengers went back and informed the king 
accordingly. Listening to the words of the 
messenger, Nahusa laughed and said to the 
messenger.
7Г55 W 
UHuWiyqnqi

=== PAGE 477 ===

428
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAtfAM
ШЧ g ehRtSMllM 
"Rsf W
 rITIR *11
"O messenger, you move at once and bring the 
Saptarsis here at once I shall make suitable 
arrangements with them.", 
ftrcg «гея $с5гт тт
ggfater gsrRg ч§^я gi r ч 11
On hearing the words of the king, the 
messengers went to Saptarsis and repeated the 
words of Nahusa to them.
cter «jg r g*j: дн44т -g^n
ТШ ^gT g шщдЫтГдтег дттщч^н
On hearing the words of the messengers, all 
the Saptarsis arrived at the palace of the king 
delightfully who bowed in reverence to them.
^ g g sJgnu: xjqr 
sIsicta'Hil
ЩРЛ: Uqyil: w f •Hdd ^rt»etc'«ci(., ll*'#ll
Nahusa said- All of you are the sons of 
Brahma, possessing the eternal lustre and are 
attached to your devotees like Brahma himself.
ЧТТШПШТ: V
I
: | 
4 l^lrtt4 ^d lV^ 34U«M<*f^dr: IR ЦII 
чпиплжт: д4 Eftrar д?тш w i
TpR
Because of your devotion to Narayana you are 
spotless and are the form of sattva, free from 
attachment, pride and arrogance. You equate 
yourself with Narayana in lustre and glory, you 
are also like him in virtues, compassion, love and 
granting the boons, 
tjc^ctrcu WIcTT {M l rtc*ii<=t El 
Efl 
Я ЗМТ 
TT^f%^f4TJT: 11 "R V311
W T 3 ^ :
Eft ^R pg I 
g% ‘CRfrr grfecR j 
^cf Щ ERT ?М Г ЧШЯТ 
fqfERI I* 6 11
Thus speaking the king meekly prayed to them 
and started crying. Finding the king filled with 
grief, the ascetics said. Saptarsis said- О son, you 
ask for a boon; whatever is desired by you we
are sure to bestow on you. There is nothing 
beyond our competence, 
f ^ g сгт тррд ер fERigyi ШТ: чщ\
RHflfrwcei ^huict^ ^fgf •gnq.iR^ii 
3WTftr
дШ дт 
дт спгот дт ^ § * tti i i о 11
The position of Indra, Manu, long life, the 
lordship of seven islands, becoming eternal and 
achieving of everlasting pleasure, all the success 
of all the fortunes which are beyond the reach of 
anyone else or salvation or the devotion to Hari 
or whatever is beyond the reach of anyone else 
can be bestowed by us.
fgRtfcqrt ^ ^ g^T 
Ч: 1 И
g<? <pr iRi^g дгсчпгепгй 
*u
O son, in which one of these things are you 
interested you tell us just now with pleasure, we 
shall 
bestow 
everything 
delightfully 
and 
thereafter leave for performing tapas.
дед зля фыЫ’Т fgqn
The time spent without the adoration of Krsna 
is equated with lakhs of yugas and the day which 
is spent without his adoration is considered to be 
a bad day.
The one who desires for something else than 
serving him is considered to be like inviting his 
total destruction and the consumption of poison.
Iert cTc^er gt ft fgqyH g gigsfai 
fqqqfd tpiiivin fd^iqiqdq’irmriqji^^n 
wm 
fgtnpgrfg f iiR itri
д а {Нсы<и:пз'*п 
T3jf ддпиттаШ ещ д ^Й ?т ggti 
g ^ tfg g E q rfg ^ gfgRT gg^i i ^ ц 11
eRt g g g t sjtgT
g HfMdi чц-сим gigi4lftagi4R:iRE,n
All the gods like Brahma, Siva, Dharma, Vis 
nu, Mahavirat, Ganesa, Surya, Sesa, Sanaka and 
other sages always meditate upon his lotus-like 
feet. The same feet relieve of birth, death, old

=== PAGE 478 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAWA, CHAPTER 60
429
age and ailment. We always meditate upon the 
same. On hearing the words of the Saptarsis, 
Nahusa who was influenced by illusion spoke in 
shame casting his head downwards.
39ТЕГ
4 ^ ЧЩ 44Zlf?4 
Ч 44i4c444:i
зт§чт 
(рч) й 4ttf ?i4 tpi444tfbH4^ii3 4 ii
ЧТЧ VMMfa ЧЩШ
РЧ^Ч ЧЧ ЧТ 
q>bdl(%H4ll^ll
Nahusa said- "You are competent enough to 
bestow everything and are graceful to the 
devotees. Therefore, you kindly bestow the boon 
of granting Sac! to me at the moment. The chaste 
Sac! desires that her beloved should be carried by 
Saptarsis in a vehicle. I only desire this much of 
the boon, you kindly bestow on me your grace 
accordingly.".
яцгта era: $тат чтч?ч 4 tw q j
ЧЧПЧП^!
ттчн ч Ш чгат Ш ч ^дшччп
Щ : Я%ТЧЧГ§ ^W #rar4vfT:ll^oii
О Narada, on hearing the words of Nahusa, all 
the ascetics playfully laughed aloud. Finding that 
the king had been influenced by the illusion of 
Visnu, the Rsis who were graceful on the down­
trodden people agreed to carry the palanquin of 
the king Nahusa.
ёПЕ: F3F& dfelfaehi
ТШ 4 ^ 
'^4UT^Nd:ll'k?ll
(J^ded X4llulqn«l Ч ЧгФпРТЧ ЧЩР:1 
W IT 
Ч ЧЧЙЧ1Г*?И
ч^нччч чгат щ ^ т^гчщп 
^чп 5%тга чч 4T^t чй'ьч^и'кщ
Thereafter the palanquin which was inlaid 
with several gems was carried on their shoulders. 
King Nahusa adorned himself with all the gem- 
studded ornament and the best of costumes was 
seated in the palanquin. Finding that the sages 
were moving quite slowly, the king admonished 
them for their low speed. The sage Durvasa who
was leading them all was enraged and he 
pronounced a curse on the king saying, "O 
foolish minded king, you fall down becoming a 
huge python." You will be relieved of the curse 
only at an audience with Yudhisthira. О great 
king, thereafter, you will proceed to Vaikuntha 
mounted on a gem-studded plane and would 
enjoy all the pleasures, because the actions never 
remain infructuous.
чячйч %пгг -лгат % пз^ччч!
чзгсга ч grf 
ч^п^'кп 
iraf: 4 i згрч ^ччччт:1
TRT Ш
 -dtSIcrTrRqf ЧЧТ ЧЩрГИ'йЧИ
■?га1 чрттч чч^лчт чч чгагзчттччР^1
Ч ^ : 444^11^11
О great sage, thus speaking all the sages left 
the 
place 
similarly 
and 
with 
the 
curse 
pronounced on the king he was turned into a 
snake. On hearing this Sac! bowed in reverence 
to her teacher and went back to the city of 
Amaravatl. Brhaspati also reached there quickly, 
the place where Indra was hiding himself in the 
lotus stalk.
ЗЙЧЯЧЧЧЧЧ: f44T 4 3>4lP(fa:ll*4ll
The merciful Brhaspati with a delightful mind 
went into the lake and started calling Indra.
f4wf444ra
srfa sm гачтчч? чч 
ч!ч fw i 
чга яЩгщгчч? 
^ 1 4 # : 11 y й 11
wytisra -rat чгат 4ipsr 1 ^чтчч:1
ЧЧ fofTP чач 4 
ЧЧ!ЧЧ1||*<01
W 4 
ччгат 40JlhljJfT:l
Ч Ч^Ч ЧЧТЧШ 
ЧЩТ 4 :11 ч о 11
Brhaspati said- О son, you come near me 
because, as long as I am there, you can never be 
afraid, be fearless and come to me, I am 
Brhaspati 
your 
teacher 
calling 
for 
you. 
Recognising the voice of his teacher Mahendra at 
once was filled with delight and shedding away

=== PAGE 479 ===

430
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
his tiny form, took to his natural form. On 
reaching before the teacher he prostrated before 
him. Brhaspati on his part lifted up the terrified 
and crying Indra and embraced him lovingly.
chrrRrar tim id Higftggreiiig 
tdltftjKT» T$t gUBIIMRl t 
3 t^ 
гЩ^ОТЧ;1
ЗГРГс^Г 
ШТ h^rsf^TTimy II
Thereafter he had the soma-yajha performed 
by Indra for his repentance and then enthroned 
him on the gem-studded lion-throne. He was 
bestowed on him four times more the fortune and 
all the gods returned to serve him.
W
 qgft тф з £к $1!ЖЧ1
WfrtvT W 
ИТ ^Г5рс(П111Ц^ II
Sac! getting back Indra the lord of gods went 
to her place and delightfully started enjoying the 
conjugal pleasures on a bed of roses.
fglg chfad gcH
g 
ЧЧ:
О son, thus I have narrated to you the story 
relating to the shattering of the pride of 
Mahendra and the protection of the chastity of 
Sac!. What else do you want to listen to from 
me?.
■«jwbfeiR g 
iit Tjfkmmi
grer ft сьиушш gg?g 1% тш дщ иччи
Narada said- О best of the sages, you kindly 
tell me the method of performing Soma-yajna. 
How does the teacher get the yajiia performed 
and what is the result of the same?.
чтадщздтд 
д£?<д!н?тчч tiludiw d ft4i 
gg ■RlhcHdmn ддчтя: дя!% дпч^м 
gtftg? w spgrT g ^ g j ggr -ggn 
ЬгтШ; ggftg у^чуии^ч^пц^м 
g ig Igifggi grg ftftg ggg^gi 
arfgg? gisth fgag g gftt gragffgim<iu 
Narayana said- О sage, the main object of 
perfonning the Soma-yajna is to relieve one of
the curses of the Brahmahatya. _According to the 
procedure laid down in the scriptures, the 
performer has to consume Somalata for a year. 
He takes fruit for one year and for one year he 
has to live on the water alone. It destroys all the 
sins and can be completed in three years. The 
one who keeps a stock of eatables for three years, 
for increase in the welfare of the people for three 
years and stores the food stuffs for more than that 
period, he alone gets entitled to the drinking of 
Soma.
щ щ дтд ^gt gr gpt дфтёг ^ i 
ч gtfintgt gglsg gprt д|д%тл:пц<? n
О sage, only the great king or the god can 
perform this yajna and none else because one has 
to distribute enough of riches and food stuffs as 
daksina for this yajna.
?fg gtg^To тдгго д^ш тзрщ о зтг° чттдчт0
ft ч т gficmtjgRr: | щ о 11

=== PAGE 480 ===

430
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
Chapter - 61
The Shattering of the Pride of Indra 
through Bali
?f?r й ъШ
ЗЩТ ^Tctt 
14^5^11^11
Sri Narayana said- О Brahman, I have spoken 
to you about the shattering of the pride of Indra 
to some extent. Now you listen to the second 
incident about him quite carefully.
■«цщчч !кзт Tttersiprra тш
f^SrET 
-ЩЩЩ ?l I ? 11
rf^T <jj«J(i qfci^Ki 
ё>1
w fsw r w r e f 
^ д т т г :п з п 
<щт 
дчч %i *
*1|т»)| фес|| <4fed ТГЩ фЧч! 
фМ1ЙЙ:1

=== PAGE 481 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 61
431
In the earlier times Indra, after churning the 
ocean, consumed the nectar and defeated the 
demons. As a result of this he was inflated with 
pride. Thereafter lord Krsna got his pride 
shattered through Bali. All the gods like Indra 
and others had been deprived of their glory. 
Thereafter with the reciting of the stotra of 
Brhaspati and performing of the vratas by Aditi, 
the lord was pleased and he incarnated himself as 
the incarnation of Vamana from the womb of 
Aditi. Thereafter the compassionate lord begged 
from Bali for his kingdom and restored 
Mahendra to the gem-studded lion-throne and 
well established the gods.
T O 
41: cbc^ftA W l
ЖПТ 
чгЦ’Ц R^ll^ll 
W фч^1 ч>чкд4тЬцгнс1:1 
ЗТ: 
тяЫт зщгс Tfld4fsrai4^ii^ii
^ a r it: I
W
 
Wi^cFWI 3TTll<ill
О sage, similarly in the first kalpa, Indra again 
was inflated with pride which was shattered 
through Durvasa. He was thus deprived of all the 
glory but the lord who is always graceful to his 
devotees restored his glory to Indra. Thereafter 
getting intoxicated with 
this glory, Indra
desecrated the chastity of Ahalya, the wife of 
Gautama. As a result of the curse of Gautama 
Indra had a thousand yonis on his body. Indra 
thus had to face immense pain in his body.
viF^ddi: 
«j^fcKlI^M
ТЩГ 
т* ш т а т 
зтп
cTccl^hl ТТТН1
ТОТ 
dKd^tUlld'TWimil
At the sight of Indra all the sages and the 
ascetics started laughing aloud. All the gods felt 
ashamed and Brhaspati fell down as if dead. 
Thereafter Indra meditated on 
Surya for a
thousand years. With the boon of Surya, Indra 
was turned into a thousand-eyed one as the moon 
got the blemish because of the abducting of Tara,
similarly the appearing of a large number of eyes 
on the body of Indra also earned him blemish.
<*4dl<*<HI4J 
^ 
Щ11 ^ 11
Narada said- О Brahman, О best among those 
well-versed in the Vedas, how was Ahalya the 
beloved of Gautama who was immensely chaste, 
adorable, quite auspicious in the universe, having 
a spotless heart, immensely meritorious, without 
blemish and was bom of the amsa of Kamala, 
how could Indra abduct her you kindly tell me, I 
intend to listen to this story.
TRTTOT ЗЗЖ
тот* «Шыгст 
ч гя1
XT ^
 
11 ^ 11
Narayana said- О Narada, Indra spotted 
Ahalya who had come on a pilgrimage to Pus 
kara-tlrtha.
Trfwri 
?TRit qWiRjN'qmini
зтдшШ ш w ^gT
i^tbiRbHi ■ylwcti 
ttt# ч ч t rh^
athii^
i
She had a smiling face, beautiful teeth, 
peaceful and solid pelvic region, besides the 
breasts. Finding her there Indra got fainted. The 
next day on the bank of river MandakinI, Indra 
again met her where she was alone and smiling 
and for taking her bath she getting herself 
unrobed with shyness .
^ecTT «frfot 
?ft:l
Tjsfacirc chiqraf ^ЗЩТТ %cT4t 3T:ll^ll 
ЗГР2Т tott gtmt
ЗЩтТ 
>=(141 (cH^ ufcislniqjl^ II
At the sight of her developed pelvic region 
and the breasts, Indra lost his senses. On 
regaining consciousness the passionate Indra 
went to her and started flattering the chaste lady.

=== PAGE 482 ===

432
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
3Tfr ■gm# w n # 
щг: i
^ щ 
^iTccF^ farfreifitei^ n 
3# g^raj <sfor тег drafsraritipii 
^ч^ст^теячг^УччНтег^119о||
Mahendra said- This virtuous beauty and the 
youthfulness is quite astonishing; your face is 
putting to shame the full moon of the winter 
season, your side-glances are attracting the minds 
of the people. The beauty of your eyes resembles 
the beauty of the lotus flower.
WT Witter rT UMHSt3H43HHj
W ft М^ЧМкГч (p^lR^II 
fecr^r foprermf здщ ш 
зтвщг еыдёы^сг дйчнуц1^ч\1Ч9П
Your walking 
resembles 
an intoxicated 
elephant or a wagtail bird, your speech is nectar­
like and quite sweet which is difficult to get. The 
developed hips which are the best are quite 
pleasing, increase passion in a passionate person 
and attract even the sages as well.
srtrfa cbfcHi "hterT
3# farrwrpvi гфг 
r з 11
згщм 
t#reteRntt^44,iR^ii
The thighs resemble the trunk of the banana 
trees and are quite solid. Both the hips are round 
like the lunar disc, both your nipples are quite 
charming and the lips resemble the ripe wood 
apples and are quite charming.
3 # 
сгт сгтей тгкщм rnrteR: i
"mmr 
теч;| i ? ч 11
fqfrar sfiftr fnf ffoprei WdHte{i 
Frpf гг н р 1ч!^пч1 ^П ш чБгчЦ и^п
gchiPHi w^Ftt
rt -pht wtert ^raterwirepiiqvaii 
w ^4ifte щщтго^сщгпт:1 
gjmt дт УТОЖ : 1% 
STRICT hWrfiR.i
The ascetic Gautama must have performed 
tapas only for your sake to get you in reward;
you are such a damsel with beautiful teeth. Did 
he achieve this beautiful damsel after adoring 
lord Visnu and his illusion the eternal Prakrti 
named Durga the 
lotus-like 
damsel 
who 
resembles in beauty goddess LaksmI having very 
tender limbs, beautiful face, charming body, 
lotus-like face, having spotless and attractive 
teeth, having youthful body of sixteen years, 
tough breasts, heavy buttocks and thin waist. I 
am well aware of maintaining you being well- 
versed in the art of making love or otherwise 
only the god of love or the passionate moon can 
realise your worth. What can Gautama know 
about you?.
3cte>diai!i>€m4HHt nt 
т т р п ^ п
^ cflWlfq 
<pr cRmi
fctgHI рЛЯ t r e uldhHJRoll
3tcJ(c(^tef fqiqqq qnwiPRW piR ^11
The intellectuals well-versed in the art of 
making love, praise me always together with 
Urvasi and other apsaras. О beautiful damsel, I 
shall make SacI as your slave and entrust you to 
her care and by remaining with me you can enjoy 
the unlimited treasure. Therefore you should 
disown Gautama, who is unaware of the 
scriptures on love, is quite weak, a mendicant, 
not very practical, having no desires and is 
devoted to Narayana.
srfg^isrr tersffiTT w -oteitmre qJts^rq;i
chiychl w
 
fm fe^iRqii
The foolish creator has made an unequal 
couple comprising of a mendicant and a 
passionate damsel.
chinch: 
чти 5Rnt •g^fi
гтргГЕГ 
тГ 
ll
Thus 
speaking 
the 
passionate 
Indra 
delightfully fell on the feet of Ahalya. Thereafter 
the immensely chaste Ahalya started speaking 
the words which were quite appropriate and 
according to the Vedas.

=== PAGE 483 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 61
433
aiw^mg^RFiifcr ^ p : шччгш:м?^и
ft> гГЗч^Г гРШ Ш
 xT sR ft xfl
шьйч <тгёк « I W w ч%ачизЧ1 
■# ^ 
^
 ттщщ gjift-ii -яч:1
ЗГЭДГ Ч 
W T ?ftgT O S^m i^ll
Ahalya said- Because of the misfortune of 
Brahma and the mendicant Marlci besides 
Kas'yapa you happen to be the unfortunate son 
bom in their race, the person whose mind is 
injured by the women; the recitation, tapas, 
mind, vratas, adoration of the gods and visiting 
of the holy places are of no consequence for him. 
The damsels were created in the universe to 
attract the minds of the people. Otherwise there 
would have been no creation. Therefore, in the 
earlier times at the command of lord, Brahma 
resorted to the creation.
тгё ттнсыи^х! тЫ вМ н Thni 
оцт я xj цтгш фппттатзвт тттчп^п 
cRita^pMcgjHi fare gsfet 
ягпшт chiiMi тт1чтчт crf%?T адтп^п
The female is the jackpot of illusion and could 
be responsible for diverting the attention of the 
people from the path of righteousness. She is a 
powerful obstruction in the performing of tapas 
and is the abode of all the sins. This is the strong 
bondage for the people who are already 
indulging in the karmas\ she happens to entangle 
the humans like fish in a net and the humans 
serve her like the fire flies in burning lamp.
RtMcbWT ^yijt=l4UJ^ 4*|<I444J 
qftwir frUcftt TTfaH 
x tll^ll 
■ЩЩТ: ТГШШТ^хГ ^tgj? xl^flfcHdqj
-ФТГ Ы Ы ^ xT fr&Rviqmо 11
She has milk in the mouth but inside pitchers 
of poison are kept in full. She is initially quite 
sweet but in the end she pushes people into hell 
serving herself as a step for the same. This is the 
reason why the ascetics like Sanaka and others
did not marry. The one who is attracted to the 
wives of others, his action becomes infructuous.
PT? 44«h 
qqifn <*I4<*N xfll'tf^ll
rf 
t Ъ ebl^xhHJ
яЫ!" 
^
 
mi'k? и
О Indra, to enjoy the company of others' wives 
attracts bad names and hell after death. Thus 
speaking, 
the 
immensely 
chaste 
wife 
of 
Gautama, leaving Indra quickly went to her 
abode.
ддппчш тгьчга tthferi
^ 
хГ Шч^ГхГП^? II
l^chcfl 7ftcT4': '?Т^Г чН1Ч 
^ТЖ1 ^РЧЙ и| Ш -W Bt хШ Т TTtll^'^ll
Reaching there she narrated the entire story to 
the sage Gautama laughingly denounced Indra 
very much. Soon thereafter Gautama went to 
Siva, in the meantime Indra impersonating 
himself as Gautama enjoyed the company of 
Ahalya.
тгё 
^ -и # : т т ^ п гтв щ |
PfitaN 
yPhjJM :ir*4ll
g fr: WTPSTcR ^ 
xTII^II
Щ Щ Щ ТЧ TtTf xt w f 44pl£HI4J 
щ хг тпчид&ш xt q^RtriJ 
хпг*\эи 
XT 
vGd<*dH4l44:l
ЗЩхГ -qft ЧПТТ ТгпГчТ VllcbqifyPlIII'Sill
The all knowledgeable sage came to know 
about everything and immediately returned to his 
abode. Gatuama the best of the sages spotted 
Indra moving out of his hermitage and also found 
Ahalya having the developed pelvic region and 
the breasts, lying unrobed there. The sage then 
pronounced a curse on Indra, "You will have 
yonis all through your body". In anger he 
pronounced a curse also on the terrified and 
crying. Ahalya, "In the thick forest you will be 
turned into a stone". After getting immensely 
ashamed Indra went to his abode but the terrified 
Ahalya with her mind filled with grief spoke 
sweet words to Gautama.

=== PAGE 484 ===

434
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURA1VAM
4t з зге! з ftt^fat з з газ^т giffei 
rt ^ ^ з й з ! M
 Ш тт зге g*T: 1
ч 11
4t44 4313
ЩТ 314lf4 44: ^pgr 3J34t 3 ТТ(ЩШЧ;1
ra$3if4 з crarrsfer rat 4rat?f з fsrara^i i ч о 11
Ahalya said- О religious one, why are you 
disowning a sinless person like me. You are 
well-versed in the Vedas and think it over from 
the religious angle. Gautama said- I am well 
aware of the fact that you have a spotless heart, 
being absolutely chaste and well disciplined but 
you have borne the semen of others, that is why I 
have to disown you.
4T4traT 3 3T 31411
clt 3t 
4T3 ?ГСЗ chcAlch4JI4 ?ll
3 ^ 1зИТ 341 43 4T4trai?3(3T) t4%44j 
drai?3 ^ r a y r a p<j»dH,44?n
га 44М1М^Гц 3ran3iraqfeT554f4raf4i 
435 314t H^HUitfitr^cMI 444 4^114311
Therefore you go to the deep forest and 
remain there in the form of a rock. Thereafter 
with the touch of the feet of Rama you will again 
become sanctified and because of that merit you 
would again come here and achieve me. 
Therefore, О damsel, "you go to the forest". 
Thus speaking Gautama went to the forest for 
performing tapas.
34: 4414 3§4t 3 f341?3 
34ИУЭ11
О sage, I have thus narrated to you the story 
about the shattering of the pride of Indra in detail 
but Indra could get back the lost glory and the 
riches by the grace of the lord.
ffir 
4?T0 зПфШМ-гаЭо 34° 44441°
The woman who is enjoyed by others is 
considered to be unchaste, therefore such of the 
persons as enjoy the company of his wife again, 
being utterly foolish, has to fall in to hell for a 
long time. The food touched by a woman who is 
enjoyed by others, turns into refuse and the water 
becomes like urine. This is certain therefore one 
should not touch her and by doing so the entire 
merit earned in the earlier life is destroyed .
3rf4534T з 
rat зтЪт 4 fraftn 
"rat 
еттга! газет
га зга raiirat етгат ■gra язгат ift!
4гат^зчз ^ зга 4t 
з 1431143114^11
If a women enjoys the company of another 
person unwillingly, she is not desecrated. The 
one who indulges in the passionate advances 
other men earns blemish. You have enjoyed the 
company of Indra taking him to be your husband 
and you could realise the truth after my 
appearing before you.
435 435 44R43 4 3 Ч14|ик4чи|)| 
344i^#rei3ifreir: 34т 4f3rafram4ii

=== PAGE 485 ===

434
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURA1VAM
ЗТ2Г
Chapter - 62
The life story of Rama
Щ ^ Т И Р Т TIRt 
-ЩЩ)
tr a r irr^rot 
Tffcmtfw: 11 я 11
Narada said- О Brahman, when did Rama the 
son of Das'aratha an incarnation of Visnu redeem 
Ahalya, in which yuga did he do so and at which 
place?.
tmwdK 
зтчшн hhi^
i
gsm w щшрт 
д й р н rri i ^ 11
O virtuous one, you kindly narrate to me the 
pleasant story of the incarnation of Rama for 
which I am getting anxious. Therefore you 
narrate the story in brief.
4RTOUI ЗсГТсТ
sT^PhT шШг 
dVH«llrW4^|

=== PAGE 486 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 62
435
TTW qt TWFl gi
>0 
-O
Narayana said- At the request of Brahma, 
Narayana narrated the story of lord Visnu's 
incarnation as Rama in the Tretayuga who was 
bom out of the womb of Kaus'alya. Similarly 
Bharata who was equal in qualities with Rama 
was bom of Kaikeyl and Laksmana the ocean of 
virtues and Satrughna were bom of the womb of 
Sumitra.
w f t ftfatFlT W 4ldlJl^U(|d^ll4ll
g Tmt cptSfr «тГчч1 *Т1 
P ^ l P d g tragj giRUT дтщ ^д?:11^11
Thereafter with the influence of Vis'vamitra, 
Rama visited Mithila together with Laksmana 
and accepted the hand of JanakI in marriage. 
While moving on the way Rama the lord of the 
universe looked at a rock in the form of a damsel 
and enquired from Vis'vamitra the reason for its 
existence at that place.
ТТЩд ggq- g g r Pd^giPhTT 4£ld4l:l 
здтд ш gffisl т р д 44^^^ gi№ii 
gjRUT d-Ftsll^^l ТПТГ чтачцгач: I
S3 
А 
чЭ
чЭ
R w f W |#F T T ~Ш Ш
 д 4% fllldll
Thereafter, the extremely religious and the 
greatest and the great tapasvl Vis'vamitra 
narrated to Rama the story relating to the turning 
of Ahalya into a stone. Rama who could purify 
the universe, on hearing the story from the mouth 
of Vis'vamitra pleased his toe on the stone as a 
result of which she was instantaneously turned 
into a human figure of a beautiful woman.
ТГТ <1ЧЧ|Г¥1Ч ?Я 1 w f t
^
 гтй graf ~тщ TftaR: 1I411
Thereafter pronouncing a blessing on Rama, 
she at once proceeded towards the abode of her 
husband. Gautama also on finding his wife back 
blessed Sri Rama immensely.
TTR^g faldcfi Rtgi 
д<Ш 
^IdlW V ^ 4RTII?°H
О Narada, thereafter Rama on reaching 
Mithila broke the bow of Siva and got Slta's hand
in marriage.
fens ч## 
frs^ gi
w f l w
 
11 н 11
О best of the king, Sri Rama after the 
marriage, shattered the pride of Paras'urama and 
playfully performed the welfare sports and 
moved on to the city of Ayodhya.
tri p 
^стжщ!
gHfifefe 
RpferaNii^ii
The king Dasaratha gracefully intended to 
enthrone Rama as the king. The water from 
seven holy places was collected and all the sages 
were gracefully invited. 
fimfsraRT 
PR? 4$tHtfqd4J 
4^1 g<d4lctl g сь^><А 
I
eUiimm IR R T<fe^fed сГГЩ 
TFRg ‘ФИШ g TFJpg ggRg дц^ц 
With all the welfare ceremonies the Adhivasa 
was performed but Kaikeyl, the mother of 
Bharata, felt extremely envious at the thought of 
the crowning of Rama. She asked for the 
encashment of the two boons she had received 
from Dasaratha in earlier times. According to 
one boon Rama was to be exciled and Bharata 
was to be crowned as the king.
Щ Щ тщщ\ 
y-44if!d:i
тгчт ^ni 
II ^4II
Filled with the love of Rama the king was 
reluctant to grant the boons. But Rama who was 
well-versed in the scriptures and the dharma 
insisted on the king to be truthful.
«ЙТТС ЗЗТсГ
dSWVId^Fld g g p i rHRt 4T:l
<msfsfe g ндй dwiTM-? frisri^ii^ii
Sri Rama said- The merit one achieves by 
building of a hundred lakes is comparable to the 
one like the donating of a step-well.
<$>И1ЧЫЙЧ 
?ТчйчТ:1 
wi5lira g 
w i дятшщч1Т: 11 ^ 11
The merit one earns by donating ten step-wells 
the same merit is achieved by giving away a 
daughter in marriage.

=== PAGE 487 ===

436
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAiyAM
<*¥1сЬ^1Я<*ЙЧ 
НЧгГ ЧТ:1
cmtsiirai ч н я ч ч ^ я ч4 1 ччи^и
О king, the merit one gets by giving away in 
marriage ten girls, he receives greater merits than 
that by performing a yajna.
ТТсгфт ч зр ч W & 
I
cRTtslira? ч 
м
The merit one earns by perfonning a hundred 
yajiias he achieves a greater merit by looking at 
the face of his son.
ЧТсПЩЩТ ЧсЧПЧ 
ЧТ: I
' 
«О 
чЭ
ч?чич чягГ 
^шган1сФшчт^11?о||
The merit one gets by looking at the face of a 
hundred sons, he gets merits greater than that by 
being truthful.
ч ft штЬ snff чтзшсцш? w {i
4 ft 
(M 4
*?14l<44:ll^ll
Because there is no other dharma greater than 
being truthful and there is no other sin greater 
than being untruthful. There is no sacred place 
comparable to the Ganga and there is no other 
god greater than lord Krsna.
TTfer srafmr o ra tffr ч Ф тт srrq;i 
eraffertr: Щ: эй ЧТ 
4?4T:IR ? ll
There is no other relative greater than the 
dharma and no other riches are greater than 
dharma. Nothing is dearer in the universe than 
dharma. Therefore making all efforts you protect 
your dharma.
W T шГгЩ'1 4 Ш
: TJ5T4 ЧТЦ11 ^ ^ 11
О father, by protecting one's own dharma one 
always achieves welfare, glory, good name, 
praise and honour.
ЧЭ& ТК Ч ^ Т ЧГЭЧТ W p f W fl 
eHcJlR фГцгпГч 4i4t4 Ч1сН1Ч
4 <fi4t<NTvM 4t f? Ч4ТТЧ ЩЧ ^сТЭ^М^ЧII 
ЭПЧЬтЙЕ 4 44 fr <llc(«)^fc;<4ich<ll 
ЭЧГ ЧЭ7Г 
W
:
Therefore in order to protect the truthfulness 
of your words, I, performing the dharma, disown
the household pleasures and move for roaming 
about in the forest for fourteen years. I shall 
conduct my self as a forest-dweller. The one who 
willingly or unwillingly, by taking an oath for 
truth fullness, does not follow it he invites 
impurities which are carried with him as long as 
the sun and the moon last. Thereafter, he is bom 
as a dumb person suffering from leprosy for 
seven births.
Я э д м #штТ feng э^э?ч
w f f ч 
4i i ? vs 11
-щщ "дЙ!
Ч1Н4ТЧ % : 414 TRTf ЩГТЧ Э ТТТП ^П
Thus speaking Rama, clad in the bark 
garment, 
wearing 
matted 
locks 
of hair, 
accompanied by Laksmana he moved on to the 
forest. О sage, the king on the other hand, lost 
his life in the grief from the separation of his son, 
Rama. Rama, on the other hand, in order to 
uphold the truthfulness, started wandering in the 
forest.
cblHFcA 4^RUd 
TMUTW 41
,дччт щ тт uk
ЧЧ cjiHdl chiuml TT^Rlt ?ЩТ1
JHeblfctfdRctfjflf '4^'hlh 4ПЧТ 411 ^ o||
After sometime in the 
great forest, 
Surpanakha, the sister of Ravana, was wandering 
in the forest with her husband. The wicked 
demoness finding Rama there, was infatuated 
with passion and her body was overwhelmed 
with passion and she fainted.
«Umftcfid тщ т 4 iw t4 i4 Э4£Й1
Therefore Surpanakha who was intoxicated, 
youthful and well-versed in the love-sport 
wearing a smile on her face, went to Sri Rama 
and said.
?pfr|{srNl4
| 4 4 | ЧЧ?Ч1Ч ЧЧЧТЧ huriPcMI
ШЧТТ4Ы ЧЙЭТ ЧТ TJ?PJT
Surpanakha said- О Rama you have the dark 
complexion and possess all the virtues; you

=== PAGE 488 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 62
437
kindly accept me in this secluded place, since I 
am infatuated with your love.
spett ijijo ra ra iw snf w e p v g if f e i
ЗсГГсГ WT 
^и ч'ч'т^ 4R^II??II
О Narada, the extremely religious Rama 
getting terrified because of the curse and keeping 
in mind the dharma, spoke very sweet words.
?JUi4 ЗЩтТ
3TW Ш : TWRffsiWFf W
5 :7sT fSRTtS^TT 
xT ^tsHH-44,11^^11
Sri Rama said- О mother, I am here with my 
wife therefore you go to my younger brother 
who doesn't have a wife at the moment. If a 
husband gets attracted towards another woman in 
the presence of his wife it becomes quite painful; 
therefore you go to Laksmana who happens to be 
the other person.
ТТЩЭГ СТЕРТ 
w m ЩЦЩ r ^ti
di^uui "5TF?T ЩчТ xT Wi^u||pc|dH,l 13 Ч 11
Listening to the words of Rama, she went to 
Laksmana and glanced at him, who was quite 
peaceful, beautiful and having all the auspicious 
symbols.
RT чтзгщ' u g m i^ c tid W JT: gR:l
сТ^ГЩЕГ: ftxfT dl^Ixl
She requested him again and again, saying "O 
virtuous one, you use me." Laksmana on the 
other hand on listening to her words spoke to her.
'Sdixi
feirar ttr TT^?t t тд% ^.гоГч^Гтп
Rldl^Rll xTRTRTRt RldKKilSf^^ni^V91l
m жншцтчт <et w r n t
Ret RETT чтШщТч ШсШЩГЕГ адт
Laksmana said- "O foolish one, why do you 
want to live with a servant like me, leaving aside 
Rama who is the lord of all. I am the slave of 
Slta. My wife also is the slave of Slta; therefore, 
you go to Rama who is my lord and become a 
co-wife of Slta. О chaste lady, the since I happen 
to be like the son of Slta and I happen to be your 
son as well and shall remain like that.".
T ^ R R I T R ЕГЕГ: ЗКЭГГ Щ ^ Т fT T R H R T I 
ЗсПхГ 
TJ5T ybdichUdlBdlcjchlll^^ll
On hearing the words of Laksmana the 
passionate Surpanakha was hurt in her mind and 
her throat, lips and palate were dried up. The 
foolish demoness then told Laksmana.
V jtfu iT s h e iW
R t ■R S * l 4 1 c W q 4 4 R « l d l 4 J 
Й ч ( т Т ? ^ R f q b q f T r R - T T ? F I : l l 'k o ||
WT xT Rri%Tt AlcREfT 
cnjq TT:I
T»TT¥llild c^RTET tfmRTdl 
^:irs^ll
WT?T4: gi^T9xT r)4IVIItl4 rT$RUTII'tf?lll
Surpanakha said- О foolish one, I have arrived 
here of my own will. In case you disown me in 
spite of that, you will have to face a great misery. 
These is no doubt about it. Brahma became 
unadorable in the universe because of his 
neglecting Mohinl. Daksa had to carry the head 
of a goat on his body because of the curse of 
Rambha. Because of the curse of UrvasT, the 
As'vinlkumaras were deprived of their share in 
the yajnas. О Laksmana, because of the curse of 
Mena, Kubera became ugly.
Щ Ч Т tjdlxDyilfrr Ш
 R T R R lf o c J I d J 
dfH4dldTll¥ll4I^W<Ml cHJcr ^ 11*3 II
Because of the curse of GhrtacI, Kamadeva 
was reduced to ashes by Siva; because of the 
curse of Madalasa, Bali had to be dethroned.
fRS&SRTFSr fcTOTqf <^Thfd:l 
R
R
w
n w
r m
t i r m r a f r ^
w iR i 11**11
Because of the curse of Mis'rakesT, Tara the 
wife of Brhaspati was kidnapped. Similarly with 
my curse, the wife of Rama would be abducted.
cPTRRJTT q ftc R W RTqf W
I f l f W
I I 
R rE T ^ § T $ sflH ¥ x T ЯТТ 
" g m 1 ^ 4 1 1
Because in the earlier times in Madhyandini- 
s'akha of the Vedas, it has been heard that if a 
passionate and youthful wife herself comes to a 
person she should never be disappointed.

=== PAGE 489 ===

438
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
Ц сУскУ| fyicJJRI: тщг ЧТ5) 3% l
c=T^TOT: 11^^ 11
HTf^cbt TOT: ЩТШТСГТ FffiTOTI 
W T ^ "^ir civTORIT^qW: I I'X 11 
^ N r t ^ЧЩГ&И Ъ m m *ГЧ1НУЧ1
трП^гУТ ^jtfuRsll Чг&ИЧГСТ TiyWRI 
^
 
fK^TT 5РПЧ TO3FT HITII^II
sifPiw щ m 
гг §4>t гпт:1 
rn^Tt 
1чщ ш rT4f^4tll4 о II 
ЫзНУ^Й ЧсУТ 
ЧГОТИЧ^П
By doing so one meets with misery in the 
present word and achieves hell in the other 
world. On hearing the words of Surpanakha Laks 
mana took out a dagger and with a sharp edged 
crescent arrow, he severed her nose. Thereafter 
her valorous brother Khara, Dusana arrived there 
and fought with Rama but were dispatched to the 
heavenly abode with the use of weapon by Laks 
mana. Finding Khara, Dusana having been 
killed, together with fourteen thousand demons, 
Surpanakha went to Lanka and denounced 
Ravana and narrated the entire story to him. 
Thereafter, she retired to Puskara-ksetra. By 
performing great tapas there she got a boon from 
Brahma. О Narada, finding that a female ascetic 
was performing tapas after fasting completely, 
Brahma the ocean of mercy understood her 
desire and said.
st^itaiy
ЗШР2Т ш <^ятт yrfrfr 
?ПТ:1 
fadP*y|Uli left
^|щ и|Г?И1({1ч1ч)^У< И # : PTRl
'Я’ЧГгА 
ЖВДГУ ^*ПТЙ11Ч311
Brahma said- You are performing severe tapas 
to achieve Rama who is self-disciplined or Laks 
mana who is the incarnation of dharma as your 
husband. Both of them are beyond Brahma, Vis 
nu and Siva, Prakrti and are inaccessible. 
Therefore, О beautiful one, you will get them as 
your husband in the next birth .
5ЩГТ У 'fluid ■WlC'iy RTTI 
^ 
Ш У # Ш У-fwlT ^
 II14 ^ 11
Thus speaking Brahma delightfully went back 
to his abode. The demoness then entered the fire 
and ended her life. During the next birth, she was 
bom as hunch back.
3TZT VhiuKsll diyyiAbi4RhfbpifyiTI:l 
tiTITT 4l44l ITlrat dlillql ТЩГ%?УТ:11ЧЧ11
On the other hand listening to the words of 
Surpanakha, the great demon Ravana was filled 
with illusion and was immensely enraged. He 
started trembling. He kidnapped Slta deceitfully.
4 ^gT 
TJEgf ЗТТЧГ f%t R^l 
У?ЯТ сЬКУШШ ШТ rTSSbillfol^tf УПЦ^И
О sage, finding Slta missing, Rama fainted for 
a long time. His younger brother Laksmana 
brought him back to his senses after making 
many efforts.
HTt ЩГРТ UfH 
У <b<n ЧЦТ1
з п ^ т xt 
ynWhism ■д^пч'эп
Irud^uoi 
^ c[gT 'flH=hl fy'h:! 
УНТ ftrait TTR: yjJ^UT ptpi W:II4<HI
О sage, thereafter both of them started 
searching for Slta throughout day and night in 
thick forest, mountains caves, rivers and various 
other places like the abodes of the ascetics. Both 
of them were filled with grief but being 
unsuccessful in their efforts, they made friends 
with SugrTva.
ftiRT cnf^R 
тт хт нягтп
■Ш1 У1У xT ftlBT
In order to upkeep his word Sri Rama killed 
Bali with his arrow and enthroned Sugrlva as the 
king of Kiskindha.
^cn^nwiuyihm тоНг у нЫ и
PiTiypcH $|к|Ч?хГ ■RH^RULII^oll
ITC^ y t IwtT ТЩ THT|- HlychH.1
ci хг w r n m ro T%rrt 
^5ftRITS5f^T 1 тУГ UI^PlFy^'rrT^ii^y II

=== PAGE 490 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 62
439
Thereafter Sugrlva the king of the monkeys 
also fulfilled his word for the searching of Slta 
and sent his messengers everywhere. Rama and 
Laksmana continued to stay with Sugrfva. 
Blessing Hanuman Rama gave away his 
beautiful ring studded with gems to Hanuman 
and also gave him a message for Slta by means 
of which she could maintain her life. Thereafter, 
he embraced Hanuman lovingly and giving her 
the inaccessible dust of his feet, sent him towards 
the southern direction.
ёдчгчвнй HfT чА<1ЙУ1ииИ^|
Hanuman who was bom of the ams'a of Rudra 
receiving the message from Rama travelled to 
Lanka in search of Slta.
зтутгзгэтт -Rfai 
vifW&iiHi
РН1^КЯ1Ч1г1ф?Н fjgf
RdU ТПТ 
(d 'JtM'rtl ^Rtigcfchql
f w t w ^тгттт ш д п ^н # ттч ,1 1 s 4 11
triluMHI 'Чщщ rf yfhTtfFT RqiPwHj
■p fet хг -prat хг 
i ^ ^ 11
M'rotpi’dl Т^5ШТ1
On reaching Lanka he found JanakI in 
Asokavatika who had become quite lean and thin 
because of grief, remaining without food and was 
quite lean like the moon rays on a moonless 
night. She was reciting the name of Rama in her 
mind filled with devotion. She was carrying the 
locks of hair on her head and had the complexion 
of molten gold. She was always devoted to the 
name of Rama throughout day and night. She 
had a spotless mind was quite noble, performing 
the best of vratas, quite chaste, possessing the 
symptoms of MahalaksmI. She was illumining 
with her own lustre and was the one who could 
provide all the merits of the holy places and 
could purify the entire universe.
«tllcAl ТТШ c|gT Tx?lf 
4<41|vt№ m w
RTfcf snff rtt ^gT 
WSRumfSr^l 
3RTR ТИТО^Т Rldl^cl-H^ninill^ll
щщддтЕГ
bITtmi «firm: 
: |
ЧТчПЫ R 
о^Ч1”<ь1ч:11\эо и
t w r 
icRr чтлт fauw d;
ЧрткВТ rT frlTR cf^raf R#TCT fWnjj № Я11 
сГТГЗТТ WlrichK xf spfa:l 
cJRfnR R f: 
dcfWU(7?<*1riJ|Rlb3^ll
Bowing in reverence to the mother, Hanuman 
found her weeping. Then he handed over the 
finger ring of Rama to her and holding her feet 
Hanuman started crying. Thereafter he conveyed 
the message of Rama to her which could save 
Slta's life. Hanuman said- Both Rama and Laks 
mana are getting ready beyond the ocean. The 
valorous monkeys have made friends with Rama. 
Lord Rama after killing Bali, has enthroned 
Sugrlva, his friend, as the king of the monkeys 
and has also restored his wife to him. Sugrlva has 
taken a vow to free you. All the monkeys have 
proceeded to all the directions in search of you.
ШЩ RfvlRmf R Rat THTta#ER:l 
W t t RFlt cRSR R tsfg^SSJlfabA ifaii^ll 
fhlAt тгапт чтч R g i r im r w f i 
cbRcLIrUfiltulq I RTcRrlR ЧТ^Щ^Н'Э^И
О mother, getting news from me about your 
presence here, the lotus eyed Rama would bridge 
the deep ocean and arrive here. Killing the 
wicked Ravana with his friends or relatives 
would free you from the bondage.
3TST W l f r if t 
: I
RRftgrit 
rrt: w r xi RfrtRmihsqn
By your grace, I am going to reduce the city of 
Lanka, made in gems, to ashes, you will find it 
delightful.
R riff W lfa
^чТнсЬКтоГчд ч т^ т ttrut tMTi 
R 
RfafsfT ^IrlRTI 1^^911
О performer of the noble vratas, I look at 
Lanka like the child of a monkey. Similarly I

=== PAGE 491 ===

440
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
consider the ocean like urine, the entire earth like 
a cup, Ravana with his demon army like a heap 
of ants. In half a MuhQrta I shall destroy them all 
playfully.
4 
1 Щ 1
Ш Г RR 
сm RtfR R^W rihddll
Because of the words of Rama I shall not 
indulge into whole-sale killing at the moment. О 
virtuous one, О mistress, you be cheerful 
discarding all fear.
RUHR cfET: SJiRT
3RTR REIR sfHT %IT TTRRfRsRTTII^ II
On hearing the words of the monkey, Janaki 
started weeping again and again and feeling 
panicky, the chaste Slta, the wife of Rama, spoke 
to Hanuman.
3TR RtcrfR R TIRt 
о ||
Slta said- In the ocean of my grief Rama is 
still alive.
3jftT ^ 
ЧТ2Г
Is my lord, the son of Kaus'alya, hail and 
hearty? How could Rama be at the moment? He 
must have grown weak.
fa? 
rr w i f e : f5Ri:i 
w 
r <r Rfvimfa: -rirrii^
ii
Rama who is dearer to me than my life what 
type of food does he consume? Is it a fact that 
Rama the husband of Slta is residing beyond the 
ocean?.
3rfir RrR R R R ^ 4 
W: Щ:\ 
arfa 
rt rirt RnfRRT f 
з n
Is it a fact that my lord has firmly resolved to 
arrive here? Is my lord not infested with grief, 
does he remember a sinful person like me who 
has been the cause for his grief.
R ^ cRf?T сТЯЗГ Щ W
 R R<flW:l 
ЩТГ RTSSlrffa: 
TJTT 
Rftll<S*ll
Rip;: riwrHr :i
Sift SSRlfa R RR RIWRTRT ЗПр£1 16 Ц11
My lord had to suffer immensely for my sake. 
In the earlier times, he, at the time of enjoying 
conjugal pleasures did not use the garland taking 
them to be obstructions between the two bodies 
but at the present moment the obstruction is in 
the form of a hundred yojanas wide ocean. Shall 
it be possible for me to have an audience with the 
ocean of mercy.
cR R T 
ftc T R T R
arffr f t e i c F fR R T fR 
R R : З П Т Г :П ^ ^ Н
Who is beautiful, peaceful, quite religious and 
the chaste lord? Shall it be possible for me to 
serve at the lotus-like feet of lord Rama.
4fd$cnfa£t4TSrr TJSIRT STtaR fRT'
3Tftr ТГ 
RR RficrfR c^qur-.lld^ll
W TeERFr) RTRt RTq^tfr RRT fSFTTI 
qUPUT RRTf Rhf ^RefTc-RTfR ^RT:II£<SII 
3tfR RR 
RRRtTJR: RRTI
37ftr 3gRlfR RR t RSRtrf STtfoaRTRII 
MlUIHlRlgth tfRTT RR g n R ^ fc ro i^ ll^ ^ ll 
The life of a foolish woman who is deprived 
of the service of her husband, is of no 
consequence. Is my dharmaputra Laksmana 
perfectly all right? My husband always remains 
drowned in the ocean of grief, whose pride is 
shattered at the moment. My Devara is the best 
of the warriors, quite chaste and god-like. Does 
the younger brother of my lord have a firm 
resolve? Can I have a look at Laksmana who is 
dearer to me than my life, is quite graceful, the 
form of merit and the form of dharma. 
cfER SIR! ^rcTT RRRR ^TRRj 
RRRRRT R m RfT TOT HltfRf ^ll< ?o ||
О sage, on hearing the words of Janaki, 
Hanuman spoke the words which were filled 
with welfare and assured her that he could reduce 
Lanka to ashes without much effort.
3R: JlRte RR| щ 
qR tfd: R>fR:i 
RR^ vfi^^R raR R R ta^R R :ll4R I 
Thereafter, Hanuman the son of wind-god, 
reassured Janaki again and quite easily went 
back to the lord having lotus-like eyes.

=== PAGE 492 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAWA, CHAPTER 63
441
Tpf Шйгашнт tfrTRT 
*ti
?f?r й 
# фтегШ ^prqj
Ш? ШТТПТ «rainf%| | ^ о о 11
On reaching there he conveyed the entire news 
about JanakI to him. On listening to the news of 
welfare about Slta, Rama became emotional.
сПЧТТТГ5§: Tli 4*I«M4<I*4I:II,?3H
О Narada, at that point of time, Laksmana and 
Sugrlva also became emotional and started 
crying. Thereafter all the valorous monkeys also 
followed them.
О son, thus I have spoken to you about the life 
story of Sri Rama which is quite pleasant, the 
form of tattvas, bestows salvation and serves as a 
boat for the crossing of the ocean of the universe.
fffT 
ТП5Т0 $H<3,aj|4i^<go 3rT° 4R^4T°
Prasq 
vtfi ^ ш
 T f ^ r t i
ТП^ЗТ: w
 Ш 4^|Гч ЧТТ^М^'йИ
О Narada, Rama, then got ready with the army 
and his younger brother. They constructed a 
bridge on the ocean and then left for Lanka.
1ч?гег тгащ тптТ тщ 
жтагатр! 
т а 
41dwiv^ 
чи
f^TT 
ЗШТ 44оЫЧЧГЦПТТЧ^1
зтгт^ггг JPTsft W 
: 11 ^ 11
зйзт ^рзттт «гган; 
ctgrfrn
#гГГ ТТЧМ 
14 <911
TT4t Ш
 у (y dTd AI
cl^or PtRdvff 
atlfdoiiiidfddiydlll^ill
О Brahman, Rama, after waging a war killed 
Ravana with all his relatives and relieved JanakI 
of all the dangers and freed her. Thereafter, the 
truthful Rama was made to board on the Pus 
paka-plane. Rama reached Ayodhya playfully. 
Rama embraced Slta there and enjoyed love- 
sport with her as a result of which the pain of 
separation between both of them disappeared. Sri 
Rama became the lord of the seven continents of 
the earth and the entire earth was freed from 
mental agonies and diseases.
сГЧсПТ HMM'sfi dlWchj W di^cdcftl
Cs 
C\ 
чЭ 
чЭ
ddiyd h t: 
RiSdVlUdl
Lord Rama had two sons named Lava and 
Kusa. The solar race was further spread with 
their sons and grandsons.

=== PAGE 493 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAWA, CHAPTER 63
441
ЗТ8Г 'fWgcTRtSWT:
Chapter - 63
T h e b a d d re a m o f K a m s a 
ЧГСГЧЩ
3TST grat RiRi^ci ^
 f:« 4 ^£ i w 
Ru^iil R i^cb:n^i 
3* fa t c n fw дщщ 
a r i f ^ i 
4141413 М Ч Й dljc)|T£| 4P|:fed:ll?ll
Narayana said- Thereafter Kamsa thinking of 
a bad dream, felt immensely agitated and 
frightened and leaving eating food, was filled 
with grief. He summoned his sons, friends, 
brothers, relatives and the family priest in his 
court and started narrating his bad dream to 
them.
сШЗсГЩ
W ^гг 
at 
f? 
I
ftciisrrt ЗШ: 
«n^ciivy 3<lf^dl:ll^ll
Kamsa said- I witnessed an extremely bad 
dream at the dead of night. All the intellectuals, 
relatives and family priests but listen to me.
Rrsrtft TfhMumrri тпотг 4тт 
Чтымг< 
чт5т ъ adcMHjmi
Яфг411^1|^1У rf cHlnRl^l a w t l 
313tatpgJ фШ||$ ТПТ трт т ^ г п ч п
I found in my dream that in my city an old 
woman with black body was dancing. She was 
adorned with a garland of red flowers with the 
red sandal-paste applied on her body. She was

=== PAGE 494 ===

442
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
clad in red garments and was laughing aloud. 
She held a sharp sword in her hand and a terrific 
skull-cup; her moving tongue was protruding and 
looked quite horrible .
■cfiWn ШЧШТ фЩГ ^W||U|<fyqi|
Similarly there was another black woman who 
was clad in black garments who appeared like a 
Mahasudra 
woman. 
Her 
dried 
hair 
was 
dishevelled and the nose was cut off. She wanted 
to embrace me.
spat Tjulfdcra» arctaf тпт 
ф(лии|Ш w ifa fovifasiifa 'шгая 
фЩТ 
VIWdlHibHlPl гП1<411
She was clad in dirty garments had dried up 
hair and applied tilakam of the ashes. О Satyaka, 
I found that the ripe fruits of tala, having black 
colours were falling on my cheeks, one after the 
other continuously creating a sound.
ft
qqlfd ЩТ 
1^11
fifTWT W f^ajT 
4ft4s|e|df ^Trffl
миЦйТ xf 
TFT: TF:ll?o||
^ 
С- 
-О 
'O 
*
A deformed mleccha worn "in adorned with 
dirty garments, having dry hair was offering 
broken small-shells for the making of ornaments. 
A chaste lady having her son alive, in great anger 
pronounced a curse again and again on me and 
broke a pitcher filled with water.
I also saw that a Brahmana filled with anger 
was pronouncing a curse on me, was offering me 
his undecayed garland which was soaked in the 
red sandal-paste.
§ПЩТ1
8ТЩ <Tti^(a'4fer 
RRII^ll
I also found that in every bit of my kingdom 
there was a rain of burning flames, ashes and 
blood.
щчт ш т W
 
Щ
1
4$>dlfa {cteJjellctiK W Z $ 4 -d y v < 4 u p {||^ ||
I found that a monkey of terrific size, the 
crows, the dogs, the bears, the pigs and the 
donkeys were creating a terrific noise.
Ч?Ч|ГЧ
cb4liv*ivHtsHPf
The dry-wood had been 
collected 
the 
blackness of which could not be removed.
чЪсТШГтеиТТ ^еМ*КН^ГУс1Т1 
fw ar wmhTMt T^4umf4diii^4ii 
JbUl<h4HgWl Ш ffr^ rf^ W w ri 
^ ^ S f w tf RT W ^nffr 4^Pq<lvHdlll^ll
At the time of the sun-rise, I found the 
monkeys and the nails. A chaste woman came 
out of my palace. She was clad in pltambara and 
had applied the white sandal-paste and other 
cosmetics, adorned with garland of jasmine 
flowers and gem-studded ornaments. She was 
holding a lotus flower playfully and her forehead 
was painted with the spots of vermilion. The 
chaste lady getting annoyed with me pronounced 
a curse on me and left my palace .
3tfd^iVri iiydlfa fdyifii Tht RRII^II
I found some people with dishevelled hair 
entering in my kingdom holding nooses in their 
hands. They looked quite terrific and dry.
HHHlfl утЬ^П ^rJRff xf
stata 
w rrfq 
ж т и и п
fe^RTOT xt fa m щ щ # RhCsHii 
-щ 
Rt xj <*tHfd44gr<Tii^ii
I found unrobed women dancing in each and 
every house having dishevelled hair and terrific 
form. Then there was an unrobed widow, who 
belonged to the Sudra caste and whose nose was 
cut-off, looked quite terrific and was applying oil 
on my body.
fHo)kl#K^Tbl¥ri '4W£U|f fdJMill
arf^mrcRTR^ fefT: q^nftr ufw m iR ou

=== PAGE 495 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 64
443
I found all these astonishing types of women 
in the early morning who were carrying fire 
flames. They had no clothes on their bodies and 
had applied ashes on their entire bodies. They 
were smiling.
Ъ f e l t ^
In the dream I witnessed a marriage function 
which looked quite pleasant but I witnessed 
some people who were clad in red clothes, 
having red hair on the body.
W сЩ^Т tтт 
'THMvdUiqj
gicRt xt w ift xi ч^ч|Гч Trfrar ж ги ??и
I found a naked person who looked quite 
frightening, who vomited blood sometimes and 
danced sometimes. Sometimes he was found 
running and sometimes he slept while at the 
other times he smiled.
4i|Jrei 
w ft trnscT ггэдФй : i
■ЦсЬсЫЙ 
RcinRi rf гПЗЩТ:||^||
wfqHdHJ
O brother, I found that both sun and the moon 
had risen in the sky at one and the same time. О 
family priest, in my dream I witnessed the falling 
of a comet, earth-quakes, national calamities, 
great storms and terrific disturbances.
tlfrMRcStfi^cf xr?qifir ^fa4W )ll?4ll
The trees were shaking, because of the force 
of the wind their branches were being broken 
and the mountain peaks were found falling on the 
earth.
tp*T Rm PvRR ЗсЯчТ тчцГЦяч!
■RUlWiraR 
t] || R s* 11
In every house a tall and naked male figure 
was found dancing, having no head. That terrific 
person held a garland of human skulls in his 
hands.
фЯ Ш Гт
All the houses were filled with dust after 
having been burnt to ashes and all the people 
were crying in panic all round.
^с(ЦсЫ1 TT3TT -R &Ш Ч ТПТТсГЙП
(я я т) 'щ ч зрусщы ч dhckc(lPivT?ci^:ii
О Narada, after thus speaking the king Kamsa 
kept quiet. Listening to that dream all the 
brothers and relatives of the king started heaving 
deep sighs.
tSTSTC 
Ш : 
grrf%rT:l
fttn ш
 w # ш :1
^ 
W ТПТ: h^qqfeldTfll^oll
The family priest Satyaka realising the total 
destruction of Kamsa approaching fainted, all the 
wives and parents of Kamsa started crying in 
grief; they came to realise that the time of 
destruction was fast approaching .
^f?T 
° 4?>|o Sli^WM-tHslo 3rf° ЧГЩ*П°

=== PAGE 496 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 64
443
Chapter - 64
Yajna of Kariisa
Tfci 
w r? f 
цтгЦ?т:1
riyciig 
тргп^и
Narayana said- О sage, Satyaka the family 
priest of Kamsa, who was quite intelligent and a 
pupil of Sukracarya took into consideration all 
that had been spoken by the king. He then spoke 
to him beneficial words.
■Hr^ch ЗагТсТ
чц 
M^mih 
й 4fsr f ^ i
Satyaka said- О virtuous one, be fearless, why 
should you be afraid when I am there. You 
perform the yajna of Siva which removes all the 
obstructions.

=== PAGE 497 ===

444
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURA1VAM
т п w
i i 4W «rprt W|^niT:i
f:W 4ni -ilVtcbc ¥I^WPHI?leh:ll3ll
The yajna is called after Dhanurmakha and 
after its performance, one has to give away as 
daksina food and riches, which removes the bad 
dreams and destroys all dangers from the enemy.
31|b4JTfarch4 |f£$c| 4lfa'4lfd<*4^4J 
ТЛТТ 
hPhi-T! 
: 11'VJ 11
While performing this yajna one is relieved of 
the dangers like Adhyatmika, Adhidaivika and 
Adhibhautika disturbances besides removing all 
obstructions. It also bestows on one enough of 
fortune.
4FT w m F p s r ЖЩгр*
■RT^II^clRr 
r4r4S(1H.II4M
At the end of the yajna lord Siva himself 
appears in person and removing old age and 
death, bestows the desired boon. Thereafter the 
performer of the yajna is filled with all the 
riches.
т4еьА.Ч 
'ЧНТ 
ЦП «ГТЩ1
In earlier times the valorous Banasura, Nandi, 
Parasurama and Bhalla the best of the warriors 
had performed this yajna.
*TFt4 IjaT ftng: •R ^
 ЧТЩНТ «nffo>:l№ll
■црт 
^ ттчтч м
fra ^
 чщттч: f^ tT :Eif;qtfTfy:ii(iii
In earlier times Siva had given this bow to 
Nandls'vara who met with success in the yajna. 
The religious-minded Nandlsvara handed over 
the bow to Banasura. By achieving success 
through the yajna В ana handed over the bow at 
Puskara 
region 
to 
Parasurama 
and 
the 
compassionate Parasurama had given the same to 
you.
га ^bW rfgftfikqu^ii
O king, the bow is a thousand hands in length, 
it is quite hard and ten hands in width. It moves 
according to the will of Siva.
^
 
ч
^ чттвт 1w i I ^ о 11
This Pasupata weapon of Siva is difficult to 
be moved. No one else can break it except 
Narayana himself.
гав! ra q^r: xjrai т^тга f
You adore this bow in the welfare yajna of 
Siva and extend invitation to all.
3Tf4*RIPt S ftfft sphrf? *UlliT4l
fqqri^ газшнга rafrarafa 4 ’R7PT: 11W 11
О king in case the bow is broken in the yajna 
the performer of the yajna has to meet with his 
end. There is no doubt about it.
Ф Ч spjfa 
ЧЧ1 
RlfsjcTfl 
т е 4^1% ^ ътяг нспГньч!) rrqp5foTii??n
And with the breaking of the bow the yajna is 
surely desecrated. When the yajna is not 
completed then the question of reaping its reward 
would not arise.
ЩЯТ ra sl^q) fFt ЧЙ' ЧТТГЦЩ: 
ж ^itra'aiMW 4 '^ q r щ хчйп^п 
sRff Шггапт га ф р ш Ш «Rfi
н1ьцч&!4 |^Ч1с?иёУЧ1»т^?(<*Т<и^| 1^411
О intelligent one, Brahma resides at the base 
of the bow, Narayana in the middle and lord Siva 
resides in the ground. First of all it is inlaid with 
gems and issues lustre like the sun or the mid­
day sun of the summer season.
Щ газгогага ffrTTIBihll 
Q qnR : fro ^ r ш г ч f w t 
frW fH l 
R frlT i R g lr^ ciq ii^ ll
О king, the valorous Ananta, Stirya and 
Karttikeya cannot handle it, then what to speak 
of others? In the earlier times Siva had killed 
Tripurasura with this bow. Therefore, you 
arrange for the success of this yajna fearlessly.
RrU'chW cf^T: ?iraT 
згага qra: raraf$ -ШЧ ra

=== PAGE 498 ===

KRSIVA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 64
445
On hearing the words of Satyaka, Kamsa, the 
king of the solar race, spoke to the family priest 
who was his great well-wisher.
4)4? -аз m
4 ^ 4g*l f4R??T4:l
4 4«ft 44R4f4:ll84ll
Kamsa said- My killer and the destroyer of my 
race, Krsna, has been bom in the house of 
Vasudeva and is presently living in the house of 
Nanda.
Ч ^ с |л Ц { ^ -RfeUT:
«rfrpft 444t 44t 44ТЧ 41414)1 4vfhRo||
C\ 
Cv
That valorous boy has killed my valorous 
relatives and quite competent courtiers besides 
sister Ptitana.
w R 
4H4«R:i
4 
т а г 4 4<md^n ^ ^ii
He is competent enough to increase his 
strength at will and could raise up the mountain 
Govarddhana on a single hand and also defeated 
the immensely powerful Mahendra.
ЩПЩ cerium 
44'14Ч~ф
4ТН4гШЧ1 т а fifrp 4ГТ11У411
He also displayed his divine form to Brahma 
and 
also 
created 
illusory 
cowherds 
and 
cowherdesses besides the calves.
?R4 4fR4 Щ 
4145 4R44JI 
ЧЧ ЩЕЧТ rR 4 lW 
14 ^ 11
Therefore, О Satyaka, you somehow manage 
the killing of the same valorous boy because in 
the entire universe, except that boy there is no 
one else who could be inimical to me.
4% 44^f 4 mcilvl f4JJ c4t^54 f4%444 
4?f4? 4?4T?4 4RT4: 41*f4 ЧЧ 4144?: 114 * 11 
4gld4?cft 
4 ЧЧ441 ^ 4 4 : 444*{l 
f4WJ: 4F& 4?4fafl 44dVlt 414144:114411 
4^44 f%4T? fsh? W&4 4^14:1
•O 
4 
v 
ч5 
чЭ 
Cs
4иМч1 Ч^ЫИГч yH ^V dil ЧЩИ4^И
In heaven, Patala and earth there is no other 
enemy for me. This is certain. All the best of the
kings everywhere in the world are friendly to me. 
Brahma is an ascetic and similar is the case with 
Siva while Visnu is all-pervading and eternal, 
therefore, simply with the killing of Krsna the 
son of Nanda, I would be adored the world over. 
I shall then become the lord of the seven 
continents and a great king.
43Pf 
VI*) 4
^fabillfa 4fK?4 44 fqftfc? ЧТ?ЧТЩ| 14 11
By defeating the daityas and the gods in the 
heaven, I shall kill the weak Indra and defeating 
the sun I shall achieve the place of Mahendra. 
484444 4 4FS 4 ЧЧ4 ^ q w ^ l 
тщ 
44R 44 
f4%4^H4<ill
My 
ancestors who 
are 
suffering 
from 
consumption besides the wind, Kubera, Varuna 
and Yama would surely be defeated by me.
W 4R44 ?ТТ4 4R 4 4^4^44,1 
4^1Ш44 ^ 
44m m 4П44Ч.11 ? Ч11
Therefore you go to the city of Vraja ruled by 
Nanda. Go to the Nanda and bring Krsna here as 
well as his brother Baladeva expeditiously.
4Ш4Ч 444 4 4? 4*J414 4T 4444J: I 
%4 444 4tf44TT4 44 4TT4f44i 44TII?o||
On hearing the words of Kamsa, Satyaka 
spoke beneficial words which were quite 
appropriate and could bestow prosperity.
41441 3414
3?jf4£54 4T5f4 44?^4Wft? 4TI
444T44 44T4PT 4^4444^4144113 ^1
Satyaka said- О virtuous one, in Vraja of 
Nanda, you kindly depute Akriira, Uddhava and 
Vasudeva.
4R44I44 44: fc4T 4414? 44 4?4lf^l 
44ЧЩЩ4И44 4 4 ^ 4 4 4 1 4 4T: 11 ^ 4 11
On hearing the words of Satyaka, Kamsa 
spoke to Vasudeva who was seated on a lion- 
throne in the court.
4)4? 3414
4t44t 4lf4Vn44IU|i <сП|ЩЧ{ч?ТТ44:1 
44 44*44 44? 4 ^ 4 ^сИНЧЧИЗЗН

=== PAGE 499 ===

446
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
rl 4 ^ W «ГсТ 
4^4^44,1
mJ4Fra #5=Г 
h)$HdlRlH4.ll3'tfll
Kamsa said- О brother Vasudeva, you are 
well-versed in polity and are quite competent in 
the making of devices. Therefore, you go to the 
place of your son in' Vraja of Nanda, informing 
them about the festivities of yajna. You bring 
with you Vrsabhanu, Nanda, Balabhadra, Krsna 
and all the residents of Gokula here, 
ijfhm' 
^cTT TT5FJ rS Ш %Ш 1 
;J4l^pHIU!l4ldRd>;J fd*TPR R^TII?4II 
The messengers carrying the messages of the 
king moved to other kings and the sages on all 
directions.
^ER ЗТЕГТ ^|tet>chU(5l8dl<geb:l 
Ш*Г W i Щ
 
%5R!TI I ? $ 11
О Brahman, on hearing the words of the king 
the throat, lips and palate of Vasudeva were 
dried up and he spoke with a painful heart.
Rbjvrr 
w t цц ж$птч;|
d-d si ■л 
Ш Ч^Ч^Ч^И^^эЦ
il^lldld) 4<3TI UBt ^ rT 
3 1 ^ 
д а T ^ll^^ll
Vasudeva said- О king, you have entrusted the 
duty of my going to Vraja and to invite Nanda 
and his son, but in case the son of Nanda arrives 
here at the time of the festivities, your yajna here 
is bound to face some controversies, 
mrt x( ^чгчга <4)К'Г^ьу|(ц
Tf 4 % Щ 
ЕТЕПРг
Щ: f>wT «гРтusif c(Ict«tfrti 
<4■h 
лчН 
хПГко||
Then should I bring him for waging a war? It 
will not be proper for me and it would be a sort 
of obstruction there. The people would say that 
Krsna was killed when he was brought here by 
his father himself or otherwise Vasudeva got the 
king killed through his son.
S'MHcfcdWlfq 
т^Т зиГ сИ 
4fdUlfa Ъ 
pKlftMqn^ll
Either one of you would be surely killed at the
spot and no one knows the number of warriors 
which would be killed further because the war 
can never be peaceful. 
сПР^НГЕГ: SpEJT TOT^5TRBR:l
On hearing the words of Vasudeva, the eyes of 
the great king Kamsa became red with anger. He 
holding a sword in his hand rushed to kill 
Vasudeva.
TR vr cj|<qi4|R cTt^R^I 
ЗИ-ЙЧ1 R^Kl'itMdlcr W l^ ll^ ll 
ddmPtvit Tji -цди 
jRdwm Щ 
t ^ТШ'к'кМ
At this slight, Ugrasena cried in panic and 
dissuaded Kamsa from doing so. Vasudeva also 
left for his abode in anger. Thereafter the king 
Kamsa deputed Akrura to Vraja for getting the 
son of Nanda to Mathura.
£di-*H4i4dWHt 
sldfStfi Tram
The messengers were dispatched in all the 
directions and all the kings and the sages arrived 
there together with their companions. 
ffrHflrnyri ШТ: 
sil^uilVri «4^4:1
ITHchV^ 
: 4^rfwWTII'kSM
difikd^EJI^R: 
4PRT$>et wild4:ll'X\9ll
3RIFET Ч Я Т О 'д а ! *dt^4l:l
тгШ%Г:
Щ£Ы?Ы сЩЩizl Т (Ш Щ Ч Щ :1 
WdlVEJ dRtaV’d tidd^Et fpqfd:ll'«^ll 
c f ilr illiR I 
T T r ilR w r ill
T^Tf 
^f4fT:ll4o||
1%'JctiRrdVri Ш : fqRR: ^llchdldd:!
RldlPd^jfPd^cl 
1riH[RTch:ll4HI
STRtfrgi^cT 'Jthrcbi'U'W^I 4>r4iuiiu3ch:l 
p h rr ^га^ЕГ 
11 ч ? 11
q%: r Rt: <*TJ|ldVri ddPHdi: Mlfuifdtdyil 
ctivMlRbdlqig'Jqirim^M
TfT^ui^ ycbo^^irj g^Jtiq^ET W ffo: 1

=== PAGE 500 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAiVpA, CHAPTER 65
447
3PR3W гИТ 
^ И Ч *11
All the Dikpalas, the gods, the Tapasvls 
Brahmanas like Sanaka, Sanandana, Vodhu, 
Pancansikha, 
Sanatkumara, 
illumining with 
divine lustre, then Kapila, Asuri, Paila, Sumanta, 
Sanatana, Pulaha, Pulastya, 
Brhgu, 
Kratu, 
Angira, Marici, Kas'yapa, Daksa, Atri, Cyavana, 
Bhardvaja, Vyasa, Gautama, Parasara, Praceta, 
Vasistha, 
Samvarta, 
Brhaspati, 
Katyayana, 
Yajnavalkya, 
Uttanga, 
Saubhari, 
Parvata, 
Devala, Jaiglsavya, Jaimini, Visvamitra, Sutapa, 
Pippalada Sakatayana, Jabali, Jangali, Apisali, 
Silalika, 
Astlka, 
Jaratkaru, 
Kalyanamitra, 
Durvasa, Vamadeva, Srngl, Vibhandaka, Pathi, 
Kavi, 
Kanada, 
Kaus'ika, 
Panini, 
Kautsa, 
Aghamarsana, 
Valmlki, 
Lomaharsana, 
Markandeya, Mrkandu, Parasurama, Samkrti, 
Agastya, Vanta and several other sages arrived 
there
'd4RcR:l
5ПТШГ ЦЧГсгай dlfbtch) 5tfeTfiPT:immi
w
t : 11 ч s 11
Refold: 
4^NdT:l
#зт1 #ПТ: 
Ч*|сГН1:11ЩЭИ
■RgNhrmmRT тщтггзтт од|Янч,
ЭДН ^ f l ^ l Iч 6 11
О sage, accompanied by the sons and the 
pupils of the Tapasvls, Brahmanas besides 
Jarasandha, 
Dantavakra, 
Dambhika, 
Dravides'vara, Sis'upala, Bhlsmaka, Bhagadatta, 
Mudgala, 
Duryodhana, 
Dhiimakesa, 
Dhumraketu, Sambara, Salya, Satrajita, Sanku 
and several other valorous kings including Bhis 
ma, Drona, Krpacarya, the valorous Asvatthama, 
Bhurisrava, Salva, Kaikeya and Kausala. The 
great king Kamsa talked to each one of them 
appropriately and Satyaka started the yajna in an 
auspicious time.
ЗЙЩЯо Tt^To %Tl^aJ|Mt-U<30 ЗтТ° 4Tf^4T° 
«Ь^ЧЩ<*УЧ ЧТЧ W :4% r4t5SM :IIS1XII

=== PAGE 501 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAiVpA, CHAPTER 65
447
m
 -crsEmfiwsszmT:
Chapter - 65 
Festivities of Akrura 
ЧНИЩ
стерт 
тткзвт gfRnii ^r ; i 
я^гчгш :и ^п
Narayana said- On hearing the words of 
Kamsa, Akrura who was the best of the religious 
people, quite peaceful and who always remained 
happy in his heart, calmly said to Uddhava.
-pwTSSi T3RT «njar й
W T f^T 
frfSTPTIRU
j p i хщ
й n w q чшгсь'4 
11
сШтПТ^т4 RRKMBhl ^nflT ^ fq ^ q im i
Akrflra said- "Today, our night has been 
turned into a dawn. The day is quite auspicious. 
The teacher, the Brahmanas and the gods are 
indeed happy with me, the merit I had earned 
during the crores of last births has appeared 
before me. Akrura who was held in bondage 
because of his actions, the same have been 
destroyed today. Getting relieved of the prison of 
the universe, I am proceeding to the abode of 
Hari.
сГЩ <ртГ 
ЗТТНТГ ЯП сПТ? 1ГНЧII
The intelligent Kamsa has made me to seek 
for a friend. Therefore, the anger of the king has 
turned into a boon for me.
9гзтзт 
w
i ттрпр
^ n fir щ ц 
^ГгъуГгЬУ<|Ямн.н^ и
I shall immediately move to Vraja in order to 
bring Sri Krsna here. Krsna who happens to be 
the bestower of enjoyment of pleasures and moks 
a will meet me there.

=== PAGE 502 ===

448
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAIjiAM
ъ f^T
372ЩТ 4<J)dl(IlTh4f ^n fR ^jfWRIIId II
He has a complexion of new clouds, the eyes 
like blue lotus flowers he is clad in pltambara on 
his entire body, would be covered with dust or 
applied with the 
sandal-paste. He would 
otherwise have the butter rubbed on his limbs 
and would be smiling; I shall look at him in this 
form.
faRcJT faHTcJJfWt 
iFhgiqj
$ rn TRt 
Xl ^ГЬМ%1Ш :11^ II
Or playfully he would be playing on the flute 
and would be running after the cows grazing 
here and there.
feb=tl d'h-d 
VldH Щ
f % r 
ъ
т 
т xt 
^pitn^o и
Otherwise either seated or walking, either 
sleeping or awake, I would be in a position to 
look at the lord. After looking at him in the 
auspicious moment I shall achieve great pleasure.
<ГгЧКЧ«й яттМ
4 f? STRlf?! 
tll^ n
Brahma, Visnu, Siva and all the gods meditate 
upon his lotus-like feet and the serpent Ananta 
having the vast body is unable to know about his 
end.
4 
^cJT: 1RIW
ъ т 
Фтт p t A tw dlii^n
The influence of whom is unknown to the 
gods and the ascetics, the one whose glory is 
beyond the recitation of Sarasvatl and while 
doing so she becomes dumb.
fst^TWTI
щ 
Ш9РП^ТЧ1м^11
For serving whom MahalaksmT is deputed like 
a slave girl and the auspicious Ganga emerged 
out of his feet which removes birth, death, old
age and ailment, is the best in the three worlds 
and destroys the sins of others to just have a 
glance at her.
a tm i|r4<f|WTR fitf ^ fa ^ 'H ll
At whose lotus-like feet Durga meditated who 
happens to be the destroyer of all the 
misfortunes, is the mother of the three lokas, is 
the great goddess besides being MQla-prakrti. 
cijni 
Hgifdkuij^xi 'гнгг tTi
ЗННэЧ1Й fgfenftFT 
WII^H
■R W 
tT^t fldVcHW tII
ct ^ ^
 | 
ЧГ*ПЧ13Ч^(ЦПЩ11^11
31^: 4l4j
д$ьгч1[с1:*сМ tI 1
frfut tt M i тг M M f e w j i
w i w n M M
 
и
й ч з т ттФй 
ш ш ч .1
R oll
Lord Visnu in whose hair-pits, innumerable 
globes are enshrined and who happens to be 
harder than the hardest and who happens to be 
the sixteenth Goloka of lord Krsna. О brother, I 
am going to have a look at him; he has an 
illusory form, is the inner soul of all, all 
knowledgeable beyond Prakrti, the form of 
eternal light, who takes to a definite form in 
order to grace his devotees, is beyond qualities, 
unattached, devoid of bliss, devoid of shelter, the 
great lord, all blissful, bestower of bliss, the one 
who delights Nanda, who moves at will, is 
beyond everyone, the cause of all and is believed 
to be eternal. All the ascetics' meditate upon his 
child-like form throughout the day and night. 
TRRTnM ^ M gR :
4131^4^1) Jflxireif 'iIc#lR?ll 
ПЧ: 
trrwt хГ 1ЩГ 
Tllfijf?ri
R ip M xi Tgm я ^
 twTsfh tmuyy ii
In the initial Padmakalpa, Brahma who 
emerged from the lotus, performed tapas seated 
on a lotus for a thousand manvantaras in which 
because of his remaining without food, his belly

=== PAGE 503 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 65
449
shrank. He then heard the words, "Perform the 
tapas again and you will find me". But in spite of 
performing such a long tapas he was unable to 
have an audience with the lord.
шё|г*н g r o w ctt ШЧ 
crq^l
rf 
I ? Э 11
О Uddhava, in the meantime he performed 
tapas again and then he had an audience with the 
lord who also bestowed on him a boon. I would 
be able to have an audience with such a great 
lord.
дтт FfR preft *rrat «rspJTt тот: i
rT 
TT 3 ^ ТГ: II'R'jSII
In the earlier times Siva had performed tapas 
up to the length of the sage of Brahma and then 
he could look at the lord in the Jyotirmandala in 
Goloka.
тмГтт^ «гагат щ точ;|
W
 
Л
 Ъ 
ЧЩ\ R Ч11
ТОШТСсТОРТ ct *T ^ «rat (tT>) «ra^oRcT.-l
4 t^ i rf 
d4o&c(|I^ ^ 11
He then achieved the best of his devotion 
besides the knowledge of all the tattvas, all the 
success and the best of the tattvas. The lord who 
is graceful to his devotees, made Siva like him. 
О Uddhava, I shall have an opportunity to meet 
with such a lord today.
ТОТОЧчГСТОгаЙ ЯТОТО *T Ч<Ч|гц ч:1Г?'Э11
ТЩТ TOSSrudM 
<2^ 
^T 
I
WP?T W 
<гаЗТО1 ? 6 11
О Uddhava, Ananta had adored the lord for 
the life of a thousand Indras with devotion, 
remaining without food and only after that he 
could achieve the lord who bestowed all the 
knowledge on him. I am going to meet such a 
great lord today.
^ттопт:1
Щ1 тога rasft ч srffrjTt 'H#<*nfrnHii? ч ii
vilw i ^T Uin^ldi *T МОШ1Ч1^ииГч$1
ssrorasr <тдзТО13 ° n
3tbdiRivifdR^iuii
ттз яйщ 4RTTO: 
sr^nnt tot:II3^ii
37?t -цщ fti^ui щ тт: tor «(^1
|^ т о га т о т ^ т о га ? г то р то в ? ii
Dharma also meditated upon him up to the life 
of a thousand Indras and as a result of the same 
he became the witness of the deeds of all and by 
the grace of the same he became the ruler on the 
humans and the bestower of the reward for their 
deeds. О Uddhava, I shall have a chance of 
meeting with such a great lord today, whose one 
day and night is counted after the destruction of 
twenty-eight Indras. In this order with the 
passage of months and years, Brahma lives for a 
hundred years and after the spending of the age 
of Brahma, whose one second is counted. I am 
going to meet with such a great lord .
4lfra «JRTHT W tT 
г ЩЩТ OTI 
над тот fg^ciHi vRraiti Tfifa<idii33ii 
fq^cl f^cf TO y^lch 
дГОТГтога:
тотоё'ущп: it Itotr ^ргт чтото hW*iii
тоЫшгс ^mrairmpTOii34ii
О brother, as the particles of dust on earth are 
beyond counting, -similarly the number of 
Brahmandas also is beyond counting the base of 
which happens to be Mahavirat. In every globe 
there are separate Brahma, Visnu, Siva and other 
gods besides the sages, the ascetics, siddhas, 
human beings and other movable and immovable 
creatures. The one whose sixteenth Goloka is 
Virat, who is playfully bom and is destroyed 
such a great lord who is a ruler will be met my 
me today.
TOsftmi ттщтотг 
TfroromTOPfii^ii
Thus speaking Akrnra felt overwhelmed and 
his eyes started shedding tears of joy. He fainted 
at that time. He then started adoring the lotus-like 
feet of the lord.
m ra ^Rkauhra w t w t 4<ira44i
fTOT 5R%TO TOTSlxr fTOTTO TOUIrTO: 11^^911

=== PAGE 504 ===

450
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
T&WZ dMlRiHGJ 54VIVI-H ^T: ^T:l
IT Щ #5Г 
I<44P<<4H 3 
11
Remembering the lotus-like feet of the lord 
Krsna again and again with devotion, he 
circumambulated 
lord 
Krsna. 
Thereafter 
Uddhava embraced Akriira again and again and 
praised him. Thereafter, he immediately left for 
his abode and Akriira also went back to his 
abode.
ffcT -sTl g f>J ° Ч?То 
ЗТЗБТ^Щрд^дЭТТ ЧРТ
о ЗтГ° ЧТ«ЧТ° 
:11^Ч11

=== PAGE 505 ===

450
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
Chapter - 66
The removal of Radha's Grief 
4UI4UI
зтаг 
тг^г 4i^v<=k : wthi
ш Tntftrata wiTtoggi: 11 * 11
Narayana said- Lord Krsna, the foremost 
among those performing Rasa getting anxious 
for a union with Radha, spent pleasant time with 
her in Rdsamandala.
±|i(1 Pi^i rT TTfeTI
After the union with Krsna, Radhika felt 
sleepy she then had a dream after which she rose 
up and sat down. She then meekly submitted 
herself to lord Krsna her beloved.
irfiiraiictM
3 # w f4% T 55W icrt gRtfa ^g rirri
oRunri fw di R я ^
Radhika said- О lord, you come here. Let me 
embrace you because I am not aware of what the 
destiny would do to me after this.
ScitcMI m 43WFII Ы f^T ^^fRTI
f 
'dWlumifl 
Rl£4dlimi
Thus speaking, the immensely virtuous Radha 
embraced her beloved and started speaking about 
the bad dream, she had witnessed.
<|fachlc)M
d<ld4d 
WT 
R ТПТГИЧ11
Radhika said- О lord, I was seated on the gem- 
studded lion-throne under an umbrella of gems. 
At that very moment a Brahmana getting 
annoyed with me, snatched away the umbrella 
from my hands.
w A Ш Я Ш 4ft 1УA zf
тптА iUiimi-H w
 f f o t к ^rii^n
He forcefully drove a weak person like me in 
the terrific, insurmountable and deep ocean 
which looked like an ocean of collyrium.
cTT TtmRT ^IchldT W fh ^ 4 ^ : 1
Rrft cdl^icdl Ч*Уфй|ПэИ 
=rrf% 
| ЧТО TOt ^ ifR дч: 44:1 
TOT 4 ^gT WTtcTT gJTlfR ЗП^ЧТ 
1611
Getting panicky I started looking in the ocean 
again and again which was infested with 
crocodiles and the high waves which made me 
upset. "O lord, you protect me. I repeated these 
words again and again; I was terrified at finding 
you nowhere and then started offering prayer to 
the god.
fiWT ТГЭГ Rw^t-dl Ч¥У|Гч rKHUgtfRI 
АПШЧТ TO ЧЧЧТТОШ!^ tT ТОчАп^И
jcfuirR to xrvyiRt 1ншг^4цийнн.1 
w ? to тотипз Rrcro ytufidHii^o и
О Krsna while I was drowning in the ocean I 
found that the moon was reduced to a hundred 
particles and even the sky was falling on earth.
ЦсЬсыА TO ЧчА 4П5Й TO^44l:l 
ЗТсЙТО'efw<jHlcbH 
WrTTlfOTTIIHII
In the second moment I found the solar disc 
which fell from the sky on the earth was reduced 
to four pieces. Thereafter, I found that both the 
sun and the moon had risen in the sky and were 
eclipsed by Rahu who was completely black. 
$птчА to Mvmfa 
<AfH4iAifdi
ТОЧААГТОИ^И

=== PAGE 506 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 67
451
The next moment, I found that an illustrious 
Brahmana snatched away the pitcher of nectar 
from me and broke it in anger.
Again I found that the angry Brahmana was 
dragging away my beloved from me.
*ldlch4H<ug Щ 
1Щ ТГЯТ1
W7TT IsPJSfsflJi t-f Ш
 W IfT T II^ II 
Щ
 R^RK ^U |:|
О lord suddenly the lotus stalk held in my 
hands fell down on the ground and was reduced 
to pieces. The spotless mirror which was made of 
the best of gems was suddenly broken into 
pieces, falling from hands. The mirror which was 
quite spotless was rendered black after the fall, 
like the collyrium. 
lift if 7ЩТШЩ 
ЯгЕТТ rf cf8£TR:l 
3Tcfor т#РТ xrt WcT t>uul)d^ll^ll 
The garland of gems worn by me on the 
breasts was broken and shattered. The lotus also 
faded out and fell down on the ground.
R^Tlfachl : TRif 
^ 
xR 
SllWld^Pd 
хГ ^ГСГТ $ШШ11^11
All the puppets of my mansion were dancing 
and laughing. In a moment they clapped their 
hands and in another moment they started 
singing and then crying.
фштуи? 
iir яятт
йчя-q 
чтптГч rt яч*ччиии
A cakra of black colour was roaming in the 
sky, sometimes it fell down on earth and was 
again raised up.
У|иц(у<с(: 
ft:fJr4lvhd<R14l
тй fe w 
шт! чгч^дта in n n
фШМи|1 гГ 
41'4lfv?lbi|fa
фьии^ч(1щн1 
U^nfiT ЯТУсШП^оИ
fqqdd ^ ^gT xf imngcrwi
■^гчРн 
зггщт
^«lrcb^Pd TPjfFT 
RTCRRI
Getting out my great lord who is dearer to me 
than my life he was saying. "O Radha you send 
me off. I am going. An image of black colour 
clad in black costumes embraced me. This is 
what I have witnessed in the dream. О lord of my 
life thus witnessing the opposite type of dream, 
my right limbs are fluttering. I am feeling restless 
and am crying because of the onset of grief. My 
mind is extremely disturbed. О lord, you happen 
to be the best of the gods, therefore you tell me 
immediately as to what does it means.".
$ritcRch ТТ1«Ш 
J^bcbcbUdlBdl^Hchll 
ЧЧТЧ 
ЧТ1сГГ 7TT ¥ iU fe gH IIR 3 ll
wiwwt 
фгч| w ^ R ti
зттеч# ^ ч я й я ^ ra w ra ёТс^гщтг 11 ^ 11
Thus speaking Radhika, whose throat, lips and 
palate had dried up, getting frightened and filled 
with grief, fell at the feet of lord Krsna. 
Thereafter, lord Krsna who-is the lord of the 
universe, listening to the dream of Radhika 
embraced her and with the application of his 
divine yogic powers, he enlightened her.
ШЦЩ 
7ТГ 
FT 7ШЩ fFfcnTI 
7IRT 71 ЯЧсРТ *T cFFT FT7T T^rfR I IЯ Ч П
Thereafter, when Radha was imparted with the 
spotless divine knowledge, she was relieved of 
her grief and then embraced the lord gracefully. 
6ftF?T° RF0 ЗЙфНПчГаЩГо ЗтТ°
Ч£чГНг1ЧВщШ:1ЩМ1

=== PAGE 507 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 67
451
Chapter - 67
Description of Spiritual Yoga
^gT cblft-fl сЫЧЧ^Ч:!
Ф?зт outfit rit 
vbU'rcuigrRi 1^11
Т1Ш фШ1<4^ W<tl

=== PAGE 508 ===

452
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
hvld 
R ^IR II
Narayana said- Krsna the lord of passion, 
finding his beloved becoming conscious due to 
the idea of separation from him, embraced her 
and moved towards the lake of water-sport. О 
sage, at that point of time, the great goddess 
Radha appearing in the lap of Krsna as the 
clouds appear in the sky and the lightning 
appearing in the clouds.
IT Ж
 TTltf fTTOT хГ фЧ11ч&:1
££TTi4i4yi 
Rf0T:ll?ll
4(?l4Mumft|d:ll'«ll
©4 
Cs
ШШЧ?сГ ehl^chlc^l
{RW cFR M fW 4T 4 ftr4 i^ :lim i
All merciful Krsna gracefully enjoyed the 
company of Radha, Sri Krsna looked in both of 
them as an emerald in a heap of gems. There was 
a bed made of the best of the gems and a lamp 
made of gems was burning. All the ascetics of 
the divine dance were made of the gems 
including the ornaments. Lord Krsna was then 
adorned with the gem-studded ornaments and in 
the company of Radha, who was also adorned 
with gem-studded ornament were engrossed in 
the ocean of love-sport.
Trfr XltWtj Т1Щ TThWMctw Ш1
fTtft 
^ T t 
4 R4tT^I I $ 11
Getting disinterested in the love-sport without 
getting her mind detached from the same, Radha 
the goddess of the divine dance, spoke to Krsna 
the lord of the divine dance.
TlfachlctM
HUjwiiSi <^thl 4TST TJ?IT k iH I 
ТЩ f^RTI
■гтт 
тг*пй mf?r
Radhika said- О lord, I always remain 
delighted with you and without you I feel like a 
dead person and get faded, like the bunch of 
great medicinal plants blossoms in the morning 
and getting faded with the sunshine.
ч &t ctlqfynsNuj «зги ттт4 csrtt fin n
feit: сШТП^И 
cTgrfTT ^ ^frr: -fotanTRTOTI 
т?ят щщ ёЧтнт f f t 
trail i 11
I shine with you like the light of the lamp at 
the night. Without you my lustre goes on 
decreasing like the lustre of the moon in the 
black fortnight. I always illumined like the full 
moon placing my head on your chest and getting 
deprived of you. I get destroyed at once like the 
moon rays in the moonless night.
'лТН4ГчЦ>1^сТЩ ^R{|^| ЩЩ ТЩ1
тгнгг fzR isi Ггакт 
Ф я ( w i i ? о 11
With you I remain like the flames of fire in 
which ghee is poured and without you I get faded 
like the lotus flower in the winter season.
RT4tMGHIiHdl RrlRtffa тш щ -^l 
зщптй Tcft xj% fetwttwi m ■Егаттпч^ч
When you leave me get myself drowned in the 
worries as the sun or the moon cover the earth 
with darkness after they set.
WT 44W | foTT ^ wfN4^TPT4;i 
dHMHl 4frWT
Without 
you 
my 
costumes, 
beauty, 
youthfulness, consciousness get destroyed in the 
same way as the stars get destroyed at dawn.
xt TTTTT RR 4Wt f^4TT:ll
dj4«tlSSTR4T 
cWTSt ^ T^TT f^RTII^ II
You are the soul of all but you happen to be 
the only lord of mind. Without you I remain like 
the body without the soul.
цохпиапгц^ы й -grTTsi хг щщ f^RTi
hi НChi 
{^dfcddii f^TTII^II
You are my five pranas and as such without 
you I feel like a dead person, like the eyes which 
become useless without the eye-balls.
w r w
 fxfirW writ w fa ? Ш \
ЗШТ^ТТТ w(4|l iffaT guilx^vu ОДГ Rfftl 1^411
With you I glitter like a painted surface and 
without you I look like the earth grown with wild 
vegetation.

=== PAGE 509 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 67
453
кЩ fSRT MR4«fldlSi fitW '<рй«4 x T I^ II
^тгцщчят #*гт xt <am -и'^сАит хп
4gaTfSRRft хГ^ЙЯГЧЙТЧТ W II^ II
О Krsna, I remain with you like the painted 
image of gold and without you, I look like an 
image of clay filled with dust and water. You are 
the lord of the divine dance and as such all the 
cowherdesses appear before you as the crystal 
gems appear in the garland of gold.
дРЗТТМ <.riUI TflsJ <1л^1 ТГЗГШГгТ: I 
зш хг%щ 
\6 II
О lord of Vraja, the group of kings illumine 
with you as the constellation surround the moon 
in the sky.
cxTOT # Ч Т 
ЧЧ'-КЧ I
тт§#тгай| i w 11
О son of Nanda, as the fruits and branches 
decorate the trees similarly you decorate or 
glorify Yas'oda and Nanda. 
ccRTT W ? 
Ч1$сЧс)|ГШ1Ч.1
m i 
ч1^Фл R uw rfiR о и
О lord of Gokula, with you the people of 
Gokula appear so graceful as the great king is 
surrounded by his people.
HMVllfa ^ TI^?T гёШТ ЖГЧТ TRTWI 
THEt ^cRU)4 -ЦЩ ^ S R ild R lllR HI
О great king, with you the divine dance also 
looks pleasant as the city of Amaravatl looks 
glorious in the heaven of Devaraja Indra. 
■f^icRrq farmt щ rt ?twt чЫ йм 
з й щ хг ф ш xt 
ч и
You are the lustre of the trees of Vrndavana, 
their lord and the sun, as the lion is considered to 
be quite glorious in the forest among the wild 
animals.
<xrtt fe n *т#зт w 
т vii^yi’Ki
*lVW l ^Tfw U ЭДТИ ^И
Without you, the mother Yasoda is engrossed 
in grief like the cow who cries without her calf. 
ЗТГ^'ЯЧЙ Ч^Щ ЯШТТ 
хГ ЧН«Ч,1
ЩЩ %ТТ ш И ( W slT^RT^i: 1 \Ч■*11
Without you Nanda feels restless and his mind 
is reduced to ashes as the paddy gets fried in the 
heated vase.
j ^ a \ whilum tit 
it: i%\
34<Mifr4^Aci зйщтчто ш fg^: 11 з ч 11
Thus speaking Radhika infatuated with love 
held the feet of Krsna. Thereafter lord Krsna 
again enlightened her with spiritual knowledge.
W чфгст ^грЩ ^аЩ Щ хТ ЧТ7^1 R S11
О Narada, the spiritual knowledge removes 
the illusion in the same way as a sharp edged axe 
cuts the trees.
ЧТО[ЗсПхГ
зньчгТечск RgRTRi <щ
V?lchx^4 XT 'rtlchHi STEj chldsH REIR\9ll 
4RRtm ЗЩхГ
snwfm^r 'читана ч ^штГ itifhqiRfbi
ЗЕТ Xt ЧИ1У<Ш¥хТ TEf 
if t : TaRTq;iR<SII
Narada said- О best of those well-versed in the 
Vedas, you enlighten us on the spiritual 
Mahayoga which destroys the grief of the 
people. I am quite anxious to hear about it. 
Narayana said- Even the yogis are not quite 
aware of the spiritual Mahayoga which is of 
various kinds and is known to lord Hari 
completely.
'Rbfa<*№4lfa«b x k 
4lR&?cR: I
■pk: сЬУРПЧТО QjnR W -qriny^il
О sage, Sri Krsna the lord of Radha, had 
narrated a few parts of the divine Mahayoga to 
Siva getting extremely delighted.
WJ:
&S 
3«|dRi crfrg tT ЧЧ^ГОЩН?oil
Siva performed tapas up to a thousand Indras. 
He happened to be the best of Vaisnavas and 
quite senior and the best among the mendicants.
Mwht gxcbt над! 
чК1 xf 44lvit:!
^гсгг тт w
 ^pcrr чаш 
Hi

=== PAGE 510 ===

454
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
fq ^ w fe lR H tT fPT4T XT фЧ1Й(У:11^^И
In the Padmakalpa Brahma performed severe 
austerities in the Puskara-ksetra. Finding him 
there, lord Krsna revealed a little of the 
Mahayoga to Brahma. Brahma performed tapas 
for a period of a hundred Indras, when he was 
reduced to only a skeleton. Thereafter the 
compassionate lord gracefully spoke to him.
ТП «ft ЧтШ qffioif <щ;|
гРШУсР ^11^4,11^^11
WSfSSbMlfftq, Рь£|гфЧЧ1 
fTtnftfatl 
Tit сРРгщагщ ^-.ii^
ii 
f^ Io F R flR Tt rT W
 TTf%Tf ТПТТ.1 
ШЧЧТЧЧЧ! rf Ш£|гЩ1с(|гГ ЧП^И^ЦП
In the earlier times my father who was quite a 
religious one, performed tapas in the Simhaks 
etra which prolonged to fourteen Indras and was 
rendered 
quite 
weak. 
Therefter, 
the 
lord 
becoming merciful bestowed the knowledge of 
the spiritual Mahayoga. Thereafter, the same 
knowledge was imparted to Sanatkumara who 
performed tapas for a hundred Indras. He was 
also imparted with a bit of the knowledge. 
Thereafter, О Narada, after performing severe 
tapas for a long time, the same knowledge, in 
part, was given to Ananta.
ftit ciw grftft 
crofeRifi 
5 ^ 
M
eTtIIFH 
<ПГ:11^И
Thereafter Kapila performed severe tapas for 
a long time on Himalaya and to Bhaskara, who 
performed hard tapas in the Puskara region, the 
part of the same divine knowledge was imparted 
to them. Thereafter the lord who is graceful on 
his devotees, parted with no part of the same 
knowledge to Prahlada, Durvasa, Bhrgu and 
Nigudha.
5hUlH<lc|\ T ft гЩсПЧ #4lPlRl:l 
w<ET?n тт(чэд rfrat 
fa^rra^ii^ii
Thereafter lord Krsna had imparted knowledge 
of the same to Radhika on the charming bank of 
the lake of the water sport. I am going to speak 
out the same to you which you please listen to.
fErTRT ftftST 
cURfaccri rf
sarraissHnffqgj
Finding his beloved quite sad, the lord, who 
happens to be the teacher of the yogis, embraced 
her and started narrating to him the spiritual 
yoga.
Ttrossrqft дяг famPq fifti 
if t Fic^TchfUM 
^TM ^^Il'koll
Sri Krsna said- О beloved, you remember the 
happening of the past birth, you recollect the past 
happening. Why do you forgot yourself? You 
remember the curse of Sudama pronounced by 
him in the Goloka.
чГзьчГя 
4W <aft:ir^u
0 goddess of humility, we shall be separated 
from each other for sometime because of the 
curse of Sudama. О virtuous one, we shall meet 
again.
Tffftr qfqtqifq
4 ^ 
11^^ II
We shall again visit Goloka and enjoy the 
company of the cowherds and cowherdesses 
there.
STfTOSSqifacj, fafawfl c^rfir 1ч?Г1ЧЧ1 
V?l^4 F ft ЧТТ 
ЧЯЧР4 Wll^3 И
Listen, presently I am going to speak about the 
spiritual yoga to you which removes grief, 
bestows pleasure, is the form of tattva and 
provides solace to the mind.
3ft TraftrtRRT W ftfftF: fftqftfil 
fg im r w 
Tier ^11 ^ 1 1
1 happen to be the inner soul of everyone, am 
involved in all the actions, omnipresent and 
pervade everywhere in invisible form.

=== PAGE 511 ===

KRSiyA-JANMA-KHANpA, CHAPTER 67
455
clWxHfa
«О ' 
s3v3
TT xt ^ПШгГсЩ Rl^ft xT ycich^Ull^ll^mi
As the wind pervades everywhere but is not 
involved similar is my case. I am the witness of 
all the deeds.
^Ttgf 4rHfdfa*3$>xl 7P& 7T^Tt%l
ЧГтКТ ^тят^ртпт xT cBtrf g dh^CIli ТЩТП'Х^И
I am present in all the bodies in the form of 
Jiva (soul) which happens to be my reflection. 
The Jiva has to face the reward of good and bad 
deeds and is also the creator of actions.
?m 
цизоТ
4 % % 
Ш Rfini^Oll
fXi<) |
зпср- хг fasrarfi xt t o ^ < ^ 411^^11
As the pitchers filled with water get the 
reflection of the sun and the moon, but when the 
pitcher is broken, the reflection of the sun and 
the moon disappear. Similarly, the soul merges in 
me. The soul disappears from the body at the 
appropriate time. Both of us always remain in all 
the creatures.
хг дтпж
зщ 
зоцтШ 4Wifui ъ
3rrfy,qNiliraji: fj? 
xti
TTWT: 
<^Vxj Ч,1%|^Т:^^Ш'4Т11Чо11
^vxRI
ifftfr: t^7T ^Пхг vvri хг чзеш щ y> 
fltwA xt дгчнт 
txf xnfr %^T:i
^RTT ■ц'^пПтгТ: 114 "R11
ЗЦГЧТсЧТ 
1
^ % У!^Гг1«Г 
Tt TEST: З П # H%I14^11 
3T^TS5tt^lil WcJT^Zl^ Xtl 
w s t xr ш ^ xt -цщ д щ ^ 5Щ%:11Ч'КН 
Щ: ttjsfzt 4 wfsrfyyr XT Timsscrm:) 
зщ ц^Гснте 
feygift tpt иВт^иччм
з ш
 тгя 
w y tr t p i gnftRti
ЗЩ t pf t f TTTf gyf i *Tv|Rt44JT: 114^11
зт^ 
grot й xitw : Tif?n
сгет 
тт хг fgtft 
w t t ш \ i ч ^ 11
rtw % £f xT 
?lgI^bUjfvHTc(JJ:l 
lagrfgajjfyrai з!упух<й xnfEr^T^bvhrim^ii
О beautiful one, I am the base and the 
universe is lodged on the base. Without the base 
the structure cannot remain in the same way as 
no task can be established without a reason. О 
beloved, all things are perishable whether they 
are produced in large numbers or in small 
numbers. Some of the gods happen to be my 
ams'a but some of the gods represent my rays, 
some of them are the part of my rays and some 
of them are the aritsas of my ams'a. Prakrti also 
happens to be my ams'a which has the form of 
atom and which can take to five forms. Sarasvatx, 
Laksml, Durga, yourself and Savitrl represent the 
five forms of Prakrti. All the gods having 
invisible or visible forms are also the forms of 
Prakrti. I happen to be the soul of all and with the 
demand of my devotees I take to various forms. 
О Radha, all the things of nature which are bom 
or destroyed in due course of time, I myself 
alone remain present at the beginning and at the 
end of the creation. As the sun-shine cannot be 
separated from the sun rays, the whiteness cannot 
be separated from the milk, similarly both of us 
cannot be separated from each other. There is 
absolutely no difference between both of us; this 
is certain. In the universe I happen to be 
Mahavirat in whose hair-pits, innumerable 
globes are enshrined. At that time from your own 
aths'a, you become Mahati the wife of Mahavirat. 
In the universe, I remain as a junior Virat, out of 
the navel of whom the universe emerged. О 
chaste lady, in the hair-pits of Visnu, my ams'a 
always resides. At that point of time you appear 
as Brhatl the wife of Visnu. In every globe, we 
find Brahma, Visnu, Siva and other gods. All the 
three Brahma, Visnu and Siva happen to be my 
arhs'as and the rest are my rays.
Mv^iyiiyixbvRtl Tli t*fHT УД1хЩ:1
c(<j)Ud 
тщтёт^т1т? тзг хртч$тг: 11 ч 4 n

=== PAGE 512 ===

456
BRAHM А V AIV ART A-M AH APURAI4 AM
xx 
m xi ^ т г з ; tuet щ \
tHtridl <er ^
 щ inflrat цшт: 1w r:ii^o и
O goddess, then the whole movable and 
immovable universe happens to be particle 
Goloka. You reside in Vaikuntha as MahalaksmI, 
where I reside as Visnu having four arms. Like 
Goloka it is lodged above Brahmanda where you 
happen to be Sarasvatl. In the Satyaloka you 
happen to be the beloved Savitri of Brahma.
fywviich f^rar щ xt 
fa4iy±i f*f
ш ^ 
ъгт ^
trpftft йт TiWsrr fyra^tftri i ^ ? 11
In the abode of Siva you become Siva. You 
are Is'varl and the Mtilaprakrti. You are the one 
who destroyed the demon named Durga and 
destroyed all the evil forces. Therefore, you are 
given the name of Durga. The same Durga 
happened to be the Satl, the daughter of Daksa 
and then became the daughter of Himavan. This 
is the reason why the virtuous Parvatl always 
remains in the heart of Siva the lord of Kailasa .
Щ 
gtafabUjq&gTT:M5 3ll
щ xX 
%ЗТ sntft ^ГтМг xX
гг -ЩЦ цщ ТТ% ТШУЖГ ЖП1б.*П
Sudama at that very place as a result of which 
you arrived in Bharata. О beautiful one, in order 
to purify Bharata and Vrndavana you are present 
here and all the women of the world appear from 
your amsa.
*гт irrfbrm 
« s i -гг: 
wi
Щ 
^TgT cOfggiTfiFgTII^VslI
о5Р5ГГ w W tfs ? ЧТЙ 
cert fERTI
You happen to be the form of all the women in 
the universe. With my amsa, I become the fire 
and you with your amsa appear as the power of 
burning as Svaha the beloved of Agni. I am in a 
position to bum and destroy only when you are 
with me, but without you I feel helpless. By my 
own rays I shine as the sun in the sky and you 
happen to be my lustre.
W T щ ъ x m r «rifir 
fo rrs t т
3 ^ XT «Богат x f z m *T TTlW rx ftftuftl I ^ Ч 11
■ч%шьга1 
<щт f^TT ч 
i
-Щ# T>cTCI4Tt 
Ш П f-RTI
3T? 
щ и 4f3y€j srf^ofhivs
Tti FfHt «p% tR 
xt фШ й f^m 
щ 
cR^mr й ^ w w ct%uTTiv3^u
In the ocean of milk, you happen to be the 
beloved of Visnu in the form of Sindhukanya 
(LaksmI) who emerged out of your amsa. At the 
time of creation, I remain present with Brahma, 
Visnu and Siva - and you represent LaksmI, 
Parvatl, Sarasvatl, Savitri, separately. In the 
Goloka you appear as Radha and in the divine 
dance you are known as Rasesvari
WQ <|^VcFl 
fg w
tit rci 
4Rci д ш тр ш i $ ч 11
C6jf W
 xX f^RTHT 
-§<!fTI
ГЧгГ:П^^II
In the plesant Vrndavana you are known as 
Vrnda and on the bank of Viraja river you appear 
as the cowherdess Viraja. You were cursed by
You happen to be Sanjna the beloved of Stirya 
and I shine only when you are with me and 
without you I cannot shine from my rays. I 
become the moon and you accordingly become 
Rohinl. By your remaining with me, I am always 
pleasant and without you I don't have the lustre 
by my own rays. I conduct myself as Indra and 
you happen to be SacI the LaksmI of the heaven 
with you I happen to be the lord of the gods and 
without you I happen to be lustrless. By my rays, 
I happen to be Dharma and you happen to be 
DharminI, the spouse of Dharma. I perform all 
the function of Dharma with you and without 
you I feel helpless. I am the form of yajna and 
from my rays and with your amsa you appear as 
daksind the spouse of yajna.

=== PAGE 513 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAI4DA, CHAPTER 68
457
ши iv9 311
г^ТЗЙ 4ioi|<;i’l 
Ч1Н r^IT f5RT
ЗЩ tpTOt ъ ф З WT3? cERT fERTII^II
With you I bestow the reward and without you 
I am helpless. With my own rays I represent the 
abode of manes and from your amsa you conduct 
yourself as chaste Svadha. With you on my side I 
am in a position to accept the offering of pindlas 
and without you I am helpless. If I am Purusa 
you happen to be Prakrti and as such I am unable 
to create the universe without you.
c4$4lfchRcRJI vt^tT 
fERTIh94ll
ЧРТ 
tpj ^
 Y^J f^TTI
3T? Vl4V^f «hd'Ut WiVlH Щ O T T H I^ ^ II
TO ШТОТгаНТ rT
^ щ c b r f ^ f d ^ M
d l w h i ^ n
Hfe: 
vFTO ^STT fWTT TO
9m w tp^r rt 
w TRffr: faTOii\9<sii 
^psfqtnti
TOT33STO 7RJ c# W ТОТЗТОЗ^ TO TO fl l\9 <? 11
~m <ег хч cWTst ^ той
ч % 
f^TTiii о и
You represent all the riches and therefore with 
you remaining on my side, I become the lord. 
With your remaining with me I am known as the 
lord of LaksmI and without you I am devoid of 
all my glory as the potter is unable to make a 
vase without the clay. Similarly without you, the 
universe cannot be created. With my rays I 
happen to be Sesa and from your amsa you 
happen to be the goddess earth. О beautiful one, 
being the place of all the cereals and the gems I 
hold you always over my head. You are the 
lustre, 
peace, fortune, 
absolutely 
chaste,
satisfaction, 
growth, 
forgiveness, 
shyness, 
hunger, 
lust, 
compassion, 
sleep, 
faith,
drowsiness, unconsciousness, adoration, the form 
of all, the form of devotion and the bodies of all,
those who possess the body. You are always my 
base and I happen to be your soul. Therefore, as 
you are, so am I. Both Prakrti and Purusa have 
the same form. О goddess, the universe cannot 
survive without either of them.
тотгто щ тгат HionRiehi finroii 
!кщт ctsrfrr 
«гйшчта 
*п
7T rt abUlfHjgrEycI ТОГО
cWT сГ ТОГО TTTsf ebl^cWI TO? *l»jeb;ll4TO
О Narada, thus speaking lord Krsna embraced 
his beloved Radha and getting filled with 
passion, he took the passionate Radha in to the 
house of gems and enjoyed her company there.
$П<ЗК1о TOo sJlehoJNt'Hlsi о д^о 4R^4T° 
TOT TOPTfTTOTtSSTOT:II^V9ll

=== PAGE 514 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAI4DA, CHAPTER 68
457
Chapter - 68 
Radha's request to Kr$na 
чгсгаит ш т
f^f^cTt yiuiy^n шготчта
Narayana said- After performing the love- 
sport, the eternal lord Krsna got up from the bed 
of roses and woke up his beloved also.
TR^T <jir4i cff^JcT Jjtsi4j
ЩЩ R ft W b W ti Ъ 
11 ? 11
He cleaned her mouth a the piece of cloth. 
Thereafter 
Madhusudana 
spoke 
to 
Radha 
peaceful and sweet words.
arfa % ^rot тй чш=)Г<
дзг 
WTsft' 5ГЗТ gt3T 
1 э 11
tiRifaar^fa 
ш тгсг f*» sercriT^i
^
 1ТТТГ W R l % 
n m ^ T T : I ("к 11
fjrarf^rat: 
т|чзрга>1чч»р
^TOT ё(Т т*Ц*«И
^rot ТЩ ^ 
Щ г ё SJRfaf^T Til

=== PAGE 515 ===

458
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
f e r r e t Ш R 
^ u t R T H I U M ^ I I ^ I I
Sri Krsna said- О goddess of divine dance, О 
goddess who cuts pleasant jokes, you wait here 
for a moment in the dancing hall, thereafter you 
can move to Vrndavana or Vraja. You are the 
great goddess of the divine dance therefore 
moving to the Rasamandala to perform the 
divine dance for a moment as the god of the 
village remains in every village, similarly you 
first go with cowherdesses to the Candana-vana 
and then for a moment you move on to the 
Campavana and stay there. О beautiful one, for a 
moment I shall go to my abode where I have to 
attend to an important work. Therefore, О lady of 
my life, you leave me gladly for a moment. 
m u n f i l E T ^ c f t щ j i i u i i ^
 f u l f i l 
^ 1
ягстг 
-щщ arc: fs%uv9ii
Because you happen to be the goddess of my 
life and my life always remains with you, О dear 
one, where can a person live without the life.
^ Т Т Ш Т 
% W
W
R 4 T I
W tT t Т ГС fsT C T R l f e l 
¥ i * < l f d r c i l l < S I I 
ШГСТ ^ W fX: 
yiunRjchl ufoi
U t 
J w y g l d : l l 4 l l
3 1 ^ ,< м г с ч щ щ и
# : r -<Jr t s f t : i 
ЗП Т С Т rc H T ^ 1 y c f m ^ Ш Т с Щ д 1 : 1 1 ? о | |
My mind always remains attracted towards 
you, you are my worldly pleasure and no one is 
dearer to me than you. You are dearer than Siva. 
О chaste lady, this is true that Siva happens to be 
my life but you happen to be dearer to me than 
my life. Thus speaking lord Krsna who is all 
knowledgeable, all competent, soul of all, the 
protector and is the lord who does good to 
everyone embracing Radhika got ready to leave. 
< j4 ic || 
■M tss-flM rU ch f a v T C F r e r c j 
3 3 1 * 1 < I R ic h I ^
f f 3 ^ 4 f d ^ i l d l l l ^ l l 
Goddess Radhika, finding the lord getting 
ready to go, spoke with a sad mind.
< |R |c h |c ( l4
ft ЧМ muiilB 
Ь т ГСП 
I 
Т Т Г С Т Ш ^ Т Г Г С 5ГЗТ 5 T 3 T C I I ^ I I
aifrc тзт ушнга ч?<ч(Гч f4?rcrcR4j
igfsi RR Tftt RTT 
tin ^
ii
Radhika said- О lord, О my dear husband, you 
are the best among those who are loved by me, О 
lord Krsna, you do not go to Vraja. О lord of my 
life presently I find that your mind is disturbed, 
therefore in case you leave at the moment, my 
fortune and love would also depart.
з з Rife rt
¥KUIIJldl4Jir*H
Therefore throwing me in the vast and deep 
ocean of grief, where are you going? I am getting 
upset because of separation. I am quite humble 
and I take refuge in you.
R dlW lfq ip f t dlW lfa
^buifd f^Tffir TfRT RTR f ^ T f q ^ l l ^ m i
In case you leave then I will not go back to my 
house. I shall go to some forest, reciting the 
name of Krsna.
R 
RURlfa RRRRFKl
Otherwise I shall not go to the forest but I 
shall drown myself in the ocean of love and 
getting desirous of you I shall end my life.
w ssrcr 3 ЗЗТ 3% R3T ife: I 
w
 ^ rcfrc RTClW 14^1 ^ R T ^ I I ^ 11
As the light the soul, the moon and the sun 
remain together similarly how could you leave 
when you are entangled with me with the comer 
of my costumes?.
3TCRT Rlfa 
f^IT ^ RIRRcRTRI
r згаз % 
fort Rt vKuim di^ii^ n
О lord of the down-trodden, in case you leave 
at the moment disappointing me then it would 
not be proper for you to leave a humble person 
like me who has taken refuge in you.
■ЦТСЩЧЧГ aiTRRt srcrf3mrf?T37^i:l
T3T WRIT RtRRR RSI ^Hlfq Rrnffll^ll
The one whose feet are adored always by 
Brahma, Visnu and Siva, he is taking to the form

=== PAGE 516 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 69
459
of a cowherd because of his illusion, how can I 
really know about you who is envious of you.
чПЫ|еЫ ЧТрТЧГЬТ сГ^ПТ11 ^ о ||
О lord I have committed innumerable sins 
improperly and whatever I had spoken to you 
taking you as my husband in arrogance. You 
kindly forgive me.
ЧТ№Г:1
?ттат 
tra tmrmi
чЭ
v?T хГ Щ Ч TW lfa smiTT cfT 4fVhW d:IR?ll 
Tift? 
Ф & т qchH^I qfSrafqi 
sfH«T4RvlR ^TII^II
My pride has been shattered and the goal has 
been left behind, what more can I speak in order 
to know about my fortune? In spite of knowing 
about the truth, about you from the mouth of 
Garga, I am still infatuated with the illusion, 
therefore getting over-powered with love and 
devotion, I am unable to speak out anything but 
in case you are going, leaving me alone then you 
will earn a blemish and all your sons, and 
grandsons would be destroyed in the fire of the 
anger.
8ТГО 
f^RT яю(с(ст1*Р{!
ТЙ 
ТШ fqcKen 
З тЫ O TtlR 'kll
You are the lord of my life and without you 
even a moment is spent by me like a yuga. 
Therefore, О lord how can I remain alive getting 
separated from you for a hundred years.
Ч|1£Ш ГОПТТгГОЩ grwhrHi
таПТ 
^RT ^119411
О sage thus speaking Radhika fell down on 
the 
ground in 
anger and fainted losing 
consciousness.
фИЛШ Rfekri 
f iW xf -fTTlfqfy :l
ГОсГТГ <шП<6=ГТ Ъ ТГЦГОЧШ
Thereafter the all merciful Krsna finding her 
fainted, brought her back to senses and embraced 
her.
cTSTTSftr W TO О Т ТЭГ 4 W IT O ^ fa fW T T IR V S l
In spite of the face that he had bestowed the 
divine knowledge of the yogic practices on her 
which could remove the grief but in spite of that 
Radhika, who always had a smiling face could 
not be relieved of the grief.
WOT 353HRI
When the separation from ordinary things 
creates grief for a person then how could the 
separation from the body and the soul be 
pleasant.
4 
ITT fenf sCWFifr sRT uftn
T1W 
^ II
The lord of Vraja could not go to Vraja on that 
day. He took Radha to the lake of the love-sport.
err jic=ii ЧТ: 
tr o t хг tm тл?!
Ш ф 
tt% tra w l ^ rn ^ o ii
Reaching there he again had the divine play 
with Radha as a result of which the burning 
sensation of the mind of the goddess of the 
divine dance was subsided.
ттат tit w fq n
WRRtTv^ Ъ cRSlft Т#Т TT^II? ?ll
Thereafter, G Narada, getting decorated with 
flowers and sandal-paste, Radha enjoyed the 
company of her husband Krsna on the bed of 
roses.
ife lo RitTo
о ЗтТ° Т1«Ч1» 
:\\ЪС\\

=== PAGE 517 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 69
459
rmfsssTR: 
Chapter - 69
D e s c rip tio n o f th e s p o rt o f R a d h a 
a n d K r § n a
3rt: xrt 
да|4>ум4)4<н
г(^ 
1 ^ 11

=== PAGE 518 ===

460
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
Narada said- Thereafter what is the extremely 
secret and secret tattva of Radha and Krsna and 
what was their other tattva you kindly tell me.
щ
 ягс^ 
w
 лтящ дяч;|
Я |ЧЯ № 
'дп Е щ щ И З II
дя: w r t wrpfWT: 
fgg:i
^
 R ТЯЯГ ^TTsf f ^ W = r f ^ W I I ^ I I
Narayana said- О Narada, I will speak to you 
the extremely secretive tattva which the ancient 
people describe as quite secret in the Vedas and 
other scriptures. You please listen to me. 
Thereafter, the passionate, moving at will, all- 
pervading and clever lord Krsna enjoyed the 
love-sport with beautiful Radha.
*Щ :ч Г ё ^ 1¥ 1с к 'Ч | эд т дпятт < *d M d ll 
chinwag ftgoir f^ rr
$ii?e^mi ъ chmcbli 
д ^ т т дя;<1йс| ^ g r g f e r ^ q T i m n 
я гт е г SRTT ЦШ ЯВ ТТ 
ят1яя]п 
■?wt: f? M T глядят ^ЯФ ёФ ягзЩ д я1|^11 
^с$<Л|}1чди|| q|J|H)fd(3yiKdll 
ЯТЯТЯЯШ Т ^TTSqt 
f ^ f t M t i i v a i i
Radha was completely like the figure of her 
mother Kalavatl. Kalavatl had the strength of 
sixty-four arts, quite attractive, well-versed in the 
sports of love, extremely intelligent, passionate, 
well-versed in passionate advances, always filled 
with passionate desires, completely passionate, 
most beautiful of woman, having quite stable 
youth-fullness and was the mind-bom daughter 
of the manes, was quite fortunate, arrogant, the 
pupil of Siva, possessed all knowledge, who 
lived for a hundred kalpas, well-versed in the 
Vedas and post-Vedic literature, well-versed in 
yogic practices and polity, the one who could 
change to many forms, quite chaste and was the 
well-known Siddhayogini.
я т е *п Ttf£ ш 
ящ ялт ъ <ш<£Т1
^ ш т я н г я т с г -щ '.p V n -*сп!ля Tfo\\6\\ 
ш:ч(аз;<н1чм g frt 
шк т т 
л я г f a i w n тш ч й т ш т я 1с я л ;: 11 ^ 11
Л! ЯШЩЯ9ГРзт1 ЯЩ1ЯЧЯШТЧ;|
<дН*КЧГВ£<'| cb«Rirvl(«IHi ^ ftg il^ o ll
w я>я! гг vilcbgf?^H.i
Her daughter named Radhika was also like her 
mother and quite passionate. The noble Radhikfl 
displayed several types of dispositions in the 
divine dance for lord Krsna who was always 
anxious to perform for the sake of his beloved 
and particularly Radha who was quite dear to 
him, enjoyed sixty-four types of asanas, by 
which the pelvic region and the breasts were 
injured with the nails, the painting of the sandal­
wood paste and the vermilion was shattered and 
the hair-do was disarranged. She enjoyed 
everlasting pleasure by getting unrobed and 
fainted with grief. Her entire body was filled 
with emotions and she was overwhelmed. She 
went to sleep in the same position.
дедт лт {¥дят д те : дяглт 
'$qTftfa:i
ЛТЛЯТ ЛЕЙ ЛТЯШ ЛПЛЙ?ЩПТП1^11
Thereafter, finding her enjoying the sleep, the 
compassionate lord Krsna who is the lord of 
illusion also, just for educating people getting 
filled with illusion cried aloud.
w
 щ g g w я дя: дяп
ТЛ1ЛТ ^ 
yiuilfaSild^dRM^II
Embracing the great goddess Radha he kissed 
her again and again. She was bathed with the 
waters of his tears.
siwfygii йглллт «тнутош эш тЬ
Krsna then clad his beloved with the garments 
sanctified by fire which were quite fine and were 
invaluable besides being difficult to get in the 
universe, 
gjstff T^iqmiR
лдлтй w 
птядуя 
i 
11
firgt гг ъф <тт: Tir4^w:?m sm i 
дзл ^ 4 fa -g fc r:ii^ ii 
т е 
я п | ятят1теШ^ш?д|
ЛЛПЛЛ% *Г Т<ЯЯзЙТТ%лд1 I W 11

=== PAGE 519 ===

KRSiyA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 69
461
mki^ hhisiiai ъ
4Rrqqqk^fHdi <TT %Щ#ГЯТ iq ^ :ll^ ll
He made a knot of her hair, plastered her body 
with saffron and sandal-paste, adorned her neck 
with garlands of invaluable gems and applied 
vermilion on the head at the point of the parting 
of the hair; her cheeks were decorated with 
various types of flowers like lotus and others and 
her feet were adorned with the gem-studded 
anklets, beautiful red paint was applied over her 
feet and the toes. Thus the lord decorated his 
beloved when she was fast asleep by applying 
various types of cosmetics.
З'ч^сьн -цЦт *11ё|(н$чч1Гцмч1
t e w 
I w 11
•умгч inmt WRt ebk1lfa<gcbld<:l
Н)сЬГЧг1ГЧВ:119оН
зтртот 
^гшт 5^
 
11 ? * 11
Thereafter infatuated with love, he embraced 
her and implanted kisses on her repeatedly, he 
then laid her against his chest and then went to 
sleep himself. In the meantime the grandsire 
Brahma, Siva, Sesa and the gods arrived there 
together with the sages. They saluted before him 
bowing their heads and with folded hands started 
offering prayers as prescribed in the Samaveda.
Ш 
fcfuT ftlldiK
ftrSfETC? IR 3 11
h l^ S tTTERTT Ш^гг 
'pifar ?TRT 
<5ТчТ Pidi-u^tNN^ 'ПЖТТТ я<£>с1: XR iT^rRTvtlWT
ftfcfa 
чишетттщ
ch^atTUTR 
VK9I43H
'ЧтЬНИ^КсЬ ^cWcIcUH W W lW R ЗТГ TRlS'ST 
TIR'kll
t v fw m wi
О 
-О 
' 
Сч 
' 
Cs 
'
Brahma said- О lord of the universe, victory to 
you, all of us adore your sacred feet. You are 
beyond the gunas like sattva, rajas and tamas 
you are formless, moving at will, graceful to the 
devotees, having the eternal form, taking to the 
form of a cowherd by illusion, lord of the 
illusion, clad in the best of garments, having the 
best nature, peaceful, loveable by all, can 
subjugate all, possessing eternal knowledge, 
quite blissful, beyond everything, beyond Prakrti, 
residing in the heart of everyone, unattached 
witness of the deeds of all the people; you are 
formless as well as with form, spotless, remover 
of the burden of earth, ocean of mercy, destroyer 
of the grief and sufferings of the people, 
destroyer of old age, death and fear, serving as a 
sage for those who take refuge in you, graceful 
and compassionate to the devotees and are the 
immense treasure of the devotees, we bow in 
reverence to you. You are the great god of all, 
we bow in reverence to you. Whatever was 
spoken by Brahma again and again to please the 
god, was spoken with utmost devotion, after 
which he fainted.
W tt 4: -^UTtfr TTRT%T:l
iTcf^cr 4 W*T:IR$II
Whosoever recited the stotra composed by 
Brahma or listens to it with an attentive mind, all 
his desires get fulfilled, there is no doubt about it.
зтд^Т 
w 
cwforarqj
freJrt vREf ■Roit чПфЛсЫ
A man without son gets a son, without a wife, 
gets a wife and a pauper receives immense riches 
surely.
4jcKcj| 
cfTPT 
I
3RtvlT 4fdi4l4l(d PckUft
Enjoying all the pleasures in this world, he 
achieves the slavehood of the lord ultimately 
and, achieves his everlasting abode.
'Лисп ШсГГ iPJTKf xT TT: 1Н :1
-о 
о 
о
W4P4 qcRSJT 
HR^II
He was thus eulogised by Brahma who 
prostrated before him again and again with his 
mind filled with devotion.

=== PAGE 520 ===

462
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
$1^1 <414
3T % H 
W T R ^ F T W r i
^ттщгпт чм m& ч<сьет mi 
4lsviMi щ
 м Turrit тГиищ
ч^ч^т чпч^ 1чмтч*^ 44tS 43^11^011 
5гзт ч^твм ч м м м <^<ич crri 
ччч з<1щатч м ^мс^ йфунчм?
Brahma said- О lord of the gods, О blissful 
one, the delight of Nanda, you are filled with 
bliss, are all blissful, I bow in reverence to you. 
О lord, leaving Vrndavana you go to the abode 
of Nanda. You remember the curse of Sudama in 
which you have to remain separated from your 
beloved for a hundred years.
w n ? firai MMI
4 4 ^ M 1
И
w 
ччшьч)
ГчдоуцШ RIM ЩМ ^уим ф снпззн 
йч чт! тщт! w f w чтг<щ1 
314; F)TtsMf- W 4 ^Rntii ^113*11
Because of the curse of your devotees, you 
have to get separated from your beloved for a 
hundred years. You will get back again and go to 
Goloka but О lord, presently you go and reach 
the abode of your father and meet Akrara who 
happens to be your uncle and has arrived here. 
He is quite adorable, graceful and a great Vais 
nava. О lord, you go to Mathura accompanied by 
him. О Hari, reaching there you break the bow of 
Siva and destroy the enemies.
14 ctfti зчтмтч ш мгам чш ц\
Rpqfat &IW±IIW шищч'г
You free yourself from your parents from the 
bondage, killing the wicked Karnsa. Thereafter 
you build the city of Dvaraka and relieve the 
earth of her burden.
4% ctmnrat -?mf: 
w tf Rnrh
iw w tgwpji ^
 «линя змфчпчпз^п
O virtuous one, destroying the city of KasI of 
lord Siva you have to destroy the abode of Indra 
also, engaging Siva in a trance, you destroy the 
arms of Banasura.
О 
lord, 
kidnapping 
Rukminl, you kill 
Narakasura and marry the sixty thousand girls 
there.
M M filM T m i u i u MI s T ^ T M T M M 5Ы I
d(rl8lfrl8 Щ ^ dlcljfiyi 4Mmf?ni3<ill
О lord of Vraja, disowning your beloved who 
is dearer to you than your life, you proceed to 
Vraja. Till such time as Radha does not wake up, 
you get up at once. You will meet with welfare.
^с|ЦсЫ[ WT M M&Hluh 4T?I
Thus speaking Indra together with the gods 
like Brahma went back to Brahmaloka. The 
serpent Sesa and Siva also retired to their 
respective abodes.
M фылмЙЙ 
1 
щ : зпмт ъ чммт д 
мм mRt w n i д чм^птЫ^И frhi 
^
 mit rmt шч HK<cdci4ci mii^
ii
ll>f о II
Thereafter filled with devotion the god 
showered the flowers soaked with sandal-paste 
on the lord and they heard a divine voice from 
the sky which said, "Karnsa is fit for killing. By 
killing him relieve your parents of bondage and 
then relieve the earth of her burden.".
ЧЧЩ\ МЧММЧ: I
ЧМТ ЛЧсРТТ М<4МТ чгдгнч1 тт^: ^:11*Ч11
Hearing all these words, for the welfare of the 
people, lord Krsna leaving aside Radha got up 
slowly.
f4Tt$M Д ЛЧ: 34:1
^
 М^М^ЧТЧ1 м^МТЧТЧМйМ:11*М 1
Looking at Radha again and again the lord 
went up to a distance and he stopped for a 
moment in his abode in the Candana-vana.
чмт f44ir ЧГГ чмгтм! чмчвчм:1 
ч 
lift тттм MiRT M ШЩМсгМ*{||'!£'й11 
ЧМ ТФЛ йв ЩТЩЧ yiUHcrW I

=== PAGE 521 ===

KRStyA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 69
463
TIUHtTU fsratPT ЪЩ 
£||*Ц ||
Radha on the other hand woke up and get up 
from her bed. She was peaceful, beautiful but 
finding her lord missing who was beautiful and 
peaceful, she said, "O lord, the extremely dear 
one, О lord of my life, the chief of my life, О 
beloved one, where have you gone.
fKcJT ЩГРТ
3ctm 
am зтгтт
3TFT55T5SW 1 4 i«l^ctgcRyf ^T: •дч:и'к\эи
After searching for him for a moment she 
went to the Malatl-vana. She rested there for a 
while and again got up and then slept on the 
floor. She started crying in a moment saying, "O 
lord." Repeating these words again and again, 
she started lamenting loudly.
W f Ш
 ЖГЧШНШ fariTR^:!
Burning with the fire of separation she fainted 
and she lay there on the grassy land like a dead 
person.
зтввтш ЧИЩУ
cfcl^rcJIH^RIRixf TjffcJT
О Brahman, at that point of time a lakh of 
cowherdesses arrived there to serve her, some of 
whom were carrying in their hands the fly- 
whisks and sandal-paste.
о т w f f m h Iht 
-mt ^RtsrfRi
■pTfocT fjRlt ^gT 
fafafrlTI 1Ч о 11
Lila has been the most favourable of the 
cowherdesses of Radha who picked her up and 
embraced her. Finding her friend like a dead 
person, she was upset and started crying.
ш w
 
у im foriih ^ii
She spread the lotus leaves on the ground and 
then she placed the body of Radha on the same 
who was sleeping without any movement.
rifw ^ciw iP cidi тш Ц п ч^н
dl^ct
тгщ п ч^п
W 4R: Ш Ш \ 
TT3W2lf^T:l
ФЕП ТШТ 
rX -RWTrET фщШ-.ИЧ'кИ
w
 
^
 yiи|ы^птп^11 ч ч и
т а г 
^ rtt <1Ы |(н^ччТ^н,ич^11
ЧТЧтЩЩТТ ^гшт R fW :l
^ ТШ фгЩТ ^c!^ri% ll4'3ll
The cowherdesses holding beautiful white fly- 
whisks started serving her and applying sandal- 
paste on her body and then clad her in a thick 
garment. In the meantime, lord Krsna also 
arrived there and found Radha there who was 
dearer to him than his life. О Narada, at that 
point . of time 
the 
strong 
and powerful 
cowherdesses were preventing the entry of Krsna 
towards the place of Radha like the soldiers of 
the king. But the compassionate Krsna, reaching 
there lifted Radha and took her in his lap and 
enlightened her With various types of divine 
knowledge. On regaining consciousness, Radha 
looked at the lord of her life and getting 
composed, she shed away the pain of separation. 
Thereafter, the beautiful Radha embraced her 
beloved and Madhusudana on his part carried 
Radha to the bed of gems and enjoyed the love- 
sport with her.
W Rdrt TdhMi
ЩЩ фТЩ R ft 4lfdR|{4jTl44N4<JII
Thereafter Ratnamala, the dearest friend of 
Radha, spoke to Krsna in sweet tone the words 
which were very appropriate.
wTTvrmra
Щ cfWT 
TTfh7TTRWTm4l
i%rt Щ 4tf?TOTt 3 W : уИЧсШиЩИЧЧ II 
W
 
^МТ)1ЛУГ:1

=== PAGE 522 ===

464
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
Ratnamala said- О Krsna, you listen to me, I 
am going to talk to you that which would be 
quite pleasant, beneficial, truthful and the tattva 
of polity besides being the cause of immense 
love of a couple. It is strictly according to the 
scriptures on love, polity, Vedas, Puranas and 
human behaviour. These words also bestow great 
reputation.
4Tftmt ^ frar чшт firat д а w
Ш: 
ЧТЩН f$rst: 4f?T:ll^ll
Of all the women the mother is extremely 
lovable of all the relatives, the brothers is lovable 
and the son is more lovable than him. A husband 
is more lovable than the son.
яПй»ИТ fe fW li Ч Ц 4$. ЧТ: 
^П
The chaste lady loves her husband more than a 
hundred 
sons. 
This 
is 
well-known. 
The 
passionate woman and the one who is well 
versed in the art of making love is devoted to her 
husband the most and no one can equal the 
husband.
^
 -tTttf fcT^q^j fepsiFri
3RWT fgrdwW fctqq^dsRH: 41^11^11
In case the husband is also well-versed in the 
art of making love, in spite of that for the ladies 
he is quite pleasant and in case a husband is 
wicked and foolish, he is treated like poison and 
is always troublesome.
ЧТЧЧТ 
ЧШНТ
О Krsna, the love of a couple is considered to 
be quite important in the universe. The equality 
of a couple is the biggest fortune and is also 
desirable.
?4cht: w m 4lfer ЧЧ-ЧЧ % -qf^i
4 ^ fdtbvt vsfleH cT4t:ll^4ll
The household in which the couple is not 
treated with equality, poverty dwells there and 
the life of both of them becomes of no 
consequence.
чрщйт! 
щ 
^ 4if4di4j
It is extremely painful for the woman to get 
separated from a meritorious husband. This 
separation could be the seed of grief and 
lamenting. And they have to suffer from it 
throughout the life.
W
 WTWt wifr 4%: ШЩГ?хГ •гтГ^ёГ:1 
Ч^Г^^Б: H iw fqi #3? ЧТЗ хТП^^эп
Whether sleeping or awake, the husband 
happens to be the life of the women. He is also 
considered to be their teacher in this as well as in 
the future life.
SRRTwTfa 
ЧШЧ TlfspETI
WRf Щ
 
6II
It is because of this that Radhika fainted after 
your departure and fell down suddenly on the 
grassy land.
•
ci^T^rar
I poured the cool and best water over her after 
which she regained consciousness and she started 
breathing again and again she regained her glow.
$ГЩ 
! 4TZTI 
8ТЩ W tl
am Ttf^
<l(e|chl<4t: WtT ЧПТЧТ
ччч уч чянптч qj i \э
Another cowherdesses spoke again, "O lord, О 
Krsna," she then started crying in a moment and 
in a moment she fell down and fainted. As the 
iron rod becomes untouchable having been burnt 
in fire similarly the body of Radha became 
untouchable with the fire of separation .
4T^ fcfclf) xf 
3^1
ЩН д а 
II
4lfRT 
Ч1ЩЧТ -рдёЧТ 3T5Tffd:l
VlVctcq^fd W W I 4fif few m 
II
While sleeping or awake, during day or night 
in the house or in the forest on land or in water, 
in the sun and the moon shining in the sky,

=== PAGE 523 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 69
465
Radha became motioniess like a dead person. 
She was unable to distinguish anything. Lying on 
the ground she thought everything in the from of 
Visnu.
О Krsna, О well-versed in polity, you think on 
the matter carefully in your mind and do 
something by which the life of a damsel could be 
saved.
fFnSfqf 
tbrHlfa 
Wl
Р|чсЧ circhrl
W m чт 
m s
ЧЩ: ШРТ
TRP^fni 
to S11
Щ
 5Г«И1сЫ<: 
^RTt ^ 1|\Э\Э||
Collecting the petals of lotus flowers, a bed 
was made for her on the wet land Radha 
suffering from the pain of separation slept on that 
bed, the sandal-paste was applied on the thick 
garments and her female friends started serving 
her by moving the fly-whisks of white colour but 
with the touch of the limbs of Radha, the mud 
dried up and the leaves of the lotus flower were 
also bum out. О Hari, the sandal-paste was dried 
up and the complexion of the body was turned 
into the colour of black hair.
?4I4di ТГТТ cT^Ttrpfl
%hf fdRHIRl HtaT
LdMtrH ^ eft <£T 'hc^T <fj«J||Pucn cPJTI
ЪЩЩ Tjgt 
<|tsnfed«M TRT^||V9<? It
The spot of vermilion was turned into black. 
The costumes, the divine dance and the divine 
people were discarded. Ratnamala finding Radha 
in such a condition went to Krsna and spoke 
sweet words which were quite beneficial for 
Radha.
I ffwr дрщшчт csrfwR w w ri
■fllUli^I^fd З’ТЬг Tff "hfr 4T55UTRrftr §сРфйо||
Ratnamala said- О Krsna, О lord of Kamala, 
in separation from you, my friend would surely 
meet the end of her life. In case you do not 
arrive, she is sure to die.
RTRT fJWT ilrTrUyRld p ;i 
4 *Й<Ф'1рн1 ?сЧ1 ifr dlfdfdVIK^II^^II
W 4W lclM : fH T 
W
: l
f%ct 'RRt dlfdRlt h R u iiqyteU d ^ll^^ll
Hearing the words of Ratnamala, the lord 
smiled and spoke to her the words which were 
truthful, О gist of polity and could be quite 
pleasant.
STHpicfljciM
t?Tt ^raftr 
ftiN» tsfPtidg firai
MTSftr 4
Lord Krsna said- О P.atnamala, since I am the 
lord on to myself I am quite competent to remove 
the cause of her suffering but I am not competent 
enough to shatter the twin of the destiny.
1 P % 
Tf% 
^лГчги W l 
w gnf 
ЧН: 11 d 11
In all the Brahmandas I have prescribed the 
decorum by which the sages, the gods and the 
humans perform the actions.
^ W V IN lftj^ : ¥ГсМ |Ы )[цш 
^
 'JiMKUlswi^y w Щ
w f a : т е
0 beautiful one, we are going to face 
separation for a hundred years because of the 
curse of Sudama though it is not desired by 
either of us, but О slender waisted, one because 
of my boon, she will get separated from me only 
when she is awake but when in sleep she would 
always be united with me.
3f|b!!lf?4<fit W
 2^TT ? ilW < l »tfabqfdl 
Ш 
Щ й ^lITTlfa -K h R ^ II^ II
1 have already bestowed on her the divine 
knowledge as a result of which the grief would 
disappear. Therefore, you wake up Radha, you 
will meet with all the welfare. I shall now go to 
the abode of Nanda.

=== PAGE 524 ===

466
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
$г4£скс(| ЗГПЧТ ЯТ53Т 
Ч^Тс-ТЦ Mlrt 1
шштчщЫ^гаш^сг я т ^ |\сс\\
О Narada, thus speaking lord Krsna went to 
the 
abode 
of Nanda and the group of 
cowherdesses woke up Radha.
ТШ ^ ^ f*m 44TR Rm twri 
а д шчт ^1% 
чзчк ^ 44441 16 <? 11
Reaching home Krsna offered his salutation to 
his parents; thereafter the mother took Krsna in 
his lap and offered him the fresh butter.
41^4 Щ RPRyl хПЁГК 
Ч1Щ |
зшч ш щччт чм! 
11 ч о 11
The mother then offered him the cool water 
and the betel, consuming which Sri Krsna dwelt 
in this house of the mother.
TtfeT: ^dt*ro}:i
RR^ET^lWTTfFr t гГ 
?ll
All the Gopas offered him delightfully the 
garlands, sandal-paste and the betels, serving him 
with the white fly-whisks.
ff?r «тЬ^Го ГЩТО 
34» ЧНЗ(ЧТ» 
«tfjWTFPPT 4lAchl4yhfa44l5Kn4:ll^^ll

=== PAGE 525 ===

466
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
Chapter - 70
The plight of Akriira and departure of 
Kr§na for Vraja
4К1ЧЩ ЗШгГ
згаш т: WVKU'l ШП 
ЙЩ:1
^<*)К ?1<Н 
ft^raWrTR^II^II
m f t хТ ЩЩгТ 
^nfw ЪёЩ)
'jimih Pki ^<ah: у<3'Н^ч1мч1яс1:1Г^II 
^<Iul^lci-ннn*i^l
f^ll<=l?m m 31*||[<чПзШ:11Э11 
31TPTt Щ5^7?Т?тТ с|^чгчуцрс)^:1
fch¥IH.c|<ifl ¥<U4 fs^jf *3<vTlcH.qJ
# 1«Ш»ТТ1еПЧ <4441rtrfq^f4d4M4ll
'fffot ^Фш| ^ 44^(4TfumMUl:ll^ II
ч^<(44945 W -нГ^ча TRnFTt^FRp
ferf?T^ 
w t тд^м'эи
Narayana said- Thereafter Akrura who was 
dispatched by Karhsa, went to his abode and took 
food including sweets mixed with camphor, 
scented betel and fragrant water and comfortably 
slept on the bed. Towards the end of the night, he 
witnessed a dream which was described in the 
Vedas and the Puranas. He found that the 
Brahmana boy who was quite healthy, his hair 
tied in a knot, clad in two garments was sleeping 
on the bed. He had a beautiful complexion and 
his face was devoid of any worry or grief. He 
was in tender age, having a dark complexion and 
two hands, holding a flute in hand, clad in 
pltambara, adorned with a garland of forest 
flowers, having the body plastered with sandal- 
paste, wearing the garland of jasmine flowers, 
adorned with the best of the ornaments studded 
with gems, having peacock feathers on his head, 
wearing a serene smile on the face and having 
the eyes like lotus flowers. О sage, he witnessed 
that beautiful boy in his dream for the first time . 
cpfr 
^ПТ Midget! tTcTfifi
ч1г1сШЧ<Ъм'[ <(a^4ui^fqcti*^ll<ill
*T !iij<*vraMcb<i grrqj
Thereafter he saw a chaste lady whose 
husband and son were alive. She was clad in 
yellow garments adorned with the ornament of 
gems, holding a burning lamp in one hand and 
white paddy in the other. She had beautiful limbs 
and the face was like that of the beautiful moon 
of the winter season. She was wearing a serene 
smile on her face and was anxious to shower a 
boon.
cfiTf 
fet
^TtRmct 
jpt^T Ж 1ггчНН?°И
Thereafter pronouncing a blessing she looked 
at the Brahmana together with the goose on the 
white lotus besides a horse and a pool.

=== PAGE 526 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 70
467
ГнРм 
HiTc^n yfc*4n ^ртч7
^1УЙиН|Г<^>Н04сЙсЬ<н1с1ЪН,11ПИ
He also witnessed trees blossoming with 
flowers and fruits, beautiful and auspicious trees 
of mango, neem, coconut, a huge sun-tree and a 
plantain tree.
■^RT 
*7 W17474 44dRyfdH.I
Xf 7ГЗГЩ ^7 77fT787 ^Hlf^ldH.11^11
He found himself having been bitten by a 
white serpent and also found himself seated on a 
mountain, a tree, an elephant, as a boat and 
himself mounted on the horse.
# I l t d lfc d d d xf s^cR T xj MWRH.I
rT wrawrtfcRTT^ii^ii
фРуГЦуП^!# ^7 4^47 ЧТГ%Т 7ЩТ1 
уФНУ1«УуьсЬ7 
^4=rf9?T4;il^ll 
JllRKOii 4745487417414 Xi yrrdlf^dH.1 
Щ Щ - XT
Thereafter he found himself playing vlna and 
consuming milk with rice, -food with curd and 
milk placed on the lotus leaves. He witnessed 
that his limbs had become dirty because of 
insects and dirt. He then found himself crying 
infatuated with illusion, then carrying the flowers 
and white paddy in his hands. In a moment his 
body was plastered with sandal-paste, in a 
moment he found himself seated on a roof, in the 
ocean filled with blood, with his wounded limbs 
and filled himself with blood and puss.
TTcTt 55^ 7T777 'RpJT ^74 *7 сЫо^н^|
ЧтЫЧ|Ги|ФмЫ xf 4uk-OT3RH 
TTlfo *7 ТШгШ x[
^
 ^ ЖШ Wit 
WII^II
dlu|ci Усччкгч *7 
"^ТГ^Щ.1
hi4dlafd4i фьишрщ'| rvNlH^-chH,nuii 
^УННГ 47 cfTv7 47 ^i|4H4ipHdi 
<c(4ilcdl 47 77^5 
^775Г77ЩИ44 II
He then found the silver, the gems, gold, 
finger rings, jewels, gems, welfare pitcher filled 
with water, cow with calves, the big bull, the
peacock, parrot, crane, kite, wagtail bird, betel, 
garland of flowers, fire in flames, adoration of 
gods, the image of Parvat! and of Krsna, 
Sivalinga, Brahmana's daughter, a child, the 
ripened crops, the temple, the king, the lion, the 
tiger, the teacher and the gods .
^ScJT 1 R tr q r et ЧШТТ55^сЬчТшЬЧ^|
3347 <687*71414 Ы -^dl'^c) tTll^oll
Thus after witnessing the dream he performed 
his daily routine and then narrated the entire 
dream to Uddhava.
-a^cti^i 44151*7 фт ^
41^ 44,1 
47Ш ■cidiK ?Т^5ШТ «41 <HI RtRt 47T5M4 ?ll 
Нс4*Ы ъ 
^437541
Н1о^ИкНМ4 T^t gfl h^H^HcbH,IR :?ll 
477^ 
фЛн>«7 4$dHI4cb4J
Mfd^Hdl TiTsgt Ronm<umfbidi44ii;?^ii
^«Kd4cy 47 4iv*7 47 87747 47 433H ^14,1 
^{Щ 7^<рГ4 4474714 *11 
с7с4У*^Ш ^4 47 ^HdlVH T7d^4<h4J 
%^7t 47 WTTcRT 47 477Ш ^f«7 41*7774,114411
•qfnt TRTuf Rfct 4ckil4fui<#H4irmdH,l 
417 "4Ш 47^4 47 MlbHl* 4d4-dR^I 14^11 
-фиггуТН ТШ HHIT: 
? № 778771
fcjfnQd fciMH 47 •y<{ll<ll yfdMl 7787711 "R t911 
^ckdidTff 557474 VlffHwf 47 <Ш*СТ1 
ТП4Тр7 4^77 ^77 
yd)77K774,ll4<ill
О Narada, getting permission from Uddhava, 
adorning his teacher and the gods, with his mind 
set at the feet of lord Krsna, he travelled to the 
abode of Krsna. At the time of tlie start of his 
journey, he met with various auspicious symbols 
which bestowed welfare. He found the he-jackal 
and she-jackal on his left, a vase filled with 
water, the mangoos, Nllakantha bird, a beautiful 
chaste woman adorned with divine ornaments 
whose husband and son were alive, white 
flowers, garland of flowers, fried paddy, a 
wagtail bird. On the right side he met with the 
burning fire fames, a Brahmana, a bull, an

=== PAGE 527 ===

468
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAl^AM
elephant, a cow with calf, a white horse, a goose, 
a garland of flower, the flag, gem, gold, silver, 
pearls, ruby, wine, flesh, sandal, wine of Bassia 
latifolia trees, ghee, black deer skin, fruit, fried 
paddy, mirror, painted plane, beautiful image, a 
white lotus flower, a forest of lotus flowers, 
Samkha, kite, cat, mountain, clouds, peacock, 
parrot and crane .
TJ<Wci W j 
М ^М У :I
t?fT Tycdl ущ 
13 ° И
Thereafter he met with snake, cuckoo, welfare 
sound of the musical instruments, recital of the 
music of Krsna, reciting of the name of Hari and 
sound of victory. Thus witnessing the auspicious 
symbols and hearing of auspicious sound, Akrura 
delightfully remembered the name of the lord 
and entered Vmdavana.
^R^Tt ТЩ
^11
cnfat 
w*d4fef<ifcid4i
115 ^ 11
ФЛ: ^ rC R R P lfW ^ I 
#£RTf ^,f5E$ffi^4f^
:ll33ll
He found there the desirable Rasamandala 
which was quite pleasant and was decorated with 
sandal-paste, aguru, kasturl, flowers and where 
the fragrant cool breeze was blowing. It had 
several welfare pitchers, trunks of banana tree, 
tender leaves of the mango trees tied to a cord 
and spread everywhere. The place was decorated 
with several gems and three crores of beautiful 
diamonds, studded in the temple and a hundred 
crores of charming kunja-cottages. Looking at 
the divine dance he walked in Vmdavana up to a 
distance.
ТтШ
Ш З’-ЗГсМ <ЩТ |фЕ|е{£< 
тТ ^:ll?kll
qqV) J^tdl TRT
hi %.aati^i?i 
^prqi i^mi
MfuiflAui qfei fH^ggnJuni 
■ф 
Ш^стт TRUt f % TTtll^tsil 
ЧШЩТёГШгП^Т ЧтНЧ|(и|<#Ч^(ЧН'Н,1
Thereafter he came across the beautiful and 
charming Vraja of Nanda. It was quite charming 
like Vaikuntha, having many beautiful houses 
and steps besides the pillars which were 
decorated with various types of creepers and 
gems; it was built by Vis'vakarma, using the best 
of gems. By the visible road he entered the royal 
gate, having a number of banners and decorated 
with a large number of gems. It was decorated 
with pearls and rubies beside the mirrors made of 
the gems; if had a number of marigala kalas'as 
made of gems.
Ч Ш Й Т Ш 
Ч£тШ :1
Trfttit TWftnnsqt 
h
WPpT Ф ъ Ъ 
ycHyi-ilch^l
f^Ilt Tft-qpej? гг w 
T J ifW W
; W
: Tlfth d l fcHcTW II 
w rr:
When Nanda came to know about the arrival 
of Akriira he 
was 
immensely 
delighted. 
Accompanied by Balarama and Krsna, he went 
to welcome him. Vrsabhanu and other cowherds 
and dancers were moving ahead. Placing the 
pitchers filled with water and the elephant to the 
fore besides black cow, they could with them 
madhuparka, padya, the asanas of gems. Nanda 
went to him with a delightful and humble face. 
The boys and the servants then saw the virtuous 
Akrura there. He was immediately embraced and 
all the cowherds offered their salutation to him 
bowing their heads on the feat of Akrura who 
blessed them all.
щ тв т

=== PAGE 528 ===

KR§NA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 70
469
f?TW Tti hThT ^jpfypsrqjl'kS II 
m w t 
ThThfr 
jiuicimA i 
зтгё тоттшгто 
t r ^m r sn 1**11 
тщщ o u ^ jj^ ^chikddfercg:i 
TTT^tsfTOTfTcf:
О sage, thus all the people were united 
together. Akrura lifted up Krsna and Balarama in 
his lap and was overwhelmed with emotion, 
feeling blissful and tears started flowing from his 
eyes. He felt gratified and since he was 
successful in his mission he kissed their tender 
cheeks.
f|f3T
чЫ^)Ч<№н '4IHdl4lvd^f4d4n*^ll 
pt Ш
 wtj{\
шсы№г:н*^и
At that point of time, he found Krsna having 
two arms clad in yellow garment, adorned with 
the jasmine flowers with the sandal-paste having 
been applied on his limbs, holding a flute in his 
hand. Brahma, Siva, Sesa and other gods 
including the sages like Sanaka and others were 
offering prayers to him. The girls of the 
cowherds v/ere staring at him continuously.
UNdi-yifa: чП.фЛурт f g ^ i
^nrr 
■RfTRRT хГ хщ фщ ||*<' ||
h l^ : чГ<ЙРмчм*<Н1
The next moment he found the lord in the lap 
of Akrura with four arms wearing a smile on his 
face surrounded by LaksmI and Sarasvatl, 
adorned with the garland of forest flowers and 
flanked by the courtiers like Sunanda, Nanda and 
Kumuda. Many of the devotees and siddhas were 
serving him.
’nRfiTt: 4<ldl<4J
^
 
t 4^|c|cH [dHNH4JI4°ll 
^tJhfdchdcbivi dHKi^PRiRidHj 
Rjim4 h t 
w^<ii^dH,ii4^i
In the next moment they found him with five 
faces, three eyes, having the complexion of 
spotless crystal gems, adorned with Nagas,
without robes, like eternal Brahma and with the 
ashes applied on his body. He had the matted 
locks of hair on his head and was holding a 
rosary in his hand like a yogi.
^ЧЧ1Н1<*< Ь441ЧГЧ0 ste W -tTlpHHJ 
$pjt xi<jt|tsi вчя1чв «it чнИчицд-цич^||
In the next moment they found him in the 
form of Brahma who was engaged in meditation.
Ф^сгИ гГ ТОГСТ ^ГЩ $ШТ^1 
§ТЩ 4IW>T?i4 W WldlttV R4WT4[II4?II
In another moment, he was found in the form 
of Dharma and in another moment he was found 
in the form of Sesa, in another moment he was 
found in the form of eternal flame or the sun.
Sfut WTWFPTO ddfich^ijPlPddqj 
*11441*441*1 w дтпр; щтгаточвч*м
Again he was found in extremely graceful 
form, which put the lustre of the moon to shame 
crores of beautiful gods of love. He was loved by 
innumerable damsels, quite passionate and filled 
with passion. Finding such a type of boy, Akrura 
embraced him.
TJchjET 
<|gT W W W cJS^ftn 
Т ^Ч ^тГ хТЧГЩИЧЧИ 
fTOT 
ТОгЭТ ^q,in«ldRui^:l
14 ^ 11
О Narada, then Akrura placed the boy on the 
gem-studded lion-throne, offered to him by 
Nanda and with his mind filled with devotion, he 
went round the lord and then offered his 
salutation to him placing his head on the ground.
т о тогег
cv
TO: <*KU(*M4iq Ч<ЧкЧЧ4*\Гчи|
■p^qpqftT 
TFT TO: I
T O 
4<ldHdT|A| xTII4V9ll
Rijunq Rdfiiq 
Wt44U||
WIIЧ ^ 11
y4^c(ifb(^c(iq fayculq^d^fiiull
9l^RlbUjRi|c||r4cbll4,?ll

=== PAGE 529 ===

470 
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
Akrura said- You are the form of cause, form 
of the lord I offer my salutation to you. You are 
the lord of all the globes and I offer my 
salutation to you, the one who is beyond Prakrti 
and also the lord, is without qualities, unattached, 
without form, with form, the form of all the gods, 
the lord of all the gods, the only supreme god of 
all the gods, the beginning of the universe, 
Brahma in innumerable globes beside being Vis 
nu and Siva, you are the seed of all the form. 
You are the lord of the universe, the lord of the 
cowherdesses and lord of all the Gangs, I offer 
my salutation to you.
чч: ^Hiulyuq 7Ж7ТШ чцt чч: i
WII44U|««\4W "ШГ^ЧЩРТ T H I^ II
тштгата ттатат: зпипЩсяш wi 
mmiwru mife&foz&m ?tii^
ii
^ чч: i
сГ ЧЧ: I
vTPrg 
XT f%rST?r: ll^^ll
You are the lord of all the gods I offer my 
salutation to you. You are the lord of Radha, I 
offer my salutation to you. You are husband of 
Radha I offer my salutation to you. I offer my 
salutation to the one who takes to the form of 
Radha, you are adorable by Radha, you are 
dearer to Radha than her life, you are adored by 
Radha. You are the only god of Radha and her 
beloved, the life of Radha, salutation to you. You 
are the one who is adored by the Vedas, you are 
all knowledgeable and the sole god of the Vedas 
being the seed of the Vedas. I offer my salutation 
to you, in the hair pits of whom always 
innumerable globes are enshrined, I offer my 
salutation to him.
Hgf&wTKi^cHiU fctyci^iiq 
4R:I
Тещ УфЙЪЧга 
4Rt°11^ Ц11
ШЧТ6ЧРТ xTI
TrTcR f^T 
7W m #ll^ll
I offer my salutation to you again and again to 
Mahavisnu, Isvara and the lord of the universe, 
you are yourself, the form of Prakrti, the form of 
Isvari, the foremost among the humans, I offer 
my salutation again and again. Thus offering 
prayer Akriira fainted in the court of Nanda.
ЧЧЖ t p i ^
 
^
 7T:I
Щ Ч<Ч1гЧНЧ>сНЦ||^1|
xrfrrT: vtjiqM Щ 
wi
T5tfWTR^ T^T 
4R^I
il^TRT 
c^TTI IS S 11
fЧЪШ Ч1Щ Щ 
x* ft : hFT: I
He suddenly fell down on the ground. He 
again saw that the lord who was standing outside 
was also in his heart, was the soul of all, being 
Isvara, was found in dark complexion, all round, 
was established in the universe and the from of 
the universe. О Narada, finding Akrura having 
fainted, Nanda lifted him up and seated him 
honourably on the gem-studded lion-throne. He 
then enquired of him about the news and also 
said, "What is there being visible." Thereafter he 
served him with delicious sweet food and 
enquired about his welfare again and again. 
Akrura on his part conveyed the news of Kamsa 
to him .
wiu^iql^PJTT^f rf ТЧЧ 71ЧфШ|41:1 
^гЧ^сГ Ш 
4^R4lfgd:llt9?II 
ЗРТвй оТЧТГ ЦТФТга! 
fWRI 
s m t ddUMlfa M R trirf RlhRI №711 
fcTCHT: M ldni Trirrst xirafafS<T:l
TTTCTtf?r 
vftcTOTll^ll
ззд -^щрт w r щ
He also advised him to send Krsna and 
Balarama to Mathura for getting their parents 
released from the bondage. Thus whosoever 
recites the stotras composed by Akrura, with 
devotion, he would get a son if he has a none, a

=== PAGE 530 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHATjTOA, CHAPTER 70
471
wife if he has no wife, riches if he has no riches, 
land if he has no land, the one having lost 
children would get children, a disgraced person 
would be graceful and inglorious person would 
achieve immense glory. Thereafter he slept on 
the bed of campaka flowers.
ШгГШЩ ТЩП сГШ5$Т$сКЧЧтГЧЧ1
WRTFira 7JR p o t ^РГсЯ|^1П9Ч11
р н гг 
r 
m
HHiychu Щ1Г rt
Ret? RTRcT ^
 <S<4<hi 5^fithHcbH4ll'9^ll
rrstt rrirI щстчггч#гатщ^ч;| 
RTPTRTR ¥ F ? R^pilRt RfecTT:l№<SII
Thereafter getting up early in the morning he 
completed his daily routine and made Balarama 
and Krsna to take their seats in the chariot. He 
carried five types of eatables like milk, curd, 
ghee, butter and butter milk with him and other 
valuable eatables. Accompanied by Vrsabhanu, 
Nanda, Sunanda and Candrabhanu, they got 
ready for the journey. Nanda the lord of Vraja 
made several of the musical instruments to be 
sounded 
including 
double 
drums, 
drums, 
panavas, damarii, big drums and several other 
musical instruments.
«RRT c m R 
RRR TTRpuRt:l
p o t W W d4TO|: ёЙЧчНё<И:110<?11 
■ p tfR RTftrTT: ira f; &fRTT T O T fe n 
R ip tfe vfeTRTl 16 о 11
Listening to the sound of musical instruments 
and coming to know of the departure of 
Balarama 
and 
Krsna 
to 
Mathura, 
the 
cowherdesses were extremely enraged and they 
arrived there finding Krsna having mounted on 
the chariot. О Brahman, thereafter, inspired by 
Radha the cowherdesses in anger, in spite of 
dissuading lord Krsna not to do so, broke the 
royal chariot with their kicks.
RR R% Rfer 
гП
р т RRR5?fRII<i ^11
R R ^ RofalRTR RlTRR:l 
gnfeTS^RT R 
ЪЩ JTRfRTR: 116 Ъ11
All the cowherds cried in panic but the 
powerful cowherdesses embraced Krsna and 
took him away. Some of them called Akrura in 
anger to be quite cruel and denounced him. Some 
of them bound Akrtira with clothes.
cKtfet RT3RTRTR cKftjft R^TR 
д а RRRT4RT fKRTiRRRR "дЧНй^П 
$TRfeTRRerff 
^ RTOT:I
^fttr 
уЪ ушш rt
nJ
О sage, some of the cowherdesses removed 
the costumes of Akrura and tried to break his 
armlets with their hands. Thereafter, Madhava 
found Akrtira having been so injured he went to 
Radha and tried to convince her.
fHR^R
зтат егттчта rrtrtrtr rt трттйчи
здатотчШ ^
 vm rorfet 4R4;i
RTRt
Tsrfer Rffer^r Tfet fgpgpferi
R RlgT RTgRRRRHTRTR RTRRlfR: 116 R11 
RcRRT RlcRT TJTi f R I RRRFR?RPRRtl
т Ч ' Ш
с Ы : Traf: RT 7fe2RHRT:l
чЭ'О'О 
v
RtRcR^ Щ TT^ TT TIRRT Щ RTTRI 16 T11
RTSSR^fRTTP RRT RfecRRlfRR: 1
№
нВ|Ы л <1:11<?о||
The lord then humbly enlightened her about 
the divine yoga and also to Akrtira. Again for 
convincing Radha, Krsna went to her. In the 
meantime, they found a divine chariot moving in 
the sky which was decorated with beautiful 
costumes besides the gems and was built by 
Visvakarma. At the sight of the chariot, the lord 
of the universe went to the palace of his mother. 
He took his food together with all his relatives 
and slept there. Then the lord was surrounded by 
the sages Indra, Brahma, Siva, Sesa and other 
ascetics. О Narada, thereafter Radha together

=== PAGE 531 ===

472
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAhtAM
with the cowherdesses also slept on the flower 
bed. All the people of Gokula were filled with 
delight, some of them started dancing and some 
of them were singing.
о ТЩТо ?ff^j®T3RR3'o ЗтГ° 'ГТТ^-ТТ0 
ч т imfMBtsEzrm: | |\з о 11

=== PAGE 532 ===

472
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAbfAM
Chapter - 71 
The Journey of Kr$na 
ЧЩ5ЩГ w w
Rfinsrot ^ -gr^rrat трщ -л^хгатщ 
W д
щ
ч
т
i ^ 11 
^ ^
 gpfri 
wgrnTPnmf^i r 11 
cT^r
4l44gW4IRTfi^bc!^lmQ^[f^^H^H
ЧЩЩ «lOTiqiR СЬ'НУТЧГО RfvRi
w^rTM W Rm 
# : ' ^ t^ ii'^u
ctni f^rym ro
Wd-УТ fsR^TSrtf ^ Ш Rrtf ^d^rcr^imil
Narayana said- With the fragrant wind 
blowing Radhika was sleeping on the bed of 
flowers and sandal-paste. After the three fourths 
of the night was over, Krsna woke up Yasoda to 
perform the welfare ceremony in the auspicious 
moment when the moon and the constellations 
were in a favourable position, lagna was 
auspicious and the unfavourable planets which 
had no bad no effect. Lord Hari himself got up 
and assured his relatives. Getting afraid of 
Radhika he stopped the playing of the musical 
instruments. The one who is independent and 
creator of the universe besides being the 
protector and maintains the entire universe, was 
found afraid of Radha.
dra ъ сптт#|
RTfR Ш МЧУТ rRRTfsFTTIRII
cji^r 
g f| for таг^%ст!п1\эм
ч1г1^ус(у1 <*hi 
трсгсяап
^ r t 
w ^ m fri
^ ^
 
T5Tcf Щ5ЕН зЯГ11Ч11 
^>гЩ ^ЩЯТёП "ЯЙ ^cftl 
Tp*nf ЦЩЩ Щ R^RTORT RforT: IR о 11
He washed his feet and was clad in two 
garments. Thereafter the spotless paste was 
applied on his body. A pitcher filled with water 
was placed to his left which was filled with fruits 
and tender leaves and was painted with sandal- 
paste, aguru and Brahmanas were placed to the 
right. In the forefront a chaste woman having the 
son and the husband alive was placed ahead 
carving the mirror and the burning lamp. The 
DUrva grass given by the teacher, beautiful 
flowers, the auspicious white paddy were placed 
on the bead, ghee, beverages, silver, gold and 
curd were shown to him, plastering his neck with 
sandal-paste, he was made to wear the garland of 
flowers. Thereafter, Krsna was made to adore his 
teachers as well as the Brahmanas.
faiircMcR TGf дата1 WTRTRimn 
t w
 
щ
Thereafter conches were blown and the Vedas 
were recited with music and the verses 
showering welfare were also recited by the 
Brahmanas. Devoting the mind to the form or the 
one who bestows welfare, he lifted up his right 
foot to move forward.
fogtR TrfwgirmFt тратт fojti
anj ЬфЛ 
II 
II
iRt 
я-зт-з? ч ^ щ PTfnt grtfi 
RPRf: ТЩПЧЧГ ferF R : W dR-.ll^ll 
foRtsfotfr 
facSlfoTf: I
fT ^lt PlotJfio4fy7IRd:IR4ll

=== PAGE 533 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAI4DA, CHAPTER 72
473
сШТТ ftrJ^TT: 11 ^ 11 
<1л1н Pir4^cH*|J
РГИЯШ^ТЯ#: TThTRt Р)г^сНЧП^Э||
■§Ш7ПЧ< 
-Ч^сЦфу Р)гЧ$НЧ,1 
Рг^ЩсНЧ^Т 
*Цгчся Р|гч^аЧ*{^11\ 6 11
The lord then pressing his nose with middle 
fmger stopped breathing for a while from the left 
side, he them released the breath from the right 
side. Thereafter, he went to the best of the court­
yard of Nanda. The lord was delightful, blissful, 
always engrossed in bliss, eternal, the eternal 
form, the eternal form of the seed, appearing in 
human form always, the lord of all, always 
engaged in welfare deeds, taking to new form 
always and always appearing youthful in 
garments and speaking always new words, his 
love is always achieved by internal efforts. His 
words are sweeter then the nectar and always 
look new; his feet are always eternal and fresh 
and his adoration is always new and eternal.
right and embraced Krsna, kissing his cheeks. 
The relatives also extended their love for Krsna.
ТЩГо 
ЗтТ» -u«*u0
w r т ч 
ш*гат 'p : i
ШНЧст)с||^-й:|
4<t*HI*lui 
Tfett far^gp^iTn
^11
rn 
ЩТЖТ: ЧШРЕН: I
im W 
g iw # r r t w i r ? 11
4%T554*<fcRl4TS5fwrer ^ТЩЧ1ЙН:1
Thus the lord of illusion who always is 
combined with the illusion standing in that 
courtyard got ready to depart for the journey. In 
the courtyard, which was decorated with the 
trunks of banana trees, with tender flower leaves 
tied with the silken cord and the gems which 
were made by VisVakarma and painted with 
kastCirl, saffron and sandal-paste. Lord Krsna 
together with Akrnra and other relatives made 
preparation for their departure. At that point of 
time Yasoda stood on the left and Nanda on the

=== PAGE 534 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAI4DA, CHAPTER 72
473
Chapter - 72
Killing of Karasa and release of Vasudeva 
and DevakI
fOTt ^ ЧЩТ fipfar
fe ? I RfTT W ТГ^ЛТФП: W JI 
f i f e VTAHJlO F fe rfit 
T ife Tfirat
3T^Rpra^T?Tt Tlfiffe fe3RTT^II?ll
^ Ш
:1
^^1=ьА^^А4Ги|1ч: T rfirn#:im i
f e M f e l? E r ^ t w r f ^ f i ^ : I
«it: ^p^<pTO ffell4ll 
T R f e T g ^ r f e :
ТоТМЩТ^Т^': ^TtfiRTT 
: I
M ihail
ifirm fe R l: 11 ч 11
Narayana said- О sage, lord Krsna bowing in 
reverence to his teacher moved out of the camp 
and mounted the chariot that had arrived from 
heaven and moved towards the city of Mathura. 
He entered in the beautiful city of Mathura 
together with Akrnra and other attendants. The 
city of Mathura was more beautiful than 
Amaravati, was quite charming, shining and 
studded with gems. It was constructed by 
Vis'vakarma and was invaluable, extremely
ЧТТРМ 33 Ы

=== PAGE 535 ===

474
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAhJAM
beautiful, decorated with gem-studded pitchers, 
having hundreds of royal roads which were 
decorated with the best of gems and diamonds 
like the moon on all sides. It had many lanes 
which were numberless and was filled with many 
auspicious things, the best of the business people 
and thousands of lakes so abundantly found in 
the city. The damsels of the city were adorned 
with the best of the costumes and the ornaments 
studded with gems. The beautiful damsels were 
quite youthful and were raising their heads with 
the desire of having a look at the lotus-like face 
of lord Krsna. They were looking at him with 
unstable eyes, their eye-brows were moving and 
roving. They were always feeling passionate, 
with the stiff pelvic region and the breasts, soft 
limbs, beautiful slender-waist and were well- 
versed in the love-sport.
:l
чЫ)<*ЧУЧтЫ
s3 
nS 
•
tM:I
TfoTat ТПЙ:
fe<*l£UlglkHcblfa!b4 Thjrfii fCRW 4.l 
TfetT f e r 
i ^ 11
The city of Amaravatl had crores of vehicles 
studded with gems which were decorated with 
various types of ornaments and painted with 
paintings, variously decorated and were lodged 
in three crores of gardens. There were different 
types of fragrant flowers, in which the black 
wasps, greedy for the honey, were roaming about 
over the Bassia Latifolia trees attracting a large 
number of bees as well. The city had several 
types of forts which were invincible for the 
enemies and were filled by those well-versed in 
the scriptures on the military. Having a large 
number of valorous soldiers lodged in three 
crores of mansions, the city was quite pleasant 
and was built by Vis'vakarma with the best of
gems. .
rf IfTT <|gT <*4HHW4:l 
^
 trfg <jTo3rt ш 
W i
TtlffRyr ЧЧЙ,Н)Ч1
fa<£dr<*ui fow l ^ ч зд н .11^11
^T 
41Щ
^ЧрЧЧ<*<^4 WS5T ^441^^11 
11
Looking at such a type of the city of Mathura, 
the lotus-eyed lord was moving ahead. In the 
meantime he met with Kubja (hunch back) who 
was quite old and was moving with the help of a 
staff, bending forward considerably. She was 
quite dry and was deformed and was carrying 
kastiirl and saffron in her hands. О Narada, with 
her touch the sandal-paste and the flowers had 
become more fragrant.
Ш ^ZcfT yfwdt 
«taflRT ?ГМЧ>сГСЧ) 
ЗгНчдпТ IT уЫ^ЗТ ^JiPt^tuqJ1 ^6.11 
тттщ Щ
 -qsqf 
w 4dl^pd:l
KTt 
пт? ч й ^ 1ч н ч < Ъ ^ и
Ttc^itri 
зплчтT4: griiR oii
The old women looked at lord Krsna with a 
delightful mind, who was peaceful, full of lustre, 
abode of LaksmI, lord of Sri and the abode of 
Sri. The hunch-back suddenly folded her hands 
bowing in devotion. Bowing in devotion, 
lowering her head, she applied sandal-paste over 
the body of the lord and also on the attendants 
surrounding him. Holding the golden vase filled 
with 
sandal-paste, 
the 
old 
woman 
circumambulated lord Krsna and offered her 
salutation to him again and again.
^ 1фШ14ГуЧЫи[ sftfcGT -Щ ёГЧсГ II
S ftw W 
iftcFtT 
I"R 
I 
cjf^TST^TcHTTT T^WmfctTI 
W iKVWNTyi 3FJIT SRIT 44tl<TIR^II 
Rwigf TlfwdT 
сТНЩ5дЧ7Тр?Ж1 
■pcT) Г ^^4с^Ш т11У 311 
3t4r4<^Pl4bl^R41KpHlRhni

=== PAGE 536 ===

KFtSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 72
475
4Mdlnrc"^f§d4J 
с||ФТРЫ 
<4<|н1фйчИЗЧ11 
^SRTt
T-Tcfifni^WT rf ЗГ9ШТТ <fdch4^l 
«ff^OT еК^шш H)HHli=)4'«Ul|d:lR\9ll 
« к ш
 7TW-TRI 
-ЩЯШ XRT^l 
f j^ f e r r Ш ЧШ wfr 
'SraTTSScTETf^l R 6 11
m 
т ф ш urn тштс^гам^пт!
THVI^lfdif^d y^RHPli‘idH.II?<?M 
т<иу#ч{м>й fifadifa^ iirHdH.1 
T ^U T O ^T Tlfat tfftcTW: 11 ? 011 
fy -^ 4 d d ra n Ydd^l4t4rFT*4J 
faydlfa^ ^IR l^fad diyyy^:ll?^ll 
изг W Xf ^?дт гг (тетч 4TR лрп 
w r f| тп ^mtiw=r 4lfcidiii?3ii
Thereafter at the sight of lord Krsna, the old 
woman 
was 
filled 
with 
grace 
achieving 
youthfulness, beauty and a well-buib body. 
Suddenly she appeared like beautiful and 
charming like LaksmI who was clad gem- 
studded in beautiful garments. Sanctified by fire 
and was adorned with several types of gem- 
studded ornaments having a youthful age of 
twelve years. She was quite pleasant and her lips 
appeared like ripe wood-apples. She was wearing 
a serene smile on her face, having a complexion 
like that of molten gold, beautiful pelvic region 
and teeth, the breasts like the fruit of wood- 
apple, wearing a garland of beautiful gems, 
walking slowly like an elephant adorned with the 
anklets of gems and the hair was well arranged in 
a knot which was adorned with a garland of 
jasmine flowers. The knot was filled towards the 
left in a roundish manner. The hunch-back had 
applied a spot of kastiirl on the forehead and 
above that there appeared a spot of sandal-paste. 
She was also adorned with a spot of vermilion 
like the flower of a pomegranate fruit. She was 
holding a mirror of gems in her hand. She was 
well-versed in the love-sport. She, looking with 
side-glances accepted lord Krsna as her husband.
The lord, on his part, also assured her and left for 
another place, getting gratified, Kubja also 
delightfully went back to her abode like LaksmI. 
She looked at her palace which had been turned 
like that of LaksmI having the bed of gems and 
studded with the best of diamonds. A line of 
gems was inlaid in the same, the mirrors of gems 
were displayed on all sides which added to the 
grandeur. The red garments, betel, white fly- 
whisks and garland were held by the attendants 
appearing in large numbers in her abode. 
Reaching there delightfully, she consumed the 
sweet food and rested herself on the beautiful 
bed served by a number of female attendants. 
Then she went to sleep.
xRft Ш Ш Ш ^
 
'RITt’ll?? II 
W llftW W Rf grfhff^pifWRI 
^TfcTrt 
TRIg 
"CTRRhHT:ll?tfll
ctnfnTT ТШТТ trrar flRRnff 
jiUPlhd ^
 
ПЧГ^ТЧ11?ЧИ
^MdfiWI4*i «jigjiclAIVil-dt cblhcfcl 
<£lfZ3KiM<Hr4 <*IHRcKT ^ chlHcbH.11?^II 
Thereafter the chaste lady placed on her bed 
the betel, camphor, kastiirl saffron and sandal- 
paste and nearby she placed the garland of 
jasmine flowers. She also arranged the cool 
drinking water, scented with camphor and also 
arranged for delicious sweets. Thereafter she 
physically, mentally and by actions devoted her 
mind at the feet of the lord. О sage, visualising 
about the arrival of lord Krsna and devoting her 
mind to his lotus-like face, tha passionate women 
looked at the universe in the form of Krsna who 
was all passionate and filled with passion, 
moving a delightful mind, 
rffit 
3?1фШ?Т "ЩёТШТ 44I£44J 
4WIH4j fw=IT ’TcSRI 7T5TOf<T4ll?^ll 
#sfir 
Ъ sfoRPIT Ш
 fw rr Rfol 
^
 WRTTRt *Г 
UTRlrRfII?£ II
Thereafter lord Krsna looked at the gardener 
who was carrying the flower garlands in the 
royal paiace. The gardener looking at the lord

=== PAGE 537 ===

476
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURA1VAM
bowed in reverence over the ground and offered 
all the garlands to lord Krsna.
gstaT 
тгзптп? m э т: 11 ? 11 
ш ^
 тзга» fsiw 
31ёф1сй1нУ ^ 7Ш dlfcHl.artHI1* 011
The lord on his part bestowed his inaccessible 
slavehood on the gardener and moved forward 
along the royal road. He then found a washerman 
carrying a heap of clothes who was quite strong, 
youthful and proud.
cR# *RT1% W fJWTT fsnifr ЧЩЧ1 
TT TR$ *T 
cR3T rl^c4|T=f 
ftfC^II^II
О sage, the lord humbly begged from him 
some clothes. The washerman, however, did not 
part with the clothes and on the other hand spoke 
some very harsh words.
THnTRq
The washerman said- О foolish one, О lord of 
the cowherds, the costumes are not meant for 
cowherds like you because they are meant for the 
king.
ul44vill¥4 3ivyiHfrH4 vTUfEI 
^rftfR: chU'Ki^ 
3II
Ч ^П1Г Ш ^Т cjtf W : 3RRq Зс#Г1 
fdfU4l4l5W TFT^: 
cl^nn^ll'«'kll
You are greedy for girls and you are extremely 
wicked, the way in which you have behaved with 
the cowherd girl in Vmdavana, you cannot 
behave like that in the region of Kamsa, because 
the king who punishes the wicked is available 
here.
ARfiRT cRT: StRfT
ЗЩНТ cI^c^
tT TTT^Tt ^ЧсР^И'ЯЦП 
it 
rt^T ЩГТ? сН4Ч$сЬЧ1 
oR5T WKUmRT ^ ш т : тгчигшш^^11
On hearing the words of the washerman, 
Madhusudana 
laughed with Baladeva and 
together with all the cowherds. Thereafter lord
Krsna, administered a slap on the face of the 
washerman and snatched away all the costumes 
and wore them all with all the cowherds.
4?lci)cb 
Wl
^
 ТЗШГЯ^Г g w ^оЦ^ФГЧ.! 
11 
^г<щтр< ЖЦ\
TffRTit
The chief of the washerman surrounded by his 
courtiers mounted a plane and turning to a divine 
form left for 
Goloka, 
having 
everlasting 
youthfulness, devoid of death and old age and 
the best. They were clad in yellow garments, 
wearing a serene smile on the faces and looked 
like Krsna.
т е ТтЫтг тщгёт 
щ Ш^ :1
fW IW SSW гТВГ TR4R ТШ
зш wr
fUirRtMdfd ЩЩ fjTOTtsft <SRtfd<U$4JI4oil 
dWNRl f f ^ R T 
*TI
Я Г^ТТ^ 
114 
I
TT ЯтН: ЧМУТЧШ ЗПФЗТ «ftPdvHHJ 
cR^ ^
 RfcTRi 
Ф 
M
The 
self-disciplined 
washerman 
reached 
Goloka and was turned into an attendant of the 
lord and started waiting there for the return of 
Krsna. At sun-set AkrOra also went to his abode 
with the permission of lord Krsna and Nanda. 
Baladeva, accompanied by Krsna, went to a Vais 
nava Kuvinda who was very poor. The devoted 
Kuvinda bowed at the feet of the lord and adored 
him. The lord felt delighted and bestowed on him 
his slavehood which is beyond the reach of the 
gods like Brahma and others.
tf^ 
^
 
fattf.na»jTi44j
1%Г ^T 
TTT ёрщ Pkiviisfh 
-^1114^11 
1ТТЩ 
cjyMi Ш ■taud xT Ptfquiqi
^raViuV. Ф щ t 
щтгпШ нч^и
After consuming the best of the sweets, all the 
people slept on the beds. At that point of time the 
lord left for the abode of Kubja who was 
sleeping on the bed. Reaching there he looked at

=== PAGE 538 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 72
477
Kubja who lying on the gem-studded bed and 
appeared like LaksmI, served by the female 
attendants on all sides, 
ч т т ч т ч nt firafr ч <1чЫ Гч frferr: i 
diyctiri чгныад! 
ччЦиччи
зйчччтдчтч
ът 1%Г 4^T4Ft ^ f l t 
g^R l 
JTT VJjblLil щ Ъ Ф я1 tldUIW хГМЧ^И 
TT4jfi4f4 Ч^ТГЧЧЧТ 
сПТ: 
гГЧ:ЗПн|сп-н1 «ы-d ЧЧ 
14^11
зтдчт чштчтч f ^ r w
 w ssvra^i
Ъ 4tHl& 'iRiyfff< ЖЧ} I4 6 11
Instead of waking all the attendants of Kubja, 
lord woke her up alone and spoke to the chaste 
lady. Lord Krsna said, "O virtuous one, О 
beautiful one, wake up and let me enjoy the love- 
sport with you because in earlier birth you 
happened to be Surpanakha, the sister of Ravana. 
О damsel, during my incarnation as Rama you 
had performed the tapas for me. Influenced by 
those tapas I have taken to this form and have 
come to you as your beloved. Therefore, you 
serve me. Presently you enjoy all the pleasures 
with me and then proceed on to Goloka which 
destroys birth and death.
<^<*<41 
fv-щт ЧЧГсГ 4$rf4l
чтчт 
щ т* grant 
11
ЧТ yfadl Ч 
HdRJlMHF^dll
ddid тщ | 
ct d<*l< dihdl 7Щ ||^ о II 
Thus speaking lord Krsna embraced her and 
unrobing her, enjoyed her passionate advances. 
With a serene smile on her face, the passionate 
damsel felt shy at the first union but implanted a 
kiss on the lord. The lord took her in his lap like 
LaksmI.
RWRRfadiRd 
tfdMfuddll
dHiycblthid 
4? ЧТТ^П^П 
4 rltdl 
^1 -ctchK ?l
crcgii^n
O Narada, the lord was well-versed in the art 
of making love and both of them did not rest
during the physical union and they enjoyed the 
love-sport in various ways. Lord Krsna scratched 
her breasts and the pelvic region with the nails 
and also sucked her nectar-like lips. 
f%|cWHU4A| 
т а 4:1
hssIhn 4 
II
43tTS544T4 dt сРТГ ^wra^:Wf1WPljl 
4 fddKI4 ranf Rdf 
WT^II^'kll 
At the end of the night the lord implanted the 
semen in her womb after which the beautiful 
damsel fainted. In the lap of lord Krsna she lost 
the consciousness about day and night, heaven or 
earth, water or earth.
дЯЧШ 4 
ЧЧЧ CiHNfd: I 
4cdc4fd*ijujd 
4vft44:ll^4ll
зтгптатч
татч йт it 
fd°ra^T4;i I s ^ 11
T^wm fhd^l
iP4if^df9d4;i 1 s ^ 11 
чт ччч ч d id dtrt 
gin 
dtW: dfdfdrnTdTdT 4 4 f: 4Ri||R<*l:ll^<ill
Thus the time of day-break arrived and it 
appeared that moon had become dirty getting 
enraged with the husband. Thereafter the plane 
from Goloka arrived and she attaining the divine 
form went to Goloka. She was clad in the divine 
garments sanctified by Agni and adorned with 
the gem-studded ornament. She was having the 
complexion of molten gold becoming eternal and 
devoid of birth and death. О sage, she was 
known in the Goloka as the cowherdess 
Candramukhi and several types of cowherdesses 
became her attendants.
'ф м н Гч йсг 
w tR^tri
татч ЧЧ 
44(4^4:11 s Ч11
m ^ ч 1 Гт^ттчг ч f%rat ч ч !ч щ :1 
g:7sif ггапччтечй н т
^ iv9o n
<yitstu4 
gRwr tsiiT=cgd g ^ n ^ n
ghmRci-^dictiHK^wiRhHti^i

=== PAGE 539 ===

478
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
^|ЯЧгн1 rT ЧЧ1 ?Г 
II
The lord also remaining there for a while went 
back to the palace where Nanda was staying 
delightfully. Kamsa on the other hand was 
enjoying a sound sleep in the night when he felt 
terrified and started witnessing frightening 
dreams. О sage, he saw the sun had fallen from 
the sky breaking into four pieces on earth and the 
moon also after falling from the sky had broken 
into ten pieces. A .terrific unrobed man holding a 
terrific noose in his hand and besides, there also 
appeared a widow the wife of a Siidra, who was 
also unrobed and had her nose cut off.
^TRTt 
4^1141
ъ cHteffcrgi ^ flrgttfai 113311
budUMumwiki яфт т# * tprij
w Щ ^ С1РШТ1IV9X11
3Tfernf?t ШёПШ 
Pictjon^Hitecbi ^ 
7T^
chettciricHchkiuu 
«ГЖ 
vuViH 
rT ^ьсЬсыв gr?t ^41
тщ5чг щ дгсгщ rt я^яг трршдп^рэ^п 
ярщйпя ЩЩТЯ ЯШЯ >4dc(f^dH.I 
<ВЫЧ?В4 гг eTtt ^ fraftlld^^mniРЭЙII 
JH rf g ^ щчч ч ч
зш к w Ш ^ ^ R t ч^ц^тч;| to ч 11 
3tdVw 
^ 4tPR ^шга' чщ\ 
ттщ 
7ТО8ШТ gsrqmro ЯШЧВйоП 
(чей %пп< Цн1 bd,dl iufegHiHj 
язЕгдл^лттгаш w w trm ^Гкичи^
«ЫНЬчж
W 
<ШЧ1ЧК1 -дгщ ЧсНгЧЧЯ 1WTI!«i^ll
She was smiling and was using the line of 
ashes as tilakam, her white and black hair was 
turned upwards; she was holding a sword in one 
hand and a skull cup in the other, her tongue was 
protruding and was moving. She wore a garland 
of skulls round her neck. Similarly he also saw a 
donkey, a he-buffalo, a pig, a bear, a crow, a 
vulture, a white kite, a monkey, a white dog, a
crocodile, a jackal, a heap of ashes, a heap of 
bones, a fruit of tala tree, hair, cotton, coal, 
burning wood, a dead body over the burning fire, 
the wheel of the potter, the oil mill, the cremation 
ground, burnt wood, dry wood, kusa-grass, 
straw, the moving headless body of a human, a 
crying dead body, the dry pool filled with ashes, 
the burnt fish, iron, the burnt out forest, Sudra 
suffering from leprosy, a naked Brahmana 
having dishevelled hair pronouncing a horrible 
curse in anger, an enraged mendicant, an ascetic 
and a Vaisnava. Thus witnessing a horrible 
dream he got up and spoke to his parents, 
brothers and the wife who was crying, infatuated 
with love. Thereafter he got the stage prepared 
and an elephant was made to stand there. He 
arranged for a terrific army of wrestlers. To start 
the welfare ceremony, he 
summoned the 
assembly and performed auspicious and welfare 
deeds reciting the welfare mantras. He cautioned 
his family priest.
■'ЧЫУТОШ 
41
ШШ 
M 
щ - 
3 II
ял! 
1
elKRimiR
■g^wFnid'tfii
Holding an astonishing sword in his hand, he 
seated himself on the stage and deputed the very 
strong warriors on duty. He made the kings, 
Brahmanas, the mendicant, the relatives, people 
and the warrior to sit on the stage.
■ржлЫ%1чщ ^^гч;|
ЗШ55ЯГЩТТ 
Tfifat Tfi? ЧПД11 Ч11
Ufiyiw eppfei enw гт?г hV rjii
7m Я^ТТ «ifsRT ^ ЩЩ ?l 16 $ 11
О Narada, thereafter lord Krsna together with 
Balarama arrived there and playfully picked up 
the bow of Siva. A thundering sound was created 
with the breaking of the bow. The entire city 
looked like having become deaf; looking at this 
Kamsa was immensely disturbed but lord Krsna, 
the son of DevakI, was immensely delighted.
feuTT шч 
яя 
<cia?md: i
OTfeTrl: 
ЯсгГ 
STII

=== PAGE 540 ===

KFtStfA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 72
479
^
 ст ^ тггфгчн% щ^ 11^'э11
m \ щ д а а д ш ^т «rfib'
Л '^ ^Ч ТТЩ-R: ?П«Н cRI^fttmq;il<i<ill
Killing the elephant and the wrestler he 
entered the assembly. At that point of time, all 
the ascetics with their delightful mind were 
looking at the lord. The gods were looking at the 
lord with a delightful mind, while the kings on 
the other hand, looked at him in the form of a 
great lord who was the ruler of the kings, 
ftrai чтт 
ш п
сыГч^Ч: ^ificb^iicHlbllrirciuiiyiftui^ii^и 
ТШ?хГ chlrhjw 
ТТТ TRRIT:I 
TRRT Tfcfjr? xtcf ЯТиЩгТ xf ■Щ^Г:11Я oil
The parents looked at them like an infant, 
while the damsels looked at them like the 
beautiful god of love. Kamsa on the other hand 
looked at Krsna and Balarama as his own 
enemies as well as the enemies of his relatives. 
The wrestler looked at them like the god of death 
and all the Yadavas looked at them like their 
own lives .
ЧЧЧфгЧ ifTlPcJSnfrldt TRTT TJRfl 
'5ГПТЧ' 
ITT fJiTT -§1^44,114 $11
fPTTT л '<£Ui№t:i 
4o€|cbl^-R w m cfldn 
911
Lord Krsna holding the Sudars'ana-cakra in 
his hand bowed in reverence to the sage, the 
Brahmanas, his parents and the teacher and 
moved towards the stage and reached close to 
Kariisa. О sage, the all merciful lord who is 
attached to his devotees and bestowing his grace 
on the devotees dragged Kamsa from the 
platform and killed him without much difficulty. 
ч ш 
feyr л тгё f r a m хщ!
TTtrt ттган xt 
ц n
RtwihT w trt Rc-ч И fe n r л\ 
тшт -ф ы л то ^
At the time of the death, Kamsa looked at the 
entire universe like Krsna and also found, the 
arrival of the plane studded with gems. О sage, 
taking to the divine form, he mounted on the
plane and went to Visnuloka and his lustre was 
merged into the lotus-like feet of lord Krsna. 
fTtpT сГСТ ТТШТ sFUPfrfifr SR 1^1
TT TTT
ЙНН1Ч <*U4MI ЩЯЪп^хГ TfTRTII^II 
TRTcTT 
^ffRt ^ l^lfiR ll
I f | Л Л Л , TRfHg ThTTRII^lSlI 
TFR T8T SR TtfT TRTT ТТГСТ Wl 
Л Л UTfTT TRlTrf%^l tgTRT8TRTiraRII'?^ll
ЛЛЛтЙ Л:
SJTTT^ 4q^RvT4,l»?0ll 
tgdPd ^ ^FOTT Tdlfa 
TTTTTTtl 
TTlfT Л TT^rfRT R fR JTfR: tR^ll^o^ll
ТТЩТЧТ fr fti xt f^ fat xt Й Щ 1
ЩГ тНЧ1гЧ14фс|Т^11^о ? И
f e t 
хт чхшдтщ<Щ1 ч;|
xt fdTT xt
TtwrarR^w?xT tiT^Tt ттгот
TT -Ц ifR xt TTT^Tf TfSRT TTT ЛИ yPTI 
TT Л 
ТЩ^сЧТ ЛЩ i n 4 ^ tsfr xTI I ^ о 4 1
Thus after killing Kamsa he distributed riches 
to Brahmanas and bestowed the kingship to the 
intelligent Ugrasena who was bom in the lunar 
race. On the other hand the mother of Kamsa, his 
wives, the father, the brothers, the mother, the 
sisters and the wives or brothers started 
lamenting. They cried "O Rajendra, you appear 
before us, get up and occupy the royal lion- 
throne and mle over the country protecting the 
riches and the relatives besides the army. О 
valorous person, where have you gone leaving us 
like orphans, the people said. The one who could 
create and preserve all the creatures from 
Brahma to the least blade of grass playfully and 
who is adored by Brahma, Sesa, Siva, Dharma, 
Stirya, Ganesa, Ganga, the group of sages and

=== PAGE 541 ===

480
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAPjJAM
the gods continuously during day and night, the 
same lord Krsna is adored in the Vedas. 
Sarasavti recites his name feeling panicky while 
Prakrti offers prayers to him delightfully. He is 
beyond Prakrti and in the form of eternal Brahma 
and is adored by all. He moves at will 
unattached, without qualities, without blemish, 
beyond everyone, eternal Brahma, the great soul, 
the great lord, eternal, the form of eternal flame, 
the one who takes to a definite form for the sake 
of his devotees, always blissful, eternal and 
imperishable, the same lord, under the influence 
of illusion and in order to relieve the earth of her 
burden, has incarnated on earth together with the 
cowherds. He is the lord of illusion. He is lord of 
all and in case he kills someone, no one on earth 
can protect him. The one who is protected by the 
eternal soul, who on earth can kill him?.
<psfarjeR3T •Hcfyy («КЧ1Ч 4£PPll
зГЩЩТ’^'ЗВТТОГО’ 
: 4)4 SR
О sage, all the people thus spoke among 
themselves and then kept quiet. Thereafter they 
served the Brahmanas with food and distributed 
riches to them.
члспчГч Ticrif4i w m
%т^Т Щ 
cBTTR^ з д т К: 11 % О 0 11
ЯЧТЧ 
TffiTt fqcrt rWTI
чГлЧУТгЧ'^Г<:11^о^||
On the other hand lord Krsna who happens to 
be the soul of all went to his parents and he cut 
off the falters of iron and freed them. He 
prostrated before his parents and humbly offered 
prayers to them.
ftrat т а 
w r a wi
яг Tjwnfa
^4ч1ч1ч ^«tui f r a ^?lf 
PT: I
ftij: VldyuHl^HI Ч^ШТ<Л1Т1ЩГТЩ| I ^ 5> о 11
Sri Krsna said- The one who does not 
maintain his father, mother, the teacher who 
bestows knowledge, the teacher who bestows 
mantra, such a person always remains impure
throughout the world because, of all the people 
in the world the father is quite adorable besides 
the teacher and the mother who carries a child in 
her womb. The parents who bring up the child 
are therefore adorable a hundred times more.
ЧШТ xf iM f r a t 
fU fw i
Ч Т^И Щ : ■qfr «F f: Ш ЬГ
w r Щ : w f r ^5:1
T f| d'WTriR:
ччпт хп
т ш хШ Т rft jRtt fcrrTT Xf 
^ 11
1wr5r ТГТТГ хг чтШ тго
чтгташш иттн1'Ч<иг<Т1(11^ 'й 11 
■qfvr «w w w w Ф в тм га
хГ «ГЩ П ^ ^
 
1П Ч 11
Because they bestow welfare, of all those who 
bestow welfare to all are also treated as the 
mother. Therefore, there is no other relative 
closer than the mother in the universe but the 
teacher who bestows knowledge is more glorious 
than the mother because, according to the Vedas, 
there is no one else more adorable than him. О 
sage, thus speaking lord Krsna and Balarama 
offered their salutation to them. Thereafter the 
parents also embraced their children and were 
served with sweet food. Vasudeva getting 
delighted performed the welfare ceremonies and 
serving the Brahmanas with food, distributed 
wealth among them.
ЧёПо
отТ° ЧЩЧТ0
что %mfrafrs-srra: i № я 11

=== PAGE 542 ===

480
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAPjJAM
Chapter - 73
Nanda and others relieved of Grief 
ЧЛЩЩЗЦЩ
зтаг 
щ
 
ci forc ш:\ 
«itoflT4Rl 
f^H«znfrq<«l№:il^il 
35^

=== PAGE 543 ===

KRSNA-JA\MA-KHAiypA, CHAPTER 73
481
ЦтЩ
vrt4<4ft:lRil
Narayana said- Lord Krsna imparted spiritual 
knowledge to Panda who was suffering from the 
grief of separation of the son and feeling helpless 
was crying aloud, getting fainted. Thereafter, the 
lord of the universe offered him the best of gems 
and said.
faster 
rST3T 
и? pWI
*ir цзтт T^rt 
Зин? и
т щ xr te ra 
то
fatew 
iteftyiur w ptgRimi
Krsna said- О Nanda, shed away the grief and 
feel delighted and blissful, hearing my words. I 
am imparting divine knowledge to you which 
you kindly receive. The divine knowledge was 
imparted by me in earlier times at Puskara-ksetra 
to Brahma, Sesa, Ganesa, Siva, Surya, the 
ascetics and the great yogis.
Si: Sirs 3s: згш т: sir тот sr*sfanfs:i
OTSTfar Slfar TTTTTT ТГ TT^dSilbnilM I
The people continue to come and go in this 
universe according to the result of their actions. 
Therefore who is the father of whom and who is 
the son of whom?.
SiMljyKi'Nt'gVxl STFfa 32ntefacT:l
Sitem gtefa 
'tete^icm ^ R ssih.ii^ ii 
fpTOoTO yfasiTTlt ^ s r s t ^rfafawi 
fa^fafaf sifters ^fasN^sifaslfafii^ii
RTSST 
WPST faqtej TO 
faw nr^r 
tin <iii
Everyone takes birth at a particular place 
according to his karmas. Someone takes birth 
with the great yogis, someone with the queen, 
some with Brahmana woman, someone with Ks 
atriyas, Vaisyas and Sudra women. Thus 
someone is bom as a bird, someone as an animal. 
Influenced by my illusion, all the people feel 
delight in the various types of worldly pleasures 
and feel painful at heart with the departure of 
their relatives.
M'fllUfasHiqtel fax^fa Ц<и||[е|еь:1 
fte4 «rafa цг?хг ц щ fa ^ g ro цгт: 11 ч 11
For them the loss of their sons and daughter, 
the land and the riches is more painful than even 
death. Because of this, these foolish people 
suffer form grief but the intelligent never do so.
^frt)<4Th¥^ чйм) fafafafalTO I 
44M>iTRcb?^c( qctedlfaTO: ^jfTOII^oii
My devotees who is filled with my devotion is 
self-disciplined and adores by the reciting of the 
mantras and because of his being always devoted 
to me, he always remains .spotless and without 
blemish.
ч<£*П£тй cfpteU xfatefa щ fa^r?T:i 
*nfa xfafr #5?хГ cETctefa ^ crSfal | HI I 
c|fa<fafa 
TOiter fa SRJfl 
fterfa ц$г: дттнт jjemfuT xr 
toi^
ii
Feeling panicky from me the wind blows, \the 
sun rises and illumines the universe, the moon 
rises with all the rays and Indra pours timely 
rains, the fire bums, the death takes sway the 
lives of the people, the trees blossom timely with 
flowers and fruits.
fteiyHyxt 
сгтгащ>хт згезто i
far?xr 
vtyraiT^xi tefa:ii^ n
ТТ^ЖЩГхГ ЧИТОТ: ЗШ E ^fa 4%fld:l
fa?=lfa XT ^
 
W 9U8RTII ^ 11
The wind has no base but it carries the 
tortoise, the tortoise carries Sesa and Sesa carries 
the mountains, the seven nether worlds stand in a 
line. The waters of the nether worlds are quite 
static and the earth is floating on the water.
farrmWET%05t щтпЬзт: THtTOMlWI
гТгЧТ^хпГч ТГёТ1Э1:
faWRTOfa WRKfafafad: 11 ^ 11
"ЩЩТ: ШШН: 4Rfsnfra'qqd:l
чш frormr цтои^эп 
iffterT 
^idvjt^ w

=== PAGE 544 ===

482
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAiyAM
ъ щгЫ; щ д з з д щ и и и
The heaven and other seven lokas are based on 
earth, the Jyotis'cakra and the constellation stand 
on the bases of the planets but the Vaikuntha 
stands with out any base and is beyond the globe. 
Goloka is situated at a distance of fifty crores of 
yojanas beyond that, which is floating. The 
Goloka having no base is built with the best of 
gems 
having 
seven 
gates, 
having 
seven 
substances, seven moats and lakhs of boundary 
walls. A river named Viraja flows there. Goloka 
is surrounded by the mountains of hundred peaks 
covered with gems, a single peak of which 
spreads over an area of ten thousand yojanas and 
is filled with lustre.
VMcblfdUW4!H 
Pcf хП
M 
xt vl^4Wl44JI^ И
<TU4U^H:l
That mountain is spread over an area of a 
hundred yojanas and is more than hundred times 
in length and a lakh of yojanas in width. A 
Rasamandala is spread over ten thousand 
yojanas in Goloka which is built with invaluable 
gems and is circular like the lunar disc.
m i ? 
i
ЧТЧТМ: 
xt ^TTWl
fachlfeiiJrHctHl 
11 ^ ’R11
■ЦЩЦТцШфТ: IR i 11
jflc-fTcb^J^-HMcjcq ^911^:11^^11
ТЩ f|£nf?lf^<y-d44,l 1
11 ? ^ 11
ЗШс^ПШТЩТЧ! TlfafsT?^ fcHlRicHf.1
4HlfcwfaR^V«l 
7e|rf4flA:IR\sll
UifuicHJ^TfcWReki flTraTTR4f^c!^l
чёта! in ^-«41 r 1 11
3TTRtWmlw ■drqflf^fdilfddhl
:IRSU
щ ^ттчизоп
<=rf^<£^jg,ra$ 
: 11 ? * 11
duchioxt'iciui^: 
|
It is surrounded by the blossoming Parijata 
flowers a thousand kalpavrksa and a hundred 
flower orchards in which several types of flowers 
are blossoming. There are three crores of gem- 
studded houses, a lakh of cowherdesses who 
reside there well guarded, the lamps are made of 
gems, the beds are made of gems and several 
types of eatables are stored there. It has a 
hundred step-wells of honey. Similarly there are 
several step-wells filled with nectar and are also 
filled with several types of cosmetics and other 
articles required during love-sport. О lord of 
Vraja, thus I am narrating to you the number of 
the buildings of Goloka which are unknown even 
to the best of intellectuals. It has three crores of 
palaces which are studded with gems beside the 
charming and beautiful Bhavana of Radha. This 
palace of Radha is decorated with invaluable 
pitchers of gems and the mirrors of gems which 
illumine. There are lines of gem-studded pillars, 
has a large number of white fly whisks which are 
quite astonishing. The handles of the fly-whisks 
were decorated with the best of gems and rubies. 
The lamps of gems illumined the area. The steps 
are decorated with gems and the vases are also 
made of gems. The beds are also decorated with 
lines of gems and painted with three types of 
paintings with three moats. There are difficult 
entrance gates, there are sixteen apartments. At 
the gates of these apartments, sixteen lakhs of 
cowherdesses are deputed to guard them who are 
clad in the best of garments sanctified by fire and 
adorned with the best of gem-studded ornaments. 
They have the complexion of molten gold and

=== PAGE 545 ===

KR$NA-JANMA-KHA14PA, CHAPTER 73
483
illumine like hundreds of moons. The attendants 
of Radhika are lodged there
'■нччг^
Tt 
^ 11
vS
<i^cl 
ffSlf^qTrf^ii^^ii
3m rW iR|it: RrfRt 
3m^T75ff4W 
ж ТЩ11 i 4 11
^ ftPTTRa^RT TTfoni
ЗТЧ^ГСсТсЩТГ fWftt "Щт4тди^\э11
<91441 *Г hfcH yo4ct^iui6wn:l 
^
f f r a
 ftrft <i44R<4n3<iii
ЗЖЬИТ ЧНЛч1^4ЧГа^11?ЯП 
<fdcl WtWFhT ^dWltHI чн1б<*^1 
тз-тчст (<тг) щтгатчт1ч№т: ttfr^fenu^on
W h ll^ li
■цштщИгетдтш тдтят ipto щп 
TT^TR: W ^ Tim <ршЯ§ШдЧТ1ПП II
The court-yard of that palace is inlaid with 
beautiful gems, which is decorated with the best 
of the pillars studded with gems, the tree, the 
leaves and the fruits besides the welfare pitchers 
made of gems and the pedestals made with 
rubies. They have innumerable beautiful mirrors 
made of gems. Thus the palace is decorated with 
invaluable gems and happen to be the best of all 
the palaces on which Radhika is seated attended 
by a lakh of cowherdesses. She illumines like 
crores of full moons, having a complexion of 
white campaka flowers, adorned with all the 
beautiful ornaments and is clad in gem-studded 
costumes, holding in her hands a mirror and a 
beautiful lotus of gems; she applies a spot of 
vermilion of the size of the flowers of 
pomegranate and also spots of kasturl and 
sandal-wood. She wears round her neck the
garland of jasmine flowers and her hair is tied in 
a knot. The knot is tilted towards the left which 
attracts even the sages. Thus Radha is served by 
the cowherd esses all round. All the cowherdesses 
carry in their hands white fly-whisks and are 
adorned with the best of gem-studded ornaments. 
Radha happens to be the best of the goddesses of 
my life. She is currently reborn as the daughter 
of Vrsabhanu, because of the curse of Sudama.
W lf ^ T % 
W W l
rR Ч1<Гсши'| chRsyPH vjcr: ftR:irs3 ii
WRIT 
wrsfcr 
Wlltr*II
■<|WTR dRRft ^RrarEfT ^
7TRR ^ T R t 
II
RRt l?TRi ЩГОРТ <5Г^: 'Ш4 
sRTI 
3RRTRT W m ft V ftfRR; 7#jft% ll'k^ll
О father, I have to be separated from her for a 
hundred years during which period, I shall 
relieve the earth of her burden and thereafter I 
shall proceed to Goloka. This is certain. You 
yourself, 
Yasoda, 
all 
the 
cowherds 
and 
cowherdesses, Vrsabhanu his wife Kalavatl and 
all other relatives will proceed with me. О 
Nanda, you convey all this to Yasoda also. 
Therefore, О virtuous one, now you shed away 
the grief and move to Vraja. I happen to be the 
soul of all, the witness of all, pervade in all, but 
still I remain uninvolved.
МфЫПрШ! 
RTVzrt Ttfifft:
rm 
щ graRf ч
Щ SRT <WT flRT W ^
 *r ^ |Щ | I* 6 11 
w s s w r ftgfT 
W 
T^l
W ?TWT ^ ^
 
ЭДТ Т&Ш. ЗГЧТП^ЧМ
W 
с т ^ т т т Щ 1
rrt щ т^ГчсьиПа ттшш ufa татчнцоц
Soul is my reflection, this is admitted by all, 
Prakrti is my deformed form and I alone happen 
to be the form of Prakrti. О king, as the 
whiteness cannot be separated from milk and the

=== PAGE 546 ===

484
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAtfAM
coolness of the water cannot be separated from 
it, the instinct of burning cannot be separated 
from fire, the sound cannot be separated from the 
sky, the fragrance cannot be separated from the 
earth, the lustre cannot be separated from the sun 
or the moon, the soul cannot be separated from 
the great soul since there is no difference 
between them. Similarly Radha and myself are 
inseparable. Therefore you shed away the feeling 
of being a cowherdess in Radha and myself 
being a son to you.
ЗЩ 
URc[: RT xT
щ т 
Ф
р fQTc^TRim ^||
TO Щ 
Ш 
cSItM ^ I 
fWTTS? фпЯТ щ URdYdi 
TOTRII4 TO 
О Nanda, both of us, myself and Radha who 
represent Prakrti or the cause of everything. 
Therefore I am going to reveal to you my 
pleasant grandeur. You kindly listen to me. О 
father, in the earlier times, I have displayed the 
same grandeur to Brahma. In the earlier times I 
happened to be Krsna among the gods who 
appears in Goloka with two arms .
Fvidc-iich 
TOPTI 
shtivfBb хт ?г?тщг ^Фф£зчт?точто
ф я м т тч!Я||Гет wfa: WmfinT^iih^ii
TOTSi dU^d,<b|'| gro: dxdddm^R!
3T$TUWWfofPT ■RTRt хГ ШЧ Тф W1 ч Ч11
Пфпчт wpwndi яготатичто
•яФгШЧТ 
WWWSS-ST^f wi
SRHt xT TOWRfp# R%vbr^U4V9ll 
ЙТОНТ 
Rufat Ф рТ : тгПРр
<WdRi ^ w rlst TOfrou'i w lw nihT O 
дщпт uiR^idisi рЫчт tjwt: торр 
viHijwwviiswfar w t tjdRlfa wi4TO 
^чгщтч! 
щчитГз? ачщтщ! 
ti^itiii w m \ si Rapiioiwjj wfrn^oii
Similarly in Vaikuntha I reside as Visnu 
having four arms, in Sivaloka I reside as Siva, in
Brahmaloka reside as Brahma. Among those 
having the lustre, I represent the sun, Agni in all 
the auspicious things, water in all the things 
which flow, the mind among the organs of 
senses, Vayu among these moving with speed, 
Yama among those who provide punishment, 
Kala among those which cannot be counted, in 
the letters Samaveda in the Vedas, Indra among 
the fourteen Indras, Kubera among the rich 
people, Isana among the Dikpalas, sky among 
those who are all-pervading, the soul among the 
creatures and Brahmana among the varnas. In 
the riches I happen to be the best of gems, gold 
in the glittering articles, the kaustubha gem 
among the gems, Sanatkumara among the Vais 
navas, Ganapati among the Yogmdras, Parijata 
among the flowers, Puskara among the holy 
places, Salagrama among those who are 
unthinkable, TulasI leaf among the leaves, 
Skanda among the army commanders, Laksmana 
among the archers, Rama among the great kings 
and the moon among the constellation . 
топят т о ^ ч Ъ щ я т ч ^ н ТОРТ: I
хГИ$ТО
Нагатят xT 
TOTS? 
W
ЗРрТ П8?ТТОТЯТ <|с^«пчл(Ч5 
И
^rrcnt flRr:
RfTSi Ф и Т О * fTcf4iqRT4lfVRtll^?ll 
Rinftfn qfilgdHi W TOlUli ПТОГТОТТ1 
fe rT f #3TWTT5t w r n f etttoPt 
ii 
зщ ш : 
TOR: Ясир*!
cbyATWxT у ф н ! TOR: hRpnf dmilhhll
arrorsi тт ярпят t o w w toRpt:i 
^cuffuri xr4R^:iih^n 
тти Ф т xj- w w l щ ч Ь п ■дпттот 
ТОтФт Фот: fy^Hi cbfhcdl ■gfr:ll^\9ll
Ф я т ^pF Ref хП
hrtw w Ф Tt f e w f хг 
i $ 6 11
TJHTW 
- # # 5 ? ^TOTT 
ряФ TO-^nni « t ТЗТОПТОЧТО % II 
ridlW ■уфшШП TOOlt TTTOTWfl 
з ф т о т о ф ЯРрФ WTTtlfer: 1119 о 11

=== PAGE 547 ===

KR^A-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 73
485
I happen to be the MargasTrsa among the 
months, the spring season among the seasons, 
Sunday among the days, EMdas'i among the 
tithis, the earth among those who passionately 
bear everything, mother among all the relatives. 
Amrta (nectar) among the consumable, ghee 
among the articles produced from the milk of the 
cow, kalpavrksa among the trees, Kamadhenu 
among the cows, Ganga among the rivers which 
removes the sins of all, the speech among the 
intellectuals, the pranava among the mantras, the 
form of seed among the vidyds, the paddy among 
the crops, plpala among the trees, the one who 
bestows the mantra among the teachers, Kasyapa 
among the Prajapati, Garuda among the birds, 
Ananta among the snakes, the king among the 
people, Bhrgu among the Brahmarsis, Narada 
among the sages of the gods, Janaka among the 
royal sages, Sukra among the great sages, 
Citraratha among the Gandharvas, Kapila among 
the siddhas, Brhaspati among the wise people, 
Sukra among the poets, Saturn among the 
planets, Vis'vakarma among the architects, lion 
among the wild animals, Nandlsvara among the 
bulls, Airavata among the elephants, Gayatrl 
among the metres, Vedas among the scriptures, 
Varuna among the aquatics, UrvasI among the 
apsaras, Jalasagara among the waters.
T g fo : p 4 d H i Ч ШИЩ f|4 lv P T :l
'Vmwt rt Rrfant bfortnoTi ъ R feri 
RlsyY-ТТЧГч R lfe l d^RldT Ъ 
JlfT ^nfcr 
сГ^ЩГСТ R fa: Щ 1 
REZT ТЗГ9Г У I |V9 i 11
^чрггшттлт Ъ Щи^сЛЧГ 8ГТЗШ:1
RRRT 
Ref W II^II
im t Щ 1 Щ 
crcftJTT RTRT ТИТ! 
qirfiprt «WR^tS? ТЩТ Ъ 
5ПИЭЦИ
# эдчЩтТЧ: R&r: РТ:1 
413<*гу уи(чщ TfdRR 
^ina^u 
*JR?S? Tn%uit RS& RS4T РГ RTRhf tTI
сЫН'|ГчК1 R£nRT R?Rt RT% Rl
Vl^’5 RTW3RTt5?R^gfir тТ Adcb: 11^3 ^ 11
RT 
€nt RTW ^ 1
RTRT 
gnftcT^lb3<? II
RRRT щ tJRfat оЧН^ЗД>:1
wits? 
т б о и
Sumeru among the mountains, Himalaya 
among the stores of gems, Durga among the 
Prakrtis, LaksmI among the goddesses, Satarupa 
among the women, Radhika of all my beloved's, 
Savitrl among the chaste woman, Prahlada 
among the daityas, Bali among the valorous 
people, 
the 
sage 
Narayana 
among 
the 
intellectuals, Hanuman among the monkeys, 
Arjuna among the Pandavas, Manasa among the 
daughters of the serpents, Drona among the 
Vasus, Bharata among the varsas, Kamadeva 
among the passionate people, Rambha among the 
passionate women, Goloka among the lakes, 
which is the best of all. Similarly I happen to be 
Santi among the matrkas, Rati among the 
beautiful women, Dharma among the witnesses, 
Sandhya among the Vasaras, Mahendra among 
the gods, Vibhlsana among the demons, Kalagni- 
rudra among the Rudras, Samhara among the 
Bhairavas, Pancajanya among the conches, 
forehead among the limbs, Bhagavata among the 
Puranas, Mahabharata among the history books, 
Kapila among the Pancaratras, Svayambhuva 
among the Manus, Vyasadeva among the Munis, 
Svadha among the spouse and the manes, Svaha 
among the beloved's of Agni.
Щ Я T TTTtPR'rs? 
~ф$т\
УПТУТ^фг TTRtS? м|Ц^Пч^Л R?RR<S *11
4Hlfrl^3 RRTS? чТг1Чг^%<'1 RfR:l
fawjsRi w i t rT 
^ ii
3TtR#ITR? 
fOTTPt fprRcT xll
Ki4ch^ w i *r 
33^ : 11^^11
3T? 
PTfJlt w
t ггп&Щ? cMTI
RgJTR gru 
HT:
STOTRIW 
Т Р Й ST fW^RTRI
7T#* ^ W M T f?TvT t? ^RTfpiRT^I 16 Ч11 
RWH tTFR Щ RG M ^i

=== PAGE 548 ===

486
BRAHMAVAIVART A-M AHAPURAT^AM
fR(f)«cflcHi gtfavpj cfl% rJTSSrt^RgWIIdffll 
«nferf cpfuTT тГ
3Ttfl44 rl4?£||? 
Я^Г Tjg' ^TII^ISII
-у^Гниач яшщтщ «етуПтич rfi
ш сшзгй 
^ st) яч |тщд: 11 <* <£ 11 
RTcfer^ AilvH ЗЯЙд Яб1рс)<1й1 
w rm r? 
я?п^ 5 
n<i я и
tlT H T O f^f^ xjWiq ТЯРЩ1
£ )^R 4 ^ftr< r 
^«ш Н яичич о и
TFnuit яучгнп/. сыцщ4^Глуге тп
ЯсЯГ^Я ^ТОТ 
^||
ч^га^ч яп?зп? 
яляяч гп 
яЧаГЧг^д чйд Й :?т^| хГ 
иччи 
Я 
TIThf "ФЧТ^тггод^ЕТ Я:)
Г: "Я^ЩИЧ^И
2^ ъ я4’ЯЬЦ Я^ПнЗ Х( ЯШЯ)
ЯШ ^
 TbvIRta тщч д ||ш й : 11Ч*И 
■Я^ШТЩ^ТГЗ^ Я ч -ЦШТЩ ЯТЯ1 
■R^Ttsi Ч %5ч1г?ТГ w t ЩТЛШТПГ^ИЧЧИ 
я^чт тгё#ятят ччт^т тгШ и т
■фЯТУТЧ^сТЗЯТ ЯТ Ч 4Tr Rt tn ftR :ll4 ^ll
чтчч#т 5^g3T fgfsnT дШ ш *n
^ПсЯТ5? яЗзРдЯТ Ш Щ ? ЯТ^Т: ЯТЧЯРЧ^П
ЯЧЩ ■?ГтСТШ щ^ччшт^гшп 
Я?) Я^Г (ТЭТ ЯТ^Т Я^Г (t) ЯгГГ5ЯЯГ:11Ч<Л1 
^ 9i^vi яя? ятя тля ^twi д я дзп 
яигяяч гг т тгат g?tigt grcfcr wi i ч ч 11 
щ зч *пя -ф щ ц w m язн^: ttwi 
g cRsramm ^ I g gtfeft g^i i ч о о 11
Rajashya among the yajnas, daksina among 
the spouses of yajna and Parasurama among 
those well-versed in the use of weapons who had 
been the son of Jamadagni. I am Suta among the 
composers of the Puranas, sage Angira among 
the those well-versed in polity, Visnuvrata 
among the vratas, Daivabala among the forces, 
Diirva among the ausdhl, kus'a among the straws, 
truthfulness among the religious people, the son 
among those who are bestowed with affection,
ailment among the enemies, fever among the 
ailments, my slavehood of all the types of 
adoration which best of all and the Grhastha 
(household) among all the as'ramas, Samnyasls 
among the prudent, Sudars'ana among the 
weapons, welfare among the blessing, great 
knowledge 
among 
the 
fortunes, 
Vairagya 
(unattachment) among all the pleasures, sweet 
words among those which increase love, self 
realisation among the charities, the noble deed of 
all the things which are to be collected, tapas 
among all the hard labours, moksa among the 
fruits, prakamya among the siddhas, Kasi among 
the Purls (towns), KancI among the cities, 
inhabited by the Vaisnavas. I am Mahavirat 
among all the solid foundations. I happen to be 
the atom of all the tiny things in the world 
Asvinlkumara of all the physicians, Rasayana 
among the Osadhis, Dhanvantari among those 
well-versed in the mantras, grief among those 
which consume a person, Meghamallara among 
the Ragas and Kamoda among the beloved’s, 
Sridama among the courtiers, Uddhava among 
my relatives, cow among the animals, sandal 
among the forest trees, the holy places among all 
the tlrthas and Vaisnava among the devotees 
who always recite my mantras. There is no one 
dearer to me than my own devotees; In the trees I 
happen to be the sprouting leaves and I happen to 
be the form of all the things. I pervade in all the 
creatures who also dwell in me. As the fruit 
remains in a tree and the tree in the fruit, 
similarly I am the cause of everything. There is 
no other greater cause than myself; I am the lord 
of everything, I have no lord. I am myself the 
cause of all the deeds. This is what has been 
ordained by the intellectuals, the sinners are 
influenced by my illusion and are unaware of me 
because they are influenced by the destiny 
indulging in sinful ways and evil advice. I am the 
soul of all the creatures and their lord. Wherever 
I stay, the hunger, thirst and all other saktis 
remain there and when I leave that place all those 
also disappear as the attendants of the king 
disappear with the king. Therefore, О lord of 
Vraja, О Nanda, О father, you go to Vraja with 
this knowledge and impart the same to Radha 
and Yas'oda. Thereafter Nanda the lord of Vraja

=== PAGE 549 ===

K9§NA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 74
487
together with his attendants left for Vraja and 
reaching there he narrated the words of Krsna to 
all the ladies.
^ «Г 7l£f 413: 
ЯТ741
-m^Tt 4TW 74:11 ^ O ^ 11 
4^441^74^34714(4 4194^1
4744F4 
Ч^-КЧ^И^о ^||
ТТТЧ^БТШ Ьг 
44П4Т 4TFI 
3^74 374: 
4714434: 34:ll^°^n
О Narada, with the imparting of the great 
knowledge they also were relieved of the grief 
and though lord is uninvolved and the lord of 
illusion but still he loves someone under the 
influence of the illusion. Yasoda inspired Nanda 
who go to Mathura again. Reaching there, they 
eulogised all blissful Madhava by reciting the 
stotra composed by Brahma and prescribed in 
Samaveda. Both of them started crying standing 
before their son.
ff4 9Й$П»Го ТЦГТо зПф'ИМ'Шао 34° -474*4° 
Н-41^<*УЧ14Ч Чт!44НЙЧчЪч!4:1№?11

=== PAGE 550 ===

K9§NA-JANMA-KHANpA, CHAPTER 74
487
Chapter - 74
Talk between Nanda and Kr§na
ЧТТШЩ
#|>тат: чячн^: 
Wpi
ЧЧТП'гЦТ rt 4T4t ЯтЫЧ'Я^сЬиеЬ:11Я11
«Jcfr ШШТЩГ 
Яфй: Щ:\ 
ЧТТгЧТЩ
jfet 44TW5 ЗрГГ гЩЩЕГ '^Icdfa.-I 
ЗТШЩЧТ м1фН|-«1 fc)<5'J4<*id<4.11^11
Narayana said- Lord Krsna who is blissful, 
complete in all respects the lord, the great soul, 
extremely devoted to his devotees, who appears 
on earth to rid of her burden, who is formless, 
beyond Prakrti, beyond all and Brahma, adored 
by Siva, Sesa and is the lord of the universe, was 
pleased with the prayer of Nanda and spoke to 
him delightfully who was suffering from the pain
of separation, getting upset and had arrived from 
Gokula.
Sthl’IciljdM 
W 4^sT3T T5 
Wi
Щ 
4t ?1H #еБЯЙЙфчИН11'*И
^fadchrii) ЩгТ 
Ч3срщ_|
3tR: 
PirttVi.'limi
Triht ^ftri сш 
m zr
^ИЩПТ: фП(Ч^
mi^ll
q^ctlfd 1чг£Г9Т: I
MWK&fM 
W c4«4I№ll
Krsna said- You go to Vraja and get yourself 
relieved of the grief and illusion on the earth. I 
am speaking to you the truthful and the best of 
the knowledge which removes the knot of grief. 
Listen 
to me attentively, 
there 
are 
five 
mahabhutas on earth known as the wind, the 
earth, the sky, the water and the tejas. О father, 
the s'rutis testify that the bodies of all the 
creatures on earth comprise of these five 
mahabhutas, that is why this7 body is called 
РйпсаЬЬаиИка. It comprises of false illusion, 
artificiality and is full of illusion like the dream. 
At the time of death the entire body pahcabhiita 
merges in them. Its indication, its form and 
identity are filled with illusion.
<st ер щ ц m r m щ 
чп
s » 
-O
gufoiT w r i yivdw&if u fc w ftiiiii 
g.-zj m ф я эпЬя ъ jpra^fii'? и
Therefore, О fathers, who is the son of whom, 
who is the wife of whom and who is the husband 
of whom Jlva wanders in various forms for 
several births in various ways. Because the Jlva 
takes new birth because of his deeds and because 
of the karma it also merges into the great soul 
and it achieves pleasure, pain, fear and grief 
because of the past deeds. Someone is bom in the 
heaven because of his deeds, someone is bom in 
the house of Brahma, someone is bom in the 
house of Brahmanas or Ksatriyas. Someone is 
bom in the house of Vaisyas and someone is the 
bom in the house of Sfldras.

=== PAGE 551 ===

488
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAtfAM
ifcgT Щ ЩЯТ 7«17% %ЛТ ё(Т g?JtJTf 
Ы
 fgJhf 
«БЧТ ЗТ 
||
Similarly, it sometimes is bom in the house of 
some degraded person, sometimes as an insect of 
the refuse, sometimes as an animal or bird and 
sometimes as a petty creature.
Ш 
xTI
b it cjT h t i ЗТ 
1ЯЯ11
tpT: 
73^ gig Tggpfam
-q ^ r ■qfeni: g g n i^ n
Therefore, О father, all the people are bom in 
their respective yonis again and again wandering 
here and there. But my devotee always remains 
engrossed in the uprooting of all the actions.
Ш
 %?TT 'й П Щ д
"qqt: 11 ^ 11
7RT: 7ТЧ 
ТТЧЩЙШсЩ;!
«г^гатт1дчдздЦ(г*п
There are four yugas known as Satya, Treta, 
Dvapara, Kaliyuga. Thus after the completion of 
twenty five thousand yugas. Manu, meets it with 
his end and the life of Indra has been equated 
with Manu, after the death of fourteen Indras 
continuously a day of Brahma is counted.
tjg чШчш тт%: 
тгд qftftdi щ т g f g
w o r ^ 
Ф71щ(ШШг1^|
His night is of similar duration. This has been 
pronounced 
by 
those 
well-versed in 
the 
calculation of time. Thus they have the month 
and the year. The age of Brahma has been 
calculated to be hundred years and after the death 
of Brahma, a single moment of mine is counted.
ggrts? 'чтчтдтт g чтьш^(д«1 :п^зн 
тртдртшд;: g?gr g? cqggg «mf gi 
giw ^g ft w rtg; %?дт gtf р щ п ^ п
Similarly, all the things right from Brahma to 
the blade of grass are perishable. I alone am the 
trnth who take to human form to bestow grace on 
the great soul and the devotees. He who adores
me reciting my mantra on earth, he, after death, 
destroying his past deeds, proceeds to Goloka. 
a tW lf W Чй Ч Ч%тГ& Щ
1
чтдттч чгштч^рт fgurt ggfwgi 
g 
gft^rfg ■q^fr: 11 ? о 11
He does not fall from Goloka even after the 
fall of innumerable BrahmSs, he achieves the 
eternal body which is devoid of death. О Nanda, 
my devotees never meet with any misfortune at 
any time. Apart from that my Sudars'ana-cakra 
always protects them.
зг£ тдгй «r crc&g ч ^ Tgnft ftgr jrj: i r г 11 
gfcgsg m qt w g f w ii 
%rgr ■sr g # R ¥ giHlgi g ^ ^ g g ^ n ^ ii 
gsrgig g^Ttgi g ghrt gftmut gin
-?Ы> rtn rig q f^ tg in R iii 
qqgrfeKTrq g 7Ш%1 
чяд? tjpfrg g ч^гш ч^ч^д: irtsu
Therefore my devotee is more powerful than 
myself, but still I remain anxious; for him being 
a lord, I don't have any lord, father or mother 
therefore instead of taking me as your son, you 
adore me as a complete Brahma as a result of 
which you will be relieved of the fetters of 
karmas and shall proceed to Goloka. О lord of 
Vraja, the cowherdess Yasoda, the group of 
cowherds should be told about the reality and 
leaving aside the grief, you go back to your 
house. After thus speaking in the assembly lord 
Krsna kept quiet; thereafter, Nanda getting 
overwhelmed with bliss asked him.
ддзгпд
gg -qmifigi ?пч 
grenfa <ggiggi
■gsts? vong-g fgfai итог *гащ1г?чп 
ч^дтд ggg sjgr 
gggRgg^i
ffg M f g f | g^i i ^ g 11
Nanda said- О blissful one, you bestow 
worldly knowledge on me by means of which I 
should be able to achieve your loka. Because I

=== PAGE 552 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 75
489
am quite devoid of wisdom and you happen to be 
the creator of the Vedas. On hearing the words of 
Nanda, 
the 
all-knowledgeable 
lord 
Krsna 
enlightened him on the daily routine as 
prescribed in the Vedas.
зИ'ИЕЦО ТЩТо
о ЗгГ° ЧТТ^ЧТ0

=== PAGE 553 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 75
489
Chapter - 75
T h e im p a r tin g o f w o r ld ly k n o w le d g e to 
N a n d a
щ r r ystptifq *tr у w n ^ n ^ i 
i^rhRhf 
у 5^
11^11
The lord said- О Nanda, I am bestowing on 
you the astonishing knowledge which is quite 
secretive in the Vedas and the Puranas and is 
quite difficult to get. You listen to it quite 
attentively.
ч fytrarrm ft чт% w
 
yi
One should not believe in the wicked women 
because they are the biggest obstruction in the 
path of achieving moksa; they are filled with 
illusion.
«Й^ЧГу RTRRt SPRTf
foy у тгш ш иШ птт fy?m yi 
згФгау IctRt 
^ w g m i
(cifxi^xl rRTTT ЗШТ:^Т
■RR 
- p i # 
УПЧ11
4 
У 
tTffi: ypffrfRR:!
-ЩЩ if f 
w n ^
 ^ Ttftll^ll
О 
lord 
of Vraja, 
because 
of being 
characterless, they are always against the 
devotees of the lord and they serve as the seeds 
of destruction. A person should get up early in
the morning and change the clothes worm by him 
during the night. He should meditate upon his 
sole lord in the lotus of his heart and should 
meditate upon his teacher in his mind and 
perform all the duties in the morning. Such a 
wise person should take a bath with clean water 
and while taking a bath, should not perform 
Samkalpa because the devotees are more 
interested in the destruction of the karmas and 
are not interested in enjoying their result. After 
taking a bath, he should recite the name of the 
lord and performing samthyd he should go back 
to his home.
ч щ ч тгз-t sfyvifywy
tj^
rw a tr -щйу -g{^RRq;ib9H
W O Tt -Ruff 
•gf?nw SRTsfq У1
ш у fgit yfy у 
nc it
ЗПУЩ У ycf* 
У11<? II
& щ \ УТ
Ч ^ Ч У И * ^ ! «LTR^rR Я^Ш:11?о||
Reaching there he should wash his feet and 
then enter the house and clad himself in 
sanctified garments. He should then perform 
puja for the lord. He should perform puja for 
Salagrama, 
gems, yantras, 
images, 
water, 
Brahmana and cow and more specially for the 
teacher, then kalas'a, the lotus with eight petals, ? 
vase with sandal-paste but I should be invoked 
only in Salagrama stone and the water. Such a 
devotee should meditate upon me by reciting the 
appropriate mantra and then adore me. He 
should with great devotion recite the mula- 
mantra and make the offering of sixteen types .
yfclRR I^ R R crcji»mRt|cf rP
УНУТ^ 
RURTSST Я>£аЦ|1ПИ
% 1 ^ 4 .1
R^rf 
тгат yfi 
u
^ У ^vPHf Щ ehll&M [УЧ1УеЬЧ1
f^quiRRtfR: f t f f c p h ll^ ll
у ш
 
fy^fysR:!

=== PAGE 554 ===

490
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
^ 
Щ fewj fefe fera^i i w 11
He should also adore Sridama, Sudama, 
Vasudama, Vlrabhanu and Surabhanu, the five 
cowherds and then should adore my courtiers 
named, Nanda, Sunanda, Kumuda and Sudarsana 
besides LaksmI, Sarasvatl, Durga, Radha, Ganga, 
Vasundhara, 
the 
teacher, 
Tulasi, 
Siva, 
Karttikeya, Ganes'a, the nine planets, Dikpalas, in 
a proper manner. It would be appropriate for an 
intellectual to adore first of all, Ganesa, Stirya, 
Agni, Siva and Parvatl
Tp^feTW W f ^
 wfefeTTf^llW I
xi^
i i w 11
R5 yuiui tihRHT шуепг5ГЩ^?§Щ1
t* ТТрг Rrilffd^falHIl W l
feut 4 
om IE|^^#BJ|)j{||^ II
R t 
*t m nt^chKoi^i
felf- Rife RPIjryoitijycIlft^lJcIlRlHl^l Roll
In the Vedas these gods have been described 
as the destroyer of the deeds and bestower of 
moksa. For the removal of obstruction, Ganesa 
should be adored; for the removal of the ailments 
the sun and Agni; for achieving peace and purity, 
Visnu; Siva for achieving moksa, knowledge and 
wisdom and Parvatl for achieving wisdom. After 
adoring them, one should offer three hand cups 
full of flowers and should recite the relevant 
stotra and kavaca. Bowing in reverence to the 
teacher and adoring him, one should offer his 
salutation to the gods. Thus after performing the 
daily routine, one should adore the gods 
according to one's convenience. For self­
purification, one should perform the adoration as 
prescribed in the Vedas. Similarly one should 
pay attention to the words which are forbidden, 
should not look at refuse which could be the 
cause of ailments. Looking at urine also one 
attracts ailment and one has to fall into the hell.
By looking at the male and female organs, one 
attracts sin, pain, ailment and poverty.
35 ■gri RFt feturi «бзщг 
m 
kHI¥l«tW i R R W f e w R T rih 
?ll 
fecmrm rj 
я м 1ч R f f e ^ i
ТНШ ТТ ЗЛТЩ 
g ro fe fe l3 lTIR ? ll
■qjaicnt щ w
 
*гщ|
c fe l^ c fT #
 
Ц Щ R ife
ЗШЗПЙ' Tfe 
4 
влп(®*сы4.ц1Н.1
T 3 R t Refect 
ЯГ R ^ o O T f W B R r ^ I R 'k l l 
One should not look at the thighs, heart, 
breasts, side-glances and smiles of the other 
women because indulging in such an action 
attracts misfortune. One should not cohabit with 
his own wife during the day time because it is 
harmful and one attracts the ailment of eyes and 
ears. Similarly a star should not be looked at in 
the sky which could result in ailment and fear. It 
per chance one has a look at the stars he should 
recite the name of Hari and also the name of 
Narada seven times. In the evening the sun and 
the moon should not be seen because by doing so 
one attracts ailment and fear. At the time of the 
rising of the moon if one looks at it, one attracts 
ailments.
W Tfe 5F5 <jgT ^Tfei 5rifeT:l 
cpgfex&c&jj хГ 3 
TTW ?RFT TriH RfaR 
hfe drill 
4 fJriferrfeTT Rfe tfe 4RTTR
TfeTffe gcf RI4T^cdfe^fferBTRTII?V9ll 
ft^TFppfht 
4 R^d^;TWTWfl
ТЗгГЗ RTsf ferFT Ъ
Similarly if one looks at the reflection of the 
sun and moon in the water, he meets with grief. 
By looking at the conjugal pleasures of others 
one gets separated from his relatives; by 
sleeping, eating and travelling with a wicked 
person, one attracts complete destruction. By 
talking to him, touching his body, sleeping with 
him or eating with him, all his sins are 
transferred to the noble person. One should not

=== PAGE 555 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANI?A, CHAPTER 75
491
approach the terrific animal for fear of injury. 
And one should not keep company with a wicked 
person which could attract grief and fear, 
sii^unwi яят щг #гптятят W rw.-i
Я fi-yff&TR flfr Я%1Г?ТЯЧ chHUI^lR^ll
^ctHffcWTini &я|ян'г <$я Я1
fart SR W 4 $ЯЯ%11ИЯГ cfiRUI^il^ о ||
я щ я ящ я ят wwfgrT 
я п
pfeW TW fnr f^grai ятяя
7ЦГ: grifetW iftn VlrH-hlft ^7 T: I
yRTRiifa W<j?: ЯНЯЛЯРш^И 
ШЗп: яязряйя f я%7: яз*гзря§ I 
Я?ЯЯТ4[ yifacbli ЯтаяЯЩ f4%?H{ll33ll 
дщсйг я яят я 
ятщ|
hffirail ЯТГЯЯТ{я Я^Я: ЯНЯПЯр?*11
янягяйя ятя^тг чунГятч я я я ь
о 
O
ЗяЬясГГ Я Я Ж tsRyytfif 
ЯПЗЧП
:рт$?Я ^Tlfvft ftfiR: H H W f
WTFTrfrщ ти : яня^яп^и 
я^язг: ?мяяп(ч 
^щггрядI 
whI 'ЛС'Асы 
i^^ii
япяЬтт% я яяг% ят1яяТ Я?шт: vidHJ 
%$плт fejigf^>y ггшст t?r %ЯгГпз<Л1 
тпеяя 
f щ я ftgnf я^ 1 
ятя w m шяя ftftra я
ЯУсШ BER^ f Я дШТ ЯТ% 9(^1 
дШ Я %Я^ 
U^ldl Я Я ЯТс%|I'k011 
% 47% ЯТ% дТсТТ ЬЧГЙУНТ Ч ^ |
fyaiuTi Ц яя ^ я т я?г£т1я r t ^
r ii^
ii 
sr ящя! %я^нт 1ящяг?я ч ^ я я ^ 1 
я ящ% ^|т я я*Пт)г 
^ 11
One should not indulge in the killing of a cow, 
a Brahmana and especially a Brahmana which 
attracts total destruction. One should not steal the 
riches of the gods, the temples, Brahmanas and 
the Vaisnavas. By doing so, one attracts total 
destruction. The one who snatches away the 
livelihood given by himself or others and one 
who does so, has to be bom as the insect of
refuse for sixty thousand years. Thereafter for a 
hundred crores of births, he has to bom as a pig; 
for a hundred years, he has to be bom as a wild 
animal; for seven births, he has to be bom as a 
Rhinoceros and horse; for seven births, he is to 
be bom as a deformed person, for births the 
insect of the pelvic region of the wicked woman 
for a hundred births and for another hundred 
births he has to be bom as an insect of a boil. О 
Narada, for seven births he has to be bom as a 
lizard, a donkey for seven births, a cat for seven 
births, a monkey for three births, a horse for a 
hundred years, a terrific serpent for seven births, 
a tiger and buffalo for seven births, a frog for a 
hundred births, a he-goat for seven births, a bear 
for seven births, a jackal for a lakh of births. 
Thereafter because of the stealing of those riches 
he becomes a leech. For a hundred lives of 
Brahma he has to fall into the kumbhipaka hell 
where the sinners are boiled. The one who 
refuses to give immediately the daksind to a 
Brahmana after pronouncing the same, the 
charity after the lapse of a night is doubled and 
after the expiry of a month it multiplies to a 
hundred times after a lapse of two months, it 
multiplies to a thousand times and after the 
expiry of a year, the donor has to fall into the 
hell. In case the donor is unable to pay and the 
receiver is unable to demand the same, both of 
them fall into hell. By killing a Brahmana, the 
race of the killer is destroyed and after getting 
deprived of the wealth and riches he becomes a 
pauper or a beggar. He feels grief-stricken when 
no one offers salutation to him in spite of his 
being a Brahmana or a god.
я fyfi^p?4f%T % ягчй ткя ^яч;| 
ят яй ягт §яят wtfir т^Ы флчи'яэ и 
я 
зкят зяяЬп% 9гз1щяч;|
ЯТтБ%Щ£%УП%1 ЦяЯТг^ЯЯГ 
II
я*й 
%Ая 
яфт! Я%^1
Mfrtfldl Я cicbtid ЯсЯТ Я? <з-л!<^с(Н,1 
% Я 
w rfw ТВ? f%r Я 
II
fgraj 
% я®; я тщтткя sRfcti

=== PAGE 556 ===

492
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAiyAM
f m 'чтят p w t тгта? ^ <гапг*\эн 
з ш 
fgfrer чтй
■f43TT:ir*d!t
дЭсЧТЧ чттегчт:Ifitf^II
¥ПНЯ1Ч^Н ЙнрТТЩ % тг ^ # 1
<М дч% ?г % т: ж з т ч ^ г т т ^ и ч о и
The one who does not adore the teacher, has to 
fall into the terrific hell, the wicked woman or a 
foolish woman who disregarding her husband 
resembling Hari and neglects him besides 
denouncing him, she has to fall into the 
kumbhipaka hell. If one denounces her husband 
by evil words she has to be bom a crow and if 
one resorts to physical violence against her 
husband, she has to be bom as a pig by becoming 
angry, she has to be bom as a snake. The one 
who becomes arrogant has to be bom as a 
donkey and the one who speaks evil words has to 
be bom as a bitch. If one makes others to 
consume poison he has to be bom as a blind 
person. The chaste woman surely accompanies 
her husband to Vaikuntha. Such of the foolish 
people as denounce Siva, Durga, Ganes'a, Surya, 
Brahmana, Vaisnava and Visnu have to fall into 
a terrific hell. Similarly, he who disowns his 
parents, the son, the chaste wife, the teacher, 
shelterless sister and daughter, surely falls into 
the hell. The Ksatriya who is not devoted to the 
Brahmana or lord Hari besides Vais'ya and 
Sudras, surely proceed to the hell. Such of the 
damsels, as are not devoted to their husband are 
considered to be extremely degraded. Such of the 
Brahmana as consume the water of Salagrama 
and the prasada of lord Visnu, even the holy 
places get purified with their arrival and they 
also 
purify 
hundred 
future 
and previous 
generations besides the earth.
ТШЯУЧГТТ fet:
ftJT Rirt tt "чЫЫ д% пч
яя: 
ттигаиг
зттчят ijirtauil Rcpt 
*rr *rHjpfcr:i
Tjt 4rW "ЧШ 4
•q^ 
ЙГ?УЯ ТШ^ПЧ'*!!
After adoring the gods and the manes, if a 
Brahmana eats meat once, he is till considered to 
be pure, but the one who always consumes meat 
he falls into the terrific hell. If a Brahmana fries a 
fish for selfish purposes be has to observe fast 
and thereafter perform repentance by observing 
Candrayana-vrata. О Nanda, such of the 
Brahmana who observing fish, having been 
deprived of the knowledge, he also becomes 
impure and destroys his merit. Such of the 
Brahmana who consumes the left over of Visnu 
and does not consume fish or meat, he is surely 
achieves the merit of Asvamedha sacrifice for 
every step he walk on earth.
TjcFT^ft й ftjfcr ^ шнрчти% яч;| 
Щ 'З РЧ З ТЯ ТЯ ТГО Т^гЙ ЧТЯ ТТ¥В Г:П Ч Ч 11 
ehlhA c(|«J^j Щ eta’ll 
ftffcr ФЯсйтРг frflft WI14^II
xnw 
^
 
114 V911
Pimm! Ч ТЧТЦЙГ 
ТГ «hcicbl 
«татрт fsjpt я^т «п^ипч ^ ч ч ^ п ч й м
Such of the people who perform vrata on 
Ekadasi day and on the day of the birth of lord 
Krsna they are relieved of the sins committed by 
them for hundred years. There is no doubt about 
it. All the sins committed by them during 
childhood, boyhood, old age and when young, 
are destroyed. The one who takes food on the 
Ekadasi day and on the birthday of lord Krsna 
consumes the sins of the three worlds. There is 
no doubt about it. This rule is not applicable to 
the infirm, old and children. They can be purified 
after giving double the food they consume.
3WTt ш&тз тт w f t o д ^ и ч ^ п
Т-П
ЧТМУЗТгТгШ: WlrWlrlHh'mftcRIcfl 15 oil
WW -ЧШ TT^t тт ЯТРГШ rJ

=== PAGE 557 ===

KR§NA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 75
493
зп#з> ччы># хт Tarf ^ чГ<^^||^^|| 
чш ^T# дрз## ч чт?ВГ:) 
чзчгнм 
^rvami^^ll
# *Щ?Г 
ЧТ
^Ц$1 <|i4ict 3nf ^Т rPRT 
II
ЧТ Ч^с{^Гс|Йс4 ^ТЧЧГГЧТ d4d ^u«b4j 
4T4t 
у?фт g^wjnfirdlii^'sn 
чт% ъ fqg^RmfegiRt ч
^«iT^t#R^ii^4ii
щ ччд? 
гпдщ^#щт^|
^ртщт 5nigf^ 
9# Шт: и s s и
Цт^-d гпог|[ ЩШ: УПЩ1 
чт: '53l#ri4j4ijffiTt 
?Щ#^5;;ЧТТ:11^^эи 
ЖИГ# ЧТ f^RT: ЧТ##%^:1
з # Н # Т ж Ь М ^ГсЧТ ^11 ^:115 ,с II 
^ IW ?ictc;# Ъ # Ц ^гчЩ щ :1 
ЧТ 
faZTTR ЧТЧТЩ.11^^«I
# # sf? r -Ц: 
ЧГЧТЧТГ 
Ч ^ Ч 1Н.1
чт ?^с(^с|^ьсы4: ч т^ ч т^ р га т# т:11^о||
In case someone who is competent to observe 
a fast on Sivaratri and Ramanavami day, but 
takes his food, he falls into the terrific hell. The 
one who cohabits with his wife on a moonless 
night or on a full moon night, first day of the 
month, on the fourteenth and eighth day of the 
moon and also consumes oil and meat, he is 
surely bom as a Candala. One should not eat the 
fish, meat, small grained pulse in a vase of 
bronze; ginger and the red vegetables should not 
be taken on Sundays otherwise one has to fall in 
the kumbhlpaka hell. There is no doubt about it. 
О lord of Vraja, the food served by a woman in 
period, the food of a loose woman and the food 
mixed with wine, in case it is consumed by a 
Brahmana, he surely consumes refuse. Whatever 
deeds are performed by him during the day, he is 
deprived of the reward for 'the same and he 
always remains impure. He is deprived of the 
impurity only when his body is burnt in fire. 
Such of woman who enjoys the company of four 
men has to be treated as a whore; she is not
entitled to receive any share cooked for gods and 
the manes. The one who performs yajna from 
village to village and food during the sraddha 
performed by Sudras have to fall in the hell till 
the life of the sun and the moon. Such of the 
Brahamans who take srdddha food with the 
Sudras they have to fall in the kumbhlpaka hell 
up to the life of with some one else at the 
instance of a Sudra, he should be considered as a 
drunkard and should be excommunicated from 
performing seven religious deeds. Similarly the 
soldiers, the writers, those performing piija in the 
temples, earning their livelihood from the 
bullocks, burning the dead bodies of the Sudras, 
the Brahmana who is the husband of a Sudra 
woman should also be excommunicated because 
the food of such a person is like refuse for the 
noble people. Similarly the one who does not 
perform sandhya during the morning or the 
evening and neglects all the Brahmana practices 
should be excommunicated like a Sudra.
: ЧТ#?4ЧТ1
чЭ
с11чЧ'Ы1ч1’НсЬ?4 sTfiJPJTt ЧЧ^>
гГ # 
10 ч и
^cfrftrli ч г в т г jf tr 
: I
drMich44<*lr(slMi 
ТЩ1№ЭН
з м :# т М Н т гг 
зйусп; 1пэ*п
The one who does not perform sandhya such a 
Brahmana is always considered to be impure and 
unfit for all the religious performances. Because 
of this, whatever actions are performed by him, 
he is deprived of the reward. The Vamamargt 
Brahmana falling into hell surely has to face 
pain. The Intellectuals could not drop refuse at 
the places like the starting point of a river, the 
pits at the root of trees, near water, near god and 
green crops. О lord of Vraja, one should not rub 
his hand for purification with the dust from a 
heap of white ants, the earth dug by rats, the 
earth inside water and the earth with remnant 
from the one already used for washing the hands, 
the earth from the mud meant for plastering the

=== PAGE 558 ===

494
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
walls of the houses. The earth from the place of 
white ants, the plough land is not fit for use in 
purifying the hands because by rubbing the 
hands with dust, the hands cannot be purified. 
aiiMdiHlfeafli 
«то$зг1П«мг m i
4^3 dcflhdlfeUcil rTSTTI 1^3ЦII 
u fW b ^ c^d l: ТШЗТ:
^wpu^yifdcfii ut 
$ Ф Ф тЯ : грщнэъп
зт^т 
?пялтч trf&f cramit9t9 и
ufiret ^^газт ъ Tpuf
ъ ш Tjm w i t ^hm 
^пнчляГуН(г?14 w l 
qra^r:i 
Ф&: 
с!?Г^415тгпп%:1Ьэ^||
титг#тТ 
ff^RT:l
3RT: Tj|gf Q ^€( t<f^teipTT«:il£o|i 
TRift TT ТьГгГРЯЧТ 
^T:l
W5RT ЯУТГП! 3% : 1ТТГЗЯЩ1 
зШ ^rnft4T^ ЧТ: $db^l'cfd4II<S*ll 
TT Ш%: Ш fT w nfq ЗГСтфр{1
^g^rrsftr 
ii
fita r^ rf iTfrTHT dile*<wid 
TWpfinvTTUfu гГЧ^ dlfed WfH.lli'Jfll
О Nanda, similarly the earth from around the 
trees, green crops, the earth dug from under the 
tree or taken out of the water of the river are unfit 
for purification. Similarly the one who cuts the 
melon and the orie who extinguishes the lamp, 
has to be bom with ailment and is always bom a 
pauper. The one who places a lamp, Sivalinga, 
Salagrama, 
gems, 
image 
of 
the 
gods, 
yajnopavita, the gold, samkha jewels, diamonds, 
urine of the cow, cowdung, ghee, the water of 
the Salagrama, on the ground has to fall in the 
hell. Ultimately he is bom as a pauper, miser, 
suffering from leprosy, having no issues, without 
land, without a wife, without the people, without 
relatives, a degraded one, blind, hunchback, 
lame, without feet and is bom as deformed. The 
one who sleeps during the time of performing
sandhya, thrice a day and cohabits with his wife, 
has to face the ailment for seven births together 
with poverty. When someone brushes his teeth, 
sunrise who is the lord of the universe, such a 
sinner can say that I am performing the adoration 
of lord Janardana. In case one adores Siva by 
making a Sivalinga in earth, ashes, cowdung or 
sand, even once he resides in the heaven for a 
hundred kalpas. In case, one adores a thousand 
Sivalingas, all his desires are fulfilled .
ЩТ Ъ 
няй fcT^I
SfteRpEt 
116 Ч11
ащот) ЧТЖ
hcdfad t o t 
% ЯТГ:Ий^И
dlcighd^ 
yictqj
тт Trgrat сщджш 
^гачг 
i 
^
 
^сщтг сгп%: TdTrfffira 
иЗ^тг ятщтй:
тт% fy-ггчтач «гг^пщ^ m fira-;ii<i я и 
firar vrc^fh "ши ^ d ri fern и
ddtsfddil fil'd! tIUl fildl ^ThKddlsfiiebi: 11Ч о
ddtsfer: 
^ Tlff<T ■R
ТЩТ^сГ 
?n
TRrarfiT ъ ттдщ чтггегдщд1ж: i
|g^;ii4 ^ ii
з ш й 9ГЖШТЧ f w i: ЛШ ^З^Т *1:1 
ЗТПГТ dlfldull yifot:
жтт^т *т *щг ^
 *г*гт ipfe^cun-.i 
w 
w *г*тт ■gfg: н д а п и п
*ш fsrcr 
w 3rd fsrara tm
3 ^ 
w щ^пЕдштт 4щг §mr #■: 11 ч ч 11
Tjfg: ^fgCT3T 
% TTTI
%ггё пт ^гсчаФ ш гж rrfirarr w h i ^ u 
4 $ 
ш
 xr ttti
ТГТ fhf 
|^^Й4|Г?1Ч1||^'311
p f ТГТ ^ThTdlTi ^ Tj|l
ш шщ1 in xi жгМт fg^iidsr^crrfTii^^ii

=== PAGE 559 ===

KFt$NA-JANMA-KHAtfPA, CHAPTER 75
495
By adoring a lakh of Sivalingas one achieves 
the position of Siva. Thus a Brahmana who 
adores Sivalinga, is deprived of the future birth. 
A Brahmana who does not adore Siva, he is sure 
to fall in the hell. Such of the people who 
denounce me for adoring Siva, they fall in the 
hell and remain there up to the life of a hundred 
Brahmas. In case at the time of adoration, sand is 
found with the Sivalinga in that case the devotee 
becomes blind and in case of any hair having 
been found there with the Sivalinga, the devotee 
is bom as Yavana besides being degraded, as a 
pauper, miser and suffering from horrible 
ailment. He has to face great losses and is reborn 
in degraded yonis. Of all the people in the 
universe, Brahmanas are dear to me. LaksmI is 
dearer to me than the Brahmanas who always 
reside in my heart. Radha is dearer to me than 
LaksmI and my devotees are dearer to me than 
Radha and Siva happens to be the dearest of all. 
No one else is dearer to me than Siva because 
whosoever recites the name of Mahadeva, while 
walking I at once follow him. My mind is always 
devoted towards the devotees. Radha happens to 
be my life while Siva happens to be my soul, 
who is dearer to me than my life. I create the 
universe through NarayanI, the eternal force, 
who preserves the universe as well and is also 
responsible for its destruction. The gods like 
Brahma and others are bom out of her. With her 
influence the entire universe is victorious, she 
starts creation and without her the universe 
cannot survive. She is the form of mercy, sleep, 
nectar, satisfaction, lust, faith, forgiveness, 
patience, maintenance, peace and shyness. She 
happens to be MahalaksmI in Vaikuntha, the 
chaste Radhika in Goloka, LaksmI in the ocean 
of milk and Satl, the daughter of Daksa, she is 
also known as Durga who destroys misfortune, 
Parvatl the daughter of Menaka, SvaraglaksmI in 
the house of Indra beside Sarasvatl, Savitrl and 
the great goddess of knowledge with Brahma.
Rffr RT <|Г5еьц»|(ть: 3JRI¥lfd>¥R 4t4«h\|
¥lbh¥ifd>:
rtrit^rt ¥iGb¥R strutt r srrj rti
c(R¥lfR>: 
TTTII^ooll
She happens to be the power of burning with 
Agni, the lustre of Surya, the rays of the moon, 
the coolness of water, the producer of greenery 
and cereals and the divine sakti of the gods.
rHRRT RT TJ%uri
тдгшгсщт fl'miftchw w ii^o
^nuit R3R^Rt?R Ф т ?Rl№fquT)ri|^o^|| 
Rft 
RR^fiRT §
R rf 
RT^sn¥lRh^f4uniH!o^||
Spft 7ТР& RT<J¥T%¥R 
fdSTdfdi: 
Rcfrf 
л
PR WH R Rl T?T%4RT ^TTT f?TRTR 7TTI 
PR ^ R fef Ы fR> *JR: Rl^fqRSfRII 
JT¥T RRlfR RSP7T RRT^ RRRlfp Til
She is the tapas of the mendicant, the family 
deity of the house-holders, the salvation for those 
seeking salvation, the hope for the worldly 
people, the devotion for my devotees and she 
always remains alive and devoted to me. She 
happens to be the RajyalaksmI of the kings, the 
income of the Vaisyas and the three-fold force 
which enables the people to cross over the ocean 
of the universe. She is the intelligence of the 
wise people, the commentary on the Vedas and 
other scriptures, the power of giving charity with 
the donors for Brahmanas with the Ksatriyas and 
with the chaste woman she is the form of 
devotion for husband. I have handed over this 
type of NarayanI to Siva. I have thus explained to 
you everything; what more do you want to listen 
to from me? You tell me. I will surely reveal the 
truth to you.
RtsRjTo тщто
Го ЗтГ« ЧГгаЧТ» 
ТМГЭЦН

=== PAGE 560 ===

496
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAI^AM
Chapter - 76
T h e D e s c rip tio n o f V is ib le T h in g s
ЯТГ xf 
ЩЦ -ЦЩ г! 3^41
Зтяе? щ 
sfcj gftfgM 4TRii?n
Nanda said- О supreme lord you tell me the 
things by looking at which one earns merits and 
those by looking at which one earns sins. I am 
quite anxious to know about them.
тпщ рпнт wtefat ^wrant я
Krsna said- The best of Brahmanas, the holy 
places, the images of Visnu and other gods are 
quite appropriate for looking at and by doing so 
one earns the merit of taking a bath at a holy 
place.
^4-W 
HnlHl 
cRJTI
чНп^ГСТ *T#Tt *T 
4T ^ |R o|[^||^||
iT^rUT ТОТ Я ^4t4t hWlt Я f^GRT: 1
rT Гй^|У4( ^niVeiMi 
ЖГкИ 
^тзггчт я fhcRRi я чэ^тнт ttvte ж 
irriTt я vftTurt ягарл‘| 
дгШ^г№Г^1Ч?гШН1 <^Г Ж
я 4TTtnt аШ тйч1ч,и^|| 
я^тачт чртйчт т Ы хг Ъ ф т -л 
цш ч! Цязтлт xt 4ifciRRiFn ч^щгттэп 
^
 ЯТЧЧ1Щ1
tRrTTfT ^ТсРЯутррЙ 
ф ( 
х*\\6\\
тТ rlNlVri Tl^sl <pfol 'HHH.I 
ЯТсЧТ Я ^<*Hqu||U|i ^gT ^trer оТ^5П::П<? II 
чттгач я з^т тш я 
тргёпч gfapr хг 
дтщ ъ $ т : 11 % о 11
Similarly, the sight of Surya with devotion, 
chaste 
woman, 
a 
mendicant, 
a yogi, 
a
Brahmacari, a cow, a fire, a teacher, an elephant, 
a lion, a white horse, a parrot, a cuckoo, a 
wagtail bird, a goose, a peacock, a Nllkantha, a 
Sankha bird, a cow with a calf, a plpala tree, a 
woman whose son and husband are alive, a 
traveller going to the holy places, a lamp, a gold, 
a gem, a jewel, a diamond, a ruby, a TulasI and a 
white flower remove the sins. О great king, one 
earns merit by looking at a flute, white paddy, 
ghee, curd, honey, a pitcher filled with water, 
paddy, a mirror, water, a garland and white 
flowers. A person also earns merit by looking at 
gorocana, camphor, silver, pools and an orchard 
with blossoming flowers.
cMTl
'fc'bjxi 
<gT "ТЧ TJU4II«II 
ШТЩТЩГЕгай ЧЯ 
^TT.1
c^lcW ^'tUTd ^JT ip p ll^ ll
О Nanda, a person also attains merit by 
looking at the moon of the bright fortnight, 
nectar sandal-paste, kasturi and saffron beside 
the banner, the banyan tree, auspicious abode of 
the gods, temple of the gods and the caves.
4=nf9TcT 
frifeW T OTI
Я 
^gl ЧШ: 
vr^H tll^U
w m тт w fcii
m ^
 зчя 
11 ** 11
And the sight of the divine kalasa in a temple, 
inhaling fragrant breeze, blowing of the s'amkha 
and the beating of drums also bestow merit on 
the people. In case one looks at sakti, gem, 
silver, crystal, kus'amUla, earth of Ganga, kus'a 
grass and copper, he surely achieves merit.
Чга^ЗТ fc|Ujj<j.?|chqj
TpT W 3°^ ^ Г Т : 11 *4 I•
rtufeqr 
^njTTfrw^t
я ? 
^|т я дтпт 
ЧТ: 11 ^ 11
One earns great merit by looking at the 
spotless book of the PUranas, Visnu-mantra with 
seed, dUrva-grass and an unbroken gem. One 
earns merit also with the reciting of siddha- 
mantra of the tapasvis, the buck and the 
festivities ofyajna .

=== PAGE 561 ===

KFtSiyA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 76
497
TTTRt тгГтггг
^ТПТ 
I ?V911
^f%Rt 4R|Tfl W4T -4jTiei4R*4U^HIHI 
3 ^<*i ^ ckh'i Roti^ui^ftidi^ii^ii 
^T O t -ГЩ f ^ E I c n f c ^ l 
ftnsra w r it xr ^gT 5шт v $ m
: 11 w II 
gjTffg^rr qfulmdi r j 4'ifsrarafd4i ^prn^i 
^gr ч щ \ ъ gmfo ’mH ^ usahh^ oii 
In case one looks at the urine of a cow, the 
cowdung, the milk, cowdust, the abode of a cow, 
a place having the foot prints of a cow and ripe 
crop, he surely achieves merit. Looking at a 
beautiful damsel, a girl of sixteen years clad in 
beautiful costumes and adorned with divine 
ornaments, chaste woman, the best of diirva- 
grass, unbroken rice and the best of food also 
provides one the merits. The one who performs 
the adoration of the image of Radha on the full 
moon day in the Kartika month and offers her his 
adoration, he is relieved of the bondages of birth 
and death.
rWTSyunfq^ Rift? 
^ 1
^gT 
ЗТЯПЖПЗЧЧМ^М 
ъ <щ*тт ’ЗГ faycRгагеч # * 3 1 
^
 w дгШ 
1 ^ ^ 11
A person is relieved of the bondages of birth 
and death if one looks at the image of Durga on 
the eight day of the bright fortnight in the month 
of As'vin. The one who looks at Kasivisvanatha 
on the day of Sivaratri observing the fast is also 
relieved of the bondage of birth and death.
4WT ^gT RT 
Israel 
щщгт TJ3tt p g r W 
уЯПЗП5ЧЧ;11?^11 
y«w4ijfl ш 
m k ят:1 
Чс^ЧИ1: ir fw ^gT cfctlfcf ^ tsIir ^ IR 'k ll
Looking at Bindumadhava on the JanmastamI 
day the one who performs puja with devotion, is 
also relieved of the cycle of birth or death. In the 
bright fortnight of the month of Pausa, one who 
witnesses the image of LaksmI, is relieved of all 
the sins and future births.
W 3RT «гётПгг 3*: 
чШЙсьщуН тчшт m rk 
^ crr cjiiyiiwvhjui?
i t rtRt тщ^тг 
^ 11
ЧЯТ 
gjfrft ^FH3TJ14^l
^ ttr w 
R 11
ifH T ЧД1 ^gT gr 
3RR30343I 
ЗЧ1Щ 3^ 7^ ^ilcqi 
^RgiTsAl I ^ 6 11
He enjoys all the riches like Kubera for seven 
births enjoying the company of his sons and 
grandsons. The one who observes fast on 
Ekadasi day and breaks the fast on Dvadasi day, 
after getting up early in the morning taking a 
bath and visiting the image of Annapurna on 
KasI he is relieved of the cycle of birth and 
death. On the fourteenth day of bright fortnight 
of the month of Caitra, the one who visits the 
temple of Bhadrakall at Kamarupa and offers his 
salutation to her, is also relieved of the cycle of 
birth and death.
^гсгт mird; 
^чтзтпчч.!
5тm fesjjqi firnt
fqgmt W 4 4 ? i^ 377Т%
mu\ -дизт 
ч 
i з о 11
On the day of RamanavamI one who performs 
the adoration of Rama and worships him bowing 
in reverence he is relieved of the cycle of birth 
and death. The one who worships the lord in the 
Puskara-ksetra or Badrikairama and worships 
the god after taking a bath and observing fast he 
is surely relieved of the cycle of birth death. The 
one who performs the pindadana at Visnupada 
and adores lord Visnu, he is relieved of the cycle 
of birth and death together with his ancestors; the 
one who shaving his head in Prayaga and goes to 
Naimisaranya observing fast, he is relieved of the 
cycle of birth and death .
2|f44KUi| 
SWtslUs^RI
fTrfjS fire) 1 rf 
qc^Rcbwiftl^ ^11
^ гз т RftlfdRT
^ Ш311 ^ ? i f

=== PAGE 562 ===

498
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
О 
Nanda, 
after 
achieving 
success 
in 
Bctdrikasrama, one who consumes the jujubi 
fruit and worships my image, he is relieved of 
the cycle of birth and death. The one who 
worships me seated in the auspicious Vmdavana 
and adoring me offers his salutation to me, he is 
relieved of the cycle of birth and death. 
dUie<l 
xj ъ Ш Ml'HrgusThl
41^ <|gT Ъ RScUW Ф &
^ 
^ ri? r 
ЯТ: I
W HT ч&п 
tET g^tfr чЬЧуиёЧЧПЗ’* II
The one who adores MadhusQdana placing 
him on the auspicious pedestal and offers his 
salutation with devotion, he is relieved of the 
cycle of birth and death. In the age of Kaliyuga 
the one who adores lord Jagannatha seated on the 
chariot and who perfonns his рщй with devotion, 
he is relieved of the cycle of birth and death. 
ЗтПШЯПШЯЩ JPTFf ТЧ1ЧЧ1хШТ1
щ щ чт т ят^сг з гШ ^ьжаизчцизчп
qfu^lili xl ^gT hdlfdlTi ^ТОРТI
44R ficcIT
On the first day of the month when the sun is 
in northward movement, if one takes a bath at 
Prayaga and adores me, offering salutation, he is 
relieved of the cycle of birth and death. On the 
full moon day of Kartika one who adores my 
image observing fast, he is relieved of the cycle 
of birth and death.
^ iTRzrt xf p t Hur-urn:!
W 4T ЯТ? RT ^gT giTtH 
^Щ||^\э|1
'iihvdi ■мдя-ч зтпт1цШ щ ^|
^gT ЧРТНГ gptfa ЯГЛТоц^^и
On the full moon day of the month of Magha, 
the one who adores me with Radha on the bank 
of Candrabhaga river, he is relieved of the cycle 
of birth and death. On the full moon day of 
Asadha, whosoever takes a bath at Rames'vara 
and obst :ving the fast, adores me, is relieved of 
the cycle of birth and death.
ш т д ф М w "Фтгш fm^rur: 11 i ч 11 
prafo fgpm т й
p iw 
t Rmmfo xi tTracr-.ii^oii
^cfT -Rl^TRt zf 4RW 
I
<h h w forest 
W
w j t i 
эттнт ^gr 
grafo ярщжпзччмхчп
The Vidyadharas adore me perfoiTning divine 
dance in heaven and at the same time Vibhlsana 
arrived there for bowing in reverence to Siva. 
The Gandharvas and Kinnaras beautifully sing at 
night and at the same time Madhava also arrived 
for adoring Siva. Adoring Siva having the 
crescent on his head, being lord of all, the god 
dwells there. A person is relieved of birth and 
death after adoring him there and ultimately 
arrives in the abode of Siva. When the sun is on 
the southward movement the one who adored 
SQrya at Konarka, after observing fast, he is 
relieved of birth and death.
fftchia щ ф 
cfWtl
4i4dlyfd4i ^gT 
huiycunj
q fe t тга т ^gT grfifr ягяя: ^p ir ii^
ii
тчтггг Ш : t t w TgT W IT W l 4W: I
Cs 
eC j 
О 
-О
яттщ xt ф* w r дрйя 'чьчуиёччн^чи
ууч М 
ш ^г ят ^gT gf% nng^!cfii'k^ii
The one who adores the images of Parvatl, 
Karttikeya, Ganes'a, Nandi and Siva in the holy 
place of Krsikostha, 
Suvasana, Kalavinka, 
Vasundhara, Vispandaka, Rajakostha, Nandaka, 
Puspabhadrka, he is surely relieved of the cycle 
of birth and death. By fasting there one has to 
adore the gods offering prayers and one has to 
break the fast by consuming curd, only then the 
fast is considered to be successful. At Citrakuta 
mountain close to the western ocean, there is a 
mountain known as Manibhadra, the one who 
adores the lord thereafter observing fast which 
has to be broken after consuming curd, one 
achieves salvation.

=== PAGE 563 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 76
499
sftcT IT ^T IT$3q ЗГТЙТГ 
1?ГсГ^сТ4 fK^T т?ф4 IT fd^l4d:l 
f?reni«i44 
згтНтг
The one who consecrates my image and also 
of Parvatl, he is relieved of the cycle of birth and 
death. The one who builds temples for Siva, 
Durga, my temples and the place of Siva, he 
achieves salvation from the universe.
ЦИЯйН 
7ЩсТ UltaT^I
fg ra w R 
ii
ч ir 
gipmfq irgRham trr^i
ЗТТЧ^Т iRTt тргг: frr PtHKil: ftTcf:ll4Оn
r h r i qirrat
T Т|Щ feffiTttfq ШтШтЧТ ТЩ^ИЧ ^11
3TtIRt tefiPTIRlfa ^ yid)^ld«:y^ll4^ll
q^lWlferf IT 
TTtc^ 14ТЧ.1
ч ft qprt чйтгтч nm ^ чтч1гЧЧ:11ц^и
■<*ЧГТ\чтачЬп ■qfyyiil 
IT:1
чЭ 
s3
irfHT yctrutmi ^ i^ rtjvr н ^ н ч ^ п
The one who builds a flower orchard, a bridge, 
a wdl, a pool and the abodes of Brahmanas his 
life meets with success. О father, no one knows 
about the merit one earns by constructing the 
abodes of the sages, the mendicant, the gods and 
the Brahmanas because the particles of the dust 
on the earth can be counted as also the drops of 
rains but in case an abode is provided for a 
Brahmana its merit is beyond description. The 
one who provides livelihood to a Brahmana, he 
is relieved of the cycle of birth and death and 
achieves the eternal LaksmI. Thereafter, by 
achieving salvation he achieves my slavehood 
and devotion and then proceeds to Vaikuntha and 
he never falls from Vaikuntha like me. The one 
who gives away a girl of eight years adorned 
with ornaments to a Brahmana, he achieves the 
merit of donation to goddess Durga .
Tpf 
44IHIW 
uftPT:l
R d t ГРТ ТГВТ IT 
RUT f4T4J IЧ Ч П
factigc^Pi chifewu^H4,H
зиГ 1Ф? 
fsra^im^n
He witnesses all the divine articles, is adored 
in Brahmaloka, achieves my slavehood and 
enjoys all the pleasures of Vaikuntha. Anyone 
who witnesses the marriage, he earns the merit of 
donating crores of gold coins. Ultimately he 
achieves heaven and the indestructible LaksmI.
IT: '§f4sr44J4 H 
IT Tritfed-qi 
■^гстт т^тЫззт? it TfTt^r Tw t 
ягдяп н ч 4 tfer:l
TJltft RcRTT 
^ТТЧЧ>Н Н ^ П Ч й II
тзи н и щ гтВ ттЫ 
ftrq;i
гТ ТТ^ ТЩ Rfeftl 14 11 
RTT?f. 'Й тд н г 
ТТ* fhT: I
фШНИГ ^ r n R R R R ^ II^ o ll
тпрт 
it ^ 4 iMFriitiTWi 
сЙ&сШ^Н! 
c ^ tR H ^ II^ U I 
tujUHcnf Ш
 IT -qrq^l 
4 ^ 4 % tr^ -qt^ f%rrqjlЩУ11
The one who looking at a helpless pauper 
Brahmana of high family and marries him, he 
achieves moksa definitely The one who on an 
auspicious day, donates with devotion a chatra 
or sandals to TulasT, the beloved of the lord 
Salagmma, he earns the merit of donating land. 
If one gives away in charity an elephant, he 
enjoys the dwelling in heaven up to the number 
of years equivalent to the hair on his body and 
the one who donates a great elephant, he earns 
four times the merit described earlier. He enjoys 
all the pleasures in my abode. This has been 
described in the Vedas. Similarly by giving away 
a white horse in charity, one earns half the merit 
of donating an elephant and by donating several 
types of horses, one earns one-fourth of the 
merit. О father, by donating a black cow one 
earns the merit equivalent to the donating of an 
elephant. He does not get the same merit by 
donating another cow and by giving away in 
charity an ordinary cow one earns half the merit. 
О virtuous one, he who donates a cow with a calf

=== PAGE 564 ===

500
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURA^AM
earns the merit of donating land. He who donates 
land, has to remain in my abode till the number 
of years equivalent to the particles of dust of that 
land. One earns great merit by donating 
knowledge and he enjoys pleasure in Vaikuntha 
for a long time.
Ш 
TRsr тайт rfi
зптсгй т а чт? ш ■лн|Гч t
TO 4 
T
чту WR^iTsf^r ч g p r^ m : tFyfror
зтуТО 
цш* щ : m
ТОГО xT TO
t o TOfr fTOy 
^ гГ т о п ^ п
ТОЩТОЧ^ 
'Ч^гГ f ^ l
хъёък гг m w t ъ 
xth^ oii 
дкут c w frh g TOraf^TOro1 
TOT 
^ V& TOidAiitun 
STTOJR tf 4 'TJ? 
TO cOTI 
Ч Ц Я?ТОг TOT хГ ЗГЧЙ TO ТОГО! 1^ 11 
w m m хТ 
4 TOd TOTORFJT
XT чШ TOi4f^:i tti О 11
Similarly by donating gold one gets riches and 
by donating silver one achieves kingship. The 
merit one earns by donating food is beyond 
description. By serving food to a Brahmana one 
earns great merit. This is the reason why no 
charity is considered to be bigger than of serving 
the food to the needy persons. While giving 
away food in charity, one remains unmindful of 
the receiver and there is no other rule specially 
applicable to this purpose. Thus the one, who 
serves food in charity, he earns the merit and the 
person who receives the food also does not earn 
sin. This is the reason why the giving away of 
food in charity has been considered to be quite 
graceful and leads one to Vaikuntha. In case a 
cloth is given to a poor Brahmana, the donor 
earns to stay in Vaikuntha delightfully till the 
number of years equivalent to the number of 
threads of the cloth. Thereafter he stays in 
Candraloka and Vamnaloka with great pleasure.
By placing a wick in an iron lamp, whosoever 
offers it to lord Visnu, his house always remains 
lighted and even Yama, the god of death, cannot 
create darkness in his house. He ultimately 
achieves my abode. In case a similar type of 
lamp is given away in charity to a Brahmana, the 
donor does not have to face the torture of Yama 
and ultimately he achieves great pleasure up to a 
divine thousand years in the abode of Indra.
ЭТОТ cTOf 
T O hiqi^rl:I
зТО 
TTc$ TO: 9Г%||\э?|1 
niwjyh 
iTO qtjyid
ШёТОГ firc ^cpf ЩдЧШрГОсТ: I № 4 11 
TO ёТО ЯТУ TORT: I 
ТОПТОТОТТОУ TO ТОщ TOfl№3ll
хпр|щ HfiTOi цпщт froaFti 
ЗТЧТ2ГПТ 
TO TO ТОТОЬЭТШ
ТОг т о т g яТОТО TOTOt 
fgfTO fTOTO TO ТОТОьэчи 
зтТО ТОтоТО дТОТОТОчЦ! 
т о г о TO tor 
дзтщчпьэ^и
ТОГ TORT (dTOx) тот ТО ТО TOl
Ь)«|>й dlcj>vl drb deft drtt Г*к1ф<г1|ЬЭ\Э|1 
xi тот toTi
pTO ТОпт 4R TOR jihjTOtoii 
^р з я ТОт fog TO TO ц ТОт ди'эйп
Thus one gets a seat in heaven according to 
the number and quantity of things donated by 
him. By donating the best of things one enjoys 
his stay in heaven for a lakh of years' and by 
donating medium type of things his stay is 
reduced to half and by donating a betel one 
enjoys the best of pleasure in heaven for a 
hundred years and by donating a garland one 
achieves whatever he desires; thus one achieves 
a place in heaven according the things donated 
by him and the person who receives such a 
donation. The one who donates an ordinary bed, 
he resides in heaven for a hundred years. By 
donating an excellent bed he enjoys his stay in 
heaven for four times more the number of years 
and by donating and extraordinary bed one

=== PAGE 565 ===

KFt§NA-JANMA-KHA№>A, CHAPTER 77
501
enjoys his stay in heaven for three lakhs of years. 
Similarly, by donating a house to a helpless 
Brahmana one enjoys his stay in heaven up to the 
life of Indra. By serving food to a hungry 
Brahmana one achieves imperishable wealth and 
an increase of his sons and grandsons. Therefore, 
О lord of Vraja, you proceed to Vraja at the 
moment and after reaching there you advise all 
the people of Vraja to behave accordingly. О 
lord in the Gokula, the cows and the cowherds 
are getting upset because of my absence; you 
reassure them all and remain gracefully. О 
Nanda, I have made you aware of the merit one 
earns by giving away in charities. This should 
not be discussed among the degraded people; 
only then one earns the result of having good 
dreams.
TFft гг f^3TT Ф к for 
II
The unfortunate person of Kasyapa gotra, a 
degraded person, an enemy, a foolish person and 
woman should not be told about this and the 
same should be told to an intelligent Brahmana. 
By speaking the same in the temple of the god, a 
pipala tree or TulasI plant or a banyan tree, one 
gets double the merit. In case it is not revealed to 
any person, one gets four times the merit.
Ш 
mqf ^ ■qfrj ijt 
•qj^r Ъ чоЬМ 
4т4'сЛП*МЧ1
grfsni ш 1% ^sr: %ГмГч^Гчий^||
By witnessing a good dream an intellectual 
gets the merit of taking a bath in the Ganga, 
besides riches, wealth, wife, land, sons and 
people besides salvation. He achieves all types of 
pleasures and his desires are fulfilled. Thus, О 
lord, I have spoken to you whatever I had heard 
earlier.
Г о ЗтТ° -ТШрП° 
:1Пэ^!1

=== PAGE 566 ===

KFt§NA-JANMA-KHA№>A, CHAPTER 77
501
Chapter - 77
The Good Dreams
ЧЯ TdN
^vT тзяч f% дтщ 
^
grrsftr 
xl 
Ш
 3Wfll*ll
Nanda said- О lord, which one of the dreams 
bestows merit and by witnessing which dream 
one achieves moksa, which one of the dream 
bestowed pleasure and which ones of them are 
considered to be good dreams.
яЬттгатзсггЕг
gtjf яттачяа' s w .
(То адщ ш тат у п щ п | TPTtFfiiyn 
■R HT?Rt 
§гЯГЯ:
ftfevT_Ш w n ftr f% m i I ? 11
Sri Krsna said- Of all the Vedas, Samaveda is 
considered to be the best for performing all types 
of deeds. In the Manohar-punya-kanda of the 
Kanvas'akha, the bad dreams and the good 
dreams which bestow merit have been described. 
О father, I am highlighting all of them, you 
kindly listen to me attentively. I am narrating to 
you the chapter on good dreams which bestows 
immense merit. By listening to the chapter on 
great dreams one earns the merit of taking a bath 
in Ganga.
■ичста чт: ^ягг ч^пчтчяя я$Ц1М1
Ы ч Н Й ТОЯ: «с1кЧ1ЪЯУс(:(
TRfe 
хГ 
IV911
Гх|Ч1ТО?1шЧТ€ГтН1 ЧТ: W
 Ъ 4?4ftn
О
РРЧГЯ сШ 
Ч WT:ll<ill
The dream is witnessed during the first 
Prahara of the night bestows the reward in a

=== PAGE 567 ===

502
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
year; the dream witnessed in the second Prahara 
produces the result in eight months and the one 
witnessed in the third Prahara bestows the result 
in three months and the dream witnessed in the 
fourth Prahara of the night can produce the 
result in fifteen days. The dream which is 
witnessed during the dawn produces the result in 
ten days. And in case a dream is witnessed in the 
early morning it gives the result instantaneously. 
Whatever is seen is thought during the day and is 
reflected in the dream. О father, when a person 
who is infatuated with worry and disease, 
witnesses a dream it becomes of no consequence, 
mil 
тЩщяЕГ « Ш : I
Cv 
' 
чЭ
w r g 
f%i traifw gi
fTOTSt gfo 
vf^cfT^T tEFrqii^oll
The one who is lying motionless and is 
suffering from the force of urine and refuse or is 
infatuated with fear, is naked or with dishevelled 
hair, the witnessing of a dream by such a person 
is of no consequence. In case a sleeping person 
after witnessing a dream or narrates it to 
someone in the night itself, he does not have to 
get a reward for it.
Зсрдт удачлО g fgrfw няй §дч)
- f ffrg # что carfsbraifd g n ^ u 
ТЙ vfi g 
TRsT g сйЩ
gtrog g^iiRii
If a person of Kas'yapa gotra witnesses a 
dream, he surely invites misfortune. In case the 
dream is told to an unfortunate person, one has to 
face misfortune; by speaking the same to a 
degraded person one invites ailment; by speaking 
out the same to an enemy, one invites fear; by 
narrating it to a foolish person, one invites 
quarrel; by speaking to a damsel one is deprived 
of the riches and when one narrates it during the 
night, one has to face the danger of theft.
f%rat FW) 
ctrfeid'
Ч 
ftcPT: Trftfgt: 
9TOIR3II
If one, after witnessing a dream, again goes to 
sleep he meets with grief and if the dream is
retold to an intellectual, the desire is fulfilled. 
Therefore, О lord of Vraja, the intellectuals 
should not discuss about the dream with persons 
of Kasyapa gotra.
TTcfi g «promt g sTSIFtt g sW-Ttl
ятаддпт g #пчт ^nmt g гйд gi i r* 11
ЗТТТЩЩ g SRS Ф гт ftept ш \
яйда ШТ дНЛТ щгизя!
fctoal sl4)4 fiftrUTT гГШ1
О lord of Vraja, one gets food and cries 
(weeping), if one witnesses in the dream a cow, 
an elephant, a horse, palaces, climbing on the 
mountains. By receiving vlna one gets enough of 
paddy and land. If the limbs are out with the 
attack of weapons or one gets wounded or 
having been bitten by insects or touching the 
refuse and blood, one gets wealth.
■^swpRrnrcmt grafaro grtffir g;i
rort trfgftW ^
 gr ^ft
finfFT ViylqRT^TlIUll
The one who enjoys the pleasure of the 
company of an unchaste woman, he achieves a 
good wife. By getting soaked in urine, drinking 
semen, entering a city or the hell, drinking of 
blood, water of the ocean or the nectar, one gets 
good news besides enormous riches.
’Го 
gguf g cjW ifcj^g gt
gtaqg ТШ W gpgj Ш ТЭТ е=гзгЦ11?ЯИ
Щ umrfufcdqf^'tiTii^oii
g 
^gT grsf w m v^
i r ^ii 
■цвго maht g gfir 
w Rf i 
ftrag rofAidi 'дддт §g м
 gfgsrfgiR^n
By witnessing in a dream an elephant, gold, 
bull, cow, lamp, cereal, fruit, flower, girl, 
umbrella, the glory is increase besides getting 
immense riches. One achieves immense riches 
by witnessing in a dream a pitcher full of water,

=== PAGE 568 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 77
503
a Brahmana, flower, fire, betel, temple, white 
paddy and actor and a whore. By witnessing in 
the dream a cow, milk and ghee, one achieves 
merit besides riches. In case one witnesses in the 
dream rice with milk on the leaf of the lotus 
flowers, the curd, milk, ghee, honey, Svastika- 
sweet he surely becomes a king in the near 
future.
чНМ|и|| тТ ^ЩтГ did чтг 
^ra irlf rl ш к ’ctlfow 
m ш -qipti g tsfr д а э т «гН ^ w f i n
XT
The one who consumes the meat of the birds 
and the human flesh in a dream he earns enough 
of riches, good news and his desire is fulfilled. If 
one who gets a chatra or a sandal, he achieves 
enough of cereals and by getting a spotless and 
sharp sword, he gets the appropriate reward.
% Ч ШЧt 'dfesjfol 
ъ urfHT ^
 
Щ етч,н?М 1
TpJut srfgRt 
d'^udcfi
■щч ftf 
^gT 
bin&sr^Ti^iR^ii
The one who swims over the water play-fully, 
such a person becomes a minister, If one 
witnesses a tree laiden with fruits, the person 
surely gets enough of riches; he who is bitten by 
snakes, earns enough of fortune. The one who 
witnesses in a dream, the sun or the moon he is 
relieved of all the ailments.
fTcPffit 
*rraf
W
 
f¥ rM 5 : и % т ^ W T ^ iR ia ii
W
 ч Ш ящ !
у 
хмт 
i ^ 6 11
The one who witnesses a mare, a hen and a 
female crane bird, he obtains a beautiful wife. 
The one who is bound in fetters in a dream he 
achieves enough of glory and a son. If anyone 
consumes rice with milk on a lotus leaf seated on 
the bank of a river, he surely becomes a king. 
щйсБЗТ -cffy-ERB ^ ^ rt ^
SR u t ^ 
nfflgi cfT 
IЯ 4 U
<W$e|RT: Tifetf ^ 1
Щ 
SR rt fspjR 
1 3 о 11
By witnessing a leech, a scorpion and a snake 
one achieves enough of riches, son, victory and 
glory. If one witnesses animals with long horns 
and big teeth or tusks like those of pigs and 
getting troubled by monkeys, one becomes a 
king and achieves enormous riches .
TTTRT RTO tpfogj xt Щ хГ^фШ11
Щ 
И Ч Й % R 
?ll
tjh 
'# rt tguf я|з<зт fest s r r ^
i
IjfflRt 
xf R ^ ^cfT ЩЦ SRtfll? я H
The one who witnesses fish, meat, ornaments 
with Jewels, samkha, sandal-paste and diamond, 
one achieves enough of riches. If one witnesses 
wine, blood and gold, one gets food and 
treasures. By looking at the image of a god or 
goddess or Sivalinga, one achieves enough of 
riches.
^pfT xf 
W SR 
Тяч 
3 I
ЭТТЧста 
Ъ tRFPPTI
fe n w : ftfcRT 
«Will 3*11 
ftsr: TTR сШ&ёГ vrfWfll
^pRTEsTWTT 
41 RTRRtRTI
Ч)с||ЩЯУА Tift цм тгнлтйт-пт.|
v: тэ-r cHRirui тиг 
$ и
If one witnesses a creeper laden with flowers 
and fruits beside the mangoes and burning fire, 
one achieves enough of riches, intelligence, 
wealth. By witnessing the myrobalan fruit, 
mango fruits and lotus, one achieves enough of 
profits. If one witnesses god, a Brahmana, 
ancestors and a Brahmacarf, whatever is seen in 
the dream becomes true. Clad in white garment, 
plastered with white sandal-paste, holding a 
white rosary if a damsel embraces a person, he 
enjoys the pleasures which always surround hipi. 
If a damsel clad in yellow garments, holding a 
yellow rosary and sandal-paste embraces a 
person, he meets with much welfare.

=== PAGE 569 ===

504
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURA^AM
■Mcrtfri ^5R4if4 svifydift
■qwfmTcn У 
faI
W f# 
ifa’
I 3 ^ 11
fsr^TT ■# ■yflqrir ferr 
яит я^ягат% ■r M няй fp^i i 3 6 11 
W # rf sfTfiot 
WUTt ^сБУШ1
w w t д а т а ^Tsftr # jra yfw tr я # п э Ч )1 
W ^ri?r 
Щ rTW g # 4fgtqf?ri 
я т з# д а т а ^ f ^ r r n ^ i r v i y u i i ^ o i i
Except ashes, bones and cotton if anything 
else which is white is seen in a dream it is 
considered to be quite fortunate. Similarly except 
the cow, the elephant, the horse, a Brahmana and 
the god, all the black things witnessed in the 
dream are denounced; the one who meets a 
divine woman, wearing a smile on her face 
adorned with all the gem-studded ornament, 
belonging to the Brahmana caste or arrives in the 
house of anyone, he surely achieves great profits. 
A Brahmana, a god, a Brahman!, the daughter of 
the god or a Brahmana couple when seen in a 
happy mood as in dream they bestow the reward 
on anyone who surely gets a son. О Nanda, the 
one who is bestowed with the blessing of a 
Brahmana in the dream and whatever he speaks, 
it comes out to be true and his riches and horses 
go on increasing.
5J35RT я д а я ttW H ST%3gcrtfI
ЧТТГЕПЛ: fy ra t д а s f o y i f r i w ^ i 
■tfhfrerw 
f o p 
r* ^ 11
In case a Brahmana getting immensely pleased 
visits the house of a person in a dream, in such a 
house Narayana, Siva and Brahma enter, as a 
result of which there is an increase in his fortune, 
glory and lustre.
f i t tret ЯЯТТ фсГ FTThfl 
-*cp3r 3 няй ipfn
ят# Tttfq ttfttgmi
sfor д ат 
я гщ% wrararfoixxn
In a dream if someone suddenly gets a cow 
then he gets land and a chaste wife. The one who 
is lifted up by an elephant with his trunk over its 
head, he surely becomes a king. This has been 
ordained in the Vedas, 
тттанм! v m w fafora 
f # ч щ 
HI# TJ дата Я р : 
д а Г*ЧП
Я^тЫт fatfom rl foqisffoT:l 
ytrfa ^rfff т р щ 
-gtnfot
О lord of Vraja, in a dream if a Brahmana 
embraces a person, he surely achieves riches 
beside having a bath in the holy place. In case a 
Brahmana in a dream offers some flowers to an 
auspicious person, be becomes victorious besides 
achieving enough of riches, 
animals and 
pleasures.
нтаГ 
та 
iftwrgiTfor тап*\эи
^i^rgrRyer Уята1яМятгтат
f 
Plfo rnntdll
By visiting the sacred places besides palaces, 
the gems and the house, in a dream, one gets 
enough of riches. The one who takes a bath in 
the holy places in a dream or if someone presents 
him with a pitcher filled with water, such a 
person surely obtains a son and enough of riches. 
TJ3HT*TI Я^тГИГ tTtrf?T W ШГг&Щ
Ф& дат § ficRrag;
Ш qf^mwifd та н а # НЯТ* f34J
^ тазд? татаг jf t t
In case a person arrives in the house of a 
person carrying wine, he surely achieves 
enormous riches. In case a divine woman arrives 
in the house of someone and drops refuse, he 
surely 
achieves 
riches 
and 
his 
poverty 
disappears.
зтг?нт1 sfonra таГтзта та w rfr та1 
т а ^ w m fo даий ятФтт я?нч ?n 
чгётап щ щ ей н^тат чттаттГ58ЩГ1 
д а т а д а т а тал# тан та# тадатапч^п
In case, in a dream, a Brahmana couple arrives 
in the house of someone in that case Siva and

=== PAGE 570 ===

KR$I4A-JANMA-KHAI4f>A, CHAPTER 77
505
Parvatl or Laksminarayana arrive in that house. 
In case a Brahmana couple offers some paddy or 
a bunch of flowers, he achieves all-round riches.
graft 
Tftcfcftsfti
ЧЧЩГ! yujmH rRTT ъ <443^114311
Tgft 
ftin?tr ctt^t #t: ^ ° i 
fttR R 4dl<hi ЯТ lfftlft^43eR^IU 4^ll
О lord of Vraja, in case a Brahmana offers a 
garland of gems to a person besides a garland of 
flowers or sandal-paste, he meets with all-round 
glory. By receiving gorocana, a flag, turmeric, 
sugar-cane and food, in the dream one receives 
success all round.
fe g ft Я 
ЪЩ # : TT&I
craft ^Tft дад 
14 ц 11 
m m 
^ 7T xt тгат ^ftsifdi
73ft 7373: T$m: 
114^11
In case a Brahmana couple places a chatra or 
some white paddy on the head of someone, he 
surely becomes a king. The one who wears a 
white garland of flowers in the dream and the 
body is plastered with sandal-paste and is then 
seated on the chariot or when he consumes curd 
or rice with milk, he surely becomes a king.
Щ73Г g ft 
Я -ЦВШ cJT 
'rftrfl
^ i f t 
^ 
^ftll 4 ^911
ii^itriLiid 3 f t ят f ts f t тглт
fimft 3|bd<ftfal 4ctWn^f4dTIm^ll
In a dream, when a Brahmana or a Brahman! 
placing nectar or curd in a vase, offers to a 
person, such a person surely becomes a king. 
The maid of eight years adorned with all the 
ornaments when appears in the dream before 
someone, she becomes a poet or an intellectual.
373 <ргг iftiTcftr 7T
^ i f t jR ftj 73ft 37$ Tfjgsft я тттнч<? n
IT 
даэЦ: чГсз^Я:)
3 ^ sg ft 73ft 3t 3ft3 3 7j3 33Tiigoii
In case in the dream she offers a book to 
someone, he becomes a world renowned poet 
and the best of intellectuals. In case in the dream,
Sarasvatl teaches a son like the mother, be 
becomes the son of Sarasvatl and no one can 
compete with him in wisdom
7TT73ft7pT: 7Tlsft cfc^rft T lfft tlftSTT:!
1 ЩИТ: 4ld^li 3 ft^ 3 t4 tjg fo p jn ^ ||
7T Я
mfttft 3733? 73ft trft зт m m зтн^ ? n
In case a Brahmana teaches someone in the 
dream with much effort or offer him a book 
lovingly, he also is turned as a great intellectual. 
In the dream, if someone meets with a book 
while walking on the way, he also becomes a 
great writer well known in the universe.
7T h fe ft 3?T73t Я
7T Я'^%4: W t 9Ч9Р5пщрд#:1
73ft 
ft З Я 3T U ftft 3T
In case a Brahmana bestows a Mahdmantra to 
a Brahmana, such a person achieves great 
wisdom, wealth, qualities and becomes an 
intellectual. In case a Brahmana presents another 
Brahmana with an image or of a mantra, he 
achieves success in the mantra
Ш 
я ^gr w ssftft дагтпдч 11
713^: 7T «ftgrsft ftftT Я «hfavftd'd: |
3ft 37^ fttt:
In case someone in the dream goes before a 
Brahmana or a group of Brahmanas and receives 
their blessings, such a person surely becomes a 
great king or a great poet. Getting immensely 
pleased in a dream, if a Brahmana gives away 
land to someone, he surely becomes a lord on 
earth.
73ftsft з Г т ^ З 7T 
д а ftft 
f ^ r TRR^f
ferrgfttr: 7Щ*гГя7$ дазт c^ift я ц д г п
In case a Brahmana getting someone mounted 
on the chariot, shows round various heavens, he 
becomes immensely rich and enjoys a long life.

=== PAGE 571 ===

506
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAhJAM
In case, in a dream, a Brahmana gives away his 
daughter to another Brahmana, such a person 
becomes immensely rich and a king.
^
 штат 
сгтч^ 4cpjii^ii
^ctvnfl 
xf 
1$5пт1щлдщ|
4 tnRf% TJIT 
IT 4^f%3T3ftcR||\9о II
In the dream, if one witnesses a pool and a 
ocean, a river, rivulet, a white snake and a white 
mountain, he surely achieves wealth. The one 
who witnesses a dead body, gains long life, he 
feels painful while coming across a sick person 
and feels delighted when he comes across a 
healthy person
3TTPTI TTfhtri 
W f t j ^ 1
f^zn 
-ц 
т т
-Щ& ^gT tT w nfi IT W ТГ5ТГ Я^5Ч;1
3T cfiliHcfiT ^gT гПЕЭТ wfdch4|fH<*IH.IIV9?ll
ш з у ¥ 3t%f
сцй 4 
tpr 5[THt я ^ г хгн^э^и
w cr farf # : ттрщшт)' ЭГЧНГ f^cmiva'kii
^JcFvTT Ш 
cfT 
Щ ША4$\\
w t?tt WRTrhlrf: 
wf?TT:l
чя: gsnnftr
In case, in the dream, if a divine damsel comes 
and speaks to a person, "You are my lord". And 
he wakes up at the same time then he surely 
becomes a king. In the dream in case, the 
goddess Kalika" appears and offers a rosary of 
crystal beads or the vajra of Indra or the bow, 
such a person surely achieves great glory. In case 
a Brahmana tells somebody, "You are my slave," 
he becomes devoted to lord Hari and achieving 
my slavehood he is called a Vaisnava. In the 
dream a Brahmana is represented in the form of 
Visnu and Siva. The Brahman! represents Laks 
ml and Parvatl, the white complexioned woman 
represents the mother of the gods, Ganga or 
Sarasvat!, the one who takes to the form of the
cowherdess, surely stands for Radhika my 
beloved and the cowherds are the form of the 
cowherds of Goloka. This has been ordained by 
those well-versed in the dreams. О Nanda, I have 
thus narrated to you everything about dreams; 
what else do you want to listen to from me? 
What more should I speak.
SflW0
!o 3rT° HHcJh 1° 
t:l№V9ll

=== PAGE 572 ===

506
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAtfAM
Chapter - 78
Discourse to Nanda on Spiritualism
т^3с(тет
sftfjWT ^PTcTt 4W YWM'Vrl SJWT W l
^ r n t 
v f e f r ^ д а п п ^ п
Nanda said- О Krsna, О lord of the universe, I 
have listened to your discourse on good dreams 
quite carefully which is the gist of the Vedas and 
is a part of worldly practices.
зтдят srljjfardifa Trot 
xt
d f^ i^ fo i з т г ш <гч! chfap^fRiRii
O son, by witnessing dreams and by 
performing deeds one earns sins. I would like to 
listen to them from you at present; you kindly tell 
me about the same.
cfxR 
гГСТ ^ 13*nf*R:l
ihnar
%^тчт 
хг ^ - crrt wiqfai
ftniTi w iptat n w r f rim i
Thus, the followers of the Vedas listen to the 
provisions of the Vedas and other scriptures, 
with devotion. Similarly the people of the world 
remain anxious to listen to your nectar-like 
words because you happen to be the creator of 
the Vedas. The Vedic people, the intellectuals, 
Brahma and other gods besides the sages also 
preserve them.
SJtT чтФд<з(«;чЬ(ияЧ1б| ctxnl^nqj
114II

=== PAGE 573 ===

KFtSiyA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 78
507
^Щтттттатгзг «4сЬГЧ1ЬНУТЧ1
W T ^ Ч 
II
Therefore, О son, whatever nectar-like words I 
have listened to from your lotus-like mouth, have 
made my body burning with the fire of 
separation, quite cool and calm, your lotus-like 
feet fulfil all the desires and even Brahma and 
other gods are unable to have a look at your 
lotus-like feet even in dream. Fortunately I am 
looking at them with my own eyes .
ЗГЕТ: xr: 
^
 UFJlfa хГ тщ ^|
fam ranft % ^ W
* 4 u i l i h 9 l l 
ъ f^ t 
скр ъ ч
"tm 
11 й 11
After this where can sinners like me have a 
glance at your lotus-like feet? My body is filled 
with refuse and urine and is entangled and is 
bound with the fetters of my deeds. О son, when 
shall the day come when I would be able to talk 
again to a person like you, who are the lord of 
the Brahma and other gods.
сптт^п ^ 
i ^ n
TRi ctdl 
vra? 
t g % n q o ii
Therefore, О merciful one, О son, you kindly 
forgive me for the same. The gods Brahma, Siva, 
Sesa, the sages, always meditate upon your lotus­
like feet and Sarasvatl and sruti are unable to 
recite your glory becoming dumb before you .
$г4чч<*<ч1 
Пнм ^:
тзгяпт 
ъ %гт*?Игщн:|Щ |1
ТШ Й Я)4|С)|^ШГ1 4te«IT4l4T 4RTT:I
4fW&dlir'4cfi %
 % TTT^ иПЕЧЙ:11^И
Thus speaking Nanda who was deprived of 
pleasure and filled with grief, because of the 
separation from his son fainted while crying. 
Finding him in such a condition Visnu felt 
panicky and started convincing him variously, 
bestowing the extremely spiritual knowledge on 
him .
■SffapRFpra'
%cR 
сБЯТТОТ *TR 
ТЩГ *J4JI(?? II
Ttwnf?qgt ^ГЯ % R t Ъ fScfaqi
Sri Krsna said- О Nanda, О best of the kings, 
best of the 
lord 
of Vraja, 
you 
regain 
consciousness and listen to my words which are 
beneficial and spiritual. This spiritual knowledge 
is even beyond the reach of the great yogis, quite 
secretive in the Vedas and other scriptures, 
which is being bestowed by me on you .
footer 3£3RTT 
Щ
: fR4lf|rT:l 
<H^^<|cq|f44<fVHRIv( 3TRRhl?4ll 
ftrifr ^ 
d'jHiy ?RT sMI 
% 
VTl'ch*rr^f^cjfS?cr:
О Nanda, you delightfully listen to it with apt 
attention and follow it, because by doing so one 
is relieved of birth, death, old age and ailments. 
Therefore, О lord of Vraja, О great king, be 
composed and receiving the divine knowledge^ 
relieved of grief and illusion and blissfully move 
to Vraja.
тшт* тытгатр
т т й т э ч з^ т а т uVdiKRhct rTii^ii 
Гцад1ф14чргс4'и|^?гг 
ш г 
ггясШ^тйчт:11^п
r4 * % i
w n trrf%cT: 
3% :im n
vRjR w f ^ r :
:IR o||
i r a : 7t4a;%i w 
двш м п ^ii 
зщчтгчт rT 71%: 71%RTc*ra>: T3<T:l 
%
 W T ^ 
TRTcRtl R ^ 11
ЯТЩТ (qiniVricFU 7ТГ 
*П&%ТТ1
ч£т fercT frsmT: 7$ w s te f tr ^ R f a ii^ n
ЗЩП1%сТ 'ЙЧТ tlfl?: TUT: hdfn 
ЯЗЗЯНТ 
ТЩ1Щ 11? ,к11

=== PAGE 574 ===

508
BRAHMA VAFVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
This entire movable and immovable universe 
is of no consequence like a water bubble, it is 
like a morning dream and leads only to illusion. 
The human body of five elements which is the 
cause of the building of the universe, also falls 
and is perishable. A human considers the illusion 
as truthful and in all his actions he is 
overpowered by desire anger, greed and illusion. 
He is over-powered by sleep, drowsiness, 
hunger, thirst, forgiveness, devotion, mercy, 
shyness, peace, belief, support, satisfaction and 
other elements. He 's involved in the worldly 
affairs 
with 
his 
mind, 
intelligence, 
consciousness, breathing, knowledge, soul, the 
lord of all and the supreme knowledge. Brahma 
is my mind, the eternal Prakrti is the wisdom, Vis 
nu is the breathing and consciousness is the great 
goddess Laksmi. Till such time as I remain in the 
body everything moves. When I leave the body, 
the same is deserted by everyone; without me the 
body falls in no time. All the five elements of the 
body that is earth, water, fire, wind and sky are 
merged in the five elements .
ш 
fgjcRi lymi
Ш: Rztf: TTfirT: 3wlT:l 
HIRSH
О father, that is why the whole universe is the 
cause of illusion alone, in which the wise people 
do not attract grief and the intellectuals never 
indulge in the same. All the saktis like sleep, etc., 
are the rays of Prakrti. Desire, anger, greed, 
illusion and arrogance are the amsa of adharma 
or sin .
rf 
тртт:
?ПЧТгЧд5: fM t vJiMflTgqRRT Щ fthUT:11*^911 
■гщт W rfR 
гЩТЗ? 
т р :1 
WTTT farpqT 
l y i l l
snff R^TT 
3wTrf4&:l
pcf T fi -Чс^гПТП 'чГ-ТР^г^: ^TT:ii^<?u
The athsas of Brahma, Visnu and Siva are 
reflected with sattva, tamas and rajas. The all 
knowledgeable Siva and myself whom the form 
of the soul, when I enter into the Prakrti then I 
become saguna. Brahma, Visnu and Siva are all 
saguna, in other words in these forms, I take up 
the task of reconstruction. Dharma, Sesa, Surya, 
the moon are all my amsas\ similarly all the 
sages, the ascetics are also part of my ams'as. I 
pervade in all the bodies in the worlds but I never 
get involved in anyone of them. My devotee 
always gets relieved of birth, death and old age.
«fife: I 
*11
ТфИч 1^51 fttqj 
cno»fdl
Ш^Л'ачжнагч.! I? 4 i1
He becomes the great Siddha, virtuous, 
glorious, intellectual, poetic, achieves such four 
types of siddhis and can destroy the deeds. I 
always remain present in my devotees, my 
devotees do not want anything else. He is 
engaged in achieving siddhis which are known to 
have twenty two types .
3tfirmT HftRT ttlftt: tngtrRjttflRT
xj 
xj w r eblRlcRlrfd^fl
ciilchuf^ TJfflRSHRtfcRtT^II^II 
^
1чт Щ
 
yiuilcb^uri)^ rn 
3-0 
RfRSRnr
WlKdll^'SII
О Nanda, you listen to me about them from 
my mouth and receive the siddhamantra. The 
names of the siddhis are anima, Laghima, Prapti, 
Prakamya, 
Mahima, 
Isitva, 
Vasitva, 
Kamavasayita, Dura-sravana, Parakaya-praves'a, 
Manoyayitva, 
Sarvajnatva, 
Agnistambhana, 
Jalastambhana, 
Ciranjlvitva, 
Vayustambha, 
controlling of hunger, thirst and sleep, a

=== PAGE 575 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 78
509
Vaksiddhi, bringing up the dead body, the 
creation, pranayama. The relevant siddha mantra 
is aif 
w t 
fSf^t fow l 
щ .
згё *RTT WJS: Tridt W W :I
This mantra is quite secretive and is like 
kalpavrksa which has been prescribed in the 
Sdmaveda and provides all success to the 
siddhas.
s m ^rfrR: fegr
hcdl 
ЗРТ ШгГ cblRn<*l ufiuehRiIshlHJГко 11
All these yogis, the ascetics and the gods 
achieve success by reciting the mantras, by 
consuming the havisya food in the Narayana-ks 
etra; by reciting this mantra for a hundred lakhs 
of times, the intellectuals meet with success. О 
father, you go to Kas'I and recite this mantra over 
the Manikamika ghata.
*jtg чттгащЬг
згечкгащ: w rf ят^г: writ
I am now talking to you about Narayana-ks 
etra which you may please listen to. Up to the 
width of four hands of the flowing water in the 
river, the place has been described as Narayana- 
ksetra, only Narayana happens to be the lord of 
this place and none else.
?lH Щ ^ HRi gfcMrifd d'HI ch
5PT f^TTSfrir 
Ч -ЩТО: I Г* ? 11
A person who dies at that place, achieves 
salvation and divine knowledge. If anyone 
recites the mantras even without performing 
vrata, he is relieved of the cycle of birth and 
death; there is no doubt about it.
9PjT 
Ttfer rf дзятгг ^3T ^311
ШЧФт rt 
Шящтитч,!
bs&t Гч<?ЧТ^Я TTPt fcWKfMlfcHHI
ЗТ^етшШ ^
 fviy[quijfc)p|^ch^iu^|| 
3t^t^RPT4TcTR dwjlgld fg3T tWTI
зтсйтт f e s w гг ^ r ^ i f - t ^ i q n ^ i i 
4(rl'4frhfc(^dl 
friWJj'qfrhfcJsldehl^l 
зрипт fssrat ^
 
o£ff4TcnfpjM^n^ я 11
'g^gupifd W sin<4^1 
xftr 
^ ^uuiriidtiiRi-i^imoii
MitTiT^rRoj ъц
Щ тФ пШ ^ Ш 
WII4 rii
О lord of Vraja, you go to Vraja and purify the 
place. О father, now I am telling you about the 
person by looking at whom one earns a sin. You 
please listen to me. The bad dream is the result of 
sinful ways and is the result of many of our 
actions. One earns sins by looking at the killer of 
a cow, the killer of a Brahmana, an ungrateful 
person, a wicked person, a destroyer of the 
images of the gods, the killer of the parents, a 
betrayer of the faith, a giver of false witness, 
those who extend ill treatment to beggars, those 
who performed yajnas in villages, the one who 
snatches away the livelihood of the gods and the 
Brahmanas, the one who cuts the plpala tree, the 
one who denounces Siva and Visnu, a person 
without Diksa, the Brahmana who falls in evil 
ways and those who are deprived of the 
sandhyas thrice a day. By looking at the pujari of 
a temple, the driver of the bulls, the store-keeper 
of the Siidras, the one who bums the dead bodies 
of the Siidras and takes the food of sraddha with 
them, a woman having no son or a husband, 
women with severed nose, those who denounce 
Brahmanas and the gods, a lady who is not 
devoted to Visnu or her husband, a widow Sudra 
woman, a candala woman, a loose-woman and 
those who always remain in anger, the wicked 
person, 
the 
indebtors, 
varnasankaras, 
the 
thieves, those who always speak untruth, these 
who come to take refuge, the thieves of meat, a 
Brahmana having a Sudra as his wife, a Sudra

=== PAGE 576 ===

510
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
cohabiting with a Brahmana woman, the money 
lender, the wicked person who cohabits with a 
Brahmana woman and a person who is 
denounced by all the varnas.
SPTORnfitf 
44ISTTT4J
■ЩТ WTtRFTT *T 
Я М ) ^сТТНЧ ? II
тьчсн) 
vidxw fsraT w h
RfifWW 
M l l ^ II
чшёэтчт та к т a' 
ттнанп
'^TT.-im 'kll
эдШ т: W ^ [ ar hfdTTc^T: TRT дзп
тр" ^
 ^ 
tT w W
 
11Ч Ч11
The eighteen types of women have been 
described as inaccessible. They include the 
mother, the step-mother, the mother-in-law, wife 
of the teacher, wife of son, wife of the brother, 
sister of the mother, sister of the father, wife of 
the nephew, brother's wife, newly wedded wife 
of others, aunt, the women in period, mother of 
the father and the mother of the mother. О lord 
of Vraja, the list of these has been provided in 
the Samaveda which is fully supported by the 
people of wisdom. If anyone looks at them with 
side glances or touches them with evil intentions 
he earns the sin of Brahmahatya.
ИТ <ЩТ ^ 4 
tffT Wldj 
armat afc т?а^т fsrfvRrrer
In case one accidentally looks at them with an 
evil eye, he should at once worship Hari. 
Whosoever looks at them with passionate 
intentions, always earns denouncement.
ТЦЩТ-di 4 Vyq&f ?ПФЧ)сТТ sT^aRl
тщ тш Tfa ^
 ч w r^ f^ Tf^ TrTm h ^ ii
О lord of Vraja, therefore, the wise people 
never cast an evil eye on them. The intellectuals 
never look at the sun and the moon when they 
are eclipsed by Rahu.
3F4retTHft:
3F4# 
xTlfa 
=Fwnf4^H46H
R f W hsupH gtfhrd
4 ^T?ET ^
 "RT% fRTTTf^l 14 4 11
In case the son is in the house of the birth, the 
eighth house, the seventh house, the twelfth 
house, ninth house and tenth house and in that 
case one should not look at the sun. In case the 
moon is in the constellation of birth and the 
fourth and eighth house, then one should not 
look at the moon. The moon rising in the bright 
fort-night in the month of Bhadrapada is known 
as Na$tacandra. The intellectuals should not 
look at it.
чГ<гЧтЬ1 *Rrfhfo:l
У^тттт^от cM#4%bcFRi{||^o||
гг^ ggifa ^ ч ъ araaf afa
ЗШЧТТГ ЧТГ <gT 
^TH 
?ll
О Nanda, in case someone intentionally looks 
at the moon, he earns a blemish like the 
kidnapping of Tara by moon; in case anyone 
looks at it, unconsciously then one should drink 
the sanctified water.
TT^f ^
 fig AMT ftsTKTft д?1сТН1
w m a i rt ftg lw i$4
4^ui hjt at 
dl«j:
« Г ч % n ^ n
By doing so, a person is purified and is 
relieved of all sins on earth. The mantra which 
purifies the water is like this :
О prince, don't cry, you take this Syamantaka 
gem because of which a lion had killed Prasena 
and the lion was killed by Jambavan. The water 
sanctified by this mantra should always be 
consumed. I have thus spoken all the essential 
things to you. What more shall I speak.
9ils<gio трио 9il<j)Wi4ri-+itsio Зтг° чттдчт®
чтга?р^т° зт^тн17шГ58гм:11»йи

=== PAGE 577 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 79
511
Chapter - 79
Reason for not viewing the Eclipsed Sun 
ЧЯ? ЗЯТЯ
ТЩПЯТ: дат 
^rrsfcr ^IWTtl
V 'V ^: дат ЯТ^ 
rnf^ f^ll^ll
Nanda said- О lord of the universe, why is the 
viewing of the sun and moon eclipsed by Rahu 
and the moon on the fourth day of the bright 
fortnight is prohibited? .
щчда?4 щ % fegrfa 
fsrm
-jont TTbzr 
fouf^trMl
TifcR зрзт 
W 44sp&iii? n
You are the creator of the Vedas, therefore 
who else could be consulted on the subject? This 
is a secret topic in the Vedas as well as in the 
Puranas. Because of this, even the people with 
wisdom are not aware of the same. On hearing 
this, the lord said to him.
ЯЬЯЩЯЯГЯ
сгегт ^
я я я ш ч шчщ м Ш
:1
fer: зш?т ч Ф тш 
я ifctRimi
The lord said- The revealing of this secret is 
prohibited in the Vedas; therefore you please 
forgive me and you ask for something else. О 
father, the secret things are not revealed by the 
learned people, because by doing so some 
obstructions or dissension's are created among 
the intellectuals.
ЗЯТЯ
о т т а я я я м ч яя; язяя яда
rlTfh 
irglRrft Я ЗТЩс^ПЦ II
Nanda said- О lord of the universe, you kindly 
tell me. Do not deprive a devotee of the 
knowledge; why are the sun and the moon 
getting eclipsed considered as auspicious?.
t ? jra$mf4 дап^р ттш гчт 
ЯТ f^ T 
тЫдаяТ яЗщ :И5и
^gr яттрт ч т щ-. i
3nW H«30$d ЯЯЙЯТТ
Lord Krsna said- О Nanda, I an going to 
narrate to you an old story by listening to which, 
a man is freed from blemish and earns the merit 
of having a bath in a holy place. I am going to 
tell you the same. You please listen. The sin one 
earns after looking at a most sinful person-all 
such sins are washed out by listening to the story.
uehqi 
й51«*^бН(Рчп:1
% < к га (| г(^ ш
 44c[i<id4ii£ii 
ч$чшй 
ш w i 
яяттгят я 
ii^ ii
яГотШТ ЯТиФЛЯтШ!
ч ш япягЬя xiafaftoi чч*т1Пон 
4f<(fn|PTdHST ?4аящдаго?яп
датщ яят зяти ^и
Once, Jamadagni delightfully went to the bank 
of Narmada together with his wife Renuka. He 
enjoyed the water-sport with her on the bank of 
the river; she was newly wedded, beautiful, quite 
youthful, clad in beautiful garments, wearing a 
serene smile on the face, adorned with the best of 
ornaments studded with gems, heaving with the 
weight of her breasts, having a developed pelvic 
region, moving slowly, the best of the beauties, 
having the complexion of white campaka 
flowers and the face like the full moon and the 
sharp side-glances.
днда{зшяс4^яяйчт^г ijcsfcm i % ? 11 
dw ferPpf 
Tftvsrdi
■р^яящя^яй 
i ^ 11
щячтеящ Tgf^i
ящ ш тягея ЯдЯТЯ япян: ятяци т*и
ЯЗЯф WlTRij 9ЩЛЛучг

=== PAGE 578 ===

512
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
'^l#ch<rf gi%: M 
Щ:\
Ч?Г(ТЧ^ ТЯТЗГ 
^
О lord of Vraja, she was clad in extremely fine 
garments and was filled with passion; she was 
feeling emotional and had fainted after the union. 
The sweet notes of the cuckoos, the hissing 
sound of the black wasps, the fragrant breeze, the 
flower beds arranged on the bank of the river 
looked quite fine. The sage had his body 
plastered with sandal-paste and having the rosary 
on the clothes, was engaged in the love-sport 
with the damsel. At that point of time the sun 
spoke to him, "You are the great grandson of 
Brahma the lord of the universe, who happens to 
be the creator of the Vedas. You are yourself 
quite well-versed in the Vedas and the post- 
Vedic literature, well-versed in the dharma, the 
best of those well-versed in the Vedas, a great 
ascetic, illustrious, a Brahmacarl and performer 
of the best of vratas.".
<pfcyfcfci 
ъ 
Фткт:
«в? 
er#r irsrfrjT T?r: W fl
^ 
11 и II
The people attain wisdom with the study of 
the scriptures composed by you. It is quite 
religious to act according to the provision of the 
Vedas and to act against them is quite sinful. 
Therefore, being well-versed in the dharma, why 
are you acting in an opposite manner? How have 
you been indulging in the sinful ways when the 
Vedas prohibit union between a man and woman 
during the day time?.
Sfi rT qffrm щ й $Я <3T 
Tl
ЧгРТ 
UrSira % Я fg^r; 11W 11
^
 гГяШТ -grqri 
W p q : ^1ЧёГ?зГПР1^сТ:!1 
rtfeRTT ?ПТ 
smnft' R cftlR oll
I am the witness of all the religious people; 
that is why I am speaking to you like this. On 
hearing the words of the sun the sage stopped 
enjoying the conjugal pleasures and finding
Surya having been turned into the form of a 
Brahmana, the sage was over-powered with 
shame and anger. His mouth became red in 
anger. Renuka also hurriedly clad herself in the 
garments.
'ЛЧ(дПчЬс1Ы
ЩэфЩФЧt 4 
trf&5rT:|
Щ 
rTIR^ll
^Rifr mtMfqwhJli
3^R t JW- 
*qcb4ulll
Ч5?ЩШ rj VIlTTdl qrR ^rm ;
Я 
ТТШПТГ 
ril
Я
R4II
xF% 
^orrcfr-fl
4TTIW^ 
W ^ 
I 
S И
TRRRR ?? ^ Tlfd
т г зг ^ ?т э д я w i 4cf^qTftrT:iR \9ii 
grates
^4dldrtl<rT-4TI I ^ 6 11
Jamadagni said- How do you consider 
yourself a great intellectual; is there no other 
intellectual on earth beside you? I am a pupil of 
sage Bhrgu and you happen to be a pupil of sage 
Kas'yapa. I am quite well-versed in all the four 
Vedas and the provisions of dharma and the sins 
prescribed there in. The actions according to the 
Vedas are considered to be dharma and the 
opposite of the same is called sinful. Whatever 
you have spoken now is meant for the people 
without wisdom and those who are inactive 
having been surrounded with their own deeds. 
But the illustrious person while moving in an 
opposite direction does not earn and sin like the 
fire flames which consumes everything. The 
people, yourself and all others are witnesses of 
dharma and your son named dharma also 
bestows the reward for the deeds, still you do not 
happen to be the rulers of the Vaisnavas like us.

=== PAGE 579 ===

KFl§iyA-JANMA-KHAPSPA, CHAPTER 79
513
The devotees of lord Vasudeva never meet with 
any evil because the Sudarsana-cakra of the lord 
always protects them. Therefore, О son, none of 
the gods like Narayana, lord Brahma, Siva, 
Yama and you yourself can control us. We 
people always move at will like the princes. I can 
reduce all the people including Yama and the 
gods to ashes. О son, I can make Mahendra and 
others lifeless just in a moment.
t r f r a i й ■gift т т а т т хП
ЧЧ ЩЧЧ ^ ЧПЭТфрЛ: И # : RT:IR<?II 
зпг R Ш т ттй TtwfWTT fRT: i 
ЧЧ ?K4TdtlV 
ТЩЗГТсТГ Rfabtlfall^oll
How could you be the spokesperson for me? 
You go to your abode, Sri Krsna happens to be 
my only lord who is beyond Prakrti. Arriving in 
this lonely place, you have destroyed my 
conjugal pleasures. Because of this, you would 
disappear due to your being eclipsed by Rahu .
■ Щ 
% ’Em: R f <£fr$cTT чФ ч
ЦЩЧТ ^ТлТНсШИ^ ЯИ
-Ggilibl Я^РГГсГИЗУИ
CRT: 
g^TsT Ijf4ywr4ll?^ll
The clouds who used to arrive to have a look 
at you always remained at a distance from you 
but with the blowing of the wind they would 
cover you and your arrogance and lustre would 
disappear with then. Getting covered by the 
clouds, you would lose your lustre and you 
would be eclipsed by Rahu. Listening to the 
words of Brahmana, the sun offered prayers to 
Jamadagni with folded hands
RH=h< -3=11x1
ЗТёГКП: 
ЧЧЧ Ч1«Ц(: 
I
4RlilOIVxI 
5ПТ:ИЗ*||
MUlVIW lft 
тЫ |Р ч T O R :l
&У^ЗЯ$Т:113Ч11
^M<d?xl RT 
%5f.i
gdlVWxt fgfm : fTT:
Ч ччш\
^fT: 
jffi* 
;5ПТ^Т: 11^^911
ЗТТЧТ^Т: ^RIT ferr fERlfa ^Ш Т: fH :l 
тгрп: 
^<4w<ui fg ^ m ^ u
Щ ЧЧ <3RIT TTOt w
 w r ЭДТО1
ТП^сТ: 
Rfabiifa fg^ScRl
ЧЩ 
ШсТ^хГ Rf^lfTIl’koll
RxR 
Tp&4 ^rngrnr: gr:i
W VIVH4lidWRR:
The sun said- О well-versed in dharma, all the 
Brahmanas are adorable, graceful and respected, 
even lord Narayana, Siva, Brahma, Ganesa, Sesa, 
eternal dharma and even Janardana in the form 
of a Brahmana, adore the 
Brahmanas. О 
Brahmana, we are receiving everything that is 
given by the Brahmanas. The Brahmanas as well 
as the god of fire are extremely important for us, 
they happen to be the mouths for all the gods. 
The Brahmanas are the best and you happen to 
be the pure Vaisnava. You perform your dharma. 
The Vaisnavas are devoid of anger, in whose 
mind the lord Janardana always resides. The 
Brahmanas are adorable by us and you adore all 
the gods. Therefore, О Brahmana, this type of 
conduct begets mutual love. If you have 
pronounced a curse on me, I am also going to 
pronounce a curse on you, because otherwise 
you would feel that the sun has no lustre. 
Therefore, О Brahmana, you would he defeated 
by a Ksatriya and you would meet your end with 
the weapon of a Ksatriya. On hearing the words 
of the sun, the Brahmana was again enraged as a 
result of which his face became extremely red, 
he pronounced another curse on the sun saying, 
You would be defeated by Siva.
3RRt: сШ# ?ШЭГТ <b?ihl4 Щ 9HTI
sthpttr ч т щ и fermT tjmrmftmxy u
3ЧЧЩ ЩП RTRT «iteRTRTR
xT R # 
11* 3 11
О lord of Vraja, knowing about the dispute of 
both of them, Brahma and Kasyapa arrived there. 
On their arrival Brahma, the teacher of all, the

=== PAGE 580 ===

514
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAISAM
well-known persons spoke to the panic-stricken 
Surya 
and 
the 
extremely 
religious 
sage 
Jamadagni.
щггатёг
дщгж trfpTTF^fPsra^ 5гт?щт: ^ n ra 'su 
зт? cjrftfir т а г
g w уГт:гш:11'*ч1 
u p stsi ^fct^nfrr <я?йт tttiRrti
УТТТТТ -ГЩ ШЭД 
<ёГ 4f4ctP$U||l{||^||
fntfaRcttt 
m yijff^mr^i
хрпщтГ: wr-grEt ‘tRm Riiiw ii
Brahma said- О sun, you are the form of 
Narayana, therefore you forgive the Brahmana 
who is to be maintained by you and is not to be 
killed. I would reveal to you the result of the 
curse pronounced by you because I have arrived 
here getting terrified at the instance of Bhrgu, 
Kasyapa and Marici. Therefore I am going to 
speak out plainly. О best of the gods, you be 
peaceful, you are the witness of all the people, 
sometime you would be covered by the clouds 
but then again you would be freed from the 
same.
^TT^RcRt ей ёГ ТЩШЙГ ЙггаГш
3RWT ЫсЫЙН 
ЯёГРд^П
?5t 
ёГ ЧЧ^)^1 ТЙ fw fiptr ^RTrllX^ tl
You would be eclipsed by Rahu when the year 
has a short or the access of a month. At that point 
of time you would not be looked at by the people 
but for some people looking at you would be 
quite meritorious. Besides this a look at you at all 
the times would bestow merit. People would be 
relieved of their sins by going before you .
-я-чучнгГс Tnfxir|3 
ш 
ёр*$ 
ЙгрщГяпч 0 11
ЗШЗЛЙ 
WSfh -щи
ёг w r ёт 
чйщ Гр п ч ^и
By remaining in the house of birth, the 
seventh, eighth, tenth, ninth, fourth and tenth
house, you would be invisible for the people and 
similarly at the time of sunset, with the sky over­
cast with clouds, at noon, in the water and when 
half risen, your viewing would earn sin for the 
people.
STR%:Xstf4fq%T ШЙ5Т ?MPITI
упснад w tr i vrf^rfRiiq^ii 
3RJW rt^ НёТ^ёГ TPjTT ЙЩрЩГЧТ!
ёг 
щ TllRw: 114 3 11
Because of the grief of the wife, moving in the 
forest or the abode of father-in-law and wives' 
brothers your lustre would be reduced. Otherwise 
your wife Sanjna would be unable to bear your 
heat. You would be defeated by Siva while 
engaged in the battle with the demons named 
Mall and Sumall
ЗЙёгдскзт 
ёг wmrnro w
^ i 
ТТРРТТПТТ v rfw ЙЙсТ дёТПЧ'йП 
f ‘ш 
тгезг w
«wfajci 
i ц ч 11
ТГГРТГ ёг J ^ -Щ Ш Ъ : Ч)ЬЧЧЙ*:11Ч^И 
fafyPT атйёгщ 
ёп
Ф рФ :Г Ч W&: Щ ?ф 
-дёТ'.ИЧ^И
О lord of Vraja, thus speaking to Surya, 
Brahma further said to the Brahmana who was 
quite humble, defeated by the curse, feeling 
shameful and enraged. He said, "O Brahmana, 
now you go to your abode." О son, you can 
reduce the entire universe to ashes in a moment. 
Instead of behaving like that you comfortably go 
to your abode because you have to serve the sun 
always and the sun to you. Thus the relation 
between both of you is adorable and stands and 
stands for survival of both of you. A king named 
Kartavlrya Arjuna would be bom in the race of 
Ksatriya and you would be defeated at his hand 
and meet with your end. 
дтт ^ зпёЕч 'Ref «bcfiRtH % nfugrp^i 
ЧШ-ЧиЦГ-cj 
tfcf ЙТ 'qfabqfdПЦ<Я1
fTAtPfAJl w f t 
ёг <*fwfdi
ёгугат 
ч ^ й т ч ^ п

=== PAGE 581 ===

K^Sl^A-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 80
515
Your path of the birth and death has not been 
destroyed so far but Narayana would be your son 
from his arhs'a who would relieve the earth of Ks 
aU'iyas, twenty one times and your death at the 
hands of a Ksatriya would earn glory in the 
universe.
WT 
9ГЗГ?ЗТ1
ш ъ ш 3TTwt
|дчт||^ ^11 
Ж Yrftr 
I
зт^гг 
1ЩТТ115,^11
ТЩЗШТ: Ъ кф щ ЗТТ ?Г5ТГ W fW:l
trf 
cbyfijanfiT 
gHcFfrqii^ii
О lord of Vraja, after thus speaking Brahma 
went to the Brahmaloka. Thereafter Bhaskara 
and Jamadagni also reverted to their respective 
places. О father, the reason for which the sun is 
eclipsed and is not to be viewed during that time, 
the same reason has been highlighted by me. О 
father, I shall now narrate to you the old story 
relating to the prohibiting of the viewing of the 
moon during the fourth day of the black fortnight 
of the month of Bhadrapada and the reason for 
the sun getting eclipsed with the curse of the 
sage are related to the old story which I am going 
to tell you now
тщто 
ан.ц-и°
TruTHitni frrmriJszmT: ii^
ii

=== PAGE 582 ===

KRSI^A-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 80
515
Chapter - 80
T h e R e a s o n fo r n o t v ie w in g th e m o o n o n th e 
fo u r t h d a y o f th e b r ig h t fo r tn ig h t o f 
B h a d r a p a d a
ЧТТ ШЧТ Tjft: TRqt
тттп i
TR^mft 4ffwiT IWT TT^ft W RW l
чЭ 
>Э 
^ 
"О
sTcftg джЬтггт
и
и
i^ w tP iq b ic w u i^ lu ^ a ri 
'■y<3*H№i ^гтчг ■• g ^r^^H l-^H i im i 
^ш ^птр пчс^< т% гт% чт1 
'ЫфПЗМ^ЧЧ ^|^|и^адн1:^Н Ш Ц 1 1 
щ М 1щ ш т щ^гт *ыЧ*кчцПЙ1 
Аадчгтт -^НлЧ<зП cb'mwRT ъ gsrggffii^u 
ЧЧПТТ fcpmWHl 3TTI 
к ш ш тр>щ ш 
чччИ рд^ьэи
ф гщ ^трдт?^ q ^ q q ^ 0 l4 l^ d :l 
чп^ rjjprf r l ^ r 
gvfn 1611
?пч ^ ч m m w w t Tfrrarr g # i 
wnftpimRT grt д^т ^ ш д ^ п ^ н 
■здцгчгч: здГчч! nt im r f ^ r 
^ i 
щ я 
ч ч^ гег iTGfMTi i v 11
Sri Krsna said- In earlier times, Tara, the wife 
of teacher Brhaspati was quite youthful, adorned 
with gem-studded ornaments, clad in extremely 
fine garments, was quite chaste, having a 
developed pelvic region, wearing a serene smile 
on her face, quite charming, beautiful and good 
looking, her hair was adorned with the garland of 
jasmine flowers, she had a developed forehead 
with sandal-paste and a spot of vermilion and 
kastUrl. She wore anklets which were made of 
the best of gems, she had beautiful side-glances 
and collyrium was applied over her eyes, she had 
beautiful teeth like jewels. She had a pair of ear 
ornaments which adorned her temples. Thus the 
beautiful damsel walked like an elephant, quite 
slowly, having tender limbs, a moon like face 
and was quite passionate. She after taking a bath 
in the river MandakinI was adorned with wet 
garment. With her mind devoted to the feet of 
her husband, as soon as she was about to leave 
for her home, the moon was infatuated with 
passion at the sight of her beautiful figure and 
fainted. О lord of Vraja, this moon fainted on the 
fourth day of the bright fortnight and he retained 
consciousness. Mounted on the chariot he 
forcibly carried Tara holding her with her hand

=== PAGE 583 ===

516
BRAHM AV AIVART A-M AH APURANAM
and mounted her on the chariot. Getting 
passionate, he carried her on the chariot and 
embraced her. Then the moon was found getting 
ready for a union with her, Tara spoke to him.
UKcbieuri
cm m ъщ -qt xps 
g^PihRi
Tjw ft i p t ъ Tnftt9RWRTm4;ii^ii
hW TH FftR
TbhRt ГсЯГСсЧ! ^
 ^ТГ ^ чГгГЭТТП ^ II
Tara said- О moon you leave me, О blemish 
for the gods, leave me alone. I happen to be the 
wife of your teacher and also the daughter of a 
Brahmana, I have always been chaste and 
virtuous. One has to earn the sin of hundred 
Brahmahatyas by cohabiting with the wife of a 
teacher. If the wife of a teacher happens to be the 
daughter of a Brahmana and a chaste one, 
cohabiting with her earns the sins of a thousand 
Brahmahatyas.
«Г cTFJT:
Ш w s i 
^ II
fmtm
prfstcftyy 
ftpfr hftgrfirn 4^11^11
w n f щ xnfre 
w r г^тзп 
ш э д <pi ^
RlHfd ШПаГсРТ Ш rt ^tlT§ygRf4,l
WTTO ШТГ 
fa&hlRl ТГТ ufcTsTdlll^ll
т т р ш з д ш :
сШ|^ R$ROTT W t Rfearfft 4 W T :ll^ ll
Therefore, lord of gods, you be patient, look I 
happen to be your mother and you happen to be 
my son. In case you indulge in such a type of 
deplorable action, you will earn disgrace and on 
hearing this Brhaspati, the teacher of the gods 
would reduce you to ashes. You happen to be the 
pupil of my husband and are dear to him like his 
own son. Therefore, sinful one, don't indulge in 
this. You leave the mother like me free and 
protect the dharma and in case you would touch 
me again I shall shower on you the sin of the 
killing of a woman. The moon a on the other
hand, did not listen to the words of Tara and got 
ready to cohabit with her. At this Tarn who was 
free from passion and was quite chaste, became 
enraged and pronounced a curse on him, "You 
would be eclipsed by Rahu, covered with the 
clouds and would be quite sinful to look at. You 
would be filled with blemish and suffer from the 
disease of consumption. There is no doubt about 
it.".
^
 ?1W tRT Tuf 
w m mi
M ^ rt 
vrpfm^r silyurjfaii^ii
tF^TcTRI 
rt <pc5Tfsfh ТГЩТ sFJfl
frem 
w t fit
Thus pronouncing a curse on the moon she 
also pronounced a curse on the god of love, "You 
would be reduced to ashes by an illustrious 
person. О lord of Vraja, thereafter the moon 
caught hold of Tara and enjoyed her company 
who was crying and sobbing. He took her in his 
lap and moved from that place.
fraPt fTjft 
#T tRT^I
ШГ-ЩЧфчТ «nfft 
TTTf^ll? о ||
ТЩЩ[ дщ?КГЕПЧТ 'В 
Ш
 
*11 
R g T R T c T : f t :- . I
^
 ч 
? и
Thereafter he took her to secluded places, the 
charming and beautiful mountains pools, rivers 
and rivulets, the beautiful valleys, the flower 
orchards which were surrounded by the black 
wasps and the cuckoos issuing sweet notes. He 
also took her to the flower orchards and enjoyed 
her company on a bed of flowers. Thus the moon 
having his body plastered with the sandal-paste, 
consuming beverages and was so immensely 
absorbed in the company of Tara that he lost 
track of day and night.".

=== PAGE 584 ===

K?§NA-JANMA-KHAiypA, CHAPTER 80
517
sfiilWWJl'qift *1^ch|.scH4<StllR4ll 
T^i^t 
vfurqf^Rf^l 
MlfuicRl^ThRlf^ai $Ugftui TFTtf^l I ^ <411
'^3*1^ fM<(W^IRV9II 
cfrenft чГс^41 hired ct*iU|Hld4pdd:l
g$mt тчй m m 
w w i r c i i 
UTeFt WTtin^ TlfentTlft^f gi
ьачммА g f ^ i i ^ i i
Tpft Ъ 
gftt %)Й<Е15ЙИЗ ОII
He moved on the chariot to the Malaya 
mountain and Malaya forest with the fragrant 
breeze blowing in the forest of sandal-wood, the 
shores of the western ocean peaks of the Trikuta 
mountain, under the shed of the banyan tree, in 
the pool, over the lotus leaves plastered with 
sandal-paste, in the charming orchard, of the 
campaka flowers, on the land of sea-shore of the 
ocean of milk, over the Kraunca mountain, 
mountain of gold, mountain of gems, mountain 
of rubies, sapphire and diamond which looked 
quite beautiful. They were decorated with 
different types of costumes, white fly-whisks, the 
mirrors, lamps of gems. They visited places of 
love sports, loving places and consumed the 
intoxicated beverages at the places were Varuna 
cohabits with Varunanl. The same places were 
used by the moon to enjoy the company of Tara. 
Thereafter they went to the sacred orchard on the 
bank of the river Ratnamala, the Rksa mountain, 
the forest of kalpavrksa and the abode of Svaha, 
the beloved of Agni. The moon enjoyed the 
company of Tara. Then they reached the shore of 
the ocean of milk and consumed the milk of 
Kamadhenu.
f?TI
creoit чач1нт g тсгвй жЬгпт:из W
m 
erfmsTrwwfi
sure 
g rp^cf ?rm 
из ? и
He presented her with a pair of garments 
sanctified by fire. Varuna gave the garland of 
gems and the wind god presented a gem-studded 
chatra.
W lW qro eRR 41fd^frhd:l 
11 ^ ^ 11
In the meantime, he spotted the sage 
SukrScarya who had returned from the abode of 
Bali. The moon bowed before him and narrated 
to him the entire story, taking refuge with him. 
Sukracarya, the best of the sages who was well- 
versed in the Vedas and post-Vedic literature, 
tried to convince him with appropriate words.
■$jnj g<g зга^пГч ^
 tjft ш щ | 
тгчЫ 
tfcng si^iuivg iii^ n 
^fctdui тдттспт 
f4?Wl
^
 
sT3Ti i ^ ц 11
Sukra said- О son listen to me, whatever I tell 
you, you hand over Tara to Brhaspati, who is the 
pupil of Siva, since you are the son of his teacher 
and the great grandson of Brahma. You hand 
over the beloved of your teacher, who is adored 
by the gods and at once take refuse with him.
T jw ft t n g p t гЕГЛ "qpRlflgtl.
итгщтд Ч1чР|<д1т1^ Чб1ч>пш^^и 
■щкт 
тщпг д дйч gi 
sgigrampnui!«
 
дт:!1?\эп
О virtuous one, at my command you release 
the wife of your teacher because she happens to 
be like your mother and perform repentance for 
your sin, because it is quite virtuous to get 
relieved of the ill effects of the sin. By forcibly 
cohabiting with the chaste wife of the teacher 
was to earn the sins of a thousand Brahmahatyas. 
fwtuns g wrt grat 
W4}
W ri ЧТТРЖШЧ gtrm dgf: ■p:ll^< ill 
cF7<g здт 
gjArpftsfTrf 9
чк1д«|1шг: gigtfg4fefggrg%ii^4ii
He also falls in the kumbhlpaka hell and has to 
live there up to the life of a hundred Brahma's. 
The lord Narayana treats equally all from a blade

=== PAGE 585 ===

518
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAI4AM
of grass to Brahma. Therefore, О son, in case 
even Brahma has to face the result of his deeds, 
then you are of no consequence, all the gods, the 
demons and all the three types of creatures are 
depending on Narayana alone.
«ЙЦГо -qfTo 
ЗтГ°
aui6<ulsyfUuri 41 SKIRT: 11с о 11

=== PAGE 586 ===

518
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAI4AM
Chapter - 81 
The Abduction of Tara 
зйротзслгг
xrafwiRft 
fT&tflt ^
 TT:I 
зтга^тчтп^гат^ tuivi^iyyiRu^ii^ii
Sri Krsna said- In the meantime Sukra 
witnessed Devasena (army of gods) who was 
moving through the sky, wearing a coat of arms.
RRRRFlf fBRRtfe?=r ?W<*lfd4ftKOT:l 
vracbife^^iuif w t f 
и
3RRiqf URSRPWT -R1J? R ^TW {I
W h r f RRi r 
чздэтяиз и
In the army there were three crores of flags, 
hundred crores of great chariots, hundred crores 
of elephants and four times more chariots, four 
times the terrific horses and six times more of the 
number of horses were the foot soldiers.
IfRlcfTlWruSRT ЧЗЯНЗТ RsiR Rl 
Чг^И1 
R fdfu34H( f&RSItfRjmi
There were five lakhs of trumpets besides 
other musical instruments, three lakhs of drums 
and two lakhs of small drums.
т^пэгг 
r 
r ^ r Rl
■f%t r w Щ 
rrr Rsnimn 
"trfprRr r r 4щ 
Б-дгаяч!
ф?ТН R 
ЯРТШ^И^И
3df<rdi^ R^FSSTf^jFTRRffRRR^I 
^-ЧтСТЧТЯГ R -Rip 4jfeiRRf|U9ll
Mahendra mounted on the Airavata, Dharma 
on the white horse. Kubera, Varuna, Agni and 
the wind god mounted on chariots. The god of 
death mounted on a buffalo, Surya mounted on a 
chariot, Siva mounted on a bull and Ananta 
mounted on a serpent. The Adityas, Vasus, 
Rudras, Siddhas, Gandharvas, Kinnaras and the 
sages having the lustre of the sun were also 
moving.
7TR[E5ctT Rnfa: 
RRiytJHR fo?l|cfi44J
IH tn t fsju t ^ R R p iR RSpRHdll 
gRT^RfsRRSl^'l
Щ cTW3)
О lord of Vraja, looking at the army of gods, 
Sukra remained unmoved and assuring the moon, 
he summoned double the army. The army of the 
demons was lodged on the shore of the ocean of 
milk, the banks of Ratnamala river and the 
asrama of Agnipriya.
ITdflRjRrt эта?; RRft TRRT^I
fr^RToRRFRn^l I ? о 11 
f ? W
 R Э Т 95Т R c C ? io R 4 (l 
f ^ T y P i f | W
 ^ w
r r N
i R R f i i n n 
hr.-trrr тщт
тгфт ■R^anRJFfll^ll 
R^9a< *г4т*1 
RTITTRJ
W n R R ^ 4 l M ^ T 0 1 4 R R l l T q ; i I 
11
R f w t R T R R R R 
S IR fT T R T I
RRRT: WWRRTR ТЩП1Ч 4 ^ 4 1 1 ^ 1 1 
In the meantime Sukra the spotted Siva who 
had arrived there with the army of gods, camping 
near the bank of the pool under the eternal 
banyan tree. He mounted on a bull, bestowed 
welfare and was holding the trident and pattis'a 
as weapons. He was clad in tiger skin, possessed 
great lustre and had taken to human form to 
grace his devotees. He was bestower of all the 
riches, all knowledgeable, the cause of all, the 
lord of all adorable by all, the eternal one, always 
anxious to help the grief-stricken people who 
come to take refuge with him, wearing a serene 
smile on the face and was illumining with the

=== PAGE 587 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAI4PA, CHAPTER 81
519
eternal lustre. Sukra became upset, got up at 
once, went to him and bowed at his feet.
^
 
те! ^prasr:
^ ^ ш тчтго ж тч;| 1 1 1
ЗЩ URtFcft Ш ТШгТ 
IT: I
?trt тая fysnwri 
i ^ 11
я ш 
^
 
чтч;| i ^ 11
^ПТГ U)<Hr<ldli rPTRSU
^ R t 
%a[5rg; ^trt ч% тч1 i u i i
Getting extremely pleased lord Siva who is 
beyond everything pronounced a blessing on 
him. Thereafter, Sukra made him sit on the gem- 
studded lion throne. О Brahmana, in the 
meantime Sukra spotted Brahma also who was 
peaceful, the creator of the universe and was 
mounted on a beautiful chariot of gems, clad in 
divine garments sanctified by fire, adorned with 
the rosary of crystal beads, having a delightful 
face, wearing a smile on the face. He was the 
supreme lord of the spotless universe, granter of 
boons, tapas for the ascetics, the creator of the 
Vedas, the source of the Vedas and was quite 
charming to look at.
тег: зплчтч -ffcprep 
lafaitrtH 
сггазггчпт «rfreor; ii^
ii 
i4yiT хгапт ^ттеп xt ddlyxHum^i
f
тег: 
Tricon
fegrai tjpTcft 
g rfw ^i
mtfT gKrihtmr теЧсГ: tf*psnRT:IR*ll 
In the meantime Sukra who was panic-stricken 
offered his salutation to him with folded hands 
and offered him a gem-studded lion throne as a 
seat with great devotion. Sukra adored both the 
gods, devoting the mind at the lotus-like feet. 
Being the form of welfare he did not think it 
proper to enquire about their welfare. Thereafter 
Brahma, the creator of the universe, with the 
permission of Siva spoke to Sukracarya the 
words which were quite appropriate.
sragsnfa ipffr 
ipri 
Ш лш ^
 ^dfebf,dqiR ^||
trtctt 
те! tjw tI Tferarif i *
yrwure^f% чгч?х1 unratpR^n
терГ 
XT 
тег TUTtHcf^l
3Tt 
xt W nrftlR -kll
Brahma said- О son Sukra, listen to me, I am 
going to tell you the misdeed of the moon which 
is disgraceful in all the three worlds and is 
against the Vedas. Chaste Tara, the wife of his 
teacher, was about to go back to her home when 
the moon forcibly took her and has now taken 
refuge with you. О son, you look here the army 
of the gods which has arrived here for the same 
purpose. Myself and Siva have arrived here 
before you for the same purpose.
■?hpv5rrar
| fe r uaicqfvryfqx^fqi 
f? n rre i 
Щ qiftR: 113 ч 11
3RRJT TTffenftr 
*11
Rfe ^
 T%rTI ^ 
xl ^fg31IR ^II
ш : 
спыьпп w
■piuif frqppf Xt 
xt -tftarailRfcll
ч хщпт 
t p n r <? 11
зтертч! tprat 
дтт те 
i
^iihdlsT^y тттегт fre r 
о n
Siva said- О Brahmana, is case you are 
desirous of your welfare, you produce the moon 
here. I shall remove the head of that sinful person 
with the striking of this trident, otherwise in a 
moment I shall reduce the entire demon race to 
ashes. Because, О Brahmana, if I am enraged 
who can protect the demons, by using the 
Pasupata weapon and the weapon of wind, 1 shall 
playfully destroy all the enemies of gods. The 
sage Angira is bom in my race and is the teacher 
of Durvasa. Because of the eternal relationship 
Brhaspati happens to be the son of my teacher. 
The illustrious teacher can reduce the moon to 
ashes but since he happens to be quite a dear

=== PAGE 588 ===

520
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
pupil of the teacher, the compassionate teacher 
has not done so. In the earlier times Brhaspati 
had raped the wife of his elder brother Utathya 
getting infatuated with passion. Because of the 
curse of his brother his beloved also has been 
abducted.
- ч а д и 
tmf
You hand over to the son of my teacher, his 
wife Tara and the one who has abducted her who 
is none else than the moon himself.
if
m Ttfer fsraTTt 
uifht WTFmi 
hThl Ъ Щ
 RlftT TT ШЩ тТ Ч TP?TO:II3 3 II
If a competent person does not protect the 
person who comes to take refuge with him then 
he has to fall in the hell for a period of the life of 
the fourteen Indras. Here, since the sinful person 
comes to take refuge with you, I don't have to 
think of anything else because if a sinner takes 
refuge with someone, the person who protects 
him also becomes a sinner. There is no doubt 
about it.
O Brahmana, you take out the chaste Tara and 
the sinful moon who has cohabited with his own 
mother and hand over both of them to us.
'fthhm^TfUTi щ tr&it tfnarafai
ттшт 
зт TTrirr т^зт^пзчи
c[k3T TJThJTt 
^n ^fq u jfR l
■Rif: R&Hiai Ы Й Ш Xt
Sukra said- You are the lord of the gods, the 
demons and the entire universe and you rule over 
the same. Who else can rule over the gods and 
the demons. Therefore by helping the gods why 
should you destroy the demons. You are the 
destroyer of the universe, then why should you 
display your prowess over the demons alone.
R* iRtfw: щ ц ц г ТГртГ ftftir: TcriPp
: 113 \э 11
«rf^TSfr Wirfoi: 
RoTRmtl
тгщ зге^тг д а <тт$ sftrfa vftcran 13 c n
You are the form of flames, with qualities, 
without qualities and the eternal Brahma. 
Because of the difference in gunas, you appear 
as Brahma, Visnu and Siva in three separate 
forms. О Lord, it is you alone who remain 
present at the gate of the king Bali, holding a 
gada in your hand. Both Indras and Bali have 
been bestowed with RajalaksmI by you.
8-nm 
IT Difa rT WTI
f% tfoq- гт 4 # 
ftrm Tii^n
vrfsiRT w r^r^iriron 
зщ тг 
itn i Riftr тгегп
fT> f n t SrilcRcf
у р ш щ й зрзт згочг чтгат1зд^: i
ftyiHUa RRHR 
R ^ llt^ ll
О lord, О Siva, О Tara, you shed away the 
anger; what type of glory are you going to 
achieve by killing a Brahmana? I cannot hand 
over the moon to you till I am alive since he had 
taken refuge with me, becoming grief-stricken, 
shameful, down-trodden and sinful. Therefore, О 
Siva, I take refuge under your lotus-like feet. О 
virtuous one, you now do whatever you think 
best. Not only I myself but the entire universe is 
ruled by you. On hearing the words of Sukra, 
Siva felt delighted and said, "Bring the moon, the 
lord of night here at once". On his arrival here, 
he would meet with welfare.
TJpfTR^Rt «ГЦГ gtafert 
w rita fireirew Rrrcfirafgtt дзпгкзи 
# F r ^ w o rrit т а тт RRiiomi 
tbjrt 
э т м ч ш R^ffrrirs'ji и
O lord of Vraja, in the meantime, the lord 
Brahma made the poet Sukra to understand the 
reality. He brought Tara and the moon there and 
presented them at the lotus-like feet of Siva. Siva 
embraced lovingly the moon.

=== PAGE 589 ===

KFISNA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 81
521
утут тнА ж Ь д 
щ ущ т тт:)
^4rl ^5ЧТ^ТЯУ ^ 11^ 4 11 
qtrfe, тн1чйсут у шч^ учч ?igrr:i 
УУТТ У=£ fWTti У^РЛТ yf?TT: ^fy^l 1*^11 
УПН У=£ w fr% Щг^Ж t УУТТ Я: I 
TT^nsf гГУ!Ч У яТзту£ ЩЯТТГ: дт:|Г*\э||
Ш ТУ ц^КУ1 учту У^?1Ш :1 
f^TTfr н^зтсгш grriff
Then dropping the dust of his feet over the 
moon, he purified him completely. Thereafter the 
compassionate Siva placed his hand on the head 
of the moon and freed him from danger. 
Thereafter, both Siva and Brahma made the 
moon to have a bath in the ocean of milk, in 
repentance and made him sinless and pure. 
Thereafter Siva the lord of the yogis, divided the 
moon into two parts. One part of the moon was 
placed by Siva on his head. Therefore since that 
time Siva is known also by the name of 
Candras'ekhara and the part having the sign of the 
deer earned the blemish and started feeling 
shameful among the gods.
ёТЗУУТ y ТУУТгрГ 
У«ЬК Tf: I
гГУНГТ У 8ТГТЩ У^ШТТ У 
TRITlfT?y fTC4T -'ГГУТ 
Ж УЩ &Ч ТТУ W M У УН УУТ1Ц о ||
Thereafter by yogic practices he ended his 
body which was thrown away by Brahma in the 
ocean of milk. Finding this, the sage Atri feeling 
compassionate started crying at the shore of the 
ocean of milk. О lord of Vraja, as soon as the 
tears of the sage Atri were dropped into the 
ocean of milk, the moon was relieved of all the 
sins.
dWcjygy 
i w r t ^crw^ i 
утят у яяуту5ят(я^чт tr a t ytpi 
зуту ft ч ^ у | 
^ушт^ич
Thereafter both'Siva and Brahma crowned the 
moon and in the assembly of gods, lord Siva 
spoke to the moon.
ЗУ1У
тутутч яу? 
ту 
fyyy ■gyn
я?уттгищ>у 
у$*ш<й yfyyjfiTim^ii
Mahadeva said- О son, you go back to your 
home and enjoy all the worldly pleasures. 
Thereafter because of the curse of Tara you will 
have to suffer from the disease of consumption. 
°4sf yfftsFTWT 
yfr *jfy|
4<?TfTTbT Ч^ЯЩ^у yrftyjKI 4tfcRrfdim^|| 
f 
fHTI
чут шч^чТ ^
 TpTii4Yii 
Who is competent enough to neutralise the 
curse of a chaste woman on earth? But because 
of my blessing the disease of consumption will 
also be removed. You have caused harm to the 
wife of your teacher on the fourth day of a 
Bhadrapada, therefore, with each yoga your sight 
would earn sin to the viewers.
ЧЩЧУ affair yrf У)<гЧУ^Пгу!г1^П 
ЗТУ^Ау ЧТГтВоУ fTct ytf ^ я т^ я ч я ч ч и 
^УТТрТ | УУТ <*т5чт>у1 Ч Ч?Ч%1 
wrf^txny 
ЦЯТ^У 4tiy<yfdll4^ll 
Because an evil deed cannot be destroyed 
even after the lapses of crores of kalpas without 
facing the reward for it. Therefore the result of 
the good or evil deeds performed by anyone has 
to be faced. О son, even after the death, the 
deeds 
never vanish but 
after performing 
repentance, they surely get destroyed. 
dRfyiftJirdrTt cbd^y^M U ^I
«ifytyfa 
*рГ||Ц\э||
■^UT У1УУ1тЩ55ЧЩ ЧТТ& У 4% Tl
ЯсУ ff? 4R4 
У}УгУТ ^5Г ЯУ 
14 <2.11
ЗШЯТТГ УНГсЯМ) Ч ТУТ УТТ^ТУ fEyfftl
ЧЧЧЧТ ЧТУ) yify УТУтаП^УУТУУ^ИЧ^ 11
О son, because of the abduction of Tara by the 
moon, the blemish in the form of the deer would 
always remain present in the body of the moon. 
О chaste lady, you come here and listen to me. 
You tell me plainly by whom have you 
conceived. О dear one, get yourself relieved of it

=== PAGE 590 ===

522
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
and purify yourself. In case an unwilling and 
chaste lady is forcibly raped by someone she 
never gets impure but in case she enjoys the 
company of others willingly, she has to fall in the 
hell and remain there till the life of the sun end 
the moon.
Thereafter, Tara smilingly spoke to Brahma, I 
have conceived from the moon. On hearing this 
the gods, Siva and sages started laughing.
house and narrate all this that I have told you, to 
my mother Yas'oda and all other cowherdesses. 
In spite of that you try to console all the 
cowherdesses who are plunged in grief and 
extend to them the divine knowledge which has 
been imparted by me to you.
fftt 
TTffTo
ЗтГ° ЧНЗЧТ0
rTRt W 
HfWdW
XT 
v\
d^ll h^d ТЭ" rT 
dHchH'Mqj
fefq-
TfPT: Tm w сВЧЯ)5ТеГ:|
^TSf^cT:li^^ll
Цг|% 
| т я и
<T fw iht 
4Tt 4^11^*11
spj 
ttiihM it hrgi
ТТГЩТРТЩТ
д? чтя 9^ m
^
 ^Ti^t ъ 'Rcsrg; ^Ttftranw^n^^u
etjgfaKtfa 
eft
О lord of Vraja, Brhaspati was filled with 
shame and Brahma handed over Tara to him. The 
sage Brhaspati took the chaste lady with him and 
went to his abode. Tara gave birth to a son at that 
very place who was quite beautiful, having the 
lustre of gold and quite illustrious. The moon 
owned him. Thereafter bowing in reverence to 
Siva and Brahma, both of them went back to 
their respective places. Sukra also was delighted 
with ail the demons and went back to his abode. 
О Nanda, thus I have narrated to you this 
auspicious and pleasant story, which is quite 
graceful, bestows glory, increases age, bestowing 
all the riches, removes grief, increases pleasures 
and bestows all the welfare. Therefore, О lord of 
Vraja, disown all the grief and go back to your

=== PAGE 591 ===

522
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
Chapter - 82
Subsiding of Evil Dreams
^
 TTgTWT 
'ШФ ЗПТП
crgEmi^ii
Nanda said- О virtuous one, О lord, I have 
heard everything, now you tell me about the evil 
dreams. "On hearing his words the lord said, you 
listen.".
«тЬтгщтчщ^т
n9
^ 
^
 ~W&1\
ч#т %rfipz ^ fahfdwwr
Sri Krsna said- The one who laughs heartily in 
his dream, enjoys songs and dances according to 
his liking; besides he surely falls into danger.
cFcTT 
fatfM xj r^rffri
ея^ Ш
^ т т ш 
щ гопи^и
The one whose teeth are broken or fallen, 
meets with the loss of wealth besides suffering 
bodily disease.
ЗЩГ^тГЯ 
Гс.^1 H.I
The one who applies oil on the body or is 
seated on a donkey, camel or a he-buffalo, 
moving towards the south, is sure to meet with 
his death.
■ЩЙ ЗГЙ ЖТТЩЧЙТ9) chiq"l<ch4j
йй ъ ггая ^
 wtf?ni4ii

=== PAGE 592 ===

KRShfA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 82
523
t r i 
ferat ш \
dHhwi ^gT ^скчспд-аг^м^п
The one who gives away in dream a y'ayw 
puspa (Shoe flower)1 an Asoka1 2 3 flower or 
karavlra-puspc? besides oil and salt, is sure to 
face misfortune. The one who meets in a dream a 
black unrobed Sudra widow with a severed nose 
or comes across a small shell or the fruit of a tala 
tree, he meets with grief.
TTR Ш Щ Щ xl
зччщ тагищ 
4 ^[н|яч.|
д=1ГЧШ 
rT c[gT ^-.'tsrhdlRdlTII-i II
The one who witnesses in a dream in a 
Brahmana and his wife in anger he surely meets 
misfortune and his wealth departs from his home, 
by looking in a dream at the forest flowers, red 
flowers, a pal as a flower, cotton and white 
garments, one meets with grief.
^ecfT трттт хг fgggt чтг 
^cfcTT 43 
TTT*rf% хГ 
тп 
зп*чг1гчРт Ч1с(й ctw 
hRKjR)ii?oii 
спчт 43 grfa ъ гЫ ■fai gcjutagi 
УНЩГТОЩ 44$ uftfsR <?ТЧ1<3(«1||^11 
фыл|игц«ш qiff ^bumivurjvrMHiflj 
зццф 4: 4341 444 qqtffewfanw))
f O T xt g u t 
xt чттч:
4 : шитгготгшн! xt
tRWTifu xt uirrrff 
R W
: 11V* 11
The one who witnesses in his dream a lady 
clad in black garments who is smiling or a 
widow with black complexion, one surely meets 
with death. If the gods dance in the dream of 
anyone, laugh or pat the thighs or are shown 
running, he surely meets with his end. If
1. Hibiscus Rosesinansis
2. Jonesia Asoka.
3. Nerium Oleander
someone vomits, eases, drops refuse or witnesses 
a physician, silver and gold, he surely meets with 
a calamity within ten days. If a person witnesses 
in a dream a black cloth, black colour and a 
woman with black colours and embraces her, he 
surely meets with his death. The one who meets 
with a dead calf, deer or a human with a shaven 
head or bones, he surely meets with some 
misfortune. The one who rides on a chariot 
driven by a donkey or a camel and after being 
seated in the chariot, he wakes up, he surely 
meets with his death.
SjftuT qd-iisfu xTI
crornfb gi^ct uteT tbt fgftf&Tqi 1^411 
тщщзщ! 4Rt ТтЬЧК"ЦуЙШГЧ,1 
ЗФ1*Пт 4 : 4 4 4 444 '
The one who finds himself soaked in ghee, 
milk, honey, butter milk or guda, he surely has to 
feel pain. The one who witnesses a woman in a 
dream clad in red costumes, wearing garlands of 
red flowers and with other means of decoration, 
he is surely over-powered with diseases .
'4fiMl?Rs&?li¥xJ P|c|Wll#ui)c{ 4\
'STriRurf fecit ^gT ш к 
x m ^ ll
утутгт 
гг ^unfqr vilftRcf гП
?nft 4 
^gT §:Ti 
и II
One meets with death in case he witnesses in 
his dream fallen nails, hair, coal, a heap of ashes 
and a burning fire. By witnessing the cremation 
ground, dry-wood, grass, iron, teakwood trees, a 
black horse in a dream he surely achieves grief.
ЩаЦ UTR3T W
 
Щ4НЩ1
ш "чдт д з д 
ж г г g u t 
и
4Г45 4ЯЭп ЯгёТсБ ^ R t 44Ц\
*$4 ТМЧ4 
otnfeRUigi R 011
By looking at sandal, a bone of forehead, a 
terrific garland of red flowers, black gram, green 
gram, small grained pulse, he develops a terrific 
boil in his body. In case someone witnesses in 
his dream, an anny, a chameleon, a crow, a bear, 
a monkey, a nilagaya and puss, he surely 
develops ailment in his body .

=== PAGE 593 ===

524
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAIJtAM
sm m uf щ ^ 
rr dPiuiH.!
TrETTOT ъ 
qrot rifth 
*11
3 R W TT^TUtt ^СГЗМ ^Ш Щ |
^ г т -щд[ A ftfa f fAifq нАг g ^ i i ^ i i 
§AtoA Are? zt TOT^iT Ч Щ 1 
m ? W W W ^gT "Щ 
IR 3 11
ИПэ^А sTflauff ТОТ ЖТСТА cfT ^pT: Ipni 
fh?m toe! chlm^bdan ^•.штотрдщич'* n 
If someone witnesses a broken vase, a wound, 
leprosy, a red garment, natted locks of hair, a 
pig, a he-buffalo, a donkey, thick darkness, a 
terrific dead body, male and female organs, he 
surely meets with misfortune. If anyone meets 
with a denounced rnleccha holding a noose and a 
weapon 
in 
his 
hand 
beside 
the 
terrific 
messengers of Yama, holding a noose, one surely 
meets with death. One has to face grief in case 
one witnesses in a dream a Brahmana and his 
wife, a child, a son or a daughter crying and 
lamenting in anger.
?twt w zj < н |И 
?гсэтшт^пщ|
гАгЭт щ {чфспадтг c[gT 
п ч н
<ДтШи'| "Р ^gT ^
 ^ vT*A gTO{.l
By looking in a dream at a black flower, a 
garland with black flowers, crops, warriors with 
a coat of arms and a deformed rnleccha woman, 
one surely meets with death. In the dream, if one 
consumes fish his brother surely meets with his 
end.
ЗП1 q чАт AA TOT t'TMRUt^l 
ЦсфспаШЧ ct ^gT 
l-Rtsll
totsIto Ф'Ч’Ч 
Птфн чтъФГ^мЧч1 
^
 ^ fA A ^gT -gcf ёАят: i r <i 11
By witnessing a musical instrument, a dance, a 
song and music besides red costumes, one surely 
has to face grief. If one comes across in a dream 
an injured person, a body without the head or the 
one with dishevelled hair, dancing rapidly and a 
deformed person, he surely meets with his death. 
gA qTSfh TJflT TOTSfrr фШТТ AflsJT «ЩРШ1
зфцёАг q 
ЧТО ^сЗЙ(ч£йМЧИ?ЧП 
Alt (?чп?€г 
Awenfh чА% fit 
94?TfAfATTO AlT4T flqjftTOTII^oll
If one witnesses a rnleccha of black colour, a 
black dead body 
and a rnleccha-woman 
embracing a person, he surely meets with his 
end. The one whose teeth are broken or hair is 
fallen, he surely meets with losses besides pain in 
the body.
ЗЧ^АА Ч toA 
dHjuilsfif qn 
ТОШ 
ЧТО 
*11
hrRt 4 fiTOnW
■{тнт^-rt чтоА? ^gT f :W drg^ii^ ? 11
The person who comes across in a dream, the 
creatures with horns or protruding teeth or 
children and the grown-up people become hostile 
to him, he meets with danger in the royal court. 
If someone witnesses a falling tree, a rain of 
stones, straw, a beggar, a red fire flame and a 
rain of ashes, he meets with grief.
ijt ЧЧЧ 
ЧТ fqAjj WKcbHJ 
TO4TOTO чААА T|gT 5:'tsl4c|iy^l<l I 3 ? 11 
{y d 3 yVi
Art тоА ч: toA АчБнчто fqr%w^i13*11
If one witnesses falling houses or a mountain, 
terrific comets or the broken branches of the 
trees, he meets with grief. The one who falls in a 
dream from a chariot, from a horse, from a 
mountain, from a tree, from a cow, from an 
elephant or from the sky on the earth, he surely 
meets with misfortune.
tAA rjTOWli 4 А?ТО.ИЗЧИ
то щ ^ тй 
ч что ттщ щ 1
чзчто totA sA t ’tpt чтп^
п
чААГТО ЧрТО ЧтА ЧШТ ЧЧАШ1 
TOlA Ч|ГЧЧЯЧТО ЧТ^АтА Ч§ЧШ13Ы 1
шАч fror m ч ч tjAtot ttotAt 4i
ччрттто % ш
ш

=== PAGE 594 ===

KR§I4A-JANMA-KHAI4PA, CHAPTER 82
525
ТТСШ ЖЩПЛГ 
3T ^5 Ш 1
9>I*W e^e^dl Ч^сЬта«П1
Чгяы'яц щт$1 <m 
чщя: и* о и
The one who falls from heights into ashes, into 
pits filled with fire-flames, into pits with salt or 
lime, he surely meets with his death. The one 
from whose head some wicked person forcibly 
snatches away the chatra, his father, teacher or 
the king he surely meets with his end; the one 
from whose house the terrified cows with calves 
run away, the fortunes from such a sinful person 
surely disappear. The one who is bound in a 
dream with the messengers of Yama or a 
mleccha with the noose and is driven away, he 
surely meets with his death. In case an 
astrologer, a Brahmana or his wife or a teacher 
pronounces a curse getting-enraged, he surely 
meets with misfortune. In case an enemy, crows, 
cocks, deer, pounce upon someone in a dream, 
he surely meet with his end.
w r т Ф т t TcfR Я TPTf
jrPTVqiyR 
ЧЧ ?1Т^тШдШ||кЙ^11
Pddl4l f| ЯЗсШ ТТ 5;-Щ Ч:
згея# 
fowj 
«wi& hj
Щ 4RTWT sfa 
^Я^1Г8'81)
■ф : ^дязг: ш # 
ъг ш щ
frauroftr ^ r y is f r
fern} ЧТМЩ fTDOt T O RftJRRI
iff ят#: tpt Ф й
яз?ят чгчтРг чтчтРг 
чгЦ|
?1П<?>сч1 яГтЪ^тЬ! 'JlWl 41<Plt1l 
ir*fV9 II
щ ш f| 
ft 
| ^ i
^ rw xt 
чг 
тгдяй|г*<я1
^fgrzn^Tt UtT: 
ЯЧЯРЯ^)
ъ т аг xi чйядрй я^жвг^и
ЗТТ ЧЯ: 
fn t W lf t 
P $ W 4 J
spf тщ( ^ 
тш vra?ft ятектН! i1ч о i i
ЧТЯР^Шр! Я*1р|| 
-Wired ЧГ
In a dream, in case a he-buffalo, a bear, a 
camel, a pig or a donkey runs away in anger, he 
surely meets with ailment; by soaking the red 
sandal-wood in ghee, reciting the Gayatrl mantra 
in case one makes a thousand offerings, the 
effect of a bad dream is wiped out. In case one 
recites the name of Madhusudana in devotion a 
thousand times, such a person is relieved of all 
the sins and his bad dreams are turned into good 
dreams. In case an intelligent person recites the 
name of Acyuta, Kesava, Visnu, Hari, Satyaka, 
Janardana, Hamsa and Narayana with utmost 
devotion, one is relieved of the sin and his bad 
dreams turn into good dreams. By reciting the 
name of Visnu, Narayana, Krsna, Madhava, 
Madhusudana, Hari, Narahari, Rama, Govinda, 
Dadhivamana, the ten names which bestow 
welfare a hundred times, such a person is 
relieved of all ailments. The one who recites the 
name of god a lakh of times, he is surely relieved 
of all the bondage's and by reciting the name ten 
lakhs of times, he is relieved of all the bondages. 
Consuming havisya food and reciting the name 
purifies a pauper who becomes rich and by 
reciting the name a hundred lakhs of times, one 
is relieved of the cycle of birth and death. The 
one who recites the mantra in ЧЧ: fefFt reciting 
the name of Durga, Ganapati, Karttikeya, Surya, 
Ganga, Dharma, TulasI, Radha, Laksnu and 
Sarasvatr standing in the water he gets his desires 
fulfilled and all his evil dreams turn into good 
dreams.
3Tf ф cFTt 
ЯЗТЯВЙ ЯгЩТ!
% НГЗПЧТ ЯЧГ: ЯН^П$ГС:11Ч^И
ч? tl 
^ ^IfcT -1|РЙ 
(ЧЧ1Ш) the one
who recites this mantra of seventeen letters, it 
serves him like a kalpavrksa.
114^11
crat ЫГяРа я gifedt^i
ЗЙ 
W*Rf ёЩЩТ 
||

=== PAGE 595 ===

526
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
By reciting 
this mantra ten times after 
purifying oneself, the evil dreams are turned into 
good dreams. By reciting this mantra a hundred 
lakhs of times, one achieves success in this 
mantra and by achieving this success, he obtains 
all the siddhis.
^tScfT щ w i WR
,Чр=ГТ -ЩЩ 
угщ^ИЧЧИ
Rit 
гг ч щ щч згет?т^ 1 1 ч $ 11
After facing death in a dream one should 
recite this mantra a lakh of times and by doing so 
one achieves one's age up to a hundred years. An 
intelligent person should reveal his dream facing 
the east or the north but those belonging to the 
Kasyapa-gotra, the pauper, the degraded people, 
the denouncer of Brahmanas and the gods, the 
foolish and ignorant should not be told about the 
dream_
зт?сш 
rn
xt зшга f t t 
я«ь№|Циц\эи
% гцягаиэчи 
Ч1ч д а ч 1
One should speak out the dream before a 
plpala tree, an astrologer, a Brahmana, the 
manes, seats of the gods, Arya and Vaisnava 
people besides friends. Thus I have narrated to 
you the story which relieves one of all the sins, is 
graceful, increases glory and age. What else do 
you want to listen to from me?.
$ld aiislfiJo RffTo ЗЙсртГЗРтЭо 3rf° HKrfH 1°

=== PAGE 596 ===

526
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
Chapter - 83
The duties of all the four Varnas and 
Others
^ R t giRR щ xt srgir^Ri xf дзэн 
4^ ш
 45 й in Y^Mfq «щ \ fgrcm^n
Nanda said- О son, you are the cause of the 
Vedas and Brahma. Therefore, you tell us 
everything. You will meet with welfare. To 
whom shall I asked except you?.
fe n w t 4 Г f t spf?Er
R ^rifR H i хг 
ф й -яЫ y g r a ifiim q jm i 
Runuri to c jiw lu ii c N c r u i 4 d w fa i 
yR ra tfu i w h u t хг rTrtr^ g iig n tfR ii? n
What is the dharma of Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, 
Vais'yas, 
Sudras, 
mendicants, 
yogis, 
Brahmacarls, learned persons, widows, the noble 
people and those of the chaste woman? You 
kindly tell me in detail everything.
Tjftort JjftuIW l 4 fviW TUi! xT fg v h R .-i
34ПЛТ x n ft cb^lRi ftc lt 4 Ш T lfd im i
cRftf^T ЯтН: Л
: 44П
$щптг| хг 
4cpi хг f e w t g p f
f% ftoiT f £ l 4 
4 | f t 4 * f iP P 4 XTI1 Ц 11
О lord, you tell me in detail the duties of the 
householder, the wives of the house-holder, the 
pupils and the duties of the sons towards their 
parents and the duties of the daughters. You 
kindly speak them out in detail. О lord, what is 
the number of castes of the women, the number 
of the types of devotees, the number of the 
globes? You kindly tell me in detail everything .
gfcWcl Г3З1З
ТЩТ f^JT: 
4 4 4 4 4 4 4
тЩг! 4ШП5Ч1ч^Г 
^ 411511
Sri Krsna said- A Brahmana gets himself 
purified after performing sandhya, always serves 
me. He always take food with my left-over and 
he does not take food without offering me the 
same first.
ЗШ fsrm 4H 44 4fS4lfRf44f544i
The one who does not offer to Visnu the food, 
it becomes like refuse and the water like urine. 
Therefore, a Brahmana who consumes the left­
over of Visnu is relieved of the cycle of birth and 
death.

=== PAGE 597 ===

KR$NA-JANMA-KHANpA, CHAPTER 83
527
fHoU гГЧТТЙЧТсГ:
9Г м М ^ smf- 4wi^[4T«aa:!i^ii 
fawip-d ^ te n гг f^T ъ трътщ 
щтт 
rr 
ъ ^ l l ^ l l
^М Т f e w i i TJT^ Ъ fq^ir^l 
h^uil hl4U| 
еЬ<$ьу ЧТ? ■ЩгПТ:11?о)|
The one who remains engrossed in tapas, 
pure, peaceful, well-versed in the scriptures, the 
one who performs vrata and visits holy places, 
the one who engages himself in the study of 
many subjects and an extremely religious 
Brahmana getting sanctified with the Visnu- 
mantra serves his teacher. Thereafter, accepting 
his command he becomes a house-holder. Such a 
Brahmana always adores his teacher daily and 
offers daksina to him. He should always 
maintain his teachers daily. There is no doubt 
about it.
тйчтчГч грант focR 
та: i
Щ : WPTtfafaT Щ : 
4jT:ll^ll
IJTPJTT 
tlgjjui:i
^
 -$т тай 
fcft ^441 
зг^ЕГ^тГтНТ тгарр;: ч т а г ^ ;зрпфт:11^11
Of all the adorable persons, the guru happens 
to be the best. Indeed he is to be treated like
Narayana the lord of LaksmI. For that purpose 
alone everything is offered to the gods. This has 
been prescribed in the Vedas, one's own teacher 
is the consumer and has to be treated like 
Janardana.
Tjfl a 
т а
rf чтззГ^№4ч1 
fort w w e t щ т ^ r : i i ^ n
sngiuTt 
^traRRg;:ii^ti
gTpOTt
wmrn^r Fd[cnyn$ ^ 91^ 1^ ^ 4:11 u h
зрплт W cfif 
yrjlhFl %ГТ: 1 
w
r a p j p i w
f e m
: i i ^ i i 
«щй й тагт ^ 
тп
wk: чтчМз т а г чтгнчгат татам ^о и
fESRf 
fraojeTtcfc ТГ w fo l
ТП=Ш: -Rcf4% 
^11
■hff-Rtfn'Vl'pi W vCT4^ ^Tliyyil 
frai 
f^T 4lci^Th: 4$ TW:i
(cfiiiuii йг<1фгч ч* igmrt^iwpiR^iR^ 11
ЧуТЧ dfd (ТгЧТ^ТЧ9)ТШЧЧ1 
ftoT Hrasst 
WF?4T ^ ЧТЧ TJPPflR^II
The teacher is Brahma, the teacher is Visnu, 
the teacher is Siva himself. All the gods reside in 
the teacher delight-fully. Therefore the lord 
becomes happy, all the gods always reside in the 
body of the teacher. Therefore, when the teacher 
is pleased, the lord himself is pleased and with 
his pleasure all the gods feel pleased. In case the 
teacher does not love his pupil like his own sons 
and does, not bless them when they adore him 
then he also earns the sin of Brahmahatyd. There 
is no doubt about it. The one who is devoted to 
his dharma and the one who serves Visnu 
always, is considered to be quite an auspicious 
one. The rest are considered to be impure. Such 
of the Brahmana as make his livelihood by 
driving bullocks, cooking food for the Stidras, 
serves as a temple priest or does not perform 
sandhya, the one who sleeps during the day time 
or the one who consumes the food of sraddha of 
the Sfldras and bums the dead bodies of the 
Stidras, such a Brahmana could be equated with 
a 
Stidra. 
The 
Brahmana, 
who, 
adoring 
Sdlagrama, sips the water of washing the same, 
takes food after offering him and also consumes 
the caranodaka of the same, he is relieved of all 
the sins and achieves Visnuloka because by 
consuming the caranodaka of lord Hari, one 
earns the merit of having a bath in the holy 
places. The one who has the Sdlagrama stone, 
should take it for granted that such a person has

=== PAGE 598 ===

528
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAiyAM
earned the merit of taking a bath in the holy 
places besides earning the merit of performing 
the yajna. О lord of Vraja, the water with which 
Sdlagrama is washed, is considered to be ten 
times more auspicious than the sacred water of 
the Gariga. Therefore the Brahmana always 
consumes the same. Such a Brahmana is relieved 
of the cycle of birth and death and becomes like 
gods. 
Therefore 
it is incumbent on the 
Brahmanas that they should consume food only 
after offering naivedya to Visnu.
TlcFT^r Ч 
rT 1JR ^ ЗРЧсРЖ!
t ш 
14 4 11
Ч ^ 
^fr 1% 
-Ц % T:)
«г Bifr «tii^
ii
They adore Visnu with devotion and consume 
his caranodaka as a part of daily routine. О 
father the one who performs sandhya thrice a day 
and adores me with devotion performing vratas 
on 
Ekadasl, 
Janmastml, 
Sivaratri 
and 
Ramanavami day and does not take food, such a 
Brahmana is freed from the cycle of birth and 
death. All the holy places on earth reside on his 
feet.
fudPd fadtl -STvl^l 
rT 
I ^ С11
rfarfft- щ 
% it % 'ST: I
By consuming the water, washing the feet of a 
Brahmana, one earns the merit of having a bath 
in a holy place. Till such time the earth remains 
wet with the caranodaka of Brahmana, his 
ancestors consume the water in the lotus leaves. 
The one who consumes the left-over of Visnu, 
such a Brahmana is purifies the earth, the holy 
places and all the people. And thereafter he is 
relieved of the cycle of birth and death, he 
achieves the merit of having bath in all the sacred 
places and for performing all the vratas 
h? 
рГЧгГ 
tfj^ i
■cri|^TfTTO: ^#ЗГШЯШ>Т1ЩТ:и^о||
TT xf TcFt 4
#sftf xn^t 
^11
He 
achieves 
the 
merit 
of performing 
Asvamedha sacrifice at every step, he becomes 
purified like fire and the air, beside being 
illustrious like the sun. He does not witness 
Yama or his messengers even in dream and 
ultimately he becomes the courtier of the lord 
and move on to Vaikuntha enjoying all the 
pleasures there.
ЯГ %гётП=ЕТ ШТГ % f53TW
Tn^^gjT?rfg?r:i|^^||
A Brahmana who serves the lord, never meets 
with a fall, the one who adores the lord, never 
meets with a fall, the one who adores the lord 
reciting the Visnu-mantra is known as Vaisnava. 
srrgpjft 
ЭТ# 4 % VfWRUT: 5Щ 1 
wr 
зт щ : 
^ н
A Vaisnava-Brahmana is always well-read 
and no one could be compared with him. A 
mantra prescribed in the Vedas, Puranas or the 
tantras is considered to be quite auspicious, 
fayrtdf xrfrcgr «г fm : vnvbv^f twra'.-i
t 
'mlihum
The one who receives the mantra after fully 
thinking about it, such a person is known as 
Saiva, Sakta or Vaisnava. The Visnu mantra 
getting out of the mouth of the teacher, enters the 
ear of a devotee and such a person is considered 
to be an auspicious Vaisnava. By receiving the 
mantra alone one is relieved of the cycle of birth 
and death.
f e l WPJSRfTsFT 
eft;
Udi-'TW TTlriTH TIH
cTrSnj rWTI
W ^ sT ^ c R II? 6 II
He pierces through the globe and moves on to 
the abode of the lord. A true devotee of Visnu

=== PAGE 599 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHA^PA, CHAPTER 83
529
redeems the seven past and seven future 
generations including his brothers, parents and 
the mother of the mother. О lord of Vraja, one 
receives this reward soon after getting the 
mantra. 
'
4t^<uid4<*>bub4iuii w W fi
tjchlfei) 
5Ш HST 
<? II
f e n fe rp n -ЦЩ ticbrdl?^ erft'.^wTTI 
fe lT: ШТ тщ Ш
 ЩЫ: ЩПШТ: fe :ll* o | |
A person who performs the recitation of the 
mantra with Purascarana, he redeems his 
hundred past and hundred future generations. 
Those of the Vaisnavas who are immensely 
devoted to the lord are beyond the Samkalpa but 
all the details are performed within Visnupada. 
They redeem a lakh of their ancestors. The 
Brahmanas and the gods are my witnesses but 
my devotees are the dearest among all.
f e f e fe rc fe Ч d ЧШЧХ: f e :l
grffr MAtiifiui dtdicfditifesM: i 
ctur^4T^lRitMIГ й ^ п rfll
Of all the people in all the lokas my devotees 
are the dearest to me and there is none else equal 
to them. The one who receives the mantra from a 
teacher, who is illustrious and can protect at 
every step, he is bestowed with all the wisdom. 
The one who is younger in age, having little 
knowledge or learnings and belongs to a lower 
caste, the mantra should not be received from 
such a teacher.
TjtafemfeTEct fipj: уч||Д нш пгк?и
ftfunTT ct^l^NIwt я лк ^ Т ч И ^ ^1
f e ч J^liriccfi^raTirtrkii 4
4 Ъ vldlvT WtFTW rj^ ||w H t^ fe |^ ||'* q ||
The mantra which is against the meaning of 
the scriptures and is incomplete should not be 
received by anyone. Similarly one should not
receive the mantra from a foolish person, the one 
having no asrama, the father, the recluse, the 
ailing person and the person having no progeny 
or a wife. The one who is devoid of devotion to 
Visnu, Siva or Sakti, the Vismi-mantra should 
not be received from him. The Vismi-mantra 
should be received from a Vaisnava Brahmana 
alone.
Tnfefe$rRTt
TTffer# v& m t jroft iaisra#Trr:i
tERnfererarii'kvsii
T lffe l 
fe?TT 
1
w iW tsfr 
ТПТ: 1
й 11
The one who receives the mantra from a 
person who is a physician his life span in 
shortened. The one who receives the mantra 
from a person without intelligence, he becomes a 
foolish fellow. The one who receives the mantra 
from a person without learnings, a fool or the one 
who belongs to a degraded caste, one meets with 
the fall of his position. By receiving mantra from 
a foolish fellow, one becomes a fool, the one 
who receives from a mendicant, having no 
asrama, meets with grief the one who receives 
the mantra from his father, has to face losses. 
The one who receives the mantra from a recluse, 
has to meet with death and in case of receiving 
the same from a person with disease, he invites 
ailment and when receiving the same from a 
person having no sons, his progeny is destroyed. 
In case the mantra is received from a person 
having no wife, the receiver has to lose his wife. 
In case one receives a mantra, who forgets the 
same, the person who receives it also becomes 
forgetful.
The one who receives the mantra from a 
person undevoted to Visnu, such a person is 
deprived of the devotion and in case the mantra 
is received from a Saiva or a Sakta, the devotion 
towards the lord never increases.

=== PAGE 600 ===

530
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
sfT^uit ^wrg; 
gggFT
I 
'514:114 ° II
^■«1^-с^П|Г<4|ЦТтйМ1||ЧГ^Н|4ч1^1
W iTc^fR?14l«J 
sT^sr:im ?ll
Only a pure Vaisnava Brahmana can serve the 
fried food and none else. Because in case any 
other person except the Brahmana recites откат 
or performs the homa adoring Salagrama and 
offers fried food to the lord, such a person is 
surely degraded.
^Т#4Щ§ТтаТ0Ч 
'§sfhl
w i^t4T54?t4t у^Щ=гч;| 14 ? 11
The intellectuals should not receive the 
mantra from a sad or a wicked person. In case it 
so happens accidentally, such a person is relieved 
of all his fortunes.
srrgioiHi g p ч$д ?fgg g ТчжГч^н.!
зтт^ддч- д^дгтдтд^Фг^ддт д ^ и ч з и
fog ЧсРШШ^Т ch^oy; Щ91 Tig g |
3TSJqTT ggfofo rRJWHI RTtf^Trim'kll
шч gtilpf pgr gfo foftg ^srai:i 
w r чГ<Бфг! fgrrt ?тдт тщг g gffor:ii44ii
The Brahmanas should always take the havis 
ya and vegetarian food. Discarding meat a 
Brahmana shines like the sun. The intellectual 
Brahmanas should use new ways for cooking 
daily or otherwise the food should be cooked for 
fifteen days and thereafter, the same should be 
discarded. My devotees should cook the food in 
a neat and clean place and should offer the same 
to me with devotion.
сщг fo^r 
g Twtr fowg grp^i 
srfo^s-r g ^ctccii g 4jti4lfd4^fs,vi:i 14^11 
g^rafagrr ^ g T S S ^ f<MM4l:i 
g^fotr^fog шг: grange groggy ly'sii
After offering me and to the Brahmanas, he 
should himself consume the food. Without 
offering the food to me if any Brahmana 
consumes the food, he becomes impure like the 
wine. After the solar or lunar eclipse, after the
removal of the impurity of birth and death or 
after the touch of a vase by an unclean person, 
the vase for cooking should me immediately 
changed.
51st gsrofo g gtgr sfft g gragti 
хщщпстт pgr 
gtfo чГрртчм! 
fgfofo ч gfog fofo ^
 fetrfafa: 1 
fog*r 
g чшд^ичяи
The fried cereals and the food should be taken 
getting clad in two garments, washing the feet at 
a neat and clean place. The people of high castes 
should not take food twice during the day 
because by doing so all the actions becomes 
infructuous and the consumer is driven to hell.
g m g j 4<$dW
д ^ щ т ^ ц д ^ ifg^r^rt g ihm tns о 11 
fegg fgmprmg gig дзт^щтд gi 
pr^tggg^ ^g ч датд^дуШи^ ^11 
gsgrfr-ng gggg дддтдтд дрт:1
gpr g ra ^ g t дщщ ggjj ч?щ\ 
ш дрзт
д ^ д : grfot р т pgiforggnTP.i 
■^д ^terr gt рп?д gpfag gfofit^ii
The one who consumes 
havisya 
food, 
controlling his senses, is prohibited from starting 
on a journey during the day of sraddha, for a 
war, 
crossing a river, 
eating 
again 
and 
cohabiting. The intelligent people and the Vais 
nava should be given the vases, the one who is 
the husband of a Sudra woman, the one who 
performs yajnas with the Sudras, the one who is 
deprived of sandhya, the wicked person, those 
earning a living by driving bullocks, the sellers 
of parrots, the temple priest, should never be 
offered the charities, because by offering these to 
such persons, the donor surely reaches hell. In 
case someone, after performing s'mddha and 
eating food, cohabits with his wife, he surely 
falls in to hell. О father, the one who sells away 
the daughter is considered to be the biggest

=== PAGE 601 ===

K^ShtA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 83
531
sinner. The one who sells away the daughter 
after accepting a price, such a sinner has to fall 
into the terrible hell.
д^ёттзщ птщ erf Xj -fogfa: -щ\
Then he has to fall in to the kumbhlpaka hell 
together with his ancestors, sons and the priest 
up to the number of hair on the body of the girl.
* m ^ ll
Therefore an intelligent person should give 
away the daughter to a competent person. Such 
of the Brahmanas as behaves like Stidras, the 
daughter should not the married in his family.
ёррч W griffin ёщ ^:
О lord of Vraja, I have thus highlighted to you 
the duties of the Brahmanas and the Vaisnavas as 
prescribed in the Vedas and the Puranas.
Pemi^h $)Pwioii 
чн1ьогтё5-т^1 
tM ril TFR 
ТЙ Pr4^d( стал I ^ 6 11 
ftrtr ётг 
?п ж 11<щрлч;|
ТГЗТГТГ ёТ §:fil4T 
It
W TW Ht ёт 
JOt -^nit^ or ёГ|
сРТ^ёГ ВР^тсёТ ёГ dHd: dihd Ч<ЦЦ\Эо ||
Now you listen to the dharma of Ksatriyas. 
All the Ksatriyas should always adore the 
Brahmanas, Narayana, rule the countries, should 
become fearless in the battle-field, give away 
charity to the Brahmanas, protect those who take 
refuge with them, protect the people who are 
suffering, like their own sons, should achieve 
mastery in archery and the scriptures and display 
prowess in the battle-field and should continue to 
perform tapas and other religious duties.
TtfbSrt чИёЩПЩГ ftrst ёГ gftgiHftdl
■н^гИИ'э
^■WcRtqqrdTd Tf4T^ ёГ
hirhtiarcTrfi f e r 
ётмтгацн\эчи
wr ыяРтггтёга 
ёг
тгг щ 
w ff
They should always maintain a well-read 
Brahmana, well-versed in the scriptures and such 
a person should be entrusted with the court with 
due responsibility. The glorious Ksatriyas should 
always maintain the elephants, horses, chariots, 
foot-soldiers and the four-fold army. When 
challenged for a war they should not run away 
from it, because if a Ksatriya is killed in a battle­
field, he surely enjoys heaven and its glory.
c|lfaFiqqi?cH: f>fwivHl
Hcfifr 
^ ё я и -gi^ai д^и^эчи
The duty of the Vaisyas is to engage himself 
in business, besides adoring the Brahmanas and 
the gods, performing the vrata. Similarly the 
adoration of Brahmanas is also prescribed for the 
Sudras. In case a Sudra troubles the Brahmana or 
steals away his riches, such a Sudra achieves 
candala-hood.
сь!Ггл?«тГо[ w n w iPj тгзтт:1
^
1эявН1Ч?:11'зЬИ
-ц: ф srrspjftmrft гщтттчт ч
3T q|c(^ g^iul: 
1^^911
7ГЩ xf РР£И1<Ш ffhfi
ТГ>Р?ёТ ЧЙ<Ы: W rPHTII^H
3?Efvft4t 
Profit: ^ 4^rRH3RHJII<io|| 
W 9РЛ#Т: 
I
чМ 
Ч ЧТ51Ш ЧТ: 11 d ^11
In case a Sudra steals the riches of a 
Brahmana, he has to become a vulture for a 
thousand crores of births, a pig for a hundred 
births and a wild animal. In case a Sudra cohabits 
with a Brahmana woman, he earns the sin of 
cohabiting with his mother. Because of this he 
has to fall into the kumbhlpaka hell. He is thrown 
into boiling oil and is bitten by snakes. The 
messengers of Yama further torture him.

=== PAGE 602 ===

532
BRAHMA VALVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
Thereafter the great sinner is born as a cdndala 
for seven births, a snake for seven births, leech 
for seven births and an insect of refuse for a 
hundred crores of births. Thereafter, such a 
sinner for seven births becomes an insect of the 
pelvic region of a loose woman and for seven 
births he has to become an insect of the boil of 
cows. Thus by travelling through many births, he 
is never bom as a human being.
^RJlfSRT xT 
SRf TPmsTTEzT Pl?ll44l
ЗТЗТЩЩТШПТГ 4% 4 H TW
p^chnifui 
щ чр*;4Ргфчнч1
fT?% 
ёГ IITTTftT *ТТ
Now you listen to me about the duties of a 
samnyas! or a recluse by holding a danda a 
person becomes the form of Narayana. The 
recluse, who always meditates upon me, he, 
destroying his earlier karmas, also destroys the 
deeds of the present birth. Ultimately he achieves 
my abode.
%*1|ГТТЧ: 
MrJT cRfSTTI
ШГ: 
'<WcTW Ш 9^11^11
О lord of Vraja, as a holy place gets purified 
with the touch of the feet of a Vaisnava, similarly 
the earth also gets purified with the touch of the 
feet of a recluse.
iw % 
ж-л
ЗГ-qiftR 
ггЦи^ЧИ
A person gets purified and is relieved of his 
sins with the very touch of the recluse. In case 
food is served to a recluse, the giver of the food 
achieves the merit of performing the Asvamedha 
sacrifice.
ЧсЗТ xl cblMdl ^gT
w
 Фч|Шчг jpd 
'^raifTtinTHi^u
3ERJT# ^
 -RRlI 
1Щ 1
Щ cf^sT ЗТ ТЩ% %5Г cl%%<5ri£\9l|
The one who offers his salutation to a recluse 
after suddenly meeting him, achieves the merit of 
performing the Rajasuya sacrifice. One gets the 
same type of merit by meeting a recluse, a Yati 
and a Brahmaccln. In case a recluse suffering
from hunger goes to a house-holder in the 
evening, whatever type of food is served to him 
should be taken by him.
■ц <гта% ёг 
ч 
rn
4 £RJT$ui
(T? 
гг 
sr^ i i d ч 11
Ke should not demand for sweet dishes nor 
should he display his anger nor should he accept 
riches. He should be unattached and should 
remain, alike in the winter or the summer seasons, 
rising above greed and illusion. Thus spending 
the night at one place he should move on to the 
other, the next day.
cJk^T iJYtetT TjHurt SR4j
In case a recluse enjoys a ride, receives riches 
from a house-holder or resides in a beautiful 
house after constructing it, such a recluse is 
considered to be a fallen one.
xf ф(Цхм(й|мч д><з(п 
xf 'Jf:i 
it й
#
 1 гпхвт: 
*11
In case a recluse ploughs the field or enters 
into some business, he falls from his discipline 
and the dharma.
xT tgsr msfir 
^ 1
In case he performs good or bad deeds relating 
to his caste, then he is to be excommunicated 
from the as'rama and becomes a laughing stock.
згптгот! bfafftT чт ч^ед|Гч4) ТЩ1
Similarly, a widow Brahmana woman should 
always be beyond desire, she should take havisya 
food once a day.
4 81% 
xf n-8f£bd ^%ДёВ^1
xf 
xfa 
| <? * 11
rqcKril "C[f%4WT5T 
ЧТТВЩТ riitrlj
ЧЩёТтгТёГ "Ы xT 
xTI 14 4 11
U"ii4lxxtKbi 
Hi-TnRtid: i

=== PAGE 603 ===

KF^NA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 83
533
3 ^ ^ ^ 
^ 
«rfe: 11 ^ 11
fwr-t ч ^ 
ш ч 
g*n
i^cbi^tii ч ^Tfcoij ^turjj^rwlR;*) 11 <? \э 11 
w w t f % д тй uRtdiiii 
^ t w ^ 
4r^g€wrat: 11 ч 11
дтё ъщ -фх*т дзгй 
хп 
rfTwr feidiwiuii т & \ ^ iR u u g u ^ i i 
TRnRrct 
% гш р р gift gwgj 
т?е^
 wgt 
чпШ wi i ^ о ° 11
з м щ ^ т ш т г Ыч^тт у M ri
чй 
тш^?гч;| i ^ о ^ 11
She should not be dad in divine garments or 
apply fragrant material, scented oil, garland, 
sandal-paste, vermilion and ornaments. She 
should be clad in unclean garments and remain 
devoted to Narayana. She should devotee herself 
to Narayana and with great devotion, should 
always consider the other men as her own sons. 
О lord of Vraja, she should not take sweet food 
and should not enjoy fortunes. She should not 
take food on the birthday of Krsna, Rama, 
Sivaratri, Narkacaturdasi, eclipse of the sun or 
moon. She should discard fried things and should 
take simple food alone. The use of betel by a 
widow a Yati, a BrahmacarJ or a recluse is like 
the eating of cow meat and the consuming of 
wine is also prohibited. This has been prescribed 
in the Vedas. They are prohibited from 
consuming red vegetables, small grained pulse, 
sour lime, betel and round gourd. A widow who 
sleeps on a comfortable bed makes her husband 
fall.
iiMdRi^i cjttciT R m r
tfofe fewri
ftaTRJf 4 fcffw 4% 4?*# ^tfanil 11° 311 
■дш g щ р хц w
 
-cr^rRct^i 
RR4 х(щ 
д м 'щчди^о'«||
In case a widow enjoys the ride of a vehicle, 
she has to fall into hell. Oil should not be applied 
to her hair and her body should not be decorated. 
The hair which is turned into the form of looks of
hair should be cut off only at a sacred place. She 
should not apply oil over the body, should not 
look at a mirror, should not look at the face of 
other men. She should not participate in a yalra, 
a dance and other festivities and should not look 
at a beautiful person clad in the best of gannents.
VJipM Rett spf
тттчгг? щ- 
Rrerter wwrarfa
Now you listen to the duties of the noble 
people as prescribed in the Samavecla. Now I 
narrate to you the best of the duties to be 
performed by a noble person. You listen to me.
ЗЦЗЩЩЦйьж fsiRjTun Ttfpn-fl-lHj 
g^tjit йсгс fag 
гтгтти 
^ n
ятаё WIcRdNuigi
Ш И Н 
д iH4r«iAf д ■*ТсЩ11?о\э||
odoKvji4R^<*Js| fggrg ^ y 4 d :i 
^ w rafafa ^ w R fai'* g g ^ g g ii? o <'ii 
d<dlfj£hU %тщ ^rRUiqjfiRrigi
RfgRraw ж т| i ^ о ч 11
The noble people should engage themselves in 
teaching, studies, maintaining pupils, serving 
teachers, Brahmanas and the gods daily, attaining 
proficiency in different theories, maintaining a 
high standard of intellect, self satisfaction pure 
discourses, continuos study of the scriptures, to 
mould the thinking of the people according to the 
Vedas and act according to the scriptures. They 
should be well-versed in the performing of the 
duties of the gods, the Vedas and should 
consume things which are prescribed in the 
Vedas. They should conduct themselves in a 
pure and simple way.
д spf w fafar g w w i 
fag д д М cgcwwdh^c^YiudHii^o и 
зеш 
гщргап 
gw гпгедт ^ngf 
ддсяд-.иши
gjgfauui^gi g ш
 uRdlduigi 
dc^uRd cfa ч ggilRw: g w h i^ n
dURlUlldti WiRT SETTW^ M
 RWtl
д*дш gw ^
 
w { iin ? n

=== PAGE 604 ===

534
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
'4JW14i$tr*H 
Ч&Т ¥ R 5ПЧ1
О lord of Vraja, now you listen to me about 
the duties of the chaste woman. A chaste woman 
remains anxious about her husband and always 
sips his caranodaka daily. She takes food 
devotedly with the permission of her husband. 
Discarding the vratas, tapas and adoration of the 
gods, she spends her time by devoting herself at 
the feet of her husband and offers prayer to him 
satisfying him in all respects. A chaste woman 
should not act without the command of her 
husband and should not act with enmity. A 
chaste woman considers her husband more 
important than Narayana and remains always 
devoted to him. О lord of Vraja, a chaste woman 
is never attracted towards the best faces of other 
man, clad in beautiful garments and does not join 
them in journey, festivities, dance, song and 
other types of sports.
fret 'гАз'чГь
4% 
ШЩ- атШ^ЕГ^Г ■рстщ чп
Whatever is eaten by her husband daily is 
always acceptable to her. A chaste lady never 
separates herself from her husband even for a 
moment.
ч 
wfirTT 
зйщ : 11 w
 i •
A 
chaste 
woman 
never 
enters 
into 
controversies with her husband. Evan if she is 
scolded by her husband, she never gets enraged.
gjfifiT ^fDT^RT ЗШАПЧ rT 4f3Rq;i
ч 
g r ftriiw ii
ЩЩТТ ^ ^RFjnt 
w tl
The chaste woman should serve food to her 
hungry husband and serve him water. When 
asleep, he should not be disturbed and she should 
not demand conjugal pleasure when he is asleep. 
A chaste lady has to love her husband, a hundred 
times more than his sons because for a bride only 
the husband is the true relative and not the gods 
or others.
сщч ^«з[т 
щ&ч ш ч : 11 ? n 11
She looks at her husband quite devotedly who 
happens to be nectar-like towards her.
1# : Vfd^dW rT 
1 ^ 011
A chaste woman redeems thousands of her 
generations. The husband of the chaste woman is 
relieved of all the sins.
Because of the performance of the chaste 
woman, the sins of the husband are washed 
away. As by getting relieved of all the desires, he 
together with his chaste wife enjoys her company 
in the abode of lord.
ШрГ dterffT 
cn^rftn
TT^Fft 
rf Ш 15 Wl I 
4 11
All the holy places on earth dwell in the feet 
of a chaste lady. The glory of all the gods and the 
sages always remain pleasant in the chaste 
woman.
umRcHi ?PT: 
sPddi 
5ГЗП
2^ 
dr*T<f сТЩ ■Rdr^lI^?ll
О lord of Vraja, the merit a mendicant 
achieves by performing tapas, 
performing
vratas, fasting by the ascetics and the giving 
away of charities by the donors, the same merit is 
always achieved by the chaste woman.
чкгаит: тгчГ4шг11
4TTT: ^
 Щ Tpft 4)dlWT«Tt rT -Rdcr^l I ^ * 11
That is why even lord Narayana, Siva, 
Brahma, the creator of the universe, all the gods 
and the sages get afraid of the chaste woman.
w h it чт^гзгет ш : ^стт щ гёгт
qld9(dl 
q^Mrl ЧШЭДЯТ: 11 ^ Ц11
With the dust of the feet of the chaste woman, 
the earth gets purified and by offering salutation 
to the chaste woman, one is relieved of all the 
sins.

=== PAGE 605 ===

Kbt$NA-JANMA-KHAtf DA, CHAPTER 83
535
Ыгсрц 
атпт hfasran
A chaste woman is always considered to be 
highly meritorious and she is competent enough 
to reduce the three worlds to ashes with her 
curse.
ЗТсЙЧТ xT tlfir: 3TTf: WT 
Pet W1
т % <гщ 
ч ш с М ^ п
The husband of the chaste women is always 
noble and her sons develop no doubt and she 
never gets afraid of the gods and Yama.
тлт 
fw ш и ^ ^ п
M Ttt ЖГШРТ ш ш r xt чтМтзт^1
4clft xf ЧЧЩхЯ cETtf?T ТггаЧ Refill 
я и
*!?<*t4 гпт: ~$ш -?щ [ «йгГ xt grerati
хт 
тдуг4сч1ян.и^оц
1чтц14я[т зтМ 
M m
>Э Сч
cfi3T qYdW ШТс^ $пМ=дё!Т1| ^ | |
зттзй fcfwf4<xtr хг ц ш члд хг xrppii
ЧЗЭ^ЧЧ f^tt З^ГГ тттт WJSfd xtll^yil
ШЧ^тЕчМг Ф п й : 3j4M:l
ЗГТЛТ чМт: 3JRT 
xl зМ ^ГП^^П
Therefore only after a person performs good 
deeds for a hundred births only then is a chaste 
woman bom in that race. The mother of the 
chaste woman is purified and the father is 
relieved of the cycle of birth and death. The 
chaste woman should get up early in the 
morning, change the clothes worn by her during 
the night and should clad herself in new clothes. 
Then she should adore her husband offering 
white flowers and she should make her husband 
take his bath with spotless clean water and offer 
him two clean garments and then wash her feet. 
Thereafter making him sit on a pedestal, apply 
sandal-paste on his forehead and all the limbs, 
place a garland around his neck and then should 
adore her husband with great devotion, reciting 
the hymns from the Samaveda
3Tt 4R: cbMIh Vll’dN 
*xhsill
frq M яМ г 
^ 4 xt xim 4.1t 
чштб4 faM t w 
'^gpjTi44j
W it Т^йГёГсфс? ^ tJT^M ХП 
3Tt 4R: <£RfRJ 
xT i?H?xK?eR5f4U) 11 ^ EI 
ЧЧ: 
^RtRT З Р М тг а - xf|
M тщщфт тгаЪпткта х т ^ 'э и
By reciting the mantra 'ж ЯЯ-. +mw WtlW 
яящт 11 she should offer the sandal-paste 
and flowers, padya, arghya, incense, lamp and 
the best of garments beside the naivedya, in 
addition to the spotless clean water, fragrant 
betel and should recite, "O my beloved husband, 
the form of Candrasekhara, I bow in reverence to 
you. You are peaceful and the form of Brahmana 
and the life of Satl, I adore you.".
4HFTRI xf тррщ l^TSTRFT ^ 4R:I
чзднюпй^еетч хщ^аднсьтч хш ^< я1
5ПЧТШТГЦ tn%lt
чЫ%\ чШиЦ: чМ ? ч|?ЛТ:11^'?И
xt 
I* о 11
You are adorable and are the base of my heart, 
I offer my salutation to you. You are the lord of 
my body, the star of my eyes, the base of the 
knowledge of the wives, you are all blissful, I 
offer my salutation to you. The husband is like 
Brahma, Visnu and Mahes'vara. The husband is 
like Brahman, I bow in reverence to you. О lord 
you forgive me for all the sins committed by me 
knowingly or unknowingly.
ТГШМ 
^1 
M r ттвдий '•ygyieft tRrar 
щ ш т xr siw PfraT xr 33т 
ЗГтМз1 xf ^ct tj4 
М цт: 11 ^ ? 11
Мечт щ f«r чзрчт 
*иш4 wi
М Я Т XT TgTtnrt W трчНМ г firf 5TTI1 ^ Щ11

=== PAGE 606 ===

536
BRAHMA VAIVART A-M AH APURAT^AM
TOS^Tt oTTSfcr Ч Й gr vW l
зтчтг ?ro?r g t frsJrt 
ерщп W
ii 
Trift rr т р й 
тд^гг бшчг^1
h%<TT гг *|Jc3T Щ нШпЧЩгТ г г Ц и ^ И 
тш ъ •&$ ш т ^спягг «г 9 T^w i
ЧЩ^сГТ 
'RT с(^рВПИ 
ш : Ч%сГЩ^ Tjf|UTt wsrat 5ПГИ^\Э||
G lord of the wife, "you are the ocean of 
mercy, you forgive the sins of a slave like me.” 
О lord of Vraja, in earlier times at the beginning 
of the creation, LaksmI, Sarasvatl, PrthvI and 
Ganga had recited this meritorious stotra. Savitri 
had adored Brahma in earlier times by reciting 
this stotra, Parvatl had adored Siva by reciting 
this stotra in the ancient times. The gods and the 
sages were also adored by their spouses reciting 
this stotra which bestows welfare to all the 
chaste woman. In case a chaste lady recites this 
auspicious stotra or those of the people who 
listen to it, all their desires are fulfilled. The one 
without a son gets a son, a pauper gets riches and 
an ailing person is relieved of his ailment and a 
person is relieved of the fetters. О lord of Vraja, 
in case a chaste woman recites this stotra, she 
earns the merit of visiting a holy place, besides 
the merit of performing all the vratas and tapas. 
After adoring the husband offering the prayers, 
she should take food with the permission of her 
husband. О lord of Vraja, I have now narrated to 
you the duties of a chaste woman.
«йазгЗо TTftTo вйф-шпгдгего за» 
Я'гатГчЩ» зг^ШнгПТГзегп^Г: П ^ 11

=== PAGE 607 ===

536
BRAHMA VAIVART A-M AH APURATdAM
Chapter - 84
The Eatables and Non-Eatables 
for the four Varnas
f&^cir44 4 ^ ^ftf?r т а 
здчЬачш 4(щ тш4и4 ъ Hc^T:ll?ll
f4f% Tjflwtrat ш ^T ^rrani
Sri Krsna said- The house-holders should 
daily adore Brahmanas and the gods. The people 
of all the four varnas should engage themselves 
in performing the dharmas of their respective 
varnas. All the gods repose their hopes in the 
house-holders. Therefore, a house-holder who 
does not welcome a guest or a beggar, is 
considered to be unclean.
iw t: дпЬдй чпМгши rt ^
tt:i 
T[p 8mrarf% 
11 з 11
At the time of performing the pindas the 
ancestors and the guests arrive at the time of 
performing piija by a house-holder as the cows 
rush towards the tank filled with water.
лгзп 
зтт£г Tjftnft
In the evening if a hungry ascetic arrives at the 
door of a house-holder and getting honoured 
there, he leaves the place showering blessings on 
him.
3ig>cdl5frlRh£dl 
*raf?T M(d<*ll 
ЛТд 
ЛТ5Г ЧТРГСГгПЧ И
The one who does not welcome the guest 
becomes a sinner and attracts all the sins of the 
three worlds. There is no doubt about it.
Гтлштл 
нггд- sni^n
The one from whose house a guest returns 
disappointed, from the same house the ancestors, 
the gods and the god of fire also go away 
disappointed.
4чтШтй4сГ:1 
■widu: х г г а ^ ^ т р т щ в т
The one who does not adore a guest, he earns 
the sin of killing of a wife, the killing of a cow, 
becomes ungraceful and the one enjoying the 
company of the wife of his own teacher. The

=== PAGE 608 ===

K$$iyA-JANMA-KHANpA, CHAPTER 84
537
same guest gives away all his sins to the house­
holder and moves out carrying all his merits.
^cri^iyei ^ртгутч:1
4lbtfiuii щ щ рд т 
tt 
и
Therefore those well-versed in dharma, the 
large hearted house-holder serve the gods and 
others, feeling them to be like their own sons, 
then take their own food.
ЧТТ ЧТЧТ 
ЧТ^Т ЯВЙ xt '«jyxivft Ш)
ЗТТШТ ^ 4 44TSTrRtnn<5g:7<|i5 W l l ^ o l l
The household in which there is no mother 
and the wife becomes an evil place such a person 
should desert the home and retire to the forest 
because for him the house is as troublesome as 
the forest.
Ife чщт 3»гг fguwH xt 
47$ 4TSS^t Яг$Ч ^
 tt^ tiin n
A wicked woman always becomes envious of 
her husband and looks at him like poison; she 
does not provide food to him and always 
denounces him.
early in the morning and offers her salutation to 
the family gods and then plasters the court-yard 
with cowdung and performs other welfare deeds.
JJ3<jhcd хТ 
xf 74lc4lS.S44T 
ТТЯТI
f t Ш 
W f5T^3^cIT4.l I ^ 11
Thereafter, performing the household jobs, the 
chaste lady takes her bath and returning to the 
home, she bows in reverence to the Brahmana, 
her husband and the family gods.
^6<2>c<4 f ft^AI ^iWifaccll hfr 74$!
ЗтШ fjrfgiST ^ 
f t t W tll^ ll
The chaste house wife performs the household 
duties pretty well and getting free from the same, 
she serves her husband and adores the guest. 
Thereafter she takes her food.
gtyxt 
fyiujyg
зщгтт чшт grf чч:
The father is adored by the sons and the 
teacher is adored by the pupils thus both the sons 
and the pupils serve like servants accepting the 
command.
f f e p i тТ 7TT xT U141T«j ЧЩ)
The wicked woman always treats her husband 
like a straw even if he is an adorable person like 
a sage and she always denounces him.
q Ic^cR h T-Ч 7ШЩ 
11 ^ 11
Thus by accepting a girl of a wicked race, a 
person has to face the evil ways of the wife 
which bum him like a fire and he lives like a 
dead man throughout his life.
TjftnTfat WOT* ^ t t 
frtfI
-o
Trftoft hfavixW xf ^ |^ U |4 fa d lll^ ll 
■RT 
ш ш ггт ЧЩхБгЧ Tfr fTfI 
■snfot 4|f4T 4?П^Т1Ч$Ч 4R44 qil*4ll
Now I repeat to you the noble conduct of the 
good nature woman, you please listen. The 
chaste woman is always adored by the gods and 
the Brahmanas. Such a spotless woman gets up
4 
5 ЧТЧ 
fyibilW gpftjl
Xf 
f4r4 T n f e Ъ R 4 $ $ q i l ^ l |
ч fgfarffig q tj$ fqgtr wm\
^Rr9T xf 4TffiS xf 
oil
ч ш ^ ^ c f r a i fijgygTGTfiran m
i
Щ : trr ЧЧ 
h 4 4 ^4V ld:ll??ll 
fh4T ЧШТ Ч Ч Ч М 
p r : ТЩТ5^ПТ:1 
зи 1Ш 
дрдт 
tN t f^ fw i n ^ 11
The son and the pupil should not force the 
father or the teacher to work. The father and the 
teacher should always be offered all the service, 
because by not doing so, one attracts the sin of 
Brahmahatya. A son should respect the mother 
more than his father and more than her he should 
adore the teacher. Thus the son who is unable to 
serve the parents, the teacher, the wife, the pupil 
and himself as a dependent son, the helpless 
sister, the daughter and the wife of the teacher he 
earns sins because it is the duty of a person to 
maintain all of them.

=== PAGE 609 ===

538
BRAHMA VAIVART A-M AH APURAN AM
TJcj r l o&fet ш
 ТГЙТ
т щ ^ W r: тй$га1':и?зм
Traf ^Tf^^fctyr *tts^
 ^пгг rj $гщтгт 
<TT: TTctf: 
gfoiT: 4fr£dlRiq>l:lR'Sll
О father, I have thus spelt out the best of the 
duties of them all and the chaste ladies who are 
spotless and clean. At the beginning of the 
universe Brahma had created all the types of 
creatures in a similar way. All the intelligent and 
pure damsels were bom out of the amsa of 
Prakrti.
TT % 
5Й TRT:I
ft^T Й Й 9ТЭП rj 
Й ^ fqPlfijdlll^ ЧII 
«fv^T ^ ШЭДТ -illfdrgrnn 1ч Ш т TJTTI 
Зтгсгт w t r tt tq ч к т т Tqsmr 
ЗтГЯТ
яг&тйзй ч 
t <акччу|<*<чи^||
When Dharma was reduced in body because 
of the curse of the daughter of Kedara, then 
Brahma in anger created krtya woman. О lord of 
Vraja, in earlier times Brahma divided the race of 
krtya woman into three parts; the first among 
them was known as uttama, the second one 
madhyama and the third one was adhama. The 
extremely religious uttama woman is always 
devoted to her husband. She does not accept the 
company of any other man even at the caste of 
her life.
ЧуЙгТТТ W cRRT W '^ feirfrl^ T 1 
ъГрЩВЩ'гГ 3T # 3t4wH44liy<ill 
p i t 
^TTFwTri XT 4 ^
TIT 
W IT rl t w i№
# Я ^ | R 11
W T ЧТШ 8ТЯ ЧтШ 
Ш ^щ т ЧТ: I 
й
 % 
Trrat ^ т т ч й я т з п й |13оп 
She adores the Brahmanas and the guests like 
her own husband, performs fasting and vratas 
and adores everyone. The madhyama type of 
krtyd woman is such who does not fall into the 
company of other men because of the protection 
of the teachers and considers her husband as 
something. О Nanda, because of the non­
availability of men, their desire, their chastity 
remains intact.
зтагст т а f^TSrti^rRSvrai ttsiti
3TSpf?TtaT £ :й нг fifw 
$п
The woman who are bom in degraded families 
are known as degraded woman who are 
extremely wicked. Such woman are devoid of 
dharma, have a wicked nature, are ill-spoken of 
and quarrelsome.
hfr ЧсЙЙ ftrT Wt rf Т1Й ТЩП 
5 :Tt ^Tf?r адчпу 
гг щ *йиз ? и 
vIKgrTJMrAlT 
ЗЛЧТ
з Ш ^ 
Tf -nfrg TJ 
з и
^
 ttyqfq- t$TW:l
■^рт^ггт ^ г щ т "щдтттРщ! 
13*11
The wicked woman denounces her husband 
daily and serves the other men daily; she always 
tortures her husband and considers him like 
poison. Not only this, with the help of the other 
men, she even tries to kill her husband who is 
quite religious, glorious and beautiful. Such a 
degraded woman looks at other men with a 
passionate eye who see her as quite beautiful and 
he enjoys her voluptuous advances.
w
 r$m sszctT 
4^ivk*4,i
й ч : ferrafa чшир сы1ччнг Рнчнчизчи
Finding the youthful and wicked person well- 
versed in the love-sport and the one who is 
wicked like a pig, the pelvic region of the 
passionate woman always remains wet with 
fluid.
й 4TssfTi й ч й ч cjfrs
ЗтЫ 
^ TTTR T5[TI I ^ ^ 11
The degraded woman does not serve food to 
her husband. She always speaks in a foul tongue 
but she thinks of her friend quite lovingly.
тттй й чтт ttt ^ й ш т ъ й ч тп
щтт д гй ч й тпатт 
I ? \э 11
ЧЙЧ тгит: Й Т М Й Й Щ Й Й Ч WI 
ч тщ дп й ш тй шФтчй Й ЧЗТ{1 I 3 6 11
Getting denounced by the teachers and having 
been observed by hundreds of persons, she still 
moves on the wrong path and makes illegal

=== PAGE 610 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 84
539
friends. Even the kings are unable to set her 
right. There is no one dear to her and she moves 
just according to the available opportunity. She is 
always desirous of new faces like the cows 
grazing in the forest are always desirous of fresh 
pasture.
тгй тш щщ
зтат%ш Trent сетг ctfo fqfsjrqji^ii 
W ЯГ TRt T ^ frrn
Her attachment is short lived like a line drawn 
on water or like a lightning. Infatuated with evil 
ways, she always talks deceitfully. She never 
feels interested in performing the vratas, tapas, 
religious functions, household jobs, the teachers 
or the gods. Her mind is always wavering for her 
friends towards whom she is always found 
attached.
ЧтШТТ fyfefRT ^
1>5 ^ 11
Thus I have spoken about the three types of 
woman; now you listen to me about the three 
types of devotees. My devotees resting on a bed 
of grass, getting deprived of all comforts always 
remain engrossed in reciting my name, my 
qualities and glory.
3ltp3r ^
 ^T : 
xni'k^ll
Ч 
bfnT4T%K4tfcR?r^l.
fagfaiRfor щ 
1*411
ctlotffct f q f ^ n Я^Т МН1^1'Ц§гЧПЧГч I
Feeling devoted to my lotus-like feet, they 
adore me. My devotee is devoid of all desires 
and such a devotee achieves the Ahaitukl form of 
devotion. Such a devotee is not interested in the
siddhis like anima and others, the Brahmanhood 
who is the cause of all the siddhis or etemalship. 
Not only this, except serving at my feet, they 
considers the four types of salvation including 
Salokya to be of no consequence. My devotee is 
not desirous of salvation and the consuming of 
nectar; he/she is always desirous of my 
everlasting and eternal devotion. He/she is 
disinterested in all other creatures and the 
difference between men and women disappears 
from his or her mind.
ttaf frr^m uTt w m w m
otRREiT RcfiRyi fir 5Г srraqf ъ
RTSSTffii: 
^
gjftfr jr n 
q^cbiJPtf-qq^irx^tl
4 Cb<lr444 i(<4lcHchWr^cl: ТГ
О lord of Vraja, such a devotee of high order 
remains unmoved with hunger, thirst, sleep, 
greed, illusion and enemies. Such types of 
devotees are unmindful of the clothes they wear 
but they continue reciting my name throughout 
day and night. О Nanda, such a type of person is 
the best of my devotees. Now I speak about the 
medium type of the devotee who is a house­
holder and getting purified because of his good 
deeds of earlier births, never gets involved in 
worldly deeds. On the other hand, he tries his 
best to destroy the earlier deeds and making all 
efforts and remaining unmindful, he performs no 
deeds. He is well aware of the fact that 
everything belongs to lord Krsna and he does not 
happen to be the performer of any deeds.
cHtfolT tR W cfTcJT
tsw CTT STRICT 3T Tsn^sfcr Ч Ъ 
urmuTt щ ъ хг тфш;: 'Н ^ Щ п ц ^ п 
jjyi ^ПТ trsprycT 
гг tu<jvi: i
ЧШ ф QfspyTclIrf cblsrdTEJ ?ЩТ55^ТТ11Ч^ 11

=== PAGE 611 ===

540
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
geJ|us<^4l<a4H 
М Ш :1
У ЯЩ 
114 ^ 11
He thinks in this way, mentally with speech 
and with actions, such a type of devotee is called 
NyUnabhakta. The devotee who is still lesser in 
grade is known as Prakrtika. This has been 
mentioned in the Vedas, my devotee does not 
have to come across Yama or the messengers of 
Yama even in a dream. The best of my devotees 
redeems thousands of his generations, the 
medium type of devotees redeems hundred of his 
generations and the Pr,' biika devotee redeems 
twenty five generations. О father, at your 
command I have narrated to you the qualities of 
the three types of my devotees; now you listen to 
the topic of the creation of the globe quite 
carefully. The cause of the creation of the globe 
is known to my devotees with great difficulty, 
-дтт: ^pr: 
f : w .i
farmer -Rctftf 
4s|?cH:n44ii
cbixw^ quiyi^ 
ТТТШТПЧ^П
%дт?ег ^чм г ^ 
Trfsrar
щтч^т 
чмт зпч# g^Riiq^n 
xT -gfiRT: 
f^nfq^4T:i
ЙёЧШУГТ WSSFTT *Г ггггг f^TT fe?Tt ^?TU4 6 11 
The sages, the gods and the noble people 
know about the same with great difficulty, but I 
am quite well aware of the course of the universe 
about which I am going to tell you. The cause of 
universe is quite well-known to Brahma, 
Mahesvara, Dharma, Sanatkumara, the sage 
Naranarayana, Kapila, Ganesa, Durga, LaksmI, 
Sarasvatl, Vedas, Savitrf, the mother of the 
Vedas and Radhika. No one else knows about 
the same; all the intellectuals are unable to know 
its cause, as the soul is eternal, similarly the sky 
is eternal beside all the ten directions.
•ЦЩ fostT Ъ
wxi йлчдат 
хрггпшяп
Ъ ctr4I^T^c(fFU dtd^ldtfd^til^oll
TTRTTRWfaT ЯТТЩТП^И 
WITTI
TFmBumfufnii^^n
■qWT 
«K’UchlRtR'Nluctll
^rrsf tt'm-dra.-tyHi'wcjHii 
1^*11
As Prakrti is eternal, so the globe is also 
eternal 
and 
also 
Vaikuntha. 
Once while 
performing the divine dance in Goloka, a 
beautiful damsel of sixteen years appeared from 
my left half, having the complexion of white 
campaka flowers and the lustre of the full moon 
of the winter season. She was extremely 
beautiful and was the best of all the ladies on 
earth. She wore a serene smile on her face, was 
delightful in her mind, had soft limbs and was 
quite charming to look at. She was clad in the 
garments sanctified by fire and was adorned with 
ornaments studded with gems, which looked like 
a line of cranes in the clouds. Her forehead was 
adorned with a spot of vermilion, besides other 
spots of kusturl which looked like the moon 
surrounded by the stars, the line of parting of the 
hair was quite bright, she was adorned with the 
invaluable ornament of gems which were shining 
emitting rays like the sun.
The pair of ear ornaments were adorning her 
temples and her feet were plastered with the red 
paste of saffron and kastiirl. Her cheeks painted 
looked like different types of leaves, her nose 
resembled the beak of Garuda which was 
adorned with jewels.
^ЗтЯТ (ggThgrW^-d4^441 рЛМ^'ЭИ 
ctfc'tdldjfc'MIsgfa чФч!«(*«ич<1 ЖИ

=== PAGE 612 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 84
541
W ^ ^ P R I'W I ЧЧ1(Ч ^Н ЬН 111^11
ЭТОГО m Й ч Ь |^ с Ь ^ и ^ Н 111^ <? I! 
Г: Vlf^J4«bdwcfHII 
TIhaoll
She was. wearing the Gajamukta which is 
recovered from the temples of the elephant. The 
line of her teeth resembled gems. Her lips 
resembled the ripe wood-apple fruit, her face 
resembled the full moon of the winter season, her 
eyes resembled the lotus flower which were quite 
white like the eyes of a doe and the collyrium 
applied in the eyes looked quite charming. She 
was wearing beautiful armlets and wristlets 
which were shining. She had beautiful hands 
which looked like shining gems. The finger rings 
studded with gems adorned the fingers.
TOthTOjtlTfQT'dll
tfidfiHtti TFtoT толт^.-тад|^н11
totgufaft cfra#*Rnit9?u 
to 
тогтзЦ w ff тччпнгсЫ1 
TT% ТОГО тот то tott tjtoI toii^
ii 
гРТ ТОТ М Ш
 ТОЛСТО. TThfern
The anklets were made of the best of gems and 
the rings on the toes were also studded with 
gems. The soles of the feet looked quite 
beautiful, having been painted with red colours. 
She walked slowly like an elephant. She looked 
charming having beautiful eyes. Becoming 
passionate, she looked with side-glances. Joining 
the divine dance, the damsel took me from the 
fore-front and that is why she was given the 
name of Radha by the intellectuals gracing her. 
She was quite pleasant in nature and as such she 
was known as Isvarl.
i r a 
cf? tFifo: Tiartf&m
т о к ш TIcfeifT 
■g- ТО&Т:1ЬЭЧ II
t o Sh ^-cR I^ T ITT TOT T O T O ^ r T T I
то щ тст^ тьр ^ t o w Iii^
ii
ТГТО ^ T O fe lfR T ^ [Ч Ш 1 ^ TIT TOTI
TOfrot to 
w
 «тй frdTOPrfqiiva^ii
Since she was competent to perform apy 
deeds, she was given the name of sakti. Since she 
happened to be the base of everything from all 
sides, the form of everything and bestowed 
welfare, 
she 
was 
given 
the 
name 
of
Sarvamangala. She came to be known as 
MahalaksmI in Vaikuntha and Sarasvatl in the 
other form. After the creation of the Vedas she 
was known as the mother of the Vedas. She was 
also known as Savitrf, Gayatrl and the one who 
bears the three worlds.
iJTT TTpST <pf ^ TO 
xT Л
и
II
In the earlier times because of the killing of a 
demon named Durga she came to be known as 
Durga. In earlier times she also appeared as Satl 
from the tejas of all the gods.
TORT ^:УсЦГ<^НТЦ||Т1||\Э<?11 
7ЩЩТ 
rT ЯтШТ w riM i
ц^гатот той to 
#RT^f?r TTTcNfti 16 о 11
That is why she came to be known as the 
eternal sakti for the destruction of all the demons. 
She is blissful to all, filled with all the pleasures, 
is the destroyer of all misfortune, frightens the 
enemies and removes the danger of the devotees. 
She appeared as Sat! and was known as the 
daughter of Daksa, thereafter she was known as 
Parvatl having been bom as the daughter of 
Himalaya.
т о к т т о т о то дтнто то тодщп
3RTO cfoRfr TTfT giFJTO TO&ltfTO: 116 \ 11 
Tjfe ch'dfq w тот ш yicRQi gr: gr:i 
TO TTTOTOTOT TOT ЛЙТО TO T Wild ?II 
tost ffro Ш ТО?! gfipTO: ?ttot 
torjjtt ТОЙрВ *T w «JfiroffiTOT^I 16 з 11
She is the base of everything. She is the earth 
with one of her rays, with one of her rays she is 
TulasI, with another ray she is Ganga and the 
form of all the women on earth. О father, I create 
the same sakti again and again. Finding the same

=== PAGE 613 ===

542
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
sakti present in the Rasamandala, I enjoyed her 
company and the conjugal pleasures with her up 
to the life of hundred Brahma's. I also enjoyed 
her astonishing types of plays and the love- 
sports.
Thereafter both of our bodies were sweating 
profusely creating a charming pool there.
трщ m km sm дтрг fctyci’nH'cbi 
snjg- NrT^raf ^ дщтщнт щ
XT ЪФй ^ #чЬпЧ ТЧТ ^кЩП<^П
The flow of the sweat moved with such force 
and reached the Goloka as a result of which all 
the lokas were filled with water. О lord of Vraja, 
in the earlier stage there was water everywhere 
and there was no earth. By enjoying the love- 
sport I implanted my semen in the womb of the 
damsels.
t&n 
"ш тш 'rrat
^Ш5Г -Щ 
xt 
■ЧШ^гГ^Ий'ЭИ
tr ^ |т 
Ш ж ttti 
hKr йтчш т fra t 
tt wrt ^
 ш Trafent тт^сшг»
^cfTSTtrd 
^ w WHT 
ТП W lli^ ll
ш ч т Ч 1 1 Ш w m gn i^Tti 
rRTTftTf: 
fhf FR-Rh
РГТРЩ^П: ТШШ^сТ
^sqfS^l^nfir «MfqvqRir: ЗГ^П 
^1
Э Ш fprat ШХ\ thrtTVli^H 
sRn
#
 
д^Ш155^5ПТ: 11 s 9 11
Radha carried this pregnancy up to the life of a 
hundred Brahma's and then gave birth to a 
beautiful child. Finding the child Radha was 
enraged and started lamenting feeling disgusted. 
Thereafter, the child was driven out and he fell 
down as the Mahavirat, who was the base of 
everything. He fell into the water; finding the son 
floating in the water, I pronounced a curse on 
Radha. О virtuous one, she became issueless
because of my earlier curse pronounced on her. 
Similarly Durga, LaksmI and Sarasvatl emerged. 
Together with Radha all the four of them 
conceived. О lord of Vraja, thereafter all the 
damsels gave birth to children because of the 
rays of which an egg emerged who was based on 
my rays.
W cfit Wj 
^T:l
з г е зга* 
tFPT 'ч>тайч
сГС*Т Н!ЯТ *1 ^4lfT
■RPTOi ъ т ^
 
ЧТ$КТ:М<*ЧП 
щ 
сгй i w Ъчт gjRcTt^:i
ъ fgiiif^Tur^t т а ъ: 11 <? ^ 11 
згстт^зсг чтт й fiRTr m ^ 
f ^ t 
эдш Ф чмг-яЪ ^и
cfcft fe d чзурщг щцп; w m rX Tp^l 
rt^r -тот 
w m с ь ч в ш п ^ п * I
f e d 9BRT:
tl^r TfiTt Щ wdscu Htil tt«bK TT: 11R R11
I made the child to suck my thumb which 
became an immovable tree because of his deeds 
and started floating in water. With the use of 
yogic practices, the water became his bed and 
pillow, all the hair pits on his body remained 
filled with water. In each hair-pit the Ksudra- 
virat resided. From the navel of the Ksudra-virat, 
a thousand petalled lotus emerged. From the 
same lotus, Brahma was created, that is why he 
is known by the name of the one bom out of the 
lotus. After having been bom of the lotus 
Brahma started thinking, "How has my body 
been bom, who are my parents and brothers"? 
Thus thinking he spent three lakhs of years. 
Thereafter for divine five lakhs of years he 
performed my tapas, then I bestowed a mantra 
on him which purified him as a result of which 
he methodically performed tapas seated on the 
lotus for divine seven lakh of years. Thereafter, 
he received a boon from me and by becoming the 
creator, he started the creation.

=== PAGE 614 ===

KRSISA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 84
543
TRW ufr w m i
f<cRirir 'ir^jiR^jT R^&KT^irfa^ii^ooii 
жтсгТ 
ohtfeiR Ran
T :ll^ n 
VRTTRt 
tg4 W9T4.I
f4t?4 
faftqfal: w tf: m R5RW rfllVo^U 
штагтот^тш т & ч\ щ *т \
ЭД^ГЙЯ^НгатЕТ d4l^<M 
W II^O3|| 
4(dR4l^ RZTT m
J tn # t rf *ТШЧ11?о*|| 
iM ^rflfa Uchf 
#?5RI
тФт 
я^тГ^гоп: ^ тц д и ^ о ч и
fcjV31*}<=l % dld^d TTTTOPTRnfR *T
xf % 03^ ftTTSRT: II * о $ 11
Rf??SiRT ШТЧ^ПТ 4^T: «h&^^4l:l 
f^tfRRFT ^rn W fR R t f^ftfed^l I ^ о ^Э11 
dFn^rfT ^ТГсТга?: 4odlVRdVl{e.qVd:l 
3TETT qr44PJTV4 fe fe t: Ж Ч Т Я Ч :!!^ u
Thus with the influence of illusion in every 
globe one finds Brahma, Visnu, Siva, Dikpalas, 
eleven Rudras, seven planets, eight Vasus, three 
crores of gods, Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Viasyas, 
Siidras, Yaksas, Gandharvas, Kinnaras, goblins, 
Raksasas besides movable and immovable. 
Besides every globe, there are seven heavens, 
seven oceans, seven continents, Svarnabhumi 
and darkness, land and earth, the nether-world 
and seven Brahmandas are there. О lord of 
Vraja, in each globe, the moon, the sun, the 
sacred land of Bharata, Ganga and other holy 
places are present, the number of the globes is 
equivalent to the number of the hair pits on the 
body of Mahavisnu and over the globes. Vaikunt 
ha is lodged, having no support; it was created as 
per my desire. Even the Vedas are unable to 
speak about the same. For the degraded yogis 
and the non-believer, Vaikuntha is invisible. The 
Goloka is located at a distance of fifty crores of 
yojanas from Vaikuntha; it is floating in the air 
which is quite astonishing and quite beautiful.
ЗТ^сГ TRtfrqfllTt Йётеч* qt^SRTI
^Ш ГФ71##Г RUT fSR^RlT 3pT:l
TRSfT f^TRT ^119^011
O T 1 : щ т р т Фл: T O T ^TOTI
зитн 
i(ui«w4l rm 111 w я 11
RnTtRt ch\^H'<lRI4RTs4Ri R%TTI
3TRRR^fRRkr Tr5rTf4 
II
It has been built in a beautiful way which is 
according to my wishes; it has a mountain range 
with a hundred peaks, auspicious Vrndavana, the 
best of Rasamandala and the river named Viraja. 
О lord of Vraja, the river Viraja is a hundred 
crores yojanas in width and a hundred times 
more in length and looks charming from all 
sides. It has the invaluable gems besides 
diamonds, rubies and innumerable kaustubha 
gems. It is quite pleasant. Each and every house 
of Goloka has been made with gems.
TRt?t ^ Ml*U4<Jid fa^cbtfuTH
ттт^тЙТТОЙ^Т ЖГ^ :1
'Rfct wmseTtfi 1 н * 11
The. boundary wall is quite beautiful which 
could not be viewed by Visvakarma even. The 
Rasamandala of Goloka, the groups of the 
cowherds and cowherdesses, the Kamadhenu, 
innumerable lotus flowers, kalpavrksas, pools 
and crores of flower orchards surround Goloka.
Т Ш ^ Щ ^ Т 
:11 ^ 4 11
■^nfecRRTtTtt:
w p^gfhrM ^: 11 
11
T%?T П?<т^Щ|^Т«1Вгсь1^:|(^1Э|
3T^Ti4W T^4f|^;i^4fcTI 
щ п ш л 4 ^ т р л т4fgcT*т
The Rasamandala is surrounded by the 
cowherds and has a hundred crores of buildings 
in which there are lamps of gems, beds of roses, 
fragrant sandal-paste, kastiiri, kumkum, besides 
incense, garlands of gems, mirrors of gems, 
guards and three crores of slave-girls of Radha

=== PAGE 615 ===

544
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAbf AM
also who reside there are adorned with the best 
of gem-studded ornaments and clad in garments 
sanctified 
by 
fire. 
The 
Rasamandala 
is 
surrounded by a lakh of intoxicated elephants.
TRT W сф)Г<Ш 
^гГТ^ЗГ11^<?11
3T4RH^tfvvi ^^rq'l^fgpjrhfl
Tpfr^r 
Ч ^ :11Ш Н
VSi'f^Г<Гс|??Г 
:ll^ 9 ll
^ТШШЧТЙ^Г w ff^T fsmfhtPf»
ЗР^НеНГсТП
M ^rdhuit^iofi
#шзщЩч?т ho^i^rrcfiiffifra-T^i i^ * ii 
3Rte gjirM хт sfcyPi&R'I^Hi 
УШ<Гч<Я d^lfo hleftcfTfE? 44^^11^411
Its soldiers are quite young and quite beautiful. 
О lord of Vraja, the Rasamandala is circular in 
shape like the moon and is studded with gems 
like the stars. It is spread over an area of ten 
yojanas. It is quite charming and is filled with 
kasturl, saffron, fragrant sandal-paste, welfare 
pitchers, fruits and fresh tree leaves, curd, fried 
paddy, leaves, tender Dfirva-grass, fruits and 
innumerable trunks of banana trees adorned with 
tree leaves entwined with silken cord, garlands 
and ornaments. It has been built with valuable 
gems and has a hundred peaks. Its height is a 
hundred yojanas and is hundred times more in 
length. It is visible from a distance of fifty crores 
of yojanas and is beyond description even in the 
Vedas. It is like the boundary wall of Goloka.
•qftcTr EffgcT T^T IkigirRhfcrcrqf 
Ш ^-<ГсГ4 ТЩ -ptt tl^H 4l<^:lim il 
дГёЧ^гЕГ {lityTj 
tsM jfail
?тт{я^
Since the garlands of gems decorate it from all 
sides it looks quite charming. There is charming 
Vmdavana 
having 
trees 
of 
sandal-wood, 
charming 
kalpavrksas, 
mandara 
trees, 
kamadhenus and immensely beautiful flower 
orchards, 
beautiful 
swimming 
pools 
and 
excellent places for love-sport. It is quite 
excellent and is the best for performing the 
divine dance in seclusion.
Tf^Rt
ч М <ф(ТсЩ 
S R ^Iim il
^гг 
11 ^ о 11
lift'd^ ctj[Jtrr:i
трф{Т -oRrTq^€f у^сП^таггаг[:И^^^1
The innumerable cowherdesses guard the 
place. The forest which is three lakh yojanas in 
area is circular in shape; one gets the hissing 
sound of the black wasps and the sweet notes of 
the cuckoos can also be heard. There is an A fa 
ayavata which is quite charming. It is quite 
widespread and its height is a thousand yojanas 
and it is spread over an area of four thousand 
yojanas. The kalpavrksa which fulfils all the 
desires of the cowherdesses is also available 
there.
*UiPc$fi<jdv^ тащ геШ щ 1 :| 
febdidUdkiuii ггщтг 
^ 11^ ? II 
wrfeppT 
hferyg 4frf^4Ti
f^igdfgqrf<qtii^?ii
dT dftgfd М Ш Ч Ч Ш Щ ТЙ^П
'^tmiTydTSfiTii^'kii
The slave-girls of Radha spend their time 
playfully there; the cool breeze scented with the 
water of Viraja river and the flowers blow there. 
The Vmdavana which is served by innumerable 
slave-girls is the dwelling place for me and 
Radha. The same Radha because of the curse of 
a Brahmana named Srldama has been bom as the 
daughter of Vrsabhanu.
slgnfi&t: 
TjfadT sTdl
Г у ^ Ш сЫ ’сЗУТ 
f^TTI 1 ^ Ц11

=== PAGE 616 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 85
545
ШсТ ■HcSiJcfiAui 
fjRTI
chRjd 4 ^ 
<чи^ч||
w f e t ■qfrfiRt %
II
О lord of Vraja, she is adored by Brahma, the 
gods and siddhas and other ascetics. She happens 
to be my beloved, possesses all the virtues 
besides the prowess, intelligence, learning and is 
adorable like me, by all. О Nanda, 1 have thus 
described everything about the globes. What else 
do you want to listen to from me.

=== PAGE 617 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 85
545
m
 M o d iy ilta ita r e :
Chapter - 85
The eatables and non-eatables of the 
four Varnas
cpnfat xT g p if xt «щгщр ъГ т е щ\
тт^глт chrtwiFit 
gnw^i 
T^rTts^i ъ ъ 
fqrfTRt iT^nh^rq;iRii
Nanda said- О virtuous one, you kindly let me 
know what are the eatables and non-eatables for 
the four varnas of Brahmana, Ksatriyas, Sudra 
and Vaisya and what are the results of their 
deeds? Because you happen to be the cause of all 
the causes, the great sage and the lord on to 
yourself. I cannot ask this, question from 
anybody else.
xpjorf щ оплкг гг згайчач.! 
ЗПТП Ш 
Й?11Ц4Ш^И
чщ 
rTl
щ p 
дат m i
сРпМттт^т ^ Ш р п ц п
Sri Krsna said- I am now narrating to you 
about the eatables and non-eatables by the four 
varnas as prescribed in the Vedic literature. You
listen to me attentively. Manu has prescribed that 
the water, the milk, curd and ghee, the food, fried 
materials, honey, guda, coconut water, fruit and 
the roots, kept in iron vases become unfit for 
consumption. The burnt food and the beverage, 
vinegar prepared by a Brahmana becomes unfit 
for consumption.
ч т ^ т г р ш й шучь! 1 w щ i 
чщ хг шучыад чт4 
p fein^ii
The water of the coconut placed in a bronze 
vase, the honey and milk preparations kept in 
copper vases besides all other beverages become 
unfit for consumption except the ghee. 
сТТУУЙ 
уггч!'»н»р
p i удеру xte шгг тт!чттгч$шт^11Ы1
The consumption of milk in a copper vase, the 
ghee in a used vase, the milk, the food and salt is 
prohibited because for the one who consumes it, 
it becomes like consuming a cow’s flesh.
з т р y^fiRsi щ p Ы p <ran
The ghee mixed with honey, oil and the guda 
mixed 
with 
ginger 
become 
unfit 
for 
consumption. This has been prescribed in the 
s'rutis.
4ici£l4'Jiei xfa Ч|й xT 
dWTI 
xt w ft ЖТ W : 
fgyf^R rf fp rr т ч ч т Ъ н <ш\ 
ячут Щ Tlfstyi^ xf f t ЗЩТ: 4fTf4^ll^o||
The left-over water, the eating of radish in the 
month of Magha, the recitation of mantras seated 
on a bed are all prohibited and the intellectuals 
should not indulge in the same. The intellectuals 
should not take food twice a day or eat food at 
the time of both the sandhyas and taking the food 
in the last quarter of the night is prohibited for 
the intellectuals.
UMld Ч1УУ p f P enquire) rf|
xt тш! nmiyrra xtt

=== PAGE 618 ===

546
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAI4AM
The water, payasam, flour, ghee, salt, svastika, 
guda, milk, butter-milk and honey should not be 
received in the palm of the hand from anyone 
which happens to be like cow's flesh. The 
camphor placed in the vase of silver becomes 
unfit for consumption according to the Vedas. 
чГг^Ч1ЛсБ|(1 ^Ч1тШ
rf cR-j xf 4cfa|l}c|
In case the person who serves the food touches 
the person who is eating food, then the food 
becomes unfit for consumption. This is the 
opinion of all.
4ehHMF "ПТЩЭДТГ 4U?4luif rT trf^TJTTT^i
^i4ian xf Tj^fTTi fd£l4d:lir* II
4^1<iurt 
sgIvxhi
оч1У1чкчГч RtfJMl гЧТНТ 41У ^tiu 'ЩТ! 1^411
О lord of Vraja, the meat of the mangoos, 
rhinoceros, the birds, the snakes, fish, the 
donkeys, the cats, the jackals, the tiger, lion and 
of human being is prohibited from consumption. 
*IhU rt xf ТЖ1ЩТ ^fe'R T 
xfl 
чи^еьн‘1 4,'cjS<£Hi.^cbHi wftfsjcn^ii^ii
ТЩ xf 44uuii xf 4 ЗтгЙ'
# < R t ^TfcchHT 4f 
xf Т8?ТТГЧ41 ^V9 П
xf ftnftf^ran
згачт ъ 
^ sG lw n u ii
Similarly the aquatic animals like crocodile, 
lizard, frogs, crabs, porcupines and the spotted 
cow's flesh should not be taken. О lord of Vraja, 
one should not take the meat of the elephant, 
horses, human flesh, demons, mosquitoes, flies, 
ants which is prohibited in the Vedas and the 
common human tradition, 
w
i w raiR t vK4iuii t m xfi
•o
ftfa j TPRWtat T^TRr xf TTiW^I I ^ 11
ЗГЩЦ -qflqluiT xf 
cffir 
rCTI 
WlVlch xf rfSff cR fcRiuu 4c)ilcich44l19 о II 
ч'шч^-.зртгщ; сгет 
m i
gurfqt xf :ЕЩТп! хПЩЧ$Ч xf 
^11
Similarly the meat of the monkeys, the bears, 
the camel, Astapada, a deer with kasturi and the
meat of the donkey should not be consumed. The 
milk of a buffalo and the preparation of her milk 
like curd, ghee and butter besides the svastika 
prepared from the same is prohibited. The meat 
of the horse or the mare's milk is prohibited from 
consumption by all the four varnas. This has 
been prescribed in the Vedas.
nffoi ш хшт femni gutter xfiR я и
cjufat xf xigtnf 
<чатлч1.
iR# xi 
j|)4iRi(ira^ci ^113311
Ginger should not be consumed on Sundays 
by all and for the Brahmanas, the left-over water, 
food and milk is considered to be unfit for 
consumption. The food cooked by a widow 
having no son or husband should not be taken 
because such a food is like the cow's flesh or 
even worse than that.
ЗТсЙПтТ xf Iff
Гч<^с||4ч ЧЩ fqtt&R 4;JW f\lR'KI| 
^шишч'чач чгччгЫ
Xf Ч-=х1Ч<^
If a Brahmana takes such a food from a widow 
due to ignorance, all the adoration's of the manes 
and the gods become infructuous. This has been 
prescribed by Manu. The fish is unfit for 
consumption of the Brahmanas, the Vaisnavas 
and people of other castes should not take the 
same on the eighth and fourth day of the 
fortnight, the moonless-night, full-moon night 
and the first day of the month.
xf чтач *тш ч
<цт Xf fftqt RjJ'Wldj R ^ 11 
з ш ^ т xf Rcjut Ы xfTO$*f*tcf xfi
4^f 4fof ffi^t oq^r
ч4ччп^1
3fifer фГч^сИ g 
xf
3W8?i tflgiuiwi Xf ^шщнт fa$l4d:l 
3 rf^ f 
"ЦгМ WEflfTTJTI4l I ^ 4 I i 
Гч<Мн*|Гч(ш ^f 
тряг rjf cTSTTI 
■qf^fifS^ 
Ш Ч 
g- «eft ^ 4 11 3 о 11

=== PAGE 619 ===

KRS1SA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 85
547
qf$rogq qfeq^si 
ЧФ4Ч1Н стал 
grra^rtw^i q q^ t gbwq qns
fdTtfct dH4<*4 fqerq 
ЗЩЦ «ГГЩЩЯГ q 
q чЫ ир1 3 Ч11 
лФ рщФ л q унчу чГм^<и 
ЗТтфпчТГсГГф^ 1^ 5^ q ф ш :11?^11
For the performing of the sraddhas and the 
adoration of the gods, the offering of the 
permissible meat is not prohibited. In the above 
five days, the consumption of meat is prohibited, 
this has been prescribed by Manu. The salt and 
the oil which is not well sanctified is not unfit for 
consumption but the food stuffs sanctified by the 
fire can be consumed by everyone. The 
consumption of the ghee or the water placed over 
the palm becomes unfit for consumption. The 
dirty water and the water with insets is also unfit 
for consumption even the visible clean water if it 
is not fully cleaned is unfit for consumption. The 
Brahmanas, 
especially 
the 
Vaisnavas, 
the 
recluses, the Brahmacans should not take 
anything without first offering it to lord Visnu. О 
father, the honey, the milk, curd, ghee and other 
things when filled with the ants should not be 
taken. This has been prescribed in the Vedas. In 
case a fruit is eaten by an insect or the bird, it 
remains pure but if something is eaten by a cow 
it becomes unfit for consumption. The sweets 
fried in ghee and oil beside other sweets prepared 
by Sfidras are fit for their consumption but not by 
the Brahmanas. The food and water of all the 
unclean persons should be discarded. After 
removal of the impurity, everything becomes 
impure. There is no doubt about it.
f e w cbifemfe Jtgtf
It is difficult to face the reward of the deeds. 
This has been prescribed in the s'rutis. О lord of 
Vraja, I have spelt out to you, the eatables and 
non-eatables by all, according to my knowledge.
ifeht ТЩчрТ q <Ш±||Гч fetT: ЭДИЗЧ11
О father, there is a difference of opinion 
because of the four Vedas but in spite of that, I 
have told you the gist of everything.
4№FT STfqg cfctf сЬеФ*1(гуИ<ГЧ1
зтщфсг чщ щ Зкт erf
After the expiry of hundred crores of kalpas, 
the deed is never destroyed.
qfefai q 4ftFhi q qgfeq ^uimfai 
feife^qqfe 
лФ .-п^п
With the adoration of the gods and visiting the 
holy places in different types of bodies, the 
human bodies also receive some merit. О father, 
the one who remains inimical to me cannot be 
purified 
by 
performing 
any 
amount 
of 
repentance, as the vase of wine cannot be 
purified by any number of rivers.
трФ 4 fe f t t f e тгнлт: I 
тгаФттт ф ф ; флт ФштФ q n i^ u 
q 
feqT Фшг q 
i 
«
 ^jf^miqtfe штГ yfe4^uii4M*<>ii 
q qtz 
qqf ficadd q *4цц| 
q qts 
^ q 
qii-8
q^q W
 qisfa #RFWRq qi 
tftsNq^q gi^q q^q fqq^q qi 1-8 911 
3R^it^q -^тшшФТГ qi 
<nfe$q 
^qqr y^qq):l|-8^ll 
qfstqfq-<u)^yifg«})4i ШЧЧ qi 
qgnqt 
ФФт fe?feq:ll'8'8ll 
О lord of the Vaisyas, a person cannot be 
purified by performing any type of auspicious 
deeds or repentance, performing of charities and 
the yogic practices because the good and bad 
deeds never get destroyed unless one faces them. 
By facing them, one gets purified and only then 
does he achieve redemption. The bad deed 
cannot be destroyed wjth the performing of the 
good deeds. The bad deeds cannot be destroyed 
by performing yajnas, tapas, vratas, fasting

=== PAGE 620 ===

548
BRAHM AVAIV ART A-M AH APURAIVAM
bathing in holy places, performing charities, 
recitations, strict observance of the rules, going 
round the globe, listening to the Puranas, 
auspicious discourses, adoring the teacher and 
the gods, by following one's own dharma, 
adoring the guest and the Brahmanas and serving 
them with food.
($Я14 doll'd TjTjfetpBI 
4^4 $4*54 *1 9ПЦПТ:1ГЙЧИ
44*щ ш
 *4$ ятя$4 т т т .ч
4^4ТТ 4 % $1$ ^ ?$4 44 $44ПГ*^П
Whatever is given to the Brahmana one gets 
back the whole of it because a Brahmana 
happens to be the field and the charities given to 
him are like the seed. О father, a person can 
achieve heaven by performing a deed, but the 
moksa cannot be achieved by performing the 
deeds. It can be achieved by serving me.
*4$ Ъ 4^444 4*31 gEf$4 xll
H
i t o 4 4T4T Ъ 4^144 4 44: ^jf$:inftsiI
One achieves heaven by performing noble 
deeds and by performing evil and deplorable 
deeds, one is thrown into hell and then is reborn, 
suffering from ailment in degraded yonis. He 
then gets purified.
"4ISTt '4t $Щ»ШТТ4Т гГ 45T44¥$t44T44ilri
<^¥Jch<ct4l4l(tf $W$4W4$cf4IirSdn
The Brahmana who resorts to the killing of 
cows and the one who commits big or small 
crimes, falls into the dandasuka hell up to the 
number of years equivalent to the number of the 
hair on the body of the cow.
4$щ 4f$4$$r 
ЧШЩ xJI
gforr cqfsm^cT Р|ЩВ: ^?Tl4T:l|-)i4ll 
44: 45tlgTc4yWI4
44: 45Щ 4 ypiSlvil 4$4ЩТ 4<$ 4Т:11Цо||
He is bitten there by the snakes who emit 
flames of poison. He feels tortured, remains 
without food and his belly shrinks. He is then 
taken out of the same and is placed in the yoni of 
the cow for the number of years equivalent to the
number of hair on the cow's body. Thereafter he 
becomes a patient of leprosy for a lakh of years 
and then becomes a canddla. Thereafter he is 
bom as a human being.
Щ <*>44UI
■qterfirrcn 
4$rsff$:ll4 ?ll
Because of his deeds, he is reborn as a 
Brahmana suffering from leprosy. He is relieved 
of the ailment by serving food to a lakh of 
Brahmanas and then gets purified.
3145Т444Г<$ 4 
4444:1
3tebl4d*4q$ Щ 44$ 
f4^R44fil4^ II
44$ ¥1*41Я¥4 
4T4 4 WT4:I
ilRTf¥4Vl4 
*31^ 
^ 45$Ж:11ЧЗИ
з д 4 ^ 4g$ хт 4T4 
4 w : i
ОЩУТИТ 4 41445^114*11 
If one performs the deeds unmindfully, he has 
to face half the reward for the same. Similarly a 
Kastriya also by performing a degraded act has 
to suffer fully and if he does something 
unmindfully he has to suffer half the result of the 
same. Half of his sin has to be borne by the 
Vaisya and half of it by the Sudra who kills the 
cow. There is no doubt about it. After performing 
repentance he is purified and has to face the rest 
of the reward. In the Anukalpa one fourth of the 
result of the misdeeds has to be faced by a 
person, there is no doubt about it. But a 
Brahmana who becomes a killer of cow's has to 
suffer four times for the sin .
4T4 4 44Г"ТГ W W dftftffT 4Ц 
45$ттп^4 $|S$ 4 4444t54n4tsf4 4ТИ4Ч M 
4T4f¥44 4RT 45$ c4lRl>4 4 4?I4:I 
4ft4t 44f4 »it¥4rfq 4T43$ 4 frfgRPftlhh H
Similarly a Brahmana or a person of any other 
caste if he does so unwillingly, he has to face the 
reward accordingly for the sin. Repentance is the 
only remedy for the same. There is no doubt 
about it. The killer of the cows has to be bom as 
a cow for an equal number of years as the 
number of hair on the cow's body.

=== PAGE 621 ===

KR§NA-JANMA-KHAiypA, CHAPTER 85
549
Mt «rafw 1^ щ ^ г dT<Tg^^jup^iiv9ii
4 ^ % : 
xt xhpjsRfi
tfi^aiHT xRj^i 'Mtafarcii ^& Цнч<£П
A killer of the Brahmana becomes an insect of 
refuge for four times the number of years and of 
four times more the number of years, he becomes 
a mleccha. Thereafter for four times more the 
number of years he becomes a blind Brahmana 
who is purified after serving food to four lakh 
Brahmanas.
4JVR3t xt 
sf!ST?€hJTJlf cPhfat
хГШЧШ
«rf$RT: fifihJTT Ш ГЧЧГ^Т-СТ ЬЧУ!^:1Що||
After getting relieved of the terrible impurity, 
he regains his eyesight and becomes glorious. In 
all the four varnas, the killer of a woman has 
been treated as a great sinner; he falls in the 
kalasutra hell for the number of years equivalent 
to the number of hair on the body of the woman 
and is eaten away by the insects where he 
remains without food, suffering immensely.
ITftt 
HP3J хГ ЩсГ§^ хГ ЧРШ1
TcT: PM 
^UTIIS, ^11
Ш: 
W W rf^№ftlRTlhRT:ll^4ll
fcblxiq^^xi 
1ёр1^ 1Ч1хЩ{1пЙЦ1
ттФя^хг тщттпчг 
спйлт 
xfa w g^xr 
gnblt -ЩЪ ^
 ^tn?r^JT
Thereafter, the great sinner is bom on earth as 
a person 
suffering 
from 
the ailment of 
consumption. Thereafter for hundred years he 
has to serve food to the Brahmanas for getting 
purified. He then becomes a Brahmana of a 
suitable form for performing tapas. Thereafter, 
he also has to suffer for his sins and with the 
giving away of gold in charity, he is purified. 
The one who terminates pregnancy, is treated to 
be a great sinner and is driven in the Sunlmukha 
hell where he has to spend a hundred years and is
tortured there with sharp weapons. Thereafter, he 
has to be bom for a hundred years as a horse. 
ш : tntft 
% gnfarri
MufcflTl^xsgfriril^qil
He is then bom a wealthy Vaisya and he gets 
purified after giving away gold in charity for 
fifty years.
^AJVT?xf 
дт^П ТТЩ Щ В ^И 
XT 5ПЧЙ craftfTT XT ЩНсЬД!
ъаШ ш Щ ч xtrss^n^ 
xtii^
ii
mil Я^ЧтТП^Г qqWlI Vinm
rRTt Trfifaefflfi XT 
^ l ( t MTII^dll
He is then reborn in his own race and is freed 
from the ailment and is then bom as a Brahmana 
again. If a Brahmana or a Ksatriya kills a Ks 
atriya except in battle, he falls into TaptasQla hell 
where he has to suffer for a thousand years; he 
cries aloud there when he is tortured with 
burning iron rods. Thereafter for a hundred years 
he becomes an intoxicated elephant and then for 
a hundred years he is reborn as a Sudra suffering 
from blood ailment.
T i^ m qqqyri нутй<т?хг ш Г fg^T: I
in? x t ii^ ii
^ ? х Т 
ЩЦ Rritqgriqj
f i f e xl MhRlfd сщЬт! 
гЩ1|\Эо||
fcbrid^x) 4^ tRT:i
ciqfat TRUE ^
 ■<ffqanfstwpga:i|\9^li
Thereafter, he is relieved of the ailment by 
donating an elephant. He then becomes a pure 
Brahmana. Similarly a Vaisya who kills a Vaisya 
or a Sudra or a Sudra who kills a Vaisya, all are 
treated to be similar types of killers and they 
have to fall in the Krmikunda for a hundred years 
where they suffer with the biting of insects. He 
then becomes a hunter and suffer from the 
ailment. О lord of Vraja, thereafter for fifty 
years, he becomes a person with a krsodara belly 
and by giving away a horse in charity at a holy 
place, he is relieved of the sin.

=== PAGE 622 ===

550
BRAHM AV AIV AR'/A-M AH APURA14AM
ddl 
srftJPJTt cpd<4l'Sf4l
Я>91?1ё4ч4ч1 
<f9^:ll\9’?n
чГп>4<41г1 99%4 ftltlf тЩ^Я^ТЧгГ: I 
ятят 3i^ jtv4 ci ^nraTsgrnratsfq- gri иэ 3 11 
тиТ4Л <ч$ми4я ч # т 
^rjpfrf: *ад,{чг 
я^чтии*и
9ч!чГ Я М ^cf ftiqlfa Tfrft 4T:I 
шг * ^ < 3^499 ci^ormftf 4fe?riU94ii 
M : ^pst 
<MJ4W Я1
4jfWT44 ^ЙЧ Wlfenfir 4#9gfo:ll^ll 
If a Brahmana kills willingly or unwillingly a 
Siidra he gets purified by reciting the Gayatrl 
mantra a lakh of times or half the number of the 
same. The one who kills a dog because of the 
curse of Siva has to fall in the terrific hell for a
hundred years; thereafter he is bom as a dog for 
sixteen years. He is then eaten away and gets 
purified as a Brahmana. After taking a bath in the 
Ganga and giving away gold in charity, he is 
purified for all times to come.
fgmft ндщ 
чгчн ^ тпрлГи^и 
Р9т чфзчсглй ттч яйч f^ar-pi
Ъ Ч тя Щ
ЗТШ4Т 
4T9> cInIoii ЯМ гТ2Ш 
Ч1ЯПЛ W T O t
м trafr я4^г fn |4 t
Ч^Л irrfeit f t # тр4т4чЙГ 4tfeft:ll<io||
The one who kills a cat is purified by taking a 
bath in the Ganga and by giving away a measure 
of salt to a Brahmana. The one who kills snakes 
with his feet implanted on its hood, the people of 
all the four varnas earn the sin of one fourth of 
the Brahmahatya. Thereafter for a hundred years 
they fall into the Asipatra hell and have to suffer 
there getting eroded by sharp-edged weapons. 
Thereafter they are bom as aquatic snakes for 
five years and they meet with their end after 
having been tortured by human beings.
гЯТГ ЧВГ5ГГ: ЛРЙ W < Jrhl %
злйлт хт^гаяд- Tjttr srcrfr 
зт?9Я99 ’HTMtfig -^cfufysr ftiMti 
ftttfalT Ч М ЛТЛТЯМ^ 
'STIli^ll
He is then bom as a sinful human being 
suffering from fever, with lean and thin body and 
meets with his end at the age of five years. О 
lord of Vraja, he is then bom as a horse for 
twenty years and becomes a Sudra again but 
remains quite proud and suffers from ailments. 
By giving away silver in charity and feeding a 
hundred Brahmanas, he is purified
шг sjsjfr Fsft ъ ftteFf cjt govern
By killing the wretched creatures, one himself 
becomes wretched. He suffers from small 
ailments for a hundred years and is then purified.
зтйрй omliffrht 
-g ^ i
«Tf^loIRi гг Я М ftfafw 
^ГЯЭДЧсГ
дцЫ я м ; ^
 
ч^ш :игчи 
р л gjraf ш т я яр й ш л ъ ячщ|
Wrat ч 
4 ^ W
tutt w 
i d s 11
ЧТЧ Я сЧЧгГ ЧТЧ ?n fw 9Г4РЩ^^11й^11
я ч^йчтйг ячял 
f^cnftyifti
ftqfuft Я М #9" 
хщщщЧТЧ;11 ^ d 11
О lord of Vraja, therefore one should always 
be compassionate towards the non-ferocious 
animals but it is not a crime to kill the wild 
animals. О father, such of the people of the four 
varnas who cut the plpala tree, attract the sin of 
Brahmahatya and fall into the Asipatra hell and 
are tortured by sharp-edged weapons daily 
throughout the day and night. They then suffer 
from torture for a hundred years and become the 
semara tree for a lakh of years. Then they are 
bom as deformed Sudra persons suffering from 
ailment.
ftftt 
c$nfirftftcT:ii<t <? ii

=== PAGE 623 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 85
551
They have to suffer for the whole life, and are 
reborn as Brahmanas, suffering from boils. A 
person is relieved of the ailment by giving away 
gold in charity.
31сГмЙЗЧЧ*М 3<ТГ f3TT 
ЗЧТЗТкзЗТЗгй З я к 43ukR3: 11 <? о 11 
к23ШТ$ЗИЩЗТ 3 <jidMl5fd«^dMch:l 
(щ щ т ш ш fe k r Гзурш «нщзт.мя^п
з 
vr^^cft:i 
f w c ? g ^тчзтррш ат^у 11 
зтззй < s r^ rfq ^ frn iftF T O T T i
дчШ ri 
? 11
The one who gives false evidence and is an 
extremely ungrateful person, a betrayer of the 
faith, a killer of the friend, a usurper of the riches 
of the Brahmanas, the one who takes the food of 
the sraddha with the Sudras, the one who bums 
the dead bodies of the Sudras, the cook of the 
Sudras, the driver of the bulls or the one who 
earns his livelihood with the driving of the 
bullocks, the messengers and the temple priest 
have been treated to be great sinners who have to 
remain in the kumbhlpaka hell for a thousand 
years.
ш
 с ш н т 4мн?з
vrf^TT ^ зк зт зз ygtauui
They are tortured throughout day and night in 
the boiling oil, they suffer from ailments and are 
eaten away by serpent like creatures.
TJST: tfctforpnf&T. УТТЗЗТк 4T3R: 1 
W ? : 
44# TVdt ^тТсТ.-П^ЦП
3^Tfk33T3frR: ЧЗЗЖй.&Ь 7ИТ1 
ЗЗТПкт W Tvt 
3 3 ^ 3 q tlk $ ll
They are then bom in this world as vultures 
for a thousand years, a pig for a hundred births, a 
dog for a hundred births and then they become 
Sudras, suffering from diseases and live for fifty 
years suffering from indigestion and fever. They 
are relived of the ailment after giving away in 
charity a hundred pieces of gold.
з к Ь к 343SRI ттггщгГ 
зтчз:1
TfapTrOTfRt 3 ^5ЦЩПЗТ:11Ч^11
3ufclt 3 Щ З 3
у t яз<зт зщШ 
Д8ГТ11 s г 11
Of all the four varnas, whosoever costumes, 
milk, curd and ghee besides steals the silver and 
jewels or the riches of Sudras, falls into the tank 
of urine for a thousand years. He is then reborn 
as a sky-lark. This is certain.
Mt 'q'^^iftcrpjaii д а 331
$8°qi(i|R4TdThl 
TT-raftll^ll
He is then bom as a Sudra for a hundred years, 
where he leads a miserable life suffering from 
leprosy. He is then reborn as a Brahmana 
suffering from leprosy. He is then purified after 
giving away six pieces of gold.
3$T: Tjfczn 4Гчк
The one who loots away the treasure steals 
fruits and vegetables and playfully steals the 
riches, becomes a Yaksa on earth.
зч к п тгай
Cfk ЗЗсртТзк: 
з г к 3f3ll^oyil
Не then becomes Nllakantha for a hundred 
years and then is reborn as a- black complexioned 
Sudra.
^ зт ^ 3 3 
и;°зп
3437U56^Tt ттаТтБ: 3RfRt 343 ЧТЗ ЗИ ^о*
W 'iRRf'Tt ЗсЗТ з к Я З к 333i:! 
з к з ? 3 33: 
T<H3)8f 3 3=Чк|1^оЦ||
rffit Т1313$кз з з к 3T?M: 
: 1
43uk<TvTd.m ЧШ 313 W 3 :11 ? о ^ 11
He then is bom as a Brahmana with excess 
limbs and then again he is bom as a Brahmana. 
He is relieved of all the sins by serving food to 
the Brahmanas. The one who steals the ripe fruits 
is bom as an animal having fragrant andakosas. 
It is called kastUrl. Similarly by remaining as a

=== PAGE 624 ===

552
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAiyAM
deer for seven births, he is then born as sulphur. 
In one of his births, he is born as a Siidra 
suffering from leprosy and then he is bom as a 
Brahmana with an insignificant ailment and 
remains quite lean and thin. Here he gets purified 
by giving away six pieces of gold in charity. 
There is no doubt about it.
3 : ^ Ъ ftquT: w rew g r
cnf?TcT -ЩШНГ
The one who steals away the paddy, is bom as 
a miser for seven births and remains filled with 
grief. He is then thrown into the pit of refuse 
from where he is freed ultimately.
W /ifarm <рт Щ TTRcT nfett
ъ згат!?г xtii^
ii
штг sngt 
4 'fp ^ i
The one who steals away the gold is bom as a 
degraded person, suffering from leprosy and the 
one who receives gold in charity also has to fall 
into the pit of refuse for a hundred years. Then 
suffering for the reward of all his misdeeds he 
again becomes a Brahmana with minor ailments. 
He is relieved of the remaining part of the sin by 
giving away gold in charity.
xT ’ITRt хГ MxJjcKl 
«a-iqj 
fW nM 4ffiyr< gublt 
rtrt 
TOTrift xt фГчшн
crafat ^ 
xT
шг «тгИтг 
ч р ^:1
ЗТШТ 
я ф rirrfw r
fervor 
хГ гГЧй ^ Г : 11^ЧП
The one who enjoys the company of an 
inaccessible woman, falls into the terrific hell. 
He then is thrown into the terrific kumbhlpaka 
hell for a hundred thousand years and becomes
an insect of the pelvic region of loose woman. 
He has then to be bom as an insect of refuse and 
he remains there for a lakh of years. He is then 
bom as an animal and thereafter as a petty 
creature. He is then bom a mleccha and 
thereafter he becomes a degraded Siidra. He is 
then bom as a eunuch and after, becoming a 
Brahmana suffering from ailment, he is reborn as 
a Brahmana who gets purified after visiting holy 
places but because of the impurity he remains 
issueless. He is relieved of the impurity by 
serving food to a lakh of Brahmanas and then 
obtains a son.
ЯЯсГ: 
ттфТ:
тгш: 
tp R -w з т а т п п т н
effort -щ ъ
The enraged person is bom as a donkey for 
seven births, a quarrel-some person is bom as a 
crow for seven births, a person who gives away 
in charity, Salagrama, he falls into the kalasutra 
hell for a hundred years where he has to suffer. 
He is then bom as a wagtail bird on earth.
HlgxjI'^tT 
ЧЧ)^1т?хГ
fqgxfa: '^Гчч^Т11 W
1
The one who steals away iron, is deprived of 
progeny. The one who steals away ink, is bom as 
a parrot and the one who steals away sweets 
becomes an insect.
fgilM 
%ТШ xT 
^xi^t qnfirct ш 
si^ u ж i
tmf дггт 
crafmt 
яегп
rmfsftr ferar ^
 
’et WJRTfi i ^ о 11 
ащуцг 
Xf ■fe5RTRT
xi т ^ 1чтйш1 
T O : ТЗЗзй Я*& 
g|T^xr 
^ gjiurai: 11 ^ ? 11 *
xr ijgryxr
ГЧЗД1Ч1<*1 
fclM t cpxffhr^:!

=== PAGE 625 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAiyDA, CHAPTER 85
553
^ тоштГ а т ш 9raf^faii^4ii
Those who are envious of Brahmanas and 
teachers are bom as insects of the head. О father, 
the one who enjoys the company of loose woman 
has to suffer in the terrific hell for a hundred 
years and is then reborn as a useless insect, 
thereafter for seven births he is bom as a widow, 
a childless woman, untouchable and a woman 
with a severed nose. The one who steals away 
red articles, suffers from a blood ailment he also 
becomes Yavana having no character, is cruel 
and lame. He becomes a dwarf, devoid of dlksa, 
having an evil eye or becomes a one-eyed 
person. He then becomes arrogant, deaf, a 
denouncer of the Vedas, ill spoken and dumb, 
indulging in violence, devoid of hair, devoid of 
truth, beard and moustaches, ill spoken, deprived 
of teeth, untruthful, devoid of tongue, engaged in 
evil deeds and devoid of fingers. The one who 
steals books, he becomes a foolish person with 
disease. The one who receives a horse in charity 
has to fall into the red urine hell for a hundred 
years and thereafter he is bom as a horse.
cmfuTt xf
WVTTt 
^ ЩТГЗГЧ11^ П
ф т р з s t f m iw jT wisrrRtf 9T^i
3 W 
сЩТ 
TTRcT: 11 ^ C 11
The one who steals away an elephant or 
receives the same in charity, has to remain as an 
elephant for a long period before he becomes a 
Sudra. The one who kills a he-goat without the 
yajna, the one who steals it or receives the goat 
in charity, has to fall in the kunda of puss for a 
hundred years and after that he is bom as a 
cdnddla. He is then reborn as a goat for one year 
and thereafter the person is purified.
fejsRTST TOI 
1
с{тТ1ЩТ^ ctT^R 
? p :lim il
ЦУЛеЙ fqbdiRHlfd 
sl^ fp q B ^ o ll
TO 
f ^ T tTO
TOi 
Гчч\Гм*ш«
He is relieved of the curse after meeting his 
death with the weapon of the enemy. The one 
who takes back the things given in charity or the 
one who takes back his words, is bom as a 
mleccha and falls into the hell, the one who 
consumes alone sweets in the company of others, 
he surely falls into the kalasiitra hell, he remain 
there for a hundred years and is reborn as a 
goblin for a thousand years. He is then reborn as 
a filly or as an ant.
sptei ТОГФЙЗ 
Tjfroi Tgwqi 
зйсБ 
тот 
^ ? ii
■gfbr
fajp&bfal'WKtf ^ 
^ и ^ ч ч
f ^ T
^ ftraRt 
^FWrt
*точ?й ч
то чт!т<т 
тотгш^ч
He is bom as a black wasp and during one 
birth he is bom as a bee, then a wasp for one 
birth, a large mosquito for one birth and ill- 
smelling insect for one birth, a bug for one birth 
and thereafter is bom as a foolish Sudra suffering 
from ailment. Getting free from the sin, he 
becomes a Brahmana again in due course of 
time. The one who steals away oil and the one 
who cmshes oil, becomes a louse for one birth 
and a wicked gold smith for one birth. Even the 
Brahmana the creator of the letters, if he steals 
away the riches of the giver of food, he has also 
to be thrown in the kunda of darkness and then 
has to be bom as a gold-smith. He has then to be 
bom as a widow and a kayastha in one birth. In 
case a kayastha has not eaten the flesh of his

=== PAGE 626 ===

554
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAiyAM
mother while remaining in the womb of the 
mother, it is not because of his grace but is due to 
his having no teeth.
тспгшт: чзиЫГФсь
фЧ1$14|
О lord of Vraja, the gold smith, the trader in 
gold and a kayastha are all very clever and there 
is no one else more cruel than them on earth. 
§pmrr>i ?тат 4ifw w "m ^i 
gfofT cfiTSTOt 
5Г
The heart of these people is always like the 
sharp edged dagger. In hundreds of the kayastha 
people only one could be found as a noble one 
but the goldsmith and the trader in gold can 
never be a noble person.
ч 
ш ^irfichc^'iai^ii^oii
Tfarogift 
fprai:i
Nfaci^R^ifui 
i w : l
cRTtsftr HTfr чштрг fggTdt ЗПчй ^ftr.-ll^^ll 
cffit ftc)dftx^i£| 
xf
сНЧщА: игашч ЧТ^БИ^хГ ^4?T:ll^^ll
О father, therefore, people with great wisdom 
filled with welfare, well-versed in the scriptures 
and the religious people should not believe in 
them, keeping in view their own welfare. The 
one who usurps the boundary, thief of the land, 
the terrorist and the one who usurps the land 
surely falls into the kalastitra hell. He has to 
suffer there with hunger and thirst for sixty 
thousand years and then is thrown as the insect 
of refuse. He then is bom as an untouchable 
Sudra before he is relieved of the impurity. 
Therefore the intellectuals should always be 
careful in using their intelligence.
ЧтЪ<Ш1Ч*1Ч) xf 
<Th'chli<*:l
Ш: 
штТ fori
The one who steals the red garment becomes 
an insect for one birth of red colour, he then is 
reborn as a Sudra and is then reborn as a sinless 
Brahmana.
fraszjfbrt 
m<T:7TRft xr 
щ-.\
R&tnyirai f^cd^rral '-ч^этч^кд>:и^чи
ar^g: ттечшт* xr
Clfs^g: 
fgyT:11**511
The one who is devoid of performing the 
sandhya thrice a day an the one who sleeps early 
in the morning at the time of performing 
sandhya, the thief of yajnopavita, the one who 
performs sandhya in spite of being impure, the 
denouncer of the Vedic and post-Vedic literature 
is impure and falls for three births and instead of 
going to the heaven he falls in the hell.
Ч: ф
 W # m 4 t
cfdfart xr f tc # ^ WFT m тШсТ:11***э11 
я ^ х г г ш ^ хг
xt TTpratn^^ii 
чП*еЦ&Г$У|Ги| xITSS^Tt TFT 
cRt 4 * # xj|U51Hl ТЯТРЩТ ЗРТТГГ xTII**<? N 
TT: i^iyl iRRgiBt 'H-4eh xr ftft: ^f%T: I 
■fttsfa fast ogrfii^siteMddlxtgfe: п *4 ° I 
ЗШ^5?хТ 4^fT
^
 
xf Ч1Ч5Г:11^Ч ^11
The Sudra who cohabits with a Brahmana 
woman surely falls into the hxmbhlpaka hell 
where he has to stay for three lakh of years, 
suffering all the times. He is then throwned in the 
kunda of boiling oil where he has to be bom 
through out the day and night and then he is bom 
as the insect of the pelvic region of the loose 
woman. For sixty thousand years he has to 
consume the filth of the pelvic region and for a 
lakh of births, he has to be bom as a candala. He 
is bom as a Sudra with a wound. He is then 
purified and is bom as a Brahmana with ailment 
who gets purified after visiting the holy places. A 
person who adores a god placing him in an 
unclean environment, surely becomes a Sudra. 
ftebVi tllRSci faff ft4yd 
ftclrp
a rp tft 
otnfaftTbyxf -цист
xr fqrtfot 
ТШЧВЦЗН

=== PAGE 627 ===

KR$NA-JANMA-KHANI?A, CHAPTER 85
555
The one who adores the stone Sivalinga with 
matted locks of hair, surely becomes a Yavana. If 
one prepares a weak Sivalinga, he becomes blind 
and in case a degraded linga is made, the one 
who makes it earns disgrace and the one who 
makes it without devotion, is bom as a pauper 
and deformed and a person with ailment because 
the result of the preparation of the linga is 
bestowed according to the making of the linga.
феяi 
Уф^уч 
f^'ll?4'kll
The one who makes a linga in clay, in ashes, 
cowdung, pindas or sand and adores it once he 
stays in heaven for a kalpa.
ШТГ 
ЙГСГТхГ 4glMTtf¥3
TRTT 
xf fHfRi ?TrT4yHT?II 1^4411
Thereafter, 
he 
becomes 
an 
intelligent 
Brahmana possessing vast land. By adoring a 
hundred lingas of Siva, one becomes a king in 
the land of Bharata.
Щ
1
xT Jgfat ^
 Т1ЙЙ <ЧТЙ Ч^Ц.11 ?4 $ 11
ЗВЙ xt ‘rfTi wxj щГ xt ^|ct>g4:i
'ЧуЙ' xnfettered| xuwjfctRcki bicT
By adoring a thousand Sivalingas one surely 
gets the merit, he remains in heaven for a long 
time and remain a great king in the land of 
Bharata. By adoring ten thousand lingas, one 
becomes the lord of Bharata and by adoring a 
lakh of lingas one becomes the lord of the 
universe and if these lingas are adored with great 
devotion, one achieves extra merit.
йгйтйт ^йт йгатщт йзйт wi
4RldU||^4l ЙЭГ fdSPSTlfa^' дЙтщц^ЧйП
One achieves birth in the race of Brahmana by 
taking a bath at holy places, performing charities, 
serving food to the Brahmanas and by adoring 
Narayana.
ЗТЙЙсЙЧ firm qfedl 1 ЩТЙ 4 ^ 1 
qftsdi sU'^jui^tU 
ЙЙ%гт:11?Ц^П
ЗЙ^ЯТЧТЙТ ^ТВЙ ЯГЙ ЙЙ
ч$ 
чЭ
ЙЙ: ЗЙЙТ ЙЙЙ 'Й^'МтЫ Vxl ^шгатм 
хг 
х! ч т й й я й 
?и
By performing additional tapas one becomes 
an intellectual Brahmana and a Vaisnava who 
has controlled all his senses. One is bom on the 
land of Bharata after performing deeds of great 
merit or with the touching of his feet, the earth 
gets purified. The pious and Vaisnava Brahmana 
bestows suspiciousness to the holy places and 
redeems thousands of his generations. This has 
been ordained in the Vedas.
зтйзгтт ргЕтттг йгт ^ у<Гс1яй:1
Л
 ^ 
I ^ ? 11
A Brahmana becomes a physician because of 
his ill deeds and then a wicked surgeon, he is 
then bom for three births, as a wicked surgeon, a 
physician and a snake charmer, who is always 
wicked and is envious of the Brahmanas and the 
gods. For a thousand years he remains as a 
terrific serpent.
xi 
^ дйчй gsn 
злей* спйй fm m хт ч й ш 
*ГЙЙ ЙЙЩ ЧгЩ ^RuiVxl ЙЗГЩТ1
чтйй
'ЯЙФ MU^ch^cl ■^Mlvlt'xl RnFtRJI 
WfciMwIlfaVxf сБх0Ч?€Г Й
^
 W ^ Й
"ЧШЧ^тТ xt ТТ ЙЧ?х1
зйщт хг щ щ xt ш «тердт ^ 
i ^ 6 \ i
ФЙЯТГП^^^Г Ч ЧЧЙ'^ПЙ ЯЩ1
О lord of Vraja, the female messengers of the 
loose woman fall into the kalasiitra hell for a 
number of years and then become lizards. After 
becoming a lizard for a birth, he ’becomes a deer 
for three births, he-buffalo for a birth, a bear for

=== PAGE 628 ===

556
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAiyAM
a birth, a rhinoceros for a birth and for three 
births he is born as a jackal. The one who cuts 
off the water from the tank of someone else and 
cuts the standing crop denoting the same, he 
becomes a crocodile during one birth and a 
tortoise for three births. A Brahmana greedy of 
fish and also consumes meat and also the meat 
which is not given to him is bom a fish and a 
deer. О father, he has to bear the ill-effects of his 
misdeeds for a thousand years and by getting 
purified with his deeds, he becomes a Brahmana. 
He who does not perform Ekadasl vrata, 
becomes degraded.
'ЧфЩ fgjpT 
^4 rtycR
'Itf'lWiiftri tpt -Rtsfr 
ч tip :i 
^ e r r гг чтсб 
w i
But he is relieved of the sin if he offers double 
the weight of the food he consumed, in charity. 
The one who consumed food on my birthday, 
consumes the sin of the three worlds; there is no 
doubt about it. After eating the food, he falls into 
the hell and then he becomes a candala.
ITct xf 
^
уьчгопнчуЫ stfebipvi w^it'Tn w n
Similarly the one who takes food on Sivaratri 
and RamanavamI days meets with the same fate. 
If one is unable to observe fast then he should 
consume the havisya food and should perform 
auspicious 
festivities serving food to the 
Brahmanas. He is then purified and is relieved of 
the sin.
■grfer RmychlW tpti 
■JJST: chtfdR'gyif&T
■?ггж: тпгэрщй 
rT ОДт яЫЧ1^|
ЖГ%сТТ
Therefore, on that day one should recite my 
name delightfully. In case someone eats food on 
the night of a moonless day, he has to become a 
vulture for a crore of births, a pig for a hundred
births and a wild animal for a hundred births. 
Thereafter he becomes an impure Brahmana, a 
white kite and a parrot;.
An unmarried Brahmana and a goose. He who 
steals away the divine garments, he is bom a 
peacock for three births.
TJW 
W JFTf 11^9 Vail
g><wi4>:l
^
 
Ч^1Ч<йТ 
# 5 ^ 4 ,1
учЫ у 
I ^ ч N
<mt 
yrugicT: 
I
cqiRj^Ttitdn: 
«ГЩШТ^Т ШТ: 
О II
The one who steals away a bay-leaf becomes a 
duck for long time. He who steals away the 
images of gods, is bom as person with disease, a 
deaf and the hunch back. He who enjoys the 
company of his wife on Sunday and the five 
auspicious days besides using oil, honey and 
meat, surely falls into the hell named Vajradariist 
ra where the sinner has to face grief for a 
thousand years. Thereafter he is bom as a 
mleccha for seven births, besides being a 
candala or an ailing Sudra. Thereafter he is 
purified by becoming a Brahmana.
щщшнгег 'hirhc-M янгГ фЫшпп
«11$ Lit Щ 
^gT 4 
ЧШЧ*.UH ^11 
4||с|чгЛ|сН1М^ч^|^4дчГ Я^ 1 
3T*5?etR T 
w ®
w
p ^ l I
? 11
fyic^pl 
H: "ЩГЗЯЩИ^^И
Therefore a religious minded person in the 
land of Bharata should make an effort not to take 
food on that particular day. The degraded person 
who does not bow in reverence while looking at 
a Brahmana or a god, becomes impure for the 
whole life and becomes a Yavana. He who does 
not welcome a Brahmana by getting up, surely

=== PAGE 629 ===

KFtSNA-JANMA-KHAIVpA, CHAPTER 85
557
earns the sin of killing a Brahmana for seven 
births. He who is envious of Siva becomes a 
temple priest or a cock for seven births.
Tt 
т о ; шнт щЬтт щ ■язгочни* и
ЧЭ 
>4»
srt 11 u ч 11
ч^нЫтг
жиг 
i u s 11
fe t fTT^T 
^TfroT iTR^vT:!
^5 Ъ qr^^ffT O гГС$ Ш c^lfa ^:ll^\9 ll
7T 
f :7JT <У^ПЧЧ Ш ^ 1
Йс^Т ^ti4d фгс(1 difiqebi ?лЧ<рЙГ:1йб<П1 
трШШ Ч TO* ТОТЙ TT ТОП: I 
■^4f4dfu[*hi zf 7TOT: ■ДВПЯЩИ^ЧМ 
A person who unknowingly destroys adoration 
of the gods and ancestors, falls into the terrific 
hell. He has to remain there for a thousand years 
and is reborn for three births as a crow. He is 
then reborn as a jackal at a holy place for three 
births and consumes dead bodies. О lord of 
Vraja, thereafter the sinner during the three 
births, protects dead bodies in holy places and 
snatches coffins. Such of the foolish people as 
neither adored the gods nor the teacher with 
devotion or provide them with good food surely 
get cursed and become temple priests. He 
becomes hostile to gods and he does not earn 
merit by performing puja. The one who 
extinguishes the lamps with his hand is bom as a 
fire-fly for seven births.
3TcftcT 
W ШЩЙ1
The one who eats without offering food to his 
family gods or the one who is quite greedy for 
fish, becomes a fish-eating-bird and then is bom 
as a cat for seven births.
HlUltefli cb4)TO W IT # 
rTOT 
4‘HWtW TOt:ll^4 ^11
He who steals away the begs becomes a 
pigeon, he who steals a garland becomes a bird; 
the one who steals away paddy, becomes a 
sparrow and a thief of meat becomes an elephant.
qiu£cb:
SHRchfgyfqfatft TfH: ЧПННТрЧЧЧИ
vit-Ach
'fl’Ach 
rEtt 
fed «till1ЧЧ^М
Ш 
W W O TTI
сИп£пь*1еБ1Й *Г 
% В Ж :ичч^11
7ПГ: JBTlfn н тй н
ПЙ Ж Й глгаж ТггаЙЭЖТО: 11 * ч Ч 11
A poet who attacks intellectuals becomes a 
frog for seven births. Such of the petty 
intellectuals as poses himself as a Brahmana, 
becomes a mangoose for seven births, a person 
suffering from leprosy during one birth and a 
chameleon for three births. He then becomes a 
wasp during one birth and then becomes an ant 
of the trees. He then is reborn as a Stidra, Vaisya, 
Ksatriya and a Brahmana, he who sells away 
girls of all the four varnas, surely falls in the hell 
and remains there till the time of the sun and the 
moon. Thereafter he becomes a hunter selling 
meat. He suffers from some aliment according to 
his earlier evil deeds.
TOqfofftft font ч ft ^rHt 
i ЧЧ ^ 11
й т й 
?iR ^ :ii4 4 '9 ii 
ЙтТ ТЙТ: "ЩГ5ЯЩ1
ттж: 11 ч ч 11
ch^cbkw^d хТ|
feTORfTOI xf ^I^IU I ЙТО:М?ЧЧМ
'В' 
<чг|с*1; ‘УВПГЯЩ1
g»(c«di: 
°°II
A Brahmana who sells away my name can 
never be freed and can never achieve salvation. 
This is certain. The one who remaining on earth 
does not recite my name, such an ignorant person 
becomes a cow during one birth, a goat and a 
ram and then for seven births he is to be bom as 
a he-buffalo. A person who is a great conspirator, 
wicked and is devoid of dharma, becomes an oil­
man and a potter. The one who paints false

=== PAGE 630 ===

558
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
blemishes and denounces the gods as well as the 
Brahmanas, becomes a black-smith during one 
birth and for seven births he has to be bom as a 
washerman. Such of the Brahmana, Ksatriyas, 
Vais'yas and Sudras are denounced and are 
unclean as they are bom as mlecchas for ten 
thousand years.
O T R Ы R H R S R lTf R R fa lR R R RWTI
•o
зш кдлМ щ эт: 
RtftR: rrtii? o*ii
The one who is lustful of woman, passionate 
and always thinks of them, suffers from the 
disease of consumption and in the next birth he is 
bom as a eilnuch.
RBjRRSR* Ш ш : т а й otjrotb
chi4dl Rifadi 
rrr R?RfRiR°^n
■r R^R^fe^Rra т а й otjrotb
^ 
?пч^нл i ? о ^ 11 
зчЫич^т Щ 1
rrt RRfR 
щ ^4% л i ? о * 11
The one who looks with passionate eyes, at 
the pelvic region of the wives of others, the 
breasts and the faces of woman becomes blind 
and in his next birth he becomes a eunuch. A 
Brahmana who being ignorant performs evil 
deeds and indulges himself in killing, falls into 
the Andhatamisra hell for ten thousand years. 
Thereafter he is bom as an astrologer, receiver of 
charities and remains devoid of wisdom. He is 
then bom as a Sudra and then a Brahmana 
according to his deeds.
R R : 
Rt^lR c*)4ui*<i«u|
щ щ ш ъ trait ftssm rr^r r?1r r л \ч ° ч и
R ЧРЙЯ- 
^
 OTRT: R H O T R fl 
srirwfrrrrt «тнй д а ! r3r ii? orii
Е П Щ ч М RTRRftl
таотЙчта! йвг: w u ra ^di vni ^i i ^?и 
RfROTOTlfR^Rrat R R R R R tR T: ^ T T : RRTI 
Ч Й 5 
ROT R | T R $ R 4«*h< ROT 119 0 6\ I 
R ^ R xj ROT 
ROT 
ототтл 
О Т Й Р R ROT RRT ROTS!>OTOT?R R T R R lR o ^ ll
R R RO T RRRTTTR 91ОТОТЩЧ ROTl
Cs 
ЧЭ
ROT O T fR J R R fc j Щ О Т : ^ R R c T R I I ^ o H
An astrologer who is well-versed in the 
scriptures if speaks falsehood, he surely becomes 
the chief of the monkeys for seven births. 
Thereafter, as a result of the reward of the tapas 
for several births, he is bom in the land of 
Bharata and becomes a virtuous Brahmana. The 
person devoid of dharma becomes sinful. The 
one who performs his dharma is considered to be 
extremely purified like fire and illustrious and 
even the gods are afraid of him. As the Ganga is 
the most sacred of all the rivers, Puskara is 
sacred among the holy places, KasTpurl among 
the cities, Siva among the intellectual, the Vedas 
among the scriptures, the plpala tree among the 
trees, my adoration among the tapas, various 
types of tapas and fasting among performing of 
vratas, similarly the Brahmanas are adorable 
among all the people.
fe lR T ^ R RferffR O T R lfT R R R lft R l 
fRR RTRTR : ^
 RThOTTfirfRR^RRiR W\ 
^jriv[|4rh Ы R<WOTuraiuaiHi 
r r r д й й r t r йоттот: « f o n R S l i i ^ i i
R O T^R ROTRTR RROTR fR O TR R I
RRTRRT R Й О Т xt <m R P fc R ^ R rTI 
^■cta^lROT ROTotmt 
W RlfcR^I 
T P 4 R R T R RRRRT RRTTRTT RTRJOTR R I G W<$||
All the tlrthas reside in the feet of Brahmanas 
and the dust of the Brahmana's feet is considered 
to be quite auspicious and destroys sins and 
ailments; their blessing bestows welfare. О 
father, thus I have narrated to you the effects of 
the evil and good deeds as heard by me. Now 
you listen to the rest. After listening to the 
scriptures, one should offer gold, silver, clothes 
and betel to the Brahmanas. For my pleasure the 
reciter should be given a hundred gold coins, a 
cow, silver, costumes and betels.
ffR 9П9510 RRTo $ilcjiwM-+iTgo 3R° RRRRT0 
RRROTRR° ЧохиуШнч15йтатЛ1<£ЦИ

=== PAGE 631 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 86
559
Chapter - 86
T h e S to r y o f V r n d a
4 ^ -dc((4
cb4«fl<fa4J
f^tiwhJTf 
сг^г^ч щ
efi^RRrRT 
ehtfUR t|fd: 1
Wf W c R ^ ^
 5ЕПШЩ1^Т| R 11
Nanda said- О lord with the resolve of the 
daughter of Kedara you have spelt out the result 
of the deed. I halve also learnt about the conduct 
of loose woman. Now you tell me in detail the 
story about Kedarakanya who was king Kedara 
and in which race was he bom.
дтт <т цртг: 
r j : w r^dR ran
TTT Rft HrBMT R 9MT RRTT R RTfen^ll^ 
fydddldHU^ HRt: 3 ^
3R144T^43r?ET 
"Ц?ПЩТ: 11411
cT<lc*HT:l
R H S M ft: 
^OTR: W h flim i
Sri 
Krsna 
said- 
In 
the 
earlier 
times 
Svayambhuvamanu was the son of Brahma who 
was married to Satarupa who was quite graceful 
among the ladies. They had two sons named 
Priyavrata 
and Uttanapada. 
Out of them 
Uttanapada happened to be quite glorious and he 
had a son named Dhruva. Dhruva had a son 
named Nandasavarni and Kedara was the son of 
Nandasavarni. He happened to be the lord of all 
the seven continents and was a great Vaisnava. 
HRT 
rlrRRBJr
RRt 
R 
II
y^iPui ^nfq g ru R r i
imr щ г 
^gmppiioii
Rpimt r 
rtr m i
q ifillcH lh ^i^lR гЩТ Щ Т ^ з ГеНТЧ ^ Н
flw зщтн fireira ■уштмтаст зптп 
f e i srrgnbRt ^
 щ R*wnpi<?ii 
т?ШЩГ WOIFlt ЯШТЧШ
■джМ w q^4|vftoggw i;i 
3IHR WuitHUi sTT^rotwr ^
 33T1IUH
The 
Sudarsana-cakra 
always 
remained 
present in his court. He used to give away in 
charity a lakh of cows of high breed whose horns 
were covered with gold plates, which were given 
to him by Varuna and covered with the best of 
garments purified fire, a lakh of gold coins and 
land with growing crops. The best of the gems, 
jewels, diamonds, a lakh of horses, a lakh of 
elephants, silver, rubies, sweet dishes and a 
hundred mountain-like heaps of paddy, besides 
gem-studded ornaments. He used to serve food to 
a hundred lakhs of Brahmanas daily. The king 
had all the vases made of gold. The gold vases 
for eating and the yajnopavlta were of gold and 
had beautiful finger rings. He also gave away in 
charity the gem-studded seats delightfully to the 
Brahmanas.
W wttt гг щ т *r w h ii 
R|
'т т Ч \ fsFrsi R qfl^iJlebRcbX11 w
A lakh of Brahmanas were engaged by the 
king to serve in the kitchen for cooking food and 
serving it to the Brahmanas.
RffieRT d&chVifl
Midfiiw rsirt fdstuii rRr wm 
j|:f*sRT
■q^r3ptT?Rt INI '^ШТЩГсГ
chc4iVH4-dl R f^cTlf^n^l I 
11
He always had a huge stock of honey, curd, 
guda and milk. The king right from the morning 
till evening engaged himself in serving the fruits, 
roots and other eatables to the Brahmanas. He 
was a great Vaisnava who had controlled all the 
senses. He offered everything of his own to me 
and always recited my name throughout the day 
and night.

=== PAGE 632 ===

560
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURA1VAM
tjcbql "^ГЩТ^ёГ сЩЭТеГ ^ Vе!<*^1 
fciMiuii urthi^c)
'p rr w w ?€ n ir 
^ wJti
^ f^JiT: ^чт^тт ^ ti 1^1э 11 
Once the cook came to him and told the king, 
"O king, ten lakhs of Brahmanas have, arrived to 
take food; Today the Brahmana are taking quite 
simple food. О lord you tell me kindly as to what 
should be done. О king the Brahmanas should 
take their food with pulses and other eatables.".
^ Ъ г с ^ ч 1*|еБ1<| ^PTriT гП 
■гтГ ТГЗТТ rT^diJUl; ТПТсГ 
1111
TfT^pprr м
 
«П<Шв:1
Х1^П Ж 
I 
11
at4vT<<T4iruicHi 
"Флттч.1
I^Rra-git 
i ^ о 11
The authority of the king spread up to the four 
yojanas and the one whose authority extended to 
hundred times more the area, he is considered to 
be a mandalesvara. The one whose command is 
extended to ten times more than mandalesvara is 
called Rajendra. In the court of Kedara five lakhs 
of kings always remained present who were 
adorned with gem-studded ornaments, the jewels 
and the diamonds and presented to the king the 
best of gems, horses and elephants.
«4dl<*cHA|l ЩТ
^11
«hijjcbl 
чИЛ «tiHdC'iiri'hl
^ 
н -rti r ^ 11
{Ml •НЧ-Л1 rft 
XT!
•щ 
ш 
3 u
^
 д ш ш T^t rFRT -гщЧ1^ ч ; |
Тд?ПТ11 ^ 11
гргошщтге Rt щ ъ m crc^i 
4Vrilc<2>wi
From the fire altar of the same king LaksmI 
had appeared as a damsel, having lotus-like eyes, 
she was clad in the garments sanctified by fire 
and was adorned with gem-studded ornaments,
she said to the king, О lord I am your daughter". 
On hearing this the king handed over the girl 
with devotion to his wife and stood there. 
Thereafter the girl humbly spoke to her parents 
and went for performing tapas at the bank of the 
Yamuna in an auspicious forest. Because of her 
performing the tapas there, the place was known 
as Vrndavana. After performing tapas she 
desired to have me as her husband as a boon. 
Brahma then bestowed a boon to her, "You 
would achieve lord Krsna as the husband later.". 
R 
-RfWT Wtl
^тапттрутам!
9ПЯТ 
W : ■RTScfi' *T
^
 gRTT T#T ^fFT 
ТТТЧТ1^\Э||
ТЩ TRUM 
I ? 6 11
w 
f)4R дягалтч;|
tfdTWSK сГСЧИ? Я и 
WRrg-(^=R4.i
^Z5T W 
ЫКИЩ1Щ •Rfafrll^oll
Once she was lying down in the spring season 
over the bank of the river in the flower bed, 
adorned with all the gem-studded ornaments, she 
wore a serene smile on her face while sleeping 
there. At the same time a Brahmana in order to 
test the chastity of the damsel arrived there. The 
girl also saw a beautiful young men having 
arrived there whose body was plastered with 
sandal-paste. He was adorned with gem-studded 
ornaments and was quite desirable by the 
damsels. He was quite young, beautiful and quite 
pleasant to look at. He appeared like a boy of 
sixteen, having the lustre of the molten gold, 
looking more beautiful then the crores of the 
gods of love, wearing pltambara, a face like the 
moon and the eyes like the lotus of the winter 
season. On finding the Brahmana boy there, the 
girl got up from her bed and made him sit 
besides her.
Т£ЛТ Щ
 *tqvqi 
4>H FFT 
4^11 
■Mril fRcT 
WHIR 
^11
Ml «J^ccu 
!>l

=== PAGE 633 ===

KFt$NA-JANMA-KHAtfPA, CHAPTER 86
561
4M<dl4M<rKlSkbdftlll
gnggfat ^ щит sr Ягйчт 
9ГЗГ11 з ч 11
She adorned him with devotion and offered 
fruits and roots to him besides the fragrant water 
and then bowed in reverence to him О lord of 
Vraja, Dharma in the form of a Brahmana boy 
was 
shining with his 
eternal 
lustre. 
He 
delightfully accepted the adoration of the 
princess and spoke the words which were quite 
appropriate for the passionate women but were 
difficult for the chaste woman.
язей ckft дшт 
я ящ |
cfn№r 
<5fq?[4£fal I 3 з 11
IdUdMWI % 
дт с||ойГу
ctf 
Щ. Ь 
RTfR сП^МЧ! IЭ * 11
Dharma said - О beautiful one, who is your 
father? What is your name? Why are you staying 
here in the lonely place? You tell me. О beautiful 
one, what for are you performing tapasl What is 
your desire? You will meet with welfare. You 
ask for a boon.
з ф п я
fSBT 
fwfTi
гпт: gsfrfft Tiftr ^RTJufh # ■crf?rq;i 1^411
'RTrafsf^T 
^ 4|p*9d ЯТЦ1
Vmda said- О Brahmana, I am the daughter of 
Kedara and my name is Vmda. Residing in 
Vrndavana, I performed tapas in a secluded 
place in order to get lord Hari as my husband. О 
Brahmana, if you can bestow a boon on me then 
give the same to me. And if you are not 
competent enough to do so what is the use of 
putting a question to me?.
srf ЗЯТЯ * I
Я 4<4lc4H4lVcH'4l
Ш дГЯТ it trf?T cRjf fiRT
I ЯЙ ^% 43vn^R :ii^< sii
яЫу[)ЯсЬНЯ Я1
Еьу|1Н|1Ч^НЯ чГорЬйНЯ WII3SH
<НЯ ЯТЯ^ ШЯ тгат 
ЯШЩ1
3 3 ^ 4 1 ' ЯТЯТ ЯТЯГгЧНЧЫ^ЧИ^оП 
я ш яшт ?пят ig m
ЗТЯуЯЯЧТЯТЯТ ЯсЯ Я (drqfcRs'lJ
я^ияш тдтщпт
Dharma said- The lord is devoid of desires, 
beyond comprehension, the soul of all, the lord 
of all, without qualities, invisible, who becomes 
visible to shower his grace on his devotees; 
therefore who else would be able to achieve him 
as her husband, except Sarasvatl and LaksmI? 
The four-armed lord Hari who sleeps in the 
Vaikuntha with two spouses and the two-armed 
lord who dwells in the Goloka holding a flute, 
appearing in the form of a cowherd, is lord Krsna 
and he has Radha as his spouse. The same Radha 
who is the form of eternal Brahmana, serves the 
dark-complexioned Krsna always, who possesses 
considerable mental prowess and fortunes, is 
peaceful and extremely beautiful. Her beautiful 
body puts to shame the bodies of crores of gods 
of love. He is adorned with invaluable gem- 
studded ornaments, is the form of truth, 
imperishable, clad in pltambara and happens to 
be the bestower of all riches.
fgsn^rt 
гщч|зг:|
fSfjf: ■*гпщн*311
The same Krsna who is two-armed in Goloka, 
resides in the Vaikuntha, having four arms.
-qfaiiql Я^'<<Й ? P : 
Я1
frw зтя fam^idiqfan^qii .
O Vrnda, with the fall of Brahma, lord Krsna 
winks his eye. After a lapse of twenty five yugas. 
Indra comes to an end and after the fall of 
fourteen such Indras, a day of Brahma is 
counted, his life similarly is in lengthy.

=== PAGE 634 ===

562
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
-CTlftr cpfo^l
ттд- $)|dl^W44<* 
<&Tdc4TRll^ll
Thirty such days make a month and twelve 
such months make a year. Brahma has the life of 
hundred such years.
<ц|<ч^сНч4-^1 ^ct-4 
I
<bv4Ri chlficblfj Ъ Ш 
"4t 
щ т а : TTh?er 
Xj ЩЧЧЩГ1
гг щ ячтчг chrAicblfavi^t ^ЩМ'кйМ 
ТГ?Г TTlSTt QddfTl §пдат: ХПЖТ:|
dd^^dfaf: ЩТ wlfrl f4r*T ^RIcTT^I 
^ s f a c k d l ^ 
fife:IIЦ ОII
f e r n тта^тстг ^ тттг ъ ^ 4 3 14 1
Ш 4TTs4t f | ^TTct|-chHchHHchWch:ll4 ^l
With the end of the life of Brahma, a second 
of lord Visnu is counted, the sages like Sanaka 
and others serve him throughout life but even 
after performing tapas, for crores of kalpas, they 
never achieve his glance. The serpent Sesa 
having a thousand serpent-hoods adore him with 
devotion for an innumerable number of years but 
he is not able to get him. Brahma, the creator of 
the Vedas, who is the creator of the universe, 
bestows reward for all the deeds; bestower of all 
the fortunes, he always adores the lord who is 
eternal, the form of Brahmana, imperishable, 
with all the four mouths but the lord is beyond 
the description of the Vedas, is the death for the 
time and is the Yama for Yama, is not able to 
achieve him.
41 
UixEjgcBPJT 
Щ сСТТПЧ^П
felt Hlftd 
^рщсТ:
4fcSviR+>4cU*41 Ш 
^4fd-1lfVH\ll4^1l
HTBtuft fct«T4Bn Ararat in 4ш гйич*п
^гчтгщт 'TFT^ %)HthPlc4 
^Tciri
4ТГ Tcftf?T 4 SHIRT TS 
^HftVT^immi
я^тттщттаттw
w r :i
BiTBlrr Tj i j i r r ^ 4 T ^ 4ТЩ ^уПЧ,114 S11
ЧЧЗНТ^Т^й ?tlPNl ^T Jj4|]b:l
щ 
4тпт1^ 
^ п ц \э и
TTTTSTTf гг 4 W)jJ4VI4n Tnl^ftll4<ill
f^ rfra чщта язнтт тгат
mR^uTht?
h^Siarfd ^ratS4 tj4w4fa
The one who taking the form of Rudra 
destroys the universe, offers prayer with all his 
five faces. No one else is dearer to the lord than 
him but still he cannot be achieved even by such 
people; then what to speak of others. О Vrnda, 
Durga who is the form of all the prowess, 
destroys misfortune, 
the 
form 
of eternal 
Brahmana, Mdlaprakrti, Isvari, Narayani, Vis 
numaya, Vaisnavl and the eternal force is 
influenced by the illusion of the lord always 
roamed about in the perishable universe. She has 
also been adoring the lord with great devotion; 
the 
elephant-faced 
Ganesa 
and 
six 
face 
Karttikeya always adore him according to their 
prowess. Lord Ganesa who is adored first of all, 
happens to be the lord of the gods and the teacher 
of the intellectuals. There is no one greater than 
Ganesa who could achieve the siddhis nor is 
there any other lord of the gods or a yogi or an 
intellectual comparable to Ganesa and who 
happens to be the lord of the gods, the same lord 
Ganesa adores him. Sarasvatl the great goddess 
also adores him, LaksmI serves at his lotus-like 
feet throughout the day and night with devotion. 
With the frowning of whom the whole universe 
is complete and meets with welfare, with the fear 
of whom, the wind blows, the sun bums, Indra 
pours the rain, the fire bums and the death roams 
about in the universe, 
rjfeft 
чтт тгакш Ш Т 1 
ТТрГ 
^4TW«fcn?cT-g4[fTII^II
By serving him the earth has become the base 
of all and the store of all the riches, terrified from 
whom the ocean and the mountains remain 
within their limit.

=== PAGE 635 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAISDA, CHAPTER 86
563
хг RT R fr ■qfer R f^ rM ti 
strrt w f t
By serving whose lotus-like feet, Ganga 
becomes the essence of all the holy places and 
redeems everyone.
pferr RR# 
WRTSRR WTTcfl
RRR?T?xt 
RTRT 
MTtRTMIh^ll
s!W % xt r %
з й - r r y^iivxi упзгат т р г ш щ п ^ и 
*Г ы п*н1^^чг^М ; ,w ?xt^ vxri 
^ifxt^xbHI^II: 
^jlx|xe< М<Ц1гИН:11^ЧН
тгШчщ^Т RfcRTfoT SfiR: wft?RT4;i 
Т О Ш TlfefR RTSRt RFRRT R d ^ IR R II^ II
With the reciting of whose name, Tulasi gets 
purified and by whose glory, the nine planets and 
Dikpalas get frightened. Brahma, Visnu and Siva 
are present in all the globes besides the Sesa, 
other gods and sages. Some of them have the 
amsas of lord Krsna while others are the amsas 
of his amsas. О virtuous one, you intend to 
achieve the same lord as your husband who is 
beyond Prakrti but he could be achieved by 
Radha only in Goloka. No one wise can achieve 
her.
rt v t o w
n ■fmoiTfiiw RfR^i 
RRRRT R 
RTFftll^RII
w ifq Rift сЯгутГог % 
Rftr t i 
«Г§[§сГ RT^R TtratfhT RRTRTRTR w
: II ^ 6 11
Therefore, О virtuous one, О damsel, you 
accept me as your husband and enjoy all the 
pleasures. I happen to be the lord of all the gods 
and possess more prowess than the gods and the 
demons. О virtuous one, you can enjoy with me 
all the pleasures of the three worlds with my 
grace. There is no doubt about it.
WRTRTRft xf сЫЗъГ-П 
<aftl
^спчт 
^ ш т №
 
u
Beyond the seven oceans, Brahma has built up 
a sporting place for the gods which is quite 
charming and known as the city of Kancanl.
R^R hx*S RR ^ TR Й RRT R f I 
fHRR4
О R3ma, you will meet with welfare, let us go 
and enjoy the pleasure there. There is an orchard 
which is quite dear to Indra.
RR5 Тч |Дч<и 
RHTCRfRRfRRR^I 
гГ^- RR5 Щ й TR Й RRT R?lh3^ll
The golden Lanka is adorned with the 
ornaments of gold. О beautiful one, you would 
meet with welfare; you get along with me there 
and let us enjoy the pleasure.
fclHKcfc 
TRRi
R$R W Щ ^ T4Wt RRTRf IЬЭ ? 11
There are the gardens named Vispandaka, 
Suvasana, Nandaka and Puspabhadraka. О 
beautiful one, you go there and enjoy my 
company.
TJ^RRp RtffR 
RT "ФТПТЧ;1 
rI r W RR ^ TR Й RRT 
II
О beautiful damsel, let us go to the beautiful 
caves of the Sumeru mountain and the bed of 
ocean of milk and enjoy my company there.
TfiRRTt<*> WRTtRT ТЩ TETT T?:Wrq;i 
R^R W
 RR % TR TT^T RRTRfllR'Stl
Visiting Satyaloka, Brahmaloka and the 
charming lonely places enjoy my company there.
RRT% ftcTR TRT *
RRR ^
 xFRRRPJRTlIRhll 
MIHdl Rfacfcl T*RT ^rlcbl RTRRt cWH
Cs
xtl^xrRlcfjqtqinri R^R уЧ-ЙёТЧ11^
11 
faRTRi RfUM! R вдадГчЙАЧ 
rI r Rx3 Щ й TR Й RRT R?l IR R 11
There is a beautiful place on the Malaya 
mountain built with the best of gems where the 
fragrant cool breeze blows, the jasmine flower 
and the flower of RetakI, Madhavi and Campa 
creepers are also tyere. The place is filled with 
the sweet notes of the cuckoos and the hissing 
sound of the biack-wasps. О beautiful one, you 
get along with me and enjoy my company there.

=== PAGE 636 ===

564
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAI^AM
ф&Ц а д Я 'З ЗВЙТЙ ЧТО ^1
WWRTOTI to й 11 
R to q ^f ттй ^
 Ч15ГЩ%| 
ъЫ W Щ й TR ТЙ W W I И9 я 11 
ТёГйН Tffurgrt ТЕГ 44H1<1<4<4I 
г^сГ *1^5 
^ ТЧ Tftl ЧЧ1 И?П6 о ||
О goddess, the places of Indra, Varuna, Vayu, 
Yama, Kubera, Agni, Dharma and the moon are 
quite pleasant; you can enjoy my company at 
whichever place you like. We can visit 
Ratnadvlpa, Manidvlpa, Candrasarovara which 
are quite beautiful. О beautiful one, you get 
along with me and enjoy my company.
WTtrJi UWS-cl tt tJvfH ^1 
4 
sRI 16 ^11
О lord of Vraja, thus speaking Dharma in 
order to test the chastity of the daughter of 
Kedara advanced towards her deceitfully.
dqirj ИТ
Ш W 
ф М гг wt9R4;i i d ? 11
The eyes of the damsels became red with 
anger and the princess spoke to him the words 
which were quite beneficial, truthful, appropriate 
and glorious.
g-^ldi-cl
<|R» 
3lBt ^llfdg 1ЩПТ:1
$ГЩП1ПЧТ сПТ1Г RyT 'RrJT ^sRT 
II^^II 
чттэтщттярт: wtraT^n^rarmiTT^i 
зщФтГсг | fsrcr ^rs^^ifcrr h^T IU ^II
Vrnda said- О lord, be patient with all the 
castes, Brahmana is believed to be the supreme. 
The base of a Brahmana is tapas, truthfulness, 
the performing of vratas and patience. О 
Brahmana, it is not proper for noble people to 
cohabit with the wives of others. Because of sin, 
the wicked people have to face misfortune.
Ш: W T Wffo <T4vR4l 
hfeiraRT 
«wranXiH fq % ^iiim i 
RTiflTfll 
ЩЖсЩЖ R^Tfl
^jnrhTI^i Ч^Чг! 
<||<4^*$>J:4ch4>$U<i^U 
4 ^cT: ^4^6d: I
mfert ■фг^У'вг 
uii
^rot f t i fat 5:11 Ttiw FT эд
ЭТФЩГРТЧ 
^ gr=gf?[|idd II
Thereafter he is vanquished by the enemies 
and then is completely destroyed. The one who 
rapes chaste woman forcibly, is surely described 
as the one cohabiting with his mother and earns 
the sin of a hundred Brahmahatyas. He stays in 
the kumbhlpaka hell for the life of the sun an the 
moon. He is thrown into the pan of boiling oil 
but because of his having an ethereal form he 
does not die; the Messengers of Yama strike on 
his head with iron rods. For a short-lived 
pleasure, he has to suffer pain for a long time. 
This happens to be the cause of total destruction. 
Therefore the intellectuals never invite such a 
type of misfortune.
W 43 % 1 ЩШТ ?TR<pfcn 
usrr t'luftusii ^gr gfc: 4trf?r Шттщжу 11 
fire
4ЯГТ ferrart щ ц Ъ 
ФгСТ 
11Я o-l
О Brahmana, your knowledge is weak. Let 
you meet with welfare and you kindly excuse 
me. As a fire-fly hovers round the burning wick 
of a lamp, similarly fish and deer finding the 
sweet places at the mouth of a thorn swallow it, 
the hungry person consumes poisoned food.
<j$i(ri 
jje W f44g>wr 441^4,1 
ш ggT -4«y)oiT gisrea 4%<4ii<? *11 
icHiyiqta ч1^н 4ТчТГ *raf?r H*4e: I 
■pr V 4f%rt T£folT «tftrrfnt TTpft BHm I<? ? 11
m Я1сь|»ч4 ъ ■
giffenjcRT ЧТЧ ^ 
giRait^l
ш f e f fow ra чрвМ 4 RtfonRjiy^u
Ш p ii^ IH lg TR^ W -grr gift
4TS54g ggT rt щ sif3gfartff<Tii<?411
ЗТ^ R^cllW и !ФЧТН15?У ^rrgrOTI

=== PAGE 637 ===

KR$IVA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 74
565
^г*сгг*гч1чг 
ft# w m f Fflfoimii^n 
f f t f цизд# щ wiPrat ##гг Щ
1
IF F 
’MhWMI *1И<«\Ч1 F !& F I:ll^ ll
§F? ffigjfFT W T % %nftrr fTTIFFTI 
F # n ftrij fFBf% FT%FT: 
f g F ll^ il
A wicked person accepts milk filled with 
poison with pleasure; similarly a wicked person 
turns round others' wives, having a pleasant face 
which results in total destruction. By looking at 
the face of a beautiful woman, a wicked person is 
filled with fallacy. The beautiful face of the 
damsels, the breasts and the pelvic region are the 
seeds for destruction. Filled with fluid and urine, 
the pelvic region is like an altar of hell. It is filled 
with bad smell, sinful and entitles one to receive 
punishment at the hands of Yarna after men and 
women are united. Similarly the men have to fall 
into the terrific hell for yugas. О Brahmana, 
finding me alone if you intend to rape me, then 
all the gods, the lokapalas, dharma who is the 
witness to all the deeds, lord Hari and the lord of 
Yama, lord Krsna, MahesVara the abode of all 
intelligence, Durga, wisdom, mind, Brahma and 
all other gods would arrive.
T?IF FT FTgITJT
STFIF FF5 IT? F STFWJW r^Td d :ll^4 H 
F F F F F if W
 FcF
f f if t ij f f f f f # f t w 
i % о ° 11
F lf# F $ F fo ip F F Ш
 F fdFT FFI 
FFfcTHFF FFFFfiw fr T # F Ft flsni^o *||
All these gods remaining witness to all the 
people remain present at all times in all the 
places. Therefore, О foolish Brahmana, which is 
the secret place and what is secretive? О 
Brahmana, therefore you excuse me; you leave 
the place and meet with your welfare. О son, the 
Brahmanas are not to be killed, therefore, you 
leave the place with pleasure; otherwise, I am 
competent enough to reduce you to ashes. I have 
been performing tapas for a hundred and eight 
yugas; therefore, there is no name or gotra for 
my father nor are my parents alive.
5 f# F W fa ft smf F f g 7 # F fFcFT?T: I 
3Trf<cFVF Ш tF*: FFF?F gFTyiF:liqo?||
ST?IT F^FaR Tt 
I# F Ft W l 
# Г 
tF T: 
^fTcTT:
О Brahmana, lord Krsna who is the soul of all 
always protects me and. the cakra of lord Krsna 
always protects me besides the sun, the moon, 
the wind, Agni, Brahma, Siva and the goddess 
Durga always protects me.
F F F * U # cfifFFfFI 
1$ ш : ft^Jf f t: 11^0*11
4 R tf^JT F Ft S#W *FT F F # S F ^ T l 
Ft FTFI F fF F iF W
 FcF F S T I^ ^ II^ o m i
The one who has bestowed whiteness to the 
goose, greenness to the parrot, different colours 
to the peacock, the same lord will surely protect 
me, he is the lord of the orphans boys, as well as 
the old people. Therefore taking me to be a 
women, dharma cannot disown me.
f#cP jFFfl Fcft FT FT# FF F F W l 
3TFIF5FT F F F trj FT FTFT FlF#T F l l ^ l l
О son, you leave me alone and go to your 
place comfortably. Thus the lady remained 
unmoved like the earth.
т т т Ш f f t 
stfT f f i
$НТГ F F ^FF R ^ F T% $TFT F F II ?ol9ll 
^F: TIFT IF F TJ# FTTFTFTF FcFF:l 
FFfFTvRtt FTF f I f F F ^ F F B I^ o ^II
aTTFTgrf^reFM FWfFiqg^IFIF^:!
F*f ^gfT FTFTTFF FF|flFF^?FF: 11 Я° Я11 
ftfFT # b # F t p i f| T F iF FFT fFp.1 
1f ?# 2 FfHF F # Fd)ohtFTfi4FT F F lI^ o M 
«tFFFT^FTF
$ F IF 
F ^ F ^ F^FJcfFIT# !
Ftf # F F F ^ F F Щ Ф?
In spite of speaking the truth to him, when she 
found that the Brahmana a was making advances 
to her, she then pronounced a curse on him, "O 
degraded Brahmana, you get destroyed, О sinful

=== PAGE 638 ===

566
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAl^AM
one, you get destroyed, О degraded one, you get 
destroyed Thus speaking when he was about to 
pronounce another curse, the sun prevented her 
from doing so with great effort. О father, in the 
meantime, Brahma the creator of the universe 
beside Siva, Visnu and other gods arrive there in 
panic and finding Dharma deduced to a single 
ray, all the gods started crying. О lord of Vraja, 
he picked up Dharma in his lap who was 
frightened from Uma like the fourteenth day of 
the black fortnight and was cursed by a chaste 
women. His lustre was faded. The lord said- О 
Vrnda, you are my devotee and free from the 
birth, death and old age, you please forgive him. 
О chaste lady, bring Dharma back to life, you 
protect dharma who happens to be my devotees.
feprafar
S^RTtrof STWcf fen spf Щ
 
■<*>Гпй xKpctf ет 
сп тгти ш п
Brahma said- without Dharma the entire 
universe has plunged into darkness, the moon, 
the sun, the earth and Sesa are all shaking.
JRR *T ЗГПоНг? fetT «fen 
spf tjfen Щ cf f e n
Mahadeva said- О beautiful one, without 
Dharma the entire universe has been destroyed. 
Therefore, О damsel, you will meet with welfare 
but you bring Dharma back to life.
щ ^тГтщ ЯЗ й 
tRfe cnfen^i
Stlrya said- О chaste damsel, you ask for a 
boon, you will meet with welfare by bringing 
back Dharma to life, you protect the universe.
ЗПРПЗсГГЕГ
«л? cjb№t пчш пет ф? f e f e 
snf iffer ж ^ ifenff sferan i 
11
Ananta said- You earn dharma only by 
performing tapas then why do you destroy him, 
let you meet with welfare and bring Dharma
back to life. As a result of this, all your dharmas 
could be well-protected.
ЗГ^ШТТ
The moon said- Dharma in the form of a 
^rahmana and arr;,'cd before you at the instance 
of Brahma in ore ;r to test your devotion. 
Therefore he has ’ м killed without any fault of 
his own.
dnferifeff snft nfer ет ч*т ^trirqi 
пет тш ет nrat nfn 
ani -nw:ii w u
Mahendra said- The dharma is earned by 
performing tapas and dharma alone bestows the 
reward of the tapas. In case Dharma is destroyed, 
how would one be able to achieve the result of 
his tapas.
чЪб| ЗПТЕГ
spf 
gfira snf щ w ici^i
fqnRd ^RoTi 
fetT nfer & nf% ll^<J II
Varuna said- О religious one, by bringing 
back Dharma to life, you protect the eternal 
dharma. О religious one, all the deeds of the 
people would become infructuous without 
dharma.
ЧсН 39T3T
fR ^>ТЯ ФТ
зргё rnret ddiT4 feT^tf?n 1^411
The wind god said- О beautiful one, you at 
once bring back Dharma to life and purify the 
universe. With the destruction of Dharma your 
tapas would also become infructuous.
Rtm fefei tFfwTtTTsfe ет я ш ч .1
fN fe 
I ^ ч о 11
Agni said- О beautiful one, you have arrived 
in the land of Bharata, to earn Dhaima and 
unknowingly you have killed Dharma. Therefore 
you bring him back to life.

=== PAGE 639 ===

KR§NA-JANMA-KHAI4DA, CHAPTER 86
567
ФТ ЗЩсТ
Ф%шткч5яф ф ? Ф гс ттёщт1^ ^ii
Yarna said- О beautiful faced one. I bestow 
the reward to all the people of the universe for 
the deeds performed by them according to the 
Vedas. Therefore, you bring Dharma back to life 
immediately.
Ьэтчт егфт f a r тррегт 4fer?m 
яччфсч 
ftTfrra ьчГтстчЧитп
On hearing the words of all the gods and the 
ascetics, chaste Vrnda got up and bowing in 
reverence to all the gods she said.
зщ 
ч ^rnifq snf
EfrT: 
W 5Kl4Rir чЯ1адЧВГсСИ^ЗН
ымитГч gg spf тр та *г згш^т:1 * I
in 
^cTW 3%?сП;||^'К11 
cftT: TTc^T Elf? "ФТ TR^t Et &HJ|W
I 
<Рт тр$? •Ratssr 
чщ $m v. i i ^ ч 11 
Elf? ^ XT Я^НгЕТ 3RT TRET ФТ: ■gfel 
Eft 5 ^ T 'Rc^r ft^TT Я° 11 ? у $ 11 
Elf? ягптл: ЯТЯ: RdW fq?qfara^:l
?ПЧТЭТЭ>: 
TRETT fetT Я01^\Э||
ЪЩ’ЯЪ w тТ ?Ф: JTf5%: ТТЧТ Elf? I 
Щ : TTWT: TTrST fg^T 4*11^611
^ c f ^ i T ITT f^ r ф? шк адт m 
W ^
 ^ 
i?W TRftl i ^ ч 11
Vrnda said- О gods I never knew about the 
true identity of Dharma who appeared to me in 
the form of a Brahmana, in order to test me. He 
has been destroys by me in anger. By your grace,
I shall surely bring him back to life". О lord of 
Vraja, thus speaking Vrnda said- In case my 
tapas is truthful, my devotion towards lord Visnu 
is truthful then with the influence of that tapas 
the Brahmana should be relived of all the 
miseries. In case, I am truthful, my vrata is 
truthful, because of the influence of the same and 
with the influence of my tapas, this Brahmana
should be freed from the misery. In case the 
eternal Narayana who happens to be the soul of 
all and Siva the all knowledgeable one is also 
truthful, in that case the Brahmana should be 
relieved of the entire miseries. In case Brahmana 
is truthful beside the gods and the Prakrti, the 
yajna and the tapas then this Brahmana should 
be freed from all the sufferings. Thus speaking 
Vrnda picked up Dharma and took him in her 
lap. Finding him reduced to the form of a mere 
ray, she started crying.
ЧШ4Я1^ ^TTSSfrlTI 
frqoET 
ЕГ 
^cifcfTtT TTTII^ о ||
In the meantime Mhrti the wife of Dharma 
was filled with grief and she fell at the feet of 
lord Visnu.
| ( 3 ш
| ЯТ2Г tsw frm r ^ЬтфуТ ERqf tptl 
Trot qftcRT3RRT ^ знгата 
V\
Mflrti said- О lord, О ocean of mercy, you are 
the 
ere 
graceful 
to 
the 
down-trodden, 
compassionate, О compassionate lord of the 
universe, you bring, my husband back to life. 
4fdfFT гГОТ 4lft 
TTT VdlUtdl 
■ewtss^ 
ш ф п eot 
^ ii
A women who is deprived and her husband is 
considered to be a sinner in the ocean of 
universe. She becomes like a face without eyes 
and the body without life. 
fitcT «lid % fildl Rid URTT ftcf 'TTcT:l
far tpgftfe чТТёТТ ft£?l3T hfd:
irofrт*Т? ф
ЗФЕТ ^ т ЯЯФЩдЫт 
hi: 11 ^ "1$ 11
The parents, the brothers, the sons and the 
relatives can give only a limited comfort but the 
husband provides 
all the 
comforts. 
Thus 
speaking, the goddess stood there quietly and 
started crying. Thereafter, lord Visnu spoke to 
Vrnda.
SThHIdl^dlET
тггаГОФЕФТШ via? фгщвр'ЕГ Э1 ПТ: I 
сТ ^^?« Г Ч кя^Г 'П г0Г ^ Т 11^ Ч 11

=== PAGE 640 ===

568
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAI^AM
Visnu said- О beautiful one by performing 
tapas you have achieved the age comparable to 
Brahma. You bestow the same age to Dharma 
and go back to Goloka and stay there.
cT3TSRRT rT гРШТ Ц^Г-Ч( R #RtqfR\
grci! ^R T FFllim il 
щ щ ж тщ щ RfsrofRi 
RtswriWR 
fen ?
You would achieve me with this body alone 
later on. О damsel, reaching Goloka in the 
Varaha-kalpa you would be bom as a daughter 
Vrsabhanu and would be known as the reflection 
of Radha. In the Vrndavana Rayana would be 
bom from my Goloka and would own you after 
marriage. While performing the divine dance you 
would meet me together with Radha and other 
cowherdesses.
RT vlfRfeR Ш Г R f e M W IT R?l 
■ЩТ
RT 
RTcRcfT RRT fe R RCTRlRRSfentl
focrr^iH тнпипят r rstrt
f e 
ТТШ RTSRTSfcTT Rtctbijfni
w fe ? fejsi?R feuHRffei
RRfevmvaoii
r ft 
ч ft vyRfa Rwrai:i
Rfe W R t l ^ UTRT TRTMgjTftRtll^^ll
S R # ^
 Slfetf TtHeWScfRRfW: 11
$f)qWOTRTR W rRtRJl^^ll
When Radha would be bom as the daughter of 
Vrsabhanu due to the curse of Srldama, at that 
very moment, Radha would appear together with 
you as her reflection. At the time of the marriage 
Rayana would 
accept you because 
after 
entrusting the real Radha to you, he would 
disappear. Therefore, all the people of Gokula 
would treat you, as the real Radha but the 
cowherds would not be able to witness the lotus­
like feel of Radha in dream. Because Radha 
herself resides in my heart and her reflection 
would be the wife of Rayana. On hearing these
words of Visnu, the damsel gave away his life to 
Dharma. Thereafter Dharma got up in his full 
form with the complexion of molten gold and 
looked more illustrious than before; he then 
bowed in reverence to lord Visnu.
?fe: 
RSRR 
<№NMfl:l
ч ft fern r^ irr ufor r ft?ir*ran v*3 ii
$fe 
RTRR R RRRRT *l»W)iHill
rtctr 5 ^ 5 rtcrirtr ч н щ -.и г ^ и
tfe R RfcjnfcR RRItjRf RRTSfRTI
ftur?r>Rifr fe fe s rfe fgxfr вчти^чи
RRPITR^R SpftsR R^T?R W T ?tl
тй' дтч> ^п?1: p : r & rrtjhiit^
ii
ftfe fa RR 
Ш : BfiRTrfl
R RRfR RTTRIRTR
Vmda said- О gods you listen to my words 
carefully which cannot be overlooked and can 
never untme or false. In anger I pronounced the 
word ksyobhava thrice but when I was about to 
pronounce the same the fourth time, Stirya 
prevented me from doing so. The same total 
effect of my curse would be that in Satyayuga, 
Dharma would be complete in all respects but in 
Tretayuga, he would have only three feet; in 
Dvapara only in two and in Kaliyuga only one; 
in the later part of Kaliyuga, only a small 
reflection of dharma would be visible thereafter 
in Satyayuga he would again appear in his full 
form. The words of destruction were spoken by 
me thrice and as such the effect of the same has 
also been pronounced by me. I was going to 
repeat the same the fourth time when Surya 
prevented me from doing so, therefore, I could 
not speak it out. Therefore Dharma would remain 
in the last part of the Kaliyuga only in negligible 
form.
f$R IjtpTSR R 
RwfiRR:!
RaiTW: ffelt iff 
сЩ gRRII^II
RR RcJ^fen W fl
RtRfeTfRR RTfRife T§RT

=== PAGE 641 ===

KR§ISA-JANMA-KHAiypA, CHAPTER 87
569
зНзкчвь^Ц!
fg^fw 
'W ^ : !
ЧИТ ?fr 
ЩИТ *Tc}^<TT:11*4 ?ll
w ? r тщ ^gr чт1нгж w w m m
^ ? r i w w h fg> 
1*4^1
O Nanda, in the meantime the gods witnessed 
the arrival of a chariot moving with great force 
which was quite beautiful to look at and was 
built with the best of gems, it had the doors of 
gems and was decorated with diamonds, rubies, 
precious gems, 
costumes, white fly-whisk, 
ornaments and beautiful mirrors. Vmda after 
bowing in reverence to Visnu, Siva and Brahma 
beside other gods, mounted over to chariot and 
proceeded to Goloka. Thereafter the gods also 
went to their respective places. Now what else do 
you want to listen from me .
$fh Ш фо ТЩО ЯфШЩШо ЗтТ° ЧНЦЧТо

=== PAGE 642 ===

KR§ISA-JANMA-KHAiypA, CHAPTER 87
569
Chapter - 87
Arrival of Sanatkumara at the time of 
conversation between Kp§na and Nanda
ЗЛТЛ
гЛТ ^ГЩ 
VHblW 
ТЛЛ*р
«в! «гатШ 
m -&fawe -mi
стш^ -^гч^гаЫ 
gjara-
Nanda said- О lord, you happen to be well- 
versed in the Vedas and your knowledge 
surpasses Brahma, Siva, Sesa and other gods 
beside the munis or the siddhas; therefore, you 
let me know about your true identity and I am 
anxious to know about the same. You kindly 
reveal to me your true identity in this secluded 
and lonely place.
•fKIdUt ЗсГГЭГ
•3TF3PJJ: 
'jqd’fll dgkNwill?li
З^Г?гГ
^ d rv v сгГу в ^л 
лгал 
*nm i
лпглтлт: tiifn iP w лэттлг "rfhm wTi
*ГСЛ>?Л 
TRTcR:ll4II
^ fq ^ tT S S fft? ^ ЛЩ : ЛЗЛ^ПЗШ Т!
лт?л^%?л ch5»d4V4 4<ivk:ii^ ii
Лп4уёлГсГ rWT ЛТгРЙ еЛНН>Л ^ШяТ<М11\Э||
лтллслл: ^ л н л гт
hidiU^hl 
згт^ гул fcis^oi: i
ЗРгТЛЭЦ ^TdTT-^t СШГ<9Л
4TtS? Л # ЧТТЛ1
ЛТЛ#Г: Л ^ тга м ^ Ш Л : ^ n jc f ЛП^о||
А ^ Л ^ Л Ч Й Л Л Ч ТлЛ ^Л ЛИ W I
Sri Narayana said- О son, in the meantime all 
the sages and ascetics shining with divine light 
arrived there in order to have an audience with 
lord Krsna. They included Pulaha, Pulastya, 
Kratu, 
Bhrgu, 
Angira, 
Praceta, 
Vasistha, 
Durvasa, Kanva, Katyayana, Panini, Kanada, 
Gautama, Sanaka, Sananda, Sanatana, Kapila, 
Asuri, Vayu, Pancasikha, Visvamitra, Valmiki, 
Kasyapa, Parasara, Vibhandaka, Marici, Sukra, 
Atri, Brhaspati, 
Gargya, 
VatsySna, Vyasa, 
Jaimini, Mitavak, Rsyasrnga, Yajiiavalkya, Suka, 
Saubhri, Suddhajatila, Bharadvaja, Subhadraka, 
Markandeya, Lomasa, Vitankana, Astavakra, 
Satananda, 
Vamadeva, 
Bhaguri, 
Samvartta, 
Utathya, 
Nara, 
Narayana, 
Narada, 
Jabali, 
Parasurama, 
Agastya, 
Paila, 
Yudhamanya, 
Gauramukha, Upamanyu, Srutasravah, Maitreya, 
Cyavana and Vararuci arrived there .
т ^ г л г w rn iw t тч ^ гл
л гя л п тт ■RT^rq.i i w 11 
1Ш лсл^!ш ?чл^ч;1 
тщ лт л w m лиг -фщ злга л : 11 
11
л и
m 
щ -g4W r:i

=== PAGE 643 ===

570
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAJNfAM
Finding the sages present there, Sri Krsna got 
up suddenly and welcomed them offering his 
reverence to them with folded hands. Thereafter, 
all of them were made to sit over the charming 
lion thrones; Sri Krsna then asked about their 
welfare and adored them all. After mutual 
consultations Sri Krsna took his seat among 
them. In the meantime Krsna spotted a fall of 
lustre in the sky which was also witnessed by the 
sages.
ctrR fPTTT TOTOTO*!
•q&j Tpsrarfti чч
ЗпШ'ТсГ t p i 
Ъ -qTT^I
n p i it 
■дчугат: 11 ^ 11
m m щ
ззгта- сщ^т yfrfr ^ т о г о тяшчч;н^ 11
Inside the lustre there was Sanatkumara in the 
form of a nude child having the lustre like gold. 
О Narada he appeared among the assembly 
suddenly. Finding him having arrived suddenly, 
all the ascetics bowed in reverence to him and 
Sri Krsna also with a smiling face and the love 
reflecting in his eyes, bowed his head to him in 
reverence. The child than bestowed his blessing 
on all those present there taking his seat among 
the assembly of ascetics. Thereafter he spoke to 
lord Krsna who happens to be eternal.
■ШссЬМК icpti
Щ g t ЯТ5Г: 7ЦТОТШ 47^41 fRlcT^I
ШсТ 
ЧЯЧ1гЧЯ:1
щщ tr^TtfqiRo и
Rpjcrrw 
TT'4#iTPi ггзщп
Sanatkumara said- О ascetics, you may meet 
with welfare always and you may also get the 
fruit all the tapas performed by you, but it is of 
no use to question-about the true form of lord 
Krsna who bestows his grace on all. Presently all
of you meet with welfare because you are having 
an audience with the great soul at present. He has 
taken to the human form at the instance of his 
devotees. He is beyond Prakrti beyond qualities, 
unattached the seed of all and has incarnated on 
earth to relieve her of her burden.
ЗсПтГ
Tiftonfwr^nfq'
( Ш 
- ф fer 
fra il R -R11
Sri Krsna said- О Brahmana, if it is desirable 
to enquire about the welfare from all who 
possess the human bodies than why are you not 
interested in such question about me?.
Frfft ITT# TO TOT rj ^pp^prq;i
Sanatkumara said- О lord the worldly body is 
always surrounded with the good or bad deeds, 
but the one who himself is the seed of welfare, it 
is no used asking question about his welfare.
fyusyKt ёГ 
ёг 
fra;: т р .-i 
4 featl fo r lit fTO t 
fTO'l I ? * 11
Sri Krsna said- О Brahmana, of the people 
having human form or the other are termed as 
Prakrtika and without Prakrti they cannot 
survive.
TOcTOIT
*1 Jhcjifdchi T^ITT:I
TO JTfjffRTS^r 
зд: IR Ц11
чттоштщ ш
 
r t= 11
Sanatkumara said- The bodies which are bom 
with the application of semen, they are known as 
Prdkrtika but the one who is the lord of Prakrti 
and the cause of his body cannot be Prakrtika. 
You happen to be the cause of all the causes, the 
one beginning of all, the lord himself, the 
foremost of all the incarnation, the seed of all as 
well as indestructible.

=== PAGE 644 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 87
571
Р(гЧ 
*мкн*^1
итт т<41гчгтц><з{^п^^||
The Vedas always define you as eternal, form 
of flame, the excellent, the supreme soul and the 
lord.
цщщ TRjnt 
fqpbf xriti
Xf dcjr^fwyi 
3WtlR<ill
О lord, the Vedas and post-Vedic literature 
also define you as the lord of illusion, without 
qualities, beyond the illusion and also possessing 
the form.
OTfJUJT ^c)|-cl
т а 
щ :\
Sri Krsna said- О Brahmana, presently I am 
the son of Vasudeva and my body has the semen 
and blood as usual. Then how can it not be called 
as Pmkrta and why is it not proper to enquire 
about the welfare of the same body.
сЩТ: ТТ^гаТО^Т faVcirfa W 
?ГРТ^Г: Ut 
c||^<? ^¥НТсГ:11^ о П
гп^Нтг ^fTR 
rj riwf
tfhdlu'ifam
•RT^raTt 
9П?: TRfo1 
WII^^II
TTif^ufr чч
Sanatkumara said- you are the one in whose 
hair pits, innumerable globes are enshrined and 
happen to be the abode of all. That is why you 
are called Vasu and because of the god-hood 
inherent in how you are called Vasudeva. The 
word Vasudeva has also been repeated in the 
Puranas, the history books and the treatises on 
journeys or pilgrimages. His body comprising of 
the semen and blood has not been defined in the 
Vedas. The ascetics and the Dharma stand 
witnessed for the same. Presently the Vedas, the 
sun and the moon are my witness.
ч у *®*f
w z 
ервдгасгп: l
W ilt tfTTT Н?зГгсьГчГЧт1Гч?17$ттТ:II^II
Bhrgu said- О Brahmana, you have spoken 
truthfully, you are the fore-most of the Vaisnavas 
and therefore we welcome you. Are you 
perfectly all right, you tell us the reason for your 
arrival here.
THrgiUK T9TEf
STtfiTT ЧЧЧ: fpf #4dt ^ШТ Т1ШЧ;1 
3T?T $4 
^lfdvnyf4^rssw:ll^4ll
Sanatkumara said- О sages and lord Krsna, 
you please listen to me about the purpose for 
which I have arrived here.
ЗПЧТ^СЧ% Rlfo 
ЧТ: 11? ^ II
Sri Krsna said- О religious one, tell me the 
purpose for your arrival here. You are foremost 
among, the intellectuals and possessed all the 
knowledge, you know everything and therefore 
you kindly speak out the purpose for your arrival 
here.
ччг§>чп: ззтег
^HldWfal 
Щ UBHt TlfRT (riV£)d:ll^\9H
Sanatkumara said- О lord, you are quite 
graceful and you are adored throughout the 
universe; you happen to be the lord of all and no 
one is superior than you.
«fywi ЗЩЕГ
щ т ч «rant ъ ттчгнг f s ^ r i
т а ТШТШГ51 
<2.11-
ff?T ^?5(Т р тп ^ г 
ячтг
RrERSS^raf хГ cf^R ЖЧТЧПТ 1^4 сП{11Э ^ II
Sri Krsna said- О lord of the Brahmanas, I 
bestow the fruit of the yajnas and daksinas, for 
performing yajnas, vratas and tapas. On hearing 
this Kumara was about to leave the place in a 
hurry in the forest but the sages prevented him 
from going finding his words to Ъе quite 
astonishing.

=== PAGE 645 ===

572
b r a h m a v a i v a r t a -m a h a p u r A n a m
I 
w t f t 
g ^oim i
ЯЧ 5)l%d«*'iir ЯШ ЯРеГфШГййч\||*о||
fg; -jg 4адт?я4 gg fgntfg fg f^ i 
зтяк frar fgqfr)Uiwig> ят§я^п **и
The sages said- О great sage, О virtuous one, 
О ocean of mercy, О Kumara, what are the 
doubtful words spoken by you in the presence of 
lord Krsna. О son, have you witnessed or met 
with any surprise? You please speak out the 
same in detail.
sRUT Ч1с|гч1 Я?
«Л$?Я«П^?Я {чт?11д>1:11'*311 
snfgraT Ч'Ич) таг fqcHuvueil^ ^dni:l 
^wt: ЧЗЯ№|1Я МТЩ Я xjyc^yjc^ll^^ll
чрдЙ дд; дтат ^яятотя я%кТ:1
q f ?)я 
№
 f?raTHii**u
щтат я таттьт *njg federal :i 
я ч я т т з п й т а fp R : д о т т : n 
grari дгйтрт^ qqfg %п&яГ:1г*чи
In the meantime Brahma, Siva with Parvatl, 
Ananta. Dharma, SQrya, the moon, Adityas, 
Vasus, Rudras, Dikpalas and all the gods arrived 
there. Finding them having arrived there, Sri Krs 
na got up from his seat and welcomed them 
individually offering madhuparka and adoring 
them with devotion. All the sages adored Sesa, 
Siva, Brahma and Parvatl. The Brahmanas and 
the gods conversed with one another; thereafter, 
Sanatkumara having the lustre of gold addressed 
the assembly while seated on the gem-studded 
lion-throne.
ЧЯТ Чд?Я TTp^Ft 4 4*2T TTfimufft: I
ggl яд я «^ejiua ид 4ifyn 
cmt яд?я зттдшд gifra gfr: таяч;1 
gfrapit fgumirra ш 
1^<тНдщ щ ц5^ ятята: дия!яч:| 
sfcnra д^ищдд 
f 
я ^jfeg: I г* 6 11
foqifqrT tiu^ui ЯЙЧ Я 4WRTI
sr^sW g r^W = i 
здщ ^ н х ч 11
w rfr «pit ячта! яд vfc&\:\
ЯтТГ M^THWifg 
чод^пцои
Sanatkumara said-1 had gone to Goloka but I 
could not find there Krsna the lord of RSdha. 
Thereafter I went to Vaikuntha and could not 
find the four-farmed Visnu there. I then went to 
the ocean of milk but lord Hari was no where to 
be found there; thereafter feeling fatigued, I 
found that a vast tortoise of the size of a hundred 
yojanas was lying there. He looked terrified, 
shaking, grief, stricken and dry. It was driven out 
from the water by a fish named Raghava. I told 
him that you are quite graceful. He said, "O great 
sage I am not graceful but the ocean of milk is 
graceful which is filled with innumerable 
creatures of my size and even bigger than me. 
^ctRrgTsfRT 
дчгш ЧЩ*ГЯ Я1 
SPIT Я§ЯП 
яЬг ШЯРНГ:11Ч*11
I than told the ocean of milk, "O ocean of milk 
you are graceful. He said, "I am not graceful, this 
earth is graceful which has accommodated seven 
oceans like me.
sprrsftT ядяддд чп^Ят^ятя qn 
spitS44Tt ЧЯТ55ЯТТ: ^ШТЖГ 4PRTf|g^:|l4?l
qs^SF *[fsr ^ я q fo l 
sPTijfw ^дддгзя spit чт^дягд ^114 ^ 11
SPT <g>qf qqtsqRt ЯЯ? gbr ^ *ptl 
«PTrsfq 
ЧЩ «Ptisfra % 1^ 114*11
ЯЩЧТ mrimuilsF qgt spitm^T q:l 
«PTtsqtrgg;: чяч! «Pit чт^дятя я-.иччи 
«рг?я щ
д а fengr яядтч^1 
«pitsfq дд «пдт я «Pit чт^дшя я: 11 ч $ 11
«Pit тт^ят! е[ЯГ i?P?KIU|i 
I
qgfqra: я^зяг «nfeq: ячшшч^и 
сьр1сйн9я w it тая 
д^:1 
grafsfq дд ?Щ9Я spit чтщята я: 114 d 11
ЯяШ тря ггщ ?nf44T Я 
I
«pit guVgti дят^ятч! яят: чт-.ич^п 
^ я % ф fgRi 
я д % ч qn^ngiT: уяти^ои

=== PAGE 646 ===

KSSlVA-JANMA-KHAiypA, CHAPTER 87
573
I then said, "O earth you are graceful but she 
said, "I am not graceful but Ananta the lord of 
the serpents is graceful who supports me and is 
bom from the arhsa of Krsna and pervades 
everywhere. He has a thousand hoods over one 
of which I have been lodges like a sesamum seed 
in the winnowing basket. Then I said, Sesa is 
quite graceful". He said, no I am not graceful, О 
sage, the tortoise who happens to be my base is 
graceful, you go to him. Then I spoke to tortoise, 
you are graceful, but he replied О sage I am not 
graceful. The wind carries me; therefore he is 
more graceful than myself, Then I spoke to the 
wind god, "You are graceful" he replied "lord 
Brahma is graceful who had created the three 
worlds, then I spoke to Brahma, "O Brahma you 
are graceful, he said", I am not graceful. Lord 
Mahavisnu is graceful who happens to be the 
teacher of the yogis and is adored by all, is the 
form of Dharma, is eternal, is death for the death, 
the destroyer of all, having over-come the death 
and the lord of all. when I told him, You are 
graceful," he said, "No I am not graceful lord 
Ganes'a is graceful who is adored first of all 
everywhere, who is the intellectuals, the best 
among the gods, because I have heard in the 
Vedas that there is no one else more graceful 
than Ganesa among that siddhas, ascetic, the 
gods, the yogis.
fT O T | STZTT TTfT 
re st W l 
^яГитГ^т! «m? gi«i4wft44d:ii^ii 
ЧГСПРЛ: 
три HrawfTI
W rri
SRTiyfct 
W ёТсГ: t
ihcHdt wd4,l
As the Ganga is the best of all the rivers, Pus 
kara is the best of all the holy places, similarly he 
happens to be the best of all. I therefore told 
Ganesa that he was graceful who said, "All 
whatever has been prescribed in the Vedas is
dharma and whatever is done against the same is 
sinful. Vedas are treated as the form of Narayana 
himself, we are adored because of the provisions 
of the Vedas. All the scriptures and the Puranas 
have emerged from the Vedas. The source of 
dharma history, Samhitas also vests in the 
Vedas. Therefore, according to the opinion of the 
intellectual, Vedas are graceful. Then I spoke to 
the Vedas saying, "You are graceful". Then they 
said, "We are not graceful the people who 
perform yajnas are graceful; we people only 
prescribe the path but the yajha provides the 
fruit. О sage, therefore only such people are 
graceful and you go to them.
4 cpEf EF9T SR7 eb4 
E II
0 virtuous one, I went to the people who 
performed the yajiia and said to them. "You 
people are graceful" they said, "We are not 
graceful only the good deeds are graceful".
sri 
чт? гргдцщ 
gjtfoTT ЧкгЦГгИ *l: 
дщШшт 
•м4<*нз;:1
sfrf^JT: ттшсчт ёт sRrt
1 than spoke to the noble deeds and said, you 
are graceful. They said, "we are not graceful, 
lord Krsna alone is graceful who bestows the 
fruit for the good deeds and who happens to be 
the eternal Brahmana and the creator of the 
universe.
*44Wt4 
ТЩТ 4 «[gT 'flhqlVdiHj 
R fn w iA ^
 
i s ч 11
ёЩЯТ dhdl ^
 9РПЧТ
Ч<ЧГгЧ1Чй<* ёцрэо||
шщ щттттчт ёг щщт 
«ятгзтеШ 
^плт|5т: ^|fcr x m ^ ii 
?РШТ
^%1ТТ%сГ 
?СТЩТГ 
IН9 ^ 11
^%щт 
§ ч
simrr 
ёщрт
Then I went to the abode of Dharma but I 
could not find him there and ultimately I arrived

=== PAGE 647 ===

574
BRAHM AV AIV ART A-M AH APURAI^AM
at Mathura in order to meet him. He is the one 
who bestows fruit for all the yajnas, tapas, vratas 
and he is the lord on to himself, the supreme 
soul, cause of all the causes besides being 
Brahma and the fore-most of the gods. I told 
him, "You are gracefhl with daksina." At these 
words of mine, the lord spoke to him about the 
causes of everything and said that a yajna 
performed, by giving away the daksina, is quite 
successful and the yajna performed without daks 
ina is unsuccessful. In case the Brahmana is not 
provided 
daksina 
immediately 
after 
the 
completion of the yajna than it is doubled after 
the lapse of one night.
ЧШ Tranjof W
 fgTTTTr 5 
тгагш 
5 тт дтт ч щ g u ilts *n 
On the expiry of one month, it is multiplied to 
hundred times and after the completion of two 
months it is multiplied to a thousand times. After 
completion of one year the performer of the 
yajna has to fall in the hell, 
gqfait rj щ
 g тт&к ftutg gi
4 
©v vS
dWTUSIrirli -q# cfllfapiW 
|\э Ц11
He has to remain there in the tank of urine for 
a thousand years and is then reborn as a candala 
and a sinner.
c£14T 4 
I
gqfnit g
■cfiusioft
In case the performer does not give and the 
receiving does not receive daksina then both of 
them are thrown in the hell for thousand years. 
Thereafter, 
the 
performer 
and his 
priest 
Brahmana become candala, both of them suffer 
from ailment because of the same sin".
Tit 
-gw 
:l
ЙТЧга rT ^
 4<R)o4M
жгд rj ТТШ4Й- сТ55П#Т: ^TTSSfvr: I
On hearing this all the gods and the sages 
laughed aloud getting surprised, Nanda also 
getting surprised shed away from his mind,
attraction towards Krsna, of his being a son to 
him. He started crying in grief among the 
assembly. At that point of time Parvatl consoled 
him and said, "You shed away the illusion, you 
free yourself from ignorance.
<Jc|W
SThTFR* MlfuicKi m i |w FR t ^ 1 
fepT 44 g I t * 42fT54 *334: jptlldoll
Nanda said- О lord I feel deprived like the one 
in whose house an invaluable gem is bom but he 
remains ignorant about the same.
ччтчтта 4444; 
ядй щ\
■qirmftr 4 -34% 
д^тгаг^гий *n
■f^TcR Ш554Т7Т iterant 44ПГЗГ1
g 4 i f 4 « r f 4 i ^ g giid?n
O lord, you are beyond Prakrti and you 
forgive me for my sin. О wielder of the gada I 
will not go to Gokula, the bank of Yamuna, 
Vmdavana, my abode, the place of Yasoda and 
the cowherdesses.
f* 
w t * g f a # Tifemftn 
f a f a g 4Tvfa 44 # : cbaraifq
g W 4 # 445f ТШТ4 4R4I
p g r gjraraV #щ ттчт
You kindly tell me what reply shall I give to 
Yasoda and Radha who is your beloved, besides 
the cowherds? О Narada, thus speaking Nanda 
fainted in the assembly. Thereafter Krsna took 
him in his lap and started consoling him.
?f4 #4f?To ТЩТо 
ЗтТ» TR44T°
TraTT?W*mt5sstra:ii<:v9ii

=== PAGE 648 ===

574
BRAHM AV AIV ART A-M AH APURAtyAM
Chapter - 88
Kr§na recites Durga stotra for Nanda 
39Tcf
m i 
| Ш ^ Ш 
<fft\
ш
 ^ ептегтч;||^||
Sri Krsna said- О father be conscious. The

=== PAGE 649 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANJ5A, CHAPTER 88
575
cn lire universe comprising of moveable and 
immovable creatures is like the water bubble, 
етл ш? 'Ч^тгт ттш Trftft tmtump 
sT^IW^i w i t ^T l^rfP rT T ^IR II 
ijRhy^i "ц^тчгпт fcibuim’iii tnRHWi 
O T W c& 4 ft 
«W ife’ll? II
d r 
етг 
TftiR ^T:i
ТгТШТЗТ «<iwri4 Ыч^Ртф^ЯЧП 
7т4сПо*Ш^ чъ ЗНОШЗ Ш^И'ЙИ 
О virtuous one, discarding attraction you 
adore the eternal goddess Maya who is beyond 
everything, 
the fomt of Brahma, 
eternal, 
destroyer of all the attractions, bestowers of 
salvation, extremely virtuous and is the eternal 
illusion of Visnu. In the terrific battle of 
Tripurasura, Siva had recited this stotra in 
adoration to the goddess and killed the demon. О 
Nanda, shall bestow that stotra to you in the 
present assembly. The stotra destroys all the 
attractions and fulfills all the desires. You please 
listen to it.
ЕГ|
^тттг cnfecTfejiiimii 
м эга* tr^ctjT sfPFtng*ic$mti 
Щ ^ГТШЧТ^ЯТТ TIITh N ' § ^ 1^ 11^11 
Щ ТЩ fcHlfflU ЧЕШ 'MTbctrtfrll 
етПЯТ \sh cbtr^l ЕГ PijjjiV'i ’ЧТТсЧТТ: I Its 11
Nanda said- О lord you are graceful to the 
devotees, you kindly bestow the knowledge of 
the best of stotras of Durga which removes all 
the obstructions, removes the grief, bestows 
fortune, popularity and fulfils all the desires, 
destroying the evil times, which is quite secretive 
and the best of all the stotras. You are graceful to 
the devotees, creator of the Vedas, without 
qualities and beyond everything.
sffahdHelW
d t t TJcqfqr^d'H.I
Чс}[4и£Н1!?п4
feffT tlTOTur 
^RcTRil 
ЧШ^ПТ1Ч^#Т 
Ti 9?ПЛТ114 11
Sri Krsna said- О lord of the Vaisyas, In the 
earlier times, Siva got terrified from the battle 
and at the advice of Narayana and the inspiration 
of Brahma he had recited the stotra. The same 
stotra removes all the obstructions and noose of 
attachment, is being narrated by me which you 
please listen.
^gr et ?igmii4dra ?i
МЫ yi<*< sTipT Ч8МЧ 4ptd dllI ^о 11
ЧгТЯф%ЩШ Ш dlfST) f | sr^n^finJThlll^ll
Finding that Siva was surrounded by the 
enemies, Narayana, spoke to Brahma. Then 
Brahma went to Siva in the battle-field and spoke 
to him, "For the destruction of the danger on the 
gods you recite the stotra of Durga who removes 
the misfortune, is mulaprakrti, eternal prowess 
and is the form of Brahma.
#щ т d d ts ? ^
fERT VlRh^l44 d t ER gj йзЧ>ёГТ:Н^ 11 
ЩПТГМ ЕГЕГ: Яет fh f TTT4R d=UT:l 
Чет «rf%,yTrRcHSR:ll^ll 
W : 
щ я$пет дет 
El ^Ш# 1
3ITEIRT:f.?r^9^ 
El 4iF4IHII^II
О lord of the gods I am speaking this at the 
instance of Hari because no one can win the 
battle without the help of the eternal goddess." 
On hearing the words of Brahma, Siva bowed his 
head in reverence and started reciting the name 
of Durga. He took his bath and washing his feet, 
he clad himself in two garments and holding 
kus'a grass in his hand getting purified and 
thinking of lord Visnu in his mind, he said.
■ЩГ 7$I 
"^MTliyi-ni
d SfihUHHki ЕГ щ зн й ф1ЛЧ&11^Ч11
Mahadeva said- О Durga the great goddess, 
you are the one who removes the misfortune. 
Therefore you protect me. I am your great

=== PAGE 650 ===

576
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURArjJAM
devotee and have been currently surrounded by 
the enemies; therefore you protect me.
fciwi4N 
чгтгаГсгг
О virtuous one, you are the illusion of lord Vis 
nu and known as NarayanI, eternal form of 
Brahma and blissful.
RTW g w i тТ TO T 
W R I
cRTt: 4t w ЧТ ccf 
^HldPlII^II
О mother of the universe, you are the mother 
of Brahma and the other gods. You are visible 
when you have a definite form and are invisible 
when you are formless; by your illusion you 
appear as Purusa and by the same process to you 
appear as Prakrti. You are the eternal Brahma 
and beyond them both. О eternal one, you 
contain the eternal Brahma.
'iml 0^ 
yifccj) 
Mtldltll
^ WFRFft: ^POrtcl^fquilll^ll
You are the creator of the Vedas known as 
Savitri; in the Vaikuntha you appear as Mahalaks 
ml, the goddess of all the riches, In the ocean of 
milk you appear as the spouse of lord Visnu 
when he sleeps there, known as Martyalaksml, in 
the heaven you are known as Svargalaksml and 
on the ground you are known as Rajalaksml.
4idnr)
■R-chrp4-^-qT <гг 
^11
In the nether world you happen to be LaksmI 
of the Nagas and in the household you appear as 
GrhalaksmI, besides being the form of truth and 
bestower of all the fortunes.
Я|1ЯП|ц{д^ wf 
ЧНТк*Я:11?^|1
You are the great goddess of Brahma named 
Sarasvatl and you happen to be the life of the 
supreme soul known as Krsna.
iTtHtli ^ ^
 ттат 
^rfrri
ттгншШггт 
19 3 11
cS ЧТЧТ fcWMvltfd X llt^ 'k ll
You dwell over the chest of the Kfsna in 
Goloka and you are known as Radha with him. 
In the forest named Vmdavana, you are known 
as Vrnda while in the Rasamandala you are 
known as Vrndavana-vinodinl. You are the 
goddess named Citravall dwelling over the 
mountain of hundred peaks.
vlH 'flll
^ UdfelHI ^ B T I R h l l 
r4t)c( 
W l^ l 
w h
rct^Vli 5П1 
Ч Т ^ с П Г ^ Ч с Т ; 11 ? ^ 11
In one of the kalpas you were bom as Sat! the 
daughter of Daksa, in another kalpa you were 
bom as Parvatl the daughter of Himalaya. 
Sometimes you were bom as Aditi the mother of 
the gods and you also represent the universe in 
the form of the earth. You are Ganga, TulasI, 
Svaha and Svadha; all the spouses of the gods 
have been bom of your amsa or the part of your 
ams'a.
^TTOTT 
r n ^ f t n r i\ lR \ 9 M
О goddess you represent the men, women and 
eunuchs. You are the form of the trees and in the 
trees you appear like the sprouting tender leaves.
ТЩШ Ъ ^
 гг З ТШ ? Г T l^ fq n flr i
# Ч Т 
ГГ Т Ш Й Tl ft% cT4 J R 
11
You happen to be the power of burning with 
the fire, the coolness in water, tejas of Surya, 
fragrance of the earth and the sound in the sky, 
you surely happen to be the lustre of the moon 
and the bunch of lotus flowers.
^
 
*T Ч Ш utrm fdcbu
R W ft ^ 
41^ у 
i ^ о 11

=== PAGE 651 ===

KR^tyA-JANMA-KHAiypA, CHAPTER 88
577
Y o u are the' creation, the fo rm o f creation, 
preserver, epidem ic in destruction and becom e 
the fo rm o f w ater in the w ater.
fret ЦЧТ Щ f%[ щ дщт та gEgfffiufli 
gfipra 
gfERef «l^iR q.rr $T4T таЧЧИЗ *11 
У11ЙЫ tET -Щ1I Slftf: <filfcura 
til 
НТДТ щ tnraT W
 
? II
Y o u are the hunger, m e rc y, sleep, passion, 
intelligence, 
satisfaction, 
support, 
faith, 
forgiveness, 
peace, 
fallacy, 
g lo ry , 
shyness, 
illusion, consum ption and the fo rm o f salvation.
*l<l¥lRH4fr4l та
M ч 
g ^ tR ii^ ^ ii
Y o u possess the fo rm o f all the prow ess, 
bestow er o f all the riches and are k n o w n as 
inexplicable in the V e d as therefore n o one know s 
about y o u r true identity.
WSlcIcRtW 
4 t[ 
"^arfri 
^ 1 Ч 7Ш : 
fSlSEI STТШ mraftllS'SII
О goddess the serpent 3e$a w ith a thousand 
hoods is unable to adore y o u besides the V edas 
and Sarasvatl; w h o else can spell out y o u praise.
тач й щ ^irKt ч ч ti 
тяти 
Tfftfa Ч~|с|сй^ fUNtdl R ^ f r i l i4ll 
$чт 
ч^пттй чч ?щ$тч 5^i 
$?g<*rai ti -щ т тат& ч Ш т й н ^ и
ЧПТЧПЕТ 
Ч<Ч1гЧЧ1П^'Э II
E v e n B ra h m a the creator o f the universe and 
eternal lord V is n u are unable to recite y o u r glo ry. 
I being M ahesvara and feeling terrified in the 
battle-field, I am reciting y o u r g lo ry w ith all m y 
five faces. Th erefore О great illusion, be m erciful 
on m e and destroy the enem ies. T h u s speaking in 
pathetic vo ic e , lord S iva fell d o w n o ve r the 
chariot in the battle-field.
f?T4W tJTT: # g fyrara та тачтч та1
muiViarMIS-gt Щ%||^йИ
Th ereafter getting inspired w ith the kindness 
o f N a ra ya n a , D u rg a appeared before S iva having
the lustre o f crores o f suns fo r his protection and 
bestowed vic to ry on h im . T h e great goddess 
spoke to h im . " Y o u destroy the enem y w ith the 
application o f illusion".
^Tfellxl
та* tjnfhcT щ й ч% 
dif*M4j 
4rairat: ■gunit та тач трта 
и
D u rg a said- Y o u w ill m eet w ith w e lfare . Y o u 
ask fo r a boon. Y o u are best am ong the gods 
therefore, I shall bestow vic to ry on y o u "
4gl^4 3414
q t i 45RJ ^ < 4 *4 ?fra й c u f l w f t l
clrfsgd gif ЧТЧГ1Т W rlftll'Holl 
M ah a de va said- О great goddess y o u are the 
eternal, the eternal sakti. Th erefore , О goddess 
D u rg a , let this dem on be destroyed. I need o n ly 
this boon.
ViHdjfdW
# Ш ч р п т 44 $гЧ dM«yj«:l 
744 f^encTT SRidiRdita *q|fd{ly47:ir**ll 
4dfwRT* faujjjqfrMt грдта ft 
ЧЧГС gicTOT 
тд^ПГПтГ та frag: И*? II 
B h ag avatl said- О virtuous one, О teacher o f 
the universe, yo u w o u ld surely be victoriou s, y o u 
are y o u rs e lf the suprem e lord, the creator and the 
fo rm o f the eternal flam e, y o u rem em ber H a ri 
and conquer the dem on. In the m eantim e lord 
V .im trtS k T n g to the fo rm o f a bull lifted u p the 
chariot o f &iva o ve r the horns.
4 
4 ЗДТ IT: I
у т т а ^ ч т а ^ р ч д тай т а ч н о й 
fyira: w
 
та яптат fraraj 4^94^41 
44R frag* #sr IT ЧТО ЧЙтаЙИ'**11 
< p § f: Й « Б * ^ e t i v d ^ 5 ^19*114.1
татй тайзцн ftRrai fcwjte ’ети'^цн 
W i ^ ifm йта grarayraifra ifftn:i
Т Т Й 4 4 1fe t 3 f4 4 T :ll'« ^ ll 
T h u s the w heels o f the terrific chariot w ere 
raised and it started floating in the air. She than

=== PAGE 652 ===

578
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAtfAM
bestowed a weapon to Siva sanctified by 
mantras. Siva than held the weapon remembered 
the goddess Durga and Visnu and than killed 
Tripurasura. The demon fell down on earth. At 
that point of time the gods eulogised lord Siva 
and showered the rain of flower petals. Durga 
than gave to Siva a trident, Visnu a bow and 
Brahma the auspicious blessing. The delighted 
ascetics also behaved similarly. All the gods 
started dancing and the Gandharvas started 
singing.
#5Г
4<Av«i,4'jHci> 
тпт ^prq;i 
PicJuiui^ rta ^R^RhMci
чй ад то * 
ч4Г«П&у4
■ЩГТТТЩРМТТсЯШТ Чт4сТГ TT^TII^II
?тЫц1^сьш*1ч<*4^н[чфч1ччн11
y ^R iR a^ w fiih ^ii 
« 1Л1ШЧЗЧ1^ТсГ«П 
«гачт^г^г f 
«RlPpfcr 
I ц ^ 11
О father, in the meantime the Stavaraja also 
appeared in person who could remove the 
obstructions, 
the 
persons 
creating 
the 
obstructions, the killer of the enemies, was 
bestower of all riches, bestowed pleasure, quite 
auspicious, bestower of salvation and the 
devotion of lord Hari beside the dwelling in 
Goloka and the success. By reciting this 
Stotraraja, Parvatl also gets pleased. This stotra 
relieves one of the greed, passion, anger, the 
cause of deeds beside bestowing the prowess, 
intelligence making one free from the cycle of 
birth and death. This stotra bestows the people 
with riches, sons, wife, land and all the riches, 
removing all his ailments and grief. All the 
success is achieves by him. By reciting this 
stotra even the immensely barren woman gets a 
child, a grief stricken person is freed from fetters.
fruf '«Raw srft т ц\ 
ч ■# ч ч : 
тт^пймчзп
ча)з№гЙЧ 
cbc^iuj 
4 T:II4 * II
The ailing person is freed from the disease, 
while the pauper is bestowed with immense 
riches; the person under the influence of this 
stotra does not die even when thrown into the 
burning fire nor his boat capsizes in the great 
ocean. О best of the Vaisyas, with the influence 
of this stotra, a person meets with welfare even 
when surrounded by the robbers, enemies and 
wild animals.
Ьштчт w
 <d4M4iuii fe rt w i 
4 ^R \ 
ЧЩ TTfT tHIUli JTUIcft W II4 4 II
ч4ч^|ип grunt w щ р тп 
jtbMiuii uiRvHhi хг 
w im ^ ii
Runjw r zi спшт 
trail
W ■гтгттЩ : R t^ni rru u lw n m ^ ii 
^T4t ^ tm Rhuj3<fl:
vi и h *i д ян г'гстп ч ^и
4<tc(dl xt 
irfiraiT 
ъ \
Ш 4d)3fb=K RTt? ЧТсТ: w
t 5ПП1Ч^11
О lord of Vraja, as the gem is the best among 
the articles that glitter, a Brahmana among the 
varnas, Ganga among the rivers, отката among 
the mantras and Tulasi among the leaves, 
Vasundhara among the land, Parijata among the 
flowers, sandal-wood among the wood, Visnu- 
piija among the adoration's, Ekadasl among the 
vratas, Siva among the intellectuals, Ganesa 
among, the siddhas, Visnu among the gods, 
Vedas among the scriptures, Durga among the 
goddesses, Kamala among the having peaceful 
nature, 
Sarasvatl 
among 
the 
intellectuals, 
Radhika among the beautiful damsels. Similarly 
this stotra happens to be the best of all and no 
other stotra can equated with it.
ttt ЦтТ 
xj Tjn-fR ^4ч4Гиц
Фтвт 4i4g4iR 
i ^ о 11
In the earlier times at the time of solar eclipse 
I bestowed this stotra which is remover of all the 
difficulties to BrahmS.

=== PAGE 653 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 88
579
fapTPT 71Ш ИГ ^
 ЧГ^ТТ ЧсП*РТП 
fal^PT TR^f^T: ЧТТ 
^ f l l^ ll
Brahma bestowed the knowledge of this stotra 
to Siva who had been surrounded by his enemies. 
In turn Siva bestowed this stotra to Sanaka and 
others beside Durvasa.
*»в1сл-фччл -7jlfT4m wi
hHfTPT JeNfclRl ^
ТРИ xF5Pr 
f^xllfa ^Ептггг W1 
w e t (чтучтвт 
xT TO ^ h l$ ^ II
Lord 
Sanatkumara gave 
this stotra 
to 
Gautama, Pulaha, Pulastya, Angira, the sun and 
the moon. Surya bestowed the knowledge of the 
stotra to Yama. Yama gave it to Citragupta.
faPI 
MlptlehuftHN ^1
ТТЩГРЩ^Т Vi Ш T O bT^cTWllh^H
О father, the one who recites it daily he 
achieves Goloka and with the influence of the 
same you are having an audience with Parvatl at 
present.
Ч ^TPZT tnfq^ W
4 R W
W
 Ч Р Н Р Г ТТТЧГРГ 
r W r i l h h l l
7I%PT W faHBT c^rtoq- xt 3PTRTT:I
f e p ^ ш^рт w frp m w iih h n
t jw t pi ^ n ^ T ^ rtfa ri
f a ? f c T T : l l ^ l l
■ЫГЩ xt н ч й 
w r f ^ i
The knowledge of this stotra cannot be 
imparted to anyone else nor would it be proper to 
bestow its knowledge to a sinner; it. can be 
bestow to a devotee of Narayana, a peaceful 
intellectual and all knowing Brahmana. This 
stotra should never be given to the driver of the 
bulls, a Brahmana who happens to be the 
husband of a loose women, the Brahmana 
serving as a cook with the SQdras and the 
Brahmanas consuming the food with the Sudras 
at the time of sraddhas. It should also not be 
given to a Brahmana \vho sells away his
daughter. With the achieving of the success by 
this stotra, one gets all the siddhis and by 
reciting this stotra ten thousand times, one meets 
with success.
" TTRTEEf tr4diyki TcTbrWcy guq<^|
5[rt 
-Mill did TPT ИГПТГОЧ $ПТГ1|V9o || 
w t ёр? 
tpr TTFrf^l
щт: 
Ч1<Ш{1№1П
щ тпй 
tpf jitdtcfi-cim4ff4tdH.n'3'Rii 
It results in the disturbance of fire, water dust 
and the mind. It is the best of the stotra and 
bestows the merit of performing and a thousand 
Asvamedha sacrifices, going round the earth and 
taking bath at all the holy places. О father, I have 
bestowed the knowledge of the stotra. to you 
since you happen to be dearer to me than my life. 
Now you adore goddess Parvatl in my assembly. 
О best of the Brahmanas, on hearing the words 
of Sri Krsna, Nanda adored goddess Durga who 
bestows all the riches. Thereafter getting pleased 
the goddess bestowed him the boon of his stay in 
the Goloka.
TJvfa W f ?ПТ ^ W SpT *pfl 
hlcj><r) xf «hthpnfckl 
сЩГРТ ^nftT W t ЩтЩ fa 4 ^ хП 
щ 
ёрГГ fh f ТТЯТЩ ^PJ4T ТЩП'З'ЙИ
"дч^т: 
xi
О sage, thereafter the inaccessible knowledge 
which was not available even in the Vedas, 
beside the kingship of Gokula, the inaccessible 
devotion of lord Krsna and his slavehood and the 
boon of meeting with success was bestowed to 
Nanda by the goddess. Thereafter Durga left the 
place after talking to Siva, the gods and the sages 
also adored Krsna the son of Nanda and left the 
place.
ЗЩхГ 7 ^ ЗТТ^ТОТТ sRI 
:II
Я?ЩРШТГ??сТ c
f f e
хГЦ'ЭЧИ

=== PAGE 654 ===

580
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAtf AM
Then Krsna said to Nanda, "Now you have 
been Impaired the inaccessible divine knowledge 
and as such you shed away all the attachments 
and return to Vraja with all the dwellers of Vraja 
delightfully.".
i j l f o TRjjTo 
ЧПсрТ'’

=== PAGE 655 ===

580
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAtf AM
Chapter - 89 
Kr$na eulogises Nanda 
яЬрттзсттд
Tf53 11т=й TJ5 TT^5 SWiM "5ГЗТ дЗТ1
g<f дтд тддт gm 
дчд: frr:ii?n
m й (ч-ччнвчн чтчгегтн
jpifclT: 
g 5FW?ll4i^PTlTIRII
Sri Krsna said- О lord of Vraja now you revert 
to Vraja because you have been bestowed with 
all the knowledge beside meeting with the sages 
and the gods. You have listened from my various 
types of inaccessible stories which remove the 
cycle of birth and death and the stotra of Durga 
which is quite auspicious.
f w h% fqTrf^t 
ftlrc sti 
TPfKT Wmr^T snurng g гПЩиГЦ! 1^11 
STogli 4 ficT cTTcT
ШТ sr Wffcfa ^ c fo ^ im i
О father, I have described everything whatever 
was visible, whatever shortcomings I have been 
responsible for, you kindly forgive me, the 
pleasure which I could not get from my parents 
in the royal houses here were provided to me in 
your house which would not be available even in 
the heaven.
firagrag sr зщ?д fsRST ЧЩ
tfrsra gjprt st# ^ TTtftranw^nmi 
Wr^HT 
sr ТШТ snfxr fqfrqcT:! 
T J ^ g f^ ^ g s p p fg g p fa m i^ ii
-gii 
w
 gtrTtsRgrm^i 
gitf ч д а т ш 
TTTfwpfr:iiV9ii
My loving words which are filled with 
humility, fear, joy were spoken by me to Yasoda, 
the cowherdesses, the boys of Vraja and 
especially to Radha. All of them are still in 
Gokula; you enjoy their company with your 
family and friends in Goloka in due course of 
time.
ghTHT щщй: insf g w F r 4t4<£:l 
ттш чщ 
т а г it? g n g ftriiiii
w it 
sr 
ftw :i
si 
ф rgiwRqwnp i <? 11
•qfumriuigqgsbRi WTFmFifg^fiRP^I
т ^ Ш #rtsrmt:i
^fgw sr wgrw gfcjgrerngfg цгпр 
rtrgrcTT sr ц тШ 
R ot)^ fg g T g s n i^ ll
О father, after enjoying all the pleasures in this 
world, Yasoda, RohinI, the cowherdesses, the 
cowherds, Vrsabhanu, Kalavatl, the mother of 
Radha and Radha also leaving the human body 
would go to the Goloka. О father, at that that 
point of time, a hundred lakhs of chariots would 
arrive in Gokula from Goloka which will be 
decorated with innumerable ornaments of gems, 
the garland of gems, the sapphire, rubies and 
jewel, garlands, flags of yellow fine garments 
with white fly-whisks held by the divine 
attendants. The chariot would also have the 
mirrors of gems and would have a number of 
cowherds and cowherdesses aboard the same, 
you would proceed to Goloka mounted on the 
chariot.
ЗТЧШчЩ ТШ 4WT4RTT STHTcMh 
fttpt 4R# дг*тт «RTT RRTT «hHNdll
\ «ртт g #ттошт g jnfaraT g ^
rtii^ ii
srdjfqgggr <prf чттт gfar 
^<<li 
зтц^чдд^геттуд ertt ^чт

=== PAGE 656 ===

KFtSI4A-JANMA-KHANl?A, CHAPTER 90
581
Since R a d h a and her m other K a la va tl w ere not 
b o m o f any h um an contact, they w o u ld go to the 
Goloka 
w ith 
their 
hum an 
bodies 
because 
K a la v a tl happens to be the m in d b o m daughter o f 
the m anes. T h e m other o f Slta, the m other o f 
Pa rva tl nam ed M e n a , D u rg a , Ta ra and beautiful 
Slta are all b o m w ith o u t any hum an contact; all 
o f them including K a la va tl and M e n a are quite 
graceful.
Ш h m h f TgvbTRj 
гл Ы 
*r W Ъ 
cmn I ^ 11 
gcc(T 
sTjf?5R:l
4ThdrMH4,ll^n
О father, thus I have spoken to yo u the 
e xtrem ely secret story w h ich is inaccessible to 
others. B o th D u rg a and m y s e lf have bestow ed 
o u r blessing to y o u ". O n hearing the w ords o f 
K rs n a , N a n d a the lord o f V ra ja spoke to K rsn a 
the lord o f the universe and w h o is graceful to 
the devotees thus.
4 ^ -sdW
^TTRt ^ 
^ 
Ф?
злщ 
Rt д а
N a n d a said- О lord K rs n a w h a t are the eternal 
dharma o f the fo u r yugas, y o u k in d ly tell m e in 
detail.
difaffq 
g^TRMTI
щ 
пАщ jnf&wi trani w i
Y o u k in d ly tell m e the m erits and dem erits o f 
Kali age, beside the position o f dharma, artha 
and the people.
cfrR sjren W-'. сЬЯсТёТ»€ГЧ:1 
«шт gtfaw rif fefeif wif^RTTRiRoii
O n hearing the w ords o f N a n d a , lord K rsn a 
d e lig h tfu lly spoke to h im the sweet story.
VtfTo 
3tT° ЯТЩЯТ0
ueh|^c(pirt4l5EmiT:ll<ill

=== PAGE 657 ===

KFtSI4A-JANMA-KHANl?A, CHAPTER 90
581
Chapter - 90
D e s c rip tio n f o r Y u g a s
SttfjHJT <5414
^PJ ^ 
нну ^ 1 1
ЗИТ W ■gqfTt 
RfapTP{ll*ll
qf^ufdRl «raf ^if^eRiVTj ^
 чрВ 
qR ^dq j m qR ^dm ^ itirii
Sri Krsna said- О Nanda, you listen to me 
delightfully. I am going to tell you an extremely 
charming story which has been described 
beautifully in the Puranas. In the Krtayuga, all 
the people are religious minded and the religion 
is fully established during that period. The 
people are truthful and are full of mercy and 
compassion.
3Tdfa 
rji
й Г ад ш уУ д ри и 1Т%ГГ:11^ II
3<|Uf||fd '^UJ|fU| РЗЩЩ{тГГ -ЦЩ rll
«RHiftu ■pirfbr enfyneKftT *nfr ^ im i
All the four Vedas, the post-Vedic literature, 
various types of historical treatises and the 
Samhitas predominate the society. All the 
charming Puranas, the five Pancaratras and all 
the religious scriptures which bestow welfare, 
remain quite popular.
fen Ъф к,: 4 $ ^Qdct'dtdTfwd:!
ЧШЧПП ^ 85TRI^T cFi# W 
ёГПЧ II
All the Brahmanas are well-versed in the 
Vedas, quite meritorious and tapasvls. They 
always remain devoted to Narayana and recite 
his mantras.
W W : 
^шгат:1
ж г 
11 s и
All the four varnas including Brahmanas, Ks 
atriyas, SQdras Vaisyas perform their duty 
religiously. Out of them Sudras serve the 
Brahmanas and perform their dharma.

=== PAGE 658 ===

582
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
TRRf 
ЗШЧТсТТЯЧШ:!
3T3TFTt 
4tgWVraRr|4r:l|V9l|
The Kings have a religious bent of mind and 
maintain the people always and receive the taxes 
equivalent to the sixteen part of their earnings.
т а чр&гздт<ггп 
зф ш и лп
The Brahmanas remain free from taxes and 
they roam about it will, the earth always 
produces various types of cereals and crops 
remaining filled with gems.
RwiiN fttPTtHT: '§ШШТ1 
чтЦЩ: 
qfdsTdЧ{ТУИИ:11^11
Зкгг ^nrtfnr: ^
 ч 'dteren ч нщгг:1 
ч ЧЧ c(^1qfali Ч Ш qUcfift'difilfyoii 
The pupil are devoted to the teacher, the son 
remain devoted to the father and the wives 
remain to their husbands maintaining to their 
chastity. All the people enjoy the conjugal 
pleasure of their wives at the appropriate time; 
no one is greedy of the women and or is wicked. 
During this yuga there are no thieves or robbers 
and no one owns the wives of others.
cRct: unfahfcr-t: 
Src*:i
«tHefidl 3RT: ^
 
tlUtSwqrfl:liWl
W
The trees remain laiden with fruit and the 
cows yield the maximum of milk. All the people 
are healthy, with long and well-built body 
besides being beautiful; some of the auspicious 
people remain alive up to a lakh of years and are 
never attracted by ailments. As the Brahmana are 
devoted to Visnu similarly, the remaining three 
varnas of the people are also devoted to Visnu. 
'flblMillj Ч^Г Ч1Г: 'RrRT 4>dlKd«ul
R4:TdT?rJ ftftsFU: W ftH ^ 4 ^ 1
УьШчПчи? Ъ -щтш Ч^П%сГ^11^11
All the rivers and rivulets are filled with water 
and the mountain caves look quite charming. The 
people of all the four varnas purify themselves
by taking bath in the holy places. The Brahmanas 
purify themselves by performing tapas. Thus all 
the people of the earth have noble souls. One 
cannot hear the name of a wicked person in the 
three worlds during Satyayuga. All the varnas 
are filled with welfare.
fttTT: 'ficScbl^U ШашНТ ^ШТТ:1
The ancestors arrive at the appropriate time, 
the gods also arrive at the appropriate time. The 
guests are adored in all the household; the people 
of all the three varnas respect the Brahmana and 
provide them with food regularly because the 
mouth of a Brahmana, as never barren and is free 
from the thorns.
4 W t 4RHT ^ ^
 Чг4Г^1ущ: I 
11
4TSSrHj(Viu4)i: cbRlrM?
4 t*cfRT fgTTFlt ^ feftTT Ш fT<cRT:lfy<£ II
j w 
4 % чтзЫ чПД5ЯТ:|
4 § :% й зн г: ^
 
W4f^T4;ifySil Ч
Ч 
4 TPTTdf: ^ fh T R ^ r ?fi?fT:IR o ll
The people remain extremely happy by 
reciting the name of Narayana in the festivities. 
During this yuga no one denounces the gods, the 
Brahmanas and the intellectuals. No one praises 
himself. All the people remain engaged in 
praising others. No Person remains inimical to 
others. All the people think of the welfare of 
others; all the men and women are quite well- 
read and there is no one devoid of wisdom. 
There is no one filled with greed and all the 
people reside in the palaces of gems which are 
studded with to sapphire and rubies beside the 
gold. At that point of time there are no beggars; 
no one suffers from ailment and all the people 
are free from grief and other ailments. They 
remain delightful all the times.

=== PAGE 659 ===

KRSiyA-JANMA-KHAWA, CHAPTER 90
583
4 % 
ЧТГ ЧТ^тГ %f5R|
Ч ЛТЙЙ Ч 
Ч 
Ч ffFR4T:IR ?П 
*m$4T: wfifHW WnfT944fWT:l 
ЗЛЙЩтШ#пдаГ 
^f|4:11 ? * 11
No man or woman is seen without ornaments. 
There are no sinners, nor wicked. No one 
remains hungry or denounces. All the people are 
free from old age and remain always young; they 
are free from the ailment and other deformities, 
«nf: TRfr
ч1$£1ч?ы h m r 
sjwtsfg 
r 3 11
Thus in the Satyayuga the people are truthful, 
compassionate and extremely religious. Dharma 
in Tretdyuga remains present with three feet only 
and in Dvapara, it has only two.
« ifeq ra дай 4^E n f4$^Tfs3RT: i
§^i4t ^ с М о л ч ^ т : дат^зш ?'*и
At the beginning of the age of Kali, the same 
. Dharma becomes quite lean and thin and stands 
on earth on one leg. О lord of Vraja, at that point 
of time, the sprouting of the wicked people, the 
robbers and the thieves starts.
зЫ Ргщ : 
йййягдап
Й1чт 'зчпдат 
ййтдаг чтщНтщги^цп
«тйшчг w 
чйщ т:1
ТЧРФЦЙТЧТ W : 
fg^Ttll-R^ll
Some people engage themselves in performing 
evil deeds throughout the day and night but some 
of the people feel afraid of doing anything evil. 
Therefore they start concealing their evil deeds. 
The loose women feel panicky and indulge into 
sinful ways secretly. The men also become 
panicky and they enjoy secretly the company of 
other women. Similarly the religious minded 
people are also shaken, the kings would perform 
only pretty religious deeds and the Brahmanas 
would devote themselves to the study of Vedas 
only nominally.
ддаЙТЧТ: 
ЧсГч^ф[чЧ:1
irwfdsfti 4ta№r AiwRmfo 'ш даг.и^и 
dwfrigfoT чтчттщ ^гт: тлш й т $ячч) 
4Tc|feh1^4: W T w kqf'Vl 
^ I R ill
Only a few people would get themselves 
devoted to their dharma and all the people would 
bp free to move anywhere alike. Till such time 
the holy places, the ascetics, noble people, the 
village deities and the scriptures besides the 
method of adoration would remain on earth, the 
truthfulness, the aths'a of dharma and the tapas 
would remain on earth.
лйгйлййшт jJUT ТПЙ Ч?ТЧЙ1
ЧТЯТГ WJSfapfr -lj<hd 4 % ЗЧЬиЧ)1 ? ^ 11
й ш ч ? ( «лйтщ «п
дал f f t йтттач: 11 3 о 11
О father, though the Kaliyuga is filled with all 
the evils but still there are great virtues in the 
same. There will be a performing of mental merit 
but not the sin. О father, after the sanctity of thS 
holy places is lost, the dharma, also looses itf 
importance. The dharma would becomes'black 
form like the moonless night.
■m it щщ& ф * snenoirnifr
Nanda said- О son for how long the holy 
places, the ascetic, the village deities and the 
scriptures would remain on earth 
during 
Kaliyuga.
зИфПД ЗсГГЧ
Й4ЧЙ.1
c^TRt 5rf?THT Ш ?ТШПЙТ VI UTTUI^lli^ll
Sri Krsna said- During Kaliyuga the lord 
remains on earth for ten thousand years. Till that 
time the images of the gods and the scriptures 
beside the Puranas are also adored.
йгйч hfjTalft ^ч%лч;|
For half that period (five thousand years), tile 
Ganga and all other holy places would enjoy 
their sanctity and for half of that period, the 
village deities would be adored besides the 
intellectual and the Vedas.

=== PAGE 660 ===

584
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAiyAM
3*enf: 4% о% т ?t^ft Ъ 
far: I 
xr<wrf Rfegri^T 
ijcr rTii^^u
4 '4-y'4digi^?^ 4 % Reft 4 ъ $гоп 
#wtchir<d> f4c^t iJTU)y4yyNd:ll^4ll 
4 
feRk WWT4T rr 
RKliynwrfy^RI^ felcjyil: «^тз#||^^||
О father at the end of Kaliyuga, wickedness 
would establish itself completely. At that point of 
time, the people of all the four varnas would 
become like Sudras. At that point of time no 
marriage would be performed with the reciting of 
the mantras. The people will be deprived of 
truthfulness and forgiveness. Because of the 
importance of the conjugal pleasures, the 
marriage would be performed only with the 
consent of the women. The Brahmanas would 
not wear the yajnopavltas would not apply 
tilakam 
on the forehead nor would the 
Brahmanas perform the sandhyas thrice a day
R f: Tsref 
Rifat ядгит
SWffWffT НГЗПУгГ RgcfafeR ё та гг:Mgt9ll
41% 4 W l 
W ^3%
«hftfd cTjftr 4П4Т 
Ъ ebffadhjl? 6II
All the people discarding all the vows would 
eat whatever they liked. Thus all the people of 
the 
four 
varnas 
would 
consume 
things 
irrespective of those which have been prescribed 
as eatables and non-eatables. All would be 
wicked. There will be dearth of chaste women on 
earth and in every house-hold, the loose women 
would 
be 
available, 
who 
would 
always 
denounced their husbands, such a person would 
always feel panicky and shaky like a servant.
4ПТТ4 ЯУЩ fezift HFfcft 
4 Sglcifcr 
RRfaft 
fcR R II^II
%UT RfrRdWId: fafafajT Rfetft 4R:I 
StflfRRllfsSdl Rtft 4% 
W .II* o ||
Cs 
C'
О father, the loose woman would serve the 
best of the sweets to her lower beside the food, 
betel, the fragrance, sandal-paste and the 
costumes, but would never care for the food of
her husband. The son would always denounce 
the father and the pupil their teacher. The king 
would always be terrified by the public while the 
king would torture by the people
fyraryE) Vftfifen:!
^4 4lfRT 444hT R1 Йгч$>1:1 
R4#TTH4T: Rif4rftf4W T44% ^nr«?ll
The noble people would suffer at the hands of 
the robbers, the thieves and the wicked people. 
The yielding of crop would be destroyed on earth 
and the cows would stop yielding enough of 
milk. The milk, butter and ghee would be in 
short supply. All the people would be devoid of 
truthfulness and always speak falsehood.
^RR?W TW 4T $ЩИЩТ ^4cfTpFT:l
4RT f e w R$ft ъ uffeET94:IIXXII 
4Щ: W 4R4 44ft 
TJ^4T 4ГЩгГ:1
w
 ТГШ4 ^
 4T5TT Rfe9f?ril><4 II 
4TTT 
hfft 
Щ t%ehbij
3=TFET f44t ?44 R?ft 
R feufftlltr^ll 
The Brahmana would be deprived of purity, 
performing of sandhya, study of scriptures and 
become the drivers of bulls, cooks in the kitchen 
of Sudras, resorting to the burning of the dead 
bodies of the Sudras, getting entangled with 
Stidra women. The Sudras on the other hand 
would be attracted towards the Brahmana ladies, 
consuming the food of a Brahmana the wicked 
Sudra would abducts the wife of the Brahmana 
who could be equated with his own mother and 
quite adorable. The servants would conspire to 
kill the king and occupy the throne. The women 
would kill the husband and would enjoy the 
company of the lover. The son would kill the 
father and himself become the king.
Rif 
f$l?4l«4<iquu:i
4|4Г cqrf%-Tffl?y

=== PAGE 661 ===

KR$iyA-JANMA-KHAWA, CHAPTER 90
585
c)4lgkl¥x| fo^jT:ll*<ill
Thus 
all 
the 
people 
would 
become 
independent, moving at will, lustful, gluttons, 
suffering from ailment, dirty, the reciter of 
broken mantras and would propagate false 
mantras. The teachers would be casteless, devoid 
of age would be and denounced.
TRprycnfr 
u 4Pk <*)I:i
«пШчР* -RTfRt 
II
The mlecchas would become the king and the 
Yavana would denounce the dharma destroying 
the spotless glory of the ascetics.
3-ftrdyr:l
^X(T 
xt foit$xi тр я 
11 ц 011
«lu -d if тйтЗ' xf «lu ll xt TRTW ftRTM 
^rM lR lW ?J^ct^^Rcfi:|i4 ^ll 
fTH 
HriTT fhSl^UT 4 ^ T rfl 
^3HcHgV4 xt v irile?
The 
adoration 
of ancestors 
gods 
and 
Brahmanas, the guests, the teachers and the 
parents would not be respected; they would 
remain welcoming their own wives. О father the 
relatives of the wife would be preferred and the 
influence of the ladies would go on increasing, 
the people of high castes would become their and 
would steal the riches of the gods and the 
Brahmanas. in Kaliyuga the people would 
respect the religion only playfully or with the 
intention of causing grief;; the entire universe 
would be deprived of the abodes of gods and 
would become terrific.
3i<Nu> xf 
tjrftT cbfH<lqd:l
oUlRnt 4TT:II43II 
зти^нтнщтт TT3T# f? д^?щ:1
# 3 4 ^TT: ■?пдгячштгп1|ц'«11
Because of the evils of the age of Kali, there 
would 
be 
indiscipline 
everywhere 
and 
disturbance would increase. All the people would 
face hunger, wear dirty clothes and would 
become pauper. The one whose house is filled 
with pitchers of small shells would be treated as
the king and the one having innumerable pitchers 
like the same would be known as the great king. 
The people would be of the size of the thumb 
and the trees would be of the size of vegetables.
cTTWRT 
ЧТЯ Hi tl&T xT|
■p^#r 
trap xj ш : чт^иччи
'jk'tn 
i 
ЧШШ 32ГП
fgfht ч # ? ^
 ^^|и|гччПьфс!Ччпц^ и
The fruits of tala, coconut, jack fruit would be 
of the size of sesamum seeds and other fruits 
would be of still smaller in size, there will be 
general shortage of the vases for waters cereals 
and cloth in the households the houses would be 
quite broken and deserted.
ip& R h frp 
?Г%?ТЧ1
4RT: ^
 xT 
: M4V91I
■ЩШпТГ Ч 3>|!ч-4! ЧЩх||(ч Ч #ЧПТ:11Ч<£11
They would be filled with bad smells; having 
no lamps and filled with bad smells, having no 
lamps and filled with darkness; all the humans 
would be sinful and would feel panicky of the 
wild animal. At that point of time the people 
would be greedy for fruits and the women would 
be quarrel some. The women would be deprived 
of deities beside the men.
4Ut ЧЩ: 
'dsnil^xj ж т т :1
^THfritT ччгежнччн
STUvUfritT 4l4vxl 
vrflW3HI:l
3TY<T<4T#f#:
4i^tii4T^xr (ГЩ: filial: «r«i(c#4ebi:l 
4>HiP< 
xjTsrf^t xt ^Н1Й хш^яч
RR3T: сЬА^тЬК! f# 3 T у 4с|ЙгГТ:1
ж ф ? ф гч ящ п $ ? п
3#Т qggbcui
зга^иг! 
<ш тыи?1[чсШ1^?11
All the rivers, rivulets, the caves, the lakes and 
pools beside the tanks would be deprived of the 
water. The women would be barren, passionate 
and would always like the company of lovers; all

=== PAGE 662 ===

586
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURATjIAM
the people would cut the plpala tree and the land 
would be deprived of the trees. The trees would 
be without the branches fruit and trunks; the fruit 
would not be delicious. The water and the food 
would have no taste. The human beings would 
speak untruth, would be heartless and devoid of 
dharma. Thereafter the twelve Adityas would 
bum all the creatures of the universe with their 
heat. О lord of Vraja, at that point of time only 
the story of the earth would remain.
ЭДТ1 
xT 
Sfcf ёгаЫ M l 
тр: 
Mfeiifd и й ч c h illi
As the land dries up at the end of the rainy 
season, similarly after the expiry of Kaliyuga, the 
land would be free from all the creatures. 
Thereafter again the Satyayuga would start.
«hRlcl TR? Uxsi rTRT gH ^<=H{I 
3T? fjstg # gtH: 
<*ид\(ч
чдчй gg 
gfir era
igftagi 
f ir a t g 
i % ъ 11
sp g «IHixx) 
dlciMI fp T <4cd H.I I ^ V911
эдрпдттш % «иН$1ч:
Щ fhHT 
д^ТрТ ^Fft
О father, I have thus narrated to you 
everything; now you comfortably go back to 
Vraja; I am indeed like an infant before you and 
what could I speak about dharma before you. 
Remaining in Vraja, I consumed butter, ghee, 
milk, curd, butter-milk, svastika and the sweet 
dishes and several other sweet dishes which were 
prepared for the gods and the ancestors; I 
consumed them forcibly because he crying of a 
child has his own strength. Therefore all the 
short-comings committed by me at every step 
should be forgiven by you since you are my 
father and I am your son beside Yas'oda is my 
mother.
4R*Ki xT g?TRT frfgnft Щ\ 
cbl^Risrfy 
Ref
eblVI: cb<jfd ufftl «HjjHI ei’j-jRTt 
||
You narrate this joke of mine to Yas'oda and 
RohinI and tell them that you had heard all this 
from an infant like me. Thereafter you can 
narrate the same to all the dwellers of Gokula 
because the meeting between the relatives is 
arranged by destiny.
ЭДН: 
fo x ^ faftsj jftfaifg xti
ЭДН: gfe g 
ЭДН?д чГ^чк'МчП'э ^11
ЭДН: «h<l(rl 
ЭДН: 
ЗГЗГГ: l
^sT 
Ш ggj xt ЩЩ хпьэ^ ll
Tt4 ch4M<|sli ЭДН т р <*<IW XTI
MHfH Шст 
ч дн 
ii
fHRg 
ЯГ^Г ^illftPTf дЧ:1
xt чдтшт?! ftr: 11^э y 11 
% эдяч^ч 
g 
i 
fag чт: fan <g g rht Rig: wsfa дпьэц ii 
trt 
?тйч 4i4rdi g g^gri 
gig fat rsirpt w Ш f tt g?glhSS,11
It is the destiny which is responsible for the 
separation from them, their opposition and the 
period of love. The destiny creates the universe 
and the destiny preserves the same. The destiny, 
provides bliss and the destiny gets responsible of 
the destruction of the universe. Thus the destiny 
arranges for the pleasure, the pain, fear, the grief, 
old age, death, birth and all other things 
according to the deeds of a person. О father, 
therefore everything should be considered as 
having been arranged by destiny. There is no 
doubt about it. You are indeed the Vaisya of- 
Gokula, known as the king Nanda and I am the 
son of Vasudeva from Mathura; my father 
getting terrified from Kariisa, left me in your 
house, therefore, you enjoy the greater respect 
from me than my own father and Yasoda enjoys 
greater respect for me than my mother. Therefore 
О lord of Vraja, you relieve yourself from the 
illusion and attachment because of my discourse 
and that of Parvatl you go back to your abode 
delightfully.

=== PAGE 663 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAWA, CHAPTER 91
587
Н-<д ЗШУ
7Ж f^TSFT Ш V 4 ДШТ RfTfTT^I 
% k=t TTtfH тщ 
■гттшг^и'э^п 
i# it w гг щ&яц ttwj5H4;i 
Л>ЛЙсЬ'1 ’?ПШНМ?|Ц'| Ttf^nt 'ВгЧТ^П'ЗЙ II 
TUCTiiliichl Tifet ч gsi Tqrt% 
cfTT^cb VTv4fdtf %TvT W ^ T o ^ ll ^ ll 
^cJycHcjl Т^ЁГ "Л)$э ф*А1| -c|cbl< IT: I
XT 
TT f^cT ^cTTsfe?T: 11С 011 
:ffRT dc^IU^i <p=TT ^rfrr ITTgrT: I 
■RTR: ШЧНч*) 
TT:Md^ll
Nanda said- О son, you remember the 
charming and auspicious place of Vrndavana. 
Why are you not reminded of the festivities of 
Gokula, the cows, the beautifiil bank of Yamuna 
river, the Rasamandala, your divine dance with 
cowherdesses 
in 
Rasamandala, 
the 
cowherdesses, the cowherds, Yasoda, RohinI and 
Radhika who is dearer to you than your live? О 
son for the sake of these people you must go to 
Gokula for sometime. Thus speaking, Nanda 
took Krsna in his lap and started dropping tears 
over him. He embraced him and kissed his 
temples. Thereafter the blissful Krsna spoke to 
him.
sftsHjTo RjtTo ?Д<у>ш|чп-ч<д о 3W° ТГЩТГ0
43favnT№mT:ii4°ii

=== PAGE 664 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAWA, CHAPTER 91
587
Chapter - 91
DevakI and Vasudeva speak to Nanda 
,# Ф 1с(гсэм
f m r ч(<ы^| fg^&R gr r^
i 
йя Pi^cfc: %я gbftii^u 
чточгФтте? gi<zpg: gsrfmfgi 
д а т а fir t m i ^щгтШ яя: fhci:)Ri) 
д?тгдт Tti%nrt ^ g g rtw ттРшягалт! 
Miurifsichi ттйад ят w
 4i<nyfAMjtm3ii
тт^ттаят^ wg g^g? g ^g^ii
я т я т rngfim i
Sri Krsna said- One meets with someone and 
faces separation from him and because of the 
deeds he meets with him again. Therefore, who 
can oppose it, О father, I am shortly sending 
Uddhava to Mathura and you would come to 
know about everything. He would speak there 
about my arrival of otherwise. He, after arriving 
there would meet Yasoda, RohinI, cowherdesses, 
the cow and Radha who is dearer to me than my 
life. In the meantime Vasudeva, DevakI, 
Baladeva, Akrura and Uddhava arrived there.
я? 
тщяярд шзт rri
rJRT R tf TJ? W
 
W RRII4п
fftwri Rfprreg RftT Я1^я gpggi 
RfRR% w
r я^я 
ggcRRii^ii
Vasudeva said- О Nanda, you are great 
intellectual, you are my intimate friend and 
brother. Shedding away the attachment, you go 
back to your house, this boy belongs to you as 
much as he belong to us. О brother, this city of 
Mathura is the gate of Gokula, whenever there 
are any festivities you would surely arrive and 
meet your sons.
^■gcHjgra
gsrogmggt: тргся^д qggt fjgRi 
ШсТО: %Я ^ Я^Я ^jgi ^ft % щ г^и\эи 
тгаяг: R«wi ^ чРя! yta^i 
gjg 
#giJRgt RfggrfRiM и
DevakI said- О Nanda, this Krsna is as much 
your son as he is of both of us; then why your 
face is getting faded? He remained in your house 
for eleven years and was brought up here. If he is 
here for sometimes then why do you get worried
flTS 
g RflTRi fd^-P fl
mjfcr-яня щ
э д д ш
fRii^n
It would be better if you stay here with the boy 
for sometime in Mathura and looking at his

=== PAGE 665 ===

588
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAtfAM
m o o n like face, m ake y o u r birth quite graceful 
and successful.
3fiH 
'Пс^Т <4^iiqi 
JT^II^oH
^ГчФ'мгитн.1
«dl4ill55KTlf?4^R U#T ^ Г ^ Ш Н П
S ri K rs n a said- О U d d h a v a , y o u go to G o k u la 
w ith pleasure and y o u r desire w o u ld be fu lfilled 
there. R e ach in g there, y o u m eet m other Y a s o d a , 
R o h in I, the cow herds, R a d h ik a , cowherdesses 
and enlighten them w ith the divine kn ow ledge I 
have im parted here.
T^fRTSjJ 'УН*< Ч^ТЩЩ^ГТ
RfiFW 
5FSrfW R U ^U
Since m y m other has ordained N a n d a w o u ld 
stay here w ith pleasure fo r som etim es. Y o u 
in fo rm m other Y a s o d a about m y stay here.
^ciyekcU 
fhaTT ЧШ 
ill
Th u s speaking lord K rsn a accom panied b y his 
parents, Balabhadra and A k ru ra entered into the 
palace.
'dt&dl T5Rf (u!<cqi 
tT ЧП^1
зттй зга^зй? trd
О N a n d a , thereafter U d d h a v a spending the 
n igh t in M a th u ra , departed in the early m orning 
fo r the charm ing Y rn d a va n a .
«Hsltilo гЩо 
здь ЧГО^П°

=== PAGE 666 ===

588
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAtfAM
Chapter - 92
Radha Stotra
ЧТТШПГ ЗШУ 
1 ^ : WRT rf Tiui^d^i
ЧЧШ<НО'| Щ fnf FI^Tt "Щ *3^11*11 
TT^t ^ tPtRt ШТЩТ f^Tf?T t -q^T ^I
УЗГП1ЧП&?3<* ^|T 4fH$6l*4IRII
N araya n a said- U d d h a v a w h o w as inspired b y 
S ri K rsn a , delig htfu lly b o w e d in reverence to 
Ganes'a, 
N a ra ya n a , 
S iv a , 
D u rg a , 
L a k s m I, 
Sarasvatl, Gariga and D ik p a la s and w itnessing 
the 
auspicious 
sym bols 
proceeded 
tow ards 
G o k u la .
^sira- |§R r w r t ^ ^ ig ^ R <wti
Ф М ^ЯТ5Г 4fvl5=rf44,ll?ll 
4fr(3^<ml -Risgt Hcfa 4Fq'<tfoi4J 
чД^ЛсПТ frrai 
*tim i
утешит 
ъ «purer* 
Wfimn
чга>ч)« 
*т 
^dyVch^i 
4dl<*l Ч^ГЯГ гПЧ1 
3®T ^ 4 ^ 1 1 * N 
trfir cb'c^iiui о т 
br^ i 
jrw t 
m oiR угч^ ч и ^ эн
Rqwtpjf ТгШП? TJTHR wtefoftfreinp 
^4(*<4lv(«bi^4 iW*jqu|4^fqnl^ll<t ll
clHfirolfW w
^ t ^
ttsRr r i 
(П чтм ^т 
3 tf^ r ччт "д5[тч 11
H e heard o n the w a y beating the o f b ig dru m s, 
the bells, the b lo w in g o f conches, reciting o f the 
nam e o f the lo rd, accom panied w ith m usic and 
the sound o f w elfare. H e also cam e across on the 
w a y , chaste w o m e n w hose husband and son w as 
alike, the burning lam p , the garland, m irro r, the 
pitcher filled w ith w ater, the curd, fried p a d d y, 
the fruit, tender durva grass, w hite p a d d y, silver, 
g o ld, h o n e y, group o f Brahm anas, the bu ck, the 
b u ll, ghee, fresh m eat, the elephant, the k in g , 
w h ite horse, 
banners, 
m angoose, 
N lla k a n th a , 
w hite flow ers and sandal-paste. H e than reached 
V rn d a va n a first o f all he cam e across the Aks 
ayavata tree in the B h a nd lra forest, it w as in red 
colour, 
w ith 
glassy 
leaves; 
it 
w as 
quite 
m eritorious and auspicious. Th ereafter he m e t 
w ith the boys clad in beautiful garm ents, w h o 
w ere adorned w ith gem -studded ornam ents and 
w ere crying reciting the nam e o f K rs n a as a b o y . 
Assuring them va rio u sly, U d d h a v a entered the 
city 
d e lig htfu lly 
and 
w alke d 
up 
to 
a 
long 
distance.

=== PAGE 667 ===

K£$NA-JANMA-KHAiypA, CHAPTER 92
589
чТщйёгййот дтЫЧ1Готсга^^:11?о||
4 R W ТЧНга
u t Ш ШщгагГ ^gT тТ 
t u i^ ii 
З Щ 1 Wt^of cwft (RSTflt 15^1 
щФщ frfg^ft w
 4IFsJ f^Tvt TTqil^ll
He spotted the palace of Nanda which was 
built by Visvakarma inlaid with several gems 
and diamonds besides pearls and other precious 
gems on all the sides; it had the pitchers of gems 
decorating the same. It had astonishing type of 
gates and Uddhava entered the same, reaching 
before the court-yard he descended from the 
chariot and stood over the ground. Finding him 
there, Yasoda and RohinI at once came out and 
enquired about his welfare.
зт ц xt ш
 Tit гг ттдчс£ ^
 t^ ti
з^сг: «w m w w$ щ зргаг rai
StRlwft fctvtwq ^mWFRTdiri 
fEtrrai <zym trra fw w 
W i
art rararfir ядтг 
^juj •rtotri
^rai u^ndidf xf 
тШ Й TJ3[TII^II
д а щ 
ш ■pnf
ЙзгатЧГЯ fazra xt ^glq-4^11^11 
■qfujlfg ЗГШ xT 
xT fkgn^i
W хГ Щ^ЦТЧПТ 
Ч1ЧТЙЕТ cT9TIIII 
He was seated delightfully over a seat and 
offered water, arghya and madhuparka; then 
they asked him, "O Uddhava, where are Nanda, 
Balarama and Krsna. You tell us truthfully." 
Thereafter Uddhava spoke to them all, the words 
of welfare and said, "O Yasoda, Balarama, Krsna 
and Nanda are quite comfortable; Krsna would 
return to Gokula only after performing of the 
thread ceremony; therefore his arrival here would 
be delayed. I have arrived here only to convey 
the news to you. After informing you suitably I 
shall go back to Mathura; on coming to know 
about the welfare of all of them, Yas'oda and
RohinI were filled with delight and they 
distributed gems, gold and beautiful costumes to 
the Brahmanas; thereafter they served Uddhava 
the sweet dishes which were as tasty as the 
neater; he was presented with the best of gems, 
diamonds and other precious stones. The musical 
instrument were played upon in welfare tunes.
жпрщрч^гатош <*>гшчге
^i?xt ЧГЗЧТЧГСТ T tW -^ ctaR II^ II
y m ^ ш ч ш ftwsrn m 
Т|4)ч?АШ; З^ЧЯ<1ф$:П ?о|| 
хГ^М ш П^% По!Щ Ш ^: I
«гай тртатчто #<^Ruq^cwrHii^!>ii
чГ^тгап -щ Щ 
у u
«гщйга: г а ф г а ^ т xrw^raTiR^ii
fjrararo газт xj-дя\> дт:из*м
The Brahmanas were served with food the 
festivities of the welfare were arranged and the 
recitation of the Vedas was made delightfully 
presenting various 
types of gifts 
to 
the 
Brahmanas. The naivedya, flowers, incense, the 
lamp, were offered to lord Siva. The goddess 
Bhavan! of VmdUvana was adored with sandal- 
paste, costumes, betel, honey, milk, preparations, 
offering sixteen types of adoration's to her. 
Several types of sacrifices were also made which 
included a hundred he-buffaloes, a hundred he- 
goats and ten thousand sheep, for the welfare of 
lord Krsna, the Brahmanas were given in charity, 
a hundred cows together with a hundred gold 
coins. They were adored with great devotion.
rarararra 
ra т й й йгатгш т.1 
Т&тйч1& ш : irah зга^тгшгазщ11? ч 11 
Ъ$Ф Ш Й гё ^ ф 1*Тсг|<ТЧ1
fffeTET Г«ЩсЩ%т^ЧЙ Xl 
4dd^fra<|yx) Й^тШгагагаЙ:11^\Э11 
Зунигой: ч ф

=== PAGE 668 ===

590
BRAHMAVAIVART A-M AH APURATjJ AM
з ^ 4 р т 4 з я # з ^ : чМ^«тч;|1Ч<111 
T^Tct 
Q cb l№:l
f 3 # : R # # : ^ W T ^ f ^ l l ^ l l 
ЗЩГПТй: 4 f# T f^JTT344?lff^:l 
W it 3%*ЗТ 
ЯЗЗГ 4T3f3t34RII3o||
Then Uddhava assured Yasoda, Rohinl, 
cowherds, 
old 
people 
and 
cowherdesses 
variously and moved towards Rdsamandala. 
Reaching there he found a circular building like 
the globe. Which was known as Rasamandala', it 
had hundreds of the pillars of the banana trunks; 
it was decorated with the best of costumes and 
the tree leaves bound in the cord of silk. It had a 
number of beautiful garland with a huge stock of 
curd, paddy, fruit, silken cloth, flowers, tender 
Durva-grass, sandal-paste, aguru, kasturl and 
saffron. It was protected by three crores of 
cowherdesses, it bad three lakhs of pleasure 
houses which were quite charming and beautiful. 
Waiting for the arrival of Krsna, a lakh of 
cowherds always remained there, looking at the 
Rasamandala and living Yamuna to the right, 
Uddhava moved on to the forest of jasmine 
flowers.
334T4f W cfirnr з [33,141 3il3 *11
з 3 4 
u i
«rgjtfFfi 
з <*H44j
qfrvRiHi Ф41?ГТ4Т frlftanm ейз 3113 у II 
зтзЬяг зззззтзт з 3»ftbsRi 34 ззп 
4i»l?ciwn fgfiR H 3 fM i з& г з п з 3 n
34 3 WRTTRRT f|4TTRI4f 34 Щ1 
443T4t Г31ЯГ4Т FTTfRHt 34t?nRll3XII 
44R3I44 ТЩ ЗТЧ ^ 3 T 3 4F3TRI 
^£3T 3TR34 3 3 Ш РЗ 3^4444,11? Ч И 
YWilfcfiHRi ? # 4 Ч ^11| 3ftP334j 
3|33RJ|gT4r 4 § 4 ^ # 3 R l 1^5,11 
з з # : q frp зтз!зп з1 т# зт^|
31^4 ЗЗЧЩЛЛТ xrf3T: 
1^^911
З ^ З Т ЗЗЧРУзТ 3 ?# 3 ^4 RTOPfl 
4 # Т?Ы f#f|R 4 4f*3 3#34RII3 с II
ЗЬТЗП41 3 Р|*ЗН! 4lR^ Nll 34 ЗЗГ1 
43ЯТ 3>43>ШП jJ3 #4f 3 35I44RI13 <? II 
^43Т 4f3i43uf 3 ^Ф?ЗЧк4Ч1#^1 
3^3 3143: ^ v 3 T f3 # ЗЩ#34Ч,И'ко||
From there he moved on to the forest of 
sandal-wood, campaka-vana Mhi-vana, Ketaki- 
vana and Madhavi-vana. From there he moved 
on to the Bakula-vana, Vanjula-vana, Yas'odd- 
vana, Mallika-vana, Palasa-vana, Sirlsa-vana, 
Dhatrl-vana, 
Kancan-vana, 
Nages'vara-vana, 
Karnika-vana Lavanga-vana, 
forest of teak 
wood, forest of tala trees, Hintala-vana, forest of 
jack-fruits, mango groves, the pleasant Langall- 
vana and the forest of Mandara trees. Leaving 
this forest to the left Uddhava reached Kunda- 
vana and thereafter he reached Madhuvana in 
which the sweet voice of the cuckoos was 
echoing and the black wasps were creating the 
hissing sound. It had enough of the wild growth 
and was the base of wine. It was fragrant with 
forest flowers and the fragrant cool breeze was 
blowing. Thereafter, he moved over to the royal 
path built by Vis'vakarma and reached the secret 
forest of Jujubi trees, thin crossing over to 
s'rlphala forest, lemon forest, orange forest, 
forest of lotus flower, fragrant oleander forest 
and Tulasi-vana, he found there enough of fruit 
of red colour and other delicious fruits. Leaving 
it, Uddhava moved to the forest of banana trees.
ЗТ313 f4^4 #
 3# 4lfa<J>344j
■цщЦтщ з т а г 
$м
зтезтрз ftmnt з fe rn i R44
% 3 3^34Pf 3 4 ^ : 4 ft# 3 R IIX 4 ll 
414rf33f3l33fT(^ Ш
 f3V334bftl 
4UTh3f4)T4rfa|<f3^4^^3o7 4TRIIX3 II 
«^diuR td 4 3 3 # : ^tlRldRl 
4 4 # R t)X X )l
ЗТЗсЗЗТОШ 3 i# : 4 f# f3 3 R I 
3f^^RJ37lRn?3 4dl3ilf3: h fa p R IIX k lt 
З Ш 4 3 3 3 # :!
3 # f4?STt 3 R33 T 3 I«4 I# :IIX 3 II

=== PAGE 669 ===

KR$NA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 92
591
жтМт 
щ тщ «j^M4
eh<*^ehH*i T*j
f ^ g n f f g r ^ 
w to stfg j
^HTWfdlt Щ <йчм1ч1 иЧрсМЧи*6П
It was quite a secluded place and was located 
pleasantly. He then spotted the extremely 
charming abode of Radhika, having the boundary 
wall studded with gems and surrounded by moat 
and the forts, being inaccessible by the enemies. 
It was easily accessible for the friends and had 
quite secretive and indicative paths; it was 
surrounded by the moats from all the four sides; 
it was painted with various types of paintings and 
was built by Visvakarma, using the precious 
stones and gems beside the garland of gems, it 
had the pillars which were made of the best of 
the gems. The steps were made of gems and the 
pitchers were also decorated with gems; it had a 
number of banners of fine cloth sanctified by 
fire. It had beautiful mirrors made of gems as 
well as the white fly-whisks. He then came 
across the main gate which had the doors of 
gems. Above the gate, Visvakarma had painted 
beautifully scene from Vrndavana, kadamba- 
vana, stealing of the cloth, extremely beautiful 
Rasamandala, several types of orchards of gems 
were depicted which was filled with cowherds 
and cowherdesses.
rtdsJ< 
<ЩТ fcici^eW *T riUlM IT: I 
fefct -grcfwTfpr d'wigTmifiwHimou 
■grt 
"ЩГМ Ч1<=М|ЪсГ fcH^oiqi
m zzrf fegffq^liq ^11
а1ччйсь 
Wfl
faRfa* чч1цтчич?п
<Vn«=«ni< fguJTT^ct 
4Tft4V5vTqi
*Ту П5|<г&1я xr Ф ш |4УеТо1^0ПНЦ^11 
irtfiranrf щ#сгг щ ш sr Tf^TrT^i
xTI
Г П 1Ч Ч И
A lakh of cowherdesses were guarding the 
gate, holding the staff in their hands. All of them 
could move at will and they carried various types 
of presents in their hands. Finding the gate there, 
Uddhava crossed, it then crossing the second and 
the third gates he reached the fourth gate which 
was quite surprising. Thereafter he crossed the 
fifth gate and found beautiful paintings there; he 
than reached the sixth gate which was quite 
beautiful from all sides, the walls of the place 
were painted by Visvakarma with the scenes 
from Ramayana including the battle scenes the 
ten incarnations of lord Visnu, Rasamandala and 
the water sport at the bank of Yamuna river. The 
sixth gate 
was 
guarded 
by 
a 
thousand 
cowherdesses. All of them were adorned with the 
best of ornaments studded with gems and held in 
their hands the staff decorated with gems and 
other precious stones.
Risrat с т я г ttt m s$ ш
3R^tR TT^ gjifal W 'TT 33^:114^11 
7ШГ f^nw iqw tiyifadTHaUlUiqi 
ш Rrerat 
m t i r o it дцтпч'эи 
RfFraErt гг Ш|Гутшэтфзт:1 
Jf^tT 
чи£|у^-чг^«яЧ11Ч«Я1
f^ r зйтштчш жтгятдттчч;|1ч^ ii
Out of them the female friend of Radha named 
Madhavl put a meaningful question to Uddhava 
besides asking about his welfare. Uddhava on his 
part gave the appropriate reply. Thereafter the 
cowherdesses left Uddhava at that place, went to 
Radhika and spoke to her dearest friend. 
Listening to the goodness, the cowherdesses, 
started blowing conches, ringing bells, playing 
on small drums and big drums welcoming 
Uddhava's arrival there. They carried him to the 
inner apartment of Radhika.
^
 grwr ттат fgr 
и
'•yvefewjAsii *т ттант

=== PAGE 670 ===

592
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAI4AM
'{TficfcC-n {*<НУД Щ
^jfb*d[SJ4*uei Щ fgjfafa: ?4T44f?URII^l
Ш ТЧ Tf m ^gT 4f454WRfi4T:l
g^rajifeRRryl^r т щ \ 44>: it
Arriving in the place which was built with the 
best of gems, Uddhava met with Radhika; she 
was beautiful like the moon rays. Her eyes were 
like full blown lotus flowers, she had discarded 
all the ornaments, except the pairs of ear 
ornaments which were hanging issuing the lustre. 
Because of the separation from Krsna, her mouth 
had become red; she was lying over the ground 
getting fainted and was crying at the same time; 
she was motionless and peaceful. She was 
without food; her lips, throat had dried up; she 
was breathing some-how; finding her in that 
condition, Uddhava the great devotee of Krsna 
was filled with emotions. He bowed his head in 
reverence to Radhika.
h r тгапт^тотит sr^ifc^fa^q j
44t 
44t 44:1
44t 44: 11 * 411
V Jvf4l44 =nf4$ < ^140$ 44Г 44:t
44t 44:11^11
Uddhava said-1 bow in reverence at the lotus­
like feet of Radha who is adored by Brahma and 
other gods and by whose virtues all the three 
lokas gets purified; I bow in reverence to the 
dweller of Gokula. I bow in reverence to 
Radhika. The one who resides over the mountain 
of hundred peaks and is known as Candravatl, I 
offer my salutation to her; she is the dweller of 
the Tulasi forest and the Vrndavana; I adore her 
again and again. She is the dweller of the 
Rasamandala, the goddess of divine dance, I 
offer my salutation to her a gain and again.
fclU11di43lfa4 
^ 44Г 44:1
Ъ 44t 44:11^411
44: 
хГ ?TRTT$ 4 44t 44:1
fnnT4$T:fWT$ rr 
44t 44:11 6 11
I offer my salutation to Vrnda, the dweller on 
the bank of Viraja river. I offer my salutation to 
the passionate Krsna of Vrndavana, I offer my 
salutation again and again. I offer my salutation 
to the beloved of Krsna who is quite peaceful, I 
offer my salutation to her again aiid again. The 
one who reside is in the heart of Krsna and is his 
beloved, I offer my salutation to her again and 
again.
44t 
4?I^T^ 44f 44:1
4TR4c$ 44t 44:11^411 * I
4 
44t 44:1
43Fn4f5f4T$ €T 
44f 44:ll'9o ||
I offer my salutation to the one who resides in 
Vaikuntha as MahalaksmI. I offer her salutation 
again and again. The one who is the great 
goddess of all the knowledge and also appeared 
in the form of Sarasvati, I adore her again and 
again. She is the lady of all the fortunes, in the 
form of Kamala I offer my salutation to her again 
and again. 
She is the beloved of lord 
Padmanabha, I offer my salutation to her again 
and again.
qglfabuTr^ 4ТЭГ rT ТЩ1Й 44f 44:1 
44: ftFffcTT^ ^ 4с$?ф$ 44t 44:1 fa ^11
She is the one who happens to be the mother 
of Mahavisnu, is quite eternal and the eternal 
force. I bow in reverence to her again and again.
I bow in reverence to the daughter of Sindhu and 
the goddess LaksmI of the universe, I offer my 
salutation to her again and again. She happens to 
be Narayan! the beloved of Narayana, I offer her 
salutation again and again. I bow in reverence to 
Visnumaya; she is also called Vaisnavl, I offer 
my salutation to her again and again.
4rTT4urfir4T$ 4 41440$ 44t 44:1 
44TS4J 
4Г 44t 44:1ПЭ? II
45T4T4R44tm$ 
44t 44:1
44: сЫ?4Г01^Гфг$ 
4 44Г 44:lf3^U 
414 4fOjf 
4lfe$ 4 44t 44:1

=== PAGE 671 ===

KFtSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 92
593
441S4T ffelS41^ Щ4Z$ 44l 44:lto*ll
I adore the treasure known in the form of 
Mahamaya. She is the fonn of all the welfare, I 
bow in reverence to her. She is the form of 
welfare, I bow in reverence to her. The one who 
happens to be the mother of all the four Vedas 
and is also known as Savitri, I bow in reverence 
to her. The one who removes all the misfortune, I 
bow in reverence to Durga again and again.
44r 
44t 44:1
Ьт:1т цуй н'| зтг 
-g^rutsmi
ЗШШЧ^ТЙ z( 
rT 44l 44: I I
TRT 4R: I to a 11
The one who was bom in K rtayu ga out of the 
tejas of all the gods, I bow in reverence to the 
same goddess again and again. I bow in 
reverence to the goddess who destroyed the 
demon Tripurasura. Because of that she was 
known as Tripurasundarl. I bow in reverence to 
her again and again.
44f{t4 zf ТЩЙ M uilt 44t 44: I 
441 f%RciWTT^ Рн]ий 44t 44:ltot9ll
The one who happens to be the most beautiful 
of all the beautiful goddesses on earth who is 
without qualities, I bow in reverence to her again 
and again. The one who has the fonn of sleep, I 
bow in reverence to her. The one who is without 
qualities I bow in reverence to her.
44T 
44: *Й -imI 44:1
44: 
t n ^ ^ 4 4 l 4 4 :1 to il I
44T 444ТЧШ^ 'Щ4Й ^ 44l 44:1 
fq<i^KW^4i4 '|1чиЙ 44t 44:ito<?n
I bow in reverence to the daughter of Daksa, 
who came to be known as Satl, I bow in 
reverence to her again and again. I offer my 
salutation to the daughter of the mountain who 
was known as Parvatl, I bow in reverence to the 
ascetic goddess again and again. I bow in 
reverence to Uma again and again. The one who 
remained without food and without clothes, I 
bow in reverence to her again and again.
441 4t§ 44Г 44:1
44: <!г1Ш=(|ПЙ 
441 44:1 to о II
The one who is known as Gaurl, I bow in 
reverence to her; the one who dwells in G aurl- 
loka, I bow in reverence to her. I bow in 
reverence to the dweller of Kailasa. The one who 
is known as Mahes'varl, I bow in reverence to her 
again and again.
zf 
4 
4 44t 44:1
441 
8?4Й ^ 
4 441 44:1 \6\\\
РЛЙ 
f4jffr«53 441 44:1
44: 
441 44:1 to?II
The one who is of the form of sleep, 
compassion, reverence, I bow in reverence to her 
again and again. The one who is patient and 
forgive and everyone. I bow in reverence to her 
again and again. The one who is the fonn of 
shyness, I bow in reverence to her again and 
again. The one who has the form of lust, hunger 
and the one who establishes everyone, I bow in 
reverence to her again and again. The one who is 
the form of destruction I offer my salutation to 
her. I offer my salutation to the great epidemic 
again and again.
Ч4Й 4Т44Й zl q fe td 44t 44:1
44: 444Й 41?Й 
4П4& 44l 44:1 
II
The one who is the form of fear as well as 
fearlessness and the granter of salvation, I offer 
my salutation to her again and again. I offer my 
salutation to Svadha and Svaha, the form of 
lustre as well as peace, I bow in reverence to her 
again and again.
444d«^ 4 Ш
 4 34Й W 44t 44:1
>9 
>Э 
4
44! 
4 44l 44:11^11
The one who is the form of satisfaction, 
protection and compassion, I bow in reverence to 
her again and again. The one who is the fonn of 
sleep and devotion, I offer my salutation to her 
again and again.
^fr44i^i^«s4i^ FTrStltl rT 44t 44:1 
44l get $Г4Й zt Ж 4Й 44T 44:lto4 II

=== PAGE 672 ===

594
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURA^AM
The one who has the form of hunger, thirst 
and shyness, I offer my salutation to her again 
and again. The one who has the form of patience 
and forgiveness beside consciousness, I bow in, 
reverence to her again and again.
ЧТО TOT: I
ЗГОЙ 
ТОЙ^ТТОТГТОТ:11<£^11
The one who represents the eternal strength 
and is the mother of all, I bow in reverence to her 
again and again, the one who is the burning 
sensation in the fire and who happens to be 
Bhadra, I offer my salutation to her again and 
again. The one who has the lustre of the hill 
moon as well as the lotus flower of the winter 
season, I bow in reverence to her again and 
again.
#TO ^ 4UkK ^ 7 Ш
 TOTf TOT: I
HTfTO 
^адИсЯ|<41: -r^t ii^
u
то|сГ 
I
TOTTO TO? 
Щ
^ S3
хШЧ 
TOTOTTf&T 
ЧШтК 'Rfwil<i<? II
^ ck cil WBS^rTTOT ТШТЧТО ЧЧ: TOT:I
TOR ^T: 46«lsttr»iM[4ch44ll<? о и
^ тотто чтто torto тоточГ ?нчГ-вч.1
4 
ТВТ: # $ : 4t<lbUI:ll<?
О goddess as the whiteness cannot be 
separated from the milk, fragrance cannot be 
separated from the earth, coolness cannot be 
separated from water the sound can not be 
separated from the sky. The lustre cannot be 
separated from the sun, similarly the Vedic and 
Pauranic literature define Radha as inseparable 
from Madhava. О goddess of welfare, "O chaste 
goddess regain consciousness and give me the 
reply". Thus speaking Uddhava bowed in 
reverence to Radha again and again. Thus the 
one who recites the stotra composed by Uddhava 
with devotion, after enjoying all the pleasures in 
this world, lived in the abode of lord. He does 
not suffer from the separation from the relatives 
or ailment and the grief.
TltfTOTT TOt cTORfflTO RRrfiRf FWftumTI 
37Wt TTO# ТО1|(ЫчТ ТОГО* «R^ll'??ll 
[н41ч<4тог trfbr iMi^Hl rihcy-Jii^i 
{|infg,4^'d TFTt TOgf W
 
3 II
TOTTTOEZJTT 
1Jc2tTOSSW3TnT<3[: I 
3tWicbl$: ЧТ^^ТО^ТГТТЙ5?Т:11<?*11 
By reciting this stotra a lady whose husband 
has gone to some other place gets back the 
husband and the one who is separated from the 
wife gets back the wife, a person without a son 
gets a son, a pauper gets the riches, a person 
without land gets the land, a person who is 
issueless gets the progeny, the ailing person 
would be freed from the ailment and person in 
fetter would be freed from the fetters, the person 
in panic would he freed from the same and the 
one who is over-powered with misfortune would 
be relieved of the same. A person with no 
reputation achieves immense reputation and a 
foolish person becomes wise.
9Г|ЦГ° HfTo $ПфШМ-Ч{с|о ЗтГ° HI«41° ШКНЫ 
НТО f&Hoifrirt4l5&tn4:ll<? HII

=== PAGE 673 ===

594
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURA^AM
m
 ^HclfdcWlSSTFT:
Chapter - 93
Conversation between Radha and Uddhava 
ЧТТШУГЗЦЩ
Vm n fem
Г^^ГГсНМ фШ||сЬН *T'd*jelM ^ITSi^tTII^II
Narayana said- On listening to the sto tra of 
Uddhava, Radha regained consciousness, then 
convincing Uddhava as Krsna she spoke to him.
(ch?ii4 
iifwl m m
3TFT<Tf Щ cpT ffw 
Rt 
^3^*11 ? 11
Radhika said- О son, who are you? What is 
your name? Who has sent you, where from have 
you arrived? And what is the purpose of your 
arrival here? You tell me. 
фШПфйы 
wit фШ|Ч1^Ч1

=== PAGE 674 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 93
595
4'lSM4J13H 
4^4 1ЩЧГ t&4 dldl
RUHI'Wfd 4lfM t тщ cF4T44 cRqim i 
44^4 T o b T ^ j ^ 1 
44: чйшчйтщт?4йчт? 4 4 4 4 ^ 114 11
^
 4 f^fen fa 44crf TerfefST: 4?i
#т^чччт^ ^ g ^ ^ n fir д^чч;||^ ii
All of your limbs resemble those of Krsna. I 
therefore, believe what you happen to be the 
courtier of Krsna, therefore you let me know 
about the welfare of Krsna and Baladeva. You 
also tell me as to how is Nanda staying there? 
Would Krsna ever come to this charming 
Vmdavana, when I would be able to have a look 
at his moon like face? Shall be able to enjoys the 
divine dance with him in the R asam andala, shall 
I again have the chance of enjoy the water-sport 
with my friends? Would I be able to plaster the 
sandal-paste on the body of Krsna?.
3q[4 34T4
З ^ гЦ Ш н % 
s i 444fl
Йчч: 
<рш!ч ч<чкчяп|\эп
44lf4T« Р Ш : 4PJcfcf ^Ttfhl 
ф-ыл*Ц ctH^ci'W f?I4 Т44Т 4iy<fRII<ill
Uddhava said- О beautiful faced one, I am a 
Ksatriya and my name is Uddhava. Krsna the 
supreme soul has deputed me to convey the news 
about his welfare.. I happen to be the courtier of 
the lord, that is why I have arrived here. 
Currently Krsna, Baladeva and Nanda are quite 
well in Mathura.
tlftchldbaf
arfer 
tfiftyMcHisfe 4 :i
441 ^ c b ^ n i 
4iyd^im i
444 ^T 44 TRT rff^aqRMlfbHd^l
f4W ЧёЧ ^K^W d^ll^oll 
гщШ 4 4)44 4 4§4R 4 '^5T4.I
UTfUfft 4=R44T4Tlj^ll
rf 4 чшзгчг^т ^afrrfdt тгччо^п
44|Цщ^чЬ|44*Ы 4fa4pf<4N^II
rTTifH Tfmrmri д ф т ^ р п ^ т ч ;| 
^ЧрЧЧк-КЙчИ ^сШЛЩ*ЛЧ,М^ 11
^4|Гит44чч4гзизичч1з<Ч)
* ^ ^ 4 K W 4 4idfuf 4 4^4411 
и 
ЧТЧРШЧЧ 4 4 
^qpy^ujjuiH 4
34-H^ci ■н41сггщ': лгчятгг: fitfr 441
F 
ТТЧТЧТ4 44lf4 4 У1Щ4ЬН4И^Э
44 4TS4441 <1*41^4 ^ГСЙсЙЧ: 4^ 4^1 
^dgcR 4l 4T ^4t 3 4 ^ 4 4 ( 4 4TII^II
Radhika said- The bank of Yamuna is present 
here, the fragrant wind is blowing, the kadam ba 
tree is also available for his sports. The beautiful 
and auspicious Vmdavana is also there, the 
cuckoos are issuing sweet notes, the bed with 
sandal-paste is also there, all the, four types of 
eatables and the honey is also there. That wicked 
god of love, who always causes pain is also 
there. The lamps of gems are burning in the 
R asam andala, the pleasure house is also there 
which has been built with the best of gems. The 
cowherdesses are there, the full moon is there, 
the flower bed painted with sandal-paste is also 
there issuing fragrance. The betel with camphor 
is also there which is consumed after performing 
the love-sport, the fragrant garland of jasmine 
flower is also there, the white fly-whisks is there, 
beside, the mirror made of gems, the garland of 
gems, the pool for with the water sport 
surrounded by charming gardens is also there, 
the garden with fragrant flower is also there, the 
lines of beautiful lotus flowers are there. Thus all 
the pleasures are available but where is the lord 
of my life? О Krsna, О Saranatha, О lord of my 
life, where are you? what is the fault of the slave 
girl like me or otherwise the fault of the slave 
girl is visible at every step. Thus speaking she 
again fainted.

=== PAGE 675 ===

596
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURATjfAM
■cIcHl ЩТ9ШПТ 
ТГ 3^g:l
m ^gT t w M 
$rf§rag*ig: 11 w 11
m fa : 
yogurt: I
grgfaT g 
fira^fen^ii^oii
f^giftyi tfert g Rt#li W^rfzf4:l
ebl(4rcb'wiH64dl g ец|Гч'Ч1^ьН15ЧТГИ? ЯИ
cfiiRi^'ly^K g TjgterT gftg$h
^gi^iisf gglfo ч1гччТшич1г ^ п 
gsrfgtgiffggn' дгЭТ ggn trf^gf^i 
gjifirarag^gr g gnfg^sjgfag Tjgni^n 
fmtsfg g?^g Rtar g gffiggfgi 
щ (д^дт fggr 
сы(ч*1^(п
Thereafter, U d d h a va som ehow brought her to 
senses again and he w as im m ensely surprised. A t 
that po in t o f tim e the seven fem ale friends o f 
R a d h a w here m o vin g w h ite fly-w h isks on her. 
T h re e 
lakhs 
o f 
cowherdesses 
rem ained 
in 
attention, 
alw ays 
to 
serve 
R a d h a . 
She 
was 
surrounded b y a hundred crores o f cowherdesses 
through out the d a y and nigh t. Som e o f them 
carried the co llyriu m in their hands, some o f 
them carried the garland o f flow ers.
chifgf^tftwi g щ^щжттшт1 
g n fg ^ q rn t тг ^
 
g-1%gfwi i ^ ^ 11 
gjifg^urgRu g ^ifgrf|4cnQcfiTi
g gnlg^fg ш 
r ^ 11
S om e carried ve rm ilio n in their hands, w hile 
others carried gorocana, w h ile still others carried 
the vases o f sandal-w ood in their hands, some o f 
them carried the m irrors, som e o f them carried 
kumkum and others carried vases o f kasturl.
girfgwtqgpng g gj^ д<дт гг fggfm 
RffMft: Ruf rtr д?дт ^grsfggTiRtHi 
grrfgcfnfg^vr g uifogr Rfrfgsfgi 
gnfgiffg ?шд?г ^fuf^gifgg4.iR4ii 
ggfg^fwig? g щк 
g 
*)jsi^rifdcbi gnfgferarasit gfrr^rfgi i r ^ 11 
Som eone carried the vase o f campaka flow ers 
w h ile others carried the vases o f honey filled 
w ith gem s. Som e o f them carried the fragrant o il, 
som e o f them carried fragrant o il, some o f them 
carried the betels w ith the fragrance o f cam phor, 
w h ile others carried the scented w ater. Som e o f 
them w ere attending to the dancing puppets.
gjrfgisfg еь*^ gnfg^r Tgnjgm^i 
gf^Si^g; gtfggfFR gfr^fgi 19 \э 11
gufggj
gnfg^xtmgRn g 
w r r^
tt^ 1ттдччщ^
Ttgqgt g gi ^gT дгатд
■gftg g,uW)fN f^tR ggtfggci;ii3 ?ii
Som e o f them carried the balls, som e o f them 
carried the gem -studded ornam ents w h ile others 
carried invaluable garm ents sanctified b y fire, 
some o f them carried the eatables. Som e o f them 
w ere inserting the flow ers in the hair o f R a d h a , 
w h ile others w ere carrying the com bs. S om e o f 
them carried the red paint fo r the feet and som e 
o f them carried the essence o f myrobalan and 
w ere standing in panic at a distance, som eone 
feeling p a nicky w as p rayin g w h ile som eone w as 
grief-stricken and c ryin g , som e o f the intelligent 
cowherdesses w ere addressihg sweet w ords to 
R a d h a , 
w h o 
w as 
burning 
w ith 
separation. 
Som eone w as lo oking at R a d h a , w h o w as lyin g 
at the beautiful bed and w as trying to re m o ve the 
g rie f o f separation. Som eone o f them w as trying 
to lay R a d h a on the bed o f lotus leaves. Fin d in g 
R a dh a in such a condition U d d h a v a felt p a nicky 
and he.spoke w ords w h ic h w ere sw eet like nectar 
to R a d h a.
3Jgg зспд
g ft дт 
Гн4^Пгч)ч,|
ямт л1<н1<*=ыГчч)н.|
фшши||(к|сЫ ^=rt gisr:wraTftFfrq;ii^VN
U d d h a va said- I k n o w y o u fu lly w e ll, y o u 
happen to be the forem ost o f all the gods and 
goddesses or affectionate, Siddhayoginl, the fo rm 
o f the entire prow ess, Miilaprakrti, Isva ri and the 
dam sel o f Goloka, y o u have incarnated on the 
earth 
because 
o f the 
curse 
o f S ridam a, 
О

=== PAGE 676 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 93
597
goddess, you happen to be the beloved of Sri 
Krsna and always reside in his heart.
ЩГ iffR RR^RTfR ^RldfRRtfRrdigi
Rfelt 
Rltf
widti^fqurThi 
Tw ^R w "щятч;| i i s 11
O goddess, you be attentive and listen to me 
with your cowherdesses, I have come here to 
convey a good news to you which is desired by 
you and pleases the heart and would be serve as 
the rain to extinguished the fire of separation or 
serves the medicine for the person ailing from 
separation.
шг T?isf?r r rtsr RTRgt ■gf?cT: r r ii 
rrrt
ggftRT RRH 15ШТ RT^- U^rdctPTfun
И Т ?: 4<RH^I RgiYS^IRlfR RjfRIRII3<ill
f R ^ R ^ RtR^ 'di'WtW-dRpadUJ 
■ЫНтЬсЫеЯ RRJT ycRl <UetctfH4u|:||'*{'tf ||
f i w fag Rtf%s r 5i%
tr^ Rf:i 
ИЧ^Ц^ЗТ cTRR IRR RT^ ^TRT RffniXh II
О mother, you composer yourself and clad 
yourself in the divine garment sanctified by fire 
you adorn yourself with gem-studded ornaments 
and apply the paste of kastiirl, kumkum and 
sandal-paste over your body. Decorate your hair 
with the garland of jasmine flowers, О virtuous 
one, now you adorn yourself with the best of 
costumes and have your cheeks suitably painted 
and the pasting of hair would be adorned with 
kastiirl and sandal-paste, applying the spot of 
vermilion over your forehead and the red paste 
over the soles of your feet. You now get up and 
occupy the gem-studded lion-throne, you discard 
the dirty bed of the lotus leaves. 
'
Vasudeva has invited Nanda to remain in 
Mathura till the performing of the thread 
ceremony of Krsna. Therefore Nanda is quite 
happy thereafter the completion of those 
festivities, Nanda accompanied by Krsna. and 
Baladeva would delightful return to Gokula.
3rrrt 5>штт 
rjrr rpr gr:i 
RrhRUtTRlfa -gefi RdR If^TcR cR R It^ll
At that time Sri Krsna would be delightful, 
bow in reverence to the mother and would return 
to Vrndavana in the night.
Tfffi
Ref 
R ficM8*lfa R Ш сЩ И*° И
О chaste lady you would surely have a look at 
the lotus-like face of Sri Krsna and would be 
relieved of the pain of separation.
■дтзщт r r m end rjr 
g<*ibui4J
R f^pS T^p RR uRspq Jn ^ d T II^ II
зтц^^л^тЬлжттт^пт cfri
Сч 
Сч 
\Э
ддтщ r^ r Irbr cbhiti*|4if^idgiix?ii 
RTvTtffRRRRfRRR I 
RRR RIR 
Rut R
■g^R giOTR RRRT 
R fT R f I
RR?R RlfRR ът RTGfR R ^ ifR d ^ lltf^ ll
7#gRRf4Rfnrtpf| RTRtgtl 
Clfg^oaiyeh1*^ R RRRRjRTtRIRjfqR1I'tfRII 
•НиПу^сЙ RTRRtRTRjRt4RjRR^:l
О 
О 
Сч
TTfRTl hKd)4l<rd^lt^l 
IIV <£ 11
hippri
ЦЩЦ|СЧ4|(Щ^ R R^tHlI RgTsfRRTII^II 
W R f R ^f?T RtRffa: iffRITT R^TI 
RTRlRT ^RT Ы О Т Й : ^dRI4^:M4°M
О
М<НЙ^е|1 R тМч|тИ1 R R t^l
RjlRRTTfRqfnRpf^ 
^11
5c^RR9RRT R R^ RRRfwft RRR ?l
Т
ч
Э
 
О 
О 
сч 
Сч
RUHR RTRRR R RHTfR^Rf^RRII4^ll
You consume the sweet beverages, devoting 
your mind towards Krsna. You consume the 
fragrant betel and water, enjoy the channing bed 
delightfully which is having a bed sheet of fine 
cloth sanctified by fire and is also decorated with 
the garlands of jasmine flowers kastiirl, lilies, 
campaka flowers and sandal-paste. Issuing 
divine fragrance, it is decorated with the garland

=== PAGE 677 ===

598
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
o f jasm ine flow ers from all sides, is decorated b y 
several precious gem s and the jew els and the 
p illo w is m ade o f the best o f auspicious flow ers. 
О goddess, all the cowherdesses serve y o u some 
o f y o u r dear friends are m o vin g the w h ite fly - 
w h isks uninterruptedly, but I w ant that yo u 
should be lodged o ver the lion throne w h ic h is 
bu ilt 
o f the 
best o f the 
gem s 
and all 
the 
cowherdesses should serve at y o u r feet. О sage, 
thus speaking U d d h a v a adored the lotus-like feet 
o f R a d h a w h ich are adored b y B rah m a and all 
other gods d a ily w ith reverence. 
A fte r thus 
speaking, U d d h a v a kept quiet.
ъщ: зр т irfrarT TifinsT m t i
qtacruf p t o
фшгга gf^rt <тшч4 чшчи^ 1
г^<?нГс|ГччТЛ ЩТ Ъ ЧЧН1£В{1
РТГ 
Щ plrMIfiWIPf 
rni4V9ll
rf 
УТфШТШ ТЧФТс&тЦ
O n hearing the w ords o f U d d h a v a , the sm iling 
and chaste R a d h a offered to h im a ring w h ich 
w as in valuable, beautiful and studded w ith gem s 
and was m ade b y V is va k a rm a . She then offered 
h im the tw o ear ornam ents in w h ich one could 
lo o k his o w n reflection. T h e y w ere y e llo w in 
colour, w ere unprecedented and were shining 
like the lam p. These kundalas w ere handed over 
b y lord A g n i to K rs n a in the Rasamandala. 
Th erea fte r she 
also 
gave 
h im 
several 
gem - 
studded ornam ents and the costumes sanctified 
b y fire , the garland o f gem s w h ic h had been 
handed o ve r b y V a ru n a to K rs n a in the earlier 
tim es, she also handed over the Syamantaka gem 
to U d d h a v a w h ich w as handed o ver b y S urya to 
K rs n a . T h e same gem was presented b y K rsn a to 
R a d h a.
^ tT *T 4^U | TprfWRR cf<4j 
tRSPfrT p i 
н!сч1 
ТТОШИЧЧ И
ЦиГКУКГччЫ ШТгТ ТЧАГ^Т^!
I ^ о 11
Ш
 д а w i
?ТГМ 
<дРга1иЩ1№:( |^ ||
щ я 9Г?ттт И ш w * ттчщ15Н1
т т т м зг^тд^пт m I s ? 11
Thereafter the goddess R a d h a handed o ve r the 
lion-throne studded w ith best o f gem s w h ic h w as 
presented 
to 
Sri 
K rs n a 
b y 
M ah e n dra 
quite 
de lig htfu lly. She also gave h im the chatra w h ich 
w as m ade o f the best o f gem s and diam onds. A 
garland o f diam onds decorated it and several 
lotus flow ers o f gem s w ere engraved o ve r it- She 
also gave the m irro r o f gem s w h ich w as handed 
over to K rsn a b y B ra h m a in the Rasamandala. 
T h is w as also handed o ver to U d d h a v a b y 
R a d h a.
^Ч1Ч И RTjvT Ъ 
-ytpT PTIIS31I 
тУ|Гг1ЧН1^<Чч11^'кМ
Thereafter she also gave h im a garland o f 
china-rose flo w e r in w h ich the best o f gem s w ere 
studded and w h ic h w as g iven in earlier tim es b y 
S iva to K rsn a and w as in valuable, auspicious, 
rem over o f deaths birth and o ld age, beside the 
ailm ent. She also handed o ve r the Candrakanta 
gem w h ich w as g iven to K rsn a b y the m o o n w as 
an excellent gem and had the lustre o f the fu ll 
m o o n .
n p u f тГ RpTW 
9 ^ 
тТ гЩхТ fipRtT
She also handed o ver the pure im perishable 
vase o f honey w h ic h w as handed o ve r to K rs n a 
b y Dharm araja.
faSTst tRRRT Ъ ^
 рс(|^[цтг*Чч||^\э||

=== PAGE 678 ===

KRShJA-JANMA-KHANEiA, CHAPTER 93
599
xf ^
 
ЩЦ
She also gave Uddhava, the gold vase which 
were quite auspicious and were used for taking 
food and water, she also served the sweet and 
delicious dishes to him including payasam. She 
than offered him the betel sanctified by camphor 
beside the garland of flowers beside, the garland 
of flowers with soaked in sandal-paste.
^WlfVl4 W jfef cilfstsd ЯЩ W fl 
fWR щ ъ ТТ1МГ&
■felt iTVHefitf ^ s t Щ1: зШ
ф ф щ 
xT feyvlPfl
rT 
^11
<?тзт ^ 
■p^Tsffer^i
■gfepgi^g; дщт 
ri^ q w fii^ u
ф а т щ щ щ !
f e f t 
jjsiriN §Гя'>у^<тн.п'э?п 
"ш Щ ш тм ?т pfen pfet ■5^1 
Щггт i^ffet rijfet
She than blessed him variously and bestowed 
him with the divine knowledge which was 
imparted by lord Krsna himself to Radha in 
Rasamandala of the Goloka, she than blessed 
him that the LaksmI would not depart from his 
house up to a hundred generations, beside 
bestowing the knowledge of Yasaskarl, wide 
spread popularity, spotless, glory, all the siddhis, 
the slavehood of the lord, the infallible devotion 
to the lord, beside becoming the best of the 
courtier of the lord. This delightfully handing 
over all these things and pronouncing the 
blessing on him, Radhika got up and she clad 
herself in the divine costumes sanctified by fire 
adorned herself with the best of gem-studded 
ornaments, garland of diamonds and also applied 
the spot of vermilion over her forehead besides 
the collyrium in the eyes. She wore long garland 
of flowers. She applied sandal-paste on her body
and than adored Uddhava who was seated on the 
gem-studded lion throne. At that point of time 
the complexion of the body of Radha resembled 
that of. the molten gold and her lustre exceeded 
hundreds of moons. She was surrounded by a 
hundred crores of cowherdesses, thereafter, she 
delightfully adored Uddhava who was seated on 
the gem-studded lion-throne.
RfPPJVTWffT ?fT: 
faw ii
ct^ грят *rd гРЗАЛ if e ff? R rirife'3411 
ctf <%4?idigi4t m drp)vrai6fcd:i 
m sprang*:
4 % ricWRt spfi ЧЩРРРШ* TrifU^II 
,s«act dcp-ct
Radhika said- Will Krsna really come back 
you tell me truthfully, he is deprived of deceit- 
fullness, you speak out the truth in this vast 
assembly because the step-well is better than a 
hundred wells and a yajna is better than a 
hundred step wells, a son is better than a hundred 
yajnas and truthfulness is better than a hundred 
sons. There is no sin greater than the falsehood. 
Uddhava said- О beautiful one, the lord would 
surely come and you would truthfully meet him 
and your suffering would come to an end at the 
sight of the lotus-like face of lord.
4MT4firpj goREJT cPPT f e lt (jfrifdlHH'a’UI
0 virtuous one, the pain of separation from 
which you had been suffering has disappeared 
with my meeting you, you shed away all the 
worries which are always troublesome and enjoy 
all the pleasures of life.
sit irenw ^nfri ТгШ 4u4<i f f e l 
fetm 
xt
^
 t cRjfejnfR cfcTc^ffRT 
U1
1 am returning to Mathura and shall surely 
send the lord back to Gokula. He would 
complete all the unfinished tasks. О mother, let

=== PAGE 679 ===

600
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURA14AM
m e take leave o f I shall go to the lord and 
reaching there, I shall to h im con vey new s about 
y o u .
TrfsrartaTcr
ftT%TT4;i
*JUT §{ЗЧйП адМ яЗ 3JcR fiSRT «rai IС Ч11 
RT f o # 4 «rafa f^U^fcbrd<IH.I 
*saRibirfR чгапга ^ awmfybyfytui^ii
R a d h ik a said- О son, in case y o u have to go to 
the pleasant city o f M a th u ra , then yo u stay here 
fo r som e m ore tim e and listen to m y painful 
sto ry. I am b a d ly suffering fro m the pain o f 
separation. Th e re fo re , y o u do not forget m e 
reaching there. Y o u tell m y beloved everything 
and send h im here w ith ou t fail.
ЧЙЩТ *штт ctra? Этт зт
iMHlfa fWTiflqiU'SU 
4 ^IrfiT^ET VUWlfut 1% 
Wl
^ 
w 
i ч 11
O th e rw ise , w h o can reach the m in d o f a 
dam sel, a learned person can create anything 
according to the scriptures but w hen even the 
V e d a s are unable to recite his g lo ry then w hat 
could the scriptures do. Therefore , О son, I shall 
speak 
e verything 
to 
y o u w h ich y o u should 
c o n ve y to lord K rsn a .
^ cfT ч 
й 
W 
ш ч я га ч
#
 ЯМ 'g^cfld? %?R ^ Ш
 ^Il<^t9ll 
f>W||'fifd rf 
«JUTtfq rppqtefftqi
<fwt 
Vra c43w(T frararaifa f t :
Ш
 tf4-T<rdl4>df 31#: Wfl
s n # ratu^praTra 
srgn^T: tp r :i
Ъ 4fcWT ЧЩ 
УТечГгЩ 44114° II
и<^скч1 q<kfuii 
fcdinl 8 # 4 £«*1114
ferar ra #
 w tr r a f s # raifrisgiik^ii 
^f^RTT 
J4T4I
r f # $#444 
Ч га Т о : 11 4 3 II
Because o f the pain o f separation I am unable 
to distinguish betw een the hum an being and an 
anim al betw een the w ater and the earth or the 
d a y or n igh t, I have indeed forgotten m y s e lf and 
am u nm in dful o f the rising o f the sun and the 
m oon 
or 
their 
setting. 
I 
have 
regained 
consciousness sim p ly in order to receive the 
new s about the w elfare o f the lo rd, during all the 
tim e 1 o n ly visualise the fo rm o f the lord or to 
listen to the sweet notes o f his flute. D iscard in g 
the traditional shame and fear, I alw ays get 
engrossed at the lotus-like feet o f the lord. N o 
doubt I achieved the lord o f universe w h o is 
b e yon d Prakrti but I could not achieve the true 
know ledge because o f his illusion. I understood 
h im o n ly as the lord o f cowherdesses w hose feet 
are adored b y B ra h m a and all other gods beside 
the V e d a s . I denounced h im in anger. T h is fact is 
paining m y heart like a thorn. О U d d h a v a , the 
tim e I spent w h ile serving at his lotus-like feet, 
reciting his g lo ry and adoring h im is considered 
to be quite auspicious and delightful m om en t and 
m y entire life is dedicated to h im , n o w in 
separation fro m h im m y heart alw ays rem ains 
p ainful. Because o f this, I shall n ot have the 
fortune to enjoy his love sport-in the secluded 
place like this.
4 WtTfa 
ЧТЫ5У1 
ra# гат 4 sjFirfq 
14*11
ЧМ #
 Ч -<ГадтГч 4 5^nfw g w f 5l4 l 
чгшМг ^achtai гаышга га ддчччпччч 
трйга ч rarrarfa 
Trwr^ppfi
iftraf ч rarcnfo #
 га^чёы-нч11^ ч
4 # Ч wnffr 4 # W T f# {l 
R 1 9 ^ ^ Tt4 TfCT ЧрПЧЧЧ.! IS >311
ттц 45р*5 тНЖГсГГЧ;|
ч # 
I ч d 11
4335 ifrint 4T?f 4 qrrtnfR fT: £4:1
зга' ш гагат й <*(ч и 1 4та% 4гага#тш ч4п

=== PAGE 680 ===

KR$NA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 94
601
CRT Ш m & t TFf%: gg- Щ : ggifcr Ш :1
-RT ТГШ КПгЗТ
ун4хй! 
унсьтйш11^оо||
I shall not be able to go to the V rn d ava n a any 
m ore. I w o u ld n ot be able to plaster his b o d y 
w ith sandal-paste nor w o u ld I be able to adorn 
his neck w ith garland o f flow ers nor w o u ld I be 
able to have a lo o k at his lotus-like face. I w o u ld 
not be able to visit the jasm ine, the lilly and 
campaka flow ers forests or the Rasamandala any 
further. T h e visit o f the charm ing sandal-w ood 
forest w ith H a r i, the peaks o f gem s o f the M a la ya 
m o u ntain, the Madhavf forest, the Madhuvana 
w h ic h 
is 
quite 
secretive 
and 
charm ing, 
the 
Khanda-vana, 
the 
beautiful 
and 
charm ing 
Candrasarovara, the Nandana-vana o f the gods, 
the 
forest 
o f Puspabhadraka 
and 
Bhadraka 
cannot be visited b y m e any further w ith out 
com pan y o f the lord. W h ere is the beautiful 
Madhavl creepers laiden w ith flow ers in the 
spring season? W h e re is the n igh t o f the spring 
season. W here is the spring season? A n d A la s , 
w here has M a d h a va gone? T h u s speaking R a d h a 
started devoting her m in d at the lotus-like feet o f 
the lord, she felt em otional and fainted w hile 
cryin g.
STtgw° "ЧёЛо silchtuM-Mtao -jtH°

=== PAGE 681 ===

KR$NA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 94
601
Chapter - 94 
Uddhava's Prayer to Radha 
ЧШЦЩЗЩсГ
д а chi^mry diocjw
S ri N a ra ya n a said- О sage fin d in g , R a d h ika 
lyin g like dead, U d d h a va was surprised and he 
felt extrem ely pa nicky. Thereafter, he som ehow 
brought her back to senses and said to her.
Т41сЧН
ЧТ 
чрчзч! wrifiiPii
W itnessing the devotion o f the chaste and 
virtuous 
R a d h ika 
tow ards 
K rs n a , 
U d d h a v a 
thought on to h im se lf that his devotion fo r the 
lord w as o f no consequence.
^Idd ||R5 chrdllui 
^1
Ш Ъ Ч ^
 ф Щ SSprfR RTOPfll^ll
U d d h a v a said- О m other o f the universe, О 
virtuous one, y o u regain y o u r senses, I b o w In 
reverence to y o u , y o u happen to have all g ood 
deeds perform ed in the earlier births, n o w y o u 
w o u ld surely m eet K rsn a .
ЩтТ1 (с(^Ч чПчл 
R ftl
■дцМ 
TTtfw: 11* 11
Cdlchl'twll^el
^ 
HdchiaiW ТШЧ11ЧИ
<j>d'4IM^i ipiT iMqxjfi xf fttfolHJ
Я*Г ЫЙЧЙНГ^НТН>11^|1
T h is entire universe has been pu rified w ith 
y o u , this earth has been sanctified w ith the dust 
o f y o u r feet, y o u r face is quite 
auspicious, 
adorable in the h o ly places, spotless, bestow s the 
devotion o f the lo rd , the fo rm o f w elfare and 
rem oves all the obstructions.
TWT Щ ф ш ня ^Ч1-Яф(Ч: ЧТТ1
<1шчт8гач1 ^ 1 ч w?r ^ m i |\э 11
TTfrioRt ^f%dt ^jJT 
WPtgcfqj
зэтгг чтш! япй тшш: fRT: iw n i^ ii
Y o u are R a d h a , y o u are K rs n a , y o u are Purusa 
and y o u are Prakrti. T h e V e d a s or the Puranas do 
not differentiate betw een R a d h a and M a d h a v a . 
Thereafter fin ding R a d h a in 
an unconscious 
condition, the cowherdesses M a d h a v l spoke to 
R a d h a pushing aside U d d h a v a 
and standing 
before R a d h a.
tTOSjctTEr
1% Щ 
?icUiv4 WT Щ cHytmipl
fa r# 1% щ Rrifi 
II
-щ 
зт 51Ш 44.1
Ш 
ЗТТШгТ: 
^>at TRT:I

=== PAGE 682 ===

602
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURA1VAM
<з f% 
з ^ з тй зптгн 4*<4*<44j 
зпзпз Т$Г 3<^3 35: fil3 : Wlr33: 3 T :ll^ ll
M a d h a v l said- w h at is the virtue o f lord K rsn a , 
w h o is the fo rm o f a thief, clad in the best o f 
garm ents, enjoys the best o f pleasures, g lo ry, 
prow ess, fortunes and strength, beside the siddhis 
and the g lo ry w h a t m ore virtues does he have as 
com pared to yo u? H e a som ehow arrived here 
fro m som ew here and again disappeared but the 
cow herds shall still rem ain there. There is no 
prince here therefore, О virtuous one, w h y are 
y o u dyeing fo r the son o f N a n d a , y o u protect 
y o u rs e lf m akin g all the efforts because there is 
no one else greater than ones o w n soul, 
faekqi TlitefriPic'i'J'Jll 3ef3 *з1)с|Ч ^3TI 
;333lf33f3T3 3 i^ f3 7 r:$ 1 3 4 jl^ ll 
Hi-Ouri зРгз зз4 уоЧсй 
33>3 ЗЩ31 3Tsf 3 % 3333 fTSI I v* 11
з!язтз з т * щ *пзз <jtfi 
з % M iifw Tifurt ftrariuii гг ^ ? q R n ? 4 ii
M a la ti 
said- 
О 
R a d h a , 
disgrace 
to 
y o u r 
shamelessness and y o u r life has becom e useless. 
Presently y o u are destroying the good nam e o f 
all the damsels o f the universe. A l l the ladies 
should keep their m oves a secret, because b y 
revealing the sam e, there is the loss o f reputation. 
Th erefore О frie n d, open y o u r eyes and carefully 
lo o k w ith y o u r o w n eyes, y o u love anyone 
keeping the lo ve o f the husband as a secret in 
y o u r heart. О goddess there is no caste betw een a 
friend and foe. In the deeds, one becom es a 
friend.
?T3: сЫ'4с|£Йс| fhq 3 3>4uil mPfl
еКнЫйч TjdtaTIlWI
T h e intelligent person perform s his o w n deeds 
because it is o f n o use spoiling the w o rk o f 
anyone.
cF: 3i3T 3R33T ТЙ 31: 
123 31
ЗТТ4 3 ТГЧЗ ЗТсЗТ 
33331 I ^ 11
О R a d h a , w h o is beloved o f w h o m and w h o is 
inim ical to w h o m , people conduct them selves 
taking both the things into consideration.
Tlffarosrft 3- HlUlftdf 33: Щ:\
35гзз>г f :зецзт TTfOTr зщпз 
1 
11
Y o u listen fro m m e the sym ptom s o f an 
enem y. A n enem y snatches a w a y the riches and 
life besides being till spoken and causes pain. 
*c|cj>Htv4l qffjtgird 
5f|jeh3PAl
T J ^ r r ^ R y|U||Rj§<j 3R7UTt 33:11^ II 
f% 
3Tff3 4% % 3F3 ?Tf3i 
ЗТТЗПЗ 3}T 33^3 31: fjRT: *=<1счЧ: 3 T:II9 ° II 
G e ttin g y o u excom m unicated fro m y o u r caste, 
th row ing yo u in the ocean o f g rie f, stealing a w a y 
yo u r consciousness, 
the heartless 
K rsn a has 
disappeared. О foolish one, then w h y do y o u 
rem em ber him ? y o u shed a w ay this terrific g rie f 
and preserve y o u rs e lf m akin g efforts, because 
w h o could be m ore im portant than self.
"ЧШТЗЩЗТЗ
333T 3$13 qof зу313НЗЙз1|
знзтз Tfqft 4ifhnt 3 трз fir4i 1? * 11 * 4
W
 W T3T tf)fd^3 31
4 4 fM f3 W % 
T 3 % -311^11
33т 33 з у ч ^ й 1J13 3 ^3 3*3^1 
3f313 ЗЗйЩГ 3 1J3: ^ЗТ5^313Ч^11^^11 
1J3: ^J333 33fS[3 133Т <333 3 
Tjt <3333 трззз ЧНзПчГ 333 
P a d m a va tl said- О dear, y o u had y o u rs e lf 
spoken on the bank o f the rive r Y a m u n a that the 
love o f a dull person carries a person too far and 
w ith that the w o m e n have to suffer a lot. Because 
no line can be draw n in the lightening and the 
w ater, sim ilarly the love o f a w ic k e d person is 
o n ly short live d . Th erefore the people w h o are 
w ell-versed in p o lity have pronounced that the 
w ick e d person should never be believed at any 
tim e, w henever y o u looked w ith a side glance 
tow ards K rsn a o n the b a n k o f Y a m u n a , y o u had 
kept it a secret, because o f yo u r consciousness. 
T h is is the result o f the same and y o u have 
disow ned 
y o u r 
teachers 
and 
y o u r 
relatives 
discarding their w o rds. N o w y o u alw ays th in k o f 
K rs n a alone. Y o u are u n m in d fu l about y o u r fo o d 
and life .

=== PAGE 683 ===

KRSiyA-JANMA-KHAiypA, CHAPTER 94
603
сртЩ RTSS?!* 
cTSTT!
<J<* fO T t R s p q j rr cRTfrr Щ 
IR Ц 11
щ Rf^ щф< wnrraTSsfM^r Ш9ЧТ1 
RT^l 
RtfcRM 
TStfR
L o r d K rsn a is co m forta bly lodged in M ath u ra, 
w h ile y o u are rotting here in the forest o f banana 
trees. E v e n i f y o u lay d o w n y o u r life fo r his sake, 
he is n ot going to appear before y o u . О beautiful 
one, y o u save y o u rs e lf and y o u w ill surely m eet 
h im in due course o f tim e.
ЭТтбЧ^Т ^pT IP# 
H
f f tj ?ТШ ЯШРРт f e w tu f RTOcrqtRRil
v m u u w f f r 
r t i
cd^tfd' ?fr RiPR RRRT R^F: UT^IR^II
C an d ra m u kh I said- O n e achieves pleasure and 
pain according to one's earlier deeds including 
the 
everlasting 
fortune, 
the 
pain, 
grief, 
m isfortune and the riches, in the land o f Bharata 
w h ic h is sought fo r b y all. Y o u w o u ld achieve 
lord. H a ri, y o u r beloved as y o u r husband b y 
p e rfo rm ing tapas.
RRTSfh 
Tmtcnp
ЩЩ: Щ : gjsr xP^rtrpf гщтпага1||?Ч 11
?г<4^щ u^hs^T dftC ct R r r r : i 
W t Щ<$ ТЩ^Г iptW>5RR R8JTII3 О il 
R f? R fbw rrgpr y i u i i w ^ g i -q ^ W f l 
■p i f y ^ r 
fq q ftp p rr R t R frll? *11
W
 
"fnf^T TPTfrnT: 11 ^ ? 11
W h y are y o u burning y o u r b o d y w ith the 
arrow s o f passion? H o w are the m o o n , the god o f 
love and the spring season, the enem ies o f the 
passion? S iva had burnt the god o f love to ashes, 
R a h u had sw allow ed the m o o n and vo m ited it 
back 
and 
the 
spring 
season 
died 
w ith 
the 
separation fro m his friend and arrived in the 
abode o f Y a m a . T h e m oon w h o w as considered 
to be the ocean o f nectar has turned as the ocean 
o f poison fo r m y friend R a d h a . T h e shining
garm ents are like the fire , the sandal-paste serve 
as the o fferin g in the fire and the fragrant breeze 
bum s the b o d y.
ЯШЩТ RR w it R R R fafa зМ ш 
ТГЖГТ fR 
ftsR 
l^^ll
ггат^йчг^ч| а<щиш1т1т w
Vrat^T R 
R^RT %?TT R R II^ II
L o o k this friend o f m ine is lyin g m otionless 
discarding fo o d and is alive o n ly b y breathing, 
therefore, О son o f the K u ru race, y o u praise 
y o u r friend K rs n a w ith y o u r m o u th again and 
again. Because the reciting o f his nam e and his 
virtues are the g o o d new s about h im and she 
w o u ld be brought back the life.
Щ f% RTETfa RTRlfR ^WTRtrRFtRl^Ofl 
i i
trq хгп^цп 
sqrafRT R R RR: RTRR RTfRRRl 
TRIT 
RtSRRtefR ReUM LII^II
Щ 4 RPTfR fR^FS RRTRT RRRRTSm
чгаЬя: ftrt ш ftjjurw <§Rt Tjxmtn^vsn 
W 4 TJR R RtRRT Rt^R RettfRRrp 
R K M d tu I ^ 5 4 Щ »д RW ttfTHJ!?*' II 
R W I |l< c b ТЩ 'MTbH^fcPT^I 
foRft^Npfrq R RR ^Н Ч %<Ч П ^И 
vTH IR TR ^ р Т О Р Е р 
Rc4TctR414sp R g 4 ^ l f a 4 V iH ‘{M,k o |(
%lfR RRtRT R R%: -9Ш: RT:I
VrV<4b=hilfd ^RRf h)«Scbl??R
SHR ^cqfR RRtRT R R^gg^or Riqfqi
ЗТТЩ RRUt 
RftpESR fa R H :ll^ l!
W RqtfRtRtRR r srtrt ^pj ^ n fc n p 
WT R RRRT 3TR RRc^R % ^RRTII 
TlR: R4^4K¥R Rt<dRtt?R qtRfefll'Z^II 
Sas'ikala said- О M a d h a v l, the one, w hose 
g lo ry is recited b y B rah m a and other gods beside 
the fo u r V e d a s , w hose lotus-like feet are adored 
b y the gods and the sages and w hose g lo ry is 
be yon d 
the 
recitation 
o f K a m a la , 
Sarasvatl,

=== PAGE 684 ===

604
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
Durga, Ananta, Mahesvara, the siddhas, the 
ascetics, Manus; therefore, what do you know 
about Krsna who is the supreme soul? He is the 
soul of all, is formless, is without qualities, is 
form of truth, The form of the lord which has 
been described is truthful, bestows pleasure, 
blissful, charming, bestower of grace over the 
devotees, the abode of divine play, the welfare of 
all the welfare's, whose beauty excels crores of 
the gods of love, whose beauty is beyond 
comparison. The same lord Krsna having the said 
form has incarnated on earth in order to rid of her 
of the burden. The water of MandakinI has 
emerged from the sweat lotus-like feet of the 
lord, who was accommodated by lord Siva 
several in his head and getting detached always 
devotes his mind reciting his name. He 
discarding his food, costumes and ornaments 
remaining unrobed, starts dancing in a movement 
with devotion and recited the qualities of the lord 
from 
all 
his 
five 
faces. 
Brahma, 
Sesa, 
Sanatkumara and the siddhas in groups always 
meditate upon the divine lustre of the lord and 
engage themselves tapas for him and spend their 
lives, who could know about the glory of the 
same Krsna.
archil' щ 
95ifciajjfric(iq<4:i 
■дч^тпнг: fegj чТтНТ: 
'ШгЩН'ЯЧ и
Tclljj Ч 
ё! 
1*^11
w 
aFiW fi
TcT^r cbfiHel^ai РичПЦИ^И 
ЩЧЗТГ 
4didTT cTW 
t W * ftoUdfcyi ё! -cmzt
Suslla said - Hundreds of the gods of love 
cannot be compared with the beauty of Sri Krsna 
and the moon, Asvinikumaras are of no 
consequence before his beauty. Brahma, Visnu, 
Siva, the gods, the sages, Manus, siddhas and 
devotees besides the ascetic always adore and
meditate upon the feet of the lord Krsna in the 
innumerable globes. All the four Vedas are 
unable to recite his glory. The goddess Sarasvatl 
becomes dumb before him and getting nervous 
she seeks apology from him, the serpent Sesa 
with a thousand hoods always shakes while 
offering prayers to him, Brahma the creator of 
the Vedas is known as a lord because of him. 
The same lord is being denounced by Madhavl. 
srcfoiT 'ЯЧТТ ЧТИТ <|1чЫ'| зйдч W 1
w n im o ii
Therefore this assembly has become in 
auspicious and the life of a cowherdess is of no 
consequence now. Only Radha is the most 
virtuous of all who always remains engaged in 
the love of lord Krsna, with the reciting of whose 
name the sin of crores of birth gets destroyed, 
there is no doubt about it.
ЧЧ: 
uaVi: 
uddl чнддаг ёШЧ ^11
Ъ ЩЧГ -qt 
VlrffW
Ratnamala said- Krsna had lifted Govardhana 
with his left hand but he could add to the glory of 
the kings because the one who could reduce to 
pieces thousand of mountains, the same Krsna 
kills lakhs of demons at a time.
Щрт 'dWIilui ё}Цщи ёг
■^tvTRT ё!
^TSU»yTs41?c| ^trr: 
ёЖЧ^
Visnu in the form of a boar incarnated on earth 
from his amsa and lifted the goddess earth over 
the tip of his tusks quite playfully, redeeming the 
earth from the vast ocean, with thousands of 
mountains and trees, in which innumerable 
demons dwelt.
4>4uil n+d 4 
4 'cl ч1 ичЧ,1

=== PAGE 685 ===

KR§1VA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 94
605
4 
3fW m -ф з ^^4135^44111441
О friend, b y that deed alone one could asses 
his prow ess, strength, reputation and praise. H e 
happens to be the soul o f ail.
MlR'dldlciM
W&lTCT гГ сГ§9Т 
*1о^ч1,мГцуГ^Ь1 тш кттт 
ш wiwet 
л ё г к и й fa^i 
fdRi^T: ^ T T ^ W T c T R T t t M W im ^ll 
Tjt: ufrfw 
ti&iud щпт ЩЩ1 
Ч*ГйШ|)н1ч<^ Ч & x||UjqfRvMHII4<SN 
Pdrijata said- О dear, the earth is the base o f 
all 
the 
seven 
continents, 
the 
forest, 
the 
m ountains, the oceans, M e ru m ountain, seven 
heavens and up to Brahmaloka. B e lo w the earth 
there 
are 
seven 
nether 
w orlds. 
T h e 
globe 
com prises o f all o f them w h ich is created b y 
B ra h m a . T h e same B rah m a resides in the hair- 
pits o f M a h a visn u in a tin y fo rm .
vtlhlPl ш£г f ^ r R r 
xfl 
■R T3^ 4ldVliVIV^ 
4<4ldH:ll4'HI
Because the num ber o f globes is equivalent to 
the num ber o f the hair-pits on the b o d y o f 
M a h a visn u . T h e same M ah a visn u is the sixteenth 
part o f lord K rsn a .
R il *T?T:
ЩЧТТ hl4ct)-UI xl 1% Щ 
Tnggfn^oll
Th erefore 
h o w 
could 
the 
reputation, 
the 
strength and the g lo ry o f lord H a ri be described? 
T h e re fo re , 
cowherdess 
M a d h a vl 
w h o 
is 
a 
glutton, can never k n o w about h im .
ТЩЦЦЩ
nS
ЩГТ 
Ч 
^
 ^vtlPd 4|Гч«Г:1
тг дтарт чщт ч Ш ^ртчп^п
M a d h a v l 
said- 
О 
U d d h a v a , 
these 
cowherdesses 
are uselessly 
speaking w ith ou t 
understanding m y w o rds. Th erefore , y o u please 
listen to m e w h atever I have to say.
^ n p it R(UJJ: 
Rn|uTt
4jcft ’MKMdtul ч1ч4ч: f ^ j f % :ll ^ ll
L o r d V is n u becom es Saguna according to his 
o w n sweet w ill and w ith his o w n sweet w ill he 
becom es Nirguna. T h e same lord, in order to rid 
the earth o f her burden incarnate on the earth in 
the fo rm o f a cow herd.
^T: ytiunR Ric&i: 
ШсЩ1
951^|^1ч,ч ты ^ Ч 'ИмРп ^ hWch^ II^ II 
t 
taHlfa TJSTS? W Rt HI4cb-Ucbll 
cTSITSfrr TTgxT: ■НгЧ -CTUrTT c(rH 
1^X11
foqfacJxHld тТ 
^ fr ШЦ1
cfrf 
щ -4t ^pft fh n
сТТОсГ iPTTJTPT хГ 15Щ[1 
[*чГн4хН)4 
df^VlMUI^II^^II
In case the V e d a s , the Puranas, the siddhas, 
the ascetics, the noble souls, B ra h m a , S iv a , Sesa 
and his devotees are n ot aw are o f his true 
identity, then h o w could a foolish cowherdesses 
like m e, w h o is a glutton, k n o w about him ? S till 
О son, y o u listen to m y truthful w ords just n o w . 
A r e all the virtues o f the lord including his 
duties, his strength, reputation, strength ,prow ess, 
costum es, siddhis 
and 
all 
other 
virtues 
are 
beyond description. L o r d K rs n a w h o m o ve at 
w ill in definite fo rm , can be be yon d description? 
W h a t is the nam e o f the Nirguna suprem e soul? 
W h a t is his fo rm .
fajjuifq xf fauj|i$ixj 
WIAR: I
^
 xT fgPTTWt ЧЩ 
xt
Ш Rk IcI Ч?,14й1 4 
T4i
ТПТТ татт^г 
TJST cT W t Scf^: W ^ll^ill 
таг Ч<Ч1гНМН1^с(Ч"Н^1
rmMxRht xi
II
A l l the foolish cowherdesses are denouncing 
m e w ith ou t understanding m y w o rd s. H o w could 
this foolish cowherdess k n o w about the lord w h o 
is beyond nature, tru th fu l, the fo rm o f eternal 
flam e , the supreme soul, the inexplicable lord 
and the one w h o takes to a hum an fo rm in order 
to grace his devotees
qdlKM'^ xpjn Ш МсРГЗЯчУ TOI
ebfutdl 'URTT dKfletrHdd 1WIIV9o||

=== PAGE 686 ===

606
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
fcWRWT xf 
4Hldd)l
ЩГСадЩ ТГГЧТ ФПГ 
I!\э^м
'R W dl 
xf W r^ TTI
K a m a la the spouse o f V is n u w h o happens to 
be the m other o f the three w orlds serves at his 
feet like a slave getting p a n icky. H e happens to 
be V is n u m a y a , Miilaprakrti, eternal and the form 
o f B ra h m a . S till she rem ains panicky rem aining 
on his right side, S im ila rly the goddess Sarasvati 
getting 
terrified 
becomes 
non-pulsed 
and 
is 
unable to recite his g lo ry, then h o w could the 
V e d a s recite the g lo ry o f the lord.
Ш 
: I
ъ тр ш хп 1V9 э 11
ijesf ш г а 
^ т ш й m d w q i
^
 
^TTSSrRR 4Thfl 'адТОЩ ЗГУ 'R:llt9'tfll
O n hearing the w ords o f cowherdess, U d d h a va 
w as flooded w ith devotion and he felt em otional 
in his b o d y . H e then started crying and getting 
fainted, 
he 
fell 
do w n 
on 
the 
ground. 
O n 
regaining consciousness he devoted his m in d at 
the lotus-like feet o f the lord and considered 
h im se lf to be o f no consequence before the 
cowherdesses 
and 
he 
spoke 
to 
them 
w ith 
devotion .
SRi 
ifrTHt 
'MHfiUHl
m 
xf д а д 
w i |\э ч 11
gfursri щ Tpj<pi <я{й|ыгзднч№*ктч,| 
зге ^сдт щшт re reire^srere ^рт
U d d h a v a 
said- 
O f 
all 
the 
continents 
Ja m b u d vlp a 
is 
quite 
graceful 
glorious 
and 
pleasant, on w h ich the auspicious land o f Bharata 
is lodged. T h is is the auspicious place fo r the 
traders and is the best place fo r their auspicious 
com m ercial activities, because the m erit earned 
b y pe rfo rm ing good deeds b y anyone in the land 
o f B harata is enjoyed at another places.
SRT *TKddif <T 
crnjl
Ч1ч1чЦ1©адШ RcT 4<4ft4<rl4J№t9ll 
W rsft- hlfachT SRJT RR1T
чЭ
f4 rR Ч ^ Г -d <|£||4(l: Ш<ЧЧ1
T h is land o f Bharata has been pu rified w ith 
the dust fro m the feet o f R a d h a w h ic h is quite 
spotless, graceful, m eritorious and auspicious. 
E v e n m ore than that, o f all the ladies in the land 
o f Bharata, the cowherdesses are considered 
quite graceful, w h o alw ays have the privile ge o f 
havin g an audience w ith R a d h a , lo okin g at her 
lotus-like feet.
q fy q t jq ^ lf u i Н ТЩ РТ re ЩЯЩ Т1
ЧЫ151спГш1 т а «jjarmmiltddil W l
% яадге 
«гададягп
< И Ы 1 ^ |Г ч TTtqfqi 
чУй?|)Ц_11
B ra h m a 
had 
perform ed 
tapas 
fo r 
sixty 
thousand years in order to achieve dust o f the 
lotus-like feet o f R a d h a but w as unsuccessful. 
R a d h a the dw eller o f a Goloka is dearer to K rs n a 
m ore than his o w n life . She had to be b o m as the 
daughter o f V rsabh ana due to the curse 
o f 
Srldam a, such o f the people w h o are devoted to 
lord K rsn a , are also devoted to R a d h a , B ra h m a 
and other gods do not com pare to the sixteen part 
o f cowherdesses.
ф ь и т^ м fcM H lfd 
4 ^ c R :l
■ЩТ 
T |jq |^ 
^ l l < ^ l
T h e devotion o f lord K rs n a is w e ll k n o w to 
S iva the lord o f the yogis, R a d h a , cow herdesses, 
the cow herds and the dw ellers o f Goloka.
ЩП 
M l
SRTtSij «hciehrqiSsuMioi ulg>H recT:I
ш^зтпгет 
p refer ге^згеадге-й-*
■Rspt Xt 4 d iw ifq c M g ^ E T c h l ^ l
№T T fq fs R ifr VreT Rfiffitf ^ F U F R f r i K t q i l
4 rehfare: RTf 
Wtfxt 4<Rlc44:l
■qr^it 
rerwr refretr ч й re 
16 ъ 11
Sanatkum ara and B ra h m a also k n o w a little 
about h im . T h e siddhas and the devotees also

=== PAGE 687 ===

KRS14A-JANMA-KHA1VPA, CHAPTER 94
607
k n o w n about h im . I have been graceful b y 
com ing 
to 
G o k u la . 
T h e 
cowherdesses 
have 
served as the teacher to m e , as a result o f w hich I 
have achieved the infallible devotion o f lord. I 
shall not go back to M a th u ra n o w . F o r all future 
births 
I 
shall 
serve 
the 
cow herds 
and 
cowherdesses and spend m y life reciting the 
nam e o f K rs n a because out o f the devotees o f 
lord K rs n a , n o one could be superior to the 
cowherdesses. T h e type o f devotion w h ich has 
been achieved b y the cowherdesses has not been 
achieved b y anyone else.
«tivllcicijcu-ct
ftgTJTT T R IT t <3RIT «R tT -fo r Cbc-Hewll
CRT 
W
:
s r t t ^Hchhrli 4: yld m ra i 4f?tsRm
K a la va ti said- T h e manes had three daughters 
nam ed D h a n y a , M e n a and K a la v a ti and all the 
three o f us roam abate on earth according to our 
sw eet w ill. O u t o f these three, the chaste D h a n ya 
becam e the w ife o f Janaka and the m other o f 
Sita, both m y s e lf and R a d h ik a are b o m w ith ou t 
any hum an contact. Because o f the curse o f 
S rld a M a , R a d h a had to be b o m as the daughter 
o f V rsabh ana on earth and because o f the curse 
o f Sanatkum ara,' the three sisters had to be b o m 
on earth.
w й язН 44twrq;i
firat srfTRt чтзгцт w fgwj щ wn ъщ\\
O n c e all the three o f us w e n t to S veta-dvlpa 
located on the ocean o f m ilk w ith the m in d filled 
w ith de vo tio n , in order to have an audience w ith 
lord V is n u .
arepSIRlf? 4 ?«T cb)4!<^|oSVII4 ?l
p>:ii^n
A t that po in t o f tim e Sanatkum ara the lord o f 
the yogis also arrived there but all the three o f us 
did not w elcom e h im b y standing, w h ich enraged 
h im and he pronounced a curse o n us.
ЗсПгГ
TJSlfWcT 
*T iff: W f Ч Ш П
Rc&nfuifildl
Sanatkum ara said- О foolish girls, y o u w o u ld 
be reborn on earth and becom e the w ive s o f 
hum an 
beings, 
because 
o f 
the 
arrogance 
displayed b y y o u . Y o u w o u ld n ot be able to go 
back to the heaven again.
flench
'rtlfii 
UlcJrtll
SRJT fad! 5 
tltfTRf IRgpczr 
tlRf «ted I 
%|{с)Ьч1г11
^ffrpTT УсГГВ1 хГПЧЧН 
(vfbiiw 
ъ givfradli 
^fijGTfd Ittett RTsgt 
% ^rii< ^ii
ifiHFTdlfdf WT 
^Н)<КёГтПт1)|
Thereafter the sage w as som ehow pleases and 
granted boon to all the three o f us. H e said to 
M e n a y o u w o u ld be b o m and becom e the w ife o f 
H im a la y a from the amsa o f V is n u and y o u 
w o u ld have a daughter nam ed P a rva tl. D h a n y a 
w o u ld be the w ife o f Janaka the great ascetic in 
w hose house La k s m I in the fo rm o f Sita w o u ld 
incarnate. A t the end o f the Dvapara y o u w o u ld 
be b o m as K a la v a ti and becom e the w ife o f V rs 
abhana, V a is y a and w o u ld be k n o w n as chaste 
K a la v a ti. R a dh a the dw eller o f Goloka w o u ld be 
the daughter o f K a la v a ti w h o w o u ld incarnate on 
earth because o f the curse o f Srldam a. Th e re is 
no doubt about it.
sl§l?T?)41uii чкмскиЫ rii 
srm ftR# Tjscft -щ т р ф т ъ т щ \ \<> c \ \
Sri K rsn a , the lord o f M ah e svara, B ra h m a and 
Sesa w o u ld also incarnate o n the land o f Bharata 
in order to rid the earth o f her burden.
cbciratft f r o :
'ЛёгдтН?^ RlHlcfi Tiftitypt ц -щщ;и яRII 
Thereafter 
accom panied 
b y 
her 
daughter 
R a d h a , 
Vrsabhana 
and 
K a la v a ti 
w o u ld 
be

=== PAGE 688 ===

608
b r a h m a v a i v a r t a -m a h A p u r a i^a m
relieved o f the cycle o f the birth and death and 
arrived in Goloka. Th ere is no doubt about it.
SFRT R r ^ rt r $ % t r j R TfwriTri
RfM! % зт RtcfrRT^R R^T ill IЯ о © I
«ЬС'ЧМ fqcojvtl^i R 
Гч<*^|
fR4T fRRrRT тг1%ттт %4T fR 4 fifty fell |5> о ?||
r ^ § :^r з т^ с ^ Ь т
)JR ftRprt cfRtlVR ^ Ы )4ЙН|Гч<*1:11?о^|
0^11
RP%R yiufRfi<* cmR
fjpr Ttihn 
^ 44,1
m m $ЧКГ*Ч1^ И trtqfvb^ll^o^ll
^fywjftMi^lHi f««5Hi Rftmqfai
& cR: Ч Ш 1 R 
Я # : Щ:
fipfnr?R frftWR TT: '■ЙчЛЧ’Ч! щ : 11^0 411
D h a n y a too w o u ld go to V a ik u n th a together 
w ith S lta. M e n a k a w ith the bo o n o f Parvatl 
w o u ld be turned into a Siddhayoginl and at the 
end o f kalpa she w o u ld proceed to V is n u lo k a 
and reside there delightfu lly like La k s m I. W h o 
can achieve g lo ry w ith ou t facing the painfu l 
situation. 
A fte r 
facing 
the 
difficu lt 
situation 
according to ones o w n deeds, one achieves the 
inaccessible 
pleasures. 
In 
earlier 
tim es 
the 
daughters o f the m anes enjoyed all the pleasures 
in the heaven. Because o f the boon fro m B rah m a 
and b y at the adoring the feet o f lord V is n u they 
w ere treated like La k s m I. Thereafter h avin g an 
audience w ith lord V is n u or their deeds were 
destroyed. Because o f the grace o f same lo rd, w e 
m et 
K u m a ra 
and 
w e 
achieved 
the 
divine 
kno w le dge fro m his m o u th. Sri K rs n a happens to 
be 
the 
lord o f B ra h m a , 
V is n u , 
S iva , 
gods, 
siddhas and the entire universe. H e is beyond 
P ra k rti, Nirguna, unattached, o f all the best and 
m oves at w ill.
frJuT: Ч Ш Т R 
Я # : WR) 
r p r 
RTgft r gnfaiT Rtfgrrafini
Ч Ш r 
i
r ^
jn ^ r ^ r fa^iRi r лпяад\пя<»чи
cfRRU 
R^T RlftRt Н1сЬЧНсЫ:1
ЗПгФТУЕП^ ^ ■pi xtfeTOi^fquTtll^oll
Tu la sI said- In all the creatures the gods are 
variou sly lodged, V is n u happens to be the life 
(breathing), B ra h m a , lord o f consciousness and 
the m in d , the goddess P rakrti, control all the 
strength 
and 
intelligence, 
S iva 
controls 
the 
eternal kn o w le dg e , D h a rm a h im se lf appears in 
the fo rm o f n o b ility, lord K rs n a w h o is Nirguna, 
the suprem e soul, eternal B rah m a n and beyond 
P rakrti, rem ains as the w itness o f all the deeds 
w h ich are perform ed b y all the people. T h e jiva 
happens to be the recitation o f the sam e, the sun 
and the m o o n reflect the eyes, Sarasvatl resides 
in the tongue, the earth dw ells in the skin and the 
Lo ka p ala s in the arm s.
ЗКНЙеС fjfRTRT R R if W f o 
RRT RRfc R R lf 4 ^ (R )fw p T T :lim il 
HRTRRpfc44T55(4H RRpcT Meld RRTI 
RRVR ТО Т RRrOT КП*Й 4)Г'М'1 т^ ГИ Ш 
cFffrni gnfuit Rl$ft fP : ppf R r Pptri 
ЗМ у|41 R $,EQ|?R ERR 
g p T II^ ^ II
A l l o f them serve the soul in one w a y or the 
other. 
T h e 
soul 
loves 
them 
all. 
A s 
in 
the 
assem bly o f the hum an beings, the people go to 
the k in g , 
sim ilarly all the Jivas, 
go to the 
suprem e soul. T h e yogis m editate u p on he lord 
w ith great devotion. K rsn a happens to be the 
witness o f the deeds o f all the people, therefore, 
w h o can keep a secret o f a n y deed fro m him ? 
L o r d 
K rs n a 
w h o 
pervades 
all 
the 
people 
propagates fo r them
"tpfmfxnu ifRTpR
злит! faunyy fgmf) rttr^
r %rtii 
RFRRWI: 
RfR spf$R R*R:ll?o^ll
dilfcHtflcflR
TIT «UHI^R <23J?R ЧсПЧГЫ^УГШ11
% fR^r: R f RHfR RPTRTIW'KI 
R IM q fW l RRT 
Rfcfajj «JR:I 
m 
ш
 tr m зг#вт R te R iiw i

=== PAGE 689 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 95
609
K a lik a said- A l l the children, the old and 
yo u n g and three types o f hum an beings including 
the gods and the siddhas k n o w K rs n a pretty w e ll. 
A t the present m o ve m e n t, it w o u ld be o n ly w ise 
to brin g R a d h ik a back to consciousness w h o is 
ly in g fainted. 
О U d d h a va , 
yo u therefore do 
som ething 
fo r 
that. 
B rin g 
her 
back 
the 
consciousness.
м 1ч
<fTt) 
'flU'4(uR«i№ ЧЩ1
35^ •fWl’flVhW fchehtWlftt 
JRTR fT5 RRmf -qiwrfa 
3^:1 
T 
ТТШГН1 
^IWTl W I I ^ I I
cRt 
W [ l
U d d h a v a said- О virtuous one, О m other o f 
the universe, y o u regain y o u r consciousness, I 
happen to be the servant o f the devotees o f K rs 
na. Th erefore О m other be com passionate on m e. 
I intend to return M a th u ra . I am controlled b y 
som ebody else like the puppet as the bull is 
controlled 
b y 
the 
person 
w h o 
yokes 
h im , 
sim ilarly I am also controlled b y the lord o f the 
universe.
ffw sftsn?J^o RfTo 
Tracery'
о ЗтТ° •TTOpU' 
r:ltR-«ll

=== PAGE 690 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 95
609
Chapter - 95
Radhas Discourse to Uddhava 
ЧТТШПТ Зсгта
w gxr: 
i m я м u f a i
то 
^
ii^ii
W
 -qft 
- ^ R fa^ERTTI 
qhrtfe: wfwfevTr 'Rferr
Narayana said- On hearing the words of 
Uddhava, Radhika, regained her consciousness, 
she than occupied the gem-studded lion throne 
and expressed the pain of her heart with very
sweet words. At that point of time, the 
cowherdesses were serving her moving the white 
fly-whisks.
<|R|ch(c<|^
W it W
 c|?R <*T Rt rf(T)fgW t ТРТЦТ1
awtSTzmqf чг^ц Ararat «ra w rtn ^ n
ЩГТ Ref ТЩТ 3WR Щ
1 
Ч1Ч1*К tflSWM'il R cS ^im i
Radhika sad- О son you go back to Mathura, 
but don't forget me while enjoying the comforts 
there, because if you do so there would be no 
other sin greater than, that in the universe. You 
go to Mathura and narrate my words to lord Krs 
na who is all blissful and try to bring him to me .
'sftft'j'jFrfrT 
Н И dlqVl 4fnHJ 
GT^cT зкздт щ 
confer §:feR tiim 
fe ^ rfe jrate ^ 4ifRT ^ 
fW SHl %f%4t 
faFTTSScRR R ^ c lll^ ll
tiyirtu Щ rW ’4 
rfrd'jcH^I
FR lfq R4W 
ЧчПн
т й % f 
w m ^rr*cjsS4^n^ii
Which one of the woman has faced the 
separation of such a type of husband in her life? 
Is there anyone else more grief-stricken than 
myself? What type of consolation are you 
providing me? It is no more proper to console 
me. О Uddhava, without the soul one remains of 
no consequence. The love with Hari, the fortune, 
offering of new respect every day, inaccessible 
love, speaking in seclusion and new physical 
union are always remembered by me. There is 
nothing else in my mind. Waking up during the 
night from sleep, my suffering is increased .
■ЧЩЗТ f t cRT fw 4 T SlTcKWfll 
ЗЙЗГЧёЩЗЙЧ Ш '*Ч!ЧЧ>Я улт^пяп 
ч ^TFTtfq gReirt ъ чттч;|
щщттатит фЩ^гг TTTRRR:ll?o|| 
ч(%жя R зШ R УЧЧ1МКН.1 
w t RTR R ifhRTq TRt ^ 4 fe lt RrPR'II

=== PAGE 691 ===

610
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURArjf AM
датт усгЛяг 
grot щ |:i3R^T4;i
tj 
'JilHlId ftt f^TTil^
О son, y o u w ill surely redeem m e since I am 
d ro w n in g in the ocean o f grie f. Th ere is no m erit 
greater fo r a person in the universe than to 
p ro vide protection to som eone. It is greater than 
the m erit o f visitin g the h o ly places. M y m in d is 
quite d ifficu lt to console and I am unable to 
console it. I alw ays devote m y m in d at the lotus­
like feet o f lord K rs n a , his virtues reputation, 
lo ve . D ro w n in g in the ocean o f love again and 
again, m y m in d does not rem ain stable and 
therefore it rem ains alw ays unstable. B u t yo u tell 
m e h o w m a n y o f the damsels had to face this 
type o f g rie f, w ith o u t m e w h ich one o f the 
dam sel could realise the g rie f o f m y separation 
fro m K rsn a .
ттйтт ■щзщ? w fef£rmfacT4i 
дат jtfert 4ifRi <*|Гчн)з даштияз п 
Щ m Ulfr ЛсШ ^ 
rf UFTrit ЭДПЧЧ 
д а m датпт f 
^dini ■grfr^H^ii
T h is type o f g rie f w as k n o w n either to S ita or 
to m yse lf. Th ere is n o one else in the three 
w o rld s w h ose m in d is so p a in fu l as com pared to 
m e . C a n any w o m a n believe in m y pain after 
lo o k in g at m e. О son U d d h a v a , w h ich one o f the 
ladies has faced such a type o f grief.
ITfcfra^>fr
Th ere is no one else am ong the w o m a n w h o is 
so b a dly suffering like R a d h a , w h o is suffering 
fro m separation fro m his lord and is devoid o f 
fortune and is com pletely grief-stricken. Th ere is 
no one else am ong the damsels feeling m ore 
painful at heart than R a d h ika .
■щтщ сБгЧс^г д ч й ? ! w m 4 f^ l
xt тпТдап i ^ 11
In the universe the husband happens to be 
kalpavrksa w h o w as achieved b y m e , but have 
been deprived o f the same because o f the cruel 
destiny.
sfcrc -w m дат ■rjfcro 
да: i 
даттдадад^р^да^#тщ;| i 
11
W ith the lo o k at his lotus-like feet as w e ll as 
the face like the m o o n and his costum es, m y life , 
m y birth and m y love has been successful. 
идащШтит tset щитт: st^di.-i 
зпсчт 
ттог 
дагт чттД Штт! дат^гддащРт! 
т п Ш ТЩТ даТТ f^TRTTfft г1чЪсН*^11 н 11 
W ith the hearing o f w hose nam e all the five 
pranas becom e activated and sprout like flow ers 
and the soul is fille d w ith affection, the one w h o 
touched m e at the tim e o f conjugal pleasure and 
w ith that I enjoyed the g lo ry the three w o rlds. 
H o w can I forget such a lord b y getting any 
am ount o f riches.
WT yu|i|cj 
*T:|
ч Ш тй ^1 fgiR T ?$ст Ш й farfir: i r о i i 
ri 
fejRfri сдай даНтдатч;| 
з^трдатт w
 
да^щщ ян
датт зт ттдат ш fsmmfir *r t лбщ! r я 11 
дач !ч4щчт#гт ч 
ч ^ mm: i
rjmwri- ч f^grr.MR^ii
дал m ттдат ш f^wnfR t 
i я * 11
T h e one w h o is victorious o ve r the three 
w orlds; is quite virtuous and has been created b y 
B rah m a or w h o happens to be the creator o f the 
B rah m a , w h o is the bestow er o f all the riches, is 
m ore peaceful than kalpavrksa, is the lord o f 
La k s m I, quite charm ing the lord o f the universe, 
the seed o f all besides bring the suprem e soul 
and the lord. H e happens to be m y husband. H o w 
can 1 forget h im b y receiving a n y am ount o f 
riches? 
T h e 
one 
w hose 
beauty 
cannot 
be 
com pared w ith the m o o n , the g o d o f lo ve and 
A s vin lk u m a ra or in other w o rld s, w h o else is 
incom parable in the three w orlds in so fa r as this 
qualities are concerned and w hose lotus-like feet 
are adored b y B ra h m a , S iv a and Sesa, h o w can I

=== PAGE 692 ===

K?$I4A-JANMA-KHA]ypA, CHAPTER 95
611
forget such a lord b y getting any am ount o f 
riches.
z* 44lS<qj
^Sfrr ^
 
stn^T dH^Rvi'4.1^411
Jdfcftu
^rfbTd^T AmUorii^
ii 
щ ф ^[Ц ^srfwr яКк*тш:1 
ддт дт ччсгт щ fawfifag gftg^iiyvsii 
g«wiarfa gratsg -g^wrfg
дчщ i r c 11
il^ihcdifdd) 
hfuFTT: iMsftr gi
тпр: ig^ERfg^r и?т?ггд^т: ^ trir^ii 
chIHW длн: ТЩ<|: w tf gt§ffrcR:l 
^ isThv^ TgcRT^xf 1«('Ч1)с|155гН«^*:11^о||
ддт дт дччт чтБ fgwrftr д it зщ| 
шт 4Tfe чзз чч m g|gil\fiRii^n 
m g gtafgf 
ч grfggf я-uadl i
ч 
ч хг 
% дт дчт^д eft ittrii 
щддддгзччттд %дят дчдт! fgfir: 1 
ч 
hulwg glrfl^iuit ^3 * ^ :1 1 3 3 1 1 
Th ose w h o visualise his pleasant fo rm even in 
dream , 
they 
start 
m editating 
upon 
h im 
throughout 
the 
day 
and 
n ight 
continuously 
diso w n ing everyth in g. B y the virtue o f w h o m , 
the m ountains are turned into w ater and the dry 
w o o d 
becom es 
flu id , 
the 
dried 
trees, 
start 
sprouting and are laiden w ith flow ers, the w in d 
stops and the sun, m o o n and ocean stand in 
devotion . О son, h o w can I forget such a type o f 
husband b y getting any am ount o f riches, Fee lin g 
p a n ic k y o f w h o m , the w in d b lo w s, the sun bu m s, 
the clouds, po ur rains, the fire b u m s, the death 
roam s about am ong the creatures, w ith the fear 
o f w h o m the trees sprout tim e ly and the ocean, 
the planet, the sages and the gods engaged 
them selves in their respective duties, the one 
w h o 
is the 
death fo r tim e, 
appears 
as 
the 
destroyer in the fo rm o f S iva and happens to be 
the lo rd o f B ra h m a . T h e one w h o is independent 
and h im se lf is the fo rm o f the soul, h o w can I 
forget such a type o f lord b y getting any am ount
o f riches. О devotee o f the lo rd, I don't have the 
kn ow ledge 
to turn m y 
face 
fro m h im . 
N o 
intellectual can console m e , S a vitrl, Sarasvatl, 
V e d a s , p o st-V e d ic literature, the ascetics the 
noble people the gods, the serpent A n a n ta h avin g 
a thousand hoods, B ra h m a the creator o f the 
V e d a s , S iva the teacher o f the yogis and Ganesa 
are unable to console m e.
Г4У^ШГухЫчрц| тп%^ 
4f?T:l 
сетстшвт g g<f g *33 §:*i ^ р т ^ - н з * ! 
fftgR: *T ohWVxl дпсш д 
xTI
дддгст -ф&т чдт^д hm V pni 
*jfg* 
зя зп д ч -д щ д д н з^п
T h e one w h o is visible , his m o ve m e n t could 
attract som e one but the one w h o is invisible and 
w ith ou t 
any 
path 
w h o 
can 
visualise 
his 
m ovem ent. T h e g ood or bad or pleasure or pain 
are over w ith the passage 
o f tim e, 
all. the 
elem ents 
are 
controlled b y the 
tim e, 
w h ic h 
cannot averted. О son, y o u get up and go to the 
city o f the M a th u ra , since y o u are anxious to go 
to M ath u ra. I understand that it is d iffic u lt to 
rem ain w ith ou t K rs n a , w h ich is alw ays p a in fu l. 
T h e one w h o is separated fro m h im , has alw ays 
to suffer from pain.
vyg xi^Mrsi dtg дярдр*тщ р1 
TifcfngxR gtgr
W t T ito ^gr д^|дх^дпстщ||^ 11
Reaching there y o u w ill m eet the m oon -faced 
K rsn a w hose sight rem oves birth , death and old 
age. A t these w ords o f R a d h ika and fin ding her 
suffering from the pain o f the separation fro m 
K ysn a, U d d h a v a cried aloud.
tffTTo
*ratagg*f°
Jo ЗтГ° ЯТС^ЧТ0 
Т:М^ЧИ

=== PAGE 693 ===

612
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
m
 quaicrfddiiUsiFT:
Chapter - 96
D e s c r ip tio n o f th e m o v e m e n t o f tim e b y 
R a d h a
ЧТТЩЩЗсПд
% wt Tprenfssmtrii^ii 
ш ъ trrsrat ’Thrt w j 
«тет 
nsnfg^grRiT4;imi
Narayana said- Uddhava was ready to proceed 
to Mathura but was feeling upset and had fallen 
on the lotus-like feet of Radha. He was filled 
with emotion and overwhelmed with the 
separation from Radha and was crying aloud. At 
that movement the cowherdesses Madhavl, with 
her mind filled with love spoke to him while 
weeping.
тттЕГоц-уга
чЭ
fans w t w* ^
 
di(^T4.n^|i
ir^r ъ ъ r^wft niirait f5F3m?5r$qjmi 
m ts 1тРШ ш г а
35ГГЕГ Щ
 
TTfijcFTRlIMI
Madhavl said- О Uddhava, in case you think it 
proper you wait for while, I shall extend to you 
the deep knowledge which is occupying your 
mind. О virtuous one, you put a question to 
Radha who happens to be the mother of the three 
worlds. The same is inaccessible in the Vedas 
and the Puranas besides being secretive. Thus 
speaking the foremost of the cowherdesses took 
her seat in the assembly. Thereafter Radhika with 
a peaceful mind spoke sweet words to Uddhava.
ЦЗДсБТ 4c|4rmfd £|IAlcbl<*l XR; TR; i
> 
О 
чД
ЗГРА 
^c(eh44)C,14<444l’^l R 11
Uddhava said- A person arrives in the universe 
alone and departs alone from the universe, A 
creature or a person has to face the reward of his 
deeds performed by him earlier.
cR^TT 
ijRT: guflfler
чЭ
fHIT 
^TTSi qj4u1<4iRi4dr)llt9ll
A person takes his birth because of his deeds 
and disappears from the universe because of his 
deeds. He achieves the pleasure, pain, fear, grief 
and everything else because of his deeds.
дпЫг яИтгШтщ# 
xnf?r ^nidii 
Trnf^cF w Xjrf^lRTlr ^rt ЩХТТ ^ 1 
w n w f Ч ХТЙга' 
^ 
Hq>5R^II^ II 
^diiwiKTJi 
%m\ cRfurlni 
Ы ш т: W fOT: жхр ЧНсЫта-.П^оИ 
ГсЬГгТЭТЧ 
1Щ VdircyVHdiHWRI 
щщ 
drwrfii жтт фыл^сьчм^м
When the enjoyments are left out a person is 
bom again in the universe and faces all the 
enjoyment. He arrives in the universe because of 
his deeds and goes back because of his deeds, 
therefore О chaste lady, whatever gems you have 
given to me cannot accompany me to the heaven. 
Therefore they are of no used to me. О goddess 
you are like the beautiful boat to cross the ocean 
of the universe. Lord Krsna also makes other to 
cross over the ocean of universe. He himself the 
sailor. Therefore, you bestow me the gift by 
which I should be able to cross the ocean of the 
universe. After receiving the gratification I shall 
go to Mathura to meet Krsna.
xjt xrt chHhfd W : ^тттт тТ xpirafti
fxRjW 5T^l<3iHt 
rf Ш cRII^II
О mother, you kindly let me know the 
movement of time for the gods, the human 
beings, ancestors and the Brahmaloka.
Щ^Г 
xfat 
-snfiT 
ЦФТг1ФТ1Ч 
СЬЧН1Н4М^М
Lotus faced one you spell out a remedy for me 
by which I should be able to cross the movement 
of the time and achieve the abode of the lord.

=== PAGE 694 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 96
613
<Tsgr:«Hferaiiir«ii
Because yo u reside in the heart o f the one 
w hose lotus-like feet are adored b y B rah m a , 
S iv a , Sesa and gods fro m a distance and meditate 
upon h im through out the day and night.
ЗЩсПгг сГЕГ: ^ - jt ЗЦПТ ФЧгЛНЧИ
w r t 
m i ^4 11
O n hearing the w ords o f U d d h a v a , lotus face 
R a d h ika sm iled, w ip in g out her tears w ith a 
cloth, she started speaking.
■щ|сгга
ctttifu я$чч<&сц
нйк 
щч ^ Tfir 
w i
R a d h ika said- О U d d h a v a , y o u have put up 
this question at the instance o f M a d h a v L Firs t o f 
all y o u tell m e that the ladies are considered to be 
quite 
delicate, 
ones 
therefore 
w h at 
type 
o f 
kn ow ledge can I im part to yo u?.
^TtgT chTHTTM дщ vjfFTlfa
W
 Ч?РН^1Ч trg ъПИ>1э||
О son, the spotless m ovem en t o f the tim e is 
k n o w n o n ly to lord K rs n a , besides B ra h m a , S iva , 
Sesa and the V e das.
fibi%l£c;i4 *Tl)uT TRTt *TFrf%
^ргшт фГО1с)сетл 
я тч и зй и ^ ц
bird I* ^rrftr 
^ FtiMhUI
cfcWhfd'Wfilct ш гф hl?VI
О son, according to the V e d a s , the noble 
people also are aware o f the same to some extent. 
N o w I am going to tell y o u som ething w h ich I 
had heard fro m the m outh o f lord K rsn a in the 
Rasamandala 
o f 
the 
Goloka. 
I 
have 
also 
witnessed the same in the Goloka, V a ik u n th a and 
Brahmaloka, the same Kdla-cakra (movement of 
lim e ), is being spelt out b y m e, yo u listen to it.
^ЩТ ГчтП| 
Н I 9б!?Uchinch*4 ^Tl
dfi!Hlch«T W PW ntn^nFTf ^ ЩГсПТН 
grcuui chHufu 'qqiPIUd 4hisdl:l 
TH’k U H 
gisra ift 
яп
Ч'ЯрЬ W W ЧШ ehicdehM ^UdUbMI
frftjf ^ 
1 ^ ? 11
Ш : Wfr 
f%4T 
^IrtFTTI
rf fq^sq- eblrBlR
О best o f the frien d, I am going to narrate to 
y o u the m ovem ent o f tim e w h ic h influences the 
hum ans, ancestors, Brahmaloka, nether w o rld s, 
the globe and the people w h o live beyond them . 
Y o u 
listen 
to 
m e. 
T h e 
great 
lord 
w h o 
is 
m editated upon b y the intellectuals w h o happen 
to be the lord o f the universe, w h o happens to be 
the killer o f the tim e, the teacher o f the u niverse, 
de vo id o f gunas unattached and w h o happens to 
be the soul o f all, w ith ou t w h o m the bodies are 
destroyed, one can cross the m o ve m e n t o f the 
tim e o n ly be serving the great lord.
зтщ № 
jjift'ni ifgTct
« tit: 
ТЕГЯТ ^uqcffii f^RTII^II
E x c e p t the people w ith great m erit and the 
spotless devotees o f lord K rs n a , the life o f all the 
creatures, is shortened b y S urya.
fcjyqiqfrtcbT-U^tV^dt:
zT 
^Т :11УЦП
^^fvr?R R lT IR ^II
%fi^wi&4N4div^ trhtfhrfiyy дъигагтну^п
A s fo r exam ple y o u lo o k at the fo u r m in d -b o m 
sons o f B rah m a nam ed Sanaka and others. T h e ir 
age rem ains stable, they alw ays rem ains o f five 
years' o ld , w ith ou t yajnopavita like the children 
and in the same fo rm they happen to be the 
teachers o f eleven R u d ra s, tw elve A d ity a s and 
the great intellectuals. T h e y are spotless from 
inside and their faces alw ays w ear the serene 
sm ile, they rem ain w ith ou t garm ents and are 
sanctified w ith the reciting o f the nam e o f K rsn a , 
T h e y are devoted to V is n u and p u rify even the 
h o ly places.
srrsit 
и щ | i ^ <£ 11

=== PAGE 695 ===

614
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
T h e y are free from the w orries o f, V e d as, 
p o st-V e d ic literature and scriptures. T h e ir faces 
are alw ays shining and they recite the nam e o f 
H a ri through out the day and nigh t.
I ^ 11
xf 
rt iffoj *r WlddMJ 
m W W tlt rf 
W ^ % :ll?o ||
Hasari Jj-eqtt «jjaulmaiqj
T h e y are unconcerned w ith the adoration o f 
B ra h m a n . T h e y are pu rified at heart. T h e y have 
o ve r-co m e , 
the 
death. 
T h e y 
are 
im m ensely 
virtuous and o ve r-po w e re d S tirya , w h o is the 
cause o f death. T h e y are k n o w n b y the nam es o f 
San aka, Sanandana and Sanatkum ara, those w h o 
recite their nam es regularly, all their sins are 
re m o ve d and they achieve the m erit o f h avin g the 
bath at the h o ly places. T h e y u ltim ately achieved 
the d e vo tio n o f lo rd H a ri and slavehood o f the 
lord.
^chugdH«h 
cb»5u|| rf fgjTtrPT^I 
gR^cRd: U'9xnrHHc«v4R41(dT^I
4т§ 
н п т wss-gfr bsitii^
n4<*4fd'^H XT 'gR^ddH H J
s r a r i
Y o u lo o k at M a rka n d e ya the son o f sage 
M rk a n d u w h o has achieved the B rah m a n h oo d b y 
m eans o f his g o o d deeds and being illustrious 
and h a vin g d ivin e lustre, he at the age o f ten 
years, b y adoring the lord achieved the life o f 
seven kalpas. T h a n lo o k at V o d h u , Pancasikha, 
Lo m a s a and A s u ri. A l l o f them h avin g been 
freed fro m the deeds, they devote them -selves 
e xclu sive ly. T h e y e njo y the age o f a hundred 
kalpas, th ey alw ays rem ain devo te d at the feet o f 
lord H a ri.
здччт «#г 
чи
fcWl4U| fitf fcty щгцарт W
gR^lcRdT ЗсГ 
^RR4UdR:ll^ll
N o w y o u lo o k at Parasuram a the son o f 
Jam adagni, H a n u m a n , B a li, V y a s a , As'vattham a, 
V ib h lsa n a , K rp a c a rya and Ja m b a van . T h e y w ere 
sanctified because o f their devotion at the feet o f 
H a ri.
R rt%
^
 
11 ? ^ 11
Я|Я^ u^r
Rrru chidRpf 
тпт2шшд>ч.1
w ^ iii4 ii
^ ?R t ч %гтТ й tjct: фдч|(чт:1
PfefHT fgq% RtTcTf '3R:II'Uo ii
сЧЧтУПТрт Ч^ЧГй) M 
R l4 ^n i
щзт 
згрч щ w : дяч чт чт^гагшти 
chW 
ГсН( ^(41
grttw<T: t r
О U d d h a v a , y o u have a lo o k at siddhas the 
sages and the devotees 
o f H a ri am ong the 
hum ans w h o alw ays rem ain devoted at the feet o f 
the lord w ith spotless m in d and e n jo y the long 
life . 
Y o u 
lo o k 
at 
Prahlada 
the 
son 
o f 
H ira n ya ka sip u w h o w as alw ays inim ical to the 
gods. H e also rem ained devoted to lo rd H a r i and 
achieved long life and conquered the m o ve m e n t 
o f tim e . Th e re are innum erable other such people 
also. Th erefore as a result o f p erfo rm in g great 
tapas fo r several births, one is b o m on the 
auspicious land o f B harata. Th o s e w h o don’t 
serve the lord they are foolish and sinners. 
Le a v in g V a s u d e va , w h o so e ver in vo lve s h im s e lf 
in the w o rld ly pleasures and is considered to be a 
great fo o l. H e w illin g ly leavin g aside the nectar, 
consum es the poison. In the universe w h o is the 
w ife o f w h o m , w h o is the son o f w h o m and w h o 
is the brother o f w h o m ? In the universe w h e n 
one is ove r-p o w e re d w ith m isfortune w h o help 
h im except lord K rsn a ? T h is is the reason w h ile 
w h y the noble people recite the nam e o f K rs n a 
throughout the day and n ight.

=== PAGE 696 ===

KR§I4A-JANMA-KHA]4f>A, CHAPTER 96
615
ШЯЩ гППТГЧГЧ V in'W R44:ll^^ll
STFT^F^WN' hfpiaftT4gr gi
^FJJ ^rFTfd ^rR Я^ЩТТ1ТГЕШЧ;11^X11
чтмт g fhtpiT g ^iiun gifg ?прит:1
4F1HT тщгшфчт rRq^qt g тргапГКЦ II
L o r d K rs n a is the destroyer o f the birth, death, 
o ld age and ailm ent, beside re m o vin g all the 
g rie fs . O n ly b y reciting the nam e o f S ri K rsn a , 
the suprem e soul w h o is blissful, one can over­
com e the tim e o r death. О son, y o u listen to m e I 
am g o ing to tell y o u about the life o f the hum ans, 
the ancestors, the gods, B ra h m a , N a g a s , R a ks 
asas and others.
<*зд<ч(Гч 
gigsiR
ж w r gctemi 
n
g w vtlRf fg$grfr g r w n fr g mft gi
itiw itg m g ^ i 
f ^ r m ir ^ ii
*IHR«|tr4di Ч14чтё чя^рдан.! 
g w : gfs^wira^tsg^tT: g^Tiiis<jii 
4T4tuj: g fgggt ^плтйддддг gg-.i 
й gg:ii'k<?u
w\ajfb&ui[fa 
gdtfqfa:!
стадии 14 о и
fgg^r fW ? g fstfrnw g $ur:i 
дпш д ^ щ ^ д H f?g ^ш гдтпц ?ii 
<ндчод<=ут ^издтдгчтиг f^nwgi 
li^ n iq ^ R H g g f^ g g 7 |^ : 11 ч ^ 11 
дга?У
^055^ R|^: g«i4fg-<asifgr«t Ш зппчзн
д^твт: тщх wot д
gtj№: 
<i0ivgjj{«Sf^g'€4rtii4'kii
I am revealing to y o u a deep secret, y o u listen 
to m e attentively. T h e great V ira t is the best 
abode and base o f everyone. Innum erable globes 
are enshrined in his hair-pits, yo u listen to m e 
about the sm allest o f the things called atom . T h e 
tim e starts fro m the atom alone, the same atom 
takes the fo rm o f a ll, is b e yon d discussion,
desired 
the 
m ost w ith 
distinction 
m ultiplies 
variously and also gets because o f separated 
because o f w h ich people it to be one. It is k n o w n 
as the atom o r paramdnu w ith the com bination o f 
three 
anus 
is 
produced 
trasarenu. 
Th re e 
trasarenus m ake a truti. T h is has been ordained 
b y the intellectuals. Thereafter a hundred trutis 
m akes a vedha and three vedhas m ake a lava, 
three lavas m ake a nimesa and three nimesa 
m ake a ksana, the fiv e ksanas m ake a kastha, the 
ten kasthas m ake a laghu and fifteen laghus 
m ake a danda. Y o u listen to its m easure. A sear 
o f w ater should be placed in a vase equal o f six 
palas w ith the hole m ade b y fo u r fingers w ith the 
w ire o f g old. T ill such tim e it rem ains subm erged 
in the w ater, the same is called danda. S im ila rly 
tw o dandas m ake a mahiirta and sixty danda 
m ake a tithi. Its eighth part has been described as 
a prahara. S im ila rly, fo u r praharas m ake a day 
and fo u r praharas m ake a nigh t.
i^ ptr MchlRdqj
Щ & Г Ш : Wl^cfcrlvWllfa^ дпцчи
gwr:i
gtRufongtf?g yrc&Rreftdgrrim^u
Fifte e n tithis m ake a fo rtn ig ht w h ich are o f 
tw o 
types 
k n o w n 
as 
the 
bright 
and 
dark 
fortnights. T h e tw o fortnights m ake a m o n th and 
tw o m onths m ake a season. S ix season m ake a 
year w h ich are the k n o w n as the spring, sum m er, 
ra in y, w in te r, autum n and cold.
gttf: щфт 
«HfafePtafarn:! 
gggrt: зга?щ ^нтддд tig дпц\эи 
зуддттг ggntsgfqftr w M t fg§:i
^ 5 g^ggi i ч 6 11
tm ii ^гв этгз: ятдптг ятз tjg gi 
3iif^: 
Rpf: тМ 
щ ^т:11
ggrr ftefr g#wt
iftwtg 4Rqj)f3d:i 
gqf gigcrn^t g цт^та^ 
gpf qft g 
МжГ HITO^I

=== PAGE 697 ===

616
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAtfAM
тпьп (<fcrf%ci Pi fijri *|xf w u i
■чтащташФст 
tpg dtimr h 
4<FT 
? P W
 lAwNtTlar x tll^ ll 
jr f ^ f o f in ^ r туаетщг: ж Ш :1
q^uImiTT: ufd4^UT|cfTHIR p<? тШ^ЧИ
% far ^ 
d sm i^ n
m t ъ ш ч \ х(ц 
ч т \ hsiti
c^RfcfcT^ft xnft U^Tt rf sHTt^ftll^l
T h e intellectuals have described five types o f 
years 
k n o w n 
as 
Samvatsara, 
Pravatsara, 
Ilavatsara, Anuvatsara and Vatsara. T h e people 
w h o are w ell-versed in the signs o f tim e or w e ll- 
aw are about the sam e. О U d d h a v a , the tw elve 
m onths m ake a year k n o w n as V a is a k h a , Jyestha, 
A s a d h a , S ravan a, B hadrapada, A s v in a , K a rtik a , 
Margas'Trsa, Pausa, M a g h a , Ph alguna and C aitra. 
C aitra happens to be the last m o n th o f the year, 
the C aitra and V aisakh a m onths represent the 
spring season, the Jyestha and A s a d h a represent 
the sum m er season, H a v a n a and Bhadrapada 
represents the ra in y search, A s'vin a and K a rtik a 
represent the w in te r season, M argaslrsa and Paus 
a represent the autum n and M a g h a and Phalguna 
represent the cold season. Th e re are tw o h a lf 
years k n o w n as Uttarayana and Daksinayana. 
B o th o f them com bined com prise o f a year. T h e 
period fro m the m o n th o f M a g h a to A s a d h a are 
treated to be Uttarйуana w h ile the period from 
Sravan a to Pausa m o n th is treated as Daks 
inayana. T h e span o f n igh t increase fro m the 
m o u th Sravana u p to the m o n th o f Pausa, the 
people w ell-versed in the V e d a s have described 
the bright fortn ight fro m Pratipada to the full 
m o o n d a y as the bright fortnight and fro m the 
first d a y after the fu ll m o o n to the m oonless n ight 
as the dark fortnight. T h e days are counted fro m 
Pratipada, Dvitlya, Trtlya, Caturthl, Pancaml, 
Sasthi, 
Saptami, 
Astami, 
Navaml, 
Dasaml, 
EMdasl, Dvadasi, Trayodasl, Caturdasi and 
Amavasya (m oonless d a y).
Щ Ш 
3 W T -vm )
ifmwrlfr w 
n
w fe if ш 
fayinai ^ r g d w i
^ST 3 ? dW 
^eilqielrril cWTI|\9o||
««biTScii 1
ШТ: 
trar 
dSITIhs ?ll
1 Ш
 f fMtar 
ж чт
ш
 wTfvr: 
xj- 
f^ m ri
щГ^цЕг ЧЩ ЪШ ?
Th ere are tw e n ty eight Naksatras, including 
As'vini, Bharani, KrttiM, Rohini, Mrgasira, 
Ardra, 
Punarvasu, 
Pusya, 
As'lesa, 
Magha, 
Purvdphalguni, Uttaraphalgunl, Hasta, Citra, 
Svati, Visakha, Anuradha, Jyestha, Mula, Piirvas 
adha, Uttarasadha, Sravana, Abhijit, Dhanistha, 
Satabhisd, 
Purvabhadrapada, 
Uttara- 
bhadrapada and Revatl. 
These tw e n ty 
eight 
constellation are believed to the w ive s o f the 
m o o n and the m o o n spent the tim e w ith them one 
b y one. T h o u g h the V e d a s o n ly tw e n ty seven 
constellations as the spouses o f the m o o n , but 
still the shadow o f Sravan a constellation is called 
Abhijit w h ic h m akes the total as tw e n ty eight. 
3Tfafax%cpirE3lfrT 
'PJdTI
pg^T *r psft xT# tlfeuPT 3 W Щ1РЭ*И 
^ 
fret 
xpsto w i
SPIT «Г ^тс(| 
nmiPn«h 1ч?Ш1^9Ц
Ш: f4WT41c(nT Ш 
хГ (сгчМсьн)
«пр 
pajgfrfoarp* д т и э ^ и
РсГ53?дТ 
xf PcRri
vd
gptr fprssrr W d Г)гЦ?1:11'3'ЭИ 
^Trif xr w t 
-ц^сйот Prvinrai 
f ^ « T : 
■^TriTreraTiivsiii

=== PAGE 698 ===

KRSlVA-JANMA-KHAiypA, CHAPTER 96
617
fafe: ШД: ^pT:
cb)(f?Brt Я4МН1ТТ1; gjmt ^ЧсИГчГгП 
qq^-q qi^q$>t|q etjItfq^fdrHrtall\6 ^11 
ТЩГЕТ dfai^^'ifM 
TTffw sm
xl^MMlft ЧРТ^сГ ЙЩБТ ff?r сьШчМ<Я
O n c e in the m on th o f C aitra , the m o o n spent 
'his tim e enjoying the conjugal pleasure w ith his 
beautiful spouse R o h in i, at this Sravana was 
enraged and entrusting the care o f the m o o n to 
her shadow , she left fo r the house o f her parents. 
Thereafter at the instance o f her father the tim e 
w as 
distributed. 
Thereafter 
the 
constellation 
Abhijit w as introduced. О son, I have heard 
about these constellation fro m the m outh o f K rs 
na tit the m ountain o f hundred peaks, w h o 
alw ays used to m o ve around along w ith the 
tithis. N o w y o u listen fro m m e the nam es o f the 
yogas w h ich are Viskambha, Prlti, Ayusman, 
Saubhagya, Shobana, Atiganda, Sukarma, Dhrti, 
Siila, Ganda, Vrddhi, Dhruva, Vyaghata, Hars 
ana, 
Vajra, 
Siddhis, 
Vyatlpata, 
Variyan, 
Parigha, 
Siva, 
Sadhya, 
Subha, 
Sukra, 
Brahmandra and Vaidhrti. T h e nam es o f the 
karanas are Bava, Valava, Kaulava, Taitila, 
Gara, Vanija, Visti, Sakuni, Catuspada, Naga 
and Kimstughna.
ЧТШ Wfcr ТТПк ftRpiTt W fccfTft ?TRI
wifrr f3Fi itat 
4cRi згШ сП ф ^ и
скЧЖЛ ЧШШГ хГ Ж М xf RcrfaTTRI
^
 йч^тА rj 
II
T h e m onths o f the ancestors are strictly like 
those o f the hum ans. T h e bright fortnight is the 
day o f the ancestors, w h ile the dark fortnight is 
considered to be their nights. S im ila rly, the years 
o f the gods as expectedly like those o f the 
hum ans. T h e period o f Uttarayana is considered 
to be their day and the period o f Daksinayana is 
considered to be their nigh t. Seven ty one divine 
yugas m ake a manvantara.
Ч^Ж< § fcb*IHT
ТСТНЩ: -qffiM V l^lSSf: жШгЩНйЧИ 
Щ 
"ЩЖТШдШгТ: 11 й s 11
T h e age o f Indra is exactly like that o f M a n u 
w h ich 
has 
been 
described 
as 
tw e nty 
five 
thousand and five hundred years. T h e sun rays 
do 
not 
reach Brahmaloka. 
T h e 
people 
o f 
Brahmaloka do not k n o w about the d a y and 
night after the fall o f Indra.
f^cllpivr хГ 
ОД^<£ЙЗ|ГЧЧ:1 
ЧТЧН 
d^HRII^II
«Jipfa: Tra5tf&T:l
зт^г 
щ врт: 11 <i 6 11
Щ&1: 
f4 W ^ W fh l
«Пср 4ldlJ4l\uT 
Ч 
II
%U3=pf%4: 
Ч % 
I <? ° 11
xT^nfir Tt^iuit xt 
r j m h
x li ^sr 
4T #nfq^IT 
*11
f^ t XT Ь ш ^
 
tR W R :l
43RT ^ T lf^ T XT #
 xl 
ЖГ|1Я Ч11
L ik e the m ovem en t o f the hum an B ra h m a too 
has the m o ve m e n t, w h o falls. T w o palas m ake a 
danda and tw o dandas m ake a muhurta and w ith 
the fall o f In dra, his one day is counted. T h irty 
such days m ake a m onth and tw e lve m onths 
m ake a year. T h u s B ra h m a enjoys the age o f a 
hundred years. A fte r the fall o f B ra h m a , Nimesa 
a m ovem ent o f K rs n a is counted, there are no 
days and nights in the V a ik u n th a , because it is 
be yon d the reach o f the sun. T h e dw ellers o f 
V a ik u n th a rem ain unaw are about the d a y and 
n ight. T h e place is also be yon d the reach o f the 
m o o n and the planets, w ith the w ill o f the lord, 
the sighs o f zodiac do not m o ve there, the place 
is illum ined w ith the lustre o f lord K rs n a and 
w h ile m o vin g into his palace, one com es across 
the night.
pcf сЫНЛГг)Ш 
ТШЧ1
chi сТЮЖЧ! ’ЧтгаРВТПёЧТ ft4 lffrl; 11 S 3 11
4Tdi% xt Tmf i Ч
Ч f^ftyT ^II^II 
xl Tjfcr 4FTT4t M fu i^ id f4 ^ T :l
■mvm ^нчРч^хт 4TQ?xr rrrarssfctTii<?4ii

=== PAGE 699 ===

618
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAtfAM
ЩЙ г1ШЯЧ|иН 
rrf^lftR: I
RSJT 
Ш cfiT Tlfwmi ycbiRdH>ll<?^il 
Ы m t ъ 
y^i'4,1
зМ ^TcTRTTSifirgj ЩЩЩ ^ITKUqj
£Й 43: 
^M f^F taR rani\Я6\\
HSfitht ^ RTK?t fqpi 4Rch)RdH,ll<?,?ll
arfiraj Md^idHci R ^ u ii m m i
^vR gn^f^T 
11R о о 11
RU'UHl^^ifoi H^afayiRr: r ? i ^
^crit 
Ш ъ chH^fe: R^tBr:ll^o^ii
^ b iii WTT yiUllsicii feRsitfchqj
cpf f^af 'gJ4t rj 
4Rcftif3d4JIS°?H
vT$<tsRRct Wl
TWT gfiftrt ri Эдс#: 4R<*lRd4Ji^°3ii
3#gj fe rr ^
 f^st с|^щ щ ц |
^cjfljd cbRd^Ji rtr «TlR^Rra^n^o^u 
ШШГЕЕГ Щ
 *Г 
^qHchqi
cpf $fir ~ Ф ^ ш
 
11 * о ц 11
^ ^ r d lR v if e : ЧЩ f g ? W ^ : l 
^TRctf: cbH^c4rhi|c) ^
Jl4N?oi= n 
?Rr R grfsnr RrR ehlHhts4lRl^4U|qi 
Rznsjtr од|^1Ч 7Щ? RcR 
^T4;ii^oV9ii 
The same movement of time always prevails 
in Visnuloka, the lord is the form of the time, the 
supreme soul and is invisible, the seven neither 
worlds are also beyond the reach of the sun and 
the moon, the dwellers of that place are well 
aware of the same and they developed know how 
doubt about the same. The gems studded in the 
hoods of the serpents illumine the place and the 
fire is lighted in the evening and the night is 
covered with darkness, the dwellers of that place 
know about the time with the ringing of the bells. 
They have similar arrangement as we have on the 
earth. There are four yugas known as Satyayuga, 
Treta, Dvapara and Kali. The life of each one of 
these extepds to twelve thousand divine years. 
Out of these, Krtayuga has a span of four
thousand and eight hundred years. This has been 
spelt out by the people well-versed in the signs 
of time. The Satyayuga. has the span of 
seventeen lakhs and twenty eight thousands years 
of the humans. О son, the Tretayuga has the span 
of lakh and six hundred divine years. This has 
been told by those well-versed in time. This time 
is equivalent to twelve lakhs, ninety six thousand 
years all the humans. According to those who are 
well-versed in the signs of time, Dvapara has the 
span of too thousand and four hundred divine 
years which period is equivalent to eight lakhs 
and sixty four thousand years of humans, this has 
been ordained by those well-versed in the signs 
of time. О son, the span of Kaliyuga extends to a 
thousand and two hundred divine years which is 
equivalent to four lakhs, thirty two thousand 
years of human beings, this has been told by 
those well-versed in the signs of the time. 
Thereafter, the astrologer have described the 
period of Caturyugas eighty lakhs and twenty 
thousand years. О son, I have narrated to you 
whatever I had heard earlier about the time. Now 
you move on to Mathura, the place of Hari.
ff?T sftsRJo UfTo зПфил-я-ч^до 3rT° 4R^4T° 
TTql«gcld° chlrfftfeMuj 4TR 4Uuqfdd4lsaTPT:N<?5ll

=== PAGE 700 ===

618
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAtfAM
Chapter - 97
Radha's discourse to Uddhava
HKNui <jc(|r|
4ST 
firan
■Rg^TTsstrn^r 
Щ ш \ w \
-гЩ щ: 
#5T R gfiH I WTORTfl
crjt Rffct grt ggn i^ 11
Narayana said- Finding Uddhava getting ready 
to depart, Radha the beloved of Hari felt panicky 
and with a painful heart she descended from the 
throne. Becoming anxious, together with the 
cowherdesses Radhika placed her hand over the 
head of Uddhava and blessed him.

=== PAGE 701 ===

KRStyA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 97
619
vreRrapi i p xi
^ТРТШ HRTTcT tRcT Rof ш ^Tl 1311 
~фц cf$fal4W W p p j W H dqi 
w m Jl4SjfR^<«*^rJ^4TfddH.I 1*11
д«4ЧИ 3^hT ^ T?T rpst fg^Tl^i
hfd^qdT -RTScft ^Tb£R W сТгГГПЧII
Th ereafte r, she offered the tender Diirva-grass, 
u nbroken rice, w h ite paddy and other things o f 
w elfare including fried p a d d y, fru it, betel, curd, 
m irro r, pitcher w ith tender leaves, fragrance, 
ve rm ilio n and sandal-paste, the lam p, gem , the 
dam sel w hose husband and son was alive, the 
gold and silver.
гЩЩсГ 4gi'Hi&q) f^rT WT ^
■фтпзт 'RTS^'? xT 
^tfecTT ff^ll^ll
О best o f the Brahm anas, thereafter Radh a 
w ith a painful heart, w ith her eyes filled w ith 
tears, lifted up U d d h a v a w h o had fallen on her 
feet and spoke to her the truthful and beneficial 
w o rds w h ic h w ere filled w ith w elfare.
ClfacftTcnvj
■дчт ЩЩ WrRT chc-d|UI4Rl TPPTRj 
WT cw 
Mihail
R a d h ik a said- L e t y o u r jo u rn e y be quite safe 
and 
auspicious 
and 
y o u 
should 
m eet 
w ith 
prosperity. Y o u achieve the divine know ledge 
fro m the place o f the lord and be in the good 
books o f lord K rsn a .
«jh'WNfth: 
Щ
S l^ lclfq cycled I 
1 cf4TTifft 1
O f all the boons I bestow u p on , the boon o f 
achieving the devotion o f lord K rsn a and his 
slavehood w o u ld be the best. O f all the five types 
o f salvation, the devotion o f lord H a ri happens to 
be the best. T h e B rah m a n h o o d , the go d-h o od o f 
In d ra , becom ing eternal, the nectar and gaining 
o f siddhis can be achieved but the slavehood o f 
lord H a ri is inaccessible.
W
 Ш
 fe t:l 
d^Tt*4 -3FR 
П
O n e takes birth in the sacred land o f Bharata 
after perform ing good deeds fo r m a n y births. 
Such a B rah m an a, i f achieves the devotion o f the 
lord, his life becom e successful.
ЧЧ1Н 'fllcn ?TW
fttp t гг 
ш
 ш ^ г fqfswuii
Tgw 
^TcTRt 
xTI
'^ТТ'ФТ ^cR ~цщ 
qqijup^i
11 ^ 11
Rtfr R^vT 8Rt trfiu im ^ sn ^ ll^ ll
tiqgld dd4: W T fkSffF: ЧуН rTOTl
^ ш т щ ^ п ^ ц и
B y 
reducing 
the 
earlier 
deeds 
perform ed 
during the present birth , 
ones 
life 
becom es 
successful, N o t o n ly he alone, bu t the lives o f 
thousands 
o f 
ancestors, 
the 
m other, 
the 
grandm other, 
hundreds 
o f 
ancestors, 
real 
brothers relatives, w ife , teachers, pupils w ith the 
servants surely becom es successful. О son, the 
deed w hich is presented to lord K rsn a is k n o w n 
to be the best deed. T h e deed w h ich could please 
K rs n a that is considered to be quite m eritorious, 
w hatever deeds are perform ed w ith de vo tio n , fo r 
the 
achievem ent 
o f 
som ething, 
it 
bestow s 
w elfare, 
becom es 
graceful 
and 
results 
in 
pleasure. T h e vrata, fasting, tapas, speaking o f 
the truth, the devotion and the p e rfo rm ing o f 
puja, w hich is perform ed fo r the sake o f K rs n a , 
results in the achieving o f the slavehood o f the 
lord.
■RRWfefclH ^ Ч Ш Ъ W RR: 11 ^ 11
RMRld^cbRJi Rcf<Rihvl Ш \
78РТГ *Nr ?T4RR
3lfdVlVl T3R 
VKUIPIcRMtliqilUII

=== PAGE 702 ===

620
BRAHM AVAIVART A-M AHAPURAty AM
R^*4T^4 ^lR <4^4 'ЛЧЧ R4*:l
ч е т *4з#тчт 4<v4<m44ch^ii^n
tjr^
rot ^Ir 1ч5?14(тл^ ч1чЧ|ц^|
4^4T #4*S 3'tH n?°II
T h e g ivin g a w a y o f the entire earth in charity, 
g oing 
rou nd the. entire 
earth 
in pilgrim age, 
bathing in all the h o ly places, perform ing o f all 
the vratas and tapas, perform ing o f all the 
yajnas, pe rfo rm ing o f all the charities, recitation 
o f all the V e d a s and the post V e d ic literature, 
p ro vid in g protection fo the terror-stricken person, 
im parting 
o f 
the 
inaccessible 
kn o w le dge , 
adoration o f the guests, protection o f those w h o 
takes 
shelter, 
adoration 
o f 
all 
the 
gods, 
p e rfo rm ing o f puja and recitation o f mantras, 
o ffe rin g o f fo o d to the Brahm anas and gods w ith 
Purascarana the adoration o f the teacher and the 
parents and their m aintenance do not w eight 
even one-sixteenth part o f the m erit one achieves 
b y attaining the slavehood o f lord K rsn a .
<K4l^c( 44Я RR fO T 4{|dR4l 
* 4 # R 
R
fчвт ш ч т д а 
чш ?етч1
чГ^иЫ ^ 5 чтьу^йчён.11^^11
сьГЧик дгфттт -щ цяъ Pi^ h^r r i
RTtfa-^RWi ЖЧ сКТВЛИТ R <ЩиЩ||^||
r W 
^44.1
R # 
iRRTf4RR4?4^4;iR'>$M 
fRTJRT RT*4Rfig R
RR 4 Ч<ЧН< RTR4 44FK44JR4II
Th e re fo re , О U d d h a v a , y o u recite the nam e o f 
K rs n a , w h o is b e yo n d the qualities, free fro m 
desire, 
the 
suprem e 
soul, 
the 
lord, 
eternal, 
tru th fu l, 
eternal 
B rah m a n , 
be yon d 
Prakrti, 
com plete in all respect, spotless, graceful to the 
devotees, the w itness o f the deeds, u n in vo lve d , 
the fo rm o f flam e, the cause o f all the causes, the 
fo rm 
o f everyth in g, 
the 
lord 
o f everything, 
bestow er 
o f 
all 
the 
fortunes, 
w elfare 
and 
d e vo tio n , 
besides 
the 
slavehood to his 
feet. 
Th erefore discarding the evil arrogance and all 
other kno w le dge one should adore w ith devotion, 
the nam e o f son o f N a n d a w h o is alw ays blissful.
^ ehl^ftlVIKslHi RTR ЧТЯ* RSRgrtfl 
44FF4441R*44 
1 ^ ^ 11
stgcT: Rim$n4 жч fRRTR # 1
RI4 R3TFR R # 4 f r # ЩЩ ?| 1^ V911
A thousand o f his nam es have been m entioned 
in the Kauthum i-s'akha o f the V e d a s . B y reciting 
the sam e, all the obstructions are rem oved. O n 
hearing all these w o rds U d d h a v a w as im m ensely 
surprised 
and 
he 
w as 
filled 
w ith 
all 
the 
kn ow ledge.
1RRBT R #
 RtgRT 4П534ГЛ4ТЧ 4Ffl
#
#
4
#
 f43KT R 34: g4:IR<ill
Thereafter U d d h a v a keeping a cloth rou nd his 
neck, placed his head o ver the feet o f R a d h ik a 
and prostrated before her again and again.
RB|^4?R Rf4T4:l
4fgR^JRT ^ГЯГГТ R #ra*?R 4TT4IIЧ ^ 11
О 
N a ra d a , 
his 
entire 
b o d y 
w as 
feeling 
em otions, his eyes w ere fille d w ith tears because 
o f the devotion. W ith his m in d fille d w ith lo ve 
and at the v e ry thought o f separation fro m 
R a d h a, he started cryin g aloud.
# 5 RRT г1Л1ШП RT*4 R44TR*4R:I 7
7TH Sp4T RJT4RTRTR 4T*R4:11 3 о 11 
33R R*%4 ^gT # 4 4 4BfiR44q;i 
У1*УУ<УПЧ31Ч1Ч R feT <t>cul4HR^II^UI 
R44 44WTTR R4T ЦтЗТ 
■^Rlf^TR R 3#* R<R R*%*4 4ГО*М^ ^11 
T h a n R a d h a also getting fille d w ith em otions 
started crying together w ith all the cowherdesses. 
Thereafter, R a d h ika lifted up U d d h a v a and m ade 
h im sit. B u t to o k U d d h a v a a deep sigh and 
became 
senseless. 
Fin d in g 
h im 
so 
fainted 
R a d h ik a lifted up U d d h a v a w hose m in d w as fu ll 
o f devoted to lord K rs n a and sprinkling w ater on 
his face, he w as brought back to senses. О 
N a ra d a , R a d h ika then addressed h im saying, " O 
son, y o u enjoy long life ". T h u s speaking she 
bestow ed her blessing on h im .
33R#44T ЗШЗ 434TR #4*41 
R44T4T R 4РТТЧТ 4T4: 4<4P5$4II33II

=== PAGE 703 ===

KR$NA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 97
621
On regaining consciousness Uddhava spoke 
the spiritual words to Radhika as well as the 
cowherdesses who were crying.
Щ\{$\ ^ЧНТ
ш 
j Ti^wlfiRct ^
113*11
Uddhava 
said- 
Of 
all 
the 
continents 
Jambudvlpa happens to be quite graceful 
glorious and inaccessible. The auspicious land of 
Bharata is located there, which is desired by all.
"gtRI ^-£,lcH cMRI
There is an auspicious Vrndavana, the same 
Bharatavarsa has been purified with the dust of 
the feet of Radha, which is desired by all the 
gods.
£RfT -ЦРЩ xt Tjfsraf % vTRPJ ^farTTI
Thought the land is quite graceful in the three 
worlds and also auspicious but in spite of that it 
has become more sanctified with the dust of the 
feet of Radha which purify all the holy places. 
цГцс|^«(Ги1 fcoUlfa TJGEFTi; TJTTI 
^рлт гг ячщщ 
^fog& figii^ii 
UIHI* 
R4№n^l
viRdMi ТТ^ШфШТГ 4 
wqRKIII^dll 
янт йчтззёщтспщ* 
xi ?ш т\ 
grnt япй ^ дой 
cfti I 3 я 11
ттшнт 
г ш twqugqi
чтзд! ч чт?гс: 11 * 011
In the earlier times Brahma had performed 
tapas at Puskara for sixty thousand years 
according to the Vedas in order to have a look at 
the lotus-like feet of Radha. But he could not 
have an audience with Radhika and Krsna, even 
in dream. Thereafter, he heard of a divine voice 
from the sky saying. In the Varaha-kalpa, in the 
land of Bharata, in the forest of Vrndavana, you 
would 
have 
a 
glance 
of them 
in 
the 
Rdsamandala. There is no doubt about it.
xT f^TTI $ПЯТ IfiTO: 
RtC.I
фштг 
qfrpfrHmar:ii'i^ii
On hearing this, Brahma left for his abode 
getting free from tapas, thereafter in due course 
of time he had an audience with lord Krsna and 
he felt delighted with the fulfilment of his desire.
Rfmqt Jiiftcsn! у трш 
Ф т \
The lives of the cowherds and cowherdesses 
are quite graceful, because they always have a 
look at the lotus-like feet of Radha.
RTftgt T ifef tri: тщт 
f ^ w .i
gfiiKi?xi -дч^хг 
ftdl gutfi ftfsJgftT Wd: 
g^cd^iiqj
■gvHT gdlcfi^si 9^uql*u gdjebrgi rtf'll I 
All the ascetics, the noble people, the yogis, 
the sages, the siddhas and Vaisnavas, serve at the 
feet of Radha who is quite proud, auspicious, 
purifies the holy places, is spotless and difficult 
to access, as a result of their devotion it becomes 
easy for them to have a look at the lotus-like feet 
of Radha which is difficult for Brahma and the 
gods to achieve.
fRt Allctcfifaf^dRI
фЩЧ ТТЧТгЧЧПl^qil
xiehH учуг: дут у ч<т1утту
7УУ фШТГ qidlid> "шлттднпх^и 
ч|П.'лтЯдчМ1Чз1^ гРЩхГ<Т^1 
3 ^ gyf^RT R-РУ УТУТ: ч|^к(чч;<ч1:1Г*^э|| 
Rhftrm W t хг gii
Ti^ranfwi i1^ d 11
^ УТ 
pRfPd 41 fad $4 fRpft У1 
фшШ0Т#сЬ|ЗДсП У T rfet УУд||*<? II
% у <?гчч1 ш # r : i
ТТЗПйг У УхУ% 
У ^T%||4 o||
cTHri^ 
55Й 
У УУУЛ
xl^Psirafe^ frgRr: TTHfa: Щ11Ч v\
Krsna the supreme soul and the lord of all had 
painted the nails of her feet and had adored her in 
Goloka on the mountain of hundred peaks with

=== PAGE 704 ===

622
b r a h m a v a i v a r t a -m a h a p u r A n a m
inaccessibles stotra. H e also offered the tender 
D n rvd -g ra s s , unbroken rice, fragrance, sandal- 
paste and bunch o f Parijata flow ers to her. She 
happens 
to 
be 
the 
friend 
o f 
thirty 
six 
cowherdesses and the mistress o f thirty thousand 
cowherdesses. She is k n o w n as R a d h ika w h o is 
dearer to K rs n a than his life and is adored b y the 
gods, w h o so e ver feel envious o f the same R a d h a 
or denounce her or finds faults w ith her, he earns 
hundreds o f Brahmahatyas. There is no doubt 
about it. Because o f that sin such sinners fall into 
the kumbhlpaka hell w here they are th row n in 
the boilin g o il, in pitch darkness and they are 
crushed 
like 
sugar 
cane 
up 
to 
the 
seven 
generations till the tim e o f fourteen Indras.
Щ: trt xT w far sfafai ?г№госТ:1
faoEf 
xt 
ЩЩ:11Ч^Н
Th ereafter they are b o m on earth as the insects 
o f refuse fo r a thousand d ivin e years. T h e n they 
becom e the germ s o f the pelvic region o f the 
loose w o m e n alw ays consum ing refuse, licking 
puss.
^ xt <Шс(¥11<ЛИ|Гч^
it •гПчЩсПхГ TTfacftf fT:
■554Г ъ 
m фш|[Ф^<сЫст|1ч-*п
T h is has been ordained b y B rah m a in the 
kanvas'akha. T h u s speaking U d d h a va again got 
ready to depart. A t that point o f tim e R a d h ika 
w h o w as suffering because o f the separation o f 
K rs n a spoke to U d d h a v a w h o w as crying at the 
same tim e.
Т1Й*Гс|Ы
W5 
ПУЧО 
cttem m^cTRI 
w
 4v^if4 fafani tra m hzjt 
faf*hd xf rn *FT W fWT^TTWI 
ЗТЩТ fa w t 
w t ^ R f l4 ^ l l
R a d h ik a said- О son, y o u go to M a th u ra and 
apprise K rs n a about the situation here and yo u 
m o ve in such a w a y that I should be able to m eet 
G o v in d a , m y life w o u ld be unsuccessful.
Trfirar m 
xT ■pt р:||Ц \эц 
ящщ m 
xT
^fa тт 
w pt ЧГЩ114 <s 11
In the universe the hope is alw ays troublesom e 
and 
getting 
detached, 
fro m 
getting 
all 
the 
pleasures o f the w o rld s it bestow s the real 
pleasure. Thereafter he is absorbed in m editation 
o f lord K rs n a ". T h u s speaking R a d h ik a also 
started sobbing. U d d h a v a on his part b o w e d in 
reverence to the sobbing R a d h a and left fo r the 
place o f Yas'oda.
TTrSTRT %RT ?T ^crqcf SEIHddTTlI
Tfh1Ц*11
iTterat w w R T f : w faJidicft ?m :i
ш ч ф ш т ц ч 
^u ^o \\
O N a ra d a , after departure o f U d d h a v a , R a d h a 
w as fainted she w as so deeply absorbed in the 
m editation o f K rs n a that she lost consciousness. 
О sage, the cowherdesses then fin d in g her in 
such a position fille d the lotus petals their o w n 
tears and placed w ith them on the bed, on w h ich 
R a d h a w as m ade to sleep, bu t w ith the v e ry 
touch o f her b o d y , the bed w as burnt out.
ifT: 
fm ifaxftfa 'xP34lf|^l
ЗЧШ ад1ТЧ1Ч14}И<(^*сГС<Ш<ГЦИ^ *11 
Щ
 
ШЧ fh fa l xR prl^q: I
f a w n 
ii
Thereafter, the cowherdesses m ade R a d h a to 
sleep on a bed w h ich w as covered b y a b ed-cover 
and w as ve ry soft. T h e y then sprinkled the w ater 
m ixe d w ith sandal-paste on her but the w ater 
w ith sandal-paste w ith the touch o f the b o d y o f 
R a d h a , also dried u p . W ith o u t U d d h a v a , R a d h a 
felt a m om ent as long as the yugas.
it in g m ^ r ifa #5T WIT cfafa ^1 
ifa W
 w r f a ^ d w if a i I ^ ^ 11
^TtiqxHi fa4T ftdi4$flxta'U*tl 
WjjfafWjT: "wf 1W <jhrti

=== PAGE 705 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 98
623
She cried 0 Uddhava, "You speak to Krsna at 
once and send here the lord of life at once". She 
thus spoke filled with mental agony, loosing 
consciousness and a miserable condition. The 
cowherdesses embraced Radha in such a 
condition and they also started crying. Thereafter 
they brought her back to consciousness and 
consoling her.
t o ЗтГ° ЧТТ^ТГ0 
f . l l ' t v s t l

=== PAGE 706 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 98
623
Chapter - 98
Arrival of Uddhava in Mathura and 
meeting with Kr$na
ЗУТУ
t г ш У trow <ЕГСУТ ^ r i
тлят яркут у <$y w \m уярт gr:i 
с щ ^ у uTfyy ^frr fsaygiRii 
sgpeitsypgy 
trfrar ygyry 4:\
УУУ V lW ^ У Щ Ш У сБШЧНЗ ||
Narayana said- Uddhava then went to the 
abode of Yasoda where he bowed in reverence to 
her delightfully. Thereafter getting leave from 
her, he moved on. Leaving the palm grove to the 
left, he reached the bank of Yamuna. He took his 
bath and food there and than left for Mathura. He 
found Krsna seated under the shade of the 
banyan tree. The lord also delightfully looked at 
Uddhava and smilingly spoke. At that point of 
time feeling grieved, Uddhava was sobbing and 
the tears were flowing from his eyes. He felt 
panicky.
ЗТГПУ^^ЛУ ehv'Ml'Ji Т1УТ 'flictfci -Jilciidl
ч1чГу1?М1 У с(гИН1 У Udl414l 
Щ ^ 
У ШИЧИ
Sri Krsna said- О Uddhava, come on, is 
everything all right? "Is Radha alive?" The
cowherdesses who are suffering from the pain of 
separation are still alive? Are the cowherds, the 
calves and the cows getting on well? What is the 
condition of my mother Yas'oda with the 
separation from her son .
У^ УУГ ОДЙ dwh 
IdiUdM TfTI 
УУ1тБТ tFRt 
УТ ТЧ: ТГТ 
41^1 I
^
 rignfnegyt gay «ругат yygi
tt4 эвШ жтч;!
yqlaR |y«b'Rw y g ^ ry y p t :n<!;ii 
ypjsft У yst 
чГуРУ! УТё1*1руа:1 
^ZT ytSf УУТ ^Z УТУйУ
О brother, what did they speak on meeting 
you? You tell me truthfully the words of my 
mother. And what was the message conveyed by 
her me. Did you visit the bank of Yamuna, the 
auspicious Vrndavana the Rasamandala with 
deserted orchards, the pleasant Kunja cottage and 
pool of water sport, the flower, orchards 
surrounded by the black-wasps, the cool shadow 
of the Bhandlra-vana and the banyan tree 
surrounded by the cowherd boy, the abode of 
cows and the cows of Gokula.
yf^ ytaf?r тт ут ^gT wit fogy ret тщ
ИсМ4 У^ ^ <4-41 yTSS^tvtyfy ^ tRtll^o ||
In case Radha is alive, then what did she speak 
about me on finding you there? О brother, you 
tell me all this because my mind is getting 
anxious.
РьЧУ^ГЧсЫ: yyf: Гудак«ИНУ>1:1
т Ттт?у tpgj: Шу*д&гсут у ч у »*у ^ ii w i
What did all the cowherdesses speak? What 
did the cowherd boys speak? What did the grown 
up cowherds, my father and friends speak to you.
УёП^УТУ УТТ1 
fr%uff yyf| 
faRg^T4TTRny У^У??ГЧУёёТУТ: 11 ^ 11
О brother, what did RohinI the mother of 
Baladeva spoke to you and what did the wives of 
my other relatives speak to you.

=== PAGE 707 ===

624
BR AHM А V AIV ART A-M AH APURAN AM
H i 
H T R tT Ч Ш H T R R JT I
6\ 
^
^4<4(eF4 ^TRRt ш
 cblcJvTrfcl H ll^ ll
What food did you take there? what was the 
astonishing gifts given to you by my mother 
Yasoda and Radha? How did they talk to you 
and were their words quite sweet.
R h T H t П |Г ч с Ш '| H Н Щ Ч Т RljjHr H I 
qyiui^ifh 
тгГн
О Uddhava, how are the cowherdesses, the 
cowherds, the children, the mother and Radhika, 
disposed towards me, do they have same old 
affection for me or not.
R t H T f lT H RTcTT ^ R T H w
H
 T T f p f t l 
R T H R R R H RTT Т Ш R ^ T R f H P f v I T I I ? 4 1 1 
R t H W if R T R p H ? y R T T fW H R T W v T O : !
чщ£Н hzijH н «пнт: ^tef^R tf^R iu^ii
Does my mother ever remember me? Does 
RohinI remember me? Does Radhika remember 
me? Getting infested with the pain of separation 
from my love, do the cowherdesses, the cowherd 
boy remember me? Do the cowherd boys engage 
themselves in sport in my absence in the 
Bhandira forest.
Riff f lp s R^qlfiRd^ll^ll
Did you visit the place where I consumed the 
nectar-like food offered to me by the Brahmana 
damsels, with the boys.
S’tfRHIWH 
^гг НТЫчГ HT:I 
ЩРЛТ H TfcTT RIcJl HR 
II
Did you visit the place of yajna of Indra, 
Govardhana, the best of the mountains and the 
place where Brahma had stolen away the cows? 
«TlfAUMH HH: SRHT Vll^'cki RfRfHpi 
R^cll^R RHHRT R R M R ^ I I W l 
On listening to the grief-stricken and-sweet 
words of Krsna, Uddhava spoke to the eternal 
lord.
ЗНГН
THHT 
R ^ f b R p i
HRwT 
1RR P
rI h RR^I R о 11
Z& HTOTHTT H W T PIR R H R R J 
RtHTR RHRRT H ШЩ 4 IR R U d < R R JR U I 
RcRTTRRT Н Н Н Я Т Н Г Н * R t f W : H IT :1 
^ R T R r R R p T H TIHT <lfl$>Rfl R T T II? ^ II
Uddhava said- О lord, whatever have you 
spoken, I have visited all these places and I have 
made my life in the land pf Bharata as success. I 
have visited the auspicious Vrndavana which is 
the best place in the land of Bharata besides the 
land of Vraja which is the essence of the same 
and 
the 
charming 
Rasamandala. 
The 
cowherdesses happens to be the essence of the 
Rasamandala and Radha the foremost of the 
performers of the divine dance was also seen by 
me.
'^ d v frc H R& l H H #
R f ^ 4f3T<h?t НнН и ^ п Ш и к З и
ТГТ «л^чи|с)Йс111
She was lying in the forest of banana trees on 
the bed of lotus petals which was soaked with the 
sandal-paste. She had discarded all the gem- 
studded ornaments and was lying there in gloom. 
She looked quite dirty, lean and thin and was 
clad in the white garments.
НН<ТТ "RMRRTR ТШ ^RHTRt: I
fow m fflii уиГцН h fflp iR m i 
The female friends of Radha were serving her 
continuously moving the white fly-whisks, she 
had discarded taking food and her belly had 
shrunk, she used to breath moment after moment, 
p t ИНН Hi HURT H<fUR44lf|-dll
Hi нт н й w i H; ht rcrt H; ht Hr 
Rt 
R HIRlH Hi Rt HRJ HTHH^I
rtwtrHtHrt SHTHRTRT RR RHIR^II
Thus would it be possible for Radha to survive 
from the fever of separation even for a moment? 
О lord Hari, she has lost consciousness about the 
water or the earth, the day or the night, the 
human or the animals and the relatives and 
stranger. She is devoid of all the outward 
knowledge and is solely devoted at your feet.

=== PAGE 708 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-КНАЬфА, CHAPTER 98
625
ЗгГсй Я?ГЯТ Я # <Я^4¥1ЯЯЯ:1
^ Щ 5 ^ ^n4fiRWET 
11 ? 6 11
w
 w
 ятам
3%if<R Я ЯЯЯТ ЯТ ТГЯТ ^c4W U |||R<?|| 
ЗШ!я ЯШ Я ЯШЯТ ЯрТТ Т^ПТТ W I 
Ч ft ТТЯИПТ ЯШ Ч 
Ч я1шл%11 з 011
Her glory is spread in the universe and as such 
her death also would be glorious. Even the 
robbers who are devoid of knowledge do not 
intend to kill a women then why would you so 
desire? Therefore, О lord of the universe, you 
visit the desired forest of banana trees at once. 
Radha who is extremely devoted to you is not 
out of the universe. О lord, Radha is protected by 
you who is a great devotee of yours. There is no 
devotee comparable to her in the world nor 
would one ever be.
ЯШИ: vichTr^Tdl ЯЯТ?Я
ufd mra щ щ ш я ti fit 3.iii^^ ii
The god of love is afraid of Siva and you 
happen to be the foremost of Siva, after 
achieving a husband like you, Radhika is still 
burning with passion.
щятгшМ 
та шп{я ят4я(
Ж5УЯ W 'fertoft ЯП}?II
Therefore the deeds are the foremost and no 
one can stop the same. The spring season and the 
moon with its rays are actually burning her. The 
blowing of cool breeze is regularly burning her, 
therefore she is lying there suffering from pain 
like an orphan. She is having the complexion of 
the lustre of molten gold but presently the same 
has turned black.
flciuicjui*-?Tr w graYdufrafadii
тая fraEn та^ш p i t татг fg^.-n^'kii
The complexion of the hair of her head has 
become golden and she is lying without garments 
in spite of the face that she is adored like you and 
Brahma.
гз<£ть: p R t 
4f41^iuii
^ЧЧТ ЯТ: 11 3 411
Siva the teacher of the yogis also adores here 
Sanatkumara, 
Ganesa 
and 
the 
best 
of 
intellectuals are also her devotees.
ярйшта яШяятяя^яш
сЯ^ЯШ я т р ! ТТЯТ Ч ЯШ -^riStR: 11^^11
Various types of ascetics and sages are also 
devoted to her but the type of devotion displayed 
by Radha is difficult to get anywhere.
«ЯТЯсГ 
TTSJT тая 
cIT^Ttl
ffcrarfa ^ я яятя та!р w i i ^^ii 
■?тЫ w
 щ т ч щ я ят4я зш 
Ш*ята яя: ^ят 
ятяя:
%^яя яяятятя я%т ята^91яч;| I ^ л 11
The way in which Radhika adored you even 
LaksmI can not do so. 1 have admitted before her 
that you would reach her. Therefore, О virtuous 
one, "You move immediately and display the 
truthfulness of my words." On hearing the words 
of Uddhava, Madhava smiled and he started 
speaking words according to the Vedas which 
were quite truthful.
#яяядягя 
дтЩят|| g r a i ЖШЯЙ1 
яяяй siiswrS ящя таг^(яш ян^и
Sn Krsna said- It is not a sin to resort to 
falsehood while cutting jokes with the damsels, 
in the marriages, for the sake of livelihood, when 
life is in danger and for the sake of the cows and 
the Brahmanas.
тая1ш^яё^я р я я ята?: p f: I
ЯГШЯ ЯТ% Я^ЯтЕГ ЧШ Я % ЩЯ^11^о||
Therefore even if you don’t make your words 
truthful, there is no harm in the same nor would 
you have to face the hell. My devotee actually 
goes to the Goloka and not to the hell.
«fifranfa cWTsfh ж
яттайта^^ряУя)я!ящ^яя11'к^1
In spite of that I shall honour your words, I 
shall go to Radhika, the cowherdesses and my 
mother Yasoda in dream.

=== PAGE 709 ===

626
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAiyAM
W 
ТЩПЦЯТ:!
у 
911 
^сгч w 
^гп w i ^5#»тц| 
штат ^terrщ w '•йГч'^щ з sjmfehRi1*311 
^tsrftl^T ^>Т^Г xT TcR TfaT XT ftf^IT^I 
htor^q^rsplc* citefacsn 
g?:ii**n 
O n hearing this the glorious U d d h a va w ent 
back to his abode. T h e n lord K rsn a reached 
G o k u la w h ic h w as suffering fro m separation. In 
the dream he assured R a d h ik a and bestow ed the 
divine 
kno w le dge 
on 
her 
and 
satisfied 
the 
cowherdesses w ith various types o f sports. H e 
sucked the breast o f Y a s o d a w h o was enjoying 
the deep sleep and assuring the cow herds and the 
cow herd boys va rio u sly, he returned to M ath ura, 
ffit ?h<aki ° 
зя^ штзрчтзГо <3тг° 4h<?4i°

=== PAGE 710 ===

626
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAtfAM
Chapter - 99
Yajnopavlta of Kf$na and Coronation of 
Ganesa
чшчщ
■QcTf^RRTt TPff q^qWPT
хг rPTF-jf w
: tt^ii
^aRraTOT q^t: fwigitftq:liqi!
N a ra ya n a 
said- 
In 
the 
m eantim e, 
A c a ry a 
G a rg a came to V a s u d e va h o ld in g a danda and 
chatra, w earing the m atted locks o f hair on the 
head, illu m in ing w ith lustre, adorned w ith w hite 
yajnopavlta, lo okin g like a m endicant and a 
disciplined person, havin g w hite teeth and clad in 
w h ite garm ents, being the fa m ily priest o f Y a d u s .
<T 
УТГПГЧ qi
*гзгцг q 
^
11? II
ТИП
w n т а цщц'М
Fin d in g h im there D e v a k I, V a s u d e va suddenly 
got up and bow ed in reverence to h im o fferin g 
h im the gem -studded lion throne. Thereafter, 
they offered madhupurka, 
K am ad h e n u 
(w ish 
fu lfillin g c o w ), the garm ents, sanctified b y fire, 
fragrance and garland o f flo w e rs. T h e y adored 
h im w ith d e v o tio n .
w m i 
fw qj 
Rf I 
Osmium 
щ щ й 
55Ы4 it
T h e y served h im the sw eets, payasam, fried 
fo o d , the honey and the fragrant betel.
ЗШТЩ tpOT ЧТЖ 
rt (ccrllchU qi
Щ 
гГ 4^^4,11^11
Н е m entally b o w e d in reverence to S ri K rs n a 
and Balaram a lo okin g at them and then he spoke 
to V a su d e va and D e v a k I.
т е г
зччШ Ш 
о т ч ш щ ^ьэи
G a rg a 
said- 
О 
V a s u d e va , 
y o u 
lo o k 
at 
Balabhadra and y o u r son K rs n a and realise that 
the age fo r p e rform ing their yajnopavlta, has 
arrived.
q ^ q -sqW
зччШ1ш ^pg h?r4 ч ^amfan<sn
Y a s o d a said- Y o u are adorable fo r the race o f 
Y a d u s , therefore y o u prescribed an auspicious 
tim e 
fo r 
perform ing 
the yajnopavlta 
w h ic h 
should be praised b y the noble people.
иЗ'йТГ 
^пч^щчйгьпр
w i 
I 11
ттщ:
fgT Rdiqfil W fq^pg ^uql:ll^oll
G a rg a said- О V a s u d e va , com parable to the 
V a su s, y o u send in vitation letters to all y o u r 
relatives and w ith great e ffo rt collect the m aterial 
required fo r the cerem ony. D a y after to m o rro w is 
the auspicious tim e. O n that d a y the m o o n and 
the planets are favourable. T h e day is adorable

=== PAGE 711 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAI^PA, CHAPTER 99
627
b y the noble people therefore the yajnopavita can 
be perform ed on that day.
я 4 тт cter «шт щт^сгг д^щ т;|
ЯШЬЯТЯТЯ Я
^ ^ 13тНЧйсЫ«{11^11
R%TT4;i
Ч^*гЧ'| 
тгащт 
V ll
ттШ чртрщтпш чГинл -ggn^gpri
diTTri^HcTw xt утЫЧ|Гщснг^^11^11
O n listening to the w o rds o f A c a ry a G a rg a , 
V a s u d e va at once despatched the auspicious 
in vita tio n letters to all his relatives. H e than 
m ade canals o f ghee, curd, m ilk , ho ne y and guda 
and also collected several things fo r presents, 
including the gem s, the je w els, g o ld, ornam ents, 
different types o f costum es, diam onds and heaps 
o f jew els.
Ш 1 ЯТЩ Я5<ЯТ 4 W
 ЧтШШН:11^1
O n the other h an d, K rs n a , w h o is graceful to 
the devotees also rem em bered in his heart w ith 
de vo tio n the gods, sages and the siddhas.
ятР^г яряят 
тропят ^viw anii^m i
A t that point o f tim e people fro m all the state 
o f society arrived there including the sages, the 
brothers, the gods and several o f the kings.
HPIch-41 
Я % :1
f4&IISl4ycl J(>t<e4yc(l5S4c4si,H|llS4>l:||^||
щ итт 
яггг яяяГ w=nRnr:i
O n the fem ale side, the daughters o f the gods, 
daughters 
o f the N a g a s , 
the princesses, 
the 
V id ya d h a rls and the G an dharvas w h o played on 
m usical instrum ent also arrived. T h e B rahm ana, 
the 
beggars, 
the 
bards, 
Yatis, Brahmacaris, 
m endicant, ascetics and yogis also arrived there. 
pjmRTeti: 
gpf 
Я1
«Pfri<n3I3T: 
^W<*4fuill?<ill
A t that auspicious tim e the relatives o f all the 
ladies, the group o f all the relatives, relatives 
fro m the m others side also participated.
яЫр ilW r g^ntzf^JT4T fRT fet:i
д я т р ^ я я т 4 ^ я я т я я Ы ^ 1 1
B h lsm a, 
D ro n a , 
K a m a , 
As'vattham a, 
also 
arrived w ith their fam ilies and sons besides 
Dhrtarastra.
g^tt т а ferai ^iraryuiH dii
явятчтзпч! <iMt^cbi:ii^oii
K u n ti also arrived there w ith her sons w h o 
w as a w id o w and w as filled w ith g rie f as w e ll as 
delight. 
T h e 
com petent 
kings 
o f 
various 
countries and the princesses also arrived there.
ЗТШ^ТН^НЩЧТ ЯЩЯ1 ЯЩЩ:1
ящсгряязя яВт?я явят яяг япятт.-иу
ЯгЯ: TTUiJ^t spft *ВтВгет:1
тМт: 11 ? ? 11
■ячяяя R44W дяВв'я я ч ш : i 
ЯЧс^Ятй ЯЯЯР%; Чо^ЦиУШК1^?11 
^dkl"Wi(^4[ Hirot ШЩЯ: ЩсЬШИ
ялГуш тяг 
i^ntrg^rii
ЗЩр Ef сГТЯ ^Я рряЩЯ w f e : l
^4fdv^i55bfui^ 
^^чГн:1г?чи
зигтсШ шячтя cjirulf^: Ч|Г<я^сЬ:1 
^нт ilHPBPWET ЯВЯТ: JP^rasTTIR^I! 
^зМГ4«%Г4ся^ячм тгзттчТн: i
^яяря -дят^ ятоя: япсятгршат 
тсйиМ H 14W сьГтв^
я т№: шГнцяуя ч|1т я ^ я у т и
4TT5W 
TR^in ч и 
[4$М|Гч*: т?шрр%
^ iv il ягРяят ?пЯнт тр о и м и
З Ч Я ^Т Я # 
^сТ5ЯЯТ:1
gj3: дггця grtwr ятзрт^я «nffops ?и
Я ^мт трч: тй д^ЯТЯЯ -Щ: I
dl^gell 5сГ% 
^ II
T h e sages like A t r i, V asistha , C y a v a n a , the 
Bh aradvaja, 
the 
great tapasvl, 
Y a jn a v a lk y a , 
B h lm a , G a rg y a , M ah atap a, G argacarya, V atsa

=== PAGE 712 ===

628
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
with his son, Dharma, Jaigisavya, Parasara, 
Pulaha, Pulastya, Agastya, Saubhari, Sanaka, 
Sananda, 
Sanatkumara, 
Sanatana, 
Vodhu, 
Paiicas'ikha, Durvasa, Angira, Vyasa, Suka the 
son of Vyasa, Kusika, Kausika, Parasurama, 
Srnglrsi, Vibhandaka, Srngl, Vamadeva, all 
virtuous Gautama, the Kratu, Yati, Aruni, 
Sukracarya, 
Brhaspati, 
Astavakra, 
Vamana, 
Valmlki, Paribhadraka, Paila, Vais'ampayana, 
Praceta, 
Purujit, 
Bhrgu, 
Marlci, 
Madhujit, 
Prajapati, Kas'yapa, Aditi the mother of the gods, 
Diti the mother of Daityas, Sumantu, Subhanu, 
Kanva, 
Katyayana, 
Markandeya, 
Lomasa, 
Kapila, Panini, Pariyatra, Paribhadra, Pungava, 
Samvarta, Utathya, Nara, Narayana, Visvamitra, 
Satananda, Jabali, Taitila, Sandipani the teacher 
of 
yo g is 
and 
intellectuals, 
Upamanyu, 
Gauramukha, Maitreya, Srutasrava, Katha, Kaca, 
Karakha, Bharadvaja, with all the pupils arrived 
at the place of Vasudeva. Vasudeva on his part 
welcomed them prostrating before each one of 
them.
3 W lfw ? k ft WW R fW T T ?5*ТУ1(И:1 
{сЦЙчЬлУЙЧ 
Щ 
ll^^ll 
T T d -Щ Ш гТ Т ЪНЩ:
R frrm S : r n fw jl: 
я п гу у т : 113x 11
чГучучп
W
 У ^ У W l l ^ m i 
WU ЧУГЧЧЙНУ! WFZt
зщ туу у ч т у т y s jy y ч ч ч н д е п п з ^ п 
з п ^ у т т у у Ш 7 M H R I ^ r : ЧГЧТУЧ:1 
У У < У ? У Ч УУГТ У У У % f?TTm y f y i i ^ n 
^be.i<4 
УУУТ Т c^-sj Х У Ш
 fitl-ij
У 
: 11 3 6 11
In the meantime Brahma wearing a smile on 
his face and mounted on the goose arrived there. 
Parvatl arrived mounted over a gem-studded 
plane together with Siva, NandT, Mahakala, 
Vlrabhadra, 
Subhadraka, 
Manibhadra, 
Paribhadra, Karttikeya, Ganes'a, Indra mounted 
over Airavata, Dharma, the sun and moon, 
Kubera, Varuna, Pavana, Agni, Yama, Jayanta, 
Nalakflbara, all the planets, the Vasus, Rudra
with all the gan as, Adityas, Sesa and several 
other gods also arrived there. Vasudeva on his 
part adored each one of them prostrating on the 
ground. He adored all the gods with great 
devotion. At that point of time his head bowed in 
reverence, feeling emotional
У^У ЗУГУ 
hi sTgr чч щтг urch^T: hn?TT:l 
чуу fysmTT 
w m hfthTerai: 11 з я 11
^ H t УЧУГ: Ш 
УЧТУТ: I
■grroTt у дчЦ тп Г у ^ и п 
о u
Vasudeva said- Today Brahma himself has 
arrived in my abode who is the primeval 
Brahman, illustrious, the great lord, beyond all 
and maintains the universe, besides being the 
creator of the Vedas, the cause of the universe, 
eternal and the teacher of all the sages and 
siddh as.
ЧУУ? чпщта У $ГЧТ Щ ЧЩгйВ{1
чт4йс}>гдтМ д^гтшт утчй чч:1
ЧТУ^ ЧУЧ УЧУ ^УТЧТЧУЩГ: ЧЧ:11ХХМ 
T&J 
гЙ^скУ! a sse rt# ! У1 
Ш
 ynftit яусГЩ; 
1IX 3 11
His lotus-like feet are inaccessible even in 
dream and by reciting his name all the 
obstructions vanish in no time, the same Siva has 
also arrived here. Lord Ganesa has also arrived 
here who frees people from all the miseries, 
bestows welfare on the people, who is adored 
first of all, the one who is the foremost of the 
gods and the one who is the form of welfare and 
is established first of all in the ceremonies with 
the reciting of the m an tras invoking him. 
сш Ш г^Г *Р1УЙУ|фЧ1 У ч § ш 
^УТЧГ ЧУЧГ ЧЧУТ 
44R44TIIXXII
у £НУсЬЙЧ>Уч1 |1ХЧ!1 
tRITIWi WIT ЧТУ^ЧсЫч(T|)|
Щ ; 4T^t ЧЩТЧТКТ У [fetid vTOt ЧЧ:ПХ?,И 
71Щ1Й У УУТУТ У ЧТТ ЧТЩТГУЧ R f^l

=== PAGE 713 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 99
629
ТТ{%ТГТ RRTJTT RrEcRRHTIl'kUII 
f>4iu4l tT 
xJTSSfo&IT rT RTCtl
spits? фИфгчЪ? ш
 iteR rrii^
ii
3irmsf& mt 
щчтт w r^
i
трет? зйотхг ч<тн,||^яи
UH «<cjec((S^|ch ^dll
ш ч т г о T s f W ^ 
i ч о 11
Lord Karttikeya has also arrived who is adored 
by all the Yadus. Mahalaksmi has also arrived 
here who is the best of the goddesses and is 
extremely adorable. The goddess Parvati has also 
arrived here who is the primeval form of the 
universe, the form of the entire universe, 
Miilaprakrti, Isvarl, the best of all, the form of 
eternal Brahman, by adoring her during in the 
winter season, one gets his desire fulfilled, the 
one who is the eternal s'akti, compassionate one 
and has incarnated on the land of Bharata out of 
compassion. The same goddess Parvati, who is 
graceful to her devotees has arrives in my abode 
with all her attendants and gods. О Durga, since 
you have arrived in my abode therefore I feel 
myself to be quite graceful, my life has met with 
success. Thus Vasudeva binding a cloth around 
his neck, bowed in reverence to all the gods, the 
sages and the Brahmanas offering prayers to 
them and made sit them on the gem-studded 
throne, individually, 
трзгагцщ fgfyRrfhipJi ъ
IT R fri 14 ^11
yfacHtan?ilU|'re€r W T ipf
T&:
Cs
rtrrtrtr Ytu4
Wliq-kll 
RTtRR ctiftkp rT|
11Ц Ц11
43*j|JfR - ^ T Mo^dlcSn RfRKl:l
w ra ro m 
r =5rt: 11 ч ^ 11
Thereafter, 
he 
properly 
adored 
them 
individually with his mind filled with devotion,
He adored offering the gems, the diamonds, the 
jewels and the gem-studded ornaments, the 
garments, the flower garlands the fragrant 
sandal-paste to Brahma, the gods, the sages, 
Brahmana as and Garga, the family priest. At the 
auspicious time Ganesa was made to sit on the 
gem-studded there and he was adored first of all. 
The water of all the seven oceans was kept in 
pitchers which were decorated with flowers. The 
fragrant and cool water of Ganga was also 
brought together with the sacred water from Pus 
kara together with the pure milk preparations. 
Herambha Ganesa was adored with devotion, 
reciting the mantras, pouring the water over him. 
ckUIhiu RIPriT RlfeTTcHR dUcfl
щштищэм
4l4dl^T
7IRT Ч Т О WTddH.4h<ili
О Narada, Ganes'a was also offered the 
garland of Parijata flower, the ornaments of 
gems, the garment sanctified by fire, fragrant and 
the Sandal paste, the garland of flowers and 
gems and the finger ring. Thereafter he offered 
his prayer to lord Ganesa who happens to be the 
foremost of all the gods, the form of welfare, 
remover of obstruction, peaceful and eternal.
?f?t Stt$f?To RIP0 
3tT° HK^hi0
RJIdgg-РЙ 
RTR dcHci(dd,4)5SJPI:ll44ll

=== PAGE 714 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 99
629
m
 VMdMISSSTR: 
Chapter - 100
Aditi welcomes Parvati
ЧННГОТЗЭТЕГ
RTWt xf 
^Tt^r Ъ •q(d9raTH^II 
H rq ip rs^ fr щ з г ^ т m w стгш 
ЩШ1: 
^
 
■Цр^ТЦ^П^И
TRWt rr 
^T: ^T:l
ЗГЩЩ

=== PAGE 715 ===

630
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAtfAM
ЧаШзшЧ тщ ЧшгпЧ1^'(1ус|<1ч.1
УТ<11ЧКТчЫ)-{ дщ ш ^ W h i m i
О 
С\
Narayana said- Thereafter Aditi, Diti, Devaki, 
RohinI, Rati, Sarasvatl, the chaste Yasoda, 
Lopamudra, Arundhatl, Ahalya, Tara proceeded 
to the temple of Parvatl and bowing. In reverence 
to her again and again, they offered their 
salutation to her. Then after talking to her they 
made her enter into the gem-studded palace. 
There she was made to sit on the gem-studded 
lion throne and honoured offering the garland, 
the costumes, gems studded ornaments and was 
than established there.
^
 dchicpit щ 
^ Ч с к д и ч и
The goddess Devaki offered her the Parijata 
flowers, which were brought by Indra with great 
effort, at the lotus-like feet of Parvatl.
chTd 
31# lift'd RT41:11 ^ 11
The parting of her hair was adorned with the 
spot of vermilion while the forehead was 
adorned with the spot of sandal-paste. She was 
also decorated with kastiiri and saffron on all 
sides.
чЬгашга ц\ш \ч ggiftd
HRfFr хТ eft 
ebl|tlf^c([fRd^llV9ll
ЗРТтЬФ д 
T % 4TctM-d4l: i
TFT g ftnl% ^dgi4}:ll<£ll
She was served with sweet food, offering the 
cool fragrant water, the fragrant betel was also 
offered to her, the nails of her toes were painted 
with saffron and she was served by moving the 
white fly-whisks.
TFRg TficHf 
*0
Cs 
' 
s3
чдчицш fgfagidldhdgiTi: Tmt:ii<?n
tNch'Au 
dpi<*'-<qi TRUTH: I
R^rTTII^oll
Devaki thus adored Parvatl and thereafter she 
also adored the wives of the sages, the chaste
woman whose son and husband were alive, the 
princesses, the daughter of all the gods, the 
beautiful daughters of the Nagas and the sages 
besides the daughters of all other relatives
HUT ЯЯТШ ТЩ СПЛИНУ
RfvT дтяттчш Ф гащ ш дТ^РЩ1ЩП
Several of the musical instrument were 
sounding delightfully and welfare mantras were 
recited serving food to the Brahmanas.
ftigt WIT4HI TmiUlM^ddTRI
T trg ft: T T ^ lftr : w l ^ ^ Г и ё < Ж 1 Н .1 1 ^ 1 1
The village deities named Bhairavl and SasthI 
were 
adored, 
offering 
sixteen 
types 
of 
adoration's.
i p t HTWR 
^TTTTW RfRqi
тгадтчгн crg^cTw sfcrWTii^n
Then Devaki the spouse of vasudeva had the 
recitations of the Vedas and welfare mantras, 
made by the Brahmanas.
gi
mMlcfq тйеьК ТТЛ 
TRh^:ll?4ll
Devaki who was graceful to her son made 
Balabhadra and Krsna bathe with the best of the 
water of the Ganga from heaven brought in 
golden pitchers. She then offered the costumes, 
the sandal-paste, the flowers garland and the 
ornaments made with the best of gems. They 
were thus fully decorated.
"ЦЩФЛжгегГ: -щи: српт RH gi
зтпш д w
 ^ччЦгип д ч п д н ^ и
О Narada, having been decorated with the 
ornament in the form of mother, Sri Krsna 
reached the assembly of great sages.
^гдт it w m тпднттш т к ч gi 
тзд fftm i f t p g fmt snftg 
-дчд^д cbiR^dl 4uV<=rc:i 
ijgggvgf sRuVci д>гтд тдц^дтдп^и

=== PAGE 716 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 100
631
O n their arrival B ra h m a , S iva , Sesa, D h a rm a 
and S u rya got up to w elcom e them . Thereafter 
the 
gods, 
the sages, 
K a rttik e ya and Ganesa 
offered prayer to lord K rsn a separately.
B ra h m a said- О lord, yo u are inexplicable and 
y o u take to the hum an fo rm fo r the o n ly to grace 
y o u r devotees. 
Y o u are inexplicable b y the 
V e d a s , 
Th erefore 
w h o 
could 
be 
com petent 
enough to praise y o u .
ЗШхГ
chf^nri gpjuit 
-RT^nit ■щгст % ч;и
f% 
хГ 
o|
M ah a d e va said- Y o u alw ays pervades all the 
creatures 
in 
the 
universe 
and 
still 
rem ain 
unattached, yo u are the witness o f all the deeds 
o f the people and are im perishable. Therefore 
w h a t type o f adoration can I o ffe r to y o u because 
yo u are form less, de vo id o f gums and are also 
nirguna.
з<нчг*|{й^ц|изадчит g:<sMKU[4jR*n 
"qirfgniTW # я т xf 
xri
-ф з fg w p d w n fr fonfoT fiBtqrfai ш
A n a n ta 
said- 
О 
lo rd, 
I 
am 
de vo id 
o f 
kn o w le d g e , then h o w could I k n o w about the 
endless lo rd , because y o u happen to be the cause 
o f the creation o f crores o f globes and y o u 
redeem the people fro m the ocean o f universe. 
Innum erable globes are lodged into the hair-pits 
o f M a h a visn u w h ic h are astonishing as w e ll as 
artificial.
rifct 
?T^[ribUjfvicnr4chl:l
rfarfft ЧТШТ rraTIR^II
O u t o f them the noble people, the gods, 
B ra h m a , V is n u and S iva , represent y o u r arhs'as 
and all the h o ly places are located in the land o f 
Bharata.
"tsnfWcT 
W T IR iill
I pervade the universe in m y tin y fo rm o f 
N a g a . Y o u have established m y s e lf on the back 
o f tortoise live the m osquito sits on the huge 
elephant.
чтчтпцгс gsg 
4tf^r -%Фщ\
щ ш
 w
 4if^r xi gtffagii 
щ /feujtt: v r m хг йзжг 
cr?xri
3PriR?xt M^fgtun д а ш
Th ere is nothing sm aller in the w o rld than the 
atom and there is nothing greater than M a h a vis 
nu but y o u happen to be be yon d M a h a visn u and 
no one else is beyond y o u , therefore y o u are 
greater than the greatest and sm aller than the 
smallest. Y o u happen to be the fo rm o f w ater 
w h ich is the base o f M a h a visn u . W a te r is the 
base 
o f Goloka 
and 
yo u 
have 
taken 
to 
im m ovable fo rm .
зтактй 
Firawrei:!
О virtuous one, y o u take to h um an fo rm fo r 
the sake o f yo u r devotees. Y o u r breathing is the 
base o f all the creatures in the w o rld ,.
'q<*3<%Acfear vPir ^ : hfcr xfi
ч ^ 
r ч i i
Y o u had p ro vide d m e w ith several hoods in 
earlier times and therefore collectively w ith these 
hoods intend to recite y o u r g lo ry bu t y o u have 
not bestow ed m e w ith the divine kn o w le dg e .
cctUPRi ф Фщ 
4
4 ft ^
 foriMT Ъ 4 f| ?1HWch: f? R :ll 
t t w i 
frf: W
 cpq^ll^oii
T h e gods said- О lord y o u are endless and in 
case A n a n ta is n ot able to recite y o u r g lo ry, 
B ra h m a h im se lf and lord S iva are unable to do so 
w h ile Sarasvatl becom es double before y o u then 
h o w can the w e a k people recite y o u r g lo ry.

=== PAGE 717 ===

632
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
4 VitHi: 'RTtjJ ^Tqi
eRT 
TRT: f% 
Ш Й 3^113 *11
The sages said- 0 lord in case the Vedas are 
unable to recite your glory, then how could one 
in spite of our being well-versed in the Vedas, 
recite your glory.
^ ш
 
^ с г ■gftfo: дкпц
rll4i ^p=T ^ctrcd H<<MI 
1ч<зНЧ>
1ШПЧ ЖТЩ TTTHNi 
У лщ й-! I i i 11
Thus one who recites the stotra composed by 
the sages and the gods, at the time of adoration, 
purifying himself and with the mind filled with 
devotion, he enjoying all the pleasures in this 
world achieves the divine knowledge and 
proceeds to Goloka ultimately.
ff?T sftsiglo 4510 $tl<jhWM**ttslo 3tT° hks^i0

=== PAGE 718 ===

632
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
H e had a circular spot o f kastUrl painted on his 
forehead and it looked like the m o o n am ong the 
clouds.
T^R^FRT^R#rtf|RT4.l 
■ЩЪ 
^
 ‘d|cT ЩЦ11ЧII
H e had tw o arm s, beautiful dark co m p le xio n , 
w as the beloved o f R a d h a , 
quite 
charm ing, 
w earing a sm ile on his delightful face. T a k in g to 
hum an fo rm , in order to grace his devotees, he 
w as w earing armlets and w ristlets o f gem s. H e 
w as sobbing in the lap o f his father together w ith 
Balabhadra.
m 4fcTcfiT<rt rT 
ЯЧПТГ1
^рш5тштттаг wRdciirW^cb'H.ii'aii
Chapter -101
Yajnopavita of Balarama and Kr$na
чкгаш зсгггт
TErt^r Ът дчят f^Tg% я н %1
wfot 
i t t m ш м м т 11^и 
N a ra ya n a said- A s soon as the gods and the 
sages com pleted the m ental prayer o f K rs n a , they 
spotted K rsn a clad in pltdmbara standing in the 
court-yard.
m i зЛ<|[чн1^см ЧсАчзгвЗ
^Nr WRTfalcTOT Ш \ 19 11
О 
sage, 
as 
the 
fresh 
clouds appear w ith 
lightening and the line o f sky-larks, sim ilarly 
lord 
K rsn a w as 
standing 
there w earing 
the 
garland o f jasm ine flow ers.
зптй 'чтлёП'ад Гсьм(!
Thereafter at the arrival o f the auspicious tim e 
w hen the lord o f lagna w as in the high position 
looked u p on and favourable b y the stars w h o 
w ere casting their glance. A t the point o f tim e, 
b o w in g to the com m and o f the B rahm anas, he 
started, the cerem ony b y reciting the w elfare 
mantras.
WTJira w •щ^п<411
с&ЧП?** 
ytlf^dH.1
^ 
^ 
xi 
fyrarqi i ^ 11
TTRnt: qUyifc RWT 
||
A fte r offering a hundred g old coins to the 
Brahm anas, he bo w e d before In d ra , the sages 
and the fa m ily priest, besides Gan esa, S u rya , 
A g n i, S iva and Pa rva tl w ith utm ost de vo tio n . H e 
adored them w ith sixteen types o f offerings 
together w ith all the gods.
рПЙсПЯЧ 
w f^i
Зтзг чзгтРтатщ^г яэ<ят ч1з;?тяг^ [:1

=== PAGE 719 ===

KR§NA-JANMA-KHAI4I?A, CHAPTER 101
633
^тсГТ XT щ т xl УНхЩИфЫ ХП1^ п
Then with the reciting of the Vedic hymns, the 
bodies of both the brothers were plastered with 
fragrant material. Thereafter the gods, the 
Dikpalas, nine planets were adored together with 
the 
sixteen mothers 
by making five-fold 
offerings, the ghee was poured on them, seven 
times.
Щ Ч&П TTfW w f t TT:I 
ffetK S -tfftciluq 
<ШП^П
фЩ|Н Ч<Ч1гч}||^*|1
^
 ^ w i xndhft w n^i^it^4ii 
3T4vTWTTTVj утЫЧ|(и|сН4^1<сКН.1
■^Ttfw Xl 
t^kll
уЙЧ^Г?х) ^«Уи^ЭИ 
^Tt^T 
ftzt TTTfkft XT Ш Wifi I
Thereafter adoring the king of Cedi, he moved 
forward and completed the Vrddhi-sraddha and 
adored some other gods also. Thereafter he 
performed the yajha has prescribed in the Vedas, 
after which both Krsna and Balarama were 
adorned with yajhopavlta. The sage Sandlpani 
bestowed the Gayatrl hymn to both the boys. 
First of all Parvatl gave the jewels. The father 
Vasudeva gave him a garland of gems together 
with the garland of white flowers and Durva- 
grass. Aditi, Diti, Devaki, Yas'oda, RohinI, 
Savitrl, Sarasvatl and other goddesses also 
offered him the bhiksa in gems and pearls.
4R4F4T tMcb-iii: pfagdu 
«ifa-tll «JFSJciHT xl ftffMffi: Rd<yvilxHl:U
The daughters of the gods, Nagas, the chaste 
woman, the princesses and the damsels of the 
relatives, offered the bhiksa, with their eyes filled 
with affection.
cJWItrTr xl ЦсНН! xf frfluftl
fkw ft wist хг Tf?r: '«raw «rfaTiRoii
fasti
МщтУ xt irak 
m i
Thereafter IndranI, VarunanI, the spouse of the 
wind god, RohinI, the spouse of Kubera, Svaha, 
Rati also gave him the gem-studded ornament as 
bhiksa. Both Balabhadra and Krsna accepted the 
offerings and distributed them among Garga and 
their teacher. After completion of the ceremonies 
according to the Vedic traditions, the teacher 
Garga was presented with the daksina.
§ % чтагад# й хг 
Tgmfmm i ? 3 11
фштга чгг^га щ ь r: 
ч^: iwrai fncrtra 
ijdw cfR'kii 
« к фМТ ЩЧ фЩ 
дгрт скг:1 
ЗЙ k k Ч^ТхТ 
хГ 4fd9ldl
4rai?£nw «ггадчш ^RcniRmi 
The gods and the Brahmanas were respectfully 
offered the food. Then all the people who had 
arrived to participate in the yajha variously 
offered blessings to Sri Krsna and Baladeva and 
went back to their abodes. After completion of 
the auspicious ceremonies Nanda and Yasoda 
took the boys in their laps and started kissing 
their faces. At that point of time both Nanda and 
Yasoda became emotional and started sobbing. 
Sri Krsna then somehow reassured them and 
spoke to them.
SftfiWT 4jc)|x|
Щ
 W I «
ж
 Ш
tfam щ
 fauff fa km xt w m fa-.n ^ n
Sri Krsna said- "O mother Yasoda and О 
father, both of you reached here delightfully, you 
happen to be our mother who has brought us up 
and you happen to be our real father.". 
з^Рсятм шст iiTwifa тгаркрп 
Tft: 
W 4 ^ Ч 1б1^ч1 ГчшЧИ^ 1 1
О father, we are moving to the abode of the 
sage Sandlpani in order to achieved learnings.

=== PAGE 720 ===

634
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAtfAM
зттга Tgf%rt эдй ?raf?r
cfUR: 
cRFff 
^TTffT Wl 1 ^ 11
3-rifelT ^uiihJ
^ 3 5 :3t ^ ^ Ъ tffe Xj 
^ II
тгат 
га <гга гг 'yiPnmft
4 $ 
^TFF^ ra ife cRSlfezife I з о 11
After our return from that place, after a long 
time, we shall surely come to you. О mother, it is 
the time alone which accepts and also creates 
differences. So much so, the separation, meeting, 
the pleasure and pain and the welfare are all 
managed by the time itself. I have imparted the 
knowledge of tattvas to the respected father. He 
would surely narrate to you the secret of the 
same.
$cucK4i 'Jihm ЧМ1 ЩТЗ'Щ'ЗШТ <4till
dcfl^l §ТЩ ЩЩ 
ЗТТ^Ч^ЩНЗ *11 
ъ звтта f e r n rn
4 ^ : 
w f i I^ 4 f5 ^ 7 rrril5 4ll
Thus speaking Krsna the lord of the universe 
went to the court of Vasudeva. Remaining there 
for sometime, both of them went to the abode of 
the teacher Sandlpani, thereafter both Nanda and 
Yasoda humbly spoke to Vasudeva and DevakI 
and got ready to depart.
чтбттГиг ^crnf 
Rffcrra^i fife Ш 1
TFT 
deleft 
|3 ^ 11
Т^гасртТ: УТТ1 
3TITTRII?^II
At that point of time Devaki offered to Nanda 
several types of gems and jewels, gold, rubies, 
diamond, costumes, sanctified by fire. Vasudeva 
and Krsna presented Nanda with white horses, 
elephants and the chariot made of gold.
тга1тргзг?гаит 
f%5RT: I
^
 g^TI t ? Ц11
At the time of their departure all the 
Brahmanas, 
Devaki 
and 
other 
damsels,
Vasudeva, Akrnra and Uddhava delightfully 
followed them.
тщт й Tii
ТЩЧТ гГ ТГЧТга W Tferaw d ■qf:ii?^n
Reaching the bank of river Yamuna, all of 
them started crying with grief, thus after talking 
with one and other they returned to their abodes.
feral 4^cu?tqi
HHHdfifui mra w m t тщета g ^ rii^ n
4 ^ c h <<=tchi ТГ
4RTWTfnt 4T5T 
W
 TMTI I 3 6 11 
Tffi>l4lfr|eWgR rT firera W tjsi)441^1 
щфяЬ 
jfeft- Tfe 
<?и
О sage, at the command of Vasudeva, the 
widow KuntI also returned to her abode with her 
sons and the gems given to her by Vasudeva. 
Vasudeva and Devaki also gave away enough of 
gems and jewels, costumes, gold, silver, rubies, 
sapphire and various types of sweets to the 
Brahman as and the bards for the welfare to their 
sons.
fernm ятгзгт xft <лтгатгатг 
11* о 11 
?ш1чт wrarapir ra frraur ^rarfe^i 
Щ П 4(ui4lfu|cW yThlcH^iHi^:ir«^ll
Thereafter the festivities were gracefully 
performed which included the recitation of the 
Vedas and the name of the lord, serving food to 
the Brahmanas. Thereafter the gems, jewels, 
sapphire and precious stones besides 
the 
costumes were distributed to the relatives as 
gifts.
ffT 3Tfe>To iTflo
о ЗтТ° ЧШ^ТТ0 
:N*o*|l

=== PAGE 721 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 102
635
Chapter -102
Prosecuting of study by Kp§na and 
Balabhadra with Sandlpani
чттгФэт зсгга-
ттШчЭД? Ягдт гг 
gcjri 
4W Tt чШшч,11^11 
*1 ^ггт адчГщ ^ft: l
ят% 
сгчзта ^sftfacppmi
Narayana said- Both Krsna and Balabhadra 
reached the abode of sage Sandlpani and bowed 
in reverence to the chaste wife of the teacher. 
Earning blessing from her lord Hari presented 
the precious gems to the wife of the teacher and 
then spoke.
fetal 
I'M «lift cfifedT ctifotsn rpTl
Sri Krsna said- О Brahman, I have a desire to 
complete all the learning, therefore you start the 
teaching at an auspicious time.
зйПтрёп 
w n w ci
trar ж&щ х г^ :и *11
япттчш enravi ^ Traifeii
Cv 
s3
дкштчш 
ж ^ т ч .11 ч 11
Thereafter with the reciting of the word от, 
the sage gave his consent, he then welcomed 
them offering madhuparka, eatables, the cow, 
the costumes and the sandal-paste. He also 
offered them the sweets and the fragrant betel, 
talking to them with sweet voice. He also offered 
prayer to the lord .
ЧТ 
«ПЯ wftyT ЖМИ 1
11 ^ 11
^ti)c||-=tJ|chv4cifl ЯтЫЧ! Я|Ч|С(СГ1Я1РЭ11
Sandlpani said- You are the one beyond 
measure, the primeval Brahman, the sole abode 
of all the pleasures, the eternal lord who moves 
at will, self illumining, unattached, unpresented, 
unrestrained, the only lord of the devotees, the 
family god of the devotees, the one who takes to 
human form for the welfare of the devotees, 
kalpavrksa for the fulfilment of the desires of the 
devotees, who is adorable the devotees more than 
their lives.
т е г w re rtsfa 
i
ЯВШТ 
ЯЧТН ^eft ЯЩВПЯ xlll^ll
You take to the form of a boy with your 
illusion and are adored by Brahma, Siva, Sesa 
and have incarnated on earth to rid her of her 
burden.
^TtfrRt Я fSr^cf glgj^livc ЗЯШЧЧ 
strraRt Ятьй<эд 
■g^n^ii
■cf-<dl(^dRclI^- ■yfvRT ^TbctrRHH,! I\ ° 11
ЙГ<г11Ч^Ч^(Я.1 IWI
ЗГЯтБЯсН <Т&ЧКЯ-У рт\ЯЧ^1
гГ 
JRrpT Т$:1
w \ m Зя><*яч1^ч w f ii^ u
*ЧЧ1ТЧЧ'|УсН^|
atт^яРгчЬлячпГпн Я ^ П ^ И 
eft ЩШГ 
ЖЧН1ЧЯ1ГЦ-)г1Чч1 
^0|?чГч 
сЬНЧ||Ч1 ёг -СЙ1РЛ^||^Ч11
ттгзта? 4ferawT4i4rflsi% хг явгсп 
ЯГЗ й 
T4W W
 w i l l
Т<ПгЧК1ЧТЧ W 1 Ы Г : чр^чокч^ч Ж1^И
The yogis conceive you as the eternal flame 
and the devotees meditated upon the same flame 
delightfully with devotion. The one who had two 
forms and holds a flute in his hands, whose all 
the limbs are plastered with the sandal-paste, the 
one who has dark complexion and wears a serene 
smile on his face, the one who is graceful to his

=== PAGE 722 ===

№
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAiyAM
devotees, wears the yellow lower garment and 
long garland of forest flowers. You are the one 
who can put to shame the god of love with a 
single glance, the one whose lotus-like feet look 
beautiful with the application of the red paint and 
the kaustubha gem adores the chest, the one who 
possesses the beautiful figure, one who smiles 
gracefully with delight and is clad in beautiful 
garments, the one who is adored by the gods and 
happens to be the god of all the gods, lord of the 
universe and influences the three worlds with his 
illusion, who happer . to be the best of all 
possessing the lustre of crores of the gods of 
love, who is quite charming, the one who himself 
is the lord, adorned with all the invaluable gem- 
studded ornaments who is the best of all, 
bestower of the boons and happens to be the 
cause of all the four Vedas. The same lord has 
arrived here for learnings, playfully at my place, 
you happen to be the one who always remains 
engrossed in his own soul. You are virtuous and 
complete in all respects therefore all the people 
are desirous of seeking knowledge from you in 
various fields.
ЗШ ^ ТТТГсТ ЗРТ Ш
 Ф я RRT 
tllfdsKri xT 
■нЧк'1 xf 
I ^ 11
М чт сМцщчсп%ггч;м u 11
rckqiq^Htl Tjt-TT TJfT: ЯТ^ЩтГФ^ I
The wife of the teachers said- My life has 
success today, my birth has been successful, my 
chastefulness has been successful and our abode 
also has become successful, the hand with which
I have offered the food to you, the same right 
hand of mine has become successful, your feet 
are like the holy places and with your arrival 
here, my abode has been sanctified with the dust 
of your feet, my house has been purified besides 
the court yard with the sight of both your feet, 
both of us have been relieved of the cycle of 
birth and death.
xr 
т т з;:1
■dlfcPwPRlfa cKhffoT 
rTliy oil
Because the grief, the pain, the ailment, the 
deeds, the birth, hunger and thirst are painful to a 
person till such time they do not have a glance at 
your lotus-like feet. О lord, you happen to be the 
killer of the time, the creator and the destroyer 
also.
ЯЖ Ч1Ш ^ 441
I? «hurt«bH 
яч
<trcf ^
 
ч т 1ч1*Р|фчРП
TIT 
фс31 ?fT gR: ТЗТ?Я
ттпппчттт ^плт w 
w i ^ т 11
О compassionate one, you destroy the illusion, 
you be graceful on us. Thus speaking the eyes of 
the wife of the teacher were filled with tears, she 
took the lord in her lap and started suckling him 
from the breasts like Devakl.
ч т о rt зет Tmfb щ я gRigri Rtrgi 
w
 чг1в 1ФГчя 
TmfiRT R f TriTfrifiiy^ii 
Wcfc^T 
fRzzrr ч?дт R
Sri Krsna said- О mother, why do you offer a 
prayer to an infant like me? This body is all 
falsehood and perishable, you take to divine form 
which is free from the birth, death, old age and. 
proceed to Goloka with your husband.
xjgrt ri<T-qfercn gPtguctlql
<МН’| xf 
xT RuftRT h^TFI^TUrtfl 
^<4j|U|| xtdritfT 
R $ 11
mfoicWHi 
w gig' 
lit xi р к т Цгт 
R 'mi
■^lahrie ggufai grl' i ^ pjtt 3^1
дъГядгё тт^г g fl^sigg; grqr
gPljfcn W giR rTcTT^ftWRIlR^II

=== PAGE 723 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 102
637
TT^efigrTR^I
T h u s S ri K rsn a attained all the know ledge 
fro m Sandlpani including the fo u r V e das in a 
m onths tim e, restored his dead son to h im . H e 
then gave a w a y three lakhs o f gem s, five lakhs o f 
rubies, fo u r lakhs o f diam onds, five lakhs o f 
je w e ls , tw o lakhs o f rubies and three lakhs o f 
inaccessible divine garm ents, the garland given 
to h im b y goddess D u rg a , the finger ring and ten 
crores o f gold coins to the teacher. Thereafter, 
the best o f the ornam ents fo r all the lim bs o f the 
ladies and the costumes sanctified b y fire w ere 
offered to the w ife o f the teacher, then Sandlpani 
handed o ve r all the costumes and ornam ents to 
his son and m ounting on the divine chariot 
proceeded to Goloka. W itnessing this supreme 
lord H a ri also reverted to his abode.
ТТсГ TdTtr^cTtzr rrfrr щ чтец
^ 13^ *T: q^f^<Jcb4JI3 *11 
four'll 4 ^ 1 rPERt ЧТ? RVWtl 
ЗТРРгсШ:
?? 
Ш§' ЯТСГ 
-ВЙёГ^:
m 1ч^Т 
ёШгГ Ш 11^ 1:11^^11
О N a ra d a , y o u listen to the other stories o f the 
lord, w hosoever w o u ld recite this auspicious 
stotra w o u ld achieve the infallible devotion o f 
lord K rs n a . Th e re is no doubt about it. W ith the 
influence o f the same stotra a person w ith ou t 
separation w o u ld achieve the best o f reputation 
and a foolish w o u ld becom e a learned one. 
E n jo y in g all the pleasures he w o u ld achieve the 
abode o f the lord w here he w o u ld attain the 
slavehood o f lord H a ri. Th ere is no doubt about 
it.
ЗЙ1Гё?Г0 
sHiJiuiNI-urslo ЗтТ° ЧНЩЧТ0

=== PAGE 724 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 102
637
372Г
Chapter -103
Building of Dvaraka by Kr§na
4RPHH
зтегн The? 
ШЩ ftcft RrR:)
тгас% сгезтй' ъ 
w
 ф: 11 я 11
7TRR dcJOTlc' Ъ
ъщщ ффц ^ 
ЩТ 'R: IR11
T£jf*RsRft *1*ЧМЬ1Ч # ТТЧЦ!
4t 
чт ^Ш гтттч;! I ^ 11
^ШТ ф т <pi щ Ш гп#Щ |
STojrfwRWlt ЯЩ ЯТЯ ТТТЧ^П^П 
шятч щ: фы ят^ ^RTiPrfy^i 
fav w tf n fp ry g щ ф г. ehfuWRWmmi 
тГпш тй Rstf д-
яттч<т: чпчг'Чсцттпдутажчт^:11^11
Narayana said- Krsna together with Balarama 
returned to Mathura and offered his salutation to 
his father and seated under the banyan tree he 
summoned gracefully, Garuda, ocean of milk and 
Visvakarma. Thereafter discarding the costumes 
of cowherds, he clad himself in the royal 
garments. In the meantime the Sudarsana-cakra 
also arrived before the lord having the lustre of 
the crores of suns, it was illustrious like Hari 
himself, destroyer of the enemies, infallible and 
was the best of all the weapons. Mounting on the 
gem-studded chariot the lord, Visvakarma, 
together with his pupils and the ocean feeling 
panicky, bowed before the lord in reverence. 
Thereafter the all-pervading lord spoke to them 
smilingly.
Ч^ГчН! 73R4
й чпттг? ^ u^ kiwiPm f4%tt4;ii^ii
Sri Krsna said- О virtuous ocean, you give me 
a hundred yojanas of land for dwelling, which 
could be returned to you.

=== PAGE 725 ===

638
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
чт 
| cBifr Щ нгёд
тчатВг тг Tf^rt cbml4 ^ чМчсТТчнйп
^ггчГч wifori т* hiHnflfahPinsn
О architect, y o u bu ild such a type o f city here 
w h ich should be becom e be yon d com parison in 
the three w o rlds. It should be charm ing fo r all, 
beautiful fo r all the ladies, desirable b y the 
devotees, the best like V a ik u n th a and beyond 
even the heavens.
WTFT ■qrafaqfft STW{ll?o||
О virtuous lord o f the birds, till such tim e 
V is'vakarm a 
builds 
u p 
the 
n ew 
c ity, 
yo u 
accom pany h im throughout the day and n ight.
сг tRtn# 
fulfil
зШщакагг $ 3nrg: 
^
 fo r
О best o f the Cakra, " Y o u rem ain w ith m e 
through out the day and n igh t." О sage, thus 
speaking to everyone and receiving his approval, 
all others left the place accept the cakra.
т а г чж уШтттт! w m fh ii^ u 
fa fe r щ щ й 
WH M l 
зщ%т тщтнт 
: 11 ^ 11
О 
virtuous 
one, 
thereafter 
lord 
K rsn a 
enthroned 
the 
father 
o f K a ih sa 
k n o w n 
as 
U grasen a as the kin g beside several other K s 
atriyas. H e defeated Jarasandha sk ilfu lly and also 
kille d K a la y a va n a . Thereafter the process o f 
b u ild in g the city w as started.
11 ^ 11
ЧШТИ^ЧИ
Rf&TRr: 
l^ ll
ЖГ5РТТ^Г:
Rf&lRr: 
hft^Td: l
11 u 11
тртГ^;| 
i M : 11 ^ 11
RTJM ?TTJt ^
 ■q^IW fB4H4I^M9oll
g fe ifo ■гпсгВгц^ат^^|
IhTcTd^: ^щгозё#: HchTU!^:l 
^H^gRHtfvr: VtH<*-TlPl'4l^:ll9?ll 
жч 
gr шФв щ щ щ гг hte?Ti 
3i^TO4^4Wiftr TjRi(sr<*^ra^4 ^t ir^ ii
S ri K rsn a said- О V is va k a rm a , y o u b u ild a 
charm ing city spread o ver an area o f a hundred 
yojanas, having the puppets m ade o f rubies, 
em eralds, 
the 
best 
o f 
sapphire, 
charm ing 
Paribhadra, Palanka, celebrated je w els, sulphur, 
gdlima, m oon stone, sun-stone and crystal. T h e y 
should have the shades like y e llo w , dark, w h ite , 
blue like the 
seeds 
o f pom egranate, 
y e llo w 
gorocana, like the seed as lotus flo w e r, like blue 
lotuses, the c o llyriu m , w h ite campaka flo w e r, 
shining like m olten g o ld, hundred tim es m ore 
valuable 
than 
the 
g o ld, 
slightly 
red, 
m ost 
beautiful, h e a vy, the best o f all and city should 
be bu ilt w ith the best o f gem s according to the 
signs o f architecture, m ore or less, according to 
various designs. T ill such tim e y o u bu ild the c ity, 
the Yaksa s w ill bring the gem s fro m H im a la y a 
throughout the day and night. T h e seven lakhs o f 
Yaksa s w ill be deputed b y K u b e ra , a lakh o f 
Vetalas and a lakh o f kusmandas b y 
S iv a , 
D an avas b y Parvatl the daughter o f H im a la y a 
beside the Brahm araksasas w o u ld assist y o u in 
the construction w o rk .
Ш ж иГвзгттяргм м<ш^Птнч1
Y o u 
bu ild 
beautiful 
houses 
fo r 
sixteen 
thousand and eight hundred o f, m y spouses 
w h ich should be surrounded b y the m oats and

=== PAGE 726 ===

KFt§NA-JANMA-KHANpA, CHAPTER 103
639
high bou ndary w a lls , each one o f these houses 
should 
have 
tw elve 
room s 
w ith 
the 
m ain 
entrance.
-gcRT 
efif^ET cb4IS^:l
ъ ф ц щ а \ ъ
^^T4iwt 
Rhcbiiuii ushr s rn ^ ii
T h e y 
should 
have 
the 
artificial 
doors, 
b e autifu lly painted, the should be deprived o f the 
evil trees and should have enough o f the popular 
types o f trees, in the court-yard should have 
auspicious sym bols and Candra-vedha. S im ilarly 
other houses should be bu ilt fo r the people o f 
Y a d u 's race and the divine asramas fo r their 
attendants.
T h e palace o f kin g U grasena should be the 
best and the as'rama o f V a su d e va should be 
Sarvatobhadra (open from all fo u r sides).
% % 
IvERI
dT3< ^
V is va k a rm a said- О lord o f the universe, yo u 
tell m e w h ich one o f the tree is praise-w orthy 
and w h ich one is a prohibited one. W h ic h one o f 
them produces g o o d or bad results? Y o u kin d ly 
tell m e all.
rf fylfot ^
ш w i 
^ Tmti i ? <? n
^Tf f^f?T ^
 y<=t^l 
i% w
t 
щ MifpiMi ^ Ы ти ^о и 
4fvt ffm irR f^f?r f r cTWsm 
HicfeiTimi 
tnrnjf чГнашп 
qn
щтштт ъ 
w ягдташ о т щ |
^ T ^ T T R t: 
ТПТГП^ -RII
зтч^гт дт отт ^ тгё чт
О lord w ith the fall o f w hose bone the place 
becom e auspicious apd w ith the fall r f w hose
bone it becom es inauspicious. T o w a rd s w h ich 
side o f the cam p the w ater is auspicious and on 
w h ich side it becom es inauspicious? О lord o f 
the gods the boundary w a ll, m oats, the gates, the 
houses and their enclosure w alls should be o f 
w h ich sizes? О lo rd , the w o o d o f w h ic h tree 
should be used in the bu ilding o f a cam p and the 
w o o d o f w h ich trees as inauspicious. Y o u k in d ly 
tell m e.
ЗШгЬ 
ЕГПЩ:1
fylfo ts 
tpitrecsre:II3*N
S ri K rs n a said- In case the coconut tree is 
planted in the as'rama, the householder achieve 
riches, these trees w h e n planted tow ards the east 
or north-east bestow s son to the householder.
^ b l tlfvn&ST rIMral 4 % T :I 
TmiTfSi: 
йчся-^тап13411
f4Wnri
РТЩФг HWftr 
cfSTTII^II 
МИГАЕТ p r^ q ^ p it УТ<ШП1
Rqdl^rl 
■qiir % ^
 T jftll^ll
T h e tree bestow s w elfare all rou nd. In case a 
m ango tree is planted to the east o f the house, the 
householder achieves enough o f riches and it 
bestow s w elfare everyw here. О divine architect, 
the trees o f w o o d -a p p le , ja c k -fru it, the lem on and 
ju ju b i, i f planted on the eastern side, they bestow 
sons to the householder and in case they are 
planted on the southern side, the householder 
gets the riches all the tim es, T h e prosperity o f 
householder increases w ith them .
5^ЩТШгИ11
qf^rir тгагги^ я 11
f^TFT tttsK V^ 
ftyilMdl
T(U)ch: 
Я5(Я^Т8Ш1'ко II
T h e trees o f sala fruit, banana, m yro b a lan , 
w h e n planted in the southern side they increase 
the friends. T h e y are auspicious fo r all sides, the 
betel nut tree w hen planted on the southern side

=== PAGE 727 ===

640
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURA^AM
provides the householder w ith riches, sons and 
fortunes, in case they are planted in the w est, 
they bestow pleasure and in case they are planted 
in the north-east, they bestow , w elfare all round, 
the campa tree is auspicious w herever it is 
planted.
g iftr
c ll^ c b K ^ v c lV ^
H fl lLbVf 
Ш
 
f4% ?PTI 1 *^ 1 1
T h e w h ite gourd, p u m p kin , Ayambu, Palasa, 
date p alm and cucum ber are alw ays auspicious in 
the royal cam p. T h e purple goose fo o t, w o o d 
apple and bringle plants are quite auspicious. T h e 
creepers w ith fruits are alw ays auspicious fo r all 
places.
c R p p it 
f^TfsA: T h b fc r rUГ * ? 11
"EfcT: i
О architect, thus I have spoken to y o u about 
the 
auspicious trees n o w y o u 
listen 
to 
the 
inauspicious trees. T h e w ild tree should neither 
be planted in a city n or in an asrama. T h e 
banyan tree should n ot be planted in a cam p 
w here the danger o f thieves alw ays rem ains. B u t 
in the big cities, the banyan tree is quite popular. 
T h e ve ry sight o f this tree showers m erit on the 
people.
t o 'PfadTHi w s f t гт-кци
In the asrama cities and the villages, the plant 
o f the cotton tree is totally prohibited. It causes 
m isfortune to the kin g .
ч ftfeg: yfacgyg 3JTOP 41ГЩ *ri
% 
ЧёПтТ
О architect, 
the planting o f tam arind tree 
should be planted in the villages but should never 
be planted in the cam ps. It destroys learnings and
intelligence and creates pain, w ith the planting o f 
this tree, the people have to loose the riches. 
Therefore one should carefully escape fro m the 
same.
T h e planting o f the tam arind in an asrama is 
strictly prohibited and its plantation is restricted. 
In the tow ns and villages its plantation is not 
prohibited but it is quite popular.
ftfag:
T h e planting o f palm tree and the tree w ith 
thorns are strictly prohibited in the cam p because 
they destroy the learning and the intelligence, 
therefore they should be kept as a distance.
^T?cT -quicPi^Hi qpq xt -q^OT^iiqoli
In the cities as w e ll as the villages the planting 
o f cereals like gram s is not prohibited but it is 
quite popular, the p a d d y is considered to be quite 
auspicious there.
ШЧ THt 
Ш
 *1 Ш
*11
^■Octchl 
n(*)q -in {4 *П
ч шит 
rRSSuci'*!
h'jlRTMlw ^qqvril'Hi *T 
*П
In the villages as w e ll as in the cities, beside, 
dsramas, the planting o f sugar-cane is considered 
to be quite auspicious together w ith as'oka tree, 
sirisa 
and kadamba 
tree. 
T h e 
planting 
o f 
turm eric, ginger, black m yro balan , as w e ll as 
green m yrobalan are quite auspicious and bestow 
w elfare in the land o f construction, the bone o f 
an elephant is considered to be quite auspicious 
together w ith the bone o f the horse belonging to 
the breed o f Uccaihs'rava.

=== PAGE 728 ===

KRStfA-JANMA-KHANpA, CHAPTER 103
641
ч 
Trip
cH4<TU|i ЧТТТЩ rl 
чщгчГчПЧЧИ
Ф<^1<|иц 
4mU|uiIh^ 3 ^ |
-gcuimii и^щ гГ 'дчч^иц^п
The bones of others brings total destruction. 
The bones of monkeys, human beings, the 
donkeys, the crows, the gods, the jackal and the 
cats are considered to be quite inauspicious, the 
bones of the seep and the pigs are considered to 
quite auspicious.
f f e xnftf q-cjfwhftJriil rl tw fel
3tcT 
гГ| | ц \э 11
It is quite beneficial, in case the water is 
available towards the north-east, west and the 
north of the camp.
jf e W t ^ Ч 
^er:l
ЩТТ Tjfpit «HdT?R4H4dll
О architect the intellectual should keep the 
length and breadth of the house as equal. By 
constructing the house in a quadrangle, the house 
owner meets with his end.
d fe w : nftfel fefpfTft felrip 
T fe 45 ^
 
j o w j i i w i
The length and breadth of the house after 
dividing it by two if is nothing is left, it is 
considered to be quite auspicious for the people.
ЗГ& 
5$ р Ш Ш1
Tj^Ttnt 
ftt тгштрт д а rill5°ll
Two hands ahead of the width of the houses 
and three hands ahead and three hands beyond 
the length on the south, the door of the house as 
well as of the boundary walls is always 
considered to be auspicious.
зщ щ 
Щзгс ч з ^ ч и ^ 11
3145? f t f e SlfOT ^ 1ЙНГ x lll^ ll
A door should not be provided in the middle 
of the house. It is always auspicious to be kept a 
little this way that way. The square house is 
considered to be auspicious when provided with
a Candra-vedha. But the auspicious house also 
becomes 
inauspicious 
when 
it 
has 
the 
Suryavedha. Similarly the Suryavedha court-yard 
is also inauspicious.
Ч5Г WlfadT IJH rif 'ПШЧ!
язтшттА n ММДЫ1 ?П«оГл.^Т1 ic -а и
The TulasI plant which is planted by the 
householder 
is 
always 
considered 
to 
be 
auspicious which bestows riches and provides 
merit and the devotion of lord Hari.
Ш
 jp T # <£T W i^RTfiFT v fe j 
RTvtdt T f e l 
T f e l fe ctf d S P II^ II 
dferi* hfcrldil ri 
qcJ»H ^ririp
3t4<lfadt ri 
'ddiy€IR4lf4Id^l 1^411
^
 ^ ?[%Ot M ^ f e Ш W T :I
I 5 $ 11
ravrfdB«i«r: зпзпт ч 
■фгщт 
^ofdiTi
smmt ^rflrst 
T fe i ^ p p p i^ n
щ £ Ы 
■wfefefaTiffeii
w r ri hfrilTTH W W 
PTriT: Ш%ТТЩ ^ Trwftt
fidid^th ^
 Tfaaiai'Hhfefip ьэ о 11
fe rrirw f e w тщтчд f f e wi
fdfdiVdi Q^dVHRi ^^IIV 9^II 
ferm ri Rf^cjKiuii w rfe rtm ^ ^ i 
«rdTMt тгя т riiii)<ugHm ctifed44ii^ ^ n 
p fe fe fe R t f? lfe cbiaqlPrild^l
W<R£R ^Wlfen? gi4bfe^:l
g f e 
fe T
^рщтщ gTWfrr 
iiw$W4J
fe g fe r 5ft ч ^ т ^рттч ^famr щ и 'зч п
The one who sights the TulasI plant in the 
morning, he earns the merit of giving away gold 
in charity. Towards the east and the south of the 
house, the plants of jasmine, madhavl, ketaki,

=== PAGE 729 ===

642
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAiyAM
nagesvara, w o o d apple, thorn-apple, maulasirl 
and aparajitd 
are 
alw ays 
considered 
to 
be 
auspicious. T h e garden o f these plants is alw ays 
considered to be auspicious. Th ere is no doubt 
about it. A house-holder should not bu ild a house 
h a vin g a height o f m ore than sixteen hands and 
the bo u nda ry w alls should n o t be m ore than 
tw e n ty hands in height. A n intelligent person 
should n ot m ake the carpenter and o il-m e n and 
the goldsm ith to live in the centre o f the city but 
the B rahm anas, K sa triya s, V a is ya s, Sudras, the 
astrologer, the bards, the physicians and the 
gardener should alw ays the m ade to live close to 
one's house. T h e cam p should be surrounded b y 
a m oat h avin g a length o f hundred hands and ten 
hands in depth. T h is type o f m oat has been 
praised b y all. T h e entrance gate o f the m oat 
should 
be 
indicative 
w h ic h 
should 
be 
com fortable fo r the m ovem en t o f the people but 
should be inaccessible fo r the enem ies. Ex c e p t 
the w o o d o f cotton tree, tam arind w ild -p a lm , 
neem, sindhuvdra, the w ild fig tree, w o o d-apple , 
banyan, castor oil tree, the w o o d o f all other trees 
cou ld be used fo r the construction purpose. Th e 
k in g should n ot touch the w o o d vajra-hasta, 
otherw ise one faces the destruction o f the son, 
the w ife and the riches. T h is has been ordained 
b y B ra h m a , О son I have spoken all this fo r the 
in fo rm atio n o f the people, n o w y o u go w ith 
pleasure and construct the city w ith ou t w o o d . 
T h is is the m ost auspicious tim e to start the 
construction w o rk . V isva k a rm a them b o w e d in 
reverence to the lord and left the place w ith 
G a ru d a .
TfiTsr? тптИт ъ
Трти гГТ 43d Щ cfilW 
TTfllia^ll
T h e y 
reached 
the 
pleasant 
banyan 
tree 
standing on the shore o f the ocean and spent the 
n ig h t there.
*(frct>RlcchtidJd сиге 
m.Hicmilha'ail
flfcr rTSTUi 
47ft -tfli
^
 % fVlv4chiRui:li\9<il
u-us 
dt'td'diH 4^ 01:1
f^9c|cbq? Xf
In the dream G a ru d a w itnesses the charm ing 
city o f D v a ra k a . О sage, he w itnesses all the 
sym ptom s w h ic h lord K rsn a had spoken to 
Vis'vakarm a in the city. In the dream also all the 
artisans w ere laughing at V isva k a rm a and other 
w ere laughing at G a ru d a . A fte r w a kin g u p , both 
G a ru d a and Vis'vakarm a felt asham ed.
J1W TRTT ?MU№-TfctPP'41 
Щ Tht 
xl faRtfelTTfU
bRTT55i^lf<di ^
 W IT 
tTR^dT^lld о I
T h e city o f D v a ra k a w as quite beautiful and 
w as spread o ve r an area o f hundred yojanas, it 
w as established b y conquering the cities 
o f 
B ra h m a and others, there w as enough o f in lay 
w o rk . T h e lustre issued fro m the gem s studded in 
the houses covered the son.
sftsRffo TTjn’o
о ЗтТ° 4TT^T°

=== PAGE 730 ===

642
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAiyAM
Chapter - 104
Entry into Dvaraka and Crowning of 
Ugrasena
ЧШЧПТЗдТЕГ
g w 
xt •m:
ShW W lft 
WW hW grfR>H:ll^ll 
Tjgpr^Er iiM'Wdll
4tK?x|lft 
WlRII
SRT ^Щ?хГ Чн41 ci-Hd: tW TT^ xTi
atTf^n^Errftr 
тгщр Шншжн^н
^ 
«г 
Ш 1
зтпщИ хг щ
 
ч% Щ )1^и
^гсГТ гг ^WT: 
у*>чЫчч.1
3<|ehlVllx»4 fcWl^xJ М М 
II
Narayana said- In the meantime Brahma, Siva 
with Bhavani, Ananta, Dharma Surya, Agni,

=== PAGE 731 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAINiDA, CHAPTER 104
643
K u b e ra , V a n in a , V a y u , Y a m a , M ah e n dra, the 
m o o n , eleven R u d ra s, several gods and sages, 
seven 
V a s u s , 
tw elve 
A d ity a s , 
D a itya s, 
G an dharvas and K in n a ra s arrived in the city o f 
K rs n a and Balabhadra to have a v ie w o f the same 
passing b y the charm ing banyan tree. 
T h e y 
spotted lord K rs n a there. T h e gods w h o were 
m o vin g 
o ve r their planes 
arrived there 
and 
started adoring the lord.
immdlei
yThmifui^^ui
w R l: 
^ТОТГТТГ^Т
М1сЫ^е(1ч^тЬ'| с # : *UlRlicA:l 
■фТГ^: Т)Ч^?*Т 
^rprtlllill
Thereafter, 
they 
to ok 
round 
the 
city 
o f 
D v a ra k a w h ich w as quite beautiful, charm ing 
and w as decorated w ith sapphires, em eralds, 
gem s and several other precious stones studded 
in-lines and w as surrounded w ith a m oat o f 
hundred yojanas. It had nine boundary w alls, the 
sw im m in g pools, w ith lotus flow ers over w h ich 
the black w asps w ere fly in g creating hissing 
sound.
^Ttfrot
it V'CT=blRRT:li^oii
qqicbiq'l ^ < р ^Г ЯЙШ 
qd<jtrp|ctign-Tt 
ч М 44RT4t rT 
Ъ dIHRi
fdPfdlRw х4и|<^%,^ШП
Т=гЩ ^: 
сьи*Й<Пн
fftcratRrqf^ft^Rr: qftcT: 
1^411
?пй: й*11ЙПЫгй: f?R$: 1 Р Й :1
3i^H?qi|^R^Ry.i ftEt 4Ri^diH,n^n
There w ere Sarvatobhadra style o f structures 
and three lakhs o f flo w e r orchards, the fragrant 
cool breeze was b lo w in g , the w in d scented w ith 
the sandal-paste w as b lo w in g d e lig h tfu lly. Th ere 
hundreds crores the coconut trees decorating the 
city. T h e num ber o f betel-nut trees w as fo u r 
times the num ber o f the coconut tree. 
T h e 
num ber o f m ango 
trees 
was 
four-tim es 
the 
num ber o f betel-nut trees, the num ber o f ja c k - 
fruit trees w as equivalent to the num ber o f 
m ango trees and the city w as decorated fro m all 
the sides, T h e num ber, o f tala trees w as the same 
as the num ber o f m ango trees. Th ere w ere large 
num ber 
o f 
pipala, 
ju ju b i, 
w o o d -a p p le , 
m yrobalan, banyan, silk cotton, trees silk-fru it 
tree and kadamba trees in the city besides the 
trees o f ba m bo o , tam arind, campa, maulasirl, 
nagakesara, lemon, orange, pom egranate, p a lm 
and A rju n a trees, beside pistaka, sugar-cane, 
deciduous tree, hantaki and m yrobalan trees. 
Beside 
them , 
there 
w ere 
enough 
o f sala, 
Buchanania 
latifolia, sirisa, saptaparna 
and 
several other trees in the city also there.
чик^^тГч q^dini 
<^^HRRtriu^ThimruwqRfcl: 11^19 II
11 ^411
q R ^ ti
mfoh q<ifPiiiiR^qlviчRbpiqi
w o M TR4T?f: qqRcfdl^lR^ll
'TOifeinl I^5TWI
ТОТ$1сф ■Rpit qiRiVIHIMR^rn^lR^II
^ 2cIT 
-цщ й 
few * ^
: I
згсы ззй 
vnfvft
TOT y ^ lH f
ЩТЛЩТ^аг TT41^IT,IR'kll

=== PAGE 732 ===

644
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
ТТ%ТГ 
II?ч II
T h e city o f D va ra k a had innum erable high 
palaces. A l l these w ere built w ith the best o f 
gem s in w h ich the je w els, diam onds and other 
precious stones w ere studded. It had several 
vases m ade o f gem s. T h e steps also w ere m ade 
o f gem s, 
they 
had ve ry 
strong 
doors 
w ith 
shutters. Th ere w ere several pillars o f rubies. T h e 
court-yards w ere decorated w ith sapphire and 
em eralds, the street w ere decorated w ith gem s. 
T h e roads w ere quite w h ite , the entire city o f 
D v a ra k a w as shining like the m id -d a y sun o f the 
sum m er season. Th ere w ere lakhs o f w in d o w and 
horse stables, all the gods felt surprised w hile 
lo o k in g at the city o f D v a ra k a . S ri K rs n a w ith a 
delightful m in d together w ith Balaram a and other 
respectable persons o f the race o f Y a d u including 
U grasen a , 
V a s u d e va , 
D e v a k I, 
m others 
o f 
Pan davas, N a n d a , Y a s o d a , cowherds besides the 
kings and the sages, Gan dharvas and Kinnaras 
entered the city.
^Tt^T 7TTWT SPRIT Rf 4iugqi:l
TRIctf: faivKI?3e| 
4TOJIR^I1
ГсЬя4^|(М Й<Й1 hl^ehl cutiuiu^chi:I
ЖН1УЕГ тщшТгШИ 
4l4lc$U=ll WT <1 ё11УУЙ Ъ t w : l
'•т й |Птч?ег 
sgraifon :i r <gi
ичш:п?<?м
TTwiRt *ртепз*пйчт ri 
i
г: 
U^Tcfqj 1^т»Щ :||^о||
О N a ra d a , at that point o f tim e several people 
arrived 
before 
S ri 
K rsn a 
including 
N a n d a , 
Y a s o d a , 
cow herds, 
Pandavas 
w ith 
m others, 
G a n d h a rva s, 
K in n a ra s, V id ya d h a ris, K in n a ris, 
the dancers, the singers, the players o f m usical 
instrum ents the beggars, the bards, astrologers 
kings o f several countries, the physician, hum an 
beings, ascetics, Yatis, AvadMtas, Brahmacari, 
the sages w ith their pupils, siddhas in groups, 
Sanaka, Sananda Sanatana and Sanatkum ara the
teacher o f the intellectuals, w h o alw ays rem ained 
five year old and naked also arrived w ith three 
crores o f his pupils.
Tri%rTt fgfm «птаттл:! 
<ь$гсгчуЕТ сНЙ1Р*¥*1 
^
n^<*:ll3? II 
: HT^lffTT 4WT3T:l
eFtfefq; fyM : ЙсГГ:
% ф г т WTWgpzrTRT: c£tfef*r: Щ\ 
г1Й?М?гТ 
Wll^'kll
Г: 
Чо*Й|Щчт:1
ГЙ1ГгМч|ГЕ1у-у w
: U(f«^:ii?4ii 
Tnftnfr: зЙ гй: 
д а п я ш т и
T h e sage D u rva s a , arrived w ith three lakhs o f 
his pupils, K a sya p a w ith a lakhs o f his p upils, 
V a lm lk i w ith three lakhs o f his p upils, G a u ta m a 
w ith one lakh o f pupils, Brhaspati w ith three 
crores o f pupils, Sukracarya w ith three crores o f 
pupils, Bharadvaja w ith a lakh o f pupils, A n g ira 
w ith three crores' o f p upils, Vasistha and Praceta 
w ith a crore o f pupils each. A tr i w ith three crore 
o f people, B h rg u w ith five crores o f p upils, 
M a rlc i w ith three crores o f p eople, A g a s ty a w ith 
crores o f pupils, Pulastya w ith three lakhs o f 
p upils,. Pulaha and K ra tu w ith a lakh o f pupils 
each, 
Satananda 
w ith 
thousand 
o f 
p upils, 
V ib h a n d a ka Rsyas'm ga w ith three and a h a lf 
crores o f pupils, Pa n in i w ith crores o f pupils and 
K a tya ya n a arrived w ith lakhs o f pupils.
w ra 7=r 
ifmfrwTi
^чочГ^5г«ьИгРт:1
f*£tfef*T:ll3<GI 
chlfdPiM тяф: T^lWRMTl
Щ 4U14fUlv^cj 
ТЩ TTflE[T:irtJo||
^Tfef^T:l

=== PAGE 733 ===

KRS^A-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 104
645
1Ыг№г: ттфтШ cfHTT ?ф гт 
^ rfe R # : fyiu^ri <sftcT: 4^4?rfgfir:M^9
гГИ'й^И
■g-doiv^ w ^ r
fyr^c#: 
oyrafvibil: TJTfrR:ll*'KII
с # : Ы
ш
 ^gfr 
xii
h U y id : 
r # ^ T t : ^IcTril'Skll
Y a jn a v a lk y a arrived w ith thousand o f his 
p u p ils, V y a s a arrived w ith three crores o f pupils, 
the fa m ily priest G a rg a arrived w ith lakhs o f 
p u p ils, 
G a la v a and 
Saubhari 
arrived w ith 
a 
thousand pupil each, Lom as'a and M arka n d e ya 
arrived w ith three crores o f pupils, V am ad e va 
w ith crores o f pupils, Jaiglsavya w ith three 
crores o f pupils and thereafter pupils Sandlpani 
w ith three crores o f pupils, w h ile D e va la arrived 
w ith crores o f pupils, V o d h u arrived w ith the 
crores o f pupils, Pancasikha arrived w ith the 
lakhs o f pupils, N a ra ya n a arrived w ith three 
crores o f pupils besides N a ra , V isva m itra arrived 
w ith crores o f pupils, Jaratkaru, Parasuram a and 
A s tlk a , arrived w ith three crores o f pupils each. 
V a tsa arrived w ith lakhs o f pupils, D a k sa arrived 
w ith three lakhs o f pupils, K a p ila arrived w ith 
fiv e crores o f pupils, Sam varta and U ta th y a w ith 
three lakhs o f pupils each, Ja im ini arrived w ith 
thousand o f pupils, Paila arrived w ith lakh o f 
pupils, Suvarna arrived w ith thousand o f pupils, 
V y a s a pupil V aisam payana arrived w ith lakhs o f 
pu p ils, Srn gi and U p a m a n y u arrived w ith lakhs 
o f 
pupils 
each. 
G a u ram u kh a 
arrived 
w ith 
thousand o f pupils, K a c a arrived w ith a lakh o f 
pupils.
зГ¥«геГ1'Ш ггат fm :
Ф ч-: cfauTv^
f T P tw t: ^
 
w
A sva tth a m a and D ro n a ca rya , K rp a ca rya w ith 
their pupils, B h lsm a , K a rn a , S aku n i, the king 
D u ry o d h a n a 
and 
his 
brother 
stayed 
w ith 
Jagadguru.
frra ■цтФт 
■hupmi:i
я зф т -Ц[ф: тэте? 5Г%Т 1 ГШ
TTTtf 
rr^u t^T ii^ill
^ f? r 
ТШ ЩЩЩ «nnfrr: II* 11
Sri K rsn a said- A l l the people w h o have 
arrived here w ill return o n ly after com pletion o f 
the auspicious festivities. О k in g , y o u enter the 
city gate o f D v a ra k a in the Mahendra rnuMrta 
together w ith the m others, fathers and Y a d a va s . 
A l l other people o f the race o f Y a d u should go 
back to M ath u ra. A t these U grasena felt terrified 
and said to h im .
ц w n f t 
cTt 
^T: I
Ф Ш ч й 
^ tjrffcrr 
m о 11 
тпай» 'ЧТфтг €T Фртт M h f *r:i
ЗП4^Ги] лФГПк^П 
fttpit fiwivr 
<с|Н|цГч
Фг 
W tllk^H
jrroter: fcr# тгеп 
Фт:
шшч ъ чШ ri 
дрфт
sRtet Ъ ^ spt 
ч<^Ч^4<*Ч,11Ч,к11
^crftg^raVcfeh stiikkii
fapit фщ m hfer
ш тФ ш ч'зи
О V a s u d e va , I shall go back to m y ancestral, 
land because it happens to be m ore auspicious 
that any 
other place 
fo r the p e rform ing 
o f 
adoration o f the gods and the m anes. T h e one 
w h o does m ake the o ffe rin g o f the pindas to the 
ancestors on the land and the fire, the ancestors

=== PAGE 734 ===

646
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
destroy the performers and the sraddha. The 
sraddhas performed by such a person for the 
ancestors become fruitless or bear little fruit but 
such a performance when made at the ancestral 
place bears much fruit. The ancestors land is 
considered to be dearer than the son, grandson 
and wife. The inaccessible ancestral land is 
dearer than the parents. Therefore for performing 
the adoration of the gods and the ancestors, it is 
considered to be quite auspicious, whatever is 
playfully given there is considered, to be. The 
charity, the charity given by someone at some 
other place is considered to be inauspicious, 
when one dies at the ancestral-land one achieves 
great merit like dyeing at a holy place. О Hari, 
the water of the pool of the ancestral and is 
considered to be quite auspicious like the water 
of the Ganga. By taking a bath there in that pool, 
one earns the merit of having a bath in the 
Ganga. The adoration of the gods and offering of 
water (tarpana) are considered to be quite 
auspicious. In case the birth place is an ancestral 
place the fruit of tarpana and other performance 
is doubled.
snivel ЗсПгТ 
'ТПТТШ cfcR fg; ctr fqqg;: 3TT
w 
cM 
i ц г 11
■ггетт: мутчтзпл ЧТШ 
||
<3[R хГ &K<4>I<U хГ 
хГ
xtdAui W 
Xf ^ftril^oll
Sri Krsna said- You have spoken the truth, 
who can stop the birth and the ancestors land is 
like a holy place but can that holy place be more 
important than the city of Dvaraka. The city of 
Dvaraka is the best of all and bestows great 
merit, with the entry of the people in Dvaraka 
they achiever moksa. О king, by giving away 
charities or by, performing sraddha or the 
adoration of gods in Dvaraka, one achieves four 
times more the merit than taking a bath in Ganga 
and other holy places.
gg ТДГШП 
TpT:ll^ll
cFTifr
flcRT <cf 
-Щ ^хТ^иТ ^411^11
m 
jp ig - 
-pr w i i ^ ? ii
^nfear: д ж м sfr дтоттп
'f^TcTT <u|^|c| ^u<1h 
faimi 
d4fr=HW ГПТШ 
^ T W I l ^ m i
TRT Ч ' ф ч
fg?g w ч щ fm m w w m t t t w i 
ЦекПч&УкГЙ 
^
 xT -R^Tt w i l^ \9 ll 
4 W44T44t Ы ъ д ч «ИЭтН:1 
xT 4H^R#TR<t
You go to the royal palace together with 
Brahma, gods and the sages beside the Yadavas 
and reside there. This city of Dvaraka puts 
Amaravatl, the city of Indra to shame. О king, 
you enter the divine assembly named Sudharma 
in the auspicious time of Mahendra. The people 
of Jambudvlpa, the great kings, the courtiers and 
others would give you the taxes as the gods give 
to Indra. You conquer Kubera in riches, the sun 
in the lustre, Indra in fortunes, the gods in the 
battle, 
the 
sages 
in 
sacredness 
and 
the 
mendicants in tapas besides with vratas, you 
would excel the vratas (performers). There has 
been no king like Ugrasena nor would there any 
such king be in future. In his court the extremely 
valorous Balarama is present over one of whose 
thousand heads, the entire globe is lodged like 
the sesamum seed in a windowing basket. There 
is no one else more valorous than Baladeva and 
there is no end to his virtues. This is the reason 
the people have given him the name of Ananta.
eiuqitreT ч^швп 
'?тавт f^TTI 
«tfarr 
4 ^ x 1 
ТПТ:11^<?И

=== PAGE 735 ===

A-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 104
647
сгдч ^rgx у 
^T: I |V9 011
W it ЧТ^: Ш? Ч^ЯЩЧГШ'Н.1
ЩТЗЕТО^ WRT 4fW5TOTIU3 *11
ftfS? 7%сТ ЦТ cg$ ЧГС^?Щ:11\Э*И
3T»Fcft *J 
ТЗ^ €П
■gf^nmt ^ 
T?TRt 
i^ ^ ii
SGtfz ЧтРирЮН 
W tf ^ l 
4d4'|i uWiy 
<m hi ч^рт 'Wrii'a'^n 
W m
n чтптчтчМ' ъ 
h 
4%^F3T wfrn ёПрНТЧ%ёГН{1РэЧ II 
щ чтщ1
gjtf24)fc4rl4jl'3t= ll
Ш 1ЩТ ^?ratfs щ ш рг ч^рт ш \ 
frqfoT Ш Г М W 4t Ч З Е Щ ^1РЗ\Э|| 
т^гщт Tmynt 
ч ^зр щ | 
-31V<^!<j НгШТ W W lf тТ w n fril'sd ll
T h e eight V a su s, R u d ra s, w ith ou t S iva , the 
valorous tw elve A d ity a s and Indra together w ith 
all the gods w o u ld not be able to ove r-po w e r 
U grasen a. O n hearing the w ords o f K rs n a , the 
k in g started together w ith all Y a d a va s . H e fou nd 
his palace in the m iddle o f D va ra k a shining w ith 
gem s on the gates o f w h ic h thousands o f gods 
w ere deputed h o ld in g the s ta ff and the trident in 
their hands. T h e cam p w as inside the six gates. 
Th e re w ere palaces inlaid w ith hundreds o f 
precious stones. T h e kin g fo u n d a crore o f 
intoxicated elephants in the elephant-stable. Th e 
n um ber o f ordin ary elephants ran to fo u r crores. 
H e fo u n d ve ry strong horses in the horse-stable, 
the num ber o f w h ic h w as six times m ore than the 
elephants w h o could gallop w ith the speed o f 
w ith the horse o f the sun. О N a ra d a , the herd o f 
those elephants w as superior than all the vehicles 
o f In dra and w ere jeering at A ira va ta . T h e kin g 
then cam e across the horses o f ve ry high breed o f 
U ccaisarva . Th ereafter there w ere ten crores o f 
donkeys and the num ber o f fo o t soldiers w as six 
tim es m ore than the sam e, there w ere five lakhs 
o f chariots b u ilt w ith the best o f gem s and an
equal num ber o f charioteers. T h e n um ber o f 
horses w as six times m ore then the cavalry m en. 
T h e kin g also witnesses the assem bly nam ed 
Sudharm a.
rihfaffri: I
йзнйззсгшччг.о||
^fgrlt W ЧЦЧ$: 
praffefsm
tifgy?T w
 ri4T vg s p js g ft ^ jp iii *n
Ш2Г щ gjpfaT «г 
4c[4^cfc^i
ЖНГ Ifr: 11 d ^ 11
T h e assem bly w h ic h w as quite charm ing to 
lo o k at, accom m odated the gods and the sages. 
T h e assem bly w as issuing lustre like the fire. It 
had enough o f silken clothes o f red and y e llo w 
colours, 
besides 
the 
lion 
thrones. 
It 
w as 
decorated w ith the lines o f invaluable gem s and 
w as 
surrounded 
b y 
a 
hundred 
crores 
o f 
disciplined soldiers. A t the tim e o f entering into 
beautiful assem bly h all, the conches w ere b lo w n 
and drum s w ere beaten. T h e sages recited the 
V e d ic h ym n s. Fin d in g the kings arrival, K rsn a 
and Balaram a got u p fro m their seats.
WT
7147*1 ^щФтат:!
THpTMfa 
pF?pTFT4T:l
7ТЧ ётЫМ щгаёГ.ПС'кН 
чзргч 
дчНтчт?гчт ^::i 
tp r r t r зрщт *г Vrwfq дата *т^ч п 
pffW R чщ \
ш тт р ч % я p rq p rifs m p iu s ii
^
 сСЩЗТ 2[tf 
4 % p i
riWFT р ^ f s m ЧТЧТсЧ^И^И
B ra h m a , S iv a , Sesa, the ascetics, the best o f 
the gods also stood u p . A l l the kings and the 
siddhas together w ith V asu d e va also stood up. 
Thereafter 
valorous 
U grasena 
w ith 
the 
perm ission o f In dra, the sages, lord K rs n a , the 
gods and the teacher, also to o k his seat. О

=== PAGE 736 ===

648
В RAHM AVAIV ART A-M AHAPURAhl AM
N a ra d a , 
the 
coronation 
o f 
the 
kin g 
was 
com pleted w ith the reciting o f the hym ns from 
the V e d a s and pouring w ater fro m the seven h o ly 
places. T h e kin g w as then offered the tw o divine 
garm ents sanctified b y fire w h ich w ere presented 
b y V a ru n a to K rsn a .
WT c&gusg
■ЦТ^с^ ТрГЧТс^ tTfRtr
3P% 
i f # T1%5T:
iflricb rT 
итй 5+jiiui rT 
о n
T h e valorous B a la d e va presented h im the 
chatra o f gem s, B ra h m a presented a kamandalu, 
S iva the trident, Pa rva tl a garland o f gem s, the 
chaste M a la tl presented h im a garland o f flow ers. 
Th ereafter several other gods, the sages, the best 
o f the kings and the siddhas also gave their 
presents to h im .
W ft ПТТ ^тТ fOTRT тПТПг^НЧ *11
V a s u d e va presented h im w ith an auspicious 
w h ite -fly-w h is k s , w h ich w as presented to K rsn a 
b y V a s u d e va .
4^t ^
 W TJTRt ФГЧЙЗ «Г
N a n d a presented h im a K am ad he n u co w . 
Yas'oda and D e v a k l d e lightfu lly gifted h im the 
best o f gem s.
TOlfa: feT?^nfn ШсГ: 'Й<ГгГмЛ:1
^tTT
c^rr 4ж тЬг^1
4Ui(|cj|0b( rf gRifll
щ : ^
 ъ ягг^д 1 я^т «тщтгетп 
щ : дят!ж и^^т^1ртяж 11Ч Ч 11 
^
 тт 
д я ^ш -.i 
яфзгг 
*111 <? 5 11
ЗтМ еМ- ^
 гЛ 
^(vpjiroTPfl
inW ^nfw 
fe r дячв
■щтстя гГ 
^rsf^TT:l
ЯЯЙ *П5УЕГ§: 's i дчч? 
ЯЯТ ft:l
T h e 
seven 
attendants 
started 
serving 
h im 
m o vin g the w hite fly -w h isk s , A k ru ra w ith the 
perm ission o f S ri K rs n a held chatra on the head 
o f the k in g . T h e kin g w h ile seated o n the gem - 
studded lion throne looked at the m irro r w h ic h 
could be achieved b y p e rfo rm ing several good 
deeds. Thereafter, S ri K rs n a offered a present. 
T h e Bhdta then started praising the kin g w h ile 
the Brahm anas, the gods and the sages show ered 
their blessings on h im . T h e k in g distributed w ith 
great de vo tio n , crores o f diam onds, together w ith 
the bhatas and the beggars, all the people o f the 
race o f Y a d u after attending the coronation o f the 
kin g adored the gods. T h e sages, B rS h m an a, the 
bhatas, the beggars and the teachers w e n t back to 
their respective abodes. A l l the attendants o f K rs 
na also w e n t back to their respective abodes. T h e 
n ext m orning all o f them came to attend the court 
nam ed Sudharm a. In the assem bly they b o w e d 
before the k in g and to o k their seats.
fffT #ЗГЩ0 Я?То а^ШТЗЯЩо 3rfo чгсзчт»
ачйчтРйсй чтч
11 * о ■* ti

=== PAGE 737 ===

648
В RAHM AVAIV ART A-M AHAPURAhl AM
Chapter -105
Arrangement for the Marriage of Rukmini
чтчжзгггст
ЗТ2Г 
ЩГ^ёТЦШ7Ч;1
W W 
ФчёВ:))^11
TRT 4TTTOW ^r сГГгТТ -Щ
erf%^=r 
fetRav^ift Rf^RT'.n^ и
Narayana said- The king Bhismaka was 
possessing immense prowess and was quite 
noble and truthful king of Vidarbha country. He

=== PAGE 738 ===

K^SJVA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 105
649
was bom of the arhs'a of Visnu and was the 
bestower of all riches, quite religious, the best 
and was quite adorable.
IW di-4l 
«ilfadi ЩТ1
3Rfa 
W
 TRT ТТОЩ ^ШТ11 ^ 11
qStffcHqqtff THWPWjfqdll 
dH*n«Hcjui?qT 
^rahmi
^рет««»ч1 тгг 4fr4?n<r» hfHsrni
^TRfT ^RTT I4TTRT giUH^riJUIVll(H4ltl4ll
He had a daughter named RukminI who had 
the form of MahalaksmI. She was the best of the 
damsels, extremely beautiful, charming, quite 
passionate, 
adored by the damsels, 
quite 
youthful, adorned with all the gem-studded 
ornaments, having the complexion of molten 
gold, illumining, chaste, the form of auspicious 
tattva truthful, pious, peaceful, well disciplined 
and possessed all the qualities.
те^ щт TriRTi '«ягаЛч^и
( я^чдрдтдт: g^tf 4i^fri nfswhfii
The goddesses like IndranI, VarunanI, the 
spouse of moon RohinI, the spouse of Kubera, 
Svaha the spouse of Surya, Santa, Kalavatl and 
all other beautiful woman did not compare to 
even one-sixteenth part of RukminI the daughter 
of Bhismaka.
cTT <JgT 
giM^gHdi RTT^I
ш
 
irits^5 igsft: g^i^ii
fggjggW 
н^нгч^нч! ^ртг^п^н 
щ
 fg^piT w r фШ т?ег три: i 
fa t ш
 
gflfeti^u^oii
The king Bhismaka witnessed his daughter 
engaged in sport like the ray of the moon with 
the other girls, she possessed the lustre of the full 
moon of the winter season, her eyes were like the 
lotus flower of the winter season. She became 
youthful and fit for marriage. She was filled with 
shyness, humility and was quite chaste. Having a
look at her the religious king who performed all 
the best of the vratas felt worried. He then 
consulted his daughter, the sons and the family 
priest.
дт ^Jitfa fare? ъ ■gnf r a t 
i
Bhismaka said-1 would like to have a suitable 
groom for my daughter. Whom should I select, 
whether, he should be a prince or the son of great 
king?
ШщдВщ дрдт й gefam R % tti 
tr?g gt grig 
s? 11
ц gfuscT 
^ 44.11 ^ 11
TTRt 
8JWtH ffaF faw\fg4f|
4$l#flJlfd xt 
MlrlfedH.il^ I I
My growing daughter has achieved the age of 
puberty, therefore a groom for her should be 
searched immediately. Such a groom should be 
quite young, the religious minded, truthful, 
devoted to Visnu, well-versed in the Vedas and 
post-Vedic 
literature, 
an, 
intelligent 
one, 
beautiful, pious, peaceful, large hearted should 
believe in forgiveness, all virtuous, having long 
life and the one having been bom in the high race 
and well-known everywhere, 
gtftfg Trggg '-t^iyii^yfgyiKdHj 
щт MTtnf wyfti g ffw tfi 1^41
In case a prince is selected then he should be 
well-versed in the treatises on welfare, a great 
charioteer, glorious and the one who should be 
able to face the war courageously.
g*tfg tfgTjg g^g ftfpjg asm 
gntfg fftgg 
1 
ч
grg^g> 1ддщт 
Римеьщ 
^ ig g g ftgT aggrg f^: fw .ii^n 
‘ftaqrg ?ldFPgt ^<lf|giHI:l 
зли: згащ fg?r?g «щ?
-R^drg^ ftwiTW: 4<l<*4fllMII

=== PAGE 739 ===

650
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURA3VAM
In case the son of the god is selected then he 
should be all virtuous. In case the son of an 
ascetic is selected then he should be well-versed 
in all the four Vedas, the best orator, a deep 
thinker and should be the one following all the 
principles. On listening to the words of the king, 
Satananda, the son of Gautama who was well- 
versed in the Vedas and never spoke anything 
otherwise, the best of orators, well-read, quite a 
religious one, the family priest and the one who 
know all the tattvas on earth and was quite 
efficient in performing all the deeds, spoke to the 
king.
W
O
T
TRriS <тс тс тс#г
urcfesrR тс ^tcRr тстстстТч ftw m ii w i
Satananda said- О king, you are well-versed in 
all the religious practices and the religious 
scriptures, I am going to narrate to you and old 
story of the Vedas which you kindly listen.
mratTwr чзтс чгсттсщ vfoi 
ctridTcRfd: 
3rg:ll3°ll
fTCTCTpTC fTCTCRT TC s r ^ T ^ ^ T : I
W it
WTIcRT TC 
SrfuRr JTfiW: T C I
ftf&rsrc fq%ET?rc чпзтт тс qjcb^TJu^u
Narayana himself has incarnated on earth in 
order to relieve her of the burden. О lord, the son 
of Vasudeva complete in all respect, is the 
creator of Brahma, adored by Siva, Ananta and 
others, the form of eternal flame, the best of all, 
the one who takes to human form for the sake of 
his devotees, the soul of all the creatures, beyond 
Prakrti, unattached, uninvolved and the witness 
of all the deeds.
TCRJT TC Tlfqafaw i TCI 
ЗтсГТ ТСТЗДШ 
ftlcjUTt 
TC?!I^N 
cW 
TC TCRjf 
W TCI
f|cr TC%M?TC
:ll?*ll
О best of the kings, by offering your daughter 
to him you would go to Goloka together with 
hundreds of your ancestors. By giving away the
daughter to him, you would achieve moksa after 
death, enjoying all the pleasures on earth.
TCcfe ^ГЩТ ЦтЗТ ТСЩЩФ TC
ш
frcqr тсяятс зьчии^ччи^чи
You give away RukminI, the form of 
MahalaksmI to him with the best of offering. О 
virtuous one, by doing so you will never have to 
be reborn on earth.
fqyidl fnftsldl ЧГЯТСШТС:
жпдпч^ i>mr W s w w flTC4.i i ^ ^ • i
^rawr fjf 
ЧПЩ!
ЗТРЙТС WTC4R
тс RrU^q^riq^i
О king, this relationship has already been 
ordained by Brahma, therefore, you send a 
Brahmana to Dvaraka to meet Krsna in this 
connection quite expeditiously. After consulting 
all, settling, about the auspicious time, you call 
for Krsna the supreme soul, who has taken to 
human form in order to grace his devotees. О 
king, at the mere sight of Krsna, the deeds of the 
human being performed during the past birth get 
destroyed.
TC 4 TCFffTC TCTCTTt ^ 1 : UdVri 
gfl^FETC %TCT
КШЙ «ТСШсЩТС TCffir-Tt TC 
ТСЩ
ЧТЧТСТС! TCfhjcTI TC^T: ?IR3lfb| TCTf7TCII?o||
WTCTCTCTC: VhlVri TCoTCTCTCTC: 4qlf¥H:l 
TC^Tlt арЩсТТ fTCR 
ЯИ
tEWT уччЙ У TCrFT: W TW rai:l
зщгчг: 
тсчтс stcrttc*tc$tc qifiRtqu^ v
TCFrailsi ГЩПТТС гГЗДЩ TCTCTClfTC fahfl 
•?PTR^TC: ЗрТСТ
зя^гцтс 
TCjjcsnrc tc^tc tci 
tcitcttr -grcnf тс тсчтс тс 4rc^wq;ii^^ii
^
 
TCTCTTC TC yyKttMGI 
TC^frir^iTCTC 4(uiPlWd4;il^4l 
ЧТСШрЯЧ TCTC SR TC frcqR M l

=== PAGE 740 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAWA, CHAPTER 105
651
fiq t 
1ГПТ H^SRTfwq;i 
irrlfiflTwV +.1^ ^ < * 1ГЧ ^xr^ 4:||^\9II 
щпщт5«Г%т^ УтИНЛ WITTER: I
ЗШ9 fW Ш ^T W li^R R ^ri I ^ <111 
-щщ ш у^ш : ^Nt?rTr4TW !;ii?<?ii
The supreme soul who is adored by all the 
Vedas, the sages, the gods, the siddh as, the 
mendicant and Brahma do not know him truly, 
the one who is adored by the great yo g is with 
deep meditation but are unable to achieve him. 
By reciting whose glory even Sarasvati becom es 
dumb. Even the Vedas, scriptures, Sesa with 
hundred hoods, Siva with five face, Brahma with 
four faces, Karttikeya with six faces, the sages, 
devotees and the Vaisnavas are unable to recite 
his glory and are unable to achieve him. He is 
beyond the y o g is and the siddh as. О king, what 
can I speak about his qualities, being merely a 
boy? On hearing the words of Satananda, the 
face of the king became delightful, he stood up 
with force and embraced the Brahmana. The 
king then with the delightful mind presented him 
with elephants, horses, the best of chariot 
studded with gems, the charming lion throne, 
enough of riches and the -land which produced 
several types of cereals remained wet with the 
rain water and producer enough of cereals when 
ploughed. He therefore gave away in charities 
several villages with cultivative lands. In the 
meantime, RukmT the son of the king felt 
enraged since he was quite irreligious, he started 
trembling, his face and eyes became red. 
Becoming unstable, he stood before all the 
members present there and spoke to his father as 
well as the Brahmana.
tifcWWW
rTS2T
гтзт 
1ящдтплт нНячт яЙёятщШ'* о
RukmT said- О great king, you listen to my 
beneficial, truthful and praise-worthy words, you 
should not care for the words of the beggar, the 
greedy and the people filled with anger.
T&bRi 5Г 
^г<гн1»тШН1чГч1 
yii^wdi ъ 
ггат тггци'й^ii
trcchHi чтгадят шортит ^ УлГч-tmi 
^frrniTt ^ Rufat Etfaq<l g^t: w n ^ n
Because the words of the dancers, the Vais'yas, 
bards, the beggars, kayasthas and the beggars are 
always full of falsehood. The words of 
messengers, a actors, lustful, passionate, pauper 
and 
the 
foolish 
are 
always 
filled 
with 
sycophancy.
diWdeH 
fttTl f w i
О valorous one, the terrified Krsna deceitfully 
took away the riches of Kalayavana and than 
killed him.
IjTRFiTdT E[4t ejiUlil ucHHl EpP ^11
щ цъцкй ■ptinrkii
Krsna is known as the wealthy person in 
Dvaraka. He has built his house in the sea-bed, 
getting terrified from Jarasandha.
щтшщтгт M 
ъ hIhsii
I am myself competent enough to kill 
hundreds of Jarasandhas playfully in a moment, 
what to speak of others kings.
tuiynwfavfHd:!
I am the pupil of Durvasa and am well-versed 
in the welfare. О Bhlsmaka, I am therefore quite 
competent enough to kill the entire universe in a 
movement.
ЧсЧЧ: Ч^<|Ч?ч 
ЧгЧЧ:1
т а Ъ ®lHctio^<: w f sfcj IT ^ $РТ:1Гй^э11
Only Parasurama and my friend Sis'upala 
could be equated with my prowess. Both of them 
are competent enough to conquer the heaven.
W it 
^1
щ я щ ъ : ftroft gtt P w i t iw i

=== PAGE 741 ===

652
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
fief 3TWTtrf^5nfR STOfa w r f ^ ^ l
3# ч ^ щ кучщ rm 
tjim о и
TOTft g)-yiw'№r< t^TORft xT ^fW ITt4ll4^
s w iw fa 
?n
TT^t 
y ? n i s ^ i ( ^ ) r W xfll
Ш ТНПргГ ЧГ 
щ §HM$ixf ЯТ ^f%:l
ш ^тятrty4i<wv^i ч т ^ ш Г ^ д а ц н
I am com petent enough to ove r-po w e r Indra in 
a m ovem en t w ith his entire a rm y. О k in g , b y 
conquering Jarasandha in the battle-fields K rsn a 
has becom e arrogant and considers h im se lf quite 
valorous b y m eans o f his o w n intelligence. In 
case 
he 
passes 
through m y village 
fo r 
the 
purpose o f m arriage then I w ill surely dispatch 
him to the abode o f Y a m a . Y o u intend to give 
a w ay R u k m in I in m arriage at the instance o f the 
beggar B rah m a n a, to K rsn a the son o f N a n d a the 
cow herd, w h o got his cow s grazed b y h im , he is 
the one w h o is the lover o f the cowherdesses and 
used to eat the le ft-o ve r o f the cow herds. О great 
kin g , yo u are de vo id o f w isd o m because yo u 
w a nt to act on the advise o f a w eal person. K rsn a 
is neither a prince n or a valorous one or b o m in a 
spotless fa m ily . H e is neither auspicious nor the 
giver o f charity, nor a rich person or w ell 
disciplined.
cfFSlt 
ftl^WfcHRI *jf4RI
О k in g , yo u give y o u r daughter to Sisupala 
w h o is b o m o f good fa m ily w h o had satisfied 
S iva w ith his prow ess and is the son o f great 
kin g .
ГйЧ"?1и| 
Ч1ЧТ^[?ГО9ЩЧТ^1
щзрщгТ 'ЧяЩух| Щ5ГСТ terciftKT:ll44ll
Y o u im m ediately send im itation letters to all 
the 
kings 
in 
several 
countries 
besides 
the 
relatives and the sages.
Щ- 
• T O #ТРг cfrchvl сЩГI
ITS 
xf TOTRimhll
я?гтпг fъШ xi 
щ
’Terra? 
§*? ш ч ч fg ^ n v s ii
w §«ц^гчш ^*н,ичл11
ybhTitnr trfviVM Гчьд?пя1 
qciqiyqgtnki
rr^ ju i^ n ^ o ii
W ЩГ i M xf w fw 4 t feS T W I 
хШ ё^ ЩГЯТ xf cbH^mi Xf T O 37SII$ ?ll
шяннг ягн!
ч4Пп Ч1*Й«) xf 
T^ft> хГ Я%ТГ:11^? II 
РТЬТТ dcRIdiy xf ч Ы
 xf ТОТЯ1
rrfrpnf otf^RFfi я т т jfTh Rfhdllh^ll
Y o u despatched the letters o f in vitation to 
An g a desa, K a lin g a country, M a g a d h a , Saurastra, 
V a lk a la , Ratadesa, the best o f Vangades'a, V ira t, 
M u d g a la , 
M u ran g ak a , 
B h a lla k a , 
G a lla k a , 
Kharvadesa 
and 
D u rgadesa, 
b y 
sending 
Brahm ana 
there. 
Y o u 
should 
arrange 
fo r 
a 
thousand canals o f ghee, a thousand canals o f 
h o ne y, a thousand o f curd and a thousand o f m ilk 
besides five hundred canals o f o il, tw o lake 
canals o f GUI, five hundred heaps o f sugar, tw o 
thousand heaps o f sweet and hundred heaps o f 
the 
w h e at-flo u r, 
fou r 
lakes 
heaps 
o f boiled 
p a d d y, the fou r lake heaps o f cereals, a lake o f 
rabies and an equal num ber o f tortoise, ten lakes 
o f he-goats and fou r times the num ber o f sheep, 
the sacrifice should be offered to the village 
goddess w ith devotion , the cooked m eat o f the 
anim al should be got ready. T h e vegetables 
should also be collected in large num ber.
3M STTOf xf ЩГ5Я 
Tmfrf|cT:l
TOT 
Tuf 
ЯЙтЦТ Я?11^ И
Ы яжтотчго 
i
xf 
xf Tf^mfR^Tfecmiihmi
ТГЯТ WJTIWItt T O ЯТЩ R^fl
fttfbiuj tf Т^зг T O T Xf
fer: Tjeraf ThrPHf 
t% n^i

=== PAGE 742 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAISJDA, CHAPTER 105
653
TRT fi^T W WfHHI 
yq'tilm 
ri ^r^pih^Tt 8% 
и
After listening to the words of Rukml, the king 
consulted in secrecy the family priest, he than 
sent a competent Brahmana to Dvaraka and 
keeping in view the auspicious time, the king 
arranged for the festivities, as desired by his son 
the king despatched invitation letters to several 
places. The Brahmana presented the welfare 
letter to the king who was seated in the assembly 
of the kings and gods, named Sudharma. Coming 
to know about the welfare letter, the face of the 
king was delighted. He delightfully gave away to 
the Brahmanas a thousand gold coins.
eftffa сгщзтщ ЖГЩЩ W !Tcfa:i 
^ |^ н Ц ч г ^ с | 
gpjcfT4ji^n
ям-шцга
xf cbRillUm ^Tf?T:llV9o и
зпт^ 
f% hi%j
cblWTRIR датГГИёПГ cRTj;i|^ll 
%4^TJT 
у 441^1
щ п 
w fgw nferr ^
10э^ц
TSRST^r RUfW «raRTT 
ЧЕГ:
^|T5T9^nfq 
-41(1191^1(11 gn^efi:nta^ll
rfarr rr# д а : wtrwtii 
ch«H$№ dhl 
*l*fl HdBIItshS ti
The big drams were beaten in the whole of 
Dvaraka, the gods, the sages, the kings, the 
relatives, the bards, the beggars were served with 
food with devotion. Sri Krsna was clad in the 
best of garments which were quite channing and 
incomparable in the three worlds. Thereafter the 
marriage procession was taken but to be the best 
is the three worlds. During the marriage 
procession the hymns from the Vedas were 
recited, starting in the Mahendra-yoga. Brahma 
together with Savitrl were mounted on a chariots 
and moved ahead of all. The delightful Siva with 
Parvati also moved on the chariot, followed by 
Ananta, Sesa, Surya, Ganes'a, Karttikeya, Indra,
the Moon, Varuna, Vayu, Kubera, Yama, Agni 
and Is'ana.
^TR t 
f*3TI<fy?y -qqblt hfgcbi£it:l 
iRf^lUTi 
Щ 
^ГН^^П^ЭЦ II
The three crores of gods, six crores of the 
sages, six lakhs of king and three lakhs of white 
chatras were carried in the procession.
31ШТГ Ш TPSIT 481% WH 7ЦЙ1
тгатга^г: 
cR4tii^^n
In the meantime the king appeared glorious 
like the moon among the constellations. The 
valorous king 
delightfully moved 
towards 
Kundinapura.
C*f44hiRfT^4 
4£l<*H:l
ЧТГЧТНТ 
^ erj; |
gw n«3fn: 
%кчдтВП7Т:||\э<*!1
fRrfaHfMT Ф т: 
IW W III
Егт%гг ида: TSEi xnu^ciT: livs ^ n
The valorous Baladeva was mounted on a 
gem-studded vehicle. Then Vasudeva, Uddhava, 
Nanda, Akrara, Satyaki, the cowherds, the king 
Yadavas, the king of the lunar race, Duryodhana 
and others besides Dhrtarastra also moved on. 
Then Yudhisthira, Bhlma, Arjuna, Nakula and 
Sahadeva moved on delightfully in a vehicle. 
Ф 4Т 
g jn f^ n tq ^ rrn r
^ЧШТ^угГ 
VTvhVV W Tt R TTll^oii
ягя! щ 
fermr 
1
3i^iRi4i т и н xx ешрп srgraiRunqfi^n
Bhlsma, Drona, Kama, valorous Asvatthama, 
Kipacarya, 
Sakuni 
and 
Salya moved 
on 
delightfully, three crores of warriors, hundreds 
crores of Brahmanas, a thousand ascetics, yogis 
and Brahmacdris also moved on with the 
procession.
fe h p j f e w n g f r a f e tII
dchHHi 
xf ТЦ4Г 4t*lcblRlluqil^^|| 
4Rtf?Tv4^vtT%^ (чГчя 
Ef|
E* gnmT03T4t 4&ШТ El 
\63 11

=== PAGE 743 ===

654
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
Wctfuii ТШШЧ7 
f Ч[ЩI
Ч-этй|^|гсы!чн1^ ^ 64^c( ^ ТТёгПТ; I
гашщтщ щ г тг ^
тччтш ш и б ч п
ЙЖТЩ 
У TT^fnrt Ш т^ Ч .11 « 1 11
Two thousand sages who had controlled their 
anger, the Avadhutas also moved on together 
with a thousand carriers of the lotus flowers and 
a thousand carriers of the other flowers also 
moved on. Many of the artisans who could create 
beautiful 
paintings 
also 
moved 
on. 
The 
processions had a lakh of musical instruments as 
lakh of Gandharva and the singers. О Narada, 
during that of the time you were bom as 
Gandharva named Upabarhana moving with fifty 
. damsels. The procession also included a lakh of 
Vidyadharls, a lakh of apsaras, a lakh of 
Kinnaras and three lakh of Gandharvas
'ffr sffalffo тщто
о ЗтТ° 4H«bu° 
:11?оцц

=== PAGE 744 ===

654
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
зет
Chapter -106
Marriage of Revatl and Balarama 
w \ m sctra
ЦиП-тЫ-гА ТГЗТТ chcb'til *T *4^l«tcrf: I
5^сН>сЬТ^)ЧТП^:М?11
я^1\гпй 
w r^ jfw ^ R m i
З ^ Т О ^ е т % H&JJ ^TTRIR11 
(TcH^lif ТВЩЙЧ cfcM^ldl
гптг ъ т *пг ^
 w r t 
11 3 11
Narayana said- In the meantime the valorous 
king, Kakudmi arrived from Brahmaloka in 
search for a suitable groom for his daughter. He 
gave away in marriage his daughter named 
Revatl who possessed beauty unequal in the 
three worlds, adorned with all the ornaments, 
having quite a youthful body to Baladeva quite 
playfully. She was bom in Satyayuga and had 
seen twenty seven yugas.
^ctr cfpsfi felBR
rt ^mrisT 
c^nmi
3tfnnt w it щ т гп
4HWeb!Т^тБТЧТ ^T#lt xnftT сЧ$ПЭЭТ1щи
ТтШ^Г 1Щ - w b stfs ^T RTcflRI
W MTbiqifurcWgltcfi^ll^ll
cbAtl
T^TT^n^lt: TTTif <pf&§R ^111911
He gave away his daughter in marriage to 
Balarama in the presence of the sages, gods and 
Indra and also gave away three lakhs of elephant 
in dowry. The dowry included ten lakhs of 
horses, a lakh of chariots, a lakh of slave-girls 
adorned with the gem-studded ornaments, a lakh 
of diamonds, a lakh of gems, a crores of gold 
coins, beautiful costumes sanctified by fire, the 
jewels, rubies and other diamonds. The king 
Kakudmi handing on his daughter Revatl in

=== PAGE 745 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 106
655
marriage to Balarama mounted on a gem-studded 
chariot and went back to Kundinapura.
зтггнй ^ 
Rif- R^HchhTun
"idol 
■MilMdl cb4cllch<rll4ll<i II
id ch i 
^сГ гт^ГГсН Ч^ % ^ 1
фгт ^ rI ^ rii^ i
After the completion of the marriage, DevakI, 
RohinI, Yasoda, Aditi, Diti entered the house 
together with Revatl who was bom out of the 
amsa of Laksmi.
dl^lUlWNdmiy 3 ^ Т«ТГ SR g ^ l
r^ r щччшга HRbiHt ^
wtii^° и
DevakI the spouse of Vasudeva served the 
Brahmanas with food and the riches, performing 
the welfare ceremony, 
зм i'dRid rrrt t h r : 
r ? i
RVn4H?RI4l%tl| fftlR RR* g^TIIUII
Thereafter the gods, the sages, the king with 
their armies delightfully reached the city of 
Kundinapura.
The four warriors guarding the gate included 
Rukml, Sisupala, valorous Dantavaktra and 
Salva who was well-versed in the warfare as well 
as illusion, the prince Rukmi was anxious for a 
war holding all the weapons. He was enraged 
finding the army of Krsna and then hearing at the 
gods and the sages, he spoke aloud harsh words, 
which were echoed in the sky.
3RTT *ЫНфН e&tf 
rf %R Re5R)
fe n s? cbsifqunft ^ ^iu ii tg'TTRfepi^n
Rukml said- The deeds performed at a time or 
the moves of the destiny cannot be stopped by 
anyone otherwise what to speak in the assembly 
of the gods.
'bfW lfl 
R%TH{I
OTRlffT ^Р(|$рЦв1 R^REII^II
In order to marry RukminT, the beautiful 
damsel who is suitable for the gods, a cowherds 
son of Nanda is arriving with the sages.
RHfR: 4fwfR?ar R#dR?=r ^fgcTRII^II
RhM cR ЩЩП VW^RHUIl 
4RR#E1 hfniRlffilR f^ g R b rril^ ll
R%T 
RT?f 
R ? R ^ :il^ ii
TWRtTR^r rfpfhlt
oil
The cowherds is the lover of the cowherdesses 
and consumes always the left-over of the 
cowherds, his caste is unknown nor does he 
know anything about the food or the love- 
making.
Everybody found the city to be quite beautiful 
which was surrounded by seven deep moats and 
seven boundary walls with hundred gates. 
Vis'vakarma had built the outer gate of the city 
with various gems and jewels which was 
witnessed by all the people of the marriage party. 
The gate was guarded by four great warriors.
-•bUHW f^T4W =r 
RtjTRvffl
uiurfaqi 
^IIWfaHRcRII^hll 
r r w I w tstI m tsiwct tutEr h : i
favflRR фШТО-й iqRRrrR ^tpRRrll^ll 
RRR 
i^ T R I
R R ^ tI 
hfdjhcll^ll^ll
1% R ТГ^Ч ^Г fq; 5 RT RfTRra: I 
cR^cf: 
R^RI ^ R R f^ ll? HI
He is neither the son of a king nor a sage, he 
was bom of Vasudeva, Ksatriya and was brought 
up by a Vais'ya.
f^TcRTR R 
fORRTI
3><wtl <^dl nf RRtRTgrRRT Ktcb) ^RT:IR ^ II
The wicked person killed a woman during his 
childhood. By enjoying the conjugal pleasures 
With him Kubja died, together with the 
washerman.
ТГ^И^Т ^ 
ggl^rdl RRqjJciqj 
RfRRi R srf%: RST: qjRf fdinfdd:ll^il

=== PAGE 746 ===

656
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
By killing a king one earns Brahmahatya and 
this Krsna killed the religious king Kamsa in 
Mathura.
yilce)
(diMRrti W m eh
Salva said- О god. there is nothing untrue in 
whatever has been spoken by Rukmi, how can 
the cowherd of Nanda become the husband of 
Rukminl.
3orm
stfe fcbdiv^4
чнЦ.| dkl6l:
Sis'upala said- what more surprise could be 
there in the universe that Brahma and other gods; 
and the sons to Brahma have arrived here at the 
command of a human being.
■RrRT 5iifjluu e|«ll 
1
iRT g' ^cR ЗГгЩ T^ehl4 driuddi: I
S3 
чЭ 
'
Dantavaktra said- A Brahmana is always 
greedy and the gods are always graceful to the 
devotees but why have the sons of Brahma 
arrived here at the command of the son of 
Nanda? On hearing the words of these people, all 
the gods, the sages and the kings besides 
Balarama were enraged.
ffh' 34l<a^]° R fto
Jo 3rf° ЧШ1ЧТ0

=== PAGE 747 ===

656
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
ЗТ8Г
Chapter -1 0 7
Subjugation of Salva by Balabhadra tmd 
the stotra recited by Bhi$maka
ч ю т т и г а
'sRhrith ъ *птз*
Narayana said- О sage thereafter, the valorous 
Baladeva broke the chariot of Rukml with the 
plough.
yVchNII# 
^hdlirfd:!
"mfh Ч\Гчй hfctM IFjf Mihm ‘Rill'll I 
w f t r 
ciiwimir Н Ш 1
ТШН* '4Ь1*ПЧ1Я Щ
The valorous Baladeva who happened to be 
the lord of the universe after breaking to pieces, 
the chariot and the horses besides the charioteer 
of Rukml, rushed towards him in order to kill 
him. Rukml on his part prevented the advance of 
Balarama by shooting a number of arrows and 
thought of capturing Balarama with the use of 
Nagastra.
ЯТПТО' 
ТРЩПТ girfl
r h t ч щ ш ■g^imi
^f^FFT RHpft 
^f«Rf;|l4ll
Balabhadra himself shot Garudastra in order 
to destroy the Nagastra. О sage, in rage Rukml 
took out the Pasupata weapon on which could 
not be infructuous, destroyed the enemies and 
was illustrious like hundreds of suns. But 
Baladeva surrounded RukmT with Jrmbhastra 
and he started having a deep sigh .
ЗД|Щтг^*4) 
Rrf^rT: i
ftfsr щр ^шстпрдчгст wpii^n 
т а г R: I
'JOCICi^UgRe R TReffe 4<»)H ?ll^ll

=== PAGE 748 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 107
657
R u k m l w as than o ver-pow ered w ith sleep and 
fell d o w n on earth. S alva on the other hand 
fin ding h im sleepy, shot a hundred arrows at 
B a la d e va , show ered m ountains and rocks besides 
w ater and fire-flam es.
TT^ffcrr сггтщчта HTfvfti
адщ ад! t r e WtspT:iliH
the best o f the courtier o f V is n u because he is 
destined to be killed b y K rsn a h im se lf.".
rM d d d W 
ёТ Щ
 IT ? FFT ёП
Ь Tlf ЗЩЧТ?ё) ТПТ11 ^4 II
Balaram a broke the teeth o f D a n ta va ktra w ith 
the striking o f the plough because he w as jeering 
at all the people.
B u t B alaram a on his part neutralised all o f 
them w ith the use o f his w eapon and w ith the 
striking o f the p lo ugh , he reduced the chariot o f 
S alva into pieces.
tTtZcRRTRfsr 4 3 W
 xfa Hfmn 
аетЩ^Ш^Т it sFjJ 
il
ST5T VUvd <j)UI|qsZt rTg- 
hlhM THtl 
473 
4 
^
 ё! ТтФг ЩГГИ’ 0 11
H e killed his horses and the chariot also play 
fu lly , he then rushed towards h im w ith the 
intention o f killin g h im . B u t there w as a divine 
voice fro m the s k y , saying, " Y o u forgive Salva 
because he is to be kille d b y K rsn a alone. W h o 
can described y o u r prow ess in the battle-field on 
w hose head the entire globe rests like a seed o f 
sesam um in a w in n o w in g basket.".
mss ecu dn^d^ei 
dHl
а д ад! оцйст: ади а д т №т ^ н 
Л11АУН1 tpR <|gT !щ ад гг 4^1'dHII 
адпг 
rf 
адгг srfsm^ii
cihi Т2Г адт адш cii^-гИ ёп 
з#Етадт гг^адлрадгадтш адчади^и
O n hearing this, B a lad eva struck h im on the 
head w ith his plo ugh as a result o f w h ich he fell 
in the battle-field. Fin d in g that S alva had fallen, 
Sisupala show ered his arrows like the show ering 
o f the w ater on the ground. B alaram a on his part 
reduced his chariots into pieces.
ct ^
 ? Ш : ТТЩП^ЙЙ ёТ tW t cFTI
S iva h im se lf stopped B alaram a fro m killing 
him saying, " O Balabhadra, don't kill Sisupala,
адгНТ fadih <|gT ЧТё? cfirT:
Ш : U^FT
W itnessing the prow ess o f B a laram a, all the 
w arriors fled a w a y. Thereafter the m arriage party 
entered K un din ap u ra .
brifFRRrt ад w
t адтч^г:! 
дШ ?Т^И ч: ТПФТГЗППЧ 1^: iJT:ll^3ll
In the m eantim e the great sage Satananda 
arrived before K rsn a together w ith crores o f 
sages.
TT 5%адтто WTSlt ёГ frflTRI 
зтадт xnfr тгадт firinun xt ^ T au ^ ii^ in 
чрадщ адададнт^т ёп 
flftcfFdr Щ Щ flfW flryfl W
^ : l l ^ l l
Н е 
m ade 
the 
m arriage 
party 
enter 
the 
inaccessible 
gate 
o f 
the 
city 
w h ic h 
w as 
inaccessible 
fo r 
the 
enem ies 
but 
w as 
quite 
pleasant fo r the friends. A l l the daughters o f the 
gods, the N a g a s, the sages and the princesses 
arrived there to have a lo o k at the g room .
7T5|f ftim fffo ёп
UTRT cbK4T4W TlfwfV^^TsIT: 11Ч ° 11 
Ч<^ш(чч1щ<УГОЯ 4T4ycfT4J 
TT^T «ТВПгЧТТ 
HI
яФтзтдададт 
хтШшЖ!
311
Я^^Н1ЧрчЬ|с|ад|-ЧзГкт%гГЧ1 
чт!адт чтс%нт ададт 
13*11
ЧТН^Т: 
: TtfsfcT

=== PAGE 749 ===

658
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAtfAM
щ я ^ н г а ч ч п ч ц п
?I4'c4^*^VR4 tR E m ^^w ri 
<
w
«йч*4 т а f4c?t •ччшч! 19 ^ 11
tftsfaj chWbd sr^ T ? te f^ T ^ I
ч'Ш^щз» w i
еПЧГОТЕЦ §тшкт 4W я # : ТЩГ1 
VZZtjg xT
gstFT g^m rdf дя^дт: ЧЧЗД^ЧГЧ! 
^TSt Ш^РТШЧТ W<fiWWfwWII-
C-, 
Cv 
*4
put чтчкщхт тг R fz
holding flowers presented by a damsels. His head 
was adorned with a crown. Looking at such a 
fortunate groom, the ladies felt unconscious.
■Щ щМ Ы SRT
^гчгчг -щ 
w t ф ц о ш ^ п ?
f4W %rr jTRT
тгэт 
w n^r.
uMIucU flltPctill-441^ ЗГЩЧЩ 4T:I
%Tfq?t тПгдЩгТ ^PTT ^ifdrfMdl
w
 1ччга 44Rt 
дтчй: ^fu^-su
oR W4t«dJ TJ55T ■flingftycJT^ll^oll
Siva smilingly delighted Krsna and all the 
damsels stared Krsna, who was adorned with the 
best of the gem-studded ornaments, was the lord 
of all, was graceful to the devotees and took to 
human form 
to grace them, having the 
complexion of new clouds, clad in yellow 
garments, whose body was plastered with the 
sandal-paste adorned with the long garland of 
forest flowers, wearing the armlets, wristlets and; 
garland of gems. His ears were adorned with a 
pair of ear-ornaments which decorated his 
temples, He worn anklets which produced 
dangling sound, having a smiling face, holding a 
flute in his hand, looking at the mirrors of gems, 
served by the white fly-whisks by the seven 
cowherd attendants, having been a youthful 
body, the eyes resembling the lotus flowers of 
the winter season, the face resembling the full 
moon of the winter season, the one, who was 
graceful on his devotees, was beautiful like 
crores of the gods of love, the one who was 
eternal and spotless like the holy place, sanctified 
with his glory and adored by Brahma, Siva and 
Sesa, having a delightful mind and lustre of 
crores of moons, the one who could not be 
achieved even by meditation, could be adored at 
the time of misery, the one who is beyond 
Prakrti, who is having the complexion of Durvd- 
grass holding the mirror made of gems and the 
silken cord, having the beauty of the blossoming 
banana tree, having the form of Trivikrama, 
adorned with the garland of jasmine flowers,
They started saying, "The life of RukminI is 
quite graceful, praise-worthy and desirable." The 
queen of Bhlsmaka stared at her son-in-law 
continuously and felt extremely satisfied; his 
face and eyes were filled with delight. The king 
with a delightful face arrived with his courtiers 
and priest and bowed before the gods, the 
Brahmanas and the kings offered them the 
appropriate seats; at the place filled with enough 
of food-stuffs; the demand of giving echoed 
through out the day and night. Vasudeva spent 
the night there with the gods and the relatives.
grcj^oT: 
tlcbK 4T:I
ччгсзт 
fast tprr sfft sr зш й и
тШТ ^ЧЧГПТ ^4l%3TfR Ff:l
Чйрт RigeRT: WT: ЩП®Г'Н4^Л1:11^И
JRBT 
gfehcaifq* 4STTI
згщщтдйзгатчге 
зггегашшиз'эи
The next morning he freed himself from all the 
daily routines, took a bath, performed sandhya 
and clad himself in two garments. He than 
reciting the Vedic hymns invoked Visnu, the 
Matrkasa and adored all the gods performing the 
Nandisraddha. Thereafter he served food to the 
Brahmanas and his relatives.
ctrer sr спддщга д а п щ ч^тчч)
Tjgd «надчш gRfgrfo « v ifw fii^ ii
ЧГЗЗТ 
ehudlMIfi ЧТЧПЧ ^TW TtTl
TRT 4 W E?t( 
xt -qfRRH? Ч И

=== PAGE 750 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 107
659
Wf 
9ЩТ Я:1
ЧНЛ-ГгЯ SR gifci 4Tfil4lfuicKl|llcb^li^o|| 
я$яяш ^ щ я rm ^R R g w ^i 
я ф я т $гщпЫг5^ 1ящ%гей 
■g^ii
ЯНГ Я ЯТёЩЯШ cKUdlUW RfH'H.1 
т а 5 Ш Ш ШЯаяГ?Я ЯЯГ?ТЯ1Гк311
The musical instrument were played upon 
performing the welfare ceremonies. The groom 
was clad in the best of gannents. A beautiful 
palanquin was arranged. Similarly king Bhls 
maka also performed all the festivities through 
the priest with the reciting of the Vedic hymns, 
distributing to the Brahmanas and the beggars, 
the diamonds, riches, jewels, rubies, eatables, 
beside the beautiful garments. The musical 
instruments were sounded and all the welfare 
ceremonies were perfonned, RukminI was also 
adorned with the best of ornaments and was clad 
in the best of costumes.
Я Я qylfacRI 
Ш: Г?ТЯ 
ЯТЯ* ЯЩЯ ЯЯЯ^ЯИХЗП 
И<3|£|ГЯгМЧ Я rlHl&9(rlR^rll
riiuwti ^ГддШн'к'кИ
ЭД-dTUTPfJ^d $М1сЬ|ЭД4с|Ш||'кЧ11
ячтят: Мявй я oRuimytery^i
Rcbj=r Я ЯЯ^ я1 ьцд|^и'| ^Т: 11^^11
All the ceremonies were perfonned by the 
queens and the wives of the sages. Thereafter at 
the auspicious moment of Mahendra-yoga, when 
the lord was associated with lagna and was 
under the influence of the best of the planets the 
marriage was performed at the auspicious time 
when constellations the moon and the stars 
looked quite auspicious having no blemish. The 
marriage ceremony of the couple was performed 
in the welfare yoga. At that point of time, Sri Krs 
na arrived in the court yard of Bhismaka.
зптаття яЬ w i ЧЙГзУТяГ£Ь:1
•о 
О 
-О
ЯТ4 f45T ЯШ ^ЯТгП'И'к'ЗИ
J|)4Ich4: ят^
щ яятя?я яягв^:1 
я ф я RR&riflfd:
Т
П
:
1ГйЧП 
ясШ Ытяш!
HM lftl^eh^d 4MI<*AwilSht:ir*<HI 
1яй1<м4ш'(1[чнм 
яятя!
ЯШ Я 
ЯЯЯУЯ ^ЫЯ:11Ч°И
Я^ ЯЯРШ 4- Я- friril^dTlTt?gqF)l:l
я г г ^ я я ^ # : нч^п
timchMl rR4I4t ТЯШНТ Я' ЯсгТсЫ
Я Т тМ ятШ ^ я !щ я ^ я ш ^ : 11ч ^ 11
Я^ЯГ 
ЯШШТсгая^ :!
f4<iRt^:ll43II
RTjfcftt: 
Я^я№тяяШ я1:1
Т1% ^я% % гя;|1Ч'к11
Не was accompanied by the gods, the sages, 
the Brahmanas, the priests close relatives, the 
parent's, the kings, cowherds, courtiers, friends, 
bards and the astrologers well-versed in the 
science of astrology. There were several people 
playing on the musical instruments besides 
dancers singers, artisans, the gardeners the 
Vidyadharis, apsaras and the kinnaris and others 
The gods, the sages, the kings who had arrived to 
witness the marriage looked at the place of the 
marriage delightfully which had thousand of the 
trunks of the banana trees tied with the silken 
cords. There were innumerable garlands of 
campaka flowers, the tender leaves of the sandal­
wood and mango trees besides several types of 
garlands of red, yellow and white flowers. There 
were 
a 
large 
number 
of 
Ghdta-pallavas 
decorating the place which were painted with 
kasturi, sandal-paste, saffron, leaves, 
fried 
paddy, fruits, flowers and Durva-grass. The 
place was surrounded by the Brahmanas and the 
kings.
таг^яп^тШ ятяяя яяяяп 
ч Ш тТЗЧГяЙ: chhHte>|RfRc$:ll44ll 
Яс$ : RffllfiThl
<гнн1 я 
таёщтн^'.пччп

=== PAGE 751 ===

660
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
fgrfw ^l 
g6<t<*iRuuqUV3ll 
xrfTrT: i ) M ? ^TWnf: ^#4^:1 
ч-уаЫ g уо1г1и^ чу(Гфоч;пчй 11 
femTTMT^q^r 4#$Nt g Ш^РТТЧ! 
mt 
gqglglgdgqtjiiih^ii
g ^ g f^f4T g 
о к
§n?rggH w r 
^тчогйчп
g ш^тт тщг «^гт щл^гшти^яп 
зга^г тягаtif fagfo зп^й -ggn 
trfsj 
igw: я^ш уд-.и^и
t: Щ
\
Ш^сГТ ^Tt^TRT 
#JTcRWTl 15,^11
gstf g g ^ ^gj?g wH'iyg -jqiwsm 
Tgfw tFR H 
^suggsraii^ii 
зстш gragmre 
yicRui gi 
ggr dk.rg ^4r4i g шчтд^эд1%)Ц^дпд 
gg^g grg^g gr^ig:
There was the goddess of the best of gem. The 
place was filled with the sandals-paste, kasturl 
and saffron, issuing fragrance. The cool fragrant 
wind was blowing, thousands of lamps made of 
gems were burning there, the burning of several 
types of the incense and other scented materials 
were issuing fragrant; the auspicious architects 
had made various types of attractive paintings all 
around. The Gandharvas were engaged in 
beautiful music, the Vidyadhari and the dancers 
were dancing, the place was decorated with 
several of the paintings created by the artisans 
which attracted the people. The damsels were 
peeping through the windows and the secret 
gates. The king was holding kusa-grass in his 
hand besides the pitcher of welfare. The learned 
priest was also present there. Brahma and other 
gods looked at the court-yard of the king. All of 
them delightfully descended from the chariots 
and entered the court-yard of the king. The kings,
the demons, Sanaka and other sages arrived 
there. Lord Krsna was also present there with his 
courtiers. Finding all the people there. BhTsmaka 
at once got up and offered his salutation to the 
gods, the sages, the kings, bowing his head. He 
then offered Individual gem-studded lion-throne 
to everyone for taking their seats. The king 
respectively adored all, offerings prayers to each 
one of them with devotion. He then started 
Vasudeva and DevakI getting emotional with his 
eyes filled with tears.
здтд
зга ir тпш 
gtfgg g ggtfgggi 
ggg g-43TdlTi
Bhlsmaka said- My life has met with success 
today and has been beautified; the fruit of crores 
of my birth has emerged.
ттд fggmr злтат зг^ттт 
■ш grtiTh'ji g я г ^g $пт: згагп^п
срш ч д а д шт gifnt tmi
щ д т ж
The one who is the creator of the universe and 
is the bestower of all the riches, whose lotus-like 
feet are difficult to be seen eve ■ in dream, the 
one who bestows the reward for the tapas is the 
creator, the same lord is now present in my 
court-yard. It is not proper to enquire about the 
welfare from the one who roams himself into his 
own soul.
grtfcttfJr fa& t: 
днТчг<4:1
кпч1^г?д gr ^g: g % g : 
i^<?n
gncft gggFggrt^pgg.- зг$:1 
щ я д ? д 
w
t 
i\ъ о 11
He is the one who is adored by the yogis, the 
siddhas, the gods and the ascetics but is 
inaccessible to them, the same Siva have arrived 
in my court-yard. The lord who happens to be 
the killer of the time, death for the god of the 
death, the one who has conquered the death and 
is the lord of death, the same lord is presently 
visible to all.

=== PAGE 752 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHA^DA, CHAPTER 107
661
hf£r 
жггщ[1
4Rf*Erf: 
rT ЯЯ Jnf6t:lh9?ll
T h e one w h o carries the earth o ver one o f his 
thousand heads and the one w h o is beyond 
description in the V e d a s , the sam e, 
lord is 
present in m y court-yard.
'ЫдпщщЬтг f | Trafr 
w rq i 
^тттпчт щ я #
 
яятяг gwrarwi я згетг ^ n i a t : i
TRRfvhTTt «РЩРЯгЕЩГ: STfut ЯЯ11\э311
T h e one w h o is lo vin g ly visible in all the 
desire, the one w h o is adored first o f all and the 
one w h o is the best o f all the gods, the same 
Ganesa is present in m y court-yard. T h e one w h o 
is the best o f the sages and the Vaisnavas, 
besides being the teacher o f the intellectuals, the 
same Sanatkum ara is present in m y court-yard.
tftonyti tT raw ift сг?ш:|
T h e sons, 
grandsons, 
great grandsons and 
other descendants o f B ra h m a are illu m in ing w ith 
divine lustre. A l l o f them h ave , presently arrived 
in m y house.
3 # 
сТШЯШ WSS3W: I
gfetT ЯЙЯ 
tnfT #ЯЙЯ ЯТЯТ1
ЯТЯ* ж!я 
ш1я Я И ^И
uicjRtgfd irfspriri
ятятяягптяя fq®rf% 1яяя ящ11\з\эп
M y house has been turned into the h o ly place 
like the one at the end o f the kalpa, w ith the 
w ater 
o f w hose 
feet, 
the 
h o ly 
places 
get 
sanctified, he is also available here. A l l the h o ly 
places o f the earth and the ocean are lodged in 
the feet o f the B rahm anas; the earth rem ains w et 
w ith the w ater from the feet o f the Brahm anas. 
T h e ancestors sip the w ater from the leaves o f 
the lotus flo w e rs. T h e y are all present in m y 
house.
fauпщМ? ■ртят зтзт 1язгтя 
«HHi whfcrfaT <шчтя1£т ftfsRmii^ii 
frFrPt я 
щтМЦтяетягтят 
yjpi ятт 
=ртчт 119 <? 11
B y consum ing the w ater w ith w h ic h the feet o f 
the Brahm anas are w ashed, b y g ivin g them the 
daksina, one achieve the m erit o f taking bath in 
all the h o ly places. T h e w ater o f the feet o f the 
Brahm anas rem oves 
all the m isfortunes, 
the 
ailm ents and bestow s pleasure and rem oves pain.
я TTffra^r ntsf я т*ят игадгля:!
4 4% <h<AIVHIWb:IM о II
я -дет xnfeneTTEcT я- я т # ч т я я <{1 
дяя я % язя я я яя нн4)чячм4
Я 
TTf^n fh ЯТ55ШТ: ЧЯЯсЯГ:1 
Я % ЯЯНГ 
Ч7Я|иМ: I\6 Ч11
Th ere is n o place holier than G a n g a ; there is 
no god greater then H a ri, there is no devotee 
greater than Sanatkum ara, there is no tree greater 
than kalpavrksa; there is no flo w e r better than 
Parijata; 
there 
is 
no 
vrata 
greater 
than 
Harivasara, there is no goddess greater than 
Prakrti. There is no base greater than the w in d , 
there is nothing m ore solid than M a h a visn u and 
nothing is sm aller than the atom .
я w w rc : ятт ят$зяя?я я tMami 
Я ^Я Я Т : tstefaiteng сЬЧёР«£ё1:1ММ1
There is no dsrama m ore sanctified 
than 
B rah m an a, n or the h o ly place. E v e n the gods do 
not com pare w ith them . T h is has been ordained 
b y B rah m a .
я$а?я щ: jnj:i
bUHKflgft f fiTWtt ЯИЯЯТЯГЧ 1яШсПТ1М^11
Р ф гуя (япсбггГ
■я 
Я§|Я* дптт 
h<*h?IM4ll
T h e lord w h o is beyond B ra h m a , V is n u , Sesa 
or Pra k rti; the god w h o is inaccessible through 
m editation and could be achieved w ith great

=== PAGE 753 ===

662
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
devotion and m editation. H e is beyond quality 
invisible and takes to hum an fo rm in order to 
bestow his grace on the devotees; all these gods 
are presently available in m y house.
sfoR forfot fotfonfir ^ fo rg il^ ll
H is inaccessible lotus-like feet are adored b y 
B ra h m a , 
S iva , 
A n a n ta , 
K u b e ra , 
Ganes'a and 
S urya.
??дд?дт 
грог жтчЬт -щц 4T:i
^гтд 
urfogrTiidgii
T h u s speaking B h lsm aka h im se lf came and 
stood before K rs n a and praised h im w ith the 
reciting o f the stotra fro m Samaveda.
ж кпЖ Т ШЧТ 
fofot T?g g)
gtffoTT «fcfolfoft <*ГШМТ rf 'ФПТЛ^И^йИ
B h lsm a k a said- Y o u are the inner soul o f 
everyon e, the w itness o f all, unattached, the 
cause o f the deeds and the cause o f all the 
causes.
зла? тгяс$ gg
w f o g g tfit g g ff 
з и
O N a ra d a , thus praising the kin g sipped w ater 
and 
rem em bered 
lord 
V is n u . 
Thereafter 
he 
offered w ater at the feet o f the lord w h ic h are 
daily w ashed La k s m I. H e then offered Diirva- 
grass, flow ers and w ater together w ith arghya, 
madhuparka and sugar. H e applied fragrant, 
sandal-paste on all the lim bs. 
дЯЩтТ '4{j%lT ^*T<5i»Sfo 4%cb4J
w g g дтщ?д дй 
1 9. 111 
T h e garland o f Parijdta flow ers w h ic h w as 
given to h im b y In d ra , w h o offe re d b y h im to the 
lord adorning his neck.
f^TJTW 
ft chit ftTR гГВТ ТГ ТГЗТТ
T h e beautiful ornam ent o f gem s offered to the 
kin g b y K u b e ra , w as offered w ith devotions b y 
the kin g to the lord.
T^tT cttgil ggi
^
 ggg -f^oira TjfrjoVcmre gn< ^u
итчгнтн forf ftrqrdpqiftcb:ll<s^ll
Som e o f the people call y o u as the fo rm o f 
lustre and eternal w h ile others call y o u as the 
suprem e soul w h ich is reflected in a hum an 
being.
fog дтрт
^ifftfvicft^i'O^ g gtgjCgfi'^g 
: 11
T h e people o f ordinary w isd o m conceived yo u 
as the one havin g p o lity and Prakrtika Jiva. T h e 
person w ith great w isd o m conceive y o u as the 
one h a vin g the eternal b o d y.
CftlfbWnB fog tfofo TRTcPPfl
gwrifoi: jragfg дгсщ ф гн 
?ii
S om e o f the people conceive y o u as the 
internal light, eternal and h avin g an ever-lasting 
b o d y . Because w ith ou t the visible lord the lustre 
cannot em erged.
■qg ggtgr g mssgrer: gnfonnf g чнд| 
w т а Ш 
тпд
T h e tw o garm ents sanctified b y fire w h ich was 
g iven b y A g n i to the kin g in earlier times w ere 
o ffe r to lord K rsn a
fo g g T g w g fo ffoggfom
nRHcfo TRTT ^UTTBT UC4lr44:IRV91l
T h e shining gem -studded cro w n w h ich w as 
offered b y V is va k a rm a , to the kin g w as g ive n b y 
h im to lord K rsn a , adorning his forehead.
m gsrafor g gfor gprfogj
g 
c^i i ч 11
Trafoyfos for qTt rgrifoioF^i
g g? тщ <k|ft^ftffMtTH.fi<?su 
-t(d«b(i TRfi tfRRf gifocT 
^tgi g g fo тгят gftfrc gggr щ \r о о i i 
gg r 
^ii
T h e incense, 
the lam ps 
o f gem s, 
tasteful 
naivedya and several types o f flow ers besides 
gem -studded lion throne w ere also offered to 
h im . T h e w ater o f seven h o ly places w as g ive n to 
the lord fo r sipping and a betel w ith cam phor

=== PAGE 754 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 109
663
was also given to him. He was also given a 
charming bed which was quite appropriate for 
love-sport and the fragrant water was offered for 
drinking. Thus selecting Krsna as the groom, the 
prayer was offered. The king then offered the 
bunch of flowers to Krsna.
ytsHtlo Mjjio 
о З т Т о ЧТТЦЧТ0

=== PAGE 755 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANpA, CHAPTER 109
663
чЪ епгс:
Chapter -108
Marriage of Rukmini
4ttW I ЗЩЩ
RftfrtfiRfr 
R iw ftl
W
P ШТЧКГ ^ c n f ^ ^ l l ^ l l 
Ж^ЩПГПШ *1 ■<HHchK‘Ml4nU
джЫп^гс!Т11?!1 
mv4^ "trfwr w a r '^гчс^к^^^1чч|
ш М ч з ! ^ "учтФ тт хг атгг^гичи
N a ra ya n a said- In the m eantim e R u k m in i the 
fo rm o f M ah a lak sm I arrived in the court o f the 
k in g together w ith the gods and the sages, she 
w as seated on the gem -studded lion-throne. She 
w as adorned w ith gem -studded ornam ents and 
clad in the garm ents sanctified b y fire. H e r hair­
do w as lo okin g quite charm ing; the chaste lad y, 
w earing a sm ile on her face w as looking at the 
invaluable gem -studded m irro r. She had the spot 
o f kasturl o ver her forehead and her lim bs w ere 
plastered w ith sandal-paste; the forehead was 
decorated w ith the spot o f ve rm ilio n . She had the 
lustre o f m olten gold and she w as shining like 
the lustre o f the hundreds o f m o o n s. A l l her 
lim bs w ere plastered w ith sandal-paste and she 
w o re the garland o f jasm ine flow ers. T h e seven 
princesses bro u gh t her in the court.
A l l the yogis, the gods, the sages, the siddhas 
and the kings had a glance o f the chaste R u k m in i 
w h o w as the fo rm o f La k s m I.
WST^nJTT: 
yirpq Wlfd
cfr 
''ЗРТЗЯГСТ: gjRit yiRTT W 
<c;vl chl-n; Chltll 
RTRT chl-nl 
^tutll
T h e chaste R u k m in i to ok seven rounds and 
b o w e d before her husband, she sprinkled cool 
w ater w ith the tender leaves, soaked in sandal- 
paste. Thereafter K rs n a also sprinkled w ater on 
his beloved w h o w as sm iling. A t the auspicious 
tim e both the husband and the w ife looked at 
each other.
Ш 
% : 
GfchTf ^pTFRTI
ггззгат ч ^ ч т 
^
R u k m in i w ith the serene and sm iling face w as 
shining w ith her lustre and keeping her head 
dow nw ards sat in the lap in her father.
тгят 
ufqofamq
У # 
^ * |о Т ЯК?11М 1
О N a ra d a , the kin g w ith the reciting o f the 
hym n s fro m the V e d a s handed o ve r in m arriage, 
his daughter to K rs n a .
<3^c||$fqi ^ wt: 
f w t
иитщ 
«rant ^ RRt RSJTU^II
K rs n a accepted the hand o f R u k m in i w ith the 
perm ission 
o f V a su d e va 
reciting 
the 
w o rds 
Svasti. L o r d K rs n a accepted R u k m in i in the same 
w a y and S iva had accepted Pa rva tl.
-ptnfaj 
f.EDTTU Ч<Ч1гЧ}|
^гртТГ ёТТ 
ШТ 
till 
И
T h e kin g gave a w a y to the lord K rs n a five 
lakhs o f gold coins in D a ksin a .
f^gfi cb-qi щ
тит
A fte r the p erform ing o f the m arriage, the kin g 
em braced the daughter and started sobbing in 
presence o f the gods and the sages.

=== PAGE 756 ===

664
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURA14AM
чГ^ЧТ WRT
f w r 
srtt *r 
wii^ ii
Then begging forgiveness the king gave away 
his daughter to lord Krsna who was soaked in 
tears flowing from the eyes of the king.
«finro ТЩТо 
3tT° ЧТТ^ТГ0
Г:11*о£И

=== PAGE 757 ===

664
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURA14AM
Chapter -1 0 9
Festivities of the Marriage of Kp$na and 
RukminI
чтттздгЕг
^pfTI
3tFIc5r Rfc* р д т Ш 
дрт! w n w r х^п*лч^тч;и?11 
f n w r RfhctRi
■gwmfm^R^T fsfri c^n)4 xHI^II
Narayana said- In the meantime the queen 
mother of RukminI arrived with other chaste 
woman whose husbands and sons were alive to 
complete the welfare ceremonies. Both the bride 
and the groom were made to enter the palace 
made of gems. The palace was decorated with 
several types of diamonds, the garland of gems 
as well as the paintings. The sapphire emeralds 
and others gems besides the mirrors were 
shining.
w w i w Tnfon Tfr w Ttftuft w Iriixii 
■<ЗЧ<яЧ 
gftqgft qferTTTfl 
T^ftT^rrwt ^ T^WI^fclTRIimi 
rX Щ Ш SFlcM?Pfl 
TC^ cntymiR eft ^Ill^ll 
чщ?чт 
-qm^l
■qZI^fHfrlTW ЗЙТГТ ^«Tc^ycfi||\9ll
Я^ВТШШ Tljift ^ «А>Р 
ch'4«hl»^l 
<hUfd 'fldHlld 11
Krsna found that Durga, the remover of 
misfortune, Sarasvatl, Savitrl, Rati, RohinI, Satl, 
wives of the gods, Indra, the queen and the 
chaste wives of the sages were seated on the 
gem-studded lion thrones. All of them were 
adorned with gem-studded ornaments. At the 
entry of Sri Krsna into the palace, all the people 
stood up in reverence and made him sit on the 
charming lion throne. All the wives of the sages 
and the gods praised him individually. The queen 
served food to both the newlyweds and offered 
fragrant water and the betels with camphor. 
сртТО 
Ш RfvP#^T4;i
wg^TEr-mi I ч 11
w
 pftsri' fOTl 
«frot-.i
српй gfcft h fts w fl 
i
W CTT Ъ TfhaT Tt 
^ Ш И ^ И
^5Ц^Ш^=Г дРгЧТ: 
RfFT hTRI
w m ^
 
пт: 11 и 11
Durga handed over to Krsna the letter of 
welfare and with the permission of all, she asked 
him to read it out. In the courtyard of the 
goddess, Krsna smiling read it. It said LaksmI, 
Sarasvatl, Durga, Savitrl, Satl, Radhika, TulasI, 
PrthvI, 
Gangs, Arundhatl, 
Yamuna, Aditi, 
SatarQpa, Slta, Devahtiti and Menaka bestow 
welfare upon the newly wedded couple. When 
Krsna read it all the goddesses present there 
laughed aloud.
P lectra
■ф цщ \ ^ q U T ^ R T m ТЦЩЧТТ rT 'hiffldTRI 
зЫ ^Чсм1
Parvatl said- "0 beloved of RukminI, I look at 
you with a smiling face you look at the young, 
beautiful damsel named RukminI".
VlT^ctW
нд % rjt щ gggf T^wr^fraTi
wir arsfcwl д^<чдч-дрдч1 $д{^|1Тк11

=== PAGE 758 ===

KRSjVA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 109
665
In dranI said- T h e one w h o had been desirous 
o f y o u since long insulting other gods, this 
R u k m in l w h o is. adorned w ith all the gem - 
studded ornam ents is quite suitable fo r y o u .".
m i Щ Щ Т 
IT Ш РП dlfadl 3TTI
^pT:lR4U
S a vitri said- "B o th the bride and the groom are 
equal and they w ere m ade fo r each other b y the 
lord earlier. T h e union o f the equals is alw ays 
auspicious.".
f w r r T tW Щ <*T ?й| $ГЧТ 'gfel
R a ti said- "W h o else is com petent enough to 
cut jo ke s at the lord disregarding the other 
gods"?.
mi щ ш д^п ^
G a y a trl said- "In the house o f B h lsm a k a , w ith 
so m uch o f hustle and bustle, the bride is equal to 
the g ro o m ".
riog ff? зитата gnfofai v tuf^i 
gifW Ф ш trjt 
Ф ч
R o h in I said- " O lo rd o f the universe, y o u 
speak out the truth in the assem bly o f the 
damsels as to h o w did y o u like R a d h ika in 
com parison to R u k m in l".
TTtngt 
0Ф ^fgrrngt ^
•щ Ф$% 
R<isbl'i'ig W ftn w i
Sarasvatl said- T h e lo ve he h ad fo r R a d h a, 
cannot be had in R u k m in l. In the earlier tim es, 
she w as alw ays w ith h im in all his sports and 
increased interested in sports.
УРЛ|!УЩс|31 ЦТ TjoyyiUllfacbl TRTtl
eh'JRHft ^tTRRgrafil^cRITIRoll
Ъ f^rrw TriWR:l
w W читфА w i r *ii
^C(ifstei<3^ril Щ difddl сЦсЩГ^сЬИ
rrats^n?er сЬёид>Н1:11??и
She happens to be the goddess o f his life , she 
is dearer to h im than all the fiv e pranas. R u k m in l 
happens to be an incarnation o f L a k s m I and the 
bestow er o f all the riches, R a d h a on the other 
hand happens to represents the entire prow ess o f 
lord K rs n a besides being the goddess o f w isd o m . 
D u rg a , N a ra y a n I, Parvatl the great goddess o f the 
gods, S avitri the m other o f the V e d a s , Sarasvatl 
the goddess o f learning and all other goddesses 
are o n ly the rays o f R a d h a .
ч 
w т^ггат ч f?raidi rruWnR^u
тат^Г 
r i Ч сП^?г:|
f M t т а щ щ цшт hcr:iRvn 
Щ < ^1сМ 
Т1УТЧЩГ<Я|^1^сП1.1
W it тш д тгаА 'rA i r ч 11
aruimfqfa f?gr ч щ : 4i44tfqg:ii?^n
B ra h m a , 
Sesa, 
A n a n ta , 
G a n esa, 
SO rya, 
devotees, La k s m I, Pa rva tl and m y s e lf do not 
enjoy the same grace o f K rs n a w as has been 
enjoyed b y R a d h a . T h e earth is graceful o f all the 
three lokas on w h ich the land o f B harata is 
located. O u t o f the land o f B ha ra ta , V m d S v a n a is 
graceful, h avin g the im pression o f the lotus-like 
feet o f the R a d h a . Radha happens to be the m ost 
virtuous and auspicious o f all the chaste ladies. 
"H e is the one w h o painted the toes o f R a d h a 
w ith p aint." O n hearing this all these damsels 
started laughing.
ssmRl fRi: тга? ттат g$r:wrfeirm 
Ш ЛИ! 
tpRi 4Ф 1 fgiHIRVsU
T h e one w h o is adored b y all the ladies fro m a 
distance, the heart o f the same lord adores R a d h a 
w h o alw ays rem ains present there. A com parison 
should thus be m ade keeping R a d h a in v ie w , 
i r o g t e : 
m fW т Л Ф и
зтат?гг 4tfal: Ф :

=== PAGE 759 ===

666
BRAHM А V AIV ART A-M AH APURAN AM
O n hearing these w o rds o f Sarasvatl, S avitrl, 
Satl, Pa rva tl and all other damsels spoke out in 
the assem bly, " Y o u have spoken out the truth".
Lo p a m u d ra , A n u s Q y a , A h a ly a , A ru n d h a tl and 
all the w ive s o f the sages, felicitated lord K rsn a .
stsr 
w
r уч'М^А» Фчз;:)
VRroiW ж щ .11 ^ о 11
Th ereafter the k in g B h ism a k a properly adored 
all the kin g s, the gods and the sages serving them 
fo o d at the same tim e.
■ЩЦсТТ ЧэПёга'Г НШ фрТГ 'dldrflfhfdl
«гдг? rjR дгаФтФт^.-пэ v
T h e sound o f w elfare m usic besides, "E a t 
m ore and g ive m o re ", echoed in the sky.
dHUrtl^ui 
m ccmFc|cfl:ll3?ll
A fte r this, in the early m orn in g B ra h m a , S iva , 
A n a n ta and the gods besides V a su d e va w ere 
m ounted o n the vehicles.
ТШ тЩттч?ЕТ cty^cttfcHlPcJd:)
T h e k in g U grasena and V a su d e va m ade K rsn a 
and R u k m in I to m o ve on the jo u rn e y.
^рщЬсггаТ <*>-41 
Writijfp I
Subhadra the m other o f R u k m in I em braced 
her daughter and then started crying in presence 
o f her relatives and fem ale friends.
Rlf% RT
ш ФпРт mt w<Rc)i Rsi m RTsftr ^faRm^mi
Subhadra said- О daughter, w here are y o u 
g o ing leaving alone the queen m other? H o w can 
I disow n you? A n d h o w can y o u disow n m e?.
g rtrrti
:ii3^u
Y o u had been b o m as m y daughter w ith the 
illusion o f M ah alaksm I and y o u are leavin g fo r 
the house o f lord K rs n a , becom ing his chaste 
w ife , 
leaving 
fro m 
m y 
house, 
go 
to 
the 
V asude va .
<5С^екЧ1 etrijcbi '
Ф т а : 
rfrt fiwt
R Щ 
R%T* 
-R:l
'=EjfipcrtlfV 
Ф ВШ Г?Ф Т RIRRTI13 6 11
Th u s speaking w ith her m in d fille d w ith g rie f, 
the m other soaked her daughters b o d y w ith her 
tears. B h ism aka on the other hand w ith his eyes 
fille d w ith tears entrusted her daughter to K rs n a , 
begging forgiveness fo r any short c o m in g , cryin g 
aloud at the same tim e. R u k m in I also started 
sobbing w h ile K rsn a too also fo llo w e d suit.
ЦчПФчА TCT *ПЧ1=Г 
^ 113 II 
л^ктщт m e m 
m jJTWfl 
^гшт гг щ
 щ febtiuti w w ^ n ^ o ii
<<4Hl 
R W ^cu4<r4-U*M4Uiqi 
а|<4'н1чл*1ч1я|Ги| 'fjinfR fq?44j4|J|||
Ф ш Ф Ъ tunfiii 
tfRRl g^Tir*? II 
Фтт w w rai 4 ^ * 4 1 
зтдгчтРт ъ tmifui 
mutton
cig^eJVriUTtlWl 
TjftfR:
ф г irmnRTfit RRtil'tf’tfii
V a su d e va m ade the son and the daughter-in- 
la w to m o u nt the chariot. In the m eantim e the 
kin g gave a w ay the d o w ry to his so n -in -la w 
w h ich included a thousand elephants s ix tim e 
m ore 
the 
horses, 
a thousand 
slave 
girls, 
a 
hundred servants, a thousand gem s, invaluable 
gem -studded ornam ents, gracefu lly, beside five 
lakhs o f coins o f pure g o ld , the g o ld vases m ade 
b y Vis'vakarm a fo r taking fo o d and a large 
num ber o f cow s d e lig h tfu lly. T h e n um ber o f 
calves o f those cow s w as one thousand. H e gave 
a w ay beautiful costumes w h ic h w ere shining like 
the fire and w ere invaluable. B o th V a s u d e va and

=== PAGE 760 ===

Kft§lVA-JANMA-KHAWA, CHAPTER 110
667
U grasen a accom panied b y the sages and the gods 
d e lig h tfu lly m o ve d tow ards D v a ra k a .
W сШЧ1Ч1Ч 4ffHty
^ дщчшш 
<piW44.i 1*411 
Ttfjmft ТЩ1 -q^T T^nfsEftl
Щ т hRwuit тяп 
ъ тр. p : i
4jt tl^WTRT 'cfiW4T4 R fF r^ll^ll
En te rin g the city o f D v a ra k a the w elfare 
cerem onies w ere perform ed and the m usical 
instrum ent w ere played u p on . D e v a k I, charm ing 
R o h in i, Yas'oda, the w ife o f N a n d a , A d iti, D iti 
and the best o f damsels looked at the charm ing 
R u km in T and K rsn a again and again and then 
to ok them to their h o m e , perform ing all the 
w elfare cerem onies.
tld ffi 
■gfwrrgr^i
д
а 
т а г гпгйй и
F o u r types o f dishes w ere served to the gods, 
the sages, the k in g , relatives and w h o begged 
forgiveness fro m them fo r a n y s h o rt com ing.
чгЫ т 
-дзл
rriy^nfii чХачшта n ifr^ n ^ 
ii
T h e bards and the Brahm anas w ere served 
w ith gem s d e lightfu lly and h ap pily served the 
fo o d.
TJct 
SR H«MI
R fR «Ш31Ч1Ч 
^сгЕЧТИЧоИ
T h u s consum ing the fo o d all the people w en t 
back to their respective houses. D e v a k I the w ife 
o f 
V a s u d e va 
then 
perform ed 
the 
w elfare 
cerem ony.
о ЩТо
ъ&*тш&чгч
о ЗтГ° ЧЯЦЧТ®

=== PAGE 761 ===

Kft§lVA-JANMA-KHAWA, CHAPTER 110
667
m
 <J?i(fychvidci4l5SiiFr: 
Chapter - 110
Conversation between Yasoda and Radha 
ЧТТШиГ 39ТтГ 
3Tm% 
'R if
ttpJ р
щ
 ’f n w n f t i w i
N a ra ya n a said- w ith the departure o f all the 
guests w h o had arrived to attend the m arriage 
cerem ony N a n d a and Y a s o d a sat w ith their son.
Ч|?|^сЛт1
? fR 
Ш
 ЦтТ 
*lls|e||
■qt gift «
 
Vfjqif&IRII
Y a s o d a said- О M a d h a v a , y o u have bestow ed 
the know ledge to y o u r father N a n d a , n o w , О 
ocean o f m e rcy, y o u also be graceful to the 
m other like m e.
тт?трт
ЧШШгГт 
Ъ ufdrfldfall? II
I virtuous one, y o u redeem m e also since y o u 
have arrived to rid the earth o f her burden, y o u 
redeem a person like m e w h o is terrified fro m the 
terrific ocean o f the universe.
W rn T O t Я Т ^ R fiS c u fa c H u l 4 f t : I
ш чъ wfeiTW ятьЯЬй < p iw im i
T h e illusory Prakrti serves as a boat to cross 
the ocean o f the universe. О m erciful one, y o u 
happen to be the boat-m an or the sailor.
sjreiT 4ifnr ^ м Ъ ч :1 
ш т -цш яз?чт *п1ччт xi TjTPfs: ич п
O n hearing the w ords o f Y a s o d a , Purusottam a, 
the 
teacher 
o f the 
great 
teachers 
and 
the 
intellectuals sm iled and spoke to the m other w ith 
devotion.
jIH 4ihir4ch ЯТгЩгЬг W fci4<41си*-Ц1
^
 
я щ ^ щ гп тг д я ч ;||^ 11

=== PAGE 762 ===

668
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
S ri 
K rs n a 
said- 
О 
m other 
kn ow ledge 
is 
connected w ith yo ga and know ledge is also 
connected 
w ith 
different 
subjects 
bu t 
the 
kn o w le dge pertaining to devo tio n is considered 
to be the best. T h is is the auspicious cause o f m y 
slavehood.
?TH ЧЗЕГМ згш 
W ( l
Яек=*ПгЧ«Б w r i ?rut Я 
^ l i o i l
T h e kno w le dge has been defined to be in 
V e d a s 
o f 
five 
types 
bu t 
the 
know ledge 
concerning the devotion is considered to be the 
best o f all. Y o u listen to som e o f the sym ptom s 
o f the sam e.
%Гсччил%еьтп я ятей Яспчт?т1дчн1
4liNt #ER ^
 
^cRq;ild II
я <гач 
я 
и
B y o ve r-co m in g hunger and thirst, p u rifyin g 
inner-self, 
pu rification 
o f 
the 
entrails, 
the 
shattering o f the cakras and m editating u pon the 
kundalini-sakti, 
the control o f the organs o f 
senses and discarding o f the greed one achieves 
devotion .
ЯуТгаЙ гаЙШЧ 4fui^WI*d4J
^ w 
1 
1
нк1 чим1ч ipfe ^rftrtf Я (c*VtMd:I 
?пч яВтгага» infra Шцч! утбЧ'МТш<я,и
Mulddhara, Adhisthana, Manipura, Anahata, 
Visuddha and Jna are the six cakras. These are 
inaccessible to the foolish and especially the 
w o m a n . О chaste la d y, the kn ow ledge o f yogic 
practices is m eant fo r the siddhas.
'Л’гН1н(ч Hefol M 
iran
ЯЧТ: inf 
ЯЗхЗПП Я "q^hBmi^n
fingsrara xi 
fn ^r 
xijjfravicy fnvgRi n m 
nraii^ii 
T h e 
kn o w le dge 
about 
one's 
o w n 
se lf is 
desirable b y all. T h e noble people k n o w about 
them selves as per desire. T h e kn ow ledge o f 
siddhis is im portant in all the deeds o f the 
siddhas.
-щ Rtgrrarai fins m РгаЬш<ищ|
T h e kn ow ledge w h ic h bestow s moksa is quite 
successful and redeem s e ve ryon e . Such a typ e o f 
kn ow ledge m akes one to fo llo w the path o f 
Nivrttimarga and the devotee is h o w e ve r n ever 
desirous o f the same.
ягкякясь я -q^TR <pi ттат ЗЩПЯЙ1 
irraf я т а яга ягагат wi tbiirafnn^mi
T h e kn ow ledge about the de vo tio n can be 
im parted to yo u b y R a d h a . B y shedding a w a y the 
hum an approach, y o u can achieve the divine 
kno w le dg e from her.
ч^га cfii 
ura ijra n^rrafwi 
w
 
я ? 
1 ^ n
T h e know ledge that I im parted to N a n d a , the 
same w ill be im parted to y o u b y her. О m other, 
yo u m o ve on gracefully w ith N a n d a to V ra ja .
fqpra firaT яятямчгс ?fi:i 
4^1 щтГсгат imf inrai ^
r I ^ t ii^
ii
тгат 
ftfgITT c«1t1i^Nu|i^| 
cffHT 
Я ftllg Rt Ф
^ Ч 11^ 11
Ч^чЦ<г1 
xF^nfxi^l 
w i t ^fbchcftai я ni^ui ra tjfxsniHii^ 11 
гагаяят 
чттачч:!
УГ^ЧЧйгЧхЫ г1^ Й ^ Ч 1ЧШЧ1)':?оП
4?q-dl ir f w qiRT
■pRTt га 
xT ЯПЧ qj|4RW'jTd:IR *11 
W ffo: trfra: ЭД>ггаНггат 1?%irarat:l 
RraiPi?! i% it хг ярШя : ?пга1Шя:11??11
янц>5 
qfra: 
xm*3ii
T h u s speaking displaying all his h u m ility , S ri 
K rs n a w en t to the inner apartm ent w h ile N a n d a 
accom panied b y Y a s o d a w e n t to the banana 
forest. B o th o f them fo u n d R a d h a there, w h o w as 
lyin g unconscious on the bed o f lotus leaves 
soaked w ith w ater and sandal-paste. R a d h a had 
discarded all the ornam ents and w as clad in

=== PAGE 763 ===

KJ*§NA-JANMA-KHANt>A, CHAPTER 111
669
brigh t costum es. B y rem aining w ith o u t fo o d her 
b e lly had shrunk the lips had dried u p , the eyes 
w ere 
fille d 
w ith 
tears. 
She 
was 
lyin g 
unconscious; she w as m editating upon the lotus­
like feet o f lord K rs n a rem aining unconcerned 
fro m the outer w o rld ; she w as totally engrossed 
in 
the 
m editation 
o f lord 
K rsn a . 
She 
was 
w itnessing her sm iling beloved in the dream and 
staring at his lotus-like face; she som etim es 
laughed before her beloved and same tim e w e pt 
before h im . H e r fem ale friends w ere m o vin g the 
w h ite fly-w h isk s continuously. H un dreds and 
crores o f the cowherdesses guarded the place, 
h o ld in g the canes in their hands. T h e y w ere 
guarding the seven gates throughout the d a y and 
n ight protecting R a d h a .
tit ^§7 fir m я м 
ттд- хп
ЧЧРТ 
т а г SOgcfcSfuTOrq
F in d in g her there in that condition N a n d a 
together 
w ith 
his 
w ife 
w as 
surprised 
and 
prostrated before her in reverence.
. fts j 
T xf -ЩШ 
atm ^rR f яти Ш щ тчШ ггтч;1пч11
TJRTt 
<ЩТ ЧЯъ? 
FRTtl
W ith the w ill o f the lo rd R a d h a at once got up 
fro m here sleep and she regained consciousness, 
u n m in d fu l o f the subject to be discussed, finding 
the couple there, the chaste lad y asked them , the 
reason fo r their arrival there. She than spoke 
sw eet w ords in presence o f her fem ale friends.
Ш
 хЩГ RUIUIdl 
RT f% URRFBfl 
Ч Ъ ^ 
4 ^RTfh Ж U ^ IR V a il
R a d h ik a said- "W h o are you?" W h a t fo r have 
y o u arrived here? Y o u tell m e I am not aw are o f 
the subject to be talked I an unable to distinguish 
betw een a h um an and an anim al. 
f% 
cfT R3ct f e T ffelT 4cRT ftR 
f m tjrtr д # с г^ т 4Tt 
I am unable to differentiate betw een the earth 
and the w ater, the d a y and n igh t, the m an and
w o m a n or the eunuch. I am unaw are o f any 
differentiation.
т|(удмхгч 
fsrm
^ffriT 
jfi qftj'urftfrfi RRh r <?ii
3RTO Pi chi TTFUT: UJjqixf fird cpcT: |
xTll^oll
O n hearing the w ords o f R a d h ik a , N a n d a w as 
extrem ely surprised. O n hearing the w ords o f 
cow herd Y a s o d a feeling p a nicky w e n t closer to 
her and sitting besides here, she said. N a n d a also 
to ok his seat offered b y the cowherdesses .
m t& m
^cR- fTS wr rdhlWH 
RRcT:l
ШЩШ W 
RfR f^ ll? *11 
tgrlt fci Vе* Rfef xf 
xT
TTfTZJ^xT ^ШЩс^?хГ fxlfUull^'Ji^ciulll^ ^ II
Y a s o d a said- О R a d h a , be conscious. Y o u 
save yo u rs e lf m aking all the efforts because on 
the arrival o f the days o f w elfare y o u w ill surely 
m eet the lord o f y o u r life. О great goddess, y o u 
have purified n o t o n ly y o u r o w n race bu t also the 
universe as a w h o le . T h e cowherdesses have 
been pu rified b y serving at y o u r lotus-like feet.
Ж Г urwfa rxfrcblfif
TRTt eftlT$xr хГЕШТ: ^lanfr 
T h e people, the sages, all the fo u r V e d a s and 
Puranas shall alw ays recite y o u r g lo ry like other 
h o ly places.
i^rsrtsr TTrqr
iu w r p r M xt rt ^r?im
O fo rm o f intelligence, I am Y a s o d a and he is 
N a n d a and y o u happen to be R a d h a the daughter 
o f Vrsabhana. О perform er o f noble vratas, yo u 
listen to m y w ords.
О virtuous one, I have just returned from 
D v a ra k a , the abode o f K rs n a . О chaste la d y, lord 
H a ri has directed m e tow ards y o u .

=== PAGE 764 ===

670
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
Ц^тг) 
7ЩТ^гТ:1 
W ^ 
jf^ll} 5 II
Now you listen to the welfare news of lord 
Gadadhara. You would shortly meet Sri Krsna 0 
goddess regain your senses.
■JWIlcqcfi 
-ЦЩ ЧГ ЧШЩ1
сУ'^'бЧ^Ы ftlHWlh
You bestow the knowledge of devotion to me, 
presently. Both of us have arrived here at the 
advice of your husband.
tfTGwU 
^RTR^Tl
0 beautiful faced one, "Lord Hari would 
arrive here before you after this and you would 
soon to be freed from the curse of Sridama".
fcETT cffitf W 
Writ 
13 ЯII
On hearing the words of Yasoda about the 
news of Gadadhara, all the miseries of Radha 
were removed.
W
 ifcn -ШТ 4WIST fWTWrifl
-idl'd TTgT Vh'dl ctllchdjl ^Irb|jTl4i^ll'Xo ||
Radha regained her consciousness becoming 
peaceful, honouring the mother of Krsna, she 
spoke to her sweet words concerning the 
devotion.
$Пяб1о RfT° ^Jlgitui'Ji'+ugo ЗтГ° ЧК^ЧТ0
о ЗтГ° ЧТТ^ЧТ' 
ЯТИТ.-Н^оП

=== PAGE 765 ===

670
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAiy AM
R a d h ika said- О chaste la d y, lord K rs n a is the 
fo rm o f know ledge and is adorable b y B ra h m a , 
S iva and A n a n ta ; he instead o f im parting the 
know ledge h im se lf has directed y o u to m e . B y 
this, I am able to understand his feelings about 
m e. E v e n the V e d as and the ascetics are unable 
to judg e tru ly, his ideas.
тгёпт ftwtw 
%imi
I belong to the class o f w o m a n w h o are 
considered to be w e a k , de vo id o f w isd o m and 
deprived 
o f 
kn o w le d g e . 
Because 
o f 
the 
separation fro m h im , m y kn o w le dg e has faded 
out. In such a condition w h a t cou ld I speak about 
the five types o f kn o w le dg e . S till the devotion 
happens to be the best o f kn o w le dg e w h ic h is 
being narrated b y m e . Y o u please listen to the 
s a m e ..
зйфготад cAoilfll Ч 
ft&fr WWI 
WTfh cR 
11411
О virtuous la d y, don't becom e fearless because 
o f the bo o n o f K rs n a because even an ascetic has 
to fall fro m Goloka.
tfSTfrq figTWVlISH
Therefore disow n ing e ve ryth in g , y o u recite 
the nam e o f the lord. D iscard in g the feeling o f 
his being the son y o u , take h im to be the eternal 
Brah m an .
f% 
<ЬУЙьац£| -Щ ц<£1Й% Wl
Chapter - 111
т а ! ^
 ф щ щ w яузтч.1
^'чттсррьэн
Conversation between Radha and Yasoda
О 
Y a s o d a , 
y o u , 
after 
discarding 
all 
the 
perishable articles, go to V rn d a va n a situated on 
the auspicious land o f Bharata.
felcTETR W 
WtlWHI
fFT^r t rN wild и
Mw W53HT fHf vnwisf wmWTfh
«<чАн 
R4RT hid I
^ r : 7TTPW 
4W WRf% WtW WIRII
WT3W TRRFR TTER WW rRU^fll^ll

=== PAGE 766 ===

KRSIVA-JANMA-KHAtfPA, CHAPTER 110
671
T a k in g bath in the spotless clean w ater o f the 
Y a m u n a thrice a d a y, y o u prepare an eight 
pettaled 
lotus, 
w ith 
a 
devoted m in d , 
adore 
blissful lord K rs n a va riou sly and get absorbed in 
the blissful stage ultim ately.
ЗГгёГТ ЙфЧИ cltf 
-?ra^: Щ 1
чш TTfrn^oii
О chaste la d y, y o u better uproot all the deeds 
perform ed 
earlier 
w ith 
hundred 
m eans and
alw ays converse w ith the V aisnavas.
ч щ чт?штщч;|
w
 те! чПьфч! 
^11 я? n
A devotee accepts the flam es; o f fire , captivity 
in 
a 
cage, 
leaving 
am ong 
the 
thorns end
consum ing the poison bu t he fails to keep 
co m p an y o f the people de vo id o f the devotion o f 
lord H a ri because the same deeds to destruction. 
A person w h o is de vo id o f devotion , n ot o n ly 
destroys 
h im s e lf 
but sim ultaneously 
create
differentiation.
Ж 
^ril 
II
зт^)Н 1,ч<1ч|Пч^гн1'Ш:
Rifo ifT: т&я ся&ПГ«П
B y keeping the co m p a n y o f a devotee, w ith 
the reciting o f the story o f lord H a ri, the tree o f 
devotion sprouts w ith the nectar-like stories. B u t 
b y 
conversing 
w ith 
the 
people 
de vo id 
o f 
de vo tio n , 
serves 
as 
the 
burning 
flam e, 
the 
sprouting tree is dried u p. O n ly b y the serving 
the lord or reciting o f his stories lo rd , it develops 
and sprouts.
rRW RRraf ъ чтташ: mRcsmi
жп 
ynrrmf Ttt sftetT тегами 
и
T h e com pany o f the non-believer should be 
left in the same w a y , as a person runs aw ay in 
panic at the sight o f a terrible snake.
гг jrt&r « 1счч:
tir чгшшпте ■g ^ ч ^^-fii^ii
ёВШТ %91ST cErR ^ %UR RPRI
TlhlPl R&sJJ 4i(i^Rfnll^ll 
^-hchlRfl^ltiii hiT*TCc(
О Y a s o d a , y o u m ust adore y o u r son w ith great 
efforts, like a lord. T h e one w h o recites the nam e 
o f 
R a m a , 
N a ra ya n a , 
A n a n ta , 
M u k u n d a , 
M adhusudana, K rsn a , Kes'ava, K a m s a ri, H a ri, 
V a ik u n th a and V a m a n a or the one w h o reads 
these eight nam es d a ily, he is freed fro m the 
thousands and crores o f sins o f the previous 
births. Ra stands fo r globe and Ma stands fo r the 
lord. T h u s the one w h o is the lord o f the globe is 
called R a m a . H e enjoys the com pan y o f R a m a , 
that is w h y he is also called R a m a .
r ! f t йч ttr:
тчй ш
 Rpf тЕт 7TR % |a i : l l ^ n
w i t w r w t тпт TmfNt % :i
TT^frt ЩЧЫтГЧ! 
Tdfc4«b:II'R о 11
-nfw ttr тга^т
ЧТЯТ 
f^WTT W h t W H 
?ll
Since R a m a happens to be the cause o f the 
kn ow ledge o f Rdmatattva 
and the 
place 
o f 
keeping com pan y w ith R a m a , he is also called 
R a m a . E v e n otherw ise Ra stands fo r La k s m i and 
Ma stands fo r the lo rd . Th erefore the intellectuals 
call the lord o f La k s m i as R a m a ; the m erit one 
earns b y reciting thousands o f the divine nam es 
the same is achieved b y reciting the nam e o f 
R a m a o n ly once.
ТИ'Ш сТЧй f t <гоЬЯГЯи|ЧШ:1 
4IRWTRprrl4t ЧТТШ R fa^RT: IR ? 11 
Rt 
th r-r r чтттащ:
4TWT ^TTTUWWW T O W R tR ^U 
RTf f | т е ifat RTSR 4RFTUT:
R'^RRIRUtejeRRT XJRRf*R?TcOTRIR>SII
4lt ^ 
R 4 11
c m t# T R ^ T W R t S R Ч Ш Ц П Т: IP J :I
чнсцчтт 
g g f wi r s 11

=== PAGE 767 ===

672
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
йчтччt
уфЧЬЧЧЧН rT 1ччЫ R ^cJ'W ^II^II
дд^£ш и)чФ й4 ^«4dHiR<in
<J4d «ifd 4^43lf 'д^Й Ч' ehlRct: I
д^ч 
w
m чдд^ч-.иччи
T h e intellectuals believes that Nara stands fo r 
Sarupya 
salvation. 
Th erefore 
the 
one 
w h o 
happens to be the g o d o f the same or the Ayana 
is 
called 
N a ra ya n a . 
T h e 
sins 
w h ic h 
are 
com m itted b y som e one are k n o w n as Nara and 
Ayana stands fo r disappearing. T h is w ith the 
reciting o f the nam e o f N a ra ya n a , all the sins 
disappear. 
W ith 
the 
reciting 
o f 
the 
w o rd 
N a ra ya n a once, a person achieves the m erit o f 
h a vin g a bath in all the sacred places fo r a 
hundred 
kalpas. 
A c c o rd in g 
to 
another
interpretation Nara stands fo r m erit and moksa 
w h ile 
the Ayana 
stands fo r the 
appropriate 
kn o w le dge . T h e one w h o therefore, enshrines the 
kn o w le dge o f both , he is considered to be 
N a ra ya n a . T h e one w h o be yon d the description 
o f the fo u r V e d a s , Puranas, scriptures and others 
literature and is unlim ite d, he is called Ananta b y 
the intellectuals. Мики stands fo r studies and 
salvation beside moksa and the one w h o provides 
the sam e, is k n o w n as M u k u n d a . E v e n otherw ise, 
the w o rd Мики stands fo r love and devotion as 
prescribed in the V e das and the one w h o bestows 
the same to the devotees is called M u k u n d a . 
Because he happens to be the killer o f the dem on 
M a d h u , he is therefore called M adhustidana.
?f?r 'R4Tt
■qg 
<3>uch4^|'Miy^ll3o||
ЯтБНТ 3PfcTt 
дрч ЧЩсЬТМ 
чГ<ТШЧ1^4 cf4 WrfFtt 4§t 4 f II? *11 
cft1% дчч ^ ft 7T tig- тщ5Ч:1
w er чга^'еп^га»: 11 ? ч 11
stWFfh 
г[чИп|<|щт:1
ф(Ч!М ЧТЧПЙ 1ТТ?ЕГ гЩГ^Цёв4ТпТ11^?11 
?рМ чТ tI rit Ч?ШЧ фШТ:
ёкНгзгшШ Trt 
чг cnfti 14*11
ЧШЧ1 tJT^Er PicfTui ЙЧ <jiv)i: i(chinfn:l
ЧРЧГ щ
 
^idhTigi 14 ч n
ii=hiejchl g фИ||^ч ЧЧКсЧ гГЙ ЧТ:1
фш1чпч: ч тч тчч д ч ч« т^г# м ч ^и
E v e n otherw ise the people derive m eaning 
from the w o rd M a d h u w h ic h is a neutral gender 
and is present in the g o o d or bad deeds o r a w in e 
o f intoxicated tree. 
Th erefore 
the 
one 
w h o 
destroys the same together w ith the deeds o f the 
devotees, he is called M adhusudana. Such o f the 
deeds w h ich results in e vil rew ard and are sweet 
in fallacy, they are term ed as M a d h u . T h e one 
w h o 
destroys 
the 
same 
he 
is 
called 
M adhustidana. 
T h e 
w o rd 
Krsi 
stands 
fo r 
excellence and na stands fo r the noble devotion 
and A stands fo r the container. T h a t is w h y 
people call h im b y the nam e o f K rs n a . A c c o rd in g 
to another interpretation Krsi stands fo r blissful 
and na stands fo r the slavehood. T h e on w h o 
provides both o f them is called K rsn a . E v e n 
otherw ise the w o rd Krsi stands fo r the sin earned 
during the crores o f the births and na stands fo r 
the reliever o f the sins. T h is results in the m a kin g 
o f the w o rd K rsn a . T h e m erit one earns b y 
reciting the thousand divine nam es o f the lord 
thrice, the same m erit is earned b y h im w h ile 
reciting the nam e o f K rsn a . Th ere has been no 
nam e better than K rs n a in the past n or w o u ld it 
be in future.
4 t ЧТЧ 
% :l
фшт 
^ -ntfq W 
1чсгт:ПЧ'эП
Ш 
ririT ЧЧГ чтепд^та-г 7T:l
ф иШ 4 fv t ЧТЧ
-щгщ чв1чтась^гу:1
-Ш фШМЧ^| гГИ^ЯИ
чТ 
ЧТпТ ЯлдлЯч и
^щчГч чщч! щпйт ъ gcnf4 ш 'ч о к
^crfRrr H4fW4?Rif4 rti
фшятчжтттч 
чт#ч

=== PAGE 768 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 111
673
T h e 
people 
w ell-versed 
in 
the 
V e d ic 
kn o w le d g e , h o ld the v ie w that the nam e K rs n a is 
the best o f all. О cowherdesses, the one w h o 
recites the nam e o f K rs n a again and again 
re g u larly, he is saved fro m falling into the hell in 
the same w a y as the lotus emerges out o f the 
w ater. T h e one in w hose tongue the w o rd K rsn a 
alw ays rem ain, all his great sins are reduce to 
ashes. T h e reciting o f the nam e K rs n a is better 
than the pe rform ing o f thousands o f Asvamedha 
sacrifices, because b y doing so, one is never 
reborn again. B y reciting the same nam e, one is 
freed fro m the cycle o f the birth and death. A l l 
the yajhas, lakhs o f vratas, w ith bathing in the 
h o ly places, A l l types o f tapas, perform ing o f 
vratas, thousands o f the reciting o f the V e d a s , 
g oing round the globe a hundred tim es, all these 
com bined do n ot com pare to the one sixteen the 
part o f the m erit one earns b y reciting the nam e 
o f K rs n a . w ith the greed o f perform ing the good 
deeds, a person enjoys his stay in the heaven and 
the fa ll from the heaven is a m ust. B u t the one 
w h o recites the nam e o f H a ri he achieves the 
eternal abode.
% ^
 
w
 х1Т55<ФГ:1Г* ЗП
д&Г$хГ
<№тчй(%чП xt 4 o^nfr: 31«fil$d:l
W it fa?=IRI4f4 ftc*r?T:ll'S4ll 
ЧтБНТ жгелчт xT ffrtrPT Л
: 1
чпшиШ Омзчмг выучки - ч т % \
ттат crcfsrcr h fr гттш w f t w Rra«r:irtfV9ii
T h e letter Ka stands fo r w ater. T h e one w h o 
pervades that w ater and the bodies o f all the 
creatures, he is called K e sa va b y the V e d ic 
people. T h e w o rd Karhsa is used fo r obstruction, 
ailm ent greed and the D a n a va s. T h e one w h o is 
inim ical to all o f them is k n o w n b y the nam e o f
Kamsciri. T h e one w h o in the fo rm o f R u d ra and 
destroy the universe alw ays and the enem ies o f 
the devotees, is k n o w n b y the nam e o f H a ri. Ma 
stands fo r the fo rm o f eternal B rah m a n and 
MUlaprakrti 
besides 
being 
Isva rl, 
N a ra y a n I, 
SanatanI, V is n u m a y a , M ah a laksm I, Sarasvatl the 
creator o f the V e d a s , R a d h a , Vasun dh ara and 
G a n g a . Th erefore , the lord is k n o w n as M a d h a v a
gruM ftfcftd xt.
’enftr
^ xjttt 
xnfh.
m tt ъ щ ц ^упткпт: 114 о и 
StWTT J Ч«кч1 
Ijddl.
UdW 
utdl W WT^I
^di414»£) 
ht.
ЕЦТ^Ч 
xf ydd +ifdll4 ЗП 
Щ 
Щ 
R4fR «ПЙЭсТЩ 
'divnfq w ife ^спчгчСч f c ^ i i 4 3ii 
О chaste lad y, the one w h o is adored b y 
B ra h m a , V is n u , S iva and Sesa and the sage like 
Sanaka and others, w h o are unable to k n o w 
about 
the 
secret 
o f his 
existence 
b y 
deep 
m editation, 
the 
one 
w h o 
is 
be yon d 
the 
conception o f all the V e d a s and the Puranas, y o u 
should adore w ith devotion the one w h o stole 
a w a y the butter fro m y o u r house. W h e re is the 
m ilk , curd, b u tter-m ilk, ghee and other m ilk 
preparations? W h e re is the th ie f o f these articles? 
W here is y o u r lin k w ith the base o f the universe? 
T h e one w h o could n ot be captured b y the yogis, 
siddhas, ascetics, the devotees, B ra h m a , S iv a and 
Sesa, h o w could he be bou nd w ith the m ortar b y

=== PAGE 769 ===

674
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
you? Th erefore yo u adore y o u r son w h o is 
lodged in the centre o f the lotus flow ers in the 
fo rm o f the lord and adore h im w ith devotion, 
m editation, recitation, m akin g all the efforts. Y o u 
w o u ld m eet w ith w elfare. Y o u ask fo r a boon, 
desired b y y o u . T h e one w h ic h is b e yon d a reach 
o f the gods his 
adoration 
w o u ld surely be 
bestow ed b y m e to yo u .
W tcfaTrT
ЧЧ1
<Tcf qiqyrf cspjfo: <$т Щ сПг(рт£%МЧ311
Y a s o d a said- I desire a bo o n to achieve the 
infallible devotion at the feet o f lord H a ri and his 
slavehood. Y o u also enlighten m e about the root 
o f y o u r o w n nam e.
TTfSratara
cwra TT^xmfxr 
14*11
R a d h ik a said- w ith m y boon y o u w o u ld surely 
achieve the devo tio n o f the lord besides his 
slavehood. 
N o w I tell y o u the best o f the 
decision.
дТГ 44fr 
c(i4 e iil
ЧЧТ rX ^ fe tt Ч^Т 1ч%57ЕГ я ^ с и ч ч и
ЗТ?>ЧЧ TERT ттат згат TratfranfiRh 
тга т: « Ъ т т т : m ^sraft ч щ п ч ^ и
In the earlier tim es N a n d a fou nd m e in the 
B h a n d lra forest seated under the shed o f a 
banyan tree, I stopped Prajapati N a n d a and said 
to h im , " I am R a d h a m y s e lf and b y reflection the 
w ife o f R a y a n a . R a y a n a w as b o m o f the amsa o f 
H a ri and happens to be one o f the im portant 
courtiers o f lo rd H a r i.
TIVKVri -Ц?Т^ыуЙ$>с)||ч ЧЧ1 mtarji
9t ш ! ’чщдгат:11ч'э11
T h e w o rd Ra stands fo r M ah a visn u in the hair- 
pits o f w h o m several globes are lodged and dha 
stand fo r the m otherhood am ong the creatures
g # 4TcTT5?mmt RmuftfMhrafti 
йч ra t тгапгаш ^fratt ^ дтт д& ичбп
I being the Mulaprakrti and Is'varl, I am the 
m other o f all o f them . T h is is the reason w h y 
H a ri and other people gave m e the nam e o f 
R a d h a in the earlier tim es.
Щ Tftiq^nYt 5|ФТЩЯТ5*|ЧТ1
тшёгё щ 
?frmr ч? чш чнч <? ii
I have becom e the daughter o f V rsa bh a na 
because o f the curse o f Srldam a; n o w I shall be 
separated fro m lord H a ri fo r a hundred years.
ЗЧ'щчуя $wrra m^Hctrl ЧЩ 1 
fmjorit чтчттт mrar чч чтчт чкчгач1и£, ° н
Vrsabhana happens to be the best o f the 
courtiers o f the K rsn a and parson m y m other 
nam ed K a la v a tl is the m in d b o m daughter o f the 
ancestors.
згайчтгоггге? 
чч чтят ч чшЬ 
дч: чгё ч gtmfirafraifo 
*11
^f?r % mfsm ч 4 5ГЧ 
^Rrafri 
^gcAui 
raiftm jnfYrt 4f?ni^Tii
In the land o f Bharata, both m y s e lf and m y 
m other are b o m w ith ou t hum an contact I shall 
m o ve to the abode o f H a ri together w ith y o u . О 
queen o f V ra ja , I have thus spoken out to y o u all 
the things. О chaste la d y, n o w y o u m o ve back to 
V ra ja together w ith y o u r husband w h o is the lord 
o f V ra ja .
ЧЧТ5ЧТ rr 444t гатчтч oqqeufttbll
rarraf ч^1ч1 чтлтч(ч-g^fri ra 911
C u rre n tly y o u are obstructing m y m editation. 
О beautiful one, a person earns sins b y disturbing 
m edication.
«йзгщо тщто «Чф-шга-чао зтг» чтгачт® 
twuyir^rao ц«ы^ий'*)>1ннч15«чга:11ттт11

=== PAGE 770 ===

KR§tfA-JANMA-KHAWA, CHAPTER 112
675
Chapter -112
The Stories of Pradyumna and Durvasa 
чттщщ ЗШУ 
j n w з^сгщчт 3^ 1. 
зп й Tprefet 
щ ^н?п
3^4: mRu) T^T 4MiR<^ui R^Rmqji^N
N a ra ya n a said- О sage, at the com m and o f 
V a s u d e va , K rsn a w e n t in D v a ra k a , in the palace 
o f R u k m in I, w h ic h w as decorated w ith the best 
o f gem s. It w as shining like the best o f crystal 
gem s and other invaluable diam onds, it had a 
num ber o f paintings decorating all the sides.
4fT4: 'hiwtRTcT^II^II
It w as decorated w ith the invaluable pitchers 
o f gem s and a large num ber o f w h ite fly-w h isks 
and the m irrors. T h e costumes sanctified b y fire 
appeared on all the sides.
-bfcHin ^4l4dlc( 4c)4AcJ41H.I
?R14t ftR4cTi 33711*11 
ЗШ^оГ 
чт ЧЩГПЖНчзтЩ!
fw t ^ 1ьмфдп щ
 muhi^-rtii^ ii
R u k m in I w h o w as quite y o u th fu l was found 
there lyin g on the bed o f gem s and sm iling 
d e lig h t-fu lly. 
She 
w as 
adult, 
had been just 
w e dde d and w as therefore feeling shy o f the first 
u n io n . She w as adorned w ith the best o f gem - 
studded ornam ents and her hair do looked sim ply 
charm ing; w h ic h w as decorated w ith the garlands 
o f jasm ine flow ers. T h e daughter o f B hlsm aka 
suddenly fid d lin g K rs n a before her offered her 
salutation to h im .
чт штщ w m m т ш й ч ч т n-.i
тт 
Ш И ? 11\Э 11 
^ Is R h T rW ^ n T 
341 W l l
w t ^
 *14^1 
ТЩЧПМП
Fin d in g her there, 
K rs n a the 
lord o f the 
universe, sat on the bed and started enjoying 
conjugal pleasures, the damsels w as fainted; the 
god o f love had been reduced to ashes b y lord 
S iva .
R 
RfijcsN1 Ч Ч ЗПЧ Tf4 •dolqj 
■ifdh RlNdM IH I ftchcH '3T F4 хП1 
ш й с[т^Т Ъ 
и
A fte r killin g the dem on Sam bara, he achieved 
the chaste R a ti. A t that p oint o f tim e at the 
instance o f the gods, R a ti rem ained in the house 
o f the dem on as her shadow nam ed M a y a v a tl.
ЧТО? <jc(l4
ЗЩТТ 7П Ч Т 4>PTl ^ 1 4v4 ЯЧТГТЧ: I 
ch«tiRd MgWHI faj^Rui -ЩЧТ ch«H*TU^o u
N a ra d a said- О virtuous one, y o u please tell 
m e h o w w as Sam bara kille d b y K am ad eva ? Y o u 
please tell m e the story in detail.
HKIUUI ЗсП^Г
TT4cff% Tl
T J ^ T чтч га tc 4 f 
Ж ГЧТЧ
4^ 
f ^ T m urqdl W t H ^ I I
N araya n a said- A fte r the lapse o f a w e e k, the 
dem on entered the labour ro o m o f R u k m in I and 
carried a w ay her son w ith great force. T h e 
dem on w h o w as w ith ou t a son felt extrem ely 
delighted b y getting that son. H e entrusted his 
care 
too 
M a y a v a tl, 
w h o 
felt 
delighted 
b y 
receiving the child.
ЩГЧТЧГСТ qrHchqj
IH W d i lit T?ftT 
f T ^ l l ^ l l
She carefully brought up the child, Sarasvatl 
then spoke to her in lonely place.
fv id c b N H H 3^ 4 W h j4 : trfdWctl
ЖЩЧ:П

=== PAGE 771 ===

676
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
Sarasvatl said- In earlier tim es, y o u r husband 
w as reduced to ashes because o f the anger o f lord 
S iv a ; the same K a m a d e va has been b o m as the 
son o f R u k m in i w h o has been abducted b y the 
dem on.
топток ъ ч ^ т чкчптт^тощто^ 
тотчк 
f k чккто ч 
п цч u
T h e one w h o is w ell-versed in the illusion has 
bro u g h t h im fro m the labour ro o m o f R u k m in i 
and g ive n h im to y o u . H e happens to be yo u r 
husband and not the son.
«тот rr шшчш тототт ч ш mfi
ТО ТОТ <Jdv^'«i тчто w it щ и ъ 11
Sarasvatl w h o happened to be the m other o f 
the universe also spoke to K a m a d e va , "T h is is 
y o u r 
w ife 
nam ed 
R a ti 
and 
y o u 
enjoy 
her 
c o m p a n y "
ё З д 
TOW: I
toT froi tlRfd w itot frori R*3II
Y o u are K a m a d e va , the son o f R u k m in i and 
y o u are n ot the son o f the dem on. T h e chaste 
R a ti had alw ays been crying like the bird o f prey.
эдЗгёгт w toT ТОлТ 
«TgniT: 4TOj
Чт\*Г 
f t k T1TOT Щ
T h u s 
speaking 
Sarasvatl 
the 
spouse 
o f
B ra h m a , 
Brahmaloka 
and 
the 
beautiful 
K a m a d e va da ily enjoyed the com pany o f the 
beautiful R a ti in the lo n e ly places.
TOW $kT ^
 
fkro.1
щ т т t t w ч к ftfc t 
и
O n c e the dem on witnessed K a m a d e va and 
R a ti bo th engaged in the conjugal pleasure.
4 f w ктчТОЩЩ 4STO^:TOv)fkrlH4l
Tfft 
gmTcgchinlR о ||
^TOT 
trJITO 
7Э^ЩтПк;1
тощ xa^ig'Riw ддчто тк жтчп? $п
Th e- sm iling K a m a d e va w as fo u nd on the 
breast o f R a ti w h o w as anxious to enjoy conjugal 
pleasures and g o t fainted in passion. W itnessing 
this the dem on w as enraged. H e to ok out his
sw ord . H o ld in g the sw ord in his hand, he spoke 
to K a m a d e va and R a ti.
?i«H ТОЩ
ЩПБЩсЁ rT TJTsf кпЗТОТкчЧ,! 
Ч^|Ч1г|Пи1 «15 ЗШтТ Ч1^1Ткя^И^?11
Sam bara said- О fo o lish one, y o u consider 
y o u rs e lf to be v e iy w ise, y o u are the m ost 
degraded o f all the sinners and are intoxicated, 
y o u enjoy the com pan y o f y o u r o w n m other. О 
passionate one, disgrace to y o u .
ЩТ W ^JTOvTt TOT chi у chi 6d^cHi*t,l 
p TjftTO TlifTT TOfk Tjrk 4 k lR 3 ll
О loose w o m e n , an intoxicated the one, the 
passionate 
one 
and 
the 
senseless 
w o m e n , 
disgrace to y o u , a chaste la d y is enjo ying the 
com pan y o f her son in seclusion.
т о к ^дуеш:!
trot тот тк 
йнпчкт tow:ir*ii
T h u s speaking he raised his sw ord to k ill her. 
T h e dem on w h o w as about to k ill R a ti, w as 
pushed aside b y K a m a d e va .
T O fkT WiF4f%?T: TOlf4lfcf: l 
TJ4TO %Ht TITO chfik TP3TOfTOI R Ц11 
fTOTO хТТЧЙ^Мкт xTI
ттут янч|Гчч1ч ipriR^ii
^ггтго^щрщ ckfTO 
I
ТОТ: читотптчт clOTTO4TOr:IR\9ll
W Ш ЧТОТТО fn f ffiro rfro K l
TOTWTO: fTOfk WTTTOWT:IR<HI
О B rah m a n , the dem on felt pain in all his 
lim bs and fainted falling at a distance. R e g a in in g 
his consciousness he w as burning w ith rage and 
held the trident o f S iva tig h tly in hand. О sage, 
the trident havin g the lustre o f hundreds o f suns. 
T h e dem on w as burning w ith rage. B ra h m a , S iva 
felt terrified. T h a n the w in d god w hispered in the 
ears o f K a m a d e va , " Y o u recite the nam e o f 
D u rg a , the great illusion w h o rem oves all the 
m isfortunes". O n hearing the w ords o f the w in d 
g o d, the god o f lo ve recited the nam e o f D u rg a .

=== PAGE 772 ===

K$$NA-JANMA-KHAiypA, CHAPTER 112
677
^JR «ГЧсГ 
ТЩ RIRT XRRT4j 
W T ^ W W 
"tFRJt 4^TI R Ч11
A s a result o f all this the trident and other 
w eapons, w ere turned into the fragrant flow ers 
w ith 
the 
touch 
o f the 
b o d y o f K am ad eva . 
Thereafter the god o f love kille d the dem on w ith 
the use o f Brahm astra.
ifil T jf^ T згй? ЗЛИТ IR«Ft
TTctf ТдЩ xt ftTcftft ^STET^ll^ о l|
H e returned to his abode w ith R a ti in D va ra k a . 
A l l the gods then adored goddess Parvatl and left 
fo r their respective abodes.
•bfct-НиП 
TRUITT Tfw gd4j
cbKdlftlft Щ S H A R P * 
f I
R u km in T pe rfo rm ing 
all 
the w e lfare , 
rites 
accepted his son and R a ti. K rsn a on the other 
h and perform ed great festivities.
ЦПЛР^згаТЧТО 4yiulHi'H frl4d1RI 
зтгг^ш т: ihRujy 
f^ R II^ II
RMRt w M
 xf urfunn? ш
 Rl 
'«SrfcRl ftftmmi R Ш П 
TR TR II^ I
v5ii«(c(ui щ ч щ xt тпрп? tr fr it . i 
rTTf^T: w f 
wpqfw хШ Т 
I
цсн-Rri 
tRRr xti
4V5 Ы Щ * Ъ ^^9^4^11^411 
-gr 
^ tr TnigS n 
ehvqfW W . ТЩЩЩ rT ^ ? T II? ^ H 
T h e BrShm anas w ere served w ith fo o d adoring 
Pa rva tl 
at 
the 
same 
tim e. 
Thereafter in 
an 
auspicious tim e he m arried seven damsels nam ed 
K a lin d l, 
Satyabham a, 
S atya, 
N a g n ijiti, 
Satl, 
Ja m ba vatl and La k sm a n a ; several sons w ere b o m 
to them , ten sons and a daughter w ere b o m o f 
each one o f the queens. T h a n he killed a dem on 
nam ed N a ra k a and also the dem on nam ed M u ra 
and fo u nd sixteen thousand damsels there. 
$rdiisra>r 
? w g fw ftg 4 T :i
ygtrvTcPpn: 
fR'UUUwjhdl:II^V3I)
m fr: 
тт 
r r ^ n it ii? « iii
Ea c h one o f the damsels had m ore than a 
hundred fem ale friends each; all o f them w ere 
quite, a y o u th fu l, jo via l and adorned w ith the 
gem -studded ornam ents. L o r d K rsn a accepted 
their hands in an auspicious tim e and enjoyed 
their com pan y in the auspicious tim e.
tJchTqi 
aRl^cRl ^TW xtl
^>Н1^ЧЛ1(Ч
T e n sons and the daughter w ere b o m to each 
one o f the w ives o f K rsn a . T h u s he had different 
issues fro m all his w ive s.
T^T 5ГШ W 
ЧЙд'1с| :1
4р4чкМ|Ь1е«41н<Ч||1'*о||
O n c e the sage D u rva sa arrived in D v a ra k a 
w ith three crores o f his pupils.
M I ftinr^ftirT W :
3 RPtcRS 
4 щ 111 >5 ^ 11
B rah m an a, the kin g U grasena together w ith 
the son and priest, accom panied b y V a s u d e va , 
K rs n a A k rQ ra and U d d h a v a besides the sages, 
adored 
D u rva sa 
m a kin g 
sixteen 
types 
o f 
offerings 
to 
h im . 
T h e 
sage 
blessed 
them 
in d ivid u a lly.
tf^RVir xt 3Rft eft ^
 <Tri? ^pTSRTI
gfttprrf&ioRtfhT^r ш xr tftcraj
V a su d e va gave a w a y in m arriage his daughter 
nam ed Eka n a m sa to the sage together w ith m a n y 
gem s, jew els and diam onds in d o w ry .
ri rit W tT 
W PfRfl
•q^TRT gfft&g: ■RRtRter
r r r 
"та1ч Ш |1х ч 11
ЩсртТ RTTR xT -stss^tt
RCfR д т а щ vratr щ xt
|R fftrftfftft cRft TfWHtT #rarqt:IIX ^II

=== PAGE 773 ===

678
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
w fe WTWIT WETT
II
The sage enjoyed the company of the newly 
wedded wife in the palace of gems. Vasudeva 
also gave to Durvasa an asrama which was 
beautifully decorated with gems. Once Durvasa, 
the best of the sages thought in his mind that all- 
pervading Krsna sometimes sleeps on the gem- 
studded bed. Sometimes listens to the recitation 
of the Puranas, sometimes he keeps himself busy 
taking in the food in the court-yard, sometimes 
he chews the betel offered by Satya and 
sometimes he enjoys the company of RukminI 
having been served with the moving of white fly- 
whisks, 
sometimes he 
is 
found 
sleeping 
delightfully. While Kalindl processed his feet. 
Sri Krsna always discussed with the sage, several 
things.
fe w f 
fast ^gT тЧЧЧЧ1^И {1 
тгггг штанга 
wr:
Finding him in astonishing form, Durvasa was 
surprised. Thereafter the sage offered prayer to 
lord Krsna in the abode of RukminI and the 
assembly named Sudharma besides in the 
company of intellectuals.
wt w r wini чт2г йгнг4 
wafarai 71% 
5ТШ 1^for fW iih о 11 
frw r 
ТтпсШ
WRW^\4WmFT fttWWT (ЧсЧ^ЛЧПЧ ^ll 
wwwpiTTgf^T 
w it
Durvasa said- О lord of the universe, victory 
to you, victory to you. You conquer everyone. О 
Janardana, you are the form of everyone, the lord 
of everyone 
or eternal without qualities, 
unattached, uninvolved, spotless, invisible, the 
one who takes to human form to grace his 
devotees, the form of truth, eternal, formless, 
always fresh, adored by Siva, Sesa and Kubera.
LaksmI serves at your feet. You are the divine 
lustre of Brahman, inexplicable; your qualities 
are unknown to the Vedas, adorable like the sky 
and the supreme soul. I bow in reverence to you.
t r w 
m
Thus adoring the lord mentally and bowing 
before Krsna he stood before him with his 
permission.
hydra A rarat 
w d уш ч ч)
w & t ъ w it w r4ji4'sn
Thereafter the lord of the universe bestow the 
divine knowledge to him which was beneficial, 
truthful, ancient, according to the Vedas and 
acceptable by the intellectuals.
w $fihr f^iciiyiRd 
4 'JiihiRt ^Md:i 
-щ w fw ш
 wr; ^
 ywtrimmi
3TFWW *T R^TT TIW: 
WIT fdTTI
H lftl^Flfa ti^ w w fa W4vifh4:ll4^ll 
зтттгйзт iidT? а д й ? 'israggsi^i 
Rt r sw T ciw ffti: w rarw ri g- d ^ ra ru
Tlfh4T4 V yif&4iq;i
w w ^ try w jg w i 
тт^ % s j i t r r 
гг 
11 ч 11
wTTtswwwt 
?m\:\
Wnftf jf^fWWTFT 
<*>Hl<*rti:ll^oil
g^IT9RvtmT: ^dlfR yfhqry ^T ^ f|f I 
^rydrqi vPffiT ЧТШ "^W IW kR w ftl
ptw^ET firat w w w 
wt: 11 ^ *11
Lord Krsna said- О Brahmana, you are bom of 
the arhs'a of Siva, don't get afraid, are you not 
aware of the fact with the divine knowledge 
possessed by you that I happen to be the creator 
of and all are bom out of me. I happen to be the 
soul of all; without me every body is lifeless 
when I depart from the bodies of the creatures, 
all the strength disappears. I am myself the form 
of flame and represent each individual appearing 
separately in all the bodies. The one gets satisfied

=== PAGE 774 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 113
679
w ith the fo o d , he takes and others cannot be 
satisfied w ith it. T h e figure o f all the creatures 
are m ade separately. I appear in com plete fo rm in 
Goloka. Because o f the curse o f S rldam a, R a d h a 
is unable to fin d m e presently. A l l are b o m out o f 
the amsa o f R a d h a . T h e amsa o f R a d h a is 
available in the palace o f R u k m in I and other 
goddesses happen to be the rays o f the same. 
" M y amsa is also available in the bodies o f 
several creatures o f earth." T h u s speaking the 
lord o f the universe w e n t inside the house. 
D u rva sa also leaving his belo ve d there, started 
pe rfo rm ing tapas.
5fw 
ЗтТ° ЧГЩЧТ»

=== PAGE 775 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 113
679
Chapter -113 
Durvasa enlightened by Parvati 
ЧШЗЗТ 33T3
Я%ЦЗ?3|% ^HRrMcRcU ^ U W Tfftqi
3J3tm w f t яззит ^t^rt ягч%зячп*11
1ТЯТ 
^33% «URI4 %T3 f^rarrqj
jf£ j3 т о т чщщT upvw : M
: ^ jf3 :lR li
333% ЗЙЯЗТЗШ ^|ЗТ% %ЫЫч1
зшч-пзчщзтз wcUnd з% зтг:изи
TJ%?3 з з з 
ЩЩ ЗТ%% 4% l
ЗЗЗТЗ f%?T ТГгЗ *и^п«см41Р|ч1|Г)£11
Narayana said- Durvasa accompanied with his 
pupils went to meet Siva with his mind filled 
with devotion, leaving the city of Dvaraka. He 
proceeded towards Kailasa. On reaching Kailasa, 
the sage together with his pupils purified 
themselves and started adoring Siva and Parvati. 
Thereafter he spoke all the details about Sri Krs 
na and the tattva of his tapas and the detachment 
of his mind from them. On hearing the words of 
the sage, the chaste Parvati smiled and in the 
presence of Siva spoke truthful words which 
were quite beneficial.
3T%3J3T3
Ф%тЗ 3 3RTftl 3%0 *P3% -Щ Щ 
ЗН Ш qfelH I 33 3lf% 33% ^11411 
3HMrdl ^1 gcinl gjH'Jli xl illrigdlqj
<33*=» ч щ : iH ro t w ^ r f f з%% зтп^и 
cnfui^r зт язт% з т % г т ^ 331% зм
3 $ ЗТ 33% 3TS% %ЩЗ% 3RT u fo s^ lh a il
Parvati said- О sage, you are unaware of the 
tattva of dh arm a and still you consider yourself 
to be quite religious. Where are you moving 
leaving your childless wife. The one who 
disowns a youthful wife having no son who is 
quite chaste and devoted towards her husband 
becoming an ascetic, Brahmacarl or Yati or goes 
to a distant place for carrying out business or 
becomes a mendicant or a wandering ascetic in 
order to rid himself of the cycle of birth and 
death, he can never get redemption. He surely 
becomes responsible for the destruction of his 
dh arm a. Because with the curse of the wife, he 
has to fall in the hell after death his glory in this 
world is lost. This has been ordained by Brahma. 
О Brahmana, therefore you go back to Dvaraka 
and protect your dh arm a.
ЯГ % 8гП373 4 3 % 3 % Щ •HslrH § з *р 
3lRn?T%3 4ТЗ%Т ЧТ31 3- 373 ЗГИй II 
? |3 3 3?%TT?T ?<3T? 3^ hY«£3:I 
ШТЩ W I %3 733% ТЩ
4*T4vii зз?тт xi з%з: чГ<зг<зз1 
зтзз^гпШ 3T33% 71%7Щс$ЧЧ1 I я ° 11 
д а ЩЗГ 3% iffrfc: 
q few трзтг: < рт д з<чг?чч:и^11
3 3 3%% 33% ЗгЗ три гЧеНЧ!
зг тз% зз% 3t ■gfti 1 яч 11 
■?I33RIf3P3T3T^% ЧТЗ ТЩЗ.Ч 
3<3R% т а 3%I% 3T%% 3^3 
3333tS3333t 3T5% 4T%43 3 31333^1
^ З З Т Т Ш Т 4 % 3 £ 1 3 Г 
4 % S g 3 q ; i

=== PAGE 776 ===

680
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAl^AM
chlf&jT^lfiJ'dlrflgl: фОЧ1Ч|Гйу^||?Ц||
Ekanamsa was bom out of my ams'a and 
therefore maintain her with devotion. О son, the 
water of the feet of lord Krsna is blissful like 
kalpavrksa which is adored by LaksmI and is 
inaccessible by all. The gods like Siva, Sanaka 
and other sages recite the glory of lord Krsna 
whose name is like the charming nectar. Where 
are you going leaving him? О sage, the one who 
recites the name of the lord at his lotus-like feet, 
he is relieved of the sin committed by him up to a 
hundred births. There is no doubt about it. By 
reciting his name, all his sins committed during 
childhood, boyhood, in youthful age as well as in 
old age, knowingly or unknowingly, gets 
destroyed. The one who looks at the lotus-like 
feet of Sri Krsna,. he becomes always adorable. 
This is the total truth, such a person is relieved of 
all the sins performed by him during the crores of 
births.
TTefoifa ft wtafft TJtT: WTfq-frem:i
ТРШ 
'^jFRsTTgT 
I
rlcftHWI 
rrw rfri
сршгЧтТТугт чЩТЩ: 11 
gti 
WK$4-.\
xT Ttf^THT ^
 mfTT 
fellR ^ II
All the holy places get sanctified with such a 
type of devotee of lord Krsna. Those who are 
connected with lord Krsna only that vrata, tapas, 
truth, merit and -adoration become successful 
because by doing so one is relieved of the cycle 
of the birth. In case Brahmana well-versed in the 
Vedas is deprived of the devotion of lord Krsna 
even a devotee of the lord becomes degraded by 
talking to such a person. The Brahmana who 
consume the left-over or is devoted to him, such 
an auspicious soul, is competent enough to purify 
the fire and the wind besides the entire universe. 
О Brahmana, living lord Krsna where are you 
going to perform tapas.
сРЩТ iWraiifllld «)фьикгний хП
хГ 
4T4ft4falRoll
IT gT>: ^TTRl efft «h<lfrl 3RT 
щ тШ хй 
T O : ^Tf^lvT:IR^II
чт^ уОн.!
ggfar: 
Pvici^i?4di^iR9ii
w t w t g>®l4<j 
ЦГШ ^ 1 
тпгпят #
 
чт^1?9тч;| r ? 11
The devotees achieve the fruit of their tapas 
by merely reciting the name of Sri Krsna. A 
teacher who is deprived of the devotion of the 
lord Krsna he happens to be a great enemy and 
renders the life of his pupil infructuous. On 
hearing the words of Parvatl, 
Siva was 
overwhelmed with love and his limbs felt 
emotional. Thereafter he prayed to goddess 
Parvatl. The sage Durvasa offering his salutation 
at the feet of Siva and Parvatl, devoting his mind 
at the lotus-like feet of Sri Krsna went back to 
Dvaraka. Reaching there he started offering 
prayer to lord Krsna.
Цсыч¥1н4 тщг 
xt \титат TT?I
fjccnt 
3fRRPjTq;iR*ii
He then went to the abode of Ekanamsa and 
then enjoyed her company. At the command of 
Yudhisthira, Krsna went to Hastinapura.
тЬтм mi xi 
yg^iiPrifr:i 
зчтйт ш
т 
xii r ч i i
xbummtl -ЩТ xt fcfira№dc$nTiqi
r ^ 11
He then talked to KuntI, the king Yudhisthira 
and his brothers delightfully and with great 
efforts he killed Jarasandha and Salva; he then 
made Yudhisthira to perform the RajasUya- 
yajna, through the sages and the kings gave away 
suitable amount of daksina.
fyfyJhTrf 
cf? ^
 'WR IT: I
TWRlt 
| r ^ 11
ФЕГГ гТЩТН xT 
h ^ l
ч ggT m tt^ t 
ятагац! r c ii

=== PAGE 777 ===

KR§NA-JANMA-KHAN1?A, CHAPTER 113
681
In 
that 
yajiia 
he 
kille d 
Sis'upala 
and 
D a n ta va ktra . W ith the fall o f Sisupala, he w e n t to 
V a ik u n th a at once but fin d in g V is n u absent fro m 
that 
place 
he 
returned 
and 
started 
adoring 
M a d h a va .
Sisupala said- О M e d h a va , y o u are the creator 
o f the V e d a s , the p o st-V e d ic literature, the gods, 
the dem ons and all other creatures.
ferPT igfe Щ 
<*№ gi
RTW Ъ ЮТ WT W : 
Т*ёГ 
о ||
и ч т 
Ь т ъ ^ ж ч м щ :1
Ю Т f^cWIHiyel il^K<l:ll^ ^11
Y o u are the creator o f the sm aller creatures o f 
the universe and go on through the kalpas. Y o u 
h a p p e n ,to be B ra h m a , S iva and Sesa b y yo u r 
illu sion , 
the 
M a n u s , 
the 
sages, 
the 
gods, 
D ik p a la s , represents y o u r fo rm in ones w a y or 
the other.
ю т дчрю т 
’Ef юттр? чрга?:1
giTTot щ ЮТ 
ЮТ1: ЮТЧН^И
Y o u are Pu ru sa as w e ll as Prakrti and the 
eunuchs; y o u are the cause as w ill as the deed 
beside being the producer and the produce.
4P5RF5T Ъ TpTt 3hrt yfcftW ^
tr f 
tgfh 
llfhfycP{.ll??ll
T h e good or bad qualities o f a m achine depend 
u p on the m achine m an. T h is has been ordained 
in the V e d a s . A l l the hum ans are m achines w hile 
y o u happen to be the m achine m an. Therefore 
everyth in g is established in y o u .
РЧ 
ттют sjRuiwcu
y§tVII41^44vy Т$Г T3I 'nuq^^ll^'kll
О teacher o f the universe, I am y o u r w icked 
gate-keeper, therefore y o u fo rgive m y sins and 
save m e fro m the curse o f B rah m a .
$<^с|ЦсКсП ЗРРЙЮТГ 
Vyt Wl
TJ<?r 
ERijJ: 
^UdTgJ ШПТМЦ1 1341
T h u s speaking both Ja ya and V ija y a (Sis'upala 
and D a n ta va ktra ) reached the gate o f V a ik u n th a .
~ЯГкт ^
 b f o m ^ ; |
A l l w ere surprised w ith the reciting o f the 
stotra o f Sis'upala. A l l o f them considered Kpsna 
to be the lo rd, in all respect.
ч»нйя1 TDTffii ^ w
id
w сЫШЧШ ^T :ll^t9ll
ярти чютсгсщ т а г ^ ф"чтй^:1
?ПЖ 
f^R 'fepcfT 'ПЩгаТП^йИ
fe fF iT ydctoHitji ^ ^ г ч г а
^ n 4 ic W 4 h r cfti^ 
-дш^11 i ч 11
Thereafter RajasHya-yajha w as p e rform ed and 
creating dissension's, m ade the K au ra va s but 
fig h t w ith Pandavas. T h e m e rciful lord w e n t back 
to M ath u ra in order to relieve the earth o f her 
burden w here he stayed fo r a long tim e and 
brought back to life the son o f a B rah m a n a 
w o m a n ; w h o w as brought ba ck fro m the place o f 
the dead and restored to his parents.
■^R8IRWTT4hT ^
1
WT^TT.II^o||
D e v a k I w as extrem ely pleased at this. She also 
dem anded back her dead sons; the lord brought 
back her dead son fro m the place o f the dead and 
entrusted them to the care o f D e v a k I.
ш \ 
■^тчг д а ю т WI
'«ЧЧГЮТ W^I^K'obT VHtlftRSH: 11^11
Thereafter he rem oved the p o ve rty o f Sudam a 
w h o had com e take to refuge w ith h im .
^
 
fdVElHi '«!НчЫЦ|
grh 
ЯТ7ЮТ *ГтМсУЯ:1Г*?1
C on su m in g the fried p a d d y o f S u d a m a , the 
lord w h o is alw ays graceful to his devotees, 
blessed h im to be graced b y the goddess o f riches 
fo r seven generations.
дята ю т тт хг одю трям41|
W 
«ПШГ: 4 Enj? ?ll*3 II

=== PAGE 778 ===

682
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
H is k in g d o m equated the city o f Am aravatT 
and he becom es as rich as K u b e ra him self.
ftyeRdT -ф яШ xi ^
H e achieved in fallible devotion o f lord H a ri, 
the inaccessible slavehood and infallible place o f 
Goloka.
xnfemt хГ '91^Т1ФГТЧ<? Wl
чгат xT адгатчш 
эачИцга»{1г*ч и
ci^mra тш f%c5T
m g i f4R ra ~ ш т 
g ^trs^n
H e than stole a w a y the Parijata tree fro m the 
place o f Indra shattering his pride and m ade 
S atya to p e rfo rm Punyaka vrata. H e encouraged 
the 
p e rfo rm ing 
o f the auspicious 
deeds, 
he 
presented h im s e lf as daksina to Sanatkum ara that 
yajna.
«Ugnuiljtfl'jRHRIR Н'ЯТГ ЧЧ ^ 1 gcjn
т ж ч т т й ч н XT 
Ч*&Т:1Г#\ЭИ
H e served fo o d to the Brah m an a and also 
offered the gem s to them ; he increased his 
prestige before Satyabham a.
•bfeHuih 
xf 4^ 444^1
iroraHT tjUtiii щ fermrtffq 
ii
gtfaram чФг ftra 
3^1
3t^t дагагаш Шстт хг тит^п
фгс(| 
i g 
хГ <?»Ч|Р|Й:11Цо|
xf з^гатчгн Ararat яш^яичич V\
W vr щшчгог
: 11 ч 911
^ЩТТТРТЬЛЧТЧГО 4l<iuMu«l iran 
x)i^c^l<M4pq^ll4?ll 
UUii/l ЧуЩТЧТЧ ^gnratarat W fl 
ёГ5§ЗПЧТ funHI xf 
nftgsj 
xf ^
 -g^i
'wRdchHI xT ЧНёЩТ ^Itrq-t^immi
ЧЧЩтарьЯТЧТ xf <VTH^4344i^l 14 $11 
frravr чгте тщ 
WRi^fwg^i 
W ч чзШ хг gfir <psr ^sfara^nh^ii
fnftr xrft tpst c i^ « s i^ дфщйи
О 
sage, 
he 
prom oted 
the 
p o p ula rity 
o f 
R u k m in I and other spouses am ong the V a is 
navas, the gods and the Brahm anas besides other 
religions. T h e lord then bestow ed to U d d h a v a the 
divine kn o w le dg e . H e im parted the kn o w le d g e o f 
Gita to A rju n a in the fare-front o f the battle-field. 
T h e m erciful lord relieved the earth o f her 
burden and bestow ed the R ajalaksm I on earth to 
Yu d h u sth ira . H e m ade D u rg a to be adored as the 
village deity, e veiyw h ere to w h o m several types 
o f naivedya and the pleasant incense, lam ps etc. 
w ere 
offe re d 
p e rform ing 
the 
homas. 
T h e 
Brahm anas w ere served w ith the fo o d and in 
order to please P a rva ti; he built a beautiful palace 
o f Pa rva ti and Ganes'a studded w ith invaluable 
several gem s on the R a iv a ta m o u n ta in . F o r the 
pleasure o f Pa rva ti, he also b u ilt-a palace fo r 
Ganesa on the R a iva ta m ou ntain. A t that p oint o f 
tim e five lakhs o f sw eet balls o f sesam um seeds 
w ere 
m ade 
and 
seven 
lakhs 
o f modakas, 
hundreds o f heaps o f sugar, the ripe banana fru it, 
ten lakhs o f sweet dishes, charm ing payasam, 
fried, ghee, butter, curd, m ilk , incense, lam ps, 
garland o f Parijata flo w e rs, fragrant sandal- 
paste, fragrance and the costumes sanctified b y 
fire w ere distributed.
Щ g сККадЧКТ
W W ^iR TR m 3^
 Ж ЧП^ТЧ.114 4 11 
gra 
xtcf дкгашш rfit i t
7x1 ЩГЧТЧГО ЧТЩ;
?fgra длччтчтч д д тгтга жштч,1 
■щ 
д girara чтгт д яггап: щ п ^
Н е perform ed a yajna com prising o f crores o f 
homas, served the Brahm anas the fo o d and o ffe r

=== PAGE 779 ===

KRStf A-JANMA-KHAISDA, CHAPTER 114
683
prayer to Ganapati. At that point of time, ten 
types of musical instruments were sounded 
Samba then adored Stirya to get rid of the 
leprosy, he had attracted for a year. Samba 
continue to consume the havisya food together 
with his mother. He adored Stirya with several 
types of offerings. Stirya then himself appeared 
before Samba and bestowed to him several 
blessing and his stotra.
'ffif Sjfinpclo Tfepo 
ЧРТ
о 
nulviuyti

=== PAGE 780 ===

KRStf A-JANMA-KHAISDA, CHAPTER 114
683
m
 
<5 VTJ fachW d ц \$ щ щ : 
Chapter -114
: \u II
^М бШ <^гТ^йс*«НГ^с41Ч1 
^|(ёЧ1^1^Ч|сЫ<Ш^Л^(ЧсиЧ,11Я И 
«tTTWd<rft^?n^Rd^4^)'wdcdl44l
ftducqTugi ^ chmetiumMtrkdiH» 
giiydii ЩРТШ Ъ 
дЗл^РЗГШЯЯИ 
^•Н1Пт1><т61т6Ч1^ЧЧ1ЙЧ|(5|?П^|
^JJHWcdtwcldTH.II^II 
Щ IgT сЫЧЧЗП^ еЫЧЬч1«Гг1ЧЬШ:1 
-qgt ТЩ ЗЛЧЧтП
У1ы щ <ы ч |Ыг зл^т ЗН^)1^УсТГЧ.1
3lfdyVl Ч$т *Т 
1^ 11^11
Union between U$a and Aniruddha
HUIU] ЗЭТЕТ
f>bU|^$N Щ ^[ 4^N^41ldi4:l
feiifi?T tjct rTii^n
T?fR 4^1 ^ y ^ x ir ^ lR I I
N a ra y a n a said- Pradyu m n a w as the son o f K rs 
na w h o w as im m ensely valorous and strong. H e 
had a son nam ed A n iru d d h a w h o w as b o m out o f 
the 
arhsa 
o f 
B rah m a . 
O n c e 
the 
yo u th fu l 
A n im d d h a w as sleeping on the bed in a secluded 
place w h ic h w as h avin g the flow ers and the 
scented sandal-paste o ver it.
-щя zftrf m e t щ ш ччГвд)
тг 
II
W=rt ftifUdr ТЩ\ 4^l1oR%dTHil 
3t4p4rr^fd4ia|'UPUH foyfoTTqjmi 
3 I 
H «l^l^ch^UT^i Rid RJ
hUd^cdfdtl&dr^imil 
3pffa ^Чс|ЧЧ'| cWUCT^4T%iT14.l 
gewfiraiytlal ^ VK^4vPTP44TRIRII 
?Kdt<jra'4ig«cbl3l^fdf^dH4i\i 
^тЫЧ^ЬУ MHU^K-dM^dim^tr^l НЭ11
In the dream he fo u n d a beautiful dam sel lyin g 
on the bed o f flow ers and w hose lim bs w ere 
painted w ith 
fragrant 
sandal-paste. 
She 
w as 
sm iling. T h e dam sel w as quite beautiful and 
yo u th fu l and w as adorned w ith several types o f 
ornam ents, she w o re beautiful arm lets, w ristlets 
and the bangles o f conch-shells. H e r tem ples 
w ere decorated w ith the ear ornam ent. She w as 
clad in an extrem ely fine garm ent the anklets 
w o rn b y her w h ich issued dangling sound. She 
had the lips resem bling the ripe w o o d apples; the 
eyes w ere resem bling the lotus flo w e r o f the 
w in te r season. H e r face resem bled the lotus 
flo w e r o f the w in ter season and w as bestow ed 
w ith the grace o f crores o f the m oons. T h e lines 
o f her teeth w ere quite charm ing and looked like 
the garland o f je w els; she had the hair-do w h ich 
w as curved at three places and adorned w ith the 
garland o f jasm ine flow ers. T h e kastiiri, saffron, 
red paint and sandal-paste besides the co llyriu m 
w ere applied on her b o d y and the eyes. H e r 
cheeks w ere decorated w ith several types o f tree- 
leaves; 
she 
w as 
h avin g 
the 
ve rm ilio n 
spot 
resem bling the flo w e r o f pom egranate; her thighs 
resem bled the trunk o f banana tree. B o th her 
breasts 
w ere 
quite, 
hard 
thick 
and 
w e ll- 
developed; 
she w as bending because o f the 
w eigh t o f her breasts and w as suffering fro m 
passion. T h e beautiful dam sel w as lo o k in g w ith

=== PAGE 781 ===

684
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAiyAM
side-glances; both her feet w h ic h w ere painted 
w ith red paint and the saffron, looked like the red 
lotus flo w e rs. H e r costum e w as rem oved w ith the 
b lo w in g o f the w in d , revealing her private parts, 
as a result o f w h ic h she w as fille d w ith passion. 
She had an e xtrem ely charm ing com ple xio n o f 
the campaka flo w e r. 
Fin d in g her there, 
the 
unstable son o f the god o f love w as infested w ith 
passion and spoke to her quite sweet w ords.
dclW
fg > 
Ъ T f p s r i ЗЕТ ter 
c E P f t i
c& w sft 
w m cIT 
сГТ сЦЗЗЙГ
A n iru d d h a said- О beautiful one, are yo u a 
forest goddess or the daughter o f G an dharvas; 
are y o u the daughter o f a w om an? О beautiful 
one, w h o m do y o u love?.
s
i v
T
l I
d
H
' g f T R F I I
q-fWw gsr ^
e
r
 rt4;i i ^3 11
Y o u happen to be m ost beautiful o f the three 
w orlds and also m ake the m inds o f sages get 
attracted tow ards y o u . Y o u tell m e , are y o u alone 
here? W h y are y o u n ot afraid o f m e?.
ЗЩ s I c - ilc H H W W u k : 3 b l4 lt < M lS f T T I 
m
% s g q f r e s w ч з Ы к с Я Щ З : i i ^ V 9 i i 
ШФТГЩЩ- ЪПЧГ ЗГ ehW II'W 
c h iM c b lc h im i f n f
Presen tly, I am the grandson the lord o f the 
three w orlds and the son o f the god o f lo ve. О 
dam sel, m y nam e is A n iru d d h a . I am quite 
y o u th fu l, beautifu l, passionate, w ell-versed in the 
scriptures o f lo ve and can fu lfil the desire o f the 
passionate w o m a n .
rt RjRcr ip ftk щ k k tj
чкччтяк чкччткягчи^п 
ч к р чкччт rrtt 4fk£ fsrki 
■^r 
xx gngk <ыу<*Ьйки?оц
О 
w e ll 
disciplined, 
one y o u 
are 
clad in 
beautiful garm ents and therefore yo u lo ve me 
since I have a g o o d nature, I am w ell-versed in 
the art o f m akin g lo ve , desirous o f m akin g love
and the son o f R a ti. О b e lo ve d , the passionate 
w o m a n is alw ays desirous o f a passionate and a 
healthy person.
fggisrnj f ^ k ЗГ «hRmwifd RITRR:I
RRRt 
ЯП
O n ly com petent dam sel seeks a com petent and 
passionate 
person. 
Because 
the 
u n io n 
o f a 
com petent damsels w ith the com petent m an is 
alw ays desirable.
дзшп 'нЫтн4 зг qwTRrffkrwTi
fatflSSRRft R*l(^cblutq 
r r irqII
Thereafter feeling shy o f the n e w u n io n , she 
covered her eyes and the face and spoke to h im .
chlfif^g|€l
3n^3F: RTTR^ksfR з к ч cqTfkk§RTI
T h e dam sel said- Y o u are quite passionate and 
the son o f the god o f love and are getting anxious 
because o f the passions. I f y o u are suitable fo r a 
passionate dam sel, than w h y did y o u th in k about 
the passion.
w : чтткстчч зп
4RR Rtkt RlutJJsh 
R
Y o u y o u rs e lf happen to be the grandson o f the 
lord o f the three w orlds and the son o f quite a 
com petent person and are y o u rs e lf also quite 
com petent; then w h y don't y o u m arry?.
k r a ifk l '4|?pfrft ЧТТ XT трЩ сТТ M
l
fkRcR 
R ffk TRTIR4II
T h e m arried w ife is alw ays auspicious, chaste, 
virtuou s, 
alw ays 
rem ains 
w ith 
the 
husband, 
dw ells in the race, develops the race and is the 
life partner.
wiPWcTII 4
4 k tR T ЧТГ ЧТТ 4 
5 II
T h e secret w ife is alw ays fe a rfu l, could be 
w o n o ve r b y love and charities and is alw ays 
unstable; such a w ife rem ains o n ly per chance 
and not the life partner. T h e keeping o f such a

=== PAGE 782 ===

KRSrSA-JANMA-KHAtfpA, CHAPTER 114
685
w ife 
is 
prohibited in the 
V e d a s 
and 
other 
scriptures.
чт чташчнт
■RlfW Ч % # сщзй ^ЩёГГ ^
1R V911
T h e im proper w ife is the step fo r m o vin g 
tow ards the hell and earns disgrace in this as w ell 
as the future w o rld . A person o f high caste 
besides being a V aisna vas or a noble person, 
n ever gets interested in the im proper w ife .
RldW ^-d:l
Я # т г ЧШЧТ
In case som eone gets attracted tow ards such a 
w o m a n in fallacy and w hen he w as not fo llo w in g 
the com pan y o f noble people, o n ly in that case 
one could get attracted tow ards the im proper 
w ife because it is the nature o f the people, but 
getting detached fro m such w o m e n is alw ays 
beneficial.
jrrafrrjTff дчЩт<тГ ftfrr: wrait
In 
case 
a 
detached 
person 
gets 
h im se lf 
in vo lve d again in the w o rld ly pleasure, such a 
person becom e a sinner and has to repent w hile 
being jeered upon on earth. A l l his actions 
becom e like the bathing o f an elephant.
W^T «nfarft yvifudll
ilfawi §Ц№\ TIT ?Wcyfil4yTf^ll^on
■q^
t nf^pHt 
^ii
H T 
5>lHl 
^ЩТ1
ЗРЭДТ 
Т1еГ cPTR: TQvH
A 
V a is n a va 
h avin g 
a 
chaste 
disciplined, 
b e autifu l, peaceful, glorious, graceful, obedient, 
soft spoken, h avin g soft lim bs, quite com petents, 
y o u th fu l and the one w h o pleases during the 
conjugal pleasure, such a w ife and disow ning 
her, proceeds fo r perform ing tapas. W h e n such a 
lad y begets a son, becom es peaceful in her m in d, 
otherw ise his entire tapas, w o u ld be destroyed.
f <4?1ЙгЧ<ТТЛ mnftT ^tcfl 
H ^Tftt t o ; vtt fqgftt: ■RHfrfg?ll^ll
In case a person o f a degraded fa m ily goes to a 
graded w o m a n he fall into the terrific hell fo r 
seven generations.
ЩЩЗ&П ЩЩ: ^idi<fcach<: | 
«1|иГ^Н1'ФЧ^Я1 
^гПТгГТ
I am U s a the daughter o f B a n a , w h o happens 
to be the devotee o f S iva and is the conquered o f 
the three w o rld s, w h ile S iva happens to be lord 
o f the tree w orlds.
ч ш т ттФчг % w d j yaRnti
чт таггпдт
A 
w o m a n 
o f 
hig h 
race 
can 
n ever 
be 
independent under any circum stances bu t she 
rem ains in bondage. T h e loose w o m a n is alw ays 
independent and b o m in the degraded fa m ily.
f w 
3F4t Wt fsfrnmr WTBI Wl 
4i«MJ eft -T dl^lcl 
TRETT: 11^ ^II
T h e 
father 
gives 
a w ay 
in 
m arriage 
his 
daughter to a com petent person.- T h e daughter 
does not desire fo r a husband. T h is is the eternal 
dharma.
щ rt 
trteirsi TTTfwfa ^
 Wfl
Wit Я1&Т Щ ctTSWUW 
Wfq;i I 3 t9 11
Y o u are quite com petent and so am I . О lo rd, 
in case y o u are desirous o f m e , y o u go to B a n a , 
S iva or the chaste Pa rva tl w ith a request to seek 
m y hand.
f ^ f t -RlScft iTRTsriTT W T ? l 
f % t Ш Щ W R I mtit ehT4lr«T3Tl R ^ l l ^ d l l
T h u s 
speaking 
that 
beautiful 
and 
chaste 
dam sel disappeared. О sage, thereafter suddenly 
the sleep o f A n iru d d h a , the son o f the god o f 
lo ve w as disturbed.
WgctT T W t ТГ tЩЩ 
c ^ H R R : l
«гр оцт^нщ^тт т ^
 imiiWR4T4;iii ^ i
W itnessing the dream , he w as filled w ith 
passion and fin ding his be lo ve d no w ere there, he 
becom e upset.

=== PAGE 783 ===

686
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAhiAM
R4R?R ф §Т1^ :1
$pjt 
■$% r щ 
I * ° И
Thereafter he discarded taking food, spent 
sleepless nights, got intoxicated and became 
quite lean and thin; sometimes he stood erect, 
sometimes he slept, while sometimes he wept in 
a lonely place.
R R 
R F R R 
^fcW i?| ^ R :|
3FRT?RRtfRR: R c tf: RMRTCl^RTHirssll
Finding the son so weeping, DevakI, Rukminl, 
Rati and other damsels spoke to lord Krsna.
RTRT R R R T 
T t^ zf
RcTTR ycJdtqd". 
TtjfRRR:lliS4U
On hearing their words, the lord who was 
well-versed in all the tattvas, smilingly spoke to 
them.
# R R R T R R T R
•o
c b iR ip «nxiicb^i i f r
m ушу p fa r 
r<rtrir: 11*311
Sri Krsna said- Finding Siva and Parvatl 
engaged in the conjugal pleasure, the daughter of 
Bana became passionate. She then achieved the 
boon getting influenced with the passion.
ш
 r ^ h r m r o R t s f r e s r TTT^cfti
R R т М JIR R R Ш
 
R l l * * l l
RERRt R ЗГЧШ RT RTTtfR R R R R TS R R I 
R f R K
 fR g 4 fR T RlfRT fR R T 4Ч1'оОДТИ*Ч II
Parvatl made Aniruddha to witness a dream 
and he has thus intoxicated the mind of my 
grandson. Now I shall intoxicate the daughter of 
Bana in the dream. All of you should remain 
carefree; this mental agony would not lost for 
long.
f f R fJW T: R R T M T R R R ^ R T R ^ R f ^ f p l
WR R cGfaiRRf yrtUWl R «ЬГРУтЬ^11^ ^ U
Thus assuring them lord Krsna who is the 
bestower of all the siddhis made with this 
illusion, the daughter of Bana, to witness the 
dream.
■у vil 
«1Н 1 R T p T R R F T R f ^ l
HeRfleiH 
V^mJIRfqdTI 1*\э 11
3 T R jR f^^ R # rak lR f^ ll* < £ ll
4R)RRh^RTRRRlR RR^fhR^I
chlfdcb^^vllvTI'R RfRRT '^44^^4.11^^11 *
q-R4ll%TRRR^ - R fa t UthdVRRTI 
^RTRRR#RIRRR8iT: 
^11
?TRR W r f | WFRREjf^l 
R ^gT RfRT RTSRV 
W
l ^RTIIЦ Ч11
The damsel was quite youthful adorned with 
all the gem-studded ornaments besides the 
garland of flowers and was lying on the bed, 
witnessing a dream. She witnessed in dream a 
youthful person sleeping in a lonely place, in the 
palace of gems. He had the dark complexion, 
resembling the fresh cloud. He was extremely 
youthful, having the beauty resembling the 
crores of gods of love, had a smiling face, quite 
pleasant, clad with the ornament of gems like 
armlets, wristlets and anklets, besides two gem- 
studded ear ornament illumining the temples. 
The sandal-paste was plastered on his entire 
body. He was clad in yellow garment and 
adorned with the garland of jasmine flowers 
hanging on his chest. Finding him lying on the 
bed of roses, made of gems, the chaste girl went 
to him suddenly
3 R 1R R f T R T Eft 
Щ Ш 1 
, 
RilRhRRft'RT RJFRT cftlRRIuratflfSRTim 3 II
With her heart infested with love, the damsels 
spoke to Aniruddha the son of the god of love.
RRTRTR
cRRR RHRRi Щ Ef R t R R R T R T R R R R I 
SlfRsfrst RRtRT R R R R R R R ffiT R r:{ll4 'tfll 
RcfTJTRR RR5T R RTR^O T R ^ l 
fRRTRPSHRTfrf RTREh ’pTRt ^ЩЩ11Ч Ч11

=== PAGE 784 ===

KR$NA-JANMA-KHA!ypA, CHAPTER 114
687
U s a said- О passionate one w h o are you? y o u 
e njo y the com pany o f a passionate damsel like 
m e, I am quite yo u th fu l, fresh and desirous o f the 
fresh union . I feel, attracted tow ards y o u and y o u 
p e rfo rm the G a n d h a rva type o f m arriage. T h e 
G a n d h a rva type o f m arriage is perm issible fo r 
the hum an beings.
fsTRT я
4i4il у hl-fl 
drihsillfd 
?TTR gwR ^НШЩМЧ^И
I f a deceitful person neglects a passionate 
dam sels, M ah a laksm i pronounces a terrific curse 
on h im and leaves the place.
3Ti '<£ШГВТ ТГЖГ cbiqgrilrq^: -щ щ 
дат 
ddKjqfd fgTTIIVail
T h e m an said- I am m y s e lf the grandson o f 
K rs n a and the son o f the god o f lo ve , therefore, 
О beautiful one, h o w can I accept y o u w ith ou t 
their perm ission?.
^cIRcRcd R fRHRraft Ж ТТ R :l
щ тгч oi||q,HI RiRTT 4 ^gT diT-d R llw ^llV ^II
fqrr oMcwi RfKm r 
r%
rr;i
Ш ж 
т ш w t 4Щ 11 ч ч 11
T h u s speaking the person disappeared. T h e 
dam sel on the other hand fin ding her beloved 
h avin g 
disappeared, 
w as 
com pletely 
upset; 
instead o f sleeping, she got up from the bed and 
getting intoxicated she started speaking to her 
fem ale friends.
T5tw5 Ш RRSSvftat f% fchfurilri fR%RRI 
зщ ^ й гп ч га fe s te r '^RtfiRlii^on
fyrq4R<UT4idu| R cffihi h ^ Tdl 
f ? lt 
R cfa f?TR TTR Iv n i H u : M ^ 7 I I
W ith the m ere reciting o f the nam e o f S iv a , all 
the 
evils 
disappear 
and 
w elfare 
prevails 
everyw here. W e lfa re is the abode o f S iva .
&УН1^Пн||у|-ЧГ: -Rtf g t fridWfdl 
qglfd 
RtRjpr4ffrRll^gll
B y devoting the m in d to D u rg a , the destroyer 
o f the m isfortune, all the ailm ents disappear. 
Parvatl the bestow er o f the w elfare 
alw ays 
provides w elfare to all.
frin vltglriri: fiR T (e b lW lq rq ^ ^ < li
R 
R fTR f^rfR pTH ^^II 
Iri^vlfgl Rtlft RRT ЩЩЩ R dfriJUiqj 
fh? r prat Т Ж Rafpt RtfRR тр^И ^Ч И
O n hearing the w ords o f C itralekh a, beautiful 
U s a did not speak out anything. O n the other 
hand, discarding her fo o d and sleep, she started 
th in kin g about the same person. C itralekh a then 
w e n t to her parents, D u rg a , S iv a , as w e ll as 
Ganesa.
IriavltsiM ri: RRT ■RTf^TcS^t Rfftl 
qmivrj pigrtriW fRTRFt Refect: I
r ?tr prart fh f Л
п
 ira lw -.u ^ h ii
Le a rn in g about the m ental condition o f U s a , 
the w ife o f B a n a started crying aloud. B a n a w h o 
w as seated besides S iva w as also grieved and he 
fainted. A t the sight o f the condition o f the 
parents o f S iv a , Pa rva tl and Ganesa started 
sm iling.
RUtpcfT 3R1R
C itralekh a w h o happened to be the best o f the 
yoginls asked her, W h a t has happened; then she 
tried to convince her.
Rt pplfa f t -g:73R2r$ c?RRrf|R:l
R 
R g iju rR lI^ II
tefit fTS cfiRRlf&T cbT4T% чШ Ж РЯП 
7RR PriJ: %RT R I^n g jH f^ ЯРЙ R f t ll^ ll
C itrale kh a 
said- 
О 
auspicious 
one, 
be 
conscious. 
F ro m 
w h o m , 
have 
yo u 
felt 
so 
panicky? B o th S iva and Pa rva tl are here and the 
place is inaccessible to anyone.
Ganesa said- T h e one w h o in arrogance, 
m akes other to suffer fro m m ental torture, he 
h im se lf suffers 
fo u r tim es m ore 
the 
torture 
In flicted on others.
fpltpTRtPR Ш
 RtggTRT eh(RRtf|rtri 
eft R7t 
tptf RRtR TJgcfcrqj1 $ 6 II

=== PAGE 785 ===

688
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURA1VAM
U s a 
becam e 
passionate, 
witnessing 
the 
conjugal pleasure o f S iva and Pa rva ti. D u rg a had 
blessed her w ith a boon o f getting a unique 
husband.
W W i ^cfr т ё 
W R W ji
зт§чт 
«г srolftagfa ^ g ra ^ n ^ ii
P a rva ti h erself had infested the love fo r the 
son o f the g o d o f love w ith pass on in U s a and 
n o w she is q uietly siting the left o f S iva .
Щ
 ST 
Wcri^RdycKti
ip q ^П Ч Ш 4FW4.1|V9о ||
T h e om nipresent lord K rs n a had realised the 
same and have arranged U s a to witness a dream 
in w h ich the beautiful person w as displayed.
3^ 
TRltl
тпАщт 
ф И ш 
^11
Щ 
hfr g t £R 
II
Tf^jt 
4f|p3F^lh9?ll
oij'jj'wiild 
spf щ «dui^i 4R*Ji(hu:l
ш
щ : зптйч m m \
чГ«$Ттх1 ТШ RPngrHf 4
§рщтг»т чгйщ -qfi g^r.-iivami
A t the sight o f a com petent person dam sel 
alw ays becom es desirous o f h im bu t is contained 
because 
o f the 
fear o f dharma. 
Fin d in g 
a 
beautiful person, w o m a n b o m in a degraded 
fa m ily or a loose w o m a n is relieved o f her sleep, 
fo o d , husband, son, riches, house, intelligence, 
household, 
household 
affairs, 
shame 
o f the 
fa m ily , the caste and dharma and ultim ately she 
sacrifices her life also, but the degraded w o m a n 
could n ever disow n a yo u th fu l person w h o is 
w ell-versed in the art o f m akin g love. Therefore 
the intelligent person should protect the yo u th fu l 
ladies even after putting his life in danger. H e 
should n ever believe a w o m a n w h o is infested 
w ith illusion because the damsels speak sweet 
w ords but their hearts are quite sharp like a 
blade.
Ш Ttrfr ч 
^ЭБГ1
JptrijJ ? J W
s r f r e s W
B j f У Ч тТ О сГ н Т гГ Ь П
file'sII
4 *fJT tf?T W
 сп тгт: 
H O T f I T I
Ш
Ш
Т ОТГГ T o f S H c h W c H ^ : l U 3 « i l l
T h e bent o f their m in d is u n k n o w n to the 
V edas and the people w h o are w ell-versed in the 
V e d a s . C itralekha w h o happened to be the best 
o f the yoginls, should p la y fu lly m o ve to D v a ra k a 
fo r bringing A n iru d d h a after abducting h im . O n 
hearing the w orlds w hiskered b y Gan esa, w h ic h 
could not be heard b y В ana. She w as perm itted 
to perform this jo b . C itralekha at once reached 
D v a ra k a and then the abode o f H a ri.
T r i u m f i r 
# р т т y f a & ? i m
OTfosj Tl -фЩЩ Ъ ^ T : № ч 11 
7 W T W W 1чШ wra?
-Щ qqj-q-ifqqj 
о ||
щ в Ы ^ г г т в т г ^ й о т 
o t t I i
г
г
Ы
,4 №г а : и л ^ 1 1 
ОТ?! vm& \ ОТЯ: ОТТОВ: зт0ОТгГО:1 
■фЬ0|^ 1^ -RRWFT 
3 II
О Т Т О Т Ш Ш Й : w
f f O T : " т г ц Ш т ш
\
? lim Tret Ш wmbw ш к -м б зи
h v f t i a T w f ? i < ^ ^ т о т ^ T tftu d в о т и ^ м
T h e place w as inaccessible to all but still 
C itralekha entered expeditiously and abducted 
A n iru d d h a and placed h im on the chariot, w ith 
the influence o f her yo gic practices. О sage, the 
chaste C itralekha could m o ve w ith the speed o f 
the m in d . B lo w in g the conch, she in a m om en t 
reached Sonitpura. O n the other hand fin ding 
A n iru d d h a m issing fro m his cham ber, all the 
ladies started cryin g , lam enting fo r the b o y w h o 
w as dearer to them than their lives. T h e all- 
know ledgeable K rs n a w h o w as w ell-versed in all 
the tattvas, assured them va riou sly. H e at once 
accom panied w ith , S am ba, K a m a d e va , Satyaki

=== PAGE 786 ===

KIt§]4A-JANMA-KHA14pA, CHAPTER 115
689
and the arm y m o ve d on w ith G a ru d a m ounted on 
the chariot h olding samkha, cakra, gada and 
padma. T h e y m o ve d on tow ards Sonitpura, the 
city w as protected b y the ganas o f S iva and 
Pa rva ti.
m w 4iPhi 
унтт ttrtt щ чтгГчггт^и
1?|Ьч1 gqldfl: VM-nI 
RtH&cdl
«h<x<i 
Jjt41fuHci4H<S'3ll
ч Ы 
i ^ g r f t r
w m t frfert ^gT frtr^m -ф ^ ч ч й й м 
#5г ^ gm prm w tfa : nRr^idi^i 
~зш 
xt чрш'(
W^p$rufii<?oii
эдтчтго t jw xi тп#чt w
 xti 
qfasldl ufr 
ТГТ ^ 
^11
Trpgfor 
?ТЩШ1 Wlr<TH: I
dfxKh'qm: ^«ЬТРЗТ^ИЯ^И
the m ental agony o f U s a w as re m o ve d. She 
m arried A n iru d d h a the son o f the god o f love in a 
G a n d h a rva 
style 
and 
enjoyed 
the 
conjugal 
pleasure. B o th o f them enjoyed the conjugal 
pleasure fo r a long tim e.
4 f f ir W ITT: TtR Tft:i 
зет «ШЧЩ<Т ЗЙЗТ Ч ^Т 4^dh4l^ll^ ЦII 
R^5f ШРТ ^ЩхГ ^ЩуЫыи| diiyebll 
■Q^ ftcS XT Т # Т W T : fR % T :l.
«РТЕГ 
fer TRT 
1^
1^! IR * 11
T h e passionate A n iru d d h a d id n o t care fo r the 
day and nigh t. O n the other hand the passionate 
U s a w as fainted w h ile enjoying the conjugal 
pleasures fo r the first tim e. T h u s both o f them 
w ere united and they enjoyed all the conjugal 
pleasures 
in 
lo n e ly 
place, 
thereafter, 
О 
B rah m an a, the kin g cam e to k n o w about the 
reality fro m his guards.
ffrT sDflgio 1ЩТо
о ЗтГ° -TTTcptT0
:11Ш Н
O n the other hand C itralekha w as a great 
yoginl quite graceful am ong the ladies, quite 
auspicious, peaceful and w as w e ll-k n o w n as 
siddhayoginl and as the granter o f success, She 
than consoled the b o y w h o was crying getting 
separated fro m his m other. Thereafter, she m ade 
h im take his bath and the sandal-paste was 
applied on his b o d y decorating h im w ith the 
garland o f flow ers. T h u s the b o y havin g been 
beautifully decorated, w as m ade to enter the 
inner apartm ent w h ic h w as protected b y the 
gods, through yo gic practices. U s a w as w ith ou t 
fo o d fo r lo n g , thin w aisted and protected b y her 
fem ale friends, w as w o ke n u p. She was also 
m ade to take bath and adorned w ith all the 
ornam ents, garlands, applying the sandal-paste 
on 
the 
b o d y 
in 
addition 
to 
the 
auspicious 
ve rm ilio n . Thereafter, in the auspicious tim e o f 
Mahendra, both o f them w ere m ade to talk w ith 
each other secretly. O n fin ding her beloved there,

=== PAGE 787 ===

KIt§]4A-JANMA-KHA14pA, CHAPTER 115
689
ЗТ2Г
Chapter - 115
Bana gets ready for a war hearing the news 
about his Daughter
4RRTUT 39ГЕГ
ЗТ8Г #TT Т8Ш^Г {PJ^«iiui4\W4l 
ТЩР?Т 
xf ^Uge|aifui4<3
Narayana said- Thereafter, the guards feeling 
panicky prostrating before Karttikeya, Ganesa 
and Durga spoke to the king Bana.
t8(rair 35^:
Wt^TcFI iftel 
UiydqjRII
The gods said- The time is quite wicked and 
unsurpassable. Presently the adult daughter 
becoming independent is desirous of a husband.
4W -RTflt

=== PAGE 788 ===

690
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
twfcn три дТят 
тш •рлщи'эи
O lord it is alw ays painful i f the noble people 
keep the com pan y o f the w ic k e d , the good and 
bad are the products o f the continuos com pany o f 
the people.
Rm&s j w
 
и А
 щ
ТЩТТ 
xT 'Ч£К«Щ1М|
w
 
хг сь^ч^Гч тяттчг 
wrPt ятлдтата ^
 ч ^сийятчичи 
1Ш щ- яятт тзтгрт
■d^'R^kfhnTlll^ll
eftftrr msixr gtfpt 
жя# trti 
gpgt щ ц nsraki чтй 4m<Tferdi^i№ii 
9Wl4i xT xJoxHfqj
5W=f TffjfTt 
tfd 11^4^4,11^11
тгщтт Ъ ^^upfif^dPii 
pcj m m rHferrir^ спитая 
i^n
C itra le kh a , 
herself becom ing 
a messenger, 
brought a com petent groom fo r the girl w h o is 
quite strong, va lorou s, resem bling In dra, a great 
charioteer, 
y o u th fu l, 
healthy 
and 
is 
m ore 
beautiful than the god o f lo ve . She m ade both o f 
them to enjoy each other com pany through out 
the 
d a y 
and 
night. 
N o w 
chaste 
U s a , 
yo ur 
daughter has conceived. In spite o f her having 
been born in noble race, she has becom e like the 
burning fire fo r both the races. N o w y o u have to, 
becom e a grandfather o f a m ale o f a fem ale 
ch ild. 
Y o u m eet an extrem ely yo u th fu l and 
clever person besides the clever daughter in 
w hose b o d y there are signs o f enjoying conjugal 
pleasures 
and w h o is 
com pletely under the 
com m an d o f her husband, 
is quite unstable 
rem aining in the com pany o f a m ale, enjoying 
conjugal pleasures in seclusion, alw ays sm iling, 
lo o k in g w ith side-glances and unstable eyes. O n 
hearing this, В ana was asham ed as w ell as 
enraged.
^ 
^ dlRd: УТЧЯТ ЩЩ1
тщгуЯ 
%сРЧТ Wilson 
йтггГТ ЧЗЧПЯЧТ Щ
ъ|\сЫ^ИгЧ^:И^П
4 t: Я^ЯЯ ^щ тпМ т^^гщ г1:1
gferf шч^оцт хг ддт чтят %тгя хп 
зятхг?гагтт ятт its qfu5?mf444,i 
%т -ш чШп?тпя 4RuinT^TsiicigH.ii^ii
Н е resolved fo r w a g in g a w a r but S iva stopped 
h im 
fro m 
doing 
so. 
H e 
spoke 
to 
Gan esa, 
K a rttik e ya , 
P a rva tl, 
B h a ira vl, 
B h a d ra ka ll, 
Y o g in I, eight B h a ira va s, eleven R u d ra s, G o b lin s , 
Pretas, 
K usm and as, 
Ve talas, 
Brahm araksasas, 
Y o g in d ra s , the Siddhas, C a n d a and other R u d ra s, 
K o ta rl the village d e ity, spoke to S iva the w ords 
w h ich w ere considered to be beneficial fo r B a n a . 
These w ords truthful according to p o lity and 
w ere beneficial in the long run.
Ч ^с| ЗЯТхГ
crm 
gsTT^cit jtttr^ i
чкгаия) ятс* ^ уч> сН :||^ || 
f ^ r
ЯРЯ НРШ fsr?cnf4 ЧТЯ ЯГО: ЖЬ?сН:11^ЧН 
<щ& ffrr w m : язий Ьч grtfet:! 
гпдШшт чттгат?чжтШ: ятя g fg ii^ n
Я # : ЯТ:1
ЯТ W 4T gm ХЛЖЧТ XT %(%ЯГ: I 
ЯТЯТ яЫТ
S iva said- I am narrating to y o u an ancient 
story yo u please listen to it. In order to rid the 
earth 
o f her 
burden, 
the 
lord 
h im s e lf has 
incarnated o n earth in the land o f Bh arata and 
has 
kille d 
m a n y 
kin g s; 
all 
the 
globes 
are 
enshrined in his hair-pits; his abode is the eternal 
B rah m an that is w h y people call h im w ith the 
nam e o f V asu d e va . L o r d K rsn a happens to be on 
earth as B ra h m a fo r B ra h m a . H e is b e yon d 
Prakrti, de vo id o f gunas, unattracted, alw ays 
graceful to his devotees and takes to hum an form 
fo r their sake, is eternal B rah m a n is the abode o f 
the 
supreme 
soul. 
H e 
is 
the 
one w ith the

=== PAGE 789 ===

KR^I^A-JANMA-KHAiypA, CHAPTER 115
691
departure o f w h o m , a hum an becom es a dead 
b o d y . H o w can a w a r be possible w ith h im .
w f o s l Riran# чал tjs foreran
tMTSStRT хГ Гт<ГсЫЧ) 
хг адм ^'Л п ^и
A s one is unable to visualise the sky having 
been covered w ith the w eapons. S im ilarly a 
person is unable to visualise the invisible soul 
even b y m editation.
cTPT
а й т щ щч: ph i^ ir о к
H is son nam ed A n iru d d h a can destroy the 
three w o rld s in n o .tim e .
WvTERTt WWT;|
^ 
чт^т чЪ$>Пчп?*н
A l l the gods, the dem ons and all the valorous 
people do n o t com pare to the one-sixteenth part 
o f A n iru d d h a .
'trtJRcf trtT 
ЧЧ ElrRT I
M xf 4 § ^ fs rg ^ r: IR ? 11
S uch o f the people w h o have com parable 
strength and the riches, the m arriage should be 
perform ed o n ly betw een them ; it w o u ld not be 
proper to engage a w e a k person w ith a valorous 
one.
c#r: fm й 
TTTPjat WTSfii
4Ufl¥3 
^ 
SwmR^II
WTRRTrIRYII
H e is the one w h o drove B a li y o u r father, w h o 
w as im m ensely valorous and w as b o m out the 
aths'a o f H a ri to the neither w o rld in a m ovem ent. 
H e is the one w h o is the lord o f V rn d a va n a , the 
suprem e soul and all other creatures are o n ly his 
rays.
ч1<Цс(м
Щдй ы<мР|Й¥Ч IrtRf xt R;qiPiVi*{l
W T4^T: "?TWEr W R i tHTcPPflRhll
Pa rva ti 
said- 
B ra h m a , 
S iva , 
Sesa 
alw ays 
m editate u pon h im in their hearts through out the 
day and nigh t.
Щ щет T F tW l
Strra^ тНЧГгЧН W R T R4TcR^IR^II
S u rya , Ganesa, S iva the teacher o f the yogis, 
alw ays m editate u p on the eternal lord.
TRcftTH: grfhHt 
чнш щ <ж1 
mnti 
«picrt ^p ir ^ ii
Sanatkum ara, 
K a p ia , 
N a ra 
and 
N a ra ya n a 
alw ays m editate u p on the eternal lord.
■цчщгаг 'зчИ ^ ет 
щт;1
srnraisi xt sm ^ «piert po | r c 11
M a n u , the sages, siddhas, the yogis alw ays 
m editate u p on the eternal lord.
Ч&Ы xt pi?T хГ ЧПВЩ1 
sqpRf ^ R : P f ЯТгЩчГрьц^^п
A l l the intellectuals, w h o are the forem ost o f 
all, adore the lord o f all, w h o is eternal.
UUIVI detlx)
3WTW g ERTTEnfa ^шГсГРГ тЩгЧЧ: I
хгд|Щ :11?о ||
Ganesa said- It is m isfortune o f Prahlada and 
B a li a great devotee o f V is n u w h o has g ive n 
birth to such a foolish son.
•W><( ЗоГГхГ
згёг 9 Ш ШТ хТ fg<CTi|cbfv|-qJ: ЕШТ1 
Ш ти П ^Г Р Т ^Г Т гп Т Ц ?Ч ^:11??11 
й %ЧТ 46RH 4tl*hl;l
K a rttik e ya said- О brother, have y o u heard the 
stories o f H ira n ya ka sip u , H ira n ya ksa , M a d h u 
and K aita b h a. A l l o f them w ere quite valorous 
dem ons and w ere y o u r ancestors. A l l o f them 
w ere dispatched to the abode o f Y a m a p la y fu lly 
b y V is n u .
ш
р м
 
tzw чнгащ; TPJI
Tf^RTT V ra f^ W ^ h T U x tlR ^ II
О brother, w h o can save the one w h o is to be 
kille d b y none else them N a ra ya n a h im self. 
Therefore keeping in v ie w y o u r o w n w e lfare , 
y o u leave the idea o f a w a r.

=== PAGE 790 ===

692
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURA^AM
Ы g ggr ffgi dy«IT«n^VeK:l
:ii3*u
On hearing his words, В ana was enraged. His 
face and eyes became red with anger. He held a 
bow in his hand and started thundering like the 
god of death.
ЩПТ ЗсГГсГ
Щ ТШ: 
Щ Ш
^PJJ W
 «blRebll^mi 
^pTT^pt ШтБ¥г FrftTRt ^№ht ёГ8ГТ1 
f.dcbM^R'^ g д й 
g g ^ ll^ H
Bana said- О mother, О father Siva, О brother 
Ganes'a, О brother Karttikeya, listen to what I 
speak. The people performing deeds have to face 
the good or bad results according to the deeds 
performed by them. Who can get the reward of 
any type without performing a deed.
чттнсБтёгг fggg fes: yuyi^fti 
дитйипГч 
яшсь'й ч
A person cannot die, ahead of times even 
when wounded with hundreds of arrows and 
when the time comes even with the touch of the 
blade of grass one cannot survive.
т ч ы zrw ftgfut ЙШ Т1М Ш JTTI 
Й д f e t gw g 
|ртдт4сГ||^И
In which ever way the destiny has ordained 
the person has to meet with the death in the same 
way, who can avert the result of an action which 
one has to face definitely.
Й Й chid4t Й % fatbiri ЧЩ
g ^ g g r S f g il^ ll
The one who becomes a coward in the battle­
field, his life becomes useless, the person who is 
victories in the battle-field, he earns the glory 
and after the death he achieves the heaven.
3tf^T gpgf ijflfir ЧЧЧ (913<в*«Я1
чйдт g irntM 
gfwtr mtiivo и 
Й gT \f^lfd ch-tn g 
gT 'flUcldW gi 
w r f д д д й ^г ш т 
ggriixgi
ffg ^ дтщ й д 
д* ддм
gMfgwrfg д?дд>щ|
згегегт чснсуй д гчздй д grAg^ii^ п
Не entered the city which was protected by 
Siva, Parvatl and Ganesa and accepted the 
daughter, in the same way as a valorous person 
does in the battle-field. Who can abduct anyone's 
daughter like this, who is still, alike. In the court, 
the'guard has spoken that the girl has conceived. 
These words entered my ears like vajra. 
Therefore, after killing Aniruddha, I shall also 
kill the girl, otherwise I shall jump into the 
burning fire.
щ gw yciawfa -Rimst rteft gfa:i
gjwr чищ т -тзтцщ^ дщчашп 
^buiwifii ттЫтгг згзятег •gmg gii*'*n 
arfresig р й
gcTtsfg ятй g$ gHfo: ftgf*?: щп-*чп
Kotarl said- О son, you listen, since I happen 
to be your mother according to dharma. The 
parents have to suffer from, mental agony at 
every step, because of the conduct of the wicked 
son. Since Usa had been accepted by somebody, 
therefore she cannot be given by you to anyone 
else. You give away your daughter to Aniruddha, 
the grandson of Krsna and the son of Pradyumna. 
By doing so your seven generations in the land 
of Bharata would be purified.
%gj 
w&g 
g?rr gfgi
aiww дтгай g <gt 
greg: i i"k s 11 
g^nr йдтгдт 
$pt.-i 
йгйддч ^<дт 
trggggtii'ktiii
ядй тегчтевт дд тЙ 
w g: ^rnifg^gr ддй тшщдтп'кй и 
дм: wtwgr ggi ggfcpr^g f?rg: iggri 
дтт 
g% 4i4uj cFteft crani'k^ n
g ^дтйд ^1^4ддду|д ^i 
g f 
fgnt gg^: wgngg.-imoii

=== PAGE 791 ===

KR§I}tA-JANMA-KHANpA, CHAPTER 115
693
чгёоЭТ 
«liui^l zf ШГЩИа ?ll
<4IUI41v=H:I
Tiwmfui <ты*чн\м xrrq^iiц ^ 11
In order to achieve the g lo ry and lustre on the 
land o f B h arata, y o u give a w a y everything in 
d o w ry otherw ise lord H a ri w o u ld surely k ill yo u 
w ith the use o f the Sudarsana-cakra in the battle­
fie ld . "W h o w o u ld be able to save you?" O n 
hearing the w ords o f K o ta ri the dem on was 
further enraged. О sage, m ounted on chariot he 
w e n t to the place w here the grandson o f K rsn a 
w as lodged. Thereafter w ith the perm ission o f 
& v a , K a rttik e ya to ok the com m and o f a rm y and 
m arched o n. B a n a then perform ed the w elfare 
cerem ony. 
Ganes'a, 
S iva , 
Pa rva tl and K o ta ri 
blessed B a n a va rio u sly. A l l the eight Bhairavas, 
eleven R u d ra s, h o ld in g the w eapons in their 
hands started fo r a w a r. In the m eantim e under 
the influence o f Pa rva tl and the w ife o f B a n a, 
m essenger carried the w o rd s, to A n iru d d h a and 
spoke to h im .
3ifHW)fd8 Щ 41 jdlcTcH Щ 1
я ? 
3ii
T h e m essenger said- О A n iru d d h a , get up and 
listen to the w elfare w ords o f P a rvatl. О son, yo u 
w e a r the kavaca and com ing out y o u start the 
w a r.
чгёУчт 
зпчт w m TTT^ft
sft w r yudibuli
vjiucu ЧШТ 
ЧРТ'.МЧ'йП
T h e 
terrified U s a rem em bered 
the 
chaste 
goddess Pa rva tl saying, 
" O 
M ah a m a ya , 
yo u 
protect the one w h o is the lord o f m y life ; yo u 
extend h im all protection in the terrific battle­
field. Y o u are the m other o f the universe and 
y o u r love extends to all eq ually".
3l2nfretg: ihnft *K44i!ui(i^ f |
злщч таг штаг ^raiRTSsflpt трциччн
Thereafter, A n iru d d h a w earing the coat o f 
arm s and h o ld in g the w eapons in his hand, 
m ounted the chariot, given to h im b y U s a .
G e ttin g out o f the cam p he spotted B a n a w h o 
w as w earing the coat o f arm s 
and h o ld in g 
w eapons in his hands. H is eyes w ere burning in 
anger.
ШЩ?51 n*jcii4 *чиРча:11ЧФН 
чЪчшчтей ъ RmiRkf M^Hf?ictii4\9ii
A t the sight o f A n iru d d h a , B a n a w as enraged 
and in the terrific battle-field he started em itting 
ve no m .
Ш 3414
3n^s-4viw<ii4<iii 
fqrtr % ?IU(< 
'flsn? 
«bifunl^l 
rlcTt 
^cll^ci 
^ЧфН^ЧЧМЧ^И
B a n a said- О valorous one, y o u are extrem ely 
w ic k e d , de vo id o f the kn ow ledge o f p o lity ; y o u 
are the- fo rm o f fire flam e fo r the solar race, y o u 
are acting disgracefully in the auspicious lan d, 
y o u r father ow n ed the w ife o f Sam brasura after 
killin g h im . Y o u w ere b o m out o f h er. Y o u are a 
blot on y o u r race.
firamst 
чдтгат 
ф ю :\
i r t ^ 
чтчт чг ч ^ч ^т:iis о 11
Y o u r grandfather k n o w n as K rs n a is the K ,. 
atriya o f M ath u ra. H e is the son o f a V a is y a in 
G o k u la k n o w n b y the nam e o f N a n d a . 
w ттгщгг ччнч
hlMWi 5^ : 4<4<n*4<l:IISUI 
In V rn d a va n a he happens to be a cow herds o f 
N a n d a w h o grazed the co w s; he is the lo ver o f 
the cowherdesses and is an extrem ely w ic k e d 
person.
ЩШЧ ЧЧЧТ Ш1 4Khimt H«nfife:l
зпч<*г щ ъ 
зтатч % ^ч wi is я 11
H e kille d during his childhood, POtana and is 
therefore the kille r o f the w o m a n . Reach in g 
M ath u ra he kille d K u b ja after enjo ying conjugal 
pleasures w ith her.

=== PAGE 792 ===

694
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
т а 
k t r a t чн1^<н> 
ж щ 
11S i 11
Th ereafter the heartless K rs n a w h o is greedy 
fo r passion kille d N a ra k a and to ok a w ay the 
group o f ladies o f his palace.
якгат ш
 
ш к gsknti
тащ д д а 
^таВш ъ к т а и т к и ^
H e also ove r-po w e re d B h lsm aka and his w eak 
son; and m arried princess R u k m in l.
татксТ: 
'^ctirtiN 4U|)vcH4[l
ШяГ*Ы1 ^Ш*Ы ЗШЩ 4fuich-4eh|i^||^mi
Satrajita achieved a gem fro m S u rya w h ich 
w as taken a w a y b y K rsn a killin g h im together 
w ith his daughter.
fJWtrgcT^g xr дтпкгШ xr
frig id тагтШ:11^11 
сртата ri vnv<4 хт 
tt ^t w : i
эттягата 
таган ^т: i
тнгякташр! VH9i т а :ii^ ли
H e m anaged a terrific w a r betw een Kau ravas 
and Pandavas. Thereafter, in the yajna o f Y u d h is 
thira he heartlessly kille d Sis'upala, D a n ta va ktra , 
S alva and Jarasandha. H e therefore relieved the 
earth o f v e ry com petent kin gs. H e deceitfully 
kille d N a ra k a and usurped his g o ld ; getting 
terrified fro m the kin g he w e n t to the ocean and 
to o k refuge there.
facctf хг шаг rari ягзкт та к т хп
тал? шкгаг xt дщ тг тсг%#ч^11 $ я 11
A t the sight o f his w ife he attacked Indra his 
brother and fo rc ib ly to ok a w a y the Parijata 
flo w e rs.
таг %гтоГчу1 w
 я щ к xri 
тага тая та к т та кт <*raifa к ь э о и 
ктат хг тащув 
гага тая гаяяи^ 
df'jfg4Pi'ii 
xiguif rafrat ^км 'э^и
T h e great sinner killin g the brother o f his o w n 
m other, he usurped all his riches, w h at shall I
speak to y o u ; he also fo rc ib ly m arried the 
daughter o f Ja m bavan the great beer after killin g 
h im in the battle-field. H is fathers sister becam e 
the beloved o f fo u r people.
ШР<41 xT 
cblfak Ш \
■ntgkt ткчдацта ^тагстагш г: i its ^ и
Я^ЯТ 
Я ськя1^НЧ)Гч1сЩ11\Э311
щ
 srfrat тая яктат: т?тгакя:1 
fn s i ш р щ ш ■#rak
ЯШНЯ тая f^T xjkftr cbim-dd: i
тага тачк я -цгщ щ^та дкиэчи
T h e w ife o f his brother nam ed D ra u p a d ! w as 
m arried to five persons. H e is the d w eller o f the 
cow sheds; is voluptuous and is quite w ic k e d . H is 
elder brother k n o w n as B a lad eva rem ains dru n k, 
consum ing w in e and sum m ons Y a m u n a the w ife 
o f his brother according to his sweet w ill. T h a t is 
w h y A rju n a the son o f K u n tI abducted his sister 
Subhadra, w h o w as the daughter o f his m etem al 
uncle. Y o u should k n o w about y o u r fa m ily 
traditions. О sages, listening to the w o rds o f 
B a n a A n iru d d h a w as enraged and he gave a 
suitable reply.
srfras тапя
fra rк япчс^уя я зд я : д я ^ k : i 
iiw i^ui я # д я 
татя
A n iru d d h a said- M y father nam ed K a m a d e va 
w as the auspicious son o f B ra h m a in earlier 
tim es, w ith the w eapons o f w h o m all the three 
w orlds w ere over-pow ered.
f^ychihFivlk я к к гг: татак: i
’фШ1ТЯ тркшдЯТ 
Ч<Н1гЧЧ: I |V9V911
яктатт ткякт ктатткя
VI*<UW ^ Щ
^ 1 с1тктЯ Й Т ^1ИЭй11 
шят uraradl та^тт штат ттякт ж 
т к таек та$я тактщ& я г а д к its я 11
Because o f his m isdeed he w as b u m to ashes 
because o f the anger o f S iva . 
C u rre n tly he 
happens to be the son o f lord K rs n a , m y m other

=== PAGE 793 ===

KR§NA-JANMA-KHAIV1?A, CHAPTER 115
695
nam ed R a ti is quite a chaste la d y. She had to stay 
in the house o f Sam bara because o f the desire for 
her husband, w h o had abducted her fo rcib ly. She 
gave a w a y her shadow to the dem on and saved 
her chastity. D h a rm a stands w itness to the sam e.
щ Tjfteu wfsrai w Iri 
ОТТОГО s n it Я 
W ■Щ%пй| IС О 11
(чгпч? crrf^d 
f% отч[Гя -55^1
Я XT TR?t Ч TOTftt 
TJcT Ш 6 *11
M y father killin g the dem on Sam bara to ok his 
chaste w ife w ith h im and w e n t to D va ra k a . B o th 
the sun and m o o n are w itness to the sam e; h o w 
can y o u like a fo o l understand m y grandfather 
V a s u d e va w h o is u n k n o w n even to the V e d as.
ReSfacjRW faycnfa T O HtRf I 
сГЯТ^Г: 
W ^ T ^ ^ r ^ c l : l l 6?ll
Vasu is the place w h ich happens to be the 
abode o f all, one in w hose hair-pits, the globe are 
lo dg e d, he lord cam e to be k n o w n as V a su d e va .
ТОГО 
т щ т щгг 
%щщ\
Y o u better ask about h im fro m S iva to w h o m 
y o u are serving. Y o u happen to be the son o f 
B a li w h o is the servant o f K rsn a and as such yo u 
happen to be his slave.
11Й ■)< 11
Y o u are de vo id o f w isd o m and as such yo u 
call h im as the son o f Vais'ya o f G o k u la . T h e 
V e d a s perm it the taking o f fo o d w ith Ksatriyas 
and the V aisya s.
T h e same D ro n a w as b o m as N a n d a and the 
chaste D h a ra w as b o m as Y a s o d a . R a d h a on the 
other hand was b o m as the daughter o f V rs 
abhana due to the curse o f Sudarr.a; she at the 
com m and o f her lord accom panied w ith thirty 
crores o f cowherdesses arrived in the land o f 
Bharata fro m the Goloka
mfo: ят^ Я 
я W4niti^r^Tsf^aRT:i
mfnr тот? т ш т : язя w r
Because o f this, the lord kept the co m p a n y o f 
those dam sels. H e m arried R a d h a and B ra h m a 
perform ed h im se lf as the priest o f the m arriage.
Trtwfzyg % тощ ттого -gsTsfepm
ягкящт i t : 11 ^ 4 и
A crore o f cow herd boys arrived fro m the 
Goloka on earth. A l l o f them w ere the best o f the 
attendants o f H a ri and w ere illustrious like h im .
Я ? Т Я З ЯТОЬТЯЗ ЯТЗЗГОЧ:!
ЯРТТЯ fyupspsf m ^tw ifa ЯТЯЯТИЧ о It
T h e lord w ith his illusion turning to the fo rm 
o f the cow herds is protecting the cow s w ith his 
illusion.
чгИ1 
я 
я яящ н 
t£Z<3T я ЯГОЧ fe q x щ р ^TORTOI1Я *11 
тзятой я ^ я я p t яя% ш т \ 
я н ^cpfiT гогя f r o я^1я ятото;|1Ч*п
О dem on, Putana w as the daughter o f B a li and 
y o u r sister; she w as childless in earlier birth and 
looking at the lord as the incarnation o f V a m a n a 
had desired to achieve a son like h im and could 
feed the child w ith her breasts.
ЗГЗПЧ%: Я 0 Т SRT сП Я fjTOT
m я ш
 
ч<ч1лнч>сп:^11^411
D ro n a w as Prajapati and his w ife D h a ra was 
quite chaste; both o f them perform ed tapas and 
achieved the lord as their son.
ТОГО ТОГО ^ТОПТГО Я?Т1ГО ЯГ ЯЯ TOltl 
Р Щ З Т Т И П р т : ?ПЧ<*КЧ||^1М^И
RvirehlR я ягоГОт 
яфгщяп 
^ я я тя т ^ % й о тго го п го я ш < £ й 11
гогот: то яня я trap яяянгд:1
ЯН ГОТО Я 
ЯГО ЯТ ЯЯЯНГО.ИЧЗП
fTOT ЯТ ■qfro Т5Г ЯЯТОГО JTOH:I
яНто ягоя готяттото тоЬиго я^ ич^ п
C\
ЧТЯТ 
<1ГО1¥Я r^TOt Л щ : 1
тоятя ят ня ягой: ^гояЬтотяпччи 
rH yfiH dvt®dl ГОёТТЯ) ЯТ ТОПЯ ?l 
ЯРЙ ЯРЯ ЯГОтТ^ 
ЯИЧ«чИ

=== PAGE 794 ===

696
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
T h e lord fu lfille d her desire; after feeding the 
child w ith her breasts she left the earth m ounted 
o ve r a gem -studded plane to Goloka. K u b ja on 
the other hand was the sister o f R a va n a k n o w n as 
Surpanakha in her earlier birth , w h o passionately 
desired R a m a as her husband bu t the extrem ely 
religious La k sm a n a severed her nose. Thereafter 
she p e rform ed tapas and achieved a boon from 
B ra h m a , as a result o f w h ic h he achieved the lord 
as her husband and then proceeded to Goloka as 
a result o f her em brace b y lord K rsn a , she w ent 
to Goloka as a cowherdesses.
tnftt 
ch-^H( ‘RTfspjff ^ГОТЩ^11Ч'Э1
N arakasura w as kille d because o f his earlier 
m isdeeds and H a ri m arried the dam sels. T h e sun 
and the m o o n stand w itness to the same.
^Web^l RUlrlSpft: 
fSRTT Wtl
%udT^Hicn -pmt WJTts 
хп i 6 11 
«fst ш ш тчт щ рт 
^
 фщт ш г ъ <г Фт v f f i ’i m n v i
Ш |ib4IOd e | f Il^oо ||
M ah a lak sm I the daughter o f B h lsm a became 
the chaste w ife o f K rs n a w h o arrived on earth at 
the com m an d o f B ra h m a fro m V a ik u n th a . She 
w as b o m as Satyabham a the w ife o f Satrajita; the 
k in g gave a w a y the daughter in m arriage to K rs 
na together w ith and auspicious gem . L o r d H a ri 
incarnated on earth in order to rid her fro m the 
burden. T h a t is w h y engaging the K au ra va s and 
the Pandavas in the battle-field, he relieved the 
earth o f her burden.
Гуг^чй 
зшг fz m тп? m
Sjfrnft ш тчф xt 
*11
ehUKyiimotfrml JfTW vFRsfiT
^
 
11 ^ о 9 11
ШЧ ЧШ 
crenrt f^TcT: I
ч1УН1с1сН)<г1^1П^о^||
Sisupala and D a n ta va kra happened to be the 
tw o guards o f the lord in V a ik u n th a , k n o w n b y
the nam e o f Ja ya and V ija y a . B o th o f them had 
fallen fro m V a ik u n th a because o f the curse fro m 
Sanaka and w ere b o m on earth thrice; in one 
birth they w ere 
b o m 
as 
H ira n ya ka sip u 
and 
H ira n ya ksa , he had conquered V a m n a . L o r d V is 
nu taking to the fo rm o f N rs im h a kille d h im 
p la yfu lly.
Mt-RPl tJTT TratJT: 
II
#ГГТГТТ fttf 
^ 
^
 tBTT:l
?йфнлч 
<тати*очп
Щ Щ Ч 
^П?сГ Z\\
ШЯТтГРТ t*sqT& 
1* о ^ п
ч щ : 
хт ^94?Enfxf ш к щ \
T h e other one H ira n ya ksa w as kille d b y the 
lord incarnating h im se lf as V a ra h a ; n o w y o u 
listen to the story o f his second births, In the 
second birth they w ere b o m as R a va n a and 
K u m b h a k a m a 
w h o 
w ere 
kille d 
b y 
R a m a ; 
thereafter both o f them w ere b o m as the sons o f 
D h a rm a and w ere kille d b y K rsn a . Jarasandha, 
S alva and the w icked Kariisa had also to reap the 
results o f their m isdeeds and had to be kille d at 
the hands o f K rsn a . Y a v a n a w h o w as am ong the 
sons o f M an dh ata w as also kille d because o f his 
earlier m isdeeds. H o w is K rs n a lord o f La k s m i 
concerned w ith the riches.
учи№ т а г w iw t 
и
хпШ 
W^IYEI rPTOT 
iR : 11 ^ о ч 11
Because o f the Рщуака-wata perform ed b y 
Satya the lord had to bring the Parijata tree fo r 
her. Jam bavatl the daughter o f B h a llu k a w as 
herself b o m as ams'a 
o f D u rg a . 
L o r d H a ri 
accepted her as his spouse because o f the tapas 
perform ed b y her.
$ШТ: 3=ГГ:
^
 
I**011

=== PAGE 795 ===

KR§NA-JANMA-KHANI?A, CHAPTER 116
697
T h e ksetraja sons w ere b o m to K u n ti at the 
com m and o f her lord. Th is practise is prohibited 
in the Kaliyuga but w as w e ll-k n o w n in all the 
other three yugas.
■gfiifgrl 
Фт?ЕГ WH 
: |
«rf%: Ч)1Н]Н1
^
 ТЩЧТ yri?: 
TTTI
^dfiqfd cRHl ЧЩ facT ^I
#ЧЭТ: 
’цфс:
Y u d h isth ira had been the son o f D h a rm a , 
B h im a w as the son o f the w in d go d, A rju n a w as 
the son o f In dra w h o achieved vic to ry on the 
earth and in earlier times S iva bestow ed h im the 
Pasupata w eapon. In Kaliyuga the practice o f 
fiv e 
things 
are 
prohibited 
w h ich 
include, 
Asvamedha 
sacrifice, 
G o m e d h a 
sacrifice, 
samnyasa, 
conception 
through 
artificial 
insem ination 
and 
conception 
fro m 
D e va ra . 
D ra u p a d I 
w as 
bestow ed 
w ith 
five 
spouses 
because o f the boon o f S iva .
чьЧЧ^ ^
 faqfd
т а w n p тчттгё
B alaram a alw ays consum ed the auspicious 
nectar o f the flow ers w h ich is alw ays religious 
and pious. H e had sum m oned Y a m u n a fo r taking 
bath.
^ 
tfTTOT: 4*l<rij4W ЩШЙ1
О Т MlgvIHi xl^nUToh:
K rs n a had given a w ay his sister Subhadra to 
A rju n a , 
the 
m arriage 
w ith 
the 
daughter 
o f 
m aternal uncle is n ot prohibited in the south. B u t 
in other countries it is considered to be sinful
ffo 
TTfTo #§5ШТЗЯЩо 
ЧТТ^ТТ'
Wnf4M^t-> 4'oc|<*Vllfa «Vldtn^SSqTiT: 11^411

=== PAGE 796 ===

KR§NA-JANMA-KHANI?A, CHAPTER 116
697
Chapter - 116
The episode of Draupadi having five 
Spouses
ЩЩ Зс[Щ
3Tfre§: wsfrsfrr Щ 
7 7 ^ ^ ?TI
Щ Ч Т ^ d d rl 
^ 5 W ^ d W I I ? l l
B a n a said- О A n iru d d h a , y o u are quite an 
intelligent person. Y o u have spoken the truth. 
S iva 
also 
told 
m e 
like 
that. 
I 
have 
w ell 
understood in m y m in d everything.
cciylcki vichtcuidi-sciHi wf*RT firan 
щ щ т щ т й о ц г е т д ^ т ч и
Y o u have told m e that the virtuous D ra u p a d i 
could have five spouses because o f the b o o n o f 
S iva , y o u narrate the same episode to m e in 
detail.
ftp Й 
PPP PST ifd : I
Ш frP ^с|ЙЧ f m SBSrq^ll^ II
W h y did Sam bara abduct R a ti y o u r m other 
and w h y did the gods hand her o ve r to h im . H o w 
could the gods o ve r-p o w e r h im .
3h[-1 
M | t |
й ш г г^ фтгт
ш : w fa ш
1 т й ч зу с й с й т !
<±<=(|-c| ЙРГ 
^nH ^*e)ig R4h H,I
ащ:Т TRT7P? щ д ^уГИнЧНЧИ
*i)di^ ЗПЙ ^fTI
dtA ^
 ёЩ^ПВГ 
W
 1Щ: I IS 11
^
 ч р Й 'Pied 'JtHH.I 
p\Hlddqi«} t! yidi«iHUId)l<U||^| |\э 11 
% Г 4 PTfp dt 
pubrt 
-Ц rrq 
PP Tt 
flcim id rsp .llill 
Ugfwsl’d'i TFT fPI <*4HiHHd4J 
с^Р гш ти ттой fssnspt fppfdfir:i
сГЭГ:11^ H

=== PAGE 797 ===

698
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAIVfAM
A n iru d d h a said- O n c e R a m a and Sita having 
bath in Pancavatl w ere seated on the bank o f the 
rive r. A t that p o int o f tim e Sita said, "In the 
autum n season the w ater becom es spotless and 
tasteful; the fo o d and other dishes becom e cool." 
R a m a collected som e fruits and handed them 
o ve r to Sita. T h e n handing o ve r some fruits to 
La k s m a n a , he ate him self; Laksm an a received 
the fruits, the w ater but did not consum e the 
sam e, 
because 
in order to 
redeem S ita, 
he 
intended to k ill M egh an ada. O n ly such a person 
could k ill M egh an ada w h o could never have 
slept 
fo r 
fourteen 
years 
nor 
had he 
eaten 
anyth in g. In order to have an audience w ith the 
lotus eyed lo rd , the m erciful A g n i taking to the 
fo rm o f a B rah m an a arrived there and started 
speaking harsh w ords.
dfebdlxj
Щ TFT ТЦГЩРТ 'ШГФ[ГСЧ <pi
rte TTcJUTl ^ТЩ ПТ: 11 ? 011 
§ R c |l4 : ТПтБ^Т 'dM 'kl xT 
felT5fT fa R a d 
М1ты 
4 l 4 r l l l ^ l l
A g n i said- О virtuous R a m a , yo u hide Sita 
som ew here, because R a va n a influenced w ith the 
e vil deeds o f his earlier births, w o u ld arrive here 
and abduct S ita. T h is cannot be prevented. Th is 
has been ordained b y destiny. W h o can escape 
fro m the same? It has been ordained, in the 
V e d a s that destiny is m ost p o w e rfu l.
ТШТ TjftelT Щ w
 ^TOTsteT 
fllSjJI
grtf -#чт xt ^уГчшчп^н
R a m a said- Y o u carry Sita w ith y o u and her 
shadow he should rem ain here because it is 
d ifficu lt to p erform any deed w ith ou t a w o m a n .
■hIcii ygiceil м«ч41 +>tf4i xi gulVn:! 
т^гат tt^ t! m n '
T h e god o f fire then to o k a w ay Sita w h o w as 
feeling 
g lo o m y 
and 
crying. 
Since 
then 
the 
shadow o f Sita rem ained w ith R a m a .
TIT хГ ЩЩ fcIT
TT^ITT Ш TRTt 
it ТШтасЦф^Ч II
T h e same shadow Sita w as carried b y R a va n a 
p la yfu lly in earlier tim es. Thereafter R a m a after 
killin g R a va n a w ith all his relatives, redeem ed 
Sita.
4<l^|etJl<rl хГ Ш
 
ТТЛ
эдРтззы! tr -шут 
m w '^Rchl^ii^
A t the tim e o f fire ordeal, the shadow Sita 
entered the fire. T h e god o f fire protected the 
shadow Sita and handed her o ver to h im S ita in 
tw o form s.
тпттат xt TjFtc^r хг w fl тгтгепт -g^n
T5FTT TRsfi' qf$4i?ef
R a m a delig htfu lly w e n t back to his as'rama. 
T h e shadow Sita on the other hand started livin g 
w ith A g n i w ith a v e ry h e avy heart.
tit xi щгат ттчугг^ чкниш<1^ |
'd'4 Vtrau 
Xf T^FR: ll^ ll
T h e shadow Sita then perform ed severe tapas 
at a p ool nam ed N S raya n a . F o r a hundred divine 
years she adored S iva .
Щ ^UJtq 
ixjycJTxl 
Щ |
d<4|x) TIT 
^UIT 
^d^RITH^ II
T# ^f| ТТ5Е1Щ 
Q<4lxT4^l
тт4тгтгя^тдутят^ 
ж ^
ir о и
Thereafter, S iva appeared before her and said, 
О virtuous la d y, ask fo r a b o m , suffering fro m 
the pain fro m the separation o f her husband and 
getting upset, she spoke to S iv a , " G iv e m e m y 
husband back." These w ords w ere repeated b y 
her five tim es. L o r d S iva getting pleased w ith her 
tapas granted her the boon.
ЧЩ^ГЗЭПхГ
TTTfizrrxT ТЩЩ T|ft ф 
оЕПсрш
Чо4^Т?'х( 
ЧЙЬЦрЦ fyillRTclllT ?ll
M ah a d e va said- О chaste lad y, getting upset 
y o u had desired fo r the husband uttering five 
times therefore five Indras w o u ld becom e y o u r 
spouses from the arhs'a o f V is n u .

=== PAGE 798 ===

KR$NA-JANMA-KHAI4PA, CHAPTER 116
699
% Ъ ^
 Ъ хтй^ЕпрГ Ч^ЕГ сгтсг^оп: I
Ш*Г ^ Г Г # г ^ г Г гщ§03*пргг|Ц^||
Ь ж \»НеЬ|сЧ*>Ш
i m ЦрЩ[ ^ШТ ?Я фШТТ fagrquftlR^II
Those five Indras have currently appeared on 
earth in the form of five Pandavas and DraupadI 
is the shadow Sita who appeared from the 
sacrificial alter. The same shadow was known as 
Vedavatl in Satyayuga. In Tretayuga she was 
known as JanakI and in Dvapara she is bom as 
DraupadI. Because of this, DraupadI is known of 
having been bom thrice.
^WTctT f t T O Щ НЧ fWTT Tcfctf&fTI
DraupadI is an extremely chaste and Vaisnava 
woman, a devotee of Krsna and because of the 
same she is also called Krsna. In future she 
would be bom as Svargalaksml of Indra.
ттат ^
 щ^тчвт з л в д ж гаТ 1
Midi WITT c|fh| ЗГП7Г ЧЖЗ§ЧТ1 Г? Ц11
The king in the Svayamvara of DraupadI gave 
her to Arjuna. The valorous Arjuna spoke to the 
mother I have brought a unique thing with me.
thereafter Siva again who said to her, "O Rati, 
because of my curse you would be over-powered 
by a demon." Sambara after conquering the gods 
would abduct you.
eft ЖТоНсЫ T Ч
ЭШТ З Ж fwg 7% q|c(^4)c|fd % t# : I I 3 o ||
Thus speaking, he again pronounced a boon 
on her, "Your chacu,y would not be lost. You 
entrusting your shadow w the demon, would live 
in your own abode, till sue.:. :me your husband is 
brought back to life".
% cfifsni 
hTRfififl
Зтч! тртдШ
m ^ 4 ^ 4^1^): I
'jrqpjgVTril dnciMiui4)HnJdlv<4<:ll?^11
Thus I have narrated to you the ancient story, 
now О demon, listen to the secret story of the 
gods. At the same time the valorous Subhadra 
arrived there, who happened to be the brother of 
Kumbhanda and was more valorous warrior of 
Bana.
Ш Tfid' W Rfor4sref:i
jhrraifHchiM^ii
сщэтег т т ч тт щ т щ $ г: w i 
w M b n 
w w
 тлтапещ^ш r * 11 
#чшт: ж Т чтш |§чт тзд- что^щ:! 
уд<^пчг(ч^пл1 
ч т w ^ birvjii
But the mother spoke out, "You enjoy the 
same with your brothers." Therefore because of 
the earlier boon of Siva and because of command 
of the mother later on, DraupadI had five 
spouses. These five Pandavas happen to be five 
Indras out of the fourteen Indras.
-щ гтш
^ 
xTI I ? 6 11
I 
tfr ж т щ
 ^ггпгшт «raifTTi
ffrfet 
w r e q f ?ffrqfjriiy ^11
Siva had pronounced a curse on my mother 
what her husband would be burnt to ashes 
because of his anger. At this she denounced Siva
The great warrior denounced Bana and getting 
equipped with all the weapons, he threw a trident 
at Animddha, the grandson of Krsna.
-3#et%ot 
ээтчдта:!
f ^ t r SfjSSFcT
Tft 
щ ч ч ж :1 
чттштгтж f^fii 
тпта#П13чп
But the son of the god of love neutralised it 
with the use of the crescent arrow. Bhadra then 
shot a s'akti which was illumining like hundreds 
of suns. Aniruddha on his part destroyed the 
same with the use of Vaisnavastra. Subhadra 
then used Narayandstra in the battle-field.
ЗЩЩГ 
fn^dl 
dHtl
зяФна ^ WT4 ’
But Aniruddha the son of the god of love 
bowed before Narayandstra and fearlessly slept

=== PAGE 799 ===

700
BRAHM А V AIV ART A-M AH APURAN AM
there. T h e w e apon issuing the lustre o f the 
hundred suns started m o vin g rou nd and round 
above A n iru d d h a .
3T^ 
^ rq l rT 
11
т ?щ щ щ ^yR ivyw -уяй^1
A fte r som etim e the w eapon w h ic h could be 
cause 
o f 
the 
destruction 
o f 
the 
universe 
disappeared. 
A fte r 
the 
disappearing 
o f the 
w e a p on , A n iru d d h a held a sw ord in his hand and 
broke the chariot o f B h a d ra , k illin g , horses as 
w e ll as the charioteer. M o v in g forw ard then he 
kille d Subhadra p la y fu lly .
ЩтЩтТЧ^1
<m 
ЗПГШЧЩ «Ь|Й4>:И^ЧИ
Thereafter B a n a becam e m otionless in the 
battle-field. Thereafter A n iru d d h a shot a sleeping 
a rrow , as a result o f w h ich B a n a w as o ve r­
pow ered b y sleep. Fin d in g B a n a ove r-p o w e re d 
w ith sleep in the battle-field, he to ok out his 
sw ord and w as about to k ill the dem on kin g 
w hen K a rttik e ya prevented h im fro m doing so.
yiddiu^q ЭН^тШ c^FFTTI 
arfres -qgrant «ihcr
K a rttik e ya 
prevented 
A n iru d d h a 
fro m 
attacking B a n a w ith the shooting o f a hundred 
arrow s.
T fftk «nui$g 4 g l< a 'vl4 ir*4 :l.
ЩЛТЧТ 
3rrfir f ^ T ТЛ^ГИ ^ 11
ЩЧТсЧ^ЧЩиТТ ^Tifrfr 
ТГ: I
«Л1ЛП*фт Ъ&Ш цШт<ЯПиГЦ11Ъо11
щщ&щ: 
ч^и4<*н,|
щ ит тгя?нга^гат11^?11
A fte r the killin g o f Subhadra, B a n a shot a 
hundred arrow s w h ich w ere burnt out b y the son 
o f K a m a d e va w ith the shooting o f an arrow . 
Th ereafte r B a n a shot Brahmastra w h ich could 
destroy the entire universe. A n iru d d h a on the 
other hand shot another Brahmdstra reciting the 
mantras and destroyed the one shot b y B a n a .
TO: m p i 
W ^ r w teRrt:)
7^%'?ГдЧТМТ11'г5^11
B a n a getting enraged, w as about to shoot 
Pasupata, w eapon but w as presented fro m doing 
so b y G a n esa, K a rttik e y a and S iva .
<т щ 
n
F in d in g B a n a attem pting to use Brahmdstra, 
A n iru d d h a shot a num ber o f arrow s as a result o f 
w h ic h the valorous B a n a started ya w n in g in the 
battle-field.
тяж* ш
 ш тщ 
тчга#п
%TFR ftfstT it TOR 
II
щ
 ш ж щ т p r o i
сгозг щШ тзг т#^ш Ш сЩ 11'*\э||
A n iru d d h a then shot Sakti-astra w h ich was 
indestructible and broke into pieces the chariot o f 
K a rttik e ya w hich w as bu ilt w ith the best o f 
gem s.
«ПЩ гЙсЩГТ TOT ^FT 
II
K a rttik e ya on the other hand getting enraged 
broke the chariot o f A n iru d d h a into pieces.
A n iru d d h a then 
shot a 
crescent arrow 
at 
K a rttik e ya w h ic h broke his b o w and thereafter 
the Bhalldstra w as used b y A n iru d d h a .
TOTH 351Е1гШ W тщщ Щ fTTFRI 
-Щ ТОЩ 
ЧЦЧ1^ : 11Ч о ||
a # r e ^ r cGt^tr imtmm 
ич 
cRif^cR: дч*ШсЧ 
сь|-чч=тсьн.1 
щ grprta шзткнт ^тн п чз и
K a rttik e ya then attacked A n iru d d h a w ith a 
m assive club but A n iru d d h a the son o f the g o d o f 
lo ve , held the club in his hands fo rce fu lly and 
shot it back to K a rttik e ya w h o w as about to 
th ro w a trident at A n iru d d h a . In the m eantim e 
K a rttik e ya 
m o ve d 
fo rw a rd 
and 
h olding

=== PAGE 800 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 117
701
A n iru d d h a w ith his hands threw h im on the 
ground.
f t гГЗГЕШТ 4uW<:ll4?H
M o s t p o w e rfu l lord A n iru d d h a took a sw ord in 
his hand. A t this, Gan esa the great, intervened 
and pacified b o m o f them , 
gnffo;: W l 
vTTR^r:i
Tlef' 
Щ w f t Ъ TiiifrtR: 11Ц * 11 
K a rttik e y a 
then 
left 
fo r 
his 
hom e 
and 
A n iru d d h a w e n t back to the abode o f O s a . 
Ganes'a left the place fo r the abode o f S iva in 
order to narrate to h im the entire story.
91^1^0 4^|o 
ЗтТ° ЧТТ^ЛЬ сГПТЩ0
3iPibc&i ^^1о=ис>Гн TTy+dWl 'ЩШоТ: I

=== PAGE 801 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 117
701
M ah a d e va said- О Gan esa, y o u listen to m y 
w ords w h ich are tru th fu l, the gist o r p o lity and 
result in, pleasantness.
ЗПЧЩГ 
ФНОПЧ! rt gSROiqjm li
Y o u consider K rs n a to be the com bination o f 
all including Pra d yu m n a , the son o f K rsn a and 
A n iru d d h a .
ftcfrst TTrd <pni ^ 'RhcRT ТНШЦН^И
О lord o f the ganas, e verything right fro m 
B rah m a to the blade o f grass is treated to be a 
like b y K rsn a .
fg*pt W b ЖШЧТ ЧЧГ%Щ\
Chapter -117
Conversation between Siva and Ganesa 
ЧТТРЖ id
%Щ2ТТЧ ЧсЩ ЧгЭТ R ^ iH l
тгё f^nwpTO зйщ ^ ^sra^r^ii^ii
стал
m i
N a ra ya n a said- 
Ganesa after reaching the 
abode o f S iva b o w e d in reverence to h im and 
narrated to h im separately all the happenings o f 
the 
battle-field, 
w h ic h 
included 
the 
battle 
betw een 
B a n a 
and 
A n iru d d h a , 
killin g 
o f 
Subhadra, 
battle 
betw een 
K a rttik e ya 
and 
A n iru d d h a and the prow ess o f A n iru d d h a . 
<|ulVldd4 ЗрЗТ
O n hearing the w ords o f Gan esa, S iva spoke 
beautiful and secret w ords w h ich w ere according 
to the V e d a s .
uuVycu щ тр т ^ ra t 
rri 
% т чет Ш
 мГЬл1«т^<зпыёЧ.1г«11
H e is tw o-arm ed in Goloka, quite peaceful, 
beloved o f R a d h a , beautiful, the fo rm o f a ch ild, 
appearing as a cow herd and the com plete lord.
cRTO%Rr:l
4 tl w iiltfreri Rrtfvr fawwii
WfiT ттШШШ! 1 ^ 011
w 
ъ tM w
 RhiRpihi
3tifgw ?^^ fat ^ *fafa? < rew A n w i
diet'd! <i)ejj<rl T^t tjfa 
fal
H e 
is 
surrounded 
b y 
the 
cowherdesses, 
cowherdes and the cow s. H e is the one w h o 
rem ains present in the charm ing and auspicious 
V rn d a va n a and the Rasamandala, h o ld in g a flute 
in his hand. H e is the one w h o is adored b y 
B rah m a , S iva and Sesa, w h o resides under the 
shade o f a banyan tree, on the m ountain o f 
hundred peaks and also roam s about in the 
B h a nd lra forest on the ba nk o f V ira ja rive r w h ic h 
is spotless. H e has the dark com p le xio n o f n e w 
clouds and is clad in y e llo w garm ent and looks 
like lightening in the n ew clouds. H e alw ays

=== PAGE 802 ===

702
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAIVAM
appears in the Rasamandala o f Goloka, all the 
creatures 
in 
the 
charm ing Goloka 
and 
the 
auspicious v'rndavana, represent his aritsa but 
K rs n a h im se lf is the lord.
ЪШ 
т щ т о ч т е : 11^11
L o r d K rsn a w o u ld arrive soon h olding his 
Sudarsana-cakra 
w h ic h 
is 
infallible 
and 
possesses the lustre o f the crores o f suns.
^
 
тщто 
ЧГОРТ»
T h e com plete B rah m an has forgotten h im se lf 
because o f the curse o f Brahm a H is son nam ed 
A n iru d d h a , 
possesses 
all 
the 
prow ess 
and 
strength.
W JNWlfrd:
«nui?rf WIT b t 
T% T:I|^||
I have deputed K a rttik e ya fo r the terrific 
battle. B a n a had alm ost been kille d in the battle­
field w h o has been saved b y Skanda.
-тщ 5 hiit?cRI
зМ 
йп^чп
з М W 
^T;
<<знт«ии: 
щпцег тртпгшп
^ 
w ihrA % w ir: 11 ^ 11
О G a n esa, though both Skanda and A n iru d d h a 
are 
equals 
in 
the battle-field but 
the 
eight 
Bh airavas all the eleven R u d ra s, eight Vasus and 
Indras the gods, tw elve A d ity a s , all the dem ons 
beside Skanda the forem ost o f the god as w e ll as 
all m y ganas including B a n a w o u ld be unable to 
defeat A n iru d d h a in the battle-field.
9ПЕГТ T O : 3IPT tjg гП 
сСТЩ: 
'ф-Ш1?г1 зг^сГ: TR:l)?<ill
A n iru d d h a 
h im se lf 
is 
beyond 
B rah m a , 
Pra d yu m n a , 
K a m a d e va , 
B a lad eva , 
Sesa 
and 
K rsn a .
тгнгГ gtfer ^
 щщ таг
О lord o f the ganas, I have spoken all this to 
y o u , y o u protect B a n a ; y o u are the fo rm o f 
w elfare and rem ove all the obstructions.

=== PAGE 803 ===

702
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAIVAM
3Wl*dKVHfa«VI«d4lssn*T:
Chapter -118
Durga dissuades Bana from the War
hUHuI з^ТёГ
ш 
т й jnf §*ft?Rrf?Rhi ?u
4^cMc4) W ЗШЩГ Щ cRteftl
Ш: * 5<WTC TJ%m я ^ Ф ф т гв ч и з и
N a ra ya n a said- A fte r thus speaking to G a n esa, 
S iva retired to his inner apartm ent, he fo u nd 
there D u rg a the destroyer o f the m isfortune, 
B h a ira vl, 
B h a dra ka li, 
U gracan da 
and 
K o ta rl 
seated on the beautiful lion thrones, all o f them 
got up at once and b o w e d in reverence to the 
lord.
яэтгсявй 
сыЕ&ггеч
татт^т 
%imi
PcifBTvRR Ш 
hhlSAlIl
зд* 
^г.пчи
Thereafter, Ganesa w h e n valorous K a rttik e y a , 
N a n d i, Sunanda, the m inister M a h a k a la , eight 
B h a ira va s, the siddhas, the yogis and eleven 
Rudras 
also 
arrived there. 
In the 
m eantim e 
M an ibh ad ra w h o guarded the m ain gate arrived 
there and spoke to S iva .
Фтт^ЗсГЩ
3TWnfT ^ &3lPl riT^Ftf 
Я|рТ: 4R«fV^
т а w nm rari Ф т?^
$>1АЧ^Ч:1Рэи

=== PAGE 804 ===

KR$1SA-JANMA-KHANI?A, CHAPTER 118
703
fcra^w r ^ rai-а^фнл: tR#an:ii£ii
■RHf*T: 4 1 $ ^ : #fel:
:IRH
ЯйЧпН
ущ <$#<?<# ^ч ач ^ й й ш я rni^oii
R'guwrwi c#?R ТШШ rT f^ H ^ T :lin il 
H^tfzRpt^^nUT hcrtHl «Г (j|chl(iRT:l 
VlH«bl(€(w?c(i4i «rfifaii dbqgjJuhiR^ti
ЩрВТ dnHHiJU^JU^^bqdiqj
TTTsf я «зДшпш# tftfora g r^ tt^ n
M a n ib h ad ra said- T h e a n n y o f Y a d a va s is 
innum erable 
and 
com prises 
o f 
B a lad eva , 
P ra d yu m n a , S am ba S a tya k i, U gracan da , B h im a , 
A rju n a , A k rn ra , U d d h a v a , Jayan ta, the son o f 
Indra and are seated on the chariot built w ith the 
best o f gem s. S ri K rs n a the creator o f the creator 
is also there, seven cow herds are m o vin g the 
w h ite fly -w h is k s . H e possesses the lustre o f cores 
o f gods o f love and is adorned w ith long garland 
o f forest flow ers. H e is shining like crores o f 
suns and is h olding an astonishing cakra. T h e 
kaumodaM-gada is placed in the chariot; beside 
the indestructible trident and Pancajanya conch 
are also seem there. There are three crores o f the 
w ild elephants, three crores o f terrific w arriors, 
hundred crores o f horses besides fo u r times m ore 
the fo o t soldiers adorned w ith kavacas seven 
tim es m ore that num ber or the w ielders o f the 
sw ords and the n um ber o f archers as double its 
num ber.
xrfrfTt 
rift
ярмгачгчт я
33^ Ш тЙШЩгБТ 
^ : i
w f a f r * p # 1T irg|fW rW TII^4ll 
it# # ires: •manfactfuT я т а г у :\ 
puitertRfqqbi щеьнЫГя^
A l l o f them h ave surrounded Sonitpura in the 
same w a y as the arm y o f R a m a had surrounded 
La n k a w h ich w as 
thousand talas in height, 
illu m in in g w ith the fire flam es and had a num ber
o f m oats and w as inaccessible fro m the dem ons 
and the gods. G a ru d a w ith the w aters o f the 
Svargaganga had destroyed the bou ndary w a ll o f 
the c ity, w h ich w as bu ilt w ith the best o f gems 
and w as quite h ig h.
Щ
 
VcrlRi 
ЗОИН! fBFTCST R г|«ыя№ггЧ 
B a lad eva h ave destroyed lakhs o f the soldiers 
w ith his plo ug h and three lakhs o f gardens have 
been uprooted.
тзя
ш#т! яязпс# я 
uawR m i 
зр# ri 
т з ъ
K illin g the gate-keepers they have entered the 
m ain-gate. O n hearing this, lord S iva in the 
assem bly 
o f 
the 
gods 
spoke 
to 
Pa rva tl, 
B h a d ra ka li, Skan da, G a n ap a ti, eight B h a ira va s, 
R u d ra s, V irab h a d ra , M a h a ka la , N a n d i and all the 
arm y com m anders.
3ciitl
у ч т и
M ah adeva said- S ri K rs n a , the lord o f Goloka, 
has arrived w h o can destroy the entire universe 
in a m om en t then w h a t to speak all this land.
Ш ТЩ ът -л
ЯР# Ш55§ Ш
 
tR4.tR ?11
A l l o f y o u should protect B a n a w ith all the 
m eans. B a n a should m o ve out to the battle-field 
reciting the nam e o f G anesa.
ЯРТПЯ
ШЯЯ^ТШТШ: T^tiP#TifR8T:iR^ii
ЧЦЯПёТГ # Я # # Ш # #(ЧсКПсЖ1
iraRTgr я ^tertiR ^n
Skanda should be on the left o f B a n a , w hile 
Ganesa 
should 
m o ve 
fo rw a rd 
and B h a ira va 
should be on right his together w ith In d ra , N a n d i, 
M a h a ka la and V ira b h a d ra . A l l other w arriors 
should protect h im , the goddess D u rg a should

=== PAGE 805 ===

704
BRAHM AV AIVART A-M AH APURAI^ AM
move in the upper region together with Kotarl, 
Kali and Ugracanda.
Ш Щ tTWWFT 
3#wrfyii4l
vm t 
^тттвш ^p i r x i i
Durga, the destroyer of misfortune should 
protect Bana. О virtuous one, you happen to be 
the strength of lord Krsna, that is why you are 
known as Narayanl.
WFniT:
37<ггаЫ*"7Т|'ГГШ -ЩГ ЩЩ 
R 4II
You are illusion of Visnu, the mother of the 
universe, bestower of all the welfare's and 
therefore you protect Bana with the use of 
S u darsan a-cakra.
fSBTT it
<4|Ь|Ц|е?Г cFT 91% In^tojiivndl
I love Bana the most, much more than Ganesa 
and Karttikeya, you place your hand on the head 
of Bana together with the dust from your feet.
f?IcrR SRR ^=3T frf
s i e r r a ngt trrarssf 
i
On hearing the words of Siva, Durga, the 
destroyer of misfortune spoke sweet, meaningful 
and truthful words which were appropriate to the 
time.
hfuRHif^cb 'irri'ujTt;m i Гсгтфу?!
сЬ'ЧГеЬТдч ’Г TpmyUT'uftfdlHIGill
ШЩ фЩЩ nTWRl
тт эдаг ftRM % ^ачтгччт ^
iitsii
Parvati said- О Bana, you hand over your 
daughter Usa to lord Krsna together with 
Aniruddha and giving in dowry the gems, 
diamonds, jewels, rubies, sapphire, emeralds and 
all the ornaments studded with precious gems. 
Thereafter you rule the country fearlessly, what 
type of war can you wage against the one ho 
happens to be the soul of all.
'ofw hd W . ЗГПЛТ:
?l(rh¥*JlQ TRt ЦЯТ TcRT 
о It
With the departure of whom the body becomes 
lifeless together with all the organs of senses. I 
happen to be the strength, Brahma is the mind 
while Siva is the store of all the knowledge.
ТПГ: Ticrfw 
%£T гФШ 
Ч31Г1
efTUlfe^J 
Ш УШгФТТ Щ1 
ЧЯЧШ 
’ЧтЬТрТ?^: 11 ^ ? 11
ftrd: TRSft % 
uRuujd'M: JTf:l
тртг?т: Л
д а 43RftT гШТ ХГТ:||^^И
With the departure of the soul from the body, 
it falls and becomes like a dead body. О Bana, 
who can stand the lustre of S u darsan a-cakra in 
the battle-field. Sri Krsna happens to be the 
supreme soul, the one who takes to human form 
in order to oblige his devotees who is eternal, 
truthful and complete Brahman. The soul cannot 
be wounded with the shooting of an arrow like 
the sky, then what type of fight could be there 
with the soul? You are dearer to me much more 
than Ganesa and Karttikeya.
fchdRy finht ЗМГ 4 % ^WTdJT: fSRT: I
TTfiratT ■^W ^ll^'kll
f^TS? fyran&sfir щ т ъ m w f i 
щ Rrfc^i %ут?ч 
ти! тршэчн
TIT rflt $FT9PWI
tttM I 
-tfsm
"efapmiff щтщсчт ъ *гпй
Tirert ^ш^птгтрт5|чт1
^ 
yUA) <^ч^|Ф1 c^ll^ ЙII
tPT^rf W fi4?l 
(Vlri W TRTrTRI
95W4№r 
■witRrinti i ^ 4 11
I like Bana much more than all of my 
attendants but no one else is dearer to me than 
Krsna. I happen to be MahalaksmI in Vaikuntha, 
Radha in G oloka, Siva in Sivaloka and Sarasvatl 
in B rahm aloka, In incarnated as Sat! in earlier 
times, the daughter of Daksa for the killing of the

=== PAGE 806 ===

KFISNA-JANMA-KHANI?A, CHAPTER 119
705
dem ons. Thereafter I ended m y life because o f 
y o u r denouncem ent and w as b o m as the daughter 
o f 
the 
m ountain. 
In 
the 
battle-field 
w ith 
R a kta b lja , I came to k n o w n as K a li. I happen to 
be S a vitrl, the m other o f the V e d a s , Slta the 
daughter o f Janaka and R u k m in i in D va ra k a . 
Presently I have been b o m on earth as the 
daughter o f V rsabh ana and the spouse o f K rsn a 
in 
V rn d a va n a . 
Y o u 
happen 
to 
be 
the 
all 
know ledgeable and eternal S iva , w h a t should I 
speak to y o u about the appropriate action to be 
taken at the m om ent.
?f?r «ftw to UfTo
ЧН^ЧТ0
:1IWH

=== PAGE 807 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANpA, CHAPTER 119
705
Chapter -1 1 9
Bali praises K|-$na
RTTBPR ■scllx)
Ы нШ т fRT qulyi?*! f?TR: trrrj
«hlvi) R Rt 3RTRT tliR RUTH
3RIR RRRTS^hj^TRT RETT RTTR1
RtfrfH: RTRRT RTRt ^U^fdMlyRtl ЦП T И
N a ra ya n a said- 
O n hearing 
the w ords o f 
P a rva tl, 
S iv a , 
K a rttik e y a 
and 
K a li 
started 
praising her .. L o r d S iva addressed to the m other 
o f the universe, w h o is b e yon d e ve ryth in g, the 
fo rm 
o f eternal 
flam e 
and 
happens 
to 
be 
Mulaprakrti besides being Isva ri.
RTRT R£RR Щ?Т 
^cfcfiRtf4TRJ{l
ЗЩхТдтщТРТ R RRT RTRERTTII^ll
RMT RREJ RvRT Rf TRnf^RWjfRRTRI
rtrrttr щ т R ^JRR R^M '^im i
M a h a d e va said- О great goddess, w hatever 
has been spoken b y y o u is strictly according to 
the V e d a s and is desirable. It is quite im proper 
and laughable to fig h t w ith the eternal soul. B a n a 
should adorn is daughter w ith all the ornam ents 
and h and her o ve r to the lo rd . T h is is the m ost 
appropriate action besides being glorious and 
p le a s a n t.
R q$l(d RRT «HUH fgiuqehftud: 3TRTI 
^
 ТТЩдТЖГ RtRt RRRRR?TT<TTT:II4II 
RMt RR3§ RTTRt TnWTrafR^TTT^tl 
R?RTEEITSSRRR fiR? RR RTRTfRRR: 
II
О goddess, i f B a n a does not do so being the 
descendants o f H ira nya ka sip u and feels 
that 
getting p a n icky, to run a w a y fro m the battle­
field, w o u ld be disgraceful and in that case B a n a 
is w ell-versed in the w a rfa re , should proceed to 
the battle filed w earing the kavaca. О S iv a , w e 
shall also fo llo w h im , w earing the kavacas.
3RTR RWi RT Rpj R R R TR^RRITT HI 
fn f R RtW RIR R fRtR R RgRrilRII
rt r rrtRr rrrrtr;i
3IWRIR R^IRifi 
3wiRU|UTt;||(£||
B a n a w as advised to g ive a w a y his daughter 
but he refused to do so. D u rg a tried to convince 
h im bu t he did n o t agree to her w o rd s. In the 
m eantim e B a li, the forem ost o f the V aisna vas 
and w as the im m ensely religious person, arrived 
there in the assem bly.
TR T # # rM RRTW RHTRcR:l 
Jtflft: -HHfacH: TtfRR: Йс1€ПчЪи<?11
Rtffl^ TlgR: RTRTRlfRRI 
SIRT^I TRIfof RTJt?T R f?IRT f^IRRI I \ о 11 
JTOriR 
R R 3RTR R RRfRI
ЗтТТдТГШТ ^Т^ТТ^ RTRTt fRRTII^II 
R^RTR RRE{R: RRfR firaRIRET^IITTH 
T h e great w arrior had arrived m ounted on the 
chariot inlaid w ith the best o f gem s. A t that p oint 
o f tim e the seven D a itya s w ere m o v in g the w h ite 
fly-w h isks serving h im and he w as surrounded 
b y seven lakhs o f dem ons. H e w as a great archer 
and descending fro m the chariot, he b o w e d in 
reverence 
to 
Gan esa, 
Pa rva tl, 
S iva 
and 
K a rttik e ya 
and 
than 
to ok 
his 
seat 
in 
the 
assem bly. Fin d in g h im arriving there, fro m a 
distance, all the people except, S iva got up to 
w elcom e h im . Thereafter S iva enquired o f h im 
about his w elfare.

=== PAGE 808 ===

706
b r a h m a v a i v a r t a -m a h a p u r a n a m
гг Я Т^ШТ
зщ % urqt Hmt 
w i 4 : i i ^ n
Mahadeva said- О great king, you are quite 
clever and always give away riches in charity, it 
is a matter of great pride for the Vaisnavas to 
assemble at a place.
'гМ~цРч Я щтРг
ft^4l4W4luii Я 
-ЩЩЩ: $ Я :11^ | | 
cRTtsiirar: 4^idisfq ?n^iu?l 
4 % ^ 
^bura^l^UKrq^ll^ll
7T Rd: ЧсИ1^с( -R ^cT^T gdWI^I 
rfr^wTsfrr я
fg^f?rя ш : ■gr:ii^4i 
4 % UThTpf ^
 -щф y^l/llf^clciU W I 
With the very touch of the Vaisnavas, all the 
holy places get sanctified. The Brahmanas are 
considered to be most adorable of all the castes. 
In case the Brahmanas is a Vaisnava, he becomes 
more adorable. No god is more auspicious than 
the Vaisnava Brahmana. He is pure than the 
wind, the fire and all the holy places. Even the 
gods are afraid of him, the sins cannot remain in 
his body in the same way as the hay cannot 
remain in the fire.
«ifc-nwraf
wild ЗПТ5П2Г ^гчч4аочн1?ск:|
ЗЩтГ TTC^cRf ЩЩ RM 
I ya 11
Bali said- О lord of the universe, why are you 
praising a slave who is not suitable for the place. 
О lord you have bestowed upon me, The 
inaccessible fortune.
dddT 4l*R«cftoi 
ТР$гГ:1
^ТТГТ Rtsm 
MIOlIrMvrt TR^II^II
зттячт ъц 
я ^Nrfir Ppifidqi
■f^ckdl 4 
ЧЯТ f^THTT w m r 
R ОI
billdMHW
^pfcur ^rt tpr ъ щъп 
1 гч 11
О lord of the gods, though you pervade 
everywhere, still taking to the dwarfish form 
because of the destiny you have established me 
in the nether-world, taking away all my riches 
from me. You bestowed them upon Indra. you 
kindly make Bana my dearest son to understand 
the situation. It is not proper to fight with the 
soul even by the gods. Thus speaking, he bowed 
his head saluting Siva. Thereafter, he praised 
lord Siva with the stotra prescribed in the 
Samaveda. At that point of time he was 
overwhelmed with devotion and tears started 
flowing from his eyes. Getting extremely 
emotional, he started reciting the mantra given to 
him by Sukra.
зтРзят: яте$ Ш щ & т 9frTT ъ\ 
т р т ёпч ч й щ tcPTTSi clfeRT: im tlR 3 ll 
iT4^4T Ч51С1^ч1<л^1 ЯтНПТ ^(rhd:l 
w * r 
Ятш г
Bali said- О lord, in the earlier times because 
of the vrala and the prayer of Aditi you took to 
the dwarfish from and cheated me. Snatching 
away all my riches, you gave them to your 
devotee. The same devotee is non else than the 
meritorious Indra.
ЗЩЧТ ЧЧ 
qiui: ^lfh<fchch<:|
ЗТШтаГТ^Т: I T t s f r r ^ R T h d ^ l I R m i 
Presently my son Bana happens to be the slave 
of Siva. He has been protected by Siva who is 
always graceful to his devotees.
*j^d'6|iw Нссьят ткч дггй tr ^ ir s 11 
w i g эдШ нА gifor: I 
3P nrts% 
^
 ^пт; 11 ^ \э 11
Parvatl brought him up like a mother, brings 
up his son. Your grandson has forcibly taken 
away his daughter who was about to kill him but 
was prevented by Karttikeya. Though you are 
competent enough to control your grandson still 
you have arrived here to kill Bana.

=== PAGE 809 ===

K^A-JANM A-KHANDA, CHAPTER 119
707
RclfaFR’R R&T R4R1R: «left ST?I:I
-О 
-чЭ
^THclt ЧТ2Г eRSm ogfoPI:IR<ill
ЯЩТ R^TRTR ffe : HfrfatVdftl 
RRRR: TlfafWRl Rfa; R% ^ f |i |||^ ||
T h e great soul treats all equally. T h is has been 
ordained in the V e d a s . О lord o f the universe, 
w h y are y o u m o vin g in the opposite direction.
Intelligent is the best o f all the s'aktis. T h e life 
elements in all the creatures o f the w o rld is o n ly 
the reflection o f y o u r soul.
Ш Т r ftsurt Rt 
rrt 
r !ri
т у т п
In case, yo u intend to kill som eone, w h o can 
save h im on earth. T h e lustre o f Sudarsana-cakra 
is like the crores o f suns.
In t ^ттщпт^щ 
r fteiFra^! 
rrt 
Зтштот! m t ъ щ \i з ° 11
ОТТ RRT?R ^ЕПГСТ 
RT:l
rrt яегшш ftwiT fenriT '^I'qfviu^ ^ii
W h ic h o f the w eapons o f the gods could stand 
before the same? Sudarsana-cakra is the best o f 
all the gods. A s are y o u so is K rs n a w h o happens 
to be the creator o f the creators.
fgmT: ■дтФттж: %R: •Hwiiyuidyii
•о 
>э
7RR feiraT R3TR: ■gfg^idi ГчШЧ?:1!^11
V is n u happens to be the base o f sattvika 
elem ents, S iva happens to be the base o f tamas 
w h ile B rah m a is the base o f rajas.
cbTHlRdbif RRcHf^crRRgH«HR>:l
rTRR^RTSSRR: Rtsfo RSJTJlt trait RFTI I■3 3 I
R qR VTRTWRlczRr RSI?R cldSvll: I
rrt?r 
/srpl^R toiwti i ? * 11
R ^ q T Ч<Ч1гЧТ i ЗГТЩТ f q u g ^ 1 b r a i:i
rttr r trr 5гщ w q ?tMir44): f?rar:ii^m
T h e one w h o is the base o f tamas, forem ost o f 
the eleven R u dras and the destroyer o f the 
universe, the same lord happens to be the Goloka 
o f S iv a , k n o w n as K a la g n i-R u d ra . Besides him 
all the R u dras are m erely the rays o f S iva . O u t o f 
all o f them y o u happen to be devoid o f gunas 
and beyond Prakrti. 
Y o u happen to be the 
suprem e soul and also the fo rm o f V is n u , w h o is 
the life o f all the creatures. B ra h m a h im se lf is the 
fo rm 
o f 
m eanw hile 
S iva 
is 
the 
fo rm 
o f 
kn o w le dge .
#R : TcrapfaiT чтрй -m i m $t rr'irwm 
dlPd 
R?T 47^1 R8IT5^TT:ll?t9ll
^gT: RRt R RHfRT RfSclfllWR RTRRTII^H
A person has to face the rew ard o f his deeds 
and yo u yo u rs e lf rem ain the w itness to h im . 
A fte r y o u r departure all the people fo llo w y o u as 
the follow ers fo llo w the k in g . A fte r y o u leave the 
bodies, a person becom es dead and the b o d y 
becom es untouchable but influence, w ith y o u 
illusion, 
even 
the 
people 
w ith 
intelligence 
becom e aware o f the same.
Ш sTjR^cT % RRt WRlilcli RTfoltl 
fspprr a<3hfd§J/f ^TOTcft R RdTddfN? II 
RR 
RR RTRT gRRRTI
^ T T : 
9l^fdbU|(vHlrMcbl:IIYo||
R^umfu l^yqimtsraT rt
R Rttf R Rvt 
RtR^I RSUH*^11
Such o f the people w h o adore y o u can o n ly be 
freed fro m this illusion; the three fo ld Prakrti 
includes D u rg a , V a is n a v l, SanatanI, N a ra y a n I 
and IsanI w h ich represent y o u r fo rm , w h ich is 
difficu lt to over-com es B rah m a , V is n u and S iva 
w h o are present in all the globes, represent y o u r 
amsas o n ly as Sri K rsn a resides in G o k u la , 
sim ilarly the great V ira t w h o is the base o f all 
dw ells in the w ater.
R PR d i i j t a u u 
RdnH:l 
c||R<cj 
73ШН: ЧНЙПд: 
t i l 'l l I
H e happens to be the lord V a s u and y o u 
happen to be his lord. T h e nam e V a su d e va has 
been derived fro m the sam e. T h is has been told 
b y those w h o are w ell-versed in the ancient 
scriptures.
0 4 chcldl R?}RcplR chvldl 
I
c\
Щ Щ R gflTVIVR RRRT WT: R^Rpm^M

=== PAGE 810 ===

708
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
4vl4T еЦ с^Зс| g ^ x l 4Ч4Ш1 
3wT4T <4 44£?4 4Р1ЧТ 4# 44 411** 11 
<4#4 45FT4T # 4 f^TT# #Э##7Ч4П 
4ччг 4 ч ч й ч ч?т?4 4 н < т :п '* 4 п 
g^ng^rm iW ^ ^
 ^ щ^епжтт: I 
ДЦГТОТ WlPibyjo# 4#ЧЧ: TT^ril^ll
Y o u happen to be the sun from one o f yo u r 
rays and also the m o o n . Y o u also happen to be 
the fire fro m yo u r race and also V a y u from yo u 
rays besides being V a re n a , K u b e ra , Y a m a , Indra, 
D h a rm a , Sesa, Isana, N a irriti, M a n u and the 
beneficial 
planets. 
A l l 
the 
m oveable 
and 
im m ova ble creatures are b o m out o f y o u r rays. 
Y o u are the eternal, illustrious Brah m an . T h e 
yogis alw ays m editate upon yo u .
4 c4T57f5[4% T O # S4T4# 4 сЩч#1
iMcilWyRVIW 
4тЫг7Н41 
xK H I^dR 4^'- f l f # R W T T ^Il'tfill 
pqiPitxSd# 4 4l^l4TvU4pf44J
4fbrpSvT4T#4 41374Р#Ч7#4Ч41 
7сЧШ Ш |^ ^ g4TJF4#rr%44.l IЧ о 11 
У1Ы РМ Н 1хН41
VKdJu'I^pPdlW xP^tfeT43W q;im ^ll 
4 # щ irfm nfiT ^r 
chifdchifdRm
447#: 4 1 ^ 4 : #f4 4'?#44T 4t:ll4 3ll 
4ТЧЧТН4ЧЧ 4 TT4T48T: Wcdfeld^l 
йПЧШТгЧ fTRTST 
14 3 11
4 # # ? 4 Ч Р ##: ЗПШ W R I 
# 4 T f# # 4 ^ r4 47 7#45T 44f#44ll4'*ll 
74HhJHd4 4 4 ^ 4 lc ^ 4 d h 4741 
744 Pfr4 Myiw 4 4fi#: 474^474114411 
ftfpfof 4 f#ft? 4 ЧЧ44Т 7ГШЧ41 
■Ц4 £4Tc4T 4 # 
MtcdHj 14 ^
чэтфэтШ чтт4% 4
<TSJ: Т^ЧТКЫ^ШУШ 74 777744tll4'3ll 
: rdld^TbV^ 7444: # 4%cR:|
4#W4 fs#^4 4fP5?43 TJ4 4114 611 
74lf 4RT 4#$>l?4 f%4# ^34:1 
hundtd4d)g 4 f% Trflf# f^nfnt 474114^ N 
amfudd 17444# 4 47: $RJ4ff#l 
4#74§44 4^4T ?Щ414 44c4f#: 11 
4f74#cl4: #7Р444 4 4тН4гШ:11^о||
T h e devotees respect y o u and m editate upon 
yo u in their heart. T h e one w hose b o d y has the 
com plexion o f new clouds, is clad in pitambara 
wears sm ile on his delightful face, the one w h o is 
graceful to the devotees, the one on w hose b o d y 
the sandal-paste is plastered the one w h o is 
havin g tw o arm s, he holds a flute in his hand, the 
one w hose head is adorned w ith peacock feather, 
the 
one w h o wears 
the 
garland o f jasm ine 
flow ers, invaluable armlets and w ristlets, the ear 
ornam ent m ade o f gem s decorate the tem ples, the 
one w h o wears the rings studded w ith gem s and 
w hose w aist-band issued dangling sound, w hose 
lustre jeers at crores o f the gods o f lo ve , w hose 
eyes defeat the g lo ry o f the lotus flow ers o f the 
w in te r season, the lustre o f w hose face resem bles 
the lustre o f the fu ll m o o n o f the w in te r season, 
w h o 
is 
stared 
b y 
crores 
o f 
cowherdesses 
sm ilin g ly, 
w h o 
is 
served 
b y 
the 
cow herds 
m o vin g the w h ite -fly w hisks w h o appears in the 
fo rm o f a b o y , the one w h o alw ays rem ains in the 
heart o f R a d h a and is d ifficu lt to be achieved b y 
deep m editation and is inaccessible, the one w h o 
is adored b y B ra h m a , S iva and Sesa, the one w h o 
is praised b y the siddhas, the ascetics and the 
yogis the one w h o is inexplicable in the V e d a s , 
the one w h o m oves at w ill and is all-pervading 
w h o is the sm aller than the sm allest and greater 
than the greatest, the one w h o is eternal, truthful 
and the lord beyond P rakrti, u n in vo lve d and 
unattached, the people get pu rified b y devoting 
their m inds at the eternal lord and alw ays get 
anxious to o ffe r at his lotus-like feet, the tender 
Dfirva-grass, unbroken rice and the w ater, the 
one w hose g lo ry cannot recited b y the V e d a s , 
Sarasvatl. Sesa, B rah m a , Ganes'a, S u rya , In dra, 
the m oon and K u b e ra , that to speak o f the people 
havin g little w isd o m . It is b e yon d m e to praise 
h im . T h is B a n a is a foolish dem on and is n o t a

=== PAGE 811 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANQA, CHAPTER 119
709
god. Therefore, you kindly forgive him. On 
hearing the words of Bali, Sri Krsna who happen 
to be the lord of the universe and the one who is 
graceful to his devotees spoke.
m 'fcSrR Tji W 7ШН 
W l
R lfrjT U R T^ T 
?ll
gjftw fq- w m ■pter crf^uT:i 
У1ТС 1Ч R7T ^тТГ Я т Ш r н ч П з ч п ^ п
R4TRKP?R 
illrl4 %HRTI
дат W
 
RR 
U R T II^ II
Sri Krsna said- О son, don't be afraid, you are 
completely saved and you go back to your abode, 
your son is eternal because of my boon or grace, 
I shall rid him of the arrogance who is just 
foolish. I have granted a boon delightfully to 
Prahlada that his descendants would not be 
killed. I shall bestow your son, the knowledge of 
over-powering the death.
ш ч ^ т ь ч Т ш и ч !
W ИЧпрТТЩРТ TTcJrt «ГЩЩТ fiR T II^ II 
VUUcTh 3T?TRf
■'fhmra зщтг r tM
■^'|*>UT €1 
ЯтШГ R с^П^ЯП
Щ1Щ 
f^rarqr
% R трЩ тТ fTRIRJT R «ГВШ
щ r S w f R щ щ вт r r t : 
я тч н
The stotra with which you had adored me and 
is included in Samaveda, was bestowed by me to 
Brahma in earlier times at the time of solar 
eclipse, in the siddMsrama who bestowed the 
same to Sanatkumara. The knowledge of the 
same was bestowed by Gauri at the bank of 
MandakinI to Gautama. The merciful Siva 
bestowed is knowledge to his devoted people, 
Brahma and I bestowed it knowledge to Siva on 
the bank of the Viraja river. In earlier times 
Sanatkumara imparted the knowledge of the 
same to Bhrgu. Currently I will bestow this 
knowledge to Bana who would recite the same.
R ift 4SI4iHl*j4r$¥d 
cpTRI hfatfR-Ufa сШ^ЧО 
: 11 <4 6 11
'•сттчгт r : udf^rii т а ш н r я^тнгГ: i
^tfeR t(fidlcdl4l^ct ЧТТ R?TR:II^4H
This is an immensely meritorious stotra when 
heard from the mouth of the teacher, having been 
served with the ornaments, costumes and sandal- 
paste and while so listening whosoever would 
recite the same with devotion daily, he would be 
relieved of the sins committed by him during 
crores of his births.
fehctt tspjst rtt?
rtwt f:{a^i)ohRi »tctifeylt.cntoT4[iit9oii 
RRST ТРГЩТПЧТ RTPjcpt Wfl 
RSBFIT R ТВТТЩТ
This stotra relieves one of all the misfortunes 
and bestows all the riches. It removes all the 
ailments and grief and serves as a boat to cross 
the terrific ocean of the universe. It removes the 
cycle of birth, death and old age and shatters all 
the bondages. This happens to be the ornament 
of the devotees.
R Ш
: 
^ % T :l
Reft RHf R % TTOWT R гПТ:^ Rll\9?ll 
R RcR R ^ F Tn t ТШ R
R h m ^ rM ^ ^ W 4 . I ^ ^ 11
R RRft fR ^R Ttir 
^cR tS X R ^ Rlfft 
H A IR 'S 11
Whosoever recites the same, he earns the merit 
of taking bath at all the holy places, performing 
all the yajnas, vratas and tapas. a person surely 
meets with the success by reciting this stotra. 
Thereafter he leads the life like a god on the 
earth and ultimately reaches the abode of Visnu.
RfWBlio ТЩГо 
ЧТ«Ч1°
qt^gMgwdit^ttmRtSWT: 11 ^ Ч11

=== PAGE 812 ===

710
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
Chapter - 120
j
Bana presents his daughter to Aniruddha 
474R4UT ътъ
m 
*TI
c£P Щ
Щ
Щ
 fp P TP TRPJT ^ T P P II^II
N a ra ya n a said- Sri K rsn a after consulting 
B alaram a and U d d h a va dispatched a messenger 
to B a n a .
fyr^r w t f M p g p f f'lfp P lfr H n 
c b rfii^ h ’H'Zbm 
ъ p p p ff im i
зттррр чщ \ 
щ 
f?rarq;i
m T c tw iih 
О т э и p m fy p p ji^ n
H e w en t to the place w here S iva , Ganes'a, 
Pa rva ti, the destroyer o f m isfortunes, K a rttik e ya , 
B h a d ra ka ll, U gracan da and K o ta rl w ere seated. 
T h e m essenger bow ed in reverence to Ganesa, 
S iva , Pa rva ti and all other respectable people 
there.
^РЗЗЩ
«ппттщ чй fiW T: w m
f p p t p t i 
fp i 
TjsteiT щ щ g w i m i
t p й ч Р у и г ч т % ч PTfp 'P p p u p v . i 
p t p т а ; p ifp m fa : fq g fP : w n k i i
T h e 
m essengers 
said- 
" O 
S iva , 
K rs n a 
is 
in vitin g B a n a fo r a battle-field or otherw ise he 
should go and take refuge w ith K rsn a together 
w ith A n iru d d h a and U s a . T h e one w h o does not 
face the w a r w h e n he is in vited fo r the sam e, he 
drives his seven generations after death to the 
hell"
<|РТР Щ1Р ЯРР ШРЙГ 4«llRrdrqi
O n hearing the w ords o f m essengers, Parvati 
w h o 
w as 
seated 
beside 
S iva 
spoke 
the 
appropriate w ords.
4(£?fitc||€t
о
Titter *ftppi рррт 
^rmt ^гзпрэп 
'У?Ч1Ч1 W cfHT pIPTI RtiRTcfi^l
щ 
^rut fR ig ЯтЕзшргч;! i<s 11
Pa rva ti said- О virtuous B a n a , yo u g ive a w a y 
everything in d o w ry and take refuge w ith S ri K rs 
na together w ith y o u r son. H e happens to be the 
lord o f all, bestow er o f all the riches, the best o f 
all the protector o f all, is all m e rciful and is 
graceful on the devotees.
H$IR§:W4S^ P-PP-^fp ^П1<Н1 
ppmfptp?p рттшррртр! 
i
■Н'Н|Пг<*1 SRunftri: ищет 
P*fhl^°И
ySRferoRVP Pifapt РР>РТШР:1 
■р'|Р|Пг<Ь?Р ^cPRt facbliPI P 4*IPH:II^I 
<рщиз; ертп^ т fpfjwr: 
РР Pi
^ n pIvcrv^ Щ-- тпчт%дпт<ш11^11
O n hearing the w ords o f Pa rva ti, all the gods 
and the sages present in the assem bly term ed her 
w ords 
graceful 
and 
praised 
her. 
T h e y 
also 
advised B a n a to act accordingly but B a n a started 
burning in anger and he w as trem bling w ith his 
eyes burning red. T h e dem on then suddenly got 
up and in spite o f the objection b y all, he adorned 
h im self, w ith the kavaca, h o ld in g a b o w in his 
hand and b o w in g in reverence to 
S iv a , 
the 
valorous dem on m o ve d on w ith three crores o f 
soldiers 
o f the a rm y. 
H e w as 
fo llo w e d 
b y 
K u m b h a n d a , 
K u p a k a m a , N ik u m b h a , 
K u m b h a 
and the com m ander Isvara w earing the kavacas.
d-Uxli-UcC^-lci ^lU*UcHp4ll 
Ptfudlfl 'йтщ*? W^Rcj p p p n ^ n 
<*M*Ud pp p|
P^P^TP PP P ll^ ll 
P P $ : p rfptfii: 
Р Н Т % Р Р Р Р P i
P P P # P P £ T P W
P t : RRlfgcfit P P f t l l W I
Thereafter 
U nm attab h a ira va, 
Sam hara- 
bhairava, 
Asitaiigabh airava, 
R u ru b h aira va, 
M ah a bh aira va , K ala b h a irava , Pracandabhairava 
and K ro dh abhairava also fo llo w e d h im carrying
PP5 <4iu| U^IUIU «jglcdl PP PrPPjPfJ

=== PAGE 813 ===

KRS^A-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 120
711
all the weapons, the lord Kalagnirudra also 
followed him with all the Rudras.
3WJST ЗГЁЩ5Т Ъ trftlgcHI TjfuS4lfi|«*ll 
if iJWUdl
•о
з М w чфш: Traf W : ta<frif6Wl:l
nJ
w rf ttt ящ^птщ
^[U lt 
^TRTT fllgiuft 9tlP?lf^ll?<4ll 
cHrmfl Trdrt# хт д т щ И ^ гщ ^ :! 
'4h?!Al0 Tt^TWTT *M t ФЫ*ГЯЙ11<?11 
зрг! xi t?ra^r: тга! tstwt: ira f^ n
Ш^ШТЧЯЩ w fr ^chlHchTll^oll 
'irbciuii Rfrht Г ^нс-н ^чит
Ugracanda, Pracanda, Candika, Candinayika, 
Candes'varl, Camunda, Candl, Candakapalika, all 
the eight of them marched forward holding the 
skull-cups in their hands. The village deity of 
Sonitpura named Kotarl also moved on mounted 
on the gem-studded chariot. She had a smiling 
face and held and skull-cup and a sword in her 
hand; all the eight goddesses named IndranI, 
peaceful 
Vaisnavl, 
BrahmanI, 
Kaumari, 
Narasimhi, Varahl, of terrible form, Mahamaya, 
Mahesvari and Bhairavl of terrific form also 
followed the army mounted over a chariot 
delightfully. Bhadrakalika was mounted over a 
gem-studded chariot, offered her salutation to the 
lord. She had a red complexion, three eyes and 
looked terrific because of her protruding tongue. 
All of them carried the trident, sakti, gada, sword 
and the skull-cup in their hands.
w f t ■$THSWET фТОШ Че|?сП:1
ЦпПзаьга: yi«4l(ui%sfr: I l l ’ll 
W 
Multyl 4(4dl f=HII
gm : -^ifsarfr р з т зплщ хп^ Ы
т^Щ 'йн
Ш : 7Р7Ш ^gT RTAtfe: ТЩЙТ^ШЧН
w f t R^TI 
4FT ЧГЩ11 ? $ 11
W ife : Щ ПШ Щ И щ щ TT:I
Thereafter Mahadeva holding a trident in his 
hand was mounted on Nandi and marched on. 
Karttikeya holding a terrific weapon in his hand 
moved on mounted on the peacock. Thus all the 
gods and goddesses except Ganesa and Parvat! 
marched 
on 
to 
the 
battle-field. 
Finding 
Mahadeva and Bhadrakall there, Krsna spoke to 
them. Bana then blew the conch and bowing at 
the feet of Siva, strung his bow and aimed the 
divine arrow from the bow. Finding Bana getting 
ready for the war, Satyaki the killer of the enemy 
moved forward in spite of being dissuaded by 
other people. О Narada, Bana shot a divine 
weapon named Aiijana on him. The weapon was 
infallible, issued the lustre like the mid-day sun 
of the Summer season and was quite sharp. 
Finding the weapon Satyaki himself became 
quite humble.
f% 3T 4 AW: AAAt w rq s j
ctf| fq^nr gimyg ттцдГадЫн w\ r 6 11
ТГЩНчГ divthH Picilut W т!ЩТ 7T:I
1%r=^ g rw ^
 w i t фщ нагч;| i ? 4 11
foghr w
 щит: 
Ф и р тя ч и зо и
As a result of this, he could not be burnt and 
was flown to the sky. Thereafter Bana shot a fire 
arrow which was neutralised by Satyaki with 
Varunastra, extinguishing the flames of the fire 
which, were rising to the height of a tala tree. 
Thereafter Bana shot the terrific arrow of the 
wind.
тигаатш 
«uuivy яш Ф Ртз
But Satyaki neutralised the same with the 
shooting of a Parvatastra. Bana then used 
Narayanastra in the battle-field.
I

=== PAGE 814 ===

712
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
Ч1^¥сН 
Ш : 
^T:ll^? II
But Satyaki because of the training he 
received for Arjuna prostrated before it on the 
ground. Thereafter Bana who was well-known in 
the warfare shot the Mahesvara arrow.
WrfyfOTTcfTWT у[ф=^Ин1н*1И
Satyaki destroyed it with the use of Vaisnava- 
astra. Thereafter Bana shot Brahmastra.
$rot tOTT fclfat s P lW ^ Rlr4f*:l 
НМИ-Ы ^
 f^Fr тетг TuiQviK^:ii?'kii
Satyaki on the other hand destroyed the same 
with the use of Brahmastra. Bana, who was 
well-versed in the warfare shot the Ndgdstra.
ЭД1?
But Satyaki destroyed the same with the 
shooting of Garudastra in a moment. Thereafter 
Bana took up the infallible trident of Siva.
<тетсг w rfofrif 
«nre
ЗПП1 ФТЩ «ПЩГ ^TW ЧЩЧсТ W II^ II
Satyaki than offered prayer to Durga. as a 
result of this, the trident was turned into the 
garland of flowers adorning his neck. Bana then 
placed the Pds'upata on the bow.
Ш ТШФ зр»Т 
W lf e tf Ш
 f I
ФФ rt 
<JgT ehiR4i4l 45I«H:II3^I
w 1%фт cbmfv^^d Hprei
But Satyaki shot an arrow which plunged 
Bana into a swoon. Finding Bana getting into 
sleep, the valorous Karttikeya shot the crescent 
arrow. But Kamadeva destroyed it playfully. 
After this, Karttikeya shot a gada having the 
lustre of the rising sun.
gw N itre chi4 ^ ftctfuj Tf trajR TT:I
ЧШЦип^ 
ЗП^ЦтаТ 
11 ^ Ч11
ФГИ 
Ш : фШ |Г^И
ТтШсГ rX
The god of love neutralised it also, Skanda 
then shot Nardyandstra but Pradyumna because 
of the training he had received from Krsna, 
prostrated on the ground like a rod. Skanda then 
shot an another arrow named s'akti, having the 
lustre of the fire of dissolution. Kamadeva on his 
part neutralised the same by issuing the 
Nardyandstra-, then Karttikeya took up in anger 
the Pasupata weapon.
gjmt Huiiiuiit4ui fqgfnt xi т е ш*[1 
5 Щ гг 3ifl$TT gflfM 
gijiK4uiif4 сычуу fefat zt гштатп 
зптщ сыЙ<* зттчт^ m^|4d cT^ni'dy и 
f%rWTTfiT W f ftfet ^ ti r e fPfl 
«hil^ch Plfcd ^gT Щ ъГ 
ШТИ'к?
<*1чичлч 
FRSt
фон гТ сГШТ rt hdi-d 
'Лисп 3BJ: 11 
<икч«(ч*1 
tu4dl tidll
дпШ з w rrm m <тет 
о т т ш м'кчи
'О
But Kamadeva with the use of Nidrastra made 
him unconscious who went to sleep. Finding 
Karttikeya having been over-powered by sleep 
and yawning, Banasura and Bhadrakall in anger 
caught hold of Kamadeva. She then carried 
Kamadeva and Bana in her lap and went to the 
place where the chaste Parvatl was seated. She 
woke up Karttikeya and Bana also regained 
consciousness.
щ
 тттег: тетг ч ш и Фф гк Ф т
qfgc^q FT5TFT: 
W TureJrTRB^II
In the meantime ката left the place from the 
hole of the nose suddenly and somehow 
terrorising all, reached the battle-field.
ШЧ zf Ш 3 1 ?f^ ^ T re i 
^
 
ЧШЧ: ^jbcbcbUdl
At that point of time all the Yadavas finding 
Kamadeva there, started laughing. The throat of 
all the ganas of Siva dried up and they ware 
upset with fear.
ЗТ2Г Ш : ФТ: 
<«!4lb£l 3EpRT:l

=== PAGE 815 ===

KRSI^A-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 120
713
Thereafter B a n a again m ounted on the chariot 
and started figh tin g w ith K a rttik e ya .
«пит-, тщт ж щ Ф fg^trr тига#п 
Ringer
B a n a used five arrow s in the battle-field w h ich 
w ere neutralised b y B a lad eva w ith the use o f 
crescent arro w .
тд д-гщ wrong 
g ctifRh
WWR ^cW?c| rVW 
114 ° 11
H aladh ara Balaram a then broke the chariot 
w ith the use o f the plough and w ith the use o f the 
m ortar, he killed the chariot as w e ll as charioteer.
Щ ф ч W ЩЭД:1 
cbiHiPHh^l whwrwRwmw ^ёгшиц *11
A t the tim e w h e n B a n a w as about to be killed 
b y B alabhadra, K alagn irudra prevented h im from 
doing so.
7W ЩёТТрЧП^Вд W4? 
'WTI
фч § r l g s j R THP^fTI IЦ 4 11
chMlfiMK: gifar 1w ^r здяТрдиЩ!
WMri^ril: 
^SWTT^RTT 
fwgim^ll
Th ereafter Balabhadra broke into pieces the 
chariot o f K ala gn irudra and kille d w ith the use o f 
the p lo u g h the horses and broke the chariot. 
K ala g n irudra then issued the terrific fever, as a 
result o f w h ic h all the Y a d a va s were over­
pow ered w ith fever except K rsn a .
W 
ЧТТГсГррЛ: ддз? ^ЩсГ 3WTR1
w fg$g ^wt щ KTpi яит^ймч^и 
wwwowiw^Tj ч^чГг)гцьит)
^tuidMcuf-iujiinil TOiwf&T ччм TT:1 
щ gww fw?w^raw wtsiw tR; 11 ц ц 11
Сч 
чЭ 
'О
A t that point o f tim e S ri K rsn a created the 
V a isn a va fe ve r and m ade it spread on the arm y 
and neutralised the fever o f Kalagn irudra. B o th 
the fevers w ere engaged in the battle-filed for 
som etim e. U ltim a te ly the fever o f R u d ra was 
ove r-po w e re d b y V aisn a va fever restless. A t 
regaining consciousness he prayed to S ri K rsn a .
VWT 3WTW
sn«iRi£ ssbivim
(44irHi 
"5^ : ТТсГЭГ Учш
T h e fever said- О lord o f the universe y o u are 
the one w h o takes to the hum an fo rm to grace 
y o u r devotees, yo u are a soul o f all and are the 
com plete Purusa, y o u are adored everyw here.
wrow wer fiwT gwiR TcRi
vWTT whit 
Ш дЫч\эи
O n hearing the w ords o f the fe ve r, S ri K rs n a 
w o u n d up his fe ve r; thereafter the M ahesvara 
fever getting terrified fled a w ay fro m the battle­
field.
dIURri 
WTOTRT W RtlBcbRI
fw^tr wwmt W «RdlPdfyUdl444,114^ II 
ibicJH: ^тпЙЧ WRWPTRT ciiddll
тдв-гч 7Ш дпл?д
RtRWT rTt W WgJWTWt WgTWR:l
TT дш? ЧЩШ
О II
Bana than again shot thousands o f arrow s 
issuing the lustre o f the fire o f dissolution and 
w ere sanctified w ith the reciting o f the mantras. 
A rju n a on the other hand stopped the flo w o f all 
the arrow s w ith his o w n arro w . B a n a then shot 
the terrific s'akti havin g the lustre o f the m id -d ay 
sun o f the sum m er season, w h ic h w as neutralised 
b y A rju n a quite p la yfu lly.
з^чйшя g
gjfPiiftiRig gqi fg ^r qibuiipi^ii
B a n a then shot a hundred Pasupata arrow 
havin g the lustre o f hundred o f suns and was 
quite terrific. It could destroy the entire universe. 
Fin d in g h im so doing S ri K rs n a lifted up the 
Sudars'ana-cakra.
(Гкпчт g щ
 g ддщт?тёддищ| 
fggk 
g uumwvtfriftqgii^y 11
T h e Sudars'ana-cakra 
cut o f f thousand 
o f 
heads o f B a n a w h o he fell d o w n on the ground 
like a w ild lion.

=== PAGE 816 ===

714
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAI4AM
чщ щ 
тщ)' ч^1 чг1:
3T^?sf cfTW ёТ& ЯНгпМ^ГЩТ^1Щ?11
Thereafter the Pasupata weapon which was 
infallible and quite terrific like the fire of 
dissolution, reverted in the hands of Siva.
Ш : WiT 
oqfirat Bd^'rH:ll^^ll
A great river was created with the flow of the 
blood of Bana. He became unconscious and fell 
on the ground and he lost his senses because of 
the pain.
With: Thftw ftSIW STcRWT dfHfidq rX\ 
grt 
W Thr ThwrmfhhT^ii^oii 
WWtWT hlw w
i 
h ^ p u t h^J^nr^WRT 
*11
qlflldl W 
^1 <^qumi4d4j 
щ
 ^m ^di WHiwcw rx
hlfmWWTht Ъ 
TihRT V lh id ^ T 1
tnhl^uiT Сталин -щ щ чч)ё<Ч!№ЗИ 
^тм чщ ятШ qqu^R5diPi
чЭ
^
 ?TPT чГй4'УК*га*П:1Вэ'*11
hWT3S:hhTh hhWFh^WT Whcihh:I 
W^T33hrW h t^ h Whh ^«WT '^WW^d%ll^4ll
In the meantime Siva, the teacher of the 
universe arrived there and holding Bana in his 
arms, he was infested with illusion. He than 
started ciying.
Si
f^iwrahn^ci "hWhw "RTtwrq^i
WJRWThTh cfchUURHH: J T 4 ;II^ II
wnh tj|pwr w f t m ^wr w4T#r:i 
^
 ччпШ w r £ «иишч^ащи^и
With the fall of the tears from the eyes of Siva 
a lake was created. The all merciful lord then 
brought him to senses. He then carried Bana in 
his arm and went to the place of Krsna. He than 
placed Bana at the lotus-like feet of Krsna, which 
were always adored by LaksmI.
Thereafter, Bana adored the lord with the 
stotra recited by Bali with devotion and offered 
his daughter adorned with all the ornaments to 
Sri Krsna with devotion. Thereafter, he, bowing 
in reverence gave away five lakhs of elephants, 
twenty lakh horses, a thousand slave-girls 
adorned with all the gem-studded ornaments, a 
thousand lakh of emeralds, sapphire, gems and 
the best of diamonds beside thousand of water 
vases made of gold. 
crcrfoT -^iw^nfcri 
*n
wiuivw Rctiiui TwqwtwT ?fcfiwwTii\94ii 
At the command of Siva, Bana presented to 
Krsna the fine costumes which were sanctified 
by fire.
dhWyfHi wfri ъ ^afarwrftrr чхщ\
IT^fbr ^
 WWT WTlfur WwWlfT tTIIV9S I
Siva then started praising Krsna who happens 
to be the lord of the universe according to the 
Vedic hymns, in the same way as he was adored 
by Bali. 4
?TFT 
WTHTTW 
<H4<4 
Wit W
Sri Krsna then bestowed on intelligent Be, the 
sacred knowledge of over-coming the death and 
placing his hand on his body made him eternal 
and indestructible.
О Narada, he also gave away to Krsna 
thousands of vases filled with betels and honey.
дртг wfcmrRT qiqqqti
wravtn ^ -qfrpi т а Util's van
Placing his daughter at the lotus-like feet of 
Hari, he started crying in land voice. Lord Kari 
consoled him.
ф With 
cR 
XT ^рТТ%ТЧ;1
ЩШ f^ iiv a i 11
Thereafter bestowing his blessing according to 
the Vedas and taking permission from Siva, he 
left for Dvaraka.

=== PAGE 817 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 120
715
тш 
gt 
щтч:1
#5г 
?т ф :
Reaching Dvaraka lord Krsna presented the 
newly wedded daughter of Bana to Rukmini and 
Devakl.
UsdrUci -q^T Ъ дптдтош gnETtl 
sugtuil^'flhihm 
£R 
16 о 11
After that, the welfare festivities were 
performed with great enthusiasm and the 
Brahman as were served with- food and given 
riches in charity.
Sltggrt'o T[fTo
4R34T° w t o I
Hl3chl4fdVlrii(i|chVldd4l5KmT:ll^oll

=== PAGE 818 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 120
715
Srgala said- I am Vaikuntha and the god of 
gods having four arms, lord of LaksmI, maintain 
the universe and preserve the same being 
Brahma and Vasudeva.
итящт Я1®5? хг чшащипц щ\ 
RTOEPf 
WT RRII4H
Brahma had prayed to me to incarnate in order 
to rid the earth of her burden. That is why I 
arrived in the land of Bharata.
3TT?qR 
У 
: 11S11
The son of Vasudeva is a Vaisya and is quite 
arrogant and Ksatriya as well. He is filled with 
illusion and is a cheat.
Chapter -121 
The story of Srgala 
HHiqui ЗЗТсГ
fW : ШЧТи! tq^RriTTJTRWI 
ггаТ55^ШТГГ ferET 
I 1
3TFIRI 
сРгга 
Ъ TWtW^I 
Rft ETRT) ^Tt faqqqcfchRJRII
Narayana said- Thereafter, Sri Krsna was 
seated in the assembly called Sudharma with his 
courtiers. 
In 
that 
assembly 
a 
Brahmana 
possessing the divine lustre arrived there. 
Reaching there the Brahmana started offering 
prayer to Sri Krsna quite humbly with devotion.
WTipUT ЗЭТЕТ 
qgjcpi 7ТГЭДН
Brahmana said- There is a Vasudeva named 
Srgala (jackal) who considers himself to be Sri 
Krsna and the king of kings; he always speaks ill 
of you, you kindly listen to the same.
cira^crrst
•О 
чЭ ^ 
^ 
^ 
' 
45 О
wT?rr шит 
wrarimi
jM 
ЙЙгЧ tjRvt ^fRTT W l
4№Й<сП 
дщццш ЧхгяЦщэИ
He makes the people to fight with each other 
and making the valorous to fight with the weak 
people, he has destroyed the kings, he is 
extremely deceitful.
<|4fsR чцтщ ^jqrpt rT 
ЧТЙТ UM4I4IR cffERTSv^R
Щ R Ruf R ~Ц xtiRr R iR^Tl 
ХГЕШЩНТ ЧГЧЧТ11^11
чЭ
R -ЦЦЩ 
Г*
ХПсШТЧПТ ЧТ5ГЧТ1I я 0 11
Krsna who 
is 
devoid 
of valour, 
had 
Duryodhana, Jarasandha and a weak king named 
Bhlma, Drona, Bhlsma, Kama and other warriors 
on earth killed from Arjuna. He therefore has the 
weak warriors killed with the valorous warriors, 
sometimes deceitfully.
cf-dricR cfTR rj faoqftiuiui 
■RR4 Trijt M 
^f?R RTRI IW i 
7^1 vflUiq 
7Щ7ТТ ^cTI
Ч 
7T W ^TRt ^1У|П5сЬ:11??11
RRR RcRT RSjft 
rifdelcHII
Сч 
чЭ 
О
R riR TIR I 
M R R R II^ Il
f^tuqcfifyR %гЧ 
4gldH4J

=== PAGE 819 ===

716
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
Щ xi 
rfa 
■gfsT ^:ii^il
He killed Sisupala, Dantavaktra, Kamsa who 
was ailing since long, Narakasura my son and the 
weak Kes'I besides the demon named Mura quite 
deceitfully. One should not be deceitful in the 
battle of dharma. That irreligious boy killed 
Putana and Kubja. Thus he is the killer of a 
woman. In the greed for costumes that deceitful 
and uncultured person killed the washerman. I 
have saved the earth by killing the great demon 
like Hiranyakas'ipu. Hiranyaksa, Madhu and Kait 
abha.
-щц щ п 
fyrg.-i
31f fqwpxj
I am myself Siva and the preserver of the 
universe and Visnu the destroyer of the wicked 
persons.
xi (h'jJui; 
4T:ii^
ii
All the sages and the ascetics were bom of my 
athsas. I am myself Narayana without qualities 
and beyond Prakrti.
P W ЩШ Щ 
W II^II
0 virtuous one, till now because of shyness 
and mercy beside having a friendly attitude 
towards you I have been forgiving you. 
Whatever has happened, has happened, now you 
fight with me.
Ф н 
dTmw'qpu ftw TR iiU и 
W
 w rr srufcup тттат ргздчп
P R ptelTS? хщфг:11^11
&ксы fit 
^ r q цтщг: 73*11
3J7J 
RT Ш xf -ЩЩ 3^IIR о |
1 have leamt through messenger that you have 
become more and more arrogant therefore it is 
proper for me to subjugate you. It is the duty of 
the king to trample upon the people who raise 
their heads quite high and presently I happen to 
be the ruler of the univers. I shall myself arrive in
Dvaraka taking to the four armed form holding 
samkha, gada, cakra and padma together with 
the army. In case you are desirous of a fight then 
fight with me, otherwise you take refuge under 
my feet.
fjrff; ЧТ qibufd ЧЧ 7РГ WITW:l 
WfajcTt cbfwifa irraii W 3TUR xTII^II
In case you do not take refuse with me then I 
shall destroy the entire city of Dvaraka in a 
moment.
ттзй xi i i p fgt w i хг
уттрт 
vftvraTIRlII
I myself alone will destroy playfully your 
army, sons, attendants, relatives and brothers 
burning them in fire flames.
ircf^rc xi 
xi 
p * xt 
7ПБ ЩЩ 
xT TJfrrat sJ^JVir4d:IR^ll
ЗгЫтт зитсчн 
xii
ТЗНЗЗГ f| 
XT qiR^rllcT-R I p r i l ^ l l
You consider, yourself to be quite valorous by 
conquering Siva, who is an ascetic and pretty old 
and Indra who suffers from Brahmasapa and 
having vaginas on his body, you consider 
yourself to be quite valorous and have become 
arrogant. You had been over-powered by your 
wife just for the sake of Parijata flower . 
гТЩгГ
ЗЩЯГГ fasgRTPT: чтзпфэт xr^farrqjR hii
you are the debauch and are ruled by Radha in 
Gokula. Presently you are like the slave of 
Satyabhama and other ladies.
^Агарсхп fastyy p iftp r ferat 
sfipcrr: w m : 
71:11^11
Thus speaking О sage, the Brahmana kept 
quiet and hearing him the lord laughed aloud 
with all his courtiers. 
ч м Пьу| xi 7Трз w u t xi хщШч;|
The Brahmana was then adored variously 
serving four types of food to him, he felt pained 
with the words of Srgala which pierced like the

=== PAGE 820 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAl^DA, CHAPTER 121
717
thorns 
and 
he 
spent 
the 
n igh t 
w ith 
great 
d iffic u lty.
5ГШ js m w Ш : TTlft gill 
<*т)ягч&и| 
^гттс% ^4Hi4r(: ич г. n
In the early m orn in g he got u p anxiously and 
accom panied w ith his people, he m ounted o ver a 
chariot and at once reached the city o f Srgala.
ЯИТ *РТТИТ cTRlf IT
зтгагеч 
w
: ^
4;i r <?ii
H e had fo u r artificial arms and he h im se lf 
reached before K rsn a .
erotic*' xi -mirei firey^i ъ
З П ^ ЧУ1Н 1Ч f tr ^ * ! ^ Ttlfrei:ll^o|!
K rs n a talked to h im like a friend; he looked at 
h im w ith lo vin g eyes and sm ilingly embraced 
h im .
тш 
.^Eofr яг ■щШш щ )
T h e kin g in vite d h im but S ri K rsn a did not 
accept fin ding K rsn a discarding his arrogance, he 
felt frigh tfu l and said.
*rettT чГа яР ^ тЗ! 
1 ГШ WZ\
■m: ЧЩ ^gts'qqftctll Я^ТШ Ш ^И
Srgala said- Y o u c u t-o ff m y head w ith yo u r 
calcra and go back, let the sinner havin g the 
perishable b o d y fa ll on earth.
3T? 
lift ящгд- ftnfit w i 
W4iftr 
tit ftrenre 
smli i ? 3 11
I happen to be Subhadra w h o alw ays rem ained 
guarding y o u r doors like Ja ya and V ija y a . О 
lord, y o u are all know ledgeable and are therefore 
w ell-aw are o f e verything. D o not delay.
fil
?М<$Щ 
4fWlfil ЧЩЧ 13113*11
I had fallen because o f the curse o f La k s m r, 
the period o f m y curse is ove r. I shall n o w 
proceed to y o u r abode after lapse o f hundred 
years o f curse.
SftcjiWr <jc(|c(
hi fire hit 43*134 gftmrerri
Tfif ttffrrfir 
-ГШ5 *7h Wg714,M^4ll
S ri K rsn a said- О frien d, y o u first attack m e 
and thereafter I shall fig h t. О son, I am quite 
w ell-aw are 
o f everything. 
Y o u 
go 
back 
to 
V a ik u n th a w ith pleasure.
^ id iu ii^ ftr^r him ifiri
1 tremr Щ : уттдкшя сЫ'Н^Гчи|:||?^||
Thereafter Srgala shot ten arrow s tow ards Sri 
K rsn a . A l l o f these arrow s b o w in g in reverence 
at the feet o f K rsn a disappeared in the sky.
h it ft# h M
 ЯГ УНЧ1ря!?|{31чЧ1Ч1
T h e kin g then threw gada w h ic h issued fire- 
flam es but the same w as shattered into pieces 
w ith the touch o f the b o d y o f S ri K rsn a .
3511 ftr$hi 'ЗШТ if'lfikl * 
cfSTTI
tp h lf СТзЬтЙЩ ФСЩ ^ $reth ^113411
73^"" З' W IM
tp re^p refin th r щщщ * q rfa rri 13 ^ 11
T h e kin g then shot the trident, m ortar and sakti 
w hich w ere destroyed and broken into pieces 
w ith the touch o f the b o d y o f S ri K rsn a . H e then 
shot the terrific sw ord and the arrow s, but w ith 
the touching o f the b o d y o f S ri. K rs n a , they w ere 
all reduced to pieces.
firrre TraRfireptrer
Tjt Щ Tpftghi * fireiWhThlft *11*0 11
W h e n the kin g w as w ith o u t any w e a p o n , the 
m erciful K rsn a said to h im , " O friend yo u go and 
bring some m ore sharp edged w e ap on .
*JhTH 33T*
44Ч1?ЧЯ1 Щ 1
hih4h hirer?* ERtgRnreiRnriix^ii
Srgala said- T h e soul and the sky cannot be 
w ou nded w ith the use o f arrow s, therefore, h o w 
can I have a fight w ith the soul? Y o u are the one 
w h o relieves the 
earth o f her burden. 
Y o u 
redeem m e from the ocean o f the universe.

=== PAGE 821 ===

718
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
'qgifasr fgrpr Ч18Т fatni Щ ШтИтач;|
% fe r^ frn t т ш RT^icd R M ifr[:ii^ ii
<*4uii4lvbKRbi 
femn sniper
c^idl ^рМёТГТТ ^ yctwl И^^ПТ5Щ_1 Гк ^ И
О lord, the terrific ocean of the universe is 
.filled with poison; therefore you remove all my 
bondage's of illusion, you are the lord of all the 
deeds, creator of Brahma, bestower of the fruits 
and all the noble deeds, bestowed all the riches, 
the cause of all the deeds and are competent 
enough to shatter the deeds.
сщш 'hitwr) w k w 'тФ* грт:1 
■qifa
C4=kch «Т dVdi 
4l'3d'*tifc|chH4l
fifiTBI 'STcR #cc(T cFcR гГ 
I* 4 11
тпт^ m ^гат Ъ Р
Й
:1
Щ HPT 
И
чтч <тЫчт mi щц\
IWThl^bq^ Ш ЩМ.-Н'кйП
After ending this body of five elements, I shall 
reach the gate of Vaikuntha. On listening to the 
prayer of a friend, the words of which were 
spoken like nectar, the lord who happened to be 
the ocean of mercy, started crying filled with 
emotion and compassion. With the tears fallen 
from the eyes of lord Krsna, a pool was created 
which was known by the name of Bindusara. It 
was a divine pool and became the best of the 
pool, person with a dip in the pool is relieved of 
the cycle of birth and death and the sins 
committed by him in earlier birth also disappear. 
There is no doubt about it.
^м1’;Ч'Чс0
f f e f e й frtfeT TR:l 
^rTgRT 
1-frcRr ftip 
«тег: 11* b 11
Sri Krsna said- О friend, you have a spotless 
mind, then how were you so misguided? Why 
did you make the messenger to speak such harsh 
words?.
цаГЧтЫ TRT 
^tWT%T55TtcT:t
ЗРггат 
ЧТ2Т TEf^TSfir cRT 
II
Srgala said- Since I made the messenger speak 
in harsh tone you have arrived here, otherwise О 
lord, it is difficult to have an audience with you 
even in dream.
qmiihj ш ш ъ trr^rqi 
.^гщт fM 
д т 
w f t ч^тпцоц 
ti 'тмгйш Tifresum^i 
т а Ш WRT ч т 7ГГГРТ ?ИЦ ?ll
In the meantime he ended his life with yogic 
practices and looking at Krsna he delightfully 
proceeded to Vaikuntha. At that point of time a 
divine lustre as high as seven tala trees appeared 
there and merged into the lotus-like feet of Sri 
Krsna.
ТЩТ 
Slfcbl фЬчг! dwll ^ ГЧс1< У UHj 
IBM: # ? ^ffT Ъ 4fqi(fhWIIl
^PTPT T fw flM 
I4^H
rf d<*<1 ^ d<MI 
I 
1ТЩ? ШГВГ 4 
f»M фсс(!
Sri Krsna felt delighted. At the sight of this he 
felt delightful and went back to Dvaraka; 
reaching there, he bowed in reverence to his 
parents and then reached the abode of RukminI, 
which was issuing the fragrance of flowers and 
sandal-paste. He spent the night on the bed of 
flowers and, sandal-paste. RukminI was fainted 
placing her head on the chest of her lord.
Ijfrf 
uglo 
TTCcfTT0
m u

=== PAGE 822 ===

718
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
ЗГО £lгаVIWЙ <*»7Idtwlssqr^: 
Chapter - 122
T h e s to r y o f S y a m a n ta k a G e m 
нк< зшгт
trafari тгплТтт ^ фш!ч ч<Ц|гчнп
wiwt g^rn^ii

=== PAGE 823 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHA14PA, CHAPTER 122
719
m Ш -q^mFT 
'oSlTW^^fRIRII
N a ra d a said- Y o u have narrated about the 
m arriage o f several dam sels w ith K rsn a but the 
m ystery about the Syam antaka rem ain unfolded. 
О virtu o u s, one I have not heard about it. Y o u 
k in d ly tell m e.
чттгаит ш ъ
ti t r a -^сгь^гп 
m w m i -R 
чштгт ti
htitJli SlfrRrtT Ш71 Tririlf rlfisldl Tlcth
\St
Ш
 Н73Ш з^пцття злчш w i i^ ii
N a ra ya n a said- In the earlier times on the 
fourth m o o n d a y o f the B hadrapada, the m oon 
abducted Ta ra and freed her on the fourth m oon 
day o f A s'vin a. Brhaspati then accepted her. Th e 
chaste 
lady 
felt 
sham eful 
because 
o f 
her 
conception Brhaspati denounced her and T a ra in 
anger pronounced a curse on the m o o n getting 
filled w ith shame and anger.
ffiridra
п т т е й щ 
T ^ ti
upt 
71 hpft 71 
ъ ■hfarufdimn
T a ra 
said- 
Y o u 
w o u ld 
earn 
the 
blem ish 
because o f m y curse. W h o so e ve r yo u looks at 
y o u on the fourth m oon day o f Bhadrapada, he 
w o u ld also earn blem ish.
V is n u said- О m o o n y o u w ill be freed fro m the 
blem ish fo r all the tim es. O n ly such a person 
w o u ld earn a blem ish, w h o w o u ld lo o k at yo u on 
the 
fourth 
m o o n 
day 
o f Bhadrapada 
quite 
w illin g ly . 
T h e 
blem ish 
o f m o o n 
w o u ld 
be 
transferred to such a person and he w o u ld earn a 
blem ish.
ЩЩ TT^fw Ж
:1
t hTfg ИсЭК'Щ$71 71 
II
ifriUT 
сПЙ 
"ЧТГТТ fitcIlfTHi
L o r d H a ri announced w ith the clapping o f the 
hands that on the fourth day o f the m o o n either in 
the bright or dark fortn ight, the m o o n should not 
be witnessed.
trid ^gT ■WdtcRt 71 Ц1НН 
4 # 7P$ Tl^qf § 71 
f 11U 11
whit rn^nfh- fqyrmi
71 TpltTl 
II
H e also fo llo w e d , the declaration about the 
m o o n fo r h im se lf and because o f that he earned a 
blem ish on the fourth day o f the n ig h t in 
Bhadrapada. N o w I shall narrate to yo u w a y in 
w h ic h he earned the blem ish. T h e lord w as freed 
fro m the blem ish to educate the people.
TraiftjpT: 
71 riecbf I
ТЗРГТГЗ) 
7Г5ГПТ тТ*Т1^ГЧ11^П 
•
я т 71 7F597T Ч17ТдтЛ7ГТТд71 
q n w trm w w hUTTI fvhlRfcbTdll^ll
O n 
hearing 
this, 
the 
m oon 
w en t 
to 
the 
N arayana-saro vara and perform ing tapas there 
he w as free fro m the sin.
hhrfggpH: 71 w
'O
гГЧШТГ TTgwhi ф тщ Xl ^4lftfil:IH 9ll
Fin d in g the m oon havin g becom e so lean and 
thin, the com passionate N a ra ya n a m e rcifully told 
h im .
iploHclN
\Э
ятбг чд 
щ трЬ бтн shifts) i
о
уттчтатч дтгдтот 
htfTi Ги<иГШ11£11
Satrajita a devotee o f Surya perform ed tapas 
at Puskara-tirtha and achieved Syam antaka gem 
from Sitrya.
ШМптщЩтЧ 
xl
T h e Syam antaka gem produce eight bharas o f 
gold da ily. L o r d V is n u w as established in that 
gem .
ШГ^ГсТ: 7И7ГОЩ Zfm fibOIW srfTEtT:!
■tfidehli Hftli cJTgpdt
W fgfeg Л71Ч971
■qfht 
w it mnit шттвт!
Satrajita got ready to present the said gem w ith 
devotion to Satyabham a as a d o w ry . M o v e d w ith

=== PAGE 824 ===

720
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
the e vil tim e the w ic k e d Prasena stopped him 
fro m doing so and stealing the gem he w en t to 
the auspicious place o f Varanasi.
nftt 
75ft? 
тег орЛп^эН 
одягчгсу^геитку 
т ^ Ш 
11 ^ 11
■qftt 
im f ттте ш Ш тчп^ и
B u t o n the w a y a v e ry strong lion kille d h im 
and to o k a w ay the gem w ith the cord and w ore it 
round his neck. T h e lion w as none else than then 
the son o f the kin g o f K a lin g a , w h o had been 
facing the curse o f that Brah m an a and had taken 
to the fo rm o f an anim al. T h e same lion was 
kille d b y a v e ry strong beer nam ed Jam bavan and 
carrying the gem w ith h im , he reverted to his 
abode.
Щ: 
ШШ Ф \ ijPTT? W :l
<m ffig 4 теТГТ: '^Tlqi^T^f ^n^oll
O n the other hand people in D va ra k a started 
saying that the gem had been stolen b y K rsn a 
and it w as d ifficu lt to fin d out the w a y b y w h ich 
he stole a w a y the gem .
те$чти^и
O n hearing this in order to w ash out the 
blem ish, lord K rs n a m o ve d in the forest on the 
path bearing the foot-prints o f the thief.
Ф 
^ 
ft?
W <T 
^ tim: 11 ? ? 11
Fin d in g Prasena having been dead, he was 
grieved. T h e n he fo u n d the lion but fin d in g , h im 
w ith o u t the g e m , M a d h a va felt disinterested.
ъ ф 
ТТ ш тш ! ^
 7T:II?3 II
Th erea fte r, 
the 
all 
know ledgeable 
K rsn a , 
because o f his divine p o w e r came to k n o w o f 
everyth in g and w e n t to the abode o f the beer, he 
fo u n d a child sleeping in the lap o f the m id -w ife .
w r a сггещтгсг ш mrt wm fftrm 
tffbt T P 
та 
>ЧЧЧ1*:11?'«11
T h e m id -w ife getting fille d w ith com passion 
w as talking to the child, "y o u have this gem 
kn o w n 
b y 
the 
nam e 
o f Syam an taka w h ic h 
belongs to y o u .".
fW: TTOTWfrf^t tawcRT FT:l 
•gfRRcR VX ftsftlcl 
WFr(cb:IR4ll
T h e lion killed Prasena and Ja m bavan kille d 
the lion . О prince don't c ry, this gem belongs to 
yo u .
?f?r 
тег f t ^ l
ir g ^ i i ? ^ 11
T h e one w h o recites this stotra, com posed b y 
the m id -w ife and then drinks the w ater, he is 
relieved o f the blem ish o f w itnessing the m o o n 
on the prohibited d a y.
зтптг ф
 q?iiPd cfiforan ^frer«i:i 
trerffrt ятеЫ тел? « R re rl^ tn ^ ii
Such o f the w icke d person w h o denounces the 
V edas and w illin g ly witnesses the m oon on the 
prohibited d a y, he surely earns the blem ish.
<pjfr «rratera: 
trf&t itnre
g # "Лещ ri 
gsramro чйте: i r 6 11
O n hearing the w ords o f the m id w ife K rs n a 
to ok a w a y the gem fro m the child. T h e enraged 
m id w ife w ent to the beer and spoke to h im .
5Ц-кЙГ?г| «ЧРГсЧ гРгЩ нГиЩсЯ W : l 
SPIT SlfWlcldf TBT 
Pf&t c^ll^^ll
Jam bavan 
than 
com e 
there 
and 
started 
eulogising K rsn a . Thereafter, he gave a w a y his 
daughter Ja m bavat! to h im together w ith the 
divine gem in d o w ry .
^S T Pn*bH$l 
7T:ll?o||
L o r d K rsn a w en t to D v a ra k a and show ed the 
gem to Y a d a va s and w as freed fro m the blem ish.
тз?г% cFfei cr?R риккэунут!тч;1

=== PAGE 825 ===

KRSiyA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 123
721
0 son, I have narrated to you the story of the 
Syamantaka gem with the hearing of which one 
is relieved of all the blemish. 1
1 have narrated to you the beautiful story 
which I had heard from the mouth of Dharmaraja 
in earlier times, what else do you want to listen 
from me now.
'ifa' 
о TfejTo зйсрштзРПЗГо ЯГП^ЧТ0
W44fcfi4foie<ui ч т ^ . i f d M t s a m r : 11 ^
 11

=== PAGE 826 ===

KRSiyA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 123
721
Chapter -123 
Glory of Ganesa 
vic(N
RuV p£jRT©II4 
rT
fit d<sl^ur|) e|cHWI4RT Ъ RRHW:II?II
чП?чн w iit: 
xii
ctrr^T 
ffffihimi
Narada said-1 have listened to the inaccessible 
method of adoration of Ganesa quite briefly from 
the mouth of Brahma; now you tell me about the 
glory of Ganapati, who is the teacher of the 
yogis, in considerable detail.
Ы)сК14:
TmFTTsra^qtw 34*. ihftrnt 3TT11311
^ C R :
3 # Щ 1Т M t n U t t W W 3^ 11*11
In the earlier times the people of the three 
worlds performed a great рщй in Siddhasrama, 
where Radha and Krsna had met again after the 
expiry of the curse or hundred years separation 
pronounced by Srldama. Then О sage, how 
could Radha adored Ganesa first?
Щ 
fltffowjfcleflfcll
4 F H ^ 
RFtf 
W II4II
'<Й% xl RRT ^ 
xTl
RRiif 
*n% «irrarg 
11
RIWFT rFT 5tntsq[34ifhllt3ll
How could the Brahma, Visnu, Siva and other 
gods, the king of Nagas known as Sesa, the great 
serpents, the great king on earth, powerful 
demons, Gandharvas and other rulers adore 
Ganesa on earth. You kindly tell me in detail.
ч п в т з щ у
^Hl'cR) gfsjcft srh rfr jpratfT Rtfti 
m 
щ csforr 
^7311 c 11 
jrt уугвт w t w 304^ ^ rt^ i 
4^134^ 
^311411
Narayana said- Since the earth happens to be 
quite auspicious in three worlds it is adorable by 
all. The land of Bharata only bestows the reward 
of the good deeds. In the land of Bharata there is 
an auspicious region in which Siddhasrama is 
located which bestows grace, reputation and 
moksa.
ЦЧфЧгА RWTrfiT 
WcT fl 
т&ц fetffiT ^
 7TW ftnsf <П7сП1 \ о 11 
3% J^r fh^T: сьГчНКЧ:!
The great yogis, the ascetic, sage Kapila and 
others achieved excellence there, performing a 
hundred yajhas there, the god of gods achieved 
the position of Mahendra.
rR frr^rspt rtr R^qmfq 37^731
^
 RcRi 3^11 ^ 11
Because of this, the place is given the name of 
Siddhasrama. It is beyond the reach of all. О 
sage, Ganesa resides there always.
^ч^ыРчЬми|$ччмч’| ypiTRi 
^TTSST ЗЙЧШ XT 33ft 
^RT: 11 
11 
чттёт ццс(|^с) 
1рЕЙтщгот: I 
унеЬКУТ:11^П
There is a beautiful image of Ganesa studded 
with gems, which is adored on the full moon day 
of Vaisakha by the gods and the Nagas, humans,

=== PAGE 827 ===

722
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAtfAM
dem ons, G a n d h a rva s, the siddhas the Raksasas, 
the sages and the yogis.
jm \: сЬтП^У^ Ш WT M lffa: 11 ЯЧ11
A t that p o int o f tim e S iva also accom panied 
b y Pa rva tl, K a rttik e ya and other ganas arrived 
there together w ith B rah m a .
сШ55згпта #n?^r 4ff|: щ
ЯТТТ:
зтт^грш fhi: Ttsf 
f^4TTOT:i
ЗТВВЙ 4W ^nT t УЧсЫсцГмГ^: ЩИЯ'ЭИ
Sesa also arrived there w ith all the serpents. 
A fte r that, all the gods, M an u s and the sages also 
arrived there; all the gods and the kings arrived 
there in order to adore Ganesa. L o r d K rs n a also 
reached 
there 
together 
w ith 
the 
people 
o f 
D v a ra k a .
зтгзршт rTSJT 4^: TTTsf
Г: -ЩИЯйИ
3TRRTf 
W фьи|М|иц^Ус11|1ЯЯ11
трчш 
дщт sfft w 
i я о 11
S im ila rly N a n d a together w ith the people o f 
G o k u la also reached there; the beautiful R a d h a, 
the be lo ve d o f S ri K rsn a also reached there. 
A fte r the e xp iry o f a hundred years o f separation 
together w ith three crores o f cowherdesses o f 
G o k u la , w h o w ere quite strong like the elephant. 
R a d h a h avin g the beautiful teeth to ok her bath 
and w as clad in the beautiful and fine garm ent.
т а г Tit fatisiRr 7MT ъ nfumognHi 
g>RTT ^ снфснТпяяи
Th ereafter the chaste R a d h a w ashed her feet 
p retty w e ll and observing fast, controlling her 
senses reached the mandapa o f gem s.
Wcfiv4 fesmi xll
'■Э
She w ith the intention o f achieving K rsn a 
perform ed the puja o f Ganes'a bathing his im age 
w ith w ater o f the G a n g a .
sqrf Щ 4H4d<^l4tt Ш
 ^*rl<pRl:l 
' Щ 
bRtlW
ffeshT 4W f ^lf=Rt 3FPft tRTI 
ilRRTtf ЧТЖ ct ht ЩЙ ОТТ ШИЯ'кИ
■О
Thereafter R a d h a w h o happens to 
be the 
m other o f the V e d a s , the V a s u s , the universe, the 
m other o f intellectuals and filled w ith w isd o m , 
offered w hite flow ers to the gods and adored 
Ganesa like her son according to the m ethod 
prescribed in the Samaveda.
~Щс1 <rP4T?7 tyd •Jdd’U sigiu^tuil
il^ q y 
uli|^W4'-dcfi4J t Я Ч11
Г: 71^гФтарТ ЧЧМЧЧ)
Ч<Ц 
11
^TRT ?1гПТ
адгйчвлчйч гь-ufaR *г сь№пгчи?£П 
VKtifrTdcff-n^Rdium^Hui^i 
sm^tzrRTrq* w
T h e dw arfs, the pot-bellied person, the fat 
people, the people possessing divine lustre, those 
havin g the faces o f elephants, those h avin g the 
lustre o f fire, the one havin g the single tusk, the 
one w h o happens to be the teacher o f all the 
intellectuals and people o f w isd o m , the one w h o 
is adored b y B ra h m a , S iv a , Sesa sages, siddhas, 
ascetics and noble people, w h o is all virtu o u s, is 
eternal, is fo rm o f B rah m a n , the fo rm o f w e lfare , 
the place o f w e lfare , the one w h o rem oves all the 
obstructions, is peaceful, bestow er o f all the 
riches, the one w h o can m ake the people to cross 
the ocean o f the universe, the one w h o alw ays 
provides protection to those w h o take refuge in 
h im , is the fo rm o f m editation, is quite adorable 
and graceful to the devotees, the same Ganesa 
had to be adored.
ff?T KIRctT 
cRSTT 3Щ 
4tffl
■Нс(Ц;¥1Ьн 'dl'M 
xf -ctfllK ШП^оЦ
A fte r 
thus 
m editation, 
R a d h a , 
placed 
the 
flo w e r on his head and perform ed all the rights 
prescribed in the V e das.

=== PAGE 828 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 123
723
дЧ Р й И ЩШ M r 'ЩРТЙЧТ1 
^
 RR RTP% w
 
xfll} ^11
Thereafter with the performing of dhyanam 
she offered a bunch flowers at the lotus-like feet 
of Ganesa, having a protruding belly.
TTTrPT cuftTcR xfl
p f # : 
RiPyxR^K<&:l
3Tsf 
'dfofRl RTR jtlc=T|cbcfir«4lU^ 3 II
Thereafter, Radha, the dweller of Goloka 
herself offered the fragrant water of the holy 
places, 
Diirva-grass, 
unbroken rice, 
white 
flowers, fragrant sandal-paste and arghya to 
Ganesa.
ч м р fR iw vti RiR-лшд
R R 7Щ ГУГРТ 1 R R (Т Щ Щ 1 
cb^fl^|4RRi XT RR^I RRJggFp^l 
RR%- 
rTCR < ^1Ф1^Т)П#У|13Ч11
Then she offered a beautiful garland of 
Parijcita 
flowers 
soaked 
in 
sandal-paste. 
Thereafter Radha the dweller of Vmdavana 
pasted the body of Ganesa with kasturl, saffron 
and fragrant sandal-paste.
^
 cRR RPRtRf RFTOPIRT TTcff l 1 3 ^ 11 
fjJlP4gckt 9R cT Pd^fdRuf-eidhl 
^
 purftraT \тФ '^wmlvcum xTii^t9ii
Then Radha the dweller of the great lotus, 
took up the fragrant white flowers and soaking 
them with fragrant sandal-paste, offered them at 
the lotus-like feet of Ganes'a. Thereafter the 
beloved of Krsna of feed the fragrant material 
together with incense to lord Ganesa.
p t 
^
itr татш RUddlns 6 и
The primeval and eternal Radha then offered a 
lamp to Ganesa which removed the complete 
darkness.
^
 fgfgg ттщ Tpgig ТТЧЧГвТЧ'
tRHTfr r .gpcrarfw Chichi p b rifr ri 
RfUfrl R RpfR HlwiRUillPl RpIDJoll 
^fR R h sq ifr frlcHHi 
Rl
•giTctgrfH w ^R i RTRift r ii^
ii 
дсрттчрлМ rfggifr Iw gpft ri
CS 
Cn
pM ilft R TWlfbt Vl^W^rflPl R ll^ ll 
45|Rd*Ri H^dilRl ROyllRl R^rrfur Rl 
w 
ii
qTl^fiH.1
R£RR p r : oF^gf r rirrmi а&г R irs*n 
fw g m t 'wRdRui Twrimt iiRAr r i
^prd4 гТ11"кЧ11
p t 
^bUlHItillfa^Rdll
wjygrtfRmfai trt Г р н н RTRii^hii 
^
 f ^ f s R ip g
w t r p gfl^sg^iittvsii
pFR Rpfct rrt RRir*£ll 
т р э ? p f 
pig d R ry riM i
p p r R rt trt д ф т ^ а п й р и 'к ч u 
R р д р р щ 5^1
hHdl4i<'i 
-gfRcT R fcnftfd^llHо II
RHisf r p t 
p t iM fp ff p n 
зтрд f& f 3 r fp R j ^хпчяц пч 
rW
t prafrffrftpfti 
a tp g r^ p ^ w pim rf& Tgph^:ii4?ii 
MRt^id •ynvM r pixrpxif^fn^i
g R g p pRiptRi 14^11 
^
 rvi^lrM-dl^ роЩГ:1УНШ?т 
^tgr щ эдцдч g 
giR sgpi^im ^n
RRR44T im t^4teg#T gi i ч ч 11
ЧГ^ТТрдИ cblRd^dbcdcIlRTHll 
&> R Tft punrd^ RlbdRuiRR т р т и ч ^ п 
^4|дцд R g g ■nwr?! wt^n^n^i 
Ш ^ШТ ЩЪ ^ Rt PRRR Р^ИЧ'ЭИ

=== PAGE 829 ===

724
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAiyAM
dWlc( ТП7ГТ 43vhT 
ЧТЯЧЯТ 
Wt^TTI 
Wim^ll
Then the tasteful food and others eatables and 
beverages which we difficult to get in the three 
worlds. She also offered the ripe fruits, the roots 
from the villages and the forest, the sweet balls 
of sesamum and several other types of sweet 
balls of barley and flour besides other sweet 
times including svastikas. Several types of 
friends articles besides sugar, ghee, milk, honey, 
guda, curd, payasam and heaps of banana fruits 
besides other sweet and vegetables with food 
including rice were offered to Ganapati by Radha 
the beloved of Krsna. She also offered the gem- 
studded lion-throne. The five garments sanctified 
by fire were given by Radha, the dweller of the 
mountain of hundred peaks to Ganesa. She also 
offered to Ganesa the betel with camphor. 
Thereafter, the mistress of the cowherdesses, 
offered from water seven holy places to Ganesa 
for drinking which was quite auspicious and 
cool. Thereafter Radha offered to Ganes'a an 
invaluable white fly-whisks. Radha who always 
dwells in the heart of Krsna also gave away in 
charity, Kamadhenu cows with calves and 
performing repentance, she offered a bunch of 
flowers and recited the mUlamantra making 
sixteen type of offerings. Thereafter Radha the 
dweller of Kalindl recited the mantra 
4 nt 
Г^и(сн|^н 
of sixteen letters which 
was like the best of kalpatarus and recited it a 
thousand time. Radhas then filled with devotion 
became overwhelmed and tears started flowing 
from her eyes and she started adoring Ganesa.
obstructions peaceful, well-built, pleasant and 
beyond measure; you are adores by the fore-most 
of the gods and the demons. You are the one who 
serves as a sun for the lotus-like gods and happen 
to be the resting place for the welfare. I offer my 
prayer to the same type of Ganesa. The stotra is 
quite auspicious and removes the terrific 
obstructions, whosoever recites it in the early 
morning, he is freed from all the obstructions.
ТЩТо 9ЦфШ|чцД)4до Зт)о ГЩЦЧТ0 
11 ^ i 11
Tlfaehlcira
^qraf5$yi ^ 
4^
144411^011
^ чЬг RSiguq f e w w t ТЩТ1 
Ч: 
^11
Radha said- You happen to be eternal abode, 
eternal Brahman, the lord of all, remover of the

=== PAGE 830 ===

724
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAiyAM
Chapter -124
Prayer of Radha by Ganesa, Brahma, Siva 
and Ananta
ТТЩ 
№T T 
Rtfh
rrtrt: rtcr ^
 
wi
З Ш Т Ш Т Н : W R tM w n?R 4.IR ll
N araya n a 
said- 
T h e 
chaste 
R a d h a adored 
Ganes'a appropriately and o ffe rin g prayer to h im , 
presented to h im the gem -studded ornam ents fo r 
all the lim bs. O n hearing the prayer o f R a d h a and 
fin ding her adoration and the articles given b y 
her in charity, Ganesa spoke to R a d h a w h o 
happened to be the m other o f the universe and 
havin g the peaceful nature.
rfct тртт 
^Т*Г1
ЩГ&ПШ Rcpft 
W lfercTTII^II
Rc4K4<44dH ShT^RT ^ 
r tt g w w a r r t r t - R 4 gn ^i:iiK ii 
sftfcHjxtiUN 
fR ^ r: снГчёПЪ^: I
ТГРТЩЩТЫ^ tR fojT MIUllBlcbl W lim i 
RTRTfftf^cU W
 c ^ U ll^ rt trm :l
4TRRtJT 33TR

=== PAGE 831 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAiyDA, CHAPTER 124
725
Ganesa said- О m other o f the universe, the 
adoration provided b y y o u , 
is educative fo r 
others. О auspicious one, yo u are the form o f 
B rah m a n and reside alw ays in the heart o f K rsn a ; 
he is the one w hose lotus-like feet are m editated 
upon b y B ra h m a , S iva , Sesa and other gods, 
Sanaka and sages, K a p ila and others, devotees 
and siddhas, yo u happen to be the beloved o f the 
same K rs n a . Sri K rs n a happens to be M a d h a va 
from the right side and R a dh a em erged from his 
left side. L a k s m I the m other o f the universe 
appeared fro m his left side.
Trah 
Щ : ^ t t ^ тдГйЧгТи: t
fciyciift ct,i4^mfui w гГФКщ^Гчщ)|1йп
Y o u happen to 
be. the m other o f Vasus, 
Param esvarl, Miilaprakrti and the m other o f the 
V e d a s . О m other, all the hum ans o f the universe 
represent y o u r fo rm , the entire universe represent 
the deeds and yo u happen to be the cause o f the 
sam e.
T*c( b fe fr 
TTrHfS ^ffT НГРР-Ш
siiibfiiJ 
w irW Pi^fg^ii^oii
W h e n 
B ra h m a 
falls 
at 
the 
tim e 
o f 
the 
dissolution o f the universe, a m om ent o f V isn u is 
counted. T h e one w h o recites the nam e o f R a d h a 
and then o f K rsn a he surely goes to the Goloka i f 
the order is reversed, 
one 
earns the sin o f 
Brahmahatya.
^jTHcTt 4 # W
 ЧТЩЖ ftRTT ?fr:l
fqtftsr w rim 
ч т а ш п п
§:<si¥iUf4^cr xti
Y o u are the m other o f the universe and H a ri 
happens to be the father but the one w h o is 
be yon d everything is m ore adorable than the 
parents. Such o f the people w h o in the land o f
Bharata recite the nam e o f K rsn a o n ly and 
denounce R a d h a , their race gets destroyed and 
have to suffer m ental agon y fo r long. T h e y are 
then fallen in the terrific hell and have to rem ain 
there till the sun and the m oon.
4 Ъ Tp-ryET 
Ф к: W l^ 4 l4 d :ll^ l
TRf ^cfRT ЗЙЩ ъ р ф tjRtPri
ЩШ sraftr jpifaT:
T h e one w h o bestows the kn o w le dg e is k n o w n 
as the teacher besides the mantras and the 
tantras. T h e same mantras and tantras represent 
yo u r devotion. B y reciting the mantras o f the 
gods, 
the 
people 
achieved 
the 
extrem ely 
inaccessible devotion o f goddess D u rg a .
fhboq- trt 
tiFTcTi «ШШЯ *TI
гГсГГ У1ЧШ w o t: 
■Щ^ПТМ^И
B y reciting the mantra o f S iva w h o is the 
cause 
o f 
the 
universe, 
one 
achieves 
the 
inaccessible lotus-like feet o f the lord.
fcPTT: 
гг gefa Щ1зт
4ls¥ii?l 
4-50fa
B y achieving the inaccessible lotus-like feet o f 
the lord, the virtuous person never disow ns them 
even fo r the fraction o f a m om en t in future.
ctf 3 ^ 
cb4^<rlPl^-rH^II?<ill
4ы4сЧ<3| 
xT 1-1К cl I
щ
 xj w m t h 4 4 4 H 4 ^ pGi
In the sacred land o f Bharata, such o f the V a is 
nava person 
w h o 
recites 
yo u r mantra 
w ith 
devotion or received the kavaca w h ich shatter 
the base o f the deeds and recites it w ith great 
devotion , he redeems w ith h im self, thousands o f 
his generations.
cFcitj 
% fawjdwfa 
о II
Such o f the persons w h o adore her daily 
appropriately and wears the kavaca o fferin g the 
costum es, ornam ents, sandal-paste to the teacher, 
he surely becom es equal to V is n u .

=== PAGE 832 ===

726
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
^ WCTvRi ТП&Б сШ
” 
чЭ 
>0
felFT ш т cRJ ^Tr^nfR 7ТШЧ.1 R^ll 
^ 
?P#T ^ t^T tT ^HITTI
фУ1тЦН-А1М ^RRtlR? 11
ЩИТ W dddd) h)4lfayid<*tfzfa:!
gtfrdts? 
gsm if4^;iR 6ii
■Rc^ TJSJ^at % 
4jH41'c^ I
ТТ59Ш ^
 M 
"Щ?тч;1 R Ч11
О mother whatever has been given by you to 
me, make them purposeful. Presently for my 
pleasure you distribute all these things to the 
Brahmana. Only than I shall take my food. The 
things which are fit for giving away in charity 
besides the daksina should be given to the 
Brahmanas which best-owed the merit beyond 
measure.
siiSiuiHi g ri -ш 
gtsRT^ram
f^eRT xf itc^oM ill^ c ^ d ^TT:ll^^||
The valorous Radha is accompanied by three 
crores 
of 
cowherdesses. 
The 
strong 
cowherdesses had driven me out. I also advise all 
of you to adore Ganesa first of all, because he 
bestows the merit beyond measure. In case the 
adoration is performed in the middle, one gets 
the medium type of merit and when his adoration 
is performed last of all, one gets very little merit.
^1
TTHfifa?€j щ tPTT TTSTOT ч Ш : tr : из о И
О Radha, the mouth of the Brahmanas, is 
equal to the mouth of god. Therefore whatever is 
eaten by the Brahmanas, it surely reaches the 
gods.
fayiw wsrarqw WRpf TlfcfT
W
 гТ^ПЛТ^ ЗЙ1ТГ 
R^IRVII
О sage, thereafter all those articles were 
distributed by Radha to the Brahmanas which 
pleased the Ganesa immensely.
Trdfwtfkfi 
0$¥l$)4R?lcbl:l
^uyiviricl гГИ^ЦЦ
In the meantime Brahma, Siva, Sesa and other 
gods also arrived under the banyan tree for 
performing adoration.
rR Щ fvrd^tl ^KcTlbdM 7T: I
T$rai:ll^ll
At that point of time a messenger of Siva 
whose throat has been dried up spoke to the 
gods, goddess and Sri Krsna.
■фТр?Т 
rl ^ R t l
«^M'HMgdl W ЗГр*1 ШШЦЩЧ^||^\3||
The messenger said- Radha the daughter of 
Vrsabhana reciting Svastivacana adored Ganes'a 
first of all.
Radha adored Ganesa in the presence of the 
gods, the sages and the goddesses.
•ddtfl'cRi ЖТсБТП? 
R4^ddl:l
KThT 
TRRT <d4ll4d:ll3 ?ll
On hearing the words of the messenger all the 
men the sages, Manu, kings, gods and goddesses 
started laughing.
тщщ^г -щ 
fa rm spj: i
rT 
UTcRf 
-R II
w
w
 ^C|4lf4d:l
gf^TT: jrag: Traf gf%4n^: Mfd9td l:ll3 ? ll
g4^t ЧТО: 
dtltdtyil
^ ш т : 
У±1ч4<1113*11
RukminI and other damsels beside the goddess 
however felt surprised at the same time 
Sarasvatl, Savitrl, Parvatl, the great goddess, 
Satl, Rohini, Sanjna, Svaha and other goddesses 
delightfully arrived here. All the chaste wives of 
the sages also arrived the. The ascetics. Manu, all 
the gods, the humans, also arrived there together 
with Krsna.
^ 
feM fol: gF3Tt 
: ^рщй|
All of them performed the adoration in the 
auspicious time. All the strong as well as the 
weak people adored separately.

=== PAGE 833 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 124
727
щ р л ч ! ^ хттМ 
?i
yi& m i HHsf ъ т ^ ш ч т <!$& wn ? ^ и
A hundred crores of heaps of the sweets balls 
were heaped up, the number such heaps was half 
of those comprising of the balls of sugar and 
svastikas.
ЗШТЧТ
STPtanfP XBcTT^cf 
щ ф }
There were hundred crores of heaps of the 
cereals and other delicious items. The delicious 
and sweet fruits were available in large number.
^RRZT rTI
cwf: ушпзЩФ Ытпчт ъ
The adoration could be performed with honey, 
milk, curd and ghee which were flowing in 
hundreds of canals and could be used for 
performing pftja in all the three worlds.
4ЯТ УкУТ 4 ^ 
ТГЧЩ^Т ТИЖШ71
Cs 
c 
СЧчД 
\S
xniift 
Timwr TiRmiii^ ii
After performing puja, all of them took their 
seats. Thereafter Parvatl getting filled with 
affection went to Radha.
7TT ттат Trr^cft 
ттш тт ЭДЧ rll
yyrafrqf Xf 
а д TIRf* ^ Ill^ o ll
зтттиад ?pFT ^ Ш
 ^ rn rrtR I 
туш 4 ft 
TTsri ^ад адщт^тп'^п
Finding Parvatl with her, Radha got up at once 
and started tailing to her in a sweet manner. Both 
of them embraced each other, kissing each other 
at the same time, thereafter, Parvatl embracing 
Radha spoke to her the sweet words.
Шут ятт tsfrznftr ад тгат Rfrnpnrmj 
4нт н fgi^TPTT -sfarra TTmr^uriu^n
Parvatl said- О Radha, you are the abode of 
welfare and as such what should I ask you. 
Getting freed from the curse of Srfdama, the 
agony of your flames of separation has been 
subsided.
т а чад-, жтттадг^ 
й нет
I had always been thinking about you, 
similarly your mind also remains devoted to me. 
Therefore there is no difference between the two 
of us. In the same way as there is no difference 
between Purusa and s'akti.
Уад 
PTPfhl
xf адРН ■yidTxPslRyich^ll^kll 
Such of my devotees who denounce you and 
your devotees denounce me, all of them fall into 
the kumbhipaka hell where they have to remain 
till the life of the sun and the moon.
d^leuiH^elrlhi XTc4% 
fd<4J I'iS Ч11
Such of the degraded people who consider 
Radha and Madhava to be different, their race is 
uprooted and they fall into the hell remaining 
there for a long time.
4lfpl RHR-yrfP Щ 
Щ 1
im w g ri u s 11
Thereafter they have to be bom as pigs for 
hundred 
generations 
spreading 
over 
sixty 
thousand years and are then bom as the inserts of 
the refuse.
Jru>cR:l
-ш ~т w m n iw ii
It is you who have adored my son Ganesa and 
not myself. He is adorable by all at all the times. 
As he is to you, he is same to me.
■щрщадЩу grqyicTrdyPfemr^dii 
р а д й y i y # g •RRHi
foffcf Ш 
7ТТНГ ffc|EP?aU54^ll>f II
O goddess, there would be no separation 
between Radha and Madhava through out the life 
in the same way as the whiteness cannot be 
separated from the milk. In the sacred land of 
Bharata by adoring lord Ganesa who is the 
remover of the obstruction, you would surely 
achieve Sri Krsna.

=== PAGE 834 ===

BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
728
ГсЩ*&Ч ТГЛЯГ трщгдтд^пцoil
You are the goddess of the divine dance and 
Krsna happens to be the lord. It is always 
auspicious to have the union of a clever damsel 
with a clever person.
sfr^FT: ?гго£ф>т Wraqfcft T#l 
»£>;me fjwpt я? ттятщпч ?n
O chaste lady after the lapse of hundred years 
of separation, due to the curse of Sridama, you 
have 
achieved salutation. 
You enjoy the 
company of Sri Krsna today with my blessing.
TJ^fTI
ФВТ:11Ч^11
О beautiful one, with my unprecendeted 
command 
you 
clad yourself in 
beautiful 
garments, like a damsel who always unites with a 
noble person.
зп§: Trird штат: 
f w n i
At the command of Parvatl the female friend^ 
of Radha started decorating her beautifully. They 
made Radha to sit on the beautiful lion-throne.
MTrTt тзготат tit w r r a t яд- 
ттатат 
^
 t s t e m trrt? rq ;ii4 ^ ii
A garland of gem was placed around her neck; 
she was made the hold a beautiful lotus flower in 
her eight hand.
^ 1
трзтГ irlnft 
ti^ t ЗР^ИЧЧИ
Then the beautiful cowherdesses applied red 
paint on the feet of Radha; the cowherdesses 
named Sundari applied vermilion over her head.
3R$T ТПТЩсТ Tfrwra: TSR^sJc^l 
■y-ctitictiqd ТЩТ ЗЩТТ ШШ1 Tnffll4dll
chtod ji^AIckl ёТ хГГЩ;?р1Ч51^111Ч'Э11 
тнчичц Trafed згатт гр^чт Tufti 
зпчгёщгатчщттлт ЩНГ 1P9R4W4.II4^II
4lci(4rtl 
TTT^ JlMje’dl Ч;9Ц^ЯЭДЧ,1 
T % Т 1Т Ш TThft T t^ T JI^ fa ffl«Т.11Ч Ч II 
гГГ ^ H lfd llV c b i cRt 4fh4TTYcTJ3fTqi 
$>1сч4Ч<л<шЯ «Г Н Ы Ч «h'TJiHl'NqHH,! 1 d ° • I 
ъщ зг с # т т ш и 
Ч & Щ Я^ЗТ Ъ Ч|[ч^М Я^Нё&Ч11^11
fnf^gFrt 
тп1тзшт ^
■р М я д т Ш зт 
d и
f?^rt згапт чШг 31 T J# tfI T i r f w Tlcftl 
w
t 3T чЪ?Г<Ш ‘| fd n rf fcT^nt T T ln id 3 1 
ТЧТЩ -фкгпчтч 71*ЯТЧТсП ^ гГГс Ш
^ т т й ч ч ш зг ъ т зг ^ h m ^ i i d ^ n 
ш
т еВНЧШШ Ч Й Т Г 31 чтагЯЧЗП 
«БЧёТНГ W d JH T Т Н зр<рчыШ|1^ ЧП 
зг^пт т$ ш ч зг т & т 3its^
-гг ф т $
т а г 3RPTPRf ёГ -Щ Ц xf PTsftft Tpftl 
З^Т ^ R R c p ^ R t ТёТёРЭТ ё! t H I ^ T R I I ^ I I 
ёБ^ЩЧМТ ^ «n ivf f%?I4T4t З Ш Т TUI 
щ щ н зт щ TR t ^ г Г < я з г Г « с П { | |^ || 
f^oifjraT щ fjEoiRf ё ш т grfriw 
Р ^ Т Я Я Т Й T m r s n i W vTIkRTM jllddll 
т т щ п ^ Ш ч т я 31 
^тт.м
й TTsf few * ятзп ШЩ: ^тт^?дщ ц\эо|| 
ш
т я я я ш т ^ я т т % : тт^ттптппэ^м
The sandal-paste on the place of parting here 
was brightened, the chaste Malatl made the 
beautiful hair-do, which was adorned with the 
garland of jasmine flowers. Her breasts were 
adorned with the sandal-paste as well as kastiirl 
which could attract the mind of even the sages, 
Malavatl on the other hand offered her a garland 
of white and fragrant campaka flower. A 
cowherdesses who was well-versed in the love- 
sports adorned the body of Radha with the gem- 
studded ornaments and made Radha more 
passionate, who was already filled with passion. 
The chaste Lalita applied the collyrium in the 
eyes of Radha which were like the lotus petals of

=== PAGE 835 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 124
729
the w in ter season; besides beautiful garm ent and 
she w as m ade to hold the Parijata flo w e r given 
b y Indra. T h e chaste cowherdesses Sus'Ila m ade 
R a d h a understand the m ethod o f serving the 
beverages to K rs n a . 
K a la va tl the m other o f 
R S d h a rem em bered all the sixteen arts o f the 
ladies w h ich had been forgotten due to the evil 
tim es. 
S udh a m u kh I, 
her 
sister, 
attracted 
her 
attention to the perform ing o f the love-sports, 
K a m a la on the other hand arranged the bed for 
the u nion w ith the jasm ine flow ers and the lotus 
leaves plastered w ith sandal-paste. T h e chaste 
C am p ava tl 
h o ld in g 
the 
beautiful 
сатрака 
flow ers soaking them w ith the sandal-paste, kept 
them in the tree leaves fo r the use o f K rsn a . 
Th ereafte r, in order to please K rsn a , the flow ers 
o f banana trees, the bunch o f flow ers o f kadamba 
tree and the garlands w ere prepared. T h e beloved 
o f K rs n a , m ade fo r the use o f K rs n a , the fragrant 
and charm ing betel besides the fragrant w ater. A t 
the same tim e the. gods and the sages witnessed 
that 
the 
entire asrama 
w as 
filled w ith 
the 
fragrance 
o f gorocana. 
A l l 
o f 
them 
w ere 
surprised and spoke to K rsn a . Thereafter lord K rs 
na w h o k n e w about everything to them .
a tf q w тГ 
WSTfaT TlfiR&T!
Rtf 
fcrawu
S ri K rs n a said- T h e g lo ry o f R a d h a had faded 
because o f the m ental agony o f the separation; 
she had lost all the know le dge .
й ч з й 
RRTK rt m t I
t a n i r ifomi 
йзгапьэзп
R 
RSgOT yiiURTMfall^ll
She has regained the kn ow ledge after the lapse 
o f hundred years because o f the lustre o f R a d h a, 
Siddhasrama had becom e ye llo w ish , her lustre 
provides pleasure like the crores o f m oons and 
soothing effect to the eyes.
ctRJRT 
RTRRtRTI
\3
^>ТНТ^ТШ1Т1|\ЭЧ11
O n hearing this, the sages, the ascetics, the 
goddesses beside the gods like B ra h m a and S iva 
w ere surprised.
REfR RIRT 
RlrtAJIcqqjiHII 
R i trtrt ^
^
crr^ r 
ii
T h e y arrived there ra pidly and bow ed before 
the same in reverence; thereafter all the people o f 
the three w orlds had an audience w ith R & dh ika.
Rtf|4t RRRHT R ^ h n ^ rra rq ;iltit9 ll 
^RTOT
TTT Riwdi RTift RcftRl
_ct>3r^4t Rtimsn rrctihj 
4 t4 lr4 R 4 *A IPi 
o il
RpIT R TjfRcIT ^R RR R Ч1ЧТГЧЧ1
R 
?ll
RcRRIRnRT 
R RRT hfrldhT^IRII^ Я и 
RHfcfRRT Refill? fetTRl yyftwfm
'O 
«V
M^feSTOT R 
RTrlT^lli^ll
rrt 
яГя^сгГгту
■^пстотч.и^'ки
чШ ч: RHfa: щаггШсП
Rtrgfa: fsHiTHifR: 
4 II
5i 
PwrummiTi €^mfR<TTqj
RTRfRSH^T 
flTOT RR4rET?f
i d \э 11
с^щчт Чсьчин r <fi4Hi^i RctiPf^iTi
R ^T T fR R t R4T 9КЧЧМ ^3ITfiRfqR<i<SII
R chl4*|C4lviqi RTT^I 
RfelRRcRTWR ri IR^ird5T'HAcfJ4.l I R 11 
^TRt
чтчтщШ^этзщ^щгоч{78Ш1ч;и ч ° 11
R^rh 
RTRR^T R qfdl<HRi{l

=== PAGE 836 ===

730
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
&4IW4 ^ фЫЛЗД ЧТЧГЛТ: ||<^|| 
cfnSuTT ТГШТ ^гтат 754 ^rTWRfq тп 
гК5Ш ТТ тттп4 W ^ f
ятгатчтятщтш 
hfasMIRI
SRTT tTPbt Tfn.gaif ?l9^ :W « fw ir^ !l^ ^ l|
5T ^41^4^:11^^11
<d<4i T^kfHwn^i
^ w n ^ c n w Щ WT$ft Xt «ГЩВ|^ ЦII 
Trnfwfi Tmwrt 
fyfefef^jfi^i 
SHTRTOTSJft §TRTS5lt
T h e lustre o f her b o d y resem bled the w hite 
campaka flo w e r w h ich w as quite pleasing and 
ch ann ing and could attract the m inds o f the 
sages. She had beautiful hair, her b o d y was 
beautiful and she appeared like a dam sel o f 
sixteen years, h avin g hard breasts, the developed 
pelvic 
region, 
slander 
w aist 
and 
developed 
nipples. H e r face could put to shame crores o f 
the m oons. She alw ays rem ained sm iling and had 
the beautiful teeth. H e r eyes resem bled the lotus 
flo w e r o f the w in te r season. She w as the fo rm o f 
M a h a la k sm i, the fo rm o f seed, prim eval, eternal 
and the fo rm o f eternal B rah m a n , besides being 
the goddess o f the life o f lord K rsn a . She is the 
one w h o is adored fo r achieving the supreme 
soul; she is b e yon d everyth in g, the fo rm o f 
B ra h m a n , 
u n in vo lve d , 
everlasting 
de vo id 
o f 
qualities, P rakrti, the one w h o bestows grace on 
her 
devotees, 
the 
fo rm 
o f 
truth, 
spotless, 
auspicious, pu rifier o f the dow n -trodden, the one 
w h o sanctifies even the auspicious h o ly places, 
possessing the divine g lo ry , the creative instinct 
o f B ra h m a , 
the 
beloved 
o f lord, 
the 
great 
goddess, the m other o f M ah a visn u the goddess o f 
the divine dance, adorable, passionate, goddess 
o f 
the 
divine 
dance, 
clad 
in 
the 
garm ent 
sanctified b y fire , the one w h o m oves at her o w n 
w ill, the abode o f w e lfare , the one w h o is served 
by the seven cowherdesses m o vin g w hite fly - 
w hisks o ve r her, the one w h o is adored b y the 
fo u r fem ale friends at her feet, the one w h o is 
adorned w ith the gem -studded ornam ents, the 
one w hose tem ples are shining w ith the ear
ornam ent w o rn b y her, the one w h o w ears an 
elephant gem in her nose w h ic h keeps o n 
hanging, the one w h o had the nose like the 
curved beak o f G a ru d a , the one w hose b o d y is 
plastered w ith saffron, kasturi end sandal-paste, 
the one w h o is quite passionate and w alks like 
the elephant, she is quite attractive h avin g a 
beautiful nose, to becom es victorious w ith the 
god o f love she is alw ays passionate and the best, 
she is the one havin g a blossom ed flo w e r in her 
hand, she is the one h o ld in g Parijata flo w e r and 
the gem -studded m irro r in her h an d, she is the 
one w h o is seated on the lion-throne Studded 
w ith various types o f gem s, she is the one w h o 
alw ays adored the 
lotus-like feet o f K rs n a ; 
adored b y padma w h ic h are the fo rm o f w elfare 
and those lotus-like feet are alw ays placed b y her 
in her heart, 
she is im m ensely em otional a 
spotless devotee, a chaste w o m a n , a graceful one, 
quite proud, h avin g fa ir-co m p le xio n , the one 
w h o alw ays resides in he heart o f K rs n a , the one 
w h o is dearer to K rsn a than all his b e lo ve d , the 
one w h o is sw eet-spoken, the one w h o em erged 
from the left side o f K rs n a , the one w h o is 
unprecedented in the qualities and the beauty. 
T h e one w h o resides in Goloka, the one w h o is 
the goddess o f all the goddesses, the suprem e 
goddess, the mistress o f the cow herdesses, quite 
secretive, the one w h o provides all the success is 
the fo rm o f success could be achieved b y deep 
devotion , the one w h o is d ifficu lt to be achieved 
the one w h o is adored b y her devotees and the 
one w h o appeared in the land o f Bharata as the 
daughter o f Vrsabh ana. I adore such a type o f 
R a d h a .
щнч -штат 
адметл<1:1 
ТО филч|ькт:11<?\эи 
w t 
<ргтэг qwctOqj 
W 
ттж bramfiri I ч 11
I f a person p e rform ing m editation 
adores 
R a d h a , he is freed fro m the cycle o f birth and 
death in this w o rld and then becom e attendant o f 
K rs n a after death. Thereafter B ra h m a the creator 
o f the universes started eulogising R a d h a , w h o 
happens to be the m other o f several B rahm as.

=== PAGE 837 ===

KRSINfA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 124
731
4 ^ ^ н те м 
tr 
| ^ 11
tm n i
щ я /гГ ч ^ ч М ^гч ч т Ш п ^ о о ц 
iwTsfqr ч чт ?m ^ аггзч-учТ чич,) 
ч 4«чГт TcwsfcT пит gmyu1fAifm*o *ц 
ctmt чщ?г ^ ^
 '^^Tcr g^i 
feSTSI^ -фтг^гет ТЩЦЩ гг 
I * о 4 11
Brahma said- О great goddess, my mind gets 
devoted at your lotus-like feet. Therefore with 
the inspiration, I adored you for sixty thousand 
divine years in the land of Bharata at P uskara-ks 
etra. But still I could not have a look at your 
lotus-like feet. So much so that I could not have 
a look at them even in dream. At that point of 
time a divine voice was heard from the sky, "In 
the V araha-kalpa, in the sacred land of Bharata, 
in S iddh asram a you will see the lotus-like feet of 
Ganes'a".
жтт krefaupwcn
p|ctc?*c| Г Щ Ш Р Т
11*0311
How can you have the devotion of Radha 
Madhava being involved in various types of 
worldly pleasures. О virtuous one, you detach 
yourself from everything; it is difficult to be 
achieves by all.
h f f r n f гщ д чт c n f e t i с Р П Т : т Ш Ч М * о * | |
On hearing this, I felt unconcerned getting 
disappointed with my tapas but the fruit of my 
ta p a s has been well rewarded today.
4^4i№i ц(<ч<ч ч ш 
S4BRT ечтчГчугуу 
fm n
ifRft T R ^ g - fegj: 7RT??T 
Щ ^=r ^ ttt: чсгй Ararat wTsr^fftrii*o^ h
Mahadeva said- The one whose lotus-like feet 
which are adored by LaksmI are difficult to be 
achieved. The gods like Brahma, the sages, 
Manus, siddh as, the noble people, yo g is always
adore him. But still they are unable to achieve 
her who resides in his heart.
3TRT ч5с(М
clcdW cl^Hlcll 
ЧШ|[Гч ЧГ 
Щ 
ЧТЧТ: WtjJ ЧТгГ
Ananta said- You are the one who performed 
the best of the vrata, are the mother of the Vedas 
and Puranas. Myself, Sarasvatl and the sages are 
unable to recite your prayer.
3TWRR ЧШЧ ЧЧЧ 
• xf
By reciting the prayers by us lord Hari starts 
frowning but he gets frightened with your 
denouncement. This is the difference between 
the two.
Pet 
% x* ■ЧЧ1<И!;1
чГ4Ч^1^ШИ1*о*||
Thus all the gods, the goddesses, Manu and all 
other people who had arrived here, offered 
prayer to her with reverence.
GvwRTI 4 WcHIW 
# fw ;|
тТёТТЩТ 4 rJ^Rn; 3^r^r4^>Jw4,ll**oll
Realising this the face of all the damsels 
including Rukmini fell in shame; they took deep 
sighs, fading even mirrors.
UrWmi 
fi9T«fIl
xj 
1ЩЩ ЯТЩ11***И
О Narada, Satyabhama who was without food 
and was slander waisted, discarded her pride like 
a dead person.
■^fft 
о 4{il о $ftBF®TF3RT®о ЗтТ° ЯТЩ ЧТ°
1|и>1чрн 9i а ?гу)ч iR^rtnldcW wr ч т

=== PAGE 838 ===

732
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
3TST
Chapter -125 
Rajasiiya Yajiia of Vasudeva 
ЗШУ
4|UjVT^4l^|c| 4ISIIWltfldH f^tl
sngg f% 
gr pft oMUsqi^faii^ii
N a ra d a said- О lo rd, after the adoration o f 
Ganesa and the reccing o f Radhd-stotra w h at 
happened thereafter y o u please tell m e.
ЧТТгаЩ ЗсПтГ 
гтй ^ ^дт?д wrgg.-i 
д т р д # gfni^ g w g^a&i iя 11 
gg^gt t^ggr g ч<Ч1^ч4сь^1
?ir^iui444i 
и
^g 43rihui ^ ^ 1^ ^ W c(i:ii>jii
N a ra ya n a said- A t the Ganesa-piijana-tirtha, 
the gods, the yogis and the ascetics had arrived 
and all w ere seated under the shade o f the 
banyan tree. O u t o f them , V a s u d e va and D e v a k I 
enquired from S iv a , B ra h m a , Sesa and other 
ascetics 
respectfully, 
" O 
virtuous 
one, 
you 
people 
are 
graceful 
to 
the 
dow n-trodden 
therefore h o w can the degraded people like us 
achieve the best position? H o w shall w e cross the 
ocean o f universe? y o u kin d ly tell m e.
’qgifa-Mtut gqf g g g g g Ч1ЙЧП:1
©N
ч tp'OHiift gterffr ч ^гт ■gfevuhgrnmn 
ЩЛ*Ч|Пд 3<Щ1Й sWRM^Mlfa gi 
cnrifg wHidMifq fgj^grgNifr gn^n 
fgi 
ggffur д#п^д ^шгатм
gWT g Iqwj^TbHi TjRIT ■H^dlsd.'ll'ail 
4I^RTH i Ш: PIT д§ЩТ1
ctT2#T g ufcnfai дцр ^тштм^п
Y o u , people indeed serve as the sailors fo r 
crossing the boat o f the ocean o f the universe, 
because the h o ly places are not alw ays in the 
w ater and the gods never emerge from the earth.
T h e auspicious yajiia vrata, fasting, perform ing 
o f tapas, g ivin g a w a y charities in m a n y w a ys , the 
adoration o f the Brahm anas and the gods, p u rify 
the perform er fo r a long tim e but the V aisna vas 
p u rify people w ith their v e ry presence, w ith the 
touch o f the dust o f the feet o f the devotees o f 
V is n u , the entire universe gets pu rified at once. 
T h e h o ly places, the ocean as w e ll as the 
m ountains also get purified.
TJTT 
Vld^W wic^l
■*Tt5?nft 
W ^ WfaTT Щ119,11
w f 
g 
gzrri
wr fngg gnrtsi Ttfl ffgt^g gii^o n 
?$g prgf чшт дтРят g 
i 
g^ggg: дтдт ярд tfgg; ^ggqji 
gguikfr %prrggig 
11 n 11
T h e gods also get desirous o f m eeting o f a 
V aisn a va fo r the destruction o f their sins like the 
fire burning the w o o d . Such o f the person w h o is 
unable to achieve the kn ow ledge b y keeping the 
com pany o f the V a isn a va s, indeed is a fo o l. T h e 
know ledge otherw ise is tasteful like the m ilk and 
the curd. Therefore , 
О teacher o f the great 
intellectuals, I happen to be the father o f K rs n a 
and have kept his co m p an y fo r lo ng. S im ila rly 
D e v a k I too happens to be his m other. Liste n in g 
to the w ords o f V a s u d e va , S iva h im se lf w h o 
happens to be w ell-versed in all the V e d a s 
laughed aloud and said.
зспд
riPraul prfggt д|И|-тг«ига;кпт^| 
gifgfTfrramr 
f w n i^
ii
дщ^дтд ш гзд д§^д?д Ф зы \
*nfpr: д^ддтдт# ддПттшд grs^rRg: 11
M ah a de va said- T o live w ith the intellectuals 
som etim es becom es disgraceful to them , as the 
people w h o get pu rified w ith the w ater o f G a iig a 
still go to the other h o ly places. T h e father o f K rs 
na is quite a w ell-read person and his father was 
the fo rm o f V a s u and was descendants o f the 
race o f K asyap a .

=== PAGE 839 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAIVPA, CHAPTER 125
733
3 # ^
 тщгШЩ ^R T 4 ft тЩчУ) I ^ 11 
femjqRJT fTTWrr 4 Ж4Т ^FmmfTI 
34 rT 4tftcTT: УГУЗ^НГ ^43>413Ш?Ч1!
4W f^tlt 4 4^3 41 
4T44TI
ещзй 4413Щ?ГЗТ 34Ш 4fi34T3f4l I ^ 11
T h e y have a clear and auspicious approach 
tow ards K rs n a and they seek know ledge fro m us, 
w h o are unaw are o f the personality o f K rsn a . 
T h e illusion o f V is n u is D u rg a . M ah a m a ya and 
overpow ers even the intellectuals. T h e illusion o f 
V is n u is be yon d the reach o f all the people in the 
three w o rlds. W e people alw ays get influenced 
w ith the sam e, influences w ith the same illusion, 
B ra h m a the creator o f the V e d a s , perform ed 
tapas fo r his w h ole life at his lotus-like feet and 
w anted to taste such a type o f K rsn a .
4Tct| ??ГЩ: 4ft 
4133*4 411^11
W ith the fall o f ten lakh and eight hundred 
Indras, B ra h m a has to fa ll; after that a m ovem ent 
o f M a d h a va is counted.
W 
4 4г1*4Ш4 %дчТ1
4lfelld(l? с[тЗТ 44T УТ*74 T^PT:11UU
Th e re w as a fig h t betw een K rsn a and Indra fo r 
the sake o f Parijdta tree, I saved Indra b y 
returning the Par ij at a tree to h im .
W
 4 ffRFTct 
зт 1з44тзтзт{1
4% fafo-dctfRi 
fill^11
T h e kn o w le dge w h ich is beyond description 
and the people w ith little w isd o m hardly k n o w 
about the sam e. Th erefore it is alw ays proper to 
adore the lord.
3nfai4T4R44l ?Т14Ч*чг« ^мчГм 41
33^4 ЗШ4 ^ 
TF35 ^рТТ^рТЦ) Roll
I am aware o f the soul o f the creatures but I 
am unaw are about the kn ow ledge above them 
w h o are equals, therefore yo u better ask about 
the auspicious things from K rs n a alone.
<Slgrille xPftfa 3144 cSRffaft % :l
ШЗк4Г413131 4 4Tcftftft Ч|[уЙ:11У^11 
315114з1зуТ&4 W
 434 44:1
чЭ 
•О
33: ЗГШ 
-gf^RT 344: 4IRT?fll^U
T h e fou r praharas o f B ra h m a have 
been 
equated w ith a kalpa b y the know ledgeable 
people. T h e same M arka n d e ya rem ained alive 
for seven kalpas, after the fell o f nineteen eight 
Indras. T h e same sage M a rka n d e ya had them to 
fall. Thereafter the sage as the result o f the tapas 
perform ed by h im , achieved the slavehood o f K r§ 
na.
3Jvft sT^UT: 4 ft W Rl4?I*4 41 
ft34THT4i ЗЩТШ 4 ЗЗГ4Гу4<з1[341Ч1П 3 II 
ЗЙ41ЧГч ^3R t qqtnrq^rTHT^I 
<ft3TSSg?4 
4t 4 ■gifiT4 f34T ll'^ll
A t the tim e o f dissolution, w ith the fall o f 
B rah m a , 
the sage Lo m a sa also had to 
fa ll. 
Thereafter, the D ikp ala s and nine planets also 
have been to fall. T h u s those w ith long life have 
to live o n ly fo r this duration.
3141% 4 fm : 4 ft ftl3c4ftiST4g ftT3:l 
4 ^ v ift4 3 : yrg: 43fft: 4ftl(44T:lR4ll
A t the tim e o f dissolution B ra h m a falls; he 
rem erge fro m the forehead o f S iva . S iva happens 
to be the beginning o f all. T h is has been ordained 
b y G a n g a .
фШ|31ЧТ£фрТ 43T TT3T 3$4 41 
3&3 f f t RSftft4 4lf3ft 4 'W W dlil^ll
T h e w a y in w h ich R a d h a em erged fro m the 
left side o f K rs n a , D u rg a , La k s m I, Sarasvatl and 
S avitrl also em erged fro m his b o d y in the same 
w a y.
snftfttSTarf^ft: 43: сЫ4<^4 ЩЗУП 
3^3 4 4 ^ 3
T h e tw elve A d ity a s w ere b o m out o f the b o d y 
o f A d iti. S im ila rly there w ere fourteen Indras on 
earth.
3$3 343y4hft 45ГЙЗЗЗ$4 *tl 
44413 
13444444 *ft<tlR<ill
S im ilarly 
there 
w ere 
eight 
V a su s, 
eleven 
Rudras after the fall o f M a n u , Indra also falls.

=== PAGE 840 ===

734
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
т п т т г Ъ 
ftSFT UcTOSfh rn
r ч i i
w r n tr wHTcb w т<пгтн yilrbfa^ci тпч;|
f?3JT trg- ^ril^oii
After dissolution the entire universe, Brahma 
with Brahmaloka and together with his s'aktis, 
are all submerged in water. Krsna himself is the 
root of all and the lord of all.
*Г5Г рГ ТГЗГ^ 
il^cbllUlWI
«ToTlfw cTT 
?lt
4ifw
4 rt CHW ЯШГЧЧ^?У[сЙ cMTII? 9 II
Therefore 
Vasudeva 
should 
organise 
a 
Rajasiiya-yajna and should adore his son Krsna 
with the performing of the у a]ha. Thereafter 
giving away daksina appropriately, you cross 
over the ocean of the universe. Without that, you 
cannot achieve moksa\ you are a Kas'yapa; the 
riches of the devotees cannot be held by you. 
DevakI is the form of Aditi.
w i я н # ?
cFER 
ТТЧсГ 
1 3 ? 11
щ '^ cn h rn t 
т а г ^ :i
fST tar щ п щ 
ftT :ll? 'k ll
m щтг^г
Wt%fd 
ъфуМсПтЯ 'R'.-ll
WtgiRifl 'rprangifTcn^in чяп^цп
You should therefore go to the heaven 
together with DevakI which happen to be your 
own abode and your own temple. On hearing the 
words of Siva, Vasudeva who had over-powered 
all tire organ of his senses collected the material 
perfonned the Rajasiiya-yajna in the auspicious 
time. Yajnesa, the lord of yajna himself was 
resent thereat he re fore the gods appeared 
themselves and accepted the offerings. О sage, 
thereafter at the instance, of Krsna, Sanatkumara 
the lord of the gods.
A lvi<4> 
сьЦе^ cHIdd 'ЦУЧ
с$*ПЛТ 
(CTH
Ш ^ПЛТ fgWT 4 ^ 1 1 ? 1Э11 
сгпй ъ 
w&rHTsfrr ^
j| uiii
Wdlrl M^htni ctf$TW
Sanatkumara said- О lord, the husband of 
LaksmI, you give me all your belongings in daks 
ina immediately and make the yajha successful, 
now you listen to the words which are according 
to the Vedas. In case the Brahmana is not given 
daksina at once, with the passage of a ghadi, the 
amount of daksina is doubled. After the lapse of 
the day it multiplies to four times and after the 
lapse of three nights it multiplies to six times.
■q$n% f ?rrfW ТТШТ^ f ггдфпп
^
 ъ w ^
utt iranI? я и 
srafcrT w ёг^пртт sigiarlcRT 
*пггп 
тГ ЧФп 
-?>4^UtlP^cfrilXo|| 
сГШс(Щ^ Wc9T 
7T:I
-d 
43
31<^;щпчт crania ян
After the lapse of the fortnight it multiplies to 
hundred times and after the lapse of a month, it 
further multiplies to four hundred times; after the 
lapse of six months, it multiplies to a thousand 
times. О lord of the Yadus, after lapse of one 
years, it multiplies to a lakh of times after which 
both the performer and the priest fall into the 
hell. This has been ordained by Brahma. On 
hearing this Vasudeva at the instance of Krsna 
delightfully gave away everything to the sage.
3ThrUt rT 7rTRT
"щц 
f a m i^ u
At very first, Vasudeva, the father of the lord 
of LaksmI then gave away ten crores of very 
precious gems to Garga.
yiddliltf Minimal i 4^u|pHi rl'wjfjJUTH,!
ЩрГГсВЛЧ! t5T fHIRt ^Tchftrri 
II
згам хпзт тттгштш ^rrf% аэп
#ЯхШТО^Г хГ рЩГ W
ЩЦ^ГТОТ ^
 ^frfcRtf2 тгитчАн^чн

=== PAGE 841 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAtf DA, CHAPTER 126
735
7Ь ^ 11Я11ЧНН1
qrnmt 
ъ щ щ q#Rt trb 
щяттатчртт гщт ъ w r a n r wte ^ 1 1 ^ 1 1 
щщт freai #sr tw ist щ 4tq|T44j 
^fcci«*14T fW H l W TRrfoT ёЩ£<Я1Й xTII* 611 
^srt w i t tpsrRT q^R t ^ferm fri 
f F T H T Щ З Г 5wtT Ф щ Ъ Ш jr:IIX<ill
ш $т тг 
^Tfw w ^ \
Tpifer 
^
 фГтШРИ mleRhl^llHoll
aiRRifr ^ 4WifCrT 
^i
^ftqW d^iP i wnfar ъ тщтРг гП1ч ?11
W Ptmra WRRT ft#: ^ : I I 4 ^II
m orn in g all o f them left the place w ith the 
perm ission o f K rsn a .
ftT^ftT: ftftft: 7# w
i fWft#lftT4l 
3T^ZR5mif Щ #3RUT#?ftftll4'kll
Thereafter, all the people o f the race o f Y a d u s 
and adored w ith innum erable gem s and other, 
valuables 
proceeded 
to 
D v a ra k a 
w h ich 
w as 
protected b y K rsn a .
ffft 
ftfTo бПфЫ)|чя-^{до 3ft0 ftRftftT0
ЧоЧ fif ?| (ft fa 
ftt5«ftTft: 11»УЧ11
T e n crores o f the best o f gem s and fo u r times 
m ore the g o ld , em eralds, diam ond, silver, gold, 
vases, all the ornam ents o f his w ife and the 
da ug h te r-in -law , a lakh o f w hite fly-w h isks an 
equal num ber o f gem -studded m irrors, herds o f 
Kamadhenu cow s, a hundred crores o f elephants, 
a hundred crores o f huge elephants, fou r hundred 
crores o f horses, all the riches o f the Y a d a va s, all 
the riches o f U grasena w ith his consent, the 
p a d d y w ith a hundred lakh o f villages, 
the 
blossom ing trees, a lakh o f m ountains like heaps 
o f cereals and an equal num ber o f the heaps o f 
p a d d y, 
beside payasam, 
nectar-like 
sweets, 
svastika sweet, sweet balls o f sesam um , curd, 
h o n e y, m ilk , guda and ghee w ere given filled in 
canals. Thereafter he gave a w a y the betel w ith 
cam phor, the fragrant and cool w ater, fragrant 
sandal-paste, garland o f Parijata flow ers, the 
beautiful seeds, spotless costum es, the flow ers 
m ade o f gem s, beside the fruit w ere delight fu lly 
given to the B rahm anas, H e also served the gods 
b y feeding the Brahm anas.
i^n^r fro t tt# 
ifftti
ftftfitftftf: 
ЗД>фЕиПЗЧ71Ч ^114311
D u rin g the n igh t, the sages and gods enjoyed 
the com pany o f their w ives and in the early

=== PAGE 842 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAtfDA, CHAPTER 126
735
Chapter -126 
M e e tin g o f R a d h a a n d K r $ n a 
ЧТТШПТ
TTaWTWT 
Ч М 
Tt?l
c(cfrf$T; W ЧК^И^И
Narayana said-0 Narada, Krsna thus heard the 
adoration of Ganesa in the company of Yadavas, 
the gods, the sages, the goddesses and other 
people (1).
зщч t^rr
ТГгШ 1 ГШ ТЩ\ Ш fegrSW
Thereafter from his amsa, he proceeded to 
Dvaraka in the company of RukminI and other 
goddesses and in one form he stayed in 
Siddhasrama.
tp3T 'фШтгЧШ W f ЧМWdTfttfa: 1
ч$: 
ш ттргп
ззга«
 m ттч!ч t=r 
4 iw r 4№cTo tw 
таянии
From there, he keeping the company of 
cowherds and cowherdesses, Nanda, mother 
Yasoda 
and 
cowherdesses 
continued 
conversation with them. Thereafter, he spoke to 
his parents, the cowherds and cowherdesses of 
the Goloka.

=== PAGE 843 ===

736
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURA!>AM
#Hfl'l«<l4e|[io|
•о
Tfrs ч^зчт чч? i? ч и зпчгаччгч1 
Ч1сг4'?Т1^ ^4fxr чтчт^ чэт^чРгнчи 
чрЕчт сщтч?1ч ёг w
 %тгащгто^1 
чмГзчуШ 4R4if4 т $ щ .вщ ^И гм ^ч
Sri Krsna said- ”0 mother, О Nanda, you are 
dear to me then my life now you return to Vraja. 
О glorious and the best mother Yas'oda, you also 
return to Gokula and spend the rest of the life 
there. Enjoying all the pleasures in Gokula, you 
would achieve the salvation together with the 
people of Gokula".
*Eich-chuj|: ТЧЧТСЧЧпЧ ёп 
ЧПТ1Ч TlfirailWt 4 ^ T 4fSFvt rWTI lt911
Thus speaking with the permission of his 
parents, he went to his place of Radhika and 
Nanda proceeded towards Gokula.
TM 
W ^ H i ёГ y fw iiq j
Reaching there, he met Radha who was 
adorned with the garland of gems and was 
smiling, she was ever youthful and looked like a 
damsel of twelve years.
зтт<рт tkgwifa: «fwaifw
She was seated on the gem-studded seats, she 
was smiling and was surrounded by innumerable 
cowherdesses, each holding a staff in her hand.
^гчт ёг 
тт xtfm ятщчёчшч;|
-фц ^ 
xt -yfwdtjn^oll
ч# нчг<ч<й>чгч чта зап и та 4Ri
T^^urqiUriUlIHlI
ёг hMfl)*hc"ilVi}f4ciRI 
i ЧЗНЧЯ Ч-ЯНЧ 
i и и
дНЧЧТ
ЧТДТГ-ет ёТ Ч’ЬтЧИ^ II 
ЧТ%Ч 
чшадгч ч*чНч: w ^Ч^ТЧ!
ilUIUi ЧТЧТ ЯЧгЧТ gtiid
Radha looked at Krsna who was dearer to her 
than her life and was coming towards her; he was
clad in beautiful costumes like a boy and he was 
wearing a serene smile on his face. He had a 
lustre of the new cloud and had a dark 
complexion. He was clad in beautiful silken 
yellow lower garment and the entire body was 
plastered with the sandal-paste. His body was 
adorned with the best of gem-studded ornaments 
and a peacock feather was adorning his head. He 
was wearing garland of jasmine flowers, his 
delightful face wore a smile. He was holding the 
blossomed lotus flowers. He was carrying a flute 
in his one hand and in the other he carried a 
mirror. Finding him there, Radha got up at once 
from her seat and started praying him with 
devotion.
TTfe&tcTTrr
зга ^ ЧПШ ^E4 
ёТ tfdlfyrfH.!
Ч^гщт Ч73ёЕ5 й ifepsr сйё!4 ЧЧ: 11 *4 11
Radha said- My life has met with success 
today by looking at your moon like face; my 
eyes and my mind are now delighted.
■цщ Ч1ПТ1УУ fFWf?y ЧТЧЧЧТ ёГ ^44:1
344t#&ft5( ёГ <*#Ч «4^^4411^11
All the five prcinas of mine have been filled 
with delight; the sight of a dear relative is cause 
of delight always.
f444TSt 44W
с ч ^ гч т 5тр^Ч1 ёГ ■■н1чУкП5?Г ^ffcHTII
I had been drowned in the ocean of grief and 
was burning with the fire of separation but today 
the same has been completely subsided.
f^!4T 
ёГ JvidetMl <ЧЧТ Ч?1
PyTcf^l^hl 
ёт гЧЧТ f44Tli
With you, I am always the from of welfare, 
bestower of welfare and the cause of welfare. 
But without you I am like a dead body, getting 
motionless and become invisible.
cgf4 
ёГ ^ ^ЧТЗ^ёТ: 744RI
ёг 
чй tsfa iiw i
ЧТЧ ■ЩЧЕЧТё» ^1Щ ;|
414^4^4^4: WT 1чё^ПЧТЧТгЧЧ:11?оЦ

=== PAGE 844 ===

KR^A-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 126
737
W h e n yo u stay in this b o d y the soul becom e a 
beautiful and pure. I feel m y s e lf all p o w e rfu l, but 
w ith o u t yo u I lo o k like a dead b o d y . О lord, the 
separation betw een the m an 
and w o m a n is 
alw ays pa infu l but w ith the separation o f the 
lo rd , all the s'aktis and the five pranas also 
disappear.
W fF t W
W
 fRSTT W & T Rc[TIR \ 11
Th u s speaking the goddess R a d h a m ade Sri 
K rs n a to sit on the seat and the herself adored his 
feet.
T e tfw iw 
т ю т r ^ i
RPltfR: RHfR: VT?4'<Rfacl: T?ifaxnRbll?^tl
Thereafter, 
S r! 
K rs n a 
occupied 
the 
gem - 
studded lion-throne together w ith R a d h a , seven 
cowherdesses served them b y m o vin g w hite fly - 
w hisks.
R fW T T R W T T R T TR R TR T R rT ^ I R B I I
T h e cowherdesses nam ed C andana applied the 
fragrant sandal-paste on the b o d y o f the lo rd , the 
sm iling Ratnam ala placed the garland o f gems 
around his neck.
т г^ щ Ш 
Ч<Ц'|с(Я\ R R fl
зт 
R T R R FT 
хГ
T h e chaste P a d m a va tl adored the lotus-like 
feet o f the lord w ith lotus flow ers, she also 
offered the arghya together w ith Durva-grass, 
flow ers and sandal-paste.
R F m t w m t w i i 
r
Ъгцщвсщ 
хрцрш RcftlRh II
M a la tl on the other hand placed the garland o f 
jasm ine flo w e r around the neck o f M a la tl, the 
chaste C a m p a va ti offered h im the bunch o f 
jasm ine flow ers.
щГсгттш r 
U Tff-лж ^
 R g r
R W
p t R TfR ft Ж РТН R H R I 1^5,11
Parijcita on her part, offered the lo rd, the 
Parijdta flow ers, betel w ith cam phor, besides the 
cool fragrant w ater.
^
 
RT 
^ЧЩ1
5Й51сьчнчшнч^й V(?<cviuii^iiyi9u 
^
 
IT^R chHetl RT
R "д^ТЧ;! R d 11
Kad am bam ala 
presented 
the 
garland 
o f 
kadamba flow ers, the fresh lotus flow ers and 
valuable m irrors o f gem s. T h e tender lim bed 
K a m a la gave the tw o costumes g ive n b y V a ru n a
W i t 
RfT Rggujgn^liy^ И
T h e beautiful M a d h u presented to the lord the 
sweet honey havin g the colour o f gorocana in a 
vase.
штфл 
RRRT f R g # l
Щ
1 
r
-jM
R - d R x lR id iq u B oil
Sudh am u kh i presented to the lord, a vase o f 
nectar w ith devotion , a cowherdesses prepared a 
bed o f flow ers.
4'^RRfT4bnif^> '^441^11^^11
T h e bed w as decorated w ith the garland o f 
jasm ine 
flow ers. 
It 
w as 
placed 
in 
such 
a 
charm ing place w h ich w as b u ilt w ith the best o f 
gem s.
cbWtl*|-rncki4 RTRR 
^11
It w as decorated w ith the best o f gem s, je w els, 
emeralds and other precious gem s and had the 
fragrance o f kasturl, the saffron and several 
scented m aterial.
vg^Tfcmi
gftlt Ш fW w p iT fe rt:ll3 3 n
It w as illum ined w ith hundreds o f the gem - 
studded lam ps. It bore the fragrance o f several o f 
the scented incense and other m aterials. 
fircTT TRRt 4fdcH-Cl W ll^ ^ R RfRKTT:l 
^ZRT 7?fR TTTR R fR R 
RRIRT W IT Risf f w t tftirfRTRI 
¥ t r r a ? M R TlftglR RTTrtWI.11^411

=== PAGE 845 ===

738
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
ш ч ^
 
^ш тт c!Ff?t щ - p i f ^ i I 3 $ 11
хТ трцч'
wwqctgHT w 
nifti I э \э 11
щ ^гсгасш й ш ц ^ ^ ^ i 
trf$P2T tjTcft ^ П с Я ^ TFRpfuT4;il 3 6 II 
mR^rdw < b '« w w w t ^ i 
здщ mt w
 тзтй mt вггт: и 
'ftRhdl 
7TRT <ШТ STRIT R%TRjl3 <? II 
By making a bed for comfortable sleeps, the 
cowherdesses left the place smilingly. Thereafter, 
finding the bed in a lonely place which attracted 
the mind, Madhava entered the place of pleasure. 
Both of them were engaged in conjugal 
pleasures. The chaste Radha then adorned the 
neck of Madhava with the garland of fragrant 
flowers and also gave him the fragrant betel. 
After that she pasted the kasturl and saffron paste 
on his body and adorned his hair with the 
beautiful jasmine flower. She handed over a fully 
blossomed lotus flower with thousand petals, in 
his hand and snatching away the flute from his 
hand she gave him the mirror of gems; thereafter 
she placed the blossomed flower of Parijata 
before him. Thereafter Radha in a peaceful form 
spoke quite sweet words to her beloved.
ТТ$1<*№К1
1ЧЕШ ftfFraSR 
TTjfrnpRjl
щ q r ^ dfjTritAii'koii
ftwrsfrr gryicwt и ш w nfetm i
«raiirayfrr i^«rr g^crreraiii^ii
Radhika said- О lord, the one who is the store 
of the welfare, the cause of welfare, the form of 
welfare and the bestower of prosperity. To ask 
the question about your welfare is of no 
consequence. In spite of that, it is proper to 
enquire about the welfare because the traditions 
are more forceful than the Vedic hymns.
fiyiTT TlfethJficFM RcWftlVl WdRI
ТГТ 
eilcnm ^ 
I Гй 3 11
TiRdiddh 
ruvumlRi
трдт fgfartr 
«rcnjiiYS и
iprai rt 
TiRdifd тргачз
ttist 
ъ чЬтй ^ n r t c^ii'k^n
O lord of RukminI, О lord of Satyabhama, are 
you all right. At the instance of Satyabhama, you 
playfully engage yourself in conflict with Indra 
and uprooting the Parijata tree from Amaravatl 
in the heaven, conquered the gods and handed it 
over to Satyabhama. This is what has been heard 
by me. With the use of the Parijdta flower, she 
performed the Punyaka-vrata. After completing 
it, She gave yourself as daksina to the priest.
тгат ш д : fiw: дщ1
TTctfar. 
tfAWRi Rmfa
You are beyond the reach of Brahma, Siva and 
Sesa then how could she over-power you? You 
are afraid of Satyabhama in comparison to all 
other damsels.
TRwuqi faqWqRfaRcRf W RTT^I 
щц 
щ spgrat ^ГГЧТ W SpIRf I* ^ 11
Your love for RukminI is the matter of great 
glory of her it is heard that you are afraid of 
Satyabhama and you offer her the flower 
garland.
щ 
s&RTTg гнтчгй IfR
О beloved of Jambavatl, you tell me truthfully 
which one of the damsels is more attached to 
you.
Ш c!Tf 3ft T f w TOI 
tciRr R ra r 
ш щ
 q^TsR rpm ii
Which one of them is more lovable to you? 
Which one of them, performing the best of 
vratas is loved by you the most?
7TT 75ft чтсгртш чт *rraf ftiRr ■oRp r R :i 
j)4ildR<w 
^ f a ^ i i ^ i i
Only that damsel could be called virtuous who 
conducts herself according the desires of the 
husband. 
The 
complete 
harmony 
in 
the

=== PAGE 846 ===

KRSI^A-JANMA-KHAtyPA, CHAPTER 126
739
conducting o f lo ve between the m an and a 
w o m a n is d ifficu lt to get in the three w orlds.
4f4?<3>r 
fa^Mlfa Rift hUlcfdl Rfftqi 
^RRI 
TfTcft 
14 о 11
T h e passionate, chaste and virtuous dam sel is 
fu lly attracted tow ards the one w h o possesses all 
the qualities is quite passionate, valorous and 
n ob le.
t^TTIsf RgHfal'RfRR:l 
sfaTRTR f| RRlfft 'rP qfatqi^q^qiiq ^11
T h e black-w asps feeling greedy fo r the nectar, 
rush tow ard the lotus flo w e r but the frog is 
com pletely unaw are about it and therefore places 
its feet o ver its head.
RRt S IR # Ф йатч RR R ftR Rl
jrh ru' fa^RVR ч rr| ftR чтзнцпч^п
T h e 
one 
w h o 
plays 
upon 
the 
m usical 
instrum ents enjoys the sweet new s o f the tune 
but instrum ents itself unaw are o f it. A clever 
person ve ry w e ll kn o w s the taste o f the m ilk but 
not the vase in w h ich the m ilk is contained. 
RftqRR4iRIWd[ R R fo RtfRR: Т£Щ\ 
ЦсБЯМГШ!: 
RRTII43U
T h e consum ers are w ell-aw are o f the taste o f 
the ripe fru it bu t the tree o ve r w h ich the fruits is 
ripened rem ains unaw are o f the same.
p ftrN W IW K fRRRfct 'ijHIMR:! 
r r Rnft r 
w iiq ^ n
T h e thirsty person kn o w s the taste o f the cold 
w ater but the tank or the pitchers in w h ich the 
w ater is contained rem ains unaw are o f the same. 
RtfiRr f| fa^Rfci $nfat-wr^ra RRpi 
tr^ q fa ild % R 
RRR RRTII44H 
T h e consum er enjoys the tasteful the rice but 
the p a d d y field or the vase in w h ic h the rice is 
cooked rem ains unaw are o f the same. 
xRRTWJt RRHIR? R 'hPlfa'dl 
R R^Tt T O l# R RIR RlfftRR ЭДТ11Ц ^ 11 
T h e user o f the sandal-paste rem ains quite 
w ell-aw are o f its fragrance but the don key w h o 
carries the sandal-w ood rem ains unaw are o f the 
sam e.
R R RTRfR %RT?R RiryiRTRRRWTI
RffaRT RRR: fegTRT f% RTRfo RtfRR:ll4t9
T h e one w h o in b e yon d the reach o f the 
V e d a s , 
B rah m a , 
S iva , 
Y o g is , 
ascetics 
and 
siddhas, h o w could he be k n o w n b y the w o m a n .
RfaPR R^R J*R 
facRHdMJ
RWftcIT R RT ^R 
$PTlR Rl 14 6 11
E v e n the fortune, g lo ry and lo ve are d ifficu lt 
to achiever but the ladies snatch them in a 
m om ent.
fRRRR MIRlfay f£R ЗПТП
amifeTfaRte r ^buiciHi fafjiARRiih'Oi
О lord, after reaching the extrem e height, one 
has to fa ll. T h e violence o f the V aisna vas results 
in m isfortune.
sfiRTRT R RRT 
RRiRrRvT: I
i^d i^ favfaft ^=*^Ti<i4Vir4d:n^on
Y o u r devotee nam ed Srldam a w as cursed b y 
m e and because o f the same I had to face the 
m isfortune as a result o f the curse o f Srldam a.
f?RT: RRR RT «Г§: fllRT RT fafftRRIRTI 
W
 R faiW IFR Rf RR^R cT<ft?RT:ll^ ^11
T o w h o m the lord is dearer; he is alw ays 
achieved w ith devotion and fo r h im the devotee 
is the lord.
3faRT: RRT: p u ilft RRf% Rl 
RRTRTRTRR: RTSRt RRRlfRfafRHEvtRjl^ll
T h e V e d a s , the V e d ic literature, the ascetic 
and the Puranas pronounce repeatedly that lord 
K rsn a is over-pow ered b y R a d h a . T h is is useless. 
farRT R RT|JOT Щ RR1TR ^[RRRR^I 
RkRT R ^fahUMMld: RRIRlR: R R ^ R T.II^ H 
O ve r-p o w e rin g S iva together w ith his ganas, 
cutting o f the arms o f B a n a y o u brought back 
A n iru d d h a , the grandson o f R u k m in I together 
w ith his w ife .
ЗЩ TRfa RRIRM RpRwft fa,qq(R ?l 
ftR f W RRTR ft 
fa tp j R fthRRI I ^ * 11
W h a t did R u k m in I speak after y o u r return? 
Y o u love all e qually, w as there any increase 
fro m prestige w ith the sam e.

=== PAGE 847 ===

740
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
ф-ЬЧШЗЭЗ&Ч 
ftgdlRcMIi
w sg m ш ^чт: cr тггяг хщ п т:п ^ч и
In the battle between the Kauravas and the 
Pandavas, you made the kings of the Kaurava 
side to be killed. You tell me where is your 
vision for equality to all?
Чсгдч%ТПТ&:11^11 
г1Я ЧТЙЯ 
*f г^ГгЧЧИ
vlfefifr f e w ^ 
Щ
 ■гш ^ V911
You became the charioteer of Arjuna, the son 
of Indra. What did noble Bhlsma speak to you 
getting ashamed in the assembly?.
^54 T4|<*d 
4T:ll5,dll
гГ 
*Г1
я # :
fttfuiyy 
4Rta4untl.i
щ sTfT trt sstfa: тгт^Г: тЩсЧТ:1
тПЧГсЧТ гГ -R^T ’p i Я1ЗДГШ:1ЬЭ^11
What did Brahma, Siva, Sesa and other gods 
speak to you? All your devotees kept quiet and 
spoke nothing. You are the same who is 
inexplicable in the Vedas, Puranas and the 
historical treatises, beyond Prakrti, the great lord, 
devoid of gums, unattached, uninvolved, the 
witness of all the deeds, the one who takes to 
human form for the sake of the devotees, the 
eternal Brahman^ the divine light, beyond 
everything and became the charioteer of a human 
being in spite of your being the supreme soul.
fwR 
чд^щ tpgr атГ*чт=ьтГч4|| 
arqfMr TiifychTffi ^ягсчрчтт ^ ятастщм
Initially you kept company of the old Kubja 
who was untouchable by the youth, 
г^гат Ъ 
зтяг ЯТНН: дрт Itpm 
зттапгрЩ- 
rt трт я ■дчттстчи^и
What for did you kill Kamsa your maternal 
uncle? You said that 'you will come’ but after 
departure you did not come again?
щ ш gfhqi
tgtfqgsq 
НП^ЩЧгГ^:1ЬЭ'гП1
Killing Yadavas, dividing the city of Dvaraka, 
the people had prevented the goddess, who 
ordained to capture you.
frgcREJT TTfac&T 
^
 -rti
w f Ttmu WPT 
«РТТ finaqil
Thus speaking Radhika started crying aloud 
and fainted stopping breathing.
4Tbzfr Я<4ЩМ1<Н4«11:
rm raf: 
w ^ f f r ^пьэ^и
The cowherdesses who were peeping through 
the windows witnessed the sight. All of them 
rushed towards her and all of them declared that 
Radha was dead.
З Й Ш TTf: Tlctf: 
cRv?T rf ■ийадн,!
-ЩГ 
f t ЯТ^ 3Wtl|\9i9ll
All of them lifted up Radha and started crying. 
О lord, О Hari, "Save us ".
f% fa t f% fa t ЗЮТПгПТТ W TJfT хГ Я: I 
cf «yi-MW: «щчт cpi^ ii^
ii
The cowherdesses said- О Krsna what have 
you done? Our Radha is dead. You bring her 
back to life. You will be prosperous. All of us 
shall retired to the forest.
ЗР Ш 
<pt ЗГСЧШ: tPlq|fqq:i 
irhM ^
 ^
-Ыдзквщгтг тпш: i iv9 s 11 
теш ^гачгчта 
rt яттз1
'iTiwl IlRlchf 
4iPl4) ЯРЙ'Ий o||
дя: дя:11£?11
Otherwise all of us shall give you the blemish 
of killing a woman. О Narada, on hearing the 
words of the cowherdesses, the lord of Radhika, 
Madhava spoke the words which were like nectar 
and with his lovable glance at her brought her 
back to life. The proud Radha got up while 
sobbing. Thereafter all the cowherdesses took 
Radha in their lap and started talking to her.

=== PAGE 848 ===

KR§NA-JANMA-KHANpA, CHAPTER 126
741
SltfjBJT ЗЗТёТ
Tl4 
tfRRISdlftqgj RT^I
ii^w i 
Tgi: w t vrafwtrftrgcTjn.i^M
Sri Krsna said- О Radha, I shall impart the 
divine knowledge to you hearing which even a 
ploughman becomes immensely intelligent.
згш з? w m w f l fg; ^fgMuqifduifadiHj
^
3^
11 с? и
I am the lord of the universe since birth then 
what to speak of the woman like RukminI and 
others, I possess the personality because of my 
being the cause of the deeds as well as the deeds 
themselves.
U<*ilr4ist ^ f£n$4i 
'^"ifd^U: Т&Щ 
SlefiRT ^l<4l^rf^U|rfd4lld*ll
I myself represent divine lustre, I happen to be 
the soul of the entire universe and pervade all the 
creatures right from the blade of grass to 
Brahma.
'ttefiferr^ i RrMfa 4 transit ^TTRtani
чауггЧЙ 
^гзМдпйчп
Since, with the taking of food by one, others 
are not satisfied, similarly with my departure 
from the body one dies but the others remain 
alive.
snvTOF 
ф цикч: ЩЩ1 * I
ftfa t 
Td4 TPMnrfd: !ЩГ:1
I am complete in all respect in the form of 
Krsna. Since my birth I remain present with two 
arms in Goloka, Gokula and Vrndavana being 
the lord of Radha and also play as a child with 
Yasoda in the form of a cowherd; all the 
cowherds, the cowherdesses, are associated with 
me
% trm : 4HKR:l 
cd$4)*HWd)*l-d: W
I remain in Vaikuntha with four arms and 
appear as the beloved of LaksmI and Sarasvatl 
there in peaceful form.
rraiftT ^ 
116 Я11
I also appear over the earth in Sveta-dvlpa in 
the ocean of milk as the husband of ManasI, 
Sindhukanya and MartyalaksmI. There also I 
appear in four armed form.
зт? чнтгёуз ч4 erf: тптш:1 
епШ т ъ qffigt
I happen to be the sage Narayana, the 
profounder of Dharma. I am devoted to Dharma 
and those who follow the path of Dharma are 
attached to me.
¥llf%^4fW4*4T W qf% T W R%cTTI 
зтл щдт: trRrr? f i # ъ «ШП1 \\\
The extremely religious and chaste LaksmI 
happens to be my spouse and I happen to be her 
lord in the sacred land of Bharata.
t rT5Erf4i4^nRRll<?^ll
I am the lord of siddhas and bestower of 
siddhis and also appear in the form of Kapila. О 
beautiful one, thus I take to several forms 
according to the exigencies of the situation.
3li 
7sfgrpiM?r:l
зтташ Rfofct w chiitou^icgai^g^i
щ qnrgtJif^r шгтргщт ш Ф ппчъп
R 
R4?Tt RvraiRlfg!
чЭ 
л 
45
cPrmSStlfadRF 
хГ
In the two-armed form, I always remain in 
Dvaraka as the, lord of RukminI. I sleep in the 
ocean of milk and also dwell in the abode of 
Satyabhama and other queens taking to different 
forms. I functioned as the charioteer of Arjuna. 
Arjuna happens to be a human sage, the son of 
Dharma, is quite valorous and was bom on the 
earth from my urns a. He had performed great 
tapas 
in 
the 
Puskara-ksetra 
for 
myself 
performing as his charioteer
ROT 
<1(ч«hi 
^<rl«b uichH d^ll
т а ! 
ftran
tsnfgggsryg ъ ■

=== PAGE 849 ===

742
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
О dear, you are Radhika in the Goloka, you 
are the same in Gokula. You happen to be 
Mahalaksmi and Sarasvatl of the Vaikuntha. You 
happen to be the MartyalaksmI in the ocean of 
milk. You are the daughter-in-law of Dharma 
and appear in the form of Laksml with peaceful 
form
cfcfqH'W 
3iRiT я ш чж т ^#1 
Ш "ШТ fhfaiHTilT Щ 
if4$( 7PTTI I
чзгггтт чгсзщчт 
fran 1 <? я 11
You happen to be the chaste Bharat!, the 
dearest wife of the sage Kapila in the land of 
Bharata. You are the one known as Sita in 
Mithila. you happen to be shadow of the chaste 
DraupadI, you also appear in the form of 
Mahalaksmi in Dvaraka and RukminI as well. 
DraupadI who was bom of your ray became the 
spouse of the Pandavas
11'зим 
щ ^ 
твгет фтГчч1|
4H IW w ^ w щвртт 
о
qHTWlWTSi ^ WVFT сщчт ш \
гГЧНИгЧ! "ЧПсЧТ:П^о ^||
You are Sita of Rama and was abducted by 
Ravana. О chaste one, you appear in different 
forms in the universe and similarly I also appear 
in different forms in the universe. I happen to be 
the 
complete 
supreme 
soul 
and 
beyond 
everybody
тй "4ctfqnsr й
O chaste one, I have therefore imparted to you 
the entire divine knowledge. О Radha, supreme 
goddess, you forgive me for all the sins.
Ш \ xifw i Щ ТТ^Ш!
s9 
s9
ттГЩТгГ 4 % :
On hearing the words of Krsna, Radha as well 
as the cowherdesses felt satisfied and started 
offering their salutation to. Krsna.
^f?T 
тщТо
о ЧТТЖТ°.
и т »

=== PAGE 850 ===

742
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
Chapter -1 2 7
Conjugal pleasure of Radha and Kr$na 
4RI-4UI ЗЩЩ
«i<jwra-€R 
■g^Ti
w j : •Rctf: т г щ т з т и ^ п
Narayana said- On hearing the words of Krs 
na, Radha was extremely delighted. Thereafter 
all the cowherdesses offering their salutation to 
Radha and Krsna went back to their respective 
abodes.
Ш
 
TTTSSrt c(*xlcEWHlxPT[IRll
Thereafter, the chaste Radha having the side- 
glance smilingly decorated her body in sixteen 
types.
"Щр$Т 
ч-нз tfi
r 4 % r^ t 
т а г ■R-.u^ и
Ttfesi «рит: w n fa т
37tgTSR ЗГС1ёТ W 
*nmi
s9 
s 9 '5
Thereafter in seclusion, she offered the sandal- 
paste and garland then dragged Radha towards 
himself and placing her on the chest, he kissed 
her over her various limbs of the body.
ТШ №1 'фЩРЧ RTsRH R4lsJRll
фЩ 3TM?t 
xt l^ lfR II4 ll
Radha also repeated similarly and embracing 
his beloved dragged him on the body.
3JfR 
gm ?Tr#TP№w 4.i
■wljalwlM'iHcii щ р *pmww:ii$ ii
О 
\5 
’
Thereafter, both of them started enjoying 
conjugal pleasure described in the treatises of 
love.
^НЧШ8ШТ1 
^ c T f^ mRTRHll 11911
RferTT УЗ'-Н'ЬНПГй.НЧТ *ЯУсН11
furri4w 1ni r f^mf^rf^radiiiiii

=== PAGE 851 ===

KR§I4A-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 127
743
All the limbs of the body of Radha were 
injured after which Radha was over-powered 
with sleep. After enjoying all the pleasures she 
was fainted. She was just breathing and her eyes 
were closed.
<ahl4HTfl cbWRfar: w r f w ii
да ■gwIi^Tii’? ii 
Rldcfl да^я№пдат1щТ1 
^RTWTTO4RT 5Г 
■ytd^tRtcblll^0 П 
fe iw i ( w дат дадай зг даг^чп 
дагда дач шщ ^тдат ^fchT ^^R ii^u
Radha kept on sleeping and in the early 
morning Radha who was well-versed in the love- 
sport, having tender limbs, was lying on the 
chaste of her beloved. Her all the limbs issued 
heat like the heat of the winter season or the 
coolness of the summer season, making the love 
sport enjoyable. She was having solid breasts 
which were leaning little because of their 
excessive weight the one who provided pleasure 
at the time of conjugal sports, quite clever, 
passionate and the best. She was awakened with 
the sweet note of the cuckoo.
VTwrm да ъгчт
дата тгсчт да гг чтдап" чдачтч n
Эт тТ (дакт rT ЧЧ: "44:1177 II
She felt afraid with the hearing of the sound of 
the voice of cuckoos. Thereafter holding the lord 
in both her arms she said.
тш "455 дагптпт чда 
дащ 
да 
cbf<54fq чт^ч XT W t4 хП1^ II
Radhika said- О virtuous one, let us move on 
to the auspicious Vmdavana; I shall spend time 
with you enjoying the water sport as well as the 
physical union on the land.
датдаГч дада да^т чГитчЙрт 
здаг дажгч да даччт ч 
дат 1 х* п
да 5lf4 сдагг 
^ ёПсЧТТТ XRTI
Ядай" 4ЯЧ1 ТГЧТП^ЧП
3T4tii^4"cbi^sf4 ч дайдадат дай|
ШЪ: 
41541414 RRHT^I1^11
Thereafter I shall go to the Malaya mountain 
and visit the beautiful places there which are 
situated in lonely place. Those places I have not 
visited since my birth and shall now visit them 
with you. This is my desire. Thus talking the 
auspicious night passed. He lovingly spoke to her 
in the morning.
ш : 
да: «дач тдадатт; w ?fr:i
WIT 4T$ 9Hh*4dHl£H: 11 w 11
Thereafter Radha having the eyes resembling 
the 
lotus 
flowers 
of the 
winter season, 
performing all the essential jobs mounted the 
chariot with the cowherdesses and Krsna.
4H''l«Kmci ш 44l4lfa
дадай: яда(даЧМ77 II 
qfuiw^Rqcbiam 4да|(^{дайдада
MdiimfuicHmf^^ft: 49ll (да^И7 о II
чтчтМ11М9^ й ч д ан зМ :)
9]<М^йдайЙ4гаа1Т117 711
"Ч1ЧЫ$: "441^4^117 711
The chariot was a yojana in length and width 
and had a hundred crores of chambers studded 
with gems and other precious ones. It moved 
with the speed of wind and had arrived from 
Goloka having thousands of wheels and the 
horses. It was decorated with the crores of gem- 
studded pillars and the small fringes. The gems, 
sapphire, emeralds and other precious stones 
studded in the pillar looked quite charming. It 
contained several types of paintings, white fly- 
whisks, the mirrors and the divines clothes 
besides several garlands, It had innumerable beds 
made of gems and decorated with flowers and 
sandal-paste. It had lakhs of cowherdesses 
having the similar type of bodies and costumes

=== PAGE 852 ===

744
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAISAM
Rr^T Pl^lichl<^ fcM^K 3 # 4S#II43H
M o u n te d on the chariot, the lord once again 
w e n t to V m d a v a n a ; he enjoyed the w ater sport in 
the rive r as w e ll as the love-sport on the earth 
during the night.
Щ ТТ 
ч ^ ч а й д Wl
Tifesi tafaiRTR m m £ xt
Th erea fte r, 
fu lly 
decorating 
them selves 
he 
to ok R a d h a and w en t round the place show ing 
her e verything n ew .
Ч -# <Al
4
4
4
4
#
 R # W T T ^T II?m i 
# 1 # 1 
xf R T # eR ^:
fisfR rut rut # # i r $ 11
4TR£lfFFI 4 # UlfrdMcFl RRI 
4f*& 
xt 4i4Tiiui>R)ci> 11 ^ \э 11 
RRR4RR fRH% R e # xT 4J4TT#I
щз& xi 
fcRd^u^^n
#IR T c b m # l4 i cblofcj-yj XT R # ёП
RR| U 4TR| xt f f t 
RRt#IR ЯII
W& 
4 # fJRxJRRT#ftl
^ trr# T^PTT# xTR # W IT w i 1 ^ 0 11
Thereafter 
he 
took 
round 
R a d h a 
to 
V isp a n d a ka , Surasana, M ah e n dra , N an danavana 
and the peaks o f Sum eru m ountain, the charm ing 
Gan dham adana m ou ntain, beautiful hills, caves 
in the forest, e xtrem ely secret flo w e r orchard, the 
w aters o f the rivers and rivulets, the sea-shore, 
the forest o f Parijata flo w e rs, the pools o f 
Subhadra, Puspabhadra and N a ra ya n a , the abode 
o f w in d g o d , the M a la ya m ountain w h ich is the 
abode 
o f 
the 
gods, 
C itra kuta , 
B hadrakuta, 
Pancakuta and S ukuta on the golden land o f the 
gods, on the islands in the oceans the heaven, the 
beautiful C andrasarovar and the asramas o f the 
sages. H e enjoyed the com pany o f R adh a 
#5T xT yT4FR4 
xT
SRxfTT #TRTOT4T R # 
rW II^ *11 
T h e n 
he 
im m ediately 
returned, 
to 
the 
auspicious Jam b u d vlp a and reached D v a ra k a . H e 
also show ed her the R a iva ta ka m ountain.
RtfH Ч441ЛгЧ hl4R)3»cR44tf<riqi 
Ш 
xt Rfultt 'З # ^ГсЙ R*flril3RII 
Н е then reached the place o f G o k u la in w h ich 
the cow s and the cow herds alw ays d w e lt. T h e y 
visited 
Bh and lravan a 
and 
the 
auspicious 
V rn d ava n a.
fesrr r# rj 
per xji
Le a rn in g about the arrival o f K rs n a , N a n d a , 
Y a s o d a and old cow herds and cowherdesses 
w ere delighted and their eyes w ere filled w ith the 
tears o f jo y .
cIRUK RTPpR # R T XT rzr#
t: i
W 
xt RIRTtfl
т т т щ RraRiii^mi
Thereafter they placing the huge elephant, 
w here the dancers and the dam sels w hose sons 
and husband w ere a live , ahead w elcom ed S ri K rs 
na as the gods w elcom e the god o f fire. T h e n 
M a d h a va fin ding N a n d a and his m other, arrived 
there in the fo rm o f B a la K rsn a and R a d h a.
Щ : AI3RI4% ТЩЩ R f^ R :l 
R # 
4 # I f ? 4'4slUf3iRll^^ll
Thereafter M adhusudana sm ilin g ly sat in the 
lap o f his m other; both Y a s o d a and N a n d a started 
kissing the face o f K rsn a .
ЗиГус-Ш ^TTRxyryxl 
# f r ^ ; i
4c|R xl RW ^m rl 
4RR R lflll^ll
A n d they em braced h im tig h tly T h e y w ere 
overw helm ed w ith jo y and the tears o f love 
started flo w in g from their eyes. In the m eantim e 
lord K rsn a busied h im se lf in sucking the breast 
o f Yasod a.
rlicjvi cfc^j: 
R2T4T R # l
9iefttfWfa-RW T^RUUlRrqdRIl^<i II 
#efil<V|c(N# #fRri RtacnRRTI 
R ^4f#5^t xf RTc^falrRRfeft^l 13 <? 11
A t that p oint o f tim e all the people lo oke d at 
K rs n a in same fo rm in w h ic h he had gone to

=== PAGE 853 ===

KR^NA-JANMA-KHAIVDA, CHAPTER 128
745
M a th u ra . H e w as h olding a flute in his hand and 
w as adorned w ith the gem -studded ornam ents; he 
appeared o f the age o f eleven years and w as clad 
in y e llo w lo w e r garm ent and the locks o f hair 
w ere decorated w ith the feather o f peacock and 
the garland o f jasm ine flow ers.
TTERTT W 419^4,1
^3Tt ъ ш ifrqHt ■дФст ъ w щч:\
Rf&RrT Я9ТЙ «Г ■pRlf W T гШ11* *11
■gxCTqrfnmitt ^ 
^
 tj^ti
ЗТШЧ# 
ТЩЙТ W HTR 
xn
Сч
9P9P9ftr ^ w n f r 9^lf&T ^ ?WT ^ f l I * ? 11
Thereafter, Yas'oda took R a d h a and M a d h a va 
in 
the palace, 
w here she perform ed all 
the 
w elfare 
cerem onies 
and 
served 
fo o d 
to 
the 
B rahm anas, the cowherdesses w ere also adored 
in the same w a y as the people adore the sages. 
Thereafter 
d e lightfu lly 
the 
Brahm anas 
were 
g ive n the gem s, the precious stones, gold, jew els, 
em eralds, Gajaratna, G o ra tn a , Asva ra tn a , paddy 
and the land w ith standing crops, beside the 
costum es.
3T4<f Tvfcnmn TT8RTT W 419=14,1 
tM w ^ iWT9 
ЧТОП1^^П
chKAIWIft
<TttJ€T ЯШ9ГЧГ4 
rf 44)^411* ЧП
Th ereafte r R a d h a and M a d h a va w ere show n 
the 
unprecedented 
articles. 
О 
N a ra d a , 
the 
cowherdesses w ere then served w ith delicious 
sw eet fo o d . T h e drum s w ere beaten, the w elfare 
cerem onies w ere perform ed and all the gods 
w ere d e lightfu lly served w ith delicious fo o d.
ffrf sftqfiacfo Ч£|о
о ЧП^ЧТ° 
11^*311

=== PAGE 854 ===

KR^NA-JANMA-KHAIVDA, CHAPTER 128
745
m 
VlddMl 5ЩЩ:
Chapter -1 2 8
Kr$na spills out the evil of Kali Age
ЧТШЩ ЗЩгТ
¥4ifR JilMiyciifq а д tt.-i 
snrosft 
ъ щ 
?ii?ii 
p i s * 
^
 
Ф
 щ ш тЬ тщ :1 
з э ш т $ т Ф
 4 14 4 1? ^ f t r f t i R и
N a ra ya n a said- S ri K rs n a w as surrounded b y 
the cow herds and he h im se lf w as seated under 
the banyan tree in the B h and ira forest. It w as the 
same place w here the B rah m an a w o m e n had 
served h im the fo o d . R a d h a to ok her seat to the 
left o f lord K rsn a .
"гтжта%щщ|
ITT e h H lq d ill^ll
Yas'oda sat to his right together w ith all the 
cow herds 
Vrsabhana 
and 
N a n d a 
besides 
K a la va tl.
зт^т rrm ryit ifrrzt^ r сггегат: p ^ r a n 
m p r e r -r 
*w jffa c P {ii'!fii
A H the cowherdesses, cow herds, relatives and 
the friends also took their seat. T h e lord then 
spoke to N a n d a the appropriate w o rds.
s f t w n p r E i
Щ
 
iratpilfa 1 M
 4 tW lfe d 4 J 
w f 
чтчт?! ^ 4 ie ilc f^ tn c ig ^ iim i
S r! K rs n a said- О N a n d a , y o u k in d ly listen to 
m e , I shall n o w speak out the appropriate w ords 
suited to the tim e, w h ich are tru th fu l, beneficial 
and w o u ld bestow pleasure after death.
зпргш щ ч*# УЧ
W
 IT IW T 1
^
1
1 Я 11
A l l the creatures right from the blade o f grass 
to B ra h m a are perishable like the lightening in 
the cloud or the line draw n on the w ater o r the 
w ater bubbles. Y o u take it fro m m e.

=== PAGE 855 ===

746
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
*mi±ii 
чга^ g fa&gri
S3 
О
w tw w 
g ^ t ^ i to 11 
rl^T TTf^T тщт w r u i ^
i 
fg^FT fqsgmrgt g тчт ggwt gg^iMii
I have already spoken this in Mathura and 
nothing is left out. In the forest of banana trees 
Radha had spoken of this to Yas'oda. It is 
completely truthful and removes the darkness of 
illusion, serving as a lamp. Therefore disowning 
all the false illusion get yourself devoted towards 
the eternal-abode.
PT^I
c64h<rrf4^44n<! и
That stage relives one of the birth, death and 
old age, bestows immense pleasure, removes the 
greed and suffering destroying the roots of the 
deeds.
РТР Ш «FIcRT THfiRRI
m тд 
гиадт ш pt 
и
Taking to me to be the eternal Brahman, you 
should devote your mind towards the same, 
removing the feeling my being son and achieve 
the eternal abode.
pfrЫ w # g <g Tn?f
3tK(d«fivUMI44 дп^ЙфдЧЧИНИ
Now the time for the arrival of Kaliyuga is 
meaning which destroys the root of the deeds. 
Therefore all of you together with the residents 
of Gokula should go to Goloka.
ШРРГ1Ч4Ш1 PTfpr 
g rPtg gi 
fgp ^iRcb' prfprfg^ д^чеПФ*Ч11^11
In the Kaliyuga there are no rules for the man 
and woman nor are there any rule for the castes. 
The Brahmanas would never perform sandhya 
and would not wear yajnopavita.
g^jg g frag; ftp <трт irf4f|jgq;i 
^ejrajgigfaw fgPT qiW№>HI^ II
Or sometimes they would wear the Yajiiasutra 
and tilakam and would be deprived of other 
religions duties, they would cohabited during the 
day time and would indulge in irreligious ways.
*щнт g sRTHt g w t дн^сг gi 
^ к д ^ п й ч snff p i^ g W ^ n ^ i i
The yajna, vratas and performing of tapas 
would disappear, the dharma would disappear 
totally from the earth, because of the curse of the 
daughter of Kedara.
pfwyg Hit g?fl
(T W 
I ^ Ч11
The husband would be ruled by the woman 
who could move independently. Such woman 
would denounce her husband always throughout 
the day and night.
M R f 
pfrm g 1Ш sRTI
W it g РтШГШ g 
(ЧЧЧТТЧИ W l
g^ff g gtfpg: ggf дш^дщ шъ-л 
^гардрд: "^WTW gft pfgpjfrllRgii
The woman would always head the families 
and they would have more importance. All the 
men would be under the influence of the women 
and would face defeat everywhere. All the 
women in the age of Kali would always serve 
their lovers. They would love the lovers much 
more.
ъф 
g$g g ш р ч gftpg: i 
pfwm т г а г т а т г fargrpiI’ dii 
git pggfg gpra fgg^rar pfg w i 
т а jfl<g стшт 
g PTRgpg^'11^4 и
A women would serve food to her husband 
with anger in the same day as the food served to 
a servant. But she would look at the lover with 
the side-glance and her sight could be filled with 
nectar. She would look at her husband like 
poison. Such woman would always feel attracted 
towards her lover
pgft gp putt g frai fag ggtfg gi
5ЩРТ яддгт 'nuig pggifg giiR о и
They would man-handle the husbands always 
but will show enough of grace to the lovers.
■^ч^ты g т а giT^cHrTdHii

=== PAGE 856 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAIVDA, CHAPTER 127
747
T h e y w o u ld alw ays rem ain ready to serve the 
lovers decorating them selves. In the age o f K a li 
the lovers w o u ld be the life o f the ladies and 
w o u ld be like brothers, the m ovem ent and the 
soul.
c4W хПШйГ^ГТ xf Hbjkf
figurrcxft Зсг 
w сйд- wi r ? 11
In the age o f K a li, the adoration o f the guests, 
V is n u , manes and the gods w o u ld disappear.
тш ^ чт! 
l
71ЖГ: 11 ^ ^ 11
T h e people w o u ld alw ays be envious o f V is n u 
and the V aisn a vas, all the people o f the fou r 
varnas w o u ld get attracted tow ards Vamacara.
■$даятч xt ч н # < p i 
rrari 
4 
fcff 
TRUR'SH
ЧТШ сЬНаПЧТ xf 
TtdTffiTiqj
■дтзч 
i ? ц 11
ATcfAU Ш ЩЩ 4<fc4T ЩТРТгЯЧтГиЧЧ!
Ц'Ф'Я сПЧЧЧ* ^ fe l? x t
T h e people w o u ld rem ain under the influence 
o f mlecchas and w o u ld never touch Salagrama, 
T u la s i, kusa or the w ater o f the G a n g a . T h e 
Brahm anas also influenced w ith illusion disow n 
the cause o f all the causes, the seed o f all, 
bestow er or pleasure and moksa and all the riches 
w o u ld fo llo w the vama-mantra w hich is the 
kille r o f the V e d as.
WctTT fawpMf 
W
W55^IT «BRclf 5РЩТ ^ gWlTII?l9ll
T h e eternal goddess B h a g a va tl, w h o is also 
called 
V is n u m a y a , 
w o u ld 
deprived 
such 
Brahm anas o f m y devotion at m y com m and.
xf ghfftr ч^т ^<444ra4fiR<iii
In the age o f Kaliyuga I w o u ld continue to be 
adored on earth fo r ten thousand years and 
G a n g a w o u ld flo w on earth fo r five thousand 
years in Kaliyuga.
j|c4# flpnpTtKT^Er W cthjf l хГ 44^441
gmnft xi w n fr чга^сг 
i ч ч 11
T ill such tim e the G a n g a flo w s on the earth, 
the Tu la si plant, devotion o f V is n u and reciting 
o f the Puranas continue y o u w o u ld also continue.
ТСПТ х Ы Ш 4TfRT TtcT^ cErft
Vfabqfcr 1%ШТ -Ф&: ?TBT:II?oil
О lord o f V ra ja , no one w o u ld recite m y nam e 
in Kaliyuga. T h e B h lla s , the w ick e d people 
w o u ld becom e o f the same types.
iw l: TfaT 4Tt: 
xt
fasten чтт:
A person should be deprived o f the adoration 
o f his parents, the teacher, the gods, Brahm anas 
and the guest.
WrffiTT 
ЧТТЗЧЩ^гГТ Ш чггт!
^GfMr VfeMTII} УII
T h e land w o u ld be deprived o f truthfulness, 
the trees could be deprived o f the fruit and the 
rivers w o u ld be deprived o f the w ater.
Rlfh#n ^ТЧТ:
T h e B rah m an as w o u ld be deprived o f the 
know ledge o f the V e d a s , the kin g w o u ld becom e 
w e a k. There w o u ld be classless society and the 
kin g w o u ld turn as mlecchas.
^сГтР^тШ дЧ: Ы
щ
 3JT7RT
5TRt xt ЧГЧЧсЧЛчЛ 
11 3 * 11
T h e son w o u ld torture the father and sim ilarly 
the pupil w o u ld behave w ith the teacher like a 
servant. In the house w ife w o u ld pounce u p on 
the husband like a greedy cock.
7ШЧГ HfaT: 
xT ЧТ{ЧЧ:1
ЯЧIfa ^fjxRH^hII
In the last phase o f K a li all the sinners w o u ld 
get destroyed. Som e o f them w o u ld be destroyed 
w ith the scorching heat o f sun w h ile others 
w o u ld 
be 
destroyed w ith 
the 
o ver 
flo w in g 
w aters.
1
yfirawft ч 
^татп

=== PAGE 857 ===

748
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAI4AM
The lord of the Vais'yas, the earth would be 
destroyed in the Kaliyuga. At the time of 
creation, the seed of truthfulness women again 
start sprouting.
Ucirw?w> fer w icr ццщщ
зв ^ 1ЧтГрзтганг чт^тат^йтт^?гч,1 i^iii 
т Ы йч<гчнт щ
т й ^ : xrfty=RT ^Tpra)feqf^:l
i"x о 11
тгГЙсКЩВРТ gpf ЪЩ: ЩШ ^Й11К?11
О Brahmana, in the meantime a divine chariot 
arrived there, which was five yojanas in length 
and four yojanas in width. It had the lustre of the 
fine crystal gem. It was built with the best of 
gems and was decorated with the garland of 
Parijdta flowers. It had a number of ornaments 
made of kaustubha gem. It had the pitchers of 
valuable gems and the garland of rubies were 
hanging; it had a crore of chambers in it. It was 
yoked with a two thousand of candras and two 
thousand horses, it had a large number of fine 
silken garments and was surrounded with crores 
of cowherdesses. The chariot which had arrived 
from Goloka was witnessed by all the people.
1ПВД
Hal «(кича! 
гртт 
ik ^ 11
вт: I
УЙТРТМШ: 
я ж п к зп
?гПШТ "mtnftnr ЧУЖТЙ Tgfq%tn^l
^гшт ТТШ 7ТЙ TTt^dlfafcllKKII
At the command of Sri Krsna, all the people 
mounted on the chariot and then went to Goloka. 
О Narada, Radha and Kalavatl who deserves to 
be thanked, were never bom from any human 
womb. Both of them were bom without any 
human contact. The spouses of s rut is had 
appeared in their forms. They also shedding their
human bodies went to Goloka. Thereafter Radha 
also went to Goloka together with the people of 
Gokula,
Щ М ^
 fa* 
W гёсЩ! IK 4 11
О Brahman, on the way they came across the 
banks of the Viraja river, which were adorned 
with several types of gems, crossings the Viraja 
river, they reached the mountains of hundred 
peaks.
HHmfilWmnehM
штГ ^
 
i p i <^|cH cR^IIK^Il
There, they found the Rasamandala, which 
was decorated with the best of gems. The 
charming Vmdavana filled with flowers, was 
located at some distance from that place.
W 
fi!?ld5TGRRI
WTOfoFlfasftu? Vliyi<*lfi4t4Tfd^HKt9ll
The eternal banyan was also seen by them 
which was three hundred yojana in height and 
hundred yojana in width and had crores of 
branches.
■Щей: 
чадчГа f^fwq;i
ЧТЙ 
TRlFTTI IK 6 11
The fruits of red colour were decorating the 
tree. The charming Vmda was present under the 
tree with thousands of cowherdesses.
ЧПсГГ cl 4lfwn TfT 'Rqwftl 
зтвгещ w^of m i ш цщчттг ггик<? и
Finding her there Radha at one, descended 
from the chariot and went to her gracefully. 
Vmda on her, part bowed in reverence to Radha.
Ш TriTTW yfdd$>T
ЧЯШВГЙ ТЙ flT^RH4Pd^l)4 о II
й чичпчга шйзчдаш!
■udRiV't 'HtsHRtV'* 
V^dril4^:ll4^11
Then talking to her she took her to her abode. 
Vmda then made Radha to sit on the gem- 
studded lion throne and she herself started 
serving at her feet. The seven female friends 
started moving the white fly-whisks.

=== PAGE 858 ===

KRSiyA-JANMA-KHA^DA, CHAPTER 129
749
зттадл^ЧсЫ: ^T5if 
ж х г А ^ ч ,1
зглс^'^гат з т уяга-фУсБ!!ч 9 и
W TPRW ТГТ Ч7ЧГ4<Гч4сЬ^|
4 lfw Щ 114 i 11
T h e cowherdesses arrived there to have an 
audience 
w ith 
R a d h a 
the 
great 
goddess. 
Thereafter R a d h a arranged fo r separate dw elling 
places fo r N a n d a and others. Thereafter the 
blissful R a d h a accom panied b y the cowherdesses 
m o ve d tow ards her abode.
ffff 
ТЩо 
*r&o ЧТГЗЯГ»

=== PAGE 859 ===

KRSiyA-JANMA-KHA^DA, CHAPTER 129
749
TTffK ^i^q TTPrr^ci 
а д TT:l
зщщ щ к grapi fgft 
ъ 
щ 11
T h e people o f G o k u la w ere assured b y K rs n a , 
w h o spoke to them the sw eet and beneficial 
w ords.
'члсьчсгга
•о
I ibum I 
w i Ш ТтжТ vai
WIT fol4T w f TfWT 4HT44SvT4H<GI 
^ВтГРТ 
^ 1
ЗтТёщЙ rT Wtt qicfccj^c||eb4lllV9H
Chapter -129
Submerging of Dvaraka and departure of 
Ki-§na for the eternal Abode
чпБтитзгггег
Ш^шгТ яртсГГШ чГ^р^ТЧ: TTg:l
wrTTcm4t^ *r mrr nr^draifitHiquH)
ЗЗГО 
gjtra^i
^
 %5H 
W f?r TraTIRIl
т щ я ъ щ ш щ ^
 
ад у
<ч'ПГЧТ^<^ЧяП Ъ fOTT ^ 
11 ? 11
сгггт чгй: n fw rf *гапт ^т-л 
стетт 
f w r w
N araya n a said- 
T h e com plete 
lord K rsn a , 
together w ith the people o f G o k u la finding the 
Salokya type o f salvation there, sat under the 
banyan tree in the B h and ira-van a accom panied 
b y fiv e cow herds. H e had a glance on the entire 
G o k u la . A t that point o f tim e, G o k u la seemed 
upset, w ith o u t a protector and extrem ely busy. 
V m d a v a n a too looked deserted. A t that point o f 
tim e the m erciful lord K rs n a filled G o k u la w ith 
cow herds and cowherdesses sprinkling the nectar 
there. H e m ade V m d a va n a quite charm ing and 
beautiful.
S ri K rsn a said- " O cow herd, О brothers, yo u 
rem ain hap py and be stable, yo u enjoy y o u r 
spouses in the beautiful Rasamandala, K rsn a 
w o u ld rem ain present in V m d a v a n a till the tim e 
o f sun and m o o n ".
ш w m w iift feanr ^iirwfqi
w ft 
чадтт ъ чет: 7свщ11<н
4^€jrf4
ЗЖТ srw^tcf чеяф 44RWTIHII 
^T?rT «-ЩЕТГ^ 
т 
"gw чтадЕпи^ои 
cc)Rrll?EU5^: ТТ^ 43TSST^ тгоадг$:1
Th u s speaking, the lord o f the universe w e n t to 
the B h and ira-van a. 
Thereafter Sesa, 
D h a rm a , 
G a u rl 
and 
S iva , 
S u rya , 
In dra, 
m o o n , 
A g n i, 
K u b e ra , V a ru n a , the w in d g o d, Y a m a , Tsana the 
gods, eight V a su s, all the planets, the sages and 
M an u s reached the place w here lord K rsn a w as 
seated. B rah m a reaching there prostrated before 
the lord and said-.
Wtarer
qftqxfcm
B ra h m a said- О eternal fo rm o f B rah m a n and 
com plete lord, the fo rm o f flam e, eternal, beyond 
P rakrti, I b o w in , reverence to y o u .
'РГчИя ЙЯ14Л7 W R адЯ^НЧП 
Ш 5КИ ЧТ атч

=== PAGE 860 ===

к
750
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
Y o u are com pletely unattached, invisible and 
visible o n ly to the devotees, yo u are the one w h o 
m oves at w ill, the eternal abode, the supreme 
soul, I o ffe r m y salutation to y o u .
сЩЩГСТ zf сЩТТП
гГ 4RTST<T
Y o u are the lord and the fo rm o f all the deeds, 
cause o f all the causes, y o u are B rah m a , S iva and 
Sesa, the lord o f the gods, the lord o f all, I offer 
m y salutation to y o u .
I ynfcrJW ТЩТ ТТЩЩ Ч*ТГ57гГ TtllWI
O f all the three w o rlds, earth is quite graceful 
o ver w hich yo u have placed y o u r feet p u rifyin g 
the same b y w itnessing y o u r lotus-like feet, all 
the gods 
and 
the 
sages, 
have 
been 
feeling 
graceful.
аднГСПкй <|TRTSqr ^ Ч 1^<ТУГЧ1 
arWTcPtfh 
TTTSfTT 
^11
T h e one w h o is beyond the com prehension o f 
the great sages w h o is difficu lt to be adored the 
same lord has appeared before us.
ctTf: ттгйчнгга?гг fg?-=nft ^
 eifaTTi
<3WR1 
rtitfd^l 1У ? II
Y o u are the lord o f Sarasvatl, La k s m i, Parvati 
and are the lord o f S avitrl, R a d h a and divine 
dance, I o ffe r m y salutation to y o u .
^^TRRTTI 
TRTOTcfT 
T f l l ^ l l
Y o u are the beginning o f all, the lord o f all, 
the protector o f all, destroyer o f all and creator o f 
all, I o ffe r m y salutation to y o u .
AfATIdLKJRTHT SR1T ТОГ д Ш Т П 
ccrfTT ^ | 4IW tRR
W ith the touch o f the dust fro m y o u r lotus-like 
feet, 
the 
earth 
has 
been pu rified, 
becom ing 
graceful, but О lord, w ith y o u r departure fo r yo ur 
eternal abode, it w ill get deserted.
cfhfarTt 
tort 
ТОРТ? TOfe TTOT 
| ^ | |
A hundred and tw e nty five years have passed 
and n o w y o u are proceeding to y o u r divine 
abode deserting the earth.
жщш TOfsfcrcror щ ттршаг crtstpri 
f^TT w ftr TOPR[ -f^TTl 1 ^ 11
M ah a d e va 
said- 
О 
virtues 
one, 
yo u 
had 
incarnated on earth at the request o f B rah m a and 
relieved the earth o f her burden; n o w y o u are 
going back to y o u r abode.
ТОГО TOST: TJcTT тЩ1%ТТ1 
Ч-tql ТОГО:
V is n u happens to be the abode o f all, in the 
hair-pits o f w h o m innum erable globes reside. 
T h e same lord M a h a visn u incarnated on earth in 
the fo rm o f K rsn a .
тотт h w fq ^ M 'r TjtpfcRT
TOTO^TOITOpT 
q^Tdqiqiiy ?ll
W hose lotus-like feet are beyond the reach o f 
the siddhas and w o u ld be achieved o n ly b y 
perform ing tapas 
fo r prolonged periods, 
the 
same lord has becom e visible to us.
3FRT
ссГЧЧчТГ f | snTTOTTffcr ТОН1?П$:1
TOT TOtTII^I!
arow m r: WMtyq
З Ш # T? fav<*lfa ^n%T: ТОШ тощи
A n a n ta 
said- 
Y o u 
are 
the 
lord 
w ith o u t 
lim itations and I happen to be and arhsa o f y o u r 
ra y. Lo d g e d in a secluded place in the universe 
rem ain on the head o f the tortoise like a sm all 
m osquito 
on 
the 
elephant 
head. 
Th e re 
are 
innum erable 
B ra h m a , 
V is n u , 
S iva 
and 
the 
serpents 
Sesa 
beside 
tortoise. 
Th e re 
are 
innum erable globe's bu t y o u happen to be the 
lord o f all.
чтаг 
то? яГстгРп
ЧМ SraifR ?т1ёГ1ТО TOT fK^T to^ tori
ШТОЩТ 
TO 1ЧЧЯТ

=== PAGE 861 ===

KR$I4A-JANMA-KHAN1?A, CHAPTER 129
751
О lord w h e n shall the auspicious day arrive? 
T h e lord w h o is . invisible even in dream , the 
same lord appeared before all the creatures. О 
lo rd, y o u are leaving fo r Goloka p u rifyin g the 
earth and the same earth w h o has been plunged 
in g rie f is n o w cryin g.
cffe -щщч fg? m ъч «pf ч*тгяз 
\ч c 11
T h e gods said- T h e one w h o is beyond the 
com prehension o f the V e d a s , B rah m a , S iva and 
all the gods, w h o are unable to o ffe r prayer to 
h im , w h a t type o f prayer can be offered to h im . 
W e o ffe r our salutation to y o u .
Ferrer w rsfrgn
rftTW W RT хГ Щ 
дг[Т5ЙгТТ:117Ч11
T h u s speaking all the gods getting filled w ith 
delight, hurriedly left the place and reached the 
city o f D va ra k a to have an audience w ith the 
lord.
m йчт хт ЧРТГДТ ид<тЫг*утгач1
«Гшш Vfn rleRT: WRFRTril^oll
Thereafter G o p a la left fo r the blissful Goloka. 
T h e earth started shaking together w ith the seven 
oceans.
Sclfsra ЗНЭД rT oWsrr ^ 5<p?ll4d:l
11 ^ ^11
D v a ra k a w as deserted because o f the curse o f 
B ra h m a and S ri K rsn a the lord o f R a d h a left the 
city and entered the im age that w as lyin g under 
the fo o t o f kadamba tree.
fg?TTRTW iftsuyg w r : Tsnftfr:
Th ereafter all the Y a d a va s w ere destroyed 
fighting am ong them selves, using the red-grass 
as the w eapon . T h e ir spouses also m et w ith their 
end ju m p in g in the burning flam es together w ith 
their husbands.
тг тгзтт wgfa: 
ggt w f 
яМ дтпзз
Thereafter, A rju n a w en t to H astinapur and 
com m unicated the new s to Y u d h isth ira w h o also 
together w ith his w ife and brothers w en t to the 
heaven.
Fin d in g lord K rsn a lodged in the fo rm o f an 
im age in the root o f the kadamba tree, all the 
gods including B ra h m a w en t there and bo w e d to 
h im w ith devotion.
<£§<j: ч ш н ^ чгсгфтт w n
FTPT fetJtlTcTTri ftfhri T^m iuV.ll^m i 
•^rtM grwBrri
3rate 
ttft grpj<*.M гн><к^и^н
Н е w as having the dark co m p le xio n , o f the 
tender age o f a b o y and his b o d y w as adorned 
w ith all the gem -studded ornam ents. H e w as clad 
in the divine garm ents, havin g the lustre o f the 
fire. H e w as w earing the long garland o f forest 
flow ers, was extrem ely beautiful, peaceful, lord 
o f La k s m I, holding divine w eapon in the hand, 
served b y La k s m I and other goddesses at his feet. 
A l l 
the 
gods 
then 
offered 
their 
prayer 
to 
N a ra ya n a the suprem e soul and pervading god. 
L o r d K rsn a also lo oking at the gods p rovided 
protection to them sm ilin g ly.
Tfarat m FmwctRg
Hjrir ш ш г о m 
<s n
T h e lord assured the earth w h o w as upset and 
w as crying and gave the hunter his eternal abode. 
WFTW for: ^
 W 
ТНЩЧсЩ!
ящятд g- тот g 
g^rforii? 11
sigtfHwrT 
Tfruufti
Igra: w it ^п ^д ж й щ ч п д н 'ко и
O N a ra d a , the illu m in ing lustre o f B alaram a 
enter Sesanaga, the lustre o f Pra d yu m n a entered 
K a m a d e va and that o f A n iru d d h a in B rah m a . 
T h e eternal goddess R u k m in l in the fo rm o f 
M ah a laksm I proceeded on to V a ik u n th a w ith her 
hum an b o d y.

=== PAGE 862 ===

752
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURA^AM
ттгцчтгчт Yferi rf 
ддтёшчп 
-щц tjmgggt 
pgfgit 
i^ ? ii
Satyabham a w h o happened to be the ams'a o f 
L a k s m I, 
entered 
into 
the 
earth. 
Thereafter 
Ja m ba vatl 
entered 
the 
b o d y 
o f Pa rva tl, 
the 
m other o f the universe. 
pt tn ^oq?g tjret
rTwt ът 
rrg xt 
и
A l l the goddesses w h o happened to be the 
aths'as o f w h ich e ve r goddess entered their bodies 
separately.
чтэяад Ы : тзтд xr fg %
д т т -<j^cr?4iuif3!5qi 
ОТ1Ь!^11
T h e unique tejas o f Sam ba entered the b o d y o f 
S ka n da. T h e tejas o f V asu d e va entered K asyapa 
w h ile that o f D e v a k I entered A d iti.
старят тргшт з г ш f t p
T h e ocean h avin g a delightful face and the 
eyes subm erged the entire city o f D va ra k a under 
w ater leaving aside the abode o f R u k m in l.
Я^ОТГ?: 
р я д ТТЧ1тГЧф
РТГд gflgVfiT
Thereafter the ocean o f saline w ater arrived 
and offered prayer to Purusottam a and started 
cryin g, fillin g his eyes w ith tears, as a result o f 
the separation fro m the lord.
Pfr fRWTl wratrt g д р т гтггп
W Ftft 
xT pfPTPHT Xf ^ттггз^П
ТТРгард ВТ: ggf:
О sage, all the rivers like G a n g a , Sarasvatl, 
P a d m a , Y a m u n a , G o d a v a ri, Svarnarekha, K a v e ri, 
N a rm a d a , Sarasvatl, B ah ud a and the auspicious 
K rta m a la arrived there and started o fferin g their 
salutation to the lord.
3mg s n p t 
W t WPydTPI
пт f^ r^ c b im n i^ iii
G e ttin g upset w ith the fever o f separation her 
eyes fille d w ith tears, the G a n g a spoke to lord 
K rsn a w h ile crying.
I яга тф тш prfp
зпчтск щ pf^grr 4fdatid gwtt p iix ^ i!
B haglrathl said- О lovable lord, y o u are n o w 
proceeding to GoJoka. W h a t shall be our position 
during the age o f K a li? .
sfrmidljctW
gqffnr % я р в
bwifr hifiHf grfr 
з;пдрд тряпиц° и 
ттгп^д f? gn^fgiiq ^ii
S ri K rsn a said- О G a n g a , Y o u rem ain on earth 
fo r five thousand years during Kaliyuga. A l l the 
sins 
that are w ashed 
in y o u r w ater w o u ld 
disappear w ith the reciting o f the mantras b y the 
devotees and b y the people w h o earn m erit b y 
havin g a lo o k at y o u .
~ч&r ponfa pgfpT %l 
тпг д?дт hrayi-rmfir: тго?
Y o u . w o u ld also listen to the reciting o f the 
nam e o f H a ri and the reciting o f the Puranas.
w f g 
wi i ч ? 11
W ith the reciting o f the Puranas and the nam e 
o f H a ri, the sins like Brahmahatya get destroyed 
in no tim e.
V Fftw fr HFdg imraifpr^T gi 
p rig ^rtgOTgifr 
чтсш пятиц^п 
OTsfir twrgr 
w f g чгГчч1*гГсц 
^ o tri gift nfmfp pqR ifa g дт^дицщ 
p ^ wi-tt ?rclr^ TlfpT TjTpJ WPJ.)
р т д р т т ч д и
These sins are reduced to ashes w ith the touch 
o f a Vaisnavas in the same w a y as the strew is 
b u m it out in the fire flam es or the d ry -w o o d is 
also burnt out in fire. О G a n g a , all the h o ly 
places 
w h ich 
are 
located 
on 
earth, 
are 
all 
enshrined in the bodies o f m y devotees. T h e 
earth gets p u rifie d w ith the dust fro m the feet o f 
m y devotees.

=== PAGE 863 ===

KRSIVA-JANMA-KHAI4PA, CHAPTER 129
753
ЖГ: iimft 
жг: шт tftwi
Сч 
Сч
felT $
РП^Т fet 
Ь 
firaT:l
сщ тт^^и г tp l 
tfra^: 114 6 11
A l l the h o ly places get purified at once w ith 
the fall o f the dust from the feet o f m y devotee. 
A B rah m a n a w h o is devoted to m e and recites 
m y mantras also consum es the naivedya and 
alw ays rem ains devoted to m e , he becomes 
dearer to m e than m y life . W ith the ve ry touch o f 
his b o d y , the w in d as w e ll as the fire get purified.
тГЗлШ TTfo ЧгГгП
ptJTcraT? 
xTim^ll
'(JdfWvRH cfW 'фЬЩ^лШч''!ГгГ:11^о|| 
ттщ:
D u rin g Kaliyuga m y devotees w o u ld rem ain 
on earth fo r ten thousand years. In the m eantim e 
the 
four-arm ed 
fro m , 
havin g 
the 
lustre 
o f 
hundred o f m oons, illu m in ing all the directions, 
h o ld in g s'amkha, cakra, gada and padma, w ith 
Srivatsa m a rk on his chest, em erged fro m the 
b o d y o f K rsn a .
'W4TW 
TI ЗРПЧ
ftpqcff^r ъ 
тяга 'hftiTdt жтп$ ^ и
•O 
Cs
H e at once m ounted on the beautiful chariot 
and proceeded tow ards the ocean o f m ilk . La k s 
m l, the daughter o f the ocean also transform ed 
herself into a goddess and left the place.
sfrfjWTRrraT ;яшт
'Й<Гё№ 
fowft ^IWWcbtf'RlI^II
^ fajaupiMi яжг 7T:i
W ith the departure o f lord V is n u , the preserver 
o f the universe, to S ve ta -d vlp a , M artya laksm I 
w as born from the m in d o f S ri K rs n a . In his pure 
and spotless fo rm , S ri K rs n a w as divided into 
tw o form s, his right hand side w as havin g tw o 
arm s and appeared in the fo rm o f a cow herd b o y.
Ч#Т 
#fa?I: ЧЫ|ЧШИ
чЧ|НЬи:11^Ч11
WtFRfi 
3Tf:ll^li
Щ ЩЦ Ж 
£р$щ: ЖЖ{1
4T4W Ж 
ЯтШди^ЯЗЩ:11^\з|1
ЗРрГ Ж :1
^ГРнГ -Ц 
jUIrTl^'q ЖТсНЧИ^И
T h a t fo rm had the da rk-com plexioned o f a 
new cloud, w ore pltambara, placing a flute on 
his m o u th , filled w ith g lo ry , h avin g sm iling face, 
the eyes like the lotus flow ers and possessed the 
lustre o f a hundred crores o f the m oon s. H e w as 
blissful, havin g the g lo ry o f crores o f gods o f 
lo ve , 
com plete 
lo rd, 
like the 
eternal 
abode, 
eternal B rah m a n , de vo id o f gunas, the suprem e 
soul, the one w h o w as alw ays graceful to his 
devotees and takes to hum an fo rm fo r their 
benefit 
o n ly , 
havin g 
eternal 
b o d y 
and 
w as 
beyond Prakrti. T h e yogis alw ays adored h im as 
the everlasting flam e.
fTA№li T O 
*П{1 
cre[f% тт 4 ftniMHi 
^ gcifcr ^тт: ^
 ж
fm -. Tfi чт4^ч 
жррэоц
T h e devotees consider h im to be the eternal 
flam e o f their m inds and the V e das described 
h im as the eternal truth. T h e great intellectuals 
conceived him as eternal and everlasting. A l l the 
gods describe h im as the lord w h o m o ve d at w ill. 
T h e siddhas and the ascetics conceived h im to be 
om nipresent.
•щц fm m ira^T w rnt ъ
S iva , 
the lord o f yogis describes 
h im as 
inexplicable. 
T h e 
creator 
o f 
the 
universe 
describes h im to be the cause o f all the causes.
w i t яг 
w №w 4,i 
^ 11
T h e serpent Sesa conceives h im to be the lord 
w h o could be achieved b y nine types o f devotion

=== PAGE 864 ===

754
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAI^AM
and beyond m easure, the divine six types o f 
philosophies project h im in six different fo rm .
TjTMHrerawr nw arafei
H e has been described to possess the nine 
form s including one o f the V aisn a vas, one o f the 
V e d a s , one o f the Puranas.
Ъ Ч Rtf # 3 # c^cfl 
ft # t?rto?cIT5 5 lt 7Г R # #
T h e jurisprudence define h im as the one w h o 
is beyond conception and this theory is also 
accepted b y Sankara. T h e Vaisesika doctrine 
•escribes h im as eternal and prim eval.
ЧНЗЭТ 
R c# tsMteT tHIdTflJ 
ТЬТШТ Reft# т-f ^ R f : y^efiHUl^iltami
T h e 
Samkhya 
people, 
the 
Sdmkhya 
Philosophers 
described 
h im 
as 
the 
fo n n 
o f 
v crlasting flam e . T h e Mlmansd philosophers 
call h im as the fo rm o f everything and the 
Yedanla philosoph y describes h im to be the 
cause o f all.
bWSTSTZFRT 
^ T ; 'tpypp^CTcfTTi 
'ratsSF# fTTOt rT ЯтЩга ftra fo n ^ l № ^ 11
T h e Yogasastra o f Patanjali described h im to 
be beyond m easure and the V edas take h im to be 
the fo rm o f truth. T h e Puranas described h im as 
the one w h o m oves at w ill and the devotees 
alw ays take h im to be the one having the eternal 
fo rm .
7TC# 
Tl^Tt T<4^4 :l
тПсрГ 
c[^T<ft cftlfi9\9U
T h e same suprem e soul happens to be the lord 
o f Goloka and the beloved o f Radha. besides 
being the son o f N a n d a . H e rem ains in G o k u la 
and V rn d a va n a in the fo rm o f a cow herd.
cj^uci
In V a ik u n th a he appears as the fo u r arm ed 
lord o f M ah alaksm I. H e happens to be the form
o f N a ra ya n a , the reciting o f w hose nam e bestow s 
salvation.
ТТПТГ «raft TRTI|V3'?II
О N a ra d a , b y reciting the nam e o f N araya n a 
once, a person earns the m erit o f havin g a bath in 
the G a n g a fo r a hundred kalpas.
4T#j: 4fwiftcT:i
щ ещ ртгртт: ? t e w w : i i i i ) i i
Rorj^Uf «jft# сНЧМ-ЧИ
Thereafter 
lord 
V is n u 
w e n t 
to 
V a ik u n th a 
surrounded b y Sunanda, N a n d a and K u m u d a , 
h olding samkha, gada, cakra and padma in the 
hands beside displaying the SrJvatsa m a rk on the 
chest, adorned w ith the kaustubha gem w earing 
the long garland o f forest flo w e rs, m ounted o n a 
plane and adored b y the gods.
«ft 
x( ТТ9ТГМ 
5T»J:I
ш
 tiyiftift ra ^dicH iui^ hrq;nd?ii
A fte r the departure o f the lord o f V a ik u n th a , 
Sri K rsn a the lord g f R a d h a played on the flute 
w hich attracted the three w orlds.
т^50Чс’У’(Щ( т-гауедГч RTT^I 
згатяг ептщга «трш ч##
О N a ra d a , on hearing the vo ice o f the flu te , all 
the gods and the sages fainted or all those present 
there w ere fainted w ith the illusion o f the lord, 
except P a rva tl.
ЗсПН 4 # # 
«Fraft TRTrRRj 
friWIRPP «Fra# Rcfevt R4Ifr#ll<i'kll
w g r r a ^ i чт ишггЧ'га^ГтоГп
T rw 
ttt ra trrr ш
т # w tii^M i
Thereafter, Pa rva tl w h o happened to be the 
illusion 
o f V is n u , 
the 
fo rm 
o f all, 
eternal 
B rah m a n , 
the 
fo rm 
o f 
the 
suprem e 
soul, 
possessing qualities as w e ll as w ith o u t them , the 
one w h o m o ve d at w ill and w as the chaste 
goddess, spoke to the lord.

=== PAGE 865 ===

KRS14A-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 129
755
Ц|с^Цс(|£1
чЭ
iTg^si ттШщщтт тгн й чшчч^и
trete rx TiiHi* trf^raf р в w r ii^ n
Pa rva tl said- О lo rd , I w as alw ays in the fo rm 
o f R a d h ik a in the Rasamandala o f Goloka. Y o u 
fill the v o id in the Goloka b y pe rform ing the 
divine dance.
t ri rfcf ^r:'Wvffwril<j^ll
Y o u proceed m ounted on the gem -studded 
chariot. B y residing in y o u r heart I felt m y s e lf 
com plete.
чкчзсй ri t m ете w f i n f r i i^ i i
dcll^ TRET 'Jlldl fTRJefRTT ?fc|T55?WTI
4 n f^ 
Wsraf4sfti i<^ ч 11
A t y o u r com m and I becam e M ah a laksm i the 
dw eller o f V a ik u n th a . I also functioned there as 
Sarasvatl appearing to the left o f lord H a ri. I 
have been b o m out o f y o u r m in d and appeared as 
the daughter o f the ocean at y o u r com m and. I 
had appeared as S a vitrl the m other o f the Vedas 
and stayed w ith B ra h m a w ith m y athsa.
йзТ:7][ Et^ERT TJTT E?^ rPTOS^PI
3 # Ш pcTM pT ^5£Ц ?KkcG4ll<?o||
Ea rlie r, 
during 
the 
tim e 
o f Satyayuga, 
I 
appeared fro m the tejas o f all the gods at yo u r 
com m and and to ok to the fo rm o f a goddess.
p ? f%ET p fo £ ftpT fpr* сйи<> ^||
I then kille d p la yfu lly the dem ons nam ed 
Sum bh a and Nis'um bha beside D u rg a after w h ich 
I w as g ive n the nam e o f Trip u ra .
<тЪ<чЫ
ггщ55^г 
TRft игч^^ГчиПпч^и
B y killin g the dem on nam ed Raktabrja, I came 
to be k n o w n as the destroyer o f R aktablja. A t 
y o u r com m and I becam e S afi, the daughter o f 
D a k sa in the truthful fo rm .
E B R rtRRm Ы W 
T ET S S p iri
Щ ЧТ p ^ T (W ) '^ГЗГЧПТ 
<.ЖЧи5«й| I
A t yo u com m and I discarded that b o d y and 
then came to be k n o w n as the daughter o f 
H im a la y a . Y o u had handed m e o ve r to S iva in 
Rasamandala.
fesjprfTirnf 
fe w jU iq i xf ^w |cj)|
^
 Я ТГВ Л А Т Р Т 1 1 
if 11 
IJOTUnunfeeFISf xt
TT^ifgm Tt^r cfTEt? E E T T l TlfiraiT E T B p i
I had been the devotion o f V is n u and as such I 
came to be kn o w n as V is n u m a y a or V a is n a v l, I 
w as the illusion o f lord N araya n a and as such I 
came to be k n o w n as N a ra y a n i. I w as the 
beloved o f K rsn a and w as the m other o f M a h a vis 
nu also k n o w n as R a d h a .
w
s s ^e i t е з з ш ? ч ^ У ф й ^ Г ч и П | 
«B H ic b H ivi^K ? гг 
^ и я ^ н
A t y o u r com m and I to ok to five form s and w as 
k n o w n as Pancaprakrti. W ith m y rays or the 
ams'a o f m y rays, I becam e the spouses o f the 
gods.
W
 E ? T E F T сШ 5? fg T fR T T I 
в Ш $ Т : Trf^rTT Т Г Е V B R f Eftc R E p l l ^ l l
О virtuous one, y o u m o ve on at once because I 
am suffering badly fro m y o u r separation there, I 
alw ays roam about in the Rasamandala together 
w ith the cowherdesses.
f P T ТГргт T ffi& Y c H : I 
Ж У Т Ч EB TEB T BBT Е1с^сЬЧт1ЧЧПЯ<П1 
Liste n in g to the w ords o f Pa rva tl, K rsn a the 
lord o f the divine dance, sm iled and m ounted on 
the chariot studded w ith gem s then proceeded to 
Goloka.
siteiiim y e ?b ^
e r t crssm
ЕГ Ч М ? №с ||ч Г * fTOTTPFJI T F hTTHTIIR R II 
p P T t 
xf W 7F f%EET Щ : I
чтт^ p i t чтт Я1 ^ т " щ р ^rafli i ^ о о 11
Thereafter Parvatl w h o happened, to be the 
eternal V isn u m a ya , brought the gods back to

=== PAGE 866 ===

756
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAtfAM
senses w h o had been fainted because o f the 
sound o f the flute o f lord K rsn a . R eciting the 
nam e 
o f 
H a r i, 
all 
the 
gods 
then 
retied 
astonishingly to their respective abodes, D u rg a 
also d e lightfu lly w a n t along w ith S iva to her 
abode.
m oRuit ш
и тт 
щ \
W f 1 *гг 
wravvnTq;ii^o
R a d h a then fin ding K rs n a arriving in V ra ja , 
left the place and fo llo w e d the lord together w ith 
all the cowherdesses.
^ZcTT 
W tPffl
■Я1ЯЧ1Ч 
f?TTRT тШ щ: Щ :1 1 ^||
R e ach in g close to h im , the chaste R a d h a 
b o w e d 
in 
reverence 
to 
the 
lord 
after 
his 
descending fro m the chariot.
ттгот ттггаг?гг Tjf^cfT:
:l
tfffsr c?i^mi^<lvcKMi44lby«hi:ii^o^ii
A l l the cow herds and cowherdesses havin g the 
delightful face and eyes w elcom ed the lord and 
played u pon the big drum s.
<£^1 TT9T 'ЛМгч(и:1
зтегщг wrfof 
1rfargngpr4.11 
ж щ - 
w n r
дтгсг ^rnf
K rs n a fin d in g . R a d h a standing o n the river 
V ira ja , at once got d o w n fro m the chariot and 
held her hand taking her to the m ountain o f 
hundred peaks in the Rasamaiydala, w here he 
started roam ing about w ith her. Thereafter they 
w e n t to the auspicious banyan tree and having a 
sight o f it, they w e n t to V m d a va n a .
gvTOtaiR-T 
W t WdlcHHJ 
егтй 
fRTd’i чпусПсшчч ш \ 1 ^о ^ 11
Th e re he fo u n d the Tulasl-vana, Kunda-vana 
and Madhavl-vana, leaving them to the left they 
m o ve d tow ards the Malatl-vana.
tO T 
up^rtur^ipiq-MlfcHtr 41
а д UMWuf XT xfT«Tj<R^RH4ll?o\9ll
TRT TlfiradHTcR ТП41
згггст т ш 
чаГщгсй ^ n ^ o d ii
T h e campaka-vana w as to the right and a 
forest o f sandal-w ood w as at the back. T h e n he 
fo u n d the place o f R S d h ika w h o w as lodged in 
her abode occupying a gem -studded lion throne.
w гтщтёт 
enfat ^3iH4i
H e consum ed there the fragrant w ater, the 
betel w ith cam phor and slept on the bed o f 
flow ers over w h ich the sandal-paste had been 
spread.
R 
tlW W? fWTt TRWRI
тгё Ф^гштгёг 
i
11
•3>
hlHlcblt^Qi T«i
H e w as filled w ith ocean o f pleasure and 
started enjoying the com pany o f his be loved. 
Th u s I have narrated everything to y o u , w hatever 
I had heard fro m the m outh o f D h a rm a .
^ffT «tteuio TtfTo «ftfjWF3Rrero ЧТЩЧР

=== PAGE 867 ===

756
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAtfAM
Chapter -130
The marriage of Nanda 
ЯШ? ЗЗГЕГ
Ш 
4MVl44'4if4id4vl
JTM Ъ 9l?l^rff4Vic^ll^11
Narada said- О virtuous one, I have listened, 
to everything and nothing has been left out. This 
Brahmavaivarta Ригйпа is unprecedented and 
fulfils all the wishes.
3t§4t fir gifisnfa rFhi
ЗТЩ 
hw rt zj Щ? ^nfh flqivl’U^lRlI
О teacher of the universe, you tell me as to 
what should be done by me. You give me a 
command I shall go to Himalaya for performing 
tapas.

=== PAGE 868 ===

KRStfA-JANMA-KHANlM, CHAPTER 130
757
зщ ф птаЗ: vocnyi5wf4^vfa:i
vP4Rft
9ГЩрч^:11^И
Narayana said- In one of your earlier births, 
you were the husband of fifty damsels, known as 
a Gandharva named Upabarhana. Currently you 
are the son of Brahma.
ате&Бг xr m t w
 rtwr ш
 trt^i 
ЗШТЩ ъ m 
чтт?
One of the damsels was quite beautiful and 
chaste, she performed great ta p a s for Siva in 
order to get Narada as her husband.
3Tf}f TJcf Ч$ГМН
ЖЧ Ъ p ^ l I ? о 11 
зтдчт 
fecTT? 
xll
зшН^гег xt 
я ш ч н
Saunaka said- О virtuous one, we have 
listened to quite attractive, astonishing and 
unprecedented ancient secret, I would like to 
listen about the marriage of Narada, the son of 
Brahma and the one who had controlled all his 
senses.
■rt xt fgweFJn гг wulal41y?iMi 
TfT f e r ? 
^гш ци
She was the daughter of Srnjaya and the real 
sister of SvarnasthlvI. You batter marry him. No 
one could venture to go against the wished of 
lord Krsna.
dMfwt 4^miqi f^buj9[d4<idu((H,ii^ti
^ЗГГ W W TKlt 
{micjdiqj
ЯШИ ftfiTT 
^
 clWg^xi ГРЗ‘11^11
{^{1^4 oFtRfit -qptViraivtiqi
щ т т г W 
II
ЭГОЧ|ЧТ rt ^IVcIryfeuqlctqi^l 
femm Ш
 
ш
 
crpftivsii
She happened to be the ray of Laksmi with 
tender limbs, 
besides being quite chaste, 
virtuous, attractive and Soft spoken. She is quite 
passionate, beautiful and possessed the ever 
lasting youthfulness therefore you surely marry 
her, who can erase the reward of the earlier 
deeds.
^тггногт fKi grf ^pn^pTtfiiiii
The deeds do not vanish even after the lapse of 
hundred crores of kalpas one has to face the 
reward of the good and had deeds without fail.
4l<ldU|d€|: ^gccfT 
fy^itdU
т \щ
Suta said- On hearing the words of Narayana, 
Narada bowed before him with a painful heart 
and at once moved to the abode of Srnjaya.
Suta said- Narada secretly looked at the 
virtuous daughter of Srnjaya and went to the 
court of Brahma which was surrounded by all the 
gods. Bowing in reverence to Brahma he spoke 
to him quite humbly.
trqfrsR x; 
xt w r a щтщ 4f?T:ll Y*N 
Tpffrtrftmn^r w f ^ 1 : 
^TTTl
Brahma the lord of the universe, after meeting 
his son and learning about the proposed marriage 
delightfully proceeded with other gods, mounted 
on the gem-studded plane, accompanied with his 
son, to the place of Srnjaya.
dxsscqi TJstqf <M| {d'^UuMiMcllHj 
cff^nrit с^хГТ qfuiyTb'lRyj cram 
т ш ^ ^ н т ^ t.-i
^
 ^щ х^хт 
^ W
h;i i ^ 11
On hearing about the news, the king Srnjaya 
adorning his charming daughter with gem- 
studded ornaments gave her away in marriage to

=== PAGE 869 ===

758
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURAI4AM
N a ra d a d e lig h tfu lly' H e offered several o f the 
precious gem s and the riches in daksina the kin g 
then prayed to them w ith fo lde d hands. T h e kin g 
Srn ja ya w h o w as the best o f the yogis, after 
o ffe rin g his daughter to B ra h m a , started crying 
uttering the nam e o f his daughter.
3^ TjjfR' 
«tiddclbAl
3T? Tnfir cr tflt 
сЧадг 'jflfad'l 'p :ll
H e 
said, 
" O 
daughter 
h avin g 
the 
eyes 
resem bling the lotus flow ers w here are yo u going 
deserting m y house. G e ttin g separated fro m y o u r 
com pan y I shall go to the terrific forest because 
w ith o u t y o u I am feeling like dead."
ЗШТКГ ftRR 372IT 
ЧШ Ш\
W t (it 
TTTSWrO? тгг f^ ill^ o ll
T h e 
girl 
w h ile 
sobbing 
left her w eeping 
parents behind o fferin g her salutation to them 
and m ounted on the chariot o f B rah m a.
TjffaT xf 
^ ij* Ш TRTSfo<T:l
ЯЗГЯЙ» тГ 
WII? ?ll
B ra h m a on his part d e lightfu lly accom panied 
w ith the bride and the groom together w ith the 
gods and the sages w en t to Brahmaloka.
^ciRftT W 
УЫ cji^iqiR ^ f ^ l i y ^ M
H e 
perform ed 
all 
the 
w elfare 
ceremonies 
there, serving fo o d to the Brahm anas and the 
gods, beating the big drum s.
TTtcTpf 
cnfsRT: tr^gpbiTi
' О 
чЭ 
Cv
W
 чшгтя for
T h e sage N a ra d a was deprived o f his earlier 
deeds. О dear one, the one w h o is habitual to 
p erform ing particular type o f deed, w h o could 
prevent h im fro m doing so.
rj ^ТЙГЕГ^пШ!
TT 
W IT TTltf ffir 4 fonfoT^II?'#ll
W fm fr ^TWRTT^TTraf «UH<£l OTTIRhll
3T5JStS jMdldV’d ^•Mwhld$ldeb:U?^ll 
fSWtfd tpg 
OTh ЧКНВЙ трВ: I
xf 
W
t: wI R6 I I
зтит^гсп dRifTri ч т ъ тгат <щ \\ъ я и
т р т %ТШ ^
 tfOg^rtJUl^TO rPpi 
dqirl TRct WTcT: яб^ч ч<.Ч|*1ч>ЧПЗ ° II
H e then started enjo ying the com pan y o f his 
spouse 
on the 
bed o f flow ers 
and becam e 
unconcerned w ith the passing o f the d a y and 
night. Th u s N a ra d a the best o f the sages w as 
in vo lve d in the conjugal pleasures. H e Started 
residing under the charm ing banyan tree. A t that 
point o f tim e, Sanatkum ara, the three brothers 
arrived 
there 
w h o 
alw ays 
rem ained 
n ude, 
illu m in ing w ith the divine lustre. T h e y appeared 
like the Suprem e lord in the fo rm o f children, 
appearing in the age o f fiv e years, w h o w ere 
de vo id o f the first shaving o f their heads, the 
thread 
cerem onies 
and 
the 
p erfo rm in g 
o f 
sandhya. T h e y w ere alw ays reciting the mantra 
o f K rs n a , w hose teacher w as N a ra y a n a h im se lf, 
w h o rem ained roam ing about all the tim es, w as 
the forem ost o f the intellectual V a is n a va s , the 
best o f the devotees o f the lord and w h o w ere the 
teachers o f the teachers, arrived there. Fin d in g 
those brothers w h o are the best am ong the noble 
people. N a ra d a prostrated before them . T h e sage 
then sm iled and spoke to N a ra d a , the w ords 
w h ich w ere quite auspicious.
ЧНсФМк ЗШУ
■O
3T% W : fo
Tqbpri^d 3R f w ьГягТЯсЯчпз 
i 
f o «psReRRUI^II^II
тгц 
form гг fo rt чргптгч; | 
о т
Sanatkum ara said- О brother, w h a t are y o u 
doing? О husband o f dam sel, are y o u keeping on 
w e ll, 
is 
the 
lo ve 
o f the 
couple 
g oing 
on 
increasing? T h is love obstructs the divine path o f

=== PAGE 870 ===

KR§NA-JANMA-KHAiyi?A, CHAPTER 130
759
knowledge. It serves as the door leaf for the door 
of devotion. It obstructs the path of salvation and 
m to the wordily the bondage for a long time.
«Jl'd 
h"t HtdicbKUi^l
w t 
чттач-.иззи
This is the seed for entering in the womb and 
results into the fall in the hell. A degraded and 
sinful person enjoys it like the nectar.
m чттщщ щэкзт ei-rtss^ 
tr:i 
p gferat wert ящрт arrt fm
The one who discarding the name of Narayana 
involves himself into such worldly pleasures, he 
under the influence of the illusion owns the 
poison discarding nectar.
Rfat 3.4’4>itefw ^ w m h R t fern
cRfgsrcj: ччцм 
^чтчп ^чи
Except the lord all the people, have to face the 
fruit of their deeds, we people are the sons of 
Brahma, this type of behaviour is to be indulged 
into by the human beings.
gf3[ 4 4lfw 
Ml
Ш 
*4 rt frRIR 
Ц: 11 ? * 11
If you have not to face the result of your deed 
then how could you be bom as the son of female 
servant getting detached from the company of 
devotees of the lord?.
flM-M 
4<2(Im41 fiRIHJ
чтяй g t т ш wrr to rrii^
ii
O brother, discarding this beautiful damsel, 
who is the form of illusion, you proceed on for 
performing tapas. In the sacred land of Bharata, 
you must recite the name of Madhava, 
performing tapas.
чготтТ ш
 xfr
fgw fgwMR gfeprr tort fg-Rii^ii
By devoting your mind to lord Narayana who 
bestows salvation on the people, the one who 
remains engrossed in the worldly pleasures, he is 
surely over-powered with the illusion or the 
pleasures, he surely over-powered with the 
illusion of the lord.
TO TOT R cFWT ^R8TTSTOj
totor топто ш
ш
 пяттячвзяп
The essence of all the mantras and the best of 
all happens to be the mantras called Krsna. You 
receive it.
ят4т g mrprta 
g g?nJ gi
-9 
*9 
чЭ 
л <0 
0 < 0
cT% 
WT:II'*0||
There is no mantra better than the same in all 
the Puranas, the four Vedas, the religious 
treatises and all the tantras.
тоттоЕт ^ ^ дщй TOMfmi
ЗТЯТЯзОсЬЕЧ Щ К ? Т О Т ^яМ '^: 11*^11
This mantra, was given to me by Narayana 
nimself at Puskara-ksetra on the occasion of the 
solar eclipse. I reciting the same for innumerable 
kalpas, became adorable by all and I moved at 
will.
$RcfRT TTOtfgRT tt 
tTR Vt ТЩ|
ЯТ TOffo PcRT qfmTORTIl'tf Я П
Thus speaking he bestowed the mantra to 
Narada. Holding a rosary in his hand, he started 
reciting the same through out the day and night.
cTC^ ^TI% t 3RT TOT g guiRTW:l
точга trw ^ torm шгач^п'й^п
Sanatkumaras who happened to be the 
foremost of the Vaisnavas pronouncing their 
blessing for Narada and bestowing the mantra on 
him went to Goloka to have an audience with the 
eternal Brahman.
ТОДЯЧ 
Я М 
cRtTI
IWIt
Narada on the other hand receiving the mantra 
which bestowed all the success, destroying all his 
previous deeds achieved the infallible devotion 
of Lord Krsna.
R3FRT TOTITOt TOlf TO cPT% TOlh
Disowning his wife he went to the land of 
Bharata for performing tapas. Reaching the bank 
of Krtamala river, he hod an audience with lord 
Siva.

=== PAGE 871 ===

760
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAtfAM
гГ ЩШ 
xUHW fyra1 ^Я: I
ядвггег Ararat ячя ^ ЧтН5[ШсТ:11'й^ п
Finding Siva there, the sage N&rada suddenly 
prostrated before him. Lord Siva who bestows 
his grace on his devotees spoke to Narada.
w ar
srgt ян5 ц т 
■щЬгап
чщ&т 
*nr ^ я
Siva said- О Narada, I have been delimited to 
meet you with the glory, the day on which meet 
our devotees, it becomes an suspicious days for 
the human beings.
Щ % ЯТЯТ <ЯГ*ТГ %f%4t ЧтЯфЩ:1 
ЯТ TRTcT: 
^
For the human beings it is quite beneficial to 
have an audience with the devotees of the lord. 
The one who has an audience with the Vais 
navas, he earns the merit of having bath at all the 
holy places.
3tfrr 5ГШГ ЩТЯЯГ:
ЯЯТ Я^ТГ "ФЛ^ТТЯ 
ТЭТгЯЯТЯ
Have 
you 
achieved 
the 
inaccessible 
Mahamantra which is difficult of all the tantras 
which I had bestowed upon Ganesa and my son 
Skanda.
ЩТ ТЯ^Т ^итгя ЯГНГО ТГОЯУЗН1
'dlHt 
qqt ЯШЧЩЯ ^tliq о ||
The knowledge of this mantra was bestowed 
by lord Krsna on me in Rasamandala of the 
Goloka besides Brahma and Dharma. Dharma 
bestowed the knowledge to Narayana.
1 ?П ЧШрТЩгГ <pi 
?ТЯ h
ш Т яш яитг я ^ и ч *11
Brahma 
bestowed 
the 
knowledge 
to 
Sanatkumara, who has bestowed the same to 
you, by receiving this mantra, one becomes 
Narayana himself.
f^ETRUt тХ ЯШЯ5Г
хШЦ^И
By reciting this mantra, the good or bad time, 
become of no consequence; by reciting this 
mantra five lakhs of time, one meets with 
success.
str 
ч ття гзя ?гя 
cNra: i 
а п я Ъ ЯТЯЯ?Я С Ь ^ Й ^ ЯТЯ^ И Ц ^ II 
fjHTT
¥Мсь1<Ц4к4 ^ п я ч д т г TTTq^im^ii 
яШ ^4uft^4<£rtUelPrf4$:l
gfcffa ЕшРзкщнччи
ct qi<Hcf)*flrqqfugd4j
■£ч4нццц?ич4 Гк 4 1ч тад ly ienff f i r -.iiq ^ H
ЩЩЩД ^(l(W frftfT JPJR: ч щ 
ЯТЧТгЯТЯ Ч тБ 13 ТЩ ^З Щ П Ч \эП 
4 я тШ
г р М t щ «4 $ с К я ^ 1 
)8чАяАч я ш ё л ч ч ш чч1аяц|1Чйп
я ЧЧЯН^ W4 1ЧгЯ ХПЖЧЧ.1
^ c t ^ i ч г ^ т т д Ф т т я « н ^ г н п 14*11
One should adore Krsna according to the 
dhyanam prescribed in the Samaveda which 
destroyed the sin and cuts at the root of the 
deeds. He has dark complexion of the new 
clouds is of quite a tender age, wearing 
pltambara, illumining with the lustre of hundred 
crores of the moons, adorned with best of the 
gem-studded ornaments. His body is plastered 
with sandal-paste. The kaustubha gem adorns his 
chest, the peacock feather appears on the head. 
He wears the garland and of jasmine flowers, 
wears a serene smile on the face. He is adored by 
Siva and others gods daily, He is difficult to be 
achieved even with meditation, is devoid of all 
the gunas, beyond Prakrti, the supreme soul of 
all, the one who takes to human form for the sake 
of his devotees, the on who is inexplicable by the 
Vedas and is the lord of all. I adore lord Krsna 
who is the best or all. One should meditate upon 
the eternal lord with this dhyanam. Who is 
blissful, truthful eternal, beyond everything and 
is known by the name of lord Krsna. Thus 
speaking lord Siva retired to his abode.

=== PAGE 872 ===

KPSI^A-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 131
761
TT тпщзт згшаг чг^апт^ ^ r i 
TTTcf: « ft# 
'4>irfqg^l 'chrlcHH, 
fr# 4 : ш^ч% ъ чтз (хгагт) ччпШ s b ii
B o w in g at the feet o f lord S iva , N a ra d a w ent 
fo r 
pe rform ing tapas. 
N a ra d a 
discarded 
his 
h um an b o d y b y yo gic practices and devoting his 
m in d at the feet o f lord H a ri he entered the lotus­
like feet o f lord H a ri w h ich are adored alw ays b y 
K a m a la .
чщо % шм'4)до ЧИсНТ» 
4K<fbtcii^if^Meb<ur чпт 
о и

=== PAGE 873 ===

KPSI^A-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 131
761
Sjc-HlUlfa'SVHeUH 
^
 W JI
зт^ши^чфгт сУт6Ч5Е|тТ)»?1ГшНН111^11 
4R? 0 R4WFT xrf^uf TR tF^I 
3TfTT «hgf44ilf4 e ^ ^ fN lfU ld l'H .
Ъ W 4 F T rl^r вЧПЯ1дЧ^Г11\Э11
3T^cbRvi^chVld'd4V^FT:
Chapter - 131
The birth of Agni and Gold
ззгггт
ЗТНЩ^Я'ТГетП' #4 ТТФТ^ЧсТЧ^!
*т -gifrcst тщ тщ ч4 43411 * 11
Saunaka said-1 have listened, to the extremely 
astonishing, secret, charming and completely 
new story from you.
tofactaMid g 
-цч^тч.!
4 <|#ИТ Щ TTlTHT fTT% JWTll IЯ11
But it is inexplicable in the Puranas, charming, 
beautiful, ancient and the inaccessible story.
ttcwt xt 
^cfrswrar
4^?RT ТПШ «RT ^ПТ ^ьогсГФто:11^11
ЯтШЧТ ^Гг+Тс)!ЯЧЧ||^11
When shall I meet with such a type of 
auspicious deeds, in which my life would 
become successful, keeping the company of the 
Vaisnavas. This company of the Vaisnavas is 
destroyer of the life in the womb, cuts at the root 
of the deeds, bestows toe slavehood of lord Hari 
and increases his devotion.
The story about the birth of Ganes'a is difficult 
to get in the Puranas which relieves one from the 
company of the wicked and evil minded people 
and uproots the cause of the deeds. I have 
listened to the story about TulasI and Radhika. 
Beside this, I have listened, to several other 
secret known and unknown stories which fulfil 
the desires. О lord, I have listened to everything; 
now I intend to listen to the story about the birth 
of Agni as well as the gold. О virtuous one, you 
kindly tell me the story about both of them.
ЧЧ ЗЩтТ
wnrfgfwi 
|m?R: i
y<j>(nRr4i ч^Ач 
xtlldll 
m j f^?TT 
4for ^ГупЫсЫЦ
У fid 4 '^ ^ VNSWTS^R 44 
11
Stita said- Of all the material of the universe 
water, fire and the eternal Prakrti have their own 
entity, similarly the Mahatattva has its own 
entity. As the sky and the direction are there or 
the universe is there, the arrogance is bom out of 
Prakrti and Mahat.
сЙ=1 rf §di$>w:l
WSftT 
% m i I \ о 11
Agni also exists like Sabda and Tanmatras. In 
spite of that I would narrate to you the story 
about its emergence. 
tTcFTT 4fl=RT# Ъ ^пччгч|щ т:1
feoj ЧЦ|Л(сПр1Н 11
тшчт 
чгош 
fwreAf *п
3 ^ : 
JfcTt f ^ r :ll^ ll
«wfu-d:
? т т т г а 1чт йилчтгщ^ ^ < 411*311
Once during the time of creation Ananta, 
Brahma and Siva went to have an audience with

=== PAGE 874 ===

762
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURA14AM
V is n u 
on 
the 
S ve ta -d vip a, 
after 
m utual 
discussion. T h e y to ok their seats on the lion 
thrones, in the court o f lord V is n u . In the court, 
the dam sels w h o had em erged out o f the b o d y o f 
L a k s m I continued dancing there, reciting the 
g lo ry o f the lord w ith their sweet voice.
ШШ ^ cRferr sJrftt grfSR
L o o k in g at their w e ll bu ilt b o d y , the flesh, 
sm iling faces and the pelvic region, B rah m a w as 
infested w ith passion.
hHlfaciKui сБ<| ч w rm
cM ЧШ г т ъ 
Ш ЯТf^T:ll^4ll
etiH щагаШ t o w
i n
% tl I ^ 11
О 
B rah m a n a, 
B rah m a 
could 
not 
control 
h im s e lf and his 
semen fe ll. 
B rah m a feeling 
asham ed hid it in a cloth and after the m usic w as 
o ve r, B ra h m a getting infatuated w ith passion 
to ok out the cloth and threw it out in the ocean.
W f: M M P O T I
3cm j^iur: ^
 df^dW Wiraf^ll^sll
Th erea fte r, a divine im m ense lustre, em erged 
out o f the w ater and sat in the lap o f B rah m a , 
w h o w as feeling asham ed seated in the court o f 
V is n u .
TdfwT'tU Test
УЯТЯТ ЩГОТГ 
IIU II
In the m eantim e, getting angry V a ru n a came 
out o f the w ater and b o w in g in reverence to the 
gods he tried to take a w ay the b o y w ith h im .
згцщ 
n
T h e b o y on the other hand started crying and 
caught hold o f B rah m a . B u t B rah m a could not 
speak anything getting asham ed.
qivich'W ■ЖЧ *ycq| -cjctiKSSeb^iM TOT1
G e ttin g enraged V a ru n a caught h old o f the 
hand o f the b o y and dragged h im . B rah m a , the 
Prajapati, threw h im aw ay in the court..
tntld 
Ejcft ci^>uTl
W
 ^dcloblU^I i^ lT ^ n ^ u
Thereafter, the w e a k V a ru n a fell at a distance 
and w ith the anger o f B ra h m a , he lay there like a 
dead person at a distance.
ЗТТЕГТЧЩЩТ^гГТ ^ Т?гаЛ:1 
WTW %rFt rBT d^Txl 4^7cK:IR?ll
L o r d S iva brought h im back to life w ith his 
m erciful glance. A fte r regaining consciousness, 
V a ru n a said-.
щлт Зсгггт
т ъ ^
 
чц g^Ts-tmlfcyd:! 
зт? w ^ n mm ftj фщ m
V a ru n a said- T h e b o y has been b o m in the 
w ater and therefore he is m y son. I shall carry 
h im w ith m e, h o w could B rah m a beat me?
*n?re>: WTIWf Trfa fgwrt
B rah m a said- О lord V is n u , О M ahes'vara, this 
b o y has com e to take refuge w ith m e. Therefore 
h o w can I g ive a w a y a crying child w h o has 
com e to take refuge w ith m e.
^KUTTUdcfanf ЧТ 4 T^'d4fu5d:l 
ttoh 
dictai 
iR4i(
T h e fool w h o is unable to protect the hum ble 
person w h o comes to take refuge w ith h im , he 
has to fall in the hell till the tim e o f the sun and 
the m o o n .
tftETT ЩЩ MfttcfH: 1
ТЭТЕ! cTT
Liste n in g to the w ords o f both o f them , the all 
know ledgeable 
M adhusfldana 
spoke 
the 
appropriate w ords.
tjsdcll ^ «hifa-flsllful 
si 13: MM Id ETrff
УВ11Ч1В
Ш1 W
 
S)4dl !dfsl4d<*: I
TpT: -?ТГ# cH,U|f4|fi| TfhnW:IR<iH

=== PAGE 875 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAiypA, CHAPTER 132
763
T h e lord said- L o o k in g at the b o d y o f the 
dam sels the semen o f B ra h m a had fallen. Fee lin g 
asham ed, he threw it out in the spotless w ater o f 
the ocean. T h e son b o m because o f that is 
appropriately the son o f B ra h m a , but he has also 
to 
be 
the 
son 
o f V a ru n a according 
to 
the 
provisions o f the scriptures.
Ш 
% : IR 11 
U-d ЦЩ ^ПГГ fain 
<4iddii4 тТ1
^
 
щ;щзт «гизои
M a h a d e va said- L ik e the relationship between 
the 
kno w le dge 
and 
the yoni, 
there 
is 
no 
difference betw een a pupil and the son. T h is fact 
is quite w e ll-k n o w n to those w h o are w ell-versed 
in the V e d a s , in other w o rd s, as on is b o m w ith 
the use o f yoni and the kn ow ledge is connected 
w ith a pu p il. Th erefore both o f them are equals. 
Th erefore V a ru n a should provide the know ledge 
and mantras to this b o y . T h is b o y nam ed A g n i is 
the son o f B ra h m a and w o u ld be the pupil o f 
V a ru n a .
gdTV'iyy ftelfaij ёЛПЙЧтШ^И
B u t the lord V is n u should provide h im the 
p o w e r o f burning and becom ing illustrious. Th is 
A g n i 
w o u ld 
be 
com petent 
enough 
to 
bom 
e ve ryb o d y and V a ru n a should m ake the fire to 
extinguish.
^Tftcsr 
^
 сттй
t f t feft ^ W ht ТёСЧМГ 
ЯII
A t the com m and o f S iva , V is n u gave him the 
p o w e r o f burning and V a ru n a im parted h im the 
kn o w le dge o f mantras and also gave h im the 
charm ing garland o f gem s.
ft WRT fF W muui 7TT: t
в 
4 j\ 8 
s3
V a n in a than took the child in his lap and then 
gave h im to B ra h m a , V is n u and S iva .
gt&ftt ' « ' ^ 1% 'Ргстншз*п 
A l l the people then left fo r their respective 
abodes, b o w in g in reverence to B ra h m a , V is n u 
and S iva . Th u s I have narrated to y o u the story o f 
the birth o f A g n i.
O n c e all the gods w ere seated in the assem bly, 
in the heaven, w here the apsaras w ere dancing.
fcfcTIcPT W 
ТШЧГ qf^tcl *Tl
■фТГсГ cTl4 ХЩ? H'wtdl Ш7ГОТ dVIll^hll
Fin d in g R a m b h a havin g beautiful fig u re, the 
god A g n i became passionate and his sem en fell 
w h ich w as covered b y h im in shame in the cloth.
IT 
1113^11
ifff % 
t WZ:
W h e n the cloth w as th ro w n aw ay b y h im , it 
turned into the shining gold and in a m om en t it 
was raised to the height o f the Sum eru m ountain. 
Thereafter the intellectuals started calling h im as 
A g n i having the lustre o f g o ld. T h u s I a have 
narrated to y o u about the birth o f g old w h a t else 
do yo u w a nt to listen from m e.
$!ri 
ЧёСТо $Пфш|чл*ч<ао зч° "tiv;4lo

=== PAGE 876 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAiypA, CHAPTER 132
763
Chapter - 132 
Brief of the own story 
УПЧ5)
д а Ы HIcIVlN' «1% i p i w rt^ i 
ЩШРТ TJTTCt даш filial
Saunaka said- О lord of Dharma, I have 
listened to everything and nothing has been left 
out. О virtuous one, you kindly narrate the entire 
Purana to me in brief.

=== PAGE 877 ===

764
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
T^f^ET y<l«l rT 
R f?
wt(^t)^ t m rt mini
I have never heard about this Purana, since m y 
b irth , О adorable one, I have never com e across 
and orator like yo u n or have I heard about h im .
RETORT Ш Я Tt тЩц\
Stita said- О virtuous one, y o u listen m e 
attentively the entire P ritna.
tr srWtwM4.i
'ddfWxtdld хг 4ч1чГч iWHi44.n^n
B rah m a -kha n da 
consists 
o f 
the 
fo rm 
o f 
B ra h m a n w h ich I have recited. T h is is beyond 
description and no one could k n o w about the 
same through the agamas.
■ЯШ* ъ ftrrart 
f^pfut 1 ^ 1 
w p f t m ^|(тш^с( sRFm хшци
ь4го^тЬ1ЧШтч 4firaiR%* % n i^ ll 
^TTcfrrr 
■НсЬЧИЛГГ R fe rTI
RRr$t?4igTtoT: 11 11 
IiqTRIWtt: ^krwfRUJTt: Rrp^|cr:l 
pRsqur ъ fcwui R4iR4 
Ъ#41 id,m 'hl RSfR:
f 4 4 ^ 
tT ^ Wl I ч 11
ЗЩВП 5l^6T?4ct 4t4Biqu||9rq4,l 
W t 4TT5fF^r cR Тп4 rf 
1Tо 11
RWRT 
Ч[^1йГ(^)Г4^ЧН,1
m Ы 
w
r e
H e is visible , in visib le, w ith qualities and 
w ith o u t qualities 
separately, 
one adores him 
accordingly to his o w n com petence. О best o f 
B ra h m a n a , I have described separately about 
Goloka and others regions according to B rah m a - 
khanda supported b y different stories. I described 
the various castes and the divine sport o f R a d h a 
and 
M a d h a va 
besides 
the 
emergence 
o f 
M a h a visn u in brief. T h e talk betw een B rah m a
and N a ra d a , the intelligence o f sage N a ra d a , his 
proceeding 
to 
the 
abode 
o f N a ra -N a ra y a n a , 
discussion w ith them and the prayer to N a ra d a 
have been described.
^ERT Я # : 73ut ■ggnfuSRR трВ 
ste? y$dVi ъ
О sage, n o w y o u listen about Prakrti-kh anda 
w h ich is like the peace o f nectar, the sym ptom s 
o f P ra k fti and its form s have been described.
ШТШЧ тТ О Т rT ^ R ipHlfctc^l 
H^ff: 'RTW f ^
 RTfcft TTfacET rCTII^II 
prmrt 
4ctq-Mmi ^
ЗЧПзЯТЧ 
tUWrhlW^ct
T h e ir stories, their destruction and the m ode o f 
their 
adoration 
have 
been 
described. 
T h e 
different form s o f L a k s m i, 
Sarasvat!, D u rg a , 
S avitrl, R a d h a and other form s o f Prakrti w ere 
discussed separately in addition to the story o f 
M ah a laksm I 
and 
M ahasarasvatl 
w ere 
also 
narrated.
3Pt4 lllyehl^lM RTfefT^r И&Г ^Tl 
RRRT RRRTfcTT: RfqctvwTla[^4«^ii^4li 
^.usHi rtjPt Уюп dm 
рщпц tran 
R ihP m kT hrill^
ii
T h e story o f R a d h ik a and S a vitrl is uniq u e. 
T h e conversation betw een Y a m a and Sarasvat! 
besides Satyavan rem aining life , the description 
o f kundas and their qualities, the relationship 
betw een the hum an being and the deeds besides, 
the facing o f the results o f the deeds have been 
described.
зтр4 TTfychHsmd ьтт%
■p^TRT 
rrfTcT
T h e story o f R a d h ik a , is quite secretive in the 
Puranas. T h e story o f kin g S uyajn a is quite 
unique.
yl<W 2 ^ ^ 4l<s4|r1 4<Hiq^n^lq *11 
RSiip; *г
T h e story o f T u ls i is quite astonishing and 
unique. 
T h e 
battle 
betw een 
S iva 
and

=== PAGE 878 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHAIVpA, CHAPTER 132
765
Sam khacuda together w ith the dialogue has been 
narrated.
ЖГРТ "ЦсГ rj|
f4«R 
||
T h e conversation betw een Tu la sI and K rsn a 
has been narrated, their conjugal pleasures, the 
killin g o f Sam khacuda and freeing R a d h a o f the 
curse o f Sridam a have been narrated.
4^nfR: ■gmut ъ 
язожг тип
ШаТ#5Т xf Ujfl41t°qiT4lfhqd4jR°ll
T h e m isfortune o f the gods w as rem oved and 
their regaining the lost g lo ry , the salvation o f the 
creatures and the story o f the G a n g a have been 
narrated.
г$ст 'чти геля ж
cHf: зпчтчт1ш : i
ЗТ1ЖГ ТТЗПрГ: Tsmt n o t тторй: ^ojll^^ll
T h e story o f M anasa w h ic h increases the 
pleasure besides the stories o f Svaha and Svadha 
beside o ve r goddesses have been narrated. In the 
Prakrti-kh anda in the series o f the question, 
various other stories have been included, N o w I 
speak about the G an apati K h a n d a .
snta' жгт т й ^ 15 ^ 15 ^
TRT "И 
4^4.11 ^ ^ 11
T h is Gan apati K h a n d a is quite sweet and is 
tasteful at o ve r step. T h is is quite charm ing and 
n e w and is considered to be m ost secretive o f all 
the Puranas.
ТТЧ.1
ЗГГтТТ ЯЙЗТ xf ЖЧТ
WPT: ^IPlfRPTTRMI 
qi^qfdiqot ^cnr^M Flf^Rt^OT^IR4II
T h e 
stories 
contained 
there 
in , 
are 
quite 
attractive fo r the listeners, the story o f the, sports 
o f S iva and Pa rva tl are included there in. In itially 
it relates to the disturbing o f the love sport o f 
S iva and Pa rva tl and then the birth o f Skanda. 
T h e pride o f Pa rva tl and subsiding o f the same 
have been described.
трпЁ xT sPt fawi^cqwRdJWMHI 
'p e lt ЩгШ 3rf?TI R ^ 11 
o'W'd 
хй ЭЩПР^хр^цит: i 
зттйяЫг TpjtynRT 
f?mR3Tiiy\3ii
T h e detail about Puiyyaka-vrata o f V is n u , the 
story o f the goddess, the grant o f bo o n b y V is n u 
to Parvatl have been described. T h is K h a n d a also 
contained details about the m eeting w ith H a ri in 
the fo rm o f a B rahm ana a guest and the birth o f 
Ganes'a 
in 
the 
tem ple 
o f S iva , 
have 
been 
m entioned.
ЖТПЯ^Щ x[ 
I ? 6 11
L o o k in g at the face o f their son b y S iva and 
Parvatl and the perform ing o f the festivities in 
the abode o f S iva have been m entioned.
^ctraT 
WR f e r n % 4 1
w ti z w i ^411^14,1 
ж тт зтжщят дттнт терн fsnj^ii^oii 
зртй щртвт хг w rifa хг iiifudiifi 
wunfil^ fsrwi 
11^ ^11
ч ш тж ж й v ж н й жтш^1
тр^ггй хг чщпшташжтач 11 3 ? 11
T h e m eeting o f the gods and all the ganas w ith 
child Gan esa, w h o has been eternal, virtu o u s, the 
fo rm o f truth and eternal B rah m a n has been 
described. T h e child happens to be the rem over 
o f all the construction, bestow er o f all the riches, 
tapas, recitation, p erform ing o fyajna, vratas and 
the 
bestow er o f their 
fruits, 
quite 
virtuous, 
charm ing, adored b y the ladies, the beloved o f 
Parvatl and S iva , the fo rm o f eternal soul, the 
eternal lord, the lord o f all the gods, the seed o f 
all and w as the fo rm o f N araya n a .
^VRTaT "WeWIrtluimi^MMWVlII 
wjMKii&ii gw isj 
uhtvhhm^
ii
W ith the audience o f w h o m , b y reciting w hose 
nam e, b y adoring w h o m , all the crores o f the sins 
com m itted during the earlier births are destroyed.

=== PAGE 879 ===

766
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
cblftahU<ui jricRT шгпШд; тгд gi 
TjTjt^pR 3g
T h e K h a n d a also contains the account o f the 
redem ption o f K a rttik e y a and his cro w din g; the 
m ethod o f adoration o f Ganesa has also been 
described.
g 
gi
^ ftp u T 
xt
T h e 
battle 
betw een 
Jam adagni 
and 
K a rtta v iry a -A rju n a , the abduction o f Surabhl and 
the killin g o f the sage have been described.
yferd 
g '^1^414.1^^11
T h e se lf burning b y the chaste R e n u k a , the 
terrific v o w taken b y B h rg u , have also been 
described.
fT:STnct,pJi gctCchfelfacK fetl
О B rah m a n a, the dialogue betw een Ganesa 
and Para.suram a, w h o rid the earth o f the K s 
atriyas tw e n ty one tim es, has been narrated.
T h e battle betw een both o f them besides the 
breaking o f the tusk o f Ganes'a, the lam enting o f 
D u rg a and the curse o f B h a rg a va , have been 
described.
upfcTf «ite'ywm rtst нкнсп:
T h e appearing o f H a ri at the reciting o f his 
nam e b y Paras'uram a, convincing o f Parvatl b y 
lord N a ra ya n a .
ftidHtaw ч<ц|^4ч1Гшс1н.1
5R3 
■q w w ^ u r^ il^ o ll
■q^T g ёвдд M фьикд ЧНТ1гЧЧ:1
дт^гч tim д я^н у4ичг;1Ч11'*?11
T h e description o f astonishing and desirable 
S iva lo ka and bestow ing o f the greet w eapon b y 
S iva to Paras'uram a, the g ivin g a w a y o f the
mantra-kavaca o f S ri K rs n a beside the protection 
and all the riches have been m entioned.
ЧШТГ feR g tWI IT: I
т о эдитт fer gg?g ^НЧ|^ЧТ^И^^ II
T h e killin g o f Ksatriyas b y Parasuram a tw e n ty 
one times ridding the earth o f her burden has 
been discussed.
yyqRf№>4d: MdluiGUHTd gi
feRtgufer: w*£ mrm ferra^ii* 3 и
О best o f the sage, 
in the series 
o f the 
questions, the stories o f G anapati-khands have 
been described.
g 
ттгадяст:1
чТатдт 
и
N o w y o u listen to the K rs n a Janm a K h a n d a 
w h ich rem oved the birth, death, old age and 
ailm ent. Y o u listen to it quite carefully.
тщ gg чд чдч.1ч 11
T h e story is unprecedented, quite charm ing, 
alw ays fresh and bestow s the slavehood o f lord 
H a ri, besides being auspicious, nectar, like and 
fit fo r hearing.
ч зрт тот дшттдт^ чдт^
ъ%ч 
ддтШшпт
It is tasteful at e ve ry stop, in case o f achieving 
a hum an birth , one does net listen to it, his birth 
w o u ld be 
o f no 
consequence. 
T h is K h a n d a 
illum ines all the tattvas and happens to be the 
means o f crossing on the ocean o f universe.
лч7чч1ч<Рпим дфт д ччнччф
^HJryTU||»tl-iiM|fHRl4HcbltU|^||V^II
T h is is such a type o f alchem istry w h ich 
destroys all the deeds and the ailm ent and serves 
as a step tow ards salvation.
•вйдтчштгцрщди^ч дрт feri
ngt: VIIMM-Wt Tclfeft
О B rah m an a, there is a m ention o f the great 
quarrel between R a d h a and Sridam a. T h e curses

=== PAGE 880 ===

KFISIVA-JANMA-KHANPA, CHAPTER 132
767
o f both o f them have been highlighted beside 
their departure fro m Goloka.
start ^ sro n n t rr т щ
^
 
и
In the K rs n a Ja n m a K h a n d a , the incarnation o f 
H a ri on the earth has been described.
зпШЫт 
cr^erw Trf^i
TfrgtH T O ? t:ll4 о ||
T h e events o f the emergence o f lord H a ri in 
the abode o f V a su d e va and his departure to 
G o k u la 
getting 
afraid, 
o f K a m sa 
are 
count 
m entioned.
l^lcRFT frqftrf 3TRRt rJ
TTTtf ^ 
lt:ll4 ^ ll
G e ttin g upset w ith the terror o f K a m s a , N a n d a 
shifts abruptly from G o k u la to V m d a v a n a and 
the childhood plays to K rsn a w ith cow herds are 
m entioned besides the bu ilding o f the astonishing 
V m d a v a n a , the childhood plays o f H a ri w ith the 
cow herds.
7TTO wwmprt W ^1F3R rsfet ft: I
^ гггш n v m h ft стищ! 141911 
TOR 
щ т $ т Щ 1 
citttt 
tauftt Ф'гаму <jta ferim ^n
p r e r t TOT #talR: TTTWjm
тоештогоТч ъ т т ш ЦТЧ1РРТ:11Ц ?u
as a result o f the curse o f S ridam a, the birth o f 
R a d h a as the daughter o f Vrsabh anu and the 
childhood place o f K rs n a in G o k u la have been 
m entioned. 
'
tvJTfefqsr-i ^
 
to ti
TTtaTT 
ft: 11Ц? II
T h e killin g o f the D a itya s b y H a r i, arrival o f 
G a rg a and the cereal taking cerem ony o f K rsn a 
are fo u n d described.
я1 <|ТОГТОТЧ1йТ xT 
14^11
T h is K h a n d a also contains the stories about 
the killin g o f Putana, Sakatasura, rem oval o f the 
bondage o f K rs n a and the falling o f the tw o 
A rju n a trees.
TOta rifctrrirfrui топ
fOT 
WOT: ТОГО ^:мч>П1
T h e appearing o f the three lokas in the m outh 
o f K rs n a , the stealing a w ay o f the cow s and the 
calves, the creation o f another set o f cow s and 
calves besides the cow herds b y K rs n a and the 
adoration o f K rs n a b y B ra h m a , fin d m ention 
therein.
■щш TOfft нтто=п т о ^ rtto ъщ \
T h e consum ing o f the fo o d b y H a ri brought b y 
Brahm ana ladies and their achieving the bo o n 
has been m entioned. T h e Katyayam-vrata the 
adoration o f D u rg a , the blessing pronounced b y 
Parvati on the cowherdesses at the ba nk o f the 
Y a m u n a , the consum ing o f the tala fruits are 
m entioned. О B rah m a n a, there is a m ention o f 
the seasons the stealing a w a y the costum es o f the 
cowherdesses and blessing them also have been 
m entioned.
&тоттоЫ ш
 
топ
qtaro *т сггг то! ттпйто! чдчгайичяи
ТШНТ ЩЩ StacT TOTOPlfTOTOHl 
TFTOT Щ fiWTF-t f w r Ш Ч TOTIIS °П 
ptatasteT w -rotarr fimrmi xt TtfiRRTi 
w it 
^ 
w rar 
I is I
T jftt TTgTTfro tfTOT f T ro w e l 
SPTOfa ?TTcT ТТТОГ w TOTOIIS7II 
4RTOT44 TO TOT TO? fg-TTrinf.)
тотштотоФт тогтот? ftutaiissn
T h e destruction o f tlie yajna o f In dra , the 
separation o f K rsn a fro m R a d h a and m eeting 
again, R a d h a influence K rs n a in the p la y, w ith 
the illusion o f H a ri, the stay o f R a d h a in the fo rm 
o f 
shadow 
in 
the 
house 
o f 
R a y a n a , 
the 
disappearing o f R a d h a using all the cosm etics 
together w ith K rs n a have been m entioned. О best 
o f 
the 
Brahm anas, 
again 
their 
arrival 
at

=== PAGE 881 ===

768
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
M a la ya ca la w h ich w as the lone ly place and the 
conversation 
betw een 
Radh a 
and K rs n a 
are 
m entioned in the K rs n a Janm a K h a n d a .
^cTc^rqfq 
т Ш Ч Н Ш # 1
*3
g r w F t 
тр т
^
 чтикт ?t}gtkqi
чн1Нснк%Ът w 
< т зтк w ln ^ m i
О sage, the redem ption o f cowherdesses in 
several w a ys and their arrival in V rn d a va n a , 
m eeting w ith K rs n a , increase o f the pleasure o f 
the cowherdesses and the love-sport o f K rsn a in 
the w ater and as w e ll as on the ground have been 
m entioned.
ummufa чтчтм w u t? y ft$)4d:i
sRft м п к 
ям тм ям ям^11 ^ p, 11
T h e description o f the fortune o f R a d h a b y the 
cowherdesses beside her beauty described by 
V ya s a .
4 4 :fW R t ^cTRt 
5ilTh4d Ml 
ЧЧЯТ: ЯЯЗсЯЧ 
3fcfkt T T W rs k ll^ ll
T h e sighting o f the seen b y the gods from the 
sk y, the m ental condition o f the damsels in 
Rasamandala have been define.
ЗТ$Ч kfSft 4RT 
fe n
StjbtFBH ^cT fe fk t M fcFU44RII^<ill 
f e k 
ЗСТЩЧ гП^ТЧг#Т M l 
ЧУПЧЧН fgwit: Ufa 4^MlftRT^II^,?ll
Ш Ч ^rsyifdHTI
M y fe y k 
M grfeihaon
О B rah m an a, this has also been brought out 
that the goddess has been b o m fro m the am s'a o f 
Laksm T. T h e arrival o f A k ru ra , the lam enting o f 
cow herdesses, the denouncing o f A k ru ra , the 
arrival o f V is n u in M a th u ra , the lam enting o f the 
cowherdesses 
have 
been 
defined 
in 
a 
chronological order.
M .1 % R 3fT3RT fe k 
rT|
ддагат w w uw -w i f e r n f e mii^
ii
T h e separation o f R a d h ika from K rsn a has 
been described, besides the display o f his im age
to A k ru ra on the bank o f the Y a m u n a . E n tr y o f 
the lord in M a th u ra , the killin g o f w asherm an, 
enjoying o f conjugal pleasure w ith K u b ja and her 
redem ption has been described.
ЗГНТМ f
чкнгсшм KrarnRi
spfft ЩЩ 
f e k ?1ЯГГ1ИЭЗ II
W S lfek ЗГГЗ?Г 4RRS4y^44.l
дгчм fk k sfer 
fentnR i 1^311
T h e pleasing o f the w eaver and redem ption o f 
the gardener, breaking o f the b o w o f S iv a , killin g 
o f the elephant, entry into the ro yal court, display 
o f several form s, killin g o f K a m sa and the 
lam enting o f the relatives o f Karhsa have been 
m entioned.
Т Ш cTM 
rffafjRrail
f e i m тг 
т м ч ч т ч ^ ч .п ^ 'к п 
C rem ation o f K a m sa and cro w n ing o f his 
father as the kin g o f M a th u ra , lam enting o f 
N a n d a and his astonishing prayer are m entioned.
ШтШЧТЩ MMfe f e k dIVI44dl:l
RMTMTffes ?пч ч^га m ^
 fe j: i пэ ц 11
T h e conversation betw een the son and the 
father in a lonely place the bestow ing o f the 
spiritual know ledge to N a n d a .
ччкт ччч 
ммкнзчтятгм mi
V3
м fRi^ur тяьчм m^rnti пэ^п
T h e departure o f the 
sages, 
the 
story 
o f 
D h a n y a and all other stories have bee included in 
chronological order. A l l these stories w h ic h are 
difficu lt to get have been narrated.
ЗЗМР1ЧЧ ЗГМсТ 7IOTR M Ш Ч Ч.1
5ПЧ ччг?м 
kiffei ^уч1сЩ1№ч>11
T h e arrival o f U d d h a v a , the abode o f R a dh a in 
a secluded place, conversation betw een them and 
the eternal kn ow ledge have been described.
fOTM fcISt'dlR 4TPjtl
Чг(<Ш'<гя м т ч ч ьтт<У кгтп'зйи
T h e yajnopavlta o f K rs n a his stay in the house 
o f the teacher, restoring o f the dead son to the 
teacher, have all been described.

=== PAGE 882 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 133
769
жгощзт w t ftsri w r m
'йНсьн!^ ftrafot 
iw ii^
ii
T h e n subjugation o f Jarasandha, killin g o f 
Y a v a n a , the h o ld in g o f D va ra k a and the display 
o f the art b y Vis'vakarm a have been defined. 
IHcbl^R
TifWJfrpUT г(Щ p u it WT OTI16 о 11
E n try into D v a ra k a , lam enting o f U grse n a, 
abduction o f R u k m in I and the salutation b y the 
kin g have been m entioned.
TRlfat <*lffRRi rX У1тЬЧЗДИ rTSTTI
M arriage w ith several dam sels, redem ption o f 
M a y a va t I and killin g o f Sam bara also fin d in the 
same place.
VIIWWf^R W ild ? II
T h e pe rform ing o f the RajasUya-yajna b y 
Y u d h is th ira , 
the 
killin g 
o f 
Sis'upala 
and 
D a n ta va kra and the killin g o f S alva have been 
described.
■qnt^r 
$FX XTifencl^
3TCFIT 
irratt diuiw jplifAHRI
-ЩЧ 
fWR:lld*ll
T h e stealing o f the gem , bringing o f Parijata 
fro m the heaven, the rem oval o f the burden o f 
earth w ith the killin g o f the w icked people in the 
battle 
betw een 
K a u ra v a 
and 
Pan dava, 
the 
abduction o f U s a the cutting o f the arms o f B a n a, 
the 
adoration 
b y 
B a li 
and 
the 
prowess 
o f 
A n iru d d h a have been m entioned.
jrtor: wppfcm
xX 
rx 4141^4,11^411
T h e conversation betw een R a d h a and Ya s o d a 
has been recorded besides the story o f Srgala.
<ЭД*1Ы1У^Ч hu|yi4yH Ш \
<lfacbl«l4 £WIW ЩЧ1гШ:11<^11
In the context o f pilgrim age, the adoration o f 
Ganes'a and the audience o f S ri R a d h a w ith the 
lord have been m entioned.
тгощт 
ш ш т:ядтунч;|
W I T T 4 R 
W i t
T h e 
adoration 
o f the 
goddess 
R a d h a 
the 
display o f the g lo ry o f R a d h a , visitin g the h o ly 
places w ith R a dh a have been m entioned.
f w t 
Ф*Я\
4 IU ^ M i тХ~РЯ$ W t F t l l l d d l l
О Saunaka, the destruction o f the race o f 
Y a d u s , the redem ption o f Pandavas and the 
departure o f lord H a ri to his abode have been 
m entioned.
t w i t 4TOT^ilRf^f|^crnHt:l
tflcRT TR? tR W F T 
W R I T : I Id Я II
T h e m arriage o f N arad a and the birth o f fire 
and gold have been m entioned in brie f.
f o n t *X 
m
зтст: m
T h is Brahmavaivarta has been divided into 
fou r parts. О best o f the sages, w h a t m ore do yo u 
w a nt to listen from m e.
ЩТо «TftfuwRtsfo 4R^fT° 3t4*Rfu|cfi
ч т g.iRvKly=hVidtmlsKmi: и ^ ? 11

=== PAGE 883 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 133
769
Chapter -133
Characteristics features of the Purana
зга й т е зят
Яб]^Ч(| Р(йч 4li^chKU|t^| |t> 11
?щг 
^ 
r t1
Saunaka said- My life has been successful 
today my birth has been beautified, because the 
Brahmavaivarta removes all the obstruction and 
provides salvation. О son, you first assure 
protection to me and only then I shall put any 
further question

=== PAGE 884 ===

770
BRAHMAVAIVARTA-MAHAPURAiyAM
Tgcf ЗЩхГ
WTFT ЗГ^Т ЪЪ '-yfd^fyi
^.gjg^fsnfir 
ЧЧ1з<Н,ИЗП
Siita said- 0 virtuous one, shed away the rear 
and ask me any question of you liking. I shall 
speak out to you whatever is secret and pleasant.
зт§чт ждгчтшш qtiuiHi гг щщщ;| 
"msm44fcr 
вг 
тшти^н
Saunaka said- Presently I intend to listen to the 
distinguishing features of the Puranas, their 
number and the fruits for the listening, to the 
same.
згтГЕГ
fsrsmfur ттттщт^г
tr-SRIbnftli W Jlfq W l'd^im il
Suta said- О Saunaka, the Puranas are quite 
comprehensive which include history, collection 
of hymns and Pancardtra. I speak them to you 
according to the scriptures.
h-cMtlfui xfl
qVihxtftd fdH 4<(ui 
II
A Purana has five characteristics which 
include sarga 
(creation 
of the universe), 
pratisarga (dissolution and recreation of the 
universe), Varhs'a (genealogies of gods, the 
patriarchs, 
the sun, the moon etc.) than 
manvantaras (aeons presided over by Manus) 
and vamsanucarita (accounts of dynasties of the 
different ruling families).
^M jpiuTni 
хГ % 4 ш :1
xf tpCPJIRT 
cbSlillft rTMtall
The 
intellectuals 
should 
know 
this 
characteristics of the Upapuranas. Now I am 
explaining about the Mahapuranas.
^fS^TTfxr f^gfg^r 
xf W H 4)
ch^uti cil-PFH 
444t xtTdifttJT xtll<ill
cptfa TTHTHi xT 
w Pu^tur^i
t^RT xt
^^TlRjcb ЩРЯ Xf rrprt 4ft<*)$d*fl
xf ТЯ1ЩЯГ fetR gKRTrfa Й|| ?o ||
The creation, preservation, maintenance, lust 
for performing deeds, the story of Manus the 
description of dissolution, the mode of salvation, 
the reciting of hymns of Hari, reciting of the 
Vedas 
separately 
are 
the 
ten 
additional, 
characteristics of Mahapurana. Now I speak to 
you about the number of the Puranas. You try to 
understand me.
Щ ЪЩ Ш xf ЩШill 
<ji
Brahma-purana happens to be the best of all 
containing ten thousand verses followed by 
Padma-purana containing fifty five thousand 
verses.
wfa'vrfdW'H' 
ъ fg-gfgt: i 
xjjjf% fim w 
M 
I W 11
The intellectuals believe, Visnu-purana to 
contain twenty-three thousand verses. Siva- 
purana consists of twenty four thousand verses.
4H<$№ ycblRd^ll^il
Srlmadbhdgvata-purana 
comprises 
of 
eighteen thousand verses while Naradiya-purana 
has twenty five thousand verses.
Rrafat 
Jrixrt ttfihfdl % : I
ч<чГ«ччт|и1 xr Ttfgr 4R<*1f3du(i
х|^^|щ«|Ги| m ir^Tdilii«^ii^4 ii 
4<ioi^cft ^
 tfera 4RcblR?dHJ
^ ^шЬпШтШЧ.11 
11
The Markandeya-purana consists of nine 
thousand verses, while Agni-purana comprises of 
fifteen thousand and four hundred verses, the 
Bhavisya-purana has fourteen thousand and five 
hundred verses while Brahmavaivarta-purana 
comprises of eighteen thousand verses.
хТ 5<РПНТ чшйз fd?4yt:l 
cT TR
The Brahmavaivarta-purana is considered to 
be essence of all the Puranas. The Linga-purdna 
has eleven thousand verses.
xtd(^¥lfd4l^ -ЩЩ hftchlRdhl

=== PAGE 885 ===

KrtSIVA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 133
771
m «>^g<iui ъ nf^cj
<jm w i
The Varaha-purana has twenty four thousand 
verges. The Skanda-purana has been conceived 
to contain eighty one thousand and one hundred 
verses. 
Vamana-purana 
comprises 
of ten 
thousand verses and Kurma-purana contains 
seventeen thousand verses.
хпр&т 
тгтит h fe re w i
лгез 4RchlRfl4.11? о и
The intellectuals belief that a Matsya-purdna 
has fourteen thousand verses and Garuda-purana 
comprises of nineteen thousand verses.
m 
w i t hRcbifddifi
t^ t ЧТЖТПзЛН 
?ll
Brahmdnda-purana 
has 
twelve 
thousand 
verses; thus the total number or the verses of all 
the Puranas comes to two lakhs.
3JbdK¥l3<luiMlite*ta T^f|sn:l 
Pci rilMgiiuiHmtiic^i н сШ аш ^и
This is the number of verses described by the 
intellectuals in the Puranas; similarly there are 
eighteen Upa-puranas.
#
#
 «ГГПТ 41 ri(P4icb c fiis # tU 
T #
 Л^ТШШЙ фЩ|Ц|^|гир4[^Ч||^^||
Mahabharata is a book of history. The 
Valmlki Ramayana happens to be an epic. There 
are five Pancaratras including the Krsna- 
mahatmya.
4#
 
41 Э Д # ^cPThW^I
Ч5ЕГШ ^ 
1 ^ 11
t#
 # d H i ъ фЩ1мГн>лчГлс1н,1
Sl*pi?4I f?|ctwif4 ЗГ$КЗД # 1 гГП^ЦИ 
iftd4W ЛЛПТТЛ TlftflT: hR ^lfddl:!
#
 % Л
 #
 # л 41
The five Pancaratras are the Vasistha-ratra, 
Naradiya-ratra, Kapila-rdtra, Gautamiya-ratra 
and 
Sanatkumariya-ratra. 
There 
are 
five 
collections of hymns known Samhitas relating to 
the adoration of Krsna. These are Brahma-
samhita, 
Siva-samhitd, 
Prahlada-samhita, 
Gautama-samhita and Kumara-samhita; thus I 
have explained to you everything separately.
3T#1 fafFT Ш
 TTOTfa 41 iMiqqqj
3 4 # ЛТШТ 41 ТТНТФ <ШЧи^(Й||^\э||
?Г|ф>Х1П 
1^ 1^51 $J|U| 41 ТЛЯтНЗЩХ
^
 
чг лШ 
чшфл "gfrq;! I ? ^ 11
This is a vast book. In the Rasamandala of the 
Goloka, according the agamas this Purana was 
narrated by Sri Krsna to me as well as to Brahma 
who happens to be his devotee. Brahma then 
narrated the same to Dharma and Dharma
narrated the same to Narayana.
ЧНВГСТГ #
 41 4 1 # ХТТ 41 ЧтБсБЛ I 
ЗТ^ c^t 4Т p f # -ф в eWWlfa щ \ \ ? 9 . II
w it Щ
4T<^U1# fgycfiy riffcTdi ЧВ11сЧЖЧПЗо|| 
# # 4 1 3#
#
 cbWan^i 
Hf5#44xmi4,lli 1*11 
34 d ?1б)^ч^Гнс^с( xi (c(g4«u:l
Narayana narrated it to Narada and Narada 
narrated the same to me. О best of the sages, I 
have spoken out to you all this, taking you to be 
a senior sage. It is difficult to get the 
Brahmavaivarta Purdna which influences the 
universe. It is the form of eternal Brahman for 
the people of the universe and it happens to be 
the witness for all those, performing the deeds. 
The people call it by the title of Brahmavaivarta 
Purdna because of the glory of Brahman is 
contained in it. This Purana bestows prosperity, 
merit and all the welfare.
TriltW 41 Tfpsi 41 'Щ ТЩ ЧЛ H34J
?fwfrfix 4te 
#
17413^113311
It is quite secretive, pleasant and is filled with 
many secrets, it bestows the devotion of lord 
Hari besides the inaccessible slavehood of the 
lord.
7#
 w ri ш ?i)ebiimv4i?T44J 
7#
 41 w 
ттггг-g f# !

=== PAGE 886 ===

772
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
It is quite pleasant, bestower of the Brahman, 
is the form of gist, destroyer of grief and mental 
agony; as the Ganga is considered to be the 
sacred most of all the rivers and bestower of 
salvation, this Purana also is believed to be like 
the same.
пЫ -й htcbl 
trjt chi 
vffcf
4 % ЧШ 
ТШТ 
^Г^П^ЧП
As Puskara is considered to be the holiest of 
all the holy places, Kasi of all the cities, 
Bharatavarsa of all the contents which bestows 
salvation. Similarly this Purana also happens to 
be like that.
4STT 
ifl'R'jild W ЧЩсГ:1
чэ 
V» 
ЧЭ
As the Sumeru is among the mountains, TulasI 
leaf among all the leaves, Ekadasl among the 
vratas, at the best, similarly this Purana happens 
to be the best.
«VfjW'iyxf 
ril
hulV=H:II^V9ll
As kalpavrksa is considered to be the best of 
the trees, Sri Krsna is the best among the gods, 
Siva among the intellectuals, Ganesa among the 
yogis is considered to be the best, similarly this 
Purana happens to be the best.
g rfq H : ^ 4 td ^ R c J4 t ?ИТ1
i F W T r t r 
W S IP iT h ll^ d ll
As Kapila happens to be the best of siddhas, 
the 
sun 
among 
those 
containing 
luster, 
Sanatkumara among the Vaisnavas, similarly this 
Purana happens to be the best of all.
N 4 4 xf W
 ТРТГ 
SIJOW Tqj
хГгш fffi T^l^uq^di W ill? <? II
As Rama is considered to be the best of the 
kings, Laksmana among the archers, chaste 
Durga among the goddesses, similar is the case 
with this Purana.
sruTifiraT w
 71m 'ф ш гш t fr o h j w i
W
 vTCTT: 
У Ш К Й 1 П *о ||
сгат 4 4 w J | 4 g ^ c t ^ it c f xti 
TTcfr 
Щ 
^11
As Radha happens to be the best of the 
beloved's 
of Krsna, 
LaksmI 
among 
the 
goddesses, Sarasvatl among the goddesses of 
learning, similar is the case with this Purana 
which is quite pleasant, sweet, bestower of merit. 
No other Purana is comparable to it.
^
 ТОЩ
Now the fruit of listening of the Purana is 
defined. This Purana has been defined to be the 
one which shatters all the doubts. This is the one, 
which provides all the pleasures and1 riches in 
this world.
xfa 
i* з i1
It bestows pleasure, merit and is the remover 
of obstructions, bestower of the slavehood of 
lord Hari and provides pleasure in the other 
worlds as well.
ч^ншГч 
W it tPTOT M l
■re: ire^pjTpnftr w ятвт
The merit of performing yajna visiting holy 
places, vratas, tapas, going round the globe 
cannot be compared with, the merit of listening 
to his Purana.
xlgufafir 
ЧШ^Ч oft Ч1НЧ1
ЧТТЩ xT 
трШГ*ЧИ
О son, in case anyone listens to it attentively, 
he achieves a merit greater than the reciting of 
the Vedas.
TjnicRt xl f w t 
MqqrH^I 
*jtiTrf?r §4чг m ч к в ч w fqrr vT ^ ii^
ii
In case an issueless person listens to the 
recitation of this Purana, he achieves a virtuous 
son. In case an unfortunate woman listens to it, 
she becomes quite fortunate and enjoys the 
company of her husband.
qtRTrRT 5RIWB5TT hftW-Stll Ъ ЧТЙчЬ
g? xt (4<4Шнчи'*'з||
The one who always delivers dead Children or 
the one who is extremely barred or even a 
wicked woman achieves a virtuous son by 
listening to this Purana.

=== PAGE 887 ===

KRSNA-JANMA-KHANDA, CHAPTER 133
773
зтрг rret f m
i crer 
31«езШ : 
«mfET xrftrgET:||'s<sn
fmraf fsq^ 
re^et ^w r^i
Rill-qJtd RfaFJ RE^ETFraT 3174^:11'*'? 11
A person without a child, gets a child. A 
person without a wife gets a wife, the one who 
has lost his glory gets back the glory and the 
foolish becomes an intellectual. And ailing 
person is relieved of the ailment, a person in 
bondages is relieved of them. A terrified person 
is freed from the fear and the unfortunate person 
is relieved of the misfortune.
3BR% ЯРЕЙ R^ET! 
REZ& fcPT1
am 
et cdftni fHi ^tIer ej 
о i
^0<цс(|^ячи||^с( 
villdlrM^tiiJctHJ
W^cfiisf IjiHIdiMIc* Щ R: ^TJ^ETRRET.TI 
hHtddHhud R 
Ш R?TR:I 
EJET:E3t fEWt et 
fd ^ i|:ll4 ^ ll
ficbt'hdl R : 
u11Id RRERT c[ERT E | qfi*IGi4J
чтец ^hrrt 
4 ^ i 14 ^ 11
чш r?tr:i
^ ert
reeit ее riehicr <^етг<гт Fr^gcpji 
ЗТШ1ЩЩЩ 
4 
4RR4.I i ч ч 11 
чт^г rert 
r 
flrrm
^ 
Сч 
О 
*N
ЯЕЭТ R R^nint ег тршт: RRET: ^%Г:1|Ц^ 
rtrr Riuicb 
reet 
r i
RWfdERT RTRRj Щ ЕГ^ hsyicRRUIcRRJiqiall 
R^R 
R T^^RERR RRIfRRI
1ч ^ gro^g-w дтЕгетт 11^1114 й 11
In the secluded forest or in the forest fire, a 
person is freed from all the danger. A virtuous 
person by listening to this Purana a is relieved of 
all the sins, leprosy, poverty, ailment and terrific 
grief. The sinful person cannot know about it but 
he achieves the merit or giving a lakh of cows in 
charity. There is no doubt about it. The one who 
has controlled all his senses listens to all the
four-khanda of the Purana in auspicious time, 
with devotion and gives away daksina thereafter, 
he is relieved of all the sins accumulated during
his childhood boyhood, youthful age or the old 
age. There is no doubt about it. He, mounting on 
the gem-studded chariot, taking to the form or 
Krsna proceeds to Goloka and accepts the 
slavehood of Krsna. lie never gets destroyed 
even after the destruction of innumerable 
Brahmas and he remains with the lord as his 
attendants for a long time. Taking a proper bath 
controlling his senses and with an auspicious 
mind, after listening to Brahma-khanda, one 
should series the fried food, the payasam, the 
fruit, the betel and gold to a beggar as daksina. 
Thereafter, he should offer the sandal-paste, 
white garland, fine cloth and the naivedya of the 
lord to the reciter of the Puranas.
rert r ъ ф - m t tarter rf pym hi
rw Rieri Ei gem err цгпщ еыоч-шпчя
By listening to the beautiful Prakrti Khanda, 
the reciter of the Purana should be served with 
curd and the food besides, gnda.
W R t RTfa RRT ^ п | R pr^R ^I 
^ERTRFTO^: 
fdWI?IPJ -RRET:II^oil
Thereafter he should give away in charity, a 
cow with calf. For the removal of obstruction 
one should listen to the Ganapati Khanda with a 
devoted mind.
REfclEt RIR<*>IR wRdcfi fETFRR^P^IIh 
RRhRRtbcdT^R cbld^X'MEhfd RI
R RERT REH^R 4Tf^RET: II 
RIRR.TR «dai-cd Ut 4<4l^vtlR$4l 
’ЩЧЩЩ RRTER Zf WU^UdcH4d4q;ilh?ll
r ie r r ч гд а т r 
ел
е$*плт diricWcR 
gRRimxii
The reciter of the Purana should be given the 
yajnopavlta of gold, a white horse a garland, 
svastika, sesamum sweet balls and the ripe 
seasonal fruits and flowers. The devotees after 
listening to the Krsna Janma Khanda with 
devotion should offer a gem-studded ring to the 
reciter of the Purana, the fine cloth, a garland, 
gold ear-rings, beautiful palanquin, boiled milk 
and everything else should be given to him in 
daksina offering him the prayer.

=== PAGE 888 ===

774
BRAHMA VAIVARTA-MAHAPURANAM
«ГТ^ЧПЧТ *T ^ItfdPTTM'ITflrfl 
?n^rf4OTTRi
4)^ 4N4i ^«й.М'Фч! P|t4id ЯсГсП 
^фШ|ЙуУ1«ЩУ1^Ч^Ь41тх| ЗЛ^Щ^И^Н 
^1ф»)|^1х*1444 
y<JU| 'гг; yuilfri tTI
W f T ёГчй ?f^T t p i ЗТТфгГ^И^^П
H e 
should then 
serve 
fin d to 
a hundred 
Brahm anas, besides the devotees o f V is n u , the 
person w ell-versed in the scriptures otherw ise the 
entire exercise w o u ld be fruitless, T h e one w h o 
listen to the recitation o f the K rsn a Janm a 
K h a n d a from the one w h o does not believe in 
K rsn a and is de vo id o f his de vo tio n , he cannot 
earn the devotion o f lord; all the m erits or; the 
other hand get destroyed.
^T: ^pJTtfr гП 
ЧЙ1Г 'З'Щ ^ 
я ф :
T h e one w h o listens to the Purana fro m a 
Brah m an a w h o is devoted to Sri K rs n a , he earns 
the devotion o f the lord as w ell as the m erit and 
ultim ately he achieves lord H a ri.
ТЗуТтГ eblyd 
Uti4cb(d:l
W h a teve r I had heard fro m the m outh o f m y 
teacher 
I 
have 
narrated 
the 
same 
to 
y o u . 
Therefore О best o f the Brahm anas, yo u bid me 
farew ell. 
I 
am 
going 
to 
the 
abode 
o f S ri 
N a ra ya n a .
W hd:l
ЯЗсПЧЩгТГ TITfll^oll
I had arrived here to o ffe r m y salutation 
fin ding a group o f Brahm anas here. A t y o u r 
com m and I have recited the Brahmavaivarta 
Purana.
A l f 5П£ш1г и ^ фонт
Rfictra 
f e i трттвг чщ tw ii^
ii
I b o w in reverence to the B rahm anas, lord 
K rsn a , S iva , B rah m a and Ganes'a.
4>Г4Ч Ч-tiu ЗИТ Rt <М<+сЧ1
язг тт щ w 
u
T h e lord o f R a d h a w h o is be yon d the three 
gunas, is truthful, should be adored through-out 
day and n ight p h ysica lly, m entally as w ell as 
w ith speech.
чттг 
чч-.i
Tqt4R:(h9^ll
tna^rrfr ^gr grenfr
ЗШ f^S19R tnfR m 
<rol?cR:ll\9'i{ll
T h e goddess Sarasvatl, V y a s a , the teacher o f 
the Puranas and D u rg a the destroyer o f the 
m isfortune are adored b y m e again and again 
offering salutation to than. О Saunaka, after 
looking at y o u r auspicious lotus-like feat, I am 
n o w proceeding to Siddhasrama w here G an ap ati 
is lodged.
afe afc s|c af« sjc
■sftWjinl'o ТЩТо 
ятТсрТТо
4K4*tHWU|fi4l^
TBfTHfac'