=== PAGE 2 ===

CORNELL
UNIVERSITY
LIBRARY

=== PAGE 4 ===

Cornell University

Library

The original of this book is in
the Cornell University Library.

There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.

http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924023202819

=== PAGE 5 ===

THE GARUDA PURANAM.

QDITED AND POBLISHED BY

MANMATHA NATH DUTT (Shastri), M.A,

Rector, Keshub Academy,

Author of the Biglish Translations of the Ramijdnam, Mohd«
Bharatam, Srimedbhagavatam, MahéniPodna-Tantrom,
Harivatns'a, Agni Purénam, Mérkandéya
Purdnam, &en Se.

CALCUTTA

SOCIETY FOR THE RESUSCITATION OF
INDIAN LITERATURE,

3, Forrtarocor Srreer, P. O,, SHAMBAZAR,

1908,

=== PAGE 6 ===

BL
yvas

PT AX

ABN AF

wygntzp sy H. C. Das, xtys: PRESS,
3, FURIAPVKWR STERT, CALCUTTA.

=== PAGE 7 ===

CONTENTS,

Supyecr.

Cuaprer I.—Discourse between Suta and Shaunaka and other
Rishis in the forest of Naimisha—Suta promises to narrate
the Garuda Puranam oe tee on

CuapterR II—Sources of the Garuda Puranam—Vishau charges
Garnda to compose the Garuda Puranam on

Cuarrer I1.—Suta describes the subjects dealt with in the
Garuda Puranam ase oe ae :

Cuaprer IV.—Order of Universal creation described by
Narayanato Rudra. we

Cuarter V.—Creation of the Prajapatis, ‘The progeny ‘Of

Daksha described on oe
Cuarrer VI.—Re-incarnation of Daksha in the form of

Prachetas—Origin of the different races of men, the progeny
of Kashyapa described ... te oa oe
Cuaprer VII.—Description of the sun-worship} etc, ag per-
formed by the Selforigined Manu ...
Cwapter VIIJ.—Description of the mode of “yorshipping
Vishnu ane oo
CuapteR IX,—1he mode of spiritual initiation oo <e
Cuaprer X,—1 he mode of worshipping the goddess Lakshmi
Cuaprer XI.—Descyiption of the Nava-Vyuha form of
worship we a we we =
Cuarrer XII.—Descrjptton of the order to be gbserved in
the course of worship... we ave
Cuaprer XIII.—1 he prayer Of Vishnu Panjaram . oo
Cuaprer XIV.—A brief discourse an Yoga
Cuaprer XV.--Enumeration af ane thousand epithets of
* Vishny oe os on we ue
Cuaprer XVI,—Description of the mode of meditating on
Vishny as well as of the rjte of sun-worship ... 7
Cuaprer XVII—Description of another form of sun-worship
Cuaprer XVIII—Mode of worshipping the death-conquering
deity (Mrityunjaya) ” ne on on

Paee,

4
ron)
9-10
10—I3

14-16

16-21
2I—23
23-24
25

26
26—30
30—33
33-34
34-36
36—47

47-49
49-50

5I—53

=== PAGE 8 ===

it

Supyecr.
Carrer XJX.—The Garudi Vidya which is the cure for all
kinds of snake-bite on oa
Cuarter XX.—Mantra-cures (curative formulas) of snake-
bite as narrated by S'iva = ae
CuarTer XXI.—Mode of worshipping the Panchavaktra (ive:
faced) manifestation of S'iva = ws os
Cuaprer XXII.—Ihe mode of worshipping S'iva owe
Cuarrer XXIII.—Description of another form of Siva

worship te
Cuarter XXIV.—1he worship of Ganapati
Cuaprer XXV.—Sandal-worship (Padua puja) described ,,,
Cuarter XXVI—fhe mode of performing the rites of
Karanyasa (location of the energies of different divinities
in the different limbs by a votary by dint of occult and
psychic force) a = oo we
Carrer XXVII.—Rites for neutralising the effects of snake
venoms = t00 cs
Cuarrer XXVIII—The mode of worshipping. the Gopala
Manifestation of Vishnu oo we
Cuarrrr XXIX.—Mantras to be ‘used in connection with. the
worship of S’ridhara manifestation of Vishnu .,, we
CtiapTer XXX —Elaborate description of the mode of worship-
ping the S'ridhara manifestation of Vishnu... he
Cwarrer XXXI,—Description of another form of Vishnu

worktip a ve as
Cuarrex XXXII—Adoration of the five fundamental prin-

ciples of the universe... wn ves
Cusvren XXXIII—Worship of the divine discus (Sudar-

s'anam) of = aD a

Cuaptrer XXXIV.—Hayagriva worship
CuarTer XXXV.—The mode of worshippiig the Hayagriva
manifestation of Vishnu ., os a
Cuspree XXXVI—Mode of performing the rite of Gayatri
Nyasa i co oo a
Cwaprer XXXVII Description of the glories of Gayatri...

Cusprer XXXVIII—The mode of meas the deities,

Durga, etc. oo a oo on
@warrsa XXXIX.—Description of another form of Sun-
worship. om oe 1 - vee

Pace
53-56
56-38

58-59
39—60

60—63

63—64
6465

65—66
66-67
67—68
68—69
69-72
7275
77-8

81—82
8286

87

87-89,
89—90

90—93,

93-95

=== PAGE 9 ===

Supyecr. Pace.

Crtarrer XL.—Maheshvara worship ... ts yw 9598
Carrer XLI.—Enumeration of diverse incantations, Mantras

(Nana Vidya) eee oe ae ae 9899
Cuarrer XLII —Description of investing a phallic emblem

with sacred thread] (S'iva-pavitrarohanam) we eee 9Q—IOR

Cuarrer XLIII —Description of the rite of investing an image

of Vishnu with the holy thread (Vishnu-pavitrarohanam) — 102—105
Cuapter XLIV.—Contemplation of embodied and dis-em-

bodied God us co se 105-107
Cuapter XLV.—Characteristic marks of S’alagrama Stones ... 107—110
Cuarrer XLVI.—Adoration of the deity presiding over home-

steads (Vastu) oe on a see TIO IIE,
Cuarrer XLVII—Essential features of a divine temple or of a

palace wee wee ase ae we LIZ—LIT
Cuarrer XLVIIL.—Installations of divine images... we 7126
Caarrsr XLIX.—Discourse on Yoga and acts of piety ave 126130

Cuarrer L.—Discourses on charities and gift-makings, etc. 4. 130—137
Cuarrer LII.—Regulations of Prayaschittas (penitential rites) 137~142
Caarrer LIII—Traits of conduct of men marked by the

several kinds of Nidhis ove on see 142143
Caarrer LIV.—Progeny of Priya Vrata and incidental des-
cription of the Seven Islands of the Earth... wee TASRT GS

Cuarrer LV.—Description of the Geographical situations of
the different countries of the earth, as well as of India with

its physical features ous on oy oe S146
Cuarter LVI.—Enumeration of the names of princes of the
continent of Plaksha, etc. me wee wee 147 TGS

Cuaarrer LVII.—Cosmogeny of Hell and the nether regions... 148~149
Cuarrer LVIII.—Pogitions and Coo of the sun and

other planets ave we ow we 149 —155
Cuarrer LIX.—Discourses ‘on Astrology, presiding deities of

the different planets and constellations of stars, situations

of Yoginis on the different days of the fortnight, etc... 152156.
Cuarter LX.—Discourses on the period of influences of the

different planets with that of the sun oo see 157158
Cuarrer LXI.—Influences of the moon in her different

mansions... we ae oo we 159160
Cuarrer LXII.—Discourses on Langnamana and determina-

tion of what one ought or ought not to do from the stable

or mobile character of the Lagna .. on oe Wom16z

=== PAGE 10 ===

iy CONTENTS,

Supyecr. Pag.
Cuarrer LXIIL—A brief discourse on the auspicious and
inauspicions marks on the persons of males... va 162-164
Cuarrer LXIV.—A brief discourse on the auspicious or in-
auspicious marks on the person of females... vas 16 4-165
Cuarter LXV.—Auspicious marks on men and women as dis-
closed hy the science of Samudrikam oD wee 165175,

Cuarrer LXVI.—Description of the specific marks of S’ala-

grama, description of Tirthas, and of sixty countries such

as Prabhasa ve wee wee ++ 175-176 :
Cuarren LXVII—The science of Pavana Vijaya (conquest

of breath) and anguring bad ar evil from the direction of

the breath-wind on on te we 177189
Cuarrer LXVIII —(Agastya Samhita). Description of the

origin of gems in the treatise on Ratna Pariksha (test of

gems) by the -holy Agastya 180—186

Cuarrer LXIX.—Tests of Pearls 186—191
Cuarrer LXX—Tests of Ruby | 191195
Cuarrer LXXI.—Tests of Emerald ... tn 195-198
Cuarrar LXXII.—Tests of Sapphires a 198—200
Cuarrer LXXIII.—Tests of Lapis Lazuli (Vaidurya} 200
Cnarter LXXIV.—Tests of topas (Pushpa-raga)... 202—203
Cuarrer LXXV.—Tests of Karketana on tee 203-204,
Cuarrsr LXXVI—Tests of Bhishma-stone ... tes 204-205
Cuartzr LXXVII —Tests of Pulaka stones we oe 206
Cuarre#® LXXVIII.—Tests of blood-stone one on 207
Cuarrer LXXIX.—Tests of crystals ... a ss. 207-208
Cuarrer LXXX.—Tests of Corals ., are ae 208
Cnarrer LXXXIL—A brief description of haly pools and

sanctuaries ove ee wt see 209—212
Cuarrer LXXXII.—Description of the sanctity of Gaya, and

its early history oo ove oe wee 212215,

Cuarrer LXXXIIL—Description of different rites to be per-

formed at different places at Gaya and of their merits .., 245-224
Cuarrer LXXXIV.—Ablutions in the river Phalgu, merit of

making offerings of funeral cakes at Rudra. History of king

Vishala oe oo oD vee 225—238
Carrer LXXXV.—Merit of offering ‘faneral cakes at Preta-

stila in Gaya - 7 . 230—233
Cuarrer LXXXVI,—Merit of performing S' raddhas at Preta.

Shila wn on ow oe wn 233937

=== PAGE 11 ===

CONTENTS. v

Supject. Pace.
Cuarrer LXXXVII.—Enumeration of the names of fourteen
Manus and of the Devas and Saptarshis who flourished in

the times of their sons ... os one see 237243
Carter LXXXVIIL—Annals of Ruchi incidentally narrated

in the discourse between Markandeya and Kraushtika —...” 243248
Cuarter LXXXIX —Ruchi hymnises the Pitris, who in their

turn grant him a boon te we sae 246-—255
Cuaprer XC.—Marriage of Ruchi and birth of Rauchya

Manu on as 255
Cuarter XCI. —Contemplation of Hari ae ase 256-257
Cuaprer XCII.—Contemplation of Hari and its process... 258— 260
Cuaprer XCIII.—Laws of virtue as promulgated by the holy

Yajnavalkya we wo sss 260262
Cuapter XCIV.—Initiation with the holy thread and study

of the Vedas . a wes 262-266
Cuarter XCV —Duties of “nouse-holders aes ws 266-278

Caaprer XCVI—Origin of mixed castes—the five great
Yajnas, Sandhya-rites, duties of house-holders aud members

of different castes a oo rs see 271—280
Cuapter XCVII.—Purifications of defiled articles we 280-231
Cuapter XCVIII.—Gift-making and Charity oe 281—281
Cuaprer XCIX.—Mode of performing S'raddhas ... ws. 284289
Cuarrer C.—Exorcism of Vinayakas ... -_ ss 290—291
Carrer Cl.—Propitiation of malignant Planets ... °292—293
CHaPreR CII.—Duties of the order of forest-dwelling hermits 204
CHapTeR CIII.—Duties of Yatis eae oe 295
Cuapter CIV.—Signs of sinful souls ... oe wee 295 ~— 2:16
Cuaprer CV —Rites of atonement... ae 290—305
Cuaprer CVL—Impurities a . 305—309
Cuarrer CVII—A synopsis of the Dharma- Shastra by.

Parashara wo we : ses 309315

THE VRIHASPATI SAMHITA.
cuarrer CVLII.—Synopsis of rules of conduct... eee BIS RIS

cuapTer CLX —Advice on thrift and economy in the Nitisara 318—324
cHaptrer CX.—Advice as to the non-rejectment of a certain

good, etc. oe ove eee 324—328
cHaprer CXI.- —~Commendable traits in kings, ete, (in the

Nitisara) on ae ae see 328350

=== PAGE 12 ===

vi CONTENTS.

. Sunjecr.
7 cuarrer CXIL.—Commendable traits in servants (in the
Nitisara) we ve
CHAPTER CXII.— Injunctions as to the appointments of the
honest and the erudite in the King’s service, etc.
cuaprer CXIV.—Injunctions as to the distinction a friends
and enemies (in the Nitisara) - . we
cHapTerR CXV—Counsels on forswearing bad wives, etc.,
(End of the Vrihaspati Samhita)...
Zeuserer CXVI.—Enumeratién of the names of Vratas (vows
and penances) commenced a
cuaprer CXVIL.—The Ananga Trayodashi Vratam.
cHarTer CXVIII —The Akhandya Dvadashi Vratam
cuaprer CXIX.—Agastyargha Vratam ... ws
cHapTer CXX.—The Rambha Tritiya Vratam aoe
cHarrser CXXI—Ihe Chaturmasyam Vratam
cuaprer CXXII.—The Mashopavasha Vratam_..,
cuaprer CXXIII.—Kartika Vratas ... ve
/ cHapTeR CXXIV.—The Shiva Ratra Vratam
cuaprer CXXV.—The Ekadashi Vratam te
cuarrer CXXV1—Vishvaksena Puja
cnapTter CXXVII.—Bhaimi Ekadashi and Dvadashi
cHAPTER CXXVIII.—Various Vratas described ... os
cHaprer CXXIX.—The Pratipad Vratas

cuaPre® CXXX.—The Shashti Vratas, Maricha Saptami

Vratas oo oD = ees
CHAPTER CXXXI Rohini Ashtami Vratas etc. ...
CHAPTER CXXXII.—The Sadgati Vratam, etc...
carter CXXXIII.—Ashokastami Vratas etc.
cuarrer CXXXIV.—Maha-Kausika Mantra, -
cHaPTER CXXXV.—The Viranavami Vratas, etc.
cHaPTER, CXXXVI—The S'ravana Dvadashi Vratam a
cuarTer CXXXVII.—The Damanaka Trayodashi, etc,

Vratas ose oe oe

cuaprer CXXXVIIL Geneology of royal princes (solar race)

cuarrer CXXXIX—Gencology of the princes of ,the lunar
race ts - ve on as

cHAPTER CXL.—Description of the race of Puru ase

cuarter CXLL—Descriptions of kings who came after
Janamejaya ., we 7 oo

Pace.

+ 331—333

* 333-339

339-346

- 316-354

359—360

ves 361362
+. 362363

363—365
365—367
367—368
368—369
370—372
372374
+ 375-378

378—380

w+ 380-382
s+ 383-385
v+ 385387

387—388
388—389
389-390

390-392
392—397

397-402
403—406

406—408

=== PAGE 13 ===

CONTENTS. vii

Supyecr. 7 . * Pace.

cuapteR CXLII—Incarnations of Vishnu and the glory of
nuptial fidelity described on on vee 4084
cuapTerR CXLIIL—The Ramayanam ... see ATI 416
carter CXLIV.—Description of the Harivamsha see 416418
cHAPTER CXLV.—the Mahabharatam _ wee 418422

THE DHANVANTARI SAMHITA.

cuaprer CXLVI—Description of the Nidanam of all the

diseases a wee wee $224.25,
caaprer CXLVII—the Nidanam of Fever ae we 420—.
carter CXLVIII.—The Nidanam of Raktapittam

(Hemorrhage) wee wee see 437-439
cuarrer CXLIX.—The Nidanam of cough we we 439442
cuarrer CL—The Nidanam dyspnoea ws we Ab
cuaprer CLI—The Nidanam of Hic-cough te se AAI SS
cuapTeR CLIL—1he Nidanam of pulinonary consumption... 445—449
CHAPrgR CLIIl.—Ihe Nidanam of Aversion to food ses day—450

cHapreR CLIV.—The Nidanam of heart-disease ...
cuarrer CLV.— the Nidanam of diseases resulting from the
excess or abuse of wine wa 454458
cuarrer CLVI—the Nidanam of Hemorrhoids ves 458-404
cuapter CLVIIL—The Nidanam of Dysentery 464-5467
cuarrer CLVIII.—The Nidanam of Stangury, ete. . 468472
cuarrer CLIX.—!he Nidanam of diseases of ,the Urinary

organs (Pramehas) ae on see 472-477
cuaprer CLX.—The Nidanam of abscesses, etc. os. 477—485,
cuaprer CLXI.—The Nitlanam of Asgites, etc. ... ve a85—408
cuarrer CLXIL—The Nidananyof Chlorosis + 491-495
cuarrer CLXIII.—The Nidanam of Erysipelas ... ss 496—499
cHaPre: CLXIV.—The Nidanam of cutaneous affections

(Kusthas) ... oes ss 499—504
cuapres CLXV.—The Nidanam of bodily parasites ++ 504-506

cHierer CLXVI.—The Nidanam of diseases of the nervous

system we
cuapran CLXVIL—The Nidanam of Vata-Raktam. -
cuarrer CLNVIIL—The Nidanam of Mukho-roga 7

cuaPrek CLXIX.—The Nidanam of diseases of the ears
cuarrer CLXX.—The Nidanam of diseases of the nose
cuarres CLXXI.—1he Nidanam of diseases of the eyes os

=== PAGE 14 ===

viii CONTENTS.

a Sunyecr. Pace.
cuarrer CLXXII.—he Nidanam of diseases of the head... 538—540
cuapter CLXXIII —the Nidanam of diseases of the female

reproductive organs nee ase $405 44
cuarrer CLXXIV.—!he Nidanam of difficult labour wes 544-546
cuaprer CLXXV.—'the Nidanam of diseases Pestle to par-

turient women oe wee 546-547
cuapter CLXXVI—~‘he Nidanam of diseases "peculiar to

infant-life ... -_ ws §47—550
cuserar CLXYXVIL—t he Nidanam of ‘Sypbilis - sss 550-554
cuapter CLXXVIII --!he Nidanam of Variola ... wee 554-557
carrer CLXXIX —lhe Nidanam of minor affections se 557-560
ctapTeR CLXXX.—the Nidanam of Fistula in Ano, etc. 1 .. 561—562
cuaprer CLXXXI—Jhe Nidanam of poisons... ses §63—572
cHaprer CLXXXIL—1!the Nidanam of Goitre, scrofula and

glandular swellings o- ae wee §72—-$75
cuarten CLXXXIIL—Ihe Nidanam of vomiting see 575578
cnaprer CLXXXIV.—The Nidanam of Urticaria ves §79—S8E
cHaptenR CLXXXV.—!he Nidanam of S'ula, neuralgic

pain, etc. oe oy oe os wee 581—585
cutaprer CLXXXVI.—The Nidanam of aphonia sss §85—586
cuapTer CXXX VII.— he Nidanam of Udavarta see 586588
cuapter CLXXXVIIL—the Nidanam of traumatic ulcers

ete. te = .. 588592
CHAPTER CLEXXIX. — the Nidanam of S'arira Vranas (ldio-

pathic ulcers) oo oa see 592593,
cHaprer CXC —Ihe Nidanam of fractures co we 594-595
cuapraR CXCI —Medicinal recipes of inffalible efficacies... 595606
CHAPTER CXCII.—Medical treatment of fever? etc, ws» 606—613,

cHaPTeER CXCIII —Medical treatment‘of Sinus, etc.

613-619
cuaprer CXCIV.—Medical treatment of female
complaints... . a ve wes 619623

cuaprer CXCV.—Therapeutic properties of drugs sas 623-627
cuaprer CXCVI —Preparations of medicinal oils and Ghritas 627~629

cuapter CXCVII.—Various medicinal ‘compounds disclosed
by Hari to Hara aa fi se €29—630

cuaeter CXCVIIL—Various other medicinal Recipes ase 630—632
cuapter CXCIX.—'the same continued

632 639
cuaprer CC.—1he same continued } ae vs 639642

=== PAGE 15 ===

CONTENTS. ix

Supyecr. Pace.
CHAPTER CCl.—The same continued ... 639-642
cuarrer CCII —The same continued .., ++ 642—644

CHaprer CCIII —The same continued... + 644-645
cHaPTEeg CCIV.—The same continued ae we 645—649
cHaPTeR CCV.—Various other Recipes 646—618
cHaprer CCVI.— he same continued

cHaPTER CCVII.—The same continued
cuaPTer CCVIII.—Aphrodisiacs, Love, charms, tc.
cuapTeR CCIX.—Various other Recipes ony

carrer CCX.—The same continued ae z
cHapTER CCXI.—Medical treatment of cuts, wounds, scalds,

burns, etc. are oe ++, 661—062
cHapTeR. CCXII.—Other Medicinal Recipes w+ 662663,
cHaPTER CCXIII.—The same; continued oD w+ 664-660
cuapTer CCXIV.—Medical treatment of snake-bite, etc. ... 666—668
cHaPTER. CCXV.—Various Recipes... + 668—670
cHAPTER CCXVI.—Medical treatment of the “Giveases of

cows, etc, oD - - 5 67r
cHarrer CCXVII.—Various Recipes for the cure of sterility,

virile impotency, etc. ... . we vee 671—675,
cHarreR CCXVIIL.—Various Recipes of fumigation-com-

pounds, etc, one _ oes «+ 675—676
cuapter CCXIX.—The prophylactic charm of Vaishnava 2

Kavacham wee ae or wv 677-679
cuapter CCXX.—The Sarvarthada Mantra oy 680
cHapTeR CCXXI.—The Vishnu-Dharma Vidya ... w+ 681—682
cHaPTeR CCXXII.—The Garuda Vidya on v1, 682—687
cHaPren CCXXIII.—1 he Tripura Vidya ws 687—089
cHapTeR CCXXIV.—The Chudamani ++ 689—692
cuarrer CCXXV.—The Pavana Vijaya we 692—693,
cuapreR CCXXVI.—Medical treatment of the diseases of

horses aon oo ED ft +» 693—607
cuaprer CCXXVII.—Different names. of the “Ayurvedic

Drugs wae oo oe v1 698—705,
cuarTer CCXXVIIL. Rules of Grammar a ws 70670
cHarTer CCXXIX.—Duties of Brahmanas, etc. ... we 7E2—727
Cuarrer CCXKXX.—A Synopsis of practical pieties ws 2729
cuartar CCXXXI—Expiatory Penances 7 ses 7130-738
cuAeTer CCXXXII.—Dissolution of the Universe wee 238742
cHaPreR CCXXXIII,—-Naimittika Pralaya, etc. .., ve 742743?

=== PAGE 16 ===

x + CONTENTS.

Supyecr. Pace.

cuapter CCXXXIV.—The Wheel of Existence (Samsara
Chakra) oe woe oe os wes 743-746
cuapTer CCXXXV.—The mode of Practising the Great Yoga 746—751
cuaprer CCXXXVI—Vishnu Bhakti os ws 151-755
cHarTen CCXXXVII.—The same continued os se 755-756
cuaprer CCXXXVIIIL.—The contemplation of Vishnu. 787

cuaPTRR CCXXXIX.—The excellence of Faithi ...
cHapTer CCXL.—Traits of a true Vaishnava

758—76t
761-—763

cuaprer CCXLI.—The hymn to Nri-Sinha 763—765,
cuapren CCXLIL—The Jnanamritam Stotram ... ve 765-769
carrer CCXLIII.—The hymn to Vishnu composed by the

holy Markandeya os we ses 769-770
cHapTeR CCXLIV.—The hymn to Achyuta os ae 770775,
cuapterR CCXLV.—The knowledge of Brahma ... + TT5—780
cuapter CCXLVI.—The knowledge of Self vs ve 780-782
cuaprer CCXLVII.—Synopsis of the Gita oe ove 78200783

cuapter CCLVIII—The eight'essentials of Yoga, etc. the,
merit that may be acquired by hearing the nagration of
the Garuda Puranam etc. ony ay vee 783-784

=== PAGE 17 ===

PREFACE.

A few preliminary remarks on the history, scope and contents
of the Garuda Puranam may be necessary. The Garuda
Puranam may be safely described as a sister work to the
Agni Puranam. Each of them treats of Pard Vidy4 and Apar&
Vidya, secular knowledge and metaphysical truths, and par-
takes mure of the nature of a catechism of the then’prevailing
Brahmanism, or of what a Brdhmana was required to know at
the time, than of the Puranm proper, at least if we may be
admitted to look upon the Ramayana or the Mah4bhératam as
the model of that class of literature. Superficially conforming
to the Rules of Pancha Sandhis, etc., the Garuda Puranam,
like its sister work, reflects but the knowledge of the
Brdhmanical world at the time, and had its uses then as it
has even now.

Without doing violence to the antiquarian instinct,
we must say that it is quite futile to attempt to lay
down the precise date of the composition of the Garuda
Puranam. Its name occurs in the Haldyudha’s Brahmana
Sarvasvam. Chakrpani Dntta has quoted many a recipe
from it, and the Vishnu Dharmottaram, according to
several eminent authorities, orginally formed a portion of
the Garuda Puranam. All these [factors emphatically
demonstrate the fact that, the Garuda Puranam was in
existence even before the tenth century of the Christian Era.
On the contrary, we have reasons to believe that, hosts of
Puranas and Upapuranas were composed in the age of Brah-
manic renascence, which immediately followed the overthrow
ef Buddhism in India. The Garuda Puranm, like the Agni,
Shiva, Padma, and the like Puranas, were the exponents of
the victorious Brahmanism, which, being inevitably divided into
schisms, tried to invest the tutelary deity of each sect with

=== PAGE 18 ===

ii PREFACE.

the attributes of supreme divinity or Brahma, and to equip its
members with a complete code of rituals, law and other neces-
sary informations regarding the incidents of every day life,
subservient to, and in conformity with, the Vedas and the
Vedic literature. Thus each schism or faction, or more
correctly, each Puranam, the scripture of each sect of special,
tutelary divinities, becaine a new school of law, medicine and
metaphysics, etc., re-instating the old errors of the Vedic
literature, as if to ignore the many advanced truths and
principles of the later day Buddhistic science, and to confirm
the victory of Brahmanism even in error and fallacy.

The description of the incidents of the life of Buddha,
however meagre and incidental it might be, and the
accurrence of the name of Sushruta in the medical portion
of the Garuda Puranam leaves not the slightest doubt that
its author was intimately acquainted with the Buddhistic
literature of the age, both medical and metaphysical. It is
a settled fact of history that the Sushruta Samhita, at least
the recension of the Sashruta Samhita by the Buddhist
Nagarjuna, was written in the second century before the birth
of Christ. Now, the Sushruta Samhita says that, the number
of bones in the human body is three hundred. The Vishnu
Smriti (Institutes of Vishnu) following the orthodox (Vedic)
non-medical opinion- on the subject gives it as three hundred
aud sixty-six. . .

We know that Nagarjuna, the Buddhist redacter of
the Sushruta Samhita, mentioned in his recension of the
work that there are “three hundred bones in the human
organism, but the followers of the Vedas say that their
number is three hundred and sixty’? which tallies with
the number given inthe Yajnavalkya Samhita. The Garuda
Puranam gives the number as the three hundred and sixty two
(Asthndm Doyodhikam Proktam Sashthyadhika S’atatrayam)
a sort of compromise between the Vedic and the Buddhistic
osteology, or between the dictates of conscience, imperatively

=== PAGE 19 ===

PREFACE. iti
urging the man to state the whole truth, and the pride of
conquest impelling him to set upa schism against truth. The
author of the Garuda Puranam, whoever he might be, must
have been sufficiently familiar with the works of Nagarjuna and
other Buddhistic Medical Acharyas so as to be fully convinced
of the truth of their statement, and attempted to make the
Vedic number of skeletal bones as near to the trutlas possible.
This fact serves to throw a new light upon the date of the
composition of the Garuda Puranam. It unmistakably points
to a period of history when the victorious Brahmanism once
more attempted to restore the teachings of the Vedas in their
pristine glory, and the truths of the Buddhistic science or
metaphysics were still too potent a factor to be ignored or
lightly dismissed—a fact which supports our contention and
lends a plausible colour to the view we have adopted as
regards the probable date of the composition of the Garuda.

The second question, that confronts us, is the purity of the
text, z.e., whether the Garuda Puranam, as we now possess
it, is what it was originally written by its author; or whether
its bulk has been considerably increased by subsequent
additions? In the first Chapter we learn that, the Puranam
consists of eight thousand and eight hundred verses, and the
subjects dealt with therein are creation of the universe, Pujas,
Holy pools and shrines, Cosmogony and Geography, Ages of
Manus, Duties of different so¢ial orders, Gift-making, Duties
of kings, etc., Laws, Vratas, Royal dynasties, Therapeutics
with Etiology, Vedangas, Pralaya, Laws of Virtue, desire,
and money, and Knowledge (of Brahma and external things).
These then were the main themes that were originally dealt
with in the Garuda Puranam, and we may say that this was so:
in the light of the principle of 4dhvdya Sampravibhiga (classi-
fication of chapters: which forms one of the cardinal rules in
forming the plan of a Sanskrit work. We regret to say that,
many things, having no legitimate connection with the main
themes of this Puranam, nor having a direct bearing thereon,

=== PAGE 20 ===

iv PREFACE,

have been added to it, anda large mass of original matter has
been expunged from it so as to bring it within the compass of
the eight thousand and eight hundred Slokas, as laid down in
the introductory chapter. Thus we see that the Pretakhanda
or Vishnu-dharmottara was added to it by way of an appendix,
and the reason of these successive accretions to the text
can be easily understood if we consider that, the Garuda
Puranam, like the Agni, etc., although originally a compen-
dium of the available Brahminical knowledge, and rituals, pur-
sued and followed by the Vaishnava section of the community,
came to gather in many tributaries from the other branches
of Brahmanic thought and religion, as the distinction between
the sect of Vishnu and other sects of S’iva and Sakti etc., came
to be less marked and pronounced, and the points of differ-
ence or antagonism between them were more rounded off.
Thus we see many Tantrik rites and Mantras such as, the
Tripura Vidya, Nityaklinna Vidya were introduced into the
Garuda Puranam, one of the Scriptural Puranas of Vaishna-
vism ; and the Preta-khanda, which we find invariably appen-
ded to the Puranam in many of the manuscripts, does but re-
flect the necessity of ‘subsequently adding to it a treatise on
funeral rites, or on punishment and reward after death accor-
ding to one’s deserts,‘only to enhance the utility of the work
as ‘a book of reference in every day life, as the members of
the sect began to be more bigoted and averse to reading reli-
gious works, or Puranas dedicated to the tutelary gods of
other sects. It requires nothing more than an average intellect
to detect that the part under reference (Preta-Khanda) is
manifestly an interpolation, inasmuch as the subject has been
already dealt with in chapters on S'raddha-vidhi, Papa-
Chinha Lakshanam and Prayaschittd, etc., and the insertion
of a more detailed and elaborate dissertation on the subject
under the style of Preta-Khanda is an unnecessary repetition
and re-opening of a finished discourse (Samépta Punardtta+
#4) which is bad both in reason and rhetoric. We have

=== PAGE 21 ===

PREFACE. v

attempted to expunge all spurious portions, or passages of
questionable authenticity from the text in the light of the
reasons stated above, and tried to restore it to its original
form as far as possible after the progress of so many centuries
since it first saw the light.

We may be asked the rationale of our conduct in under-
taking the English translation of the Garuda Puranam. The
question is natural enough, if the work is nothing but a com-
~pendium of Brahmanic rituals and mysteries, what is the
profit of disinterring it from beneath the oblivion which it so
unqualifiedly deserves. Our answer is that, in addition to the
many mystic rites and practices, which legitimately fall within
the range of studies in spiritualism, the Garuda Puranam
contains three Samhitas, v7z., the Agastya Samhita, the
Brihaspati Samhita (Nitisara), and the Dhanvantari Samhita ;
any one of which would give it a permanent value, and accord
to it an undying fame among the works of practical Ethics or
applied medicine. The Agastya Samhita deals with the forma-
tion, crystallisation and distinctive traits of the different preci-
ous jems, and enumerates the names of the countries from which
our forefathers used to collect those minerals. The cutting,
polishing, setting, and appraising, etc., of the several kinds of
jems and diamond, as they were practised in ancient India,
can not but be interesting to artists and lay men alike, and the
scientific truths, imbtdded in the highly poetic accounts of
their origin and formation,*shall, we doubt not, be “welcomed
even by the present day mineralogists, if they only care to
look through the veil and to see them in their pure and native
nuditity. In these days of Oriental research, it is quite within
the possibilities of every ardent enquirer to make himself
acquainted with the terms and technicalities of the science
of our Rishis, and we are confident that any labour he may
bestow on the subject in connection with the Agastya Samhita
will be remunerated a hundred-fold.

The next Samhita in the Garuda Puranam is the Bribaspati

=== PAGE 22 ===

vi PREFACE.

Samhita, commonly known as the Nitisara, in which we find
observations on practical conduct and a knowledge of human
nature, which strongly remind one of Bacon’s essays and in
comparision with which the Samhita gains one or two points
mote, not to speak of its excellent poetry and harmony. In
the ftiological portion of the Dhanvantari Samhita, one is
astonished to find that in “certain types of fever the blood
undergoes a sort of chemical change which produces the
morbific factors of the disease, that in hamoptisis the”
blood comes from the spleen, {liver or the blood-vessels
(facts unknown to the Nidanist, Madhava), that there is a kind
of parasites that produces leprosy, and cutaneous affections in
general,” facts which, it was but yesterday, that the science of
the west have gained access to. The therapeutical portion of
the Samhita contains many excellent remedies which can not
but benefit man in the art of living a long, healthy life. It is
almost impossible for us to give within such a small compass
even the faintest glimpse of the splendid truths that lie scatter-
ed through the pages of this noble Puranam ; enough if we
conclude our remark with the saying that, it broadens the
vision of a man into regions where systems and worlds
are but bubbles and atoms, and enables him to consolidate his
amity with those profound realities, which encompass “ being
and becoming” in every :plane of existence, or at Ieast helps
him to lift up the veil of the Nature’s workshop and to catch
a view, however slight and momentary, of the nature and
essence of things.

CALCUTTA,
t M. N. DUTT.

The rath June, 1908.

=== PAGE 23 ===

THE

GARUDA PURANAM.

CHAPTER I.

I SALUTE the One Supreme, without birth, decay or end,
identical with knowledge, great, auspicious free from impuri-
ties, without beginning, devoid of elemental body and actions,
stationed in all creatures, Hari, freed from impurity and
illusion and present everywhere. With mind, speech and
actions I do always salute Hari, Rudra, Brahma, the lord of
Ganas and the goddess Saragwati. Having’ adored and
lauded the poet Suta, well-versed in Puranas, of a quiet
nature, the master of all scriptures, devoted 'to Vishnu and
-high-souled when he came to the forest of Naimisha while
-making a pilgrimage to sacred shrines and seated on a holy
seat was meditating on the sinless, Vishnu, the great Rishis,
-Sounaka-and others, dwelling in the forest of Naimishi,

-having:asceticism for their wealth, of quiescent souls, efful-
gent like the sun and ever engaged in the celebration of
. Sacrifices, said.

.The Rishis.said:—O Suta, thov art informed of. every

thing and therefore we ask you:— Amongst the celestials

=== PAGE 24 ===

2 GARUDA PURANAM.

who is Iswara and who is worthy of adorations ? Who should
be meditated on? Who is the creator of the universe ?_ Who
protects it and who destroys it? From whom proceeds
religion? Who suppresses the wicked? With what vowed
observances is he pleased? By what yoga can he be obtained?
What are his incarnations and what is his family? Who
has instituted the various castes and orders and who pro-
tects them? O Suta, O thou of great intellect, do thou
describe unto us, all this and every thing else, the most
excellent themes about Narayana.

Suta said:—TI will describe the Garuda Purana, the
essence of all accounts relating to Vishnu. Formerly Garuda
described it to Kashyapa and I myself had heard it
from Vyasa. The Lord Narayana alone is the lord of
all the lords of the deities, the great soul and the great
Brahma; from him proceeds birth &c. For the protection
of the universe Vasudeva, without birth and death,
assumes various incarnations by his body, namely that of
Koumara and others. Having undertaken the incarnation’ of
Koumara and lived in the celestial region the first deity Hari,
O Brahman, practised the most difficult vow of celebacy with-
out any break. Secondly having assumed the Boar-form the
lord of sacrifices, for the general well-being, released and
held up the earth sunk deep under the nether region. Thirdly
for the creation of the Rishis, he, assuming the form of a
Brahma Rishi, performed Sattwik (pervaded by the’quality
of goodness) actions from which alone proceed desireless
actions. Then for protecting righteousness, Hari, assum-
ing the form of Nara Narayana, practised hard penances. He
was then adored by the celestials and Asuras. His fifth incar-
nation was Kapila, the lord of Siddhas* who expounded unto

* Inspired seers. A Siddha is a semi-divine being supposed to be
of great purity and holiness characterised by Siddhis or eight super-
natural faculties or perfections.

=== PAGE 25 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 3

the celestials the Sankhya,* which ascertains the Tattwas or
elementary particles which had been lost in time. In his
sixth incarnation he was born as the son of Atri and com-
municated jto Alarka, Pralhada and others, the knowledge of
Anwikshiki (metaphaysics) obtained by him from Anasu
His seventh incarnation, in the Sayambhuva Manwantara, was
Yajna, the will-begotten child of Akuti, who performed
sacrifices in the company of the celestials. In his eighth
incarnation he was born as the powerful son of Nabhi from
Merudevya. Adored of all the orders he pointed out to men
the real road. Solicited by Rishis he assumed the body of
Prithu as his ninth incarnation and the Brahmanas and
other creatures were revived by him with the milk of herbs.
When the Earth was submerged under water in the end of
the Chakshusa Manwantara he assumed the form of a Fish
and saved the Manu Vaivaswata by placing him on a boat.
In his eleventh incarnation the Lord, in the shape of a tortoise,
held on his back the mount Mandara with which the celestials
and Asuras churned the ocean. In his twelfth incarnation as
well as in the thirteenth in the form of a woman he stupified
the Asuras and pleased the celestials. Assuming the form of
a man-lion in his fourteenth incarnation he subdued the
Daitya chief by cutting his entrails with his fierce claws.
Assuming the form of a dwarf in his fifteenth incarnation he
went to the Sacrifice of Bali and praying for room for his
three feet obtained it. Beholding the kings aggrandise the
Brahmanas in his sixteenth incarnation, he, filled with anger,
divested the earth of the Kshatriyas for twenty one times.
In his seventeenth incarnation he was begotton on Satyavati
by Parasara (as Veda-Vyasa) ; and seeing the feeble intellect
of the people he divided the Vedas. Then for accomplishing

* It is a system of philosophy ascribed to Kapila, It is called
Sankhya because it enumerates twenty-five Tattwas or principles. Ac-
cording to this system final liberation is obtained by a true knowledge of
these principles.

=== PAGE 26 ===

4 GARUDA PURANAM.

the work of the celestials he was born as a king (Rama),
built a bridge over the ocean and performed other feats. in
his nineteenth and twentieth incarnations the Lord was born
as’ Rama and Krishna and relieved the earth of her burden.
Then at the junction of the Kali yuga, for stupefying the
enemies of the celestials he was born as Buddha, the son of
Jina. In the period of the eighth junction (change of cycles),
when all the kings will be on the verge of destruction, he will
be born as Vishnujasa’s son Kalki, the lord of the world.
Innumerable are the incarnations of Hari, the mine of Sattwa,
O twice-born ones. The prime Manus, the knowers of the
Vedas, are all said to have originated from Vishnu. From
them proceeded the work of creation. And they should be
adored with vowed observances and other rites. This Garuda
Purana consisting of eight thousand and eight hundred
verses Vyasa formerly narrated to me.

CHAPTER II.

THE Risuis said :—Why «did Vyasa" describe to you the
Garuda Purana? Do thou describe thus the most excellent
theme relating to Vishnu.

THE SuTA said:—In the company of the ascetics I had
gone to the hermitage of Vadarika. There I saw Vyasa
meditating on the great Ishwara. Having bowed unto him
I took my seat and accosted that foremost of ascetics
saying :—

“O Vyasa, relate unto me the form of Hari from which
has emanated the creation of the universe, Methinks, while
thou dost meditate on the Lord, thou must be knowing it.”

=== PAGE 27 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 5

Hear, O Vipras,what he did relate on being thus ac’costed
by me.

VyYASA said :—Hear, O Suta, I will recount the Purana
Guruda which Brahma described to me in the company of
Narada, Daksha and others.

Tue Sura said:—How did Brahma relate the sacred
Purana Garuda, describing the true essence, unto thee whea
united with Daksha, Narada and others.

VyaSA said :—Having saluted Brahma who was residing
in the Brahmaloka, myself, Daksha, Narada, Bhrigu and
others said to him. ‘ Describe unto us the quintessence (of
the sacred lore).”

BRAHMA said:—O Vyasa, I will recount to you, the
Garuda Purada, the cream of sacred learning which Vishnu
described to me and Rudra formerly while in the company
of other celestials.

Vyasa said:—O Brahman, describe to me the Garuda
Purana, pregnant with great significance, the essence of all,
which Hari formerly described to Rudra while in the com-
pany of other celestials,

BRAHMA said:—With Indra and other celestials I had
gone to the mount Kailasha. There I saw Rudra engaged in
the meditation of the great station. Having saluted him
I addressed him, saying:—“O Shankara, on what art thou
meditating? Save thee, I do nov know of a greater deity. Do
thou therefore describe unto me [the subject of thy medita-
tion] the quintessence [of the sacred learning] who, along
with the celestials, am anxious to listen to it.”

Rupra said :—l meditate on Vishnu, the great soul, the
Demiurgus, who gives all, who is present everywhere and
who resides in the hearts of all creatures. O grand-father,
my body is besmeared with ashes and my hairs have been
clotted. All my vowed observances are intended for the
adoration of Vishnu. I will describe him unto you, the
essence of all, on whom I meditate. I meditate on the deity

.

=== PAGE 28 ===

6 GARUDA PURANAM.

Hari, Vishnu, Jishnu, who is lotus-navelled and shorn of
a body; who is purity, the source of purity; who is the im-
personal self and the individual soul ; who is the great Ishwara
and unites all souls with himself. In him exist all the worlds
and elements and into him they enter. All the gunas
(qualities) and elements exist in that lord of elements as
pearls are strung by athread. He has a thousand eyes, a
thousand heads, a thousand thighs and a most beautiful
face. He is the minutest of the minute, the firmest
of the firm, the heaviest of the heavy and the best of
all that is good. In the words, letters, principal and minor
sacred lores and in the true Saman he is lauded as truth and
the author of true deeds. He is called the ancient Purusha
and Brahma amongst the twice-born. He is called Sankar-
shana in destruction. I therefore adore him in whom all these
worlds shine us the Shakula fishes in the water. He is the
divine law, the word (Om), Brahma, the that, the existent and
non-existent and the supreme. The celestials, the Yakshas,.
the Rakshasas and the Pannagas. adore him. Fire is his mouth,
the heaven is his head, the sky is his navel and the earth is his.
feet and the sun and moon are his two eyes. I meditate on
him. I meditate on that deity whose breaths are the wind, in
whose belly the three worlds exist and whose arms are the
divisions of the time. I meditate on that deity in whose
hairs are the clouds, and in the joints of whose body are the
four oceans. I meditate on that deity who is above time,
who is above sacrifices, who is above the existent and non-
existent and who is the beginning and end of the universe.
T meditate on that deity from whose mind emanates the moon,
from whose eyes the sun and from whose mouth the fire. I
meditate on that deity from whose feet the earth is produced,
from whose ears the directions and from whose head the Div
(celestial region). I meditate on that deity from whom have
proceeded the works of principal and minor creations, the
various races, Manwantaras, and histories of the families.

=== PAGE 29 ===

GARUDA PURANAM, 7
We will proceed to him, to witness the true essence, on whom
I do meditate.!

BRAHMA said:—I was thus formerly addressed by Rudra.
Having lauded and saluted Vishnu, the dweller of the white
island (Shweta-dwipa) we sat calmly desirous of listening to
(the subject). From amongst us Rudra said to Vishnu, the
great Iswara:— Describe to us the most essential of all
essence; we salute thee.” What, O Vyasa, you have asked
me the Lord Bhava asked Vishnu in the hearing of myself and
other celestials.

Rubra said:—O Hari, O king of gods, tell usawho is the
god of gods; who is Iswara; who should be mé ated on;
who should be adored; with what vowed observances, the
great is propitiated? With what religious observances, with
what process of self-restraint, with what form of adoration
and with what sort of conduct is He pleased? What is his
form? From what deity the universe has emanated and who
protects it? What are his incarnations? In whom the
world is dissolved? From what deity proceed the works of
principal and minor creations, the various families and Man-
wantaras? In whom do all these exist? Do thou describe
all this and every thing else, O Hari-|

Then Hari described to Rudra the glories of the great
Iswara, the Yoga aad eighteen | sorts of learning.

Hari said :—Hear, O.Rudra, I will describe it, along with
Brahma and other celestials.

I am the god of gods, the lord of all the worlds. I am the
object of meditation and adoration and am lauded by the
celestials with.panegyric verses. When I am worshipped by
men with self-restraint, vowed observances and good conduct
O Rudra, I grant them the most excellent stage.

I am the seed of the preservation of the world and I am
also the destroyer of the universe, O Shiva. O Hara, I am
also the suppressor of the wicked and the protector of
religion. With fish and other incarnations I do protect the

=== PAGE 30 ===

8 GARUDA PURANAM.

earth. I am the import of the mystic formula and am en-
gaged in adoration and meditation. I am the creator of
heaven and!I am myself the heaven, &c. I am the knower,
the hearer, the speaker and the object of speech. I am
all and the deity identical with all. I am the source of
worldly enjoyments and emancipation. I am the presents
of meditation and adoration; I am the Mandalas, the
Itihasas, O ‘Rudra. O Shiva, I am all the deities. O
Shambhu, I am all the forms of knowledge. I am at one
with Brahma, O Shiva. I am Brahma, all the regions, and
identical with all the deities. I am the personification of
righteous conduct and the religion of Vishnu. I am the
Varnas (castes) and Ashramas (orders) and.I am the ancient
religion. I am the process of regulation, that of self-restraint
and the various vowed observances, O Rudra. Iam the sun,
the moon, and all the auspicious things. Formerly with
asceticism the bird Garuda had worshipped me on earth.
Pleased ‘with him | asked him to pray for a boon ; and he too
prayed for a boon.

Garupa said :—O Hari, my mother Vinata had been made
a slave by the Nagas. Do thou so order, that 1 may bring
ambrosia after vanquishing the celestials, that I may release
her from slavery and that I may be thy carrier. Do thou so
order that I may be highly powerful, geeatly strong, omni-
scient, the afflicter of the Nagas,.and the author of Puranas
and Samhitas.

VISHNU said:—What you have said, O Garuda, will all
be'accomplished. You will'release your mother Vinata from
the Nagas. Having vanquished all the deities and others
you will bring ambrosia. You will be the highly powerful
carrier. By my favour you will be the author of the Purana,
describing my gloriés and forms. By your name it will be
celebrated on earth-as Garuda. :O son of Vinata, as I am
the God ‘of gods and Shree ‘is celebrated so the Garuda
Purana will be celebrated amongst all the’ Puranas. As I am

=== PAGE 31 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 9

worthy of being lauded so thou shalt be. Meditating on me
by your mind do you describe this Garuda Purana by your
bird mouth.” Thus accosted, O Rudra, Garuda described it
to Kashyapa. Hearing the Garuda Purana Kashyapa revived
the burnt tree. Hearing yourself with fixed attention do
you revive others with your learning. “The bird, Om, Um,
Swaha”—This is the great learning of Garuda. Hear, O
Rudra, the great Garuda Purana narrated by Garuda.

—:0:—=

CHAPTER III.

Sura said:—Thus did Rudra hear it from Vishnu;
Brahma from Rudra; from Brahma the ascetic Vyasa; and
myself from Vyasa. And I relate it to you, O Shounaka, in
the forest of Naimisha. In the assemblage of the ascetics
have been described by me, the creation and the adoration
of the deities, the various sacred shrines, the wealth of the
world and the Manwantaras; the duties of the various
Varnas (castes) and Ashramas (orders) ; the gifts, the regal
duties, the laws, vowed observanees, families and the medical
science with a diagnosis of diseases; the various auxilliary
sciences, the universal dissolution ; religious profit, desire,
worldly profit and the most excellent knowledge. The
illusory deeds, and those beyond the range of illusion, of
Vishnu have all been narrated in Garuda Purana. This
Garuda is Bhagavan.* By the favour of Vasudeva he
has been endued with great strength. Having become the

* It is an epithet applied to a god or demi-god or a great ascetic,
Literally the word means one endued with six qualities,—prosperity, ,
might, glory, splendour, wisdom and dispassion,

2 .

=== PAGE 32 ===

10 GARUDA PURANAM.

cartier of Hari he is the instrument of creation &c. Having
vanquished the celestials Garuda brought ambrosia, by which
the appetite of the universe, lying in the belly of Hari, was
appeased. His very sight or recollection destroys the
serpents. Through Garuda Kashyapa revived all the burnt
trees. Garuda is Hari. He related it unto Kashyapa. The
auspicious Garuda Purana, when read, gives piety and all
objects. Hear, O Shounaka, how Hari describe it unto
Radra.

CHAPTER IV.

Rupra said:—O Janarddana, do thou described the
primary and scondary creations, the families, Manwantaras
as well as the histories of the families.

Hart said :—Hear, O Rudra, I will describe the old sport
of Vishnu, consisting of creation, preservation and destruc-
tion, which destroys all sins.

The Lord Vasudeva, void of passion, Nara-Narayana, is
the great Soul, Para Brahma, the creator and the destroyer
of the universe. All this exists in Him as both manifest and
unmanifest. He exists in the form of Purusha (male-heing)
and Kala (Time). Vishnu is both manifest and unmanifest.
He is Purusha and Kala. Understand, his actions are like
those of a sportive child. He is without beginning, the
Creator; He is without end and Purusottama (the most
exalted of male beings). From him originate the unmani-
fest as well as the soul. From him emanate the intellect,
mind, the Tattwas (principles) ether, air, fire, water and earth.
O Rudra, He is the golden egg and is himself his own end.

=== PAGE 33 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. IL

The Lord assumes a body for the purposes of creation.
Having assumed the body of Brahma with four mouths,
parvaded by the quality of Rajas (darkness) he creates the
entire world, moveable and stationery. This entire universe
consisting of the celestials, Asuras and human beings lies
inside the egg. As Creator he creates the universe; as
Vishnu he protects it; and he destroys it in the end. Hari
himself is the destroyer. Having assumed the body of
Brahma Hari creates the universe and as Vishnu he protects
it. And assuming the form of Rudra the Lord destroys the
universe at the end of a Kalpa. When Brahma was engaged
in the work of creation, He, assuming the form of a boar,
held up with his tusks the earth sunk under water. Hear,
O Shankara, I will describe all in short beginning with the
first creation of the deity.

The first creation is Mahat or intellectual principle ; it is
simply a metamorphosis of Brahma. The second creation
is that of Zanmatras or the subtle elementary particles.
This is known as the creation of elements. The third is
called Vaikdrika or the creation of organs. This is the
(Prakrita) material or elementary creation originating from
intellect. The fourth is the primary creation—and all the
stationery bodies are known as primary creations. The next
is Tiryyaksrotas* whd are otherwise called Tiryyakjonya i.e.
beasts &c. The sixth is the Urdhasrotasat which is called
the creation of the celestials. The seventh is the creation
of Arvakasrotast or human beings. The eighth is the creation
of Anugrahas§ pervaded by the qualities of Sattwa (good-
ness) and Tamas (ignorance).

* Lit the stream of beings living according to nature.

+ Lit the stream of beings tending upwards.

$f. And as these eat by swallowing down they are called
Arvaraskotasas.

§ A class of deities.

=== PAGE 34 ===

12 GARUDA PURANAM.

These are the five orders of the Vaikarika (organic)
creation. There are three orders of the elementary and
organic creation, Koumara makes the ninth. O Rudra, there
are four orders of creation beginning with the celestials and
ending with the stationery creation.

While engaged in the work of creation Brahma first
procreated his mind-born sons. Then desirous of creating
the four classes of beings, viz the celestials, Asuras, Pitris
and human beings, all, going under the name of Amva he
adored his own self.* As the lord of beings, although
himself of unfettered soul, concentrated his soul, being
desirous of creating, passion overspread him and first from
forth his hips came out the Asuras. And then he renounced
his person surcharged with Zama or darkness; and his dark-
ness, on being renounced by him, O Shankara, was converted
into Night. Having assumed another body he became desi-
rous of creating and felt delight. Then O Hara, came out
from the mouth of Brahmi, the celestials surcharged with the
quality of Sattwa (goodness). On being renounced by him
his body, surcharged with the quality of Sattwa, was
converted into Day. Therefore it is that the Asuras are
powerful in the night and the celestials during the day. He
then assumed a person fraught with the quality of goodness
and then sprang from him the ancestorse And that body, on
being renounced by him, became Twilight remaining between
day and night. Then having assumed a body fraught with
the quality of Rajas (darkness) he created human beings.
And on being renouned by him that form became moon-light
which is termed Praksandhya.t Moonlight, Night, Day and
Twilight are his bodies. And then he assumed another body
fraught with the quality of darkness and thereat sprung hunger

* The passage is not clear. Perhaps by the expression “adored his
own self” the author means that Brahma was engaged in the process
of mental retrospection.

+ Meaning going before twilight.

«

=== PAGE 35 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 13

from him and from hunger wrath. Brahma then created
Rakshasas exercised with hunger. [Those that said ‘ Save
him’] are called Rakshas and those [that said ‘We shall eat
him up] are called Yakshas from Yakshana eating. And
from the movement (Sarpana) of his hairs sprang the
serpents. Waxing wroth he generated some beings of
wrathful temper. O sinless, then the Gandharvas came out
singing. All these beings were created by him.

He created goats from his mouth, the kine from his belly
and sides ; the horses, elephants, asses and camels from his
feet, and medicinal herbs furnished with fruts and roots from
the hairs of his body. Fair complexloned male sheep, horses,
mules and asses are called grdmya or household animals.
Hear, I will describe the wild ones. [They are] the beasts
of prey, the clovén-hoofed, elephants, monkeys, and fifthly,
birds and sixthly, acquatic animals and seventhly, reptiles.
From his eastern and other mouths he created the Rik and
other Vedas. The Brahmanas originated from his mouth,
the Kshatryas from his arms, the Vaishyas from his thighs and
the Shudras from his feet. The region of Brahma is for the
Brahmahas, that of Shakra for the Kshatryas, that of Marut
(wind-god) for the Vaishyas and that Gandhatvas for the
Shudras. Those practising the Brahmacharya injunctions
attain the region of, Brahma. The householders, performing
duly their duties, repair to the région of the Creator. Those,
living in the forest, acquire the region of the seven Rishis.
The sphere of the Yatis, going at will, is the eternal region.

=== PAGE 36 ===

CHAPTER V.

—_——

Hart said:—Having created the world and all orders of
beings the Lord created his mirid-begotten sons for multi-
plying his creation ; namely Dharma, Rudra, Manu, Sanaka,
Sanatana, Bhrigu, Sanatkumara, Ruchi, Shuddha, Marichi,
Atri, Angira, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Narada and the Patris
Varhisadas.

The Lotus-sprung deity, from his right thumb, created
Daksha endued with four forms and his wife from his left
thigh. Daksha begat on her beautiful daughters, He gave
them away unto the sons of Brahma and conferred Sati on
Rudra. Numberless, highly powerful sons were born unto
Rudra. He conferred the auspicious Khyati, matchless. in
beauty, on Bhrigu. Bhrigu begat on her Dhata and Vidhata.
He also begat Shree who was Narayana’s wife. Hari begat
on her himself Bala and Ukshmadi. Ayati and Niyati were
the two daughters of the high-souled Manu. They were the
wives of Dhata and Vidhata. They gave birth to two sons,
Prana and Mrikandu. Markandeya was the son Mrikandu.
Marichi’s wife Sambuti gave birth to Pournamasa. Viraja and
Sarvaga were the two sons of that high-gouled one. Angiras
begat on Smriti sons and daughters namely Sinivalee, Kuhu,
Raka and Anumati. Atri begat on Anasuya sinless sons,
Soma,.Durvasa and the yogin Dattdtreya. Pulastya begat
on Priti Dottoli. Three sons, Karman, Arthavira and Sahishnu
were begotten by the patriarch Pulaha on his wife Kshamia.
Krati begat on his wife Sumati the sixty thousand Rishis of
controlled passions by name Valakhilyas. They were all of
the height of a thumb and effulgent like the burning sun.
Vashistha begat on Urjja seven sons, viz, Rajo, Gatra,
Urdhavahu, Sharana, Anagha, Sutapa, Sukra. These are the
seven Rishis,

=== PAGE 37 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 15

Daksha conferred Swaha on the fire-god who had
assumed a body. O Hara, from him Swaha obtained three
highly effulgent sons viz Pavaka, Pavamana and Shuchi, all
eaters of water. Swadha gave birth to Mena and Vaitarani.
They were both Brahmavadinis.* Mena was married to
Himachala (mount Himalaya).

O Hara! the Lord appointed Manu Swayambhu (self-
create) formerly sprung from Brahma’s self and resembling
himself to rule creatures. Swayanbhuva Manu accepted
as his wife Shatarupaa who had destroyed all her sins by
ascetic penances. And to that person Satarupa bore
Pryavrata and Uttanapada; and daughters named Prasuti,
Akuti and Devahuti; of them Manu conferred Akuti on
Ruchi, Prasuti on Daksha and Devahuti on Kardama. To
Ruchi were born Yajnc2 and Dakshina3. Again Yajna begat
on Dakshina twelve highly powerful sons by name Yamas.

The most excellent Daksha begat twenty four daughters.
They were Sraddha,q Lakshmi,s5 Dhriti,6 Tushti,7 Pushti,8
Medha,g Kriya,ro Buddhi,r1 Lajja,r2 Vapu,13 Santi,14
Riddhi,15 Kritir6. These thirteen daughters of Daksha were
wedded by Dharma for procreating sons. Khyati,17 Sati,18
Sambhuti,1g Smriti,20 Priti,z1 Kshama,22 Saunati,23 Ana-
suya,24 Urjja,25 Swaha and Swadha26 [were the remaining
ones]. The foremost of asceties Bhrigu, Bhava, Marichi,
Angira, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Atri, Vasistha and the Pitris
duly married all these daughters beginning with Khyati, And

* Female interpreters of the divine Science.

1 Having an hundred forms. 2 Sacrifice. 3 Gifts in sacrifice 4
Veneration. 5 The goddess of wealth. 6 Patience. 7 Satisfaction.
8 Nourishment. 9 Intelligence. 1o Act. 11 Intellect. 12 Bashful-
ness. 13 Body. 14 Suceess. 15 Fame. 16 Righteousness. 17
Renown. 18 Chastity. 19 Birth. 20 Memory. 21 Gratification.
22 Forgiveness. 23 Reverence. 24 Good-natured. 25 Energy. 26
This and the last words are uttered while offering oblations to fire.

=== PAGE 38 ===

16 GARUDA PURANAM.

then Sraddha brought forth Kama,1 Chala,2 Darpa.3 Niyama4
and Dhritis as her sons, and Tushti Santosha6 and Pushti
Lobha.7 Medha8 brought forth Shrutag and Kriya,1o
Dandami1, Layar2 and Vinaya13 and Buddhi,14 Bodh15 and
Lajja, Vinaya Vapur6 and Vyavasayar7 as her sons. And
Shanti brought forth Kshema and Riddhi, Sukham18 and
Kirti Yagas.19 These are the offspring of Dharma.

K&ma’s wife was Rati whose son was Harsha.21 Daksha
once undertook the celebration of a horse sacrifice at which
all his sons-in-law were invited. They all went there accom-
panied with their wives except Rudra and Sati. But Sati
went there uninvited and was insulted by Daksha. Having
renounced her body she was again begotten on Mena by
Himavan. Gouri became Shambhu’s wife whose sons were
Vinayaka and Kumara. Rudra, the powerful master of
Bhringi, was by nature wrathful. He destroyed Daksha’s
sacrifice and imprecated a curse on him, saying “ You will be
born as a man, in the family of Dhruva.”

—0:—

CHAER VI.

Hari said:—Uttanapada begat a son on Suruchi by
name Uttama and another on Suniti by name Dhruva who
attained to the most exalted station, having adored
Janarddana, the god of gods, by the favour of the ascetic.
Dhruva’s son Shnisthi was greatly strong and highly power-
ful. And his son was the greatly intelligent Prachinavarhi.

1 Sexual desire. 2 Lakshmi. 3/Pride. 4 Restraint. 5 Nourish:
ment. 6 Contentment. 7 Avarice. 8 Intellect. 9 Knowledge or what
isheard. 10 Action, 11 Punishment. 12 Justice. 13 Humilation,
14 Intellect. 15 Apprehension, 16 Body. 17 Exertion, 18 Felicity,
1g Fame.

=== PAGE 39 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 17
.

His son was Divanjaya whose son was Ripu. His son was
known as the beautiful Manu Chakshusha. His son was
Ruru whose sen was the beautiful Anga. Anga’s son was
Vena who was an atheist and an irreligious person. Vena, the
perpetrator of iniquities, was killed by the Rishis with Kuga.
They then churned his thigh for a son and thereat sprang a
son, greatly dwarfish and black. They then said “sit down,
sit down” and he was called Nishida dwelling on the
mount Vindhya. Then the twice-born ones suddenly
churned his right thigh. From there sprang a son assuming
the mental form of Vishnu, by name Prithu. By that son
Vena repaired to the celestial region. The king milched the
earth, for giving life to his subjects.

Prithu’s son was Antarddhana whose son again was
Havirdhina. His son Prachinavarhi became the Lord
Paramount of the world. He espoused the daughter of the
ocean of salt water and begat on her ten Prachinavarhis
who were called Prachetas and were masters of the science
of archery. They all practised the same religious austerities
and renfained immersed in the bed of the deep for ten
thousand years. They attained to the dignity of the
Patriarchs ; and their wife was Marisha. Of her was born
Daksha by the imprecation of Bhava.

As before Daksha again created four classes of beings
from his mind. Obstructed+ by Hara they did not multiply.
The Patriarch then desired to carry on the work of creation
‘by sexual intercourse. He-~then espoused Asikni, the
daughter of the Patrirch Varuna. He begat on the daughter
of Varuna a thousand sons. The end of the earth being
described by Narada they went there to learn it and did not
return. On their being lost Daksha created another thousand,
named Savalakha, who also followed the foot-steps of their
“prothers*O Hara. Worked up with anger Daksha cursed
Narada saying “ You will obtain a birth” and he was again
born asthe son of the ascetic Kashyapa. On his sacrifice

3 .

=== PAGE 40 ===

18 GARUDA PURANAM.
.

being destroyed Daksha imprecated the terrific Maheshwara,
saying “Having worshipped thee with necessary articles
the twice born will leave them aside. Even in another birth,
your hostilities will not terminate, O Shankara.”

Daksha begat on Asikni sixty beautiful daughters. He
gave away two of them unto Angiras. He conferred two on
Krishashwa, ten on Dharma, thirteen on Kashyapa and
twenty seven on Indu. He conferred Suprabha and
Bhamini on Vahuputra. And O Mahadeva, he gave unto
Aristhanemi, his four daughters viz Manorama, Bhanumati,
Vishala and Vahuda. He conferred on Krishashwa Supraja
and Jaya.

Arundhati, Vasu, Y4mi, Lamva, Bhanu, Marutvati,
Sangkalpa, Muhurta, Sadhya, Vishwa, these ten are known
as the wives of Dharma. I will now describe the names of
the wives of Kashyapa. They were Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kala,
Anayu, Sinhika, Muni, Kadru, Pradha, Ira, Krodha, Vinata,
Surabhi and Khaga. Vishwa gave birth to Vishwadevas
and Sadhya to Sadhyas ; Murutvati to Marudyant and Vasu
.to Vasus. From Bhanu were born the Bhanus and from
Muhurtta the Muhurttas. Ghosa was born of Lamva and
Nagavithi (milkway) was born of Yami (night). All the ob-
jects of the world were born of Arundhati and Sankalpa
(pious determination) was the son of Sankalpa. Apa, Dhruva,
Soma, Dhava, Anila, Anala, Pratyusha and Prabhasa are the
names of the Vasus.

Apa’s son were Vaitundya, Srama (weariness), Sranta
(fatigue) and Dhani. And the son of Dhruva was the great
Kala (Time) the cherisher of the world. The son of Soma
was Varchas (light) by whom was generated Varchaswi
(radiance). Dhava begat on his wife Manohard Ruhina,
Hutahavya, Shishira, Prana and Ramana. Anila’s wife was
Shiva. Her son was Pulomya and Avijnatagati (unknowable
motion). These were the two sons of Anila. The son of
Agni, Kumara, was born in a clump of Sara reeds whose

=== PAGE 41 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 19

sons were Shakha, Vish4kha, Naigameya and Prishtata.
The son of Kirtikas was known as Kartikeya. Pratyusha’s
son was the ascetic Davala. Vishwakarm4, the celebrated
architect of the celestials, was the son of Prabhdsa. His
sons were Ajaikapada, Ahirvadhna, Twastri and Rudra, all
very energetic. And the own begotten son of Twastri was
the great ascetic Vishwarupa. There are eleven Rudras, the
lords of the three worlds. They are Hara, Vahurupa,
Tryamvaka, Aparajita, Vrishdkapi, Shambhu, Kapardi,
Raivata, Mrigavyadha, Sarva, and Kapali, O great ascetic.
Soma’s wives were twenty seven in number known as stars,
Kashyapa begat on Aditi twelve suns. Vishnu, Shakra,
Aryama, Dhat4, Twastha, Pusha, ‘Vivashwan, Savita, Mitra,
Varuna, Angshuman and Bhaga—these were the twelve
Adityas.

Hiranyakashipu and Hiranyaksha were born of Diti. A
daughter, by name Sinhika, was also born who was married
to Viprachitti. Hiranyakashipu had four very powerful sons
viz., Anuhlada, Hlada, the powerful Pralhada and Sanghlada.
Of them Pralhada was devoted to Vishnu. The sons of
Sanghlada were Sivi, Ayushman and Vashkala. Pralhadajs
son was Virochana who begat Bali, who again had a hundred
sons of whom Vana was the oldest, O bull-emblemed deity.

All the sons of Hiranyakasha were also gifted with great
prowess—Utkara, Shakoni,. Bhutasantapana, Mahanabha,
Mahavahu and Kalanabha.

Danu’s sons were Dwimurdha, Shankara, Ayomukha,
Shankusira, Kapila, Samvara, Ekachakra, Mahavahu, the
highly powerful Taraka, Swarbhanu, Vrishaparva, the great
Asura Puloma and the mighty Viprachitti.

Swarbhanu had a daughter by name Suprabha and Sar-
mistha was the daughter of Vrishaparvan who had two other
celebrated daughters, namely Upadanavi and Hayasira.
Vaishwanara had two daughters named Puloma and Kalaka
who were both married to Maricha. They gave birth to

=== PAGE 42 ===

20 * GARUDA PURANAM.

.
sixty thousand sons, the leading Danavas. Poulamas and

Kala Kanjas are known as the sons of Maricha.

Viprachitti begat on Sinhika Vyansha, Shalya the strong,
Nabha the powerful, Vatapi, Namuchi, Itwala, Khasrima,
Anjaka, Naraka, and Kalanabha.

In the family of the Daitya Pralhida the Nivatakavachas
were born. Six daughters, gifted with great energy, were
born to Tamra, named Shuki, Syeni, Bhasi, Sugrivi, Suchi
and Gridhrika. Shuki gave birth to parrots, owls and crows ;
Syeni to hawks ; Bhasi to kites ; Gridhrika to vultures; Suchi
to water-fowl ; Sugrivi to horses, camels and asses. These
are known as the offspring of Tamra.

Vinataé gave birth to two sons celebrated as Garuda and
Aruna. The offspring of Surasi were a thousand powerful
serpents. Kadru had also a thousand sons—many-hooded
serpents of unmitigated prowess. The most celebrated
amongst them were Shesha, Vasuki, Takshaka, Shanka,
Sweta, Mahapadma, Kumvala, Ashwatara, Elapatra, Naga,
Karkota, Dhananjaya and many other deadly and poisonous.
serpents.

Krodha gave birth to highly powerful Pishachas. Surabhi
gave birth to kine and buffaloes. Ira gave birth to trees,
creepers, grass &c. Khag’ gave birth to Yakshas and Raka-
has and Muni to Apsaras. Aristha gave birth to highly
powerful Gandharvas. mo

Then were born the deities Maruts, forty nine in number,
viz, Ekajyoti, Duryyoti, Trijyoti, Chaturjyoti, Ekashukra,
Dwishukra, the highly powerful Trishukra, Idrik, Anyadrik,
Sadrik, Pratisadrik, Mita, Samita, the highly powerful Sumita,
Ritajit, Satyajit, Sushena, Senajit, Atimitra, Amitra, Dura-
mitra, Ajila, Rita, Ritadharm4, Viharta, Varuna, Dhruva,
Vidharana, Grihamekagana, Idriksha, Sadriksha, Etadriksha,,
Mita, Shana, Etana, Prasadnksha, Sutra, the great ascetic
Tadngugra, Dhvannibhasa, Vimukta, Vikshipa, Dyuti, Vasu,
Valadrishya, Labha, Kama, Jayi, Virat, Udveshana and Guna.

=== PAGE 43 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 20

They all ride the wind. These all are the forms of Hari,
All the kings, Danavas and the celestials adore Hari with
mystic formulas along with the sun and other members of
the family.

CHAPTER VIL.

Rubra SAID :—I will describe in brief the adoration of
Suryya (the sun) as instituted by Shywambhuva, which is
essential and gives enjoyment and emancipation. Listen
to it, O Vyasa.

RupRA SAID :—I will describe the adoration of the sun
yeilding religion, desire &c.

Om, salutation unto the seat of the sun. Om salutation
unto the form of the sun. Om, Hrdm, Hrim, salutation
unto the sun. Om saluation unto the moon. Om salutation
‘unto Mars. Om salutation unto Mercury. Om salutatiow
unto Jupiter. Om salutation unto Venus. Om salutation
unto Saturn. Om salutation unto Réhu. Om salutation unto.
Ketu. Om salutation unto the bundle of effulgence.

O bull-emblemed deity, one should adore the sun and
other planets by offering them seats, conveyances, water for
washing feet, Arghya,. water for rinsing mouth, water for
bathing, raiments, sacrificial threads, scents, flowers, incense,
lamps, and salutation, by circumambulating them and per-
forming the ceremony of Visarjjana. (the withdrawal of life).

Om, Ham, salutation unto the seat of Shiva. Om, Ham,
salutation unto the form of Shiva. Om, Hém salutation unto
his heart. Om, Him, unto the head, Sw4h4. Om, hum, unto
the tuft of hair, Vashat. “Om, Haim, unto the amulet, Hum.
Om hum unto the three eyes Voushat. Om, Ham, salutation
unto the weapons. Om, Ham, salutation unto-the immediate

=== PAGE 44 ===

22 GARUDA PURANAM.

.
born. Om, Him, salutation unto V4madeva. Om, Haim,
salutation, unto Tatpurusha. Om, Houm, salutation unto
Ishana. Om, Ham, salutation unto Gouri. Om, Hum, salu-
tation unto the preceptors. Om, Ham, salutation unto Indra.
Om, Ham, salutation unto Adhora.

On, salutation unto the seat of Vasudeva. Om, salutation
unto the form of Vasudeva. Om, Am, Om, salutation unto
the Lord Vasudeva, Namas. Om, Am, On, salutation unto
the Lord Sangkarshana, Namas. Om, Am, On, salutation
unto the Lord Pradyumna Namas. Om, Am, On, saluta-
tion unto the Lord Aniruddha Namas. Om salutation unto
Narayana. Om salutation unto the Eternal, existent Brahma.
Om, Hum, salutation unto Vishnu. Om, Kshoum, salutation
unto the Lord Narasimha (man-lion). Om, Bhus, Om, salu-
tation unto the Lord Baraha (Boar). Om, Kan, Tan, Pan,
Sham, salutation unto the son of Vinata. Om, Jam, Khan,
Vam, salutation unto Sudarshana. Om, Khan, tan, Pham,
Sham, salutation unto the club. Om, Van, Lan, Man, Koham
salutation unto the conch-shell Panchajanya. Om, Gham,
Dham, Bham, Ham salutation untoShree. Om, Gan, Dan,
Van, San, salutation unto Pushti (nourishment). Om, Dham,
Sham, Vam, San salutation unto the garland of forest flowers.
Om, Sam, Dam, Lam, salutation unto “the mystic mark
Srivatsa. Om, Tam, Cham, Bham, Yam, salutation unto
the (jem) Koustava. Om salutation unto the preceptors.
Om Salutation unto Indra and other deities. Om Salutation
unto Vishwaksena.

O bull-emblemed deity, with these mantrams, seats and
other offerings should be dedicated to Hari. Hear now of
the adoration of the female energy of Vishnu, Saraswati.

Om, Hrim, salutation unto Saraswati. Om, Ham, saluta-
tion unto her heart. Om, Hrim, salutation unto her head.
Om, Hum, salutation unto her hairs. Om, Ham, salutation
unto her amulet. Om, Hrum, salutation unto her three eyes.
Om, Hus, salutation unto the weapons.

=== PAGE 45 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 23
.

Shradha, Hriddhi, Kala, Medha, Tushti, Prabha, Mati,

these energies of Saraswati, should be adored wlth mantrams
. beginning with Om and ending with Namas.

Om salutation unto the Kshetrapalas. Om salutation unto
the preceptors. Om salutation unto the great Guru.

He should then dedicate seats and other offerings to
Saraswati standing on a lotus. The sacred Archana
[installation of the image] of Suryya (sun) and other deities
should be performed with their respective mantrams.

—0:—.

CHAPTER VIII,

Hart said:—Having bathed in the Mandapa (temple)
built on earth one should adore Vishnu in Mandala (circular
figure).

With powders of five colours, this circular figure, Vajranabha,
should .be drawn. O Rudra, sixteen rooms should be drawn
there. In the fourth and fifth corners strings should be placed.
The strings in the corner should be extended to both the other

corners. A man, avell versed in all these rites, should thus’

place strings in all the corners. Similarly he should deal
with interior corners. The first should be placed in the
centre and then at the junction of the lines in the middle.
In all the interior parts there are eight centres. The'‘centres
of the eastern and central figures should be connected with
astring. O Hara, the foremost of the twice-born should
draw the base in the interior parts. O,Shiva, connected
with it the pericarps of the central string should be drawn.
On two sides of the pericarps an expert should draw the
filaments. A learned man should draw petals on their heads.
© thou of firm vows, a worshipper, conversant with the

.

=== PAGE 46 ===

24 GARUDA PURANAM.
.

knowledge of the true object, should draw figures of lotuses
in all the centres.

With the division of the first string one should draw the
doors. With the half he should make decorations for the
same. The pericarp should be drawn with yellow colour,
the filaments with dark blue, the inside with violet and the
petals with crimson. The four parts should be filled up
with black powder, the doors with white powder and the
five lines of the Mandala in order with crimson, yellow and
dark-blue. Having performed Nyasa (assignment of the
limbs he should adore Hari in the five mandalas. He
should assign his heart to Vishnu, the middle part to Sankar-
shana, the head to Pradyumna and the tuft of hair on the
head to Aniruddha. His entire body should be assigned to
Brahma and the fingers to Shridhara. Meditating “I am
Vishnu” he should perform the Nyasa of Hari in the pericarps.
He should perform the Nyasa of Shangkarshana in the east,
that of Pradyumna in the south, that of Aniruddha in the
west, that of Brahmain the north that of Shridhara, Indra
and other deities in Rudra and other corners. Having adored
them with scents and other articles a worshipper attains to
the great station.*

CHAPTER IX,

Hart said :—Being initiated in proper time and having
his eyes covered with a cloth a disciple should offer one
hundred and eight oblations with the Principal mantram.

* In this chapter occurs the drawing of a figure with various colours.
Such a figure is necessary for the celebration of a religious rite. Even
in a Hindu marriage such figures are drawn fer the solemnization of
religious rites.

=== PAGE 47 ===

GARUDA PURANAM 25
’

O Rudra, twice the number should be offered in a Putraka
Homa,* thrice the number in: Sadhakat and four times the
number in Nirvanadeshika.{ A destroyer of a preceptor,
Vishnu’s image, Brahmana and a woman deserves death at
the hands of those who are not initiated. I will describe his
Diksha or initiation destructive of virtue and sin.

Having caused his disciples to sit outside he should make
them concentrate their minds. O Rudra, he should consider
them purified by the wind, burnt by the fire and again
sprinkled with water. Uniting the sentiency with fire he
should consign it to fire. He should meditate on Pranava,
the instrument of all, in the sky and in the body. He should
next unite it with Ashetrajna§ for its being the cause of the
body. Then imagining all the Saktis or female energies of
of the deity in the various Mandalas he should adore Hari.
There should be four doors in order of Brahma Tirtha
(shrine) and others. The head is the lotus; the fingers are
the petals; the palm is the pericarp ‘and the nails are the
filaments. Then meditating there on Hari, the sun and fire,
he, with a controlled mind, should place it on the head of
the disciple, for in the hand is stationed Vishnu, his own
hand being that of Vishnu, and with its touch the entire
collection of sins is dissipated.

Having adored jthe disciple, covered his eyes with a piece
of cloth, and placed him infront of the deity the preceptor
should throw flowers there. He should throw, flowers where
the head of the deity, the holder of Shranga bow, is. He
should mention his name as well as those of his wives. In
the case of a Shudra, an expert preceptor should mention
the name of his master.

* A Homa or offerings to fire for the acquisition of a son.
+ One intended for becoming a worshipper.
£ One intended for attaining emancipation.
§ The lord or the divine emanation residing in the body.

4 .

=== PAGE 48 ===

CHAPTER X.

Hari said:—I will describe the adoration of Shree and
other deities in Sthandilas* for the attainment of Siddhist

Om, Shrim, salutation unto the great Lakshmi.

Shram, Shrim, Shrum, Shroum, Shras. He should
gradually worship the heart, head, the tuft of hair, amulet,
the eyes, the seat and the image. One who wishes to attain
his desired-for objects should offer oblations to the Mandala,
the sun, moon, Lakshmi and her limbs in one corner, Durga,
Gana, preceptor and -Kashtrapala (Vishnu) in the-Mandal a
having the figure of a lotus drawn inside it, four doors
painted with dust and sixty four corners.

With the mantram, “Om, Gham, tam, dham, Ham, saluta-
tion unto the great Lakshmi” he should adore Lakshmi
together with all the members of the family as narrated
before.

Om, Soum, salutation unto Saraswati. Om, Hrim, Soun,
salutation unto Saraswati. Om, Hrim, say, say. O goddess of
speech, Swaha. Om, Hrim, salutation unto Saraswati.

CHAPTER XI.

I wItt now describe the mode of adorning the nine
Vyuhas as narrated unto Kashyapa. Having drawn up the

* A level square ‘piece of ground prepared for a sactifice.

+ Supernatural powers acquired by Yoga. The word Siddhi may
also mean “the accomplishment of the object for which a religious rite
is undertaken.”

=== PAGE 49 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 27

vital breath through the head one should place it in the’ sky
through the navel. Then with the mantram Ram he: should
consume the body identical with the up-going vital air. And
he should destroy all with the mantram Yam. With the
mantram Lam he should overflood the entire world mobile
and immobile. Then with the mantram Vam he should:
meditate on ambrosia. Thereupon by dhyana (meditation)
he should think of the four-armed deity, clad ina yellow
raiment, in the middle of the-bubble, as well as of his bathing:
He should next perform the three-fold mantra-nyasa*
ceremony of the fingers and body.

After the recitation of this mantram, with one composed
of twelve letters, he should make assignment ef six limbs so
that Hari himself might appear there. Beginning with the
thumb of the right hand he should assign the middle finger
to the petal. Having assigned the two Vijas in the middle
he should assign them to the other limbs viz, heart, head, the
crown of the head where lies the tuft of hair, mouth, eyes,
belly, back, arms, hands, thighs and feet. Having converted
the hand into the shape of a lotus he should place the thumb
in the middle. And there he should meditate on the Lord
of all, the great undecaying Principle. Then in order he
should assign all the other mantrams to fore and other
fingers. He should then in order make assignment of the
head, eyes, mouth, throat, hear, navel, buttock, thighs and
feet. Having assigned the mantrams of six limbs or parts to
the palms he should assign others to the body. He should
assign the five mantrams to the five fingers beginning with
the thumb and ending with the youngest.

He should assign the mantram of the eye to the hand ard
then make assignment of other limbs. Having assiged
heart to the heart he should assign head to the head, sikh
(tuft of hair) to the Sikh4 and, amulet to the entir: body.

* The assignment of mystic syllables to various deines.

=== PAGE 50 ===

28 GARUDA~PURANAM.

Eyes ‘Should be assigned to the eyes and the weapon to the
two hands. Having bound all the quarters with the weapon
he should commence the rite of adoration. First of all with
a controlled mind he should meditate on Yogapitha (the seat
of yoga) in his heart, and in due order on religion, knowledge,
disassociation from the world, and prosperity. He should
assign iniquity &c. to the north-east and east. The body, free
of all these sins, should be then converted into Pitha (seat).
He should afterwards assign Ananta. Having meditated first,
by means of the Vedas &c. on learning, the ‘eight quarters
like unto eight petals of a lotus born in a tank, a white lotus
of a hundred petals covered with filaments he should meditate
on Mandalas ‘identical with the sun, moon and fire and then
think of the deity on one above the other. He should then
perform the assignment of eight energies of Keshava
stationed’in the east and of the ninth in the pericarp.

Having thus meditated on and adored the Yogapitha, he
should invoke the lord thereof, Hari, the holder of Shranga
bow and assign him there. He should assign heart &c to the
lotuses of the four quarters, east &c., the eye in the middle
and the weapon in the corners. He should assign the
mantrams of Sangkarshana &c. to the east and other
quarters and Vinata’s son to the eastern and western doors
and the discus Sudarshana‘of, a thousand rays to the southern
gate. He should assign’ Shree to the south, Lakshmi to the
north, the club to the northern gate and the conch-shell to
the corners.

An intelligent worshipper should place the Shranga bow
either on the right or on the left of the deity. Similarly
conci.shell and discus should be placed on both the sides.
Accorting to the distinction of their respective quarters all
the guartian deities thereof should be assigned. In the same
way the verious weapons, such as thunder-bolt &c., should
be assigned He should meditate on Brahina upwards and

=== PAGE 51 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 29

Ananta downwards. Having meditated on and adored them
all he should display Mudra.* ,

Anjali’ (the folding of palms) is the first Mudra which
speedily secures the favour of the deity. Vandani is the
next when it is placed on the breast with the right hand
raised half-way up. Urdhangustha (thumb raised up) is
formed by the clasping of the fist of the left hand with the
thumb of the right hand. In this the thumb of the left hand
should be raised up. These are the three ordinary forms
arranged according to the difference of the forms of the idols.

With the intertwining of the youngest finger eight
Mudras are formed in order. These should be formed with
the recitation of the first eight mantrams. With the thumb
the three sucessive fingers ending with the youngest should
be bent. Then the two hands should be bent. This is the
Mudra of Narasimha (man-lion).~ Having raised up the
left hand he should whirl it. This is the Mudra approved of
Varéha (the boar-form). Having raised up the two fists he
should straighten the fingers of the one and then bend all
of them. This Mudra is called Anga. Having intertwined in
order the two fists the Mudras for the ten guardian deities of
the quarters should be formed. The first vowel, the second,
the last but one and the last should be in order assigned to
Vasudeva, Bala, K4ma and Aniruddha. “Om, 7a¢sat, Hum,
Kshroum, Bhus” are “the mantrams for Narayana, Brahma,
Vishnu, the man-lion and “Boar forms. White, red, green,
violet, blue, dark-blue, crimson, cloud-colour, fire-colour,
honey-colour and twany colour are the nine names.

Kan, tan, jam, pam, Sham, Garutman.

Jam, Kham, ban, Sudarshana. Kham, cham, pham, Sham,
the club.

Vam, lam, man, Ksham, conch-shell. Gham, dham Vam,
bham, Ham, Shree. Gam, jam, dam, vam, Sham, nourishment.

* A mode of intertwining of the fingers during religious worship,

=== PAGE 52 ===

30 GARUDA PURANAM.

Dham, Vam, the garland of the’ forest flowers. Dam,
Sam, is for the mystic mark Srivatsa.

Chham, dam, pam, Yam is for the jewel Koustava.

He should then say “Iam Ananta” These are the ten
limbs of the Lord of gods.

Garuda is smoke-coloured. The club is white. Pushti
(nourishment) is of the colour of a Sirish flower. Lakshmi is
gold-hued. The conch-shell is effulgent like the full-moon.
Srivatsa is of the colour of a Kunda flower. The garland is
of five colours. Ananta is of the colour of acloud. All the
weapons described before are of the hue of lightnings.

According to the light of the science of the lotus-eyed
deity one should offer Arghya, Padhya (water for washing
feet) &c.

CHAPTER XII.

Hari said:—I will describe the order of adoration for
achieving the success thereof.

The recollection of the great soul should be made with
the mantrams, “Om, Salutation, &c.” ‘

With the mantram “ Yam, Van, Lam, Ram” the purifica-
tion of the body should be performed.

With the mantram “Om, salutation” the image of the
four-armed deity should be made.

Then the three sorts of the making of idols should be
made. Then follows the adoration of Yoga-pitha stationed
in the heart.

On, salutation unto Ananta. Om, salutation unto religion.
Om, salutation unto disassociation. Om salutation unto know-
ledge. Om salutation unto prosperity. Om salutation unto sin,

=== PAGE 53 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 31
?

Om salutation unto ignorance. Om salutation unto worldli-
ness. Om salutation unto proverty. Om salutation unto the
jotus. Om salutation unto the solar disc. Om salutation unto
the lunar disc. Om salutation unto the disc of the fire. Om
salutation unto Vimala. Om salutation unto Utkarshina. Om
salutation unto knowledge. Om salutation unto action. Om
salutation unto ignorance. Om salutation unto inaction. Om
salutation unto yoga. Om salutation unto Prarhd. Om, saluta-
tion unto Satya. Om salutation unto Ishana. Om salutation
unto Sarvatomukh. Om salutation unto Hari’s seat with all
its accompaniments, principal and minor. Om salutation unto
Vasudeva. Om salutation unto the heart. Im, salutation unto
the head. Um salutuation unto Shikha (tuft of hair on the
head). Em, salutation unto the amulet. Oum salutation unto
the three eyes. As, phat, salutation unto the weapon. Am,
salutation unto Sangkarshana. Am salutation unto Pradyumna.
As salutation unto Aniruddha. Om, As salutation unto Nara-
yana. Om, Zatsaé salutation unto Brahma. Om, Hum, saluta-
tion unto Vishnu. Kshroum, salutation unto his man-lion and
boar forms. Kam, Tam, Jam, Sham, salutation unto Vinata’s
son. Jam Khem, Vam, salutationjunto Sudarshana. Kham,
Cham, Pham, Sham, salutation unto jthe club. Vam, Lam,
Mam, Ksham, salutation unto the conch-shell Panchajanya.
Gham, Dham, Bham, Ham, salutation unto Shree. Gam,
Dam, Vam, Sham, salutation unto;Pushti. Dham, Vam, saluta-
tion unto the garland of white flowers. Dam, Sham, saluta-
tion unto Shrivatsa. Chham, Dam, Yam, salutation unto
Koustava. Sham salutation unto Shringa bow. Im, saluta-
tion unto the arrows. Cham, salutation unto the leathern
fence. Kham, salutation unto the sword, and the lord of
the Suras. Dham, salutation unto the giver of riches and the
lord thereof. Ham salutation unto Ishana, the lord of learning.
On, salutation unto the thunder-belt. Om unto dart. Om unto
rod. Om unto sword. Om unto noose, standard, club, and

trident.

=== PAGE 54 ===

32 GARUDA PURANAM.
.

Lam, salutation unto Ananta the lord of the nether region.
Kham salutation unto Brahma, the lord of all the worlds.
Om salutation unto the Lord Vasudeva.

Om, Om, Namas; Om, Nam, Namas; Om, Mom, Namas;
Om, Bham, Namas; Om, Gam, Namas; Om, Vam, Namas;
Om Tem, Namas; Om Vam Namas; Om Sum, Namas; Om,
Dem, Namas; Om, Vam, Namas; Om, Yam, Namas.

Om, Om Namas; Om, Nam, Namas; Om, Mom, Namas;
Om, Nam, Namas; Om, Ram, Namas; Om, Yam, Namas;
Om, Nam, Namas; Om, Yam, Namas; Om salutation unto
Narayana. Om, salutation unto Purusottama.

Salutation unto thee, O thou having lotus eyes; saluta-
tion unto thee O creator of the universe, O Subramanya;
salutation unto thee, O great Purusha, O thou the first-
born.

In Homa rites this mantram ending with the word
Swaha should be recited. Having duly recited this mantram
one hundred and eight times the worshipper should offer
Arghya and bow unto the Deity again and again. After-
wards having worshipped the fire he should duly adore with
his own mantram Achyuta the god of gods.

Having first lighted fire, fed it and whirled it one, con-
versant with manttams, should adore it in the Kunda with
auspicious results. Having first meditated on all he should
assign hi mind to the Mandala. Then with the Tattwa
called Vasudeva: he should offer one hundred and eight
oblations. Then with Sangkarshana and other mantrams
he: should offer six adorations, three each time to his limbs
as well as to the guardian deities of the quarters. Then in
the end he should offer Purndhuti. Then he should immerse
his own self in the great principle which is beyond the
range of speech. Then taking his seat, making again
Mudras he should again bow. This is the daily Homa rite;
the occasional one requires double the rituals. [He should
then say] “Go, go to that great region where dwells the

=== PAGE 55 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 33

deity who is devoid of passions. May all the deities repair
to their respective quarters.”

Sudarshana, Shri, Hari, Achyuta, Trivikrama (three foot-
steps), Chaturbhuja (four-arms), Vasudeva, the sixth Pra-
dyumma, Sangkarshana, Purusha are the nine Vywhas. Then
comes Aniruddha and Ananta. With all these Chakras the
gods are known and marked. And they are worshipped in
a house along with the Rakshsas and Danavas.

Om Chakraya Swaha, Om Vichakraya Swaha, Om Sucha-
kr4ya Swaha, Om Mahachakraya Swaha, Om, the remover of
the Asuras, Hum, phat, Om, Him of thousand flames, Hum,
Phat.

This adoration of the discus at the door of the house is
auspicious. It gives also protection.

CHAPTER XIII.

Hari said :—I will now describe the most auspicious
mantram of Vishnu called Panjara.*

Salutation unto thee, O Govinda. Take up thy discus,
Sudarshana and protect me in fhe west, O Vishnu. I have
taken refuge with thee. ake up thy club Koumodaki, O
lotus-navelled deity, salutation unto thee. Protect me in the
south, O Vishnu, I have taken refuge with thee. Salutation
unto thee, O Purusottama. Taking up thy plough-share
Sunanda, protect me in the east, O Vishnu, I have taken
refuge with thee. Taking up thy mace Shatana, O thou
having lotus eyes, protect me in the north, O lord of the
universe, I have taken refuge with thee. O Hari, taking up

. * A mantram of invoking the various weapoas and embellishments of
Vishnu to one’s help,

5

=== PAGE 56 ===

34 GARUDA PURANAM.
.

thy sword, leathern fence, and other weapons, protect me,
© destroyer of Rakshasas. 1 bow unto thee, I am under thy
protection. Taking up thy great conch-shell Panchajanya
and thy lotus Anudbodha, protect me, O Vishnu, O Boar,
in the south-east. Taking up the sun, and moon as well as
the sword Chandramasu do thou protect me in the south-west,
O thou ofa celestial form, O man-lion. Taking up Vaijayanti*
and Srivatsa, the ornament of thy throat do thou protect me
in the north-west, O god, O Hayagriva. I bow unto thee.

O Jan4rddana, having ridden Vinata’s son do thou protect
me in the sky, O thou unvanquished by the Rakshas. I bow
unto thee, O thou never defeated. Having ridden
Vishalakshat do thou protect me in the nether region, O
tortoise,t salutation unto thee. Salutation unto thee, O great
fish. O truth, making thy Vahupanjaram in the hand,
and fingers, do thou protect me,O Vishnu. Salutation unto
thee, O Purusottama.

This great Vishnu Panjara was thus described unto
Shankara, who again described it unto Katyayani. By this
she killed the immortal Asura Mahisha, the DAnava Raktavija
and other thorns of the celestials. By reciting it with
reverential faith a man always destroys his enemies.

CHAPTER XIV.

Hari said :—I will now describe the great Yoga which
gives emancipation and enjoyment. The Dhyayins (yogins)

* Flag or banner of Indra that was given by him to Vishnu,

+ Garuda, Literally it means having large eyes,

These are the various forms assumed by Vishnu in his various
incarnations,

=== PAGE 57 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 35

hold that the Lord Hari is alone to be meditated on. There-
fore, listen to it, O great Ishana.

Vishnu, the lord of all, is the destroyer of sins, without
end and devoid of feet and body. He is Vasudeva, the lord
of the universe and identical with Brahman, Although he
daily assumes various bodies he is [in sooth] devoid of them
all. He is shorn of the natural functions of the body and is
devoid of death and decay. Stationed in the six fold objects
he is the seer, hearer and smeller and is (at the same time)
above the reach of organs. He is devoid of the functions of
senses, the creator and has no name or family. The deity is
in the mind but does not himself possess it. He is devoid of
mental faculties, discriminative knowledge and knowledge.
He perceives all by intellect, is stationed in it, the witness of
all and omniscient ; (and at the same time) he is devoid of
intellect. He is devoid of the functions of intellect, is all,
present every where, and is in the mind of all. He is freed
from vital airs and is devoid of their actions. But he is the
vital principle of all creatures, of a quiescent soul and
divorced from fear. He is shorn of Ahankara (egoism) and
other principles and devoid of their natural actions. But, he
is their witness, the ordainer thereof and of the form of
great felicity. He is the witness of the various states of
of waking, dreamless sleep and dreaming sleep and himself is
above them all. But he is 7u+iya,* the great ordainer, of
the form of the quarter and devoid of gunas (qualities). He
is emancipated, enlightened, undecaying, all-pervading, all-
auspicious and always present in self.

Understanding this the men, who meditate on this great
Isha (God), attain to his form. There is no need of ascertain-
ing actions in this matter. O Shankara, O thou of good vows,

* The fourth state of the soul in which it becomes one with Brahman
er the Supreme spirit.

=== PAGE 58 ===

36 GARUDA PURANAM.

.
I have thus described the DhyAna. He, who always reads it
attains to the region of Vishnu.

—:0:———

CHAPTER XV.

_—

Rupr said:—O Lord, O Janarddana, do thou describe
unto me the Great Being by reciting whose name a man may
cross the dreadful ocean of Samsara.*

Hari said :—Reciting the thousand names of Vishnu, the
Demiurgus, the great Brahman, the Absolute, Undecaying
Self, a man attains to emancipation.  bull-emblemed deity,
hear with fixed attention, I will describe this sacred and
great object of recitation (Fafa) which destroys all sins.

He is Vasudeva, the great Vishnu, VAmana (Dwarf),+
Vasava, Vasu, effulgent like the newly risen sun, and the
highly powerful Balabhadra. He fettered (the Asura) Bali,
is the all-knower, the worshipful knower of the Vedas and the
poet. He is the creator of the Vedas, of the form of the
Vedas, worthy of being known and filled with the Vedas.
He is the knower of the Vedangas,} the lord of the Vedas, the
mine of strength and the saggrandiser of the strong. He is
without changes, the lord of béons, the giver of boons, and

* Commonly worldliness—but really it is the transmigatory series.

+ An incarnation of Vishnu in which he put down the great Asura
Bali, who had grown excessively powerful by his rigid austerities.

$ Certain classes of works regatded as auxilliary to the Vedas, and
designated to aid in the correct pronounciation and interpretation of
the text and the right employment of the Mantras in ceremonials. They
are six in number, viz., (1) Stksha, the science of proper articulation
and pronounciation ; (2) Chhandas, the science of prosody ; (3) Vya-
arvana grammar; (4) Nirukta, elymological explanation of difficult
Vedic words (5) Fyotish, Asteonomy ; (6) Kalpa, ritual or ceremonial.

=== PAGE 59 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 37
the master of Varuna. He is the slayer of heroes, the great
hero and the great Ishwara adored of all. He is the soul,
the great soul, the inward self and above the sky. He is lotus-
navelled, the Padmaniddhi,* the lotus-handed and the holder
of club. He is the Great, above the elements, the foremost
Purusha and the Demiurgus. He is lotus-waisted, Pundarika
wears a garland of lotuses and is beloved of all. He is fotus-
eyed, Padmagarbha,t Parjanya (rain-god) and seated on a
lotus. He is beyond the range of all, the great object, the
greatest of the great lord. He is most learned of all learned
men, holy and destroyer of sins. He is pure, manifests all,
holy and the protector. He is devoid of thirst, Padya,t the
Purusha and Prakriti (Nature). He is Pradhana (intellectual
principle), the lotus, the earth, the lotus-navelled and the giver
of desirable objects. He is the lord of all, present every
where, the All, Omniscient, the giver of all and the great.
He is identical with all and the entire universe, the witness
and up-holder of all. He is the Deity who shows favour unto
all and is stationed in the hearts of all creatures. He is the
protector of all, is adored of all and is saluted by all the
deities. He is at the root of the entire universe, is the des-
troyer of all and the fire. He is the protector of all, pervades
all and the cause of all causes. He is meditated on by all,
the friend of all ang the holder of the various forms of the
deities. He is the object of the Study of all, the commander
of the celestials and is adored of the gods and Asuras. He is

* One of the nine treasures of Kuvera, viz., Padma, Mahapadma.
Sankha, Makara, Kachhapa, Mukunda, Nanda, Nila and Kharva;
their nature is not exactly defined though some of them appear to
be precious jems; according to the Tantrik system, they are personi-
fied and worshipped as demi-gods attendant either upon Kuvera or
Lakshmi, Here the term is an epithet of Vishnu.

+ Name of Brahma, meaning from born of a lotus. Here it is an
epithet of Vishnu showing that he is identical with Brahma.

£ Water for cleaning feet. This shows that Vishnu permeates every
object in the world.

=== PAGE 60 ===

38 GARUDA PURANAM.

always the, destroyer of the wicked and Asuras. He is the
protector of truth, the centre of good people, the lord of
Siddhas, is adored by them, is obtained by the Siddhas and
the Sadhyas and the lord of their hearts.

He is the refuge of the world, the auspiciousness, the
doer of good, beautiful, humble, truthful and having truth for
prowess. He is stationed in truth, of a true determination,
the knower and giver of truth. He is religion, the observer
of religious rites and a Karmin (one who practises religious -
rites) but he is devoid of all actions. He is the ordainer of
actions, the action itself and’ the practice of, religious rites.
He is the lord of Shree and of men, beautiful, the lord of all,
but himself having no master. He is the lord of the celestials,
the master of Vrishnis, of Hiranyagarbha and of the des-
troyer of Tripura. He is the lord of the beasts, Vasus, Indra,
Varuna, trees, wind, fire, Yama, Kuvera, stars, medicinal herbs
and trees. He is the master of the Nagas, of the sun, of
Daksha, of friends and of kings. He is.the master of the
Gandharvas, the most excellent lord of the Asuras, of the
mountains and rivers. He is the most powerful lord of the
celestials, of Kapiia, of creepers and of Veerudhas (spreading
creepers). He is the master of the ascetics, the most excel-
lent lord of the sun, moon, and of Shukra. He is the lord
of planets, Rakshasas, the Kinnaras and, the most excellent
master of the twice-born ones. He i is the lord of the rivers,
oceans, lakes and goblins. He is the master of the Vetalas,
Kushmandas, birds and beasts.

He is the high-sould Mangala, Mandara, the lord of
Mandara. He is creator of Meru and Madhava and devoid of
mind. The great deity wears a garland and is adored by
Mahadeva. He is of a quiescent soul, and is the illustrious
slayer of Madhu. He is highly powerful, the great vital air and
is lauded by Markandeya. He is identical with Maya (illusion),
fettered by it and devoid of it. He is lauded by the ascetics
and is their friend. He has a nose, big cheeks, big arms, big

=== PAGE 61 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 39
teeth and is freed from death. He has a huge mouth, a great
soul, a great body, a great belly, big feet and a high neck.
He is greatly respected, is high-minded, of gieat intellect, of
great fame, of great form and the great Asura. He is Madhu,
he is Madhava, he is Mahadeva, and he is Maheshwara. He
is adored in sacrifices, of the form of a sacrifice and is the
worshipped lord of the sacrifices. He is the great wind, the
great luck and the superhuman Mahesha. He is man, Manu
and does good unto men. He is deer, is adored by them and
is their lord. He is the master of Mercury, Venus, Saturn,
Rahu and Ketu. He is the good mark and is endued with it ;
he has long lips and is handsome to look at. He is bedecked
with various ornaments and besmeared with sandal of
different kinds. His face is painted effulgent with various
colours and adorned with diverse flowers. He is Rama, the
great Iswara with his consort. He gives jewels and takes
them away. He is with and without any boon. He is of a
great, terrific and calm appearance. He is like unto a blue
cloud, is pure and resembles a cloud at the end of a cycle. He
is smoky cloud, of yellow hue, of various forms and without
any colour. He is of a distorted figure, the giver of forms
and is white-hued. He is of all colours, the great yogin, the
sacrificer. He is gold-hued and is called gold. His body is
made of gold and hg puts on a golden girdle. He is the giver
of gold or parts of it. Hg is fond of gold and houses made
of gold. He is beautiful and of huge wings and the creator
of Suparna. He is Vinata’s son, the sun, the beginning, the
the creator of beginning and auspiciousness. He is the
cause of the intellectual principle, of the Puranas, of intellect
and mind. He is the efficient cause of consciousness,
egoism, elements of fire, ether, earth, egg and Prakriti
(Nature). He is the cause of the body, eyes, ears, skin, tongue,
vital breath, hand, foot, speech and the organ of generation.
He is the efficient cause of Indra, Kuvera, Yama, Ishana and
the most excellent creator of Yakshas and Rakshasas. He

=== PAGE 62 ===

40° GARUDA PURANAM.

is the most excellent cause of ornaments, virtue, creatures,
Vasus (gods of riches), of Manus and of birds. He is the
foremost cause of the ascetics, the Yogins, the Siddhas, the
Yakshas, the Kinnaras and Gandharvas.

He is the cause of the river, male and female, the oceans
and trees. He is the cause of Veerudhas, the worlds, the
nether region and celestials. He is the cause of serpents,
the auspiciousness, the beasts and of all.

He is identical with the body, the organs of sense, the
soul, the intellect, the mind, egoism, consciousness, the
condition of waking, that of dreaming sleep, the intellectual
principle and the great soul.

He is identical with ether, water, and the great soul of
earth and air. He is the great soul of the smell, colour,
sound, speech and touch. He permeates, as the great soul,
the ears, skin, tongue, nostrils, hand, foot, organ of generation.
He permeates Indra, Brahma, Rudra, Manu, and the
Patriarch Daksha. The great is identical with truth. He is
identical with Isha, the great soul, the Rudra and the Yati
conversant with the knowledge of emancipation. He is
energetic and is the very energy itself. He is the holder of
the leathern fence and sword and the destroyer of the Asuras.
He is modest by nature and engaged in the well-being of
the ascetics. Hari is of the form of a Yatin, a Yogin and is
meditated on by the Yogins. He is Shiti* He is perfect
knowledge, genius, time, summer, rainy season, determina-
tion, year, the ordainer of emancipation and destroyer of
Moha (stupifaction). He stupefies the wicked, is Mandavya
and mare-mouthed. He is Sangvartaka (fire), the creator of
time, Goutama, Bhrigu, Angira, Atri, Vashistha, Pulaha
Pulastya, Kutsa, Yajnavalka, Devala, Vyasa, Pardashara,
Sharmada, Gangeya, Hrishikesha, Vrihatshrava and Keshava.
He is the destroyer of miseries, has beautiful ears and is
without them. The great Narayana is the lord of Prana, of

* Literally “ white or black.” It is an epithet of Shiva.

=== PAGE 63 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. . 41

vital air the Apana, of Vyana, of Udana and of Samana. He
is the ‘best master of sound, touch and colour. He is the
master of the destruction of the world, the first-born, has a
sword in his hand, the plough-share for his weapon, the
discus in his hand, the Kundalas [on his ears] and the
mystic mark Srivatsa on his breast. He is Prakriti, has the
Koustava gem on his neck and is clad in a yellow raiment.
He has a beautiful face, an ugly face and is without any.
He is without end, of endless forms, has beautiful nails and
is the handsomest of all the celestials. The lord Vishnu has
a beautiful quiver and most resplendent arrows. He is the
destroyer of Hiranyakashipu, the grinder of Hiranyaksha,
the killer of Putana and Bhaskaranta. He is the grinder
of Keshin, and Mushtika. He is the killer of the demon
Kansa, of Chanura and Aristha. He is fond of Akrura, He
is without wickedness, is wily and is adored by those who are
fond of simplicity. He is the destroyer of the lordly powers,
is himself endued with them, the sun and the Lord himself.
He is Uddhava, Uddhava’s lord, and is being meditated on by
Uddhava. He is the holder of discus, is fickle and is devoid
of the moveable and immoveable properties. He is egoism,
determination, mental faculties, the sky, earth, water, air, eye,
ear, tongue, nose, palate, hand, foot, waist and the organ of
generation. He is Shankara, the, giver of auspiciousness, the
giver of endurance ; and hesforgives men. He is fond of his
votaries and is their protector. He is endued with reveren-
tial faith and himself increases it. He is lauded by his
votaries, devoted to them and gives fame ; and he multiplies it.

He is fame, resplendence, forgiveness, patience, reverential
faith, compassion, the great, the gift, the giver, the agent of
action, is fond of the celestials, is purity, is pure, the giver of
felicity, emancipation and the object of desire. He hasa
thousand feet. He is the thousand-headed physician who
opens the gate of emancipation. He is the door of subjects,
has a thousand ends and a thousand hands. He is Shukra,

6 .

=== PAGE 64 ===

42 GARUDA PURANAM.

has a beautiful head-gear, and a beautiful neck. He is
Keshava, Pradyumna, Aniruddha, Hayagriva, Shukara
(boar), Matysa (fish), Parashurama, Pralhada and Bali. He
is daily sought by people for help, entightened, emancipated
and the holder of forms. He is the destroyer of Khara and
Dushana and the grinder of Ravana. He is the husband of
Sita and the prosperous Bharata. He is the killer of the
victor of Kumbhendra, the grinder of Kumbhakarna, the
destroyer of the killers of men and celestials. He is the
destroyer of the wicked Asuras and the enemy of Shamvara.
He is the destroyer of (the demon) Naraka as well as of the
three-headed demon. He broke down [the trees] Yamala
and Arjuna and always helps asceticism. He plays on the
musicat instrument and is himself the instrument. He is
enlightened and the giver of boons. He is the substance
and is fond of substances. He is Soura and the destroyer of
time and is incapable of being cut. He is Agastya, Devala,
Narada, and fond of Narada. He is Prana, Apana, Vyana
(vital airs), the qualities of Rajas (darkness), Sattwa (good-
ness) and Tamas (ignorance). He is beyond Tamas (ignor-
ance). He is Udana, and Samana (vital airs). He is medicine
and the medical man.

He is perpetually and universally the same. His form is
transparent and he is devoid of any form. He is devoid of
the organs of vision and speech, af hands, fat, the organs of
generation and excretion. He is devoid of great asceticism.
He is devoid of perception, intellect, consciousness and
vital airs, Prana, Apana, Vyana, Udana and Samana.

He is devoid of the ether and fire, water and earth.
He is devoid of sound, touch andall colours. He is devoid
of carnal passion and other inferior appetites. He is shorn
of grief and the power of speech. He is devoid of the
quality of Rajas (darkness) and six-fold deviations from the
natural state. He is devoid of sexual passion, anger, avarice,
and pride. He is the subtlest of the subtle and the grossest of

=== PAGE 65 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 43

the gross. He is clever, leader of the strong and the agita-
tor of all. He agitates Prakriti (nature), Mahat (intellectual
principle), the elements, intellect, the organs of sense and
of the objects thereof. He is the agitator of Brahma and
Rudra. He is beyond the range of vision and hearing.
Skin cannot touch him. He is tortoise. Tongue cannot
perceive him. He is beyond the range of smelling and
speech, The hands and feet cannot reach him. Hari is
beyond the range of mental and intellectual perception and
understanding. He is within the comprehension of the sense
of ego and mental faculties.

He holds the conch-shell in his hand, is undecaying and
holds also the club and Shranga bow in his hands. He is
dark-blue, the image of knowledge and the scorcher of the
enemies. He is within the range of the knowledge of the
ascetics; he is endued with knowledge and knows all by
his knowledge. He is comprehended by knowledge and
manifests the consciousness of the objects of knowledge.
He is the soul, object of mental perception, the creator of
the world and the destroyer of it. He is Govinda, the lord of
kine and the giver of felicity unto the cow-herds. He is the
protector of kine, the master of kine, Gomati and Godhara.
He is Upendra, Nrisimha, Shouri, Janarddana, Araneya,
Vrihatbhanu and highly effulgent. He is D&modara, the
three-fold time, cognizant of time and devoid of time. He
is the three-fold Sandhya (periods of conjuction), is Dwapara,
Treta, the creator of subjects and of the foot steps. He
is powerful and holds a rod in his hand. He holds one and
three rods in his hand. He is the division of the Samaveda,
its means, of the form of Saman and the chanter of Saman.
He is conversant with Atharvan Veda and is the preceptor
thereof. He is the Rik of the Rik Veda and is stationed
there. He is the reader of the Yayush, the Yayurveda itself
and is conversant with the rituals thereof. He has one foot,
many feet, beautiful foot, a thousand feet, four feet, two feet.

=== PAGE 66 ===

44 GARUDA PURANAM.

The powerful lord is like unto Smriti and Nyaya. He isa
Sanyasin (disassociated from the world, and is the four orders
of hermit &c viz, a Brahmacharin (student), Grihasta (house-
holder), Vanaprasta (retired into forest) and Bhikshsu (a
hermit living on alms). He is the four Varnas (castes) viz
the Brahmanas, the Kshatryas, the Vaishyas and the Shudras.
He gives good character, is endued with the same and devoid
of a bad character. He is emancipation, is engaged in
spiritual communion, is the encomiastic verse, the encomiast
and the worshipper. He is worshipful, the speech, the object
of speech and the speaker. He is the knower, the grammar,
the word and is conversant with words.

He is within the reach of words, lives in sacred shrines,
is the sacred shrine and is conversant with the knowledge of
all the shrines. He is resident in all the sacred shrines, is
Sankhya, .Nirukta and the presiding deity thereof. He is
Pranava,* the lord of Pranava and is adored with Pranava.
He is Gayatrit and the holder of club. He lives in
Shalagrama and is Shalagrama itself. He resides in water,
lies in Yoga, on Sesha and Kusha. He is the earth, is the
action, the cause and the holder of the earth. He is the
Patriarch, and the eternal. He is the object of desire and
tlie universal creator of desire. He is the Lord Paramount,
the sun, the heaven, is stationed on a cay and the strength of
the charioteer. He is rich; the giver of riches, blessed and
engaged in the well-being of the Yadavas. He is the
favourite of Arjuna and he is both Arjuna and Bhima. Un-
bearable is his prowess and he is a master of all the

* The sacred syllable Om, an abbreviation of the Hindu triad, vis,
Brahma, the creative force, Vishnu, the protecting force and Shiva,
the destructive force. These three forces or the deities presiding over
them are represented by Om. The abbreviation is intended for the
purpose of recitation, The prayers and sacred hymns and mantrams of
the Hindus are all presented by Om.

+ The sacred verse which the Brahmanas recite. It is one of the

verses of the Rik veda, embodying the worship of the sun-god.

=== PAGE 67 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 45

scriptures. He is Saraswati, the great Bhishma and the
captor of Parijata flowers. He is the giver of ambrosia, the
ocean of milk and the milk itself. He is the protector of
Indra’s son and the upholder of the mount Govardhana. He
is the destroyer of Kansa, the master of his elephant and the
killer of the same. He is Shipidisthe* (pervaded by rays),
cheerfulness and the destroyer of the calamities of all people.
He is Mudra, the maker of Mudras and is devoid of all
Mudras. He is endued with a body, is stationed in a body
and the organizer of the body. He is the hearer, the creator
of the ears, the object of hearing and the power of hearing.
He is stationed in skin, is one who touches, the object and
power of touching. He resides in the eye, is the seer of
forms and the creator of the eye and is the object of vision.
He resides in the tongue, has a strong taste and is the.
organiser of taste. He resides in smell, creates smell, him-
self smells and is the creator of the organ of smelling. He
resides in speech, is the speaker, the object of speaking, the
power of speech and the creator of the same. He resides
in vital airs. He is the creator of fine arts, is the fine art
itself and the creator of hands. He is the foot, the agent of
going, the place of going and the power of going. He is
the ordainer of gifts, is stationed in the organ of generation
and is the pleasure. He is the slayer of enemies, Kartavirya,
Datt&treya, is engaged in the well-being of Alarka and is the
destroyer of Kartavirya. He is Kalanemi, Mahanemi, the
cloud and the lord of clouds. He is the giver of food, of
the form of food, the eater of food and the ordainer of
food. Hecreates smoke and is of a smoky form. He is the
most excellent son of Devaki. He is the delight of Devaki,
Nanda and Rohini. He is a favourite of Vasudeva and his
son. His smiles are both like Dundhuvi (trumpets) and
flowers. He is fond of laughing aloud. He is the lord of

* An epithet of Vishnu,

=== PAGE 68 ===

46 GARUDA PURANAM.

all, decaying and undecaying. He is Achyuta (undecaying),
the lord of truth and is fond of truth. He is the most
beloved husband of Rukshmini. He is the favourite of
milk women and his piety has been sung in well known
verses. He is Vrishakapi, Yama, Guhya, Mangala, Budha,
Rahu, Ketu, the crocodile and the union of the mouths of the
elephants. He is the destroyer of crocodiles and the
protector of the headmen of villages. He is the Kinnara,
Siddha, the Prosody and easiness. He is of the universal
form, of large eyes and the slayer of the Daityas. He is of
endless forms, is stationed in elements, in the celestials and
Danavas. He exists in dreamless sleep, is dreamless sleep
itself and is the place for it. He exists in an awakened state,
is the agent and the place thereof. He exists in the state of
dreamless sleep, is conversant with it and is the dream itself:
He also exists in the fourth state devoid of these three states”
of dreamless sleep, dreaming sleep and awakening. He is
the discriminating knowledge, is Chaitra, the sentiency and
the creator of sentiencies. He is the lord of the worlds and
the ordainer of the worlds. He resides in the nether region,
the nether region itself and the destroyer of all sorts’ of
feverish complaints. He is of the form of. great felicity and
the propounder of various forms of faith. He is easily
accessible, and accessible with difficulty. He is engaged in
PrinSyama (suppression of vital, air). He is Pratyahara,*
Dhirakat and the maker of Pratyahara. He is effulgence,
personal grace, rays, pure and like unto crystal. He is above

* It is the Yogic process of restraining the organs of senses from
suscipitibility to outward impressions, and directing them entirely to
mental perceptions, This is one of the means for effecting the entire
subjugation of the senses.

¥ Steady thought; retention or holding of the image or idea formed
in the mind by contemplation,

=== PAGE 69 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 47

perception, white coloured, the all and pure. He is Vashat-
kar,* Vashat, Voushat, Swadha, Sw4ha and inclination there-
to. He is the agent of cooking, giving delight, eating,
understanding and thinking. He is identical with knowledge
and understanding. He is the Great and the Creator of all
Creators. He is the river, Nandi,t the lord of Nandi and
the destroyer of the trees of India. He is the holder of
discus, the husband of Shree and the king of the Lords
Paramount. He is the master of all the celestials and is
the leisure. He is Pushkara,t{ the lord of Pushkara and
the Pushkara island. He is Bharata, Janaka, Janya§
and is devoid of all forms. He is without any form,
without any cause, without any fear and without any
help. O bull-emblemed deity, I have thus described
to you the thousand names of the Lord Vishnu destruc-
tive of all sins. By reading them a Brahmana attains
to Vishnu-hood, a Kshatriya acquires victory, a Vaishya
acquires riches and a Shudra is endued with reverential faith
in Vishnu.
— 0:

CHAPTER XVI,

RupraA said :—O folder of conch-shell, discus and club,
do thou again describe the Dhyana (meditation) of the Deity,
the Lord Vishnu, the pure, impersonal self.

Hari said :—Hear, O Rudra, Hari’s dkyana, destructive
of the tree of transmigatory series, never seen before, exten-
ding all over and eternal. It is undecaying, present always

* An exclamation used in making an oblation to a deity with the
dative form of the deity.

+ The attendant of Shiva. It may also mean the character ina
drama who introduces the prelude.

Literally it means a “lotus.” It is an epithet of Krishna.

§ Father.

=== PAGE 70 ===

48 GARUDA PURANAM.

and every where and consists only in the thought “Iam
Brahma.” [Meditate on him as] the root of the entire world,
the lord of all, the Great Demiurgus, as stationed in the
hearts of all creatures, as the great lord of all creatures.
He is the container of all, having none to contain
him and is the cause of all causes. He does not come
in contact, is emancipated and is being meditated on by
emancipated Yogins. He is without the gross body,
the eyes, organs of vitality, the action of vital airs, the
organs of generation and execretion, the organs of sense,
the mind, the action of mind, intellect, mental faculties,
egoism, the action of intellect, the vital airs, Prana, Apana
and their actions.

Hari said :—I will describe again the adoration of the
sun which had been related formerly unto Bhrigu.

Om salutation unto Khakholka.

This is the principal mantram of the sun affording emanci-
pation and objects of enjoyment.

Om salutation unto God Khakholka. Om unto rays ta, ta,
salutation unto the head. Om unto knowledge, salutation
unto the tuft of hair on the head. Om unto him of thousand,
ta, ta, salutation unto the amulet.

Om salutation unto the master of all light. Ta, Ta, salu-
tation unto the weapon. Om, burn, burn, burn burn, ta, ta,
salutation. .

This is the fiery mantram of the sun destructive of the
sin.

Om Adityaya, Vidmahe, Vishwabhavaya dhimahi, Tanna
Suryye Prachodayat.

The worshipper should perform the Sakalikarana rite
with this Gayatri of the sun. He should worship Dharma
in the east, Yama in the south, Dandanayaka and Vaivarna
in the north, dark-blue, twany and other colours in north-east
and north-west, the holder of thunder-bolt in the south-west
and the earth and sky in the north-west.

=== PAGE 71 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 49

Om salutation unto the moon the lord of stars. Om
salutation unto egoism the son of the earth. Om, salutation
unto Budha, the son of Soma. Om salutation unto the lord
of speech, the master of all forms 6f learning. Om
salutation unto Bhrigu’s son, the great saint Shukra. Om
salutatation unto Shani (Saturn) the son of the sun. Om
salutation unto Rahu. Om salutation unto Ketu.

In all the quarters beginning with the east and ending
with the north-east all these should be adored, O bull-em-
blemed deity.

Om salutation unto Anuruka. Om salutation unto the lord
of Pramathas.* Om salutation unto Budha. O lord! O
thou endued with immeasurable rays! O lord of the entire
world! O thou carried by seven horses! O thou having
four arms! O thou, the giver of great supernatural powers !
O thou twanty-coloured with scintillations! O auspicious
deity, take this arghya. Salutation unto thee. Take this
dreadful fire. Burn, burn, ta, ta, salutation.

Having invoked the sun-god with this mantram he should
make the Visarjana (life-destroying rite) with the following
mantram. ‘

Om salutation unto the sun endued with six lordly
powers, of a thousand rays. Go happily to return again.

CHAPTER XVII.

Hari said :—I will describe the adoration of the sun
formerly related unto the god of riches.t
—
* Shiva. + Kuvera,

=== PAGE 72 ===

50 GARUDA PURANAM.

In a purified place a worshipper should draw the figure
of a lotus with eight petals and pericarps. Then making
Avahani mudra* he should invoke Hari there.

He should place in the middle the diagram form of the
sun and sprinkle it with water. He should place the heart of
the deity in the quarter presided over by the fire-god. He
should place the head in the north-east and the tuft of hair in
the south-west. He, having his mind fixed in concentration,
should assign Dharma to this quarter presided over by Puran-
dara. He should place his eyes in the north-west and his
weapon in the corner presided over by Varuna. He should
place Soma in the north-east and Lohita in the quarter be-
longing to Purandara. He should place Soma’s son in the
east and Vrihaspati in the south. He should place the pre-
ceptor of the Danavast in the south-west and Shani (Saturn)
in the corner presided over by Varuna. He should place
Ketu in the north-west and Rahu in the quarter presided
over by Kuvera.

In the second apartment, he should adore the twelve
suns viz Bhaga, Suryya, Aryama, Mitra, Varuna, Savita,
Dhata, the highly powerful Vivashwan, Twasta, Pusha, and
Indra. The twelfth is Vishnu. In the quarters beginning
with the east, a man, filled with ‘reverence, should adore
Indra and other deities, Jaya, Vijaya, Jayanti, Aparajita,
Sesha, Vasuki and other Nagas.

—:

* A particular kind of the arrangement of fingers made before in-
voking a particular deity,

+ Shukra.

=== PAGE 73 ===

CHAPTER XVIII.

Sura said :—I will describe the Archna (adoration) of
Mritunjaya (the victor of death) narrated unto Kashyapa by
Garuda, which gives redemption, is holy and identical with
all the deities.

First Om should be placed, then jumkara and thirdly
Virsarga. This mantram destroys death and poverty. This
great mantram of three letters is the lord of ambrosia. By
reciting it people become freed from death and all sorts of
sins. By reciting it a hundred times one reaps the fruit of
Vedic recitations and of the celebration of sacrifices at sacred
places. By reciting it one hundred and eight times at three
periods of junction one defeats the Death and his enemies. :
He should meditate on the lord of ambrosia, seated on a white
lotus, the giver of boons, with the’promise of protection in one
hand and jars full of nectar in two other hands. He should
think of the goddess of ambrosia as stationed on his limb,
sweet-speeched like ambrosia, holding the pitcher in her right
hand and lotus in the left. He, who recites it eight thousand
times at the three periods of junction for one full month,
becomes freed from decrepitude, death and _ leprosy,
defeats his enemies and gives peace unto all creatures. He
is the [real] worshipper who knows the site [of a temple],
the placing [of an idol], the suppression of vital airs, the
appearance, the temple, water for washing feet, the water for
‘rinsing mouth, the water for bathing, Arghya, Aguru, pastes,
lamps, raiments, ornaments, edibles, drinks, drinking water,
Matra, Mudra, recitation, meditation, gifts, oblation, the
chanting of glories, playing on musical instruments, singing,
dancing, Nyasa (assignment of limbs), yoga, circumambula-
tiqn, bowing, mantrams, clarified butter, eulogy, (the life-
destroying rite) Visarjana, the adoration with six ingredients
emanating in order from the mouth of the great Deity.

=== PAGE 74 ===

52 GARUDA PURANAM.

The Arghya, Padya, &c., should be fanned with a piece
of cloth, and then purified with Kavacka mantrams and then
the rite of Amriti-Karana (conversion into nectar) should be
performed. Then Adhara Saktis* should be adored and
Pranayama (suppression of vital airs) should be practised in
the seat. Then the purificatory rite of Pindat should be per-
formed. Then with Agni and other mantrams he should medi-
tate on the self as being identical with the deity. He should
then make assignment of hands and other limbs and after-
wards adore the self in the form of light stationed in the lotus
of the heart. He should then throw shining flowers on the
idol or thetaltar. For the adoration of the door of the self the
Adhara Saktis should be worshipped. And bringing one’s
self near the deity he worships his family. For the adora-
tion of six Angas (limbs) the quarters should be divided.
Dharma and other gods, Shakra and other celestials, the
various members of their families and their weapons, the
cycles, and the Muhurttas (divisions of time) should be adored.
This worship yields enjoyment and emancipation. He should
first adore the Matrikas, Ganas, Nandiganga, Mahakala,
Yamuna and Dehalya.

Om salutation unto Bhairava, the lord of ambrosia. Evam,
Om, Jum, Sas, salutation unto the sun. In this way adora-
tions should be offered to Shiva, Krishna, Brahma, Gana,
Chandika, Saraswati, Mahalakshmi and others.

s

—0:——

* Female deities presiding over various articles,
+ Balls of food offered to the departed manes,

=== PAGE 75 ===

CHAPTER XIX.

SuTA said :—I will now describe the Praneshwara* rite of
Garuda narrated by Shiva.

I shall first describe the places where a person, bitten by
a serpent, does not survive, viz., funeral pyre, ant-hill, well, and
the cavity of atree. The person, three lines on whose limbs,
are hidden, does not live. [Aman dies if he is bitten] in
the sixth day of the fort-night, when the sun is in the cons-
tellation Cancer, when it is in the Aries, when it is with the
asterism Mula or when it is in the Maghat or Ashleshaf
[A man dies when he is bitten] on the sides, on the loins, on
the throat, on the joints or the temple, ears or belly. The
Dandin (hermit), a person holding weapons, a mendicant
and a naked person are the emissaries of Death.§ If a person
is bitten on the mouth, arms, neck, and on the back, he does
not survive.

Every day the sun, first of all, lords, for half a Yama,||
over all the serpents. Then with six revolutions the six
planets lord over them. In the night with five revolutions
the five planets lord over them. The sun is the presiding
star of Sesha, the moon of Phani, Mars of Takshaka, Jupiter
of Karkotyna, Venus’ of Padma and Mahapadma, Saturn of
Shankha, and Rahu of Kuluka and Ahi. Jupiter is the Death
itself in both days and nights. Saturn is Death in the day and

+ It perhaps refers to the rite for counteracting the evit effects of the
poison.

+ The ninth Nakshatra or lunar mansion containing five stars.

$ The tenth lunar mansion containing five stars.

§ The meaning is that if these persons are sent for calling a phy-
sician the patient dies.

|| Eighth part of a day. A watch of three hours.

q If a person is bitten on Thursdays he never survives under any
circumstances.

=== PAGE 76 ===

54 GARUDA PURANAM.

the period when Rahu presides over Kuluka at the hours
of the conjunction of two-half Yamas, it is hostile to life.

A day, consisting of sixty dandas,* should be distributed
over a human body divided into three sections. Five dandas
should be assighed to the toe, twelve to the feet, five to the
calf, two to the knee and one to the organ of generation. Six
dandas should be assigned to the navel, four to the breast
and eight to the throat. Fifteen dandas should be allotted
to the tip of the nose and one each to the eye, ear, eye-brow,
and temple. Then all the days, beginning with Pratipat, the
first day of a fort night, should be allotted to all the limbs
beginning with the head. If the moon lords over the right
part of a man’s body he does not survive. If it lords over
the left part of a woman’s body she dies. The benumbed
part should be rubbed over with a hand till unconsciousness
is not removed.

The great mantram of self, pure like crystal, called Hansa,
is to be known as one which counteracts the evil effect of
poisoning. Its Veeja is of four sorts.

Om, Kuru, Kunde Swaha.

Formerly this learning was kept by Garuda for protecting
the three worlds. Desirous of killing the serpents he assigned
Pranavatohis mouth. An intelligent worshipper should assign
Kuru to his throat, Kunda to the calves, and Swaha to the
two feet. This Nyasa is called Yugaha. The serpents leave
the house in which this mantram is written. Having
recited it a thousand times one should place a thread on his
ear. The serpents leave the house in which sugar, after
reciting this mantram, is thrown. By reciting it seven lacs
of times the celestials and Asuras obtain Siddhi.

Om, Swaha unto golden lines, unto him having the form
of a fowl.

In this way two letters should written on each petal of a

* One sixtieth part of day and night. Twenty four minutes.

=== PAGE 77 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 55

lotus of eighteen petals. When a person, bitten by a snake,
is sprinkled with water with this mantram the poison
goes out.

Om, pakshi (bird) Swaha. Then the assignment of all
fingers, beginning with the thumb and ending with the
youngest finger, should be made in the body. Garuda
should be assigned to the mind, mouth, heart, organ of
generation and feet. Even in a dream the venomous serpents
do not transgress his shadow. He, who recites this mantram
for a lac of times, destroys the poison even by his very sight.
On, Hrom, Hroum, Hzim, Bhirundayai Swaha.

Having recited this mantram by placing his finger on the
ear one should destroy the poison of the person bitten. He
should then assign a, @ to the tips of the feet, e.7. to the
calves and knees, u, #%, a az to the waist, or to the navel, and
on to the heart. He should assign am to the mouth and as
to the head. Hansa, when recited, meditated on and adored,
destroys all sorts of poison. Having meditated “I am
Garuda” he should perform the rite destructive of poison.
Having assigned the mantram Ham to the body he should
say “ Destroy poison, &c.” Having assigned Hansa to the
left hand, he should close up his mouth and nostrils. This
mantram destroys the poison affecting the skin and flesh.
Having attracted it by the air he should remove the poison
of the person bitten. He should next assign it to the body
of the person bitten and meditate on the blue-throated
deity (Shiva). When ‘the juice of the root of Pratyangira
is drunk with rice it destroys poison. The root of the new
Phalin is equally effective. When clarified butter is pasted
on the head it also destroys poison. If a person drinks up
hot ghee (clarified butter) the poison is not increased. If
the root of Sirisha compounded in five parts with one part
of red garlic (Grinjana) is pasted all over the body or is
drunk it destroys poison.

Hrim destroys the poison of Gonasha (a large kind of

=== PAGE 78 ===

56 GARUDA PURANAM.

snake Boa). When the mantram Hrim ending with Visarga
is meditated on it brings all under control; when it is as-
signed to the female organ it brings a maiden under control
and clears up the muddy water. Having recited “Garuda is
every where” fifty-six thousand times a person becomes a
poet, well read in Sruti and obtains a submissive wife. The
theme of the Muni Vyasa forsooth destroys poison.

CHAPTER XX.

Suta said:—I will now now describe the highly secret
mantrams narrated by Shiva. His weapons are the noose,
the bow, the discus, the club, the dart and Pattisha. Having
used these weapons inspired with mantrams in a battle a
king conquers his enemies. The mantram for purifying the
mantrans should be first written on a lotus petal. Om is the
Brahma Vijam. Hrim is the Vishnu Vijam. These three
Vijams should be assigned to the head of Shiva thrice in
order.

On, Hrim, Hrim. .

Having taken up the dart in his hand he should whirl it in
the sky. By seeing it all the evil stars and serpents are
destroyed. Having held the smoky coloured bow by the
hand a man should meditate on it in the sky. By it the
wicked serpents, the evil stars, clouds and: Rakshasas are
destroyed. This mantram protects the three worlds, what to
speak of the land of mortals ?

Om, jum, Sam, Hum, Phat. Eight sticks of Catechu
wood, inspired with mantrams, should be placed on the
ground. That will prevent the falling of thunder-bolt. The
eight sticks should be inspired with great mantram described

=== PAGE 79 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 57

by Garuda. The ground should be dug twenty one times in
the night. This will ward off the dangers proceeding from
lightning, mouse, and thunder-bolt.

The mantram is:—Hara, Kshara, amala, Vashat, added
with Vindu Sadasiva.

Om, Hram, salutation unto Sadashiva.

He should then‘assign pinda (balls of rice) effulgent like
Darimi flowers with the fore-finger. By seeing it the evil
clouds, lightning and other enemies viz. the Rakshasas,
goblins and female ghosts fly away into the ten quarters.

Om, Hrim, salutation unto Ganesha. Om, Hrim, salutation
unto the chakra of Sthambhana.

Om, em, salutation unto the Damaras of the three worlds.

This pinda is called Bhairava which counteracts the effect
of poison and the evil effects of the hostile planets. It pro-
tects the field and grinds the goblins and Rakshasas.

Om, Namas. Having meditated on the thunder-bolt of
his hand he should ward off the evil influence of wicked
clouds and with Vajra Mudra all the ghosts, the enemies
with poison. Om, Kshum, Namas. He should meditate on
his left hand. It destroys all venomous creatures.

Om, Hram, Namas. The very recitation of this mantram
destroys the evil clouds and stars. Having meditated on
death he should consume the universe with the destroying
weapon. >

Om, Kshma, Namas.

Meditating on Bhairava one should remove the evil influ-
ences of stars, goblins and poison.

Om lasat, jhvaksha Swah3. This mantram destroys the
enemies of the field vz, the evil stars, goblins, poison and
birds. ~

Om Ksham Namas. The figure of a cistern should be drawn
with blood and then the names of planets should be written
there.

8 »

=== PAGE 80 ===

58 GARUDA PURANAM.

Om, Mara, Mara, Maraya, Maraya Swaha. Om, Hum,
Phat, Swaha.

The dart should be inspired mentally with eight hundred
mantrams. it destroys all the enemies. _

With higher energies the lower ones should be suppréssed!
Then the mantrams should be practised in Puraka* and
should be again well inspired in Kumbhaka.t They should
then be received with Pranava. ‘When the mantrams are thus
properly received and used they yield fruts like servants.

CHAPTER XXI.

SuTa said :—I will now describes separately the adoration
of Panchavaktra (five mouths) which yeilds enjoyment and
emancipation.

Om bhur [salutation unto] Vishnu, the first bhuta, the
stay of all, unto him having a form, Swaha.

First of all with this mantram invocation of Sadyajata
(Shiva) should be made.

Om, Ham salutation unto Sadyajata. His falas (parts)
are eight in number viz. Siddhi, Riddhi, Dhriti, Lakshmi,
Medha, Kanti, Swadha, Sthiti.

Om, Ham, salutation unto Vamadeva. His falas are
thirteen in number, viz, Raja, Raksha, Rati, Palya, Kanti,
Trishna, Mati, Kriya, Kama, Buddhi, Rati, Trasani, and
Mohini.

* A Yogie posture in which the thumb is placed on the right nostcil
and the fingers raised from the left through which the breath is inhaled.
+ The posture in which both nostrils are closed and breathing
suspended.

=== PAGE 81 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 59

Manonmani, Aghora, Moha, Kshudha, Kala, Nidra, Mrityu,
Maya—these are the eight dreadful Kalas.

Om, Hraim, salutation unto Tatpurusha. His Ka/as are
Nivrithi, Pratishtha, Vidya, Shanti and Kevala.

Om, Hroum, salutation unto Ishana. His Aalas are Nish-
chata, Niranjana, Shashini, Angan§, Marichi and Jvalini.

CHAPTER XXII.

SuTA said :—I will now describe the great adoration of
Shiva which yeilds enjoyment and emancipation. He is of a
quiescent soul, present every where, void and stationed in a
room of twelve parts. His five mouths are represented by
five short vowels and his limbs by leng vowels added with
Vindu. His weapon is represented by Visarga. Then the
word Shiva should be written upwards. With the sixth the
great mantram Houm impregnated with various meanings
should be written. With hands the after parts of the feet
should be held and then the ends thereof should be placed
on the head. This is the great Mudra. Then the assignment
of hands should be made. ‘With the aséra mantram the back
should be purified. Then beginning with the youngest finger
and ending with the fore all the fingers should be assigned.

I will now describe the adoration in the pericarp of the
lotus of the heart. One should adore religion, knowledge,
disassociation from the world and prosperity in the heart.
The invocation and the installation [rites of the Deity], the
water for washing feet and Arghya should be dedicated to
the heart. And similarly the rinsing of the mouth, sprinks
ling of water and adoration should be made.

=== PAGE 82 ===

60 GARUDA PURANAM.

I will now describe the rites of fire worship. They
should be written with the astra mantram. Then the coat
of mail should be sprinkled with water. And Sakti should
be assigned to the heart. Then he should place fire either
in the heart or in the pit for Sakti, Having performed the
Garbhadhana he should celebrate the other rites. Afterwards
having assigned to the heart the freedom from all those rites
as well as all other rites he should perform Homa for Shiva
and all the members of his family. Then in a diagram having
the figure of a lotus drawn inside it he should worship the
bull-emblemed deity Shambhu.

CHAPTER XXIII.

Sura said:—I will describe the adoration of Shiva by
which religious profit, desire &c. are secured. With three
mantrams beginning with Om and ending with SwahA the
mouth should be rinsed with water.

Om, Ham, salutation into the principle of self. Hirm,
salutation unto the principle of learning. Om, Hum, saluta~
tion unto the principle of Shiva Swaha. The ears should be
closed with the heart.

Om, ham, yam, Swaha, are the mantrams for bathing
with ashes and offering oblations of water. All the gods
and all the Munis should be adored with the mantram
“ Salutation bhoushat.”

All the Pitris and all the Pitamahas (patriarchs) should be-
adored with mantrams ending with the word Swadha.

Om, Ham, salutation unto the great grand-fathers. The
same is for the maternal grand-fathers: [The next is} Ham,

=== PAGE 83 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 61

salutation unto all the Matris. Then the vital airs should be
suppressed. Then he should rinse his mouth with water, rub
his body and recite the Gayatri [which is as follows].

Om, Ham, Tan Maheshaya Vidmahe, Vagvishudhayz
dhimahi Tanno Rudra Prachodayat.

Then having placed near the sun he should adore him with
Surya (sun) mantrams. [It is] Om, ham, Him, Hum, Haim,
Houm, Has salutation unto Shiva Suryya. Om, Ham saluta~
tion unto Kakolka, the form of the sun. Om, Hram, Hrim,
Sas, salutation unto the sun. In the same way [the atten-
dants of the sun] Dandina and Pingala should be remem-
bered. Then in the south-east and other corners of the mystic
diagram Vinata, Isha and other powers of the sun should be
adored with great felicity. Then he should adore Padma
with the mantram Ram, Dipta with the Sreem, Sukshma
with rum, Jaya with rem, Bhadra with raim, Bibhuti with
rom and Vimala with Roum. He should adore lightnings
with Ram, in the east and other quarters, rom in the middle
and raz on all sides. He should adore the seat of the sun,
the form of the sun and the sun itself with the mantranr
“Hram, Hrum, Sas.”

Om and am are the mantrams for the heart of the sun
and his head and tuft of hair. Roum is for heaven, sky and
earth. The burning mantram Hum is for the coat of mail ;
astram is for the initiated queen. The worshipper should
adore all in the heart of the sun.

Som is the mantran for Soma, Man for Mangala, Vam
for Budha, Vrim for Vrihaspati, bham for Bhargava, Jum for
Shani and ram for Rahu. With Ram one should adore Ketu
and with Om the solar disc.

Having adored the sun and rinsed his mouth with water
he should assign all the fingers beginning with the youngest.

Ham, Him is the mantram for the head, Hum for Sikha
(tuft of hair), Haim for coat of mail, Houm for eyes and
Hos for the weapon. Having thus placed the Sakti he

=== PAGE 84 ===

*
62 GARUDA-PURANAM.

should perform again the nyasa of bhuta-suddhi (purification
of elements).

Then making a vessel of arghya, he should sprinkle it
with water and then adore the self as being stationed in the
lotus, in the exterior with the mantram “ Salutation unto
Shiva,” then Nandi and Mahakala at the gate, then Ganga,
Yamuna, the goddess of speech, (the mystic mark) Srivatsa,
the presiding . ‘goddess of the land, Brahma, Gana, the
preceptor, Sakti and Ananta in the middle pericarp, Dharma
(the god of virtues and others, in the east and other sides, the
god of sin (Adharma) and others in the south-east pericarp,
Yama and Jejeshtha in the middle pericarp, Roudri, Kali and
Shivasita in the eastern pericarp of the lotus of the heart.
Then the Valavikarini should be adored ‘with the mantram
“Om, Houm, salutation unto Valavikarini”. The goddess of
strength, which subdues all creatures, should be next adored.
Then in the pitha before Shiva Manonmani should be adored.
He should then make a seat for Shiva and his great image.
He should invoke the spirit of Shiva within the image. He
should then perform the rites of Sthapanam (installation of
the image), Sannidhana, Nirodha, Sakalikarana, Mudra,
Arghya, Padya, Achama, Abhyanga, Udvarta, Snana (bathing)
and Nirmanchana (rubbing). Next he should offer raiments,
unguents, flowers, incense, lamps, charu (a kind of food) water
for rinsing mouth, delightful habitation, betel, umbralla,
chowries, and sacred thread. He should then imagine the form
of one God, recite his name and dedicate it tohim. With
eulogy, bowing and [meditation in the] heart this adoration
of Namanga (Name and limbs) should be finished. Agnisha
should be placed in the north-west. He should then adore
‘Indra and other deities and Chanda and dedicate to them
offerings, saying “ Thou art the mysterious of the mysterious
and the protector. Do thou accept this my recitation. O
god, may I, by thy favour and on thy being present here,
‘attain success. O god! O thou the giver of fame! do thou

=== PAGE 85 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 63

destroy all my actions, good or bad whatever I have done
who am of the dignity of Shiva. Shiva is the giver, Shiva is
enjoyer and Shiva is the entire universe. Shiva is‘victorious
everywhere. I am myself Shiva. O Shiva! thou art” the
saviour and the leader of the universe. Save thee I have no
other lord.”

I shall now describe another method of the adoration of
Shiva. Gana, Saraswati, Nandi, Mahakala, Ganga, Yamuna,
anéthe presiding deity of the house—all these should be assign-
ed to the eastern gate. Then shouldjbe adored Indra and other
deities, earth, water, fire, air, sky, smell, taste, form, sound,
touch, speech, hand, feet, the organ of generation, ear,
skin, tongue, nose, mind, egoism, nature,"man, anger, malice,
learning, proper time, improper time, fate, tillusion, pure
learning, Ishwara (creator) and Sadasiva.

Having known all these as the powers of Shiva an
emancipated person, having the true knowledge of the deity, —
becomes himself Shiva. [He should also meditate] ‘He who
is Shiva is Hari and Brahma.

‘CHAPTER XXIV.

SuTA said:—I will now describe the most excellent
adoration of Ganas* which gives all and even heaven. The
worshipper should adore the seats of Ganas, the images of
Ganas and the lord of Ganas. Heart and other limbs should
be assigned to Durga. The sandals of the preceptor, the
seat of Durga and her image should be adored with the

* Troops of inferior deities considered as Shiva’s attendants and
under the special superintendence of Ganesha.

=== PAGE 86 ===

64 GARUDA PURANAM.

mantram :—Hrim, O Durga, protect.” Then assignm ent
should be made to the eight Saktis, called Chandikas, viz
Rudrachanda, Prachanda, Chandogra, Chandanayika, Chanda,
Chandavati and Chandarupa with the mantram “O Durga,
O Durga, O protectress” Then Vajra, Khanga and other
Mudras of Shiva should be adored ‘in the south-east. Then
Sadasiva, the lord of goblins and the lotus seat [should be
adored.]

Em, Klim, salutation unto Sonstripura: Om, Hram, Hrim,
Kshem, Kshaim, Strim, Skom, Rom, Sphem, Sphom, the
lotus seat and the heart &c of Tripura.

Then in the lotus pitha (altar) should be adored Brahmani,
Maheshwari, Kouméri, Vaishnavi, Varahi, Indradevata,
Chamunda and Chandika. Then the Bhairavas should be
adored. Asitanga, Ruru, Chanda, Krodha, Unmattabhairava,
Kapali, Bhishana, and Samhara, are the eight Bharavasa.
He should meditate in his heart, in a mandala (diagram) with
a lotus inside it and having three corners, on Rati, Priti,
Kamadeva, the five arrows, Yogini, Valuka, Durga, Vighnaraja,
Guru (preceptor) and Kshatrapa.

By reciting this mantram for a lac of times and by offer-
ing oblations to the fire Tripura gives Siddhi.

ie,

CHAPTER XXV.

Sura said:—Em, Krim, Shrim, Sphem Kshoum, I adore
the paduka (shoe), of Ananta-Sakti.

Em, Hrim, Phroum, Kshoum, I adore the paduka of
Adhar4-Sakti, salutation.

—
4 @ These are the personifications of the tercific power of Shiva,

=== PAGE 87 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 65

Om, Hum, | dore the paduka of Katagni Rudra, saluta-
tion. Om, Hrim, Hum, I adore the paduka of Hatakeshwara,
salutation.

Om, Hrim, Shrim, | adore the seat called Ananta, having
the earth, insular continents and the oceans on all sides,
salutation.

+ Hrim, Srim, Nrivritti and other Kalas. Earth and other
elements. Ananta and other worlds. Omkar and other
letters. The nine syllables Hakar etc. Sadyajata and other
Mantrams.

Ham, the heart and other limbs. This is the mantram
of Maheswara. It is identical with ‘the most consummate
learning and is the ocean of great ambrosia.

CHAPTER XXVI.

SuTA said :—Thereupon Karanyasa (assignment of hands)
and the purificatory rite should be performed. Having formed
Padmamudra he should make the assignment of mantrams.

Koum, salutation unto the youngest finger. Noum, salu-
tation unto the nameless (ring) finger. Moum, salutation
unto the middle finger. Toum, salutation unto Tarjani. Am,
salutation unto Augustha. Lam salutation unto the soles of
the hands. Vam, salutation unto the back of hands.

Then Deha (body) Nyasa. Kam, salutation unto
Manivandha. Em, Hrim, Shrim, salutation unto Karaskara.
He should consecrate the hands with Hum Hum, effulgent like
the great fire.

Em, Hrim, Hrim, Shrim;-Hraim, Saphaim, salutation unto
Bhagavate. Sphaim salutation unto Kuvjikayai.* Hrum,

* An unmarried girl of 8 years,

=== PAGE 88 ===

66 GARUDA PURANAM.

Hrim, Kroum Anganame ofgdreadful mouth. Ham, Him,
Kilikili, Hrim, Hrim, Shrim, Em, salutation unto Bhagavate
of the upper mouth. Sphoum, salutation unto Kuvijakayai
of the left mouth. Hrim, Shrim, Hrim, salutation unto
Anganame of the southern mouth. Om, Hrim, Shrim,
salutation unto Kilikili right mouth. Om, salutation unto
Aghoramukhi (dreadful mouthed) of the northern mouth.
Om, Namas salutation unto the heart of Bhagavate. Kshem,
Em, Kuvjikayai, Sirase (head) Swaha. Hrim, Krim, Hrim,
Pram, Ang, A Na Name, Shikhayai (tuft of hair), Aghora-
mukhi, Kavachaya, (coat of mail) Hum. Haim; Im, unto
three eyes Voushat. Kiliki unto weapons phat.

Em, Hrim, Shrim, salutation unto the mystic diagram of
the great dart of a connected circular form. Em, Hrim,
Shrim, salutation unto the circular orb of the air. Em,
Hrim, Shrim salutation unto the disc of the moon. Em,
Hrim, Shrim, salutation unto the mystic diagram of
Mahakulavodhavali. Em, Hrim, Shrim, salutation unto the
mystic diagram of Koula.’ Em, Hrim, Shrim, salutation unto
the mystic diagram for the preceptor. Em, Hrim, Hrim,
salutation unto the mystic diagram of the Saman. Em,
Hrim, Shrim, salutation unto the diagrams of the principal
and minor pithas of all Siddha yoginis, of all the principal
fields and minor ones and of all their offspring.

These twelve mystic diagrams should be adored in order
of succession.

CHAPTER XXVIIL.

SuTa said:—-Om, O thou the skeleton of Kala and
Vikala! O Chandini! O thou the destroyer of creatures! O

=== PAGE 89 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 67

thou the venom of serpents! O Virathanarayani! O Uma! O
thou of burning hand! O Chanda! O Roudri! O Maheswari,
O thou of a huge mouth, O thou of a burning mouth! O
thou having dart-like ears! O Sukamundha! O thou the
destroyer of all, destroy the enemies. Khakha, thou dost
Took at all with thy entire body covered with blood. O
goddess Manasa! Stupify all, stupify all. O goddess! thow
art born in the heart of Rudra, thou art stationed there and
thou dost appear in a terrific form. Protect, Protect Mam,
Hum, Mam, Phapha, Tata, O thou wearing a girdle of beads.
O thou destroyer of the poison of plants and enemies. O
O Shala! O Mala! Hara, Hara, Vishoka, Ham, Ham!
Shavari, Hum, Shavari, Prakonavishare ! Sarve ! Vinchamegha
Mile! It is destructive of the poison of all serpents.

CHAPTER XXVIII.

SuTA said:—I will now describe the adoration of
Gopala which yeilds emancipation and enjoyment. In the
door Dhata, Vidhata, Ganga with Yamuna, the Nidhis
Sangka and Padma, Sharanga, Sharabha and Shree should
be adored. In the east should be adored Bhadra and
Subhadra, in the south Chanda and Prachanda, in the west
Vala, and Pravala and Jaya and Vijaya in the ‘north. In
the four doors Shree, Gana, Durga and Saraswati should be
adored.

In the south-east and other corners of the field Narada,
Siddhas, the preceptor, Nalakuvara should be adored. In the
east the worshipper should adore Vishnu, his asceticism and
power. Then in the middle he should adore the family of

.

=== PAGE 90 ===

-68 GARUDA PURANAM.

Vishnu, the Saktis, the tortoise, Ananta, earth, religion,
knowledge and disassociation from the world. He should
adore prosperity in the south-east and the manifest self in
the north. He should then adore the Sattwa guna identical
with Prakriti (nature), and Rajas identical with Moha
(stupefaction) and Tamas, the lotus and the principle of
egoism, learning, the great principle and the solar
and lunar discs. Then in the east he should adore Vimala
and other seats with the mantrams Shrim, Hrim, salutation
unto the dearest lord of milk-men, Swaha. This is the
mantram.

In the eastern corners of the diagram of the heart he
should adore his weapons viz Achakra, Suchakra, Vichakra,
the discus Sudarshana, which protects the three
worlds and destroys the Asuras. Then in the east he
should adore the Saktis namely Rukshmini, Satyabhama,
Sunanda, Nagnajiti, Lakshman4, Mitravrinda, Jamvavati and
Sushita. Then in the east he should also adore his conch-
shell, discus, club, lotus, mace, the Shranga bow, sword,
noose, goad, the mystic mark Srivatsa, and the jewel Kous-
tava. He should then adore his crown, garland of wild flowers,
his Indra and other flags, Kumudas, Vishwaksena and
Krishna along with Shree. By reciting his name and
adoring him one attains all desired-for objects.

——

CHAPTER XXIX.

Hart said :—I will now describe the Trailokyamohini ‘rite
(fascinating the three worlds) of the foremost of. male beings,
its adoration and the mantram called Shridhara which
yeilds religious profit, desire and wives.

=== PAGE 91 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 69

Om, Hrim, Shrim, Klin, Hum, Om, Namas: O foremost
of male-beings! O thou of an incomparable form! O thou
the abode of the goddess of prosperity! O thou the agitator
of the entire universe! O thou who rivest the hearts of all
women! O thou who maddenst the three worlds! Distress
the hearts of all beautiful women amongst the celestials and
Asuras ; dry them up, strike them, check them, melt them
and attract them. O thou of great auspiciousness! O thou
of good luck! O thou the giver of all desired-for objects!
destroy such and such person with thy discus, club or
sword. Cut him with all thy weapons, strike him with thy
goad, inflict him. Why dost thou wait.? Save me, save
me, so long my Siddhi is not perfected. Hum, phat, salu-
tation. Shrim, salutation unto the holder of Shree and the
enchanter of the three worlds. Klim, salutation unto the
foremost of male beings, the enchanter of the three worlds.

Hum, salutation unto Vishnu, the enchanter of the three
worlds. Om, Shrim, Hrim, Klim, salutation unto Vishnu,
the enchanter of the three worlds.

All the Trailokyamohana mantrams are capable of secu-
ring the accomplishment of all objects. They may be medi-
tated upon again separately and in brief.

Having adored with mantrams the seat, the image, the
six limbs, discus, club, sword, mace, conch-shell, the Shranga,
arrow, noose, goad, Lakshmi, Garuda and Vishwaksena one
attains to all.

CHAPTER XXX.

SuTA said :—I will describe in full the auspicious adora-’
tion of Shridhara. The family of all should be looked at
impartially by the learned.

=== PAGE 92 ===

7° GARUDA PURANAM,

Om, Shrim, salutation unto the heart. Om, Shrim, unto
the head Swaha. Om Shram, unto the tuft of hair on the
head, Vashat. Om, Shraim unto the coat of mail, Hum. Om,
Shroum, unto the three eyes, Voushat. Om, Shras unto the
weapon, Phat.

Having thus-shown unto self the various Mudras as
Sangka, Chakra, Gada etc. and meditated on self known as
Shridhara, the holder of conch-shell, discus and club a wor-
shipper should adore the deity in the mystic diagram
Sastika and others. He should first of all adore the seat of
the god of gods, the holder of Shranga with the following
mantram, O- Mahadeva. Hear them, O Shankara.

Om, O presiding deity of the seat of Sridhara, come here.
Om, salutation unto the entire family of the presiding deity
of the seat of Achyuta.

Om salutation unto Dhatri, Om salutation unto Vidhatri.
Om salutation unto Ganga. Om salutation unto Yamuna.
Om salutation unto the Adhara Saktis. Om salutation
unto the tortoise. Om salutation unto Ananta. Om salu-
tation unto the earth. Om salutation unto religion. Om
salutation unto knowledge. Om salutation unto Vairagya
(the spirit of disassociation from the world). Om salutation
unto prosperity. Om salutation unto irreligion. Om saluta-
tion unto ignorance. Om salutation unto worldliness. Om
salutation unto poverty. Om salutation unto Skanda. Om
salutation unto Neela. Om salutation unto the lotus. Om
salutation unto Vimala. Om salutation unto Utkarshini. Om
salutation unto Jnana. Om salutation unto Kriya. Om salu-
tation unto Yogin. Om salutation unto Putra. Om saluta-
tion unto Prarhé. Om salutation unto Satya. Om salutation
unto Ishina. Om salutation unto Anugraha. Having wor-
shipped them, O Rudra and invoked Hari a greatly wise
worshipper should adore him with these mantrams destruc-
tive of all sins.

=== PAGE 93 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 7

They are:—Om, Hrim, salutation unto Shridhara, Trailo-
kyamohana and Vishnu.

Om, salutation unto Shree. Om, shram, salutation unto
the heart. Om, Shrim, salutation unto the head. Om,
Shram, salutation unto Sikha (the tuft of hair on the head).
‘Om, Shraim, salutation unto the coat of mail. Om, Shroum,
salutation unto the three eyes. Om, Shras, salutation unto
tthe weapon. Qm, salutation unto the conch-shell. Om,
‘salutation unto the lotus. Om salutation unto the discus.
‘On, salutation unto the club. Om, salutation unto the mystic
mark Srivatsa. Qm salutation unto the jem Koustava. Om
salutation unto the garland of {forest flowers. Om, salutation
unto the yellow raiment. Om, salutation unto Brahma.
‘Om, salutation unto Narada. Om, salutation unto the pre-
-ceptors. Qm, salutation unto Indra. Om, salutation unto
Agni. ‘Om, salutationunto Yama. Om, salutation unto Nirhita.
‘On, salutation unto Varuna. Om, salutation unto Vayu. Om,
salutation unto Soma. Om, salutation unto Ishana. .Om,
salutation unto Ananta. Om, salutation unto Brahman. Om,
salutation unto Sattwa. Om, salutation unto Rajas. Om,
salutation unto Viswaksena.

Then he should dedicate raiments, sacred thread, scents,
flowers, incense, lamps and food and then circumambulate
the deity. Having dedicated-them with great Mantrams
he should recite the mantram.* Having recited it one hundred
and eight times he should dedicate it. Then for a moment
he should meditate on the deity stationed in his heart, pure
like crystal, effulgent like a koti of suns, of a delightful
countenance, gentle, adorned with shining ear-rings, crown,
beautiful limbs and a garland of forest flowers. A learned
worshipper should think of Shridhara in his own form as
identical with Para Brahma. With the following hymn he
should chant the glories of the great Ishwara.

Salutation unto the deity the abode of Shree. Salutation
unto the lord of Shree. Salutation unto Shridhara with the

=== PAGE 94 ===

72 GARUDA PURANAM.

Shranga bow, unto the giver of prosperity. Salutation again
and again unto the dearest lord of Shree of a quiescent soul,
unto Shriman. Salutation unto the abode of Shri mountain,
unto him who does us good. Salutation again and again unto
the mass of spiritual well-being. Salutation again and again
unto Shrikara. Salutation again and again unto him who is
worthy of adoration and being taken refuge with.

Having thus chanted the hymn, bowed unto him the
worshipper should perform the Visarjana (the life-destroying
rite) of the god of gods.

O Rudra; I have thus described the adoration of the
great Vishnu.. He, who does it with great reverential faith,
attains to the great station. He, who reads this chapter des-
cribing the adoration of Vishnu, has all his sins washed off,
and attains to the exalted station of Vishnu.

CHAPTER XXXI,

Rubra said :—O lord, do thou again describe unto me
the adoration of the lord of the universe by which I may
cross over the most difficult ocean of Samsara (transmigatory
series.)

Haki said :—O bull-emblemed deity, hear, O great one,
I will describe the adoration of the Lord Vishnu which yeilds
the most auspicious emancipation and enjoyment.

Having bathed and performed the rite of Sandhya a
worshipper should enter the sacrificial room. Having washed
hands and feet and rinsed his mouth particularly he should
assign the words of the principal mantram to his hand. Hear,
hear, O Rudra, I will describe the principal mantram of the
deity.

=== PAGE 95 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 73

Om, Shrim, Hrim, salutation unto Shridhara Vishnu.

This is the mantram of the Lord Vishnu, the king of the
celestials. It destroys all diseases, counteracts the evil influ-
ence of the planets, dissipates all sins and gives enjoyment
and emancipation. A learned worshipper should then make
the assignment of the limbs.

Om, Han, salutation unto the heart. Om, Him, salutation
unto the head, Swaha. Om, Hum, salutation unto the tuft of
hair, Vashat. Om, Haim, salutation unto the coat of mail,
Hum. Om, Houm, salutation unto the three eyes, Voushat.
On, has, salutation unto the weapon, phat.

I have thus described unto thee ,the mantram of the
powerful Vishnu. Having performed Nyasa (assignment of
mantrams) a self-controlled worshipper should make Mudras.
He should then meditate on the great Vishnu—Hari, white
as the moon or a Kunda flower, holding conch-shell and
discus, bearing the mystic mark of Srivatsa and the Koustava
jem and adorned with the garland of forest flowers—the
great Ishwara bedecked with a jewelled necklace and a
crown. Having meditated ’“I am Vishnu” he should perform
the purificatory rite. With the mantrams yam, Ksham and
Ram he should [mentally] harden and form an egg and then
cut it with Pranava. Then, O bull-emblemed deity, thinking
of the form as described before he should make {the worship
of self with sacred sweet-ecented flowers. Then invoking
spirit unto all the deities seated there he should worship
them with mantrams. Hear them, O Mahadeva! O
Shankara.

O ye deities! come to the seat of Vishnu. On, saluta-
tation unto the entire family of Achyuta. Om, salutation
unto Dhatra. Om, salutation unto Vidhatra. Om, salutation
unto the Ganges. On, salutation unto Yamuna. On, salu-
tation unto Sankha Nidhi. Om, salutation unto the Nidhi,
lotus. Om, salutation unto Chanda. Om, salutation unto
Prachanda. Om, salutation unto the presiding goddess of

10 .

=== PAGE 96 ===

74 GARUDA PURANAM.

the gate. ‘Om, salutation unto the Adhara Sakti. Om,
salutation unto the tortoise. Om, salutation unto Ananta.
Om, salutation unto Shree. Om, salutation unto Dharma.
Om, salutation unto knowledge. Om, salutation unto the
spirit of disassociation from the world. Om, salutation unto
religion. Om, salutation unto worldliness. Om salutation
unto poverty. Om, salutation unto Sattwa. Om, salutation
unto Rajas. Om, salutation unto Tamas. Om, salutation
unto Skanda. Om, salutation unto Neela. Om, salutation
unto the lotus. Om, salutation unto the solar disc. Om,
salutation unto the lunar disc. Om, salutation unto the orb
of fire. Om, salutation unto Vinata. Om, salutation unto
Utkarshini. Om, salutation unto knowledge. Om, salutation
unto action. Om, salutation unto disease. Om, salutation
unto Prarha. Om, salutation unto Satya. Om, salutation
unto Ishana. Om, salutation unto Anugraha.

With these mantrams and scented flowers these deities
should be adored. Thereupon having worshipped Vishnu,
the author of creation and destruction and invoked his
spirit in the mystic diagram, O Rudra, the worshipper should
worship the great Ishwara. O Rudra, this religions rite of
Vishnu destroys all sins. He should first of all make
assignment of mantrams in self and the deity. He should then
show Mudra and afterwards offer Arghya. Then he should
bathe the deity and next offer raiments and water for rinsing
the mouth. Next he should present scented flowers, incense,
lights and charu. Then circumambulating the idol and recit-
ing the name he should dedicate it to him. A worshipper
should also adore his limbs with other mantrams. Know this
to be the principal mantram of the deity. Hear, O three-eyed
deity, I will now describe the other mantrams.

Om, Ham, salutation unto the heart. Om, Him, salutation
unto the head. Om, Hum, salutation unto the tuft of hair.
Om, Haim, salutation unto the coat of mail. Om, Houm,
salutation unto the three eyes. Om, Has, salutation unto the

=== PAGE 97 ===

GARUDA PURANAM. 75

weapon. On, salutation unto Shree. Om, salutation unto
the conch-shell. Om, salutation unto the lotus. Om, saluta-
tion unto the discus. Om, salutation unto the club. Om,
salutation unto the mystic mark Srivatsa. Om, salutation
unto the jewel Koustava. Om, salutation unto the garland
of forest flowers. Om, salutation unto the yellow raiment.
Om, salutation unto the sword. Om, salutation unto the
mace. Om, salutation unto the noose. Om salutation unto
the hook. Om, salutation unto the Shringa bow. Om,
salutation unto the arrow. Om, salutation unto Brahma.
Om, salutation unto Narada. Om, salutation unto all the
Siddhas. Om salutation unto Bhagavan. Om, salutation
unto the preceptor. Om, salutation unto the great pre-
ceptor. Om, salutation unto Indra, the king of the celes-
tials, his carrier and entire family. Om, salutation unto
Agni, the king of fire, his carrier and the entire family.
Om, salutation unto Yama, the king of the dead, his
carrier and the entire family. Om, salutation unto Nirhiti,
the king of Rakshas, his carrier and the entire family.
Onm, salutation unto Varuna, ‘the king of waters, his carrier
and the entire family. Om, salutation unto Vayu, the
king of vital airs, his carrier and the entire family. Om,
salutation unto Ishana, the king of learning, his carrier and
the entire family. Om, salutation unto Ananta, the king of
serpents, his carrier and the entire family. Om, salutation
unto Brahma, the lord of creation, his carrier and the entire
family. Om, unto thunder-bolt, Hum, phat, salutation. Om,
unto Sakti, hum, phat, salutation. Om, unto rod, hum, phat,
salutation. Om unto the sword, hum, phat, salutation. Om,
unto the noose, hum, phat, salutation. Om unto the stan-
dard, bum, phat, salutation. Om, unto the club, hym, phat,
salutation. Om unto the trident, hum, phat, salutation. Om,
unto the discus, hum, phat, salutation. Om, Voum, salutation
unto Vishwaksena.

With these mantrams, O Mahadeva, his attendants and

=== PAGE 98 ===

76 GARUDA PURANAM.

parapharnalia should be adored by men. Having adored the-
great Vishnu, identical with Brahman he should chant the
glories of the gteat undecaying Atman, with the following
hymn.

Salutation unto the powerful lord Vishnu, the god of
gods. Salutation unto Vishnu, unto Vasudeva, the author of
creation. “Salutation unto Grasishnu who lies at the time of
universal dissolution. Salutation unto the lord of celestials
and sacrifice. Salutation unto Vishnu, the lord of Munis and
Yakshas. Salutation unto the great Jishnu, the lord of all
gods and préseft every where. Salutation again and again)
unto the lord of ali adored of Brahma, Rudra and Indra. °
Salutation unto the lord of the world who encompasses the
well-being of all {creatures, who protects all, who creates all, .
who déstroys the wicked, who gives boons, who is of a
quiescent soul, who’ is worthy of adoration, who is worthy of
taking refuge with, who is manifest in his own form anid who»
gives religious profit, worldly profit and desire.

Having thus chanted his glories the worshipper should
‘meflitate on the undecaying Brahman in his heart and should,
thus adore Vishnu, O Shankara, with the principal mantram.
The man, who recites this principal mantram, goes to Hari.
O Rudra, I have thus déscribed unto thee, the most excellent
theme of Vishnu, mysterious, highly secret and yeilding:
eimancipatioh and enjoyment. The learned person, devoted
to Vishnu, who reads this, listens to it or Ee) others listen
to it, goes to the region of Vishnu.

=== PAGE 99 ===

CHAPTER XXXIL

—

MAHESHWARA said :—0O holder of conch-shell, discus and
club, do "thou describe the adoration of five Tattwas* by
knowing which discriminately a man attains to the most |
exalted station.

Hari said:—O Shankara! O thou of good vows !I will,
describe the adoration of five Tattwas, which yeilds auspici-
ousness and is itself auspicious, heavenly, secret, great and
yeilds all desired-for objects. Do thou listen to this. most
sacred subject, O Mahadeva, which destroys Kali.

Vasudeva is one, undecaying, peaceful, the great soul,
eternal, unstained. O god, by his Maya (illusive power)
Hari exists in five forms, viz. as Vishnu who favours the |
creation and destroys the wicked, as Vasudeva, Sangkarshana, | .
Pradyumna and Aniruddha. In his own form Narayana.
exists as five. O bull-emblemed deity, listen to the mantrams ,
expressive of these five forms.

. Om, am, salutation unto Vasudeva. Om, 4m, salutation
unto Sankarshana. Om, am, salutation unto Pradyumna.
Om, salutation unto Aniruddha. Om, salutation unto
Narayana.

I have thus related the five mantrams expressive of the |
five deities. They are destructive of all sins and diseases
and are holy. I will now describe the most auspicious ,
adoration of the five Tattwas—the religious prescription
and the mantras involved therein, O Shankara. .

A worshipper should first of all bathe and then perform,
the Sandhya rite. Then entering the temple of worship he :
should wash his head, rinse his mouth and then sit in a.daddha
posture. Then with the mantram “Am, -Kshroum, Ram”

* Five Tantrik ingcedients worship,

=== PAGE 100 ===

78 GARUDA PURANAM.

the purificatory rite of all the articles should be performed.
Then hardening the ordinary article he should make an egg.
And then dividing it he should meditate on the great Ishwara
in it—Vasudeva, the lord of the universe clad in a silk
raiment, effulgent like a’thousand suns and wearing shining
Kundalas. Then in the lotus of the heart he should meditate
on the great Ishwara. Then he should meditate on the
lordly “deity Sangkarshana, his own self, Pradyumna,
Aniruddha, Narayana and all the celestials headed by Indra,
all originating from the god of gods. Then he should make
assignment of two hands. Then with the mantrams for
limbs he should perform the Anganydsa called Vyapaka, O
Mahadeva. Listen to these mantrams, O thou of firm
vows. Om, 4m, salutation unto the heart. Om, Im,
salutation unto the head. Om, um, salutation "unto the tuft
of hair. Om, Em, salutation unto the coat of mail. Om,
Oum, salutation unto the three eyes. Om, as, salutation unto”
the weapon, phat.

On, salutation unto the entire family of Achyuta. Om,
salutation unto Dhatri. Om salutation unto Vidhatri. Om,
salutation unto the Adhara Sakti. Om, salutation unto the
tortoise. Om, salutation unto Ananta. Om, salutation unto
the earth. Om, salutation unto knowledge. Om, salutation
unto the spirit of disassociation from the world. Om, salu-
tation unto prosperity. Om, salutation santo irreligion. Om,
salutation unto ignorance. Om, salutation unto poverty.
On, salutation unto the solar disc. Om, salutation unto the
lunar disc. Om, salutation unto the orb of fire. Om, salu-
tation unto Vasudeva, the great Brahman, Shiva in the
form of fire, extending allover, the presiding lord of all the
celestials. Om, salutation unto Panchajanya. Om, salutation
unto Sudarshana. Om, salutation unto the club. Om, salu-
tation unto the lotus. Om, salutation unto Shree. Om,
salutation unto Kriya (action). Om, salutation unto Pushti
(nourishment). Om, salutation unto Sakti (energy). Om,