=== PAGE 1 ===

INTRODUCTION
TO VEDANTA

UNDERSTANDING
THE FUNDAMENTAL
PROBLEM

SWAMI DAYANANDA

=== PAGE 2 ===

Introduction
to Vedanta

Understanding the
Fundamental Problem

Swami Dayananda

Edited by
Barbara Thornton

@

Vision Books

(Incorporating Orient Paperbacks)
New Delhi ® Bombay @ Hyderabad

=== PAGE 3 ===

Also by Swami Dayananda
The Teaching of the Bhagavad Gita

First Published 1989
Ninth Printing 1997

ISBN 81-7094-289-6
© Sri Gangadhareswar Trust, 1989, 1997

Published in India by
Vision Books Pvt. Ltd.
(Incorporating Orient Paperbacks)

24 Feroze Gandhi Road, Lajpat Nagar III,
New Delhi-110024 (India)
Phone: (+91-11) 6836470/80
Fax: (+91-11) 6836490
E-mail: visionbk@del2.vsnl.net.in

Printed at
Rashtra Rachna Printers
88, Ganesh Nagar, Pandav Nagar Complex,
Delhi-1 10092 (India).

=== PAGE 4 ===

Contents

Publisher’s Note viii

I. Human Pursurrs

The Four Categories of Human Effort 1
The Endless Search for Security: artha 2
The Mercurial Nature of Pleasure: kima 3
Human Choice Requires Special Standards 5
Animals Need No Ethics 6

Source of Ethics: Commonsense 7
Interpretation of Ethical Mandates 7

To be Ethical is to be Fully Human 8
What Religious Ethics Add 9

The Religious Ethics Called dharma 10
The Ranking of the Fourfold Struggle 11
“Falling into Place”: moksa 11

II. THe FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEM

The Locus of Error 13

The SelfJudgement of Inadequacy 15

The Attempt for Completeness through Change 16
Personal Values Determine Types of Changes 18
Attitude towards Change 19

Gain through Change Always Involves Loss 20
Fickle Pleasure 22

Recognition of the Fundamental Problem — 23

The Analysis of Experience 24

Inadequacy is Centred on Oneself 25

Insight into Adequacy : the Norm for SelfJudgement 27
The Direct Search for Freedom from Inadequacy 28

=== PAGE 5 ===

Il]. THe Inrormep SEEKER

The Futile Solution — 30

The Experience of Adequacy 31

Distinguishing Knowledge and Experience 32

Inquiry into the Nature of Oneself : atma- vicara 34
Analysis of the Search for Adequacy 35

The Nature of Achievement 37

The Gain of the Already-Achieved 39

Freedom from Inadequacy: an Already-Achieved Goal 41
The Informed Seeker 42

IV. IGNORANCE AND KNOWLEDGE

Everyone is Born Ignorant 46
The Shedding of Ignorance 46
Connections: sambandha 48
Objects are Known through Perception 49
The Means of Knowledge Must be Appropriate 49
Inferences are Perception-Based 50
Intellectual Knowledge is Inferential Knowledge 52
Knowledge is Not Created 52
Valid Knowledge 53
Perception is Useless for Knowing Oneself 54
The Need for Knowledge of Oneself 57
The Means to Gain Knowledge of Oneself 57
For Knowledge of Oneself, Go to a Qualified Guru 59
Indirect and Direct Knowledge from Words 63
The Words of the Guru give Direct Knowledge
of the Self 64

V. THe TEACHER

The Gain of Adequacy Requires Knowledge,

not Action 66
Words, a Valid Means of Knowledge 67
The Story of the Tenth Man 68
The Problem when the Seeker is the Sought 71
Teaching through Words in a Context 73
General Knowledge and Particular Knowledge 73

=== PAGE 6 ===

Self-Ignorance is not Total Ignorance of Self 74
What the Teacher Must Know 76
The Teacher should know Adequacy as Himself 77
Inadequate Teaching Can Make the Problem Worse 80.
The Teacher should know the Traditional

Methodology 81
The Teacher must Demolish Wrong Conclusions 83
Both Self-Knowledge and Methodology are Needed 84
The Flow of Knowledge from Teacher to Student 86
The Traditional Teaching of Self-Knowledge is

Called Vedanta 87

VI. Toe Text

The Two Sections of the Veda 90

The Variety of Action 91

The Role of Scriptures 92

Knowledge of the Subtle Results of Action 92

Knowledge of Heaven 93

Knowledge of Rituals 96

“How to” Knowledge is not an End in Itself 97

Knowledge as an End in Itself 99

Special Name for End of the Veda Justified 100

The Student of the Karmakanda 101

The Student of Vedanta 102

Words are Means of Knowledge in Both Sections
of the Veda 104

The Words of Vedanta Give Direct Knowledge
of Oneself 105

Handling the Words of Vedanta 107

The Mind Must be Attentive 108

The Proof of Vedanta 110

=== PAGE 7 ===

Publisher’s Note

Swami Dayananda Saraswati is a traditional teacher of Ve-
danta, the teaching of the Knowledge of Self found in the
Upanisads at the end of the Veda. In addition to giving public
talks, Swami Dayananda conducts comprehensive residential
courses in Vedanta and Sanskrit from time to time, training
other teachers to carry on the tradition of teaching. Swamiji
teaches his courses in English but uses texts printed in the
original Sanskrit. He introduces and defines, as needed, tech-
nical Sanskrit words, helpful in grasping the subject matter,
and frequently redefines them until they become familiar.
This book is based on the opening talks given by Swami
Dayananda at the start of a 3-year course in November 1979,
at Piercy, California. The first text studied at this course was
Tattvabodha, a simple textbook of definitions, comprising an
outline of Vedanta. Swamiji’s introductory talks were aimed at
helping the new students discover the nature of the funda-
mental human problem. Barbara Thornton compiled,
abridged, and edited the talks. Laurel Elkjer, Mahadevan
Embrathiry, Diane Piskulic and Ruth Greenfeld assisted in
editorial review and proofreading.

viii

=== PAGE 8 ===

CHAPTER ONE

Human Pursuits

The Four Categories of Human Effort

A human being sees himself as a deficient person.
His constant, compulsive pursuits make his sense of
inadequacy evident. To escape from this deficiency,
he struggles for a large number of things in life
which fall under four main headings:

dharma ethics;

artha securities;
kama pleasures;
moksa liberation.

All four are collectively called purusartha that
which is longed for by human beings. These are the
goals purusa, the human being, struggles for.

The four basic human pursuits can be subdivided
into two sets. One set, the pursuit of security and
pleasure, artha and kama, is shared in common with
other living beings; the other set, effort in accordance
with ethics, dharma, and the pursuit of liberation,

=== PAGE 9 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA
AAT AAT STAT

moksa, is peculiar to human beings. The second, the
human set of pursuits, arises because a human being
is a self-conscious person. A self-conscious being is a
thinker, with the capacity to reach conclusions about
himself. This capacity has made possible the
universal human conclusion: I am a limited,
deficient being who must struggle for certain things
through which I hope to become complete.

The Endless Search for Security: artha

Artha, one of the two pursuits human beings share
with other creatures, stands for all forms of security
in life: wealth, power, influence, and fame. Every
living being seeks security in some form appropriate
vo itself. Animals, birds, fish, insects — even plants
and microbes — all seek security. Shelter is sought,
food is hoarded, the dog buries its bone, the bee fills a
comb with honey, the ant tunnels out a storehouse
for grain. All creatures have a sense of insecurity.
They, too, want to be secure. However, their attitude
and behaviour are governed by a built-in program.
Their sense of insecurity goes so far and no further;
the animal's struggle for security is contained, it has
an end. For them no endless brooding over security.

For the human being, on the other hand, there is
no end to longing and struggle.

The endlessness of human struggle to fulfil the
sense of want, can be seen by analysing experiences.
If it is money I seek, no matter how much I
accumulate it never seems enough. Irrespective of

=== PAGE 10 ===

HUMAN PURSUITS
LAL EE ASNT ETT

how much money I have, I do not feel secure. I may
then seek security in power and influence, spending
on the buying of power the very money which I had
struggled to accumulate — not that money has no
longer any value for me, but that I now attach a
higher value to power. I am seeking security through
power. The struggle for wealth, power, and fame is
endless. All these are struggles for security, because I
feel I am insecure.

Because I am a self-conscious being, I have the
capacity to feel insecure; I accumulate assets but the
accumulation fails to make me feel secure. The gain
is never enough. I am always driven to seek more
and different kinds of security in a futile effort to
create a condition of security.

The Mercurial Nature of Pleasure: hama

Kama stands for the many forms of sensual pleasure.
All creatures seek what is pleasurable — through
whatever sense organs available to them. For non-
human creatures the pursuit of pleasure is defined
and controlled by instinct. They pursue what they
are programmed to enjoy, directly and simply.
Their enjoyment is not complicated by philosophy
or self-judgement. A dog or a cat eats what tastes good
until it is full, quite unconcerned by considerations
of health or aesthetics. Enjoyment begins, ends, and
is contained in the moment, in accordance with an
instinctual programme.

=== PAGE 11 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA

Human pursuit of pleasures is more complex. Our
desires are driven both by instinct and personal value
systems. One's instinctual desires, as a living being,
are complicated by the human ability to entertain
wide-ranging, changeable personal desires. Every
human being lives in a private, subjective world
where one sees objects as desirable, undesirable, or
neutral — neither desired nor undesired. When I
examine my attitudes towards these objects, I find
that what is desired by me is not desired by me at all
times, or at all places; nor is what I desire necessarily
desired by others. What is desired, changes. Time
conditions desire; place conditions desire; individual
values also condition desire.

Take the example of a "garage sale" where I sell off
to others what I once considered valuable; it is now of
no value to me but is still prized by others. In turn,
what othets consider worthless, I find valuable. In
fact, sometimes what one has sold as junk, one may
later again consider valuable, because circumstances
or attitudes have changed. As time goes by, some of
what I now prize will lose value for me and I shall be
ready to hold a new garage sale.

These shifts in value which cause objects to be
regarded as desirable, undesirable, or neutral, also
occur and affect one's attitude towards people, ideas,
ideologies, situations, and places. All are subject to
becoming desirable or undesirable or neutral. Old
cars, old houses, old furniture, even an old husband
or a wife, go from one status to another. This
interchange goes on all the time. Subjective values do

=== PAGE 12 ===

HUMAN PURSUITS
ee EOE

not remain the same; when values change, likes and
dislikes also change. Likes and dislikes dictate the
pleasures one seeks just as they dictate what one
rejects or avoids. Part of seeking pleasure is avoiding
what causes displeasure.

Both animals and human beings struggle to obtain
the pleasant and avoid the unpleasant. The difference
is that the human struggle is not determined and
limited by any set pattern but is dictated by
fluctuating values. These ever-changing values keep
one ever-struggling.

Human Choice Requires Special Standards

Because the struggle for security, artha, and
pleasures, kama, is not instinctually controlled but
‘guided by changing personal values, it becomes
necessary for the human society to have a set of
standards which is independent of any individual's
subjective values that determine his likes and
dislikes.

Since I have the faculty of choice, I must have
certain norms controlling my various actions,
karma. Not being preprogrammed, for me the end
cannot justify the means. I have a choice over both
ends and means. Not only must the end chosen be
permissible, but the means to gain that end must also
conform to certain values. This special set of values
controlling the individual choice of action is called
ethics. The human struggle for security and
pleasure, artha and kama, must be in accordance

=== PAGE 13 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA
ALTAR LAA AAR

with an ethical choice. Ethical standards guide one to
the consideration of one's neighbours’ needs. In
choosing the means of achieving what I want to
achieve, I must take into account my neighbours'
needs, too. Indifferent to his needs, I cannot use my
neighbour as an object to achieve my ends. I must
value his needs as well as my own.

Animals Need No Ethics

For animals the question of ethics does not arise.
They have little unprogrammed choice over action.
Actions controlled by instincts, not subject to choice,
create no ethical problems. Merit does not accrue to
the vegetarian cow nor demerit to the tiger who eats
the cow.

The human being with his faculty of choice on
the other hand, must first choose the end he wishes
to pursue and then the means to gain that end. We
exercise our power to choose our ends, particularly in
the western societies, in an endless permutation of
variety: in food, dress, style of living, etc. "My
thing!" proclaims this individuality. Then, too, in the
West there seems to be a value attached to choice
which is labelled "spontaneous", but which really is
impulsive. It is good that there are many different
means and ends to choose from; it makes for a
colourful collage. However, impulsive choice, or the
choice of means simply because they are easy and
convenient, may result in trampling upon one's

=== PAGE 14 ===

HUMAN PURSUITS
EE TALL TE

neighbour, destroying his security, and causing him
pain.

Source of Ethics: Commonsense

One discovers the source of ethical values by
observing how one wants others to behave with
reference to oneself. Ethical values are based on
commonsense appreciation of how one wants
oneself to be treated.

1 do not want others to use deception (or some other
disagreeable means) to take away from me what I
want; therefore non-deception becomes a value to
observe with reference to others even as I pursue my
ends. The ends and means I want (or do not want)
others to choose because of the way such choices
affect me establish a standard in me by which I
judge the propriety of the goals and the means I
choose myself — a standard which takes into
consideration the impact of my choices upon others.
Such values comprise commonsense ethics, which
are recognized and confirmed scripturally in a more
comprehensive ethical doctrine — religious in
nature — called dharma.

Interpretation of Ethical Mandates
Commonsense ethics are the "do and don't" rules

based on how one wants to be treated oneself. When
this basis of ethics is seen, it becomes clear that there

=== PAGE 15 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA

LAST ST TE

may be circumstances which justify interpreting or
suspending a given standard.

I want you to speak truthfully to me and not tell
me lies. This is the basis of the universal ethic "Speak
the truth; do not lie". But consider the doctor in the
case of a gravely ill patient whose recovery is
uncertain, a patient whose state of mind is weak and
depressed. If, in the doctor's opinion, full knowledge
of the gravity of his condition may hurt the patient's
chances of recovery, must the doctor follow this
ethical mandate? Probably not. In such
circumstances, speaking the truth is subject to
interpretation, taking into consideration all the
factors involved. Similarly, the ethic of non-injury
does not prohibit the work of the surgeon's knife or
the dentist's drill.

To be Ethical is to be Fully Human

It is not necessary to be religious to be ethical. The
ethical standards which specify the right and wrong
means of achieving security and pleasures are based
on commonsense. .An irreligious person can be
completely ethical by commonsense standards. To
be ethical is to be fully human — not controlled by
mere instincts.

A human being with his highly developed, self-
conscious mind has the capacity to make
unprogrammed choices and to reflect upon the
consequences of his choices. This capacity has given

=== PAGE 16 ===

HUMAN PURSUITS
LLL ELITE ICT TE LLL TLE LO ELLE LE AEE TEE LEE

rise to ethical guidelines. To be fully human is to
utilize these guidelines in the exercise of choice.

To "do wrong" morally also is to be human.
Animals, so far as we know, cannot commit ethical
mistakes. There seems to be no ethical category
controlling the pursuit of artha and kama for
animals. None is required, because animals have no
unprogrammed ethical choices. But a man can
choose the wrong means to gain his ends. With a
mind capable of rationalization, he can always abuse
the freedom of choice given to him; he can ignore
commonsense ethical standards. When he does so,
he does not fulfil his role as a human being in
society. Society establishes rules to prevent and
alleviate the suffering such abuse of freedom of
choice can cause others through criminal and civil
laws.

What Religious Ethics Add

Sometimes one can be clever enough to abuse
freedom without transgressing man-made laws or, at
least, without being caught. At this point religious
ethics enter the picture. One must learn to
distinguish well between commonsense ethics and
religious ethics. Religious ethics confirm
commonsense ethics and add a few more.

Religious ethics generally say: you may deceive
your fellow man, you may escape the hands of the
law, but you really cannot get away from the results

=== PAGE 17 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA
ss tree

of your actions. The results will catch up with you in
some way, sooner or later.

Religious ethics also usually enjoin special duties
and impose additional prohibitions, based not just on
common sense but on some religious tradition or
scriptural revelation. It is not necessary to follow
these special ethics to be a good citizen;
commonsense ethics are good enough for that.

The Religious Ethics Called Dharma

The religious ethics called dharma, found in the
Veda, confirm commonsense standards, specify
further religious "do's and don'ts", and add the
concept of punya and papa — results produced by
good or bad actions, now or hereafter.

According to dharma, human action has an
unseen result as well as an immediate tangible
result. The unseen result of the action accrues in
subtle form to the account of the "doer" of the action
and, in time, will fructify, tangibly, for him as a
"good" or "bad" experience — something pleasurable
or painful. The subtle result of good action, pu nya,
fructifies as pleasure; the subtle result of bad action,
papa, fructifies as pain. Papa can be defined as sin.
Sin is the choice of either a wrong goal or a wrong
means in the pursuit of an acceptable goal. This
choice will bring an undesired result; the very kind
of result that the doer wanted to avoid in the first
place. Papa is paid for in terms of undesirable
experiences. The word punya has no good English

10

=== PAGE 18 ===

HUMAN PURSUITS
LLL LL A A STAN

equivalent. It indicates the result of a good action
which is not seen, but which will bring later a
desirable experience, something that is pleasing.

The Ranking of the Fourfold Struggle

Dharma occupies the first place in the four categories
of human goals, because the pursuit of security, artha,
and pleasures, kama, needs to be governed by ethical
standards. Artha, striving for security, comes second,
because it is the foremost desire of everyone.
Everyone is obedient under the doctor's scalpel
precisely because everyone wants to live. Granted
life, one then wants to be happy, to pursue pleasures,
kama. I want to live and live happily; and both
pursuits, the struggle for security and the search for
pleasure, must be governed by ethics.

The last category is the goal of liberation, moksa
ranked last because it becomes a direct pursuit only
when one has realized the limitations inherent in
the first three pursuits.

"Falling into Place": moksa

Moksa, like dharma, is a peculiarly human pursuit
not shared by other creatures. Even among human
beings, liberation is a conscious concern of only a
few. These few recognize that what they want is not
more security or more pleasure but freedom itself —
freedom from all desires.

ll

=== PAGE 19 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA

FLL TT

Everyone has some moments of freedom,
moments when one seems to "fall into place". When
I "fall into place", I am free. These fleeting moments
of falling into place are experienced by all human
beings. Sometimes music causes one to fall into
place; at other times it may be the fulfilment of an
intense desire, or the keen appreciation of something
beautiful. That everything is in place is evidenced by
not wanting anything to be different in the
circumstances of the moment.

When I do not want anything to be different, I
know that I have fallen into place with what is. I
know fulfilment. I need make no change to become
contented. I am, for the moment, free — from the
need to struggle for some change in me or the
circumstances. If I should fall into place
permanently, requiring no more change in
anything, my life would then be, fulfilled, the
struggle over.

The pursuit of moksa is the direct pursuit of that
freedom everyone has experienced for brief
moments when everything has "fallen into place".
How can that freedom be gained? What kind of
bonds deny such freedom? Let us now explore these
questions.

12

=== PAGE 20 ===

CHAPTER TWO

The Fundamental Problem

The Locus of Error

When you see something but do not recognize it for
what it is, you can take the thing for something other
than what it is. Failure to see an object for what it is
leads to a mistake as to the nature of the object. If the
object is totally unperceived, there is only ignorance,
but no mistake. A totally unperceived, unknown
object never becomes the locus of error concerning
its nature.

For example: Seeing a dark shape beside the path,
in the greyness of dusk, I fail to perceive that it is a
tree stump. Concluding that the shape is a man
lurking in the shadows I become alarmed and go in
another direction. My perception of "something"
beside the path gave me a locus of making a mistake.
Because I saw something but failed to recognize iit for
the harmless thing it was, I had a basis for making a
mistake about what was seen — a mistake that caused
me to change my direction.

13

=== PAGE 21 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA
_ eA NER RAS TTL TE

My short-sighted neighbour and his keen-eyed
wife, travelling the same path a few minutes later
had no problem. He could not see even the outline of
the old stump; so he made no mistake about it. There
was no scope for him to make a mistake about it; he
had no perception of it; he did not know it was there.
His keen-eyed wife saw it clearly for what it was. So
both went along the path happily, one in total
ignorance of the existence of the object, and the other
in clear knowledge of its nature.

An animal has little chance to commit an error
about itself because its consciousness of itself as an
individual is very limited. It does not appear to have
much capacity for critical awareness of itself, or
others. The cow does not pine because she is unable
to give as much milk as her sister in the next stall.
The alley cat is not depressed because it wants to be a
bulldog. The horse does not spend hours in the
meadow trying to fly. Not having the kind of self
perception that allows it to compare and judge itself,
an animal has no basis for making a major mistake
about its nature. Thus, an animal seems to have no
basic confusion about itself; it appears to be free from
the multitude of complexes that bother human
beings. But a human being does have the capacity to
commit such an error. Highly conscious of himself,
he has a locus in which to make a mistake about
himself. If, in looking at himself, he does not
recognize himself for what he is, he will make a
judgement about himself that will be something
other than what his self is.

14

=== PAGE 22 ===

FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEM
RR EE

The Self-Judgement of Inadequacy

It is clear that one judgement the human being
makes about himself is: As I now am, I am an
incomplete being; I am deficient, inadequate."

The evidence of this judgement is seen in the
compulsiveness and constancy of the human pursuit
of security and pleasure. As a conscious being, aware
of the right and wrong means of gaining these goals,
one often disregards this knowledge, choosing less
than ethical means. Even when the means are
proper, the great importance of artha and kama'can be
seen in everyone's intense preoccupation with their
gain.

The gain of security and pleasures assumes such
importance because it is through their gain that one
hopes to escape from want, inadequacy, and
incompleteness and become a free, adequate person.
"I want to be a complete person. As I am, I am not
complete", is the common experience of everyone.
This urge to be complete stems from seeing oneself
as apparently incomplete. The high degree of
human capability for self-perception makes possible
the human judgement of lack of completeness.

All struggles in life are expressions of the urge to
be complete. The conclusion that I am an incomplete
person either accurately reflects my nature, or is a
mistake. This will have to be decided. If it reflects
my true nature, there is no need to seek further
knowledge about myself for the sake of changing

15

=== PAGE 23 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA

LL A RS TL aL ER

my conclusion that I am incomplete. On the other
hand, if it is an erroneous conclusion, then I need to
know more about myself in order to discover the
completeness that seems to be hidden from me.
Whether I am complete or incomplete, must be
determined. But until it is determined, the "fact" is
that I see myself as an incomplete person.

The Attempt for Completeness
through Change

In most situations I see myself as incomplete, not
wholly adequate. Whatever the circumstances may
be, I do not feel truly at home; something further is
needed. And I try to achieve completeness by
changing the situation. For example: A young man,
happily married, with three young children, a good
job, a comfortable home, and a generally pleasant
prospect for the future, none the less felt
uncomfortable about his situation. He did not feel
adequate under the circumstances because he was
not putting aside funds for the children's college
education. The children would not have good
prospects in life unless they were educated. Yet, the
college costs escalated every year. The young man
therefore decided to take a second job. The job
brought in some money which he began to invest.
He felt less worried about college expenses but grew
concerned over his health. Perhaps the strain of two
jobs was too much; he was always tired and noticed
some shortness of breath. He began to eat a special

16

=== PAGE 24 ===

FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEM

CAAA Ta AT

diet and joined a gym programme to build up
stamina. His energy increased and his health was
better than ever; but a sense that he was still not "on
top of things" remained. He had been investing his
extra funds in slightly speculative stocks. The stock
market now begun behaving erratically; perhaps the
better thing would have been to go in for some kind
of real estate investment. But then again the days of
major tax advantage in real estate were gone. Taxes
might go up. Perhaps tax-free municipal bonds would
be the best answer, although the yield would be
modest. In the meantime, he began to think that he
must find some way to spend more time at home
with his children. They were growing up and he
rarely ever saw them; his wife complained that she
too, never saw him. He wanted to be a more involved
father and more companionable husband. He
needed to find a way to lessen the load and spend
more time at home. And so it went on. Doggedly, he
continued to work to bring about a change in the
circumstances which he hoped would allow him to
feel adequate, complete — at home with himself.

If you look closely at the variety of changes you
work to bring about in the situations in your life, you
will find that you make changes so that you will feel
adequate. My attempt to change the situation is really
an attempt to change myself. I do not try to change
the situation in which I am at home with myself, But
when I see myself as inadequate, I add new things
into my situation so that I may feel better; or, I may

17

=== PAGE 25 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA
REL E LEE SOLE ELE DIE NEE ES IIE ETE IEEE LO TELE TE

eliminate some aspects from the situation in order to
be comfortable.

Personal Values Determine
Types of Changes

The types of changes one attempts to bring about in a
given situation are dependent upon one's personal
value system. Personal values are made up of
subjective values and ethical values. Subjective values
come from one's temperament, conditioned by one's
own array of experiences of pleasure and pain. For
example, if I am of an active temperament I am
likely to be drawn to active persuits which I find to be
pleasant. My ethical standards also will affect the
choice I make, in some cases causing me to choose a
less-desirable option or to shun a more attractive
opportunity. My ethical values are those guiding
standards which take into consideration the likes
and dislikes of others. I accept ethical guidelines
either because I have not resisted their imposition
upon me by society, culture, or some other authority,
or because I see their value for myself. In either case,
I follow them because, I feel that I shall be more
fulfilled by doing so rather than being guided solely
by my personal likes and dislikes. Thus, ethical
standards are also connected with the desire to court
what is pleasant and avoid what is unpleasant.

18

=== PAGE 26 ===

FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEM
CLARA A LILA LTT LAE LTT TT

Attitude towards Change

There is no problem with change itself. Change
cannot be avoided. Life is a process of constant
change. What is being discussed is a certain kind of
expectation centred on change. The changes being
talked about are the changes one is driven to make
for the sake of altering one's situation, expecting such
change will make one more comfortable, more
adequate, more complete.

Our topic is not simple, matter-of-fact changes,
made simply because the given circumstances call
for a change; nor is it the casual, incidental changes
one makes for the sake of variety to which one
attaches no importance. We are talking about
changes towards which one has certain expectations
linked with one's conclusions about oneself.

For example: Preparing and eating food is one of
the ordinary, matter-of-fact actions (change comes
through action) that takes place daily; to carry one's
food into the garden to eat at a picnic table on a
pleasant day is an incidental, casual change. There
is no problem with such changes. They are not
changes sought for the sake of a change in oneself
but are natural or incidental to the situation.
However, eating in order to be happier, to soothe one,
to ease one's hurt feelings, to escape from the
moment, to make one feel more adequate is a change
sought through the action of eating. Food carried
outside to the garden because one wants the setting to
banish one's depression, lift one's spirits, make

19

=== PAGE 27 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA
AEA ORE ALES ARLE LLL STOTT

oneself feel more whole, is a change one sought
through eating one's meal in different surroundings.

Most changes one seeks are not for the sake of the
change, but for one's own sake. When I am
comfortable I stop all compulsive change-seeking.
Through most of my change-seeking I am actually
interested in a change in myself. The change I
really want is the one that will make me comfortable
in any situation — so adequate, so complete that no
situation will bother me. If I became so, situational
change, for the sake of completeness, would not be
necessary for me. Compulsive change-seeking
centres on oneself alone — in the hope that through
change one can become a non-deficient, adequate
person.

Gain through Change Always
Involves Loss

This compelling need to be free from the feeling of
inadequacy is found in everyone. Every human
being has the problem of feeling inadequate,
deficient, incomplete, and therefore, he tries to rid
himself of inadequacy. This attempt is a basic urge;
and, the attempt, universally, is in the form of
change through which one gains security, artha, or
pleasures, kama. However, any gain that comes as a
result of effort is not absolute. Every gain of security
through effort involves a concomitant loss. The gain
obtained is always offset by the time and effort

=== PAGE 28 ===

FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEM

Ree TEE SO

expended, by the. responsibility assumed, by some
other alternative possibility sacrificed.

For instance, when I buy a large, impressive, well-
appointed house, the pleasure and security I gain,
which contribute to my feeling of adequacy and
comfort, are offset by the money spent, the debt
incurred, the cleaning staff required, the
responsibility of maintenance and protection
assumed, all of which take away something from
the feeling of adequacy and comfort which I sought
in the buying of the house in the first place.

Any gain from change also always involves a
loss. When one gains something there may be an
initial release from a sense of inadequacy, but one
then finds that the original problem still remains. By
gaining or disposing of one thing or another, the
problem of inadequacy is not solved. Adequacy,
freedom from being incomplete, is the end I seek
behind all my forced pursuit of security, artha; but no
gain or disposal accomplishes that end.

One does not achieve freedom, or adequacy by
gaining something or by giving up something else.
An inadequate person remains inadequate even upon
gaining the desired thing. An inadequate person
enjoying the disposal of some unwanted thing still
remains inadequate. So the human problem — that
one seems to be an incomplete being — is never
solved by seeking security through gain or disposal.

21

=== PAGE 29 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA
PATA AT

Fickle Pleasure

The pursuit of pleasure, kama, for the sake of
adequacy, is no more satisfactory than the pursuit of
security.

The gain of pleasure rests upon the convergence of
three constantly changing factors, never fully
predictable, nor, ever under one's control. Moments
of pleasure require availability of the object,
availability of the appropriate, effective instrument for
enjoying the object, and presence of the proper frame
of mind for enjoyment of the object.

I may have a strong desire for a fresh ripe peach,
but no peaches may be available. On the other hand,
I buy some peaches but a sudden attack of hay fever
prevents me from enjoying their fragrance or taste.
The hay fever passes. I am about to take a bite when
news arrives of an accident injuring someone dear tc
me. My interest in the peach vanishes. I no longe:
have any appetite.

Even in the presence of the object and the
availability of the right instrument, enjoyment can
be denied for want of the right attitude.

Pleasure is momentary, because any of its
contributory factors can, and do, change. Of course
we do have moments of joy from time to time, but
being dependent upon the alignment of three
changing factors they last but a moment. The
objects of enjoyment are limited, bound by time. Ir
the very process of enjoyment some get expended
and all are subject to change, in the hands of time

22

=== PAGE 30 ===

FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEM
TSS SSAA A LT

The instruments of enjoyment also are time-bound,
limited, and not capable of consistent performance.
And the mind, being what it is — whimsical,
capricious — gets tired of what it once eagerly
desired and sought. The mind can discover
monotony in objects. Thus, trying to maintain a
moment of pleasure is like throwing a saddle over
three wild horses sitting astride all three, and being
able to successfully guide them in one direction.

Recognition of the Fundamental Problem

From looking at one's own life experiences one can
see that what really underlies all one's continual
striving is the desire to become totally free from all
deficiency, to become complete and wholly adequate
in all situations. But, except for fleeting moments,
one always seems to be inadequate. The
fundamental human problem is to become adequate;
the solution chosen is the gain of security and
pleasures. The result is temporary release, if any, but
not an end to the sense of inadequacy.

Neither security nor pleasure brings about an end
to inadequacy. So if one looks at one's own struggle:
for security, artha, and pleasures, kama, one finds
that the sense of adequacy, of fulfilment, that one
hopes to obtain through artha and kama are gained
only occasionally, and only momentarily. The
struggle never ends.

23,

=== PAGE 31 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA

iaciiiaaiiiiaiaiiiaiiieiiaai id

The Analysis of Experience
In the Mundaka Upanisad it is said:

partksya lokan —-harmacitan brah mano
nirvedama annastyakriah krtena

tadvijnanartham sa  gurumevabhigacchet
samitpdnih Srotriyam — brahmanistham
(I. ii. 12 Mundaka Upanisad)

Having analysed the worldly experiences
achieved through effort, a mature person gains
dispassion, discerns that the uncreated
(limitlessness) cannot be produced by action.

To know That (the uncreated limitlessness), he,
with twigs in hand, should go to a teacher who
is learned in the scriptures, and who is steadfast
in the knowledge of himself.

The Upanisad says that when a mature person
analyses his own life experiences to see what he has
achieved through his effort, he gains dispassion
towards the results of effort. The gain of dispassion
means that he has understood the inability of the
results of effort to solve the basic human problem. His
worldly experiences involving changes achieved
through effort have brought about no lasting solution
to his sense of incompleteness. However, although
the problem has not been solved by worldly
experience, this realization is nevertheless useful
because it forms the basis of the analysis that leads

24

=== PAGE 32 ===

FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEM
LLL REL LLL LLL LLL LEED,

him to discover the nature of his real problem. A real
solution to a problem cannot be sought until the
problem is seen for what it is; all analysis depends
upon data.

The personal experiences in one's own life form
the data for the analysis that enables one to discover
the fundamental human problem. The gain and
analysis of experiences is very important. It is
through analysing one's experiences that one
becomes mature.

Through analysing my own experiences, my
efforts and actions, my gains and losses, I find that I
consistently see myself as an incomplete person. No
matter how many desirable things I gain, no matter
how many undesirable things I get rid of, I remain
deficient. In spite of all my various pleasures and
security, I am an unfulfilled, inadequate person.
When I see my experiences in this light, I become
mature.

Maturity is shown not by seeking better
experiences but by discovering, through an analysis
of experiences, the basic human problem: what one
wants is to be non-deficient, adequate — and that
experiences do not make one non-deficient, adequate.

Inadequacy is Centred on Oneself
Analysis of one's own experiences reveals that one
cannot solve the human problem by the pursuit and

attainment of things in the world; nor does one solve
it by renouncing worldly things. Gain or loss is all

25

=== PAGE 33 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA
SAAS AA TE

that can happen through action: either you gain
something that you do not have, or you get rid of
something that you do have.

Through either gain or loss, the discovery is the
same: I am still inadequate. With something gained,
I do not become adequate; free from something
abandoned, I do not become adequate. The discovery
is made: inadequacy is something centred on me,
not on the possession or dispossession of something. I
am inadequate because I am inadequate; the
inadequacy does not depend upon any factor other
than myself. Neither pravriti, the positive pursuit of
something, nor nivriti, the turning away from
things, cures my inadequacy. One can yery easily
see this by analysing one's own as well as others’
experiences.

A mature person, a brahmanah 1 then, is someone
who, having analysed his own experiences, has
discovered that the total adequacy he seeks, is not
gained through effort. He knows that regardless of
his experiences he finds himself to be an incomplete
person at all times. He recognizes that what he really
wants is a drastic change in himself, not a situational
change. He wants some change that will make him

1. In the context here brahmanah simply means a mature
person. a “mature” person is not the same as a “wise”
person, the latter being someone who knows the truth of
his own nature.

26

=== PAGE 34 ===

FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEM
LL TE

a non-deficient, completely adequate person. He sees,
too that all the changes that he wants to bring about
are only changes for the sake of helping him
become an adequate person.

Insight into Adequacy: the Norm
for Self-Judgement

Everyone wants to be free from self-centred
inadequacy. Why doesn't one accept oneself as
inadequate? We can only say that it is because there
seems to be an insight of adequacy. I have some
insight into what it is to be adequate; therefore, I
cannot accept not being adequate. The insight of
adequacy comes whenever I have an experience
wherein there is freedom from being an inadequate,
deficient person. And such experiences occur in the
lives of everyone. Whenever one experiences a
moment of pleasure or joy, one sees oneself as an
adequate person for a while. Whether the moment of
joy comes from a slapstick joke or subtle humour,
the sudden discovery of something wondrous or the
gain of a highly desired object, or a certain sensory
pleasure — any time you experience a moment of
joy, however momentary, you see yourself at that
moment as a person not wanting in anything, a
happy person. Everyone has these moments in life,
howsoever few and far between. One has the
experience of oneself as an adequate person —
complete, full. That experience of not wanting in
anything becomes the norm by which the

27

=== PAGE 35 ===

INTRODUCTION TO ‘VEDANTA

initiaited

experience of being wanting in something is judged,
and is judged as something one does not care for.
One cannot consider something as bad unless one
knows what is good. There is no dissatisfaction if
there is no norm for satisfaction. We do not lack such
a norm for adequacy.

Everyone has the experience of an adequate self.
That is why one strives to be adequate. One has
insight, in terms of experience, of an adequate self,
momentarily free from all limitations, all lurking
imperfection.

Therefore one struggles for security, artha, and
pleasure, kama, through which one sometimes
seems to be able to gain these experiential moments
of adequacy. But the struggle is usually abortive,
futile, unfruitful, and, when successful, the moment
is brief — the experience of adequacy does not last.

The Direct Search for Freedom
from Inadequacy

Moksa becomes relevant when one realizes that
behind one's struggle for security, artha, and
pleasures, kama, is the basic human desire to be
adequate, free from all incompleteness, and that no
amount of security or pleasure achieves that goal.
Moksa means freedom from inadequacy. When I
appreciate that what I am really seeking is a solution
for my inadequacy, a problem centred on myself, I
become an open-eyed seeker who knows what he is
looking for. In Sanskrit there is a very precise word

28

=== PAGE 36 ===

FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEM
LEAL LENT EL ITE TIE

for such a seeker: mumuksu. A mumuksu is one who
desires freedom from all limitation. A mumuksu
knows that his pursuit of the first three purusartha, the
first three of the fourfold human goals, does not salve
his problem. His ethically guided, dharmic pursuit
of artha and kama does not resolve his inadequacy.
He is then ready to directly seek adequacy. This
adequacy is called moksa, liberation, and since it is
something seekers consider a thing to be "achieved",
it is listed as the fourth human goal, the fourth
purusartha, although as we shall see later liberation
is not an "achievement" in the usual sense of the
word.

So when a mature person analyses his
experiences, he discovers that behind his pursuit of
security and pleasure is a basic desire to be free from
all insufficiency, to be free from incompleteness
itself, a basic desire which no amount of artha and
kama fulfils. This realization brings a certain
dispassion, nirveda, towards security and pleasures.
The mature person gains dispassion towards his
former pursuits and is ready to seek liberation,
moksa, directly.

29

=== PAGE 37 ===

CHAPTER THREE

The Informed Seeker

The Futile Solution

From the experiences of his own life, a mature
thinker discovers that security and pleasure do not
solve his basic problem — his desire to be adequate,
free from all limitation — in spite of the pleasures he
has enjoyed or the security he has obtained.
Pleasures, which always depend upon the favorable
alignment of changing factors, do not last; neither
does one find lasting completeness in them. Security
is bound by time, limited in nature; loss offsets gain.
Security too does not last forever. The inadequate
person, holding on to insecure things, does not
become secure. The unfulfilled person, gathering up
moments of pleasure, does not become complete. The
never-ending pursuit of security and pleasures
betrays the continuing sense of insecurity and
incompleteness on the part of the pursuer. The
mature persons here realise that the pursuit of
adequacy through artha, kama, is futile. Equally
futile is the attempt to gain adequacy through the

30

=== PAGE 38 ===

INFORMED SEEKER

AT

giving up of such pursuits. Inadequacy is not
dependent on the presence or absence of things. It is
centred on oneself.

The Experience of Adequacy

That I seek adequacy is the result of my judgement
that I am inadequate. Such a judgement could not be
possible unless I had some idea of what adequacy is
like. My idea comes from experience, the experience
of moments of adequacy — moments in which I
required no change in me or the world.

When I am adequate at that moment, I seek no
other thing. I am just myself, seeking nothing. I
need nothing; I crave no change, either in the
situation or in me.

Such experiences of joy — moments of happiness
— are there in everyone's life. Joy and inadequacy
cannot exist in me at the same moment. When I am
joyful I am adequate — and it is an adequacy that
cannot be furthered. Adequate is adequate. There
isn't a more adequate. There is no supra adequacy —
only adequate. Adequacy does not come in degrees.
Anything other than adequacy is inadequacy.

Because there are moments in which I find
myself adequate, I am not totally without the
experience of adequacy. But most of my experiences
seem to establish me as inadequate, which I find I
cannot accept. I constantly reach for adequacy. The
rare moments of sufficiency give me a standard by

31

=== PAGE 39 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA
SEER erence EE:

which to judge myself as insufficient the rest of the
time.

Distinguishing Knowledge and Experience

How can the contradictory experiences of adequacy
and inadequacy be reconciled? Here it is necessary
to distinguish knowledge from experience.

Knowledge is the grasp of what is. Experience is
the direct perceptual participation in an event.

Experience can lead to knowledge, but the
impression of experience need not be knowledge.
Experience has to be assimilated in terms of
knowledge. This is so because one may experience
something and still be ignorant of it. Experience is
one thing; knowledge of what I have experienced is
quite another. When I have knowledge it includes
perception — it includes experience. But experience
does not have to include knowledge. For knowledge,
what is experienced must be known for what it is.
Experience may or may not coincide with
knowledge. Knowledge is something that can both
contradict experience and resolve the seeming
contradictions in experience.

Experience can lead to knowledge. Experience
need not include or be knowledge. Experiences can
be contradictory. Knowledge includes experience.
Knowledge can contradict experience. Knowledge
can also resolve the contradictions in experience.
Knowledge cannot be contradicted.

32

=== PAGE 40 ===

INFORMED SEEKER
ESET TEE EE ES ILENE ERE EBLE,

Any given set of perceptual impressions gained
from experience may or may not conform to
knowledge. To qualify as knowledge they must pass
the test of inquiry.

For instance, the experience in most parts of the
world is that the sun rises each day in the eastern
sky and travels to the west where it sets. In the polar
regions, at a particular time of the year, the
experience is that the sun travels in a circle; Sunrise
and sunset are not experienced. Which set of
experiences should be taken as real? Are both sets of
experiences real? An analysis becomes necessary.
An inquiry must be made, taking into account all
available factors. The questions are: Is the experience
of a sun that rises in the east and sets in the west fact
or not? Is this observation true? What about the polar
sun that can be seen travelling in a circle? How does
this observation correspond with fact?

Experience 1: The sun rises and sets

Experience 2: The sun moves in a circle

Knowledge : With respect to the earth the sun
is stationary, neither rising nor
setting nor moving in a circle

The sun appears to rise or set or move in a circle
from the standpoint of a particular spot on an orbiting
planet turning on its axis. After inquiry and analysis,
the contradictions are resolved in a_ true
understanding of the relationship of the earth to the
sun. The sun, although apparently in motion, is

33

=== PAGE 41 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA
FAA NATE

stationary as it relates to the earth. The appreciation of
this fact is knowledge. The experiences were only
mithyd, apparent — something which appears to be
but is not so. The sight of a rising or setting sun may
be a beautiful experience; but in terms of knowledge
it is an illusion. Experiences may contradict each
other; knowledge encompasses and reconciles the
contradictions.

Inquiry into the Nature of Oneself: atma-vicara

With regard to oneself there are two contradictory
sets of experience. Most of the time, experientially, I
find myself to be inadequate; and yet, there are
moments when I find myself adequate, not wanting
— full and complete.

The question, thus, arises: am I adequate or am I
inadequate? There is experience to support either
conclusion. Or, perhaps, I must conclude that I am
occaisionally adequate and often inadequate; or that I
am occasionally inadequate and largely adequate. If
these are the conclusions, then I must reflect how I
become inadequate if in fact, I am adequate; or, vice-
versa. Such reflection requires inquiry.

The inquiry necessary to resolve the particular
question of self-adequacy is called aima-vicara. Atma
means "I" or self, and vicdra is inquiry.

Self-inquiry, @ma-vicara, is necessary, because I
have two contradictory sets of experience about
myself. My ceaseless pursuit of things in the hope
they will make me adequate shows that I experience

34

=== PAGE 42 ===

INFORMED SEEKER
LLL LLL LLL LL LLL NE LE ETE LLL

myself as inadequate. I usually have a sense of being
deficient. From this continual sense of deficiency, I
conclude that I am inadequate. But sometimes I do
experience moments of adequacy. It is from such
moments that I know what it is to be adequate. These
occasional experiences of adequacy make any
conclusion that I am inadequate premature. The
issue must be kept open. An inquiry is necessary to
resolve the contradiction. I must examine and
analyse my experiences to see which validly reflect
fact and which are illusory.

Analysis of the Search for Adequacy

When I examine my search for adequacy, I find that
adequacy is not an object in relation to me.
Inadequacy is centred on me. I am an inadequate
being. I seek adequacy as myself. I do not seek
adequacy to be other than myself; but, I seek it
through other things — through security artha, and
pleasures, kama, because that is the only way I know
of seeking adequacy. Ceaselessly I seek adequacy
through artha and kama until, finally, I am able to
see that these pursuits do not lead me to adequacy. I
become mature. I recognize that what I seek is
adequacy itself — an adequacy not produced by gain
of security and pleasure. I become a mumuksu, a
direct seeker of adequacy.

When I recognize the nature of the human
problem and understand that it cannot be solved by
pursuit of artha and kama, I seem to be in a helpless

35

=== PAGE 43 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA
A

position. What is left for me to do? Artha and
kama are all I know and there seem to be only two
things to do with them: pravrtti, the pursuit of gain,
and nivrtti, the renunciation of gain, neither of
which solves the problem of inadequacy. Artha and
kama do not work. Perhaps the solution has to be
simply to accept inadequacy.

But when one explores the possibility of accepting
inadequacy, no solution to the problem is found. One
does not find it posible to accept inadequacy. The
seeking of adequacy is not a cultivated desire. It is not
a desire one acquires along the way, born of
circumstances and conditioning. A cultivated desire
can be abandoned, but a natural urge cannot be given
up. The ambition to be an astronaut is an acquired
desire that can be dropped later for any one of a
variety of reasons. But natural urges such as the urge
to breathe or the urge to eat can never be dropped; one
can hold one's breath but the urge to breathe
remains; one can refuse food but the urge to eat is still
there.

The urge to be adequate is universal and is not in
one's power to give up; nor can one accept
inadequacy and be happy.

I cannot give up my urge to be adequate nor can I
accept inadequacy. I see that behind all my pursuit of
security and pleasures is the fundamental urge to be
adquate and that these pursuits do not make me so.
Neither pursuit nor the abandonment of pursuit
makes me adequate. Seeing all this I become a
mumuksu, a direct seeker of freedom from

36

=== PAGE 44 ===

INFORMED SEEKER
RAE AN A NE

inadequacy who seems to have no other means to
achieve what he seeks.

The Nature of Achievement

Achievement in life falls under two categories. The
first category, which we know very well, is the
achievement of the not-yet-achieved, apraptasya
prapti; the second, not uncommon but less well
recognized, is the achievement of that which is
already achieved, praptasya prapli.

What is not yet acheived is achieved in time and
space by effort. The house you do not have, the
spouse, the children, the money, the fame, the
health — all that you do not have, require appropriate
effort over a period of time to achieve. A place
different from the one you occupy is achieved by
effort. You walk, run, drive, or fly to it. A clay pot is
produced by appropriate effort spent for a period of
time on a lump of clay which has only potential
form.

These are the achievements we_ know,
achievement, through efforts, of things away from us
in time and space. Being dependent upon efforts,
these achievements are limited by these very efforts.
A given effort, being what it is, is limited in nature. It
begins and ends. It is so much and no more. Efforts
being limited, the results of efforts also are limited.
The product of effort cannot but be limited. The
bringing about of a new condition through effort at
the same time causes a change in the old condition.

37

=== PAGE 45 ===

°
INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA

AAA RAE

For example:

Desired achievement: to move from place one to
place two.

Effort: a brisk five minute walk;

Result: Place two achieved; place one lost.

Place one and place two are mutually limiting. The
gain of one is the loss of the other. A new condition
results in the change of the old condition. The first
and the second — the new and the old — are
mutually limiting.

It is evident that a result dependent on effort is
always limited in nature because effort is limited. So
achievements which are not-yet-achieved, apra-
plasya prapti, being dependent upon effort, will
necessarily be limited. Therefore, the achievement
of adequacy, which is the fourth human goal,
liberation or moksa, cannot fall under the heading of
the not-yet-achieved, apraptasya prapli. The adequacy
one seeks is nothing less than limitlessness. One
seeks to discover oneself as a full, complete, adequate
being without even any hint of limitation. This
discovery does not — cannot — take place through a
process of becoming.

A limited being through limited action gains a
limited result. A series of limited results do not add
up to limitlessness. A limited being plus a limited
result, plus limited results, endlessly, still equals a
limited being. By a process of becoming, the
inadequate, and limited being will never become

38

=== PAGE 46 ===

INFORMED SEEKER
TT TT

limitless. Any changes one brings about, within or
without, will not change the limited to the limitless.

All that one does not have — that is removed from
one in time and space (including heaven!)—will fall
under the heading: not-yet-achieved, apraptasya pra-
pti. And anything that is separated from one in time
or space is limited — wanting. That which is limited
and wanting, will remain limited and wanting.

One is not going to be freed from inadequacy at a
given place and at a given time or be freed
somewhere else, later. This cannot happen. Change
of situation, change of place, passage of time are
relevant only to something which is limited.

The Gain of the Already-Achieved

The second category of achievement is that of the
already-achieved, praptasya prapti. If adequacy is not
the result of the not-yet-achieved, apraptasya prapli,
perhaps it can be an accomplishment of the already-
achieved, praptasya prapti. Is there such a thing as
accomplishment of the already-achieved? It seems
ridiculous. How can one seek to achieve what is
already achieved?

Let us see: A man ardently prays to the Lord to be
given a head upon his shoulders.

The Lord appears and says, " No, no. That I cannot
give you".

"What", says the devotee, "you call yourself the
Almighty Lord but say you cannot do this simple
thing which I humbly request?"

39

=== PAGE 47 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA
LLL LILLE ET ELE ALLE LIE E LEE TELL LE LE LOLLLTE,

"I may be the Lord, but how can I give you,
another head at the same location, where you
already have one? I can give you a second head, or
another head in exchange, or modify the head you
have — all of which seem like things which would
be useful to you — but I cannot give you a head
where you already have a head."

There can be no achievement of the already-
achieved such as obtaining a head where a head
already is. The existing object (a head) stands in the
way of the gain of a second object (another head) in
an identical time-space locus.

However, there is another kind of situation where
achievement of the already-achieved appears to be
possible. When you have something but do not
realize that you have it, ignorance of what is
possessed can cause you to seek what is already in
fact in your possession. You can have something and
not realize that you have it. Non-recognition of
something can cause one to seek the very thing that
is in one's possession.

Achievement of the already-achieved becomes
possible when ignorance prevents one from
knowing the fact that the thing is already there.

For example: Resting a moment from my studies,
I automatically push my reading glasses up from
my eyes until the lenses rest on the top of my head.
Returning to my book a few minutes later, I search
the desk and the table, the chest of the drawers, and
the floor, for my missing glasses, unaware that they
are with me, precariously perched on my own head.

40

=== PAGE 48 ===

INFORMED SEEKER
LEE ELEM LEE LLL LE LE LER LE ILE ET TOLEDO LEE

"Someone has taken my glasses", I cry; "I must have
them; I need them; I must find them". All the time
my glasses are with me. Only ignorance of that fact
keeps me away from them.

When I am searching for glasses which are on
the top of my head, there is no distance in space or
time between me, the seeker, sadhaka, of the glasses
and me, the possessor of the glasses, the end to be
achieved, the sadhya. With the glasses forgotten,
perched on my head, I want to be the possessor of my
glasses. I am a seeker, sadhaka, of the state of being
the possessor of my glasses. Because the glasses are
on the top of my head, I am the goal, sadhya, the
possessor of my glasses.

The distance between me, the seeker of the
glasses, and me, the sought, the possessor of the
glasses, is ignorance alone. Thus, in the situation
where one is ignorant of the fact that what one seeks
is already there, there is such a thing as the
achievement of the already-achieved; in such a
situation one's ignorance creates an apparent
distance.

Freedom from Inadequacy:
an Already-Achieved Goal

The first three human goals, dharma, artha, kama,
the ethical pursuit of security and pleasures, deal
with not-yet-acheived gains; gains which, distant
from the seeker in time and space, must be gained

41

=== PAGE 49 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA
STRANI LL TT

by effort. Effort being inherently limited, produces a
limited result.

The fourth human goal, freedom from
inadequacy, limitlessness, moksa, is not, cannot be,
produced by limited effort. Freedom from
inadequacy, moksa, cannot be a not-yet-achieved
goal to be gained through effort. Perhaps, then,
moksa may be an already-achieved goal hidden
from the seeker by the ignorance of the seeker.
Inquiry into the nature of adequacy shows that this is
the only category in which we can put moksa

If freedom from inadequacy, moksa, is already
achieved, this means that like the possessor of the
glasses who wants to find the glasses, I am the
adequate self who yet wants to become the adequate
self. I am the adequate self and yet I seek the
adequate self; this can only mean that somehow
ignorance hides me, the sought, from me, the
seeker.

The Informed Seeker

It has been said that the seeker of adequacy, moksa, is
called a mumuksu. Such a seeker has discovered that
the basic human problem underlying all pursuits is
the urge to be completely free from inadequacy and
has realized that the pursuit of security and pleasures
cannot bring this freedom. When the direct seeker of
freedom further discovers that the goal he seeks must
fall under the head of the already-achieved, another
dimension is added to his understanding. He is then

42

=== PAGE 50 ===

INFORMED SEEKER
LS LLL LTTE LTE TE TE TE LTE GE ELLE REE LEE

in a position to understand what means are available
to him to gain his goal.

When I, a seeker directly pursuing freedom from
all inadequacy, discover that what I seek is not
something apart from me, something yet to-be-
achieved, but is something separated from me only
by ignorance, my goal becomes the destruction of
that ignorance: then I seek knowledge.

When you know that you are not different from
what you seek, then you become an informed
mumuksu. You know you are seeking knowledge.
An informed mumuksu is called a jijiasu:

mumuksu One who desires freedom from
inadequacy;

jijriasu One who desires knowledge
for the sake of freedom from
inadequacy.

A mumuksu who has not discovered that knowledge
is what is required may do many, futile things in his
search for liberation. A seeker observant enough to
see that his usual pursuits do not produce adequacy
but who has not understood that adequacy cannot be
produced by any kind of effort, may resort to harsh
austerities, hoping to win the freedom he has not
been able to achieve by usual efforts. Many
examples can be found in almost all religions of
severe, painful, and sometimes strange practices
undertaken for the sake of deliverance from
limitation.

43

=== PAGE 51 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA
SELLE LLL TE

Every mumuksu, every seeker, will become a
jijnasu (one who seeks not to do something but to
know something) when he understands the nature
of the problem. The problem is to dispel self-
ignorance. The solution is to gain self-knowledge.

The adequate being that I want to be can never be
attained through a process of becoming. The fact
must be that I am already an adequate being, even
though I seek to be an adequate being. The separation
between me and adequacy must be due to ignorance.
Therefore, it is ignorance, self-ignorance that must
go. For self-ignorance to go, there must be self-
knowledge. Self-knowledge is what is called
liberation.

For self-knowledge, self-inquiry is necessary.
Inquiry is necessary because of the contradictory
information my experiences have given me about
myself. I have had two types of experiences: one type
of experience has led me to conclude that I am
inadequate; another type has shown me to be an
adequate being. I need to reconcile these two types of
experiences to see the fact that I am an adequate
being. To accomplish this reconciliation I must
conduct a self-inquiry called “dtma-vicara. This
inquiry into the self which leads to discovery of the
nature of oneself, is called Vedanta.

=== PAGE 52 ===

CHAPTER FOUR

Ignorance and
Knowledge

There are two types of achievements: achievement of
something not-yet-achieved, and achievement of
what is already-achieved. Freedom from
inadequacy, moksa, cannot be of the first kind
because achievement of the not-yet-achieved involves
change produced by effort. Change is always
limited. The previous condition and the succeeding
condition mutually limit each other. All gain
through change involves loss. There is never any
absolute gain. Completeness—total adequacy-—
cannot be an achievement of the not-yet-achieved. If
such an achievement is possible, it must be of the
second kind: an achievement of the already-
achieved. Everyday experiences reveal examples of
such achievements. A situation in which someone is
searching for his reading glasses, unaware that the
glasses are perched on the top of his head, is an
example of an already-achieved goal. The one who

45

=== PAGE 53 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA

AAA ALATA

seeks to be the possessor of the glasses is already the
possessor of the glasses. The seeker is not different
from the sought. The apparent difference between
the seeker and the sought is brought about by
ignorance.

Everyone is Born Ignorant

Just as one can be ignorant of one's glasses sitting
atop one's head, one can be ignorant of oneself. In
fact there is no reason why one should know oneself.
Everyone is born vastly ignorant. Not absolutely
ignorant, because even a tiny infant knows a few,
basic things: to ask for food; to fear a fall; to recognize
a smile although his ignorance is immense.

The vast ignorance of the newborn includes the
ignorance of the self. The ignorance with which one
begins life includes ignorance of oneself as well as
ignorance of everything else. As one is ignorant of
other things, like mother, father, language,
arithmetic, so, too, one is ignorant of oneself. Every
form of ignorance is present—self-ignorance
included.

The Shedding of Ignorance
Ignorance is shed as one gains valid knowledge.

Valid knowledge requires an appropriate pramana,
an appropriate instrument, or means of knowledge.

=== PAGE 54 ===

IGNORANCE AND KNOWLEDGE
EAE CR AS

prama-karanam pramanam
knowledge-instrument _ means of knowledge

Certain means of knowledge—the five sense organs
supported by an attentive mind—are given to us for
knowing the world. It is very natural to make use of
these means at our disposal. If one's eyes and ears
are open, and the mind simultaneously alert, one
sees and hears. Similarly, one smells, tastes,
experiences the sense of touch. In a newborn child,
the sense organs are not fully functional. Function
develops gradually. As the child develops, the
capacity of the sense organs increases. Later, as the
adult ages, the capacity declines. It is through these
means of knowledge, the senses supported by the
mind, that one sheds one's ignorance of the world
and gains knowledge—a working knowledge of the
world. Thus, as one gains knowledge, one sheds
ignorance. Ignorance is not gained. Ignorance is one
thing for which one need not work. Everyone is born
with ignorance in abundance.

As one grows, through the use of valid means of
knowledge, one sheds ignorance, ajfiana. When the
senses and the mind are not defective, perception, the
use of the senses supported by the mind, gives rise to
a valid working knowledge. Perceptual knowledge is
the "working knowledge" of the world, valid in its
own sphere.

The family encourages this process of learning
and at the same time makes language available as
part of the knowledge to be gained. The mother says,

47

=== PAGE 55 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA
RESELL EE LEE SES LEE LTE LE LEE LODE LEDER,

"this is an apple", "this is a chair", "this is a table",
"this is a flower". The father adds, "this is your
hand", "this is a stone", "these are two stones". As a
child one looks, touches, tastes, smells, and listens to
the sound that is a word naming the object perceived.
In this way, ignorance is shed and knowledge
gained, first of forms and names, then of colour and
other attributes; then later come finer distinctions,
shades of colour, various sizes and shapes. Thus
forms and names and finer and yet finer
distinctions are acquired. And knowledge is gained
of actions too—of walking, talking, eating; and of
categories, classes of things, and the connections
between and among them.

Connections : sambandha

As one acquires more and more perceptual
knowledge, one is able to perceive certain
connections between different things; between
classes of things; between different actions; between
actions and things. These special relationships or
connections are called sambandha. From these
relationships we are able to make certain inferences.
Such inferences are called vyapti-jiiana.

vyapti invariable concomitance
jiana knowledge

I see smoke. I infer fire.

I have vyapti jriana, inferential knowledge of
fire.

=== PAGE 56 ===

IGNORANCE AND KNOWLEDGE
RALLIES

Thus, the knowledge of certain relationships allows
me to make certain inferences from my perceptions.
Inferential knowledge is perception-based.

Through perception and perception-born inference
one gathers knowledge of the world. And the
validity of perceptual and _ perception-based
knowledge is established by its practicability in the
world.

Objects are Known through Perception

The perceptual means of knowledge, the five sense
organs, are the valid means for knowing things
which the sense organs can objectify. Each sense
organ has an appropriate object for objectification: the
eyes, form and colowr; the ears, sound; the nose,
smell; the tongue, taste; the body, touch. My five
sense organs objectify the five appropriate sense
objects external to them and with these senses,
supported by my mind, I gain knowledge of all the
things I can objectify.

The Means of Knowledge Must be Appropriate

In the light of the knowledge gained through one's
senses, the ignorance of the world goes away.
Ignorance never goes away unless knowledge, its
opposite, is born. The birth of knowledge always
requires a valid means of knowledge. The means
must be appropriate to the particular knowledge
sought. What can be gained through one means of

49

=== PAGE 57 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA
LLL LLL LLL TT LL

knowledge cannot be gained by another means. If
you want to know the colour of the flower in your
hand, the ear won't do; nor can the eye tell you if it
is fragrant. The sense organs, each one of them, is
capable of acquiring a given form of knowledge—
objectifying a particular object in a given way. The
valid, appropriate means for knowledge is
determined by the nature of the particular
knowledge sought.

If the particular knowledge sought is the colour of
some object, open your eyes and look. If the object is
too far away for your short-sighted eyes to determine
its shade, it will do you no good to try to "hear" its
colour with your keen ears. Get stronger eye glasses;
borrow some binoculars; but you have to use your
eyes. Ears, no matter how sharp, cannot do the job.
The particular knowledge of a particular object
requires appropriate means for that knowledge.

Inferences are Perception-based

Inferences, too are basically perception because they
are dependent upon data from the senses. All
inferences are based on perceptual data.
Technological progress has brought about
enhancement of the sensory capability. Our capacity
to perceive has been greatly improved by various
instruments which have been developed:
microscopes, telescopes, x-ray machines, radar
devices, and so forth. With improved sensory data,
our knowledge has grown.

50

=== PAGE 58 ===

IGNORANCE AND KNOWLEDGE
SERIA AEE ETS

All increase of knowledge as a result of enhanced
perception, bringing increased opportunity for
inference, still remains no more than knowledge
about things which can be objectified.

With improved sensory data, knowledge keeps

improving. This improved knowledge is always
about something which can be objectified. Whether
the knowledge is about a cell, or an atom, or the
universe itself, it is about something subject to
objectification. Even psychology is knowledge about
something that can be objectified. One's thoughts,
responses, and attitudes can be observed—
objectified—and from that objectification some
generalizations can be made. Thus, a new discipline
of knowledge is born.
The knowledge acquisition we have been discussing
so far is of things, objects. Perception is always of an
object. Inference is based upon perception. Therefore,
all inferences (and presumptions); being what they
are, are about objects alone.

1. The word "object" is being used in its grammatical sense
of something other than the subject, oneself, not in the
general sense of something tangible. This usage of object
can be understood through grammatical analysis of
sentence structure.

I know an atom.

subject predicate object

Object means anything the subject objectifies. Any given
thing the subject comes to know, he objectifies.

51

=== PAGE 59 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA
_ RAN ES

Intellectual Knowledge is Inferential Knowledge

What one calls "intellectual knowledge" is nothing
but inferential knowledge. Such intellectual
knowledge, too, has its basis in the perception of
objects. There is no intellectual knowledge which is
not, finally, based on objects. Intellectual is
inferential and all perceptual and inferential
knowledge is of objects—of things other than oneself.

Knowledge is not Created

The gaining of knowledge is nothing but the
shedding of ignorance. The moment I come to know
what a pot is like, my ignorance of pot is gone.
Similarly, when I come to know what a cell is like,
then my ignorance of cell, to the extent that I know
about the cell, is removed.

Ignorance is something one is born with.
Knowledge is nothing but the shedding of it, ajiana
nivylti. The gain of knowledge is not a creation, srsti.
The gain of knowledge is only a negation—negation
of ignorance. Knowledge is covered with ignorance.
All one does is remove ignorance; then knowledge
is so to speak gained. Knowledge is not something
produced or created. Knowledge always is.
Knowledge is what is.

By removing ignorance one uncovers knowledge.

ajnana-nivrtli = jrana
ignorance, causing the removal of = knowledge

52

=== PAGE 60 ===

IGNORANCE AND KNOWLEDGE
EARL LLL LLL LLL

Valid Knowledge

Knowledge is valid when it is true to what is. When
it is true to what is, it cannot later be negated. When
the word jf ana, knowledge, is used, it should be used
to mean completely valid knowledge; knowledge
that is abadhitam, not subject to later negation.

For the most part, the knowledge one gathers is not
completely valid but is a "working knowledge" of the
world. Working knowledge is a relatively valid
knowledge, which can be negated; but is none the
less useful. That the sun will rise in the east
tomorrow morning at a certain time is working
knowledge based on sensory data. This knowledge
can be negated. it is relatively valid only from a
given standpoint. More complete understanding of
the fact reveals that the sun does not rise. But the
working knowledge of sunrise at a particular place
and time is useful knowledge, helpful in planning
one's activities.

Through the five senses backed by the mind one
goes on gaining knowledge and shedding ignorance
about things other than oneself. The knowledge
gained is about things that can be objectified, not
about oneself, the non-objectifiable subject. Objects
are things other than oneself, the subject. I possess
valid instruments to gain a working knowledge of
objects. Sensory perception and_ sense-based
inference are the valid means of my knowledge of
all the things I can objectify. This is what perception,
including all forms of enhanced perception, is

=== PAGE 61 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA

AACA

perception, is meant for—to know things that can be
objectified. Inference, too, perception-based as it is, is
a means of knowing things other than myself.

Perception is Useless for Knowing Oneself

I am the subject. I am the knower. Do I have a valid
means of knowledge for knowing myself?
Perception and inference do not reveal the subject.
Perception and perception-based inference are
useless for knowing the subject—they work only for
things which the sense organs can objectify. One
can use perception well and come to enjoy a high
level of information about objects and still be
ignorant about oneself. One can be a very well-
informed person, learned in various disciplines of
knowledge with many achievements to one's credit,
and still continue to be ignorant of oneself, Self-
knowledge is not necessary to operate the means of
knowledge—the senses backed by the mind—for
knowing objects. One need not have self-knowledge
to be proficient in any of the usual disciplines of
knowledge.

So far as we know, non-human creatures do not
have sufficiently self-conscious evolved minds to
inquire into the nature of themselves. None the less,
they successfully use perception and inference.
Some kind of perception and some use of inference
seem available to all beings. The migratory
behaviour of birds indicates an ability to make
inferences; their navigation requires inference. Bats

54

=== PAGE 62 ===

IGNORANCE AND KNOWLEDGE
AEN BR ME

are able to determine the location and type of objects
by reading echoes; they conduct their affairs on the
inferences drawn from these data.

A cow presumably has neither self-consciousness
nor self-knowledge, but its ignorance is not a
problem. A cow does not say to itself, "I know I am
the finest breed of cow who gives many litres of milk
each day, but I do not seem to be satisfied with this
role. I wonder what my real nature is. Surely, I must
be something more than a living milk machine". A
cow is not bothered by self-knowledge or self-
ignorance. Its only problems are those of hunger,
thirst, warmth and survival. Unconcerned with self-
ignorance, lacking self-consciousness, the cow none
the less conducts its affairs through perception and, at
least, rudimentary inference.

In the Brahmasutra Bhasya there is a classic
description of the cow's ability to infer: A man and a
cow are standing in a meadow. The man pulls out a
bunch of grass and calls out to the cow. She turns her
head and looks at him. He smiles, extending his arm
and beckoning to her with the hand holding the
grass. She looks and thinks. Eating grass is ista-
sadhana, a desirable objective, especially eating grass
obtained with no effort. She remembers, that this
happened a few times in the past. "People like this
one have fed me good grass. It was nice." "Come",
calls the man. The cow looks at him closely. He
appears benevolent. The cow makes up her mind, "I
am being offered a harmless, pleasant experience".
She has made an inferential conclusion based on her

55

=== PAGE 63 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA
LL LES RENE LLL LET TE TTR ELE LEI,

present perceptions and remembered past
perceptions; she begins to amble slowly towards the
man.

After a few seconds the man drops the bunch of
grass, bends over and picks up a large stick. The cow
stops in her tracks and looks closely. The man raises
the stick over his head and scowls angrily. The cow
quickly reaches a new inferential conlusion. "This
fellow may be about to beat me with that stick—a
very unpleasant experience." She tosses her head,
turns, and trots quickly away.

Both decisions, to first approach the man and then
to run away from him are the result of perception-
based inference. Thus the cow, in spite of its self-
ignorance, is quite able to make inferential
conclusions.

Human beings are more skilled in gathering
perceptual data and making inferences than a cow
or, so far as we know, any other animal. We
enhance our perceptions with powerful instruments,
adding to the capacity of our sense organs. We have
developed keen disciplines of logic which enable us
to make better inferences from the data we gather.
But no matter what data are gathered or inferences
drawn, leading to proficiency in countless branches
of knowledge about things, the human being can
remain as self-ignorant as the cow. For, knowledge
gathered about objects does not destroy self-
ignorance.

=== PAGE 64 ===

°
IGNORANCE AND KNOWLEDGE
TERE LEE ELSE ELE SELLE DEE LOTTE TELLER

The Need for Knowledge of Oneself

If there is a solution to the peculiar human problem
of one's constant struggle for completeness, then that
solution lies in knowledge alone. When it has
become clear to me that it is not possible for me to
become a complete, adequate being through the gain
or loss of things, nor can I rid myself of the urge to
become an adequate being, then I know I must gain
knowledge of myself. The adequate being I want to
be cannot be produced by a process of becoming. No
action can produce limitlessness; therefore, there is
only one way out—not the one of action, but the one
of knowledge.

If my problem has a solution, it can only be
through the knowledge of myself. To gain the
limitlessness I seek, I must already be that fully
adequate being whose adequacy is hidden by
ignorance. I need a means to shed that ignorance.

The Means to Gain Knowledge of Oneself

Where can one find means to discover the nature of
oneself, the subject, IP As a knower, the subject
revealed by the first person singular I, I am ignorant
of myself. I am the subject, the knower, behind the
mind and the sense organs but from childhood
onwards I, the subject, am unknown to myself. In
the beginning I was ignorant of myself and most
other things. As I grow, I gain knowledge of many
things through perception and inference. But my

57

=== PAGE 65 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA

ATTA TS

ignorance of myself remains. I want to shed that self-
ignorance. Is there an appropriate, valid means of
knowledge of myself? Perception and inference are
useful only for things which can be objectified. I, the
subject, cannot be objectified. Perception and
perception-based inferences are all relevant only for
knowledge of objects other than "I". By definition,
sense data and inference are means of knowledge
for things which the subject can objectify. If the
subject is objectified, it no longer is the subject but
only another object—and that which objectifies it is
the sought-for subject. How can I gain knowledge of
myself, I, the ultimate, non-objectifiable subject?

The Mundaka Upanisad verse we came across
‘describes the need for knowledge and also tells what
to do to gain that knowledge:

pariksya lokan ~~ karmacitan brah mano
nirvedamay annastyakratah,  krtena
ladvijnanartham sa gurumevabhigacchet
samitpanih  srotriyam brahmanistham
(Lii, 12 Mundaka Upanisad)

Having analysed the worldly experiences
achieved through effort, a mature person gaine
dispassion, discerns that the uncreated
(limitlessness) cannot be produced by action.

To know That (the un¢reated limitlessness),
he, with twigs in hand, should go to a teacher
who is learned in the scriptures, and steadfast in
the knowledge of himself.

58

=== PAGE 66 ===

IGNORANCE AND KNOWLEDGE
Sr RNER RR RI RS I

The mature person recognizes from examination of
his own worldly experiences that what he seeks is
adequacy, and is able to see that the things for which
he has been struggling cannot bring that adequacy.
He gains a dispassion towards security, artha, and
pleasures, kama. Basically, he seeks nothing less
than limitlessness itself. The gain of the limited
cannot produce limitlessness. Limitlessness by
nature is uncreated, akrta. By action, krtena, the
uncreated is not produced.

To know that uncreated limitlessness which
cannot be produced, which can only be known, but
not by such means as perception and inference, one
has to go to a teacher, a guru, “with twigs in hand’—
which means with hands ready to serve, and with
the right attitude. This verse tells what a mumuk su,
an informed seeker of freedom from limitation
should do. An informed seeker knows that his
search is for knowledge; he has become a jijviasu,
one who desires knowledge. For that knowledge he
must go to a teacher, a guru.

For Knowledge of Oneself,
Go to a Qualified Guru

A guru is one who dispels darkness. The word itself
reveals the function; gu stands for darkness; ru means
the one who dispels darkness. A guru then, is a
dispeller of darkness. He doesn't produce anything.
He doesn't even produce knowledge. He throws light

59

=== PAGE 67 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA

ARENA TT AN ET EST

on something that is already there. A guru isa
teacher, who has the capacity to dispel the ignorance
covering whatever it is one wants to know. If I want
to end my ignorance of astronomy, I need to find
someone who knows something about the stars and
the planets. It will not do me any good to go toa
marine biologist who cannot distinguish a galaxy
from a constellation. I must find someone who has
lost his ignorance in the area of my interest;
someone who has the knowledge I seek.

A teacher does not produce anything; he does not
need to produce anything. Nobody can produce
knowledge. Knowledge is the accurate appreciation
of what is. The teacher throws light upon something
which is already there. If an object I want to see is in
a completely dark room, all I need is light to see it in.
The light does not produce the object; it merely
dispels the darkness so that I can see it. A light in a
dark room produces neither the room nor the objects
in it; it only reveals what is.

Similarly, to dispel my ignorance of myself, what
is needed is light. Am I the inadequate, limited
being I generally see myself to be? Or, am I the
complete, whole being I long to be~my
completeness somehow hidden from me by
ignorance? To answer this question, a teacher is
needed—a teacher with appropriate knowledge to
throw light upon my nature. If the teacher has
knowledge of his own nature, is that appropriate
knowledge to illumine my nature? A guru with self-
knowledge can throw light upon his self; but does

60

=== PAGE 68 ===

IGNORANCE AND KNOWLEDGE
LL

that light give him knowledge of my self, too? If my
self and his self are the same, he will know my self
if he knows his own. He will be able to throw light
on my self for me from his knowledge of his own
self. However, if the guru's self is peculiar, differing
from mine then, perhaps, his knowledge will be of
no use to me,

The possible peculiarity of the guru's self is not a
problem because the adequate self which one seeks,
the adequate self which the guru knows, cannot have
any peculiarity and yet be the adequate self.
Adequacy has no peculiarity. Adequacy is totality,
completeness; adequacy is without any limitation;
adequacy is limitlessness which can suffer no
duality. Adequacy can only be one; oneness without
a second. There cannot be two limitlessnesses.
When there are two, each limits the other.

Therefore, the verse says lam gurum abhigacchel,
go to that guru; that guru who can throw light upon
the uncreated, the limitless self. Guru means teacher,
not just teacher of a particular subject. Guru means
any teacher who by means of communication can
throw light on a subject that he knows and which the
student wishes to know. To be a valid guru worthy of
the label, one must be able to throw light on
ignorance.

The student, because he wants to know, is willing
to serve the teacher. The student is a jijwasu, one
characterized by wanting to know. A jiyiasu wants to
know—whatever the cost—so he goes to the teacher
with a readiness to serve, with a fresh open mind,

61

=== PAGE 69 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA

Se

with a loving heart. The verse indicates this attitude
by saying samitpanih, "with twigs in hand",
bringing fuel for the teacher's fire, a traditional way
of showing willingness to serve the teacher.

And what does the teacher do? He teaches, That is
all he has to do. What is teaching? Teaching, for the
most part, is nothing but words. What do words do?
Words are a means of knowledge. No doubt, like
inference, they are dependent upon perception, but at
the same time, they also can be an independent
means of knowledge. Sometimes words do what
one's sense organs cannot do. Words depend upon
perception—the hearing of the ears or the seeing of
the eyes; but ears only hear sounds; eyes only see
forms. It is the informed mind that turns sound and
form into words. When the mind undergoes the
discipline of language, the sounds heard are no
longer meaningless sounds but become meaningful
sounds; the forms seen become meaningful forms.
Words, thus, have an independence from their
simple perception as sound which allows them to
give rise to knowledge that the simple perception
does not reveal. Words encode past perceptions;
words make possible the analysis of the connections
between perceptions in the absence of the perceived
objects. Words can become an independent means of
knowledge which can reveal both known and
unknown things to one.

Consider for example that a friend has returned
from a visit to some exotic place and he describes to
me a very unusual bird. A bird with an emerald

62

=== PAGE 70 ===

IGNORANCE AND KNOWLEDGE
REESE I LL I ELE TI,

beak, ruby feet, gold and silver wings. I know what a
bird is, what the parts of a bird are, and the colour
and appearance of precious stones and metals;
therefore, from his words I am able to gain
knowledge of a thing unknown to me, a strange bird
which I have never seen.

This knowledge is gained through words, sabda,
which constitute an independent means of
knowledge.

Indirect and Direct Knowledge from Words

Words can give indirect or direct knowledge,
depending on the relationship between the knower
and the object. If the object is away from the
knower's immediate experience, words can only
give rise to indirect knowledge; if the object is within
the range of the knower's immediate experience,
words can bring about direct knowledge. The bird
with the emerald beak, described above, was known
only by indirect knowledge. Not having seen the
bird myself, my knowledge of the bird rests upon the
words of my friend. The weight I give to that
knowledge depends upon my faith in the accuracy
of his perception and his truthfulness. Similarly, I
can gain indirect knowledge of many things not
directly known to me. Indirect knowledge becomes
direct knowledge when confirmed by experience.
For example: Someone gives a detailed description
of the appearance and flavour of the tropical jackfruit
to a person who has never seen or tasted jackfruit.

63

=== PAGE 71 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA
RARE AE OE LEE TELE LE LLL EE ELLE

Subsequently, the latter comes to India where he has
the opportunity to sample many tropical fruits
strange to him. One day while eating an unknown
fruit he tells his host, "This is very good, but some
day I would like very much to try jackfruit; I have
heard so much about it". Words have given him
indirect knowledge of this fruit. His host replies, "It is
jackfruit you are now eating", imparting knowledge
of something the guest is at the time experiencing.
"Oh", says the traveller, "now I know jackfruit".
Words have brought him direct knowledge.

The Words of the Guru
give Direct Knowledge of the Self

What kind of knowledge can the words of a teacher
give about oneself? Indirect or direct? I seek
knowledge of myself, of "I". Where is this I? Is it
near me or away from me? It is neither. It is I,
immediate. Words throwing light on oneself will
give direct knowledge of "I". Either they must give
direct knowledge or no knowledge at all.

When the teacher, the guru, who has knowledge
of himself teaches, he will throw light on the me
which is here, now, the available, immediate me;
the knowledge will be direct, immediate knowledge.

That is why the teacher of self-knowledge and the
teaching are regarded as sacred; they are a direct
means of knowledge of oneself. The teaching is a
body of knowledge in the form of words and
sentences—known as Vedanta—which throws light

64

=== PAGE 72 ===

IGNORANCE AND KNOWLEDGE
AAA PT TT

upon oneself. Vedanta is called a Sabda pramana, a
verbal means of knowledge. Through words, it is a
direct means of knowledge of oneself.

=== PAGE 73 ===

CHAPTER FIVE

The Teacher

The Gain of Adequacy
Requires Knowledge, not Action

To gain anything which is away from one in time
or space requires a change. Change involves effort,
the exerted force called action, karma. Every change
involves a loss. Gain through change involves the
loss of the prior condition. The limitless, adequate
being that one wants to be, cannot be the product of a
process of change. One cannot become totally
adequate, complete, because the new condition
gained excludes the relinquished old condition. A
"becoming", being what it is, is always limited in
nature. There is no absolute gain in any becoming.
To be a fully adequate being is to have an absolute
gain. An absolute gain is not possible in the relative
world. So, the adequate being can never be the end
product of a process of becoming.

Therefore, the gain of the adequacy that everyone
seeks, has to be a gain that does not involve a process
of becoming; it has to be a gain without effort. The
only thing that can be gained without effort is

66

=== PAGE 74 ===

THE TEACHER
AAA

something that has been gained already; something
that is already there. It is necessary to "gain"
something that is already there when that
something is separated from the seeker, not by time
or distance, but by ignorance. If the seeker does not
know that what he seeks is there, it will be "as
though" away from him. To gain such a thing
requires not action, but knowledge. Knowledge
depends upon the operation of a valid means of
knowledge. We have means of knowledge for
objects other than ourselves. The senses provide the
data for knowing objects. All objects other than
oneself can be known from perceptual data and
perception-based inference. But what is the means of
knowing the knower, the subject? There does not
seem to be a way at one's disposal to know oneself,
the knower, who knows the objects. The subject
cannot be known through the objectification of
perception and inference. A "subject", when
objectifed, becomes an object. It is not possible to
objectify oneself and still look at oneself. If I become
the object, I am no longer the subject. The subject-I
cannot be the object-I. Whatever is objectified can no
longer be considered the subject who is looking and,
it is that "looker-subject" that I seek to know. Is it a
hopeless dilemma? Am I stuck with self-ignorance?

Words, a Valid Means of Knowledge
For knowing oneself there is a need for a valid

means of knowledge capable of dispelling self-

67

=== PAGE 75 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA
AS

ignorance — some means other than sense-based
perception and inference. It has been seen that
words, sabda, in their own right, independent of
perception, can be a valid means of knowledge.
Words are based on sounds heard (or forms seen),
but it is not the sense data that are the word; the sense
data only carry the word to an informed mind —a
mind that recognizes certain sounds or forms as
language. It is the sound or form as word, that brings
knowledge. The knowledge brought by words can be
direct or indirect. Whether the words bring direct or
indirect knowledge depends upon the object. If the
object is beyond the scope of one's perception or
experience, the knowledge born will be indirect.
Indirect knowledge, no matter how useful, is never
completely true to the object. It is always subject to a
later modification upon direct knowledge. However,
if the object is not away from one but is at hand,
experienced but not recognized, then words can give
direct knowledge, a knowledge true to the nature of
the object. For example, there is a well-known story
that shows how words can give knowledge, both
direct and indirect.

The Story of the Tenth Man

Ten students were given permission by their guru to
go on a pilgrimage. In the course of their journey,
they crossed a swift river. After the crossing, the
leader of the group, responsible for their safety,
assembled them on the river bank and counted

68

=== PAGE 76 ===

THE TEACHER
LALA LTT

them. He counted nine. The tenth student was
missing. He counted again, very slowly, up to nine.
Still there was one missing. The leader looked all
around, but nowhere could the tenth man be seen.
He counted again: nine only. He stood there in
shock and despair thinking of the sad message he
would have to take back to their teacher: "One man
has been lost".

An old man standing a short distance away, had
been watching this scene. He walked over to the
sorrowful leader and asked, "Why are you so upset?"
The leader, pointing to his companions, answered,
"When we started on our pilgrimage this morning
there were ten of us; now that we have crossed this
river, there are only nine". The old man looked at
the group and asked, "You say there were ten of you
when you started out?" "Yes". "Now you say there are
only nine?" "Yes. The tenth one cannot be found. He
must have drowned", replied the trembling leader.
The old man smiled a little and said "Don't worry.
The tenth man got across the river with you. He is
here now. I'II show him to you".

The old man seemed wise and sincere; relief
swept over the young leader. "Did you hear that?" he
called out to the group gathered around. "The tenth
man is!" One of the students was more sceptical.
"How can you say that?" he asked the leader; "Have
you seen the tenth man?" "No", said the leader, "I
have not yet seen the tenth man, but this gentleman
says he exists and I believe him".

69

=== PAGE 77 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA
TL TTT

At this juncture in the story, the leader has only
indirect knowledge that the tenth man exists.
Through the words of the old man he has gained
indirect knowledge, called paroksa jrianam, of the
existence of the tenth man. Previously he had come
to the conclusion that the tenth man probably had
drowned and had been swept away by the river; but
now his faith in the truth of the old man's words lets
him accept, even without personal verification, that
the tenth man exists. The leader's mind is no longer
closed and agitated. It is in a more neutral frame
with some faith in a happy outcome. The neutral
frame of mind is a receptive mind, ready for
knowledge — able to accept that the fact can be
discovered, knowledge can be gained. The leader
has faith in the correctness of the indirect
knowledge, a faith that the indirect knowledge will
be confirmed by direct knowledge. It is faith,
sraddha, pending discovery — an openness and
positive expectation. The leader has no reason to
disbelieve the words of the old man, and his
credibility is given weight by the fact that the old
man has said "I will show the tenth man to you here,
now", not sometime later in some other place. The
old man has said that he will at the present time, in
the present place produce the tenth man. He has not
told the leader that there is anything the leader must
do in order that the tenth man can be produced — to
bring about the tenth man. The promise held out by
the old man does not involve effort on the part of the
leader or change of place or passage of time.

70

=== PAGE 78 ===

THE TEACHER
eel

The story continues: The old man tells the leader,
"Please bring all the other boys here in front of me
and have them arrange themselves in a line". The
leader, his eyes still red from weeping over the loss
of his fellow student, quickly responds. "Now", says
the old man, "come stand by my side and count
these fellows one more time". The leader's heart
sinks; he is reluctant to go through one more sad,
useless count. None the less, he has faith in the old
man, and reluctant though he feels, but because the
old man has requested it, he counts one more time up
to nine, and turns to the old man, "Sir! Where is the
tenth man?" he demands.

The old man says: "tat tvam asi, That thou art. You
are the tenth man. You, the leader who forgot to
count himself, are the tenth man you are seeking."

The Problem when the Seeker is the Sought

Any seeking is a denial of the presence of the
sought. The act of seeking denies that the sought is in
the presence of the seeker. The presence of the
seeking denies the presence of the sought. In the
story of the tenth man, the seeker is the sought.
When the seeker is the sought, the presence of the
sought is denied at the very place where it is to be
found. A search in which the seeker and the sought
are identical is inherently likely to fail. The very
status of being a seeker means that you have
concluded that what you seek is not in your
presence; this conclusion ensures that you will not

7

=== PAGE 79 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA

SELLE LEE LOE TLE ELLE LETT TEE

look where what you want is to be found. The
presence of you as a seeker denies you as the sought.
The best place to hide something is where it is
thought not to be. If it is hidden at a place where it is
denied, or thought not to be, it is, indeed, well
hidden.

So the moment the tenth man started seeking, the
place where the sought was to be found was denied.
But the tenth man, seeing his group as incomplete,
had no choice but to search for the missing man who
would complete the number, a search which
excluded the sought. The nature of this kind of
situation must be very clearly seen — and grasped
fully.

When the seeker and the sought are identical,
any small attempt on the part of the seeker to gain the
sought will deny the presence of the sought at the
place where it is to be found.

In such a situation, for the seeker to "gain" what he
seeks, he must be relieved of seeing himself as a
seeker; he must be freed, for the time being, from the
need to gain the sought. The old man, by promising
to reveal the missing tenth man, freed the leader's
mind from the status of a seeker. That mind, even
though it had not discovered the presence »f the tenth
man, became imbued with a faith, sraddha, that the
discovery would be made, allowing it to abide in a
certain freshness and receptivity. From a sentence,
then, the free, fresh, receptive mind was able to
discover, | am what I seek; I am the tenth man".

=== PAGE 80 ===

THE TEACHER
LLL LLL LLL LE LILLE LLL LLL DDE LLL ELL

Teaching through Words in a Context

The statement of the old man, "That thou art", was a
teaching, upadesa, which imparted knowledge to the
student. The knowledge was imparted by words
spoken by the teacher in a context the teacher had
created.

The context — the interrelated conditions
surrounding the words — is an important factor in
the ability of words to convey the meaning intended
by the teacher.

The old man did not just make a bald declaration,
uncaring of whether it would be believed. Instead he
assembled all the students and allowed the leader to
commit his mistake again so that he may discover
what had happened. The leader was led to see for
himself, through words spoken in a specially created
context, that he had left himself out — that he was the
missing man he sought.

General Knowledge and Particular Knowledge

From the old man, the sorrowful student leader
obtained visesa jfianam, a peculiar, different, extra
knowledge which enhanced his general knowledge,
sam anya jvdnam, of the situation. Prior to hearing
the words of the old man the student leader did not
know that he, himself, was the tenth man. He did
not have that particular knowledge, vise sajnanam, of
the tenth man and of himself but he certainly was
not without some knowledge of both the tenth man

73

=== PAGE 81 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA

TS NTR TT TELE ASST EE

and himself. It took some knowledge of the tenth
man for him to become a seeker of the tenth man. If
he had no knowledge whatsoever of the existence of
a tenth man, he would have had no basis for missing
him, no basis for committing a mistake about his
identity. But he did have some knowledge. He knew
that the person who seemed to be missing was a man
and a student and that he had been present at the
arama when their guru had counted out their
number before sending them on the trip. Even
without any help from the old man, the leader had a
great store of knowledge about himself. He could
describe himself physically; he could name his
relatives; he could identify his location, his
possessions. He knew that he was a student on a
pilgrimage, that he was the leader of the group, that
he was standing on the bank of a river. So he had
knowledge of himself. But he didn't have the
particular knowledge that he was the tenth man. It
was the lack of that particular knowledge that the
tenth man was himself which made him a seeker of
the tenth man. When he gained that particular
knowledge from the old man he ceased to be a
seeker.

Self-Ignorance is’ not Total Ignorance
of Self

When it is said that one is self-ignorant, this does not

mean that one is totally without knowledge of
oneself. If one were totally ignorant about oneself, a

74

=== PAGE 82 ===

‘THE TEACHER
LT

mistake about oneself could not be committed. If I did
not have the kind of evolved mind that can appreciate
"T am", then I would not consider myself to be an
inadequate being. If "I am" is unknown to me then I
cannot conclude that "I am inadequate". When I
have no consciousness of an object, I do not commit a
mistake with regard to it. However, when I am
conscious of something but don't recognize it for
what it is, it is then that I commit a mistake.

"I am" is very much known to me. I know that I
am here now. I know “I am" exists. The question is,
"Do I correctly recognize that existing ‘I am’ for what
it is?" If 1 am the adequate being I long to be but fail to
recognize that fact, then I shall conclude that I am
inadequate and strive to become adequate — a futile
effort. Adequacy cannot be gained through change
or through action. Adequacy can only be gained
through recognition of it as the existent fact which
has been hidden from me by ignorance.

When something is an immediate, existent fact,
not recognized out of ignorance, words can produce
direct knowledge of that fact. The words "you are the
tenth man" spoken in the appropriate context,
produced immediate knowledge of the presence of
the tenth man for the leader of the students.

If, in fact, adequacy is one's nature, then when a
teacher creates the appropriate context for the words
to convey their meaning, the statement, fal vam asi,
“that thou art" — you are that adequate being you
seek to be — can give direct knowledge of oneself as
an adequate being.

75

=== PAGE 83 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA
SLL LL LL LE

What the Teacher Must Know

For a teacher to be able to use words to give direct
knowledge not only must the object of knowledge be
present but the teacher, himself, must both be free
from ignorance about the object and know how to
create a context in which words can destroy the
student's ignorance. For the old man to be able to use
words to impart immediate knowledge of the tenth
man, he had to have completely and directly shed
his ignorance of the identity of the tenth man. If the
students had scattered along the bank with some out
of sight before the old man had an opportunity to
count them all for himself, then he would not have
had direct knowledge of the tenth man. He might
have had a plausible theory that could be proved
later, but he would not have had the kind of
knowledge that enabled him to state categorically
that he could immediately produce the tenth man.
Had the old man missed seeing the tenth man, he
would have had only more ignorance to impart.

For words to produce direct, immediate knowledge
the teacher must clearly know what he sets out to
impart by words and, in the presence of the object of
knowledge, the correct context must be established.

The old man had to see clearly that the leader
himself was the tenth man. Had he not known that
he could not have held out the assurance that he
could produce the tenth man. The old man was a
good teacher. He recognized the problem and he
knew what he was doing in setting the context before

76

=== PAGE 84 ===

THE TEACHER
ell

revealing who the tenth man was. The teacher must
himself know the tenth man to be able to reveal him.

The Teacher should know Adequacy
as Himself

To reveal adequacy to the seeker, teacher should
know adequacy himself, and he should know how to
establish a context in which adequacy is discovered.
The Mundaka verse we have discussed describes that
teacher:

gurumeva _abhigacchet ...
srotriyam —_ brahmanistham

Go to a teacher who is learned in the subject
matter, and steadfast in that knowledge.

The teacher whose words can be a direct means of
self-knowledge is one who is both Srotriyam and
brahmanistham. Srotriyam means one who is well-
versed in the scriptural source of the teaching, one
who knows the content of the texts and also the
methodology for imparting that knowledge.
Srotriyam derives from the verbal root which means
"to hear" and indicates, in accordance with the oral
tradition of teaching, the one who is versed in the
knowledge of the adequate being, having heard that
knowledge from its proper sources. Brahmanistham
is one who knows adequacy; who absolutely knows
"I am a complete being".

77

=== PAGE 85 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA
AAT

One who is brahmanistham knows brahman as
himself, not as something other than himself.
Brahman, derived from a word which means "to
grow, to increase", indicates "bigness", o1
“limitlessness". Nistha means "steadfastness". The
one who is brahmanistham is one who is steadfast in
the knowledge of himself as the full, complete,
limitless being.

The teacher who can teach you that you are the
complete being must necesarily be steadfast in the
knowledge of the complete being himself, as
himself. If he does not have this knowledge, in all
likelihood his teaching will make completeness out
to be something other than oneself — something
which has to be gained by effort. At best, if he is
learned in the scriptures he will be able to teach
about completeness as indirect knowledge from
scriptures, unvalidated by himself.

A teacher who does not know himself teaches
from indirect knowledge. He will say things like
"the scriptures tell us that there is a complete,
adequate being hidden within who must be
uncovered by the practice of austerities — who will
be discovered in the light of meditation". We read
such things in books and we also hear them from
teachers who have not understood the scriptures and
do not know themselves as the complete being.

Such statements mislead the seeker. The complete
being can never be covered; it only seems so due to
ignorance. Nothing can cover the complete being
because it is the complete being. Just as space cannot

78

=== PAGE 86 ===

‘THE TEACHER

be covered by the things in it, so completeness
cannot be covered. Being all-pervasive, space cannot
be covered by anything in it. Similarly, the complete
being cannot be covered by anything — not by any
form of thoughts, memories, tendencies, sins, habits.
The only thing that can cover the complete being is
ignorance. Just a dash of ignorance can cover the
complete being. The complete being can only be
covered by not knowing that "I am the complete
being". That is all that is required. The whole
problem is nothing but ignorance.

Therefore, the wise person,the one who can teach
the knowledge, is brahmanistham — who knows
very clearly, "I am the complete being". He knows
that the complete being is not an object different
from himself. Therefore he will not say, "The
scriptures say that there is a complete being within
you hidden by a variety of things which you must
remove..." He will say, "You are the complete being".
And because he knows, his words will carry weight.
His words can carry no weight if he does not know.
To tell you that you are the full, complete being —
that you are all-happiness — the teacher must know
that he is full, complete — that he is happiness itself.
The teacher must be happy for his words to work as a
means of knowledge when he tells you that you are
full, complete happiness. An unhappy person cannot
teach you that you are happiness simply because the
scriptures say so.

=== PAGE 87 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA
SALLE RT TT

Inadequate Teaching Can Make
the Problem Worse

A teacher who cannot impart the knowledge of
completeness to the student — cannot directly teach
that the student is the adequate being—either because
he does not have command of the methodology to
impart what he knows, or because he does not
himself know his own nature, can worsen the
student's problem. To continue to feel unhappy after
one has been told that one is completely adequate —
happiness itself — is an infinitely worse situation
than thinking that one needs to do something to
become happy.

Such a situation is like the case of a miserably poor
man who discovers that he is the heir to a huge
fortune but is too poor to pay the legal fees to establish
his claim to the inheritance. The knowledge of the
wealth he owns but cannot claim makes him more
miserable than before. He feels worse than he did
before he knew that he was entitled to the
inheritance. To know that the wealth is there,
rightfully his, yet have no access to it, creates more
problems for him than he earlier had in his simple
poverty.

Similarly, to be told that one is complete, adequate
without being able to appreciate that completeness
makes the misery of the human predicament more
acute. That kind of teaching does not really help
anyone. It only creates more problems. Therefore,
the Mundaka verse says:

\

80

=== PAGE 88 ===

THE TEACHER

brahmanistham gurum abhigacchet

Go to a teacher steadfast in the knowledge of
himself as completeness.

Go to a master who can say, convincingly, "That
thou art". Unless he sees for himself what he is, the
teacher cannot make the statement with conviction to
his student. So go to a teacher who is brahmanistha,
steadfast in the knowledge of himself.

The Teacher Should Know
the Traditional Methodology

The verse also says:
Srotriyam gurum abhigacchet
Go to a teacher learned in the subject matter.

To be learned in the subject matter includes
knowledge of the methodology of teaching. A good
teacher is one who has learned from his teacher how
to teach. An established method of teaching is called
sampradaya, i.e., a traditional handing down of
instruction.

So the guru, the teacher, should have the
sampradaya, the methodology for teaching the
knowledge of oneself. Because of the peculiarity of
the subject matter, for the knowledge of oneself the

81

=== PAGE 89 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA
LLL LLL LLL SELLE LL LE LDL IE LETS LE LEE LLL

method of teaching is as important as the subject
matter.

When one seeks to know oneself, the situation is
not the same as seeking to know an object. An object
is something available for demonstration. One or
more of the five senses can grasp an object. By
definition an object is what is external to the subject,
objectifiable by the senses. From infancy onwards,
the senses, supported by the mind, are busy
objectifying all things in their environment and
storing these perceptions in memory; names for
many of these perceived objects are also learned. The
mother holds out a flower to her baby and pointing to
the blossom, says "yellow flower"; then she points to,
a lemon, "yellow fruit"; later, she shows the child a
canary and says, "yellow bird". The child can see
the objects; it can see their colour; it can reason that
what mother is talking about is their colour, that
being what they have in common. From this mind-
assisted perception the child learns to call a particular
colour perception "yellow". The colour yellow is
available for perception.

anu

No particular problem is presented in teaching
what is available for perception. However, that is not
the case where the subject matter is the nature of
oneself. The teacher cannot show you the self
because what you are seeking to know is not what
can be seen with the eye, but is the seer himself. One
seeks to know the nature of the observer — not the
nature of the observation. So to know oneself presents

82

=== PAGE 90 ===

THE TEACHER
SoA

a very peculiar situation; the subject matter is not
available to the usual means of knowledge.

The Teacher must Demolish
Wrong Conclusions

The teacher has another problem. Not only is the self
not available for objectification but the seeker of self
knowledge has usually also reached very definite
conclusions about himself; conclusions which get in
the way when he tries to understand what the
teacher is saying. The student's attitude towards
himself makes the teacher's task difficult indeed.
The student comes to the teacher with deep-seated
convictions about himself. All his life he has
struggled to be happy, complete, and free. But, for all
his struggles, he still sees himself as weak,
inadequate, powerless, lacking. These are well-
entrenched conclusions about himself. He has never
for a moment had an inkling that he might be
complete, full, free from all limitations, that he
might be limitlessness itself. If the teacher simply
says to such a student, "You are the complete being",
the student, sitting there with all his limitations and
inhibitions, will not be able to accept that statement,
let alone understand it. In fact, he will argue that he
is not complete and will bring all the learning at his
command, logic, mathematics, physics, sciences, to
prove how incomplete he is. To be able to make such
a student realize that he is complete, the teacher must
have a quick wit and a thorough knowledge of the

83

=== PAGE 91 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA

LETTE LE EE ETT TILT TIE ET TLE TIE.

content and methodology of teaching. He must be
prepared to encounter and demolish all possible
conditioning and all possible schools of speculative
thought. He must be able to remove belief systems
not supported by direct discovery (the belief that one
is complete is not the same as the knowledge of one's
completeness). He must be able to strip words, such
as "eternal", of their vagueness and use them in
such a way that they convey precisely what he
wants them to convey. Such a teacher is called a
Srotriya, one learned in content and methodology.

Both Self-Knowledge and Methodology
are Needed

To be a teacher of the knowledge of the adequate
being, it is not just enough to be a brahmanistha, one
steadfast in the knowledge that he is the adequate
being. The teacher also must be a Srotriya, one who
knows the methodology. It is like the difference
between a singer and a music teacher. To teach
music, it is not enough that one knows how to sing.
A singer, untrained in the teaching methodology of
music may help you follow his example for a few
moments, or he may inspire you to seek the
knowledge of music, but he cannot make a musician
out of you.

Similarly, one who is brahmanistha, nothing
more, has solved the basic human quest for himself;
he knows himself to be complete; but that by itself ,
does not give him the methodology for helping

84

=== PAGE 92 ===

THE TEACHER
EET ES

another to fulfil the quest. He may be a great source
of inspiration. His happiness and quietude may be
compelling. He can be seen, quiet and simple, his
happiness complete, independent of people,
possessions, circumstances. People will be attracted to
him and _ their minds, too, may become quieter in
his presence. His example may be an inspiration for
them. But unless he knows the methodology of
teaching he cannot be a source of knowledge for
others. For a teacher, therefore, knowledge of the
method of teaching is as important as knowledge of
the subject matter itself. Otherwise, it becomes
mysticism. For mysticism no tradition is required;
there may be inspiration, but no methodology; no
way for the teacher to communicate the vision to the
student.

Teaching should be infallible. When a student
goes to a teacher to gain knowledge, the teacher
should have a way to communicate that knowledge
to the student. Knowledge is about what is. Anything
that is, anything that exists, should be available for
disclosure. Knowledge, if it is knowledge, is available
for communication. For anything that is available for
communication, there can be a teaching tradition.
The nature of the object involved in the
communication determines the method of
communication.

When what is taught is the adequate self, a
particular method of communication is needed, on
account of the nature of the subject matter. The
subject matter being the subject, oneself, a very

85

=== PAGE 93 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA
AAA AT

special method for its teaching is called for. One who
teaches it must know the special method, and be an
expert in handling it.

The scriptures, sruti, clearly state what the nature
of one's self is. "You are brahman. You are
completeness, fullness—the totally adequate being
you long to be." If one hears these words from a
teacher and still does not know for oneself, "I am
brahman; 1 am the complete being", the scriptures
are not to be blamed. Sruti, scripture, has not failed. It
is the teacher who is to be blamed. The teacher has to
make you see that you are brahman. Teaching does
not consist in the teacher simply repeating, "You are
brahman,". The teaching must be based on a
methodology that makes you see that you are
brahman.

The words of the scripture say that you are
limitlessness—full, complete-beingness; but for you
to see that fact the teacher must know the
sampradaya, know the methodology which creates
a context that leads you to see foi yourself the fact
behind the words. Until you see that fact, the teacher
must continue to teach.

The Flow of Knowledge from
Teacher to Student

When did it begin, this traditional teaching that
reveals the nature of oneself? The teaching flows
from teacher to student. Every guru who is a Srotriya
and a brahmanistha, was once a mumuksu. And his

86

=== PAGE 94 ===

THE TEACHER
SEE NTR ATT LE TT

teacher also was once a student; and so, too, the
teacher before him. Seeking to identify the first
teacher is like seeking to identify the first father. We
know there was a father because there is a son and
every son has a father; and know, too, that the father
once was a son. It does not change the example if
you protest that once upon a time the father was a
monkey. He was still a father. All that can be said is
that a father was there because the son is here. The
guru was there because the teacher is here. Just as
my presence here establishes that the parentage
leading to me was continuous, similarly the
presence of a student taught by a teacher establishes
that the teacher-student lineage has never been
broken. This is what is called the guru Sisya
parampara, the flow of traditional knowledge handed
down from teacher to student.

The Traditional Teaching of
Self-Knowledge is Called Vedanta

This traditional teaching, a teaching without a
beginning is called Vedanta.

veda a body of knowledge
anta end

Vedanta means that which is at the end of the Veda.
The Vedas, a body of scriptural knowledge, are four
in number—Rg, Yajur, Sama, and Atharva. The texts
found at the end of each of these four vedas deal with

87

=== PAGE 95 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA

LE RL TTT TE SN EESTI.

the nature of oneself. So in the scriptures known as
the Vedas there is a section at the end of each Veda
which deals with the nature of self. It is here that
knowledge of oneself is unfolded. These sections of
the Vedas and their contents, the teaching of
knowledge of oneself, are known as Vedanta. The
place, the content and the teaching of that content are
collectively known as Vedanta.

We do not see the beginning of the teaching. It is
just taken back to the sis, the inspired sages to whom
the Veda was revealed. We do not bother about the
m isla, the root of these sages; rsi miulam na vicarayet,
the origin of the rsis is not to be questioned. If one
must go beyond the rsis, then it can just be said the
guru is the Lord. The same thing is said about the
first father—-he is the creator, the father of all, the
Lord. The first guru is the same creator, for it is with
the creator that knowledge rests. Any knowledge
belongs to the creator. To go beyond the rsis, the
teaching is traced to the Lord alone—the creator, In
fact, the source of any knowledge has to be traced to
the creator alone. Upon careful analysis, no
knowledge can be traced to any given person—it
always leads back to the creator.

So this knowledge of oneself called Vedanta
which comes from the creator, which is found at the
end of the Veda, which can be traced back to the
ancient sages called the rsis, passes from teacher to
student in the traditional flow of teaching called the
guru-sisya-parampara. This flow of knowledge, the
guru Sisya parampara., is revered by the teacher and

88

=== PAGE 96 ===

THE TEACHER
RELL LOSE EEE TLE LECLERC TOTTI,

the student alike because it is an instrument for
solving the fundamental human problem.
Traditional study generally begins with a tribute to
the teaching and to the teachers—to those who focus
the light that dispels the ignorance concealing the
nature of oneself. Thus one salutes the guru-sisya-
parampara:

Sadasivasamarambham
Sankaracaryamadhyamam
asmaddcaryaparyantam
vande guruparamparam

Beginning auspiciously with the Lord, with the
teacher, Sankara, in the middle, extending as
far as my teacher, I salute progression of
teachers.

89

=== PAGE 97 ===

CHAPTER SIX

The Text

The Two Sections of the Veda

Vedanta is a body of teaching found at the end of the
Veda. The vedas, four in number, Rg, Yajur, Sama,
and Atharva, are each divided into two sections. The
first section deals with dharma, religious ethics;
karma, religious actions, various rituals; artha, other
special actions to achieve security; and kama pleas
ures. This section, called the karmakanda, the "action
section", is very bulky, understandably so, because it
eals with human desires and the actions needed to
fulfil the desires. Human desires are many; to detail
the variety of means, called karma, required to
secure their fulfilment does require much space.
The last section of the Veda is called jianakdnda
the "knowledge section". It is a very much shorter
section beeause its subject matter is a single desire
moksa the desire for liberation. The fulfilment of that
desire is not through actions, which are many, but
through knowledge, which is singular with regard
to the particular thing to be known.

90

=== PAGE 98 ===

THE Text
AAA AAA TT

The ways of knowing a particular thing are not
many, for these have to be the particular, appropriate
means determined by the nature of what is to be
known. Thus, the second section of the vedas, the
"knowledge section", called Vedanta, is a short one.

The Variety of Action

When the means to achieve a given end is action,
karma, there can always be some choice. There are
many ways of doing and achieving the same thing.
About action it is said:

Kartum Sakyam One can do it.

akartum sakyam One can not do it.
anyathd va kartum One can do it

Sakyam differently.

Example: Jim is abie to come.
Jim, come here! Jim is not able to come.

Jim is able to come in
his own way (jumping,
skipping, running,
walking, now, later).

Thus, for an end that has to be achieved through
effort there is a variety of possible actions, karma, to
choose as a means for that end.

Every individual has many desires. The
individuals who entertain these desires too, are
many. Desires vary from individual to individual,

91

=== PAGE 99 ===

INTRODUCTION TO VEDANTA

TAA RN

and from time to time within an individual; these
variations are many. The possible actions, karma,
which will achieve these various desires are also
many and varied. Therefore, the karmakanda, the
first part of the Veda, dealing with actions that
achieve desires, is truly a vast one.

The Role of Scriptures

Veda, meaning "knowledge", is the name for the
body of Indian scriptural knowledge. A scripture is a
body of knowledge considered divinely
authoritative, about matters which cannot be known
by the ordinary means of knowledge.

The Veda, both the first and the second sections,
for the most part are a means of knowledge for things
which one cannot come to know by one's inherent
means of knowledge—the five senses supported by
the mind.

Knowledge of the Subtle Results of Action

The karmakanda is the source of knowledge of the
special religious actions—rituals, prayers, medi-
tations needed for gaining of security and pleasure in
this world and hereafter. It is also the section where
religious ethics are detailed. As we have seen,
religious ethics codify commonsense ethics, based
on the way one wants to be treated by others, and add
something more. The "something more" which is

92

=== PAGE 100 ===

THE TexT
EERE DE EE DE ET EL ETE ETE

added is the idea of punya and papa, merit and
demerit, which accrue to the performer of actions.

Punya, merit, is the subtle result of a good action.
Papa, demerit, is the subtle result of a bad action.
Commonsense ethics as codified in the rules of
dharma and adharma give the standards for
determining whether an action is "good" or "bad".
The subtle result of a good action is punya,, the
occurrence of an enjoyable, pleasant experience at
some later time. The subtle result of a bad action is
papa, an uncomfortable or painful experience at a
later time. If one refuses to be sad, all papa, can do is
give some physical pain. If you accept discomfort,
then papa, can do nothing to you. You cannot be
touched by an external situation which is the
negative result of past actions if you are insulated
against any kind of reaction to it. Maturity of
thinking gives that insulation. Generally, man is not
so insulated. He wants to be comfortable in all ways;
therefore, papa, the uncomfortable subtle result of an
adharmic action, is to be avoided. Punya, the plea-
sant, comfortable result of a dharmic action is to be
sought.

Knowledge of Heaven

The pleasurable rewards of punya, are often reserved
for heaven. The rituals and other kinds of action that
will take one to heaven are set out in the first section
of the Veda. Heaven is viewed as something of a
temporary holiday home. It is a place that one enters

93