=== PAGE 2 ===

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

It is with great satisfaction that I present this English
edition of Sri Kalki Purana, which was compiled by Srila
Vyasadeva for the pleasure of the devotees. I pray that this
presentation will be accepted as a sincere attempt to glorify Lord
Kalki, the incarnation of Godhead. My Godbrother, Laxman Das,
inspired me to undertake this translation of Sri Kalki Purana and
so I first wish to thank him. He has also paid the total amount
required for the publication of this book. Without his assistance,
this book would not have been possible to publish. I also wish
to thank Purnaprajfia Prabhu for editing and proofreading
this book, Kurma Ripa Prabhu for doing the layout and cover
design, and Anjana Dasa for painting the cover illustration. I
also wish to thank my wife, Caitanya Devi Dasi, and son, Bhakti
Siddhanta Das, for typing the manuscript into the computer. I
thank Giridhari Das for typing the roman transliteration of the

verses.

Bhumipati Dasa
Completed on the disappearance day of Srila
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura 8/12/2006

=== PAGE 3 ===

CONTENTS

Introduction vii

CHAPTERS

1. A Description of Kali-Yuga..i..ccceccesesssesessesssessesnesnesseecssneentenseeneeseeens 1
2. The Birth and Sacred Thread Ceremony of Lord Kalki... 14
3. Lord Kalki Receives Benedictions From Siva and Parvati... 27
4. Padmavati Receives a Benediction From Lord Siva....sssssssssesseees 40
5. Padmavati’s Svayamvara...cccseccesssssssssecsesseseeecseeseesnsnecrescseeateacenseneeneeseaee 52
6. Suka Goes To Sithhala as the Envoy of Lord Kalki
Conversation Between Padmavati And Suka....csssssssssssussesssseecssssen 60
7. The Procedure for Worshiping Lord Visnu......c.ccsesceeseseeeeeneseeeee 70
8. Conversation Between Padmavati and Suka
Lord Kalki Goes to Sitthala..cccccecsecessecsseesseessneesessnnssssessesssneseees 79
9. The Meeting of Lord Kalki and Padmavat?.........scsecsssssecssiesesseessess 91
10. The Marriage Of Lord Kalki To Padmavati
Prayers of The Kings To Lord Kalkic..sc.ccessecsesssessssssserseseesneennesenes 100
ll. The Story of Ananta and How He was Influenced by Maya... 110
12. The Meeting of Amanta And Hathsa....ccssscssssssssssessssecsssieecssecessiecesvecs 125
13. Visvakarma Reconstructs the Village of Sambhala
The Arrival of Lord Kalkicsesscsssssssssssssssssssisisnensssvsnsssnssvsssnsvssssnssssnesse 137
14. Lord Kalki Conquers the Buddhists Who Opposed Him........0000+ 148
15. Lord Kalki Is Attacked By The Mleccha Women
Instructions by the Weapons Personified.......csssscsssssesseesesssessseeeeeeen 161
16. The Killing of the Raksasi, Kuthodarin...cccccccceccscessessevesesesssessssesseseeees 173
17.

The Descendents of the Sirya Dynasty

Lord Ramacandra’s Pastimies...ccccsssscsssssssesssssssssssecesesessssvesssssrsssnsesectesees 185

=== PAGE 4 ===

18. The Descendents of Lord Ramacandra

King Maru and King Devapl.......eccesesseesseecsseseesieesiee sessseesteenee scenes 204
19. The Appearance of Satya-Yuga

Description of the Different Manus.....-cccccsecsssces coecctesseecssecneeneeenees 214
20. Lord Kalki Goes Out to Conquer Kali and His Allies .......cececeees 219
21. The Followers of Kal: Are Defeated

The Killing of Koka And Vikoka..sesecseeeesesssssseseesseaneenense eeenees 231
22, Lord Kalki Travels To Bhallatanagara Ruled By Sasidhvaja

A Great Battle Takes Place....ccccsesssssecsssesssessssessearestescssesessessesesseseens 241
23. King Sagidhvaja Brings Lord Kalki to His Palace..essscscsssssessssesssneees 253
24. The Prayers of Suganta

Lord Kalki Marries King Sasidhvaya’s Daughtet.esccccssscsssssssseeeesees 259
25. The Devotion of Sasidhvaya And His Previous History... 268
26. The Glories of the Devotees of Lord Hart... ecsesceeneseseneseene 281
27. The Story of Dvivida Gorilla

King Sasidhvaya’s Previous Birth as King Satrajit.sce csccccssses eee 289
28. Kalki Travels to Kaficananagara and Delivered Visakanya...........0+ 299
29, Prayers Offered to Maya-Devi,

The Deliverance Of King SaSidhvaja...sss cesses senses 308
30. Lord Kalki And Visnuyasa Perform Sacrifices

Instructions by Narada Mun... seseesesesseencseseesesscseenessenssnesneeee 313
31, The Vow of Ruk mini. cicccccce ccccccescsccccscsees sssssesssrssesesesscsessnssescseensessesees 327
32. Lord Kalki Enjoys Pastimes With His Consomts.....ecsecsseeecesneeens 339
33. The Demigods Arrive at Sambhala

The Disappearance of Lord Kalki... ciccecesssecssecsteeesneessee neeenseeess 346
34. Prayers Offered to Mother Ganga... cesses csssesssesssses « ssesseesneeseessess 356
35. The Glories of Hearing Sri Kalki Purana vc. ceccscssssees scssseeeeseesseseees . 361

=== PAGE 5 ===

INTRODUCTION

About five thousand years ago, Sri Krsna Dvaipayana Vyasa, an
empowered incarnation of Lord Krsna, appeared 1n the holy land of
Bharatavarsa. Realizing that as the four yugas progress, the human
beings’ power of understanding gradually diminishes; He divided the
one Veda into four and imparted them to His four principal disciples.
These four Vedas are the Sama, Rk, Yajur, and Atharva. Later on, His
disciples again divided the Vedas into many branches.

Even after dividing the Vedas, Srila Vyasadeva did not feel
satisfied. Thinking that it will be impossible for the people of Kali-yuga
to understand the actual purport of the Vedas, He took the essence of
that understanding and compiled a simple literature called the Purana
Samhita, in story form. Based on this literature, His three principal
disciples wrote three more sarnhitas: Sdvarni-samhita, Samsapayana-
samhita, and Akrtavrana-samhita. The eighteen Puranas and thirty-six
sub Puranas were later compiled, being based on these four samhitas.
Because Srila Vydsadeva’s Purana Samhita 1s the source of these
literatures, all the Puranas and sub Puranas are attributed to him.

Among the upa-puranas or sub Puranas, the Kalki Purana ts most
sacred and widely respected. At the end of Kali-yuga, the Supreme Lord,
Hart, will incarnate as Lord Kalki and kill all the mlecchas, yavanas,
atheists, and Buddhists of the world that defy the Vedic authority. The
pastimes of Lord Kalki are the subject matter of this literature, which
1s presented in story form. Exalted personalities can see everything,
past, present, and future. For this reason, there 1s no fault in narrating
these future events as if they had already occurred. The Kalki Purana

consists of thirty-five chapters.

=== PAGE 6 ===

1 offer my respectful obeisances unto Lord Acyuta, the unborn,
omniscient, and unlimited Supreme Personality of Godhead, who 1s the
destroyer of all obstacles, the shelter of all living entities, and the original
speaker of the Vedic literature He 1s worshiped with great devotion by
the demigods, headed by Indra, the foremost of sages, and by the rulers
of the various planetary systems, for the purpose of attaining all kinds of
perfection tn life

Before reciting this Kalki Purana,, which 1s the verv means of conquest,
one should offer respectful obeisances unto the Personality of Godhead,
Narayana, unto Nara narayana Rs, the supermost human being, unto
mother Sarasvati, the goddess of learning, and unto Srila Vyasadeva, the

author

CHAPTER ONE
A Description of Kali-Yuga

Text 1
sendra devagana munisvarajana
lokah sapalah sada yam sarvartha
susiddhaye pratidinam bhaktya

bhajantt uttamah tam

vighnesam anantam acyutam
gjam sarvajfia sarvasrayam
vande vadika tantrikad: viidhah

sastrath puro vanditam

Text 2
narayanam namaskrtya
naram caiva narottamam
devim sarasvatin caira

tato jayam udirayet

Text 3

yad dordatida karala sarpa kavala

jvala jvalad vigraha netuh satkarah

=== PAGE 7 ===

Sri KALKI PURANA

vala danda daha bhiipah ksitt ksobhakah
sasvat samdhava vahano duya
janth kalkth paratma harth
parat satyayugadikrt sa
bhagavan dharma pravrtti prryah
May the Supreme Personality of Godhead, having assumed the form
of Kalki, who 1s the Supersoul of all living entities, establish the eternal
principles of religion Having appeared in a family of brahmanas, He wiil
annihilate the sinful kings of Kali-yuga by the fire of the poison emanating
from His ferocious serpent-like hands while riding on the back of an
excellent horse of the Sindh province. In this way, He will protect the
pious and re-establish Satya-yuga

Text 4-5
11 sutavacah srutva
nammisaranya vasinah
saunakadya mahabhagah
papracchustam katha mimam

he suta sarvadharmajfia
lomaharsana putraka
trikalayfia puranayiia
vada bhagavatim katham

After Sri Sita Gosvami had offered his obeisances to the Supreme
Lord in this manner, the sages at Naimisaranya, headed by Saunaka Rsi,
said: O Sita Gosvami! O son of Romaharsana! O knower of religious
principles! O seer of past, present and future! O learned authority of the
Puranas, please continue narrating to us the pastimes of the Supreme
Lord.

Text 6
kah kalth kutra va jato
jagatam isvarah prabhuh
katham va nitya dharmasya
vinasah kalina krtah

=== PAGE 8 ===

A DESCRIPTION OF KALI-YUGA

Who 1s Kali? Where was he born? How did he become the master
of the world? How does he destroy the observance of eternal religious

principles?

Text 7
iti tesam vacah srutva
stito dhyatvaé harm prabhum
saharsa pulakodbhinna

sarvangah praha tan munm

After hearing these words of the great sages, Sita Gosvami became
so ecstatic that the hairs of his body stood on end He then absorbed his
mind in remembrance of Lord Hari and continued to speak to the sages

Text 8
suta uvaca
srnudhvam idam akhyanam
bhavisyam paramadbhutam
kathitam brahmanaé purvam
naradaya viprechate

Sita Gosvami said: Please listen attentively as I describe wonderful
pastimes of the Lord that will be revealed at a future time. These
transcendental pastimes were previously glorified by Lord Brahma, who
was born from the universal lotus flower, when he was requested to speak
by the great sage, Narada

Text 9
naradah praha munaye
vyasaya amuta tejase
Sa vyaso nyaputraya
brahmarataya dhimate

Thereafter, Narada repeated what he had heard to the unlimitedly
powerful Srila Vyasadeva, who in turn narrated these topics to his exalted
son, Brahmarata

Text 10
sa cabhimanyu putraya
visnurataya samsadi

=== PAGE 9 ===

Sri Karki PuRANA

praha bhagavatan dharmaénn
astadasa sahasrakan

Brahmarata then described these topics of bhdgavata-dharma to
Abhimanyu’s son, who was known as Visnurata, as he was seated in the
royal assembly This narration consists of eighteen thousand verses

Text 11
tada nrpe layam prapte
saptahe prasna sasitam
markandeyadibhih prstah
praha punyasrame sukah

After hearing for one week without interruption, the saintly king
relinquished his material body and departed from this world, although
the discussion of the glories of the Lord had not ended. After the passing
away of Abhimanyu’s son, great sages, headed by Markandeya, continued
to inquire from Sukadeva Gosvami in that sacred aframa

Text 12
tatraham tadanu jfiatah
srutavanasmi yah kathah
bhauvisyah kathaya masa
punya bhagavath subhah

I was present at that time, and so I heard everything from Sukadeva
Gosvami, by his order | will now narrate to you these most auspicious
pastimes of the Supreme Lord that will take place in the future

Text 13
tam srnudhvam maha bhagah
samahita dhiyo‘nsam

gate krsne svanilayam
pradurbhiito yatha kahh

O greatly fortunate sages, please listen attentively as | describe to you
how Kal: appeared in this world after Lord Krsna had returned to His
own abode

=== PAGE 10 ===

A DESCRIPTION OF KALI-YUGA

Text 14
pralayante jagatsrastah
brahma loka pitamahah
sasarja ghoram malinam
prsthadesat svapatakam

After the annthilation, the secondary creator of the universe, Lord
Brahma, the grandfather of everyone, who was born on the universal
lotus flower, created Sin personified, having a black complexion, trom
his back.

Text 15
sa cardharma i khyatas
tasya vamsanu kirttanat
sravanat smaranal lokah

sarva papath pramucyate

The name of Sin personified was Adharma By faithfully hearing
about, chanting, and remembering the descendents of Adharma, one
quickly becomes freed from all sinful reactions.

Text 16
adharmasya priya ramya
muthya marjara locana
tasya putro’ttejasvr
dambhah parama kopanah

The wife of Adharma, (Irreligion), was named Mithya, (Falsehood)
She was very beautiful, and had eyes like those of a cat They had a son
named Dambha, (Pride), who was always very angry and energetic

Text 17
sa mayayam bhagyantu
lobham putrafica kanyakam
nikrttm janaya masa

tayoh kodhah suto’ bhavat

Dambha had a sister named Maya, and within her womb, he begot
a son named Lobha, (Greed), and a daughter named Nikrti, (Cunning)
Lobha begot a son named Krodha, (Anger), in the womb of Nikrtt

=== PAGE 11 ===

Sri KALKI PURANA

Text 18
sa himsayam bhagmnyantu
jJanaya masa tam kalim
vamahasta dhrtopastham
tailabhyaktanyana prabham

Himsa, (Envy), was Krodha’s sister. From the womb of Himsa, Krodha
begot a son named Kali. Kal: 1s always seen to be holding his genitals in
his left hand. His complexion 1s very black, like black ointment that has
been mixed with oil

Text 19
kakodaram karalasam
lolanhvam bhayanakam
putigandham dyittamadya

strt suvarna krtasrayam

Kali’s abdomen 1s like that of a crow, his face 1s frightening to behold,
and his tongue 1s red and appears to be full of greed. His appearance 1s
very fearful and a bad smell emanates from his body. Kali ts very fond of
playing chess, drinking wine, enjoying the company of prostitutes, and
associating with gold merchants.

Texts 20-21
bhagmyantu duruktyam sa
bhayam putrafica kanyakam
mrtyum sa janayamasa
tayosca murayo’ bhavat

yatanayam bhaginyantu
lebhe putrayutayutam
utham kahkule jata
vahavo dharma nindakah

Kali’s sister was Durukti, (Harsh Speech). From Durukt1’s womb,
Kal: begot a son named Bhaya, (Fear), and a daughter named, Mrtyu
(Death). Bhaya begot a son named Niraya (Hell) from the womb of Mrtyu
and Niraya begot ten thousand sons in the womb of his sister, Yatana
(Excessive Pain). Thus I have described the destructive progeny of Kali,
who were all blasphemers of genuine religious principles.

=== PAGE 12 ===

A DESCRIPTION OF KALI-YUGA

Text 22
yaya adhyayanadi dana
veda tantra vinasakah
Gdhi vyadh jaraglann
duhkhah soka bhayasrayah

All these relatives of Kali were the destroyers of sacrifice, study of
the Vedas, and charity, because they transgressed all the Vedic principles
of religion. They were reservoirs of mental distress, disease, old age,
destruction of religious principles, sorrow, lamentation, and fear

Texts 23-24
kaliraya anugascerur
yuthaso lokandsakah
babhivuh kala vibhrastah
ksankah kamuka narah

dambhacara duracaras
tata matr vihimsakah

vedahinad dvya dinah
sudraseva parah sada

These descendents of Kalt are found wandering everywhere
throughout the kingdom of Kali, destroying the people of the world They
are misguided by the influence of time, very restless by nature, full of
lusty desires, extremely sinful, very proud, and violent even to their own
father and mother Those who are known as twice-horn among them are
devoid of all good behavior, without any observance of proper etiquette,
and always engaged 1n the service of Sadras.

Texts 25-27
kutarka vada vahula
dharma wikraymo’ dhamah
veda vikraymo bratva
rasa vikrayinas tatha

mamsa vikraymah krurah
sisnodara parayanah
paradara rata matta

varna sankara karakah

=== PAGE 13 ===

Sri KALKI PURANA

hrsvakarah papasarah
satha matha nivasinah
sodasabdayusah syala

bandhava nicasangamah

These fallen souls are very fond of dry arguments, and they use
religion as a means of livelihood, teach Vedic knowledge as a profession,
are fallen from the execution of their vows, and sell wine and other
abominable things, including meat. They are cruel by nature, and very
fond of gratifying their bellies and genitals. For this reason, they lust
after the wives of otners and are always seen to be intoxicated They were
not born from a father and mother who were properly married, and they
are short in stature and always engaged 1n sinful acts, such as cheating
others They generally reside in a sacred place, live for only sixteen years,
associate with wretched people, and only consider a brother-1n-law to be
a friend and relative

Text 28
vivada kalaha ksuvdhah
kesa vesa ubhusanah
kalau kulina dhaninah
piyya vadardhusika duyah

The people of Kali-yuga are accustomed to quarrelling and fighting
amongst themselves. They go to great lengths to groom their hair, wear
the best of clothes, and decorate themselves with costly ornaments.

Text 29
sanyasino grhasakta
grahasthastva vikinah
gururninda para dharma
dhvayinah sadhuvaticakah

In Kali-yuga, a person with a lot of money will naturally be respected
as a great soul. If a twice-born person earns his livelihood by lending
money on interest, he will be considered a pillar of society. The sannyadsis
of Kali-yuga will be attached to home and property, and householders will
become devoid of all power of discrimination. In Kali-yuga, people will
blaspheme a spiritual master or other elderly person without hesitation.

=== PAGE 14 ===

A DESCRIPTION OF KALI-YUGA

Indeed, people in general will simply become hypocrites, liars, and
cheaters
Texts 30-37
prangraha ratah sudra
parasva haranadarah
dvayoh svikaram udvahah
sathe maim: tadanyata

pratidane ksama’ saktau
viraktu karanaksame
vacdlatvafica panditye

yasor’'the dharma sevanam

dhanadhya tvatica sadhutve
diire mire ca tirthata

sutramatrena vipratvam

dandamatrena maskart

alpasasva vasumati
naditire’varopita

strvyo vesyalapa sukhah
svapupmsa tyaktamanasah

paranna lolupa vipras
candala grhayayakah

striyo vaidhavya hinasca
svacchanda acarana privah

citravrsti kara megha
mandasasya ca medini

prayabhaksa nrpa lokah
karapida prapiditah

skandhe bhéram kare putram
krtva ksuvdhah prayajanah
ginidurgam vanam ghoram

asravisyant: durbhagah

=== PAGE 15 ===

10

Sri Karki PurRANA

madhu mamsar mulaphalarr
ahdrath prana dharinah
evam tu prathame pade

kaleh krsna vinindakah

In Kali-yuga, Sudras will accept charity from others, or else plunder
others’ wealth without discrimination. Mutual agreement will become
the sole criteria for solemnizing the marriage of a boy and girl. People will
show sympathy and magnanimity, but it will simply be a form of duplicity.
Forgiveness will be granted only when a person 1s unable to harm the
offending party. In a society of might makes right, people will easily
become annoyed with those in a weaker position. Even fools will be very
talkative in an attempt to prove that they are learned. People will engage
in religious ceremonies, but simply to acquire a reputation. If one has got
wealth, he will be considered to be a saint. Just to bathe 1n a holy place,
people will travel a great distance and undergo much trouble. Simply by
putting on a sacred thread, one will be recognized as a brahmana. Simply
by carrying a staff, one will be recognized as a sannyasi.

The earth will restrict the production of food grains. The currents of
rivers will flow very rapidly, and even married women will behave little
better than prostitutes, because they have practically no attachment for
their husbands. Those who are twice-born will be dependent on others,
so much so that they will not hesitate to engage as priests for Sudras.
Women will become promiscuous, so that will be easily abandoned by
their husbands. Clouds will shower rain very irregularly, and the land
will not yield sufficient crops. Kings will whimsically torture and kill
their subjects, and burden them with excessive taxes. Such unfortunate
subjects will finally take their family and belongings and take shelter of
mountains and dense forests. The people of Kali-yuga will sustain their
lives by eating flesh, honey, fruit, and roots, without discrimination.
Almost everyone will take pleasure in blaspheming the Supreme Lord,
Sri Krsna These are some of the symptoms that will manifest at the
beginning of Kalt-yuga.

Text 38
dviteye tannama hmas

trtrye varna sankarah

=== PAGE 16 ===

A DESCRIPTION OF KALI-YUGA 11

ekavarnas caturthe ca

vismrta cyuta satkrivah

In the second quarter of Kali-yuga, people will no longer chant the
holy names of Lord Krsna. In the third quarter of Kalt-yuga, there will be
an upsurge of unwanted population, and in the final quarter of Kali-yuga,
there will be only one class of human being, because God consciousness
will have been long forgotten.

Text 39
nihsvadhyaya svadha svaha
vausadom kara varyitah
deva sarve nvaharah

brahmanam saranam yuyuh

When the study of the Vedas, performance of sacrifice, chanting of
mantras, and other religious practices thus disappear from this world during
Kali-yuga, the demigods, being afflicted due to not receiving their share
of sacrificial offerings, will take shelter of Lord Brahma, the grandfather
of the universe, who was born from the universal lotus flower

Texts 40-43
dhantrim agratah krtva
ksinam dmam manasvimim
dadrsur brahmano lokam

vedadhvani nnaditam

yanadhumath samakirnam
munivarya nisevitam
suvarna vedikamadhye

daksinavarttam wjvalam

vahnim yupankita udyana
vana puspa phalantitam
sarobhth sarasair hamsarr

ahvayantam watithim

vayu lola lata jala
kusumali kulakulash

=== PAGE 17 ===

Srt Kaki PuRANA

pranamahvana satkara

madhuralapam tksanath

Keeping mother earth, who had become emaciated due to great
distress in front, all of the demigods went to the abode of Lord Brahma
There, they experienced that the entire atmosphere was surcharged with
the sounds of the chanting of Vedic mantras, and every where was smoke
pouring from the sacrificial fires Lord Brahma, the leader of all the sages,
was sitting upon his throne, conducting a fire sacrifice on an altar made
of gold Here and there were many gardens and orchards full of flowers,
fruit, and wood for performing fire sacrifices. Swans, cranes, and other
aquatic birds made wonderful sounds, as 1f they were greeting their guests
with joy The swans, cranes, and other aquatic birds were surrounded
by intoxicated bumblebees hovering around innumerable creepers and
flowers, swinging to and fro in the cool breeze Thus, it appeared as if they
were all offering obeisances and speaking very sweetly while greeting
their guests with great pleasure

Text 44
tad brahma sadanam devah
sesvarah kinnamanasah
viisustadanuyfata

nyakaryam niveditum

Thus, all the demigods, headed by Indra, arrived in the abode of
Lord Brahma in a distressed state of mind By the order of Prayapati, they
entered the assembly hall of Lord Brahma, so that they could disclose to
him to cause of their grief

Text 45
tribhuvana janakam sada
sanastham sanaka sanandana
sanatanaisca siddhath
panseuita pada kamalam

brahmanam devata nemuh

The demigods first offered their respectful obeisances to Lord Brahma,
whose lotus feet were being served by perfected beings such as Sanaka,
Sanandana, and Sanatana as he sat in meditation Lord Brahma 1s the

=== PAGE 18 ===

A DESCRIPTION OF KALI-YUGA

secondary creator of the three worlds who acts under the direction of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead

Thus ends the translation of the first chapter of Sri Kalki Purana

13

=== PAGE 19 ===

CGuAPTEFR Two
The Birth and Sacred Thread Ceremony of Lord Kalki

Text 1
suta uvaca
upavistas tato deva
brahmano vacanat purah
kalerdosad dharma hanm
kathaya ma swadarat

Sata Goswamt said Thereafter, by the order of Lord Brahma, all the
demigods sat in front of him and then explained how the observance of
religious principles was declining at an alarming rate in Kali yuga

Text 2
devanam tadvacah srutva
brahma tanaha duhkhitan
prasadayitva tam visnum
sadhayisyami abhipsitam

After hearing their words saturated with anguish, Lord Brahma said
Let us all approach Lord Visnu We should please Him with our prayers
so that He may act for our welfare

Text 3
in devath pari rto
gatva goloka vasmam
stutva praha puro brahma
devanam Indavepsitam

Atter saying this, Lord Brahma took all the demigods and went to the
abode of Lord Ham known as Goloka There, he offered prayers to the
Supreme Lord, informing Him of the plight of the demigods

Text 4
tacchrutva pundarikakso

hyahmanam idam avravit

=== PAGE 20 ===

THE BirTH AND SACRED THREAD CEREMONY OF LorD KALKI

sambhale «isnuvasaso

grhe pradurbhabamyaham

sumatyam matan vibho '
kanvayam teannidesatah

After hearing everything in detail, lotus eyed Lord Hari said O
Brahma, rest assured that [ will soon descend to the earth and appear
in the village known as Sambhala | will take birth in the house of a
brahmana named Visnuyasa, from the womb of his wife, Sumati

Text 5
caturbhir bhratrbhir deva
Aarisyame kaliksavam
bhavanto bandhava devah
svamsena atatarisvatha

My mission will be to eliminate the wicked Kali, with the help of My
four brothers O demigods, your expansions should also take birth on the
earth to assist Me in My mission

Text 6
ryam mama priva laksmih
simhale sambhatisvati
brhadrathasya bhupasya

haumudvam kamaleksuna

bharyyayam mama bharvatsa

padma namm janiyyatt

My consort, the beloved lotus eyed Kamala devi, will also appear on
the earth, having the name Padma She will be born from the womb of
Kaumudh, the wife of Brhadratha, the king of Simhala

Text 7
vata suvam bhucam devah
stamsavatarane ratah
yaanau maru dervapi

sthapayisyamt aham bhutt

15

=== PAGE 21 ===

16 Sri KALKI PURANA

O demigods, you should not delay. By your plenary portions, take
birth on the earth Later on, | will entrust the responsibility for ruling the
earth to two powerful kings named Maru and Devapi.

Text 8
punah kratayugam krtva
dharman samsthapya purvavat
kalivyalam sannurasya

prayasye svdlayam vibhoh

1 will then again establish Satya-yuga, and thus reinstate the principles
of religion as they were before. Rest assured that | will return to Vaikuntha
only after destroying the poisonous snake, Kali.

Text 9
iyud wnitam akarnya
brahma devaganair urtah
jagama brahmasadanam
devasca tridevam yuyuh

After Lord Hari assured the demigods in this way, Lord Brahma,
surrounded by the other demigods, departed for his own abode. From
there, the demigods returned to their respective abodes.

Text 10
mahimna svasya bhagavan
nya janma krtodyamah
viprarse sambhala gramam

abu esa paratmakah

O greatly powerful brahmana, thereafter, with a desire to make
His appearance within this world in a humanlike form by His own
transcendental potency, the Supreme Lord, Har, the Supersoul within
the heart ot everyone, entered the village of Sambhala.

Text 11
sumutyam visnuyasasa
garbhamadhatta vaisnam
graha naksatra rasyadi

sevita srt padambyyum

=== PAGE 22 ===

THE BIRTH AND SACRED THREAD CEREMONY OF LorD KALKI

Meanwhile, in due course of time, Visnuyaga’s wife, Sumati, became
pregnant so that all auspicious symptoms began to appear in her body.
Thereafter, all the presiding deities of the planets, stars, and constellations
began serving the lotus feet of the child within her womb.

Text 12
sarit samudra grrayo lokah
samsthanu jangamah
saharsa rsayo deva

jate visnau jagatpatau

On an auspicious day and at an auspicious time, Lord Hani, the master
of the universe, took birth within this world. At this time, all the lakes,
rivers, oceans, mountains, demigods, and sages, and indeed all moving
and non-moving living entities, became filled with ecstasy.

Texts 13-14
babhuvah sav vasatvanam
ananda vwidhasrayah

nrtyanti pitaro hrstas

tusta deva jaguryasah

cakrur vadyam gandharva

nanrtuscapa saroganah

Every living being began to display symptoms of happiness upon the
appearance of the Supreme Lord. The forefathers danced 1n ecstasy, the
demigods sang the glories of Lord Hari, the Gandharvas played musical
instruments, and Apsaras danced with great jubilation,

Text 15
dvadasyam sukla paksasya
madhave mast madhavah
jate dadrsauh putram

pitarau hrstamanasau

In this setting, Lord Hart incarnated within this world in His form
as Kalki on the twelfth day during the fortnight of the waxing moon in
the month of Vaisakha Upon seeing the beautiful baby, the hearts of
Visnuyasa and Sumati became filled with great happiness.

17

=== PAGE 23 ===

18 Sri KaLkKt PuRANA

Text 16
dhatri mata mahasasthi
nabhicchetri tadamvika
gangodaka kleda moksa
sdvitri marjanodyata

When Lord Kalki appeared, Mahasasthi was His nurse, Ambika cut
His umbilical cord, and Savitri cleansed His body with water from the
Ganges.

Text 17
tasya visnor anantasya
vasudha’dhat payahsudham
matrka mangalya vacah

krsna janma dine yatha

On the auspicious day of Lord Kalki’s advent, mother earth showered
nectar in the form of an abundance of milk, and the elderly ladies blessed
the child with auspicious words.

Texts 18-19
brahma tadupadhdr yasu
svasugam praha sevakam
yahiti sutika garam

gatva visnum prabodhaya

caturbhujam idam rupam
devandm api durlabham
tyaktva manusa vad rupam

kuru natha vicdritam

Lord Brahma, who knew the mystery of the Lord’s appearance, hastily
called for his servant, Pavana, and told him to immediately go to the
maternity home and offer the following prayer to Lord Visnu: O Lord,
please consider how this four-armed form of Yours is rarely seen, even by

the demigods. Please assume a two-armed form like that of a human being
and then carry out Your mission.

Text 20
iti brahma vacah srutvd

pavanah surabhi sukham

=== PAGE 24 ===

Tue BirTH AND SACRED THREAD CEREMONY OF LorpD KALkt

sasitih praha tarasa

brahmano vacanadrtah

Without delay, Pavana-deva, whose cooling body has a very pleasing
aroma, went to the maternity room of Lord Kalki and submitted Brahma’s
appeal.

Text 21
tacchrtva pundarikaksas
tat ksanat dvibhujo’bhavat
tadat tat pitarau drstva

vismaya panna manasau

When the lotus-eyed Lord heard this request, He immediately
assumed a two-armed form. His father and mother were certainly struck
with wonder upon seeing this wonderful pastime of the Lord.

Text 22
bhrama samskara vattatra
menate tasya mayaya
tatastu sambhala grame

sotsava jivajatayah

mangalacava babhulah
pdpatapa vivarjitah

The parents could not understand the actual truth regarding their
son because of being bewildered by the Lord's yogamdya potency. They
considered that their vision of the Lord’s four-armed form had been
a hallucination, and that all along they had witnessed His two-armed
form. Thereafter, all the inhabitants of Sambhala celebrated the Lord's
appearance by performing auspicious rituals, completely forgetful of their
material miseries.

Text 23
sumatistam sutam labdhva
visnum jisnum jagatpaum
purnakama vipra mukhyan

ahityadat gavam satam

19

=== PAGE 25 ===

Sri KALKI PURANA

Having received the all-glorious Lord Visnu, the master of the three
worlds, as her son, mother Sumati’s happiness knew no bounds. She
invited the brahmanas and gave them each one hundred cows in charity.

Text 24
hareh kalyanakrd visnu
yasah suddhena cetasa
samarg yajur vidbhir

agrayais tannama karane ratah

For the welfare of his child, the pure-hearted Visnuyaga invited many
brahmanas that were expert in reciting the Rg Veda, Yajur Veda, and Sama
Veda, and had them perform the child’s name-giving ceremony.

Text 25
tada ramah krpo vyaso
draunir bhiksu sarirmah
samdyata hartm drstam

balakatvam upagatam

At that time, Lord Rama, Krpacarya, Vyasadeva, and Agvattama
came there in the guise of brahmanas to have the darsana of Lord Han,
who has assumed the form of child Kalki.

Text 26
ianagatan samdlokya
caturah surya sannibhan
hrstaruma dvyavarah

pwayancakra isvaran

As Visnuyaga, the foremost of brahmanas, gazed upon those four
exalted brahmanas whose effulgence was equal to that of the sun-god, his
hair stood on end. He then worshiped these four exalted personalities,
offering them nice prayers

Text 27
pujitaste svasanesu
samuistah svasukhasrayah
harm kodagatam tayya

dadrsuh sarva murttayah

=== PAGE 26 ===

THe BirTH AND SACRED THREAD CEREMONY OF LorD KALKI 2]

Atter being worshiped by Visnuyasa, these four who were disguised as
brahmanas, who could indeed assume any form at will, sat at ease in their
respective places. While seated, they gazed at child Kalki as He was seated
upon the lap of His father

Text 28
tam balakam narakaram
visnum natvd munisvarah
kalkt kalka vindsartham
avirbhiitam vidurbudhah

The four exalted brahmanas offered their obeisances unto Lord Visnu,
who had assumed the form of a human being. They very well understood
that Lord Kalki had appeared to rid the earth of all those who had become
degraded to the level of sinful demons.

Text 29
nama kurvams tatastasya
kalki ritya bhivisrutam
krtva samskara karmant

yayuste hrstamanasah

The four exalted brahmanas named the transcendental child Kalk.
They happily performed the child’s birth ceremony and then departed for
their own abodes.

Text 30
tatah sa bavrdhe tatra
sumatya partpalitah
kalenalpe kamsanh
suklapakse yatha sas

Thereafter, as the moon in the fortnight of the waxing moon increases
day by day, Lord Kalki grew up under the care of His affectionate mother,
Sumat: Within a very short time, the Lord grew up to become a young
boy.

Text 31
kalker yesthastrayah surah
kaviprayfia sumantrakah

=== PAGE 27 ===

22 Srt Katki PurANA

pitrmatr preyakara
guru vipra pratisthitah

Before Lord Kalki’s birth, three sons were born to Sumati, named
Kavi, Prajfia, and Sumantra All of them were heroic warriors who always
acted for the pleasure of their spiritual master and their parents. They
were highly praised by all elderly respectable people and brahmanas

Text 32
kalkeramsah purojatah
sadhavo dharmatatparah
gargya bhagya uisaladya
Jnatayas tadanuvratah

Great saintly persons like Gargamum, Bhagya, and Visala had also
appeared in the family of Lord Kalki All of them were parts and parcels
of Kalki, and His obedient servants.

Text 33
visdkhay ipa bhupala
palitas tapavarjitah
brahmanah kalkim alokya
param pritim upagatah

These exalted personalities were maintained by the king, who was
named Visakhaipa. After having the dargana of Lord Kalki, all these
bradhmanas felt jubilant and relieved of all material miseries.

Texts 34-35
tato visnuyasah putram
dhiram sarva gundkaram
kalkim kamala patraksam
provaca pathanadrtam

tata te brahma samskaram
yajnasutram anuttamam
savitrim vacayisyamt
tato vedan pathisyasi

After some time, when Visnuyaga saw that his lotus-eyed child, Kalk1,
who was a reservoir of transcendental qualities, was ready to begin His

=== PAGE 28 ===

Tue BirRTH AND SACRED THRFAD CEREMONY OF LoRD KALKI 23

education, he called him and spoke with a gentle voice. My dear child, |
will now arrange for Your sacred thread ceremony so that you can chant
the Gayatri mantras and begin Your study of the Vedas
Text 36
kalkiruvaca
ko vedahka ca savin
kena sutrena samskratah
brahmana widita loke

tat tattvam vada tata mama

Lord Kalki said: My dear father, what are the Vedas’? What are the
Gayatri mantras? How 1s it that one can become a braéhmana simply by
undergoing some ritual and putting on a thread? Please describe all this
truthfully.

Text 37
pitovaca vedo harervak
savitrt vedamata pratisthita
trigunaiica trivrt sutram
tena viprah pratisthitah

Visnuyaga said: My dear son, the words of the Supreme Lord constitute
the Vedas, and the Savitri, or Gayatri, mantras are the mother of the
Vedas. The sacred thread represents the three modes of material nature,
which are controlled by the Supreme Brahman. When a brahmana wears

his sacred thread, he becomes highly respected within society.

Text 38
dasayayfiath samskrta ye
brahmana brahma vadinah
tatra vedasca lokanam

trayanam tha posakah

Brahmanas who have duly undergone the ten samskdras and have
studied the four Vedas thoroughly are qualified to protect the principles

of the Vedas.
Text 39
yajnadhyavana danadi

tapah svadhyaya samyamath

=== PAGE 29 ===

24 Sri KALKI PURANA

prmayant: harm bhaktya
cedatantra uidhanatah

Only brahmanas can please Lord Hari by their unshakable faith and
devotion They study the Vedas, perform fire sacrifices, give charity,
undergo penance, and carefully control their senses

Text 40
tasmat yathopanayana
karmane’ ham duyath’saha
samskarttum bandhava janais
tvamicchami subhe dine

Therefore, on an ausprcious day, I would like to invite all my relatives, as
well as qualified brahmanas, and perform Your sacred thread ceremony

Text 41
putra uvaca
ke ca te dasa samskara
brahmanesu pratisthitah
brahmanah kena va visnum

arcayant vidhanatah

Lord Kalki said: My dear father, what are the ten samskaras, which by
observing a brahmana becomes highly regarded 1n society’ Tell Me how a
brahmana engages in the worship of Lord Visnu.

Texts 42-43

putovaca
brahmanavam brahmanayjato

garbhadhanad: samskrtah
sandhya trayena savitrt

puja Japa parayanah
tapasvi saryavan dhiro

dharmatma trati samsrtm
visnavarcanam idam jitatva

sadananda mayo duyah

Visnuyasa said One who is born of brahmana parents who had
observed the garbhadhana samskdra, worship the Supreme Lord according

=== PAGE 30 ===

THE BIRTH AND SACRED THREAD CEREMONY OF LorD KALKI 25

to the prescribed rules and regulations, chant the Gayatri mantra three
times a day, undergo austerities, always speak truthfully, and are patient,
will happily rise above the modes of material nature and thus be able to
deliver other living entities from the ocean of material existence

Text 44
putra uvaca
kutraste sa dvyo yena
tarayati akhilam jagat
sanmargena harm prman

kamadondha jagattraye

Lord Kalki said. Where can that brahmana be found who pleases
Lord Visnu by following the path of devotional service, who works for the
welfare of all living entities within the three worlds, and who 1s capable
of delivering all the people of the world?

Text 45
pitovaca
kalina balina dharma
ghatina duya patina
mrakrata dharmarata

gata varsan tarantaram

Visnuyasa said: At present, the pious brahmanas have left this country
(India), having been chastised by the powerful Kali, who 1s envious of
saintly persons, and who destroys the practice of religious principles

Texts 46-47
ye svalpa tapaso viprah
sthitah kalryugantare
stsnodara bhrto’dharma
nurata viratakriyah

papasara duracaras
tejohinah kalavitha

atmanam raksitum nawa
saktah sudrasya sevakah

=== PAGE 31 ===

26 Sri Karki PURANA

Only those brahmanas who have not become very powerful as a result
of their performance of austerity are still under the control of Kali. They
are simply engaged in eating, sleeping, enjoying sex, and acting sinfully
in other ways, thus avoiding their duty to perform the Vedic rituals. Such
brahmanas are sinful and powerless because they whimsically engage
in the service of Sudras. Thus, they are completely unable to protect
themselves from the influence of Kal.

Text 48
itt janaka vaco nisamya kalkth
kahkula nasa mano' bhilasajanma
dvya nya vacanais tadopanito
gurukula vasam uvasa sadhunarthah

When Lord Kalki, the maintainer of the devotees, who had taken
birth with a desire to destroy the influence of Kali-yuga, heard these
words of his father, he underwent the sacred thread ceremony and then
left home to live at the dsrama of His guru

Thus ends the translation of the second chapter of Sti Kalki Purana

=== PAGE 32 ===

CHAPTER THRFEE
Lord Kalki Receives Benedictions From Lord Siva and Parvati

Text 1
suta uvaca
tato vastum gurukule
yantam kalkim nimiksya suh
mahendradn sthito ramah

samantya asramam prabhuh

Sata Gosvami said: Thereafter, Lord Kalki went to live at the gurukula.
Upon seeing Him approach, the greatly powerful Parasurama, who lives
at Mount Mahendra, took Him to His agrama.

Text 2
praha tvam pathayisvamu
gurum mam viddh: dharmatah
bhrguvamsa samutpannam

jamadagnyam mahaprabhum

Lord Parasurama said: My dear child, I will act as Your teacher and
so You may treat me as Your dcarya. | am the son of the greatly powerful
sage, Jamadagmi, and thus | belong to the Bhrgu dynasty ~

Texts 3-4
veda vedanga tattavaynam
dhanurveda visaradam
krtva nhksatreyam prthi im
dattva upraya daksimam

mahendradrau tapastaptum
agato'ham dvydtmaja
tvam pathatra nyam vedam

yaccanyacchastram uttamam

I am well-versed in the four Vedas, the literature dealing with
grammar, and the six branches of the Vedas. | am very expert in the art
of shooting arrows. Previously, I made the entire earth devoid of ksatrivas

=== PAGE 33 ===

28

Sri KaLkt PURANA

and then gave the southern portion of the country to the brahmanas
Thereafter, I went to Mount Mahendra to perform austerities O son of a
brahmana, you may stay here and study whatever scriptures you like

Text 5
it tadvaca trprasrutya
samprahrsta tanuruhah

kalkih puro namaskrtya
vedadhiti tato’ bhavat

Stta Gosvami said: Upon hearing these words of Parasurama, Kalki
became very pleased and immediately offered His respectful obesiances
to Him Thereafter, He began to study the Vedas under the direction of
his spiritual master.

Text 6
sangam catuhsastikalam
dhanurveda adi kafica yat
samadhitya jamadagiiyat
kalkth praha kratatyalth

Kalki mastered the sixty-four arts under the tutelage of the son of
Jamadagni. He also learned the Vedas, the branches of the Vedas, the
Dhanurveda, and other departments of knowledge. Thereafter, He folded
His hands and spoke to His guru as follows.

Text 7
daksimaém prarthaya vibho
ya deya tava sannidhau
yaya me sarva siddhithsyad

ya syat tvattosa karmi

Lord Kalki said: O my Lord, please tell me what kind of daksina I
should give You so that You will be pleased, and I will thus be able to
achieve complete perfection in life.

Text 8
rama uvaca

brahmana prarthito bhumana

kah mgraha karanat

=== PAGE 34 ===

BENEDICTIONS FROM LorpD SIVA AND PARVATI 29

visnuh sarvasrayah piurnah
sa jatah sambhale bhavan

Parasurama said: O great soul! Long ago, Brahma prayed to Lord
Visnu, the shelter of all living entities and the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, to destroy the influence of Kali. I understand that You are that
same Supreme Personality, appearing 1n the village of Sambhala.

Text 9
matto vidyam sivadastam
labdhva vedamayam sukam
stmhale ca prryam padmam
dharman samsthapayisyast

You have learned the art of discharging arrows from Me. You will
imbibe transcendental knowledge from Sukadeva Gosvami, and You will
be awarded a powerful weapon by Lord Siva. Thereafter, You will marry
a woman named Padma from the island of Simhala Your mission 1s to re-
establish sandtana-dharma.

Text 10
tato digvyaye bhiipan
dharmahman kalipriyan
nigrhya bauddhan devapm
marufica sthapayissyasi

Thereafter, You will set out to conquer the entire world and in
the course of that conquest, You will defeat many sintul kings who
are representatives of Kali. You will also annihilate many followers of

Buddhism and finally, You will entrust the responsibility of ruling the
world to Devapi and Maru

Text 11
vayame taistu santustah
s@dhukrtyath sadaksmah
yayfiam danam tapah karma
karisyamo yathocitam

lam fully satisfied just to know that You will perform these pastimes
and so there ts no need for any other daksina When the principles of

=== PAGE 35 ===

30 Sri KALki PURANA

religion are re-established, then people will perform sacrifice, give charity,
and undergo austerity without impediment.
Text 12
ityetat vacanam srutea
namaskratva munim gurum
viuvoda kesvaram devam

gatva tustava sankaram

After hearing these words of Parasurama and offering him obeisances
three times, Lord Kalki, the master of the demigods, approached Lord
Mahadeva and began to offer him prayers.

Text 13
pwayitva yathanyayam
sivam santam mahesvaram
pranipatyasu tosam tam
dhyatva praha hrdi sthitam

After offering His respectful obeisances to Lord Siva, who 1s very
easily pleased, and worshiping him with devotion, Lord Kalki began to
speak, keeping His mind fully under control.

Text 14
kalharuvaca
gaurmatham visvanatham
_smanayam bhiitavasam
vasuki kanthabhusam tryaksam
paticasyadi devam puranam

vande sandrananda sandohadaksam

Lord Kalki sard: O Lord Sankara, you are the oldest of all, the husband
of Gauri, the lord of the universe, the only protector of the living entities,
and the shelter of everyone. Your neck 1s decorated with the serpent,
Vasuki, you have three eyes and five heads, you are always absorbed in
transcendental ecstasy, and you award liberation to your devotees I offer
my obeisances unto you

Text 15
yogadhisam kamanasam

karalam ganga sangaklinna

=== PAGE 36 ===

BENEDICTIONS FROM LORD S1tvA AND PARVATI 31

murddhanamisam jatajutato
pariksipta bhavam mahakalam

candrabhalam namami

You are the lord of mystic yoga and the destroyer of lusty desires.
Your form 1s fearful to behold, your head 1s always wet with the water of
the Ganges, the matted hair on your head looks most enchanting, your
forehead 1s decorated with a mark of the halt moon, and you are the
personification of mahda-kdla. | offer my obeisances unto you.

Texts 16-17
smasdnastham bhutavetala sangam
nana sastrath khadaga suladibhisca
vyagrat yugra vahavo lokandse
yasya krodhad dhataloko’stameti

vo bhittadih patica bhutath
sisrksuh tanmatratma kalakarma
svabhavath prahrtyedam prapva
jivatvamiso brahmanando

ramate tam namamt

You frequent crematoriums in the company of ghosts and hobgoblins,
and you carry a trident and other weapons in your hands At the time
of annihilation, the entire creation 1s burnt to ashes by the blazing fire
emanating from your anger. The conditioned souls are born in this world
under the influence of false ego, and their bodies are made of the five
gross material elements. You are the lord ot the mode of ignorance, and
thus you are one of the directors of the material universe Although you
are involved in universal affairs, you always remain aloof from material
association as you remain absorbed in transcendental ecstasy | offer my
obeisances unto you

Teat 18
sthitau cisnuh sare ayisnuh
suratma lokan sadhun
dharmasetun vibhars:
brahmadyase yo'bhimant

=== PAGE 37 ===

32 Sri Karki PURANA

gunatma savdadyangaistam
paresam bhajami

I worship Lord Siva, the protector of the universe and the Supersoul of
all living entities He 1s always victorious, being a qualitative incarnation
of Lord Visnu, and He delivers saintly persons by protecting the principles
of religion. He 1s the personification of transcendental sound, a reservoir
of divine qualities, and the possessor of great intelligence.

Text 19
yasyajnaya vayavo vant
loke yvalatyagnth savita yan
tapyan sutamsuh khe tarakath
sagrahaisca pravarttate
tam paresam prapadye
By your order the wind blows, fire burns, the sun distributes heat
and light, and the moon, planets and stars illuminate the sky. I offer my
obeisances unto you.
Text 20
yasyasvasat sarvadhatn dharitrt
devo varsat yambu kalah pramata
merurmadhye bhuvandanajica bhartté

tamisanam visvarupam namami

By your order, the earth sustains all moving and non moving entities,
Indra showers rain, the time factor divides the duties of everyone, and
Mount Sumeru, which 1s the shelter of the universe, remains fixed at the
center I offer my humble obeisances to the universal form of Lord Siva.

Text 21
itt kalkistavam srutea
suvah sarvatma darsanah
saksat praha isannisah
parvati sahito’ gratah

After hearing these prayers, Lord Siva, being omniscient, appeared
before Lord Kalki with Parvati and spoke to Him while smiling grandly.

=== PAGE 38 ===

BENEDICTIONS From Lorp Siva AND PARVATI 33
Text 22
kalkeh samsprsya hastena
samasta vayavam muda
tamaha varaya prestha
varam yatte’ bhi kamksitam

Lord Siva caressed the entire body of Lord Kalki with his hands and
then said: O foremost of all beings, please ask from me the benediction
You desire.

Text 23
tvaya krtamidam stotram
ye pathant jana bhuvr
tesam sarvartha siddhihsya
Gdtha loke paratra ca

Anyone on this earth who faithfully hears the glorious prayers that
you have offered me will achieve all kinds of perfection, both in this life
and in the next.

Text 24
uidyarthim capnuyad vidyam
dharmarthim dharmam apruyat
kaman avapnuyat kam:

pathanat srvanadapr

If a student recites these prayers, his education will become fruitful,
if a plous person recites these prayers, he will attain pious merit, and
if a sense enjoyer recites these prayers, he will enjoy all kinds of sense
gratification. Anyone who recites or hears these prayers will have all his
desires fulfilled.

Text 25
tvam garudam ida casvam
kamagam bahurupmam
sukamenafica sarvayiam
maya dattam grhana bhoh

This horse was manifested from Garuda, and it can go anywhere at
will and assume many different forms. Here also 1s a parrot that knows

=== PAGE 39 ===

34 Sri Karki Purana

everything—-past, present, and future. I would like to offer You both the
horse and the parrot and so please accept them

Text 26
sarvasastrastra vidvamsam
sarvavedartha paragam
jayinam sarvabhutanam

tvam vadisyanti manavah

By the influence of this horse and parrot, the people of the world will
know You as a learned scholar of all scriptures who 1s a master of the art
of releasing arrows, and thus the conqueror of all.

Text 27
ratnat sarum kardlafica
karavala mahaprabham
grhana gurubharayah
prthwya bhara sadhanam

1 would also like to present You this sharp, strong sword and so please
accept it. The handle of this sword 1s bedecked with jewels, and it 1s
extremely powerful. As such, this sword will help You to reduce the heavy
burden of the earth.

Text 28
itt vaca asrutya
namaskrarya mahesvaram
sambhala grama gamat

turagena tvaranvi tah

After hearing all this, Lord Kalki offered His obeisances and then
departed for the village of Sambhala, riding on the back of the horse
given by Lord Siva.

Text 29
pttaram mataram bhratan
namaskrtya yathavidhi
sarvam tadvarnaya masa

jamadagnyasya bhasitam

=== PAGE 40 ===

BENEDICTIONS From Lorp Siva AND Parvati 34

Upon arriving home, Lord Kalki offered his respectful obeisances
to His father, mother, and brothers. He then narrated whatever had
happened and told them about the orders of His guru, Parasurama

Text 30
sivasya varadananca
kathayitva subhah kathah
kalkth paramatejasut
ynatbhyo’ pyavadan muda

The unlimitedly powerful Lord Kalki also described the benedictions
He had received from Mahadeva. Thereafter, the Lord happily met the
other brahmanas of the village and also informed them of all that had
transpired.

Text 31
gargya bhargya visalad
yasta cchrutva nanditah sthitah
kathopa kathanam jatam

sambhala gramavasmam

When great personalities, such as Gargya, Bhargya, and Visala heard
about these pastimes of Lord Kalki, they became extremely pleased.
From that time onwards, the inhabitants of Sambhala simply absorbed
themselves in repeatedly hearing and chanting the glories of Lord Kalki.

Text 32
visakha yupa bhiipalah
srutva tesafica bhasitam

pradurbhavam harermene
kalinigraha karakam

King Visakhayiipa also came to hear these wonderful discussions of
Lord Kalki and thus he became convinced that the Supreme Lord Hari
had incarnated in this world to destroy the influence of Kali-yuga.

Text 33
mdahismatyam nyapure

yagadana tapobratan

=== PAGE 41 ===

36 Sri Karki PURANA

brahmanan ksatrvyan vaisyan
sudranapi hareh priyan

King Visakhayapa could see that the people of his capital, Mahismati,
including the brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas and Sudras, had suddenly
experienced a change of heart so that they were now performing sacrifices,
giving charity, and undergoing austerities.

Text 34
svadharma nuratan drstava
dharmastho’ bhunnrpah svayam
prayapalah suddhamanah
pradur bhavacchriyah pateh

Due to the influence of the incarnation of the Supreme Lord, the
husband of goddess Laksmi, everyone tn the capital became a follower of
religious principles The king also became pious, so that he maintained
his subjects with a pure heart.

Text 35
adharma vamsyastan drstva
janan dharma kvyaparan
lobha nrtadayo jagmus
tadesat duhkhitan bhrsam

Those who had been born in sinful families also became inclined to
executing religious principles. When the greedy, wretched people who
were totally devoid of truthfulness, being servants of Kali, saw this change
of heart, they became very unhappy and left the country.

Text 36
Jaitram turaga maruhya
khadagatica vrmalaprabham
damsitah sasaram cépam

grahitvagat puradvahih

Thereafter, Lord Kalki picked up His brightly shining trident and
bow and arrows and set out from His palace, riding upon His victorious
horse and wearing His amulet.

=== PAGE 42 ===

BENEDICTIONS FROM LORD SIVA AND PARVATI

Text 37
visakhayupa bhupalah
prayat sadhwana priyah
kalkim drastum hareram sa
méavirbhiitarica sambhale

When the king of that country, Visakhayipa, who was very dear to
saintly persons, realized that Lord Kalki, the incarnation of the Supreme
Lord, Hart, had appeared, he went to see Him

Texts 38-39
kavim prayiam sumantufica
puraskratya mahaprabham
gargya bhargya visalaisca
jnaubmh parwantam

uisakhayupo dadrse
candram taraganairwa
puradvahth surair yadvad

mndramuccaih sravahsthitam

The king saw that, just as Indra, the king of heaven, rides on the back
of his horse, Uccahisrava, 1n the midst of the demigods, and as the moon
is surrounded by all the stars, Lord Kalki was seated on the back of His
horse, surrounded by many greatly intelligent and powerful personalities,
including Sumanta, Gargya, Bhargya, and Visala.

Text 40
usakhayupo'vanatah
samprahrasta taniuruhah
kalkeralo kanat sadyah

piurndtmam vaisnavo’ bhavat

As soon as King Vigakhayiipa saw Lord Kalki, he became stunned in
ecstasy and the hairs of his body stood on end. He offered his obeisances

to Lord Kalki so that by His mercy, the king became a devotee of the
Lord.

37

=== PAGE 43 ===

38 Sri Karki Purana

Text 41
saha rayna vasan kalkth
dharménaha puroditan
brahmana ksatriya visima

asramanam samasatah

Lord Kalki lived with King Visakhayiipa for some time In the course
of his stay, Lord Kalki briefly described to the king the principles of four
varnas and four dramas.

Text 42
maméamsan kali wbhrastan
itt mayjanma sangatan
raga sinyasca asvamedhabhyam

mam yajasva samahitah

(Lord Kalk: said:) Many pious human beings have become degraded
in this age of Kali. But because of My presence, they will all become
plous once again. Now I would like that all of you worship Me by the
performance of a Rayjasiiya sacrifice and a horse sacrifice.

Text 43
ahameva paroloko
dharmascaéham sandtanah
kala suabhéva samskdrah
karmanu gatayo mama

I am the supreme destination for everyone. | am the objective of
eternal religious principles. Religion, sin, destiny, the time factor, nature,
deeds, and samskdras are My followers.

Text 44
soma suryakule jatau
devapi marusamynakau
sthapayitva kratayugam

krtva yasyam sadvatim

I will install King Devap: of the Candra dynasty and King Maru
of the Sirya dynasty upon the throne to rule the world, and after
the commencement of Satya-yuga, I will return to My own abode,

Vaikuntha.

=== PAGE 44 ===

BENEDICTIONS FRoM LoRD SIVA AND PARVATI

Text 45
itt tadvacanam sratva raja
halkim harm prabhum
pranamya praha saddharman

vaisnavan manasepsitan

After hearing this, King Visakhayipa offered his respectful obeisances
to Lord Kalki and then further inquired about Vaisnava dharma from
Him.

Text 46
i nrpavacanam msamya kalkih
kalikula naésana vasanavatarah

nyqjana parisad vinodakan
madhura vacobhiraha sadhurdharman

After hearing the king’s inquiries, the Supreme Lord, Kalki, who had
incarnated to destroy the dynasty of Kali, began to speak very sweetly
about the religious principles that are followed by saintly persons, just for
the pleasure of His servants.

Thus ends the translation of the third chapter of Sr7 Kalki Purana.

39

=== PAGE 45 ===

CHAPTER FOUR
Padmavati Receives a Benediction From Lord Siva

Text 1
suta uvaca
tatah kalkth sabha madhye
rajamano raviryatha
vabhase tam nrpam dharma
mayo dharman duyapriyan

Siita Gosvami said: O great sages, thereafter, the Supreme Lord, Kalki,
who 1s the personification of religious principles, described to the king
the duties of brahmanas while sitting in the royal assembly, appearing just
hke a brilliant sun.

Text 2
kalkiruvaca
kalena brahmano nase
pralaye mayi sangata
ahameva samevagre
nanyat karyamidam mama

Lord Kalki said: When the final dissolution of the universe will take
place, everyone, even Lord Brahma, will be annthilated. At that time, the
entire universe will become merged within Me. In the beginning, only I
existed, and thereafter, all living entities and elements emanated from
Me.

Text 3
prasupta loka tantrasya
dvata hmasya catmanah
mahanisante rantum me
samudbhuto virat prabhuh

After the final dissolution, the entire universe remained unmanifest
and there was no one except the Supersoul. Then, at the end of that long
and dark night, | manifested My universal form in order to enact the
pastime of material creation

=== PAGE 46 ===

PADMAVATI RICEIVES A BENEDICTION FROM LORD SIVA

Text 4
sahasrasirsa purusah
sahasraksah sahasrapat
tadangajo’ bhavat brahma
vedavakro mahaprabhuh

That universal form of Mine has thousands of heads, thousands of
eyes, and thousands of legs. From the mouth of the universal form came
the supremely powerful Brahma, who spoke the four Vedas

Texts 5-6
jwopddher mamamsacca
prakrtya mayaya svaya
brahmopahih sa sarvajiio

mama vagveda sasitah

sasarja pvajatant
kalamavasa yogatah
deva manvadayo lokah

sapraja payah prabhuh

In accordance with My order, which 1s as good as the Vedas, the
omniscient Brahma began his work of creating the living entities, who
are My separated parts and parcels, as well as the time factor, and the

planetary systems In the beginning, Brahma created the progenitors,
Manus, demigods, and human beings

Text 7
gunmya mayayamsa me
nanopadhau sasarjire
sopadhaya ime loka
deva sasthanu jangamah

Although all of them are My parts and parcels, they engage in different
kinds of activities by the arrangement of mayd, under the dictation ot the
three modes of material nature As a result, all moving and non-moving
living entities are materially designated.

41

=== PAGE 47 ===

42 Sri Karki PuRANA

Text 8
mamamsa mayaya srsta
yato mayyavisan laye
evam vidha brahmana ye

macchartra madatmikah

All moving and non-moving living entities are My separated parts
and parcels, although they appear to be products of maya. At the end,
everyone will merge into Me. The brahmanas and other members of the
social order are just like parts of My body.

Text 9
mamuddharant bhuvane
yaya dhyana satkiyah
mam prasevanti samsantt
tapo dana kryasviha

The brahmanas always worship Me by the performance of devotional
activities, such as sacrifice, study of the Vedas, undergoing austerities,
and giving charity.

Text 10
smarant amodayanty eva
nanye devadayas tatha
brahmana vedavaktaro
veda me mirttayah parah

The twice-born devotees who preach the purport of the Vedas, and
who are themselves personifications of the Vedas, please Me to such an
extent that none of the demigods or anyone else can.

Text 11
tasmadime brahmana jastath
pustastni jagayjanah
jaganti me sariran

tatpose brahmano varah

The Vedic knowledge has spread only by the work of those who are
twice-born. All of the living entities in this world, who are My parts
and parcels, are being protected by the Vedas Therefore it 1s to be

=== PAGE 48 ===

PADMAVAT! RECEIVES A BENEDICTION From Lorp Siva 43

concluded that those who are twice-born are the principal instruments
for maintaining My body

Text 12
tenaham tan namasyami
suddha sattva gunasrayah
tato jaganmayam purvam

mam sevante’khilasrayah

That 1s why | offer My obetsances to the brahmanas from My position
in the mode of pure goodness. Those who are twice-born are the shelter
of everyone and they serve Me, considering Me to be the basis of the
entire universe.

Text 13
visdkhayupa uvaca
viprasva laksanam bruhi
tvadbhaktth ka ca tatkrta
yatas tavanugrahena
vagvana brahmanah krtah

Visakhaytpa said: My dear Lord, kindly describe to me the
characteristics of a genuine brahmana. In what way do they render
devotional service unto You? It appears that their words carry the weight
of Vedic injunctions, by Your mercy.

Text 14
kalkaruvaca
veda mamisvaram prahur
avyaktam vyaktimatparam
te veda brahmana mukhe
nana dharme prakasitah

Lord Kalki said: I exist bevond the realm of visible moving and non-
Moving entities, as described 1n the Vedas | am celebrated as the non-
manifested Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Vedas are manifested
in various forms through the mouths of the brahmanas

Text 15
yo dharmo brahmananam hi
sa bhaktir mama puskala

=== PAGE 49 ===

44 Sri KALKI PURANA

tayaham tositah srisah

sambharami yuge yuge

The religion of the brahmanas 1s to render pure devotional service
unto Me Being pleased by their devotional service, {| incarnate, along
with Goddess Laksmi, in every millennium

Text 16
urdhtantu trirtam sutram
sadhava nirmitam sanath
tantu trayam adhowrttam

vyfiasutram vidurbudhah

A sacred thread should be prepared by either married or unmarried
brahmana ladies They should take three strands ot thread and fold them
to make six circles

Text 17
trigunam dadgranthi vuktam
veda pravara sammitam
strodharan nabhimadhyat

prstharddha parmanakam

According to the injunctions of the Vedas, the sacred thread should
consist of six circles of thread. It should divide one’s back into two halves
as 1t hangs from the shoulder to the navel

Text 18
yaquurvidam nabhimitam
sama gana mayam vidhih
vamaskandhena «idhrtam
yajnasutram balapradam

Such a sacred thread should be worn by brahmanas who study the
Yajur Veda The sacred thread for those who study the Sama Veda should
hang below the navel This is the Vedic injunction When the sacred
thread 1s placed over the left shoulder, 1t gives one strength

Text 19
madbhasma candanadyaistu
dharavet tilakam duyah

=== PAGE 50 ===

PADMAVATI RECFIVES A BENEDICTION FROM Lorb Siva

bhale tripundam karmangam

kesa paryantam wyralam

It is the duty of those who are twice-born to mark the forehead with
tilaka made of clay, ash, or sandalwood paste Marking the body with tilaka
is a limb of devotional service The bradhmanas decorate their toreheads
with taka, beginning from the nose up to the hair line

Text 20
pundram anguli manantu
tripundram tat tridha krtam
brahmavisnu sivavasam

darsanat papa nasanam

The length of one’s tilaka should be three fingers It 1s said that Brahma,
Visnu and Siva reside within the marking of tulaka. Theretore, simply by
seeing a person’s tilaka, one becomes freed from sinful reactions

Text 21
brahmandnam kare st arga
vaco veda kare havih
gatre trthani ragasca
nadiyu prakrus trvrt

The heavenly planets are present in the hands of a brdhmana Their
worlds are non-different from the Vedas Sacriticial ingredients also exist
in the hands of a brahmana In his body reside all the holy places, and
attachment for religious principles, as well as the three modes of material
nature, resides within his navel

Text 22
savitrt kantha kuhara
hrdayam brahma samyfiitam
tesam stanantare dharmah

prsthy dharmah prakn ttitah

The Gayatri mantra ts a brahmana’s necklace, and his heart 1s the
tesidence of the Supreme Brahman Religious principles reside on a
brahmana’s chest and irreligion resides on his back

45

=== PAGE 51 ===

46 Sri KaLki PuRANA

Text 23
bhudeva brahmana rajan
pujya vandya yaduktibhih
caturasramya kusala

mama dharma pravarttakah

O King, the brahmanas are considered to be the real leaders of society
and so it 1s the duty of everyone to worship them, and show them respect
by greeting them cheerfully. Even though the brahmanas may belong to

any of the four dsramas, they always preach My mission as their prime
occupation

Text 24
balascajx jana urddhas
tapourddha mama prryah
tesam vacah palayitum

avatarah krta maya

Even young bradhmana boys are enriched with transcendental
knowledge and austerity. For this reason, they are very dear to Me.
Indeed, I incarnate within the material world just to show the truth of
their statements, which are always based upon the Vedas.

Text 25
mahabhagyam brahmananam
sarva papa pranasanam
kalidosa haram srutva

mucyate sarvato bhayat

By hearing these discussions of those who are twice-born, good
fortune will prevail as all of one’s sinful reactions are vanquished. Indeed,
by such submissive hearing, one can be freed of the contamination of Kali
so that no anxtety or fear will be able to enter his heart.

Text 26
itt kalkiwacah srutia
kalidosa vindsanam
pranamya tam suddhamanah

pravyayau vaisnavagranh

=== PAGE 52 ===

PADMAVATI REVLEIVES A BENEDICTION FROM Lorp Siva 47

After hearing these discussions, which destroy the contamination of
Kali, from the lotus-like mouth of Lord Kalki, the exalted Vatsnava king,
Visakhayiipa, departed with a purified mind.

Text 27
gate rajani sandhyayam
swadatta suko budhah
canttva kalkipuratah
stutva tam puratah sthitah

The day passed and evening approached when the supremely
intelligent Suka, who was favored by Lord Siva, arrived before Lord Kalki
after wandering about at his will. He offered his obetsances to Lord Kalki
and then stood before Him with folded hands.

Text 28
tam sukam praha kalkistu
sasmitam stutt pathakam
svagatam bhavata kasmad
desat kim khaditam tatah

Upon seeing Suka, who was reciting prayers, Lord Kalki smilingly
said: May you achieve auspiciousness. Where are you coming from? What

have you eaten?

Text 29
suka uvaca
srnu natha vaco mahyam
kautuhala samanvitam

aham gatasca jaladher
madhye stmhala samyniake

Suka said: My dear Lord, I will tell You something of great interest
and so please hear me with attention | have just visited the island known
as Simhala, which 1s situated in the middle of the ocean

Text 30
yathavrattam duipagatam
caritram sravanapriyam
brhadrathasya nrpateh

hanyayas caritamrtam

=== PAGE 53 ===

48 Sri Karki PuRANA

Please listen to the wonderful characteristics of that island, which 19
ruled over by a king named Brhadratha. He has a beautiful daughter whose
qualities are like nectar, and which are very pleasing to hear about

Text 31
kaumudyam tha jataya
Jagatam papa nasanam
caritam simhale duipe

caturvarnya janavrte

This girl was born from the womb of Queen Kaumudi. One who heas
of her divine qualities 1s relieved of all sinful reactions That island 1s
inhabited by the members of all the four varnas

Text 32
prasada harmya sadana
pura raji virajate
ratna sphatka kudyadi

svarna bhati virajte

The island ts decorated with beautiful palaces, residential quarters,
agricultural fields, and cities. Many gates and pillars bedecked with jewels
and crystal have been erected here and there. Indeed, the entire island
shines like gold

Text 33
seribhir uttama vesabhih
padminibhih samavrte

saobhth sarasair hamyair

upakula jala kule

On that island reside many nicely dressed women who are decorated
with auspicious characteristics There are many beautiful lakes in which
cranes and swans are seen playing.

Text 34
bhrnga ranga prasangadhaye
padmath kalhara kundakath
nanambuja latajyala

vanopa vanamanidate

=== PAGE 54 ===

PADMAVATI RECEIVES A BENEDICTION FROM Lorp Siva 49

These lakes were filled with lotus flowers and water lilies, and they
are surrounding bv gardens filled with jasmine and other varieties of
flowers. Bumblebees hover over those flowers, being intoxicated by their
aroma and honey Everywhere there are seen beautiful gardens, bushes,
and creepers

Texts 35-36
dese brhadratho raja
mahdavala parakamah
tasya padmavat: kanya
dhanya reje yasasvint

bhuvane durlabha loke
pratuma varavarnint
kama moha kan cdru

caritra citra nirmita

That beautiful island 1s ruled by the pious King Brhadratha. His
daughter, named Padmavati, 1s certainly glorious and possessed of a
spotless reputation. Such a talented girl, possessing matchless beauty,
1s very rarely found within the three worlds. Just by seeing her, one 1s
reminded of Rati, the enchanter ot the mind of Cupid She 1s a wonderful
creation of the creator and her characteristics are simply wonderful.

Text 37
siva seva para gaurt
vatha piya susammata
sakhibhth kanyaka bhisca

japa dhyana parayana

She worships Lord Siva, along with her companions As Parvati ts
respected and worshiped by all, this princess 1s adored by one and all
In the association of her friends, she remains fully absorbed in chanting
mantras and meditating on the Supreme Personality of Godhead

Text 38
jratva taica harer laksmim
samud bhutam varanganam
harah pradura bhuta saksat

parvatya saha harsitah

=== PAGE 55 ===

50 Sri Karki PurRANA

Understanding that Kamala, whose face 1s exquisitely beautiful and
who 1s very dear to Lord Hani, had incarnated within this world, Sankara,
the lord of the demigods, along with Parvarti, joyfully came to see her.

Text 39
sa tamalokya varadam
SIvam gaurt samanvitam
layttadho mukhi kificm
ovaca puratah sthitah

Upon seeing Lord Siva and Parvati before her, eager to bestow upon
her a benediction, Padmavati shyly stood with her head bent down, being
unable to utter a sound.

Text 40
haras tamaha subhage
tava narayanah panh
panim grahisyati muda
nanyo yogyo nrpatmajah

Lord Siva said: O fortunate one, you will recerve Lord Narayana as
your husband. He will joyfully accept your hand 1n marriage. Rest assured
that there is no other prince on earth who 1s a suitable match for you.

Text 41
kamabhavena bhuvane
ye tvam pasyanti maénavah
tenaiwva vayasa naryo

bhavisyantyapt tatksanat

Anyone who lustily casts his glance upon you will immediately be
transformed into a woman, regardless of his age.

Text 42
deva suras tatha naga
gandharvas caranadayah
tvaya rantum yata kale
bhavisyant: kila strvyah

=== PAGE 56 ===

PADMAVAT! RECEIVES A BENEDICTION FROM Lorp Siva

Whether they be demigods, demons, Nagas, Gandharvas, Caranas,
or anyone else, if they simply desire to enjoy a conjugal relationship with
you, they will immediately transform into women

Texts 43-44
vina narayanam devam
tvatpant grahanarthi nam
grham yahi tapas tyaktva

bhogayatanam uttamam

ma ksobhaya hareh patni
kamale vimalam kuru

itt dattva varam somas
tatrawvantardadhe harah

However, this curse 1s not applicable to Lord Hari, who 1s your only
husband. It 1s only applicable to others. Now, you may give up your
penance and return home. Do not give any further trouble to your tender
body, which ts the object for the attainment of great happiness. O lover of
Hart! O Kamala! Please take care of your soft and gentle body

After awarding his benediction to Padmavati, Lord Siva disappeared
from view.

Text 45
haravaram iti sa nisamya padma
samucitam atma manoratha prakasam
vikasita vadana pranamya somam

nygjana kalayam avivesa rama

Having received her desired benediction from Lord Siva, Padmavats's
happiness knew no bound, so that her face blossomed brightly. She then
offered her obeisances to Uma and Mahadeva and returned home

Thus ends the translation of the fourth chapter ot Sri Kalki Purana

51

=== PAGE 57 ===

CHAPTER Five
Padmavati’s Svayamvara

Text 1
suka uvaca
gate bahutithe kale
padmam wiksva Brhadrathah
nirudha yauvanam putrim

uismitah papasankaya

Suka said: After a long time had passed, King Brhadratha realized
that his daughter, Padmavati, had grown up. Fearing some misbehavior
on her part, the king began to consider the matter very seriously

Text 2
kaumudim praha mahicrm
padmodvahe’tra kam nrpam
varayisyami subhage

kulasila samanvitam

He addressed his queen: O fortunate one, I am considering handing
over my daughter to a pious king who belongs to a noble family and thus
accept him as my son-in-law.

Text 3
sa tamaha patm dew
sivena pratibhasitam
visnurasyah patiriti

bhavisyati na samsavah

However, the queen said. O King, the lord of Parvati has already
assured us that Padmavati’s husband will undoubtedly be Lord Hart
Text 4
ut tasya vacah srutia
raga praha kadet tam
visnuh sarva guhavasah

panimasva grahisyat

=== PAGE 58 ===

PADMAVALIZUS SVAyaMVARA

Upon hearing this, King Brhadratha said: When will Lord Hari, who
1s present within the hearts of all living entities, accept our daughter as
His wife?

Texts 5-6
na me bhagyodayah kascid
vena jamataram harm
varayisyamt kanyarthe

vedavatya muneryatha

imam svayavaram padmam
padmamuva mahodadheh
mathane’suradevanam
tatha visnur grahisyatt

I do not feel that I am so fortunate as to be able to hand over my
daughter to Lord Visnu. What piety have I accumulated so that I will be
able to accept Lord Hart as my son-1n-law? Therefore, just like the Munt’s
daughter, Vedavati, or Laksmi, who appeared from the ocean of milk as it
was being churned, | would like to arrange a svayamvara for my jewel-like
daughter, Padmavati. Let Lord Hari come and accept her in this way.

Text 7
wt bhupaganan bhupah
samahiiya puraskrtan
gunasila vayoripa

vidyadravina samurtan

Having made this resolution, the king invited all the other kings of
the country who were adorned with good qualities, of good character,
learned, very wealthy, and in the prime of their youth

Text 8
svayamvarartham padmayah
stmhale bahumangale

vicarya karayamasa

sthanam bhupa nwesanam

To insure the svayamvara’s grand success, King Brhadratha
made auspicious arrangements throughout his kingdom. He ordered

=== PAGE 59 ===

54 Sri Katkt PURANA

religious rituals to be performed throughout the land, and he also made
arrangements for the stay of the invited guests

Text 9
tatrayata nrpah sarve
viwwaha krta niscavah
nyasamnyath parwrtah
svarna ratna vibhusitah

Meanwhile, many kings having the desire to accept Padmavati’s hand
in marriage arrived in that island fully decorated with golden ornaments
and accompanied by their armies.

Text 10
rathan gaya nasvavaran
samdarudha mahabalah
svetacchatra krtacchayah
svetacamara vyitah

Some kings and princes arrived on chariots, some on elephants, and
yet others came riding on beautiful horses. A white umbrella was held
over the heads of these powerful kings as they were fanned with white
cadmaras

Texts 11-13
sastrastra tejasd dipta
devah sendra wabhavan
rucirasvah sukarma ca
madirakso drdhasugah

krsnasarah paradasca
jemutah kruramardanah

kasah kusambur vasuman
kankah krathana safyayau

gurumitrah pramathi ca
vyrmbhah sriyayo’ ksamah
ete canye ca bahavah

samayata mahabalah

=== PAGE 60 ===

PADMAVATI™S SVAYAMVARA

wn
wr

Because of the brightly shining weapons in their hands, these
princes appeared as beautiful as Indra, surrounded by all the demigods
Among the kings who arrived there were Ruciragva, Sukarma, Madiraksa,
Drdhasuga, Krsnasara, Parada, Jimuta, Kriiramardana, Kaga, Kusambu,
Vasuman, Kanka, Krathana, Safiyaya, Gurumitra, Pramathi, Viyrmbhah,
Sriiyaya, and Aksama

Text 14
ulisuste ranga gata
svasva sthanesu piyitah
vadya tandava samhrstas

citra malyam baradharah

When the kings arrived at the svayamvara, they were respectfully
greeted and thus they took their seats in a happy mood. A dancing and
singing program then commenced for their pleasure Because of the
presence of these illustrious rulers of men, the arena looked very colorful
and enchanting

Text 15
nanabhoga sukhodriktah
kama rama ratipradah
tanalokya stmhalesah

svam kanyam varavarnimim

The eyes and minds of everyone who saw these aristocratic and
powerful kings became filled with yoy. When everyone was comfortably
seated, Brhadratha requested his associates to bring his uniquely beautiful
daughter onto the stage.

Text 16
gaurim candraénaném syamam
tarahara vibhusitam
manimukta pravalaisca

sarvamga alankrta subham

Padmavati’s complexion was golden, and her face resembled the full
moon She possessed all godly qualities, and she was decorated with a

garland of flowers Her entire body was covered with jewels, pearls, and
coral.

=== PAGE 61 ===

56 Sri Katkt PURANA

Text 17
kim mayam mohajananim
kim va kamapriyam bhuvt
rtipa lavanya sampattva

na canyamtha drstvan

When | saw Padmavati, I considered her to be the personification of
maya, which bewilders everyone. Then again, | wondered whether she
was Rati-devi herself, the beloved consort of Cupid, appearing upon the
earth Although | have traveled throughout the heavenly planets, as well
as on this earth, and indeed throughout the entire three worlds, | had
never seen a more beautiful girl than Padmavati.

Text 18
svarge ksitau va patale’
pyaham sarvatrago yadi
pascad dasiganat kirnam
sakhibhih parwaritah

When Padmavati came out from the palace, hundreds of her
companions and maid-servants surrounded her on all sides.

Texts 19-21
dauvarika vetrahastath
sasitantah puradvahih
purovandi gandkirnam

prapaya masa tam sanaih

nupurath kinkin bhisca
kvanantim janamohinm
svagatandm nrpandaiica

kulasila gunén bahun

srnvantt hamsa gamana
ratnamdla karagraha

ruciva panga bhangena

preksant: lolakundala

When the princess left the palace, she was protected by her personal
guards, who were equipped with various weapons. Professional singers

=== PAGE 62 ===

PADMAVATI’S SVAYAMVARA

walked before her as she arrived at the svayamvara arena An enchanting
sound was created by her ankle bells and her earrings swung back and forth
as she slowly entered within the midst of the assembled kings and princes,
gazing in all directions, a flower garland in her hand. Padmavati was then
informed of the family background and distinguishing characteristics ot
all those who had come seeking her hand in marriage

Text 22
nrtyat kuntala sopana
gamda mandala mandita
kaficit smerollasad vakta
dasana dyotadiputa

Her hair swung to and fro as she glanced about the arena, and this
increased the beauty of her cheeks. Her face appeared even more beautiful
when she smiled, so that she resembled a fully blossomed lotus flower

Text 23
vedi madhydruna ksauma
vasana kokilasvara
riipa lavanaya panayena
kretukama jagattrayam

The waist of the princess was very thin, she was dressed in red garments,
and her voice was pleasing to the ear, like the singing of acuckoo When |
saw all of these manifestations of feminine attractiveness, | thought that
the princess had decided to purchase the entire three worlds by paying
the price of her exquisite beauty.

Text 24
samagatam tam prasamiksya bhupah
sammohmim kama vimidha cittah
petuh ksttau vismrta vastra sastrah
rathasva matta dvipa vahanaste

As soon as the assembled kings saw the jewel-like Padmavati, they
became greatly afflicted by the arrows of the Cupid Indeed, they were so
struck with wonder that that their weapons fell from their hands

5

4

=== PAGE 63 ===

58 Sri KALKkr PURANA

Text 25
tasvah smaraksobha niriksanena
strtyo babhuvuh kamanwya rupah
vrhannitamva stanabharanamrah

sumadhyamas tatsmrt jatarupah

However, as the kings gazed upon the princess with lusty desires,
they suddenly transformed into females, much to their astonishment.
Their bodily features, characteristics, and personalities became just like
women. Their waists were thin and their figures were beautiful. Indeed,
their beautiful bodies bent slightly forward due to the weight of their
heavy breasts.

Text 26
vilasa hasa vyasanati citrah
kantananah sona sarojanetrah
strirupam atmanam aveksya bhiipah

stémanva gacchan visadanuvrttya

Their movements and smiles, as well as their dancing and singing
skills became that of a woman. Their faces appeared charming, just like
blooming lotus flowers. Upon finding themselves to be beautiful women,
the kings followed Padmavati as 1f they were her companions.

Text 27
aham vatasthah paridharsitatma
padma vivahotsava darsanakulah
tasya vaco’ntarhrdi duhkhitayah

srotum sthitah seritvamitesu tesu

At that time, I climbed up into a banyan tree, desiring to watch the
svavamvara of Padmavati. | was already very upset after seeing all that
had taken place. 1 waited just to hear if Padmavati would express her
unhappiness because all the kings had turned into women.

Text 28
janthi kalke ' kamala vilapam
srutam vcitram jagatama dhisa '
gate vivahotsava mangale sa

sivam saranyam hrdaye nidhaya

=== PAGE 64 ===

Papmavati’s SvayamMvara

O Lord Kalki, You are the master of the universe. Let me disclose to
You the lamentations of Your consort, Kamala. while she was meditating
upon her worshipable lord, Sankara.

Text 29
tan drstva nrpatin gajasva
rathibhis tyaktan sakhitvam gatan
stribhavena samanvitan anugatan
padmam vilokyantike dina tyakta
vidhusana vilikhat padamgulath
kamint isam karttum nyanatham

isvara vacasthathyam harim sa’smarat

All the kings who came there, hoping to marry Padmavati, were
rejected by their respective carriers, the elephants and horses, and even
their soldiers. When they followed the princess as her companions, she
took off all her ornaments and began to write something on the ground
with her right toe. With a desire to make the words of Lord Siva come
true, Padmavati fixed her mind on her own beloved Lord Har, the

supreme controller

Thus ends the translation of the fifth chapter of Sri Kalki Purana.

=== PAGE 65 ===

CHAPTER SIX

Suka Goes To Simhala as the Envoy of Lord Kalki
Conversation Between Padmavati And Suka

Text 1
suka uvaca
tatah sa vismita mukhi
padma nyqjanair vrta
harim patim ctayantt
provaca vimalam sthitam

Suka said: Thereafter, while surrounded by her relatives and
companions, and herself highly astonished, Padmavati addressed one of
her friends, named Vimala, while still remembering her husband, Lord
Hart.

Text 2
padmovaca
trmale kim krtam dhatra
lalate bkhanam mama
darsanadapr lokanam

pumsam stribhava karakam

Padmavati said: O Vimala, 1s it my destiny, dictated by providence,
that any man who desires me will turn into a woman?
Text 3
mamapt manda bhagyayah
papinyah swa sevmam
viphalatvam anupraptam

vyamuptam yathosare

lam extremely unfortunate and sinful. Just as sowing seeds on barren
land 1s useless, my worship of Lord Siva has proved futile
Text 4
har laksmipath sarva
Jagatém adhpah prabhuh

=== PAGE 66 ===

CONVERSATION BETWEEN PapDMAvaTit AND SUKA

matkrte’pyabhilasam
km karisyati jagatpatth

Will the Supreme Lord, Hart, the master of the universe, controller of
all controllers, and husband of Laksmi, ever accept me as His consort?

Texts 5-6
yadi sambhor vaco mithya
yadi visnur namam smaret
tada hamanale deham
tyqjam han bhaévita

kva caham manus dima
kvaste devo janardanah
nugrhita vidhatraham

sivena parivanicita

If the words of Lord Siva prove false, and if Lord Hari does not accept
me, | will certainly end my life by entering fire while remembering the
lotus feet of the Lord. Alas, 1 am a lowly human being. How insignificant
lam and how great 1s Lord Hari, the master of the demigods! The creator
must be angry with me, otherwise why would Sankara, whose forehead 1s
decorated with the mark of the moon, deceive me?

Text 7
visnuna ca parityakta
madanya katra pwat

Iam still living, even after being reyected by Lord Hart. Who other
than me would remain alive in such a situation?

Text 8
i nanavilapnya
vacanam socandsrayam
padmaya sdrucestayah
srutvayda tastavantke

O Lord Kalki, when I heard these lamentations of Padmavati, whose
character 1s spotless, I could not wait any longer, and so I approached You
without delay.

=== PAGE 67 ===

62 Sri KALKI PURANA

Text 9
sukasya vacanam srutva
kalkth parama vismitah
tam jagada punaryahi
padmam bodhayitum privam

After hearing these words of Suka, Lord Kalki felt elated He said My

dear Suka, you must go at once and pacify my beloved Padmavati

Text 10
matsandesa baho bhutva
madrupa guna kirttanam
sravayitva punah kira

samayasyast bandhava

I consider you to be My best well wishing friend Please go to
Padmavati as My messenger, and after describing My beauty and qualities
to her, return to Me

Text 11
sa me priva patiraham
tasya deva vinirmitah
madhyasthena tvaya yogam

avayosca bhavisyan

Padmavati 1s very dear to Me Indeed, | am her eternal husband Our
union has already been destined by providence Therefore, you act on My
behalf so that we can meet one another

Text 12
sarvajno st uidhyno’st
kalayfio’ pr kathamrtath
tamasvasva mamasvasa

kathastasyam samahara

You are the knower of everything You know all the rules and
regulations prescribed in the Vedas You also understand about the proper
time and circumstances Therefore, pacify Padmavati with your nectarean
words and then return to Me with her assurance

=== PAGE 68 ===

CONVERSATION BETWEEN PADMAVATI AND SUKA

Text 13
it kalker vacah srutva
sukah parama harsitah
pranamya tam prita manah
prayayau simhalam tvaran

Being instructed by Lord Kalki in this way, Suka became jubilant as
his entire body became filled with ecstasy He offered his obetsances to
the Lord and quickly departed for Simhala

Texts 14-16
khagah samudra parena
snatva pittamrtam pavah
vya pura phalaharo

vayau rdja nivesanam

tatra kanvapuram gatea
vrkse nagesvare rasan
padmam alokya tam praha

suko manusa bhasaya

kusalam te vararohe
rupa yauvana sali
wam lola nayanam manye

laksmi rupam waparam

Thus, Suka, the great parrot, crossed the ocean Upon reaching
his destination, he first bathed, drank some water, and ate many sweet
and ripe fruit After that, he entered the king’s palace and sat at the
top of a ndgakesara tree, which was situated within the compound of the
ladies’ quarters After some time, the magnanimous Suka saw Padmavati
approach, and so he addressed her in a human voice O beautitul lady
with a most charming face, your eyes appear to be very restless By seeing
you, I feel that you are Laksmui, the goddess of fortune

Text 17
padmananam padmagandham
padmanenram kar ambuje
kamalam kalayantim tam
laksayami param srivam

=== PAGE 69 ===

Sri KALkxi PURANA

Your face resembles a lotus flower. The aroma of your body ts like the
scent of a lotus and your eyes are just like lotus petals. Your hands are
reddish, like lotus flowers, and you hold a lotus in your hand.

Text 18
kim dhatra sarva jagatam
rupa lavanya sampadam
nirmutasi vararohe

jivanam mohakérmi

O beautiful one with a charming face, you simply bewilder all living
entities I think that the creator had made you after collecting all the
beautiful objects of the world.

Texts 19-20
itt bhdsitam akarnya
kirasya amutam adbhutam
hasant praha sa devt
tam padma padmamdalint

kstvam kasmad agato’st

katham mam sukarupadhrka
devo va danavo va

tvam agato’st dayaparah

Upon hearing these sweet words of Suka, Padmavati, whose navel
resembled a lotus, smiled and said: Who are you? Where have you come
from? Are you a demigod or demon who has taken the form of a parrot? Is
it out of compassion tor me that you have come here?

Text 21
suka uvaca
sarvajiio’ ham kamagami
sarvasdstrartha tattvavit
deva gandharva bhupanam

sabhasu paripujitah

Suka said: I am the knower of everything, and so I know the intensions
of everyone. I am well aware of the real purport of all scriptures. | am
highly regarded in the assembly of demigods, Gandharvas, and saintly
kings.

=== PAGE 70 ===

CONVERSATION BETWEEN PADMAVATI AND SUKA

Text 22
carami svecchaya khe tuam
tksanartham thagatah
tvamaham hrdi santaptam

tyakta bhogam manahsvmim

I travel in outer space of my own free will. | have now come her just to
see you. Although you are very learned, at present you are afflicted with
grief, and thus you have given up all thoughts of enjoyment.

Texts 23-24
hasyalapa sakhi sanga
dehabharana varjtam
vilokyaham dina cetah

prechami srotum initam

kokila lapa santapa

janakam madhuram mrdu
tava dantaustha jhva

agra lulitaksara panktayah

yat karna kuhare magnas

tesam kim varnyate tapah

You have given up smiling, joking, speaking with others, the company
of your friends, and all kinds of jewelry. By seeing you 1n such a pathetic
condition, I feel morose and so I would like to hear your sweet voice,
which defeats the song of a cuckoo. Only one who has undergone great
austerities 1s able to hear the words that are produced by the combined
effort of your teeth, lips, and tongue.

Texts 25-26
saukumaryam sirisasya
kva kantirva nisdkare
pryusam kva vadantyeva

anandam brahman: te dhunah

tava bahulata vaddha
ye pasyant: sudhananam
tesam tapo dana japair
vyarthar kim janayisyati

65

=== PAGE 71 ===

66 Sri Kaki PURANA

For you, the tenderness of a Sirisa flower and the brightness of the full
moon are most insignificant. People always glorify the nectar and bliss of
Brahman, but to you even this seems insignificant The pious exalted soul
who will drink the nectar of your face while being held in the creepers
of your arms does not require to perform any religious duties, such as
performing penance, chanting mantras, and giving charity.

Text 27
tlakalaka sammisram
lola kundala manditam
loleksanollasad vaktram

pasyatam na punarbhavah

Anyone who once beholds your beautiful face decorated with marks
of tilaka, curly hair, swinging earrings, and beautiful eyes, will no longer
have to accept another matertal body.

Text 28
brhadrathasute svadhim
vada bhévini yatkrtam
tapah ksmamiva taniim

laksayami rujam vina

kanaka pratima yadvat

pamsubhir malmukrta

O daughter of King Brhadratha! O well-wisher of all! Please tell me
the cause of your mental agony. You have no material attachment and yet
you have become very weak because of mental distress. At present, you
look like a golden deity covered by dust.

Text 29
padmovaca
kim rupena kulenapi
dhanena abhyanena va
sarvam msphalatam eti

yasya devam daksinam

Padmavati said: If Lord Hari 1s against someone then what 1s the use
of beauty, opulence, and a prestigious lineage?

=== PAGE 72 ===

CONVERSATION BETWEEN PADMAVATI AND SuKa 67

Text 30
srnu kira mamakhyanam
yadi va viditam tava
balyah pauganda-kaisore

harasevam karomyaham

My dear bird, if you do not know why I am suffering then kindly hear
with attention. I engaged 1n the worship of Lord Siva as a child, and also
when I became a mature girl.

Text 31
tena pujavidhdnena tusto
bhutva mahesvarah
varam varaya padme '
tvamityaha priyaya saha

As a result of my worship, Lord iva, whose head 1s decorated with
the sign of the moon, appeared before me along with Parvati and said: O
Padmavati, ask me for a benediction.

Text 32
layayadho mukhim age
sthitam mam viksya sankarah
praha te bhavat: svami
harwnarayanah prabhuh

When he saw me standing before him, my head hung low due to
shyness, and my body fully covered, he assured me, saying: The Supreme
Lord, Har, will become your husband.

Text 33
devo vd danavo vanyo
gandharvo va taveksanat
kamena manasa nari

bhavisvati na samsayah

Whether he ts a demigod, Gandharva, asura, or any other creature,
if a male looks upon you with lust in his heart, then he will immediately

turn into a woman.

=== PAGE 73 ===

68 Sri KALKI PuRANA

Text 34
i datvd varam somah
praha visnurcanam yatha
tathaham te pravaksyami

samahita manah srnu

(Padmavati said to Suka:) Let me tell you about the procedure for
worshiping Lord Hari that Lord Siva described to me after awarding me
that benediction.

Text 35
etah sakhyo nrpah purvam
ahrta ye svayamvare
pura dharmarthina drstva

ramyam mam yauvanan vitam

These companions of mine that you see here—they were all great
kings at the time of my svayambara, which was arranged by my father.

Texts 36-37
svagataste sukhasina
vivaha krta niscayah
yuvano gunavantasca
rupadravina sammatah

stayamvara gatam mam te
vilokya rucwraprabham

ratnamala sritakaram
nipetuh kama mohitah

These kings were very handsome, highly skilled, and unlimitedly
powerful After they had assembled here with a desire to marry me, I
entered the arena of my svayamvara, holding a necklace of jewels in my
hands. Although these kings had been sitting at ease, as soon as they saw
me, their hearts were pierced by the arrows of Cupid, and some even
fainted, falling onto the ground

Text 38
tata uttthaya sambhrantah

samprecya stritvamatmanah

=== PAGE 74 ===

CONVERSATION BETWEEN PADMAVATI AND SUKA 69

stanabhara nitamvena
gurund parmamitah

However, as soon as they stood up, having regained their composure,
they where aghast to find that they had been transformed into women
with rounded hips and heavy breasts.

Text 39
hiya bhiya ca satrunam
mutranamita duhkhadam
stribhavam manasa dhydtva

mameva anugatah suka

O parrot, upon seeing themselves in this way, the kings became
highly embarrassed and afraid to look at one another At last, with broken
hearts, they decided to follow me as my companions.

Text 40
pancarya hare ratah
sakhyah sarva gunanutah
maya saha tapodhyana
piyah kurvant: sammatah

Since that time, all these kings have been living with me as my
companions. They are very talented women and are living under the
shelter of my affection. Along with me, they also engage in worshiping
Lord Hart, rending service unto Him, meditating upon the Lord, and
performing austerities for His pleasure.

Text 41
taduditam itt samnnisamya kirah
sravana sukham nyamanasa prakasanam
samucita vacanath pranksya padmam

murahara yajanam punah pracaste

After hearing this wonderful story from the mouth of Padmavati,
Suka continued to speak with her in a very pleasing manner, and then
brought up the subject of Lord Hari’s worship

Thus ends the translation of the sixth chapter of Sri Kalki Purana

=== PAGE 75 ===

CHAPIER SFVEN
The Procedure for Worshiping Lord Visnu

Text 1
suka uvaca
visnurcanam sevenoktam
srotum icchamyaham subhe
dhanast krtapunaydst

siva sisyatvam agata

Suka said: O auspicious lady, you are certainly most glorious and pious,
and thus you exhibit unalloyed devotion for Lord Siva. Now I would like
to hear about the procedure for worshiping Lord Hari as instructed by
Lord Siva.

Text 2
aham bhagya vasadatra
samagamya tavantikam
srnomi paramascaryam

kwrakara nwaranam

It is my good fortune that I have met you here today. Please describe
in detail the worship of Lord Har, for by hearing such topics, | will be
freed from having to endure life in the lower species.

Text 3
bhagavad bhakti: yogarica
japadhyana vidhim muda
paramananda sandoha

dana daksam srutiprryam

Worship of Lord Hart ts a limb of pure devotional service, and it
includes meditation upon the Lord and the chanting of His mantras.
Discussions of Lord Hart are always very pleasing to the ears and heart.

Texts 4-5
padmovaca
srl visnorarcanam punyam

=== PAGE 76 ===

THE PROCEDURE FOR WORSHIPING LorD VISNU

sivena paribhasitam
yat srddhayanusthi tasya
srutasya gatitasya ca

sadyah papaharam pumsam
guru go brahma ghatinam
samahitena manasa

srnu kira yathoditam

Padmavati said: The procedure for worshiping Lord Hari that was
described by Lord Siva 1s most sacred. By performing such worship, or
even hearing about it with faith, one ts immediately freed from all sinful
reactions, even those for killing a spiritual master, cow, or brdhmana. O
parrot, hear attentively as I describe the procedure for worshiping Lord
Hari that was instructed by Lord Siva.

Text 6
krtva yathokta karmani
purvahne snanakrta sucth
praksdlya pam padau ca
sprstvdpah svdsane vaset

Early in the morning, one should bathe and perform his other daily
duties. He should then wash his hands and feet, perform dcamana, and sit
on a proper asana to begin his worship of the Lord

Text 7
pracimukhah samyatatma
sanganyasam prakalpayet
bhutasuddhim tato’rghasya
sthapanam vidhi vaccaret

With a controlled mind, one should sit facing east and then perform
the various nyasas and other required rituals Thereafter, one should
place all the articles for worship, such as arghya, 1n their proper places.

Text 8
tatah kesava krtvadi
nyasena tanmayo bhavet
atmanam tanmayam dhyatva

hrdistham svasane nyaset

71

=== PAGE 77 ===

72 Sri KALKI PURANA

Before beginning, one should think of himself as being qualitatively
one with Lord Visnu while displaying the keSava-kirti-nydsa One should
then invite Lord Hari to be seated on a lotus dsana within his heart

Texts 9-10
padyardhya dcamanvyadyath
sndna vaso vibhusinath
yathopacaraih sampujyya

mulamantrena desikah

dhyayet padadi kesamtam
hrdayambuja madhyagam

prasanna vadanam devam
bhakta bhista phalapradam

One should then worship Lord Hart by offering Him various articles,
including pddya, arghya, dcamantya, sndniya, and ornaments. Next, one
should meditate on the Lord, beginning from His lotus feet, gradually
raising one’s attention to His face. The Lord should be meditated upon as
being situated in one’s lotus-like heart He should be seen smiling as He
fulfills all the desires of His devotees.

Text 11
om namo narayandya svaha
yogena siddha wbudhath
panbhavya manam laksmyalayam
tulast kacita bhaktabhrngam

prottunga rakta nakharamguli patracitram
bhangarasam haripadambujam asraye’ ham

One should then chant om namo nérayanayu svahda and recite the
following prayer: I take shelter of the lotus feet of Lord Har, who 1s
constantly meditated upon by learned mystic yogis He 1s the shelter of
Goddess Laksmi, and the bee-like devotees drink the nectar of the tulasi
buds at His lotus feet. His reddish nails have colored the water of the
Ganges

Text 12

gumphan mani pracaya ghattita rajahamsa
sifyat sunupura yutam padapadma vrntam

=== PAGE 78 ===

THE PROCEDURF FOR WORSHIPING LORD ViSNU

pitamvara aficala vilola calat patakam
svarna trivaktra balavayafica hareh smarami

1 meditate on the lotus feet of Lord Hart, which are decorated with
varieties of precious jewels, which resemble the feet of a swan, and which
are decorated with tinkling ankle bells. His cddara hangs to His lotus feet,
and it appears like a flag flapping in the wind His lotus feet are adorned
with three golden bangles.

Text 13
jamghe suparna gala nilamani pravrddhe
sobhaspada aruna manidyut caticumadhye
arakta padatala lambana sobhamane loke

ksanotsava kare ca hareh smarami

I meditate on Lord Hart’s lotus feet, which are the color of the blue
sapphire worn by Garuda Just as the beak of Garuda 1s reddish, so the
toenails of the Lord are tinged with a pinkish hue The Lord’s lotus feet
thus increase the beauty of the lower portion of His body, and are very
pleasing to the eyes of His devotees

Text 14
te janunt-makhapater bhuja mula sanga
rangotsavavrta tadid vasane vicitre
cancat patatru mukha nirgata samagita

vistarit atma yasasi ca hareh smarami

I meditate upon Lord Hart’s knees, the beauty of which 1s enhanced
because the end of His cddara, which 1s draped from His shoulder, resides
there. The Lord’s carrier, Garuda, reveals His transcendental glories by
singing narrations of His pastimes.

Text 15
visnoh katim vidhikrtanta manoja bhumum
jwanda kosa ganasanga dukula madhyam
nanaguna prakrtt pita vicitravastram
dhyayen mbaddha vasanam khaga prstham

1 meditate on Lord Hart’s waist, which 1s decorated with the three
modes of material nature 1n the form of colorful cloth, which 1s the shelter

73

=== PAGE 79 ===

74 Sri KALKI PuURANA

of Lord Brahma, Yamaraya, and Kamadeva, and which ts the resting place
of His marginal energy, the living entities He 1s seated upon the back of
His carrier, Garuda
Text 16
satodaram bhagavata stnvah prakasam
avartta nabhi tikasad vidhyanma padmam
nadi nadi gana rasotthasitantra sindhum

dhyaye nada kosa mlayam tanu lomarekham

I meditate upon Lord Hart’s thin abdomen, which 1s decorated with
three lines From His abdomen, a lotus flower sprouted that was the birth
place of Lord Brahma and thus, the origin of the universe The Lord’s
abdomen 1s the place of generation of the oceans, and 1s adorned with
fine hair

Text 17
vaksah payodht tanaya kuca kumkumena
harena kaustubha mani prabhaya vibhatam
sravatsa laksmu haricandana prasunam

alocitam bhagavatah subhagam smarami

Lord Hart’s chest 1s decorated with kunkuma from Laksm1’s breasts, as
well as a beautiful necklace and the effulgence of the Kaustubha gem It
1s also adorned by the mark of Srivatsa, sandalwood paste, and a beautiful
flower garland I meditate on the expansive chest of Lord Har

Text 18
bahu suresa sadanau balamangadadi
sobhaspadau duhitva vinasadaksau
tau daksmau bhagatatasca gadasunabha
teyantau sulalitau manasa smarami

I meditate on Lord Hani’s charming right arms, which are decorated
with bangles and a source of great beauty, and are expert in killing sinful
demons The Lord’s right arms shine brightly because they hold a club
and disc

Text 19

vamau bhwyau muran pordhita padmakhankhau
syamau karmdra karavan mani bhusanadhayau

=== PAGE 80 ===

THE PROCEDURF FOR WORSHIPING LoRD VISNL 75

raktamguli pracava cumbita janumadhyau

padmulaya privakarau ructrau smarami

I meditate on Lord Murart’s left arms, which appear blackish like the
trunk of an elephant The Lord’s left arms carry a lotus flower and conch
shell, and are decorated with yeweled ornaments The reddish fingers of
those long arms touch the Lord’s knees The enchanting hands of the
Lord are very pleasing to Goddess Laksmi

Text 20
kantham mrnalam amalam mukhapankajasva
lekhatrayena tanamalikaya nivitam
kimva vimukt vasa mantraka satphalasva

vrttam ciram bhagavatah subhagam smarami

] meditate upon Lord Hari’s beautiful throat, which 1s like the stem of
His lotus-like face, which 1s decorated with three perfect lines, which 1s
adorned with a flower garland, and which 1s like a stalk of delicious fruit
in the form of mantras that award one liberation

Text 21
raktambwam dasana hasa vikasaramyam
raktadharaustha vara komala caksudhadhvam
sammana sodbhava caleksana patracitram

lokabht ramam amalafica hareh smarami

I meditate upon Lord Hart’s lotus face, which 1s tinged with the
color of a red lotus flower and has beautiful by red lips The Lord’s face
appears even more enchanting when He smiles, thus reve aling His teeth
Nectarean words emanate from His face, which 1s pleasing to the heart,
decorated with restless eyes, and enchanting to the mind

Text 22
suratmajava satha gandhaiidam sunasam
bhrupallavam sthitt lavodava karmadaksam
kamotsavaiica kamala hrdava prakasam
samemtayami hanwaktra vilasadakyam

By the influence of Lord Hari’s eyebrows, one 1s relieved of entering
the abode of Yamaraja Below the eyebrows are two enchanting nostrils,
from which the creation, maintenance, and annihilation of the universes

=== PAGE 81 ===

76 Sri KALKI PURANA

are enacted The Lord’s eyebrows are the impetus for many passionate
pastimes They enhance the beauty of the Lord’s face and they bring
ecstasy to the heart of Laksmi

Text 23
karnau lasan karakundala gandalolau
nanadisaiica nabhasasca tikasagehau
lolalaka pracava cumbana kuficitagrau

lagnau harer mamkirita tate smarami

I meditate on Lord Hart’s ears, which are adorned with fish-shaped
earrings that swing to and fro on His cheeks and illuminate the four
directions Hits ears appear slightly wrinkled due to carrying the burden
of many ornaments

Text 24
bhalam cicitra tlakam priva caru gandha
gerocana racanaya lalanaks: sakhyam
brahmaka dhama mankamta kirita yutam

dhyaven manonayana harakam tsvarayya

I meditate on Lord Hart’s forehead, which 1s decorated with marks
of beautiful tilaka, which 1s very attractive, and which emits a very sweet
aroma The Lord’s torehead 1s also adorned with beautiful leaves painted
with cow’s urine that captivates the hearts of all women His forehead 1s
the shelter of Brahma, decorated with a jeweled crown, and 1s pleasing to
the eyes and hearts of all

Text 25
srt vasudeca cikuram kutilam nibaddham
nana sugandht kusumath svajana darena
dirgham rama hrdaya gasamanam dhunantam
dhyaye mbu vaha ruciram hrdavabja madhye

I meditate upon Lord Hari’s long black curly hair, which His
associates lovingly decorated with fragrant flowers, which breaks the
chastity ot Laksmi, which trembles 1n the wind, which resembles the color

of a dark monsoon cloud, and which ts most enchanting

=== PAGE 82 ===

THE PRocEDURE FOR WORSHIPING LoRD Viswne 77

Text 26
meghakaram soma suryaprakasam
subhrun nasam sakracapaika manam
lokatitam pundartkavataksam

uidyuccailanc asrave ham purtam

I take shelter of Lord Har, who possesses a most attractive form,
whose complexion 1s dark like a cloud, whose eyes resemble the moon
and sun, whose eyebrows are charming like a rainbow, whose nose 1s long
like the beak of a bird, whose eyes are broad like lotus petals, and whose
yellow garments are the color of lightning

Text 27
dinam ham sevava vedaratva
papaistapath puritam me sariram
lobhakanta soka mohadhi 11ddham

krpava dystaya paht mam vayudcra

I am a fallen soul who 1s devoid of devotional service to You as
prescribed in the Vedic literature My body 1s filled with sinful propensities,
and ts a reservoir of misery | am under the control of greed, lamentation,
and illusion, and thus overwhelmed by mental agony O Lord Vasudeva,
kindly deliver me by Your merciful glance

Text 28
ve bhaktavadyam dhyayamanam manojyiiam
vyakum visnoh sodasa slokapuspath
stutta natta pujavitea uidhynah

suddha mukta brahmasaukhyam pravanti

Those exalted souls who diligently follow all the prescribed rules and
regulations, who repeatedly bow down before the original Personality of
Godhead, who worship Him and offer Him this garland of sixteen prayers
with unalloyed devotion, will be purified of all sins and thus merge into
the ocean of transcendental bliss

Text 29
padmeritam idam punyam

stucna partbhasitam

=== PAGE 83 ===

is Sri KALKI PURANA

dhanyam yasasyam ayusyam

svargyam svastyanam param

This prayer spoken by Lord Siva to Padmavati ts supremely pure, most
glorious, and the giver of fame. It awards one a long duration of life full of
peace and prosperity, and residence in the heavenly planets after death.

Text 30
pathann ve mahabhagaste
mucyante’ham so’khilat
dharmartha kama moksaném

paretreha phalapradam
Simply by reciting this prayer, a fortunate soul will achieve all four
objectives of life, both in this world and the next.

Thus ends the translation of the seventh chapter of Sri Kalki
Purdna.

=== PAGE 84 ===

CHAPTER EIGHI

Conversation Between Padmavati and Suka
Lord Kalki Goes To Simhala

Texts 1-2
suta uvaca
itt padmavacah srutva
kiro dhivah satam matah
kalkidutah sakhi madhye
sthitam padmam atharrarit

vada padme sangapujam
harer adbhuta karmanah
yamasthaya vidhanena

carami bhuvanatrayam

Sita Gosvami said: After hearing these instructions fiom the mouth
of Padmavati, Sika, who 1s honored by all saintly persons, very sober,
and a representative of Lord Kalki, said: O Padmavati, kindly describe
the various limbs of Lord Har1’s worship. | will perform them as | travel
throughout the three worlds

Text 3
padmovaca
evam padadi kesantam
dhyatva tam jagadisiaram
purnatma desiko mulam

mantram japati mantrauit

Padmavati said: A devotee who 1s well-versed in the chanting of
mantras should meditate on Lord Hartas | have described, beginning trom
His lotus feet and gradually rising to His head, while accepting Him as the
Lord of the universe and the Supersoul of all living beings Thereatter, he
should faithfully chant the mila-mantra

Texts 4-5
Japad anantaram danda

pranatum matmamscaret

=== PAGE 85 ===

Sri KaLkit PURANA

visvaksenadi kanantu

datva visnu niveditam

tata udvasya hrdaye
sthapayen manasa saha
nrtyan gayan harernéma

tam pasyan sarvatah sthitam

A pious devotee should offer his obeisances to the Lord after chanting
the mila-mantra, falling flat onto the ground. He should then offer the
remnants of Lord Visnu’s food to His associates, such as Visvaksena,
and atter doing so, perform sankirtana by chanting and dancing, while
perceiving the all-pervading Lord within his heart.

Text 6
tatah sesam mastakena
krtva nawedya bhug bhavet
ityetat kathitam kira
kamalanatha sevanam

Thereafter, the devotee should touch the remnants of the Lord’s
flower garland to his head and then honor His remnants of food. This 1s
the proper way to worship the Lord of Laksmi.

Text 7
sakamana kamapurama
kamamrta dayakam
sronananda karam deva

gandharva navahrt priyam

By worshiping the Supreme Lord 1n this way, a matertalistic devotee
will have all of his desires fulfilled, and an unalloyed devotee will attain
liberation from material existence. Such worship 1s very pleasing to the
demigods, human beings, and Gandharvas

Texts 8-9
suka uvaca
saminitam srutam sabdhi !
bhagavad bhakti laksanam
tvat prasadat papmo me
kirasya bhuvi mukudam

=== PAGE 86 ===

CONVERSATION BETWEEN PADMAVATI AND SuUKA

kintu tvam kaficanamayrm
praumam ratnabhusitam
sajivamiva pasyami

durlabham rupinim srryam

Suka said: O chaste one, I have heard with full attention your
description of the characteristics of devotional service to the Supreme
Lord. Now, by your mercy, I will be able to free myself from all sinful
reactions, even though | am not a great devotee. I now see you as a golden
deity decorated with jeweled ornaments and full of life. By seeing your
form, which 1s very rarely visible in the three worlds, | am convinced that
you are none other than Laksmi.

Text 10
nanyam pasyami sadrsim
ripa sila gunaistara
nanyo yogyo gunt bhartta

bhuvene’ pi na drsvate

1 cannot think of any woman whose beauty, characteristics, and
personality are equal to yours. For this reason, it would be very difficult
to find a suitable husband for you within the three worlds.

Texts 11-12
kintu pare samudrasya
paramascarya rupavan
gunavan isvarah saksat

kascid drsto’timanusah

na hi dhatrkrtam manye
sarivam sarvasaubhagam

yasya srt vasudevasya
nantaram dhyana yogatah

And yet, I have found a suitable match for you across the sea. He
1s all-attractive, extraordinarily qualified, and non-different from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead While gazing upon His enchanting
body, one cannot imagine that it had been made by the creator. After
lengthy deliberation, I have concluded that He 1s directly the Supreme
Lord, Hart.

8

=== PAGE 87 ===

82 Sri Karki PuRANA

Text 13
traya dhyatam tu yadrupam
visnor amuta tejasah
tat saksat krtam ityeva

na tatra kryadantaram

I feel within the core of my heart that | have seen the supremely
powerful Lord Hani, upon whom you always meditate. I do not find any
difference between His form and the form of Lord Har.

Text 14
padmovaca
braht tanmama kim kutra
jatah kira paracaram
janasi tatkrtam karma

ustarenatra varnaya

Padmavati satd: O parrot, please tell me—where 1s His place of birth?
If you know more about Him then tell me what He has accomplished in

His life.

Text 15
urksadagaccha pijam te
karomi vidhivodhitam
vyapura phalaharam
kuru sadhu payah pra

O bird, why are you sitting at the top of this tree’ Please come down
and sit next to me. I will treat you with respect and so do not be afraid.
Come and have some sweet juicy fruit that | brought and drink some pure

water
Texts 16-18
tava caficuyugam padma
ragada arunam wealam
ratna samghattitam aham

karomi manasah priyam

kandharam suryakantena

manina svarnaghattma

=== PAGE 88 ===

CONVERSATION BETWEEN PADMAVATI AND SUKA

karomydcchadanam caru
muktabhih paksatim tava

patatram kunkumena mgam
saurabhena aticitritam
karomi nayana ananda

dayakam ripamidrsam

Alas! How beautiful 1s your beak, so bright and redder than a ruby! I
would be happy to plate your beak with gold Indeed, | will decorate your
neck with a sunstone set in a gold locket. | will cover your wings with
pearls and decorate your entire body with marks of fragrant kunkuma.
Thus, anyone who sees you will become very pleased

Text 19
puccha maccha manwrata
ghargharena atisabditam
padayor nupuralapa

lapmam tvam karuomvaham

I will decorate your tail with a strand of precious jewels. When you
fly through the sky, this strand of jewels will make an enchanting sound. I
will decorate your feet with ornaments so that when you walk, there will
be the beautiful sound of tinkling bells.

Text 20
tavamrta kathavrata
tyaktddhim sadhi mamiha
sakhibhih samgatabhiste
him karisyami tadvada

My distress has been dissipated by hearing your nectarean words.
Now, kindly instruct me—what can I do for you? | and my companions
are prepared to do whatever you ask.

Text 21
wt padmavacah srutva
tadanukam upagatah
kiro dhirah prasannatma

pravaktum upacakrame

83

=== PAGE 89 ===

84 Sri Katkt PURANA

Upon hearing these words of Padmavati, Suka descended from the
treetop and spoke as follows.
Text 22
kira uvaca
brahmana prarvitah sriso
maha karuniko babhau
sambhale visnuyasaso
grhe dharmam riraksisuh

The parrot said: The supremely merciful Lord of Laksmt has already
made His advent at the house of a great brahmana named Visnuyaéga in
the village of Sambhala He has appeared to re-establish the principles of
religion, having been requested to do so by His exalted devotees.

Texts 23-25
caturbhir bhratrbhir yiau
gotrajath paricaritah
krtopa nayano vedam
adhitya ramasannidhau

dhanurvedasca gandharvam
swvadasvam asim sukam

kavacatica varam labdhva
sambhalam punaragatah

visakha yupa bhupalam
prapya siksavisesatah

dharmanakhyaya matiman
adharmamsca nirakarot

He 1s residing with His brothers and other relatives. After His
sacred thread ceremony, He went to the @srama of Paragurama of the
Bhrgu dynasty, where He mastered the Vedas. He also mastered the arts
of discharging arrows and music. He received a sword, horse, parrot, and
shield from Mahadeva, as a benediction. Thereafter, He returned home
to Sambhala and began helping the king, Visakhaydpa, protect religious
principles and destroy those who practice irreligion.

=== PAGE 90 ===

CONVERSATION BETWEEN PADMAVATI AND SUKA 85

Text 26
iti padma tadakhyanam
misamya muditanuna
prasthapaya masa sukam
kalker anayanddrta

After hearing this from Suka, Padmavati’s happiness knew no bounds.

Her lotus-like face brightened and she immediately sent Suka to bring
Lord Kalki.

Text 27
bhusayitva svarnaratnas

tamuvaca krtanyalih

She decorated Suka with golden ornaments and spoke to him with
folded hands.

Texts 28-29
padmovaca
niveditam tu janasi
kimanyat kathayamyaham
stribhava bhayabhitatma
yadi nayati sa prabhuh

tathapi me karmadosat
pranatm kathayisyast
sivena yo varo dattah

sa me sapo’ bhavat kila

Padmavati said: O parrot, you know the request that I will make of
you. What more can I say? If the Lord refuses to come here, fearing that
He might also turn into a woman, then simply convey my obeisances to
Him and describe everything that has happened as a result of my past
misdeeds. Also, inform Him of how the benediction that Lord Siva

awarded me has now become a curse

Texts 30-32
pumsam maddarsane napi
stribhavam kamatah suka
srutvett padmam amantraya

pranamya ca punah punah

=== PAGE 91 ===

86

Sri KALki PURANA

uddiya pravayau kirah
sambhalam kalkipaltam
tamagatam samakarnya

kalkth para puranyaxah
kode krtva tam dadarsa

svarna ratna vibhusitam
sanandam parama ananda

davakam praha tam tada

The benediction | received from Lord Siva was that any male who
looked at me with lust would immediately turn into a woman

After hearing these statements of Padmavati, Suka pacified her and
repeatedly offered his obeisances After giving her sufficient assurances,
he flew into the sky and within a short time, arrived at the village of
Sambhala, which was protected by Lord Kalki When Lord Kalki, the
destroyer of demons, heard the news of Suka’s arrival, He became jubilant
When they met, Lord Kalki placed Suka upon His lap and thus saw that
his entire body was decorated with golden ornaments

Texts 33-34
kalkth paramatejasi
tarasmmnam alam sukam
pujayitua kare sprstva
pavah panena tarpayan

tanmukhe svamukham tattva
papraccha vwidhah kathah

kasmad desaccanttva tuam
drstva purvam kimagatah

The all-powerful Lord Kalki caressed Suka’s body with His left palm
and offered him some water to drink Indeed, the Lord almost touched
Suka’s lips with His own as He said My dear Suka! Where have you been
during your travels’? Where are you coming from just now’? What are the
wonderful things that you have seen’

Text 35
kutrosttah kuto labdha

manikaficana bhusanam

=== PAGE 92 ===

CONVERSATION BETWEEN PADMAVATI AND SUKA 87

aharnisam tvanmilinam

vafichitam mama sarvatah

What were you doing for such a long time’ How did you get these
jeweled ornaments’? | have been longing to meet you, throughout the days
and nights

Text 36
tavanaloka nenapi ksanam

me yugavad bhavet

Indeed, even a moment of separation from you seemed to Me more
than a yuga
Texts 37-38
wt kalkervacah sruttva
pranipatya bhrsam
kathava masa padmayah
kathah purvodita yatha

samvadam atmanastasya
nyalankara dharanam

sarvam tadvarnaya masa
tasyah pranati purcakam

When the magnanimous Suka heard these words of Lord Kalki,
he repeatedly offered his obeisances and then began speaking, telling
everything about his meeting with Padmavatt He described their
conversation, and told the story of how she had given him the jeweled
ornaments

Text 39
srutveti vacanam kalkih
sukena sahito muda
jagama tvarito’svena
swadattena tanmanah

After hearing everything about Padmavati from Suka, Lord Kalki
became very attached to her Without further delay, the Lord mounted
the horse that was given to Him by Siva and happily departed for the
Stmhala island

=== PAGE 93 ===

88 Sri KALKI PURANA

Text 40
samudraparam amalam
stmhalam janasamkulam
nana trmana bahulam

bhast aram mankaficanath

This island was situated far across the ocean, and thus surrounded
by water on all sides It was thickly populated, many airplanes were seen
there, and it shone with the splendor of countless yewels and gold

Text 41
prasada sadanagresu
pataka toranakulam
sre sabha panattala
pupra gopura maudatam

The city was decorated with many palaces and massive gates On
top of the gates and palaces were placed colorful flags that increased
the beauty of the island There were assembly houses, raised platforms,
memorials, domed buildings, and concrete roads Indeed, there was no
end to the beauty of this magnificent city

Texts 42-43
purastri padimm padma
gandhamoda duirephium
purim karumatim tatra
dadarsa puratah sthitam

marala jala saficala
vilola kamalantaram
unmulitabja malalt

kalita kulitam sarah

Soon after Lord Kalki’s arrival at Simhala, He gazed upon the city,
which was known as Karumati This city was adorned with a nice lake
filled with lotus flowers The water of the lake was never still, due to the
swans that were always swimming here and there Swarms of humming
bees came from the nearby forest to drink the honey of the lotus flowers

=== PAGE 94 ===

CONVERSATION BETWEEN PADMAVATI AND SUKA

Text 44
jala kukkuta datyu
hanaditam hamsasarasath
tadarsa s.accha pavasam
lahart lola tyitam

Many swans, cranes, and other aquatic birds that were swimming in
the lake created a very pleasing sound The cooling breezes skimming
across the waves of the lake gave pleasure to the trees and plants growing
on the shore

Texts 45-47
canam kadamta kuddala
sala talamra kesarath
kapitthasvattha kharyura
vya pura karatyakath

punnaga panasair nagarat
angatr arjunasimsapauh
kamukarr narikelaisca

nanairksaisca sobhitam

tanam dadarca ruciram
phalapuspa dalavrtam

drstva hrstatanuh sukam
sakarunah kalkth purante cane

praha pritikaram caco tra sarasi
snatat yam itvadytah tacchrtva

emayaniitah prabhumatam vamuti
padmasramam tatsandesamtha

pravanam adhuna gatva sa karo vadat

The forests surrounding the lake contained many varieties of trees,
including kadamba kuddala and sala While walking in the forest Lord
Kalki became jubilant by seeing its beauty With great affection He said
My dear Suka, I want to bathe at this place

89

=== PAGE 95 ===

90 Sri Katki PURANA

Understanding the Lord’s intention, Suka humbly said My dear
Lord, permit me to go and meet Padmavati

Thus Suka came before Padmavati and informed her of Lord Kalki’s
arrival

Thus ends the translation of the eighth chapter of Sri Kalki Purana

=== PAGE 96 ===

CHnarpTer Nine
The Meeting of Lord Kalki and Padmavati

Texts 1-3
suta uraca
kalkth sarovarabhyase
jalaharana vartmam
svaccha sphanka sopane

pravalacita vedike

saroja saurabha vyagra
bhramad bhramara nadite

kadamva pota pavali
varitaditya dan sane

samutasa sane citre
sadasvenava taritah

kalkih prastha payamasa
sukam padmasramam

Sita Gosvami said Lord Kalki dismounted and sat on a divine altar
that was bedecked with emeralds, crystal, and other precious stones,
which was situated by the pathway used by people to bring water from the
lake The Lord saw swarms of humming bees hovering around the fully
blossomed lotus flowers 1n the lake, fully intoxicated by their fragrance
The forest was cool because of the shade provided by the kadamba trees
After sitting down comfortably, Lord Kalki sent Suka to see Padmavati

Text 4
sa nagestaram madhvasthah
suko gata dadarsa tam
harmyastham «sini patra

saximim sakhibhn vitam

Suka flew to the residence of Padmavati and sat at the top of a
nagakesara tree From there, he saw Padmavatt ling down on a lotus
shaped bed inside the palace, surrounded by her companions

=== PAGE 97 ===

92 Sri Katkt PuRANA

Text 5
nisvasa vata tapena
layatm vadanam bujam
utksipantim sakhidatta
kamalam candanoksitam

Her face looked dry and pale, due to her warm breathing, which was
a sign of her intense separation from the Lord. She held a fully blossomed
lotus flower smeared with sandalwood paste, slowly moving it from side
to side.

Text 6
reva vari parisnatam
paragadhyam samdgatam
dhrtanvam rasagatam

nindantim pavanam priyam

Although a gentle cooling breeze blew, carrving fine drops of water,
the pollen of lotus flowers, and the aroma of various other flowers, which
was certainly very pleasant, Padmavati did not take any pleasure in it at
all, but instead criticized tt.

Text 7
sukah sakarunah sadhu
vacanals tamto sayat
sa, tvamehyeht, te svasthi

sudgatam svasti me subhe

When Suka saw Padmavati’s pathetic condition, he attempted to
pacify her with sweet words. Padmavati then said: O Suka, may you
achieve auspiciousness. | hope that you journey has been fruitful. The
bird said: Yes, I feel that everything ts going as planned.

Text 8
gate tvayyati vvagraham
santiste’stu rasayanat
rasayanam durlabham me

sulabham te sivasraye

Padmavati said: O parrot, since your departure, I have simply been
waiting anxiously for your return Suka said: J think that there 1s a remedy

=== PAGE 98 ===

THe MEETING OF LorD KALKI AND PADMAVATI 93

so that all of your misery will be vanquished. Padma said: | must be very
unfortunate because I am not able to gain any relief from my suffering.
The bird said: O devotee of Lord Siva, it will not be difficult to dispel
your anguish.

Teat 9
kva me bhagya vihinaya
thatva varavarnint
dew tam sarasastne

prausthapya gata vayam

Padmavatt said: O Suka, I am so unfortunate. How will my desire ever
be fulfilled? Suka said: O gentle lady, your desire will be fulfilled very

soon. | have brought the Lord of your heart and He ts waiting by the side
of the lake.

Texts 10-12
evamanyo'nya samvada
muditatma manorathe

mukham mukhena nayanam

nayane sadyta dadau

vmala malin lola
kamala kaémakandala
vilasmt carumati

kumudetyasta nayikah

sakhya eta matustabhn
jalakrdartham udyatah
padmd praha sarastiram

ayantu sa maya strryah

Upon realizing that her long cherished desire would soon be fulfilled,
Padmavati became filled with joy and the hairs of her body stood on end
She touched her lips to the lips of the parrot and fixed her eyes on his eyes
Padmavati’s eight principle companions—Vimala, Malini, Lola, Kamala,
Kamakandala, Vilasini, Carumati, and Kumuda—were preparing to go to
the lake to enjoy playing in the water Padma addressed her companions:
My dear friends, let us go now to the lake and enjoy ourselves

=== PAGE 99 ===

94 Sri KALKI PURANA

Text 13
ttvakhya yasu suakam
aruhya parwarita sakhibhis
carurvesabhir bhutia

stantah puradtah.h

pravavau traritam drastum

bhaismi yadupatim vatha

After saying this, Padmavati hurriedly mounted a palanquin and left
the palace, along with her nicely dressed companions She was ina hurry
to see Lord Kalki, and she reminded one of how Rukmini had left her
palace to meet Sri Krsna, the Lord of the Yadus

Text 14
janah pumamsah patht ve purasthah
pradudravuh stritva bhavad digantaram
srmgatake va vipanusthita ve

nyamgana sthapita punayakaryah

While Padmavati was going to the lake, all the male citizens ran away,
here and there, fearing that they might turn into females 1f they looked
at the princess After their wives had seen that they had returned home
safely, the men peacefully engaged in the worship of the Supreme Lord

Text 15
nivaritam tam siwikam vahantyah
narvo ti matta valavattarasca
padma sukoktava taduparyupastha

jagama tabhih parn aruabhih

In this way, the road became devoid of men Padamavati's palanquin
was carried by young, strongly built women According to the plan of
Suka, Padmavati traveled to the lake by palanquin, surrounded by her
companions

Text 16
sargjalam sarasa hamsanaditam
praphulla padmodbhava renuaasitam
cerurvt gahyasu sudhakaralasah

kumudvatt namudayaya sobhanah

=== PAGE 100 ===

THt MEETING OF LorD KALKI AND PADMAVATI

Soon, Padmavati and her companions, whose faces resembled full
moons, and whose forms were very charming to behold, arrived at the
lake The water of the lake was fragrant because of the presence of many
fully blossomed lotus flowers The swans and cranes created a beautiful
sound In this setting, all the girls entered the water and began playing
with great merriment

Text 17
tasam mukhamoda madandha bhrngah
thava padmani mukharat mde
lagnah sugandhadhi kamakalasva

nivaritas capi na tatvayuste

Bees became captivated by the aroma emanating from the girls’ lotus
like faces Indeed, they became so intoxicated that they gave up enjoying
the nectar of the lotus flowers Although the girls repeatedly tried to drive
the bees away, they kept coming again and again bec wise of the heavenly
fragrance and beauty of their faces

Text 18
hasopahasath sarasa prakasath
vadvaisca nrtvaisca yale atharath
karagrahaista jala yodha narttas

cakarsa tabhn vanitabhn uccath

At this time, Padmay ati enjoyed playing with her friends Their minds
became enlivened by dancing, singing, playing musical instruments
clapping their hands, joking, smiling, and teasing one another

Text 19
sa kamatapta manasa sukokum
artcya padma sakhibhth sameta
jalat samutthaya maharhabhusa

jagama nirdista kadamta sandam

Thereafter, Padmavati, who was becoming afflicted by the arrows of
Cupid, remembered the words of Suka and then came out of the water,
followed by her friends She changed her clothes and decorated herself
with beautiful ornaments, and then went underneath a kadamba tree
that had been appointed as the place of rendezvous

95