

=== PAGE 1 ===

es
Renate
ae i i
Ly HY Be

iy
He



=== PAGE 2 ===



=== PAGE 3 ===



=== PAGE 4 ===



=== PAGE 5 ===

a
_ mie
Se She


=== PAGE 6 ===

1. From the Temple of the Kailas 8th Century
At Ellora, Hyderabad


=== PAGE 7 ===

DHE

KAMA SUTRA
VATSYAYANA

Translated from the Sanscrit
by

The Hindoo Kama Shastra Society

COMPLETE IN SEVEN PARTS
with
PREFACE, INTRODUCTION, AND CONCLUDING REMARKS
Illustrated

BENARES—NEW YORK
PRINTED FOR THE SOCIETY OF THE FRIENDS OF INDIA
1883-1925
For Private Circulation Only


=== PAGE 8 ===



=== PAGE 9 ===

CONTENTS

THE List OF ILLUSTRATIONS WITH NOTES ........ ix
PREFACE ......... Me os oo St ee ee xvi
INTRODUCTION ......... ee) HRM, «iplle 5 2ee
THE KAMA SUTRA OF VATSYAYANA Pew 025 (5 13
Part I. INDEX, AND GENERAL CONSID-
ERATION OF THE SUBJECT .... 1
Part II. OF SEXUAL UNION .......... 29
Part III. ABOUT THE ACQUISITION OF A
WIFE .... Sa eae KOO:
ParT IV. ABOUTAWIFE.............. 89
Part V. ABOUT THE WIVES OF OTHER
PEOPEE! sent. es. eeu
ParT VI. ABOUT COURTEZANS Sako SS
Part VII. ON THE MEANS OF ATTRACTING
OTHERS TO ONESELF ......... 163

CONCLUDING REMARKS ..........-0-00 20-0000 175


=== PAGE 10 ===



=== PAGE 11 ===

THE LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS WITH NOTES
I. When “Each is Both’’— Frontispiece

The monolithic Temple of the Kailas has been char-
acterized as the most wonderful and interesting monu-
ment of architectural art in India. Certainly it is the
most splendid of those representing Buddhist, Brahmani-
cal, and Jain work near Ellora, a village of India in the
State of Hyderabad and north-east of the city of Bom-
bay... This cave-temple is not a mere interior cham-
ber cut in the rock. It is a model of a complete temple
such as might have been erected on the plain. That is,
a sloping hill has been hewn away externally as
well as internally, leaving the temple a solid mass of trap-
rock about a sunken, cloistered court measuring 276 by
154 feet. . . . Though Moslem zealots have striven
to destroy the carved figures, and time and earthquakes
have weathered and broken away parts here and there,
this great temple is still one of the most perfect examples
of Dravidian architecture... . It was built by Krishna
I., Rashtcakuta, King of Malkhed in the incredibly short
period of twenty-three years, between 760 and 783
A. D.

Il. From the Temple of Surya— Page 1

With the exception of Number VI the remainder of
the reproductions are of stone sculptures from the Tem
ple to Surya (the Sun-God) at Konarak, a small vil-
lage on the coast of Orissa, and 19 miles north-east of
the city of Puri. All of this temple, except the Jaga-
mohan ot Audience Hall, is in unrecoverable ruin. Vari-
ous suggestions as to why worship in it was given up
have been offered. One is founded in a native legend
that the priests deserted it after mariners had profaned it
by stealing a great lode-stone which rumor had set in
the Vimana, (tower over the sanctuary), alleging the lode-
stone drew their vessels irresistibly toward the shore.
Others have blamed earthquakes, lightning, sinking of
the foundations in the sandy soil, etc. And, there is a
record in the Temple at Puri of an attempt by invading
vandals to destroy it. It is certain that its neglect be-
gan in the first half of the 17th Century when the tower,
which was 174 feet high, gave way. Its deterioration
continued unchecked until the opening of the 20th Cen-
tury when the British Archaeological Survey came to it.
They drove the snakes away, excavated, replaced what
they could, cleaned off the overgrowing vegetation, and
filled the Audience Hall with stones and sand, their
method of preventing its threatened collapse. . . .
It is from the Audience Hall that the subjects of these
reproductions come. Though the interior was quite

ix


=== PAGE 12 ===

Il.

Illustrations

severe, the decoration of the exterior was amazingly elab-
orate. All who have seen it have lavished praise on it:
“the noblest specimen of medieval art; ‘the most ex-
quisite memorial of sun-worship in India;” and, from
Sir James Fergusson, ‘‘for its size, the most richly orna-
mented building—externally at least—in the whole
world.” It wrung unwilling tribute even from the
Mohammedans. But it is difficult for the imagination to
grasp from words the mere extent of the decoration that
covers like an embroidered veil all of the structure that
remains. To mention only one thing: the extant frieze
work varying from a foot to a foot and a half broad
amounts alone to nearly three thousand feet in length
and must contain at least six thousand figures. The
sculpture is remarkably free from that conventionalism
which, to the Western eye, frequently mars Eastern art.
In delicacy, power, breadth and appropriateness of treat-
ment, it represents one of the highest points ever reached
in stone sculpture. It demonstrates that there was a
time when the Hindoo artist worked from nature, as
did their gods themselves, in the enshrining of their
dreams in matter. Much of the stone used was very
hard (chlorite), and has every appearance of having re-
tained all its original clarity and strength of line. But,
unfortunately for us, many of the figures are in a soft
sandstone which has seriously suffered from the weather

The date of the construction of this glorious
monument to the religion that underlies all the religions
of man is, according to the Annals of the temple itself,
S’aka 1200, ie, A. D. 1278, under the King Lang-
uliya Narasinka Deva. Moreover the seal of this he
runs thus: “‘The lord of the earth, the tailed
Narasinka, erected a temple for the ray-garlanded asl
in the S’aka year 1200." Late research has fairly cer-
tainly set its construction between the years 1240 and
1280 A. D.

From the ‘‘Black Pagoda’’—

The Jagamohan or Audience Hall of the Temple to
Surya at Konarak has come to be more specifically known
as the “Black Pagoda.” This has probably come about
through some association of the epithet kala, meaning
“black,"” which the Hindoos apply to all deserted or
desecrated religious edifices. The term is certainly not
derived from the general color of the building, for the
stone of which it is built is light... . . The name
Konarak or Konarka comes from the vernacularized
forms of two Sanskrit, words (kona, “corner,” and
acka, “the sun”), implying “the corner of the sun,”
ive., the corner of the world dedicated to the sun. It
is thus to be surmised that this locality had for
ages been associated in men’s minds as especially blessed
by the sun, and that long before this temple was built
Konarak had been a prominent center of Sun-worship.

. This probability is also supported by the legend
of the founding of the temple, This legend, which is
quite characteristic of the great imagination and pictur-

Page 29


=== PAGE 13 ===

Illustrations

esqueness of the Hindoo mind, is, according to the Samba
Purana, as follows. Samba (one of the heroes of the
Mahabharat), the son of Krishna by Jambavati, is en-
joying life in the heavenly home of his father. A hand-
some young man, full of spirit and given to the dis-
play of it, he has become the object of the displeasure
of the sage, Narada, who believes him lacking in the
respect due a learned man. So that, in spite, Narada
maligns Samba to Krishna, insinuating that for a son
Samba is over-familiar with his step-mothers, the 1,600
present wives of the god. Krishna, quite proof against
this, disbelieves it. Narada does, however, soon after
find the opportunity to his revenge. One fine, warm
day the wives are all naked bathing in a great tub, and,
moreover, flushed with wine, they are rather unrestrained
in their dousing each other with water. The sage lures
Samba to the scene; then, contriving the presence of Krish-
na, accuses Samba with his pernicious beauty of having too
exciting an influence on the wives. Krishna, presented
with the evidence of this spectacle, in an instant anger
curses his son with the curse of leprosy. Although
Samba later proves his complete innocence the curse
cannot be revoked and the leprosy takes hold. Krishna
then does the best he can for his unfortunate boy: in-
structs him how he can be cured. Samba is to go to
earth, and by the river that runs through Konarak he
is to lead the life of an ascetic and put himself upon
the mercy of the one god, Surya, who can effect his
cure. For twelve years Samba prosecutes his devotion
to the Sun-god. In a vision Surya then appears to him
in all his glory. Samba has learned the twenty-one
laudatory epithets of the ray-garlanded One. He re-
peats them without fault. The god answers his prayer,
and makes him whole. The next day, Samba, bathing
with more than usual joy in the river, finds a marvellous
image of the god to whom he is so much indebted. Of
course, how the image came to be at the bottom of the
river was another point that had to be explained. That
went back to ages before that age, to the time when
Surya was married to Sanjna, a daughter of the metal-
worker Visvakarma. But so fierce and rough had the
god seemed to her that in disgust she would not suffer
his embraces. In dismay at this repulse Surya consulted
Brahma, and on that divinity’s advice went to the father
of the girl, who evidently knew his daughter's likes and
dislikes, to get himself made over more to the form she
had been taught to appreciate. Visvakarma placed Surya
on his lathe, and worked over all of the god except the
feet. He pared off a full eighth of the body, and then
smoothed him down properly, according to the tradi-
tions of the family. Unwilling to scrap the divine refuse
Visvakarma fashioned out of it the discus of Vishnu,
the trident of Siva, the club of Kuvera, the lance of Kar-
tikeya. Of the great amount he still had left he made
a likeness of Surya himself. Thus came the image that
Samba recovered from the bed of the river and about
which in gratitude he built a sanctuary. And thus was
the beginning of the great temple at Konarak.



=== PAGE 14 ===

xii Illustrations

IV. From the Temple of Surya— Page 69

This is another life-sized group of many in different
sizes on this temple frankly depicting the sexual epi-
sode. Though this subject has here perhaps attained
its most happy expression, it is the theme of many rep-
resentations on many Indian temples. For the Hindoo
mind openly faced the sexual function as the reality
it is, one of the expressions of the divine mind. They
held it as a peculiarly sacred and godlike function in
themselves. The great number of their religious laws
dealing with the sexual, the place it occupies in secular
literature, show that its significance in the life of man
was recognized by them at its inherent importance. And,
as can be seen in these sculptures, they were not content
to classify and elucidate its manifestations in writing
alone. As though they would insure the uninitiate from
any mistake they even illustrated the subject in stone.

One commentator on this work has been so hardy
4s to suggest it is merely an imaginative depiction of
the heavenly joys awaiting the faithful believer. But,
distinctive in Indian art as this work is, the Hindoos
were too serious artists and too bound up in the legends
of their theology to permit us to presume that these
sculptures were other than illustrations of religious sub-
jects taken from their mythology. One wonders, how-
ever, just why so much of the decorations on a temple
to the sun should depict the sexual. Neither the sect
of the Sauras (which had its origin in a Persian in-
fluence) nor that of Surya (the ancient Vedic divinity
of the sun) has as a principal part of its mysteries those
connected with the union of the sexes. There is, how-
ever, a sect, the Sahtas, worship of woman, which does
emphasize the sexual element. Many of the figures on
this Audience Hall suggest a fusion of the sect of Surya
with that of Naga (or some other sect of serpent wor-
shippers) as well as with that of Sahta.

V. Apsaras humbling an Ascetic— Page 89

The subject of this group suggests the influence of
the ideas of a serpent cult. Serpent worship is still one
of the religions of India. It was formerly very wide-
spread, and influenced the decoration of many other
monuments, especially the Buddhist stupas of Sanchi and
Amravati, The intimate association of the serpent with
woman in the minds of all primitive peoples is not as
obvious as its association with the lingam (phallus).
Here the substitution of the serpent for the male organ
is suggested. . . . This group appears to illustrate
a part of Brahmanical belief associated with the Apsaras.
They were originally spirits of the clouds and waters,
semi-divine nymphs said to have sprung from the churn-
ing of the ocean. In the Rig-Veda there is but one Ap-
saras, who, as the wife of Gandharva, gave birth to the
first mortals Yama and Yami. In the heroic age there
are many Apsaras and many Gandharvas who form part
of the retinue of Indra, the first as dancers, the second
as musicians. One of the uses the gods had for the
beautiful Apsaras was a means of humbling the over-


=== PAGE 15 ===

VI.

Vil.

Illustrations

pious ascetic. So strongly did the Hindoo believe in
the efficacy of his ritual that he held a devotee could,
through austere practices, develop supernatural powers
that made him a rival and even a being superior to the
gods. Obviously, the gods could not have this. To
humble him through the symbolism of the sexual act
was both pertinent and suggestive. . . . The figure
behind the man may be another Apsaras who was sent
along to make certain the reduction of an especially ob-
durate case, or it may have been intended to represent
the god himself assisting at the rite. Or, again, the
group may represent two proselytes accompanied by an
instructor...

xiii

A Naga from the Temple of Surya— Page 101

The Nagas were another of the Hindoo's many races
of a semi-divine character who had the same standing
in relation to the universe as human beings themselves.
The details of life in their world were fully described
as known. Their element was Water, as that of the
Yakshas was Earth. The capital city of the Nagas
was under the sea, and was called Bhogavati, “‘the city
of enjoyment.” The name is derived from naga mean-
ing either a ““snake"” or an “elephant,” and has the earlier
connotations, a “tree” and a “mountain”. . . . This
figure shows more definitely the influence of serpent wor-
ship. The substitution or confusion of the serpent
with the lingam is more obvious. There is substanti-
ation of this conjecture by the suggestion in the upper
part of the pedestal that the figure is standing on the
horned head of a great reptile.

Monolithic Pillar from a Stupa— Page 131

This stupa (burial mound of the ashes of some dis-
tinguished person) is at Bharahat, a village in the small
State of Nagod. The excavations instigated by Alex-
ander Cunningham in 1874 showed it to be one of the
most important and handsome in India. The mound
itself was found to be 70 feet in diameter, between 50
and 60 feet high, and was surmounted by an ornament
shaped like the letter T. About this mound ran a cir-
cular balustrade, a hundred feet in diameter, the ground
plan of which made a gigantic swastika. The whole of
this stood toward the east side of a paved and walled
quadrangle about 300 feet by 320 feet... . The pillar
shown, which is 7 feet 1 inch high, came from the
balustrade. The elaborate ornament and large number
of inscriptions on this stupa have yielded valuable infor-
mation in regard to the art and social conditions of the
people of Buddhist India at that period. The subjects
were taken from the Buddhist Sacred Books, more es-
pecially from the accounts given in them of the life
of the Buddha in previous births. . . . The figure shown
here (the motive is one very frequent in Hindoo art) has
been taken for Maya, mother of the Buddha, awaiting his



=== PAGE 16 ===

Illustrations

birth under the tree Sala. It is much more probable that
it was intended to represent the guardian spirit of a
Yakshini, the females of one of their semi-divine races,
to which the nearest approach in Western thought is the
fairy and gnome people... . This pillar is now in the
Indian Museum at Calcutta. Villagers had already car-
ried off the greater part of the stone and bricks with
which to make cottages when the monument was first
brought to Western notice. Only about half of the
original eighty pillars and about a third of the cross-
bars were recovered.

VIII. From the Temple of Surya— Page 163

One of the groups illustrating variant positions to be
assumed in the sexual act. (See Chapter 6 of Part II.)


=== PAGE 17 ===

PREFACE

In the literature of all countries there will be found a certain
number of works treating especially of love. Everywhere
the subject is dealt with differently, and from various points
of view. In the present publication it is proposed to give a
complete translation of what is considered the standard work
‘on love in Sanscrit literature, and which is called the ‘‘Vatsya-
yana Kama Sutra,”’ or Aphorisms on Love, by Vatsyayana.
While the Introduction will deal with the evidence con-
cerning the date of the writing, and the commentaries written
upon tt, the chapters following the Introduction will give a
translation of the work itself. It is, however, advisable to
furnish here a brief analysis of works of the same nature,
prepared by authors who lived and wrote years after Vatsya
had passed away, but who still considered him as the great
authority, and always quoted him as the chief guide to
Hindoo erotic literature.
Besides the treatise of Vatsyayana the following works on
the same subject are procurable in India: —
The Ratirahasya, or secrets of love.
The Panchasakya, or the five arrows.
The Smara Pradipa, or the light of love.
The Ratimanjari, or the garland of love.
The Rasmanjari, or the sprout of love.
The Anunga Runga, or the stage of love also called
Kamaledhiplava, or a boat in the ocean of love.
The author of the ‘Secrets of Love’’ (No. 1) was a poet
named Kukkoka. He composed his work to please one Venu-
dutta, who was perhaps aking. When writing his own name
at the end of each chapter he calls himself “Siddha patiya
pandita,”’ i.e., an ingenious man among learned men. The
work was translated into Hindi years ago, and in this the
author’s name was written as Koka. And as the same name
crept into all the translations into other languages in India,
the book became generally known, and the subject was popu-
larly called Koka Shastra, or doctrines of Koka, which is
identical with the Kama Shastra, or doctrines of love, and
the words Koka Shastra and Kama Shastra are used indis-
criminately.
The work contains nearly eight hundred verses, and is
divided into ten chapters, which are called Pachivedas. Some

AMAWNN

xv


=== PAGE 18 ===

Xvi Preface

ot the things treated of in this work are not to be found in the
Vatsyayana, such as the four classes of women, viz., the
Padmini, Chitrini, Shankini, and Hastini, as also the enumera-
tion of the days and hours on which the women of the dif-
ferent classes become subject to love. The author adds that
he wrote these things from the opinions of Gonikaputra
and Nandikeshwara, both of whom are mentioned by Vats-
yayana, but their works are not now extant. It is difficult
to give any approximate idea as to the year in which the
work was composed. It is only to be presumed that it was
written after that of Vatsyayana, and previous to the other
works on this subject that are still extant. Vatsyayana gives
the names of ten authors on the subject, all of whose works
he had consulted, but none of which are extant, and does not
mention this one. This would tend to show that Kukkoka
wrote after Vatsya, otherwise Vatsya would assuredly have
mentioned him as an author in this branch of literature along
with the others.

The author of the ‘‘Five Arrows’’ (No. 2 in the list) was
one Jyotirisha. He is called the chief ornament of poets,
the treasure of the sixty-four arts, and the best teacher of the
rules of music. He says that he composed the work after
reflecting on the aphorisms of love as revealed by the gods,
and studying the opinions of Gonikaputra, Muladeva, Bab-
bravya, Ramtideva, Nundikeshwara and Kshemandra. It is
impossible to say whether he had perused all the works of
these authors, or had only heard about them; anyhow, none
of them appear to be in existence now. This work contains
nearly six hundred verses, and is divided into five chapters,
called Sayakas or Arrows.

The author of the “Light of Love’ (No. 3) was the poet
Gunakara, the son of Vechapati. The work contains four
hundred verses, and gives only a short account of the doc-
trines of love, dealing more with other matters.

“The Garland of Love’ (No. 4) is the work of the
famous poet Jayadeva, who said about himself that he is a
writer on all subjects. This treatise is, however, very short,
containing only one hundred and twenty-five verses.

The author of the ‘Sprout of Love’’ (No. 5) was a poet
called Bhanudatta. Jt appears from the last verse of the
manuscript that he was a resident of the province of Tirhoot,
and son of a Brahman named Ganeshwar, who was also a
poet. The work, written in Sanscrit, gives the descriptions


=== PAGE 19 ===

Preface xvii

of different classes of men and women, their classes being
made out from their age, description, conduct, etc. It con-
tains three chapters, and its date is not known, and cannot
be ascertained.

. ‘The Stage of Love’ (No. 6) was composed by the poet
Kullianmull, for the amusement of Ladkhan, the son of
Ahmed Lodi, the same Ladkhan being in some places spoken
of as Ladana Mull, and in others as Ladanaballa. He ts sup-
posed to have been a relation or connection of the house of
Lodi, which reigned in Hindostan from A.D. 1450-1526.
The work would, therefore, have been written in the fifteenth
or sixteenth century. It contains ten chapters, and has been
translated into English but only six copies were printed for
private circulation. This is supposed to be the latest of the
Sanscrit works on the subject, and the ideas in it were evi-
dently taken from previous writings of the same nature.

The contents of these works are in themselves a literary
curiosity. There ace to be found both in Sanscrit poetry and
in the Sanscrit drama a certain amount of poetical sentiment
and romance, which have, in every country and in every
language, thrown an immortal halo round the subject. But
here it is treated in a plain, simple, matter of fact sort of
way. Men and women are divided into classes and divisions
in the same way that Buffon and other writers on natural
history have classified and divided the animal world. As
Venus was represented by the Greeks to stand forth as the
type of the beauty of woman, so the Hindoos describe the
Padmini or Lotus-woman as the type of most perfect femi-
nine excellence, as fellows:

She in whom the following signs and symptoms appear is
called a Padmini. Her face is pleasing as the full moon; her
body, well clothed with flesh, is soft as the Shiras or mustard
flower, her skin is fine, tender, and fair as the yellow lotus,
never dark coloured. Her eyes are bright and beautiful as
the orbs of the fawn, well cut, and with reddish corners.
Her bosom is hard, full and high; she has a good neck; her
nose is straight and lovely, and three folds or wrinkles cross
her middle—about the umbilical region. Her yoni resembles
the opening lotus bud, and her love seed (Kama salila) is
perfumed Itke the lily that has newly burst. She walks with
swan-like gait, and her voice is low and musical as the note
of the Kokila bird, she delights in white raiments, in fine
jewels, and in rich dresses. She eats little, sleeps lightly, and


=== PAGE 20 ===

xviii Preface

being as respectful and religious as she is clever and courteous,
she is ever anxious to worship the gods, and to enjoy the
conversation of Brahmans. Such, then, is the Padmini or
Lotus-woman.

Detailed descriptions then follow of the Chitrini or Art-
woman; the Shankhini or Conch-woman, and the Hastini
or Elephant-woman, their days of enjoyment, their various
seats of passion, the manner in which they should be manipu-
lated and treated in sexual intercourse, along with the charac-
teristics of the men and women of the various countries in
Hindostan. The details are so numerous, and the subjects so
seriously dealt with, and at such length, that neither time
nor space will permit of their being given here.

One work in the English language is somewhat similar to
these works of the Hindoos. It is called ‘‘Kalogynomia; or
the Laws of Female Beauty,” being the elementary principles
of that science, by T. Bell, M.D., with twenty-four plates,
and printed in London in 1821. It treats of Beauty, of
Love, of Sexual Intercourse, of the Laws regulating that
Intercourse, of Monogamy and Polygamy, of Prostitution,
of Infidelity, ending with a catalogue raisonne of the defects
of female beauty.

Another work in English also enters into great details of
private and domestic life. It is called ‘‘The Elements of
Social Science or Physical, Sexual and Natural Religion, with
a Solution of the Social Problem,’’ by a Doctor of Medicine.
London, Edward Truelove, 256, High Holborn. To per-
sons interested in the above subjects this work will be found
to contain such details as have been seldom before published,
and which ought to be thoroughly understood by all philan-
thropists and benefactors of society.

After a perusal of the Hindoo work, and of the English
books above mentioned, the reader will understand the sub-
ject, at all events from a materialistic, realistic, and practical
point of view. If all science is founded more or less on a
stratum of facts, there can be no harm in making known to
mankind generally certain matters intimately connected with
their private, domestic, and social life.

Alas! complete ignorance of them has unfortunately
wrecked many a man and many a woman, while a little
knowledge of a subject generally ignored by the masses would
have enabled numbers of people to have understood many
things which they believed to be quite incomprehensible, or
which were not thought worthy of their consideration.


=== PAGE 21 ===

INTRODUCTION

It may be interesting to some persons to learn how it came
about that Vatsyayana was first brought to light and trans-
lated into the English language. It happened thus. While
translating with the pundits the ‘“‘Anunga runga, or the stage
of love,’ reference was frequently found to be made to one
Vatsya. The sage Vatsya was of this opinion, or of that
opinion. The sage Vatsya said this, and so on. Naturally
questions were asked who the sage was, and the pundits
replied that Vatsya was the author of the standard work on
love in Sanscrit literature, that no Sanscrit library was com-
plete without his work, and that it was most difficult now
to obtain in its entire state. The copy of the manuscript
obtained in Bombay was defective, and so the pundits wrote
to Benares, Calcutta, and Jeypoor for copies of the manu-
script from Sanscrit libraries in those places. Copies having
been obtained, they were then compared with each other, and
with the aid of a Commentary called ‘‘Jayamangla’’ a re-
vised copy of the entire manuscript was prepared, and from
this copy the English translation was made. The following
is the certificate of the chief pundit: —

“The accompanying manuscript is corrected by me after
compacting four different copies of the work. I had the assis-
tance of a Commentary called ‘Jayamangla’ for correcting
the portion in the first five parts, but found great difficulty
in correcting the remaining portion, because, with the excep-
tion of one copy thereof which was tolerably correct, all the
other copies I had were far too incorrect. However, I took
that portion as correct in which the majority of the copies
agreed with each other.”

The ‘Aphorisms on Love,” by Vatsyayana contain about
one thousand two hundred and fifty slokas or verses, and
are divided into patts, parts into chapters, and chapters into
paragraphs. The whole consists of seven parts, thirty-six
chapters, and sixty-four paragraphs. Hardly anything is
known about the author. His real name is supposed to be
*‘aallinaga or Mrillana, Vatsyayana being his family name.
At the close of the work this is what he writes about himself:

“After reading and considering the works of Babhravya
and other ancient authors, and thinking over the meaning of
the rules given by them, this treatise was composed, according

xix


=== PAGE 22 ===

xx Introduction

to the precepts of the Holy Writ, for the benefit of the world,
by Vatsyayana, while leading the life of a religious student
at Benares, and wholly engaged in the contemplation of the
Deity. This work is not to be used merely as an instrument
for satisfying our desires. A person acquainted with the true
principles of this science, who preserves his Dharma (virtue
or religious merit), his Artha (worldly wealth), and his
Kama (pleasure or sensual gratification), and who has regard
to the customs of the people, is sure to obtain the mastery
over his senses. In short, an intelligent and knowing per-
son, attending to Dharma and Artha and also to Kama, with-
out becoming the slave of his passions, will obtain success in
everything that he may do.”

It is impossible to fix the exact date either of the life of
Vatsyayana or of his work. It is supposed that he must have
lived between the first and sixth century of the Christian
era, on the following grounds:—He mentions that Satkarni
Satvahan, a king of Kuntal, killed Malayevati his wife with
an instrument called kartari by striking her in the passion of
love, and Vatsya quotes this case to warn people of the danger
arising from some old customs of striking woman when under
the influence of this passion. Now this king of Kuntal is
believed to have lived and reigned during the first century
A.D. and consequently Vatsya must have lived after him. On
the other hand, Virahamihira, in the eighteenh chapter of his
“Brihatsanhita,” treats of the science of love, and appears to
have borrowed largely from Vatsyayana on the subject.
Now Virahamihira 1s said to have lived during the sixth cen-
tury A.D., and as Vatsya must have written his works pre-
viously, therefore not earlier than the first century A.D., and
not later than the sixth century A.D., must be considered as
the approximate date of his existence.

On the text of the ‘‘Aphorisms on Love,” by Vatsyayana,
only two commentaries have been found. One called ‘‘Jay-
amangla’’ or ‘‘Sutrabashya,”’ and other other ‘‘Sutra vritti.””
The date of the ‘‘Jayamangla”’ is fixed between the tenth and
thirteenth century A.D., because while treating of the sixty-
four arts an example is taken from the ‘‘Kavyaprakashe "”
which was written about the tenth century A.D. Again, the
copy of the commentary procured was evidently a tcanscript
of a@ manuscript which once had a place in the library of a
Chaulukyan king named Vishaladeva, a fact elicited from the
following sentence at the end of it:—


=== PAGE 23 ===

Introduction xxi

“Here ends the part relating to the art of love in the com-
mentary on the ‘“‘Vatsyayana Kama Sutra,” a copy from the
library of the king of kings, Vishaladeva, who was a power-
ful hero, as it were a second Arjuna, and head jewel of the
Chaulukya family.”

Now it is well known that this king ruled in Guzerat
from 1244 to 1262 A.D., and founded a city called Visal-
nagur. The date, therefore, of the commentary is taken
to be not earlier than the tenth and not later than the thir-
teenth century. The author of it is supposed to be one
Yashodhara, the name given him by his preceptor being
Indrapada. He seems to have written it during the time of
affliction caused by his separation from a clever and shrewd
woman, at least that is what he himself says at the end of
each chapter. It is presumed that he called his work after
the name of his absent mistress, or the word may have some
connection with the meaning of her name.

This commentary was most useful in explaining the true
meaning of Vatsyayana, for the commentator appears to
have had a considerable knowledge of the times of the older
author, and gives in some places very minute information.
This cannot be said of the other commentacy, called “Sutra
vritti,” which was written about A.D. 1789, by Narsing
Shastri, @ pupil of a Sarveshwar Shastri; the latter was a
descendant of Bhaskur, and so also was our author, for at the
conclusion of every part he calls himself Bhaskur Narsing
Shastri. He was induced to write the work by order of the
learned Raja Vrijalala, while he was residing in Benares, but
as to the merits of this commentary it does not deserve much
commendation. In many cases the writer does not appear
to have understood the true meaning of the original author,
and has changed the text in many places to fit in with his
own explanations.

A complete translation of the original work now follows.
It has been prepared in complete accordance with the text of
the manuscript, and is given, without further comments, as
made from it.


=== PAGE 24 ===



=== PAGE 25 ===



=== PAGE 26 ===

entury

3th C

From the Temple of Surya

At Konarak,

II.

Orissa


=== PAGE 27 ===

THE KAMA SUTRA
of
VATSYAYANA

Part I

Index, and General Consideration of the Subject


=== PAGE 28 ===



=== PAGE 29 ===

PART I.

Index, and General Consideration of the Subject.

Chapter

Chapter

1b
II.

Til.
Iv.

Il.
II.
Iv.

VI.

Vil.

Vill.
Ix.

Salutation to Dharma, Artha, and Kama.
Observations on the three worldly attain-
ments of Virtue, Wealth, and Love.

On the study of the Sixty-four Arts.

On the Arrangements of a House, and
Household Furniture; and about the
Daily Life of a Citizen, his Companions,
Amusements, etc.

About classes of Women fit and unfit for
Congress with the Citizen, and of
Friends, and Messengers.

PART II.
Of Sexual Union
Kinds of Union according to Dimensions,

Force of Desire, and Time; and on the
different kinds of Love.

Of the Embrace.
On Kissing.
On Pressing or Marking with the Nails.

On Biting, and the ways of Love to be em-
ployed with regard to Women of dif-
ferent countries.

On the various ways of Lying down, and
the different kinds of Congress.

On the various ways of Striking, and of the
Sounds appropriate to them.

About Females acting the part of Males.

On holding the Lingam in the Mouth.

How to begin and how to end the Congress.
Different kinds of Congress, and Love
Quarrels.


=== PAGE 30 ===

Chapter

Chapter

Chapter

The Kama Sutra
PART III.

About the Acquisition of a Wife

1G
Il.
Il.

IV.

Il.

Observations on Betrothal and Marriage.
About Creating Confidence in the Girl.

Courtship, and the manifestation of the
feelings by outward signs and deeds.

On things to be done only by the Man, and
the acquisition of the Girl thereby. Also
what is to be done by a Girl to gain over
a Man and subject him to her.

On the different Forms of Marriage.

PART IV.
About a Wife

On the manner of living of a virtuous
Woman, and of her behaviour during
the absence of her Husband.

On the conduct of the eldest Wife towards
the other Wives of her Husband and of
the younger Wife towards the elder ones.
Also on the conduct of a Virgin Widow
re-married; of a Wife disliked by her
Husband; of the Women in the King’s
Harem; and of a Husband who has more
than one Wife.

PART V.

About the Wives of Other People

1b

I.

Ill.

On the Characteristics of Men and Women,
and. the reason why Women reject the
Addresses of Men. About Men who have
Success with Women, and about Women
who are easily gained over.

About making Acquaintance with the
Woman, and of the efforts to gain her
over.

Examinations of the State of a Woman’s
mind.


=== PAGE 31 ===

Chapter

Chapter

Iv.
VE

VI.

Il.
008

Iv.

VI.

of Vatsyayana 5

The Business of a Go-between.

On the Love of Persons in authority with
the Wives of other People.

About the Women of the Royal Harem, and
of the keeping of one’s own Wife.

PART VI.
About Courtezans
Of the Causes of a Courtezan resorting to
Men; of the means of Attaching to her-

self the Man desired, and the kind of Man
that it is desirable to be acquainted with.

Of a Courtezan living with a Man as his
Wife.

Of the Means of getting Money; of the
Signs of a Lover who is beginning to be
Weary, and of the way to get rid of him.

About a Re-union with a former Lover.

Of different kinds of Gain.

Of Gains and Losses, attendant Gains and

Losses, and Doubts; and lastly, the dif-
ferent kinds of Courtezans.

PART VII.

On the Means of Attracting Others to One’s Self

Chapter

1G

Il.

On Personal Adornment, subjugating the
hearts of others, and of tonic medicines.

Of the means of exciting Desire, and of the
ways of enlarging the Lingam. Miscel-
laneous Experiments and Receipts.


=== PAGE 32 ===

CHAPTER I.
Salutation to Dharma, Artha, and Kama.

IN the beginning, the Lord of Beings created men and women,
and in the form of commandments in one hundred thousand
chapters laid down rules for regulating their existence with
regard to Dharma,* Artha,+ and Kama.t Some of these
commandments, namely those which treated of Dharma,
were separately written by Swayambhu Manu; those that
related to Artha were compiled by Brihaspati; and those that
referred to Kama were expounded by Nandi, the follower
of Mahadeva, in one thousand chapters.

Now these “Kama Sutra’ (Aphorisms on Love), written
by Nundi in one thousand chapters, were reproduced by
Shvetaketu, the son of Uddvalaka, in an abbreviated form in
five hundred chapters, and this work was again similarly re-
produced in an abridged form, in one hundred and fifty
chapters, by Babhravya, an inheritant of the Punchala
(South of Delhi) country. These one hundred and fifty
chapters were then put together under seven heads or parts
named severally—

1st. Sadharana (general topics).

2nd. Samprayogika (embraces, etc.).

3rd. Kanya Samprayuktaka (union of males and females) .

4th. Bharyadhikarika (on one’s own wife).

5th. Paradarika (on the wives of other people).

6th. Vaisika (on courtezans).

7th. Aupamishadika (on the arts of seduction, tonic medi-
cines, etc.).

The sixth part of this last work was separately expounded
by Dattaka at the request of the public women of Pataliputra
(Patna) , and in the same way Charayana explained the first

* Dharma is acquisition of religious merit, and is fully described in Chapter
5, Volume III, of Talboys Wheeler's “History of India,” and in the. edicts of
Asoka.

+ Artha is acquisition of wealth and property, etc.

+ Kama is love, pleasure and sensual gratification.

These three words are retained throughout in their original, as technical
terms. They may also be defined as virtue, wealth, and pleasure, the three
things repeatedly spoken of in the Laws of Manu.

6


=== PAGE 33 ===

The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana 7

part of it. The remaining parts, viz., the second, third,
fourth, fifth, and seventh were each separately expounded
by:—

Suvarnanabha (second part).

Ghotakamukha (third part).

Gonardiya (fourth part).

Gonikaputra (fifth part).

Kuchumara (seventh part), respectively.

Thus the work being written in part by different authors
was almost unobtainable, and as the parts which were ex-
pounded by Dattaka and the others treated only of the
particular branches of the subject to which each part related,
and moreover as the original work of Babhravya was dif-
ficult to be mastered on account of its length, Vatsyayana,
therefore, composed this work in a small volume as an
abstract of the whole of the works of the above-named
authors.


=== PAGE 34 ===

CHAPTER II.
On the Acquisition of Dharma, Artha and Kama

MAN, the period of whose life is one hundred years, should
practice Dharma, Artha, and Kama at different times and in
such a manner that they may harmonize together and not
clash in any way. He should acquire learning in his child-
hood, in his youth and middle age he should attend to Artha
and Kama, and in his old age he should perform Dharma, and
thus seek to gain Moksha, i.e., release from further transmi-
gration. Or, on account of the uncertainty of life, he may
practice them at times when they are enjoined to be prac-
ticed. But one thing is to be noted, he should lead the life
of a religious student until he finishes his education.

Dharma is obedience to the command of the Shastra or
Holy Writ of the Hindoos to do certain things, such as the
performance of sacrifices, which are not generally done, be-
cause they do not belong to this world, and produce no visible
effect; and not to do other things, such as eating meat, which
is often done because it belongs to this world, and has visible
effects.

Dharma should be learnt from the Shruti (Holy Writ),
and from those conversant with it.

Artha is the acquisition of arts, land, gold, cattle, wealth,
equipages, and friends. It is, further, the protection of what
is acquired, and the increase of what is protected.

Artha should be learnt from the king’s officers, and from
merchants who may be versed in the ways of commerce.

Kama is the enjoyment of appropriate objects by the five
senses of hearing, feeling, seeing, tasting, and smelling, assisted
by the mind together with the soul. The ingredient in this is
a peculiar contact between the organ of sense and its object,
and the consciousness of pleasure which arises from that con-
tact is called Kama.

Kama is to be learnt from the Kama Sutra (aphorisms
on love) and from the practice of citizens.

When all the three, viz., Dharma, Artha, and Kama come
together, the former is better than the one which follows it,
i.e., Dharma is better than Actha, and Artha is better than
Kama. But Artha should always be practiced by the king,
for the livelihood of men is to be obtained from it only.

8


=== PAGE 35 ===

The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana 9

Again, Kama being the occupation of public women, they
should prefer it to the other two, and these are exceptions to
the general rule.

Objection.

Some learned men say that as Dharma is connected with
things not belonging to this world, it is appropriately treated
of in a book; and so also is Artha, because it is practiced only
by the application of proper means, and a knowledge of
those means can only be obtained by study and from books.
But Kama being a thing which is practiced even by the brute
creation, and which is to be found everywhere, does not want
any work on the subject.

Answer.

This is not so. Sexual intercourse being a thing dependent
on man and woman requires the application of proper means
by them, and those means are to be learnt from the Kama
Shastra. The non-application of proper means, which we
see in the brute creation, is caused by their being unrestrained,
and by the females among them only being fit for sexual
intercourse at certain seasons and no more, and by their inter-
course not being preceded by thought of any kind.

Objection 2.

The Lokayatikas* say:—Religious ordinances should not
be observed, for they bear a future fruit, and at the same time
it is also doubtful whether they will bear any fruit at all.
What foolish person will give away that which is in his own
hands into the hands of another? Moreover, it is better to
have a pigeon today than a peacock tomorrow; and a copper
coin which we have the certainty of obtaining, is better than
a gold coin, the possession of which is doubtful.

Answer.

It is not so. 1st. Holy Writ, which ordains the practice
of Dharma, does not admit of a doubt.

and. Sacrifices such as those made for the destruction of
enemies, or for the fall of rain, are seen to bear fruit.

3rd. The sun, moon, stars, planets and other heavenly
bodies appear to work intentionally for the good of the
world.

* These were certainly materialists who seemed to think that a bird in the
Jnnd was worth two in the bush.


=== PAGE 36 ===

10 The Kama Sutra

4th. The existence of this world is effected by the observ-
ance of the rules respecting the four classes* of men and their
four stages of life.

5th. We see that seed is thrown into the ground with the
hope of future crops.

Vatsyayana is therefore of opinion that the ordinances of
religion must be obeyed.

Objection 3.

Those who believe that destiny is the prime mover of all
things say:—We should not exert ourselves to acquire wealth,
for sometimes it is not acquired although we strive to get it,
while at other times it comes to us of itself without any ex-
ertion on our part. Everything is therefore in the power of
destiny, who is the lord of gain and loss, of success and de-
feat, of pleasure and pain. Thus we see that Balit was
raised to the throne of Indra by destiny, and was also put
down by the same power, and it is destiny only that can
reinstate him.

Answer.

It is not right to say so. As the acquisition of every object
presupposes at all events some exertion on the part of man,
the application of proper means may be said to be the cause
of gaining all our ends, and this application of proper means
being thus necessary (even where a thing is destined to hap-
pen), it follows that a person who does nothing will enjoy
no happiness.

Objection 4.

Those who are inclined to think that Artha is the chief
object to be obtained argue thus. Pleasures should not be
sought for, because they are obstacles to the practice of
Dharma and Artha, which are both superior to them, and
are also disliked by meritorious persons. Pleasures also bring
a man into distress, and into contact with low persons; they
cause him to commit unrighteous deeds, and produce im-
purity in him; they make him regardless of the future, and

* Among the Hindoos the four classes of men are the Brahmans or priestly
class, the Kshutrya or warlike class, the Vaishya or agricultural and mercantile
class, and the Shoodra or menial class. The four stages of life are, the life of
a religious student, the life of a householder, the life of a hermit, and the life
of a Sunyasi or devotee.

+ Bali was a demon who had conquered Indra and gained his throne, but
was afterwards overcome by Vishnu at the time of his fifth incarnation.


=== PAGE 37 ===

of Vatsyayana 11

encourage carelessness and levity. And lastly, they cause him
to be disbelieved by all, received by none, and despised by
everybody, including himself. It is notorious, moreover,
that many men who have given themselves up to pleasure
alone, have been ruined along with their families and rela-
tions. Thus, King Dandakya,* of the Bhoja dynasty, car-
ried off a Brahman’s daughter with evil intent, and was
eventually ruined and lost his kingdom. Indra, too, having
violated the chastity of Ahalya,+ was made to suffer for it.
In a like manner the mighty Kichaka,t who tried to seduce
Draupadi, and Ravana,§ who attempted to gain over Sita,
were punished for their crimes. These and many others fell
by reason of their pleasures.

Answer 4.

This objection cannot be sustained, for pleasures, being as
necessary for the existence and well being of the body as
food, are consequently equally required. They are, more-
over, the results of Dharma and Artha. Pleasures are
therefore, to be followed with moderation and caution. No
one refrains from cooking food because there are beggars to
ask for it, or from sowing seed because there are deer to
destroy the corn when it is grown up.

Thus a man practicing Dharma, Artha, and Kama enjoys
happiness both in this world and in the world to come. The
good perform those actions in which there is no fear as to
what is to result from them in the next world, and in which
there is no danger to their welfare. Any action which con-
duces to the practice of Dharma, Artha, and Kama together,
or of any two, or even one of them, should be performed,
but an action which conduces to the practice of one of them
at the expense of the remaining two should not be performed.

* Dandakya is said to have abducted from the forest the daughter of a
Brahman, named Bhargava, and being cursed by the Brahman, was buried with
his kingdom under a shower of dust. The place was called after his name the
Dandaka forest, celebrated in the Ramayana, but now unknown

+ Ahalya was the wife of the sage Gautama. Indra caused her to believe that
he was Gautama, and thus enjoyed her. He was cursed by Gautama and sub-
sequently afflicted with a thousand ulcers on his body.

t Kichaka was the brother-in-law of King Virata, with whom the Pan-
davas had taken refuge for one year. Kichaka was killed by Bhima, who as-
sumed the disguise of Draupadi. For this story the Mahabarata should be re-
ferred to.

§ The story of Ravana is told in the Ramayana, which with the Mahabarata
form the two great epic poems of the Hindoos: the latter was written by
Vyasa, and the former by Valmiki.


=== PAGE 38 ===

CHAPTER III.
On the Arts and Sciences to be Studied.

MAN should study the Kama Sutra and the arts and sciences
subordinate thereto, in addition to the study of the arts and
sciences contained in Dharma and Artha. Even young maids
should study this Kama Sutra along with its arts and sciences
before marriage, and after it they should continue to do so
with the consent of their husbands.

Here some learned men object, and say that females, not
being allowed to study any science, should not study the
Kama Sutra.

But Vatsyayana is of opinion that this objection does not
hold good, for women already know the practice of Kama
Sutra, and that practice is derived from the Kama Shastra,
vt the science of Kama itself. Moreover, it is not only in this
but in many other cases that though the practice of a science
is known to all, only a few persons are acquainted with the
rules and laws on which the science is based. Thus the Yad-
nikas or sacrificers, though ignorant of grammar, make use of
appropriate words when addressing the different Deities, and
do not know how these words are framed. Again, persons
do the duties required of them on auspicious days, which are
fixed by astrology, though they are not acquainted with the
science of astrology. In a like manner riders of horses and
elephants train these animals without knowing the science
of training animals, but from practice only. And similarly
the people of the most distant provinces obey the laws of
the kingdom from practice and because there is a king over
them, and without further reason.* And from experience
we find that some women, such as the daughters of princes
and their ministers, and public women, are actually versed in
the Kama Shastra.

A female, therefore, should learn the Kama Shastra, or at
least a part of it, by studying its practice from some con-
fidential friend. She should study alone in private the sixty-
four practices that form a part of the Kama Shastra. Her

* The author wishes to prove that a great many things are done by people
from practise and custom, without their being acquainted with the reason of
things, or the laws on which they are based, and this is perfectly true.

12


=== PAGE 39 ===

The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana 13

teacher should be one of the following persons, viz., the
daughter of a nurse brought up with her and already mar-
ried,* or a female friend who can be trusted in everything,
or the sister of her mother (i.e., her aunt), or an old female
servant, or a female beggar who may have formerly lived in
the family, or her own sister, who can always be trusted.

The following are the arts to be studied, together with the
Kama Sutra:—

1 Singing.

2 Playing on musical instruments.

3 Dancing.

4 Union of dancing, singing, and playing instrumental
music.

5 Writing and drawing.

6 Tattooing.

7 Arraying and adorning an idol with rice and flowers.

8 Spreading and arranging beds or couches of flowers, or
flowers upon the ground.

9 Coloring the teeth, garments, hair, nails and bodies, i.e.,
staining, dyeing, coloring and painting the same.

1o Fixing stained glass into a floor.

11 The art of making beds, and spreading out carpets and
cushions for reclining.

12 Playing on musical glasses filled with water.

13 Storing and accumulating water in aqueducts, cisterns,
and reservoirs.

14 Picture making, trimming, and decorating.

15 Stringing of rosaries, necklaces, garlands, and wreaths.

16 Binding of turbans and chaplets, and making crests
and top-knots of flowers. .

17 Scenic representations. Stage playing.

18 Art of making ear ornaments.

19 Art of preparing perfumes and odors.

20 Proper disposition of jewels and decorations, and
adornment in dress.

21 Magic or sorcery.

22 Quickness of hand or manual skill.

23 Culinary art, i.e., cooking and cookery.

24 Making lemonades, sherbets, acidulated drinks, and
spirituous extracts with proper flavor and color.

25 Tailor’s work and sewing.

* The proviso of being married applies to all the teachers.


=== PAGE 40 ===

14 The Kama Sutra

26 Making parrots, flowers, tufts, tassels, bunches, bosses,
knobs, etc., out of yarn or thread.

27 Solution of riddles, enigmas, covert speeches, verbal
puzzles, and enigmatical questions.

28 A game, which consisted in repeating verses, and as
one person finished, another person had to commence at once,
repeating another verse, beginning with the same letter with
which the last speaker's verse ended, whoever failed to re-
peat, was considered to have lost and to be subject to pay a
forfeit or stake of some kind.

29 The art of mimicry or imitation.

30 Reading, including chanting and intoning.

31 Study of sentences difficult to pronounce. It is played
as a game chiefly by women and children, and consists of a
difficult sentence being given, and when repeated quickly,
the words are often transposed or badly pronounced.

32 Practice with sword, single stick, quarter staff, and bow
and arrow.

33 Drawing inferences, reasoning or infering.

34 Carpentry, or the work of a carpenter.

35 Architecture, or the art of building.

36 Knowledge about gold and silver coins, and jewels
and gems.

37 Chemistry and mineralogy.

38 Coloring jewels, gems and beads.

39 Knowledge of mines and quarries.

40 Gardening; knowledge of treating the diseases of trees
and plants, of nourishing them, and determining their ages.
41 Art of cock fighting, quail fighting, and ram fighting.

42 Art of teaching parrots and starlings to speak.

43 Art of applying perfumed ointments to the body, and
of dressing the hair with unguents and perfumes and braid-
ing it.

44 The art of understanding writing in cypher and the
writing of words in a peculiar way.

45 The art of speaking by changing the forms of words.
It is of various kinds. Some speak by changing the beginning
and end of words, others by adding unnecessary letters be-
tween every syllable of a word, and so on.

46 Knowledge of languages and of the vernacular dialects.

47 Art of making flower carriages.

48 Art of framing mystical diagrams, of addressing spells
and charms, and binding armlets.


=== PAGE 41 ===

of Vatsyayana 15

49 Mental exercises, such as completing stanzas or verses
on receiving a part of them; or supplying one, two or three
lines when the remaining lines are given indiscriminately
from different verses, so as to make the whole an entire verse
with regard to its meaning; or arranging the words of a
verse written irregularly by separating the vowels from the
consonants, or leaving them out altogether; or putting into
verse or prose sentences represented by signs or symbols.
There are many other such exercises.

50 Composing poems.

51 Knowledge of dictionaries and vocabularies.

52 Knowledge of ways of changing and disguising the ap-
pearance of persons.

53 Knowledge of the art of changing the appearance of
things, such as making cotton to appear as silk, coarse and
common things to appear as fine and good.

54 Various ways of gambling.

55 Art of obtaining possession of the property of others
by means of muntras or incantations.

56 Skill in youthful sports.

57 Knowledge of the rules of society, and of how to pay
respects and compliments to others.

58 Knowledge of the art of war, of arms, armies, etc.

59 Knowledge of gymnastics.

60 Art of knowing the character of a man from his
features.

61 Knowledge of scanning or constructing verses.

62 Arithmetical recreations.

63 Making artificial flowers.

64 Making figures and images in clay.

A public woman, endowed with a good disposition, beauty,
and other winning qualities, and also versed in the above
arts, obtains the name of a Ganika, or public woman of high
quality, and receives a seat of honor in an assemblage of men.
She is, moreover, always respected by the king, and praised
by learned men, and her favor sought for by all, she becomes
an object of universal regard. The daughter of a king, too,
as well as the daughter of a minister, being learned in the
above arts can make their husbands favorable to them, even
though these may have thousands of other wives besides
themselves. And in the same manner, if a wife becomes
separated from her husband, and falls into distress, she can
support herself easily, even in a foreign country. hy mea’.s

y of


=== PAGE 42 ===

16 The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana

of her knowledge of these arts. Even the bare knowledge
of them gives attractiveness to a woman, though the practice
of them may be only possible or otherwise according to the
circumstances of each case. A man who is versed in these
arts, who is loquacious and acquainted with the arts of gal-
lantry, gains very soon the hearts of women, even though he
is only acquainted with them for a short time.


=== PAGE 43 ===

CHAPTER IV.
The Life of a Citizen*

HAVING thus acquired learning, a man, with the wealth that
he may have gained by gift, conquest, purchase, deposit, + or
inheritance from his ancestors, should become a householder,
and pass the life of a citizen. He should take a house in a
city, or large village, or in the vicinity of good men, or in a
piace which is the resort of many persons. This abode should
be situated near some water, and divided into different com-
partments for different purposes. It should be surrounded
by a garden, and also contain two rooms, an outer and an
inner one. The inner room should be occupied by the
females, while the outer room, balmy with rich perfumes,
should contain a bed, soft, agreeable to the sight, covered
with a clean white cloth, low in the middle part, having gar-
lands and bunches of flowerst upon it, and a canopy above
it, and two pillows, one at the top, another at the bottom.
There should be also a sort of couch besides, and at the head
of this a sort of stool, on which should be placed the fragrant
ointments for the night, as well as flowers, pots containing
collyrium and other fragrant substances, things used for per-
fuming the mouth, and the bark of the common citron tree.
Near the couch, on the ground, there should be a pot for
spitting, a box containing ornaments, and also a lute hang-
ing from a peg made of the tooth of an elephant, a board
for drawing, a pot containing perfume, some books, and
some garlands of the yellow amaranth flowers. Not far
from the couch, and on the ground, there should be a round
seat, a toy cart, and a board for playing with dice; outside
the outer room there should be cages of birds,* and a
separate place for spinning, carving and such like diversons.
In the garden there should be a whirling swing and a com-
mon swing, as also a bower of creepers covered with flowers,
in which a raised parterre should be made for sitting.

* This term would appear to apply generally to an inhabitant of Hindoo-
stan. It is not meant only for a dweller in a city, like the Latin Urbanus as

opposed to Rusticus.
+ Gift is peculiar to a Brahman, conquest to a Kshatrya, while purchase,

deposit, and other means of acquiring wealth belong to the Vaishya.
Natural garden flowers.
* Such as quails, partridges, parrots, starlings, etc.

17


=== PAGE 44 ===

18 The Kama Sutra

Now the householder, having got up in the morning and
performed his necessary duties, should wash his teeth, ap-
ply a limited quantity of ointments and perfumes to his
body, put some ornaments on his person and collyrium on
his eyelids and below his eyes, color his lips with alacktaka,t
and look at himself in the glass. Having then eaten betel
leaves, with other things that give fragrance to the mouth,
he should perform his usual business. He should bathe
daily, anoint his body with oil every other day, apply a
lathering§ substance to his body every three days, get his
head (including face) shaved every four days, and the other
parts of his body every five or ten days.|| All these things
should be done without fail, and the sweat of the armpits
should also be removed. Meals should be taken in the fore-
noon, in the afternoon, and again at night, according to
Charayana. After breakfast, parrots and other birds should
be taught to speak, and the fighting of cocks, quails, and
rams should follow. A limited time should be devoted to
diversion with Pithamardas, Vitas, and Vidushakas,{| and
then should be taken the midday sleep.** After this the
householder, having put on his clothes and ornaments,
should, during the afternoon, converse with his friends.
In the evening there should be singing, and after that the
householder, along with his friend, should await in his
room, previously decorated and perfumed, the arrival of the
woman that may be attached to him, or he may send a
female messenger for her, or go to her himself. After her
arrival at his house, he and his friend should welcome her,
and entertain her with a loving and agreeable conversation.
Thus end the duties of the day.

The following are the things to be done occasionally as
diversions or amusements.

1 Holding festivals* in honor of different Deities.

2 Social gatherings of both sexes.

3 Drinking parties.

+ The calls of nature always performed by the Hindoos the first thing in
the morning.

+ A colour made from lac.

§ This would act instead of soap, which was not introduced until the rule
of the Mahomedans.

|| Ten days are allowed when the hair is taken out with a pair of pincers.

{1 These are characters generally introduced in the Hindoo drama: their
characteristics will be explained further on.

** Noonday sleep is only allowed in summer, when the nights are short.

* These are very common in all parts of India.


=== PAGE 45 ===

of Vatsyayana 19

4 Picnics.
5 Other social diversions.

Festivals

On some particular auspicious day, an assembly of
citizens should be convened in the temple of Saraswati.+
There the skill of singers, and of others who may have come
recently to the town, should be tested, and on the following
day they should always be given some rewards. After that
they may either be retained or dismissed, according as their
performances are liked or not by the assembly. The mem-
bers of the assembly should act in concert both in times of
distress as well as in times of posterity, and it is also the
duty of these citizens to show hospitality to strangers who
may have come to the assembly. What is said above should
be understood to apply to all the other festivals which may
be held in honor of the different Deities according to the
present rules.

Social Gatherings

When men of the same age, disposition and talents, fond
of the same diversions, and with the same degree of educa-
tion, sit together in company with public women,{ or in an
assembly of citizens, or at the abode of one among them-
selves, and engage in agreeable discourse with each other,
such is called a sitting in company or a social gathering.
The subjects of discourse are to be the completion of verses
half composed by others, and the testing the knowledge of
one another in the various arts. The woman who may be

+ In the “Asiatic Miscellany,” and in Sir W. Jones's works, will be found
a spirited hymn addressed to this goddess, who is adored as the patroness of
the fine arts, especially of music and rhetoric, as the inventress of the Sanscrit
language, etc., etc. She is the goddess of harmony, eloquence, and language,
and is somewhat analogous to Minerva. For further information about her,
see Edward Moor’s “'Hindoo Pantheon.”

¢ The public women, or courtezans (Vesya), of the early Hindoos have
often been compared with the Hetaerae of the Greeks. The subject is dealt with
at some length in H. H. Wilson's “Select Specimens of the Theatre of the
Hindoos,” in two volumes, Trubner & Co., 1871. It may be fairly consid-
ered that the courtezan was one of the elements, and an important element too,
of early Hindoo society, and that her education and intellect were both su-
perior to that of the women of the household. Wilson says, “By the Vesya
or courtezan, however, we are not to understand a female who has disregarded
the obligation of law or the precepts of virtue, but a character reared by a state
of manners unfriendly to the admission of wedded females into society, and
opening it only at the expense or reputation to women who were trained for
association with men by personal and mental acquirements to which the matron
‘was a stranger.”


=== PAGE 46 ===

20 The Kama Sutra

the most beautiful, who may like the same things that the
men like, and who may have power to attract the minds of
others, are here done homage to.

Drinking Patties

Men and women should drink in one another’s houses.
And here the men should cause the public women to drink,
and should then drink themselves, liquors such as the
Madhu, Aireya, Sara, and Asawa, which are of bitter and
sour taste; also drinks concocted from the barks of various
trees, wild fruits, and leaves.

Going to Gardens or Picnics

In the forenoon, men, having dressed themselves, should
go to gardens on horseback, accompanied by public women
and followed by servants. And having done there all the
duties of the day, and passed the time in various agreeable
diversions, such as the fighting of quails, cocks, and rams,
and other spectacles, they should return home in the after-
noon in the same manner, bringing with them bunches of
flowers, etc.

The same also applies to bathing in the summer in water
from which wicked or dangerous animals have previously
been taken out, and which has been built in on all sides.

Other Social Diversions

Spending nights playing with dice. Going out on moon-
light nights. Keeping the festive day in honor of spring.
Plucking the sprouts and fruits of the mangoe trees. Eating
the fibres of lotuses. Eating the tender ears of corn. Pic-
nicing in the forests when the trees get their new foliage.
The Udakakshvedika or sporting in the water. Decorat-
ing each other with the flowers of some trees. Pelting each
other with the flowers of the Kadamba tree, and many other
sports which may either be known to the whole country,
or may be peculiar to particular parts of it. These and
similar other amusements should always be carried on by
citizens.

The above amusements should be followed by a person
who diverts himself alone in company with a courtezan, as
well as by a courtezan who can do the same in company with
her maid servants or with citizens.


=== PAGE 47 ===

of Vatsyayana 21

A Pithamarda* is a man without wealth, alone in the
world, whose only property consists of his Mallika,} some
lathering substance, and a red cloth, who comes from a
good country, and who is skilled in all the arts; and by
teaching these arts is received in the company of citizens,
and in the abode of public women.

A Vitat is a man who has enjoyed the pleasures of for-
tune, who is a compatriot of the citizens with whom he
associates, who is possessed of the qualities of a householder,
who has his wife with him, and who is honored in the as-
sembly of citizens and in the abodes of public women, and
lives on their means and on them.

A Vidushaka§ (also called a Vathasaka, i.e., one who pro-
vokes laughter) is a person only acquainted with some of
the arts, who is a jester, and who is trusted by all.

These persons are employed in matters of quarrels and
reconciliations between citizens and public women.

This remark applies also to female beggars, to women
with their heads shaved, to adulterous women, and to old
public women skilled in all the various arts.

Thus a citizen living in his town or village, respected by
all, should call on the persons of his own caste who may
be worth knowing. He should converse in company and
gratify his friends by his society, and obliging others by his
assistance in various matters, he should cause them to assist
one another in the same way.

There are some verses on this subject as follows:—

A citizen discoursing, not entirely in the Sanscrit langu-

* According to this description a Pithamarda would be a sort of professor
of all the arts, and as such received as the friend and confidant of the citizens.

+ A seat in the form of the letter T.

+ The Vita is supposed to represent somewhat the character of the Para-
site of the Greek comedy. It is possible that he was retained about the per-
son of the wealthy and dissipated as a kind of private instructor, as well as
an entertaining companion.

§ Vidushaka is evidently the buffoon and jester. Wilson says of him that
he is the humble companion, not the servant, of a prince or man of rank, and
it is a curious peculiarity that he is always a Brahman. He bears more affinity
to Sancho Panza, perhaps, than any other character in western fiction, imitating
him in his combination of shrewdness and simplicity, his fondness of good
living and his love of ease. In the dramas of intrigue he exhibits some of the
talents of Mercury, but with less activity and ingenuity, and occasionally suffers
by his interference. According to the technical definition of his attributes he
is to excite mirth by being ridiculous in person, age, and attire.


=== PAGE 48 ===

ae) The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana

age,* nor wholly in the dialects of the country, on various
topics in society, obtains great respect. The wise should
not resort to a society disliked by the public, governed by
no rules, and intent on the destruction of others. But a
learned man living in a society which acts according to the
wishes of the people, and which has pleasure for its only
object is highly respected in this world.

* This means, it is presumed, that the citizen should be acquainted with
several languages. The middle part of this paragraph might apply to the
Nihilists and Fenians of the day, or to secret societies. It was perhaps a ref-
erence to the Thugs.


=== PAGE 49 ===

CHAPTER V.

About the Kinds of Women Resorted to by the Citizen's,
and of Friends and Messengers.

WHEN Kama is practiced by men of the four castes accord-
ing to the rules of the Holy Writ (i.e., by lawful marriage)
with virgins of their own caste, it then becomes a means of
acquiring lawful progeny and good fame, and it is not also
opposed to the customs of the world. On the contrary the
practice of Kama with women of the higher castes, and with
those previously enjoyed by others, even though they be of
the same caste, is prohibited. But the practice of Kama with
women of the lower castes, with women excommunicated
from their own caste, with public women, and with women
twice married,* is neither enjoined nor prohibited. The
object of practicing Kama with such women is pleasure only.
Nayikas,+ therefore, are of three kinds, viz., maids,
women twice married, and public women. Gonikaputra
has expressed an opinion that there is a fourth kind of
Nayika, viz., a woman who is resorted to on some special
occasion even though she be previously married to another.
These special occasions are when a man thinks thus:—
(a) This woman is self-willed, and has been pre-
viously enjoyed by many others besides myself.
I may, therefore, safely resort to her as to a
public woman though she belongs to a higher
caste than mine, and in so doing I shall not
be violating the ordinances of Dharma.
Or thus:—
(6b) This is a twice-married woman and has been
enjoyed by others before me, there is, there-
fore, no objection to my resorting to her.

* This term does not apply to a widow, but to a woman who has prob
ably left her husband, and is living with some other person as a married woman,
maritalement, as they say in France.

+ Any woman fit to be enjoyed without sin. The object of the enjoyment
of women is twofold, viz., pleasure and progeny. Any woman who can be
enjoyed without sin for the purpose of accomplishing either the one or the
other of these two objects is a Nayika. The fourth kind of Nayika which
Vatsya admits further on is neither enjoyed for pleasure or for progeny, but
merely for accomplishing some special purpose in hand. The word Nayika
is retained as a technical term throughout.

23


=== PAGE 50 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 51 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 52 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 53 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 54 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 55 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 56 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 57 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 58 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 59 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 60 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 61 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 62 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 63 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 64 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 65 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 66 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 67 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 68 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 69 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 70 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 71 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 72 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 73 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 74 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 75 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 76 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 77 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 78 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 79 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 80 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 81 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 82 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 83 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 84 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 85 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 86 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 87 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 88 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 89 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 90 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 91 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 92 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 93 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 94 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 95 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 96 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 97 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 98 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 99 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 100 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 101 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 102 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 103 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 104 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 105 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 106 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 107 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 108 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 109 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 110 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 111 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 112 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 113 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 114 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 115 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 116 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 117 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 118 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 119 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 120 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 121 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 122 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 123 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 124 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 125 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 126 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 127 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 128 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 129 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 130 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 131 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 132 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 133 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 134 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 135 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 136 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 137 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 138 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 139 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 140 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 141 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 142 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 143 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 144 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 145 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 146 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 147 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 148 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 149 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 150 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 151 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 152 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 153 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 154 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 155 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 156 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 157 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 158 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 159 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 160 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 161 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 162 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 163 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 164 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 165 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 166 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 167 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 168 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 169 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 170 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 171 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 172 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 173 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 174 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 175 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 176 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 177 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 178 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 179 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 180 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 181 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 182 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 183 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 184 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 185 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 186 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 187 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 188 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 189 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 190 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 191 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 192 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 193 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 194 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 195 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 196 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 197 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 198 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 199 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 200 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 201 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 202 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 203 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 204 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 205 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 206 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 207 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 208 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 209 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 210 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 211 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 212 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 213 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 214 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 215 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.


=== PAGE 216 ===

The Kama Sutra

Or thus:—

(c) This woman has gained the heart of her great
and powerful husband, and exercises a mas-
tery over him, who is a friend of my enemy;
if, therefore, she becomes united with me she
will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:—

(d) This woman will turn the mind of her husband,
who is very powerful, in my favor, he being
at present disaffected towards me, and intent on
doing me some harm.

Or thus:—

(e) By making this woman my friend I shall gain
the object of some friend of mine, or shall be
able to effect the ruin of some enemy, or shall
accomplish some other difficult purpose.

Or thus:—

(f) By being united with this woman, I shall kill
her husband, and so obtain his vast riches which
I covet.

Or thus:—

(g) The union of this woman with me is not attended
with any danger, and will bring me wealth, of
which, on account of my poverty and inability
to support myself, I am very much in need. I
shall, therefore obtain her vast riches in this
way without any difficulty.

Or thus:—

(h) This woman loves me ardently, and knows all
my weak points, if therefore, I am unwilling
to be united with her, she will make my faults
public, and thus tarnish my character and
reputation. Or she will bring some gross ac-
cusation against me, of which it may be hard
to clear myself, and I shall be ruined. Or per-
haps she will detach from me her husband who
is powerful, and yet under her control, and
will unite him to my enemy, or will herself
join the latter.

Or thus:—

(i) The husband of this woman has violated the
chastity of my wives, I shall therefore return
that injury by seducing his wives.
