=== PAGE 1 ===

THE

LINGA-PURANA

Part I

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS
PRIVATE LIMITED
DELHI

=== PAGE 2 ===

First Edition: Delhi, 1951
Reprinted. Dethi, 1982, 1990

Also available at:

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS
Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110007
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004
24 Race Course Road, Bangalore 560 001
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Madras 600 004

PRINTED IN IND

8Y JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS, A-45 NARAINA
INDUSTRIAL AREA, PHASE I, NEW DELHs 110 028 AND PUBLISHED BY
NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS
PVT. LTD., BUNGALOW ROAD, JAWAHAR NAGAR, DELH! 110 007.

=== PAGE 3 ===

Section I
1. Introductory
2. Index of Content
3. Primary Creation
4. Inauguration of Creation
5. Creation
6. Glory of Siva
7. Esoteric secret of Siva
8. Yogic Zones
9. Obstacles and Portents
10. Means of Direct Perception
ll. Sadyojata
12. Glory of Vamadeva
13. Glory of Tatpurusa
14. Origin of Aghora
15. Glory of Aghoreéa
16. Glory of Isana
17. Origin of Linga
18. Visnu’s praise of Siva
19. Enlightenment of Visnu
20. Enlightenment of Brahma
21. Eulogy of Siva
22. Creation of Rudras
23. Kalpas
24. Incarnations of Siva
25. Mcthod of Acamana and Ablution
26. Procedure of Sacred Ablution
27. Worship of Linga
28. Mental worship of Siva
29. Victory over Death
30. Story of Sage Sveta
31. Hymn to Siva
32. Hymrto Siva

CONTENTS

=== PAGE 4 ===

Statement of the sages
Praise of the Yogin
Deteat of Ksupa

Dialogue between Ksupa and Dadhica

Grant of boons to Brahma
Creation of Brahma

Specific Dharmas of Four Yugas
Extent of four Yugas
Nativity of Brahma

Origin of Nandifvara
Coronation of Nandifvara
Coronation of Nandisvara
Description of Nether worlds
Dvipas and their lords
Bharata sub-continent

The mountain Meru
Ilavrta sub-continent
Abodes of Devas
Continents

Geography of the World
Geography of the World
Movements of Luminaries
The Sun’s Chariot
Description of the Moon
Movements of the planets
Coronation of the Sun and others
The form of Solar rays

The Solar Sphere

The situation of the planets
Situation of Dhruva
Origin of Devas and others
Grant of boons by Pulastya
Thousand names of Siva
The narrative of Yayatu
The narrative of Yayati
The race of Jyamagha
Srikrsna, his birth and life
Various Creations
Statement of Nandikesvara

130

333

=== PAGE 5 ===

72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79,
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.

89.

90.
91.
92.
93.

94

95.

Construction of Rudra’s Chariot
Glory of Worshipping Siva
Description of Siva Lingas
Monism of Siva

Installation of Siva’s image

The Temples of Siva

Scrubbing and cleaning the shrine of Siva

The mode of worship of Siva

The holy Pasupata rite

The holy rite for the release of Pasgus
Hymn of purification

The holy rites of Siva

The holy rite of Umi-Maheévara

The glory of the five-sy]llabled Mantra
The sacrifice of meditation
Suppression of delusion

Review of Pagupata yoga
Characteristics of good conduct

The expiatory rites of the ascetics
Portentous phenomena

Glory of Srigaila

The narrative of the Asura Andhaka
Uplifting the Earth

The Exploits of Nrsimha the Man-lion

347
364
366
369
373
378
387
389
392

397

402
41)

416
422
44]

455
458
466
478
480
+86
502
304
507

=== PAGE 7 ===

CHAPTER ONE

Introductory

1. QObeisance to the Supreme Soul, Rudra, Visnu and
Brahma,! the lord of Pradhana and Purusa?® and the cause of
creation, sustenance and dissolution.

2-4. The sage Narada® went to Naimisa‘ after worshipping
Siva, in all the holy centres,’ viz. Saileéa, Sangamce$vara,
Hiranyagarbha, Svarlina, Avimukta, Mahialaya, Raudra, Gopre-
ksaka, the excellent Pagupata, Vighnegvara, Kedara, Gomiayu-
keSvara, Hiranyagarbha, Candrega, [sanya, Trivistapa and
Sukresvara.

5. On seeing Narada, the residents of Naimisa were delight-
ed in their minds. After honouring him they offered him a
befitting seat.

1. The Saiva Puranas trace the origin of Brahma, Vignu and Rudra
to the Supreme Spirit (Maheévara) and assign the functions of creation
existence and dissolution of the universe to each respectively. In fact,
the three gods represent the three attributes—sattva, rajas and tamas which
together form Pradha4ana—the original source of the universe. Thus, the
trinitarian pattern of the Cosmos is a single whole at its base. Cf. Devi
Bhaga. 1.8. 2-4.

2. Pradhana—the primary or unevolved matter, the original source
of the material world.

Purusa—the twenty-sixth principle represented as passive and a spec-
tator of the working of Prakrti—the creative force. He is distinguished
from the personal soul (jiva) as the latter is the enjoyer of the fruits of the
World-Tree. Cf. I. 28.7; II. 17. 26-27.

3. Narada—the mind-born son of Brahm and a divine sage who
acts as a messenger between gods and men.

4. Naimiga or Naimiéa, mod. Nimsar. It is situated in the Sitapur
district in the Uttara Pradeéa, on the left bank of the Gomati river. The
place is so called because the rim (nimi) of the revolving wheel of virtue
was shattered here and virtue had to make a permanent abode in this
region (Vdyu 2.7). Or the place is so called because here an army of
asuras was destroyed by the sage Gauramukha in a twinkling of eye. (Cf.
Vardha quoted in ST.) On the authority of the Matsya Purdva, A Borooah
(Ancient Geography of India) places it about the confluence of the Gomat! and
the Ganges. It was sacred in the Krta age, as Puskara in the Tret4, Kuru-
keetra in the Dvadpara, the Ganges in the Kali age.

5. For detail about the holy centres, see part I. Ch. 92.

=== PAGE 8 ===

2 Lingapurdna

6-17. He too being pleased accepted the seat offered by
the excellent sages. Seating himself comfortably on the excellent
seat and duly worshipped by the sages he discussed with them
the holy narrative of the Lingas, the narrative consisting of
wonderful anecdotes. At the very same time, the intelligent
Sfita who was well-versed in the Purdnas came to Naimisga for
offering homage to the sages. The residents of Naimisa greeted
him duly with holy songs and adorations, (since) he was the
disciple of Krsna Dvaipayana.® On seeing the truly trustworthy
and scholarly Sita Romahargana’ there arose in them the desire
to hear the Purana. They, thereafter, asked him about the
meritorious Purana that contained the glory and greatness of
the Lingas.

The residents of Naimisa said :

“O Sita, of great intellect, after adoring the sage Krsna
Dvaipayana for the knowledge of the Puranas you have obtained
the Puranic lore from him. Hence, O Sita, the best among the
Pauradnikas, we desire to hear from you that Puranic lore
illustrating the glory of the Lingas. Narada, the glorious son of
Brahma, after completing his pilgrimage to the holy centres of
the supreme lord Rudra and worshipping the Lingas therein, has
arrived here. You are a devotee of lord Rudra. So also are we
and Narada. It behoves you to recount the meritorious Purana
containing the glory and greatness of the Lingas® in the
presence of this sage. Since, everything (relating to Dharma)
has been successfully achieved by you, it should all be well
known to you.”

Thus told, Sita, the most gifted among the Pauridnikas was
delighted in his mind. He, the meritorious one, made obeisance

6. Krsna Dvaipiyana Vyasa was the son of Paraiéara by Satyavati
who later on married king Santanu. He composed the Mahabharata end
the Puranas and arranged the Vedas into four compendiums (Vayu 1.60. 11ff)

7. Romahargana or Lomahargana was one of the five disciples of
Vyasa (Vayu. 1.60. 19; SP, Vidyesvara-Sathhitd, 4.7). He was assigned the
duty of preserving Purdnic tradition while the other four Paila, Vaisampé-
yana, Jaimini and Sumanta were entrusted with the task of preserving the
Vedas. He is called Sita but he is a brahmin. He should not be confused
with the Sita of mixed caste who was the offspring of a kqtriys father and
brahmin woman as described in Manu (Aanusmrti X. 11.17)

' 8. Repeated in verse 10 of this Chapter.

=== PAGE 9 ===

Introductory 3

first to Narada, the son of Brahma and then to the ascetics of
Naimiga and began narrating the Purana.

Sita said :—

18. After bowing to Siva, Brahma and Visnu, I remember
the leading sage Vy4sa in order to recount the Lifga Purana.

19-24. I bow down to the supreme lord whose body is
Sabda-Brahman, who is the revealer of the Sabda-Brahman,
whose limbs are the letters whose characteristics are unmanifest,
but who menifests himself in diverse ways, who is constituted
by the letters a, u, m, who is gross as well as subtle, who is
greater than the greatest, who has the form of Om, whose face is
the Rgveda, tongue the Samaveda, throat the Yajurveda, and
heart the Atharvaveda, who is the lord beyond Pradhana
and Purusa, who is devoid of birth and death and who is
called Kalarudra when he assumes tamoguna and Brahma when
he assumes rajoguna and the all-pervading Visnu when he
assumes sattvaguna, who is Mahe:vara when devoid of all the
gunas®, who manifests first in seven’ forms by enveloping the
body of Pradhana, then in sixteen! forms, and finally in
twentysix!? forms, who is the source of origin of Brahma, and
who assumes the form of the Linga merely for the sport of
creation, sustenance and annihilation (of the universe). After
bowing down faithfully to that supreme lord, I begin recounting
the auspicious narrative of the Lingapurana.

g. Repeated in I.6.30.

10, saptadh4a—a group of seven tattvas consisting of intellect (buddhi),
ego (ahamkdra) and five subtle elements (tanmAtras).

11. godasadh’—five senses of action (Karmendriyas), five senses of
knowledge (jfidnendriyas), five gross elements (mahabhitas) and mind.

12. To the twentythree categories (supra Nos. 10, 11) are added
Pradhana (twentyfourth), Jiva (twentyfifth) and Puruga (twentysixth)-
To this group of twentysix is added another (the twentyseventh) namely
the supreme lord, (maheévara).

=== PAGE 10 ===

4 Lingapurdéna
CHAPTER TWO

Index of Content

Sita said :—

1-3. Formerly the excellent Lingapurana was composed by
Brahma, the great soul. It was based on the events that
happened in the Igana_kalpa, and originally it contained a
crore of verses among a hundred crore that comprised all the
Puranas. The Puranas were abridged into four hundred thou-
sand verses by Vyasas in the different manvantaras. Later in
the beginning of Dvapara, they were classified into eighteen
parts, beginning with Brahmanda among which this Linga-
purana ranks as the eleventh. Thus I have heard from VyAsa.

4. O brahmins, the number of verses in this Purana is
eleven thousand. I shall succinctly narrate it now, as it has not
been heard by me in detail.

5. When the Puranas were abridged into four hundred
thousand verses by Krsna Dvaipayana, the Linga was abridged
in eleven thousand verses.

6. At the outset the creation of Pradhana is mentioned,
then the primary and secondary creation and then the origin
of the cosmic egg, enveloped by eight sheaths.*®

7. Then, the evolution of Brahma through the cosmic egg,
by the force of rajoguna, the evolution of Visnu and Rudra,
and Visnu’s lying down in the waters.

8. The creation of the Prajipatis; the uplifting of the earth,
the duration of Brahmi’s day and night, the reckoning of his
whole span of life.

9-10. The savana of Brahma; his yuga and kalpa; the
divine and human years; the years of sages, Dhruva and
Pitrs; the nativity of Pitrs; the duties of the people in their
respective stages of life; the decrease of population in the
Universe; the manifestation of the creative energy.

11. The male and female nature of energy; the creation of
Brahm; the birth of twins; the eight names of Rudra in the
course of weeping.

1g. But in I. 3.33 the Purina refers to the seven sheaths of the Cosmic

=== PAGE 11 ===

Index of Content 5

12. Thedispute between Brahma and Vignu ; the mani-
festation of the Linga once again; the penance of Silada; the
vision of Indra, the slayer of Vrtra.

13-14. His request for a son not born through a womb ; the
impossibility of getting such a son, the dialogue between
Silada and Indra; the birth of Brahma from a lotus; the
manifestation of Bhava in the Kali age; the preceptor and the
disciple ; the incarnations of Vyasa ; the kalpas and the
manvantaras.

15-18. The nature ofthe kalpas and their different names ;
Vignu in the form of Varaha in the Varaha kalpa—meghavahana;
the grandeur and majesty of Rudra ; the manifestation once
again of Linga in the midst of sages ; the propitiation of Linga;
the injunctions regarding ablution ; the nature of purity ; the
glory of Varanasi and of the holy centres ; the shrines of Rudra
and Visnu on the earth as well as in the firmament.

19. Tha fall of Daksa on to the earth in the Svarocisa
manvantara; the curse on Daksa and his release from the curse.

20. The description of Kailasa ; the yoga pertaining to
Pasupati (Siva) ; the extent of the four yugas ; the detail of the
duties assigned to each yuga.

21-22. The magnitude ofthe interval between the yugas ;
the activities of Rudra during these intervals ; his residence in
the cremation ground ; the origin of the digit of the moon on
his forehead ; his marriage ; birth of his sons ; the fear of the
people in anticipation of destruction due to excessive indulgence
in sexual intercourse.

23-24. The curse pronounced by Sati on the Devas and on
Visnu who was, later on, absolved by Rudra ; Rudra’s dis-
charge of semen; the birth of Karttikeya; the merit of perfor-
ming ablution to the Lingas during the eclipse ; the dispute
betwecn Ksupa and Dadhica as also between Dadhica and
Visnu.

25-27. The incarnation of the trident-bearing lord Nandi ;
the narrative of the chaste lady ; the discussion about the
individual soul and avidya or ignorance ; the nature of worldly
activities and of perfect knowledge ; the characteristics of those
entitled to liberation ; the birth of Vasistha’s sons; the descrip-
tion of the families of the great sages in the spiritual lineage of

=== PAGE 12 ===

6 Liigapurdna

Vasigtha ; the devouring of Sakti by a demon-king duc to the
wickedness of Visvamitra ; the capture of the divine cow
Surabhi.

28-29. Vasistha’s grief over the loss of his son ; lamenta-
tions of Arundhati; the course of their daughter-in-law ; the
words of the child in the womb ; the birth of Paragara, Vyasa
and Suka ; the destruction of the Rakgasas by Sakti’s son Para-
fara.

30-31. The truth about the deities ; the perfect knowledge
as the grace of the lord ; the composition of the Puranas at the
behest of the preceptor Pulastya ; the magnitude of the worlds ;
the movement of the planets and luminaries ; rules of procedure
about Sraddha for living ones ; those who deserve Sraddhas ;
the description of Sraddha.

32. Rules of procedure about Nandisraddha ; the method of
studying the Vedas ; the efficacy of the five yajfias and the
rules of their performance.

33. Theconduct and behaviour of women during their
menstrual period ; the birth of excellent sons due to that conduct;
the rules about sexual intercourse in regard to persons of diffe-
rent castes in due order.

34. The injunctions regarding what should and what
should not be eaten in respect of the people of all castes ; the
expiatory rites for the general as well as for the particular sins
severally and in detail.

35. The form and features of the hells ; crime and punish-
ment; signs of men destined to be heavenly or hellish in later
births.

36. Kinds of charitable gifts ; the city of the King of the
Dead ; ritualistic detail of the five-syllabled mantra ; the
greatness of Rudra.

37. The fight between Vrtra and Indra ; the suppression
of Vrtra in his universal form; the dialogue between Sveta and
Mrtyu; the destruction of Kala on behalf of Sveta.

38-41. The arrival of Siva in the forest of cider trees; the
narrative of Sudarfana; the characteristics of Krama-sannyasa;
the statement of Brahma that Rudra could be propitiated by
devotion and faith; the incident of Brahm’ scized by Madhu
and Kaitabha; then in order to impart the highest perfect

=== PAGE 13 ===

Index of Content 7

knowledge to Brahmi, the story of Visnu assuming the form
of a fish; in all conditions the incarnation of Vignu just as a
matter of sport; the birth of Srikrsna’s son Pradyumna by the
grace of Rudra; Visnu as a tortoise for holding the churning
rod.
42. The birth of Samkarsana; the rebirth of Candika; the
birth of Krsna among the Yadus.

43. The wickedness of Kumsa, the uncle of Krsna; Krsna’s
sporting activity during infancy; his worship of Siva for
obtaining sons.

44. The origin of water from the skull of Siva in the form
of Visnu; Visnu’s propitiation of Rudra for lessening the
burden of the earth.

45. The milking of the earth, at the outset, by Prthu the
son of Vena; the curse of Bhrgu incurred by Visnu in the
course of conflict between Devas and Asuras.

46-47. In his incarnation as Krsna his residence in
Dvaraka; the curse of Durvasas as conducive to his welfare;
the curse on Yadavas for their destruction; the growth of reeds
and javelins.

48. The annihilation of the Yadavas in mutual quarrel by
using reeds and Krsna annihilating his tribe sportively through
that very reed.

49. Krgna’s vuluntary departure from this world; the
perfect knowledge of Brahman and salvation in detail.

50-51. The subjugation of Andhaka, Agni and Daksa who
had assumed the forms of Indra, elephant and the deer; the
description of the primordial Brahman; subjugation of Kama
by Siva, and of the enemies of devas, of the daitya Halahala in
particular; the destruction of Jalandhara and the origin of
Sudariana discus.

52-53. The acquisition of that excellent weapon by Visnu;
Rudra’s activities; thousands of his adventures; the activities
and the powers of Visnu, Brahma and Indra; the description
of the world of Siva.

54-56. Rudra’s world on the earth; HatakeSvara in the
nether worlds; the nature of austerities; the power of brahmins;
Linga’s excellence over all other images of deitics—all these are

=== PAGE 14 ===

8 Lingapuréna

recorded in their proper order and in detail in this Purana.
He who after knowing the gist recites it, is liberated from sins.
He goes to the world of Brahmi.

CHAPTER THREE
Primary Creation

Sita said:

1. The non-characterized is the root uf the characterized.
The manifest Prakrti is the characterized, while Siva is the
non-characterized, but the characterized (Prakrti) is said to be
related to Siva.

2-4. They call the characterized by thc name Pradhana or
Prakrti. But the non-characterizecl, devoid of smell, colour,
taste, sound, touch and attributes, is Siva who is stable and
everlasting. [On the contrary] the characterized Pradhana
or Prakrti is endowed with smell, colour, taste, sound and
touch; it is the source of origin of the universe; it is elemental
both in subtle and gross forms, O excellent brahmins; it is the
physical body of the worlds; it has originated from the non-
characterized, of its own accord.

5. [Formerly] it split itself into seven as well as eight and
then into eleven. The non-characterized, thus, becomes chara-
cterized through maya.

14. ST. adds another interpretation. ‘The order of contents (as
stated in this chapter is not observed here (i.e. in this purana) nor are the

contents described in detail’, 431 TY JtTHaATATA aTTeaF TATATT
THT HAT ATT: STIL aT argyere a faertor ws eereqay ster: |
15. The twentysi principles emanate from the Saptavirhéaka tattva:
a: aefaerey Prem: TeTTTAT: THY: (1. 71.51). In this formulation, Pra-
dhina(the twentyfourth), the source of twentythree principles is insentient;
Jiva (the twentyfifth) is the knower of Pradhina; Puruga (the twentysixth)
has the perception of the two lower categorics— Jiva and Pradhina, but he
cannot bestow grace (Qefataaiteacy 1.17.109). Maheivara (the

=== PAGE 15 ===

Primary Creation 9

6-9. From them took shape, the trio of the important deities.
From one of the three the universe arose; it is protected by
another; by one (i.e. the third) it is destroyed.?® In this manner,
the universe is pervaded by Siva. Thus the three mirties have
been classified as alinga, linga and lingdlinga. Brahman itself is
the universe. The non-characterized lord is the source of the seed.
He, the Supreme lord, is both the seed and the womb as well as
the seedless. Being seedless he becomes seed, i.e. the cause of
the universe. The term Atman applies to the seed (bija),
womb (yoni) and the unmanifest matter {pradhana).

10. He who is Rudra, Brahma and Visnu is called Siva
in the Puranas by virtue of his eternally and intrinsically enligh-
tened and pure nature.

11. Prakrti, when observed by Siva became Saivi. O
brahmins, formerly it was unmanifest, but being intrinsically
endowed with the attributes it became manifest at the begin-
ning of the creation.

12. The entire universe beginning with the unmanifest and
ending with the gross elements originated from it. That Saivi
Prakrti, the creator of the universe is known as aja (the un-
born).

13-14. ‘The individual soul is devotedly attached to that
aja (the unborn Prakrti) of red, white and black colour—the
aja that is single, though the mother of many. He resorts to her
in her manifest form, and having enjoyed eschews her when he
becomes unattached. This Prakrti is the creator of worlds when
she is presided over by Purusa.

15. At the time of the creation, mahat was evolved, at the
behest of Purusa, out of Pradhana consisting of the three gunas
and presided over by Puruga.

16. Being urged by the desire to create, the mahat when

twenty-seventh) alone is capable of extending gracc to his devotees. In this
context, Pradhana or Praksti is apratibuddha, Jiva is buddhiman, Purusa
is buddha and Mahefévara is prabuddha,

16. Brahm4, Vigsnu and Rudra—the personified cntities of the three
gunas—rajas, sattva and tamas that constitute, Pradhina or Prakgti, the
material cause of the universe—are responsible for the creation, sustenance
and destruction of the universe. The three emanate from the transcendent
reality Maheivara. (Cf. Devi Badge. 1.8.4; Brahmanda 1.4.6; Visnu 1.2.66)
For detail see V.S. Agrawal : ALP—A Study, pp. 37-41.

=== PAGE 16 ===

10 Lingapurdga

presided over by Purusga enters the unchanging, unmanifest Pra-
dhana and effects the creation of the manifest.

17-18. Out of mahat evolved (1) sattvika aharmkara chara-
cterized by conception and determination, (also) (2) rajasa
ahamkara consisting of three gunas but with rajas as pro-
minent, (also) (3) tamasa aharhkara with tamas as prominent.
The subtle elements evolved out of mahat and became the
nucleus for all creation.

19. The subtle element-sound evolved out of ego and from
it the unchanging ether. Thereafter the ego, the cause of sound
enveloped the ether.

20. O brahmins, the creation of the gross elements from
the subtle elements is expounded in this manner. O great sages,
the subtle element ‘touch’ evolved from the ether and the air
evolved from that.

21. From the air evolved the subtle element colour and
therefrom agni (fire), whence evolved the subtle element taste,
whence the waters. From these evolved the subtle element
smell and from it the earth.

22-23. Oexcellent brahmins, the ether enveloped the sub-
tle element touch. The air with the activity of blowing enve-
loped the subtle element colour. The fire enveloped the subtle
element taste. The waters having the nature of taste enveloped
the subtle element smell.

24-25. Hence the earth has five qualities; the waters have
four; the fire has three; the air has two, the ether has one qua-
lity. Thus the creation of the elements originated from the
subtle elements through their mutual interaction.

26. The Vaikarika as well as Sattvika creation takes place
simultaneously, yet, here, it is explained as evolved gradually in
the manner described above.

27. For the purpose of perceiving sound and the rest there
are five organs of sense and five organs of action. Mind (which
is also a sense) belongs to both categories. (These eleven
senses evolve out of ego.)

28. The constituents of creation beginning with mahat
(intellect) and ending with Vigesa!? (earth) generate the cosmic
re 17. The group of seven beginning with with mahat t (intellect), and endi

“with viéeqa (bbitas) constitutes the Cosmic Egg which is Sp material,
‘it derives its potency of consciousness (cetanat&i) from

=== PAGE 17 ===

Primary Creation ll

egg, whence Brahma arose like a water-bubble.

29. He alone is Rudra and Vignu pervading the universe.
These worlds are within that cosmic egg and this universe is
within it.

30-33. The cosmic egg is externally enveloped by water
ten times its magnitude. The water is externally enveloped by
fire ten times its mass. The fire is externally enveloped by air
ten times its mass. The air is externally enveloped by the ether
ten times its magnitude. The ether is enveloped by ego the
cause of sound. The ego is enveloped by intellect and intel-
lect is enveloped by Pradhana. They say that the coverings of
the cosmic egg are seven!*. There within is Brahma seated on
the lotus. There are crores and crores of such eggs in exis-
tence.

34, In ali these cosmic eggs there are four-faced Brahmas,
Vignus and Rudras. They are all created by Pradhana after
coming into contact with Siva.

35. The dissolution is also mutual but it begins from the
end and goes up to the beginning. The great lord is the sole
agent for this creation, sustenance and dissolution.

36. In creation he is endowed with rajas, in sustenance with
sattva and with tamas in dissolution. He alone possesses this
subtle nature in due order.

37-39. He is the first creator of all beings, their protector
and annihilator. So lord Maheévara is the overlord of Brahma.
He is also known as Siva, Sadasiva, Bhava, Visnu and Brahma
since he is aJl. All these worlds are in this egg, so is the creator
Brahma. Thus the elemental creation of Prakrti has been des-
cribed by me. It is presided over by Puruga; O brahmins, this
auspicious creation with intellect (mahat) at top is primordial.

18, The Seven sheaths of the Cosmic Egg consist of intellect (mahat),
ego (aharhkira), and five subtle elements (tanmitras). (Vayu. 4.87. Kiérma
1.4.46). “<

=== PAGE 18 ===

12 Lingapurdna
CHAPTER FOUR

Inauguration of Creation

Sitta said :

1-2. The period of the duration of the Prakrita creation is
said to be a day of Brahma. There isa similar period constitut-
ing the night. The lord effects creation during day time and
dissolution during the night. He has neither a day nor a night
(as we understand the terms). The time-duration by day and
night is used in a secondary sense.

3-6. During the (so-called) day all the Vikrtis—the Vis-
vedevas, the Prajapatis and the sages stay by. During the night
all of them are dissolved. They are produced (again) at the end
of the night. A day of His constitutes our kalpa, His night too
similarly another kalpa. There are fourteen Manus by the time
a thousand sets of four yugas come to a close. O brahmins, the
Krta yuga consists of four thousand years. Four hundred, three
hundred, two hundred and hundred years respectively constitute
the period of transition both at the beginning and end of a yuga."®

7-9. The améfaka, therefore, is one-sixth of the duration of
each yuga. The period of duration of Treta, Dvapara and Kali
is respectively three thousand, two thousand and one thousand
years without their amsaka parts. That of Krta has been men-
tioned above. O men of holy rites, fifteen winks in the eyes of a
man of normal health in normal condition constitutc a kastha.
Thirty such kasthas make one kala. Thirty such kalas make
one muhirta.

10-12, The night contains fifteen such muhirtas and the day
another fifteen muhirtas. A (lunar) month according to human

19. Each yuga is prefixed and suffixed by a sandhyé which specifies
the advent and culmination of a yuga. The two sandhyais of a yuga are of
equal length though their period of duration differs from yuga to yuga.
Thus Krtayuga lasts for four thousand divine years and its sandhyas for
eight hundred such years; Tret4 lasts for three thousand divine years and
its sandhy4s for six hundred such years; Dvapara lasts for two thousand and
its sandhy4s for four hundred; Kali lasts for one thousand and its sandhyas
for two hundred such years. The total pcriod of duration for the four yugas
is ten thousand divine years and that for their sandhyas is two thousand
divine years.

=== PAGE 19 ===

Inauguration of Creation 13

reckoning constitutes the night and day of the pitrs. Divided
further, the dark half constitutes the day and the bright half
constitutes their night when they go to sleep. Thirty human
months make one month of the Pitrs. The period of three hun-
dred and sixty months calculated according to human reckon-
ing makes one year of the Pitrs.

13. A hundred years calculated according to human
reckoning make three years of the Pitrs.

14. Twelve months according to human calculation make
one year (of the mortals) ; twelve months of the manes (accor-
ding to their own calculation) constitute their one year.

15. According to Lingapurana one human year constitutes
the period of day and night for the manes. Their days, nights
and years and their further divisions are as follows:

16. The period of Uttarayana (northern transit of the
sun) is the day for the manes; the period of Daksinayana (south-
ern transit ofthe sun) constitutes their night. These days and
nights are calculated in accordance with the reckoning of
the devas.

17-23. Thirty human years constitute a divine month.
O brahmins,a hundred human years constitute three divine
months and ten days. Three hundred and sixty human years
constitute a divine year. Three thousand and thirty human
years constitute a year of the seven sages. Nine thousand and
ninety years, according to human calculation make a year of
Dhruva. Thirty six thousand human years make a century of
divine years. The people who know arithmetic say that the
three hundred and sixty thousand human years constitute the
period of a thousand divine years.

24-35. The duration of a yuga is calculated according
to the divine reckoning. The first yuga is named Krta;
thereafter comes Tretaé and then Dvapara and Kali. O men
of holy rites, these are the (names of the four) yugas. Hence-
forth the number of years of each yuga which have been
mentioned earlier in divine reckoning are now being counted
according to human reckoning. The Kyta consists of one
million four hundred and forty thousand human years; Treta
of one million eight hundred thousand years; Dvapara of seven
hundred twenty. thousand years and Kali of three hundred and

=== PAGE 20 ===

14 Lingapurdna

sixty thousand human years. Thus the duration of the four
yugas, without the period of junction and transition totals to
three million six hundred thousand human years. If Sandhya
periods are included, the set of four ages will consist of four
million three hundred and twenty thousand years. A little
over seventy one sets of four yugas—Krta, Treta, Dvapara and
Kali—constitute a manvantara.™ The number of human years
in a manvantara are thirty crures six million and seven
hundred and twenty thousand, O excellent brahmins. The
period of a manvantara, according to this Purana, is not more
than this.

36. The number of years in one set of four yugas have
been mentioned carlier. O excellent brahmins, a thousand such
sets of four yugas constitute a kalpa (of Brahma).

37. During Brahma’s night the creatures perish; at the
end of the night they are created again. There are twenty-eight
crores of gods who move in aerial chariots.

38. During the manvantaras and the intermediary periods
their number increased to three hundred and ninety two
crores.

39-40. O brahmins, during the last kalpa their number
came to seventy-cight thousand. In all kalpas this is the position
in brief. When the dissolution is imminent people abandon the
persons surviving the last day of the kalpa and go to Janaloka
from the world Mahar.

41-42. The number of years in half a kalpa by divine
calculation is two thousand eight hundred and sixty two crores
and seven millions. The kalpa too shall be similarly calculated.
A thousand such kalpas make a year of Brahm.

43. Eight thousand years of Brahma make his yuga. A
thousand yugas of Brahma constitute a savana.

44. Nine thousand such savanas constitute a day of
Rudra.

45-49. O great sages, the following are the names of some
kalpas of Brahmi, viz—bhavodbhava, tapas, bhavya, rambha,

ao. A manvantara comprises about seventyone mahiyugas which
are equal to 12,000 years of the gods. The Puranas mention fourteen
manvantaras. These derive their names from fourteen successive mythical
progenitors and sovereigns of the earth.

=== PAGE 21 ===

Inauguration of Creation 15

kratu, rtu, vahni, havyavaha, sdvitra, fuddha, maijjaliya,
madhyama, vairaja, nisida, mukhya, meghav4hana, paficama,
citraka, Akrti, jfiana, manas, sudarga, brmha, évetalohita,
rakta, pitavasas, asita, and sarvariipaka. O excellent sages,
thousands and crores of such kalpas have already elapsed.

50. Atthe dissolution of a kalpa, whatever remains of
creation produced during day and night is destroyed.

51-53. The destruction is subject to the behest of lord Siva.
When the creation is annihilated and the Pradhana is stationed
in itself, both Pradhana and Purusa come to a standstill or
remain inactive. O brahmins, it is only when the three gunas
are not in equilibrium that creation takes place. When they
are in equilibrium the creation is dissolved. The great lord is
the cause of both. The creation is effected by him sportively
in this manner.

54-56. Such creations, effected through the agency of
Pradhana are innumerable. The kalpas together with their
Brahmas and Visnus are innumerable. But lord Siva is only
one. The activities of Prakrti emerging from Pradhana are due
to His sport. The activities as characterized by the gunas are
threefold and destructible but the (uncreated) Atman has
neither a beginning nor a middle nor an end.*!

57. The life-time of Brahma consists of two halves called
parardhas.** What is created during His day time is destroyed
during His night.

58-61. The worlds bhiir, bhuvah, svar and mahar perish;
only the worlds above remain intact. At night, when the mobile
and immobile perish and a vast sheet of water® spreads like a
single ocean, Brahma goes to sleep in the water. He is there-

a1. Creation is the result of stimulation (kgobha) of the gunas.
When there is no stimulation, creation does not exist; consequently, the time-
units—kalpas, manvantaras, yugas, sarnvatsaras and other relatively bigger
and smaller units disappear as a matter of course.

22. A kalpa (a period of four thousand cycles of four yugas) consti-
tutes a day of Brahma. It is divided into two halves : 2 parirdhas. A half
kalpa covers a cycle of two thousand caturyugas. At the end of a full kalpa
a great fire consumes the world.

23. Ekdrnava symbolises the state of the universe during the period
of dissolution when the divided units are drawn together forming a single
watery mass. For.detail see MP—A Study. PP. 9-10.

=== PAGE 22 ===

16 Lingapuréna

fore known as Narayana. At the end of the night he wakes up
and beholds a void what used to be the world of mobile and
immobile beings. Then he, the most excellent among the
knowers of Brahman decides to create. He assumes the form of
a boar®‘ and lifts the earth submerged in the waters. He lifts it
up and places it as before, together with all the rivers, rivulets
and oceans.

62-63. With great effort he makes the earth even. He
gathers together all the mountains burned by fire on the earth.
He establishes the four worlds, bhuh, etc. as before. He, the
lord creator, then decides to create everything afresh.

CHAPTER FIVE
Creation

Sita said :

1. Obrahmins, while Brahma of unknown origin pondered
on creation he became manifested as delusion enveloped in
darkness.

2. Ignorance originated from the self-born Brahma in
five® forms:—-darkness (tamas), infatuation (moha), the great
infatuation (mahamoha), gloominess (tamisra), and blinding
gloominess (andhatamisra ).

3-4, This creation of Brahma which 1s enveloped by igno-
rance is declared to be primary. From this creation emerged the
immovables (plants, mountains etc. ). He considered this creation
incapable of causation. He thought of creating yet. While he
thus meditated, his neck turned horizontally.

5-8. At first the horizontal creation named _ tiryaksrotas
emerged from him; the next was urdhvasrotas chiefly characte-

24. The Purdpas often mention Varéha (Boar incarnation of Vignu)
lifting the earth from the depth of the Ekarnava ocean.

a5. Avidya, also designated as viparyaya is fivefold. Cf. IT.9.30.
Its fiwe kinds are defined in the Devi Bhdga, These are subdivided into sixty-
‘two kinds. Cf. II. 9. 34-35.

=== PAGE 23 ===

Creation 17

rized by goodness. Then came arvaksrotas, after that anugraha,
and lastly bhitédi. The first creation of Brahma is known mahat;
the second of tanmatras as bhautika; the third of the sense-
organs as aindriya; the fourth of the immovables as mukhya;
the fifth of animals as tiryagyoni; the sixth of gods as daivika;
the seventh of mankind as mdnuga; the eighth (of emotions)
as anugraha; the ninthof Kumaras as Kaumarya.** These are
Prakrta and Vaikrta creations.

9-11. Formerly, O excellent sages, Brahma created Sananda,
Sanaka and Sanatana. By refraining from worldly activities
they attained the Supreme Being. By his yogic accomplishment
he created Marici, Bhrgu, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu,
Daksa, Atri and Vasistha. These nine sons of Brahma were the
knowers of Brahman and excellent brahmins. They are known
as expounders of brahman and were equal to Brahma himself.

12. [He had three more sons] Sankalpa, Dharma and
Adharma. Adharma is always present near Dharma. Thus there
were twelve progenies of Brahma of unknown origin.

13-14. The eternal lord had at the outset created Rbhu
and Sanatkumara. These two eldest sons became the divine
expounders of Brahman. Being free from sexual desire they
remained bachelors and rose equal in wisdom to Brahma. They
were omniscient and possessed of all merits. I shall now state
succinctly the names of the wives of the brahmanical sages and
the birth of their progenies, O excellent sages.

15-17. The lord created Viradja (Manu) and Vairajii
Sataripa who was not born of womb. She bore two sons and
two daughters to Manu. The elder was the intelligent Priyavrata
and the younger Uttanapada. The elder daughter was Akiti
and the younger was Prasiti.

18-26. Prajapati Ruci married Akiti and lord Daksa mar-
ried Prasiti the mother of the worlds and a great Yogini. Akiti
gave birth toa son Yajfia and a daughter Daksinaé. Dakgina
gave birth to twelve illustrious sons. Prasiiti of great penance
bore twentyfour daughters to Daksa viz.,—Sraddha (faith),

26. Ninefold creation : The Puranic cosmology divides the cosmic
creation into nine classes. For detail, see SP. (English trans. p. 248 note
214). -

=== PAGE 24 ===

18 Lingapurdna

Lakgmi (good fortune), Dhpti, Pusti, Tusti, Medha, Kriya,
Buddhi (constancy), Lajja (Modesty), Vapus (beauty), Santi
(tranquillity), Siddhi (perfection), Kirti (fame), Khyati (cele-
brity), Sati (truth), Sambhiti (fitness), Smrti (memory),
Priti (affection), Kgama (patience), Sannati (humility),
Anasiya (sincerity), Orja (strength), Svah& (oblation to the
gods), Arani and the blessed Svadha (oblation to the pitrs).
He gave them duly in marriage. The first thirteen daughters
Sraddha to Kirti married the patriarch Dharma. The wise Bhrgu
married Khyati; Bhargava (Sukra) married Arani; Marici
(married) Sambhiti ; Angiras (married) Smpfti. The other
married pairs were: Priti and Pulastya, Ksama and Pulaha,
Sannati and Kratu, Atri and Anasfiya, Urjai and Vasigtha,
Svaha and Vibhavasu, Svadha and the Pitrs.

27-28. Sati the mental creation of the lord was adopted as
his daughter by Daksa. She the mother of the worlds attained
Rudra as her husband. At the beginning of the creation
Brahma had created a Being (Rudra) possessed of a body half
man’s and half women’s?? and then the Creator said, ‘Divide
thyself.”’ And he being accosted thus, divided himself into two.
It was then that she was born.

29. All the women in three worlds are born of the female
part. Similarly, all the eleven Rudras?® originated from his
male part.

30-33. Everything feminine in gender is she herself and
everything masculine is Rudra himself. Keeping Rudra in view,
lord Brahma looked at Daksa and said, ‘‘Worship her, she is of
good holy rites, the mother of all the worlds, of mine as well as
yours. Ifthe word putri (daughter) is interpreted as ‘one who

27, This half-male and half-female form of lord Siva is most popular
in ancient sculpture. The concept has its basis in the Purusa-Prakrti doctrine
of the SAmkhya philosophers.

28. Eleven Rudras. For the names of eleven Rudras, see I. 82. 40-41.
Their names are variously mentioned in the Purfnas. For instance, Matsya
has two lists (5. 29-30; 153. 19) which differ from each other. Vayu agrees
with Matsya only in three names. Bhavisya(125.7) gives a different list.
For the interpretation of these names and other detail, see MP. A Study
PP, 65-67.

=== PAGE 25 ===

Creation 19

saves from the hell “put” she will become the excellent wife of
Rudra and the mother of the Universe. She shall be your
daughter and known as Sati.

Thus urged by Brahma Daksa obtained her as his daughter
and respectfully gave her to Rudra (in marriage) .

34, The thirteen wives of Dharma, Sraddha and others have
already been mentioned. I shall now mention the progeny of
Dharma from those wives, in due order.

35-36. They are Kama (love), Darpa (pride), Niyama
(restraint), Santoga (contentment), Lobha (covetousness),
Sruta (learning), Danda (punishment), Samaya (agreement),
Bodha (wisdom), Apramada (non-erring), Vinaya (humility),
Vyavasaya (industry), Kgema (welfare), Sukha (happiness)
and Yagas (fame). These are the offspring of Dharma.

37-40. Dharma begot of Kriya (activity) and Buddhi (in-
telligence) two sons each viz..—Danda (punishment) and
Samaya (agreement) of the former, Apram4da (non-erring) and
Bodha (wisdom) of the latter. Hence the sons of Dharma and
Adharma are fifteen in all. Bhrgu’s wife KhyAti gave birth to Sri,
(who became) the wife of Visnu and to two sons Dhatr and
Vidhatr who later became the sons-in-law of Meru. Prabhiti,
wife of Marici, gave birth to two sons: Pirnamasa and Marica
and four daughters: Tusti, Drsti, Krsi and Apaciti.

41-45. O great sages, Ksama bore to Pulaha three sons :
Kardama, Variyas and Sahisnu and onedaughter Pivari, golden
in colour and stout as the earth. Pulastya begot of Priti two
sons Dattorna and Vedabahu and a daughter Drsadvati. Sannati,
wife of Kratu gave birth to sixty thousand sons who are known
as Balakhilyas. Smrti, wife of sage Angiras, gave birth to four
daughters: Sinivali, Kuhu, Raka and Anumati after obtaining
three sons: Anubhava, Agni and Kirtiman, O sages of holy
rites.

46-50. Anasiiya, the wife of Atri, gave birth to six children,
a daughter Sruti and five sons: Satyanetra, Bhavyamiarti, Apa,
Sanai‘cara and Soma; the sixth was Sruti (mentioned above).
The affectionate mother Orja bore to Vasigtha seven handsome
sons: Rajas, Suhotra, Bahu, Savana, Anagha, Sutapas and
Sukra. To the god of fire who identifies himself with Rudra
and is the eldest.son of Brahm and also the very life of the

=== PAGE 26 ===

20 Lingapurdna

people, Svaha bore three sons, for the welfare of the three
worlds.

CHAPTER SIX

Glory of Siva
S@la said:

1-3. The three sons of Agni® are Pavamana, Pavaka and
Suci. The fire produced by attrition is called Pavamana; that
from lightning is named PAvaka; that from the sun is known as
Suci. The three were the sons of Svaha. Together with their
sons and grandsons their number goes upto fortynine (= 7 x 7).
The fires are produced in sacrifices.

4. All these are ascetics and observers of holy rites. All of
them are prajapatis identical with Rudra.

5. The Pitrs are of two categories: yajvans and non-yajvans.
Yajvans are also called Agnisvattas, the non-yajvans as Barhi-
sadas.

6. Sraddh& gave birth to the mental daughter Mena. This
mental daughter is well known in the world.

7-8. Mena gave birth to Mainaka Kraufica, his (Mainaka’s)
younger sisters Uma and Ganga. The latter became the holiest
by virtue of her contact with the body of lord Siva. Svadha
gave birth to a mental daughter Dharani (earth) who became
the support of sacrifices. That lady (Dharani) of lotus-face
became the wife of Meru, the king of mountains.

9-10. The Pitrs are amrtapas (imbibers of nectar). Their
account in detail, together with that of the sages and their fami-
lies I shall narrate in a separate chapter, later on.

29. For agnivarhéa see Vayu I. 29; Brahmdpda I. 1.10; Mérkagdeya
52. 20-21, Vignu 1.10. 14-17. According to Linga (11.12.93) agni is the
creative force that permeates the Cosmic Egg and effects the work of crea-
tion.

There are fotynine agnis (II.12.35) which are the different forms
wef Rudra (1.6.4), while according to Harivaméa they are the attendants
of Rudra (2.122. 17-40). Though there is a general agreement in the
Puriinas in regard to the number of agnis there is a wide disagreement
about their names.

=== PAGE 27 ===

Glory of Siva 21

Sati, the (adopted) child of Daksa, the future daughter of
Himavat, married Rudra.

11. Later, she cursed her father Daksa [and immolated her-
self] Rudra who thought on her created many Rudras.

12. He created them in the form of his own person and
they were honoured by all the worlds. O leading sages, it was at
the behest of Brahma that lord Rudra created them. The
lord had laughed and they were created immediately.

13-16. The fourteen worlds* were completely covered by
them. They were of different sort, devoid of impurities, death-
less and ageless. On seeing these Rudras in front Brahma spoke
to them :

*O Rudras, obeisance to you. O three-eyed gods, you are
omniscient, omnipresent and splendid. Some of you are long,
some short and dwarfish. Your hair are golden. You dazzle
our eyes by your splendour. You are eternal, enlightened, devoid
of impurities and dvandvas. You are passionless sons of Rudra.
You are the universal souls. Thus, after eulogising Rudras,
lord Brahma circumambulated them and spoke to Rudra.

17. ‘© lord, obeisance be to you; O great Rudra, it does
not behove you to create subjects devoid of death. O lord, you
should create mortal subjects.”’

18. Then the great lord Rudra replied thus, ‘‘My position
is not of such a nature. O Brahma, you should create such sub-
jects endowed with death.”

19. Thus, at the will of Rudra, the four-faced Brahma
created the Universe, of the mobile and immobile beings, en-
dowed with death and old age.

20-24. Thus, as Rudra desisted from creating mortal sub-
jects he obtained the title ‘sthanu’. O Brahmins, Rudra alone is
capable of that. He is the supreme and unsullied soul who can
assume physical bodies when he wills. The lord bestows happi-
ness on all living beings mercifully and without strain. He has,
therefore, acquired the title Sankara. He is the all-pervading

go. The universe is comprised of fourteen worlds, seven rising above
the earth and seven lying below. The seven upper regions are (i) bhir,
(ii) bhuvah, (iii) svar, (iv) mahar, (v) janah (vi) tapas, (vii) satyam
and the seven lower are (i) atala,. (ii) vitala, (iii) sutala, (iv) rasitala,
(v) tala, (vi) talatala, (vii) patala.

=== PAGE 28 ===

22 Lingapurdaa

soul who bestows blessings upon the person who out of the fear
of worldly existence has resorted to yoga whereby he has become
detached eschewing worldly activities and pleasures. [It is en-
joined that] detachment can be produced by perfect knowledge
as well. The indiscriminate eschewal of this knowledge is mea-
ningless and is contrary to the purpose. It is through his grace
that the confluence of knowledge and detachment takes place.

25-26. Virtue, knowledge, detachment and prosperity are
the result of his blessing. By taking recourse to him one can be
easily liberated. Even if he is engrossed in sin he does not fall
into hell.

27-31. Hence, by resorting to him, people can attain
eternal release from worldly existence.

The Sages said :

There are twenty-eight crores of hells from ghora to maya
where the sinners are tortured, if they do not seek refuge in Him.
He is the support of all living beings. He is unchanging. He is
the lord of the worlds. He is Purusa, the great Atman. He is
often invoked and often culogised. He is named Kala Rudra
when he assumes tamoguna, and Brahma when he assumes
rajoguna and Vigsnu when he assumes sattvaguna. When devoid
of attributes he is called Maheégvara. O intelligent Sita, now
tell us, by doing what or by neglecting what do men go to hell.
We are eager to hear it.

CHAPTER SEVEN
The esoteric secret of Siva

Sata said :

1. I shall recount to you, at the outset, the esoteric secret,
in brief, of the all-knowing Siva of unmeasured splendour.

2-3. The yogins who are conversant with the tenets, who
have adopted great detachment, who are constantly associated

=== PAGE 29 ===

Esoteric secret of Siva 23

with the eight®!means of Yoga, such as the control of breath and
who are endowed with the attributes of mercy** etc., go either
to hell or to heaven according to their deeds.

4. By virtue of his grace, knowledge arises and yoga func-
tions through knowledge. By dint of yoga, liberation is effected,
and everything is achieved through his grace.

The sages said :

5. O best of yogins, if perfect knowledge comes through
grace, you shall tell us about the form and feature as well as the
divine yoga of lord Siva (through which that grace is attained).

6. How does the lord devoid of anxiety bestow his grace on
men by means of the yogic path and at what time.

Sitia said:

7. May you all hear what had been formerly mentioned
by Nandin to Sanat kumfra, the son of Brahma, in the pre-
sence of devas, Sages and pitrs.

8. O sages of good holy rites, listen to the incarnations of
Vyasas, at the end of Dvapara and the incarnations of lord
Siva as Yogacaryas in the kali age. -

9. In different areas, the four disciples of the lord, fully
endowed with mental control spread the doctrines of Siva.
There grew up many disciples of disciples and the lord was
pleased at this.

10. The perfect knowledge of the lord had been tradition-
ally and gradually transmitted orally to men of the first three
castes from brahmins to vaisyas in the manner befitting them.
It was done so out of mercy.

The sages said :—

11. It behoves you to tell us who those Vydsas were who

gi. The eight ancillaries of yoga constitute (1) yama, (2) niyama,
(3) dsana, (4) pranfyima, (5) pratyihira, (6) dharani, (7) dhy&na,
(8) samadhi. Cf SP. Véyaviya samhité, ch. 37.

g2. For the cight virtues of the soul, compare Agnipurdga as quoted
in ST. SOT MAMTA AF AATATAIST AAT | THTTeTTETy at weTs

wqwqr ~

=== PAGE 30 ===

24 Lingapurdna

incarnated during every Dvapara age and furthermore, in which
manvantara and kalpa they incarnated.

Sita sard :

12-13. O brahmins, may you be pleased to listen. I shall
duly recount the Vyasas in the Varaha kalpa of the Vaivasvata
manvantara which is still current. I shall recount the Rudras in
all the manvantaras. They had been the guides and instructors
of perfect knowledge of the Vedas and Puranas in all the circles
of yugas.

14-18. O brahmins, these are the Vyasas: (1) Kratu,** (2)
Satya, (3) Bhargava, (4) Angiras, (5) Savitr, (6) Mrtyu, (7)
Satakratu, (8) Vasistha, (9) Sdrasvata, (10) Tridhaman, (11)
Trivrta, (12) Satatejas, (13) Dharma who is known as Nara-
yana, (14) Taraksu, (15) Aruni, (16) Krtafijaya, (17) Rtafi-
jaya, (18) Bharadvaja, (19) Gautama, (20) Vacafravas, (21)
Sugmayani, (22) Suci, (23) Trnavindu, (24) Ruksa, (25)
Sakti, (26) Pardsara the son of Sakti, (27) Jatukarnya, (28)
Krsna Dvaipayana who was Visnu himself.

Now listen to the yogesvaras in due order in the Kali age.

19-20. They are innumerable in the various kalpas and the
manvantaras. Since the incarnations of Rudras and Vyd4sas in the
Kali age are too many, I shall recount the incarnations in the
Vaivasvata manvantara, in the Varadha kalpa and in all the
other manvantaras falling therein.

The sages said :

21. O Sita, it behoves you now to recount the manvan-
taras in the Varaha kalpa and in all the later kalpas as also
recount the Siddhas in the Vaivasvata manvantara.

Sita said ::

22-28. The first Manu was (1) Svayambhuva son of
Brahma. Then, O brahmins, was the Manu (2) Svarocisa. The
subsequent Manus were: (3) Uttama, (4) Tamasa, (5) Raivata,
(6) Cakgusa, (7) Vaivasvata, (8) Savarni, (9) Dharma, (10)
Savarnika, (11) Piganga, (12) Apisangabha, (13) Sabala, and

33. identical with ‘Prabhu’, Cf. ST. quite wf wafcegee: |

=== PAGE 31 ===

Esoteric secret of Siva 25

(14) Varnaka. The Manus are also designated according to the
vowels beginning with ‘a’ and ending with ‘au’. O excellent
brahmins, they are also classified according to their colours as
(1) tveta (white), (2) pandu (grey), (3) rakta (reddish), (4)
tamra (copper-hued), (5) pita (vellow), (6) kapila (tawny),
(7) kygna (black), (8) Syama (dark), (9) dhimra (light-smoke-
coloured), (10) sudhimra (deep smoke-coloured), (11) api-
Sanga (non-tawny) (12) pisanga (tawny), (13) trivarna sabala
(three-coloured) and (14) kalandhura (extreme black). Thus
all the holy Manus have been mentioned by (1) name, (2)
letters, and (3) colour. Those identical with the vowels are, in
brief, mentioned as the leaders of the manvantaras. Among
them, the seventh Manu is Vaivasvata represented by the vowel
‘r’ and colour black. This seventh Manu is also a leader among
devas. I shall mention the yogins in this repeated cycle of yugas
in the kalpas that have passed by and those thatare yet to come.

29-35. The current kalpa in the seventh manvantara is
known as Varaha. Now listen to the yogic incarnations of the
lord and their line of disciples in due order, in all the kalpas
and manvantaras. In the first Kali of Svayambhuva Manu they
were (1) Sveta, (2) Sutara, (3) Madana, (4) Suhotra, (5)
Kankana, (6) Logaksi, (7) Jaigisavya, (8) Dadhivahana, (9)
Rsabha, (10) Ugra, (11) Atri, (12) Subdalaka, (13) Gautama,
(14) Vedasirsa. (15) Gokarna, (16) Guhavasin, (17) Sikhanda-
bhrt, (18) Jatam4lin, (19) Attahasa, (20) Daruka, (21) Languli.
(22) Mahakavya, (23) Salin, (24) Dandin, (25) Mundisvara,
(26) Sahisnu, (27) Somasarma, (28) Lakuliga. O men of holy
rites, the incarnations as Yogacaryas of the lord in all the cycles
of four ages in the Vaivasvata manvantara have been recounted
(as twentyeight) .

36. O excellent sages, in every Dvdpara age, there are
Vy4sas in the same manner. The following are the recurring
disciples of these Yogesvaras, each of whom had four disciples.

37-51. They are;—(1) Sveta, (2) Svetasikhandin (3) Sveta-
éva, (4) Svetalohita, (5) Dundubhi, (6) Sataripa, (7) Rcika,
(8) Ketuman, (9) Visoka, (10) Vikega, (11) Vipaga, (12)
Pa’anasana, (13) Sumukha, (14) Durmukha, (15) Durdama, (16)
Duratikrama, (17) Sanaka, (18) Sananda, (19) Sanatana, (20)
Rbhu, (21) Sanat, (22) Sudaman, (23) Virajas, (24) Sankhapada,

=== PAGE 32 ===

26 Lingapurdna

(25) Vairajas, (26) Megha, (27) Sarasvata, (28) Suvahana,
(29) Meghavaha, (30) Kapila, (31) Asuri, (32) Paficagikha,
(33) Valkala, (34) Paragara, (35) Garga, (36) Bhargava (37)
Angiras, (38) Balabandhu, (39) Niramitra, (40) Ketusrnga
(41) Lambodara, (42) Lamba, (43) Lambdaksa, (44)
Lambakesaka, (45) Sarvajfia, (46) Samabuddhi, (47) Sadhya,
(48) Sarva, (49) Sudhaman, (50) Kaégyapa, (51) Vasistha,
(52) Virajas, (53) Atri, (54), Devasada, (55) Sravana, (56)
Sravisthaka, (57) Kuni, (58) Kunibahu, (59) Kuégarira,
(60) Kunetraka, (61) Kafyapa, (62) Uganas, (63) Cyavana,
(64) Brhaspati, (65) Utathya, (66) Vamadeva, (67) Maha-
yoga, (68) Mahadbala, (69) Véacafravas, (70) Sudhika,
(71) Syavasva, (72) Yatifvara, (73) Hiranyanabha, (74)
Kausalya, (75) Logaksi, (76), Kuthumi, (77) Sumantu,
(78) Barbari, (79) Kabandha, (80) Kusikandhara, (81)
Plaksa, (82) Dalbhyadyani, (83) Ketuman, (84) Gopana,
(85), Bhallavin, (86) Madhupinga, (87) Svetaketu, (88)
Taponidhi, (89) USika, (90) Brhadagva, (91) Devala, (92)
Kavi, (93) Salihotra, (94) Agnivesa, (95) Yuvanasva, (96)
Saradvasu, (97) Chagala, (98) Kundakarna, (99) Kumbha,
(100) Pravahaka, (101), Uliaka, (102) Vidyuta, (103)
Mandika, (104) Asvalayana, (105) Aksapada, (106)
Kumara, (107) Ulika, (108) Vatsa, (109) Kusika, (110)
Garbha, (111) Mitra, (112) Kaurusya. These noble souls are
the disciples of the yogins in all cycles of four yugas.

52-55. They are all devoid of impurities, almost identical
with Brahman, and engaged in the path of knowledge. They are
devotees of Pasupati, great Siddhas and have ashes smeared on
their bodies. There are hundreds and thousands of disciples
and their disciples. They attain the Pasupata yoga and Rudra’s
world. All beings from Devas to Pisacas are said to be Pasus.
Since Lord Rudra is their overlord he is called Pasupati. O
Brahmins, the yoga evolved by Rudra, the overlord of the
Pasus is known as Pagupata yoga, which leads all persons to
their blissful prosperity.

=== PAGE 33 ===

27
CHAPTER EIGHT

Yogic zones

Sila said :

1. I shall succinctly mention the yogic zones now. They
have been established by Siva himself, O brahmins, for the
welfare of men.

2. The portion covered by a vitasti beneath the throat and
above the umbilicus is the excellent zone of yoga; so also the
curling lock of hair below the umbilicus and middle portion
between the eye-brows.

3. The knowledge of all topics that arises in the soul is
called yoga.*4 The concentration of the mind is possible only
through his grace.

4. O excellent brahmins, the form of his grace can be
realized by the individual alone. It cannot be imported by
Brahma or any other. It arises itself in the individual gradually.

5. Yoga indicates the region where the Supreme Lord
dwells.** For the attainment of that region, knowledge is the
cause, and this knowledge comes through his grace alone.

6. One should abstain from sensual activities and burn
sins by means of perfect knowledge. The achievement of yoga
shall be possible only to one who has restrained the activities of
his sense-organs.

7. Oexcellent brahmins, yoga is restraining the function-
ing of the mind.** Eight means have been mentioned for the
achievement of yoga.

8-9. They are(1l) yama (restraini), (2) niyama ( obser-
vances), (3) dasana (a particular posture), (4) pranayama
(restraint of breath) (5) pratyahara ( withdrawal of the senses) ,
(6) dharana (retention), (7) dhyana (meditation) and (8)
samadhi (ecstatic trance) .

10-11. Abstention by way of austerity is called restraint
(yama) ; O foremost among those who have restraint, the first

34. Yoga is defined as the achievement of knowledge of ali objects
by the personal soul (jiva).

35. K. reads frafo for Fratory |

36. Cf. PéteAjala Yogasitra UvrfeTaafafrAe: 1 1.1,

=== PAGE 34 ===

28 Lingapurdna

contributory cause of restraint is non-violence (ahirhsé), truth-
fulness, non-stealing, celibacy and non-acceptance of gifts are
the other causes The root of niyama (observances of vows} is
undoubtedly yama alone.

12. Considering all living beings as one’s own self and
working for the welfare of all living beings is called non-viol-
ence. It helps in achieving the knowledge of self.

13. Retelling precisely what has been seen, heard, inferred
or experienced is called truthfulness (satya). It is devoid of in-
jury or infliction of pain on others.

14. The Vedas declare. “One should not utter what is
obscene in the presence of the brahmins’’. ‘‘Even after knowing
the defects of others one should not proclaim them to others’’—
this is another passage in the Sruti.

15. Not stealing the possessions of others purposefully, even
in emergency, mentally, physically and verbally is non-stealing
in brief.

16. Not indulging is sexual intercouse,®”? mentally, verbally
or physically is the vow of celibacy, with reference to the asce-
tics and the religious students.

17. This holds good in regard to the anchorites, forest-
dwellers and widowers. I shall now tell you about the vow
of celibacy of the householders who live with their wives.

18. In their case, as prescribed, indulgence in sexual inter-
course with their own wives and abstention from it with other
women mentally, physically and verbally should be understood
as brahmacarya.

19. The householder shall take ablution after indulging in
sexual intercourse with his own wifc. If he is in yogic commu-
nion with his self he is undoubtedly a celibate.

20. Inthe case of non-violence (ahirhs4) too, the same
rule is applicable. Violence sanctioned by Sruti, in regard to
the brahmanas, preceptors and sacrifice comes under ahimsa.

21. Women are always to be avoided. One should stay

37. For eight kinds of maithuna, cf. ST, A{UT] #7 afte:
Tare yA | aHeTserTaraey Perf fata aw 1 CAATETAST
saat aatfa: | fart AETAA TAA eR 1) Brahmacarya

(celibacy) is defined as the reverse of maithuna (sexual indulgence) and
it imparts vigour and force : Cf. Yogasiira : seraasfarcsrai array: |

=== PAGE 35 ===

Yogic Zone 29

far off from them. A shrewd person views them as he views
the corpses.

22. He should have the same attitude in the sexual inter-
course with his own wife, as when discharging the faeces and
urine on the ground. There should be no attitude other than
this.

23. Woman is like a burning coal; man is like a vessel of
ghee. He should always avoid contact with women therefore.

24. Ifwe ponder over this, we shall know that there is no
satiety in sexual pleasures. Hence, one should practise detached
attitude mentally, physically and verbally.

25. Lust is never suppressed by indulging in sexual plea-
sures. Just as fire burns vigorously if ghee is poured in, so also
lust is increased by means of indulgence.**

26. Hence the yogin should always practise renunciation
for achieving immortality, since he who is not detached is born
and re-born in different wombs.

27. The Vedas" declare thatit is only through renunciation
that immortality is attained. O brahmins, the most excellent
among the knowers of Sruti and Smrti, it is not possible
through rites, through progeny or through offerings of materials
of worship.

28. Hence one should practise detachment, mentally, ver-
bally and physically. Abstention from sexual intercourse, except
during the prescribed period, after menstruation is stated as
celibacy in the case of householders.

29-31. Thus the restraints (yamas) are succinctly men-
tioned. I shall now tell you the observances (niyamas). They
are ten in number : (1) cleanliness (Sauca), (2) sacrifice (ijya),
(3) penance (tapas), (4) charitable gift (dana), (5) study
of the Vedas (svadhydya) (6) restraint on the organs of gener-
ation (upasthanigraha), (7) holy rites (vrata), (8) fast
(upavasa) , silence (mauna), and holy bath (snana). Accor-
ding to some, observances (niyama) mean (1) absence of
craving (anihi), (2) cleanliness (Sauca), (3) satisfaction
(tusti), (4) penance (tapas), (5) muttering of Siva’s mantra

38. Paacada$i. 7. 47.
39. Na karman4 na prajay4 dhanena, TA. 10.10.93; Mahda. U. 10.5

=== PAGE 36 ===

30 Lingapurdna

(japa), (6) meditation on Siva and (7) postures such as pad-
maka. Of these cleanliness is twofold : (1) external and (2)
internal. Of the two the internal is superior to the external.

32-35. One who has external cleanliness should practise
internal cleanliness too. The holy bath should be conducted in
accordance with the injunctions. It is threefold : (1) Agneya
(fiery), (2) Varuna (watery) ‘and (3) Brahma (consisting of
Brahman). It is only after he has practised the external bath
that he should practise the internal. If he is devoid of interna]
purity, he is still dirty even if he applies clay over his body
and plunges into the waters of the tirthas. O excellent brah-
mins, the moss, the fishes, the sharks and the animals that prey
upon fishes remain ever in water. But are they pure ? Internal
cleanliness should always be pursued in accordance with the in-
junctions.

36. Internal cleanliness is mentioned as follows. One
should apply the holy ashes of detachment with a feeling of
devotion. One should take a holy dip into the waters of know-
ledge of the soul. This is how one can attain purification.

37-39. Siddhis are accomplished only in a pure and not in
an impure person. A person of holy rites who is satisfied with the
sustenance he gets by justifiable means has the characteristics
of satiety (tusti). He is not worried about his needs. Austerity
is the right observance of the holy rites Candrayana, etc.
Svadhyaya is the threefold repetition of Omkara mantra,
i.e. (1) Vacika—oral utterance which is the basest of the three;
(2) Upamsu—slow muttering which is better than Viacika;
(3) Manasa—when the sound does not come out of the throat
which is the best of all, This is stated in detail in the ritualistic
text on the five-syllabled mantra.

40-43. Siva-pranidhana (contemplation of Siva) mentally,
physically and verbally, unflinching devotion to the preceptor,
withdrawal of the organs of sense from the objects of worldly
pleasures—this in brief is called pratyahara (withdrawal).
Dharana (retention) is the fixation of the mind in the proper
place. Dhyana (meditation) comes through the normalcy of
Dhiarana (retention). If it iscoupled with thought, it issamadhi

an

(ecstatic trance). In samadhi there is concentration of the

=== PAGE 37 ===

Yogic Kones 31

mind and meditation; herein the perception of object is entirely
excluded.

44. In samadhi“ the supreme consciousness alone shines, as
though it were devoid of physical body. Pranayama (control of
breath) is the root of dhyana, samadhi, etc.

45. The wind within the body is prana. Itsrestraint isyama.
As stated by the brahmins itis threefold: (1) slow (manda), (2)
middling (madhya) and (3) uttama (superior).

46. The restraint of the prana and apana is called prana-
yama. The magnitude of the restraint of breath is stated to be
twelve moments.

47-50. The slow (manda) consists of twelve moments
which form one stroke or blow (udghata). The middling con-
sists of two strokes. The superior has three strokes, i.e. thirty
moments. The three respectively generate sweating, shivering
and rising up. When the following symptoms areseen the prana-
yama® is excellent, for it denotes the onset of bliss. The symp-
toms are: reeling due to drowsiness, horripilation, sensation of
hearing some sound, pressing of one’s own limbs, shivering,

40. Samadhi is a fixation of the mind on the personal soul (jiva),
and further, of the personal sou] on the supreme soul, so as to identify the
contemplator with the object meditated upon. This is the eighth and last
stage of yoga. Of. Hathayogapradipikd :

afer aay arcane wafer Are: |
Taree TarfachrdaT 1

TTTT ACT HATTA: |
waseararger earta: aishrstras i

With Buddhists it is the fourth and last stage of dhyana.

41. The time of matri is that of a winking and opening the cye-lids
once, or that of a prosodial instant. The udghata prandyima extends

during twelve m&tr4s or twelye prosodial instants. It is defined in the
Markandeya thus :

fafaeetect arar aat wert eer |
ATTATHET ACATS: SY ATLRTAT AH: 1
SP, defines matrii as a unit of time required for the snapping of the
fingers after moving them round the knees neither speedily nor slowly.
(Vayaviya 37.31).
42. For the kinds and characteristics of Kumbhaka prandyimma, see
Hafhayogapradipika. .

=== PAGE 38 ===

32 Lingapurdna

vertigo born of sweating, fixation, absence of knowledge and
unconsciousness.

51-54. Pranayama is of two types: sagarbha and agarbha.®
If it is pursued with japa, it is sagarbha; if without japa, it is
agarbha. It is like an elephant, oran eight-fuoted animal Sarabha
or a formidable lion. When caught and tamed properly it hecomes
submissive. Similarly, for the yogins, the wind which is by nature
unstable and uncontrollable becomes normal and subservient by
proper practice. Just as the lion or the elephant or the Sarabha,
though ferocious, is tamed after a whilc with a proper training,
so also the wind attains normalcy and equanimity due to con-
stant acquaintance and practice.

55-57. He who practises yoga never suffers calamity. When
the prana is properly trained it turns the defects of the mind,
speech or body, preserving the body of the practiser. Thus, if
the devotee perfects himself by taking recourse to the pranayama
his defects perish; the very breath is conquered by him, and the
divine quiescence etc. are achieved.

58-62. The attributesof the pranayama are four, viz, Santi,
praianti, dipti and prasada. They are explained in order: O
brahmins, the first of these four is :anti. It means the suppres-
sion of sins congenital or adventitious. Pra‘anti is a perfect
restraint in speech.“ All round, all time brilliance, O brahmins,
is called dipti. Prasada is the clarity of the mind which is of four
types. It is the clarity of the sense-organs, of the intellect and the
organic winds. The organic winds —prana, apana, samana, udana
and vydna have their functional names : Naga, Kiirma, Krkala,
Devadatta and Dhanajfijaya respectively. The clarity of these
winds is called prasada.

43. According to ST. sagarbha is a variety of Kumbhaka that includes
puraka (inhaling) and recaka (exhaling) varieties of pranayama.
ard: THRCTENRE:, TTT: Fare: | SP. defines agarbha as the kind of
Pranayama wherein the breath is restrained without meditation and japa,
and sagarbha as that wherein meditation and japa are allowed. (Vdyaviya

$7- 33> 34)-
44. Praéintib—restrained or restricted speech. ST. quotes from

the Mahabhirata :
HUTT ATA SATE: Ter ade aarear aqfadiay |
ad adq carga aeeia fra atq onge aaa UI

=== PAGE 39 ===

Yogic Zones 33

63-67. ‘Che wind which traverses through the body is called
prana; that which brings down food and drink is called apana;
that which enables the limbs of the body to bend is called vyana
which incites the ailments too; that which excites and afflicts
the vulnerable points (in the body) is called udana. That which
normalizes the functions of the organs is called samana. Thus
the first set of five winds has been explained to you. The wind
Naga functions in the act of belching; the Karma in the opening
of eyes; Krkala in sneezing; Devadatta in yawning and Dhanafi-
jaya in making a loud report. It is present even in the dead
body. By restraining these winds, one can attain prasada. O
brahmins, in the fourfold set of attributes, prasada figures as
the fourth.

68-69. O brahmins, the intellect has these synonyms—viz.,
visvara, mahat, prajfia, manas, brahma, citi, smrti, khyati,
samvit, IS$vara and mati. It is through pranayama that the
clarity of intellect is achieved.

70-74. O excellent sages, Visvara is so called because it com-
promises between two conflicting opposites. Since it is the first
and the greatest of all the tattvas arising out of Prakrti it is
called mahat. It is called prajiia because it is the repository of
all means of knowledge. It is manas because it thinks. It is
Brahmi because it is big and swells up. O most excellent
among the knowers of Brahman, it is called citi because it
gathers together all activities for the sake of enjoyment. It is
called smrti because it enables one to remember things. Since
it obtains everything it is called Samvit. Because it is known
everywhere by means of knowledge it is called khyati.© It is
called Ivara because it is the overiord of all elements and
comprehends everything. O sages, most excellent among the
intelligent, it is called Mati because it is the instrument of
thought subjectively and objectively. It is called Buddhi
because it enlightens things and is itself the instrument of
enlightenment.

75. The perspicuity of this Buddhi is achieved through

45. khy&ti—a category of intellect (MP. 3.17). It is so called be-
cause it is the source of the perceived creation or the cosmos which becomes
visible or the gbject of perception by the mind and the senses.

=== PAGE 40 ===

34 Lingapurdna

Pranayama. By restraining himself one shall burn all defects
by taking recourse to pranayama.

76. By means of pratyahara (withdrawal of sense-organs)
and Dhiaranas (retentions) one shall destroy sins. By medi-
tating on the mundane objects as if they were poisonous one
destroys all ungodly qualities.

77. O excellent ascetics, one should increase the power of
intellect by means of samadhi. The eight ancillaries of yoga
should be practised only after securing the proper place for
yogic practice.

78. The knower of the Atman shall then duly secure
Asanas (correct postures) for achieving yogic results. If the
place and time are not suitable he cannot have even a glimpse
of yoga.

79-86. The yogic exercises should not be practised in the
the following places or circumstances—near the fire, within
water, on a heap of dry leaves, in a place infested with crea-
tures, in the cremation ground, in a dilapidated cowpen, in
the four crossroads, in a place full of noises, in a place
generating fear, in a monastery, or the anthill, in an in-
auspicious place, in a place inhabited by wicked men and in
a place infested with mosquitoes. One should not practise
yogic exercises when there is some ailment in the body or
when the mind is in dejection.

The devotee shall delightedly practise the ancillaries of
yoga in the following places. It should be a well protected
place, auspicious and pleasing; or acavc in a mountain or
shrine of Siva, or a well-guarded park or a forest, or a corner
in one’s own house devoid of people and animals. It should
be scrupulously clean, well scrubbed, smeared with cowdung
and rendered beautiful in diverse ways. It shall be spotlessly
clean like the surface ofa mirror. It shall be fumigated with
black agallocum. Different kinds of flowers should be strewn
all round. A canopy should adorn the whole place. It should
be endowed with roots, fruits, tender sprouts, ku’a grass and
variegated flowers. The practitioner of yoga should sit in a
balanced posture. He should practise the ancillaries of the yogic
exercises with delight in his mind. He should pay reverence to
the preceptor Lord Siva, Goddess Uma, Vinayaka, the leading

=== PAGE 41 ===

Yogic Zones 35

yogins and their disciples. He should practise the posture of
svastika*® padma*’ or ardhdsana.#

87-90. He should sit with the knees on a !evel or kneel on
one of the knees. Whatever the posture may be he shall sit
steadily withdrawing his feet. He shall keep his mouth shut,
eyes closed, chest projected in front. With his heels he should
cover the testicles and the penis. With his head somewhat
lifted up and the rows of teeth not touching each other, he
should observe the tip of his nose. He shall not look at the quar-
ters. He shall cover up his tamas by means of rajas and the
rajas by means of sattva. Then stationing himself in the
sattva he shall practise meditation of Siva.

91. With great concentration, he shall meditate in the
pericarp of the lotus, on the Supreme Being which is symbo-
lised by Ornkara and is as pure as the candle flame.

92-95. He should meditate within three angulas below the
umbilicus, on the excellent lotus having (at its centre) an
octagon, a pentagon or a triangle. He should also meditate on
the fire, moon and sun together with their consorts; or the order
may be : first thé sun, then the moon, and then the fire. Or
the order may be first the fire, then the sun and then the
moon as prescribed in the Sastras. He should conceive the
four® aims—Virtue etc. beneath the fire and ponder over

46. svastika—a posture of sitting practised by a yogin in which the
toes are placed in the inner hollow of the knees. SP. lists eight types of the
yogic pose : (1)svastika, (ii) padma, (iii) ardhendu (iv) vira, (v) yoga,
(vi) prasadhita, (vii) paryanka, (viii) yathegta.

47. padm4sana—a particular posture of the body in religious medi-
tation. Cf.
HOTS AAT FACT, The TAA
arene earafacan JF Teareafata ayer

ST. quotes from HYP, pp. 25-26 :
HVAT TATA TY Hear TAT FAY |
arene faertarrearqge g fergat i
SHET FTH AHN Ta TA: |
I TqaTaa Meet TeV OTTATT 1
48. Construe ‘ardhdsanam’ with ‘padmam’ i.e. the lotus half seat.
It is also called siddhdsana.
49. This group of four consists of (i) dharma, (ii) jfidna, (iii) vairigya
and (iv) aijvarya.

=== PAGE 42 ===

36 Lingapuréna

the three gunas over the zone. He should then think of Rudra
stationed in sattva and adorned by Uma.

96. He should perform the rite of meditation in the umbi-
licus or the throat, or the middle of the eye-brows or on the
forehead or on the crest of the head in accordance with the
injunctions.

97. He should meditate on Siva (sitting in the lotus with
two, sixteen, twelve, ten, six or four petals in due order).

98-100. He should meditate on Him in a spot as lustrous as
gold or as splendid as burning coal or very white or as reful-
gent as twelve suns or as brilliant as the disc of the moon or
as flashing as millions of lightning streaks or as lustrous as fire
or as glittering as a circle of lightning or as refulgent as a crore
of diamond pieces or as brilliant as a ruby. He should practise
meditation on the image of blue and red coloured lord (Siva).

101. He shal] meditate on Mahefvara in the heart; on
Sadafiva in the lotus-like umbilicus ; on Candraciida on the
forehead and on Sankara in the middle of eyebrows.

102-108. He shall meditate on Siva on his forehead; on
Mahadeva (the great lord) in his lotus-like heart and in the
mind. The great lord is of the following description : He is
devoid of impurities. He is unsullied. He is the quiescent
Brahman in the form of knowledge. He has no specific charac-
teristics. He cannot be particularly pointed out. He is minuter
than the atom. He is splendid and supportless. He cannot be
reflected upon. He is devoid of death and birth. He is liberation
itself. He is ambrosial, imperishable and unborn. He is mira-
culous, the greatest and the largest bliss. He is devoid of
defects and qualities. He is subtler than the subtlest, auspicious,
self-cognizable, incomprehensible. He is the greatest lord
identical with perfect knowledge. He is beyond the scope of
sense-organs. He has no semblance. He is the greatest prin-
ciple, greater than the greatest, devoid of conditioning
adjuncts, comprehensible through meditation, non-dualistic,
beyond all darkness and the greatest Being. The devotee should
meditate in the umbilicus on Sadafiva, the lord identical with
devas.

109-111. He shall meditate on lord Siva identical with

=== PAGE 43 ===

Obstacles and Portenits 37

pure knowledge, in the middle of the body through sugsumna®
pass or through the Kumbhaka. He shall then perform thirty
two recakas (respirations) concentrating on the heart and
umbilicus. O excellent brahmins, then eschewing Recaka and
Piraka®! respirations and taking recourse only to Kumbhaka
he shall meditate on Siva in the middle of the body with
normal elegance.

112-116. After identifying with the lord he will compre-
hend the bliss of Brahman emerging from elegance and the
state of perfect equanimity.

Twelve pranayamas make one dharani; twelve dharanas make
one meditation and twelve meditations make one Samadhi.
O brahmins, one may attain yogic realization by contact with
wise men or by his own efforts, gradually. Of course, even as
he practises yoga, there may be obstacles in this path. But
they perish through constant practice by the direction of the
preceptor.

CHAPTER NINE
Obstacles and Portents
Sila said :

1-3. Obstacles to yogic practice take shape in ten different
ways. They are (1) lethargy, (2) ailment, (3) negligence,
(4) doubt, (5) unsteady mind, (6) lack of faith, (7) illusion,
(8) misery, (9) dejection and (10) indulgence in sensual

50. HATA: =ALFATTSTSA ATT: | Cf. Sivagité as quoted in
ST. : maeqTHleTT ae GATT ATHMAT | YL Eafe gatfacer Tar THAT
faqeart 1) It is a vein of the body lying between those called id& and
pingala and supposed to be one of the passages for the breath or spirit.
51. recakam pirakarh tyaktva. Kumbhaka alone is recommended
for the attainment of spiritual goal; recaka and piraka are excluded. Cf.
Hathayogapradipikd p. 70
gram dae fas taqepatad |
a wer ary fefeaq fre ag fret

=== PAGE 44 ===

38 Lingapurana

pleasures. Of these lethargy means abstention from work due
to the bulkiness of the body and mind.

4. Ailments originate from the imbalance of the consti-
tuent elements. They are the outcome of the defective previous
schemes as well as of bad habits. Negligence constitutes
omission to secure the means of yoga.

5-6. Doubt is a double perception—‘this or that’. Un-
steadiness is the instability to stabilize the mind. The mind
remains unsteady due to its engrossment in mundane affairs
even when the ground is achieved. Lack of faith is the un-
emotional attitude towards the means of yoga.

7-9. Illusion is misconception of the mind as regards one’s
aim, the preceptor, right knowledge, good conduct and lord Siva
as also in the apprehension of self in non-self even when it
is nearby. Misery is threefold : spiritual,5? material’ and
divine. There is also a natural misery due to the agitation of
the mind through the frustration of desires.

10-12. When the mind is affected by tamasor rajas it is
afflicted. The state of the mind at that time is called dejection.
Dejection should be eschewed by strict detachment from the
material objects. When one can discriminate between what is
worthy and what is not worthy but still stubbornly clings to
the unworthy, engrossed in diverse mundane affairs his mind
becomes fickle then. These are the impcdiments in the reali-
zation of yoga for a yogin.

13-15. To the devotee who practises yoga excessively en-
dowed with zeal the obstacles subside but other impediments
in the form of siddhis begin to appear.» The siddhis arc six :

52. adhydtmika—this misery procceds from bodily and mental
causes within one’s self. Cf. Visnu aeatfaat @ fefaa: aa
WlAASTAT | quoted in ST.

53. adhibhautika—this misery is produced from external causes:
aarifrgey ST.

54. ddhidaivika—this misery proceeds from the influence of the at-
mosphere or planets, from divine or supernatural agencies: sfrerrerri fron
ST.

55. Upasarga—It is an ailment in the soul of a yogi and, if unchecked,
it will hinder his progress in the path of self-realization. Linga records
sixtyfour upasargas.

=== PAGE 45 ===

Obstacles and Portenis 39

(1) pratibha, (2) ‘Sravana, (3) vartaé, (4) dargana, (5)
asvada, and (6) vedana.

16. These siddhis if avoided initially when their pot-
cncy is very little, lead to better results. Pratibha (keen intel-
lect) is the disposition (of the mind), resting on one’s power
of understanding.

17-20. Buddhi (intellect) is the faculty of discrimination
by which anything knowable isknown. If one has knowledge of
things subtle or hidden far or near, past or future, at all times
and places, that knowledge is called pratibha. Ifthe yogin is
able to grasp without effort, the import of all words by merely
hearing a concealed or indistinct syllable, whether short, long
or prolated that ability is called sravana. The perception of
touch without actual contact is called Vedana (awareness).
The ability to see divine forms without effort is called dargana.
Asvada (appreciation) is the ability to taste divine delicacies
without strain.

2i. Varta is the intellectual perception of divine smells
and subtle clements. O brahmins, through yoga, the yogins
attain the knowledge of everything about the embodied beings.
» 22-25. In this world there are sixty four qualities present
in the body. O brahmins, among these, the aupasargika quali-
ties should be eschewed. In the region of pisacas, O brahmins,
the qualities of carth (should be eschewed) ; in the region of
raksasas the qualities of water; in the region of Yakgsa the
qualities of fire; in the region of Gandharvas the qualities of
breath; in the region of Indra the qualities of ether; in the
region of Soma the qualities of the mind; in the region of
prajapati the qualities of ego; in the region of brahman the
qualities of intellect should be eschewed.

26-29. In the first region (earth) there are cight qualities;
in the second (water) sixteen; in the third (fire) twenty four;
in the fourth (gandharva) twentytwo; in the fifth (Indra)
forty. Each of the five subtle elements—smell, taste, colour,
touch and sound is evolved eightfold. O excellent brahmins,
there are fortycight qualities in the region of the moon, fifty-
six in the region of Prajapati, and sixtyfour in the region of
Brahman. In all the regions ending with that of Brahman, the

=== PAGE 46 ===

40 Lingapurana

yogin should discern obstacles through yoga and eschew them.
He can realize the supreme brahman thus.

30-31. The yogic siddhi p&rthiva (pertaining to the earth)
is eight: {}) bulkiness, (2) leanness, (3) infancy (4) youthful-
ness, (5) old age, (6) ability to assume different shapes, (7)
ability to hold body by means of (only) four elements without
the part of the earth and (8) having perpetual sweet scent.

32-35. The yogic siddhi apya (pertaining to the water) is
sixteen : (1) He can stay under water as long as he wills; (2)
he can come out of water whenever he wills; (3) he can drink up
even the ocean and be none the worse for it; (4) he can let the
water spring up wherever he wills; (5) whatever he wishes to
eat he can transform it into tasty substance; (6) he can hold
body with only three elements, viz. fire, air and ether; (7) He
can hold a mass of water by the bare hands without any con-
tainer; (8) he can have a body free from cuts and wounds.
These eight powers together with the eight qualities of the earth
constitute aigvarya pertaining to the water.

36-38. The yogic siddhi taijasa (pertaining to the fire) is
twentyfour: (1) ability to create fire from the body; (2)
absence of fear from being scorched by it; (3) ability to arrange
something unburnt even when the whole world is burnt; (4)
ability to keep fire in the water or (5) hold it in palms, (6)
ability to create fire by merely remembering it; (7) ability to
re-create at will what is reduced to ashes; and (8) ability to
have the body with two elements—air and ether, to the exclu-
sion of the other three.

39-41. The yogic siddhis pertaining to the air are : (1)
ability to move as fast as the mind; (2) ability to enter the
bodies of living beings; (3) ability to hold weighty things like
mountains on shoulders; (4) lightness, (5) weightiness, (6)
holding the air with palms; (7) ability to shake the earth with
the tip of the finger and (8) to create bodies with the air.

42-43. Ability (1) to have no shadow of oneself; (2) to
see the subtle elements; (3) to walk over the ether; (4) to have
the objects of desire at will; (5) to hear sound from a distance,
(6) to comprehend all types of sounds; (7) to have a body
composed only of subtle elements and (8) to see all living

=== PAGE 47 ===

Obstacles and Portents 41

being—these are the powers pertaining to Indra whois so called
because he creates bodies by means of these powers.

44-45. Ability (to acquire whatever he desires), (2) to
wander wherever he pleases, (3) to overpower all, (4) to
perceive all secret things, (5) t> create according to desire,
(6) to bring others under control, (7) to see things at will, (8)
to perceive the whole world—these are the powers pertaining
to the mind in the region of the moon.

46-47. Ability to cut, (2) strike, (3) bind, (4) create
and (5) destroy, (6) bless, (7) conquer time and (8) death—
these are the qualities pertaining to the ego in these regions of
Prajapati.

48-49. The following powers pertain to Brahma—(1)
creation of the world by mere conception, (2) protection, (3)
dissolution, (4) exercise of authority, (5) functioning the
world at will, (6) dissimilarity with all, (7) creating separately
all visible things and (8) the creatorship of the universe.

50. The power greater than and beyond this is the one
pertaining to Visnu. It is the source of the power of Brahma.
It can be understood by Brahma alone and not by others.

51. There is another greater power pertaining to Siva. It
is not understood even by Vignu. Who else can know lord
Siva—the pure entity possessed of many qualities.

52. In the course of practising yogic exercises*’ these impe-
diments in the form of attainments do often take place. The
impediments should be checked assiduously by complete
detachment.

53. Knowing that worldly pleasures are highly ruinous, the
detached yogin should eschew everything without the least
sense of fear.

54. Absence of desire is, indeed, commendable. It is
through the absence of yearning for the attainment of powers

56. It refers to the eternal transcendent spirit placed in the twenty-
seventh category beyond the influence of sattva, rajas and tamas, and re-
garded as higher than the highest. Cf. a: qcefaarat fier: TTETTAT:
LL & | 1.77.5!

57- STM —2TaRITHTS ST, The sixtyfour attainments (siddbayah)
are useful from the materialistic point of view but they are obstacles (upa-
sargas) to yoga. ~

=== PAGE 48 ===

42 Lidgapurdpa

and it is by complete detachment that the calamities can be
eschewed.

55. In all the worlds, upto the world of Brahma, onc should
avoid obstacles. Checking up all desires one should totally
abandon them. The great lord is delighted thereby.

56-61. When the lord is delighted liberation becomes easy
to attain, by virtue of complete detachment. In some cases, a
sage (after getting His grace) may roam about without
eschewing the Siddhis for the sake of blessing others or for mere
sport. Then also he can be happy.

In some places leaving the Earth he may sport in the sky
with splendour; in some places hc may utter the Vedas or their
subtle meanings succinctly; in some places he may compose
verses based on the meaning of the vedic passage;.in some
places he may compose poems in the Dandaka or other meters
in thousand ways. He may obtain knowledge of the cries of
beasts and birds. Everything beginning with Brahma and
ending with the immobile beings may become perceptible to
him like myrobalan fruit in the palm.

O excellent sages, of what avail is much talk ? Knowledge in
many ways and forms will risc up within that sage of great
soul. It is only by practice that perfect knowledge becomes
pure and stable.

62. The knower of the yoga can perceive thousands of
images of devas and their splendid aerial chariots. Everything
can come within the range of his ken.

63. He can see Brahina, Visnu, Indra, Yama, Agni,
Varuna and other deities. He can see thousands of planets, stars
and luminaries as well as their regions.

64-65. Entering the state of ecstatic trance he can sce the
dwellers of nether regions. He can dispel darkness ( = igno-
rance) by the steady influx of his inmost spiritual light—glowing
with divine grace and characterized by goodness—which he can
see within himself.

66-67. No doubt need be entertained that by virtue of
His grace, one can attain Dharma, riches, knowledge, detach-
ment and salvation. The details of his grace, one cannot
describe cven in ten thousands of years. O leading sages, one
should steadily Adhere to the yoga pertaining to lord Siva.

=== PAGE 49 ===

43
CHAPTER TEN
Means of Direct Perception
Sita said :

1-9. O great brahmins, lord Siva becomes delighted with
all these persons : those who desire to be liberated, who have
conquered self, the twice-born, the virtuous, who have attained
sadhanas, the noble-souled, kind and merciful, the ascetics,
who have renounced the world, who are detached and endowed
with perfect knowledge, who have self-control, the three kinds
of donors, who have subdued senses, who speak truth, who are
liberal, endowed with yogic practice, conversant with érutis and
smrtis and<who do not come into clash with the éastric injunc-
tions. The word ‘sat’ refers to the Brahman. Those who are
likely to attain Brahma in the end are called liberated. They
who are neither angry nor delighted in regard to the ten types
of sensuous objects®® and eight types of means*®® are called
self-conquerors. ‘The brahmins, ksatriyas and vai$yas are called
twice-born because they have special consecratory rites. The
virtuous is the one who has acquired the knowledge of dharma
explained in Sruti and smrti which is proper for different castes
and stages of life and which brings about happiness in heaven
and other worlds. One who acquires learning by serving his
preceptor is asadhu (among the religious students) . The house-
holder is also a sadhu when he performs holy rites (ordained
for him). The forest-dweller becomes a sadhu when he achieves
penances.

10. The striving ascctic is called a sadhu when he
achieves yogic power. Thus the persons who achieve Dharma
relating to ashramas or the various stages of life are called
sadhus.

11-13. ‘The pcrsons in the different stages of life arc: the
religious student, the householder, the forest dweller and the
ascetic. The two words Dharma and Adharma mentioned here

58. daésdtmake vigaye—objects that can be accomplished through
ten urgans of sense, i.c. five organs of action and five organs of knowledge.
59- This,group of eight is explained in the preceding chapter.

=== PAGE 50 ===

44 Lingapurana

denote activities. Auspicious activities constitute Dharma and
inauspicious activities Adharma. The word Dharma is explained
as that which is great in the task of Dharana (holding up, or
uplifting) and Adharma (its opposite) as not holding up. In this
context Dharma is instructed by the preceptors as one that
takes to what is desired.

14-16. Adharma, as taught by the preceptors, is one that has
as its fruit what is not desired. ‘] hey call those persons Acaryas
(preceptors) who are elderly, not greedy and _ self-possessed;
devoid of arrogance, well disciplined, and straight forward. He
who practises (Dharma) himself who establishes others in
dharma and who gathers together the meanings of the scrip-
tural texts is called acarya. What should be known or what is
worthy of knowledge is srauta if it is heard and smarta if it is
remembered.

17-21. Asacrifice when it pertains to Vedas is called srauta,
and when it pertains to the varnagramas is called smarta. One
who has found truth and does not hide it when asked for, is called
an 4carya. Truth, as defined in this purdna, is the statement of
facts exactly in the manner seen. Tapas (penance) constitutes
celibacy, silence, observance of fast, abstention from injury of
all sorts and quiescence. When a person behaves towards all
living beings like unto himself® both for welfare or otherwise
that attitude is called kindness. Whatever one has obtained by
justifiable means, whatever one likes the most, should be given
to ameritorious person. This is the characteristic feature of the
charitable gift of the donor. Charitable gift is of three types
viz.—the lowliest, the highest and the middling.

22-27. The sharing (of possessions) with all living beings,
out of sympathy is the charitable gift of the middling order.
The rites laid down by Srutis and Smrtis in regard to persons
of different stages in life and castes constitute dharma. Dharma
that does not come into clash with theconduct ofthe persons of
disciplined life is held to be righteous. —

That person is glorified as one of auspicious soul who eschews
the fruits of his illusive activities.

One who has refrained from all attachments is glorified as a

60. This ethical code places this cult at par with universal religion.

=== PAGE 51 ===

Means of Direct Perception 45

Yogin. He who ponders over the risks involved in sensual plea-
sures and remains unattached to them even though pressed
importunately from all round is called self-controlled.

The characteristic feature of perfect control constitutes the
fact that sense organs do not function falsely or improperly
whether for one’s sake or for others.

The following is the detached state:—The person is not
excited when calamities occur nor is he overjoyed when he has
pleasant results. Absolute cessation of joyousness, affliction and
despondency is detachment.

Renunciation of the fruits of all activities committed or
omitted is called Sannyasa.

28-31. The eschewal of both joy and misery is called
Nyasa. All created things from the unmanifest to the manifest
gross elements are insentient. Perfect Knowledge is_ the
discrimination between the sentient and the insentient. Lord
Siva, no doubt, bestows his grace on him who is endowed
with such perfect knowledge. So also dharma bestows grace.
Yet I shall tell you a great secret. One who is endowed with
devotion to the lord is undoubtedly liberated. It is certain that
lord Siva checks the different sorts: of delusion of the devotee
and is delighted with him even if he (the devotee) lacks full
accomplishments for yoga.

32-37. Perfect knowledge, teaching of the Vedas, offerings
to the gods, ineditation, sacrifices, penance, charitable gifts,
study of the Vedas, all these undoubtedly contribute to the
devotion of Lord Siva. O excellent sages, devotion results
from thousands of Candrayanas,*! hundreds of Prajapatyas,**
monthly fasts and other holy rites. Those who lack in devotion
to the lord fall into a mountain cave and undergo the results

61. Candrayana : Cf. Yajfiavalkya 3. 324 et seq; Manu 11.217. It
is a religious observance or expiatory penance regulated by the period of the
moon’s waxing and waning. Herein the daily quantity of food consisting
of fifteen mouthfuls at the full moon is diminished by one mouthful every
day during the dark fortnight till it is increased in like manner during the
bright fortnight.

62. Prajapatya : It is a religious fast or penance. Hercin onc shall
take food for three days in the morning, for three days in the evening, and
thereafter shall abstain from food for three days.

=== PAGE 52 ===

46 Liigapurdna

of their karman.** A devotee is liberated through his devotional
emotion. O brahmins, there is no doubt in this that heavenly
pleasures are not difficult of access even to ordinary men, by
the mere sight of the devotee; what doubt then in regard to
the devotee. It is only through devotion that Brahma, Visnu,
gods, sages, and others stabilise themselves and attain strength
and fortune. This has been stated by the lord himself while
addressing Uma.

38-41. O brahmins, these words were spoken by the lord to
the goddess Uma at Varanasi, in the Avimuktaka® region
While the lord was sitting with her, she addressed him thus:
“O great lord how can you be realised and worshipped. O
Lord, tell me, is it by penance, or Jearning, or yoga ?

Sita said:

On hearing her words and looking at her with a face
resembling the full moon the lord with the crescent moon for
his ornament laughed boisterously and recollected what had
been formerly mentioned by Mena, the consort of the
Himalaya when she saw that her daughter had overstayed there.

42-47 The lord said: ““O gentle lady, O sportful one, now
that you have obtained a beautiful city for your abode, do you
forget what was mentioned by your mother in regard to the
selection of a site for abode. O foremost among those who ask
questions, formerly I was asked by Brahma in the same
manner as I have been asked by you. O splendid lady, in the
Sveta kalpa, Brahma saw me in the white colour as Sadyojata;
in the Raktakalpa in the red colour as Vamadeva; in the
Pitakalpa in the yellow colour as Tatpurusa; in the Aghora-
kalpa in the black colour as f§vara; in the Visvaripa kalpa as
the multi-coloured Igina. Then hc said to me: O Vama, O

63. MTA —ATAIT TAT ST. in expectation of en-
joying the objects of senses.

64. Avimukta—same as K4éi (Mbh. III. Ch. 84. 79-8; Visnu 5.34.
go, 54; Matsya 180.54, 94 ff; Vayu. 106. 69). For detail, vide P. V. Kane,
History of Dharmaéastra (Vol. iv. pp. 618-642). But in the Kali age it
has lost its original form. Cf. Brahminda 2.3.67, 60-64. It is called Avimukta
or Avimuktaka, for it is the permanent abode of Siva (1.92.45-46) :

Faget TAIT TENA AT HATTA |

wa atufae werrefagertate aay i

=== PAGE 53 ===

Sadyojdta 47

Tatpurusa, O, Aghora, O Sadyojataé, O Mahefvara, O lord
of Devas,O great lord, you have been seen by me along with
Gayatri. O great lord, by what means and by whom can you be
controlled ? O storehouse of mercy, wherein are you to be
meditated upon ?”’

48-53 “O lord, how can we see you along with the
goddess ? How can we worship you. It behoves you to recount
it.”

The lord said to the goddess :

I said (then to Brahma), ‘O lotus-born one, I can be
controlled by faith alone. I am to be meditated upon in the
Linga which both you and Vigsnu beheld in the ocean. I am to
be adored by the twice-born in the form of the five-taced deity
with the five-syllabled mantra. O preceptor of the universe, born
of the cosmic egg, I have been seen by you to day by virtue of
your devotion to me.’ He (Brahma) then asked me to create
in him a feeling of further devotion which I readily granted.
O goddess, with that increased devotion he saw me clearly in
his heart. I declare that I am subject to control by means of
devotion alone. I can indeed be seen thereby, O daughter of
the Himalaya ! And, indeed, | am always to be worshipped in
the linga by the brahmins full of faith. Faith is the greatest and
the subtlest virtue. It is perfect knowledge and sacrifice; it is
penance, heaven and liberation. I am always seen through
faith.

CHAPTER ELEVEN
Sadyajata
The sages said :

1-2 How did Brahmé see the great lord as Sadyojata,
Vamadeva, Tatpuruga, Aghora and Is4na? It behoves you to
recount it precisely.

=== PAGE 54 ===

48 Ligapurdna

Sta said :

The twentyninth kalpa should be known as évetalohita.

3. In that (kalpa) when Brahma was pursuing intense
meditation a son with tuft was born unto him. He was
called Svetalohita

4-5. On seeing that Purusa, the glorious lord Brahma
with faces all round, thought of the noble-souled lord in the
form of Brahman. Brahma retained Sadyojata in the heart and
became engaged in meditation. After realising the greatest being
through meditation Brahmi, the lord of Devas, saluted him.

6-7. Brahma contemplated again over Sadyojata. There-
upon from his sides were born Svetas (white ones) of great
fame, viz. Sunanda, Nandana, Visvananda and Upanandana;
these noble-souled ones were thedisciplesof Brahma by whom
he was always surrounded.

8. In front of him the sage Sveta, glittering in his white
colour, was born, Then there was born Hara of great splendour.

9-11. There all the sages resorted to the great lord Sadyojata
with perfect devotion. They praised the eternal Brahman.
Hence all those persons O brahmins, who resort to lord Visve: -
vara after being engrossed in breath-control and mentally
devoted to Brahman, become liberated from sins, They will
have the splendour of brahman and be free from impulses.
They will go beyond Vignu’s abode and enter Rudra’s
world.

CHAPTER TWELVE
Glory of Vamadeva
Sita said:

1. Thereafter the thirtieth kalpa is called Rakta. In this
kalpa, Brahma of great splendour had the red colour.

2-5. Even as Brahmé desirous of a son was meditating,
a boy of great splendour menifested himself : He was adorned in
red ‘ornaments. He wore red garlands and clothes. His eyes

=== PAGE 55 ===

Sadyojata 49

were red. He was valorous. On seeing that noble boy in red
clothes, Brahma resorted to great meditation and understood him
to be great Lord. Brahma, of self control bowed to Vamadeva.
and contemplated on him. Thus eulogised by Brahma, the
supreme lord Siva was delighted at heart. He addressed
Brahma thus.

6-9. ‘Since, O Brahma, I have been seen by you medita-
ting on me with the desire for a son, with great devotion, and
since I waseulogized with the mantra beginning with ‘“‘brahmane
Vamadevaya” you will attain the strength of meditation and
will realize me as Isvara, the assiduous creator of the worlds,
in every kalpa. Thercafter four sons were born to him who
were as pure and splendid as brahman. They were named as
Virajas, Vibahu, Visoka and Visvabhavana.

10. They were pious and on a par with Brahma. They were
heroic and enterprising. They wore red garments and red gar-
lands and applied red unguents.

11-13. Their bodies were smeared with red saffron; they had
applied red ashes over their bodies. At the end of a thousand
years they re-entered the great eternal lord. In the mean-
time they attempted to realize brahman. For blessing the worlds
and with a desire for the welfare of their disciples they imparted
instructions in dharma and became favourites of Brahma.
Ultimately, at the end of a thousand years, they re-entered the
great lord.

14-15. Allother brahmins who practise yoga and repeat
the sacred formula ‘namo brahmane Vamadevaya’® and who are
devoted to him as their greatest resort are liberated from sins.
They become devoid of impurities and they attain the strength
of Brahman. They achieve the blessed region (rudraloka)
whence there is no return to this (mortal) world.

65. Vamadeva form is represented by the back-face of Siva. In
Hindu Mythology God Siva has five faces named [idna, Tatpuruga,
Aghora, Vamadeva and Sadyojéta, representing the five elements:
ether, air, fire, water and earth. Of. part II. ch. 14. A statue of Siva
in the Elephanta caves represents this form in which the frontal view depicts
three heads only, the fourth one on the back is concealed from view and the
fifth one on the tep is dropped out as the symbol of invisible ether.

=== PAGE 56 ===

50 Lingapurdna
CHAPTER THIRTEEN

Glory of Tatpurusa
Sita said:

1, The thirty first kalpa is known as Pitavasas. Therein,
the blessed Brahma was clad in yellow garbs.

2. Even as Brahma desirous of a son was meditating, a boy
of great splendour, wearing yellow robes, appeared before.

3. He wasayouth with the body smeared with yellow
scents. He wore yellow garlands and dress. He had long arms,
a golden sacred thread and yellow turban.

4. On seeing him, Brahma, endowed with meditation men-
tally resorted to and sought refuge in the overlord, the creator
of the worlds.

5. Thereafter Brahma went on meditation. He saw the
excellent cow of the great lord. In her universal form it had
come out of his mouth.

6. It had four feet, four faces, four hands, four udders,
four eyes, four horns, four teeth and four mouths.

7-10. The cow was goddess herself who had faces all round
and who possessed thirtytwo qualities. On seeing the great
goddess in the form of the cow, the great lord who is wor-
shipped by all devas said again repeating the words : ‘O great
goddess, symbol of intellect and memory, comeon, come on.’
{Thus addressed] she joined her palms in reverence to the lord
and stood there. Then the lord of devas spoke to her. [O
goddess,] enveloping the universe by your yogic power you
should keep it under your control. You will be Uma for the
welfare of the brahmins and for the attainment of their goal
(of liberation) .

11. The lord of devas, the preceptor of the universe gave
her to Brahma who was meditating on the lord for obtaining
a son.

12. By practising meditation Brahma realized that she was
the great goddess and he accepted her from the preceptor of
the worlds.

13-14. After meditating on Gayatri pertaining to Rudra
Brahma became self-controlled. By performing the japa of
Rudra-Gayatri as instructed by the lord and realizing that it

=== PAGE 57 ===

Origin of Aghora 51

was Vedic knowledge, Brahma who is worshipped by the whole
world, resorted to the great lord with his mind fixed in
meditation.

15. The lord then granted him a divine yoga, great
learning, riches and glory, wealth of knowledge and detach-
ment.

16-21. Thereafter from his sides there emerged divine
sons who wore yellow garlands, yellow garbs, yellow necklaces.
They had yellow unguents on their bodies and yellow turbans
on their heads. Their faces and hair were all yellow. For a
period of thousand years, these persons of great power and
splendour who were devoid of impurities spent their time for the
welfare of brahmins. They were yogic souls delighting in penan-
ces. They were endowed with virtue and power of yoga. They
instructed the sages engaged in long sacrifices in the system
of great yoga and (finally) entered the body of the lord. Thus
others too who seek refuge in him in this manner, who have
restrained their souls, who have- conquered the sense organs
and who are engaged in meditation will become sinless. They
will have the splendour of Brahman and be free from
impurities. They will enter Rudra the great lord and be relea-
sed from re-birth.

CHAPTER FOURTEEN
Origin of Aghora

Sita said:

1-2. When the kalpa of yellow colour passed by and an-
other of the self-born lord was ushered in by the name of Asita
and when the universe became a vast sheet of water®* and a
thousand years by the divine reckoning passed by, Brahma be-
came desirous of creating the subjects. He was dejected and
began to ponder.

3. Even as he was meditating with the desire for a son,
his colour was changed into black.

66. See note 23 0n p. 15.

=== PAGE 58 ===

52 Lingapurdaa

4-6. Thereupon he, the lord of great splendour, saw a
boy fn front of him. He had black colour but he was refulgent
with his brilliance. He had great prowess. He wore black gar-
ments, black turban, black sacred thread, black crown and black
garlands. He had black unguents on his body. On seeing this
noble-souled Aghora of terrible exploits, Brahma saluted the
miraculous lord who had the black and tawny colour.

7-10. | Then the glorious lord Brahma became engaged
in Pranayama. He thought of the supreme lord Siva within his
heart. With his mind engaged in meditation he resorted to
lord Aghora. He contemplated on him in the form of Brahman.
When Brahma was meditating thus, lord Aghora of terrible
exploits granted him vision. Thereupon four noble sons appeared
from his sides. They were black in colour and they wore black
garlands and unguents. They were Krsna, Krsnagikha,
Krgnasya, and Krgnavastradhrk.

11-13. By resorting to yoga they adored the great lord for
a thousand years. They imparted instruction in supreme yoga to
their disciples. By resorting to yoga these persons, endowed with
yogic powers, thought on Siva. They entered the region of lord
Siva, the region devoid of impurities and free from attributes.
Those others too, who contemplate on him by resorting to yoga
can go unto the region of that eternal lord.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Glory of Aghoresa
Silla said :

1. When the terrible kalpa of black colour passed by,
Brahm eulogised the supreme lord in the form of Aghora.

9-6. Thereafter the delighted lord Aghora blessed Brahm&
and said to him: “Do not doubt that I, assuming this form,
destroy all kinds of sin, including the terrible sin of brahmin
slaughter. O blessed one, O deity of virtuous sacred rites, I
destroy all minor and major sins of small or great power and

=== PAGE 59 ===

Glory of Aghoresa 53

poignancy. O Brahmi, I destroy verbal, physical, mixed and
incidental sins committed wantonly and consciously. I dispel
the natural and adventitious sins inherited from either parent.
O lord, do not doubt that I destroy all miseries originating
from sins.

7-13. O lord, by repeating one hundred thousand times
the mantras of Aghora, even a brahmin-slayer is liberated
from sins. O dear, for verbal sins half of this number is recom-
mended. For mental sins, half of the previous number. If the
sin is committed consciously the japa shall be four times
that number. If the sin is committed out of fury, eight times
that number. A slayer of a hero shall repeat the mantra a
hundred thousand times; the destroyer of a child in the womb
acrore times; a matricide a hundred thousand times; a
destroyer of cows and women or an ungrateful wretch by repeat-
ing ten thousand times; a willing or unwilling drinker of
liquor by repeating a hundred thousand times or half that
number and the partaker of meals before taking bath a thou-
sand times. The brahmin who abstains from japa or who takes
meals before performing the daily sacrifice or abstains from
giving charity should repeat this mantra a thousand times.
The base man who steals the property of a brahmin or who
steals gold is released from sin by repeating this mantra
mentally a hundred thousand times. A person defiling the
preceptor’s bed or slaying his own mother ora brahmin shall
repeat this mantra mentally the same number of times, O
Brahma.

14-17. The sin resulting from contact with the sinner
is equal to the sin of the original sinner. Still by repeating the
mantra ten thousand times he is liberated from sin. The person
imbibing sin by the contact with the sinner shall repeat the
mantra a hundred thousand times if done mentally; if done in
low tones four times that number ; if in high tones eight times
that number. It is enjoined that persons guilty of subsidiary
sins need repeat the mantra only half the number enjoined for
the main sinner; half that number if the sin is committed
unconsciously. O brahmins, if a brahmin sinner commits the
sin of brahmin slaughter, liquor drinking, theft of gold or
defiling the preceptor’s bed he should do as follows:

=== PAGE 60 ===

+4 Lingapuriga

18-22. He should gather together (i) urine of a tawny
coloured cow repeating Rudra-Gayatri,® (ii) freshly laid dung
of the same or similar cow repeating the mantra Gandhadvara,“
(iiij) ghee made from a similar cow repeating the mantra
Tejosi gSukram,® (iv) milk from the same or similar cow repeat-
ing the mantra ‘Apydyasva’? and (5) fresh curds made from
the milk of the same or similar cow repeating the mantra
Dadhikrana.7! To this mixture water taken with a tuft of
kuga grass should be added by repeating the mantra Devasya
tva,”* and the mixture should be well stirred in a vessel made
of gold, silver or copper, or in a cup made of lotus or palaéa
leaf, repeating the aghora mantra. In this vessel he should place
(different) gems and a piece of gold along with a tuft of kuéa
grass.

23-26. He should repeat the mantra of Aghora a hundred
thousand times and perform homa with ghee, cooked rice,
sacrificial twigs, gingelly seeds, barley grains and unhusked
gtains. He should perform homa, seven times separately with
each one of these materials. Ifthe materials are not available he
should perform homa with ghee alone. O brahmins, he should
perform homas as well as ablution for the lord with ghee while
repeating the Aghora Mantra. He should bathe the lord with
eight drona”* measures of ghee and wipe it off. He should then
observe fast for a whole day and night, take holy bath and
drink kirca before the image of Siva. After performing the
rite of Acamana he should repeat Gayatri.

27-32. By performing this the following sinners become libe-
rated form sins:—an ungrateful person, a slayer of brahmin, a
destroyer of a child in the womb, a murderer of a warrior, a slayer
of preceptor, a betrayer of faith, a thief, a gold-stealer, a defiler
of the preceptor’s bed, a liquor-addict, a paramour, a low-caste
woman, a ravisher of other men’s wives, a destroyer of brahmin’s
property, a cow-killer, a matricide, a patricide, an idol-breaker

67. Rudra-Giyatri : TA I. 10.5 : ‘tatpurugdya dhimahi tanno rudrah

pra codayit.
68. TA. 10.1.10; Mahan. U. 4.8.
69. VS. 22.1.

90. VS. 12.114; TA, 3.17.1.

71. VS. 23.92; TS. 1.5.11.4

ja. VS. 2.11; TS. 2.6.8.7.

73. Itisa measure of four Adhakas equal to 1024 muftis.

=== PAGE 61 ===

Glory of Itaéna 55

and particularly the person who destroys linga images. If one
who commits these sins is a brahmin, no matter if his sins are
mental, verbal, physical or of any other type, even if he
commits these a thousand times he is liberated from these
by performing the aforesaid rites. Even if the sins are accumu-
lated in hundreds of births he is liberated. This secret has been
divulged by me in the context of lord Aghora. Hence a brahmin
shall repeat the Aghora mantra perpetually for the expiation
of sins.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Glory of Isana

Sita said:

1. O leading sages, there was a kalpa of Brahma known
as Visvariipa. It was exceedingly wonderful.

2-7. When the period of dissolution passed by, when again
the universe of mobile and immobile beings came into existence
Brahma began to meditate with a desire for sons. Then
Sarasvati of universal form and loud sound manifested herself.
The universe constituted her garlands, garments, sacred thread
and turban. The mother of the universe with all universal
scents and long lips manifested herself. Brahma meditated on
lord Igana resembling pure crystal and bedecked in all orna-
ments. With concentrated mind, Brahm4 paid homage to Isana,
the omnipresent lord of all—Om O [éana, O Mahadeva,
obeisance be to you. O lord of all learning, obeisance be to you.
O lord, with the bull as your conveyance, obeisance be to you.
O lord of living beings, obeisance be to you.

8. O overlord of Brahm, obeisance be to you. Obeisance
to Brahman in the form of Brahma. Obeisance to the overlord
of Brahma. O Sadaéiva, may auspiciousness befall me.

9. O lord representing omkara in a physical form, O lord of
devas, O Sadyojata, obeisance be to you. I resort to you. I have
resorted to Sadyojata. Obeisance to Sadyojata.

=== PAGE 62 ===

56 Lingapurdga

10. Obeisance to you, the unborn, the source of birth and
who are not beyond the worldly existence. O Bhava, O Isana,
O source of the worlds, O deity of great lustre, bless me.

11. O Vamadeva, obeisance to you, the eldest being, the
granter of boons. Obeisance to Rudra, Kala the reckoner of
time.

12. Obeisance to the lord as the mind, to the lord black
in colour, to the lord as a religious student, to the lord as the
strength of the strong and to the lord devoid of organs and
their function.

13. Obeisance to the suppressor of Bala, to the strong, of
the form of Brahman. Obeisance to the overlord, the suppressor
of living beings.

14, QObeisance to the lord the impeller of the mind,
obeisance to the lord of great lustre, obeisance to the refulgent
Vamadeva and to the supreme soul.

15. Obeisance to the eldest and the greatest ; obeisance to
Rudra the bestower of boons. Obeisance to you the slayer of
Kala. Obeisance to you possessed of the noble soul.

16. With this prayer he bowed to the lord of Devas, to the
God with the Bull as his emblem. He who reads this narrative
even once becomes entitled to the world of Brahma.

17-23. He who narrates this to the brahmins at the time of
Sraddha attains the greatest goal. When Brahma thus paid
homage to him, lord Siva spoke: “I am delighted with you.
What favour do you seek from me ?”

Then Brahma who bowed to the delighted Rudra said with
a delighted mind in clear words: know O lord, I wish to see
this universal form of yours. Here is the universal cow’
Goddess of welfare. Who is she possessed of four feet, four faces,
four horns, four mouths, four curved fangs, four udders, four
hands and four eyes? How is she known as Vidvaripa (of
universal forms) ? What is her name? What is her lineage ?
To whom does she belong ? What is her power of action ?” On
hearing his words the bull-bannered lord Isana addressed
Brahmi the best of Devas, born of himself, in words full of

. 74. Viévagauh : She is identical with Prakyti or Pradhina. Com-
prising thirty two qualities she is described as the source of this universe. See
below, verses 29-35.

=== PAGE 63 ===

Glory of Isdna 57

the secret of all mantras which being pious are conducive to
prosperity.

24-25. Listen to a great secret. As in the first creation, the
kalpa that is current now is known as Vifvaripa. O lord
(Brahma) there is the region of Brahma which you have
attained. O lord ! beyond that region there is an auspicious
region occupied by Visnu born of my left limb. Since that
time, this the thirtythird kalpa has begun.

27. O lord of Devas possessed of great intellect, before you,
hundreds and hundred thousands of Brahmas have passed
away. Now listen.

28. You who are a devotee of the spiritual lineage of
Mandavya have attained the state of my son by practising
penance. Stabilised in bliss you can realize the supreme bliss.

29-31. Olord, you are characterized by the following
qualities: (1) Yoga, (2) Sankhya, (3) penance, (4) learning
(5) Sastric injunctions, (6) holy rites (7) pleasant speech,
(8) truth, (9) mercifulness, (10) Vedic knowledge, (11) non-
violence, (12) wisdom, (13) forbearance, (14) meditation,
(15) proximity with the lord, (16)control of the senses, ‘17)
quiescence, (18) intelligence, (19) illusion, (20) intellect, (21)
fortitude, (22) splendour, (23) ethics, (24) fame, (25) intelli-
gence, (26) modesty, (27) vision, (28) auspicious speech,
(29) satistaction, (30) skill in the exercise of sense-organs, (31)
performance of Vedic rites, and (32) pleasure. While she, the
goddess, has these thirtytwo qualities recognizable in her
appellation of thirtytwo syllables.

32-34. O Brahmi, the goddess Prakyti, the source of your
origin has been created by me. She is the overlord of Visnu
and other gods. She is my progeny. Philosophers call her by
various names, the four-faced deity, the origin of the universe,
primordial nature, cow or speech, Gauri, Maya, Vidya, Krsna,
Haimavati, Pradhana or Prakrti.

35-39. She alone is unborn.” She is red, white and black in
colour; She creates subjects in the universe that are of the form
as she herself. I am unborn, know me to be omnipresent and
know her to be Gayatri of universal form.

75. TA.10.1; Mahan. U. 9.2, Svet. U 4.5.

=== PAGE 64 ===

58 Litigapuriga

After saying this, the lord created four sons. They were boys
of all forms, who stood beside the Goddess. They were known
Jati Mundi, Sikhandi Ardhamunda. Resorting to the yaugic
practices they of great splendour worshipped the lord. They carri-
ed out their task of instruction in dharma. They followed the
path of yogic practice. These controlled souls of good conduct
entered lord Rudra at the end of a thousand divine years.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
Origin of the Linga

Sita said :—

1-5. Thus the origin of Sadyojata has been succinctly
narrated. He who reads or listens to or narrates this to excel-
lent brahmins attains identity with brahman by the grace of the
supreme lord.

The sages satd :

How did Linga originate ? How should lord be propitiated
in Linga ? What is this Linga ? What its substratum ? O Sita,
you should narrate all this to us.

Romaharsana said:

Formerly, Devas and Sages had, in reverence, asked Brahma
thus : “O lord, how did Linga originate by itself ? How should
lord Rudra be worshipped in the Linga. What is Linga? What
its substratum ?

Brahmé said :

Pradhana is Linga and lord Siva is its substratum.

6-13. O excellent Devas, it was for us both—Vigsnu and
myself that Linga manifested itself in the ocean. It was when
the aerial charioteers had gone to the Janaloka together with
the Sages and when the period of sustenance being over the
creation was withdrawn and when at the end of a thousand
sets of four yugas, they had gone to Satyaloka and in the end,
except their overlords, had attained identity with me, then all

=== PAGE 65 ===

Origin of the Linga 59

immobile beings had dried up due to all-round drought and
other beings like men, animals, Pig4cas, Raksasas, Gandharvas
including plant life were scorched to death by the rays of the
Sun. Everything was a single vast sheet of water. It was terribly
dark all round. In that vast sheet of water, the lord devoid of
impurities and free from calamities had gone to sleep. He had
a thousand heads,” a thousand eyes, a thousand feet and a
thousand arms. He, the universal soul, omniscient, the source
of origin of all, was characterized by the qualities of rajas, tamas
and sattva in the form of Brahm4, Rudra and Visnu. He was
omnipresent and the supreme lord in view of his being the
soul of all. He was in the form of Kala with K4la in his umbi-
licus. He was white, black, pure, of huge arms, the soul of all
and identical with Being and non-Being.

14. On seeing the lotus-eyed deity lying thus, I was
deluded by his mdyd. I asked him angrily :

15-16. Who are you? Tell me. Then with my hand I
raised up the eternal lord. Due to the severe and firm blow of
my harids he woke up from sleep and sat in his serpent couch.’”
Within a moment he regained control of himself and with his
lotus-like bleary eyes he looked at me.

17. Enveloped that he was by a halo of brilliance he spoke
to me as I stood before him. He got up from bed and laughing
awhile addressed me sweetly.

18-32. ‘I welcome you, O dear Brahma of great bril-
liance.” O leading Devas, when I heard his words uttered
smilingly my arrogance was provoked by rajas and I spoke to
him thus: “With smiles within, you call me by the appellation
‘Dear’ (as if I were inferior to you). But know that I am the
cause of creation and annihilation of the universe. O sinless one,
you address me as apreceptor would address his disciple. But
I am the creator of the universe, the promptor of Prakrti, the
eternal, unborn Brahma, the origin and soul of the universe. I
am the lotus-eyed lord. Now tell me quickly why you speak
thus in utter delusion.

76. RV. X. go. 1.

77- In Hindu Mythology Vignu is represented as reclining on the
serpent Sega. A vivid picture of Segaéiyi Vigpu is depicted on the outer
wall of the Dagivitira temple at Deogarh.

=== PAGE 66 ===

60 Lingapurdga

He then replied to me—‘See for yourself that I am the
creator, sustainer and destroyer of the universe. You are born
of my eternal body. You forget that I am the lord of Universe,
the Supreme soul invoked and culogised. I am Vignu, Acyuta,
Tgana, the origin of the universe. It is not your fault that you
have forgotten me. This has been effected by me through my
maya. Listen to the truth, O four-faced’® deity. Indeed, I am
the lord of all devas. Iam the creator, leader and destroyer.
There is no other lord like me. I alone am the Supreme
Brahman. O Brahma, I am the greatest principle, the greatest
luminary, the supreme soul. O four-faced lord, whatever is seen
or heard in this universe—the mobile and immobile, is
identical with me and permeated by me. Formerly the unmani-
fest pradhana the twenty-fourth principle” from the gross to
the indestructible atom was created by me. Out of fury were
Rudra and others created. Outof joy and sport you were born as
also the Cosmos: Intellect, the threefold® ego, subtle elements
sense-organs including the mind; and gross elements were also
created by me.

As he finished his speech, a terrible, thrilling fight ensued
between us. In the middle of that ocean of dissolution we were
engaged in fight, instigated by rajas.

33. In the meantime a brilliant Linga appeared in front of
us in order to suppress our dispute and enlighten us.

34. It had thousands of clusters of flames. It was comparable
to hundreds of (all-consuming fires). It was stable, with no
decline or increase. It had neither a beginning nor an end nor
a middle.

35. It was incomparable, inexplicable, and indistinct. It was

78. Brahmi is four-faced (Caturmukha). It is stated that originally
he had five heads but one was cut off by Siva for telling a lie. According to
another version, the fifth head was burnt off by the fire of Siva’s eye for
speaking disrespectfully of Siva, We read in the Satarudra sarhhitd that
it was Kalabhairava, a terrible form of Siva who cut off the fifth head.
Visnu Purina (ch.8) however gives a different version. It states that
Bhairava attempted to cut off the fifth head of Brahm4 at the instance of
Siva but gave up the attempt when Siva intervened at the behest of Visnu.

79. It refers to the invisible (avyakta) Pradhina, the twentyfourth
category in Sdrhkhya philosophy.

80. Aharhkira (ego) is threefold : sittvika, rijasa and timasa.

=== PAGE 67 ===

Origin of the Liga 61

the source of the universe. Lord Viggu was deluded by its
thousand flames.

36. I too was deluded. Then Vignu said to me—‘‘Let us test
this fiery Being. I shall go to the root of this incomparable
column of fire.

37-38. You should go up assiduously”. After saying this,
Visnu assumed the form of a boar. O Devas, I assumed the
form of a swan. Ever since they call me harsa (swan) or
Virat harmsa (cosmic swan).

39-43. Hewho repeatedly calls me swan, shall himself
become a swan of bright and white colour, with fiery eyes and
feathers. O gods | I assumed the speed of the wind and _ the
mind and went higher and higher. Visnu the all-pervading soul
assumed the form of a black boar and went lower and lower.
The boar looked like a heap of blue collyrium. It was a hund-
red Yojanas in length, ten Yojanas in girth. Its body was huge
as the mount Meru. It had white and curved teeth. It had
the refulgence of all-consuming sun with long snout and loud
grunt. Its legs were short and its body of diverse colours. It was
victorious, firm and incomparable. Assuming this form of a
black boar, Vignu went lower and lower, hurriedly, for a period
of one thousand years.

44. Still he could not reach the root of the Linga. O des-
troyer of enemies, throughout that period of time I was going
higher and higher.

45. I hurried up my efforts to see the end of that Linga.
I was tired. Arrogant that I was I could not see the end and
returned to the place of my start.

46. Similarly, Lord Visnu was also tired. His fear was
evident in his eyes. He, the origin of all Devas, immediately
came up there

47, We bowed to lord Siva. The noble-minded Visnu was
deluded by Siva’s May4 and he stood there in mental dejection.

48. We bowed to lord Siva at the sides, behind and in front
and wondered what that was.

49. O great Devas ! then a loud sound Om®! issued (out
of the column), It was clearly a prolated sound.

8:1. Om is a mystic syllable consisting of three sounds a, u, m. It
is the object of profound religious meditation. The highest spiritual efficacy
is attributed not only to the whole word but also to each sound separately,

=== PAGE 68 ===

62 Lingapurdna

50-51. Thinking what it could be, Visnu stood there together
with me. Then he saw the eternal first letter ‘a’ on the right
hand side of the Linga; then on the left the letter ‘u’; there-
after, the letter ‘m’ in the middle and the vibratory tone in
the end. That tone was ‘Om’.

52-55. Visnu saw the first syllable ‘a’ in the south, like the
disc of the sun, the second syllable ‘u’ as refulgent as fire in the
north, the third ‘m’ in the middle as refulgent as the sphere of
the moon; above it, he saw the lord like the pure crystal. It was
the fourth entity, devoid of attributes, nectarine, unsullied,
undisturbed, devoid of mutually clashing opposites, unique, void,
without an exterior or interior but still endowed with exterior
and interior, as it was stationed both without and within. It was
devoid of beginning, middle and end, it was the cause of
bliss.

56-62. The three matraés and half a matra called nada,
together constitute Brahman. The three Vedas Rk, Yajus and
Saman are in the form of the three matras. Visnu contemplat-
ed on Siva, the universal soul, through the words of the Vedas.
The Vedas became a sage. Visnu understood the glorious
essence of the Vedas—the supreme lord through that sage
alone.

Brahma said :

Rudra is free from anxieties and worries. Speech recede:
along with the mind being unable to attain him. He is ex
pressible through the single syllable (om) **, which is the Divin
order, the supreme cause, truth, bliss, nectar, the suprem:
Brahman, greater than the greatest. Out of that single syllabl:
‘om’, the syllable ‘a’ is Brahm4; ‘u’ Visnu, and ‘m’ is Rudra
‘a’ is the cause of creation, ‘u’ of illusion and ‘m’ of bliss.

63-65. The syllable ‘m’ is the sower, ‘a’ is the seed and ‘u
is the womb. The three symbolise the lord, Pradhanaand Purusa
Thus the sower, the seed and the womb, together with nada,

82. Om is a symbol of Brahma : Cf. Yogasdtra : ‘tasya vicakah pra-
navah’. In later times it came to represent the Hindu triad, viz., a(Visnu),
u (Siva), m (Brahm4). But this order is not followed in some Purdyas.
For instance, according to Linga ‘a’ represents Brahm4, ‘u’ Vignu and ‘m,
Rudra.

=== PAGE 69 ===

Origin of the Liriga 68

constitute lord Siva. The sower divided itself out of his own
free will. Out of the linga of the lord the sower created the seed
‘a’ which he discharged into the womb ‘u’ where it increased all
round.

66. It turned into a golden egg enveloping the first letter
‘a’, This divine egg was ensconced in the water for many
years.

67-68. Then at the end of a thousand years the egg that
had evolved out of the unborn and stationed in the waters was
split into two by the primeval lord himself. The splendid
golden skull of the egg became heaven and the base became
the earth.

69. From the egg the four-faced Brahma was born. He is
the creator of the universe, the lord of three forms.

70-72. The wise exponents of Yajus say that Om is Brah-
man. The Rk and Saman Srutis too have declared similarly. On
the lord of Devas precisely we meditated and we eculogised him
by reciting the Vedic mantras. Delighted by our eulogy the
unsullied lord delightfully stationed himself into the divine
Linga after assuming the form of sound.

73-82. The letter ‘a’ was his head; ‘a’ the forehead; ‘i’ the
right eye; ‘i’ the left eye; ‘u’ the right ear; & the left ear; ‘y’ the
right cheek; 7 the left cheek, ‘Ir’ and ‘lz’ the pairs of his nostrils;
‘e’ the upper lip, ‘ai’ the lower lip; ‘o’ and ‘au’ the two rows of
teeth; ‘am’ ancl ‘ah’ the palates; the five letters beginning with
*k’ his five hands on the right side; the five letters beginning
with ‘“c’”’ his five hands on the left side; the five letters begin-
ning with ‘t’ his right leg; the five letters beginning with ‘t’ his
left leg; the letter ‘p’ his belly; ‘ph’ his right side, ‘b’ his left
side; ‘bh’ his shoulder, ‘m’ his heart; the letters ‘y’ to ‘s’ the
seven dhatus; ‘h’ his soul and ‘ks’ his anger. On seeing the
great lord along with Uma, Visnu bowed and then looked up
at him. He sawa mantra emerging from ‘Om’ with five digits.
Resembling pure crystal it contained thirty eight syllables. It
was conducive to the increase of knowledge, and it was the
means of achievement of all righteous matters. He saw the Rk
of twenty four syllables and four digits in Gayatri metre and in
green colour, with the efficacy for gaining control. He saw the
Atharvan magtra of thirty three syllables, eight digits, black in

=== PAGE 70 ===

64 Lingapurdga

colour and with its efficacy of black magic. He saw the Yajus
mantra of thirty five syllables, eight digits, white in colour, with
the efficacy for peace. He saw the Saman mantra of sixtysix
syllables, of thirteen digits, in the jagati metre, in the coral-red
colour, with the efficacy for creation and dissolution of the
universe.

Having obtained these five mantras, lord Vignu performed
japa. He saw lord Siva in all digits and syllables (constituting
the limbs) with body consisting of Rk, yajus, and siman, with
Igana for his coronet, Tatpuruga for his face, Aghora for his
heart, Vamadeva for his private parts, sadyojata for his feet,
serpents for his ornaments, with eyes and hands all round. On
secing the great lord (of above description) the overlord of
Brahma, the cause of creation, sustenance and dissolution and
the granter of boons, Vigsnu eulogized him with pleasing words.

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
Visgu’s praise of Siva

Visnu said :

1. Obeisance to the single-syllabled Rudra, ‘a’ in the form
of Atman; obcisance to the primordial deity whose physical body
is learning.

2. Obeisance to lord Siva, the supreme soul in the form of
the third syllable ‘m’. Obeisance to the lord who is as lustrous as
the sun or the fire or the moon. Obeisance to him in the form of
yajamana who performs sacrifice.

3. Obeisance to fire in the form ot Rudra. Obeisance to the
lord of Rudras. Obeisance to Siva of auspicious mantra. Obei-
sance to Sadyojata. Obeisance to Vedhas, the creator.

4, Obeisance to the illustrious Vamadeva, the granter of
boons and the immortal lord. Obeisance to Aghora, Atighora,
Sadyojata and the deity of vehemence and impetuosity.

5. Obeisance to Igana, Smagana (i.e. the lord of crema-
tion ground ); obeisance to one of high velocity. Obeisance to the
speedy lord whose foot is the Vedas, who has an upward Linga
and who is Liga himself.

=== PAGE 71 ===

Visnu’s praise of Siva 65

6. Obeisance to him who has a golden Lingaor who is gold
himself or who is of watery Linga or who is water himself. Obei-
sance to Siva, the Linga of Siva. Obeisance to one who per-
vades all, including the firmament itself.

7. Obeisance to the wind or to one who has the velocity of
the wind, and who pervades the wind. Obeisance to the fire,
the lord of all fiery articles and who pervades the fire.

8. Obeisance to the water and to one who has become
water. Obeisance to one who pervades water. Obeisance to the
earth or the atmosphere. Obeisance to one who pervades the
earth.

9. Obeisance to one, of the form of sound and touch, taste
and smell and to one who has smell. Obeisance to the lord of
Ganas, and to one who is the most secretive.

10. Obeisance to the infinite. devoid of forms, obeisance
to the infinite, devoid of ailments; obeisance to the permanent,
the most excellent, who is in the womb of waters, and who is
the Yogin.

11. Obeisance to one who is stationed in between Brahma
and Vignu in the midst of waters; obeisance to the splendour,
the protector, the destroyer, the perpetual maker and the Death.
Obeisance to lord Siva.

12. Obeisance to the insentient, worthy of contemplation
who removes the stress and strain of the sentient, who is form-
less or of good forms, who has no limbs or who is attractive with
limbs.

13. Obeisance to one who has smeared ashes all over the
body; obeisance to the cause of the sun, moon and fire; obei-
sance to the white, of white colour; and to one moving about on
the mountain of snows.

14. Obeisance to one of excessively white complexion,
white face, white tuft, and white blood.

15. Obeisance to one who Jacilitates easy crossing (of the
ocean of mundane existence), obeisance to the splendid one,
obeisance to one having two forms, to one of hundred forms, to
one devoid of forms and to one holding a banner.

16. Obeisance to one who has prosperity, grief and absence
of grief; obeisance to the Pindka-bearing lord, with matted
hairs, devoid of noose, holding a nuose, the destroyer of noose.

=== PAGE 72 ===

66 Lingapurépa

17. Obeisance to one of good sacrifice, to one having sacri-
ficial offering, to one favourably disposed to the Brahmins.
Obeisance to one who is a poet. Obeisance to one having good
face and good mouth; who is difficult to be suppressed and who
is of good mental control.

18. Obeisance to one who assumed the form of a Brahmin,®*
who is Yama™ and who has made serpent his bangle. Obeisance
to one who is Sanaka, Sanatana, Sanandana and Sanat.

19. Obeisance to one who hunts the deer,® who is the great
atman, and the eye of the world. Obeisance to one who has
three abodes and to one who is devoid of rajas.

20. Obeisance to Sankhapala, Sankha, rajas and tamas.
Obeisance to Sarasvata, the cloud and the cloud-vehicled.
Obeisance be to you.

21. Obeisance to one of good vehicle, devoid of vehicle, the
bestower of boons to the devotee, to Siva, Rudra and pradhana.

22. Obeisance to you, possessed of three gunas, having the
nature of the four vyihas, the cause of existence and dissolution.

23. Obeisance to you of the form of salvation, the granter
of liberation, the supreme soul, the sage and the all-pervader.

24. Obeisance to you the holy lord, the lord of serpents,
of the form of ‘Om’ and the omnipresent lord.

25. Obeisance to you identical with all,®* all-pervader, and
the primordial lord.

26. Obeisance to the unborn, the lord of subjects, the cause
of vyiihas and the great lord of Devas.

27. Obeisance to Sarva, Satya, (truth) and Samana (the
subduer) and Brahma. Obeisance to the omniscient deity of
living beings.

28-29. Obeisance to you, the supreme soul. Obeisance to
one invested with the form of intellect, consciousness, memory
and knowledge. Obeisance to onecomprehensible through know-
ledge. Obeisance to one in the form of concord and summit.
Obeisance to one whose neck is blue.

83. It refers to Siva disguised as a Brahmana. ST.
84. i.e. Yama, the god of death and destruction. ST.
85. as a hunter kills the birds and animals. ST.
. The epithet is applied to Vignu because the waters (nara) were
his first place of motion (ayana). (Cf. Manu : Apo nari iti prakt&), but
here, as applied to Siva it means ‘one who lives among the people :

TUT ATR AL AIA SIT TET IST st,

=== PAGE 73 ===

Visnu’s praise of Siva 67

30. Obeisance to one whose half body is female®’, who
though unmanifest has eleven forms. Obeisance to one who is
immovable.

31. Obeisance to the sun, the moon, who establishes and
destroys the universe. Obeisance to one who is the cause of
fame, who brings on peace and is the lord of all.

32. Obeisance to the lord of Ambika, and the lord of Uma.
Obeisance to one of golden arms and of golden semen.

33. Obeisance to the blue-tressed one who is wealth. Obeis-
ance to the black-necked deity with matted hairs Obeisance to
one with the serpent for his ornament.

34. Obeisance to one riding the bull; obeisance to the creator
and destroyer ofall; obeisance to one who excelled even the
heroic Rama in prowess; obeisance to you, the lord of Rama.

35. Obcisance to the Emperor of kings, to one attained by
kings, to the overlord of protectors; obeisance to you, O Destroyer
of demons.

36. Obeisance to one bedecked in keyiiras (armlets). O
lord of cows, obeisance be to you. Obeisance to lord Srikantha
holding a Jikuca fruit in the hand.

37, Obeisance to the lord, the chief of the worlds; and to
one whose Scripture is the Veda; obeisance to you, to Saranga
the Royal Swan.

38. Obeisance to one with golden necklaces and shoulder-
lets; to one with serpents for sacred thread, ear-rings and
garlands; obeisance to one who has made a serpent his waist-
band.

39-42. O Siva, obeisance to you, having the Vedas in the
womb. Obeisance to the foetus containing the entire universe.

Brahma said :

After having culogised thus, Vignu ceased along with
Brahma. This excellent hymn is holy, it is destructive of all
sins. He who reads this himself or narrates this to the brah-
mins well versed in the Vedas goes to BrahmAa’s region though
he might have incurred sins. Hence one should perform the
Japa of this, read this or narrate this to splendid brahmins for
washing off his sins. It has been so ordained by Visnu.

87. Cf. note 27. on p. 18.

=== PAGE 74 ===

68 Lingapurépa
CHAPTER NINETEEN
Enlightenment of Visnu

Sita said:

1. The Supreme Lord said : O excellent among the Devas,
I am delighted with you. On beholding me, the great Jord, you
should cast off all fear.

2-3. Both of you very powerful were born of me formerly.
Brahma, the grandfather of the universe was born from my
right side; Visnu, the soul of the universe, sprang from my left
side. I am extremely pleased with both of you. I shall grant you
the boon of your choice.

4. After saying this, the lord, the storehouse of mercy patted
Visnu with his gentle and smooth hands out of compassion.

5. Then with a delightful mind, Visnu bowed and spoke
to the great lord who though devoid of Linga was stationed in
the Linga.

6. If love has been generated in you, if boon has to be
granted to us, may our devotion to you remain perpetual and
unswerving.

7. O Devas. the moon-crested lord accordingly granted
them an unswerving devotidn and faith.

8. Then Visnu knelt on the ground and bowed to the lord.
With perfect control over himself he spoke to the lord in low
tones.

9. O lord of the Devas, our controversy has borne splendid
fruits, since you yourself have come over here to remove the
same.

10. On hearing this, Lord Siva again spoke smiling to
Visnu who bowed to him with his head bent down and who
stood with palms joined in reverence.

Lord Siva said ;

11. O lord of earth, you are the projector of dissolution,
sustenance and creation. O dear Visnu, protect this world
with all its mobile and immobile beings.

12. OVisnu, I am lord Siva, the unsullied, I divided my-

=== PAGE 75 ===

Enlightenment of Brahma 69

self into three forms*® under the names of Brahma, Vignu and
Rudra with the activities of creation, protection and dissolution.

13. O Visnu, abandon your delusion. Protect this Brahma,
who in the Padmakalpa, will become your son.

14. Then you will see me thus, so will the Jotus-born
Brahma too. Thus saying the lord vanished there itself.

15. Ever since then the worship of the Linga was well
established in the world. The great goddess is the altar for the
Linga. The Linga is the great lord himself.

16-17. Linga is so called because, O gods, everything gets
dissolved in it. The brahmin who reads this narrative of Linga,
in the presence of the Linga image attains Siva-hood. No
doubt need be entertained in this respect.

CHAPTER TWENTY
The enlightenment of Brahma

The sages said :

1-6. How did Brahma become the lotus-born (deity),
formerly, in the Padmakalpa ? How did Visnu and Brahma
see lord Siva? Please recount all this particularly now.

Siita said :

It was one vast sheet of water, terrible, undivided and full
of darkness.

In the middle of that vast sheet cf water lay Lord Visnu
holding the conch, discus and the iron club. He had the lustre
of the cloud. His eyes resembled the Jotus. He wore the coro-
net. He was known as Hari, lord of Sri, Narayana and
Purusottama. From his mouth emerged all souls, all beings. He
had eight arms and a large chest. He, the source of origin of
the universe, the yogic a4tman, the knower of the yoga,
adopted an inconceivable yoga and occupied the lofty body of

88. The supreme lord in his qualified (sakala) state is characterized
by three functions : viz. creation, sustenance and destruction. The idea
is often repeated in the Puranas.

=== PAGE 76 ===

70 Lingapurdna

a huge serpent that had a thousand hoods and whose splendour
was incomparable. In that vast sheet of water, the lord lay on
that great couch of serpent.

7-8. A tall and lofty lotus was sportively created in his
umbilicus as he lay there all-powerful self-contented but un-
wearied in activities. It was hundred Yojanas long. It resem-
bled the mid-day sun. It had adamantine stalk.

9-11. Evenas the bountiful lord was playing (with the
lotus), Brahma, who was born of the cosmic Egg of golden
womb, who had golden colour, who was beyond the pale of the
sense-organs, who had four faces and large eyes came near the
lord casually. On seeing Visnu of splendid eyes sporting with
the lotus that was glorious, divine, splendid and fragrant,
Brahma was surprised and asked in a tone filled with gentle-
ness—

‘‘Who are you lying (here) in the middle of the waters?”

12-16. On hearing the splendid words of Brahma, Visnu
got up from his couch and with his eyes beaming with surprise
replied: —

“In every kalpa this is my shelter and asylum. What had
been done, whatever is being done and what would be done
(everything is done here itself). The heaven, the atmosphere
and the earth everything is my region.”’

After saying thus, lord Visnu addressed him again—‘Who
are you? Whence do you come near me? Where do you in-
tend to go ? Where is your abode ? Who are you that have the
universe for your physical body? What can I do for you ?”

17-24. Thereupon Brahma replied to Visnu. Being deluded
by the Maya of lord Siva, he could not fully comprehend
Visau who himself was deluded by the Maya of Siva and
hence unknowable.

Brahma said :

‘Just like you I tooam the Prajapati, the primordial creator.”
On hearing with wonder the words of Brahma the creator of the
worlds and on being permitted by him, the source of origin of
the universe, the great yogin, Visnu entered through the mouth
of Brahmi, out of curiosity. Within the belly of Brahma he saw

=== PAGE 77 ===

Enlightenment of Brahma 71

the eighteen continents™® together with the oceans and moun-
tains. On entering the belly of Brahma, Visnu of great splen-
dour and brawny arms saw the eternal seven worlds” up to the
column of Brahma in which the people of the four castes®!
stayed. Then uttering repeatedly, ‘How powerful is his
penance” he wandered through different worlds of diverse
creation. Though he wandered for a thousand years, he could
not reach the end. Then he (Visnu) the support of the worlds
who had Sega the Jord of snakes as his bed, came out of
Brahma’s mouth, and addressed him thus:

25 “O sinless one! You are the beginning, the end and the
middle of the universe. You are Time, the quarters and the
ether. O sinless one, I do not perceive the limits of your
belly.”

26-28. After saying thus, Visnu spoke to Brahma again—
‘In the same manner as you, I also am a lord. O illustrious one,
please enter my belly and see the wonderful worlds therein.”’
On hearing these pleasant words of Visnu, Brahma of truthful
exploits approved of them and entered his belly. Then he saw
those very worlds stationed inhis womb.

29-30. He roamed about therein but hecould not find the
end. Then on observing the movement of Brahma, lord Vigsnu
closed the openings of the passage and slept a perfect sleep.

On seeing the openings closed Brahma assumed a subtle
form and found an opening in the umbilicus.

89. Dvipa in the broader sense signifies a continental division of the
terrestrial world. The number of such divisions varies according to diffe-
rent authorities being four, seven, nine, thirtcen or cighteen. According
to the Puranic tradition dvipas are situated round the mountain Meru like
the petals of a lotus flower and separated from one another by a distinct
ocean. In the restricted sense dvipa is a land enclosed between two rivers
(mod. doab). The word ‘dvipa’ is used in both these senses in the Puranas.

go. Seven regions. Cf. 1.23.53-54. The three—Bhi, Bhuva and
Svar are separated from thefour higher regions—Mahas, Jana, Tapas and
Satya by a mountain Lokdloka. The light of the luminaries illumines the
three worlds but fails to reach the four higher regions.

gi. Caturvarnya. ‘The concept of fourfold social organization is
already found in the RV. (x.gv.12). The idea is developed in the Purinas.
Vaéyu (Ch.g) speaks of the cosmic origin of society (113-114; 139-140).
Siva is the originator, Manu the founder and Bali the propagator of Varna
(Ibid. 1.30.218; §9, 35-36; 61-98, 95-32).

=== PAGE 78 ===

72 Lirtigapurdga

31. Then the four-faced Brahma came out of the stalk of
the lotus and assumed his own form.

32. The Seif-born Brahma, the source of the origin of the
universe sat in the lotus, resembling in lustre the interior of the
lotus itself.

33-37. In the meantime, even as either of them was wholly
engaged in a struggle with the other in the middle of the
ocean, lord Siva of immeasurable soul, the lord of living beings
appeared there itself. Holding a trident in hand and clad in
garments of pure gold he came to the place where Visnu was
lying on Segsa—the lord of serpents. As he waded through the
waters quickly, big drops of water rose up in the sky, kicked up
by his feet. The wind that blew was very hot and cold. On
perceiving this wonderful phenomenon, Brahma spoke to Vigsnu
‘See how hot and cold waters make the lotus shake.

38-40. Clear this doubt of mine and tell me what else
you wish to do now.”’

On hearing these words uttered by lord Visnu, the destroyer
of Asuras and of unequalled exploits meditated thus :—‘‘ What ?
Who is this great being occupying my umbilicus? He speaks
pleasing words though I have been angry with him.” After
thinking thus, Visnu spoke in reply :—

41-48. “O Sir, are you in a perplexed state inside the
lotus ? O lord, what is it that I have done wherefore O excellent
one among men, you speak to me thus: What is it for? Tell
me factually.’ Lord Brahma, the storehouse of the Vedas,
replied to the lutus-eyed lord of Devas who spoke thus in
accordance with the activities of the world:—‘“‘It wasI who
formerly entered your belly in accordance with your wish. Just
as all the worlds within my belly were seen by you O lord, so
also all the worlds in your belly are seen by me. O sinless one
after a thousand years I returned. With a spirit of rivalry and
a desire to subject me to control, all the openings were closed
suddenly by you. O blessed one, I pondered over it. By dint of
my own splendour I gained exit through the umbilicus by the
lotus stalk. Let there be no dejection in your mind : O Visnu,
this is the sequence of events in their gradual advancement.
What should be done by me hereafter, kindly tell me : What
shall I do?”

=== PAGE 79 ===

Enlightenment of Brahma 78

49-51. On hearing these loving, pleasing auspicious and
irreproachable words of Brahma, Visnu the destroyer of Hiranya-
kagipu and of immeasurable soul, spoke sincere and simple
words. This type of adverse action was not envisaged by me.
I closed all the openings sportivcly and casually out of a desire
for enlightening you.

52. You should not mis-understand me. You deserve my
respect and worship. O auspicious one, forgive if at all I have
committed any offence against you.

53-58. You are borne by me, O lord, descend from this
lotus. I cannot bear you. You are refulgent and weighty.
Thereupon Brahmi said once again: ‘Tell me, what boon you
desire to have. O lord, take me down from the lotus’. Then
Visnu said : ‘O slayer of enemies, you should be my son. You
will attain splendid pleasure. Speak agreeable and loving words.
O lord, descend from the lotus. You are a great yogin. You
are worthy of our worship. You are the Pranava itself. Hence-
forth you will be the lord of all; adorned with a white turban
you will be known as ‘padmayoni’**—one whose source of origin
is a lotus. O Brahma, O lord, as son to me, you will be the
overlord of seven worlds’.

Thus the lord granted him the boon and Brahma accepted
the same cheerfully and spitelessly. Just then on seeing the mir-
aculous, huge-faced Siva with the lustre of the rising sun,
Brahma said to Visnu.

59-62. ‘O Visnu, who is this incomprehensible person with
a huge face and curved fangs ? With hairs dishavelled, with ten
arms stretched and holding a trident, with all-round eyes he
seems to be the lord of the universe. He has a deformed body
and a girdle of Mujfija grass. With huge penis lifted up, he is
roaring loudly and terribly. With a mass of splendour and
lustre he has enveloped the quarters and the firmament. He
comes this way itself.”” On being addressed thus by Brahma, lord
Visnu replied as follows:

92. The Purapas describe the golden lotus flower of one thousand
petals sprung up from the navel of Visnu while he lay recumbent in the
ocean, Cf, Matsya 168.15. According to Harivamsa (Bhavizya-parva, chs.
7-14) the golden lotus became the seat of Brahma and also his birth-place.
Hence Brahma is called padmayoni.

=== PAGE 80 ===

74 Lingapurana

63-66. “He is wading through the ocean with great speed.
When his feet press the surface of water, as he wades through
the ocean with great speed, masses of water rise up even to the
sky. O lotus-born one, you are being sprinkled from all sides
with a heap of water. By the wind coming out of his nostrils, this
great lotus emerged out of my navel is being shaken. It is lord
Siva who has no origin and who destroys the world that has
come. Let us eculogise the bull-banncred lord with hymns of
prayer.”

67-68. Then Brahma who was infuriated spoke to Visnu
whose eyes resembled the lotus:—‘‘Indeed you do not know
yourself as the lord of all the worlds. You do not know me also
as Brahmi, the eternal creator of the worlds. Who is this Siva
apart from us both ?”

69-73. On hearing these words of Brahma uttered in rage
Vigsnu spoke: ‘O auspicious one, bestower of welfare, do not
speak ill of the great soul. Here is he who has the lustre of the
splendid yoga, who is the invincible bestower of boons, who is
the unchanging ancient Purusa, the cause of this universe. He
is the sower of seeds and the refulgence of seeds, shining by him-
self. He, the lord, plays with toys as do the childern. Pradhana,
the eternal womb, the unmanifest Prakrti and the quality
tamas—darkness-——these are my names, since I perpetually give
birth to creation. The person of your query is lord Siva who
is the goal of the ascetics who, being afraid of the pangs of birth
and death resort to him. He is the sower of the seed; you are
the seed itself and I am the eternal womb.’’®? On being addressed
thus, Brahma, the soul of the universe asked again:

74. ‘How is it that you are the womb, I am the seed and he

93- According to the Puranic account of creation (sarga), in the begin-
ning, the Cosmic Egg which arose out of the waters was insentient. It
remained in this state for thousands of years until it was activated by the
sentient principle which entering divided it into two parts. One of the two
halves became the celestial and the other the terrestrial sphere.

The creation is traced to the seed, personified as Brahma, deposited
in the foetus personified as Visnu, by Siva the sower of the seed. In fact,
both the insentient egg and the sentient principle that activates it belong to
Siva himself who out of sheer will and sportively too, creates, dissolves and
then re-creates and re-dissolves the universe.

=== PAGE 81 ===

Enlightenment of Brahma 75

(lord Siva) the sower. This isa puzzle which you alone can
solve.”

75-79. After thinking about the multiformed creation,
Visnu spoke in answer to this specific query of Brahma, the
creator of the worlds.

There is no other greater living being than him. He is a
great mystery, the dimensional abode of intellect and _ the
coveted goal of spiritualists. He split himself into two. His un-
qualitative part remained unmenifest; the qualitative one came
into appearance. Of him who was aware of activities of Prakrti
and who was inaccessible and fathomless, the seed was born,
formerly, at the first creation. This seed was laid into my womb
which, after the lapse of some time, grew into a golden egg in
the ocean.

80. For a thousand years the Egg lay in the waters. There-
after it was split into two by the force of the wind.

81. The upper lid of the Egg became the heaven and _ the
lower lid became the earth. The foetus became the lofty golden
mountain Meru.

82. Then with the soul entering the womb, you, the lord,
Hiranyagarbha the most excellent of the lords of Devas, and
of four faces were born.

83. On seeing that the world with stars, sun and moon,
was void you meditated. Then the kumaras were born to you.

84. Pleasing to look at, they became ascetics, the predece-
ssors of yatis. Thus at the end of a thousand years they were
born as your sons.

85-87. They resembled the terrestrial fire in brilliance.
They had eyes large as the petals of a lotus. Sanat and
Rbhu remained celibate having sublimated sexuality; the other
three were Sanaka, Sanatana and Sanandana who were born
simultaneously and who could visualize things even beyond the
scope of sense-organs. They possessed great intellect; they were
the cause of the sustenance of the worlds. They were devoid
of the threc types of miseries and they desisted from worldly
activities.

88-90. Seeing that life and death in the world yield but
little pleasure, that itis attended with great strain and pain,
that births and deaths recur again and again, that there is little

=== PAGE 82 ===

76 Lingapurdna

pleasure in heaven, that miseries abound in hell, knowing the
S4straic injunctions about the inevitability of the future as also
that Rbhu and Sanat were under your control, the three—
Sanaka, Sanatana and Sanandana of great prowess eschewed
the three gunas and took to spiritual life.

91-94. Thus in the functioning of the kalpa, when the
three sons—Sanaka and others took to detachment you will
become confused and deluded through the illusory power of
lord Siva. Then O sinless one, your consciousness will perish.
In the present kalpa, the elements both gross and subtle will
be affected by his maya who, in fact, is the activizer of these
elements. This great and glorious account of the most excellent
of all Devas is as famous as the golden Meru—the mountain-
ous abode of Devas.

95-97. Knowing him as the great lord and knowing me
as the lotus-eyed Visnu, knowing also that the lord is the
greatest of all living beings, the bestower of boons and the
preceptor of the universe, you should bow to him, uttering the
pranava (orhkara) mantra and the Saman verses. If he is
infuriated he will burn us both by his very breath. After
realizing the lord of great strength and yoga, I shall keep
you in front and eulogize him who is of fiery and dazzling
splendour.

CHAPTER TWENTY ONE
Eulogy of Lord Siva

Siita said:

1-3 Thereafter keeping Brahma in front, the Garuda-emble-
med deity Visnu recited the hymn to lord Siva, containing
his past, present and future names as enjoined by the Vedas.

Visnu said :

Obeisance to you, O deity of holy rites, of infinite splendour,
the overlord of the field (kgetra), the sower of the seed, the
trident-bearer, of excellent penis deserving worship, the staff-
holder and of dry and arid semen.

=== PAGE 83 ===

Eulogy of Lord Siva 77

4. QObeisance to the eldest, the excellent, the foremost
and the first; Obeisance to one who is worthy of honour and
worship. Obeisance to Sadyojata.

5. Obeisance to the unfathomable and the lord of jivas
(personal souls). Obeisance to the naked and the lord of all
created beings.

6. Obéisance to the lord of the Vedas, the Smrtis and the
lord of activities, charities and substances.

7. Obeisance to the lord of Yoga and Sankhya. Obeisance
to the lord of the sages who are bound together by the Polar
Star.

8. Obeisance to you, the lord of stars and planets;
obeisance to the lord of thundering sound of lightning, thun-
derbolt and clouds.

9. Obeisance to the lord of great oceans and their islands.
Obeisance to the lord of mountains and continents.

10. Obeisance to the lord of the rivers and rivulets, to the
lord of medicinal herbs and plantations.

11. Obeisance to the cause of Dharma, piety and righteous-
ness, to the lord of maintenance (of all created beings), to the
lord of Parvati and her eternal associate.

12. Obeisance to the lord of ‘rasas’, jewels, and the units
of time.

13. Obeisance to the lord of day, night, fortnights and
months; Obeisance to you, the lord of seasons and the lord of
number.

14 Obeisance tothe lord of ‘aparardha’ (half of Brahm4a’s
age) Obeisance to the lord of Parardha (the other half of
Brahma’s age) ; Obeisance to the lord of Puranas and to the lord
of creation.

15-17. Obeisance tu the lord of the Vyantaras, of yoga,
and of fourfold creation. Obeisance to one of infinite vision;
to the lord of all occupations that have sprung up from the
beginning of kalpa (that is creation itself). Obeisance to the
lord of the universe and to the overlord of Brahma. Obeisance
to the source of origin of sacred lores and to the overlord of
holy rites.

18-19. Obeisance to the source of origin and the overlord
of mantras, pitrs and the individual souls. Obeisance to you,

=== PAGE 84 ===

78 Litgapurdpa

the deity of righteous speech, the ancient bull and the lord of
souls. Obeisance to the deity who has Nandin, the leader of
cows and bulls, as his banner.

20. Obcisance to the lord of Prajapatis, to the lord of the
Siddhas, to the lord of daityas, danavas and raksasas.

21. Obeisance to the lord of gandharvas, yaksas, garuda,
snakes, serpents and birds.

22. Obeisance to the overlord of the guhyas and pisacas,
to Gokarna, to the protector, to Sankukarna (one whose ears
resemble the pike) .

23. Obeisance to the incomprehensible varaha (boar) ; to the
star bear, devoid of rajas, the lord of Devas and asuras and ganas.

24. Obeisance to the lord of the waters; the lord of reful-
gence; the lord of Laksmi (glory and splendour) and the lord
of the earth.

25. Obeisance to one who unifies the strong and the weak;
to the agitator who cannot be excited; to the bull (Nandi)
who has a single illuminated horn; and a huge hump.

26. Obeisance to one who is stable in the body; to
one enveloped in halo; to one who represents the past, future
and present.

27. Obeisance to the brilliant and virile, to the heroic and
the unconquered, to the bestower of boons, to the best of
persons of great soul.

28. Obeisance to mahat (the first evolute of Prakrti) in all
its 3 stages, past, present and future;™ obeisance to you repre-
senting the people; to penance, to the bestower of boons.

29. Obeisance to the minute as well as the great; to the
all-pervading lord. Obeisance tv bondage and liberation; to
heaven and hell.

30. Obeisance to lord Siva, who is worthy of worship.
Obeisance to the sacrifice, and to the deity of effulgent
brilliance. Obeisance to the principle beyond all attributes.

31-32. Obeisance to the noose, to the weapon, to one
equipped with missiles as ornaments; to one who is the
material for sacrifice; to one invoked; to one who partakes of
what is offered in the sacrifice; to one who does desirable acts;
to one who does acts of charity, such as digging wells; to the

94. The 26b, 27 and 28a are repeated in 34 and 35 of this Ch.

=== PAGE 85 ===

Eulogy of Lord Siva 79

brahmin performing agnistoma; to the member of the assem-
bly; to one who does the sacrificial ablution after giving
rewards to the sacrificers.

33. Obeisance to one refraining from violence, to one
devoid of temptations, to one who is a redeemer of souls (Jivas) ,
to one who bestows nourishment, to one who habitually re-
presents and practises good conduct.

34-35. Obeisance to one who represents the past, future
and present. Obcisance to the brilliant and virile, to the
heroic and the ungonquered, to the bestower of boons and to
the best of persons of great soul. Obeisance to ‘mahat’ the first
evolute of Prakrti in all its three stages: past, present and
future. Obeisance to one without a fear.

36. Obeisance to the ever young, of golden form, the
bestower of boons, the lower, the upper and the lord of the
sleepers-on.

37-38. Obeisance to the wearer of garlands, to the enjoyer
of objects through the vehicle of sense-organs. Obeisance to one
representing the universe, to onc who is universe-formed arid
to one with heads, handsand feet all round. Obeisance to Rudra
the unsurpassed. Obeisance to one who receives offerings
poured into the fire. Obeisance to one who represents fire that
carries oblations to the gods.

39. Obeisance to the holy one who has all attainments.
Obeisance to the sacrifice and to one devoted to the sacrifice,
to one who isa good warrior, to one of terrible aspect and to
one who agitates persons who cannot be easily excited.

40. Obeisance to one of good progeny, to one of good
intellect and to one who is the brilliant sun. Obeisance to the
enlightened, pure and all-pervasive and to one who is contem-
plated on by all.

41. Obeisance to one who is both gross and subtle, to one
who is both visible as well as invisible. Obeisance to one who
showers and blazes, and who is both the wind and the winter.

42. Obeisance to you, of curly hairs, of great chest and
tuft, of golden colour, or resembling gold.

43. Obeisance to one who has odd eyes, to one assuming
the form of Linga, to one of tawny colour, to one of great
prowess and to the destroyer of rain, to one of gentle eyes.

=== PAGE 86 ===

80 Lingapurdga

44. Obeisance to one of brown, white, black, red, tawny
and yellow colours. QObeisance to one who is possessed of a
quiver.

45. Obeisance to you, marked and not marked by special
traits; Obeisance to one worthy of worship and adornment,
Obeisance to one who is a suitable patron.

46. Obeisance to one befitting welfare. Obeisance to the
elderly one. Obeisance to one favourably disposed. Obeisance
to One representing the past, to the truthful one. Obeisance to
one who is both true and untrue.

47-48. Obeisance to one of lotus colour, to the destroyer
of death, the lord of death, to one of white, dark, tawny and
red colours and to one having the colour of a charmingly
brilliant cloud at dusk, to one initiated, to one having lotus-like
hands; to one without garments and to one with matted hair.

49-50. Obeisance to one without magnitude; to one iden-
tical with all; to the unchanging and immortal one; to one
who represents colour and smell; to the eternal and to the
uninjured one; to the huge one in front; to one without illusions;
to one full and satisfied; to one difficult of access; to one re-
presenting anger and to the tawny coloured one.

51. Obeisance to one whose physical body is capable of
being known and (at the same time) not known; obeisance to
the powerful, to the brave; and the speedy one; obeisance to
the deity behind sandy soil and behind current of water; to
one stationed, extended and stretched.

52. Obeisance to you the intelligent potter; obeisance to
you, with the crescent Moon on the forehead. Obeisance to
the wonderful one of variegated dress and colours and of the
form of intellect.

53. Obeisance to one, of great consciousness and alertness;
obeisance to you, the most satisfied‘one and the best bestower
of favours; obeisance to the forbearing one, to one having self-
control; and to one of adamantine body.

54-55. Obeisance to the destroyer of the Rakgasas, to the
dispeller of poisons, to the bright-necked one and to one who is
above anger. Obeisance to the all consuming God of Death; and >
to one holding sharp weapons, to one cndowed with great joy,
to one with great gaiety, to one comprehensible only to the

=== PAGE 87 ===

Eulogy of Lord Siva 8]

ascetics; to one devoid of ailments, to one identical with all
and to the great god of Death.

56. Obeisance to Pranava; to the lord of Pranava; to the
destroyer of Bhaganetra; to the hunter of deer; to the diligent
one and to the destroyer of Dakga’s sacrifice.

57. Obeisance to one, the soul of all creatures, to one who
excels all lords, to the destroyer of the Puras, to one having
good weapons and to one having bow and axe.

58. Obeisance to one who destroyed Piisadanta and
Bhaganetra; to the bestower of desires; to the excellent one;
to one who burnt the body of Kama.

59. Obeisance to one of terrible face in the battlefield; to
one having face of a great elephant; obeisance to the lord who
destroyed the Daityas and to one who caused distress to the
Daityas.

60. Obeisance to the destroyer of snow; to the severe one;
to one wearing wet hide; to one having perpetual interest in
the cremation ground; to one holding the fire-brand.

61. Obeisance to you the protector of lives; to the wearer
of skulls and to one surrounded by care-free goblins of different
classes.

62. Obeisance to one having male-cum-female body; to
one who pleases the Goddess; to one having matted hair; to one
having tonsured head and to one having the serpent for sacred
thread.

63. Obeisance to one the habitual dancer, to one fond of
dance and music, to the lord of anger, to one practising
music and to one who is sung about bv the sages.

64. Obeisance to one in the form of a lion, to one of sharp
nature, to one both pleasing and not pleasing, to the horrifying
and the terrible one, to the suppressor of Bhaga demon.

65. Obeisance to one praised and sung about by the en-
lightened souls. Obeisance to the highly blessed, to one who
laughs boisterously, who roars like a lion and who flaps and
blows.

66. Obcisance to one whoroars and jumps; obeisance to
the joyous soul, to the benevolent, to one who breathes,
runs and controls all.

=== PAGE 88 ===

82 Lingapurdga

67. Obeisance to one who meditates, yawns, cries, runs,
gallops and sports about; to one who has a protruding belly.

68. Obeisance to one who has functions and no functions to
perform, to one who has a thousand heads, to one who is poor
or miserly, to one who has an impassioned body, to one who
has small anklet-bells.

69. Obeisance to one of deformed dress; to the ruthless
and unforgiving; to one who cannot be measured; to the pro-
tector; to the illuminated and devoid of attributes.

70. Obeisance to one fond of the elegant, to the beautiful,
to one adorned with a crest-jewel, to the minutest of the minute
and to one who cannot be measured or known by qualities.

71-74. Obeisance to one possessed of good qualities; to the
secret one, to one who goes to impassable places. This earth is the
mother of worlds. Your feet are resorted to by good men. Your
belly, the support of all Siddhis, contains the wide firmament be-
decked in clusters of stars. Just like the galaxy of stars the glori-
ous necklace shines on your chest. To you, the ten quarters
are the ten arms bedecked in shoulderlets and bracelets. Your
neck has great girth and extent; it is comparable to the blue
collyrium; it is adorned with golden threads.

75. Your face is irrepressible; it is terrible due to the cur-
ved fangs; it is incomparable. Your head which is heaven it-
self shines all the more with its turban of lotus garlands.

76-81. Refulgence in the sun, brilliance in the moon, firm-
ness in the mountains, strength in the wind, heat in the fire,
chilliness in the waters and sound in the firmament—the wise
know these qualities to be due to the internal throbbing of the
imperishable !ord.

The following names of lord Siva are to be used for Japa,
viz.—Mahadeva, Mahayoga, Mahesvara, Purisaya (lying in
the city of mind), Guhavasin (dweller in the cave), Khecara
(moving about in the sky), Rajanicara (walking at night),
Taponidhi (storehouse of penance), Guhaguru (Sire of Guha),
Nandana (delighter ), Nandavardhana (the increaser of delight) ,
Hayafgirga- (horse-necked ), Payodhata (yielder of milk), Vidhata
(dispenser of justice), Bhitabhavana (activiser of living be-
ings), Boddhavya (the object of knowledge), Bodhitd (the subject
of knowledge) Neta (leader), Durdharga (invincible), Duspra-

=== PAGE 89 ===

Eulogy of Lord Siva 83

kampana (unshakeable), Brhadratha (having a great chariot) ,
Bhimakarman (of terrible activities) Brhatkirti (of great fame),
Dhanafijaya (conqueror of wealth), Ghantapriya (fond of bells),
Dhvajin (one with a banner), Chatrin (one with an umbrella),
Pinakin (bearer of the bow Pinaka), Dhvajanipati (Lord of the
army) Kavacin, (having armour), Pattigin (having the iron club) ,
Khadgin (having sword) ,. Dhanurhasta (having the bow in the
hand), Paragvadhin (having the axe), Aghasmara (non-des-
troyer), Anagha (sinless), Sara (heroic), Devaraja (king of
Devas), Arimardana (Supressor of enemies).

82-83. Formerly, after propitiating you the enemies were
slain by us in the battle. You are a submarine fire. Not satiated
by drinking all the waters of the ocean, you are infuriated in
form, but delighted within. You are the bestower of desires;
you can go as you wish; you are fond (of us) ; you are the
celibate religious student. You are unfathomable and
favourably disposed towards the Brahmins; you are adored
by the society.

84. You have made sacrifice the everlasting treasure of the
Devas. The fire-god bears to you the offering, as mentioned in
the Vedas O supreme lord, if you are pleased we too become
pleased.

85. You are the lord of Parvati, you are beginningless.
At the time of first creation you are Brahm, the maker of
worlds. The followers of the Samkhya system realise you as
one beyond prakrti and at the close of meditation they enter
you, devoid of death.

86. Those who meditate on you, understand you as
perpetual siddha through yoga and then eschew those yogas.
Those enlightened persons who resort to you through their
actions enjoy divine bliss.

87. The greatness of yours has been glorified in accor-
dance with what we know according to our capacity. Your
reality and principles cannot be enumerated; you are the
supreme soul who cannot be easily crossed.

88-91. Be auspicious towards us everywhere. As you are
so you are; obeisance be to you.

=== PAGE 90 ===

84 Lingapurdna

Sia said:

He who recites this prayer by Brahma and Visnu, he who
narrates this to the brahmins, or he who listens to this with
concentration shall obtain that benefit which one attains after
performing ten thousand horse sacrifices. Even a man of
sinful activity who listens to this in the temple of Siva or
respects this will be liberated and will live in Brahma’s world.
He who recites this at the time of érdddha or a divine rite or
during sacrifice or during the sacred ablution or in the midst
of good men reaches the proximity of Brahma.

CHAPTER TWENTY TWO
Creation of Rudras

Sata said:

1-2. On seeing both of them extremely humble, the lord of
Umi with eyes tawny as honey, was much delighted, thanks
to the exposition of truth. The three-eyed, the pinaka-bearing,
and the trident-holder lord Siva, the destroyer of Daksa’s sacri--
fice became very glad.

3. On hearing their nectar like words lord Siva sportingly
asked them though he knew their intentions.

4-7. ‘Who are you noble souls eagerly yearning for each
other’s welfare ? You lotus-cyed ones have somehow met together
in this terribly cxtensive flood.”

Glancing at cach other, the noble souls replied: ‘‘O lord,
what is there that remains unknown to you? O lord Rudra of
great ‘Miya’, we two have been created by you willingly.”

On hearing their words and having honoured and greeted
them the glorious lord spoke sweetly in smooth words :—

‘OC Brahma ! O Visnu ! I am speaking to you.

8. Iam delighted by your devotion couched in words of
perpetual value. Both of you are endearing to my heart.

9. What shall 1 give you now ? Which is sweeter boon you
desire ?”? Then the blessed lord Vignu spoke to lord Siva :

=== PAGE 91 ===

Creation of Rudras 35

10. O lord! everything has been granted by you. If you
are so pleased with me, O lord ! grant that my devotion for you
remains stable.

11. On being requested thus lord Siva realised it. He
honoured Visnu and granted him devotion to his lotus-feet.

12. “You are the creator of this world. You are its presi-
ding deity. Hail unto you, O dear, O lotus-eyed lord, I shall go
(now).’’

: 13-15. After saying this the great lord blessed Brahma too.
Greatly delighted he patted Brahma with his auspicious hands
and said:—‘‘O dear, surely you are cqual to me. You are my
devotee too. Hail unto you. I shall leave now, O deity of good
rites, may there be perfect awareness in you.”’

16-17. After saying this, the lord of the Ganas bowed to by
all Devas, vanished there itself. After attaining perfect know-
ledge from Visnu, Brahma whose source of origin was the lotus,
performed terrible penance with a desire to create. Even as he
performed this penance, nothing resulteds

18. After a great deal of time his misery turned into anger.
From the eyes overwhelmed with anger drops of tears fell
down.

19-20. From those drops of tears, huge poisonous snakes
appeared. They had all the three humours, the wind, bile and
phlegm. They were highly blessed; they were adorned with
Svastika marks. Their hairs were dishevelled and scattered.
On seeing the snakes born at the outset Brahma censured
himself.

21. O fie upon the fruit of my penance of this sort, if it
were to be like this. Even in the beginning, my progeny has
become the destroyer of the world.

22. Originating from anger and fury a severe loss of sense
overwhelmed him. Out of the distress resulting from his loss of
sense, he lost his life.

23. From the body of Brahma of unequalled valour, the
eleven Rudras® sprang up crying, out of sympathy and mercy,

g5. The word Rudra is derivable from4/ru to cry and 4/dru to move.
The Puranas make frequent reference to the crying of Rudras. SP. (Vdyaviya
12, 25-30) identifies Rudras with the life principles, i.e. the prinas that acti-
vate the insentient-matter for creation. Assoon as Rudra or Prana becomes

=== PAGE 92 ===

86 Lirigapurdna

24. They became known as Rudras due to their crying.
The Rudras and the pranas are identical with each other.

25-28. The pranas are stationed in all living beings. The
trident-bearing lord Siva who enforces strict discipline granted
him ‘ife again. After obtaining life, lord Brahma saluted lord
Siva, the lord of Devas. By means of Gayatri he perceived him
as identical with the universe. On seeing and eulogizing him
as such, Brahma was struck with wonder. Bowing to him again
and again, he proclaimed : ‘O lord ! how is it that you have
assumed such forms as Sadyojata and others.”

CHAPTER TWENTY THREE
Various Kalpas

Sitta said:

1. Onhearing the words of Brahma, lord Siva in the
form of Brahman spoke to him smilingly, in order to enlighten
him.

2-3. When the Sveta kalpa was current, it was I who
existed then. I had white turban, white garlands and white
garments. I was white myself with white bones, white
hairs, white blood and white complexion °° So the kalpa too was
known as Svetakalpa.

4. Gayatri, the goddess of Devas, born of me, had white
limbs, white colour, white blood. She was known as Brahmani.

5. O lord of Devas, that was why I had been understood
by you as the secret deity. By my penance I had assumed the
form of Sadyojata.

manifest in the organism it cries for food. Cf. Harivamsa 2.74.22; 3.14.39.
Another characteristic of the Rudras is their rhythmic movement (dravana,
from 4/dru to move) which is responsible for the incessant flow of
creation represented by the Satarudriya or Kofirudriya concept. Cf.
TREAT Aeafer Tsar seh Peary VV. 16.4; Vayu 10.58.

y6. Svetalohitah—nitana-iveta-ripah ST., of new white complexion.
For ‘‘lohita” as a synonym of ‘new’ sce Visca: ‘lohitah syin nave bhaume’.

=== PAGE 93 ===

Various Kalpas 87

6. The title Sadyojata is a secret Brahma ; the twice-
born who know me, who have assumed secret nature, shall
attain nearness to me whence there is no return.

7-12. When the next kalpa known as lohita, asa result of
my colour, came, Gayatri glorified as a cow, born with red flesh,
red bone, red blood, red milk, red eyes and red udders was
known as Brahmani. Since the colour was changed into red and
since the lord was Vama, I was known as Vamadeva. O deity
of great strength, then also I, who was in a different colour, was
recognised by you who had practised self-control by resorting to
yoga. I was then known as Vamadeva. The twice-born who
realise my V4Amadeva form shall go to Rudra’s world whence
there is no return.

13. When the yuga gradually changed and I became
yellow in colour, the kalpa was known as Pita—the name
assigned by me.

14. Gédyatri, the goddess of Devas born of me was named
Brahmani. She was yellow in body, yellow in blood and
yellow in colour.

15-17. O deity of great strength, there too, I was
realized by yogins devoted to the practice of yoga, through
your yogic mind. I was realized by you in the form of Tatpu-
rusa. Hence, it was, O deity born of the golden egg, I got the
Tatpurusa form. Persons endowed with penance, devoid of
impurities, who are in contact with Brahman and who know
me as Rudra, and Rudrani as Gayatri—the mother of the Vedas
go to Rudra’s world whence there is no return.

18-21. When I became terrible and black in colour
the kalpa was known as Krsna after the colour assumed by
me. There I resemble K4la (god of death). I am Kala (Time),
the reckoner of the worlds. O Brahma, I was then known by
you as Ghora (the terrible) with terrible exploits. O lord of
Devas, Gayatri, bora of me, was black in body, black in blood,
black in form and was named Brahmani. Hence to those
who know me that I have assumed the ghora form, I, the
changeless one, shall be Aghora (non-terrible) and Santa
(quiescent) .

22-25. O Brahma, when I assumed the universal form I was
realized by you by means of the yogic trance. Gayatri, the

=== PAGE 94 ===

88 Liigapurana

sustainer of the worlds®’, also assumed the universal form. To
those who know me as having assumed this universal form,
I shall always become auspicious and gentle. That Kalpa too
will be known as Viévariipa ( =of universal form).

26-29. These four who are of all kinds of forms will be-
come popular as my sons. Since they are of different colours,
their subjects too will be of different colours or castes (Varnas) ,
and allowed the use of Gayatri. Man’s aim of life will be four-
fold: virtue, wealth, desire and liberation. All living beings
will come under four groups®, four stages of life. The feet of
Dharma will be four®® since my sons are four in number.

30. Hence the universe consisting of the mobile and im-
mobile beings is stationed in the four yugas. Since it is stationed
in the.four yugas it shall have four feet.

31-32. There are eight worlds: Bhih, Bhuvah, Svar, Mahar,
Janar, Tapas, Satya and Visnu. These are established in the eight
substratums each of which is imperishable. Bhuh, Bhuvah, Svar
and Mahah constitute the four substratums.

33. The first is Bhih, the second Bhuvah, the third Svar
and Mahar is the fourth.

34-35. The fifth is Janah, the sixth Tapas, the seventh Satya
whence people do not return to this world. The world of Visnu is
the eighth. It is also the spot whence a return to this world is
difficult. Beyond that is the world of Skandha and Uma endow-
ed with all attainments.

36-39. Beyond that is the world of Rudra—the splendid
region of yogins. The twice-born who are devoid of ego, who
have neither lust nor anger and whose minds are devoted to
yoga alone can enter it. Since Gayatri was seen by you as four-
footed, the worlds are also four, viz. the world of Uma,
Kumara, Mahesvara and Visnu.! Again, since Gayatri was

97. Sarvabhaksa—'‘resorted to by all’. S7. interprets differently:
sarvam pitAlajdtam bhakgayati ndéayati si—one who consumes all the
products of the nether regions.

g8. catvdrah—four classes of living beings as mentioned by S7:
jariyuja-andaja-svedaja-udbhijjaripah.

g9. The four feet of righteousness, according to ST. comprise daya
: (compassion), dinam (charity), tapah (penance), satyam (truth).
100. péddnta—the ultimate region, i.e. the world of Visnu.

=== PAGE 95 ===

Various Kalpas 89

seen as four-footed, the animals shall also be four-fovoted.
Their udders too will be four.

40-41. Since the Soma-juice, which is the life of living
beings, accompanied by Vedic chants, fell off from my mouth,
the cows came to be known as those whose udders are sucked.
Hence the nectar in the form of the Soma-juice is known as
the life of living beings. Hence too, the animals became quadru-
peds; the whiteness of their milk is also due to that.

42-44. Since the great Goddess was seen as biped in the
course of the rites, Gayatri the creator of the worlds is also of
the same nature. Hence all human beings are bipeds, endowed
with two breasts. Since the great goddess, the unborn deity of
great strength, was seen by you as supporting all living beings,
therefore, the subjects will have all kinds of form.

45-51. The unborn deity shall have great splendour and
universal form and from his face there will come out the
fire-God whose energy will be unfailing. Hence, the pure and
all-pervading fire-god has the form of living body. The pure-
souled men of two births who see me as endowed with the
faculties of overlordship, sense-control and omnipresence
become liberated from rajas and tamas. Eschewing physical
body they attain my vicinity and never return to this earth.

O brahmins, lord Brahma who was thus addressed by Rudra
bowed to him. Becoming purified in the mind he spoke to him
again. “‘O lord, you are aware of the greatness of Gayatri as
well as the glory of the Supreme lord (Maheévara). O lord,
may you kindly grant me the highest abode of Gayatri and
that of yourself’’. The lord then granted the boon to him,
Hence, he who knows the multiformity or the universality of
the supreme lord as also of Gayatri attains identity with
Brahman, as stated to Brahma by the lord himself.

=== PAGE 96 ===

90 Lingapurdpa
CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR
Incarnations of Siva

Sata said:

1. On hearing everything uttered by Rudra, Brahma the
Prajapati bowed to Rudra, lord of Devas and spoke thus :

2. “O lord, lord of the chiefs of Devas, O multiformed,
O Mahefvara, O husband of Uma, O great god, honoured by
all, obeisance to you.

3-4. O multiformed, O highly blessed god, when and in
which age (yuga) will these bodies honoured by all be seen by
the brahmins and by what penance or meditation of yoga ?
Obeisance to you, O lord Mahadeva”.

5. On hearing his words and seeing him in front, the great
lord Rudra revealed by Rk, Yajus and Saman smiled and
said :—

6-9. Except through meditation, neither through penance
nor by conduct nor through gifts and holy rites nor by visits to
pilgrim centres nor through sacrifices with ample monetary gifts
nor through the study of the Vedas'® nor through wealth nor
through knowledge of various kinds is it possible for men to
see me.

O Brahma, in the Varaha kalpa—the seventh in number,
Varaha, will be the illuminator of the kalpa and your grandson,
Vaivasvata, will be the Manu.

10-13. In the course of that kalpa containing the four yugas,
towards the end of Kali, I will be born to bless the worlds and
for the welfare of the brahmins, O Brahma. As the yuga
proceeds further, when the great lord himself becomes Vyasa,
during the first Dvapara age I will be born at the end of Dva-
para!°2 as sage Sveta. I will be endowed with a tuft and will
stay on the excellent mountain Chagala!®® a beautiful peak of
the Himalaya mountain.

101. Vedanaih—éastraih ST. by sacred books.
soz. Yugintike—dvapara-samiptau S7.—at the end of Dvapara

see:
103. Chigala: This peak of the Himilayas has not been identified so
far.

=== PAGE 97 ===

Incarnations of Siva 91

14-18. Then my disciples will be four noble brahmins, the
masters of the Vedas and having tufts. They will be Sveta,
Svetagikha, Svetdsya and Sveta-lohita. After attaining Brahman’s
goal, they will approach me and will be devoted to the path
of meditation and yoga. O Brahmi, in the second Dvapara age
lord Prajapati will become Vyasa, known as Sadya. Then, in
the Kali age, I will be born by the name Sutara for the wel-
fare of the world, with a desire for blessing the disciples. My
disciples then will be known by these names:

19-24. Dundhubhi, Satariipa, Rcika and Ketuman. After
attaining yoga and meditation and after establishing the Brah-
ma} on the earth they will attain the region and companion-
ship of Rudra. In the third age, Dvapara, Bhargava will be the
Vyasa. Then, at the end of Dvapara 1 will be born as Damana.
There too four boys will be born to me, namely, Vikega, Vikoga,
Vipasa and Sapanasana. These four of great prowess will go
to the world of Rudra through the same yogic path and will
never return. In the fourth Dvapara yuga, Angiras will become
Vyasa. At that time I shall be born by the name Suhotra.
There too, four ascetics will be born as my sons.

25. They will be excellent brahmins of steadfast rites and
yogic souls. They will be known as Sumukha, Durmukha,
Dardura and Dhrtikrama.

26-28. By performing subtle yogic practices they will be-
come pure and shall wash off their sins by taking recourse to
the subtle yogic practice. Endowed with yoga and through
the same path (as described above) these courageous souls will
go to the world of Rudra and never return. In the fifth Dva-
para age Savitr will be the Vy4sa. At that time, I shall be born
as a person of great penance with the name Kanka for blessing
the worlds and propagating yoga among the people.

29-30. Four blessed persons of pure origin shall be my disci-
ples. They will be yogic souls with steadfast rites. They will be
known as Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatana and Sanat. They will be
devoid of ego, altogether.

31-38. In the end they will come to my abode and never
return. In the sixth yuga, Mrtyu will be the Vyasa and I shall

104. Brahma-jiianam S7T.—knowledge of Brahma, the impersonal
spirit, the supreme soul.

=== PAGE 98 ===

92 : Lingapurana

be known as Laugaksi. Then also my disciples will be four, all
yogic souls with steadfast rites, all blessed and popular. They
will be known as Sudhama, Virajas, Sankhap4da and Rajas.
They all will be yogic, noble souls, pious and sinless, and en-
dowed with yogic practices. Through the path of meditation
they will come near me and never return.

In the seventh cycle of yugas, Satakratu, who was famous
in the previous birth as Vibhu the shining one, becomes the
Vyasa. Then at the end of Dvapara and the advent of Kali I
shall be born as Jaigisavya, the omnipresent, renowned, and the
best of yogins. There too four sons will be born to me. They will
be known as Saérasvata, Megha, Meghavahana and Suvahana.
Devoted to the path of meditation those noble souls will,
through the very same path, go to Rudraloka devoid of
misery.

39-42. In the eighth cycle, Vasistha will become the
Vyasa. I will be born by the name Dadhivahana. There too my
sons will be yogic souls of steadfast rites and great yogic prac-
"tice. There will be none equal to them. They will be known as
Kapila, Asuri, Paficasikha! and Baskala. These will be
righteous souls of great prowess. After attaining the yoga of
the lord they will burn their sins and come near me, never to
return.

43-47. In the ninth cycle when Sarasvata will be the
Vyasa I will be born by the name Rsgabha. There too, my
sons will be persons of great prowess. They will be Paraéara,
Garga, Bhargava and Argiras—all brahmins well versed in the
Vedas, exalted with the strength of their penance, and capable
of cursing and blessing. Attaining the path of meditation in the
the manner prescribed in the yogic system those ascetics will
go to Rudraloka never to return.

48-51. In the tenth Dvapara age, the sage Tripada will be the
Vyasa. Then I will be born as a brahmin sage on the excellent

105 Kapila is considered as the founder of the Samkhya system of
philosophy. Asuri and his pupil Pajicadikha, like the founder-teacher Kapila,
are known only by their names. Perhaps they preached their cult by oral
transmission, Their works, if any, are lost to us.

=== PAGE 99 ===

Incarnations of Siva 93

hill Bhrgutunga,!°* a beautiful peak of the Himalayas. That
peak adored by Devas is well known through the name of sage
Bhrgu. There too my suns will be steadfast in their holy rites.
They will be known Balabandhu, Niramitra, Ketubhrnga and
Tapodhana. They will be yogic and noble souls, endowed with
penance and yoga. With their sins burned through penance
they will go to Rudraloka.

52-54. In the eleventh Dvapara age, Trivrata will become
Vyasa. Then I will be born at Gangadvara in'®? the Kali age
as a person of great splendour named Ugra, famous in all the
worlds. There too I will have four sons of great prowess, viz.—
LamLodara, Lambaksa, Lambakega and Pralambaka. After
attaining the yoga of MaheSvara they will go to Rudra’s
world.

55-58. Inthe twelfth cycle the sage Satatejas of great splen-
dour, the best among the wisc, will become Vyasa. At that time,
when Dvapara ends, and Kaliyuga starts, I shall be known by
the name Atri in the forest Haituka!*. There too will be born
my sons who will have ashes for ablution and unguent, who will
be such yogins, and who will be devoted to Rudra’s world.
They will be known as Sarvajfia: Samabuddhi, Sadhya and
Sarva. After attaining the yoga of Mahe vara they wil] go to
Rudraloka.

59-62. When the thirteenth cycle sets in due order, Dharma
under the name Narayana will be the Vy4sa. At that time, I
will be born as the sage Vali in the holy penance grove of Vala-

106. Bhrgutunga is one of the peaks of the Himalayas. According
to Vardha (ch. 146, 45-46) itis a mountain in Nepal on the eastern bank
of the Gandaka river where the celebrated sage Bhrgu had a hermitage. The
Va. (81. 33) locates it near the Vitasté (Jhelum) and Himavat. See GEA MI
part 1. p.70.

107. Ganhgadvara represents modern Haradvara. It is also known
by other names like Haridvira, Mokgadvira, Mayadvara. Cf. SK iv.
1.7.314:

’ But according to SP. KRS.(25.3) Ganga is said to have descended from
Brahmagiri situated in the south (Jbid. 24. 3) in the proximity of Nasik
near Tryambaka. This place of Ganga’s descent is said to be Gangidvira
(Ibid. 27. 6).

108. Haituka vana. It is not identifiable.

=== PAGE 100 ===

94 Lingapurdna

khilya on the mountain Gandhamadana!™. There too those
ascetics will be born as my sons. They will be known as
Sudhama, K4syapa, Vasistha and Virajas. They will all be en-
dowed with the power of great yogas, be devoid of impurities
and will remain celibate. After attaining the yoga of Mahesvara
they will go to the world of Rudra.

63-66. Inthe fourteenth cycle Taraksu will be the Vy4sa.
There too in the final yuga, I will be born in the excellent family
of Angiras under the name Gautama. That penance grove!!®
too will be named after Gautama. There too my sons will be
born in the Kali age. They will be known as Atri, Devasada,
Sravana and Sravisthaka. They will be yogic noble souls, and
endowed with yoga. After attaining the yoga of Mahevara they
will go to Rudraloka.

67-71. When the fifteenth cycle comes in due order, Tray-
yaruni becomes the Vyasa.

I will be born as a brahmin by name Veda iras. Then I
shall have a powerful missile known as Vedasiras. There will
be a hill named Vedafiras!!1 on the banks of the Sarasvati!!2
behind the Himflayan slopes. There also four ascetics will be
my sons, viz., Kuni, Kunibahu, Kuéarira and Kunetra. All of
them will be yogic and noble souls who will remain ascetics
throughout. After attaining the yoga of Mahe‘vara they will go
to Rudraloka.

72-75. In the sixteenth cycle of four yugas when Deva is
the Vyasa, I shall be born by the name Gokarna!! in order to

109. Gandhamiadana. Its location is highly controversial, According
to the Pauranic account this mountain forms the division between Ildvrta
and Bhadraiva to the south of Meru and is renowned for its fragrant
forests.

110, Gautamavana can be placed in the proximity of Brahmagiri near
Tryambaka in which God4vari has its source where the sage Gautama had
its hermitage.

111. Himavat or HimalJaya. This most celebrated mountain forms
the northern boundary of Bharata extending from the eastern to the wes-
tern sea.

112, Sarasvati, This sacred river rises in the Sirmur hills of the
Sivalika range in the Himalayas.

113, Gokarna. The Gokarna forest referred to here is located in the
Western Ghat. This place is sacred to Siva and is celebrated for a jyotir-
linga of Siva. There is also another Gokarna in Nepal on the Bagamatt
river,