=== PAGE 1 ===

THE MAHABHARATA

OF
KRISHNA-DWAIPAYANA VYASA

Translated into English prose from the
original Sanskrit Text.

BY
PRATAP CHANDRA ROY, C. 1. E.

VOL V
BHISHMA PARVA

ORIENTAL PUBLISHING CO.
11D, ARPULI LANE
CALCUTTA-12

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 2 ===

THE MAHABHARATA
BHISHMA PARVA
CONTENTS

SECTION: I—X
Jamvu-Khanda Nirmana Parva
SECTION : XI-XII
Bhumi Parva nee
SECTION : XI_XLII
Bhagavat-Gita Parva a on
SECTION: XLIII
Yudhishthira asks for Krishna's Blessings Parva
SECTION: XLIV—L
1st. Day's War oe vo
SECTION: LI—LV
2nd. Day’s War ae wee
SECTION: LVI—LIX
3rd. Day’s War one cone
SECTION: LX—LXIV
4th. Day’s War oad ove
SECTION: LXV—LXVIII
The Glories of Vasudeva
SECTION : TLxIX LXXIV
5th. Day's War
SECTION: LXXV—LXXX
6th. Day’s War aoe oH
SECTION: LXXXI—LXXXVII
7th, Day’s War -_ we
SECTION: LXXXVIII-XCVII
8th. Day’s War -_ _
SECTION: XCVIII
Duryodhana’s Consultations with Sakuni,
Dussasana and Karna os
SECTION : ‘XCIX-CVIt
9th. Day’s War
SECTION : cvit
Yudhishthira Repairs to Bhishma
SECTION : CIX—CKX

SECTION: CXXI-CXXII
Bhishma’s Bed of Arrow

SECTION ; CXXII_CXXIV

10th. Day’s War

All meet Bhishma

Downloaded from https:/Avww.holybooks.com

1-26

26-31
“32-105
105—111
11137
137152
153—166

167—180

. 180—189

189—201
201—213
213—232

233—262

262—265
265—286
287—292
292—328
328—332

332-336

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 3 ===

THE MAHABHARATA

BHISHMA PARVA

SECTION I
(Qamvu-khanda Nirmana Parva)

Om ! Having bowed down to Narayana, and Nara, the most exalted of
male beings, and also the goddess Saraswati, then must the word Jaya be uttered.

Janamejaya said,—'' How did those heroes, the Kurus, the Pandavas,
and the Somakas, and the high-souled kings assembled together from
various countries, fight ?””

Vaisampayana said,—'‘Listen thou, O lord of the earth, how those
heroes,—the Kurus, the Pandavas, and the Somakas,—fought on the
sacred plain! of the Kurukshetra, Entering Kurukshetra, the Pandavas
endued with great might, along with the Somakas, advanced, desirous of
victory, against the Kauravas. Accomplished in the study of the Vedas,
all (of them) took great delight in battle. Expectant of success in battle,
with their troops (they) faced the fight. Approaching the army of
Dhritarashtra’s son, those (warriors) invincible in battle,? stationed
themselves with their troops on the western part (of the plain), their
faces turned towards the east. Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, caused
tents by thousands to be set up according to rule, beyond the region
called Samantapanchaka. The whole earth seemed then to be empty,
divested of horses and men, destitute of cars and elephants, and with
only the children and the old left (at home). From the whole area of
Jamvudwipa over which the sun sheds his rays,* was collected that force,
O vest of kings. Men of all races, assembled together, occupied an
area extending for many Yojanas over districts, rivers, hills, and woods.
That bull among men, king Yudhishthira, ordered excellent food and
other articles of enjoyment for all of them along with their animals,
And Yudhishthira fixed diverse watch-words for them sothat one
saying this should be known as belonging to the Pandavas. And that
descendant of Kuru’s race also settled names and badges for all of them
for recognition during time of battle.

1 Tapas-kshetra because Kuru, the common ancestor of the rival
houses, performed his ascetic austerities there. Since Kuru’s time, many
ascetics took up their abode there,—T.

2 Some texts have Duddharsham for Duddharshas.—T.
8 Literally, “gives heat."—T.
i *
4 ‘Vara’ is used ore in the SEMA SHARAN AESARCLSAPHES—T,

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 4 ===

2 MAHABHARATA

“Beholding the standard-top of Pritha’s son, the high-souled son of
Dhritarashtra, with a white umbrella held over his head, in the midst of
a thousand elephants, and surrounded by his century of brothers, began
with all the kings (on his side) to array his troops against the son of
Pandu. Seeing Duryodhana, the Panchalas who took delight in battle,
were filled with joy and blew their loud-sounding conches and cymbals
of sweet sounds. Beholding those troops so delighted, Pandu's son and
Vasudeva of great energy had their hearts filled with joy. And those
tigers among men, Vasudeva and Dhananjaya, seated on one car, having
félt great joy, both blew their celestial conches- “ And hearing the blare
of Gigantea and the loud blast of Theodotes belonging unto the two, the
combatants ejected urine and excreta-! As other animals are filled
with fear on hearing the voice of the roaring lion, even so became that
force upon hearing those blasts. A frightful dust arose and nothing
could be seen, for the sun himself, suddenly enveloped by it, seemed to
have set.?, A black cloud poured a shower of flesh and blood over the
troops all around. All this seemed extraordinary. A wind rose there,
bearing along the earth myriads of stony nodules, and afflicting there-
with the combatants by hundreds and thousands. (For all that), O
monarch, both armies, filled with joy, stood addrest for battle, on
Kurukshetra like two agitated oceans. Indeed, that encoounter of the
two armies was highly wonderful, like that of two oceans when the end
of the Yuga is arrived. The whole earth was empty, having only the
children and the old left (at home), in consequence of that large army
mustered by the Kauravas.* Then the Kurus, the Pandavas, and the
Somakas made certain convenants, and settled the rules, O bull of
Bharata’s race, regarding the different kinds of combat. Persons equally
circumstanced must encounter each other, fighting fairly. And if
having fought fairly the combatants withdraw (without fear of molesta-
tion), even that would be gratifying to us» Those who engaged in con-
tests of words should be fought against with words. Those that left the
ranks should never be slain.‘ A car-warrior should have a car-warrior
for his antagonist ; he on the neck of an elephant should have a similar
combatant for his foe; a horse should /be met by a horse, and a foot-
soldier, O Bharata, should be met by a foot-soldier. Guided by considera-
tions of fitness, willingness, daring and might, one should strike another,

1 Both 17 and 18 are read differently by the Burdwan Pundits—T.
2 This sloka is variously read. For bhauman in the first line some
texts read bhimam which I have adopted. For,sahasa in the second line
some texts have rajasa, and then aditye (locative) for ‘adityas.'—T.
3 The Bombay text is evidently faulty here; it repeats the second
elt of she 7th sloka, making the second halt of the 25th the first half of the —
M4th.—T,

4 i.e, strapglempatenrihm ditiea/ishwim holBooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 5 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 8

Biving notice. No one should strike another that is unprepared? or
Panic-struck. One engaged with another, one seeking quarter, one
Tetreating, one whose weapon is rendered unfit, uncased in mail, should
never be struck. Car-drivers, animals (yoked to cars or carrying wea-
pons) men engaged in the transport of weapons.” players on drums and
blowers of conches should never be struck. Having made these conve-
nants, the Kurus, and the Pandavas, and the Somakas wondered much,
Sazing at each other. And having stationed (their forces thus), those
-bulls among men, those high-souled ones, with their troops, became
8lad at heart, their joy being reflected on their countenances,"3

SECTION II

Vaisampayana said,—"Seeing then the two armies (standing) on
the east and the west for the fierce battle that was impending, the holy
Rishi Vyasa the son of Satyavati, that foremost of all persons acquainted
with the Vedas, that grandsire of the Bharatas, conversant with the past,
the present, and the future, and beholding everything as if it were
Present before his eyes, said these words in private unto the royal son
of Vichitravirya who was then distressed and giving way to sorrow,
reflecting on the evil policy of his sons.

“Vyasa said‘<“O king, thy sons and the other monarchs have their
hour arrived.‘ Miustered in battle they will kill one another. O
Bharata, their hout having come, they will all perish, Bearing in mind
the changes brought ‘on by time, do not yield thy heart to grief, O king,
if thou wish to see them (fighting) in battle, I will, O son, grant thee
vision. Behold the battle.”

“Dhritarashtra said—'O best of regenerate Rishi, I like not to .
behold the slaughter of kinsmen. I shall, however, through thy Potency
hear of this battle minutely.”

Vaisampayana continued.—"Upon his not wishing to see the battle
but wishing to hear of it, Vyasa, that lord of boons, gave a boon to
Sanjaya. (And addressing Dhritarashta he said),—'This Sanjaya, O
king, will describe the battle to thee. Nothing in the whole battle will
be beyond this one’s eyes,’ Endued, O king with celestial vision, Sanjaya

1 Literally, “confiding."—T,
2 The Bombay text has Castropanayishu ; the Bengal texts have
Oastropojibishu.—T.

_. 8. Ibis impossible to notice all the variations of reading occuring in
this section without considerably swelling the notes. I have accordingly
left a good many unnoticed.—T,

4 Rather, “have their periods run out.”—T,
Downloaded from https:/www‘holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 6 ===

4 MAHABHARATA

will narrate the battle to thee. He will have knowledge of everything.
Manifest or concealed, (happening) by day or by night, even that which
is thought of in the mind, Sanjaya shall know everything. ‘Weapons
will not cut him and exertion will not fatigue him. This son of Gaval-
gani will come out of the battle with life. As regards myself, O bull of
Bharata's race, the fame of these Kurus, as also of all the Pandavas, I
will spread. Do not grieve. This is destiny, O tiger among men. It
behoveth thee not to give way to grief. It is not capable of being pre-
vented. As regards victory, it is there where righteousness is.’ ” 4
Vaisampayana continued,—"That highly-blessed and holy grandsire
of the Kurus, having said so, once more addressed Dhritarashtra and
said.—'Great will the slaughter be, O monarch, in this battle. I see
here also (numerous) omens indicative of terror. Hawks and vultures,
and crows and herons, together with cranes, are alighting on the tops
of trees and gathering in flocks. These birds, delighted at the prospect
of battle, are looking down (on the field) before them. Carnivorous
beasts will feed on the flesh of elephants and steeds. Fierce herons,
foreboding terror, and uttering merciless cries, are wheeling across the
centre towards the southern region. In both the twilights, prior and
posterior, I daily behold, O Bharata, the sun during his rising and setting
to be covered by headless trunks. Tricoloured clouds with their ex-
tremities white and red and necks black, charged with lightning, and
resembling maces (in figure) envelope the sun in both twilights. I have
seen the sun, the moon, and the stars to be all blazing. No difference
in their aspect isto be noted in the evening. I have seen this all day
and all night. All this forbodes fear. On even the fifteenth night of the
lighted fortnight in (the month of) Kartika, the moon, divested of
splendour, became invisible, or of the hue of fire, the firmament being
of the hue of the lotus. Many heroic lords of earth,—kings and princes,
—endued with great bravery and possessed of arms resembling maces,
will be slain and sleep, lying down on the earth, Daily I notice in the
sky during night time the fierce cries of battling boars and cats.? The
images of gods and goddesses sometimes laugh, sometimes tremble, and
sometimes again these vomit blood through their mouths and sometimes
they sweat and sometimes fall down. O monarch, drums, without
being beaten, give sounds, and the great cars of Kshatriyas move without
(being drawn by) animals yoked to them. Kokilas, wood-peckers, jaws,
water-cocks, parrots, crows, and peacocks, utter terrible cries. Here
and there, cavalry soldiers, cased in mail, armed with weapons, send

Ji The second half of the 9th, and the whole of the 10th sloka are
omitted in the Bengal texts.—T.
2 The Bombay text reads pralahshaye for prajashaye. 1 have adopted
the tormer.—T.Downloaded from https:/Mvww.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 7 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 6

forth fierce shouts. At sun-rise flights of insects, by hundreds are seen.
In both twilights, the cardinal quarters seem to be ablaze, and the
clouds, O Bharata, shower dust and flesh. She, O king, who is celebrated
over the three worlds and is applauded by the righteous, even that
(constellation) Arundhati keepeth (her lord) Vasistha on her back. The
planet Sani also. O king, appeareth afflicting (the constellation) Rohini.
The sign of the deer in the moon hath deviated from its usual position.
A great terror is indicated. Even though the sky is cloudless, a terrible
roar is heard there, The animals are all weeping and their tears are
falling fast.’ "

SECTION III

“Vyasa said,—'Asses are taking births in kine. Some are having
sexual pleasure with mothers. The trees in the forests are exhibiting
unseasonable flowers and fruits. Women quick with child, and even
those that are not so, are giving birth to monsters. Carnivorous beasts,
mingling with (carnivorous) birds, are feeding together. Ill-omened
beasts, some having three horns, some with four eyes, some with five
legs, some with two sexual organs, some with two heads, some with two
tails, some having fierce teeth, are being born, and with mouths wide
open are uttering unholy cries. Horses with three legs, furnished with
crests, having four teeth, and endued with horns, are also being born.O
king, in thy city is also seen that the wives of many utterers of Brahma
are bringing forth Garudas and peacocks, The mare is bringing forth the
cow-calf and the bitch is bringing forth, O king, jackals and cocks, and
antelopes and parrots are all uttering inauspicious cries.! Certain women
are bringing forth four or five daughters (at a time), and these as soon
as they are born, dance and sing and laugh. The members of the lowest
orders are laughing and dancing and singing, and thus indicating direful
consequences. Infants, as if urged by death, are drawing armed images,
and are running against one another, armed with clubs, and desirous of
battle are also breaking down the towns (they erect in sport), Lotuses
of different kinds and lilies are Srowing on trees. Strong winds are
blowing fiercely and the dust ceaseth not, The earth is frequently trem-
bling, and Rahu approacheth towards the sun. The white planet (Ketu)
stayeth, having passed beyond the constellation Chitra. All this Parti-
cularly bodeth the destruction of the Kurus. A fierce comet riseth,
afflicting the constellation Pusya. This great planet will cause frightful
mischief to both the armies. Mars wheeleth towards Magha and
Vrihaspati (Jupiter) towards Sravana. The sun's offspring (Sani) approach-

1 Both the Bengal and the Bombay editions have Kukkuran for
Kukkutan as the Burdwan Pundits correct it. A bitch producing dogs and
bitches would be ng anggaabyitrom https:/www.holybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 8 ===

6 MAHABHARATA

ing towards the constellation Bhaga, afflicteth it. The planet ; Sukra,
ascending towards Purva Bhadra, shineth brilliantly, and wheeling
towards the Uttara Bhadra, looketh towards it, having effected a junc-
tion (with a smaller planet), The white planet (Ketu), blazing up like
fire mixed with smoke, stayeth, having attacked the bright constellation
Jeshtha that is sacred to Indra. The constellation Dhruva, blazing
fiercely, wheeleth towards the right. Both the moon and the sun are
afflicting Rohini. The fierce planet (Rahu) hath taken up its position
between the constellations Chitra and Swati!’ The red-bodied (Mars)
possessed of the effulgence of fire, wheeling circuitously, stayeth ina line
with the constellation Sravana over-ridden by Vrihaspati. The earth
that produceth particular crops.at particular seasons is now covered
with the crops of every season.” Every barley stalk is graced with five
ears, and every paddy stalk witha hundred. They that, are the best
of creatures in the worlds and upon whom depends the universe, viz,
kine, when milked after the calves have their suck, yield only blood.
Radiant rays of light emanate from bows, and swords blaze forth brilli-
antly. It is evident that the weapons behold (before them) the battle,
asif it were already arrived, The hue of weapons and the water, as
also of coats of mail and standards, is like that of fire. A great slaughter
will take place. In this battle? O Bharata, of the Kurus with the
Pandavas, the ‘earth, O monarch, will bea river of blood with the
standards (of warriors) as its rafts. Animals and birds on all sides, with
mouths blazing like fire, uttering fierce cries, and displaying these evil
omens, are foreboding terrible consequences. A (fierce) bird with but
one wing, one eye, andone leg, hovering over the sky in the night,
screameth frightfully in wrath, asif for making the hearers vomit
blood.‘ It seemeth, O great king, that all weapons are now blazing
with radiance. The effulgence of the constellation known by the name
of the seven high-souled Rishis, hath been dimmed. Those two blazing
planets, viz., Vrihaspati and Sani, having approached the constellation
called Visakha, have become stationary there for a whole year. Three

1 Unlike the Bengal editions, the Bombay edition correctly includes
this sloka, or rather half sloka, within the 17th, making the 17th a triplet
instead of a couplet. For the well-known word Dhishthitas, however, the
Bombay text has Vishthitas.—T.

2 The Bombay text reads Paricchanna for Paricchinna. The former
is better.—T.

3 Vaisase is explained by Nilakantha as Virodhe, Conttavarta—a
river having bloody eddies.—T.

4 Conitam cchardayanniva. I have adopted Nilakantha’s explanation,
The Burdwan Pundits take it as referring to “weapons” instead of ‘‘hearers.”
The passage, however, may mean that the bird screams so frightfully ag
if it vomits blood. The only thing that militates against this interprete-
tion is that cchardayan isa causal verb, In the Mahabharata, however,

causal forme are freaBan Sed hSH AGM AAERGRRERRL RTT

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 9 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 7

lunations twice meeting together in course of the same lunar fortnight,
the duration of the latter is shortened by two days. On the thirteenth
day therefore, from the first lunation, according as it is the day of the
full moon or the new moon, the moon and the sun are afflicted by Rahu.
Such strange eclipses, both lunar and solar, forebode a great slaughter.
All ‘the quarters of the earth, being overwhelmed by showers of dust,
look inauspicious. Fierce clouds, portentous of danger, drop bloody
showers during the night. Rahu of fierce deeds is also, O monarch.
afflicting the constellation Kirtika, Rough winds, protending fierce
danger, are constantly blowing. All these beget a war characterised by
many sad incidents.? The constellations are divided into three classes,
Upon one or another of each class, a planet of evil omen has shed its

influence, foreboding terrible dangers.? A lunar fortnight had hitherto
consisted of fourteen days, or fifteen days (as usual), or sixteen days.
This, however, I never knew that the day of new moon would be on
the thirteenth day from the first lunation, or the day of full moon on
the thirteenth day from the same. And yet in course of the same month
both the moon and the sun have undergone eclipses on the thirteenth
days from the day of the first lunation.* The sun and the moon there-
fore, by undergoing eclipses on unusual days,® will cause a great
slaughter of the creatures of the earth. Indeed, Rakshasas, though drink-
ing blood by mouthful, will yet not be satiated, The great rivers are
flowing in opposite directions. The waters of rivers have become

1 This sloka is omitted in many editions, though it is certainly genuine,
I have rendered it very freely, as otherwise it would be unintelligible. The
fact is, three lanations twice meeting together in course of the same lunar
fortnight is very rare. The lunar fortnight (Paksha) being then reduced by
two days, the day of full moon or that of new moon, instead of being (as
usual) the fifteenth day from the first lunation becomes the thirteenth day,
Lunar eclipses always occur on days of the full moon, while solar eclipses
On those of the new moon. Such eclipses, therefore, Ccouring on days
removed from the days of the first lunation by thirteen instead of (as usual)
fifteen days, are very extraordinary occurrences.—T,

2 Vishamam is battle or war, and akranda is weeping or productive of
grief. The latter word may also mean a fierce battle. If understood in this
sense, Vishamam may be taken ag indicating hostility, or absence of peace.—T

3 Nilakantha explains this ina long note the substance of which is
appended below. Kings are divided into three classes, viz., owners of
elephants (Gagapati), owners of horses (Aswapati), and owners of men
(Narapati). If an evif-omened planet (papa-graha) sheds its influence upon
any of the nine constellations beginning with Aswini, it forebodes danger to
Aswapatis ; if on any of the nine beginning with Magha, it forebodes danger
to.Gajapatis ; and if on any of the nine beginning with Mula, it forebodes
danger to Narapatis. What Vyasa says here, therefore, is that one or ano-
ther papagraha has shed its influence upon one another of each of the three
classes of constellations, thus foreboding danger to all classes of kings.—T.

4 Vide note ante—T.

5 Aparvani, i.¢., not on Parva days or days of full moon and new moon
48 ordinarily coming. The Bombay edition, after aparyani, reads grahenau
tau. A better reading unquestionably grastavetau, as many Bengal texts
have.—T. Downloaded from https:/Avww.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 10 ===

8 MAHABHARATA

bloody. The wells, foaming up, are bellowing like bulls.’ Meteors,
effulgent like Indra’s thunder-bolt, fall with loud hissess.2. When this
night passeth away, evil consequences will overtake you. People, for
meeting together, coming out their houses with lighted brands, have
still to encounter a thick gloom all round.* Great Rishis have said that
in view of such circumstances the earth drinks the blood of thousands
of kings. From the mountains of Kailasa and Mandara and Himavat
thousands of explosions are heard and thousands of summits are tum-
bling down. In consequence of the Earth's trembling, each of the four
oceans having swelled greatly, seems ready to transgress its continents
for afflicting the Earth.‘ Fierce winds charged with pointed pebbles
are blowing, crushing mighty trees. In villages and towns trees, ordi-
nary and sacred, are falling down, crushed by mighty winds and struck
by lightning. The (sacrificial), fire, when Brahmanas pour libations on
it, becomes blue, or red, or yellow. Its flames bend towards the left,
yielding a bad scent, accompanied by loud reports. Touch, smell, and
taste have, O monarch, become what they were not. The standards
(of warriors), repeatedly trembling are emitting smoke. Drums and
cymbals are throwing off showers of coal-dust. And from the tops of
tall trees all around, crows, wheeling in circles from the left, are uttering
fierce cries. Allof them again are uttering frightful cries of pakka,
pakka and are perching upon the tops of standards for the destruction of
the kings. Vicious elephants, trembling all over, are running hither and
thither, urinating and ejecting excreta. The horses are all melancholy,
while the elephants are resorting to the water. Hearing all this, let that
be done which is suitable, so that, O Bharata, the world may not be
depopulated.’ ”

Vaisampayana continued,—“Hearing these words of his father,
Dhritarashtra said,—'I think all this hath been ordained of old. A great
slaughter of human beings will take place. Ifthe kings die in battle
observing the duties of the Kshatriya order, they will then, attaining to
the regions reserved for heroes, obtain only happiness. These tigers
among men, casting away their lives in great battle, will win fame in
this and great bliss for ever in the next world.’

____ 1 Pratisrotas ; strict grammar would require pratisrotasas , the mean-
ing is that those that flowed east to west now flow west to east, &. For
kurddanti some texts have narddanti which is certainly better. Kurddanti
means play or sport ; wells playing like bulls would be unmeaning, unless
the sport is accompanied by bellowing.—T.

2 The Burdwan Pundits reads suskasani for sakrasani, The latter,
however, is the true reading.—T,

3 The original is very obscure. Uluka is explained by Nilakantha as
@ brand (used for want of lambs). The line, however, is elliptical, The
Burdwan Pundits introduce an entirely new line.—T.

4 Mohabhuta iDoweliadgdyrent hjtes/yww.holybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 11 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 9

Vaisampayana continued,—"'O best of kings, thus addressed by his son
Dhritarashtra, that prince of poets, the Muni (Vyasa) concentrated his
mind in supreme Yoga, Having contemplated for only a short space of
time, Vyasa once more said,—'Without doubt, O king of kings, it is Time
that destroyeth the universe. It is Time also that createth the worlds,
There is nothing here that is eternal. Show the path of righteousness to
the Kurus, to thy kinsmen, relatives, and friends. Thou art competent
to restrain them. The slaughter of kinsmen hath been said to be sinful.
Do not do that which is disagreeable to me. O king, Death himself
hath been born in the shape of thy son. Slaughter is never applauded
in the Vedas. It can never be beneficial. The usages of one’s race are
as one’s own body. Those usages slay him that destroyeth them. For
the destruction of this race and of those kings of the earth it is Time
that maketh thee deviate into the wrong path like one in distress,
although thou art competent (to walk along the path of righteousness).
O king, in the shape of thy kingdom hath calamity come to thee. Thy
virtue is sustaining a very great diminution. Show what righteousness
is unto thy sons. O thou that art invincible, of what value is that
kingdom to thee which bringeth sin to thee? Take care of thy good
name, thy virtue, and thy fame. Thou wilt then win heaven. Let the
Pandavas have their kingdom, and let the Kauravas have peace.”

“While that best of Brahmanas was saying these words in a sorrowful
tone, Dhritarashtra, the son of Amvika, accomplished in speech, once
more addressed him, saying.—'My knowledge of life and death is similar
to thine. The truth is known to me as regards these. Man, however,
in what concerns his own interests, is deprived of judgment. O sire,
know me to be one who is an ordinary person. Of immeasurable power
thou art. I pray thee to extend thine towards us. Of soul under
complete control, thou art our refuge and instructor. My sons are not
obedient to me, O great Rishi, My understanding too is not inclined to
commit sin.? Thou art the cause of the fame, the achievements, and
the inclination for virtue, of the Bharatas. Thou art the reverend
grandsire of both the Kurus and the Pandavas.’

“Vyasa said.—'O royal son of Vichitravirya, tell me freely what is in
thy mind. I will remove thy doubts.”

“Dhritarashtra said—'O holy one, I desire to hear from thee of all

those indications that happen unto those that become victorious in
battle.”

1 Parena is explained by Nilakentha as atisayena.—T.

2 Some of the Bengal texts read anugraham (making the initial a silent
after maharshe (in the vocative case). There can be no doubt however, that
this is incorrect. The true reading is nadharmam which I have adopted.
The Bombay text reads na cha dharmam. The introduction of the particle
cha needlessly makes the line incorrect as to metre.—T

a Downloaded from https:/Avww.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 12 ===

10 MAHABHARATA

“Vyasa said,—'The (sacred) fire assumes a cheerful radiance, Its
light ascends upwards. Its flame bends towards the right. It blazes up
without being smoky. The libations poured on it yield a fragrant scent,
It is said that these are the indications of future success. The conches
and cymbals yield sounds that are deep and loud. The Sun as well as
the Moon gives pure rays It is said that these are the indications of
future success. Crows, whether stationary or on their wings, utter
cries that are agreeable. They again that are behind, urge the warriors
to advance; while they that are ahead, forbid all advance.’ Where
vultures, swans, parrots, cranes, and wood-peckers utter delightful cries,
and wheel towards the right, the Brahmanas say that their victory in
battle is certain. They whose divisions, in consequence of ornaments,
coats of mail, and standards, or the melodious neigh of ‘their steeds,
become resplendent and incapable of being gazed at, always conquer
their foes. They who utter cheerful shouts, those warriors, O Bharata,
whose energies are not damped and whose garlands do not fade, always
cross the ocean of battle. They who utter cheerful shouts having
penetrated into the divisions of the foe, who utter even kind words,? to
the enemy, and who, before striking, forewarn the foe, win victory.
The objects of hearing, vision, taste, touch, and smell, without under-
going any change for the worse, become auspicious. This also is another
indication of a victorious army, viz., there is joy among the combatants
at all time. This also is another indication of success, viz, the winds
that blow, the clouds, and the birds, all become favourable ; while the
clouds (so favourable) and the rain-bows drop beneficial showers. These,
O king, are the indications of armies to be crowned with victory, while
O monarch, all these become otherwise in the case of those that are
about to be destroyed. Whether the army be small or large, cheerful-
ness, as an attribute of the combatants, is said to be a certain indication
of victory. One soldier, struck with panic, can cause even a large army
to take fright and fly. And when an army, struck with panic, takes to
flight, it causes even heroic warriors to take fright. Ifa large army is
once broken and put to rout, it cannot like a herd of deer disordered in
fright or a mighty current of water be easily checked. Ifa large army
is once routed, it is incapable of being rallied; on the other hand,
beholding it broken, even those well-skilled in battle, O Bharata, become
heartless. Beholding soldiers struck with fear and flying, the panic

__ 1. The second line of the 67th sloka is very obsoure. I have followed
Nilakantha in translating it thus. The sense seems to be, that when crows
hover behind an army, that is an auspicious sign; while it is an inauspi-
cious sign if they are seen ahead, Iam not sure that Nilakantha is right
in taking the pronoun ye as referring to even crows.—T

2%. Suob as “en's abd lar BBINUI AR GeBEaR, soon.” &o,—T,

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 13 ===

BHISHMA PARVA li

spreads in other directions, and soon, O king, the whole army is broken
and flies in all directions. And when an army is routed, even brave
leaders, O king, at the head of large divisions consisting of the four
kinds of forces, are incapable of rallying them. An intelligent man,
always exerting himself with activity, should strive (to win success) by
the aid of means.’ It is said that that success which is won by negotia-
tion and other means is the very best. That which is achieved by
producing disunion (among the foe ) is indifferent, While that success,
O king, which is won by battle, is the worst. In battle are many evils,
the inital one, as it is said, being slaughter. Even fifty brave men who
know one another, who are undepressed, who are free from family ties,
and who are firmly resolved, can crush a large army. Even five, six,
seven men, who are unretreating, win victory. Vinata’s son Garuda, O
Bharata, beholding even a large concourse of birds, asketh not the aid of
many followers (to vanquish them). The strength in number, therefore
of an army is not always the cause of victory. Victory is uncertain, It
depends on chance, Even they that become victorious have to sustain
loss.”

SECTION IV

Vaisampayana said,—'‘Having said these words unto Dhritarashtra,
Vyasa took his departure. And Dhritarashtra also, having heard those
words, began to reflect in silence. And having reflected for only a short
space of time, he began to sigh repeatedly. And, soon, O bull of Bhara-
ta's race, the king asked Sanjaya of soul worthy of praise,—saying,—'O
Sanjaya, these kings, these lords of earth, so brave and taking delight in
battle, are for smiting one another with weapons of diverse kinds, being
prepared to lay down their very lives for the sake of earth. Incapable
of being restrained, they are, indeed, smiting one another for increasing
the population of Yama's domain. Desirous of prosperity connected
with the possession of earth they are incapable of bearing one another,
I, therefore, think that earth must be possessed of many attributes.
Tell meall these, O Sanjaya, Many thousands, many millions, many
tens of millions, many hundreds of millions, heroic men have come
together at Kurujangala. I desire to hear, O Sanjaya, with accurate
details, about the situation and dimensions of those countries and cities
from which they have come. Through the potency of that regenerate
Rishi Vyasa of immeasurable energy, ‘thou art endued with the lamp of
celestial perception and the eye of knowledge.

“Sanjaya said,—'O thou of great wisdom, I will recount to thee the

1 This line is omitted in many of the Bengal texts except the Burdwan

one —T.
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 14 ===

12 MAHABHARATA

merits of earth according to my knowledge. Behold them with thy eye
of wisdom. I bow to thee, O bull of Bharata’s race. Creatures in this
world are of two kinds, mobile and immobile. Mobile creatures are
of three kinds according to their birth, viz., oviparous, viviparous, and
those engendered by heat and damp. Of mobile creatures, O king, the

foremost are certainly those called viviparous. Of viviparous creatures ~

the foremost are men and animals. Animals, O king, of diverse forms,
are of fourteen species. Seven have their abodes in the woods, and seven
of these are domestic. Lions, tigers, boars, buffaloes, and elephants
as also bears and apes, are, O king, regarded as wild. Kine, goats, sheep,
men, horses, mules, and asses,—these seven amongst animals are reckoned
as domestic by the learned. These fourteen, O king, complete the tale
of domestic and wild animals, mentioned, O lord of earth, in the Vedas,
and on which the sacrifices rest. Of creatures that are domestic, men
are foremost, while lions are the foremost of those that have their abode
in the woods, All creatures support their life by living upon one another.
Vegetables are said to be immobile, and they are of four species viz.,
trees, shrubs, creepers, creeping plants existing for only a year, and all
stemless plants of the grass species.! Of mobile and immobile creatures,
there are thus one less twenty; and as regards their universal consti-
tuents, there are five. Twenty-four in all, these are described as Gayatré
(Brahma) as is well-known to all.2 He who knows these truly to be the
sacred Gayatri possessed of every virtue, is not liable, O best of the
Bharatas, to destruction in this world. Everything springeth from the
earth and everything, when destroyed, mergeth into the Earth, The
Earth is the stay and refuge of all creatures, and the Earth is eternal. He
that hath the Earth, hath the entire universe with its mobile and im-
mobile population. It is for this that longing for (the possession of the)
Earth, kings slay one another.*’

1 Nilakantba explains these five species thus :—trees such as the pee-
pul; gulma (shrub), as kusa, kasa, &¢., growing from a clump underneath ;
creepers, such as all plants growing upon the soil but requirnig some
support to twine round; Valli, those that creep on the earth and live for a
year only, such, as the gourd, the pumpkin, etc., and lastly, Trina, such as
grass and all plants that are stemless, having only their barks and leaves T

2 When Gayatri, or Brahma or the Universe, is mentioned, these
twenty-four are indicated, five of which exist independently, the remaining
nineteen being the result of five in those various proportions—T.

3 This seotion inthe Bombay text consists also of 21 slokas in all,
Many of the slokas, however, alter the 10th, are given in a most incorrect
order. Before completing the tale of the mobile creatures and their two
divisions, domestic and wild, the Bombay text introduces the slokas about
the vegetable creation distinctly included within the head “immobile.” The
fact is, where the arrangement of the slokas is concerned, the Bengal texts
are generally supeflowtoaded Bombans dwewtplybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 15 ===

SECTION V

“Dhritarashtra said,—'The names of rivers and mountains, O Sanjaya,
as also of provinces, and all other things resting on the earth, and their
dimensions, O thou that are acquainted with the measures of things of
the earth in its entirety and the forests, O Sanjaya, recount to me in
detail.”

“Sanjaya said,—'O great king, all things in the universe, in conse-
quence of the presence (in them) of the five elements, have been said
to be equal by the wise. These elements, are space, air, fire, water,
and earth. Their (respective) attributes are sound, touch, vision, taste,
and scent. Every one of these elements possesses ( in addition to what
is especially its own ) the attribute or attributes of that or those com-
ing before it. The earth, therefore, is the foremost of them all, possessing
as it does the attributes of all the other four, besides what is specially is
own, as said by Rishis acquainted with truth,’ There are four attributes
O king, in water. Scent does not exist init. Fire has three attributes
viz,,sound, touch, and vision, Sound and touch belong to air, while
space has sound alone, These five attributes, O king, exist (in this way)
in the five principal elements depending on which all creatures in the
universe exist. They exist separately and independently when there is
homogeneity in the universe? When, however, these do not exist in
their natural state but with one another, then creatures spring into life,
furnished with bodies. This is never otherwise. The elements are des-
troyed, in the order of the one succeeding megring in to the one that
proceeds; and they spring also into existence, one arising from the one
before it. Allofthese are immeasurable, their forms being Brahma
itself. In the universe are seen creatures consisting of the five elements.
Men endeavour to ascertain their proportions by exercising their reason.
Those matters, however, that are inconceivable, should never be sought
to be solved by reason. That which is above (human) nature is an indi-
cation of the inconceivable.

“*O son of Kuru's race, I will, however, describe to thee the island
called Sudarsana. This island, O king, is circular and of the form of a
wheel, It is covered with rivers and other pieces of water and with moun-

1 Ibave rendered 4 and 5a little to freely. The language of the ori-
ginal is very terse.

2 Samyam is homogeneity. The allusicn is to the state of the universe
before creation, when there exists nothing but a homogeneous mass or
Brahma alone. The first compound of the 2nd line is read differently. The
Burdwan Pandits and the Bombay edition read anyonyam (in the accusa-
tive) ; many of the Bengal texts read anyonyena (in the instrumental). The
meaning is scarcely affected by this difference of reading.—T.

8 The order of destruction is that earth merges into water, water into
fire, fire into sir, and air into space. And so the order of birth is that from
space arises air, from air arises fire, from fire arises water, and from water

arises earth. —T. 1. mloaded from https:/www.holybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 16 ===

14 MAHABHARATA

tains looking like masses of clouds, and with cities and many delight-
ful provinces, It is also full of trees furnished with flowers and fruits,
and with crops of diverse kindsand other wealth. And it is surrounded
on all sides with the salt ocean, Asa person can see his own face ina
mirror, even so is the island called Sudarsana seen in the lunar disc.
Two of its parts seem to bea peepul tree, while two others look like a
large hare. It is surrounded on all sides with an assemblage of every
kind of deciduous plants. Besides these portions, the rest is all water.
What remains I will describe to thee shortly. The rest I will speak of
afterwards. Listen now to this that I describe in brief.”

SECTION VI

“Dhritarashtra said.—'Thou art intelligent, O Sanjaya, and acquain-
ted with the truth (about everything). Thou hast duly given a descrip-
tion of the island in brief. Tell us now of the island in detail. Tell us
now of the dimension of the expanse of land that lies in the portion
looking like a hare. Thou mayst then speak of the portion resembling
peeppala tree.” 8

Vaisampayana said,—Thus addressed by the king, Sanjaya began
to say.

“Sanjaya said,—'Stretching from east to west, are these six mountains
that are equal’ and that extend from the eastern to the western ocean.
They are Himavat, Hemakuta, that best of mountains called Nishadha,
Nila abounding with stones of lapis lazuli, Sweta white as the moon, and
the mountains called Sringavat composed of all kinds of metals.* These
are the six mountains, O king, which are always the resorts of Siddhas
and Charanas, The space lying between each of these measuresa
thousand Fojanae, and thereon are many delightful kingdoms. And these
divisions are called Varshas, O Bharata. In all those kingdoms reside
creatures of diverse species. This ( the land where we are ) is in the
Varsha that is called after Bharata. Next to it (northwards) is the
Varsha called after Himavat. The land that is beyond Hemakuta is
called Hraivarsha, South of the Nila range and on the north of the Nisha-
dha is a mountain, O king, called Malyavat that stretches from east
to west. Beyond Malyavat northwards is the mountain called Gandha-

1 Nilakantha explains the last six slokas as having an esoteric meaning.
By Sudarsana he understands the mind. The rest is explained consistently.
Interpretations, however, are not rare among commentators seeking to put
sense in non-senge.—T.

2 The Bombay text reads Varsha parsatas for parvatas samas.—T.
8 For Pinaddha occurring in the Bengal texts, the Bombay edition
reads Vichitra,—T, : . re
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 17 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 15

madana.! Between these two (viz., Malyavat and Gandhamadana) isa
globular mountain called Meru made of gold. Effulgent as the morning
sun, it is like fire without smoke.? It is eighty-four thousand Yojanas
high, and, O king, its depth also is eighty-four Yojanas, It standeth
bearing the worlds above, below and transversely. Besides Meru are
situated, O lord, these four islands, viz,, Bhadraswa, and Ketumala,
and Jamvudwipa otherwise called Bharata, and Uttar-Kuru which is
the abode of persons who have achieved the merit of righteousness. The
bird Sumukha, the son of Suparna, beholding that all the birds on Meru
were of golden plumage, reflected that he should leave that mountain
inasmuch as there was no difference between the good, middling, and
bad birds. That foremost of luminaries, the sun, always cicumambu-
lates Meru, as also the moon with (his) attendant constellation, and the
Wind-god too. The mountain, O king, is endued with celestial fruits
and flowers, and it is covered all over with mansions made of furnished
gold. There, on that mountain, O king, the celestials, the Gandharvas,
the Asuras, and the Rakshasas, accompanied by the tribes of Apsaras,
always sport- There Brahman, and Rudra and also Sakra the chief of
the celestials, assembled together, performed diverse kinds of sacrifices
with plentiful gifts) Tumvuru, and Natada and Viswavasu, and the
Hahas andthe Huhus, repairing thither, adored the foremost of the
celestials with diverse hymns. The high-souled seven Rishis, and
Kasyapa the lord of creatures, repair thither, blessed be thou, on every
parva -day.* Upon the summit of that mountain, Usanas, otherwise
called the Poet, sporteth with the Daityas (his disciples). The jewels
and gems (that we see) and all the mountains abounding in precious
stones are of Meru. Therefrom a fourth part is enjoyed by the holy
Kuvera. Only a sixteenth part of that wealth he giveth unto men.
On the northern side of Meru is a delightful and excellent forest of
Karnikaras, covered with the flowers of every season,® and occupying a
range of hills. There the illustrious Pasupati himself, the creator of all
things, surrounded by his celestial attendants and accompanied by Uma,
sporteth bearing a chain of Karnikara flowers (on his neck) reaching
down to his feet, and blazing with radiance with his three eyes resem-
bling three risen suns. Him Siddhas truthful in speech, of excellent vows

1 The Bengal texts adda line here which is properly omitted in the
Bombay edition.—T.

2, Atterthe 10th occursa line in the Bengal text which is evidently
vicious—T.

3 Day of the full moon and that of the new moon.—T.

4 The Bengal texts, except the Burdwan one, have divi for Daityas,
of course, the latter reading is correct.

The Bombay text has Sarvatas (which is better) for Sarvata in the
Bengal texts.—T | Downloaded from https:/www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 18 ===

16 MAHABHARATA

and austere ascetic penances, can behold. Indeed, Maheswara is incap-
able of being seen by persons of wicked conduct, From the summit of
that mountain, like a stream of milk, O ruler of men, the sacred and
auspicious Ganga, otherwise called Bhagirathi, adored by the most
righteous, of universal form and immeasurable and issuing out with
terrific noise, falleth with impetuous force on the delightful lake of
Chandramas.! Indeed that sacred lake, like an ocean, hath been formed
by Ganga herself. (While leaping from the mountains), Ganga, incap-
able of being supported by even the mountains, was held for a hundred
thousand years by the bearer of Pinaka on his head.? On the western
side of Meru, Oking, is Ketumala.* And there also is Jamvukhanda,
Both are great seats of humanity, O king.‘ There, O Bharata, the
measure of human life is ten thousand years. The men are all of a
golden complexion, and the women are like Apsaras, And all the resi-
dents are without sickness, without sorrow, and always cheerful. The
men born there are of the effulgence of melted gold. On the summits
of Gandhamadana, Kuvera the lord of the @uhyakas, with many
Rakshasas and accompained by tribes of Apsaras, passeth his time in joy:
Besides Gandhamadana there are many smaller mountains and hills. The
measure of human life there is eleven thousand years, There, O king,
the men are cheerfull, and endued with great energy and great strength
and the women are all of the complexion of the lotus and highly
beautiful. Beyond Nila is (the Varsha called) Sweta, beyond Sweta is
(the Varsha called) Hiranyaka, Beyond Hiranyaka is (the Varsha called)
Airavata covered with provinces. The last Varsha in the (extreme) north
and Bharata's Varsha in the ( extreme ) south are both, O king, of the
form ofa bow. These five Varshas (viz, Sweta, Hiranyaka, Hlavrita,
Harivarsha, and Haimavat-varsha) are in the middle, of which Hlavrita
exists in the very middle of all. Amongst these seven Varshas (the five
already mentioned and Airavata and Bharata) that which is further north
excels the one to its immediate south in respect of these attributes, viz.,
the period of life, stature, health, righteousness, pleasure, and profit.
In these Varshas, O Bharata, creatures (though of diverse species) yet,

1 In the first line of 23, the Bengal texts read Sirasas ( ablative ) for
Sikhhrat of the Bombay edition. In the last line of 29 also, the Bombay
text has plavantiva-pravegena for the Bengal reading patatyajapravegena,
Moimaterial difference of meaning arises if one or the other is accepted.

2 Alluding to the tradition of Siva’s holding Ganga on his head and
for which the great god is sometimes called Gangadhara.—T.

ms This word occurs in various forms, Ketumala and Ketumali being two
others.
__ 4 The Bombay edition reads tu for cha atter Jamvukhanda, The mean-
ing becomes changeshmmibaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 19 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 17

live together. Thus, O king, is Earth covered with mountains. The
huge mountains of Hemakuta are otherwise called Kailasa. There, O
king, Vaisravana passeth his time in joy with his @uhyakas, Imme-
diately to the north of Kailasa and near the mountains of Mainaka there
is a huge and beautiful mountain called Manimaya endued with golden
summits. Beside this mountain is a large, beautiful, crystal and delight-
ful lake called Vindusaras with golden sands (on its beach). There king
Bhagiratha, beholding Ganga (since) called after his own name, resided
for many years. There may be seen innumerable sacrificial stakes made
of gems, and Chaitya tree made of gold, It was there that he of a
thousand eyes and great fame won (ascetic) success by performing sacri-
fices, There the Lord of all creatures, the eternal Creator of all the
worlds, endued with supreme energy surrounded by his ghostly atten-
dants, is adored. There Nara and Narayana, Brahman, and Manu, and
Sthanu as the fifth, are (ever present). And there the celestial stream
Ganga having three currents,! issuing out of the region of Brahman, first
showed herself, and then dividing herself into seven streams, became
Vaswokasara, Nalini, the sin-cleansing Saraswati, Jamvunadi, Sita, Ganga
and Sindhu as the seventh. The Supreme Lord hath (himself) made
the arrangement with reference to that inconceivable and celestial
stream. It is there that? sacrifices have been performed (by gods and
Rishis) on a thousand occasions after the end of the Yuga (when creation
begins). As regards the Saraswati, in some parts (of her course) she bee
cometh visible and in some parts not so. This celestial seven-fold Ganga
is widely known over the three worlds, Rakshasas reside on Himavat,
Quhyakas on Hemakuta, and serpents and Nagas on Nishadha, and
ascetics on Gokarna- The Sweta mountains are said to be the abode of
the celestial and the Asuras, The Gandharvas always reside on Nisha-
dhas, and the regenerate Rishis on Nila. The mountains of Sringavat
also are regarded as the resort of the celestials.

“ ‘These then, O great king, are the seven Varshas of the world as they
are divided. Diversecreatures, mobile* andimmobile, are placed in them
all. Diverse kinds of prosperity, both providental and human, are
noticeable in them. They are incapable of being counted. Those desir-
ous, however, of their own good believe (all this), I have now told thee
of that delightful region (of land) of the form ofa hare about which

thou hadst asked me. At the extremities of that region are the two
Varshas, viz,,one on the north and the other on the south. Those two

1 The sacred stream Ganga is believed to have three currents, In
heaven the current is called Mandakini ; on earth, it is called Ganga ; and
in the subterraneous world it is called Bhogavati.—T.

2 The Bengal texts, excepting the Burdwan one, incorrectly read Sakram
for Satram.—T.

8 The correct reading is Gatimanti. Many of the Bengal texts in-

correctly read matimanti, which is unmeaning.—T,
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

3 https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 20 ===

18 MAHABHARATA

also have now been told to thee. Then again the two islands Naga-dwipa
and Kasyapa-dwipa are the two ears of this region of the form of a hare.
The beautiful mountains of Maleya, O king, having rocks like plates of
copper, form another (prominent) part of Jamvudwipa that having its
shape resembling a hare.’ ”

SECTION VIL

“Dhritarashtra said,—'Tell me, O Sanjaya, thou of great intelligence,
of the regions to the north and the east side of Meru, as also of the
mountains of Malyavat, in detail.

“Sanjaya said.—'On the south of the Nila mountain and the northern
side of Meru are the sacred Northern Kurus, O king, which are the resi-
dence of the Siddhas. The trees there bear sweet fruits, and are always
covered with fruits and flowers. Allthe flowers (there) are fragrant,
and the fruits of excellent taste. Some of the trees, again, O king, yield
fruits according to (the) will ( of the plucker ). There are again some
other trees, O king, that are called milk-yielding. These always yield
milk and the six different kinds of food of the taste of Amrita itself.
Those trees also yield cloths and in their fruits are ornaments (for the
use of man), The entire land abounds with fine golden sands. A por-
tion of the region there, extremely delightful, is seen to be possessed of
the radiance of the ruby or diamond, or of the lapis lazuli or other
jewels and gems.” All the seasons there are agreeable and nowhere
does the land become miry, O king. The tanks are charming, delicious,
and full of crystal water. The men born there have dropped from the
world of the celestials.* All are of pure birth and all are extremely
handsome in appearance’ There twins (of opposite sexes) are born and
the women resemble Apsaras in beauty. Théy drink the milk, sweet as
Amrita, of those milk-yielding trees (already mentioned), And the
twins born there ( of opposite sexes ) grow up equally. Both possessed
of equal beauty, both endued with similar virtues, and both equally
dressed, both grow up in love, O monarch, like a couple of chakrabakas.
The people of that country are free from illness and are always cheer-
ful, Ten thousand and ten hundred years they live, O king, and never
abandon one another. A class of birds called Bharunda, furnished with
sharp beaks and possessed of great strength, take them up when dead

and throw them into mountain caves. I have now described to. thee,
O king, the Northern Kurus briefly.

1 Many of the Bengal texts incorrectly read Merorapyyntaram for
Merorathottaram.—T,

2 This sloka boginning with mani and ending with prabham is omitted in
the Bombay text, I don’t think rightly. If anything that seems to bea
repetition is to be omitted, half the Mahabharata as it now exists, would
then have to be pronounced not genuine.—T.

3° The line is omitted, without any reason, in the Burdwan text.—T.

4 ie, “have fallen ayay fem tp empahiHogbBERS cot

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 21 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 19

“IT will now describe to thee the eastern side of Meru duly. Of all
the regions there, the foremost, O king, is called Bhadraswa, where there
is a large forest of Bhadra-salae, as also a huge tree called Kalamra,
This Kalamra, O king, is always graced with fruits and flowers. That
tree again isa Yojana in height and is adored by Siddhas and the
Charanas, The men there are all of a white complexion, ‘endued with
Sreat energy, and possessed of great strength. The women are of the
complexien of lilies, very beautiful, and agreeable to sight. Possessed
of radiance of the moon,” and white as the moon, their faces are as the
full moon. Their bodies again are as cool as the rays of the moon and
they are all accomplished in singing and dancing. The period of human
life there, O bull of the Bharata’s race, is ten thousand years. Drinking
the juice of the Kalamra they continue youthful for ever. On the south
of Nila and the north of Nishadha, there is a huge Jamvu tree that is
eternal. Adored by the Siddhas and Charanas, that sacred tree granteth
every wish. After the name of that tree this division hath ever been
called Jamvudwipa, O bull of Bharata race, a thousand and a hundred
Yojanas is the height of that prince of trees, which touches the very
heavens, O king of men. Two thousand and five hundred cubits measure
the circumference of a fruit of that tree which bursts when ripe, In
falling upon the earth these fruits make a loud noise, and then pour
out, O king, a silvery juice on the ground. That juice of the Jamvu,
becoming, O king, a river, and passing circuitously round Meru, cometh
to the (region of the ) Northern Kurus. If the juice of that fruit is
quaffed, it conduces to peace of mind, No thirst is felt ever after, O
king. Decrepitude never weakens them. And there a species of gold
called Jamvunada and used for celestial ornaments, very brilliant and
like the complexion of [ndragopoka insects, is produced. The men born
there are of the complexion of the morning sun.

“"‘Onthe summit of Malyavat is always seen, O bull of Bharata’s
race, the fire called Samvataka which blazeth forth at the end of the
Yuga for the destruction of the universe. On Malyavat’s summit to-
wards the east are many small mountains and Malyavat, O king, mea-
sures eleven thousand* Yojanas. The men born there are of the com-
plexion of gold. And they are all fallen from the region of Brahman and

1 In sloka 18, the Bengal texts read Bhayanakas for mahavalas. In 16
Mudhabhishekas for Purvabhishekas is substituted in the Bombay text. In
Tagain the Bombay text reads Subhas for drumas. There are some minor
discrepancies from 13 to 16 which need not he noticed.—T.

2 The Bengal texts have Chandrabhasa for Chandraprabha. The differ-
ence is not material._T.

3 Both the Burdwan and the Bombay editions read Panchashat ( five
and six). The Bengal texts generally have panchasat (fifty),—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 22 ===

20 MAHABHARATA

are utterers of Brahma, They undergo the severest of ascetic austerities,
and their vital seed isdrawn up. For the protection of creatures they
all enter the sun. Numbering sixty-six thousand, they proceed in ad-
vance of Aruna, surrounding the sun. Heated with the sun’s rays for
sixty-six thousand years, they then enter the lunar disc.’ ”

SECTION VIII

“Dhritarashtra said,—'Tell me truly, O Sanjaya, the names of all
the Varshas, and of all the mountains, and also of all those that dwell
on those mountains.

“Sanjaya said—‘On the south of Sweta and the north of Nishadha,
is the Varsha, called Romanaka. The men that are born there are all of
white complexion, of good parentage, and handsome features. And the
men born there are also all without enemies. And they live, O king, for
eleven thousand and five hundred years, being ever of cheerful hearts.
On the south of Nishadha is the Varsha called Hiranmaya where is the
river called Hiranwati. There, O king, liveth that foremost of birds
named Garuda. And the people there, O monarch, are all followers of
the Yakshas, wealthy, and of handsome features. And, O king, the men
there are endued with great strength and have cheerful hearts. And
they live for twelve thousand and five hundred years, O king, which is
the measure of their lives. The mountains of Sringavat,’ O ruler of men,
have three beautiful summits. One of these is made of jewels and gems,
another is very wonderful, being made of all kinds of gems and adorned
with palatial mansions. There the self-luminous lady named Sandili
always liveth. On the north of Sringavat and up to the margin of the
sea, O king, the Varsha called Airavat. And because this jewelled
mountain is there, therefore is this Varsha superior to all. The sun
giveth no heat there and men are not subject to decay. And the moon
there, with the stars, becoming the only source of light, covereth ( the
firmament ). Possessing the radiance and complexion of the lotus,
and endued with eyes that resemble lotus-petals, the men born there
have the fragrance of the lotus. With winkless eyes, and agreeable
scent ( emanating from their bodies ), they go without food and have
their senses under control. They are all fallen from the region of the
celestials, and are all, O king, without sin of any kind. And they live,
O monarch, for thirteen thousand years, that being, O best of the

1 The Bombay edition reads Tasmat-sringamats param. The Bengal
texts read Yasmat-sringamatas param, The Bengal reading is better. ‘The
Asiatic Society's edition contains a misprint. The meaning is, Because
Sringa (jewelled mountain of that name), therefore superior.” I have
rendered it somewhat freely.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 23 ===

BHISHMA PARVA a1

Bharatas, the measure of their lives. And so on the north of the milky
ocean, the Lord Hari of unlimited puissance dwelleth on his car made
of gold. That vehicle is endued with eight wheels, with numerous
supernatural creatures stationed on it, and having the speed of the
mind. And its complexion is that of fire, and it is endued with mighty
energy and adorned with Jamvunada gold. He is the Lord of all crea-
tures, and is possessed, O bull of Bharata’s race, of every kind of pros-
perity. In him the universe merges (when dissolution comes), and from
him it again emanates (when the creative desire seizes him), He is the
actor, and it is He that makes all others act. He, O monarch, is earth,
water, space, air, and fire, He is Sacrifice’s self unto all creatures, and
fire is His mouth.”

Vaisampayana continued—"The high-souled king Dhritarashtra,
thus addressed by Sanjaya, became, O monarch, absorbed in meditation
about his sons. Endued with great energy, he then, having reflected,
said these words:—'Without doubt, O Suta’s son, it is Time that
destroyeth the universe. And it is Time that again createth everything.
Nothing here is eternal. It is Nara and Narayana, endued with omni-
science, that destroyeth all creatures.' The gods speak of him as
Vaikuntha (of immeasurable puissance), while men call him Vishnu (one
that pervadeth the Universe) I"

SECTION IX

“Dhritarashtra said,—‘Tell me truly (O Sanjaya) of this Varsha that
is called after Bharata, where this senseless force hath been collected,
in respect of which this my son Duryodhana hath been so very covetous,
which the sons of Pandu also are desirous of obtaining, and in which my
mind too sinketh. O, tell me this, for thou art, in my judgment endued
with intelligence.

* “Sanjaya said—‘Listen to me, O king. The sons of Pandu are not
covetous about this country. On the other hand, it is Duryodhana that
is covetous, and Sakuni the son of Suvala, as also many other Kshatriyas
who are rulers of the provinces, who being covetous of this country are
not able to bear one another. I will now tell thee, O thou of Bharata’s race,
of the tract of land known by Bharata’s name. This land is the beloved
one of Indra, and, O thou of Bharata’s race, this land, O monarch,

that is called after Bharata, is also the beloved land of Manu, the son of
Vivaswat, of Prithu, of Vainya, of the high-souled Ikshaku, of Yayati,
of Amvarisha, of Mandhatri, of Nahusha, of Muchukunda, of Sivi the
son of Usinara, of Rishava, of Ila, of king Nriga, of Kusika, O invin-
cible one, of the high-souled Gadhi, of Somaka, O irrepressible one,
and of Dilipa, and also, O monarch, of many other mighty Kshatriyas.

1 They aro but portions of the same Supreme Being.—T,
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 24 ===

29 MAHABHARATA

I will now, O chastiser of foes, describe to thee that country as I have
heard of it. Listen to me, O king» as I speak of what thou hast asked
me. Mahendra, Malaya, Sabya, Suktimat, Rakshavat, Vindhya, and
Paripatra,—these seven are the Kela-mountains’ (of Bharatvarsha).
Besides these, O king, there are thousands of mountains that are
unknown,. of hard make, huge, and having excellent valleys, Besides
these there are many other smaller mountains inhabited by barbarous
tribes. Aryans and Mlecchas, O Kauravya, and many races, O lord, mixed
of the two elements, drink the waters of the following rivers, viz., magni-
ficent Ganga, Sindhu, and Saraswati ; of Godavari, and Narmada, and
the large river called Yamuna; of Dhrishadwati, and Vipapa, and Vipasa
and Sthulavaluka; of the river Vetravati, and that other one called
Krishna-vena ; of Iravati, and Vitasta, and Payosyini, and Devika ; of
Vedasmrita and Vedavati, and Tridiva, and Ikshumalavi 5? of Karishini,
and Chitravaha, and the river called Chitrasena; of Gomati, and
Dhutapada and the large river called Gandaki*, of Kausiki, and Nischitra,
and Kirtya, and Nichita, and Lohatarini ;4 of Rashasi and Satakumbha,
and also Sarayu ; of Charmanwati, and Vetravati, and Hastisoma, and
Disa; ofthe river called Saravati, and Venna, and Bhimarathi; of
Kaveri, and Chuluka, and Vina, and Satavala ; of Nivara, and Mahila,
and Suprayoga, O king; of Pavitra, and Kundala, and Rajani, and
Puramalini; of Purvabhirama, and Vira, and Bhima, and Oghavati ; of
Palasini,and Papahara, and Mahendra, and Patalavati, of Karishini,
and Asikni, and the large river Kusachira: of Makari, and Pravara,
and Mena, and Hema, and Dhritavati; of Puravati, and Anushna, and
Saivya, and Kapi, O Bharata; of Sadanira, and Adhrishya, and the
mighty stream Kusadhara; of Sadakanta, and Siva, and Viravati;
of Vatsu, and Suvastu, and Kampana with Hiranwati; of Vara, and the
mighty river Panchami, of Rathachitra, and Jyotiratha, and Viswamitra,
and Kapinjala ; of Upendra, and Vahula, and Kuchira, and Madhuvahini:
of Vinadi ; and Pinjala, and Vena, and the great river Pungavena ; of Vi-
disa and Krishna-vena, and Tamra, and Kapila, of Salu, and Suvama, the
Vedaswa, and the mighty river Harisrava ; of Sighra, and Pischala, and
the river Bharadwaji, of the river Kausiki, and Sona, and Chandrama ;
of Durgamantrasila, and Brahma-vodhya, andVrihadvati ; of Yavksha,

1 ie. mountains forming boundaries of divisions.—T.

2 The Bombay text reads “Ikshula and Krimi for “Ikshumlavi" ccourr-
ing in Bengal texts,—T.

3 The Bengal texts have Gandakincha mahanadim. The Bombay text
reads Vandanancha mahanadim with a cha immediately before, The Burd-
wan Pandits read Chandanancha mahanadim,—T.

4 The Bombay texts read Tridiva for Nischita ; this incorrect, for

Tridiva occurs in the Bombay text itself a little before, The name Loha-
tarini Occurs in various forms.—T,

we wea Voeraretls the Bengal texts read Ohandrabhaga. Both Chandra-
age and Votrav ays AOSUPR ASRS ERERE otfooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 25 ===

BHISHMA PARVA a8

and Rohi, and Yamvunadi ; of Sunasa, and Tamasa, and Dasi, and Vasa,
and Varuna, and Asi; of Nila, and Dhrimati, and the mighty river
Parnasa ; of Pomasi, and Vrishabha, and Brahma-meddhya, and Vrihad-
dhani. These and many other large rivers, O king, such as Sadonirmaya
and Krishna, and Mandaga, and Mandavahini; and Mahagouri' and
Durga, O Bharata; and Chitropala, Chitraratha, and Manjula, and
Vahini ; and Mandakini, and Vaitarani, and Kosa, and Mahanadi; and
Suktimati, and Ananga, and Pushpaveni, and Utpalavati ; and Lohitya,
Karatoya, and Vrishasabhya ; and Kumari, and Rishikullya, and Marisha,
and Saraswati; and Mondakini, and Supunya, Sarvasanga, O Bharata,
are all mothers of the universe and productive of great merit. Besides
these, there are rivers, by hundreds and thousands, that are not known
(by names). I have now recounted to thee, O king, all the rivers as far
as I remember.

“After this, listen to the names of the provinces as I mention them.?
They are the Kuru-Panchalas, the Salwas, the Madreyas, the Jangalas,
the Surasena, the Kalingas, the Vodhas, the Malas, the Matsyas, the
Sauvalyas, Kuntalas, the Kasi-kosalas, the Chedis, the Karushas, the
Bhojas, the Sindhus, the Pulindakas, the Uttamas, the Dasarnas, the
Mekalas, the Utkalas ; the Panchalas, the Kausijas, the Nikarprishthas,
Dhurandharas ; the Sodhas, the Madrabhujingas, the Kasis, and the fur-
ther-Kasis; the Jatharas, the Kukuras, the Dasarnas, O Bharata ; the
Kuntis, the Avantis, and the further-Kuntis ; the Gomantas, the Manda-
kas, the Shandas, the Vidarbhas, the Rupavahikas; the Aswakas, the
Pansurashtras, the Goparashtras, and Karityas ; the Adhirjayas, the
Kuladyas, Mallarashtras, the Keralas, the Varatrasyas, the Apavahas, the

Chakras, the Vakratapas, the Sakas; the Videhas, the Magadhas, the
Swakshas, the Malayas, the Vijayas, the Angas, the Vangas, the Kalingas,
the Yakrillomans ; the Mallas, the Suddellas, the Pranradas, the Mahikas,
the Sasikas ; the Valhikas, the Vatadhanas, the Abhiras, the Kalajo-
shakas; the Aparantas, the Parantas, the Pahnabhas, the Charma-
mandalas ; the Atavisikharas, the Meaubhutas, O sire ; the Upavrittas,
the Anupavrittas, the Surashatras, Kekayas; the Kutas, the Maheyas,
the Kakshas, the Samudranishkutas ; the Andhras, and, O king, many
hilly tribes, and many tribes residing on lands laying at the foot of the
hills, and the Angamalajas, and the Manavanjakas; the Pravisheyas,
and the Bhargavas, O king; the Pundras, the Bhargas, the Kiratas, the

1 It is impossible in the above list to notice, without largely swelling
the notes, all the discrepancies of reading that occur in the various texts.
Many of the names given in one edition would not agree with those given in
another. Considering, again, that most of these names are not capable of
indentification, the selection of the right reading is exceedingly diffioult.-T,

2 In Sanskrit, the provinces are called after the people or tribe inhabit-
ing them ; thus Magadha is frequently mentioned as “the country of the
Magadhas, So also, it is not the king of Magadha but the king of the
Magadhas. The names below, therefore, are all names of tribes and not

of places.—T. Downloaded from https:/www.holybooks.com
https:/Avww.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 26 ===

24 MAHABHARATA

Sudeshnas, and the Yamunas, the Sakas, the Nishadhas, the Anartas,
the Nairitas, the Durgalas, the Pratimasyas, the Kuntalas, and the
Kusalas ;_ the Tiragrahas, the Ijakas, the Kanyakagunas, the Tilabharas,
the Samiras, the Madhumattas, the Sukandakas; the Kasmiras, the
Sindhusauviras, the Gandharvas, and the Darsakas; the Abhisaras,
the Utulas,, the Saivalas, and the Valbikas; the Darvis, the Vanava-
darvas, the Vatagas, the Amarathas, and the Uragas ; the Vahuvadhas,
the Kauravyas, the Sudamanas. the Sumalikas; the Vadhras, the
Karishakas, the ‘Kalindas, and the Upatyakas; the Vatayanas, the
Romanas, and the Kusavindas; the Kacchas, the Gopalkacchas, the
Kuruvarnakas; the Kiratas, the Varvasas, the Siddhas, the Vaidehas,
andthe Tamraliptas; the Aundras, the Paundras, the Saisikatas, and
the Parvatiyas, O sire.

"There are other kingdoms, O bull of Bharata’s race, in the south,
They are the Dravidas, the Keralas, the Prachyas, the Mushikas, and
the Vanavashikas; the Karnatakas, the Mahishakas, the Vikalpas, and
also the Mushakas; the Jhillikas, the Kuntalas, the Saunridas, and the
Nalakananas ; the Kankutakas, the Cholas, and the Malavayakas 5 the
Samangas, the Kanakas, the Kukkuras, and the Angara-marishas ; the
Samangas, the Karakas, the Kukuras, the Angaras, the Marishas: the
Dhwajinis, the Utsavas, the Sanketas, the Trigartas, and the Salwasena ;
the Vakas, the Kokarakas, the Pashtris, and the Lamavegavasas; the
Vindhyachulakas, the Pulindas, and the Valkalas; the Malavas, the
Vallavas, the further-Vallavas, the Kulindas, the Kalavas, the Kuntaukas,
andthe Karatas; the Mrishakas, the Tanavalas, the Saniyas; the
Alidas, the Pasivatas, the Tanayas, and the Sulanyas ; the Rishikas, the
Vidarbhas, the Kakas, the Tanganas, and the further-Tanganas. Among
the tribes of the north are the Mleechas, and the Kruras, O best of the
Bharatas; the Yavanas, the Chinas, the Kamvojas, the Darunas, and
many Mleccha tribes; the Sukritvahas, the Kulatthas, the Hunas, and
the Parasikas; the Ramanas, the Chinas, and the Dasamalikas. These
countries are, besides, the abodes of many Kshatriya, Vaisya, and Sudra
tribes. Then again there are the Sudra-abhiras, the Dardas, the Kasmi-
ras, and the Pattis; the Khasitas; the Atreyas, the Bharadwajas, the
Stanaposhikas, the Poshakas, the Kalingas, and diverse tribes of Kiratas;
the Tomaras, the Hansamargas, and the Karamanjakas. These and
other kingdoms are on the east and on the north. O lord, alluding to
them briefly I have told thee all. Earth, if its resources are {properly
developedaccording to its qualities and prowess, is like an ever-yielding!
cow, from which the three-fold fruits of virtue, profit and pleasure, may
be milked. Brave kings conversant with virtue and profit have become
covetous of Earth, Endued with activity, they would even cast away

1 Kamadbuk ip, Shas 6Besteh Mine inbich sbsraxsaield milk, —T,

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 27 ===

SECTION XIV

“Dhritarashtra said—'How hath Bhishma, that bull among the
Kurus, been slain by Sikhandin ? How did my father, who resembled
Vasava himself, fall down from his car? What became of my sons, O
Sanjaya, when they were deprived of the mighty Bhishma who was like
unto a celestial, and who led a life of Brahmacharyya for the sake of his
father 2? Upon the fall of that tiger among men who was endued with
Sreat wisdom, great capacity for exertion, great might and great energy,
how did our warriors feel? Hearing that bull amongst the Kurus, that
foremost of men, that unwavering hero is slain, great is the grief that
Pierceth my heart. While advancing (against the foe), who followed
him and who proceeded ahead? Who stayed by his side? Who
proceeded with him? What brave combatants followed behind
(protecting his rear ) that tiger among car-warriors, that wonderful
archer, that bull among Kshatriyas, while he penetrated into the
divisions of the foe? While seizing the hostile ranks, what watriors
opposed that slayer of foes resembling the luminary of thousand rays,
who spreading terror among the foe destroyed their ranks like the Sun
destroying darkness, and who achieved in battle amongst the ranks of
Pandu's sons feats exceedingly difficult of accomplishment ? How, in-
deed, O Sanjaya, did the Pandavas oppose in battle the son of Santanu,
that accomplished and invincible warrior when he approached them
smiting ? Slaughtering the (hostile) ranks, having arrows for his teeth,
and full of energy, with the bow for his wide-open mouth, and with the
terrible sword for his tongue, and invincible, a very tiger among men,
endued with medesty, and never before vanquished, alas, how did
Kunti’s son overthrow in battle that unconquered one, undeserving as
he was of such a fate,—that fierce bowman shooting fierce shafts,
stationed on his excellent car, and plucking off the heads of foes (from
their bodies)—that warrior, irresistible as the Yuga-fire, beholding whom
addrest for battle the great army of the Pandavas always used to waver ?

1 The first half of the first line, in the Bengal texts, is read as
‘Kathamascha me putra’, the Bombay text reads 'Kathamachksha me Yodha’.
If the latter reading be adopted, the meaning would be—“Tell me how my
warriors were, etc, etc.—T,

2 Inthe second line of sloka 3, for ‘kim na asinmanastada’ (what was
the state of mind of our men) the Bombay text reads ‘Kimu asinmanastava’
(what was the state of your mind)? There can be no question that the
Bengal reading is better.—T. .

3 The Plural pronoun ‘ye’ in the second line of the 8th sloka (changed
into ‘ya’ by rule of Sandhi because coming before tenam) is read ‘ke’ (or ka)’
by the Burdwan Pundits, I think the correction a happy one. Nilakantha
would take 7 and 8 and the first half of 9as a complete sentence reading
‘Asya twam antike’ (shou wort near him) for ‘Asyatam antike’ (smiting or
shooting arrows near).—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
5 https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 28 ===

34 MAHABHARATA

Mangling the hostile troops for ten nights, alas, that slayer of ranks hath
set like the Sun, having achieved feats difficult of achievement. He
who, scattering like Sakra himself and inexhaustible shower of arrows,
slew in battle a hundred millions of warriors in ten days, that scion of
Bharata’s race, now lieth, although he deserveth it not, on the bare
ground, in the field of battle, deprived of life, a mighty tree uprooted
by the winds, asa result of my evil counsels ! Beholding Santanu’s son
Bhishma of terrible prowess, how indeed, could the army of the
Pandavas’ succeed in smiting him there? How did the sons of Pandu
battle with Bhishma? How is it, O Sanjaya, that Bhishma could not
conquer when Drona liveth? When Kripa, again, was near him, and
Drona’s son (Aswatthaman) also, how could Bhishma, that foremost of
smiters be slain ? How could Bhishma who was reckoned as an Atiratha
and who could not be resisted by the very gods, be slain in battle by
Sikhandin, the prince of Panchala? He, who always regarded himself
as the equal of the mighty son of Jamadagni in battle, he whom
Jamadagni'’s son himself could not vanquish, he who resembled Indra
himself in prowess,—alas, O Sanjaya, tell me how that hero, Bhishma,
born in the race of Maharathas, was slain in battle, for without knowing
all the particulars I cannot regain my equanimity. What great bowmen
of my army, O Sanjaya, did not desert that hero of unfading glory ?
What heroic warriors, again, at Duryodhana’s command, stood around
that hero (for protecting him)? When all the Pandavas placing
Sikhandin in their van advanced against Bhishma, did not all the Kurus,
O Sanjaya, stay by the side of that hero of unfading prowess? Hard as
my heart is, surely it must be made of adamant, for it breaketh not on
hearing the death of that tiger among men, viz,, Bhishma! In that
irresistible bull of Bharata’s race, were truth, and intelligence, and
policy, to an immeasurable extent. Alas, how was he slain in battle ?
Like unto a mighty cloud of high altitude, having the twang of his bow-
string for its roar, his arrows for its rain-drops, and the sound of his
bow for its thunder, that hero showering his shafts on Kunti’s sons with
the Panchalas and the Srinjayas on their side, smote hostile car-warriors
like the slayer of Vala smiting the Danavas. Who were the heroes that
resisted, like the bank resisting the surging sea, that chastiser of foes,
who was a terrible ocean of arrows and weapons, an ocean in which
shafts were the irresistible crocodiles and bows were the waves, an ocean
that was inexhaustible, without an island, agitated and without a raft to
cross it, in which maces and swords were like sharks and steeds and

1 Some of the Bengal texts have ‘Panchalanam’ for ‘Pandavanam’—T,
2 Theform of the 2nd line is a negative interrogative, implying,—'I
hope the Kurus did not abandon him._T,

The Burdwan Pundits omit this and the following sloka without any
reason.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 29 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 85

elephants like eddies, and foot-soldiers like fishes in abundance, and the
sound of conches and drums like its roar, and ocean that swallowed
horses and elephants and foot-soldiers quickly, an ocean that devoured
hostile heroes and that seethed with wrath and energy which constituted
its Vadava-fire ?? | When for Duryodhana’s good, that slayer of foes,
Bhishma, achieved (terrible) feats in battle, who were then in his van?
Who were they that protected the right wheel of that warrior of im-
measurable energy? Who were they that, mustering patience and
energy, resisted hostile heroes from his rear ? Who stationed themselves
in his near front for protecting him? Who were those heroes that
Protected the fore-wheel of that brave warrior while he battled ( with
the foe)? Who were they that stationing themselves by his left wheel
smote the Srinjayas? Who were they that protected the irresistible
advance ranks of his van? Who protected the wings of that warrior
who hath made the last painful journey 2? And who, O Sanjaya, fought
with hostile heroes in the general engagement? If he was protected
by (our) heroes, and if they were protected by him, why could he not
then speedily vanquish in battle the army of the Pandavas, invincible
though it be? Indeed, O Sanjaya, how could the Pandavas succeed
even in striking Bhishma who was like Parameshti himself, that Lord
and creator of all creatures? Thou tellest me, O Sanjaya, if the dis-
appearance of that Bhishma, that tiger among men, who was our refuge
and relying upon whom the Kurus were fighting with their foes, that
warrior of mighty strength relying on whose energy my son had never
reckoned the Pandavas, alas, how hath he been slain by the enemy ?*
In days of yore, all the gods while engaged in slaying the Danavas,
sought the aid of that invincible warrior, viz., my father of high vows,
That foremost of sons endued with great energy, on whose birth the
world-renowned Santanu abandoned all grief, melancholy, and sorrows,
how canst thou tell me, O Sanjaya, that that celebrated hero, that
great refuge of all, that wise and holy personage who was devoted to
the duties of his order and conversant with the truths of the Vedas and
their branches, hath been slain? Accomplished in every weapon and
endued with humility, gentle and with passions under full control, and
Possessed of great energy as he was, alas, hearing that son of Santanu

1 This comparison, lengthy ag it is,is not sustained throughout with
the usual felicity of Vyasa. In several parts it is undoubtedly faulty,
Slight variations of reading also ocour here and there, without affecting the
sense materially.—T.

2 ‘Gachchhato durgam gatim.’ The Bombay edition reads 'Gachchhanto
etc., otc.,’ The meaning then would be—who protected the wings, them-
selves making the last painful journey ?—T,

3 The Burdwan Pundits make ‘Mahavalas’ an adjective of ‘Putras’, A
better construction wayldibsuka fakerifpasinalemingduxShisghma,—T,

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 30 ===

86 MAHABHARATA

slain I regard the rest of my army as already slain. In my judgment,
unrighteousness hath now become stronger than righteousness, for the
sonsof Pandu desire sovereignty even by killing their venerable
superior! In days of yore, Jamadagni’s son Rama, who was acquainted
with every weapon and whom none excelled, when addrest for battle
on-behalf of Amvya, was vanquished by Bhishma in combat. Thou
tellest me that that Bhishma, who was the foremost of all warriors and
who resembled Indra himself in the feats he achieved, hath been slain,
What can be a greater grief to me than this? Endued with great
intelligence, he that was not slain even by that slayer of hostile heroes,
that Rama, the son of Jamadagni, who defeated in battle crowds of
Kshatriyas repeatedly, hath he now been slain by Sikhandin. Without
doubt, Drupada’s son Sikhandin, therefore who hath slain in battle that
bull of Bharata’s race, that hero acquainted with the highest weapons,
that brave and accomplished warrior conversant with every weapon, is
superior in energy, prowess,and might to the invincible Vargava endued.
with the highest energy. In that encounter of arms who were the
heroes that followed that slayer of foes? Tell me how the-battle was
fought between Bhishma and the Pandavas. The army of my son, O
Sanjaya, reft of its hero, is like an unprotected woman. Indeed, that
army of mine is like a panic-struck herd of kine reft of its herdsman.
He in whom resided prowess superior to that of every one, when he
was laid low on the field of battle, what was the state of mind of my
army ? What power is there, O Sanjaya, in our life, when we have
caused our father of mighty energy, that foremost of righteous men in
the world, to be slain? Like a person desirous of crossing the sea when
he beholds the boat sunk in fathomless waters, alas, my sons, I ween, are
bitterly weeping from grief on Bhishma's death. My heart, O Sanjaya,
is surely made of adamant, for it rendeth not even after hearing the
death of Bhishma, that tiger among men. That bull among men in
whom were weapons, intelligence, and policy, to an immeasurable
extent, how, alas, hath that invincible warrior been slain in battle?
Neither in consequence of weapons nor of courage, nor of ascetic merit,
nor of intelligence, nor of firmness, nor of gift,can a man free himself
from death, Indeed, time, endued with great energy, is incapable of
being transgressed by anything in the world, when thou tellest me, O
Sanjaya, that Santanu's son Bhishma is dead. Burning with grief on
account of my sons, in fact, overwhelmed with great sorrow, I had
hoped for relief from Bhishma, the son of Santanu. When he beheld
Santanu’s son, O Sanjaya, lying on earth like the Sun (dropped from
the firmament), what else was made by Duryodhana as his refuge ?
O Sanjaya, reflecting with the aid of my understanding, I do not see
what the end will, of, 105 iin fi RelQUsing SeeBoAide and that of the

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 31 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 87

enemy and now mustered in the opposing ranks of battle. Alas, cruel
are the duties of the Kshatriya order as laid down by the Rishis, since
the Pandavas are desirous of sovereignty by even compassing the death
of Santanu’s son, and we also are desirous of sovereignty by offering up
that hero of high vows asa sacrifice." The sons of Pritha, as also my
sons, are all in the observance of Kshatriya duties. They, therefore,
incur no sin (by doing) this. Even a righteous person should do this,
O Sanjaya, when direful calamities come. The display of prowess and
the exhibition of the utmost might have been laid down among the
duties of the Kshatriyas.

“How, indeed, did the sons of Pandu oppose my father Bhishma,
the son of Santanu, that unvanquished hero endued with modesty, while
he was engaged in destroying the hostile ranks? How were the troops
arrayed, and how did he battle with high-souled foes ? How, O Sanjaya,
was my father Bhishma slain by the enemy? Duryodhana and Karna
and the deceitful Sakuni the son of Suvala, and Dussasana also,—what
did they say when Bhishma was slain? Thither where the dice-board
is constituted by the bodies of men, elephants, and steeds, and where
arrows and javelins and large swords and bearded darts from the dice,
entering that frightful mansion of destructive battle’s play, who were
those wretched gamblers,—those bulls among men,—that gambled,
making their very lives the frightful stakes? Who won, who were
vanquished, who cast the dice successfully, and who have been slain,
besides Bhishma, the son of Santanu? Tell me all,O Sanjaya, for peace
can not be mine, hearing that Devavrata hath been slain,—that father
of mine, of terrible deeds, that ornament of battle, viz., Bhishma ! Keen
anguish had penetrated my heart, born of the thought that all my chil-
dren would die. Thou makest that grief of mine blaze forth, O Sanjaya,
like fire by (pouring) clarified butter (on it), My sons, I ween, are
even now grieving, beholding Bhishma slain,—Bhishma celebrated in all
worlds and who had taken upon himself a heavy burden. I will listen
to all those sorrows arising from Duryodhana’s act. Therefore, tell me,
O Sanjaya, everything that happened there,—everything that happened
in the battle, born of the folly of my wicked son. Ill-ordered or well-
ordered, tell me everything, O Sanjaya, Whatever was achieved with
the aid of energy in the battle by Bhishma desirous of victory,—by that
warrior accomplished in arms—tell me all fully and in detail. How,
in fact, the battle took place between the armies of the Kurus and the
manner in which each happened.’

1 Ghatayitwa is, literally, ea PAIR ARR. ALRiBuoRLoom

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 32 ===

SECTION XV

Sanjaya said,—"Deserving as thou art, this question is, indeed,
worthy of thee, O great king. It behoveth thee not, however, to impute
this fault to Duryodhana. The man who incurreth evil as the conse-
quence of his own misconduct, should not attribute that misconduct to
others. O great king, the man that doth every kind of injury to other
men, deserveth to be slain by all men in consequence of those censurable
deeds of his. The Pandavas unacquainted with the ways of wickedness
had, for a long time, with their friends and counsellors, looking up to
thy face, borne the injuries (done to them) and forgiven them, dwelling
in the woods.

“Of steeds and elephants and kings of immeasurable energy that
which hath been seen by the aid of Yoga-power, hear, O lord of Earth,
and do not set thy heart on sorrow. All this was pre-destined, O king.
Having bowed down to thy father, that [wise and high-souled?] son of
Parasara, through whose grace, [through whose boon bestowed on me,] I
have obtained excellent and celestial apprehension, sight beyond the
range of the visual sense, and hearing, O king, from great distance,
knowledge of other people’s hearts and also of the past and the future,
a knowledge also of the origin of all persons transgressing the
ordinances,” the delightful power of coursing thtough the skies, and un-
touchableness by weapons in battles, listen to me in detail as I recite
the romantic and highly wonderful battle that happened between the
Bharatas, a battle that makes one’s hair stand on end.

“When the combatants were arrayed according to rule and when
they were addrest for battle, Duryodhana, O king, said these words to
Dussasana,—O  Dussasana, let cars be speedily directed for the protec-
tion of Bhishma, and do thou speedily urge all our divisions (to advance),
That hath now come to me of which I had been thinking for a series of
years, viz., the meeting of the Pandavas and the Kurus at the head of
their respective troops. I do not think that there is any act more
important (for us) in this battle than the protecting of Bhishma. If
protected he will slay the Pandavas, the Somakas, and the Srinjayas.
That warrior of pure soul said,—'I will not slay Sikhandin. It is heard that
he was a female before, For this reason he should be renounced by me in
battle—For this, Bhishma should be particularly protected. Let all my
warriors take up their positions, resolved to slay Sikhandin. Let also all
the troops from the east, the west, the south, and the north, accomplish-

1 The words ‘high-souled” and also “through whose boon bestowed
on me’ eo in the 9th sloka following. In paraphrasing, their place is
ere.—T.

2 ‘Vyotthiopatti vijananam,’ ‘Vyutthita’ is doubtful word. It
has been oxplainedOnwititelediitiva'tinavluum nolybookscom “oO

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 33 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 89

edinevery kind of weapon, protect the grandsire. Even the lion of
mighty strength, if left unprotected may be slain by the wolf. Let us
not, therefore, cause Bhishma to be slain by Sikbandin like the lion slain
by the jackal, Yudhamanyu protects the left wheel. and Uttamaujas
Protects the right wheel of Phalguni, Protected by those two, Phalguni
himself protects Sikhandin, O Dussasana, act in such a way that
Sikhandin who is protected by Phalguni and whom Bhishma will re-
nounce, may not slay Ganga’s son.”

SECTION XVI

Sanjaya said,—" When the night had passed away, loud became the
noise made by the kings, all exclaiming,—Array !~Array !—With the
blare of conches and the sound of drums that resembled leonine roars, O
Bharata, with the neigh of steeds,and the clatter ofcar-wheels, with thenoise
of obstreperous elephants and the shouts, clapping of arm-pits, and cries
of roaring combatants, the din caused everywhere was very great. The
large armies of the Kurus and the Pandavas, O king, rising at sunrise,
completed all their arrangements. Then when the Sun rose, the fierce
weapons of attack and defence and the coats of mail of both thy sons
and the Pandavas, and the large and splendid armies of both sides,
became fully visible. There elephants and cars, adorned with gold,
looked resplendent like clouds mingled with lightning. The ranks of
cars, standing in profusion, looked like cities. And thy father, stationed
there, shone brilliantly, like the full moon. And the warriors armed
with bows and swords and ‘scimitars and maces, javelins and lances and
bright weapons of diverse kinds, took up their positions in their (res-
Pective) ranks. And resplendent standards were seen, set up by thou-
sands, of diverse forms, belonging to both ourselves and the foe. And
made of gold and decked with gems and blazing like fire, those banners
in thousands endued with great effulgence, looked beautiful like heroic
combatants cased in mail gazed (at those standards), longing for battle.
And many foremost of men, with eyes large as those of bulls endued
with quivers, and with hands cased in (leathern) fences, stood at the heads
of their divisions, with their bright weapons upraised, And Suvala’s
son Sakuni, and Salya, Jayadratha and the two princes of Avanti named
Vinda and Anuvinda, and the Kekaya brothers, and Sudakshina the
tuler of the Kamvojas and Srutayudha the tuler of the Kalingas, and
king Jayatsena, and Vrihadvala the ruler of the Kosalas, and Kritavarman
of Satwata’s race,—these ten tigers among men, endued with great bra-
very and possessing arms that looked like maces,—these performers of
sacrifices with plentiful gifts (to Brahmanas), stood each at the head
ofan Akshauhini of troops. These and many other kings and princes,

1 Literally, ‘in Indra’s abodes,” i.o., ‘Amaravati,’—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 34 ===

40 MAHABHARATA

mighty car-warriors conversant with policy, obedient to the commands
of Duryodhana, all cased in mail, were seen stationed in their respective
divisions. All of them, cased in black deer-skins, endued with great
strength, accomplished in battle, and cheerfully prepared, for Duryo-
dhana’s sake, to ascend to the region of Brahma,! stood there commanding
ten efficient Akshauhinis. The eleventh great division of the Kauravas,
consisting of the Dhartarashtra troops, stood in advance of the whole
army. There in the van of that division was Santanu’s son. With his
white head-gear, white umbrella, and white mail, O monarch, we
beheld Bhishma of unfailing prowess look like the risen moon. His
standard bearing the device of a palmyra of gold himself stationed on a
car made of silver, both the Kurus and the Pandavas beheld that hero
looking like the moon encircled by white clouds. The great bowmen
amongst the Srinjayas headed by Dhrishtadyumna, (beholding Bhishma)
looked like little animals when they would behold a mighty yawning lion.
Indeed, all the combatants headed by Dhrishtadyumna repeatedly trem-
bled in fear. These, O king, were the eleven splendid divisions of thy
army, So also the seven divisions belonging to the Pandavas were
protected by foremost of men. Indeed, the two armies facing each other
looked like two oceans at the end of the Yuga agitated by fierce
Makaras, and abounding with huge crocodiles. Never before, O king,
did we see or hear of two such armies encountering each other like
these of the Kauravas-?*

SECTION XVII
Sanjaya said,—''Just as the holy Krishna-Dwaipayana Vyasa had said,
in that very manner the kings of the Earth, mustered together, come to
the encounter. On that day on which the battle commenced Soma
approached the region of Pitris.s The seven large planets, as they

1A Keabatriya falling bravely in fight at once goes tothe highest
regions of bliss.—-T. p

2 Hither the 26th or the 27th should be regarded as a triplet.—T.

83 Nilakantha in along note explains that ‘Magha Vishayagas Somas’
cannot mean that ‘Shoma’ or the Moon entered the constellation called
Magha. He quotes numerous slokas scattered throughout the Mahabharata
that throw light, directly or indirectly, on the question of the opening day
of the battle, and shows that all these lead to a different conclusion. What is
meant by the Moon approaching the region of the 'Pitris’ is that those who
fall in battle immediately ascend to heaven ; of course, they have first to
go tothe region of ‘Pitris.’ Thonce they have to go to the lunar region for
obtaining celestial bodies, Alltbis implies a little delay. Here, however,
in the case of those that would fall on the field of Kurukshetra, they would
not have to incur even such a little delay, ‘Chandramas’ or ‘Soma’
approached the region of 'Pitris'so that the fallen warriors might have
celestial bodies very soon, without, in fact, any necessity, on their part,
to incur the delay of a journey to the lunar region prior to their ascension
to heaven with resplendent HadiAtiss7Meww.holybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 35 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 41

appeared in the firmament, all looked blazing like fire.’ The Sun, when
he rose, seemed to be divided in twain. Besides, that luminary, as it
appeared in the firmament, seemed to blaze forth in flames.? Carnie
vorous jackals and crows, expecting (dead) bodies (to feast upon),
began to utter fierce cries from all directions that seemed to be ablaze.
Every day the old grandsire of the Kurus, and the son of Bharadwaja,
tising (from bed) in the morning, with concentrated mind, said\—'Victory
to the sons of Pandu'—while those chastisers of foes used (at the same
time) yet to fight for thy sake according to the pledge they had given.
Thy father Devavrata, fully conversant with every duty, summoning
all the kings, said these words (unto them.) ‘Ye Kshatriyas, this broad
door isopen to you for entering heaven. Go ye through it to the
tegion of Sakra and Brahman. The Rishis of olden times have showed
you this eternal path.* Honour ye yourselves by engaging in battle
with attentive minds. Nabhaga, and Yayati, and Mandhatri, and
Nabusa, and Nriga, were crowned with success and obtained the highest
tegion of bliss by feats like these. To die of disease at home is sin for
a Kshatriya. The death he meets with in battle is his eternal duty’.—
Thus addressed, O bull of Bharata’s race, by Bhishma, the kings, looking
beautiful in their excellent cars, proceeded to the heads of their
respective divisions. Only Vikartana's son Karna, with his friends and
telatives, O bull of Bharata’s race, laid aside his weapons in battle for
the sake of Bhishma. Without Karna then, thy sons and all the kings
on thy side proceeded, making the ten points of the horizon resound

with their leonine roars. And their divisions shone brightly, O king,
with white umbrellas, banners, standards, elephants, steeds, cars, and
foot-soldiers. And the Earth was agitated with the sounds of drums
and tabors and cymbals, and the clatter of car-wheels, And the mighty
car-warriors, decked with their bracelets and armlets of gold and with
their bows (variegated with gold), looked resplendent like hills of fire.
And with’ his large palmyra-standard decked with five stars, Bhishma,
the generalissimo of the Kuru army,‘ looked like the resplendent Sun
himself. Those mighty bowmen of royal birth, O bull of Bharata’s

1 There aro nine planets in all the Pauranic astronomy. Of these
Bahu and Ketu are regarded ‘Upagrahas,’ and hence, of ‘grahas’ there are
only seven. Thus Nilakantha, and the Burdwan pundits have made a mess
of this line. The genesis of the blunders they have committed is distinctly
traceable to their non-apprehension of Nilakantha’s very simple note.—T,

2 The Bengal texts read ‘Bhanumanudito divi.’ The Bombay reading
is ‘Bhanumanudito Ravis.’ Ifthe latter be adopted, ‘Bhanuman’ would be
an adjective of ‘Ravis.’—T.

3 ‘Purvais Purvatarais’ is literally—‘They of old and still older
times ;” for ‘Sanatanas’ some editions read ‘Srutijas’ (qualifying panthas).’
‘Srutija’ means arising from the Srutis or as laid down in the Srutis—T,

4 ‘Chamupatis’ is the Bengal reading. The Bombay text reads
‘Ohamupari.’ If the latter reading be adopted, the meaning would be, “at

rmy".—T,
Besbeed ol:the (Kara) ae ied from https:/www.holybooks.com

6 https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 36 ===

42 MAHABHARATA

race, that were on thy side, all took up. their positions, O king, as
Santanu’s son ordered. (King) Saivya of the country of the Govasanas,
accompanied by all the monarchs, went out ona princely elephant
worthy of royal use and graced with a banner on its back. And
Aswatthaman, of the complexion of the lotus, went out ready for every
emergency, stationing himself at the very head of all the divisions, with
his standard bearing the device of the lion's tail. And Srutayudha
and Ghitrasena and Purumitra and Vivinsati, and Salya and Bhurisravas,
and that mighty car-warrior Vikarna,—these seven mighty bowmen on
their carts and cased in excellent mail, followed Drona’s son behind but
in advance of Bhishma. The tall standards of these warriors, made of
gold, beautifully set up for adorning their excellent cars, looked highly
resplendent. The standard of Drona, the foremost of preceptors, bore:
the device of a golden altar decked with a water-pot and the figure of
a bow. The standard of Duryodhana guiding many hundreds and
thousands of divisions bore the device of an elephant worked in gems.
Paurava and the ruler of the Kalingas, and Salya, these Rathas took up
their position in Duryodhana’s van. On a costly car with his standard
bearing the device of a bull, and guiding the very van (of his division),
the ruler of the Magadhas marched against the foe. That large force
of the Easterners looking like the fleecy clouds of autumn? was (besides)
protected by the chief of the Angas (Karna’s son Vrishaketu) and
Kripa endued with great energy. Stationing himself in the van of his
division with his beautiful standard of silver bearing the device of the
boar, the famous Jayadratha looked highly resplendent. A hundred
thousand cars, eight thousand elephants, and sixty thousand cavalry
were under his command.* Commanded by the royal chief of the
Sindhus, that Jarge division occupying the very van (of the army) and
abounding with untold cars, elephants, and steeds, looked magnificent.
With sixty thousand cars and ten thousand elephants, the ruler of the
Kalingas, accompanied by Ketumat, went out. His huge elephants, look-
ing like hills, and adorned with Yantras,‘ lances, quivers and standards,
looked exceedingly beautiful. And the ruler of the Kalingas, with his tall

1 The Bengal editions read ‘Magadhascha ripum yayau.’ Ths Bombay
text reads ‘Magadhasya Kripo-yayau’. If the latter reading be adopted,
the meaning would be “and guiding the very van of the Magadha troops
Kripa went.”—T,

_2 The Bengal reading is ‘Saradabhraghana-prakshyam.’ The Bombay
reading is ‘Sharadamvudhara-prakshyam,’—T,

3 Vasavartinas is nominative, masculine, plural, referring to cars. cc. ;
the Burdwan Pundits take it as @ genetive singular qualifying ‘tasya,’ and
they render it, therefore, as “of that subordinate of Duryodhana.” This is
evidently incorrect.—T.

4 Machines, —

‘achines, perhaps cal #ap4/ 8.7 w-holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 37 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 48

standard effulgent as fire, with his white umbrella, and golden curass,
and Chamaras (wherewith he was fanned), shone brilliantly. And
Ketumat also, riding on an elephant with a highly excellent and
beautiful hook, was stationed in battle, O King, like the Sun in the
midst of (black) clouds. And king Bhagadatta, blazing with energy and
riding on that elephant of his, went out like the wielder of the thunder.
And the two princes of Avanti named Vinda and Anuvinda, who were
regarded as equal to Bhagadatta, followed Ketumat, riding on the necks
of their elephants. And, O king, arrayed by Drona and the royal son of
Santanu, and Drona’s son, and Valhika, and Kripa, the (Kaurava)
Vyuha’ consisting of many divisions of cars was such that the elephants
formed its body ; the kings, its head ; and the steeds, its wings. With
face towards all sides, that fierce Vyuha seemed to smile and ready to
spring (upon the foe).”

SECTION XVIII

Sanjaya said,—"Soon after,O king, a loud uproar, causing the heart
to tremble was heardy made by the combatants ready for the fight,
Indeed, with the sounds of conches and drums, the grunts of elephants,
and the clatter of car-wheels, the Earth seemed to rend in twain, And
soon the welkin and the whole Earth was filled with the neigh of
chargers and the shouts of combatants. O irresistible one, the troops
of thy sons and of the Pandavas both trembled when they encountered
each other. There (on the field of battle) elephants and cars, decked
in gold, looked beautiful like clouds decked with lightning. And
standards of diverse forms, O king, belonging to the combatants on thy
side, and adorned with golden rings, looked resplendent like fire. And
those standards of thy side and theirs, resembled, O Bharata, the
banners of Indra in his celestial mansions. And the heroic warriors all
accoutred and cased in golden coats of mail endued with the effulgence
of the blazing Sun, themselves looked like blazing fire or the Sun. All
the foremost warriors amongst the Kurus, O king, with excellent bows,
and weapons upraised (for striking), with leathern fences on their
hands, and with standards,—those mighty bowmen, of eyes large as those
of bulls, all placed themselves at the heads of their (respective )
divisions. And these amongst thy sons, O king, protected Bhishma from
behind, viz., Dussasana, and Durvishaha, and Durmukha, and Dussaha
and Vivinsati, and Chitrasena, and that mighty car-warrior Vikarna.
And amongst them were Satyavrata, and Purumitra, and Jaya, and
Bhuristavas, and Sala. And twenty thousand car-warriors followed
them. The Abhishahas, the Surasenas, the Sivis, and the Vasatis, the

1 ‘Vyuha’ is an array of troops ina certain form, Many such will be
spoken of in this and the other ‘parvas’ devoted to the battle,—'T,
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https:/Avww.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 38 ===

44 MAHABHARATA

Swalyas, the Matsyas, the Amvashtas, the Trigartas, and the Kekayas,
the Sauviras, the Kitavas, and the dwellers of the Eastern,, Western,
and the Northern countries,—these twelve brave races were resolved to
fight reckless of the lives, And these protected the grandsire with a
multitudinous array of cars. And with a division that consisted of ten
thousand active elephants, the king of Magadha followed that large car
division. They that protected the wheels of the cars and they that
protected the elephants, numbered full six millions. And the foot-sol-
diers that marched in advance (of the army), armed with bows, swords,
and shields, numbered many hundreds of thousands. And they fought
also using their nails and bearded darts. And the ten and one Akshauhinis
of thy son, O Bharata, looked, O mighty king, like Ganga separated
from Yamuna.?"
SECTION XIX

Dhritarashtra said,—“Beholding (our) ten and one Akshauhinis
arrayed in order of battle, how did Yudhishthira, the son of Pandu, make
his counter-array with his forces smaller in number ? How did Kunti's
son, O Sanjaya, form his counter-array against that Bhishma who was
acquainted with all kinds of arrays, viz., human, celestial, Gandharva,
and Asura ?"

Sanjaya said,—"Seeing the Dhritarashtra divisions arrayed in order
of battle, Pandu’s son of virtuous soul, king Yudhishthira the just,
addressed Dhananjaya, saying,—'(Men) are informed from the words of
that great Rishi Vrihaspati that the few must be made to fight by
condensing them, while the many may be extended according to pleasure,
In encounters of the few with the many, the array to be formed should
be the needle-mouthed one. Our troops compared with the enemy’s are
few. Keeping in view this precept of the great Rishi, array our troops,
O son of Pandu.'—Hearing this, that son of Pandu answered king
Yudhishthira the just, saying—That immovable array known by the
name of Vajra, which was designed by the wielder of the thunder-bolt,—
that invincible array is the one that I will make for thee, O best of
kings, He who is like the bursting tempest, he who is incapable of
being borne in battle by the foe, that Bhima the foremost of smiters,
will fight at our head. That foremost of men, conversant with all the
appliances of battle, becoming our leader, will fight in the van, crushing
the energy of the foe. That foremost of smiters, viz., Bhima, bebolding
whom all (the hostile warriors) headed by Duryodhana will retreat
in_panic like smaller animals beholding the lion, all of us, our fears

1 The Bengal texts read
the Bombay reading.—T, %y
2 The Bombay edition reads ‘Yamunantara’ for ‘Yamunantare’ of the

Bengal texts. The difference i ing i ial, —
Downloaded from hitpa/ Munk Ran booke capa terial. —T.

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

this line in a very faulty way. I have adopted

=== PAGE 39 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 4b

dispelled, will seek his shelter as if he were a wall, like the celestial seek-
ing the shelter of Indra. The man breathes not in the world who would
bear to cast his eyes upon that bull among men, Vrikodara of fierce
deeds, when he is angry.'—Having said this, Dhananjaya of mighty arms
did as he said. And Phalguni, quickly disposing his troops in battle-
array, proceeded (against the foe). And the mighty army of the
Pandavas beholding the Kuru army move, looked like the full,
immovable, and quickly rolling! current of Ganga. And Bhimasena,
and Dhrishtadyumna endued with great energy, and Nakula, and
Sahadeva, and king Dhrishtaketu, became the leaders of that force.
And king Virata, surrounded by an Akshauhini of troops and accompanied
by his brothers and sons, marched in their rear, protecting them from
behind. The two sons of Madri, both endued with great effulgence,
became the protectors of Bhima’s wheels; while the (five) sons of
Draupadi and the son of Subhadra all endued with great activity,
protected (Bhima) from behind. And that mighty car-warrior,
Dhrishtadyumna, the prince of Panchala, with those bravest of com-
batants and the foremost of car-warriors, viz., the Prabhadrakas,
protected those princes from behind. And behind him was Sikhandin
who (in his turn) was protected by Arjuna, and who, O bull of
Bharata’s race, advanced with concentrated attention for the destruc-
tion of Bhishma. Behind Arjuna was Yuyudhana of mighty strength;
and the two princes of Panchala, viz., Yudhamanyu and Uttamaujas,
became protectors of Arjuna’s wheels, along with the Kekaya brothers,
and Dhrishtaketu, and Chekitana of great valour—This Bhimasena,
wielding his mace made of the hardest metal, and moving (on the field of
battle) with fierce speed, candry up the very ocean. And there also
stay, with their counsellors looking on him, O king, the children? of
Dhritarashtra—Even this, O monarch, was what Vibhatsu said,
pointing out the mighty Bhimasena (to Yudhishthira).2 And while
Partha was saying so, all the troops, O Bharata, worshipped him on the
field of battle with gratulatory words. King Yudhishthira, the son of
Kunti, took up his position in the centre of his army, surrounded by huge
and furious elephants resembling moving hills. The high-souled
Yajnasena, the king of the Panchalas, endued with great prowess,
stationed himself behind Virata with an Akshauhini of troops for the
sake of the Pandavas. And on the cars of those kings, O monarch, were

1 The Bengal texts read ‘Syandamana ;' ;° the Bombay reading ié
‘Spandamana.’ Both imply ‘‘moving,” only the motion in the latter case is
slower, perhaps, than in the former.—T.

2 The word used is ‘Dayadas’ lit. taker of (one’s) wealth.—T.

3 The Bombay text is here faulty. ‘Darsay swamahavalam’ is scarcely
correct. The Bengal reading is ‘Darsayan sumahayalam,’—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 40 ===

46 MAHABHARATA

tall standards bearing diverse devices, decked with excellent ornaments
of gold, and endued with the effulgence of the Sun and the Moon.
Causing those kings to move and make space for him, that mighty
car-warrior Dhrishtadyumna: accompanied by his brothers and sons
protected Yudhishthira from behind. Transcending the huge standards
on all the cars on thy side and that of the enemy, was the one gigantic
ape on Arjuna's car. Foot-soldiers, by many hundreds of thousands,
and armed with swords, spears, and scimitars, proceeded ahead for
protecting Bhimasena. And ten thousand elephants with (temporal)
juice trickling down their cheek and mouth, and resembling (on that
account) showering clouds,’ endued with great courage, blazing with
golden armour, huge hills, costly, and emitting the fragrance of lotuses,
followed the king behind like moving mountains.? And the high-souled
and invincible Bhimasena, whirling his fierce mace that resembled a
parigha® seemed to crush the large army (of thy son). Incapable of being
looked at like the Sun himself, and scorching as it were, the hostile
army (like fire), none of the combatants could bear to even look at him
from any near point. And this array, fearless and having its face turned
towards all sides called Vajra, having bows for its lightning sign, and
extremely fierce, was protected by the wielder of Gandiva. Disposing
their troops in this counter-array against thy army, the Pandavas
waited for battle. And protected by the Pandavas, that array became
invincible in the world of men,

“And as (both) the armies stood at dawn of day waiting for sunrise,
a wind began to blow with drops of water (falling), and although there
were no clouds, the roll of thunder was heard, And dry winds began

to blow all around, bearing a shower of pointed pebbles along the ground.
And at thick dust arose, covering the world with darkness. And large
meteors began to fall east-wards. O bull of Bharata’s race, and striking
against the rising Sun, broke in fragments with loud noise. When the
troops stood arrayed, O bull of Bharata's race, the Sun rose divested of
splendour, and the Earth trembled with a loud sound, and cracked in

1 Literally, ‘with rent cheeks and mouth."—T,

2 The Bombay reading is certainly faulty here. For ‘Chalanta iva
paravatas’ it reads ‘Jimuta iva varashikas,’ although it makes the previous
line begin ‘Ksharantaiva Jimuta —T.

3 A‘parigha’is a thick club mounted withiron. The comparison is
very feeble, for Bhima’s mace, in the popular estimation, is much heavier
and stouter than any parigha manufactured for human combatants, ‘Pracha-
karsha’ is, lit. dragged. I think, however, the root ‘krish’ must be taken
here in the sense of ‘crush,’ By the by, is not ‘krish’ the same word as
‘orush’ ?—T.

4 The name Vajra implies either a hard needle for boring diamonds
and gems, or the thunder-bolt. In this sloka the word Vajra is used as
associated with the thunder and therefore, as thunder is accompanind by
lightning so the bows of the warriors are the lighting-marks of this parti-
cular Vajra—L. Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com :

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 41 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 47

many places, O chief of the Bharatas, with loud noise. And the roll of
thunder, O king, was heard frequently on all sides. So thick was the
dust that arose that nothing could be seen. And the tall standards (of
the combatants), furnished with strings of bells, decked with golden
ornaments, garlands of flowers, and rich drapery, graced with banners
and resembling the Sun in splendour, being suddenly shaken by the
wind, gave a loud jingling noise like that of a forest of palmyra trees
(when moved by the wind). It was thus that those tigers among men,
the sons of Pandu, ever taking delight in battle, stood having disposed
their troops in counter-array against the army of thy son, and sucking
as it were, the marrow, O bull of Bharata's race, of our warriors, and
casting their eyes on Bhimasena stationed at their head, mace in hand.”

SECTION XX

Dhritarashtra said—"“When the Sun rose, O Sanjaya, of my army
led by Bhishma and the Pandava army led by Bhima, which first
cheerfully approached the other, desirous of fight? To which side
were the Sun, the Moon and the wind hostile, and against whom did
the beasts of prey utter inauspicious sounds ? Who were those young
men, the complexions of whose faces were cheerful? Tell me all these
truly and duly.”

Sanjaya said,—"Both armies, when arrayed, were equally joyful, O
king. Both armies looked equally beautiful, assuming the aspect of
blossoming woods, and both armies were full of elephants, cars and
horses. Both armies were vast and terrible in aspect ; and so also, O
Bharata, none of them could bear the other. Both of them were
arrayed for conquering the very heavens, and both of them consisted of
excellent persons. The Kauravas belonging to the Dhritarashtra party
stood facing the west, while the Parthas stood facing the east, addrest
for fight. The troops of the Kauravas looked like the army of the chief
of the Danavas, while that of the Pandavas looked like the army of the
celestials. The wind began to blow from behind the Pandavas (against
the face of the Dhartarashtras), and the beasts of prey began to yell
against the Dhartarashtras. The elephants belonging to thy sons could
not bear the strong odour of the temporal juice emitted by the huge
elephants (of the Pandavas). And Duryodhana rode on an elephant of
the complexion of the lotus, with rent temples, graced with a golden
Kaksha (on its back), and cased in an armour of steel net-work. And he
was in the very centre of the Kurus and was adored by eulogists and
bards. Anda white umbrella of lunar effulgence was held over his
head graced with a golden chain. Him Sakuni, the ruler of the
Gandharas, followedp if abeauakaangeriva Gapstarsaoplaced all around,

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 42 ===

48 MAHABHARATA

And the venerable Bhishma was at the head of all the troops, witha

white umbrella held over his head, armed with bow and sword, with a.

white headgear, with a white banner (on his car), and with white steeds
(yoked thereto), and altogether looking like a white mountain. In
Bhishma’s division were all the sons of Dhritarashtra, and also Sala who
was a countryman of the Valhikas, and also all those Kshatriyas called
Amvastas, and those called Sindhus, and those also that are called
Sauviras, and the heroic dwellers of the country of the five rivers. And
on a golden car unto which were yoked red steeds, the high-souled
Drona, bow in hand and with never-failing heart, the preceptor of
almost all the kings, remained behind all the troops, protecting them
like Indra. And Saradwat's son, that fighter in the van,’ that high-
souled and mighty bowman, called also Gautama, conversant with all
modes of warfare, accompanied by the Sakas, the Kiratas, the Yavanas,
and the Palhavas, took up his position at the northern point of the
army. That large force which was well protected by mighty car-
warriors of the Vrishni and the Bhoja races, as also by the warriors of
Surashtra well-armed and well-acquainted with the uses of weapons,
and which was led by Kritavarman, proceeded towards the south of the
army.2 Ten thousand cars of the Samasaptakas, who were created for
either the death or the fame of Arjuna, and who, accomplished in arms,
intended to follow Arjuna at his heels,® all went out as also the brave
Trigartas. In thy army, O Bharata, were a thousand elephants of the
foremost fighting powers. Unto each elephant was assigned a century
of cars; unto each car, a hundred horsemen ; unto each horseman, ten
bowmen ; and unto each bowman ten combatants armed with (sword
and) shield. Thus, O Bharata, were thy divisions arrayed by Bhishma.
Thy generalissimo Bhishma, the son of Santanu, as each day dawned,
sometimes disposed thy troopsin the human army, sometimes in the
celestial, sometimes in the Gandharva, and sometimes in the Asura.
Thronged with a large number of Maharathas, and roaring like the very
ocean, the Dhartarashtra army, arrayed by Bhishma, stood facing the

west for battle. Illimitable as thy army was, O ruler of men, it looked,

terrible; but the army of the Pandavas, although it was not such (in
number), yet seemed to me to be very large and invincible since Kesava
and Arjuna were its leader,”

1 The word is ‘Uttaradhus’ which seems to be very doubtful.—T.

2 This sloka is omitted in the Bengal texts.—T.

3 ‘Yenarjunastena,’ ‘Yona’ is yatra, and ‘tena’ is ‘tatra,’ as Nilakantha
rightly explains, The meaning is—‘who would be there where Arjuna

would be.” —" Downloaded from https:/Avww.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 43 ===

SECTION XXI

Sanjaya said,—"Beholding the vast Dhartarashtra army ready for
battle, king Yudhisthira, the son of Kunti, gave way to grief. Seeing
that impenetrable array formed by Bhishma and regarding it as really
impenetrable, the king became pale and addressed Arjuna, saying.—’O
mighty-armed Dhananjaya, how shall we be able to fight in battle with
the Dhartarashtras who have the Grandsire for their (chief) comba-
tant? Immovable and impenetrable is this array that hath been
designed, according to the rules laid down in the scriptures, by that
Srinder of foes, Bhishma, of transcendent glory. With our troops we
have become doubtful (of success), O grinder of foes. How, indeed,
will victory be ours in the face of this mighty array ?'—Thus addressed,
that slayer of foes Arjuna answered Yudhisthira, the son of Pritha,
who had been plunged into grief at sight, O king, of thy army, in these
words,—Hear, O king, how soldiers that are few in number may van-
quish the many that are possessed of every quality. Thou art without
malice ; I shall, therefore, tell thee means, O king. The Rishi Narada
knows it, as also both Bhishma and Drona. Referring to this means,
the Grandsire himself in days of old on the occasion of the battle
between the Gods and the Asuras said unto Indra and the other celes-
tials —They that are desirous of victory do not conquer by might and
energy so much as by truth, compassion, righteousness and energy.?
Discriminating then between righteousness, and unrighteousness, and
understanding what is meant by covetousness and having recourse to
exertion fight without arrogance, for victory is there where righteous-
ness is.—For this know, O king, that to us victory is certain in (this)
battle. Indeed, as Narada said,—There is victory where Krishna is.—

Victory is inherent to Krishna. Indeed, it followeth Madhava. And
as victory is one of it8 attributes, so humility is his another attribute.
Govinda is possessed. of energy that is infinite. Even in the midst of
immeasurable foes he is without pain. He is the most eternal of male
beings. And there victory is where Krishna is. Even he, indestructible
and of weapons incapable of being baffled, appearing as Hari in olden
days, said in a loud voice unto the Gods and the Asuras:—Who amongst
you would be victorious ?—Even the conquered who said,— With Krishna
inthe front we will conquer.2—And it was through Hari’s grace that

1. The Bengal texts read ‘Dharmenikena chanagha’ which is evidently

faulty, remembering that the words are Brahman’s to Indra and the celes-

tials. The Bombay reading is ‘Dharmenaivodyamena cha’ which I have
adopted.—T.

2. The sense is that they, viz., the gods, who accepted Krishna’s lead,
or selected him for their leader, became victorious. The Bengal reading is
eyidently superior, viz., Anu Krishna literally “behind Krishna,” i.¢., “with
Krishna in the front, or ‘with Krishna as a leader.” The Bombay reading
is Katham Krishna. If this were adopted, the meaning would be, ‘How

| OKrishna, shall we conquer 2” Ido not understand how victory should

_ be theirs who answered in this way. Of course, the answer implies
modesty. But modesty is not the sole requisite of victory, nor is modesty
inculcated here as the Bhieilaadad sah Hitekottyyew-Bylybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 44 ===

50 MAHABHARATA

the three worlds were obtained by the gods headed by Sakra. I do not,
therefore, behold the slightest cause of sorrow in thee, thee that hast
the Sovereign of the Universe and the Lord himself of the celestials for
wishing victory to thyself.—'"

SECTION XXII

Sanjaya said,—"'Then, O bull of Bharata's race, king Yudhisthira,
disposing his own troops in counter array against the divisions of
Bhishma, urged them on, saying,—'The Pandavas have now disposed
their forces in counter array agreeably to what is laid down (in the
scriptures). Ye sinless ones, fight fairly, desirous of (entering) the highest
heaven’.—_In the centre (of the Pandava army) was Sikhandin and his
troops, protected by Arjuna. And Dhristadyumna moved in the van,
protected by Bhima.’ The southern division (of the Pandava army) was
protected, O king, by that mighty bowman, the handsome Yuyudhana,
that foremost combatant of the Satwata race, resembling Indra himself. .
Yudhisthira was stationed on a car that was worthy of bearing Mahendra
himself, adorned with an excellent standard, variegated with gold and
gems, and furnished with golden traces (for the steeds), in the midst
of his elephant divisions.2 His pure white umbrella with ivory handle,
raised over his head, looked exceedingly beautiful; and many great
Rishis walked arround the king® uttering words in his praise. And many _
priests, and regenerate Rishis and Siddhas, uttering hymns in his praise*
wished him, as they walked around, the destruction of his enemies, by
the aid of Yapas, and Mantras, efficacious drugs, and diverse pro-
pitiatory ceremonies, That high-souled chief of the Kurus, then
giving away unto the Brahmanas kine and fruits and flowers and golden

1. It will strike even the most cursory reader that Sanjaya, in new
section assigns new positions to almost every one of the noted combatants
of both sides.—a fact that furnishes strongest argument for supposing
that all these sections abound with interpolations. It is difflcult, almost:
impossible, to ascertain what the genuine text is—T.

2, The Bengal texts read ‘Kanchana-bhanda-yuksam.’ The Bombay
reading is much better, being ‘Kanchanabhanda-yoktam’ ; again, for ‘Nagar
kulasya’ the Bombay edition reads ‘Nagapurasya’, Nilakantha notices the
latter reading but it is a wretched conceit.—T.

8, The Bengal reading is 'Mahindram’ (king of earth, or king) ; the
Bombay reading is ‘Mahendram' (the great Indra). Without iva any word
to that effect, ‘Mahendram’ would be ungrammatical,—T.

4,. The Bengal texts read, and as I think, correctly, ‘Stutavanta
enam,’ The Bombay reading is ‘Srutavanta enam.’ In the case of Tegene-
rate Rishiy and Siddhas it is scarcely necessary to say that they are con-
versant with theéintisded Tom https://www.holybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 45 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 51

coins along with cloths’ proceeded like Sakra, the chief of the celestials.
The car of Arjuna, furnished with a hundred bells, decked with
Jamvunada gold of the best kind, endued with excellent wheels,
Possessed of the effulgence of fire, and unto which were yoked white
steeds, looked exceedingly brilliant like a thousand suns.? And on that
ape-bannered car the reins of which were held by Kesava, stood
Arjuna with Gandiva and arrows in hand—a bowman whose peer
exists not on earth, nor ever will. For crushing thy sons’ troops he who
assumeth the most awful form,—who, divested of weapons, with only
his bare hands, poundeth to dust men, horses, and elephants,—that
strong-armed Bhimasena, otherwise called Vrikodara, accompanied by
the twins, became the protector of the heroic car-warriors ( of the Pan-
dava ) army. Like unto a furious prince of lions of sportive gait, or like
the great Indra himself with ( earthly ) body on the Earth, beholding
that invincible Vrikodara,like unto a proud leader of an elephantine
herd, stationed in the van (of the army ), the warriors on thy side,
their strength weakened by fear, began to tremble like elephants sunk
in mire.

“Unto that invincible prince Gudakesa staying in the midst of his
troops, Janarddana, O chief of Bharata’s race, said—He, who scorching
us with his wrath, stayeth in the midst of his forces, he, who will attack

our troops like a lion, he, who performed three hundred horse-sacrifices,
—that banner of Kuru’s race, that Bhishma,—stayeth yonder! Yon
tanks around him on all sides great warriors like the clouds shrouding
the bright luminary. O foremost of men, slaying yon troops, seek battle
with yonder bull of Bharata’s race.”

SECTION XXII

Sanjaya said,—“Beholding the Dhartarashtra army approach for
fight, Krishna said these words for Arjuna’s benefit.”

“The holy one said,—‘Cleansing thyself, O mighty-armed one, utter
on the eve of the battle thy hymn to Durga for (compassing) the defeat
of the foe.”

Sanjaya continued,—Thus addressed on the eve of battle by Vasu.
deva endued with great intelligence, Pritha’s son Arjuna, alighting from
his car, said the (following) hymn with joined hands.

“Arjuna said,—'I bow to thee, O leader of Yogine, O thou that art
identical with Brahman, O thou that dwellest in the forest of Mandara.

1 The Bengal reading ‘Sahasrani’ for ‘Savastrani’ ig correct, I adopt
the latter.—T

2 This is how I understand this verse, and Iam supported by the
Burdwan Pundits. Nilkantha, it seems, thinks that the car had a thou-
sand wheels resembling a thousand suns. This seems tobe extravagant,—T.

8 Verse 16 is read variously. As the last word of the first line, I read
‘Achakarsha’ for ‘raraksha,’ and accordingly I take that as a genetive and
not an ablative particle —T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 46 ===

52 MAHABHARATA

O thou'that art freed from decrepitude and decay, O Kali, O wife of
Kapala, O thou that art of a black and tawny hue, I bow to thee. O
bringer of benefits to thy devotees, I bow to thee, O Mahakali, O wife
of the universal destroyer, I bow to thee. O proud one, O thou that
rescuest from dangers, O thou that art endued with every auspicious
attribute, O thou that art sprung from the Kata race, O thou that
deservest the most regardful worship, O fierce one, O giver of victory,
O victory’s self, O thou that bearest a banner of peacock plumes, O
thou that art decked with every ornament, O thou that bearest an awful
spear, O thou that holdest a sword and shield, O thou that art the
younger sister of the chief of cow-herds, O eldest one, O thou that wert
born in the race of the cowherd Nanda ! O thou that art always fond of
buffalo’s blood, O thou that wert born in the race of Kusika, O thou
that art dressed in yellow robes, O thou that hadst devoured Asuras
assuming the face of a wolf, I bow to thee that art fond of battle! O
Uma,?2 O Sakambhars, O thou that art white in hue, O thou that art
black in hue, Othou that hast slain the Asura Kaitabha, O thou that
art yellow-eyed, O thou that art diverse-eyed, O thou of eyes that have
the colour of smoke, I bow to thee. O thou that art the Vedas, the
Srutie, and the highest virtue, O thou that art propitious to Brahma-
nas engaged in sacrifice, O thou that hast a knowledge of the past,
thou that art ever present in the sacred abodes erected to thee in
cities of Jamvudwipa, I bow to thee. Thou art the science of Brahma
among sciences, and thou that art that sleep of creatures from which
there is no waking. O mother of Skanda, O thou that possessest the six
(highest) attributes,O Durga, O thou that dwellest in accesible regions,
thou art described as Swaha, and Swadha,* as Kala, as Kashta, and
as Saraswati, as Savitra the mother of the Vedas, and as the
science of Vedanta. With inner soul cleansed, I praise thee. O
Sreat goddess, let victory always attend me through thy grace on the
field of battle. In inaccessible regions, where there is fear, in places
of difficulty, in the abodes of thy worshippers and in the nether regions
(Patala), thou always dwellest. Thou always defeatest the Danavas,
Thou art the unconsciousness, the sleep, the illusion, the
modesty, the beauty of ( all creatures). Thou art the twilight,

1 I follow Nilakantha in rendering many of the names ocourring in this
and the succeeding slokas. I retain, however, those names that are of
doubtful etymology, as also those that are very common.—T.

2 Every scholar knows the derivation of this word as given in this sloka
of Kalidasa (in his Kumara Sambhavam ) Umeti matra tapasonishiddha
paschadumakhyam Sumukhi Jagama.—T.

3 Both Swaha and Swadha are mantras of high efficacy. Kala and’
Kastha are divisions of time. Saraswati implies speech.—T.

Downloaded from https:/Avww.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 47 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 58

thou art the day, thou art Savitri, and thou art the mother, Thou art
contentment, thou art growth, thou art light, It is thou that suppor-
test the Sun and the Moon and that makes them shine. Thou art the
prosperity of those that are prosperous. The Siddhas and the Charanas
behold thee in contemplation.!’ ”

Sanjaya continued—Understanding (the measure of ) Partha’s
devotion, Durga who is always graciously inclined towards mankind,
appeared in the firmament and in the presence of Govinda, said these
words.

‘ “The goddess said,—'Within a short time thou shalt conquer thy
foes, O Pandava. O invincible one, thou hast Narayana (again) for
aiding thee. Thou art incapable of being defeated by foes, even by the
wielder of the thunderbolt himself.’

_. ‘"“Having said this, the boon-giving goddess disappeared soon. The

son.of Kunti, however, obtaining that boon, regarded himself as success-
ful, and the son of Pritha then mounted his own excellent car. And
then Krishna and Arjuna, seated on the same car, blew their celestial
conches. The man that recites this hymn rising at dawn, hath no fear
any time from Yakshas, Rakshaeas, and Pisachas, He can have no enemies ;
he hath no fear, from snakes and all animals that have fangs and
teeth, as also from kings. He is sure to be victorious in all disputes,
and if bound, he is freed from his bonds, He is sute to get over all
difficulties, is freed from thieves, is ever victorious in battle and
winneth the goddess of prosperity for ever. With health and strength,
he liveth for a hundred years,

“[have known all this through the grace of Vyasa endued with
great wisdom. Thy wicked sons, however, all entangled in the meshes
of death, do not, from ignorance, know them to be Nara and Narayana.
Nor do they, entangled in the meshes of death, know that the hour of
this kingdom hath arrived. Dwaipayana and Narada, and Kanwa, and
the sinless Rama, had all prevented thy son. But he did not accept their
words. There where righteousness is there are glory and beauty.
There where modesty is, there are prosperity and intelligence. There
where righteousness is, there is Krishna; and there where Krishna is,
there is victory.”

1 Sankhye is explained by Nilakantha to be Samyak Khyanam Prakasana
Tasmin ; hence Atmanatma-vivekarupa Samadhi,—T.
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 48 ===

SECTION XXIV

Dhritarashtra said,—"'There (on the field of battle) O Sanjaya, the
warriors of which side first advanced to battle cheerfully? Whose
hearts were filled with confidence, and who were spiritless from melan-
choly ? In that battle which maketh the hearts of men tremble with
fear, who were they that struck the first blow, mine or they belonging
tothe Pandavas? Tell me all this, O Sanjaya. Among whose troops
did the flowery garlands and unguents emit fragrant odours? And
whose troops, roaring fiercely, uttered merciful words ?”

Sanjaya said,—"'The combatants of both armies were cheerful then
and the flowery garlands and perfumes of both troops emitted equal
fragrance. And, O bull of Bharata’s race, fierce was the collision that —
took place when the serried ranks arrayed for battle encountered each
other. And the sound of musical instruments, mingled with the blare
of conches.and the noise of drums, and the shouts of brave warriors
roaring fiercely at one another, became very loud. O bull of Bharata’s
race, dreadful was the collision caused by the encounter of the comba-
tants of both armies, filled with joy and staring at one another, and the
elephants uttering obstreperous grunts."

SECTION XXV

Dhritarashtra said—'‘Assembled together on the sacred plain of
Kurukshetra from desire of fighting what did my sons and the Pandavas
do, O Sanjaya.”

Sanjaya said,—“Beholding the army of the Pandavas arrayed, king
Duryodhana, approaching the preceptor (Drona) said these words :—
Behold, O preceptor, this vast army of the son of Pandu, arrayed by
Drupada’s son (Dhrishtadyumna), thy intelligent disciple. There (in
that army) are many brave and mighty bowmen,? who in battle are
equal to Bhima and Arjuna- (They are) Yuyudhana, and Virata, and
that mighty car-warrior® Drupada, and Dhrishtaketu, and Chekitana,
andthe ruler of Kasi endued with great energy; and Purujit, and
Kuntibhoja, and Saivya that bull among men; and Yudhamanyu of
great prowess, and Uttamaujas of great energy; and Subhadra's son,
and the sons of Draupadi, all of whom are mighty car-warriors. Hear,
however, O best of regenerate ones, who are the distinguished ones
among us, the leader of army. I willname them to thee for (thy)
information. (They are) thyself, and Bhishma, and Karna, and Kripa
who is ever victorious; and Aswathaman and Vikarna, and Sauma-

1 Hridayakampane is the correot reading, and not Hridayakampanam.-T
2 Literally, “bearers of large bows."—T.
3 Lit. “owner of a large car," or, as explained befor
competent to fight single-handed against a thousand archers.”
Downloaded from https:/Avww.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

‘a warrior
T.

=== PAGE 49 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 55

datta, and Jayadratha-' Besides these are many heroic warriors,
prepared to lay down their lives for my sake, armed with diverse kinds
of weapons, and all accomplished in battle. Our army, therefore,
protected by Bhishma, is insufficient. This force, however, of these
(the Pandavas ), protected by Bhima, is sufficient.? Stationing your-
selves then in the entrances of the divisions that have been assigned to
you, all of you protect Bhishma alone.—(Just at this time) the valiant
and venerable grandsire of the Kurus, affording great joy to him
(Duryodhana) by loudly uttering a leonine roar, blew (his) conch. Then
conches and drums and cymbals and horns were sounded at once and
the noise (made) became a loud uproar, Then Madhava and Pandu’s
- son (Arjuna), both stationed on a great car unto which were yoked
white steeds, blew their celestial conches- And Hrishikesha blew ( the
conch called ) Panchajanya and Dhananjaya (that called) Devadatta ; and
Vrikodara of terrible deeds blew the huge conch (called) Paundra. And
Kunti’s son king Yudhishthira blew ( the conch called ) Anantavijaya ;
while Nakula and Sahadeva, (thoseiconches called respectively) Sughosa
and Manipushpaka.* And that splendid bowman, the ruler of Kasi and
that mighty car-watrior, Sikhandin, Dhrishtadyumna, Virata, and that
unvanquished Satyaki, and Drupada, and the sons of Draupadi, and
the mighty-armed son of Subhadra—all these, O lord of Earth, severally
blew their conches. And that blare, loudly reverberating through the
welkin and the earth, rent the hearts of the Dhartatashtras. Then
beholding the Dhartarashtra troops drawn up, the ape-bannered* son of
Pandu, rising his bow, when, the throwing of missiles had just
commenced, said these words, O lord of Earth, to Hrishikesha.*
“Arjuna said,—'O thou that knoweth no deterioration, place my car
(once) between the two armies, so that I may observe these that stand

1 The text of the Gita bas come down to us without, it may be ven-
tured to be stated, any interpolation. The difference of reading are few
and far between. For Jayadratha some texts read tathaivacha.—T.

2 The words ‘Aparyaptam and Paryaptam’ have exercised all commenta-
tors, If ‘paryaptam’ is sufficient (as it certainly is), ‘aparyaptam’ may mean
either more or less than sufficient. The context, however, would seem to
show that Duryodhana addressed his preceptor in alarm and not with confi-
dence of success. I, therefore, take 'aparyaptam’ to be less than sufficient.-T

3 It bas been observed before that Schlegel renders the names of these
conches as Gigantea, Theodotes, Arundinca, Triumpphatrix, Dulcisona, and
Gemmiflora, and that Professor Wilson approves of them.—T.

4 I have elsewhere (see ante) shown why compounds such as this are
necessary in translating from the Sanskrit.—T.

5 It seems a fashion to doubt the etymology of this word, as if comen-
tators of the learning of Sreedhara and Sankara, Anandagiri and Nilkantha
even upon a question of derivation and grammar can really be set aside in
favour of anything that may occur in the Petersburgh lexidon. Hrishikesa

means the lord of tewevaaded im https:/www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 50 ===

56 MAHABHARATA

here desirous of battle, and with whom I shall have to contend in the
labours of this struggle. I will observe those who are assembled here
and who are prepared to fight for doing what is agreeable in battle to the
evil-minded son of Dhritarashtra.’ ”

Sanjaya continued,—"“Thus addressed by Gudakesa, O Bharata,
Hrishikesa, placing that excellent car between the two armies, in view
of Bhishma and Drona and all the kings of the Earth, said,—'Behold, O
Partha these assembled Kurus,—And there the son of Pritha beheld,
standing (his) sires and grandsons, and friends, and father-in-law and
well-wishers, in both the armies. Beholding all those kinsmen standing
(there), the son of Kunti, possessed by excessive pity, despondingly said
(these words).

“Arjuna said,—‘Beholding these kinsmen, O Krishna, assembled
together and eager for the fight, my limbs, become languid, and my *
mouth becomes dry. My body trembles, and my hair stands on end,
Gandiva slips from my hand, and my skin burns. I am unable to stand
(any longer); my mind seems to wander. I behold adverse omens, too,
OKesava. Idonot desire victory, O Krishna, not sovereignty, nor
pleasures. Of what use would sovereignty be to us, O Govinda, or
enjoyments, or even life, since they, for whose sake sovereignty,
enjoyments, and pleasures are desired by us, are here arrayed for battle
ready to give up life and wealth, viz., preceptors, sires, sons and grand-
sires, maternal uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law, and
kinsmen. I wish not to slay these though they slay me, O slayer of
Madhu, even for the sake of the sovereignty of the three worlds, what
then for the sake of (this) earth?? What gratification ¢ - be ours,
O Janarddana, by slaying the Dhartarashtras ? Evenif they oe regarded
as foes,* sin will overtake us if we slay them. Therefore, it behoveth
us not to slay the sons of Dhritarashtra who are our own kinsmen.*
How, O Madhava can we be happy by killing our own kinsmen?
Even if these, with judgments perverted by avarice, do not see the
evil that ariseth from the extermination of a race, and the sin of
internecine quarrels, why should not we, O Janarddana, who see the
evils of the extermination of a race, learn to abstain from that sin ?

1 ‘Ranasamudyame’ may also mean ‘‘at the outest of battle.”"—T,

2 The meaning is that even for the sake of such a rich reward in
prospect I would not kill persons so dear and near to me, I would much
rather suffec them strike me, myself not returning their blows.—T,

3 The word is ‘atatayinas.—T.

4 Most editions read ‘savandhavam’ ‘with (their) kinsmen or friends,”
I think, however, that swa (own) for (with) is the correct reading, K.T.

Tell dopts it in hi i i i i
Flag opts it Bhi APH ge JHARUROH dB.< Bh, VIET of the Baared
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 51 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 57

A race being destroyed, the eternal customs of that race are lost ; and
upon those customs being lost, sin overpowers the whole race. From the
predominance of sin, O Krishna, the women of that race become corrupt.
And the women becoming corrupt, an intermingling of castes happen-
eth, O descendant of Vrishni. This intermingling of castes leadeth to hell
both the destroyer of the race and the race itself. The ancestors of
those fall (from heaven), their rites of pinda and water ceasing. By
these sins of destroyers of races, causing intermixture of castes, the rules
of caste and the eternal rites of families become extinct. We have
heard, O Janarddana, that men whose family rites become extinct, ever
dwell in hell. Alas, we have resolved to perpetrate a great sin, for we
are ready to slay our own kinsmen from lust of the sweets of sovereignty.
Better would it be for me if the sons of Dhritarashtra, weapon in hand,
should in battle slay me (myself) unavenging unarmed,—’ "

Sanjaya continued —'‘Having spoken thus on the field of battle,
Arjuna, his mind troubled with grief, casting aside his bow and arrows,
sat down on his car.”

[Here ends the first lesson entitled “Survey of Forces"! in the
dialogue between Krishna and Arjuna of the Bhagavadgita, the essence
of religion, the knowledge of Brahma, and the system of Yoga, comprised
within the Bhishma Parva of the Mahabharata of Vyasa containing one
hundred thousand verses.]

SECTION XXVI
f Sanjaya said,—"Unto him thus possessed with pity, his eyes filled
and oppressed with tears, and desponding, the slayer of Madhu said
these words.”

The holy one said—'* Whence, O Arjuna, hath come upon thee, at
such a crisis. this despondency that is unbecoming ‘a person of noble
birth, that shuts one out from heaven, and that is productive of infamy ?
Let no effiminacy be thine, O son of Kunti. This suits thee not.
Shaking off this vile weakness of hearts, arise, O chastiser of foes.—"

Arjuna said,—''How, O slayer of Madhu, can I with arrows contend
in battle against Bhishma and Drona, deserving as they are, O slayer of
foes, of worship ?? Without slaying (one’s) preceptors of great glory,
itis well (for one), to live on even alms in this world. By slaying
Preceptors, even if they are avaricious of wealth, I should only enjoy

1 Insome editions this lesson is stated to be “Arjuna’s grief.” The
description of the lesson again is given in fewer words,—T.

2 The commentators betray their ingenuity by emphasizing the word
‘ishubhis’ (with arrows), explaining, “how can I encounter them with
arrows whom I can nobeneoundserrovi thisrenvianshpeordecn—T.

(= https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 52 ===

58 MAHABHARATA

pleasures that are bloodstained !!_ We know not which of the two is of
greater moment to us, viz, whether we should conquer them or they
should conquer us. By slaying whom we would not like to live,—even
they, the sons of Dhritarashtra, stand before (us). My nature affected
by the taint of compassion, my mind unsettled about (my) duty, F ask
thee. Tell me what is assuredly good (for me). Iam thy disciple.
O, instruct me, I seek thy aid.? I do not see (that) which would dispel
that grief of mine blasting my very senses, even if I obtain a prosperous
kingdom on earth without a foe or the very sovereignty of the gods.” ”

Sanjaya said—“Having said this unto Hrishikesa, that chastiser of
foes—Gudakesa—(once more) addressed Govinda, saying.—‘I will not
fight,—and then remained silent. Unto him overcome by despondency,
Hrishikesa, in the midst of the two armies, said.

“The holy one said,—‘Thou mournest those that deserve not to be
mourned. Thou speakest also the words of the (so-called) wise.
Those, however, that are (really) wise, grieve neither for the dead nor
for the living. It is not that, I or you or those rulers of men never
were, or that all of us shall not hereafter be. Of an Embodied being, as
childhood, youth, and decrepitude are in this body, so (also) is the
acquisition of another body. The man, who is wise, is never deluded in
this.5 The contacts of the senses with their (respective) objects
producing (sensations of) heat and cold, pleasure and pain, are not
permanent, having (asthey do) a beginning and anend. Dothou, O
Bharata, endure them. For the man whom these afflict not, O bull

1, ‘Arthakaman’ is an adjective qualifying 'Gurun’. Some commentators
particularly Sreedhara, suggest that it may, instead, qualify ‘bhogan’. The
meaning, however, in that case would be far-fetched.—T,

2. Sreedhara explains that ‘Karpanya’ is compassion (for kinsmen), and
‘dosha’ is the fear of sin (for destroying a race). The first compound, there-
fore, according to him, mcans,—'tMy nature affected by both compassion
and fear of ain, etc." It is better, however, to take ‘Karpanya’ itself as a
‘dosha’ (taint or fault). K. T, Telang understands it in this way. ‘Upahata,’
however, is affected and not contaminated.—T.

3, What Arjuna says here is that "Even if I obtain such a kingdom on
Earth, even if I obtain the very kingship of the gods, I do not yet see that
will dispel that grief which will overtake me if I slay my preceptor and
kinsmen.” Telang's version is slightly ambiguous.—T,

4, The Bengal texts have ‘Parantapa’ with a ‘Visarga’, thus implying
that it refers to ‘Gudakesa’, The Bombay edition prints it without the
‘Visarge’, implying that it is in the vocative cage, referring to Dhritarashtra
the listoner,—T, . i

5 Ono of the most useful rples in translating from one language into
another is to use identical words for identical expressions in the original.
In translating, however, from a language like Sanskrit which abounds in
synonyms, this is not always practicable without ambiguity. Ag an exame-
ple, the word used in 13 is ‘Dhira’ ; that used in 11 is ‘Pandita’. There can
bo Tistle donbt, Bewaetied HBhn HRBRAAh AHR eDRBS ave exactly the same

eaning.—T,
a 'Rtips:/www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-1 2-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 53 ===

BHISHMA PABVA 69

among men, who is the same in pain and pleasure and who is firm in
mind, is fit for emancipation.! There is no (objective) existence of
anything that is distinct from the soul; nor non-existence of anything
possessing the virtues of the soul. This conclusion in respect of both
these hath been arrived at by those that know the truths (of things).?
Know that [the soul] to be immortal by which all this [universe] is
pervaded. No one can compass the destruction of that which is
imperishable. It hath been said that those bodies of the Embodied (soul)
which is eternal, indestructible and infinite, have anend. Do thou,
therefore, fight, O Bharata, He who thinks it (the soul) to be the
slayer and he who thinks it to be the slain, both of them know nothing ;
for it neither slays nor isslain. It is never born, nor doth it ever die ;
nor, having existed, will it exist no more. Unborn, unchangeable,
eternal, and ancient, it is not slain upon the body being perished. That
man who knoweth it to be indestructible, unchangeable, without decay,
how and whom can he slay or cause to be slain? Asa man, casting off
robes that are worn out, putteth on others that are new, so the Embo-
died (soul), casting off bodies that are worn out, entereth other bodies
that are new. Weapons cleave it not, fire consumeth it not; the
waters do not drench it, nor doth the wind waste it. It is incapable of
being cut, burnt, drenched, or dried up. It is unchangeable, all-
pervading, stable, firm, and eternal. It issaid to be imperceivable,
inconceivable and unchangeable, Therefore, knowing it to be such, it
behoveth thee not to mourn (for it). Then again even if thou regardest
it as constantly born and constantly dead, it behoveth thee not yet, O
mighty-armed one, to mourn (for it) thus. For, of one that is born,
death is certain; and of one that is dead, birth is certain. Therefore,
it behoveth thee not to mourn ina matter that is unavoidable. All
beings (before birth) were unmanifest. Only during an interval

(between birth and death ), O Bharata, are they manifest ; and then
again, when death comes, they become (once more) unmanifest. What
grief then is there in this? One looks upon it asa marvel; another
speaks of it asa marvel. Yet evenafter having heard of it, no one
apprehends it truly. The Embodied (soul), O Bharata, is ever in-
destructible in everyone's body. Therefore, it behoveth thee not to
grieve for all (those) creatures. Casting thy eyes on the (prescribed)

1 ‘Amritatwa’ is really emancipation or non-liability to repeated death
or repeated re-birth. To render it as “immortality” is, perbaps, a little
slovenly, for every soul is immortal, and this particular section inculoates
it.—T.

2 ‘Sat’ and ‘asat’ are the two words which must be distinctly understood
as they ocour often in Hindu philosophy. ‘Sat’ is explained as the real, i. e.,
the soul, or anything as real and permanent as the soul. ‘Asat’ is the reverse
of this, i.e., the unreal or the Non-soul. What is said here by Krishna is
that the unreal has no oxistence; the real, again can have no non-exis-
tence. Is not this a sort of cosmothetic idealism ?—T-

Downloaded from https:/Avww.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 54 ===

EO rllt—“‘i‘—OO

60 MAHABHARATA

duties of thy order, it behoveth thee not to waver, for there is nothing
else that is better for a Kshatriya than a battle fought fairly. Arrived
of itself and (like unto) an open gate of heaven, happy are those
Kshatriyas, O Partha, that obtain sucha fight. But if thou dost not
fight such a just battle, thou shalt then incur sin by abandoning the
duties of thy order and thy fame. People will then proclaim thy
eternal infamy, and to one that is held in respect, infamy is greater (as
an evil) than death itself. All great car-warriors will regard thee as
abstaining from battle from fear, and thou wilt be thought lightly by
those that had (hitherto) esteemed thee highly. Thy enemies, decrying
thy prowess, will say many words which should not be said. What can
be more painful than that? Slain, thou wilt attain to heaven; or
victorious, thou wilt enjoy the Earth. Therefore, arise, O son of Kunti,
resolved for battle, Regarding pleasure and pain, gain and loss, victory
and defeat, as equal, do battle for battle’s sake and sin will not be
thine! This knowledge, that hath been communicated to thee is
(taught) in the Sankhya (system). Listen now to that (inculcated) in
Yoga (system). Possessed of that knowledge, thou, O Partha, wilt cast
off the bonds of action. In this ( the Yoga system ) there is no waste of
even the first attempt. There areno impediments, Evena little of
this (form of) piety delivers from great fear.2 Here [in this path], O
son of Kuru, there is only one state of mind, consisting in firm devotion
(to one object, viz., securing emancipation). The minds of those, how-
ever, that are not firmly devoted (to this), are many-branched (un-
settled) and attached to endless pursuits. That flowery talk which, they

that are ignorant, they that delight in the words of the Vedas, they, O
Partha, that say that there is nothing else, they whose minds are
attached to wordly pleasures, they that regard (a) heaven (of pleasures
and enjoyments) as the highest object of acquisition,—utter
and promises birth as the fruit of action and concerns itself with
multifarious rites of specific characters for the attainment of pleasures
and power,—delude their hearts and the minds of these men who are
attached to pleasures and power cannot be directed to contemplation
(of the divine being ) regarding it as the sole means of emancipa-
tion’. The Vedas are concerned with three qualities, (viz, religion,
profit,and pleasure). Be thou, O Arjuna, free from them, unaffected

1 Most toxts read ‘Yudhaya Yujyaswa.’ A manuscript belonging to a
friend of mine has the correction in red-ink, 'Yudtaya Yudhaya Yudhaswa,’

It accords so well with the spirit of the lesson sought to be inculcated here
that I make no scruple to adopt it.—T,

2 A life in this world that is subject to decay and death. So say all the
commentators,—T,

3 What Krishna seeks to inculcate here is the simple truth that per-
sons who believe in the Vedas and their ordinances laying down specific
acts fer the attainment of a heaven of pleasure and power, cannot have the
devotion without which there cannot be final emancipation which only is
the highest bliss. The performance of Vedic rites may lead to heaven of

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 55 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 61

by pairs of contraries (such as pleasure and pain, heat and cold, etc.),
ever adhering to patience without anxiety for new acquisitions or
Protection of those already acquired, and self-possessed, whatever
objects are served by a tank or well, may all be served by a vast sheet
of water extending all around; so whatever objects may be served by
all the Vedas, may allbe had by a Brahmana having knowledge (of
self or Brahma). Thy concern is with work only, but not with the
fruit (of work), Let not the fruit be thy motive for work ; nor let thy
inclination be for inaction. Staying in devotion, apply thyself to work,
casting off attachment (to it), O Dhananjaya, and being the same in
Success or unsuccess. This equanimity is called Yoga (devotion). Work
(with desire of fruit) is far inferior to devotion, O Dhananjaya. Seek
thou the protection of devotion. They that work for the sake’ of fruit
are miserable. He who hath devotion throws off, even in this world,
both good actions and bad actions. Therefore, apply thyself to devotion.
Devotion is only cleverness in action. The wise, possessed of devotion,
cast off the fruit born of action, and freed from the obligation of
(repeated) birth, attain to that region where there is no unhappiness.
When thy mind shall have crossed the maze of delusion, then shalt thou
attain to an indifference as regards the hearable and the heard.?, When
thy mind, distracted (now) by what thou hast heard (about the means
of acquiring the diverse objects of life), will be firmly and immovably
fixed on contemplation, then wilt thou attain to devotion,’

“Arjuna said,—What, O Kesava, are the indications of one whose
mind is fixed on contemplation ?. How should one of steady mind speak,
how sit, how move ?”

pleasure and power, but what is that heaven worth ? True emancipation is
something else which must be obtained by devotion, by pure contemplation,
In rendering ‘Janma-Karma-phalapradam’ I have followed Sankara, Sree-
dhara and other commentators explain it differently, —T,

1 This sloka has beon variously rendered by various translators, It is
the same that occurs in the Sanat-Sujata Parva of the Udyoga, (Vide
Udyoga parva, Section—XLV). Both Srsedhara and Sankara (and I may
mention Anandagiri also) explain it in this way. Shortly stated, the mean-
ing is that to an instructed Brahmaua (Brahma-knowing person and not
& Brahmana by birth), bis knowledge (of self or Brahma) teaches him that

which is obtainable from all the Vedas, just as a man wanting to bathe or

Occupying an extensive aren, Nilakantha explains it in a different way.

2 ‘Stotavyasya Srutasyacha’ is literally ‘of the hearable and the heard,’
ive, “what you may or will hear, and what you have heard,” European
translators of the Gita view in these words a rejection of the Vedas by
the author. It ig amusing to see how confidently they dogmatise upon
this point, rejecting the authority of Sankara, Sreedhara, Anandagiri, and
the whole host of Indian commentators. As K.T. Telang, however, has
answered the point elaborately, nothing more need be said here—,

a Downloaded from https:/Avww.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 56 ===

62 MAHABHARATA

“The holy one said,—'When one casts off all the desires of his heart
and is pleased within (his) selé with self, then is one said to be of steady
mind. He whose mind is not agitated amid calamities, whose craving .
for pleasure is gone, who is freed from attachment (to worldly objects),
fear and wrath, is said to be a Muni of steady mind. His is steadiness of
mind who is without affection everywhere, and who feeleth no exulta-
tion and no aversion on obtaining diverse objects that are agreeable
and disagreeable. When one withdraws his senses from the objects of
(those) senses as the tortoise its limbs from all sides, even his is steadi-
ness of mind. Objects of senses fall back from an abstinent person, but
not so the passion (for those objects). Even the passion recedes from one
who has beheld the Supreme (being). The agitating senses, O son of
Kunti, forcibly draw away the mind of even a wise man striving hard
to keep himself aloof from them. Restraining them all, one should stay
in contemplation, making me his sole refuge. For his is steadiness of
mind whose senses are under control. Thinking of the objects of sense,
a person's attachment is begotten towards them. From attachment
springeth wrath; from wrath ariseth want of discrimination; from
want of discrimination, loss of memory ; from loss of memory, loss of
understanding; and from loss of understanding (he) is utterly ruined,
But the self-restrained man, enjoying objects (of sense) with senses
freed from attachment and aversion and under his own control, attaineth

to peace (of mind). On peace (of mind) being attained, the annihila-
tion of all his miseries taketh place, since the mind of him whose heart
is peaceful soon becometh steady.? He who is not self-restrained hath
no contemplation (of self). He who hath no contemplation hath no
peace (of mind).* Whence can there be happiness for him who hath
no peace (of mind)? For the heart that follows in the wake of the
sense moving (among their objects) destroys his understanding like the
wind destroying a boat in the waters.* Therefore, O thou of mighty arms,

i One may abstain, either from choice or inability Go procure them,
from the objects of enjoyment. Until, however, the very desire to enjoy
is suppressed, one cannot be said to have attained to steadiness of mind.
Of Aristotle’s saying that ho is a voluptuary who pines at his own absti-
nenee, and the Christain doctrine of sin being in the wish, mere abstinence
from the act constitutes no merit —T.

2 The particle ‘he’ in the seqond line is explained by both Sankara and
Anandagiri as equivalent to ‘Yasmat’. The meaning becomes certainly
clearer by taking the word in this sense. The'he’, however, may also be
taken as implying the sense of *indeed.”—T.

3 Buddhi in the first line is explained by Sreedhara as ‘Atmavishayak
buddhi.’ ‘Bhavanta’ Sreedhara explains, is ‘Dhyanam; and Sankara as
‘Atmajnanabhinivesas’. K,T. Telang renders ‘Bhavana’ as perseverance. I
do not think this is correct.—T.

4 Sankara, Anandagiri, and Nilakantha explain this sloka thus. Sree-
dhara explains it otherwise. The latter supposes tho pronouns ‘yat’ and ‘tat’
to mean a particular sense among the ‘Charatam indriyanam.’ If Sreedhara’s
interpretation be opepAalad FRA RIBS: KAMARA DodNetien{ One sense) amongst

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 57 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 63

his is steadiness of mind whose senses are restrained on all sides from the
object of sense- The restrained man is awake when it is night for all
creatures; and when other creatures are awake that is night to a
discerning Muni.1. He into whom all objects of desire enter, even as
the waters enter the ocean which (though) constantly replenished still
maintains its water-mark unchanged—(he) obtains peace (of mind) and
not one that longeth for objects of desire. That man who moveth about,
giving up all objects of desire, who is free from craving (for enjoyments)
and who hath no affection and no pride, attaineth to peace (of mind).
This, O Partha, is the divine state. Attaining to it, one is never
deluded. Abiding in it one obtains, on death, absorption into the
Supreme Self,”

SECTION XXVII

“Arjuna said,—‘If devotion, O Janarddana, is regarded by thee as
superior to work, why then, O Kesava, dost thou engage me in such
dreadful work ? By equivocal words thou seemest to confound my
understanding. Therefore, tell (me) one thing definitely by which I
may attain to what is good.’

“The holy one said—'It hath already been said by me, O sinless one,
that here are, in this world, two kinds of devotion ; that of the Sankhyas
through Knowledge and that of the Yogins through Work. A man doth
not acquire freedom from work from (only) the non-performance of
work. Nor doth he acquire final emancipation from only renunciation
(of work), No one can abide even for a moment without doing work.?
That man of deluded soul who, curbing the organs of sense, liveth
mentally cherishing the objects of sense, is said to be a dissembler. He,
however, O Arjuna, who restraining (his) senses by his mind, engageth
in devotion (in the form) of work with the organs of work, and is free
from attachment, is distinguished (above all). (Therefore), do thou
always apply yourself to work, for action is better than inaction. Even
the support of thy body cannot be accomplished without work.’ This

the senses moving (among their objects) which the mind follows, (that one
sense) tosseth the mind’s (or the man’s) understanding about like the wind

.tossing & (drunken boatman’s) boat on the waters.” The parenthetical words

are introduced by Sreedhara himself. It may not be out of place to men-
tion here that sofaras Bengal, Mithila and Benares are concerned, tho
authority of Sreedhara is regarded as supreme.—T*
«1 The vulgar, being spiritually dark, are engaged in worldly pursuits.
The sage in spiritual light is dead to the latter,—T.

2 ‘Prakritijais Gunas’ is explained by Sreedhara as qualities born of
one’s nature such as ‘Ragadveshadi.’ Sankara thinks that they are the
qualities or attributes of primal matter (which enters into the composition
of every self) such as Satwa, Rajas, and Tamas.—T.

8 “Apply to work,” i.e, to work as prescribed in the soriptures. Thus
says Sankara. "To mowningisaoovenbed/prarnonpebec.camys Sreedhara.—T.

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 58 ===

64 MAHABHARATA

world is fettered by all work other than that which is (performed) for
Sacrifice. (Therefore), O son of Kunti, perform work for the sake of
that, freed from attachment. In olden times, the Lord of creation,
creating men and Sacrifice together, said,—flourish by means of this
(Sacrifice ]. Let this ( Sacrifice ) be to you (all) the dispenser of all
objects cherished by you. Rear the gods with this, and let the gods (in
return) rear you. Thus fulfilling the mutual interest you will obtain that
which is beneficial (to you).2 Propitiated with sacrifices the gods will
bestow on you the pleasures you desire. He who enjoyeth (nimself) without
giving them what they have given, is assuredly a thief. The good who eat
the remnant of sacrifices are freed from all sins. Those unrighteous ones
incur sin who dress food for their own sake.—From food are all crea-
tures; and sacrifice is the outcome of work.* Know that work proceeds
from the Vedas; Vedas have proceeded from Him who hath no decay.
Therefore, the all-pervading Supreme Being is installed in sacrifice.‘
He who conformeth not to this wheel that is thus revolving, that man
of sinful life delighting ( the indulgence of ) his senses, liveth in vain,
O Partha.® The man, however, that is attached to self only, that is con-
tented with self, and that is pleased in his self—hath no work (to do).
He hath no concern whatever with action nor with any omission
here. Nor, amongst all creatures, is there any upon whom his
interest dependeth.© Therefore, always do work that should
be done, without attachment. The man who  performeth
work without attachment, attaineth to the Supreme. By

1 Sacrifice is Vishnu’s self as declared by the Srutis ; work for sacri-
fice, therefore, is work for Vishnu’s sake or gratification. For the sake of
that i. e., for sacrifice’s, or Vishnu's sake, So all the commentators.—T,

2 ‘*Bhavaya’ is explained by both Sankara and Sreedbara a: radhaya”
or ‘make grow” Perhaps, “rear” is the nearest approach to it in English.
K. T. Telang renders it ‘please.,’ The idea is eminently Indian. The gods
are fed by sacrifices, and in return they feed men by sending rain. The
Asuras again who warred with the gods warred with sacrifices.—T.

3 ‘Parjjanya’ is explained by both Sankara and Sreedhara as rain. It
means also the clouds or the origin of rain.—T.

4 The word in the original that is rendered in the Vedas is Brahma.
It may mean the Supreme Soul, Of course, in Brahmanio literature, the
Vedas are Brahma and Brahma is the Vedas, but still in the second line of
15 there is no necessity of taking Brahma as equivalent to the Vedas, I do
not think Telang is accurate in his rendering of this line.—T.

5 The wheel referred to is what has been said before, viz. from the
Vedas are work, from work is rain, from rain is food, from food are crea-
tures, from creatures again work and so back to the Vedas.—T,

6 The sense seems to bs, as explained by the commentators, that such
@ man earns no merit by action, nor sin by inaction or omission. Nor is
there anybody, soni aD HBS RF of Gok RAE creature on whom

PBSoks.c¢

he depends, for, any, .om/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 59 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 65

work alone, Janaka and others, attained the accomplishment
of their objects. Having regard also to the observance by men
of their duties, it behoveth thee to work. Whatever a great man
doth, is also done by vulgar people. Ordinary men follow the ideal
set by them (the great ).2 There is nothing whatever for me, O
Partha, to do in the three worlds, ( sinceI have ) nothing for me
which hath not been acquired ; still I engage in action.? Because if at
any time I do not, without sloth, engage in action, men would follow
my path, O Partha, on all sides. The worlds would perish if I did not
perform work, and I should cause intermixture of castes and ruin these
people. As the ignorant work, O Bharata, having attachment to the
performer, so should a wise man work without being attached, desiring
to make men observant of their duties. A wise man should not cause
confusion of understanding amongst ignorant persons, who have attach-
ment to work itself ; (on the other hand) he should (himself) acting
with devotion engage them to all (kinds of) work. All works are, in
every way, done by the qualities of nature. He, whose mind is deluded
by egoism, however, regards himself as the actor.? But he, O mighty-
armed one, who knoweth the distinction (of self) from qualities and
work, is not attached to work, considering that itis his senses alone
(and not his self ) that engage in their objects. Those who are deluded
by the qualities of nature, become attached to the works done by the
qualities. A person of perfect knowledge should not bewilder those
men of imperfect knowledge.® Devoting all work to me, with (thy)
mind directed to self, engage in battle, without desire, without affection
and with thy (heart’s) weakness dispelled. Those men who always
follow this opinion of mine with faith and without cavil attain to final
emancipation even by work. But they who cavil at and do not follow

1 The example set by the great is always catching, ‘Itaras,’ here, is ‘Vul-
gar’ and not “other.” ‘Kurute’ which I have rendered as maketh” is used
in the sense of “regardeth.” ‘Pramanam,’ however, may not necessarily
mean something else that is set up as an ideal. It may refer to the actions
themselves of the great men set up by them as a standard.—T.

2 Sreedhara would connect “in the three worlds’’ with what follows, I
follow Sankara and the natural order of words.—T.

8. The word rendered “nature” is ‘prakriti.” It really implies “primal
matter."—T. .

4 The second line, literally rendered, is ‘deeming that qualities engage
in qualities.” The first ‘‘qualities” imply the senses, and the second, the
objects of the senses, The purport is that one knowing the distinction
referred to, never thinks that his soul is the actor, for that which is work
is only the result of the senses being applied to their objects.—T.

5 ‘Guna-karmashu’ is explained by Sankara as works of the qualities,
or works done by them. Sreedhara explains the compound as “qualities
and (their) works."—T. . .

6 Devoting all work to me, i.e., in the belief that all you do is for me
or my sake.—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
9 https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 60 ===

66 MAHABHARATA

this opinion of mine, know, that, bereft of all knowledge and without
discrimination, they are ruined. Even a wise man acts according to his
own nature. All living beings follow (their own) nature. What then
would restraint avail? The senses have, as regards the objects of the
senses, either affection or aversion fixed. One should: not submit to
these, for they are obstacles in one's way.' One's own duty, even if
imperfectly performed, is better than being done by other even if well
performed. Death in (performance of) one’s own duty is preferable.
(The adoption of) the duty of another carries fear (with it),

“Arjuna said,—'Impelled by whom, O son of the Vrishni race, doth
aman commit sin, even though unwilling and as if constrained by
force’ ?—

“The holy one said,—'It is desire, it is wrath, born of the attribute
of passion; it is all devouring, itis very sinful. Know this to be the
foe in this world.? As fire is enveloped by smoke, a mitror by dust,
the foetus by the womb, so is this* enveloped by desire. Knowledge,
O son of Kunti, is enveloped by this constant foe of the wise in the form
of desire which is insatiable and like a fire. The senses, the mind and
the understanding are said to be its abode. With these it deludeth the
Embodied self, enveloping (his) knowledge. Therefore, restraining
(thy) senses first, O bull of Bharata’s race, cast off this wicked thing,
for it destroyeth knowledge derived from instruction and medita-
tion.* It hath been said that the senses are superior (to the body which
is inert). Superior to the senses is the mind. Superior to the mind is
the knowledge. But which is superior to knowledge is He5 Thus
knowing that which is superior to knowledge and restraining (thy) self
by self, slay, O mighty-armed one, the enemy in the shape of desire

which is difficult to conquer.’

SECTION XXVIII

“The holy one said,—‘This imperishable ( system of ) devotion I
declared to Vivaswat: Vivaswat declared it to Manu; and Manu
communicated it to [kshaku. Descending thus from generation, the
Royal sages came to know it. But, O chastiser of foes, by ( lapse of a )
long time that devotion became lost to the world. Even the same
(system of) devotion hath today been declared by me to thee, for thou
art my devotee and friend, (and) this is a great mystery’,

1 The senses, as regards their diverse objects in the world, are either
drawn towards them or repelled by them. These likes and dislikes (in the
case of men who, of course, only act according to their nature) stand in the
way of theit emancipation, if men submit to them.—T,

2 Dosire, if not gratified, results in wrath, Thus the commentators.—T

3 Vide next sloka.—T. ey

4 ‘Prajahi’ is explained by both Sankara and Sreedhar: ‘parityaja’
(cast off} “7. ara as ‘parityaja

5 He is the Bapaesaddond hel paww Rolybooks.com :

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 61 ===

BHISHMA PABVA 67

“Arjuna said_—'Thy birth is posterior ; Vivaswat's birth is prior.
How shall I understand then that thou hadst first declared (it) ?°

“The holy one said—'Many births of mine have passed away, O
Arjuna, as also of thine. These all I know, but thou dost not, O
chastiser of foes. Though (I am) unborn and of essence that knoweth
no deterioration, though (I am) the lord of all creatures, still, relying on
my own (material) nature I take birth by my own (powers) of illusion.
Whenever, O Bharata, loss of piety and the rise of impiety occurreth,
on those occasions do I create myself. For the protection of the right-
eous and for the destruction of the evil doers, for the sake of
establishing piety, I am born age after age. He who truly knoweth my
divine bitth and work to be such, casting off (his body) is not born
again ; (on the other hand) he cometh to me, O Arjuna. Many who
have been freed from attachment, fear, wrath, who were full of me, and
who relied on me, have, cleansed by knowledge and asceticism, attained
to my essence. In whatsover manner men come to me, in the selfsame
manner do I accept them. It is my way, O Partha, that men follow on
all sides.!| Those in this world who are desirous of the success of action
worship the gods, for in this world of men success resulting from action
is soon attained. The quadruple division of castes was created by me
according to the distinction of qualities and duties) ThoughI am the
author thereof, (yet) know me to be not their author and undecaying,?
Actions do not touch me, I have no longing for the fruits of actions,
He that knoweth me thus is not impeded by actions. Knowing this,
even men of old who were desirous of emancipation performed work.
Therefore, do thou also perform work as was done by Ancients of the
remote past. What is action and what is inaction,—even the learned are
perplexed at this. Therefore, I will tell thee about action (so that)
knowing it thou mayst be freed from evil. One should have knowledge
of action, and one should have knowledge of forbidden actions: one
should also know of inaction. The course of action is incomprehensible.
He, who sees inaction in action and action in inaction, is wise among

men ; he is possessed of devotion ; and he is a doer of all actions. The
learned call him wise whose efforts are all free from desire (of fruit)
and (consequent) will, and whose actions have all been consumed by

1 There can be little doubt that what Krishna says here is that no
form of worship is unacceptable to him. Whatever the manner of tho
worship, itis I whois worshipped. After K. T, Telang’s exhaustive and
effective reply to Dr. Lorinser’s strange hypothesis of the Gita having been
composed under Christian influences, it is scarcely necessary to add that
such toleration would ill accord with the theory of the Christian authorship
of the poom.—T.

2 i.e., both inactive and undecaying. Work implies exertion, and, there-
fore, loss of energy. In me there is no action, no logs of energy and there-

fore, no decay.—T. A ownioaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https:/Avww.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 62 ===

68 MAHABHARATA

the fire of knowledge.! Whoever, resigning all attachment to the
fruit of action, is ever contented and is dependent on none, doth nought,
indeed, although engaged in action. He who, without desire, with —
mind and the senses under control, and casting off all concerns, per-
formeth action only for the preservation of the body, incurreth no sin.?
He who iscontented with what is earned without exertion, who hath
risen superior to the pairs of opposites, who is without jealousy, who is
equable in success and failure, is not fettered (by action) even though
he works. All his actions perish who acts for the sake of Sacrifice,*
who is without affections, who is free (from attachments), and whose
mind is fixed upon knowledge. Brahma is the vessel (with which the
libation is poured) ; Brahma is the libation (that is offered) ; Brahma
is the fire on which by Brahma is poured (the libation) ; Brahma is the
goal to which he proceedeth by fixing his mind on Brahma itself which is
the action. Some devotees perform sacrifice to the gods. Others, by
means of sacrifice, offer up sacrifices to the fire of Brahma. Others
offer up (as sacrificial libation) the senses of which hearing is the first
to the fire of restrain. Others (again) offer up (as libations) the objects
of sense of which sound is the first to the fire of the senses.° Others
(again) offer up all the functions of the senses and the functions of the
vital winds to the fire of devotion by self-restraint kindled by know-
ledge.7. Others again perform the sacrifice of wealth, the sacrifice of
ascetic austetities, the sacrifice of meditation, the sacrifice of (Vedic)
study, the sacrifice of knowledge, and others are ascetics of rigid vows.®
Some offer up the upward vital wind (Prana) to the downward vital
wind (apana) ; and others, the downward vital wind to the upward
vital wind ; some, arresting the course of (both) the upward and the
1 'Kama-sankalpa vivarjjitas,’ ie., freed from kama (desire of fruit)

and sankalpa—the consequent will or determination to do. Thus both Sree-
dhara and Sankara.—T.

2 ‘Chitta’ is the mind and ‘atma’ in this connection is the senses. Thus
both Sreedhara and Sankara.—T.

3 Sacrifice means here the Supreme Soul. What is done for the sake
of sacrifice is done for procuring emancipation.—T.

4 What is meant by this is that in the case of such a person complete
identification with Brahma takes place, and when such an indentification
has taken place, action is destroyed.—T,

5 i.e., offering up sacrifice itself as a sacrifice to the Brahma fire, they
cast off all action.—T,

6 Offering up the senses to the fire of restraint means restraining the
senses for the practice of Yoga. Offering up the objects of the senses means
non-attachment to those objects,—T.

7 Suspending the functions of life for contemplation or Yoga—T.

8 In these cases the sacrifices consist in the giving away of wealth, in

the ascetio austerities themselves, in meditation, in study, etc. Sreedhara
explains the first compound of

xplai 6 g8cOn: ip Aiflg ntly. According to
him, it meang, noPanniae ar TEA ON een nay,

=== PAGE 63 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 69

downward vital winds, are devoted to the restraint of the vital winds.
Others of restricted rations, offer the vital winds to the vital winds."
Even all these who are conversant with sacrifice, whose sins have been
consumed by sacrifice, and who eat the remnants of sacrifice which are
amrita, attain to the eternal Brahma. (Even) this world is not for him
who doth not perform sacrifice. Whence then the other, O best of
Kuru’s race? Thus diverse are the sacrifices occurring in the Vedas.
Know that all of them result from action, and knowing this thou wilt
be emancipated. The sacrifice of knowledge, O chastiser of foes, is
superior to every sacrifice involving (the attainment of) fruits of
action, for all action, O Partha, is wholly comprehended in knowledge.?
Learn that ( Knowledge ) by prostration, enquiry, and service. They
who are possessed of knowledge and can see the truth, will teach thee
that knowledge, knowing which, O son of Pandu, thou wilt not again
come by such delusion, and by which thou wilt see the endless creatures
(of the universe) in thyself (first) and then in me. Even if thou be
the greatest sinner among all that are sinful, thou shalt yet cross over all
transgressions by the raft of knowledge. As a blazing fire, O Arjuna,
reduceth fuel to ashes, so doth the fire of knowledge reduce all actions
to ashes. For there is nothing here that is so cleansing as knowledge. One
who hath attained to success by devotion finds it without effort within
his own self in time. He obtaineth knowledge who hath faith and is
intent on it and who hath his senses under control ; obtaining knowledge
one findeth the highest tranquility in no length of time. One who hath
no knowledge and no faith, and whose mindg is full of doubt, is lost.
Neither this world, nor the next, nor happiness, is for him whose mind
is full of doubt. Actions do not fetter him, O Dhananjaya, who hath
cast off action by devotion, whose doubts have been dispelled by know-
ledge, and who is self-restrained. Therefore, destroying, by the sword
of knowledge, this doubt of thine that is born of ignorance and that
dwelleth in thy mind, betake to devotion, (and) arise, O son of Bharata.”

SECTION XXIX
“Arjuna said\—'’Thou applaudest, O Krishna, the abandonment of
actions, and again the application (to them). Tell me definitely which
one of these two is superior.
“The holy one said—‘Both abandoment of actions and application
to actions lead to emancipation. But of these, application to action is
superior to abandonment. He should always be known to be an ascetic

1 This sloka consists of 3 lines. All these are different kinds of Yoga,
__ or the different stages of Yoga practice,—T.

2 i.e., knowledge being attained, the fruits of action are attained by,
Bb least, their end beipg,ageaneasashrnidps://www.holybooks.com
1 https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 64 ===

70 MAHABHARATA

who hath no aversion nor desire. For, being free from pairs of opposites,
O thou of mighty arms, he is easily released from the bonds (of action).
Fools say, but not those that are wise, that Sankhya and Yoga are dis-
tinct. One who stayeth in even one (of the two) reapeth the fruit of
both.’ Whatever seat is attained by those who profess the Sankhya
system, that too is reached by those who profess the Yoga, He seeth
truly who seeth Sankhya and Yoga as one.? But renunciation, O mighty-
armed one, without devotion ( to action ), is difficult to attain, The
ascetic who is engaged in devotion (by action) reacheth the Supreme
Being without delay. He who is engaged in devotion (by action) and is
of pure soul, who hath conquered his body and subdued his senses, and
who indentifieth himself with all creatures, is not fettered though per-
forming (action).? The man of devotion, who knoweth truth, thinking
—I am doing nothing—when seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, eating,
moving, sleeping, breathing, talking, excreting, taking, opening the
eyelids or closing them; he regardeth that it is the senses that are
engaged in the objects of senses.‘ He who renouncing attachment
engageth in actions, resigning them to Brahma, is not touched by sin as
the lotus leaf (is not touched) by water. Those who are devotees,
casting off attachment, perform actions ( attaining ) purity of self, with
the body, the mind, the understanding, and even the senses ( free from
desire ). He who is possessed of devotion, renouncing the fruit of action,
attaineth to the highest tranquility, He, who is not possessed of devo-
tion and is attached to the fruit of action, is fettered by action per-
formed from desire. The self-restrained embodied (self), renouncing
all actions by the mind, remains at ease within the house of nine gates,
neither acting himself nor causing (anything) to act-* The Lord is not
the cause of the capacity for action, or of the actions of men, or of the
connection of actions and (their) fruit. It is nature that engages (in
action). The Lord receiveth no one’s sin, nor also merit. By Ignorance,
Knowledge is shrouded. It is for this that creatures are deluded. But
of whomsoever that Ignorance hath been destroyed by knowledge of
self, that knowledge ( which is ) like the Sun discloseth the Supreme

1 ‘Sankhya’ is renunciation of action, while ‘Yoga’ is devotion through
action.—T.

2 The grammatical form of the word Yoga as here employed is excep-
tional.—T.

3 The first atman is explaned as the soul, the second as the body, by
all the commentators,—T”*

4 Taking means taking anything with the hands.—T.

6 Water when thrown over o lotus leaf escapes without soaking or
drenching the leaf at all.

6 Telang renders ‘Pura’ as city. Of course, the body having two eyes, $wo
ears, two nostrils, Davinieankhyom ditpe:hvopertialyptakexoretions, i is meant,—T,

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 65 ===

BHISHMA PARVA nm

Being. Those whose mind ison Him, whose very soul is He, who abide
in Him, and who have Him for their goal, depart never more to return,
their sins being all destroyed by knowledge.’ Those, who are wise cast
an equal eye on a Brahma endued with learning and modesty, on a cow,
an elephant. a dog, and a Chandala.?_ Even here has birth been conquer-
ed by them whose minds rest on equality ; and since Brahma is faultless
and equable, therefore, they (are said to) abide in Brahma.* He whose
mind is steady, who is not deluded, who knows Brahma, and who rests in
Brahma, doth not exult on obtaining anything that is agreeable, nor
doth he grieve on obtaining that is disagreeable. He whose mind is not
attached to external objects of sense, obtaineth that happiness which is
in self ; and by concentrating his mind on the contemplation of Brahma,
he enjoyeth a happiness that is imperishable. The enjoyments born of
the contact (of the senses with their objects) are productive of sorrow.
He who is wise, O son of Kunti, never taketh pleasure in these that
have a beginning and anend. That man whoever here, before the
dissolution of the body, is able to endure the agitations resulting from
desire and wrath, is fixed on comtemplation, and is happy. He who
findeth happiness within himself, (and) who sporteth within himself, he
whose light (of knowledge) is deprived from within himself, isa devotee,
and becoming one with Brahma attaineth to absorption into Brahma.
Those saintly personages whose sins have been destroyed, whose doubts
have been dispelled, who are self-restrained, and who are engaged in the
good of all creatures, obtain absorption into Brahma. For these
devotees who are freed from desire and wrath, whose minds are under
control, and who have knowledge of self, absorption into Brahma exists
both here and thereafter.* Excluding (from his mind) all external
objects of sense, directing the visual glance between the brows, mingling
(into one) the upward and the downward life-breaths and making them
pass through the nostrils, the devotee, who has restrained the senses, the
mind, and the understanding, being intent on emancipation, and who is
freed from desire, fear, and wrath, is emancipated, indeed. Knowing me
to be enjoyer of all sacrifices and ascetic austerities, the great Lord of all
the worlds, and friend of all creatures, such a one obtaineth tranquillity.’

1 Such men are exempted from the obligation of re-birth. Leaving
this body they merge into the Supreme Soul.—T.

2 The word is ‘Swapacha’ meaning a member of the lowest caste.—T.

8 “Brahma is faultless and equable”’ : so Sreedhara and others,—"‘since
faultless equality is Brahma."—T.

4 The sense is that they are at one with Brahma both here and here-

atter.—T, Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 66 ===

SECTION XXX

“The holy one said,—‘Regardless of fruit of action, he that performs
the actions which should be performed, is a Renouncer and devotee,
and not one who discards the (sacrificial) fire, nor one that abstains
from action! That which has been called Renunciation, know that,
O son of Pandu, to be Devotion, since no body can be a Devotee who
has not renounced (all) resolves.? To the sage desirous of rising to
devotion, action is said to be the means; and when he has risen to
devotion, cessation of action is said to be the means. When one is no
longer attached to the objects of the senses, nor to actions, and when
one renounces all resolves, then is one said to have risen to Devotion.
One should raise (his) self by self; one should not degrade (his) self ;
for one’s own self is one’s friend, and one’s own self is one’s enemy.* To
him (only), who has subjugated his self by his self, is self a friend, But
to him who has not subjugated his self, his self behaves inimically like
an enemy. The'soul of one who has subjugated his self and who is in
the enjoyment of tranquillity, is steadily fixed (on itself) amid cold and
heat, pleasure and pain, and also honour and dishonour. That ascetic is
said to be devoted whose mind is satisfied with knowledge and experi-
ence, who hath no affection, who hath subjugated his senses, and to
whom a sod, astone and gold are alike. He, who views equally .well-
wishers, friends, foes, strangers that are indifferent to him, those who
take part with both sides, those who are objects of aversion, those who
are related (to him), those who are good, and those who are wicked,
is distinguished (above all others). A devotee should always fix his
mind on contemplation, remaining in a secluded place alone, restraining
both mind and body, without expectations (of any kind), and without
concern [with anything].‘ Erecting his seat immovably ona clean
spot, not too high nor too low, and spreading over it a piece of cloth, a
deer-skin, or blades of Kusa grass, and there seated on that seat, with
mind fixed on one object, and restraining the functions of the heart
and the senses, one should practise contemplation for the purification
of selfs Holding body, head, and neck even, unmoved and steady, and
casting his glance on the tip of his nose, and without looking about in

1 Renouncer and devotee ‘Sannyasin’ and ‘Yogin,’—T.
2 Which spring from desire.—T.
3 Self in this sloka is explained by the commentators as mind. The
mind, unless controlled, cannot lead to devotion.—T.

4 ‘Ohitta’ and ‘atma’ are explained by the commentators as ‘mind and
body.”—T. Downloaded from https:/Awww.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 67 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 78

any of the different directions, with mind in tranquillity, freed from
fear, observant of the practices of Brahmacharins, restraining the mind,
with heart fixed on me, the devotee should sit down, regarding me as the
object of his attainment. Thus applying his soul constantly, the devotee
whose heart is restrained, attains to that tranquillity which culminates in
final absorption and assimilation with me. Devotion is not one’s,O
Arjuna, who eateth much nor one’s who doth not eat at all; nor one’s
who is addicted to too much sleep , nor one’s who is always awake. Devo-
tion that is destructive of misery is his who is temperate in food and
amusements, who duly exerts himself temperately in all his works, and
who is temperate in sleep and vigils. When one’s heart, properly res-
trained, is fixed on one’s own self, then, indifferent to all objects of de-
sire, he is one called a devotee.! Asa lamp in a windless spot doth not
flicker, even that is the resemblance declared of a devotee whose heart
hath been restrained and who applieth his self to abstraction. That
(condition) in which the mind, restrained by practice of abstraction,
taketh rest, in which beholding self by self one is gratified within self ;
in which one experienceth that highest felicity which is beyond the
(sphere of the) senses and which the understanding (only) can grasp, and
fixed on which one never swerveth from the truth ; acquiring which one
regards no other acquisition greater than it, and abiding in which one is
never moved by even the heaviest sorrow ; that ( condition ) should be
known to be what is called Devotion in which there is a severance of
connection with pain. That Devotion should be practised with preser-
vance, and with an undesponding heart. Renouncing all desires without
exception that are born of resolves, restraining the group of the senses
on all sides by mind alone, one should, by slow degrees, become quiescent
(aided) by (his) understanding controlled by patience, and then direc-
ting his mind to self should think of nothing.* Wheresoever the mind,
which is (by nature) restless and unsteady, may run, restraining it
from those, one should direct it to self alone. Indeed, unto such a
devotee whose mind is in tranquillity, whose passions have been sup-
pressed, who hath become one with Brahma and who is free from sin,
the highest felicity cometh (of his own accord). Thus applying his soul
constantly (to abstraction), the devotee. freed from sin, easily obtaineth
that highest happiness, viz., with Brahma, He who hath devoted his

1. Fixed on one's own self, i. 6., withdrawn from all objects of sense.
Thus Sankara,—T.

2 ‘Nischayena’ is explained by Sankara as equivalent to “with
preservence” or steadily. Sreedhara explains, it as equal to “with the
certitude of knowledge acquired by instruction."—T,

8 ‘Dhriti-grahitaya Buddhya’ is, as explained by Sankara and others,
“with understanding controlled by patience,” K,T. Telang renders it

“with firm resolve coupedniitded Gam ptips:-Eyw.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 68 ===

4 MAHABHARATA

self to abstraction, casting an equal eye everywhere, beholdeth his self
in all creatures and all creatures in his self. Unto him who beholdeth
me in everything and beholdeth everything in me, I am never lost and
he also is never lost to me-' He who worshippeth me as abiding in all
creatures, holding yet that all is one, is a devotee, and whatever mode
of life he may lead, he liveth in me. That devotee, O Arjuna, who
casteth an equal eye everywhere, regarding all things as his own self and
the happiness and misery of others as his own, is deemed to be the best.’

“Arjuna said, ‘This devotion by means of equanimity which thou
hast declared, O slayer of Madhu,—on account of restlessness of the mind
I do not see its stable presence. O Krishna, the mind is restless, bois-
terous, perverse, and obstinate. Its restraint I regard to be as difficult
of accomplishment as the restraint of the wind.’

“The holy one said, ‘Without doubt, O thou of mighty arms the
mind is difficult of subjugation and is restless. With practice, how-
ever, O son of Kunti, and with the abandonment of desire, it can be
controlled. It is my belief that by him whose mind is not restrained,
devotion is difficult of acquisition. But by one whose mind is restrained
and who is assiduous, it is capable of acquisition with the aid of means.’

“Arjuna said, ‘Without assiduity, though endued with faith, and
with mind shaken off from devotion, what is the end of him, O Krishna,
who hath not earned success in devotion? Fallen off from both,* is
he lost like a separated cloud or not, being ashe is without refuge, O
thou of mighty arms, and deluded on the path leading to Brahma?
This my doubt, O Krishna, it behoveth thee to remove without leaving
anything. Besides thee, no dispeller of this doubt is to be had.*

“The holy one said, ‘O son of Pritha, neither here, nor hereafter,
doth ruin exist for him, since none, O sire, who performs good (acts)
comes by an evil end. Attaining to the regions reserved for those
that perform meritorious acts and living there for many many years, he
that hath fallen off from devotion taketh birth in the abode of those th:
are pious and endued with prosperity. Or, he is born even in the family
of devotees endued with intelligence. Indeed, a birth such as this is
more difficult of acquisition in this world. There in those births hi
obtaineth contact with that Brahmic knowledge which was his in hi

1 i.e. Tam always visible to him, and he too is always within m:
sight and I am always kind to him.—T.

2 i,e., how its stable existence may be secured, the mind being b'
nature ever restless. —T.

3_ Fallen off from both, i, ¢,, ftom heaven (through work) and absorp:
tion into Brahma (through devotion),—T,

4 Without Row cla feast HE ee uppoksro'
Without Revie ina yeaiidy oe Gave YR lume:

2-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 69 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 5

former life ; and from that point he striveth again, O descendant of
Kuru, towards perfection. And although unwilling, he still worketh on
in consequence of that same former practice of his. Even one that enquir-
eth of devotion riseth above (the fruits of) the Divine word.’ Striving
with great efforts, the devotee, cleansed of all his sins, attaineth to
perfection after many births, and then reacheth the supreme goal. The
devotee is superior to ascetics engaged in austereties ; he is esteemed to
be superior to even the man of knowledge. The devotee is superior to
those that are engaged in action. Therefore, become a devotee, O
Arjuna. Even amongst all the devotees, he who, full of faith and with
inner self resting on me, worshippeth me, is regarded by me to be the
most devout.”

SECTION XXXI

“The holy one said, ‘Listen, O son of Pritha, how, without doubt,
thou mayst know me fully, fixing thy mind on me, practising devotion,
and taking refuge in me. I will now, without leaving anything speak to
thee about knowledge and experience, knowing which there would be
left nothing in this world (for thee) to know. One among thousands of
men striveth for perfection. Of those even that are assiduous and have
attained to perfection, only some one knoweth me truly.” Earth, water,
fire, air, space, mind, also understanding, and consciousness,—thus hath
my nature been divided eight-fold. This is a lower (form of my) nature,
Different from this, know there is a higher (form of my) nature which
is animate, O thou of mighty arms, and by which this universe is held.?
Know that all creatures have these for their source. I am the source of
evolution and also of the dissolution of the entire universe. There is
nothing else, O Dhananjaya, that is higher than myself. Upon me is all
this like a row of pearls ona string. Taste I am in the waters, O son of
Kunti, (and) Iam the splendour of both the moon and the sun, I am the
Om in all the Vedas, the sound in space, and the manliness in men. I
am the fragrant odour in earth, the splendour in fire, the life in all
(living) creatures, and penance in ascetics. Know me, O son of Pritha,

_ to be the eternal seed of all beings. I am the intelligence of all creatures

1 The Divine Word, io, the Vedas. So great is the efficacy of

| devotion that one merely enquiring of it transcends him who conforms to
tha rites of the Vedas—T .

2 Only some one, i.s., very few. For perfection, i.e., for knowledge

of self. Thus all the commentators.—T.
| 3 The last word of the first line of this sloka is ‘param’ (higher) and
| not ‘aparam’ with the initial ‘a’ silent owing to the rules of Sandhi. Many

of the Bengal texts have ‘aparam’, not excepting the latest one printed at
| Oslontts.—T.

Downloaded from https:/Avww.holybooks.com

} https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 70 ===

16 MAHABHARATA

endued with intelligence, the glory of all glorious objects. I am also the
strength of all that are endued with strength, (myself) freed from desire
and thirst, and, O bull of Bharata's race, am the desire, consistent with
duty, in all creatures.’ And all existences which are of the quality of
goodness, and which are of the quality of passion and quality of
darkness, know that they are, indeed, from me. I am, however, not in
them, but they are in me- This entire universe, deluded by these three
entities consisting of (these) three qualities knoweth not me that am
beyond them and undecaying ; since this illusion of mine, depending on
the (three) qualities, is exceedingly marvellous and highly difficult of
being transcended. They that resort to me alone cross this illusion.?
Doers of evil, ignorant men, the worst of their species, robbed of their
knowledge by (my) illusion and wedded to the state of demons, do not
resort to me. Four classes of doers of good deeds worship me, O
Arjuna, viz., he that is distressed, that is possessed of knowledge, being
always devoted and having his faith in only One, is superior to the
rest, for unto the man of knowledge I am dear above everything, and
he also is dear to me. All these are noble. But the man of knowledge
is regarded (by me) to be my very self, since he, with soul fixed on
abstraction, taketh refuge in me as the highest goal. At the end of
many births, the man possessed of knowledge attaineth to me, (thinking)
that Vasudeva is all this. Such a high-souled person, however, is exceed
ingly rare. They who have been robbed of knowledge by desire, resort
to their godheads, observant of diverse regulations and controlled by

their own nature.* Whatever form (of godhead or myself) any wor-
shipper desireth to worship with faith, that faith of his unto that
(form) I render steady. Endued with that faith, he payeth his adora-
tions to that (form), and obtaineth from that all his desire, since all
those are ordained by me.* The fruits, however, of those persons en-
dued with little intelligence are perishable. They that worship the
divinities, so to the divinities, (while) they that worship me come
even tome.® They that have no discernment, regard me who am
(really) unmanifest to have become manifest, because they do not know
the transcendent and undecaying state of mine than which there is

1 ‘Kama’ which I bave | rendered desire is explained by Sreedhara
as the wish for an unattained object ; and ‘raga’ as the longing or
thirst for more, The second'Kama’ is explained as desires of the class
of love or lust—T,

te is explained by Sankara as divine ; by Sreedhara as marvell-
ous —.

3 The divine desires are about sons, fame, victory over enemies,
etc. ; regulations, such as fasts etc. ; their own nature, f.e., disposition
Pe agpandant on the acts of their past lives. Thus all he commenta-
ors.—'

4 The worshipper obtains his desires, thinking he gets them tro
the godhead he worships. It is however, that gives him those.—T.

- 6- The divinities being perishable, myself imperiehable, What these
obtain is perishDbimloa¥él dtom bttpsotwliypelbobtabants imperishable. T.

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 71 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 7

nothing higher.*- Shrodued by the illusion of my inconceivable power,
Tam not manifest to all. This deluded world knoweth not me that I
am unborn and undecaying. I know, O Arjuna, all things that have
been past, and all things that are present, and all things that are to be.
But there is nobody that knoweth me. All creatures, O chastiser of
foes, are deluded at the time of their birth by the delusion, O Bharata,
of pairs of opposites arising from desire and aversion. But those
Persons of meritorious deeds whose sins have attained their end, being
freed from the delusion of pairs of opposites, worship me, firm in their
vow (of that worship.). Those who, taking refuge in me, strive for
release from decay and death, know Brahman, the entire Adhyatma, and
action.? And they who know me with the Adhibhuta, the Adhidaiva,
and the Adhiyajna, having minds fixed on abstraction, know me at the
time of their departure (from this world).*

SECTION XXXII

“Arjuna said, ‘What is that Brahman, what is Adhyatma, what is
action, O best of male beings? What also has been said to be
Adhibhuta, and what is called Adhidaiva? Who is here Adhiyajna,
and how, in this body, O slayer of Madhu? And how at the time of
departure art thouto be known by those that have restrained their
self? 2—

“The holy one said, ‘Brahman is the Supreme ahd indestructible.
Adhyatma is said to be its own manifestation. The offering (to any
godhead in a sacrifice) which causeth the production and development
of all—this is called action.* Remembering me alone in (his) last
moments, he that, casting off his body, departeth (hence), cometh into
my essence. There is no doubt in this. Whichever form (of godhead)
one remembereth when one casteth off, at the end, (his) body, unto
that one he goeth, O son of Kunti, having habitually meditated on it
always. Therefore, think of me at all times, and engage in battle. Fix-
ing thy mind and understanding on me, thou wilt, without doubt, come

1 The ignoront, without knowledge of my transcendent essence
take me to be no higher than that what is indicated in my human and

» other incarnate manifestations. Thus Sreedhara.—T.

2 ‘Adhyatman’ is explained as all that by which ‘Brahman’ is to be
attained. All actions mean the whole course of duties and practices leading
to the knowledge of Brahman.—T,

8 The three words occuring in this sloka and explained in the next
Section, forming as they do the subject of a question by Arjuna —T.

4 ‘Bhava’ is production, and ‘Udbhava’ is growth or development.
Thus Sreedhara....T pownloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 72 ===

8 MAHABHARATA

even to me. Thinking (of the Supreme) with a mind not running to
other objects and endued with abstraction in the form of uninterrupted
application, one goeth, O son of Pritha, unto the Divine and Supreme
male Being. He who at the time of his departure, with a steady mind, —
endued with reverence, with power of abstraction, and directing the —
life-breath called Prana between the eye-brows, thinketh of that ancient
Seer, who is the ruler (of all), who is minuter than the minutest atom,
who is the ordainer of all, who is inconceivable in form, and who is
beyond all darkness, cometh unto that Divine and Supreme male Being,
Twill tell thee in brief about that seat which persons conversant with
the Vedas declare to be indestructible, which is entered by ascetics freed
from all longings, and in ex pectation of which (people) practise the vows
of Brahmacharins, Casting off (this) body, he who departeth, stopping
up all the doors, confining the mind within the heart, placing his own
life-breath called Prana between the eye-brows, resting on continued
meditation, uttering this one syllable Om which is Brahman, and thinking
of me, attaineth to the highest goal.1 He who always thinketh of me | |
with mind ever withdrawn from all other objects, unto that devotee

always engaged on meditation, I am, O Partha, easy of access. High-

souled persons who have achieved the highest perfection, attaining tome, |
do not incur re-birth which is the abode of sorrow and which is transient.
All the worlds, O Arjuna, from the abode of Brahman downwards have
to go through a round of births, on attaining to me, however, O son of
Kunti, there is no re-birth.?, They who know a day of Brahman to end
after a thousand Yugas, and a night (of his) to terminate after a thousand
Yugas are persons that know day and night. On the advent of
(Brahman's) day everything that is manifest springeth from the
unmanifest ; and when (his) night cometh, into that same which is called
unmanifest all things disappear. That same assemblage of creatures,
springing forth again and again, dissolveth on the advent of night, and
springeth forth (again), O son of Pritha, when day cometh, constrained _
(by the force of action, etc,)* There is, however, another entity,
unmanifest and eternal, which is beyond that unmanifest, and which is
not destroyed when all the entities are destroyed. It is said to be

1 All the doors, ie., the senses. Confining the mind within the
heart, i.c., withdrawing the mind from all external objects, ‘Murdhni’
is explained by Sreedhara to mean here between the eyebrows.”—T. .

2 All these regions being destructible and liable to re-birth, those
that live there are equally liable to death and re-birth,—T.

The meaning, as explained by Sreedhara, is that such persons
are said to know all, and not those whose knowledge is bounded by the
course of the sun and the moon.—T,

4 In this round of births and deaths, the creatures themselves are
not free agents, being all the while subject to the influence of Karma, as
explained by the cbpwnleatiatictanrhilbs://www.holybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

a

=== PAGE 73 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 79

unmanifest and indestructible. They call it the highest goal, attaining
which no one hath to come back. That is my Supreme seat. That
Supreme Being, O son of Pritha, He within whom are all entities, and
by whom all this is permeated, is to be attained by reverence undirect-
ed toany other object. I will tell thee the times, O bull of Bharata's
race, in which devotees departing (from this life) go, never to return,
ortoreturn. The fire, the light, the day, the lighted fortnight, the six
months of the northern solstice, departing from here, the persons
knowing Brahma go through this path to Brahma.’ Smoke, night, also
the dark fortnight (and) the six months of the southern solstice,
(departing) through this patha devotee, attaining to the lunar light,
returneth, The bright and the dark, these two paths, are regarded to
be the eternal (two paths) of the universe. By the one, (one) goeth
never to return; by the other, one (going) cometh back. Knowing
these two paths, O son of Pritha, no devotee is deluded. Therefore, at
all times, be endued with devotion, O Arjuna. The meritorious fruit
that is prescribed for the (study of the) Vedas, for sacrifices, for ascetic
austerities, and for gifts, a devotee knowing all this (that hath been
said here), attaineth to it all, and (also) attaineth the Supreme and
Primeval seat.’

SECTION XXXIII

“The holy one said, ‘Now I will tell thee that art without envy that
most mysterious knowledge along with experience, knowing which thou
wilt be freed from evil. This is royal science, a royal mystery, highly
cleansing, directly apprehensible, consistent with the sacred laws, easy to
practise, (and) imperishable. Those persons, O chastiser of foes, who
have no faith in this sacred doctrine, not attaining to me, return to the
path of this world that is subject to destruction. This entire universe
is pervaded by me in my unmanifest form. All entities are in me, but I
do not reside in them. Nor yet are all entities in me. Behold my divine
power. Supporting all entities and producing all entities, myself doth
not (yet) reside in (those) entities. As the great and obiquitious atmos-
phere always occupieth space, understand that all entities reside in me
in the same way.? All entities, O son of Kunti, attain to my nature at
the close of a Kalpa, I create them again at the beginning of a Kalpa,*
Regulating my own (independent) nature I create again and in this
whole assemblage of entities which is plastic in consequence of its

1 The commentators explain the word fire, the light, day, &c., as
sevoral godheads presiding over particular times.—T,

2 The atmosphere occupies space without affecting it or its nature.
8o all things are in the Supreme Being without affecting him.—T.

3 My nature, i Sy ARA BRAGS MURNALSSOELAP! essence.—T.

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 74 ===

80 MAHABHARATA

subjection to nature.?| Those acts, however, O Dhananjaya, do not
fetter me who sitteth as one unconcerned, being unattached to those acts
(of creation), Through me, the overlooker, primal nature produceth
the (universe of) mobiles and immobiles. For the reason, O son of
Kunti. the universe passeth through its rounds (of birth and destruction).?
Not knowing my supreme nature of the great lord of all enrities, igno-
rant people of vain hopes, vain acts, vain knowledge, confounded minds,
wedded to the delusive nature of Asuras and Rakshasas, disregard me
(as one) that hath assumed a human body. But high-souled ones, O son
of Pritha, possessed of divine nature, and with minds directed to nothing
else, worship me, knowing (me) to be the origin of all entities and undes-
tructible. Always glorifying me, (or) striving with firm vows, (or)
bowing down to me, with reverence and ever devoted, (they) worship
3 Others again, performing the sacrifice of knowledge, worship me,
(some) as one, (some) as distinct, (some) as pervading the universe, in
many forms.* Iam the Vedic sacrifice, I am the sacrifice enjoined in the
Smritis, 1 am Swadha, I am the medicament produced from herbs; Lam
the mantra, | am the sacrificial libation, 1-am the fire, and I am the
(sacrificial) offering.® Iam the father of this universe, the mother, the
creator, grandsire ; (I am) the thing to be known, the means by which
everything is cleansed, the syllable Om, the Rik, the Saman and the Yajus,
(Lam) the goal, the supporter, the lord, the on-looker, the abode, the
refuge, the friend, the source, the destruction, the support, the recep-
tacle; and the undestructible seed. I give heat, I produce and suspend
rain ; I am immortality, and also death ; and I am the existent and the
non-existent, O Arjuna. They who know the three branches of know-
ledge, also drink the Soma juice, and whose sins have been cleansed
worshipping me by sacrifices, seek admission into heaven ; and these
attaining to the sacred region of the chief of the gods, enjoy in heaven
the celestial pleasure of the gods, Having enjoyed that celestial world
of vast extent, upon exhaustion of their merit they re-enter the
mortal world. It is thus that they who accept the doctrines of the three
Vedas and wish for objects of desires, obtain going and coming. Those

‘me.

1 ‘Prakriti’ which 1 render “nature” is explained by the commen-
fators as ‘Karma’, the influence of ‘Karma’ or action being universal in
setting the form of a particular entity at the time of its creation —T.

2 This reason, ie,. my supervision—T,

3 Sreedhara says that these are different modes of worship ; “with
reverence and ever devoted” grammatically refers to each of the three
classes of worshippers indicated.

4 Performing the sacrifice of knowledge, i.e., believing Vasudeva to
be everything. In many forms, ie., as Brahman, Rudra, eto.—T,

5 ‘Mantra’ is the sacred verse or verees used for inyoki
and for other purpe@wgloaded from https:/www jolybooks com voking igo eat
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 75 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 81

persons who, thinking (of me) without directing their minds to anything
else, worship me, of those who are ( thus ) always devoted ( to me )—
I make them gifts and preserve what they have. Even those devotees
who, endued with faith worship other godheads even they, O son of
Kunti, worship me alone, (though) irregularly.’ I am the enjoyer, as also
the lord, of all sacrifices. They, however, do not know me truly ; hence
they fall off (from heaven). They whose vows are directed to the Pitris
attain to the Pitris ; who direct (their) worship to the inferior spirits
called Bhutas attain to Bhutas ; they who worship me, attain even to my-
self. They who offer me with reverence, leaf, flower, fruit, water—that
offered with reverence, I accept from him whose self is pure.2 What-
ever thou dost, whatever eatest, whatever drinkest, whatever givest,
whatever austerities thou performest, manage it in such a way, Oson
of Kunti, that it may be an offering tome. Thus mayst thou be
freed from the fetters of action having good and evil fruits. With
self endued with renunciation and devotion, thou wilt be released and
wilt come to me. I am alike to all creatures; there is none hate-
ful to me, none dear. They, however, who worship me with reverence
arein meandI also am in them. If even a person of exceedingly
wicked conduct worshippeth me, without worshipping any one
else, he should certainly be regarded as good, for his efforts are well-
directed. (Such a person) soon becometh of virtuous soul, and attaineth
to eternal tranquillity. Know, O son of Kunti, that none devoted to me
is ever lost. For, O son of Pritha, even they who may be of sinful birth,
women, Vaisyas, and also Sudras, even they, resorting to me, attain to
the Supreme goal. What then (shall I say) of holy Brahmanas and saints
who are my devotees? Having come to this transient and miserable
world, be engaged in my worship.* Fix thy mind on me ; be my devotee,
my worshipper; bow to me; and thus making me thy refuge and
applying thy self to abstraction, thou wilt certainly come to me.’

SECTION XXXIV

“The holy one said, ‘Once more still, O mighty-armed one, listen to
my supernal words which, from desire of (thy) good, I say unto thee
that wouldst be pleased (therewith).* The hosts of gods know not my
origin, nor the great Rishis, since I am, in every way, the source of the
gods and the great Rishis.> He that knoweth meas the Supreme Lord of

1 Hence they have to come back, explains Sreedhara.—T. 7

2 ‘Prayatatmanas’ is explained as ‘Suddhachittasya’\—T.

3 ‘Iman lokan’ (this mortal world), Sraedhara says, may mean “this
form of royal saint that thou hast.” This is far-fetched.—T,

4 Telang renders ‘Paramam’ ‘excellent’; Mr. John Davies, ‘all im-
portant’. The meaning is referring to the ‘Supreme Soul’.—T,

5 Both Sankara and Sreedhara explain ‘Sarvassas’ as “in every way.”

i, @., a8 orentor, as guide, fo.a> Tom https:/Avmw.holybooks.com
11 _ https:/Awww.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 76 ===

82 MAHABHARATA

the worlds, without birth and beginning, (he), undeluded among mortals,
is freefrom all sins. Intelligence, knowledge, the absence of delusion, for-
giveness, truth, self-restraint, and tranquillity, pleasure, pain, birth, death,
fear, and also security, abstention from harm, evenness of mind, content-
ment, ascetic austerities, gift, fame, infamy, these several attributes
of creatures arise from me, The Seven great Rishis, the four Maharshis
before (them), and the Manus, partaking of my nature, were born from
my mind, of whom in this world are these offsprings.! He that
knoweth truly this pre-eminence and mystic power of mine, becometh
possessed of unswerving devotion- Of this (there is) no doubt. I am the
origin of all things, from meall things proceed. Thinking thus, the
wise, endued with my nature, worship me.? Their hearts on me, their
lives devoted to me, instructing one another, and gloryfying me they
are ever contented and happy.* Unto them always devoted, and
worshipping (me) with love, I give that devotion in the form of
knowledge by which they come to me.* Of them, for compassion’s sake,
Idestroy the darkness born of ignorance, by the brilliant lamp of
knowledge, (myself) dwelling in their souls,’

“Arjuna said, ‘Thou art the Supreme Brahma, the Supreme abode,
the holiest of the holy, the eternal male being Divine, the First of gods
Unborn, the Lord. All the Réshés proclaim thee thus, and also the
celestial Rishi Narada; and Asita, Devala, (and) Vyasa; thyself also
tellest me (so). All this that thou tellest me, O Kesava, I regard as true
since, O holy one, neither the gods nor the Danavas understand thy
manifestation. Thou only knowest thyself by thyself, O best of male
Beings. O Creator of all things, O Lord of all things, O god of gods,
O Lord of the Universe, it behoveth thee to declare without any
reservation, those divine perfections of thine by which perfections

pervading these worlds thou abidest. How shall I, ever meditating,
know thee, O thou of mystic powers, in what particular states
mayst thou, O holy one, be meditated upon -by me?® Do thou
again, O Janarddana, copiously declare thy mystic powers and (thy)

etfections for I am never satiated with hearing (thy) nectar-like
words,

1_ ‘Prajas’ offspring, including, as Sankara says, both mobile, and
immobile, therefore, not mankind alone.—T.

‘Bhava-samanwitas’ is explained by Sreedhara as ‘full of love,”
which K.'T. Telang accepts. Sankara explains it as “endued with penetra-
tion into the knowledge of the Supreme object”.—T,

3 ‘Tityam’, ever, is connected with what follows and not what
precedes. Thus Sreedhara. Mr. Davies connects it with Kathayantas.—T.

4 K, T. Telang renders ‘buddhi-yogam’ as knowledge ; Mr. Davies, as
mental devotion and Sankara, “devotion by special insight."—T.

5 To know thee fully is impossible. In what particular forms or
manifestations, therefore, shall I think of thee? The word Bhavain the
second line is rendered “entities” by K. T. Telang,and “form of being” by
Mr. Davies.—T, Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 77 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 88

“The holy-one said,—'Well, unto thee I will declare my divine per-
fections, by means of the principal ones (among them), O chief of the
Kurus, for there is no end to the extent of my (perfections).1_ I am the
soul, O thou of curly hair, seated in the heart of every being. Iam the
beginning, and the middle, and the end also of all beings. Iam Vishnu
among the Adityas, the resplendent Sun among all luminous bodies ;
Tam Marichi among the Maruts, and the Moon among constellations.”
Iam the Sama Veda among the Vedas ; Iam Vasava among the gods ; I
am the mind among the senses; I am the intellect in (living) beings. I am
Sankara among the Rudras, the lord of treasures among the Yakshas and
the Rakshdsas ; I am Pavaka among the Vasus, and Meru among the peaked
(mountains). Know me, O son of Pritha, to be Vrihaspati, the chief of
household priests. Iam Skanda among commanders of forces. Iam
Ocean among receptacles of water. 1 am Bhrigu among the great Rishis,
Iam the One, undestructible (syllable Om) among words. Of sacrifices
Tam the Japaesacrifice.* Of immobiles I am the Himavat. I am the fig-
tree amongall trees, Iam Narada among the celestial Rishis. I am
Chitraratha among the Gandharvas, and the ascetic Kapila among ascetics
crowned with Yoga success. Know meto be Uchchaisravas among
horses, brought forth by (the churning for) nectar, Airavata among
princely elephants, and the king among men. Among weapons I am the
thunderbolt, among cows I am (she called) Kamadhuk. I am Kandarpa
the cause of reproduction, I am Vasuki among serpents. I am Ananta
among Nagas, lam Varuna among acquatic beings, Iam Aryaman
among the Pitris, and Yama among those that judge and punish. I am
Prahlada among the Daityas, and Time among things that count. Iam
the lion among the beasts, and Vinata’s son among winged creatures.

1 ‘Vistarasya’ evidently refers (as explained by all the commentators)
to Vibhutinam. Itis a question of grammar and not of doctrine that
there can be any difference of opinion. Mr. Davies, however, renders it “of
(my) greatness.” This is inaccurate.—T.

2 The Adityas are the solar deities, twelve in number, corresponding
to the twelve months of the year. The Maruts are the wind-gods, whose
chief is Marichi.—T.

8 The Rudras are a class of destructive gods, eleven in number. The
Vasus are an inferior class of deities, eight in number. The lord of treasures
is Kuvera.—T.

4 The Japa-sacrifice is the sacrifice by meditation which is superior to
all sacrifices.—T.

5 ‘Kamadbuk,’ the wish-giving cow called Surabhi. The cause of re-
production, é.e., I am not the mere carnal passion, but that passion whioh
procreates or is crowned with fruit.—T.

6 In 28, Vasukiis called the chisf of the ‘Sarpas’ (serpents) ; in 29
Ananta is spoken of as the chief of the Nagas. The latter are Sarpas as well,
Sreedhara says that the distinction lies in the fact of the Naga being with-
out poison. This ispaandducearrentintpb»/www.holybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 78 ===

84 MAHABHARATA

Of purifiers 1am the wind. Iam Rama among wielders of weapons. I
am the Makara among fishes, and I am Jahnavi (Ganga) among streams.*
Of created things I am the beginning and the end and also the middle,
O Arjuna. [am the knowledge of Supreme Spirit among all kinds of
knowledge, and the disputation among disputants.?, Among all letters I
am the letter A, and (the compound called) Dwanda among all com-
pounds. Iam also Time Eternal, and I am the Ordainer with face
turned on every side.* Iam Death that seizeth all, and the source of all,
that is tobe. Among females, 1am Fame, Fortune, Speech, Memory,
Intelligence, Constancy, Forgiveness. Of the Sama hymns, I am the
Vrihat-sama and Gayatri among metres. Of the months, I am Margasirsha,
of the seasons (Iam) that which is productive of flowers.‘ I am the
game of dice of them that cheat, andthe splendour of those that are
splendid. Iam Victory, I am Exertion, I am the goodness of the good.
Iam Vasudeva among the Vrishnis, I am Dhananjaya among the sons of
Pandu. Iam even Vyasa among the ascetics, and Usanas among seers,
Iam the Rod of those that chastise, Lam the Policy of those that seek
victory. (Iam silence among that are secret.) I am the Knowledge of
those that are possessed of Knowledge. That which is the Seed of all
things, Iam that, O Arjuna. There is nothing mobile or immobile,
which can exist without me. There is no end, O chastiser of foes, of
my divine perfections. This recital of the extent of (those) perfections
hath been uttered by me by way (only) of instancing them. Whatever
of exalted things (there is) or glorious, or strong, understand thou that
everything is born of a portion of my energy. Or rather, what hast
thou to do, by knowing all this in detail, O Arjuna? Supporting this
entire universe with only a portion (of myself), I stand.*”

1 ‘Pavatam’ may also mean “of those that have motion.” Rama is
Dasaratha’s con, the hero of Valmiki’s poem. Ganga is called Jahnavi
because she was, after having been drunk up, let out by the ascetic Jahnu
through his knee.—T.

2 Mr. Davies renders Vedas ‘Pravadatam’ as ‘the speech of those that
speak.” K. T, Telang renders it “the argument of controversialists.”"—T.

3 A, orrather tho sound of A asin full, isthe initial letter of the
Sanskrit alphabet. Of compounds, the Dwanda, or the copulative compound,
is enumerated first. In other respects again, the Dwanda is the best kind
of compound for the words forming it are co-ordinate, without one being
dependent on the other or others.—T. -

4 The ‘Vribat-saman’ is said to be the best, because it leads to emanci-
pation at once, Thus Sankara. The 'Margasirsha’ is the month ‘from the
middle of February to the middle of March. Productive of flowers, i. e., the
Spring.—T.

_ 5 Mr. Davies renders the last line of this verso as I have established
in continuance albéhigcanbuaram tponamanéiysauialbom This is both obseure
and inaqgHpay 4+olybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 79 ===

SECTION XXXV

“Arjuna said—'This discourse about the supreme mystery, called
Adhyatman, which thou hast uttered for my welfare, hath dispelled my
delusion.’ For I have heard at large from thee of the creation and
dissolution of beings, O thou of eyes like lotus petals, and also of thy
greatness that knoweth no deterioration. What thou hast said about
thyself, O great Lord, is even so. O best of male Beings, I desire to
behold thy sovereign form. If, O Lord, thou thinkest that I am
competent to behold that (form), then, O Lord of mystic power, show
me thy eternal Self.?"

“The holy one said, ‘Behold, O son of Pritha, my forms by hundreds
and thousands, various, divine, diverse in hue and shape. Behold the
Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the Aswins, and the Maruts. Behold,
O Bharata, innumerable marvels unseen before (by thee). Behold, O
thou of curly hair, the entire universe of mobiles and immobiles,
collected together in this body of mine, whatever else thou mayst wish
tosee,* Thou art, however, not competent to behold me with this
eye ofthine- I give thee celestial sight. Behold my sovereign mystic
nature.’ ”

Sanjaya continued,—" Having said this, O monarch, Hari, the mighty
Lord of mystic power, then revealed to the son of Pritha his Supreme
sovereign form, with many mouths and eyes, many wonderous aspects,
many celestial ornaments, many celestial weapons uplifted, wearing
celestial garlands and robes, (and) with unguents of celestial fragrance,
full of every wonder, resplendent, infinite, with faces turned on all
sides.‘ If the splendour of a thousand suns were to burst forth at once
in the sky, (then) that would be. like the splendour of that Mighty one.
The son of Pandu then beheld there in the body of that God of gods the
entire universe divided and sub-divided into many parts, all collected
together.© Then Dhananjaya, filled with amazement, (and) with hair
standing on end, bowing with (his) head, with joined hands addressed the
God.

1 ‘Adyatman,’ i.e., the relation between the Supreme and the individual
soul. This my delusion, i.e., about my being the slayer.—T.

2 Avyayam is that which has no decay. Ordinarily, it may be rendered
“eternal.” Telang renders it “inexhaustible.” Elsewhere I have rendered
it as “understanding."—T,

3 Hkastham, lit ‘all in one,” i.e., collected together—T,

4 ‘Devam’ is explained by Sreedhara as ‘Dyotanatmakam'i.e., endued
with splendour. Mr. Davies renders it resplendent ; but Telang renders it
“deity."—T.

5 'Pra-vibbaktam-anekadha’ (divided diversely) is an adjective of Jagat.
See Sreedhara. Both Mr. Davies and Telang seem to take it asa predi-
cate in contra-distincbiomtméEksebhamps:/Dbindytssstcelycorrect.—T,

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 80 ===

86 MAHABHARATA

“Arjuna said, 'I behold all the gods, O God, as also all the varied
hosts of creatures, (and) Brahman seated on (his) lotus seat, and all
the Rishis and the celestial snakes. I behold Thee with innumerable
arms, stomachs, mouths, (and) eyes, on every side, O thou of infinite
forms. Neither end nor middle, nor also beginning of thine do I
behold, O Lord of the universe, O thou of universal form. Bearing
(thy) diadem, mace, and discus, a mass of energy, glowing on all sides, do
I behold thee that art hard to look at, endued on all sides with the
effulgence of the blazing fire or the Sun, (and) immeasurable. Thou
art indestructible, (and) the Supreme object of this universe. Thou art
without decay, the guardian of eternal virtue. I regard thee to be the
eternal (male) Being. I behold thee to be without beginning, mean,
end, to be of infinite prowess, of innumerable arms, having the Sun and
the Moon for thy eyes, the blazing fire for thy mouth, and heating this
universe with energy of thy own. For the space betwixt Heaven and
Earth is pervaded by Thee alone, as also all the points of the horizon,
At sight of this marvellous and fierce form of thine, O Supreme Soul,
the triple world trembleth. For these hosts of gods are entering thee.
Some, afraid, are praying with joined hands. Saying Hail to Thee—the
hosts of great Rishis and Siddhas praise Thee with copious hymns of
praise.’ The Rudras, the Adityas, the Vasus, they that (called) the
Siddhas, the Viswas, the Aswins, the Maruts, also the Ushmapas, the
Gandharvas, the Yakshas, the Asuras, the hosts of Siddhyas, behold
Thee and are all amazed. Beholding Thy mighty form with many mouths
and eyes, O mighty-armed one, with innumerable arms, thighs and feet,
many stomachs, (and) terrible in consequence of many tusks, all
creatures are frightened and I also. Indeed, touching the very skies, of
blazing radiance, many-hued, mouth wide open, with eyes that are
blazing and large, beholding thee, O Vishnu, with (my) inner soul
trembling (in fright), Ican no longer command courage and peace of
mind. Beholding thy mouths that ate terrible in consequence of
(their) tusks, and that are fierce (as the all-destroying fire at the end of
the Yuga), I can not recognise the points of the horizon nor can I
command peace of mind. Be gracious, O God of gods, O thou that art
the refuge of the Universe. And all these sons of Dhritarashtra,
together with the hosts of kings, and Bhishma, and Drona, and also this
Suta’s son (Karna), accompanied by even the principal warriors of our
side, are quickly entering thy terrible mouths rendered fierce by thy
tusks. Some, with their heads crushed, are seen striking at the
interstices of (thy) teeth. As many currents of water flowing through

1 Verse 21 is read differently. For ‘Twam Surasangha,’ some texts read
‘twa-Asurasanghas,’ Thon again for ‘Stuvanti’ in the second line some read
Vikshate.'—T. Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
;ww.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 81 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 87

different channels roll rapidly towards the ocean, so these heroes of the
world of men enter thy mouths that flame all around. As moths with
increasing speed rush for (their own) destruction to the blazing fire, so
also do (these) people, with unceasing speed, enter thy mouths for
(their) destruction. Swallowing all these men from every side, thou
lickest them with thy flaming mouths. Filling the whole universe with
(thy) energy, thy fierce splendours, O Vishnu, are heating (every-
thing). Tell me who thou art of (such) fierce form, I bow to thee, O
chief of the gods, be gracious to me. I desire to knot thee that art
the Primeval one, I do not understand thy action.’*

“The holy one said, I am Death, the destroyer of the worlds, fully
developed. I am now engaged in slaying the race of men. Without thee
all these warriors standing in the different divisions shall cease to be.?
Wherefore, arise, gain glory, (and) vanquishing the foe, enjoy (this)
swelling kingdom. By me have all these been already slain. Be only (my)
instrument, O thou that can’st draw the bow with (even) the left hand.
Drona and Bhishma, and Jayadratha, and Karna, and also other heroic
warriors, (already) slain by me, do thou slay. Be not dismayed, fight ;
thou shalt conquer in battle (thy) foes.”

Sanjaya continued,—'Hearing these words of Kesava, the diadem-
decked (Arjuna), trembling, (and) with joined-hands, bowed (unto him) ;
and once more said unto Krishna, with voice choked up and overwhelm-
ed with fear, and making his salutations (to him).—

“Arjuna said, ‘It is meet, Hrishikesa, that the universe is delighted
and charmed in uttering thy praise, and the Aakshaeas flee in fear in all
directions, and the hosts of the Siddkas bow down (to thee). And why
shoud they not bow down to thee, O Supreme Soul, that are greater
than even Brahman (himself), and the primal cause ? O thou that art
Infinite, O God of the gods, O thou that art the refuge of the universe,
thou art indestructible, thou art that which #8, and that which és not and
that which is beyond (both). Thou art the First God, the ancient
(male) Being, thou art the Supreme refuge of this universe. Thou art the
Knower, thou art the Object to be known, thou art the highest abode.

1 'Pravritti’ is explained by both Sankara and Sreedhara as ‘Chesta,’
ie., movements or acts. Mr. Davies is, I think, not correct in taking it
to mean “evolved or developed form.”—T,

2 ‘Kala’ here is death. Mr. Davies renders it Time, following some

other translators. ‘Pravriddha’ is not (as Mr. Davies renders it) “old” or
“very old,” but swelling or fully developed. Thon again, Mr. Davies com-

mits s ludicrous blunder in rendcring ‘Rite twam’ as “Except thee.” This

_ is 6ne of those idioms at which a foreignor is sure to stumble who was only

the lexicons for his guide. What Krishna says is not that all would perish
save Arjuna, but that without Arjuna (i, ¢,, even if he did not fight ) all
would perish—T, = Downloaded from https://www. holybooks.com

] https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 82 ===

88 MAHABHARATA

By thee is pervaded this universe, O thou of infinite form.’ Thou art
Vayu, Yama, Agni, Varuna, Moon, Prajapati, and Grandsire. Obeisance
be to thee a thousand times, and again and yet again obeisance to thee.
Obeisance to thee in front, and also from behind. Let obesiance be
to thee from every side, O thou that art all. Thou art all, of energy
that is infinite, and prowess that is immeasurable. Thou embracest the
All, Regarding (thee) a friend whatever hath been said by me care-
lessly, such as—O Krishna, O Yadava, O friend,—not knowing this thy
greatness, from want of judgment or from love either, whatever
disrespect hath been shown thee for purpose of mirth, on occasions of
play, lying, sitting, (or) at meals, while alone or in the presence of others,
O undeteriorating one, I beg thy pardon for it, that art immeasurable,
Thou art the father of this universe of mobiles and immobiles. Thou
art the great master deserving of worship. There is none equal to thee,
how can there be one greater? O thou whose power is unparalleled in
even three worlds?? Therefore bowing (to thee) prostrating (my)
body, I ask thy grace, O Lord, O adorable one. It behoveth thee, O
God, to bear (my faults) as a father (his) son's, a friend (his) friend's, a
lover (his) loved one’s. Beholding (thy) form (unseen) ‘before, I have
been joyful, (yet) my mind hath been troubled, with fear. Show me
that (other ordinary) form, O God. Be gracious, O Lord of the gods,
O thou that art the refuge of the universe. (Decked) in diadem, and
(armed) with mace, discus in hand, as before, I desire to behold thee,
Be of that same four-armed form, O thou of a thousand arms, thou of
universal form.”

“The holy one said, ‘Pleased with thee, O Arjuna, I have, by my
(own) mystic power, shown thee this Supreme form, full of glory,
Universal, Infinite, Primeval, which hath been seen before by none
save thee. Except by thee alone, hero of Kuru's race, I cannot be
seen in this form in the world of men by any one else, (aided) even by
the study of the Vedas and of sacrifices, by gifts, by actions, (or) by the
severest austerities.® Let no fear be thine, nor perplexity of mind at

seeing this awful form of mine. Freed from fear with a joyful heart,

thou again see Me assuming that other form.’

Sanjaya continued,—" Vasudeva, having said all this to Arjuna, once
more showed (him) his own (ordinary) form, and that high-souled one,
assuming once more (his) gentle form, comforted him who had been
afflicted.”

1 ‘Nidhanam’ is either refuge or support or abode or respectable. Mr.
Davies incorreotly renders it ‘treasure-house,"—T,
2 Sankara accepts the reading ‘Gururgariyan,’ Sreedhara takes it as
‘Gururgariyan.’ In either case the difference in meaning is not material.-T,
3 Sankara connects ‘Adhyayana’ with Veda and Yajna, This seems to
be right explanafiemlodied from https:/www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 83 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 89

“Arjuna said, ‘Beholding this gentle human form of thine, O
Janarddana, I have now become of right mind and have come to my
normal state.’

“The holy one said, ‘This form of mine which thou hast seen is diffi-
cult of being seen. Even the gods are always desirous of becoming
spectators of this (my) form. Not by the Vedas, nor by austerities, nor
by gifts, nor by sacrifices, can I be seen in this form of mine which thou
hast seen. By reverence. however, that is exclusive (in its objects), O
Arjuna, Ican in this form be known, seen truly, and attained to, O
chastiser of foes. He who doth everything for me, who hath me for
his supreme object, who is freed from attachment, who is without
enmity towards all beings, even he, O Arjuna, cometh to me.”

SECTION XXXVI

“Arjuna said, ‘Of those worshippers who, constantly devoted, adore
thee, and those who (meditate) on thee as the Immutable and Unmani-
fest, who are best acquainted with devotion.’

“The holy one said, ‘Fixing (their) mind on me, they that constantly
adore me, being endued (besides) with the highest faith, are deemed by
me to be the most devoted. They, however, who worship the Immut-
able, the Unmanifest, the All-pervading, the Inconceivable, the
Indifferent, the Immutable, the Eternal, who, restraining the entire
Sroup of the senses, are equal-minded in respect of all around and are
engaged in the good of all creatures, (also) attain to me. The trouble
isthe greater for those whose minds are fixed on the Unmanifest ; for
the path to the Unmanifest is hard to find by those that are embodied.
They (again) who, reposing all action on me (and) regarding me as their
highest object (of attainment), worship me, meditating on me with
devotion undirected to anything else, of them whose minds are (thus)
fixed on me, I, without delay, become the deliverer from the ocean of
(this) mortal world. Fix thy heart on me alone, place thy understand.
ingon me. Hereafter then shalt thou dwell in me. (There is) no doubt
(in this). If however, thou art unable to fix thy heart steadily on me,
then, O Dhananjaya, strive to obtain me by devotion (arising) from
Continuous application. If thou beest unequal to even (this) conti-
huous application, then let actions performed for me be thy highest aim.
Even performing all thy acts for my sake, thou wilt obtain perfection,
Tf even this thou art unable to do, then resorting to devotion in me,
(nd) subduing thy soul, abandon the fruit of all actions. Knowledge is
Superior to application (in devotion) ; meditation is better than know.
ledge ; the abandonment of the fruit of teaction (is better) than medita-

1 ‘Ata urddham’ is ‘after this,” or ‘hereafter on high’ as Mr, Davies
Tenders it.—T. Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
12 https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 84 ===

90 MAHABHARATA

tion; and tranquillity (results) immediately from abandonment. He
who hath no hatred for any creature, who is friendly and compassionate
also, who is free from egoism, who hath no vanity, attachment, who is
alike in pleasure and pain, who is forgiving, contented, always devoted,
of subdued, soul, firm of purpose, with heart and understanding fixed on
me, even he is dear to me. He through whom the world is not troubled,
(and) who is not troubled by the world, who is free from joy, wrath, fear
and anxieties, even he is dear tome. That devotee of mine who is
unconcerned, pure, diligent, unconnected (with worldly objects), and
free from distress (of mind), and who renounceth every action (for
fruit), even he is dear to me. He who hath no joy, no aversion, who
neither grieveth nor desireth, who renounceth both good and evil, (and)
who is full of faith in me, even he is dear to me. He who is alike to
friend and foe, as also in honour and dishonour, who is alike in cold and
heat, (and pleasure and pain), who is free from attachment, to whom
censure and praise are equal, who is taciturn, who is contented with
anything that cometh (to him), who is homeless, of steady mind and full
of faith, even that man is dear to me. They who resort to this
righteousness (leading to) immortality which hath been (already)
declared,—those devotees full of faith and regarding me as the highest
object (of their acquisition) are the dearest to me.’

SECTION XXXVII

“The holy one said, This body, O son of Kunti, is called Kshetra,
Him who knoweth it, the learned call Kshetrajna,? Know me, O Bharata,
to be Kshetras. The knowledge of Kshetra and Kshetrajna I regard to be
(true) knowledge. What that Kshetra (is), and what (it is) like, and
what changes it undergoes, and whence (it comes), what is he (viz.,
Kshetrajna), and what his powers are, hear from me in brief. All thishath
in many ways been sung separately, by Rishis in various verses, in well-
settled texts fraught with reason and giving indications of Brahman,
The great elements, egoism, intellect, the unmanifest (viz., Prakriti), also
the ten senses, the one (manas), the five objects of sense, desire,
aversion, pleasure, pain, body, consciousness, courage,—all this in brief
hath been declared to be Kshetra in its modified form. Absence of

1 Although the limitation ‘for fruit” does not occur in the text, yet, it
is evident, it should be understood. Krishna does not recommend the total
abandonment of actions, but abandonment for their fruit. Mr Davies ren-
ders arambha as “enterprise.” —T.

2 The learned, they that are themselves acquainted with is Kshetra

and what not. ae sige si Rap nR RoR Keshetra is Matter,

and Kshetraina ig, ‘com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 85 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 91

vanity, absence of ostentation, abstention from injury, forgiveness,
uprightness, devotion to preceptor, purity, constancy, self-restraint,
indifference to objects of sense, absence of egoism, perception of the
misery and evil of birth, death, decrepitude and disease, freedom from
attachment, absence of sympathy for son, wife, home, and the rest, and
constant equanimity of heart on attainment of good and evil, unswerv-
ing devotion to me without meditation on anything else, frequenting of
lonely places, distaste for concourse of men,” constancy in the know-
ledge of the relation of the individual self to the supreme, perception
of the object of the knowledge of truth,—all this is called Knowledge;
all that which is contrary to this is Ignorance.* That which is the
object of knowledge I will (now) declare (to thee), knowing which one
obtaineth immortality. [It is] the Supreme Brahma having no beginning,
who is said to be neither existent nor non-existent ; whose hands and
feet are on all sides, whose eyes, heads and faces are on all sides, who
dwells pervading everything in the world, who is possessed of all the
qualities of the senses (though) devoid of the senses, without attachment
(yet) sustaining all things, without attributes (yet) enjoying (a) all
attributes,4, without and within all creatures, immobile and mobile, not
knowable because of (his) subtlety, remote yet near, undistributed in
all beings, {yet) remaining as it distributed, who is the sustainer of (all)
beings, the absorber and the creator (of all) ; who is the light of all
luminous bodies, who is said to be beyond all darkness ; who is knowledge,
the Object of knowledge, the End of knowledge and seated in the hearts
of all. Thus Kehetra, and Knowledge, and the Object of Knowledge,
have been declared (to thee) in brief. My devotee, knowing (all) this,
becomes one in spirit with me. Know that Nature and Spirit are
both without beginning (and) know (also) that all modifications and all
qualities spring from Nature.’ Nature is said to be the source of the
capacity of enjoying pleasures and pains.* For Spirit, dwelling in nature

1 ‘Duskha-dosha’ is explained by both Sankara and Sreedhara asa
Dwanda compound.—T.

2 Vivikta is explained by the commentators as ‘Suddha’ or ‘Chittaprasa-
dakara.' There ean be no doubt, however, that it is in opposition to

‘Janasamsadi’ following. Hence I render it ‘lonely’’—T.

8 The object of the knowledge of truth is the dispelling of ignorance
and the acquistion of happiness.—T,

4 Nor having eyes, etc,; yet seeing, etc ; without attributes, yet
having or enjoying all that the attributes give—T, .

5 All modifications, i,e,, of material forms ; all qualities, i,e., pleasure,
pain, etc. The word rendered “nature” is Prakriti (primal matter), and
that rendered “spirit” is Purusha (the active principle). Vikarna and
Gunan include all material forms and attributes of the soul.—T.

6 Karya-karana-karttritwa is explained by both Sankara and Sreedhara

“ ity of working (residing) in the body and the senses.”
folmean “the capadity ot aod Tron residing) in the body s

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 86 ===

92 MAHABHARATA

enjoyeth the qualities born of Nature. The cause of its births in good or
evil wombs is (its) connection with the qualities.1 The Supreme Purusha
in this body is said to be surveyor, approver, supporter, enjoyer,
the mighty lord, and also the Suprnme Soul.? He who thus knows
Spirit, and Nature, with the qualities, in whatever state he may be, is
never born again. Some by meditation behold the self in the Self by the
self; others by devotion according to the Sankhya system ; and others
(again), by devotion through works, Others yet not knowing this,
worship, hearing of it from others. Even these, devoted to what is
heard, cross over death.* Whatever entity, immobile or mobile, cometh
into existence, know that, O bull of Bharata’s race, to be from the
connection of Keheira and Kshetrajna (matter and spirit). He seeth the
Supreme Lord dwelling alike in all beings, the Imperishable in the
Perishable. For seeing the Lord dwelling alike everywhere, one doth
not destroy‘ himself by himself, and then reacheth the highest goal.
He seeth (truly) who seeth all actions to be wrought by nature alone in
every way and the self likewise to be not the doer. When one seeth
the diversity of entities as existing in one, and the issue (everything)
from that (One), then is one said to attain to Brahma, This inexhaus-
tible Supreme Self, O son of Kunti, being without beginning and without
attributes, doth not act, nor is stained even when stationed in the body.
As space, which is ubiquitous, is never, in consequence of its subtlety
tainted, so the soul, stationed in every body, is never tainted.® As the
single Sun lights up the entire world, so the Spirit, O Bharata, lights up
the entire (sphere of) matters. They that, by the eye of knowledge,
know the distinction between matter and spirit, and the deliverance
from the nature of all entities, attain to the Supreme.®

K.T. Telang adopts this. Mr. Davies in his text has ‘in the activity of the
organs of action.” In course of his philological notes, however, he gives

the correct rendering. ‘Is said to bo’ is explained by Sreedhara as referring
to Kapila and others.—T.

1 It is the embodied spirit only that can enjoy the qualities of Nature,
Then again, the kind of connection it has with those qualities settles its
birth in good or evil wombs.—T.

2 Mr. Davies misunderstands the grammatical connection of the words

in the second line of this verse, K.T. Telang, following Sreedhara, says,
the word should be rendered “approver”—T, “a

3 What is heard, i,e., the Srutis or the sacred doctrines.—T.

4 Destroying self by self is to be deprived of true knowledge.—T.

6 Sarvatra in the second line is explained by Sreedhara as “in every
body, superior and inferior.” Grammatically it may mean also, “in every

part of the body.” Such a theory, however, of the seat of the soul would
be contrary to all Hindu ideas.—T.

6 ‘Bhuta-Prakriti-moksha’ is explained by both Sankara and Sreedhara
as ‘moksha’ or deliverance from the prakriti (nature) of ‘bhutas’ or ‘entities’,
It is true knowledge that effects such deliverance. Mr. Davies renders it

“deliverance of ie 38 fro) Naty a is ig evi i “Beings”
A Qt -/ Holbsodeatly incorrect. "Beings:
is not pynonymot air HE ih BSBRCEBHTY incor

=== PAGE 87 ===

tr SECTION XXXVIII

“The holy one said, ‘I will again declare (to thee ) that supernal
* science of sciences, that excellent science, knowing which all the munis
‘have attained tothe highest perfection from (the fetters of) this body.’
- Resorting to this science, and attaining to my nature, they are not
* reborn even on (the occasion of) a (new) creation and are not disturbed
at the universal dissolution. The mighty Brahma is a womb for me.
Therein I place the (living) germ. Thence, O Bharata, the birth of all
beings taketh place. Whatever (bodily) forms, O son of Kunti, are
© born in all wombs, of them Brahma is the mighty womb, (and) I the
seed-imparting Sire.? Goodness, Passion, Darkness, these qualities,
» born of nature, bind down, O thou of mighty arms, the eternal Embodied
[Soul] in the body. Amongst these, Goodness, from its unsullied nature,
being enlightening and free from misery, bindeth (the soul), O sinless
one, with the attainment of happiness and of knowledge. Know that
Passion, having desire for its essence; is born of thirst and attachment.
That, O son of Kunti, bindeth the Embodied (Soul) by the attachment
of work. Darkness, however, know, is born of Ignorance, (and) bewil-
ders all Embodied [Soul]. That bindeth, O Bharata, by error, indolence,
and sleep. Goodness uniteth (the soul) with pleasure ; Passion, O Bhara-
ta, uniteth with work ; but Darkness, veilng knowledge, uniteth with
error. Passion and Darkness, being repressed, Goodness remaineth, O
Bharata. Passion and Goodness (being repressed), Darkness (remain-
eth); (and) Darkness and Goodness (being repressed), Passion
(remaineth). When in this body, in all its gates, the light of knowledge
is produced, then should one know that Goodness hath been developed
there. Avarice, activity, performance of works, want of tranquillity,
desire,—these, O bull of Bharata’s race, are born when Passion is
developed. Gloom, inactivity, error, and delusion also,—these, O son of
Kuru’s race, are born when Darkness is developed. When the holder
of abody goeth to dissolution while Goodness is developed, then he
-attaineth to the spotless regions of those that know the Supreme.
Going to dissolution when Passion prevails, one is born among those that
are attached to work. Likewise, dissolved during Darkness, one is born
in wombs that beget the ignorant. The fruit of good action is said to be
* good and untainted. The fruit, however, of Passion, is misery ; (and)
the fruit of Darkness is ignorance. From Goodness is produced Know-
ledge; from Passion, avarice; (and) from Darkness are error and

1 ‘Itas’ is explained by Sreedhara as ‘‘from the fetters of this body”".—T

2 Sreedhara makes ‘mahat’ an adjective of yoni; Sankara makes it an
adjective of Brahma. K. '. Telang follows Sankara.—T.,

8 Happiness and Knowledge are attributes of the mind, not of the Soul.
Hence, when attached to the Soul, they are as fetters from which the Soul
should be freed. ThDevidleacion fem huperPwwLholybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 88 ===

94 MAHABHARATA

delusion, and also ignorance. They that dwell in Goodness goon high ;
they that are addicted to Passion dwell in the middle ; (while) they that
are of Darkness, being addicted to the lowest quality, go down. When
an observer recognises none else to be an agent save the qualities, and
knows that which is beyond (the qualities), he attaineth to my nature.
The Embodied [Soul], by transcending these three qualities which
constitute the source of all bodies, enjoyeth immortality, being freed
from birth, death, decrepitude, and misery.?”

“Arjuna said, ‘What are indications, O Lord, of one who hath
transcended these three qualities? What is his conduct ? How also
doth one transcend these three qualities ?”

“The holy one said, ‘He who hath no aversion for light, activity,
and even delusion, O son of Pandu, when they are present, nor desireth
them when they are absent,?_ who, seated as one unconcerned, is not
shaken by those qualities ; who-sitteth and moveth not, thinking that it
is the qualities (and nothe) that are engaged (in their respective
functions) ; to whom pain and pleasure are alike ; who is self-contained,
and to whom a sod of earth, a stone, and gold are alike; to whom the
agreeable and the disagreeable are the same ; who hath discernment ; to
whom censure and praise are the same ; to whom honour and dishonour
are the same ; who regardeth friend and foe alike ; who hath renounced
all exertion—is said to have transcended the qualities. He also who
worshippeth Me with exclusive devotion, he, transcending those
qualities, becometh fit for admission into the nature of Brahma, ForI
am the stay of Brahma, of immortality, of undestructibility, of eternal
piety, and of unbroken felicity.’*

SECTION XXXIX

“The holy one said, ‘They say that the Aswattha, having its roots
above and branches below, is eternal, its leaves are the Chhandas, He who
knoweth it, knoweth the Vedas. Downwards and upwards are stretched

1 ‘Deha samudbhava’ is explained by the commentators as- having their
“‘samudbhava or parinama in deha.” It is an instance of the ‘vahuvrihi’ com-
pound.—T.

2 Light, activity, and delusion are the three qualities as indicated by
their effects—T.

3 ‘Pratishtha’ is explained by Sankara as ‘something on which another
(here Brahma) stays or rests”. Sreedhara explains it as Pratima. Telang
following Sreedhara, renders it embodiment”; Mr. Davies, as “seat.”
‘Amritasya’ and ‘Avyayasya’ are taken separately by the commentators—T,

4 The ‘Aswattha’ is the sacred Indian fig tree, here emblematical of the
course of wordly life. Its roots are above ; those roots are the Supreme
Being. Its branches are below, these being the inferior deities. Its leaves
are the sacred hymns of the Vedas, i., e., as leaves keep the tree alive and

noted hymns of
even gonduge toi, fries Ataf Roa IRE, AMARONE, ye free ond Tonal

fittps://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-1. 2-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 89 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 95

its branches which are enlarged by the qualities ; its sprouts are the
objects of senses. Downwards its roots, leading to action, are extended
to this world of men.’ Its form cannot here (below) be thus known,
nor (its) end, nor (its) beginning, nor (its) support. Cutting, with the
hard weapon of unconcern, this Aswattha of roots firmly fixed, then
should one seek for that place repairing whither one returneth not again
(thinking)—I will seek the protection of that primeval Sire from whom
the ancient course of (worldly) life hath flowed.—Those that are free
from pride and delusion, that have subdued the evil of attachment, that
are steady in the contemplation of the relation of the Supreme to the
individual Self, from whom desire hath departed, freed from the pairs
of opposites known by the names of pleasure and pain (and the like),
repair, undeluded, to that eternal seat. The Sun lighteth not That
[Seat], nor the Moon, nor Fire. Whither going none returneth, that
is my Supreme Seat. An eternal portion of Me is that which, becoming
an individual soul in the world of life, draweth to itself the (five) senses
with the mind asthe sixth which all depend on Nature. When the
sovereign (of this bodily frame) assumeth or quiteth (a) body, it
departeth taking away these, like the wind (taking away) perfumes
from their seats. Presiding over the ear, the eye, (the organs of) touch,
taste, and smell, and also over the mind, he enjoyeth all objects of senses,
They that are deluded do not see (him) when quitting or abiding in
(the body), when enjoying or joined to the qualities. They (however)
see that have the eye of knowledge.” Devotees exerting (towards that
end) behold him dwelling in themselves. They (however) that are
senseless and whose minds are not restrained, behold him not, even
while exerting (themselves).* That splendour dwelling in the sun
which illumines the vast universe, that (which is) in the moon, and
that (which is) in the Fire, know that splendour tobe mine. Entering

into the Earth I uphold creatures by my force ; and becoming the juicy
moon I nourish all herbs.4 Myself becoming the vital heat (Vaiswanara)

1 Upwards and downwards i., from the highest to the lowest of
created things. Enlarged by the qualities, i.e., the qualities appearing as
the body, the senses, etc. The sprouts are the objects of sense, being
attached tothe senses themselves as sprouts to branches. The rocts ex-
tending downwards are the desires for diverse enjoyments. Thus Telang,
following the commentators,—T.

2 Joined to the qualities, i.e., perceiving objects of sense or experiencing
pleasure and pain.—T.

8 “Atmani” in the first line is ‘in the body” as explained by Sree-
dhara and others: “in the understanding” as explained by Sankara, It
seems, however, to be used in the general senses of “themselves,” without
partioular reference to either body or understanding. An ‘Akritatman’
is one whose soul i not made or formed ; generally, “a person of un-
subdued passions.”.

4 There can be oe estion pat Boma, bere means the moon and not

the 9 hy is
Soma j juice  gnafte olybooks. bog) Beep all Hae ey bh, thag, supports

=== PAGE 90 ===

96 MAHABHARATA

residing in the bodies of creatures that breathe, (and) uniting with the
upward and the downward life-breaths, I digest the four kinds of food.*
Iam seated in the hearts of all. From Me are memory and Knowledge
and the loss of both. I am the Objects of knowledge to be known by
(the aid of) all the Vedas. I am the author of the Vedantas, and I alone
am the knower of the Vedas. There are these two entities in the
world, iz, the Mutable and the Immutable. The Mutable is all
(these) creatures. The unchangeable one is called the Immutable.*
But there is another, the Supreme being, called Paramatman, who was
the Eternal Lord, pervading the three worlds, sustaineth (them) (and)
since I transcend the Mutable, and am higher than even the Immutable ;
for this I am celebrated in the world (among men) and in the
Veda as Purushottama ( the Highest Being ). He who, without being
deluded, knoweth Me as this Highest Being,—he knowing all, O
Bharata, worshippeth Me in every way.* Thus, O sinless one, hath this
knowledge, forming the greatest of mysteries, been declared by
Me (to thee). Knowing this,O Bharata, one will become gifted with
intelligence, and will have done all he needs do.’

SECTION XL

“The holy one said, ‘Fearlessness, purity of heart, perseverance in
(the pursuit of) knowledge and Yoga meditation, gifts, self-restraint,
sacrifice, study of the Vedas, ascetic penances, uprightness,® abstention
from injury, truth, freedom from anger, renunciation, tranquillity,
freedom from reporting other’s faults, compassion for all creatures,

nourishes all herbs and numerous passages may be quoted from Hindu sacred
literature to show this. Mr, Davies, therefore, clearly errs in rendering
Soma as ‘the savoury juice.”"—T.

1 The four kinds of food are : that which is masticated, that which is
sucked, that which is licked, and that which is drunk.—T.

2 ‘Apohanam’ is loss or removal. It is a well-known word and its
application here is very natural. I am memory and knowledge ( to those
that use them for virtuous acts). I am the loss of these faculties ( to those
that engage in unrighteous acts). Mr. Davies erroneously renders it as
“The power of reason.”—T.

3 ‘Kutashtha’ is rendered by K. T. Telang as ‘the unconcerned one”,
by Mr. Davies as “the Jord on high.” LIincline to the scholiasts who ex-,
plain it as “the uniform or the unchangeable one,”—T.

4 ‘Sarvabhavena’ is explained by Sankara by ‘Sarvatma-chintaya’
(thinking Me to be the sou! of everything). Sreedhara explains it as Sarva-
prakarena. Why may it not mean “with the whole soul” or “with excess
of love.” —T.

5 I adopt Sankara’s explanation of the last compound of the first line’
ps ¢ ks.com

of this sloka, Sroed Rewnleadea fai
https: ://Iwww.holybooks.com/mahabharata-: ‘all-volumes-in-12- -pdf-files/ © iy

=== PAGE 91 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 97

absence of covetousness, gentleness, modesty, absence of restlessness,
vigour, forgiveness, firmness, cleanliness, absence of quarrelsomeness,
freedom from vanity,—these become his, O Bharata, who is born to
god-like possessions. Hypocrisy, pride, conceit, wrath, rudeness and
ignorance, are, O son of Pritha, his who is born to demoniac possessions.
God-like possessions are deemed to be for deliverance ; the demoniac for
bondage. Grieve not, O son of Pandu, for thou art born to god-like
possessions. (There are) two kinds of created beings in this world, viz.,
the god-like and the demoniac. The god-like have been described at
length, Hear now, from me, O son of Pritha, about the demoniac.
Persons of demoniac nature know not inclination or disinclination.
Neither purity, nor good conduct, nor truth exist in them.!' They say
that the universe is void of truth, of guiding principle, (and) of ruler ;
produced by the union of one another (male and female) from lust, and
nothing else. Depending on this view, these men of lost selves, little
intelligence, and fierce deeds, these enemies (of the world), are born for
the destruction of the universe-? Cherishing desires that are insatiable,
and endued with hypocrisy, conceit and folly, they adopt false notions
through delusion and engage in unholy practices. Cherishing boundless
thoughts limited by death (alone), and regarding the enjoyment of
(their) desires as the highest end, they are persuaded that that is all,
Fettered by the hundred nooses of hope, addicted to lust and wrath,
they covet to obtain this wealth to-day,—This I will obtain later—
This wealth I have,—This (wealth) will be mine in addition,—This
foe hath been slain by me,—I will slay even others,—I am lord.—I am
the enjoyer,—I am successful, powerful, happy,—I am rich and of noble
birth—Who else is there that is like me ?—I will sacrifice—I will
make gifts —I will be merry,—thus deluded by ignorance,—tossed about
by numerous thoughts, enveloped in the meshesof delusion, attached to
the enjoyment of objects of desire, they sink into foul hell, Self-
conceited, stubborn, filled with the pride and intoxication of wealth,
they perform sacrifices that are nominally so, with hypocrisy and against
the (prescribed) ordinance. Wedded to vanity, power, pride, lust and

wrath, these revilers hate Me in their own bodies and those of others.
These haters (of Me), cruel, the vilest among men, and unholy, I hurl
continually down into demoniac wombs. Coming into demoniac wombs,

1 Prabritti I render “inolination” and Nivritti as ‘‘disinclination.” The
inclination is, as all the commentators explain, towards righteous actions,
and the disinclination, consequently, is about all unrighteous actions,
K. T. Telang renders these words as “action” and “inaction”. Mr. Davies,
following the French version of Burnouf, takes them to mean “the creation
and its end."—T.

2 Sankara seems to connect ‘the genetive ‘Jagatas’ with achitas.
Sreedhara connects it (which is natural) with ‘Kshayaya’, which I
pecept.—T. Downloaded from https:/Avww.holybooks.com

13 httos://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 92 ===

98 MAHABHARATA

deluded birth after birth, they, O son of Kunti, without attaining to Me
go down to the vilest state. Threefold is the way to hell, ruinous to the
self, viz,, lust, wrath, likewise avarice. Therefore, these three one
should renounce. Freed from these three gates of darkness, a man, O
son of Kunti, works out his own welfare, and then repairs to his highest
goal. He who, abandoning the ordinances of the scriptures, acts only
under the impulses of desire, never attains to perfection, nor happiness,
nor the highest goal. Therefore, the scriptures should be thy authority.
in determining what should be done and what should not be done. It
behoveth thee to do work here, having ascertained what hath been
declared by the ordinances of the scriptures.’ ”

SECTION XLI

“Arjuna said, What is the state, O Krishna, of those who abandon-
ing the ordinance of the scriptures, perform sacrifices endued with
faith? It is one of Goodness, or Passion, or Darkness ?°

“The holy one said, ‘The faith of embodied (creatures) is of three
kinds. It is (also) born of their (individual) natures. It is Good,
Passionate, and Dark. Hear now these. The faith of one, O Bharata, is
conformable to his own nature. A being here is full of faith; and
whatever is one’s faith, one is even that. They that are of the quality
of Goodness worship the gods; they that are of the quality of Passion
(worship) the Fakshas and the Rakshasas ; other people that are of the
quality of Darkness worship departed spirits and hosts of Bhutas, Those
people who practise severe ascetic austerities not ordained by the
scriptures, are given up to hypocrisy and pride, and endued with desire
of attachment, and violence,—those persons possessed of no discernment,
torturing the groups of organs in (their) bodies and Me also seated
within (those) bodies,—should be known to be of demoniac resolves.
Food which is dear to allis of three kinds, Sacrifice, penance, and
gifts are likewise (of three kinds). Listen to their distinctions as follows.
Those kinds of food that increase life's period, energy, strength, health,
well-being, and joy, which are savoury, oleaginous, nutritive, and
agreeable, are liked by God. Those kinds of food which are bitter,
sour, salted, over-hot, pungent, dry, and burning, and which produce
pain, grief and disease, are desired by the Passionate. The food which
is cold, without savour, stinking and corrupt, and which is even refuse,
and filthy, is dear to men of Darkness. That sacrifice is good which,
being prescribed by the ordinance, is performed by persons, without any
longing for the fruit (thereof) and the mind being determined (to it
under the belief) that its performance is a duty. But that which is
performed in expectation of fruit and even for the sake of ostentation,
know that sacrifpewsDadeibtort bites:donsvdbipenkaremto be of the quality

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 93 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 99

of Passion. That sacrifice which is against the ordinance, in which no
food is dealt out, which is devoid of mantras (sacred verse), in which
no fees are paid to the Brahmanas assisting to it, and which is void of
faith, is said to be of the quality of Darkness. Reverence to the gods,
regenerate ones, preceptors, and men of knowledge, purity, uprightness,
the practices of a Brahmacharin, and abstention from injury, are said to
constitute the penance of the body. The speech which causeth no
agitation, which is true, which is agreeable and beneficial, and the
diligent study of the Vedas, are said to be the penance of speech.
Serenity of the mind, gentleness, taciturnity, self-restraint, and purity
of the disposition.—these are said to be the penance of the mind. This
three-fold penance performed with perfect faith, by men without
desire of fruit, and with devotion, is said to be of the quality of Good-
ness- That penance which is performed for the sake of (gaining) respect,
honour, and reverence, with hypocrisy, (and) which is unstable and
transient is said to be of the quality of Passion. That penance which
is performed under a deluded conviction, with torture of one’s self,
and for the destruction of another, is said to be of the quality of
Darkness. That gift which is given because it ought to be given, to one
who cannot return any service for it, ina proper time, and toa proper
person, is said to be of the quality of Goodness, That, however, which
is given reluctantly, for return of services(past or expected), or even
with an eye to fruit,—that gift is said to be of the quality of Passion.
In an unfit place and at an unfit time, the gift that is made to an
unworthy object, without respect, and with contempt, is said to be of
the quality of Darkness. OM, TAT, SAT, this is said to be the three-
fold designation of Brahma, By that [Brahma], the Brahmanas and the
Vedas, and the Sacrifices, were ordained of old. Therefore, uttering
the syllable OM, the sacrifices, gifts, and penances, prescribed by the
ordinance, of all utterers of Brahma begin. Uttering TAT, the various
rites of sacrifice, penance, and gifts, without expectation of fruit, are
performed by those that are desirous of deliverance. SAT is employed
to denote existence and goodness. Likewise, O son of Pritha, the word
SAT is used in any auspicious act. Constancy in sacrifices, in penances

cand in gifts, is alsocalled SAT, and an act, too, for the sake of That is

called SAT.!./ Whatever oblation is offered (to the fire), whatever is
given away, whatever penance is performed, whatever is done, without

faith, is, O son of Pritha, said to be the opposite of SAT; and that is
nought both here and hereafter.’?

1 ‘That’ evidently refers to sacrifice, penance, and gift, in the clause
before. The commentators, however, suggest that it may, besides, refer to
Brahma. I am myself not sure that it does not refer to Brahma,—T,

2 What the author wishes to lay ‘down in eee verses is that the words

“OM, TaT, and SAT, Mewnleades fer buEpebEWEebOORY-AA used as directed
https: ‘www, holybooks.com/mahal bea all-volumes-in-12-; -pdf-files/

=== PAGE 94 ===

SECTION XLII

“Arjuna said, ‘Of renunciation, O thou of mighty arms, I desire
to know the true nature, and also of Abandonment, O lord of the senses
distinctly, O slayer of Kesi.’*

“The holy one said, ‘The rejection of the works with desire is known
by the learned as Renunciation. The abandonment of the fruit of all
work, the discerning call Abandonment. Some wise men say that work
(itself) should be abandoned as evil; others (say) that the works of
sacrifice, gifts, and penance, should not be abandoned. As to that
abandonment, listen to my decision, O best of the sons of Bharata, for
Abandonment, O tiger among men, hath been declared to be of three
kinds. The works of sacrifice, gifts, and penance should not be
abandoned. They should, indeed, be done. Sacrifice, gift, and penance,
are the purifications of the wise. But even those works should be done,
abandoning attachment and fruit, This, O son of Pritha, is my excellent
and decided opinion. The renunciation of an act prescribed ( in the
scriptures) is not proper. Its abandonment (is) from delusion, (and) is
(therefore) declared to be of the quality of Darkness.2 (Regarding it)
as (a source of) sorrow, when work is abandoned from (fear of) bodily
pain, one making such an abandonment which is of the quality of Passion
never obtaineth the fruit of Abandonment. (Regarding it) as one that
should be done, when* work that is prescribed (in the scriptures) is
done, O Arjuna, abandoning attachment and fruit also, thad abandon-
ment is deemed to be of the quality of Goodness. Possessed of intelli
gence and with doubts dispelled, an abandoner that is endowed with
the quality of Goodness hath no aversion for an unpleasant action and
no attachment to pleasant (ones).* Since actions cannot be absolutely
abandoned by an embodied person, (therefore), he who abandons the
fruit of actions is truely said to bean Abandoner. Evil, good and
mixed—action hath (this) three-fold fruit hereaftter for those that do

here, such use cures the defects of the respective actions to which they are
applied, it being understood that all three denote Brahma.—T.

1 ‘Sanyasa’ I render Kenunciation. K. T. Telang does the same, Mr,
Davies renders it “abstention.” So ‘Tyaga’ I render ‘tabandonment.” Mr.
Davies renders it “renunciation.” What the two words, however, mean is
explained fully in the verses that follow. —T.

2 Both Sankara and Sreedhara explain the second line consisting of
two propositions, the connecting verb ‘bhavet’ being understood.—T. ‘

Re abave used “when” for “Whatever” to make the sentence grammati-
cal,—T.

4 Davies, giving the sense correctly, does not follow the true order a
the subject and the predicate, Following Lassen, he renders ‘kusala’ and
‘akusala’ as **pr@avenloadé chindh ‘https Youprerbalybsoksicom ed habi’ K. T. Telang
has rehtisrad\)heHotybodKsvchiuindhabhasst4iel-valy até grin ol sastidilesa co. —T.

=== PAGE 95 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 101

not abandon. But there is none whatever for the Renouncer.’ Listen
from me, O thou of mighty arms, to those five causes for the comple-
tion of all actions, declared in the Sankhya treating of the annihilation
of actions.” (They are) substratum, agent, the diverse kinds of organs,
the diverse efforts severally, and with them the deities as the fifth.*
With body, speech, or mind, whatever work, just or the reverse, a
man undertakes, these five are its causes. That being so, he that,
owing to an unrefined understanding, beholdeth his own self as solely
the agent, he, dull in mind, beholdeth not. He that hath no feeling of
egoism, whose mind is not sullied, he, even killing all these people, kill-
eth not, nor is fettered (by action). Knowledge, the object of Know-
ledge, and the Knower, form the three-fold impulse of action. Instru-
ment, action, and the agent, form the three-fold complement of action,*
Knowledge, action, and agent, are declared in the enumeration of
qualities to be three-fold, according to the difference of qualities. Listen
tothose also duly.° That by which One Eternal Essence is viewed in
all things, undivided in the divided, know that to be knowledge having
the quality of Goodness. That knowledge which discerneth all things as
diverse essences of different kinds in consequence of their separateness,
know that that knowledge hath the quality of Passion, But that which
is attached to (each) single object as if it were the whole, which is

without reason, without truth, and mean, that knowledge hath been
said to be of the quality of Darkness. The action which is prescribed
(by the scriptures), (done) without attachment, performed without
desires and aversion, by one who longeth not for (its) fruit, is said to be
of the quality of Goodness. But that action which is done by one seek-
ing objects of desire, or by one filled with egoism, and which is
attended with great trouble, is said to be of the quality of Passion.
That action which is undertaken from delusion, without regard to
consequences, loss, injury (to others), and (one’s own) power also, is

1 That is, as Sreedhara explains, one who hath renounced the fruit of
actions.—T,

2 ‘Kritante’ Sankara takes it as an adjective of ‘Sankhye’ and thinks
that the reference is to the Vedanta. Sreedhara also seems to be of the
same opinion.—T.

3 The substratum is the body. The agent is the person that thinks
himself to be the actor. The organs are those of preception etc. The
efforts are the actions of the vital winds—Prana, etc. The deities are those
that preside over the eye and the other senses. The deities have no place
in Kapila’s system. Hence, if it is not the Vedanta, some system materi-
ally based upon Kapila’s and recognising the interference of the deities,
seems fo be indicated. ‘Atra’is explained by Sreedhara as equivalent to
“among” or ‘with these”. I think, however, if means, “are here”, i.o., are
enumerated here, or, in this connection —T.

4 Hath no feeling of egoism, i.e., doth not regard himself as the doer,
‘Bullied’, i.e., by the taint of desire of ‘trait—T.

5 Mr. Davies, I think, is right in rendering Samgrahas as ‘complement.’
K. T. Telang renders it as equivalent to “in brief”—T.

6 In tho enungiptinn de aantities nin DSaakbxe system.—T.

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 96 ===

102 MAHABHARATA

said to be of the quality of Passion. The agent who is free from attach-
ment, who never speaketh of himself, who is endued with constancy and
energy: and is unmoved by success and defeat, is said to be of the
quality of Goodness, The agent who is full of affections, who wisheth
for the fruit of actions, who is covetous, endued with cruelty, and
impure, and who feeleth joy and sorrow, is declared to be of the quality
of Passion! The agent who is void of application, without discern-
ment, obstinate, deceitful, malicious, slothful, desponding, and procras-
tinating, is said to be of the quality of Darkness.2 Hear now, O
Dhananjaya, the three-fold division of Intellect and Constancy, accord-
ing to their qualities, which I am about to declare exhaustively and
distinctly. The intellect which knoweth action and inaction, what
ought to be done and what ought not to be done, fear and fearlessness,
bondage and deliverance, is, O son of Pritha, of the quality of Goodness.
The intellect by which one imperfectly discerneth right and wrong,
that which ought to be done and that which ought not to be done, is, O
son of Pritha, of the quality of passion. That intellect which, shrouded
by darkness, regardeth wrong to be right, and all things as reversed, is,
O son of Pritha, of the quality of Darkness. That unswerving Constancy
by which one controls the functions of the mind, the life-breaths, and
the senses, through devotion, that Constancy, is, O son of Pritha, of the
quality of Goodness.* “But that Constancy, O Arjuna, by which one
holds to religion, desire, and profit, through attachment, desiring fruit,
that Constancy, O son of Pritha, is of the quality of Passion. That
through which an undiscerning person abandons not sleep, fear, sorrow,
despondency, and folly, that Constancy is deemed to be of the quality
of Darkness. Hear now from me, O bull of Bharata’s race, of the three
kinds of happiness. That in which one findeth pleasure from repeti-
tion (of enjoyment), which bringeth an end to pain, which is like poison
first but resembleth nectar in the end, that happiness born of the
serenity produced by a knowledge of self, is said to be of the quality of
Goodness. That which is from the contact of the senses with their
objects which resembleth nectar first but is like poison in the end,
that happiness is held to be of the quality of Passion. That happiness
which in the beginning and its consequences deludeth the soul, and

1 Fall of affections, i.e., for children, etc., a8 Sreedhara.—T,

2 ‘Prakrita’ which I have rendered “without discernment” following
Sreedhara, may be, as Mr. Davies renders it, but ‘‘malicious.”—T.

3 Mr. Davies makes “unswerving” an adjective of ‘devotion.’ This is
wrong, for 'Avyabhicharinya’ (unswerving) is a feminine instrumental, and
must qualify ‘Dhritya’.—T.

4 ‘Atma-budhi-prasadajam,’ K.T. Telang, following an alternative ex-
planation offered by Sankara, renders it “clear knowledge of the self.” Mr,

Davies renders the ‘'k eae plybop| Sreedhara.—T,
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 97 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 108

springeth from sleep, indolence, and stupidity, that is described to be
of the quality of Darkness. There is not, either on earth or heaven
among the gods, the entity that is free from these three qualities born
of nature. .The duties of Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, and Vaisyas, and of
Sudras also, O chastiser of foes, are distinguished by (these three)
qualities born of nature. Tranquillity, self-restraint, ascetic austerities,
purity, forgiveness, rectitude, knowledge, experience, and belief (in an
existence hereafter),—these are the duties of Brahmanas, born of (their
proper) nature, Bravery, energy, firmness, skill, not flying away from
battle, liberality, the bearing of a ruler—these are the duties of
Kshatriyas, born of (their proper) nature. Agriculture, tending of
cattle, and trade, are the natural duties of Vaisyas. Of Sudras also,
the natural duty consists in servitude. Every man, engaged in his own
duties, attains to perfection. Hear now how one obtains perfection by
application to his duties. Him from Whom are the movements of all
beings, Him by Whom all this is pervaded, worshipping him by (the
performance of) one’s own duty, one obtaineth perfection. Better is
one’s own duty though performed faultily than another's duty well-
performed. Performing the duty prescribed by (one’s own) nature,
one incurreth no sin. One must not abandon, O son of Kunti, one’s
natural duty though stained with evil, for all actions are enveloped
by evil like fire by smoke. He whose mind is unattached everywhere,
who hath subdued his self, and whose desite hath departed, obtaineth,
through Renunciation, the supreme perfection of freedom from work.
Learn from me, only in brief, O son of Kunti, how one, having obtained
(this kind of) perfection, attaineth to Brahma which is the supreme
end of knowledge. Endued with a pure mind, and restraining his self
by constancy, renouncing sound and other objects of sense, and casting
off affection and aversion, he who resideth ina lonely place, eateth
little, and restraineth speech, body, and mind, who is ever intent on
meditation and abstraction, who hath recourse to indifference, who,
abandoning egoism, violence, pride, lust, wrath, and (all) surroundings,
hath been freed from selfishness and is tranquil (in mind), becometh fit
for assimilation with Brahma. Becoming one with Brahma, tranquil in
spirit, (such a) one grieveth not, desireth not ; alike to all beings, he
obtaineth the highest devotionto Me. By (that) devotion he truly
understandeth Me. What I am, and who I am ; then understanding Me
truly, he entereth into Me forthwith. Even performing all actions at
all times, having refuge in Me, he obtaineth, through my favour, the
seat that is eternal and imperishable. Dedicating in thy heart all
actions to Me, being devoted to Me, resorting to mental abstraction,
fix thy thoughts constantly on Me. Fixing thy thoughts on Me, thou

wilt surmount all diffigyltigg AbFOHAR OR REARS DORE bbnftom self-conceit

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 98 ===

104 MAHABHARATA

thou wilt not listen, thou wilt (then) utterly perish. If, having recourse
to self-conceit, thou thinkest—J will not fight,—that resolution of thine
would be vain, (for) Nature will constrain thee. That which, from
delusion, thou dost not wish to do, thou wilt do involuntarily, bound
by thy own duty springing from (thyown) nature. The Lord, O
Arjuna, dwelleth in the region of the heart of beings, turning all beings
as if mounted on a machine, by his illusive power. Seek shelter with
Him in every way, O Bharata. Through his grace thou wilt obtain
supreme tranquillity, the eternal seat. Thus hath been declared to thee
by Me the knowledge that is more mysterious than any (other) matter.
Reflecting on it fully, act as thou likest. Once more, listen to my
supernal words, the most mysterious of all. Exceedingly dear art thou
to Me, therefore, I will declare what is for thy benefit. Set thy heart
on Me, become My devotee, sacrifice to Me, bow down to Me, Then
shalt thou come to Me. I declare to thee truly, (for) thou art dear to
Me. Forsaking all (religious) duties, come to. Me as thy sole refuge. —
I will deliver thee from all sins. Do not grieve. This is not to be ever
declared by thee to one who practiseth no austerities, to one who is not
a devotee, to one who never waiteth on a preceptor, nor yet to one
who calumniateth Me. He who shall inculcate this supreme mystery
to those that are devoted to Me, offering Me the highest devotion,
will come to Me, freed from (all his) doubts.!| Amongst men there is
none who can do Me a dearer service than he, nor shall any other on
earth be dearer to Me thanhe. And he who will study this holy con-
verse between us, by him will have been offered to Me the sacrifice of
Knowledge. Such is my opinion. Even the man who, with faith and
without cavil, will hear it (read), even he freed (from re-birth), will
obtain the blessed regions of those that perform pious acts. Hath this,
O son of Pritha, been heard by thee with mind undirected to any other
objects? Hath thy delusion, (caused) by ignorance, been destroyed, O
Dhananjaya ?°

“Arjuna said, ‘My delusion hath been destroyed, and the recole
lection (of what I am) hath been gained by me, O Undeteriorating one,
through thy favour. I am now firm. My doubts have been dispelled.
I will do thy bidding.’ ”

Sanjaya continued, “Thus I heard this converse between Vasudeva
and the high-souled son of Pritha, (that is) wonderful and causeth the
hair to stand on end. Through Vyasa’s favour heard I this supreme
mystery, this (doctrine of) Yoga, from Krishna himself, the Lord of
Yoga, who declared it in person. O King, recollecting and (again)

1 ‘Asamsayas’ is the reading that ocours in every text, and not
gayam.” Mr. Davies, therefore, is incorrect in rendering it “doubt-
nd making ibamadueahanatifzingwianonnsoxexi—T.

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 99 ===

BHISHMA PARVA 105

recollecting this wonderful (and) holy converse of Kesava and Arjuna,
I rejoice over and over again. Recollecting again and again that
wonderful form also of Hari, great is my amazement, O king, andI
Tejoice ever more. Thither where Krishna, the Lord of Yoga (is),
thither where the great bowman (Partha) is, thither, in my opinion, are
prosperity, and victory, and greatness, and eternal justice.?’ "

SECTION XLIII

Sanjaya said—"Beholding Dhananjaya then to take up once again
(his) arrows and Gandiva, the mighty car-warriors (of the Pandava
party) uttered a tremendous shout. And those heroes, viz., the Pandavas
and the Somakas, and those who followed them, filled with joy, blew
their sea-born conches, And drums, and Pesis, and Karkachas, and cow-
horns were beaten and blown together, and the uproar made was very
loud. And then, O ruler of men, there came the gods, with Gandharvas
and the Pitris, and the hosts of Siddhas and Charanas, from desire of
witnessing (the sight). And Rishis highly blessed came there in a body
with him (Indra) of a hundred sacrifices at their head, for beholding that
great slaughter. Then, O king, beholding the two armies, that looked
like two oceans, ready for the encounter and continuously moving, the
heroic king Yudhishthira, the Just, putting off his coat of mail and
casting aside his excellent weapon and quickly descending from his car,
with joined hands, proceeded on foot, eyeing the grandsire, with restrain-
ed speech, facing the east, towards the direction where the hostile host
was (standing).? And seeing him proceed (thus), Dhananjaya, the son
of Kunti, speedily alighting from his car, followed him, accompanied by
his (other) brothers. And the Lord Vasudeva also followed him behind.
And the principal kings too (of his army), filled with anxiety, followed
in the same path.

“Arjuna said, ‘What is this act of thine, O king, that abandoning thy
brothers, thou proceedest on foot, face eastwards, to the hostile host ?”

“‘Bhimasena said, ‘Where wilt thou go, O king of kings, having cast
off thy coat of mail and weapons, towards the warriors of the foe cased
in mail, and leaving thy brothers, O ruler of Earth ?°

“Nakula said, ‘Thou art my eldest brother, O Bharata. (Beholding)
thee proceeding in this way, fear troubleth my bosom. Tell (us),
whither wilt thou go 7—

“Sahadeva said, ‘When these hostile divisions, terrible and numer-

ous, are here with whom we are to fight, whither dost thou go, O king,
in the direction of our foes ?

1 ‘Bhuti’ is explained by Sreedhara as gradual abhivridhhi, ¢.¢., growth
or greatness. ‘Niti’ is explained as Naya or justice.—T.
2 ‘Varayudham’ is according to Nilakantha, the excellent bow. ‘Yena’ in

verse 8 is equivalent to Yatra. 2. https://www.holybooks.com
14 _https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 100 ===

106 MAHABHARATA

Sanjaya continued, “Though thus addressed by his brothers, O son
of Kuru’s race, Yudhishthira of restrained speech said nothing but
continued to proceed. Unto them (then), the high-souled Vasudeva of
great wisdom smilingly said,—His object is known to me. Having paid
his respects to all his superiors (such as) Bhishma, Drona, and Kripa,
and Salya also, he will fight the foe. It is heard in histories of olden
times that he who, having paid his respects according to the ordinance
unto his preceptors revered in years and his kinsmen, fighteth with
those that are his superiors, is sure to obtain victory in battle. Even
that is my opinion—When Krishna was saying this, among the ranks
of Dhritarashtra’s son, a loud uproar of Alas, and Oh arose, but the
other (army) remained perfectly still. Beholding- Yudhishthira, the
heroic warriors of Dhritarashtra’s son conversed with one another
saying,—'This one is an infamous wretch of his race. It is plain that this
king is coming in terror towards Bhishma’s side. Yudhishthira, with
his brothers, hath become a seeker after (Bhishma’s) shelter. When
Dhananjaya, however, is (his) protector, and Pandu's son Vrikodara,
and Nakula, and Sahadeva also, why doth the (eldest) son of Pandu come
(hither) in.fear ? Though celebrated in the world, this one, however,
could never have been born in the Kshatriya order, since he is weak and
his bosom is filled with fear (at the prospect) of battle.” Then those
warriors all praised the Kauravas. And allof them, becoming rejoiced,
with cheerful hearts waved their garments. And, O monarch, all the
warriors there (then) censured Yudhishthira with all his brothers and
along with Kesava too. Then the Kaurava army, having said Fie to
Yudhishthira, soon again, O monarch, became perfectly still.—What will
this king say ? What will Bhishma say in reply ? What will Bhima
boastful of his powers in battle, (say), and what Krishna and Arjuna ?
What, indeed, hath (Yudhishthira) to say ?—Great was the curiosity
then, O king, of both the armies in respect of Yudhishthira. The king
(meanwhile), penetrating the hostile array bristling with arrows and
darts, proceeded quickly towards Bhishma, surrounded by his brothers.
Seizing his feet with his two hands, the royal son of Pandu then said
unto Santanu’s son Bhishma who was there ready for battle, (these
words).

“Yudhishthira said, ‘I salute thee, O invincible one. With thee
we will do battle. Grant (us) thy permission in that matter. Give
(us) also (thy) blessing.’

“Bhishma said, ‘If, O lord of the earth, thou hadst not, in this battle
come to me thus, I would have, O great king, cursed thee, O Bharata,
for bringing about thy defeat, I am gratified (with thee), O son. Do
battle, and obtain victory, O son of Pandu. What else may be desired

by thee, obtain thou in battle. Solicit also the boon, O'son of Pritha,
Downloaded from https:/;www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 326 ===

832
MAHABHABATA
circumambulating him thrice, and stationing guards
all
around
for
his
protection, those heroes, with bodies drenched in blood, repaired for rest
towards their own tents in the evening, their hearts plunged
into
grief
and thinking of what they had seen.
Then at the proper time, the mighty Madhava, approaching the
Pandavas, those mighty car-warriors cheerfully seated together and filled
with joy at the fall of Bhishma, said
unto
Dharma's
son
Yudhishthira
these words
:
By good luck victory hath been thine, O thou of
Kuru's
race
!
By good luck hath
Bhishrna been
overthrown, who
is
unslay-
able by men, and is a mighty
car-warrior
of
aim
incapable
of
being
baffled
!
Or, perhaps, as destiny would have
it, that warrior who
was
master of every weapon, having obtained thee for a foe that canst
slay
with thy eyes alone, hath been consumed by
thy
wrathful
eye
1
Thus
addressed by Krishna, king Yudhishthira the just replied unto Janarddana,
saying,
Through Thy grace
is Victory, through Thy wrath
is
Defeat
!
Thou art dispeller of the fears of those that are devoted
to
thee.
Thou
art our refuge
! It is not wonderful that they should have victory whom
Thou always protectest in battle, and in whose welfare Thou art
always
engaged, O Kesava
1
Having got Thee for our refuge,
I do
not
regard
anything as wonderful
1
Thus addressed by
him, Janarddana answered
with a smile,
O best of kings, these words can come from thee alone !"
SECTION CXXIII
"Sanjaya said,
'After the night had passed away, O monarch,
all
the kings, the Pandavas and the Dhartarashtras, repaired to
the
grand-
sire.
Those Kshatriyas then saluted that bull of their order,
that
fore-
most one among the Kurus, that hero lying on a
hero's
bed,
and
stood
in his presence.
Maidens by thousands, having
repaired to
that
place,
gently showered over Santanu's son
powdered
sandal wood and
fried
paddy, and garlands of flowers.
And women and old men and
children,
and ordinary spectators, all approached Santanu's son
like
creatures of
the world desirous of beholding the Sun.
And
trumpets
by
hundreds
and thousauds, and actors, and mimes, and skilled
mechanics
also came
to the aged Kuru grandsire.
And ceasing to
fight,
putting
aside
their
coats of mail, and lying aside their weapons, the Kurus and the Pandavas,
united together, came to the invincible
Devavratha,
that
chastiser
of
foes.
And they were assembled together as in days
of old,
and
cheer-
fully addressed one another according to their respective ages. And that
conclave full of Bharata kings by hundreds and adorned with
Bhishma,
looked beautiful and blazing like a conclave of the gods in heaven. And
that conclave of kings engaged in honouring the son of Ganga
looked
as
beautiful as a conclave of the celestials engaged in adorning
their Lord,
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com 
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 327 ===

BHISHMA PABVA
8S3
viz.,
the Grandsire (Brahman).
Bhishma, however, O bull of Bharata's
race, suppressing
his
agonies
with
fortitude
though burning with the
arrows
(still
sticking
to his body), was sighing like a snake.
His body
burning
with those arrows, and himself nearly deprived of his senses in
consequence of his weapon-wounds, Bhishma cast his eyes on those kings
and asked for water.
Then those
Kshatriyas, O king,
brought thither
excellent viands and several vessels of cold water.
Beholding that water
brought
for
him, Santanu's
son
said,
I
cannot, O
sire, now use any
article of human enjoyment
!
I am removed from the pale of humanity.
I am
lying
on
a bed of arrows.
I am staying here, expecting only the
return of the Moon and the sun
! Having spoken these words and there-
by
rebuked
those
kings, O Bharata, he said,
I wish to see Arjuna
!
The mighty-armed Arjuna then
came
there, and reverentially saluting
the
grandsire
stood
with
joined hands, and said,
What shall I do ?
Beholding then that son of Pandu, O monarch, thus standing before him
after
having
offered
him
respectful
salutations, Bhishma of righteous
soul
cheerfully
addressed
Dhananjaya,
saying,
Covered all over with
thy shafts, my body is burning greatly
!
All the vital parts of my body
are in agony. My mouth
is dry. Staying as I am with body afflicted with
agony, give me
water, O Arjuna
!
Thou art a great bowman
!
Thou
art capable of giving me water duly
!
The valiant Arjuna
then saying,
80 be it,
mounted
on
his
car,
and
striking
his Oandiva with force,
began
to
stretch
it.
Hearing the twang of his bow and the slap of his
palms which resembled the roar of the thunder, the troops and the kings
were all inspired with fear.
Then that foremost of car-warriors, mount-
ed on
his
car,
circumambulated
that
prostrate chief of the Bharatas,
that foremost of all wielders of weapons.
Aiming then a blazing arrow,
after having inspired
it with Mantras and identified it with the Parjanya
weapon,
in
the
very
sight
of the entire army,
the son of Pandu,
viz.,
Partha, pierced
the
Earth
a
little
to the south of where Bhishma lay.
Then there arose a jet of water that was pure, and auspicious, and cool,
and
that
resembling
the
nectar
itself, was of celestial scent and taste.
And
with
that
cool
jet
of
water Partha gratified Bhishma,
that bull
among
the
Kurus, of
godlike deeds and prowess.
And at that feat of
Partha who resembled Sakra himself in his acts, all those rulers of Earth
were
filled
with
great
wonder.
And
beholding that feat of Vibhatsu
implying
superhuman
prowess,
the Kurus trembled like kine afflicted
with
cold-
And
from wonder all the kings there present waved
their
garments (in the air).
And loud was the blare of conches
and the beat
of
drums
that
were then heard all over the field.
And Santanu's son,
his
thirst
quenched,
then
addressed
Jishnu, O monarch, and
said,
applauding
him
highly
in the presence of all those kings, these words,
wi*M
O thou
of
mighty
arms,
this
is not wonderful in thee, O son of
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com 
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 328 ===

884
MAHABHABATA
Kuru's race
!
O thou of immeasurable effulgence,
even
Narada spoke
of thee
as an ancient Rishi
I
Indeed,
with Vasudeva as thy ally, thou
wilt achieve many mighty feats which the chief of the celestials
himself
with
all
the
gods,
of a certainty,
will not venture to achieve
!
They
that have knowledge of such things know thee to be the destroyer of the
whole
Kshatriya
race
!
Thou art the one bowman among the bowman
of the
world
!
Thou
art the foremost among men.
As human beings
are, in
this
world, foremost of all creatures,
as Gadura
is the foremost
of all winged creatures
; as the Ocean is the
foremost among all
recep-
tacles
of
water
and the cow among all quadrupeds
;
as the Sun
is the
foremost
amongst
all
luminous
bodies
and
Himavat
among
all
mountains
;
as the Brahmana
is the foremost among all castes, art thou
the foremost of all bowmen
!
Dhritarashtra's son (Duryodhana) listened
not
to the words repeatedly
spoken by me and Vidura and Drona and
Rama and Janarddana and also by Sanjaya.
Reft of his senses, like unto
an
idiot, Duryodhana
placed no reliance on those utterances.
Past all
instructions, he will certainly have to lie down for
ever, overwhelmed
by
the
might
of Bhima
!
Hearing
these words of his,
the Kuru king
Duryodhana became of cheerless heart.
Eyeing him, Santanu's son said,
Listen,
king
! Abandon thy wrath
! Thou hast seem O Duryodhana
how
the
intelligent
Partha created that jet of cool and nectar-scented
water
!
There is nbife else in this world capable of achieving such feat.
The weapons appertaining to Agni,
Varuna,
Soma, Vayu, and Vishnu,
as also those appertaining to Indra, Pasupati, and Paramesthi, and those
of Prajapati, Dhatri, Tashtri, Savitri, and Vivaswat, all these are. known
to Dhananjaya alone in this world of men
!
Krishna, the son of Devaki,
also knoweth
them.
But
there
is
none else here that knoweth them.
This
son
of
Pandu, O
sire,
is incapable of being defeated in battle by
even
the
gods
and
the Asuras together.
The feats of this high-souled
one are superhuman. With that truthful hero, that ornament of battle,
that
warrior
accomplished
in fight,
let peace, O king,
be soon made
!
As long as the mighty-armed Krishna is not possessed by wrath, O chief
of the Kurus, it is fit, O sire, that peace should be made with
the heroic
Parthas
!
As long as this remnant of thy brothers is not slaini let peace,
O monarch, be made
!
As
long
as
Yudhisthira, with eyes burning in
wrath doth not consume thy troops in battle, let peace, O sire, be made
!
As long as Nakula, and Sahadeva, and Bhimasena, the sons of Pandu, do
not, O monarch, exterminate thy army,
it
seems
to me
that
friendly
relations should be restored between
thee
and
the
heroic
Pandavas
!
Let
this
battle
end
with my
death, O sire
!
Make
peace
with
the
Pandavas.
Let these words that are uttered to thee
by me be accept-
able to thee, O sinless one
I
Even this is what I regard to be
beneficial
both for thyself and the race (itself of Kuru)
!
Abandoning
thy
wrath
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com 
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 329 ===

BHISHMA PABVA
385
let peace be made with Parthas.
What
Phalguni hath already done is
sufficient. Let friendly relations be restored with the death of Bhishma
1
Let this remnant ( of warriors ) live
!
Relent, O king
!
Let
half the
kingdom be given to the Pandavas.
Let
king Yudhishthira the just go
to Indraprasha.
O
chief of the Kurus, do not achieve a sinful notoriety
among the kings of the earth by incurring
the
reproach
of
meanness,
becoming
fomentor
of
intestine
dissensions
!
Let
peace come to all
with
my
death
!
Let
these
rulers
of
earth, cheerfully mix with one
another
!
Let sire get back the son, let sister's son get back the mater-
nal uncle
!
If
from
want of understanding and possessed by folly thou
does not harken to those timely words of mine thou wilt have to repent
greatly
|
What
I say
is
true.
Therefore,
desist even
now
!
Having
from
affection,
said
these words unto Duryodhana in the midst of the
kings, the son of the ocean-going
( Ganga
) became
silent.
Though his
vital limbs were burning with the arrow-wounds, yet, prevaling over his
agonies, he applied himself to yoga.
"Sanjaya continued
'Having heard these beneficial
and
peaceful
words fraught with both virtue and profit, thy son,
however,
accepted
them not, like a dying man refusing medicine."
SECTION CXXIV
"Sanjaya said,
'After Santanu's son Bhishma, O monarch, had be-
come
silent,
all those rulers
of earth there present,
then returned to
their
respective
quarters.
Hearing
of
Bhishma's
slaughter that
bull
among men, viz., Radha's son (Kama), partially inspired with fear quick-
ly came there. He beheld that illustrious hero lying on his bed of reeds.
Then Vrisha (Kama)
endued
with
great
glory,
with voice choked in
tears, approaching that hero lying with eyes closed, fell at his feet. And
he said,
O chief of the
Kurus, lam Radha's
son, who
while
before
thy eyes, was everywhere looked upon
by
thee
with
hate
!
Hearing
these words, the aged chief of the Kurus viz.,
the son of Ganga,
whose
eyes were covered with film slowly raising his eyelids, and
causing the
guards to be removed, and seeing the place deserted by
all,
embraced
Kama with one arm, like a sire embracing his son, and said these words
with great affection
:
Come, come
!
Thou art an opponent
of
mine
who always challengest comparison with me
!
If
thou hadst not come
to me, without doubt, it would not have been
well
with
thee
!
Thou
art
Kunti's
not
Radha's
!
Nor
is
Adhiratha
thy
father
!
O thou
of mighty arms,
I heard all this about thee from Narada
as
also
from
Krishna-Dwaipayana
! Without doubt, all this is true
!
I tell thee truly,
O son, that I bear thee no malice
I
It was
only
for abating thy energy
that I used to say such
harsh words to thee
! O thou of excellent vows
without any reason thou speakest
ill of all the Pandavas
!
Sinfully didst
thou come into the world.
It is for this that
thy heart hath been such.
Through pride, and owning also to thy companionship with the low, thy
heart hateth even persons of
merit
!
It
is
for
this
that
I spoke
such
harsh words about thee in the
Kuru camp
!
I know
thy
prowess
in
battle, which can with difficulty be borne
on
earth
by
foes!
I know
also thy regard for Brahmanas, thy courage
and
thy
great
attachment
to alms-giving
! O thou that resemblest a very god, amongst men there
is none like thee
!
For fear of intestine dissensions I always spoke harsh
words about thee.
In bowmanship, in aiming
weapon,
in
lightness
of
hand and in strength of weapons, thou art equal to Phalguni himself, or
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com 
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 330 ===

336
MAHABHABATA
the high-souled Krishna
! O Kama, proceeding to the city of Kasi, alone
with thy bow, thou hadst crushed the kings
in
battle
for
procuring
a
bride for the Kuru king
!
The mighty and
invincible
king
Jarasandha
also, ever boastful of his prowess in battle, could not become thy match in
fight
!
Though art devoted to Brahmanas
; thou always
fightest fairly
!
In energy and strength, thou art equal to a
child
of
the
celestials
and
certainly much superior to men.
The wrath I cherished against thee
is
gone.
Destiny
is incapable of being avoided by exertion.
O
slayer
of
foes, the heroic sons of Pandu are thy uterine brothers
!
If
thou
wishest
to do what
is agreeable to me, unite with them, O thou of mighty arms
!
son of Surya, let these hostilities end with me
1
Let all the
kings
of
Earth be to-day freed from danger
!
'
" 'Kama I know this, O thou of mighty
arms
!
All
this
without
doubt, is (as thou sayest)
! As thou tellest me, O, Bhishma, I am Kunti's
son, and
not
the son of Suta
\
I was,
however,
abandoned
by Kunti,
and I have been reared by Suta. Having (so long) enjoyed the wealth of
Duryodhana,
I dare
not
falsify it now.
Like Vasudeva's son
who
is
firmly resolved for the sake of the Pandavas,
I also, O thou that
makest
profuse
presents
to
Brahmanas,
am
prepared
to
cast
away my
possession, my body itself, my children, and my
wife,
for
Duryodhana's
sake
!
Death from disease, O thou of Kuru's race, doth not
become
a
Kshatriya
! Relying upon Suyodhana I have always offended the
Panda-
vas
!
This affair is destined to take
its course.
It
is incapable of being
prevented. Who was there that would venture to overcome Destiny by
exertion?
Various omens indicating
the
destruction of the
Earth, O
grandsire, were noted by thee and declared in
the
assembly.
It is
well
known to me that the son of Pandu, and Vasudeva, are incapable of being
conquered by other men.
Even with them we venture to fight
!
I
will
vanquish the son of Pandu in battle
! Even this is my firm resolve
! I am
not capable, of casting off this
firece
animosity
( that
I cherish
against
the Pandavas)
1
With a cheerful heart, and
keeping
the
duties of my
order before my eye, I will contend against
Dhananjaya.
Firmly
resol-
ved that I am on battle, grant me thy permission, O hero
!
I
will fight.
Even this is my wish.
It behoveth thee to
forgive me
also any
harsh
words that
I may have at any time uttered against thee
or any act
that
1 may have done against thee from anger or inconsiderateness
I
"
1 'Bhishma said,
If, indeed, thou art unable to cast off this
fierce
animosity, I permit thee, O Kama!
Fight, moved
by
the
deshe
of
heaven
!
Without
anger and without
vindictiveness,
serve thou
the
king according to thy power and according to thy courage and observant
of the conduct of the righteous
1
Have then my permission, O Kama
1
Obtain thou that which thou seekest
! Through
Dhananjaya
thou wilt
obtain all those regions (hereafter) which are
capable
of being had
by
fulfilling the duties of a Kshatriya
!
Freed from pride, and
relying
on
thy (own) might and energy, engage in battle, since a Kshatriya
cannot
have a (source of) greater happiness than a righteous battle.
For a long
while I made great efforts for bringing
about
peace
!
But
I
succeeded
not, O Karna, in the task
!
Truly do I say this unto thee
!
'
*
'
'Sanjaya continued,
'After the son of Ganga had said this, Radha's
son (Karna) having saluted Bhishma
and
obtained
his
forgiveness,
got
up on his car and proceeded towards (the quarters of ) thy son.'
"
FINISH BHISHMA PARVA
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com 
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 331 ===

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com 
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 332 ===

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com 
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 333 ===

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com 
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 334 ===

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com 
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 335 ===

BIND::
OCT5
1970
MahSbhSrata.
Engli sh
The Mahabharata of
Krishna-Dwaipayana Vyasa
C 2d.
ed.-,
PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE
CARDS OR
SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com 
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 336 ===

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com 
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/