=== PAGE 1 ===

THE MAHABHARATA

KRISHNA-DWAIPAYANA VYASA
Translated into English prose from the
original Sanskrit Text.

BY

PRATAP CHANDRA ROY, C.1. E.

VOL XI

ASWAMEDHA, ASRAMAVASIKA,
MAHAPRASTHANIKA and SWARGA-
ROHANIKA PARVAS

ORIENTAL PUBLISHING CO.
11D, ARPULI LANE
CALCUTTA-12

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 2 ===

- ASWAMEDHA PARVA

SECTION I
(Aswamedhika Parva)

Having bowed down unto Narayana, and Nara the foremost of male
beings, and unto the goddess Saraswati, must the word Jaya be uttered.
Vaisampayana said,—"After the king Dhritarashtra had offered
libations of water (unto the manes of Bhisma), the mighty-armed'
Yudhishthira, with his senses bewildered, placing the former in his front,
ascended the. banks (of the river), his eyes suffused with tears, and
dropt down on the bank of the Ganga like an elephant pierced by the
hunter... Then -incited by Krishna, Bhima took him up sinking. ‘This
must not be so,’ said Krishna, the grinder of hostile hosts, The
Pandavas, - O king, saw Yudhishthira, the son of Dharma, troubled and
lying on the ground, and also sighing again and again. And seeing the
king despondent and feeble, the Pandavas, overwhelmed with grief; sat
down, surrounding him. And endowed with high intelligence, and
having the sight of wisdom, king Dhritarashtra, exceedingly afflicted with
“Brief for his sons, addressed the monarch, saying—'Rise up, O thou
tiger among-the Kurus. Do thou now attend to thy duties. .O Kunti's
son; thou hast conquered this Earth according to the usage of the Ksha-
triyas. Do thou now, O lord of men, enjoy her with thy brothers and
friends. .O foremost of the righteous, I do not see why thou shouldst
Brieve. O lord’of the Earth, having lost a hundred sons like unto riches
obtained..in ,a dream; it is Gandhari and I, who should mourn. Not
having listened to the pregnant words of the high-souled Vidura, who
sought our.welfare, I, of perverse senses, (now). repent. The virtuous
Vidura, endowed with divine insight, had told me,—'Thy race will meet
with.annihilation owing to the transgressions of Duryodhana. O king, if
thou-wish for the weal of thy line, act up to my advice. Cast off this
wicked-minded monarch, Suyodhana, and let not either Karna or Sakuni
by.any means see him. Their gambling too do thou,. without making any
fuss suppress, and anoint the, righteous king Yudhishthira. That one of
subdued senses will righteously govern: the Earth: .If thou wouldst
¢ not-have king Yudhishthica, son of Kunti, then, O monarch,. do thou,
performing a sacrifice, thyself take charge of the kingdom, and regarding
all creatures with.an even eye: O lord of men, do thou let thy kinsmen,
©.thou advancer of thy kindred,: subsist on thy bounty..—When, O

1‘Mahavabn’ ooours twice in this passage. One of the Prnietst is left
out on the soore of redundanoy.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 3 ===

2 MAHABHARATA

Kunti's son, the far-sighted Vidura said this, fool that I wasI followed
the wicked Duryodhana. Having turned a deaf ear to the sweet
speech of that sedate one, I have obtained this mighty sorrow asa
consequence, and have been plunged in an ocean of woe. Behold thy
old father and mother, O king, plunged in misery, But, O master
of men, I find no occasion for thy grief.’ ”

SECTION II

Vaisampayana said,—“'Thus addressed by the intelligent king
Dhritarashtra Yudhishthira, possessed of understanding, became calm.
And then’Kesava (Krishna) accosted him :—'If a person indulges ex-
cessively in sorrow for his departed forefathers, he grieves them.
(Therefore, ‘banishing grief), do thou (now) celebrate many a sacrifice
with suitable presents to the priests; and do thou gratify the gods with
Soma liquor, and the manes of thy forefathers, with their due food and
drink. Do thou also gratify thy guests with meat and drink and the
destitute with gifts commensurate with their desires. A person of thy
high intelligence should not bear himself thus, What ought to be known
hath been known by thee ; what ought to be done, hath also been per-
formed, And thou hast heard the duties of the Kshatriyas, recited by
Bhishma,’ the son of Bhagirathi, by Krishna Dwaipayana, Narada and
Vidura. Therefore thou shouldst not walk the way of the stupid ; but
pursuing the course of thy forefathers, sustain the burthen (of the
empire). It is meet that a Kshatriya should attain heaven for certain
by his (own) renown. Of heroes,’ those that came to be slain never
shall have to turn away (from the celestial regions). Renounce thy
grief, O mighty sovereign. Verily, what hath happened was’ destined
to happen so-- Thou canst in no wise see those that have been- slain in
this war.—Having said this unto Yudhishthira, prince of the pious, the
high-spirited Govinda paused ; and Yudhishthira answered him thus, *O
Govinda, full well do I know thy fondness for me. Thou’ hast ever
favoured me with thy love and thy friendship. And, O holder of the
mace and the discus. O scion of Yadu's race, O glorious one, if (now)
with a pleased mind thou dost permit me to go to the ascetic’s retreat in
the woods, then thou wouldst compass what is highly desired by me,
Peace find I none after having slain my grand-father, and that foremost
of men, Karna, who never fled from the fleld of battle. Do thou, O
Janarddana, so order that I may be freed from this heinous sin and that
my mind may be purified. As Pritha’s son was speaking thus, the highly=
energetic Vyasa, cognisant of the dutes of life; soothing him, spoke
these excellent words,—My child, thy mindis not yet calmed;‘and
therefore thou art again stupefied by a childish sentiment. And where-
fore, O child, do we over and over again scatter our speech to the’ winds ?

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com «
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 4 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 3

Thou knowest the duties of the Kshatriyas, who live by warfare. A
king that hath performed his proper part should not suffer himself
to be overwhelmed by sorrow. Thou hast faithfully listened to the
entire doctrine of salvation; and I have repeatedly removed thy
misgivings arsing out of desire. But not paying due heed to what I have
unfolded, thou of perverse understanding hast. doubtless forgotten it
clean. Be it not so, Such ignorance is not worthy of thee. O sinless
one, thou knowest. all kinds, of expiation ; and thou hast also heard of
the virtues of kings.as well as the merits of gifts) Wherefore then, O
Bharata, acquainted withevery morality and versed in all the Agamas,
art thou overwhelmed (with grief) as if from ignorance ? ”

‘ SECTION III

“Vyasa said—'O Yudhishthira, thy wisdom, I conceive, is not
adequate. None doth any act by virtue of his own power. -It is God
who engageth him in acts good or bad, O bestower of honour. Where
then is the room for repentance? Thou deemest thyself as having per
petrated impious acts. Do thou, therefore, O Bharata, harken as to the
way in which sin may be removed. O Yudhishthira, those that commit
sins, can always free themselves from them through penance, sacrifice
and” gifts’ ‘O king, O foremost of men, sinful people are purified by
sacrifice, austerities and charity. The high-souled celestials’and Asuras
perform sacrifices for securing religious merit ; and therefore sacrifices
ate of supreme importance. It is through sacrifices that the high-souled -
celestials -had waxed so wondrously powerful; and having celebrated
rités did they vanquish the Danavas. Do thou, O Yudhishthira, prepare
for the Rajasuya, and the horse-sacrifice, aswell as, O Bharata, for the
Sarvamedha and the Naramedha.' And even as Dasaratha’s son; Rama,
oras Dushmanta’s' and Sakuntala’s son, thy ancestor, ‘the lord of the
Earth, the exceedingly puissant king Bharata, had done, do thou agree.
ably to the ordinance celebrate the Horse-sacrifice with Dakshinas,
Yudhishthira replied :—'Beyond a doubt, the Horse-sacrifice purifieth
princes. But’ I have a purpose of which it behoveth thee -to hear.
Having caused this -huge carnage of kindred, “I cannot, O best of the res
generate ones, dispense gifts even on a small-scale; I have no wealth to
give.” Nor can I for wealth’ solicit these juvenile sons of kings, staying
in sorry plight, with their wounds yet green, and undergoing suffering.
How: O foremost'of twice-born ones, having myself destroyed the Earth
can I, ‘overcome by sorrow, levy dues for celebrating a ‘sacfifice ?
Through Duryodhana’s fault; O best of ascetics, the kings of the Earth
have met with destruction, and we have reaped ignominy. For wealth

a #.¢., human sacrifice. From this it appears ‘that. the; sacrifice af
buman beings was in vogue at the time.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
Attps://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 5 ===

4 MAHABHARATA

Duryodhana hath’wasted the Earth; and the treasury of that wicked-
minded son of Dhritarashtra is empty. (In this sacrifice), the Earth is
the ‘Dakshina-; this is the rule that is prescribed inthe firstsinstance.
The usual reversal of this rule, though sanctioned, is observed, by the
learned as such. ‘Nor, O ascetic, do I like to have a substitute (for this
process). In this matter, O reverend sir, it behoveth thee to favour me
with thy counsel’, Thus addressed by Pritha’s son, Krishna Dwaipayana,
reflecting for- awhile, spoke unto the righteous king,—'This.treasury,
(now) exhausted,’ shall be full. O son of Pritha, in the. mountain
Himavat (The Himalayas) there is gold which had been left behind by
Brahmanas at the sacrifice of the high-souled Marutta’.'’ Yudhishthira
asked, ‘How in that sacrifice celebrated by Marutta was so much gold
amassed? And, O foremost of speakers, when did he reign?" Vyasa
said :—'If, O Pritha’s son, thou art anxious to hear concerning that king
sprung from the Karandhama race, then listen to me as I tell thee when
that highly powerful monarch possessed of immense wealth reigned.’.””

SECTION IV

“Yudhishthira said—'O righteous one, I am desirous of hearing
the history of that royal sage Marutta. Do thou, O Dwaipayana, relate
this unto me, O sinless one.’ ye

“Vyasa said—'O child, in the Krita age Manu was lord (of the
Earth) wielding the sceptre. His son was known under the name of
Prasandhi.. Prasandhi had a son named Kshupa- Kshupa’s son was that
lord (of men), king Ikshwaku. He, O king, had a hundred sons endowed
with pre-eminent piety- And all of them were made monarchs by, king
Ikshwaku. The eldest of them, Vinsa by name became the model of
bowmen. Vinsa’s son, O Bharata, was the auspicious Vivinsa. Vivinsa,
O king, had five and ten sons; all of them were powerful archers,
reverencial to the Brahmanas and truthful, gentle and ever speaking
fair. The eldest brother, Khaninetra, oppressed all his brothers.. ‘And
having cohquered the entire kingdom rid of all troubles, Khaninetra
could not retain his supremacy ; ‘nor. were the people pleased, with
bim.. And dethroning him, they, O foremost of monarchs, invested
his son.Suvarcha with the rights of sovereignty and (having -effected
this) experienced joy (in their hearts), Seeing the reverses sustained
by his sire as well as his expulsion’ from the empire, he was ever intent
on bringing about the welfare of the people, being devoted tothe Brak:
manas, speaking the truth, practising purity and restraining his» senses

1 King Maratta celebrated a sacrifice in the Himalayas, bestowing
gold on ‘Brahmanas. ‘Not being able to carry the entire quantity, they had
carried as much as-they could, throwing away the remainder.—T, Wsit. 7

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 6 ===

» ASWAMEDHA PARVA : 5

and:thoughts: And the subjects were well. pleased with that high-min-
ded one constant in virtue. But he being constantly engaged in virtuous
deeds, his treasuresand vehicles became greatly reduced. And on his
treasury having become depleted, the feudatory princes swarming round
him began to give him trouble: Being thus oppressed by many foes while
his treasury, horses and vehicles were impoverished, the king underwent
Sreat.tribulation along with his retainers and the denizens of his capital,
Although his power waned greatly, yet the foes could not slay the king,
for his power, O Yudhishthira, was established in righteousness. And
when he had reached the extreme of misery along with the citizens, he
blew his hand (with his mouth), and from that: there appeared a
supply’ of forces, And*.then he vanquished all the kings living along
the borders of his dominions... And from this circumstance O king,
che hath been celebrated as Karandhama. His son, (the first) Karandhama
who was born at the beginning of the Treta age, equalled Indra
himself and was endowed with grace, and invincible even by the
immortals. At that time all the kings were under his control; and alike
by‘ virtue of his wealth and for his prowess, he became their emperor.
In short, the righteous king Avikshit by name, became like unto Indra
himself ‘in heroism ;.and he was given to sacrifices, delight.’ took in
virtue and held his senses under restraint. And in energy he resembled
the-sun and in forbearance Earth. herself; in intelligence, he was like
Vribaspati, and in calmness the mountain Himavat himself. And that

king delighted the hearts of his subjects by act, thought, speech, self-’

restraint, and forbearance. He performed hundreds of horse-sacrifices,
and the potent and learned ‘Angira himself served him as priest. .-His
son surpassed~his: sire in the possession of good qualities. “Named
Marutta, that lord of kings was righteous and of great renown, and
possessed the’ might of ten’'thousand; elephants. He. wag like unto
Viskinu's second self.. Desirous of celebrating a sacrifice, that virtuous
monarch, coming to Mount Meru’on the northern side of Himavat,
caused thousands of: shining” golden vessels to be ;forged.. There ona
“huge golden hill he» performed the rites) And goldsmiths’ made basins
and vessels and pans and seats without number. And thevsacrificial
ground. was near ‘this place.:. And that righteous lord of Earth, king
Marutta, along with other princes, performed a sacrifice there.’ "

SECTION V,
“Yud@hishthira said.—'O best of speakers, how that king became so
powerful’? * And how, O twice-born one, did he obtain'so’ much gold ?
And where now, O reverend sire, is all his wealth? And,'O ascetic,
how can we secure the same ? ; .
“Vyasa thereupon. said—As the, numerous ..offspring’ of the

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

Ley,

=== PAGE 7 ===

6 MAHABHARATA

Prajapati Daksha, the Asuras and the Celestials challenged each other (to
encounter), so in the same way Angira’ssons, the exceedingly energetic
Vrihaspati and the ascetic, Samvarta, of equal vows, challenged each
other, O king. Vrihaspati began to worry Samvarta again and again. And
constantly troubled by his elder brother, he, O Bharata, renouncing his
riches, went'to the woods, with nothing to cover his body save the open
sky.’(At that time), Vasava having vanquished and destroyed’the Asuras,
and obtained the sovereignty of the celestial regions had appointed as his
priest Angira’s eldest son, that best of Brahmanas, Vrihaspati. Formerly
Angira was the family-priest of king Karandhama. Matchless among
men in might, prowess and character ; powerful like unto Satakratu,
righteous souled and of rigid vows, O king, he had vebicles, and warriors
and many adherents, and superb and costly bedsteads, produced through
dint of meditation by the breath of his mouth. And by his native virtues,
the monarch had brought all the princes under his sway. And having
lived as long as he desired, he ascended to the heaven in his corporal
embodiment. Andhissonnamed Avikshit—conqueror of foes—
righteous like unto Yayati, brought all.the Earth under his dominion.
And both in merit and might the king resembled his sire. He had a son
named Marutta, endowed with energy, and resembling Vasava himself.
This earth clad in oceans ; felt herself drawn towards him. He always?
used to defy the lord of the-celestials; and O son of Pandu, Vasava
also defied Marutta. And Marutta,—master of Earth—was pure and
possessed of perfections. And inspite of his striving, Sakra could not
prevail over him. And incapable of controlling him, he riding on the
horse, along with the celestials summoning Vrihaspati, spoke to him
thus,—'O Vrihaspati, if thou wishest to do what is agreeable to me, do
not perform priestly offices for Marutta on behalf of the deities or. the
ancestral Manes. I have, O Vrihaspati, obtained the sovereignty of the
three worlds, while Marutta is merely the lord of the Earth, . How,
O Brahmana, having acted as priest unto the immortal king. of the
celestials, wilt thou unhesitatingly perform priestly function unto
Marutta subject to death? Good betide thee! Either espouse my side
or that of the monarch, Marutta or forsaking Marutta, gladly come over
to me.—Thus accosted by the sovereign of the celestials, Vrihaspati,
reflecting for a moment, replied unto the king of the immortals. Thou
art the Lord of creatures, and in thee are the worlds established.
And thou hast destroyed Namuchi,’ Viswarupa and Vala. Thou,
O hero, alone encompassest the highest prosperity of the celestials, and,
O slayer of Vala, thou sustainest the earth as well as the heaven.
How, O foremost of the celestials, having officiated as thy priest,

1 Digamvara, i.¢.,in naked state.—T.
2 Nityada always, left out on the ground of redundancy.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 8 ===

, ASWAMEDHA PARVA 7

shall I, O chastiser of Paka, serve a mortal prince. Do thou listen to
what I say.. Even if the god of fire cease to cause heat and warmth,
or the earth change its nature, or the sun ceases to give light,I shall
never deviate from the truth (that I have spoken).

Vaisampayana continued,—'On hearing this speech from Vrihaspati
Indra became cured of his envious feelings, and then praising. him he
tepaired to his own mansion.’

SECTION VI

Vyasa said_—'The ancient legend of Vrihaspati and the wise
Marutta is cited in this connection. On hearing of the compact made by
Angira’s son Vrihaspati with the lord of the gods (Indra), king Marutta
made the necessary preparations for a great sacrifice. The eloquent
grandson of Karandhama (Marutta) having conceived the idea of a
sacrifice in his mind, went to Vrihaspati and addressed him thus,—'O
worshipful ascetic, I have intended to perform the sacrifice which thou
didst propose to me once on a previous occasion and in accordance with
thy instructions, and I now desire to appoint thee as officiating priest in
this sacrifice, the materials whereof have also been collected by me. O
excellent one, thou art our family priest, therefore do thou take those
sacrificial things and perform the sacrifice thyself.’ J

Vrihaspati said,—'O lord of the earth, I do not desire to perform
thy sacrifice. I have been appointed as priest by the Lord of the gods
(Indra) and I have promised to him to act as such.’

Marutta said—'Thou art our hereditary family priest, and for this
reason I entertain great regard for thee, and I have acquired the right
of being assisted at sacrifices by thee, and therefore it is meet that thou
shouldst officiate as priest at my sacrifice.’

Vrihaspati ‘said,—'Having, O Marutta, acted as priest to the
Immortals, how can I act as such to mortal men, and whether thou dost
depart hence or stay, I tell thee, I have ceased to act as priest to any
but the Immortals. O thou of mighty arms, I am unable to act as thy
priest now. And according to thy own desire, thou canst appoint any
one as thy priest who will perform thy sacrifice.’

Vyasa said.—'Thus told, king Marutta became confused with shame,
and while returning home with his mind oppressed by anxiety. he met
Navada’ on his way. And that monarch on seeing the divine Rishi
Narada stood before him with due salutation, with his hands clasped
together- Then Narada addressing him thus said,—O royal sage, thou
seemest to be not well-pleased in thy mind; is all well with thee? Where
hast thou been, O sinless one, and whence’ the cause of this thy mental
disquietude 2? And, O king, if there be no objection to thy telling it to

me, do thou, O best of kings, disclose (the cause of thy anxiety) to me,
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 9 ===

8 ; MAHABHARATA

so that, O prince, I may allay the disquietude of thy mind with all a
efforts.’

Vaisampayana continued,—'Thus addressed by the great Rishi
Narada, king Marutta informed him of the rebuff he had received from
his religious preceptor.’

Marutta said,—‘Seeking a0) a priest to officiate at my sacrifice, I:
went to that priest of the Immortals, Vrihaspati, the son of Angita;
but he did not choose to accept my offer. Having met with this rebuff
from him, I have no desire to live any longer now, for by his abandoning
me thus, I have, O Narada, become contaminated with sin.’

Vyasa said.—‘Thus ‘told by that king, Narada, O mighty prince;
made this reply to him with words which seemed to revive that son of.
Avikshit.’ :

‘Narada said\—'The virtuous son of Angira, Samvarta by name is
wandering over all the quarters of the earth in a naked state to the
wonder of all creatures; do thou, O prince. goto him. If Vrihaspati
does not desire to officiate at. thy sacrifice, the powerful Samvarta, if>
pleased-with thee, will perform thy sacrifice.”

Marutta said—‘I feel as if instilled with new life, by these thy
words, O Narada, but O the best of speakers, do thou tell me where-L
can find Samvarta, and how I can remain by his side, and how I am to
act so that he may not’ abandon me, for I do not desire to live if I
meet with a rebuff from him also.’

Narada said,—' Desirous of seeing Maheswara, O prince; he wanders
about at his pleasure in the city of Varanasi, in the garb of a mad man.
And having reached the gate of that city, thou must place a dead.body
somewhere near it, and the man who shall turn away’ on seeing. the
corpse, do thou, O prince, know that man to be Samvarta, and knowing
him, do thou follow his footsteps wheresoever that powerful mam chooses
to go and finding him (at length) in a lonely place thou must seek his
protection with thy hands clasped together in supplication to him. And
if he enquires of thee as to the person who has given thee the informa-
tion about his own self, do thou tell him that Narada has informed :thee-
about Samvarta. And if he should ask thee to follow me, thou.must tell
him without any hesitation, that I have entered into the fire.’:

» Vyasa said.—‘Having signified his assent to the proposalof Narada,
that royal sage after duly worshipping-him; and taking his permissions
repaired to the city of Varanasi, 'and having reached there, that famous
prince did as he had been told, and remembering the words of Narada, he
placed a corpse at the-.gate of the city. And_:by’ coincidence, that:
Brahmana also entered the gate of the city at- the same time. Then on
beholding the corpse, he suddenly turned away. And on seeing him: turn
back, that prince, ‘the sonof Avikshit followed his footsteps with his:

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 10 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 9

hands clasped together, and with the object of receiving instruction
from him. And then finding him in a lonely place, Samvarta covered
the king with mud and ashes.and phlegm and spittle. And though thus
worried and oppressed by Samvarta, the king followed that sage with
his hands clapsed together in supplication and trying to appease him,
At length overcome with fatigue, and reaching, the cool shade of a
sacred fig tree with many branches, Samvarta desisted from his course
and sat himself to’ rest.’

SECTION VII

Samvarta said,—'How hast thou come to know me, and who has
referred thee to me, do thou tell this to me truly, if thou wishest me to
do what is good to thee. And if thou speak truly, thou shalt attain all
the objects of thy desire, and shouldst thou tell a lie, thy head shall be
tiven in a hundred pieces.’

Marutta said,—'I have been told by Narada, wandering on his way,
that thou -art the son of our family-priest, and this (information) has
inélined’my mind (towards thee), with exquisite satisfaction.’

Samvarta’ said,—'Thou hast told this to me truly. He (Natada)
knows me to be a performer of sacrifices. Now tell me where is Narada
living at present.’

" Marutta: said—'That prince of celestial saints (Natada) having
given me this information about thee, and commended me to thy cate,
has’entéred into the fire.’

Vyasa said—'Hearing these words from the king (Marutta)
Samvarta was highly gratified, and he said (addressing Matutta), “I’'too
am quite able to. do all that.’ -Then, O prince, that Brahmana, raving
like‘a'lunatic, and repeatedly scolding Marutta with rude words, again
accosted-him thus, “Iam afflicted with'a cerebral disorder, and, I always
act according to the random caprices of my own mind. ° Why. art’ thou
berit’'upon having this sacrifice performed by a priest of such a singular
disposition? My brother is able to officiate at sacrifices, and he has gone
over to Vasava (Indra), and is engaged in performing his sacrifices, do
thou therefore have thy sactifice performed by him. My elder brother
has forcibly taken away from me all my_ household goods and mystical
gods, and sacrificing clients, and has now left to me only this physical
body ofmine, ‘and, O ‘son of: Avikshit, ashe is'worthy of all respect
from me, I cannot by any means officiate at:thy sacrifice, unless withthis
permission:” Thou must’therefore go to * Vrihaspati first, and taking his
permission thow’canst come back to me,-if thou hast any desire'to per-
form a sacrifice, and then only’shall I officiate at thy- sacrifice.”

Marutta said;—'Do thou listen’to me, O Samvarta; I’ didy go to
Vrihaspati ‘first, but desiring the patronage’ of Vasava, he did not wish

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 11 ===

10 MAHABHARATA

to have me as his sacrificer. He said, ‘Having secured the priesthood.
of the Immortals, I do’ not desire to act’ for mortals, and, I have been
forbidden by Sakra (Indra) to officiate at Marutta’s sacrifice, as he told
me that Marutta having become lord of the earth, was always filled with
a desire to rival him,’ And to this thy brother assented by saying to the
Slayer of. Vala (Indra),—Be it so. Know thou, .O best of ascetics, that as
he:had succeeded in securing the protection of the Lord of the Celes-
tials. I repaired to him with gratified heart, but he did not agree’ to act
as my priest. And thus repulsed, I now desire to spend all I possess, to
have this sacrifice performed by thee, and to outstrip Vasava by the
merit of thy good offices. As I have been repulsed by Vrihaspati:for no
fault of mine, I have'now no desire, O Brahmana, to go to him to:seek
his aid in this sacrifice.”

Samivarta said,—"'I can certainly, O king, scobmglut all that. thou
desirest, if only thou agree to do all that I shallask thee. to do,’ butiI
apprehend that Vribaspati and Purandara (Indra) when they-will learn
that I am engaged in performing thy sacrifice, will be filled with -wrath,
and do all they can to injure.thee. Therefore, do thou assure-me.of thy
steadfastness, so as to,.ensure my coolness and constancy,:as otherwise,
ifI.am filled with wrath against thee, I shall reduce Sait, thee
and thy kindred to ashes,” -

Marutta> said—"If-ever I forsake’ thee, may Ln never , attain the
blessed regions as long as the mountains shall exist, and’ the, thousand-
rayed sun continue to emit heat ; if I forsake thee, may -I never,attain
true. wisdom, _and remain for ever. addicted to. worldly (material)
pursuits.” }

, Samvarta said,—"'Listen, O son of Avikshit, excellent asit is
of thy mind, to perform this act, so too, O king, hayel in my‘mind
ability to perform the sacrifice, I tell thee, O king, that thy.good things
will become imperishable, and that thou-shalt lord it over Sakra,and the
Celestials with Gandharvas. For myself, I have no desire to amass wealth
or sacrificial presents, I shall only do what. is disagreeable to. both
Indra and.my brother, I shall. certainly make thee .attain equality with
Sakra, and I tell thee truly that.I shall do what is agreeable to thee.;’

oe Mj '
, SECTION VIII r
Samvarta; said\—“There is a peak named Munjaban on the sume
mits of the, Himalaya mountains, where the adorable. Lord, of Uma
(Mahadeva) is constantly engaged in austere devotional exercises-,There
the mighty and .worshipful god of great. puissance, accompanied. by his
consort Uma, and armed with his trident, surrounded by wild goblins, of
many’sorts, pursuing his: random wish or fancy, constantly resides in the
sbade of ‘giant’ forest, trees, or in the caves, or.on the rugged peaks of the

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 12 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA i

great mountain. And there the Rudras, the Saddhyas, Viswedevas, the
Vasus, Yama, Varuna, and Kuvera withall his attendants, and the spirits
and goblins, and the two Aswins, the Gandharvas, the Apsaras, the
Yakshas, as also the celestial sages, the Sun-gods, as wellas the gods
presiding over the winds, and evil spirits of all sorts, worship the high-
souled lord of Uma, possessed of diverse characteristics, And there, O
king, the adorable god sports with the wild and playful followers of
Kuvera, possessed of weird and ghostly appearances.. Glowing with its
own splendour, that mountain looks resplendent as the morning sun. And
no creature with his natural eyes made of flesh, can ever ascertain its
shape, or configuration, and neither heat nor cold prevails there, nor doth
the sun shine nor do the winds blow. And, O king, neither doth senility
nor hunger, nor thirst, nor death, nor fear afflict any one at that place.
And, O foremost of conquerors, on all sides of that mountain, there exist
mines of gold, resplendent as the rays of the sun. And O king, the atten-
dants of Kuvera, desirous of doing good to him, protect these mines of
gold from intruders, with uplifted arms. Hie thee thither, and appease
that adorable god who is known by the names of Sarva, Bedha, ‘Rudra,
Sicikantha, Surupa, Suvarcha, Kapardi, Karala, Haryyaksha, Varada,
Tryaksha, Pushnodantabhid, Vamana, Siva, Yamya, Avyaktarupa,
Sadvritta, Sankara, Kshemya, Harikesa, Sthanu, Purusha, Harinetra,
“Munda; Krishna, Urttarana, Bhaskara, Sutirtha, Devadeva, Ranha,
Ushnishi, Suvaktra, Sahasraksha, Midhvan, Girisa. Prasanta, Yata,
Chiravasa, Vilwadanda, Siddha, Sarvadandadhara, . Mriga; Vyadha,
Mahan, Dhanesa, Bhava, Vara,.Somavaktra, Siddhamantra, Chakshu,
Hiranyavahu, Ugra, Dikpati, Lelihana, Goshtha, Shiddhamantra,
Vrishou, Pasupati, Bhutapati, Vrisha, Matribhakta, Senani, Madhyama,
Sruvahasta, Yati, Dhanwi, Bhargava. Aja, Krishnanetra, Virupaksha,
Tikshnadanshtra, Tikshna, Vaiswanaramukha, Mahadyuti, Ananga,
Sarva, Dikpati, Bilohita, Dipta, Diptaksha, Mahauja, Vasuretas, Suvapu,
Prithu, Kritivasa, Kapalmali, Suvarnamukuta, Mahadeva, . Krishna,
Tryamvaka, Anagha, Krodhana, Nrisansa, Mridu, Vabusali, Dandi, ‘Tap-
tatapa, Akrurakarma, Sahasrasira, Sahasra-charana, Swadha-swarupa,
-Vahurupa, Danshtri, Pinaki, Mahadeva, Mahayogi, Avyaya;: Trisula-
hasta; Varada, Tryamvaka, Bhuvaneswara, Tripuraghna, ‘Trinayana,
Trilokesa, Mahanja, Sarvabhuta-prabhava,; Sarvabhuta-dharana,
Dharanidhara, Isana, Sankara, Sarva, Siva, Visweswara, Bhava, Umapati,
Pasupati, Viswarupa, Maheswara, Virupaksha, Dasabhuja,’ Vrishava-
dhwaja, Ugra, Sthanu, Siva, Rudra, Sarva, Girisa, Jswara,Sitakantha,
Aja,Sukra, Prithu, Prithuhara, Vara, Viswarupa, Virupaksha, Vahurupa,
Umapati, Anangangahara, Hara, Saranya, Mahadeva, Chaturmukha.
There bowing unto | that deity, must thou crave his. protection. And

thus, O prince, making thy submission to that high-souled Mahadeva
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 13 ===

12 MAHABHARATA

of’ great energy, shalt thou acquire that gold. And the men who go
there thus, succeed in obtaining the gold. Thus instructed, Marutta,
the son of Karandhama, did as he was advised. - And made superhuman
arrangements for the performance of his sacrifice. And -artisans
manufactured vessels of gold for that sacrifice. And Vrihaspati ‘too,
hearing of the prosperity of Marutta, eclipsing that of the gods, becatiie
greatly grieved at heart, and distressed at the thought that his rival
Samvarta should become prosperous, became sick at heart, and the glow
of his complexion left him, and his frame became emaciated. And when
the lord of the gods came to know that Vrihaspati was much aggrieved,
he went to him attended by the Immortals and addressed him thus.

SECTION IX i

Indra said,—"Dost thou, O Vribaspati, sleep in peace, and are thy
servants agreeable to thee, dost thou seek the welfare of the gods, and
do the gods. O Brahmana, protect thee ?”

Vrihaspati said,—"I do sleep in peace in my bed, O Lord of the
gods, and my servants are to my liking and I always seek the welfare of
the gods, and they cherish me well.” q

Indra said—“Whence then is this pain, mental or physical, and
why art thou pale and altered in appearance (complexion) at present?
Tell me, O Brahmana, who those people are,-who have caused thee
pain, so that I may kill them all.’ :

Vrihaspati said —tO Indra, I have heard that Marutta will
perform a great sacrifice at which exquisite presents will be given by
him (to Brahmanas) and that at his sacrifice Samvarta -will act.as the.
officiating priest, and therefore do desire that he may not officiate as
priest at that sacrifice.” s

Indra said—Thou, O Brahmana, hast attained all the object of
thy desire when thou hast become the excellent priest of the'gads,
versed inall the sacred hymns, and hast overreached the influence of
death and dotage, what can Samvarta do to thee now ?” ‘

Vribaspati said—"Prosperity of a rival is always painfalieal one's
feelings, and for this reason ‘too, thou dost with’thy. attendant gods
persecute the Asuras with their kith and kin, and kill the most prosperous
among them ; hence, O Lord of the gods, am I changed in appearance
at the thought that my rival is prospering, therefore, O Indra, ag ad :
by all means, restrain Samvarta and king Marutta.”

Indra turning to Agni said,—"'Do thou, O Jataveda, following my
direction, go to king Marutta to present Vrihaspati to him, and say-unto
him that. this Vrihaspati will officiate at his sacrifice ‘and make i

immortal.”
ats Downloaded from https://mww.holybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 14 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA . 18

Agni said,—"I shall presently, O adorable one, repair thither as
thy messenger, to present Vrihaspati to king Marutta; and to make
Indra’s words true, and to show respect to Vrihaspati, Agni departed.”

Vyasa said,—""Then the high-souled fire-god went on his errand,
devastating all the forests and trees, like unto the mighty wind, roaring
and revolving at random at the end of the winter season.”

Marutta said,—"Behold! I find the fire-god come in his own em-
bodiment, this day, therefore do thou, O Muni, offer him a seat and
water, and a cow, and water for washing the feet.”

“Agni said,—"I accept thy offerings of water, seat, and water for
washing the feet, O sinless one, do thou know me as the messenger of
Indra,y‘come to thee, in accordance with his directions.”

Marutta said,—"O Fire-god, is the glorious Lord of the Celestials
happy, andvis he pleased with us, and are the other gods loyal to him ?
Do thou enlighten me duly on all these points.” :

Agni said. —“O lord of the earth, Sakra is perfectly happy, he is
pleased with thee, and wishes to make thee free from senility, and all
the other gods are loyal to him. Do thou, O king, listen to the message of
the Lord of the Celestials. And the object for which he has sent me to
thee is to present Vrihaspati to Marutta. O prince, let this priest (of
the Celestials) perform thy sacrifice, and make thee, who art only a
mortal, attain immortality.”

Marutta said,—“This twice-born Brahmana Samvarta will perform
my sacrifice, and I pray to Vribaspati, that he having acted as priest to
Mahendra (Indra), it does not look well for him now to act as priest to
mortal men.”

_ Agni said—“If this Vribaspati officiate as thy priest, then shalt
thou by the blessings of Devaraja (Indra) attain the highest region in
the celestial mansion and attaining fame shalt thou certainly conquer
the heavenly region. And, O lord of men, if Vrihaspati act as thy
priest, thou shalt be able to conquer all the regions inhabited by men,
and the heavenly regions, and all the highest regions created by Prajapati
and even the entire kingdom of the gods.”

Samvarta said,—'Thou must never come again thus to present

Vrihaspati to Marutta: for know, O Pavaka, (Agni) if thou dost, I
losing my temper, will burn thee with my. fierce evil eyes,”
« .. Vyasa said—"Then Agni apprehending destruction by fire, and
trembling like the leaves of the Aswattha tree (Ficus religiosa), return-
ed to the gods, and the high-souled Sakra seeing that carrier of oblations
(Agni) in the company.of Vrihaspati said as follows :"

Indra said,—"O Jataveda (Agni), didst thou goto present Vribas-
pati to Marutta according to my direction? What did that sacrificing
. king say unto thee and did he accept my message ?”

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https:/www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 15 ===

u MAHABHARATA

Agni said,—"Thy message was not acceptable by Marutta and when
urged by me, he clasping the hands of Vrihaspati, repeatedly said, that
Samvarta would act as his priest. And he also observed that he: ‘did
not desire to attain the worldly and the heavenly regions and all the
highest regions of Prajapati, and that if he were so minded, he. would
accept the terms of Indra.”

Indra said,—"Do thou go back to that king and meeting him, tell
him these words of mine, full of significance, and if he obey them-not, I
shall strike him with my thunderbolt.”

Agni said, —"Let this king of the Gandharvas repair thither.as Ae
messenger, O Vasava, for, I am afraid to go thither myself..: Know, O
Sakra, that highly incensed Samvarta, used. to ascetic practices,
told me these words in a rage. ‘I shall burn thee with my’ fierce
evil eyes if thou on any account come again here to present Vrihaspati
to king Marutta,’” be

Sakra said,—"O Jataveda, it is thou who dost burn all other things
and there in none else who can reduce thee to ashes, All the world is
afraid to come in contact with thee. O carrier of oblations, these words
of thine are worthy of no credence.” Ls

Agni said,—'Thou, O Sakra, hast encompassed the dominion of
the heaven and the earth and the firmament by the might of thy) own
arms, but even thus how could Vritra (of old) wrest from thee: the
sovereignty of the celestial regions ?”

Indra said—"I can reduce my foes to submisson as can. even
reduce the size of a mountain to an atom, if I will it, But, O Vahnni;/ds
I do not accept the libation of Soma if offered bya foe, andasI
do not strike the weak with my thunderbolt, Vritra seemed to triumph
over me for atime. But who among mortals can live in peace »by
creating feud with me. I have banished the Kalakeyas to the earth, and
removed the Danavas from heaven, and have terminated ‘the existence
of Prahlada in heaven. Can there be any man who can live in peace by
provoking my enmity 2”

Agni said,—"“Dost thou, O Mahendra, femémtirs that in. olden
times when the sage Chyavana officiated at the sacrifice of Saryati with
the twin gods Aswins and himself appropriated the Soma offering alone,
thou wert filled with wrath, and when bent upon preventing Saryati's
sacrifice, thou-didst violently strike Chyavana’ with thy thunderbolt ?
But that Brahmana, O Purandara, giving way to passion, was able bythe
power of his devotions to seize and hold fast thy hand with thy thunder-
bolt in it. And ina rage, he again created a terrible looking enemy of
thine, the Asura named Mada assuming all shapes, on beholding ! whom
thou didst shut thine eyes with fear, whose one hugejaw was placed‘on

earth, and the other extended to the celestial regions, and who looked |

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 16 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 15

terrible with his thousand sharp teeth extending over a hundred Yojanas,
and had four prominent ones thick aset, and shining like a pillar, of
silver; and extending over'two hundred Yojanas. And when grinding his
teeth he pursued thee with his terrible and uplifted pike with the object
of killing thee. Thou on ‘beholding that terrible monster, presented a
(pitiful) spectacle to all the by-standérs. Then, O slayer of Danavas,
overcome with fear of the monster, with thy hands clasped in supplica-
tion, thou didst ' seek the protection of the great sage. The might of
Brahmanas, O Sakra, is greater than that of the Kshatriyas. None are
more powerful than Brahmanas and knowing duly, as I do, the power of
Brahmanas: I do not, O Sakra, desire to come in conflict with Samvarta.”

SECTION X

Indra said,—"Even so it is; the might of Brahmanas is great-and
there are none more powerful than Brahmanas, but I can never bear
with equanimity the insolent pride of Avikshita’s son, and so’ shall I
smite him with my thunderbolt. Therefore, O Dhritarashtra, do thou
according to my direction repair to king Marutta attended by Samvarta,
and deliver this message to him—'Do'thou, O prince, accept Vrihaspati
as thy! spiritual preceptor, as otherwise, I shall strike thee with my
terrific thunderbolt.’ ”

Vyasa said,—" Then Dhritarashtra betook himself to that monarch’s
court and delivered'this message to him from Vasava.”

Dhritarashtra said,—"O lord of men, know that Iam’ Dhritarashtra
the: Gandharva,' comehere with the object delivering to thee the
message of Indra. Do thou, O lion among kings, -listen to the words
which the high-souled lord of all the worlds meant for thee,—That one
of incomprehensible achievements (Indra) only said this much\—'Do
thou accept Vrihaspati as thy officiating priest for.the sacrifice, or if
thou do-not comply with my request, I shall strike thee with my terrific
thunderbolt.’ ”

‘ Marutta ‘said —"Thou, O Purandara, the Viswadevas, the Vasus
and ithe Aswins ye all know, that in this world there is no escape from .
the consequences of playing false to a friend ; it isa great sin like unto
that of: murdering a Brahmana. Let Vrihaspati (therefore) officiate as
priest to that Mahendra the supreme Deva (god), the highest one wield-
ing the thunderbolt, and O prince, Samvarta will act as my priest, as
neither his (Indra’s): words, nor.thine commend themselves'to me.”

The Gandharva said—'’Do thou, O lion among princes, listen to
thé :terrible war-cry of Vasava roaringvin the heavens. -Assuredly and
openly will Mahendra hurl his thunderbolt at;thee. Do thou therefore
be-think-thyself of thy:good, for:this is the time to doit.”

ion Wyasa said,—"Thus’ accosted: by Dhritarashtra, and hearing the

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
hittps://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 17 ===

16 MAHABHARATA

roar of howling Vasava, the king communicated this intelligence to
Samvarta steadfast in devotion and the highest of all virtuous men.”

Marutta said, —''Verily this rain-cloud floating in the air indicates
that Indra must be near at present, therefore. O prince of Brahmanas, 1
seek shelter from thee. Do thou, O best of Brahmanas, remove this fear
of Indra from my mind.” The Wielder of the thunderbolt is coming’en>
compassing the ten directions of space with his terrible and superhuman
refulgence and my assistants at this sacrificial assembly have been over-
come with fright.

Samvarta said,—''O lion among kings, thy fear of Sakra will” soon’
be dispelled, and I shall soon remove this terrible pain by means of my
magic lore (incantation) ; be calm and have no fear of being overpower-
ed by Indra. Thou hast nothing to fear from the god ofa hundred
sactifices. I shall use my staying charms, O king, and the weapons of all
the gods will avail them not. Let the lightning flash in all the directions
of space, and the winds entering into the clouds pour down the shaw-
ers amid the forests and the waters deluge the heavens and the flashes
of lightning that are seen will avail not. Thou hast nothing to fear;let
Vasava pour down the rains and plat his terrific thunderbolt where! he
will, floating among the watery masses (clouds) for thy destruction, for
the god Vahnni (Agni) will protect thee in every way, and mabe thee
attain all the objects of thy desire.”

Marutta said,—"This appalling crash of the thunderbolt me,
with the howling of the winds, seem terrible to my ears‘and my heart is
afflicted again and again, O Brahmana, and my peace of mind is gone at
present.”

Samvarta said—""O king, the fear in thy mind from this! terrible
thunderbolt will leave thee presently. I shall dispel the:thunder by. the
aid of the winds, and setting aside all fear from thy mind, do thou accept
a boon from me according to thy heart's desire, and I ull accomplish
it for thee.” obaucy

Marutta said,—“I desire, O Brahmana, that Indra all ona éaudden
should come in person at this sacrifice, and accept the oblation offered
to him, and that all the other gods also come and take: their-own
shares of the offerings and accept the libations of Soma offered to them,”

Samvarta said —"I have by the power of my incantations’ attrac
ted Indra in person to this sacrifice. Behold, O monarch, Indra coming
with his horses, and worshipped by the other gods “hastening to this
sacrifice.” ol

Then the lord of the Devas attended by the other gods and riding
in his chariot ‘drawn by the most excellent steeds, approached the sacrifi-
cial altar of that son of Avikshit and drank the Soma’ libations” of. that
unrivalled monarch. And king Marutta with his priest rose to receive

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 18 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 17

Indra coming with the host of gods and well-pleased in mind, he wel-
comed the lord of the Devas with due and foremost honours according to
the Sastras.

Samvarta said,—"*Welcome to thee, O Indra, by thy presence here,
O learned one, this sacrifice has been made grand, O slayer of Vala and
Vritra, do thou again quaff this Soma juice produced by me today.”

Marutta said,—"Do thou look with kindness upon me, I bow unto
thee, O Indra, by thy presence, my sacrifice has been perfected, and my
life too blessed with good results, O Surendra, this excellent Brahmana,
the younger brother of Vrihaspati is engaged in performing my
sacrifices.”

Indra said—"I know thy priest, this highly energetic ascetic, the
younger brother of Vrihaspati, at whose invitation I have come to this
sacrifice. I am, O monarch, well-pleased with thee and my resentment
against thee hath been destroyed.”

Samvarta said,—"If, O prince of the Devas, thou art pleased with
us, do thou thyself give all the directions for this sacrifice, and OSuren-
dra, thyself ordain the sacrificial portions (for the gods), so that, O god,
all the world may know that it hath been done by thee.”

Vyasa said,—"Thus accosted by the son of Angira, Sakra himself
gave directions to all the gods to erect the hall of assembly, and a thou-
sand well-furnished excellent rooms looking grand as in a picture, and
speedily to complete the staircase massive and durable, for the ascent of
the Gandharvas and Apsaras and to furnish that portion of the sacrifi-
cial ground reserved for the dance of the Apsaras, like unto the palace
of Indra in the heaven. O king, thus directed, the renowned dwellers
of heaven speedily fulfilled the directions of Sakra. And then, O king,
Indra well-pleased and adored, thus said to king Marutta,—O prince, by
associating with thee at this sacrifice, thine ancestors who have gone be=
fore thee. as well as the other gods have been highly gratified and have
accepted the oblations offered by thee. And now, O king, let the fore-
most of regenerate beings offer on the sacrificial altar ated bull apper-
taining to the Fire-god and a sacred and duly consecrated blue bull with
a variegated skin, appertaining to the Viswedevas. Then, O king, the
sacrificial ceremony grew in splendour, wherein the gods themselves
collected the food, and Sakra, the lord of the gods, possessed of horses, and
worshipped by the Brahmanas, became an assistant at the sacrifice. And
then the high-souled Samvarta ascending the altar, and looking radiant
as the second embodiment of the blazing fire, loudly addressing the gods
with complaisance, offered oblations of clarified butter to the fire with
incantation of the sacred hymns. And then the slayer of Vala first drank
the Soma juice, and then the assembly of other gods drank Soma.
And then in happiness and with the king’s'permission they returned home

3) Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 19 ===

18 MAHABHARATA

and well-pleased and delighted. Then that monarch, the slayer of his
enemies, with a delighted heart, placed heaps of gold on diverse spots, and
distributing the immense wealth to the Brahmanas, he looked glorious
like Kuvera, the god of wealth. And witha buoyant heart, the king
filled his treasury with different kinds of wealth, and with the permis-
sion of his spiritual preceptor, he returned (to his kingdom) and continued
to rule the entire realm extending to the borders of the sea. So virtuous
in this world was that king, at whose sacrifice such an enormous quantity
of gold was collected, and now, O prince, thou must collect that gold
and worshipping the gods with due rites, do thou perform this
sacrifice.”

Vaisampayana continued,—'‘Then the Pandava prince Yudhishthira
was delighted on hearing this speech of the son of Satyavati (Vyasa), and
desirous of performing his sacrifice with those riches,’ he held repeated
consultations with his ministers.” "

SECTION XI

Vaisampayana said,-—"When Vyasa of wonderful achievements had
concluded his speech to the king, the highly-puissant son of Vasudeva
(Krishna) also addressed him. Knowing the king, the son of Pritha,
afflicted in mind, and bereft of his relatives and kinsmen slain in battle,
and appearing crest-fallen like the sun darkened eclipse, or fire smothered
by smoke, that prop of the Vrishni race (Krishna), comforting the son of
Dharma, essayed to address him thus,”

Vasudeva said,—‘All crookedness of heart leads to destruction
(perdition ?) and all rectitude leadsto Brahma (spiritual excellence).
If this and this only is the aim and object of all true wisdom, then what
can mental distraction do (to one who understands this)? Thy Karma has
not yet been annihilated, nor have thy enemies been subjugated, for thou
dost not yet know the enemies that are still lurking within thine own
flesh. I shall (therefore) relate to thee truly as I have heard it, the story
of the war of Indra with Vritra as it took place. In ancient times the
Prithivi (earth), O king, was encompassed by Vritra, and by this abstrac-
tion of earthly matter, the seat of all odour, there arose bad odourson all
sides, and the Performer of a hundred sacrifices (Indra), being much
enraged by this act, hurled his thunderbolt at Vritra. And being deeply
wounded by the thunderbolt of mighty Indra, Vritra entered into the
(waters), and by doing so he destroyed their property. The waters
being seized by Vritra, their liquid property left them. At this Indra
became highly enraged and again smote him with his thunderbolt. And
he (Vritra) smitten by the thunderbolt by the most powerful Indra be-
took himself to the Jyoti (luminous matter) and abstracted its inherent ~

erty. The luminous matter being overwhelmed by Vritra and i
ee Downloaded from https:/www holybooks.com u an

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 20 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 19

property, colour and form being thereby lost, the wrathful Indra again
hurled his thunderbolt at him. And thus wounded again by Indra
of immeasurable power, Vritra entered allona sudden into the Vayu
(gaseous matter), and thereafter made away with its inherent property.
And this matter being overpowered by Vritra and its property, viz., touch
being lost, Indra became again filled with wrath and flung his thundere
bolt at him. And wounded therein by the mighty (Indra), he over-
whelmed the Akasa (ether), and took away its inherent property, and
the Akasa being overwhelmed by Vritra, and its property, sound, being
destroyed, the god of a hundred sacrifices highly incensed, again smote
him with his thunderbolt. And thus smitten by the mighty Indra, he
suddenly entered into his (Sakza’s) body, and took away its essential
attributes. And overtaken by Vritra, he was filled with great illusion.
And, O venerable sir, the mightiest of Bharata’s race, we have heard
that Vasistha comforted Indra (when he was thus afflicted) and that
the god of a hundred sacrifices slew Vritra in his body by means of his
invisible thunderbolt, and know, O prince, that this religious mystery
was recited by Sakra tothe great sages, and they in turn told itto

me.

SECTION XII

Vasudeva said—"There are two kinds of ailments, physical and
mental. They are produced by the mutual action of the body and mind
on each other, and they never arise without the interaction of the two.
The ailment that is produced in the body, is called the physical ailment,
and that which has its seat in the mind, is known as the mental ailment.
The cold, the warm (phlegm and bile) as wellas the windy humours, O
king, are the essential transformations generated in the physical body,
and when these humours are evenly distributed, and are present in due
proportions, they are said to be symptomatic of good health. The warm
humour is acted upon (allayed) by the cold, and the cold by the warm.
And Sattwa, Rajas ani Tamas are the attributes of the soul, and it is
said by the learned that their presence in due proportions indicates
health (of the mind). But if any of the three preponderates, some ree
medy is enjoined (to restore the equilibrium). Happiness is overcome by
sorrow, and sorrow by pleasure. Some people while afflicted by sorrow,
desire to recall (past) happiness, while others, whife in the enjoyment of
happiness, desire to recall past sorrow. But thou, O son of Kunti, dost
neither desire to recall thy sorrows nor thy happiness ; what else dost
thou desire to recall barring this delusion of sorrow? Or, perchance, O
son, of Pritha, it is thy innate nature, by which thou art at present over-
powered. Thou dest not desire to recall to thy mind the painful sight

of Krishna standing in the hall of assembly with only one piece of cloth

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 21 ===

20 MAHABHARATA

to cover her body, and while she was in her menses and in the presence
of all the Pandavas. And it is not meet that thou shouldst brood over
thy departure from the city, and thy exile with the hide of the antelope
for thy robe, and thy wanderings in the great forest, nor shouldst thou
recall to thy mind the affliction from Jatasura, the fight with Chitrasena,
and thy troubles from the Saindhavas. Nor it is proper, O son of Pritha,
and conqueror of thy foes, that thou shouldst recall the incident of
Kichaka’s kicking Draupadi, during the period of thy exile passed in
absolute concealment, nor the incidents of the fight which took place
between thyself and Drona and Bhishma. The time has now arrived,
-when thou must fight the battle which each must fight single-handed
with his mind. Therefore, O chief of Bharata’s race, thou must now
prepare to carry the struggle against thy mind ; and by dint of abstrac-
tion and the merit of thine own Karma, thou must reach the other side~
of (overcome) the mysterious and unintelligible (mind). In this war
there will be no need for any missiles, nor for friends, nor attendants,
The battle which is to be fought alone and single-handed has now arrived
for thee. And if vanquished in this struggle, thou shalt find thyself in
the most wretched plight, and O son of Kunti, knowing this, and acting
accordingly, shalt thou attain success. And knowing this wisdom and
the destiny of all creatures, and following the conduct of thy ancestors,
do thou duly administer thy kingdom.”

SECTION XIII

Vasudevas aid,—"O scion of Bharata’s race, salvation is not attained
by foregoing the external things (like kingdom, etc), it is only attained
by giving up things which pander to the flesh (body). The virtue and
happiness which are attainable by the person who has renounced only
the external objects, but who is at the same time engrossed by passions
and weakness of the flesh, let these be the portion of our enemies) The
word with two letters is Mrit-yu (death of the soul or perdition), and the
word with three letters is Sas-wa-ta (Brahman) or the eternal spirit. The
consciousness that this or that thing is mine, or the state of being addic-
ted to worldly objects is Mrityuand the absence of that feeling is Saswa-
tam. And these two, Brahman and Mrityu, O king, have their seatsin
the souls of all creatures, and remaining unseen, they, without doubt,
wage wat with each other. And if, O Bharata, it be true that no crea-
ture is ever destroyed. then one doth not make oneself guilty of the
death of a creature by piercing (destroying) its body. What matters
the world to aman, if having acquired the sovereignty of the whole
earth with its mobile and immobile creation, he does not become attach-
ed to it, or engrossed in its enjoyment, But the man who having re-

nounced the world, has taken to the life of the recluse in the forest,
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 22 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 21

living on wild roots and edibles, if such a man, O son of Pritha, has a
craving for the good things of the world, and is addicted to them, he
may be said to bear Mrityu (death) in his mouth. Do thou, O Bharata,
watch and observe the character of thy external and internal enemies,
(by means of thy spiritual vision), And the man who is able to perceive
the nature of the eternal reality is able to overreach the influence of the
reat fear (perdition). Men do not look with approbation upon the
conduct of those who are engrossed in worldly desires. and there is no
act without havinga desire (at its root) and all (Kama) desires are, as
it were, the limbs (offshoots) of the mind. Therefore, wise men knowing
this subjugate their desires. The Yogi who holds communion with the
Supreme Spirit, knows Yoga to be the perfect way (to salvation) by reason
of the practices of his many former births. And remembering that, what
the soul desires, is not conducive to piety and virtue, but that the suppres-
sion of the desires is at the root of all true virtue, such men do not engage
in the practice of charity, Vedic learning, asceticism and Vedic rites whose
object is attainment of worldly prosperity, ceremonies, sacrifices, religious
rules and meditation, with the motive of securing any advantage there-
by. By way of illustration of this truth, the sages versed in ancient lore,
recite these Gathas called by the name of Kamagita; do thou O Yudhish-
thira, listen to the recital of them in detail. (Kama says) No creature is
able to destroy me without resorting to the proper methods (viz., subjuga-
tion of all desires and practice of Yoga &c.) If a man knowing my power:
strive to destroy me by muttering prayers etc. I prevail over him by
deluding him with the belief that lam the subjective ego within him.
If he wish to destroy me by means of sacrifices with many presents, I
deceive him by appearing in his mind as a most virtuous creature
amongst the mobile creation, and if he wish to annihilate me by master-
ing the Vedas and Vedangas, I overreach him by seeming to his mind to
be the soul of virtue amongst the immobile creation. And if the man
whose strength lies in truth, desire to overcome me by patience, I
appear to him as his mind, and thus he does not perceive my existence,
and ifthe man of austere religious practices, desire to destroy me by
means of asceticism, I appear in the guise of asceticism in his mind, and
thus he is prevented from knowing me, and the man of learning, who
with the object of attaining salvation desires to destroy me, I frolic and
laugh in the face of such a man intent on salvation. I am the everlast-
ing one without a compeer, whom no creature can kill or destroy. For
this reason thou too, O prince, divert thy desires (Kama) to virtue, so
that, by this means, thou mayst attain what is well for thee. Do thou
therefore make preparations for the due performance of the horse sacri-
fice with presents, and various other sacrifices of great splendour, and
accompanied with presents. Let not therefore grief overpower thee

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 23 ===

22 MAHABHARATA

again, on beholding thy friends lying slain on the battlefield. Thou
canst not see the men slain in this battle alive again. Therefore shouldst
thou perform magnificent sacrifices with presents, so that thou mayst
attain fame in this world, and reach the perfect way (hereafter).”

SECTION XIV

Vaisampayana said,—“With such speeches as these, was the royal
saint Yudhishthira, bereft of his friends, consoled by those sages of great
ascetic merits» And O monarch, that lord of men exhorted by the
worshipful Viswarasraba himself, and by Dwaipayana (Vyasa), Krishna
Devasthana, Narada, Bhima, Nakula, Krishna (Draupadi), Sahadeva, and
the sharpwitted Vijaya, as well as by other great men, and Brahmanas
versed in the Sastras, became relieved of all mental affliction and sorrow
arising from the death of his dear relations. And that monarch Yudhish-
thica after performing the obsequial ceremonies of his departed friends,
and honouring the Brahmanas and Devas (gods), brought the kingdom of
the earth with its girdle of oceans, under his sway. And that prince of
Kuru's race having regained his kingdom, with a tranquil mind, thus
addressed Vyasa, Narada and the other sages who were present.—I have
been comforted by the words of so great, ancient and aged saints as
yourselves, and I have now no cause left for the least affliction. And
likewise, I have attained great wealth, with which I may worship the
gods. Therefore, with your assistance, I shall now perform the sacrifice, O
the best of regenerate beings. We have heard that those (Himalayan) re-
gions are full of wonders. Therefore, O Brahmana, saint and grandsire
do thou so ordain that under thy protection we may safely reach the
Himalaya mountains, the performance of my sacrifice being entirely
within thy control, and then the adorable celestial saint Narada and
Devasthana have also addressed exquisite and well-meaning words for our
well being. No unlucky man in times of great tribulation and distress,
has ever the good fortune to secure the services of such preceptors and
friends approved by all virtuous men. Thus addressed by the king, those
reat saints, bidding the king and Krishna and Arjuna to repair to the
Himalayan regions, then and there vanished “in the presence of the
assembled multitude, and the king, the lordly son of Dharma, then seated
himself there for a while. And the Pandavas then in consequence of the
death of Bhishma, were engaged in performing his funeral ceremonies.
And their time, while thus engaged, seemed too long in passing and
performing the last rites to the mortal remains of Bhishma, Karna and
other foremost Kauravas, they gave away large presents to Brahmanas.
And then the foremost descendant of Kuru again performed with
Dhritarashtra the funeral rites (of the heroes slain in battle), and having
given away immense wealth to the Brahmanas, the Pandava chief with

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com ~
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 24 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 23

Dhritarashtra in advance, made this entry into the city of Hastina
Nagar, and consoling his lordly uncle, possessed of eyes of wisdom, that
virtuous prince continued to administer the earth with his brothers.

SECTION XV

Janamejaya said—'O the best of regenerate beings, when the
Pandavas had reconquered and pacified their kingdom, what did the two
warriors, Vasudeva and Dhananjaya do?

Vaisampayana said,—‘O lord of the earth, Vasudeva and Dhanan-
jaya were highly pleased when the Pandavas had succeeded in regaining
and pacifying their dominions, and they deported themselves with great
satisfaction, like unto Indra and his consort in the celestial regions, and
amidst picturesque woodland sceneries, and tablelands of mountains,
and sacred places of pilgrimage, and lakes and rivers, they travelled with
great pleasure like the two Aswins in the Nandana garden of Indra,
And, O Bharata, the high-souled Krishna and the son of Pandu
(Dhananjaya) entering the beautiful hall of assembly at Indraprastha,
whiled away their time in great merriment. And there, O prince, they
passed their time in recounting the stirring incidents of the war, and
the sufferings of their past lives. And those two high-souled ancient
sages, glad at heart, recited the genealogy of the races of saints and gods.
Then Kesava, knowing the full import of all matters, addressed Partha
in a sweet and beautiful speech of excellent style and import. And then
Janarddana comforted the son of Pritha afflicted by the death of his
sons, and thousands of other relatives. And he of great ascetic merit
and knowing the science of all things having duly consoled him,
Arjuna rested for a while, as if a great burden had been removed
from his own person. Then Govinda (Krishna) consoling Arjuna with
sweet speech addressed these well-reasoned words to him.

Vasudeva said—'O Arjuna, the terror of thine enemies, this whole
earth has been conquered by the king, the son of Dharma, relying on
the power of thy arms. And O the best of men, the virtuous king
Yudhishthira now enjoys the sovereignty of the earth without a rival,
by the might of Bhimasena and the twin brothers. O thou who knowest
what virtue is, it was by righteousness alone that the king has been
able to regain his kingdom free from all enemies (thorns), and it was by
the action of righteousness that king Suyodhana has been killed in
battle, and, O son of Pritha and pillar of the Kuru race, the wicked sons
of Dhritarashtra, avaricious, always rude in speech, and bent upon an
unrighteous course of conduct, having been exterminated with their
followers, the king, the son of Dharma and lord of the earth, now peace-
ably enjoys the entire kingdom of the earth with thy aid, and I too,O

on of Pandu, have lea ly whiling a’ my time i
e Ree eee R A eeay ay time in chy

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 25 ===

24 MAHABHARATA

company, amidst woodland scenes. O terror of thine enemies, what
more need I tell thee, but that where thou and Pritha, and the king,
the sonof Dharma, and the mighty Bhimasena and the two sons of
Madri are, there am I attracted with exquisite delight, O descendant
of Kuru, in these delightful and sacred and heaven-like halls of assembly,
a long time hath fleeted away in thy company without my seeing
Vasudeva, Valadeva and other leaders of the Vrishni race. And now I
am desirous of repairing to the city of Dwaravati. Do thou therefore,
O most valorous of men, assent to my departure. When king Yudhish-
thira was smitten heavily with affliction, I with Bhishma, have recited
to him many appropriate legends suited to the occasion with a vew of
assuaging his grief, and the pliant and high-minded Yudhishthira, though
our sovereign and versed in all lore, paid due heed to our words. That
son of Dharma honours truth, and is grateful and righteous, therefore
will his virtue and good sense and the stability of his power always
endure. And now, O Arjuna, if it pleases thee, do thou go to that high-
minded prince and tell him of my intention to depart from this place.
For, O thou of mighty arms, even if death cometh to me, I am unwilling
todo anything that may displease him, leaving alone my going to the
city of Dwaravati. O son of Pritha and descendant of Kuru, I now tell
thee truly, desiring to do only what is good and agreeable to thee, and
there can be nothing equivocal in it in any way, that the necessity for
my staying here no longer exists, because, O Arjuna, that monarch the _
son of Dhritarashtra hath been slain with his armies and attendants, and
the earth, my friend, withits girdle of seas and its mountains and
woods and forests, and the kingdom of the Kuru king filled with various
gems, have passed under the sway of that wise son of Dharma. AndO
foremost prince of Bharata’s race, may that virtuous prince administer
the entire kingdom of the earth in righteousness, and with the respect
and approbation of numerous high-souled Siddbas, and having his
praises always extolled by the court heralds. Do thou, O chieftain of
Kuru's race, accompany me to-day to the presence of the king, the great
aggrandiser of the Kuru race, and sound him of my intended return to
Dwaraka. As Yudhishthira the high-souled king of the Kurus always
commands my love and respect, I have, O son of Pritha, placed this my
body and all the wealth that I have in my house, at his disposal. And
O prince Partha (son of Pritha), when this earth hascome under thy
sway and that of the worshipful Yudhishthira of excellent character,
there no longer remains any necessity for my staying here except for
my affection for thee. And O monarch, when the redoubtable Arjuna
had been thus accosted by the noble-hearted Janarddana, he, showing
all the honours due to him, sorrowfully replied by merely saying ‘be
it so”. ‘
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 26 ===

SECTION XVI
(Anugita Parva)

Janamejaya said,—' When.the high-souled Kesava and Arjuna after
slaying their enemies repaired to the assembly rooms, what conversa-
tion, O regenerate one, took place between them 7

Vaisampayana said,—“The son of Pritha (Arjuna), having recover-
ed his own kingdom, joyously spent his time, without doing anything
else, in the company of Krishna, his heart filled with delight, in that
palace of celestial beauty. One day, those two listlessly proceeded toa
particular part of the palace that looked, O king, like a veritable por-
tion of Heaven. Themselves filled with, delight, they were, then
surrounded by their relatives and attendants. Pandu’s son, Arjuna,
filled .with joy in the company of Krishna, surveyed that delightful
mansion, and then addressed his companion, saying,—'O mighty-armed
one, thy greatness became known to me upon the approach of the battle.
O son of Devaki, thy form also, asthe Lord of the universe, then
became known to me! What thy holy self said unto me at that time, O.
Kesava, through affection, has all been forgotten by me, O chief of men,
in consequence of the fickleness of my mind. Repeatedly, however,
have I been curious on the subject of those truths, Thou again, O
Madhava, wilt repair to Dwaraka soon.’

Vaisampayana continued,—'Thus addressed by him, Krishna of
mighty energy, that foremost of speakers, embraced Phalguna and replied
unto him as follows.

_'Nasudeva said,—‘I made thee listen to truths that are regarded as
mysteries. I imparted to thee truths that are eternal. Verily, I dis-
coursed to thee on Religion inits true form and on all the eternal
regions, Itis exceedingly disagreeable to me to learn that thou didst
not, from folly, receive what I imparted. The recollection of all that I
told thee, on that occasion will not come tome now. Without doubt,
O son of Pandu, thou art destitute of faith and thy understanding is not
good. It is impossible for me, O Dhananjaya, to repeat, in detail, all
that I said on that occasion. That religion (about which I discoursed to
thee then) is more than sufficient for understanding Brahma. I cannot
discourse on it again in detail. I discoursed to thee on Supreme Brahma,
having concentrated myself in Yoga. I shall now, however, recite to
thee an old history upon the same topic. O foremost of all persons
observant of duty, listen to everything I now say, so that, with an under-
standing adapted to my teaching, thou mayst succeed in attaining to the

highest end, O chastiser of foes,on one occasion, a Brahmana came
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
4 hitps:/iwww.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 27 ===

26 MAHABHARATA

to us from the regions of Heaven. Of irresistible energy, he came from
the regions of the Grandsire, He was duly reverenced by us. Listen, O
son of Pritha, without yielding to scruples of any kind, to what he, O
chief of Bharata’s race, said, in answer to our enquiries, agreeably to
heavenly forms.’

The Brahmana said—That which thou askest me, O Krishna,
connected with the religion of Moksha (Emancipation), led by thy com-
passion for all creatures (and not for thy own good),—that, indeed, which,
destroys all delusion,—O thou that art possessed of supreme puissance?
I shall now tell thee duly, O slayer of Madhu. Do thou listen with con-
centrated attention as I discourse to thee, O Madhava. A Brahmana
of the name of Kasyapa, possessed of penances and the foremost of all
persons conversant with duties, came to a certain other Brahmana who
had become conversant with all the mysteries of religion.? Indeed, the
latter had mastered all the knowledge which the scriptures teach respec-
ting the departure and reappearance of beings and possessed that direct
knowledge of all things which Yoga gives. He was well skilled in the
truths of all topics relating to the world. He had mastered the truth
about pleasure and pain. He knew the truth about birth and death,
and understood the distinctions between merit and demerit. He wasa
beholder of the ends attained to by embodied creatures high and low in
consequence of their acts. He lived like one emancipated from the
world. Crowned with ascetic success and possessed of perfect tranquillity
of soul, he had all his senses under complete control. He seemed to blaze
with the resplendence of Brahma and was capable of going everywhere
at will. He knew the’ science of disappearing at will from before the
eyes of all, He used to rove in the company of invisible Siddbas and
celestial musicians. Hie used to sit and converse with themon some spot
retired from the bustle of humanity, He was as unattached to all things
as the wind. Kasyapa having heard of him truly, desired to see him.
Possessed of intelligence, that foremost of all Brahmanas, approached
the sage. Himself possessed of penances, Kasyapa, moved by the desire
of acquiring merit, fell, with a rapt heart, at the feet of the sage when
he had seen all those wonderful attributes. Filled with wonder at the
sight of those extraordinary accomplishments, Kasyapa began to wait
upon that foremost of all Brahmanas, with the dutiful reverence ofa
disciple waiting upon his preceptor and succeeded in propitiating him.
By his devotion, O scorcher of foes, rendering to him the obedience due
from a disciple to a preceptor, Kasyapa gratified that Brahmana who

1 ‘Bhutanam &o.’ is explained by Nilakantha as ‘no swasya,’ and the
vocative ‘vibho’ is taken as ‘Paramatman.’—T.

2 ‘Agatagamam’ implies, as explained by the Commentator, ‘prapta-
sastrarabasyam.'—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-fil -files/

=== PAGE 28 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA a7

possessed all these accomplishments and was endued, besides, with scrip-
tural learning and excellent conduct. Gratified with Kasyapa, that
Brahmana one day addressed him cheerfully and spoke as follows, with
an eye to the highest success. Listen to those words, O Janarddana, as I
‘repeat them.

“*_The ascetic crowned with success said,—'By diverse acts, O son,
as also by the aid of merit, mortal creatures attain to diverse ends here
and residence in Heaven. Nowhere is the highest happiness; nowhere
can residence be eternal. There are repeated falls from the highest -
tegions acquired with such sorrow. In consequence of my, indulgence in
sin, I had to attain to diverse miserable and inauspicious ends, filled as I
was with lust and wrath, and deluded by cupidity. I have repeatedly
undergone death and rebirth. I have eaten diverse kinds of food, I
have sucked at diverse breasts. I have seen diverse kinds of mothers,
and.diverse fathers dissimilar to one another. Diverse kinds of happiness
have been mine and diverse kinds of misery, O sinless one. On diverse
occasions have I been separated from what was agreeable and united
with what was disagreeable. Having earned wealth with great toil I
have had to put up with its loss. Insults and excessive misery I have
received from king and relatives. Mental and physical pain, of great
severity, have been mine. Humiliations I have undergone, and death
and immurement under circumstances of great severity. Falls into Hell
have been mine, and great tortures in the domains of Yama. * Decrepi-
tude and diseases have repeatedly assailed me, and calamities, as
frequent, in copious measure. In this world I have repeatedly undergone
all those afflictions that flow from a perception of all pairs of opposites.
‘After all this, one day, overwhelmed with sorrow, blank despair came
upon me- I took refuge in the Formless. Afflicted as I was with great
distress, I gave up the world with all its joys and sorrows. Understand-
ing then this path, I exercised myself init in this world. Afterwards,
through tranquillity of soul, I attained to this success that thou seest. I
shall not have to come to this world again (after my departure hence).
Verily, till I attain to absorption into eternal Brahma, till, in fact, the
final dissolution of the universe, I shall look on those happy ends that
will be mine, and on those beings that constitute this universe.? Having
acquired this excellent success, I shall, after departing from this world,

« 1 ‘Niraksrasritena’ is explained by Nilakantha as ‘Asamprajnatas-
samadhi-samadhigamya Brahmabbavasritena,’ ‘implying reliance on Brahma
by having recourse to Samadhi or a suspension of all functions of both body
and mind (through Yoga) and arrival at that state which is one of perfect
unconsciousness. —T.

2 The dissolution here spoken of is the Mahapralaya and not the
Khanda or Avantara Pralayas. Till then, the sage will look upon all beings,
i.¢., their repeated migrations.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 29 ===

28 MAHABHARATA

proceed, to what is above it (i.e., Satyaloka) and thence to what is higher
(ie.,absorption into Brahma). Verily, I shall attain to the condition, which
is unmanifest aspect of Brahma. Let no doubt be thine as regards this.
O scorcher of foes, I shall not return to this world of mortal creatures.
O thou of great wisdom, I have become gratified with thee. Tell me
what I shall do for thee. The time has come for the accomplishment
of that purpose for which thou hast come hither. Verily, I know
that object for which thou hast sought me. I shall soon depart from
this world. Hence it is that I have given thee this hint. O thou of great
wisdom and experience, I have been highly gratified with thee for thy
behaviour. Do thou question me. I shall discourse on what is beneficial
to thee, agreeably to thy desire. I think thy intelligence is great.
Indeed, I applaud it much, for it was with the aid of that intelligence
that thou wert able to recognise me. Surely, O Kasyapa, thou art
Possessed of great intelligence.’ Mi.

SECTION XVII

"Vasudeva said,—'Touching the feet of that sage, the Brahmana
asked him some questions that were exceedingly difficult to answer.
That foremost ofall righteous persons then discoursed on those duties
that were referred to.

"Kasyapa said,—How does the body dissolve away, and how is
another acquired ? How does one become emancipated, after passing
through a repeated round of painful rebirths ? Enjoying Prakriti for
sometime, how does Jiva cast off the particular body (which Prakriti
fives)? How does Jiva, freed from the body, attain to what is different
from it (viz. Brahma)? How doesa human being enjoy (and endure
the fruits of) the good and bad acts done by him? Where do the acts
exist of one that is devoid of body ?4

‘The Brahmana said,—Thus urged by Kasyapa, the emancipated
sage answered those questions one after another. Do thou listen to me,
O scion of the Vrishni race, as I recite to thee the answers he made!

‘—The Emancipated sage said,Upon the exhaustion of those acts
capable of prolonging life and bringing on fame which are done’ina

1 The Commentator explains that altogether seven questions are
asked. The first is about the dissolution of the body. The second relates
to-the manner of re-acquiring a body. The third has reference to the
manner in which rebirth may be avoided. The fourth relates to the causes
that operate for giving a body toJiva, By ‘Prakriti’ is meant Nature or
that Ne-science which is the cause of body. The fifth relates to the Anyat
or Param, viz., how final Emancipation or absorption into Brahma takes
place. The sixth pertains to the manner in which the fruits of acts are
enjoyed or endured, The seventh enquires after ots way in wrhich, sots
attach to Jiva even when devoid of a body.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 30 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 99

particular body that Jiva assumes, the embodied Jiva, with the span of
his life shortened, begins to do acts hostile to life and health, On the
approach of destruction, his understanding turns away from the proper
courses The man of uncleansed soul, after even a correct apprehension
of ‘his constitution and strength and of the season of both his own life
and of the year, begins to eat at irregular intervals and to eat such food
asis hostile tohim.? At such atime he indulges in practices that are
exceedingly harmful. He sometimes eats excessively and sometimes
abstains altogether from food. He eats bad food or bad meat or takes
bad drinks, or food that has been made up of ingredients incompatible
‘with’ one another. He eats food that ‘is heavy in excess of the measure
that is beneficial, or before the food previously taken has been digested.
He indulges in physical exercise and sexual pleasure in excess of the due
Measure, or through avidity for work, suppresses the urgings of his
corporeal organism even when they become pronounced. Or, he takes
food that is very juicy, or indulges in sleep during daytime. Food that
is not properly digested, of itself excites the faults, when the time
¢omes-? From such excitement of the faults in his body, he gets disease
ending in death itself. Sometimes the person engages in perverse or
unnatural acts like hanging (for bringing about his death). Through
these causes tlie living body of the creature dissolves away. Understand
correctly the manner asI declare it to thee.* Urged on by the Wind
which becomes violent, the heat in the body, becoming excited and
teaching every part of the body one after another, restrains all the
(tmovements of the) vital breaths. Know truly that excited all over the
body, ‘the heat becomes very strong, and pierces every vital part where
life may be said to reside. In consequence of this, Jiva, feeling great
pain, quickly takes leave of its mortal casement. Know, O foremost of
tegenerate persons, that when the vital parts of the physical organism

1 ‘Kala’ here means both the season of the year and the age of the
Aly Food that is beneficial in summer isnot soin winter, or that
which is beneficial in youth is otherwise at old age. Allthe texts that I
have seen have ‘viditwa’ and not ‘aviditwa' which Telang takes in his
version for the “Sacred Books of the East.” ‘Kala’ is always interpreted by
the Commentators of Charaka as referring to either period of life or period
of the year. This, as well asthe following verses, relates to the laws of
health as expounded by Charaka.—T.

2 The faults are three, viz., Wind, Bile, and Phlegm. When existing
in 8 state of harmony, they produce health. When one is excited or two,
ndisposition setsin. They are called ‘dosha’ or faults, because of
iability to be excited and produce disease. Telang, not suspecting
that the whole passage is a reproduction of & passage in the ancientwork
edited by Charaka, misunderstands some expressions and wrongly renders
ioshan! into ‘disorders,’

8 ‘Jivitam’ in the second line seems to be an objective of ‘sariram’ in
the first.—T.’

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 31 ===

80 MAHABHARATA

become thus afflicted, Jiva slips away from the body, overwhelmed with
Great pain. All living creatures are repeatedly afflicted with birth and
death. It is seen, O chief of Brahmanas, that the pain which is felt by a
person when casting off his bodies is like what is felt by him when
first entering the womb or when issuing out of it. His joints become
almost dislocated and he derives much distress from the waters (of the
womb).! Urged on by (another) violent wind, the wind that is in the
body becomes excited through cold, and dissolves away the union of
matter (called the body) into its respective elements numbering five.?,
That wind which resides in the vital breaths called Prana and Apana
occurring within this compound of the five primal elements, rushes
upwards, from a situation of distress, leaving the embodied creature.
It is even thus that the wind leaves the body. Then is seen breath-
lessness. The man then becomes destitute of heat, of breath, of beauty,
and of consciousness. Deserted by Brahma (for Jiva is Brahma), the
Person is said to bedead- By those ducts through which he Perceives
all sensuous objects, the bearer of the body no longer perceives them,
It is the eternal Jiva who creates in the body in those very ducts-the
life-breaths that are generated by food. The elements gathered together
become in certain parts firmly united. Know that those parts are
called the vitals of the body. It is said so in the Sastras. When those
vital parts are pierced, Jiva, rising up, enters the heart of the living
creature and restrains the principle of animation without any delay.
The creature then, though still endued with the principle of conscious-
ness, fails to know anything. The vital parts being all overwhelmed,
the knowledge of the living creature becomes overwhelmed by dark-
ness. Jiva then, who has been deprived of everything upon which to
stay, is then agitated by the wind. He then, deeply breathing a long
and painful breath, goes out quickly, causing the inanimate body to
tremble. Dissociated from the body, Jiva, however, is;surrounded by
his acts. He becomes equipped on every side with all his auspicious
acts of merit and with all his sins, Brahmanas endued with knowledge
and equipped with the certain conclusions of the scriptures, know him,
from indications, as to whether he is possessed of merit or with its
reverse, Even as men possessed of eyes behold the fire-fly appearing

1 ‘Garbha-sankramane’ is explained by Nilakantha as ‘entering the
footus in the womb after casting off the body appertaining to the other world,
I think Telang is not correct in his version of 19 and 20. ‘Atisarpana’ can
never imply ‘exhaustion’ ; hence, ‘karmanam’ can never be the reading he
adopts. . Besides ‘tadrisam’ seems to settle the question. The tortures felt
at death are similar to those at birth.—T.

2.‘Sambhutatwam’ is ‘sanhatatwam.’., ‘Niyachachati’. is ‘nasyyati’
‘Vayu’ is understood in the second line, or that in the first line of the; next
verse may be taken as the nom. of ‘niyachachati.'—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 32 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 81

and disappearing amid darkness, men possessed of the eye of knowledge
and crowned with success of penances, behold, with spiritual vision,
Jiva as he leaves the body, as he is reborn, and as he enters the womb.
It is seen that Jiva has three regions assigned to him eternally, This
world where creatures dwell is called the field of action. Accomplishing
acts good or bad, all embodied creatures attain tothe fruits thereof.
In consequence of their own acts, creatures acquire even here superior
or inferior enjoyments. Doers of evil deeds here, in consequence of
those acts of theirs, attain to Hell. This condition of sinking with head
downwards, in which creatures are cooked, is one of great misery. It
is'such that a rescue therefrom is exceedingly difficult. Indeed,
one should strive hard for saving oneself from this misery, Those
regions “where creatures dwell when they ascend from this world
I shall now declare truly. Dothou listen to me with attention, By
listening to what I say, thou shalt attain to firmness of understanding
and aclear apprehension of (good and bad) acts. Know that even
those are the regions of all creatures of righteous deeds, viz., the stellar
worlds that shine in the firmament, the lunar disc, and the solar disc
as well that shines in the universe in its own light. Upon the exhaus-
tion, again of their merits, they fall away from those: regions repeatedly.
There. in Heaven itself, is distinction of inferior, superior, and middling
felicity. “There, in Heaven itself, is discontent at sight of prosperity
more blazing than one’sown. Even these are the goals which I have
mentioned in detail. I shall, after this, discourse to you on the attain-
ment by Jiva of the condition of residence in the womb. Do thou hear
me, With concentrated attention, O regenerate one, as I speak to thee I’

SECTION XVIII

“The Brahmana said,—The acts, good and bad, that a Jiva does
are not subject to destruction. Upon attainment of body after body,
those acts produce fruits corresponding with them.’ As a fruit-bearing
tree, when the season comes of productivity, yields a large quantity of
fruit, similarly merit, achieved with a pure heart, yields a large corp
(of felicity), After the same fashion, sin, done with a sinful heart, pro-
duces a. large crop of misery. The Soul (of Jiva), placing the mind
ahead, addresses himself to action. Hear then how Jiva, equipt with all
his acts and overwhelmed with lust and wrath, enters the womb. The
vital seed, mixed with blood, enters the womb of females and becomes
the field (of Jiva), good or bad, born of (his) acts. In consequence of
his subtlety and the condition of being unmanifest, Jiva does not be-
come attached to anything even after attaining toa body. Therefore,

1 ‘Pachante’ is ‘phalam prayachhanti.'—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 33 ===

38 MAHABHARATA

he is called Eternal Brahma,’ That (viz., Jiva or Brahma) is the seed of
allcreatures. It is in consequence of Him that living creatures live,
That Jiva, entering all the limbs of the foetus part by part, accepting the
attribute of mind, and residing within all the regions that belong to
Prana, supports (life). In consequence of this, the foetus becoming endued_
with mind begins to move its limbs.?_ As liquified iron, poured (into a
mould), takes the form of the mould, know that the entrance of Jiva
into the foetus iseven such, As fire, entering a mass of iron, heats.it
greatly, do thou know that the manifestation of Jiva in the foetus is
such. Asalamp, burning ina room, discovers (all things within it),
after the same manner mind discovers the different limbs of the body.®
Whatever acts, good or bad, Jiva does in a former body, have certainly.
to be enjoyed or endured by him. By such enjoyment and endurance
former acts are exhausted, and other acts, again, accumulate, till ji ya
succeed in acquiring a knowledge of the duties included in that , con-
templation which leads to Emancipation, Regarding this, I shall tell
thee those acts by which Jiva, O best of men, while coursing through a.
repeated round of re-births, becomes happy, Gifts, observances. of
austerity, Brahmacharyya, bearing Brahma according to the ordinances,
laid down, self-restraint, tranquillity, compassion for all creatures, res-
traint of passions, abstentions from cruelty as also from appropriating
what belongs to others, refraining from doing even mentally. all acts
that are false and injurious to living creatures on the Earth, reverently.
serving mother and father, honouring deities and guests, worship .of
preceptors, pity, purity, constant restraint of all organs, and causing of
all good acts, are said toconstitute the conduct of the good. From
observance of such conduct, arises Righteousness which protects all crea-
tures eternally. Such conduct one would always behold among persons
that are good. Verily, such conduct resides there eternally. That
course of practices to which persons of tranquil souls adhere indicates
Righteousness. Among them is thrown that course of practices which
constitutes eternal Righteousness. He who would betake himself to that
Righteousness would never have to attain to a miserable end. It is by

1 Nilakantha explains this verse in a different way. According to him
it means,—'in consequence of his subtlety and imperceptibility, Jiva: doés:
not become attached to anything. . For this reason, one possessed. of a
knowledge of Brahma, having become cognisant of Brahma and. attained
the great object of his desire, succeeds in becoming 80 (i ¢., dissociated from
all Oley This interpretation seems to. be a little far-fetched.—T.

2 'Chetasa’ indicates ‘upadhibhutena,’ for previously, Jiva was with-
out ‘upadhi.’ 'Pranasthaneshu’ implies ‘Indriyagolokeshu’ or those vital
parts Thich constitute the seats of the senses. ‘Chetana’ dos BU) I think,
mean ‘consciousness.’ It implies mind.—T.

8 Causes them to grow. I do not follow Nilakantha Lent 0,

Downloaded from https:/Avww.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 34 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 38

the conduct of the good that the world is restrained in. the paths of
Righteousness when it falls away. He that is a Yogin is Emancipated,
and is, therefore, distinguished above these (viz, the good). Deliverance
from the world takes place, after a long time, of one who acts righteous-
ly and well on every occasion ashe should. A living creature thus al-
ways meets with the acts done by him ina former life. All these acts
constitute the cause in consequence of which he comes into this world
in a state different from his true form.? There is a doubt in the world
as regards the question. By what was the acceptance (by Jiva) of a body
first determined. The Grandsire of all the worlds, viz., Brahma having
first formed a body of hisown, then created the three worlds, in their
entirety, of mobile and immobile creatures. Having first himself assum-
ed a body, he then created Pradhana, That Pradhana is the material
cause of all embodied creatures, by whom is all this covered and whom
all came to know as the highest. This that is seen is said to be destruc-
tible ; while the other is immortal and indestructible. This that (is seen)
issaid to be Kshara(the destructible) ; that, however, which is Para
(the other) is the Immortal, (as also) Akshara (the Indestructible). Of
each Purusha taken distributively, the whole is duality among these
three.® Seen first (to appear inan embodied form) Prajapati (then)
created all the primal elements and all immobile creatures. Even this is
the ancient audition, Of that (acceptance of body), the Grand-sire
ordained a limit in respect of time, and migrations among diverse crea-
tures and return or rebirth. All that I say is proper and correct, like
to what a person who is endued with intelligence and who has seen his
soul, would say on this topic of previous births. That person who looks
upon pleasure and pain as inconstant, which, indeed, is the correct view,

1 Nilakantha points out that one of the cha’s indicates the reason or
cause. Hence, the use of ‘therefore’ in the text.—T.

2 ‘Vikrita’ does not necessarily mean degraded. It implies ‘changed
or altered.’ Jiva, whois pure and immaculate, takes birth in this world,
falling away from his true status of Brahman owing to his acts, Acts, again,
are eternal, no beginning being conceivable.—T.

8 'Parantwa-maritam-aksharam’ indicates two things, viz., Amritam and
Aksharam. The first line speaks of Kshara, or the material case, or body ;
then of that which is'para’ or other. This other is of two kinds, viz.,
‘Amritam’ or 'suddha-chaitanyam,’ implying ‘Brahma’ in its condition of
purity ; and ‘Aksharam’ or Jiva as existing in the material case. In the
second line, ‘trayanam’ refers to Kshara, Amrita, and Akshara. ‘Mithunam’
is duality, referring to that which is composed of Kshara and Akshara,
What is stated in this Verse is that every Purusha is a duality, made up of
Kshara and Akshara. Telang gives a different version of the verse, He
ignores the word 'trayanam’ totally, and takes ‘Mithunam’ asimplying a
couple (male and female). All the texts I have seen contain 'trayanam.'—T,

4 ‘Atra purvajanmani (vishaye) yatha kaschit Medhavi &., (vadet).’
geems to be the correct order of the words. Telang translates the first line
differently.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
5 https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 35 ===

34 MAHABHARATA

who regards the body as an unholy conglomeration, and destruction as
ordained in action, and who remembers that what little of pleasure
there is, is really all pain, will succeed in crossing this terrible ocean of
worldly migration that is so difficult to cross. Though assailed by decre-
epitude and death and disease, he that understands Pradhana beholds
with an equal eye that Consciousness which dwells in all beings endued
with consciousness. Seeking the supreme seat, he then becomes utterly
indifferent to all (other) things» O best of men, I shall now impart
instruction to thee, agreeably to truth, concerning this. Do thou, O
learned Brahmana, understand in completeness that which constitutes
the excellent knowledge, as I declare it, of that indestructible seat.—' "

SECTION XIX

“The Brahmana said,—He who becomes absorbed in the one recep-
tacle (of all things), freeing himself from even the thought of his own
identity with all things.—indeed, ceasing to think of even his own exis-
tence,—gradually casting off one after another, will succeed in crossing
his bonds.!. That man who is the friend of all, who endures all, who is
attached to tranquillity, who has conquered all his senses, who is dives-
ted of fear and wrath, and who is of restrained soul, succeeds in emanci-
pating himself. He who behaves towards all creatures as towards himself,
who is restrained, pure. free from vanity and divested of egoism is re-
garded as emancipated from everything. He also is emancipated who
looks with an equal eye upon life and death, pleasure and pain, gain
and loss, agreeable and disagreeable. He is in every way emancipated who
does not covet what belongs to others, who never disregards any body,
who transcends all pairs of opposites, and whose soul is free from attach-
ment- He is emancipated who has no enemy, no kinsman, and no child,
who has cast off religion, wealth, and pleasure, and who is freed from
desire or cupidity. He becomes emancipated who acquires neither merit
nor demerit, who casts off the merits and demerits accumulated in pre-
vious births, who wastes the elements of his body for attaining to a
tranquillised soul, and who transcends all pairs of opposites. He who
abstains from all acts, who is free from desire or cupidity, who looks
upon the universe as unenduring or as like an Aswattha tree, ever en-
dued with birth, death and decrepitude, whose understanding is fixed on
renunciation, and whose eyes are always directed towards his own faults,

1 'Ekayana’ is the one receptacle of all things, viz., Brahman. 'Tushni’
implies ‘ahamevedam sarvamasmityabbimanamapyakurvan’ $.¢,, ‘without
even retaining the consciousness of his own identity with everything.”
‘Kinohikachintayan’--i.e,. not even thinking that he is existing, *Purvam
purvam parityajya’ implies the gradual merging of the grosser in the subtler.
#.¢., the successive stages of Yoga before absorption into Brahma. I follow
Nilakantha.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https:/www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 36 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 35

soon succeeds in emancipating himself from the bonds that bind him.*
He that sees his soul void of smell, of taste and touch, of sound, of be-
longings, of vision, and unknowable, becomes emancipated.? He who
sees his soul devoid:of the attributes of the five elements to be without
form and cause, to be really destitute of attributes though enjoying
them, becomes emancipated.® Abandoning, with the aid of the under-
standing, all purposes relating to body and mind, one gradually attains
to cessation of separate existence, like a fire unfed with fuel.‘ One who
is freed from all impressions, who transcends all pairs of opposites, who
is desitute of all belongings, and who uses all his senses under the gui-
dance of penances, becomes emancipated.® Having become freed from
all impressions, one then attains to Brahma which is Eternal and
supreme, and tranquil, and stable, and enduring, and indestructible.
After this I shall declare the science of Yoga to which there is nothing
superior, and how Yogins, by concentration, behold the perfect soul.® I
shall declare the instructions regarding it duly. Do thou learn from me
those doors by which directing the soul within the body one beholds that
which is without beginning and end.’ Withdrawing the senses from
their objects, one should fix the mind upon the soul ; having previously
undergone the severest austerities, one should practise that concentra-
tion of mind which leads to Emancipation.* Observant of penances and
always practising concentration of mind, the learned Brahmana, endued
with intelligence, should observe the precepts of the science of Yoga,
beholding the soul in the body. If the good man succeeds in concentra-

1 The first half of the second line of 8 is read differently in the Bengal
texts. ‘Aswasthamavasam mudham’ implies ‘without ease or happiness,
endued with slavery and ignorance.'—T.

2 The Soul being destitute of these becomes 'Chinmatra,’ é.e., a pure
Chit without the attributes superinduced upon it by Ne-science or ignorance,

8 Formlessness implies subtlety. ‘Without cause’ implies increate or
as identical with eternal Brahma. Dissociation from attributes while
enjoying them implies an emancipate condition.—T.

4 ‘Nirvana,’ according to orthodox Commentators, implies the annibila-
tion or cessation of sepatate or individual existence by absorption into
universal and eternal Brahma.—T..

5 The impressions caused by objects outside self are destroyed by
those belonging to contemplation, The latter, again, should be destroyed
befere absorption into Brahma can ocour.—T,

6 ‘Siddham’ is explained as ‘destitute of the errors due to Ne-science,’

7 ‘Atmanam’ is. ‘Chittam’; ‘atmani’ is ‘dehe’; 'charayan’is ‘antar-
mukham kritwa' ; ‘nityam’ is ‘adyantasunyam.’ So Nilakantha.’—T.

8 ‘Fixing the mind upon the soul’ is that concentration which leads to
Emancipation. This becomes possible in consequence of severe susterities
undergone previously. —T.

Downloaded from https:/Avww.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 37 ===

36 MAHABHARATA

ting the mind on the soul, he then, habituated to exclusive meditation,
beholds the Supreme soul in his own soul. Self-restrained, and always
concentrated, and with all his senses completely conquered, the man of
cleansed soul, in consequence of such complete concentration of mind,
succeeds in beholding the soul by the soul. As a person beholding some
unseen individual in a dream recognises him, saying,—This is he.—when
he sees him after waking, after the same manner the good man having
seen the Supreme Soul in the deep contemplation of Samadhi recognises
it upon waking from Samadhi. As one beholds the fibrous pith after
extracting it from a blade of the Saccharum Munja, even so the Yogin be-
holds the soul, extracting it from the body. The body has been called
the Saccharum Munja, and the fibrous pith is said to stand for the soul.
This is the excellent illustration propounded by persons conversant with
Yoga. When the bearer of a body adequately beholds the soul in Yoga,
he then has no one that is master over him, for he then becomes the lord
of the three worlds.? He succeeds in assuming diverse bodies according
as he wishese Turning away decrepitude and death, he neither grieves
nor exults. The self-restrained man, concentrated in Yoga, can create
(for himself) the godship of the very gods. Casting off his transient
body he attains to immutable Brahma.* No fear springs up in him at
even the sight of all creatures falling victims to destruction (before his
eyes). When all creatures are afflicted,—he can never be afflicted by
any one. Devoid of desire and possessed of a tranquil mind, the person
in Yoga is never shaken by pain and sorrow and fear, the terrible effects
that flow from attachment and affection. Weapons never pierce him;
death does not exist for him. Nowhere in the world can be seen any
one that is happier than he. Having adequately concentrated his soul,
he lives steadily on himself. Turning off decrepitude and pain and

pleasure, he sleeps in comfort. Casting off this human body he attains
to (other) forms according to his pleasure. While one is enjoying the
sovereignty that Yoga bestows, one should never fall away from devo-
tion to Yoga.* When one, after adequate devotion to Yoga, beholds

1 Iexpand the Verse a little to make it intelligible. The sense is
this: having seen the supreme Soul in Samadhi, upon awaking from it, he
recognises it in the universe, #.¢,, regards the universe to be nothing else
than the Supreme Soul.—T. .

2 This may also mean ‘he bas none superior to him ; not even he that
is the Lord of the universe.’'—T,

8 The first line seems to be doubtful. The sense, as I understand it,
is,—such person becomes the god of the very gods. The causal verb
*karayate’ may be taken ag equivalent to ‘karoti,’—T,

4 I follow Nilakantha in rendering the second line. The sense is clear,

+ vig., that one should not fall away from the practice of Yoga, tempted by
the puissance that Yoga brings. Telang renders the line ‘one practising
cercenfration should never become despondent.’ I think, Nilakantha is
right.--T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 38 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 87

the Soul in oneself, one then ceases to have any regard for even him of
a hundred sacrifices (Indra). Hear now how one, habituating oneself
to exclusive meditation, succeeds in attaining to Yoga. Thinking of that
point of the compass which has the Sun behind it, the mind should be
fixed, not outside, but in the interior of that mansion in which one may
happen to live. Residing within that mansion, the mind should then,
with all its outward and inward (operations), behold in that particular
room in which one may stay. At that time when, having deeply medi-
tated, one beholds the All (viz., Brahman, the Soul of the universe),
there is then nothing external to Brahman where the mind may dwell.
Restraining all the senses in a forest that is free from noise and that is
uninhabited, with mind fixed thereon, one should meditate on the All
(or universal Brahman) both outside and inside one’s body- One should
meditate on the teeth; the palate, the tongue, the throat, the neck like-
wise ; one should also meditate on the heart and the ligatures of the
heart {?

“The Brahmana continued,—Thus addressed by me, that intelli-
gent disciple, O slayer of Madhu, more once asked me about this religion
of Emancipation that is so difficult to explain. How does this food that
is eaten from time to time become digested in the stomach ? How does it
become transformed into juice ? How, again, into blood? How does it
nourish the flesh, the marrow, the sinews, the bones ? How do all these
limbs of embodied creatures grow ? How does the strength grow of the
growing man? How occurs the escape of all such elements as are not
nutritive, and of all impurities separately ?. How dces this one inhale

1 Nilakantha notes that this indicates that only that Yogin who has
not advanced much may be tempted by the desire of enjoyment. He, how-
ever, who has adequately devoted himself to Yoga feels no regard for Indra
himself but can turn him away like Diogenes dismissing Alexander the
Groat.—T.

2 I have endeavoured to render verses 33 to 37 as literally as possible,
under the guide of Nilakantha, omitting his inferences, The passage relates
to the mysteries of Yoga. In the second line of 33, ‘drishtapurvam disam,’
which has been rendered ‘that point of the compass which has the Sun
behind it,’ means the instructions laid down in the Vedanta as based upon
Srutis. ‘Drishtam’ implies ‘Sruti,’ for it is ag authoritative as anything
seen. ‘Pura’ implies a city, a citadel, ora mansion. Here it refers to the
body. The ‘avasatha’ within the ‘pura’ refers to the ‘chakra’ or nervous
centres beginning with what is called the ‘muladhara.’ At the time when
Brahman is realised, the whole universe appears as Brahman and so nothing
exists, besides Brahman, upon which the mind oan then dwell. Telang, I
think, is not correct in rendering ‘manaschasya...vabyatah’ as ‘his mind
should nos any way wander outside.’ The correct version would be ‘the
mindis then nowhere,’ implying that at that time the mind has nothing
else to dwell upon. ‘Kayamabbyantaram’ is ‘kayamabhi’ and ‘antaram,’ ¢.e.,
both within and without the body. The several parts of the body named,
beginning with teeth, etc., refer to eating and other operations, all of which
influence the mind and dispose it for purity and otherwise.—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 39 ===

83 MAHABHARATA

and again, exhale ? Staying upon what particular part does the Soul
dwell in the body ?. How does Jiva, exerting himself, bear the body ?
Of what colour and of what kind is the body in which he dwells again
(leaving a particular body)? O holy one, it behoveth thee to tell me
all this accurately, O sinless one,—even thus was I interrogated by that
learned Brahmana, O Madhava. I replied unto him, O thou of mighty
arms, after the manner I myself had heard, O chastiser of all foes. As
one placing some precious object in one’s store-room should keep one’s
mind on it, so, placing the mind within one’s own body, one should then,
restraining all the senses, seek after the Soul, avoiding all heedlessness.
One would, becoming always assiduous in this way and gratified with
one’s own self, within a very short time attain to that Brahma by be-
holding which one would become conversant with Pradhana.? He is
not capable of being seized by the eye ; nor even by all the senses.? It is
only with the lamp of the mind that great Soul can be seen. He has
hands and feet on all sides; he has ears on all sides ; he dwells, pervad-
ing all things in the world.* Jiva beholds the Soul as extracted from the
body (like the stalk from a blade of Saccharum Munja, when knowledge
comes). Then casting off Brahma as invested with form, by holding the
mind in the body, he beholds Brahma as freed from all attributes. He
sees the Soul with his mind, smiling as it were at the timee Depending
upon that Brahma, he then attains to Emancipation in me.’ O fore-
most of regenerate ones, all this mystery has now been declared by me.
I ask thy permission, for I shall leave this spot. Do thou (also) go
withersoever thou pleasest. Thus addressed by me, O Krishna, on that
occasion, that disciple of mine, endued with austere penances, that
Brahmana of rigid vows, went away according to his pleasure.
“Vasudeva continued,—'That best of Brahmanas, O son of Pritha,
having said these words unto me, on that occasion, properly relating to
the religion of Emancipation, disappeared then and there. Has this dis-

1 i.e, that from which the entire universe has been created.—T.

2 Probably, ‘by any of the senses.’ The plural form occursin the
original —T.

83 This answers the questions respecting the form of the Soul, says
Nilakantha.—T.

4 Irender this verse, following Nilakantha’s gloss. The second line
of 50, according to that Commentator, refers to the ascension of the Yogin
from Brahma vested with attributes to Brahma divested of all attributes.
The ‘tam’ does not refer to body’ as Telang takes it, but to Brabma as
endued with hands and feet on all sides, etc. ‘Deheswam dharayan’ means
‘restraining the mind within the body.’ ‘Kevalam Brahma’ is Brahma
without attributes.—T.

5 The speaker here is the regenerate visitor of Krishna. The latter is
repeating the words of that visitor. In this verse, Krishna, forgetting that
he is merely reciting the words of another, refers to himself as the Supreme
Brahman in whom one must merge for attaining to Emancipation.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 40 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 89

course been heard by thee, O son of Pritha, with mind directed solely
towards it? Even this was what thou didst hear on that occasion while
thou wert on thy car. It is my opinion, O son of Pritha, that this is diffi-
cult of being comprehended by one whose understanding is confused, or
who has acquired no wisdom by study, or who eats food incompatiable
with his body, or whose Soul is not purified.!. O chief of Bharata’s race,
this isa great mystery among the deities that has been declared (to
thee). Atnotimeor place, O son of Pritha, has this been heard by
man in this world. Osinless one, no other man than thyself is deser-
ving of hearing it. It is not, at this time, capable of being easily under-
stood by one whose inner soul is confused. The world of the deities is
filled, O son of Kunti, with those who follow the religion of actions. The
cessation of the mortal form (by practising the religion of inaction) is
not agreeable to the deities.2 That goal, O son of Pritha, is the highest
which is constituted by eternal Brahman where one, casting off the body,
attains to immortality and becomes always happy. By adhering to this
religion, even they who are of sinful birth, such as women and Vaisyas
and Sudras, attain to the highest goal. What need be said then, O son
of Pritha, of Brahmanas and Kshatriyas possessed of great learning,
always devoted to the duties of their own orders and who are intent on
(the acquisition of) the region of Brahma ? This has been laid down with
the reasons (on which it rests); and also the means for its acquisition; and
its complete attainment and fruit, viz., Emancipation and the ascertain-
ment of the truth regarding pain. O chief of Bharata’s race, there is
nothing else that is fraught with happiness greater than this. That
mortal, O son of Pandu, who, endued with intelligence, and faith, and
prowess, renounces as unsubstantial what is regarded as substantial by
the world, succeeds within a short time in obtaining the Supreme by
these means. This is all that is to be said,—there is nothing else that is
higher than this. Yoga takes place in his case, O son of Pritha, who
devotes himself to its constant practice for a period of six months.’ ”

1 The second line of 56 is read variously.—T,

2 Heaven isthe reward of those who follow the religion of Pravritti
or acts, such as sacrifices, religious observances, etc. The followers, how-
ever, of the religion of Nivritti or inaction, é.e , they who betake themselves
to the path of knowledge, become emancipated. The deities derive their
sustenance from the former and become even jealous of the latter, for the
emancipate state is higher than that of the deities themselves.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 41 ===

SECTION XX

‘Vasudeva said, —'In this connection is cited the ancient narrative,
O son of Pritha, of the discourse that took place between a married
couple. A certain Brahmana’s spouse, beholding the Brahmana, her
husband who was a complete master of every kind of knowledge and
wisdom, seated in seclusion, said unto him.—Into what region shall I go,
depending on thee as my husband,—thee that art seated, having cast off
all (religious) acts, that art harsh in thy conduct towards me, and that
art so undiscerning ?' It has been heard by us that a wife attains to
those regions which are acquired by her husband. What, indeed, is the
goal that I shall attain, having obtained thee for my husband ?—Thus
questioned, that Brahmana of tranquil soul then said unto her, smilingly,
—O blessed dame, I am not offended with these words of thine, O'sinless
one. Whatever acts exist that are adopted with the aid of others, that
are seen (in consequence of their grossness), and that are true, are done
as acts by men devoted to acts.” Those persons that are destitute of
knowledge, only store delusion by acts. Freedom from acts, again; is
incapable of being attained in this world for even a moment. From
birth to the attainment of a different form, action good or bad, and
accomplished by acts, mind, or speech, exists in all beings. Those paths
(of action) which are characterised by visible objects (such as Soma-
juice and ghee for libations) being destroyed by Rakshasas, turning away
from them I have perceived the seat (of the soul) that is in the body,
with the aid of the soul.? There dwells Brahma transcending all pairs of
opposites ; there Soma with Agni: and there the urger of the under-
standing (viz., Vayu) always moves, upholding all creatures.* It is
for that seat that the Grandsire Brahman and others, concentrated in
Yoga, worship the Indestructible. It is for that seat that men of learning
and excellent vows, of tranquil souls, and of senses completely vanquish-

1 ‘Avichakshanam’ is undiscerning, in the sense of the husband's not
knowing that the interrogatrix as wife, has no other refuge than her lord
with all his defects.—T.

2 Ifollow Nilakantha. Telang adopts the views of Arjuna Misra and
renders the first line as ‘whatever acts are seized (by the touch, or seen, or
heard, eto.’) ‘Grahyam,' according to Nilakantha, implies those acts, like
Diksha, ete., which are adopted with the aid of others.—T.

3 This seat; says Nilakantha, is called Avimukta and lies between the
eyebrows and the nose,—T, a

4 Nilakantha interprets this mystically. By ‘Soma’ he understands
the artery or duct called Ida, and by ‘Agni’ the duct called Pingala. *Dhira’
is ‘Buddhipreraka ;’ ‘vyavayam’ is ‘sancharam.’ ‘Dhirobhutani dharayan
nityam vyavayam kurute’is the order of the words. The sense is this: in
this spot is seated Brahman ; there Ida and Pingala meet ;’ and there also is
Vayu which urges the understanding and upholds all living creatures —T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 42 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 41

ed, strive.’ That is not capable of being smelt by the sense of smell;
nor tasted by the tongue ; or touched by the organs of touch. It is by
the mind that that is attained. It is incapable of being conquered by
the eye. It transcends the sense of hearing. It is destitute of scent,
taste, touch, and form as attributes. It is that from which proceeds
the well-ordained universe, and it is that upon which it rests. The
life-breaths called Prana and Apana and Samana and Vyana and
Udana flow from it, and it is that into which they again enter. The
breaths Prana and Apana move between Samana and Vyana. When
the soul sleeps, both Samana and Vyana are absorbed.? Between
Apana and Prana, Udana dwells, pervading all. Hence, Prana and
Apana do not desert a sleeping person. In consequence of its control-
ling all the life-winds, the controlling breath is called Udana. Hence,
utterersof Brahman undergo penances which have myself for their goal.®
In the midst of all those life-breaths that swallow up one another and
move within the body, blazes forth the fire called. Vaiswanara made up
of seven flames. The nose, the tongue, the eye, the skin, the ear which
numbers the fifth, the mind, and the understanding,—these are the
seven tongues of that Vaiswanara’s flame, That which is smelt, that
which is seen, that which is drunk, that which is touched, as also that
which is heard, that which is thought of, and that which is understood,—
these are the seven sorts of fuel for me, That which smells, that which
eats, that which sees, that which touches, that which hears numbering
the fifth; that which thinks, and that which understands,—these are
the seven great officiating priests. Behold, O blessed one, learned
sacrificers duly casting seven libations in seven ways in the seven fires,
viz. that which is smelt, that which is drunk, that which is seen, that
which is touched, as also that which is heard, that which is thought of,
and that which is understood, create them in their own wombs,‘ Earth,
Wind, Ether, Water, and Light numbering as the fifth, Mind, and
Understanding,—these seven are called wombs (of all things). All the
attributes which constitute the sacrificial offerings, enter into the attri-
bute that is born of the fire; and having dwelt within that dwelling

1 ‘Yatra’ is not to be taken as 4 locative here. “It is equivalent to
‘yatah’ or for which.—T.

2 'Tasmin’ is taken, by Nilakantha as ‘Apana sahite Prane.’—T,

8 ‘Utkarshena anayati, hence ‘Udana,’ says Nilakantha. The sense
of the whole passage seems to be this. Wordly life is regulated by the life-
breaths. These are attached to the Soul and lead toits individual mani-
festations. Udana controls all the breaths. Udana is controlled by
penance. It is penanoa then that destroys the round of rebirths and leads
to absorption into Brahman.—T.

4 The meaning seems to be this : they who renounce sensuous objects
can create them when they like. One casting off smell that has earth for
its object can create earth when he likes.—T.

Downloaded from https:/Awww.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 43 ===

43 MAHABHARATA

became reborn in their respective wombs. Thither also, viz., in that
which generates all beings, they remain absorbed during the period for
which dissolution lasts. From that is produced smell, from that is pro-
duced taste, from that is produced colour, and from that is produced
touch; from that is produced sound.; from that arises doubt ; and from
that is produced resolution. This is what is known as the sevenfold
creation. It is in this very way that all this was comprehended by the
ancients. By the three full and final libations, the full become full with
light.”

SECTION XXI

"The Brahmana said—In this connection is cited the following
ancient story- Do thou understand, of what kind the institution is of the
ten Hotris (sacrificing priests), The ear, the skin, the two eyes, the tongue,
the nose, the two feet, the two hands, the genital organ, the lower-duct,
and speech,—these, O beautiful one, are the ten sacrificing priests. Sound
and touch, colour and taste, scent, speech, action, motion, and the dis-
charge of vital seed, of urine and of excreta, are the ten libations, The
points of the compass, Quarters, Wind, Sun, Moon, Earth, Fire, Vishnu,
Indra, Prajapati, and Mitra —these, O beautiful one, are the ten (sacri-
ficial) fires. The ten organs (of knowledge and action) are the sacrificing
priests. The libations, O beautiful one, are ten. The objects of the
senses are the fuel that are cast into these ten fires, as.also the mind,
which is the ladle, and the wealth (viz., the good and bad acts of the
sacrificer). What remains is the pure, highest knowledge. We have
heard that all this universe was wel! differentiated (from Knowledge).
All objects of knowledge are Mind. Knowledge only perceives (i.e.;
discovers the Mind without being attached to it), The knower (or Jiva),
encased in subtle form, lives within the gross body that is produced by
the vital seed. The bearer of the body is the Garhapatya fire. From
that is produced another. Mind is the Ahavaniya fire. Intoit is poured
the oblation. From that was produced the Veda (or Word); (then was
born Mind) ; Mind (desirous of creation) sets itself on the Veda (or the
Word). Then arises form (or colour) undistinguished by particular
colours. It runs towards the Mind.?—

1 What is stated inthis passageis, shortly, this: the ear, etc., are
the Hotris or sacrificing priests who are to pour libations on the sacrificial
fire. The perceptions and functions of those organs constitute the Haoj
or libations that are to be poured. The points, wind, etc., are the Agni
or sacred fireson which they are to be poured, These statements are
recapitulated in Verse 5. The objects of the senses, of the same as those
in Verse 3, are the fuel, previously described as Havi or libations, which are
to be burnt off by being cast into the fires.—T.

2 The ‘Hridaya’ or heart is the ‘Garhapatya’ fire. From it is produced
another fire, the ‘Ahavaniya,’ viz., the mind. ‘The heart was pierced. From

Downloaded from https:/Avww.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 44 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 43

“The Brahmana’s wife said_—Why did Word first arise and why
did Mind arise afterwards, seeing that Word starts into existence after
having been thought upon by Mind? Upon that authority can it be
said that Mati (Prana) takes refuge in Mind. Why, again, in dreamless
slumber, though separated from Mind, does not Prana apprehend (all
objects) ?. What is that which restrains it then ?*

“The Brahmana said,—The Apana breath, becoming the lord (ie.
bringing the Prana under its control), in consequence of such lordship over
it, makes it identical with itself. That restrained motion of the Prana
breath (which for the time becomes identical with that of the Apana)
has been said to be the motion of the mind. Hence the mind is depen-
dent upon Prana, not Prana upon the mind. Therefore, in dreamless
slumber, upon the disappearance of mind, Prana does not disappear.
But since thou askest mea question about word and mind, I shall,
therefore, relate to thee a discourse between them. Both Word and
Mind, repairing to the Soul of matter,? asked him,—Do thou say who
amongst us is superior. Do thou, O puissant one, despel our doubt—
On that occasion, the holy one made this answer.—The mind undoubt-
edly (is superior)x—Unto him Word said,—I yield to thee the fruition
of all thy desires !*

“The Brahmana said—Know that I have two minds, immovable
and movable. That which is immovable is, verily, with me;
the movable is in your dominion,* That mind is verily called movable

the heart arose mind, for the mind arose Chandramas,’ is the declaration of
the Sruti cited by Nilakantha. The Ahavaniya fire or mindis the mouth,
*Asyam G@havaniya’ is the Sruti. ‘Annamayam hi Somya manas, apomayah
pranah, tejomayi vak' is the Sruti that bears upon this, Food or fire, poured
into the mouth developsinto speech or word. ‘Vachaspati’ implies the
Veda or word. First arises the word, the mind sets itself upon it, desirous
of creation. This corrasponds with the Mosaic Genasis.—'God said ; let
there be light, and there was light.’ The word was first.—T.

1 The last question ssems to ba this : in dreamless slumber, the mind
disappears totally. If it is the mind upon which Prana rests, why does not
Prana also disappear? It is seen to separate itself from mind, for it
coutinues to exist while mind does not exist. It so, i.¢., if existing, as it
must be admitted to do, why doss it not apprehend objects ? What is it
that restrains its powers of apprehension ?—T.

2 ‘Bhutatmanam’ is ordinary Prajapati. Nilakantba takes it to mean
here individual Jiva or salf.—T.

<8 It is, through words that desirable fruits, visible and invisible, are
acquired. Of course, word means both ordinary speech and Vedic
Mantras.—T.

4 The speaker is the Brahmana, which Nilakantha explains to mean
‘the Brahmana named Manas or Mind.’ Instead of such a learned inter-
pretation, we may take it as implying thet the Brahmana ie repeating the
answer which Bhutatman, i.e, Prajapati or Jiva, made to Word. The
Brahmana is the real speaker. He recites the words of Jiva, Immovable,
according to Nilakantha, means ‘that which is seizable by the external

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 45 ===

44 MAHABHARATA

which, in the form of Mantra, letter, or voice, is referrable to your
dominion. Hence, thou art superior (to the other mind which concerns
itself with only the external world). But since, coming of thy own
accord, O beautiful one, thou enterest into the engagement (about the
fruition of all wishes), therefore, filling myself with breath, I utter
thee." The goddess Word used always to dwell between Prana and
Apana. But, O blessed one, sinking into Apana, though urged upwards,
in consequence of becoming dissociated from Prana, she ran to Prajapati
and said,—Be gratified with me, O holy one.—The Prana appeared, once
more fostering Word. Hence, Word. encountering deep exhalation,
never utters anything. Word always flows as endued with utterance or
unendued with it.2 Amongst those two, Word without utterance is
superior to Word with utterance. Like a cow endued with excellent
milk, she (Word without utterance) yields diverse kinds of meaning.
This one always yields the Eternal (viz., Emancipation), speaking of
Brahman. O thou of beautiful smiles, Word is a cow, in consequence of
her puissance which is both divine and not divine. Behold the distinc-
tion of these two subtle forms of Word that flow.®

“The Brahmana’s wife said—What did the goddess of Word then
say, in days of old, when, though impelled by the Wish to speak, Speech
could not come out ?

"The Brahmana said,—The Word that is generated in the body by
Prana, then attains to Apana from Prana. Then transformed into Udana
and issuing out of the body, envelops all the quarters, with Vyana.
After that, she dwells in Samana. Even in this way did Word formerly
speak. Hence Mind, in consequence of being immovable, is distinguished,
and the goddess Word, in consequence of being movable, is also dis-
tinguished.

senses’; and ‘movable,’ that which is beyond the ken of the senses, such ag
heaven, eto. The external world being only a manifestation of the mind, it
is spoken of here as identical with it. So, the ideas in the mind which are
not due to the senses, are only the mind This isthe movable mind. That
mind depends on word or the scriptures.—T.

1 Telang gives a different version of this Verse. I offer a verbal
rendering, without attempting to explain it.—T.

2 i.¢., a8 noisy or noiseless.—T.

8 I have given as close a verbal rendering of the passage as possible,
The sense, however, is not very intelligible fo me. The gloss of Nilakantha
ig as unintelligibleas the text. Telang also has givens verbal rendering
which differs from the above slightly. His foot-notes do not, 1 think, bring
out the meaning at all, As regards the two vernacular versions, both are
useless.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://Awww.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 46 ===

SECTION XXII

“The Brahmana said.—In this connection is cited the ancient story,
O blessed one, of what the institution is of the seven sacrificing priests.
The nose, the eye, the tongue, the skin, and the ear numbering the
fifth, the mind, and the understanding,—these are the seven sacrificing
Priests standing distinctly from one another, Dwelling in subtle space,
they do not perceive one another. Do thou, O beautiful one, know
these sacrificing priests that are seven by their nature.

“The Brahmana’s wife said—How is it that dwelling in subtle
space, these do not perceive one another ? What are their (respective)
natures, O holy one? Do thou tell'me this, O lord.

“The Brahmana said\—Not knowing the qualities (of any object)
is ignorance (of that object) ; while knowledge of the qualities is (called)
knowledge (of the object which possesses those qualities). These seven
never succeed in apprehending or knowing the qualities of one
another. The tongue, the eye, the ear too, the skin, the mind, and
the understanding, do not succeed in apprehending smells.
It is the nose alone that apprehends them. The nose, the tongue,
the ear also, the skin, the mind, and the understanding, never
succeed in apprehending colours. It is the eye alone that apprehends
them. The nose, the tongue, the eye too, the ear, the understanding,
andthe mind, never succeed in apprehending sensations of touch. It
is the skin alone that apprehends them. The nose, the tongue, the eye,
the skin, the mind, and the understanding, never succeed in apprehen-
ding sounds. It isthe ear alone that apprehends them. The nose, the
tongue, the eye, the skin, the ear, and the understanding never succeed
in apprehending doubt. It isthe mind that apprehends it. The nose,
the tongue, the eye, the skin, the ear, and the mind, never succeed in
apprehending determination (certainty in respect of knowledge). It is
the understanding alone that apprehends it. In this connection, is cited,
O beautiful lady, this ancient narrative of a discourse between the
senses and the mind.

The mind said,—The nose does not smell without me. (Without
me) the tongue does not apprehend taste. The eye does not seize colour,

\ the skin does not feel touch, the ear does not apprehend sound, when
deprived of me. I am the eternal and foremost one among all the
elements. It always happens that destitute of myself, the senses never
shine, like habitations empty of inmates or fires whose flames have
been quenched. Without me, all creatures failto apprehend qualities
and objects, with even the senses exerting themselves, even as fuel that
is wet and dry (failing to ignite a fire).—

Hearing these words, the Senses said,—Even this would be true
Downloaded from https:/www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 47 ===

46 MAHABHARATA

as thou thinkest in this matter, if, indeed, thou couldst enjoy pleasures
without either ourselves or our objects.» What thou thinkest
would be true, if, when we are extinct, there be gratification and
support of life, and a continuation of thy enjoyments, or, if,
when we are absorbed and objects are existing, thou canst have
thy enjoyments by thy desire alone, as truly as thou hast them with our
aid. If, again, thou deemest thy power over our objects to be always
complete, do thou then seize colour by the nose, and taste by_ the eye.
Do thou also take smell by the ear, and sensations of touch by the
tongue. Do thou also take sounds by the skin, and likewise touch by
the understanding. They that are powerful do not own the dominion
ofany rules. Rules exist for those only that are weak. Do thou seize
enjoyments unenjoyed before ; it behoves thee not to enjoy what has
been tasted before (by others). Asa disciple repairs to a preceptor for
the sake of (acquiring) the Srutis, and then, having acquired the Srutis,
dwells on their import (by obeying their injunctions), even so dost thou
regard as thine those objects which are shown by us, past or future, in
sleep or in wakefulness. Of creatures, again, that are of little intelli-
gence, when their mind becomes distracted and cheerless, life is seen to
be upheld upon our objects discharging their functions.? It is seen also
that a creature, after having formed even innumerable purposes and
indulged in dreams, when afflicted by the desire to enjoy, runs to objects
of sense alone.? One entering upon enjoyments depending on mental
purposes alone and unconnected with actual objects of sense, always
meets with death upon the exhaustion of the life-breaths, like an enkind-
led fire upon the exhaustion of fuel. True it isthat we have connec
tions with our respective attributes ; true it is, we have no knowledge
of one another's attributes. But without us thou canst have no percep-
tion. Without us no happiness can come to thee.—”

SECTION XXIII

"The Brahmana said,—In this connection, O blessed lady, is cited
the ancient story of what kind the institution is of the five sacrificing
priests) The learned know this to be a great principle that Prana and
Apana and Udana and Samana and Vyana are the five sacrificing
Priests-— 7é
The Brahmana’s wife said—That naturally there are seven sac-

1 The correct reading is ‘oha’ after ‘arthan’ and not ‘twam’ after it.
Hence, the Senses say that ‘without ourselves and without those which are
our objects, thou canst not have thy enjoyments,'—T.

2 Thus creatures may exist through us, even though mind may be out
of order.—T.

- 8 Both mental purposes and dreams having failed to gratify him.—T.
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://Awww.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 48 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARYA 47

rificing priests is what was my former conviction. Let the great prin-
ciple be declared to me as to how, verily, the number is five of the
sacrificing priests.—

“‘The Brahmana said,—The wind nursed by Prana afterwards
takes birth in Apana. The wind nursed in Apana then becomes developed
into Vyana. Nursed by Vyana, the wind is then developed into Udana.
Nursed in Udana, the wind is then generated as Samana. Those good
beings in days of yore asked the first-born Grandsire, saying—Do thou
say who amongst us is the foremost. He (whom thou wilt indicate)
will be our chief.—

‘**_Brahmana said,—He upon whose extinctionall the life-breaths
become extinct in the bodies of living creatures, he upon whose moving
they move, is verily the foremost (among you). Do ye go where ye
like.

“Prana said_—Upon my extinction all the life-breaths become
extinct in the bodies of living creatures, Upon my moving they once
more move. Iam (therefore) the foremost. Behold, I go into extinc-
tion [—

‘The Brahmana continued,—Prana then became extinct and once
more moved about. Then Samana and Udana also, O blessed one, said
these words,—Thou dost not dwell here, pervading all this, as we do.
Thou art not the foremost amongst us, O Prana. (Only) Apana is under
thy dominion. —Prana then moved about, and unto him Apana
spoke.—

“"—Apana said,—When I become extinct, all the life-winds
become extinct in the bodies of living creatures. When I move about,
they again move about. I am, therefore, the foremost. Behold, I go
into extinction !

“‘The Brahmana continued,—Unto Apana who said so, both
Vyana and Udana said,—O Apana, thou art not the foremost. (Only)
Prana is under thy dominion.x—Then Apana began to move about.
Vyana once more addressed him saying,—I am the foremost of all (the
life-winds). Listen, for what reason. When I become extinct, all the
life-winds become extinct in the bodies of living creatures. When I
move about, they once more move about. I am (therefore) the foremost.
Behold, I go into extinction !—

“The Brahmana continued,—Then Vyana went into extinction
and once more began to move about. At this, Prana and Apana and
Udana and Samana addressed him, saying,—Thou art not the foremost
among us,O Vyana! (Only) Samana is under thy dominion—Vyana
then began to move about and Samana said unto him,—I am the fore-
most of you all, Listen, for what reason. When I become extinct, all
the life-winds become extinct in the bodies of living creatures. When I

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 49 ===

48 MAHABHARATA

begin to move about, they once more move about. Hence, I am the
foremost. Behold, I go into extinction |~Then Samana began to move
about. Unto him Udana said,—I am the foremost of all the life-winds.
Listen, for what reason. WhenI become extinct, all the life-winds
become extinct in the bodies of living creatures. When I move about
they once more move about. Hence,I am the foremost. Behold, I go
into extinction !—Then Udana, after having gone into extinction, began”
to once more move about, Prana and Apana and Samana and Vyana
said, unto him,—O Udana, thou art not the foremost one among us,
only Vyana is under thy dominion.—

“The Brahmana continued,—Unto them assembled together, the
Lord of creatures, Brahma, said—No one of you is superior to
others. Ye are all endued with particular attributes. All are
foremost in their own spheres, and all possess special attributes.
—Thus said unto them, that were assembled together, the Lord
of all creatures. There is one that is unmoving, and one that is moving.
In consequence of special attributes, there are five life-winds, My own
self isone. That one accumulates into many forms. Becoming friendly
unto one another, and gratifying one another, depart in peace. Blessings
to ye, do ye uphold one another !—’ *

SECTION XXIV

“*The Brahmana said,—In this connection is cited the ancient
story of the discourse between Narada and the Rishi Devamata.

“*_Devamata said,—What verily, comes first into existence,
ofa creature that takes birth? Is it Prana, or Apana, or Samana,
or Vyana, or Udana ?—

“Narada said,—By whatever the creature is created, that first
comes unto him which is other (or separate from him). The life winds
are to be known as existing in pairs, viz., those that move transversely,
upwards, and downwards.

“ ‘_Devamata said,—By whom (among the life-winds) is a creature
produced ? Who (amongst) them comes first? Do thou tell me what
the pairs are of the life-winds, that move transversely, upwards, and
downwards.—

“ ‘Narada said,—From Sankalpa (wish) arises Pleasure. It also
arises from sound. It arises also from taste; it atises too from colour.
From the semen, united with blood, first flows Prana. Upon the semen:
being modified by Prana, flows Apana. Pleasure arises from the semen
aswell. It arises from taste also. This is the form (effect) of Udana.
Pleasure is produced from union. Semen is ganerated by desire, From
desire is produced the menstrual flow. In the union of semen and blood,
generated by Samana and Vyana, the pair that consists of Prana and

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 50 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARYA 43

Apana, enters, moving transversely and upwards, Vyana and Samana
both from a‘pair that moves transversely. Agni (fire) is all the deities.
Even this is the teaching of the Veda. The knowledge of Agni arises

. ina Brahmana with intelligence. The smoke of that fire is of the form
of (the attribute called) Darkness. The attribute that is known by the
name of Passion is in its ashes. The quality of goodness arises from that
portion of the fire into which the oblation is poured.1. They that are
conversant with sacrifices know that Samana and Vyana are from the
attribute of Goodness. Prana and Apana are portions of the oblation
(of clarified butter). Between them isthe Fire. That is the excellent
form (or seat) of Udana, as the Brahmanas know. Listen as I say which
is distinct from the pairs, Day and Night constitute a pair. Between
them is the Fire. That is the excellent seat of Udana as the Brahmanas
know. - The existent and the non-existent form a pair. Between them
is the Fire. That is the excellent seat of Udana as the Brahmanas know.
First is Samana, then Vyana. The latter's function is managed through
it (viz., Samana). Then, secondly, Samana once more comes into
operation, Only Vyana exists for tranquillity. Tranquillity is eternal
Brahman. This is the excellent seat of Udana as the Brahmanas
know.?—'”

SECTION XXV

,"'The Brahmana said,—In this connection is recited the ancient
story of what the institution is of the Chaturhotra (sacrifice),° The
ordinances are now being duly declared of that in its entirety. Listen
tome, O amiable lady, as I declare this wonderful mystery. The
agent, the instrument, the action and Emancipation,—these, O beauti-
ful lady, are the four sacrificing priests by whom the universe is en-
veloped. Hear in its entirety the assignment of causes (relating to this
topic). ' The nose, the tongue, the eye, the skin, the ear numbering the
fifth, the mind, and the understanding,—these seven should be under-
stood as. being caused by (the knowledge of) qualities. Smell, taste,
colour, sound, touch, numbering the fifth, the objects of the mind, and
the objects of the understanding,—these seven are caused by action.

1 The reading ‘sarvam’in the second line is incorrect, though Nila-
kantla adopts it. The different portions of the fire are indicated as the
different attributes. The smoke is of the form of Darkness (Tamas): the
ashes are the attributes of Passion; while the blazing flame, that into
which the oblation is thrown, is the attribute of Goodness.—T.

2 I give a close rendering of these Verses; without endeavouring to
bring out the sense as explained by the Commentators. The printed texts
are not correct. The text adcpted by Niiakantha differs from that of Arjuna
Misra. The very order of the verses is not uniform in all the texts,—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 51 ===

50 MAHABHARATA

He who smells, he who eats, he who sees, he who speaks, he who
hears, numbering the fifth, he who thinks, and he who understands,—
these seven should be known as caused by the agent. Possessed
of qualities, these enjoy their own qualities, agreeable or disagreeable."
As regards the Soul, that is destitute of qualities. These seven are
the causes of Emancipation. With them that are learned and poss~
essed of sufficient understanding, the qualities, which are in the position;
of deities, eat the oblations, each in its proper place, and agreeably.
to what has been ordained. The person who is ‘destitute of learning,
eating diverse kind of food, becomes seized with the sense of mineness.
Digesting food for himself, he becomes ruined through the sense of
mineness. The eating of food that should not be eaten, and the drink-
ing of wine, ruin him. He destroys the food (he takes), aad having
destroyed that food, he becomes destroyed himself. The man of learn-
ing, however, being possessed of puissance,*destroys his food for re
producing it. The minutest transgression does not arise in him from
the food he takes. Whatever is thought of by the mind, whatever
is uttered by speech, whatever is heard by the ear, whatever is seen
by the eye, whatever is touched by the (sense of) touch, whatever
is smelt by the nose, constitute oblations of clarified butter which
should all, after restraining the senses with the mind numbering the
sixth, be poured into that fire of high merits which burns within the
body, viz., the Soul. The sacrifice constituted by Yoga is going on
as regards myself. The spring whence that sacrifice proceeds is that
which yields the fire of knowledge. The upward life-wind Prana is the
Stotra of that sacrifice. The downward life-wind Apana is its Sastra. The,
renunciation of everything is the excellent Dakshina of that sacrifice,
Consciousness, Mind, and Understanding—these becoming Brahma, are
its Hotri, Adhwaryyu, and Udgatri. The Prasastri, his Sastra, is truth.*
Cessation of separate existence (or Emancipation) is the Dakshina.
In this connection, people conversant with Narayana recite some

1 ‘These’ refers to action, agent and instrument. The qualities of
which they are possessed are goodness, passion, and darkness.—T,

2 What is stated in these two Versesis this: it is the Senses that
enjoy ; and not the Soul. Thisis well known to those that are learned.
On the other hand, those that are not learned, regard this or that to be
theirs, when in reality they are different from them. They are their selves,
and not their senses, although they take themselves for the latter, ineeey
identifying themselves with things whioh they are not.—T.

3 What ie stated here is this: Restraining the senses and the mind,
the objects of those senses and the mind should be poured as libations on
the sacred fire of the Soul that is within the body.—T.

4 i.e. truth is the Sastra of the Prasastri—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 52 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARYVA 51

Richs. Unto the divine Narayana were animals offered in days of
yore, Then are sung some Samanas. On that topic occurs an
authourity. O timid one, know that the divine Narayana is the soul
of all.—’”

SECTION XXVI

“'The Brahmana said,—There is one Ruler. There is no second
beside him. He that is Ruler resides in the heart. I shall speak now of
him. Impelled by Him, I move as directed, like water along an inclined
plane. There is one Preceptor. There is no second beside him. He
resides in the heart, and of him I shall now speak. Be instructed by that
preceptor ; they who are always endued with feelings of animosity are
like snakes. There is one kinsman. There is no second beside him. He
resides in the heart of him I shall now speak. Instructed by him, kinsmen
become possessed of kinsmen, and the seven Rishis, O son of Pritha, shine
in the firmament. There is one dispeller- There is no second beside
him. He resides in the heart. Of him I shall now speak. Having
lived with that instructor under the proper mode of living, Sakra
attained to the sovereignty of all the worlds.? There is one
enemy. There is no second beside him. He resides in the heart. Of him
I shall now speak. Instructed by that preceptor allenakes in the world
are always endued with feelings of animosity. In this connection is cited
the ancient story of the instruction of the snakes, the deities, and the
Rishis by the Lord of allcreatures. The deities and the Rishis, the
snakes, and the Asuras, seated around the Lord of all creatures, asked
him, saying—Let that which is highly beneficial for us be declared.—
Unto them that enquired about what is highly beneficial, the holy one
uttered only the word Om, which is Brahman in one syllable. Hearing
this, they ran away in various directions. Amongst them that thus ran
in all directions from desire of self-instruction, the disposition first arose
in snakes of biting. Of the Asuras, the disposition, born of their nature
for ostentations, pride arose. The deities betook themselves to gifts,
and the great Rishis to self-restraint. Having repaired to one teacher,
and having been instructed (refined) by one word, the snakes, the deities,
the Rishis, and the Danavas, all betook themselves to diverse different
dispositions. It is that one who hears himself when speaking, and appre-
herids it duly. Once, again, is that heard from him when he speaks,

1 ‘Narayana’ is taken by Nilakantha to stand here for either the Veda
or the Soul. The animals offered up to Narayana in days of old were the
senses offered up as sacrifices.—T.

2 ‘Srota’ here means preceptor or dispeller of doubts. ‘Amaratwam’
is the status of the immortal head of all.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 53 ===

53 MAHABHARATA

There is no second preceptor.’ It is in obedience to his counsels that
action afterwards flows. The instruc tor, the apprehender, the hearer, and
the enemy, are pleased within the heart. By acting sinfully in the world
it ishe that becomes a person of sinful deeds. By acting auspiciously
in the world, it is he who becomes a person of auspicious deeds, It is he
who becomes a person of unrestrained conduct by becoming addicted to
the pleasures of sense, impelled by desire. It is he who becomesa
Brahmacharin by always devoting himself to the subjugation of his
senses. It is he, again, that casts off vows and actions and takes refuge
on Brahman alone. By moving in the world, identifying himself the while
with Brahman, he becomes a Brahmacharin. Brahman is his fuel;
Brahman is his fire; Brahman is his origin; Brahman is his water;
Brahman is his preceptor : he is rapt in Brahman. Brahmacharyya is even
so subtle, as understood by the wise. Having understood it, they betook
themselves to it, instructed by the Kshetrajna !?—'"”

SECTION XXVII

“The Brahmana said,—Having crossed that impassible fastness
(the world) which has purposes for its gadflies and mosquitoes, grief and
joy for its cold and heart, heedlessness for its blinding darkness, cupidity
and diseases for i¢s reptiles, wealth for its one danger on the road, and
lust and wrath its robbers, I have entered the extensive forest (of
Brahman.— '

“The wife of the Brahmana said—Where is that foremost, O thou
of great wisdom? What are its trees? What its rivers? Wihash its
mountains and hills ? How far is that forest ?—

“ “The Brahmana said,—There exists nothing that is separate a
it; There is nothing more delightful than it. There is nothing that is
unseparated from it. There is nothing more afflicting than it. There is
nothing smaller than that. There is nothing vaster than that. There is
nothing minuter than that. There is no happiness that can resemble-it.
Regenerate persons, entering into it, at once transcend both joy and
sorrow. They (then) never stand in fear of any creature, nor does any
creature stand in fear of them. In that forest are seven large’ trees,
seven fruits, and seven guests. There are seven hermitages, seven
(forms of) Yoga concentration, and seven (forms) of initiation. Eyen

1 I think Telang is not correct in his rendering of this verse. What
is stated here i is plain, viz., that it is He who is the preceptor and the disci-
“prochyamanam gribnati,'—'tat prichcchatah! ato
s the grammar of the construction. The conclusion
then comes—‘gururanyo na vidyate,—T.

2 One who understands the trutb.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 54 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 58

this a description of that forest.t The trees which stand filling that
forest, produce excellent flowers and fruits of five colours. The trees
which stand there filling that forest, produce flowers and fruits that are
of excellent colours and that are, besides, of two kinds. The trees which
stand there filling that forest, produce flowers and fruits that are
endued with fragrance and that are, besides, of two colours. The trees
which stand there filling that forest, produce flowers and fruits that are
possessed of fragrance and that are, besides, of one colour. The two trees
which stand filling that forest, produce many flowers and fruits that are
of unmanifest colours. There is one fire here, possessed of a good mind.
That is connected with Brahmana. © The five senses are the fuel here.
The seven forms of Emancipation flowing from them are the seven
forms of Initiation. The qualities are the fruits, and the guests eat
those fruits. There, in diverse places, the great Rishis accept hospitality.
When they, having been worshipped, become annihilated, then another
forest shines forth. In that forest, Intelligence is the tree ; Emancipation
is the fruit ;. Tranquillity is the shade of which it is possessed. It has
knowledge for its resting house, contentment for its water, and the Kshe-
trajna for its sun. Its end cannot be ascertained upwards, downwards.
or horizontally. Seven females always dwell there, with faces down-
wards, possessed of effulgence, and endued with the cause of generations.
They take up all the different tastes from all creatures, even as incons-
tancy sucks up truth. In that itself dwell, and from that emerge, the
seven Rishis who are crowned with ascetic success, with those seven
having Vasishtha for their foremost. Glory, effulgence, greatness,
enlightenment, victory, perfection, and energy,—these seven always
follow this same like rays following the sun. Hills and mountains also
exist there, collected together; and rivers and streams bearing waters
in their course,—waters that are born of Brahma. And there happens a
confluence also of streams in the secluded spot for sacrifice. Thence

those that are contented with their own souls proceed to the Grandsire.
Those whose wishes have been reduced, whose wishes have been direc-
ted to excellent vows, and whose sins have been burnt off by penances,
merging themselves in their souls, succeed in attaining to Brahman. Tran-
quillity is praised by those who are conversant with the forest of know-
ledge. Keeping that forest in view, they take birth so as not to lose
courage. Even such is that sacred forest that is understood by Brah-
manas, and understanding it, they live (in accordance with the ordi-
nance), directed by the Kshetrajna—’ ”

1 The seven large trees are the five senses, the mind, and the under-
standing. .The fruits are the pleasures and pains derived from or through
them. The guests are the powers of each sense, for it is they that receive
those pleasures and pains. The hermitages are those very trees under which
the guests take shelter. The seven forms of Yoga are the extinctions of the
seven senses. The seven forms of initiation are the repudiation, one after
another, of the actions of the seven senses.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 55 ===

SECTION XXVIII

“The Brahmana said—I do not smell scents. I do not perceive
tastes. I do not see colours. I donot touch. I do not likewise hear the
diverse sounds (that arise). Nor do I entertain purposes of any kind.
It is Nature that desires such objects as are liked ; it is Nature that
hates such objects as are disliked. Desire and aversion spring from
Nature, after the manner of the upward and the downward life-winds
when souls have entered animate bodies. Separated from them are
others ; in them are eternal dispositions ; (these as also) the soul of all
creatures, Yogins would behold in the body. Dwelling in that, lam
never attached to anything through desire and wrath, and decrepitude
and death. Not having any desire for any object of desire, and not
having any aversion for any evil, there is no taint on my natures, as
there is no taint of a drop of water on (the leaves of) the lotus. Of this
constant (principle) which looks upon diverse natures, they are incons-
tant possessions.' Though actions are performed, yet the assemblage
of enjoyments does not attach itself to them, even as the assemblage of
rays of the sun does not attach to the sky. In this connection is recited
an ancient story of a discourse between an Adhwaryu and a Yati.' Do
thou hear it, O glorious lady. Beholding an animal sprinkled with
water at a sacrificial ceremony, a Yati said unto the Adhwaryu seated
there these words in censure,—This is destruction of life! Unto him
the Adhwaryu said in reply.—This goat will not be destroyed. The
animal (sacrificed) meets with great good, if the Vedic declaration on
this subject be true. That part of this animal which is of earth will go
to earth, That part of this one which is born of water, will enter into
water. His eye will enter the sun; his ear will enter the different
points of the horizon; his life-winds will enter the sky. I who adhere
to the scriptures incur no fault (by assisting at the killing of this
animal).— ;

"The Yati said —If thou beholdest such good to the goat in
this dissociation with (his) life-winds, then this sacrifice is for the goat.
What need hast thou for it? Let the brother, father, mother, and
friend (of this goat) give thee their approval in this. Taking him (to
them) do thou consult them. This goat is especially dependent. It be-
hoveth thee to see them who can give their consent in this. After
hearing their consent, the matter will become fit for consideration.
The life-winds of this goat have been made to return to their respective
sources. Only the inanimate body remains behind. This is what I
think. Of those who wish to enjoy felicity by means of the inanimate

1 The correct reading is ‘bhavantyanityah’ and ‘vahuswabhavan.'—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 56 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 55

body (of an animal) which is comparable with fuel, the fuel (of sacrifice)
is after all the animal himself. Abstention from cruelty is the foremost
of all duties. Even this is the teaching of the elders. We know this is
the proposition, viz.—No slaughter (of living creatures).—If I say any-
thing further, (it will then appear that) diverse kinds of faulty actions
are capable of being done by thee. Always abstaining from cruelty to
all creatures is what meets with our approbation. We establish this
from what is directly perceptible. We do not rely on what is beyond
direct petception.—

“*_The Adhwaryu said—Thou enjoyest the properties of smell
which belong to the earth. Thou drinkest the tastes which appertain
to water. Thou seest colours which belong to lighted bodies. Thou
touchest the properties which have their origin in wind, Thou hearest
the sounds which have their origin in space (or ether). Thou thinkest
thoughts with the mind. All these entities, thou art of opinion, have
life. Thou dost not then abstain from taking life. Really, thou art
engaged in slaughter. There can be no movement without slaughter.
Or, what dost thou think, O regenerate one.—

‘The Yati said,—The Indestructible and the Destructible consti-
tute the double manifestation of the soul. Of these the Indestructible
is existent. The Destructible is said to be exceedingly non-existent.? The
life-wind, the tongue, the mind, the quality of goodness, along with the
quality of passion, are all existent. The Atman is above these forms and
hence is without duality and hope. As regards one that is freed from
these existent objects, that transcends all pairs of opposities, that does not
cherish any expectation, that is alike to all creatures, that is liberated
from the idea of meum, that has subjugated his self, and that is released
from all his surroundings,—for him no fear exists from any source |?

“*_The Adhwaryu said—O foremost of intelligent men, one
should reside with those that are good. Hearing thy opinion my under-
standing shines with light. illustrious one, I_ come to thee, believing
thee to be a god: and I say I have no fault, O regenerate one, by per-
forming these rites with the aid of Mantras !S—

1 ‘Swabhava’ is explained by Nilakantha as ‘sutaram abhava.’—T.

2 The sense seems to be this ; the life-winds indicate the operations of
the several organs of action: the tongue, which stands here forall the
organs of perception, of the sensual perceptions; the mind, of all the
internal operations ; the quality of goodness, of all pleasure; and the
quality of passion, of all kinds of pain. These, therefore include the whole
external andthe internal worlds. He that is free from these, transcends
sin, for sin is destroyed by freedom from these, knowledge being the means
of attaining to that freedom.—T.

8 ‘I have no fault etc.—The sense seems to: be that by doing these
rites with the aidof Mantras I have done that which has been approved
from ages past by those who have always been regarded wise. My eyes,
however, have now been opened by thee. I should not be held responsible
for what I did while I was ignorant.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 57 ===

56 MAHABHARATA

“The Brahmana continued,—With this conclusion, the Yati re-
mained silent after this. The Adhwaryu also proceeded with the great
sacrifice, freed from delusion, The Brahmanas understand Emancipa-
tion, which is exceedingly subtle, to be of this kind and having under
stood it, they live accordingly directed by the Kshetrajna, that beholder
of all topics—’ "

SECTION XXIX

“‘The Brahmana said,—In this connection is cited the ancient
story, O lady, ‘of the discourse between Karttaviryya and the Ocean,
There was a king of the name of Karttaviryya-Arjuna who was endued
with a thousand arms. He conquered, with his bow, the Earth extend-”
ing to the shores of the ocean. It has been heard by us that, once on a®
time, as he was walking on the shores of the sea, proud of his might,
he showered hundreds of’shafts on that vast receptacle of waters. ~The
Ocean, bowing down unto him, said, with joined hands,—Do not, O
hero, shoot thy shafts (at me)! Say, what shallI do to thee. With
these mighty arrows shot by thee, those creatures which have taken’
shelter in me are being killed, O tiger among kings. Do thou, O lord,
grant them security-—

“*_ Arjuna said—If any wielder of the bow: exists that is equal
to me in battle, and that would stand against me in the field, do ie
name him to me !—

“*_The Ocean said,—If thou hast heard, O king, of the great
Rishi Jamadagni, his son is coApetent to duly receive thee as a guest.
—Then that king proceeded, filled with great wrath. Arrived at that
retreat, he found Rama himself. With his kinsmen he began to do
many acts that were hostile to Rama, and caused much trouble to that
high-souled hero. Then the energy, which was immeasurable of Rama
blazed forth, burning the troops of the foe, O lotus-eyed one. Taking:
up his battle-axe, Rama suddenly put forth his power, and hacked that’
thousand-armed hero, like a tree of many branches. Beholding him
slain and prostrated on the earth, all his kinsmen, uniting together, and
taking up their darts, rushed at Rama, who was then seated, from all
sides. Rama also, taking up his bow and quickly ascending on his car,
shot showers of arrows and chastised the army of the king. Then,. some
of the Kshatriyas, afflicted with the terror of Jamadagni’s son, entered
mountain-fastnesses, like deer afflicted by the lion. Of them that were
unable, through fear of Rama, to discharge the duties ordained for theit
order, the progeny became Vrishalas owing to their inability to find
Brahmanas.! In this way Dravidas and Abhiras and Pundras, together

1 Kshbatriyas always require Brahmanas for assisting them in their
acts. These particular Kshatriyas, through fear of Rama, fled to the forests’
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://Awww.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 58 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 57

with the Savaras, became Vrishalas through those men who had Ksha-
triya duties assigned to them (in consequence of their birth), falling
away (from those duties). Then the Kshatriyas that were begotten by
the Brahmanas upon Kshatriya women that had lost their heroic chil-
dren, were repeatedly destroyed by Jamadagni’s son. The slaughter
proceeded one and twenty times. At its conclusion a bodiless voice,
sweet and proceeding from heaven, and which was heard by all people,
spoke to Rama,—O Rama, O Rama, desist! What merit dost thou
see, O son, in thus destroying repeatedly these inferior Kshatriyas ? In
this way, O blessed dame, his grandsires, headed by Richika, addressed
that high-souled one, saying.—Do thou desist.—Rama, however, unable
to forgive the slaughter of his sire, replied unto those Rishis saying,—It
behoves you not to forbid me.—The Pitris then said,—O foremost of
all victorious men, it behoves thee not to slay these inferior Ksha-
triyas. It isnot proper that thyself, being a Brahmana, should slay
these kings.’ "

SECTION XXX

‘The Pitris said—In this connection is cited this old history.
Having heard it, thou shouldst act according to it, O foremost of all
regenerate persons. There was a royal sage of the name Alarka endued
with the austerest of penances. He was conversant with all duties,
truthful in speech, of high soul, and exceedingly firm in his vows.
Having: with his bow, conquered the whole Earth extending to the seas,
and thereby achieved an exceedingly difficult feat, he set his mind
on that which is subtle. While sitting at the root of a tree, his thoughts,
Othou of great intelligence, abandoning all those great feats, turned
towards that which is subtle.

“*_Alarka said\_My mind: has become strong. Having con-
quered the mind, one’s conquest becomes permanent. Though surroun-
ded by foes, I shall (henceforth) shoot my arrows at other objects. Since
in consequence of its unsteadiness, it sets all mortals to accomplish acts,
I shall shoot very sharp-pointed shafts at the mind.—

**_The mind said,—These arrows, O Alarka, will never pierce
me through. -They will pierce only thy own vital partss Thy vital
parts being pierced, thou shalt die. Do thou look out for other arrows

and mountains. They could not, accordingly, find Brahmanas for assisting
them. Their children, therefore, fell away from the status of Kshatriyas
and became Vrishalas or Sudras.—T.

1 ‘Kshtriya-bandhu’ always implies low or inferior Ksbatriyas, as
‘Brahma-bandhu’ implies low or inferior Brahmanas. The expression, very
probably, is similar to Brahman-sangat’ in current Bengali, It does not
surely mean ‘kinsmen of Kshatriyas’.—T.

8 Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 59 ===

58 MAHABHARATA

with which to destroy me. Hearing these words and reflecting upon
them: he said as follows. ‘

“*_Alarka said—Smelling very many perfumes, the nose
hankers after them only. Hence I shall shoot whetted arrows at the’
nose.—

“ ‘The nose said,—These arrows will never cross through me, O
Alarka. They will pierce only thy own vital parts, and thy vital parts
being pierced, thou shalt die- Do thou look for other arrows with which
to destroy me. Hearing these words and reflecting upon them, he said
as follows. ;

“*Alarka said—This one (viz. the tongue), enjoying savoury
tastes, hankers after them only. Hence I shall shoot whetted shafts at
the tongue.

“The tongue said,—These arrows, O Alarka, will not cross
through me. They will only pierce thy own vital parts and thy vital’
parts being pierced, thou shale die- Do thou look for other arrows with
which to destroy me. Hearing these words and reflecting upon them,
he said as follows.

““_Alarka said—The skin, touching diverse objects of touch,
hankers after them only. Hence, I shall tear off the skin with diverse
arrows equipt with the feathers of the Kanka.—— ;

“The skin said.—These arrows will not, O Alarka, cross through
me, They will pierce thy own vital parts only, and thy vital parts be-
ing pierced, thou shalt die. Do thou look for other artows with which
to destroy me,—Hearing these words and reflecting on them, he said
as follow.s

“"_Alarka said,—Hearing diverse sounds, (the ear) hankers after
them only. Hence, I shall shoot whetted shafts at the ear.—

“*_The ear said,—These arrows will not, O Alarka, cross through
me, They will pierce thy own vital parts only, and thy vital parts
being pierced, thou shalt die. Do thou then look for other arrows with
which to destroy me.—Hearing these words and reflecting upon them,
he said as follows. !

“‘Alarka said,—Seeing many colours, the eye hankers after
them only. Hence, I shall destroy the eye with sharp-pointed arrows.—

“‘—The eye said—These arrows will not, O Alarka, cross
through me at all. They will pierce thy own vital parts only, and thy
vital parts being pierced, thou shalt die, Do thou then look for other
arrows with which to destroy me !—Hearing these words and reflecting
upon them, he said as follows,

‘«*_Alarka said,—This (viz., the understanding) forms many, deter-
_ Minations with the aid of ratiocination- Hence, I shall shoot whetted
arrows at the understanding.—

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 60 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 59

“*_The understanding said,—These arrows will not, O Alarka,
cross through me at all. They will pierce thy vital parts only, and thy
vital parts being pierced, thou shalt die. Do thou then look for other
arrows with which to destroy me |—

“The Brahmana continued,—Then Alarka, employing himself, even
there, on penances difficult to perform and exceedingly austere, failed
to obtain, by the high power (of his penances) arrows for casting at
these seven. Endued with puissance, he then, with mind well concen-
trated, began to reflect. Then O best of regenerate ones, Alarka, that
foremost of intelligent men, having reflected for along time, failed to
obtain anything better than Yoga. Setting his mind on one object, he
remained perfectly still, engaged in Yoga.? Endued with energy, he
quickly slew all the senses with one arrow, having entered by Yoga
into his soul and thereby attained to the highest success. Filled with
wonder, that royal sage then sang this verse: Alas, it is a pity that we
should have accomplished all acts that are external! Alas, that we
should have, endued with the thirst for enjoyment, courted (the plea-
sures of) sovereignty before now! I have learnt this afterwards.
There is no happiness that is higher than Yoga——Do thou know this,
ORama. Cease to slay the Kshatriyas. Do thou practise the auste-
rest of penances, Thou wilt then attain to what is good.—Thus
addressed by his grandsires, Jamadagni’s son practised the austerest
penances, and having practised them, that highly blessed one attained

ms

to that success which is difficult to reach._—’

SECTION XXXI

“The Brahmana said,—There are three foes in the world. They
are said to be ninefold, agreeably to their qualities. Exultation, satis-
faction, and joy,—these three qualities appertain to Goodness.? Cupidity,
wrath, and hatred, these three qualities are said to appertain to Passion.
Lassitude, procrastination, and delusion, these three qualities appertain
to darkness. Cutting these with showers of arrows, the man of intelli-
gence, free from procrastination, possessed of a tranquil soul, and with

1 The vocative,‘O foremost of regenerate ones’ applies to Jamadagni's
son. The narration is that of the Pitris. All the copies, however, represnt
this as the Brahmana’s speech to his wife. Indeed, the Brahmana is only
reciting to his wife the speech of the Pitris to Rama. The Yoga here spoken
of is, a8 Nilakantha explains the Raja-Yoga. Previously, Alarka had been

- bent upon Hatha-Yoga which frequently ends in the destruction of the
person practising if.—T.

2 -Praharsha’, rendered ‘oxultation’, is explained:by Nilakantha as the
joy that is felt at the certainty of attaining what is desired. ‘Priti’is that
satisfaction which is felt when the object desired is attained. ‘Ananda’ is
what arises while enjoying the attained object.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 61 ===

60 MAHABHARATA

his senses under subjection, ventures to vanquish others.’ In this
connection, persons conversant with (the occurrence of) ancient cycles
recite some verses which were sung in days of old by king Amvarisha
who had acquired a tranquil soul. When diverse kinds of faults were
in the ascendant and when the righteous were afflicted, Amvarisha of
great fame put forth his strength for assuming sovereignty.? Subduing
his own faults and worshipping the righteous, he attained to great
success and sang these verses.—I have subdued many faults. I have
killed all foes. But there is one, the greatest, vice which deserves to
be destroyed but which has not been destroyed by me! Urged by that
fault, this Jiva fails to attain to freedom from desire. Afflicted by
desire, one runs into ditches without knowing it. Urged by that fault,
one indulges in acts that are forbidden. Do thou cut off, cut off, that
cupidity with sharpeedged swords. From cupidity arise desires. From
desire flows anxiety. The man who yields to desire acquires many
qualities that appertain to passion. When these have been acquired,
he gets many qualities that appertain to Darkness. In consequence of
those qualities, he repeatedly takes birth, with the bondsof body united,
and is impelled to action. Upon the expiration of life, with body beco-
ming dismembered and scattered, he once meets with death which is
due to birth itself.* Hence, duly understanding this, and subduing cupi-
dity by intelligence, one should desire for sovereignty in one’s soul.
This is (tru2) sovereignty. There is no other sovereignty here. The
soul, properly understood, is the king, Even these were the verses sung
by king Ambarisha of great celebrity, on the subject of sovereignty
which he kept before him,—that king who had cut off the one foremost
fault viz., cupidity.’ ”

SECTION XXXII
‘“The Brahmana said,—In this connection is cited the old narra-
tive, O lady, of the discourse between a Brahmana and (king) Janaka.
King Janaka (on a certain occasion), desirous of punishing him, said

1 The sense seems to be this. Having first conquered the internal
foes mentioned, the man of intelligence, bent on effecting his deliverance,
should then seek to vanquish all external foes standing in his way.—T.

2 Nilakantha explains that ‘dosha’ here refers to attachment, cupidity
and the rest ; while ‘Sadhu’ implies not men but the virtues of tranquillity
and the rest.—T,

8 I think Telang renders this verse wrongly. ‘Samhatadehabandhanah”
does not mean ‘with bodily frame destroyed’ but ‘with bodily frame united.’
If ‘samhata’ be taken as destroyed, the compound ‘bhinna-vikirna-dehah’ in
the second line would bea useless repetition. The meaning is that with
bodily frame or the bonds of body united, he takes birth, When he.dies,
that frame becomes dismembered and scattered.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 62 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 61

unto a Brahmana who had become guilty of some offence,—Thou shalt
not dwell within my dominions—Thus addressed, the .Brahmana
replied unto that best of kings, saying—Tell me, O king, what the limits
ate of the territories subject to thee. I desire, O lord, to dwell within
the dominions of another king. Verily, I wish to obey thy behest, O
lord of Earth, agreeably to the scriptures—Thus addressed by that
celebrated Brahmana, the king, hearing repeated and hot sighs, said not
awordin reply, Like the planet (Rahu) overwhelming the Sun, a
cloudedness of understanding suddenly overwhelmed that king of im-
measurable energy as he sat plunged in thought. When that clouded-
ness of understanding passed away and the king became comforted, he
spoke after a short while these words unto that Brahmana.

“*—Janaka said—Although a (large) inhabited tract is subject to
me within this ancestral kingdom of mine, yet I fail to find my domi-
nion, searching through the whole Earth. When I failed to find it on
the Earth, I then searched Mithila (for it). When I failed to find it in
Mithila, I then searched for it among my own children. When I failed
to find it even there, a cloudedness of understanding came over me.
After that cloudedness of understanding passed away, intelligence came
back to me. Then I thought that I have no dominion, or that everything
is my dominion. Even this body is not mine, or the whole Earth is
mine. At the same time, O best of regenerate persons, I think that that
is as much mine as it is of others. Do thou, therefore, dwell (here) as
long as thy choice leads thee, and do thou enjoy as long .as thou
pleasest-—

““‘The Brahmana said,—When there is a large inhabited tract
in thy ancestral kingdom, tell me, depending upon what understanding,
has the idea of meum been got rid of by thee. What also is that under-
standing depending upon which thou hast come to the conclusion that
everything constitutes thy dominion? What, indeed, is the notion
through which thou hast no dominion, or everything is thy dominion ?

“ —Janaka said,—All conditions here, in all affairs, have been
understood by me to be terminable. Hence, I could not find that which
should be called mine.’ (Considering) whose is this, I thought of the
Vedic text about anybody’s property, I could not, therefore, find, by
my understanding, what should be (called) mine.? Depending upon
this .notion, I got rid of idea of mineness- Hear now what that notion
is depending upon which I came to the conclusion that I have dominion

1 The conditions referred to are affluence and indigence, as explained
by Nilakantha.—f. °

2 This is, rather, obscure. Nilakantha observes that the Vedio text
is ; ‘Do not covet anybody's property,’ What Janaka says seems
to be this: Thinking of this probibition about coveting other people's
property, I thought how could it be ascertained what belongs to others.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 63 ===

62 MAHABHARATA

everywhere. I do not desire for my own self those smells that are even
in my nose. Therefore, the earth, subjugated by me, is always subject
to me? I do not desire for my own self those tastes that exist'in con-
tact with even my tongue. Therefore, water, subjugated by me, is
always subject to me. I do not desire for my own self the colour or light
that appertains to my eye. Therefore, light subjugated by me, is always
subject to me. I do not desire for my own self those sensations of touch
which are in contact with even my skin. Therefore, the wind, subju-
gated by me, is always subject to me. I do not desire for my own’self
those sounds which are in contact with even my eat. Therefore sounds,
subjugated by me, are always subject to me. I do not desire for my
own self the mind that is always in my mind. Therefore the mind,
subjugated by me, is subject to me. All these acts of mine are for the
sake of the deities, the Pitris, the Bhutas, together with guests.7—The
Brahmana then, smiling, once more said unto Janaka,—Know that Tam
Dharma, who have come here today for examining thee. Thou art verily
the one person for setting this wheel in motion, this wheel that has the
quality of Goodness for its circumference, Brahman for its nave, ‘and
the understanding for its spokes, and which never turns back 1?

SECTION XXXII 1

“The Brahmana said,—I do not, O timid one, move in this world
in that manner which thou, according to thy own understanding, censu-
rest. Iam a Brahmana possessed of Vedic knowledge, I am emancipated.
Iam a forest recluse. I am an observer of the duties of a house-holder.
L observe vows. I am not what thou seest me in good and bad acts, By
me is pervaded everything that exists in this universe. Whatever crea-
tures exist in the world, mobile or immobile, know that I am the destroy-
er of them all, even as fire is (the destroyer) of all kinds of wood.
Of sovereignty over the whole Earth or over Heaven (on the one hand),
or this knowledge (of my identity with the universe), this knowledge -

1 The sense seems to be this : the property of smell attaches to et
Ido not desire smell for my own enjoyment. If it is perceived, it is
perceived by the organ of smell. The earth, therefore, is subject to me,
not I to the earth. I have transcended my sensations, and, therefore, the
objects to which they inhere. The whole world represents only the objects
of the sensations. The latter being mastered, the whole world has been
mastered by me.—T.

2 i.e., I live and act for these and not my own self.—T,

3 Nilakantha’s reading is erroneous, ‘Brahma-labhasya’ should be
‘Brahmana-bhasya. So also ‘durvarasya’ is incorrect. ‘Nemi’ may’ also
mean the line or track that is made by a wheelas it moves. If taken in
this sense, it would mean ‘that is confined to, or that cannot deviate from
ay Jaa constituted by goodness, The nave, Brahman, is, of course, the

‘edas,—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 64 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 68

is my wealth.’ This is the one path for Brahmanas, by which they who
understand it proceed to house-holds, or abodes in the forest, or
residence with preceptors, or among mendicants.?_ With numerous
unconfused symbols, only one knowledge is worshipped. Those who,
whatever the symbols and modes of life to which they adhere, have
acquired an understanding having tranquillity for its essence, attain to
that one entity even as numerous rivers all meeting the Ocean.* The
path is traversable with the aid of the understanding and not of this
body. Actions have both beginning and end, and the body has actions
for its bonds.* Hence, O blessed lady, thou needst have no apprehension
in respect of the world hereafter. With thy heart intent upon the real
entity, it is my soul into which thou wilt come.—’

SECTION XXXIV

*The Brahmana’s wife said—This is incapable of being understood
by a person of little intelligence as also by one whose soul has not been
cleansed. My intelligence is very little, and contracted, and confused.
Do thou tell me the means by which the knowledge (of which thou
speakest) may be acquired. I wish to learn from thee the source from
which this knowledge flows.

*The Brahmana said,—Know that intelligence devoted to Brahman,
isthe lower Arani; the preceptor is the upper Arani ; penances and
conversance with the scriptures are to cause the attrition. From this is
produced the fire of knowledge.—

“ ~The Brahmana’s wife said,—As regards this symbol of Brahman,
which is designated Kshetrajna, where, indeed, occurs a description of
it by which it is capable of being seized ?

“The Brahmana said,—He is without symbols, and without qualities,
Nothing exists that may be regarded as his cause. I shall, however,
tell thee the means by which he can be seized or not. A good means may
be found ; viz., perception of hearing, etc, as flowers are perceived by bees.
That means consists of an understanding cleansed by action. Those whose
understandings have not been so cleansed, regard that entity, through

1 The sense seems to be this. The sovereignty of the whole Harth or
of Heaven, and this knowledge of my identity with the universe—of these
two alternatives, I would freely choose the latter. Hence, he says’'—This
knowledge is my wealth.'—T.

2 Those are different modes of life.—T.

8 The sense is this: the knowledge to be acquired is that allis one.
Diverse ways there are for acquiring it. Those, again, that have attained
fo tranquillity have acquired it.—T.

4 Actions are perishable and can lead to no lasting result. Itis by
the understanding that that knowledge, leading to what is permanent, is to
be attained.—T.’

Downloaded from https:/Awww.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 65 ===

64 MAHABHARATA

their own ignorance, as invested with the properties of knowledge and
others,’ It is not laid down that this should be done, or that this
should not be done, in the rules for achieving Emancipation,—those,
that is, in which a knowledge of the soul arises only in him who sees and
hears.? One should comprehend as many parts, unmanifest and manifest
by hundreds and thousands, as one is capable of comprehending here.
Indeed, one should comprehend diverse objects of diverse import, and
all objects of direct perception. Then will come, from practice (of
contemplation and self-restraint, etc), that above which nothing exists.*,

“The holy one continued,—‘Then the mind of that Brahmana’s
wife, upon the destruction of the Kshetrajna, became that which is
beyond Kshetrajna, in consequence of the knowledge of Kshetra.’*

“Arjuna said,—'Where, indeed, is that Brahmana’s wife, O
Krishna, and where is that foremost of Brahmanas, by both of whom was
such success attained. Do thou, tell me about them, O thou of unfading
glory." r
The blessed and holy one said,—'Know that my mind is the
Brahmana, and that my understanding is the Brahmana’s wife. .He who
has been spoken of as Kshetrajna is I myself, O Dhananjaya !

1 Texpand this Verse a little for making it intelligible, A literal
version would run as follows :—Good means may be seen, perceived as by
bees. Action is (cleansed) understanding ; through folly it is invested with
the symbols of knowledge. ‘Karmabudhhi’ never means ‘action and know-
ledge’ as rendered by Telang. ‘Abudhitwatt’ means ‘through ignorance.
This ignorance is of those persons whose understandings have not been
cleansed by action.—T.

2 What is stated here is this. Inthe matter of achieving Emancipa-
tion, no ordinances have been laid down, positive or negative, like those in
respect of other things. If one wishes to attain to Heaven, he should do
this and abstain from the other. For achieving Emancipation, however,
only seeing and hearing are prescribed. Seeing implies contemplation, and
hearing, the receiving of instructions from the preceptor. Nilakantha
explaing hearing as ‘Vedantadisravanam’ (vide his comment on the world
‘srutam’ in Verse 3 above).—T.

8 The speaker wishes to inculoate that one should first contemplate:
an object of direct perception, such as earth, etc. Then on such ‘unper-
cieved’ objects as operations of the mind. Such contemplation will gradually
lead to that which is Supreme. The ‘abhyasa’ or practice referred to in the
second line is the practice of ‘sama’, ‘dama,’ eto. I do not think. that
Telang’s version of 8 and 9 brings out the meaning olearly.—tT.

4 The sense is that when her individual soul became merged into the
Supreme soul, she became identified with Brabman. This was, of course, due
to the knowledge of Kshetra as something separate from Kshetrajna—T, |

Downloaded from https:/Awww.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 66 ===

SECTION XXXV

“Arjuna said,—'It behoveth thee to expound Brahma to me,—that
which isthe highest object of knowledge. Through thy favour, my
mind is delighted with these subtle disquisitions.’

“Vasudeva said,—'In this connection is recited the old history of
the discourse between a preceptor and his disciple on the subject of
Brahman. Once on atime, O scorcher of foes, an intelligent disciple
questioned a certain Brahmana of rigid vows who was his preceptor, as
he was seated (at his ease), saying,—What, indeed, is the highest good ?
Desirous of attaining to that which constitutes the highest good, I throw
myself at thy feet, O holy one. O learned Brahmana, I solicit thee,
bending my head, to explain to me what I ask—Unto that disciple, O
son of Pritha, who said so, the preceptor said,—O regenerate one, I shall
explain to thee everything about which thou mayst have any doubts.—
Thus addressed, O foremost one of Kuru’s race, by his preceptor, that
disciple who was exceedingly devoted to his preceptor, spoke as follows,
with joined hands, Do thou hear what he said, O thou of great intelli-
Bence.’

‘The Disciple said,—_Whence am I? Whence art thou? Explain
that which is the highest truth. From what source have sprung all
creatures mobile and immobile ? By what do creatures live? What is
the limit of their life ? What is truth ?> What is penance, O leatned
Brahmana? What are called attributes by the good ? What paths are
to be called auspicious? What is happiness? What is sin? O holy
one, O thou of excellent vows, it behoves thee to answer these questions
of mine, O learned Rishi, correctly, truly, and accurately. Who else
is there in this world than thee that is capable of answering these
questions? Do thou answer them, O foremost of all persons conver-
sant with duties. My curiosity is great. Thou art celebrated in all
the worlds as one well skilled in the duties relating to Emancipation.
There is none else than thou that is competent to remove all kinds
of doubts. Afraid of worldly life, we have become desirous of achiev-
ing Emancipation.

“Vasudeva said,—"Unto that disciple who had humbly sought his
instruction and put the questions duly, who was devoted to his precep-
tor ard possessed of tranquillity, and who always behaved in a manner
that was agreeable (to his instructor), who lived so constantly by the
side of his instructor as to have almost become his shadow, who was
self-restrained, and who had the life of a Yatiand Brahmacharin, O
son of Pritha, that preceptor possessed of intelligence and observant of
vows, duly explained all the questions, O foremost one of Kuru’s race,

O chastiser of all foes.’
9 Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 67 ===

66 MAHABHARATA

‘The preceptor said,—All this was declared (in days of old) by
Brahma himself (the Grandsire of all the worlds) Applauded and
practised by the foremost of Rishis, and depending on a knowledge of
the Vedas, it involvesa consideration of what constitutes the'real entity.
We regard knowledge to be the highest object, and renunciation as the
best penance. He who, with certainty, knows the true object of know-
ledge which is incapable of being modified by circumstances, viz, the
soul abiding in all creatures, succeeds in going whithersoever he wishes
and comes to be regarded as the highest. That learned man who beholds
the residence of all things in one place and their severance as well,
and who sees unity in diversity, succeeds in freeing himself from misery.
He who does not covet anything and does not cherish the idea of
mineness with regard to anything, comes to be regarded, although
residing in this world, as identifiable with Brahman. He who is conversant
with the truth about the qualities of Pradhana (or Nature), acquainted
with the creation of -all existent objects, divested of the idea of mine=
ness, and without pride, succeeds, without doubt, in emancipating him-
self, Understanding properly that great tree which has the unmanifest
for its seed sprout, and the understanding for its trunk, and high cone
sciousness of self for its branches, and the senses for the cells whence its
twigs issue, and the (five) great elements for its flower-buds, and the
gross elements for its smaller boughs, which is always endued with leaves,
which always puts forth flowers, and upon which all existent objects
depend, whose seed is Brahman, and which is eternal,—and cutting’ all
topics with the sharp sword of knowledge, one attains to immortality
and casts off birth and death. The conclusions with regard to the past,
present, and future, etc., and religion, pleasure and wealth, which are
all well known to conclaves of Siddhas, which appertain to remote
cycles, and which are, indeed, eternal, I shall declare to thee, O thou of
Great wisdom. These constitute what is called Good. Men of wisdom,
understanding them in this world, attain to success, In days of old, the
Rishis Vrihaspati and Bharadwaja, and Gautama and Bhargava, and
Vasishtha and Kasyapa, and Viswamitra and Atri, assembled together for
the purpose of asking one another. They thus assembled together after
having travelled over all paths and after they had got tired with the acts
each of them had done. Those regenerate persons, placing the sage son
of Angiras at their head, proceeded tothe region of the Grandsire.
There they beheld Brahma perfectly cleansed of all sin. Bowing their
heads unto that high-souled one who was seated at his ease, the great
Rishis, endued with humility, asked him this grave question regarding
the highest good.—How should a good man act? How would one be re-
leased from sin? What paths are auspicious for us? What is truth,
and what is sin? By what action are the two paths, northern and

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 68 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARYA 67

southern, obtained? What is destruction? What is Emancipation?
‘What is birth and what is death of all existent objects ?—I shall tell thee,
O disciple, what the Grandsire, thus addressed, said unto them, con-
formably to the scriptures. Do thou listen.

—'Brahma said.—It is from Truth that all creatures, mobile and
immobile, have been born. They live by penance (of action). Under
stand this, O ye of excellent vows. In consequence of their own actions
they live, transcending their own origin! For Truth, when united with
qualities, becomes always possessed of five indications. Brahman is
Truth. Penance is truth. Prajapatiis truth. It is from Truth that all
creatures have sprung. Truth is the universe of being. It is for this
that Brahmanas who are always devoted to Yoga, who have transcended
wrath and sorrow, and who always regard Religion as the causeway
(along which every one must pass for avoiding the morass below), take
refuge in Truth. I shall now speak of those Brahmanas who are restrain-
ed by one another and possessed of knowledge, of the orders, and of
those who belong to the four modes of life. The wise say that Religion
or duty is one, (though) having four quarters. Ye regenerate ones, I
shall speak to ye now of that path which is auspicious and productive
of good. That path has constanty been trod over by men possessed of
wisdom in order to achieve an identity with Brahman. I shall speak now
of that path which is the highest and which is exceedingly difficult of
being understood. Do you understand, in all its details, ye highly
blessed ones, what isthe highest seat. The first step has been said to
be the mode of life that appertains to Brahmacharins. The second
step is domesticity. After this is the residence in the woods. After
that it should be known is the highest step. viz., that relating to
Adhyatma.? Light, ether (or space), sun, wind, Indra, and Prajapati,
—one sees these as long as one does not attain to Adhyatma. I shall
declare the means (by which that Adhyatma may be attained) Do ye
first understand them. The forest mode of life that is followed by
ascetics residing in the woods and subsisting upon fruits and roots and
air is laid down for the three regenerate classes, The domestic mode of
life is ordained for all the orders. They that are possessed of wisdom
say that Religion or duty has Faith for its (chief) indication. Thus have
I declared to you the paths leading to the deities. They are adopted
by those that are good and wise by their acts. Those paths are the

1 Their origin is Brahman or Truth. They live, dissociated from their
origin, in consequence of their acts. When their acts cease, they return to
and become merged in Brahman.—T.

2 4. ¢., that course of life which has for its object the acquisition of
knowledge relating to the soul. This, of course, includes the knowledge ,
that is needed for achieving identification with the Oy Soul or
Brabman.—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 69 ===

68 MAHABHARATA

causeways of piety. That person of rigid vows who adopts any one of
these modes separately, always succeeds in time to understand the pro-
duction and destruction of all creatures. I shall now declare, accurately
and with reasons, the elements. which reside in parts in all objects.
The great soul, the unmanifest, egoism (consciousness of indentity), the
ten and one organs (of knowledge and action), the five great elements,
the specific characteristics of the five elements,—these constitute the
eternal creation. The number of elements has been said to be four and
twenty, and one(more). That person of wisdom who understands the
production and destruction of all these elements, that man among all
creatures, never meets with delusion. He who understands the elements
accurately, all the qualities, all the deities, succeeds in cleansing himself
of allsin. Freed from all bonds, such a man succeeds in enjoying all
regions of spotless purity.’?

SECTION XXXVI

‘—Brahma said,—That which is unmanifest, which is indistinct,
all-pervading, everlasting, immutable, should be known to become the
city (or mansion) of nine portals, possessed of three qualities, and con-
sisting of five ingredients. Encompassed by eleven including Mind
which distinguishes (objects), and having Understanding for the ruler,
this isan aggregate of eleven.? The three ducts that are in it support
it constantly. These are the three Nadis. They run continually, and
have the three qualities for their essence, Darkness, Passion, and Good-
ness: These are called the (three) qualities. These are coupled with one
another. They exist, depending on one another. They take refuge in
one another, and follow one another. They are also joined with one
another. The five (principal) elements are characterised by (these)
three qualities. Goodness is the match of Darkness. Of Goodness the
match is Passion. Goodness is also the match of Passion, and of Good-
ness the match is Darkness, There where Darkness is restrained,
Passion is seen to flow. There where Passion is restrained, Goodness is
seen to flow. Darkness should be known to have the night (or obscurity)
for its essence. It has three characteristics, and is (otherwise) called
Delusion. It has unrighteousness (or sin) also for its indication, and ‘it
is always present in all sinful acts. This is the nature of Darkness and
it appears also as confined with others. Passion is said to have activity

1 The specific characteristics of the five elements are, as frequently
referred before, smell attaching to earth, sound to ether, taste to water, etc.
The deities referred to in the last Verse are probably the senses —T.

2 The total eleven is made up of the three qualities, the five
elements, the group of organs and senses as one, egoism and the under-
standing. —T.

Downloaded from https:/Awww.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 70 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 69

for its essence. It is the cause of successive acts. When it prevails,
its indication, among all beings, is production. Splendour, lightness,
and faith,—these are the form, that is light, of Goodness among all
creatures, as regarded by all good. men. The true nature of their
characteristics will now be declared by me, with reasons. These shall be
stated in aggregation and separation. Do ye understand them. Complete
delusion, ignorance, illiberality, indecision in respect of action, sleep,
haughtiness, fear, cupidity, grief, censure of good acts, loss of memory,
unripeness of judgment, absence of faith, violation of all rules of con-
duct, want of discrimination, blindness, vileness of behaviour, boastful
assertions of performance when there has been no performance, pre-
sumption of knowledge in ignorance, unfriendliness (or hostility),
evilness of disposition, absence of faith, stupid reasoning, crookedness,
incapacity for association, sinful action, senselessness, stolidity, lassitude,
absence of self-control, degradation,—all these qualities are known as
belonging to Darkness. Whatever other states of mind, connected with
delusion, exist in the world, all appertain to Darkness. Frequent ill-
speaking of other people, censuring the deities and the Brahmanas,
illiberality, vanity, delusion, wrath, unforgiveness, hostility towards all
creatures, are regarded as the characteristics of Darkness. Whatever
undertakings exist that are unmeritorious (in consequence of their being
vain or useless), what gifts there are that are unmeritorious (in conse-
quence of the unworthiness of the donees, the unseasonableness of the
time, the impropriety of the object, etc.), vain eating,—these also
appertain to Darkness. Indulgence in calumny, unforgiveness, animo-
sity, vanity, and absence of faith are also said to be characteristics of
Darkness. Whatever men there are in this world who are characterised
by these and other faults of a similar kind, and who break through the
restraints (provided by the scriptures), are all regarded as belonging to
the quality of Darkness. I shall now declare the wombs where these
men, who are always of sinful deeds, have to take their birth, Ordained
to go to hell, they sink in the order of being. Indeed, they sink into
the hell of (birth in) the brute creation. They become immobile entities,
or animals, or beasts of burden; or carnivorous creatures, or snakes,
or worms, insects, and birds; or creatures, of the oviparous order, or
quadrupeds of diverse species, or lunatics, or deaf or dumb human
beings, or men that are afflicted by dreadful maladies and regarded as
unclean. These men of evil conduct, always exhibiting the indications of
their acts, sink in Darkness. Their course (of migrations) is always
downwards. Appertaining to the quality of Darkness, they sink in
Darkness. I shall, after this, declare what the means are of their
improvement and ascent; indeed, by what means they succeed in attain-
ing to the regions that exist for men of pious deeds. Those men who

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 71 ===

10 MAHABHARATA

take birth in orders other than humanity, by growing up in view of the
religious ceremonies of ‘Brahmanas devoted to the duties of their own
order and desirous of doing good to all creatures, succeed, through the
aid of such purificatory rites, in ascending upwards. Indeed, struggling
(to improve themselves), they at last attain to the same regions with
these pious Brahmanas. Verily, they go to Heaven. Even this is the
Vedic audition.!’ Born in orders other than humanity and growing old
in their respective acts, even thus they become human beings that are,
of course, ordained to return. Coming to sinful births and becoming
Chandalas or human beings that are deaf or that lisp indistinctly, they
attain to higher and higher. castes, one after another in proper turn,
transcending the Sudra order, and other (consequences of) qualities that _
‘appertain to Darkness and that abide in it in course of migrations in —
this world? Attachment to objects of desire is regarded as great
delusion. Here Rishis and Munis and deities become deluded, desirous
of pleasure. Darkness, delusion, the great delusion, the great obscurity
called wrath, and death, that blinding obscurity, (these are the five
Sreat afflictions). As regards wrath, that is the great obscurity (and not
aversion or hatred as is sometimes included in the list). With respect
then to its colour (nature), its characteristics, and its source, I have, ye
learned Brahmanas, declared to you, accurately and in due order,
everything about (the quality of) Darkness. Who is there that truly
understands it ? Who is there that truly sees it? That, indeed, ‘is the
characteristic of Darkness, viz., the beholding of reality in’ what is not
real. The qualities of Darkness have been declared to you in various
ways. Duly has Darkness, in its higher and lower forms, been described
to you, That man who always bearsin mind the qualities mentioned
here, will surely succeed in becoming freed from all characteristies that
appertain to Darkness.

SECTION XXXVII
“Brahman said,—Ye best of beings, I shall now declare to you
accurately what (the quality of) Passion is. Ye highly blessed ones, do
you understand what those qualities are that appertain to Passion. In-
juting (others), beauty, toil, pleasure and pain, cold and heat, lordship

1 'Anyatha pratipannah’ is explained by Nilakantha as ‘born in other
orders.’ Telang takes it as ‘Behaving in a contrary way.’ How can goats
and sheep behave otherwise ?’ The sense seems to be that those born as
goats, succeed in ascending upwards through the efficacy of the religious
acts of the Brahmanas. By becoming sacrificial victims they regain their
true position.—T.

2 Qualities abiding in Darkness etc.,imply those qualities ate are
permanently attached to Darkness.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://Awww.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 72 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA nm

\
(or power), war, peace, argument, dissatisfaction, endurance,’ might,
valour, pride, wrath, exertion, quarrel (or collision), jealousy, desire,
malice, battle, the sense ‘of .meum or. mineness, protection (of others),
slaughter, bonds, and affliction, buying and selling, lopping off, cutting,
Piercing and cutting off the coat of mail that another has worn,” fierce-
ness, cruelty, vilifying, pointing out the faults of others, thoughts
entirely devoted to worldly affairs, anxiety, animosity, reviling of
others, false speech, false or vain gifts, hesitancy and doubt, boastfulness
of speech, dispraise and praise, laudation, prowess, defiance, attendance
(as on the sick and the weak), obedience (to the commands of precep-
tors and parents), service or ministrations, harbouring of thirst or
desire, cleverness or dexterity of conduct, policy heedlessness, contume-
ly, possessions, and diverse decorations that prevail in the world
among men, women, animals, inanimate things, houses, grief, incre-
dulousness, vows and regulations, actions with expectation (of good
result), diverse. acts of public charity, the rites in respect of Swaha
salutations, rites of Swadha and Vashat,. officiating at the sacrifices of
others, imparting of instruction,. performance of sacrifices, study, making
of gifts, acceptance of gifts, rites‘of expiation, auspicious acts, the wish to
have this and that, affection generated by the merits of the object for
which or whom it is felt, treachery, deception, disrespect and respect,
theft, killing, desire of concealment, vexation, wakefulness, ostentation,
haughtiness, attachment, devotion, contentment, exultation, gambling,
indulgence in scandal, all relations arising out of women, attachment to
dancing, instrumental music and songs—all these qualities, ye learned
Brahmanas, have been said to- belong to Passion. Those men on Earth
who meditate on the past, present, and the future, who are devoted to
the aggregate of three, viz,, Religion, Wealth, and Pleasure, who acting
from impulse of desire, exult on attaining to affluence in respect of
every desire, are said to be enveloped by Passion. These men have
downward courses. Repeatedly reborn in this world, they give them-
selves up to pleasure. They covet what belongs to this world as also all
those fruits that belong to the world hereafter. They make gifts, accept
Sifts, offer oblations to the Pitris,.and pour libations on the sacrificial
fire- The qualities of Passion have (thus) been declared to you in their
variety. . The course of conduct also to which it leads has been properly
described to you. The man who always understands these qualities,
succeeds in always freeing himself from all of them which appertain to
Passion.’ ”

* “1 Some texts read ‘Santapah’ and not ‘Sanghatah.’ The meaning
then will be grief or sorrow.—T.

2 This may refer to the exposure of other people's weaknesses by
tearing open their veils or covers.—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabKarata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 73 ===

SECTION XXXVIII

“*Brahmana said,—I shall, after this, discourse to you on that
excellent quality which is the third (in the order of our enumeration).
It is beneficial to all creatures in the world, and unblamable, and consti-
tutes the conduct of those that are good. Joy, satisfaction, nobility,
enlightenment, and happiness, absence of stinginess (or liberality),
absence of fear, contentment, disposition for faith, forgiveness, courage,
abstention from injuring any creature, equability, truth, straightforward-
ness, absence of wrath, absence of malice, purity, cleverness, prowess,
(these appertain to the quality of Goodness). He who is devoted to the
duty of Yoga, regarding knowledge to be vain, conduct to be vain,
service to be vain, and mode of life to be vain, attains to what is highest
in the world hereafter. Freedom from the idea of meum, freedom from
egoism, freedom from expectations, looking on all with an equal eye,
and freedom from desire,—these constitute the eternal religion of the
good. Confidence, modesty, forgiveness, renunciation, purity, absence
of laziness, absence of cruelty. absence of delusion, compassion to all
creatures, absence of the disposition to calumniate, exultation, satisfac-
tion, rapture, humility, good behaviour, purity in all acts having for
their object the attainment of tranquility, righteous understanding,
emancipation (from attachments), indifference, Brahmacharyya, com-
plete renunciation, freedom from the idea of meum, freedom from
expectations, unbroken observance of righteousness, belief that gifts are
vain, sacrifices are vain, study is vain, vows are vain, acceptance of
gifts is vain, observance of duties is vain, and penances are vain—those
Brahmanas in this world, whose conduct is marked by these virtues, who
adhere to righteousness, who abide in the Vedas, are said to be wise and
possessed of correctness of vision. Casting off all sins and freed from grief,
those men possessed of wisdom attain to Heaven and create diverse
bodies (for themselves), Attaening the power of governing everything,
self-restraint, minuteness, these high-souled ones make by operations of
their own mind, like the gods themselves dwelling in Heaven. Such
men are said to have their courses directed upwards. They are veritable
gods capable of modifying all things. Attaining to Heaven, they modify
all things by their very nature. They get whatever objects they desire
and enjoy them.?’ Thus have I, ye foremost of regenerate ones, des-
cribed to you what that conduct is which appertains to the quality of
goodness. Understanding these duly, one acquires whatever objects one
desires. The qualities that appertain to goodness have been declared

1 'Vibhajanti’ implies enjoyments in this connection, Telang starts
a needless objection to this word.—T. y '

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 74 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA * 73

particularly. The conduct which those qualities constitute has also
been properly set forth, That man who always understands these
qualities, succeeds in enjoying the qualities without being attached to
them,’ ”

~ SECTION XXXIX

“ *_Brahmana said,—‘The qualities are incapable of being declared
as completely separate from one another. Passion and Goodness and
Darkness are seen existing in a state of union. They are attached to one
another. They depend onone another. They have one another for
their refuge. They likewise follow one another. As long as goodness
exists, so long does Passion exist. There is no doubt in this. As long as
Darkness and Goodness exist, so long does Passion exist. They make
their journey together, in union, and moving collectively. They, verily,
move in body, when they act with cause or without cause. Of all these
which act with one another, however much they may differ in their
development, the manner in which their increase and diminution take
place will now be declared. There where Darkness exists in an increased
measure, in the lower creatures (for example), Passion exists in a
smaller measure and Goodness ina measure that is stillless. There
where Passion exists in a copious measure, in creatures of middle course,
Darkness exists in a smaller measure and Goodness in a measure that
is still less) There where Goodness exists in a copious measure, in
creatures of upward courses, Darkness should be known to exist ina
small measure and Passion ina measure that is still less. Goodness is
the spring that causes the modifications of the senses, It is the great
enlightener. No duty has been laid down that is higher than Goodness.
They who abide in Goodness proceed upwards. They who abide in
Passion remain in the middle. They who abide in Darkness, being
characterised by qualities that are low, sink downwards, Darkness
occurs in the Sudra ; Passion in the Kshatriya ; and Goodness, which is
the highest, in the Brahmana. The three qualities exist even thus in the
three orders. Even from a distance, the three qualities of darkness and
Goodness and Passion, are seen to exist ina state of union and more
collectively. They are never seen ina state of separation.’ Beholding
the sun rising, men of evil deeds become inspired with fear. Travellers
on their way become afflicted with heat, and suffer distress. The Sun
is Goodness developed ; men of evil deeds represent Darkness; the
heat which travellers on their way feel is said to be a quality of Passion.
The sun representing light is Goodness; the heat is the quality of
Passion ; the shading (or eclipse) of the sun on Parvana days should be

1 ‘From even a distance’ implies that upon even & cursory view ;
without even being examined minutely. —T.

Ll Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 75 ===

74 MAHABHARATA

known to represent Darkness.» Even thus, the three qualities exist in
all luminous bodies. They act by turnsin diverse places in diverse
ways. Among immobile objects, the quality of Darkness exists in a very
large measure. The qualities appertaining to Passion are those proper-
ties of theirs which undergo constant changes. Their oleaginous
attributes appertain to Goodness. The Day should be understood as
threefold. The Night has been ordained to be threefold. So also are
fortnight, months, years, seasons, and conjunctions.? The gifts that are
made are threefold. Threefold is sacrifice that flows. Threefold are
the worlds ; threefold the deities ; threefold is knowledge ; and threefold
the path or end. The Past, the Present, and the Future, Religion,
Wealth, and Pleasure; Prana, Apana, and Udana, these also are fraught
with the three qualities. Whatever object exists in this world, every-
thing in it is fraught with the three qualities. The three qualities act
by turns in all things and in all circumstances, Verily, the three
qualities always act inan unmanifest form. The creation of those three,
viz., Goodness, Passion, and Darkness, is eternal. The unmanifest, con-
sisting of the three qualities, is said to be darkness, unperceived, holy,
constant, unborn, womb, eternal, Nature, change or modification,
destruction, Pradhana, production, and absorption, undeveloped, not
small (i.c., vast), unshaking, immovable, fixed, existent, and non-existent.
All these names should be known by those who meditate on matters
connected with the soul. That person who accurately knows all the
names of the unmanifest, and the qualities, as also the pure operations
(of the qualities), is well conversant with the truth about all distinctions
and freed from the body, becomes liberated from all the qualities and
enjoys absolute happiness.”

SECTION XL

“_Brahmana said,—From the unmanifest first sprang Mabat (the
Great Soul) endued with great intelligence, the source of all the qualities,
That is said to be the first creation. The Great Soul is signified by these

1 What is said hereis this: the three qualities exist in even the
immobile objects of the universe. As regards Darkness, if predominates
in them. As regards Passion, it dwells in such properties of theirs as
pungency, sourness, sweetness, ete, which change with time or in congequ-
ence of cooking or through admixture. Their ovly properties are said to
appertain to Goodness. ‘Tiryagbhavagatam’ is explained by Nilakantha as
‘adhikyam gatam.’ Telang thinks this is unwarrantable. His own version,
however, of the first line is untenable. What can be the ‘tiryagbhava’ or
‘form of lower species’ of immobile objects ? Telang frequently forgets that
Nilakantha represents a school of interpretation not founded by him but
which existed from a time long anterior to him.—T.

2 ‘Conjunctions’ are evidently the periods joining the seasons , 4.¢.,
the close of one season and the beginning of another.—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 76 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 15

synonymous words—the Great Soul, Intelligence, Vishnu, Jishnu,
Sambhu of great .valour, the Understanding, the means of acquiring
knowledge, the means of perception, as also fame, courage, and memory.
Knowing this, a learned Brahmana has never to encounter delusion. It
has bands and feet on every side, it has earson every side. It stands,
pervading everything in the universe. Of great power, that Being is
stationed inthe heart of all. Minuteness, Lightness and Affluence,
are his. He is the lord of all, and identical with effulgence, and knows
not decay. In Him are all those who comprehend the nature of the
understanding, all those who are devoted to goodness of disposition, all
those who practise meditation, who are always devoted to Yoga, who
ate firm in truth, who have subdued their senses, who are possessed of
knowledge, who are freed from cupidity, who have conquered wrath,
who are of cheerful hearts, who are endued with wisdom, who are
liberated from ideas of meum (and tewm), and who are devoid of egoism.
Allthese, freed from every kind of attachment, attain to the status of
Greatness. That person who understands that holy and high goal, viz.,
the Great Soul, becomes freed from delusion. The self-born Vishnu
becomes the Lord in the primary creations. He who thus knows the
Lord lying in the cave, the Supreme, Ancient Being, of universal form,
the golden one, the highest goal of all persons endued with understand-
ing,—that intelligent man lives, transcending the understanding.”

_ SECTION XLI

“_Brahmana said,—That. Mahat who was first produced is called
Egoism. When it sprang up as I, it came to be called asthe second
creation. That Egoism is said to be the source of all creatures, for
these have sprung from its modifications. It is pure effulgence and is
the supporter of consciousness. It is Prajapati. It is a deity, the
creator of deities, and of mind. It is that which creates the three
worlds. Itis saidto be that which feels—J am all thisThat is the
eternal world existing for those sages who are contented with knowledge
relating to the soul, who have meditated on the soul, and who have won
success by Vedic study and sacrifices. By consciousness of soul one
enjoys the qualities. That source of all creatures, that creator of -all
creatures, creates (all creatures) even in thisway. It is that which
causes all changes. It is that which causes all beingsto move. By its
own light it illuminates the universe likewise.”

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 77 ===

SECTION XLII

‘Brahmana said,—From Egoism were verily born the five great ele-
ments. They are earth, air, ether, water, and light numbering the fifth.
In these five great elements, in the matter of the sound, touch, colour,
taste, and smell, all creatures become deluded. When at the close of
the destruction of the great elements, the dissolution of the universe
approaches, ye that are possessed of wisdom, a great fear comes upon
all living creatures. Every existent object is dissolved into that from
which it is produced. The dissolution takes place in an order that is
the reverse of that in which creation takes place. Indeed, as regards
birth, they are born from one another. Then, when all existent objects,
mobile and immobile, become dissolved, wise men endued with power-
ful memory never dissolve. Sound, touch, colour, taste, and smell
numbering the fifth, are effects. They are, however, inconstant, and
called by the name of delusion. Caused by the production of cupidity,
not different from one another, without reality, connected with flesh
and blood. and depending upon one another, existing outside the soul,
these are all helpless and powerless. Prana and Apana, and Udana and
Samana and Vyana,—these five winds are always closely attached to the
soul. Together with speech, mind, and understanding, they constitute
the universe of eight ingredients. He whose skin, nose, ear, eyes, tougue,
and speech are restrained, whose mind is pure, and whose understand-
ing deviates not (from the right path), and whose mind is never burnt
by those eight fires, succeeds in attaining to that auspicious Brahman
to which nothing superior exists. Those which have been called the
eleven organs and which have sprung from Egoism, I shall now, ye
regenerate ones, mention particularly. They'are the ear, the skin, the
two eyes, the tongue, the nose numbering the fifth, the two feet, the
lower duct, the organ of generation, the two hands, and speech forming
the tenth. These constitute the group of organs, with mind numbering
as the eleventh. One should first subdue this group. Then will
Brahman shine forth (in him). Five amongst these are called organs of
knowledge, and five, organs of action. The five beginning with the ear
are truly said to be connected with knowledge. The rest. however, that
are connected with action, are without distinction. The mind should be
regarded as belonging to both. The understanding is the twelfth in the
top. Thus have been enumerated the eleven organs in due order, Learned
men, having understood these, think they have accomplished everything.
I shall, after this, enumerate all the various organs. Space (or Ether)
is the first entity. As connected with the soul, it is called the ear. As
connected with objects, that is sound. The presiding deity (of this) is the

quarters. The Wind is the second entity. As connected with the soul,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 78 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA i

itis known as the skin. As connected with objects, it is known as
objects of touch; and the presiding deity there is touch. The third is
.said to be Light. As connected with the soul, it is known as the eye.
As connected with objects, it is colour; and the sun is its deity. The
fourth (entity) should be known as Water. As connected with the soul,
it is said to be the tongue. As connected with objects, it is taste, and
the presiding deity there isSoma. The fifth entity is Earth. As con-
nected with the soul, it is said to be thenose. As connected with
objects, it is scent ; and the presiding deity there is the wind. Thus has
the manner been declared of how the five entities are divided into sets
of three. After this I shall declare everything about the diverse (other)
organs. Brahmanas conversant with the truth say that the two feet are
mentioned as connected with the soul. As connected with objects, it is
motion ; and Vishnu is there the presiding deity. The Apana wind,
whose motion is downward, as connected with the soul, is called the lower
duct. As connected with objects, it is the excreta that is ejected; and ©
the presiding deity there is Mitra. As connected with the soul, the organ
of generation is mentioned, the producer of all beings. As connected with
objects, it is the vital seed ; and the presiding deity is Prajapati. The
two hands are-mentioned as connected with the soul by persons conver-
sant with the relations of the soul. As connected with objects, it is
actions ; and the presiding deity there is Indra, Next, connected with the
soul is speech whice relates to all the gods. As connected with objects,
it is what is spoken. The presiding deity there is Agni. As connected
with the soul, the mind is mentioned, which moves within the soul of the
five elements.’ As connected with objects, it is the mental operation ;
and the presiding deity is Chandramas (moon). As connected with the
soul is Egoism, which is the cause of the whole course of worldly life.
As connected with objects, it is consciousness of self; and the presiding
deity there is Rudra. As connected with the soul is the understanding,
which impels the six senses. As connected with objects, it is that which
is to be understood, and the presiding deity there is Brahman. Three are
the seats of all existent objects. A fourth is not possible. These are land,
water, and ether. The mode of birth is fourfold. Some are born of
e&gs ; some are born of germs which spring upwards, penetrating through
the earth ; some are born of filth ; and some are born of fleshly balls in
wombs. Thus is the mode of birth seen to be of four kinds, of all living
creatures. Now, there are other inferior beings and likewise those that
range the sky. These should be known to be born of eggs as also those
which crawl on their breasts. Insects are said to be born of filth, as also
other creatures of a like description. This is said to be the second mode

1 This probably implies that the mind, through the aid of the senses,
enters into all things or succeeds in knowing them.—T.

Downloaded from https:/Avww.holybooks.com
https:/Avww.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 79 ===

18 MAHABHARATA

of birth and is inferior. Those living creatures that take birth after the
lapse of some time, bursting through the earth, are said to be germ-born

beings, ye foremost of regenerate persons. Creatures of two feet or of.

many feet and those which move crookedly, are the beings born of
wombs, Among them are some that are deformed, ye best of: men:
The eternal womb of Brahma should be known to be of two kinds, viz;
Penance and meritorious acts. Such is the doctrine of the learned.
Action should be understood to be of various kinds, such as sacrifice,
gifts made at sacrifices, and the meritorious duty of study for every one
that is born ; such is the teaching of the ancients. He who duly undet+
stands this, comes to be regarded as possessed of Yoga, ye chief of regene>
tate persons. Know also that sucha man becomes freed too from all
his sins, I have thus declared to you duly the doctrine of Adhyatma.?
Ye Rishis conversant with all. duties, a knowledge of this is acquired
by those who are regarded as persons of knowledge. Uniting all these
together, viz., the senses, the objects of the senses, and the five great
entities, one should hold them in the mind. When everything ‘is
attenuated (by absorption) in the mind, one no longer esteems the ‘pleas
sures of life, Learned men, whose understandings are furnished with
knowledge, regard that as true happiness.* I shall after this, tell thee
of renunciation with respect to all entities by means, gentle and hard,
which produces attachment to subtle topics and which is fraught with
auspiciousness. That conduct which consists in treating the qualities as
not qualities, which is free from attachment, which is living alone,
which does not recognise distinctions, and which is full of Brahman, is
the source of all happiness. The learned man who absorbs all desires
into himself from all sides like the tortoise withdrawing all its limbs,
who is devoid of passion, and who isreleased from everything, becomes
always happy. Restraining all desires within the soul, destroying his

1 The sense seems to be that through these one succeeds in taking
birth as a Brahmana.—tT.

2 A repetition occurs here of about 5 Verses. The passage is evident-
ly an interpolation originally caused by carelessness.—T.

3 Nilakantha explains that this implies that one should regard these
as really undistinguished from the mind. Indeed, created by the mind
itself, these shozld always be taken as having no real existence heyond
the mind.—tT.

4 ‘That’ here refers to the attenuation of all things by absorption
into the mind.—T.

5 'Gunagunam’ is treating the qualities as not qualities ; i.e, regard-
ing bravery, magnanimity, etc., as really not merits, for these lead to pride.
‘Ekacharyyam’ ‘is ekantavasam.' i. ¢., life in-seclusion, or living without
depending upon others. ‘Anantaram’ is ‘nirastasamastabheda’ or non-
recognition of all distinctions. Some texts read ‘Brahmanatah’ meaning
‘existing among Brahmanas.’ ‘Ekapadam sukham' is ‘samastasukhagar-
bham,’ 4. ¢., the source or fountaia of all happiness.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 80 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 79

thirst, concentrated in meditation, and becoming the friend of good
heart towards all creatures, he succeeds in becoming fit for assimilation
with Brahman. Through repression of all the senses which always hanker
after their objects, and abandonment of inhabited places, the Adhyatma

. fire blazes forth in the man of contemplation. As a fire, fed with fuel,

becomes bright in consequence of the blazing flames it puts forth, even
so, in consequence of the repression of the senses, the great soul puts
forth its effulgenee. When one with a tranquil soul beholds all entities
in one’s own heart, then, lighted by one’s own effulgence, one attains
to that which is subtler than the subtle and which is unrivalled in excel-
lence. It is settled that the body has fire for colour, water for blood and
other liquids, wind for sense of touch, earth for the hideous holder of
mind (viz., flesh and bones, etc-), space (or ether) for sound; that it is
pervaded by disease and sorrow; that it is overwhelmed by five cur-
rents: that it is made up of the five elements: that it has nine doors and
two deities ;} that it is full of passion ; that it is unfit to be seen (owing
to its unholy charaeter) ; that it is made up of three qualities; that it
has three constituent elements, (viz., wind, bile and phelgm); that it
is delighted with attachments of every kind, that it is full of delusion.?
It-is difficult of being moved in this mortal world, and it rests on the
understanding as its support. That body is, in this world, the wheel of
Time that is continually revolving.* That (body), indeed, is a terrible
and unfathomable ocean and is called delusion. It is this body which
stretches forth, contracts, and awakens the (whole) universe with the
(very) immortals.‘ By restraining the senses, one casts off lust, wrath,
fear, cupidity, enmity, and falsehood, whieh are eternal and, therefore,
exceedingly difficult to cast off.5 He who has subjugated these in this
world, viz,, the three qualities and the five constituent elements of the
body: has the Highest for his seat in Heaven. By him is Infinity

1 The two deities are Jiva and Iswara.—T.

2 The correct reading, in 53 seems to be ‘samsargabhiratam’ and not
‘samsayabhivafam.’—T,

8 In the second line, the correct words are ‘martya’ and ‘sarva.’ The
sense of the second line seems to be that this body is ceaselessly revolving,
for Emancipafon is difficult to achieve. Hence this body is, as it wer
the wheel of Mme. Nilakantha’s explanation does not seem to be satic-
factory.—T.

4 Ido not think that Telang is correct in bis version of this Verse.
What is aaid here seems to be this. The body is,as it were, the wheel of
Time ; the body is the ocean of delusion ; the body is the creator, destroyer
and reawakener of the universe, Through the body creatures act, and
hence creation, destruction, and re-creation are due to the body. This
aecords with what is said elsewhere regarding the body.—T.

5 It would be wrong to take ‘satah’ as implying ‘the good,’ the finite
verses in every text being singulav.—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 81 ===

80 MAHABHARATA

attained. Crossing the river. that has the five senses for its steep banks
the mental inclinations for its mighty waters, and delusion for its lake,
one should subjugate both lust and wrath. Such a man freed from all
faults, then beholds the Highest, concentrating the, mind within the mind
and seeing self in self. Understanding all things, he sees his self, with
self, in all creatures, sometimes as one and sometimes as diverse, changing
form from time to time.' Without doubt, he can perceive numerous
bodies like a hundred lights from one light. Verily, he is Vishnu, and
Mitra, and Varuna, and Agni, and Prajapati. He is the Creator and the
ordainer : he is the Lord possessed of puissance, with faces turned in all
directions. In him, the heart of all creatures, the great soul, becomes
resplendent. Him all conclaves of learned Brahmanas, deities and
Asuras, and Yakshas, and Pisachas, the Pitris, and birds, and bands of
Rakshasas, and bands of ghostly beings, and all the great Rishis,
praise,—'"

SECTION XLIII

“«""Brahmana said,—Among men, the royal Kshatriya is (endued
with) the middle quality. Among vehicles, the elephant (is so); and
among denizens of the forest the lion; among all (sacrificial) animals,
the sheep; among all those that live in holes, is the snake ; among
cattle, the bovine bull ; among females, the mule.? There is no doubt
in this that in this world, the Nyagrodha, the Jamvu, the Pippala. the
Salmali, and Sinsapa, the Meshasringa, and the Kichaka, are the foremost
ones among tress.* Himavat, Paripatra, Sahya, Vindhya, Trikutavat,
Sweta, Nila, Bhasa, Koshthavat, Guruskandha, Mahendra and Malyavat,
—these are the foremost of mountains, Likewise the Maruts are the
foremost of the Ganas, Surya is the lord of all the planets, and
Chandramas of all the constellations. Yama is the lord of the Pitris;
Ocean is the lord of all rivers. Varuna is the king of the waters. Indra
is said to be the king of the Maruts. . Arka is the king of all hot bodies,
and Indra of all luminous bodies, Agni is the eternal lord of the ele-
ments, and Vrihaspati of the Brahmanas. Soma is the lord of (deciduous)
herbs, and Vishnu is the foremost of all that are endued with might.
Tashtri is the king of Rudras, and Siva of all creatures. Sacrifice is the

1 The correct reading seems to be‘atmana’as the last word of the
first line, and not ‘atman.'—T. ’

2 What is said here is that the quality of passion predo- minates
in these.—T.

8 Nyagrodha is the Ficus Bengalensis, Linn, Jamvuis Eugenia
Jambolana, Lamk. Pippalais Ficus religiosa, Linn. Salmali is Bombaz
Malabaricum. Sinsapa is Dalbergia Sissoo, Roxb. Meshasringa is |Asclepia
geminata, Roxb. Kichaka is avariety of mountain bamboo. Here however ‘
it evidently implies the Nimba or Melia Azadirachta, Linn.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://Awww.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 82 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 81

foremost of all initiatory rites, and Maghavat of the deities. The
North is the lord of all the points of the compass ; Soma of great energy
is the lord of all learned Brahmanas. Kuvera is the lord of all precious
gems, and Purandara of all the deities. Such is the highest creation
among all entities. Prajapati is the lord of all creatures. Of all entities
whatever, I, whoam fullof Brahman, am the foremost. There is no
entity that is higher than myself or Vishnu. The great Vishnu, who is
full of Brahma, is the king of kings over all. Know him to be the ruler,
the creator, the uncreated Hari. He is the ruler of men and Kinnaras
and Yakshas and Gandharvas, and Snakes and Rakshasas, and deities and
Danavas and Nagas. Among those that are followed by persons full of
desire is the great goddess Maheswari of beautiful eyes. She is otherwise
called by the name of Parvati. Know that the goddess Uma is the
* foremost and the most auspicious of women. Among women that are a
source of pleasure, the foremost are the Apsaras who are possessed of
great splendour.?_ Kings are desirous of acquiring piety, and Brahmanas
afte causeways of piety. Therefore, the king should always strive to
protect the twice-born ones. Those kings in whose dominions good men
languish are regarded as bereft of the virtues of their order. Hereafter
they have to go into wrong paths. Those kings in whose dominions good
men are protected, rejoice in this world and enjoy happiness hereafter.
Verily, those high-souled ones attain to the highest seat. Understand
this, ye foremost of regenerate ones- I shall after this state the ever-
lasting indications of duties. Abstention from injury is the highest
duty. Injury is an indication of unrighteousness. Splendour is the
indication of the deities. Men have acts for their indications. Ether
(or space) has sound for its characteristic. Wind has touch for its
characteristic. The characteristic of lighted bodies is colour, and water
has taste for its characteristic. Earth, which holds all entities, has
smell for its characteristic. Speech has words for its characteristic,
refined into vowels and consonants. Mind has thought for its charac-
teristic. Thought has, again, been said to be the characteristic of the
understanding. The things thought of by the mind are ascertained with
accuracy by the understanding. There is no doubt in this, viz., that the
understanding, by perseverance, perceives all things, The characteristic
of mind is meditation. The characteristic of the good man is to live
unperceived.? Devotion has acts for its characteristic. Knowledge is
the characteristic of renunciation. Therefore keeping knowledge, before

1 Nilakantha is for taking the second line as consisting of two propo-
sitions. It would be better to take ‘satinam’ as referring to ‘strinam’, and
‘vasumatyah, as an adjective of ‘Apsarasah’.—T.

2 The sense seems to be that good men never allow others to know
what their acts are. They are strangers to ostentation,—T.

1L Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 83 ===

82 MAHABHARATA

his view, the man of understanding should practise renunciation, The
man who has betaken himself to renunciation and who is possessed of
knowledge, who transcends all pairs of opposites, as also darkness, death,
and decrepitude, attains to the highest goal. I have thus declared to
you duly what the indications are of duty. I shall, after this, tell you of
the seizure (comprehension) of qualities. Smell, which appertains to
earth, is seized by the nose. The wind, that dwells in the nose is like-
wise appointed (as an agent) in the perception of smell. Taste is the
essence of water. That is seized by the tongue. Soma, who resides in
the tongue, is appointed likewise in the perception of taste. The
quality of alighted body is colour. That is seized by the eye. Aditya
who always resides in the eye has been appointed in the perception of
colour. Touch always appertains to the wind (asits quality). That is
perceived by the skin. The wind that always resides in the skin has
been appointed in apprehending touch. The quality of ether is
sound. That is seized by the ear. All the quarters, which reside in the
ear, have been appointed in apprehending sound. The quality of the
mind is thought, That is seized by the understanding. The upholder
of consciousness, residing in the heart, has been appointed in appre-
hending the mind. The understanding is apprehended in the form of
determination or certitude, and Mahat in the form of knowledge. The
unperceived (Prakriti) has been, it is evident, appointed for the seizure
of all things after certitude. There is no doubt in this.! The Kshetrajna
which is eternal and is destitute of qualities as regards its essence, is
incapable of being seized by symbols. Hence, the characteristic of the
Kshetrajna, which is without symbols, is purely knowledge. The un-
manifest resides in the symbol called Kshetra, and is that in which the
qualities are produced and absorbed. I always see, know,.and hear it
(though) it is hidden. Purusha knows it; therefore is he called
Kshetrajna. The Kshetrajna perceives also the operations of the qua-
lities and absence of their operations. The qualities, which are created
repeatedly, do not know themselves, being unintelligent, as entities to
be created and endued with a beginning, middle, and end. No one else

attains, only the Kshetrajna attains, to that which is the highest and
great and which transcends the qualities and those entities which are
born of the qualities. Hence one who understands duties, casting off
qualities and the understanding, and having his sins destroyed, and
transcending the qualities, enters the Kshetrajna. One that is free
from all pairs of opposites, that never bends his head to any one, that is
divested of Swaha, that is immovable, and homeless, is the Kshetrajna,
He is the Supreme Lord. -

1 The sense seems to be that the knowledge of one's own identity and
of things as discriminated from one another is presided over by Prakriti.
It the question is asked whence is the knowledge—'I am so,' and that ‘this
is 80,’ the answer is that it comes from Prakriti or Nature.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 84 ===

SECTION XLIV

“Brahmana said,—I shall now tell you truly abouf‘all that which
has a beginning, middle, and end, and which is endued with name and
characteristics, together with the means of apprehension. It has been
said that the Day was first. Then arose Night. The Months are said to
have the lighted fortnights first, The constellations have Sravana for
their first ; the Seasons have that of dews (viz., Winter) for their first.
Earth is the source of all smells; and Water of all tastes. The solar
light is the source of all colours; the Wind of all sensations of touch.
Likewise, of sound the source is space (or Ether). These are the
quillities of elements. I shall, after this, declare that which is the first
and the highest of all entities. The sun is the first of all lighted bodies.
Fire is said to be the first of all the elements. Savitri is the first of all
branches: of learning. Prajapati is the first of all the deities. ‘The
syllable Om is the first of all the Vedas, and the life-wind Prana is the
first of all winds. All that is called Savitri which is prescribed in this
world.’ The Gayatri is the first of all metres ; of all (sacrificial) animals
the first is the goat. Kine are the first of all quadrupeds. The twice-
born ones are the first of all human beings. The hawk is the first of all
birds. Of sacrifices the-first is the pouring of clarified butter on the
fire. Of all reptiles the first, O foremost of regenerate ones, is the
snake: The Krita is the first of all the Yugas ; there is no doubt in this,
Gold’is the first of all precious things. Barley is the first of all plants.
Food is the first of all things to be eaten or swallowed. Of all liquid
substances to be drunk, water is the foremost. Of all immobile entities
without distinction, Plaksha is said to be the first, that ever holy field
of Brahman. Of all the Prajapatis I am the first. There is no doubt in
this. Of inconceivable soul, the self-existent Vishnu is said to be my
superior.? Of all the mountains the great Meru is said to be'the’first-
born. Of all the cardinal and subsidiary “points of the horizon, the
eastern is said to be the foremost and first-born. Ganga of three courses
issaid tobe the first-born of all rivers. Likewise, of all wells and
resetvoirs of waters, the ocean is said to be the first-born. Iswara is'the
supreme Lord of all the deities and Danavas and ghostly beings and
Pisachas, and snakes and Rakshasas, and human beings and Kinnaras and
Yakshas, The great Vishnu, who is full of Brahma, than whom there

1 As explained by Nilakantha, the word ‘Savitri’ is used here to imply
all forms of worship observed by Brahmanas, etc., and the Mlecchas as well.
This turning back to explain a word used before ie in to be an instance of
“Jooking back like the lion.”"—T.

2 Telang, I think, renders this Verse wrongly. In the first line it is
said that. Brahman is superior to the Prajapatis. In the second it ‘is
pointed out that Vishnu is superior to Brahman.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 85 ===

84 MAHABHARATA

isno higher being in the three worlds, is the first of all the universe.
Ofall the modes of life, that of the householder is the first. Of this there
is no doubt. The Unmanifest is the source of all the worlds as, indeed,
that isthe end of every thing. Days end with the sun's setting and
Nights with the sun’s rising. The end of pleasure is always sorrow, and
the end of sorrow is always pleasure. All accumulations have exhaus-
tion for their end, and all ascent have falls for their end. All associa-
tions have dissociations for their end, and life has death for its end,
All action ends in destruction, and all that is born is certain to meet
with death. Every mobile and immobile thing in this world is transient.
Sacrifice, gift, penances, study, vows, observances,—all these have
destruction for their end. Of Knowledge, there is no end. Hence, one
that is possessed of a tranquil soul, that has subjugated his senses, that
is freed from the sense of meum, that is devoid of egoism, is released
from all sins by pure knowledge.’

SECTION XLV

‘Brahmana said—The wheel of life moves on. It has the under-
standing for its strength ; the mind for the pole (on which it rests); the
group of senses for its bonds, the (five) great elements for its nave,
and home for its circumference.' It is overwhelmed by decrepitude
and grief, and it has diseases and calamities for its progeny. That wheel
relates in time and place. It has toil and exercise for its noise. Day
and Night are the rotations of that wheel. It is encircled by heat and
cold. Pleasure and pain are its joints,and hunger and thirst are the
nails fixed into it. Sun-shine and shade are the ruts (it causes). It is
capable of being agitated during even such a short space of time as’ is
taken up by the opening and the closing of the eyelid. It is enveloped
in the terrible waters of delusion. It is ever revolving and void of
consciousness. It is measured by months and half-months. It is not
uniform (being everchanging), and moves through all the worlds.
Penance and vowsare its mud. Passion’s force is its mover. It is
illuminated by the great egoism, and is sustained by the qualities.
Vexations (caused by the non-acquisition of what is desired) are the
fastenings that bind it around. It revolves inthe midst of grief and
destruction. It is endued with actions and the instruments of action,
It is large and is extended by attachments. It is rendered unsteady by
cupidity and desire. It is produced by variegated Ignorance. It is

1 1t is difficult to understand which part of the wheel is intended to
be expressedly ‘bandhanam’ or the bond; 1 take it for the spokes. ‘Pariskan-
dha’ is ‘Samuha’ or the materials that together compose an object. Here
it may be taken for the nave or centre. Home is called the circumference,
because, as the circumference limits the wheel, even so home (wife and
children) limits the affections and acts of life—T.

Downloaded from https:/Awww.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 86 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 86

attended upon by fear and delusion, and is the cause of the delusion of
all beings. It moves towards joy and pleasure, and has desire and wrath
for its possession. It is made up of entities beginning with Mahat and
ending with the gross elements. It is characterised by production and
destruction going on ceaselessly. Its speed is like that of the mind, and
it has the mind for its boundary.! This wheel of life that is associated
with pairs of opposites and devoid of consciousness, the universe with
the very immortals should cast away, abridge, and check. That man
who always understands accurately the motion and stoppage of this wheel
of life, is never seen to be deluded, among all creatures. Freed from
all impressions, divested of all pairs of opposites, released from all sins,
he attains to the highest goal. The householder, the Brahmacharin, the
forest recluse and the mendicant,—these four modes of life have all’
been said to have the householder’s mode for their foundation. What-
ever system of rules is prescribed in this world, their observance is
beneficial. Such observance has always been highly spoken of. He who
has been first cleansed by ceremonies, who has duly observed vows, who
belongs in respect of birth to a race possessed of high qualifications, and
who understands the Vedas, should return (from his preceptor’s house).?
Always devoted to his wedded spouse, conducting himself after the
manner of the good, with his senses under subjugation, and full of faith,
one should in this world perform the five sacrifices. He who eats what
remains after feeding deities and guests, who is devoted to the obser-
ance of Vedic rites, who duly performs according to his means sacrifi-
ces and gifts, who is not unduly active with his hands and feet, who is
not unduly active with his eye, who is devoted to penances, who is not
unduly active with his speech and limits, comes under the category of
Sishta or the good. One should always bear the sacred thread, wear
white (clean) clothes, observe pure vows, and should always associate
with good men, making gifts and practising self-restraint. One should
subjugate one’s lust and stomach, practise universal compassion, and be
characterised by behaviour that befits the good. One should bear a
bamboo-stick, and a water-pot filled with water. Having studied, one
should teach ; likewise should also make sacrifices himself and officiate
at the sacrifices of others. One should also make gifts made to oneself.
Verily, one’s conduct should be characterised by these six acts. Know

“1 The words 'Kalachakram pravartate’ have been rendered in the first
verse of this lesson. In verse 9, the words ‘asaktaprabhavapavyam’ are
explained by Nilakantha differently. ‘Manas-krantom,’ I take, is equival-
ent to be bounded by the mind,’ I do not know whence Telang gets ‘never
fatigued’ as the substitute of this word.—T,

2 Implying that he should go to the house of his preceptor, study and
serve there, and after completing his course, return for leading a life of
domesticity.—T. P

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 87 ===

86 MAHABHARATA

that three of these acts should constitute the livelihood of the Brahma-
nas, viz, teaching (pupils), officiating at the sacrifices of others, and the
acceptance of gifts from a person that is pure. As to the other duties
that remain, numbering three, viz., making of gifts, study, and sacrifice,
these are accompanied by merit-! Observant of penances, self-restra-
ined, practising universal compassion and forgiveness, and looking upon
all creatures with an equal eye, the man that is conversant with duties
should never be heedless with regard to those three acts. The learned
Brahmana of pure heart, who observes the domestic mode of life and
practises rigid vows, thus devoted and thus discharging all duties to the
best of his power, succeeds in conquering Heaven.”’

SECTION XLVI

“‘Brahmana said,—Duly studying thus to the best of his power, in
the way described above, and likewise living as a Brahmacharin, one
that is devoted to the duties of one’s own order, possessed of learning,
observant of penances, and with all the senses under restraint, devoted
to what is agreeable and beneficial to the preceptor, steady in practis-
ing the duty of truth, and always pure, should, with the permission of
the preceptor, eat one’s food without decrying it. He should eat
Havishya made from what is obtained in alms, and should stand, sit,and
take exercise (as directed). He should pour libations on the fire twice
aday, having purified himself and with concentrated mind. He should
always bear a staff made of Vilwa or Palasa.* The robes of the régene-
rate man should be linen, or of cotton, or deer-skin, ora cloth that-is |
entirely brown-red. There should also be a girdle made of Munja-grass.
He should bear matted locks on head, and should perform his ablutions
every day, He should bear the sacred thread, study the scriptures,
divest himself of cupidity, and be steady inthe observance of vows.
He should also gratify the deities with oblations of pure water, his
mind being restrained the while. Sucha Brahmacharin is worthy of
applausee With vital seed drawn up and mind concentrated, one that
is thus devoted succeeds in conquering Heaven. Having attained to
the highest seat, he has not to return to birth. Cleansed by all purifica-
tory rites and having lived asa Brahmacharin, one should next go out

1 The sense seems to be that these last three duties are productive
of merit and should, therefore, be performed. The first three however, are
sources of living.—T.

2 ‘Havishya’ is food cooked ins particular way and offered fo the
deities. It must be free from meat. There may be milk or ghee in it, but
the cooking must be done in a single pot or vessel continuously ; no change
of vessels is allowed.—T.

8 Vilwa is the Agle marmelos, and Palasais the Butea nr of
Roxburgh.—T.

Downloaded from https:/Awww.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 88 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARYA 87

of one’s village and next live asan ascetic in the woods, having
renounced (all attachments). Clad in animal skins or barks of trees, he
should perform his ablutions morning and evening. Always living
within the forest, he should never return to an inhabited place.
Honouring guests when they come, he should give them shelter, and
himself subsist upon fruits and leaves and common roots, and Syamaka,
He should, without being slothful subsist on such water as he gets, and
air, and all forest products. He should live upon these, in due order,
according to the regulations of his initiation. Heshould honour the
guest that comes to him with alms of fruits and roots. He should then,
without sloth, always give whatever other food he may have, Restrain-
ing speech the while, he should eat after gratifying deities and guests.
His mind should be free from envy. He should eat little, and depend
always on the deities. Self-restrained, practising universal compassion,
and possessed of forgiveness, he should wear both beard and hair
(without submitting to the operations of the barber). Performing
sacrifices and devoting himself to the study of the scriptures, he should
be steady in the observance of the duty of truth. With body always
in a state of purity, endued with cleverness, ever dwelling in the forest,
with concentrated mind, and senses in subjection, a forest-recluse, thus
devoting himself, would conquer Heaven. A householder, or Brahma-
charin, or forest-recluse. who would wish to achieve Emancipation,
should have recourse to that which has been called the best course of
conduct. Having granted unto all creatures the pledge of utter absten-
tion from harm, he should thoroughly renounce all action. He should
contribute to the happiness of all creatures, practise universal friendli-
ness, subjugate all his senses, and be an ascetic. Subsisting upon food
obtained without asking and without trouble, and that has come to him
spontaneously, he should make a fire. He should make his round of
mendicancy in a place whence smoke has ceased to curl up and where
all the inhabitants have already eaten.? The person who is conversant
with the conduct that leads to Emancipation should seek for alms after
the vessels (used in cooking) have been washed. He should never
rejoice when he obtains anything, and never be depressed if he
obtains nothing. Seeking just what is needed for supporting life, he
should, with concentrated mind, go about his round of mendicancy,

1 At first he should live on fruits and roots and leaves, eto, Next on
water, and then on air, There are different seots of forests recluses. The
course of life is settled at the time of the initiatory rites.—T.

2 What is stated here is this. The Sannyasin should not ask for
alms : or, if he ever seeks for alms, he should seek them in a village or
house where the cooking has been already done and where every one has
glready eaten, This limitation is provided as otherwise the Sannyasin may
be fed to his fill by the householder who sees him.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 89 ===

88 MAHABHARATA

waiting for the proper time. He should not wish for earnings in common
with others, nor eat when honoured. The man who leads the life of
mendicancy should conceal himself for avoiding gifts with honout.
While eating, he should not eat such food as forms the remains of
another's dish, nor such as is bitter, or astringent, or pungent. He
should not also eat such kinds of food as have a sweet taste. He should
eat only so much as is needed to keep him alive. The person conver-
sant with Emancipation should obtain his subsistence without obstruct-
ing any creature. In his rounds of mendicancy he should never follow
another (bent on the same purpose). He should never parade his piety;
he should move about in a secluded place, freed from passion. Either
an empty house, or a forest, or the foot of some tree, ora river, ora
mountain-cave, he should have recourse to for shelter. In summer he
should pass only one night in an inhabited place ; in the season of rains:
he may live in one places He should move about the world like a
worm, his path pointed out by the Sun. From compassion for creatures,
he should walk on the Earth with his eyes directed towards it. He
should never make any accumulations and should avoid residence with
friends. The man conversant with Emancipation should every day do
all his acts with pure water. Such a man should always perform’ his
ablutions with water that has been fetched up (from the river or the
tank). Abstention from harm, Brahmacharyya, truth, simplicity, free-
dom from wrath, freedom from decrying others, self-restraint, and
habitual freedom from backbiting: these eight vows, with senses
restrained, he should steadily pursue. He should always practise a sinless
mode of conduct, that is not deceptive and not crooked. Freed from
attachment, he should always make one who comes as a guest eat (at
least) a morsel of food. He should eat just enough for livelihood, for
the support of life. He should eat only such food as has been obtained
by righteous means, and should nor pursue the dictates of desire. He
should never accept any other thing than food and clothing only. He
should, “again, accept only as much as he can eat and nothing more. He
should not be induced to accept gifts from others, nor should he make
gifts to others. Owing to the helplessness of creatures, the man of
wisdom should always share with others. He should not appropriate
what belongs to others, nor should he take anything without being
asked. He should not, having enjoyed anything become so attached to
it as to desire to have it once more. One should take only earth and
water and pebbles and leaves and flowers and fruits, that are not owned
by any body, as they come, when one desires to do any act, One
should not live by the occupation of an artisan, nor should one covet

1 He should never plunge into a stream or lake or tank for bathing.
—T, 5

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 90 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 89

gold. One should not hate, nor teach (one that does not seek to be
taught); nor should one have any belongings. One should eat only
what is consecrated by faith. One should abstain from controversies.
One should follow that course of conduct which has been said to be
wnectarine. One should never be attached to anything, and should never
enter into relations of intimacy with any creature. One should not
perform, nor cause to perform, any such action as involves expectation
of fruit or destruction of life or the hoarding of wealth or articles. Re-
jecting all objects, content with a very little, one should wander about
(homeless), pursuing an equal behaviour towards all creatures mobile and
immobile. One should never annoy another being; nor should one be
annoyed with another. He who is trusted by all creatures is regarded
as the foremost of those persons that understand Emancipation. One
should not think of the past, nor feel anxious about the future, One
should disregard the present, biding time, with concentrated mind.*
One should never defile anything by eye, mind, or speech. Nor should
one do anything that is wrong, openly or in secret. Withdrawing
one's senses like the tortoise withdrawing its limbs, one should atten-
uate one’s senses and mind, cultivate a thoroughly peaceful under-
standing, and seek to master every topic. Freed from all pairs of
opposites, never bending one’s head in reverence, abstaining from the
rites requiring the utterance of Swaha, one should be free from mine-
ness, and egoism. With cleansed soul, one should never seek to acquire
what one has not and protect what one has, Free from expectations,
divested of qualities, wedded to tranquillity, one should be free from
all attachments and should dependon none. Attached to one’s own self
and comprehending all topics, one becomes emancipated without doubt.
Those who perceive the self, which is without hands and feet and back,
which is without head and without stomach, which is free from the
operation of all qualities, which is absolute, untainted, and: stable,
which is without smell, without taste and touch, without colour, and
without sound, which is to be comprehended (by close study), which
is unattached, which is without flesh, which is free from anxiety, unfad-
ing, and divine, and, lastly, which though dwelling in a house resides in
all creatures, succeed in escaping death. There the understanding reaches
not, nor the senses, nor the deities, nor the Vedas, nor sacrifices, nor the
regions (of superior bliss), nor penance, nor vows. The attainment to
it by those who are possessed of knowledge is said to be without com-
prehension of symbols. Hence, the man who knows the properties of

x 1 'Kalakankhi' implies, probaby ‘simply biding time,’ i.e. allowing
time to pass indifferently over him —T.

12 Downloaded from https:/;Avww.holybooks.com
nicer uate coekercon manabharatseallvollmmes!ine12-0df-fless

=== PAGE 91 ===

90 MAHABHARATA

that which is destitute of symbols, should practise the truths of piety.’
The learned man, betaking himself to a life of domesticity, should adopt
that conduct which is conformable to true knowledge. Though un-
deluded, he should practise piety after the manner of one that is deluded,
without finding fault with it. Without finding fault with the practices
of the good, he should himself adopt such a conduct for practising
piety as may induce others to always disrespect him, That man who
isendued with sucha conduct is said to be the foremost of ascetics,
The senses, the objects of the senses, the (five) great elements, mind,
understanding, egoism, the unmanifest, Purusha also, after comprehend-
ing these duly with the aid of correct inferences, one attains to Heaven,
released from all bonds. One conversant with the truth, understanding
these at the time of the termination of his life, should meditate,
exclusively resting on one point. Then, depending on none, one attains
to Emancipation. Freed from all attachments, like the wind in space,
with his accumulations exhausted, without distress of any kind, he
attains to his highest goal.’

SECTION XLVII
“ ‘Brahmana said,—The ancients who were'utterers of certain truth,
say that Renunciation is penance. Brahmanas, dwelling in that which
has Brahma for its origin, understand Knowledge to be high Brahma.”

Brahma is very far off, andits attainments depends upon a knowledge-

of the Vedas. It is free from all pairs of opposites, it is divested
of all qualities; it is eternal ; it is endued with unthinkable qualities ;
it issupreme. It is by knowledge and penance that those endued with
wisdom behold that which is the highest. Verily, they that are of un-
tainted minds, that are cleansed of every sin, and that have transcend-
edall passion and darkness (succeed in beholding it). They who are
always devoted to renunciation, and who are conversant with the
Vedas, succeed in attaining to the supreme Lord who is identical with
the path of happiness and peace, by the aid of penance. Penance, it
has been said, is light. Conduct leads to peity. Knowledge is said- to
be the highest. Renunciation is the best penance. He who understands
self through accurate determination of all topics, which is unperturbed,
which is indentical with Knowledge, and which resides in all entities,
succeeds in going everywhere. That learned man who beholds asso-
ciation, and dissociation, and unity in diversity, is released from misery.

1 The sense seems to be this ; the self or soul is without qualities.
He who knows the self, or rather he who pursues the self with the desire of
knowing it, should practise the truths of piety laid down above. They
constitute the path that leads to the self.—T.

2 ‘That which bas Brahman for its origin’ implies the Vedas.—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 92 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 91

He who never. desires for anything, who despises nothing, becomes
eligible, even when dwelling in this world, for assimilation with
Brahma. He who is conversant with the truths about qualities of -
Pradhana, and understands the Pradhana as existing in all-entities
who is free from mineness and egoism. without doubt becomes
emancipated. He who is freed from all pairs of opposites, who
does not bend his head to any body, who has transcended the rites of
Swadha,; succeeds by the aid of tranquillity alone in attaining to that
which is free from pairs of opposites, which is eternal, and which is
divested of qualities, Abandoning all action, good or bad, developed
from qualities, and casting off both truth and falsehood, a creature,
without doubt, becomes emancipated. Having the unmanifest for the
seed of its origin, with the understanding for its trunk, with the great
principle of egoism for its assemblage of boughs, with the senses for the
cavities of its little sprouts, with the (five) great elements for its large
branches, the objects of the senses for its smaller branches, with leaves
that are ever present, with flowers that always adorn it and with fruits
both agreeable and disagreeable always produced, is the eternal tree of
Brahman which forms the support of all creatures. Cutting and piercing
that tree with knowledge of truth as the sword, the man of wisdom,
abandoning the bonds which are made of attachment and which cause
birth, decrepitude and death, and freeing himself from mineness and
egoism, without doubt, becomes emancipated, These are the two birds,
which are immutable, which are friends, and which should be known as
unintelligent. That other who is different from these two is called the
Intelligent. When the inner self, which is destitute of knowledge of
nature, which is (as it were) unintelligent, becomes conversant with
that which is above nature, then, understanding the Kshetra, and en-
dued with an intelligence that transcends all qualities and apprehends
everything, one becomes released from all sins.’

SECTION XLVIII

“**_Brahmana said,—Some regard Brahman as a tree. Some regard
Brahman as a great forest- Some regard Brahman as unmanifest. Some
regard it as transcendant and freed from every distress. They think that
all this is produced from and absorbed into the unmanifest. He who,
even for the short space of time that is taken by a single breath, when
his end comes, becomes equable, attaining to the self, fits himself for
immortality. Restraining the self in the self, even for the space of a wink,
one goes, through the tranquillity of the self, to that which constitutes
the inexhaustible acquisition of those that are endued with knowledge,
Restraining the life-breaths again and again by controlling them according
to the method called Pranayama, by the'ten or the twelve, he attains

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 93 ===

92 MAHABHARATA

to that which is beyond the four and twenty. Thus having first acquired
a tranquil soul, one attains to the fruition of all one’s wishes.1 When
the quality of Goodness predominates in that which arises from the
Unmanifest, itbecomes fit for immortality. They who are conversant with
Goodness applaud it highly, saying that there is nothing higher than
Goodness. By inference we know that Purusha is dependent on Goodness.
Ye best of regenerate ones, it is impossible to attain to Purusha by any
other means. Forgiveness, courage. abstention from harm, equability,
truth, sincerity, knowledge, gift, and renunciation, are said to be the
characteristics of that course of conduct which arises out of Goodness.
It is by this inference that the wise believe in the identity of Purusha and
Good-ness. There is no doubt in this. Some learned men that are devoted
to knowledge assert the unity of Kshetrajna and Nature. This, how-
ever, is not correct. It is said that Nature is different from Purusha :
that also will imply a want of consideration, Truly, distinction. and
association should be known (asapplying to Purusha and Nature).
Unity and diversity are likewise laid down. That is the doctrine of the
learned. In the Gnat and Udumvara both unity and diversity are seen.
As a fish in water is different from it, such is the relation of the two
(viz, Purusha and Nature). Verily, their relation is like that of water
drops on the leaf of the lotus,’

“'The preceptor continued,—Thus addressed, those learned
Brahmanas, who were the foremost of men, felt some doubts and (there-
fore) they once more questioned the Grandsire (of all creatures).?

1 Commentators differ about what is implied by the ten or the twelve,
Nilakantha thinks that the ten mean the eight characteristics of Yoga, viz.,
Yama, Niyama, Asana,Pranayama, Pratyahara, Dharana, Dhyana, Samadhi,
and Tarka and Vairagya. The twelve would imply the first eight, and
these four, viz., Maitri, Karuna, Mudita,and Upeksha. If ten plus twelve
or two and twenty be taken, then that number would be made up by the five
modes of Yama, the five of Niyama, the remaining six of Yoga (beginning
with Asana and ending with Samadhi), the four beginning with Maitri, oul
the two, viz., Tarka and Vairagya.—T.

2 What is said in this Lesson seems to be this: the Unmanifest or
Prakriti is that condition in which all the three qualities of Goodness,
Passion, and Darkness exist in a state of combination. The unmanifest is
the condition existing before creation. When one particular quality, viz.,
Goodness prevails over the others, there arises Purusha, viz., that from
whom everything flows. The relation of Purusha and Nature is both
unity and diversity. The three illustrations of the Gnat and the Udumbara
the fish and water, and water drops and the lotus leaf, explain the relation
between Purusha and Nature. He is in Nature, yet different from it,
There is both association and dissociation.—T.

‘ Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com —
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 94 ===

SECTION XLIX

— “'The Rishis said,—Which among the duties is deemed to be the
most worthy of being performed? The diverse modes of duty, we sees
ate contradictory. Some say that (it remains) after the body (is des-
troyed). Others say that it does not exist. Some say that everything
is doubtful. Others have no doubts.‘ Some say that the eternal
(principle) is not eternal. Some say that it exists, and some that it exists
not. Some say it is of one form, or two-fold, and others that it is mixed.
Some Brahmanas who are conversant with Brahman and utterers of truth
regard it to be one. Others, that it is distinct ; and others again that
it is manifold. Some say that both time and space exist ; others, that it
isnot so. Some bear matted locks on their heads and are clad in deer-
skins. Others have shaven crowns and go entirely naked. Some are
for entire abstention from bathing, and some for bathing. Such
differences of views may be seen among deities and Brahmanas conver-
sant with Brahman and endued with perceptions of truth. Some are for
taking food ; while some are devoted to fasts. Some applaud action;
others applaud perfect tranquillity. Some applaud Emancipation ; some,
various kinds of enjoyments. Some desire diverse kinds of wealth;
some, poverty. Some say that means should be resorted to; others,
that this is not so. Some are devoted toa life abstention from harm;
others are addicted to destruction. Some are for merit and glory;
others say that this is not so. Some are devoted to goodness; others
are established on doubt. Some are for pleasure; some are for pain.
Other people say:that it is meditation. Other learned Brahmanas say
that it is Sacrifice. Others, again, say that it is gift. Others applaud
penances ; others, the study of the scriptures. Some say that knowledge
and renunciation (should be followed). Others who ponder on the
elements say that it is Nature. Some extol everything; others, nothing.
O foremost one of the deities, duty being thus confused and full of con-
tradictions of various kinds, we are deluded and unable to come to any
conclusion. People stand up for acting, saying,—This is good,—This is
good—He that is attached to acertain duty applauds that duty as the
best: For this reason our understanding breaks down and our mind is
distracted. We, therefore, wish, O best of all beings, to know what is
good.« It behoves thee to declare to us, after this, what is (so) mysteri-
ous, and what is the cause of the connection between the Kshetrajna
and Nature. Thus addressed by those learned Brahmanas, the illustrious
creator of the worlds, endued with great intelligence and possessed of a
righteous soul, declared to them accurately what they asked.’—"

1 The doubts appertain to duties, that is whether they should be

done or not, and whether they have any effects here and hereafter.—T.
Downloaded from hitps://www.holybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 95 ===

SECTION L

“—'Brahmana said,— Well then, I shall declare to you what you ask.
Learn what was told by a preceptor toa disciple that came unto him.
Hearing it all, do you settle properly (what it should be). Abstention
from harming any creature is regarded as the foremost of all duties.
That is the highest seat, free from anxiety and constituting an indication
of holiness. The ancients who were beholders of the certain truth, have
said that knowledge is the highest happiness. Hence, one becomes
released of all sins by pure knowledge. They that are engaged in des-
truction and harm, they that are infidels in conduct, have to go to Hell
in consequence of their being endued with cupidity and delusion. . Those
who, without procrastination, perform acts, impelled thereto by expecta-
tion become repeatedly born in this world and sport in joy. Those men
who, endued with learning and wisdom, perform acts with faith, free
from expectations, and possessed of concentration of mind, are said to
perceive clearly. I shall, after this, declare how the association and the
dissociation takes place of Kshetrajna and Nature. Ye best of men,
listen. The relation here is said to be that between the object and the
subject.!. Purusha is always the subject ; and Nature has been said to
be the object. It has been explained, by what has been said ina previous
portion of the discourse where it has been pointed out, that they exist.
after the manner of the Gnat and the Udumvara. An object of enjoy-
ment asit is, Nature is unintelligent and knows nothing. He, however,
who enjoys it, is said to know it. Kshetrajna being enjoyer, Nature is
enjoyed. The wise have said that Nature is always made up of pairs of
opposites (and consists of qualities). Kshetrajna is, on the other hand,
destitute of pairs of opposites, devoid of parts, eternal, and free, as
regards its essence, from qualities. He resides in everything alike, and
walks, with knowledge. He always enjoys Nature, as a lotus leaf (enjoys)
water. Possessed of knowledge, he is never tainted even if brought
into contact with all the qualities. Without doubt, Purusha is unattach-
ed like the unsteady drop of water on the lotus-leaf. This is the certain
conclusion (of the scriptures) that Nature is the property of Purusha.
The relation between these two (viz., Purusha and Nature) is like that
existing between matter and its maker. As one goes intoa dark place
taking a light with him, even so those who wish for the Supreme pro-

1 The thinking or enjoying agent is subject, and that which is
thought or enjoyed is object. Subject and object are two well ‘known
words in Sir W. Hamilton's philosophy. I follow Telang in adopting
them.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://Awww.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 96 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 95

ceed with the light of Nature.? As long as matter and quality (which
are like oil and wick) exist, so long the light shines. The flame, how-
ever, becomes extinguished when matter and quality (or oil and wick)
are exhausted. Thus Nature is manifest ; while Purusha is said to be
unmanifest. Understand this, ye learned Brahmanas. Well, I shall
now tell you something more- With even a thousand (explanations), one
that hasa bad understanding succeeds not in acquiring knowledge.
One, however, that is endued with intelligence succeeds in attaining
happiness, through only a fourth share (of explanations), Thus should the
accomplishment of duty be understood as dependent on means, For the
man of intelligence, having knowledge of means, succeeds in attaining
to supreme felicity. As some man travelling along a road without
provisions for his journey, proceeds with great discomfort and may
even meet with destruction before he reaches the end of his journey,
even 60 should it be known that in acts there may not be fruits.” The
examination of what is agreeable and what is disagreeable in one’s own
self is productive of benefit.* The progress in life of a man that is de-
void of the perception of truth is like that of a man who rashly journeys
on a long road unseen before. The progress, however, of those that are
endued with intelligence is like that of men who journey along the same
toad, riding on a car unto which are yoked (fleet) steeds and which
moves with swiftness. Having ascended to the top of a mountain, one
should not cast one’s eyeson the surface of the earth.‘ Seeing a man,
even though travelling on a car, afflicted and rendered insensible by
pain, the man of intelligence journeys ona car as long as there isa
car path.’ The man of learning, when he sees the car path end, aban-
dons his car for going on. Even thus proceeds the man of intelligence
who is conversant with the ordinances respecting truth and Yoga (or

1 ‘Sattwa pradipa,’ rendered ‘light of Nature,’ implies, as Nilakantha
explains, knowledge, which is a manifestation of Nature. Arjuna Misra’s
interpretation seems to be better. He says that knowledge,—that is,
knowledgoe of truth,—is acquired by the self through Nature.—T.

2 The sense seems to be this : one who proceeds on a journey must
provide oneself with the necessary means, otherwise one is sure to feel
discomfort or meet with even destruction. So, in the journey of life, one
must provide oneself with knowledge as the means. One may then avoid
all discomfort and danger. Action does not constitute the proper means,
It may or may not produce fruits.—T.

3 4.¢., one should not care for the external.—T. -

4 i.e., one need rot do acts enjoined by the scriptures after one has
attained to knowledge which is the highest seat.—T.

5 The sense is this: riding on a car may not always be comfortable.
long as there is a car path, one should travel on one’s car. If, however,

‘the road be such as not to be fit for a-car to proceed along it, one should

avoid a car in going over it, for the car instead of conducing to comfort,
would, on such & path, be productive of only discomfort.—T,
Downloaded from https:/Avww.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 97 ===

96 MAHABHARATA

Knowledge and Devotion). Conversant with the qualities, such a man
proceeds, comprehending what is next and next.? As one that plunges;
without a boat, into the terrible ocean, with only one’s two arms,
through delusion, undoubtedly wishes for destruction ; while the man
of wisdom, conversant with distinctions, goes into the water, with a
boat equipt with oars, and soon crosses the lake without fatigue, and
having crossed it attains to the other shore and casts off the boat, freed
from the thought of meum. This has been already explained by the
illustration of the car and the pedestrian. One who has been overwhel-
med by delusion in consequence of attachment, adheres to it like a
fisherman to his boat. Overcome by the idea of meum, one wanders
within its narrow range. After embarking ona boat it is not possible
in moving about on land. Similarly, it is not possible in moving about
on water after one has mounted on a car. There are thus various actions
with regard to various objects. And as action is performed in this
world, so does it result to those that perform them. That which is void
of smell, void of taste, and void of touch and sound, that which is
meditated upon by the sages with the aid of their understanding, is said
to be Pradhana. Now, Pradhana is unmanifest. A development of
the unmanifest is Mahat. A development of Pradhana when it has be-
come Mahat is Egoism. From egoism is produced the development
called the great elements. And of the great elements respectively, the
objects of sense are said to be the developments. The unmanifest is of
the nature of seed. It is productive in its essence, It has been heard
by us that the great soul has the virtues of a seed, and that is a product.
Egoism is of the nature of seed and isa product again and again. And
the five great elements are of the nature of seed and products. The
objects of the five great elements are endued with the nature of seed, and
yield products. These have Chitta for their property. Among them, space
has one quality ; wind is said to have two. Light, it is said, is endued
with three qualities; and water as possessed of four qualities. Earth,
teeming with mobiles and immobiles, should be known as possessed of
five qualities. She isa goddess that isthe source of all entities and
abounds with examples of the agreeable and the disagreeable. Sound,
likewise touch, colour, taste, and smell numbering the fifth,—these are
the five qualities of earth, ye foremost of regenerate persons. Smell
always belongs to earth, and smell is said to be of various kinds. I shall
state at length the numerous qualities of smell. Smell is agreeable or
disagreeable, sweet, sour, pungent, diffusive and compact, oily and dry,
and clear. Thus smell, which belongs to the earth, should be known as of

1 ie., first action with desire: then action without desire; then
knowledge, according to Arjuna Misra. Nilakantha explains that sotion is
first, then Yoga ; then the state of Hansa or Paramahansa.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com =
https://Awww.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 98 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARYA 97

ten kinds.’ Sound, touch, likewise colour, and taste have been said to
be the qualities of water. I shall now speak of the qualities of Taste.
Taste has been said to be of various kinds. Sweet, sour, pungent, bitter,
astingent, and saline likewise. Taste, which has been said to appertain
to water, is thus of six varieties. Sound, touch, and likewise colour—
these are the three qualities which light is said to be possessed of, Colour
is the quality of light, and colour is said to be of various kinds. White,
dark, likewise red, blue, yellow, and grey also, and short, long, minute,
ross, square and circular, of these twelve varieties in colour which be-
longs to light. These should be understood by Brahmanas venerable
for years, conversant with duties, and truthful in speech. Sound and
touch should be known asthe two qualities of wind. Touch has been
said to be of various kinds. Rough, cold and likewise hot, tender and
clear, hard, oily, smooth, slippery, painful and soft, of twelve kinds is
touch, which is the quality of wind, as said by Brahmanas crowned with
success, conversant with duties, and possessed of a sight of truth. Now,
space has only one quality, and that is said to be sound, I shall speak
at- length of the numerous qualities of sound. Shadaja, Rishabha,
together with Gandhara, Madhyama, and likewise Panchama: after
this should be known Nishada, and then Dhaivata,? Besides these,
there are agreeable sounds and disagreeable sounds, compact, and of
many ingredients. Sound which is born of space should thus be known
to be of ten kinds. Space is the highest of the (five) elements. Egoism
is above it. Above egoism is understanding. Above understanding is
the soul. Above the soul is the Unmanifest- Above the Unmanifest
is Purusha. One who knows which is superior and inferior among exis-
tent creatures, who is conversant with the ordinances in respect of all
acts, and who constitutes himself the soul oH all creatures, attains to the
Unfading Soul.’ ”

SECTION LI

“—'Brahmana said,—Since the mind is the ruler of these five ele-
ments, in the matter of controlling and bringing them forth, the mind,
therefore, isthe soul of the elements. The mind always presides over
the great elements. The understanding proclaims power, and is called
the Kshetrajna.* The mind yokes the senses as a charioteer yokes good
steeds. The senses, the mind, and the understanding are always joined

1 'Katu’ is not bitter but pungent or sharp, as that which is attached
to chillies. —T.

2 These are the notes of the Hindu Gamut.—T,

8 The understanding operates on what is placed beforeit by the mind.
The understanding, therefore, is, as it were, the lord exercising power or
sovereignty, being served by the mind.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
13 __https:/Awww.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 99 ===

98 MAHABHARATA

to the Kshetrajna. The individual soul, mounting the chariot to which
big steeds are yoked and which has the understanding for the reins,
drives about on all sides. With all the senses attached to it (for steeds),
with the mind for the charioteer, and the understanding for the eternal
reins, exists the great Brahman-car. Verily, that man endued with
learning and wisdom who always understands the Brahma-car in this
way, is never overwhelmed by delusion in the midst of all entities, This
forest of Brahman begins with the Unmanifest and ends with gross
objects, It includes mobile and immobile entities, and receives light
from the radiance of the sun and the moon, and is adorned with planets
and constellations, It is decked, again, on all sides with nets of rivers
and mountains. It is always embellished likewise by diverse kinds of
waters. It is the means of subsistence for all creatures. It is, again,
the goal of all living creatures. In that forest the Kshetrajna always
moves about. Whatever entities exist in this world, mobile and immo-
bile, are the very first to be dissolved away. After this (are dissolved)
those qualities which compose all entities. After the qualities (are
dissolved) the five elements. Such is the gradation of entities. Gods,
men, Gandharvas, Pisachas, Asuras, and Rakshasas, have all sprung from
Nature, and not from actions, nor from a cause. The Brahmanas, who
are creators of the universe, are born here again and again. All that
springs from them dissolves, when the time comes, in those very five
great elements like billows in the ocean, All the great elements are
beyond those elements that compose the universe. He that is released
from those five elements goes to the highest goal. The puissant Praja-
paticreated allthis by the mind only. After the same manner Rishis
attained to the status of deities by the aid of penance. After the same
manner, those who have achieved perfection, who were capable of the
concentration of Yoga, and who subsist on fruits and roots, likewise
perceive the triple world by penance. Medicines and herbs and all the
diverse sciences are acquired by means of penance alone, for all acquisi-
tion has penance for its root- Whatever is difficult of acquisition,
difficult to learn, difficult to vanquish, difficult to pass through, are all
achievable by penance, for penance is irresistible. One that drinks
alcoholic liquors, one that slaysa Brahmana, one that steals, one that
destroys a foetus, one that violates one’s preceptor’s bed, becomes
cleansed of such sin by penance well performed. Human beings, Pitris,
deities, (sacrificial) animals, beasts and birds, and all other creatures
mobile and immobile, by always devoting themselves to penances, be-
come crowned with success by penance alone. In like manner, the
deities, endued with great powers of illusion, have attained to Heaven,
Those who without idleness perform acts with expectations, being full

of egoism, approach the presence of Prajapati. Those high-souled ones,
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 100 ===

ASWAMEDHA PARVA 99

however, who are devoid of mineness and freed from egoism through
the pure contemplation of Yoga, attain to the great and highest regions,
Those who best understand the self, having attained to Yoga contem-
plation and having their minds always cheerful, enter into the unmani-
fest accumulation of happiness. Those persons who are freed from the
idea of mineness as also from egoism and who are reborn after having
attained to the fullness of Yoga contemplation, enter (when they depart
from such life) into the highest region reserved for the great, viz., the
Unmanifest. Born from that same unmanifest (principle) and attaining to
the same once more, freed from the qualities of Darkness and Passion, and
adhering to only the quality of Goodness, one becomes released from every
sin and creates all things.' Such a one should be known to be Kshetrajna
in perfection. He that knows him, knows the Veda.” Attaining to
pure knowledge from (restraining) the mind, the ascetic should sit self-
restrained. One necessarily becomes that on which one’s mind it set.
This is an eternal mystery. That which has the unmanifest for its begin-
ning and gross qualities for its end, has been said to have Ne-science
for its indication. But do you understand that whose nature is destitute
of qualities? Of two syllables is Mrityu (death); of three syllable is
the eternal Brahma. Mineness is death, and the reverse of mineness is
the eternal. Some men who are led by bad understanding applaud
action, Those, however, that are numbered among the high-souled
ancients never applaud action. By action is a creature born with body
which is made up of the sixteen. (True) Knowledge swallows up
Purusha (Self with consciousness of body). Even this is what is highly
acceptable to eaters of Amrita.* Therefore, those whose vision extends
to the other end (of the ocean of life) have no attachment for actions.

1 ‘Sarvan srijati’ i.c., creates all things by attaining to the condition
of the universal cause, for the unmanifest is the universal cause. Between
such a one and the Supreme Scul there is no difference, Even this is said
in the last sentence.—T.

2 The man who reads the book called Veda is not truly conversant
with the Veda. He, however, who knows Kehetrajna, is regarded as truly
knowing the Veda.—T.

8 The argument is that ‘Mrityu’ or death being of two syllables, the
correspondence is justifiable between it and ‘Mama’ or mineness which also
is of two syllables. Soin the case of Brahman and ‘na-mama’. Of course,
what is meant by mineness being death and not-mineness being Brahman
or emancipation, cannot be unintelligible to one who has carefully read the
preceding sections.—T.

4 i.¢,, the five great elements, four organs of knowledge with mind,
and the four organs of action.—T.

5 The word ‘Purusha’ here is used in the sense of ‘dehabhimani Jiva’
or individual self with consciousness of kody, True knowledge destroys
this condition of Jiva, for the man of knowledge identifies himself with the
universe and thereby assimilates himself to Brahman. By eaters of Amrita

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/