=== PAGE 1 ===

THE MAHABHARATA

KRISHNA-DWAIPAYANA VYASA

Translated into English prose from the
original Sanskrit Text.

BY
PRATAP CHANDRA ROY, C. 1. E.

- VOL IX
SANTI PARVA

(Part II)

ORIENTAL PUBLISHING CO.
11D, SURENDRALAL PYNE LANE
CALCUTTA-12

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 2 ===

Published by
Dhirendra Nath Bose
38A, Motijheel Avenue
Calcutta-28

<ABKA R
if \* aN
DEC 3 1965
vy

Rsity o¢ 102°

19eda?

Printed by
D. P. Bose

At the,
JOYNARAYAN PRESS

UD, Surendralal Pyne Lane
Calcutta-12

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 3 ===

THE MAHABHARATA
SANTI PARVA

SECTION CLXXIV
( Mokshadharma Parva )

“Yudhishthira said, ‘Thou hast, O grandsire, discoursed upon the
auspicious duties (of person in distress ) connected with the duties of
kings. It behoveth thee now, O king, to tell me those foremost of duties
which belong to those who lead the (four) modes of life.’

“Bhishma said, ‘Religion hath many doors. The observance of (the
duties prescribed by) religion can never be futile. Duties have been laid
down with respect to every mode of life. (The fruits of those duties are
invisible, being attainable in the next world). The fruits, however, of
Penance directed towards the soul are obtainable in this world.! Whatever
be the object to which one devotes oneself, that object, O Bharata, and
nothing else, appears to one as the highest of acquisitions fraught with
the greatest of blessings. When one reflects properly (one’s heart being
purified by such reflection), one comes to know that the things of this world
are as valueless as straw. Without doubt, one is then freed from attach-
ment in respect of those things. When the world, O Yudhishthira,
which is full of defeots, is so constituted, every man of intelligence should
strive for the attainment of the emancipation of his soul.’

“Yudhishthira said, ‘Tell me, O grandsire, by what frame of soul
should one kill one’s grief when one loses one's wealth, or when one’s wife,
or son, or sire, dies,’

“Bhishma said, ‘When one’s wealth is lost, or one’s wife or son or
sire is dead, one certainly says to oneself, ‘Alas, this is a great sorrow |’
But then one should, by the aid of reflection, seek to kill that sorrow. In
this connection is cited the old story of the speech that a regenerate friend
of his, coming to Senajit’s court, made to that king. Beholding the monarch

1 It is very difficult to literally translate such verses. The word
Dharma is sometimes used in the sense of Religion or the aggregate of
duties, At other times it simply means a duty or the course of duties pres-
cribed for a particular situation. Zapah is generally rendered penance.
Here, however, it has a direct reference to sravana (hearing), manana
(contemplation ), and nididhyasana ( abstruction of the soul from every-
thing else for absolute concentration). The Grammar of the second half of
the first line is Sati apretya dc., Sat being that which is real, hence, the
Soul, or the Supreme Soul, of which every individual Soul is only a

portion.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 4 ===

2 MAHABHARATA

agitated with grief and burning with sorrow on account of the death of his
son, the Brahmana addressed that ruler of very cheerless heart and said
these words, ‘Why art thou stupefied ? Thou art without any intelligence.
Thyself an object of grief, why dost thou grieve (for others)? A few days
hence others will grieve for thee, and in their turn they will be grieved for
by others. Thyself, myself, and others who wait upon thee, O king,
shall all go to that place whence all of us have come.’

“Senajit said, ‘What is that intelligence, what is that penance, O
learned Brahmana, what is that concentration of mind, O thou that hast
wealth of asceticism, what is that knowledge, and what is that learning, by
acquiring which thou dost not yield to sorrow ?”

“The Brahmana said, ‘Behold, all creatures,—the superior, the mid-
dling, and the inferior—in consequence of their respective acts, are
entangled in grief. Ido not regard even my own self to be mine. On the
other hand, I regard the whole world to be mine. I again think that all
this (which I see) is as much mine as it belongs to others. Grief cannot
approach me in consequence of this thought. Having acquired such an
understanding, I do not yield either to joy or to grief. As two pieces of
wood floating on the ocean come together at one time and are again separa-
ted, even such is the union of (living) creatures in this world. Sons, grand-
sons, kinsmen, relatives are all of this kind. One should never feel
affection for them, for separation with them is certain. Thy son came from
an invisible region. He has departed and become invisible. He did not
know thee. Thou didst not know him. Who art thou and for whom dost
thou grieve? Grieve arises from the disease constituted by desire. Happi-
ness again results from the disease of desire being cured. From joy also
springs sorrow, and hence sorrow arises repeatedly. Sorrow comes after joy,
and joy after sorrow. The joys and sorrows of human beings are revolving
ona wheel. After happiness sorrow has come to thee. Thou shalt again
have happiness. No one suffers sorrow for ever, and ndpne enjoys happiness
for ever. The body is the refuge of both sorrow and happiness. Whatever
acts an embodied creature does with the aid of his body, the consequence
thereof he has to suffer in that body. Life springs with the springing of
the body into existence. The two exist together, and the two’ perish
together.” Men of uncleansed souls, wedded to worldly things by various
bonds, meet with destruction like embankments of sand in water. Woes of
diverse kinds, born of ignorance, act like pressers of oil-seeds, for assailing
all creatures in consequence of their attachments. These press them like
oil-seods in the oil-making machine represented by the round of rebirths (to
which they are subject). Man, for the sake of his wife (and others), commits
numerous evil acts, but suffers singly diverse kinds of misery both in this

1 And not the Soul, as the commentator explains, With the death
of the body joy and grief disappear.—T.

2 Tho art by which the body could, asin Egypt, be Beceataed for
thousands of years was not known to the Rishis.—T.
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://(www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 5 ===

SANTI PARVA 3

and the next world. All men, attaehed to children and wives and kinsmen
and relatives, sink in the miry sea of grief like wild elephants, when desti-
tute of strongth, sinking ina miry slough: Indeed, O lord, upon loss of
wealth or son or kinsmen or relatives, man suffers great distress, which
resembles as regards its power of burning, a forest conflagration. All this,
viz. joy and grief, existence and non existence, is dependent upon destiny.
One having friends as one destitute of friends, one having foes as one
destitute of foes, one having wisdom as one dostitute of wisdom, each and
every one amongst these, obtains happiness through destiny. Friends are
not the cause of one’s happiness. Foes are not the cause of one's misery.
Wisdom is not competent to bring an accession of wealth ; nor is wealth
competent to bring an accession of happiness. Intelligence is not the cause
of wealth, nor is stupidity the cause of penury. He only that is possessed
of wisdom, and none else, understands the order of the world. Amongst
the intelligent, the heroic, the foolish, the cowardly, the idiotic, the
learned, the weak, or the strong, happiness comes to him for whom it is
ordained. Among the calf, the cowherd that owns her, and the thief, the
cow indeed belongs to him who drinks her milk. They whose under-
standing is absolutely dormant, and they who have attained to that state
of the mind which lies beyond the sphere of the intellect, succeed in enjoy-
ing happiness. Only they that are between the two classes, suffer
misery.” They that are possessed of wisdom delight in the two extremes
but not in the states that are intermediate. The sages have said that the
attainment of any of these two extremes constitutes happiness. Misery
consists in the states that are intermediate between the two.* They who
have succeeded in attaining to real felicity (which samadhi can bring), and
who have become free from the pleasures and pains of this world, and who
are destitute of envy, are nevor agitated by either the accession of wealth
or its loss. They who have not succeeded in acquiring that intelligence
which leads to real felicity, but who have transcended folly and ignorance
( by the help of a knowledge of the scriptures ), give way to excessive joy
and excessive misery. Moen destitute of all notions of right or wrong,

1 The commentator explains the sense of this as follows :—The cow
belongs to him who drinks her milk. Those who derive no advantage from
her have no need for showing her any affection. One should not covet what
is above one’s want. It has been said, that ( to a thirsty or hungry or toil-
worn man’, a little quantity of vaccine milk is of more use than a hundred
kine ; a small measure of rice more useful than a hundred barns filled with
grain ; half a little bed is of more use than a large mansion.—T.

. 2 I follow Nilakantha in rendering this verse. His interpretation is
plausible. Mudatamah, according to him, are those who are in deep sleep.
There are four stages of Consciousnoss. These are (1) wakefulness, (2) dream,
(8) droamloss or deep slumber, and (4) Turiya or absolute Samadhi (which
the Yogin only can attain to).—T.

3 The two extremes, of course, are dreamless slumber and Turiya or
Samadhi, The two intermadinte Gea hole aR® and sloop with
dream. \ttps://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 6 ===

4 MAHABHARATA

insensate with pride and with success over others, yield to transports of
delight like the gods in heaven.’ Happiness must end inmisery. Idleness
is misery ; while cleverness ( in action ) is the cause of happiness. Affluence
and prosperity dwell in one possessed of cleverness, but not in one that is
idle. Be it happiness or be it misery, be it agreeable or be it disagreeable,
what comesto one should be enjoyed or endured with an unconquered
heart. Every day a thousand occasions for sorrow, and hundred cccasions
for fear assail the man of ignorance and folly but not the man that is
possessed of wisdom. Sorrow can never touch the man that is possessed
of intelligence, that has acquired wisdom, that is mindful of listening to
the instructions of his betters, that is destitute of envy, and that is self-
restrained. Relying upon such an understanding, and protecting his heart
(from the influences of desire and the passions), the man of wisdom should
conduct himself here. Indeed, sorrow is unable to touch him who is con-
versant with that Supreme Self from which everything springs and unto
which everything disappears.* The very root of that for which grief, or
heart-burning, or sorrow is felt or for which one is impelled to exertion,
should, even if it be a part of one’s body, be cast off. That object, what-
ever it may be in respect of which the idea of meum is cherished, becomes
a source of grief and heart-burning. Whatever objects, amongst things
that are desired, are cast off become sources of happiness. The man that
pursues objects of desire meets with destruction in course of the pursuit.
Neither tho happiness that is derived from a gratification of the senses nor
that great felicity which one may enjoy in heaven, approaches to even a six-
teenth part of the felicity which arises from the destruction of all desires.
The acts of a former life, right or wrong, visit, in their consequences, the
wise and the foolish, the brave and the timid. It is even thus that joy and
sorrow, the agreeable and the disagreeable, continually revolve (as on a
wheel) among living creatures. Relying upon such an understanding, the
man of intelligence and wisdom lives at ease. A person should disregard
all his desires, and never allow his wrath to get the better of him. This
wrath springs in the heart and grows there into vigour and luxuriance. This
wrath that dwells in the bodies of men and is born in their minds, is
spoken of by the wise as Death. When a person succeeds in withdrawing
all his desires like a tortoise withdrawing all its limbs, then his soul, which
is self-luminous, succeeds in looking into itself. % That object, whatever it

1 Pride in consequences of having insulted or humiliated others;
and success over others such as victories in battle and other concerns of
the world.—T.

2 The first half of the second line is read variously. The sense,
however, in effect, remains unaltered. What is said here is that man who
succeeds in attaining to a state of Brahma by true Samadhi or abstraction
from the world, can never be touched by grief —T.

8 Inall treatises on Yoga itis said that when the first stage is
passed, the neophyte succeeds in looking at his own self. The meaning
seems to be that he ex) riencet a a sort of double existence so that he succeeds
in bimself looking Taensleasens hitps.//www.holybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.« bite sao -all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 7 ===

SANTI PARVA 5

may be, in respect of which the idea of mewmis cherished, becomes a source
of grief and heart-burning.* When a person himself feels no fear, and is
feared by no one, when he cherishes no desire and no aversion, he is then
said to attain to the state of Brahma. Casting off both truth and falsehood,
grief and joy, fear and courage, the agreeable and the disagreeable, thou
mayst become of tranquil soul. When a person abstains from doing wrong
toany creature, in thought, word, or deed, he is then said to attain to a
state of Brahma. True happiness is his who can cast off that thirst which
is incapable of being cast off by the misguided, which does not decay with
decrepitude, and which is regarded as a fatal diseaso. In this connection,
Oking, are heard the verses sung by Pingala about the manner in which
she had acquired eternal merit even at a time that had been very unfavour-
able. A fallen woman of the name of Pingala, having repaired to the place
of assignation, was denied the company of her lover through an accident.
At that time of great misery, she succeeded in acquiring tranquillity of soul.’

“Pingala said, ‘Alas, I have for many long years lived, all the
while overcome by frenzy, by the side of that Dear Self in whom there is
nothing but tranquillity. Death has been at my door. Before this, I did
not, however approach that Essence of Purity. I shall cover this house of
one column and nine doors (by means of true Knowledge).?- What woman
is there that regards that Supreme Soul as her dear lord, even when
He comes near ?* Iam now awake. I have been roused from the sleep of
ignorance. Iam no longer influenced by desire. Human lovers, who are
really the embodied forms of hell, shall no longer deceive me by approaching
me lustfully. Evil produces good through the destiny or the acts of a
former life. Roused (from the sleep of ignorance), I have cast off all desire
for worldly objects. I have acquired a complete mastery over my senses.
One freed from desire and hope sleeps in felicity. Freedom from every hope
and desire is felicity. Having driven off desire and hope, Pingala sleeps in
felicity.’

“Bhishma continued, ‘Convinced with these and other words uttered
by the learned Brahmana, king Senajit (casting off his grief), experienced
delight and became very happy.’ ”

1 This is the same as 46. The Bombay edition does not repeat it.—T.

2 The house referred to is the body. The single column on which it is
supported is the backbone, and the nine doors are the eyes, the ears, the
nostrils, ée., &c.—T.

8 The sense is that women always regard their human lovers as dear

without regarding tS ARBRE AR OAR ES HARA ROryBLERS BER, He is always with

them.—T. 5 ttos-//www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 8 ===

SECTION CLXXV

“Yudhishthira said, ‘Time, which is destructive of every created
thing, is passing on.' Tell mo, O grandsire, what is that good thing which
should be sought.”

“Bhisbma said, ‘In this connection, O king, is cited the old narrative
of a discourse between sire and son, O Yudhishthira! A-cortain Brahmana,
O Partha, who was devoted to the study of the Vedas, got a very intelli-
gent son who (for this) was called Medhavin.? One day, the son, well
conversant with the truths of the religion of Emancipation, and acquainted
also with the affairs of the world, addressed his sire devoted to the study of
the Vedas.’ .

“The son said, ‘What shoulda wise man do, O father, seeing that
the period of human life is passing away so very quickly? O father, tell
me the course of duties that one should perform, without omitting to
mention the fruits. Having listened to thee, I desire to observe those
duties.’

“The sire said, ‘O son, observing the Brahmacharya mode of life,
one should first study the Vedas. He should then wish for children for
rescuing his ancestors. Setting up his fire next, he should seek to perform
the (prescribed) sacrifices according to due rites. At last, he should enter
the forest for devoting himself to contemplation.’

“The son said, ‘When the world is thus surrounded on all sides and
is thus assailed, and when such irresistible things of fatal consequences fall
upon it, how can you say these words so calmly ?’

“The sire said, ‘How is the world assailed ? What is that by which
it is surrounded ? What, again, are those irresistible things of fatal conse-
quences that fall upon it? Why dost thou frighten me thus ?”

“The son said, ‘Death is that by which the world is assailed.
Decrepitude encompasses it. Those irresistible things that come and go
away are the nights (that are continually lessening the period of human
life). When I know that Death tarries for none (but approaches steadily
towards every creature), how can I pass my time without covering myself
with tho garb of knowledge ?* When each succeeding night, passing away
lessens the allotted period of one’s existence, the man of wisdom should
regard the day to he fruitless. (When death is approaching steadily) who
is there that would, like a fish in a shallow water, feel happy ? Death
comes toa man before his desires have been gratified. Death snatches away
& person when he is engaged in plucking flowers and when his heart is
otherwise set, like a tigress bearing away a ram. Do thon, this very day,

1 i.e, coursing on, without waiting for any one—T.
2 Literally, Intelligent.—T.
8 Tho true roading i is Jnanena and not ajnanena. Then, in the last

foot, the word is omaha 2 wards with ava and api
frequently, drap th Bil ac A eRe eRe veered

=== PAGE 9 ===

SANTI PARVA 7

accomplish that which is for thy good. Let not this Death come to thee.
Death drags its victims before thoir acts are accomplished. The acts of
tomorrow should be done today, those of the afternoon in the forenoon.
Death does not wait to see whether the acts of its victim have all boon
accomplished or not. Who knows that Death will not como to him even
today ? In prime of age one should betake oneself to the practice of virtue.
Life is transitory. If virtue be practised, fame here and felicity hereafter
will be the consequences. Overwhelmed by ignorance, one is ready to exert
oneself for sons and wives. Achieving virtuous or vicious acts, one brings
them up and aggrandises them. Like a tiger bearing away a sleeping deer,
Death snatches away the man addicted to the gratification of desire and
engaged in the enjoyment of sons and animals. Before he has been able to
pluck the flowers upon which he has set his hoart, before he lias been grati-
fied by the acquisition of the objects of his desire, Death bears him away
like a tiger bearing away its prey. Death overpowers a man while the latter
is still in the midst of the happiness that accrues from the gratification of
desire, and while still thinking, ‘This. has been done ; this is to be done;
this has been half-done.’ Death bears away the man, however designated
according to his profession, attached to his field, his shop, or his home,
before he has obtained the fruit of his acts. Death bears away the weak,
the strong, the brave, the timid, the idiotic, and the learned, before any of
these obtains the fruits of his acts. When death, decrepitude, disease,
and sorrow arising from diverse causes, are all residing in thy body, how
is it that thou livest as if thou art perfectly hale? As soon as a creature
is born, Decrepitude and Death pursue him for ( effecting ) his destruction.
All existent things, mobile and immobile, are affected by these two.
The attachment which one feels for dwelling in villages and towns ( in
the midst of fellowmen) is said to be the very mouth of Death. The
forest, on the other hand, is regarded as the fold within which the senses
may be penned. This is declared by the Srutis.' The attachment a person
feels for dwelling in a village or town (in the midst of mon ) is like a cord
that binds him effectually. They that are good break that cord and attain
to emancipation, while they that are wicked do not succeed in breaking
them. He who never injures living oreatures by thought, word, or deed, is
never injured by such agencies as are destructive of life and property.”
Nothing can resist the messengers (Disease and Decrepitude) of Death when
they advance except Truth which devours Untruth. In Truth is immorta-
lity.® For these reasons one should practise the vow of Truth ; one should

devote oneself toa union with Truth ; one should accept Truth for one’s
Veda: and restraining one’s senses, one should vanquish the Destroyer
by Truth. Both Immortality and Death are planted in the body. Ono

1 The word used in the text is Devanam (of the gods). There can be
no doubt: however, that the word deva is here used for implying the
senses.—T.

)2 ie, wild beasts and lawless men.—T. ;
8 Asatyajyam and Asatyadyam aro both correct. The sense is the
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 10 ===

8 MAHABHARATA

comes to Death through ignorance and loss of judgment ; while Immortality
is achieved through Truth. I shall, therefore, abstain from injury and seek
to achieve Truth, and transgressing the sway of desire and wrath, regard
pleasure and pain with an equal eye, and attaining tranquillity, avoid Death
like an immortal. Upon the advent of that season when the gun will
progress towards the north, I shall restraining my senses, set to the per-
formance of the Santi-sacrifice, the Brahma-sacrifice, the Mind-sacrifico,
and the Work-sacrifice.' How can one like me worship his Maker in animal-
sacrifices involving cruelty, or sacrifices of the body, such as Pésachas only
can perform and such as produce fruits that are transitory ?? That person
whose words, thoughts, penances, renunciation, and yoga meditation, all
rest on Brahma, succeeds in earning the highest good. There is no eye
which is equal to ( the eye of ) Knowledge. There is no penance like ( that
involved in) Trath. There is no sorrow equal to (that involved in) attach-
ment. There is no happiness (that which is obtainable from) renunciation.
I have sprung from Brahma through Brahma. I shall devote myself to
Brahma, though I am childless. I shall return to Brahma. I do not require
son for rescuing me. A Brahmana can have no wealth like to the state
of being alone, the state in consequence of which he is capable of regarding
everything with an equal eye, the practice of truthfulness, good behaviour,
patience, abstention from injury, simplicity, and avoidance of all rites and
visible sacrifices. What use hast thou, O Brahmana, of wealth or kinsmen
and relatives, of wives, when thou shalt have to die? Seek thy Self
which is concealed in a cave. Where are thy grandsires and where thy
sire 7"?

“Bhishma continued, ‘Do thou also, O monarch, conduct thyself
in that way in which the sire ( in this story ), conducts himself, devoted
to the religion of Truth, after having listened to the speech of his

son.

same. The first means ‘having untruth for the libation ( that it eats up ).’
The second means ‘having untruth for the food ( it devours ),’—T.

1 Santi is tranquillity. The Santi-sacrifice is the endeavour to
practise self-denial in everything ; in other words, to restrain all sorts of
propensities or inclinations. The Brahma-saorifice is reflection on truths
laid down in the Upanishads. The Word-sacrifice consists in the silent
recitation (japa) of the Pranava or Om, the initial mantra. The Mind-
sacrifice is contemplation of the Supreme Soul. The Work-sacrifice consists,
in baths, cleanliness, and waiting upon the preceptor.—T.

2 Both readings are correct, viz., Kshelrayajna and Kshatrayajna,
Kshetra is, of course, the body. If the latter reading be accepted, the mean-
ing will be ‘a. sacrifice like that of a Kshatriya, i.e., battle.’ Henoe, all
kinds of acts involving oruelty.—T.

3 Or, seek Brahma in thy understanding. The word Atman is often
synonymous with Supreme Self—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https:/Awww.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 11 ===

. SECTION CLXXVI
_. .“Yudhishthira said, ‘Tell me, O grandsire, whence and how
happiness and misery come to those that are rich, as also those that are
poor, but who live in the observance of different practices and rites.’"!

“Bhishma continued, ‘In this connection is cited the old narrative
of what was sung by Sampaka who had obtained tranquillity and achiev-
ed emancipation for himself. In former times a certain Brahmana,
rendered miserable by a bad wife, bad dress, and hunger, and living in
the observance of the vow of renunciation, told me these verses :?—
Diverse kinds of sorrow and happiness overtake, from the day of birth
the person that is born on the earth. If le could ascribe either of
them to the action of Destiny, he would not then feel glad when happi-
ness came or miserable when sorrow overtook him. Though thy mind
is divested of desire, thou bearest yeta heavy load. Thou dost not
seek to achieve thy good (i.e, emancipation). Art thou not successful
in controlling thy mind? If thou goest about, having renounced home
and desirable possessions, thou shalt taste real happiness. A person
divested of everything sleepeth in happiness, and awaketh in happiness.
Complete poverty, in this world, is happiness. It is a good regimen,
it is the source of blessings, it is freedom from danger. This foeless
path is unattainable (by persons cherishing desire) and is easily attain-
able (by those that are freed from desire). Casting my eyes on every
part ofthe three worlds, I do not behold the person who is equal toa
poor man of pure conduct and without attachment (to worldly things).
I weighed poverty and sovereignty ina balance. Poverty weighed
heavier than sovereignty and seemed to possess greater merits. Between
poverty and sovereignty there is this great distinction, viz. that the
sovereign, possessed of affluence, is always agitated by anxiety and
seems to be within the very jaws of death. As regards, however, the poor
man, who in consequence of the divestment of all wealth has freed him-
self from hopes and emancipated himself, neither fire, nor foe, nor death,
not robbers, can get the better of him. The very gods applaud sucha
sman who ‘wanders about according to his sweet will, who lies down on
the bare‘ground with his arm for a pillow, and who is possessed of tran-

1 The commentator explains that the object of Yudhisnthira’s quee-
tion is this: in the preceding section or lesson it has been inouloated that
one'may seek the acquisition of the religion of moksha or emancipation even
when he is young. Yudhishthira enquires whether wealth (<o necessary for
the performance of sacrifices) is needed for the acquisition of that religion.
Tt wealth be necessary, the poor then would not be able to acqnire that
religion, Hence the enquiry about tbe way in which joy and sorrow erme
to the wealthy and to the poor.—T.

* 9 The verses are said to b3 old. Nilakantha accordingly supposes that
it was not Ssmpaka who recited them to Bhishma, but some one else. I
follow the commentator ; but the grammer of the concluding verse of this

otion must have to lybaksypom
section EO oee oe i bocite comimanecharataall-volumesi -12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 12 ===

io MAHABHARATA

quillity. Affected by wrath and cupidity, the man of affluence is
stained by a wicked heart. He casts oblique glances and makes dry
speeches. He becomes sinful, and his face is always darkened with
frowns. Biting his lips, and excited with wrath, he utters harsh and
cruel words. If such a man desires to even make a gift of the whole
world, who is there that would like evento look at him? Constant
companionship with Prosperity stupefiesa person of weak judgment.
It drives off his judgment like the wind driving off the autumnal clouds.
Companionship with Prosperity induces him to think,—I am_ possessed
of beauty! I am possessed of wealth! Iam high-born! I meet with
success in whatever I undertake! Iam not an ordinary humian being !
—His heart becomes intoxicated in consequence of these three reasons.
With heart deeply attached to worldly possessions, he wastes the wealth
hoarded by his sires. Reduced to want, he then regards the appropria-
tion of other people’s wealth as blamelesss At this stage, when he
transgresses all barriers and beings to appropriate the possessions of
others from every side, the rulers of men obstruct and afflict him like
sportsmen afflicting with keen shafts a deer that is espied in the woods.
Such a man is then overwhelmed with many other afflictions of a similar
kind that originate in fire and weapons. Therefore, disregarding all
worldly propensities (such as desire for children and wives) together
with all fleeting unrealities (such as the body, &c.,) one should, aided
by one’s intelligence, apply proper medicine for the cure of those pain-
ful afflictions. Without Renunciation one can never attain to happiness.
Without Renunciation one can never obtain what is for one’s highest
good. Without Renunciation one can never sleep at ease. Therefore,
renouncing everything, make happiness thy own.—All this was said to
me in past times at Hastinapur by a Brahmana about what Sampaka

had sung. For this reason, I regard Renunciation to be the foremost of
things."

SECTION CLXXVII

“Yudhishthira said, ‘If any person, desiring to accomplish acts
(of charity and sacrifices ), fails to find ( the necessary ) wealth, and
thirst of wealth overwhelms him, what is that which he must do for
obtaining happiness ?’ ”

“Bhishma said, ‘He that regards everything (viz., joy and sorrow,
honour and insult, &c.,) with an equal eye, that never exeits himself (for
gratifying his desire for earthly possessions), that practises truthfulness of
speech, that is freed from all kinds of attachment, and that has no
desire for action, is, O Bharata, a happy man. These five, the ancients
say, are the means for the acquisition of perfect tranquillity or eman-
cipation. These are called Heaven. These are Religion. These

onstitute the pishest, AARRINRSiuA AoseBAEtION is cited the old

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 13 ===

SANTI PARVA i

Narrative of what Manki had sung, when freed from attachments.
Listen to it, O Yudhishthira! Desirous of wealth, Manki found that
he was repeatedly doomed to disappointments. At last with a little
remnant of his property he purchased a couple of young bulls with a
yoke for training them (to agricultural labour). One day the two bulls
properly tied to the yoke, -were taken‘out for training (in the fields).
Shying at the sight of a camel that was lying down on the road, the
animals suddenly ran towards the camel, and fell upon its neck. Enraged
at finding the bulls fall upon its neck, the camel, endued with great
speed, rose up and ran at a quick pace, bearing away the two helpless
creatures dangling on either side of its neck. Beholding his two bulls
thus borne away by that strong camel, and seeing that they were at
the point of death, Manki began to say, ‘If wealth be not ordained by
destiny, it can never be acquired by evenaclever man exerting him-
self with attention and confidence and accomplishing with skill all that
is necessary towards that end. I had, before this, endeavoured by diverse
means and devotion to earn wealth. Behold this misfortune
brought about by destiny to the property I had! My bulls are borne
away, rising and falling, as the camel is running in an uneven course.
This occurrence seems to be an accident.' Alas, those dear bulls of
mine are dangling on the camel’s neck like a couple of gems! This is
only.the result of Destiny. Exertion is futile in what is due to Chance.
Or, if the existence of anything like Exertion (as an ‘agent in the
production of results) be admitted, a deeper search would discover
Destiny to’ be at the bottom.? Hence, the person that desires happiness
should renounce all attachment. The man without attachments, no
longer cherishing any desire for earning wealth, can sleep happily.
Ho, it was well said by Suka while going to the great forest from his
father's abode, renouncing everything !°—Amongst these two, viz.,
one who obtains the fruition of all his wishes, and one who casts off
every wish, the latter, who renounces all, is superior to the former
who obtains the fruition of all. No one could ever attain to the end of

1 Kakataliyam is, literally, ‘after the manner of the crow and the
palmyra fruit.’ The story is that once when a crow perched upon‘a pal-
myra tree, & fruit (which had been ripe) felldown, The fruit fell because
of its.ripeness. It would bea mistake to accept the sitting of the crow
as the cause of the fall. The perching was only an accident. Yet men
very frequently, in tracing causes, accept accidents for inducing causes.
Such men are said to be deceived by ‘the fallacy of the crow and the palmyra
fruit.’"—T.

2 Exertion to be sucosasful must depend on circumstances. The com-
bination of circumstances is destiny.—T.

8 It ia difficult to resist the belief that many of the passages of tha
Santi ara later additions. Suka was tha aon of Vyasa. [To quotes saving

of Suka (or, a8 he was Aiea Gi aS ** was the cal
00) anal t

weiter of sig paggaga, fh teks *sratavall-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 14 ===

12 MAHABHARATA

desire. Only he that is destitute of knowledge and judgments feels an
avidity for protecting his body and life.—Forbear from every desire for
action. O my Soul that art possessed by cupidity, adopt tranquillity
by freeing thyself from all attachments! Repeatedly hast thou been
deceived (by desire and hope). How is it that thou dost not still free
thyself from attachments? IfIam not one that deserves destruction
at thy hands, if I am one with whom thou shouldst sport in delight,
then, O my wealth-coveting Soul, do not induce me towards cupidity.
Thou hast repeatedly lost thy hoarded wealth, O my wealth-
coveting and foolish Soul, when wilt thou succeed in emancipating
thyself from the desire of wealth ? Shame on my foolishness! I have
become a toy of thine! It is thus that one becomesa slave of others.
No one born on earth did ever attain to the end of desire, and to one
that will take birth will succeed in attaining to it. Casting off all
acts, I have at last been roused from sleep. I am now awake.
Without doubt, O Desire, thy heart is as hard as adamant, since
though affected by a hundred distresses, thou does not break into a
hundred pieces! I know thee, O Desire, and all those things that are
dear to thee! Seeking what is dear to thee, I shall fell happiness in
my own Self. O Desire, I know thy root. Thou springest from Will?
—I shall, therefore, avoid Will: Thou shalt then be destroyed with thy
roots. The desire for wealth can never be fraught with happiness. - If
acquired, great is the anxiety that the acquirer feels. If lost after
acquisition, that is felt as death. Lastly, respecting acquisition itself,
itis’ very uncertain. Wealth cannot be got by even the ‘surrenderof
one’s person. What can be more painful than this? When acquired,
one is never gratified with its measure, but one continues to seek-it.
Like the sweet water of the Ganges, wealth only increases one’s hanker-
ing: It is my destruction. Iam now awakened. Do thou, O Desire,
leave me! Let that Desire which has taken refuge in this my body,
—this compound of (five) elements—go withersoever it choosesand
live happily: withersoever it likes.‘ Ye all that are not of the Soul,

1 i.e, arrive at sucha point that nothing was left for him to de-
sire.—T.

Qie, with the view of deine thee good, I shall eurabtipate myself
from all attachments and enjoy the blessedness of tranquillity. —T.

3 Here the theory of desire seems to be reversed. Desire is mere wish
after anything. When its gratification is tonght the form it assumer is that
of determination or will. If, however, Kama be taken as the formulated
desire after specific objects, then, perhaps. the will may be regarded‘as‘its
foundation, at least, in respect of the distress and difficulties that come in
its train.—T.

4 I think the Bombay reading of this verse is incorrect, Bhuttagramak
(nom. sing ) should be Biutagramam (acousative sing ). The Yah is’ Kamah,
It is Desire that is exhorted to go away withersoever it chooses. Ifthe
elements be thns exhorted, than is is dewt’ that the speaker desires, Thia:

Would be inconsistens sri dudd RoiR MAbs NAR. RAVBBBRS com 4

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 15 ===

SANTI PARVA 18

I have no joy in you, for ye follow the lead of Desire and Cupidity !
Abandoning all of you I shall take refuge in the quality of Goodness.'
Beholding all creatures in my own body and my own mind, and devo-
ting my reason to Yoga, my life to the instructions of the wise, and soul
to Brahma, I shall happily rove through the world, without attachment
and without calamities of any kinds, so that thou mayst not be able to
plunge me again into such sorrows !? If I continue to be agitated by
thee, O Desire, I shall necessarily be without a path (by which to effect
my deliverance). Thou, O Desire, art always the progenitor of thirst,
of grief, and of fatigue and toil, I think the grief that one feels at the
loss of wealth is very keen and far greater than what one feels under
any other circumstances. Kinsmen and friends disregard him that has
lost his wealth. With various kinds of humiliation that number by
thousands, there are many faults in property that are more painful still.
On the other hand, the very small happiness that resides in wealth is
mingled with pain and sorrow.* Robbers slay, in the sight of all, the
person that is possessed of wealth, or afflict him with various kinds of
severity, or always fill him with fear. At last, aftera long time, I
have understood that the desire for wealth is fraught with sorrow.
Whatever the object,-O Desire, upon which thou settest thy heart,
thou forcest me to pursue it! Thou art without judgment. Thou art
a fool. Thou art difficult of being contented. Thou canst not be grati-
fied. Thou burnest like fire. Thou dost not enquire (in pursuing an
object) whether it is easy or difficult of attainment. Thou canst not be
filled to'the brim, like the nether region. Thou wishest to plunge
me into sorrow.’ From'this day, O Desire, Iam incapable of living
with thee! I who had felt despair, at first, at the loss of my property,
have now attained tothe high state of perfect freedom from attach-
ments.” At this moment I no longer think of thee and thy train. I had,
before this, felt great ‘misery on thy account. I do not (now) regard
myself as destitute of intelligence. Having adopted Renunciation in
consequence ‘of loss of my property, I now can rest, freed from
every kind of fever. I cast thee off, -O'Desire, with all the passions of
my. heart. Thou shalt not again dwell with me or sport with me. I shall
forgive them that.will slander or speak ill_of me. I shall not injure

1 The use of.the plural Yushmashu might lead at first sight to take it

as standing for the, elements. It is plain, however, that it refers to all
attributes that are founded on Rajas and Tamas.—T.
aac, ~ n aire a ~

2 Beholding ‘all creatures in miy own body and mind i.e., identifying
myself with all creatures or never taking them as distinct and separated
from me ; in other words, professing and-practising the principle of univer-
sal love.—T.

3 Tha two lines ars antithetioal. What is said hore is that though
thers is misery in proparty, thara is no real happiness in affluence. Hence
Nilakantha is cight in supp sean that tha last word of the first line is not

dhans ous adhrne; thaDewalpas thegy/www.holybooks.com
onahs fesne:, bol WRPaE lth ae Te een com cafes!

=== PAGE 16 ===

14 MAHABHARATA

even when injured. If anybody from aversion speaks disagreeable
words of me, disregarding those words I shall address him in agreeable
speeches. In contentment of heart and with all my senses at ease, I
shall always live upon what may be got by me. I shall not contribute
to the gratification of the wishes entertained by thee that art my foe.
Freedom from attachment, emancipation from desire, contentment,
tranquillity, truth, self-restraint, forgiveness, and universal compassion
are the qualities that have now come tome. Therefore, let Desire,
cupidity, thirst, miserliness, avoid me. I have now adopted the path
of Goodness. Having cast off Desire and Cupidity, great is my happiness
now. I shall no longer yield to the influence of Cupidity and no longer
suffer misery like a person of uncleansed soul. One is sure to obtain
happiness according to the measure of the desires he may be able to cast
off. Truly, he who yields himself up to Desire always suffers misery.
Whatever passions connected with Desire are cast off by a person, all
appertain to the quality of Passion. Sorrow and shamelessness and dis-
content all arise from Desire and Wealth. Like a person plunging in
the hot season into a cool lake, I have now entered into Brahma. I have
abstained from work. I have freed myself from grief. Pure happiness
has now come tome. The felicity that results from the gratification of
Desire, or that other purer felicity which one enjoys in heaven, does not
come to evena sixteenth part of that which arises upon the abandon-
ment of all kinds of thirst! Killing the principle of desire, which with
the body makes an agreegate of seven, and which is a bitter foe, I have
entered the immortal city of Brahma and shall pass my days there in
happiness like a king! Relying upon such intelligence, Manki freed
himself from attachments, casting off all desires and attaining to Brahma
that abode of the highest felicity. Indeed, in consequence of the loss
of his two bulls Manki attained to immortality. Indeed, because he
cut the very roots of desire, he attained, through that means, to high
felicity” ”

SECTION CLXXVIII

“Bhishma continued, ‘In this connection is also cited the old
narrative of the verses sung by Janaka the ruler of the Videhas, who
shad attained to tranquillity of soul. What the monarch said was,
‘Unlimited is my wealth. At the same time I have nothing. If the whole
of (my kingdom) Mithila be consumed ina conflagration, I shall incur no
loss.’ In this connection is also cited the speech of Vodhya uttered in
respect of this very topic, viz., freedom from attachments. Listen to it,
O Yudhishthira’! Once on a time the royal son of Nahusha (Yayati)
questioned the Rishi Vodhya who had, in consequence of the abandon-
ment of desire, attained to tranquillity of soul and who had an intimate
acqjavintias: with thwsipeiferitran httBivemiytadyisaidn ‘O thou of great

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 17 ===

SANTI PARVA ib

wisdom, give me instructions about tranquillity. What is that under-
standing relying upon which thou succeedest in wandering over the
world in tranquillity of soul and disengaged from all acts?’ ”

“Vodhya said. ‘I conduct myself according to the instructions of
others but never instruct others myself. I shall, however, mention the
indications of ,those instructions (according to which my conduct is
framed). Thou mayst catch their spirit by reflection. My six precep-
tors are Pingala, the osprey, the snake, the bee in the forest, the maker
of shafts (in the story), arid the maiden (in the story) !}’”

“Bhishma continued, ‘Hope is very powerful (in agitating the
heart), O king! Freedom from hope is high felicity. Reducing hope to
an absence of expectation, Pingala sleeps in peace.? Beholding an osprey
with meat in his beaks, others, that have not found any meat, assail
and destroy him. A certain osprey, by altogether abstaining from meat
obtained felicity. To build a house for one’s own self is productive of
sorrow and not of happiness. The snake, taking up his residence in
another creature's abode, lives in felicity. The ascetics live happily,
betaking themselves to mendicancy, without being injured by any crea-
ture, like bees in the forest. A certain maker of shafts, while employed
at his work, wazso deeply attentive to it that he did not notice the
king who passed b7 his side. When many are together, dispute ensues.
Even when two reside together, they are sure to converse. I, however,

wander alone like the anklet made of sea-shells in the wrist of the
maiden in the story.*’”

1 Nilakantha explains that by Saranga here is meant the bee. The
anweshanam following it is ‘going behind.’ The whole compound means
‘imitation of the bee in the forest.’—T.

2 The allusion is to the story of Pingala in Section 74 ante.—T.

8 The story, evidently avery ancient one, is given in full in the
Bhagavat. Once on a time, a maiden, residing in her father's house, wished
fo feed secretly a number of Brahmanas. While iad Be the grain from
the barn, her anklet: Ph Hae utanerehdineln gig, Hearing Sivegyory
through that maine eta Hela Samco behead —

les/

=== PAGE 18 ===

SECTION CLXXIX

“Yudhishthira said, ‘O thou that art conversant with the conduct
of men, tell me by what conduct a person may succeed in this world,
freed from grief. How also should a person act in this world so that he
may attain to an excellent end?”

“Bhishma said, ‘In this connection is cited the old story of the dis-
course between Prahlada and the sage Ajagara. Once on atime king
Prahlada of great intelligence questioned a wandering Brahmana of
great intelligence and a cleansed and tranquil soul,”

“Prahlada said, ‘Freed from desire, with a cleansed soul, possess-
edof humility and self-restraint, without desire 6f action, free from
malice, agreeable in speech, endued with dignity and intelligence and
wisdom, thou livest (in simplicity) like a child. Thou never covetest
any kind of gain, and never grievest at any kind of loss. Thou art
always contented, O Brahmana, and dost not seem to regard anything
in the world. While all other creatures are being borne away in the
current of desire and passion, thou art perfectly indifferent to all-acts
appertaining to Religion, Profit, and Pleasure. Thou seemest to be in
a state of quietude (without the possibility of agitation). Disregarding
all objects of the senses, thou movest like an emancipated self, only
witnessing everything, (but never taking part in anything). What, O
sage, is thy wisdom, what thy learning, and what thy behaviour (in
consequence of which all this becomes possible) ? Tell me this without
delay, if, O Brahmana, thou thinkest it will do me good!”

“Bhishma continued, ‘That intelligent Brahmana who was well-
conversant with the duties of the world, thus questioned by Prahlada,
answered him in sweet words of grave import. Behold, O Prahlada,
the origin of creatures, their growth, decay, and death, are traceable to
no (intelligible) cause. It is for this that I do not indulge in either joy
or sorrow.' All the propensities (for action) that exist in the universe
may be seen to flow from the very natures of the creatures (to which
they inhere). All things (in the universe) are dependent on their
respective natures. Hence, I am not delighted with anything.” Behold,
O Prahlada, all kinds of union have an aptitude for disunion. All
acquisitions are certain to end in destruction. Hence I never set my
heart upon the acquisition of any object. All things possessed of

1 Animittatah 13 explained by Nilakantha as one that has no cause, i.e,
Brahma, The commentator would take this speech aga theisticoone. I
refuse to reject the plain and obvious meaning of the word, All phases ‘of
speoulative opivion are discussed in the Santi. It is very possible that a
religious inditferentiam is preached bere.—T.

2 The sense of the passage is that as everything depends upon its own
nature, it cannot, by its action, either gladden or grieveme. Itason be
born to meI am not delighted. It he dies, 1am not grieved. His birth
and death depend upon his owa nature ag mortal. I have no power to
alter that nature orcafensaticinrenyhepayinwWholybooks.com
:/www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

htt

=== PAGE 19 ===

SANTI PARVA 17

attributes are certain to meet with destruction. What remains there
for a person then to do who (like me) is conversant with both
the origin and the end of things? Of all things, large or small,
born in the ocean of waters, the end is noticeable. I'see also the death,
which is manifest, O chief of Asuras, of all things, mobile and immobile,
belonging to the land. O best of Danavas, death comes in season unto
even the strongest of winged creatures which range the sky. I see again
that the luminous bodies, large and small, which move inthe firma-
ment, fall down when their time comes. Beholding all created things
possessed of knowledge, to be thus liable to be affected by death, and
thinking all things to be possessed of the same nature, I sleep in peace
without any anxiety of heart. If I get without trouble a copious repast,
Ido not scruple to enjoy it. On the other hand, I pass many days,
together without eating anything. Sometimes people feed me with
costly viands in profusion, sometimes with a small quantity, sometimes
with even less, and sometimesI get no food whatever. I sometimes
eat only a portion of a grain; sometimes the dry sesame cakes from
which the oil has been pressed out. I sometimes eat rice and other
food of the richest kind. Sometimes I sleep on an elevated bedstead
of the best kind. Sometimes I sleep on the bare ground. Sometimes
my bed is made within a fine palace or mansion. I am sometimes clad
in rags, sometimes in sackcloth, sometimes in raiments of fine texture,
sometimes in deer-skins, sometimes in robes of the costliest kind. I
never reject such enjoyments as are consistent with virtue and as are
obtained by me without effort. I do not, at the same time, strive for
attaining such objects as are difficult of acquisition. The rigid vow
Ihave adopted is called Ajagara.1/ That vow can secure immortality.
It is auspicious and griefless. It is incomparable and pure. It is con-
sistent with the counsels of the wise. It is disapproved by persons of
foolish understanding who never follow it. With a pure heart I
conduct myself according to it. My mind never swerves from this vow.
Ihave not swerved from the practices of my order. Iam abstemious
in everything. I know the past and the present. Divested of fear and
wrath and cupidity and errors of judgment, I follow this vow witha
pure heart. There are no restrictions in respect of food and drink and
other objects of enjoyment for one practising this vow. As everything
is dependent on destiny, there is no observance of the considerations of
time and place for one like us. The vow I follow contributes to true
happiness of the heart. It is never observed by those that are wicked.
I follow it with a pure heart. Induced by cupidity, men pursue

1 The word Ajagara implies ‘alter the manner of a “big ‘enake that
cannot move.’ It is believed that fench snakes, without moving, liein the

same place in expectation of eatin i thing comes nea
famiabie when Gere ei learn lon pe Rw Hal Books kon he
olybooks.&0m/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 20 ===

18 MAHABHARATA

different kinds of wealth. If baffled in the pursuit, they become
depressed by sorrow. Reflecting properly upon all this by the aid of my
intelligence which has penetrated the truths of things, I follow this vow
with a pure heart. Ihave seen persons in distress seeking, for the
acquisition of wealth, the shelter of men, good and bad. Devoted to
tranquillity, and with my passions under control, I follow this vow with
a pure heart, Beholding, by the aid of truth, that happiness and.
misery, loss and gain, attachment and renunciation, death and life, are
all ordained by destiny, I follow this vow with a pure heart. Div ested
of fear and attachment and errors of judgment and pride, and endued
with wisdom, intelligence, and understanding, and devoted to tranquillity
and hearing that large snakes without moving enjoy the fruit that
comes to them of itself, I follow their practice with a pure heart.
Without restrictions of any kind in respect of bed and food, endued by
my nature with self-restraint, abstemiousness, pure vow, truth, and
purity of conduct, and without any desire to store (for future use) the
rewards of action, I follow, with a delighted and pure heart, this vow.
All causes of sorrow have fled from me in consequence of my having
driven off the object of desire. Having received an accession of light,
I follow this vow with a pure heart, for controlling my soul which is
thirsty and unrestrained but which is capable (under proper culture)
of depending upon itself (without the necessity of external objects to
keep it engaged). Without paying any heed to the concerns towards
which my heart, mind, words would like to lead me, and marking
that the happiness which is connected with these is both difficult of
acquisition and fleeting in respect of duration, I follow this vow with a
pure heart. Learned men possessed of great intelligence, desirous of
proclaiming their own feats, have while establishing their own theories
and censuring those of others, said this and that on this topic which is
incapable of being settled by disputation. Foolish men fail to under-
stand this vow ina proper light. I, however, see it to be destructive
of Ignorance. Regarding it also as fraught with immortality and asa
remedy against diverse kinds of evil, I wander among men, having
subdued all faults and having freed myself from thirst (after worldly
foods) f"

“Bhishma continued, ‘That high-souled person who, having freed
himself from attachments and divested himself of fear, cupidity,
foolishness, and wrath, follows this Ajagara vow, or indulges in this
sport, as it may be called, certainly succeeds in passing his days in great
delight.’ ”

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 21 ===

SECTION CLXXX

“Yudhishthira said, ‘Which of these, O grandsire, viz. kinsmen,
or acts, or wealth, or wisdom should be the refuge of a person?
Questioned by me, answer me this !

“Bhishma said, ‘Wisdom is the refuge of creatures. Wisdom is
regarded as the highest of acquisitions. Wisdom is the highest felicity
in the world. Wisdom is heaven inthe estimation of the good and
virtuous. It was through wisdom that Vali, Prahlada, Namuchi, and
Manki, when they lost their (earthly) prosperity, succeeded in acquir-
ing felicity. What is there that is superior to wisdom? In this
connection is cited the old story of the discourse between Indra and
Kasyapa. Listen to it O Yudhishthira! Once on a time a prosperous
Vaisya, in the enjoyment of prosperity, and proud of his affluence,
threw down, by negligently driving his car, a Rishi’s son of rigid vows
named Kasyapa, devoted to penances. Prostrated on the ground, the
young man, in exceeding pain, gave way to his wrath; and under the
influence of despair resolved, saying, ‘I shall cast off my life. A poor
man has no need of life in this world.” While the Brahmana was lying
in that state, silent and agitated, deprived of energy and at the point
of death, Indra appeared on the scene in the form ofa jackal and
addressing him, said, ‘All (inferior) creatures covet birth in the human
race. Among men again, the status of a Brahmana is much desired.
Thou, O Kasyapa, arta human being! Amongst human beings, thou
art again a Brahmana. Among Brahmanas, thou art again one that is
conversant with the Vedas. Having obtained that which is attainable
with very great difficulty, itbehoveth thee not to give up life from
dolly! All kinds’of (worldly) acquisitions are fraught with pride. The
declaration of the Srutis in that respect is perfectly true. Thou lookest
the picture of contentment. In forming sucha resolve (which is so
derogatory of thy own self) about casting off thy life, thou actest from
cupidity! ©, they are crowned with success that have hands! I
eagerly wish for the status of those creatures that have hands! We
covet hands as eagerly as you covet riches. There is no acquisition that
is more valuable than the acquisition of hands. Behold, O Brahmana,
Icannot extract this thorn that has entered my body, or crush these
insects and worms that are biting and afflicting me greatly !_ They that
have bestowed upon them two hands with ten fingers, succeed in throw-
ing away or crushing the worms (by scratching) that bite their limbs.
They succeed in constructing shelters for themselves from rain, cold,
and heat. They succeed also in enjoying excellent clothes for them-
selves, good food, comfortable beds, and excellent habitations. Lying
on this Earth, they that have hands enjoy kine and other animals and
cause them to carry burthens or drag their vehicles, and by the aid of
diverse means bringytharmaaimensundananitiysSots Kagit OWN Purposes).

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 22 ===

20 MAHABHARATA

Those living creatures that are without tongues, that are helpless, of
little strength, and destitute of hands, bear all the several kinds of
misery (indicated above). By good luck, O ascetic, thou art not like
them. By good luck, thou art not a jackal, nor a worm, nor a mouse,
nor a frog, nor an animal of any other miserable order. With this
measure of gain (that thou hast won), thou shouldst, O Kasyapa, be
contented! How.happy, again, shouldst thou feel at the thought that
amongst living creatures thou art a superior Brahmana! These worms
are biting me! For want of handsI am unable to drive them off.
Behold this my miserable plight! I do not cast off life because to do
so isa very sinful act, and lest, indeed, I fallinto a more miserable
order of existence! This order of existence, viz. that of a jackal, to
which I now belong is rather tolerable. Miserable as it is, there are
many orders of existence below it that are more miserable still. By
birth certain classes of creatures become happier than others who be-
come subject to great woe. But I never see that there is any order of
being which can be said to be in the possession of perfect happiness.
Human beings, obtaining affluence, next wish for sovereignty. Having
achieved sovereignty their next wish is for the status of gods. Having
won that status they then wish for the chiefdom of the celestials. If
thou becomest affluent, thou wilt never succeed in becoming a king
(for thou art a Brahmana by birth), nor in becoming a god (because, in
reality, thy status of Brahmanahood is equal if not superior to that of a
god). If by any means (led away by the alluring prospect of heavenly
bliss) thou becomest a god (instead of attaining to a superior position),
thou wilt then covet for the chiefdom of the gods. In no condition
wilt thou be contented. Contentment does not result from acquisition
of desirable objects. Thirst is never slaked although there is profusion
of water.! The thirst for acquisition only blazes up with each fresh
acquisition like a fire with new faggots thrown into it. In thee there is
grief. But joy also dwells in thee. Both happiness and misery dwell
in thee. Why then shouldst thou yield to grief ? One should shut up,
like birds in a cage, the very springs, viz. the understanding and the
senses, of all one’s desires and acts. There can be no cutting of a second
head, nor of a third hand. That which does not exist can produce no
fear. One that is not acquainted with the enjoyment a certain object
affords, never feels a desire for that object. Desires arise from the
actual experience of the pleasures that touch, or sight, or hearing gives.
Thou hast no idea of the taste of the wine called Varuni or of the meat
of the birds called Ladwala, There is no drink and no food more
delicious than these. Thou hast no idea also, O Kasyapa, of every
other superior kind of drink and food that exists among men, for thou

1 The meaning is that even copious drafts do not slake thirst perma:

nently, for after being. stalked lh AB ARERR SObEBRe coh

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 23 ===

SANTI PARVA 21

hast never tasted it. Without doubt, therefore, not to taste, not to
see, should be the vow of a man if he is to win happiness. Creatures
that have hands, without doubt, become strong and earn wealth. Men
are reduced by men toa state of servitude, and are repeatedly afflicted
(at the hands of their own species) with death, imprisonment, and other
tortures. Although such their condition, yet even they (without yield-
ing to grief) laugh and sport and indulge in merriment. Others again,
though endued with might of arms, and possessed of knowledge and
great energy of mind, follow censurable, sinful, and miserable pro-
fessions. They seek to change such professions for other pursuits (that
are more dignified) but then they are bound by their own acts (of a
previous life) and by the force of Destiny. The vilest man of the
Pukkasa or the Chandila orders never wishes to cast of his life. He is
quite contented with the order of his birth. Behold the illusion in
this respect! Beholding those amongst thy species that are destitute of
arms, or struck with palsy, or afflicted with other diseases, thou canst
regard thyself as very happy and possessed of valuable accompaniments
amongst the members of thy ownorder. If this thy regenerated body
remains safe and sound, and free from disease, and al! thy limbs remain
perfect, thou art sure of never incurring any reproach amongst men.
It would not behove thee, O Brahmana, to cast off thy life even if any
blame, founded on fact and capable of bringing about thy dismissal
from caste, attached to thee! Rise, and practise virtue. It is not
meet that thou shouldst throw away thy life! If, O regenerate one,
thou listen to me and place credence on my words, thou wilt then
obtain the highest reward of the religion inculcated in the Vedas. Do
thou set thyself to Vedic studies, and duly maintain thy sacred fire, and
observe truth, and self-restraint, and charity. Never compare thyself
boastfully with another. They who, by devoting themselves to the
study of the Vedas, become competent for performing sacrifices for
themselves and others, have no need to indulge in any kind of regret
or fear any kind of evil. They that are born under an auspicious con-
stellation on an auspicious lunation and at an auspicious hour, strive
their best for performing sacrifices, practising charity, and procreating
children, and desiring to pass their time cheerfully in those acts, at last
win very great happiness.!’ They, on the other hand, that are born
under evil constellations, inauspicious lunations, and at evil hours,
become destitute of sacrifices and progeny and at last fall into the
Asura order.? In my former life I had much useless learning. I always

1 In the Bengal texts, 44 is made a triplet. The correct reading, how-
ever, is to take 44 asa couplet and 45 asa triplet. Nilakantha points out
that Icchantaste, dc., is grammatically connected with 45.—T.

2 The auspicious constellations are such as Pushya and others ; the
inauspicious are Mula, Aslesha, Magha, &c. ; yajnaprasava may also mean
the fruits of sacrifio®pweladed from https://www.holybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 24 ===

22 MAHABHARATA

sought for reasons and had very little faith. I was a slanderer of the
Vedas. I was destitute of the (fourfold) objects of life, and was devot-
ed tothat science of argumentation which is based upon ocular or
tangible proofs.! I used to utter words based on (plausible) reasons.
Indeed, in assemblies, I always spoke of reasons (and never faith). I
used to speak irreverently of the declarations of the Srutis and address
Brahmanas in domineering tones. I was an unbeliever,sceptial of
everything, and though really ignorant, proud of my learning. This
status of a jackal that I have obtained in this life is the consequence, O
regenerate one, of those sins of mine! If even after hundreds of days
and nights I that ama jackal can once again obtain the status of
humanity, I shall then pass my life in contentment, heedful of the true
objects of existence, and engaged in sacrifices and gifts. I shall then
know what should be known, and avoid what should be avoided! Thus
addressed, the ascetic Kasyapa, rising up, said, ‘O, thou art certainly
possessed of knowledge and great intelligence !_ I am really surprised at
all this? With eyes whose vision was extended by knowledge, the
Brahmana then beheld that being who had addressed him to be Indra
chief of the gods and the lord of Sachi. Kasyapa then worshipped that
god having the best of steeds for the animal that bore him. Receiving
afterwards the god's permission, the Brahmana returned to his abode.’”

SECTION CLXXXI

“Yudhishthira said, ‘Tell me, O Grandsire, if gifts, sacrifices,
penances, and dutiful services returned to preceptors, are productive
of wisdom and high felicity”?

“Bhishma said, ‘If the mind becomes affected by desire, wrath
and other evil passions, it then runs towards sin. If one’s acts are
stained by sin, one is obliged to dwell in painful regions. Sinful men
take birth in indigent circumstances and repeatedly suffer the pangs of
famine, woe, fear, and death. Those that are virtuous in their acts, and
possessed of faith, and that have their senses under control, become born
as affluent menand repeatedly sport in festivities and heaven and happi-
ness. Unbelievers, with their arms manacled, are sent to regions render-
ed inaccessible by carnivorous beasts and elephants and full of terrors
in consequence of snakes and robbers, What more need be said of
them? They, on the other hand, who have reverence for gods and guests,

1, Anwikshikim may also mean ‘microscopic.'—T.

2 Tha word datiam, generally rendered ‘gifts’ or ‘charity,’ means and
includes protection of suppliants, abatention from injury as regards all
creatures, and actual gifts made outside the sacrificial altar. Similarly,
the maintenance of the sacred fire, penances, purity of conduct, the study
of the Vedas, hospitality to gueats, and offer of food to the Viswadevas, are

all included in the FERIA SS OOS PRGA REL LEAR ERS ‘sacrifice.’ —T,

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 25 ===

SANTI PARVA 93

who are liberal, who are fond of good and honest men, go, in consequence
of their acts of charity, along that happy way which belongs to persons
of cleansed souls. They that have no reverence for virtue are as vile
among men as seedless grains among corn or the gnat among birds. That
which is ordained in consequence of the acts of a past life pursues
the actor even if the latter strives his best for leaving it behind.’ It
sleeps when he sleeps and does whatever else he does.? Like his shadow
it rests when he rests, proceeds when he proceeds, and acts when he
acts. Whatever actsa man does he has certainly to obtain the fruits
thereof. Death is dragging all creatures who are surely destined to fall
(into orders of existence they deserve) and who are surely liable to
enjoy or suffer that which has been ordained as the consequence of their
acts. The acts of a past life develop their consequences in their own
Proper time evenas flowers and fruits, without extraneous efforts of
any kind, never fail to appear when their proper time comes. After
the consequences, as ordained, of the acts of a past life, have been
exhausted (by enjoyment or sufferings), honour and disgrace, gain and
loss, decay and growth, no longer flow or appear in respect of any one.
This happens repeatedly.* A creature while still in the mother’s
womb enjoys or suffers the happiness or the misery that has been
ordained for him in consequence of his own acts. In childhood or youth
or old age, at whatever period of life one does an act good or bad, the
consequences thereof are sure to visit him in his next life at precisely
the same period. Asa calf recognises and approaches its parent in the
midst of even a thousand kine, even so the acts of a past life recognise
and visit the doer in his new life. Washed in water a (dirty) piece of
cloth becomes clean. Similarly, men burning in repentance obtain
endle s happiness by proper penances.* Those that can take up their
residence in the woods and by performing austerities for a long period
can wash themselves of their sins, succeed in obtaining the objects on
which they set their hearts. Asno one can mark the track of birds

1 i.e, even if he seeks to avoid it.—T.
2 ie, becomes his inseparable associate.—T.

3 What is meant is that if once the consequences of the acts of a past
life are exhausted, the creature (with respect to whom such exbaustion
takes place) is freed from all vicissitudes of life. Lest, however, such
creatures become emancipated, the orthodox view is that a balance is
always left of both merit and demerit, so that a new birth must take place,
and th» consequences. of what is thus left as balance must begin to be
enjoyed or suffered. “This is not referred to here, but this is the view of all
orthodox Hindus,—T.

4 The first word of this verse is diversely read. The reading I adopt
is samunnam, meaning drenched in water. lfit be samjuktamit would
mean united, with filth, of course. Another reading is samswinnam,
meaning ‘drenched with sweat.’ Nilakantha explains wpavasah here as
equivalent to theDeemisrciadiiesm oftsel/wewettinlybpolesessions, Ordinarily, it
means ‘fabttp?+dw.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 26 ===

24 MAHABHARATA

in the sky or of fishes in the water, similarly the track of persons whose
souls have been cleansed by knowledge cannot be marked by any.?
There is no need of any more eloquence or any more reference to sinful
acts. Suffice it to say that one should, with proper judgment and as
befits one best, do what is for one’s good. This is the means by which
wisdom and high felicity may be achieved.”

SECTION CLXXXII

“Yudhishthira said, “Whence has this universe consisting of
mobile and immobile creatures, been created? Whom does it go to
when destruction sets in? Tell me this, O Grandsire! Indeed, by
whom has this universe with its oceans, its firmament, its mountains,
its clouds, its lands, its fire, and its wind, been created. How were
all objects created? Whence this division into separate orders of
existence ?. Whence are their purity and impurity, and the ordinances
about virtue and vice? Of what kind is the life of living creatures ?
Where also do they go who die? Tell us everything about this and
the other world’

“Bhishma said, ‘In this connection is cited the old narrative of
the sacred words that Bhrigu said in reply to the questions of Bhara-
dwaja. Beholding the great Rishi Bhrigu blazing with energy and
splendour, seated on the Kailasa summit, Bharadwaja addressed him in
the following words.’

“Bharadwaja said, ‘By whom was this world with its ocean, its
firmament, its mountains, its clouds, its lands, its fire, and its wind,
created ? How were all creatures first created ? Whence this distinc-
tion of castes? Whence the purity and the impurity of (behaviour),
and whence the ordinances about virtue and vice, for living creatures ?
Of what kind is the life of living creatures? Where do they go who
die? It behoveth thee to tell me everything about this and the other
world.’ Thus addressed about his doubts by Bharadwaja, the illustrious
and regenerate I?ishi Bhrigu who resembled Brahma itself, replied unto
him, saying these words.

“Bhrigu said, ‘There isa Primeval Being, known ‘to the great
Rishis, of the name of Manasa. He is without beginning and without
end. That Divine Being is incapable of being penetrated by weapons.
He is without decay and is Immortal. He is said to be Unmanifest. He
is Eternal, Undecaying, and Unchangeable. Through Him are creatures
born and through Him they die. He first created a Divine Being

1 This verse occurs in the Santi Paroa. It is difficult to understand
in what sense it is said that the track of the virtuous can not be marked,
Perhaps, it is intended that such men do not leave any history or record
behind them, they DR LURR ABER ARRAN Rind af Action good or bad.—T

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 27 ===

SANTI PARVA 25

known by the name of Mahat.1 Mahat created Consciousness. That
Divine Being created Space. That puissant Being is the holder of all
created objects. From Space was born Water, and from Water were
born Fire and Wind. Through the union of Fire and Wind was born
the Earth. Self-born Manasa then created a divine Lotus pregnant with
Energy. From that Lotus sprang Brahman, that Ocean of Veda.? The
Srutis say that as soon as born, that divine Being uttered the words,
‘I am He! For this He came to be called by the name of Consciousness.
He hasall created things for his body and He istheir Creator.* These five
elements that we see are that Brahman of great energy. The mountains
are his bones. The earth is his fat and flesh. The oceans are his blood.
Space is his stomach. The Wind is his breath. Fire is his energy. The
rivers are his arteries and veins. Agni and Soma, otherwise called the
Sun and the Moon, are called his eyes. The firmament above is his
head. The earth is his two feet. The cardinal and subsidiary points of
the horizon are his arms. Without doubt, He is incapable of being known
and His Soul is inconceivable by even persons crowned with ascetic
success. The Divine Being, who pervades the whole universe, is also
known by the name of Ananta (Infinite). He lives in Consciousness,
and is incapable of being known by persons of uncleansed souls. Asked
by thee Ihave now told thee of Him who created Consciousness for
evoking into existence all created objects, and from whom this universe
has sprung.’

“Bharadwaja said, ‘What isthe extent of the firmament, of the
points of the horizon, of the surface of this earth, and of the Wind?
By telling me the truth, solve my doubts.’

“Bhrigu said, ‘The sky thou seest above is Infinite. It is the
abode of persons crowned with ascetic success and of divine beings. It
is delightful, and consists of various regions. Its limits cannot be
ascertained. The Sun and the Moon cannot see, above or below, beyond
the range of their own rays. There where the rays of the Sun and the
Moon cannot reach are luminaries‘ which are self-effulgent and which
possess splendour like that of the Sun or the fire. Know this, O giver
of honours, that possessed of far-famed splendour, even these last do
not behold the limits of the firmament in consequence of the inaccessi-
bility and infinity of those limits. This Space which the very gods cannot

1 Manasa means ‘appertaining to the mind,’ or rather, the Will,
Mahat literally means great.—T.

2 Veda is here used in the sense of Knowledge and Power._T,

8 Sarvabhutatmakrit is explained by Nilakantha thus. He whois
Sarvabhutatman is again bhutakrit. On the authority of the Srutis the
commentator adds,—ye ete pancha akasadayodhatavo-dharana-karmanah sa
eva Brahma,—T.

4 ‘The word Devah here is evidently used in the sense of luminous or
shining ones and Not in that of gods or deities—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
4 https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 28 ===

26 MAHABHARATA

measure is full of many blazing and self-Iluminous worlds each above the
other. Beyond the limits of land are oceans of water. Beyond water is
darkness. Beyond darkness is water again, and beyond the last is fire.
Downwards, beyond the nether regions, is water. Beyond water is
the region belonging to the great snakes. Beyond that is sky once
more, and beyond the sky is water again. Even thus there is water and
sky alternately without end. Even such are the limits of the Divinity
represented by water. The very gods are unable to ascertain limits of
fire and wind and water. The nature of fire, wind, water, and land, is
like that of space. They are distinguished through want of true Know-
ledge. Sages read in diverse scriptures the limits that have been
declared of the three worlds and the ocean. Who is there, however,
that would set limits to what cannot be grasped by vision and what is
inaccessible (in all its parts)? If even it becomes possible to ascertain
the limits of the firmament which is the track of the gods and beings
crowned with ascetic success, it can never be possible to set limits to
that which is limitless and known by the name of the Infinite, to that
which correspond with the name by which it is known, viz., what
has been called the high-souled Manasa ? Whenagain His form is some-
times contracted and sometimes expanded, how can any one else except
one that is equal to Him, be able to comprehend His limits ? From the
Lotus (of which I have already spoken) was first created the Omniscient
lord, Brahman, endued with form, of essence comprised of Righteous-
ness, and the Creator of all mobile and immobile things,’

“Bharadwaja said, ‘If Brahman sprang from the Lotus, then it is
the Lotus that should be regarded as the First-born and not Brahman.
Why, however, is Brahma said to be the first ? Do thou remove that
doubt of mine.’

“Bhrigu said, ‘The Earth it is that is called the Lotus. It was
created for giving a seat unto that form of Manasa which became
Brahman. Reaching up to heaven itself, the Sumeru became the
pericarp of the Lotus. Remaining within it, tbe puissant Lord of the
Universe created all the worlds.’ ”

SECTION CLXXXIII

“Bharadwaja said, ‘Tell me, O best of Brahmanas, how the
puissant Brahman residing within Meru, created these diverse kinds of
objects.”

“Bhrigu said, ‘The great Manasa (in his form of Brahman) created
the diverse kinds of objects by fiat of Will. For the protection then of
all creatures, he first created water. Water is the life of all creatures,
and it is water which aids their growth. If there be no water, all crea-
tures would perish. The whole universe is pervaded by water. Earth,

mountains, clouds, and all things which have form, should all
Downloaded from https:/www.holybooks.com be known

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 29 ===

SANTI PARVA 27

as transformations of water. They haveall been produced by the
solidification of that element.’

“Bharadwaja said, ‘How did water spring ? How Fire and Wind?
How also was the earth created? I have great doubts on these points.’

“Bhrigu said, ‘O regenerate one, in very ancient times called the
Brahma-kalpa, the high-souled Rishis of the regenerate order, when they
assembled together, felt this very doubt about the creation of the
universe. Restraining speech, they remained immovable, engaged in
(ascetic) contemplation. Having given up all food, they subsisted upon
air alone, and remained thus for a thousand celestial years. At the end
of that period, certain words as sacred as those of the Vedas simulta-
neously reached the ears of all. Indeed, this celestial voice was heard
in the firmament to say, ‘Formerly there was only infinite Space,
perfectly motionless and immovable. Without sun, moon, stars, and
wind, it seemed to be asleep. Then water sprang into existence like
something darker within darkness. Then from the pressure of water
arose wind. Asan empty vessel without a hole appears at first to be
without any sound, but when filled with water, air appears and makes
a great noise, even so when infinite Space was filled with water, the
wind arose with a great noise, penetrating through the water.t That
wind, thus generated by the pressure of the ocean of water, still moveth.
Coming into (unobstructed) Space, its motion is never stopped. Then
in consequence of the friction of wind and water, fire possessed of great
might and blazing energy, sprang into existence, with flames directed
upwards. That fire dispelled the darkness that had covered Space.
Assisted by the wind, fire drew Space and Water together. Indeed,
combining with the wind, fire became solidified. While falling from
the sky, the liquid portion of fire solidified again and became ‘what is
known as the earth. The earth or land, in which everything is born, is
the origin of all kinds of taste, of all kinds of scent, of all kinds of liquids,
and of all kinds of animals.’ ”

SECTION CLXXXIV

“Bharadwaja said, ‘When the high-souled Brahman has created
thousands of creatures, why is it that only these five elements which
he created first, which pervade all the universe and which are great
creatures, have come tohave the name of creatures applied to them
exclusively ?°*

1 The Rishés supposed that the pouring of water created the air
instead only of displaying it.—T.

2 All oreated things are called Bhutas, but the five principal elements,
viz., fire, air, earth, water, and space, are especially called Bhutas or
Mahabhutas,—T. Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 30 ===

28 MAHABHARATA

“Bhrigu said, ‘All things that belong to the category of the
Infinite or the Vast receive the appellation of Great. It is for this
reason that these five elements have come to be called Great creatures.
Activity is wind. The sound that is heard is space. The heat that is
within it is fire. The liquid juices occuring in it are water. The solidi-
fied matter, viz., flesh and bones, are earth. The bodies (of living
creatures) are thus made of the five (primeval) elements. All mobile
and immobile objects are made of these five elements. The five senses
also of living creatures partake of the five elements. The ear partakes
of the properties of space, the nose of earth; the tongue of water;
touch of wind ; and the eyes of light (of fire).’

“Bharadwaja said, ‘If all mobile and immobile objects be
composed of these five elements, why is it that in all immobile objects
those elements are not visible? Trees do not appear to have any heat-
They donot seem to have any motion. They are again made up of
dense particles. The five elements are not noticeable in them. Trees
do not hear : they do not see ; they are not capable of the perceptions
of scent or taste. They have not also the perception of touch. How
then can they be regarded as composed of the five (primeval) elements?
It seems to me that in consequence of the absence of any liquid
material in them, of any heat, of any earth, of any wind, and of any
empty space, trees cannot be regarded as compounds of the five
(primeval) elements.

“Bhrigu said, ‘Without doubt, though possessed of density, trees
have space within them. The putting forth of flowers and fruits is
always taking place inthem. They have heat within them in conse-
quence of which leaf, bark, fruit, and flower, are seen to droop. They
sicken anddry up. That shows they have perception of touch. Through
sound of wind and fire and thunder, their fruits and flowers drop down.
Sound is perceived through the ear. Trees have, therefore, ears and do
hear. A creeper winds round a tree and goes about all its sides. A blind
thing cannot find its way. For this reason it is evident that trees have
vision. Then again trees recover vigour and put forth flowers in conse-
quence of odours, good and bad, of the sacred perfume of diverse kinds
of dhupas. It is plain that trees have scent.’ They drink water by
their roots. They catch diseases of diverse kinds. Those diseases again
are cured by different operations. From this it isevident that trees
have perceptions of taste. Asone can suck up water through a bent
lotus-stalk, trees also, with the aid of the wind, drink through their
roots. They are susceptible of pleasure and pain, and grow when cut
or lopped off. From these circumstances I see that trees have life.
They are not inanimate. Fire and wind cause the water thus sucked

1 This is certainly curious as showing that the ancient Hindus knew

how to treat disaaged Biante APA SEMROES, HARBDAR. Kigour—T.

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 31 ===

SANTI PARVA 29

up to be digested. According, again, to the quantity of the water taken
up, the tree advances in growth and becomes humid. In the bodies of
all mobile things the five elements occur. In each the proportions are
different. It is in consequence of these five elements that mobile
objects can move their bodies. Skin, flesh, bones, marrow, and arteries
and veins, that exist together in the body are made of earth. Energy,
wrath, eyes, internal heat, and that other heat which digest the food
that is taken, these five, constitute the fire that occurs in all embodied
creatures.' The ears, nostrils, mouth, heart, and stomach, these five,
constitute the element of space that occurs in the bodies of living
creatures, Phlegm, bile, sweat, fat, blood, are the five kinds of water
that occur in mobile bodies. Through the breath called Prana a living
creature is enabled to move. Through that called Vyana, they put forth
strength for action. That called Apana moves downwards. That called
Samana resides within the heart. Through that called Udana one eructates
and is enabled to speak in consequence of its piercing through (the
lungs, the throat, and the mouth), These are the five kinds of wind
that cause an embodied creature to live and move. The properties of
scent an embodied creature knows through the earth-element in him.
From the water-element he perceives taste. From the fire-element
represented by the eyes, he perceives forms, and from the wind-element
he obtains the perception of touch. Scent, touch, taste, vision, and
sound, are regarded as the ( general ) properties of every mobile and
immobile object. I shall first speak of the several kinds of scent. They
are agreeable, disagreeable, sweet, pungent, far-going, varied, dry,
indifferent. All these nine kinds of scent are founded upon the
earth-element. Light is seen by the eyes and touch through the wind-
element. Sound, touch, vision and taste are the properties of water.
Ishall speak (in detail) now of the perception of taste. Listen to me.
High-souled Rishis have spoken of diverse kinds of taste. They are
sweet, saltish, bitter, astringent, sour, and pungent. These are the six
kinds of taste appertaining to the water-element. Light contributes
to the vision of form. Form is of diverse kinds. Short, tall, thick,
four-cornered, round, white, black, red, blue, yellow, reddish, hard,
bright, smooth, oily, soft, and terrible. These are the sixteen different
kinds of form which constitutes the property of light or vision. The
property of the wind-element is touch. Touch is of various kinds:
warm, cold, agreeable, disagreeable, indifferent, burning, mild, soft,
light, and heavy. Both sound and touch are the two properties of the
wind-element. These are the eleven properties that appertain to the
wind. Space has only one property. It is called sound. I shall now
tell thee the different kinds of sound. They are the seven original

1 K. P. Singha wrongly renders this verse. The Burdwan translator
is right,—T.
Downloaded from https:/Awww.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 32 ===

30 MAHABHARATA

notes called Shadja, Rishabha, Gandhara, Mahdhyama, Panchama, Dhaivata
and Nishada. These are the seven kinds of the property that appertains
to space. Sound inheres like the Supreme Being in all space though
attached especially to drums and other instruments. Whatever sound
is heard from drums small and large, and conchs, and clouds, and
cars, and animate and inanimate creatures, are all included in these
seven kinds of sound already enumerated. Thus sound, which is the
property of space, is of various kinds. The learned have said sound to
be born of space. When raised by the different kinds of touch, which
isthe property of the wind, it may be heard. It cannot however, be
heard, when the different kinds of touch are inceptive. The elements,
mingling with their counterparts in the body, increase and grow.
Water, fire, wind are always awake in the bodies of living creatures.
They are the roots of the body. Pervading the five life-breaths (already
mentioned) they reside in the body.’”

SECTION CLXXXV

“Bharadwaja said, ‘How does bodily fire or heat, entering the
body, reside there ?. How also does the wind, obtaining space for itself,
cause the body to move and exert itself ?”

“Bhrigu said, ‘I shall, O regenerate one, speak to thee of the
course in which the wind moves, and how, O sinless one, that mighty
element causes the bodies of living creatures to move and exert them-
selves, Heat resides within the head (brain) and protects the body (from
perishing). The wind or breath called Prana, residing within the head
and the heat that is there, cause all kinds of exertion. That Prana is
the living creature, the universal soul, the eternal Being, and the Mind,
Intellect, and Consciousness of all living creatures, as alsoall the objects
of the senses.? Thus the living creature is, in every respect, caused by
Prana to move about and exert. Then in consequence of the other
breath called Samana, every one of the senses is made to act as it does.
The breath called Apana, having recourse to the heat that is in the
urethra and the abdomenal intestines, moves, engaged in carrying out
urine and faces. That single breath which operates in these three, is
called Udana by those that are conversant with science. That breath
which operates, residing in all the joints of men’s bodies, is called Vyana.
There is heat in the bodies of living creatures which is circulated all
over the system by the breath Samana. Residing thus in the body,
that breath operates upon the different kinds of watery and other
elementary substances and all bad humours. That heat, residing
between Apana and Prana, in the region of the navel, operates, with the
aid of those two breaths, in digesting all food that is taken by a living

_1 Both the Bengal and the Bombay texts read bhutani. The correct
reading, however, sppests t0;be HMO mabooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 33 ===

SANTI PARVA 31

creature. There isa duct beginning from the mouth down to the anal
canal. Its extremity is called the anus. From this main duct numerous
subsidiary ones branch out in the bodies of all living creatures.’ In
consequence of the rush of the several breaths named above ( through
these ducts ), those breaths mingle together. The heat (that dwells in
Prana) is called Ushman. It is this heat that causes digestion in all
creatures possessed of bodies. The breath called Prana, the bearer of a
current of heat, descends ( from the head ) downwards to the extremity
of the anal canal and thence is sent upwards once more. Coming back
to its seat in the head, it once more sends down the heat it bears,
Below the navel is the region of digested matter. Above it is that for
the food which is taken. In the navel are all the forces of life that
sustain the body. Urged by the ten kinds of breaths having Prana for
their first, the ducts (already mentioned), branching out from the
heart, convey the liquid juices that food yields, upwards, downwards,
and in transverse directions. The main duct leading from the mouth
to the anus isthe path by which yogins, vanquishers of fatigue, of
perfect equanimity in joy and sorrow, and possessed of great patience,
succeed in attaining to Brahma by holding the soul within the brain.*
Even thus is heat panted in the breaths called Prana and Apana and
others, of all embodied creatures. That heat is always burning there
like a fire placed in any (visible) vessel.’ ”

SECTION CLXXXVI

“Bharadwaja said, ‘If itis the wind that keeps us alive, if it is
the wind that causes us to move and exert, if it is the wind that causes
us to breathe and to speak, then it seems that life is worth little. If
the animal heat (that digests all food) be of the nature of fire, and if
itis that fire which assists at digestion by dissolving the food we take,
then life is worth little. When an animal dies, that which is calied its
life is never seen leaving it. Only the breath leaves it, and the internal
heat becomes extinguished. If life were nothing else than wind, or

1 The word for duct is Srotas. It may also be rendered ‘channel.’
Very like the principal artery or aorta.—T.

3 Notwithstanding much that is crude anatomy and crude physiology
in these sections, it is evident, however, that certain glimpses of truth were
perceived by the Rishis of ancient times. Verse 15 shows that the great
discovery of Harvey in modern times was known in ancient India.—T.

83 In works on yoga it is laid down that the main duct should be
brought under the control of the will, The soul may then, by an act of
volition, be withdrawn from the whole physical system into the convolutions
of the brain in the head. The brain, in the language of yogins, is a lotus of
a thousand leaves. If the soul be withdrawn into it, the living creature will
then be liberated from the necessity of food and sleep, &0., and will live on
from age to age, absorbed in contemplation of divinity and in perfect
beatitude.—T.

Downloaded from https:/Avww.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 34 ===

32 MAHABHARATA

if life depended only on the wind, then it could have been seen like the
external sea of air, and when passing out it would have mingled with
that air. If life depended upon air, and if it ended with the escape of
that air from the body, it would then mingle with another portion of
air (that exists externally) like a portion of water escaping into the
great ocean and thereby only changing the place of its residence. Ifa
quantity of water be thrown into a well, or if the flame of a lamp be
thrown into a blazing fire, either of them, entering a homogeneous
element, loses its independent or separate existence. If life were air,
it also, when the animal died, would mingle with the great ocean of
air outside. How can we say that there is life in this animal body
which is made up of the five (primal) elements? If one of those ele-
ments disappear, the union of the other four becomes dissolved. The
element of water drieth up if food be not taken. The element of air
disappears if the breath be restrained. The element of space disappears
if the excretions cease. So also the element of fire becomes extinguished
if food does not go in. The element of earth breaks in pieces in
consequence of diseases, wounds, and other sufferings. If only one of
the five becomes afflicted, the union, being dissolved, the five go away
into five different directions. When the body which isa union of the
elements, becomes separated into five ingredients, whither doth life
go? What dothit then know? What doth it then hear? What
doth it then say? This cow (that is given away to a holy Brahmana),
it is said, will rescue me in the other world. The animal, however,
that is given away, itself dies, Whom then will this cow rescue? The
taker of the cow ( in gift ) and the giver are both equal (in being both
subject to death). Both of them meet with extinction in this world.
How then will they meet again? How will the person that has been
eaten up by birds, or that has been broken in pieces by a fall froma
mountain summit, or that has been consumed by fire, regain life? The
root of a tree that has been cut down does not grow up again. Only
the seeds put forth sprouts. Where is the person who having died
comes back (to some sort of new existence )? Only seeds were
originally created. All this universe is the result of seeds in succession.

They that die, die to perish. Seeds result from seeds,’

SECTION CLXXXVII

“Bhrigu said, ‘There isno destruction of the living creature, or
of what is given, or of our other acts. The creature that dies only goes
into another form. The body along dissolves away. The living crea-
ture, though depending upon the body, does not meet with destruction
when the body is destroyed. It is not seen after the destruction of the
physical frame just as fire is not seen after the consumption of the fuel

with which it wagdgmikasdd from https:/iwww.holybooks.com
https:/Avww.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 35 ===

SANTI PARVA 33

“Bharadwaja said, ‘If there is no destruction of the living creature
like that of fire, I submit, fire itself is not seen after consumption of the
fuel (that ignited it). When the supply of fuel is stopped, the fire
becomes extinguished, and, as far as I know, becomes annihilated. That
should surely be regarded to have met with destruction which has no
longer any action, which furnishes no proof of its existence, and which
no longer occupies any space.’

“Bhrigu said, ‘Te is true that upon the consumption of fuel fire is
no longer seen. It mingles with space because there is no longer any
visible object in which to inhere, and hence it becomes incapable of
perception by us. Similarly, upon leaving the body, the creature lives
in space, and cannot be seen in consequence of its extreme subtility as
is doubtless the case with fire. It is fire or heat that sustains the
breaths called Prana and the others. Know that that heat (thus existing)
is called life or the living agent. That heat which is the sustainer of the
breaths, becomes extinguished in consequence of the suppression of
breath. Upon that heat in the physical frame being extinguished, the
frame itself loses animation. Falling down, it is transformed into
earth, for that is its ultimate destination. The breath that is in all
mobile and immobile objects mingles with space, andthe heat that is in
them follows that breath. These three (viz., space, air, and fire), mingle
together. The other two (viz., water and earth), exist together in the
form of earth, There is wind where space is, and there is fire where
wind is. They are formless, it should be known, and become endued
with form only in respect of embodied creatures.’

“Bharadwaja said, ‘If in the physical frames of all living crea-
tures there are heat, wind, earth, space and water, what,
then, are the indications of living agent ? Tell me these, O sinless one !
I desire to know the nature of the life that is in the bodies of living
beings—bodies made up of the five primal elements, engaged in the
five acts, endued with the five senses and possessed of animation. Upon
the dissolution of the body which is a union of flesh and blood, and a
mass of fat, sinews and bones, that which isthe living agent cannot
be seen. If this body, composed of the five elements, be destitute of
what is called life, who or what then is that which feels misery upon
the appearance of either bodily or mental pain? The living agent
hears what is said, with the aid of the ears. It, however, happens
again, O great Rishi, that the same agent hears not when the Mind is
otherwise engaged. It seems, therefore, that that which is called the
living agent serves no purpose. The whole scene that the living agent
sees with eyes acting in concert with the mind, the eye beholds not,
even when lying before it, if the mind be otherwise engaged. Then
again, when it is under the influence of sleep, that agent neither sees
nor smells, nor hears, nor sj aks, nor experiences the, perceptions of

Downloaded froth hitps:/
K https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 36 ===

34 MAHABHARATA

touch and taste. Who or what then is that which feels joy, becomes
angry, gives way to sorrow, and experiences tribulation ? What is
that which wishes, thinks, feels aversion, and utters words 7°

“Bhrigu said, "The mind also is made of the five elements in
common with the body. For this reason it is of no consequence with
respect to the acts mentioned by thee. Only the one internal Soul
sustaineth the body. It is he that perceives smell, taste, sound,
touch and form and other properties (that exist in external nature’.
That Soul, pervading all the limbs, is the witness (of the acts) of the
mind endued with five attributes and residing within the body
composed of the five elements. It is he who feels pleasure and pain,
and when separated from him the body no longer experiences them.
When there is no longer any perception of form or of touch, when there
is no heat in the fire that resides within the body,—indeed, when that
animal heat becomes extinguished,—the body, in consequence of its
abandonment by the Soul, meets with destruction. The whole universe
is composed of water. Water is the form of all embodied creatures.
In that water is the Soul which is displayed in the mind. That Soul is
the Creator Brahman who exists in all things. When the Soul becomes
endued with vulgar attributes, it comes to be called Kshetrajna. When
freed from those attributes, it comes to be called Paramatman or
Supreme Soul. Know that Soul. He is inspired with universal bene-
volence. He resides in the body like a drop of water ina lotus. Know
well that which is called Kshetrajna and which has universal benevolence.
Darkness, Passion, and Goodness are the attributes of the living agent.
The learned say that the Soul has Consciousness and exists with the
attributes of life. The soul exerts and causes everything to exert.
Persons that have a knowledge of the Soul say that the Soul is different
from life. It is the Supreme Soul that has created the seven worlds
and sets them agoing. There is no destruction of the living agent when
the dissolution of the body takes place. Men destitute of intelligence
say that it dies. That iscertainly untrue. All that the living agent
does is to go from one unto another body. That which is called death
is only the dissolution of the body. It is thus that the Soul, wrapped
in diverse forms, migrates from form to form, unseen and unnoticed
by others. Persons possessed of true Knowledge behold the Soul by
their keen and subtile intelligence. The man of wisdom, living on
frugal fare, and with heart cleansed of all sins, devoting himself to
yoga meditation, succeeds every night, before sleep and after sleep, in
beholding his Soul by the aid of his Soul.? In consequence of a con-
tented heart, and_by abandoning all acts good and bad, one can obtain

1 It is often said that in an advanced stage of yoga, one is enabled to
behold one’s Soul, or, a sort of double existence is realised in consequence
4 which she x Boul becomes an object of internal survey to the Soul itself,

ery probably, writers on yoga employ this language in a i
sense._T, Downloaded from Hips: /wmva holybooks com 3 Bgsrative
https:/Awww.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 37 ===

SANTI PARVA 35.

infinite happiness by depending upon one’s own Soul. The king, of
fiery effulgence, residing within the mind is called the living agent.
It is from that Lord of everything that this creation has sprung. Even
this is the conclusion to be arrived at in the enquiry into the origin
of creatures and the soul.’”

SECTION CLXXXVIII

“Bhrigu said, ‘Brahman first created a few Brahmanas who came
to be called Prajapatis (lords of creation). Possessed of splendour equal
to that of the fire or the Sun, they were created out of the energy of
that First-born Being. The puissant Lord then created Truth, Duty,
Penance, the eternal Vedas, all kinds of pious acts, and Purity, for
enabling creatures to attain to heaven (by practising them). After
this, the Deities and the Danavas, the Gandharvas, the Daityas, the
Asuras, the great snakes, the Yakshas, the Rakshasas, the Serpents,
the Pisachas, and human beings with their four divisions, viz.,
Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras, O best of regenerate ones,
and all the other orders of creatures that exist, were created. The
complexion the Brahmanas obtained was white; that which the
Kshatriyas obtained was red ; that which the Vaisyas got was yellow ;
and that which was given to the Sudras was black.’

“Bharadwaja said, ‘If the distinction between the four orders ( of
human beings) be made by means only of colour (attribute), then it
seems that allthe four orders have been mingled together.* Lust, wrath,
fear, cupidity, grief, anxiety, hunger, toil, possess and prevail over all
men. How can men be distinguished by the possession of attributes ?
The bodies of all men emit sweat, urine, faeces, phlegm, bile, and blood.
How then can men be distributed into classes? Of mobile objects the
number is infinite ; the species also of immobile objects are innumerable.
How, then, can objects of such very great diversity be distributed into
classes ?”

“Bhrigu said, ‘There is really no distinction between the
different orders. The whole world at first consisted of Brahmanas.
Created (equal) by Brahman, men have, in consequence of their acts,
become distributed into different orders. They that became fond of
indulging in desire and enjoying pleasures, possessed of the attributes of
severity and wrath, endued with courage, and unmindful of the duties
of piety and worship,—those Brahmanas possessing the attribute of

1 The commentator explains that the words expressive of hue or
solour really mean attributes. What is intended to be said is that the
Brahmanas had the attribute of Goodness (Sattwa) ; the second order had
the attribute of Passion (Rajas) ; the third got mixture of the two, i.e,
both goodness and passion (Sattwa and Rajas); while the lowest order got
the remaining attributepowizoadearkananikdamannesBooks. com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 38 ===

36 MAHABHARATA

Passion,—became Kshatriyas. Those Brahmanas again who, without
attending to the duties laid down for them, became possessed of both
the attributes of Goodness and Passion, and took to the professions of
cattle-rearing and agriculture, became Vaisyas. Those Brahmanas
again that became fond of untruth and injuring other creatures, possess-
ed of cupidity—engaged in all kinds of acts for a living, and fallen
away from purity of behaviour, and thus wedded to the attribute of
Darkness, became Sudras. Separated by these occupations, Brahmanas,
falling away from their own order, became members of the other three
orders. All the four orders, therefore, have always the right to the
performance of all pious duties and of sacrifices. Even thus were the
four orders at first created equal by Brahman who ordained for all of
them (the observances disclosed in) the words of Brahma (in the Vedas).
Through cupidity alone, many fell away, and became possessed by
ignorance. The Brahmanas are always devoted to the scriptures on
Brahma; and mindful of vows and restraints, are capable of grasping
the conception of Brahma. Their penances therefore, never go for
nothing. They amongst them are not Brahmanas that are incapable
of understanding that every created thing is Supreme Brahma. These,
falling away, became members of diverse (inferior) orders. Losing the
light of knowledge, and betaking themselves to an unrestrained course
of conduct, they take birth as Pisachas and Rakshasas and Pretas and
as individuals of diverse Mleccha species. The great Rishis who at the
beginning sprang into life (through Brahman's Will ) subsequently
created, by means of their penances, men devoted to the duties ordained
for them and attached to the rites laid down in the Eternal Vedas.
That other Creation, however, which is eternal and undecaying, which
is based upon Brahma and has sprung from the Primeval God, and
which has its refuge upon yoga, is a mental one.’ ”?

SECTION CLXXXIX

“Bharadwaja said, ‘By what acts does one become a Brahmana ?
By what, a Kshatriya ? O best of regenerate ones, by what acts again
does one become a Vaisya ora Sudra? Tell me this, O foremost of
speakers.’

“Bhrigu said, ‘That person is called a Brahmana who has been
sanctified by such rites as those called jata and others; who is pure in

1 The distinction here laid down seems to be this: the eternal orea-
tion is due to the yoga or mental action of the Primeval Deity. That
creation which we behold is the result of the penances of those sages who
were first created. Perhaps, what is intended to be said is that the
principle of life, of lite proceeding from life, and primal matter with space,
dc., are all due to the fiat of God; while all visible and tangible objects,
resulting from the action of those principles and from primal matter and
space, are attribaewbleatec tena hated tywayeslybopks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 39 ===

SANTI PARVA 37

behaviour ; who is engaged in studying the Vedas; who is devoted
to the six well-known acts (of ablutions every morning and evening,
silent recitation of mantras, pouring libations on the sacrificial fire,
worshipping the deities, doing the duties of hospitality to guests, and
offering food to the Viswedevas); who is properly observant of all
pious acts ; who never takes food without having offered it duly to gods
and guests ; who is filled with reverence for his preceptor ; and who is
always devoted to vows and truth. He is called a Brahmana in whom
are truth, gifts, abstention from injury to others, compassion, shame,
benevolence,? and penance. He who is engaged in the profession of
battle, who studies the Vedas, who makes gifts (to Brahmanas) and
takes wealth (from those he protects) is called a Kshatriya. He who
earns fame from keep of cattle, who is employed in agriculture and the
means of acquiring wealth, who is pure in behaviour and attends to
the study of the Vedas, is called a Vaisya.2 He who takes pleasure
ineating every kind of food, who is engaged in doing every kind of
work, who is impure in behaviour, who does not study the Vedas, and
whose conduct is unclean, is said to be a Sudra. If these characteristics
be observable in a Sudra, and if they be not found in a Brahmana,
then such a Sudra is no Sudra, and such a Brahmana is no Brahmana.
By every means should cupidity and wrath be restrained. This as also
self- restraint, are the highest results of Knowledge. Those two passions
(viz., cupidity and wrath), should, with one’s whole heart, be resisted.
They make their appearance for destroying one’s highest good. One
should always protect one’s prosperity from one’s wrath, one’s penances
from pride ; one’s knowledge from honour and disgrace ; and one’s soul
from error. That intelligent person, O regenerate one, who does all
acts without desire of fruit, whose whole wealth exists for charity, and
Who performs the daily Homa, is a real Renouncer.* One should
conduct oneself as a friend to all creatures, abstaining from all acts of
injury. Rejecting the acceptance of all gifts, one should, by the aid of
‘one’s own intelligence, be a complete master of one’s passions. One
should live in one’s soul where there can be no grief. One would then
have no fear here and attain to a fearless region hereafter. One should

1 The word Ghrina may also mean aversion. Of course, here it would
mean, if used in that sense, aversion for all unrighteous acts.—T,

2 The first balf of the first line of 6 is differently read in the Bombay
edition, Both readings are noticed by Nilakantha, I have adhered to the
Bengal reading, though the Bombay reading is clearer in sense. Visatiisa
transitive verb having Pratishtha or some such noun for its object. The
literal meaning is He who acquires fame, &c.—T.

3 Here the speaker describes the obaracter of Karma-sannyasa
(renunciation of acts). Samarambha generally means al! kinds of acts. Here.
however, only sacrifices and other ecriptural rites are intended. I follow
Nilakantha in rendering the second line, although the plain meaning would
seem to be “who poureth everything in gift.”__T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 40 ===

38 MAHABHARATA

live always devoted to penances, and with all passions completely
restrained ; observing the vow of taciturnity, and with soul concen-
trated on itself; desirous of conquering the unconquered senses, and
unattached in the midst of attachments, All things that can be per-
ceived by the senses are called Manifest. All, however, that is Unmani-
fest, that is beyond the ken of the senses, that can be ascertained only
by the subtile senses, should be sought to be known." If there be no
faith, one will never succeed in attaining to that subtile sense.
Therefore, one should hold oneself in faith. The mind should be united
with Prana, and Prana should then be held within Brahma. By dissocia-
ting oneself from all attachments, one may obtain absorption into
Brahma. There is no need of attending to any other thing. A Brahmana
can easily attain to Brahma by the path of Renunciation. The indica-
tions of a Brahmana are purity, good behaviour, and compassion unto
all creatures.’ ”

SECTION CLXC

“Bhrigu said, “Truth is Brahma; Truth is Penance ; it is Truth
that creates all creatures. It is by Truth that the whole universe is
upheld; and it is with the aid of Truth that one goes to heaven.
Untruth is only another form of Darkness. It is Darkness that leads
downwards. Those who are afflicted by Darkness and covered by it
fail to behold the lighted regions of heaven. It has been said that
Heaven is Light and that Hell is Darkness. The creatures that dwell
inthe universe may obtain both heaven and hell. In this world also,
truth and untruth lead to opposite courses of conduct and opposite.
indications, such as Righteousness and Unrighteousness, light and dark-
ness, pleasure and pain. Amongst these, that which is Truth is
Righteousness ; that which is Righteousness is Light ; and that which is
Light is Happiness. Similarly, that which is Untruth is Unrighteous-
ness; that which is Unrighteousness is Darkness; and that which is
Darkness is Sorrow or Misery. In this respect it is said that they that
are possessed of wisdom, beholding that the world of life is overwhelmed
with sorrow, both bodily and mental, and with happiness that is sure to
end in misery, never suffer themselves to be stupefied. He that is wise
will strive to rescue himself from sorrow. The happiness of living

1 The gross world is perceivable by the ordinary senses. Behind the gross
world is s subtile one which the subtile senses, i.¢., the senses when shar-
pened by yoga, can perceive, With death, the gross body alone is dissolved,
The subtile body or form, called the Linga-sarira, and made up of what is
called the Tanmatras of the primal elements, remains. Even that retains
all the characteristics of the world in an incipient form. The Linga-sarira
also must be destroyed before absorption into Brahma can take place.—T,
Downloaded from https:/Avww.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 41 ===

SANTI PARVA 39

creatures is unstable both here and hereafter.'/ The happiness of crea-
tures that are overwhelmed by Darkness disappears like the splendour
of the Moon when afflicted by Rahu.? Happiness is said to be of two
kinds, viz., bodily and mental. Both in this and the other world, the
visible and the invisible fruits (of action) are specified (in the Vedas)
for the sake of happiness.* There is nothing more important than
happiness and among the fruits or consequences of the triple aggregate.
Happiness is desirable. It is an attribute of the Soul. Both Virtue and
Profit are sought for its sake. Virtue is its root. This, indeed, is its
origin. All acts have for their end the attainment of happiness.’

“Bharadwaja said, ‘You have said that happiness is the highest
object, I do not comprehend this. This attribute of the soul that (you
say) is so desirable is not sought by the Rishis who are regarded to be
engaged in something promising a higher reward. It is heard that the
Creator of the three worlds, viz., the puissant Brahman, lives alone,
observant of the vow of Brahmacharya., He never devotes himself to
the happiness obtainable from the gratification of desire. Also, the
divine Master of the universe, the lord of Uma, reduced Kama (the
deity of desire) to extinction. For this reason, we say that happiness is
not acceptable to high-souled people. Nor does it appear to be a high
attribute of the Soul. I cannot put faith in what thy divine self has
said, viz. that there is nothing higher than happiness. That there are
two kinds of consequences in respect of our acts, viz., the springing of
happiness from good acts and of sorrow from sinful acts, is only a saying
that is current in the world.’

“Bhrigu said, ‘On this it is said as follows : from Untruth springs
Darkness. They that are overwhelmed by Darkness pursue only
Unrighteousness and not Righteousness, being overmastered by wrath,
covetousness, malice, falsehood, and similar evils. They never obtain
happiness either here or hereafter. On the other hand, they are
afflicted by various kinds of disease and pain and trouble. They are
also tortured by Death, imprisonment, and diverse other griefs of that
kind, and by the sorrows, attending on hunger and thirst and toil. They
are also pained by the numerous bodily griefs that arise from rain and
wind and burning heat and exceeding cold. They are also overwhelmed
by numerous mental griefs caused by loss of wealth and separation
from friends, as‘also by griefs caused by decrepitude and death. They
that are not touched by these diverse kinds of physical and mental

+1 The felicity that is obtained in heaven is not everlasting, being

limited in point of duration by the degree or measure of merit that is
achieved here.—T.

2 The Pauranic theory of both the solar and the lunar eolipse is that

the Sun and the Moon are sought to be devoured by the Daitya, Rahu.—T.

8 The sense seems to be that Vedas declare those fruits in order that

HN lead i Te
men may strive for thar when jer lend fo, NERO k

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 42 ===

40 MAHABHARATA

afflictions, know what happiness is. These evils are never found in
heaven. There delicious breezes blow. In heaven there is also perpe-
tual fragrance. In heaven there is no hunger, no thirst, no decrepitude,
no sin. In this world there is both happiness and misery. In hell there
is only misery. Therefore, happiness is the highest object of acquisition.
The Earth is the progenitrix of all creatures. Females partake of her
nature. The male animal is like Prajapati himself. The vital seed, it
should be known, is the creative energy. In this way did Brahman
ordain in days of old that the creation should go on. Each, affected by
his own acts, obtains happiness or misery.’ "?

SECTION CLXCI

“Bharadwaja said, ‘What has béen said to be the consequence of -
gift? What of Righteousness ? What of conduct ? What of Penances
well-performed ? What of the study and recitation of the Vedas ? And
what of pouring libations upon the fire 7

“Bhrigu said, ‘By pouring libations on the sacred fire, sin is burnt.
By study of the Vedas one obtains blessed tranquillity. By gift, one
obtains pleasure and articles of enjoyment. By Penances, one acquires
blessed heaven. Gift is said to be of two kinds: gifts for the other
world, and those for this. Whatever is given to the good attends the
giver in the other world. Whatever is given to those that are not good
produces consequences enjoyable here. The consequences of gifts are
commensurate with the gifts themselves.’ .

“Bharadwaja said, ‘What course of duties should be performed
by whom ? What also are the characteristics of duty? How many
kinds of duty are there? It behoveth thee to tell me these.’?

“Bhrigu said, “Those wise men who are engaged in practising
the duties laid down forthem succeed in obtaining heaven as their
reward. By doing otherwise people become guilty of folly.”

“Bharadwaja said, ‘It behoveth thee to tell me about the four
modes of life that were formerly laid down by Brahman, and the
practices ordained for each of them.’ .

“Bhrigu said, ‘In days of yore, the divine Brahman, for benefiting
the world, and for the protection of righteousness, indicated four modes
of life.* Amongst them, residence in the abode of the preceptor is
mentioned as the first (in order of time). He who is in this mode of
life should have his soul cleansed by purity of conduct, by Vedic rites,

1 Nearly the whole of this section is prose.—T.

2 It is difficult to understand in what senses the word Dharma is
used in the three successive questions here.—T:

3 In the first line the correot reading is Brahmana andnot Brahmarshi
Tho answer attribrtaddkadahrianassiheavb hitybocks.com .

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 43 ===

SANTI PARVA 41

and by restraints and vows and humility. He should worship the morn-
ing and evening twilights, the Sun, his own sacred fire, and the deities.
He should cast off procrastination and idleness. He should cleanse his
soul by slauting his preceptor, by studying the Vedas, and by listening
to his preceptor’s instructions. He should perform his ablutions
thrice, (viz. in the morning, noon, and evening). He should lead
a life of celibacy; attend to his sacred fire; dutifully serve his
preceptor ; daily go out on a round of mendicancy (for supporting
himself) ; and give ungrudgingly unto his preceptor the whole of what is
obtained in alms. Willingly accomplishing everything that the
commands of his preceptor may indicate, he should be ready to receive
such Vedic instruction as his preceptor may give him as a favour.' On
this subject there is a verse : That Brahmana who obtains his Veda by
attending with reverence upon his preceptor, succeeds in attaining to
heaven and obtains the fruition of all his desires. The domestic mode
of life is called the second (in point of time). We shall explain to you
all the pious acts and indications of that mode. Those who having com-
‘pleted their residence in the preceptor’s abode return home, who are of
pious conduct, who desire the fruits of a virtuous course of behaviour
with spouses in their company, have this mode of life ordained for them.
Init Virtue, Wealth, and Pleasure, may all be obtained. It is (thus)
suited to the cultivation of the triple aggregate. Acquiring wealth by
irreproachable acts, or with wealth of high efficacy which is obtained
from recitation of the Vedas, or living upon such means as are utilised
by the regenerate Rishis,* or with the produce of mountains and mines,
or with the wealth represented by the offerings made in sacrifices and
on the termination of vows and other observances, and those made
unto deities, the householder should lead this mode of life. That mode
of life is regarded as the root of all the others. They who are residents
in the abodes of preceptors, they who lead lives of mendicancy, and
others who live in the observance of vows and restraints to which they
are pledged, derive from this mode the means they live upon, the
offerings they make unto the Pitris and the deities, and, in short, their

1 A pupil should never solicit his preceptor for instruction. He should
attend only when the preceptor oalls him. To this day, the rule is rigidly
observed in all Zols throughout India. It should be added to the credit of
those engaged in teaching that they very seldom neglect their pupils. The
story is authentic of the grandfather of the great Baneswar Vidyalankar of
Nuddea, himself as great a professor as Baneswar, of continuing to teach
his pupils in the outer apartments even after receiving intelligence of his
son’s death within the inner apartments of the family dwelling. The fact
is, he was utterly absorbed in his work, that when his good lady, moved by
his apparent heartlessness, came out to tax him he answered her, in
thorough absence of mind, saying, ‘Well, do not be disturbed. If Ido not
weep for my aon, I will do so for that grandchild in your arms.’ The pupils
at last recalled him to the realities of the hour.—T.

2 ie, by picking up fallen grains from the field after the crop has been
cut away and removed by the owner.—T.
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
6 https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 44 ===

42 MAHABHARATA

entire support. The third mode of life is called the Forest-life. For
those that lead it, there is no storing of wealth and articles.* Generally,
these pious and good men, subsisting upon good food, and engaged in
studying the Vedas, roam over the earth for journeying to tirthas and
visiting diverse realms. Standing up, advancing forward, sweet speeches
uttered in sincerity, gifts according to the measure of the giver’s
competence, offer of seats and beds of the best kind, and presents of
excellent food, are some of the means for showing them regard. On
this subject there isa verse: Ifa guest turns away from a house with
expectations unfulfilled, he is supposed to take away the merits of the
householder and leave the latter all his misdeeds. Then again in the
domestic mode of life the deities are gratified by sacrifices and other
religious rites ; the Pitris by the performance of obsequial rites; the
Rishis by cultivation of (Vedic) knowledge, by listening to the instruc-
tions of preceptors, and by committing to memory the scriptures ; and
lastly the Creator by begetting children,? On thissubject there are two
verses : One in the observance of this mode of life should speak upon
all creatures words breathing affection and agreeable to the ears. To
give pain, to inflict mortifications, and harsh words, are all censurable.
Insult, arrogance, and deceit, also should be avoided. Abstention from
injury, truth, and absence of wrath, produce the merit of penances in
all the (four) modes of life. Inthe domestic mode of life these are
allowed, viz., the use and enjoyment of floral garlands, ornaments,
robes, perfumed oils and unguents ; enjoyment of pleasures derived
from dancing and music, both vocal and instrumental, and all sights and
scenes that are agreeable to the sight ; the enjoyment of various kinds
of viands and drinks belonging to the principal orders of edibles, viz.,
those that are swallowed, those that are lapped, those that are quaffed,
and those that are sucked; and the enjoyment of pleasures derivable
from sports and every kind of amusement and the gratification of
desires. That man who in the observance of this mode of life seeks the
acquisition of the triple aggregate, (viz., Religion, Wealth, and Pleasure)
with that of the great end of the three attributes of Goodness and
Passion and Darkness,* enjoys great happiness here and at last attains
to the end that is reserved for persons that are virtuous and good.

Even that householder who observes the duties of his mode of life by
following the practice of picking up fallen grains of corn from the
cracks of fields and who abandons sensual pleasure and attachment to
action, does not find it difficult to obtain heaven.’

1 Upaskara means renunciation.—T,

2 Itis generally said that by procreating offspring, one gratifies the
Pitris or pays off the debt one owes to one's deceased ancestors. ‘ Here
Bhrigu says that by that act one gratifies the Creator, The idea is the
same that forms the root of the command laid on the Jews,—Go and
maultiply.—T.

3 The end of these attributes is Moksha or Emancipation.—T.

4 Sishta is explained by Nilakantha as one who has been properly
instructed by wisdoprdoaptdrfear-fips://www.holybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 45 ===

SECTION CLXCII

“Bhrigu said, ‘Forest recluses seeking the acquisition of virtue
go to sacred waters and rivers and springs, and undergo penances
in lone and secluded woods abounding with deer and buffaloes and
boars and tigers and wild elephants. They forsake all kinds of robes
and food and enjoyments for which people living in society havea taste.

‘They subsist abstemiously upon wild herbs and fruits and roots and
leaves of diverse kinds. The bare ground is their seat. They lie down
onthe bare earth or rocks or pebbles or gravel or sand or ashes. They
cover their limbs with grass and animal skins and barks of trees. They
never shave their heads and beards or pare their nails. They perform
their ablutions at regular intervals. They pour libations on the
ground, as also on the sacred fire at the proper time without fail.
They never enjoy any rest till completion of their daily gathering of
ithe sacred fuel (for their homa fires) and sacred grass and flowers (for
sacrifice and worship) and till they have swept and rubbed clean (their
sacrificial altars). They bear without the least regard cold and heat,
and rain and wind, and, therefore, the skin of their bodies is cracked all
over ; and in consequence of observing and laying down for themselves
various kinds of rites and vows and acts, their flesh and blood and skin
nd bones become emaciated. Endued with great patience and forti-
tude, they live, always practising the quality of goodness. That
person who, with restrained soul, observes such a course of duties
originally ordained by regenerate Rishis, burns all his sins like fire and
obtains regions of felicity difficult of attainment.

““T shall now describe the conduct of those called Parivrajakas,
(That is as follows : freeing themselves from attachment to the sacred
ite, wealth, spouse and children, and robes, seats, beds, and such other
lobjects of enjoyment, and breaking the bonds of affection, they roam
bout, regarding with an equal eye a clump of earth or rock and gold.
They never set their hearts on the acquisition or enjoyment of the
triple aggregate. They cast an equal eye on foes and friends and
heutrals or strangers. They never injure, in thought, word, or deed,
immobile things or creatures that are viviparous, or oviparous or born
bf filth, or called vegetables. They have no homes. They roam over
hills and mountains, upon shores of rivers or seas, under shades of trees,
and among temples of deities. They may go to towns or villages for
-esidence. In a town, however, they should not live for more than
ive nights, while ina village their residence should never exceed one

1 Niyama is explained by the commentator as a rite; upayoga asa
tow about food; charyya as an act like visiting sacred waters ; vihita

8 vidhana.—T. Downloaded from https:/Avww.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 46 ===

44 MAHABHARATA

night. Entering a town or a village, they should, for the support of life,
repair to the abodes of only Brahmanas of liberal deeds. They should
never ask for any alms except what is thrown into the (wooden)
bowls they carry. They should free themselves from lust, wrath, pride,
cupidity, delusion, -miserliness, deceit, slander, vanity, and injury to
living creatures. On this subject there are some verses : that person,
who, observing the vow of taciturnity, roveth without giving any
creature cause of fear, is never inspired with any fear himself by any
creature. That learned person who performs the Agnihotra ( not by
kindling an external fire but) with the aid of the fire that is his own
body, indeed, who poureth libations into his own mouth and upon the
fire that exists in his own body, succeeds in attaining to numerous
regions of felicity in consequence of that fire being fed with such liba-
tions obtained by a life of eleemosynation. That person of regenerate
birth who observes in the aforesaid way this mode of life having
Emancipation for its end, with a pure heart and with an understanding
freed from resolution, attains to Brahma after the manner of a tranquil
ray of light that is not fed by any blazing fuel.’

“Bharadwaja said, ‘Beyond this region (that we inhabit) there is
a region that we have heard of but never seen. I desire to know all
about it. It hehoveth thee to describe it to me.’

“Bhrigu said, ‘Towards the north, on the other side of Himavat,
which is sacred and possessed of every merit, there is a region that is
sacred, blessed, and highly desirable. That iscalled the other world.?
The men that inhabit that region are righteous in act, pious, of pure
hearts, freed from cupidity and errors of judgment, and not subject to
afflictions of any kind. That region is, indeed, equal to heaven,
possessed as it is of such excellent attributes. Death comes there at the
proper season. Diseases never touch the inhabitants.* Nobody cherishes
any desire for the wives of other people. Every one is devoted to his
own wife. These people do not afflict or kill one another, or covet one
another's things. There no sin occurs, no doubt arises.‘ There the

1 The Hindus had no poor laws. The injunctions of their scriptures
have always sufficed to maintain the poor, particularly their religious
mendicants, The mendicants themselves are restrained from disturbing
the householders often. None again save the well-to-do were to be visited
by the mendicants, so that men of scanty means might not be compelled to
support the recluses.—T.

2 The words used by Bharadwaja in the question are capable of being
construed as an enquiry after the next world. Bhrign also, in his answer,
uses the word Paro lokah, The reference to Himavat, therefore, is explained
by the commentator as metaphorical. The whole answer of Bhrignu, how-
ever, leaves little room for doubt that the sage speaks of a region on earth
and not in the invisible world after death.—T.

3 Nilakantha would read amritya for mritya. It is a forced correction
for keeping up the metaphorical sense.—T,

4 All knowledge sheared Aaptaimiw Rolybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 47 ===

SANTI PARVA 45

fruits of all (religious) acts are visible. There some enjoy seats and
drinks and viands of the best kind, and live within palacesand mansions.
There some, adorned with ornaments of gold, surround themselves with
every article of enjoyment. There are, again, some that eat very
abstemiously, for only keeping body and soul together. There some,
with great toil, seek to hold the life-breaths.* Here (in this region that
is inhabited by us), some mén are devoted to righteousness and some to
deceit. Some are happy and some miserable ; some are poor and some
tich, Here toil, and fear and delusion, and painful hunger make their
appearance. Here cupidity for wealth is also seen, a passion that
stupefies even those that are learned amongst men. Here diverse
opinions prevail, broached by those that do deeds which are righteous
or sinful. That man possessed of wisdom who knows all those opinions
which may be divided into two kinds, is never stained by sin. - Deceit
with fraud, theft, slander, malice, oppression, injury, treachery, and
untruth, and vices that detract from the merit of his penances who
practises them. He, on the other hand, possessed of learning, who
avoids them, finds the merit of his penances increased. Here there is
much reflection about acts that are righteous and those that are un-
righteous. This region that we inhabit is the field of action. Having
done good and evil here, one obtains good for his good acts and evil
for acts that are evil.? Here the very Creator in days of yore, and all
the gods with the Rishis, having performed proper penances, become
cleansed and attain to Brahma.’ The northern portion of the earth
is highly auspicious and sacred. Those belonging to this region (that we
inhabit) that are doers of righteous deeds or that show regard for yoga,
become born in that region. Others (that are of a different disposition)
take their births in the intermediate species. Some again, when their
allotted periods run out, become lost on earth.‘ Employed in feeding
upon-one another and stained by cupidity and delusion, these men

1 ie, to practise yoga. The Bengal reading isdharanam. The
commentator goes on explaining all the verses as metaphorical. Considerable
ingenuity is displayed by him, and he even cites the Srutis in support.—T.

2 Thisat least isa verse that evidently refers to the other or the
next world, and, therefore, lends colour to the supposition that throughout
the whole passage, it is the next world and no fictitious region north of the
Himalayas that is desoribed.- Some western scbolars think that a verbal
translation is all that is necessary, Such passages, however, are incapable
of being so rendered. The translator must make his choice of, either taking
the verses in a plain or a metaphorical sense, If he inclines towards the
latter, be cannot possibly give a verbal version. The genius of the two
tongues are quite different.—T.

3 Pushkara in Rajputanab is supposed to be the spot where Brahman
underwent his penances.—T.

4 The Burdwan translator makes a mess of this verse 21 runs into 22
as explained by the commentator. K.P. Singha avoids the blunder, although
in rendering the last fing, of -24,88 ARSOMAREABR EE IRSESATAte.—T.

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 48 ===

46 MAHABHARATA

return to this very region without being able to go (after death) to that
northern region. Those men of wisdom who with vows and observant
of Brahmacharyya listen with veneration to the instructions of precep-
tors, succeed in knowing the ends reserved for all classes of men. I
have now told thee in brief the course of duties ordained by Brahman.
He, indeed, is said to be possessed of intelligence who knows what is
righteousness and what its reverse in this world.’ i

“Bhishma continued, ‘Thus, O king, did Bhrigu speak unto
Bharadwaja of great energy. Of soul highly virtuous, the latter became
filled with wonder and worshipped the great sage with veneration.
Thus, O monarch, the origin of the universe has been narrated to thee
in detail. What, O thou of great wisdom, dost thou wish to hear after
this 7"

SECTION CLXCIII

“Yudhishthira said, ‘I think, O grandsire, that thou art acquainted
with everything, O thou that art conversant with duties. I desire to
hear thee discourse to me, O sinless one, of the ordinances about conduct.’

“Bhishma said, ‘They that are of bad conduct, of badacts, of wicked
understanding, and excessive rashness, are called evil or wicked men.
They, however, that are called good are distinguished by purity of con-
duct and practices. They are good men who never answer calls of
nature on the high roads, in cow-pens, or in fields overgrown with
paddy. Having finished the necessary acts one should perform his
ablutions in river-water and gratify the deities with oblations of water.
This is said to be the duty of all men. Surya should be always worshipp-
ed. One should not sleep after sunrise. Morning and evening the
prayers (ordained in the scriptures) should be said, sitting with face
turned towards the east and towards the west respectively. Washing
the five limbs,’ one should eat silently with face turned towards the
east. One should never disparage the food which one is to eat. One
should eat food that is good to the taste. After eating one should wash
one’s hands and rise.?_ One should never go to sleep at night with wet
feet. The celestial Rishi Narada said that these are indications of good
conduct. One should every day circumambulate a sacred spot, a bull,
a sacred image, a cow-pen, a place where four roads meet, a pious
Brahmana, and sacred tree. One should not make distinctions between
one’s guests and attendants and kinsmen in matters of food. Equality

1 The five limbs which should be washed before eating are the two
feet, the two hands, and the face.—T.

3 This may be» general direction for washing one's hand after eating ;
or, it may refer to the final Gandusha, 4.e., the act of taking a little water
in the right hand, raising it to the lips, and throwing it down, repeating a
short formula.—T. Downloaded from https:/;www.holybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 49 ===

SANTI PARVA 47

(in this respect) with servants is applauded. Eating (twice a day) in
the morning and evening is an ordinance of the gods. It is not laid down
that one should eat (once more) at any intermediate period. He who
eats according to this rule acquires the merit of a fast. At the hours
ordained for Homa one should pour libations on the sacred fire. With-
out seeking the companionship of other people's wives, the man of
wisdom who seeks his own wife in her season acquires the merit of
Brahmacharyya. The remnants of a Brahmana’s dish are like ambrosia.
They are like the lacteal sustenance that is yielded by the mother’s
breast. People highly prize those remnants. The good, by eating them
attain to Brahma. He who pounds turf to clay (for making sacrificial
altars), or he who cuts grass (for making sacrificial fuel), or he who uses
his nails only (and not weapons of any kind) for eating (sanctified meat),
or he who always subsists on the remnants of Brahmana’s dishes, or he
who acts, induced by desire for reward, has not tolive long in the
world.? One who has abstained from meat (under any vow) should not
take meat evenif it be sanctified with mantras from the Yajurveda.
One should also avoid the flesh about the vertebral column (of any
animal) and the flesh of animals not slain in sacrifices.* Whether at
one’s own place or in a strange land, one should never cause one’s guest
to fast. Having obtained alms and other fruits of optional acts, one
should offer them to one’s seniors. One should offer seats to one’s
seniors and salute them with’ respect. By worshipping one’s seniors,
one obtains long life, fame, and prosperity. One should never behold
the Sun at the moment of rising, nor should one turn one’s gaze to-
wards a naked woman that is another man’s spouse. Congress with one’s
wife (in her season) is not sinful but it is an act that should always be
done in privacy. The heart of all sacred spots and shrines is the Precep-
tor. The heart of all pure and cleansing things is Fire. All acts done by
a good and pious person are good and laudable, including even the
touching of the hair of a cow's tail. Every time one meets with
another, one should make polite enquiries. The saluting of
Brahmanasevery morning and evening is ordained. In temples of gods,
amid cows, in performing the rites of religion laid down for Brahmanas,
in reading the Vedas, and in eating, the right hand should be raised.‘

1 The Burdwan translator has misunderstood this verse completely.-T.

2 It is difficult to understand what this verse means. Nilakantha
proposes two different kinds of interpretation. What then is Sankusuka
or Sanku cuka ? The above version is offered tentatively. The commentator
imagines that the true sense of the verse is that it declares such men to be
unable to attain to Mahadayu which is Brahma and not long life.—T.

8 Prishtamangéa is explained by the commentator as ‘the meat form-
ing the remanant of a Sraddha offering.’ Ido not see the necessity of
discarding the obvious meaning.—T.

4 In the sense of being moved or used. The commentator adds that
the sacred thread also should be wound round the thumb, as the Grihya-
sutras declare.—T. Downloaded from https:/www.holybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 50 ===

48 MAHABHARATA

The worship of Brahmanas, morning and evening, according to due
rites, produces great merit. In consequence of such worship the stock-
in-trade of the merchant, become abundant and the produce of the
agriculturist. Great also becomes the yield of all kinds of corn and the
supply of all articles that the senses can enjoy becomes copious.
When giving eatables to another (seated at his dish), one should say,
‘Is it suficient ? When presenting drink, one shouldask, ‘Will it gratify,’
and when giving sweetened milk and rice, or sugared gruel of barley, or
milk with sesame or pease, one should ask “Has it fallen?! After
shaving, after spitting, after bathing, and after eating, people should
worship Brahmanas with reverence. Such worship is sure to bestow
longevity on sickly men. One should not pass urine with face turned
towards the sun, nor should one see one’s own excreta. One should not
lie on the same bed with a woman, nor eat with her. In addressing
seniors one should never apply the pronoun you to them or take their
names. Thouing or the taking of names is not censurable in addressing
inferiors or equals in age.?_ The hearts of sinful men_ betray the sins
committed by them. Those sinful men that conceal their conscious sins
from good men meet with destruction. Only ignorant fools seek to
conceal the sins which they commit consciously. It is true that human
beings do not see those sins but the gods see them. A sin concealed
by another sin leads to fresh sins. An act of merit, again, if concealed
by an act of merit, increases the merit. The acts of a virtuous man
always follow in the wake of virtue. A man destitute of understanding
never thinks of the sins committed by him. Those sins, however, over-
take the doer that has fallen away from the scriptures. As Rahu
comes to Chandra (at his proper time), those sinful acts come to the
foolish man.* The objects that are stored with expectation are scarcely
enjoyed. Such storing is never applauded by the wise, for death waits
for no one (but snatches his prey whether the latter be ready or un-
ready). The wise have said that the righteousness of all creatures is
an attribute of the mind. For this reason, one should, in one's mind,
do good to all. One should practise virtue singly. In the practice of
virtue one has no need for the help of others. If oneobtains only the
ordinances of the scriptures, what can an associate do ?° Righteousness
is the origin of mankind. Righteousness is the ambrosia of the gods.
After death, men enjoy, through Righteousness, eternal happiness,’ ”

1 In every instance, the person who receives should say—‘All-sufiici-
ent’ 'Gratify to the fill,” and ‘Has fallen copiously, or words to that effect.
Erisara or Kricara is tood made of rice and pease, or rice and sesame 3 Pto-
bably what is now called Khichree.—T.

2 The polite form of address is Bhavan. Itisin the
singular. The second person is avoided, being too direct.—T,

-_ 8 I is not plain in what way the sinful acts come to the sinner. The
Hindu idea, of course, is that the consequences of those deeds visit the
doer without fail. This verse, however, seems to say that the recollection

of those sins forces itself upon the sinner and makes him miserable in spite
of himself.—T,

4 The Hindu moralist, in this verge, declares the samo high morality
that Christ himself preached. Merit or sin, according to him, does not
depend on the overt act alone. Both depend on the mind. Hence the
injunction against even mentally harming others.—T,

__5 The sense seems to be that if one succeeds in secertaining the
ordinances about virtue or piety, but if the mind be sinful, no associate can
beof any help. Thsamindaleas inphanavseibcighaeand piety:—T,

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

third person

=== PAGE 51 ===

SECTION CLCXIV

“Yudhishthira said, ‘Tell me, O grandsire, what and of what
nature is that which is called by the name of Adhyatma and which is laid
down for every person.!. O thou that art acquainted with Brahma,
whence has this universe consisting of mobile and immobile things,
been created? When universal destruction sets in, to whom does it
g0? It behoveth thee to discourse to me upon this topic.’?

“Bhishma said, “This Adhyatma, O son of Pritha, that thou askest
me about, I will presently discourse upon. It is highly agreeable
and productive of great felicity. Great teachers have (before this)
shown the truths about Creation and the Destruction (of the universe).
Knowing those truths, a person may obtain, even in this world,
great satisfaction and felicity. Such knowledge may lead also to the
acquisition of great fruits, and it is highly beneficial to all creatures.
Earth, air, space, water, and light numbered as the fifth, are regarded
as Great Creatures. These constitute both the origin and the destruc-
tion of all created objects. Unto him from whom these great primal
elements take their origin, they return repeatedly, severing them-
selves from all creatures ( into whose compositions they enter ), even
like the waves of the ocean (subsiding into that from which they
seem to take their rise ). As the tortoise stretches its limbs and with-
draws them again, even so the Supreme Soul creates all objects and
again withdraws into Himself. The Creator places the five primal
elements in all created objects in different proportions. The living
creature, however, does not see it (through ignorance). Sound, the
organs of hearing, and all holes;—these three—spring from Space as
their progenitor. Touch, action, and skin are the triple attributes of the
Wind: Form, eye, and digestion are the triple attributes of Fire or
Energy.’ Taste, all liquid secretions, and the tongue represent the three
attributes of Water. Scents, the nose, and the body are the triple
properties of Earth. The great (primal) elements are five. The mind
is the sixth. The senses and the mind, O Bharata, are ( the sources of
all) the perceptions of a living creature.* The seventh is called the

1 Adhyatma is anything that depends on the mind, Here it is, as
explained by the commentator, used for yoga-dharma as depending upon or
asan attribute of the mind, Generally speaking, all speculations on the
character of the mind and its relations with external objects are included in
the word Adhyatma.—T.

2 After Bhrigu’s discourse to Bharadwaja this question may seem to
bes repetition, The commentator explains that it arises from the declara-
tion of Bhishma that Righteousness is a property of the mind, and is,
besides, the root of everything. (V 31, sec. 193, ante), Hence the enquiry
sbout Adhyatma as also about the origin of all things, —T.

3 The word rendering ‘perceptions’ is Vijnanani. ‘Cognitions’ would

perhaps, be better Fy nicaded from https://wwwholybooks.com

7 https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 52 ===

50 MAHABHARATA

understanding ; and the eighth is the Soul.? The senses are for per-
ceiving; the mind (unable to deal with those perceptions ) produces
uncertainty. The understanding reduces all perceptions to certainty.
The Soul exists as a witness ( without acting ). All that is above the
two feet, all that is behind, and all that is above, are seen by the Soul.
Know that the Soul pervades the entire being without any space being
left unoccupied. All men should know the senses, the mind, and the
understanding fully. The three states or qualities called Darkness,
Passion, and Goodness, exist, dependent on the senses, the mind, and the
understanding. Man, by apprehending with the aid of his intelligence,
the manner in which creatures come and leave the world, is sure to
gradually attain to steadfast tranquillity. The three qualities (already
mentioned, viz. Darkness, Passion, and Goodness), lead the understand-
ing (to worldly attachments). In this respect, the Understanding (or
Intelligence) is identical with the Senses and the Mind. The Under-
standing, therefore, is identical with the six ( the five senses and the
mind), and also with the objects comprehended by it. When, however,

the Understanding is destroyed, the three qualities ( of Darkness,
Passion, and Goodness) are incapable of leading to action.* This
universe of immobile and mobile things consists of that Intelligence. It
isfrom that Intelligence that everything arises and it is into it that
everything subsides. For this reason, the scriptures indicate that every-
thing is a manifestation of Intelligence. That by which one hearsis the
ear. That by which one smells is called the organ of smell, and that
by which one distinguishes the tastes is called the tongue. By the coat
that covers the body one acquires perception of touch. That which is
called the Intelligence undergoes modifications. When the Intelligence

1 Generally, in Hindu philosophy, particularly of the Vedanta school,
adistinotion is conceived between the mind, the understanding, and the
soul. The mind is the seat or source of all feelings and emotions as also
all our perceptions, or those which are called cognitions in the Kantian
echool, including Comparison which (in the Kantian school) is called the
Vernuft or Reason. This last is called the Understanding or buddhi. The
soulis regarded as something distinct from both the body and the mind.
It is the Being to whom the body and the mind belong. It is represented
as inactive, and as the all-seeing witness within the physical frame, It isa
portion of the Supreme Soul.—T.

2 Goodness includes all the higher moral qualities of man. Passion
means love, affection, and other emotions that appertain to worldly objects,
Darkness means anger, lust, and such other mischievous propensities.—T.

8 I follow Nilakantha in his grammatical exposition of this verse. ~
The meaning, however, is scarcely clear. The identity of the Understand-
ing or intelligence with the senses and the mind may be allowed so far as
the action of the three qualities in leading all of them to worldly attach-
ments is concerned. But what is meant by the identity of the Understand-
ing with all the objects it comprehends? Does Bhishma preach Idealism
here? If nothing exists except as it exists in the Understanding, then, of
course, with the extinction of the Understanding, all things would come to
an end.—T,

4 Brown and other followers of Reid, whether, they understood Reid
or not, regarded all the perceptions as only particular modifications of the
mind. They depisdniédtecthieokine omiateagsceksbeworld.—T,

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 53 ===

SANTI PARVA 51

desires anything it comes to be called Mind. The foundations upon
which the Intelligence rests are five in number, each serving a different
purpose. They are called the senses. The invisible principle, viz.
Intelligence rests on them. The Intelligence that exists ina living
creature concerns itself with the three states (called Passion, Darkness,
and Goodness). Sometimes it obtains joy and sometimes misery. Some-
times it becomes divested of both joy and misery. Even thus the
Intelligence exists in the minds of all men. Sometimes the Intelligence
which is made up of the triple states (already mentioned), transcends
those three states (by yoga), like the lord of rivers, viz., the Ocean, with
his surges, transgressing his high continents. That Intelligence which
transcends the three qualities exist in the mind ina pure state of
(unmodified) existence alone. The quality of Darkness, however, that
impels to action, soon pursues it. At that time, the Intelligence sets all
the senses to action. The properties of the three are even thus: joy
dwells in Goodness ; sorrow in Passion ; delusion in Darkness. All the
states that exist (of the mind) are included in the three (that have been
named). I have now, O Bharata, told thee about the course of the
Understanding. An intelligent man should subdue all his senses. The
three qualities of Goodness, Passion, and Darkness, are always attached
to living creatures. Three kinds of intelligence also are noticeable in
every creature, viz, that which depends upon Goodness, that upon
Passion, and that upon Darkness, O Bharata. The quality of Goodness
brings happiness ; the quality of Passion produces sorrow ; and if these
two combine with the quality of Darkness, then neither happiness nor
sorrow is produced (but, instead, only delution or error). Every state
of happiness that appears in the body or the mind is said to be due to
the quality of Goodness, A state of sorrow, disagreeable to oneself,
that comes, is due to nothing but the quality of Passion. One should
never think of it with fear.? That state, again, which is allied with
delusion and error, and in consequence of which one knows not what to
do, which is unascertainable and unknown, should be regarded as
belonging to the quality of Darkness.* Gladness, satisfaction, delight,
happiness, tranquillity of heart, these are the properties of the state of

1 The commentator explains this verse thus, although as regards the
second line he stretches it a little. If Nilakantha be right, K. P. Singha
must be wrong. Generally, however, it is the known incapacity of the
ocean to transgress its continents that supplies poets with illustrations.
Here, however, possibly, the rarity of the phenomenon, viz., the ocean's
transgressing its continents, is used to illustrate the rare fact of the
Intelligence, succeeding by yoga power, in transcending the attributes of
Rajas, Tamas and Satiwa.—T. tJ

2 On the other hand, directing one’s thoughts boldly to it, one should
ascertain its cause and dispel that cause, which, as stated,here, is Passion.-T.

8 The first {wo words of the second line are those of verse 5 of Seo,

I, Manu.—T. Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 54 ===

52 MAHABHARATA

Goodness. Man sometimes obtains a measure of them. Discontent,
heart-burning, grief, cupidity, vindictiveness are all indications of the
state of Passion. They are seen with or without adequate causes for
producing them. Disgrace, delution, error, sleep and stupefaction, that
overtake one through excess of ill-luck, are the various properties of
the state of Darkness.! That person whose mind is far-reaching, capable
of extending in all directions, mistrustful in respect of winning the
objects it desires, and well-restrained, is happy both here and here-
after.? Mark the distinction between these two subtile things, viz.;
Intelligence and Soul. One of these (viz., Intelligence), puts forth the
qualities. The other (viz., the Soul), does nothing of the kind. A gnat
anda fig may be seen to be united with each other. Though united,
each however is distinct from the other. Similarly, Intelligence and
Soul, though distinguished from each other, by their respective natures,
yet they may always be seen to exist in a state of union. A fish and
water exist in a state of union. Each, however, is different from the
other. The same is the case with Intelligence and Soul. The qualities
do not know the Soul, but the Soul knows them all. The Soul is the
spectator of the qualities and regards them all as proceeding from itself.
The soul, acting through the senses, the mind, and the understanding
numbering as the seventh, all of which are inactive and have no self-
consciousness, discovers the objects (amid which it exists) like a (cover-
ed) lamp showing all objects around it by shedding its rays through an
aperture in the covering. The understanding or Intelligence creates all
the qualities. The Soul only beholds them (as a witness). Even such is
certainly the connection between the Intelligence and the Soul.* There
is no refuge on which either Intelligence or Soul depends. The Under-
standing creates the mind, but never the qualities. When the Soul, by
means of the mind, sufficiently restrains the rays that emanate from the
senses, it is then that it becomes manifest (to the Understanding) like a
lamp burning within a vessel that covers it. That person who renounces
all ordinary acts, practises penances, devotes himself to study the Soul,
taking a delight therein, and regards himself as the Soul of all creatures,

1 Kathanchit is explained by Nilakantha as ‘due to great ill-luck,'"—T,
8 I do not follow Nilakantha in rendering this verse.—T.

3 The soul is said to be only a witness or spectator and not an actor,
The Rishis understood by the soul the being to whom the mind, the senses,
&o., all belong, Could the idea of the inactive and unsinning Soul have arisen
from observation of the moral principle or Conscience which discriminates
between right and wrong, and acts, therefore, as an impartial judge, or
watches everything like an uninterested spectator ? European moralists
generally attribute two otherfunctions to the Conscience, viz., impelling us
to do the right and avoid the wrong, and approving when right ie done and
wrong avoided. But these functions may easily be attributed to some other
principle. At any rate, when the question is one of nomenclature only, the
last two functions may be taken away and the word Soul applied to indicate
the Conscience Pewhloddenfiynditidivdvimmihalyhnokenbn_T,

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 55 ===

SANTI PARVA 53

acquires a high end. As an aquatic fowl, while moving over the waters,
is never drenched in that element, even thus does a person of wisdom
move (in the world) among creatures. By the aid of one’s intelligence
one should act in the world after this fashion, without grief, without
joy, with an equal eye for all, and destitute of malice and envy. One
living in this way succeeds in creating the qualities ( instead of being
oneself affected by them), like a spider creating threads.* The qualities
should, indeed, be regarded as the threads of the spider. Some say that
the qualities in respect of such men are not lost. Some say that they
are all lost. Those who say that they are not lost rely upon the revealed
scriptures, (viz., the Srutis), which donot contain any declaration to the
contrary. They,on the other hand, who say that the qualities are all
lost rely on the Smritis. Reflecting upon both these opinions, one should
judge oneself as to which of them is right. One should thus get over
this hard and knotty question which is capable of disturbing the under-
standing by doubt, and thereby win happiness. When that doubt will
be removed, one will no longer have to indulge in sorrow of any kind.
Men of filthy hearts may by knowledge obtain success like persons
plunging in a well-filled stream purifying themselves of all filth. One
who has to cross a broad river does not feel happy at only seeing the
other shore. If the case were otherwise, (i.e. if by only beholding the
other shore one could reach it by a boat), then might one become happy.
The matter is otherwise with one acquainted with the Truth. The mere
knowledge of Truth will bring him happiness. As soon as such know-
ledge begins to bear fruits, the person may be regarded to have reached
the other shore. They who thus know the Soul as freed from all worldly
objects and is but the One, are said to obtain high and excellent
knowledge.2 A person by knowing the origin and the end of all crea-
tures, which is even such, and by reflecting upon the matter, gradually
obtains infinite happiness. He that has understood the triple aggregate
(viz. that it is liable to destruction instead of being eternal ), and
reflecting upon it, casts it away, succeeds by yoga to behold the Truth
and obtain perfect felicity. The Soulis incapable of being seen unless
the senses, which are employed on diverse objects and are difficult of
being controlled, be all duly restrained, He that knows this is really wise.
What other indication is there of a wise man? Acquiring this know-
ledge, men possessed of intelligence regard themselves to be crowned
with success. That which inspires the ignorant with fear can never
inspire fear in persons of Knowledge. There is no higher end for any.

1 The qualities here referred to are those of Sattwa (goodness), Rajas
(passion), and Tamas (darkness). What is meant by this verse is that such
& person transcends the qualities instead of the qualities transcending him
and his acts.—T.

2 Nilakantha takes the third line as elliptical and is for supplying te

labhante.—T. Downloaded from https:/Avww.holybooks.com
https://)www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 56 ===

54 MAHABHARATA

body (than Emancipation). In consequence, however, of the excess or
otherwise of good qualities, the sages say that differences are observable
in respect of the degree of Emancipation. A person by acting without
expectation of fruits succeeds (by those acts) in annihilating his sinful
acts of a former period. To one possessed of wisdom, the acts of a
former period (thus washed off) and those of this life also (which are
accomplished without expectation of fruit), do not become productive
of any disagreeable consequence (such as immurement in hell). But how
can acts, if he continues to be engaged in accomplishing acts, bring
about what is agreeable (viz., Emancipation) ?? People censurea person
that is afflicted (with lust, envy, and other evil passions). Those vices
hurl the person in his next life into diverse kinds of inferior orders.?
Mark with close attention the vicious in this world who grieve exceed-
ingly for the loss of their possessions (such as sons and wives, &c.).
Behold also those that are gifted with judgment and who never grieve
when thrown into similar circumstances. Those that are conversant
with both, (i.e, with gradual Emancipation and immediate Emancipa-
tion) deserve to be called truly wise.’ "*

SECTION CXCV

“Bhishma said, ‘I shall now, O son of Pritha, discourse to thee
upon the four kinds of yoga meditation. The great Rishis, obtaining a
knowledge of the same, attain to eternal success even here. Great Rishis
gratified with knowledge, with hearts set upon Emancipation, and
conversant with yoga, act in such a way that their yoga meditation may
get on properly. These, O son of Pritha, being freed from the faults
of the world, never come back (for rebirth). Liberated from liability
to rebirth, they live in their original Soul-state.4 Freed from the

1 I follow the commentator in his exposition of this verse. Anavi-
sandhipurvakam is explained as nishkamam. Ubhayam is prachinamaihikam
cha karmam. Apriyam is equivalent to vadham. The substance of priyam,
dc., is thus given; Moksham prati tu karmanah karanatwam duranirastam,-T,

2 Aturam is oxplained as pierced by lust, wrath, dc. Asuyate ie equi-
valent to dhikkaroti. Janah is explained by the commentator as parikshakah
but it would be better to take it as standing for people generally. Tasya
is an instance of the genitive for the accusative. Tat refers to nindyam
karma; sarvatah means sarvashu yonishu. Janayati Janena dadati. The
object of the verse is to show that sinful acts produce fear both here and
hereafter.—T.

8 Loka is in the locative case, the final vowel indicating to the locative
having been dropped for sandhi. Niravishan is an adverb, equivalent to
samyak-abhinivesam kurvan. Tattadeva means “those and those” i.e., posses-
sions, such as putradaradikam, Kusalan is sarasaravivekanipunan. Ubhayam
is explained as karma-mukhin and sadyomuktim, Bhisma here ‘points out the
superiority of the latter kind of Emancipation over the former ; hence
Vedie acts or rites must yield to that yoga which drills the mind and the
understanding and enables them to transcend all earthly influences —7.

4 The soul-state is the state of purity. One falls away from it in
consequence of worldly attachments. One may recover it by yoga which
aids one in liberating ne@aegelfrcnampbhonomkbychoxente—T.

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 57 ===

SANTI PARVA

influence of all pairs of opposites (such as heat and cold, joy and sorrow,
&c.), ever existing in their own (original) state, liberated (from attach-
ments), never accepting anything (in gift), they live in places free from
the companionship of wives and children, without others with whom
disputes may arise, and favourable to perfect tranquillity of heart. There
such a person, restraining speech, sits like a piece of wood, crushing all
the senses, and with mind undividedly united by the aid of meditation
(with the Supreme Soul). He has no perception of sound through the
ear ;no perception of touch through the skin ; no perception of form
through the eye; no perception of taste through the tongue. He has
no perception also of scents through the organ of smell. Immersed in
yoga, he would abandon all things, rapt in meditation. Possessed of
great energy of mind, he has no desire for anything that excites the five
senses. The wise man, withdrawing his five senses into the mind, should
then fix the unstable mind with the five senses (into the Intellect).
Possessed of patience, the yogin should fix his mind which always wanders
(among worldly objects), so that his five gates (under the influence of
training) may be made stable in respect of things that are themselves
unstable. He should, in the firmament of the heart, fix his mind into
the path of meditation, making it independent of the body or any other
refuge. I have spoken of the path of meditation as the first, since the
yogin has first to crush his senses and the mind (and direct them to that
path). The mind, which’ constitutes the sixth, when thus restrained,
seeks to flash out like the capricious and flighty lightning moving in
frolic among the clouds. As a drop of water on a (lotus) leaf is unstable
and moves about in all directions, even so becomes the yogin’s mind
when first fixed on the path of meditation. When fixed, for a while the
mind stays in that path. When, however, it strays again into the path
of the wind, it becomes as flighty as the wind. The person conversant
with the ways of yoga-meditation, undiscouraged by this, never
regarding the loss of the toil undergone, casting aside idleness and
malice, should again direct his mind to meditation. Observing the vow
of silence, when one begins to set his mind on yoga, then discrimination,
knowledge, and power to avoid evil, are gained by him.' Though feeling
annoyed in consequence of the flightiness of his mind, he should fix it
(in meditation). The yogin should never despair, but seek his own
good. Asa heap of dust or ashes or of burnt cow-dung, when drenched
with water, does not seem to be soaked, indeed, as it continues dry if
drenched partially, and requires incessant drenching before it becomes
thoroughly soaked, even thus should the yogin gradually control all his
senses. He should gradually withdraw them (from all objects). The man
that acts in this way succeeds in controlling them. One, O Bharata, by

1 Thethree words used here are vichara, viveka, and vitarka. They
are technical terms implying different stages of progress in yoga. The
commentator explains them at length.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 58 ===

56 MAHABHARATA

oneself directing one’s mind and senses to the path of meditation, succeeds
in bringing them under perfect control by steadfast yoga. The felicity that
he feels who has succeeded in controlling his mind and senses is such
that its like can never be obtained through Exertion or Destiny.’ United
with such felicity, he continues to take a pleasure in the act of medita-
tion. Even in this way yogins attain to Nirvana whichis highly blessed.’”

SECTION CXCVI

“Yudhishthira said, ‘Thou hast discoursed on the four modes of
life and their duties. Thou hast also spoken of the duties of kings.
Thou hast recited many histories of diverse kinds and connected with
diverse topics. I have also heard from thee, O thou of great intelligence,
many discourses connected with morality. I have, however, one
doubt. It behoveth thee to resolve it. I wish, O Bharata, to hear of
the fruits that silent Reciters of sacred mantras acquire (by their
practice). What are the fruits that have been indicated for such men ?
What is that region to which they go after death? It behoveth thee
also, O sinless one, to tell me all the rules that have been laid down in
respect of such silent recitation? When the word Reciter is uttered,
what shall I understand by it? Is such a man to be regarded as follow-
ing the ordinances of Sankhya or yoga or work ?? Or, is such a man to
be regarded as observing the ordinances about (mental) sacrifices ? How
is the path of the Reciters to be called? Thou art, asI think, of
universal knowledge. Tell me all this.’

“Bhishma said, ‘In this connection is cited the old history of what
transpired between Yama, Time, and a certain Brahmana. Sages
conversant with the means of attaining to Emancipation have spoken
of two methods, viz., the Sankhya and the yoga. Amongst these, in the
former, which is otherwise called the Vedanta, Renunciation has been
preached with respect to silent recitation. The declarations of the
Vedas preach Abstention (from rites), are fraught with tranquillity,
and are concerned with Brahma.* Indeed, the two paths spoken of by
sages bent on achieving what is for their good, viz., Sankhya and yoga,
are such that they are both concerned and again unconcerned (with

1 Everything that man has is the product of either exertion or
destiny ; of exertion, that is,as put forth in acts, and destiny as depend-
ent on the acts of a past life or the will of the gods or pure chance. Yoga
felicity is unattainable through either of these two means,—T.

2 Sankhya is understood by the commentator as implying Vedanta-
vichara.—T.

3 This verse is a triplet. The commentator explains that Vedanta in
the second line means Sankhya. I think, this is said because of the agreee
ment between the Vedanta and the Sankhya in this respect notwithstanding
their difference in other respects. The object of the verse is to say that
according tothe Sankhya, there is no necessity for silent recitation of
mantras. Mental meditation, without the utterance of particular words,

may lead to Brahyna-se Fred from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 59 ===

SANTI PARVA 57

silent recitations). The manner in which silent recitation is connected
(with each of the two paths) and the cause I shall now explain. In both
as in the case of silent recitation, are needed the subduing of the senses
and the fixing of the mind (after withdrawal from external objects) ;
asalsotruth keeping up of the (sacred) fire, residence in solitude,
meditation, penance, self-restraint, forgiveness, benevolence, abstemi-
ousness in respect of food, withdrawal from worldly attachments, the ab-
sence of talkativeness, and tranquillity. These constitute a sacrifice in
acts (leading to the fruition of desire about heaven or felicity in next
life).? Listen now tothe course that consists of abstention (from acts).
The manner in-which the acts of the Reciter observing the vow of
Brahmacharya may cease, I will presently declare. Such a person should
conduct himself in every way according to what has been (already)
said by me. Betaking himself to the path of abstention, he should seek
to extinguish his dependence on both the External and the Internal.
Sitting on kusa grass, with kusa in hand, and binding his coronal locks
with kusa, he should surround himself with kusa and have kusa for
robes. Bowing unto all earthly concerns, he should take leave of them
and never think of them. Assuming equability by the aid of his mind,
he should fix his mind on the mind itself. Reciting the highly beneficial
composition (viz., the Gayatri), he meditates with the aid of his intellect
on Brahma alone. Afterwards he leaves off even that, being then
absorbed in concentrated contemplation.‘ In consequence of his depen-
dence on the strength of the Gayatri which he recites, this concentrated
contemplation will come of itself. By penances he attains to purity of
soul, and self-restraint, and cessation of aversion and desire. Freed
from attachment and delusion, above the influence of all pairs of
opposites (such as heat and cold, joy and sorrow, &c.), he never grieves
and never suffers himself to be drawn towards worldly objects. He
does not regard himself as the actor nor as the enjoyer or sufferer of the
consequences of his acts. He never, through selfishness fixes his mind
on anything. Without being employed in the acquisition of wealth, he

1 Both declare, as the commentator expiaius, that as long as one
does not succeed in beholding one’s Soul, one may silently recite the
Pranava or the original word Om, When, ‘however, one succeeds in be-
aa one’s Sou], then may one give up such recitation._T.

2 There are two paths which one in this world may follow. One is
called Pravritti dharma and the other Nrivritti dharma, The firet isa
course of actions ; the second of abstention from actions. The attributes
indicated in 10 and 11 be slong to the first course or path. They are, there-
fore, called Pravartaka yajna or Sacrifice having its origin in Pravritti or
action.—T,

8 i.¢., he should first cleanse his heart by observing the virtues above
enumerated.—T.

4 Samadhi is that meditation in which the senses having been all
withdrawn into the mind, the mind, as explained previously,is made to
dwell on Brama alone.-B&inloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 60 ===

58 MAHABHARATA

abstains also from disregarding or insulting others, but not from work.
The work in which he is employed is that of meditation ; he is devoted
to meditation, and seeks meditation unalterably. By meditation he
succeeds in bringing about concentrated contemplation, and then gra-
dually leaves off meditation itself. In that state he enjoys the felicity
which attaches to the abandonment of all things. Having thoroughly
mastered the principle of desire he casts off his life-breaths and then
enters into the Brahmic body. Or, if he does not desire to enter into
the Brahmic body, he at once goes upwards into the region of Brahma
and has never to undergo rebirth. Having become tranquillity’s self,
and being freed from all kinds of calamity, such a person, by depend.
ing upon his own intelligence, succeeds in attaining to that Soul which
is pure and immortal and which is without a stain.’ ”

* SECTION CXCVII

“Yudhishthira said, ‘Thou hast said that as regards Reciters, they
obtain this very high end.* I beg to enquire whether this is their only
end or there is any other to which they attain.’ ,

“Bhishma said, ‘Listen with concentrated attention, O puissant
monarch, tothe end that silent Reciters attain, and to the diverse
kinds of hell into which they sink, O bull among men! That Reciter
who does not at first conduct himself according to the method that has
been laid down, and who cannot complete the ritual or course of
discipline laid down, has to go to hell.? That Reciter who goes~on
without faith, who is not contented with his work, and who takes no
pleasure in it, goes to hell, without doubt. They who follow the ritual
with pride in ther hearts, all go to hell. That Reciter who insults and
disregards others has to go to hell. That man who betakes himself to
silent recitation under the influence of stupefaction and from desire of
fruit, obtains all those things upon which his heart becomes set.* That
Reciter whose heart becomes set upon the attributes that go by the name
of divinity, has to incur hell and never becomes freed from it.‘ That

1 The end declared by Bhishma in the previous section is the suocess
of yoga, or freedom from deorepitude and death, or death at will, or absorp-
tion into Brahma, or independent existence in a beatific condition.—T.

2 It should be noted that ‘hell’,as here used, means the opposite of
Emancipation. A Reciter may attain to the joys of heaven, but compared
to Emancipation, they are hell, there being the obligation of rebirth attach-
ed to them.—T, : d

3 Even thie is a kind of hell, for there is re-birth attached to it__T,

4 Aiswarya or the attributes of godhead are certain extraordinary
powers attained by yogins and Reoiters. They are the power to become
minute or huge in shape, or go whithersoever one will, &. These are
likened to hell, becauce of the obligation of re-birth that attaches to them,
Nothing less than Emancipation or the absorption into the Supreme Soul ig
the end that sheid.kadtaiian HiGisteyw.holybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 61 ===

SANTI PARVA 59

Reciter who betakes himself to recitation under the influence of attach-
ments (to earthly objects suchas wealth, wives &c. ) obtain those
objects upon which their hearts are set. That Reciter of wicked
understanding and uncleansed soul who sets himself to his work with an
unstable mind, obtains an unstable end or goes into hell. That Reciter
who is not endued with wisdom and who is foolish, becomes stupefied
or deluded ; and in consequence of such delusion has to go to hell where
he is obliged to indulge in regrets.* Ifa person of even firm heart,
resolving to complete the discipline, betakes himself to recitation, but
fails to attain to completion in consequence of his having freed himself
from attachments by a violent stretch without genuine conviction of
their inutility or harmful character, he also has to go to hell."*
“Yudhishthira said, ‘When the Reciter attains to the essence of
that which exists in its own nature (without being anything like created
or born objects), which is Supreme, which is indescribable and incon-
ceivable, and which dwellsin the syllable om forming the subject of
both recitation and meditation, (indeed, when Reciters to a state of
Brahma), why is it that they have again to take birth in embodied forms ?”
“Bhishma said, ‘In consequence of the absence of true knowledge
and wisdom, Reciters obtain diverse descriptions of hell. The discipline
followed by Reciters is certainly very superior. These, however, that

I have spoken of, are the faults that appertain to it.

SECTION CXCVIII

“Yudhishthira said, ‘Tell me what description of hell is obtained
by a Reciter? I feel, O king, a curiosity to know this. It behoveth
thee to discourse on the subject.’

“Bhishma said, ‘Thou hast sprung froma portion of the god of
righteousness. Thou art by nature observant of righteousness. Listen,
O sinless one, with undivided attention, to these words resting on
righteousness as their basis. Those regions that are owned by the high-
souled gods, that are of diverse aspects and colours, of diverse descrip-
tions and productive of diverse fruits, and that are of great excellence,
those cars again that move at the will of the riders, those beautiful
mansions and hells, those various pleasure-gardens embellished with
golden lotuses, those regions that belong to the four Regents and Sukra
and Vrihaspati andthe Maruts and Viswedevas and Sadhyas and the
Aswins, and the Rudras and the Adityas andthe Vasus, and other
denizens of heaven, are, O sire, spoken of as hells, when compared with
the region of the Supreme Soul. The region last spoken of is without

1 Inthe Bengal texts there is vicious line begiuning with Prajna,
&o. The Bombay text omits it, making both 10 and 11 couplets, instead of
taking 11 as triplet.—T.
2 Na samyuktah is explained by the commentator as aviraktopi
hathena tyaktabhogah.—Bwnloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://ww.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 62 ===

0 MAHABHARATA

any fear (of change for the worse), uncreate (and therefore, in its true
nature), without pain of any kind (such as ignorance and delusion),
without any agreeable or disagreeable element, beyond the reach of the
three attributes (of Sattwa, Rajas,and Tamas), freed from the eight
incidents, (viz. the five primal elements, the senses, the mind, and the
intellect), without the three ( distinctions between the knower, the
known, and act of knowing); freed also from the four attributes
(seeing, hearing, thinking, and knowing),' without the fourfold causes
(of knowledge), without joy and delight and sorrow and disease. Time
(in his forms of past, present, and future) arises there for use. Time is
not the ruler there. That supreme region is the ruler of Time as also
of Heaven. That Reciter who becomes identified with his Soul (by
withdrawing everything into it) goes thither. He has, after this, never
to feel any sorrow. This region is called Supreme. The other regions
(of which I have first spoken) are hell. I have not told thee of all those
regions that are called hell. Indeed, in comparison with that foremost
of regions all the others are called hell.'”

SECTION CXCIX

“Yudhishthira said, ‘Thou hadst referred to the dispute between
Time, Mrityu, Yama, Ikshvaku, and a Brahmana. It behoveth thee to
narrate the story in full.’

“Bhishma said, ‘In connection with this subject that Iam dis-
coursing upon, is cited the old history of what transpired between
Surya's son Ikshvaku anda certain Brahmana, and Time and Mrityu.
Listen to me as to what occured, and what was the conversation that
took place between them, and the place where it happened. There
was a certain Brahmana of great fame and pious behaviour. He was
a Reciter. Possessed of great wisdom, he was conversant with the six
Angas (of the Vedas). He was of the Kusika race and son of Pippalada.*
He acquired (by his austerities) spiritual insight into the Angas.*
Residing at the foot of Himavat, he was devoted to the Vedas. Silently
reciting the Gayatri composition, he practised severe austerities for
attaining to Brahma. A thousand years passed over his head {while he
was engaged in the observance of vows and fasts. The goddess (of
Gayatri or Savitri) showed herself to him and said, ‘Iam gratified with
thee.’ Continuing to recite the sacred mantra, the Brahmana remained
silent and spoke not a word to the goddess. The goddess felt compassion
for him and became highly gratified. Then that progenitrix of the

1 For there no forms exist to become the objects of such functions.
All is pure knowledge there, independent of those ordinary operations that
help created beings to acquire knowledge.—T-

2 Tho six Angas are Siksha, Kalpa, Vyakarana, Nirukta, Chhandas,
Jyotish.—T,

3 i.c., an insighinRababteinadiy the, ordinacys.evay but by intuition.-T,

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 63 ===

SANTI PARVA 61

Vedas applaud that recitation in which the Brahmana had been engaged.
After finishing his recitation (for that day) the Brahmana stood up and,
bending his head, prostrated himself before the goddess’s feet. The
righteous-souled Reciter, addressing the goddess, said, ‘By good luck,
O goddess, thou hast been gratified with me and shown thyself to me.
If, indeed, thou art gratified with me, the boon I ask is that my heart
may take pleasure in act of recitation.”

“Savitri said, “What dost thou ask, O regenerate Rishi? What
wish of thine shall I accomplish? Tell me, O foremost of Reciters,
everything will be as thou wishest.’ Thus addressed by the goddess, the
Brahmana, conversant with duties, replied, saying, ‘Let my wish about
continuing my recitations goon increasing every moment. Let also,
O auspicious goddess, the absorption of my mind into Samadhi be more
complete.’ The goddess sweetly said, ‘Let it be as thou wishest.”
Desiring to do good to the Brahmana, the goddess once again addressed
him, saying, ‘Thou shalt not have to go to hell, i.e. thither where great
Brahmanas go. Thou shalt go into the region of Brahma which is
uncreate and free from every fault. I go hence, but that which thou
hast asked me shall happen.! Go on reciting with restrained soul and
rapt attention. The god Dharma will in person come to thee. Time,
Mrityu and Yama also will all approach thy presence. There will bea
dispute here between them and thee on a question of morality.’

“Bhishma continued, ‘Having said these words, the goddess went
back to her own abode. The Brahmana continued engaged in recitation
for a thousand celestial years. Restraining wrath, and always controll-
ing self, he passed his time, firmly devoting himself to truth and freed
from malice. Upon the completion of his observance by the intelligent
Brahmana, Dharma, gratified with him, showed his person unto that
regenerate individual.”

“Dharma said, ‘O regenerate one, behold me who am Dharma.
Ihave come here for seeing thee. Thou hast won the reward of this
recitation in which thou hadst been engaged. Listen to me as to what
that reward is. Thou hast won all the regions of felicity which
appertain to either gods or men. O good man, thou shalt ascend above
all the abodes of the deities, O ascetic, cast off thy vital breaths then,
and go unto whatever regions thou pleasest. By casting off thy body
thou wilt win many regions of felicity.’

“The Brahmana said, “What business have I with those regions
of felicity of which thou speakest ? O Dharma, go whithersoever thou
pleasest. I will not, O puissant lord, cast off this body which is subject
to much happiness and misery.”

“Dharma said, ‘Thy body, O foremost of ascetics, should certainly

1 K. P. Singha mistranslates the word sadhaye. It means ‘I go,’ and
not ‘I will strive do.’ Bharkargwnanthaps!abow ito .

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 64 ===

62 MAHABHARATA

be cast off. Do thou ascend to heaven, O Brahmana! Or, tell us
what else should please thee, O sinless one

“The Brahmana said, ‘I do not, O puissant lord, wish to reside in
heaven itself without this body of mine. Leave me, O Dharma! I
have no desire to go to heaven itself without my own. body.’

“Dharma said, ‘Without (thus) setting thy heart on thy body,
cast it off and be happy. Go into regions that are free from the
attribute ‘of Passion. Indeed, going thither, thou shalt never have to
feel any misery.’

“The Brahmana said, ‘O highly-blessed one, I take great pleasure
in recitation. What need have I for those eternal regions of which thou
speakest ? Indeed, O puissant lord, Ido not desire to go to heaven
with even this body of mine.’

“Dharma said, ‘If thou dost not wish to cast off thy body, behold,
O regenerate one, there is Time, and there is Mrityu, and there is Yama,
who are all approaching thee !

“Bhishma continued, ‘After Dharma had said this, Vivaswat’s
son (Yama), Time, and Mrityu,—the trio (who snatch away all creatures
from the earth), approached that Brahmana, O blessed king, and
addressed him thus.’

“Yama said, ‘I am Yama. I say unto thee that a high reward
awaits thee for these well-performed penances of thine, and for this
pious conduct that thou hast observed.’

“Time said, ‘Thou hast won a high reward which is, indeed,
commensurate with this course of recitation that thou hast finished.
The time is come for thee to ascend to heaven. I am Time and I have
come to thee.’

“Mrityu said, ‘O thou that art conversant with righteousness,
know me for Mrityu herself in her proper form. I have come to thee
in person, urged by Time, for bearing thee hence, O Brahmana.’

“The Brahmana said, "Welcome to Surya’s son, to Time possessed
of high soul, to Mrityu, and to Dharma! What shall I accomplish for
you all.’

-“Bhishma continued, ‘In that meeting, the Brahmana gave them
water to wash their feet, and the usual articles of the Arghya. Highly
gratified, he then addressed them, saying, ‘What shall I do for you all
by exerting my own might? Just at that time, O monarch, (king)
Ikshvaku, who had set out ona sojourn to holy waters and shrines,
came to that spot where those deities had been assembled together. The
royal sage Ikshvaku bowed his head and worshipped them all. That
best of kings then enquired after the welfare of all of them. The

Brahmana gave the king a seat, as also water to wash his feet, and the
usual Arghya. Having next made the usual enquiries of courtesy, he
said, ‘Thou art welcome, O great monarch ! Tell me all this thy wishes!
Let thy noble self tell me what I shall have to accomplish for thee by
putting forth momrilghtdd from https:/www.holybooks.com
fttps://www:holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 65 ===

SANTI PARVA 63

“The king said, ‘Iama king. Thou art a Brahmana in the obser-
vance ofthe six well-known duties. (I cannot ask), I will give thee
some wealth. That is well-known. Tell me how much I shall give thee.’

“The Brahmana said, ‘There are two kinds of Brahmanas, O
monarch! Morality of righteousness also is of two kinds ; addiction to
work, and abstention from work. As regards myself, I have abstained
from acceptance of gifts. Give presents unto them, O king, that are
addicted to the duty of work and acceptance. I shall not, therefore,
accept anything in gift. On the other hand, I ask thee, what is for thy
good? What, indeed, shall I give thee ? Tell me, O foremost of kings,
and I shall accomplish it with the aid of my penances.'

“The king said, ‘I am a Kshatriya. I donot know how to say
the word ‘Give.’ The only thing, O best of regenerate persons, that we
can say (by way of asking) is ‘Give (us) battle.’

“The Brahmana said, ‘Thou art content with the observance of
the duties of thy order. Similarly, I am content with the duties of mine,
O king! There is, therefore, little difference between us. Do as
thou pleasest !°

“The king said, ‘Thou saidst these words first, viz. ‘I shall give
thee according to my might. I, therefore, solicit thee, O regenerate one.
Give me the fruits of this recitation (which thou hast gone through).’

“The Brahmana said, ‘Thou wert boasting that thy utterances
always solicit battle. Why then dost thou not solicit battle with me?

“The king said, ‘It has been said that Brahmanas are armed with
the thunder of speech, and that Kshatriyas have might of arms. Hence,
learned Brahmana, this wordy warfare has set in between thee and me.’

“The Brahmana said, ‘As regards myself, even that is my resolu-
tion today. What shall I give thee according to my might? Tell me,
O king of kings, and I shall give thee, having wealth of my own. Do
not tarry.’

“The king said, ‘If, indeed, thou desirest to give me anything,
then give me the fruits thou hast earned by practising recitation for
these thousand years.”

“The Brahmana said, ‘Take the highest fruit of the recitations I
have gone through. Indeed, take half, without any scruple, of that
fruit. Or, O king, if thou wishest, take without any scruple the entire
fruits of my recitations.”

“The king said, ‘Blessed be thou, I have no need for the fruits
of thy recitations which I solicited. Blessings on thy head. I am about to
leave thee. Tell me, however, what those fruits are (of thy recitations)’

“The Brahmana said, ‘I have no knowledge of the fruits I kave
won. I have, however, given thee those fruits that I have acquired by
recitation. These, viz., Dharma and Time, and Yama, and Mrityu, are
witnesses (of the act of gift).’

“The king said, ‘What will the fruits, that are unknown, of these
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 66 ===

64 MAHABHARATA

thy observances, do for me? If thou dost not tell me what the fruits
are of thy recitations, let those fruits be thine, for without doubt I do
not wish for them.’

“The Brahmana said, ‘I will not accept any other utterance
(from thee). I have given thee the fruits of my recitations. Let, O royal
sage, both thy words and mine become true. As regards my recitations,
I never cherished any specific desire to accomplish. How then, O tiger
among kings, should I have any knowledge of what the fruits are of
those recitations ? Thou saidst, ‘Give! Isaid ‘I give! Ishall not
falsify these words. Keep the truth. Be calm! If thou request to keep
my word, O king, great will be thy sin due to falsehood. O chastiser
of foes, it does not become thee to utter what is untrue. Similarly, I
dare not falsify what I have uttered. I have, before this, unhesitatingly
said, ‘I give! If, therefore, thou art firm in truth, accept my gift,
Coming here, O king, thou didst solicit of me the fruits of my recita-
tions. Therefore, take what I have given away, if, indeed, thou art
firm in truth. He who is addicted to falsehood had neither this world nor
the next. Such a person fails to rescue his (deceased) ancestors. How
again shall he succeed in doing good to his (unborn) progeny? The
rewards of sacrifices and gifts, as also of fasts and religious observances,
are not so efficacious in rescuing (a person from evil and hell) as Truth,
O bull among men, in both this and the next world. All the penances
that have been undergone by thee and all those that thou wilt undergo in
the future for hundreds and thousands of years do not possess efficacy
greater than that of Truth. Truth is one undeteriorating Brahma.
Truth is the one undeteriorating Penance. Truth is the one undeterior-
ating Sacrifice. Truth is the one undeteriorating Veda. Truth is
awake in the Vedas. The fruits attached to Truth have been said to be
the highest. From Truth arise Righteousness and Self-restraint. Every-
thing rests on Truth. Truth isthe Vedas and their branches. Truth
is Knowledge. Truth is the Ordinance. Truth is the observance of
vows and fasts. Truth is the Primeval Word Om. Truth is the origin
of creatures. Truth is their progeny. Itis by Truth that the Wind
moves. It is by Truth that the Sun gives heat. It is by Truth that Fire
burns. It ison Truth that Heaven rests. Truth is Sacrifice, Penance,
Vedas, the utterance of Samans, Mantras, and Saraswati. It hath been
heard by us that onceonatime Truth and all religious observances
were placed on a pair of scales. When both were weighed, that scale on
which Truth was, seen to be heavier. There is Truth where Righteous.
ness is. Everything increaseth through Truth. Why, O king, dost thou
wish to do an act that is stained with falsehood ? Be firm in Truth. Do
not act falsely, O monarch! Why wouldst thou falsify thy words
‘Give (me),’ which thou hast uttered? If thou refusest, O monarch, to
accept the fruits that I have given thee of my reciations, thou shalt
then have to wandpy, oy ef- HS 0 tag falls WES diR™ Righteousness 1

lownlo. rom.
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 67 ===

SANTI PARVA 65

That person who does not give after having promised, and he also that
does not accept after having solicited, are both stained with falsehood.
It behoveth thee, therefore, not to falsify thy own words.’

“The king said, ‘To fight and protect (subjects) are the duties of
Kshatriyas. It is said that Kshatriyas are givers (of presents). How
then shall I take anything from thee (in gift) ?°

“The Brahmana said, ‘I never insisted on thee, O king (for
accepting anything from me in the first instance). I did not seek thy
house. Thyself, coming here, didst solicit me. Why then dost thou
not take ?”

“Dharma said, ‘Know’ ye both that Iam Dharma himself. Let
there be no dispute between you. Let the Brahmana become endued
with the reward attaching to gift, and let the monarch also obtain the
merit of Truth.’

“Heaven said, ‘Know, O great king, that 1 am Heaven's self in my
embodied form, come hither in person. Let this dispute between you
cease. Youare both equal in respect of the merit or rewards earned.”

“The king said, ‘Ihave no use with Heaven. Go, O Heaven, to
the place you have come from. If this learned Brahmana desires to
repair to thee, let him take the rewards that I have won (by my acts in
life).’ k

“The Brahmana said, ‘In my younger days I had, through
ignorance, stretched my hand (for acceptance of gifts). At present,
however, I recite the Gayatri, observing the duty of abstention.» Why
dost thou, O king, tempt me thus, me who have for a long time observed
the duty of abstention ? I shall myself do what my duty is. I do not
wish to have any share of the rewards won by thee, O monarch! Iam
devoted to penances and to study of the Vedas, and I have abstained
from acceptance.’

“The king said, ‘If, O Brahmana, thou art really to give me the
excellent reward of thy recitation, then let half that reward be mine,
thyself taking at the same time half the reward that I myself have won
by my acts. Brahmanas are engaged in the duty of acceptance. Persons
born in the royal order are engaged in the duty of giving. If thou art
not unaware of the duties (laid down for both the orders), let our
fruits be equal (according to the suggestion I have made). Or, if thou
dost not wish to be my equal in respect of our rewards, take then the
whole of the rewards that I may have won. Do take the merit I have
won if thou wishest to show me grace.’

“Bhishma continued, ‘At this time, two individuals of very
wnualaly aspect came there. Each had hisarm upon the other's shoulder;

1 Work and Abstention from work are the two courses of duty
prescribed or followed,midaded from https://www.holybooks.com
_ ~” https:/hwww.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 68 ===

66 MAHABHARATA

both were ill-dressed. They said these words, ‘Thou owest me nothing.
I really owe thee. If we dispute in this way, here is the king who
ruleth individuals. I say truly, thou owest me nothing! Thou
speakest falsely. I do owe thee adebt. Both of them, waxing very
hot in dispute, then addressed the king, saying, ‘See, O monarch, that
none of us may become stained with sin.”

“Virupa said, ‘I woe my companion, Vikrita, O monarch, the
merits of the gift of acow. Iam willing to pay off that debt. This
Vikrita, however, refuses to take repayment.’?

“Vikrita said, ‘This Virupa, O monarch, oweth me nothing. He
speaks a falsehood with the appearance of truth, O king.’

“The king said, “Tell me, O Virupa, what is that which thou
owest thy friend here. It is my resolution to hear thee and then do
what is proper.’

“Virupa said, ‘Hear attentively, O king, all the circumstances in
detail, about how I owe my companion, viz., this Vikrita, O ruler of
men. This Vikrita had, in bygone days, for the sake of winning merit,
O sinless one, given away an auspicious cow, O royal sage, unto a-Brah-
mana devoted to penances as the study of the Vedas. Going unto him,
O king, I begged of him the reward of that act. With a pure heart,
Vikrita made a gift to me of that reward. I then, for my purification;
did some good acts. I also purchased two Kapila cows with calves, both
of which used to yield large quantities of milk. I then made a present,
according to due rites and with proper devotion, of those two cows
unto a poor Brahmana living by the Unchha? method. Having
formerly accepted the gift from my companion, I desire, O lord, even
here, to give him return twice the reward!* The circumstances
being such, O tiger among men, who amongst us two shall be innocent
and who guilty (according to your judgment)? Disputing with each
other about this, we have both come to thee,O monarch! Whether
thou judgest rightly or wrongly, establish both of us in peace. If this
my companion does not wish to take from me in return a gift equal to
what he gave me, thou shalt have to judge patiently and set us both on
the right track.’

“The king said, ‘Why do you not accept payment that is sought

to be made of the debt that is owing to thee ? Do not delay, but accept
payment of what thou knowest is thy due.’

"Vikrita said, ‘This one says that he owesme. I say unto him
that what I gave I gave away. He doth not, therefore; owe me any-
thing. Let him go whithersoever he wishes.’

1 It seems that Vikrita had given away acow. He had then made a
gift to Virupa of the merit he bad won by that righteous sot.—T.

2 Picking solitary grains from the orevices in the fields after the
crops have been gathered and taken away.—T.

2 er
give hin pete TREE LAME tgpgave ct.

=== PAGE 69 ===

SANTI PARVA 67

“The king said, ‘He is ready to give thee. Thou, however, art
unwilling to take. This does not seem proper to me. I think that thou
deservest punishment for this. There is little doubt in this.’

“Vikrita said, ‘I made a gift to him, O royal sage! HowcanI
take it back ? If I am guilty in this, do thou pronounce the punishment,
O puissant one.’

“Virupa said, 'If thou refusest to take when I am ready to give,
this king will certainly punish thee, for he is an upholder of justice.’

“Vikrita said, ‘Solicited by him I gave him what was my own.
How shall I now retake that? Thou mayst go away. Thou hast my leave.’

“The Brahmana said, ‘Thou hast heard, O king, the words of
these two. Do thou take without scruple that which I have pledged
myself to give thee.’

“The king said, ‘This matter is, indeed, as deep (in importance)
as an unfathomable pit. How will the pertinacity of this Reciter end ?
If Ido not accept what has been given by this Brahmana, how shall I
avoid being stained witha great sin?’ The royal sage then said unto
the two disputants, ‘Go ye both, having won your respective objects.
I should see that kingly duties, vested in me, may not become futile.
It is settled that kings should observe the duties laid down for them.
To my misfortune, however, the course of duties prescribed for
Brahmanas has possessed my wretched self.’* ;

“The Brahmana said, ‘Accept, O king! I owe thee. Thou didst
solicit it, and I also have become pledged (to give thee). If, however,
thou refuse to take, O monarch, I shall without doubt curse thee.’

“The king said, ‘Fie on kingly duties, the settled conclusion
about the operation of which is even such. I should,- however, take
what thou givest, for only this reason, viz., rendering the two courses of
duty exactly equal.* This is my hand, that was never before (stretched
forth for acceptance of gifts), is now stretched forth (for acceptance a8
also) for giving away. Give me what thou owest me.’

1 Verses 107 and 108 are rather obscure. What the king says in 107
seems to be that you two have referred your dispute to me who am a king.
I cannot shirk my duty, but am bound to judge fairly between you. I should
see that kingly duties should not, so far as I am concerned, become futile.
In 108 he says, being a king I should discharge the duties of a king, i.c., I
should judge disputes, and give, if need be, but never take. Unfortunately,’
the situation is such that I am obliged to act asa Brahmana by taking
what this particular Brahmana is desirous of offering. —T,

2 This verse also seems to be very obscure. The king’s natural
inolination, it seems, prompts him to oblige the Brahmana by accepting
his gift. The ordinances about kingly duties restrain him: Hence hig
condemnation of those duties. In the second line, he seems to say that: he:
ig morally ‘bound to accept the gift, and intends to make a gift of hig own
meritsin return. The result of this act, he thinks, will be to make both’
courses of duty (vizw the Kshatriya, and the Brahmana’s) progiaee i the pame

‘ards in the x next —T.
Kind ot tay a eels hitps://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 70 ===

68 MAHABHARATA

“The Brahmana said, ‘If I have won any. fruits by reciting the
Gayatri, accept them all.’

“The king said, ‘These drops of water, behold, O foremost of
Brahmanas, have fallen upon my hand. [also desire to give thee.
Accept my gift. Let there be equality between us (through thy accept-
ing my gift asI have accepted thine).

“Virupa said, ‘Know, O king, that we two are Desire and Wrath.
It hath been by us that thou hast been induced to act in this way. -
Thou hast made a gift in return to the Brahmana. Let there be equality
between thee and this regenerate person in respect of regions of felicity
in the next world. This Vikrita really does not owe me anything. We
appealed to thee for thyown sake. Time, Dharma, Mrityu, and we two;
have examined everything about thee, here in thy very presence, by
producing this friction between thee and that Brahmana. Go now, as
thou choosest, to those regions of felicity which thou hast won by means
ofithy deeds.’

“Bhishma continued, ‘I have now told thee how Reciters obtain
the fruits (of their recitation) and what, indeed, is their-end, what the
spot, and what the regions, that a Reciter may win. A Reciter’of
Gayatri goes to the supreme god Brahman, or repairs to Agni or enters
the region of Surya. If he sports there in his (new) energetic form;
then stupefied by such attachment, he catches the attributes of those
particular regions." The same becomes the case with him if he goes to
Soma, or Vayu, or Earth, or Space. The fact is, he dwells‘in all these,
with attachment, and displays the attributes peculiar to those regions.
If, however, he goes to those regions after having freed himself from
attachments, and feelsa mistrust (respecting the felicity he enjoys) and
wishes for That Which is Supreme and Immutable, he then enters even
That. In that case he attains’to the ambrosia of ambrosia, to a state
free from desire and destitute of separate consciousness. He becomes
Brahma’s self freed from the influence of opposites, happy, tranquil, and
without pain.? Indeed, he attains to that condition which is free from
pain, which is tranquillity's .self, which is called Brahma, whence there
is no return, and which is styled the One and Immutable. » He becomes
freed from the four means of apprehension,* the six conditions, and also
the other six and ten attributes.‘ Transcending the Creator (Brahman),
he attains to absorption into the One Supreme Soul. Or, if under the
influence of attachments, he'wishes not for such absorption, but desires to

1 This is not Emancipation, but merely terminable felicity. —T.

2 Attains to amAnoipstion, or Absorption into the .éssence of
Brahma,—T.

3 These are Direct knowledge (‘through the ‘senses ), "Revelation,
Inference, and Intuition.—T.

*& The first six-are Hunger, Thirst, Grief, Delusion, Disease, and Death,
The other sixteen asa AbsuGy a breaks abe: Fenisingegy,and the mind:—T,

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 71 ===

SANTI PARVA 69

have a separate existence as dependent on that Supreme Cause of
everything, then obtains the fruition of everything for which he
cherishes a wish. Or, if he looks (with aversion) upon all regions of
felicity, which have been (as previously stated) called hells, he then,
driving off desire and freed from everything, enjoys supreme felicity
even in those very regions.’ Thus, O monarch, I have ‘discoursed to
thee about the end attained by Reciters. I have told thee every-
thing. What else thou wishest to hear 7”

SECTION CC

“Yudhishthira said, ‘Tell me, O grandsire, what reply was given
by either the Brahmana or the monarch to Virupa after the conclusion
of the latter's speech. What kind of end was it, amongst those
described by thee, that they obtained? What, indeed, was the discourse
that happened between them, and what did they do there ?”

“Bhishma said, ‘The Brahmana, saying, ‘Let it be as thou hast
said,—worshipped Dharma and Yama and Time and Mrityu and
Heaven, all of whom were worthy of worship. He also worshipped all
those foremost of Brahmanas that had come there by bending his head
unto them. Addressing the monarch then, he said, ‘Endued with the
reward of my recitations, O royal sage, attain thou to a position of
eminence. With thy leave I shall set myself to my. recitations again.
O thou of great might, the goddess Savitri gave me a boon, saying, ‘Let
thy devotion to recitations be continuous.’

“The king said, ‘If thy success (in recitation) has become fruit-
less (in consequence of thy having given away those fruits unto me),
and if thy heart be set upon practising again, go, O learned Brahmana,
half and half with me, and let the reward of thy recitations themselves
be thine.’

“The Brahmana said, “Thou hast made strenuous efforts before
all these persons (for making me a sharer, of the rewards in store for
thee as the consequences of thy own acts’. Let us then become equal
in respect of our rewards (in next life), and let us go to receive that
end which is.ours. Knowing the resolve to which they came. there,
the chief of the gods came to that spot, accompanied by the deities and
the Regents of the world, The Sadhyas, the Viswas, the Mantras, diverse.
kinds of loud and sweet. music, the Rivers, the Mountains, the Seas,

jl I think, K, P. Singha misunderstands this verse,’ Three different
ends are spoken of, One is absorption into Brahma; the other is enjoyment
of ordinary felicity, which, of course, is terminable, and the last is the enjoy-
ment of that ‘felicity which is due to a freedoin from desire and attach-
ments ;. 126 speaks of this last kind of felicity.—T,

2.In the second line,'sarddham is not an indeolinable ; or, if it be
taken as such, the sense may still remain unaltered, What the monarch
does is to call upon the Brahmana to'share with the monarch the rewards
that the monaroh had won.—T.

Downloaded from https:/Avww.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 72 ===

70 MAHABHARATA

the Sacred Waters, the Penances, the Ordinances about yoga, the Vedas,
the Sounds that accompany the singing of the Samans, Saraswati,
Narada, Parvata, Viswavasu, the Hahas, the Huhus, the Gandharva
Chitrasena with all the members of his family, the Nagas, the Sadhyas,
the Munis, the god of gods, viz., Prajapati, and the inconceivable and
thousand-headed Vishnu himself, came there. Drums and trumpets
were beat and blown in the firmament. Celestial flowers were rained
down upon those high-souled beings. Bands of Apsaras danced all
around. Heaven, in his embodied form, came there. Addressing the
Brahmana, he said, ‘Thou hast attained to success. Thou art highly
blessed. Next addressing the monarch, he said, ‘Thou also, O king, _
hast attained to success. Those two persons then, O monarch (viz.,
the Brahmana and the king), having done good to each other, withdrew
their senses from the objects of the world. Fixing the vital breaths
Prana, Apana, Samana, Udana and Vyana in the heart, they concen-
trated the mind in Prana and Apana united together. They then
placed the two united breaths in the abdomen, and directed their gaze
tothe tip of the nose and then immediately below the two eye-brows.
They next held the two breaths, with the aid of the mind, in the spot
that intervenes between the two eye-brows, bringing them there very
gradually. With bodies perfectly inactive, they were absorbed with
fixed gaze. Having control over their souls, they then placed the soul
within the brain. Then piercing the crown of the high-souled Brahmana
a fiery flame of great splendour ascended to heaven. Loud exclamations
of woe, uttered by all creatures, were’ then heard on all sides, Its
praises hymned by all, that splendour then entered Brahman’s self.
The Great grandsire, advancing forward, addressed that splendour
which had assumed a form of the tallness cf a span, saying, “Welcome f
And once more he uttered these words, ‘Verily, Reciters attain to the
same end with the yogins. The attainment by the yogin of his end is an
object’ of direct vision unto all these (here assembled). As regards
Reciters, there is this distinction, that the honour is ordained for them
of Brahman’s advancing forward to receive them (after their departure
from earth).* Dwell thou in me.’ Thus spoke Brahman and once
more imparted consciousness into that splendour. Indeed, the
Brahmana then, freed from all anxieties, entered the mouth of the
Creator. The monarch (Ikshvaku) also, after the same manner, entered
the divine Grandsire like that foremost of Brahmanas. The (assembled)
deities saluted the Self-born and said, ‘A very superior end is, indeed,
ordained for Reciters. This exertion (that we have seen thee put forth)
is for Reciters. As regards ourselves, we came hither for beholding it,
Thou hast made these two equal rendered them equal honour,’and
bestowed upon them an equal end. The high end that is reserved for

1 The sense seems to be that yogins attain to Brahma even here ;
whereas Reciters attain to him after death.—T.
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 73 ===

|
SANTI PARVA 7

both yogins and Reciters has been seen by us today. Transcending all
regions (of felicity), these two are capable of going whithersoever they
wish.’

“Brahman said, ‘He also that would read the great Smriti (viz.,
the Vedas), and he too who would read the other auspicious Smritis that
follow the former (viz. Manu’s and the rest), would, in this way,
attain to the same region with me. He also who is devoted to yoga, will,
without doubt, acquire in this manner, after death, the regions that
are mine. I go hence. Go ye all to your respective places for the
accomplishment of your ends.’

“Bhishma continued, ‘Having said these words, that foremost of
gods disappeared there and then. The assembled deities, having
previously taken his leave, returned to their respective abodes. All
those high-souled beings, having honoured Dharma, proceeded with
well-pleased hearts, O monarch, walking behind that great deity. These
are the rewards of reciters and this their end. I have described them
to thee asI myself had heard of them. What else,O monarch, dost
thou wish to hear of 7”

SECTION CCI

“Yudhishthira said, ‘What are the fruits of the yoga represented
by Knowledge, of all the Vedas, and of the (various) observances and
vows? How also may the creature-soul be known? Tell me this, O
grandsire

“Bhishma said, ‘In this connection is cited the old narrative of
the discourse between that lord of creatures, viz., Manu, and the great
Rishi, Vrihaspati. In days of old, the foremost of celestial Rishis, viz.,
Vrihaspati, who was a disciple of Manu, bowed to his preceptor and
addressing that lord and first of all creatures, said, ‘What is the cause
(of the universe)? Whence have the ordinances (about sacrifices and
other pious. observances) flowed? What are those fruits which the
learned say are attached to Knowledge ? Tell me also truly, O illustrious
one, what is that which the very Vedas have not been able to reveal ?
What are those fruits which are adored by eminent personages conver-
sant with the science of Artha, with the Vedas, and with the Mantras,
through sacrifices and plentiful gifts of kine? Whence do those fruits
arise ? Where are they to be found? Tell me also this old history, viz.,
whence have the earth, all earthly objects, wind, sky, aquatic creatures,
water, heaven, and the denizens of heaven, all sprung? Man’s inclina-
tions tend towards that object about which he seeks knowledge. I have
no knowledge of that Ancient and Supreme one. How shall I rescue
myself from a false display of inclinations towards Him ?? The Riks, all

1 The fact is, I do not know anything of Him, but still I profess to

worship ae CRT Wore SpAsLASRE Rescued from such

falsehood A8WSsta-an-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 74 ===

72 MAHABHARATA

the Samans, all the Yajuses, the Chhandas, Astronomy, Nirukta, Grammar,
Sankalpa, and Siksha,I have studied. But I have no knowledge of the
nature of the great creatures (the five primal elements) that enter into
the composition of everything.’ Tell me allI have asked thee, by
using only simple assertions and distinguishing adjectives or attributes.
Tell me what the fruits are of Knowledge and what those fruits that
are attached to sacrifices and other religious rites. Explain to me how
also an embodied being departs from his body and how he attains to
another body.’

“Manu said, ‘That which is agreeable to one is said to constitute
one’s happiness. Similarly, that which is disagreeable to one is said to
constitute one’s misery—By this I shall obtain happiness and keep off
misery—from a sentiment like this flow all religious acts. The efforts
for the acquisition of Knowledge, however, arise from a sentiment for
avoiding both happiness and misery. The ordinances about sacrifices
and other observances, that occur in the Védas, are all connected with
desire. He, however, who liberates himself from desire, succeeds in
attaining to Brahma. That man who, from desire of winning happiness,
walks in the path of acts which are of diverse kinds, has to go to hell.”®

“Vrihaspati said, ‘Men's aspirations are concerned with the
acquisition of the agreeable which ends in happiness, and the avoidance
of the disagreeable which brings misery. Such acquisition and such
avoidance again are accomplished by acts.’*

“Manu said, ‘It is by liberating oneself from acts that. one
succeeds in entering into Bralma. The ordinances about acts have
flowed for that very end.* The ordinances about acts tempts only those
whose hearts are not free from desire. By liberating oneself from acts
(as already said) one acquires the highest state. One desirous of felicity

1 The Chhandas are the rules of Prosody as applicable to the Vedio
hymns. Jyotish is astronomy. It forms an Anga of the Vedas. Nirukta
furnishes rules for interpreting obsoure passages of the Vedas, and also
gives the meanings of teobnical or obscure words used therein, Kalpa ig

the desoription of religious rites, Siksha is the science of Pronunciation as
applied to Vedic bymns and mantras.—T,

2 They who believe that happiness is not eternal and that, therefore,
they, should not pursue it, withdraw themselves from pious acts which
lead to that happiness. They seek Knowledge as the best means for avoid-
ing all that is transitory and changeful. They seek moksha or complete
Emancipation which has been described in the previous sections.—T, c

3. The meaning of ‘hell’ as applied in such passages has been explained
before.—T.

4 This is a highly aphoristic line. I give the sense by expanding the
words. By ‘acts’ here is meant "sacrifices and other religious observances,’
The intention of Vribaspati is to enforce the propriety of acts, for without
acts, the ends of life cannot, he maintains, be secured.—T.

5 The sense is that one should devote oneself to acts as a sort of
preparation. Afterwards one should abandon them for obtaining the higher.
end. Acts, on Parana ght Rls RRM vag Belp one, though mediately, in }

60]

the acanisition of 87) gcorhmahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 75 ===

SANTI PARVA 73

(Emancipation), betaking oneself to religious rites, becomes purified
(from attachments) by acts having for their object the purification of
the soul, and at last wins great splendour. By liberating oneself from
acts, one acquires the highest end, viz., Brahma, which is very much
above the reward that acts give. Creatures have all been created by
Mind and Act. These again are the two best paths adored by all.
Outward acts produce fruits that are transitory as also eternal. For
acquiring the latter there is no other means than abandonment of fruits
by the mind.'’ As the eye, when night passes away and the veil of
darkness is removed from it, leads its possessor by its own power, so
the Understanding, when it becomes endued with Knowledge, succeeds
in beholding all evils that are worthy of avoidance.? Snakes, sharp-
pointed kusa blades, and pits, men avoid when they perceive them lie
on their way. If some tread upon or fall into them, they do so through
ignorance. Behold the superiority of the fruits of knowledge (over
those of ignorance). Mantras applied duly, sacrifices, the presents
called Dakshina, gift of food, and concentration of the mind (for divine
contemplation),—these are the five acts that are said to be productive
of fruits, there being none else. Acts have (the three) attributes (of
Sattwa, Rajas, and Tamas) for their soul. The Vedas say this. (The
Vedas consist of Mantras). The Maniras, therefore, have the same
three attributes, since it is with Mantras that acts are to be accomplished.
The ritual also must be liable to the same three attributes. The fruits
of action depend upon the mind. It is the embodied creature that
enjoys those fruits.* All excellent kinds of sound, form, taste, touch,
and scent, are the fruits of acts, being attainable in the region of acts
(ie, heaven). As regards, however, the fruits of knowledge, man

1 The mind and acts have created all things. This bas been explained
in the last verse of section 190 ante, Both are good paths, for by both, good
end may be attained, viz., the highest, by drilling the mind, as also
(mediately) by acts (as explained in verse 14 above). The fruits of actions
must be mentally abandoned if the highest end is to be attained ;7.¢,, acts
may be gone through, but their fruits should never be coveted.—T.

2 Nilakantha explains the grammar of the first line differently. His
view is yatha chakshurupah praneta nayako, &. A better construction
would be yatha chakshuh pranctah (bhavati) &.—T.

8 This verse may ba said to furnish the key of tha doctrine of karma
or acts and why acts are tobe avoided by persons desirous of Moksha or
Emancipation. Acts have thres attributes : for some are Sattwika (good), as
sacrifices undertaken for heaven, &,, some are Rajasika (of the quality
of Passion), as penances and rites accomplished from desire of superiority
and victory ; and some are Tamasika (of the quality of Darkness), as those
undertaken for injuring others, notably the Atharvan rites of Marana,
Uchatana, &.: this being the case, the Mantras, without acts cannot be
accomplished, are necessarily subject to the same three attributes. The
same is the case with rituals prescribed. It follows, therefore, that the
mind is the chief cause of the kind of fruits won, i.¢., it is the motive that
determines the fruits, viz., of what kind it isto be, The enjoyer of the
fruit, of course, is the embodied creattire,—T. J

Downloaded from https:/Avww.holybooks.com
10 https:/www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 76 ===

74 MAHABHARATA

acquires them even here before death. Whatever acts are accom-
plished by means of the body, one enjoys the fruits thereof in a state of
physical existence. The body is, indeed, the framework to which
happiness inheres, as also the framework to which misery inheres.?
Whatever acts are accomplished by means of words, their fruits are to
be enjoyed ina state in which words can be spoken. Similarly, what-
ever acts are accomplished by the mind, their fruits are enjoyed ina
state in which one is not freed from the mind.* Devoted to the fruits
of acts, whatever kind of acts (Sadéwika or Rajasikaor Tamasika) a person
covetous of fruits accomplishes, the fruits, good or bad, that he actually
enjoys partake of their character. Like fishes going against a current
of water, the acts of a past life come to the actor. The embodied
creature experiences happiness for his good acts, and misery for his evil
ones. Him from whom this universe hath sprung, Him by knowing
whom persons of cleansed souls transgress this world, Him who has not
been expressed by Vedic mantras and words, I will now indicate. Listen
to me as I speak of that highest of the high. Himself liberated from the
several kinds of taste and scent, and sound and touch and form. He is
incapable of being grasped by the senses, unmanifest, without colour,
the One, and He has created the five kinds of objects‘ for His creatures,
He is neither female, nor male, nor of the neuter sex. He is neither
existent, nor non-existent, nor existent-nonexistent.* Only those that
are acquainted with Brahma behold Him. He knoweth no direction. ”

SECTION CCII

“Manu said, ‘From that eternal and undeteriorating One first
sprang Space ; from space came Wind; from wind came Light ; from
light came Water; from water sprang the Universe;and from the
universe, all things that occur in it. The bodies of all (earthly) things,
(after dissolution), first enter into water, thence to light or heat, thence

1 There can be no doubt that Nilakantha explains this verse correctly,
It is really a cruce. The words Naro na samsthanagatah prabhuh syat must
be taken as unconnected and independent. Na samsthanagatah is before
death. Prabhuh is adhikari (jnanphale being understood): K. P. Singha
gives the sense correctly, but the Burdwan translator makes nonsense of
the words.—T.

: 2 The subject of this verse as explained by the commentator, is to
inculeate the truth that the result of all acts accomplished by the body is
heaven where one in a physical state (however subtile) enjoys those fruits,
If Emancipation is to be sought, it must be attained through the mind. —T,

8 The sense depends upon the word acts. If acts are accomplished
the mind, their fruits must be enjoyed by the person ina state in which Pe
will haves mind. Emancipation cannot be achieved by either recitation
(japa) or Dhyana (meditation), for both these are acts, Perfect liberation
from acts is necessary for that great end.—T.

4 viz, Taste. &.,—T.

5 Existent, like atom ; non-existent, like space ; existent-nonexistent,

like Maya or illusion —T.
y u8iOB Aiaded from https:/wwwholybooks.com
https:/Avww.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 77 ===

SANTI PARVA 75

to the wind, and thence to space. They that seek Emancipation have
not to return from space. On the other hand, they attain to Brahma.
The refuge of Emancipation, viz., Brahma, is neither hot, nor cold,
neither mild nor fierce, neither sour nor astringent, neither sweet nor
bitter. He is not endued with sound, or scent, or form. He transcends
all these and everything, and is without dimensions.? The skin perceives
touch; the tongue, taste; the nose, scent; the ears, sounds; and the
eyes, forms. Men not conversant with Adhyatma succeed not in behold-
ing what is above these. Having withdrawn the tongue from tastes,
the nose from scents, the ears from touch, and the eyes from forms, one
succeeds in beholding one’s own self (as independent of the senses and
the mind and, therefore, of attributes). It hath been said that that
which is the Cause of the actor, the act, the material with which the
act is done, the place and the time of the act, and;the inclinations and
propensities in respect of happiness and misery, is called the Self (or
Soul). That which pervades everything, which does everything
(assuming the forms of living creatures), that which exists in the uni-
verse even as the mantras declare,* that which is the cause of all, that
which is the highest of the high, and that which is One without a second
and does all things, is the Cause. Everything else is effect. It is seen
that a person, in consequence of the acts performed by him, obtains
results both good and evil, which (though apparently incompatible with
each other, still) dwell together in harmony. Indeed, as the good and
evil fruits born of their own acts dwell together in the bodies of crea-
tures which are their refuge, even so Knowledge dwells in the body.*
As alighted lamp, while burning, discovers other objects before it,
even so the five senses which are like lamps set on high trees, find out
their respective objects when lighted by Knowledge.’ As the various
ministers of a king, uniting together, give him counsel, even so the
five senses that are in the body are all subservient to Knowledge. The
latter is superior to all of them. As the flames of fire, the current of
the wind, the rays of the sun, and the waters of rivers, go and come
repeatedly, even so the bodies of embodied creatures are going and

1 Aswabhavam is explained by the commentator as Pramatri-iwadi
ihinam.—T,
2 4. @.,0ne sees one’s own soul,_T.

8 i.e, which, though one, divides itself into a thousand form like the
image of the moon in a quantity of agitated water.—T.

4 The analogy consists in this: good and evil fruits, though incom-
patible, dwell together; similarly, knowledge, though not material, resides
in the material body. Ofcourse, knowledge is used herein the sense of
the mind or the understanding.—T.

5 It is difficult to understand why the idea of lamps set on trees is

introduced here,—T. Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-| -pat-fles!

=== PAGE 78 ===

76 MAHABHARATA

coming repeatedly.!| As a person by taking up an axe cannot, by
cutting open a piece of wood, find either smoke or fire in it, even so one
cannot, by cutting open the arms and feet and stomach of a person,
see the principle of knowledge, which, of course, has nothing in
common with the stomach, the arms and the feet. As again, one
beholds both smoke and fire in wood by rubbing it against another
piece, soa person of well-directed intelligence and wisdom, by uniting
(by means of yoga) the senses and the soul, may view the Supreme Soul
which, of course, exists in its own nature.? As in the midst of a dream
one beholds one’s own body lying on the ground as something distinct
from one’s own self, even so a person, endued with the five senses, the
mind, and the understanding, beholds (after death) his own body and
then goes from one into another form.* The Soul is not subject to
birth, growth, decay, and destruction. In consequence of the acts of life
being endued with effects, the Soul, clothed in body, passes from this
body (when deprived of animation) into another, unseen by others.‘
No one can behold with the eye the form of the Soul. The Soul cannot,
again, form the subject of any one’s touch. With those (i.e., the senses),
the Soul accomplishes no act. The senses do not approach the Soul. The
Soul, however, apprehends them all. As anything, placed in a blazing fire
before a spectator, assumes a certain colour in consequence of the light
and heat that operates upon it, without taking any other hue or attri-
bute, even so the Soul's form is seen to take its colour from the body.
After the same manner, man, casting off one body, enters another,
unseen by all. Indeed, casting off his body to the (five) great primal

1 The analogy is thus explained. Fire, when fed, bursts into flames,
When not fed, it dies out, but is not destroyed, for with new fuel the flames
may be brought back. The current of the wind ceases, but does not suffer
extinction ; for if it did, there would be no current again. The same is the
case with the raysofthe Sun, They die in the night, to reappear in the
morning. The rivors are dried up in summer and refilled during the rains
The body, once dissolved, appears in another form. It will be seen that the.
weakness of the reasoning is due only to incorrect notions about the objects
referred to,—T.

2 Exists in its own nature, i.e., unaffected by attributes and qualities
and accidents,—T.

3 Some of the Bengal texts read sumahan and subuddhih in the
second line. Ofcourse, this is incorrect. The true reading is samanah
and sabuddhih, meaning ‘with mind and with understanding.’ In the
Bombay edition occurs a misprint, viz., sumanah for samanah. Nilakantha
cites the correct readings.—T.

4 The Burdwan translator misunderstands the word Linga as used in
both 14nd 15. K. P. Singha also wrongly renders that word as it ocours
in 15. The commentator rightly explains that Linga bas no reference to
Linga-sarira or the invisible body composed of the tanmatra of the primal
elements, but simply means the gross body. In 14, he says, Lingat sthula-
dehat, Lingam tadeva dehantaram. In 16, anena Lingena Savibhutena,
Adristhah means alakshitah, A little care would have removed. such
blunders.—T, — Downloaded from https:/Avww.holybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 79 ===

SANTI PARVA 77

elements, he assumes a form that is similarly made of the same (five)
elements, The embodied creature (upon the destruction of his body)
enters space, wind, fire, water, and earth in such a way that each parti-
cular element in his body mingles with the particular element (out of
his body) with whose nature it is consonant. The senses also, which are
engaged in diverse occupations and dependent on the five elements (for
the exercise of their functions), enter these five elements that call forth
their functions. The ear derives its capacity from space ; and the sense
of scent from the earth. Form, which is the property of the eye, is the
consequence of light or fire. Fire or heat has been said to be the depen-
dent cause of water. The tongue which has for its property taste
becomes merged into water. The skin which has touch for its property
becomes lost in the wind whose nature it partakes. The fivefold
attributes, (viz., sound, &c.) dwell in the (five) great creatures ( viz.,
the five primal elements ), Those fivefold objects of the senses (viz.,
space, &c.) dwell in the (five) senses. All these again ( viz, the fivefold
attributes, the fivefold elements, and the five senses ) follow the lead of
the mind. The mind follows the lead of the Understanding, and the
Understanding follows the lead of That which exists in its true and
undefiled nature (viz., the Supreme Soul). The doer in his new body
receives all the good and bad acts done by him as also all acts done by
him in his past existence. All these acts done in this life and the next
ones to come follow the mind even as aquatic animals pass along a
genial current. As a quickly-moving and restless thing becomes an
object of sight, as a minute object appears to be possessed of large
dimensions (when seen through spectacies), as a mirror shows a person
his own face (which cannot otherwise be seen), even so the Soul (though
subtile and invisible) become an object of the Understanding’s appre-
hension,’ "?

SECTION CIII

“Manu said, ‘The mind united with the senses, recollects after
a long time the impressions of the objects received in the past. When
the senses are all suspended (in respect of their functions),* the Supreme
(the Soul), in the form of the Understanding, exists in its own true
nature. When the Soul (at sucha time) does not in the least regard
all those objects of the senses in respect of their simultaneity or the
reverse in point of time but mustering them from all directions holds

1 The commentator cites the Gita which furnishes a parallel passage,
viz , Indriyani paranyahurindriyebhyah param manah, ¢c.—T.

2 This verse seems to show that the Rishis had knowledge of specta-
cles, and probably also, of microscopes, The instrument that shewed minute
objects must have been well-known, otherwise some mention would have
been made of it by name. The commentator calls it upanetra.—tT,

3 By death on sleep.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 80 ===

3) MAHABHARATA

them before it together, it necessarily happens that he wanders among
all things that are incongruous. He is, therefore, the (silent)
Witness. Hence the Soul encased in body is something having a dis-
tinct and independent existence. There is Rajas, there is Tamas, and
there is Sattwa, the third. There are again three states of the understand-
ing, viz., waking, dreaming, and sound sleep. The Soul has knowledge
of the pleasures and pains, which are all contradictory, of those states,
and which partake of the nature of the threefold attributes first
mentioned.? The Soul enters the senses like the wind entering the fire
in a piece of wood.* One cannot behold the form of the Soul by one’s
eye, nor can the sense of touch, amongst the senses, apprehend it. The
Soul is not, again, an object of apprehension by the ear. It may, how-
ever, be seen by the aid of the Srutis and the instructions of the wise.
As regards the senses, that particular sense which apprehends it loses
upon such apprehension its existence asa sense.‘ The senses cannot
themselves apprehend their respective forms by themselves. The Soul
is omniscient (inasmuch as it apprehends both the knower and the
known). It beholds all things. Being omniscient, it is the Soul that
beholds the senses (without, as already said, the senses being able to
apprehend it). Nobody has seen the other side of the Himavat
mountains, nor the reverse of the moon’s disc. Yet it cannot be said
that these do not exist. Similarly, though never apprehended by the
senses, yet nobody can say that the Soul, which dwells in all creatures,
which is subtile, and which has knowledge for its essence, does not exist.
People see the world reflected on the moon's disc in the form of spots,
Though seeing, they do not know that it is the world that is so reflected

1 Yugapat means simultaneous : atulyakalam means differing in point
of time in respect of occurrence : kritsnam qualifies indriyartham ; Vidwan
means Sakshi ; and ckah, independent and distinct. What is intended to be
said bere ia that when the soul, in @ dream, musters together the occurrences
and objects of different times and places, when, in fact, congruity in respect
of both time and place does not apply to it, it must be regarded to
have an existence that is distinct and independent of the senses and the
body.—T.

2 The object of this is to show that the Soul has only knowledge of
the pleasures and pains arising in consequence of Satiwa and Rojas and
Tamas and in connection with the three states of the understanding due to
the same three attributes. The Soul, however, though knowing them,
does not enjoy or suffer them. Heis only the silent and inactive Witness
of everything.—T,

3 The object of the simile is to show that as wind is a separate
entity although existing with the fire in® piece of wood, so the Soul,
though existing with the senses is distinct from ther,—T,

4 The Bengal texts read indriyanam which I adopt, The Bombay
edition reads indriyendriyam, meaning the sense of the senses, in the same
way as the Srutis declare that is the Frana of Prana, the eye of the eye,
the ear of the ear, &c., Sravanena darsanam tatha kritam ia, "apprehended
by the ear,” i.c., a8 rendered above, “apprehended through the aid of the

rutis.”"—T,
2 Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 81 ===

SANTI PARVA 79

there. Even such is the knowledge of the Soul. That knowledge must
come of itself. The Soul depends upon the Soul itself. Men of wisdom,
reflecting on the formlessness of visible objects before birth and after
destruction, behold by the aid of intelligence, the formlessness of objects
that have apparent forms. So also although the Sun's motion cannot be
seen, yet persons, by watching its rising and setting, conclude that the
sun ‘has motion.? Similarly, those who are endued with wisdom and
learning behold the Soul by the aid of the lamp of intelligence, though
itis at a great distance from them, and seek to merge the fivefold
elements, which are near, into Brahma.? Verily, an object cannot be
accomplished without the application of means. Fishermen catch fish
by means of nets made of strings. Animals are captured by employing
animals as are the means. Birds are caught by employing birds as the
means. Elephants are taken by employing elephants. In this way, the
Soul may be apprehended by the principle of knowledge. We have
heard that only a snake can see a snake's legs. After the same manner
one beholds, through Knowledge, the Soul encased in subtile form and
dwelling within the gross body. People cannot, through their senses,
know the senses. Similarly, mere Intelligence at its highest cannot
behold the Soul which is supreme. The moon, on the fifteenth day of
the dark fortnight, cannot be seen in consequence of its form being hid.
It cannot be said, however, that destruction overtakes it. Even such is
the case with the Soul dwelling in the body. On the fifteenth day of
the dark fortnight, the gross body of the moon becomes invisible. After
the same manner, the Soul, when liberated from the body, cannot be
apprehended. As the moon, gaining another point in the firmament
begins to shine once more, similarly, the Soul obtaining a new body,
begins to manifest itself once more. The birth, growth and disappear-
ance of the moon can all be directly apprehended by the eye. These
phenomena, however, appertain to the gross form of that luminary. The
like are not the attributes of the Soul. The moon, when it shows itself
after its disappearance on the fifteenth day of the dark fortnight, is
regarded as the same luminary that had become invisible. After the

1 The commentator uses the illustration of a tree, Before birth the
tree was not ; and after destruction, it is not ; only in the interim, it is. Its
formlessness or nothingness is manifest from these two states, for it has
been said that which did not exist in the. past and will not exist inthe
future cannot be regarded as existing in the present. Tadgatah is explained
by the commentator as udayastamanagatah or taddarsinah,—T.

2 Both the vernacular translators render the second line incorrectly.
The first line is elliptical, and would be complete by supplying asannam
pasyanti. The paraphrase of the second line is Pratyasannam Jneyam
Jnanabhisamhitam (prati) ninisante. Jneyam is explained by the commenta-
for as prapancham. Jnanabhisamhitam means that which is known by the
name of Knowledge, i.e, Brahma, which has many similar names some of
which the commentator quotes such as Satyam (truth), Jnanam (knowledge),
Anantam (infinite), VijgannauchrnsnknagiademndyReadatatioy or happiness),

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 82 ===

80 MAHABHARATA

same manner, notwithstanding the changes represented by birth, growth
and age, a person is regarded as the same individual without any doubt
of his identity. It cannot be distinctly seen how Rahu approaches and
leaves the moon. After the same manner, the Soul cannot be seen how
it leaves one body and enters another. Rahu becomes visible only
when it exists with the sun or the moon. Similarly, the Soul becomes an
object of apprehension only when it exists with the body. When libe-
rated from the sun or the moon, Rahu can no longer be seen. Similarly,
the Soul, liberated from the body, can no longer be seen. Then again,
as the moon, even when it disappears on the fifteenth day of the dark
fortnight, is not deserted by the constellations and the stars, the Soul
also, even though separated from the body, is not deserted by the fruits
of the acts it has achieved in that body.’ ”

SECTION CCIV

“Manu said, ‘As in a dream this manifest (body) lies (inactive)
and the enlivening spirit in its subtile form, detaching itself from the
former, walks forth after the same manner, in the state called deep
slumber (or death), the subtile form with all the senses becomes inactive
and the Understanding, detached from it remains awake. The same is
the case with Existence and Non-Existence.? As when quantity of water

1 Tamas is another name for Rahu, The first line, therefore, refers
to the manner in which an eclipse occurs. There is noabsolute necessity,
however, for taking it as an allusion to the eclipse, The meaning may be
more general. Every day, during the lighted fortnight, the moon gaing in
appearance, as, indeed, every day, during the dark fortnight, it loses in
appearance. It may, therefore, be said that darkness approaches it or leaves
it for eating it away or discovering it moreand more. The actual process of
covering and discovering cannot be noticed. This circumstance may be
taken as furnishing the simile. In verse 21, cimilarly, tamas is capable of
a wider meaning. In 22, the word Rahu is used. It should be explained,
however, that Rabu is no imaginary monster as the Puranas describe but
the descending node of the moon, i.c., & portion of space in and about the
lunar orbit.—T.

2 This is a very difficult verse and the distinotion involved in it are
difficult to catch. Ofcourse, I follow the commentator in rendering
What is said hereis that in a dream, Vyakta (manifest body) lies inactive,
while the Chetanam (the subtile form) walks forth, In the state called
Sushupti (deep slumber which is like death) the indriyasamyuktam (the
subtile form) is abandoned, and Jnanam (the Understanding), detached from
the former, remains, After this manner, abhaya (non-existence, i.e.,
Emancipstion) rusults from destruction of bhavah or existence as subject to
its known conditions of dependence on time, manner of apprehension, &3.,
for Emancipation is absorption into the Supreme Soul which is independent
of all the said conditions. Tbe commentator explains that these observations
become necessary to show that Emancipation is possible. In the previous
section the speaker drew repeated illustrations for showing tbat the soul, to
bs manifest, depended on the body. The hearer is, therefore, cautioned
against the impression that the soul's dependence on the body is of such an
indissoluble kind that it is incapable of detachment from the body, which of

course, is necessary for Emancipation or absorption into the Supreme
Soul.— oe HS onloaded fram ites! www holybooks com or

T.
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 83 ===

SANTI PARVA 81

is clear, images reflected in it can be seen by the eye, after the same
manner, if the senses be unperturbed, the Soul is capable of being
viewed by the understanding. If, however, the quantity of water gets
stirred, the person standing by it can no longer see those images.
Similarly, if the senses become perturbed, the Soul canno longer be
seen by the understanding. Ignorance begets Delusion. Delusion affects
the mind. When the mind becomes vitiated, the five senses which have
the mind for their refuge become vitiated also. Surcharged with
Ignorance, and sunk in the mire of worldly objects, one cannot enjoy
the sweets of contentment or tranquillity. The Soul (thus circums-
tanced), undetatched from its good and evil acts, returns repeatedly
unto the objects of the world. In consequence of sin one’s thirst is hever
slaked. One’s thirst is slaked only when one’s sin is destroyed. In
consequence of attachment to worldly objects, which has a tendency to
perpetuate itself, one wishes for things other than those for which one
should wish, and accordingly fails to attain to the Supreme.*_ From the
destruction of all sinful deeds, knowledge arises in men. Upon the
appearance of Knowledge, one beholds one’s Soul in one’s understanding
even as one sees one’s own reflection in a polished mirror. One obtains
misery in consequence of one’s senses being unrestrained. One obtains
happiness in consequence of one’s senses being restrained. Therefore,
one should restrain one’s mind by self-effort from objects apprehended
by the senses.? Above the senses is the mind; above the mind is the
understanding ; above the understanding is the Soul ; above the Soul
is the Supreme or Great. From the Unmanifest hath sprung the Soul ;
from the Soul hath sprung the understanding ; from the understanding
hath sprung the mind. When the mind becomes associated with the
senses, then it apprehends sound and the other objects of the senses.
He who casts off those objects, asalso all that are manifest, he who
liberates himself from all things that arise from primordial matter,
being so freed, enjoys immortality.* The Sun rising diffuses his rays.
When he sets, he withdraws unto himself those very rays that were
diffused by him. After the same manner, the Soul, entering the body,
obtains the fivefold objects of the senses by diffusing over them his rays
represented by the senses. When, however, he turns back, he is said
to set by withdrawing those rays unto himself.‘ Repeatedly led along
the path that is created by acts, he obtains the fruits of his acts in

1 Caswasasya is an instance of Bhavapradhananirdesa, i.¢., of a
reference to the principal attribute connected by it.—T.

2 Indriath rupyante or nirupyante, hence Indriyarupani.—T.

3 The objects to be abandoned are those which the senses apprehend
and those which belong to primordial matter, Those last, as distinguished
from the former, are, of course, all the linga or subtile forms or ‘existents
which are made up of the tanmatras of the grosser elements.—T.

4 Or, regains bjs fad geahAsie-nttds:/mww.holybooks.com

4 https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 84 ===

82 MAHABHARATA

consequence of his having followed the practice of acts! Desire for
the objects of the senses keeps away from a person who does not indulge
in such desire. The very principle of desire, however, leaves him who
has beheld his soul, which, of course, is entirely free from desire.”
When the Understanding, freed from attachment to the objects of the
senses, becomes fixed in the mind, then does one succeed in attaining to
Brahma, for it is there that the mind with the understanding withdrawn
into it can possibly be extinguished. Brahma is not an object of touch,
or of hearing, or of taste, or of sight, or of smell, or of any deductive
inference from the Known. Only the Understanding (when withdrawn
from everything else) can attain to it. All objects that the mind
apprehends through the senses are capable of being withdrawn into the
mind ; the mind can be withdrawn into the understanding ; the Under-
standing can be withdrawn into the Soul, and the Soul into the
Supreme.’ The senses cannot contribute to the success of the mind.
The mind cannot apprehend the Understanding. The Understanding
cannot apprehend the manifested Soul. The Soul, however, which is
subtile, beholds those all.’ ”

SECTION CCV

“Manu said, ‘Upon the appearance of the physical and mental
sorrow, one doesnot become able to practise yoga. It is advisable,
therefore, for one not to brood over such sorrow. The remedy for
sorrow is abstention from brooding over it. When sorrow is brooded
over, it comes aggressively and increases in violence. One should
relieve mental sorrow by wisdom, while physical sorrow should be
cured by medicaments. Wisdom teaches this. One should not, while
under sorrow, behave like a child. The man of wisdom should never
cherish a desire for youth, beauty, length of life, accumulation of
wealth, health, and the companionship of those that are dear, all of
which are transitory. One should not grieve singly for a sorrow that
affects a whole community. Without grieving, one should, if one sees
an opportunity, seek to apply a remedy. Without doubt, the measure

1 Tadopt the Bombay reading aptavan instead of the Bengal reading
atmavit, Pravrittam Dharmam, as explained previously, is that Dharma or
practice in which there is pravritti and not nivritti or sbstention.—T,

2 The cense is this: by abstaining from the objects of the senses one
may conquer one’s desire for them. But one does not succeed by that
method alone in totally freeing oneself from the very principle of desire. It
is not till one succeeds in beholding one’s soul that one’s principle of desire
itself becomes suppressed.—T.

8 The separate existence of an objective world is denied in the first
clause here, All objects of the senses are said here to have only a subjective
existence ; hence the possibility of their being withdrawn into the mind.
The latest definition of matter, in European philosophy, is that it is a
permanent possibisityntadkeramhiMass 7iw.holybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 85 ===

SANTI PARVA 83

of sorrow is much greater than that of happiness in life. To one who
is content with the objects of the senses, death that is disagreeable
comes in consequence of his stupefaction. That man who avoids both
sorrow and happiness succeeds verily in attaining to Brahma. Such
persons, who are possessed of wisdom, have never to grieve. Worldly
possessions bring about sorrow. In protecting them thou canst not
have any happiness. They are again earned with misery. One should
not therefore, regard their loss. Pure Knowledge (or Brahma ) is
regarded (by ignorance) as existing in the diverse forms that are objects
of Knowledge. Know that mind is only an attribute of Knowledge.
When the mind becomes united with the faculties of knowledge, then
the Understanding (which bodies forth the forms of things) sets in.*
When the Understanding, freed from the attributes of action, becomes
directed towards the mind (after being withdrawn from outward
objects ), then does it succeed in knowing Brahma by meditation or yoga
ending in complete absorption ( samadhi ). The Understanding flowing
from Ignorance, and possessed of the senses and attributes, runs towards
external objects, like a river issuing froma mountain summit and
flowing towards other regions. When the Understanding, withdrawn
into the mind, succeeds in absorbing itself into contemplation that is
free from attributes, it attains to a knowledge of Brahma like the touch
of gold ona touchstone. The mind is the apprehender of the objects
of the senses. It must first be extinguished (before Brahma can be
attained). Dependent upon the attributes of objects that are before it,
the mind can never show that which is without attributes. Shutting up
all the doors constituted by the senses, the Understanding should be
withdrawn into the mind. In this state, when absorbed in contempla-
tion, it attains to the knowledge of Brahma. As the fivefold great
creatures (in their gross form) upon the destruction of the attributes by
which they are known, become withdrawn (into their subtile form
called Tanmatra), after the same manner the Understanding may dwell
in the mind alone, with the senses all withdrawn from their objects.
When the Understanding, though possessed of the attribute of certainty,
dwells in the mind, busied with the internal, even then it is nothing
but the mind (without being anything superior to it). When the mind
or consciousness, which attains to excellence through contemplation,
succeeds in identifying attributes with what are considered as their
possessors, then can it cast off all attributes and attain to Brahma which

1 Teis explained by the commentator as Brahmabhigatah. K.P.
Singha wrongly renders the last foot of the second line. The Burdwan
version is correct.—T.

~ Q Tein the first line is equal to tava,—T.

3 I follow the commentator in so far as he isintelligible, It is
evident that the words Jnanam and Jneyam are used in the original not

consistently throughowt Ps 4 from https:/www-holybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 86 ===

84 MAHABHARATA

is without attributes.1_ There is no indication that is fit enough for
yielding a knowledge of what is Unmanifest (Brahma). That which
cannot form the subject of language, cannot be acquired by any one.
With cleansed soul, one should seek to approach the Supreme Brahma,
through the aid afforded by penances, by inferences, by self-restraint,
by the practices and observances as laid down for one’s own order,
and by the Vedas. Persons of clear vision (besides seeing the Supreme
within themselves) seek him in even external forms by freeing them-
selves from attributes. The Supreme, which is called by the name of
Jneya (i.e. that which should be known), in consequence of the absence
of all attributes or of its own nature, can never be apprehended by -
argument. When the Understanding becomes freed from attributes,
then only can it attain to Brahma. When unemancipated from attri-
butes, it falls back from the Supreme. Indeed, such is the nature of
the understanding that it rushes towards attributes and moves among
them like fire among fuel. Asin the state called Sushupti (deep and
dreamless slumber) the five senses exist freed from their respective
functions, after the same manner the Supreme Brahmaexists high above
Prakriti, freed from all its attributes. Embodied creatures thus betake
themselves to action in consequence of attributes. When they abstain
therefrom, they attain to Emancipation. Some again (by action) go to
heaven. The living creature, primordial nature, the understanding,
the objects of the senses, the senses, consciousness, conviction of
personal identity, are called creatures (for they are subject to destruction).
The original creation of all these flowed from the Supreme. Their second
or succeeding creation is due to the action of couples or pairs (of
opposite sexes) and is confined to all things save the primal five, and is
restrained by laws in consequence of which the same species produce
the same species. From righteousness (living) creatures obtain a high
end, and from sinfulness they earnan end that is low. He who is
unemancipated from attachments, encounters rebirth ; while he who is
emancipated therefrom, attains to Knowledge (or Brahma).’ "

SECTION CCVI

“Manu said, ‘When the fivefold attributes are united with the
five senses and the mind, then is Brahma seen by the individual like a
thread passing through a gem. Asa thread, again, may lie within gold
or pearl or acoral or any object made of earth, even so one’s soul, in

1 The meaning seems to be this: ordinary men regard all external
objects as possessing an independent existence, and their attributes also as
things different from the substances which own them, The first step to
attain to is the conviction that attributes and substances are the same, or
that the attributes arethe substances. This accords with the European
Idealism, The next stage, of course, is to annihilate the attributes themselves
by contemplatiomowRibaceasmdinatitpbisiewthoipttoinnsent of Brahma.—T.

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 87 ===

SANTI PARVA 85

consequence of one’s own acts, may live within a cow, a horse, a man,
an elephant, or any other animal, or within a worm or an insect. The
good deeds an individual performs ina particular body produce rewards
that the individual enjoys in that particular body. A soil, apparently
drenched with one particular kind of liquid, supplies to each different
kind of herb or plant that grows on it the sort of juice it requires for itself.
After the same manner, the Understanding, whose course is witnessed by
the soul, is obliged to follow the path marked out by the acts of previous
lives.! From knowledge springs desire. From desire springs resolution.
From resolution flows action. From action proceed fruits (i.e., consequen-
ces, good and bad). Fruits, therefore, are dependent on actions as their
cause. Actions have the understanding for their cause. The under-
standing has knowledge for its cause ; and knowledge has the Soul for
its cause. That excellent result which is achieved in consequence of the
destruction of knowledge, of fruits, of the understanding, and of acts,
is called Knowledge of Brahma.’ Great and high is that self-existent
Essence which yogins behold. They that are devoid of wisdom, and
whose understandings are devoted to worldly possessions never behold
that which exists in the Soul itself: Water is superior to the Earth in
extension ; Light is superior to Water; Wind is superior to Light ;
Space is superior to Wind ; Mind is superior to Space ; Understanding
is superior to Mind; Time is superior to Understanding. The divine
Vishnu, whose is this universe, is superior to Time. That god is with-
out beginning, middle, and end. In consequence of his being without
beginning, middle, and end, he is Unchangeable. He transcends all
sorrow, for sorrow has limits.» That Vishnu hath been called the
Supreme Brahma. He is the refuge or object of what is called the
Highest. Knowing Him, they that are wise, freed from everything that.
owns the power of Time, attain to what is called Emancipation. All
these (that we perceive) are displayed in attributes. That which is
called Brahma, being without attributes, is superior to these.* Abstention
from acts is the highest religion. That religion is sure to lead to death-

1 Antaratmanudarsini is explained by the commentator as “that which
has the Antaratman for its anudarsin or witness. The Burdwan translator
is incorrect in rendering the second line,—T,

2 The first ‘knowledge’ refers to the perception of the true connection
between the Soul and the not-Soul. ‘Fruits’ mean the physical forms that
are gained in new births. The destruction of the understanding takes place
when the senses and the mind are withdrawn into it all of them, united
together, are directed towards the Soul. Jneyapratishthitam Jnanam
means, of course, knowledge of Brahma.—T.

8 The commentator explains that sorrow arises from the relation of
the knower and the known. All things that depend upon that relation are
transitory. They can form no part of what is eternal and what transcends
that relation.—T,

4 Itake the obvious meaning, instead of the learned explanation
offered by Nilakantha.—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 88 ===

86 MAHABHARATA

lessness (Emancipation), The Richs, the Yajuses, and the Samans, have
for their refuge the body. They flow from the end of the tongue.
They cannot be acquired without effort and are subject to destruction.
Brahma, however, cannot be acquired in this way, for (without depend-
ing upon the body) it depends upon that (i.e., the knower or Soul )
which has the body for its refuge. Without beginning, middle, or end,
Brahma cannot be acquired by exertion (like to what is necessary for
the acquirement of the Vedas). The Richs, the Samans, the Yajuses
haveeach a beginning. Those that have a beginning have also an end.
But Brahma is said to be without beginning. And because Brahma hath
neither beginning nor end, it is said to be infinite and unchangeable.
In consequence of unchangeableness, Brahma transcends all sorrow as
also all pairs of opposites. Through unfavourable destiny, through
inability to find out the proper means, and through the impediments
offered by acts, mortals succeed not in beholding the path by which
Brahma may be reached. In consequence of attachment to worldly
possessions, of a vision of the joys of the highest heaven, and of covet-
ing something other than Brahma, men do not attain to the Supreme.*
Others beholding worldly objects covet their possession. Desirous of
such objects, they have no longing for Brahma in consequence of its
transcending all attributes.? How shall he that is attached to attributes
which are inferior, arrive at a knowledge of him that is possessed of
attributes that are superior ? It is by inference that one can arrive at
a knowledge of Him that transcends all this in attributes and form.
By subtile intelligence alone can we know Him. We cannot describe
Him in words. The mind is seizable by the mind, the eye by the eye.®
By knowledge the understanding can be purified of its dross. The
understanding may be employed for purifying the mind. By the mind
should the senses be controlled. Achieving all this, one may attain
to the Unchangeable. One who has, by contemplation, become freed
from attachments, and ‘who has been enriched by the possession of a
discerning mind, succeeds in attaining to Brahma which is without
desire and above all attributes. Asthe wind keeps away from the fire
that is embedded within a piece of wood, even so persons that are
agitated (by desire for worldly possessions) keep away from that which
is Supreme. Upon the destruction of all earthly objects, the mind
always attains to That which is higher than the Understanding ; while
upon their separation the mind always acquires that which is below the

1 The very Yogins, if led away by the desire of acquiring extraordi-
nary powers and the beautitude of the highest heaven do not behold the
Supreme.—T.

2 Gunam, literally, attributes ; hence objects possessed of attributes.-T,

8 That which is called the external world bas no objective existence,
It is purely subjective. Hence, it is the mind that sees and hears and
touches the mind itself 7d ded from https:/;www.holybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 89 ===

SANTI PARVA 87

Understanding. That person, who, in conformity with the method
already described, becomes engaged in destroying earthly objects,
attains to absorption into the body of Brahma.’ Though the Soul is
unmanifest, yet when clothed with qualities, its acts become unmanifest.
When dissolution (of the body) comes, it once more becomes manifest.
The Soul is really inactive. It exists, united with the senses that are
productive of either happiness or sorrow. United with all the senses
and endued with body, it takes refuge in the five primal elements.
Through want of power, however, it fails to act when deprived of force
by the Supreme and Unchangeable. No man sees the end of the earth
but know this, viz., that the earth's end will surely come.? Man,
agitated here (by attachments), is surely led to his last refuge like the
wind leading a vessel tossed on the sea to a safe harbour at last. The
Sun, spreading his rays, becomes the possessor of an attribute, (viz., the
lighter of the world): withdrawing his rays (at the hour of setting), he
once more becomes an object divested of attributes. After the same
manner, a person, abandoning all distinctions (attachments), and be-
taking himself to penances, at last enters the indestructible Brahma
which is divested of all attributes. By discerning Him who is without
birth, who is the highest refuge of all righetous persons, who is self-
born, from whom everything springs and unto whom all things return,
who is unchangeable, who is without beginning, middle, and end, and
who is certainty’s self and supreme, a person attains-to immortality
(Emancipation), ”

SECTION CCVIL
“Yudhishthira said, ‘O grandsire, O thou of great wisdom, I
desire to hear in detail, O chief of the Bharatas, of that lotus-eyed and
indestructible one, who is the Creator of everything but who has been
created by none, who is called Vishnu (in consequence of his pervading
everything), who is the origin of all creatures and unto whom all crea-

1 This verse isa cruce, There can be no doubt that Nilakantha’s ex-
planation is correct. Only, as regards budhyavara I am disposed to differ
from him very slightly. The grammar of the first line is this; ‘Gunadane
manah sada budhiyaraya ; viprayoge cha tesham budhyavaraya.’ Now
‘Gunadana’ means the 'adana’ (destruction) of ‘guna’, (The root da means
to out). What is meant by tho destruction of ‘guna’ or attribute or earthly
objects is merging them in the buddhi by yoga ;in other words, a with-
drawal of the senses into the mind, and the senses and the mind into the
understanding. ‘Viprayoga cha tesham” means'in their separation,’ i.c.,
when these objects are believed to be real and as existing independently of
the mind. The result of this would be the acquisition of ‘budhyavara,”
implying the acquisition of those very objects. In the case of yogins, whose
minds may be in such a frame, the powers called ‘asiswaryya’ are acquired,
There is no especial necessity, however, for taking the case of yogins,—T,

2 What is said here is that Happiness and Sorrow have au end, though
it may not be seen, and the Soul will surely come to its final resting place,
This accords with the dootrine of infinite spiritual improvement.—T,

Downloaded from https:/Avww.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 90 ===

8&8 MAHABHARATA

tutes return, who is known by the names of Narayana and Hrishikesa
and Govinda and Kesava, and who is incapable of being vanquished
by any one.”

“Bhishma said, ‘I have heard of this subject from Jamadagni’s son
Rama, while he discoursed on it, from the celestial Rishi Narada, and
from Krishna-Dwaipayana. Asita-Devala, O son, Valmiki of austere
penances, and Markandeya, speak of Govinda as the Most Wonderful
and the Supreme. Kesava, O chief of Bharata’s race, is the divine and
puissant Lord of all. He is called Purusha, and pervades everything,
having made himself many. Listen now, O Yudhishthira of mighty arms,
to those attributes which great Brahmanas say are to be met with in
the high-souled wielder of Sarnga. I shall also, O prince of men, recite
to thee those acts which persons conversant with old histories ascribe to
Govinda. He is said to be the Soul of all creatures, the high-souled one,
and the foremost of all beings. He created (by his will) the five-fold
elements, viz., Wind, Light, Water, Space, and Earth. That puissant
Lord of all things, that high-souled one, that foremost of all beings,
having created the earth, laid himself down onthe surface of the
waters. While thus floating upon the waters, that foremost of all beings,
that refuge of every kind of energy and splendour, created Conscious-
ness, the first-born of beings in the universe. We have heard that He
created Consciousness along with the Mind,— Consciousness which is
the refuge of all created things. That Consciousness upholds all crea-
tures and both the past andthe future. After that great Being, O
mighty-armed one, viz., Consciousness, had sprung, an exceedingly
beautiful lotus, possessed of effulgence like the Sun’s, grew out of the
navel of the Supreme Being (floating on the waters). Then, O son, the
illustrious and divine Brahman, the Grandsire of all creatures, sprang
into existence from that lotus, irradiating all the points of the horizon
with his effulgence. After the high-souled Grandsire had, O mighty-
armed one, thus sprung from the primeval lotus, a great Asura of the
name of Madhu, having no beginning, started into birth, springing from
the attribute or Darkness (Tamas). The foremost of all Beings, (viz., the
Supreme Divinity), for benefiting Brahman, slew that fierce Asura of
fierce deeds, engaged even then in the fierce act (of slaying the Grand-
sire). From this slaughter, O son, (of the Asura named Madhu), all the.
gods and the Danavas and men came to call that foremost of all.
righteous persons by the name of Madbusudana (slayer of Madhu).*
After this, Brahman created, bya fiat of his will, seven sons with
Daksha completing the tale. They were Marichi, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya,
Pulaha, Kratu, (and the already-mentioned Daksha). The eldest born,

1 Rishavam sarvasattwam literally means ‘the bull of Satiwatas.”
Ordinarily, it is an appellation of Krishna, the prince of the Sattwatas or.
Yadavas, Here, however, the word is used to signify persons prizing the
attribute of Goodnesdowheadedtigiteines perwdsiboms.com = /4/ OB

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf

=== PAGE 91 ===

SANTI PARVA 89

viz., Marichi, begat, by a fiat of his will, a son named Kasyapa, full of
energy and the foremost of all persons conversant with Brahma. From
his toe, Brahman had, even before the birth of Marichi, created a son.
That son, O chief of Bharata’s race, was Daksha, the progenitor of
creatures.’ Unto Daksha were first born three and ten daughters, O
Bharata, the eldest of whom was called Diti. Marichi’s son Kasyapa, O
sire, who was conversant with all duties and their distinctions, who
was of righteous deeds and great fame, became the husband of those
thirteen daughters. The highly-blessed Daksha (besides the three and
ten already spoken of) next begat ten other daughters. The progenitor
of ‘creatures, viz., the righteous Daksha, bestowed these upon Dharma.
Dharma became father of the Vasus, the Rudras of immeasurable
energy, the Viswedevas, the Sadhyas, and the Maruts, O Bharata.
Daksha next begat seven and twenty other younger daughters. The
highly-blessed Soma became the husband of them all. The other wives
of Kasyapa gave birth to Gandharvas, horses, birds, kine, Kimpurushas,
fishes, and trees and plants. Aditi gave birth to the Adityas, the fore:
most ones among the gods, and possessed of great strength. Amongst
them “Vishnu took birth in the form of adwarf. Otherwise called
Govinda, he became the foremost of them all. Through his prowess,
the prosperity of the gods increased. The Danavas were vanquished.
The offspring of Diti were the Asuras. Danu gave birth to the Danavas
having Viprachitti for their foremost. Diti gave birth to all the Asuras
of great strength.

“The slayer of Madhu also created the Day and the Night, and
the Season in their order, and the Morn and the Even. After reflec-
tion, he also created the clouds, and all the (other) immobile and mobile
objects. Possessed of abundant energy, he also created the Viswas and
the earth with all things upon her. Then the highly blessed and puissant
Krishna, O Yudhishthira, once again created from his mouth a century
of foremost Brahmanas. From his two arms, he created a century of
Kshatriyas, and from his thighs a century of Vaisyas. Then, O bull of
Bharata’s race, Kesava created from his two feet a century of Sudras.
Possessed of great ascetic merit, the slayer of Madhu, having thus
created the four orders of men, made Dhatri (Brahman) the lord and
ruler of all created beings. Of immeasurable effulgence, Brahman
became also the expositer of the knowledge of the Vedas. And Kesava
made him, called Virupaksha, the ruler of the spirits and ghosts and of
those female beings called the Matrikas (mothers). Andhe made Yama
the ruler of the Pitris and of all sinful men.?- The Supreme Soul of all
creatures also made Kuvera the lord of all treasures. He then created
Varuna_the lord of waters and governor of all aquatic animals, The

1 Prajapati literally means ‘lord of creatures.’ It is a name applied to
those sons of Brahman who begat children.—T.

3 Samavartin is arakheriaamsnf Aix AOA tRSBEasben of the wicked.-T.

49 https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 92 ===

90 MAHABHARATA

puissant Vishnu made Vasava the chief of all the deities. In those
times, men lived as long as they chose to live, and were without any
fear of Yama. Sexual congress, O chief of the Bharatas, was then not
necessary for perpetuating the species. In those days offspring were
begotten by fiat of the will. In the age that followed, viz., Treta,
children were begotten by touch alone. The people of that age even,
O monarch, were above the necessity of sexual congress. It was in the
next age, viz. Dwapara, that the practice of sexual congress originated,
O king, to prevail among men. Inthe Kali age, O monarch, men have
come to marry and live in pairs.

“I have now told thee of the supreme Lord of all creatures. He
is also called the Ruler of all and everything. I shall now, O son of
Kunti, speak to thee about the sinful creatures of the earth. Listen to
me,? Those men, O king, are born in the southern region and are called
Andrakas, Guhas, Pulindas, Savaras, Chuchukas, Madrakas.* Those
that are born in the northern region, I shall also mention. They are
Yamas, Kamvojas, Gandharas, Kiratas and Barbaras. Allof them, O
sire, are sinful, and move onthis Earth, characterised by practices
similar to those of Chandalas and ravens and vultures. In the Krita
age, O sire, they were nowhere on earth. Itis fromthe Treta that
they have had their origin and began to multiply, O chief of Bharata’s
race. When the terrible period came, joining Treta and the Dwapara,
the Kshatriyas, approaching one another, engaged themselves in battle.*

_ . “Thus, O chief of Kuru’s race, this universe was started into
birth by the high-souled Krishna, That observer of all the worlds, viz.,
the celestial Rishi Narada, has said that Krishna is the Supreme God.
Even Narada, O king, admits the supremacy of Krishna. and his
eternity, O mighty-armed chief of Bharata’s race.’ Thus, O mighty.
armed one, is Kesava of unvanquishable prowess, That lotus-eyed one
is not a mere man. He is inconceivable.’ "

1 Nirapekshan is explained by Nilakantha as nirayameva ikshante tan,
i.¢., those who have their gaze directed towards hell alone. The Burdwan
translator takes it as indicative of houseless or nomadic habits, upon what
authority, it is not plain._T. .

2K. P. Singha takes Naravara as the name of a tribe. Of course, it
isa careless blunder.—T. i

3 I think K. P. Singha misunderstands this verse. All the texts agree
in reading it in the same way. To take it, therefore, as implying that the
sinful races, by warring with one another, suffered destruction ig doing
violence to the word Rajanath. There can be no doubt that Sandhyakala
means the period of junction between the two ages (Treta and Dwapara),
LE called terrible. It was at this time that that dreadful famine occured
which compelled the royal sage Viswamitra to subsist on a cani
Vide Ante.—T. nm re

4 The correot reading is Mabatmana (instrumental) implying Krishna;
The Bengal reading Mahatmavan is vicious. K. P. anes ae rendered the
verse correctly, The Burdwan translator, with Nilakantha’s note before
him (for he uses the very words of the commentator), adheres to the vicious
reading and mistranslates the verse.—T.

5 This verse evideatly shows that there was dispute about Krishna's
supremscy, as Professor Weber guesses, The Krishna-cult was at first
confined among a Be in Risunaln acrpdolarasandha's unwillingness
to admit:fhe. Ainin Hal eb dhsiahmm sabiaealy aojatente-thieoaffiest” ° =

=== PAGE 93 ===

SECTION CCVIII

“Yudhishthira asked, ‘Who were the first Prajapatis, O bull of
Bharata's race? What highly-blessed Rishis are there in existence and
on which points of the compass do each of them dwell ?’

“Bhishma said, ‘Hear me, O chief of the Bharatas, about what
thou askest me. I shall tell thee who the Prajapatis were and what
Rishis are mentioned as dwelling on which point of the horizon. There
was at first one Eternal, Divine, and Self-born Brahman. The Self-
born Brahman begat seven illustrious sons. They were Marichi, Atri,
Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, and the highly-blessed Vasishtha who
was equal to the Self-born himself. These seven sons have been
mentioned in the Puranas as. seven Brahmanas. I shall now mention all
the Prajapatis who came after these. In Atri’s race was born the eternal
and divine Varhi the ancient, who had penances for his origin. From
Varhi the ancient sprang the ten Prachetasas. The ten Prachetasas had
one son between them, viz., the Prajapati called by the name of Daksha.
This last has two names in the world, viz., Daksha and Kasyapa. Marichi
had one son called Kasyapa. This last also has two names. Some call
him Arishtanemi, and some Kasyapa. Atri had another son born of his
loins, viz., the handsome and princely Soma of great energy. He per-
formed penances for a thousand celestial Yugas. The divine Aryaman
and. they who were born unto him as his sons, O monarch, have been
described as setters of commands, and creators of all creatures. “Sasa-
vindu had ten thousand wives. Upon each of them their lord begat a
thousand sons, and so the.tale reached ten hundred thousands. Those
sons refused to call anybody else save themselves as Prajapatis. The
ancient Brahmanas bestowed an appellation on the creatures of the
world, derived from Sasavindu. That extensive race of the Prajapati
Sasavindu became in time the progenitor of the Vrishni race. These
that I have mentioned are noted as the illustrious Prajapatis. After this,
I shall mention the deities that are the lords of the three worlds. Bhaga,
Ansa, Aryyaman, Mitra, Varna, Savitri, Dhatri, Vivaswat of great
might, Tvashtri, Pushan, Indra, and Vishnu known as the twelfth,—these
are the twelve Adityas, all sprung from Kasyapa. Nasatya and Dasra
are mentioned as the two Aswins. ‘These two are the sons of the
illustrious Martanda, the eighth in the above tale. These were called
first the gods and the two classes of Pitris. Tvashtri had many sons,
Amongst them were the handsome and famous Viswarupa, Ajaikapat,
Ahi, Bradhna, Virupaksha, and Raivata. Then there were Hara and
Vahurupa, Tryamvaka the chief of the Deities, and Savitrya, Jayanta
and Pinaki the invincible. . The highly-blessed Vasus, eight in numbef,
have formerly been enumerated by me. ‘These were reckoned as gods
at the time of the Prajapati Manu. These were at first called the gods
and the Pitris. Amongst the Siddhas and the Sadhyas there were two

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 94 ===

92 MAHABHARATA

classes in consequence of conduct and youth. The deities were formerly
considered to be of two classes, viz. the Ribhus and the Maruts. Thus
have the Viswas, the gods and the Aswins, been enumerated. Amongst
them,. the Adityas are Kshatriyas, and the Maruts are Vaisyas. The
two Aswins, engaged in severe penances, have been said to be Sudras.
The deities sprung from Angirasa’s line have been said to be Brahmanas.
This is certain. Thus have I told thee about the fourfold order among
the gods. The person who, after rising from his bed at morn, recites
the names of these deities, becomes cleansed of all his sins whether
committed by himself intentionally or unintentionally, or whether born
of his intercourse with others. Yavakriti, Raivya, Arvavasu, Paravasu,
Ausija, Kashivat, and Vala have been said to be the sons of Angiras,
These, and Kanwa son of Rishi Medhatithi, and Varhishada, and the
well-known seven Rishis who are the progenitors of the three worlds,
all reside in the East. Unmucha, Vimucha, Svastyatreya of great
energy, Pramucha, Idhmavaha, and the divine Dridhavrata,’ and
Mitravaruna’s son Agastya of great energy, these regenerate Rishis all
reside inthe south. Upangu, Karusha, Dhaumya, Parivyadha of great
energy, and those great Rishis called Ekata, Dwita, and Trita, and Atri’s
son, viz. the illustrious and puissant Saraswata, these high-souled ones
reside in the west. Atreya, and Vasishtha, and the great Rishi Kasyapa,
and Gautama, Bharadwaja, and Viswamitra, the son of Kusika, and the
illustrious son of the high-souled Richika, viz., Jamadagni,—these seyen
live in the north. Thus have I told thee about the great Rishis of fiery
energy that live in the different points of the compass. »Those high-
souled ones are the witnesses of the universe, and are the creators of all
the worlds. Even thus do they dwell in their respective quarters. By
reciting their names one is cleansed of all one’s sins. “A person by
repairing to those points becomes cleansed of all his sins and succeeds
in returning home in safety.’”

SECTION CCIX

“Yudhishthira said, ‘O grandsire, O thou of great wisdom and
invincible prowess in battle, I wish to hear in detail of Krishna who is
immutable and omnipotent. O bull among men, tell me truly every-
thing about his great energy and the great feats achieved by him in
days of old. Why did that puissant one assume the form of an animal,
and for ‘achieving what particular act? Tell me all this, O mighty
warrior f

“Bhishma said, ‘Formerly, on one occasion, while out ahunting,
Larrived at the hermitage of Markandeya. There I beheld diverse
classes of ascetics seated by thousands. The Rishis honoured me by the
offer of honey and curds. Accepting their worship, I reverentially

saluted them in return. The following that I shall recite was narrated
Downloaded from https:/www.holybooks.com ~~
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 95 ===

SANTI PARVA 93

there by the great Rishi Kasyapa. Listen with close attention to that
excellent and charming account. In former days, the principal Danavas,
endued with wrath and cupidity, and mighty Asuras numbering by
hundreds and drunk with might, and innumerable other Danavas that
were invincible in battle, became exceedingly jealous of the unrivalled
prosperity of the gods. Oppressed (at last) by the Danavas, the gods
and the celestial Rishis, failing to obtain peace, fled away inall directions,
The denizens of heaven saw the earth looking like one sunk in sore
distress. Overspread with mighty Danavas of terrible mien, the earth
seemed to be oppressed with a heavy weight. Cheerless and grief-
stricken, she seemedas if goingdown into the nether depths. The Adityas,
struck with fear, repaired to Brahman, and addressing him, said, ‘How,
O Brahman, shall we continue to bear these oppressions of the Danavas?”
The Self-born answered them, saying, ‘I have already ordained what is
to be done in this matter. Endued with boons, and possessed of might,
and swelling with pride, those senseless wretches do not know that
Vishnu’ of invisible form, that God incapable of being vanquished
by the very deities all acting together, hath assumed the form of a boar.
That Supreme Deity, rushing to the spot whither those wretches among
Danavas, of terrible aspect, are dwelling in thousands below the earth,
will slay them all.’ Hearing these words of the Grandsire, those fore-
most ones among the deities felt great joy. Sometime after, Vishnu of
mighty energy, encased in the form of a Boar, penetrating into the
nether regions, rushed against those offspring of Diti. Beholding that
extraordinary «creature, all the Daityas, uniting together and stupefied
by Time, quickly proceeded against it for exerting their strength, and
stood surrounding it. Soon after, they all rushed against that Boar and
seized it simultaneously. Filled with rage they endeavoured to drag
the animal from every side. Those foremost of Danavas, of huge bodies,
possessed of mighty energy, swelling with strength, succeeded not, how-
ever, O monarch, in doing anything to that Boar. At this they wonder-
ed much and then became.filled with fear.’ Numbering in thousands,
they regarded that their last hour had come. Then that Supreme God
ofall the gods, having yoga for his soul and yoga for his companion,
became rapt in yoga, O chief of.the Bharatas, and began to utter
tremendous roats, agitating those Daityas and Danavas. All the worlds
andthe ten points of the compass resounded with those roars, which,
for this reason, agitated all creatures and filled them with fear. The
very gods with Indra at their head became terror-stricken. The whole
universe became stilled in consequence of that sound. It was a dreadful
time. . All mobile and immobile beings became stupefied by that sound.
‘The Danavas, terrified by that sound, began to fall down lifeless,
patalysed by the energy of Vishnu. The Boar, with its hoofs, began to
pierce those enemies of the gods, those denizens of the nether’ regioris,

and tear their flesh, fat, and bones. In consequence of those tremendous
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 96 ===

94 MAHABHARATA

roars, Vishnu came to be called by the name of Sanatana.' He is
also called Padmanabha, He is the foremost of yogins. He is the
Preceptor of all creatures, and their supreme Lord. All the tribes of
the gods then repaired to the Grandsire. Arrived at the presence, those
illustrious ones addressed the Lord of the universe, saying, ‘What sort
of a noise is this, O puissant one? We do not understand it. Who is
this one, or whose is this sound at which the universe hath been stupe-
fied ? With the energy of this sound or of its maker, the gods and the
Danavas have all been deprived of their senses.’ Meanwhile, O mighty-
armed one, Vishnu in his porcine form was in sight of the assembled
gods, his praises hymned by the great Rishis.’

“The Grandsire said, ‘That is the Supreme God, the Creator of
all beings, the soul of all creatures, the foremost of all yogins. Of huge
body and great strength, he cometh here, having slain the foremost ones
among the Danavas. He is the Lord of all beings, the master of yoga,
the great ascetic, the Soul of all living beings. Be still, all of you. He
is Krishna, the destroyer of all obstacles and impediments.2 That
Supreme God, of immeasurable splendour, that great refuge of all
blessings, having achieved a most difficult feat that is incapable of being
accomplished by others, has returned to his own unmixed nature.® It
is He from whose navel the primeval lotus had sprung. He is the fore-
most of yogins. Of supreme soul, He is the creator of all beings. There
is no need for sorrow or fear or grief, ye foremost of gods! He is the
Ordainer. He is the Creating Principle. He is all-destroying Time. It
is He who upholds all the world. The roars that have alarmed you
are being uttered by that high-souled one. Of mighty arms, He is the
object of the universal worship. Incapable of deterioration, that lotus-
eyed one is the origin of all beings and their lord."

SECTION CCX

“Yudhishthira said, ‘Tell me, O sire, of that high yoga by which,
O Bharata, I may obtain Emancipation, O foremost of speakers, I desire
to know everything about that yoga truly.’

“Bhishma said, ‘In this connection is cited the old narrative of
the discourse between a preceptor and his disciple on the subject of
Emancipation. There was a regenerate preceptor who was the foremost
of Rishis, He looked like a mass of splendour. Possessed of a high soul,
he was firm in truth and a complete master of his senses. Once ona

1 This is certainly avery fanciful etymology of the jit Sanatana
which ordinarily implies eternal.—T.
2 Atma Atmanah isexplained by Nilakantha as jivasya paramarthikam
swarupam.—tT,
3 Swamatmanam is Pratyathatmyat
Bue Bownioaded tern hips. Marw hol FolpBooks. com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 97 ===

SANTI PARVA 95

time, adisciple of great intelligence and close attention, desirous of
obtaining what was for his highest good, touched the preceptor’s feet,
and standing with joined hands before him, said, ‘If, O illustrious one,
thou hast been gratified with the worship I have offered thee, it
behoveth thee to solve a great doubt of mine. Whence am I and
whence artthou? Tell me this fully. Tell me also what is the final
cause. Why also, O best of regenerate ones, when the material cause in
all beings is the same, their origin and destruction happen in such dis-
similar ways ? It beseems thee, O thou of great learning, also to explain
the object of the declarations in the Vedas (about difference of rites in
respect of different classes of men), the meaning of the injunctions of
the Smritis and of those injunctions which apply to all cases of men.”?
“The preceptor said, ‘Listen, O disciple, O thou of great wisdom !
This that thou hast asked me is undisclosed in the very Vedas and isthe
highest subject for thought or discourse. It is called Adhyatma and is
the. most valuable of all branches of learning and of all sacred institutes.
Vasudeva is the Supreme (cause) of the universe. He is the origin of
the Vedas (viz., Om). He is Truth, Knowledge, Sacrifice, Renunciation,
Self-restraint, and Righteousness. Persons conversant with the Vedas
know Him as All-pervading, Eternal, Ommipresent, the Creator and
the Destroyer, the Unmanifest, Brahma, Immutable. Hear now the
story of Him who took his birth in Vrishni’s race. A Brahmana
should hear of the greatness of that God of gods, viz., Him called Vishnu
of immeasurable energy, from the lips of Brahmanas. A person of the
royal order should hear it from persons of that order. One who isa
Vaisya should hear it from Vaisyas, and ahigh-souled Sudra should hear
it from Sudras. Thou deservest to hear it. Listen now to the auspici-
ous account of Krishna, that narrative which isthe foremost of all
narratives. W4asudeva is the wheel of Time, without beginning and
without end. Existence and Non-existence are the attributes by which
His real nature is known. The universe revolves like a wheel depend-
ing upon that Lord of all beings. O best of men, Kesava, that
foremost of all beings, is said to be that which is Indestructible,
that which is Unmanifest, that which is Immortal, Brahma,
and Immutable. The highest of the high, and without change
or deterioration himself, he created the Pitris, the gods, the Rishis, the
Yakshas, the Rakshasas, the Nagas, the Asuras, and human beings. It is
He who also created the Vedas and the eternal duties and customs of
men. Having reduced everything into non-existence, he once more, in
the beginning of a (new) yuga, creates Prakriti (primordial matter). As
the diverse phenomena of the several seasons appear one after another
according to the season that comes, after the like manner creatures

1 The sense is that when all men are equal in respect of their material
cause, why are such differences in the srutis and the smritis about the
duties of men ?—T. powrloaded from https:/Ammw-holybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 98 ===

96 MAHABHARATA

start forth into existence at the beginning of every (celestial) yuga.
Corresponding with those creatures that start into life is the knowledge
of rules and duties that have for their object the regulation of the world’s
course.? At the end of every (celestial) yuga (when universal destruc-
tion sets in) the Vedas and all other scriptures disappear (like the rest).
In consequence of the grace of the Self-born, the great Rishis, through
their penances, first re-acquire the lost Vedas and the scriptures. The
Self-born (Brahman) first acquired the Vedas. Their branches called
the Angas were first acquired by (the celestial preceptor) Vrihaspati.
Bhrigu’s son (Sukra) first acquired the science of morality that is so
beneficial for the universe. The science of music was acquired by
Narada ; that of arms by Bharadwaja ; the history of the celestial Rishis
by Gargya: that of medicine by the dark-complexioned son of Atri.
Diverse other Rishis, whose names are connected therewith, promul-
gated diverse other sciences such as Nyaya, Vaiseshika, Sankhya,
Patanjala, &c. Let that Brahma which those Rishis have indicated by
arguments drawn from reason, by means of the Vedas, and by
inferences drawn from the direct evidence of the senses, be adored.
Neither the gods nor the Rishis were (at first) able to apprehend
Brahma which is without beginning and which isthe highestof the high.
Only the divine creator of all things, viz. the puissant Narayana, had
knowledge of Brahma. From Narayana, the Rishis, the foremost ones
among the deities and the Asuras, and the royal sages of old, derived the
knowledge of that highest remedy of the cure of sorrow. When
primordial matter produces existences through the action of the
primal energy, the universe with all its potencies begins! to flow
from it. From one lighted lamp thousands of other lamps are capable
of being lighted. After the same manner, primordial matter produces
thousands of existent things. In consequence, again, of its infinity
primordial matter is never exhausted. From the Unmanifest flows the
Understanding determined by acts. The Understanding produces
Consciousness. From Consciousness proceeds Space. From Space pro-
ceeds Wind. From the Wind proceeds Heat. From Heat proceeds
Water, and from Water is produced the Earth. These eight constitute
primordial Prakriti. The universe restson them. From those Eight

1 The meaning seems to be this: in the beginuing of every celestial
yuga, i‘e., when the Supreme Being swaking from sleep desires to create
creatures anew, all creatures or beings start again into life. With such
starting of every being, the rules that regulate their relations and acts also
spring up, for without a knowledge of those rules, the new creation will
soon bea chaos and come to anend. Thus when man and woman sta‘
into life, they do not eat each other but combine to perpetuate the species.
With the increase of the human species, again, & knowledge springs up.in
every breast of the duties of righteousness and of the diverse other
practices, allof which help to regulate the new creation till the Oreator
himeelf, at the end of the yuga, once more ‘withdraws everything into
himself.—T. Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com }

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 99 ===

SANTI PARVA 7

have originated the five organs of knowledge, the five organs of action,
the five objects of the (first five) organs, and the one, viz. the Mind,
forming the sixteenth, which is the result of their modification. The
ear, the skin, the two eyes, the tongue, and the nose are the five organs
of knowledge. The two feet, the lower duct, the organ of generation,
the two arms, and speech, are the five organs of action. Sound, touch,
form, taste, and smell are the five objects of the senses, covering all
things. The Mind dwells upon all the senses and their objects. In the
perception of taste, it is the Mind that becomes the tongue, and in
speech it is the Mind that becomes words. Endued with the different
senses, it is the Mind that becomes all the objects that exist in its
apprehension. These sixteen, existing in their respective forms, should
be known as deities. These worship Him who creates all knowledge
and dwells within the body. Taste is the attribute of water; scent is
the attribute of earth ; hearing is the attribute of space ; vision is the
attribute of fire or light ; and touch should be known as the attribute of
the wind. This is the case with all creatures at all times. The Mind,
it has been said, is the attribute of existence. Existence springs from
the Unmanifest (of Prakriti) which, every intelligent person should
know, rests in That which is the Soul of all existent beings. These
existences, resting upon the supreme Divinity that isabove Prakriti and
that is without any inclination for action, uphold the entire universe
of mobiles and immobiles. This sacred edifice of nine doors' is endued
with all these existences. That which is high above them, viz., the Soul,
dwells within it, pervading it all over. For this reason, it is called
Purusha. The Soul is without decay and not subject to death. It has
knowledge of what is manifest and what is unmanifest. It is again all-
pervading, possessed of attributes, subtile, and the refuge of all exis-
tences and attributes. Asa lamp discovers all objects great or small
(irrespective of its own size), after the same manner the Soul dwells in
all creatures as the principle of knowledge (regardless of the attributes
or accidents of those creatures). Urging the ear to hear what it hears,
it is the Soul that hears. Similarly, employing the eye, it is the Soul
that sees. This body furnishes the means by which the Soul derives
knowledge. The bodily organs are not the doers, but it is the Soul that
is the doer of all acts. There is fire in wood, but it can never be seen
by cutting open a piece of wood. After the same manner, the Soul
dwells within the body, but it can never be seen by dissecting the body.
The fire that dwells in wood may be seen by employing proper means,
viz, rubbing the wood with another piece of wood. After the same
manner, the Soul which dwells within the body may be seen by employ-
ing proper means, viz., yoga. Water must exist in rivers. Rays of light
are always attached to the sun. After the same manner, the Soul has

1 i, the body. —T.
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
13 ___shittps:/Awww.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 100 ===

98 MAHABHARATA

a body. This connection does not cease because of the constant
sucéession of bodies that the Soul has to enter.! In a dream, the Soul,
endued with the fivefold senses, leaves the body and rovesover wide
areas. After the same manner, when death ensues, the Soul (with the
senses in their subtile forms) passes out of one body for entering
another. The Soul is bound by its own former acts. Bound by its own
acts done in one state of existence, it attains to another state. Indeed;
itis led from one into another body by its own acts which are very
powerful in respect of their consequences. How the owner of a human.
body, leaving off his body, enters another, and then again into another,
how, indeed, the entire range of beings is the result of their respective
acts (of past and present lives), I will presently tell you.’ ”

SECTION CCXI

“Bhishma said, ‘All immobile and mobile beings, distributed into;
four classes, have been said to be of unmanifest birth and unmanifest
death. Existing only in the unmanifest Soul, the Mind is said to
possess the attributes of the unmanifest.? Asa vast tree is ensconced
within a small unblown Aswattha flower and becomes observable only.
when it comes out, even sobirth takes place from what is unmanifest.
A piece of iron, which is inanimate, runs towards a piece of loadstone.
Similarly, inclinations and propensities due to natural instincts, and all
else, run towards the Soul in a new life.* Indeed, even as those
propensities and possessions born of Ignorance and Delusion, and
inanimate in respect of their nature, are united with Soul -when
reborn, after the same manner, those other propensities and aspirations
of the Soul that have their gaze directed towards Brahma become united
with it, coming to it directly from Brahma itself. Neither earth, nor

1 What is meant seems to be this: there can be no river without
water, Ariver cannot exist without water. When a river ie mentioned;
water is implied. The connection between « river and water is not an acei-
dent but a necessary one. The same may be said of the sun and its rays, ©
After the same manner, the connection between the Soul and the body is a
necessary one and not an accident. The Soul cannot exist without a body,
Of course, the ordinary case only is referred to here, for, by yoga, one can
dissociate the Soul from the body and incorporate it with Brahma,—T, ~

2 The mind has no existence except asit exists in the Soul. “The
commentator uses the illustration of the second moon seen by the eye in
water, &o,, for explaining the nature of the mind. It has no real existence
as dissociated from the soul.—T.

83 'Swabhavahetuja bhavah’ is explained by the commentator as the
virtuous and vicious propensities. (Swabbava purvasamskara; sa ‘eva
heturyesbam karmanam tajjah bhavab). ‘All else,’ of course, means Avidya
or Maya, which flows directly from Brahma without being dependent..on
past acts. The meaning, then, is this: as soon as the Soul takes a new
form or body, all the propensities and inclinations, as dependent on its
past acts, take possession of it. Avidya or Maya also takes possession of

it.—T.
4 Both theDvernsalatotramsatons.teatoonsangly rendered this verse,

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/