=== PAGE 1 ===

THE MAHABHARATA

KRISHNA-DWAIPAYANA VYASA

Translated into English prose from the
original Sanskrit Text.

BY
PRATAP CHANDRA ROY, C. 1. E.

This free e-book has been downloaded from www.holybooks.com:
http:/Awww.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

VOL Ill
VANA PARVA

( Last Part )

ORIENTAL PUBLISHING CO.
11D, ARPULI LANE
CALCUTTA-12

=== PAGE 2 ===

THE MAHABHARATA
VANA PARVA

CONTENTS

SECTION: CXIV—CLY

Tirtha-Yatra Parva oof a see 249-328
SECTION: CLVI
Jatasura-BadhaParva one one -_ 328—331
. SECTION :. CLVII—CLXIV
Yaksha-Yuddha Parva ee cop vs — 331—349
SECTION: CLXV—CLKXV
Nivata-Kavacha-Yuddha Parva oo se 349—370
SECTION: CLXXVI—CLKXX
Ajagara Parva boo on ay 371—381
SECTION: CLXXXI—COXXKX
Markandeya Samasya Parva fae ae a 382—505
SECTION: COXXXI—CCXXXIII
Draupadi-Satyabhama Samvada Parva a 505—510
SECTION: COXXXIV—COLX ,
Ghosha-Yatra Parva aes “— 511—553
SECTION : COLET_coLEL
Draupadi-harana Parva -_ 553—623

SECTION : COLXtI—conxnvin

Pativrata-Mahatmya Parva ove an) wae 624—640
SECTION: CCLXLVIII—CCCVIII
Kundala-harana Parva ss 640 —656

SECTION: CCCIX—CCCXIII

Aranya Parva oe aes o- 656 —680

=== PAGE 3 ===

SECTION OXIV
(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

Vaisampayana said, ‘‘Then, O Janamejaya, the son of Pandu started
from the river Kausiki and repaired in succession to all the sacred
shrines. And, O protector of men. he camo to the sea where the river
Ganga falls into it; and there in the centre of five hundred rivers, he
performed the holy ceremony of a plunge, Then, O ruler of the earth,
accompanied by his brothers, the valiant prince proceeded by the shore
of the sea towards the land where the Kalinga tribes dwell.’ ”

“Lomasa said, ‘There is the land, O Kunti’s son, where the
Kalinga tribes dwell. Through it passeth the river Vaitarani, on the banks
whereof even the god of virtue performed religious rites, having first
placed himself under the protection of the celestials. Verily this is the
northern bank, inhabited by saints, suitable for the performance of reli-
gious rites beautified by a hill, and frequented by persons of the regene-
rate caste. This spot (in holiness) rivals the path whereby a virtuous
man, fit for going to heaven, repairs to the region inhabited by gods.
And verily at this spot in former times, other saints likewise worshipped
the immortals by the performance of religious rites. And at the very
spot it was that the god Rudra, O king of kings, seized the sacrificial
beast and exclaimed, ‘This is my share’! O chief of the descendants of
Bharata! Then when the beast was carried away by Siva, the gods spake
to him saying, ‘Cast not a covetous glance at the property of others,
disregarding all tho righteous rules.’ Then they addressed words of glori-
fication of a pleasing kind to the god Rudra, And they satisfied him by
offering a sacrifice, and paid him suitable honours. Thereupon he gave
up the beast, and went by the path trodden by the gods. Thereupen
what happened to Rudra, learn from me, O Yudhishthira! Influenced
by the dread of Rudra, the gods set apart for evermore, the best allot-
ment out of all shares, such as was fresh and not stale (to be appropria-
ted by the god ). Whosoever performs his ablutions at this spot, while
reciting this ancient story, beholds with his mortal eyes the path that
leads to the region of the gods.”

Vaisampayana said, “Then all the sons of Pandu and likewise the
daughter of Drupada—all of whom were the favoured of Fate—
descended to the river Vaitarani, and made libations to the names of
their fathers.”

‘Yudhishthira said, “O Lomasa, how great must be the force of a
pious deed! Having taken my bath at this spot in a proper form, I seem
to touch no more the region inhabited by mortal men! O saint of a
virtuous life, I am beholding all the regions. And this is the noise of the
magnanimous dwellers of the wood, whe are reciting their audible prayers.”

1

=== PAGE 4 ===

250 MAHABHARATA

“Lomasa said, ‘O Yudhishthira, the place whence this noise
comes and reaches thy ears is at the distance of three hundred thousand
yojanas, tobe sure. Olordof men, rest thou quiet and utter no word.
Oking, this is the divine forest of the Self-existent One, which hath now
come to our view. There, Oking, Viswakarma of a dreaded name per-
formed religious rites. On the mighty occasion of that sacrifice, the
Self-existent One made a gift of this entire earth with all its hilly and
forest tracts, to Kasyapa, by way of gratuity, for ministering asa priest.
And then, O Kuru’s son, as soonas that goddess, Earth was giving
away, she became sad at heart, and wrathfully spake the following
words to that great lord, the ruler of the worlds, ‘O mighty god, it is
unworthy of thee to give me away toan ordinary mortal. And this act
of gift on thy part will come to nothing; (for) here am I going to
descend into the bottom of the nether world.’ Then when the blessed
saint Kasyapa beheld the goddess Harth, despondent and sad, he, O
protector of men, performed a propitiatory act calculated to appease
her wrath, And then, O Pandu’sson, the Earth was pleased with his
pious deed. And she uprose again from within the waters, and showed
herself in the form of a sacred altar. This, O king, is the spot which
distinctly manifests the form of an altar. O great monarch, ascend over
it, and thou wilt gain valour and strength. And, O king, this is the
very altar which reaches as far as the sea, and rests itself upon its bosom,
May good luck be thine, do thou mount hereupon, and of thyself cross
the sea. And while thou this day mountest upon it, I shall administer the
ceremony for averting all evil from thee ; for this altar here, as scon as
it gets a mortal’s touch, at once enters into the sea. Salutation to the
god who protects the universe ! Salutation to thee that art beyond the universe |
O Lord of gods! vouchsafe thy presence in this sea. O Pandu’s son, thou
must recite the following words of truth, and while so reciting, thou
must quickly ascend this altar: ‘The god of fire, and the sun, and the
organ of generation, and water, and goddess and the seed of Vishnu, and
the navel of nectar. The god of fire is the organ that generated the
(ocean) ; the earth is thy body ; Vishnu deposited the seed that caused
thy being and thou art the navel of nectar.’ Thus, O Pandu’s son,
the words of truth must be audibly recited, and while so reciting, one
must plunge into the lord of rivers. O most praiseworthy of Kunti's
son, otherwise this lord of waters of divine birth, this best storehouse
of the waters (of the earth ), should not be touched, O son of Kunti,
even with the end of a sacred grass.’””

Vaisampayana said, “Then when the ceremony for averting evil
had been completed in his behalf, the magnanimous Yudhishthira went
into the sea, and having performed all that the saint had bid, repaired,
to the skirts of the Mabendra hill, and spent the night at that spot.”

=== PAGE 5 ===

SECTION CXV
(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

Vaisampayana said, “The protector of the earth spent there a singlo

night, and with his brothers, paid the highest honours to the religious men.
And Lomasa made him acquainted with the names of all of them, such as
the Bhrigus, the Angiras, the Vasishthas, and the Kasyapas. And the royal
saint paid visit to them all and made obeisance to them with joined palms.
And then he asked the valiant Akritavrana, who was a follower of Parasu-
rama, when will the revered Parasurama show himself to the religious men
here? It is desired on that occasion to obtain a sight of the descendant of
Bhrigu.” .
“Akritavrana said, ‘Thy journey to this spot is already known to
Rama, whose soul spontaneously knows everything. And he is in every
way well pleased with thee, and he will show himself readily to thee. And
the saints who practise penances here, are permitted to see him on the
fourteenth and the eighth day of the lunar course. On the morrow at the
end of this very night there will set in the fourteenth day of the lunar
course. On that occasion thou wilt have a sight of him, clad in a sable deer
skin, and wearing his hair in the form of a matted mass.’

“Yudhishthira said, ‘Thou hast been a follower of the mighty Rama,
Jamadagni’s son; thou must, therefore, have been the eye-witness of all
the deeds achieved by him in former days. I, therefore, request thee to
narrate to me how the members of the military caste were vanquished by
Rama on the field of battle, and what the original cause of those conflicts
was.”

“‘Alritavrana said, ‘With pleasure shall I recite to thee that excellent
story, O Bharata’s son, O chief of kings, the story of the godlike deeds of
Rama, the son of Jamadagni, who traced his origin to Bhrigu's race. I
shall also relate the achievements of the great ruler of the Haihaya tribe.
That king, Arjuna by name the mighty lord of the Haihaya tribe was killed
by Rama. He, O Pandu’s son, was endued with » thousand arms 3 and
by the favour of Dattatreya he likewise had a celestial car made of gold.
And, O protector of the earth, his rule extended over the entire animated
world, wheresoeever located on this earth. And the car of that mighty
monarch could proceed everywhere in an unobstructed course. And grown
resistless by the virtue of a granted boon, he ever mounted on that car,
trampled upon gods and Yakshas and saints on all sides round. And all
the born beings wheresoever placed, were harassed by him. Then the celes-
tials and the saints of a rigidly virtuous life, met together, and thus spake
to Vishnu, the god of gods, the slayer of demons, and possessed of prowess
that never failed, saying, ‘O blessed and revered lord, for the purpose of
preserving all the born beings, it is necessary that Arjuna should be killed

=== PAGE 6 ===

252 MAHABHARATA

by thee, And the mighty ruler of the Haihaya tribe placing himself on
his celestial car, affronted Indra, while that deity was enjoying himself
with Sachi, his queen. Then, O Bharata’s son, the blessed and the revered
god ( Vishnu ) held a consultation with Indra, with a view to destroying
Kartavirya’s son. Andon that occasion, all that was for the good of the
world of beings, was communicated by the lord of gods; and the blessed god
worshipped by the world, to do all that was necessary, went to the delight-
ful Vadari wood which was his own chosen retreat for practising penances.
And at this very time there lived on the earth a mighty monarch in the
land of Kanyakuyja, a sovereign whose military force was exceedingly great.
And his name of Gadhi was famous inthe world. He, however, betook
himself to a forest life. And while he was dwelling in the midst of the
wood, there was born to him a daughter beautiful as a nymph of heaven.
And Richika, the son of Bhrigu, asked for her to be united with himself in
marriage. And then Gadhi spake to that Brahmana, who led a rigidly
austere life, saying, ‘There is a certain family custom in our race: it hath
been founded by my ancestors of a bygone age. And, O most excellent of
the sacerdotal cast, be it known to thee that the intending bridegroom
must offer a dowry consisting of a thousand fleet steeds, whose colour must
be brown and every one of whom must possess a single sable ear. But,
O Bhrigu’s son, a reverend saint like thee cannot be asked to offer the
same. Nor can my daughter be refusod toa magnanimous saint of thy
(exalted) rank.’ Thereupon Richika said, ‘I will give thee a thousand fleet
steeds, brown in hue and possessing a single sable ear: let thy daughter be
given in marriage to me.’

“Akritavrana said, “Thus having given his word, O king, he went
and said to Varuna, ‘Give me a thousand fleet steeds brown in colour, and
each with one black ear. I want the same as dowry for my marriage.’ To
him Varuna forthwith gave a thousand steeds. Those steeds had issued
out of the river Ganga; hence the spot hath been named: The horse's
landing place. And in the city of Kanyakuvja, the daughter of Gadhi,
Satyavati by name, was given in marriage ; and the gods themselves were
of the party of the bride. Richika, the most excellent of the sacerdotal
caste, thus procured a thousand steeds, and had a sight of the dwellers of
heaven and won a wife in the proper form. And he enjoyed himself with
the girl of slonder waist, and thus gratified all the wishes and desire that he
ever had. And when the marriage had been celebrated, O king, his father
Bhrigu came on a visit to see him and his wife; and he was glad to
seo his praisoworthy son. And the husband and wife together paid their
best respects to him, who was worshipped by all the gods. And when he had.
seated himself, they both with joined palms, stood near him, in order that
they might do his bidding. And then the revered saint, Bhrigu, glad at
heart, thus spoke to his daughter-in-law, saying, ‘O lovely daughter, as

=== PAGE 7 ===

VANA PARVA 253

for a boon I am ready to grant thee any object of thy wish.’ And there-
upon she asked for his favour in this, that a son might be born to both
herself and her mother. And he vouchsafed the favour thus asked for.

“Bhrigu said, ‘During the days that your season lasts, thou and thy
mother must take a bath, with the ceremony for bringing forth a male
child. And ye two must then separately embrace two different trees—she
@ peepal tree, and thou a fig tree. And, O dutiful girl, here are two pots
of rice and milk, prepared by me with the utmost care. I having ransacked
the whole universe to find the drugs, the essence whereof hath been blended
with this milk and rice. It must be taken as food with the greatest care.’
And saying this, he vanished from sight. The two ladies, however, made
an interchange both in the matter of the pots of rice, and likewise as
regards the trees (to be embraced by each ). Then after the lapse of very
many days, the revered saint, once more came. And he came knowing
(what had happened) by his attribute of divine knowledge. Then Bhrigu
possessed of mighty strength, spake to Satyavati, his daughter in-law,
saying, ‘O dutiful girl! O my daughter of a lovely brow, the worng pot of
rice thou tookst as food. And it was the wrong tree which was embraced
by thee. It was thy mother who deluded thee. A son will be born of thee,
who, though of the priestly caste, will be of a character fit for the military
order; while a mighty son will be born of thy mother, who, though by
birth a Kshatriya will assume a life suitable to the sacerdotal order. And
his power will be great, and he will walk on the path trodden by righteous
men.’ Then she entreated her father-in-law again and again, saying, ‘Let
not my son be of this character ; but let my grandson be such.’ And, O
Pandu's son, he replied, ‘So let it be !’ And thus he was pleased to grant
her prayer. Then she brought forth on the expected day a son by name
Jamadagni. And this son of Bhrigu was endowed with both splendour and
grace. And he grew in years and in strength, and excelled the other saints
in the proficiency of his Vaidik lore. O chieftain of Bharata’s race, to him,
rivalling in lustre the author of light (the sun ), came spontaneously and
without instruction the knowledge of the entire military art and of the
fourfold missile arms.’ *

=== PAGE 8 ===

SECTION OXVI
(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

“Algitavrana said, ‘Jamadagni devoted himself to the study of the
Veda and the practice of sacred penances, and became famous for his great
austerities Then he pursued a methodical course of study and obtained a
mastery over the entire Veda. And, O king, he paid a visit to Prasena-
jit and solicited the hand of Renuka in marriage. And this prayer was
granted by the king. And the delight of Bhrigu’s race having thus obtained
Renuka for his wife, took his residence with her in a hermitage, and began
to practise penances, being assisted by her. And four boys were
born of her, with Rama for the fifth. And although the youngest, Rama
was superior to allin merit. Now once upon a time, when her sons had
gone out for the purpose of gathering fruits, Renuka who had a pure and
austere life, went out to bathe. And, Oking, while returning home, she
happened to cast her glance towards the king of Martikavata, known by
the name of Chitraratha. The king was in the water with his wives, and
wearing on his breast a lotus wreath, was engaged in sport. And beholding
his magnificent form, Renuka was inspired with desire. And this unlawful
desire she could not control, but became polluted within the water, and
came back to the hermitage frightened at heart. Her husband readily
peresived what state she was in, And mighty and powerful and of a
wrathful turn of mind, when he beheld that she had been giddy and that
the lustre of chastity had abandoned her, he reproached her by crying out
‘Fie!’ At that very moment came in the eldest of Jamadagni’s sons,
Rumanvan ; and then, Sushena, and then, Vasu, and likewise, Viswavasu.
And the mighty saint directed them all one by one to put an end to the
life of their mother. They, however, were quite confounded and lost heart.
And they could not utter a single word. Then he in ire cursed them. And
on being cursed they lost their sense and suddenly became like inanimate
objects, and comparable in conduct to beasts and birds. And then Rama,
the slayer of hostile heroes, came to the hermitage, last of all. Him the
mighty-armed Jamadagni, of great austorities, addressed, saying, ‘Kill this
wicked mother of thine, without compunction, O my son.’ Thereupon Rama
immediately took up an axe and therewith severed his mother’s head. Then,
O great king, the wrath of Jamadagni of mighty soul, was at once appeas-
ed; and well pleased, he spake the following words, ‘Thou hast, my
boy, preformed at my bidding this difficult task, being versed in virtue.
Therefore, whatsoever wishes there may be in thy heart, I am ready to
grant them all. Dothou ask me.’ Thereupon Rama solicited that his
mother might be restored to life, and that he might not be haunted by the
remembrance of this cruel deed and that he might not be affected by any
sin, and that his brothers might recover their former state, and that he

=== PAGE 9 ===

VANA PARVA 255

might be unrivalled on the field of battle, and that he might obtain long
life. And, O Bharata’s son, Jamadagni, whose penances were the most
rigid, granted all those desires of his son. Once, however, O lord, when
his sons had gone out as before, the valorous son of Kartavirya, the lord of
the country near the sore of the sea, came up to the hermitage. And
when he arrived at that hermitage, the wife of the saint received him hos-
pitably. He, however, intoxicated with a warrior’s pride, was not at all
pleased with the reception accorded to him, and by force and in defiance
of all resistance, seized and carried off from that hermitage the chief of the
cows whose milk supplied the sacred butter, not heeding the loud lowing of
the cow. Ane he wantonly pulled down the large trees of the wood. When
Rama came home, his father himself told him all that had happened. Then
when Rama saw how the cow was lowing for its calf, resentment arose in
his heart. And he rushed towards Kartavirya’s son, whose last moments had
drawn nigh. Then the descendant of Bhrigu, the exterminator of hostile
heroes, put forth his valour on the field of battle, and with sharpened arrows
with flattened tips, which were shot from a beautiful bow, cut down Arjuna’s
arms, which numbered a thousand, and were massive like ( wooden ) bolts
for barring the door. He, already touched by the hand of death, was over-
powered by Rama, his foe. Then the kinsmen of Arjuna, their wrath excited
against Rama, rushed at Jamadagni in his hermitage, while Rama was away.
And they slew him there ; for although his strength was great, yet being at
the time engaged in ponances, ho would noi fight. And while thus attacked
by his foes, he repeatedly shouted the name of Rama in a helpless and
piteous way. And, O Yudhishthira ! The sons of Kartavirya shot Jamadagni
with their arrows, and having thus chastised their foo, went their way. And
when they had gone away, and when Jamadagni had breathed his last,
Rama, the delight of Bhrigu’s race, returned to tho hermitage, bearing in his
arms, fuel for religious rites. And the hero beheld his father who bad been
put to death. And grieved exceedingly he began to bewail the unworthy fate
that had laid his father low.’”

SECTION CXVII
(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

“Bama said, ‘The blame is mine, O father, that like a stag in the
wood, thou hast been shot dead with arrows, by those mean and stupid
wretches—the sons of Kartavirya. And, O father, virtuous and unswerving
from the path of righteousness and inoffensive to all animated beings as thou
wert, how came it to be permitted by Fate that thou shouldst die in this
way? What an awful sin must have been committed by them, who haye
killed thee with hundreds of sharpened shafts, although thou wert an aged
man, and engaged in penances at the time and absolutely averse to fighting

=== PAGE 10 ===

256 MAHABHARATA

with them. With what face will those shameless persons speak of this deed
of theirs to their friendsand servants, viz. that they have slain an unassis-
ted and unresisting virtuous man 2—0 protector of men, thus he, great in
penance, bewailed much ina piteous manner, and then performed the obsequ-
jes of his departed sire. And Rama, the conqueror of hostile cities, cremated
his father on the funeral pyre, and vowed, O scion of Bharata’s race, the,
slaughter of the entire military caste, and of exceeding strength in the field
of battle, and possessed of valour suited to a heroic soul, and comparable to
the god of death himself, he took up his weapon in wrathful mood, and single-
handed put Kartavirya’s sons todeath. And, O chieftain of the military
caste, Rama, the leader of all capable of beating their foes, thrice smote down
all the Kshatriya followers of Kartavirya’s sons. And seven times did that
powerful lord exterminate the military tribes of the earth, In the tract of .
land called Samantapanchaka five lakes of blood were made by him, There
the mightiest scion of Bhrigu’s race offered libations to his forefathers—the
Bhrigus, and Richika appeared to him in a visible form, and spake to him
words of counsel. Then the son of Jamadagni of dreaded name, performed
a mighty sacrifice and gratified the lord of the celestials, and bestowed the
earth to the ministering priests. And, O protector of human beings, he
raised an altar made of gold, ten Vyamas in breadth and nine in height, and
made a gift of the same to the magnanimous Kasyapa. Then at Kasyapa’s .
biding the Brahmanas divided the altar into a number of shares, and thus
they became reputed as the Khandavayamas (share takers). And the exter-
minator of the military race possessed of immense strength, bestowed the
earth upon the high souled Kasyapa, and then became engaged in penance
of an exceedingly severe form. He now dwells in this Mahendra, monarch of
hills, Thus did hostilities arise between him and the members of the military
caste,—all of them who dwelt on this earth ; and Rama, endowed with
immense strength, in this way subdued the entire world.’ ”

Vaisampayana said, “Then on the fourteenth day of the moon, the
mighty-souled Rama at the proper hour showed himself to those members of
the priestly caste and also tothe virtuous King ( Yudhishthira ) and his
younger brothers. And, O king of kings, the lord together with his brothers,
worshipped Rama, and, O most righteous of the rulers of men, the very
highest honours were paid by him to all those members of the twice-born
class. And after worshipping Jamadagni’s son and having received words of
praise from him, at his direction he spent the night on the Mahendra hill,
and then started on his journey towards the southern regions.”

=== PAGE 11 ===

SECTION CXVIII
(Tirtha-yatra Parva Continued)

Vaisampayana said, “The magnanimous monarch pursued. his
journey, and at difierent spots on the shore of the sea visited the various
bathing places, all sacred and pleasant and frequented by men of the
sacerdotal caste. And, O son of Parikshit! He in proper form took his
bath in them together with his younger brothers and then went to an
excellent river, the holiest of all. There also the magnanimous king,
took his plunge, and offered libations to his forefathers and the gods, and
distributed riches to the leaders of the twice-born class, Then he went to
the Godavari, a river that falls directly into the sea. There he was freed
from his sins. And he reached the sea in the Dravida land, and visited
the holy spot passing under Agastya’s name, which was exceedingly sacred
and exceptionally pure. And the valiant king visited the feminine sacred
spots, Here he listened to the story of that well-known feat which was
achieved by Arjuna, chief of all wielders of the bow, and which was
beyond the power of human beings to perform. And here he was praised
by the highest members of the saintly class, and the son of Pandu
experienced the greatest delight. And, O protector of the earth ! the ruler
of the world, accompanied by Krishn& bathed in those holy spots, and
speaking of Arjuna’s valour in laudatory terms delightfully spent his time
in the place. Then he gave away thousands of cows at those holy spots
on the coast of the sea ; and with his brothers narrated well pleased how
Arjuna had made a gift of kine. And he, O king! visited one by one
those holy places on the coast of the sea and many other sacred spots,
and thus fulfilled his heart’s desire, till he came to the holiest of all known
by tho name of Surparaka. Then having crossed a certain tract on the coast
of the sea, he reached a forest celebrated on earth. There the deities had
practised asceticism in former days, and likewise virtuous rulers of men had
performed sacrificial rites. There he, possessed of long and lusty arms, be-
held the celebrated altar of Richika’s son, who was the foremost of all wield-
ers of the bow. And tho altar was girt round by hosts of ascetics, and was
fit to be worshipped by persons of a virtuous life. Then the king beheld the
holy and delightful shrines of all the gods and of the Vasus, and of the hosts
of wind and of the two celestial physicians and of Yama, son of the sun and
of the lord of riches, and of Indra, and of Vishnu, and of the lord Creator
and of Siva, and of the moon, and of the author of day, and of the lord of
waters, and of the host of Sadhyas, and of Brahma, and of the forefathers,
and of Rudra together with all his followers, and of the goddess of learning,
and of the host of Siddhas, and of many immortal holy gods besides. And
in those shrines the king observed various fasts, and gave away large quan-
tities of gems. He plunged his body in all the holy spots, and then came

2

=== PAGE 12 ===

258 MAHABHARATA

again to Surparaka. And he by the same landing-place of the sea again pro-
ceeded with his uterine brothers, and came over to the holy spot Prabhasa,
whereof fame hath been spread by mighty Brahmanas throughout the
world. There he, possessed of a pair of large red eyes, washed himself with
all his younger brothers, and offered libations to the forefathers and the
celestial hosts ; and so did Krishna and all those Brahmanas together with
Lomasa. For twelve days he subsisted upon air and water. And he performed
ablutions for days and nights and surrounded himself with fires kindled
on all sides. Thus that greatest of all virtuous: men engaged himself in
asceticism. While he was acting thus, information reached both Valarama
and Krishna that the king was practising penances of a most austere form
and these two leaders of the entire Vrishni tribe accompanied with troops
came to Yudhishthira of Ajamidha’s race.” And when the Vrishnis beheld
that the sons of Pandu lay down on fhe ground, their bodies besmeared all
over with dirt and when they beheld the daughter of Drupada in a sad state,
their grief was great and they could not refrain from breaking out in’ loud
lamentations. Then the king, whose courage was such that misfortune
never could cast him down, cordially met Rama and Krishna and Samva,
Krishna’s son, and the grand-son of Sini and other Vrishnis, and paid honour
to them in a suitable form. And they also in return paid honour to all the
sons of Pritha, and were similarly honoured by Pandu’s sons. And they
seated themselves round about Yudhishthira, as round Indra, O king! are
seated the celestial hosts. And highly pleased, he recounted to them all the
machinations of his adversaries, and how also he had resided in the forest,
and how Arjuna had gone to Indra’s abode in order to learn the science of
arms,—all this he related with a gladdened heart. And they were happy to
learn all this news from him ; but when they saw the Pandavas so exceed-
ingly lean, the majestic and magnanimous Vrishnis could not forbear shedd-
ing tears, which spontaneously gushed from their eyes on account of the
agony they felt”

SECTION CXIX
( Tirtha-yatra Parva continued )

Janamejaya said, “O thou of ascetic wealth! when the sons of
Pandu and the Vrishnis reached the holy spot Prabhasa, what did they
do and what conversation was held there by them, for all of them were
of mighty souls, proficient in all the branches of science and both the
Vrishnis and the sons of Pandu held one another in friendly estimation.”

Vaisampayana said, “When the Vrishnis reached the holy spot
Prabhasa, the sacred landing-place on the coast of the sea, they surrounded

=== PAGE 13 ===

VANA PARVA 259

the sons of Pandu and waited upon them. Then Valarama, resembling in
hue the milk of the cow and the Kunda flower and the moon and the
silyer and the lotus root and who wore a wreath made of wild flowers and
who had the ploughshare for his arms, spake to the lotuseyed one, saying,
‘O Krishna, I do not see that the practice of virtue leads to any good or
that unrighteous practices can cause evil, since the magnanimous Yudhish-
thira is in this miserable state, with matted hair, a resident of the wood,
and for his garment wearing the bark of trees. And Duryodhana is now
ruling the earth, and the ground doth not yet swallow him up. From this,
@ person of limited senso would believe a vicious course of life is preferable
to a virtuous one. When Duryodhana is in a flourishing state and Yudhish-
thira, robbed of his throne, is suffering thus, what should people do in such
a matter ?—this is the doubt that is now perplexing all men. Here is the
lord of men sprung from the god of virtue, holding fast to a righteous path,
strictly truthful and of a liberal heart. This son of Pritha would give up
his kingdom and his pleasure but would not swerve from the righteous
path, in order to thrive. How is it that Bhishma and Kripa and the
Brahmana Drona and the aged king, the senior member of the house, are
living happily, after having banished the sons of Pritha? Fie upon the
yicious-minded leaders of Bharata's race! What will that sinner, the chief-
tain of the earth, say to the departed forefathers of his race, when the
wretch will meet them in the world tocome? Having hurled from the
throne his in-offensive sons, will ho be able to declare that he had treated
them in a blameless way ? He doth not now see with his mind’s eye how
he hath become so sightless, and on account of what act he hath grown
blind among the kings of this entire earth. Is it not because he hath
banished Kunti’s son from his kingdom ? I have no doubt that Vichitrayir-
ya’s son, when he with his sons perpetrated this inhuman act, beheld on
the spot where dead bodies are burnt, flowering trees of a golden hue.
Verily he must have asked them, when those stood before him with their
shoulders projected forward towards him, and with their large red eyes
staring at him, and he must have listened to their evil advice, since he
fearlessly sont away Yudhishihira to the forest, who had all his weapons
of war with him and was borne company by his younger brothers. This
Bhima here, whose voracious appetite is like that of a wolf, is able to des-
troy with the sole strength of his powerful arms, and without the help of
any weapons of war, a formidable array of hostile troops. The forces in
the field of battle were utterly unmanned on hearing his war-cry. And
now the strong one is suffering from hunger and thirst, and is emaciated
with toilsome journeys. But when he will take up in his hand arrows and
diverse other weapons of war, and meet his foesin the field of battle, he
will then remember the sufferings of his exceedingly miserable forest-life,
and kill his enemies to a man: of a certainty doI anticipate this, There

=== PAGE 14 ===

260 MAHABHARATA

is not throughout the whole world a single soul who can boast of strength —
and prowess equal to his. And his body, alas! is emaciated with cold,
and heat and winds. But when he will stand up for fight, he will not —
Jeave a single man out of his foes. ‘This powerful hero, who is a very great
warrior when mounted on a car—this Bhima, of appetite rivalling a wolf's,
conquered single-handed all the rulers of men in the east, together with
those who followed them in battle ; and he returned from those wars safe
and uninjured. And that same Bhima, miserably dressed in the bark of
trees, is now leading a wretched life in the woods. This powerful Sahadeva
vanquished all the kings in the south ; those lords of men who had gathered
on the coast of the sea,—look at him now in an anchorite’s dress. Valiant

in battle Nakula vanquished single-handed the kings who ruled the regions
towards the west,—and he now walks about the wood, subsisting on fruit
and roots, with a matted mass of hair on the head, and his body besmeared
all over with dirt. This daughter of aking, whois a great soldier when
mounted on a car, took her rise from beneath the altar, during the pomp
of sacrificial rites, She hath been always accustomed to a life of happiness’;
how is she now enduring this exceedingly miserable life in this wood ! And
the son of the god of virtue,—virtue which stands at the head of all the
three pursuits of life—and the son of the wind-god and also the son of the
lord of celestials, and those two sons of the celestial physicians,—being the
sons of all those gods and always accustomed to a life of happiness, how
are they living in this wood, deprived of all comforts ? When the son of
Virtue met with defeat, and when his wife, his brothers, his followers, and
himself were all driven forth, and Duryodhana began to flourish, why did
not the earth subside with all its hills ?””

SECTION CXX
(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

Satyaki said, “O Rama! this is not the time of lamentation; let
us do that which is proper and suited to the present occasion, although
Yudhishthira doth not speak a single word. Those who have persons to
look after their welfare do not undertake anything of themselyes; they
have others to do their work, as Saivya and others did for Yayati. Like-
wise, O Rama! those who have appointed functionaries to undertake
their work on their own responsibility, as the leaders of men, they may
be said to have real patrons, and they meet with no difficulty, like help-
less beings. How is it that when the sons of Pritha have for their patrons
these two men, Rama and Krishna, and the two others, Pradyumna
and Samva, together with myself,—these patrons being able to protect
all the three worlds,—how is it that the son of Pritha is living in the

=== PAGE 15 ===

VANA PARVA 261

wood with his brothers? It is fit that this very day the army of the
Dasarhas should march out, variously armed and with checkered mails.
Let Dhritarashtra’s sons be overwhelmed with the forces of the Vrishnis
and lét them go with their friends to the abode of the god of death. Let
him alone who wields the bow made of the horn (Krishna), thou alone, if
roused, wouldst be able to surround even the whole of this earth. I ask
thee to kill Dhritarashtra’s son with all his men, asthe great Indra, the
lord of the gods kill Vritra. Arjuna, the son of Pritha, is my brother, and
also my friend, and also my preceptor, and is like the second self of Krishna.
It is for this that men desire for a worthy son, and that preceptor seeks a
pupil who would contradict him not. It is for this that the time is come
for that excellent work, which is the best of all tasks and difficult to
perform. I-shall baffle Duryodhana’s volleys of arms by my own excellent
weapons. I shall overpower all in the field of battle. I shallin my wrath
cut off. his head with my excellent shafts, little inferior to snakes and poison
and fire. And with the keen edge of my sword, I shall forcibly sever his
head from the trunk, in the field of battle; then I shall kill his followers,
and Duryodhana, and all of Kuru’s race. O son of Rohini ! let the followers
of Bhima look at me with joy at their heart, when I shall keep up the
weapons of war in the field of battle, and when I shall go on slaying all the
best ‘fighting men on the side of the Kurus, as at the end of time fire will
burn vast heaps of straw. Kripa and Drona and Vikarna and Karna are
not able to bear the keen arrows shot by Pradyumna. I know the power
of Arjuna’s son—he conducts himself like the son of Krishna in the field of
battle. Let Samva chastise by the force of his arms Dussasana ; let him
destroy by force Dussasana and his charioteer and his car. In the field of
battle when the son of Jamvavati becomes irresistible in fight, there is
nothing which can withstand his force. The army of the demon Samvara
was speedily routed by him when only a boy. By him was killed in fight
Asvachakra, whose thighs were round, and whose muscular arms were of
exceeding length. Who is there that would be able to go forward to the
car of Samva, who is great in fight, when mounted on a car? Asa mortal
coming under the clutches of death can never escape ; so who is there that
once coming under his clutches in the field of battle, is able to return with
his life? The son of Vasudeva will burn down by the volleys of his fiery
shafts all the hostile troops, and those two warriors, Bhishma and Drona,—
who are great on a car, and Somadatta surrounded by all his sons. What
is there in all the worlds including the gods, which Krishna cannot
encounter on an equal footing, when he takes up the weapons of war,
wields in his hands excellent arrows, arms himself with his dice, and thus
becomes unrivalled in fight ? Then let Aniruddha also take up in his hand
his buckler and sword, and let him cover the surface of the earth with
Dhritarashtra’s sons, their heads separated from their trunks, their bodies

=== PAGE 16 ===

262 MAHABHARATA

devoid of all consciousness as in a sacrificial rite the altar is overspread
with sacred grass placed upon the same. And Gada and Uluka, and
Vahuka and Bhanu and Nitha and the young Nishatha valiant in battle
and Sarana, and Charudeshna, irresistible in war, let them perform feats
befitting their race. Let the united army of the Satwatas and Suras,
together with the best soldiers of the Vrishnis, the Bhojas, and the
Andhakas, kill those sons of Dhritarashtra in the field of battle and let
them swell their expanded fame throughout the world. Then let Abhimanyu
rule the world so long as this most excellent of virtuous men, the mag-
nanimous Yudhishthira, may be engaged in fulfilling his vow,—the vow
that was accepted and declared by him, the most righteous of Kuru’s race,
on the occasion of the famous play at dice. Afterwards the virtuous king
will protect the earth, all his foes defeated in battle by shafts which will be
discharged by us. Then there will remain no sons of Dhritarashtra on
earth,—nor the son of the charioteer (Karna). This is the most important
work for us to do, and this will surely lead to fame.’ ”

“Krishna said, ‘O scion of the race of Madhu! no doubt what
thou sayest is true; we accept thy words, O thou of courage that is never
weak! But this bull of the Kuru race (Yudhishthira) would never accept
the sovereignty of the earth, unless it were won by the prowess of his own
arms. Neither for the sake of pleasure, nor from fear, nor from covetous-
ness, would Yudhishthira ever renounce the rules of the caste; nor would
these two heroes, who are mighty, when mounted on a car—Bhima and
Arjuna ; nor the twin brothers, nor Krishna, the daughter of Drupada.
He possessing the appetite ofa wolf (Bhima), and the winner of riches
(Arjuna), are both unrivalled in fight throughout the world. And why
should not this king rule over the entire world when he hath the two sons
of Madri to espouse his cause? The high-souled ruler of Panchala together
with the Kekaya king, and we also should put forth our united strength,
and then would the enemies of Yudhishthira be annihilated.’ ”

“Yudhishthira said, ‘Tt is not strange that thou shouldst speak thus,
O scion of Madhu’s race! but to me truth seems to be the first consi-
deration, above that of my sovereign power itself. But it is Krishna alone
who precisely knoweth what I am; and it is I alone who precisely know
what Krishna (really) is. O thou endued with valour! O scion of Madhu’s
race | as soon as he will perceive that the time is come for feats of bravery,
then, O most valiant of Sini’s race, he also of beautiful hair (Krishna) will
defeat Suyodhana. Let the brave men of the Dasarha race go back today.
They are my patrons; and the foremost of human beings, they have
visited me here. O ye of immeasurable strength! never fall off from the
path of virtue. I shall see you again, when ye will be happily gathered
together.’

“Then after mutual greeting and obeisance to seniors, and having

=== PAGE 17 ===

VANA PARVA 263

embraced the youthful, those valiant men of the Yadu race and the sons
of Pandu separated. And the Yadus returned to their home; and the
Pandavas continued their journey to the sacred spots, Then having parted
with Krishna, the virtuous king, accompanied by his brothers and servants,
and also by Lomasa, went to the sacred river Payosini. Its fine landing-
place was constructed by the king of Vidarbha, And he began to dwell on
the banks of the Payosini, whoso waters were mingled with the distilled
Soma juice. There the high-souled Yudhishthira was greeted with excellent
laudatory terms by numerous leaders of the twice-born class, who were
delighted to see him there.’ ”

SECTION CXXI
(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

Lomasa said, ‘“O king! when the Nriga performed a sacrifice hore,
he gratified Indra, the demolisher of hostile cities, by offering the Soma
juice. And Indra was refreshed and was very much pleased. Here the
gods together with Indra, and the protectors of all born beings, celebrated
sacrifices of various kinds on a large scale, and paid abundant gratuities
to the ministering priests. Hero king Amurtarayasa, the lord of the world,
satisfied Indra, the holder of the thunderbolt, by the offer of the Soma
juice, when seven horse-sacrifices were performed by that king. The articles
which in other sacrificial rites are uniformly made of the timber, wood and
of earth, were all made of gold in the seven sacrifices performed by him.
And it is said that in all those rites, seven sets of stakes, rings for the
sacrificial stakes, spots, ladles, utensils, spoons were prepared by him. On
each sacrificial stake, seven rings were fastened at the top. And, O Yudhish-
thira ! the celestials together with Indra, themselves erected the sacrificial
stakes of shining gold which had been prepared for his sacred rites. In all
those magnificent sacrifices instituted by Gaya, the protector of the earth,
Indra, was delighted by drinking the Soma juice, and the ministering priests
were gratified with the gratuities paid to them. And the priests obtained
untold wealth counted out to them. And as the sand-grains of the earth,
or as the stars in the sky, or as the rain-drops when it raineth,
cannot be counted by any one, so the wealth Gaya gave away was
incapable of being counted by figures. So untold was the wealth, O great
king! that was given to the ministering priests in all those seven sacri-
fices that even the above-mentioned objects might be counted by figures,
but the gratuities bestowed by him whose largeness exceeded all that was
known before were not capable of being counted by figures. And images of
the goddess of speech were made of gold by the sculptor of the
gods ;—and the king gratified the members of the sacerdotal caste, who

=== PAGE 18 ===

264 MAHABHARATA

had arrived from all the cardinal points, by making presents to them of
those images, of gold. O protector of men! when the high-souled: Gaya
performed his sacrificial rites, he erected sacrificial piles at so many different
spots that but little space was left on the surface of the earth. And, O
scion of Bharata’s race! he by that sacred act attained the regions of
Indra, Whoever should bathe in the river, Payosini, would go to the
regions attained by Gaya. Therefore, O lord of kings! O unswerving
prince ! thou and thy brothers should bathe in this river : then, O protector
of the earth, thon wilt be freed from all these sins.”

Vaisampayana said, “O most praiseworthy of men! Yudhishthira
with his brothers performed ablutions in the Payosini river. Then, O
sinless prince ! the powerful monarch together with his brothers, journeyed
to the hill of sapphires and the great river Narmada. The blessed saint
Lomasa there named to him all the delightful holy spots and all the sacred
shrines of the celestials. Then he with his brothers visited those places,
according to his desire and convenience. And at varicus places Brahmanas
by thousands received gifts from him.”

“Lomasa said, ‘O son of Kunti! one who visits the sapphire Hill
and plunges his body in the river Narmada attains the regions inhabited
by the celestials and kings. O most praiseworthy of men! this period
ig the junction between the Treta and the Kali age, O Kunti’s son! This
isthe period when a person gets rid of all his sins. O respected sir! this
is the spot where Saryati performed sacrificial rites, wherein Indra appeared
in a visible form and drank the Soma juice, with the two celestial
physicians. And Bhrigu’s son of severe austerities conceived anger towards
the great Indra; and the mighty Chyavana paralysed Indra, and for his
wife obtained the princess, Sukanya.’”

“Yudhishthira said, ‘How was the chastiser of the demon Paka, the
god possessed of the six attributes, paralysed by Chyavana? And for
what reason did the mighty saint conceive wrath towards Indra? And
how, O Brahmana! did he raise the celestial physicians to the rank of
the drinkers of Soma? All this, precisely as it happened, thy venerable
self will be pleased to recount to me.’”

=== PAGE 19 ===

SECTION CXXIT
(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

: “Tomasa said, ‘A’ son was born to the great saint Bhrigu, Chya-
‘vana by namo, And be, of an exceedingly resplendent form, began to
Practise austerities by the side of yonder lake. And, O Pandu’s son! O
“protector of men! he of mighty energy assumed the posture called Vira,
quiet and still like an inanimate post, and for a long period, remained at
‘the samo spot of ground. And he was turned into an ant-hill covered
over with creepers. And after the lapse of a long period, swarms of ants
enyeloped him. And covered all over with ants, the sagacious saint looked
‘exactly like « heap of earth. And he went on practising austerities,
enveloped on all sides with that ant-hill. Now after the lapse of a long
space of time, that ruler of earth, Saryati by name, for amusement visited
this pleasant and excellent lake. With him were four thousand females,
espoused by him, O son of Bharata’s race! there was also his only
daughter endued with beautiful brows, named Sukanya. She surrounded by
her maids, and decked out with jewels fit for the celestials, while walking
about, approached the anthill where Bhrigu’s son was seated. And
surrounded by her maids, she began to amuse herself there, viewing the
beautiful scenery, and looking at the lofty trees of the wocd. And she
was handsome and in the prime of her youth; and she was amorous and
bent on frolicking. And she began to break the twigs of the forest trees
bearing blossoms. And Bhrigu’s son ondued with intelligence beheld her
wandering like lightning, without her maids, and wearing a single piece of
cloth and decked with ornaments. And seeing her in the lone forest, that
ascetic of exceeding effulgence was inspired with desire. And that regenerate
Rishi possessing ascetic energy, who had a low voice, called the auspicious
one,—but she heard him not. Then seeing the eyes of Bhrigu’s son
from the ant-hill, Sukanya from curiosity and losing her sense, said,
‘What is this ?"—and with thorns pierced the eyes (of the Rishi), And
as his eyes being pierced by her, he felt exceeding pain and became wroth,
And (from anger) he obstructed the calls of nature of Saryati’s forces.
And on their calls of nature being obstructed, the men were greatly
afflicted. And seeing this state of things, the king asked, ‘Who is it
that hath done wrong to the illustrious son of Bhrigu, old and ever engaged
in austerities and of wrathful temper ? Tell me quick if ye know it’. Tho
soldiers (thereupon) answered him saying, ‘We do not know whether any
one hath done wrong to the Rishi. Do thou, as thou list, make a search-
ing enquiry into the matter. Thereupon that ruler of earth, using (as he
saw occasion) both menace and conciliation, asked his friends (about the
circumstance). But they too did not know anything. Seeing that the
army was distressed owing to the obstruction of the calls of nature, and

=== PAGE 20 ===

266 MAHABHARATA

also finding her father aggrived, Sukanya said, ‘Roving in the forest, I
lighted in the ant-hill here upon some brilliant substance. Thereupon
taking it for a glow-worm I neared it, and pierced it (with thorns). Hearing
this Saryati immediately came to the ant-hill, and there saw Bhrign’s son,
old both in years and austerities. Then the lord of earth with joined
hands, besought (the ascetic) saying, ‘It behoveth thee to forgive what my
daughter through ignorance and greenness, hath done unto thee.’
Chyavana, the son of Bhrigu, addressed the monarch saying, ‘Disregarding
me, this one, filled with pride hath pierced my eyes. Even her, O king,
endued with beauty and who was bereft of her senses by ignorance and
temptation—even thy daughter would I have for my bride, I tell thee
truly, on this condition alone will I forgive thee.’

Lomasa said, “Hearing the words of the sage, Saryati, without
pausing, bestowed his daughter on the high-souled Chyavana. Having
received the hand of that girl, the holy ono was pleased with the king.
And having won the Rishi’s grace, the king went to his city, accompanied
by his troops. And the faultless Sukanya also having obtained that
ascetic for her husband, began to tend him, practising penances, and
observing the ordinance. And that one of a graceful countenance, and void
of guile worshipped Chyavana, and also ministered unto guests, and the
sacred fire.”

SECTION CXXIII
(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

“Lomasa said, ‘Once on a time, O king, those celestials, namely
the twin Aswins, happened to behold Sukanya, when she had (just)
bathed, and when her person was bare. And seeing that one of excellent
limbs, and like unto the daughter of tho lord of celestials, the nose-born
Aswins neared her, and addressed her, saying, ‘O thou of shapely thighs,
whose daughter art thou? And what doest thou in this wood? O
auspicious one, O thou of excellent grace, we desire to know this, do thou
therefore tell us.’ Thereupon she replied bashfulfy unto those foremost
of celestials, ‘Know me as Saryati's daughter, and Chyavana’s wife.’
Thereat the Aswins again spake unto her, smiling, ‘What for, O fortunate
one, hath thy father bestowed thee on a person who is verging on death ?
Surely, O timid girl, thou shinest in this wood like lightning. Not in the
regions of the celestials themselves, O girl, have our eyes lighted on thy
like. O damsel, unadorned and without gay robes as thou art, thou
beautifiest this wood exceedingly. Still, O thou of faultless limbs, thou
canst not look so beautiful, when (as at present) thou art soiled with mud
and dirt, as thou couldst, if decked with every ornament and wearing
gorgeous apparel. Why, O excellent girl in such plight servest thou a
decrepit old husband, and one that hath become incapable of realising

=== PAGE 21 ===

VANA PARVA 267

" pleasure and also of maintaining thee, O thou of luminous smiles? O
divinely beautiful damsel, do thou, forsaking Chyavana accept one of us
for husband. It behoveth thee not to spend thy youth fruitlessly.’”

“Thus addressed Sukanya answered the celestials saying, ‘I am
devoted to my husband, Chyavana; do ye not entertain any doubts (re-
garding my fidelity).’ Thereupon they again spake unto her, ‘We two
are tho celestial physicians of note. We will make thy lord young and
graceful. Do thou then select one of us, viz., ourselves and thy husband,
—for thy partner. Promising this do thou, O auspicious one, bring
hither thy husband.’ O king, agreeably to their words she wont to
Bhrigu’s son and communicated to him what the two celestials had said.
Hearing her message, Chyavana said unto his wife, ‘Do thou so.’ Having
received the permission of her lord, (she returned to the celestials) and
said, ‘Do ye so.’ Then hearing her words, viz., ‘Do ye so,’ they spoke unto
the king’s daughter, ‘Let thy husband enter into water.’ Thereat Chya-
yvana desirous of obtaining beauty, quickly entered into water. The twin
Aswins also, O king, sank into the sheet of water. And the next moment
they all came out of the tank in surpassingly beautiful forms, and young
and wearing burnished ear-rings. And all, possessed of the same appear-
ance pleasing to behold, addressed her saying, ‘O fortunate one, do thou
choose one of us for spouse. And O beauteous one, do thou select him
for lord who may please thy fancy.’ Finding, however, all of them of the
same appearance she deliberated ; and at last ascertaining the identity of
her husband, even selected him,

“Having obtained coveted beauty and also his wife, Chyavana, of
exceeding energy, well pleased, spake these words unto the nose-born
celestials : ‘Since at your hands, an old man, I have obtained youth, and
beauty, and also this wife of mine, I will, well pleased, make you quaffers
ofthe Soma juice in the presence of the lord of celestials himself. This
Ttell youtruly. Hearing this, highly delighted, the twins ascended to
heaven; and Chyavana and Sukanya too passed their days happily even
like celestials.”

=== PAGE 22 ===

SECTION CXXIV
(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

“Lamasa said, ‘Now the news came to Saryati that Chyavana had
been turned into a youth. And well pleased he came, accompanied by
his troops, to the hermitage of the son of Bhrigu. And he saw Chyavana
and Sukanya, like two children sprung from celestials, and his joy and
that of his wife were as great as if the king had conquered the entire world.
And the ruler of earth together with his wife was received honourably by
that saint. And the king seated himself near the ascetic, and entered into
a delightful conversation of an auspicious kind, Then, O king, the son of
Bhrigu spake to the king these words of a soothing nature : ‘I shall, O
king, officiate at a religious ceremony to be performed by thee : let ‘the
requisite articles, therefore, be procured.’ Thereat, that protector of earth
Saryati, experienced the very height of joy, and O great king, he expressed
his approbation of the proposal made by Chyavana., And on an auspicious
day, suitable for the commencement of a sacrificial coremony, Saryati
ordered the erection of a sacrificial shrine of an excellent description and
splendidly furnished with all desirable things. There Chyavana, the son
of Bhrigu, officiated for the king as his priest. Now listen to me relating
the wonderful events which happened at that spot. Chyavana took up a
quantity of the Soma juice, in order that he might offer the same to the
Aswins, who were physicians to the celestials. And while the saint was
taking up the intended offering for those celestial twins, Indra pronounced
his interdiction, saying, ‘These Aswins both of them in my opinion have
no right to receive an offering of the Soma juice. They are the: physicians
of the celestials in heaven,—this vocation of theirs hath disentitled them
(in the matter of Soma).’ Thereupon Chyavana said, ‘These two are of
mighty enterprise, possessed of mighty souls, and uncommonly endued
with beauty and grace, And they, O Indra, have converted me into an
eternally youthful person, even like unto a celestial. Why shouldst thou
and the other celestials have a right to the distilled Soma juice, and not
they ? O lord of the celestials, O demolisher of hostile towns! be it known
to thee that the Aswins also rank as gods.’ At this, Indra spake saying,
‘These two practise the healing art,—so they are but servants. And
assuming forms at their pleasure they roam about in the world of mortal
beings. How oan they then rightfully claim the juice of the Soma ?’

“Tomasa said, ‘When these very identical words were spoken again
and again by the lord of celestials, the son of Bhrigu, setting Indra at
naught, took up the offering he had intended to make. And ashe was
about to take up an excellent portion of the Soma juice with the object of
offering it to the two Aswins, the destroyer of the demon Vala (Indra)
observed his act, and thus spoke unto him, ‘If thou take up the Soma with

=== PAGE 23 ===

VANA PARVA 269

a view to offering it to those celestials, I shall hurl at thee my thunderbolt
of awful form, which is suporior to all the weapons that exist.’ Thus
addressed by Indra, the son of Bhrigu, cast at Indra a smiling glance, and
took upin due form a goodly quantity of the Soma juice, to make an
offering to the Aswins. Thon Sachi’s lord hurled at him the thunderbolt
of awful form. Andashe was about to launch it, his arm was paralysed
by Bhrigu’s son. And having paralysed his arm, Chyavana recited sacred
hymns, and made offerings on the fire. His object gained, he now
attempted to destroy that celestial. Then by the virtue of that saint’s ascetic
energy, an evil spirit came into being,—a huge demon, Mada by name, of
groat strength and gigantic proportions. And his body was incapable of
being measured either by demons or by gods. And his mouth was terrible
and of huge sizo, and with teeth of sharpened edge. And one of his jaws
rested on the earth, and the other stretched to heaven. And he had four
fangs, each extending as far as one hundred yojanas. And his other fangs
were extended to the distance of ten vof/anas, and were of a form resem-
bling towers on a palace, and which might be likened to the ends of spears.
And his two arms wore like unto hills, and extended ten thousand yojanas,
and both were of equal bulk. And his two eyes resembled the sun and the
moon ; and his face rivalled the conflagration at the universal dissolution.
And he was licking his mouth with his tongue, which, like lightning, knew
no rest. And his mouth was open, and his glance was frightful, and
seemed as if he would forcibly swallow up the world. The demon rushed
at the celestial by whom a hundred sacrifices had been performed. And
his intent was to devour that deity. And the world resounded with the
loud and frightful sounds uttered by the Asura.’”

SECTION CXXV
(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

“Tomasa said, ‘When the god who had performed a hundred sacrifices
(Indra) beheld the demon Mada of a frightful mien, coming towards him
with open mouth, his intention being to devour him, and looking like the
god of death himself, while his own arms remained paralysed, he through
fear repeatedly licked the corners of his mouth. Then the lord of the
celestials, tortured with fright, spake to Chyavana saying, ‘O Bhrigu’s
son! O Brahmana! verily I tell thee as truth itself, that from this day
forward the two Aswins will be entitled to the Soma juice. Be merciful
tome! My undertaking can never come to naught. Let this be the rule.
And Iknow, O saint of the sacerdotal caste! that thy work can never
come to nothing. These two Aswins will have a right to drink the Soma
juice, since thou hast made them entitled to the same. And, O Bhrigu’s

=== PAGE 24 ===

270 MAHABHARATA

son, I have done this but to spread the fame of thy powers, and my object
was to give thee an occasion for displaying thy powers. My other object
was that the fame of the father of this Sukanya here might spread every-
where. Therefore be merciful to me: let it be as thou wishest.’ Being
thus addressed by Indra, the wrath of Chyavana of mighty soul was
quickly appeased, and he set free the demolisher of hostile cities (Indra), And
the powerful saint, O king! distributed Mada (literally intoxication), and
put it piece-meal in drinks, in women, in gambling, and in field sports,.
even this same Mada who had been created repeatedly before. Having
thus cast down the demon Mada and gratified Indra with a Soma draught
and assisted king Saryatiin worshipping all the gods together with the
two Aswins and also spread his fame for power over all the worlds, the
best of those endued with speech passed his days happily in the wood,
in the company of Sukanya, his loving wife. This is his lake, shining, O
king! and resounding with the voice of birds. Hore must thou, together
with thy uterine brothers, offer libations of water to thy forefathers and
the gods. And, O ruler of earth! O scion of Bharata’s race! having
visited it and Sikataksha also, thou shalt repair to the Saindhaya wood,
and behold a number of small artificial rivers. And, O great king, O scion
of Bharata’s race! thou shalt touch the waters of all the holy lakes and
reciting the hymns of the god Sthanu (Siva), meet with success in every
undertaking. For this is the junction, O most praiseworthy of men, of the
two ages of the world, viz., Dwapara-and Treta. It is a time, O Kunti’s
son ! capable of destroying all the sins of a person. Here do thou perform
ablutions, for the spot is able to remove all the sins of an individual.
Yonder is the Archika hill, a dwelling-place for men of cultured minds.
Fruits of all the seasons grow here at all times and the streams run for
ever. It isan excellent place fit for the celestials. And there are the holy
cairns of diverse forms, set up by the celestials. O Yudhishthira ! this is
the bathing spot belonging to the Moon. And the saints are in attendance
here on all sides round—they are the dwellers of the wood and the
Valakhilyas, and the Pavakas, who subsist on air only. These are three
peaks and three springs. Thou mayst walk round them all, one by one:
then thou mayst wash thyself at pleasure. Santanu, O king! and Sunaka,
the sovereign of men, and both Nara and Narayana have attained ever-
lasting regions from this place. Here did the gods constantly lie down, as
also the forefathers, together with the mighty saints. In this Archika hill,
they all carried on austerities. Sacrifice to them, O Yudhishthira ! Here
did they, also the saints, eat rice cooked in milk, O protector of men!

And here is the Yamuna of an exhaustless spring. Krishna here engaged —

himself ina life of ponances, O Pandu’s son. O thou that draggest the
dead bodies of thy foes! the twin brothers, and Bhimasena and Krishna
and all of us will accompany thee to this spot. O lord of men, this is the

=== PAGE 25 ===

VANA PARVA 271

holy spring that belongeth to Indra. Here the creative and the dispensing
deity, and Varuna also rose upwards, and here too they dwelt, O king!
observing forbearance, and possessed of the highest faith. This excellent
and propitious hill is fit for persons of akindly and candid disposition.
This is that colebrated Yamuna, O king! frequented by hosts of mighty
saints, the scene of diverse religious rites, holy, and destructive of the
dread of sin. Here did Mandhata himself, of a mighty bow, perform
sacrificial rites for the gods ; and so did Somaka, O Kunti’s son ! who was
the son of Sahadeva, and a most excellent maker of gifts.’ ”

SECTION CXXVI

(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

“yYudhishthira said, ‘O great Brahmana, how was that tiger among
kings, Mandhata, Yuvanaswa’s son, born,—even he who was the best of
monarchs, and celebrated over the three worlds? And how did he of
unmeasured lustre attain the very height of real power, since all the three
worlds were as much under his subjection, as they ara under that of Vishnu
of mighty soul ? Lam desirous of hearing all this in connection with the
life and achievements of that sagacious monarch. I should also like to
hear how his name of Mandhata originated, belonging as it did to him who
rivalled in lustre Indra himself : and also how he of unrivalled strength was
porn, for thou art skilled in the art of narrating events.’

“Tomasa said, "Hear with attention, O king! how the name of
Mandhata belonging to that monarch of mighty soul hath come to be
celebrated throughout all the worlds. Yuvanaswa, the ruler of the earth,
was sprung from Ikshvaku’s race. That protector of the earth performed
many sacrificial rites noted for magnificient gifts. And the most excellent
of all virtuous men performed a thousand times the ceremony of sacrificing
a horse. And he also performed other sacrifices of the highest order,
wherein he made abundant gifts. But that saintly king had no son. And
he of mighty soul and rigid vows made over to his ministers the duties of
the state, and became a constant resident of the woods. And he of
cultured soul devoted himself to the pursuits enjoined in the sacred writ.
‘And once upon a time, that protector of men, O king! had observed a fast.
And he was suffering from the pangs of hunger and his inner soul seemed
parched with thirst. And (in this state) ho entered the hermitage of
Bhrigu. On that very night, O king of kings! the great saint who was the
delight of Bhrigu’s race, had officiated in a religious ceremony, with the
object that a son might be porn to Saudyumni. O king of kings! at the
spot stood a large jar filled with water, consecrated with the recitation of

=== PAGE 26 ===

272 MAHABHARATA

sacred hymns, and which had been previously deposited there. And the
water was endued with the virtue that the wife of Saudyumni would by
drinking the same, bring forth a god-like son. Those mighty saints had
deposited the jar on the altar and had gone to sleep, having been fatigued
by keeping up the night. And as Saudyumni passed them by, his palate
was dry, and he was suffering greatly from thirst. And the king was very
much in need of water to drink. And he entered that hermitage and asked
for drink. And becoming fatigued, he cried in feeble voice, proceeding from
a parched throat, which resembled the weak inarticulate utterance of a
bird. And his yoice reached nobody's ears. Then the king beheld the jar
filled with water. And he quickly ran towards it, and having drunk the
water, put the jardown. And as the water was cool, and as the king had
been suffering greatly from thirst, the draught of water relieved the
sagacious monarch and appeased his thirst. Then those saints together
with him of ascetic wealth, awoke from sleep; and all of them observed
that the water of the jar had gone. Thereupon they met together and
began to enquire as to who might have done it. Then Yuvanaswa truthfully
admitted that it was his act. Then the revered son of Bhrigu spake unto
him, saying, ‘It was not proper. This water had an occult virtue infused
into it, and had been placed there with the object that a son might be born
tothee. Having performed severe austerities, I infused the virtue of my
religious acts in this water, that a son might be born to thee. O saintly
king of mighty valour and physical strength! a son would have been born
to thee of exceeding strength and valour, and strengthened by austcrities,
and who would have sent by his bravery even Indra to the abode of the god
of death. It was in this manner, O king! that this water had been pre-
pared by me. By drinking this water, O king, thou hast done what was
not at allright. But it is impossible now for us to turn back the accident
which hath happened. Surely what thou hast done must have been the fiat
of Fate. Since thou, O great king, being athirst hast drunk water
prepared with sacred hymns, and filled with tbe virtue of my religious
labours, thou must bring forth out of thy own body a son of the character
described above. To that end we shall perform a sacrifice for thee, of
wonderful effect so that, valorous as thou art, thou wilt bring forth a son
equal toIndra. Nor wilt thou experience any trouble on account of the
labour pains.’ Then when one hundred years had passed away, a son
shining as the sun pierced the left side of the king endowed with a mighty
soul, and came forth. And the son was possessed of mighty strength. Nor
did Yuvanaswa die—which itself was strange. Then Indra of mighty
strength came to pay him a visit. And the deities enquired of the great
Indra, ‘What is to be sucked by this boy 2” Then Indra introduced his own
forefinger into his mouth. And when the wielder of the thunderbolt said,
‘He will suck me,’ the dwellers of heaven together with Indra chris-

=== PAGE 27 ===

VANA PARVA 273

tened the boy Mandhata, (literally, Me he shall suck). Then the boy
having tasted the forefinger extended by Indra, became possessed of
mighty strength, and he grew thirteen cubits, O king. And, O great
king! the whole of sacred learning together with the holy science of
arms, was acquired by that masterful boy, who gained all that know-
ledge by the simple and unassisted power of his thought: And all at
once, the bow celebrated under the name of Ajagava anda number of
shafts made of horn, together with an impenetrable coat of mail, came
to his possession on the very same day, O scion of Bharata’s race! And
he was placed on the throne by Indra himself and he conquered the
three worlds in a righteous way, as Vishnu did by his three strides. And
the wheel of the car of that mighty king was irresistible in its course
(throughout the world). And the gems, of their own accord, came into
the possession of that saintly king. This is the tract of land, O lord of
earth, which belonged to him. It abounds in wealth. He performed a
number of sacrificial rites of various kinds, in which abundant gratuities
were paid to the priests. O king! he of mighty force and unmeasured
lustre, erected sacred piles, and performed splendid pious deeds, and
attained the position of sitting at Indra’s side. That sagacious king of un-
swerving piety sent forth his fiat, and simply by its virtue conquered the
earth, together with the sea—that source of gems—and all the cities (of
the earth), O great king ! The sacrificial grounds prepared by him were
to be found all over the earth on all sides round—not a single spot, but
was marked with the same. O great king! the mighty monarch is said
to have given to the Brahmanas ten thousand padmas of kine. When
there wasa drought, which continued for twelve consecutive years,
the mighty king caused rain to come down for the growth of crops,
paying no heed to Indra, the wielder of the thunder-bolt, who remained
staring (at him). The mighty ruler of the Gandhara land, born in the”
lunar dynasty of kings, who was terrible like a roaring cloud, was slain
by him, who wounded him sorely with his shafts. O king ! he of cultured
soul protected the four orders of people, and by him of mighty force
the worlds were kept from harm, by virtue of his austere and righteous
life. This is the spot where he, lustrous like the sun, sacrificed to the
god. Look at it! here it is, in the midst of the field of the Kurus,
situated in a fract, the holiest of all. O preceptor of earth! requested
by thee, I have thus narrated to thee the great life of Mandhata, and
also the way in which he was born, which was a birth of an extra-
ordinary kind.’ ”

Vaisampayana said, “O scion of Bharata’s race ! Kunti’s son, thus
addressed by the mighty saint, Lomasa, immediately put fresh questions
to him, with regard to Somaka.”

4

=== PAGE 28 ===

SECTION CXXVII
(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

Yudhishthira said, ‘O best of speakers! what was the extent of
power and strength possessed by king Somaka ? I am desirous of hearing
an exact account of his deeds and of his power.”

“Lomasa said, ‘O Yudhishthira ! there was a virtuous king Somaka
by name. He had one hundred wives, O king, all suitably matched to
their husband. He took great care, but could not succeed in getting a
single son from any one of them, and a long time elapsed during which
he continued a sonless man. Once on a time, when he had become old,
and was trying every means to have a son, a son was born to him, Jantu
by name, out of that century of women. And, O ruler of men! All the
mothers used to sit surrounding their son and every one giving him such
objects as might conduce to his enjoyment and pleasure. And it came
to pass that one day an ant stung the boy at his hip. And the boy’
screamed loudly on account of the pain caused by the sting. And
forthwith the mothers were exceedingly distressed to see how the child
had been stung by, the ant. And they stood around him and set up
cries, Thus there arose a tumultuous noise. And that scream of pain
suddenly reached (the ears of) the sovereign of the earth, when he was
seated in the midst of his ministers, with the family priest at his side.
Then the king sent for information as to what it was about. And the
toyal usher explained to him precisely what the matter was with refer-
ence to hisson. And Somaka got up together with his ministers and
hastened towards the female apartments. And on coming there, Osub-
jugator of foes! he soothed his son. And having done so and coming
out from the female apartments, the king sat with his family priest
and ministers.’

“Somaka then spake thus, ‘Fie on having only a single son! Ihad
rather be a sonless man. Considering how constantly liable to disease
are all organized beings, to have an only son is but a trouble. O Brah-
mana! O my lord! With the view that I might have many sons born to
me, this century of wives hath been wedded by me, after inspection, and
after I had satisfied myself that they would prove suitable to me. But
issue they have none. Having tried every means, and put forth great
efforts, they have borne this single son, Jantu. What grief can be
greater than this? O most excellent of the twice-born caste! I am
grown old in years and so are my wives too. And yet this only son is
like the breath of their nostrils, and so he is to me also. But is there
any ceremony, by celebrating which one may get a hundred sons?
(And if there is one such), tell me whether it is great or small, and
easy or difficult to perform.’

=== PAGE 29 ===

VANA PARVA 275

“The family priest said, ‘There is a ceremony by virtue of which a
man may get a century of sons. If thou art able to perform it, O Somaka,
then I shall explain it to thee.’

“Somaka said, ‘Whether it be a good or an evil deed, the ceremony
by which a hundred sons may be born, may be taken by thee as already
performed. Let thy blessed self explain it to me.’

“The family priest thereupon said, ‘O king! Let me set on foot a
sacrifice and thou must sacrifice thy son, Jantu init. Then on no dis.
tant date, a century of handsome sons will be born to thee. When
Jantu’s fat will be put into the fire as an offering to the gods, the
mothers will take a smell of that smoke, and bring forth a number of
sons, valourous and strong. And Jantu also will once more be born asa
self-begotten son of thine in that very (mother) ; and on his back there
will appear a mark of gold.’ ”

SECTION CXXVIII
(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

“Somaka said, ‘O Brahmana! whatever is to be performed—do
precisely as it may be necessary. As I am desirous of having a number
of sons, I shall do all that may be prescribed by thee.’

“Lomasa said, ‘Then the priest officiated in the sacrifice in which
Jantu was offered as the victim. But the mothers in pity forcibly
snatched the son and took him away. And they cried, ‘We are undone !’
And they were smitten with torturing grief and they caught hold of
Jantu by his right hand, and wept in a piteous way. But the officiating
priest held the boy by the right hand and pulled him. And like female
ospreys they screamed in agony! but the priest dragged the son, killed
him and made a burnt offering of his fat in the proper form. And, O
delight of the race of Kuru! While the fat was being made an offering
of the agonised mothers smelt its smell, and of a sudden fell to the
ground (and swooned away.) And then all those lovely women became
with child, and O lord of men! O scion of Bharata’s race ! When ten
months had passed a full century of sons was born to Somaka begotten
onall those women. And, O monarch of the earth! Jantu became the
eldest and was born of his former mother and he became the most belov-
ed to the women,—not so were their own sons. Andon his back there
was that mark of gold and of that century of sons, he was also superior
jn merit. Then that family priest of Somaka departed this life as also
Somaka after a certain time. Now he beheld that the priest was being
grilled in a terrible hell. And thereupon he questioned him, “Why art
thou, O Brahmana ! being grilled in this hell ?” Then the family priest
exceedingly scorched with fire, spake to him saying, ‘This is the outcome
of my having officiated in that sacrifice of thine.’ O king, hearing this,

=== PAGE 30 ===

atO es eS ee

the saintly king thus spake to the god who meteth out punishments to
departed souls, ‘I shall enter here. Set free my officiating priest ; this
revered man is being grilled by hell-fire on my account only.’

“Dharmaraja thereat answered thus, ‘One cannot enjoy or suffer
for another person's acts. O best of speakers! these are the fruits of
thy acts; see it here.’

“Somaka said, ‘Without this Brahmana here, I desire not go to
the blessed regions. My desire is to dwell in company with this very
man, either in the abode of the gods, or in hell, for, O Dharmaraja ! my
deed is identical with what hath been done by him and the fruit of our
virtuous or evil deed must be the same for both of us.’

“Dharmaraja said, ‘O king! If this is thy wish, then taste with
him the fruit of that act, for the same period that he must do. After
that, thou shalt go to the blessed regions’.

“Lomasa said, ‘The lotus-eyed king did all that exactly inthe way
prescribed to him. And when his sins were worked off, he was set free
together with the priest. O king! Fond of the priest as he was, he won
all those blessings to which he had entitled himself by his meritorious
acts and shared everything with the family priest. This is his hermitage
which looketh lovely before our eyes. Any one would attain the blessed °
regions, if he should spend six nights here controlling his passions. O
king of kings! O leader of the tribe of Kurus! Here, free from excite-
ment and self-controlled, we must spend six nights. Be thou ready
therefor.’ ”

SECTION CXXIX
(Virtha-yatra Parva continued)

“Lomasa said, ‘Here, O king! The lord of born beings himself
performed a sacrifice in former times,—the ceremony called Ishtikrita,
which occupied one thousand years. And Amvarisha, son of Nabhaga,
sacrificed near the Yamuna river. And having sacrificed there, he gave
away ten Padmas (of gold coins) to the attendant priests, and he obtain-
ed the highest success by his sacrifices and austerities. And, O Kunti’s
son! This is the spot where that sovereign of the entire earth,
Nahusha’s son, Yayati, of unmeasured force, and who led a holy life,
performed his sacrificial rites. He competed with Indra and performed
his sacrifice here. Behold how the ground is studded with places for the
sacrificial fires of various forms, and how the earth seems to be subsid-
ing here under the pressure of Yayati’s pious works. This is the Sami
tree, which hath got but a single leaf, and this is a most excellent
lake. Behold these lakes of Parasurama, and the hermitage of
Narayana. O protector of earth! This is the path which was followed
by Richika’s son, of unmeasured energy, who roamed over the earth,

=== PAGE 31 ===

VANA PARVA 277

practising the Yoga rites in the river Raupya. And, O delight of the
tribe of Kurus! Hear whata Pisacha woman (she-goblin), who was
decked with pestles for her ornaments, said (to a Brahmana woman),
as I was reciting here the table of genealogy. (She said), ‘Having eaten
curd in Yugandhara, and lived in Achutasthala, and also bathed in
Bhutilaya, thou shouldst live with thy sons. Having passed a single
night here, if thou wilt spend the second, the events of the night will
be different from those that have happened to thee in the day-time,
O most righteous of Bharata’s race! Today we shall spend the night at
this very spot. O scion of Bharata’s race! this is the threshold of the
field of the Kurus. O king! At this very spot, the monarch Yayati,
son of Nahusha, performed sacrificial rites, and made gifts of an abun-
dance of gems. And Indra was pleased with those sacred rites. This
is anexcellent holy bathing-place on the river Yamuna, known as
Plakshavatarana (descent of the banian tree). Men of cultured minds
call it the entrance to the region of heaven. O respected sir ! here,
after having performed sacrificial rites of the Saraswata kind, and
making use of the sacrificial stake for their pestle, the highest order of
saints performed the holy plunge prescribed at the end of a sacred cere-
mony, O monarch! King Bharata here performed sacrificial rites. To
celebrate the horse-sacrifice, he here set free the horse who was the
intended victim. That monarch had won the sovereignty of the earth
by righteousness. The horses he let go more than once were of a colour
checkered with black. O tiger among men! it was here that Marutta
sheltered by Samvartta, leader of saints, succeeded in performing excell-
ent sacrifices. O sovereign of kings! Having taken his bath at this
spot, one can behold all the worlds, and is purified from his evil deeds.
Do thou, therefore, bathe at this spot.’ ”

Vaisampayana said, “Then that most praiseworthy of Pandu’s sons,
there bathed with his brothers, while the mighty saints were uttering
laudatory words tohim. And he addressed the following words to
Lomasa, ‘O thou whose strength lieth in truthfulness! By virtue of
this pious act, I behold all the worlds. And from this place, I behold
that most praiseworthy of Pandu’ssons Arjuna, the rider of white steed.”

‘Lomasa said, ‘Tt is even so, O thou of powerful arms! The saints
of the highest order thus behold all the regions. Behold this holy
Saraswati here, thronged by persons who look upon her as their sole
refuge. O most praiseworthy of men! having bathed here, thou wilt
be free from all thy sins. O Kunti's son! here the celestial saints per-
formed sacrificial rites of Saraswata kind ; and so did the saints and the
royal saints. This is the altar of the lord of beings, five yojanas in
extent onall sides round. And this is the field of the magnanimous
Kurus, whose habit it was to perform sacrifices.’ ”

=== PAGE 32 ===

SECTICN CXXX
(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

“Lomasa said, ‘O son of Bharata’s race! If mortals breathe their
last at this spot, they go to heaven. O king ! Thousands upon thousands
of men come to this place to die. A blessing was pronounced on this spot
by Daksha, when he was engaged in sacrifice here, (in these words),
‘Those men that shall die at this spot shall win a place in heaven.’ Here
is the beautiful and sacred river, Saraswati, full of water ; and here, O
lord of men, is the spot known as Vinasana, or the place where the
Saraswati disappeared. Here is the gate of the kingdom of the Nishadas
and it is from hatred for them that the Saraswati entered into the earth
in order that the Nishadas might not see her. Here too is the sacred
region of Chamashodbheda where the Saraswati once more became visi-
ble to them. And here she is joined by other sacred rivers running sea-
wards. O conqueror of foes, here is the sacred spot known by the name
of Sindhu—where Lopamudra accepted the great sage Agastya as her
lord and, O thou whose effulgence is like unto that of the sun, here is
the sacred tirtha called Prabhasa, the favoured spot of Indra and which
removeth allsins. Yonder is visible the region of Vishnupada. And
here isthe delightful and sacred river, Vipasa. From grief for the
death of his sons the great sage Vasistha had thrown himself into this
stream, after binding his limbs. And when he rose from the water, lo!
he was unfettered. Look, O king, with thy brothers at the sacred region
of Kasmeera, frequented by holy sages. Here, O scion of Bharata's race,
is the spot, where a conference took place between Agni and the sage
Kasyapa, and also between Nahusha’s son and the sages of the north.
And, O great prince, yonder is the gate of the Manasasarovara. In the
midst of this mountain, a gap hath been opened by Rama. And here, O
prince of prowess incapable of being baffled, is the well-known region
of Vatikhanda, which, although adjacent tothe gate of Videha, lieth
on the north of it. And, O bull among men, there is another very re-
markable thing connected with this place—namely, that on the waning
of every yuga, the god Siva, having the power to assume any shape at
will, may be seen with Uma and his followers. In yonder lake also
people desirous of securing welfare to the family, propitiate with sacri-
fices the holder of the great bow Pinaka, in the month of Chaitra. And
persons of devotion having passions under control, performing their
ablutions in this lake, become free from sins and, without doubt, attain
tothe holy regions. Here isthe sacred tirtha called Ujjanaka, where
the holy sage Vasishtha with his wife Arundhati and also the sage
Yavakri obtained tranquillity. Yonder is the lake Kausava, where

=== PAGE 33 ===

VANA PARVA 279

grow the lotuses called Kausesaya, and here also is the sacred hermitage
of Rukmini, where she attained peace, after conquering that evil
passion, anger. I think, O prince, that thou hast heard something
about that man of meditations, Bhrigutunga. There, O king, before thee
is that lofty peak. And, O foremost of kings, yonder is Vitasta, the
sacred stream that absolveth men from all sins. The water of this stream
is extremely cool and limpid, and it is largely used by the great sages.
O prince, behold the holy rivers Jala and Upajala, on either side of the
Yamuna. By performinga sacrifice here, king Usinara surpassed in
greatness Indra himself. And, O descendant of Bharata, desirous of
testing Usinara’s merit and also of bestowing boons on him, Indra and
Agni presented themselves at his sacrificial ground. And Indra assum-
ing the shape of a hawk, and Agni that of a pigeon, came unto that
king. And the pigeon in fear of the hawk, fell »upon the king’s thigh,
seeking his protection.”

SECTION CXXXI
(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

“The hawk said, ‘All the kings of the earth represent thee as a
pious ruler. Wherefore, O prince, has thou then stooped to perpetrate
a deed not sanctioned by the ordinance? I have been sore afflicted
with hunger. Do thou not withhold from me that which hath been
appointed by the Deity for my food,—under the impression that thereby
thou servest the interests of virtue, whereas in reality, thou wilt
forsake it, (by committing thyself to this act), Thereupon, the -king
said, ‘O best of the feathered race, afflicted with fear of thee, and desir-
ous of escaping from thy hands, this bird, all ina hurry, hath come
unto me asking for life. When this pigeon hath in such a manner
sought my protection, why dost thou not see that the highest merit is
even in my not surrendering it unto thee? And it is trembling with
fear, and is agitated, and is seeking its life from me. It is therefore
certainly blameworthy to forsake it. He thatslayeth a Brahmana, he
that slaughtereth a cow—the common mother of all the worlds—and
he that forsaketh one seeking for protection are equally sinful.’ Thereat
the hawk replied, ‘O lord of earth, it is from food that all beings
derive their life, and it is food also that nourisheth and sustaineth them.
A man can live long even after forsaking what is dearest to him,
but he cannot do so, after abstaining from food. Being deprived of
food, my life, O ruler of men, will surely leave this body, and will
attain to regions unknown to such troubles. But at my death, O pious
king, my wife and children will surely perish, and by protecting this

=== PAGE 34 ===

280 MAHABHARATA

single pigeon, O prince, thou dost not protect many lives. The virtue
that standeth in the way of another virtue, is certainly no virtue at all,
but in reality is unrighteousness. But, O king, whose prowess con-
sisteth in truth, that virtue is worthy of the name, which is not
conflicting. After instituting a comparison between opposing virtues,
and weighing their comparative merits, one, O great prince, ought. to
espouse that which is not opposing. Do thou, therefore, O king,
striking a balance between virtues, adopt that which preponderates.”
At this the king said, ‘O best of birds, as thou speakest words fraught
with much good, I suspect thee to be Suparna, the monarch of birds. I
have not the least hesitation to declare that thou art fully conversant
with the ways of virtue. As thou speakest wonders about virtue, I
think that there is nothing connected with it, that is unknown to thee.
How canst thou then consider the forsaking of one, seeking for help, as
virtuous? Thy effortsin this matter, O ranger of the skies, have
been in quest of food. Thou canst, however, appease thy hunger with
some other sort of food, even more copious. I am perfectly willing to
procure for thee any sort of food that to thee may seem most tasteful,
even if it be an ox, or a boar, or a deer, or a buffalo.” Thereupon the
hawk said, ‘O great king, Iam not desirous of eating (the flesh of ) a
boar or an ox or the various species of beasts. What have I to do with
any other sort of food ? Therefore, O bull among the Kshatriyas, leave
to me this pigeon, whom Heaven hath today ordained for my food, O
ruler of earth, that hawks eat pigeons is the eternal provision. O
prince, do not for support embrace a plantain tree, not knowing its
want of strength. The king said, ‘Ranger of the skies, I am willing to
bestow on thee this rich province of my race, or any other thing that
to thee may seem desirable. With the sole exception of this pigeon,
which hath approached me craving my protection, I shall be glad to
give unto thee anything that thou mayst like. Let me know what I
shall have to do for the deliverance of this bird. But this I shall not
return to thee on any condition whatever.’ ”

“The hawk said, ‘O great ruler of men, if thou hast conceived an
affection for this pigeon, then cut off a portion of thine own flesh, and
weigh it in a balance, against this pigeon. And when thou hast found
it equal ( in weight ) to the pigeon, then do thou give it unto me,~and
that will be to my satisfaction. Then the king replied, ‘This request
of thine, O hawk, I consider as a favour unto me, and, therefore, I will
give unto thee even my own flesh, after weighing it in a balance.’

“Lomasa said, ‘Saying this, O mighty son of Kunti, the highly
virtuous king cut off a portion of his own flesh, and placed it in a
balance, against the pigeon. But when he found that pigeon exceeded
his flesh in weight, he once more cut off another portion of his flesh,

=== PAGE 35 ===

VANA PARVA 281

and added it to the former. When Portion after portion had been
repeatedly added to weigh against the Pigeon, and no more flesh was left
on his body, he mounted the scale himself, utterly devoid of flesh.

“The hawk then said, ‘I am Indra, O virtuous king, and this pigeon
is Agni, the carrier of the sacrificial clarified butter. We had come unto
thy sacrificial ground, desirous of testing thy merit. Since thou hast
cut off thy own flesh from thy body, thy glory shall be resplendent, and
shall surpass that of all others in the worlds. As long as men, O king,
Shall’ speak of thee, so long shall thy glory endure, and thou shalt in.
habit the holy regions.’ Saying this to the king, Indra ascended to heaven.
And the virtuous king Usinara, after having filled heaven and earth
with the merit of his pious deeds, ascended to heaven ina radiant shape.
Behold, O king, the residence of that noble-hearted monarch. Here,
O king, are seen holy sages and gods, together with virtuous and high.
souled Brahmanas.’ ”

SECTION CXXXII
(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

“Lomasa said, ‘See here, O lord of men, the sacred hermitage of
Swetaketu, son of Uddalaka, whose fame as an expert in the sacred
mantras isso widely spread onearth. This hermitage is graced with
Cocoanut trees. Here Swetaketu beheld the goddess Saraswati in her
human shape, and spake unto her, saying, ‘May I be endowed with the
gift of speech! In that yuga, Swetaketu, the son of Uddalaka, and
Ashtavakra, the son of Kahoda, who stood to each other in the relation
of uncle and nephew, were the best of those conversant with the sacred
lore. Those two Brahmanas, of matchless energy, who bore unto each
other the relationship of uncle and nephew, went into the sacrificial
ground of king Janaka and there defeated Vandin ina controversy,
Worship, O son of Kunti, with thy brothers, the sacred hermitage of him
who had for his grandson Ashtavakra, who, even when a mere child,
had caused Vandin to be drowned ina tiver, after having defeated him
in a (literary) contest.’

“Yudhishthira said, ‘Tell me, O Lomasa, all about the power of
this man, who had in that way defeated Vandin. Why was he born as
Ashtavakra (cooked in eight parts in his body) ?

“Lomasa said, ‘The sage Uddalaka had a disciple named :Kahoda
of subdued passions, and entirely devoted to the service of his Preceptor
and who had continued his studies long. The Brahmana had served his
tutor long, and his preceptor, Tecognising his service, gave him his own
daughter, Sujata, in marriage, as well as a mastery over the Shastras,
And she became with child, radiant as fire. And the embryo addressed
his father while employed in reading, ‘O father, thou hast been reading

5

=== PAGE 36 ===

232 MAHABHARATA

the whole night, but (ofall that) thy reading doth not seemto me
correct. Even in my fetal state I have, by thy favour, become versed
in the Shastras and the Vedas with their several branches. I say, O
father, that what proceeds from thy mouth, is not correct.’ Thus
insulted in the presence of his disciples, the great sage in anger cursed
his child in the womb, saying, ‘Because thou speakest thus even while
in the womb, therefore thou shalt be crooked in eight parts of the body.’
The child was accordingly born crooked, and the great sage was ever
after known by the name of Ashtavakra. Now, he had an uncle
named Swetaketu who was the same age with himself. Afflicted by the
growth of the child in the womb, Sujata, desirous of riches, conciliating
her husband who had no wealth told him in private : ‘How shall I
manage, O great sage, the tenth month of my pregnancy having come ?
Thou hast no substance whereby I may extricate myself from the
exigencies, after 1 have been delivered.’ Thus addressed by his wife,
Kahoda went unto king Janaka for riches. He was there defeated in a
controversy by Vandin, well versed in the science of arguments, and
(in consequence) was immersed into water. And hearing that his
son-in-law had been defeated in a controversy by Vandin and caused to
be drowned by him, Uddalaka spake unto his daughter Sujata, saying,
‘Thou shalt keep it a secret from Ashtavakra.’ She accordingly kept
her counsel—so that Ashtavakra, when born, had heard nothing about
the matter. And he regarded Uddalaka as his father and Swetaketu as
his brother. And when Ashtavakra was in his twelfth year, Sweta-
ketu one day saw the former seated on his father’s lap. And thereat he
pulled him by the hand, and on Ashtavakra’s beginning to cry, he told
him, ‘It isnot the lap of thy father.’ This cruel communication went
direct into Ashtavakra’s heart and it pained him sorely. And he went
home and asked his mother saying, ‘Where is my father?’ Thereupon
Sujata who was greatly afflicted (by his question), and apprehending a
curse told him all that had happened. And having heard all, the
Brahmana at night said unto his uncle Swetaketu, ‘Let us go unto the
sacrifice of king Janaka, wherein many wonderful things are to be seen.
There we shall listen to the controversy between the Brahmanas and
shall partake of excellent food. Our knowledge also will increase. The
recitation of the sacred Vedas is sweet to hear and is fraught with
blessings. Then they both—uncle and nephew—went unto the splendid
sacrifice of king Janaka. And on being driven from the entrance,
Ashtavakra met the king and addressed him in the following words.”

=== PAGE 37 ===

SECTION CXXXIII
(Lirtha-yatra Parva continued)

“Ashtavakra said, ‘When no Brahmana is met with on the way, the
way belongeth to the blind, the deaf, the women, carriers of burden, and
the king respectively. But when a Brahmana is met with on the way, it
belongeth to him alone,’ Thereupon the king said, ‘I give the privilege
toenter. Do thou, therefore, go in by whatever way thou likest. No
fire ever so small is to be slighted. Even Indra himself boweth unto
the Brahmanas.’ At this Ashtavakra said, ‘We have come, O ruler of
men, to witness thy sacrificial ceremony and our curiosity, O king, is
very great. And we have come here as guests. We want the permission
of thy order (to enter), And, O son of Indradyumna, we have come,
desirous of seeing the sacrifice, and to meet king Janaka and speak to,him.
But thy warder obstructs us and for this our anger burneth us like
fever.’ The warder said, ‘We carry out the orders of Vandin. Listen
to what I have to say. Lads are not Permitted to enter here and it is
only the learned old Brahmanas that are allowed to enter.’ Ashtavakra
said, ‘If this be the condition, O warder, that the door is open to those
only that are old, then we havea right to enter. We are old and we
have observed sacred vows and are in possession of energy Proceeding
from the Vedic lore. And we have served our superiors and subdued
our passions—and have also won Proficiency in knowledge. It is said
that even boys are not to be slgihted—for a fire, small though it be,
burneth on being touched.’ The.warder replied, ‘O young Brahmana, I
consider you a boy, and therefore recite, if you know, the verse demons-
trating the existence of the Supreme Being, and adored by the divine
sages, and which, although composed of one letter, is yet multifarious,
Make no vain boast. Learned men are really very rare.’ Ashtavakra
said, ‘True growth cannot be inferred from the mere development of
the body, as the growth of the knots of the Salmali tree cannot signify
its age. That tree is called full-grown which although slender and short,
beareth fruigs. But that which doth not bear fruits, is not considered
as grown.’ The warder said, ‘Boys receive instruction from the old and
they also in time grow old. Knowledge certainly is not attainable in a
Short time. Wherefore then, being a child, dost thou talk like an old
man ?’. Then Ashtavakra said, ‘One 1s not old because his head is gray.
But the gods regard him as old who, although a child in years, is yet
Possessed of knowledge. The sages have not laid down that a man’s
merit consists in years, or gray hair, or wealth, or friends. To us he is
Sreat who is versed in the Vedas. I have come here, O porter, desirous
of seeing Vandin in the court. Go and inform king Janaka, who hath a
garland of lotuses on his neck, that I am here. Thou shalt to-day see

=== PAGE 38 ===

284 MAHABHARATA

me enter intoa dispute with the learned men, and defeat Vandin ina
controversy. And when others have been silenced, the Brahmanas of
matured learning and the king also with his principal priests, bear wit-
ness to the superior or the inferior quality of my attainments.’ The war-
der said, ‘How canst thou, who art but in thy tenth year, hope to enter
into this sacrifice, into which learned and educated men only are admit-
ted ? I shall, however, try some means for thy admittance. Do thou also
try thyself.’ Ashtavakra then addressing the king said, ‘O king, O fore-
most of Janaka’s race, thou art the paramount sovereign and all power
reposeth in thee. In times of old, king Yayati was the celebrator of
sacrifices. And in the present age, thou it is that art performer there-
of. We have heard that the learned Vandin, after defeating (in contro-
vetsy) men expert in discussion, causeth them to be drowned by faithful
servants employed by thee. Hearing this, I have come before these
Brahmanas, to expound the doctrine of the unity of the Supreme Being.
Where is now Vandin? Tell me so that I may approach him, and des-
troy him, even as the sun destroyeth the stars.’ Thereupon the king said,
‘Thou hopest, O Brahmana, to defeat Vandin, not knowing his power
of speech. Can those who are familiar with his power, speak as thou
dost ? He hath been sounded by Brahmanas versed in the Vedas. Thou
hopest to defeat Vandin, only because thou knowest not his powers (of
speech). Many a Brahmana hath waned before him, even as the stars
before the sun. Desirous of defeating him, people proud of their learning,
have lost their glory on appearing before him, and have retired from
his presence, without even venturing to speak with the members of the
assembly.’ Ashtavakra said, ‘Vandin hath never entered into disputa-
tion with a man like myself, and it is for this only that he looketh upon
himself as a lion, and goeth about roaring like one. But to-day meeting
me he will lie down dead, even like a cart on the highway, of which the
wheels have been deranged.’ The king said, ‘He alone is a truly learned
man who understandeth the significance of the thing that hath thirty
divisions, twelve parts, twentyfour joints, and three hundred and sixty
spokes. Ashtavakra said, ‘May that ever-moving wheel that hath
twentyfour joints, six naves, twelve peripheries, and sixty spokes
protect thee !!’ The king said, ‘Who amongst the gods beareth those
two which go together like two mares (yoked to a car), and sweep like
a hawk, and to what also do they give birth?” Ashtavakra said, ‘May
God, O king, forfend the presence of these two? in thy house ; aye, even

1 This wheel is the wheel of Time—i.c., measured according to the
solar, lunar and astral revolutions, The importance of Ashtavakra’s reply
is this : May the meritorious deeds performed at proper times during the
revolution of this wheel of Time protect thee. 7

2 Thunder and lightning or misery and death.

=== PAGE 39 ===

VANA PARVA 285

in the house of thine enemies. He who appeareth, having for his chario-
teer the wind,’ begetteth them, and they also produce him.’ There-
upon the king said, ‘What is that doth not close its eyes even while
sleeping ; what is it that doth not move, even when born; what is it
that hath no heart ; and what doth increase even in its own speed?’
Ashtavakra said, ‘It is a fish* that doth not close its eye-lids, while sleep-
ing ; and it is an egg* that doth not move when produced ; it is stone*
that hath no heart; and it is a river® that increase in its own speed.’

“The king said, ‘It seemeth, O possessor of divine energy, that thou
art no human being. I consider thee not a boy, but a matured man;
there is no other man who can compare with thee in the art of speech.
I therefore give thee admittance. There is Vandin.’”

SECTION CXXXIV
(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

“Ashtavakra said, ‘O king, O leader of fierce legions, in this
assembly of monarchs of unrivalled power who have met together, I
am unable to find out Vandin, chief of the controversialists. But I am
searching for him, even as one doth for a swan ona vast expanse of
water. O Vandin, thou regardest thyself as the foremost of controver-
sialists. When thou wilt engage with me in staking, thou wilt not be able
to flow like the current of a river. I am like a full-flaming fire. Be silent
before me, O Vandin! Donot awakena sleeping tiger. Know that
thou shalt not escape unstung, after trampling on the head of a veno-
mous snake, licking the corners of its mouth with its tongue, and who
hath been hurt by thy foot. That weak man, who, in pride of strength,
attempts to strike a blow at a mountain, only gets his hands and nails
hurt, but no wound is left on the mountain itself. As the other mountains
are inferior to the Mainaka, and as calves are inferior to the ox, so are
all other kings of the earth inferior to the lord of Mithila. And as
Indra is the foremost of celestials, and as the Ganga is the best of rivers,
so thou alone art, O king, the greatest of monarchs. O king, cause
Vandin to be brought to my presence.’

“Lomasa said, ‘Saying this, O Yudhishthira, wroth with Vandin,
Ashtavakra thus thundered in the assembly, and addressed him in these
words, ‘Do thou answer my questions, and I shall answer thine.’ There-
at Vandin said, ‘One only fire blazeth forth in various shapes ; one
only sun illumineth this whole world ; one only hero, Indra, the lord of
celestials, destroyeth enemies ; and one only Yama is the sole lord of

1 Cloud or the mind. © 2 The male being that is ever conscious.
8 The mundane egg. 4 The soul that has renounced connection
5 The heart of a Yogi. with the body.

=== PAGE 40 ===

236 MAHABHARATA

the Pitr Ashtavakra said, ‘The two friends, Indra and Agni, ever
move together ; the two celestial sages are Narada and Parvata ; twins
are the Aswinikumaras ; two is the number of the wheels of a car;
and it is as a couple that husband and wife live together, as ordained by
the deity."? Vandin said, ‘Three kinds of born beings are produced by
acts ; the three Vedas together perform the sacrifice, Vajapeya; at three
different times, the Adhwaryus commence sacrificial rites ; three is
the number of words; and three also are the divine lights.*’ Ashtavakra
said, ‘Four are the Asramas of the Brahmanas ; the four orders perform
sacrifices ; four are the cardinal points; four is the number of letters ;
and four also, as is ever known, are the legs of a cow.” Vandin said,
‘Five is the number of fires; five are the feet of the metre called Punki;
five are the sacrifices ; five locks, it is said in the Vedas, are on the
heads of the Apsaras : and five sacred rivers are known in the world.”
Ashtavakra said, ‘Six cows, it is asserted by some, are paid asa gratu-
ity on the occasion of establishing the sacred fire ; six are the seasons
belonging to the wheel of time; six is the number of the senses ; six
stars constitute the constellation Kirtika ; and six, it is found in all the
Vedas, is the number of the Sadyaska sacrifice.’° Vandin said, ‘Seven is

1 Ashtavakra comes to Janaka's sacrifice with the object of proving the unity of the
Supreme Being. Vandin avails himself of various systems of Philosophy to combat his
opponent. He begins with the Buddhistic system. The form of the dialogue is unique in
literature being that of enigmas and th: latent meaning isin a queer way hid under
the appearance of puetile aud heterogeneous combinations of things.

Vandin opens the controversy by saying that as the number of each of these is one,
so one only intellect is the lord, leader and guide of the senses.

2 There isa Vedic revelation that two bird: live together on a tree as friends—
one of these eats the fruits and the other looks at the former.
that two are the lords, leaders and guides of the senses.

From this it is manifest
That there is a second faculty
besides the intellect is also proved by the fact that in sleep when the intellect is inactive
thit faculty continues in action, for if it were not so we could not remember having
slept, nor connect the state after awaking with that preceding sleep. Accordingly by
citing the number two Ashtavakra asserts that besides intellect there is another faculty
—consciousness that these two are jointly the lords, leaders and guides of the senses
and that they act together as Indra and Agni, &c.

3. Byciting the number three Vandin means to say that as it is Acts that produce
the three kinds of born beings, etc., so Acts are supreme ond that everything else
bz it intellect alone, or intellect and consciousness together is subservient to Acts,

4° Ashtavakra here advances the thesis that even if Acts be supreme still when the

(fourth) or Supreme Being becomes manifest to the soul, it stands inno further needs
to Acts.

5 By bringing in the quinquennial series, Vandin wishes to assert that the five senses
are competent to cognise their respective objects and that besides there senses and their

objects there is neither any other sense to perceive nor any other object of perception,
He also cites the authority of the Veda according to which the Apsaras (or conscicus-
ness) have five “locks” on their hands—i.e., five objects of perception.

6 Besides the five senses Ashtavakra contends for an additional sense n:
Mind and accordingly cites the number six. amely the

=== PAGE 41 ===

VANA PARVA 287

‘the number of the domesticated animals ; seven are the wild animals ;
seven metres are used in completing a sacrifice ; seven are the Rishis,
seven forms of paying homage are extant (in the world); and seven, it is
known, are the strings of the Vina."’ Ashtavakra said, ‘Eight are the
bags containing a hundred fold ; eight is the number of the legs of the
Sarabha, which preyeth upon lions; eight Vasus, as we hear, are amongst
the celestials ; and eight are the angles of yupa (stake), in all sacrificial
rites. Vandin said, ‘Nine is the number of the mantras used in
kindling the fire in sacrifices to the Pitris ; nine are the appointed func-
tions in the processes of creation ; nine letters compose the foot of the
metre, Vrihati; and nine also isever the number of the figures (in
calculation).* Ashtavakra said, ‘Ten is said to be the number of
cardinal points, entering into the cognition of men in this world; ten
times hundred make upa thousand; ten is the number of months,
during which women bear ; and ten are the teachers of true knowledge,
and ten, the haters thereof, and ten again are those capable of learning
it.” Vandin said, ‘Eleven are the objects enjoyable by beings ; eleven
is the number of the yupas ; eleven are the changes of the natural state
pertaining to those having life ; and eleven are the Rudras among the
gods in heaven.®’ Ashtavakra said, ‘Twelve months compose the year ;
twelve letters go to the composition of a foot of the metre called Jagati;
twelve are the minor sacrifices ; and twelve, according to the learned,
is the number of the Adityas.® Vandin said, ‘The thirteenth lunar day

1 Vandin admits the existence of the six senses but says that the
soul experiences happiness and misery through those as well as through the
intellect.

2 Ashtavakra advances an eighth element, namely, the knowledge of
the ego.

8 Each of the three qualities (existence, foulness and ignorance) of
prakriti (the passive or material cause of the world) mixing with each of
the three corresponding qualities of pradhana (the active or spiritual cause
of the world) in various proportions produces the mundano order of things.
‘Thus is proved the eternity of prakriti or nature and is also established the
doctrine of duality.

4 Prakriti does not really croate. It is the Supreme Being who
through the medium of illusion in contract with the ¢en organs (viz., the five
locomotive organs and the five organs of sense) makes manifest the system
of things. Prakriti therefore has no real existence—her existence is only
apparent in the real existence of the soul.

5 Yupas (stakes) mean here, feelings, etc. which keep men bound to
the world. Rudras are those who make others cry.

Vandin means to say that the soul is not essentially free from the
fetters of happiness and misery arising from the eleven objects of perception.
In this world all men are subject to happiness and misery. We also hear
that there are Rudras in heaven.

6 The supreme soul unaffected by happiness and misery really exists—
but His existence is not susceptible of being proved—nor can the ignorant

=== PAGE 42 ===

288 MAHABHARATA

is considered the most auspicious; thirteen islands exist on earth.”
Lomasa said, ‘Having proceeded thus far, Vandin stopped. There-
upon Ashtavakra supplied the latter half of the sloka, Ashtavakra said,
‘Thirteen sacrifices are presided over by Kesi; and thirteen are
devoured by Atichhandas, (the longer metres) of the Veda.* And seeing
Ashtavakra speaking and the Suta’s son silent, and pensive, and with
head downcast, the assembly broke into a long uproar. And when the
tumult thus arose in the splendid sacrifice performed by king Janaka,
the Brahmanas well pleased, and with joined hands, approached Ashta-
vakra, and began to pay him homage.” .
“Thereupon Ashtavakra said, ‘Before this, this man, defeating the
Brahmanas in controversy, used to cast them into water. Let Vandin
to-day meet with the same fate. Seize him and drown him in water.’
Vandin said, ‘O Janaka, Iam the son of king Varuna. Simultaneously
with thy sacrifice, there also hath commenced a sacrifice extending over
twelve years. It is for this that I have despatched the principal
Brahmanas thither. They have gone to witness Varuna’s sacrifice. Lo !
there they are returning. I pay homage to the worshipful Ashtavakra,
by whose grace to-day I shall join him who hath begot me.’
“Ashtavakra said, ‘Defeating the Brahmanas either by words or
subtlety, Vandin had cast them into the waters of the sea. (That Vedic
truth which he had suppressed by false arguments), have I to-day
rescued by dint of my intellect. Now let candid men judge. As Agni,
who knoweth the character of both the good and the bad, leaveth
unscorched by his heat the bodies of those whose designs are honest,
and is thus partial to them, so good men judge the assertions of boys,
although lacking the power of speech, and are favourably disposed towards

ever perceive Him. Men attain that condition through these twelve, viz.,
virtue, true, self-restraint, penances, good-will, modesty, forgiveness, exemp-
tion from envy, sacrifice, charity, concentration and control over the senses.

1 According to some, endeavours to attain emancipation can be
successful not in this world but in the world of Brahma. Cthers say that
to that end a special yoga is necessary. By bringing forward the objects
numbering thirteen. Vandin advances the opinion that, virtue, efc., are not
suflicient for purposes of emancipation but that suitable time and place are
also essential.

2 Ashtavakra concludes by citing the same number thirteen. The soul
which is essentially unaffected, becomes subject to happiness and misery
through the thirteen, viz. the ten organs of locomotion and sense, and
intellect, mind and egoism But Atichhanadas, é.e., those that have surmount-
ed ignorance, namely, the twelve, virtue, &c, dostroy those thirteen and that
is emancipation.

=== PAGE 43 ===

VANA PARVA 289

them. O Janaka, thou hearest my words as if thou hast been stupefied
in consequence of having eaten the fruit of the Sleshmataki tree. Or
flattery hath robbed thee of thy sense, and for this it is that although
pierced by my words as an elephant (by the hook), thou hearest them
not.’

“Janaka said, ‘Listening to thy words, I take them to be
excellent and superhuman. Thy form alsostandeth manifest as super-
human. As thou hast to-day defeated Vandin in discussion, I place
even him at thy disposal.’ Ashtavakra said, ‘O king, Vandin remaining
alive, will not serve any purpose of mine. If his father be really
Varuna, let him be drowned in the sea.’ Vandin said, ‘I am King
Varuna’s son. I have no fear (therefore) in being drowned. Even at
this moment, Ashtavakra shall see his long-lost sire, Kahoda.’

“Lomasa said, ‘Then rose before Janaka all the Brahmanas, after
having been duly worshipped by the magnanimous Varuna. Kahoda
said, ‘It is for this, O Janaka, that men pray for sons, by performing
meritorious acts. That in which I had failed hath been achieved by my
son. Weak persons may have sons endued with strength; dunces may
have intelligent sons; and the illiterate may have sons possessed of
learning. Vandin said, ‘It is with thy sharpened axe, O monarch, that
even Yama severeth the heads of foes. May prosperity attend thee ! In
this sacrifice of king Janaka, the principal hymns relating to the Uktha
rites are being chanted, and the Soma juice also is being adequately
quaffed. And the gods themselves, in person, and with cheerful hearts,
are accepting their sacred shares.’

“Lomasa said, ‘When in enhanced splendour, the Brahmanas had
risen up, Vandin, taking king Janaka’s permission, entered into the
waters of the sea. And then Ashtavakra worshipped his father, and he
himself also was worshipped by the Brahmanas. And having thus de-
feated the Suta’s son,' Ashtavakra returned to his own excellent her-
mitage, in company with his uncle. Then in the presence of his mother,
his father addressed him, saying, ‘(O son), thou speedily enter into this
river, Samanga.’ And accordingly, he entered (into the water). (And
as he plunged beneath the water), all his (crooked) limbs were imme-
diately made straight. And from that day that river came to be called
Samanga and she became invested with the virtues of purifying (sins).

He that shall bathe in her, will be freed from his sins. Therefore, O
Yudhishthira, do thou with thy brothers and wife descend to the river,
and perform thy ablutions. O Kunti's son, O scion of the Ajamidha race,
living happily and cheerfully at this place together with thy brothers
and the Brahmanas, thou wilt perform with me other acts of merit,
being intent upon good deeds.’ ”

1 Su means. excellent, and uta, sacrifice, The compound accordingly
means,—performer of excel lent sacrifice.

6

=== PAGE 44 ===

SECTION CXXXV

(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

“Lomasa said, ‘Here, O king, is visible the river Samanga, whose
former name was Madhuvila, and yonder is the spot named Kardamila,
the bathing place of Bharata. The lord of Sachi, when fallen into misery
in consequence of having slain Vritra, became freed from his sin, by
performing his ablutions in this Samanga. Here, O bull among men, is
the spot where the Mainaka mountain hath sunk into the interior of the
earth: and it is hence called Vinasana. For obtaining sons, here Aditi
in days of yore had cooked that celebrated food, (presided over by the
Supreme Being). O ye bulls among men, ascend this lofty mountain and
put an end to your inglorious misery unworthy to be uttered. Here, O
king, before thee is the Kanakhala range, the favourite resort of sages.
And yonder is the mighty river Ganga. Here, in ancient times, the
holy sage Sanatkumara attained ascetic success. O scionof the Ajamidha
race, by performing thy ablutions here in this river, thou wilt be freed
from all thy sins. O son of Kunti, do thou together with thy ministers,
touch (the waters) of this lake called Punya, and this mountain Bhrigu-
tunga and also (the water of) these two rivers, called Tushniganga.
Here, O Kunti's son, appeareth the hermitage of the sage Sthulasiras.
Resign here thy anger and sense of self-importance. There, O son of
Pandu, is seen the beautiful hermitage of Raivya, where perished Bhara-
dwaja’s son, Yavakri, profound in Vedic lore.’ ”

“Yudhishthira said, ‘How did the mighty sage, Yavakri, son of the
ascetic Bharadwaja, acquire profoundity in the Vedas? And how also
did he perish ?_ I am anxious to hear all this, just as it happened. I take
delight in listening to the narration of the deeds of god-like men.’ ”

“Lomasa said, ‘Bharadwaja and Raivya were two friends. And they
dwelt here, ever taking the greatest pleasure in each other's company.
Now, Raivya had two sons, named Arvavasu and Paravasu. And,
Bharadwaja, O Bharata’sson, had an only son, named Yavakri. Raivyaand
his two sons were versed inthe Vedas, while Bharadwaja practised
asceticism. But, O son of Bharata, from their boyhood, the friendship
subsisting between those two was unequalled. O sinless one, the high-
spirited Yavakri finding that his father, who practised asceticism, was
slighted by the Brahmanas, while Raivya with his sons was greatly res-
pected by them, was overwhelmed with sorrow, and became sore aggriev-
ed. Thereupon, O son of Pandu, he entered upon severe austerities,
for (obtaining) a knowledge of the Vedas. And he exposed his body to
a flaming fire. By thus practising the most rigid austerities, he caused
anxiety in the mind of Indra. Then Indra, O Yudhishthira, went to him

=== PAGE 45 ===

\
t
i

VANA PARVA 291

and addressed him saying, ‘Wherefore, O sage, hast thou become engag-
ed in practising such rigid austerities ?’ Yavakri said, ‘O thou adored of
celestial hosts, I am practising severe penances, because I wish that such
a knowledge of the Vedas as hath never been acquired by any Brahmana
whatever, may be manifest unto me. O conqueror of Paka, these
endeavours of mine have been for Vedic lore. O Kausika, by the force
of my asceticism, I purpose to obtain all sorts of knowledge. O lord, a
knowledge of the Vedas as learnt through teachers, is acquired in a long
time. Therefore, (with the view of attaining in short time a profi-
ciency in the Vedas), I have put forth these high endeavours.’ Indra
said, ‘O Brahmana sage, the way that thou hast adopted is not the pro-
per way. What for, O Brahmana, wilt thou destroy thyself? Go and
learn from the lips of a preceptor.’

“Lomasa said, ‘O son of Bharata, having said this, Sakra went
away, and Yavakri of immeasurable energy, once more directed his
attention to asceticism. O king, we have heard that carrying on severe
austerities he again greatly agitated Indra. And the god Indra, slayer
of Vala, again came unto that great sage, who was engaged in austere
penances ; and forbade him, saying, ‘Thou art striving with the object
that Vedic lore may be manifest unto thee as well as unto thy father ;
but thy exertions can never be successful, nor is this act of thine well-
advised’ Yavakri said, ‘O lord of the celestials, if thou wilt not do for
me what I want, I shall, observing stricter vows, practise still severer
penances. O lord of celestials! know that if thou do not fulfil all my
desires, I shall then cut off my limbs and offer them as a sacrifice into a
blazing fire.”

“Lomasa said, ‘Knowing the determination of that high-souled
sage, the sagacious Indra reflected and hit upon some expedient to dis-
suade him. Then Indra assumed the guise of an ascetic Brabmana,
hundreds of years old, and infirm, and suffering from consumption. And
he fell to throwing up a dam with sands, at that spot of the Bhagirathi
to which Yavakri used to descend for performing ablutions. Because
Yavakri, chief of the Brahmanas, paid no heed to Indra’s words, the
latter began to fillthe Ganga with sands. And without cessation, he
threw handfuls of sand into the Bhagirathi, and began to construct the
dam attracting the notice of the sage. And when that bull among the
sages, Yavakri, saw Indra thus earnestly engaged in constructing the
dam, he broke into laughter, and said the following words, ‘What art
thou engaged in, O Brahmana, and what is thy object? Why dost
thou, for nothing, make this mighty endeavour ?’ Indra said, ‘I am try-
ing, O my son, to dam the Ganga so that there may bea commodious
passage. People experience considerable difficulty in crossing and
recrossing (the river) by boat.’ Yavakri said, ‘O thou of ascetic wealth,

=== PAGE 46 ===

292 MAHABHARATA

thou canst not dam up this mighty current. O Brahmana, desist from,
what is impracticable, and take up something that is practicable.’ Indra
said, ‘O sage, I have imposed on myself this heavy task, even as, for
obtaining a knowledge of the Vedas, thou hast begun these penances,
which can never be fruitful.’ Yavakri said, ‘If, O chief of the celestials,
those efforts of mine be fruitless, even as those of thy own, then, O lord
of heavenly hosts, be thou pleased to do for me what is practicable.
Vouchsafe unto me boons whereby I may excel other men.’

“Lomasa said, ‘Then Indra granted boons, as was prayed for by the
mighty ascetic. Indra said, ‘As thou desirest, the Vedas will be mani-
fest unto thee, yea—even unto thy father. And all thy other desires
will also be fulfilled. Return home, O Yavakri.

“Having thus obtained the object of his desire, Yavakri came
unto his father and said, “The Vedas, O father, will be manifest unto thee
as well as unto myself and I have obtained boons whereby we shall excel
all men.’ Thereat Bharadwaja said, ‘O my son, as thou hast obtained the
objects of thy desire, thou wilt be proud. And when thou art puffed up
with pride and hast also become uncharitable, destruction will soon over-
take thee. O my son, there is a current anecdote narrated by the gods.
In ancient times, O son, there lived a sage named Valadhi, possessed of
great energy. And in grief for the death ofa child, he practised the
severest penances to havea child that should be immortal. And he
obtained a son even as he desired. But the gods, though very favourably
disposed (towards him), did not yet make his son immortal like unto the
gods. They said, ‘On condition cana mortal being be made immortal.
Thy son's life, however, shall depend on some instrumental cause.’
Thereupon, Valadhi said, ‘O chiefs of the celestials, these mountains
have been existing eternally, and indestructible, let them be the
instrumental cause of my son’s life. Afterwards a son was born to the
sage, named Medhavi. And he was ofa very irritable temper. And
hearing of (the incident of his birth), he grew haughty, and began to
insult the sages. And he ranged over the earth, doing mischief to the
munis. And one day, meeting with the learned sage Dhannushaksha
endued with energy, Medhavi maltreated him. Thereupon, the former
cursed him, saying, ‘Be thou reduced to ashes.’ Medhavi, however, was
not reduced to ashes. Then Dhannushaksha caused the mountain which
was the instrumental cause of Medhavi's life, to be shattered by buffa-
loes. And the boy perished, with the destruction of the instrumental
cause of his life. And embracing his dead son, Medhavi's father began to
bewail his fate. Now hear from me, O my son, what was chanted by
the sages conversant with the Vedas, when they found the sage
mourning. A mortal on no condition whatever can overcome what hath been
ordained by Fate, Lo! Dhannushaksha succeeded in shattering even the

=== PAGE 47 ===

VANA PARVA 293

mountain by buffaloes. Thus young ascetics, puffed up with pride for
having obtained boons, perish ina short time. Be thou not one of
them. This Raivya, O my son, is possessed of great energy, and his two
sons are like him. Therefore, be thou vigilant—so as never to approach
him. O my son, Raivya is a great ascetic of an irritable temper. When
angry, he can do thee harm. Yavakri said, ‘I shall do as thou biddest
me. O father, do thou not by any means entertain anxiety for that.
Raivya deserveth my regard even as thou, my father.’ Having replied
unto his father in these sweet words, Yavakri, fearing nothing and no-
body, began to delight in wantonly offending other munis.”

SECTION CXXXVI

(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

“Lomasa said, ‘One day in the month of Chaitra, while fearlessly
wandering at large, Yavakri approached the hermitage of Raivya. And
O son of Bharata, in that beautiful hermitage, adorned with trees bear-
ing blossoms, he happened to behold the daughter-in-law of Raivya,
sauntering about like a Kinnara woman. And having lost his senses
through passion, Yavakri shamelessly spake unto the bashful maiden,
saying, ‘Be thou attached unto me.’ Thereupon, knowing his nature, and
afraid of a curse, as well as thinking of Raivya’s power, she went unto
him saying, ‘I agree.’ Then, O son of Bharata, taking him in private,
she kept him chained. O conqueror of foes, returning to his hermitage,
Raivya found his daughter-in-law, Paravasu's wife, in tears. O Yudhish-
thira, thereat consoling her with soft words, he enquired of her as to
the cause of her grief. Thereupon, the beautiful damsel told him all
that Yavakri had said unto her, and what she also had cleverly said unto
him. Hearing of this gross misbehaviour of Yavakri, the mind of the
sage flamed up, and he waxed exceedingly wroth. And being thus seized
with passion, the great sage of a highly irascible temper, tore off a matted
lock of his hair, and with holy mantras offered it asa sacrifice on the
sacred fire. At this, there sprang out of it a female exactly resembling
his daughter-in-law. And then he plucked another matted lock of his
hait, and again offered it as a sacrifice into the fire. Thereupon sprang out
of it a demon, terrible to behold, and having fierce eyes. Then those two
spake unto Raivya, saying, ‘What shall we do? Thereat, the angry
sage said unto them, ‘Go and kill Yavakri.’ Then saying, ‘We shall do
(as thou biddest)'—they two went away with the intention of slaying
Yavakri. And with her charms, the female whom the large-hearted
sage had created, robbed Yavakri of his sacred water-pot. Then with
his uplifted spear the demon flew at Yavakri, when he had been depriv-
ed of his water-pot and rendered unclean. And seeing the demon

=== PAGE 48 ===

294 MAHABHARATA

approach with uplifted spear for the purpose of slaying him, Yavakri
rose up all ona sudden and fled towards a tank. But finding it devoid
of water, he hurried towards all the rivers. But they too were all dried
up. And being obstructed again and again by the fierce demon, holding
the spear, Yavakri in fright attempted to enter into the Agnihotra room
of his father. But there, O king, he was repulsed bya blind Sudra
warder, and he remained at the door, grasped by the man. And, finding
Yavakri thus grasped by the Sudra, the demon hurled his spear at him,
and thereupon he fell down dead, pierced in the heart. After slaying
Yavakri, the demon went back to Raivya, and with the permission of
that sage, began to live with the female.”

SECTION CXXXVII

(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

“Lomasa said, ‘O son of Kunti, Bharadwaja returned to his hermi-
tage after performing the ritual duties of the day, and having collected
the sacrificial fuel. And because his son had been slain, the sacrificial
fires which used to welcome him everyday, did not on that day come
forward to welcome him. And marking this change in the Agnihotra,
the great sage asked the blind Sudra warder seated there, saying, ‘Why
is it, O Sudra, that the fires rejoice not at sight of me? Thou too dost
not rejoice as is thy wont. Is it all well with my hermitage? I hope that
my son of little sense had not gone to the sage Raivya. Answer speedily,
O Sudra, all these questions of mine. My mind misgiveth me. The
Sudra said, ‘Thy son of little sense had gone to the sage Raivya, and
therefore it is that he lieth prostrate (on the ground), having been slain
by a powerful demon. Being attacked by the Rakshasa, holding a spear,
he attempted to force his way into this room, andI therefore barred
his way with my arms. Then desirous of having water in an unclean
state, as he stood hopeless, he was slain by the vehement Rakshasa,
carrying a spear in his hand. On hearing from the Sudra of this great
calamity, Bharadwaja, sorely afflicted with grief, began to lament,
embracing his dead son. And he said, ‘O my son, it is for the good of
the Brahmanas that thou didst practise penances, with the intention
that the Vedas unstudied by any Brahmana whatever might be manifest
unto thee. Thy behaviour towards the Brahmanas had always been for
their good, and thou hadst also been innocent in regard to all creatures,
But, alas! (at last) thou didst lapse into rudeness. I had prohibited
thee, O my son, from visiting the residence of Raivya; but alas! to
that very hermitage, (destructive to thee) as the god of death himself,
Yama, didst thou repair. Evil-minded is that man, who, knowing that
Iam anold man, and also that (Yavakri) was my only son, had given

=== PAGE 49 ===

VANA PARVA 295

way to wrath. It is through the agency of Raivya that I have sustained
the loss of my child. Without thee, O my son, I shall give up my life,
the most precious thing in the world. In grief for the death of my son,
Trenounce my life; but this I say that Raivya’s eldest son shall in a
short time kill him although he be innocent. Blessed are those to whom
children have never been born, for they lead a happy life, without
having to experience the grief (incident to the death of a child). Who
in this world can be more wicked than those who from affliction, and
doprived of their sense by sorrow consequent upon the death of a child,
curse even their dearest friends! I found my son dead, and, therefore,
have cursed my dearest friend. Ah! what second man can there be in
this world, destined to suffer so grievous a misfortune Having
lamented long Bharadwaja cremated his son and then himself entered
into a full-blazing fire,’ ”

SECTION CXXXVIII

(Tirtha-yalra Parva continued)

“Lomasa said, ‘At that very time, the mighty king, Vrihadyumna,
of high fortune, who was the Yajamana of Raivya, commenced a sacri-
fice. And the two sons of Raivya, Arvavasuand Paravasu, were engag-
ed by that intelligent monarch, to assist him in the performance of the
ceremony. And, O son of Kunti, taking the permission of their father,
they two went to the sacrifice, while Raivya with Paravasu's wife
remained in the hermitage. And it came to pass that one day, desirous
of seeing his wife, Paravasu returned home alone. And he met his
father in the wood, wrapped in the skin of a black antelope. And the
night was far advanced and dark ; and Paravasu, blinded by drowsiness
in that deep wood, mistook his father for a straggling deer. And mis-
taking him for a deer, Paravasu, for the sake of personal safety, uninten-
tionally killed his father. Then, O son of Bharata, after performing the
funeral rites (of his father), he returned to the sacrifice and there ad-
dressed his brother saying, “Thou wilt never be able to perform this task
unassisted. I again, have killed our father, mistaking him for a deer,
O brother, for me do thou observe a vow, prescribed in the case of
killing a Brahmana. O Muni, I shall be able to perform this work
(sacrifice), without any assistant.’ Arvavasu said, ‘Do thou then thyself
officiate at this sacrifice of the gifted Vrihadyumna ; and for thee will
I, bringing my senses udner perfect control, observe the vow prescribed
in the case of slaying a Brahmana.’

“Lomasa said, ‘Having observed the vow relative to the killing of
a Brahmana, the sage Arvavasu came back to the sacrifice, Seeing his
brother arrive, Paravasu, in accents choked with malice, addressed

=== PAGE 50 ===

296 MAHABHARATA

Vrihadyumna, saying, ‘O king, see that this slayer of a Brahmana enter
not into thy sacrifice, nor look at it. Even by a glance, the killer of a
Brahmana can, without doubt, do thee harm.’ O lord of men, imme-
diately on hearing this, the king ordered his attendants (to turn out
Arvavasu). O king, on being driven out by the king’s attendants, and
repeatedly addressed by them—‘0 slayer of a Brahmana'—Arvavasu more
than once cried, ‘It is not I that have killed a Brahmana. Not did he
own that he had observed the vow for his own sake. He said that his
brother had committed the sin, and that he had freed him therefrom.’
Having said this in anger, and being reprimanded by the attendants, the
Brahmana sage of austere penances, retired in silence into the woods.
There betaking himself to the severest penances, the great Brahmana
sought the protection of the Sun. Thereupon, the revelation teaching
the mantra relative to the worship of the Sun, became manifest unto
him and that eternal deity who obtaineth his share (of the sacrificial
butter) first, appeared before him in an embodied form.

“Lomasa said, ‘The celestials, O king, were well pleased with
Arvavasu for his acts. And they made him engaged as the chief priest
in the sacrifice (of Vrihadyumna), and Paravasu to be dismissed from
it. Then Agni and the other celestials (of their own accord) bestowed
boons on Arvavasu. And they also prayed that his father might be
restored to life. He further prayed that his brother might be absolved
from his sin; that his father might have no recollection of his having
been slain; that Bharadwaja and Yavakri might both be restored to
life; and that the solar revelation might attain celebrity (on earth).
Then the god said, ‘So be it, and conferred on him other boons also.
Thereat, O Yudhishthira, all of these persons regained their life.
Yavakri now addressed Agni and the other deities, saying, ‘I had
obtained a knowledge of all the Vedas, and also practised penances.
How came it then, O chiefs of the immortals, that Raivya succeeded
in killing me in that way ? Thereupon the gods said, ‘O Yavakri,
never act again as those have done. What thou askest about is quite
possible, for thou hast learnt the Vedas without exertion, and without
the help of a preceptor. But this man (Raivya) bearing various troubles,
had satisfied his preceptor by his conduct, and obtained (from the
latter) the excellent Vedas through great exertions and in a long time.’

“Lomasa said, ‘Having said this to Yavakri, and restored all those
to life, the celestials with Indra at their head, ascended to heaven. Here,
O Yudhishthira, is the sacred hermitage of that sage embellished with
trees bearing blossoms and fruits at all seasons, O tiger among kings,
dwelling at this spot, thou wilt be delivered from all thy sins.’ ”

=== PAGE 51 ===

SECTION CXXxIX
(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)
g “Tomasa said, ‘O descendant of Bharata, O king, now hast thou
“deft behind the mountains Usiravija, Mainaka and Sweta, as well as the
2 ‘Kala hills, O son of Kunti, O bull among the descendants of Bharata,
here flow before thee the seven Gangas. This spot is pure and holy.
Here Agni blazeth forth without intermission. No son of Manuisable to
obtain asight of this wonder. Therefore, O son of Pandu, concentrate
your mind in order that he may intently behold these tirthas. Now
wilt thou see the play-ground of the gods, marked with their footprints,
as we have passed the mountain Kala. We shall now ascend that
white rock—the mountain Mandara, inhabited by the Yakshas,
Manibhadra and Kuvera, king of the Yakshas. O king, at this place
eighty thousand fleet Gandharvas, and four times as many Kimpurushas
and Yakshas of various shapes and forms, holding various weapons,
attend upon Manibhadra, king of the Yakshas. In these regions their
power is very great. And in speed they are even asthe wind. They can,
without doubt, displace even the lord of the celestials from his seat.
Protected by them, and also watched over by the Rakshasas, these
mountains have been rendered inaccessible. Therefore, O son of Pritha,
do thou concentrate thy thoughts. Besides these, O son of Kunti, here
are fierce ministers of Kuvera and his Rakshasa kindred. We shall have
to. meet them, and, therefore, O Kunti’s son, gather up thy energies.
O king, the. mountain Kailasa is six yofanas in height. It contains a
gigantic jujube tree. And, O son of Kunti, numberless gods and
Yakshas and Rakshasas and Kinnaras and Nagas and Suparnas and
Gandharvas..pass this way, in going towards Kuvera’s palace. O king,
protected by me, as well as by the might of Bhimasena, and also in
“virtue of thy own asceticism and self-command, do thou to-day mix
with them. May king Varuna and Yama, conqueror of battles, and
Ganga, and Yamuna, and this mountain, and the Maruts and the twin
Aswins, and all rivers and lakes, vouchsafe thy safety. And, O efful-
gent one, mayst thou have safety from all the celestials and the Asuras,
and the Vasus. .O Goddess Ganga, I hear thy roar from this golden
_mountain, sacred to Indra. O Goddess of high fortune, in these
| mountainous regions, protect the king, worshipped by all of the
Ajamidha race. O daughter of the mountain (Himalaya), this king is
| about to enter into these mountainous regions. Do thou, therefore,
confer protection upon him.’
“Having thus addressed the river, Lomasa bade Yudhishthira,
| saying, “Be thou careful.’ ”
“Yudhishthira said, ‘This confusion of Lomasa is unprecedented,

7

=== PAGE 52 ===

298 MAHABHARATA

Therefore, protect ye Krishna, and be not careless. Lomasa knows
this place to be certainly difficult of access. Therefore, do ye practise
here the utmost cleanliness.’ ”

“Vaisampayana said, “He next addressed his brother Bhima of
vast prowess, saying, ‘O Bhimasena, do thou protect Krishna carefully.
Whether Arjuna be near or away, Krishn@ in times of danger ever
seeketh protection from thee alone.’ ” ‘

“Then the high-souled monarch approached the twins, Nakula
and Sahadeva, and after smelling their heads, and rubbing their persons,
with tears said unto them, ‘Do not fear. Proceed, however, with
caution.’ ”

SECTION CXL
(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

“Yudhishthira said, ‘O Vrikodara, there are mighty and powerful
invisible spirits at this place. We shall, however, pass it, through the
merit of our asceticism and Agnihotra sacrifices. O-son of Kunti, do
thou therefore, restrain thy hunger and thirst by collecting thy ener-
gies, and also, O Vrikodara, have recourse to thy strength and clever-
ness. O Kunti's son, thou hast heard what the sage (Lomasa) had said
regarding mount Kailasa. Ascertain, therefore, after deliberation,
how Krishn&-will pass the spot. Or, O mighty Bhima of large eyes, do
return from hence, taking with thee Sahadeva, and all our charioteers,
cooks, servants, cars, horses, and Brahmanas worn out with travel,
while I together with Nakula and the sage Lomasa of sev ére austerities
proceed, subsisting on the -lightest fare and observing vows. Do thou
in expectation of my return, cautiously wait at the ‘source’ of the
Ganga, protecting Draupadi till I come back.’

“Bhima replied, ‘O descendant of Bharata, although this blessed
princess hath been sore afflicted by toil and distress, yet she easily’ pro-
ceedeth, in the hope of beholding him of the white steeds (Arjuna).
Thy dejection also is already very great at not seeing the high-souled
Arjuna, who never retreateth from fight. O Bharata, it is superfluous
then to say that if thou seest neither myself nor Sahadeva nor Krishna,
thy dejection will certainly increase. The Brahmanas had better
return with our servants, charioteers, cooks and whomsoever else thou
mayst command. I never shall leave thee in these rugged and in-
accessible mountainous regions, infested by Rakshasas. And, O tiger
among men, also this princess of high fortune, ever devoted to her
lords, desireth not to return without thee. Sahadeva is always devo-
ted to thee: he too will never retrace his steps. His disposition isknown
tome. O king, O mighty monarch, we are all eager to behold Savya-

=== PAGE 53 ===

VANA. PARVA 299

sachin, and therefore, will we all go together. If we are unable to go
‘over.this mountain in our:cars, abounding as it doth in defiles, well, we
“would go on foot. Trouble thyself not, O king, I shall carry Panchala’s
daughter wherever she will be incapable of walking. O king, I have
decided upon this. Therefore let not thy mind be distracted. I shall
also carry over inaccessible tracts those tender-bodied heroes, the twins,
the delight of their mother, wherever they will be incapable of
proceeding.’

“Yudhishthira said, ‘May thy strength increase, O Bhima, as thou
speakest thus, and as thou boldly undertakest to carry the illustrious
Panchali.and these twins. Blessed be thou ! Such courage dwelleth not
in;any other individual. May thy strength, fame, merit, and reputa-
tion increase! O long-armed one, as thou offerest to carry Krishn&
and our: brothers the twins, exhaustion and defeat never be thine

Vaisampayana said, “Then the charming Krishna said with a
smile, ‘O descendant of Bharata, I shall be able to go, and, therefore,
be.thou not anxious on my account.’

“Lomasa. said, ‘Access to the mountain, Gandhamadana, is only
to be. obtained by dint of asceticism. Therefore, O son of Kunti,
shall we. all practise austerities, O king, Nakula, Sahadeva, Bhimasena, *
thou. and myself, shall then see him of the white steeds,O Kunti’s
son.

Vaisampayana said, “O king, thus conversing. together, they saw
with -delight the. extensive domains of Suvahu, situated on the Hima-
Jayas abounding in horses and elephants, densely inhabited by the Kiratas
and the Tanganas, crowded by hundreds of Pulindas, frequented by the
celestials, and rife with wonders. King Suvahu, the lord of the Pulin-
das; cheerfully received them at the frontiers of his dominions, pay-
ing them proper respect. Having been thus received with honour, and
having-dwelt comfortably.at this place, they started for the mountain
Himalaya, when the sun shone brightly in: the firmament. And, O
king, having entrusted to the care of the lord of the Pulindas, all their
servants—Indrasena and ‘the others—and the cooks and the stewards,
and Draupadi's accoutrements, and every thing else, those mighty
charioteers, the son of the Kurus, endued with great prowess, set out
from that country, and began to proceed cautiously with Krishna,—all
of.them cheerful in the expectation of beholding Arjuna.”

“Yudhishthira said, ‘O Bhimasena, O Panchali, and ye. twins,
hearken, unto my words. The acts done ( by a person) in a former
birth-do.not perish, (without producing their effects). Behold! Even
‘we have become rangefs of the wilderness. Even to see Dhananjaya,
exhausted and distressed as we are, we have to bear each other, and
pass-through impassable places, This burneth me even.as fire doth

=== PAGE 54 ===

200 MAHABHARATA

a heap of cotton. O hero, I do not see Dhananjaya at my side. I
reside in the wood with my younger brothers, anxious for beholding
him. This thought, as also the memory of that grave insult offered to
Yajnaseni, consumes me. O Vrikodara, I donot see the invincible Partha
of strong bow and imcomparable energy, and who is the immediate
elder to Nakula. For this, O Vrikodara,I am miserable. In order to
see that hero, Dhananjaya, firm in promise, for these five years have I
been wandering in various tirthas, and beautiful forests and lakes
and yet I do not meet with him. For this, O Vrikodara, I am miserable.
I do not see the long-armed Gudakesa, of dark blue hue, and leonine
gait. For this, O Vrikodara,I am miserable. Ido not see that fore-
most of Kurus, accomplished in arms, skilful in fight, and matchless
among bowmen. For this, O Vrikodara, I am miserable. Distressed
forIam I do notsee that son of Pritha, Dhananjaya, born under the
influence of the star Phalguni; ranging amidst foes even like Yama
at the time of the universal dissolution ; possessed of the prowess of
an elephant with the temporal juice trickling down; endued with
leonine shoulders ; not inferior to Sakra himself in prowess and energy ;
elder in years to the twins; of white steeds; unrivalled in heroism ;
invincible ; and wielding a strong bow. For this, O Vrikodara, I am
miserable. And he is always of a forgiving temper—even when
insulted by the meanest individual. And he conferreth benefit and
protection to the righteous ; but to that tortuous person who by craft
attempts to do him mischief, Dhananjaya is like unto’ virulent poison,
albeit that one were Sakra himself. And the mighty. Vibhatsu of im-
measurable soul and possessing great strength, showeth mercy and exten-
deth protection even to a foe when fallen. And he is the refuge of us
all, and he crusheth his foes in fight. And he hath the power to collect
any treasure whatever, and he ministereth unto our happiness. It was
through his prowess that I had owned formerly measureless precious
jewels of various kinds which at present Suyodhana hath usurped. It was
by his might, O hero, that I had possessed before that palatial amphi-
theatre embellished with all manner of jewels, and celebrated through-
out the three worlds. O Pandu’s son, in prowess, Phalguni is like unto
Vasudeva, and in fight he is invincible and unrivalled, even like unto
Kartavirya. Alas! I see him not, O Bhima. In might, that con-
queror of foes goeth in the wake of the invincible and most powerful
Sankarshana (Valarama) and Vasudeva. In strength of arms, and
spirit, he is like unto Purandara himself. And in swiftness, he is even
as the wind, and in grace, as the moon, and in ire, he is the eternal
Death himself. O mighty-armed one, with the object of beholding
that war-like tiger among men, shall we repair to the Gandhamadana
mountain, where lies the hermitage of Nara and Narayana at the site of

=== PAGE 55 ===

VANA PARVA 301

the celebrated jujube tree, and which is inhabited by the Yakshas. We
shall see that best of mountains. And, practising severe austerities
only on foot we shall go to Kuvera’s beautiful lake guarded by
Rakshasas. That place cannot be reached by vehicles, O Vrikodara.
Neither can cruel, or avaricious, or irascible people attain to that spot,
O Bharata’s son. O Bhima, in order to see Arjuna, thither shall we
repair, in company with Brahmanas of strict vows, girding on our
swords, and wielding our bows. Those only that are impure, meet with
flies, gad-flies, mosquitoes, tigers, lions, and reptiles, but the pure
never come across them. Therefore, regulating our fare, and restrain-
ing our senses, we shall go to the Gandhamadana, desirous of seeing
Dhananjaya.’ ”

SECTION CXLI
(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

“Lomasa said, ‘O sons of Pandu, ye have seen many a mountain,
and river and town and forest and beautiful tirtha ; and have touched
with your hands the sacred waters. Now this way leads to the celestial
mountain Mandara; therefore be ye attentive and composed. Ye
will now repair to the residence of the celestials and the divine sages
of meritorious deeds. Here, O king, flowsthe mighty and beautiful river
(Alakananda) of holy water adored by hosts of celestials and sages, and
tracing its source to (the site of) the jujube tree. It is frequented and
worshipped by high-souled Vaihayasas, Valakhilyas and Gandharvas of
mighty souls. Accustomed to sing the Sama hymns, the sages, Marichi,
Pulaha, Bhrigu and Angiras, chanted them at this spot. Here the lord
of celestials performeth with the Maruts his daily prayers. And the
Sadhyas and the Aswins attend on him. The sun, the moon and all
the luminaries with the planets resort to this river, alternately by day
and by night. O highly fortunate monarch, that protector of the world;

. Mahadeva, having a bull for his mark, received on his head the fall of
the waters of this river, at the source of the Ganga. O children,
approach this goddess of the six attributes and bow down before her
with concentrated minds.’

“Hearing the words of the high-souled Lomasa, the son of Pandu
reverentially worshipped the river (Ganga), flowing through the firma-
ment. And after having adored her the pious sons of Pandu resumed
their journey accompanied by the sages. ;And it came to pass that
those best of men beheld at a distance some white object of vast propor-
tions, even like Meru and stretching on all sides. And knowing that
Pandu’s sons were intent upon asking (him), Lomasa versed in speech
said, ‘Hear, O sons of Pandu! O best of men, what ye see before you,

=== PAGE 56 ===

MAHABHARATA

of vast proportions like unto.a mountain and beautiful as the Kailasa
cliff, is a collection of the bones of the mighty Daitya, Naraka. Being
placed on a mountain, it looketh like one. The Daitya was slain by
that Supreme Soul, the eternal God Vishnu, forthe good of the lord
of celestials. Aiming at the possession of Indra’s place, by. the force. of
austere and Vedic lore, that mighty-minded (demon). had. practised
austere penances for ten thousand years. And’on account of his asceti-
cism, as also of the force and might of his. arms he had grown. invinci-
ble and always harassed (Indra). And O sinless one, knowing his
strength and austerities and observance of religious vows, Indra
became agitated and was overwhelmed: with fear. And mentally he
thought of the eternal deity, Vishnu. And thereat the graceful.lordiof
the universe, who is present everywhere, appeared and stood before
him manifest. And the sages and-celestials began to propitiate Vishnu
with prayers. And in his presence even Agni of the six attributes and
of blazing beauty being overpowered by his effulgence, became shorn of
radiance and seeing before him the God Vishnu, the chief of the celes-
tials who wields the thunder-bolt, bowing with head down readily
apprised Vishnu of the source of his fear. Thereupon Vishnu said, ‘TI
know, O Sakra, that thy fear proceedeth from Naraka, that lord ofthe
Daityas. By the merit of his successful ascetic acts he aimeth at
Indra’s position. Therefore, for pleasing thee, I shall certainly: sever
his soul from his body, although he hath achieved success'in asceticism.
Do thou, lord of celestials, wait for a moment.’ Then the: exceedingly
powerful Vishnu deprived (Naraka) of his senses (by striking:him)
with his hand. And he fell down on the earth even like the monarch
of mountains struck by(thunder). He was thus slain by a-miracle-and
his bones lie gathered at this spot. Here also is manifest another: deed
of Vishnu’s. Once the whole earth having been lostand sunk into the
nether regions she was lifted up by him in the-shape of a boar -having:a
single tusk.’

“Yudhishthira said, ‘O worshipful one, relate in- particular. how
Vishnu, the lord of the celestials, raised up the earth sunk a hundred
yojanas? In what manner also was that support of all created things—
the goddess Earth of high fortune—who dispenseth blessings and. brin-
geth forth all sorts of corn rendered stable ? Through whose power had
she sunk an hundred yojanas below, and under what circumstances:was
exhibited this greatest exploit of the Supreme Being? O chief of the
twice-born race, I wish to hear all about it in detail as it happened.
Certainly, it is known to thee.’

“Lomasa said, ‘O Yudhishthira, listen to all at‘length as I relate
the story, which thou hast asked me (tonarrate). Ochild, in days of yore,
there was (once) a terrible time inthe Krita Yuga when the eternaland

=== PAGE 57 ===

VANA PARVA 303

primeval Deity assumed the duties of Yama. And, O thou that never
fatlest of, when the God of gods began to perform the functions of Yama,
there died not a creature while the births were as usual. Then there
began to multiply birds and beasts and kine, and sheep, and deer and all
Kinds of carnivorous animals. O tiger among men and vanquisher of
foes, then the human race also increased by thousands even like unto
a current of water. And, O my son, when the increase of population had
been so frightful, the Earth oppressed with the excessive burden, sank
down fora hundred yojanas. And suffering pain in all her limbs, and
being deprived of her senses by excessive pressure, the earth in distress
sought the protection of Narayana, the foremost of the gods. The
earth spake saying, ‘It is by thy favour, Opossessor of the six attributes,
that Lhad been able to remain so long in my position. But I have
been overcome with burden and now I cannot hold myself any longer.
It behoveth thee, O adorable one, to relieve this load of mine. I have
sought thy protection. O lord ; and do thou, therefore, extend unto me
thy favour. Hearing these words of hers, the eternal lord, possessor of
the six attributes, complaisantly said, in words uttered in distinct letters.
Vishnu said, ‘Thou need not fear, O afflicted Earth, the bearer of all
treasures. I shall act so that thou mayst be made light.’

“Lomasa said, ‘Having thus dismissed the Earth, who hath the
mountains,for her ear-rings, he suddenly became turned into a boar with
one tusk, and of exceeding effulgence. Causing terror with his glow-
ing red eyes and emitting fumes from his blazing lustre, he began to
swell in magnitude in that region. O hero, then holding the earth with
his single radiant tusk that being who pervadeth the Vedas, raised her
up ahundred yojanas. And while she was being thus raised, there
ensued a mighty agitation and all the celestials, together with the sages
of ascetic wealth became agitated. And heaven, and the firmament, and
also the Earth were filled with exclamations of Oh! and Alas land
neither the celestials nor men could rest in peace. Then countless celes-
tials together with the sages went to Brahma, who was seated burning
as it were in his (own) lustre. Then approaching Brahma, the lord of
celestials, and the witness of the acts of all beings, they with folded
hands spake the following words, ‘O lord of the celestials, all created
beings have become agitated andthe mobile and immobile creatures
are restless, O, lord of the celestials, even the oceans are found to
be agitated and this whole earth hath gone down a hundred yojanas.
‘What is the matter ?. And by whose influence is it that the whole uni-
vetse is in ferment? May it please thee to explain it unto us without
delay, for we are all bewildered.’ Thereupon Brahma replied, ‘Ye
immortals! do ye not entertain fear for the Asuras, in any matter or
place. Hearken, ye celestials, to the reason to which all this commotion

=== PAGE 58 ===

304 MAHABHARATA

is owing! This agitation inthe heavens hath been préduced by thé
influence of the illustrious Being who is omnipresent, eternal and the
never-perishing Soul. That Supreme soul, Vishnu hath lifted up the
Earth, who had entirely sunk down hundred yojanas. This commotion
hath taken place in consequence of the earth being raised up. Know ye
this and dispel your doubts.’ The celestials said, ‘Where is that Being
who with pleasure raiseth up the Earth? O possessor of the six attri-
butes, mention unto us the place. Thither shall we repair.’ Brahma
said, ‘Go ye. May good happen to you! Ye will find him resting in the
Nandana (gardens). Yonder is visible the glorious worshipful Suparna
(Garuda). After having raised the Earth, the Supreme Being from
whom the worlds become manifest, flameth even in the shape of a boar,
like unto the all-consuming fire at the universal dissolution. Andon
his breast is really to be seen the gem Srivatsa. (Go) and behold that
Being knowing no deterioration.’

“Lomasa said, ‘Then the celestials, placing the grandsire at their
head, came to that infinite Soul, and having listened to his praise, bade
him adieu and went back to whence they had come.’ ”

Vaisampayana said, “O Janamejaya, having heard this story, all
the Pandavas without delay and with alacrity, began to proceed by the
way pointed out by Lomasa.”

SECTION CXLII
(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

Vaisampayana said, “O king, then those foremost of bowmen, of
immeasurable prowess, holding bows stringed at full stretch and equipped
with quivers and arrows and wearing finger-caps made of the
guana-skin, and with their swords on, proceeded with Panchali towards
the Gandhamadana, taking with them the best of Brahmanas. And on
their way they saw various lakes, and rivers and mountains and forests,
and treesof wide-spreading shade on mountain summits and places
abounding in trees bearing flowers and fruit in all seasons and frequent-
ed by celestials and sages. And restraining their senses within their
inner self and subsisting on fruits and roots, the heroes passed through
rugged regions, craggy and difficult of passage, beholding many and
various kinds of beasts. Thus those high-souled ones entered the moun-
tain inhabited by the sages, the Siddhas and the celestials, and fre-
quented by the Kinnaras and the Apsaras. And, O lord of men, as
those mighty heroes were entering the mountain Gandhamadana, there
arose a violent wind, attended with a heavy shower. And owing
to this, mighty clouds of dust bearing lots of dry leaves, rose, and all
ona sudden covered earth, air and firmament. And when the heavens

=== PAGE 59 ===

VANA PARVA 305

had been covered with dust nothing could be perceived, neither could
they (the Pandavas) speak to one another. And with eyes enveloped
with darkness and pushed by the wind carrying particles of rocks they
could not see one another. And there began to arrive mighty sounds
proceeding from the tree, and also from those breaking down incessant-
ly under the force of .the wind, and falling to the ground. And
distracted by gusts of the wind, they thought, ‘Are the heavens
falling down; or theearth and the mountains being rent? And
afraid of the wind, they felt about with their hands and took shelter
under the way-side tree and ant-hills and in caverns. Then holding
his bow and supporting Krishna the mighty Bhimasena stood under
atree. And Yudhishthira the just with Dhaumya crept into the deep
wood. And Sahedeva carrying the sacred fire with him took shelter in
arock, And Nakula together with Lomasa and other Brahmanas of
great asceticism stood in fright, each under atree. Then when the
wind had abated and the dust subsided, there came down a shower in
torrents. There also arose a loud rattling noise, like unto the thunder
hurled; and quick-flashing lightning began to play gracefully upon the
clouds. And being helped on by the swift wind, showers of rain pour-
ed down without intermissions, filling all sides round. And, O lord of
men, all around there began to flow many rivers covered with foam
and turbid with mud ; and these bearing volumes of water spread over
the frothy rafts rushed down with tremendous roar uprooting trees.
And afterwards when that sound had ceased and the air had arisen they
(each of them) cautiously came out of their coverts and met together,
O descendant of Bharata. And then the heroes started for the moun-
tain Gandhamadana.”

SECTION CXLIII
(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

Vaisampayana said, “When the high-souled sons of Pandu had
proceeded only two miles, Draupadi unaccustomed to travel on foot,
sank down. Weary and afflicted as she was, the poor daughter of
Panchala became faint, on account of the hailstorm and also of her
extreme delicacy. And trembling with faintness, the black-eyed one
supported herself on her thighs with her plump arms, becoming (her
graceful form). And thus resting for support on her thighs resembling
the trunk of an elephant, and which were in contact with each other,
she suddenly dropped upon the ground, trembling like a plantain tree.
And finding that the beautiful one was falling down like a twisted cree-
per, Nakula ran forward and supported her. And he said, ‘O king,
this black-eyed daughter of Panchala, being weary, hath fallen down

8

=== PAGE 60 ===

306 MAHABHARATA

upon the ground. Do thou, therefore, tend her, O son of Bharata.’
Undeserving as she is of misery, this lady of slow pace hath been sub-
ject to great hardships, and she is also worn out with the fatigues of the
journey. O mighty king, do thou therefore, comfort her.’”

Vaisampayana said, “Having heard these words of Nakula; ‘the
king as also Bhima and Sahadeva, became sorely afflicted, and hastily
ran towards her. And finding her weak, and her countenance pale, the
pious son of Kunti began to lament in grief, taking het on his lap.
Yudhishthira said, ‘Accustomed to ease, and deserving to sleep in well-
protected rooms, on beds spread over with fine sheets, how doth this
beautiful one sleep prostrate on the ground! Alas! On my account
(alone), the delicate feet and the lotus-like face of this one deserving
of all excellent things, have contracted a dark-blue hue. O what have
I done! Fool that I am, having been addicted to dice, I have been
wandering in the forest full of wild beasts, taking Krishn& in my ¢om-
pany. This large-eyed one had been bestowed by her father, the king
of the Drupadas, in the hope that the blessed girl would be happy, by
obtaining the sons of Pandu for her lords. It is on account of my
wretched self, that without obtaining anything hoped for, she sleepeth
prostrate on the ground, tired with hardships, sorrow and travel!”

Vaisampayana said, “While king Yudhishthira the just was lament-
ing thus, Dhaumya with all the other principal Brahmanas came to the
spot. And they began to console him and to honour him with blessings,
And they recited mantras capable of dispelling Rakshasas and (to that
end) also performed rites. And on the mantras being recited by the
great ascetics, in order to the restoration of (Panchali’s) health, Panchali
frequently touched by the Pandavas with their soothing palms and
fanned by cool breezes surcharged with particles of water, felt ease, and
gradually regained her senses. And finding that exhausted poor lady
restored to her senses, the sons of Pritha, placing her on deer-skin,
caused her to take rest. And taking her feet of red soles, bearing aus-
picious marks, the twins began to press them gently with their hands,
scarred by the bow-string. And Yudhishthira the just, the foremost of
the Kurus, also comforted her and addressed Bhima in the following
words: ‘O Bhima, there yet remain many mountains ( before us ),
rugged, and inaccessible because of snow. How, long-armed one, will
Krishn’ pass over them ?’ Thereupon Bhima said, ‘O king, I myself shall
carry thee, together with this princess and these bulls among men, the
twins; therefore, O king of kings, resign not thy mind unto despair.
Or, at thy bidding, O sinless one, Hidimva's son, the mighty Ghatot-
kacha, who is capable of ranging the skies and who is like unto me in
stréngth, will carry us all.’”

Vaisampayana said, “Then with Yudhishthira’s permission, Bhima

=== PAGE 61 ===

VANA PARVA 307

thought of his Rakshasa son. And no sooner was he thought of by his
father, than the pious Ghatotkacha made his appearance and, saluting
the Pandavas and the Brahmanas, stood with joined hands. And they
also caressed him of mighty arms. He then addressed his father, Bhima-
sena of.dreadful prowess, saying, ‘Having been thought of by thee I
have come here with speed, in order to serve thee. Do thou, O long.
armed.one, command me. I shall certainly be able to perform what-.
ever thou bidst.’ Hearing this, Bhimasena hugged the Rakshasa to his
breast.”

SECTION CXLIV
(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

“Yudhishthira said, ‘O Bhima, let this mighty and heroic Rakshasa
chief, thy legitimate son, devoted to us, and truthful, and conversant
with virtue carry (his) mother (Draupadi) without delay. And, O
possessor of dreadful prowess, depending on the strength of thy arms, I
shall seach the Gandhamadana, unhurt, together with Panchala’s
daughter.’ ”

Vaisampayana said, “Hearing the words of his brother, that tiger
among men, Bhimasena, commanded his son, Ghatotkacha, repressor of
foes, saying, ‘O invincible son of Hidimva, this thy mother hath been
sorely tired. Thou art, again, strong and capable of going wherever thou
likest. Do thou therefore, O ranger of the skies, carry her. May pros-
perity attend thee! Taking her on thy shoulders, thou shalt go in our
company, adopting a course not far overhead,—so that thou mayst not
render her uneasy.’ Thereat, Ghatotkacha said, ‘Even single-handed,
Iam able to carry Yudhishthira the just, and Dhaumya, and Krishna, and
the twins,—and what wonder then that I shall to-day carry them, when
Thave others to assist me? And, O sinless one, hundreds of other heroic
(Rakshasas), capable of moving through the sky, and of assuming any
shape at will, will together carry you all with the Brahmanas.’ ”

Vaisampayana said, “Saying this, Ghatotkacha carried Krishna
inthe midst of the Pandavas, and the other (Rakshasas) also began to
carry the Pandavas. And by virtue of his native energy, Lomasa of
incomparable effulgence moved along the path of the Siddhas, like unto
asecond sun. And at the command of the lord of the Rakshasas, those
Rakshasas of terrific prowess began to proceed, bearing all the other
Brahmanas, and beholding many a romantic wood. And they proceeded
towards the gigantic jujube tree. And carried by the Rakshasas of
Sreat - speed, proceeding ata rapid pace, the heroes passed over long.
extending ways quickly, as if over short ones. And on their way they
saw-various tracts crowded with Mlechchha people, and containing mines

=== PAGE 62 ===

308 MAHABHARATA

of diverse gems. And they also saw hillocks teeming with various
minerals, thronged with Vidyadharas, inhabited on all sides by monkeys
and Kinnaras and Kimpurushas, and Gandharvas, and filled with pea-
cocks, and chamaras, and apes, and rurus, and bears, and gavayas, and
buffaloes, intersected with a network of rivulets, and inhabited by vari-
ous birds and beasts, and beautified by elephants, and abounding in
trees and enraptured birds. After having thus passed many countries,
and also the Uttarakurus, they saw that foremost of mountains, the
Kailasa, containing many wonders. And by the side of it, they beheld
the hermitage of Nara and Narayana, with celestial trees bearing
flowers and fruits in all seasons. And they also beheld that beautiful
jujube of round trunk. And it was fresh ; and of deep shade; and of
excellent beauty ; and of thick, soft and sleek foliage ; and healthful ;
and having gigantic boughs ; and wide-spreading ; and of incomparable
lustre ; and bearing full-grown, tasteful, and holy fruits dropping honey.
And this celestial tree was frequented by hosts of mighty sages, and
was always inhabited by various birds maddened with animal spirits.
And it grew at a spot devoid of mosquitoes and gad-flies, and abounding
in fruits and roots and water, and covered with green grass, and inhabit-
ed by the celestials and the Gandharvas, and of smooth surface, and
naturally healthful, and beauteous and cool and of delicate feel.
Having reached that (tree) together with those bulls among Brahmanas,
the high-souled ones gently alighted from the shoulders of the Rakshasas.
Then in company with those bulls among the twice-born ones, the
Pandavas beheld that romantic asylum presided over by Nara and
Narayana ; devoid of gloom ; and sacred ; and untouched by the solar
rays; and free from those rubs, viz., hunger, and thirst, heat and cold,
and removing (all) sorrow ; and crowded with hosts of mighty sages;
and adorned with the grace proceeding from the Vedas, Saman, Rich,
and Yajus; and, O king, inaccessible to men who have renounced
religion ; and beautified with offerings, and homas; and sacred; and
well-swept and daubed ; and shining all around with offerings of celes-
tial blossoms ; and spread over with altars of sacrificial fire, and sacred
ladles and pots; and graced with large water-jars, and baskets and the
refuge of all beings; and echoing with the chanting of the Vedas; and
heavenly : and worthy of being inhabited ; and removing fatigue ; and
attended with splendour and of incomprehensible merit ; and majestic
with divine qualities. And the hermitage was inhabited by hosts of
reat sages, subsisting on fruits and roots ; and having their senses under
perfect control ; and clad in black deer-skins ; and effulgent like unto
the Sun and Agni; and of souls magnified by asceticism and intent
on emancipation ; and leading the Vanaprastha mode of life; and of
subdued senses ; and identified with the Supreme Soul; and of high

=== PAGE 63 ===

VANA PARVA 309

fortune ; and reciting Vaidic hymns. Then having purified himself and
restrained his senses, that son of Dharma, the intelligent Yudhishthira of
exceeding energy, accompanied by his brothers, approached those sages.
And all the great sages endued with supernatural knowledge, knowing
Yudhishthira arrived, received him joyfully. And those sages engaged
in the recitation of the Vedas, and like unto fire itself, after having con-
ferred blessings on Yudhishthira, cheerfully accorded him fitting recep-
tion. And they gave him clean water and flowers and roots. And Yudhish-
thira the just received with regard the things gladly offered for his
reception by the great sages. And then, O sinless one, Pandu’s son to-
gether with Krishn& and his brothers, and thousands of Brahmanas ver-
sed in the Vedas and the Vendangas, entered into that holy hermitage,
like unto the abode of Sukra and pleasing the mind with heavenly
odours and resembling heaven itself and attended with beauty. There
the pious (Yudhishthira) beheld the hermitage of Nara and Narayana,
beautified by the Bhagirathi and worshipped: by the gods and the celes-
tial sages. And seeing that hermitage inhabited by the Brahmarshis and
containing fruits dropping honey, the Pandavas were filled with delight.
And having reached that place, the high-souled ones began to dwell
with the Brahmanas. There beholding the holy lake Vinda, and the
mountain Mainaka, of golden summits and inhabited by various species
of birds, the magnanimous ones lived happily with joy. The son of
Pandu together with Krishna took pleasure in ranging excellent and
captivating woods, shining with flowers of every season ; beauteous on
all sides with trees bearing blown blossoms ; and bending down with the
weight of fruits and attended by the numerous male kokilas and of glossy
foliage ; and thick and having cool shade and lovely to behold. They
took delight in beholding diverse beautiful lakes of limpid water and
shining all round with lotuses and lilies. And there, O lord, the balmy
breeze bearing pure fragrance, blew gladdening all the Pandavas, toge-
ther with Krishna, And hard by the gigantic jujube, the mighty son
of Kunti saw the Bhagirathi of easy descent and cool and furnished with
fresh lotuses and having stairs made of rubies and corals and graced
with trees and scattered over with celestial flowers, and gladsome to the
mind. And at that spot, frequented by celestials and sages, and ex-
tremely inaccessible, they, after having purified themselves offered
oblations unto the pitris and the gods and the rishis in the sacred waters
of the Bhagirathi. Thus those bulls amomg men the heroic perpetuators
of the Kuru race, began to reside there with the Brahmanas offering
oblations and practising meditation. And those tigers among men, the
Pandavas of the god-like appearance, felt delight in witnessing the vari-
ous amusements of Draupadi.”

=== PAGE 64 ===

SECTION CXLV

(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

Vaisampayana said, “There observing cleanliness, those tigers
among men dwelt for six nights, in expectation of beholding Dhananjaya.
And it came to.pass that all of a sudden there blew a wind from the
north-east and brought a celestial lotus of a thousand petals and effulgent
as the sun. And Panchali saw that pure and charming lotus of unearthly
fragrance, brought by the wind and left on the ground. And having
obtained that excellent and beautiful lotus, that blessed one became
exceedingly delighted, O king, and addressed Bhimasena in the following
words, ‘Behold, O Bhima, this most beautiful unearthly flower having
within it the very source of fragrance. It gladdenth my heart, O
repressor of foes. This one shall be presented to Yudhishthira the just.
Do thou, therefore, procure others for my satisfaction—in order that I
may carry them to our hermitage in the Kamyaka. If, O Pritha’s son,
Ihave found grace with thee, do thou then procure others of this species
in large numbers. I wish to carry them to our hermitage.’ Having said
this, the blameless lady of beautiful glances approached Yudhishthira
the just, taking the flower. And knowing the desire of his beloved
queen that bull among men, Bhima of great strength, also set out, in
order to gratify her. And intent upon fetching the flowers, he began to
proceed:ata rapid space, facing the wind, in the direction from which
the flower had come. And taking the bow inlaid with gold on the back
asalso arrows like unto venomous snakes, he proceeded .as a lion in
anger or anelephant inrut. Andall beings gazed at him, holding a
mighty bow and arrows. And neither exhaustion, nor languor, neither
fear nor confusion, ever possessed the son of Pritha and the offspring of
Vayu (wind). And desirous of pleasing Draupadi the mighty one, free
from fear or confusion, ascended the peak depending on:the strength of
hisarms. And that slayer of foes began to range that beautiful peak
covered with trees, creepers and of black rocky base ; and frequented
by Kinnaras : and variegated with minerals, plants, beasts, and birds of
various hues ; and appearing like an upraised arm of the Earth adorned
with an entire set of ornaments. And thatone of matchless prowess
proceedcd, fixing his lcok at the slopes of the Gandhamadana,—beauti-
ful with flowers of every season—and revolving various thoughts in:his
mind and with his ears, eyes and mind rivetted to the spots resounding
with the notes of male kokilas and ringing with the hum of-black'bees.
And like an elephant in rut ranging mad in a forest that one of mighty
prowess smelt the rare odour proceeding from the flowers of every
season. And he was fanned by the fresh breeze of the Gandhamadana

=== PAGE 65 ===

VANA PARVA 311

bearing the perfumes of various blossoms and cooling like unto a
father’s touch. On his fatigue being removed the down on his body
_ stood onend. And in this state that repressor of foes for the flowers
began to survey all the mountain, inhabited by Yakshas and Gandhar-
vas and celestials and Brahmarshis. And brushed by the leaves of
Saptachchada tree, besmeared with fresh red, black and white minerals,
he looked as if decorated with lines of holy unguents drawn by
fingers. And with clouds stretching at its sides, the mountain seemed
dancing with outspread wings. And on account of the trickling waters
of springs, it appeared to be decked with necklaces of pearls. And it
contained romantic caverns and groves and cascades and caves, And
there were excellent peacocks dancing to the jingling of the bangles of
the Apsaras. And its rocky surface was worn away by the end of tusks
of the elephants presiding over the cardinal points. And with the waters
of rivers falling down, the mountain looked as if its clothes were
getting loosened. And that graceful son of the wind-god playfully and
cheerfully went on, pushing away by his force countless inter-twisted
efeepers, And stags in curiosity gazed at him, with grass in their mouths.
And not having experienced fear (ever before), they were unalarmed,
and did not fleeaway. And being engaged in fulfilling the desire of
his love, the youthful son of Pandu, stalwart and of splendour like
unto the hue of gold ; and having a body strong asa lion; and tread-
ing like a mad elephant ; and possessing the force of a mad elephant ;
and having coppery eyes like unto those of a mad elephant ; and capable
of checking a mad elephant, began to range the romantic sides of the
Gandhamadana with his beautiful eyes uplifted; and displaying as it
were a novel type of beauty. And the wives of Yakshas and Gandhar-
vas sitting invisible by the side of their husbands, stared at him,
turning their faces with various motions, Intent upon gratifying
Draupadi exiled unto the woods, as he was ranging the beautiful Gandha-
madana, he remembered the many and various woes caused by
Duryodhana. And he thought, ‘Now that Arjuna sojourn in heaven
and that I too have come away to procure the flowers, what will
our brother Yudhishthira do at present ? Surely, from affection and
doubting their prowess, that foremost of men, Yudhishthira, will not
let Nakula and Sahadeva come in search of us. How, again, can I obtain
the flowers soon?’ Thinking thus, that tiger among men proceeded
in amain like unto the king of birds, his mind and sight fixed on the
delightful side of the mountain. And having for his provisions on
the journey the words of Draupadi, the mighty son of Pandu,
Vrikodara Bhima, endued with strength and the swiftness of the wind,
with his mind and sight fixed on the blooming slopes of the mountain,
proceeded speedily, making the earth tremble with his tread, even as

=== PAGE 66 ===

312 MAHABHARATA

doth a hurricane at the equinox; and frightening herds of elephants
and grinding lions and tigers and deer and uprooting and smashing
large trees and tearing away by force plants and creepers, like unto an
elephant ascending higher and higher the summit ofa mountain; and
roaring fiercely even asa cloud attended with thunder. And awakened by
that mighty roaring of Bhima, tigers came out of their dens, while other
rangers of the forest hid themselves. And the coursers of the skies sprang
up (on their wing) in fright. And herds of deer hurriedly ran away. And
birds left the trees (and fled). And lions forsook their dens. And
the mighty lions were roused from their slumber. And the buffaloes
stared. And the elephants in fright, leaving that wood, ran to more
extensive forests in company with their mates. And the boars and the
deer and the lions and the buffaloes and the tigers and the jackals and
the gavayas of the wood began to cry in herds. And the ruddy geese,
and the gallinules and the ducks and the karandavas and the plavas and
the parrots and the male kokilas and the herons in confusion flew in all
directions, while some proud elephants urged by their mates, as also
some lions and elephants in rage, flew at Bhimasena. And as they were
distracted at heart through fear, these fierce animals discharging urine
and dung, set up loud yells with gapping mouths. Thereupon the illus-
trious and graceful son of the wind-god, the mighty Pandava, depending
upon the strength of :his arms, began to slay one elephant with another
elephant and one lion with another lion while he despatched the others
with slaps. Andon being struck by Bhima the lions and the tigers and
the leopards, in fright gave loud cries and discharged urine and dung.
And after having destroyed these the handsome son of Pandu, possessed
of mighty strength, entered into the forest, making all sides resound
with his shouts. And then the Jong-armed one saw on the slopes of the
Gandhamadana a beautiful plantain tree spreading over many a yojana.
And like unto a mad lion, that one of great strength proceeded amain
towards that tree breaking down various plants. And that foremost
of strong persons—Bhima—uprooting innumerable plaintain trunks
equal in height to many palm-trees (placed one above another), cast
them on all sides with force. And that highly powerful one, haughty
like a male lion, sent up shouts. And then he encountered countless
beasts of gigantic size, and stags, and monkeys, and lions, and buffaloes,
and aquatic animals. And what with the cries of these, and what
with the shouts of Bhima, even the beasts and birds that were at
distant parts of the wood, became all frightened. And hearing those
cries of beasts and birds, myriads of acquatic fowls suddenly rose up on
wetted wings. Ang seeing these fowls of water, that bull among the
Bharatas proceeded in that direction ; and saw a vast and romantic lake.
And that fathomless lake was, as it were, being fanned by the golden

=== PAGE 67 ===

VANA PARVA 818

plantain trees on the coast, shaken by the soft breezes. And immediate-
ly descending into the lake abounding in lilies and lotuses, he began
to sport lustily like unto a mighty maddened elephant. Having thus
sported there for a long while, he of immeasurable effulgence ascended,
in order to penetrate with speed into that forest filled with trees. Then
the Pandava winded with all his might his loud-blowing shell. And
striking his arms with his hands, the mighty Bhima made all the points
of heaven resound. And filled with the sounds of the shell, and with
the shouts of Bhimasena, and also with the reports produced by the
striking of his arms, the caves of the mountain seemed as if they were
roaring. And hearing those loud arm-strokes, like unto the crashing of
thunder, the lions that were slumbering in the caves, uttered mighty
howls. And being terrified by the yelling of the lions, the elephants,
O Bharata, sent forth tremendous roars, which filled the mountain. And
hearing those sounds emitted, and knowing also Bhimasena to be his
brother, the ape Hanuman, the chief of monkeys, with the view of
doing good to Bhima, obstructed the path leading to heaven. And
thinking that he (Bhima) should not pass that way, (Hanuman) lay
across the narrow path, beautified by plantain trees, obstructing it for
the sake of the safety of Bhima. With the object that Bhima might not
come by curse or defeat, by entering into the plantain wood, the ape
Hanuman of huge body lay down amidst the plantain trees, being over-
come with drowsiness. And he began to yawn, lashing his long tail,
taised like unto the pole consecrated to Indra, and sounding like
thunder. And on all sides round, the mountains by the mouths of caves
emitted those sounds in echo, like a cow lowing, Andasit was being
shaken by the’ reports produced by the lashing of the tail, the moun-
tain with its summits tottering, began to crumble all around. And
overcoming that roaring of mad elephants, the sounds of his tail spread
over the varied slopes of the mountain.

“On those sounds being heard the down of Bhima's body stood on
end; and he began to range that plantain wood, in search of those
sounds. And that one of mighty arms saw the monkey-chief in the
plantain wood, on an elevated rocky base. And he was hard to be look-
ed at even as the lightning-flash ; and of coppery hue like that of the
lightning-flash : and endued with the voice of the lightning-flash ; and
quick moving as the lightning-flash ; and having his short fleshy neck
supported on his shoulders ; and with his waist slender in consequence
of the fullness of his shoulders. And his tail covered with long hair, and
a little bent at the end, was raised like unto a banner, And ( Bhima )
saw Hanuman’s head furnished with small lips, and coppery face and
tongue, and red ears, and brisk eyes, and bare white incisors sharpened
at the edge- And his head was like unto the shining moon; adorned

=== PAGE 68 ===

814 MAHABHARATA

with white teeth within the mouth; and with mane scattered over,
resembling a heap of asoka flowers. And admidst the golden plantain
trees, that one of exceeding effulgence was lying like unto a blazing fire,
with his radiant body. And that slayer of foes was casting glances with
his eyes reddened with intoxication. And the intelligent Bhima saw
that mighty chief of monkeys, of huge body, lying like unto the Hima-
laya, obstructing the path of heaven. And seeing him alone in that
mighty forest, the undaunted athletic Bhima, of long arms, approached
him with rapid strides, and uttered a loud shout like unto the thunder.
And at that shout of Bhima, beasts and birds became all alarmed. The
powerful Hanuman, however, opening his eyes partially, looked at him
(Bhima) with disregard, with eyes reddened with intoxication. And
then smilingly addressing him, Hanuman said the following words,
‘Illas Iam, I was sleeping sweetly. Why hast thou awakened me?
Thou shouldst show kindness to all creatures, as thou hast reason, Be-
longing to the animal species, we are ignorantof virtue. But being
endued with reason, men show kindness towards creatures. Why do
then reasonable person like thee commit themselves to acts contaminan-
ting alike body, ‘speech, and heart, and destructive of virtue? Thou
knowest not what virtue is, neither hast thou taken council of the wise.
And therefore it is that from ignorance, and childishness thou destroy-
est the lower animals. Say, who art thou, and what for hast thou come
to the forest devoid of humanity and human beings? And, O fore-
most of men, tell thou also, whither thou wilt go to-day. Further it is
impossible to proceed. Yonder hills are inaccessible. O hero, save the
passage obtained by the practice of asceticism, there is no passage to that
place. This is the path of the celestials ; it is ever impassable by mor-
tals. Out of kindness, O hero, do I dissuade thee. Do thou hearken unto
my words. Thou canst not proceed further from this place. Therefore,
O lord, do thou desist. O chief of men, to-day in very way thou art
welcome to this place. If thou think it proper to accept my words, do
thou then, O best of men, rest here, partaking of fruits and roots, sweet
as ambrosia: and do not have thyself destroyed for naught.’ ”

SECTION CXLVI
( Tirtha.yatra Parva continued )

Vaisampayana said, O repressor of foes, hearing these words of
the intelligent monkey-chief, the heroic Bhima answered, ‘Who art
thou ? And why also hast thou assumed the shape of a monkey? It is
a Kshatriya—one of a race next tothe Brahmanas—that asketh thee.
And he belongeth to the Kuru race and the lunar stock, and was borne
by Kunti in her womb, and is one of the sons of Pandu, and is the off-

=== PAGE 69 ===

"es

VANA PABVA 815

spring of the wind-god, and is known by the name of Bhimasena.’
Hearing these words of the Kuru hero, Hanuman smiled, and that

- son of the wind-god ( Hanuman ) spake unto that offspring of the wind-
god (Bhimasena), saying, ‘I am a monkey, will not allow thee the
passage thou desirest. Better desist and go back. Do thou not meet
with destruction.’ At this Bhimasena replied, ‘Destruction at any-
thing else do I not ask thee about, O monkey. Do thou give me passage.
_ Arise! Do not come by grief ac my hands.’ Hanuman said, ‘I have
nostrength to rise: Iam suffering from illness. If go thou must, do
thou go by overleaping me. Bhima said, ‘The Supreme Soul void of
the propetties pervadeth a body all over. Him knowable alone by
knowledge, I cannot disregard. And therefore, will I not overleap
thee. If I had not known Him from Whom become manifest all crea-
tures, I would havé leapt over thee and also the mountain, even as
Hanuman had bounded over the ocean.’ Thereupon Hanuman said,
‘Who is that Hanuman, who had bounded over the ocean? I ask
thee, O best of men. Relate if thoucanst.’ Bhima replied, ‘He is
even my brother, excellent with every perfection, and endued with
intelligence and strength both of mind and body. And he is the illus-
trious chief of monkeys, renowed inthe Ramayana. And for Rama's
queen, that king of the monkeys even with one leap crossed the ocean
extending over a hundred yojanas, That mighty oneis my brother. I
am equal unto him in energy, strength and prowess and also in fight.
And able am I to punish thee. So arise. Either give me passage or wit-
ness my prowess to-day. If thou do not listen to my bidding, I shall
send thee to the abode of Yama.’

Vaisampayana continued, “Then knowing him (Bhima) to be in-
toxicated with strength, and proud of the might of his arms, Hanuman,
slighting him at heart, said the following words, ‘Relent thou, O sinless
one. In consequence of age, I have no strength to get up. From pity
for me, do thou go, moving aside my tail.’ Being thus addressed by
Hanuman, Bhima proud of the strength of his arms, took him for one
wanting in energy and prowess, and thought within himself, ‘Taking
fast hold of the tail, will I send this monkey destitute of energy and
prowess, to the region of Yama.’ Thereat, with a smile he slightingly
took hold of the tail with his left hand ; but could not move that tail of
the mighty monkey, Then with both arms he pulled it, resembling the
pole reared in honour of Indra. Still the mighty Bhima could not raise
the tail with both his arms. And his eye-brows were contracted up,
and his eyes rolled, and his face was contracted into wrinkless and his
body was covered with sweat; and yet he could not raise it. And
when after having striven, the illustrious Bhima failed in raising
the tail, he approached the side of the monkey, and stood witha bashful

=== PAGE 70 ===

816 MAHABHARATA

countenance. And bowing down, Kunti’s son, with joined hands, spake
these words, ‘Relent thou, O foremost of monkeys: and forgive me for
my harsh words. Art thou a Siddha, or a god,or a Gandharva, or a
Guhyaka? I ask thee out of curiosity. Tell me who thqu art that bast
assumed the shape of monkey, if it be not a secret, O long-armed one,
and if I can well hear it. I ask thee as a disciple, and I, O sinless one,
seek thy refuge.’ Thereupon Hanuman said, ‘O repressor of foes, even
to the extent of thy curiosity to know me, shall I relate all at length.
Listen, O son of Pandu! O lotus-eyed one, I was begotten by the wind=
god that life of the world—upon the wife of Kesari. 1am a monkey, by
name Hanuman. All the mighty monkey-kings, and monkey-chiefs
used to wait upon that son of the sun, Sugriva, andthat son of Sakra,
Vali. And, O repressor of foes, a friendship subsisted between me and
Sugriva, even as between the wind and fire. And for some cause,
Sugriva, driven out by his brother, for a long time dwelt with me at
the Hrisyamukh. And it came to pass that the mighty son of Dasaratha
the heroic Rama, who is Vishnu’s self in the shape of a human being,
took his birth in this world. And in company with his queen and
brother, taking his bow, that foremost of bowmen with the view of
compassing his father’s welfere, began to reside in the Dandaka forest.
And from Janasthana, that mighty Rakshasa monarch, the wicked
Ravana, carried away his ( Rama's) queen by stratagem and force,
deceiving, O sinless one. that foremost of men, through the agency of
a Rakshasa, Maricha, who assumed the form of a deer marked with
gem-like and golden spots.’ ”

SECTION CXLVII
( Tirtha-yatra Parva continued )

Hanuman said, ‘And after his wife was carried away, that
descendant of Raghu, while searching with his brother for his queen,
met, on the summit of that mountain, with Sugriva, chief of the
monkeys. Then a friendship was contracted between hii and the
high-souled Raghava. And the latter, having slain Vali installed
Sugriva in the kingdom. And having obtained the kingdom, Sugriva
sent forth monkeys by hundreds and by thousands in search of Sita.
And, O best of men, I too with innumerable monkeys set out towards
the south in quest of Sita, O mighty-armed one. Then a mighty valture
Sampati by name, communicated the tidings that Sita was in the abode
of Ravana. Thereupon with the object of securing success unto Rania,
I all of a sudden bounded over the main, extending for a hundred yojanaa,
And, O chief of the Bharatas, having by my own prowess crossed the
ocean, that abode of sharks and crocodiles, I saw in Ravana’s' residence,

=== PAGE 71 ===

VANA PARVA 817

the daughter of king Janaka, Sita, like unto the daughter of a celestial.
And having interviewed that lady, Vaidehi, Rama's beloved, and burnt
the whole of Lanka with its towers and ramparts and gates, and pro-
claimed my name there,I returned. Hearing everything from me the
lotus-eyed Rama at once ascertained his course of action, and having
for the passage of his army constructed a bridge across the deep,
crossed it followed by myriads of monkeys. Then by prowess Rama
slew those Rakshasas in battle, and also Ravana, the oppressor of
the worlds together with his Rakshasa followers. And having slain the
king of the Rakshasas, with his brother, and sons and kindred, he in-
stalled in the kingdom in Lanka the Rakshasa chief, Vibhishana, pious,
and reverent, and kind to devoted dependants. Then Rama recovered
his wife even like the lost Vaidic revelation. Then Raghu's son, Rama,
with his devoted wife, returned to his own city, Ayodhya, inaccessible
to enemies ; and that lord of men began to dwell there. Then that
foremost of kings, Rama, was established in the kingdom. Thereafter,
T asked a boon of the lotus-eyed Rama, saying, ‘O slayer of foes, Rama,
may [ live as longas the history of thy deeds remaineth extant on earth !
Thereupon he said, ‘So be it. O repressor of foes, O Bhima, through
the grace of Sita also, here all excellent objects of entertainment are
supplied to me, whoever abide at this place. Rama reigned for the
thousand and ten hundred years. Then he ascended to his own abode.
Ever since, here Apsaras and Gandharvas delight me, singing for aye the
deeds of that hero, Osinless one. Oson of the Kurus, this path is
impassable to mortals. For this, O Bharata, as also with the view that
none might defeat or curse thee, have I obstructed thy passage to this
path trod by the immortals. This is one of the paths to heaven, for the
celestials: mortals cannot pass this way. But the lake in search -of
which thou hast come, lieth even in that direction.’ ”

SECTION CXLVIII
( Tirtha-yatra Parva continued )

Vaisampayana continued, ‘Thus addressed, the powerful Bhima- >
sena of mighty arms, affectionately, and with a cheerful heart, bowed
unto his brother, Hanuman, the monkey-chief, and said in mild words,
‘None is more fortunate than I am; now have I seen my elder
brother. It is a great favour shown unto me ; and I have been well-
pleased with thee. Now I wish that thou mayst fulfil this desire of mine.
I desire to behold, O hero, that incomparable form of thine, which thou
at that time hadst had, in bounding over the main, that abode of
sharks and crocodiles. Thereby I shall be satisfied, and also believe in
thy words.’ Thus addressed, that mighty monkey said with a smile,

=== PAGE 72 ===

818 MAHABHARATA

‘That form of mine neither thou, not any one else can behold. At that
age, the state of things was different, and doth not exist at present.
In the Krita age, the state of things was one ; and in the Treta, another :
and in the Dwapara, still another. Diminution is going on this age ; and
I have not that form now. The ground, riverse, plants,and rocks, and
siddhas, gods, and celestial sages conform to Time, in harmony with
the state of things in the different yugas. Therefore, do not desire to
see my former shape, O perpetuator of the Kuru race, I am conforming
to the tendency of the age: Verily, Time is irresistible.’ Bhimasena said,
‘Tell me of the duration of the different yugas, and of the different
manners and customs, and of virtue, pleasure and profit, and of acts,
and energy, andof life and death in the different yugas.’ Thereupon
Hanuman said, 'O child, that yuga is called Krita when the one
eternal religion was extant. And in that best of yugas, every one had
religious perfection, and, therefore, there was no need of religious acts.
And then virtue knew no deterioration ; nor did people decrease. It is
for this that this age is called Krita (perfect). But in time the yuga
had come tobe considered asan inferior one. And, Ochild, in the
Krita age, there were neither gods, nor demons, nor Gandharvas, nor
Yakshas, nor Rakshasasy nor Nagas. And there was no buying and
selling. And the Sama, the Rich, and the Yajus did not exist. And
there was no manual labour. And then the necessaries of life were
obtained only by being thought of. And the only merit was in renoun-
cing the world. Andduring that yuga, there was neither disease, nor
decay of the senses. And there was neither malice, nor pride, nor
hypocrisy, nor discord, nor ill-will, nor cunning, nor fear. nor misery,
nor envy, nor covetousness. And for this, that prime refuge of Yogis,
even the Supreme Brahma, was attainable to all. And Narayana wear-
ing a white hue was the soul of all creatures. And in the Krita Yuga,
the distinctive characteristics of Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas, and
Sudras were natural, and these ever stuck to their respective duties.
And then Brahma was the sole refuge, and their manners and customs
were naturally adapted to the attainment of Brahma and the objects of
their knowledge was the sole Brahma, and all their acts also had refe-
rence to Brahma. In this way all the orders attained merit. And one
uniform Soul was thecbject of their meditation; and there was only
one mantra (the Om), and there was one ordinance. And although
of different characteristics, all of them followed a single Veda; and
they had one religion. And according to the divisions of time, they led
the four modes of life, without aiming at any object, and so they
attained emancipation. The religion consisting in the identification of
self with Brahma indicates the Krita Yuga. And in the Krita Yuga, the
virtue of the four orders is throughout entire in four-fold measure-

=== PAGE 73 ===

VANA PARVA 819

Such is the Krita Yuga devoid of the three qualities. Do thou also hear
from me of the character of the Treta Yuga. In this age, sacrifices are
introduced, and virtue decreaseth by a quarter. And Narayana (who
is the Soul of all creatures) assumeth a red colour. And men practise
truth, and devote themselves to religion and religious rites. And
thence sacrifices and various religious observances come into existence.
And in the Treta Yuga people begin to devise means for the attain-
ment of an object ; and they attain it through acts and gifts. And they
never deviate from virtue. And they are devoted to asceticism and to
the bestowal of gifts. And the four orders adhere to their respective
duties; and perform rites. Such are the men of the Treta Yuga- In the
Dwapara Yuga, religion decreaseth by one half. And Narayana weareth
ayellow hue. Andthe Veda becometh divided into four parts. And
then some men retain (the knowledge of) the four Vedas, and some of
three Vedas, and some of one Veda, while others do not know even the
Richs. Andon the Shastras becoming thus divided, acts become mul-
tiplied. And largely influenced by passion, people engage in asceticism
and gifts, And from their incapacity to study the entire Veda, it
becomes divided into several parts. And in consequence of intellect
having decreased, few are established in truth. And when people fall
off from truth, they become subject to various diseases ; and then lust,
and natural calamities ensue. And afflicted with these, people betake
themselves to penances. And some celebrate sacrifices, desiring to
enjoy the good things of life, or attain heaven. On the coming of the
Dwapara Yuga. men become degenerate. in consequence of impiety.
O son of Kunti, in the Kali Yuga a quarter only of virtue abideth. And
in the beginning of this iron age, Narayana weareth a black hue. And
the Vedas and the institutes, and virtue, and sacrifices, and religious
observances, fallinto disuse. And (then) reign iti! and disease, and
_lassitude, and anger and other deformities, and natural calamities, and
anguish, and fear of scarcity. And as the yugas wane, virtue duindles.
And as virtue duindles away, creatures degenerate. And as crea-
tures degenerate, their natures undergo deterioration. And the religious
acts performed at the waning of the yugas, produce contrary effects.
And even those that live for several yugas, conform to these changes,
O repressor of foes, as regards thy curiosity to know me, I say this,—
Why should a wise person be eager to knowa superfluous matter ?
(Thus), O long-armed one, haveI narrated in full what thou hadst
asked me regarding the characteristics of the different yugas. Good
happen to thee! Do thou return.’ "*

1 Iti means these six things, unfavourable to crops ;+..excessive rain,
drought, rats, locusts, birds, and a neighbouring hostile king.

=== PAGE 74 ===

SECTION CXLIX

(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

“Bhimasena said, ‘Without beholding thy former shape, I will
never goaway. IfI have found favour with thee, do thou then show
me thine own shape.’ ”

Vaisampayana continued, “Being thus addressed by Bhima, the
monkey with a smile showed him that form of his in which he had
bounded over the main. And wishing to gratify his brother, Hanuman
assumed a gigantic body which (both) in length and breadth increased
exceedingly. And that monkey of immeasurable effulgence stood there,
covering the plantain grove furnished with trees, and elevating himself
to the height reached by the Vindhya. And the monkey, having attained
his lofty and gigantic body like unto a mountain, furnished with
coppery eyes, and sharp teeth, and a face marked by frown, lay
covering all sides, and lashing his long tail. And that son of the Kurus,
Bhima, beholding that gigantic form of his brother, wondered, and the
hairs of his body repeatedly stood on end. And beholding him like
unto the sun in splendour, and unto a golden mountain, and also unto
the blazing firmament, Bhima closed his eyes. Thereupon Hanuman
addressed Bhima with a smile, saying, ‘O sinless one, thou art capable
of beholding my size up to this extent. I can, however, go on swelling
my size as long as I wish. And, O Bhima, amidst foes, my size increaseth
exceedingly by its own energy.’

Vaisampayana said, ‘Witnessing that dreadful and wonderful
body of Hinuman, like unto the Vindhya mountain, the son ot the
wind-god became bewildered. Then with his down standing erect, the
noble-minded Bhima, joining his hands, replied unto Hanuman saying
(there), ‘O lord, by me have been beheld the vast dimensions of thy
body. Do thou (now), O highly powerful one, decrease thyself by thy _
own power. Surely I cannot look at thee, like unto the sun risen, and
of immeasurable (power), and irrepressible, and resembling the moun-
tain. Mainaka. O hero, to-day this wonder of my heart is very great,
that thou remaining by his side, Rama should have encountered Ravana
personally. Depending on the strength of thy arms, thou wert capable
of instantly destroying Lanka, with its warriors, and horses, elephants
and chariots. Surely, O son of the wind-god, there is nothing that is
incapable of being achieved by thee ; and in fight, Ravana together with
his followers was no match for thee single-handed.’ *

Vaisampayana continued, “Thus addressed by Bhima, Hanuman,
the chief of monkeys, answered in affectionate words uttered in solemn
accents, ‘O mighty-armed one, O Bharata, it is even as thou sayest.
O Bhimasena, that worst of Rakshasas was no match for me. But if I

=== PAGE 75 ===

VANA PARVA 321

had slain Ravana—that thorn of the worlds—the glory of Raghu’s son
would have been obscured ;—and for this it is that I left him alone.
By slaying that lord of the Rakshasas together with his followers, and
bringing back Sita unto his own city, that hero hath established his fame
among men. Now, O highly wise one, being intent on the welfare of
thy brothers, and protected by the wind-god, do thou go along a
fortunate and auspicious way. O foremost of the Kurus, this way will
lead thee to the Saugandhika wood. (Proceeding in this direction), thou
wilt behold the gardens of Kuvera, guarded by Yakshas and Rakshasas.
Do thou not pluck the flowers (there) personally by thy own force; for
the gods deserve regard specially from mortals. O best of the Bharata
tace, the gods confer their favour (upon men), (being propitiated) by
offerings, and homas, and reverential salutations, and recitation of mantras,
and veneration, O Bharata. Do thou not, therefore, act with rashness,
O child ; and do thou not deviate from the duties of thy order. Sticking
to the duties of thy order, do thou understand and follow the highest
morality. Without knowing duties and serving the old, even persons
like unto Vrihaspati cannot understand profit and religion. One should
ascertain with discrimination those cases in which vice goeth under the
name of virtue, and virtue goeth under the name of vice—(cases) in
which people destitute of intelligence become perplexed. From religious
observances proceedeth merit ; and in merit are established the Vedas ;
and from the Vedas sacrifices come into existence ; and _ by sacrifices are
established the gods. The gods are maintained by the (celebration of)
sacrifices prescribed by the Vedas and the religious ordinances ; while
men maintain themselves by (following) the ordinances of Vrihaspati
and Usanas and also by these avocations, by which the world is main-
tained,—serving for wages, (receiving) taxes, merchandise, agriculture
and tending kine and sheep. The world subsisteth by profession.
The (study of the) three Vedas and agriculture and trade and govern-
ment constitutes, it isordained by the wise, the professions of the
twice-born ones ; and each order maintaineth itself by following the
profession prescribed for it. And when these callings are properly
pursued, the world is maintained with ease. If, however, people do not
righteously lead their lives, the world becometh lawless, in consequence
of the want of Vedic merit and government. And if people do not resort
to (their) prescribed vocations, they perish, but by regularly following
the three professions, they bring about religion. The religion of the
Brahmanas consisteth in the knowledge of the soul and the hue of that
order alone is universally the same. The celebration of sacrifices, and
study and bestowal of gifts are well-known to be the three duties com-
mon (to all these orders ). Officiating at sacrifices, teaching and the
acceptance of gifts are the duties of a Brahmana. To rule (the subjects)
is the duty of the Kshatriya ; and to tend (cattle), that of the Vaisya,
while to serve the twice-born orders is said to be the duty of the Sudra.
The Sudras cannot beg alms, or perform homas, or observe vows; and
they must dwell in the habitation of their masters. Thy vocation, O
son of Kunti, is that of the Kshatriya, which is to protect (the subjects).
Do thou carry out thy own duties, in an humble spirit, restraining thy
senses, That king alone can govern, who taketh counsel of experienced
men, and is helped by honest, intelligent and learned ministers ; but a
king who is addicted to vices, meeteth with defeat. Then only is the
order of the world secured, when the king duly puniseth and confer-
eth favours. Therefore, it is necessary to ascertain through spies the
nature of the hostile country, its fortified places and the allied force of

10

=== PAGE 76 ===

322 MAHABHARATA

emy and their prosperity and decay and the way in which they
ee the adhesion of the powers they have drawn to their side. Spies
are among the important auxiliaries of the king; and tact, diplomacy,
prowess, chastisement, favour and cleverness lead to success. And suc-
cess is to be attained through these, either in separation, or combined—
namely, conciliation, gift, sowing dissensions, chastisement, and sight.
And, O chief of the Bharatas, polity hath for its root diplomacy ; and
diplomacy also is the main qualification of spies. And polity, if well-
judged conferreth success. Therefore, in matters of polity the counsels
of Brahmanas should be resorted to. And in secret affairs, these should
not be consulted,—namely, a woman, a sot, a boy, a covetous person, a
mean-minded individual, and he that betrayeth signs of insanity. Wise
men only should be consulted, and affairs are to be despatched through
officers that are able. And polity must be executed through persons
that are friendly ; but dunces should in all affairs be excluded. In
matters religious, pious men ; and in matters of gain, wise men; and in
guarding families, eunuchs ; and in all crooked affairs, crooked men,
must be employed. And the propriety or impropriety of the resolution
of the enemy, as also their strength or weakness, must be ascertained
through one’s own as well as hostile spies. Favour should be shown to
honest persons that have prudently sought protection ; but lawless and
disobedient individuals should be punished. And when the king justly
punisheth and showeth favour, the dignity of the law is well maintain.
ed, O son of Pritha, thus have I expounded unto thee the hard duties of
kings difficult to comprehend. Do thou with equanimity observe these
as prescribed for thy order. The Brahmanas attain heaven through
merit, mortification of the senses, and sacrifice. The Vaisyas attain
excellent state through gifts, hospitality, and religious acts. The Kshatri-
yas attain the celestial regions by protecting and chastising the subjects,
uninfluenced by lust, malice, avarice and anger. If kings justly punish
(their subjects ), they go to the place whither repair meritorious
persons.

SECTION CL
( Lirtha-yatra Prava continued )

Vaisampayana said, “Then contracting that huge body of his,
which he had assumed at will, the monkey with his arms again embraced
Bhimasena. And, O Bharata, on Bhima being embraced by his brother,
his fatigue went off, and all ( the powers of body ) as also. his strength
were restored. And having gained great accession of strength, he
thought that there was none equal to him in physical power. And with
tears in his eyes, the monkey from affection again addressed Bhima in
choked utterance, saying, ‘O hero, repair to thy own abode. May I be
incidentally remembered by thee in thy talk! O best of Kurus, do not
tell any one that I abide here. O thou of great strength, the most excel-
lent of the wives cf the gods and Gandharvas resort to this place, and
the time of their arrival is nigh. My eyes have been blessed (by seeing
thee). And, O Bhima, having felt a human being by coming in contact
with thee, I have been put in mind of that son of Raghu, who was
Vishnu himself under the name of Rama, and who delighted the heart
of the world ; and who wasas the sun in regard to the lotus face of Sita,

=== PAGE 77 ===

VANA PARVA 323

and also to that darkness—Ravana. Therefore, O heroic son of Kunti,
let not thy meeting with me be fruitless. Do thou with fraternal
feeling ask of me a boon, O Bharata. If this be thy wish, that going to
Varanavata, I may destroy the insignificant sons of Dhritarashtra—even
this will I immediately do. Or if this be thy wish that, that city may
be ground by me with rocks, or that I may bind Duryodhana and bring
him before thee, even this will I do to-day, O thou of mighty strength.’ ”

Vaisampayana said, “Hearing those words of that high-souled
one, Bhimasena with a cheerful heart answered Hanuman, saying, ‘O
foremost of monkeys, I take all this as already performed hy thee. Good
happen to thee. O mighty- armed one ! I ask of thee this,—be thou well
pleased with me. O powerful one, on thy having become our protec-
tor, the Pandavas have found help. Even by thy prowess shall we
conquer all foes.” Thus addressed, Hanuman said unto Bhimasena,
‘From fraternal feeling and affection, I will do good unto thee, by diving
into the army of thy foes copiously furnished with arrows and javelins,
And, O highly powerful one, O hero, when thou shalt give leonine roats,
then shall I with my own, add force to shouts. Remaining on the flag-
__ staff of Arjuna’s car will I emit fierce shouts that will damp the energy
of thy foes. Thereby ye willslay them easily.” Having said this unto
Bendu's son, and also pointed him out the way, Hanuman vanished at

it spot.”

SECTION CLI

(Wirtha-yatra Parva continued)

Vaisampayana said, “When that foremost of monkeys had gone
away, Bhima, the best of strong men, began to range the huge Gandha-
madana along that path. And he went on, thinking of Hanuman’s
body and splendour unrivalled on earth, and also of the greatness and
dignity of Dasaratha’s son. And proceeding in search of the place filled
with lotuses of that kind, Bhima beheld romantic woods, and groves,
and rivers, and lakes graced with trees bearing blossoms, and flowery
woodlands variegated with various flowers. And, O Bharata, he beheld
herds of mad elephants besmeared with mud, resembling masses of

uring clouds. And that graceful one went on with speed, beholding

yy the wayside woods wherein there stood with their mates deer of
quick glances, holding the grass in their mouths. And fearless from
prowess, Bhimasena, as if invited by the breeze-shaken trees of the
forest ever fragrant with flowers, bearing delicate coppery twigs, plung-
ed into the mountainous regions inhabited by buffaloes, bears and
leopards. And on the way, he passed by lotus-lakes haunted by mad-
dened black-bees, having romantic descents and woods, and on account
of the presence of lotus-buds, appearing as if they had joined their
hands (before Bhima). And having for his provisions on the journey
the words of Draupadi, Bhima went on with speed, his mind and sight
fixed on the blooming slopes of the mountain. And when the sun
Passed the meridian, he saw in the forest scattered over with deer, a
mighty river filled with fresh golden lotuses. And being crowded with
swans and Karandavas, and graced with Chakravakas, the river looked
like a garland of fresh lotuses put on by the mountain. And in that
tiver that one of great strength found the extensive assemblage of

=== PAGE 78 ===

324 MAHABHARATA

Saugandhika lotuses, effulgent as the rising sun, and delightful to behold.
And beholding it, Pandu’s son thought within himself that his object
had been gained, and also mentally presented himself before his be-
loved worn out by exile.”

SECTION CLII
(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

Vaisampayana said, “Having reached that spot, Bhimasena saw
in the vicinity of the Kailasa cliff, that beautiful lotus lake surrounded
by lovely woods, and guarded by the Rakshasas. And it sprang from
the cascades contiguous to the abode of Kuvera. And it was beautiful
to behold, and was furnished with a wide-spreading shade and abounded
in various trees and creepers and was covered with green lilies. And
this unearthly lake was filled with golden lotuses, and swarmed with
diverse species of birds. And its banks were beautiful and devoid of
mud. And situated on the rocky elevation this expanse of excellent
water was exceedingly fair. And it was the wonder of the world and
healthful and of romantic sight. In that lake the son of Kunti saw the
water of ambrosial taste and cool and light and clear and fresh ; and the
Pandava drank of it profusely. And that unearthly receptacle of
waters was covered with celestial Saugandhika lotuses, and was also
spead over with beautiful variegated golden lotuses of excellent frag-
rance having graceful stalks of lapis lazulis. And swayed by swans and
Karandavas, these lotuses were scattering fresh farina. And this lake
was the sporting region of the high-souled Kuvera, the king of the
Yakshas. And it was held in high regard by the Gandharvas the
Apsaras and the celestials. And it was frequented by the celestial sages
and the Yakshas and the Kimpurushas and the Rakshasas and the Kin-
naras ; and it was well-protected by Kuvera. And as soon as he beheld
that river and that unearthly lake, Kunti’s son, Bhimasena of mighty
strength became exceedingly delighted. And agreeably to the mandate
of their king, hundreds and thousands of Rakshasas, named Krodhavasas,
were guarding that lake, wearing uniforms and armed with various
weapons. And as that repressor of foes, iCunti’s son, the heroic Bhima
of dreadful prowess, clad in deer-skins and wearing golden armlets and
equipped with weapons and girding his sword on, was fearlessly proceed-
ing, with the view of gathering the lotus, those (Rakshasas) saw him
and immediately began to address each other, shouting forth, ‘It be-
hoveth you to enquire for the errand on which this foremost of men,
clad in deer skins, and equipped with arms, hath come.’ Then they all
approached the effulgent Vrikodara of mighty arms and asked, ‘Who
art thou ? Thou shouldst answer our questions. We see thee in the
guise of an asectic and yet armed with weapons. O thou of mighty
intelligence, do thou unfold unto us the object with which thou hast
come (hither).’”

SECTION CLIII
(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)
“Bhima said, ‘I am the son of Pandu, and next by birth to Yudhish-

thira the just, and my name is Bhimasena.. O Rakshasas,I have come
with my brothers to the jujube named Visala. At that place, Panchali

=== PAGE 79 ===

VANA PARVA 325

saw an excellent Saugandhika lotus, which, of a certainty, was carried
thither by the wind from this region. She wisheth to have those flowers
in abundance. Know ye, ye Rakshasas, that I am engaged in fulfilling
the desire of my wedded wife of faultless features, and have come
hither to procure the flowers. Thereat the Rakshasas said, ‘O fore-
most of men, this spot is dear unto Kuvera, and it is his sporting
region. Men subject to death cannot sport here. O Vrikodara, the
celestial sages, and the gods taking the permission of the chief of the
Yakshas, drink of this lake, and sport herein. And, O Pandava, the
Gandharvas and the Apsaras also divert themselves in this Jake. That
wicked person who, disregarding the lord of treacures, unlawfully
attempteth to sport here, without doubt, meeteth with destruction.
Disregarding him, thou seekest to take away the lotuses from this place
by main force. Why then dost thou say that thou art the brother of
Yudhishthira the just? First, taking the permission of the lord of
Yakshas, do thou drink of this lake and take away the flowers. If thou
dost not do this, thou shalt not be able even to glance at a single lotus
Bhimasena said, “Ye Rakshasas, Ido not see the lord of wealth here
And even if I did see that mighty king, I would not beseech him
Kshatriyas never beseech (any body). This is the eternal morality ; and
Iby no means wish to forsake the Kshatriya morality. And, further
this lotus-lake hath sprung from the cascades of the mountain ; it hath’
not been excavated in the mansion of Kuvera. Therefore it belongeth
equally to all creatures with Vaisravana. In regard to a thing of sucha
nature, who goeth to beseech another ?’”

Vaisampayana said, “Having said this unto the Rakshasas, the
mighty-armed and exceedingly unforbearing Bhimasena of great strength
plunged into the lotus-lake. Thereat that powerful one was forbidden
by the Rakshasas, saying, “Do not do this; and they from all sides
began to abuse him in anger. But slighting these Rakshasas, that mighty
one of dreadful prowess plunged (farther and farther). Now they all
prepared for opposing him. And with eyes rolling, they upraised their
arms, and rushed in wrath at Bhimasena, exclaiming, ‘Seize him !’ ‘Bind
him! Hewhim! We shall cook Bhimasena, and eat him up! There-
upon that one of great force, taking his ponderous and mighty mace in-
laid with golden plates, like unto the mace of Yama himself, turned
towards those, and then said, ‘Stay ! At this, they darted at him with
vehemence, brandishing lances, and axes, and other weapons. And
wishing to destroy Bhima, the dreadful and fierce Krodhavasas surroun-
ed Bhima on all sides. But that one, being endued with strength, had
been begotten by Vayu in the womb of Kunti ; and he was heroic and
energetic, and the slayer of foes, and ever devoted to virtue and truth,
and incapable of being vanquished by enemies through prowess. Accord-
ingly this high-souled Bhima defeating all the manceuvres of the foes,
and breaking their arms, killed on the banks of the lake more than a
hundred, commencing with the foremost. And then witnessing his
prowess and strength, and the force of his skill, and also the might of
his arms; and unable to bear (the onset), those prime heroes all of a
sudden fled on all sides in bands,

“Beaten and pierced by Bhimasena, those Krodhavasas quitted the
field of battle, and in confusion quickly fled towards the Kailasa cliff,
supporting themselves in the sky. Having thus by the exercise of his
prowess defeated those hosts, even as Sakra had defeated the armies of
Daityas and Danavas, he (Bhima), now that he had conquered the

=== PAGE 80 ===

326 MAHABHARATA

enemy, plueged into the lake and began to gather the lotuses, with the
object ‘of patti his purpose. And as he drank of the waters, like unto
nectar, his energy and strength were again fully restored ; and he fell
to plucking and gathering Saugandhika lotuses of excellent fragrance.
On the other hand, the Krodhavasas, being driven by the might of
Bhima and exceedingly terrified, presented themselves before the lord
of wealth, and gave an exact account of Bhima’s prowess and strength
in fight, Hearing their words, the god (Kuvera) smiled and then said,
‘Let Bhima take for Krishna as many lotuses as he likes. This is all-
ready known to me.’ Thereupon taking the permission of the lord of
wealth, those (Rakshasas) renouncing anger, went to that foremost of
the Kurus, and in that lotus-lake beheld Bhima alone, disporting in
delight.”

SECTION CLIV

(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

Vaisampayana said, “Then, O best of the Bharatas, Bhima began
collect those rare unearthly, variegated and fresh flowers in abun-
lance.

“And it came to pass that a high and violent wind, piercing to the
touch, and blowing about gravels, arose, portending battle. And fright-
ful meteors began to shoot, with thundering sounds. And being en-
veloped by darkness, the sun became pale, his rays being obscured. And
on Bhima displaying his prowess, dreadful sounds of explosion rang
through the sky. And the earth began to tremble, and dust fell in
showers. And the points of the heavens became reddened. And beasts
and birds began tocry in shrill tones. And every thing became envelop-
ed in darkness ; and nothing could be distinguished. And other evil
omens besides these appeared there. Witnessing these strange pheno-
mena, Dharma’s son Yudhishithira, the foremost of speakers, said,
‘Who is it that will overcome us? Ye Pandavas who take delight in
battle, go0d betide you! Do ye equip yourselves. From what I see, I
infer that the time for the display of our prowess hath drawn nigh.’
Having said this, the king looked around. Then not finding Bhima, that
repressor of foes, Dharma’s son, Yudhishthira, enquired of Krishna
and the twins standing near regarding his brother, Bhima, the doer of
dreadful deeds in battle, saying, ‘O Panchali, is Bhima intent upon
performing some great feat, or hath that one delighting in daring deeds
already achieved some brave deed? Portending some great danger,
these omens have appeared all around, indicating a fearful battle.’
When Yudhishthira said this, his beloved queen, the high-minded
Krishna of sweet smiles, answered him, in order to remove his anxiety,
‘O king, that Saugandhika lotus which to-day had been brought by
the wind, I had out of love duly shown unto Bhimasena ; and I had also
said unto that hero, ‘If thou canst find many of this species, procuring
even all of them, do thou return speedily,—O Pandava, that mighty-
armed one, with the view of gratifying my desire, may have gone to-
wards the north-east to bring them.’ Having heard these words of hers,
the king said unto twins, ‘Let us together follow the path taken by
Vrikodara. Let the Rakshasas carry those Brahmanas that are fatigued
and weak. O Ghatotkacha, O thou like unto a celestial, do thou carry
Krishn’. Iam convinced and it is plain that Bhima hath dived into

=== PAGE 81 ===

VANA PARVA 327

the forest ; for it is long since he hath gone, and in speed he resembleth
the wind, and in clearing over the ground, he is swift like unto Vinata’s
son, and he will ever leap into the sky, and alight at his will. O Rak-
shasas, we shall follow him through your prowess. He will not at first do
any wrong to the Siddhas versed in the Vedas. O best of the Bharatas,
saying, ‘So be it, Hidimva’s son and the other Rakshasas who knew
the quarter where the lotus lake of Kuvera was situated, started cheer-
fully with Lomasa, bearing the Pandavas, and many of the Brahmanas.
Having shortly reached that spot, they saw that romantic lake covered
with Saugandhika and other lotuses and surrounded by beautiful woods.
And on its shores they beheld the high-souled and vehement Bhima, as
also the slaughtered Yakshas of large eyes, with their bodies, eyes, arms
and thighs smashed, and their heads crushed. And on seeing the high.
souled Bhima, standing on the shore of that lake in an angry mood, and
with steadfast eyes, and biting his lip, and stationed on the shore of the
lake with his mace upraised by his two hands, like unto Yama with his
mace in his hand at the time of the universal dissolution, Yudhishthira
the just, embraced him again and again, and said in sweet words, ‘O
Kaunteya, what hast thou done? Good betide thee! If thou wishest
to do good unto me, thou shouldst never again commit such a rash act,
nor offend the gods.’ Having thus instructed the son of Kunti, and
taken the flowers, those god-like ones began to sport in that very
lake. At this instant, the huge-bodied warders of the gardens, equipped
with rocks for weapons, presented themselves at the spot. And seeing
Yudhishthira the just and the great sage Lomasa and Nakula and Saha-
deva and also the other foremost of Brahmanas, they all bowed them-
selves down in humility. And being pacified by Yudhishthira the just,
the Rakshasas became satisfied. And with the knowledge of Kuvera,
those foremost of Kurus for a short time dwelt pleasantly at that spot
on the slopes of the Gandhamadana, expecting Arjuna.”

SECTION CLV _
(Tirtha-yatra Parva continued)

Vaisampayana said, “Once upon a time Yudhishthira, while living
at that place, addressed Krishna, his brother, and the Brahmanas, say-
ing, ‘By us have been attentively seen one after another sacred and
auspicious tirthas, and woods, delightful to beheld, which had ere this
been visited by the celestials and the high-souled sages, and which had
been worshipped by the Brahmanas. And in various sacred asylums we
have performed ablutions with Brahmanas, and have heard from them
the lives and acts of many sages, and also of many royal sages of yore,
and other pleasant stories. And with flowers and water have the gods
been worshipped by us. And with offerings of fruits and roots as avail-
able at each place we have gratified the pitris. And with the high-souled
ones have we performed ablutions in all sacred and beautiful mountains
and lakes, and also in the highly sacred ocean. And with the Brahmanas
we have bathed in the Ila, and in the Saraswati, and in the Sindhu, and
in the Yamuna, and in the Narmada, and in various other romantic
tirthas. And having passed the source of the Ganga, we have seen many
a lovely hill and the Himalaya mountains, inhabited by various species
of birds, and also the jujube named Visala, where there is the hermitage
of Nara and Narayana. And (finally) we have beheld this unearthly lake,

=== PAGE 82 ===

328 MAHABHARATA

held in veneration by the Siddhas, the gods and the sages. In fact, O
foremost of Brahmanas, we have one by one carefully seen all celebrated
and sacred spots in company with the high-souled Lomasa. Now,
Bhima, how shall we repair to the sacred abode of Vaisravana, inhabited
by the Siddhas? Do thou think of the means of entering (the same).

Vaisampayana said, “When that king had said this, an aerial
voice spake, saying, ‘Thou will not be able to go to that inaccessible
spot. By this very way, do thou repair from this region of Kuvera to
the place whence thou hadst come—even to the hermitage of Nara and
Narayana, known by the name of Vadari. Thence, O Kaunteya, thou
wilt repair to the hermitage of Vrishaparva, abounding in flowers and
fruit, and inhabited by the Siddhas and the Charanas. Having passed
that, O Partha, thou wilt proceed to the hermitage of Arshtisena, and
from thence thou wilt behold the abode of Kuvera.’ Just at that
moment the breeze became fresh, and gladsome and cool and redolent
of unearthly fragrance ; and it showered blossoms. And on hearing the
celestial yoice from the sky, they all were amazed,—more specially those
earthly rishis and the Brahmanas. On hearing this mighty marvel, the
Brahmana Dhaumya, said, ‘This should not be gainsaid. O Bharata, let
this be so. Thereupon, king Yudhishthira obeyed him. And having
returned to the hermitage of Nara and Narayana, he began to dwell
pleasantly, surrounded by Bhimasena and his other brothers, Panchali
and the Brahmanas.”

SECTION CLVI
(Jatasura-badha Parva)

Vaisampayana continued, “Thus dwelling with the Brahmanas
in that best of mountains, in expectation of Arjuna’s return, when
Pandavas had grown confident and when all those Rakshasas together
with Bhima’s son had departed, one day while Bhimasena was away, a
Rakshasa all of a sudden carried off Yudhishthira the just and the twins
and Krishna. That Rakshasa (in the guise of a Brahmana) had cons-
tantly remained in the company of the Pandavas, alleging that he was
a high-class Brahmana, skilled in counsel, and versed in all the Sastras.
His object was to possess himself of the bows, the quivers and the other
materialimplements belonging to the Pandavas; and he had been
watching for an opportunity of ravishing Draupadi. And that wicked
and sinful one was named Jatasura. And, O king of kings, Pandu’s son
(Yudhishthira) had been supporting him, but knew not that wretch like
unto a fire covered with ashes.

“And once on a_day while that repressor of foes, Bhimasena, was
out a-hunting, he (the Rakshasa), seeing Ghatotkacha and his followers
scatter in different directions and seeing those vow-observing great
rishis, ot ascetic wealth, viz. Lomasa and the rest, away for bathing
and collecting flowers, assumed a different form, gigantic and monstrous
and frightful; and having secured all the arms (of the Pandavas)
as also Draupadi, that wicked one fled away taking the three Pandavas.
Thereupon that son of Pandu, Sahadeva, extricated himself with
exertion, and by force snatched the sword named Kausika from the
grasp of the enemy and began to call Bhimasena, taking the direction
in which that mighty one had gone. And on being carried off Yudhish-

=== PAGE 83 ===

VANA PARVA 329

thira the just, addressed him (that Rakshasa), saying, ‘O stupid one, thy
merit decreaseth (even by this act of thine). Dost thou not pay heed
unto the established order of nature? Whether belonging to the human
race, or to the lower orders, all pay regard to virtue,—more specially
the Rakshasas. In the first instance, they knew virtue better than
others. Having considered all these, thou ought to adhere to virtue.
O Rakshasa, the gods, the pitris, the Siddhas, the rishis, the Gandharvas,
the brutes and even the worms and ants depend for their lives on men;
id thou too liveth through that agency. If prosperity attendeth the
fiuman race, thy race also prospereth; and if calamities befall the
former, even the celestials suffer grief. Being gratified by offerings, do
the gods thrive. O Rakshasa, we are the guardians, governors and
Preceptors of kingdoms. If kingdoms become unprotected, whence can
Proceed prosperity and happiness? Unless there be offence, a Rakshasa
should. not violate a king, O man-eating one, we have committed no
wrong, ever so little. Living on vighasa, we serve the gods and others
to the best of our power. And we are never intent upon bowing down
to our superiors and Brahmanas. A friend, and one confinding, and he
whose food hath been partaken of, and he that hath afforded shelter,
should never be injured. Thou hast lived in our place happily, being
duly honoured. And, O evil-minded one, having partaken of our food,
low canst thou carry usoff? Andas thy acts are so improper and as
thou hast grown in age without deriving any benefit and as thy propen-
sities are evil, so thou deservest to die tor nothing, and for nothing wilt
thou die to-day. And if thou beest really evil-disposed and devoid of
all virtue, do thou render us back our weapons and ravish Draupadi
after fight. But if through stupidity thou must do this deed, then in
the world thou wilt only reap demerit and infamy. O Rakshasa, by
doing violence to this female of the human race, thou hast drunk poison,
after having shaken the vessel. Thereupon, Yudhishthira made him.
self ponderous to the Rakshasa. And being oppressed with the weight,
he could not proceed rapidly as before. Then addressing Draupadi,
Nakula and Sahadeva, Yudhishthira said, ‘Do ye not entertain any fear
of this wretched Rakshasa. I have checked his speed. The mighty.
armed son of the Wind-god may not be far away ; and on Bhima coming
up at the next moment, the Rakshasa will not live.’ O king, staring at
 Rakshasa bereft of sense, Sahadeva addressed Yudhishthira, the
son of Kunti, saying, ‘What can be more meritorious for a Kshatriya
than to fall in fight, or defeat a foe? O repressor of foes, we will fight
and either this one will slay us, or we shall slay him, O mighty-armed
one. Verily this is the place and time, O king. And, O thou of
unfailing prowess, the time hath come for the di:play of our Kshatriya
virtu2. lt behoveth usto attain heaven either by gaining victory or
being slain. Ii the sun sets to-day, the Rakshasa living yet, O Bharata,
Twill not any more say that] ama Kshatriya. Ho! Ho! Rakshasa,
say! Iam Pandu's son, Sahadeva. Either, after having kilied me,
carry off this lady, or being slain, lie senseless here.’

“Madri’s son, Sahadeva, was speaking thus, when Bhimasena made
his appearince, with a mace in his hand, like unto Vasava himself
wielding the thunder-bolt. And here he saw his two brothers and the
noble-minded Draupadi (on the shoulders of the demon), and Sahadeva
on the ground rebuking the Rakshasa and also that stupid Rakshasa
himself deprived of sense by Fate, going round in different directions
through bewilderment caused by Destiny. And finding his brothers
and Draupadi being carried off, Bhima of mighty strength was fired with

i

=== PAGE 84 ===

33) MAHABHARATA

wrath, and addressed the Rakshasa, saying, ‘I had ere this found thee
out for a wicked wight trom thy scrutiny of our weapons ; but as I had
no apprehension oi thze, sol had notslain thee at that time. Thou
wert in the disguise of a Brahmana—nor didst thou say anything harsh
unto us. And thou didst take delight in pleasing us. And thou also
didst not do us wrong. And, furthermore, thou wert our guest. How
could I, therefore, slay thee, who wert thus innocent of offence, and who
wert in the disguise of a Brahmana ? He that knowing such a one to be
even a Rakshasa, slayeth him, goes to hell. Further, thou canst not
be killed before the time cometh. Surely to-day thou hast reached the
fullness of thy time, in as much as thy mind hath been thus turned by
the wonder-pertorming Fate towards carrying off Krishna. By
committing thyself to this deed, thou hast swallowed up the hook fasten-
ed to the sine of Fate. So like unto a fish in water, whose mouth hath
been hooked, how canst thou live to-day? Thou shalt not have to go
whither thou intendest to, or whither thou hadst already gone men-
tally ; but thou shalt go whither have repaired Vaka and Hidimva.’
“Thus addressed by Bhima, the Rakshasa in alarm put them down;
and being forced by Fate, approached for fight, And with his lips trem-
bling in anger he spake unto Bhima, saying, ‘Wretch! I have not been
bewildered ; J had been delaying tor thee. To-day will I offer oblations
of thy blood to those Kakshasas who, 1 had heard, have been slain by
thee in fight.’ Thus addressed, Bhima, as if bursting with wrath, like
unto Yama himselt at the time of the universal dissolution, rushed to- —
wards the Kakshasa, licking the corners of his mouth and staring at him
as he struck his own arms with the hands. And seeing Bhima waiting in
expectation ot fight, the Rakshasa also darted towards him in anger, like
unto Vali towards the wielder of the thunderbolt, repeatedly gaping —
and licking the corners ot his mouth. And when a dreadful wrestling
ensued between those two, both the sons of Madri, waxing exceeding
wroth rushed torward; but Kunti’s son, Vrikodara, forbade them with
asmile and said, ‘Witness ye! 1 am more thana match for this Rakshasa.
By my own selt and by my brothers, and by my merit, and by my good.
deeds, and by my sacritices, do 1 swear that I shall slay this Rakshasa.’
And atter this was said, those two heroes, the Rakshasa and Vrikodara —
challenging each other, caught each other by the arms. And they not
torgiv ing each other, then there ensued a contlict between the infuriated
bhima andthe Kakshasa, like unto that between a god anda demon.
And repeatedly uprooting trees, those two of mighty strength struck
each other, shouting and roaring like two masses ot clouds. And those
foremost or athietes, each wishing to kill the other, and rushing at the
other with vehemence, broke down many a gigantic tree by their thighs.
Thus that encuunter with trees, destructive ot plants, went on like
unto that between thz two brothers Vali and Sugriva—desirous of the
possession of a single woman. brandishing trees tor a moment, they
struck each other with them, shouting incessantly. And when all the
trees Of taz spot Mad been puiled down and crushed into fibres by them
endeavouring to Kill each other, then, O Bharata, those two of mighty
strength, taxing up rocks, began to fight tor a while, like unto a
mountain aad a mighty mass or clouds. And not sudering each other,
they tell to strixing each ocher witn hard and large crags, resembling
vehement thuaver-ooits. Then trom strength detying each other, they
again darted at each other, and grasping each other by their arms, began
to wrestie like unto two elephants. And next they dealt each other
fierce blows. And then those two mighty ones began to make chattering

=== PAGE 85 ===

VANA PARVA 331

sounds by gnashing their teeth. And at length, having clenched his fist
like a five-headed snake, Bhima with force dealt a blow on the neck of
the Rakshasa. And when struck by that fist of Bhima, the Rikshisa
became faint, Bhimasena st.04, catching hold of that exhaust2{ one.
And then the god-like mishty-armed Bhima lifted him with his two
arms, and dashing him with force on the ground, the son of Pandu
smashed all his limbs. And striking him with his elbow, h2 severed
from his body the head with bitten lips and rolling eyes, like unto a
fruit from its stem. And Jatasura’s head being severed by Bhimasena's
might, he fell besmeared with gore, and having bitten lips. Having
slain Jatasura, Bhima presented himself before Yudhishthira , and the

foremost Brahmanas began to eulogise him (Bhima) even as the Marutas
(eulogise) Vasava.”

SECTION CLVII
(Yaksha-yuddha Parva)

Vaisampayana continued, “On that Rikshasa having been slain,
that lord, the royal son of Kunti, returned to the hermitage of Narayana
and began to dwell there. And once on a time, remembering his
brother Jaya (Arjuna), Yudhishthira summoned all his brothers, together
with Draupadi and said these words, ‘We have passed thee four years
peacefully ranging the woods. It hath been appointed by Vibhatsu that
about the fifth year he willcome to that monarch of mountains, the
excellent cliff Sweta, ever graced with festivities held by blooming
plants and maddened Kokilas and black bees, and peacocks, and chatakas
and inhabited by tigers, and boars, and buffaloes, and gavayas, and
deer, and ferocious bests ; and sacred ; and lovely with blown lotuses
of a hundred and a thousand petals, and blooming lilies and blue lilies
and frequented by the celestials and the Asuras. And we also, eagerly
anxious of meeting him on his arrival have made up our minds to repair
thither. Partha of unrivalled prowess hath appointed with me, saying,
‘I shall remain abroad for five years, with the object of learning
military science.’ In the place like unto the region of the gods. shall
we behold the wielder of Gandiva, arrive after having obtained the
weapons. Having said this, the Pandava summoned the Brahmanas,
and the sons of Pritha having gone round the ascetics of rigid austerities
and thereby pleased them, informed them of the matter mentioned
above. Thereupon the Brahmanas gave their assent, saying, ‘This
shall be attended by prosperity and welfare. O foremost of the
Bharatas, these troubles shall result in happiness. O pious one, gaining
the earth by the Kshatriya virtue, thou shalt govern it. Then in ob>
dience to these words of the ascetics, that repressor of foes, Yudhishthira,
set out with his brothers and those Brahmanas, followed by the Rakshasa
and protected by Lomasa. And that one of mighty energy, and of
staunch vows, with his brothers, at places went on foot ani at others
were carried by the Rakshasas. Then king Yudhishthira, apprehending
many troubles, proceeded towards the north abounding in lion: and
tigers and elephants. And beholding on the way the mountain Mainaka
and the base of the Gandhamadana and that rocky mass Sweta and
many a crystal rivulet higher and higher up the mountain, he reached
on the seventeenth day the sacred slopes of the Himalayas. And, O
king, not far from the Gandhamadana, Pandu’s son beheld on the sacred
slopes of the Himavan covered with various trees and creepers the holy
hermitage of Vrishaparva surrounded by blossoming trees growin$ neir
the cascades. And when those repressors of foes, the sons of Pandu, had

=== PAGE 86 ===

332 MAHABHARATA

recovered from fatigue, they went to the royal sage, the pious Vrisha+
parva and greeted him. And that royal sage received with affection
those foremost of Bharatas, even as his own sons. And those repressors
of foes passed there seven nights, duly regarded. And when the eighth
day came, taking the permission of that sage celebratedover the worlds,
they prepared to start on their journey. And having one by one
introduced unto Vrishaparva those Brahmanas, who, duly honoured,
remained in his charge as friends ; and having also entrusted the high-
souled Vrishaparva with their remaining robes, the sons of Pandu, 0
king, left in the hermitage of Vrishaparva their sacrificial vessels
together with their ornaments and jewels. And wise and pious and
versed in every duty and having a knowledge of the past as well as the
future, that one gave instructions unto those best of the Bharatas, as
unto his own sons. Then taking his permission those high-souled ones
set out towards the north. And as they set out the magnanimous
Vrishaparva followed them to a certain distance. Then having entrust+
ed the Pandavas unto the care of the Brahmanas and instructed and
blessed them and given directions concerning their course, Vrishaparva
of mighty energy retraced his steps.

“Then Kunti’s son, Yudhishthira of unfailing prowess, together
with his brothers, began to proceed on foot along the mountain path,
inhabited by various kinds of beasts. And having dwelt at the moun.
tain slopes, densely overgrown with trees, Pandu’s son ‘on the fourth
day reached the Sweta mountain, like unto a mighty mass of clouds,
abounding in streams and consisting of a mass of gold and gems. And
taking the way directed by Vrishaparva, they reached one by one the
intended places, beholding various mountains. And over and over
they passed with ease many inaccessible rocks and exeedingly impass-
able caves of the mountain. And Dhaumya and Krishn® and the Parthas
and the mighty sage Lomasa went on ina body and none grew tired.
And those highly fortunate ones arrived at the sacred and mighty
mountain resounding with the cries of birds and beasts and covered
with various trees and creepers and inhabite1 by monkeys, and romantic
and furnished with many lotus-lakes and having marshes and extensive
forests. And then with their down standing erect, they saw the moun-
tain Gandhamadana, the abode of Kimpurushas, frequented by
Siddhas and Charanas and ranged by Vidyadharis and Kinnaris and
inhabited by herds of elephahts and thronged with lions and tigers and
resounding with the roars of Sarabhas and attended by various beasts.
And the war-like sons of Pandu gradually entered into the forest of the
Gandhamadana, like unto the Nandana gardens, delightful to the mind
and heart and worthy of being inhabited and having beautiful groves.
And as those heroes entered with Draupadi and the high-souled

=== PAGE 87 ===

VANA PARVA 33

Brahmanas, they heard notes uttered by the mouths of birds, exceed-
ingly sweet and graceful to the ear and causing delight and dulcet and
broken by reason of excess of animal spirits. And they saw various
trees bending under the weight of fruits in all seasons, and ever bright
with flowers—such as mangoes and hog-plums and bhavyas and
pomegranates, citrons and jacks and lakuchas and plantains and aquatic
reeds and parvatas and champakas and lovely kadamvas and vilwas,
wood-apples and rose-apples and kasmaris and jujubes and figs and
Glomerous figs and banians and aswa_ tthas and khirikas and bhall atakas
and amlakas and bibhitakas and ingudas and karamardas and tindukas
of large fruits—these and many others on the slopes of the Gandha-
madana, clustered with sweet and nectarine fruits. And besided these,
they beheld champakas and asokas and ketakas and vakulas and punna-
gas and saptaparnas and karnikaras, and patals, and beautiful kutajas
and mandaras, and lotuses, and parijatas, and kovidaras, and devadarus,
and salas, and palmyra palms, and tamalas, and pippalas, and salmalis
and kinsukas, and singsapas, and saralas and these were inhabited by
Chakoras, and wood-peckers and chatakas, and various other birds,
singing in sweet tones pleasing to the ear. And they saw lakes beauti-
ful on all sides with aquatic birds, and covered all around with
kumudas, and pundarikas, and kokanadas, and utpalas, and kalharas,
and kamalas and thronged on all sides with drakes and ruddy geese,
and ospreys, and gulls and karandavas, and plavas, and swans, and
cranes, and shags, and other acquatic birds. And those foremost of
men saw those lotus-lakes beautified with assemblages of lotuses, and
ringing with the sweet hum of bees, glad, and drowsy on account of
having drunk the intoxicating honey of lotuses, and reddened with the
farina falling from the lotuscups. And in the groves they beheld with
their hens peacocks maddened with desire caused by the notes of cloud-
trumpets ; and those wood-loving glad peacocks drowsy with desire, were
dancing, spreading in dalliance their gorgeous tails, and were crying in
melodious notes. And some of the peacocks were sporting with their
mates on kutaja trees covered with creepers. And some sat on the
boughs of the kutajas, spreading their gorgeous tails, and looking like
crowns worn by the trees. And in the glades they beheld the graceful
sindhuvaras like unto the darts of Cupid. Andon the summits of the
mountain, they saw blooming karnikaras bearing blossoms of a golden
hue, appearing like ear-rings of excellent make. And in the forest they
saw blossoming kuruvakas, like unto the shafts of Cupid, which smiteth
one with desire and maketh him uneasy. And they saw tilakas appearing
like unto beauty-spots painted on the forehead of the forest. And they
saw mango trees graced with blossoms hummed over by black bees, and
serving the purpose of Cupid's shafts, And on the slopes of the moun-

=== PAGE 88 ===

334 MAHABHARATA

tain there were diverse blossoming trees, looking lovely, some bearing
flowers of a golden hue, and some, of the hue of the forest-conflagration,
and some, red, and some sable, and some green like unto lapises. And be-
sides these, there were ranges of salas and tamalas and patalas and vakula
trees, like unto garlands put on by the summits of mountain. Thus
gradually beholding on the slopes of the mountain many lakes, looking
transparent like crystal, and having swans of white plumage and
resounding with cries of cranes, and filled with lotuses and lilies, and
furnished with waters of delicious feel; and also beholding fragrant
flowers, and luscious fruits, and romantic lakes, and captivating trees,
the Pandavas penetrated into the forest with eyes expanded with
wonder. And (as they proceeded) they were fanned by the breeze of
balmy feel, and perfumed by kamalas and utpalas and kalharas and
pundarikas. Then Yudhishthira pleasantly spake unto Bhima saying,
‘Ah! O Bhima, beautiful is this forest of the Gandhamadana. In this
romantic forest there are various heavenly blossoming wild trees and
creepers, bedecked with foliage and fruit, nor are there any trees that
do not flower. On these slopes of the Gandhamadana, all the trees are
of sleek foliage and fruit. And behold how these lotus-lakes with full-
blown lotuses, and ringing with the hum of black bees, are being agi-
tated by elephants with their mates. Behold another lotus-lake girt with
lines of lotuses, like unto a second Sree in an embodied form wearing
garlands. And in this excellent forest there are beautiful ranges of woods,
rich with the aroma of various blossoms, and hummed over by the
black bees. And, O Bhima, behold on all sides the excellent sporting
ground of the celestials. By coming here, we have attained extra-human
state, and been blessed. O Partha, on these slopes of the Gandhamadana,
yon beautiful blossoming trees, being embraced by creepers with
blossoms at their tops,:look lovely. And, O Bhima, hark unto the notes
of the peacocks crying with their hens on the mountain slopes. And
birds such as chakoras, and satapatras, and maddened kokilas, and par-
rots, are alighting on these excellent flowering trees. And sitting on the
twigs, myriads of jivajivakas of scarlet, yellow and red hues, are looking
at one another. And the cranes are seen near the spots covered with
green and reddish grass, and also by the side of the cascades. And those
birds, bhringarajas, and upachakras, and herons are pouring forth their
notes charming to all creatures. And. lo! with their mates, these ele-
phants furnished with four tusks, and white as lotuses, are agitating that
large lake of the hue of lapises. And from many cascades, torrents high
as several palmyra palms: (placed one upon another) are rushing down
from the cliffs. And many argent minerals splendid,and of the efful-
gence of the sun, and like unto autumnal clouds, are beautifying this »
mighty mountain. And in some places there are minerals of the hue of

=== PAGE 89 ===

VANA PARVA 335

the collyrium, and in some those like unto gold, in some, yellow orpi-
ment and in some, vermilion, and in some, cavesof red arsenic like unto
the evening clouds, and in some, red chalk of the hue of the rabit, and
in some, minerals like unto white and sable clouds ; and in some, those
effulgent as the rising sun, these minerals of great lustre beautify the
mointain. O Partha, as was said by Vrishaparva, the Gandharvas
and the Kimpurushas, in company with their loves, are visible on the
summits of the mountain. And, O Bhima, there are heard various songs
of appropriate measures, and also Vedic hymns, charming to all crea-
tures. Do thou behold the sacred and graceful celestial river Mahaganga,
with swans, resorted to by sagesand Kinnaras. And, O repressor of
foes, see this mountain having minerals, rivulets, and beautiful woods
and beasts, and snakes of diverse shapes anda hundred heads and
Kinnaras, Gandharvas and Apsaras.’”

Vaisampayana said, “Having attained excellent state, those valiant
and warlike repressors of foes with Draupadi and the high-souled
Brahmanas were exceedingly delighted at heart, and they were not
satiated by beholding that monarch of mountains. Thereafter they
saw the hermitage of the royal sage Arshtishena, furnished with flowers,
and trees bearing fruits. Then they went to Arshtishena versed in all
duties of rigid austerities, skeleton-like, and having muscles bare.”

SECTION CLVIII
(Yaksha-yudhha Farva continued)

Vaisampayana continued, “Having approached that one, whose
sins had been consumed by asceticism, Yudhishthira announced his name,
and gladly greeted him, bending his head. And then Krishna, and Bhima,
and the devout twins, having bowed down their heads unto the royal
sage, stood (there) surrounding him. And that priest of the Pandavas,
the virtuous Dhaumya, also duly approached that vow-observing sage.
And by his prophetic eye that virtuous Muni had already known (the
identity of) those foremost of the Kurus, the sons of Pandu. And he said
unto them, ‘Be ye seated.’ And that one of rigid austerities, after having
duly received that chief of the Kurus, when the latter with his brothers
had seated himself enquired after his welfare saying, ‘Dost thou not turn
thy inclination uvon untruth ? And art thou intent upon virtue ? And,
O Partha, hath not thy attention to thy father and thy mother dimi-
nished? Are all thy superiors, and the aged, and those versed in the
Vedas, honoured by thee ?. And O Pritha’s son, dost thou not turn thy
inclination unto sinful acts? And dost thou, O best of the Kurus, pro-
perly know how to perform meritorious acts, and to eschew wicked
deeds? Dost thou not exalt thyself? And are pious men gratified,
being honoured by thee? Andeven dwelling in the woods, dost thou

=== PAGE 90 ===

336 MAHABHARATA

follow virtue alone ? And, O Partha, doth not Dhaumya grieve at thy
conduct ? Dost thou follow the customs of thy ancestors, by charity,
and religious observances, and asceticism, and purity, and candour, and
forgiveness ? And dost thou go along the way taken by the royal sages?
On the birth of a son in their (respective) lines, the Pitris in their regi-
ons, both laugh and grieve, thinking—Will the sinful acts of this son of
ours harm us, or will meritorious deeds conduce to our welfare? He
conquereth both the worlds that payeth homage unto his father, and
mother, and preceptor, and Agni, and fifthly, the soul.’ Yudhishthira
said, ‘O worshipful one, those duties have been mentioned by thee as
excellent. To the best of my power I duly and properly discharge them.’

“Arshtishena said, ‘During the Parvas sages subsisting on air and
water come unto this best of the mountains ranging through the air.
And onthe summits of the mountain are seen amorous Kimpurushas
with their paramours, mutually attached unto each other ; as also, O
Partha, many Gandharvas and Apsaras clad in white silk vestments ;
and lovely-looking Vidyadharas, wearing garlands ; and mighty Nagas,
and Suparnas, and Uragas, and others. And on the summits of the
mountain are heard, during the Parvas, sounds of kettle-drums, and
tabors, shells and mridangas. O foremost of the Bharatas, even. by
staying here, ye shall hear those sounds; do ye by no means feel inclined
to repair thither. Further, O best of the Bharata race, it is impossible,
to proceed beyond this. That place is the sporting-region of the celes-
tials. There is no access thither for mortals. O Bharata, at this place
all creatures bear ill-will to, and the Rakshasas chastise, that man who
committeth aggression, be it ever so little. Beyond the summit of this
Kailasa cliff, is seen the path of the celestial sages. If any one through
impudence goeth beyond this, the Rakshasas slay him with iron darts
and other weapons. There, O child, during the Parvas, he that goeth
about on the shoulders of men, even Vaisravana is seen in pomp and
grandeur surrounded by the Apsaras. And when that lord of all the
Rakshasas is seated on the summit, all creatures behold him like unto
the sun arisen. O best of Bharatas, that summit is the sporting-garden
of the celestials, and the Danavas, and the Siddhas, and Vaisravana,
And during the Parvas, as Tumburu entertaineth the Lord of treasures,
the sweet notes of his song are heard all over the Gandhamadana. O
child, O Yudhishthira, here during the Parvas, allcreaturessee and hear
marvels like this. O Pandavas, till ye meet with Arjuna, do ye stay
here, partaking of luscious fruits, and the food of the Munis. O child as
thou hast come hither, do thou not betray any impertinence. And, O
child, after living here at thy will and diverting thyself as thou listest,
thou wilt at length rule the earth, having conquered it by the force of
thy arms.“ ;

=== PAGE 91 ===

SECTION CLIX
(Yaksha-yuddha Parva continued)

Janamejaya said, “How long did my great grandsires, the high-
souled sons of Pandu of matchless prowess, dwell in the Gandhamadana
‘mountain? And what did those exceedingly powerful ones, gifted
with manliness, do? And what was the food of those high-souled ones,
when those heroes of the worlds dwelt (there)? O excellent one, do
thou relate all about this. Do thou describe the prowess of Bhimasena,
and what that mighty-armed one did in the mountain Himalayan.
Surely, O best of Brahmanas, he did not fight again with the Yakshas.
And did they meet with Vaisravana ? Surely, as Arshtishena said, the
lord of wealth cometh thither. All this, O thou of ascetic wealth, I
desire to hear in detail. Surely, I have not yet been fully satisfied by
hearing about their acts.”

Vaisampayana continued, “Having heard from that one of incom-
patable energy, (Arshtishena), that advice conducive to their welfare,
those foremost of the Bharatas began to behave always accordingly.
Those best of men, the Pandavas, dwelt upon the Himavan, partaking
of the food eaten by the Munis, and luscious fruit, and the flesh of deer
killed with unpoisoned shafts and various kinds of pure honey. Living
thus, they passed the fifth year, hearing to various stories told by
Lomasa. O lord, saying, ‘I shall be present when occasion ariseth,’
Ghatotkacha, together with all the Rakshasas, had ere this already
gone away. Those magnanimous ones passed many months in the her-
mitage of Arshtishena, witnessing many marvels. And as the Pandavas
‘were sporting there pleasantly, there came to see them some compla-
cent vow-observing Munis and Charanas of high fortune, and pure
souls, And those foremost of the Bharata race conversed with them
on earthly topics. And it came to pass that when several days has
passed, Suparna all of a sudden carried off an exceedingly powerful and
mighty Naga, living in the large lake. And thereupon that mighty
mountain began to tremble, and the gigantic trees, break. And all the
creatures and the Pandavas witnessed the wonder. Then from the
brow of that excellent mountain, the wind brought before the Panda-
vas various fragrant and fair blossoms. And the Pandavas, and the
illustrious Krishna, together with their friends, saw those unearthly
blossoms of five hues. And as the mighty-armed Bhimasena was seated
at ease upon the mountain, Krishn4 addressed him, saying, ‘O best of
the Bharata race, in the presence of all the creatures, these flowers of
five hues, carried by the force of the wind raised by Suparna, are falling

_in amain on the river Aswaratha. In Khandava thy high-souled
brother, firm in promise, had baffled Gandharvas and Nagas and Vasava
himself, and slain fierce Rakshasas, and also obtained the bow Gandiva,

=== PAGE 92 ===

338 MAHABHARATA

Thou also art of exceeding prowess and the might of thy arms is great,
and irrepressible, and unbearable like unto the might of Sakra.
O Bhimasena, terrified with the force of thy arms, let all the Rakshasas
betake themselves to the ten cardinal points, leaving the mountain,
Then willthy friends be freed from fear and affliction, and behold
the auspicious summit of this excellent mountain furnished with
variegated flowers. O Bhima, I have for long cherished this thought
in my mind,—that protected by the might of thy arms, I shall see that
summit.” ;
“Thereupon, like a high-mettled bull that hath been struck, Bhima- —
sena, considering himself as censured by Draupadi, could not bear (that).
And that Pandava of the gait of a lion or a bull, and graceful, and gene-
rous, and having the splendour of gold, and intelligent, and strong, and ;
proud, and sensitive, and heroic, and having red eyes, and broad
shoulders, and gifted with the strength of mad elephants, and having
leonine teeth and a broad neck, and tall like a young sala tree, and high- —
souled, and graceful in every limb, and of neck having the whorls of a
shell and mighty-armed, took up his bow plaited at the back with gold,
andalso hissword. And haughty like unto a lion, and resembling a
maddened elephant, that strong one rushed towards that cliff, free from
fear or affliction. And all the creatures saw him equipped with bows
and arrows, approaching like a lion or a maddened elephant. And free
from fear or affliction, the Pandava taking his mace, proceeded to that
monarch of mountains causing the delight of Draupadi. And neither
exhaustion, nor fatigue, nor lassitude, nor the malice (of others), affected
that son of Pritha and the Wind-god. And having arrived at a rugged
path affording passage to one individual only, that one of great strength
ascended that terrible summit high as several palmyra palms (placed
one upon another). And having ascended that summit, and thereby
gladdened Kinnaras, and great Nagas, and Munis, and Gandharvas, and
Rakshasas, that foremost of the Bharata line, gifted with exceeding
strength described the abode of Vaisravana, adorned with golden crystal
palaces surrounded on all sides by golden walls having the splendour of
all gems, furnished with gardensall around, higher than a mountain peak,
beautiful with ramparts and towers, and adorned with door-ways and
gates and rows of pennons. And the abode was graced with dallying
damsels dancing around, and also with pennons waved by the breeze.
And with bent arms, supporting himself on the end of his bow, he stood
beholding with eagerness the city of the lord of treasures. And glad-
dening all creatures, there was blowing a breeze, carrying all perfumes,
and ofa balmy feel. And there were various beautiful and wonderful trees
of diverse hues, resounding with diverse dulcet notes. And at that place
the foremost of the Bharatas surveyed the palace of the Lord of the

=== PAGE 93 ===

VANA PARVA 339

Rakshasas scattered with heaps of gems, and adorned with variegated
garlands. And renouncing all care of life the mighty-armed Bhimasena
stood motionless like a rock, with his mace and sword and bow in his
hands. Then he blew his shell, making the down of his adversaries stand
erect ; and twanging his bow-string, and striking his arms with the hands
he unnerved all the creatures. Thereat with their hairs standing erect,
the Yakshas and Rakshasas began to rush towards the Pandavas, in the
direction of those sounds. And taken by the arms of the Yakshas and
Rakshasas the flamed maces and clubs and swords and spears and
javelins and axes, and when, O Bharata, the fight ensued between the
Rakshasas and Bhima, the latter by arrows cut off the darts, javelins and
axes of those possessing great powers of illusion, and he of exceeding
strength with arrows pierced the bodies of the roaring Rakshasas, both
of those that were in the sky, and of those that remained on the earth.
And Bhima of exceeding strength was deluged with the mighty sanguine
tain sprung from the bodies of the Rakshasas with maces and clubs in
their hands and flowing on all sides from their persons. And the bodies
and hands of the Yakshas and Rakshasas were seen to be struck off by
the weapon discharged by the the might of Bhima’s arms. And then all
the creatures saw the graceful Pandava densely surrounded by the
Rakshasas, like unto the Sun enveloped by clouds. And even as the
Sun surrounds everything with his rays, that mighty-armed and strong
one of unfailing prowess, covered all with arrows destroying foes. And
although menacing and uttering yells, the Rakshasas did nct see Bhima
embarrassed. Thereupon, with their bodies mangled, the Yakshas afflict.
ed by fear, Bhimasena began to utter frightful sounds of distress, throw-
ing their mighty weapons. And terrified at the wielder of a strong bow,
they fled towards the southern quarter, forsaking their maces and spears
and swords and clubs and axes. And then there stood, holding in his
hands darts and maces, the broad-chasted and mighty-armed friend of
Vaisravana, the Rakshasa named Maniman. And that one of great
strength began to display his mastery and manliness. And seeing them
forsake the fight, he addressed them with a smile, ‘Going to Vaisravana’s
abode, how will ye say unto that lord of wealth, that numbers have
been defeated by a single mortal in battle ?’ Having said this unto them
that Rakshasa, taking in his hands clubs and javelins and maces, set out
and rushed towards the Pandava. And he rushed in amain like a
maddened elephant. Bhimasena pierced his sides with three choice
atrows. And the mighty Maniman, on his part, in wrath taking and
flourishing a tremendous mace hurled itat Bhimasena. Thereupon
Bhimasena beset with inummerable shafts sharpened on stones, hurled
that mighty mace in the sky, dreadful, and like unto the lightning flash.
But on reaching the mace those shafts were baffled ; and although dis-

=== PAGE 94 ===

340 MAHABHARATA

charged with force by that adept at hurling the mace, still they could
not stay its career. Then the mighty Bhima of dreadful prowess, baffled
his (the Rakshasa’s) discharge by resorting to his skill in mace-fighting.
In the meanwhile, the intelligent Rakshasa had discharged a terrible
iron club, furnished with a golden shaft. And that club, belching forth
flames and emitting tremendous roars, all of a sudden pierced Bhima’s
right arm and then fell to the ground. On being severely wounded by
that club, that bowman, Kunti’s son, of immeasurable prowess, with eyes”
rolling in ire, took up his mace. And having taken that iron mace,
inlaid with golden plates, which caused the fear of foes and brought on
their defeat, he darted it with speed towards the mighty Maniman,
menacing (him) and uttering shouts. Then Maniman on his part, taking
his huge and blazing dart, with great force discharged it at Bhima,
uttering loud shouts. Thereat breaking the dart with the end of his
mace, that mighty-armed one skilled in mace-fighting, speedily rushed
to slay him, as Garuda (rushed) to slay a serpent. Then all of a sudden,
advancing ahead in the field, that mighty-armed one sprang into the sky
and brandishing his mace, hurled it with shouts. And like unto the
thunder-bolt hurled by Indra, that mace like a pest, with the speed of
the wind destroyed the Rakshasa and then fell to the ground. Then all
the creatures saw that Rakshasa of terrible strength slaughtered by
Bhima, even like a bull slain by a lion. And the surviving Rakshasas
seeing him slain on the ground went towards the east, uttering frightful
sounds of distress.’ ”

SECTION CLX
(Yaksha-yuddha Parva continued)

Vaisampayana said, “Hearing various sounds resounding in the
caves of the mountain and not seeing Bhimasena, Kunti’s son, Ajatasatru
and the twin sons of Madri and Dhaumya and Krishn’ and all the
Brahmanas and the friends (of the Pandavas), were filled with anxiety.
Thereupon, entrusting Draupadi to the charge of Arshtishena and
equipped in their arms, those valiant and mighty charioteers together -
began to ascend the summit of the mountain. And having reached the
summit, as those repressors of foes and mighty bowmen and powerful
charioteers they were looking about, saw Bhima and those huge
Rakshasas of mighty strength and courage weltering in a state of uncon-
sciousness having been struck down by Bhima. And holding his mace
and sword and bow, that mighty-armed one looked like Maghavan, after
he had_slain the Danava hosts. Then on seeing their brother, the
Pandavas, who had attained excellent state, embraced him and sat down
there. And with those mighty bowmen, that summit looked grand like

=== PAGE 95 ===

VANA PARVA 341

heaven graced by those foremost of celestials, the highly fortunate
Lokapalas. And seeing the abode of Kuvera and the Rakshasas, lying
slain on the ground, the king addressed his brother who was seated,
saying, ‘Either it be through rashness, or through ignorance, thou hast,
O Bhima, committed a sinful act. O hero, as thou art leading the life
of an anchorite, this slaughter without cause is unlike thee. Acts, it is
asserted by those versed in duties, as are calculated to displease a
monarch, ought not to be committed. But thou hast, O Bhimasena,
committed a deed which will offend even the gods. He that disregard-
ing profit and duty, turneth his thoughts to sin, must, O Partha, reap the

_ fruitof his sinful actions. However, if thou seekest my good, never
again commit such a deed.’”

Vaisampayana continued, “Having said this to his brother, Vriko-
dara the virtuous, the highly energetic and firm-minded son of Kunti,
Yudhishthira versed in the particulars of (the science of) profit, ceased,
and began to reflect on that matter.

“On the other hand, the Rakshasas that had survived those slain by
Bhima fled ina body towards the abode of Kuvera. And they of exceed-
ing fleetness having speedily reached Vaisravana's abode, began to
utter loud cries of distress, being afflicted with the fear of Bhima. And,
O king, bereft of their weapons and exhausted and with their mail
besmeared with gore and with dishevelled hair they spake unto Kuvera,
saying, ‘O lord, all thy foremost Rakshasas fighting with maces and
clubs and swords and lances and barbed darts, have been slain. O
Jord of treasures, a mortal, trespassing into the mountain, hath, single-
handed, slaughtered all thy Krodhovasa Rakshasas assembled together.
And, O lord of wealth, there lie the foremost of the Yakshas and Rak-
shasas senseless and dead, having been struck down ? and we have been
let off through his favour. And thy friend, Maniman also hath been
slain. All this hath been done bya mortal. Do thou what is proper,
after this.” Having heard this, that lord of all the Yaksha hosts waxing
wroth, with eyes reddened in anger, exclaimed, ‘What!’ And hearing
of Bhima’s second (act of) aggression, that lord of treasures, the king
of the Yakshas, was filled with wrath, and said, ‘Yoke’ (the horses).
Thereat, unto a car of the hue of dark clouds, and high as a mountain
summit, they yoked steeds having golden garments. And on being
yoked unto the car, those excellent horses of his, graced with every.
noble quality and furnished with the ten auspicious curls of hair and
having energy and strength, and adorned with various gemsand looking
splendid, as if desirous of speeding like the wind, began to neigh at each
other the neighing emitted at (the hour of) victory. And that divine
and effulgent king of the Yakshas set out, being eulogised by the celes-
tials and Gandharvas. Anda thousand foremost Yakshas of reddened

=== PAGE 96 ===

346 MADBADHANALA

eyes and golden lustre and having huge bodies, and gifted with great
strength, equipped with weapons and girding on their swords, followed
that high-souled lord of treasures. And coursing through the firmament
they (the steeds’ arrived at the Gandhamadana, as if drawing forwatd
the sky with their fleetness. And with their down standing erect, the
Pandavas saw that large assemblage of horses maintained by the lord of
wealth and also the high-souled and graceful Kuvera himself surrounded
by the Yaksha hosts. And seeing those mighty charioteers the son of
Pandu, possessed of great strength, equipped with bows and swords,
Kuvera also was delighted; and he was pleased at heart, keeping in
view the task of the celestials. And like unto birds, they, (the Yakshas)
gifted with extreme celerity, alighted on the summit of the mountain
and stood before them (the Pandavas), with the lord of treasures at their
head. Then, O'Bharata, seeing him pleased with the Pandavas, the
Yakshas and the Gandharvas stood there, free from agitation. Then
thinking themselvesas having transgressed, those high-souled and mighty
charioteers, the Pandavas, having bowed down unto that lord, the
giver of wealth, stood surrounding the lord of treasures with joined
hands. And the lord of treasures sat on that excellent seat, the elegant
Pushpaka, constructed by Viswakarma. painted with diverse colours.
And thousands of Yakshas and Rakshasas, some having huge frames
and some ears resembling pegs, and hundreds of Gandharvas and
hosts of Apsaras sat in the presence of that one seated, even as the
celestials sit surrounding him of a hundred sacrifices and wearing a
beautiful golden garland on his head and holding in his hands his noose
and sword and bow, Bhima stood, gazing at the lord of wealth, And
Bhimasena did not feel depress either on having been wounded by the
Rakshasas, or even in that plight seeing Kuvera arrive.

“And that one going about on the shoulders of men, on seeing
Bhima stand desirous of fighting with sharpened shafts, said unto
Dharma’s son, ‘O Partha, all the creatures know thee as engaged in
their good. Do thou, therefore, with thy brothers fearlessly dwell on
this summit of the mountain. And, O Pandava, be thou not angry
with Bhima, These Yakshas and Rakshasas had already been slain by
Destiny : thy brother hath been the instrument merely. And it is not
necessary to feel shame for the act of impudence that hath been
committed. This destruction of the Rakshasas had been foreseen by
the gods. I entertain no anger towards Bhimasena. Rather, O foremost
of the Bharata race. I am pleased with him ; nay,—even before coming
here, I had been gratified with this deed of Bhima.”

Vaisampayana said, ‘Having spoken thus untothe king, (Kuvera)
said unto Bhimasena, ‘O child, O best of the Kurus, I do not mind this,
O Bhima, as in order to please Krishna, thou hast, disregarding the gods

 LLKLLKLLKKKK KKK

=== PAGE 97 ===

VANA PARVA 343

and me also, committed this rash act, namely, the destruction of the
Yakshas and the Rakshasas, depending on the strength of thy arms, I am
well-pleased with thee. O Vrikodara, to-day I have been freed froma
terrible curse. For some offence, that great Rishi, Agastya, had
cursed me in anger. Thou hast delivered me by this act (of thine), O
Pandu's son, my disgrace had ere this been fated. No offence, therefore,
in any way, attaches unto thee, O Pandava.’

“Yudhishthira said, ‘O divine one, why wast thou cursed by the
high-souled Agastya ?. O god, Iam curious to hear about the occasion
of that imprecation. I wonder that at that very moment, thou together
with thy forces and attendants wast not consumed by the ire of that
intelligent one.’

“Thereupon the lord of treasures said, ‘At Kusasthali, O king,
once there was held a conclave of the gods. And surrounded by gram-
visaged Yakshas, numbering three hundred maha-padmas, carrying
various weapons, I was going to that place. Andon the way, I saw
that foremost of sages, Agastya, engaged in the practice of severe
austerities on the bank of the Yamuna, abounding in various birds
and graced with blossoming trees. And, O king, immediately on seeing
that mass of energy, flaming and brilliant as fire, seated with upraised
arms, facing the sun, my friend, the graceful lord of the Rakshasas, Mani-
man, from stupidity, foolishness, hauteur and ignorance discharged his
excrement on the crown of that Maharshi. Thereupon, as if burning
all the cardinal points by his wrath, he said unto me, ‘Since, O lord of
treasures, in thy very presence, disregarding me, this thy friend hath
thus affronted me, he, together with thy forces, shall meet with destruc-
tion at the hands of a mortal. And, O wicked-minded one, thou also,
being distressed on account of thy fallen soldiers, shalt bz freed from thy
sin, on beholding that mortal. But if they follow thy behests, their (the
soldiers’) powerful sons shall not incur by this dreadful curse. This
curse I received formerly from that foremost of Rishis. Now, O mighty
king, have I been delivered by thy brother Bhima.’ ”

SECTION CLXI
(Yaksha-yuddha Parva continued)

“The lord of treasures said, ‘O Yudhishthira, patience, ability,
(appropriate) time and place and prowess—these five lead to success in
human affairs. O Bharata, in the Krita Yuga, men were patient and
able in their respective occupations and they knew how to display prow-
ess. And, O foremost of the Kshatriyas, a Kshatriya that is endued
with patience and understandeth the propriety regarding place and
time and is versed in all mortal regulations, can alone govern the

=== PAGE 98 ===

344 MAHABHARATA

world for a long time,—nay, in all transactions. He that behaveth thus,
acquireth, O hero, fame in this world and excellent state in the next.
And by having displayed his prowess at the proper place and time, Sakra
with the Vasus hath obtained the dominion of heaven. He that from
anger cannot see his fall and he that being naturally wicked and evil-
minded followeth eviland he that knoweth not the propriety relative to
acts, meet with destruction both in this world and the next. The exer-
tions of that stupid person become fruitless, who is not conversant with
the expediency regarding time and acts, and he meeteth with destruction
both in this world and the next. And the object of that wicked and
deceitful person is vicious, who, aiming at mastery of every kind,
committeth some rash act. O best of men, Bhimasena is fearless, and
ignorant of duties, and haughty, and of the sense of a child, and unfor-
bearing. Do thou, therefore, check him, Repairing again to the
hermitage of the pious sage Arshtisena, do thou reside there during the
dark fortnight, without fear or anxiety. O lord of men, deputed by me,
all the Gandharvas residing at Alaka, as also those dwelling in this
mountain, will, O mighty-armed one, protect thee, and these best of the
Brahmanas. And, O king, O chief among virtuous men, knowing that
Vrikodara hath come hither out of rashness, do thou check him. Hence-
forth, O monarch, beings living in the forest will meet you, wait
upon you and always protect you all. And, ye foremost of men, my ser-
vants will always procure for you various meats and drinks of delicious
flavour. And, O son, Yudhishthira, even as by reason of your being the
progeny of spiritual intercourse, Jishnu is entitled to the protection of
Mahendra, and Vrikodara, of the Wind-god, and thou, of Dharma, and
the twins possessed of strength, of the Aswins,—so ye all are entitled to
my protection. That one next by birth to Bhimasena, Phalguna, versed in
the science of profit and all mortal regulations, is well in heaven. And,
O child, those perfections that are recognised in the world as leading to
heaven, are established in Dhananjaya even from his very birth. And
self-restraint, and charity, and strength, and intelligence, and modesty,
and fortitude, and excellent energy—even all these are established in
that majestic one of magnificent soul. And, O Pandava, Jishnu never
committed any shameful act through poverty of spirit. And in the
world, none ever say that Partha hath uttered an untruth. And, O
Bharata, honoured by the gods, pitris, and the Gandharvas, that enhan-
cer of the glory of the Kurus is learning the science of weapons in
Sakra’s abode. And, O Partha, in heaven he that with justice had brought
under his subjection all the rulers of the earth, even that exceedingly
powerful and highly energetic monarch, the grandsire of thy father,
Santanu himself, is well-pleased with the behaviour of that wielder of
the Gandiva—the foremost of his race. And, O king, abiding in Indra’s

=== PAGE 99 ===

VANA PARVA 345

tegions, he who on the banks of the Yamuna had worshipped the gods,
the pitris, and the Brahmanas, by celebrating seven grand horse sacri-
fices, that great grandsire of thine, the emperor Santanu of severe
austerities, who hath attained heaven, hath enquired of thy welfare.”

Vaisampayana said, “Having heard these words of the dispenser
of wealth, the Pandavas were well-pleased with them. Then lowering
his club and mace and sword and bow, that foremost of the Bharatas
bowed down unto Kuvera. And that giver of protection, the lord of
treasures, seeing him prostrate, said, ‘Be thou the destroyer of the pride
of foes, and the enhancer of the delight of friends. And ye oppressors of
enemies, do ye live in our romantic region. The Yakshas will not cross
your desires. Gudakesa, after having acquired mastery over weapons,
will come back soon. Bidden adieu by Maghavat himself, Dhananjaya
will join you.’

“Having thus instructed Yudhishthira of excellent deeds, the lord
of the Guhyakas, vanished from that best of mountains. And thousands
upon thousands of Yakshas, and Rakshasas followed him in vehicles
spread over with checkered cushions, and decorated with various jewels.
And as the horses proceeded towards the abode of Kuvera, a noise arose
as of birds flying in the air. And the chargers of the lord of treasures
speedily coursed through the sky as if drawing forward the firmament,
and devouring the air.

“Then at the command of the lord of wealth, the dead bodies of
the Rakshasas were removed from the summit of the mountain. As the
intelligent Agastya had fixed this period as the limit of (the duration of)
his curse, so being slain in conflict, the Rakshasas were freed from the
imprecation. And being honoured by the Rakshasas, the Pandavas for
several nights dwelt pleasantly in those habitations.”

SECTION CLXII
(Yaksha-yuddha Parva continued)

Vaisampayana continued, “Then, O repressor of foes, at sunrise,
having finished his daily devotions, Dhaumya came unto the Pandavas,
with Arshtishena. And having bowed down unto the feet of Arstishena
and Dhaumya, they with joined hands paid homage unto all the Brah-
manas. Then Dhaumya taking Yudhishthira’s right hand, said these
words, looking at the east, ‘O mighty monarch, this king of mountains,
Mandara, lieth vast, covering the earth up to the ocean. O Pandava,
Indra and Vaisravana preside over this point graced with woods and for-
ests and mountains. And, O child, the intelligent sages versed in every
duty, say, that this (region) is the abode of Indra and king Vaisravana.
And the twice-born ones, and the sages versed in the duties, and the

13

=== PAGE 100 ===

346 MAHABHARATA

Siddhas, and the Sadhyas, and the celestials pay their adorations unto
Sun as he riseth from this point. And that lord of all living beings, ki
Yama, conversant with duty, presideth over yonder southern regi
whither come the spirits of the departed. And this is Sanyamana,
abode of thelord of departed spirits, sacred, and wonderful to behold,
and crowned with prime prosperity. And the intelligent ones call that
monarch of mountains (by the name of) Asta. Having, O king, arrive
at this, the Sun ever abideth by the truth. And king Varuna protects all
creatures, abiding in this king of mountains, and also in the vast deep.
And, O highly fortunate one, there illumining the northern regions, lieth
the puissant Mahameru, auspicious and the refuge of those knowing
Brahma, where is the court of Brahma, and remaining where that soul
of all creatures, Prajapati, hath created all that is mobile and immobile.
And the Mahameru is the auspicious and healthy abode even of the
seven mind-born sons of Brahma, of whom Daksha was the seventh.
And, O child, here it is that the seven celestial rishis with Vasishtha at
their head rise and set. Behold that excellent and bright summit of the
Meru, where sitteth the great sire (Brahma) with the celestials happy
in self-knowledge. And next to the abode of Brahma is visible the
region of him who is said to be the really primal Cause or the origin of
all creatures, even that prime lord, god Narayana, having neither
beginning nor end. And, O king, that auspicious place composed of all
energies even the celestials cannot behold. And the regionof the high-
souled Vishnu, by its native splendour, exceeding in effulgence the sun
or fire, cannot be beheld by the gods, or the Danavas. And the region
of Narayana lieth resplendent to the east of the Meru, where, O child,
that lord of all creatures, the self-create primal Cause of the universe,
having manifested all beings, looketh splendid of his excellent grace. O
child, not to speak of the Maharshis—even Brahmarshis have no access
to that place. And, O best of the Kurus, it is the Yatis only who have
access to it. And, O Pandu's son, (at that place) luminaries cannot
shine by him ; there that lord of inconceivable soul alone shineth trans-
cendental. There by reverence, and severe austerities, Yatis inspired
by virtue of pious practices, attain Narayana Hari. And, O Bharata,
repairing thither, and attaining that universal Soul—the self-create and
eternal God of gods, high-souled ones, of Yoga success, and free from
ignorance and pride have not to return to this world. O highly for-
tunate Yudhishthira, this region is without beginning, or deterioration, —
or end : for it is the very essence of that God. And, O son of the Kurus,
the Sun and the Moon every day go round this Meru, coursing in an
opposite direction. And, O sinless one, O mighty monarch, the other
luminaries also go round this king of mountains in the self-same way.
Thus the worshipful Sun who dispelleth darkness, goeth round this

=== PAGE 321 ===

VANA PABVA
579
princess
after
getting back
feo our
asylum
f
That
foolish
king of Sindhu
hall
not
let
alone
as
long as he lives, even if he find a shelter
in
the
rnal
^ regions
or is backed by Indra himself
!
And Yudhisthira
replied,
>
thou
of
mighty
arms remembering
( our sister
)
Dussala and
he
celebrated
Gandhari,
thou
shouldst
not slay the king of Sindhu even
though he is so wicked
!'
Vaisampayana continued, "Hearing these words, Draupadi was great-
ly excited.
And
that
highly intelligent lady in her excitement said to
her
husbands,
Bhima
and
Arjuna with indignation mixed
with modesty
f you care to do what is agreeable to me, you must
slay
that
mean
and
cable
wretch,
that
sinful,
foolish,
infamous
and contemptible
chief
bhe Samdhava clan
I
That foe who
forcibly
carries away
a
wife,
and
hat wrests a kingdom, should never be forgiven on the battle-field
even
though
he
should
supplicate
for
mercy
!'
Thus admonished,
those
two
valiant
warriors
went
in
search
of
the
Saindhava chief.
And
the king
taking
Krishna
with
him
returned
home,
accompanied
by
his
spiritual
Adviser. And on entering the hermitage, he found
it was laid over with seats
r the
ascetics
and crowded with their disciples and graced with
the pre-
sence of Markandeya and other Brahmanas.
And while
those Brahmanas
were gravely bewailing the lot of Draupadi, Yudhishthira endued with great
wisdom joined their company, with his brothers.
And beholding
the Iking
thus coma back after having defeated the Saindhava and the
Sauvira
host
and
recovered Draupadi, they were all elated with joy
!
And the king took
his seat
in
their midst.
And the
excellent
princess Krishna entered
the
hermitage with the two brothers.
"Meanwhile Bhima and Arjuna, learning the enemy was full two miles
ahead
of
them urged their horses to greater speed in pursuit
of him.
And
the
mighty Arjuna performed a wonderful deed, killing
the
horse
of Jaya-
dratha although
they
were
full
two
miles
ahead of them.
Armed with
colestial weapons
undaunted
by
difficulties he achieved this
difficult feat
with
arrows
inspired with Mantras.
And then
the two
warriors, Bhima
and
Arjuna,
rushed
towards the
terrified
king
of Sindhu
whose
horses
had been slain and who was alone and perplexed in mind.
And
the
latter
was greatly grieved on seeing his steeds
slain.
And
beholding Dhananjaya
do such a daring deed, and intent on running away,
he followed
the
same
forest track by which
he had
come.
And
Falguna, seeing the Saindhava
chief
so
active
in
his
fright,
overtook
him
and
addressed
him
saying,
'Possessed of
so
little
manliness,
how
couldst
thou dare to take away a
lady by force
?
Turn round, O
prince
;
it is not meet that thou shouldst
run away
!
How
canst thou act so, leavjng thy followers in
the
rnidsfc
of
thy foes ?'
Although
addressed
by the sons
of Pritha
thus,
the monarch
of Sindhu did not even once turn round.
And then
bidding
him
do what
he chose
the
mighty Bhima
overtook
him
in an
instant,
but the
kind
Arjuna entreated him not to kill that wretch."

=== PAGE 322 ===

SECTION CCLXX
(Draupadi-harana Parva continued)
Vaisampayana
said,
"Jayadratha
flying for
his life upon
beholding
those two
brothers
with upraised arms, was sorely grieved and bolted
off
with
speed
and
coolness.
But
the
mighty
and
indignant
Bhimasena,
descending
from
his
chariot,
ran
after
him
thus fleeing, and seised him
by
the
hair
of
his
head.
And
holding
him
high
up in the air, Bhima
thurst
him
on
the
ground
with violence.
And seizing the prince by the
head, he knocked him about.
And when
the
wretch recovered conscious-
ness,
he groaned aloud and wanted to get up on
his
legs.
But
that
hero
endued with mighty arms kicked
him
on
the
head.
And Bhima pressed
him
on the breast with his knees as well as with his fists.
And the prince
thus
belaboured,
soon
become
insensible.
Then Ealguna
dissuaded
the
wrathful Bhimasena
from
inflicting
further
chastisement on the
prince,
by reminding him of what Yudhishthira had
said
regarding
( their
sister
)
Dussala.
But Bhima
replied,
saying,
'This
sinful
wretch hath done
a
cruel
injury to Krishna, who never can
bear
such
treatment.
He,
there-
fore,
deserveth
to
die
at
hands
!
But
what
can
I
do ?
The
king
is
always
overflowing
with
mercy,
and
thou,
too,
art
constantly putting
obstacles
in my way from a childish sense of virtue
!'
Having said these
words,
Vrikodara,
with his crescent-shaped arrow, shaved the hair
of
the
prince's
head,
heaving
five
tufts
in as many places.
Jayadratha uttered
not a
word
at
this.
Then
Vrikodara,
addressing the
foe said,
'if thou
wishest
to
live,
listen
to me.
O
fool
!
I
shall
tell
thee the means to
attain that wish
!
In
public
assemblies and
in
open
courts
thou must
say,
I am the
slave of the
Pandavas.
on
this
condition
alone,
I
will
pardon thee thy life
!
This
is the customary rule of conquest on the
field
of battle.'
Thus addressed and treated, king Jayadratha said to the mighty
and
fierce
warrior who
always
looked
awful,
'Be
it so
!'
And he was
trembling
and
senseless
and
begrimed
with
dust.
Then
Arjuna
and
Vrikodara,
securing
him
with
chains,
thurst
him
into a
chariot.
And
Bhima, himself mounting that chariot, and accompanied
by
Arjuna,
drove
towards
the
hermitage.
And
approaching
Yudhishthira
seated
there,
he placed
Jayadratha in
that
condition
before
the
king.
And the
king,
smiling,
told
him
to
set
the Sindhu prince at liberty.
Then Bhima
said
unto
the
king,
'Do
thou tell Draupadi that this
wretch hath become the
slave of the Pandavas.' Then his oldest brother said unto him affectionately,
'If
thou
hast
any regard
for
us,
do
thou
set
this
wretch
at
liberty
!'
And Draupadi too,
reading the king's mind, said,
'Let him
off
!
He
hath
become a slave
of the king's
and
thou,
too, hast disfigured him by
leaving
five
tufts
of
hair
on
his
head.'
Then
that
crest-fallen
prince,
having
obtained
his
liberty,
approached king Yudhishthira and bowed down unto
him.
And
seeing
those Munis
there,
he
saluted them
also.
Then the
kind-hearted king Yudhishthira,
the son of Dharma,
beholding Jayadratha
in that
condition,
almost supported by Arjuna,
said
unto him,
'Thou
art
a free man now
;
I emancipate thee
I
Now go away and be careful not to
do
such
thing again
;
shame to thee
!
Thou hadst intended to take away

=== PAGE 323 ===

VAN A PAKVA
581
a lady by violence,
even
though
thou art so mean
and powerless
I
What
other wretch save thee
would
think of acting
thus
?'
Then that foremost
king of Bharata's race eyad with pity that
perpetrator of wicked deeds, and
believing
that
he
had
lost
his
senses,
said,
'Mayst
thy
heart grow in
virtue
!
Never set thy heart again on immoral deeds
!
Thou mayst depart
in peace now with thy charioteers,
cavalry and
infantry.'
Thus addressed
by Yudhishthira,
the prince,
Bharata,
was
overpowered
with
shame,
and bending down his head, he silently
and
sorrowfully wended his way to
the place where the
Ganga
debouches
on
the
plains.
And imploring the
protection of the
god
of
three
eyes,
the
consort
of Uma,
he did severe
penance at that place.
And the three-eyed god, pleased with his austerities
deigned
to
accept
his
offerings
in
person.
And he
also
granted him a
boon
!
Do thou
listen, O monarch, how
the prince
received that boon
!
Jayadratha, addressing that god, asked the boon, 'May I be able to defeat in
battle all the five sons of Pandu on their chariots
!'
The god, however, told
him
'This cannot be.'
And
Maheswara
said,
'None can
slay or conquer
them in battle.
Save
Arjuna,
however,
thou
shall be able to only check
them
( once
)
on the
field
of
battle
!
The
heroic
Arjuna,
with mighty
arms,
is the
god
incarnate
styled Nara.
He practised
austerities
of old
in the Vadarl
forest.
The
God
Narayana is his friend.
Therefore, he is
unconquerable of the very gods.
I myself have given him the celestial wea-
pon called Pasupata.
From the
regents
also of all the ten cardinal points,
he has acquired the thunder-bolt and other mighty weapons. And the great
god Vishnu who
is the Infinite Spirit, the Lord Preceptor of all the gods, is
the Supreme Being
without
attributes,
and the Soul of the Universe,
and
existeth
pervading
the
whole
creation.
At the termination of a cycle of
ages, assuming the shape of the
all-consuming
fire, he consumed the whole
Universe with mountains and
seas
and
islands
and
hills and woods and
forests.
And after the destruction of the Naga
world also in the subterra-
nean regions in the same way, vast masses of many-coloured and loud-peal-
ing clouds, with streaks of lightning,
spreading along the entire welkin, had
appeared on high.
Then pouring down
water in torrents
thick as axles of
cars, and filling the space everywhere, these extinguishing
that all-consum-
ing fire
!
When
at
the
close
of
four
thousand Yugas the
Earth
thus
became flooded with water, like one vast sea,
and all mobile creatures were
hushed in death, and the sun and the moon and the winds were all destroy-
ed,
and
the Universe was devoid of planets and stars, the Supreme
Being
called
Narayana,
unknowable
by
the
senses,
adorned
with a
thousand
heads and as many eyes and legs, became desirous of rest.
And the serpent
Sesha,
looking
terrible
with
his
thousand
hoods,
and shining
with
the
splendour of ten thousand suns, and white as the Kunda flower or the moon
or
a
string
of
pearls,
or the white
lotus, or milk, or the
fibres of a lotus
stalk,
served
for his conch.
And that
adorable and omnipotent God thus
slept
on the bosom of the deep, enveloping all space with
nocturnal
gloom.

=== PAGE 324 ===

582
MAHABHAEATA
And
when
his
creative
faculty
was
excited,
he
awoke
and
found
the
Universe denuded of everything.
In this connection, the
following
sloka is
recited respecting the mean of Narayana. "Water was created by (the Eishi)
Nara, and
it
formed
his corpus
;
therefore
do we hear
it styled as Nara.
And because
it formed his
Ayana
( resting-place
) therefore
is he known
as
Narayana."
As
soon
as that everlasting Being was engaged in meditation
for the re-creation of the Universe, a lotus flower instantaneously came into
existence from
his
navel,
and
the
four-faced Brahma
came
out
of that
navel-lotus.
And then the
Grandsire of
all
creatures,
seating himself on
that
flower and
finding that
the whole
Universe was a blank,
created in
his own likeness,
and
from
his will
the
( nine
) great Rishis, Marichi and
others.
And
these
in
their
turn
observing
the
same
thing, completed
the
creation, by
creating
Yakshas,
Bakshas,
Pisachas,
reptiles, men, and
all
mobile and immobile creatures.
The Supreme
Spirit hath three condi-
tions.
In
the
form
of
Brahma,
he is the Creator, and
in
the
form
of
Vishnu he is the Preserver, and in his form
as
Eudra, he is the
Destroyer
of the Universe
!
king
of Sindhu, hast thou not
heard of the wonderful
achievements of Vishnu, described to thee by the Munis and the Brahrnanas
learned in
the Vedas ?
When the world was
thus reduced to one vast sea
of water,
with only
the heavens
above,
the Lord, like a fire-fly
at
night-
time during
the rainy season, moved about hither and thither in
search of
stable
ground,
with
the view
of
rehabilitating
his creation, and
became
desirous of
raising
the
Earth
submerged
in
water.
What shape
shall I
take to rescue
the Earth from
this
flood, ?
So
thinking and
contemplating
with divine insight, he bethought himself
of the shape of a wild
boar
fond
of sporting
in water.
And assuming the shape of a sacrificial boar
shining
with
effulgence
and
instinct
with
the
Vedas and ten Yojanas
in length,
with
pointed tusks
and a complexion
like
dark
clouds,
and with a body
huge as a mountain, and roaring like a conglomeration
of
clouds,
the Lord
plunged
into
the
waters,
and
lifted
up the Earth with
one of his
tusks,
and
replaced
it in its proper sphere.
At another time,
the
mighty
Lord,
assuming a wonderful form
with a body half lion,
half man, and squeezing
his
hands,
repaired
to
the court of the ruler of the Daityas.
That proge-
nitor of the
Daityas, the son of Diti, who was the enemy of the (gods),
be-
holding
the
Lord's
peculiar
form,
burst
out
into
passion
and
his eyes
became inflamed with rage.
And Hiranya-Kasipu, the war-like
son of Diti
and the enemy of the gods, adorned with
garlands
and
looking like a mass
of dark
clouds,
taking up his
trident
in hand and roaring like the clouds,
rushed on that being half lion, half man.
Then that
powerful king
of
wild
boasts,
half
man,
half lion,
taking a leap
in the
air,
instantly
rent
the
Daitya in twain by means of his sharp claws.
And the adorable lotus-eyed
Lord
of
great
effulgence,
having thus slain
the Daitya king for the
well-
being
of all creatures, again took his birth in the womb of
Aditi
as son
of
Kasyapa.
And at the expiration of a thousand years she
was
delivered
of

=== PAGE 325 ===

VANA PABVA
583
that
superhuman
conception.
And then was born that Being,
of the
hue
of rain-charged clouds with bright eyes and of dwarfish stature
He had the
ascetic's staff and water-pot in hand, and was marked with the emblem of a
curl of hair on the breast.
And that adorable Being wore matted locks and
the sacrificial thread, and he was stout and handsome and resplendent with
lustre.
And
that
Being,
arriving at the sacrificial enclosure of Vali,
king
of the Danavas, entered the sacrificial assembly with the aid
of
Vrihaspati.
And beholding that
dwarf-bodied
Being,
Vali
was
well-pleased
and
said
unto him,
'I am glad to see thee, O Brahmana
!
Say
what is it that thou
wantest
from me
!'
Thus addressed by Vali, the
dwarf-god replied with a
smile,
saying,
'So be it
!
Do
thou,
lord
of the Danavas,
give me three
paces of ground
!'
And Vali contented to give what that Brahmana of infi-
nite
power had asked.
And while measuring with his
paces
the
space
he
sought,
Hari
assumed
a
wonderful
and
extraordinary
form.
And
with
only
three
paces
he instantly
covered this
illimitable
world.
And
then
that everlasting God, Vishnu, gave
it away unto Indra.
This history which
has just
been
related
to
thee,
is
celebrated
as
the
'Incarnation
of
the
Dwarf.
1
And
from
him,
all the
gods
had their being, and after him
the
world is said to be
Vaishnava.on: pervaded by Vishnu.
And for the destruc-
tion
of the wicked and the
preservation
of religion,
even He
hath taken
his birth among men in the
xace of the Yadus.
And the
adorable
Vishnu
is styled
Krishna.
These, O
king
of Sindhu, are the achievements of the
Lord whom all the worlds worship and whom the learned describe as
with-
out
beginning
and
without
end,
unborn
and
Divine
!
They
call Him,
the unconquerable Krishna with conchshell,
discus and mace, and adorned
with
the emblem of a curl of hair, Divine, clad
in
silken
robes of
yellow
hue,
and
the
best
of those versed in the art of war.
Arjuna is protected
by Krishna the possessor of
these attributes.
That glorious and lotus-eyed
Being of
infinite power, that slayer of
hostile
heroes,
riding in
the same
chariot
with
Pritha's
son,
protecteth him
!
He
is, therefore,
invincible;
the
very
gods
cannot
resist
his
power,
still
less
can
one
with human
attributes
vanquish
the son of Pritha in battle
!
Therefore,
king,
thou
must let him alone
!
Thou shalt, however, be able to vanquish
for a
single
day
only,
the rest
of
Yudhishthira's forces along with thine enemies
the
four sons of Pandu
!''
Vaisampayana
continued,
"Having
said
these
words
unto
that
prince,
the
adorable Hara
of
three
eyes,
the
destroyer
of
all sins, the
consort of
Uma,
and
lord
of
wild
beasts,
the
destroyer
of
(Daksha's)
sacrifice, the
slayer
of
Tripura
and He
that had plucked out the eyes of
Bhaga,
surrounded by his dwarfish and hunch-backed and terrible followers
having frightful eyes and ears and uplifted arms,
vanished, O
tiger among
kings, from that place with his consort Urna
!
And the wicked Jayadratha
also
returned
home,
and
the
sons
of Pandu continued
to
dwell
in the
forest
of Kamyaka."

=== PAGE 326 ===

SECTION CCLXXr
(Draupadi -liarana Parva continued)
Janamejaya
said,
"What
did those
tigers among men,
the Panda-
vas,
do,
after
they had suffered such misery in consequence of the ravish-
ment of Draupadi ?"
Vaisampayana
said,
"Having
defeated
Jayadratha
and
rescued
Krishna,
the
virtuous
king
Yudhishthira took his seat by the side of that
best of Munis.
And among those foremost of ascetics who were
expressing
their
grief upon
bearing
Draupadi's
misfortune, Yudhishthira, the son
of
Pandu, addressed Markandeya, saying,
'O adorable Sire, amongst the
gods
and the ascetics, thou art known to have the fullest
knowledge
of both the
past as well as the future.
A doubt
existeth
in my
mind, which
I would
ask
thee
to
solve
!
This
lady
is
the
daughter
of Drupada
:
she
hath
issued
from
the sacrificial altar and hath not been
begotten of the
flesh
;
and
she
is highly blessed and is also the daughter-in-law of
the
illustrious
Pandu.
I incline to think that Time, and human Destiny that dependeth on
our acts,
and
the Inevitable,
are irresistible in respect of creatures.
( If it
were not so
), how could such a misfortune
afflict this wife of ours so
faith-
ful and virtuous,
like a false accusation of theft
against
an
honest man ?
The
daughter of Drupada hath never committed any sinful
act,
nor,
hath
she
done anything
that is
not commendable
:
on the contrary,
she hath
assiduously
practised
the
highest
virtues
towards Brahmanas.
And yet
the foolish king Jayadratha had carried her away by force.
In consequence
of
this
act of violence on
her,
that sinful wretch hath his hair shaved off
his
head
and
sustained
also,
with all
his
allies,
defeat
in battle.
It is
true we have rescued her after slaughtering the troops of Sindhu.
But the
disgrace of
this ravishment
of
our
wife during our hours
of
carelessness
hath
stained us,
to be sure.
This life in the wilderness is
full
of miseries.
We subsist by chase
;
and
though
dwelling
in
the woods, we are
obliged
to
slay
the
denizens
thereof
that
live with us
!
This exile also that we
suffer
is
due
to
the
act
of
deceitful kinsmen
!
Is there any one who
is
more unfortunate than I am ?
Hath thou ever
seen
or
heard
of
such a
one before ?"
SECTION CCLXXII
(Draupadi-harana Parva continued)
"Markandeya said, 'O
bull of the Bharata race,
even Rama
suffered
unparalleled
misery,
for
the
evil-minded
Havana, king of the Eakshasas,
having
recourse to deceit
and
overpowering the
vulture
Jatayu,
forcibly
carried away his wife Sita from his
asylum in the
woods.
Indeed, Bama,
with the help of
Sugriva,
brought her
back,
constructing
a
bridge across
the sea, and consuming Lanka with his keen-edged
arrows.'

=== PAGE 327 ===

VANA PABVA
585
"Yudhishthira said,
'In what race was Eama born and what was the
measure of his might and prowess ?
Whose son
also was Eavana and
for
what was it that he had
any
misunderstanding with Eama ?
It behoveth
thee, O illustrious one, to tell me all this in detail
; for I long
to
hear
the
story of Eama of great achievements
!'
"Markandeya
said,
'Listen,
prince
of Bharata
1
s race,
to
this
old
history
exactly
as
it
happened
1
I
will
tell thee
all
about the distress
suffered by Eama together with his wife.
There was
a
great
king named
Aja sprung from the race of Ikshwaku.
He had
a son
named
Dasaratha
who
was
devoted
to
the
study
of
the
Vedas
and was ever pure.
And
Dasaratha had four sons conversant with morality and profit'known by the
names,
respectively,
of
Eama,
Lakshmana,
Satrughna,
and
the mighty
Bharata. And Eama had for his mother Kausalya, and Bharata had for his
mother
Kaikeyi,
while
those
scourge
of
their
enemies Lakshmana and
Satrughna, were the sons of Sumitra.
And Janaka was the king of
Videha,
and Sita was his daughter.
And Tashtri himself
created
her,
desiring
to
make
her
the
beloved wife of Eama.
I have now told
thee the history of
both Eama's
and
Sita's
birth.
And
now,
king, I will relate unto thee
birth of Eavana- That Lord of all creatures and the Creator of the Universe
viz., the Self-create Prajapati himself
that
god
possessed
of great
ascetic
merit
is the
grandfather
of
Eavana.
And
Pulastya
hath a mighty son
called Vaisravana begotten of a cow.
But his son, leaving his father,
went
to his grandfather.
And,
king, angered at this, his
father then created a
second self
of
himself.
And
with half of his own self that regenerate one
became
born
of
Visrava
for wrecking
a vengeance
on Vaisravana.
But
the
Grandsire,
pleased
with
Vaisravana,
gave
him
immortality,
and
sovereignty of all
the
wealth
of
the Universe, the guardianship of one of
the cardinal points, the friendship of Isana, and a
son named
Nalakuvera.
And he also gave him for his capital Lanka, which was guarded by
hosts of
Eakshasas, and also a chariot called Pushpaka capable of going
everywhere
according to the will of the rider.
And the kingship of the Yakshas and the
sovereignty over sovereigns were also
his.'
"
SECTION CCLXXIII
(Draupadi-harana Parva continued)
Markandeya
said,
"The Muni named Visrava, who was
begotten of
half
the
soul
of Pulastya,
in a fit of passion, began to look
upon
Vaisra-
vana
with
great
anger.
But,
monarch,
Kuvera,
the
king
of
the
Eakshasas,
knowing
that
his
father
was angry with him,
always sought
to please him.
And,
best of
Bharata' s race, that king of kings living
in
Lanka,
and
borne upon
the shoulders of men, sent three Eakshasa women
to wait upon his father.
Their names,
king,
were
Pushpotkata,
Eaka
and
Malini.
And
they
were
skilled
in
singing
and
dancing
and
were
75

=== PAGE 328 ===

586
MAHABHAEATA
always
assiduous
in
their
attentions
on
that
high-souled
Eishi,
And
those slender-waisted ladies vied with
one
another, O
king,
in
gratifying
the Eishi.
And
that
high-soulod
and
adorable
being
was pleased
with
them
and
granted them
boons.
And
to
every
one
of
them
he
gave
princely
sons
according
to
their
desire.
Two
sons
those
foremost
of
Eakahasas
named
Kumvakarna
and
the
Ten-headed
Eavana,
both
unequalled
on
earth
in prowess,
were born to Pushpotkata.
And Malini
had a son named
Vibhishana, and Eaka
had
twin
children named Khara
and Surpanakha.
And
Vibhishana
surpassed
them
all
in
beauty.
And
that
excellent
person
was
very
pious
and
assiduously
performed
all
religious
rites.
But
that
foremost
of
Eakshasas,
with
ten
heads, was
the eldest to them
all.
And he was
religious, and energetic and
possessed
of great
strength and prowess,
And the
Eakshasa Kumvakarna was
the
most powerful in battle, for he was fierce and terrible and a thorough master
of the arts of illusion.
And Khara was proficient in archery, and hostile
to
the Brahmanas, subsisting as he did on flesh.
And the
fierce
Surpanakha
was constant source of trouble to the ascetics.
And the
warriors,
learned
in the Vedas
and
diligent
in ceremonial rites,
all lived with their father in
the Gandhamadana.
And there they beheld Vaisravana seated
with
their
father, possessed of riches and borne on the shoulders of men.
And
seized
with jealousy, they resolved
upon
performing penances.
And with ascetic
penances
of the most
severe kind,
they gratified Brahma.
And the Ten-
headed Eavana, supporting life by means of air alone and surrounded by the
five sacred fires and absorbed in meditation, remained standing on
one
leg
for a thousand years.
And Kumvakarna with head downwards,
and
with
restricted diet, was constant
in austerities.
And
the wise
and
magnani-
mous Vibhishana, observing fasts
and
subsisting
only
on dry leaves
and
engaged in meditation,
practised
severe austerities for a long
period.
And
Khara and Surpanakha,
with cheerful hearts,
protected
and
attended
on
them while they were performing
those austerities.
And at the
close of
a
thousand years, the invincible
Ten-headed One,
cutting off his own
heads,
offered them as offering to the sacred fire.
And at this act
of his, the Lord
of the Universe was
pleased
with
him.
And
then
Brahma,
personally
appearing to them, bade them
desist
from those
austerities and
promised
to grant
boons unto every
one of them.
And the
adorable Brahma
said,
4
I am pleased with you, my sons
!
Cease now from
these austerities
and
ask boons of me
!
Whatever your
desires may
be,
they,
with the
single
exception
of
that
of immortality,
will be
fulfilled
!
As thou
hast offered
thy heads to the fire from great ambition, they will again
adorn
thy
body
as before, according to thy desire.
And
thy
body
will
not
be
disfigured
and thou
shalt be
able to assume
any form
according
to
thy desire
and
become
the
conqueror
of
thy
foes in battle.
There is no doubt
of
this
!'
Thereupon Eavana
said,
'May
I
never
experience defeat at the hands
of
Gandharvas,
Celestials, Kinnaras,
A suras,
Yakshas, Eakshasas,
Serpents

=== PAGE 329 ===

VANA PAEVA
587
and all other creatures
!'
Brahma said, 'From those that hast named, thou
shalt never have cause of fear
; except from men
(thou
shalt have no occa-
sion for fear).
Good betide thee
!
So hath it been ordained by me
!'
"Markandeya
said,
'Thus addressed,
the Ten-headed
(EavanaJ
was
highly gratified, for on
account of
his perverted
understanding,
the man-
eating one slightened human
beings.
Then the great Grandsire addressed
Kumbhakarna as before.
His reason being clouded by darkness,
he
asked
for
long-lasting
sleep.
Saying,
'It
shall
be
so*
'Brahma then addressed
Vibhishana,
'0 my
son,
I am much pleased with thee
!
Ask
any boon
thou pleasest
!'
Thereupon, Vibhishana replied, 'Even in great danger, may
I never swerve from the path of righteousness,
and
though
ignorant, may
I, O adorable Sire, be illumined with the light of devine
knowledge
!'
And
Brahma
replied,
'0
scourge
of thy enemies, as thy soul
inclines
not
to
unrighteousness although
born
in
the Rakshasa race, I grant thee immor-
tality f
"Markandeya continued,
Having obtained this boon, the Ten-headed
Eakshasa defeated Kuvera in battle and obtained from him the sovereignty
of Lanka. That adorable Being, leaving Lanka and followed by Gandharvas,
Yakshas, Eakshas,
and Kinnaras,
went to live on mount Gandhamadana.
And Eavana
forcibly
took
from him the celestial chariot Pushpaka.
And
upon this
Vaisravana
cursed him,
saying,
'This
chariot shall never carry
thee
; it
shall
bear
him who
will slay
thee in battle
!
And as thou hast
insulted me, thy elder brother, thou shalt soon die
!'
"The
pious
Vibhishana,
King, treading in the path followed by the
virtuous
and
possessed
of
great
glory,
followed Kuvera.
That adorable
Lord
of
wealth,
highly
pleased
with his younger brothers,
invested him
with the command of the Yaksha and Eaksha hosts.
On
the
other
hand,
the
powerful
and
man-eating
Bakshasas and Pisachas, having
assembled
together,
invested
the
Ten-headed Eavana with their
sovereignty.
And
Eavana, capable of assuming any form at will and terrible in
prowess, and
capable also of
passing
through the air, attacked the gods and the Daityas
and
wrested
from them
all
their valuable possessions.
And as
he
had
terrified all creatures,
he
was
called
Eavana.
And
Eavana,
capable
of
mustering any measure of might inspired the very gods with terror."
SECTION CCLXXIV
(Draupadi-harana Parva continued)
"Markandeya said, 'Then the Brahmarshis, the Siddhas and the Devar-
shis, with Havyavaha as their spokesman,
sought the protection of Brahma.
And Agni said,
'That powerful son of
Visrava, the
Ten-headed
cannot
be
slain on account of thy boon
!
Endued with great might he
oppresseth
in
eyery
possible way
the
creatures
of
the earth.
Protect us, therefore,
adorable one
!
There is none else save thee to protect us
!'

=== PAGE 330 ===

588
MAHABHAEATA
"Brahma
said, 'O
Agni,
he
cannot be conquered in battle by
either
the gods or the Asuras
!
I have already ordained that which is needful
for
that purpose.
Indeed
his
death
is
near
!
Urged by me, the four-headed
God hath already been incarnate for that object.
Even Vishnu,
that fore-
most of smiters will achieve that object
!'
"Markandeya
continued,
'Then
the Grandsire also asked
Sakra,
in
their
presence,
'Be
thou,
with
all
the
celestials,
born
on earth
!
And
beget
ye
on monkeys
and
bears, heroic sons possessed of great
strength
and capable of assuming any form
at
will
as
allies
of
Vishnu
!'
And
at
this,
the
gods,
the
Gandharvas
and
the Danavas quickly
assembled
to
take
counsel
as
to how
they
should be born on earth according to their
respective
parts.
And
in
their
presence the boon-giving god commanded
a Gandharvi,
by name Dundubhi
saying,
'Go
there
for
accomplishing
this object
!'
And Dundubhi hearing these
words
of
the
Grandsire, was
born
in
the
world
of men
as the hunch-backed Manthara.
And
all
the
principal
celestials,
with
Sakra
and
others
begot
offspring upon
the
wives
of the
foremost
of
monkeys
and
bears.
And
those sons equalled
their
sires
in
strength
and
fame.
And
they
were
capable
of
splitting
mountain
peaks
and
their weapons were stones and trees of the Sola and
the
Tola
species.
And
their
bodies
were
hard
as
adamant,
and
they
were possessed of very
great
strength.
And they were
all skilled
in war
and
capable
of
mustering any measure of energy
at will.
And they were
equal to
a
thousand
elephants
in might,
and they resembled the wind in
speed.
And some of them lived wherever they liked, while
others
lived
in
forests.
And the adorable Creator of the Universe, having ordained all this,
instructed Manthara
as
to what she
would have
to do.
And Manthara
quick
as
thought,
understood
all
his words, and went hither and thither
ever engaged in fermenting quarrels.'
"
SECTION CCLXXV
(Draupadi-harana Parva continued)
"Yudhishthira
said,
'0
adorable
one,
thou hast
described
to me in
detail
the
history
of
the
birth of Bama and
others.
I wish to learn the
cause of their exile. Do thou, O Brahmana, relate why the sons of Dasaratha
the brothers Eama and Lakshmana
went
to
the
forest
with
famous
princess of Mithila.'
"Markandeya
said,
'The
pious
king Dasaratha,
ever mindful
of the
old
and
assiduous
in
religious
ceremonies,
was
greatly
pleased
when
these sons were
born.
And
his
sons
gradually
grew
up
in
might
and
they became conversant with the
Vedas
together with all
their mysteries,
and with the
science
of
arms.
And when after
having
gone through the
Brahmacharyya vows the princes
were
married,
king Dasaratha
became

=== PAGE 331 ===

VANA PAEVA
589
happy and highly pleased.
And the intelligent Bama, the
eldest
of them
all, became the favourite of his father, and greatly pleased the
people
with
his
charming
ways.
And
theo,
Bharata,
the wise king, considering
himself old in years took counsel with his virtuous
ministers and
spiritual
adviser for installing Bama as regent of the kingdom.
And all those
great
ministers
were
agreed
that
it
was time to do so.
And, O scion of Kuru's
race, king Dasaratha was greatly pleased to behold his son,
that
enhancer
of Kausalya's delight
possessed
of
eyes
that
were
red,
and
arms
that
were
sinewy.
And
his
steps were like those of a wild elephant.
And he
had long arms
and
high
shoulders,
and
black
and
curly
hair.
And
he
was valiant, and glowing with splendour, and not inferior to Indra
himself
in battle.
And he was well-versed in holy writ and was
equal
to
Vrihas-
pati
in
wisdom.
An
object
of
love with all the people, he was skilled in
every science.
And with senses under complete control,
his
very
enemies
were pleased to behold him.
And ha
was
terror
of
the
wicked
and
the
protector of the virtuous.
And possessed of
intelligence
and
incapable
of
being baffled, he was victorious over all and never vanquished by any. And,
O
descendant
of
Kurus, beholding
his
son
that enhancer of Kausalya's
joy
king
Dasaratha became
highly
pleased.
And
reflecting
on
Bama's
virtues, the
powerful
and
mighty
king
cheerfully
addressed
the
family
priest, saying,
'Blessed be thou,
Brahmana
!
This night of
the Pushya
constellation
will
bring in a
very
auspicious conjunction.
Let, therefore,
materials be collected and let Bama also be invited. This Pushya constella-
tion will last
till tomorrow.
And Bama, therefore, should
be
invested
by
me and my ministers as prince-regent of all my subjects
!'
"Meanwhile Manthara
( the maid of Kaikeyi
), hearing these words of
the king, went to her mistress, and spoke unto
her
as was
suited
to
the
occasion.
And she said,
'Thy great ill-luck,
OTCaikeyi, hath this day been
proclaimed by the king
!
unlucky one, mayst thon be bitten by
a
fierce
and
enraged
snake
of virulent poison
!
Kausalya, indeed, is fortunate, as
it is her son that is going to be installed on the throne.
Where,
indeed,
is
thy prosperity, when thy son obtaineth not the kingdom
?'
"Hearing these words of her maid, the
slendor-waisted and
beautiful
Kaikeyi put on all her ornaments, and sought her
husband
in
a
secluded
place.
And with a joyous
heart,
and
smiling
pleasantly,
she
addressed
these words to him with all the blandishments of love,
*O
king,
thou
art
always
true
to
thy
promises.
Thou didst promise before to grant me an
object of my desire.
Do thou fulfil that promise now and save thyself from
the sin of unredeemed pledge
!'
The king replied, saying,
'I will grant thee a
boon.
Ask thou whatever thou wishest
! What man undeserving
of
death
shall be slain today and who that deserves death is
to
be
set
at
liberty
?
Upon whom shall I bestow wealth to-day,
or whose wealth shall be confis-
cated ?
Whatever
wealth
there
is in this world, save what belongeth to
Brahmanas,
is mine
!
I am the king of kings in this world,
and
the
pro-

=== PAGE 332 ===

590
MAHABHARAtfA
tector of all the four classes
!
Tell me quickly, O blessed lady,
what
that
object is upon which thou hast set thy heart
!'
Hearing these words of the
king, and tying him fast to his pledge, and conscious also of her power over
him, she addressed him
in
these
words,
'I
desire
that
Bharata
be
the
recipient of that investiture which thou hast designed
for Kama,
and
let
Rama go into exile living in the forest of Dandaka for fourteen years
as an
ascetic with matted locks on head and robed in rags and deer-skins
!'
Hear-
ing
these
disagreeable
words
of
cruel
import,
the
king,
chief of
the
Bharata race, was sorely afflicted and became utterly speechless
!
But the
mighty and virtuous Rama, learning that his father had been thus solicited,
went into the forest so that the king's truth might
remain inviolate.
And,
blessed be thou, he was followed by the auspicious Lakshmana
that
fore-
most
of bowmen and his wife Sita, the princess of Videha and daughter of
Janaka.
And after Rama had gone into the
forest, king Dasaratha
took
leave of his body, agreeably to the eternal law of time.
And knowing that
Rama not
near
and
that
the
king
was
dead,
queen
Kaikeyi,
causing
Bharata
to
be
brought
before
her,
addressed
him
in
these
words,
'Dasaratha hath gone to heaven and both Rama and Lakshmana are in the
forest
!
Take thou this kingdom which is
so
extensive
and
whose
peace
there is no rival to disturb.'
Thereupon the virtuous Bharata replied
unto
her saying,
'Thou hast done a wicked deed, having slain thy
husband and
exterminated this family from lust of wealth
alone
!
Heaping
infamy
on
my head, O accursed woman of our race, thou
hast, O
mother,
attained
this, thy object
!' And having said these words, the prince wept aloud. And
having
proved
his
innocence
before
all the subjects of that realm he set
out in the wake of Rama,
desiring to bring him back.
And
placing Kau-
salya
and
Sumitra
and Kaikeyi in the vehicles at the van of his train, he
proceeded with a heavy heart,
in company with
Satrughna.
And
he was
accompanied by Vasishtha and Vamadeva, and other Brahmanas by
thou-
sands and by
the
people
of
the cities and the provinces, desiring to bring
back Rama.
And he saw Rama with Lakshmana,
living on the mountains
of Ohitrakuta with bow in hand and decked with the ornaments of ascetics.
Bharata, however, was dismissed by Rama, who was determined to act accor-
ding to the words of his father.
And returning,
Bharata ruled
at
Nandi-
grama, keeping before him, his brother's wooden sandals.
And Rama fear-
ing a repetition of intrusion by the people cf Ayodhya, entered into the great
forest towards the asylum of Sarabhanga.
And
having
paid
his
respects
to
Sarabhanga, he
entered
the
forest of Dandaka and took up his abode
on the banks of beautiful river Godavari.
And
while
living
there, Rama
was inveigled into hostilities with Khara, then dwelling
in
Janasthana, on
account of Surpanakha.
And for the protection of the ascetics the virtuous
scion of Raghu's race
slew
fourteen
thousand
Rakshasas
on
earth,
and
having
slain
those
mighty
Rakshasas,
Khara
and
Dushana,
the
wise
descendant of Raghu once more made that sacred
forest free from danger/

=== PAGE 333 ===

VANA PABVA
591
"And after these Bakshasas had been slain, Surpanakha with mutilated
nose and lips, repaired to Lanka
the abode of her brother (Bavana).
And
when that Bakshasa woman, senseless with grief and with dry blood-stains
on her face, appeared before Bavana, she fell down at his feet. And behold-
ing
her so horribly
mutilated,
Bavana became
senseless with
wrath and
grinding his teeth
sprung up from his seat.
And dismissing
his
ministers,
he enquired of her in private,
saying,
'Blessed sister, who hath made
thee
so,
forgetting
and
disregarding me ?
Who is he that having got a sharp-
pointed spear hath
rubbad
his body with it ?
Who is he that
sleepeth
in
happiness
and security, after placing a fire close to his head ?
Who
ia
he
that hath trodden upon a revengeful snake of virulent poison ? Who indeed,
is that person who
standeth
with
his
hand thrust into the mouth of
the
maned
lion
!'
Then flames of wrath burst forth from his body,
like
those
that
are
emitted
at
night
from the hollows
of a tree on fire.
His
sister
then related unto him the prowess of Bama and the defeat of the Bakshasas
with Khara and
Dushana
at
their head.
Informed of the slaughter of his
relatives,
Bavana,
impelled
by
Fate,
remembered
Maricha
for
slaying
Bama.
And resolving
upon the
course he was to follow and having made
arrangements for the government of his capital, he consoled his
sister,
and
set out on an aerial voyage.
And crossing the Trikuta and the Kala moun-
tains, he beheld the vast receptacle of deep waters
the abode of the
Maka-
ras. Then crossing the Ocean, the Ten.headed Bavana reached Gokarna
the
favourite
resort
of the
illustrious
god armed with the trident.
And there
Bavana
met
with
his old friend Maricha who, from fear of Bama himself,
had adopted an ascetic mode of
life.'
"
SECTION CCLXXVI
(Draupadi-harana Parva continued)
"Markandeya
said,
'Beholding
Bavana
come,
Maricha
received
him
with
a
respectful
welcome,
and offered him
fruits and
roots.
And
after Bavana had taken his seat, and rested himself a while, Maricha
skill-
ed in speech,
sat beside Bavana
and
addressed him who was
himself
as
eloquent
in speech,
saying,
'Thy
complexion hath assumed an
unnatural
hue
;
is
it
all right
with
thy kingdom,
king of the Bakahasas ?
What
hath brought thee here ?
Do thy subjects
continue
to pay thee the same
allegiance that they used to pay thee before ?
What business hath brought
thee here ?
Know that it is already fulfilled, even
if it be
very
difficult
of
fulfilment
!
Bavana, whose heart was agitated with wrath and humiliation
informed him briefly
of
the
acts
of Bama
and the measures that were to
be taken.'
And on hearing his story, Maricha briefly replied to him, saying,
'Thou must not provoke Bama, for I know his strength
!
Is there a person
who
is
capable
of
withstanding
the
impetus of his arrows ?
That great

=== PAGE 334 ===

592
MAHABHABATA
man hath been
the cause
of my
assuming my present ascetic life.
What
evil-minded
creature
hath
put
thee
up
to this course calculated to bring
ruin
and
destruction
on
thee
?'
To
this Eavana
indignantly
replied,
reproaching
him
thus,
'If
thou
dost
not
obey my
orders,
thou
shalt
surely
die
at my
hands.'
Maricha
then thought within himself, 'When
death is inevitable,
I shall
do
his
biddings
; for it is better
to die
at the
hands of one that is superior,' Then he replied to the lord of the Eakshasas
saying,
'I shall surely render thee whatever
help
I can
!'
Then the Ten-
headed Bavana said unto him,
'Go and tempt Sita,
assuming the shape
of
a
deer
with
golden horns and a
golden
skin
!
When Sita
will
observe
thee thus, she
will
surely
send away Bama to hunt thee.
And then Sita
will
surely come
within my
power,
and
I shall forcibly carry her away.
And then that wicked Bama will surely
die
of grief at the
loss of his
wife.
Do thou help me in this way
1*
"Thus
addressed,
Maricha
performed
his obsequies
(in anticipation)
and
with
a
sorrowful
heart,
followed
Bavana who was
in
advance of
him.
And
having
reached
the
hermitage
of Bama
of difficult
achieve-
ments,
they both
did
as
arranged
beforehand.
And
Bavana
appeared
in
the
guise
of
an
ascetic
with
head
shaven,
and
adorned
with
a
Kamundala, and a treble staff.
Acd Maricha
appreared
in
the
shape
of
a
deer.
And
Maricha
appeared
before
the
princess
of
Videha
in
that
guise.
And impelled by Fate,
she sent away Bama after that
deer.
And
Rama,
with
the
object
of
pleasing
her,
quickly took
up
his
bow,
and
leaving Lakshmana behind to protect
her,
went
in
pursuit
of
that
deer.
And
armed
with
his bow
and
quiver
and
scimitar,
and
his
fingers
encased in
gloves
of Guana
skin, Bama
went
in
pursuit
of
that
deer,
after
the
manner
of
Budra
following
the
stellar
deer
1
in days of yore.
And
that Bakshasa
enticed away Bama to a great distance by appearing
before him
at
one time and disappearing from his view
at
another.
And
when Bama at last knew who and what that deer was,
viz., that he
was
a
Rakshasa,
that
illustrious
descendant
of
Baghu's
race
took
out
an
infallible
arrow
and slew
that
Bakshasa,
in the disguise of a deer.
And
struck
with
Bama's
arrow,
the Bakshasa,
imitating Bama's voice,
cried
out
in
great
distress,
calling
upon Sita and Lakshmana.
And when
the
princess of Videha heard that cry of distress, she urged Lakshmana
to
run
towards
the
quarter
from
whence
the cry came.
Then Lakshmana said
to
her,
'Timid
lady,
thou
hast
no
cause
of
fear
!
Who is so
powerful
as to be able to smite Bama ?
thou
of sweet smiles,
in a moment
thou
wilt behold
thy
husband Bama
!'
Thus
addressed, the chaste Sita,
from
that
timidity
which
is natural to women, became suspicious of
even
the
pure
Lakshmana,
and
began
to
weep
aloud.
And
that
chaste
lady,
devoted
to
her
husband,
harshly
reproved
Laksbmana,
saying,
'The
object
which
thou, O
fool,
cherishest
in
thy
heart,
shall
never
be
fulfilled
!
I would
rather
kill
myself
with
a
weapon
or
throw
myself
1
Tard-mrigam.
Formerly Prajapati, assuming the
form of a deer,
followed his daughter from lust, and Budra,
armed with a trident,
pursued
Prajapati and struck off his head.
That deer- head of Prajapati served from
the trunk, became the star, or rather constellation, called Mrigasiras.
T.

=== PAGE 335 ===

VAN A PABVA
593
from the top of a
hill or enter into a blazing fire than live with a
sorry
wretch like thee, forsaking my husband Rama,
like
a tigress under the
protection of a jackal
!
When the good-natured Lakshmana, who
was very fond
of
his
brother, heard these words,
he shut his ears (with his hands) and set out
on
the
track that Rama had taken.
And Lakshmana set out
without
casting a single glance on that lady with lips soft and red like the Bimba
fruit.
Meanwhile, the Rakshasa Ravana, wearing a genteel guise though
wicked at heart, and like unto fire enveloped in a heap of ashes, showed
himself there.
And he appeared there
in the disguise of a hermit, for
forcibly
carrying away that lady of blameless character. The virtuous
daughter
of
Janaka,
seeing him
come, welcomed him with fruits and
root and a seat.
Disregarding these and assuming his own proper shape,
that bull among Rakshasas began to re-assure the princess of Videha
in
these words,
1
am, O
Sita,
the king of the Rakshasas, known by
the
name of Ravana
!
My delightful city, known by the name of Lanka is
on
the other side of the great ocean
!
There among beautiful women,
thou
wilt
shine
with me
!
O
lady
of
beautiful
lips, forsaking the
ascetic Rama do thou become my wife
!'
Janaka's daughter of beautiful
lips, hearing these and other words in the same strain, shut her ears and
replied unto him, saying,
kDo not say so
!
The vault of heaven with all
its stars may fall down,
the Earth itself may be broken into fragments,
fire
itself may change its nature by becoming cool, yet
I cannot forsake
the
descendant
of Raghu
!
How
can a she-elephant, who hath lived
with the mighty leader of a herd with rent temples forsake him and live
with a hog ?
Having once tasted the sweet wine prepared from honey
or
flowers, how
can a woman, I fancy, relish the wretched arrak from
rice?'
Having
uttered
those words, she entered the cottage,
her
lips
trembling
in
wrath
and
her
arms moving
to and
fro
in
emotion.
Ravana,
however,
followed
her
thither and
intercepted
her further
progress.
And rudely scolded by the Rakshasa, she swooned away.
But
Ravana
seized
her by
the hair of her head, and rose up into the
air.
Then a
huge vulture of the name of Jatayu living on a mountain peak,
beheld that helpless lady thus weeping and calling upon Rama
in
great
distress while being carried away by
Ravana."
SECTION CCLXXVII
(Draupadi-harana Parva continued)
"Markandeya said, 'That heroic king of the v ultures, Jatayu, hav ing
Sampati for his uterine brother and Arjuna himself for his father, was
a
friend
of Dasaratha. And beholding his daughter-in-law Sita on the
lap of Ravana, that ranger of the skies rushed in wrath against the king
of the Rakshasas.
^And
the
vulture addressed Ravana, saying, 'Leave

=== PAGE 336 ===

594
MAHABHAEATA
the princess of Mithila, leave her I say
!
How canst thou, O Rakshasa,
ravish her when I am alive ?
If thou dost not release my daughter-in-
law, thou shalt not escape from me
with
life
!'
And having said these
words Jatayu
began
to
tear
the king of the Rakshasas with his talons.
And he mangled him in a hundred different parts of his body by striking
him with his wings and beaks.
And
blood
began
to flow as copiously
from Rav ana's body as water from a mountain spring.
And
attacked
thus by that vulture desirpus of Rama's good, Ravana, taking up a sword,
cut off the two wings of that bird.
And hav ing slain that
king
of
the
vultures, huge as a mountain-peak shooting forth above the clouds, the
Rakshasa rose high in the air with Sita on his lap.
And the princess of
Videha, wherever
she
saw
an asylum of ascetics, a lake, a river, or a
tank, threw down an ornament of hers.
And beholding on the top of a
mountain
five
foremost
of monkeys, that intelligent lady threw down
amongst them
a
broad piece of her costly attire.
And that
beautiful
and yellow piece of cloth fell, fluttering through the air, amongst
those
five
foremost
of
monkeys
like
lightning from the clouds.
And that
Rakshasa
soon
passed
a
great way through the firmament like a bird
through the air. And soon the Rakshasa beheld his delightful and char-
ming city of many gates, surrounded on all sides by high walls and built
by Viswakrit himself.
And the king of the
Rakshasa then entered his
own city known by the name of Lanka, accompanied by Sita/
"And
while
Sita was
being
carried away, the intelligent Rama,
having
slain the
great
deer,
retraced
his
steps
and saw his brother
Lakshmana (on the way).
And beholding his brother, Rama reproved
him,
saying, 'How
couldst thou come
hither,
leaving the princess of
Videha in a forest that is haunted by the Rakshasa
?' And reflecting on
his own enticement to a great distance by that Rakshasa in the guise of
a
deer and on
the
arrival
of
his brother (leaving Sita alone in the
asylum), Rama was filled with agony.
And quickly advancing towards
Lakshmana while reproving him still, Rama asked him, 'O Lakshmana, is
the princess of Videha still alive ?
I fear she is no more f Then Laksh-
mana
told him
everything about what
Sita had said, especially that
unbecoming language of hers subsequently. With a burning heart Rama
then ran towards the
asylum.
And on
the way
he beheld a vulture
huge as a mountain, lying in agonies of death.
And
suspecting him to
be a Rakshasa, the descendant of the Kakutstha race, along with Laksh-
mana rushed towards him, drawing with great force his bow to a
circle.
The mighty vulture, however, addressing them both, said, 'Blessed be ye,
I am the king of the vultures, and friend of Dasaratha
!'
Hearing these
words
of
his, both Rama and his brother put aside their excellent bow
and said, 'Who is this one that speaketh the name of our father in these
woods ?'
And then they saw that creature to be a bird destitute of two

=== PAGE 337 ===

VANA PABVA
595
wings,
and
that bird then told them of his own overthrow at the hands
of Ravana for the sake of Sita.
Then Rama enquired of the vulture as
to the way Ravana had taken.
The vulture answered him by a nod
of
his head and then breathed his last.
And having understood from
the
sign
the
vulture had made
that Ravana had gone towards the
south,
Rama reverencing his father's friend, caused his funeral obsequies to be
duly performed.
Then
those
chastisers of foes, Rama and Lakshmana,
rilled
with grief at the abduction of the princess of Videha, took a
sou-
thern path through the Dandaka woods beholding along their way many
uninhabited asylums of ascetics, scattered over with seats of Kusa
grass
and
umbrellas
of
leaves and
broken water-pots, and abounding with
hundreds of jackals.
And
in that great forest, Rama along with
Sumi-
tra' s son beheld many herds of deer running in all directions.
And they
heard a loud uproar of various creatures like what is heard during a fast
spreading forest conflagration.
And soon they beheld a
headless Rak-
shasa of terrible mien.
And that
Rakshasa was dark as the clouds and
huge
as
a
mountain,
with shoulders broad as those of a Sala tree, and
with
arms
that were gigantic.
And he had a pair of large eyes on
his
breast, and the opening of his mouth was placed on his capacious
belly.
And that Rakshasa seized Lakshmana by the hand, without any
diffi-
culty.
And
seized by
the
Rakshasa
the
son
of Sumitra, O
Bharata,
became
utterly confounded
and helpless.
And casting his glances on
Rama,
that
headless
Rakshasa began to draw Lakshmana towards
that
part of his body
where his mouth was.
And Lakshmana in
grief add-
ressed Rama, saying,
'Behold my plight
!
The loss of thy kingdom, and
then the death of our father, and then the abduction of Sita, and finally
this disaster that hath overwhelmed me
!
Alas, I shall not behold thee
return with the princess of
Videha to Kosala and seated on thy
ances-
tral throne as the ruler of the entire Earth
!
They only that are fortu-
nate will behold thy face, like unto the moon emerged from the clouds,
after thy coronation bath in water sanctified with Kusa grass and fried
paddy and
black peas !'
And the intelligent Lakshmana uttered those
and other lamentations in the same strain.
The illustrious
descendant,
however,
of
Kakutstha's
race
undaunted amid
danger, replied unto
Lakshmana,
saying,
'Do
not, O
tiger among men, give way to grief
!
What is this thing when I am here ?
Cut
thou
off his right arm and I
shall cut off his left.' And while Rama was still speaking so, the left arm
of the monster was severed by him, cut off with a sharp scimitar,
as
if
indeed,
that arm were
a
stalk
of the Tila corn.
The mighty
son of
Sumitra then beholding his brother standing before him struck off with
his sword
the
right arm also of that Rakshasa.
And Lakshmana also
began to repeatedly strike Rakshasa under the ribs, and then that huge
headless
monster fell upon the ground and expired quickly.
And then

=== PAGE 338 ===

596
MAHABHABATA
there came
out from
the Rakshasa's body a person of celestial
make.
And
he showed
himself
to the brothers, staying for a moment in
the
skies, like the Sun in his effulgence in the firmament. And Rama skilled
in speech, asked him, saying, 'Who art thou ?
Answer me who enquire
of thee ?
Whence could such a thing happen ?
All
this
seems
to me
to be
exceedingly
wonderful
!'
Thus
addressed by
Rama, that being
replied
unto
him, saying, 1 am, O prince, a Gandharva of the name of
Viswavasu
!
It was through
the
curse
of a Brahmana
that
I had to
assume the form and nature of a Raksha.
As to thyself, O Rama,
Sita
hath been carried away with violence by king Ravana who dwelleth in
Lanka.
Repair
thou
unto
Sugriva who will give thee his
friendship.
There,
near enough
to the
peak of
Rishyamuka is
the lake known by
the name
of Pampa of
sacred water and cranes.
There dwelleth, with
four
of his
counsellors,
Sugriva, the brother of the monkey-king Vali
decked
with
v a
garland
of gold.
Repairing
unto him,
inform
of thy
cause of sorrow.
In plight very much like thy own, he will render thee
assistance.
This is all that we can say.
Thou wilt,
without doubt, see
the daughter of Janaka
!
Without doubt Ravana and others are known
to
the king
of the monkeys f
Hav ing said these words,
that celestial
being of great effulgence made himself invisible, and those heroes, both
Rama and Lakshmana, wondered much."
SECTION CCLXXVIII
( DraupadiParana Parva continued )
"Markandeya said,
'Afflicted with grief
at the abduction
of Sita,
Rama had not to go much further before he came upon Pampa
that lake
which abounded
with
lotuses
of
various kinds.
And fanned by the
cool,
delicious and
fragrant
breezes
in
those
woods, Rama suddenly
remembered his dear spouse.
And, O mighty monarch, thinking of that
dear wife of his, and afflicted at the thought of his separation from her,
Rama
gave way
to lamentations.
The son of Sumitra then addressed
him saying,
'O thou that givest proper respect to those that deserve
it,
despondency
such
as this should not be suffered to approach thee, like
illness that can never
touch an old man leading a regular
life
!
Thou
hast obtained
information of Ravana and of the
princess of Videha
!
Liberate her now with exertion and intelligence
! Let us now approach
Sugriva,
that
foremost of monkeys, who is even now on the mountain
top
! Console thyself, when I, thy disciple and slave and ally, am near f
And
addressed by Lakshmana
in
these
and other words of the same
import, Rama
regained
his own
nature and attended to the business
before him.
And bathing in the waters of Pampa and offering oblations
therewith unto their ancestors, both those heroic
brothers, Rama and
Lakshmana, set out (for Rishyamuka). And arriv ing at Rishymuka which

=== PAGE 339 ===

VAN-A PAEVA
597
abounded
with
fruits and
roots
and
trees,
those heroes beheld five
monkeys on the top of the mountain-peak.
And seeing them approach,
Sugriva
sent
his
counsellor
the
intelligent Hanuman,
huge
as the
Himavat-mountains,
to
receive them.
And the brothers, having first
exchanged words with Hanuman, approached Sugriva. And then, O king,
Rama made friends with Sugriva.
And when Rama informed Sugriva
of
the
object
he
had
in view, Sugriva showed him the piece of cloth
that Sita had dropped among the monkeys, while being carried away by
Ravana. And having obtained from him those credentials, Rama himself
installed
Sugriva
that foremost of monkeys
in sovereignty of all the
monkeys
of
Earth.
And Rama
also
pledged
himself
to slay Vali in
battle.
And hav ing come to that understanding and placing the fullest
confidence
in
each
other,
they
all repaired to Eiskindhya, desirous of
battle
(with Valf).
And
arriving at Eiskindhya, Sugriva sent forth a
loud roar deep as
that of a
cataract.
Unable
to
bear that
challenge,
Vali
was
for
coming
out,
(but his wife)
Tara stood
in way,
saying,
'Himself endued with great strength, the way in which Sugriva is roaring,
showeth,
I
ween,
that he
hath found
assistance
!
It
behoveth thee
not,
therefore,
to go
out
!
Thus
addressed
by her,
that
king of the
monkeys,
the
eloquent
Vali,
decked in a golden
garland replied unto
Tara
of
face beautiful
as
the
moon,
saying, Thou understandest the
voice of every creature.
Tell me after reflection whose help it is
that
this brother in name only of mine hath obtained
!'
Thus
addressed by
him Tara endued with wisdom and possessed of
the
effulgence
of
the
moon, answered her lord after a moment's reflection, saying,
'Listen, O
monarch of the monkeys
! That foremost of bowmen, endued with great
might, Rama
the
son
of Dasaratha, whose spouse hath been ravished,
hath made
an
alliance
offensive and defensive with Sugriva
!
And
his brother the intelligent Lakshmana also of mighty arms, the unvan-
quished son of Sumitra, standeth beside him for the success of Sugriva's
object.
And Mainda
and Dwivida, and Hanuman the
son of Pavana,
and Jamvuman,
the
king of the bears, are beside
Sugriva as his coun-
sellors.
All these illustrious ones are endued with great
strength and
intelligence.
And these
all,
depending upon the might and energy of
Rama,
are prepared for thy destruction
!'
Hearing these words of hers
that were for his
benefit, the king of
the monkeys
disregarded them
altogether.
And filled with jealousy, he also suspected her to have set
her heart on Sugriva
!
And addressing Tara in
harsh
words, he went
out
of his cave and coming before Sugriva who was staying by the side
of the mountains of Malyavat,
he
spoke
unto him
thus,
'Frequently
vanquished before by me, fond as thou art of life, thouart allowed by me
to
escape
with
life owing
to thy relationship with me
!
What hath
made thee
wish
for death so soon
?'
Thus addressed by Vali, Sugriva,

=== PAGE 340 ===

598
MAHABHAEATA
that slayer of foes, as if addressing Rama himself for
informing him of
what had
happened,
replied
unto his brother in these words of grave
import,
'O king, robbed by thee of my wife and my kingdom also, what
need have I of life ? Know that it is for this that I have come
!'
Then
addressing each other in these and other words of the same import, Vali
and Sugriva rushed to the encounter, fighting with Sala and
Tala
trees
and
stones.
And
they
struck
each
other down on the earth.
And
leaping high into the air, they struck each other with their
fists.
And
mangled
by
each
other's
nail and
teeth, both of them were covered
with
blood.
And
the two heroes shone on that account like a pair of
blossoming Kinshukas.
And
as they fought with each other, no differ-
ence
(in aspect)
could
be observed
so as to distinguish them.
Then
Hanuman placed on Sugriva's neck a garland of flowers.
And that hero
thereupon
shone
with that garland on his neck, like the beautiful and
huge
peak
of
Malya
with
its
cloudy
belt.
And Rama,
recognising
Sugriva by that sign, then drew his foremost
of
huge
bows, aiming at
Vali as his mark.
And the twang of Rama's bow resembled the roar of
an engine. And Vali, pierced in the heart by that arrow, trembled in fear.
And Vali, his heart having been pierced through, began to vomit forth
blood.
And he then beheld standing before him Rama
with
Sumitra's
son by his side.
And reproving that
descendant
of
Kakutstha's
race,
Vali
fell down
on
the ground and became senseless.
And Tara then
beheld
that
lord of hers
possessed of the effulgence of the Moon, lying
prostrate on the bare earth. And after Vali had been thus slain, Sugriva
regained
possession of Kishkindhya, and along with
it, of the widowed
Tara also of face beautiful as the moon. And the intelligent Rama also
dwelt on the beautiful breast of the Malyavat hill for four months, duly
worshipped by Sugriva all the while.
"Meanwhile Rav ana excited
by lust, having reached
his city of
Lanka, placed Sita in an abode, resembling Nandana itself, within a forest
of Asokas that looked like an asylum of ascetics. And the large-eyed Sita
passed
her days
there in distress, living on fruits and roots, practising
ascetic
austerities
with fasts, attired in
ascetic garb, and waning
thin
day by day, thinking of her absent lord.
And the king of the Bakshasas
appointed many fiakshasa women armed with
bearded darts and swords
and lances and
battle-axes and maces and
flaming brands,
for guarding
her.
And some of these had two eyes, and some three.
And some had
eyes on their foreheads. And some had long tongues and some had none.
And some had three breasts and some had only one leg.
And some had
three matted
braids on
their heads, and some had only one eye.
And
these, and others of blazing eyes and hair stiff as the camel's, stood beside
Sita surrounding her day and night most watchfully. And those Pisacha
women
of frightful
voice and
terrible
aspect
always
addressed
that
large-eyed lady in the harshest tones. And they said, 'Let us eat her up,
let us mangle her,
let us tear her into pieces,
her, that
is, that dwelleth
here disregarding our lord
!' And filled with grief at the separation from
her lord,
Sita drew a deep
sigh and answered those
Bakshasa women,

=== PAGE 341 ===

VAN A PABVA
599
saying, 'Reverend ladies, eat me up without delay
!
I have no desire to
live
without that husband
of mine,
of eyes like lotus-leaves and locks
wavy, and blue
in hue
!
Truly
I will, without food and without
the
least love
of
life, emaciate my
limbs, like a she-snake
(hybernating)
within
a Tala tree.
Know this
for certain that I will
never seek
the
protection
of any
other parson than
the
descendant
of
Raghu.
And
knowing this,
do what ye
think fit
!'
And hearing these words of hers,
those Bakshasas with dissonant voice went to the king of the Bakshasas,
for representing unto him
all she had said.
And when
those Bakshasas
had gone away, one of their number known by the name of Trijata, who
was virtuous and agreeable in speech, began to
console the princess of
Videha.
And she said,
'Listen, O Sita
!
I will
tell thee
something
1 O
friend, believe in what I say
! O thou of fair hips, cast off thy fears, and
listen
to what
I say.
There
is
an
intelligent and old
chief
of
the
Bakshasas known by the name of Avindhya. He always seeketh Rama's
good and hath told me these words for thy sake
!
'Reassuring and cheer-
ing her, tell Sita in my name, saying
: Thy husband the mighty Rama is
well and is waited upon by Lakshmana.
And the blessed descendant of
Raghu hath already made friends with Sugriva, the king of the monkeys,
and
is ready to act for thee
!
And, O timid lady, entertain thou no fear
on
account of Ravana, who is
censured
by
the whole
world,
for, O
daughter,
thou art
safe from him on
account of Nalakuv era's
curse.
Indeed,
this wretch had been cursed
before for his having violated his
daughter-in-law, Rambha.
This lustful
wretch is
not able to
violate
any woman by force. Thy husband will soon come, protected by Sugriva
and with the
intelligent son of Sumitra in
his train, and will soon take
thee away hence
!
O lady,
I have
had a most terrible dream
of evil
omen,
indicating
the
destruction
of
this wicked-minded wretch
of
Pulastya's
race
!
This night wanderer of mean deeds is,
indeed,
most
wicked and cruel. He inspireth terror in all by the defects of his nature
and the wickedness of his conduct.
And deprived of his senses by Fate,
he challengeth
the very gods.
In my vision I have seen every indica-
tion
of
his
downfall.
I have
seen the
Ten-headed, with
his crown
shaven and body besmeared with oil, sunk in mire, and the next moment
dancing on a chariot drawn by mules.
I have seen Kumbhakarna and
others,
perfectly
naked and with crowns
shaven,
decked
with
red
wreaths and
unguents, and
running
towards the
southern
direction.
Vibhishana alone, with umbrella over his head, and graced with a turban,
and with
body decked with
white
wreaths
and
unguents,
I beheld
ascending the summit of the White hill.
And I saw
four of his coun-
sellors
also,
decked with
white
wreaths and unguents,
ascending
the
summit of
that hill
along with him.
All this bodeth that these
alone
will
be saved from the
impending terror.
The whole
earth- with
its
oceans and seas
will be
enveloped with
Rama's arrows.
O lady, thy
husband will
fill the whole earth with his fame.
I also saw Lakshmana,
consuming
all directions
(with his
arrows) and ascending on a heap of
bones and drinking thereon honey and rice
boiled in milk.
And thou,
O lady, hast been beheld by me running towards a northernly direction,
weeping and covered with
blood and
protected by
a tiger!
And, O
princess of Videha, soon wilt thou find happiness,
being united, O Sita,
with
thy lord,
that descendant of Raghu accompanied by his brother
!'
Hearing these words of Trijata, that girl with eyes like those of a young
gazelle,
once more
began to
entertain hopes
of a union with her lord.
And when at last those fierce and cruel Pisacha guards came back, they
saw her sitting with Trijata
as before.
1 "

=== PAGE 342 ===

SECTION CCLXXIX
(Draupadi-harana Parva continued)
"Markandeya said, 'And while the
chaste Sita was
dwelling there
afflicted with melancholy and grief
on account
of her lord, attired
in
mean garb, with but a single jewel (on the marital thread on her wrist),
and incessantly weeping, seated on a stone, and waited upon by Rakshasa
women, Ravana, afflicted by the shafts of the god of desire, came to her
and approached
her presence.
And inflamed by desire,
that conquerer
in battle of the gods,
the Danavas, the Gandharvas, the Yakshas, and the
Kimpurushas, attired in celestial robes and possessing handsome features,
decked with jewelled
ear-rings and
wearing a
beautiful
garland and
crown,
entered the
Asoka
woods,
like an embodiment
of the
vernal
season.
And dressed
with care, Ravana looked
like the Kalpa tree in
Indra's garden.
But though
adorned with
every
embellishment, that
inspired her
only with awe,
like a beautified
banian in the
midst of a
cemetery.
And that
night-wanderer, having approached the presence
of
that
slender-waisted
lady,
looked
like
the
planet
Saturn
in
the
presence
of
Rohini.
And
smitten
with
the shafts
of
the god
of the
flowery emblem he accosted that fair-hipped lady then affrighted like a
helpless doe, and told
her these words,
'Thou hast, O Sita, shown thy
regard
for thy lord
too much
!
O thou of
delicate limbs, be merciful
unto
me.
Let
thy
person
be
embellished now
(by these
maids
in
waiting).
O excellent
lady, accept me
as thy
lord
!
And, O
thou of
the
most beautiful
complexion, attired in
costly robes and ornaments,
take thou the first place among all the women
of my household.
Many
are the daughters of the celestials and also the Gandharvas that I possess
!
I am
lord also
of many Danava and
Daitya ladies
!
One hundred and
forty millions of Pisachas, twice as many man-eating Rakshasa of terrible
deed, and thrice
as many Yaksha do my bidding
!
Some of
these are
under the sway of my
brother who
is the lord
of all treasures.
In my
drinking
hall, O excellent
lady of
beautiful
thighs, Gandharvas and
Apsaras wait on me as they do on my brother
!
I am, again, the son of
that
regenerate Rishi
Visravas
himself
of
high
ascetic
merit.
I am
renowned, 'again, as the fifth Regent
of the Universe
!
And, O beauti-
ful lady, of food and edibles and drinks of the very best kind,
I have as
much
as the Lord
himself
of
the
celestials
!
Let
all
thy
troubles
consequent on a life
in the woods cease
!
O thou of
fair hips, be my
Queen,
as Mandodari
herself f
Thus addressed by him, the beautiful
princess of Videha,
turning away
and regarding him as something
less
than
a straw, replied
unto that wanderer
of the
night.
And
at that
time the
princess of Videha, that
girl
of beautiful hips, had her
deep
and
compact
bosom
copiously
drenched
by
her
inauspicious
tears
shed
ceaselessly.
And
she who
regarded
her
husband
as
her
god,
answered
that mean
wretch, saying, 'By sheer
ill-luck it is, O king of
the
Rakshasas,
that
I am
obliged
to
hear
such words
of
grievous
import
spoken by thee
!
Blessed be thou, O Rakshasa
fond of
sensual

=== PAGE 343 ===

VANA PARVA
601
pleasures,
let
thy
heart be withdrawn from me
!
I am the
wife of
another, ever devoted to my husband, and, therefore, incapable of being
possessed by thee
I A helpless human being that
I am, I cannot be a fit
wife for thee
I
What
joy
can
be
thine by using violence towards an
unwilling woman ? Thy father
is a wise Brahmana, born of Brahma and
equal unto that Lord himself of the creation
I Why dost thou not, there-
fore,
thyself being equal
to a Regent of the Universe, observe virtue ?
Disgracing thy brother, that king of the Yakshas, that adorable one who
is the friend of Maheswara himself, that lord of treasures, how is it that
thou feelest no shame
?'
Having said these words, Sita began to weep,
her bosom shivering in agitation, and covering her neck and face
with
her garments.
And the long and well-knit braid, black and glossy,
fall-
ing from the head of the weeping lady, looked like a black snake.
And
hearing these cruel words uttered by Sita, the foolish Ravana, although
thus rejected, addressed Sita once more, saying, 'O lady, let the god hav-
ing the Makara for his emblem burn me sorely.
I will, however, on no
account, O thou
of sweet smiles and beautiful hips, approach thee,
as
thou art unwilling
! What can I do to thee that still feelest a regard for
Rama who is only a human being and, therefore, our food ?' Having said
those words unto that lady of faultless features, the king of the Eakshasa
made himself
invisible then and there
and went away
to the place he
liked.
And
Sita, surrounded by
those
Eakshasa women,
and
treated
with tenderness by Trijata, continued to dwell there in grief."
SECTION CCLXXX
(Draupadi-harana Parva
continued}
"Markandeya said, 'Meanwhile the illustrious descendent of Raghu,
along
with
his
brother,
hospitably
treated by Sugriva, continued to
dwell on the breast of the Malyavat hill, beholding every day the
clear
blue sky.
And
one
night,
while gazing from the mountain-top on the
bright moon
in
the cloudless sky surrounded by planets and stars
and
stellar
bodies, that slayer of foes was suddenly awakened
(to a remem-
brance
of
Sita)
by the cold breezes fragrant with the perfumes of
the
lily,
lotus and other flowers of the same
species.
And
virtuous Rama,
dejected in spirits at the thought of Sita's captivity in the abode
of the
Rakshasa, addressed the heroic Lakshmana
in the morning saying,
'Go,
Lakshmana
and
seek
in Kishkindhya that ungrateful king of the mon-
keys, who understand well his own interest and is even now
indulging
in dissipations, that foolish wretch of his race whom I have installed on
a throne
and
to whom all apes and monkeys and bears owe
allegiance,
that fellow for whose sake, O mighty-armed perpetuator of Raghu's race,
Vali
was
slain
by me
with thy help in the wood of
Kishkindhya
!
I
regard
that
worst
of monkeys on earth to be highly ungrateful,
for, O
77

=== PAGE 344 ===

602
MAHABHAEATA
Lakshmana,
that wretch
hath now forgotten me who am sunk in such
distress
!
I think he is unwilling to fulfil his pledge,
disregarding, from
dullness
of
understanding,
one who hath done him such
serv ices
!
If
thou
findest him luke-warm and rolling in sensual joys, thou must then
send
him,
by
the path Vali hath been made to follow, to the common
goal of all creatures
!
If, on the other hand, thou seest that foremost of
monkeys delight in our cause, then, O descendant of Kakutstha, shouldst
thou
bring him
hither with
thee
!
Be
quick, and delay not
!'
Thus
addressed by his brother, Lakshmana ever attentive to the behests and
welfare of his superiors, set out taking with him his handsome bow with
string and arrows.
And reaching the gates of Kishkindhya, he
entered
the city unchallenged. And knowing him to be angry, the monkey-king
advanced to receive him.
And with his wife, Sugriva the king of
the
monkeys, with a humble heart, joyfully received him with due honours.
And
the
dauntless
son of Sumitra then told him what Rama had
said.
And having
heard
everything in detail, O mighty monarch, Sugriva,
the
king
of the monkeys
with his wife and servants, joined his hands,
and
cheerfully
said unto Lakshmana, that elephant among men,
these
words
: 1 am, O Lakshmana,
neither wicked,
nor ungrateful, nor desti-
tute of virtue
!
Hear
what
efforts
I have made for finding out Sita's
place of captivity
! I have despatched diligent monkeys in all directions.
All
of them have stipulated to return within a month.
They
will, O
hero,
search
the whole
earth
with her forests and hills and seas, he:
villages and towns and cities and mines.
Only five nights are wanting
to complete that month, and then thou wilt, with Rama, hear tidings
great joy
!'
"Thus addressed by that intelligent king of the monkeys, the high-
souled Lakshmana became
appeased, and
he
in his turn worship!
Sugriva. And accompanied
by
Sugriva,
he returned, to Rama on th<
breast of the Malyav at hill. And approaching him, Lakshmana inform-
ed him
of the beginning
already made in
respect of his
undertaking
And
soon
thousands
of
monkey-chiefs
began to return, after havii
carefully searched the three quarters of the earth, viz., the
North,
th<
East and the West.
But they that had gone towards the South did n<
make their appearance. And they that came back represented to Rai
saying
that although
they had searched the whole earth with her
of seas, yet they could not find either the princess of Videhaor Ravanz
But
that descendant of Kakutstha's race, afflicted
at heart, managed
live yet, resting his hopes
(of hearing Sita's tidings) on the great Moi
keys that had gone towards the South.
"After
the
lapse
of two
months, several monkeys seeking
wil
haste the presence of Sugriva, addressed him, saying, 'O king, that fon
most
of
monkeys,
the
son of Pavana, as also Angada, the son of
Vali,

=== PAGE 345 ===

VANA PARVA
603
and the other great monkeys whom thou hadst despatched to search the
southern region, have come back and are pillaging that great and excell-
ent orchard called Madhuvana, which was always guarded by
Vali
and
which hath been well-guarded by thee also after him
!'
Hearing of this
act
of
liberty
on
their
part,
Sugriva
inferred
the
success
of their
mission,
for
it is only
servants
that have been crowned with
success
that can act in this way.
And that intelligent and foremost of monkeys
communicated his suspicions to Rama. And Rama also, from this, guess-
ed that
the princess
of
Mithila
had been seen.
Then Hanuman
and
the
other
monkeys,
having
refreshed themselves thus, came
towards
their
king, who was then staying with Rama and Lakshmana.
And, O
Bharata,
observing
the
gait
of Hanuman and the
colour of his face,
Rama was
confirmed in the belief
that Hanuman had really seen
Sita.
Then
those
successful monkeys
with Hanuman
at their head,
duly
bowel unto Rama and Lakshmana and Sugriva. And Rama then taking
up his bow and quiver, addressed those monkeys, saying, 'Have you been
successful ?
Will ye impart life unto me ?
Will ye once more enable
me
to
reign
in Ayodhya
after having
slain my enemy in battle and
rescued the daughter of Janaka ?
With the princess of
Videha
unres-
cued, and the foe unslain in battle, I dare not live, robbed of
wife and
honour f Thus addressed by Rama, the son of Pavana, replied unto him,
saying,
1 bring
thee
good
news, O Rama
; for Janaka's daughter hath
been seen by me. Having searched the southern region with all its hills,
forests, and mines for some time, we became very weary. At length we
beheld a great cavern.
And having beheld
it, we entered that
cavern
which
extended over many Yojanas.
It was dark and deep and over-
grown with trees and infested by worms. And having gone a great way
through
it, we came upon sun-shine and beheld a
beautiful
palace.
It
was, O Raghava, the abode of the Daitya Maya.
And
there we beheld
a female
ascetic named Prabhavati engaged in ascetic
austerities.
And
she gave
us
food and drink of various kinds.
And having
refreshed
ourselves therewith and regained our strength, we proceeded along
the
way shown by her.
At last we came out of the cavern and beheld the
brimy
sea, and on
its
shores,
the
Saliya,
the
Malaya
and the great
Dardura mountains. And ascending the mountains of Malaya, we beheld
before us the vast ocean.
1
And
beholding it we felt sorely
grieved in
mind.
And
dejected
in
spirits
and afflicted with pain and famishing
with
hunger, we
despaired of
returning with
our lives.
Casting our
eyes on the great ocean extending over many
hundreds of Yojanas and
abounding in whales and alligators and other aquatic animals, we became
anxious
and
filled with
grief. We then sat together, resolved to die
there of starvation.
And
in
course
of
conversation we happened to
1
Abode of Varuna in the
original.

=== PAGE 346 ===

604
MAHABHARATA
talk of the valture Jatayu.
Just than we saw a bird huge as a mountain,
of frightful form, and inspiring terror into every heart, like a second son
of Vinata
1
.
And
coining upon
us unawares for devouring us, he
said,
'Who
are ye
that
are speaking thus of my brother Jatayn,
?
I am
his
elder brother, by name Sainpati, and am the king of
birds.
Once
upon
a time, we two, with the desire of outstripping each other, flew towards
the sun.
My wings got burnt, but those of Jatayu were not.
That was
the last time I saw my beloved
brother
Jatayu,
the king of vultures
!
My wings burnt, I fell down upon tha top of this great mountain where
I still am
!'
When he finished speaking, we informed him of the death
of his brother in a few words and also of this calamity that hath befallen
thee
!
And, O king, the powerful Sampati hearing this unpleasant news
from us, was greatly afflicted and again enquired of us, saying, 'Who is
this Rama and why was Sita carried off and how was Jatayu slain ?
Ye
foremost
of monkeys,
I wish to hear
everything
in detail
!' We then
informed him of everything about this calamity of thine and of the rea-
son
also of our vow of
starvation.
That
king
of birds then urged us
(to give up our vow) by these words of his
: 'Ravana
is, indeed, known
to me.
Lanka is his capital.
I beheld it on the other side of the sea in
a valley of the Trikuta hills
!
Sita must be there.
I have
little doubt
of this f
Hearing
these words of his, we rose up quickly and began, O
chastiser of foes, to take counsel of one
another for
crossing the ocean
!
And when none dared to cross it, I, having recourse to my father, cross-
ed the great ocean which is a hundred Yojanas in width.
And having
slain the Rakshasis on the waters, I saw the chaste Sita within Rav ana's
harem,
observing
ascetic
austerities,
eager
to
behold
her lord, with
matted
locks on
head,
and
body
besmeared
with filth, and lean, and
melancholy and helpless. Recognising her as Sita by those unusual signs,
and approaching that worshipful lady while alone,
I said,
'I am, O Sita,
an emissary of Rama and monkey
begotten by Pavana
! 2
Desirous of
having a sight of thee, hither have I come travelling through the skies
!
Protected
by
Sugriva,
that monarch
of
all
the
monkeys, the royal
brothers Rama and Lakshmana are in peace
!
And Rama, O lady, with
Sumitra's
son,
hath
enquired
of
thy
welfare
!
And Sugriva also, on
account of his friendship (with Rama and Lakshmana) enquireth of
thy
welfare.
Followed
by all the monkeys, thy husband will soon be
here.
Confide
in
me, O
adorable lady, I am a monkey and not a Rakshasa F
Thus
addressed by me, Sita seemed to meditate for a moment and
then
replied to me, saying, 'From the words of Avindhya I know that thou art
Hanuman
!
O
mighty-armed
one, Avindhya
is an old and respected
Rakshasa
I
He
told me that Sugriva is surrounded by counsellors
like
thee.
Thou mayst depart now
!'
And with
these
words she gave me
this jewel as a credential.
And,
indeed,
it was by means of
this jewel
that the faultless Sita had been able to support her
existence.
And the
daughter of Janaka further told me as a token from her, that by
thee, O
tiger among men, a blade of grass (inspired with Mantras and
thus
con-
verted into a fatal weapon) had once been shot at a crow while ye were
on the breast of the mighty hill known by the name of Chitrakutal And
this
she
said
as evidence of my having met her and hers being really
the princess of Videha.
I then caused myself to be seized by Rav ana's
soldiers, and then set fire to the city of Lanka
!'
"
1
Gadura.
%
Pavana, the god of the wind.

=== PAGE 347 ===

SECTION CCLXXXI
(Draupadi-hamna
Parva
continued)
"Markandeya
said,
'It was on the breast of that very
hill where
Rama
was
seated
with
those foremost of monkeys that great monkey
chiefs at the command of Sugriva, began to flock together.
The father-
in-law of Vali, the illustrious Sushena, accompanied by a thousand crores
of active apes, came to Rama.
And
those
two
foremost
of monkeys
endued with mighty energy, viz., Gaya andGavakshya, each accompanied
by a hundred
crores
of
monkeys,
showed themselves there.
And, O
king,
Gavakshya
also
of terrible mien and endued with a bovine tail,
showed himself there, having collected sixty thousand crores of monkeys.
And
the renowned Gandhamadana, dwelling on the mountains of khe
same name, collected a hundred thousand crores of monkeys.
And 'the
intelligent and mighty monkey known by the name of Panasa
mustered
together fifty-two crores of monkeys.
1
And that foremost and
illustri-
ous of monkeys named Dadhimukha of mighty
energy mustered a large
army
of
monkeys
possessed
of
terrible
prowess.
And
Jamvuvan
showed himself there with a hundred thousand crores of black bears
of
terrible deeds and faces having the Tilaka mark. 2
And these and many
other chiefs of monkey-chiefs, countless in number, O king, came
there
for aiding Rama's cause. And endued with bodies huge as mountain-peaks
and
roaring like lions, loud was the uproar that was heard there made
by those monkeys running restlessly from place to place.
And some of
them looked like mountain-peaks, and some looked like buffaloes.
And
some were of the hue of autumnal clouds and the faces of some were red
as vermillion.
And some rose high,
and some fell down, and some cut
capers,
and some
scattered
the
dust, as they mustered together from
various directions. And that monkey army,
vast as the sea at full
tide,
encamped
there
at
Sugriva's
bidding.
And
after
those foremost of
monkeys had mustered from every direction, the
illustrious
descendant
of Raghu, with Sugriva by his side, set out in an auspicious
moment
of
a v ery
fair day under a lucky constellation, accompanied by that
host
arrayed
in
order
of
battle,
as if for the purpose of destroying
all the
worlds.
And Hanuman,
the
son of the Wind-god, was in the van
of
that
host,
while the rear was protected by the fearless son of
Sumitra.
And
surrounded by the monkey-chiefs, those princes of Raghu s house
with fingers cased in guana skin, shone, as they went, like the Sun and the
Moon in the midst of the
planets.
And that monkey host armed
with
stones and Sala and Tala trees,
looked very much
like a far-extending
field of corn under the morning sun.
And that mighty army, protected
1
There is a difference of reading here.
Some texts read fifty seven.
2
A difference of reading is observable here.
T.

=== PAGE 348 ===

606
MAHABHARAl:A
by Nala and
Nila
and Angada and Kratha
and Mainda and Dwivida,
marched forth for achieving the purpose of
Raghava.
And encamping
successively, without interruption of any kind, on wide and healthy tracts
and valleys abounding with fruits and roots and water and honey and meat,
the monkey host at last reached the shores of the brimy sea.
And
like
unto a second ocean, that mighty army with its countless colours, having
reached the shores of sea, took up its abode there.
Then the illustrious
son
of
Dasaratha,
addressing Sugriva amongst all those foremost mon-
keys, spoke unto him these words that were suited to the occasion, 'This
army is large.
The ocean also is difficult to cross.
What contrivance,
therefore, commends itself to thee for crossing
the
ocean
?'
At these
words, many vain-glorious monkeys answered, 'We are fully able to cross
the sea.' This answer, however, was not of much use, as all could not avail
of that means.
Some of the monkeys proposed to cross the sea in
boats,
and some in rafts of various kinds.
Rama, however, conciliating them
all, said,
'This cannot
be.
'The
sea here
is a full hundred Yojanas in
width.
All
the
monkeys, ye heroes, will not be able to cross
it.
This
proposal,
therefore,
that
ye have
made,
is
not consonant to
reason.
Besides we have not the number of boats necessary for carrying all our
troops.
How, again, can one like us raise such obstacles in the way
of
the merchants ?
Our army
is very large.
The foe will make a great
havoc
if
a
hole
is detected.
Therefore,
to cross the sea in boats and
rafts
doth
not recommend
itself to me.
I will, however, pray to the
Ocean for the necessary means.
Foregoing food, I will lie
down on the
shore.
He will certainly show himself to me.
If, however, he doth not
show
himself,
I
will
chastise him then by means of my great weapons
that are more blazing than fire itself and are incapable of being baffled f
Having
said
these
words,
both
Rama
and
Lakshmana
touched
water
l and duly laid themselv es down on a bed of Jcusa grass on the sea-
shore.
The
divine and
illustrious
Ocean then that lord of male and
female rivers, surrounded by aquatic animals, appeared unto Rama in a
vision. And addressing Rama in sweet accents, the genius of the Ocean,
surrounded by countless mines of gems, said, 'O son of Kausalya, tell me
what aid, O bull among men, I am to render thee
I
I
also have sprung
from the race of Ikshaku 2 and am, therefore, a relative of thine f Rama
replied unto him, saying, 'O lord of rivers, male and female, I desire thee
to
grant me
a way for my troops, passing along which I may
slay the
Ten- headed (Havana), that wretch of Pulastya's race
!
If thou dost not
1
As a purificatory ceremony,
called
the Achamana.
To this day,
no Hindu
can perform any ceremony without going through the Achamana
in the
first instance.
T.
2
Tradition
represents
the sons of king Sagara of the
Ikshaku race
as the excavator of the ocean.
Hence the ocean is called
Sagara
T.

=== PAGE 349 ===

VANA PARVA
607
grant
the way
I
beg of thee, I will then dry thee up by means of my
celestial
arrows
inspired
with
mantras f
And hearing these words of
Rama, the genius of Varuna's abode, joining his hands, answered in great
affliction,
'I do not desire to put any obstacle
in thy way.
I am no foe
of thine!
Listen, O
Rama,
to
these
words,
and having listened, do
what is proper
!
If, at thy command, I get a way for the passage of
thy
army, others then, from strength of their bows, will command me to do
the same
!
In thy army there is a monkey
of the name of Nala, who is
a skilful mechanic.
And endued with great strength, Nala is the son of
Tashtri, the divine artificer of the Universe.
And whether it
is wood,
or grass
or
stone,
that
he will throw
into my waters,
I will
support
the same on my surface, and thus wilt thou have a bridge (over
which
to pass)
!'
And. having
said these
words, the genius of
the Ocean dis-
appeared. And Rama awaking, called Nala unto him and said, 'Build thou
a bridge over the sea
!
Thou alone,
I am sure, art able to do it f
And
it was by this means
that
the
descendant of Kakutstha's race caused a
bridge to be built that was ten Yojanas in width and a hundred Yojanas
in length.
And to this day that bridge
is celebrated over all the world
by the name of Nalas bridge.
And having completed that birdge, Nala,
of body huge as a hill, came away at the command of Rama.
"And while Rama was on this side of the ocean, the virtuous Vibhi-
shana, the brother of the king of the Rakshasas, accompanied by four of
his counsellors, came unto Rama.
And the high-souled Rama
received
him with due welcome.
Sugriva,
however,
feared, thinking he might
be a spy. The son of Raghu, meanwhile, perfectly satisfied (with Vibhi-
shana)
in
consequence
of
the sincerity of his exertions and the many
indications of his good conduct, worshipped him with
respect.
And he
also
installed
Vibhishana
in the sovereignty of all the
Rakshasas and
made him his own junior counsellor, and a friend of Lakshmana's. And
it was
under
Vibhishana' s
guidance, O
king,
that Rama with all his
troops
crossed
the great
ocean by
means of that bridge in course of a
month.
And having
crossed
the
ocean and arrieved at Lanka, Rama
caused its
extensive and
numerous
gardens to
be
devastated by
his
monkeys.
And while Rama's troops were there, two of Rav ana's
coun-
sellors and
officers, named Suka
and
Sarana, who had come as
spies,
having assumed the shape of monkeys, were seized by Vibhishana. And
when
those
wanderers of the night assumed their real Rakshasa forms,
Rama showed them his troop and dismissed them quietly.
And having
quartered
his
troops
in
those woods that skirted the city, Rama then
sent the monkey Angada with great wisdom as his envoy to Rav ana."

=== PAGE 350 ===

SECTION CCLXXXII
(Draupadi-harana
Parva
continued)
"Markandeya said,
'Having
quartered
his army in those groves
abounding with food and water and with fruits and roots, the descendant
of
Kakutstha
began
to watch
over them with care.
Ravana, on the
other
hand,
planted in his city many appliances constructed
according
to the rules of
military
science.
And
his city, naturally impregnable
on
account
of
its strong
ramparts and gate-ways, had seven trenches,
that were
deep and full of water to the brim and that abounded
with
fishes
and sharks and alligators, made more impregnable still by means
of pointed
stakes
of
Khadira wood.
And the ramparts, heaped with
stones, were made impregnable by means of catapults. And the warriors
(who guarded
the
walls)
were armed
with
earthen
pots
filled with
venomous snakes, and with resinous powders of many kinds.
And they
were also armed with clubs, and fire-brands and arrows and
lances and
swords and battle-axes.
And they had also Sataghnis
1 and stout maces
steeped in wax. 2 And at all the gates of the city were planted movable
and immovable
encampments manned
by
large numbers of infantry
supported
by
countless
elephants and
horses.
And
Angada,
having
reached one of the gates of the city, was made known to the Rakshasas.
And
he entered the town without suspicion or fear.
And
surrounded
by countless Rakshasas, that hero in his beauty looked like the Sun him-
self in the midst of masses of clouds.
And having approached the hero
of Pulastya's race in the midst of his counsellors, the
eloquent Angada
saluted
the
king and began to deliver Rama's message in these
words,
'That
descendant of
Raghu, O
king, who ruleth at Kosala and whose
renown hath spread over the whole world, sayeth unto thee these words
suited
to the
occasion.
Accept thou
that message
and act according
to it
!
Prov inces and
towns,
in consequence of their connection with
sinful kings incapable of controlling their souls, are themselves polluted
and
destroyed.
By
the
violent
abduction
of
Sita,
thou
alone
hast
injured me
!
Thou, however, wilt become the cause of death to many
unoffending persons. Possessed of power and filled with pride, thou hast,
before this, slain many Eishis living in the woods, and insulted the very
gods. Thou hast slain also many great kings and many weeping women. For
those transgressions of thine, retribution is about to overtake thee! I will
slay thee with thy counsellors. Fight and show thy courage
!
3 O wanderer
of the night, behold the power of my bow, although I am but a man
! Release
Sita, the daughter of Janaka
!
If thou dost not release her, I
shall make
the Earth div ested of all Rakshasas with my keen-edged arrows
!' Hearing
these defiant words
of the enjoy, king Ravana bore them
ill, becoming
senseless with wrath. And thereupon
four Rakshasas skilled in reading
1
Lib, an engine killing a hundred. Perhaps, some kind of rude cannon.-T.
2 Perhaps,
brands or torches steeped in wax, intended to be thrown in
a burning
state,
amongst
the
foe.
Eeaders of Indian history know how
Lord Lake was repulsed from Bharatpore by means of huge bales of cotton,
steeped
in
oil,
rolled from the ramparts of that town, in a burning
state,
towards the advancing English.
T.
8
Lit,
Be a Purusha
(male)
!
Manhood
would not
be appropriate in
connection with a Bakshasa.
T.

=== PAGE 351 ===

VANA PAEVA
609
every sign of their master, seized Angada like four hawks seizing a tiger.
With those Rakshasas, however, holding him fast by his limbs, Angada
leaped upwards and alighted on the palace terrace. And as he leaped up
with a
great force,
those wanderers
of the
night fell down the earth,
and bruised by the violence of the fall, had their ribs broken. And from
the golden terrace on which
he. had alighted, he took a downward leap.
And overleaping the walls of Lanka, he alighted to where his comrades
were. And approaching the presence of the lord of Kosala and informing
him
of
everything,
the monkey
Angada endued with
great
energy
retired to refresh himself, dismissed with due respect by Rama.
The descendant of Raghu then caused the ramparts of Lanka to be
broken down by a united
attack of all those monkeys endued with the
speed of the wind.
Then Lakshmana, with Vibhishana and the king of
the bears marching in the van, blew up the southern gate of the city that
was
almost impregnable.
Rama then
attacked Lanka
with a hundred
thousand
crores
of monkeys,
all possessed of
great skill
in battle, and
endued with reddish complexions like those of young camels. And those
crores
of greyish
bears with
long arms, and legs and huge
paws, and
generally
supporting
themselves on their
broad
haunches, were
also
urged on to support the attack.
And in consequence
of those monkeys
leaping up and leaping down and leaping in transverse directions, the Sun
himself, his bright disc completely shaded, became invisible for the dust
they raised.
And the
citizens of Lanka
beheld the wall of their town
assume all over a tawny hue, covered by monkeys of complexions yellow
as the
ears of paddy, and grey
as Shirisha flowers, and red as the rising
Sun, and white as flax or hemp.
And the Rakshasas, O king, with their
wives
and
elders, were
struck with wonders at
that sight.
And
the
monkey warriors began to pull down pillars made of precious stones and
the terraces and tops of palatial mansions. And breaking into fragments
the propellers
of catapults and
other engines, they began
to cast them
about in all directions. And taking up the Sataghnis along with the discs,
the clubs,
and stones,
they threw them down
into the city with great
force and loud noise. And attacked thus by the monkeys, those Rakshasas
that
had been placed on the walls
to guard them,
fled precipitately by
hundreds and thousands.
"Then
hundreds of
thousands of Rakshasas, of terrible mien, and
capable
of assuming any form at will, came out at the command of the
king.
And pouring a perfect shower of arrows and driving the denizens
of the forest, those warriors, displaying great prowess, adorned the ram-
parts.
And soon those wanders of the night, looking like masses of flesh,
and
of
terrible mien,
forced the monkeys to
leave
the
walls.
And
mangled by the enemies' lances, numerous monkey-chiefs fell down from
the ramparts, and crushed by the falling columns and gate-ways, numer-
78

=== PAGE 352 ===

MAHABHAEATA
ous Rakshasas also fell down to rise no more. And the monkeys and the
brave Rakshasas that commenced to eat up the foe, struggled, seizing one
another by the hair, and mangling and tearing one another with their nails
and
teeth.
And
the
monkeys and
the
Rakshasas
roared and
yelled
frightfully,
and while many of both parties were
slain and fell down to
rise no more, neither side gave up the contest.
And Rama continued all
the
while to shower a thick downpour of arrows like
the very clouds.
And
the arrows he shot,
enveloping Lanka,
killed
large numbers
of
Rakshasas. And the son of Sumitra, too, that mighty bowman incapable
of being fatigued in battle, naming particular Rakshasas stationed on the
ramparts, slew them
with his
clothyard shafts.
And then the monkey
host, having achieved success was withdrawn at the command
of Rama,
after
it had
thus pulled down the fortifications of Lanka and made all
objects within the city capable of being aimed at by thebeseiging force."
SECTION CCLXXXIII
(Draupadi-harana Parva continued)
"Markandeya said, 'And while those troops (thus withdrawn) were
reposing themselves in their quarters, many little Rakshasas andPisachas
owning Ravana
as their leader, penetrated amongst them.
And among
these were Parvana, Patana, Jambha,
Khara, Krodha-vasa, Hari, Praruja,
Aruja and Praghasa, and others.
And as these
wicked ones were pene-
trating (the monkey host) in their invisible forms, Vibhishana, who had
the knowledge thereof, broke the spell of their invisibility.
And once
seen, O king,
by the powerful and long-leaping monkeys,
they were all
slain and prostrated on the earth, deprived of life. And unable to endure
this, Ravana marched out at the head of his troops. And surrounded by
his terrible army of Rakshasas and Pisachas, Ravana who was conver-
sant with the rules of warfare like a second Usanas invested the monkey
host, having
disposed
his
troops in
that array
which is named
after
Usanas himself.
And beholding Ravana advancing with his army dis-
posed in that array, Rama, following the mode recommended by Vrihas-
pati,
disposed his troops in counter array for opposing that wanderer of
the night.
And coming up quickly, Ravana began
to fight with Rama.
And Lakshmana singled
out
Indrajit, and Sugriva
singled
out
Viru-
pakshya,
and Nikharvata fought with Tara,
and Nala with Tunda, and
Patusa with Panasa.
And each warrior, advancing up to him whom he
regarded
as his match,
began to
fight with him
on that field of battle,
relying on the strength of his own arms, and that encounter, so frightful
to timid persons,
soon became terrible and fierce like that between the
gods and the
Asuras in
the days
of old.
And Ravana covered Rama
with a shower of
darts and
lances and swords, and Rama also
afflicted
Ravana
with his whetted arrows of
iron furnished
with the
sharpest

=== PAGE 353 ===

VANA PABVA
611
points,
and in the same way Lakshmana smote
the contending Indrajit
with arrows capable of penetrating into the most vital parts and Indrajit
also
smote
Sumitra's
son
with
an
arrowy shower.
And Vibhishana
showered upon
Prahasta
and
Prahasta
showered upon
Vibhishana,
without any regard for each other a thick downpour of winged arrows
furnished
with the sharpest
points.
And thus
between those
mighty
warriors
there came about
an encounter of celestial weapons of great
force,
at
which
the
three worlds
with
their
mobile
and
immobile
creatutes were sorely distressed."
SECTION CCLXXXIV
( Draupadi-harana Parva continued )
"Markandeya
said, "Then
Prahasta,
suddenly
advancing up
to
Vibhishana
and uttering
a loud
yell, struck him with his mace.
But
though struck with that mace of terrible force, the mighty-armed Vibhi-
shana of great wisdom, without wav ering in the least, stood
still as the
mountains of Himavat. Then Vibhishana, taking up a huge and mighty
javelin furnished with a hundred bells, inspired it with mantras and hurled
it at the head of his adversary. And by the impetuosity of that weapon
rushing with the force
of the thunderbolt,
Prahasta's head was severed
off, and he
thereupon looked
like a mighty
tree
broken by the
wind.
And beholding that wanderer of the night, Prahasta, thus slain in battle,
Dhumraksha
rushed
with
great
impetuosity against the monkey-host.
And beholding the soldiers of Dhumraksha, looking
like the clouds and
endued with terrible mien, advancing up towards them, the monkey- chief
suddenly broke and fled. And seeing those foremost of monkeys suddenly
give
way, that
tiger
among
monkeys, Hanuman, the son
of Pavana,
began
to
advance.
And
beholding
the son of Pavana staying still on
the field of battle, the retreating monkeys, O king, one and
all
quickly
rallied.
Then
mighty
and
great and fearful was the uproar that arose
there
in
consequence
of
the
warriors
of Rama and Ravana rushing
against
each
other.
And
in that
battle which raged terribly the field
soon became miry with blood.
And Dhumraksha afflicted the monkey-
host
with
volleys
of
winged
shafts.
Then
that
vanquisher of
foes,
Hanuman, the son
of Pavana, quickly
seized that advancing leader of
the Rakshasa. And the encounter that took place between that monkey
and the
Rakshasa hero, is desirous of defeating the other, was fierce and
terrible, like
that
of
Indra
and Prahlada
(in days of yore).
And the
Rakshasa struck
the monkey with
his maces and spiked clubs while the
monkey
struck
the
Rakshasa
with
trunks
of
trees unshorn of their
branches. Then Hanuman, the son of Pavana, slew in great wrath that
Rakshasa
along
with
his
charioteer and horses and broke
his chariot
also into pieces. And beholding Dhumraksha, that foremost of Rakshasa,

=== PAGE 354 ===

612
MAHABHARATA
thus slain, the monkeys, abandoning all fear, rushed against the Rakshasa
army
with
great
valour.
And
slaughtered
in
large numbers by the
victorious and powerful monkeys, the Rakshasas
became dispirited and
fled in fear to Lanka.
And the surviving wreck of the Rakshasa army,
having reached the city, informed king Ravana of everything that had
happened. And hearing from them that Prahasta and that mighty archer
Dhumraksha, had
both, with
their
armies, been slain by the powerful
monkeys, Ravana drew a deep sigh and springing up from his
excellent
seat, said,
the time is come for Kumbhakarna to act.
And hav ing said
this, he awake, by means of various loud-sounding instruments, his brother
Kumbhakarna from his deep and prolonged slumbers. And having awak-
ed him with great efforts, the Rakshasa king, still afflicted with anxiety,
addressed
the
mighty Kumbhakarna
and said unto him when
seated
at his ease on his bed, having perfectly recovered consciousness and self-
possession, these words, 'Thou, indeed, art happy, O Kumbhakarna, that
canst enjoy profound and undisturbed repose, unconscious of the terrible
calamity that hath overtaken us
! Rama with his monkey host hath crossed
the Ocean by a bridge and disregarding
us
all
is waging a terrible war
(against us).
I have stealthily brought away his wife Sita, the daughter
of
Janaka, and
it
is
to
recover
her
that he hath come hither, after
having made a bridge
over the great Ocean.
Our great kinsmen also,
Prahasta and others, have already been slain by him.
And, O scourge
of
thy
enemies, there
is
not
another person, save thee,
that can slay
Rama
!
Therefore, O
warrior,
putting on
thy
armour, do thou
set
out
this
day
for
the purpose of vanquishing Rama and his followers
!
The two younger brothers of Dushana, viz., Vajravega and
Promathin,
will join thee with their forces
!' And having said this unto the mighty
Kumbhakarna, the
Rakshasa
king gave instructions to Vajravega and
Promathin as to what they should do.
And accepting his advice,
those
two
warlike
brothers
of
Dushana
quickly
marched
out
of the city,
preceded by Kumbhakarna."
SECTION CCLXXXV
(Draupadi-harana Parva continued)
"Markandeya
said, "Then Kumbhakarna
set
out from the
city,
accompanied
by
his
followers.
And
soon
he
beheld the victorious
monkey
troops encamped
before him.
And passing them by with the
object
of
seeking
out
Rama, he beheld the son of Sumitra standing at
his post, bow in hand.
Then the monkey warriors, speedily advancing
towards him, surrounded him on all sides.
And then they commenced
to strike him with
numberless
large trees.
And many amongst them
fearlessly began to tear his
body with their nails.
And those monkeys
began
to
fight
with him
in
various
ways approved
by the laws of

=== PAGE 355 ===

VANA PAEVA
613
warfare.
And
they
soon
overwhelmed
that
chief
of the Rakshasas
with a shower of terrible weapons of various kinds.
And
attacked
by
them thus, Kumbhakarna only laughed at them
and began to eat them
up.
And he devoured those foremost of monkeys known by
the name
of Chala, and Chandachala, and Vajravahu.
And beholding that
fear-
ful act of the Rakshasa,
other monkeys were frightened
and
set
forth
a loud wail of fear.
And hearing the screams of those monkey-leaders,
Sugriva boldly advanced towards Kumbhakarna.
And that high-souled
king of the monkeys swiftly approaching the Rakshasa, violently
struck
him on the head with the trunk of a Sala tree.
And though the
high-
souled Sugriva always prompt in action broke that Sala tree on the head
of Kumbhakarna,
he
failed
to make any impression on that Rakshasa.
And
then,
as
if roused from
his torpor by that blow, Kumbhakarna
stretching forth his arms seized Sugriva by main force.
And beholding
Sugriva dragged away by the Rakshasa, the heroic son of
'Sumitra,
that
delighter of his friends, rushed towards Kumbhakarna.
And that slayer
of
hostile
heroes, Lakshmana,
advancing
towards Kumbhakarna, dis-
charged at him an impetuous and mighty arrow furnished
with golden
wings.
And that arrow,
cutting
through
his coat of mail and penetra-
ting into his body, passed through
it outright and struck into the earth,
stained with the Rakshasa 's blood. Kumbhakarna then, having his breast
thus bored through, released
the king
of
monkeys.
And taking up a
huge
mass
of
stone
as
his weapon, the mighty warrior Kumbhakarna
then rushed towards the son of Sumitra, aiming it at him.
And
as
the
Rakshasa rushed
towards
him, Lakshmana cut off his upraised arms by
means of a couple of keen-edged shafts furnished with heads resembling
razors.
But as soon as the two arms of the Rakshasa were thus
cut
off,
double that number of arms soon appeared on his person.
Sumitra's son
however, displaying his skill in weapon, soon by means of similar arrows
cut off those arms
also,
each
of which had seized a mass of stone.
At
this, that Rakshasa assumed a form enormously huge and furnished with
numerous
heads and
legs and
arms.
Then the son of Sumitra rived,
with a Brahma weapon,
that warrior looking like an assemblage of
hill.
And rent by means of
that celestial weapon, that
Rakshasa fell on the
field of battle like
a
huge
tree
with spreading branches suddenly con-
sumed by heaven's thunderbolt.
And beholding Kumbhakarna endued
with great activity and resembling the Asura
Vritra himself,
deprived
of life and
prostrated on
the field of battle, the Rakshasa warriors fled
in fear.
And beholding the Rakshasa warriors running away from
the
field of battle, the younger brother of Dushana, rallying them, rushed in
great wrath upon
the son of Sumitra.
Sumitra's son, however, with a
loud roar, received with his winged shafts both those wrathful warriors,
Vajravega and Promathin,
rushing
towards
him.
The battle then, O

=== PAGE 356 ===

614
MAHABHARATA
son of Pritha, that took
place
between
those two younger brothers
of
Dushana
on
the
one
hand
and
the
intelligent
Lakshmana
on
the
other,
was
exceedingly
furious
and made
the
bristles
of
the
spectators stand on end. And Lakshmana overwhelmed the twoRaksha-
sas with a perfect
shower of arrows.
And those two Rakshasa
heroes,
on the other hand, both of them excited with fury, covered Lakshmana
with an arrowy hail.
And
thar terrible encounter between Vajraveja
and Promathin and
the mighty-armed Lakshmana lasted
for
a short
while.
And Hanumana, the son of Pavana, taking up a mountain peak,
rushed towards one of the brothers, and with that weapon took the
life
of the Rakshasa Vajravega.
And that mighty monkey, Nala,
also,
with
a large mass of rock, crushed Promathin, that other
younger brother of
Dushana.
The deadly struggle, however, between the soldiers of Rama
and Ravana,
rushing against one another,
instead of coming
to an end
even after this,
raged on as before.
And hundreds
of Rakshasas were
slain by the denizens of the forest, while many
of the latter were slain
by the former.
The loss, however, in killed, of
the
Rakshasas was far
greater than that of the monkeys.
SECTION CCLXXXVI
(Draupadi-harana Parva continued)
"Markandeya
said,
'Learning
that Kumbhakarna had
with
his
followers, fallen in battle as also that great warrior Prahasta, and Dhum-
raksha too
of mighty
energy, Ravana
then
addressed
his heroic son
Indrajit saying, 'O slayer of foes, slay thou in battle Rama
and
Sugriva
and Lakshmana.
My good son, it was by thee that this blazing fame
of
mine had
been
acquired
by
v anguishing in battle that wielder of the
thunder-bolt, the thousand-eyed Lord of Sachi
!
Having the power
of
appearing and
vanishing
at
thy
will,
slay
thou, O smiter of foes, my
enemies by means, O
thou foremost
of all
wielders of weapons, of thy
celestial arrows received as boons (from the gods)
!
Rama
and
Laksh-
mana and Sugriva are incapable
of enduring the bare touch of thy wea-
pons.
What shall I say, therefore, of their
followers ?
That
cessation
of hostilities which
could
not be brought about by either Prahasta or
Kumbhakarna in battle, be it thine, O mighty-armed one, to bring about
!
Slaying my
enemies
with
all
their army by means of thy keen-edged
shafts, enhance my joy to-day, O son, as thou didst once before by van-
quishing Vasava
!'
Thus addressed by him, Indrajit said
So be it,
and
encased in mail he quickly ascended his chariot, and proceeded, O king,
towards the field of battle. And then that bull amongst Rakshasas loudly
announcing
his own name, challenged Lakshmana endued with auspici-
ous marks, to a single combat. And Lakshmana, thus challenged, rushed
towards
that
Rakshasa,
with
his bow and arrows, and striking terror

=== PAGE 357 ===

VANA PABVA
615
into his adversary's heart by
means
of the flapping of his bow-string on
the leathern case of his left hand.
And the encounter
that took
place
between those
warriors
that
defied
each
other's
prowess and each of
whom
was desirous
of vanquishing the other, and both of whom were
conversant with
celestial weapons,
was terrible
in the extreme.
But
when the son of Ravana found that he could not by his arrows gain
any
advantage over his adversary, that foremost of mighty warriors muster-
ed all his energy.
And Indrajit then began to hurl at Lakshmana
with
great
force
numberless
javelins.
The
son
of
Sumitra, however, cut
them
into fragments by means
of
his own
keen-edged arrows.
And
those javelins,
thus cut
into pieces by the keen-edged arrows of Laksh-
mana, dropped down upon the ground.
Then the handsome Angada, the
son of Vali,
taking
up
a
large tree, rushed impetuously at Indrajit and
struck him with it on the head.
Undaunted at this, Indrajit of
mighty
energy sought to smite Angada with a lance.
Just at that juncture, how-
ever, Lakshmana
cut into
pieces the
lance taken up by Rav ana's son.
The son
of Ravana
then took up
a mace and struck on the left flank
that foremost of monkeys, the heroic Angada who was then staying close
beside him. Angada, the powerful son of Vali, little recking that stroke,
hurled at Indrajit a mighty Sal stem.
And hurled in wrath by Angada
for
the
destruction
of
Indrajit, that
tree, O
son of Pritha, destroyed
Indra jit's chariot along with
his horses and charioteer.
And thereupon
jumping from
his
horseless
and driverless
car, the son of Ravana dis-
appeared from sight, O king, by aid of his powers of illusion.
And be-
holding that Rakshasa,
abundantly endued with powers of illusion,
dis-
appear
so
suddenly, Rama
proceeded
towards
that spot and began to
protect his troops with care.
Indrajit, however, with
arrows,
obtained
as boons from
the gods, began to pierce both Rama and mighty Laksh-
mana in every part of their bodies.
Then the heroic Rama and Laksh-
mana both continued to contend with their arrows against Rav ana's son
who had made himself invisible by his powers of illusion.
But Indrajit
continued to shower in wrath all over those lions among men
his
keen-
edged
shafts
by
hundreds and thousands.
And seeking that invisible
warrior who was ceaselessly showering his arrows, the monkeys penetra-
ted
into every part of the firmament, armed with huge masses of stone.
Them
as
well
as
the two
brothers,
however, the invisible Rakshasa
began to afflict with his shafts.
Indeed, the son of
Ravana,
concealing
himself by
his powers of illusion, furiously attacked the monkey host.
And
the
heroic
brothers Rama and Lakshmana, pierced all over with
arrows, dropped down on the ground like
the Sun and the Moon
fallen
down from the firmament.'
"

=== PAGE 358 ===

SECTION CCLXXXVII
(Draupadi-harana Parva continued)
"Markandeya said,
'Beholding both the
brothers Rama and Laksh-
mana prostrate on the ground, the son of Ravana tied them in a net-work
of
those
arrows
of
his which he
had obtained as boons.
And tied by
Indrajit on the field of battle by means of that arrowy net, those heroic
tigers among men resembled a couple of hawks immured in a cage. And
beholding those heroes prostrate on the ground pierced with hundreds of
arrows,
Sugriva
with
all
the
monkeys stood surrounding them on all
sides. And the king of the monkeys stood there, accompanied by Sushena
and Mainda and Dwivida, and Kumuda and Angada and Hanuman and
Nila and Tara and Nala.
And Vibhishana, having achieved success in
another
part
of
the
field,
soon
arrived at that spot, and roused those
heroes from
insensibility, awakening them
by
means
of the weapon
called,
Prajna.
1
.
Then
Sugriva
soon extracted
the arrows from their
bodies.
And
by means
of that
most
efficacious medicine called
the
Visalya^,
applied with celestial mantras,
those human
heroes
regained
their consciousness.
And the arrow having been extracted from
their
bodies, those mighty warriors in a moment
rose
from
their recumbent
posture, their pains and fatigue thoroughly
allev iated.
And beholding
Rama the descendant of Ikshwaku's race, quite at his
ease, Vibhishana,
O son of Pritha, joining his hands, told him these words, 'O chastiser of
foes, at the command of the king of theGuhyakas, aGuhyakahath come
from the White mountains, bringing with him
his
water
3
!
O
great
king, this water is a present to thee from
Kuvera, so
that all creatures
that
are
invisible
may, O
chastiser
of foes, become visible to
thee!
This water laved over the eyes will make every invisible creature visible
to thee, as also to any other person to whom thou mayst give it !'
Saying
So be
it,
Rama took
that sacred
water, and sanctified
his own eyes
therewith.
And the
high-minded Lakshmana also did the same.
And
Sugriva and Jambuvan, and Hanuman and
Angada, and Mainda and
Dwivida, and Nila and many other foremost of the monkeys, laved their
eyes with that water. And thereupon it exactly happened as Vibhishana
1
This weapon could restore an insensible warrior
to
consciousness,
as the Sanrnohana weapon could deprive one of consciousness.
T.
2
Visalya
a medicinal plant
of
great
efficacy
in healing cuts and
wounds.
It is still cultivated in several parts of Bengal.
A medical
friend
of the present writer tested the
efficacy
of
the plant known by that name
and found it
to
be much
superior
to
either
gallic
acid or tannic acid in
stopping blood.
T.
3
The Guhyakas occupy, in Hindu
mythology,
a position next only
to that
of the
gods,
and
superior
to that
of the Gandharvas who are the
celestial choristers.
The White mountain is another name of Kailasa,
the
peak where Siva hath his abode.
T.

=== PAGE 359 ===

VANA PAEVA
617
had said,
for, O Yudhishthira,
soon
did the
eyes of
all these
became
capable of beholding things that could not be seen by the unassisted eye
!
"Meanwhile,
Indrajit,
after the
success he
had won, went to his
father.
And having
informed him
of the
feats he had achieved, he
speedily returned to the field of battle and placed himself at the van of
his army. The son of Sumitra then, under Vibhishana's guidance, rushed
towards that wrathful son of Ravana coming back, from desire of battle,
to lead the attack.
And Lakshmana,
excited to
fury and
receiving a
hint from Vibhishana, and desiring to slay Indrajit who had not com-
pleted his daily sacrifice, smote with his arrows that warrior burning to
achieve success.
And desirous of vanquishing each other, the
encoun-
ter that took place between them was exceedingly wonderful
like that
(in
days of
yore) between
the
Lord of celestials and Prahrada.
And
Indrajit pierced
the son
of Sumitra
with
arrows penetrating into his
very
vitals.
And
the son
of Sumitra
also pierced Rav ana's son with
arrows of fiery energy.
And pierced with Lakshmana' s arrows,
the son
of Ravana became senseless with
wrath.
And he
shot at Lakshmana
eight shafts fierce as venomous snakes.
Listen now, O Yudhishthira,
as
I tell thee how the heroic
son of Sumitra
then took his adversary's life
by means of three winged arrows possessed of the energy and effulgence
of fire
! With one of these, he severed from Indrajit's body that arm of
his enemy which had grasped the bow.
With the second he caused that
other arm which
had
held
the
arrows,
to drop down on the ground.
With
the
third that was
bright and possessed of the keenest edge, he
cut off his head decked with a beautiful nose and bright with
ear-rings.
And shorn of arms and head, the trunk became fearful to behold.
And
having slain the foe thus, that
foremost of mighty men
then slew with
his arrows the charioteer of his adversary.
And the horses then dragg-
ed away the empty chariot into the city. And Ravana then beheld that
car
without
his
son on
it.
And hearing that his son had been slain,
Ravana
suffered
his
heart to be overpowered with grief.
And under
the influence of extreme grief and
affliction, the king
of the
Rakshasas
suddenly cherished
the
desire
of killing
the princess of Mithila.
And
seizing a sword, the wicked Rakshasa hastily ran towards that lady
stay-
ing within the Asoka wood longing to beheld her lord.
Then Avindhya
beholding that sinful purpose of the wicked
wretch,
appeased
his fury.
Listen, O Yudhishthira, to the reasons urged by Avindhya
!
That wise
Rakshasa said, 'Placed as thou art on the blazing
throne
of an empire,
it behoveth thee not to slay a woman
!
Besides, this woman
is
already
slain, considering that she is a captive in thy power
!
I think, she would
not be slain if only her body were destroyed.
Slay
thou
her husband
!
He being slain, she will be slain too
! Indeed, not even he of an hundred
sacrifices (Indra) is thy equal in prowess
!
The gods with Indra at their
79

=== PAGE 360 ===

618
MAHABHAEATA
head, had repeatedly been affrighted by thee in battle f With these and
many other words of the same import, Avindhya succeeded in appeasing
Ravana.
And
the
latter
did,
indeed,
listen to his counsellor's speech.
And
that wanderer of the night,
then, resolved to give
battle
himself,
sheathed his sword, and issued orders for preparing his chariot.'
"
SECTION CCLXXXVIII
(Draupadi-harana Parva continued)
"Markandeya said,
'The Ten-necked (Ravana),
excited to fury at
the death of his beloved son, ascended his car decked with gold and gems.
And surrounded
by
terrible Rakshasas with various
kinds of weapons
in their hands, Ravana
rushed
towards Rama,
fighting with numerous
monkey-chief.
And beholding him rushing in wrath towards the mon-
key army, Mainda and Nila and Nala
and Angada, and Hanuman and
Jamvuman, surrounded him with all their troops.
And those
foremost
of monkeys and
bears
began
to exterminate
with trunks of trees, the
soldiers of the Ten-necked (Ravana), in his every sight.
And beholding
the enemy slaughtering his troops, the Rakshasa king, Ravana, possessed
of great powers of illusion, began to put them
forth.
And
forth
from
his body began to spring hundreds and
thousands
of
Rakshasas armed
with arrows and lances and double-edged swords
in hand.
Rama, how-
ever, with
a
celestial weapon
slew all those Rakshasas.
The king of
the Rakshasas then once more put forth his prowess of illusion.
The
Ten-faced, producing from his body
numerous warriors resembling, O
Bharata, both Rama and Lakshmana, rushed towards the two
brothers.
And then those Rakshasas, hostile to Rama and Lakshmana
and armed
with bows and arrows, rushed towards Rama, and beholding that power
of
illusion put forth
by the
king
of
Rakshasas,
that
descendant
of
Ikshwaku's
race,
the
son of
Sumitra,
addressed Rama in these heroic
words,
'Slay those Rakshasas, those wretches with forms like thy own f
And Rama, thereupon slew those and
other
Rakshasas of forms resem-
bling his own. And that time Matali, the charioteer of Indra, approach-
ed Rama on the
field of battle, with a car effulgent as the Sun and unto
which were yoked horses
of a tawny hue.
And Matali
said, 'O
son of
Kakutstha's
race,
this
excellent and v ictorious car, unto which have
been yoked
this
pair
of tawny
horses, belonging to the Lord of celes-
tials
!
It is on,this
excellent
car, O tiger among men, that Indra hath
slain in battle hundreds of
Daityas and Danavas
!
Therefore, O tiger
among
men,
do
thou,
riding
on
the car driven by me,
quickly
slay
Ravana in battle
!
Do not delay in achieving this
!' Thus addressed by
him,
the
descendant of Raghu's
race, however,
doubted
the truthful
words of Matali, thinking this is another illusion produced by the
Rak-
shasas
!
Vibhishana then addressed him
saying,
This, O tiger among

=== PAGE 361 ===

VANA PARVA
619
men, is no
illusion
of
the
wicked Ravana
!
Ascend thou this chariot
quickly, for this, O thou of great effulgence, belongeth
to
Indra f The
descendant of Kakutstha then cheerfully
said unto Vibhishana,
'So be
it/ and riding on that car, rushed wrathfully upon Ravana. And when
Ravana, too, rushed against his antagonist, a loud wail of woe was set up
by the creatures of the Earth, while the celestials in heaven
sent
forth
a leonine roar accompanied by beating of large drums.
The
encounter
then that took
place between the Ten- necked Rakshasa and that prince
of Raghu's race, was fierce in the extreme. Indeed, that combat between
them hath no parallel elsewhere. And Rakshasa hurled at Rama a terri-
ble javelin
looking like
Indra' s thunder- bolt and
resembling
a Brah-
mana's curse on the point of utterance.
1
Rama, however,
quickly
cut
into fragments
that javelin by
means
of
his sharp arrows.
And be-
holding that most difficult feat, Ravana was struck with fear.
But soon
his wrath was excited
and the
Ten-necked hero
began to shower on
Rama whetted arrows by thousands and tens of thousands and countless
weapons of various kinds, such as rockets and
javelins and maces and
battle-axes and darts of various kinds and Shataghnis and whetted
shafts.
And
beholding
that
terrible form
of
illusion
displayed by the Ten-
necked Rakshasa, the monkeys fled in
fear
in all directions.
Then the
descendant of Kakutstha, taking out of his quiver an excellent arrow fur-
nished with handsome
wings and
golden
feathers and
a bright and
beautiful head, fixed it on the bow with Brahmastra
mantra.
And
be-
holding that excellent arrow transformed by Rama, with proper mantras
into a Brahma weapon, the celestials and the Gandharvas with Indra at
their head, began to rejoice.
And the
gods and
the Danavas and the
Kinnaras were led by the display of
that Brahma weapon to regard the
life of their Rakshasa foe almost closed.
Then Rama shot that
terrible
weapon of unrivalled energy, destined to
compass Rav ana's
death, and
resembling the curse of a Brahmana on the point of utterance.
And as
soon, O Bharata, as that arrow was shot by Rama from
his bow drawn
to a circle, the Rakshasa king with his chariot and charioteer and horses
blazed
up,
surrounded
on
all sides
by a terrific
fire.
And beholding
Ravana slain by Rama of famous achievements, the celestials
with
the
Gandharvas and
the
Charanas, rejoiced exceedingly.
And deprived of
universal
dominion
by the energy of the Brahma weapon, the
five ele-
ments
forsook the
illustrious
Ravana.
And were consumed
by
the
Brahma weapon, the
physical
ingredients
of Rav ana's body.
His flesh
and blood were
all
reduced
to
nothingness,
so
that
the ashes even
could not be
seen.'
"
1
According to both Vyasa and Valmiki, there is nothing so fierce as
a Brahmana's
curse.
The
very
thunderbolt of Indra is weak compared to
a
Brahmana's
curse.
The
reason
is
obvious.
The
thunder smites
the
individual
at whom
it may be aimed.
fi he curse of Brahmana smiles the
whole race, whole generation, whole country.-
T.

=== PAGE 362 ===

SECTION CCLXXXIX
(Draupadi -liar'ana Parva continued)
"Markandeya said,
'Having
slain Ravana,
that wretched
king of
of
the
Rakshasas and foe
of the
celestials, Rama with his friends and
Sumitra's son rejoiced exceedingly. And after the Ten-necked (Raksliasa)
hath been slain, the celestials with the Rishis at their head,
worshipped
Rama of mighty arms,
blessing and
uttering the word Jaya repeatedly.
And all
the celestials and the Gandharvas and the denizens of the celes-
tial
regions
gratified Rama
of
eyes like lotus leaves, with hymns and
flowery
showers.
And having
duly worshipped Rama, they all
wenl
away to those regions whence they had come.
And, O thou of unfading
glory, the firmament at that time looked as if a great festival was beinj
celebrated.
"And having
slain
the
Ten-necked
Rakshasa,
the lord Rama of
world-wide fame, that conqueror of
hostile
cities, bestowed Lanka on
Vibhishana.
Then that old and wise counsellor
(of Ravana) known by
the name of Avindhya, with Sita walking before him but behind Vibhi-
shana who was at the front, came out of the city. And with great humi-
lity Avindhya
said unto
the
illustrious descendant of Kakutstha, 'O
illustrious one, accept thou this goddess, Janaka's
daughter
of excellent
conduct
!'
Hearing
these
words,
the descendant
of
Ikshwaku's
race
alighted from
his
excellent
chariot and
beheld Sita bathed in
tears.
And
beholding that
beautiful lady seated within her vehicle, afflicted
with grief, besmeared with filth, with matted locks on head, and
attired
in
dirty
robes, Rama,
afraid
of
the
loss of his honour, said unto her,
'Daughter
of
Videha,
go
withersover
thou
likest
!
Thou
art now
free
!
What
should
have
been
done
by
me,
hath been done
!
O
blessed
lady,
owning me
for
thy
husband,
it
is
not meet
that
thou shouldst grow old
in the
abode of the Rakshasa
!
It is for this
I
have
slain
that wanderer
of
the
night
!
But how can
one like us,
acquainted with every truth of morality embrace even for a moment
a
woman that had fallen
into other's
hands ?
O
princess
of
Mithila
whether thou
art chaste
or
unchaste,
I dare not enjoy thee, now that
thou
art
like
sacrificial
butter lapped by a dog
!'
Hearing these cruel
words, that adorable girl suddenly fell down in great affliction of
heart,
like
a
plantain
tree severed from its roots.
And the colour that was
suffusing
her
face
in
consequence of the joy she had felt, quickly dis-
appeared, like watery particles on a mirror blown thereon by the breath
of the mouth.
And hearing these words of Rama,
all the monkeys also
with Lakshmana became still as dead.
Then the divine and pure-souled
Brahma of four faces, that Creator of the Universe himself sprung from
a lotus, showed himself on his car to Raghu's son.
And Sakra and Agni
and Vayu, and Yamaand Varuna and the illustrious Lord of the Yakshas,

=== PAGE 363 ===

VANA PABVA
621
and the holy Rishis, and king Dasaratha also in a celestial and effulgent
form and on
car drawn by swans, showed themselves.
And then the
firmament, crowded with celestials and Gandharvas became as
beautiful
as
the autumnal
welkin
spangled with stars.
And rising up from the
ground, the blessed and famous princess of Videha, in the midst of those
present
spoke
unto Rama
of
wide
chest,
these
words,
'O prince,
I
impute no fault to thee, for thou art well acquainted with the behaviour
that one
should adopt towards both men and women.
But hear
thou
these words of mine
!
The
ever-moving
Air
is always present within
every creature.
If I have sinned, let him forsake my vital
forces
!
If
I have sinned, Oh, then let Fire, and Water, and Space, and Earth,
like
Air (whom I have already invoked), also forsake my vital forces
! And
as, O
hero,
I have never, even in my dreams, cherished the image of
any other person, so be thou my lord as appointed by
the
gods.'
After
Sita
had
spoken,
a sacred voice, resounding through the whole of that
region, was heard in the skies, gladdening the hearts
of
the high-souled
monkeys.
And the Wind-god was heard to say,
'O son of Raghu, what
Sita hath said is true
!
I am the god of Wind.
The princess of Mithila
is sinless
!
Therefore, O
king, be united with thy wife f And the god
of Fire said, 'O son of Raghu, I dwell within the bodies of all creatures
!
O descendant of Kukutstha, the princess of Mithila is not guilty of even
the
minutest
fault
!' And
Varuna
then
said,
'O
son
of
Raghu, the
humours
in
every
creatures body derive their existence from me
!
I
tell thee, let the princess of Mithila be accepted by thee f
And Brahma
himself
then
said, 'O
descendant
of Kakutstha, O son, in thee that art
honest and pure and conversant with the duties of royal sages, this con-
duct
is
not strange.
Listen, however, to these words of mine
!
Thou
hast, O hero,
slain
this enemy
of the gods, the Gandharvas, the Nagas,
the Yakshas,
the Danavas,
and
the
great Bishis
!
It was through my
grace that he had hitherto been unslayable of all creatures. And, indeed,
it was
for
some
reason
that I had tolerated him for some time
!
The
wretch, however, abducted Sita for his own destruction. And as regards
Sita,
I protected her through Nalakuv era's curse.
For that person had
cursed Ravana
of
old,
saying, that if he ever approached an unwilling
woman, his head should certainly be split into a hundred fragments. Let
no suspicion,
therefore, be thine
!
O thou
of
great glory, accept thy
wife
!
Thou hast indeed, achieved a mighty feat for the
benefit of
the
gods, O thou that art of divine effulgence
!'
And last
of
all Dasaratha
said, 1 have been gratified with thee, O child
!
Blessed be thou,
I am
thy father Dasaratha
!
I command thee to take back thy wife, and rule
thy
kingdom, O thou foremost
of men
!' Rama then replied,
'If thou
art my
father,
I
salute
thee with reverence, O king of kings
!
I shall
indeed, return, at thy command, to the delightful city of Ayodhya f

=== PAGE 364 ===

622
MAHABHAEATA
"Markandeya continued,
'Thus addressed, his father, O bull of the
Bharata race,
gladly answered Rama,
the corners of whose eyes were of
a reddish hue,
saying, 'Return to Ayodhya and rule thou that kingdom
!
O thou
of
great
glory,
thy
fourteen
years
(of exile) have been com-
pleted.'
Thus
addressed
by
Dasaratha, Rama
bowed to the gods, and
saluted by his friends, he was united with his wife, like the Lord
of
the
celestials with
the
daughter
of
Puloman.
And that chastiser of foes
then gave a boon to Avindhya.
And he also bestowed both riches and
honours on
the Rakshasa woman named
Trijata,
And when Brahma
with
all
the
celestials having Indra at their head, said unto Rama,
'O
thou that ownest
Kausalya
for thy mother, what boons after thy heart
shall we grant thee ?'
Rama, thereupon, prayed them to grant him
firm
adherence to
virtues and
invincibility
in respect of all foes.
And he
also asked for the restoration to life of all those monkeys that had been
slain
by
the
Rakshasas, and
after Brahma had
said
So be
it, those
monkeys, O king,
restored to life,
rose up from the field of battle,
and
Sita too, of great
good fortune,
granted unto Hanuman a boon,
saying,
'Let thy life, O son,
last as long as (the fame of) Rama's achievements
!
And, O Hanuman
of yellow
eyes,
let celestial
viands and drinks
be
ever available to thee through my grace
!'
"Then the celestials with Indra at their head all disappeared in the
very sight of those warriors of spotless achievements.
And
beholding
Rama
united
with
the Daughter
of Janaka,
the charioteer
of Sakra,
highly pleased, addressed him
in
the
midst of
friends,
and said these
words, 'O thou of prowess that can never be baffled, thou hast
dispelled
the sorrow of the celestials, the Gandharvas, the Yakshas, the A suras, the
Nagas, and human beings
!
As long, therefore, as
the
Earth
will
hold
together,
so
long
will
all
creatures with the celestials, the Asuras, the
Gandharvas, the Yakshas, the Rakshasas, and the Pannagas, speak of thee/
And having said these words unto Rama, Matali worshipped that son of
Raghu, and having
obtained
the leave of that foremost of wielders of
weapons, he went away on that same chariot of solar effulgence.
And
Rama also, with Sumitra's son and Vibhishana, and accompanied
by all
the monkeys with Sugriva
at
their head, placing Sita in the van and
having made arrangements for the protection
of
Lanka, recrossed
the
ocean by
the same
bridge.
And he
rode on that beautiful and sky-
ranging chariot
called
the
PushpaUa
that was capable of going every-
where at the will
of
the rider.
And that subduer of passions was sur-
rounded by his principal counsellors in order of precedence. And arriv-
ing
at
that
part
of
the
sea-shore where he had formerly laid himself
down,
the
virtuous
king,
with all the monkeys, pitched his temporary
abode.
And the son
of Raghu then, bringing the monkeys before him
in due time, worshipped them all, and gratifying them with presents
of
jewels and
gems,
dismissed them one
after another.
And
after
all
the
monkey-chiefs, and
the
apes with
bovine
tails, and
the
bears,
had
gone
away, Rama
re-entered
Kishkindhya
with
Sugriva.
And
accompanied
by
both
Vibhishana
and
Sugriva,
Rama
re-entered
Kishkindhya
riding on the
Puslipaka car and showing
the
princess of
Videha the woods along the way.
And having arrived at Kishkindhya,
Rama,
that
foremost
of all
smiters,
installed
the
successful Angada
as
prince-regent
of
the
kingdom.
And accompanied by
the
same
friends
as
also
by
Sumitra's
son, Rama
proceeded
towards his
city
along the same
path
by which he had come.
And having reached the
city
of
Ayodhya,
the
king
despatched Hanuman
thence as envoy to

=== PAGE 365 ===

VANA PAEVA
623
Bharata.
And
Hanuman,
having
ascertained
Bharata' s
intentions
from external indications, gave him the good news (of Rama's arrival).
And after the son of Pavana had come back, Rama entered Nandigrama.
And having entered that town, Rama
beheld Bharata besmeared with
filth
and
attired
in
rags and
seated with
his elder brother's sandals
placed before him. And being united, O bull of Bharata race, with both
Bharata and Shatrughna, the mighty son of Raghu, along with Sumitra's
son,
began to
rejoice exceedingly.
And Bharata and Shatrughna also,
united with their eldest brother, and beholding Sita, both derived great
pleasure.
And
Bharata
then,
after
having worshipped his returned
brother, made
ov er to him with great pleasure, the kingdom that had
been in his hands as a sacred trust.
And Vasishtha and Vamadeva then
together
installed
that hero
in
the
sovereignty
(of Ayodhya) at the
eighth
Muliurta
l
of
the
day
under the asterism called Sravana.
And
after his installation was over, Rama gave leave to well-pleased Sugriv a
the king of the monkeys, along with all his followers, as also to rejoicing
Vibhishana
of
Pulastya's
race,
to
return to
their
respective abodes.
And having worshipped them
with various articles of enjoyment, and
done everything that was suitable to the occasion, Rama dismissed those
friends
of
his with
a
sorrowful
heart.
And
the son of Raghu then,
having worshipped
that Pushpaka
chariot, joyfully gave it back unto
Vaisravana.
And then assisted by the celestial Eishi (Vasishtha), Rama
performed on the banks of the Gomati ten Horse-sacrifices without obs-
truction of any kind and with treble presents unto Brahmanas.'
"
SECTION CCLXL
(Draupadi-harana Parva continued)
"Markandeya said,
It was thus, O mighty-armed one,
that Rama
of immeasurable energy had
suffered of old such excessive calamity
in
consequence
of
his
exile
in
the
woods
!
O tiger among men, do not
grieve, for, O chastiser of foes, thou art Kshatriya
I
Thou too
treadest
in the path in which strength of arms is to be put forth,
the
path that
leadeth to tangible rewards. Thou hast not even a particle of sin. Even
the celestials with Indra at their head, and the Asuras
have to tread in
the path
that
is
trod
by
thee
!
It was after such afflictions that the
wielder
of
the
thunder-bolt,
aided by the Maruts, slew Vritra, and the
invincible
Namuchi and
the Bakshasi
of long tongue!
He that hath
assistance,
always
secureth
the
accomplishment
of
all
his purposes
!
What is
that which
cannot
be vanquished in battle by him that hath
Dhananjaya for his brother ?
This Bhima
also, of terrible prowess,
is
the foremost of mighty persons.
The heroic and youthful sons of Mad-
ravati again
are mighty bowmen.
With allies
such as these, why dost
thou despair, O
chastiser
of
foes?
These are capable of vanquishing
the army of the wielder himself of the thunder- bolt with the Maruts
in
the
midst.
Having
these mighty bowmen
of
celestial forms for thy
allies, thou, O bull of Bharata race, art sure to conquer in battle all
thy
foes
!
Behold, this Krishna, the daughter of Drupada, forcibly abducted
by
the
wicked-minded Saindhava from pride of strength and energy,
hath been brought back by these mighty warriors after achieving terri-
ble feats
!
Behold, king Jayadratha was
vanquished and
lay powerless
before thee
!
The princess of Videha was rescued with almost no allies
1 Abhigit is lit, the eighth muhurta of the day, a rnuhurta being equal
to an hour
of
48
minutes,
i.e. the
thirtieth part
of a whole day and night.
The Vaishnava asterism is
; as explained by Nilakantha,' the Sravana.
T.

=== PAGE 366 ===

624
MAHABHABATA
by Rama
after
the
slaughter
in
battle of the Ten-necked Bakshasa of
terrible prowess
!
Indeed,
the
allies
of Rama
(in that contest) were
monkeys and black-faced bears,
creatures
that were not even human
!
Think of all this, O king in thy mind
!
Therefore, O foremost of Kurus,
grieve not
for all (that hath occurred), O bull
of
the
Bharata
race!
Illustrious persons like thee never indulge in sorrow, O smiter of foes
!'
Vaisanmpayana
continued,
"It was
thus
that the king was com-
forted by Markandeya.
And then that high-souled one,
casting off
his
sorrows, once more spoke unto Markandeya."
SECTION CCLXLI
(Pativrata-mahatmya Parva)
"Yudhishthira said,
'O mighty sage,
I do not so much grieve
for
myself or these my brothers or
the
loss of my kingdom as I do for this
daughter of Drupada.
When we were afflicted at the game of the
dice
by those wicked-souled ones, it was Krishna that delivered us.
And she
was forcibly carried off from the forest by Jayadratha.
Hast thou even
seen
or
heard
of
any
chaste
and
exalted lady
that resembleth
this
daughter of Drupada
?'
'
"Markandeya
said,
'Listen, O
king, how
the
exalted
merit
of
chaste ladies, O
Yudhishthira, was
completely obtained by a princess
named Savitri.
There was a king among the Madras, who was virtuous
and highly pious.
And he always ministered unto the
Brahmanas, and
was
high-souled and
firm
in
promise.
And he was of subdued senses
and giv en to sacrifices.
And he was
the
foremost of givers, and was
able, and beloved by both the citizens and the rural population.
And
the name of that lord of Earth was Aswapati.
And
he was intent on
the
welfare
of
all
beings.
And
that forgiving (monarch) of truthful
speech and subdued senses was without issue.
And when he got old,
he
was striken with grief at this.
And with the object of raising offspring,
he observed rigid vows and began to live upon frugal fare, having re-
course to
the Brahmacharya mode
of
life, and restraining
his senses.
And that
best
of
kings,
(daily) offering ten thousand oblations to the
fire, recited Mantras
in honour of
Savitri
1
and ate temperately at the
sixth hour.
And he passed eighteen years, practising such vows.
Then
when the eighteen years were full, Savitri was pleased (with him).
And
O king,
issuing with
great
delight,
in embodied form, from the Agni-
hotra fire, the goddess showed herself to that king.
And intent on
con-
ferring
boons,
she
spoke
these words unto the monarch,
1 have been
gratified, O king, with thy Brahmacharya practices, thy purity
and self-
restraint and observance of vows, and all thy endeavours
and
venera-
tion
!
Do thou, O mighty king, O Aswapati, ask for the boon that thou
desirest
!
Thou
ought, however,
by no means show any disregard for
virtue.' Thereat Aswapati said, It is with the desire of attaining virtue
that
I have
been engaged
in
this task.
O goddess, may many sons be
born unto me worthy of my race
!
If thou art pleased with me, O god-
dess, I ask for this boon.
The
twice-born
ones have
assured me that
great merit lieth in having offspring
!'
Savitri replied,
4O king, having
already learnt this thy intention, I had spoken unto that lord, the Grand-
sire,
about thy sons.
Through
the favour
granted by the Self-create,
there shall
speedily
be
born
unto
thee on earth a daughter of
great
energy.
It behoveth thee not to make any reply.
Well-pleased,
I
tell
thee this at the command of the Grand-sire.'
1
Also called Gayatri, the wife of Brahma.
T.

=== PAGE 367 ===

VANA PAEVA
625
"Markandeya said, 'Having accepted Savitri s words and saying,
'So
be it
!'
the king again gratified
her and said,
'May this happen soon
!'
On
Savitri vanishing away, the monarch entered his own city.
And that hero
began
to live in
his kingdom,
ruling his subjects righteously.
And when
some time had elapsed,
that king,
observant of vows, begat offspring on his
eldest
queen engaged
in the
practice
of virtue.
And then,
bull of
the
Bharata race,
the embryo in the womb of the princess of Malava increased
like the lord of stars in the heavens during the lighted fortnight.
And when
the time came,
she brought forth a daughter furnished with lotus-like eyes.
And that best of monarchs,
joyfully performed the usual ceremonies on her
behalf.
And as she had been bestowed with delight by the
goddess Savitri
by virtue of the oblations offered in honour of that goddess, both her father,
and the Brahmanas named her Savitri.
And the king's
daughter grew like
unto
Sree herself
in an
embodied
form.
And in
due
time,
that
damsel
attained her puberty.
And beholding that graceful maiden of slender waist
and ample
hips, and resembling a golden image,
people thought,
'We have
received a goddess.'
And overpowered
by her energy, none could wed that
girl of eyes like lotus-leaves, and possessed of a burning splendour.'
And it
came to
pass that
once on
the occasion
of a parva, having
fasted
and bathed her head,
she presented herself
before the (family) deity
and caused the Brahmanas to offer oblations with due rites to the sacrificial
fire.
And taking
the flowers
that had
been offered to
the god,
that lady,
beautiful
as Sree herself, went
to her high-souled
sire.
And having rever-
enced the feet of her
father and offering him
the flowers she had
brought,
that maiden of exceeding grace,
with joined hands,
stood at the side of the
king.
And seeing his own daughter
resembling a celestial damsel
arrived
at puberty, and unsought
by people,
the king
became sad.
And the
king
said,
'Daughter,
the time for
bestowing thee
is come
1
Yet none
asketh
thee.
Do thou (therefore) thyself seek for a husband equal to thee in quali-
ties
!
That person who may
ha desired by thee should
be notified
to me.
Do thou
choose for thy husband
as thou listest.
I shall bestow thee with
deliberation.
Do thou,
auspicious
one,
listen to me
as I
tell thee
the
words which I heard recited by
the twice-born ones.
The father that doth
not bestow his daughter cometh by disgrace. And the husband that knoweth
not his wife in her season meeteth with disgrace. And the son that doth not
protect
his mother
when
her
husband
is
dead,
also
suffereth
disgrace.
Hearing these words of mine, do thou engage thyself in search of a husband.
Do thou act in such a way that we may not be censured by the gods
!'
"Markandeya said, 'Having said
these words to his daughter and his
old counsellors, he instructed
the attendants
to follow
her,
saying,
Go
!
Thereat, bashfully bowing down unto her father's feet,
the meek maid went
out
without
hesitation,
in
compliance with
the words
of her
sire.
And
ascending a golden car, she went to the delightful asylum of the royal sages,
83

=== PAGE 368 ===

626
MAHABHARATA
accompanied
by her
father's aged counsellors.
There,
son,
worshipping
the feet of
the aged ones, she gradually
began to roam
over all the woods.
Thus
the king's
daughter distributing
wealth in all sacred regions, ranged
the various places belonging to the foremost
of the twice-born ones.'
"
SECTION CCLXLII
(Pativrata-mahatmya Parva continued)
"Markandeya
continued, 'On
one
occasion,
Bharata, when
that
king, the lord
of the Madras, was seated
with Narada in
the midst of his
court, engaged in
conversation,
Savitri, accompanied by
the king's
coun-
sellors, came to her father's abode after having visited various sacred regions
and asylums. And beholding her father seated with Narada, she worshipped
the
feet
of
both
by
bending down
her
head.
And Narada then
said,
'Whither had this thy daughter gone ?
And,
king, whence also doth she
come ?
Why also dost
thou not bestow
her on a husband, now that
she
hath arrived
at the
age of puberty
?'
Aswapafci answered,
saying,
'Surely
it was on this very business that she had been sent, and she returneth now
(from
her search).
Do thou, O celestial sage,
listen, even from
her as
to
the husband she hath chosen herself
!'
"Markandeya continued, 'Then the blessed maid, commanded by her
father with
the words,
Eelate everything in detail.
regarded
those words
of her sire as if they were
those of a god, and spoke unto him thus,
'There
was, amongst the
Salwas,
a virtuous Kshatriya king known by the name
of Dyumatsena.
And it came to
pass that
in course
of time
he
became
blind.
And that blind
king possessed of wisdom had an only son.
And
it
so happened that
an old enemy dwelling in
the vicinity,
taking advantage
of
the king's
mishap, deprived him
of his
kingdom.
And thereupon
the
monarch, accompanied by his wife bearing a child on her breast, went into
the woods.
And having retired into the forests, he adopted great vows and
began to practise
ascetic austerities.
And his son, born in the city, began
to grow in
the
hermitage.
That
youth,
fit to
be my
husband,
I
have
accepted
in my heart
for my lord
!'
At these words of hers, Narada said,
'Alas,
king,
Savitri hath
committed
a great
wrong,
since, not knowing,
she
hath accepted
for her lord
this Satyavan of
excellent qualities
!
His
father
speaketh the
truth and his
mother
also
is truthful
in her
speech.
And it is for this that the Brahmanas have named the son Satyavan. In his
childhood he took great
delight in horses, and used to make horses of clay.
And he used also to draw pictures of horses. And for this that youth is some-
times
called
by the name of
Chitraswa.'
The
king then
asked, 'And is
prince Satyavan, who is devoted to his father, endued with energy and intelli-
gence and
forgiveness and courage
?'
Narada
replied,
saying, In energy
Satyavan is like unto the sun, and in wisdom like unto Vrihaspati
! And he
is brave like tfnto the lord of the celestials and forgiving like unto the Earth

=== PAGE 369 ===

VANA PAEVA
627
herself!' Aswapati then said, 'And is the prince Satyavan liberal in gifts and
devoted to the Brahmanas ?
Is he handsome and magnanimous and lovely
to behold
?'
Narada said,
4In bestowal of gifts according to his power,
the
mighty son of Dyumatsena is like unto Sankriti's son Eantideva.
In truth-
fulness of
speech and
devotion unto
Brahmanas, he is
like Sivi,
the
son
of Usinara.
And he
is magnanimous
like
Yayati, and beautiful
like
the
Moon.
And in beauty of person he
is like either of the twin Aswins.
And
with senses under control,
he is meek, and brave, and truthful
!
And with
passion in subjection he is devoted
to his friends, and free from malice and
modest
and patient.
Indeed,
briefly speaking,
they that
are possessed
of
great ascetic merit and are of exalted character say that he is always correct
in his conduct and that honour is firmly seated on his brow.'
Hearing this,
Aswapati
said,
'0 reverend sage, thou tellest me that
he
is possessed
of
every virtue
!
Do thou now tell me
his defects
if,
indeed,
he hath
any
!'
Narada then said,
'fie hath one only defect that hath overwhelmed all his
virtues.
That defect
is incapable of
being conquered by even
the greatest
efforts.
He hath only
one detect,
and no other.
Within a year from this
day, Satyavan,
endued with a short
life will
cast off
his body
!'
Hearing
these words of the sage, the king said, 'Come, O Savitri, go thou and choose
another
for thy lord, O baautiful
damsel
!
That one great defect
(in this
youth) existeth, covering all
his merits.
The illustrious
Narada honoured
by
even the
gods,
sayeth, that
Satyavan
will have
to cast
off his
body
within
a year,
his days
being numbered
!'
At these words
of her
father,
Savitri said,
'The
death can fall
but once
;
a daughter can
be given away
but once
; and once only can a person say, I give aivay
! These three things
can take
place only once.
Indeed, with a life short
or long,
possessed
of
virtues or bereft
of them,
I have,
for once,
selected my husband.
Twice I
shall
not select.
Having first
settled a thing mentally,
it
is
expressed in
words, and then
it is
carried out
into practice.
Of
this my mind
is
an
example
!'
Narada
then said,
'0 best
of men, the heart
of thy
daughter
Savitri wavereth not
!
It is not possible by any means to make her swerve
from this path
of virtue
!
In no other person are those
virtues that dwell
in Satyavan.
The bestowal of thy daughter,
therefore,
is approved by me
!'
The
king said, 'What
thou hast
said, O illustrious
one,
should
never
be
disobeyed, for thy words are true
!
And I shall act as thou hast said, since
thou art my
preceptor
!'
Narada said, 'May the bestowal of
thy daughter
Savitri be attended with peace
! I shall now depart. Blessed be all of ye
!'
"Markandeya continued,
'Having said this,
Narada rose up into the
sky
and went
to
heaven.
On the
other hand, the
king
began to make
preparations for his daughter's wedding
!' "

=== PAGE 370 ===

SECTION CGLXLIII
(Pativrata-mahatmya Parva continued)
"Markandeya
said, 'Having
pondered over
these words
(of Narada)
about his daughter's marriage,
the king began
to make arrangements about
the nuptials.
And summoning
all the
old Brahmanas,
and
Ritwijas
to-
gether with the priests, he set out
with his daughter on an auspicious day.
And
arriving at
the asylum of Dyumatsena in the
sacred forest, the king
approached
the royal
sage on foot, accompanied by
the
twice-born
ones.
And there he beheld the blind monarch of great wisdom seated on a cushion
of Kusa grass spread under Sala tree.
And after duly reverencing the royal
sage, the king in
an humble speech introduced himself.
Thereupon,
offer-
ing him the Argliya,
a seat, and a cow,
the monarch asked his royal guest,
Wherefore
is this
visit
?
Thus addressed
the king disclosed
everything
about his intentions and purpose with reference to Satyavan. And Aswapati
said,
'O
royal sage,
this beautiful
girl is my
daughter named Savitri.
thou
versed in
morality, do thou, agreeably to
the customs
of our
order,
take her from me as thy daughter-in-law
!'
Hearing these words, Dyumat-
sena said,
'Deprived of kingdom, and taking up our abode in the woods, we
are
engaged
in the
practice
of
virtue
as
ascetics
with
regulated
lives.
Unworthy
of a
forest
life, how
will
thy
daughter,
living
in the
sylvan
asylum, bear this hardship?'
Aswapati said, 'When my daughter knoweth,
as well
as myself, that happiness
and misery come and go (without either
being stationary), such words
as these are
not
fit to
be used towards one
like me
1
king,
I have come hither, having made
up my mind
!
I have
bowed to thee
from friendship
;
it behoveth thee not,
therefore, to destroy
my hope
!
It behoveth thee not, also, to disregard me who, moved by love,
have come to thee
!
Thou art my equal and fit for an alliance with me,
as
indeed,
I am thy equal and fit for alliance with thee
!
Do thou,
therefore,
accept my
daughter
for
fchy
daughter-in-law
and
the wife
of
the
good
Satyavan
!'
Hearing these words Dyumatsena said,
'Formerly I had desired
an alliance with thee.
But I hesitated,
being subsequently deprived of my
kingdom.
Lat this
wish,
therefore,
that
I had
formerly
entertained,
be
accomplished this very day.
Thou art,
indeed,
a welcome guest to me
!'
"Then summoning
all the twice- born ones residing in
the hermitages
of that forest,
the two kings caused the union
to take place with due rites.
And
having
bestowed
his
daughter
with suitable robes and
ornaments,
Aswapati went back
to his
abode
in
great
joy.
And
Satyavan, having
obtained a wife
possessed
of every
accomplishment, became
highly
glad,
while she
also rejoiced
exceedingly upon
having gained the
husband after
her own heart.
And when
her
father had departed,
she put
off
all her
ornaments, and clad
herself in
barks and cloths dyed in red.
And by her
services
and virtues,
her tenderness
and self-denial, and by
her agreeable
offices unto all, she pleased everybody. And she gratified her mother-in-law
by attending to her
person and by covering her with robes and ornaments.
And she
gratified her father-in-law
by worshipping him
as a god and con-
trolling her speech.
And she
pleased her husband by
her honied speeches,
her
skill in
every kind
of work,
the evenness of
her temper, and by
the
indications
of her
love
in private.
And
thus,
Bharata,
living
in
the
asylum of those
pious dwellers of the forest, they continued for
some time
to
practise
ascetic
austerities.
But the words
spoken
by
Narada
were
present night and day in the mind of the sorrowful Savitri,' "

=== PAGE 371 ===

SECTION CCLXLTV
('Pativrato-rnahatmya Parva continued)
"Markandeya said,
'At length,
king,
after a long
time had
passed
away, the hour that had been appointed for the death
of Satyavan arrived.
And as the words that had been spoken by Narada were ever present in the
mind
of Savitri,
she had
counted the
days as
they passed.
And
having
ascertained
that her
husband would
die on
the fourth day following, the
damsel fasted
day and night,
observing the Triratra vow.
And hearing of
her vow, the king became exceedingly sorrow
and rising up soothed Savitri
and
said
these
words,
'This vow
that
thou
hast begun
to
observe,
daughter of a king,
is exceedingly hard
;
for it
is extremely difficult
to fast
for three
nights together
!'
And hearing those words,
Savitri
said,
'Thou
needst
not be sorry, O father
!
This vow
I shall
be able
to observe
!
I
have for certain
undertaken this task with perseverance
; and perseverance
is the
cause of the
successful observance
of vows.
1 And having listened to
her, Dyumatsena
said,
'I can
by no means
say unto thee, Do thou
break
thy vow.
One like me should, on the contrary,
say,
Do thou complete thy
vow
/'
And having said this to her,
the high-minded Dyumatsena
stopped.
And
Savitri
continuing
to
fast
began to
look (lean)
like a wooden
doll.
And, O bull of
the Bharata race, thinking that
her husband would die on
the morrow,
the
woe-stricken
Savitri,
observing a
fast, spent that
night
in extreme anguish.
And when
the sun
had risen
about a couple
of hand
Savitri
thinking
within herself
To-day is
that day,
finished
her morning
rites, and offered oblations to the flaming fire.
And bowing down unto the
aged
Brahmanas, and
her
father-in-law, and
mother-in-law,
she
stood
before them
with
joined
hands, concentrating
her
senses
And for
the
welfare
of Savitri,
all the ascetics
dwelling in
that hermitage, uttered the
auspicious benediction that she should never suffer widowhood. And Savitri
immersed in
contemplation accepted those words of the ascetics, mentally
saying,
So be it
!
And
the king's daughter,
reflecting on
those words
of
Narada, remained, expecting the hour and the moment.
Then, O
best
of
the Bharatas,
well pleased,
her
father-in-law
and
mother-in-law said these words unto the princess seated in a corner,
'Thou
hast
completed the vow as prescribed.
The time for thy
meal hath now
arrived
;
therefore, do thou
what is
proper
!'
Thereat
Savitri
said, 'Now
that
I have
completed the
purposed
vow,
I will
eat when
the Sun
goes
down.
Even this is my heart's resolve and this my vow
!'
"Markandeya
continued, 'And when
Savitri had
spoken thus
about
her
meal, Satyavan,
taking
his
axe
upon his shoulders,
set out
for
the
woods.
And at this,
Savitri said unto her husband,
'It behoveth thee not
to go alone
!
I will
accompany thee.
I cannot bear
to be separated from
thee
!'
Hearing
these
words
of
hers, Satyavan
said,
'Thou
hast
never

=== PAGE 372 ===

630
MAHABHAEATA
before
repaired to
the forest.
And, O lady, the forest-paths
are hard
to
pass
!
Besides
thou
hast
been
reduced by fast
on account
of thy
vow.
How
wouldst thou,
therefore,
be able to walk on foot
?'
Thus
addressed,
Savitri
said,
*I
do
not
feel
langour
because
of the fast, nor do
I
feel
exhaustion.
And I have made
up my mind
to go.
It behoveth
thee not,
therefore,
to prevent me
!'
At this, Satyavan
said,
'If
thou
desirest
to
go,
I will
gratify that
desire of
thine.
Do thou, however,
take the
per-
mission of my parents,
so that I may be guilty of no fault
!'
"Markandeya continued,
'Thus addressed by
her lord,
Savifcri of high
vows
saluted her
father-in-law
and
mother-in-law and
addressed
them,
saying,
'This my husband
goeth to the
forest for
procuring
fruits.
Per-
mitted
by my
revered lady-mother
and
father-in-law,
I will
accompany
him.
For to-day I cannot bear to
be separated from him.
Thy son goeth
out
for the sake
of the
sacrificial fire
and for his
reverend superiors.
He
ought not,
therefore,
to be
dissuaded.
Indeed,
he
could be
dissuaded
if
he went into the forest on any other errand. Do ye not prevent me
!
I will
go into the
forest with him.
It is a little less than a year that I have not
gone out of the asylum.
Indeed,
I am extremely desirous
of beholding the
blossoming woods
!'
Hearing these words Dyumatsena said,
'Since Savitri
hath been bestowed by her father as my
daughter-in-law,
I do not remem-
ber
that she
hath ever
spoken any
words
couching
a request.
Let my
daughter-in-law, therefore, have her will in this matter.
Do thou, however,
O daughter,
act in such a way that Satyavan's work may not be neglected
!'
"Markandeya continued, 'Having received
the permission of both,
the
illustrious Savitri, departed with
her lord,
in seeming smiles
although her
heart was racked with grief.
And that lady of large
eyes went on,
behold-
ing
picturesque and
delightful woods
inhabited
by swarms
of
peacocks.
And
Satyavan
sweetly said
unto Savitri,
'Behold
these
rivers of
sacred
currents and
these excellent trees decked with
flowers
!'
But the faultless
Savitri
continued to
watch her
lord in all
his moods, and recollecting the
words of
the celestial
sage,
she considered
her husband
as already
dead.
And
with heart
cleft in
twain,
that
damsel, replying
to her
lord,
softly
followed him expecting that hour.' "
SECTION CCLXLV
(Pativrata-mahatmya Parva continued)
Markandeya
said,
The
powerful
Satyavan
then, accompanied by
his wife, plucked fruits and filled his wallet with them.
And he then began
to fell branches of trees.
And as he was hewing them, he began to perspire.
And in consequence of
that exercise his head began to ache.
And afflicted
with
toil, he approached
his beloved
wife, and
addressed her,
saying,
'O
Savitri,
owing to this hard exercise my head acheth, and all my limbs and
my heart
also are
afflicted sorely
!
O thou of
restrained
speech,
I think

=== PAGE 373 ===

VANA PABVA
631
myself unwell,
I feel as
if my head
is being pierced
with numerous
darts.
Therefore,
auspicious lady,
I wish to sleep,
for I have not
the power
to
stand.'
Hearing these
words,
Savitri
quickly
advancing, approached her
husband, and sat down upon the ground, placing his head upon her lap. And
that
helpless
lady,
thinking
of
Narada's words, began
to
calculate
the
(appointed)
division
of
the day,
the
hour, and
the
moment.
The
next
moment she
saw a person
clad in
red attire
with his head
decked with a
diadem. And his body was of large proportions and effulgent as the sun. And
he was of a darkish hue, had red eyes, carried a noose in his hand, and was
dreadful to behold.
And he was standing
beside Satyavan and was stead-
fastly gazing at him.
And seeing him,
Savitri gently
placed her husband's
head
on the ground, and
rising
suddenly,
with a trembling
heart, spake
these words
in distressful
accents,
'Seeing
this thy superhuman
form, I
take thee
to be
a deity.
If thou will,
tell
me,
chief
of the
gods, who
thou art
and what also thou
intendst to do
!'
Thereat, Yama replied,
'0
Savitri, thou art
ever devoted to
thy husband, and thou
art also
endued
with
ascetic merit.
It is
for this
reason that I hold converse with
thee.
Do thou,
auspicious one, know me
for Yama.
This thy
lord Satyavan,
the son of a king, hath his days run out.
I shall,
therefore,
take him away
binding him
in this noose.
Know this to be my errand
f
At these words
Savitri said,
'I had
heard that thy emissaries come to take away mortals,
worshipful one
!
Why then,
lord,
hast thou come in person
?'
"Markandeya continued,
'Thus addressed by her, the illustrious
lord
of Pitris, with a view
to oblige her, began to unfold
to her truly
all about
his intentions.
And Yama
said,
'This prince
is endued
with virtues
and
beauty
of person, and is a sea
of accomplishments.
He deserveth
not to
be
borne
away
by my
emissaries.
Therefore
is
it
that
I
have
come
personally.'
Saying
this, Yama
by main
force pulled out
of the
body of
Satyavan,
a person of
the measure
of
the
thumb, bound
in
noose
and
completely under subjection. And when Satyavan's life had thus been taken
out, the body, deprived of
breath, and shorn
of
lustre, and
destitute
of
motion, became unsightly to behold.
And binding Satyavan's vital essence,
Yama
proceeded in
a southerly
direction.
Thereupon, with heart
over-
whelmed in grief,
the exalted Savitri,
ever devoted to her lord and crowned
with success
in respect of
her vows, began to
follow Yama.
And at this,
Yama said,
'Desist,
Savitri
! Go back, and perform the funeral obsequies
of thy lord
!
Thou art
freed from
all thy
obligations to
thy
lord.
Thou
hast come
as far as
it is possible
to come.'
Savitri replied, 'Whither my
husband
is being
carried,
or whither
he goeth
of his
own
accord,
I will
follow him thither.
This is the eternal custom, By virtue of my asceticism,
of my regard
for my
superiors,
of my affection for my lord,
of my
obser-
vance of vows,
as well as of
thy favour, my course is unimpeded.
It hath
been
declared by
wise men endued
with
true
knowledge that
by walking

=== PAGE 374 ===

632
MAHABHAEATA
only
seven paces
with
another, one
contracteth a
friendship
with
one's
companion.
Keeping that
friendship (which I have
contracted with thee)
in view,
I shall speak to theo something.
Do thou listen to it.
They that
have
not their souls
under control,
acquire not merit
by leading
the four
successive modes of life,
viz.,
celebacy with study,
domesticity, retirement
into
the
woods, and
renunciation
of
the
world.
That which
is
called
religious
merit is
said to
consist of
true knowledge.
The wise,
therefore,
have declared
religious merit
to be the foremost
of all things, and not the
passage
through the
four successive
modes.
By
practising
the duties
of
even
one of these
four modes
agreeable to
the directions
of the wise, we
have attained to true merit,
and,
therefore, we do not
desire the second or
the
third mode,
viz., celebacy with
study or
renunciation.
It
is for
this
again that
the wise have
declared religious
merit to be the foremost of all
things
!'
Hearing
these words
of
hers, Yam a said,
'Do
thou
desist
!
I
have
been pleased with
these words of thine couched in proper letters and
accents, and based on reason.
Do thou ask for a boon
!
Except the life of
thy husband,
thou
of faultless features,
I will bestow on thee any
boon
that thou
mayst solicit
!'
Hearing these words,
Savitri said,
'Deprived of
his kingdom
and bereft
also of
sight, my father-in-law
leadeth
a life
of
retirement in our sylvan asylum.
Let that king
through thy favour attain
his eye-sight,
and become
strong like
either fire or the Sun
!'
Yama said,
4
thou
of faultless
features,
I grant
thee this boon
!
It will even be
as
thou
hast said
!
It seems
that thou
art fatigued
with thy journey.
Do
thou
desist,
therefore, and
return
!
Suffer
not thyself
to be
weary any
longer
!'
Savitri
said, 'What weariness
can I feel
in the
presence of my
husband ?
The lot that is my husband's is
certainly mine also.
Whither
thou carriest my husband,
thither will I also repair
!
O chief
of the celes-
tials, do
thou
again
listen
to me
!
Even
a single
interview
with
the
pious
is
highly
desirable
;
friendship
with
them
is
still
more
so.
And
intercourse with the virtuous
can never be fruitless.
Therefore, one should
live in the company of the righteous
!'
Yama said,
'These words that thou
hast
spoken, so
fraught
with
useful
instruction,
delight
the
heart
and
enhance the wisdom of even the learned.
Therefore,
lady,
solicit thou a
second boon,
except the life of Satyavan
!'
Savitri said, 'Sometime before,
my wise
and intelligent father-in-law
was deprived of
his kingdom.
May
that
monarch regain
bis kingdom.
And may that
superior of
mine never
renounce
his duties
!
Even this
is the second boon that I solicit
!'
Then
Yama
said,
'The king shall
soon regain
his kingdom.
Nor shall he
ever
fall
off from
his duties.
Thus,
daughter
of a king
have I fulfilled
thy
desire.
Do thou
now desist
!
Bet-urn
!
Do not take any future
trouble
!'
Savitri said,
'Thou
hast restrained
all creatures by
thy decrees, and it
is
by
thy decrees
that thou
takest them
away, not
according
to thy
will.
Therefore it is,
god, O divine one, that people call thee Yama
I
Do thou

=== PAGE 375 ===

VANA PABVA
633
listen to the
words
that I say
!
The
eternal duty of the good towards all
creatures
is never
to injure them in thought, word, and deed, but to bear
them love and give them their due.
As regards this world, everything here
is like this (husband of mine).
Men are destitute of both devotion and
skill.
The
good, however, show
mercy
to even
their foes when these seek their
protection.
Yama
said,
'As
water to the thirsty soul,
so are these words
uttered by thee to me
!
Therefore, do thou, O fair lady,
if thou will,
once
again
ask
for
any boon except
Satyavana's life
!'
At these words Savitri
replied,
'That
lord
of
earth, my
father,
is
without sons.
That he may
have a hundred
sons
begotten
of his loins,
so that his line may
be perpe-
tuated,
is the
third boon
I would ask
of thee
!'
Yama said,
'Thy
sire,
auspicious
lady,
shall
obtain
a hundred illustrious sons,
who will
perpe-
tuate and increase
their
father's race
!
Now, O daughter of a king,
thou
hast
obtained
thy
wish.
Do
thou
desist
!
Thou
hast come far enough.'
Savitri
said,
'Staying
by the
side of my husband,
I am not
conscious of
the length of
the way I have walked.
Indeed, my mind rusheth to yet a
longer way of.
Do thou again,
as thou goest on,
listen to the
words
that
I will presently
utter
!
Thou
art the
powerful son of Vivaswat.
It is for
this that thou art called Vaivasivata by the wise.
And, O lord,
since thou
dealest out equal law unto all created things, thou hast been designated the
lord of justice
\
One
reposeth not, even
in
one's own self, the confidence
that one doth in the righteous.
Therefore,
every one wisheth
particularly
for intimacy with the righteous.
It is goodness of heart alone that inspireth
the
confidence
of
all
creatures.
And
it
is for this that people rely parti-
cularly on the righteous.'
And hearing these words, Yama said, 'The words
that thou utterest,
fair lady,
I have not heard
from any one save thee
;
I am highly pleased with this speech of thine.
Except the
life of Satyavan,
solicit thou,
therefore,
a fourbh boon, and then go thy way
!'
Savitri then
said,
'Both of me and Satyavan's loins, begotten by both of us,
let there be
a century of sons
possessed
of strength and prowess
and capable of perpe-
tuating our race
!
Even
this is the fourth boon that
I would beg of thee
I'
Hearing
these
words of hers, Yama
replied,
'Thou shalt, O lady,
obtain
a century of sons, possessed of strength and prowess, and causing thee great
delight, O daughter
of a king,
let no more
weariness be thine
\
Do
thou
desist
!
Thou
hast
already
come too far
!'
Thus addressed,
Savitri said,
'They
that
are
righteous
always
practise
eternal
morality
!
And
the
communion
of
the
pious
with
the pious is never fruitless
!
Nor is there
any
danger
to
the
pious
from those that are pious.
And verily it is the
righteous who by their truth make the sun move in
the
heaven.
And
it is
the righteous that
support the earth by their austerities
!
And, O king, it
is the righteous upon whom both the past and the
future
depend
!
There-
fore, they
that
are
righteous,
are
never
cheerless in the company of the
righteous.
Knowing this to be the eternal practice of the good
and
right-
eous, they
that
are
righteous
continue
to
do
good
to
others
without
81

=== PAGE 376 ===

634
MAHABHAKATA
expecting any benefit in return.
A good office is never thrown away on the
good
and
virtuous.
Neither
interest
nor dignity suffereth any injury by
such
an
act.
And
since
such conduct ever adheres to the righteous,
the
righteous often become the protectors
of all.'
Hearing these words of hers,
Yama
replied,
'The more
thou
utterest
such speeches that
are pregnant
with
great
import,
full
of
honied
phrases,
instinct
with morality,
and
agreeable
to
mind,
the
more
is
the respect that
I feel for thee
!
O thou
that
art so
devoted to thy lord,
ask for some incomparable boon
!'
Thus
addressed, Savitri said,
'O bostower of honours, the boon thou hast already
given me is incapable of accomplishment without union with my
husband.
Therefore, among other boons, I ask for this, may this Satyavan be restored
to life
! Deprived of my husband, I am as one dead
!
Without my husband,
I
do
not
wish
for
happiness.
Without my husband, I do not
wish
for
heaven itself.
Without my husband, I do not wish for
prosperity.
With-
out my
husband,
I cannot
make up my mind to live
!
Thou thyself
hast
bestowed
on me
the
boon, namely, of a century of sons
; yet thou
takest
away my
husband
!
I ask for
this boon,
'May
Satyavan be
restored to
life,
for by that thy words will be made true.' "
"Markandeya
continued,
'Thereupon saying,
So
be
it,
Vivaswat's
son,
Yama,
the
dispenser
of
justice,
untied his noose, and with cheerful
heart
said
these
words to Savitri,
'Thus, O auspicious and chaste lady,
is
thy husband
freed by me
!
Thou wilt be able to take him back
free
from
disease.
And
he
will
attain
to
success
!
And along with thee, he
will
attain
a
life
of
four hundred years.
And celebrating sacrifices
with
due
rites,
he
will achieve great fame in this world.
And upon thee
Satyavan
will also beget a century of sons. And these Kshatriyas with their sons and
grandsons
will
all be kings, and will always be famous in connection with
thy name.
And thy
father also will
beget a hundred sons on thy mother
Malavi.
And
under
the
name
of
the
Malavas, thy Kshatriya
brothers,
resembling the celestials,
will
be
widely known along with their sons and
daughters
!'
And having bestowed these boons on Savitri and
having
thus
made
her
desist, Yama
departed
for his abode.
Savitri, after Yama had
gone away,
went back to the spot where her husband's ash-coloured corpse
lay, and seeing her lord on the ground, she approached him, and taking hold
of him,
she placed his head on her lap and herself sat down on the ground.
Then Satyavan regained his consciousness, and affectionately eyeing Savitri
again
and
again, like one come home after a sojourn in a strange land,
he
addressed
her
thus,
'Alas,
I have slept long
!
Wherefore
didst thou not
awake me ?
And
where
is
that
same sable person that was dragging me
away ?'
At these words of his, Savitri said, 'Thou hast,
bull among men,
slept
long on my lap
!
That restrainer
of creatures, the worshipful Yama,
had
gone
away.
Thou
art refreshed, O blessed one,
and sleep
hath for-
saken thee,
son of a king
!
If thou art able,
rise thou up
I
Behold,
the
night fs deep
!' "

=== PAGE 377 ===

VANA PARVA
635
"Markandeya
continued,
'Having regained consciousness,
Satyavan
rose up like one who
had enjoyed
a
sweet
sleep, and
seeing
every
side
covered
with
woods,
said,
'O
girl
of
slender
waist,
I
came with
thee
for procuring
fruits.
Then while I was cutting wood I felt
a
pain
in my
head.
And on account of that intense pain about my head
I
was
unable
to stand for any length of time,
and,
therefore,
I lay on thy lap
and
slept.
All this, O auspicious lady,
I remember.
Then, as thou didst embrace me,
sleep
stole away my senses.
I then saw that
it was dark
all around.
In
the midst of it I saw
a
person
of
exceeding
effulgence.
If
thou knowest
everything,
do thou then, O girl of slender waist,
tell me
whether what I
saw was only a dream or
a
reality
!'
Thereupon,
Savitri addressed
him,
saying, 'The night deepens.
I shall,
prince,
relate everything unto thee
on the morrow.
Arise,
arise, may
good
betide
thee
!
And, O
thou
of
excellent
vowS, come
and behold thy parents
!
The sun hath set
a
long
while ago and
the
night
deepens.
Those
rangers
of
the
night,
having
frightful voices,
are walking about in glee.
And sounds are heard, proceed-
ing from the denizens
of
the
forest
treading
through
the woods.
These
terrible shrieks of jackals
that
are issuing
from
the south and
the
east
make my
heart
tremble
( in fear
)
!'
Satyavan then said,
'Covered with
deep
darkness,
the
wilderness hath worn a dreadful
aspect.
Thou
wilt,
therefore, not be able to discern the tract, and
consequently
wilt
not
be
able
to
go
!'
Then
Savitri
replied,
'In
consequence
of
a
conflagration
having taken place in the forest today a withered tree standeth aflame, and
the flames being
stirred
by
the
wind
are
discerned now
and
then.
I
shall
fetch
some
fire
and
light these faggots around.
Do thou dispel
all
anxiety.
I will do all
( this
)
if thou darest not go,
for
I find thee unwell.
Nor
wilt
thou be
able
to
discover the way through this forest enveloped
in
darkness.
Tomorrow when
the
woods become
visible,
we
will
go
hence,
if thou please
!
If, O sinless
one,
it
is
thy
wish,
we
shall
pass
this
night
even
here
!'
At these
words
of hers, Satyavan
replied,
'The
pain
in my head
is off
; and I feel well in my limbs.
With thy
favour I
wish to behold my father and mother.
Never before did
I
return
to
the
hermitage after the proper time had passed away.
Even before
it
is
twi-
light my mother confineth me within the asylum.
Even when
I come out
during the day, my parents become anxious on my account, and my father
searcheth for me, together with all the inhabitants of the
sylvan
asylums.
Before this, moved by deep grief, my father and
mother
had
rebuked me
many
times and often,
saying,
Thou
earnest having
tarried long
!
I am
thinking
of
the
pass
they have today come to on my account, for, surely,
great grief will be theirs when they rniss me.
One night before this, the old
couple, who
love me
dearly,
wept from deep
sorrow and
said unto me,
'Deprived of thee, O son,
we cannot
live for even a moment.
As long
as
thou livest,
so long,
surely, we also will live.
Thou art the crutch of these
blind ones
; on thee doth perpetuity of our race depend. On thee also depend

=== PAGE 378 ===

636
MAEABHARAtfA
our
funeral
cake, our fame and our descendants
!
My mother
is old,
and
my father also is so.
I am surely their crutch.
If they see me not in
the
night,
what,
oh,
will
be
their
plight
I
I
hate that slumber of mine
f<
the
sake
of
which my unoffending mother and my father have both been
in
trouble,
and
I
myself
also, am
placed
in
such
rending
distress
!
Without my
father
and mother,
I cannot bear to live.
It is certain that
by
this
time my
blind father,
his mind disconsolate with grief, is
asking
every
one of the inhabitants of the hermitage about me
!
I do not, O
fail-
girl, grieve so much for myself as I do for my sire, and for my weak mother
ever
obedient
to
her
lord
!
Surely,
they
will
be afflicted
with extreme
anguish on
account
of me.
I
hold my
life
so long as they live.
And
I
know
that
they
should
be
maintained
by me and that I should do only
what is agreeable to them P
"Markandeya continued,
'Having said this, that
virtuous youth who
loved
and
revered
his
parents,
afflicted
with
grief held up his arms and
began to lament in accents of woe.
And seeing her lord overwhelmed
with
sorrow
the virtuous
Savitri wiped
away the tears from his
eyes and
said,
'If I
have
observed
austerities, and have given away in charity, and have
performed
sacrifice, may
this
night
be for
the good
of my
father-in-law,
mother-in-law
and
husband
!
I
do
not
remember
having
told
a single
falsehood,
even
in
jest.
Let my
father-in-law
and
mother-in-law hold
their lives Jay virtue of the truth
!'
Satyavan said,
'I long for the
sight
of
my
father and
mother
!
Therefore, O Savitri, proceed without delay.
beautiful damsel,
I swear by my own self that
if I
find
any
evil
to
have
befallen my
father
and
mother,
I will not live.
If thou hast any regard
for
virtue,
if thou wishest me to live, if it is thy duty to do what
is
agree-
able
to
me,
proceed thou
to the hermitage P
The beautiful
Savitri then
rose
and tying up her hair, raised her husband in her arms.
And
Satya-
van having
risen,
rubbed his limbs with his hands.
And
as
he surveyed
all
around,
his eyes
fell
upon
his
wallet.
Then Savitri
said unto
him,
'Tomorrow
thou
mayst gather fruits.
And
I shall carry
thy axe
for thy
ease.'
Then
hanging up
the wallet upon the bough of a
tree,
and taking
up
the
axe,
she
re-approached her husband.
And that lady
of
beautiful
thighs,
placing her
husband's left arm upon her left shoulder, and embrac-
ing him with her right arms, proceeded with elephantic gait.
Then Satya-
van
said,
*0 timid one, by virtue of habit,
the
( forest
) paths are known
to me.
And
further,
by
the
light
of the moon between the trees, I can
see them. We have now reached the same
path that we took in the morn-
ing for
gathering
fruits.
Do thou,
auspicious one,
proceed by the way
that we
had come
: thou
needst
not
any
longer
feel dubious about
our
path.
Near
that tract overgrown with Palasa tree,
the way diverges into
two.
Do
thou
proceed
along the path that lies to the north of it.
I am
now
well
and
have
got back my
strength.
I long to see my father and
mother
!'
Saying this Satyavan hastily proceeded towards the hermitage.
1
''

=== PAGE 379 ===

SECTION CCLXLVI
(Pativrata-mahatmya Parva continued)
"Markandeya
said,
'Meanwhile
the
mighty
Dyumateena,
having
regained
his
sight, could
see everything.
And when his vision grew clear
he saw everything around him.
And,
bull of the Bharata race,
proceed-
ing with his wife
Saivya
to all the (neighbouring) asylums in search of his
son, he became extremely distressed on his account. And that night the old
couple went about searching in asylums, and rivers, and woods, and floods.
And whenever they heard any sound, they stood rising their heads, anxiously
thinking that their son was coming, and said,
*O yonder cometh
Satyavan
with Savitri
!'
And they rushed hithor and thither like maniacs,
their feet
torn, cracked, wounded, and bleeding, pierced with thorns and Kusa
blades.
Then
all
the Brahmanas dwelling in that hermitage came unto them, and
surrounding them on all sides, comforted them, and brought them
back to
their own
asylum.
And
there Dyumatsena with his wife
surrounded by
aged
ascetics, was
entertained
with
stories
of monarchs of former times.
And
although
that
old couple desirous of seeing their son, was comforted,
yet
recollecting
the
youthful
days
of their son, they became exceedingly
sorry. And afflicted with grief, they began to lament in piteous accents, say-
ing,
'Alas,
son,
alas,
chaste daughter-in-law, where are
you
?'
Then
a truthful Brahmana of
the name of Suvarchas
spake unto them,
saying,
'Considering the austerities,
self-restraint, and behaviour of his wife Savitri,
there can be no doubt that Satyavan
liveth
!'
And Gautama
said,
*I have
studied all the Vedas with their branches, and I have acquired great ascetic
merit.
And I have
led
a
celebate
existence,
practising also the Brahma-
charya mode
of life.
I have
gratified Agni and my superiors.
With rapt
soul I have
also
observed
all the vows
: and I have according to the ordi-
nance, frequently lived upon air alone. By virtue of this ascetic merit, I am
cognisant of all the doings of others.
Therefore, do thou take
it for certain
that Satyavan liveth.'
Thereupon his disciple said,
'The words
that
have
fallen from the lips of my preceptor can never be false. Therefore, Satyavan
surely liveth.'
And the Bishi said,
'Considering the auspicious marks that
his wife
Savitri
beareth and
all
of which indicate immunity from widow-
hood,
there can be no doubt that
Satyavan liveth
!'
And Varadwaja said,
'Having regard to the ascetic merit,
self-restraint,
and conduct of his
wife
Savitri, there can
be no doubt that
Satyavan
liveth.'
And Dalbhya said,
'Since thou hast regained thy sight, and since Savitri hath gone away after
completion
of
the
vow, without
taking
any food,
there can be no doubt
that Satyavan
liveth.'
And Apastamba said, 'From
the manner in which
the voices of birds and wild animals are being heard through the stillness of
the atmosphere
on
all sides, and from the fact also of thy having regained
the
use
of
thy
eyes, indicating thy
usefulness
for earthly purposes once

=== PAGE 380 ===

638
MAHABHABATA
more, there can be no doubfc that Satyavan liveth.'
And Dhauma said, 'As
thy son is graced with every virtue, and as he is the beloved
of
all, and as
he is
possessed
of
marks
betokening
a
long
life,
there
can be no doubt
that Satyavan liveth.
1
"Markandeya
continued,
'Thus cheered by those ascetics of
truthful
speech, Dyumatsena pondering over those points,
attained a little ease.
A
little while after, Savitri with her husband Satyavan reached the hermitage
during
the
night
and entered
it with a glad heart.
The Brahmanas then
said,
'Beholding
this
meeting
with
thy
son, and thy restoration to eye-
sight, we all
wish
thee
well, O lord of earth.
Thy meeting with thy son,
thy sight of
thy
daughter-in-law,
and thy restoration to
sight
consitute
a threefold prosperity which thou hast gained. What we all have said must
come to pass
: there can be no doubt of this. Henceforth thou shalt rapidly
grow
in
prosperity.'
Then, O Pritha's
son,
the twice-born ones lighted a
fire and
sat
themselves down before king Dyumatsena.
And Saivya, and
Satyavan, and Savitri who stood apart, their hearts free from grief, sat down
with the permission of them
all. Then,
Partha, seated with the monarch
those
dwellers
of
the woods,
actuated by curiosity, asked the king's son,
saying,
'Why didst thou not, O illustrious one, come back earlier with thy
wife ?
Why hast thou come so late in the night ?
What obstacle preven-
ted thee
!
We do
not know,
son of a king, why thou hast caused such
alarm to us,
and to thy father and mother.
It behoveth thee to
tell us all
about this.'
Thereupon, Satyavan said, 'With the permission of my father, I
went to the woods with Savitri
There, as I was hewing wood in the forest,
I felt a pain in my head.
And in consequence of the pain, I fell into a deep
sleep.
This is all that I remember. I had never slept so long before. I have
come so
late
at
night,
in order that ye might not grieve (on my account).
There
is
no
other
reason for
this.'
Gautama then said,
'Thou knowest
not
then
the cause of thy father's sudden restoration to sight.
It,
there-
fore, behoveth Savitri to relate it.
I wish to hear it (from thee),
for surely
thou art conversant with
the
mysteries of good and evil.
And,
Savitri,
I know thee to be like the goddess Savitri herself in splendour.
Thou must
know the cause of this.
Therefore, do thou relate it
truly
!
If
it
should
not be kept a secret, do thou unfold it unto us
!' At these words of Gautama
Savitri said,
'it is as ye surmise. Your desire shall surely not be unfulfilled.
I have
no
secret
to
keep.
Listen
to
the
truth then
!
The high-souled
Narada had predicted the death of my husband.
To-day was the appointed
time.
I could
not,
therefore,
bear
to
be
separated
from my husband's
company.
And
after
he
had
fallen
asleep, Yam a,
accompanied by his
messengers, presented
himself
before
him,
and
tying him, began to take
him away towards
the region inhabited by the Pitris.
Thereupon
I begai
to praise
that
august
god, with
truthful words.
And he granted me five
boons,
of which do ye hear from me
! For my father-in-law I have obtained
these two
boons,
viz.,
his
restoration
to
sight
as also
to his
kingdom.

=== PAGE 381 ===

VANA PARVA
639
My father also hath obtained a hundred sons.
And I myself have obtained
a
hundred
sons.
And my
husband
Satyavan
hath
obtained
a
life
of
four
hundred
years.
It
was
for the sake of my husband's life that I had
observed that vow.
Thus have I narrated
unto you in detail the cause by
which this mighty misfortune of mine was afterwards turned into happiness.
The Rishis said,
*O chaste lady of excellent
disposition,
observant of vows
and endued
with
virtue, and sprung from an illustrious line, by thee hath
the race of this foremost of kings, which was overwhelmed with calamities,
and was sinking in an ocean of darkness,
been rescued.'
"Markandeya continued,
'Then having applauded and reverenced that
best of women, those Eishis there assembled bade farewell to that foremost
of kings as well as to his son. And having saluted them thus, they speedily
went,
in peaca with cheerful hearts,
to their respective abodes.'
"
SECTION CCLXLVII
(Pativrata-mahatmya Parva continued)
"Markandeya
continued,
'When the night had passed away, and the
solar orb had
risen, those
ascetics, having
performed their morning
rites,
assembled
together.
And
although
those
mighty
sages again and again
spake unto Dyumatsena of the high fortune of Savitri,
yet they were never
satisfied.
And it so happened,
king, that there came to that hermitage a
large body of people from Salwa.
And they brought tidings of the enemy of
Dyumatsena having been slain by his own minister.
And they related unto
him
all
that
had
happened,
viz., bow having heard that the usurper had
been slain with all his friends and allies by his minister,
his troops
had all
fled, and how
all
the
subjects had become unanimous (on behalf of their
legitimate king),
saying,
'Whether possessed
of sight or not,
even he shall
be our
king
!'
And
they
said, 'We have been sent to thee inconsequence
of that
resolve.
This
cars
of thine, and this army also consisting of four
kinds of forces, have arrived for thee
!
Good betide thee, O king
! Do thou
come
!
Thou
hast
been
proclaimed in the city.
Do thou for ever occupy
the station
belonging to thy father and grand-father
!'
And beholding the
king possessed
of
sight
and
able-bodied,
they
bowed
down their heads,
their eyes
expanded
with wonder.
Then having worshipped those old and
Brahmanas dwelling in the hermitage and honoured by them in return, the
king
set
out
for
his
city.
And
surrounded by
the soldiers, Saivya also
accompanied by Savitri, went in a vehicle furnished with shining sheets and
borne on the shoulders of men. Then the priests with joyful hearts installed
Dyumatsena on the throne with his high-souled son as
prince-regent.
And
after the
lapse
of a long
time,
Savitri gave birth to a century of sons,
all
warlike
and unretreating
from battle, and enhancing the fame of
Salwa's
race.
And
she
also
had
a
century
of
highly
powerful uterine brothers
born
unto
Aswapati, the lord of the
Madras, by Malavi.
Thus,
son of

=== PAGE 382 ===

640
MAHABHAEATA
Pritha,
did
Savitri
raise
from pitiable plight to high fortune,
herself, and
her father
and
mother, her
father-in-law
and mother-in-law,
as also the
race
of
her
husband.
And
like
that
gentle lady Savitri, the auspicious
daughter of Drupada, endued with excellent character,
will rescue you all."
Vaisampayana said,
"Thus exhorted by that high-souled sage, the son
of Pandu,
king, with his mind free from anxiety, continued to live in the
forest of Kamyaka.
The man that listeneth with reverence to the excellent
story
of
Savitri, attaineth
to
happiness, and
success in everything,
and
never meeteth with misery 1"
SECTION CCLXLVIII
(Kundala-harana Parva)
Janamejaya said,
"What, O Brahmana, was that great
fear
enter-
tained by Yudhishthira in respect of Kama, for which Lomasa had conveyed
to the
son
of
Pandu a message of deep import from Indra in these words,
That
intense fear
of
thine
which thou dost never express to any one, I will
remove after Dhananjaya goethfrom hence ?
And,
best of
ascetics, why
was it that the virtuous Yudhishthira never expressed
it to any one ?"
Vaisampayana said,
"As thou askest me,
tiger among kings, I will
relate that history unto thee
!
Do thou listen to my words,
best of
the
Bharatas
!
After
twelve
years
(of
their
exile) had passed away and the
thirteenth
years had set in, Sakra,
ever friendly to the sons of
Pandu, re-
solved to beg of Kama (his ear-rings). And, O mighty monarch, ascertaining
this intention
of
the great
chief of the celestials about (Kama's) ear-rings,
Surya, having
effulgence
for
his wealth, went unto Kama.
And,
fore-
most
of
kings,
while
that hero devoted to the Brahmanas and truthful in
speech was
lying down
at
night at his ease on a rich bed overlaid with a
costly sheet, the effulgent deity,
filled with kindness and
affection
for
his
son, showed himself, O Bharata, unto him in his dreams.
And
assuming
from ascetic power the form of a handsome Brahmana
versed in the Vedas,
Surya sweetly said unto Kama these words for his benefit,
'O son, do thou
O Kama,
listen
to
these
words
of
mine, O
thou
foremost
of truthful
persons
!
O
mighty-armed
one,
I tell thee to-day from affection,
what is
for thy great good
!
With the object,
Kama,
of obtaining thy ear-rings,
Sakra, moved by the desire of benefiting the sons of Pandu,
will come unto
thee, disguised
as
a Brahmana
!
He,
as
well as all the world, knoweth
thy character,
viz.,
that
when solicited
by pious people, thou givest away
but never takest in gift
!
Thou,
son,
givest unto Brahmanas
wealth or
any other
thing
that
is asked of thee and never refusest anything to any-
body.
Knowing thee to be such,
the subduer himself of Paka will come to
beg of thee thy ear-rings and coat of mail.
When he beggeth the
ear-rings
of thee,
it behoveth
thee
not
to give them away, but to gratify him with
sweet
speeches
to
the
best
of
thy power.
Even this is for thy supreme

=== PAGE 383 ===

VAN A PABVA
641
good
!
While
asking
thee
for the ear-rings, thou shalt, with various rea-
Bons,
repeatedly
refuse
Purandara who
is
desirous
of
obtaining
them,
offering
him,
instead,
various
other
kinds
of wealth,
such as gems and
women and kine,
and citing various precedents.
If thou, O Kama,
givest
away thy
beautiful ear-rings born with thee, thy life being shortened, thou
wilt
meet
with
death
!
Arrayed
in thy mail and ear-rings,
thou wilt, O
bestower
of
honours,
be
incapable
of being slain by foes in
battle
!
Do
thou lay to
heart these
words of mine
1
Both
these
jewelled ornaments
have sprung from Amrita.
Therefore, they should
be preserved by thee,
if
thy life is at
all dear to
thee."
"Hearing
these
words, Kama said, 'Who art thou that
tellest me
so, showing me such kindness
?
If it pleaseth thee,
tell me,
illustrious
one, who thou art in the guise of a Brahmana
!'
The Brahmana thereupon
said,
'0 son, I am he of a thousand rays
!
Out of affection, I point out
to
thee the path
!
Act thou according to my words, as it is for thy great
good
to do so V
Kama
replied,
'Surely,
this
itself
is
highly fortunate for me
that the god
himself of splendour addresses me today,
seeking my welfare.
Listen, however, to these words of mine
! May it please thee,
bostower of
boons, it is only from affection that I tell thee this
!
If I am dear
to
thee,
I should
not
be dissuaded from the observance of my vow
!
thou
that
are
possessed
of
the wealth of effulgence,
the whole world knoweth
this
to be my vow that, of a verity, I am prepared to give away life
itself
unto
superior Brahmanas
!
If,
best of all rangers of the sky, Sakra
cometh
to
me,
disguised as a Brahmaua,
to beg for the benefit of the sons
of Pandu,
I
will, O
chief
of
the celestials, give him the ear-rings and the
excellent
mail,
so that my fame which hath spread over the three worlds may
not
suffer
any
diminution
!
For
persons
like us,
it is not
fib to save life by a
blame-worthy act.
On the contrary,
it is even proper for us to meet death
with
the approbation of the world and under circumstances
bringing fame.
Therefore, will I bestow upon Indra the ear-rings with my coat of mail
!
If
the slayer himself of Vala and Yritra cometh to ask for the ear-rings for the
benefit of
the
sons of Pandu, that will conduce to my fame, leading at the
same time to his infamy
!
thou possessed of splendour,
I wish for fame
in
this
world,
even if it is to be purchased with life itself
;
for they that
have fame enjoy the celestial regions, while they that are destitute of it are
lost.
Fame
keepeth
people
alive in this world
even like a mother, while
infamy killeth men even though they may move about with bodies undes-
troyed.
lord of the worlds, O thou possessed of the wealth of effulgence,
that
fame
is the life of men is
evidenced by an ancient sloka sung by the
Creator
himself,
In
the next world it is fame that is the chief support
of a
person,
while in this world pure fame lengthens
life.
Therefore, by
giving
away my ear-rings and mail with both of which I was born I will win eter-
nal fame
! And by duly giving away the same to Brahmanas according to the
82

=== PAGE 384 ===

642
MAHABHAEATA
ordinance, by offering up my body (as
a gift to the gods) in
the
sacrifice
of
war, by achieving feats difficult of performance, and by conquering my
foes
in fight, I will acquire nothing but renown.
And by dispelling on the
field
of battle the fears of the affrighted that may beg for their lives, and
reliev-
ing
old men and boys and Brahmanas from terror and anxiety, I
will
win
excellent fame and the highest heaven.
My fame is
to
be
protected
with
the sacrifice of even my life.
Even this, know thou, is my vow
!
By giving
away such a valuable gift to Maghavan disguised as a Brahmana,
I
will,
god, acquire in this world the most exalted
state.'
"
SECTION CCLXLIX
(Kundala-harana Parva continued)
"Surya said, 'Never do, O Kama, anything that is harmful to thy self
and thy friends, thy sons, thy wives, thy father, and thy mother
;
thou
best of those that bear life, people desire renown (in this world) and lasting
fame
in
heaven,
without
wishing
to
sacrifice
their bodies.
But as thou
desirest
undying
fame
at the expense of thy life, she will, without doubt,
snatch away thy life
!
O bull
among
men,
in this world, the father, the
mother, the son, and other relatives are of use only to him that is alive.
tiger among men,
as regard kings,
it is only when they are alive that
pro-
wess
can
be
of any use to them.
Do bhou
understand this ?
thou of
exceeding splendour, fame is for the good of these only that are
alive
!
Of
what
use
is fame to
the dead whose bodies have been reduced to ashes ?
One that is dead cannot enjoy renown.
It is only when one
is
alive
that
one can enjoy it.
The fame of one that is dead
is like a garland of flowers
around
the
neck of a corpse.
As thou reverest me, I tell thee this for thy
benefit, because thou art a worshipper of mine
!
They that worship me are
always protected by me.
That also
is another
reason
for my
addressing
thee thus
!
Thinking again,
mighty-armed
one,
that
this
one
revereth
me with great reverence,
I
have
been
inspired
with
love
for
thee
!
Do
thou,
therefore,
act
according to my words
!
There is, besides some pro-
found mystery in all this, ordained by fate.
It is for this, that I
tell
thee
so.
Do thou act without mistrust
of any kind
!
bull among
men,
it
is
not fit for
thee to know this which is a secret to the very gods.
Therefore,
1 do
not reveal that secret unto thee.
Thou wilt, however,
understand it
in time.
I repeat what I have already said.
Do thou, O Radha's
son, lay
my words
to
heart
!
When
the wielder of the thunder-bolt asketh thee
for them, do
thou
never
give
him
thy
ear-rings
!
thou of exceeding
splendour, with thy handsome ear-rings, thou lookest
beautiful,
even
like
the Moon himself in the clear firmament, between
the
Visakha
constella-
tion
!
Dost
thou know
that fame availeth only the person that is
living.
Therefore, when
the
lord
of
the
celestials
will ask
the
ear-rings,
thou
shouldst, O son, refuse him
1
Eepeating again
and again answers fraught
with various reaeons,thou wilt,
sinless one,
be able to remove the eager-

=== PAGE 385 ===

VANA PAEVA
643
ness of the lord of the celestial for the possession of the ear-rings.
Do thou,
Kama, after Purandara's purpose by urging answers
fraught with reason
and
grave
import
and
adorned
with sweetness and suavity.
Thou dost
always,
tiger among men,
challenge him that can draw the bow with his
left hand,
and
heroic Arjuna also will surely encounter thee in fight.
But
when
furnished
with
thy ear-rings, Arjuna will never be able to vanquish
thee
in
fight
even
if Indra
himself comes to his assistance.
Therefore, O
Kama,
if
thou
wishest to vanquish Arjuna in battle,
these handsome ear-
rings of thine should
never be
parted with to Sakra.'
"
SECTION COG
(Kundala-harana Parva continued)
"Kama
said, 'As
thou, O
lord
of
splendour, knowest me
for thy
worshipper,
so also thou knowest that there
is nothing which I cannot give
away
in
charity,
thou of fiery rays
1
Neither my wives, nor my sons,
nor my own self, nor my friends,
are so dear to me as thou, on account of
the
veneration
I
feel
for
thee,
lord
of splendour
!
Thou knowest, O
maker of light, that high-souled persons bear a loving regard
for their
dear
worshippers.
Kama
revereth me
and is dear to me.
He knoweth no other
deity in heaven,
thinking this thou hast,
lord,
said unto me what is for
my
benefit.
"Xet, O
thou
of
bright
rays,
again
do I
beseech thee with
bended
head,
again
do
I
place
myself
in
thy hands.
I will repeat the
answer I have already given.
It behoveth thee to forgive me
! Death itself
is not
fraught with such terrors for me as untruth
!
As regards especially
the Brahmanas, again,
I do not hesitate to yield up my life even for them
!
And, O divine one, respecting what thou hast said unto me of Phalguna, the
son of Pandu, let thy grief born of thy anxiety of heart, O lord of splendour,
be dispelled
touching
him
and
myself
;
for I shall surely conquer Arjuna
in battle
!
Thou knowest,
deity,
that
I have great strength of weapons
obtained from
Jamadagnya
and the high-souled Drona.
Permit me now,
foremost of celestials,
to observe my vow,
so that unto him of the
thun-
der-bolt coming to beg of me, I may give away even my life
!'
"Surya said,
'If,
son, thou givest away thy ear-rings to the wielder
of
the
thunder-bolt, O
thou
of mighty
strength,
thou
shouldst
also,
for the
purpose
of
securing victory,
speak unto him,
saying,
thou of a
hundred
sacrifices, I shall give thee ear-rings
under a condition.
Furnished
with the ear-rings, thou art certainly incapable of being slain by any being.
Therefore,
it is,
son,
that
desirous
of
beholding thee slain in battle by
Arjuna, the
destroyer
of
the Danavas desireth to deprive thee of thy ear-
rings.
Repeatedly
adoring
with
truthful words that lord of the celestials,
viz., Purandara armed with weapons incapable of being frustrated,
do thou
also beseech him,
saying,
'Give me an infallible dart capable
of slaying
all
foes, and I will, O thousand-eyed deity, give the ear-rings with the excellent

=== PAGE 386 ===

644
MAHABHAKATA
coat
of
mail
!'
On
this
condition
shouldst thou give the ear-rings unto
Sakra.
With
that
dart,
O
Kama,
thou
wilt
slay
foes
in battle
:
for,
O mighty-armed one, that dart of the chief of the celestials doth not return
to the
hand
that
hurleth
it, without slaying enemies by hundreds and by
thousands
!' "
Vaisampayana
continued,
"Having
said
this,
the
thousand-rayed
deity suddenly vanished away.
The next day, after having told his prayers,
Kama related
his
dream unto the Sun.
And Vrisha related unto him the
vision
he
had
seen, and all
that had
passed between them in the night.
Thereupon, having heard everything,
that enemy of Swarbhanu,
that lord,
the resplendent and
divine Surya,
said unto him with a smile,
'it
is even
so
!'
Then
Eadha's
son,
that
slayer
of hostile heroes, knowing
all about
the matter, and desirous
of obtaining
the dart, remained in expectation
of
Vasava."
SECTION
CCCI
(Kundala-harana Parva continued)
Janamejaya said, "What was that
secret which was not
revealed to
Kama by the deity of warm rays ?
Of what kind also were
those ear-rings
and of what sort was^ that coat of mail ?
Whence,
too, was that mail and
those ear-rings ?
All this,
best of men,
I wish to hear
!
thou possessed
of the wealth of asceticism, do tell me all this
!''
Vaisampayana said,
"I
will,
monarch,
tell thee
that secret which
was not revealed by the deity possessed of the wealth of effulgence.
I will
also describe unto thee those ear-rings and that coat
of
mail.
Once
on
a
time,
king, there appeared before Kuntibhoja a Brahmana of fierce energy
and tall stature, bearing a beard and matted locks, and
carrying a staff in
his
hand.
And
he
was
agreeable
to the eye, and of faultless limbs, and
seemed to blaze forth in splendour.
And he was possessed of a yellow-bine
complexion like that of honey.
And his speech was mellifluous, and he was
adorned with ascetic merit and a knowledge
of the Vedas.
And that person
of great ascetic merit,
addressing king Kuntibhoja,
said,
'0 thou
that
are
free from
pride,
I wish
to live as a guest in
thy house feeding on the food
obtained as alms from thee
!
Neither thy followers, nor thou thyself, shall
ever act in such a way as to produce my displeasure
!
If, O sinless one,
it
liketh thee,
I would then live in thy house thus
!
I shall leave
thy
abode
when
I wish, and come
back
when I please.
And,
king, no one
shall
offend me in respect of my food or bed.'
Then Kuntibhoja spake unto him
these
words cheerfully,
'Be it so, and more.'
And he again said unto him,
'0 thou of great wisdom,
I have an illustrious daughter named Pritha. And
she beareth an excellent character,
is observant of vow,
chaste, and of sub-
dued
senses.
And
she
shall
attend on thee and minister unto thee with
reverence.
And
thou
wilt
be pleased with her
disposition
!'
And having

=== PAGE 387 ===

VANA PAKVA
645
said this to that Brahmana and duly paid him homage, the king went to his
daughter
Prifcha
of
large
eyes, anl
spake
thus unto her,
'O
child,
this
eminently
pious Brahmana
is desirous of dwelling in my house
!
I have
accepted
his
proposal,
saying,
So be
it,
relying,
child, on thy aptitude
and skill in ministering unto Brahmanas.
It,
therefore, behoveth
thee to
act in such a manner that my words may not be untrue. Do thou give him
with alacrity
whatever
this reverend Brahmana possessed of ascetic merit
and engaged in the study of the Vedas, may want
Let everything that this
Brahmana
asketh
for
be
given
to
him
cheerfully.
A Brahmana is
the
embodiment
of
pre-eminent
energy
:
he
is
also
the
embodiment of the
highest
ascetic
merit.
It
is
in
consequence
of
the
virtuous
practices
of Brahmanas
that
the
sun
shineth
in
the
heavens.
It was
for their
disregard
of Brahmanas
that
were
deserving
of honour that the mighty
Asura
Vatapi,
as
also
Talajangha,
was
destroyed
by
the
curse
of the
Brahmanas.
For
the
present,
child,
it
is a highly virtuous one of that
order that is entrusted to thy keep.
Thou shouldst always tend this Brah-
mana with concentrated mind,
daughter,
I know that, from
childhood
upwards, thou hast ever been attentive to Brahmanas, and
superiors, and
relatives, and
servants, and
friends,
to thy mothers and myeelf.
I know
thou bearest thyself well,
bestowing proper regard upon everyone.
And,
thou
of faultless limbs,
in the city of the interior of my palace, on account
of thy gentle
behaviour,
there
is
not one, even among the servants,
that
is dissatisfied with thee.
I have,
therefore, thought
thee fit to wait
upon
all Brahmanas of wrathful temper. Thou art,
Pritha, a girl and has been
adopted as my daughter.
Thou art born in the race
of
the
Vrishnis,
and
art the favourite daughter of Sura.
Thou wert,
girl,
given to me
gladly
by thy father himself.
The sister of Yasudeva by birth, thou art (by adop-
tion) the foremost of my children.
Having
promised me
in these words,
I will
give my
first
born,
thy
father
gladly gave thee to me while thou
wert yet
in
thy infancy.
It
is for this reason that thou art my daughter.
Born
in
such
a
race
and reared in such a race, thou hast come from one
happy
state
to
another
like a lotus
transferred from one lake to another.
O auspicious
girl, women,
specially
they
that
are
of mean
extraction,
although they may with difficulty be kept under restraint, become in conse-
quence
of
their
unripe
age, generally
deformed
in character.
But thou,
Pritha,
art
born
in
a royal race, and thy beauty also is extraordinary.
And then, O girl, thou
art endued with every accomplishment.
Do thou,
therefore,
damsel,
renouncing pride and haughtiness and a sense of self-
importance, wait upon and worship the boon-giving Brahmana, and thereby
attain, O Pritha,
to an auspicious state
! By acting thus,
auspicious and
sinless girl, thou
wilt
surely attain to auspiciousness
!
But
if on the con-
trary, thou
stirest
up
the
anger
of
this best of the twice-born ones, my
entire race will be consumed by him
!'
"

=== PAGE 388 ===

SECTION CCCII
(Eundala-harana Parva continued)
"Kunti
said,
'According
to
thy promise,
I will,
king, with con-
centrated mind,
serve that
Brahmana.
O foremost
of kings,
I do not say
this falsely. It is my nature to worship Brahmanas. And,
as in the present
case, my
doing
so
would
be agreeable to thee, even this would be highly
conducive to my
welfare. Whether that worshipful one cometh in the even-
ing, or in morning, or at night or even
at
midnight, he will have no reason
to be angry with me
!
foremost of kings, to do good by serving the twice-
born
ones, observing
all
thy commands,
is what I consider to be highly
profitable to me,
best of men
! Do thou, therefore,
foremost of monarchs
rely
on me
!
That best of Brahmanas, while residing in thy house,
shall
never
have
cause
for
dissatisfaction.
I tell thee
truly.
I shall,
king,
be
always
attentive
to
that
which
is
agreeable
to
this
Brahmana,
and what
is
fraught
also
with
good
to
thee.
O sinless one
!
I know
full
well
that
Brahmanas
that
are
eminently
virtuous,
when
pro-
pitiated
bestow
salvation, and when
displeased,
are
capable
of bringing
about
destruction
upon
the
offender.
Therefore,
I shall please this fore-
most
of
Brahmanas.
Thou
wilt not, O monarch, come to any grief from
that best of regenerate persons, owing to any act of mine. In consequence of
the transgressions of monarchs, Brahmanas,
foremost of
kings,
became
the cause of evil to them,
as Chyavana had become,
in consequence of
the
act of Sukanya.
I will,
therefore,
king, with great regularity, wait upon
that best of Brahmanas according to thy instructions in that respect
!' And
when she had thus spoken at length, the king embraced and cheered her, and
instructed
her
in
detail
as to what should be done by her.
And the king
said,
'Thou shalt,
gentle maid,
act even
thus, without fear, for my good
as
also
thy
own, and
for
the
good
of thy race also, O thou of faultless
limbs
!'
And having said this the illustrious Kuntibhoja, who was devoted
to the Brahmanas, made over the girl
Pritha
to
that Brahmana,
saying,
'This my daughter,
Brahmana, is of tender age and brought up in luxury.
If, therefore, she transgresses at any time, do thou not take that
to
heart
!
Illustrious Brahmanas are never angry with old men, children, and ascetics,
even
if
these transgress
frequently.
In respect of even a great wrong
for-
giveness
is
due
from
the
regenerate.
The
worship,
therefore,
best of
Brahmanas, that is offered to the best of one's power and
exertion,
should
be acceptable
!'
Hearing this words of the
monarch,
the Brahmana
said,
'So be it
!'
Thereupon, the
king
became highly pleased and assigned unto
him apartments that were white as swans or the beams of the moon.
And
in the room intended for the sacrificial fire,
the king placed a brilliant
seat
especially constructed for him. And the food and other things that were offer-
ed unto the Brahmana were of the same excellent kind.
And
casting aside

=== PAGE 389 ===

VANA PARVA
647
idleness
and
all
sense
of self-importance, the princess addressed
herself
with
right
good
will to wait upon the Brahmana.
And the chaste Kunti,
endued
with
purity
of
conduct,
went thither for serving the Brahmana.
And
duly
waiting upon
that Brahmana
as
if
he were a very
god,
she
gratified him highly."
SECTION CCCIII
(Kundala-harana Parva continued)
Vaisampayana
said,
"And
that
maiden
of
rigid
vows,
mighty
monarch,
by
serving
with
a
pure
heart,
that Brahmana of rigid vows,
succeeded
in
gratifying
him.
And,
foremost of
kings, saying,
'I
will
come back in the morning,' that best
of Brahmanas sometimes came in the
evening
or
in
night.
Him,
however,
the
maiden
worshipped
at
all
hours
with sumptuous
food
and
drink
and bed.
And as
day after day
passed
away, her
attentions
to him,
in
respect of food and seat and bed,
increased instead of undergoing any diminution.
And, O king, even when
the Brahmana reproved her,
finding fault with any of her arrangements,
or
addressed
her
in
harsh
words,
Pritha did not do anything that was dis-
agreeable to him.
And on many occasions the Brahmana came back
after
the appointed hour had long passed away.
And on many occasions (such as
the depth of night) when food was hard to procure, he said,
'Give me food
!'
But on all those occassions saying,
'All is
ready,'
Pritha held before him
the
fare.
And
even
like
a disciple,
daughter,
or a sister,
that blameless
gem of a girl with a devoted heart,
king,
gratified that foremost of Brah-
manas.
And that best of Brahmanas became well-pleased with her conduct
and ministrations.
And he received those attentions of hers, valuing them
rightly.
And,
Bharata, her father asked her every morning and evening
saying,
4
daughter,
is
the
Brahmana
satisfied with thy ministrations ?'
And that illustrious maiden used to reply,
'Exceedingly well
!'
And there-
upon,
the
high-souled
Kuntibhoja
experienced
the greatest delight.
And
when
after
a
full
year
that best of ascetics was unable to find any fault
whatever in Pritha, who was engaged in ministering unto him, well-pleased
he
said
unto
her,
'O
gentle
maid, I
have
been
well-pleased with thy
attentions,
beautiful
girl
!
I)o
thou, O
blessed girl,
ask even for such
boons as are difficult of being obtained by men in this world,
and obtaining
which, thou mayst surpass in fame all the women in this world.'
At these
words of his, Kunti said,
'Everything hath already been done in my behalf
since
thou,
chief
of
those that are versed in the Vedas, and my father
also, have
been
pleased with me
!
As regards the boons,
I consider them
as already obtained by me,
Brahmana
!'
The Brahmana thereupon said,
'If,
gentle maid, thou dost not,
thou of
sweet smiles,
wish to obtain
boons
from
me, do
thou
then
take this mantra from me for invoking the
celestials
!
Any
one
amongst
the
celestials whom thou mayst invoke by
uttering
this
mantra,
will
appear
before
thee
and
be
under thy power.

=== PAGE 390 ===

648
MAHABHABATA
Willing
or
not,
by
virtue
of this mantra, that deity in gentle guise,
and
assuming the obedient
attitude of slave, will become subject to thy power !' "
Vaisampayana
continued, "Thus
addressed,
that
faultless
maiden
could not,
king, from fear
of a, curse, refuse for the second
time
compli-
ance with the wishes of that best of the twice-born ones. Then,
king, that
Brahmana
imparted
unto that girl of faultless limbs those mantras
which
are
recited in the beginning of the Atharvan Veda.
And,
king,
having
imparted
unto
her
those mantras,
he said
unto
Kuntibhoja,
'I have, O
monarch,
dwelt
happily in thy house, always worshipped with due
regard
and
gratified by thy daughter.
I shall now depart.'
And
saying
this,
he
vanished there and then.
And beholding that Brahmana
vanish there and
then, the king was struck with amazement.
And the monarch then treated
his daughter Pritha with proper regard."
SECTION CCCIV
(Kundala-harana Parva continued)
Vaisampayana
said,
"When
that foremost of Brahmanas
had gone
away on some other errand, the maiden began to ponder over the virtue
of
those mantras.
And she said
to herself, 'Of what nature are those mantras
that have been bestowed on me by that high-souled one ?
I shall without
delay test their power.'
And as she was thinking in this way, she suddenly
perceived indications of the approach of her season.
And her season having
arrived, while she was yet unmarried,
she blushed in shame.
And it came
to pass
that as she was seated in her chamber on a rich
bed,
she
beheld
the
solar
orb rising in the east.
And both the mind and the eyes of
that
maiden of excellent waist became rivetted fast upon the solar orb.
And she
gazed and gazed on that orb without being satiated with the beauty of
the
morning Sun.
And she suddenly
became gifted with celestial
sight.
And
then she beheld that god of divine form
accoutred in mail and adorned with
ear rings.
And
at sight of the god,
lord of men,
she became curious
as
to the
(potency of the) mantras.
And
thereupon
that maiden
resolved to
invoke him.
And having recourse to Pranayama, she
invoked the Maker of
day.
And thus invoked by her,
king, the Maker of day speedily presented
himself.
And he was of a yellowish hue like honey, and was
possessed
of
mighty
arms,
and
his
neck was marked with
lines like those
of a conch-
shell.
And
furnished
with armlets,
and
decked with a diadem,
he came
smiling, and illumining all
the directions.
And
it was by Yoga power that
he
divided himself in twain, one of which continued to give
heat,
and
the
other appeared
before Kunti.
And he addressed Kunti
in words that were
exceedingly sweet, saying,
'0 gentle maiden, over-powered by the mantras,
I come hither obedient
to thee.
Subject as I am to thy power, what
shall
I do,
queen ?
Tell me,
for I shall do whatever thou mayst command ?
1 In the original, Vimanam,
i. e, a car,
T.

=== PAGE 391 ===

VANA PAEVA
649
Hearing
these words of the deity, Kunti said,
'O worshipful one, go thou
back to the place thou hast
come
from
!
I
invoked
thee
from
curiosity
alone.
Pardon me, O worshipful
one
!'
Surya then
said,
'O
damsel
of
slender waist,
I will, even as thou hast said,
return
to
the
place
I
have
come from
!
Having called a celestial,
it is not,
however, proper
to
send
him away in vain.
Thy intention, O blessed one,
it is to have from Surya
a son furnished
with
a
coat
of
mail
and
ear-rings, and who in point of
prowess would be beyond compare in this
world
!
Do
thou,
therefore,
damsel of elephantine gait, surrender thy person to me
!
Thou
shalt
then
have, O lady,
a son after thy wish
!
gentle girl,
thou of sweet
smiles,
I will go back after having known thee
!
If thou do not gratify me
to-day
by
obeying my
word,
I
shall
in
anger curse thee, thy
father
and
that
Brahmana also.
For thy fault,
I will surely consume them
all, and
I shall
inflict condign punishment on that foolish father of thine that knoweth not
this transgression of-thine and on that Brahmana who hath
bestowed
the
mantras on thee without knowing thy disposition
and
character
!
Yonder
are
all
the
celestials
in
heaven, with
Purandara
at their head, who
are
looking at me with derisive smiles at my being deceived
by
thee,
lady
!
Look
at
those
celestials,
for
thou
art now
possessed
of
celestial sight
1
Before this I have endued thee with celestial vision, in consequence of which
thou couldst see me
!'
"
Vaisampayana
continued,
"Thereupon the princess beheld the
celes-
tials standing in the firmament, each in his proper sphere, even as she saw
before her that highly resplendent deity
furnished
with
rays,
viz.,
Surya
himself.
And beholding them
all,
the girl became frightened and
her
face
was suffused with blushes of shame. And then she addressed Surya, saying,
'O lord of rays, go thou back to thy own region. On account of my maiden-
hood,
this outrage of thine is fraught with woe
to me
!
It
is
only
one's
father, mother, and
other
superiors, that are capable of giving away their
daughter's body.
Virtue I shall never sacrifice,
seeing that
in
this
world
the keeping of their persons inviolate
is deemed
as
the
highest
duty
of
women, and is held in high regard
!
thou possessed of wealth
of
splen-
dour,
it is only to test the power of my mantras that
I
have,
from
mere
childishness, summoned
thee.
Considering
that
this hath been done by a
girl of tender years,
it behoveth thee,
lord,
to forgive her
!'
Then Surya
said,
'It is because I consider thee a girl that,
Kunti,
I am
speaking
to
thee so mildly.
To one that is not so I would not concede this.
Do
thou,
Kunti, surrender thyself
!
Thou shalt surely
attain
happiness thereby.
Since,
timid maiden, thou hast invoked me with mantras^
it is
not
pro-
per for me
to
go away without any purpose being attained, for,
if I do so
1 shall then,
thou of faultless
limbs, be
the
object
of
laughter
in
the
world,
and,
beauteous damsel,
a bye- word with
all
the
celestials.
Do
thou,
therefore,
yield to me
!
By that thou shalt obtain
a
son
even
like
myself, and thou shalt also be much praised in all the world.'
'
83

=== PAGE 392 ===

SECTION CCCV
(Kundala-harana Parva continued)
Vaisampayana said,
"Although that noble girl
addressed him in vari-
ous sweet words,
yet she was unable to
dissuade
that deity of a thousand
rays.
And when she failed to dissuade the
dispeller
of
darkness,
at
last
from fear of a curse,
she reflected,
king,
for
a long
time
!
'How may
my innocent father, and
that Brahmana
also,
escape
the
angry
Surya's
ourse for my sake ? Although energy and asceticism are capable of destroy-
ing sins, yet even honest
persons,
if
they
be
of
unripe
age,
should
not
foolishly
court
them.
By
foolishly
acting in that way I have today been
placed in a frightful situation.
Indeed,
I have been placed entirely within
the grasp of this deity.
Yet how can
I do what is sinful
by
taking
it
on
myself to surrender my person to him ?"
Vaisampayana
continued,
"Afflicted with fear of a curse,
and think-
ing much within herself, an utter stupefaction of the senses came upon her.
And she was so confounded that she could not settle what
to do.
Afraid,
on the one hand,
king, of the reproach of friends if she obeyed the
deity,
and, on the other,
of his curse
if she disobeyed him, the damsel
at
last,
foremost of kings,
said these words unto
that
god,
in
accents
tremulous
with
bashfulness,
'0
god,
as my
father and mother and
friends are still
living,
this violation of duty on my part should not take place.
If,
god,
I commit this unlawful act with thee, the reputation of this
race
shall
be
sacrificed in this world on my account.
If thou, however, O thou foremost
of those that impart heat, deem this to be a meritorious
act,
I
shall
then
fulfil
thy
desire
even
though my relatives may not have bestowed me on
thee
!
May I remain chaste after having surrendered my
person
to thee
!
Surely, the virtue,
the reputation, the fame, and the life
of
every
creature
are
established
in
thee
!'
Hearing these
words
of
hers, Surya
replied,
'O thou of sweet smiles,
neither thy father, nor thy mother, nor any
other
superior of thine,
is competent to give thee away
!
May good
betide
thee,
O beauteous damsel
!
Do thou listen to my words
!
It
is because a virgin
desireth the company of every one, that she hath received
the
appelliation
of Kanya,
from
the
root
kama meaning to desire.
Therefore,
thou
of
excellent hips and the fairest complexion, a virgin is, by nature,
free in this
world.
Thou shalt not, O lady, by any means
be
guilty
of any
sin
by
complying
with my request.
And how can I, who am desirous of the wel-
fare of all creatures, commit an unrighteous act ?
That all men and women
should be bound
by
no
restraints,
is
the
law
of
nature.
The
opposite
condition is the perversion of the natural state.
Thou shalt remain a virgin
after having gratified me.
And thy son
shall
also
be
mighty-armed
and
illustrious.'
Thereupon
Kunti said,
'If,
dispeller of
darkness,
I
obtain
a son from thee, may he be furnished with a coat of mail and ear-rings, and
may he be mighty-armed and endued with great strength
!'
Hearing these

=== PAGE 393 ===

VANA PAEVA
651
words of hers, Surya answerecU *O gentle maiden, thy son shall be
mighty-
armed and decked with ear-rings and a celestial coat of mail.
And both his
ear-rings and coat of mail will be made of Amrita, and his coat will also
be
invulnerable.'
Kunti then said,
'if the excellent mail
and
ear-rings
of the
son thou wilt beget on me,
be,
indeed,
made
of
Amrita,
then, O god, O
worshipful deity,
let thy purpose be fulfilled
!
May he be powerful, strong,
energetic, and handsome, even like thee, and may he also be endued
with
virtue
!'
Surya then said,
'0 princess, O excellent damsel,
these ear-rings
had been given to me by Aditi.
O timid lady,
I will bestow them,
as
also
this
excellent mail, on thy son
!'
Kunti
then said, 'Very well, O worship-
ful
one
!
If my
son,
lord of
light,
become so,
I will,
as thou
sayest,
gratify thee
!' "
Vaisampayana continued, "Hearing these words of
hers
Surya
said,
'So be it
!'
And that
ranger of the skies,
that enemy of Swarbhanu,
with
soul absorbed in Yoga, entered into Kunti, and touched her on
the
navel.
At this,
that damsel, on account of Surya's energy, became stupefied.
And
that reverend lady
then
fell down
on
her
bed, deprived
of
her
senses.
Surya then
addressed her,
saying,
'I will now depart,
thou
of
graceful
hips
!
Thou shalt bring forth a son who will become
the
foremost
of
all
wielders of weapons.
At the same time thou shalt remain a virgin.'
"
Yaisampayana continued,
"Then,
foremost of kings,
as the highly
effulgent
Surya
was about
to depart,
that girl
bashfully
said
unto
him,
'So be it
!'
And it was thus
that the daughter of king Kuntibhoja,
impor-
tuned by
Surya, had
after soliciting a son from him,
fallen down stupefied
on that excellent bed,
like a broken creeper.
And
it was
thus
that
deity
of fierce rays,
stupefying her, entered into her by virtue of Yoga power, and
placed his own self within her womb.
The deity,
however,
did
not
sully
her by deflowering her in the flesh.
And after Surya had gone away,
that
girl regained her consciousness."
SECTION CCCVI
(Kundala-harana Parva continued)
Vaisampayana said,
"It was,
lord of earth,
on the first day of the
lighted fortnight during the tenth month of the year that
Pritha conceived
a son like the lord himself of the stars in the firmament.
And that damsel
of excellent hips,
from fear
of
her
friends,
concealed
her
conception,
so
that no one knev? her condition.
And as the damsel lived
entirely
in
the
apartments assigned
to
the maidens and carefully concealed her condition,
no one except her nurse knew the truth.
And in due time
that
beauteous
maiden, by the grace of deity, brought forth a son resembling
a
very
god.
And even
like
his
father,
the
child
was
equipped in a coat of mail, and
decked with brilliant ear-rings.
And he was possessed of leonine eyes
and
shoulders like those of a bull.
And no sooner was the
beauteous
girl
deli-
vered
of
a
child, then
she consulted with her nurse and placed the infant

=== PAGE 394 ===

652
MAHABHAEATA
in a commodious and smooth box made of wicker work and spread over with
soft sheets and furnished with a costly
pillow.
And
its
surface was
laid
over with wax,
and it was encased in a rich cover.
And with tears in
her
eyes, she carried the infant to the river Aswa, and consigned the basket to
its waters.
And although she knew it to be improper for an unmarried girl
to bear offspring, yet from
parental
affection, O
foremost
of
kings,
she
wept piteously. Do thou listen to the words Kunti weepingly uttered, while
consigning
the box to the
waters of the
river Aswa,
O
child, may
good
betide thee at the hands of all that inhabit the land, the water, the sky, and
the celestial
regions.
May
all
thy
paths
be
auspicious
!
May
no one
obstruct thy way
!
And, O son, may all that come across thee
have
their
hearts
divested
of
hostility towards thee
!
And may that lord of waters,
Varuna,
protect thee in water
!
And may the deity that rangeth the skies
completely protect thee in the sky.
And may, O son, that
best
of
those
that impart heat,
viz., Surya, thy father, and from whom
I have obtained
thee as ordained by Destiny, protect thee everywhere
! And may the Adityas
and the Vasus, the Eudras and the Sadhyas, the Viswadevas and the Maruts,
and the cardinal points with the great Indra and the regents presiding over
them,
and, indeed,
all the celestials,
protect
thee
in
every
place
!
Even
in
foreign lands
I
shall
be
able
to recognise
thee by this mail of thine
!
Surely, thy sire,
son, the divine Surya possessed of the wealth
of
splen-
dour,
is blessed, for he will with his celestial sight behold thee going down
the current
!
Blessed also is that lady who will,
thou that are
begotten
by a god,
take thee for her son, and who will give thee suck when thou art
thirsty
! And what a lucky dream hath been dreamt by her that
will adopt
thee for her son,
thee that is endued with
solar
splendour,
and
furnished
with
celestial
mail, and
adorned
with
celestial ear-rings, thee that hast
expansive eyes resembling lotuses,
a complexion bright as burnished copper
or lotus leaves, a fair forehead, and hair ending in beautiful
curls
!
son,
she that will behold thee crawl on the ground, begrimmed
with
dust,
and
sweetly uttering inarticulate words,
is surely blessed
! And she also, O son,
that will behold thee arrive at thy youthful prime
like
smaned
lion
born
in Himalayan forests, is surely blessed
!' "
"0 king,
having thus
bewailed
long and
piteously,
Pritha
laid
the
basket on the waters of the river Aswa. And the lotus-eyed damsel, afflicted
with grief on account of her son and weeping bitterly, with her
nurse
cast
the basket at dead of night, and though desirous of beholding her son often
and again, returned, O monarch, to the palace, fearing lest her father should
come to know of what had happened.
Meanwhile,
the basket
floated from
the river Aswa to the river Charmanwati, and
from
the
Charmanwati
it
passed to the Yamuna, and so on to the Ganga.
And carried by the waves
of the Ganga, the child contained in the basket came to the city of Champa
ruled by a person of the Suta tribe.
Indeed,
the excellent coat of mail and
those ear-rings made of Amrita that were born with his body,
as
also
the
ordinance of Destiny, kept the child alive."

=== PAGE 395 ===

SECTION CCCVII
(Kundala-harana Parva continued)
Vaisampayana said, "And it
came to pass that
at this
time a
Suta
named
Adhiratha, who was
a friend
of Dhritarashtra, came
to
the river
Ganga, accompanied by his wife.
And,
king, his wife named Eadha was
unparalleled on
earth for beauty.
And although that
highly blessed dame
had made great endeavours to obtain a son,
yet she had failed, O represser
of foes, to obtain one.
And on coming to the river Ganga, she beheld a box
drifting along
the current.
And containing
articles
capable of
protecting
from
dangers and
decked with unguents,
that box was brought before
her
by the
waves of the Janhavi.
And attracted by curiosity, the lady caused
it to be seized.
And she
then related all unto
Adhiratha of the charioteer
caste.
And hearing this Adhiratha took away the box from the water-side,
and opened it by
means of instruments.
And then he beheld a boy resem-
bling
the morning Sun.
And the
infant was furnished
with golden
mail,
and
looked
exceedingly
beautiful
with a face
decked
in
ear-rings.
And
thereupon
the
charioteer, together
with his
wife, was
struck
with such
astonishment
that their
eyes expanded in wonder.
And taking the infant
on
his lap, Adhiratha said
unto his wife, 'Ever since I was born, O timid
lady,
I had never
seen such
a wonder.
This child
that hath come to
us
must be of celestial birth.
Surely,
sonless as I am,
it is the gods that have
sent
him unto me
!'
Saying this,
lord
of earth, he gave
the
infant
to
Eadha. And thereat, Radha adopted, according to the ordinance, that child
of
celestial form
and divine origin, and possessed
of the
splendour of the
filaments of the lotus and furnished with excellent grace.
And duly reared
by her,
that child endued with great prowess began to grow up.
And after
Kama's
adoption, Adhiratha had
other sons
begotten
by
himself.
And
seeing the child furnished with bright
mail and golden ear-rings,
the twice-
born ones named him Vasusena. And thus did that child endued with great
splendour and immeasurable prowess became the son of the charioteer, and
come
to be known as
Yasusena and Vrisha.
And Pritha
learnt
through
spies that
her own son clad
in celestial
mail was growing up amongst the
Angas
as the
eldest son
of a charioteer (Adhiratha).
And seeing
that
in
process of time his son had grown up, Adhiratha sent him to the city named
after the elephant. And there Kama put up with Drona, for the purpose of
learning
arms.
And
that powerful
youth
contracted
a
friendship
with
Duryodhana.
And
having
acquired
all
the four kinds
of
weapons
from
Drona,
Kripa,
and Rama,
he became
famous in the
world
as a
mighty
bowman.
And after
having contracted a friendship
with
Dhritarashtra's
son, he became intent on injuring the sons of Pritha.
And he was always
desirous of fighting with the high-souled Falguna.
And, O king, ever since
they
first saw
each other.
Kama always
used to
challenge Arjuna, and
Arjuna, on his part, used to challenge him.
This,
foremost of kings, was

=== PAGE 396 ===

654
MAHABHARATA
without doubt, the secret known to theJSun, viz., begot by himself on Kunti,
Kama was being reared in the race of the Sutas. And beholding him decked
with
his oar-rings and mail, Yudhishthira thought him to be unslayable in
fight, and was exceedingly pained at it. And when,
foremost of monarchs,
Karna after rising from the water, used at mid-day to worship the effulgent
Surya
with
joined hands, the Brahmanas
used to
solicit him
for wealth.
And at
that time
there was
nothing that he would
not give away to
the
twice-born ones.
And Indra, assuming the guise of a Brahmana,
appeared
before him
(at such a time)
and said,
'Give me
!'
And thereupon Eadha's
son replied unto him, 'Thou art welcome
!'
"
SECTION
CCCVIII
(Kundala-harana, Parva continued)
Vaisampayana said, "And when
the king
of the celestials
presented
himself in the guise of a Brahmana, beholding him, Karna said, 'Welcome
!'
And not knowing
his intention,
Adhiratha's son
addressed the Brahmana,
saying,
'Of a necklace
of gold, and beauteous
damsels,
and villages
with
plenty of kine, which shall I give thee
?'
Thereupon the Brahmana replied,
'I ask thee not to give me either a necklace of gold,
or fair damsels,
or any
other agreeable object.
To those do thou give them that ask for them.
If,
sinless one, thou art sincere in thy vow, then wilt thou, cutting off (from
thy person) this
coat of mail born with thy body,
and these ear-rings also,
bestow them
on me
!
I
desire,
chastiser
of
foes, that
thou
mayst
speedily
give me these
;
for,
this one
gain of mine
will be
considered
as
superior
to
every
other
gain
!'
Hearing
these
words,
Karna,
said, 'O
Brahmana,
I will give
thee home-stead land,
and fair damsels,
and kine,
and fields
; but my mail and ear-rings I am unable to give thee
!'
"
Vaisampayana continued,
'Although thus urged with various words by
Karna,
still, O chief of
the Bharata race,
that Brahmana did not ask for
any
other boon.
And although
Karna sought to pacify him to the best of
his power, and worshipped him duly, yet that best of Brahmanas did not ask
for any other boon. And when that foremost of Brahmanas did not ask for
any other boon, Eadha's son again spake unto him with a smile, 'My mail,
regenerate one,
hath been born with my body,
and this pair
of ear-rings
hath arisen from Amrita.
It is for these that I am unslayable in the worlds.
Therefore,
I cannot
part with them.
Do thou, O bull among Brahmanas,
accept
from me
the entire kingdom of the earth,
rid of enemies and full of
prosperity
!
foremost of regenerate ones,
if I am deprived of my ear-rings,
and the mail born with my body, I shall be liable to be vanquished by the foes
!'
Vaisampayana continued, "When the illustrious slayer of Paka refused
to ask for any other boon, Karna with a smile again addressed him, saying,
'O god of gods,
even before this,
I had recognised thee,
Lord
! O Sakra,
it is not proper for me to confer on thee any unprofitable boon, for thou art
the
very lord
of the
celestials
1
On the contrary,
being as thou
art the

=== PAGE 397 ===

VANA PARVA
655
Creator and lord of all beings,
it is thou that shouldst confer boons on me
!
If,
god, I give thee this coat of mail and ear-rings, then I am sure to meet
with destruction, and thou shalt also undergo ridicule
!
Therefore,
Sakra,
take my ear-rings
and excellent mail
in exchange
for something conferred
by thee on me
!
Otherwise,
I will not bestow them on thee
!'
Thereupon
Sakra replied, 'Even before
I had
come to thee, Surya had known of my
purpose
and without
doubt,
it is he
that hath
unfolded everything unto
thee
!
O Kama,
be it as
thou
wishest
!
O son,
except the
thunder-bolt
alone, tell me what
it is that thou desirest to have
I'
'
Vaisampayana continued, "Hearing these words of Indra, Kama was
filled with delight and seeing that his purpose was about to be accomplished
he approached Vasava, and intent upon
obtaining a dart incapable of being
baffled, he addressed Indra,
saying, 'Do thou,
Vasava,
in
exchange
for
my
coat of
mail and ear-rings,
give me a dart
incapable of being
baffled,
and competent to destroy hosts of enemies when arrayed in order of battle
!'
Thereupon,
ruler of earth,
fixing his mind for a moment
on the dart (for
bringing
it there),
Vasava thus
spake unto Kama,
'Do thou
give me thy
ear-rings, and the coat of mail born with thy body, and in return take this
dart
on these terms
!
When I
encounter
the Daitya
in battle,
this dart
that is
incapable of
being baffled,
hurled by my hand, destroyeth enemies
by hundreds, and cometh back to my hand after achieving its purpose.
In
thy hand, however,
this
dart,
son of Suta,
will slay
only one
powerful
enemy of thine. And having achieved that feat,
it will, roaring and blazing,
return
to me
!'
Thereat Kama said,
'I desire to
slay in
fierce fight
even
one enemy of mine, whoroaroth fiercely and is hot as fire, and of whom I am
in fear
!'
At this, Indra said, 'Thou shalt slay such a roaring and powerful
foe in battle. But that
one whom
thou seekest to slay,
is protected by an
illustrious personage.
Even He whom persons versed in the Vedas call 'the
invincible
Boar,' and 'the
incomprehensible Narayana'
even that
Krishna
himself,
is protecting him
!'
Thereupon Kama replied, 'Even if
this be so,
do thou,
illustrious one give me the
weapon that will
destroy only one
powerful foe
!
I shall, on my part, bestow on thee my mail and ear-rings,
cutting them off my person.
Do thou, however,
grant that my body, thus
wounded, may not
be unsightly
!'
Hearing
this, Indra said,
'As thou,
Kama, art bent upon observing the truth, thy person shall not be unsightly,
or shall any scar
remain on
it.
And, O thou best of those that are graced
with speech,
Kama, thou shalt
be possessed
of complexion
and energy
of thy father himself.
And
if, maddened by wrath, thou hurlest
this dart,
while there are still other weapons with thee, and when thy life also is not
in imminent peril,
it will fall even
on thyself.'
Kama
answered,
'As thou
directest
me, O Sakra,
I shall
hurl this
Vasavi
dart only when I am
in
imminent peril
!
Truly I tell thee this
!'
"
Vaisampayana
continued,
"Thereupon,
king, taking
fhe
blazing
dart, Karna
began
to
peel
off
his
natural
mail.
And beholding Kama

=== PAGE 398 ===

656
MAHABHAEATA
cutting
his own body, the entire host
of celestials and men and Danavas
set
up a leonine roar.
And Kama
betrayed no contortions
of face
while
peeling
his mail.
And beholding
that hero among men
thus
cutting
his
body with an weapon,
smiling over and anon,
celestial kettle-drums
began
to be played upon and celestial flowers began to be showered on him.
And
Kama cutting off the excellent; mail from his person, gave
it to Vasava,
still
dripping. And cutting off his ear-rings also from off his ears, he made them
over to Indra, And it is for this fact that he came to be called Kama.
And
Sakra,
having thus
beguiled Kama that made him famous
in the
world,
thought
with a smile that
the business of
the sons of Pandu had already
been completed.
And having
done all this, he ascended
to heaven.
And
hearing that Kama had been beguiled,
all the sons of Dhritarashtra became
distressed and
shorn of pride.
And the sons of Pritha, on the
other hand,
learning that such plight
had befallen the son of the charioteer, were filled
with joy/
Janamejaya said, "When
were those heroes,
the sons
of
Pandu,
at
that
time ?
And from whom
did
they
hear this
welcome
news ?
And
what also did they do, when the
twelfth year of
their exile passed away ?
Do thou,
illustrious one, tell me all this
!
"
Vaisampayana said, "Having
defeated the
chief
of the
Saindhavas,
and
rescued Krishna, and having
outlived the entire term
of their painful
exile in
the woods, and having
listened to
the ancient
stories about
gods
and Rishis recited by Markandeya,
those heroes among men
returned from
their asylum in Kamyaka to the sacred Dwaitavana, with all their cars, and
followers, and accompanied by their charioteers, their kine, and the citizens
who had followed them."
SECTION CCOIX
(Araneya Parva)
Janamejaya
said,
"Having
felt
great
affliction
on account
of
the
abduction of their wife and having rescued Krishna thereafter, what did the
Pandavas next do ?"
Yaisampayana
said, "Having
felt great
affliction on account of
the
abduction
of
Krishna,
king
"Xudhishthira
of
unfading
glory,
with
his
brothers,
left the
woods of Kamyaka and returned to
the
delightful
and
picturesque Dwaitavana
abounding in trees and containing
delicious
fruits
and roots.
And the sons of Pandu with
their wife Krishna began to reside
there,
living frugally on
fruits and practising
rigid vows.
And while those
repressers
of foes, the virtuous
king Yudhishthira, the son
of Kunti, and
Bhimasena, and Arjuna, and those other sons of Pandu born of Madri, were
dwelling
in
Dwaitavana,
practising
rigid
vows,
they
underwent,
for
the
sake
of
a Brahmana, great
trouble, which, however,
was
destined
to
bring
about
their
future
happiness.
I
will
tell
thee
all about
the
trouble
which those
foremost of Kurus underwent
while living
in
those
woods, and which
in
the
end
brought
about
their
happiness.
Do thou
listen
to it
!
Once on
a
time,
as a
deer was
butting
about,
it
chanced
that
the
two
sticks
for making
fire
and
a
churning
staff
belonging
to
a Brahmana
devoted
to
ascetic
austerities,
struck
fast
into
its

=== PAGE 399 ===

VANA PAKVA
657
antlers.
And, thereupon, O
king,
that
powerful
deer
of
exceeding
fleetness with
long bounds, speedily went out of
the hermitage, taking
those articles away.
And, O foremost of Kurus, seeing those articles of
his
thus carried away, the Brahmana, anxious on
account of
his Agni-
hotra, quickly came
before the
Pandavas.
And approaching
without
loss
of
time
Ajatasatru
seated in
that forest with
his brothers, the
Brahmana, in great
disticss, spake these words, 'As a deer was butting
about, it happened, O king, that my fire-sticks and churning staff which
had
been placed
against a large
tree stuck
fast to its antlers.
O king,
that powerful
deer of exceeding fleetness hath speedily gone out of the
hermitage with long bounds, taking those articles away.
Tracking that
powerful deer, O king, by its foot-prints, do ye, ye sons of Pandu, bring
back those
articles of mine, so that my Agmhotra may not be stopped
!'
Hearing these words of the Brahmana, Yudhishthira became exceedingly
concerned. And the son of Kunti taking up his bow sallied out with his
brothers. And putting on their corselets and equipped with their bows,
those
bulls among
men, intent upon serving
the
Brahmana, swiftly
sallied out in the wake of the deer.
And descrying the deer at no great
distance, those
mighty
warriors
discharged
at it barbed
arrows and
javelins and darts,
but the
sons
of Pandu
could not
pierce
it by any
means.
And as they struggled to pursue and slay
it, that powerful deer
became
suddenly invisible.
And losing
sight of
the deer, the
noble-
minded
sons
of
Pandu, fatigued and disappointed and
afflicted
with
hunger and thirst, approached a banian tree h. that deep forest, and sat
down in its cool shade.
And when they had sat down, Nakula stricken
with
sorrow and
urged by impatience, addressed his
eldest brother of
the Kuru race, saying,
'In our
race, O king, virtue hath
never
been
sacrificed, nor
hath there
been
loss
of wealth from
insolence.
And
being asked, we have never said to any creature, Nay
! Why then in
the present case have we met with this disaster ?"
SECTION CCCX
(Araneya Parva continued)
Yudhishthira
said, "There
is no limit to
calamities.
Nor
is
it
possible to ascertain either their final or efficient cause.
It is the Lord
of justice alone who distributeth the
fruits
of
both virtue
and
vice.'
Thereupon Bhima said,
'Surely, this calamity hath befallen us, because
I did not slay the Pratikamin on the very spot, when he dragged Krishna
as a slave
into the assembly.
And Arjuna said,
'Surely, this calamity
hath befallen us because I resented not
those biting words piercing the
very
bones, uttered by
the SiUas son
!'
And Sahadeva
said,
'Surely,
O Bharata, this calamity hath befallen us because I did not slay Sakuni
when he defeated thee at dice
!'
"
84

=== PAGE 400 ===

$3
MAEABHA&ATA
Vaisampayana
continued,
'Then
king
Yudhishthira
addtessed
Nakula
saying, 'Do
thou, O
son
of Madri, climb this
tree and
look
around the
ten points
of the
horizon.
Do thou see whether
there is
water near us or such trees as grow on watery, grounds
!
O child, these
thy brothers are all fatigued and thirsty.'
Thereupon saying,
'So be
it,*
Nakula speedily climbed up a tree, and having looked around, said unto
his
eldest
brother, 'O
king,
I see many a tree that groweth
by
the
water-side, and
I
hear
also
the cries
of
cranes.
Therefore, without
doubt, water must be somewhere here.'
Hearing
these words,
Kunti's
son Yudhishthira, firm in truth, said, 'O amiable one, go thou and fetch
water
in these
quivers!'
Saying,
'So
be
it,'
at the command
of
his
eldest brother Nakula quickly proceeded towards the place where there
was water
and
soon came upon
it.
And
beholding
a
crystal
lake
inhabited by cranes he desired to drink of
it, when he heard these words
from
the sky, 'O child, do not commit this rash act
!
This lake
hath
already been
in my possession.
Do thou, O son of Madri,
first answer
my
questions and then drink of this water
and take away (as much as
thou
requirest).
Nakula,
however,
who was
exceedingly
thirsty,
disregarding these words, drank of the cool water, and hav ing drunk of
it, dropped down dead.
And, O represser of foes, seeing Nakula's delay,
Yudhishthira
the son of Kunti said
unto Sahadeva, the heroic brother
of Nakula, 'O Sahadeva,
it is
long since our brother, he who was born
immediately before thee, hath gone from hence
! Do thou, therefore, go
and
bring back
thy uterine
brother, together
with water.'
At
this,
Sahadeva, saying,
'So be
it,' set out in that direction
; and coming to the
spot, beheld his brother lying dead on the ground.
And afflicted at the
death
of his brother, and suffering
severely from thirst, he advanced
towards
the water, when these words were heard by him, 'O child, do
not commit this rash act
! This lake hath already been in my possession.
First answer my question, and then
drink of the 'water and take away
as much as thou mayst require.' Sahadeva, however, who was extremely
thirsty, disregarding these words, drank of the water, and having drunk
of it, dropped down dead.
Then Yudhishthira, the son
of Kunti, said
unto Vijaya, It is long since, O Vibhatsu, that thy two brothers have
gone, O represser of foes
I
Blessed be thou
! Do thou bring them back,
together
with
water.
Thou
art, O child, the refuge
of
us all when
plunged in distress
!'
Thus addressed, the intelligent
Gudakesa, taking
his bow and
arrows and also
his naked sword,
set out for
that lake of
waters.
And
reaching
that
spot, he whose
car was drawn by white
steeds beheld those tigers among men/his two younger brothers who had
come to
fetch water, lying dead
there.
And seeing them as if
asleep,
that
lion among men, exceedingly aggrieved,
raised his bow and began
to
look around
that wood.
But he
found none
in that
mighty forest.

=== PAGE 401 ===

VANA PARVA
659
And,
being fatigued,
he who was
capable of
drawing the bow by
his
left hand as well, rushed in the
direction of the water.
And as he was
rushing (towards the water), he heard these words from the sky, 'Why
dost thou
approach this water ?
Thou
shalt not be able to drink of it
by force.
If thou, O Kaunteya,
can answer the
question I will put to
thee, then only shalt thou drink of the water and take away as much as
thou
requirest, O Bharata
!'
Thus
forbidden,
the son of
Pritha said,
'Do thou forbid me by appearing before me
!
And when
thou shalt be
sorely
pierced with my arrows,
thou wilt not then again
speak in this
way
!
Having said this,
Partha covered all sides with
arrows inspired
by mantras'
And he also displayed his
skill in shooting at an invisible
mark by sound alone.
And, O bull of the Bharata race,
sorely afflicted
with thirst,
he discharged
barbed darts and
javelins and iron
arrows,
and showered on the sky innumerable
shafts incapable of being baffled.
Thereupon,
the invisible Yaksha said, What
need of all this
trouble,
O son of
Pritha ?
Do thou
drink only after
answering my questions
!
If thou
drink,
however,
without
answering my questions,
thou shalt
die
immediately
after.'
Thus
addressed,
Pritha's
son
Dhananjaya
capable
of drawing
the bow with
his left hand as well,
disregarding
those words,
drank of the water,
and immediately
after dropped down
dead.
And
(seeing
Dhananjaya's
delay)
Kunti's
son
Yudhishthira
addressed Bhimasena, saying,
'O represser of foes, it is a long while that
Nakula and Sahadeva and Vibhatsu have gone to fetch water, and they
have
not come
yet, O Bharata
!
Good
betide thee
!
Do thou
bring
them back, together with water
!' Thereupon saying, 'So be it,' Bhimasena
set out for
that place where
those tigers among men, his
brothers, lay
dead.
And beholding them, Bhima afflicted though he was with thirst,
was exceedingly
distressed.
And
that mighty armed hero thought all
that to have been the act of some
Yaksha or
Rakshasa.
And
Pritha's
son
Vrikodara
thought,
1 shall
surely have to
fight
today.
Let me
therefore, first appease my thirst.'
Then
that bull of the
Bharata race
rushed forward with the intention of drinking.
Thereupon the Yaksha
said,
'O child,
do not commit
this rash act
!
This
lake hath
already
been
in my
possession
Do thou
first answer my
questions,
and then
drink and take away as much water as thou requirest
!'
"
Vaisampayana
continued,
"Thus
addressed
by
that
Yaksha
of
immeasurable energy, Bhima, without answering his questions,
drank of
the water.
And as
soon as
he drank,
he fell down
dead on the
spot.
Then thinking that
his brothers had left him long since,
Yudhishthira
waited for some time.
And the king said unto
himself again and again,
'Why is it that
the two
sons of Madri
are delaying ?
And why
doth
the
wielder
also
of the
Gandiva delay ?
And why
doth Bhima too,
endued with
great
strength,
delay
?
I
shall go to
search
for them
!'

=== PAGE 402 ===

660
MAHABHAEATA
And resolved
to do this, the mighty-armed Yudhishthira then rose up,
his heart burning in grief.
And that
bull among men, the royal son of
Kunti
thought
within
himself.
Is
this
forest
under
some
malign
influence ?
Or,
is it infested
by some wicked beasts ?
Or, have they
all fallen,
in consequence
of hav ing
disregarded some mighty
being ?
Or, not finding water in the spot whither those heroes had first repaired,
they have spent all
this time in search
through the forest ?
What is
that reason for which those bulls among men do not come back
?'
And
speaking
in
this
strain,
that
foremost
of
monarchs,
the
illustrious
Yudhishthira, entered into
that mighty forest where no human sound
was heard
and which was inhabited
by deer and bears and birds, and
which was adorned with trees
that were bright and green, and which
echoed with the hum of
:he black-bee and the notes of winged warblers.
As he was proceeding along, he beheld that beautiful lake which looked
as if
it had
been made
by the
celestial artificer himself.
And it was
adorned with flowers
of a golden hue and with
lotuses and Sindhuvars.
And
it abounded
with canes and Ketakas and Karaviras and
Pippalas,
and fatigued with toil, Yudhishthira saw that tank and was struck with
wonder."
SECTION CCCXI
(Araneya Parva continued)
Vaisampayana said, "Yudhishthira saw his brothers, each possessed
of the glory
of Indra himself, lying dead
like the Regents of the world
dropped from
their
spheres at the end of
the Yuga.
And
beholding
Arjuna
lying dead,
with his bow and arrows
dropped on the ground,
and also Bhimasena and the twins motionless and depriv ed
of life, the
king
breathed
a hot
and long sigh,
and was
bathed in
tears of
grief.
And beholding his brothers lying dead, the mighty armed son of Dharma
with heart racked in anxiety, began to lament
profusely, saying,
'Thou
hadst, O
mighty-armed
Vrikodara, vowed,
saying,
I
shall
with mace
smash the thighs of Duryodhana in battle
! O enhancer of the glory of the
Kurus, in thy death, O mighty-armed and high -sou led one,
all that hath
become
fruitless now
!
The promises of men may be
ineffectual
; but
why have the words of the gods uttered in respect
of thee been thus
fruitless ?
O
Dhananjaya,
while thou wert in thy mother's
lying-in-
room, the gods had said,
Kunti,
this thy son shall not
be inferior to him
of a thousand eyes
!
And in the northern Paripatra mountains, all beings
had
sung,
saying,
The
prosperity
(of
this
race),
robbed
by
foes
will be
recovered
by this one without delay.
No one loill be able
to vanquish him in
battle,
ivhile
there will
be none ivhom he will not be able
to vanquish.
Why
then
hath
that
Jishnu
endued
with
great
strength been subject
to
death ?
Oh, why
doth
that
Dhananjaya,
relying on whom we
had

=== PAGE 403 ===

VANA PAEVA
661
hitherto
endured
all this misery, lie on the
ground blighting
1
all my
hopes
! Why hav e those heroes, those mighty sons of Kunti,
Bhimasena
and
Dhananjaya, came under
the power
of
the enemy,
those who
themselves always slew their foes, and whom no weapons
could
resist
!
Surely, this vile heart of mine must be made of adamant, since, beholding
these
twins
lying
to-day
on
the
ground
it doth not split
!
Ye
bulls
among men, versed in holy writ and acquainted with the
properties
of
time
and place, and endued with ascetic merit, ye who duly performed
all sacred rites, why lie ye down, without performing
acts
deserving of
you ?
Alas, why
lie
ye insensible on the earth, with your bodies un-
wounded, ye unvanquished ones, and with your vows untouched ? And
beholding
his
brothers
sweetly
sleeping there as (they usually did) on
mountain slopes,
the
high
souled king, overwhelmed
with
grief
and
bathed
in
sweat, came
to a distressful
condition.
And saying,
It is
even
so
that virtuous lord of men,
immersed
in
an
ocean
of
grief
anxiously
proceeded
to ascertain the cause (of that catastrophe).
And
that mighty-armed and high-souled one, acquainted
with
the
divisions
of
time and
place, could not settle his course of action.
Having thus
bewailed much in
this
strain,
the
virtuous
Yudhishthira,
the
son
of
Dliarma
or
Tapa, restrained his soul and began to reflect in his mind as
to who had slain those heroes.
There are no strokes of weapons upon
these, nor is any one's foot-print here. The being must be mighty I ween,
by whom my brothers have been slain.
Earnestly
shall I ponder over
this,
or,
let me first drink of the water, and then know all.
It may be
that
the
habitually
crooked-minded Duryodhana
hath
caused
this
water to be secretly
placed here by the king of the Gandharvas. What
man
of
sense
can
trust wicked
wight
of
evil
passions with whom
good and evil are alike ? Or, perhaps, this may be an act of that wicked-
souled one
through
secret
messengers of
his.'
And
it was
thus that
that highly intelligent one gave way to diverse reflections.
He did not
believe that water to have been
tainted with poison, for though dead
no corpse-like pallor was on them.
'The
colour
on
the faces of these
my
brothers
hath
not
faded
!'
And
it
was
thus that Yudhishthira
thought.
And
the
king
continued,
'Each
of
these
foremost of men
was like unto a mighty cataract.
Who,
therefore, save Yama
himself
who in due time bringeth about the end of all things, could have baffled
them thus.'
And hav ing concluded this for certain, he began to perform
his ablutions in that lake. And while he descended into
it, he heard these
words from
the
sky,
uttered by the Yaksha,
*I am a crane, living on
tiny
fish.
It is by. me that thy younger brothers have
been
brought
under
the sway
of
the
lord
of
departed spirits.
If, thou, O prince,
answer not the questions put by me, even thou shalt number
the
fifth
1
Samhritya
killing
T.

=== PAGE 404 ===

662
MAHABHAEATA
corpse.
Do
not, O child, "act rashly
!
This lake hath already been in
my possession.
Having answered my questions first, do thou, O Kunti's
son, drink and carry away (as much as thou requirest) f
Hearing these
words,
Yudhishthira
said,
'Art thou the
foremost of the Rudras, or of
the Vasus, or of the Marutas ?
I ask, what god art thou ?
This
could
not have
been done by a bird
!
Who is it that hath overthrown the
four
mighty
mountains, viz., the Himavat, the Paripatra, the Vindhya,
and
the Malaya ?
Great
is
the
feat done by thee, thou foremost
of
strong persons
!
Those whom neither gods, nor Gandharvas nor Asuras,
nor Rakshasas could endure in mighty conflict, have been slain by thee
!
Therefore,
exceedingly
wonderful
is the deed done by thee
!
I do not
know what thy business may be, nor do I know thy purpose. Therefore,
great
is
the
curiosity and fear also that have taken possession of me ?
My
mind
is greatly agitated, and as my head
also is aching, I ask thee,
therefore, O worshipful one, who art thou that stayest here
?'
Hearing
these
words
the Yaksha
said,
'I am, good betide thee,
a Yaksha, and
not an amphibious
bird.
It is by me that
all
these brothers of
thine,
endued with mighty prowess, have been slain
!'
Vaisampayana continued,'
'Hearing these accursed words couched
in harsh syllabus,
'
Yudhishthira, O king, approaching the Yaksha who
had
spoken
then,
stood
there.
And
that
bull among
the
Bharatas
then beheld that Yaksha of
unusual
eyes and huge
body
tall
like
a
palmyra-palm and
looking
like
fire
or
the
Sun, and
irresistible and
gigantic
like a mountain, staying on a tree, and
uttering
a
loud
roar
deep as that
of the clouds.
And the Yaksha said,
'These thy brothers,
O
king,
repeatedly
forbidden by me, would forcibly take away water.
It is for this that they have been
slain by me!
He
that
wisheth
to
live,
should
not,
O
king,
drink
this
water
!
O
son
of
Pritha,
act
not
rashly
!
This
lake
. hath
already
been
in my
possession.
Do
thou,
O
son
of
Kunti,
first answer
my
questions, and then
take away
as much
as
thou
likest
!'
Yudhishthira
said,
'I
do not,
O Yaksha, covet, what
is
already
in
thy
possession!
O
bull among
male
beings,
virtuous persons never approve that one should applaud
his own
self,
(without
boasting,
I
shall,
therefore,
answer
thy
questions, according to my intelligence). Do thou ask me
!' The Yaksha
then
said,
'What
is
it
that maketh the Sun rise ?
Who keeps him
company ?
Who causeth him to set ? And in whom is he established ?'
Yudhishthira
answered, 'Brahma maketh
the Sun
rise
: the gods
keep
him company
: Dharma
causeth him to
set
: and he is
established
in
truth. 2
The Yaksha asked, 'By what
doth one
become learned ?
By
1
Lit.
Letters
T.
2 Behind the plain and ot>viou
meanings of the words employed both
in the question and the answer,
there is a deeper signification of a spiritual

=== PAGE 405 ===

VANA PAKVA
663
what doth he attain what is very great ? How can one hive a second ?
And,
O
king,
how
can
one
acquire
intelligence
?'
Yudhishthira
answered,
'It is
by the
(study of
the)
Srutis that
a person
becometh
learned
: it
is by
ascetic
austerities
that one
acquireth what is
very
great
: it is by intelligence that a person acquireth a second and it is by
serving
the
old
that
one
becometh
wise.'
1
The Yaksha
asked,
'What
constituteth
the
divinity
of
the
Brahmanas ?
What even
is
their
practice
that
is
like
that
of the pious ?
What
also is
the
human
attribute of
the Brahmanas ?
And what practice
of theirs
is
like
that of
the impious
?'
Yudhishthira answered, 'The study of the
Vedas constitutes their divinity
: their asceticism constitutes behaviour
that
is like
that of
the pious
: their liability to death
is their human
attribute and
slander
is
their
impiety.'
The Yaksha
asked, What
institutes the divinity of the Kshatriyas ?
What even
is their practice
that is like that of the pious ?
What is their human attribute ?
And
what
practice
of
theirs
is
like
that of
the impious
?'
Yudhishthira
answered,
'Arrows and weapons
are
their
divinity
: celebration
of
sacrifices is that
act which is
like that of the pious
: liability
to fear is
their human
attribute
; and refusal
of protection is that act of
theirs
which
is like
that of
the impious.'
The Yaksha asked, 'What is that
which constitutes
the Sama of
the sacrifice ?
What the Yajus
of the
sacrifice ?
What
is
that which
is the
refuge
of
a
sacrifice ?
And
what
is
that
which
sacrifice
cannot
do
without ?'
Yudhishthira
answered,
'Life is
the Sama
of the sacrifice
: the mind
is the Yajus
of
the sacrifice
: the Riic
is that which is the refuge of the sacrifice
; and it
kind.
I think Nilakantha has rightly understood the passage.
By Aditya,
which of course commonly means the Sun,
is indicated the unpunfied soul
(from adatte
sabdadin
indriadivis &c.).
The first
question then,
becomes,
'Who is it that exalteth the uapurified soul
?'
Tha act of exaltation implies
a raising
of the
soul from its earthly connections.
The answer
to this is,
'Brahma,
i.e., Veda or
self-knowledge.'
The second
question
'What
are
those that keep company with the soul during its progress of purification
?'
The answer is,
Self-restraint and other qualities, which are all of a god-like
or
divine
nature.'
The third question
is,
Who lead the soul
to its place
(state)
of
rest ?
The
answer
is, Dharma,
i.e.,
restitude,
morality, and
religious observances.'
It is often asserted that one must
pass through the
observances
(Karma) before
attaining to a state
of Eest or Truth
or Pure
Knowledge.
The last question is,
'On what is the soul established
!'
The
answer,
according to
all that
has been
previously said,
is 'Truth
or Puro
Knowledge.'
For the
soul that
is emancipated
from and raised above all
carnal
connections,
is no longer in need,
of observances
and acts (Karma)
bnt stays unmoved in True Knowledge (Jnana).
T.
1 Nilakantha
explains both
Dhriti and Dwitiya
in a spiritual sense.
There is
no noed, however,
ot a
spiritual
explanation here.
By Dhriti
is
meant steadiness of intelligence
; by Dwitiya
lit,
a second. What Yudhish-
thira
says is that a steady
intelligence
serves
the
purposes
of a
helpful
companion.
T.

=== PAGE 406 ===

664
MAHABHAEATA
is Bik
alone which
sacrifice cannot do without.'
1
The Yaksha asked,
'What is
of the
foremost value
to those
that cultivate ?
What is of
the foremost value to those that sow ?
What is of the foremost value
to
those that wish for
prosperity in this world ?
And what is
of the
foremost
value to
those that
bring forth
?'
Yudhishthira
answered,
'That which is of the foremost value to those that cultivate is rain
: that
of
the foremost
value to
those that sow is seed
: that of the foremost
value to those that bring forth is offspring.
2 ' The Yaksha asked, 'What
person, enjoying all the objects
of the senses, endued with intelligence,
regarded
by the world and liked by all beings,
though breathing, doth
not
offer anything
to these five,
viz., gods, guests, servants, Pitris, and
himself, though endued with breath, is not yet alive.' The Yaksha asked,
'What
is weighter
than the
earth
itself ?
What is
higher than
the
heavens
?' What is fleeter than the wind ? And what is more numerous
than grass
?'
Yudhishthira answered,
'The mother
is
weightier
than
the earth
: the father is
higher
than the heaven
: the mind
is
fleeter
than the wind
: and our thoughts are more numerous than grass.'
The
Yaksha
asked,
'What
is
that which
doth
not
close
its
eyes
while
asleep
: What is that which doth not move after birth ?
What is that
which
is without heart ? And what
is that which swells
with its own
impetus
?'
Yudhishthira answered, 'A fish doth not close its eyes while
asleep
: an egg doth not move after birth
: a stone is without heart
: and
a
river
swelleth
with
its own
impetus.'
The Yaksha
asked,
'Who
is
the
friend
of
the
exile ?
Who
is
the
friend
of
the
house-
holder ?
Who
is
the
friend
of him
that
ails ?
And who
is
the
friend
of one about to die
?'
Yudhishthira answered,
'The friend
of
the
exile in a distant
land is his
companion, the friend
of the
house-
1 Nilakantha explains this correctly,
as I imagine, by supposing that
by
'sacrifice'
is meant
the
spiritual
sacrifice for the acquisition
of
pure
knowledge.
In the objective sacrifice which
one celebrates,
the Sama,
the
Yajus,
and the Eik
mantras are
all necessary.
In the subjective sacrifice
the
acquisition of
true knowledge,
life and
mind are
as necessary
as the
mantras from the Sama and the Yajus Vedas in an objective one.
And as
no objective sacrifice can do without the Eiks,
being principally
dependant
on them, so the subjective sacrifices for acquiring true knowledge can never
do without
prayerfulness, which,
I imagine,
is
represented
as
the
Eiks.
To understand this
passage thoroughly would require an intimate acquain-
tance with the ritual of a sacrifice like the Agnishtoma or any other of that
kind.
T.
2 Some texts road apatatam foruvapatam. If the former be the correct
reading, the meaning
would
be
'What is
the best
of things
that
fall
?'
Nilakantha explains both avapatam nivapatam in a spiritual sense.
By the
first
he understands
'They
that offer
oblation to
the
gods,' and by
the
second, 'They that
offer oblations
to the Pitris.'
The necessity
of a spiri-
tual interpretation, however,
is not very apparent.
T.

=== PAGE 407 ===

VANA PAEVA
678
holder is the wife
: the friend of him that ails is the physician
:
and
the
friend of him about to die is charity.
The Yaksha asked,
'Who
is the
guest of
all creatures ?
What
is the eternal duty ?
What, O foremost
of kings,
is Amrita ?
And what
is this entire Universe
?'
Yudhishthira
answered,
'Agni
is the guest of all creatures
: the milk of kine is amrita:
Homa (therewith)
is the eternal duty
: and this Universe consists of
air
alone.'
1
The Yaksha
asked,
'What
is
that which sojourneth alone ?
What
is that which
is re-born after
its
birth ?
What
is
the
remedy
against cold ? And what
is the largest field
?'
Yudhishthira answered,
'The sun sojourneth alone
: the
moon
takes
birth
anew
:
fire
is
the
remedy against cold
: and the Earth is the
largest
field.'
The
Yaksha
asked,
'What
is the highest refuge of virtue ?
What of fame ? What
of heaven ?
And
what,
of
happiness?'
Yudhishthira
answered,
'Liberality
is the
highest
refuge
of
virtue
:
gift,
of fame
:
truth,
of
heaven
: and good behaviour, of happiness.
The Yaksha asked,
'What
is the soul of man ?
Who is that friend bestowed on man by the gods ?
What is man's chief support?
And
what
also
is
his
chief
refuge?'
Yudhishthira
answered,
.'The
son
is
a
man's
soul
: the
wife
is
the
friend bestowed on man by the gods
: the clouds are his
chief
support
:
and gift is his chief refuge.'
The Yaksha asked,
'What is
the
best
of
all laudable things ?
What
is the most valuable of all
his
possessions
?
What is the best of all gains ?
And what
is
the
best
of
all
kinds
of
happiness
?' Yudhishthira answered,
"The best of all laudable things is
skill
: the best of all
possessions
is knowledge
: the best
of
all
gains
is
health
: and contentment is the best
of
all
kinds
of
happiness.'
The
Yaksha asked,
'What is the highest duty in the world ?
What is
that
virtue which always
beareth fruit ?
What is that which
if controlled,
leadeth not to regret ? And who are they with whom an alliance cannot
break
?'
Yudhishthira answered,
'The highest of duties is
to
refrain
from injury
: the rites ordained in the Three (Vedas) always bear
fruit
:
the mind,
if controlled,
leadeth to no regret
: and an
alliance
with
the
good
never breaketh.'
The Yaksha
asked,
'What
is
that
which,
if
renounced, maketh one agreeable
?
What
is that which, if
renounced,
leadeth to no regret ?
What
is that which,
if renounced,
maketh
one
wealthy ?
And what is that which
if renounced, maketh
one
happy ?'
Yudhishthira answered,
'Pride, if
renounced, maketh
one
agreeable:
wrath, if renounced leadeth
to no regret
:
desire,
if
renounced, maketh
one wealthy
: and avarice, if renounced, maketh one happy.' The Yaksha
asked,
'For what doth one give
away
to
Brahmanas ?
For
what
to
mimes and dancers ?
For what to servants ?
And for what
to king ?'
Yudhishthira answered,
'It is for religious merit that one giveth away
1 Yudhishthira has
the authority of the
Srutis for saying
that the one
pervading element of the universe is air.
T.
85

=== PAGE 408 ===

674
MAHABHABATA
to Brahmanas
: it is for fame that one giveth away to mimes
and
dan-
cers
: it is for supporting them that one giveth away
to
servants
: and
it is for obtaining relief from fear that one giveth to kings.' The Yaksha
asked,
With what
is the world enveloped ?
What
is
that
owing
to
which a thing cannot discover itself ?
For what are
friends
forsaken ?
And for what doth one
fail to go to heaven ?' Yudhishthira answered,
'The world
is enveloped with darkness.
Darkness
doth
not
permit
a
thing to show itself.
It
is from avarice that friends are forsaken.
And
it is connection with the world for which one faileth to
go
to heaven/
The Yaksha asked,
'For what may one
be
considered
as
dead ?
For
what may a kingdom be considered as dead ?
For what may a Sraddha
be considered
as
dead ?
And
for
what,
a
sacrifice
?'
Yudhishthira
answered,
'For want of wealth may a man be
regarded
as
dead.
A
kingdom for want of a king may be regarded as dead.
A
Sraddha
that
is performed with the aid of a priest that hath no learning may be regar-
ded as dead.
And a sacrifice in which
there are no gifts
to Brahmanas
is dead/
The Yaksha asked,
'What constitutes the way ?
What, hath
been spoken of as water ? What, as food ? And what, as poison ?
Tell
us also what
is the proper time of a Sraddha, and then
drink and
take
away as much as thou likest f
Yudhishthira answered,
'They that are
good constitute the way.
1
Space hath been spoken of as
water. 3
The
cow is food.
3
A request
is poison,
And a Brahmana
is regarded as the
proper time of a Sraddha.*
I do not know what thou mayst think of all
this, O Yaksha ?'
The Yaksha asked,
'What hath been said to be
the
sign of asceticism ?
And what
is
true
restraint ?
What
constitutes
forgiveness.
And what
is shame ?'
Yudhishthira answered,
'Staying
in one's own religion
is asceticism
: the restraint
of
the
mind
is
of
all
restraints the true one
: forgiveness consists
in
enduring
enmity
:
and
shame, in withdrawing from all unworthy acts.'
The
Yaksha
asked,
'What, O king is said to
be
knowledge ?
What,
tranquility ?
What
constitutes mercy ?
And what hath been called simplicity
?'
Yudhish-
1 The word used
in the question
is dik,
lit,
direction.
Obviously,
of
course,
it means in
this connection
way.
Yudhishtbira answers
that the
way which one is to tread along is that of the good.
T.
2 The
Srutis actually
speak of space as water.
These
are questions to
test Yudhishthira's knowledge of the Vedio cosmogony.
T.
3 The Srutis
speak of the cow as the only food,
in the following
sense.
The cow gives milk.
The milk
gives butter.
The butter is used
in Homa.
The Homa is
the cause
of the
clouds.
The clouds
give
rain.
The
rain
makes the seed to sprout forth and produce food,
Nilakantha endeavours to
explain
this
in
a
spiritual
sense.
There
is
however,
no need
of
such
explanation here.
T.
4 What Yudbishtbira means to say is that
there is no special time for
a Sraddha.
It is to be performed
whenever a good and
able priest may be
secured.
T.

=== PAGE 409 ===

VANA PARVA
676
thira answered,
'True knowledge
is that of Divinity. True tranquility
is that of the heart.
Mercy consists
in wishing happiness
to
all.
And
simplicity
is equanimity of heart.' The Yaksha asked,
'What enemy
is
invincible ?
What constitutes an incurable
disease
for man ?
What
sort of a man is called honest and what dishonest ?' Yudhishthira answer-
ed,
'Anger
is
an
invincible
enemy.
Covetousness
constitutes
an
incurable disease.
He
is honest that desires the weal
of
all
creatures,
and he is dishonest who
is
unmerciful.
1
The
Yaksha
asked,
'What,
O king, is ignorance ?
And what is pride ?
What also is to
be
under-
stood by idleness ?
And what hath been spoken of as grief ?'
Yudhish-
thira answered,
'True ignorance consists in not knowing
one's
duties.
Pride is a consciousness of one's being himself an
actor
or
sufferer
in
life.
Idleness consists in not discharging one's duties, and
ignorance
in
grief,'
The Yaksha
asked,
'What
hath
steadiness been
said
by the
Riahia to be ?
And what, patience ?
What
also
is
a
real
ablution ?
And what
is charity
?'
Yudhishthira answered,
'Steadiness consists in
one's staying in one's own
religion, and
true
patience
consists
in
the
subjugation of the senses.
A true bath consists
in
washing
the
mind
clean of all impurities, and
charity
consists
in
protecting
all
crea-
tures.'
The Yaksha asked,
'What man should be regarded
as learned,
and who should he called an atheist ? Who also
is to be called ignorant ?
What
is called desire and what are the sources of
desire ?
And what
is envy
?'
Yudhishthira answered,
'He
is
to
be
called
learned who
knoweth his duties.
An atheist
is he who
is ignorant and
so
also
he
is
ignorant who
is an atheist.
Desire
is due to objects
of
possession, and
envy
is nothing else than grief of heart/
The Yaksha asked,
'What
is
pride, and what
is hypocricy ?
What
is the grace of the gods, and what
is
wickedness ?'
Yudhishthira
answered,
'Stolid
ignorance
is
pride.
The setting up of a religious standard is
hypocracy.
The
grace
of
the
gods
is the fruit of our gifts, and wickedness consists
in
speaking
ill
of
others.'
The Yaksha asked,
'Virtue,
profit, and desire are opposed
to
one another.
How could things thus antagonistic to one
another
exist
together ?'
Yudhishthira answered,
'When
a
wife
and
virtue
agree
with each other, then all the three thou hast mentioned may exist
toge-
ther.'
The Yaksha asked,
'O bull of the Bharata race, who
is
he
that
is condemned to everlasting hell ?
It behoveth thee to soon answer the
question that I ask
!'
Yudhishthira answered,
'He that
summoneth
a
poor Brahmana promising to make him a gift and then tells him that he
hath nothing to give, goeth to
everlasting
hell.
He
also
must
go
to
everlasting hell, who imputes falsehood to the Vtdaa, the scriptures, the
Brahmanas, the gods, and the ceremonies in honour of the Pitria. He also
goeth to everlasting hell who
though
in
possession
of
wealth,
never
giveth away nor enjoyeth himself from avarice, saying, he hath none.' The

=== PAGE 410 ===

676
MAHABHAKATA
Yaksha asked,
'By what, O king, birth, behaviour,
study,
or
learning
doth a person become a Brahmana ?
Tell us with certitude
!'
Yudhish-
thira answered,
'Listen, O Yaksha
!
It
is neither birth, nor study, nor
learning, that is the cause of Brahmanahood, without doubt,
it
is behavi-
our that constitutes
it.
One's behaviour should always be well-guarded,
especially by a Brahmana. He who maintaineth his conduct unimpaired,
is never impaired himself,
Professors and pupils, in fact, all who study
the scriptures, if addicated to wicked habits, are to be regarded
as
illi-
terate wretches. He only is learned who performeth his religious duties.
He even that hath studied the four Vedas is to be regarded as a
wicked
wreth scarcely
distinguishable
from
a
Sudra
(if
his
conduct
be
not
correct).
He only who performeth the Agnihotra
and
hath
his
senses
under control,
is called a Brahmana
!'
The Yaksha asked,
4What doth
one gain that
speaketh
agreeable
words ?
What
doth
he
gain
that
always acteth
with judgment ?
What
doth he
gain
that
hath many
friends ?
And what
he
that
is
devoted
to
virtue ?'
Yudhishthira
answered,
'He that speaketh agreeable words becometh agreeable to all.
He that acteth with judgment obtaineth whatever he seeketh.
He that
hath many friends liveth happily.
And he
that
is
devoted
to
virtue
obtaineth a happy state
(in the next world).'
The Yaksha asked,
'Who
is truly happy ?
What is
most wonderful ?
What
is
the
path ?
And
what
is tht news?
Answer these four
questions of
mine and
let
thy
dead brothers revive.*
Yudhishthira answered,
'O
amphilbious
crea-
ture, a man who cooketh in his own house, on the fifth or the sixth part
of the day, with scanty vegetables,
but who
is
not
in
debt
and who
stirreth not from home,
is truly happy.
Day after
day
countless
crea-
tures are going to the abode
of Yama,
yet
those
that
remain behind
believe themselves to be immortal.
What can be more wonderful than
this ?
Argument leads to no certain conclusion, the Srutis are different
from one another
;
there
is not even one Rishi
whose
opinion
can
be
accepted by all
;
the truth about
religion
and
duty
is
hid
in
caves:
therefore, that alone is the path along which the great have
trod.
This
world full of ignorance
is like a pan.
The sun is fire, the days and nights
are fuel. The months and the seasons constitute the wooden ladle. Time
is the cook that
is cooking
all creatures in
that
pan
(with
such
aids)
;
this is the news.'
The Yaksha asked,
'Thou hast, O represser
of
foes,
truly answered all my questions
!
Tell us now who is truly a man, and
what man truly possesseth every kind of
wealth,'
Yudhishthira
answ-
ered,
'The report of one's good action reacheth heaven and
spreadeth
over the earth.
As long as that report lasteth, so long
is
a
person
to
whom the agreeable, and the disagreeable, weal and woe,
the
past
and
the future, are the same,
is said to possess every kind
of
wealth/
The
Yaksha said,
'Thou hast, O king
truly answered who
is
a
man, and

=== PAGE 411 ===

VANA PABVA
677
what man possesseth every
kind
of
wealth.
Therefore,
let
one
only
amongst
thy
brothers, whom thou
mayst
wish,
get
up
with
life
!'
Yudhishthira answered,
'Let this one
that
is
of
darkish
hue, whose
eyes are red, who
is tall like a large Sola tree, whose chest
is
broad
and
arms long, let this Nakula, O Yaksha, get up
with
life
!
The Yaksha
rejoined,
This Bhimasena is dear unto thee, and
this
Arjuna
also
is
one upon whom all of you depend
!
Why, then, O king dost thou,
wish
a step-brother to get up with his life
! How canst thou, forsaking Bbima
whose strength is equal to that of ten thousand elephants, wish
Nakula
to live ?
People said that this Bhima was
dear
to
thee.
From
what
motive then
dost
thou
wish
a
step-brother
to
revive ?
Forsaking
Arjuna the might of whose arm
is worshipped by all the sons of
Pandu,
why dost thou wish Nakula to revive ?'
Yudhishthira said,
'If virtue
is sacrificed, he that sacrificeth
it,
is himself lost.
So virtue also cheri-
sheth the
cherisher.
Therefore
taking
care
that
virtue
by
being
sacrificed may not sacrifice us, I never forsake virtue.
Abstention from
injury
is the highest virtuei and is, I ween, even higher than the
highest
object of attainment.
I endeavour to practise that
virtue.
Therefore,
let Nakula, O Yaksha, revive
!
Let men know that the king
is
always
virtuous
1
I will never depart from my duty.
Let Nakula,
therefore,
revive
!
My father had two
wives,
Kunti
and
Madri.
Let
both
of
them have children.
This
is what
I wish.
As Kunti is to me,
so
also
is Madri.
There
is no difference between them in my eye.
I desire
to
act equally towards my
mothers.
Therefore,
let Nakula
live?'
The
Yaksha
said,
'Since
abstention
from
injury
is
regarded
by
thee
as
higher than both profit and pleasure, therefore, let all thy brothers
live,
O bull of Bharata race !"
Thus ends three hundred and eleventh section in the
Araneya
of
the Vana Prava.
SECTION CCCXII
( Araneya Parva continued
)
Vaisampayana
continued,
"Then
agreeable
to
the
words
of
the
Yaksha the Pandavas rose up
; and in a moment their hunger and thirst
left them. Thereupon Yudhishthira said, 'I ask thee that art incapable of
being vanquished and that standest on one leg in the tank, what god art
thou, for I cannot take thee for a Yaksha
! Art thou the foremost of the
Vasus, or of the Rudras, or of the chief of the Maruts ? Or art thou the
lord himself of the celestials, wielder of the thunder-bolt?
Each of these
my brothers
is capable of
fighting as hundred thousand warriors, and I
see not the warrior that can slay them
all
!
I see also that their senses
have
refreshed,
as
if they
have sweetly
awaked from
slumber.
Art
thou a friend of ours, or even our father himself ?
At this the Yaksha

=== PAGE 412 ===

678
MAHABHABATA
replied,
'O child,
I am even thy father, the Lord of justice, possessed
of
great
prowess
!
Know, bull of the Bharata race,
that I came hither
desirous of beholding
thee
! Fame, truth, self-restraint, purity, candour,
modesty, steadiness,
charity, austerities and Brahmacharya, these are my
body! And abstention from injury, impartiality, peace, penances, sanctity
and freedom from malice are the doors (through which I am accessible).
Thou art always dear to me
! By good luck thou art devoted to the five
1
;
and by good luck also thou hast conquered the six. 2 Of the six, two appear
in the first part of life
; two in the middle part thereof
; and the remain-
ing two at the end, in order to make men repair to the next world, I am,
good betide thee, the lord of justice
I I came hither to test thy merit. I am
well-pleased to witness thy harmlessness; and, O sinless one, I will confer
boons on thee.
Do thou, O foremost of kings, ask of me boons.
I
shall
surely confer them, O sinless one
I
Those
that revere me, never come
by
distress
I
1
Yudhishthira
said,
'A
deer
was
carrying
away the
Brahmana's fire-sticks.
Therefore,
the
first
boon
that
I
shall ask,
is,
may
that
Brahmana's
adorations
to
Agni
be
not interrupted
!'
The
Yaksha said,
'O Kunti's son endued with splendour,
it was
I
who for
examinining thee,
was
carrying
away,
in
the
guise
of
a
deer,
that
Brahmana's fire-sticks I"
Vaisampayana continued,
"Thereupon
that worshipful one said.
'I give thee this boon
1 Good betide thee
!
O thou that are like unto an
immortal, ask thou a fresh boon
!
Yudhishthira said,
'We have
spent
these twelve years in the forest
;
and the thirteenth year is come.
May
no one recognise us, as we spend this year somewhere.'
Vaisampayana continued,
Thereat that
worshipful
one
replied,
'I give this boon unto thee
I*
And then reassuring Kunti's
son
having
truth for prowess,
he
also
said,
'Even
if, O
Bharata,
ye
range
this
(entire) earth in your proper forms none in the three worlds shall recog-
nise you.
Ye perpetuators of the Kuru race, through my grace, 'ye will
spend this thirteenth year, secretly and unrecognised, in
Virata's
king-
dom
!
And every one of you will be able at will to assume any form he
likes
1
Do ye now present the Brahmana
with
his
fire-sticks.
It was
only to test you that I carried them away
in the
form
of
a
deer
1
O
amiable
Yudhishthira,
do
thou
ask
for another boon that thou mayst
like
1
I will confer it on thee.
O foremost of men, I have not yet been
satisfied by granting boons to thee
I Do thou my son, accept a third boon
that is great and incomparable
1 Thou, O
king,
art
born
of
me,
and
Vidura of portion of mine I"
Thereat Yudhishthira said,
'It is enough
1 That is,
tranquiiifcy of mind,
self-restraint,
abstention from
sensual
pleasures, resignation, and Yoga meditation,
T.
2 That is, hunger,
thirst, sorrow,
bluntness of mortal feeling,
decrepi-
tude, and death.
T.

=== PAGE 413 ===

VANA PABVA
679
that
I have beheld thee with my senses,
eternal God of gods as thou art
1
O father, whatever boon thou wilt confer on me
I
shall
surely
accept
gladly
! May
I, O lord,
always
conquer
covetuousness
and
folly and
anger, and may my mind be ever devoted to charity, truth, and ascetic
austerities
1
The Lord of justice said,
'Even by
nature, O
Pandava,
hast thou been endued with these qualities,
for
thou
art
the Lord
of
justice himself
I
Do thou again attain what thou asked for
!'
f
Vaisampayana continued,
"Having said these words, the worshipful
Lord of justice, who
is the object of
contemplation
of
all
the
worlds,
vanished therefrom
; and the high-souled Pandavas after they had slept
sweetly were united with one another. And their fatigue dispelled, those
heroes returned to the hermitage, and gave back that Brahmana
his fire-
sticks. That man who pursueth this illustrious and fame-enhancing story
of the revival (of the Pandavas) and the meeting of father and son (Dharma
and
Yudhishthira),
obtaineth perfect tranquility of mind,
and sons and
grandsons, and also a life extending over a hundred years
I
And the mind
of that man that layeth this story to heart, never delighteth in unrighteous-
ness, or in disunion among friends, or misappropriation of other person's
property, or staining other people's wives, or in foul thoughts
1
Thus ends three hundred and twelfth section in the Araneya
of
the
Vana Parva,
SECTION CCCXIII
( Araneya Parva continued )
Vaisampayana continued,
"Commanded by the Lord of justice to thus
spend in disguise the thirteenth
year of non-discovery,
the high-souled
Pandavas, observant of vows and
having
truth for
prowess,
sat before
those learned and vow-observing ascetics that from regard were dwelling
with them in their exile in the forest.
And with joined hands they said
these
words,
with
the
intention
of obtaining permission to spend the
thirteenth year in the manner indicated. And they said,
4Ye know well that
the sons of Dhritarashtra have by deceit deprived us
of
our
kingdom,
and have
also
done
us many
other
wrongs
I We have passed twelve
years in the forest in great affliction.
The thirteenth year
only, which
we are to spend unrecognised, yet remaineth.
It behoveth you to permit
us now to spend this year in concealment
1
Those rancorous enemies of
outs Suyodhana, the wicked-minded Kama, and Suvala's son should they
discover
us,
would
do mighty wrong to the citizens and our
friends
1
Shall we all with theBrahmanas.be again established in our own kingdom?
Having said this, that pure-spirited son of Dharma
king
Yudhishthira,
overwhelmed with grief and
with
accents
choked
in
tears,
swooned
away.
Thereupon
the
Brahmanas, together with his brothers began to
cheer him up.
Then Dhaumya spake unto the king these words fraught
with mighty meaning,
'O king, thou art learned and capable of bearing

=== PAGE 414 ===

680
MAHABHABATA
privations, art firm in
promise,
and
of
subdued
sense
I
Men of such
stamp are not overwhelmed by any calamity whatever.
Even the high-
souled gods themselves have wandered over various
places
in
disguise,
for the purpose of overcoming foes. Indra for the purpose of overcom-
ing his foes, dwelt in disguise in the asylum of Giriprastha,
in Nishadha
and thus attained his end. Before taking his birth in the womb of Aditi,
Vishnu for the purpose of destroying
the
Daityas
passed
a
long
time
unrecognised, assuming the form of the Haya-griba (Horse-necked). Then
how
disguising
himself
in
the form
of
a
dwarf,
he
by
his prowess
deprived Vali of
his kingdom, hath been heard by thee
1
And thou hast
also heard how Huttasana entering into water and remaining in conceal-
ment, achieved the purpose of the gods.
And O thou
versed
in
duty,
thou hast heard how Hari with the view of overcoming his foes, entered
into Sakra's thunder-bolt, and lay concealed there.
And, O sinless one,
thou
hast
heard
of
the
office the regenerate Bishi Aurva at one time
performed for the gods, remaining concealed in his mother's womb. And
O child, living in concealment in every
part
of
the
earth,
Vivaswat,
endued with excellent energy, at last entirely burnt up all his foes. And
living disguised in the abode
of
Dasaratha,
Vishnu
of
dreadful
deeds
slew
the Ten-necked
one
in
battle.'
Thus remaining
in
disguise
in
various places,
high-souled
persons
have
before
this
conquered their
enemies in battle. Thus cheered by these words of Dhaumya, the virtu-
ous Yudhishthira, relying on his own
wisdom
and
also
that
acquired
from
the
scriptures
regained
his
composure.
Then that foremost of
strong persons, the mighty-armed Bhimasena endued with great strength
encouraging the king greatly, spake these words, 'Looking up to thy face
(for permission), the weilder of the Qandiva, acting according to his sense
of duty hath not yet, O kingi shown any rashness
1
And although fully
able to destroy the foe,
Nakula and Sahadeva of dreadful prowess have
been ever prevented by me
1 Never shall we swerve from that in which
thou wilt engage us
1
Do
thou
tell
us what
is to be done
!
We shall
speedily conquer
our
enemies
1 When Bhimasena
bad
said
this,
the
Brahmanas uttered benedictions on the Bharatas, and then obtaining their
permission, went to their respective quarters.
And all those
foremost
of Yatis and Munis
versed
in the Vedas, exceedingly desirous of again
beholdidg the Pandavas, went back to
their
homes.
And accompanied
by Dhaumya, these heroes, the five learned Pandavas equipped in vows
set out with Krishna.
And
each
versed
in
a separate science, and all
proficient in mantras and cognisant of when peace was to
be
concluded
and when war was to be waged those tigers among men, about
to
enter
upon
a
life
of non-recognition, the next day proceeded for a Krose and
then sat themselves down with the view of taking counsel of each other.
Thus ends the three hundred and thirteenth section in
the Araneya
of the Vana Parva.
END OF VANA PARVA
n

=== PAGE 418 ===

-

=== PAGE 419 ===

PK
Mahabharata.
English
3633
The Mahabharata o^
A2G3
Krishna-Dwaipayana Vyasa
19
C 2d.
ed. D
v.3
PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE
CARDS OR
SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY