=== PAGE 1 ===

THE MAHABHARATA
KRISHNA-DWAIPAYANA VYASA

Translated into English prose from the
original Sanskrit Text.
: BY
PRATAP CHANDRA ROY, C. 1. E.

VOL X

SANTI PARVA ( Part III )
and
ANUSASANA PARVA ( Part I)

ORIENTAL PUBLISHING CO.
11D, ARPULI LANE
CALCUTTA-12

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 2 ===

SANTI PARVA

SECTION CCCII

“Yudhishthira said,—'O king, thou hast duly propounded unto me,
in the way in which it should be, the path of Yoga which is approved by
the wise, after the manner of a loving preceptor unto his pupil. I ask
now about the principles of the Sankhya philosophy. Do thou discourse
to me on those principles in their entirety. Whatever knowledge exists
in the three worlds is known to thee I’

“Bhishma said,—'Listen now to what the subtile principles are of
the followers of the Sankhya doctrine have been established by all the
great and puissant Yatis having Kapila their first. In that doctrine
O chief of men, no errors are discoverable. Many, indeed, are its
merits, In fact, there is no fault in it. Comprehending with the aid
of knowledge that all objects exist with faults, indeed, understanding
that the objects—so difficult to cast off—with which human beings and
Pisachas and Rakshasas and Yakshas and snakes and Gandharvas and
pitris and those that are wandering in the intermediate orders of being
(such as birds and animals) and great birds (such as Garuda and others)
and the Maruts and royal sages and regenerate sages and Asuras and
Viswedevas and the celestial Rishis and Yogins invested with supreme
Puissance and the Prajapatis and Brahman himself are engaged, and
understanding truly what the highest limit is of one’s period of exis-
tence in this world, and apprehending also the great truth, O foremost
of eloquent men, about what is called felicity here, having a clear
knowledge of what the sorrows are that overtake when the hour comes
all those that are concerned with (transitory) objects, and knowing full
well the sorrows of those that have fallen into the intermediate orders
of being and of those that have sunk into hell, perceiving all the merits
and all the faults cf heaven, O Bharata, and all the demerits that attach
to the declarations of the Vedas and all the excellencies that are connec-
ted with them recognising the faults and merits of the Yoga and the
Sankhya systems of philosophy, realizing also that the quality of Sattwa
bas ten properties, that of Rajas has nine, and that of Tamas has eight,
that the Understanding has seven properties, the Mind has six, and Space
has five, and once more conceiving that the Understanding has four
properties and Tamas has three, and Rajas has two and Sattwa as, one,
and truly apprehending the path that is followed by all objects when
destruction overtakes them and what the course is of self knowledge,
the Sankhyas, possessed of knowledge and experience and exalted by

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 3 ===

2 MAHABHARATA

their perceptions of causes, and acquiring thorough auspiciousness,
attain to the felicity of Emancipation like the rays of the Sun, or the
Wind taking refuge in Space.’ Vision is attached to from; the sense of
scent to smell; the ear to sound ; the tongue to juices; and the skin (or
body) to touch. The wind has for its refuge Space. Stupefaction has
Tamas (Darkness) for its refuge. Cupidity has the objects of the senses
for its refuge, Vishnu is attached to (the organs of) motion. Sakra is
attached to (the organs of) strength. The deity of fire is attached to the
stomach, Earth is attached to the Waters. The Waters have Heat (or
fire) for their refuge. Heat attaches itself to the Wiud ; and the wind
has Space for its refuge ; and Space has Mahat for its refuge, and Mahat
has the Understanding for its foundation. The Understanding has its
refuge in Tamas; Tamas has Rajas for its refuge ; Rajas is founded upon
Sattwa ; and Sattwa is attached to the Soul. The soul has the glorious
and puissant Narayana for its refuge. That glorious deity has Emancipa-
tion for his refuge. Emancipation is independent of all refuge. Knowing
that this hody, that is endued with six and ten possessions, is the result
of the quality of Sattwa, understanding fully the nature of the’ physical
organism and che character of the Chetana that dwells’ within it,
recognising the one existent Being that live in the body viz., the Soul,
which stands aloof trom every concern of the body and in which no sin
can attach, realising the nature of that second object, viz.; the
acts of persons attached to the objects of the senses, understanding also
the character of the senses and the sensual obj-cts which have their
refuge in the Soul, appreciating the difficulty of Emancipation “and the
scriptures that bear upon it knowing fully the nature of the vital
breaths called Prana, Apana, Samana, Vyana, and Udana, asalso the two
other breaths, viz-, the one going downward and the other moving
upward indeed, knowing those seven breaths ordained to accomplish
seven ditterent functions, ascertaining the nature of the Prajapatis and
the Rishis and the high paths, many in number, of virtue or righteous.

1 The ten properties included in sattwa or Goodness are gladness, cheerfulness,
enthusiasm, fame righteousness, contentment, faith, sincerity, liberality, and lordship.
The nine properties included in Kaj.s or Passion are belief in the deities, (ostentatious)
charity, €.joyment and endurance of happiness and sorrow, disunion, exhibition of
manliness, lust and wrath. intoxication, pride, malice, and disposition to revile. The
eigne qualities included in Tamas or Jarkness are unconsciousness, stupefaction, excess
of stupefaction. muddiness of the under-tanding, blindness (of results), sleep, hredless«
ness. and procrastination The seven incidents of Kuddhi or rhe Understanding are
Mahur, consciousness, and the five subtile essences. The six incidents of Mind are Mind
and the five senses. The five incidents appertaining to Space are space, water. wind,
light, and earth. According toa different school of philosophy, Fuddhi or the Under.
standing is said to have four incidents appertaining to it, Viz». doubt, ascertainment,
prite, and memory. Tamas ( ‘arkness) also is otherwise regarded to have only three
incidents, Viz, inability of comprehension. partial comprehensicn. and totally erro-
neous comprehension, Rajas (Yassion) is (according to this school) regarded as having
ly the two incidents of inclination (to act) and sorrow. Sattwa has but one incident.
Viz., Enlightenment.—T. 2

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 4 ===

SANTI PABVA 8

ness, and the seven Rishis and the innumerable royal Rishis, O scorcher
of foes, andthe great celestial Rishis and the other regenerate Rishis
endued with the effulgence of the Sun, beholding all these falling away
from their puissance in course of many long ages, O monarch, hearing of
the destruction of even of all the mighty beings in the universe,
understanding also the inauspicious end that is attained, O king, by
creatures of sinful acts, and the miseries endured by those that fall into
the river Vaitarani in the realms of Yama, and the inauspicious
wanderings of creatures through diverse wombs, and the character of
their residence in the unholy uterus in the midst of blood and water
and phlegm and urine and feces, all of foul smell, and then in bodies
tbat result from the union of blood and the vital seed, of marrow and
sinews, abounding with hundreds of nerves and arteries and forming an
impure mansion of nine doors, comprehending also what is for his own
good what those divers combinations are which are productive of g. 0d
beholding the abominable conduct of creatures whose natures are
characterised by Darkness or Passion or Goodness, O chief of Bharata’s
race,—conduct that is reprehended, in view of its incapacity to acquire
Emancipation, by the followers of the Sankhya doctrine who are fully
conversant with the Soul, beholding the swallowing up of the Moon and
the Sun by Rahu, the falling of stars from their fixed positions and the
diversions of constellations from their orbits. knowing the sad separation
of all united objects and the diabolical behaviour of creatures in
devouring one another, seeing the absence of all intelligence in the
infancy of human beings and the deterioration and destruction of the
body, marking the little attachment creatures have tothe quality of
Sattwa in consequence of their being overwhelmed by wrath and
stupefaction, beholding also only one’ among thousands of human beings
resolved to struggle after the acquisition of Emancipation, under-
standing the difficulty of attaining to Emancipation according to what
is stated in the scriptures, seeing the marked solicitude that creatures
manifest for all unattained objects and their comparative indifference
to all objects that have been attained. marking the wickedness that
results from all objects of the senses O king and the repul-ive bodies, O
son of Kunti, of persons reft of life. and the residence, always fraught
with grief, of human beings, O Bharata, in houses (in the midst of
spouses and children), knowing the end of those terrible and fallen men
who become guilty of slaying Brahmanas, and of those wicked
Brahmanas that are addicted to the drinking of aleoholic stimulants,
and the equally sad end of those that become criminally attached to
the spouses of their preceptors, and of those men. O Yuchishtbira, that
do not properly reverence their mothers, as also of those that have no
reverence and worship to offer to the deities, understanding also, with

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 5 ===

4 MAHABHARATA

the help of that knowledge (which their philosophy imparts), the end
that of all perpetrators of wicked acts, and the diverse ends that
overtake those who have taken birth among the intermediate orders,
ascertaining the diverse declarations of the Vedas, the courses of seasons,
the fading of years, of months, of fortnights, and of days, beholding
directly the waxing and the waning of the Moon, seeing the rising and
the ebbing of the seas, and the diminution of wealth and its increase
once more, and the separation of united objects, the lapse of Yugas, the
destruction of mountains, the drying up of rivers, the deterioration of
(the purity of) the several orders and the end also of that deterioration
occurring repeatedly, beholding the birth, decrepitude, death, and
sorrows of creatures, knowing truly the faults attaching to the body and
the sorrows to which human beings are subject, and the vicissitudes to
which the bodies of creatures are subject, and understanding all the
faults that attach to their own souls, and also all the inauspicious faults
that attach to their own bodies (the followers of the Sankhya philosophy
succeed in attaining to Emancipation).

“Yudhishthira said—'O thou of immeasurable energy, what are
those faults that thou seest attaching to one’s body? It behoveth thee
to expound this doubt to me fully and truly !'

“Bhisbma said,—‘Listen, O slayer of foes ! The Sankhyas or followers
of Kapila, who are conversant with all paths and endued with wisdom,
say that there are in all five faults, O puissant one, in the human body.
They are Desire and Wrath and Fear and Sleep and Breath. These
faults are seen in the bodies of all embodied creatures. Those that are
endued with wisdom cut the root of wrath with the aid of Forgiveness.
Desire is cut off by casting off all purposes. By cultivation of the quality
of Goodness (Sattwa) sleep is conquered, and Fear is conquered by
cultivating Heedfulness. Breath is conquered by abstemiousness of diet
Oking. Truly understanding gunas by the aid of hundreds of gunas,
hundreds of faults, and diverse causes by hundreds of causes, ascertaining
that the world is like the froth of water, enveloped by hundreds of
illusions flowing from Vishnu, like a painted edifice, and as unsubstantial
asa reed, beholding it to be (as terrible as) a dark pit, or as unreal as
bubbles of water, for the years that compose its age areas shortlived
(compared to the duration of eternity) as bubbles, seeing it exposed
to immediate destruction, bereft of happiness, having certain ruin
for itsend and from which it can never escape, sunk in Rajas and
Tamas, and utterly helpless like an elephant sunk in mire,—noting all
this—the Sankayas, O king, endued with great wisdom, casting off all
affection arising from one’s relation towards one's children, by the aid,
O king, of that extensive and all-embracing knowledge which their
system advocates and cutting off quickly, with the weapon of knowledge

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 6 ===

SANTI PARVA 5

and the bludgeon of penances, O Bharata, all inauspicious scents born of
Rajas and all scents of a like nature arising from Tamas and all
auspicious scents arising from Sattwa and all pleasures of the touch (and
of the other senses) born of the same three qualities and inhering to the
body,—indeed, O Bharata, aided by the Yoga of knowledge, these Yatis
crowned with success,—cross the Ocean of life, That Ocean, so terrible
has sorrow for its waters. Anxiety and grief constitute its deep lakes.
Disease and death are its gigantic alligators. The great fears that strike
the heart at every step are its huge snakes. The deeds inspired by
‘Tamas are its tortoises. Those inspired by Rajas are its fishes, Wisdom
constitutes the raft for crossing it. The affections entertained for
objects of the senses are its mire- Decrepitude constitutes its region
of grief and trouble.’ Knowledge, O chastiser of foes, is its island,
Acts constitute its great depth. Truth is its shores. Pious observances
constitute the verdant weeds floating on its bosom-? Envy constitutes
its rapid and mighty current. The diverse sentiments of the heart
constitute its mines. The diverse kinds of gratification are its valuable
gems. Grief and fever are its winds. Misery and thirst are its mighty
eddies. Painful and fatal diseases are its huge elephants. The
assemblage of bones are its flights of steps, and phlegm is its froth,
Gifts are its pearl-banks. The lakes of blood are its corals, Loud
laughter constitutes its roars. Diverse sciences are its impassability.
Tears are its brine- Renunciation of company constitutes the high
refuge (of those that seek to cross it). Children and spouses are its
unnumbered leeches. Friends and kinsmen are the cities and towns
on its shores. Abstention from injury, and Truth, are its boundary
line. Deatn is its storm-wave- The knowledge of Vedanta is its island
(capable of affording refuge to those that are tossed upon its waters).
Acts of compassion towards all creatures constitute its life-buoys,*
and Emancipation is the priceless commodity offered to those voyaging
on its waters in search of merchandise. Like its substantive prototype
with its equine head disgorging flames of fire, this ocean too has its
fiery terrors. Having transcended the liability, that is so difficult to
transcend, of dwelling within the gross body, the Sankhyas enter into
pure space-* Surya then bears, with his rays, those righteous men that

1 ‘Durga’ is an inaccessible region such as a-forest or wilderness which cannot be
passed through except with great pain and danger.—T.
2 The correct reading seems to be ‘sthita-vratati-samkulam’—T.

3 ‘Udadhi’ is, literally, a water-jar. In this country most people, while
swimming, use water-jars as buoys. The mouth of jar being dipped into the water
the sir confined within it serve to support heavy weights. Ihave heard that the most
rapid currents are crossed by milkmaids in this way, all the while bearing milk pails
on their heads—T.

4 In the second line of 72, ‘dustaram janma’ means janma-yuktam dustaram.’—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 7 ===

6 MAHABHARATA

ate practicers of the Sankhya doctrines. ‘Like the fibres of the
lotus-stalk conveying water to the flower into which they all converge,
Surya, drinking all things from the universe, conveys them unto
those good and wise men.' Their attachments all destoyed, possessed of
energy, endued with wealch of penances, and crowned with success,
these Yatis, O Bharata, are borne by that wind which is subtile,
cooling, fragrant, and delicious to the touch, O Bharata! In fact, that
wind which is the best of the seven winds, and which blows in regions
of great felicity. conveys them, O son of Kunti, to that which is the
highest end in space.? Then space into which they are carried, O
monarch, conveys them to the highest end of Rajas.* Rajas then bear
them to the highest end of Sattwa. Sattwa then bears them, O thou
of pure soul, to the Supreme and puissant Narayana. The puissant and
pure-sould Narayana at last, through himself, bears them to the
Supreme Soul. Having reached the Supreme Soul, those stainless
persons who have (by that time) become the body of (what is called).
That* attain to immortality, and they have never afterwards to return
from that position, O King! That is the highest end, O son of Pritha,
which is attained by those high-souled men who have transcended the
influence of all pairs of opposites

“Yudhishthira said—'O sinless one, have those persons of firm vows
after they have attained to that excellent position which is fraught with
puissance and felicity, any recollection of their lives including birth
and death? It behoveth thee to tell me properly what the truth isin
respect, O thouof Kuru's race. Ido not think it proper.to question
any one else than thee! Observing the scriptures bearing upon
Emancipation, I find this great fault in the subject (for certain scrip.
tures on the topic declare that consiousness disappears in the emanci-
pate state, while other scriptures declare the very reverse of this),
If, having attained tothis high state, the Yatis continue>to live in
consciousness, it would seem, O king, that the religion of Pravritti is
superior. If, again, consciousness disappears from the emancipate state

1 The sense seems to be that by practising the Sankhya doctrines men cease to have
any regard for even their gross bodies. They succeed in realising their existence as
independent of allearthly or heavenly objects. What is meant by the Sun bearing
them in his rays and conveying to them all things from every part of the universe is
that these men acquire great puissance. This isnot the pusissance of Yoga tut of
knowledge. Everything being regarded as unsubstantial and transitory. the po
Indra himself, or of Brahman, is looked upon as desirable and unworthy of acai
Sincere conviction of this kind and the course of conduct that is confirmable to it
is literally puissance of the highest kind, for all the purposes of puissance are capable
of being served by it.—T.

2 This is taken as meaning that the Sankhyas are conveyed to the firmament
of the heart. Perhaps, what is intended by it is that they become withdrawn frem
external objects and even the impressions of all external things.—T.

3. Perhaps, this means the pleasures of heaven.—T.

4 I. e. they who have identified themselves with Brabma.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 8 ===

SANTI PARVA 7

and'Gne who has become emancipate only resembles a person sunk in
dreamless slumber, then nothing can be more improper than to say
that there is really no consciousness in Emancipation (for of all that
happens in dreamless slumber is that one's consciousness is temporarily
overshadowed ‘and suspended, but never lost, for it returns when one
awakes from that slumber)?"

“Bhishma said—'However difficult it may be to answer it, the
question whick thou hast asked, O son, is proper. Verily, the question
is of such a kind that even they that are possessed of great learning
become stupefied in answering it, O chief of Bharata’s race. For
all that, bear what the truth is as expounded by me. The high-souled
followers of Kapila have set their high understandings on this point.
The senses of knowledge, O King, planted in the bodies of embodied
creatures, are- employed’ in their respective functions of perception.
They are the instruments of the Soul, for it is through them that
subtile Being ‘perceives.? Disunited with the Soul, the senses are
like lumps of wood. and are without doubt, destroyed (in respect of
the functions they serve) like the froth that is seen on the bosom of
the ocean.* When the embodied creature, O ‘scorcher‘of foes, sinks
into sleep along with his senses, the subtile Soul then roves among all
subjects like the wind through space.‘ The subtile Soul, during
slumber, continues to see (all forms) and touch all objects of touch,
O king, and taken in other perceptions, as well as when it is awake.
In consequence of their inability to act without their director, the
senses, during sleep, all become extinguished in their respective places
(and lose their powers) like snakes deprived of poison.® At such
times, the subtile Soul, repairing into the respective place of all the
senses, without dout, discharges all their functions.’ All the

1 Yudhisthira’s question seems to be this. Is there or is there not consciousness
in the emancipate state? Different scriptures answer this question difterently.
If it be said that there is consciousness in that state, then why di-card heaven ard
its pleasures, or the religion ot Prevritti or acts which lead to those pleasures?
Where is the necessity then of Sannyasa or the religion of Nivritti or abstention
from all acts? On the supposition of there being consciousness in the emancipate
state, the Religion of Pravritti should be taken as superior. If,on the otherhand, the

steaze of cOusciousness be denied, that would be an error. ‘Dukshataram’ is
yuktaram'—T.

2 Although I make use of the word 'perceive’ yet rememberirg that the mind
is included among the senses and regarded as the sixth sense, the functions of
recollection, representation, &c, are also implied bs the word ‘pasyati.” The Furdwan
trauslator gives a ridicul. usly etroneous version of this Verse—T.

The Commentator expl.ins that the simile of the froth is introduced in
consequence of its disappeatance with the disappearance of water. K. P, Singha is
incorrect in taking the instance of froth as illustrative cf the quickness of the
destuction —T.

4° ‘Sarvatra’ does not mean‘through every part of the sleeper's kecdy" as. .P.
Singha takes it, but ‘sarvavishaye’ as the Commentator correctly explains it.—T.

‘Wha’ is ‘sapne’ *Anis :h' is ‘nasti isah or pravartaah yasya.—T.

€ For the Soul, in dreams, sees and hears and touches andsmells &c, precisely
as it does while awake—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 9 ===

8 MAHABHARATA

qualities of Sattwa, all the attributes of the Understanding, O Bharata,
as also those of Mind, and Space, and Wind, O thou of righteous soul,
and all the attributes of liquid substances, of Water, O Partha, and
of Earth,—these senses with these qualities—O Yudhishthira, which
inhere to Jiva-souls, are along with the Jiva-soul itself, overwhelmed
by the Supreme Soul or Brahma. Acts also, good and bad, overwhelm
that Jiva-soul. Like disciples waiting upon their preceptor with
reverence, the senses too wait upon the Jiva-soul transcends Prakriti’
it attains to Brahma that is without change, that is highest, that is
Narayana, that is beyond all pairs of opposites, and that transcends
Prakriti. Freed from both merit and demerit, the Jiva-soul entering
the Supreme Soul which is divested of all attributes, and which is the
home of all auspiciousness, does not return thence, O Bharata. What
remains, O son, is the mind with the senses, O Bharata. These have
to come back once more at the appointed season for doing the
bidding of their great Master." Soon after, O son of Kunti, (when this
body is cast off) the Yati striving after Emancipation, endued as he
is with knowledge and desirous as he is of Guna, succeeds in attaining
to that Peace of Emancipation which is his who becomes bodiless.?
The Sankhyas, O king, are endued with great wisdom. They succeed
in attaining to the highest end by means of this kind of knowledge.
There is no knowledge that is equal to this. Do not yield to any kind
of doubt. The Knowledge which is described in the system of the
Sankbyas is regarded as the highest. That knowledge is immutable

and is eternally fixed. It is eternal Brahma in fulness. It has no
beginning, middle and end. It transcends all pairs of opposites.
It is the cause of the creation of the universe. It stands in fulness,
It is without deterioration of any kind. It is uniform, and everlasting.
Thus are its praises sung by the wise. From it flow creation and
destruction and all modifications. The great Rishis speak of it and
applaud it in the sciptures. All learned Brahmanas and all righteous
men regard it as flowing from Brahma, Supreme, Divine, Infinite,
Immutable, and Undeteriorating. All Brahmanas again that are
attached to objects of the senses adore and applaud it by ascribing to
it attributes that belong to illusion.‘ The same is the view of Yogins
well observant of penances and meditation and of Sankhyas of

1 The sense seems to be that a person who becomes emancipate in this life
becomes so in Samadhi. When the state of Samidhi is over, his mind and senses
return and returning they do the bidding of the Supreme, i e. bring about both
happiness and misery, which, of course, are the consequences of the acts of past lives
though that happiness and misery are not feft. In the next Verse is said that these
men very soon leave their bodies and become freed frem rebirth —T.

2_ There are two kinds of Emancipation ; one is attainable here, in this body,
It is ‘Jivan-mukei’ the other is ‘Videha-kaivalya’ or that which becomes cne's when
one is bodiless. In 93, Jivan-mukti has been spoken of. In this Verse, the observations
apply to *Videhakaivaly:

3. ‘Vadanti’ is ‘stuvanti.’ Such men hymn its praises by regarding it as Supreme
Deity possessed of attributes. Those attibutes. of course, are the result of illusion,
for in its real nature there can be no attributes in Brahma.—Ty

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 10 ===

SANTI PARVA 417

immeasureble insight. The Srutis declare, O son of Kunti, that the
Sankhya form of philosophy is the form of that Formless one. The
cognitions (according to that philosophy) have, O chief of Bharata’s
race, been said to be the knowledge of Brahma.?

““There are two kinds of creatures on Earth, O lord of Earth, viz.,
mobile and immobile. Of these that are mobile are superior, That
high knowledge, O king, which exists in perons conversant with
Brahma, and that which occurs in the Vedas, and that which is found
in other scriptures, and that in Yoga, and that which may be seen in
the diverse Puranas, are all, O monarch, to be found in Sankhya
Philosophy.?, Whatever knowledge is seen to exist in high histories
whatever knowledge occurs. O king, in the sciences appertaining to
the acquisition of wealth as approved by the wise, whatever other
knowledge exists in this world,—all these—flow, O high-souled
monarch, from the high knowledge that occurs among the Sankhays.
Tranquillity of soul high puissance all subtile knowledge of which the
scriptures speak, penances of subtile force, and all kinds of felicity.
O king, have all been duly ordained in the Sankhya system. Failing
to acquire, Oson of Pritha, that compelete knowledge which is
recommended by their system, the Sankhays attain to the status of
deities and pass many years in felicity. Lording it over the celestials
as they will, they fall, upon the expiration of the allotted period, among
learned Brahmanas and Yotis.* Casting off this body, those regenerate
ones that follow the Sankhya system enter into the superior state of
Brahma like the celestials entering into the firmament by devoting
themselves wholly to that adorable system which is theirs and which is
worshipped by all wise men. Those regenerate persons that are devoted
to the acquisition of that knowledge which is recommended in the
Sankhya system, even if they fail to attain to eminence, are never seen
to fall among intermediate creatures, or to sink into the status of sinful
men. That high-souled person who is fully conversant with the vast,
high, ancient, ocean-like, and immeasurable Sankhya system that is
pure and liberal and agreeable, becomes, O king, equal to Narayna. I
have now told thee, O god among men, the truth about the Sankhya
system. Itis the embodiment of Narayana, of the universe as it exists

1 Brahma is knowledge without duality’ knowledge without the conscicusess
of knower and known. The knowledge or cognition of an object, when object is arni-
hilated, assumes the form of that knowledge which is called Brahma.—T,

2 The Commentator explains that the object of this Verse is to show that among
mobile creatures those endued with knowledge are superior, and among all kinds cf
knowledge, the knowledge occuring in the Sankbya system is the bighest.—T.

3 Tee, if in consequence of any defect of practice or Sadhana, the Sankhyas foil to
attain to Emancipation, they at least become translated into gods,—T,

53 Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 11 ===

418 MAHABHARATA

from the remotest time. When the time of Creation comes, He causes
the Creation to start into life, and when the time comes for destruction,
He swallows up everything. Having withdrawn everything into his

own body he goes to sleep,—that inner Soul of the universe.”*

SECTION CCCIII

“Yudhishthira said,—'What is that which is called Undeteriorating
and. by attaining to which no one has to come back? What, again, is
that which is called Deteriorating, and by attaining to which one has
to rerurn once more ? O slayer of foes, I ask thee the distinction that
exists,O thou of mighty arms, between the Deteriorating and the
Undeteriorating ones for understanding them both truly, O delighter
of the Kurus, Brahmanas conversant which the Vedas speak of thee as
an Ocean of knowledge. Highly-blessed Rishis and Yatis of high souls
do the same. Thou hast very few days to live, When the Sun turns
from the southern path for entering into the northern, thou shalt attain
to thy high end. When thou shalt leave us, from whom shall we hear
of all that is beneficial for us? Thou art the lamp of Kuru's race.
Indeed thou art always blazing with the light of knowledge. O
perpetuator of Kuru's race, I desire, therefore to hear all this from
thee. Listening to thy discourses that are always sweet like nectar,
my curiosity, without being satiated is always increasing I’

“Bhishma said—'I shall, in this connection, relate to thee the old
narrative of the discourse that took place between Vasishtha and king
Karala of Janaka’s race. Once on a time when that foremost of Rishis.
Viz., Vasishtha, endued with the effulgence of the Sun, was seated at his
ease, king Janaka asked him about that highest knowledge which is for
our supreme good. Highly proficient in that department of knowledge
which is concerned with the Soul and possessed of certain conclusions
in respect of all branches of that science,* as Maitravaruni, that
foremost of Rishis, was seated the king approaching him with joined
hands, asked him in bumble words, well pronounced and sweet and
destitute of all controversial spirit, the question.—O holy one, I desire
to hear, of Supreme and Eternal Brahma by attaining to which men of
wisdom have not to come back. I desire also to know that which is
called Destructible and That into which this universe enters when
destroyed. Indeed, what is That which is said to be indestructible,
suspicious, beneficial and free from evil of every kind ?—’

1 I.e., it is everything—T.
2 That Narayana who does all this is the embodiment of the Sankhya system—T.

3 The Commentator explains the compound ‘Adhyatmagatinischayam,
differently.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 12 ===

SANTI PARVA 419

“Vasishtha said—Hear, O lord of Earth, as to how this universe
is destroyed, and, of That which was never destroyed and which
will never be destroyed at any time. Twelve thousand years, (according
to the measure of the celestials), make a Yuga, four such Yugas taken
a thousand times, make a Kalpa which measures one day of Brahman.’
Brahman’s night also, O king, is of the same measure. When Brahman
himself is destroyed.? Sambhu of formless soul and to whom the Yuga
attributes of Anima, Laghima, &c, naturally inhere, awakes, and once
more Creates that First or Eldest of all creatures, possessed of vast
proportions of infinite deeds, endued with form, and identifiable with
the universe. That Sambhu is otherwise called Isana (the lord of
everything), He is pure Effulgence, and transcends all deterioration,
having his hands and feet stretching in all directions, with eyes and
head and mouth everywhere, and with ears also in every place. That
Being exists, overwhelming the entire universe. The eldest-born Being
is called Hiranyagarbha. This holy one has (in the Vedanta) been
called the Understanding. In the Yuga scriptures He called the
Great, and Virinchi, and the Unborn. In the Sankhya scriptures,
He is indicated by diverse name, and regarded as having Infinity
for his Soul. Of diverse forms and constituting the soul of the universe.
He is regarded as One and Indestructible. The three worlds of
infinite ingredients have been created by Him without assistance from
any source and have been overwhelmed by him. In consequence of
His manifold forms, He is said to be of universal form. Undergoing
modifications He creates Himself by Himself. Endued with mighty
energy, He first creates Consciousness and that Great Being called
Prajapati endued with Consciousness, The Manifest (or Hiranyagarbha)
is created form the Unmanifest. This is called by the learned the
Creation of Knowledge. The creation of Mahan (or Virat) and
Consciousness, by Hiranyagarbha, is the Creation of Ignorance.®
Ascription of attributes (worthy of worship) and the destruction
thereof, called respectively by the names of Ignorance and Knowledge
by persons learned by the interpretation of the Srutis, then arose,
referring to this, that, or the other of the three (viz, Akshara,
Hiranyagarbha, or Virat).‘ Know, O king, that the creation of the

L Both the Vernacnlar trauslators render this Verse wrongly.—T-
2 ‘Vasyante’ is explained by the Commentator as implying Brahmanah ante,’ and
not ‘at the end of that night’. The line occurs in Manu (Chap 1.74) where ‘ance’ refers
to Brahmana’s day and night. Vasishtha here refers to Mobapralaya, and not eny inter-
mediate Pralaya—T a
3 In the creation,of Mahan or Prajapati or Virat, and of Consciousness, the ele-
ment of Tamas or Ignorance predominates.—T. i
~ "4 This is a very abstruse Verse. I am not sure that I have understood it correctly.
Whit is said here seems to be this: from Akshara arose Hiranyagarbha : from Hiranya-
garbha arose Virat. This, that or the other is worshipped by ordinary men, while
Persons: possessed of reali insight do not invest any. of them with attributes worthy of

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 13 ===

490 MAHABHARATA

(subtile) elements from consciousness is the third.? ‘In all kinds of
consciousness is the fourth creation which flows modification’ of the
third. This fourth creation comprises Wind and Light and Space
and Water and Earth, with their properties of sound, touch, form,
taste and scent, This aggregate of ten arose, without doubt, at
the same time. The fifth creation, O monarch, is that which has
arisen from combination of the primal elements (named above).
This comprises the ear, the skin, the eyes, the tongue, and the nose
forming the fifth, and speech, and the two hands, and the two legs,
and the lower duct, and the organs of generation. The first five of
these constitute the organs of knowledge, and the last five the organs of
action. All these, with mind, arose simultaneously O king. These
constitute the four and twenty topics that exist in the forms of all living
creatures. By understanding these properly, Brahmanas possessed of
insight into the truth have never to yield to sorrow. In the three worlds
a combination of these, called body, is possessed by all embodied crea-
tures. Indeed, O king a combination of those is known as such in deities
and men and Danavas, and Yakshas and spirits and Gandharvas and
Kinnaras and great snakes, and Charanas and Pisachas, in celestial Rishis
and Rakshasas, in biting flies, and worms, and gnats, and vermin born
of filth and rats, and dogs and Swapakas and Chaineyas and Chandalas
and Pukkasas in elephants and steeds and asses and tigers, and trees and
kine. Whatever other creatures exist in water or space or on earth,
for there is no other place in which creatures exist as we have heard,
have this combination. All these, O sire, included within the class
called Manifest, are seen to be destroyed day after day. Hence, all
creatures produced by union of these four and twenty are said to be
destructible.

s “ This then is the Indestructible. And since the universe, which
is made up of Manifest and Unmanifest, meet with destruction, there-
fore, it is said to be Destructible. The very Being called Mahan who is
the eldest-born is always spoken of as an instance of the Destructible.
I have now told thee, O monarch, all that thou hadst asked me, Trans-
cending the four and twenty topics already adverted to is the twenty-
fifth called Vishnu, That Vishnu in consequence of the absence of all
attributes, is not a topic (of knowledge) though as then which pervades

worship. The speaker says that the ascription of attributes, called Ignorance, and the
non-ascription for destruction of that ascriptions called Knowledge, (with respect to
Virat or Hitanyagarbha or Akshara), then arose. It might be asked that when there
Were No men as yet to worship or to condemn such worship, how could the two arise ?
The answer is that the two, in their subtile forms, came into existence and were after-
wards availed of by men when men come into being.—T.

1 From Akshara or the Indestructible is Hiranyagarbha. From Hiranyagarbha is
Mahan or Virat and Consciousness. From the last are the subtile elements.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 14 ===

SANTI PARVA 421

all the topics, he has been called so by the wise. Since that which is
destructible has caused all this that is Manifest, therefore, all this is
endued with form. The twenty-fourth, which is Prakriti, is said to
preside over all this (which has sprung from her modifications), The
twenty-fifth, which is Vishnu, is formless and, therefore, cannot be said
to preside over the universe.’ It is that Unmanifest (Prakriti), which,
when endued with body (in consequence of union with Chit) dwells in
the hearts of all creatures endued with body. As regards eternal
Chetana (the Indestructible), although he is without attributes and with-
out form, yet he (in consequence of a union with Prakriti) assumes all
forms. Uniting with Prakriti which has the attributes of birth and
death, he also assumes the attributes of birth and death. And in conse-
quence of such union he becomes an object of perception and though in
reality divested of all attributes yet he comes to be invested therewith,
It is in this way that the Mahan-Soul (Hiranyagarbha), becoming united
with Prakriti and invested with Ignorance, undergoes modifications and
becomes conscious of Self. Uniting with the attributes of Sattwa and
Rajas and Tamas, he becomes identified with diverse creatures belonging
to diverse orders of Being, in consequence of his forgetfulness and his
waiting upon Ignorance. In consequence of his birth and destruction
arising from the fact of his dwelling in upon with Prakriti, he thinks
himself to be no other than what he apparently is. Regarding himself
as this or that, he follows the attributes of Sattwa, Rajas, and Tamas.
Under the influence of Tamas, he attains to diverse kinds of conditions
that are affected by Tamas. Under the influence of Rajas and Sattwa,
he attains similarly to conditions that are affected by Rajas and Sattwa.
There are three colours in all, viz, White, Red, and Dark. All those
colours appertain to Prakriti (so that He it is who becomes White or
Red or Dark according as the nature of the Prakriti with which is He
becomes identified for the time being). Through Tamas one goes to
hell. Through Rajas one attains to and remains in the status of
humanity. Through Sattwa, people ascend to the regions of the deities
and become sharers of great felicity. By adhering to sin continuously
one sinks into the intermediate order of beings. By acting both
righteously and sinfully one attains to the status of the deities. In this
way the twenty-fifth, viz., Akshara (the Indestructible), the wise say, by

union with the unmanifest (Prakriti), becomes transformed into Kshara
(destructible), By means of knowledge however, the Indestructible
becomes displayed in His true nature—”

1 The meanfngs of such Verses depend upon the grammatical significations of
certain words that are used. They can scarcely be rendered accurately into ary other
language not derived from Sanskrit. What is said here is that it is Frakriti which must
be said to be the Adhishthatri of the universe. Vishnu is notso. Vishnu Brahma,
Akshara, or the Indestuctible, however, is said to cover or pervade the universe
(vyapnoti). Vishnu is Vyapka but no Adhishthatri.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 15 ===

SECTION CCCIV

“‘Vasishtha said—Thus in consequence of his forgetfulness the
Soul follows ignorance and obtains thousands of bodies one after another.
He attains to thousands of births among the intermediate orders and
sometimes among the very gods in consequence of his union with (parti-
cular) attributes and the puissance of attributes.' From the status of
humanity, he goes to heaven and from heaven he comes back to huma-
nity, and from humanity he sinks into hell for many long years. As
the worm that fabricates the cocoon shuts itself, completely on every
side by means of the threads it weaves itself, even so the Soul, though
in reality transcending all attributes, invests himself on every side with
attributes (and deprives himself of liberty).? Though transcending (in
his real nature) both happiness and misery, it is thus that he subjects
himself to happiness and misery. It is thus also that, though transcend-
ing all diseases, the Soul regards himself to be afflicted by headache and
opthalmia and toothache and affections of the throat and abdominal
dropsy, and burning thirst, and enlargement of glands, and cholera, and
vitiligo, and leprosy, and burns, and asthma and phthisis, and epilepsy,
and whatever other diseases of diverse kinds are seen in the bodies of
embodied creatures. Regarding himself, through error, as born among
thousands of creatures in the intermediate orders of being, and some-
times among the gods, he endures misery and enjoys the fruits of his
good deeds. Invested with Ignorance he regards himself as robed some-
times in white cloth and sometimes in full dress consisting of four pieces
or as lying on floors (instead of on beds on bedsteads) or with hands and
feet contracted like those of forgs or as seated upright in the attitude of
ascetic contemplation, or as clad in rags or as lying or sitting under the
canopy of heavenor within mansions built of bricks and stone or on
rugged stones or on ashes ot bare stones or on the bare earth or on beds
or on battlefields or in water or in mire or on wooden planks or on
diverse kinds of beds; or impelled by desire of fruits, he regards himself
as clad in a scant piece of cloth made of grass or as totally nude or as
robed in silk or in skin of the black antelope or in cloth made of flax
or in sheep-skin or in tiger-skin or in lion-skin or in fabric of hemp, or
in barks of birch or in cloths made of the produce of prickly plants, or
in vestures made of threads woven by worms or of torn rags or in
diverse other kinds of cloth too numerous to mention. The soul regards

1 In the previous Section it has been said that through Tamas he takes birth
among the intermediate orders, through Rajas among human beings, and through Satewa
among gods. The root ‘“kshi" in’‘Gunakshayat’ means ‘aisaryya or puissance —T.

2 The soul weaves acocoon with attributes (or, acts which result from actri-
butes), and though free deprives himself of freedom.—T. ‘

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 16 ===

SANTI PARVA 428

himself also as wearing diverse kinds of ornaments and gems, or as eat-
ing diverse kinds of food. He regards himself as sometimes eating at
intervals of one night, or once at the same hour every day, or as at the
fourth, the sixth, and the eighth hour every day, or as once in six or
seven or eight nights, or as once in ten or twelve day, or as once ina
month, or as eating only roots, or fruits, or as subsisting upon air or
water alone, or on cakes of sesame husk, or curds or cowdung, or the
urine of the cow or potherbs or flowers or moss or raw food, or as
subsisting on fallen leaves of trees or fruits that have fallen down and
lay scattered on the ground, or diverse other kinds of food, impelled by
the desire of winning (ascetic) success. The Soul regards himself as
adopting the observance of Chandrayana according to the rites ordained
in the scriptures, or diverse other vows and observance, and the courses
of duty prescribed for the four modes of life, and even direlictions of
duty, and the duties of other subsidiary modes of life included in the
four principal ones, and even diverse kinds of practices that distinguish
the wicked and sinful. The Soul regards himself as enjoying retired
spots and delightful shades of mountains and the cool vicinity of spring
and fountains, and solitary river banks and secluded forests, and
sacred spots dedicated to the deities, and lakes and waters withdrawn
from the busy hunts of men, and lone mountain caves affording the
accomodation that houses and mansions afford. The Soul regards him-
self as employed in the recitation of different kinds of hidden Mantras
or as observing different vows and rules and diverse kinds of penances,
and sacrifices of many kinds, and rites of diverse sorts. The Soul
regards himself as adoptiug sometimes the way of traders and merchants
and the practices of Brahmanas and Kshatriyas and Vaisyas and Sudras,
and gifts of diverse kinds unto those that are destitute or blind or help.
less. In consequence of his being invested with Ignorance, the Soul
adopts different attributes of Sattwa and Rajas and Tamas, and
Righteousness and Wealth and pleasure. Under the influence of Prakriti
the Soul, undergoing modification himself, observes and adopts and
practises all these and regards himself as such. Indeed, the Soul regards
himself as employed in the utterance of the sacred mantras Swaha and
Swadha and Vashat, and in bowing unto those he regards as his Supe-
riors; in officiating in the sacrifices of others, in teaching pupils, making
gifts and accepting them ; in performing sacrifices and studying, the
scriptures, and doing all other acts and rites of this kind. The Soul
tegards himself as concerned with birth and death and disputes and
slaughter. All these, the learned say, constitute the path of acts good
and bad. It is the goddess Prakriti who cause birth and death. When
the time approaches for universal Destruction, all existent objects and
attributes are withdrawn by the Supreme Soul which then exists alone

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 17 ===

424 MAHABHARATA

like the Sun withdrawing at evening all his rays; and when the time
comes for Creation He once more creates and spreads them out like the
Sun shedding and spreading out his rays when morning comes. Even
thus the Soul, for the sake of sport, repeatedly regards himself invested
with all these conditions, which are his own forms and attributes,
infinite in number, and agreeable to himself. It is this way that the
Soul, though really transcending the three attributes, becomes attached
to the path of acts and creates by modification Prakriti invested with
the attributes of birth and death and indentical with all acts and condi-
tions which are characterised by the three attributes of Sattwa, Rajas,
and Tamas. Arrived at the path of action, the Soul regards particular
acts tobe endued with particular characteristics and productive of
particular ends. O monarch, the whole of this universe has been blinded
by Prakriti and all things have been diversely overwhelmed (through
Prakriti) by the attributes of Rajas and Tamas. It is in consequence of
the Soul being invested by Prakriti that these pairs of opposites produc-
tive of happiness and woe, repeatedly come. It is in consequence of
this Ignorance that Jiva regards these sorrows to be his and imagines
them as pursuing him. Indeed, O monarch, through that Ignorance it
is that Jiva imagines he should anyhow cross those sorrows, and that
he should. going into the regions of the gods, enjoy the felicity that
awaits all his good acts. It is through Ignorance that he thinks he should
enjoy and endure these delights and these woes here in this world.
Through Ignorance Jiva thinks,—I should secure my happiness. By
continually doing good acts, I may have happiness in this life till its
close andI shall be happy in all my future lives. Though, again the
(evil) acts I do in this life unending sorrow may become mine- The
status of humanity is fraught with great misery, for from it one sinks
into hell. From hell, it will take many long years before Ican come
back to the status of humanity. From humanity I shall attain to the
status of the gods. From that superior status I shall have to come back
again to humanity and thence to sink into hell once more !—One who
always regards this combination of the primal elements and the senses.
with the Chit's reflection in it, to be thus invested with the characteris
tics of the Soul, has repeatedly to wander among gods and human beings
and to sink into hell. Being always invested with the idea of meum,
Jiva has to make around of such births. Millions upon millions of
birth have to be gone through by Jiva in the successive forms he
assumes, all of which are liable to death. He who does acts in this way,
which are all fraught with good and bad fruits, has in the three worlds
to assume successive form and to enjoy and endure fruits corresponding
therewith, Itis Prakriti that cause acts fraught with good and bad
acts; andit is Prakriti that enjoys and endures the fruits thereof in

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 18 ===

SANTI PARVA 425

the three worlds. Indeed, Prakriti follows the course of acts. The
status of the intermediate beings, of humanity, and of the gods as well,—
these three fields,—should be known as originating in Prakriti and has
been said to be destitute of all attributes. Her existence is affirmed only
in consequence of her acts (beginning with Mahat). After the same
manner, Purusha (or Soul), though without attributes himself, has his
existence affirmed in consequence of the acts which the body does when
it receives his reflection. Although the Soul is not subject to modifica-
tions of any kind and is the active principle that sets Prakriti in motion,
yet entering a body that is united with the senses of knowledge and
action, he regards all the acts of those senses as hisown- The five
senses of knowledge beginning with the ear, and those of action beginn-
ing with speech, uniting with the attributes of Sattwa and Rajas and
Tamas, become engaged in numerous object. Jiva imagines that it is he
who does the acts of his life and that the senses of knowledge and acts
belong to him, although in reality he has no senses. Indeed, though
unequipt with body, he imagines that he hasa body. Though destitute
of attributes, he regards himself as endued therewith, and though trans-
cending Time, imagines himself to be under Time’s control. Though
desticute of understanding, he still regards himself as endued therewith,
and though transcending the (four and twenty) topics, regards himself as
one included among them, Though deathless, he still regards himself as
liable to death, and though motionless regards himself to be endued with
motion. Though not possessed of a material case, he still regards himself
as possessed of one; and though unborn, he still regards himself as in-
vested with birth. Though transcending penances, he still regards as
engaged in penances, and though he has no end (after which to strive),
he still regards himself as liable to attain to ends (of diverse kinds).
Though not endued with motion and birth, he still regards himself as
endued with both, and though transcending fear, still regards himself as
liable to fear. Though Indestructible, he still regards himself Destruc-
tible. Invested with Ignorance, the Soul thus thinks of himself.—"

SECTION CCCV

“ Vasishtha said,—It is thus, in consequence of his Ignorance and
his association with others that are invested with Ignorance, that Jiva
has recourse to millions and millions of births every one of which has
dissolution in the end, In consequence of his transformation into Chit
invested with Ignorance, Jiva betakes himself to millions of abodes one
of which is liable to end in destruction, among intermediate beings and
men and the deities. In consequence of Ignorance, Jiva, like Chandra-

54 Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 19 ===

426 MAHABHARATA

mas, has to wax and wane thousands and thousands of times. This is
truly the nature of Jiva when invested with Ignorance. Know that
Chandramas has in reality full sixteen portions. Only fifteen of these
are subject to increase and decrease. The sixteenth (i.e., that portion
which remains invisible and which appears on the night of the New-
moon) remains constant. After the manner of Chandramas, Jiva too
has full sixteen portions. Only fifteen of these, (viz., Prakriti with Chit’s
reflection, the ten senses of knowledge and action, and the four inner
faculties) appear and disappear. The sixteenth (viz., Chit in its purity)
is subject to no modification. Invested with Ignorance, Jiva repeatedly
and continually takes birth in the fifteen portions named above. With
the eternal. and immutable portion on Jiva primal essence become unit-
ed and this union takes place repeatedly. That sixteenth portion is sub-
tile. It should be known as Sma (eternal and immutable). It is never
upheld by the senses. On the other hand, the senses are upheld by it.
Since those sixteen portions are the cause of the birth of creatures,
creatures can never, O monarch, take birth without their aid. They
are called Prakriti. The destruction of Jiva’s liability to be united with
Prakriti is called Emancipation. The Mahat-Soul, which is the twenty-
fifth, if it regards that body of sixteen portions called the Unmanifest,?
has to assume it repeatedly. In consequence of not knowing That
which is stainless and pure, and for its devotion to what is the result of
acombination of both Pure and Impure, the Soul, which isin reality
pure, becomes, O king Impure. Indeed, in consequence of its devotion
to Ignorance, Jiva, though characterised by Knowledge becomes repeat-
edly associated with Ignorance. Though, O monarch, free from error
of every kind, yet in consequence of its devotion to the three attributes
of Prakriti, it becomes endued with those attributes.—’

SECTION CCCVI

‘"Janaka said,—O holy one, it has been said that the relation
between male and female is like that which subsists between the Indes-
tructible and the Destructible (or Purusha and Prakriti). Without a
male, a female can never conceive. Without a female a male also can
never create form. In consequence of their union with each other, and
each depending upon the attributes of the other, forms (of living crea-
tures) are seen to flow. This is the case with all orders of being. Through
each other’s union for purposes of (sexual) congress, and through
each depending upon the attributes of the other, forms (of living

1 Made of Chit and Not-Chit combined.—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 20 ===

SANTI PARVA 427

creatures) flow in menstrual seasons. I shall tell to thee the indications
thereof, Hear what the attributes are that belong to the sire and what
those are that belong to the mother. Bones, sinews and marrow, O
regenerate one, we know, are derived from the sire. Skin, flesh, and
blood, we hear are derived from the mother. Even this, O foremost of
regenerate persons, is what may be read of in the Vedas and other
scriptures. Whatever is read as declared in the Vedas and in other
scriptures is regarded as authority. The authority, again, of the Vedas
and other scriptures (not inconsistent with the Vedas), is eternal. If
Prakriti and Purusha be always united together in this way by each
opposing and each depending on the other's attributes, I see, O holy
one, that Emancipation cannot exist. Thou, O holy one, art possessed
of spiritual vision so that thou seest all things as if they are present
before thy eyes. If, therefore, there be any direct evidence of the ex:
tence of Emancipation, do thou, speak of itro me. Weare desirous
of attaining to Emancipation. Indeed, we wish to attain to That which
is auspicious, bodiless, not subject to decrepitude, eternal beyond the
ken of the senses, and having nothing superior to it !—

*“Vasishtha said—What thou sayest about the indications of the
Vedas andthe other scriptures (in respect of the matter) is even so.
Thou takest those indications in the way in which they should be taken.
Thou bearest, however, in thy understanding, only the texts of the
Vedas and the other scriptures. Thou art not, O monarch, truly con-
versant with the real meaning of those texts. That person who bears in
his understanding merely the texts of the Vedas and the other scriptures
without being conversant with the true sense or meaning of those texts.
bears them fruitlessly. Indeed, one who holds the contents of a work
in memory without comprehending their meaning is said to bear an use-
less burden. He, however, who is conversant with the true meaning
of a treatise, is said to have studied that treatise to purpose. Questioned
regarding the meaning of a text, it behoveth one to communicate that
meaning which he has comprehended by a careful study. That person
of dull intelligence who refuses to expound the meanings of texts in the
midst of a conclave of the learned, that person of foolish understanding,
never succeeds in expounding the meaning correctly-' An ignorant
person, going to expound the true meaning of treatises, incurs ridicule.
Even those possessed of a knowledge of the Soul have to incur ridicule
on such occasions (if what they go to explain has not been acquired by
study). Listen now to me, O monarch, as to how the subject of

1 The sense seems to the that the obligation to explain a treatise in
the midst of a conclave always stimulates the best {sculties, and if itis a
conclave of the learned the friction of intellects is sure to bring out the
correct sense.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 21 ===

428 MAHABHARATA

Emancipation has been explained (by preceptors to disciple from days
of old) among high-souled persons conversant with the Sankhya and the
Yoga systems of philosophy. That which the Yogin, behold is precisely
that which the Sankhayas arrive after to attain. He who sees the
Sankhya and the Yoga systems to be one and the same is said to be
endued with intelligence. Skin, flesh, blood, fat, bile, marrow, and sinews,
and these senses (of both knowledge and action), about which thou wert
speaking unto me, exist Objects flow from objects; the senses from
the senses, From body one obtains a body, asa seed is obtained from
seed. When the Supreme Being is without senses, without seed, without
matter, without body, He must be divested of all attributes! and in
consequence of His being so, how, indeed, can He have attributes of any
kind? Space and other attributes arise from the attributes of Sattwa
and Rajasand Tamas, and disappear ultimately in them. Thus the
attributes arise from Prakriti. Skin, flesh, blood, fat, bile, marrow, bones,
and sinews,—these eight that are made of Prakriti, know, O king, may
sometimes be produced by the vital seed alone (of the male). The Jiva-
soul and the universe are said to both partake of Prakriti characterised
by the three attributes of Swatta, Rajas, and Tamas. The Supreme Soul
is different from both the Jiva-soul and the universe. As the seasons
though unendued with forms, are nevertheless inferred from the appear-
ance of particular fruits and flowers, after the same manner, Prakriti,
though formless, is inferred from the attributes of Mahat and the rest
that spring from it. In this way from the existence of Chaitanya in the
body, the Supreme Soul, divested of all attributes whatever and per-
fectly stainless, is inferred, Without beginning and destruction, without
end, the overseer of all things, and auspicious, that Soul, only in conse-
quence of its identifying itself with the body and other attributes, comes
to be taken as invested with attributes. Those persons that are truly
conversant with attributes know that only objects endued with attri-
butes can have attributes but that That which transcends all attributes
can have none. When the Jiva-soul conquers all attributes born of
Prakriti and which it assumes under error, only then does it behold the
Supreme Soul. Only the highest Rishis conversant with the Sankhya
and the Yoga systems know that Supreme Soul which Sankhya and
Yogins and believers in all other systems say is beyond the Understand-
ing, which is regarded as Knower and endued with the highest wisdom
in consequence of its casting off all consciousness of identification with
Prakriti, which transcends the attribute of Ignorance or Error, which
is Unmanifest, which is beyond all attributes, which is called the
Supreme, which is dissociated from all attributes, which ordains all things,
which is Eternal and Immutable, which overrules Prakriti and all the
attributes born of Prakriti, and which, transcending the four and twenty

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 22 ===

SANTI PARVA 429

topics of enquiry, forms the twenty-fifth. When menof knowledge,
who stand in fear of birth, of the several conditions of living conscious-
ness, and of death, succeed in knowing the Unmanifest, they succeed in
understanding the Supreme Soul at the same time. An intelligent man
regards the unity of the Jiva-soul with the Supreme Soul as consistent
with the scriptures and as perfectly correct ; while the man destitute of
intelligence looks upon the two as different from each other. This forms
the distinction between the man of intelligence and man that is destitute
of it. The indications of both Kshara and Akshara (destructible and
indestructible) have now been said unto thee. Akshara is Oneness or
Unity, while multiplicity or variety is said to be Kshara. When one
begins to study and understands properly the five and twenty topics of
enquiry, one then comperhends that the Oneness of the Soul is consist-
ent with the scriptures and its multiplicity is what is opposed to them.
These are the several indications of what is included in the tale of topics
or principles created and what transcends that tale. The wise have said
that the tale of topics numbers only five and twenty. That which
transcends the topics is beyond that number and forms the twenty-sixth.
The study or comprehension of created things (numbered five and
twenty) according to their aggregates (of five) is the study and compre-
hension of topics. Transcending these is That which is eternal.—’”

SECTION CCCVII

“ ‘Janaka said—Thou hast, O foremost of Rishis, said that Unity
is the attribute of that which is Akshara (Indestructible) and variety or
multiplicity is the attribute of what is known as Kshara (Destructible).
I have not, however, clearly understood the nature of these two,
Doubts are still lurking in my mind. Ignorant men look upon the Soul
as endued with the incident of multiplicity. They, however that are
possessed of knowledge and wisdom regard the Soul to be one and the
same. I, however, have avery dull understanding. Iam, therefore.
unable to comprehend how all this can happen. The causes also that
thou hast assigned for the unity and the multiplicity of Akshara and
Kshara I have almost forgotten in consequence of the restlessness of my
understanding. I therefore, desire to hear thee once more discourse to
me on those same incidents of unity and multiplicity, on him who is
knowing, on what is destitute of knowledge, on Jiva-soul, Knowledge,
Ignorance. Akshara, Kshara, and on the Sankhya and the Yoga systems,
in detail and separately and agreeable to the truth—

“*Vasishtha said,—I shall tell thee what thou askest | Listen how
ever, to me, O monarch, asI expound to thee the practices of Yoga

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 23 ===

430 MAHABHARATA

separately. Contemplation, which constitutes an obligatory practices
with Yogins, is their highest puissance.'’ Those conversant with Yoga
say that Contemplation is of two kinds. One is the concentration of the
mind, and the other is called Pranayama (regulation of breath). Prana-
yama is said to be endued with substance ; while concentration of mind
is unendued withit.? Excepting the three times when a man passes
urine and stools and eats, one should devote the whole of his time to
contemplation. Withdrawing the senses from their objects by the aid
of the mind, one possessed of intelligence, having made oneself pure,
should agreeably to the two and twenty modes of transmitting the Prana
breath, unite the Jiva-soul with That which transcends the four and
twentieth topic (called Ignorance or Prakriti)® which is regarded by the
wise as dwelling in every part of the body and as transcending deeay
and destruction. It is by means of those two and twenty methods that
the Soul may always be known, as heard by us. It is certain that this
practice of Yoga is his whose mind is never affected by evil passions.
It is not any other person's. Dissociated from all attachments, abste-
mious in diet, and subduing all the senses, one should fix one’s mind on
the Soul, during the first and the last part of the night, after having, O
king of Mithila, suspended the functions of the senses, quieted the mind
by the understanding, and assumed a posture as motionless as that of a
block of stone. When men of knowledge, conversant with the rules of
Yoga, become as fixed as a stake of wood, and as immovable as a
mountain, then are they said to be in Yoga. When one does not hear,
and smell, and taste, and see ; when one is not conscious of any touch ;
when one’s mind becomes perfectly free from every purpose; when one
is not conscious of any thing, when one cherishes no thought ; when one
becomes like a piece of wood, then is one called by the wise to be in
perfect Yoga. Atsuch atime one shines like a lamp that burnsina
place where there is no wind; at such a time one becomes freed even
from one’s subtile form, and perfectly united with Brahma. When one
attains to such progress, one has no longer to ascend or to fall among
intermediate beings. When persons like ourselves say that there has
been a complete identification of the Knower, the Known, and Know-
ledge, then is the Yogin said to behold the Supreme Soul. While in

1 For enables them to conquer Ignorance,—T.

2 When Pranayama is performed with the aid, of mantras or yapa, it
is said to be saguna or sagarbha or endued with eubstance. Concentration
of mind, however, is made without the aid of such yapa.—T.

3 The twoand twenty ‘sanchodans’ of ‘Preranas are the two and
twenty modes of transmitting the Prana breath from the toe of the foot to
the crown of the head. That which transcends Prakriti is the Supreme
Soul.—T.

4 The reading 1 adopt is 'na-kathyate.’—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 24 ===

SANTI PARVA 431

Yoga, the Supreme Soul displaysitself in the Yogin’s heart like a blazing
fire, or like the bright Sun, or like the lightning’s flame in the sky. That
Supreme Soul which is Unborn and which is the essence of nectar, that
is seed by high-souled Brahmanas endued with intelligence and wisdom
and conversant with the Vedas, is subtiler than what is subtile and
greater than what is great. That Soul, though dwelling in all creatures,
is not seen by them. The creator of the worlds, He is seen only bya
person endued with wealth of intelligence when aided by the lamp of
the mind. He dwells on the other share of thick Darkness and trans-
cends him called Iswara.’ Persons conversant with the Vedas and
endued with omniscience call Him the dispeller of Darkness, stainless,
transcending Darkness, without attributes and endued therewith.
""This is what is called the Yoga of Yogins. What else is the
~) indication of Yoga? By such practices do Yogins succeeded in beholding
the Supreme Soul that transcends destruction and decay. This much
that Ihave told thee in detail concerns about the science of Yoga, I
shall now discourse to thee of that Sankhva philosophy by which the
Supreme Soul is seen through the gradual destruction of errors.? The
Sankhyas, whose system is built on Prakriti, say that Prakriti, which is
Unmanifest, is the foremost. From Prakriti, they say, O monarch, the
second principle called Mahat, is produced. It is heard by us that from
Mahat flows the third principle called Consciousness. The Sankhyas
blessed with sight of the Soul say that from Consciousness flow the five
subtile essence of sound, form, touch, taste, and scent. All these eight
they call by the name of Prakriti. The modifications of these eight are
sixteen in number. They are the five gross essence of space, light,
earth, water, and wind, and the ten senses of action and of knowledge
including the mind. Men of wisdom devoted to the Sankhya path and
conversant with all its ordinances and dispensations regard these four
and twenty topics as embracing the whole range of Sankhya enquiry.
That which is produced becomes merged in the producing. Created by
the Supreme Soul one after another, these principles are destroyed in a
reverse order. At every new Creation, the Gunas start into existence
in the lateral order (as stated above), and (when Destruction comes)
they merge, (each into its progenitor) in a reverse order, like the waves
of the ocean disappearing in the ocean that gives them birth. O best of
kings, this is the manner in which the Creation and the Destruction of
Prakriti takes place. The Supreme Being isal! that remains when
Universal Destruction takes place, and it is He that assumes multifarious

1 Atmagnah is 'Iswarat parah.'—T.

2 °*Parisankhyadarsanam’ is explained by the Commentator thus:
*Parisankhyanam,’ is ‘parivarianam,’ i.e, the gradual ‘pravilapam’ of errors ;
‘gene darsanam or sakshatkaram.’—'

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 25 ===

482 MAHABHARATA

forms when Creation starts into life, This is even so, O king, as
ascertained by men of knowledge. It is Prakriti that causes the Over-
presiding Purusha to thus assume diversity and revert back to unity.
Prakriti also herself has the same indications. Only fully conversant
with the nature of the topics of enquiry knows that Prakriti also assumes
the same kind of diversity and unity, for when Destruction comes she
reverts into unity and when Creation flows she assumes diversity of
form. The Soul makes Prakriti, which contains the principles of pro-
duction or growth, to assume manifold forms. Prakriti is called Kshetra
(or soil). Transcending the four and twenty topics or principles is the
Soul which is great. It presides over that Prakriti or Kshetra. Hence,
O great king, the foremost of Yatis say that the Soul is the Presider.
Indeed, it has been heard by us that in consequence of the Soul’s presi-
ding overall Kshetras. He iscalled the Presider. And because He
knows that Unmanifest Kshetra, He is, therefore, also called Kshetrajna
(Knower of Kshetra). And because also the Soul enters into Unmanifest
Kshetra (viz., the body), therefore he is called Purusha. Kshetra is
something quite different from Kshetrajna. Kshetra is Unmanifest.
The Soul, which transcends the four and twenty principles, is called
the Knower. Knowledge and the object known are different from each
other. Knowledge, again, has been said to be Unmanifest, while the
object of knowledge is the Soul which transcends the four and twenty
principles. The Unmanifest is called Kshetra, Sattwa (understanding),
and also Iswara (the supreme Lord), while Purusha, which is the twenty-
fifth principle has nothing superior to it and is nota principle (for it
transcends all principles and is only called a principle conventionally).
This much O king, is an account of the Sankhya philosophy. The
Sankhayas called the cause of rhe universe, and merging all the grosser
principles into the Chit behold the Supreme Soul. Rightly studying the
four and twenty topics along with Prakriti, and ascertaining their true
nature, the Sankhyas succeed in beholding That which transcends the
four and twenty topics or principles,’ Jiva in reality is that very Soul
which transcends Prakriti and is beyond the four and twenty topics,
When he succeeds in knowing that Supreme Soul by dissociating himself
from Prakriti, he then becomes indentifiable with the Supreme Soul,
I have now told thee everything about the Sankhya System truly. Those
who are conversant with this philosophy succeed in attaining to tran-
quility. Indeed, as men whose understandings are subject to error have
direct cognisance of Brahma. They that succeed in attaining to that
state have never to come back to this world after the dissolution of

1 The Commentator explains that ‘nistattwah’ means nirgatam
tatéwam aparoksham yasmat ;—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 26 ===

SANTI PARVA 433

their bodies; while as regards those that are said to be emancipate in
this life, puissance, and that indescribable felicity which attaches itself
to Samadhi, and immutability, become theirs, in consequence of their
having attained to the nature of the Indestructible.» They who behold
this universe as many (instead of seeing it as one and uniform) are said
to see incorrectly. These men are blind to Brahma. O chastiser of foes,
such persons have repeatedly to come back into the world and assume
bodies (in diverse orders of Being). They, who are conversant with all
that has been said above become possessed of omniscience, and accord-
ingly when they pass from this body no longer become subject to the
control of any more physical frames. All things, (or the entire universe),
have been said to be the result of the Unmanifest. The Soul, which is
the twenty fifth, transcends all things. They who know the Soul have
no fear of returning to the world.’ ”

\e SECTION CCCVIII

» ““ Vasishtha said\—I have thus far discoursed to thee on the Sankhya

Philosophy. Listen now to me as I tell thee what is Vidya (knowledge)
and what is Avidya (Ignorance), one after the other. The learned say
that that Prakriti, which is fraught with the attributes of Creation and
Destruction, is called Avidya; while Purusha, who is freed from the
attributes of Creation and Destruction and who transcends the four and
twenty topics or principles, is called Vidya. Listen to me first as I tell
thee what is Vidya among successive sets of other things, as expounded
in the Sankhya philosophy. Among the senses of knowledge and those
of action, the senses of knowledge are said to constitute what is known
as Vidya. Ofthe senses of knowledge and their object, the former
constitute Vidya as has been heard by us. Of objects of the senses and
the mind, the wise have said that the mind constitutes Vidya. Of mind
and the five subtile essences, the five subtile essences constitute Vidya.
Of the five subtile essences and Consciousness, Consciousness constitutes
Vidya. Of Consciousness and Mahat, Mahat, O king, is Vidya. Of
all the topics or principles beginning with Mahat, and Prakriti, it is
Prakriti, which is unmanifest and supreme, that is called Vidya. Of
Prakriti, and that called Vidhi which is Supreme, the latter should be
known as Vidya. Transcending Prakriti is the twenty-fifth (called

1 ‘Param,’ ‘Apatam,’ and 'Avyayam’ are theirs in consequence of
‘Alshara-bhavatwa.’ ‘Aparam’ means satyakamatwa, satyasamkalpatwa,
, puissance. ‘Param’ is the indescribable felicity of Samadhi. The
declare that knower of Brahma becomes Brahma.—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 27 ===

484 MAHABHARATA

Purusba) who should be known as Vidya. Of all Knowledge that which
is the Object of Knowledge has been said to be the Unmanifest, O king."
Again, Knowledge has been said to be Unmanifest and the Object of
knowledge to be that which transcends the four and twenty. Once
more, Knowledge has been said to be Unmanifest, and the Knower is
that which transcends the four and twenty. I have now told thee what
is truly the import of Vidya and Avidya. Listen now to me asI tell
thee all that has been said about the Indestructible andthe Destructible.
Both Jiva and Prakriti have been said to be Indestructible, and both of
them have been said to be Destructible- I shall tell thee the reason of
this correctly asI have understood it. Both Prakriti and Jiva are
without beginning and without endor destruction, Both of them are
regarded as supreme (in the matter of Creation). Those that are
possessed of knowledge say that both are to be called topics or principles.
In consequence of its attributes of (repeated) Creation and Destruction),
the Unmanifest (or Prakriti) is called Indestructible. That Unmanifest
becomes repeatedly modified for the purpose of creating the principle,
And because the principles beginning with Mahat are produced by
Purusha as well, and because also Purusha and the Unmanifest are
mutually dependant upon each other, therefore is Purusha also, the
twenty-fifth, called Kshetra (and hence Akshara or Indestructible).?
When the Yogin withdraws and merges all the principles into the Un-
manifest Soul (or Brahma) then the twenty-fifth (viz., Jiva or Purusha)
also, with all those principles disappears into it. When the principles be-
come merged each into its progenitor, then the one that remains is Pra-
kriti. When Kshetrajna too,* O son, becomes merged into his own pro-
ducing cause then (all that remains is Brahma and, therefore) Prakriti
with all the principles in it becomes Kshara (or meets with destruction),
and attains also to the condition of being without attributes in conse-
quence of her dissociation from all the principles, Thus it is that Kshetra-
jna, when his knowledge of Kshetra disappears, becomes, by his nature,
destitute of attributes, as it has been heard by us. When he becomes
Kshara he then assumes attributes. When, however, he attains to his

1 Hence, as the commentator explains, by knowing what is called the
Unmanitfest one is capable of attaining to omniscience.—T.

2 What is stated here is this ; the Unmanifest or Prakriti, by modifi-
cation, produces Mahat and the other principles. But the agency of Purusha
also is necessary for such production, for Prakriti oan do nothing without
Porusha, and Purusha also can do nothing without Prakriti. The principles
of Mahat and the rest, therefore, may be said to have their origin as much
in Purusha asin Prakriti. Beside, the two being naturally dependent on
each other, if Prakriti be called Kshara, Purusha also may be 80 called.—T,

3 Le, Jiva or Purusha.—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 28 ===

SANTI PARVA 435

own real nature, he then succeeds in understanding his own condition of
being really destitute of attributes. By casting off Prakriti and begin-
ning to realise that he is different from her, the intelligent Kshetrajna
then comes to be regarded as pure and stainless. When Jiva ceases to
exist in a state of union with Prakriti, then does he become identifiable
with Brahma. When, however, he exists united with Prakriti, he then,
O king, seems to be different from Brahma. Indeed, when Jiva shows
no affection for Prakriti and her principles, he then succeeds in behold-
ing the Supreme and having once beheld Him wishes not to fall away
from that felicity. When the Knowledge of truth dawns upon him,
Jiva begins to lament in this strain :—Alas, how foolishly have I acted
by falling through ignorance into this frame composed of Prakriti like
a fish entangled inanet! Alas, through ignorance, I have migrated
from body to body like a fish from water to water thinking that water
is the element in which alone it can live. Indeed, like a fish that does
not know anything else than water to be its element, I also have never
known anything else than children and spouses to be my own! Fie on me
that through ignorance, I have been repeatedly migrating from body to
body in forgetfulness (of the Supreme Son) {| The Supreme Soul alone
is my friend. I have capacity for friendship with Him. Whatever be
my nature and whoever I may be, I am competent to be like Him and
toattain anidentity with Him. I see my similarity wich Him. Iam,
indeed, like Him. He is stainless. It is evident that lam of the same
nature. Through Ignorance and stupefaction, I have become associated
with Inanimate Prakriti. Though really without attachments, I have
passed this long time ina state of attachment with Prakriti. Alas, by
her was I so long subdued without having been able to know it. Various
are the forms—high, middling, and low,—that Prakriti assume. Oh,
how shall I dwell in those forms?! How shall I live conjointly with
her? In consequence only of my ignorance I repair to her companion-
ship. I shall now be fixed (in Sankhya or Yoga). I shall no longer keep
her companionship. For having passed so longa time with her, I should
think that I was so long deceived by her, for myself being really exempt
from modification, how could I keep company with one that is subject
to modification ? She cannot be held to be responsible for this. The
responsibility is mine, since turning away from the Supreme Soul I
become of my own accord attached to her. In consequence of that
attachment, myself, though formless in reality, had to abide in multi-
farious forms. Indeed, though formless by nature I become endued
with forms in consequence of my sense of meum, and thereby insulted

1 High, suoh as gods, middling, such as human beings and low, such
as animals.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 29 ===

438 MAHABHARATA

and distressed. In consequence of my sense of meum, concerning the
result of Prakriti, I am forced to take birth in diverse orders of Being.
Alas, though really destitute of any sense of meum, yet in consequence
of affecting it, what diverse acts of an evil nature have been committed
by me in those orders in which I took birth while I remained in them
with a soul that had lost all knowledge! Ihave no longer anything to
do with him who, with essence made up of consciousness, divides herself
into many fragments and who seeks to unite me with them. It is only
now that I have been awakened and have understood thatIlam by
nature without any sense of meum and without that consciousness which
creates the forms of Prakriti that invest me all around. Casting’ off
that sense of meum which I always have with respect to her and whose
essence is made up of consciousness, and casting off Prakriti herself, I
shall take refuge in Him who is auspicious. I shall be united with Him,
and not with Prakriti which isinanimate. If I unite with Him, it will
be productive of my benefit. I have no similarity of nature with
Prakriti !—The twenty-fifth, (viz., Jiva), when he thus succeeds ‘in
understanding the Supreme, becomes able to cast off the Destructible
and attain to identity with that which is Indestructible and which is
the essence of all that is auspicious. Destitute of attributes in his true
nature and in reality Unmanifest, Jiva becomes invested with what is
Manifest and assumes attributes. When he succeeds in beholding that
which is without attributes and which is the origin of the Unmanifest,
he attains, O ruler of Mithila, to identify the same.

“'T have now told thee what the indications are of what is Indes-
tructible and what is Destructible, according to the best of my know-
ledge and according to what has been expounded in the scriptures. I
shall now tell thee, according to what I have heard, as to how Know-
ledge that is subtile, stainless, and certain, arises. Do thou listen to
me- I have already discoursed to thee what the Sankhya and the Yoga
systems are according to their respective indications as expounded in
their respective scriptures. Verily, the science that has been expounded
in Sankhya treatises is identical with what has been laid down in the
Yoga scriptures. The knowledge, O monarch, which the Sankhya
preach, is capable of awakening every one. In the Sankhya scriptures,
that Knowledge has been inculcated very clearly for the benefit of

disciples. The learned say that this Sankhya system is very extensive.
Yogin have great regard for that system as also for the Vedas. In the
Sankhya system no topic or principle transcending the twenty-fifth is
addmitted. That which the Sankhyas regard as their highest topic or
principles has been duly described (by me). In the Yoga philosophy, it
is said that Brahma, which is the essence of knowledge without duality,
becomes Jiva only when invested with Ignorance. In the Yoga serip-
tures, therefore, both Brahma and Jiva are spoken of,—’ "

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 30 ===

SECTION CCCIX

““WVasishtha said—Listen now to me asI discourse to thee on Bud-
dhas (Supreme Soul) and Abuddha(Jiva) which is the dispensation of
attributes (of Sattwa, Rajas, and Tamas), Assuming many forms (under
the influence of illusion) the Supreme Soul, becoming Jiva, regards all
those forms as real.' In consequence of (his regarding himself identical
with) such transformations, Jiva fails to understand the Supreme Soul,
for he bears the attributes (of Sattwa and Rajas and Tamas) and creates
and withdraws into himself what he creates. Ceaselessly for his sport,
O monarch, does Jiva undergo modifications, and because he is capable
of understanding the action of the Unmanifest, therefore is he called
Budhyamana (the Comprehender).?, The Unmanifest or Prakriti can
at no time comprehend Brahma which is really without attributes even
when it manifests itself with attributes. Hence is Prakriti called
Unintelligent. There is a declaration of the Srutis to the effect that if
ever Prakriti does succeed in knowing the twenty-fifth (i.e. Jiva) Prakriti
then (instead of being something differentiated from Jiva) becomes
identified with Jiva who is united with her. (As regards, however, the
Supreme Soul, which is ever disunited and dissociated, and which
transcends the twenty-fifth Prakriti can never comprehend it).‘ In
consequence of this (viz., his attachment to or union with Prakriti), Jiva
or Purusha, who is not manifest and which in his real nature is not
subject to modifications, comes to be called asthe Unawakened or
Ignorant, Indeed because the twenty-fifth can comprehend the Un-
manifest, he is therefore, called Budhymana (or Comprehender). . He
cannot, however, readily comprehend the twenty-sixth, which is stainless,
which is Knowledge without duality, which is immeasurable, and which
is eternal. The twenty-sixth, however, can know both Jiva and Prakriti,
numbering the twenty-fifth and the twenty-fourth respectively. O thou
of great effulgence, only men of wisdom succeed in knowing that
Brahma which is Unmanifest, which inheres in its real nature to all that
is seen and unseen, and which, O son is the one independent essence in

1 ‘Budha’ is 'Bodha’ cr pure Knowledge. ‘Abudha’is the reverse of
‘Buddha.’ The Supreme Soul is Knowledge, while Jiva is Ignorance.—

2 In consequence of Jiva’s union with or attachment to Prakriti. Jiva
takes this object for a vessel, that for a mountain, and that other fora
third. When knowledge comes, Jiva succeeds in understanding that all his
impressions are erroneous and that the external world is only a modification
of Self. “In consequence of Jiva's capacity to comprehend this, he is called
Budhyamansa or Comprehender..

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 31 ===

433 MAHABHARATA

the universe.!| When Jiva considers himself different from what he
trully is, (i. e-, when he regards himself as far or lean, fair or dark a
Brahmana or a Sudra), it is only then that he fails to know the Supreme
Soul and himself and Prakriti with which he is uvited. When Jiva
succeeds in understanding Prakriti (and knowing that she is something
different from him) then he is said to be restored to his true nature and
then does he attain to that high understanding which is pure and stain-
less (and which is concerned with Brahma). When Jiva succeeds, O
tiger among kings, in attaining to that excellent understanding, he then
attains to that Pure Knowledge (without duality) whichis called the
twenty-sixth (or Brahma)- He then casts off the Unmanifest or Prakriti
which is fraught with the attributes of Creation and Destruction. When
Jiva succeeds in knowing Prakriti which is unintelligent and subject to
the action of the three attributes of Sattwa, and Rajas and Tamas, he
then becomes destitute of attributes himself. In consequence of his
thus understanding the Unmanifest (to be something different from
him). he succeeds in acquiring the nature of the Supreme Soul. The
learned say that when he is freed from the attributes (of Sattwa and
Rajas and Tamas) and united in the nature with the Supreme Soul then
does Jiva become identified with that Soul. The Supreme Soul is called
Tattwa as well as Not-Tattwa, and transcends decay and destruction.”
O giver of honours, the Soul, though it has the manifest principles (viz.
the body) for its resting place, yet it cannot be said to have acquired
the nature of those principles. The wise say that (including the Jiva-
soul) there are five and twenty principles inall. Indeed, O son, the
Soul is not to be regarded as possessed of any of the principles (Mahat
and the rest). Endued with Intelligence, it transcends the principles.
It casts off quickly even that principle which is the indication of the
Knowing (or awakened) one.* When Jiva comes to regard himself as
the twenty-sixth which is divested of decay and destruction, it is then
that, without doubt, he succeeds by his own force in attaining to simi-
larity with the twenty-sixth. Though awakened by the twenty-sixth

1 ‘Drisya’ and ‘Adrisya,’ are the Seen and the Unseen, thatis the
gross and the subtile, or effects and causes. ‘Swabhavena anugatam’ is
‘inhering (unto all of them, in its own nature, that is, Brahma prevades all
things and unites with them without itself being changed as regards its
own nature. Vudhyate has ‘manishibhih’ understood alter it.—T.

2 'Tattwa’ is explained by the Commentator as ‘anaropitarupam’ i. e,,
uninvested with any form in consequence of Ignorance ; ‘Not-Tattwa’ is
‘nityaparoksham,’ i.e., always within the ken of the understandiog.—T.

3 That indication is ‘I am Brahma,’ Such conviction or knowledge
even, which characterises those that are awakened or Buddha, is cast off
by the twenty-sixth.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 32 ===

SANTI PABVA 439

which is Pure Intelligence, Jiva still becomes subject to Ignorance.
This is the cause of Jiva, multifariousness (in respect of forms) as
explained in the Srutis and the Sankhya scriptures, When Jiva, who
is endued with Chetana (and Unintelligent Prakriti), loses all Conscio-
usness of a distinct or individual Self, then does he, losing his multifa-
riousness, resume his Oneness. O ruler of Mithila, when Jiva, who is
found to be in union with happiness and misery and who is seldom free
from the consciousness of Self, succeeds in attaining to a similarity with
the Supreme Soul which is beyond the reach of the understanding, then
does he become freed from virtue and vice. Indeed, when Jiva, attain-
ing to the twenty-sixth which is Unborn and Puissant and which is
dissociated from all attachments, succeeds in comprehending it
thoroughly. he himself becomes possessed of puissance and entirely casts
oft the Unmanifest or Prakriti. In consequence of understanding the
twenty-sixth, the four and twenty principles seem to Jiva to be unsubs-
tantial or of no value. I have thus told thee, O sinless one, according
to the indications of the Srutis, the nature of the Unintelligent (or
Prakriti), and of Jiva, as also of that which is Pure Knowledge (viz., the
Supreme Soul), agreeably to the truth, Guided by the scriptures,
variety and oneness are thus to be understood. The difference between
the gnat and the Udumvara, or that between the fish and water, illuse
trates the difference between the Jiva-soul and the Supreme Soul.!
The Multiplicity and Oneness of these two are then understood in this
way. This is called Emancipation, viz. this comprehension or know-
ledge of oneself as something distinct from Unintelligent or Unmanifest
Prakriti. The twenty-fitth, which resides in the bodies of living crea-
tures, should be emancipated by making him know the Unmanifest or
the Supreme Soul which transcends the understanding. Indeed, that
twenty-fifth is capable of attaining to Emancipation in this way only
and not through any other means, it is certain. Though really different
from the Kshetra in which he resides for the time being, he partakes of
the nature of that Kshetra in consequence of his union with it.? Uniting
with what is Pure, he becoces Puree Uniting with the Intelligent, he
becomes Intelligent. By uniting, O foremost of men, with one that is

1 These examples are often used to explain the difference between the
Jiva-soul and the Supreme Soul. The Udumvara is the fruit of the Fious
glomerata. When ripe and broken, the hollow centre is seen to contain
many full-grown gnats. The gnat lives in the frurt but is not the fruit, just
as the fish though living in the water is not the water that is itr home.
Jiva, after the-same way, though living in the Supreme Soul, is not the
Supreme Soul.—T.

2 *Parah’ is ‘Anyah’ or ‘Chidatman.’ 'Paradharma’ means ‘partaking’ of
the nature of Kshetra in which he resides. ‘Sametya’ is kshetrena iva
ekibhuya.’—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 33 ===

440° MAHABHARAPA

Emancipate, he becomes Emancipated. By uniting with one that has
been freed from attachments of every kind, he becomes freed from all
attachments. By uniting with one striving after Emancipation, he
himself, partaking of the nature of his companion, strives after Emanci-
pation. By uniting with one of pure deeds he becomes pure and of pure
deeds and endued with blazing effulgence. By uniting with one of
unstained soul, he becomes of unstained soul himself. By uniting with
the One independent Soul, he becomes One and Independent. Uniting
with One that is dependent on One's own Self, he becomes of the same
nature and attains to Independence.—

“*_O monarch, I have duly told thee all this that is perfectly
true, Candidly haveI discoursed tothee on this subject, viz, the
Eternal and Stainlessand Primeval Brahma. Thou mayst impart this
high knowledge, capable of awakening the soul. unto that person, O
king, who though not conversant with the Vedas is nevertheless, humble
and has a keen desire for acquiring the knowledge of Brahma. It should
never be imparted unto one that is wedded to falsehood, or one that is
cunning or roguish, or one that is without any strength of mind or one
that is of crooked understanding, or one that is jealous of men of know-
ledge, or one that gives pain to others. Listen to me as I say who they
are unto whom this knowledge may safely be communicated. It should
be given to one that isendued with faith, or one that is possessed of
merit, or one that always abstains from speaking ill of others, or one
that is devoted to penances from the purest of motives, or one that is
endued with knowledge and wisdom, or one that is conversant of the
sacrifices and other rites laid down in the Vedas, or one that is possessed
of a forgiving disposition, or one that is inclined to take compassion on
and do good to all creatures ; or one that is fond of dwelling in privacy
and solitude, or one that is fond of discharging all acts laid down in the
scriptures, or one that is averse to quarrels and disputes, or one that is
possessed of great learning or one endued with wisdom or one possessed
of forgiveness and self-restraint and tranquillity or soul. This high
knowledge of Brahma should never be communicated to one that is not
possessed of such qualifications, It has been said that by imparting this
knowledge to one that cannot be regarded as fit receptacle for holding
it no advantage or good fruit can arise. Unto one that is not observant
of any vows and restraints, this high knowledge should never be
communicated even if he gives in exchange the whole Earth full of gems
and wealth of every kind. Without doubt, however. O king, this
knowledge should be given to one that has conquered one's senses. O
‘Karala, let no fear be thine any longer, since thou hast heard all this
regarding high Brahma'from me today! I have discoursed to.thee duly
about high and holy Brahma that is without beginning’ and ‘middle

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 34 ===

SANTI PARVA 441

(and end) and that is capable of dispelling all kinds of grief. Beholding
Brahma whose sight is capable of dispelling both birth and death, O
king which is full of auspiciousness, which removes all fear, and which
benefit, and having acquired this essence of all knowledge, cast off all
error and stupefaction today! I had acquired this knowledge from the
eternal Hiranyagarbha himself, O king, who communicated it to me for
my having carefully gratified that great Being of every superior Soul.
Asked by thee today, I have, O monarch, communicated the knowledge
of eternal Brahma to the just asI had myself acquired it from my
teacher. Indeed, this high knowledge that is the refuge of all persons
conversant with Emancipation has been imparted to thee exactly as I
had it from Brahman himself !—’

"Bhishma continued,—'I have thus told thee of high Brahma agree-

7

ably to what the great Rishi (Vasishtha) had said (unto king Karala of _

Janaka’s race), by attaining to which the Twenty-fifth (or Jiva) has

never to return. Jiva, in consequence of his not knowing truly the -

Supreme Soul which is not subject to decay and death, is obliged to
frequently come back into the world. When, however, Jiva succeeds
in acquiring that high knowledge, he has no longer to come back.
Having heard it, O king from the celestial Rishi, I have, O son, commu-
nicated to thee high knowledge productive of the highest good. This
knowledge was obtained from Hiranyagarbha by the high-souled Rishi
Vasishtha. From that foremost of Rishis, viz, Vasishtha, it was
acquired by Narada, From Narada I have acquired that knowledge
which istruly identifiable with the eternal Brahma. Having heard
this discourse of high import, fraught with excellent words, do not, O
foremost of the Kurus, yield any longer to grief. That man who knows
Kshara and Akshara becomes freed from fear. He, indeed, O king, is
obliged to cherish fear who is destitute of this knowledge. In conse-
quence of Ignorace (of Brahma), the man of foolish soul hath repeatedly
to come back into this world. Indeed, departing from this life, he has
to-be born in thousands and thousands of orders of Being every one of
which hath death inthe end. Now in the world of the deities, now
among men, and now among intermediate orders of Being, he has to
appear again and again. If in course of time he succeeds in crossing that
Ocean of Ignorance in which he is sunk, he then succeeds in avoiding
rebirth altogether and attaining to identity with the Supreme Soul.
The Ocean of Ignorance is terrible. It is bottomless and called the
Unmanifest. O Bharata, day after day, creatures are seen to fall and
sink in that Ocean: Since thou, O king, hast been freed from that eternal
and limitless Ocean of Ignorance, thou, hast, therefore become freed
from Rajas and also Tamas.’ ”

56

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 35 ===

SECTION CCCX

“Bhishma said—'Once ona timea king of Janaka’s race, while
ranging the uninhabited forests in pursuit of deer, saw a superior
Brahmana or Rishi of Bhrigu’s race- Bowing with his head unto the Rishi
who was seated at his ease, king Vasuman took his seat near him and
obtaining his permission put to him this question :—O holy one, what is
productive of the highest benefit, both here and hereafter, to man who
is endued with an unstable body and who is the slave of his desires?
Properly honoured by the king, and thus questioned, that high-souled
Rishi possessed of ascetic merit then said these words unto him that
were highly beneficial.

“The Rishi said,—If thou desirest both here and hereafter what is
agreeable to thy mind, do thou then, with restrained senses, abstained
from doing what is disagreeable to all creatures. Righteousness is bene-
ficial unto them that are good. Righteousness is the refuge of those .
that are good. From Righteousness have flowed the three worlds with
their mobile and immobile creatures. O thou that art eagerly desirous
of enjoying all agreeable objects, how is it that thou art not yet satiated
with objects of desire? Thou seest the honey, O thou of little under-
standing, but art blind to the fall. As one desirous of earning the
fruits of knowledge should set oneself to the acquisition of knowledge,
even so one desirous of earning the fruits of Righteousness should set
oneself to the acquisition of Righteousness. If a wicked man from desire
of virtue, strives to accomplish an act that is pure and stainless, the
fulfilment of his desire becomes impossible. If, on the other hand, a
good man, impelled by the desire of earning virtue, strives to accom-
plish an act that is even difficult, its accomplishment becomes easy for
him. If, while residing in the woods, one acts in such a way as to
enjoy all the pleasures of a residence amidst men in towns, one comes
to be looked upon not as a forest recluse but asa denizen of towns.
Similarly, if one, while residing in towns, acts in such a way as to enjoy
the felicity that attaches to the life of a forest recluse, one comes to be
looked upon not as a denizen of towns but asa forest recluse. Ascer-
taining the merits of the religion of Acts and that of Abstention from
acts, do thou, with concentrated senses, be devoted to the practices of
righteousness that appertain to thought, word, and deed, Judging of
the propriety of time and place, purified by the observance of vows
and other cleansing rites, and solicited (by them), do thou, without

1 This is a simile very often used for illustrating the danger of pursu-
ing objects of the senses. Collectors of honey used to rove over mountains,

guided by the sight of flying bees. These men frequently met with death
from falls from precipices.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 36 ===

SANTI PARVA 448

malice, make large gifts unto them that are good.'' Acquiring wealth
by righteous means, one should give it away unto those that are
deserving. One should make gifts, casting off anger ; and having made
Bifts one should never give way to sorrow nor prcclaim those gifts with
one’s own mouth. The Brahmana who is full of compassion, who is
observant of candour, and whose birth is pure, has been regarded as a
person deserving of gifts. A person is said to be pure in birth when he
is born of mother that has only one husband and that belongs to the
same order to which her husband belongs. Indeed, such a Brahmana,
conversant with the three Vedas, viz., Rich, Yajush, and Saman, possess-
ed of learning, duly observant of the six duties (of sacrificing on his own
account, officiating at the sacrifices of others, learning, teaching, making
gifts, and receiving gifts), has been regarded as deserving of gifts.
Righteousness becomes unrighteousness, and unrighteousness becomes
righteousness, according to the character of the doer, of time, and of
place.? Sin is cast off like the filth on one's body,—a little with a little
exertion and a greater quantity when the exertion is greater. A person,
after purging his bowels, should take ghee, which operates most benefi-
cially on his system (as a healthy tonic). After the same manner, when
one has cleansed oneself of all faults and sets oneself to the acquisition of
righteousness, that righteousness, in the next world, proves to be pro-
ductive of the highest happiness. Good and evil thoughts exist in the
minds of all creatures. Withdrawing the mind from evil thoughrs, it
should always be directed towards good thoughts. One should always
reverence the practices of one’s own order. Do thou strive. therefore,
to act in such a way that thou mayst have faith in the practices of thy
own order. O thou that art endued with an impatient soul, betake thy-
self to the practice of patience. O thou that art of a foolish understand-
ing, seek thou to be possessed of intelligence! Destitute of tranquillity,
seek thou to be tranquil, and bereft of wisdom as thou art, do thou
seek toact wisely! He who moves in the companionship of the righteous
succeeds, by his own energy, in acquiring the means of accomplishing
what is beneficial for him both in this and the next world. Verily, the
root of that benefit (which thus becomes his here and hereafter) is
unwavering firmness, The royal sage Mahabhisha, through want of this

1 The Burdwan translator renders this Verse incorreotly.—T

2 This bas been repeatedly laid down in the Hindn soriptures. Gifts
produce no merit unless made to deserving persons. If made to the un-
deserving, instead of ceasing to produce any merit, they become positively
sinful. The considerations of time and place alsoare to be attended to.
By failing to attend to them, sin is incurred where merit is expected. Truth
becomes as sinful asa lie, under particular circumstances ; and a falsehood
becomes as meritorious as truth under circumstances. The Hindu scriptures
make circumstances the test of acte.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 37 ===

444 MAHABHARATA

firmness, fell from heaven. Yayati, also, though his merits had become
exhausted (in consequence of his boastfulness and though whe as hurled
down from heaven) succeeded in regaining regions of felicity through
his Grmness. Thou art sure to attain to great intelligence, as also to
what is for thy highest good, by paying court to virtuous and learned
persons possessed of ascetic merit.—

“Bhishma continued,—'Hearing these words of the sage, king
Vasuman, possessed of a good disposition, withdrawing his mind from
the pursuits of desire, set it upon the acquisition of Righteousness.’ ”

SECTION CCCXI

“Yudhishthira said—‘It behoveth thee, O grandsire, to discourse
to me on that which is freed from duty and its reverse, which is freed
from every doubt, which transcends birth and death, as also virtue and
sin, which is auspiciousness, which is eternal fearlessness, which is
Eternal and Indestructible, and Immutable, which is always Pure, and
which is ever free from the toil of exertion.’

“Bhishma said,—'I shall in this connection recite to thee the old
narrative, O Bharata, ofjthe discourse between Yajnavalkya and Janaka.
Once ona time the famous king Daivarati of Janaka’s race, fully con-
versant withthe import of all questions, addressed this question to
Yajnavalkya, that foremost of Rishis.

“"Janaka said —O regenerate Rishi, how many kinds of senses are
there? How many kinds also are there of Prakriti? What is the
Unmanitest and highest Brahma ? What is higher than Brahma ?, What
is birth and what is death? What are the limits of Age? It behoveth
thee, O foremost of Brahmanas, to discourse on all these topics unto me
that am solicitous of obtaining thy grace ; I am ignorant while thou art
an Ocean of knowledge. Hence, I ask thee! Verily, I desire to hear thee
discourse on all these subjects !—

“*Yajnavalkya said—Hear, O monarch, what I say in answer to
these questions of thine, I shall impart to thee the high knowledge
which Yogins value, and especially that which is possessed by the
Sankhyas. Nothing is unknown to thee. Still thou askest me. One
however, that is questioned should answer. This is the eternal practice.
Eight principles have been called by the name of Prakriti, while sixteen
have been called modifications. Of Manifest, there are seven. These
are the views of those persons who are conversant with the science of
Adhyatma, The Unmanifest (or original Prakriti), Mahat, Consciouse
ness, and the five subtile elements of Earth, Wind, Space, Water, and

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 38 ===

SANTI PARVA 445

Light,—these eight are known by the name of Prakriti.” Listen now to
the enumeration of those called modifications. They are the ear, the
skin, the tongue, and the nose ; and sound, touch, form, taste, and scent,
as also speech, the two arms, the two feet, the lower duct (within the
body), and the organs of pleasure. Amongst these, the ten beginning
with sound, and having their origin in the five great principles.? are
called Visesha. /The five senses of knowledge are called Savisesha O,
tuller of Mithila. Persons conversant with the science of Adhyatma
regard the mind as the sixteenth. This is conformable to thy own views
as also to those of other learned men well acquainted with the truths
about principles.’ From the Unmanifest, O king, springs the Mahat-
soul. The learned say this to be the first creation relating to Pradhana
(or Prakriti): From Mahat, O king of men, is produced Consciousness,
This has been called the second creation having the Understanding for
its essence.* From Consciousness hath sprung the Mind which is the
essence of sound and the others that are the attributes of space and the
rest. This is the third creation, said to relate to Consciousness. From
mind have sprung the great elements, (numbering five). O king ! Know
that this is the fourth creation called mental, asI say. Persons con-
versant with the primal elements say that Sound and Touch and Form
and Taste and Scent are the fifth creation, relating to the Great
(primal) elements. The creation of the Ear, the Skin, the Tongue, and
the Scent, forms the sixth and is tegarded as having for its essence
multiplicity of thought. ‘The senses that come after the Ear and the
others (i.e. the senses of action) then arise, O monarch, This is called
seventh creation and relates to the sensesof Knowledge. Then, O
monarch, come the breath that rises upward (viz., Prana) and those that
have a transverse motion (viz,, Saman, Udana, and Vyana). This is the
eighth creation and is called Arjjava.* Then come those breaths that
course transversely in the lower parts of the body (viz., Samana, Udana
and Vyana) and also that called Apana coursing downwards. This,
ninth creation, is also called Arjjava, O king. These nine kinds of
creation, and these principles, O monarch, which latter number four

1 These, including Mind, form the tale of sixteen called Vikriti or
modifications of Prakriti.—T.

2 These are the subtile principles or Tanmatras and not the gross
elements.—T.

3 'Mahat’ is sometimes called ‘Buddhi’ hence the creation of Cons-
ciousness from Mahat must be creation relating to Buddbi—tT.
. 4 ‘Arjjava’ mean 'relating to straight paths or courses,’ so called from
the straight course of these winds or breaths. By reference to these breaths
is intended the other limbs of the physical system besides those already
indicated. —T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 39 ===

446 MAHABHARATA

and twenty, are declared to thee according to what has been laid down
in the scriptures. After this, O king, listen to me as I tell thee durations
of time as indicated by the learned in respect of these principles or
attribute.’ ”

SECTION CCCXII

“Yajnavalkya said,—Listen to me, O foremost of men, as I tell thee
what the duration of time is in respect to the Unmanifest (or the
Supreme Purusha), Ten thousand Kalpas are said to constitute a single
day of his. The duration of his night is equal. When his night expires,
he awakes, O monarch, and first creates herbs and plants which consti-
tute the sustenance of all embodied creatures. He then creates Brahman
who springs from a golden egg. That Brahman is the form of all creat-
ed things, as has been heard by us. Having dwelt for one whole year
within that egg, the great ascetic Brahman, called also Prajapati (Lord
of all creatures), came out of it and created the whole Earth, and the
Heaven above. The Lord then, it is read in the Vedas, O king, placed
the sky between Heaven and Earth separated from each other. Seven
thousand and five hundred Kalpas measure the day of Brahman.
Persons conversant with the science of Adhyatma say that his night also
is of an equal duration. Brahmana, called Mahan, then creates Cons-
ciousness called Bhuta and endued with excellent essence.’ Before
creating any physical bodies out of the ingredients called the Great
elements, Mahan or Brahma, endued with penances, created four others
called his sons. They are the sires of the original sires, O Best of kings,
as heard by us.? It hath been also heard by us, O monarch that the
senses (of knowledge) along with the four inner faculties, have sprung
from the (five Great elements called) Pitris, and that the entire
universe of mobile and immobile Beings has been filled with those Great
elements.?. The puissant Consciousness created the five Bhutas. These

1 ‘Rishi’ here means ‘Mahan’ or Great. Consciousness is said to have
an excellent essence, and is also a Bhuta because of its capacity to produce
the Great Bhutas, five in number.—T.

2 These, the Commentator explains, are Mind, Buddhi or Understand-
ing Consciousness, and Chitwa, considered as Vyashti instead of as
Samashthi. These are the sires of the primeval sires, i.¢., {rom these sprung
the Mahabbutas or Great oreatues (vis., the five primal Elements).—T.

3 'Devah'’is explained by the Commentator as meaning the Benses
and the four inner faculties. *Devaih’ he thinks, refers to the Bhutas or
Great elements. Literally rendered, the Verse would read as'the Devas
are the Children of the Pitris ; with the Devas, all the worlds of Mobile
Being have been covered.’ It is not safe to reject the learned Commentator.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 40 ===

SANTI PARVA 447

are Earth, Wind, Space, Water, and Light numbering the fifth. This
Consciousness (who is a Great Being and) from whom springs the third
creating, has five thousand Kalpas for his night, and his day is of equal
duration. Sound, Touch, Form, Taste, and Scent,—these five are
called Visesha, They inhere into the five great Bhutas. All creatures,
O king, incessantly pervaded by these five, desire one another's compa-
nionship, become subservient to one another; and challenging one
another, transcend one another; and led by those immutable and
seductive principles, creatures kill one another and wander in this world
entering into numerous orders of Being.! Three thousands of Kalpas
represent the duration of their day. The measure of their night also is
the same.?_-The Mind roveth over all things, O king, led on by the
Senses. The Senses donot perceive anything. It is the Mind that
perceives through them. The Eye sees forms when aided by the Mind
but never by itself. When the Mind is distracted, the Eye fails to
perceive with even the objects fully before it. It is commonly said that
the Senses perceive. This is not true, for it is the Mind that perceives
through the Senses. When the cessation takes place of the activity of
the Mind, the cessation of the activity of the Senses follows. That is
the cessation of the activity of the Senses which is the cessation of the
activity of the Mind. One should thus regard the Senses to be under
the domination of the Mind, Indeed, the Mind is said to be the Lord
of all the Senses. O thou of great fame, these are all the twenty Bhutas
in the Universe.—' "

SECTION CCCXIII

“Yajnavalkya said,—I have, one after another, told thee the order
of the creation, with their total number, of the various principles, as
also the extent of the duration of each, Listen now to meas I tell thee
of their destruction, Listen to me how Brahman, who is eternal and
undecaying, and who is without beginning and without end, repeatedly
creates and destroys all created objects. When his day expires and night
comes, he becomes desirous of sleep. At such atime the unmanifest
and holy one urges the Being called Maharudra, who is conscious of his
great powers, (for destroying the world). Urged by the unmanifest,

1 These two Verses refer to the power of the attributes of sound &c.,
over Jiva Loves and hates, andall kinds of relationship of Jiva are due to
the action of the attributes named.—T.

. 2 The duration here given has reference to the day and the night of
the Mahabhutas.—T,
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 41 ===

448 MAHABHARATA

that Being assuming the form of Surya of hundreds of thousands of rays,
divides himself into a dozen portions each resembling a blazing fire. He
then consumes with his energy, O monarch, without any loss of time,
the four kinds of created beings, Viz., viviparous, oviparous, fifth-born,
and vegetable. Within the twinkling of the eye all mobile and immobile
creatures being thus destroyed, the Earth becomes on every side as bare
as a totoise shell. Having burnt everything on the face of the Earth,
Rudra, of immeasurable might, then quickly fills the bare Earth with,
Water possessed of great force He then creates the Yuga-fire which
dries up thit Water (into which the bare Earth has been dissolved).
The Water disappearing, the great element of Fire continues to blaze
fiercely. Then comes the mighty Wind of immeasurable force, in his
eight forms, who swallows up quickly that blazing fire of transcendant
force, possessed of seven flames, and identifiable with the heat existing
every creature. Having swallowed up that fire, the Wind courses in
every direction, upwards, downwards, and transversely. Then space of
immeasurable existent swallowed up that Wind of transcendant energy.
Then Mind cheerfully swallows up that immeasurable Space. Then
that Lord of all creatures, viz., Consciousness, who is the Soul of every-
thing, swallows up the Mind. Consciousness, in his turn, is swallowed
up by the Mahat-soul who is conversant with the Past, the Present,
and the Future. The incomparable Mahat-soul or Universe is then
swallowed up by Sambhu, that Lord of all things, to whom the Yoga
attributes of Anima, Laghima, Prapti, &c., naturally inhere, who is
regarded as the Supreme and pure Effulgence that is Immutable. His
hands and feet extend over every part ; his eyes and head and face are
everywhere, his ears reach every place, and he exists overwhelming all
things. He isthe heart of all creatures; His measure is of a digit of
the thumb. That Infinite and supreme Soul, that Lord of all, thus
swallows up the Universe./ After this, what remains is the Undecaying
and the Immutable. One who is without defect of any kind, who is the
Creator of the Past, the Present, and the Future; and who is perfectly
faultless, I have thus, O monarch, duly told thee of Destruction. I
shall now discourse to thee on the subjects of Adhyatma, Adhibhuta,
and Adhidaivata,—'"

SECTION CCCXIV
fm ‘Yajnavalkya said,—Brahmanas conversant with the topics of
enquiry speak of the two feet as Adhyatma, the act of walking as Adhi-
bhuta, and Vishnu as Adhidaivatam (of those two limbs). The lower
duct (anal canal) is Adhyatma; its function of throwing out the excreta

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 42 ===

SANTI PARVA 449

is Adhibhuta, and Mitra (Surya) is the Adhidaivata (of that organ).
The organ of generation is called Adhyatma. Its agreeable function is
called Adhibhuta, and Prajapati is its Adhidaivata. The hands are
Adhyatma ; their function as represented by acts is Adhibhuta ; and
Indra isthe Adhidaivata of those limbs. The organs of speech are
Adbyatma ; the words uttered by them are Adhibhuta; and Agni is
their Adhidaivata. The eye is Adhyatma; vision or form is its
Adhibhuta ; and Surya isthe Adhidaivata of that organ. The ear is
Adhyatma ; sound is Adhibhuta ; and the points of the horizon are its
Adhidaivata. The tongue is Adhyatma, taste is its Adhibhuta; and
Water isits Adhidaivata. The sense of scent is Adhyatma ; odour is
its Adhibhuta ; and Earth is its Adhidaivata. The skin is Adhyatma;
touch is its Adhibhuta ; and Wind is its Adhidaivata. Mind has been
called Adhyatma; that with which the Mind is employed is Adhibhuta ;
and Chandramas is its Adhidaivata. Consciousness is Adhyatma;
conviction in one's identity with Prakriti is its Adhibhuta; and Mahat
or Buddhi is its Adhidaivata. Buddhi is Adhyatma ; that which is to
be understood is its Adhibhuta ; and Kshetrajna is its Adhidaivata. I
have thus truly expounded to thee, O king, with its details taken
individually, the puissance of the Supreme (in manifesting Himself in
different forms) in the beginning, the middle, and the end, O thou that
art fully conversant with the nature of the original topics or principles/
Prakriti, cheerfully and of her own accord, as if for sport, O monarch,
produces, by undergoing modifications herself, thousands and thousands
of combinations of her original transformations called Gunahs. As men
can light thousands of lamps from buta single lamp, after the same
manner Prakriti, by modification, multiplies into thousands of existent
objects the (three) attributes (of Sattwa and Rajasand Tamas) of
Purusha. Patience, joy, prosperity, satisfaction, brightness of all faculties,
happiness, purity, health, contentment, faith, liberality, compassion,
forgiveness, firmness, benevolence, equanimity, truth, acquittance of -
obligations, mildness, modesty, calmness, external purity, simplicity,
observance of obligatory practices, dispassionateness, fearlessness of
heart, disregard for the appearance or otherwise of good and evil as also
for past acts,—appropriation of objects only when obtained by gift, the
absence of cupidity, regard for the interests of others, compassion for
all creatures,—these have been said to be the qualities that attach to
the attribute of Sattwa. The tale of qualities attaching to the attribute
of Rajas consists of pride of personal beauty, assertion of lordship, war,
disclination to give, absence of compassion, enjoyment and enduring of
happiness and misery, pleasure in speaking ill of others, indulgence in
quarrels and disputes of every kind, arrogance, discourtesy, anxiety,

indulgence in hostilities, sorrow, appropriation of what belongs to
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
57 https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 43 ===

460 MAHABHARATA

others, shamelessness, crookedness, disunions, roughness, lust, wrath,
pride, assertion of superiority, malice, and calumny. These are said
to spring from the attributes of Rajas. I shall now tell thee of that
assemblage of qualities which springs from Tamas. They are stupefac-
tion of judgment, obscuration of every faculty, darkness, blind darkness.
By darkness is implied death, and by blind darkness is meant wrath.
Besides these, the other indications of Tamas are greediness in respect
of all kinds of food, ceaseless appetite for both food and drink, taking
pleasure in scents and robes and sports and beds and seats and sleep
during the day and calumny and all kinds of acts proceeding from
heedlessness, taking pleasure, from ignorance (of purer sources of joy)
in dancing and instrumental and vocal music, and aversion for every
kind of religion. These, indeed, are the indications of Tamas—'”

SECTION CCCXV

“**Yajanvalkya said,—These three, O foremost of men, (viz., Sattwa,
Rajas, and Tamas), are the attributes of Prakriti. These attach to all
things of the universe and always inhere tothem. The Unmanifest
Purusha endued with the six Yoga attributes transforms himself by
himself into hundreds and thousands and millions and millions of forms
(by embracing these three attributes). Those that are conversant with
the science of Adhyatma, say that unto the attribute of Sattwa is
assigned a high, unto Rajas a middling, and unto Tamas, a low place in
the universe. By the aid of unmixed righteousness one attains to a high
end (viz., that of the deities or other celestial beings). Through
righteousness mixed with sin one attains tothe status of humanity.
While through unmixed sin one sinks into a vile end (by becoming an
animal or a vegetable &c.). Listen now tome, O king, asI speak to
thee of the intermixture or compounds of the three attributes of Sattwa,
Rajas, and Tamas. Sometimes Rajas is seen existing. with Sattwa,
Tamas also exists with Rajas. With Tamas may also be seen Sattwa.
Then also may Sattwa and Rajas and Tamas be seen existing together
and in equal proportions. They constitute the Unmanifest or Prakriti.
When the Unmanifest (Purusha) becomes endued with only Sattwa, he
attains tothe regions of the deities. Endued with both Sattwa and
Rajas, he takes birth among human beings. Endued with Rajas and
Tamas, he takes birth among the intermediate order of Being. Endued
with all three, viz.,Sattwa and Rajas and Tamas, he attains to the
status of humanity. Those high souled persons that transcend both

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 44 ===

SANTI PARVA 451

righteousness and sin, attain, it is said, to that place which is eternal,
immutable, undecaying, and immortal. Menof knowledge attain to
births that are very superior, and their place is faultless and undecaying,
transcending the ken of the senses, free from ignorance, above birth
and death, and full of light that dispels all kinds of darkness. Thou
hadst asked me about the nature of the Supreme residing in the
Unmanifest, (viz. Purusha). I shall tell thee. Listen to me, O king,
Even when residing in Prakriti, He is said to reside in His own nature
without partaking of the nature of Prakriti.? Prakriti, O king, is
inanimate unintelligent. When presided over Purusha, then only can
she create and destroy,—

“ ‘Janaka said,—Both Prakriti and Purusha, O thou of great intelli-
gence, are without beginning and without end. Both of them are
without form. Both of them are undecaying. Both of them, again,
incomprehensible. How then, O foremost of Rishis,’can it be said that
one of them is inanimate and unintelligent ? How, again, is the other
said to be animate and intelligent? And why is the latter called
Kshetrajna ? Thou, O foremost of Brahmanas, art fully conversant with
the entire religion of Emancipation. I desire to hear in detail of the
religion of Emancipation in its entirety. Do thou discourse to me then
of the existence and Oneness of Purusha, of his separateness from Prakriti,
of the deities which attach to the body of the place to which embodied
creatures repair when they die, and that place to which they may ulti-
mately, in course of time, be able to go. Tell me also of the Knowledge
described’in the Sankhya system, and of the Yoga system separately. It
behoveth thee also to speak of the premonitory symptoms of death, O
best of men. All these topics are well known to thee evenas an (emblic)
myrobalan in thy hand !—'"

1 ‘Prakritisthah’ means ‘in bis own Prakriti or nature.’ The sense of
the line is that Purusha, even when residingin the case that Prakriti
provides him with, does not partake of the nature of Prakriti but continues
to be undefiled by her.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 45 ===

SECTION CCCXVI

“*Yajoavalkya said,—That which is without attributes, O son, can
never be explained by ascribing attributes to it. Listen, however, to
me asl expound to thee what is possessed of attributes and what is
devoid of them. High-souled Munis conversant with the truth regard-
ing all the topics or principles say that when Purusha seizes attributes
like a crystal catching the reflection of ared flower, he comesto be
called as possessed of attributes; but when freed from attributes like
the crystal freed from reflection, he comes to be viewed in” his real
nature, that is, as beyond all attributes,!_ Unmanifest Prakriti is by her
nature endued with attributes. She cannot transcend them. Destitute
of intelligence by nature, she becomes attached to attributes, Unmani-
fest Prakriti cannot know anything, while Purusha, by his nature, is
possessed of knowledge.—There is nothing higher than myself,—even
this is what Purusha is always conscious of. For this reason the
unmanifest (or Prakriti), although naturally inanimate and unintelligent,
still becomes animate and intelligent in consequence of her union with
Purusha who is Eternal and Indestructible instead of remaining in her
own nature due to her destructibility.2 When Purusha, through
ignorance, repeatedly becomes associated with attributes, he fails to
understand his own real nature and therefore he fails to attain to Eman-
cipation. In consequence Purusha’s lordship over the principles that
flow from Prakriti, he is said to partake of the nature of those princi-
ples, In consequence also of his agency in the matter of creation, he
is said to possess the attribute of creation. In consequence of his
agency in the matter of Yoga, he is said to possess the attribute of Yoga.
For his lordship over those particular principles known by the name of
Prakriti, he is said to possess the nature of Prakriti.® For his agency
in the matter of creating the seeds (of all immobile objects), he is said to
partake of the nature of those seeds. And because he causes the several
principles or attributes to start into life, heis, therefore, said to be

1 LT expand this Verse for bringing out the meaning. A verbal render-
ing will become unintelligible.—T.

2 This is a difficult Verse. Iam not sure that I have understood it
correctly. The sense to be that Prakriti, which is really unintelligent and
incapable of enjoyment or endurance, becomes intelligent and capable of
enjoyment or endurance in consequence of being united with Purusha who
is intelligent. Thus when pleasurable or painful sensations are felt, it is
the body shat seems to feel it only in consequence of the Soul that presides
over it —T.

3 The first line of 7 is the same in sense ag the second line of 8. In
the Bombay text, only the second line of 8 occurs, while the first line of 7
has peer justly omitted. In fact, Tattwa and the Prakriti are the same
thing.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 46 ===

SANTI PARVA 463

subject to decay and destruction (for those principles themselves are
subject thereto). In consequence, again, of his being the witness of
everything, and in consequence also of there being nothing else than he,
as also for his consciousness of identity with Prakriti, Yatis crowred
with ascetic success, conversant with Adhyatma, and freed from fever
of every kind, regard him as existing by himself without a second,
immutable, unmanifest (in the form of Cause), unstable, and manifest
(in the form of effects). This is what has been heard by us. Those
Sankhyas, however, that depend upon Knowledge only (for their
Emancipation) and the practice of compassion for all creatures, say that
itis Prakriti which is One but Purushas are many.’ Asa matter of
fact, Purusha is different from Prakriti which though unstable, still
appears as stable. As a blade of reed is different from its outer cover,
even so is Purusha different from Prakriti. Indeed, the worm that is
ensconced within the Udumvara should be known as different from the
Udumvara. Though existing with the Udumvara, the worm is not to
be regarded as forming a portion of the Udumvara. The fish is distinct
from the water in which it lives, and the water is distinct from the fish
that lives in it. Though the fish and water exist together, yet it is never
drenched by water. The fire that is contained in an earthen sauce’pan
is distinct from the earthen sauce’pan, and the sauce’pan is distinct from
the fire it contains. Although the fire exists in and with the sauce’pan,
yet it is not to be regarded as forming any part of it. The lotus-leaf
that floats on a piece of water is distinct from the piece of water on
which it floats. Its co-existence with water does not make it a portion
of the water. The perennial existence of those objects in and with
those mentioned, is never correctly understood by ordinary people.
They who behold Prakriti and Purusha in any other light are said to
possess a vision that is incorrect. It is certain that they have repeatedly
to sink into terrible bell. I have thus told thee the philosophy of the
Sankbyas that excellent science by which all things have been correctly
ascertained, Ascertaining the nature of Purusha and Prakriti in this
way, the Sankhyas attainto Emancipation. I have also told thee of
the systems of those others that are conversant with the great principles
of the universe. I shall now discourse to thee on the science of the

Yogins.—’”

SECTION CCCXVII

“Yajnavalkya said,—I have already spoken to thee of the science
of the Sankhyas. Listen now to me as/I truly discourse on the science

1 This refers to the opinion of the atheistic Sankhyas.--T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 47 ===

464 MAHABHARATA

of the Yogins as heard and seen by me, O best of kings! There is no
knowledge that can compare with that of the Sankhyas. There is no
puissance that compares with that of Yoga. These two ordain the same
practices, and both are regarded as capable of leading to Emancipation.
Those men that are not blest with intelligence regard the Sankhya and
the Yoga systems to be different from eachother. We, however, O
king, look upon them as one and the same, according to the conclusion
to which we have arrived (after study and reflection). That which the
Yogins have in view is the very same which the Sankhyas also have in
view. He who sees both the Sankhya and the Yoga systems to be one
and the same is to be regarded as truly conversant with the topics or
principles that ordain the universe. Know, O king, that the vital
breaths and the senses are the chief means for practising Yoga. By only
regulating those breaths and the senses, Yogins wander everywhere at
their will. When the gross body is destroyed, Yogins, endued with
subtile bodies possessed of the eight Yoga attributes (of Anima, Laghima
Prapti, &c-,) wander over the universe, enjoying (in that body) all kinds
of felicities, O sinless one. The wise have, in the scriptures, spoken of
Yoga as conferring eight kinds of puissance. They have spoken of Yoga
as possessed of eight limbs.?_ Indeed, O king, they have not spoken of
any other kind of Yoga. It has been said that the practices of Yogins
excellent fas these are (for their results), are of two kinds. Those two
kinds, according to the indications occurring in the scriptures, are
practices endued with attributes and these freed from attributes. The
concentration of the mind (on the sixteen objects named), with simulta-
neous regulation of the breath, O king, (is one kind). The concentration
of the mind (in such a way as to destroy all difference between the
contemplater, the object contemplated, and the act of contemplation)
along with subjugation of the senses, (isof another kind). The first
kind of Yoga is said to be that possessed of attributes; the second kind
issaid to be that freed from attributes.* Then, again, Regulation of

1 By the word ‘Rudra’ is meant Prana and the other breaths, The
Commentator explains that the etymolgy is utkramana kale dehinam roda-
yanti iti Rudrah Pranab. By regulating the vital breaths and the Senses,
Yogins attain to Yoga-puissance and succeed in roving wherever they please
in their linga-sarira or subtile bodies—T.

2 The Hight limbs of Yoga are Pranayma Pratyahara, Dhyana,
Dharana, Tarka, Samadhi, with the two additional ones of Yama and
Niyama,—T.

8 In the first line of 9 the word 'Pranayma’ is used to mean regulation
of the vital breaths. In the second line, the same word implies the ‘ayamah
or nigrahah’ of the senses with the mind. By 'Dharana’ is meant the fixing
of the mind, one after another, on the sixteen things named in treatises on
Yoga. By ‘ekagrata’ of the mind is meant that concentration in which there
is no longer any conscionsness of difference between, Dhyatri, Dheya, and
Dbyana,.’—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 48 ===

BANTI PARVA 465

the breath is Yoga with attributes. In Yoga without attributes, the
mind, freed from its functions, should be fixed. Only the regulation of
the breath which is said to be endued with attributes should, in the first
instance, be practised, for, O ruler of Mithila, if the breath (that is
inhaled and suspended) be exhaled without mentally reflecting the while
upon a definite image (furnished by a limited mantra), the wind in the
neophyte’s system will increase to his great injury.’ In the frst Yama
of the night, twelve ways of holding the breath are recommended.
After sleep, in the last Yama of the night, other twelve ways of doing
the same have been laid down, Without doubt, one endued with tran-
quillity, of subdued senses, living in retirement, rejoicing in one’s own
self, and fully conversant with the import of the scriptures, should
(regulating one’s breath in these four and twenty ways) fix one’s Soul
(on the Supreme Soul).? Dispelling the five faults of the five senses, viz.,
(withdrawing them from their objects of) sound, form, touch, taste, and
scent, and dispelling those conditions called Pratibha and Apavanga, O
ruler of the Mithilas, all the senses should be fixed upon the mind. The
mind should then be fixed on Consciousness, O king ; Consciousness
should next be fixed on intelligence or Buddhi, and Buddhi, should then
be‘fixed on Prakriti. Thus merging these one after another, Yogins con-
template the Supreme Soul which is One, which is freed from Rajas,
which is stainless, which is Immutable and Infinite and Pure and with-
out defect, who is Eternal Purusha, who is unchangeable, who is
Indivisible, who is without decay and death, who is everlasting, who
transcends diminution, and whichis Immutable Brahma. Listen now,
© monarch, to the indications of one that is in Yoga. All the indications
of cheerful contentment that are his who is slumbering in contentment
are seen in the person, that is in Samadhi. The person in Samadhi,
the wise say, looks like the fixed and upward flame of a lamp that is
full of oil and that burns ina breezeless spot. He is like a rock which
is incapable of being moved in the slightest degree by evera heavy
downpour from the clouds. He is incapable of being moved by the din
of conches and drums, or by songs or the sound of hundreds of musical

1 It is difficult for those who do not practise Pranayama to under-
stand this fully. The fact is, Saguna Pranayama, when the breath is in-
haled, the inhalation is measured by the time taken up in mentally reciting
a well-known mantra. So when inhaled breath is suspended, the suspension
is measured by the time taken in mentally reciting a particular mantra,
When, therefore, the suspended breath should be exhaled, it should be done
by similarly measuring the time of exhaling For beginners, this Saguna
Pranayama is recommended. Of course only exhalation has been spoken of
but it applies equally to inhalation and suspension, These three processes,
in Yoga language, are Puraka, Kumbbaka, and Rechaka.—T, 7

2 ‘Ekantasilin’ means a ‘Sannyasin’; ‘atmarama’is one who takes
pleasure in one’s soul instead of in spouses and ohildren.—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 49 ===

406 MAHABHARATA

instruments beat or blown together. Even this is the indication of one
in Samadhi. As a man of cool courage and determination, while ascend-
ing a flight of steps with a vessel full of oil in his hands, does not spill
even a drop of the liquid if frightened and threatened by persons armed
with weapons éven so the Yogin, when his mind has been concentrated
and when he beholds the Supreme Soul in Samadhi, does not, in conse-
quence of the entire stoppage of the functions of his senses at sucha
time, move in the slightest degree. Even these should be known to be
the indication of the Yogin while he is in Samadhi. While in Samadhi,
the Yogin beholds Brahma which is Supreme and Immutable, and which
is situated like a blazing Effulgence in the midst of thick Darkness. It
is by this means that he attains, after many years, to Emancipation
after casting off this inanimate body. Even this is what the eternal
Sruti declares. This is called the Yoga of the Yogins, What else is it ?
Knowing it, they that are endued with wisdom regard themselves as
crowned with success,—

SECTION CCCXVIII

‘Yajnavalkya said,—Listen now to me, with attention, O king, as
to what the places are to which those who die have to go. Ifthe
Jiva-soul escapes through the feet, it is said that the man goes to
the region of the Vishnu. If through the calves, it has been
heard by us, that the man repairs to the regions of the Vasus.
If through the knees, he attains to the companionship of
those deities thit are called Sadhyas. If through the lower duct,
the man attains to the regions of Mitra. If through the posteriors,
the man returns to the Earth, and if through the thighs to the

region of Prajapati. If through the flanks, the man attains to the
regions of the Maruts, and if through the nostrils, to the region of
Chandramas. If through thearms, the man goes to the region of

Indra, and if through the chest, to that of Rudra, If through the
neck, the man repairs to the excellent region of that foremost of

asceties known bythe nameof Nara. If through the mouth. the
man attains to the region of the Viswadevas and if through the ears,
to the region of the deities of the several points of the horizon. If

through the nose, the man attains tothe region of the Windgod;
and if through the eyes, to the region of Agni. If through the brows,
the man goes to the region of the Aswins ; and if through the forehead,
to that of Pitris. If through the crown of the head, the man attains to
the region of the puissant Brahman, that foremost of the gods. v4
have thus told thee. Oruler of Mithila, the several places to which

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 50 ===

SANTI PARVA 457

men repair according to the manner in which their Jiva-souls escape
from their bodies, I shall now tell thee the premonitory indication, as
Jaid down by the wise of those who have but one year to live. One
who, having previously seen the fixed star called Arandhati, fails to see
it, or that other star called Dhruva,’ or one that sees the full Moon or
the flame of a burning lamp to be broken towards the south, has but
one year to live. Those men, O king, who can no longer see images of
themselves reflected in the eyes of others, have but one year to live.
One who being endued with lustre loses it, or being endued with
wisdom loses it,—indeed, one whose inward and outward nature is thus
changed,—has but six months more to live. He who disregards the
deities, or quarrels with the Brahmanas, or one who being naturally of
adark complexion becomes pale of hue, has but six months more to
live. One who, sees the lunar disc to have many holes like a spider's
web or one who sees the solar disc to have similar holes, has bute one
weak more to live, One who, when smelling fragrant scents in place
of worship, perceives them to be as offensive as the scent of corpses,
has but one week more to live. The depression of the nose or of the
ears, the discolour of the teeth or of the eye, the loss of all consciousness,
and the loss also of all animal heat, are symptoms indicating death that
very day. If, without any perceptible cause a stream of tears suddenly
flows from one’s left eye, andif vapours be seen to issue from one’s
head, that is a sure indication that the man will die before chat day
expires. Knowing all these premonitory symptoms, the man of cleansed
soul should day and night unite his soul with the Supreme Soul (in
Samadhi). Thus should he go on till the day comes tor kis dissolution.
If, however, instead of wishing to die he desires to live in this world,
he casts off all enjoyments,—all scents and tastes,—O king, and lives on
in abstinence. He thus conquers death by fixing his soul on the
Supreme Soul. Indeed, the man who is blessed with knowledge of the
Soul, O monarch, practises the course of life recommended by the
Sankhyas and conquers death by uniting his soul with the Supreme Soul.
At last, he attains to what is entirely indestructible, which is without
birth, which is auspicious, and immutable, and eternal, and stable,
and which is incapable of being attained to by men of uncleansed
souls.-—

1 The pole-star.—T.

58 Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 51 ===

SECTION CCCXIX

“Yajnavalkya said,—Thou hast asked me, O monarch, of that
Supreme Brahma which resides in the Unmanifest. Thy question
relates toa deep mystery. Listen to me with close attention, O king!
Having conducted myself with humility according to the ordinances
laid down by the Rishis I obtained the Yajushes, O king, from Surya.
Without the austerest penances I formerly adored the heat-giving deity.
The puissant Surya, O sinless one, gratified with me, saying,—Solicit
thou, O regenerate Rishi, the boon upon which thou hast set thy
heart, however difficult it may be of acquisition. I shall, with cheer-
ful Soul, grant it to thee. It is very difficult to incline me to grace !—
Bowing unto him with a bend of my head, that foremost of heat-giving
luminaries was addressed by me in these words,—I have no knowledge
of the Yajushes. I desireto know them without loss of time !—The
holy one, thus solicited, told me,—I shall impart the Yajushes- unto
thee. Made up of the essence of speech, the goddess Saraswati will
enter into thy body,—The deity then commanded me to open my
mouth, I did as I was commanded. The goddess Saraswati then
entered into my body, O sinless one, At this, I began to burn.
Unable to endure the pain I plunged into a stream. Not understanding
that what the high-souled Surya had done for me was for my good,
I became even angry with him. While I was burning with the energy
of the goddess, the holy Surya told me,—Do thou endure this burning
sensation for only a little while. That will soon cease and thou wilt be cool.
Indeed I became cool. Seeing me restored to ease, the Maker of light said
unto me,—The whole Vedas, with even those parts that are regarded
as its appendix, together with the Upanishads, will appear in thee
by inward light, O regenerate one! The entire Satapathas also thou
wilt edit, O foremost of regenerate ones. After that, thy understand-
ing will turn to the path of Emancipation, Thou wilt also attain
to that end which is desirable and which is coveted by both Sankhyas
and Yogins!—Having said these words unto me, the divine Surya
proceeded to the Asta hills, Hearing his last words, and after he
had departed from the spot where I was, I came home in joy and then
remembered the goddess Saraswati. Thought of by me, the auspi-
cious Saraswati appeared instantly before my eyes, adorned with all
the vowels and the consonants and having placed the syllable Om in
the van. I then, according to the ordinance, offered unto the
goddess the usual Arghya, and dedicated another to Surya, that
foremost of all heat-giving deities. Discharging this duty I took
my seat, devoted to both those deities. Thereupon the entire Sata-
patha Brahmanas, with all their mysteries and with all their abstracts
as also their appendices, appeared of themselves before my mental

a
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 52 ===

SANTI PARVA 459

vision, at which I became filled with great joy.’ I then taught
them to a hundred good disciples and thereby did what was’ disa-
greeable to my high-souled maternal uncle (Vaisampayana) with
the disciples gathered round him.? Then shining in the midst of my
disciples like the Sun himself with his rays, I took the management
of the Sacrifice of thy high-souled sire, O king. In that Sacrifice
adispute arose between me and my maternal uncle as to who should
be permitted to appropriate the Dakshina that was paid for the recita-
tion of the Vedas. In the very presence of Devala, I took half of that
Dakshina, (the other half going to my maternal uncle). Thy sire and
Sumanta and Paila and Jaimini and other articles all acquiesced in that
arrangement.®

“I had thus got from Surya the five times ten Yajushes, O
monatch. I then studied the Puranas with Romaharshan. Keeping
before me those (original) Mantras and the goddess Saraswati, I then,
O king, aided by the inspiration of Surya, set myself to compile the
excellent Satapatha Brahmanas, and succeeded in achieving the task
never before undertaken by any one else. That path which I had
desired to take has been taken by me and I have also taught it to
my disciples» Indeed, the whole of those Vedas with their abstracts
have been imparted by me to those disciples of mine. Pure in mind
and body, all those disciples have, in consequence of my instructions,
become filled with joy. Having established (for the use of others)
this knowledge consisting of fifty branches which I had obtained
from Surya, I now meditate on the great object of that knowledge viz,,
(Brahma). The Gandhatva Viswavasu, well conversant with the Vedan-
ta scriptures, desirous, O king, of ascertaining what is beneficial for the
Brahmanas in this knowledge and what truth occurs in it, and what
is the excellent object of this knowledge, once questioned me. He put

1 ‘Chakre' literally means ‘I made.’ The Commentator explains it as equivalent
to'swayam avirabhut.'—T.

2 'Vipriya’ evidently means ‘what is not agreeable.’ There was evidently a
dispute between Yajnavalkya and his maternal uncle Vaisampayana, the celebrated
disciple of Vyasa. This dispute is particularly referred co in the next Verse.
Vaisampayana had been a recognised teacher of the Vedas and had collected a large
number of disciples around him. When, therefore, the nephew Yajnavalkya, having
obtained the Vedas from Surya, began to teach them, he was naturally looked upon
with a jealousy, which culminated (as referred to in the next Verse) into an open
dispute about the Dakshina to be appropriated in the Sacrifice of Janaka. The Burdwan
translator incorrectly renders the word ‘vipriya’ which he takes to mean as ‘very
agreeable.’ Inthe Vishnu Purana it is mentioned that a dispute took place between
Yajnavalkya and Paila. The latter's preceptor, Vyasa, came, and taking his side,
asked Yajnavalkya to return him the Vedas which he had obtained from him.
Yajnavalkya vomitted forch the Vedas. These were instantly devoured by two other
Rishis in the form of Tittiri birds. These afterwards promulgated the Taittiriya
Upanishads.—T.

3 This shows that I was then regarded as the equal of Vaisampayana himself in
the matter of Vedic knowledge. Sumanta and Paila and Jaimini, with Vaisampayana,
were the rishis that assisted the great Vyasa in the task of arranging the Vedas.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 53 ===

460 MAHABHARATA

to me altogether four and twenty questions, O king, relating to the
Vedas, Finally, he asked me a question, numbered twenty-fifth which
relates to that branch of knowledge which is concerned with the
inferences of ratioscination. Those questions are as follow :—What
is universe and what is not-universe ? What is Aswa and what Aswa ?
What is Mitra? What is Varuna? What is Knowledge? What is
Object of knowledge ? What is Unintelligent ? What is Intelligent ?
Who is Kah? Who is possessed of the principle of change? Who
is not possessed of the same? What is he that devours the Sun
and what is che Sun? What is Vidya and what is Avidya ?
What is Immobile and what Mobile? What is without beginning,
what is Indestructible, and what is Destructible? These were the
excellent questions put to me by that foremost of Gandharvas- After
king Viswavasu, that foremost of Gandharvas, had asked me these
questions one after another, I answered them properly. At first,
however, I told him,—Wait for a brief space of time, till I reflect on
thy questions !—So be it, Gandharva said, and sat in silence. I then
thought once again of the goddess Saraswati in my mind. The replies
then to those questions naturally arose in my mind like butter from
curds. Keeping in view the high science of inferential ratioscination,
I churned with my mind, O monarch, the Upanishads and the
supplementary scriptures relating to the Vedas. The fourth science
then that treats of Emancipation, O foremost of kings, and on which
I have: already discoursed to thee, and which is based upon the
twenty-fifth, viz. Jiva, 1 then expounded to him.’ Having said all
this, O monarch, to king Viswavasu, I then addressed him, saying
Listen now to the answers that I give unto the several questions that
thou hast put to me- I now turn to the question which, O Gandharva,
thou askest, viz.—What is Uuniverse and what is not-universe ?—
The Universe is Unmanifest and original Prakriti endued with the
principles of birth and death which are terrible (to those that are
desirous of Emancipation). It is, besides, possessed of the three
attributes (of Sattwa, Rajas, and Tamas), in consequence of its produ-
cing principles all of which are fraught with those attributes.2, That
which is Not-universe is Purusha divested of -all attributes. By
Aswa and Aswa are meant the female andthe male, the former
is Prakriti and the latter is Purusha. Similarly, Mitra is Purusha,

1 This is called the Fourth Science, the three others being the three Vedas,
Agriculture, and the Science of Morality and Chastisement.—T.

2 Prakriti is regarded as something in which Sattwa, Rajas, and Tamas reside in

exactly equal proportion. All the principles of Mahat, &c., which flow from Prakriti,
are characterised by these three attributes in diverse measure.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 54 ===

SANTI PARVA 461

and Varuna is Prakriti’ Knowledge, again, is said to be Prakriti.
while the object to be known is called Purusha. The Ignorant (Jiva),
and the Knowing or Intelligent are both Purusha without attributes (for
it is Purusha that becomes Jiva when invested with Ignorance). Thou
hast asked what is Kah, who is endued with change and who is unendued
therewith. I answer, Kah is Purusha.? That which is endued with
change is Prakriti. He that is not endued therewith is Purusha.
Similarly, that which is called Avidya (the unknowable) is Prakriti ;
and that which is called Vidya is Purusha, Thou hast asked me
about the Mobile and the Immobile. Listen to what my
answer is. That which is mobile is Prakriti, which undergoing
modification, constitutes the cause of Creation and Destruction,
The Immobile is Purusha, for without himself undergoing modi-
fications he assists at Creation and Destruction. (According to a
different system of philosophy) that which is Vedya is Prakriti;
while that whichis Avedya isPurusha. Both Prakriti and Purusha
are said to be unintelligent, stable, indestructible, unborn, and
eternal, according to the conclusions arrived at by philosophers
conversant, with the topics included in the name of Adhyatma. In
consequence of the indestructibility of Prakriti in the matter of
Creation. Prakriti, which is unborn, is regarded as not subject to
decay or destruction. Purusha, again, is indestructible and unchange-
able, for change it has none. The attributes that reside in Prakriti are
destructible, but not Prakriti herself. The learned, therefore, call
Prakriti indestructible. Prakriti also, by undergoing modifications,
operates as the cause of Creation. The created results appear and dis-
appear, but not original Prakriti. Hence also is Prakriti called
indestructible. Thus have I told thee conclusions of the fourth Science
based on the principles of ratiocinative inference and having Emanci-
pation for its end. Having acquired by the science of ratiocinative
inference and by waiting upon preceptors, the Rich, the Samans, and
the Yajushes, all the obligatory practices should be observed and all the
Vedas studied with reverence. O Viswavasu! O foremost of Gandhar-
vas, they who study the Vedas with all their branches but who do not
know the Supreme Soul from which all things take their birth and
into which all things merge when destruction comes, and which is the
one object whose knowledge the Vedas seek to inculcate,—indeed,
they who have no acquaintance with that which the Vedas seek
to establish,_study the Vedas to no purpose and bear their
burthen of such study in vain. Ifa person desirous of butter churns

1 By Mitra is meant here the deity giving light and heat. By Varuna is meant
the waters that compose the universe.—T.

2 ‘Kah’, the commentator explained, is ‘anandah' or felicity.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 55 ===

462 . MAHABHARATA

the milk of the she-ass, without finding what he seeks he simply meets
with a’substance that is as foul of smell as ordure. After the same
manner, if one, having studied the Vedas, fails to comprehend what
is Prakriti and what is Purusha, one only proves one’s. own
foolishness of understanding and bears a useless burthen (in
the form of Vedic lore). One should, with devoted attention, reflect
on both Prakriti and Purusha, so that one may avoid repeated birth and
death. Reflection upon the fact of one’s repeated births and deaths and
avoiding the religion of acts that is productive at best of destructible
results, one should betake oneself to the indestructible religion of Yoga.
O Kasyapa, if one continuously on the nature of the Jiva-soul and
its connection with the Supreme Soul, one then succeeds in divesting
oneself on all attributes and in beholding the Supreme soul.
The Eternal and Unmanifest Supreme Soul is regarded by men of
foolish understandings to be different from the twenty-fifth or the Jiva-
soul. They are endued with wisdom that behold both these as truly one
and the same. Frightened at repeated births and deaths, the Sankhyas
and Yogins regard the Jiva-soul and the Supreme Soul to be one and the
same.— "

"'Viswavasu then said,—Thou hast, O foremost of Brahmanas,
said that Jiva-soul is indestructible and truly undistinguished from the
Supreme Soul. This, however, is difficult to understand. It behoveth
thee toonce more discourse on this topic tome. I have heard dis-
courses on this subject from Jaigishavya. Aista,s Devala, the regenerate
sage Parasara, the intelligent Varshaganya, Bhrigu, Panchasikha,
Kapila, Suka, Gautama, Arshtisena, the high-souled Garga, Narada,
Asuri, the intelligent Paulastya, Sanatkumara, the high-souled Sukra,
and my sire Kasyapa. Subsequently I heard. the discourses of Rudra
and the intelligent Viswarupa, of several of the deities, of the Pitris,
and the Daiteyas. I have acquired all that they say, for they generally
discourse that eternal object of all knowledge. I desire, however, to
hear what thou mayst say on those topics with the aid of thy intelligence.
Thou art the foremost of all persons, anda learned lecturer on the
scriptures, and endued with great intelligence. There is nothing that
is unknown to thee. Thou art an ocean of the Srutis, as described, O
Brahmana, in the world of both the deities and Pitris. The great Rishis
residing in the region of Brahma say that Aditya himself, the eternal
lord of all luminaries, is thy preceptor (in the matter of this branch of
knowledge). O Yajnavalkya, thou hast obtained the entire science, O
Brahmana, of the Sankhyas, as also the scriptures of the Yogins in

1 The comparison lies in the folly of the two persons indicated. One churning
aas's milk for butter is only a fool. Similatly, one failing to understand the nature of
Prakriti and Purusha from the Vedas is only a fool.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 56 ===

SANTI PARVA 463

particular, Without doubt, thou art enlightened, fully conversant
with the mobile and immobile universe. I desire to hear thee discourse
on that knowledge, which may be likened to clarified butter endued
with solid grains.

““Yajnavalkya said—thou art, O foremost of Gandharvas,
competent to comprehend every knowledge. As, however, thou
askest me do thou hear me then discourse to thee according as I
myself have obtained it from my preceptor. Prakriti, which is
unintelligent, is apprehended by Jiva. Jiva, however, cannot be
apprehended by Prakriti, O Gandharva. In consequence of
Jiva being reflected in Prakriti, the latter is called Pradhana
by Sankhyas and Yogins conversant with the original
principles as indicated in the Srutis. O sinless one, the other,
beholding, beholds the twenty-fourth (Prakriti) and the twenty-fifth
(Soul) ; not beholding, ic bebolds the twenty-sixth.’ The twenty-fifth
thinks that there is nothing higher than itself. In reality, however,
though beholding, it does not behold that (viz, the Twenty-sixth)
which beholds it-? Men possessed of wisdom should never accept the
Twenty-fourth (viz, Prakriti, which is unintelligent or inert) as
identifiable with the Twenty-fifth or the Soul which has a real and
independent existence. The fish live in water. It goes thither
impelled by its own nature. As the fish, though living in the water,
is to be regarded as separate from it, after the same manner is the
Twenty-fifth to be apprehended, (i.e, though the Twenty-fifth exists
in a state of contact with the Twenty-fourth or Prakriti, it is, however,
in its real nature, separate from and independent of Prakriti. When
overwhelmed with the consciousness of meum or Self, and when
unable to understand its identity with the Twenty-sixth, in fact, in
consequence of the illusion that invests it, of its co-existence with
Prakriti, and of its own manner of thinking, the Jiva-soul always

1 Igivea literal rendering of this Verse for showing how difficule it is to under-
stand the meaning. The Commentator correctly explains the sense which is as follows :
‘anyah' or the other is the Soul as distinguished from its reflection upon Prakriti, that
is the Soul in its real character as independent of Prakriti, What is said here is that
when the Soul, in its real character beholds, or acts as a witness of everything (ise.
asexists inthe states of wakefulness and dream), becomes conscious of both itself
(che Iwenty-fifth) and Prakriti (the Twenty fourth) when, however, it ceases to behold
or act as such witness (i.e. in the state of dreamless slumber of Yoga-samadhi), it
succeeds in beholding the Supreme Soul or the Twenty-sixth. In simple language what
is said here is that the Soul becomes conscious of both itself ard Prakritiin the state
of wakefulnessand dream. In Samadhi alone, it beholds the Supreme Soul.—T.

2 What is said here is that the Twenty-sixth or the Supreme Soul always beholds
the Twentyefifth or the Jivasoul. The latter, however, filled with vanity, regards
that there is nothing higher than it. It can ‘easily, in Yogasamadhi, behold the
Twenty.sixth. Though thus competent to behold the Supreme Soul, it fails ordinarily
to behold it. The Commentator sees in this Verse a reputation of the doctrine of the
Charvakas and the Saugatas who deny that there is a Twenty sixth Tattwa or evena
Twenty fifth which they identify with the Twenty fourth —T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 57 ===

464 MAHABHARATA

skins down, but when freed from such consciousness it goes upwards,
When the Jiva-soul succeeds in apprehending that it is one, and
Prakriti with which resides is another, then only does it, O regenerate
one, succeed in beholding the Supreme Soul and attaining to the condi-
tion of Oneness with the universe. The Supreme is one, O king, and
the Twenty-fifth (or Jiva-soul) is another. In consequence, however,
of the Supreme overlying the Jiva-soul the wise regard both to be one
and the same? For these reasons, Yogins, and followers of
the Sankhya system of philosophy, terrified by birth and death,
blessed with sight of the Twenty-sixth, pure in body and mind,
and devoted to the Supreme Soul, and do not welcome the Jiva-
soul as indestructible? When one beholds the Supreme Soul and
losing all consciousness of individuality becomes identified with the
Supreme, one then becomes omniscient, and possessed of such omni-
science one becomes freed from the obligation of rebirth, I have thus
discoursed to thee truly, sinless one, about Prakriti which is unintelli-
gent, and Jiva-soul which is possessed of intelligence, and the Supreme
Soul which is endued with omniscience, according to the indications
occurring in the Srutis. That man who beholds not any difference
between the knower of the known, is both Kevala and not Kevala, is
the original cause of the universe, is both Jiva-soul and the Supreme
Soul, —

“ *Viswavasu said_—O puissant one, thou hast duly and adequately
discoursed on that which is the origin of all the deities and which is
productive of Emancipation. Thou hast said what is true and excellent.
May inexhaustible blessings always attend thee, and may thy mind be
ever united with intelligence !—

""Yajoavalkya continued,—Having said those words, the prince
of Gandharvas proceeded towards heaven, shining in resplendence
of beauty. Before leaving me, the high-souled one duly honoured me

1 ‘Tatsthanat’ is explained by the Commentator as ‘Varasya avaradhisthanat,
ies in consequence of ‘vara’ overlying the ‘avara.’ The instance of the string and
the snake iscited. At first the string is erroneously taken for the snake. When the
error is dispelled, the string appears as the string, Thus the Supreme and the Jiva soul
come to be taken as one when true knowledge comes.—T.

2 The ordinary doctrine is that the Jiva soul is indestructible, for it is both
unborn and deathless, its so called births and deaths being only changes of the forms
which Prakriti undergoes in course of her association with it, an association that
continues as long as the Jiva-soul does not succeed in effecting itsemancipation. In
this Verse the ordinary doctrine is abandoned. What is said here is that the Jiva-soul
is not deathless, for when it becomes identified with the Supreme Soul, that alteration
may be taken as its death—T.

3. This is a very difficult Verse sya’ and ‘apasya’ are ‘drashtri‘ and ‘drisya’,
knower and known (or Soul and Prakriti)*Kshemaya’ and ‘Tattwa are ‘drik’ and ‘drisya
iw., knowledge and known. One that seesno difference between these that is, one
that regards all things as one and the same, is both "Kevala’ and ‘not-Kevale," &o,
meaning that such a person, though still appearing as a Jiva (to others) isin reality
identifiable with the Supreme Soul.—

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 58 ===

SANTI PABVA 465

me by taking the accustomed turns round my person, and I looked upon
him, highly pleased. He inculcated the science he had obtained from
me unto those celestials that dwell in the regions of Brahman and other
deities, unto those that dwell on Earth, unto also the denizens of the
nether regions, and unto them that had adopted the path ot Emancipa-
tion, Oking. The Sankhyas are devoted to the practices of their system.
The Yogins are devoted to the practices inculcated by their system,
Others there are that are desirous of achieving their Emancipation.
Unto these latter this science is productive of visible fruits, O lion
among king. Emancipation flows from Knowledge. Without Knowledge
it can never be attained. The wise have said it, O monarch. Hence,
one should strive one’s best for acquiring true Knowledge in all its
details, by which one may succeed in freeing oneself from birth and
death, Obtaining knowledge from a Brahmana or a Kshatriya or Vaisya
or evenaSudra who is of low birth, one endued with faith should
always show reverence for such knowledge. Birth and death cannot
assail one that is endued with faith. All orders of men are Brahmanas.
All are sprung from Brahma. All men utter Brahma.? Aided by an
understanding that is derived from and directedto Brahma. I inculcated
this science treating of Prakriti and Purusha. Indeed, this whole
universe is Brahma. From the mouth of Brahma sprung the Brahmanas;
from his arms, sprung the Kshatriyas ; from his navel, the Vaisya ; and
from his feet, the Sudras. All the orders, (having sprung in this way)
should not be regarded as pilfering from one another. Impelled by
Ignorance, all men meet with death and attain, O king, to birth that is
the cause of acts.?_ Divested of Knowledge, all orders of men, dragged
by terrible Ignorance, fall into varied orders of being due to the princi-
ples that flow from Prakriti. For this reason, all should, by every means,
seek to acquire Knowledge. I have told thee that every person is entit-
led to strive for its acquisition. One that is possessed of Knowledge is a
Brahmana. Others, (viz., Kshatriyas and Vaisyas and Sudras) are possess-
ed of knowledge. Hence, this science of Emancipation is always open
to them all. This, O king has been said by the Wise. The questions thou
hadst asked me have all been answered by me agreeably to the truth.
Do thou, therefore, cast off all grief. Go thou to the other end of this
enquiry. Thy questions were good. Blessings on thy head for ever !—

1 This may mean that as men spesk, and as speech is Brabma, all
men must be regarded as utterers of Brahma. It, again, Brabma bs taken
to mean the Vedas in special, it may imply that all men utter the Vedas or
are competent to study the Vedas. Such an exceedingly liberal sentiment
from the mouth of Yajnavalkya is compatible only with the religion of
Emancipation which he taught.—T.

2 The doctrine is that unless acts are destroyed, there can be no
Emancipation.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
59 https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 59 ===

466 MAHABHARATA

“Bhishma continued—Thus instructed by the intelligent Yajnavalkya
the king of Mithila became filled with joy. The king honoured that
foremost of ascetics by walking round his person. Dismissed by the
monarch, he departed from his court. King Daivarati, having obtained
the knowledge of the religion of Emancipation, took his seat, and touch-
ing a million of kine and a quantity of gold and a measure of gems and
jewels, gave them away unto a number of Brahmanas. Installing his
son inthe sovereignty of the Videhas, the old king began to live,
adopting the practices of the Yatis. Thinking mainly of all ordinary
duties and their derelictions (as laid down in the scriptures), the king
began to study the science of the Sankhyas and the Yogins in their
entirety. Regarding himself to be Infinite, he began to reflect on only
the Eternal and Independent One. He cast off allordinary duties and
their derelictions, Virtue and Vice, Truth and Falsehood, Birth and
Death, and all other things appertaining to the principles produced by
Prakriti. Both Sankhyas and Yogins, agreeably to the teachings of their
sciences, regard this universe to be due to the action of the Manifest
and the Unmanifest. The learned say that Brahma is freed from good
and evil, is self-dependent, the highest of the high, Eternal, and Pure.
D.» thou, therefore, O monarch, become Pure! The giver, the receiver
of the gift, the gift irself, and that which is ordered to be given away,
areall to be deemed as the unmanifest Soul. The’ Soul is the Soul's
one possession. Who, therefore, can be a stranger toone? Dothou
think always in this way. Never think otherwise. He who does not
know what 1s Prakriti possessed of attributes and what is Purusha trans-
cending attributes, only he, not possessed as he is of knowledge, repairs
tos:cred waters and performs sacrifices. Not by study of the Vedas,
not by penances, not by sacrifices O son of Kuru, can one attain to the
status of Brahma. Only when one succeeds in apprehending the
Supreme or Unmanifest, one comes to be regarded with reverence. They
who wait upon Mahat attain to the regions of Mahat. They who wait
upon Consciousness, attain to the spot that belongs to Consciousness,
They wh» wait upon what is higher attain to places that are higher than
these. Those persons, learned in the scriptures, who succeed in appre-
hending Eternal Brahma who is higher than Unmanifest Prakriti,
succeed in obtaining that which transcends birth and death, which is
free from attributes, and which is both existent and nonexistent I got
all this knowledge from Janaka. The latter had obtained it from Yajna-
valkya. Knowledge is very superior, Sacrifices cannot compare with
it. With the aid of Knowledge one succeeds in crossing the world’s
ocean which is full of difficulties and dangers. One can never cross
that ocean by means of sacrifices, Birth and death, and other impedi-
ments, O king, men of knowledge say, one cannot pass over by ordinary

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 60 ===

BANTI PARVA 467

éxertion.! Men attain to heaven through sacrifices, penances, vows,
and observances. But they have again to fall down therefrom on the
Earth. Do thou, therefore, adore with ‘reverence that which is
Supreme, most pure, blessed, stainless, and sacred, and which transcends
all states (being Emancipation itself), By apprehending K-hetra, O
king, and by performing the Sacrifice that consists in the acquisitiow of
Knowledge, thou wilt really be wise. In former time, Yajnavalkva did
that good to king Janaka which is derivable from a study of the
Upanishads. The Eternal and Immutable Supreme was the topic about
which the great Rishi bad discoursed to the king of Mithila. It enabled
him to attain to that Brahma which is auspicious, and immoral, and
which transcends all kinds of sorrow.”

SECTION CCCXX

“Yudhishthira said—'Having acquired great power and great
wealth, and having obtained a long period of life, how may one succeed
in avoiding death? By which of these means, viz, penances, or the
accomplishment of the diverse acts (laid down in the Vedas), or by
knowledge of the Srutis, or the application of medicines, can one succeed
in avoiding decrepitude and death ?

“Bhishma said,—‘In this connection is cited the old narrative of
Panchasikha who was a Bhikshu in his practices and Janaka. Once ona
time Janaka, the ruler of the Videhas, questioned the great Rishi Pancha-
sikha, who was the foremost of all persons conversant with the Vedas
and who had all his doubts removed in respect of the purpose and
import of all duties. The King said—By what conduct, O holy one may
one transcend Decrepitude and death? Itis by penances, or by the
understanding, or by religious acts (like sacrifices and vows), or by
study and knowledge of the scriptures ?—Thus addressed by the ruler of
the Vedas the learned Panchasikha, conversant with all invisible things,
answered, saying,—There is no prevention of these two (viz,, decrepitude
and death) ; nor is it true that cannot be prevented under any circums=
tances. Neither days, nor nights, nor months, cease to go on. Only that
man, who, though transitory, betakes himself to the eternal path (of the
religion of Nivritti or abstention from all acts) succeedsin avoiding birth
and death. Destruction overtakes, all creatures. All creatures seem to
be ceaselessly borne along the infinite current of time. Those that are
borne along the infinite current of time which is without a raft (to
rescue) and which is infested by those two mighty alligators, viz., decre-
pitude and death, sink down without anybody coming to their assistance,

1 Literally, ‘these are not obstacles by external nature,’ and are
therefore irremovable by personal exertion of the ordinary kind.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 61 ===

468 MAHABHARATA

As one is swept along that current, one fails to find any friend for help
and one fails to be inspired with interest for any one else. One meets
with spouses and other friends only onone’s road. One had never before
enjoyed this kind of companionship with any one for any length of time.
Creatures, as they are borne along the current of time, become repea-
tedly attracted towards one another like masses of clouds moved by the
wind meeting one another with loud sound. Decrepitude and death are
devourers of all creatures, like wolves. Indeed, they devour the strong
and the weak, the short and the tall. Among creatures, therefore,
which are all so transitory, only the Soul exists eternally. Why should
he, then, rejoice when creatures are born and why should he grieve when
they die? Whence have I come. WhoamI? Whither shall I go?
Whose amI? Before what doI rest? What Shall Ibe? For what
reason then dost thou grieve for what ? Who else then thou wilt behold
heaven or hell (for what thou doest)? Hence, without throwing aside
the scriptures, one should make gifts and perform sacrifices !—"

SECTION CCCXXI

“Yudhishthira said,—'Without abandoning the domestic mode of
life,.O royal sage of Kuru’s race, who ever attained to Emancipation
which is the annihilation of the Understanding (and the other faculties)?
Do tell me this! How may the gross and the subtile form be cast off ?
Do thou also, O grandsire, tell me what the supreme excellence of
Emancipation is.’

“Bhishma said—'In this connection is cited the old narrative of
the discourse between Janaka and Sulabha, O Bharata! In days of yore
there was a king of Mithila, of the name of Dharmadhyaja, of Janaka’s
race. He was devoted to the practices of the religion of Renunciation.
He was well conversant with the Veda, with the scriptures on Emanci-
pation, and with the scriptures bearingon his own duty asa king.
Subjugating his senses, he ruled this Earth. Hearing of his good
behaviour in the world, many men of wisdom, well-conversant with
wisdom, O foremost of men, desired to imitate him. In the same Satya
Yuga, a woman of the name of Sulabha, belonging to the mendicant
order, practised the duties of Yoga and wandered over the whole Earth.
In course of her wanderings over the Earth, Sulabha heard from many
Dandis of different places that the ruler of Mithila was devoted to the
religion of Emancipation. Hearing this report about king Janaka and
desirous of ascertaining whether it was true or not, Sulabha became
desirous of having a personal interview with Janaka. Abandoning, by
her Yoga powers, her former form and features, Sulabha assumed the
most faultless features and unrivalled beauty. In the twinkling of an

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 62 ===

SANTI PARVA 469

eye and with the speed of the quickest shaft, the fair-browed lady of
eyes like lotus-petals repaired to the capital of the Videhas. Arrived
at the chief city of Mithila teeming with a large population, she adopted
the guise of a mendicant and presented herself before the king. The
monarch, beholding, her delicate form, became filled with wonder and
enquired who she was, whose she was, and whence she came. Welcom-
ing her, he assigned her an excellent seat, honoured her by offering
water to wash her feet, and gratified her with excellent refreshments.
Refreshed duly and gratified with the rites of hospitality offered unto
her, Sulabha, the female mendicant, urged the king, who was surrounded
by his ministers and seated in the midst of learned scholars, (to declare
himself in respect of his adherence to the religion of Emancipation).
Doubting whether Janaka had succeeded in attaining to Emancipa-
tion, by following the religion of Nivritti, Sulabha, endued with Yoga-
power, entered the understanding of the king by her own understanding.
Restraining, by means of the rays of light that emanated from her own
eyes, the rays issuing from the eyes of the king, the lady, desirous of
ascertaining the truth, bound up king Janaka with Yoga bonds.’ That
best of monarch, priding himself upon his own invincibleness and defeat-
ing the intentions of Sulabha seized her resolution with his own
resolution.?- The king, in his subtile form, was without the royal
umbrella and sceptre. The lady Sulabha, in hers, was without the
triple stick. Both staying then in the same (gross) form, thus conversed
with each other. Listen to that conversation as it happened between
the monarch and Sulabha.

“Janaka said,—O holy lady, to what course of conduct art thou
devoted? Whose art thou? Whence hast thou come? After finishing
thy business here, whither wilt thou go ? No one can, without question-
ing, ascertain another’s acquaintance with the scriptures, or age, or
order of birth. Thou shouldst, therefore, answer these questions of
mine, when thou has come to me. Know that I am truly freed from all
vanity in respect of my royal umbrella and sceptre. I wish to know
thee thoroughly. Thou art deserving, I hold, of my respect-? Do thou
listen to meas I speak to thee on Emancipation for there is none else
(in this world) that can discourse to thee on that topic. Hear me also
I tell thee who that person is from whom in days of old I acquired this

1 ‘Sanchodayishyanti’ implies 'queetioned.’ Here it means questioning
the king internally or by Yoga power.—T.

2 ‘Utemayan’ is explained by the Commentators as 'priding himself
upon his own invincibleness.’ ‘Ayaya bhavam’ implies ‘her determination
to make the king dumb’ ‘Viseshayan’ is abhibhavan.—

3 ‘Sammantum’ is explained by the Commentator as equivalent to
"gamyak jnatum,’—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 63 ===

470 MAHABHARATA

distinguishing knowledge.’ I am the beloved disciple of the high-
souled and venerable Panchasikha, belonging to the mendicant order, of
Parasara's race. My doubts have been dispelled and am fully conver-
sant with the Sankhya and the Yoga systems, and the ordinances as in
respect of sacrifices and other rites, which constitutes the three well-
known paths of Emancipation.?_ Wandering over the earth and pursu-
ing the while the path that is pointed out by the scriptures, the learned
Panchasikha formerly dwelt in happiness in my abode for a period of
four months in the rainy season. That foremost of Sankhyas discoursed
to me, agreeably to the truth, and in an intelligible manner suited to
my comprehension, on the several kinds of means for attaining to
Emancipation. He did not, however, command me to give up my king-
dom, Freed from attachments, and fixing my Soul on supreme Brahma,
and unmoved by companionship, I lived, practising in its entirety that
triple conduct which is laid down in treatiseson Emancipation. Renun-
ciation (ofall kinds of attachments) is the highest means prescribed
for Emancipation. It is from Knowledge that Renunciation, by which
one becomes freed is said to flow. From Knowledge arises the endea-
vour after Yoga, and through that endeavour one attains to knowledge
of Self or Soul. Through knowledge of Self one transcends joy and grief.
That enables one to transcend death and attain to high success. That
high intelligence (knowledge of Self) has been acquired by me, and
accordingly I have transcended all pairs of opposites. Even in this life
have I been freed from stupefaction and have transcended all attach-
ments. Asa soil, saturated with water and softened theryby, causes
the (sown) seed to sprout forth, after the same manner, the acts of men
cause rebirth, Asa seed, fried on a pan or otherwise, becomes unable
to sprout forth although the capacity for sprouting was there, after the
same manner my understanding having been freed from the productive
principle constituted by desire, by the instruction of the holy Pancha-
sikha of the mendicant order, it no longer produces its fruit in the form
of attachment to the object of the senses. I never experience love for
my spouse or hate for my foes. Indeed, I keep aloof from both, behold

1 It is difficult to say in what sense the word ‘vaisesbikam’ is used
here. There is # partioular system of philosophy called Vaiseshika or Kanada
the system believed to have been originally promulgated by a Rishi of the
name of Kanada. That system has close resemblance to the atomic theory
of European philosophers. It has many points of striking resemblance
with Kapila’s system or Sankhya. Then, again, some of the original
principles, as enunciated in the Sanakhya system, are called by the name of
Visesha.—T.

2 The mention of 'Vidhi’ indicated, as the Commentator explains,
‘Karmakands.’ The value of ‘Karma’ in the path of Emancipation’ is to
purify the Soul.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 64 ===

SANTI PABVA 471

ing the fruitlessness of attachment and wrath. I regard both persons
equally, viz., him that smears my right hand with sandal-paste and him
that wounds my left. Having attained my (true) object, lam happy,
and look equally upon a clod of‘earth, a piece of stone, and a lump of
gold. Iam freed from attachments of every kind, though am engaged
in ruling a kingdom. In consequence of all this I am distinguished over
all bearers of triple sticks. Some foremost of men that are conversant
with the topic of Emancipation say that Emancipation has a triple path.
(These are knowledge, Yoga, and sacrifices and rites). Some regard
Knowledge having all things of the world for its object as the means of
Emancipation. Some hold that the total renunciation of acts (both
external and internal) is the means thereof, _Another class of persons
conversant with the scriptures on Emancipation say that Knowledge is
the single means. Other, viz. Yatis, endued with subtile vision, hold
that acts coastitute the means. The high-souled Panchasikha, discard-
ing both the opinion about knowledge and acts, regarded the third as
the only means or path of Emancipation. If men leading the domestic
mode of life be endued with Yama and Niyama, they become the equals
of Sannyasins. If, on the other hand, Sannyasins be endued with desire
and aversion and spouses and honour and pride and affection, they
become the equals of men leading domestic modes of life.’ If one can
attain to Emancipation by means of knowledge, then may Emancipation
exist in triple sticks (for there is nothing to prevent the bearers of such
stick from acquiring the needful knowledge). Why then may Emanci-
pation not exist in the umbrellaand the sceptre as well, especially when
there is equal reason in taking up the triple stick and the sceptre ??
One becomes attached to all those things and acts with which one has
need for the sake of one’s own self for particular reasons.*? Ifa person,
beholding the faults of the domestic mode of life, casts it off for adopt-
ing another mode (which he considers to be fraught with great merit),
he cannot, for such rejection and adoption, be regarded as one that isa
once freed from all attachments, (for all that he has done has been to

1 K. P. Singha wrongly translates this Verse.—T.

2 ‘There is equal reason in taking up &o.,’ implies that the bearing of
the sceptre is only a mode of life like that of holders of the triple stick.
Both the king and the Sannyasin are free to acquire knowledge and both,
therefore, may attain to Emancipation notwithstanding their respective
emblems. Inthe emblems themselves there is no efficacy or disqualifica-
tion.—T.

3 The object of this Verse is to show that all persons, led by interest,
become attached to partioular things. The littleness or greatness of those
things cannot aid or har people’s way to Emancipation. ‘I may be a king,
gays Janaka, and thou mayst bea mendicant. Neither thy mendicanoy
nor my royalty can aid or obstruct our Emancipation. Both of us, by
Knowledge, oan achieve what we wisb, notwithstanding our outward
surroundings.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 65 ===

472 MAHABHABATA

attach himself to a new mode after having freed himself from a previous
one).* Sovereignty is fraught with the rewarding and the chastising of
others. The life of a mendicant is equally fraught with the same (for
mendicants also reward and chastise those they can). When, therefore,
mendicants are similar to kings in this respect, why would mendicants
only attain to Emancipation, and not kings? Notwithstanding the
possession of sovereignty, therefore, one becomes cleansed of all sins by
means of knowledge alone, living the while in Supreme Brahma. The
wearing of brown cloths, shaving of the head, bearing of the triple stick,
and the Kamandalu,—these are the outward signs of one’s mode of life.
These have no value in aiding one to the attainment of Emancipation.
When, notwithstanding the adoption of these emblems of a particular
mode of life, knowledge alone becomes the cause of one’s Emancipation
from sorrow, it would appear that the adoption of mere emblems is
perfectly useless, Or, if, beholding the mitigation of sorrow in it, thou
hast betaken thyself to these emblems of Sannyasi, why then should not
the mitigation of sorrow be beheld in the umbrella and the sceptre to
which I have betaken myself ? Emancipation does not exist in proverty;
nor is bondage to be found in affluence. One attains to Emancipation
through Knowledge alone, whether one is indigent or affluent. For these
reasons, know that I am living in a condition of freedom, though osten-
sibly engaged in the enjoyments of religion, wealth, and pleasure, in the
form of kingdom and spouses, which constitute a field of bondage (for
the generality of men). The bonds constituted by kingdom and afflu-
ence, and the bondage to attachments, I have cut off with the sword of
Renunciation whetted on the stone of the scriptures bearing upon
Emancipation. As regards myself then, I tell thee that I have become
freed in this way. O lady of the mendicant order, I cherish an affec-
tion for thee. But that should not prevent me from telling thee that
thy behaviour does not correspond with the practices of the mode of
life to which thou hast betaken thyself! Thou hast great delicacy of
formation. Thou hast an exceedingly shapely form. The age is young,
Thou hast all these, and thou hast Niyama (subjugation of the senses).
I doubt it verily. Thou hast stopped up my body (by entering into me
with the aid of the Yoga power) for ascertaining as to whether I am
really emancipated or not, This act of thine ill corresponds with that
mode of life whose emblems thou bearest. For Yogin that is endued
with desire, the triple stick is unfit. As regards thyself, thou dost not
adhere to thy stick. As regards those that are freed, it behoves even

ee
1 Hence, by changing my royal life for that of s bearer of the triple
stiok I can gain nothing. —T, --
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 66 ===

SANTI PARVA 473

them to protect themselves: from fall.?' Listen now to me as to what
thy transgression has been in consequence of thy contact with me and
thy having entered into my gross body with the aid of thy understand-
ing. To what reason is thy entrance to be ascribed into my kingdom or
my palace? At whose sign hast thou entered into my heart ??. Thou
belongest to the foremost of all the orders, being, as thou art, a Brah-
mana woman, As regards myself, however, Iam a Kshatriya. There
is no union for us two. Do not help to cause an intermixture of colours.
Thou livest in the practice of those duties that- lead to Emancipation.
I live in the domestic mode of life. This act of thine, therefore, is
another evil thou hast done, for it produces an unnatural union of two
opposite modes of life. Ido not know whether thou belongest to my
own gotra or dost not belong toit, As regards thyself also, thou dost
not know who Iam (viz., to what gotraI belong). If thou art of my
own gotra, thou hast, by entering into my person, produced another
il_—the evil, viz., of unnatural union. If, again, thy husband be alive
and dwelling in a distant place, thy union with me has produced the
fourth evil of sinfulness, for thou art not one with whom I may be law-
fully united. Dost thou perpetrate all these sinful acts, impelled by the
motive of accomplishing a particular object? Dost thou do these from
ignorance or from perverted intelligence ? If, again, in consequence of
thy evil nature thou hast thus become thorougbly independent or un-
restrained in thy behaviour, I tell thee that if thou hast any knowledge
of the scriptures, thou wilt understand that everything thou hast done
has been productive of evil. Athird fault attaches to thee in conse-
quence of these acts of thine, a fault that is destructive of peace of
mind, By endeavouring to display thy superiority, the indication of a
wicked woman is seen in thee. Desirous of asserting thy victory as thou
art, itis not myself alone whom thou wishest to defeat, for it is plain
that thou wishest to obtain a victory over even the whole of my court
(consisting of these learned and very superior Brahmanas), by casting
thy eyesin this way towatdsall these meritorious Brahmanas, it is
evident that thou desirest to humiliate them all and glorify thyself (at
their expense). Stupefied by thy pride of Yoga-puissance that has been
born of thy jealousy (at sight of my power,) thou hast caused a union of
thy understanding with mine and thereby hast really mingled together
nectar with poison. That union, again, of man and woman, when each

1 *Yukte’ in the first line means ‘in the Yogin.’ The Bombay reading ‘Tridandanke*
isa mistake for ‘Tridandakam.’ The Bombay text reads ‘na muktasyasti gopana,’ mean-
ing that "there isno telief for one that has fallen down after having arisen in Yoga,’
The Bengal text reads ‘vimuktasya’ I adopt the Bengal reading.—T.

2 What the king says is that he, the king, had made no assignation with the lady
in consequence of which she could be justified in entering his body. The word ‘Sanni-

karsha’ here means ‘sanketa.’ Both the Vernacular translators render this word
wrongly.—T.
60 Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-it

12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 67 ===

474 MAHABHARATA

covets the other, is sweet as nectar. That association, however, of man
and woman when the latter, herself coveting, fails to obtain an indivi-
dual of the opposite sex that does not covet her, is, instead of being a
merit, only a fault that is as noxious as poison. Do not continue to
touch me. Know that I am righteous. Do thou act according to thy
own scriptures. The enquiry thou hadst wished to make, viz., whether I
am orl am not emancipated, has been finished. It behoves thee not to
conceal from me all thy secret motives. It behoves thee not, that thus
disguisest thyself, to conceal from me what thy object is, that is whether
this call of thine has been prompted by the desire of accomplishing some
object of thy own or whether thou hast come for accomplishing the
object of some‘other king (that is hostile to me). One should never
appear deceitfully before a king; nor before a Brahmana ; nor before
one's wife when that wife is possessed of every wifely virtue. Those
who appear in deceitful guise before these three very soon meet with
destruction. The power of kings consists in their sovereignty. The
power of Brahmanas conversant with the Vedas isin the Vedas. Women
wield a high power in consequence of their beauty and youth and
blessedness. These then are powerful in the possession of these powers.
He, therefore, that is desirous of accomplishing his own object should
always approach these three with sincerity and candour. Insincerity
and deceit fail to produce success (in these three quarters). It behoveth
thee, therefore, to apprise me of the order to which thou belongest by
birth, of thy learning and conduct and disposition and nature, as also of
the object thou hast in view in coming to this place |—" ‘

“Bhishma continued—'Though rebuked by the king in these un-
pleasant, improper, and ill-applied words, the lady Sulabha was not atall
abashed. After the king had said these words, the beautiful Sulabha
then addressed herself for saying the following words in reply that were
more handsome than her person.

“‘Sulabha said —O king, speech ought always to be free from the
nine verbal faults and the nine faults of judgment. It should also, while
setting forth the meaning with perspicuity, be possessed of the eighteen
well-known merits.*. Ambiguity, ascertainment of the faults and merits
of premises and conclusions, weighing the relative strength or weakness
of those faults and merits, establishment of the conclusion, and the ele-
ment of persuasiveness or otherwise that attaches to the conclusion thus
arrived at—these five characteristics appertaining to the sense—
constitute the authoritativeness of what is said. Listen now to the
characteristics of these requirements beginning with ambiguity, one after
another, as I expound them according to the combinations, When

1 These faults and merits are set forth in the Verses that follow.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 68 ===

SANTI PARVA 475

knowledge rests on distinction in consequence of the object to be known
being different from one another, and when (as regards the comprehen-
sion of the subject) the understanding rests upon many points one after
another, the combination of words (in whose case this occurs) is said to
be vitiated by ambiguity." By ascertainment (of faults and merits),
called Sankhya, is meant the establishment, by elimination, of faults or
merits (in premises and conclusions), adopting tentative meanings.?
Krama or weighing the relative strength or weakness of the faults or
merits. (ascertained by the above process), consists in settling the pro-
priety of the priority or subsequence of the words employed in a
sentence. This is the meaning attached to the word Krama by persons
conversant with the interpretation of sentences or texts. By Conclusion
is meant the final determination, after this examination of what has been
said on the subjects of religion, pleasure, wealth, and Emancipation, in
respect of what it particularly is that has been said inthe text. The
_sorrow born of wish or aversion increases to a great measure. The
conduct, O king, that one pursues in such a matter (for dispelling the
sorrow experienced) is called Prayojanam.‘ Take it for certain, O king,
at my word, that these characteristics of Ambiguity and the other
(numbering five in all), when occurring together, constitute a complete
and intelligible sentence.’ The words I shall utter will be fraught with

1 ‘Saukshmyam,’ is literally ‘minuteness,’ It means ambiguity here. I have render
ed Verse 81 very closely to give the reader an idea of the extreme terseness of these
Verses. For bringing out the meaning of the Verse, the following illustration may
serve. A sentence is composed containing some words each of which is employed In
diverse senses, asthe well-known Verse of Parasara which has been interpreted to
sanction the remarriage of Hindu widows. Here, the object indicated by the words used
are varied. Definite knowledge of the meaning of each word is arrived at by means of
distinctions, i.e., by distinguishing each meaning from every other. In such cases, the
understanding before arriving at the definite meaning, rests in succession upon diverse
points, now upon one, now upon another. Indeed, the true meaning is to be arrived
at in such cases by a process of elimination. When such processes become necessary for
seizing the sense of any sentence, the fault issaid tobe the fault of minuteness or
ambiguity.—T.

2 To take the same example : first take the well-known words of Parasara as really
sanctioning the remarriage of widows. Several words in the Verse would point to this
meaning, several others would not. Weighing probabilities and reasons, let the
meaning be tentatively adopted that second husbands are sanctioned by the Rishi for
the Hindu widow. This is Sankhya.—T.

3 Having tentatively adopted the meaning the second husbands are sanctioned by
the Verse referred to, the conclusion should be either its acceptance or rejection. By
seeing the incompatibilty of the tentative meaning with other settled conclusions in
respect of other texts other writers, the tentative meaning is capable of being rejected,
and the final conclusion arrived at, to the effect, that the second husband is to be taken
only according to the Niyoga-vidhi and not by marriage.—T.

4 By‘prayojanam’ is meant the conduct one pursues for gratifying one’s wish to
acquire or avoid any object. Wish, in respect of either acquisition or avoidance, if
ungratified, becomes a source of pain. The action or conduct that one adopts for
removing that pain is called ‘Prayojanam.’ In the Gautamacsutras it i id that
“yamarthamadhikritya pravartate, tat prayojanam. The two definitions are
identi

5 By occurrence of these five characteristics together is meant that when these are
properly attended to by a speaker or writer, only then can his sentence be said to be

—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/_

=== PAGE 69 ===

476 MAHABHARATA

sense, free from ambiguity (in consequence of each of them not being
symbols of many things), logical, free from pleonasm or tautology,
smooth, certain, free from bombast, agreeable or sweet, truthful, not
inconsistent with the aggregate of three, (viz., Righteousness, Wealth
and Pleasure), refined (i.e., free from Prakriti), not elliptical or imperfect,
destitute of harshness or difficulty of comprehension, characterised by
due order, not far-fetched in respect of sense, corrected with one
another as cause and effect and each having a specific object. I shall
not tell thee anything, prompted by desire or wrath or fear or cupidity
or abjectness or deceipt or shame or compassion or pride. (I answer
thee because it is proper for me to answer what thou hast said). When
the speaker, the hearer, and the words said, thoroughly agree with one
another in course of a speech, then does the sense or meaning come out
very clearly, When, in the matter of what is to be said, the speaker
shows disregard for the understanding of the hearer by uttering words
whose meaning is understood by himself, then, however good those
words may be, they become incapable of being seized by the hearer?
That speaker, again, who, abandoning all regard for his own meaning,
uses words that are of excellent sound and sense, awakens only erroneous
impressions in the mind of the hearer. Such words in such connection
become certainly faulty. That speaker, however, who employs words
that are, while expressing his own meaning, intelligible to the hearer, as
well, truly deserves to be called a speaker. No other man deserves the
name. It behoveth thee, therefore, O king, to hear with concentrated
attention these words of mine, fraught with meaning and endued with
wealth of vocables. Thou hast asked me who I am, whose I am, whence
I amcoming, &c. Listen to me, O king, with undivided mind, asI
answer these questions of thine. As lac and wood, as grains of dust and
drops of water, exist commingled when brought together, even so are the
existences of all creatures.* Sound, touch, taste, form, and scent, these
and the senses, though diverse in respect of their essences, exist yet ina
state of commingling like lac and wood. It is again well known that
nobody asks any of these, saying, who art thou? Each of them also has

complete and intelligible. In Nyaya philosophy, the five requisites ate ‘Pratijna,’
“Hetu,’ ‘Udaharana’ *Upanaya,’ and ‘Nigamana.’ In the Mimansa philosophy, the five
requisites have been named differently. ‘Vishaya,’ ‘Samsaya,’ ‘Purvapaksha,’ ‘Uttara,
and ‘Nirnaya.’—T.

___ 1 These characteristics, the Commentator points out, though numbering sixteen,
include the four and twenty mentioned by Bhojadeva in his Rhetoric called 'Saraswati«
kanthabharana.'—T.

2 ‘Parartham’ means, as the Commentator explains, ‘of excellent sense.’ It does
not mean ‘Paraprayojanam’ as wrongly rendered by the Burdwan Translators The
latter's version of the text is thoroughly unmeaning—T.

3 What Sulabha says here is this: the great primal elements ate the same whether
they make up this body or that other body ; and then it is the same Chit that pervades

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 70 ===

SANTI PARVA 477

no knowledge either of itself or of the others. The eye cannot see itself.
The ear cannot hear itself, The eye, again, cannot discharge the func-
tions of any of the other senses, nor can any of the senses discharge the
functions of any sense save its own. If all of them even combine
together, even they fail to know their own selves as dust and water
mingled together cannot know each other though existing ina state of
union. In order to discharge their respective functions, they await the
contact of objects that are external to them. The eye, form, and light,
constitute the three requisites of the operation called seeing. The same,
as in this case, happens in respect of the operations of the other senses
and the ideas which is their result. Then, again, between the functions
of the senses (called vision, hearing, &c.,) and the ideas which are their
result (viz., form, sound, &c.), the mind is an entity other than the senses
and is regarded to have an action of its own. With its help one distin-
guishes what is existent from what is non-existent for arriving at
certainty (in the matter of all ideas derived from the senses). With the
five senses of knowledge and five senses of action, the mind makes a
total of eleven. The twelfth is the Understanding. When doubt arises
in respect of what is to be known, the Understanding comes forward and
settles all doubts (for aiding correct apprehension). After the twelfth,
Sattwa is another principle numbering the thirteenth. With its help
creatures are distinguished as possessing more of it or less of it in their
constitutions-2 After this, Consciousness (of self) is another principle
(numbering the fourteenth). It helps one to an apprehension of self as
distinguished from what is not self. Desire is the fifteenth principle, O
king. Unto it inheres the whole universe.” The sixteenth principle is
Avidya. Unto it inhere the seventeenth and the eighteenth principles
called Prakriti and Vyakti (i.e, Maya and Prakasa). Happiness and
sorrow, decrepitude and death, acquisition and loss, the aggreable end
the disagreeable,—these constitute ‘the nineteenth principle and are
called couples of opposites. Beyond the nineteenth principle is another,
vize, Time called the twentieth. Know that the births and death of all
creatures are due to the action of this twentieth principle. These twenty
exist together. Besides these, the five Great primal elements, and exis-
tence and non-existence, bring up the tale to seven and twenty. Beyond

every combination of the great elements. The object of this observation isto show
that Janaka should not have asked these questions about Sulabha, he and she being
essentially the same person. To regard the twoas different would indicate obscuration
of vision.—T.

1 What is meant by this is that when creatures are said to possess more of sattwa
and less of sattwa, sattwa seems to be a principle that is existent in the constitutions of
creatures.—T.

2 By the word ‘Kala’ is meant the 16 principles beginning with Prana. What is
intended to besaid is that as long as the principle of Desire exists, rebirth becomes
possible. The universe, therefore, restson the principle of Desireor Vasana, The
‘senses, &c., all arise from this principle of Vasana.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 71 ===

478 MAHABHARATA

these, are three others, named Vidhi, Sukra, and Vala, that make the
tale reach thirty.!' That in which these ten and twenty principles occur
is said to be body. Some persons regard unmanifest Prakriti to be the
source or cause of these thirty principles, (This isthe view of the
atheistic Sankhya school), The Kanadas of gross vision regard the Mani-
fest (or atoms) tobe their cause. Whether the Unmanifest or the
Manifest be their cause, or whether the two (viz. the Supreme or
Purusha and the Manifest or atoms) be regarded as their cause, or
fourthly, whether the four together (viz., the Supreme or Purusha and
his Maya and Jiva and Avidya or Ignorance) be the cause, they that are
conversant with Adhyatma behold Prakriti as the cause of all creatures.
That Prakriti which is Unmanifest, becomes manifest in the form of
these principles, Myself, thyself, O monarch, and all others that are
endued with body are the result of that Prakriti (so far as our bodies
are concerned), Insemination and other (embryonic) conditions are due
to the mixture of the vital seed and blood. In consequence of insemina-
tion the result which first appears is called by the name of ‘Kalala.’
From ‘Kalala’ arises what is called Vudvuda (bubble). From the stage
called 'Vudvuda' springs what is called ‘Pesi’. From the condition called
‘Pesi’ that stage arises in which the various limbs become manifested.
From this last condition appear nails and hair. Upon the expiration of
the ninth month, O king of Mithila, the creature takes its birth so that,
its sex being known, it comes to be called a boy or girl. When the crea-
ture issues out of the womb, the form it presents is such that its nails
and fingers seem to be of the hue of burnished copper. The next stage .
is said to be infancy, when the form that was seen at the time of birth
becomes changed. From infancy youth is reached, and from youth, old
age, Asthe creature advances from one stage into another, the form
presented inthe previous stage becomes changed. The constituent
elements of the body, which serve diverse functions in the general eco-
nomy, undergo change every moment in every creature. Those changes,
however, are so minute that they cannot be noticed.? The birth of
particles, and their death, in each successive condition, can not be
marked, O king, even as one cannot mark the changes in the flame of
a burning lamp.* When such is the state of the bodies of all creatures,

1 By 'Vidhi’ is meant that righteousness and its reverse which constitute the seed
of Desire. By ‘sukra’ is meant that which helps that seed to grow or put forth its

Peco? By ‘Vala’ is meant the exertion that one makes for ‘gratifying one’s
lesire."—T.

2 The fact then of continual change of particles in the body was wellknown to the
Hindu sages. This discovery is nor new of modern physiology. Elsewhere it has been
shown that Harvey's great discovery about the circulation of the blood was not unknown
to the Rishis.—T.

3 The instance mentioned for illustrating the change of corporal particles is
certainly a very happy one. The flame of a burning lamp, though perfectly steady (as

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 72 ===

SANTI PARVA 499

—that is when that which is called the body is changing incessantly even
like the rapid locomotion of a steed of good mettle——who then has come
whence or not whence, or whose is it or whose is it not, or whence does
it not arise? What connection does there exist between creatures and
their own bodies ?'! As from the contact of flint with iron, or from two
sticks of wood when rubbed against each other, fire is generated, even
so are creatures generated from the combination of the (thirty) princi-
ples already named. Indeed, as thou thyself seest thy own body in thy
body‘and as thou thyself seest thy soul in thy own soul, why is it that
thou dost not see thy own body and thy own soul in the bodies and souls
of others? Ifit is true that thou seest an identity with thyself and
others, why then didst thou ask me who I am and whose? If it is true
that hast. O king been freed trom the knowledge of duality that
(erroneously) says—this is mine and this other is not mine,—then what
use is there with such questions as Who art thou, whose art thou and
whence dost thou come ? What indications of Emancipation can be said
to occur in that king who acts as others act towards enemies and allies
and neutrals and in victory and truce and war? What indications of
Emancipation occur in him who does not know the true-nature of the
aggregate of three as manifested in seven ways in all acts and who, on
that account, is attached to that aggregate of three ?? What indications
of Emancipation exist in him who failsto cast an equal eye on the
agreeable, on the weak, and the strong? Unworthy as thou art of it,
thy pretence to Emancipation should be put down by thy counsellers!
This thy endeavour to attain to Emancipation (when thou hast so many
faults) is like the use of medicine by a patient who indulges in all kinds
of forbidden food and practices. O chastiser of foes, reflecting upon
spouses and other sources of attachment, one should behold these in
one’s own soul. What else can be looked upon as the indication of
Emancipation ? Listen now to me as I speak in detail of these and
certain other minute sources of attachment appertaining to the four well

in a breezeless spot), is really the result of the succesive combustion of particles of oil
and thesuccessive extinguishment of such combustion. Both this and the previous
Verse have been rendered inaccurately by K. P. Singha.—T.

1 Hence the questions of Janaka, asking as to who the lady was or whose, were
futile.—T.

2 The seven ways are as follow Righteousness and Wealth and Pleasure indepen-
dently and distinct from one another count three, then the first and second, the first
and third, and second and third, count three and lastly, all three existing together. In
all acts, one or other of these seven may be found. The first and second exist in all acts
whose result isthe righteous acquisition of wealth; the first and third exist in the
procreation of children in lawful wedlock; the second and third in ordinary acts of
worldly men. Of acts in which all three combine, the rearing of children may be
noticed, for it is at once a duty, a source of wealth, and a pleasure. K.P. Singha omits
all reference to these seven ways, while the Burdwan translator, misunderstanding the
gloss, makes utter nonsense of it.—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 73 ===

480 MAHABHARATA

known acts (of lying down for slumber, enjoyment, eating, and dressing)
to which thou art still bound though thou professest thyself to have
adopted the religion of Emancipation. That man who has to rule the
whole world must, indeed, bea single king without a second. He is
obliged to live in only a single palace. In that palace he has again only
one sleeping chamber. In that chamber he has, again, only one bed on
which at night he is to lie down. Half that bed again he is obliged to
give to his Queen-consort. This may serve as an example of how little
the king’s share is of all he is said toown. Thisis the case with his
objects of enjoyment, with the food he eats, and with the robes he
wears. He is thus attached to a very limited share of all things. He is,
again, attached to the duties of rewarding and punishing. The king is
always dependent on others, He enjoysa very small share of all he is
supposed to own, and to that small share he is forced to be attached (as
well as others are attached to their respective possessions). In the matter
also of peace and war, the king cannot be said to be independent. In
the matter of women, of sports and other kinds of enjoyment, the king's
inclinations are exceedingly circumscribed. In the matter of taking
counsel and in the assembly of; his councillors what independence can
the king be said to have ? When, indeed, he sets his orders on other
men, he is said to be thoroughly independent. But then the moment
after, inthe several matters of his orders, his independence is barred
by the very men whom he bas ordered.? If the king desires to sleep, he
cannot gratify his desire, resisted by those who have businessto transact
with him. He must sleep when permitted, and while sleeping he is
obliged to wake up for attending to those that have urgent business
with him—Bathe, touch, drink, eat, pour libations on the fire, perform
sacrifices, speak, hear,—these are the words which kings have to hear.
from others and hearing them have to slave to those that utter them.
Men come in batches to the king and solicit him for gifts. Being, hows
ever, the protector of the general treasury, he cannot make gifts unto
even the most deserving. If he makes gifts, the treasury becomes
exhausted. If he does not, disappointed solicitors look upon him with
hostile eyes. He becomes vexed and as the result of this, misanthropical
feelings soon invade his mind. If many wise and heroic and wealthy
men reside together, the king’s mind begins to be filled with distrust in
consequence. Even when there is no cause of fear, the king entertains
fear of those that always wait upon and worship him. ThoseI have
mentioned O king, also find fault with him. Behold, in what way the
king's fears may arise from eventhem! Then again all men are kings

1 The king may order some men to do somethings. These men, after obeying those
orders, return tohim to report the fact of what they have accomplished. The king is
obliged to grant them interviews fot listening to them.—T,
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 74 ===

SANTI PARVA 481

in their own houses. All men, again, in their own houses are house-
holders, Like kings, O Janaka, all men in their own houses chastise
and reward. Like kings others also have sons and spouses and their
own selves and treasuries and friends and stores. In these respects the
king is not different from other men.—The country is ruined,—the city
is consumed by fire,—the foremost of elephants is dead,—at all this the
king yields to grief like others, little regarding that these impressions
are alidueto ignorance and error. Theking is seldom freed from
mental griefs caused by desire and aversion and fear. He is generally
afflicted also by headaches and diverse diseases of the kind. The king is
afflicted (like others) by all couples of opposites (as pleasure and pain,
&c). He is alarmed at everything. Indeed, full of foes and impedi-
ments as kingdom is, the king, while he enjoys it, passes nights of
sleeplessness. Sovereignty, therefore, is blessed with an exceedingly
small share of happiness. The misery with which it is endued is very
great. It isas unsubstantial as burning flames fled by straw or the
bubbles of froth seen on the surface of water. Who is there that would
like to obtain sovereignty, or having acquired sovereignty can hope to
win tranquillity? Thou regardest this kingdom and this palace to be
thine. Thou thinkest also this army, this treasury, and these counsellers
to belong to thee. Whose, however, in reality are they, and whose are
they not? Allies, ministers, capital, provinces, punishment, treasury,
and the king,—these seven which constitute the limbs of a kingdom
exist, depending upon one another, like three sticks standing with one
another's support. The merits of eachare set off by the merits of the
others. Which of them can be said to be superior tothe rest? At
those times those particular ones are regarded as distinguished above the
rest when some important end is served through their agency. Supe-
riority, for the time being, is said to attach .to that one whose efficacy
is thus seen. The seven limbs already mentioned, O best of kings, and
the three others, forming an aggregate of ten, supporting one another,
are said to enjoy the kingdom like the king himself.!| That king who is
endued with great energy and who is firmly attached to Kshatriya
practices, should be satisfied with only a tenth part of the produce of
the subject's field. Other kings are seen to be satisfied with less than a
tenth part of such produce. There is no one who owns the kingly office
without some one else owing it in the world, and there is no kingdom
without a king.” If there be no kingdom, there can be no righteousness,
1 The Commentator explains that the three others are Vriddhi,
Keshaya, and Sthana, allof whioh arise from policy. Some of the seven
limbs are inanimate, such as the Treasury. But it is said that the Treasury
supports the ministers, and the ministers support the Treasury.—T.

Hence, when every kingdom has a king, and kings too are many, no
one should indulge in pride at the thought of his being a king.—T.

61

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 75 ===

482 MAHABHARATA

and if there be no righteousness, whence can Emancipation arise ?
Whatever merit is most sacred and the highest, belongs to kings and
kingdoms.’ By ruling a kingdom well, a king earns the merit that
attaches to a Horse-sacrifice with the whole Earth given away as
Dakshina, (But how many kings are there that rule their kingdoms
well?) Orruler of Mithila, Ican mention hundreds and thousands of
faults like these that attach to kings and kingdoms. Then, again, when
Lhave no real connection with even my body, how then can I be said
to have any contact with the bodies of others? Thou canst not charge
me with having endeavoured to bring about an intermixture of castes.
Hast thou heard the religion of Emancipation in its entirety from the
lips of Panchasikha together with its means, its methods, its practices,
and its conclusion ?? If thou hast prevailed over all thy bonds and
freed thyself from all attachments, may I ask thee, O king, who thou
preservest thy connections still with this umbrella and these other
appendages of royalty? I think that thou hast not listened to the
scriptures, or, thou hast listened to them without any advantage, or,
perhaps, thou hast listened to some other treatises looking like the scrip-
tures. It seems that thou art possessed only of worldly knowledge, and
that like an ordinary man of the world thou art bound by the bonds of
touch and spouses and mansions and the like. If it be true that thou
hast been emancipated from all bonds, what harm have I done thee by
entering thy person with only my Intellect? With Yatis, among all
orders of men, the custom is to dwell in uninhabited or deserted abodes.
What harm then have I done to whom by entering thy understanding
which is truly of real knowledge? I have not touched thee, O king,
with my hands, or arms, or feet, or thighs, O sinless one, or with any
other part of the body. Thou art bornin a high race. Thou hast
modesty. Thou hast foresight. Whether the act has been good or bad,
my entrance into thy body has been a private one, concerning us two
only. Wasit not improper for thee to publish that private act before
all thy court ? These Brahmanas are all worthy of respect. They are
foremost of preceptors. Thou also art entitled to their respect, being
their king. Doing them reverenee, thou art entitled to receive rever-
ence from them. Reflecting on all this, it was not proper for thee to
proclaim before these foremost of men the fact of this congress between

1 The object of this Verse is to show that as Janaka rules his king.
dom without being attached to it, he cannot lay claim tothe merit that
belongs to kings.—.

2 ‘Upaya’ or ‘means’ implies here the attitude of sitting (as in Yoga),
‘Upanishad’ or ‘method’ implies ‘sravana and manana, i.e., listening and
thinking. ‘Upasanga’ or ‘practices’ imply the several limbs of ‘Dhyana,’
&o, ‘Nischaya’ or ‘conclusion’ has reference to Brahma,—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 76 ===

SANTI PARVA 488

two persons of opposite sexes, if, indeed, thou art really acquainted
with the rules of propriety in respect of speech, O king of Mithila, I
am staying in thee without touching thee at all even like a drop of
water ona lotus leaf that stays on it without drenching it in the least.
If, notwithstanding instructions of Panchasikha of the mendicant order,
thy knowledge has become abstracted from the sensual objects to which
it relates? Thou hast, it is plain, fallen off from the domestic mode of
life but thou hast not yet attained to Emancipation that is so difficult
to arrive at. Thou stayest between the two, pretending that thou hast
reached the goal of Emancipation. The contact of one that is emanci-
pated with another that has been so, or Purusha with Prakriti, cannot
lead to an intermingling of the kind thou dreadest, Only those that
regard the soul to be identical with the body, and that think the several
orders and modes of life to be really different from one another, are
open to the error of supposing an intermingling to be possible. My
body is different from thine. But my soul is not different from thy
soul. When I am able to realise this, I have not the slightest doubt that
my understanding is really not staying in thine though I have entered
into thee by Yoga.’ A pot is borne in the hand. Inthe pot is milk.
On the milk is a fly. Though the hand and pot, the pot and milk, and
the milk and the fly, exist together, yet are they all distinct from each
other. The pot does not partake the nature of the milk. Nor does the
milk partake the nature of the fly. The condition of each is dependent
on itself, and can never be altered by the condition of that other with
which it may temporarily exist. After this manner, colour and
practices, though they may exist together with and in a person that is
emancipate, do not really attach to him. How then can an intermingling
of orders be possible in consequence of this union of myself with thee?
Then, again, Iam not superior to thee in colour, Nor am I a Vaisya,
nor a Sudra. I am, O king, of the same order with thee, born of a pure
race. There was a royal sage of the name of Pradhana. It is evident
that thou hast heard of him. I am born in his race, and my name is
Sulabha. In the sacrifices performed by my ancestors, the foremost of
the gods, viz., Indra, used to come, accompanied by Drona and Sata-
stinga, and Cuakradwara (and other presiding geniuses of the great
mountains). Born in sucha race, it was found that no husband could
be obtained for me that would be fit for me, Instructed then in the
religion of Emancipation, I wander over the Earth alone, observant of
the practices of asceticism. I practise no hypocrisy in the matter of the
life of. Renunciation. I am not a thief that appropriates what belongs
to others. I am not a confuser of the practices belonging to the

1 I expand this Verse fully.—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 77 ===

“484 MAHABHARATA

different orders. Iam firm in the practices that belong to that mode of
life to which I properly belong. I am firm and steady in my vows. I
never utter any word without reflecting onits propriety. I did not
come to thee, without having deliberated properly, O monarch!
Having heard that thy understanding has been purified by the religion
of Emancipation, I came here from desire of some benefit. Indeed, it
was for enquiring of thee about Emancipation that I had come. I do
not say it for glorifying myself and humiliating my opponents. But I
say it, impelled by sincerity only, What I say is he that is emancipated
never indulges in that intellectual gladiatorship which is implied by a
dialectical disputation for the sake of victory. He, on the other hand,
is really emancipate who devotes himself to Brahma, that sole seat of
tranquillity. Asa person of the mendicant order resides for only one
night in an empty house (and leaves it the next morning), even after
the same manner I shall reside for this one night in thy person (which,
asl have already said, islike an empty chamber, being destitute of
knowledge). Thou hast honoured me with both speech and other offers
that are due from a host to a guest. Having slept this one night in thy
person, Oruler of Mithila, which is as it were my own chamber now,
tomorrow I shall depart.—

“Bhishma continued, —'Hearing these words fraught with excellent
sense and with reason, king Janaka failed to return any answer
thereto.?’”

SECTION CCCXXII

“Yudhishthira said,—'How was Suka, the son of Vyasa, in days of
old, won over to Renunciation? I desire to hear thee recite the
story. My curiosity in this respect is irrepressible. It behoveth thee,
O thou of Kuru’s race, to discourse to me on the conclusions in respect
of the Unmanifest (Cause), the Manifest (Effects), and of the Truth
(or Brahma) that is in, but unattached to, them, as also of the acts of
the self-born Narayana, as they are known to thy understanding.

1 Tho ‘na’ in tho second line is connected with 'Vyayachcchate.'—T,

2 Tho object of this Verse is to show that the words uttered by
Sulabha were unanswerable. To attain to Emancipation one must practice
a life of Renunciation instead of continuing in the domestic mode,—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 78 ===

SANTI PARVA 485

“Bhishma said,—‘Beholding his son Suka living fearlessly as ordi-
nary men do in practices that are considered harmless by them, Vyasa
taught him the entire Vedas and then discoursed to him one day in
these words.

«Vyasa said—O son, becoming the master of the senses, do thou
subdue extreme cold and extreme heat, hunger and thirst, and the
wind also, and having subdued them (as Yogins do), do thou practise
righteousness. Do thou duly observe truth and sincerity, and freedom
from wrath and malice, and self-restraint and penances, and the duties
of benevolence and compassion. Rest thou on truth, firmly devoted to
righteousness, abandoning all sort of insincerity and deceit. Do thou
support thy life on what remains of food after feeding gods and guests.
Thy body is as transitory as the froth on the surface of water. The Jiva-
soul is sitting unattached in it asa birdonatree. The companionship
of all agreeable object is exceedingly short-lived. Why then, O son, dost
thou sleep in such forgetfulness? Thy foes are heedful and awake and
ever ready ( to spring on thee) and always watchful of their oppor-
tunity. Why art thou so foolish as not to know this? As the days are
going one after another, the period of thy life is being lessened. Indeed
when thy life is being incessantly shortened, why dost thou not run to
preceptors (for learning the means of rescue)? Only they that are des-
titute of faith (in the existence of next life) set their hearts on things
of this world that have the only effect of increasing flesh and blood.
They are totally unmindful of all that is concerned with the next world.
Those men that are stupefied by erroneous understandings display a
hatred for righteousness. The man who walks after those misguided
persons that have betaken themselves to deviousand wrong paths is
afflicted equally with them. They however, that are contented, devo-
ted to the scriptures, endued with high souls, and possessed of great
might, betake themselves to the part of righteousness. Do thou wait
upon them with reverence and seek instruction from them. Do thou
act according to the instructions received from those wise men whose
eyes are set upon righteousness. With understanding cleansed by such
lessons and rendered superior, do thou then restrain thy heart which
is ever ready to deviate from the right course. They whose understan-
dings are always concerned with the present, who fearlessly regard the
tomorrow as something quite remote,—they who do not observe any
restrictions in the matter of food,—are really senseless persons that fail
to understand that this world is only a field of probation.2 Repairing

1 These foss are, of course, the passions,—T.

2 Literally, ‘the world is only a field of action,’ implying that crea-
tures, coming here, have to act: these actions lead to rewards and punish-
ments, both here and hereafter. The way to Emancipation is, as has been

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 79 ===

486 MAHABHARATA

to the flight of steps constituted by Righteousness, do thou ascend those
steps one after another. At present thou art like a worm that is em-
ployed in weaving its cocoon round itself and thereby depriving itself
of all means of escape. Do thou keep to thy left, without any scruple,
the atheist who transgresses all restraints, who is situated like a house
by the side of a fierce and encroaching current, (for the destruction he
courts), and who (to others) seems to stand like a bamboo with its tall
head erected in pride. Do thou with the raft of Yoga, cross the ocean
of the world whose waters are constituted by thy five senses. Having
Desire and Wrath and Death for its fierce monsters, and owning birth
for its vortex. Do thou cross, with the raft of Righteousness, the world
that is affected by Death and afflicted by Decrepitude, and upon which
the thunder-bolts constituted by days and nights are falling incessantly.
When Death is seeking thee at all moments, viz., when thou art sitting
or lying down, it is certain that Death may get thee for his victim at
any time- Whence art thou to obtain thy rescue! Like the she-wolf
snatching away a lamb, Death snatches away one that is still engaged
in earning wealth and still unsatisfied in the indulgence of his pleasures.
When thou art destined to enter into the dark, do thou hold up the
blazing lamp made of righteous understanding and whose flame has been
well-husbanded out. Falling into various forms one after another in the
world of men, a creature obtains the status of Brahmanhood with great
difficulty. Thou hast obtained that status. Do thou then, O son en-
deavour to maintain it (properly).? A Brahmana hath not been born
for the gratification of desire. On the other hand, his body is intended
to be subjected to mortification and penances in this world so that in-
comparable happiness may be his inthe next world. The status of
Brahmanhood is acquired with the aid of long-continued and austere
penances. Having acquired that status, one should never waste one's
time in the indulgence of one's senses. Always engaged in penances
and self-restraint and desirous of what is for thy good, do thou live and
act, devoted to peace and tranquillity. The period of life, of every
man, is like a steed. The nature of that steed is unmanifest. The (six-
teen) elements (mentioned before) constitute its body. Its nature is

often shown before, by exhausting the consequences of acts by enjoyment
or sufferance and by abstaining, from further acts by adopting the religion
of Nivritti—T.

1 *Kulapatam' is explained by the Commentator as ‘Mahanadipuram,'
In Naram' &o, ‘venumivodshritam’ (asin the Bombay text) or ‘venumiyod-
dbhatam’ (as in the Bengal text) is rather unintelligible unless it be taken
in the sense in which I have taken it. K. P. Singha mistranslates ‘Kula-
patam,’ and the Burdwan translator misunderstands both ‘Kulaparam’ and
venumivoddhatam.'—T.

2 I. ©., to uphold it by doing the duties of a Brahmana.—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 80 ===

SANTI PABVA 487

exceedingly subtile, Kshanas, and Trutis, and Nimeshas are the hair
on its body. The twilights constitute its shoulder-joints, The lighted
and the dark fortnights are its two eyes of equal power. Months are
its other limbs. That steed is running incessantly. If thy eyes be not
blind, beholding then that steed incessantly moving forward in its in-
visible course, do thou set thy heart on righteousness, after hearing
what thy preceptors have to say on the question of the next world.
They that fall away from righteousness and that conduct themselves
recklessly, that always display malice towards others and betake them-
selves to evil ways are obliged to assume (physical) bodies in the regions
of Yama and suffer diverse afflictions, in consequence of their unright-
eous acts of diverse kind.'’ That king who is devoted to righteousness
and who protects and chastises the good and the wicked with discrimi-
nation, attains to those regions that belong to man of righteous deeds.
By doing diverse kinds of good acts, he attains to such felicity as is
faultless and as is incapable of being attained to by undergoing even
thousands of births.» Furious dogs of frightful mien, crows of iron
beaks, flocks of ravens and vultures and other birds, and blood-sucking
worms, assail the man who transgresses the commands of his parents
and preceptors when he goes to hell after death.® That sinful wretch
who, in consequence of his recklessness, transgresses the ten boundaries
that have been fixed by the Self-born himself, is obliged to pass his time
in great affliction in the wild wastes that occur in the dominions of the
king of Pitris.# That man who is tainted with cupidity, who is in love
with untruth, who always takes a delight in deception and cheating,
and who does injuries to others by practising hypocrisy and deception,
has to go to deep hell and suffer great woe and affliction for his acts of
wickedness. Such a man is forced to bathe inthe broad river called
Vaitarani whose waters are scalding, to enter into a forest of trees
whose leaves areas sharp as swords, and then to lie down on a bed of

1 ’Prachalita-dharma &c., implies those that have fallen away from
righteousness. The Burdwan translator misunderstands the Verse.
*Karanabhih’ is ‘kriabhih.'—T.

2 The Commentator explains that this Verse is for assuring Yudhish-
thira that kings are competent to obtain felicity in the next world. ‘Anu-
pagatam’ is explained by the Commentator as ‘not attainable in even thou-
sands of births.'—T.

8 ‘Rudhirapah’ is blood-sucking worms. ‘Uparatam’ is dead.—T,

4 The ten boundaries or commandments, as mentioned by the Com-
mentator, are the five positive ones, viz,, Purity, Contentment, Penances,
Study of the Vedas, Meditation on God, and the five negative ones, viz.,
abstention from cruelty, from untruth, from theft, from non-observance of
yows, and from acquisition of wealth.—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
\ https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 81 ===

483 MAHABHARATA

battle-axes. He has thus to pass his days in frightful hell in great afflic-
tion. Thou beholdest only the regions of Brahman and other deities,
but thou art blind to that which isthe highest (viz., Emancipation),
Alas, thou art ever blind also to that which brings Death on its train
(viz., decrepitude and old age).! Go (along the path of Emancipation) !
Why tarriest thou? A frightful terror, destructive of thy happiness,
is before thee! Do thou take prompt steps for achieving thy Eman-
cipation! Soon after death thou art sure to be taken before Yama at
his command, For obtaining felicity in the next world, strive to attain
to righteousness through the practice of difficult and austere vows. The
puissant Yama, regardless of the sufferings of others, very soon takes
the lives of all persons, that is of thyself and thy friends. There is
none capable of resisting him. Very soon the wind of Yama will blow
before thee (and drive thee to his presence). Very soon wilt thou be
taken to that dread presence all alone, Do thou achieve what will be
for thy good there. Where now is that Death-wind which will blow
before thee very soon? (Art thou mindful of it?) Very soon will the
points of the compass, when that moment arrives, begin to whirl be-
fore thy eyes. (Art thou mindful of that?) Ovson, soon (when that
mement comes) will thy Vedas disappear from thy sight as thou goest
helplessly into that dread presence, Do thou, therefore, set thy heart
on Yoga abstraction which is possessed of great excellence.? Do thou
seek to attain that one only treasure so that thou mayst not have
to grieve at the recollection (after Death) of thy former deeds good
and bad all of which are characterised by error.* Decrepitude very
soon weakens thy body and robs thee of thy strength and limbs and
beauty. Do thou, therefore, seek that one only treasure. Very
soon the Destroyer, with Disease for his charioteer, will with a
strong hand, for taking thy life, pierce and break thy body. Do thou,
therefore, practise austere penance. Very soon will, those terrible
wolves that reside within thy body, assail thee from every side. Do thou
endeavour, therefore, to achieve acts of righteousness. Very soon

1 ‘Chirasya' is grammatically connected with 'na vudhyase,’ meaning
that ‘thou art always blind 0.’ The Burdwan translator misunderstands
it completely and takes it as equivalent to'achirena.' K. P, Singha skips
over it.—T.

2 The Burdwan translator gives a ridiculous version of the Verse.—T.

_ 3 'Kevalam nidhim’ is literally, ‘one only treasure’. It may imply
either Samadhi or Brahma. Acts, whether good or bad, all arise from:
error. Abstention from acts is the true way to Emancipation.—T.

4 The passions are spoken of as wolves.—tT,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/ y)

=== PAGE 82 ===

SANTI PARVA 489

wilt thou, all alone, behold a thick darkness, and very soon wilt thou
behold golden trees on the top of the hill. Do thou, therefore, hasten
to achieve acts of righteousness.' Very soon will those evil campanions
and foes of thine, (viz, the senses), dressed in the guise of friends,
swerve thee from correct vision. Do thou, then, O .son, strive to
achieve that which is of the highest good. Do thou.earn that wealth
which has no fear frém either kings or thieves, and which one has’ not
to abandon even at Death. Earned by one's own acts, that wealth has
never to be divided among co-owners. Each enjoys that wealth (in the
other world) which each has earned for himself. O son, give that to
others by which they may be able to live in the next world. .Do' thou also
set thyself to the acquisition of that wealth which is indestructible and
durable. Do not think that thou shouldst first enjoy all kinds .of - plea-
sures and then turn thy. heart on Emancipation, for before thou art
satiated with enjoyment thou mayst be overtaken by’Death.: :Do: thou,
in view of this, hasten to doacts. of goodness.? Neither mother, nor son,
nor relatives, nor dear friends even when solicited with honours, accom-
. pany the man that dies. To the regions of Yama one has ‘to go oneself,
» unaccompanied by any one. Only those deeds, good and bad, that one
‘did before death accompany the man that goes to the other world, The
gold and gems that one has earned by good and bad means do not
- become productive of any benefit to one when one’s body meets with
dissolution. Of men that have gone to the other world, there is no~
witness, better than the soul, of all act done and undone in life. That
when the acting-Chaitanya (Jiva-soul) enters into the witness-Chaitanya
the destruction of the body takes place, is seen by Yogasintelligence
when Yogins enter the firmament of their hearts.® Even here, the god
of Fire, the Sun. and the Wind,—these three reside in the body. . These,
beholding as they do all the practices of one’s life become one’s witnesses.
Days and Nights,—the former characterised by the virtue of displaying
all-things.and the latter characterised by the virtue of concealing all
things,—are running incessantly and touching all things (and thereby
lessening their allotted periods of existence). _Do thou, therefore, be

1 The sight of golden trees is a premonitory sign of Death.—T.

2 Literally rendered, the Verse. would run thus : ‘Before the cooking is
complete of the Yavaka of @ rich man, in fact, while it is still uncooked, thou
mayst J meet with death.’ Do thou, therefore, hasten.’ By ‘Yavaka’ is meant a
particular kind of food made.of ghee and flour or barley.—T. .

3 In Verse 63 it is said that the Soul is the witness in the other world
of all acts. and omission in this life., In Verse 54, what is said is tha’ the
existence of the Soul when the body is not, is possible, for Yogins, in Yoga,
live in their Soul, unconscious the while of their bodies. The entrance of the
acting-Chaitanya into that Chaitanya which survives as the witness means
the death of the body.—T.

62

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 83 ===

490 MAHABHARATA

observant of the duties of thy own order,' The road in the other world
(that leads to the regions of Yama), is infested by many foes (in the
form of iron-beaked birds and wolves ) and by many repulsive and
terrible insects and worms. Do thou take care of thy own acts, for
only acts will accompany you along that road. There one has not to
share one’s acts with others, but every one enjoys or endures the fruits
of those acts which every one has himself perfornféd. As Apsaras and
great Rishis attain to fruits of great felicity, after the same manner, men
of righteous deeds, as the fruits of their respective righteous acts, obtain
in the other world cars of transcendent brightness that move everywhere
at the will of the riders. Men of stainless deeds and cleansed souls and
pure birth obtain in the next world fruits that correspond with their
own righteous acts in this life. By walking along the high road cons-
tituted by the duties of domesticity, men acquire happy ends:by attain-
ing to the region of Prajapati or Vrihaspati or of him of a hundred
sacrifices, I can give thee thousands and thousands of instructions.
Know, however, that the puissant cleanser (viz., Righteousness), - keeps
all foolish persons in the Dark.? Thou hast passed four and twenty.
years. Thou art now full five and twenty years of age. Thy years are
passing away- Do thou be into lay thy store of righteousness. The
Destroyer that dwells within error and heedlessness will very soon
deprive thy senses of their, respective powers. Do thou before that
consummation is brought about, hasten to observe thy duties, relying on
thy body alone.* When it is thy duty to go along that road in which
thyself only shalt be in front and thyself only in the rear, what need
then hast thou with either thy body or thy spouse and children ?4 When
men have to go individually and without companions to the region of
Yama, it is plain that in view of-such a situation of terror, thou shouldst
seek to acquire that one only treasure (viz., Righteousness or Yoga-
samadhi). The puissant Yama, regardless of the afflictions of” others,
snatches, away the friends and relatives of one’s race by the very roots.

1 The Burdwan translator gives an erroneous version of this Verse.—T.

2 I think the sense is that only righteousness can bring a man to the
path that leads to happiness and not mere instructions howsoever
repeated—T,

3 The Commentator explains that ‘Pramadagah’ is equivalent to
Pramadagrihavasin and refers to ‘Antakab.’ Chamum’ is ‘Indriyasenam
‘Grahitam' is body. ‘Yathagrahitam’ is ‘'dehamanatikramya.’ In this Verse
‘pura’ may mean either ‘in the near future’ or ‘soon,’ or ‘pura’ may mean
*before,’ i.e., ‘before the Destroyer makes thy senses so, &c..—T.

4 The road in which thyself shalt be in front and thyself in the rear’ is
the road of Self-knowledge. The Burdwar translator does not understand
how the first line comes to mean ‘Knowledge of Self ! accordingly, though
he uses tha word ‘atmajnana’ (following the Commentator), yet he erron-
eously repeats some of the words used in the line,—T, J

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 84 ===

SANTI PARVA 491

There is no one that can resist him. Do thou, therefore, seek to acquire
a stock of righteousness I impart to thee these lessons, O son, thatare all
agreeable with the scciptures I follow. Do thou observe them by acting
according to their import. He who supports his body by following the
duties laid down for his own order, and who makes gifts for earning
whatever fruits may attach to such acts, becomes freed from the
consequences that are born of ignorance and error.! The knowledge
which a man of righteous deeds acquires from Vedic declarations leads
to omniscience. That omniscience is identical with the science of the
highest object of human acquisition (viz,, Emancipation). Instruction,
imparated to the grateful, becante beneficial (in consequence of their
leading to the attainment of that highest object of human acquisition).?
The pleasure that one takes in living amidst the habitations of. men is
truly a fast-binding cord. Breaking that cord, men of righteous deeds
repair to regions of great felicity. Wicked men, however, fail to break
that bond. What use hast thou of wealth, O son, or with relatives, or
with children, since thou hast to die: Do thou employ thyself in seeking
for thy soul which is hidden in a cave. Where have all thy grandsires
gone? D6 that today which thou wouldst keep for tomorrow. Do that
in the.forenoon which thou wouldst keep for the afternoon. Death does
not wait for any one, to see whether one has or has not accomplished
one’s task. Following the body after one’s death (to the crematorium),
one’s relatives and kinsmen and friends come back, throwing it on the
funeral pyre. Without ascruple do thou avoid those men that are
sceptics, that are destitute of compassion, and that are devoted to wicked
ways, and do thou endeavour to seek, without listlessness or apathy,
that which is for thy highest good. When, therefore, the world is thus
afflicted by Death, do thou, with thy whole heart, achieve righteousness,
aided all the while by unswerving patience. That man who is well
conversant with the means of attaining to Emancipation and who duly
discharges the duties of his order, certainly attains to great felicity in
the other world. For thee that dost not recognise death in the attain-
ment of a different body and that dost not deviate from the path trod
by the righteous, there is no destruction. He that increases the stock
- of righteousness is truly wise. He, on the other hand, that falls away

1 The last word of the second line is 'muchyate’ and not yujyate.’ If
yujyate’ be adhered to, meaning would be ‘freed the consequences of igno-
rance and error, he would succeed in attaining to Brahma.—T.

2 This is a very abstruse Verse. I have rendered it, following the lead
of the Commentator, ‘Srutam,’ he explains is ‘the knowledge, born of vedic
declarations like Tattwamasi &o. ‘Sarvamasnute’ is equivalent to ‘samastam
Brahmandam vyapnoti,’ meaning ‘such knowledge leads to sarvatmyam, i.c.,
omniscience’ 'Tadetat-é&c.,’ is ‘that omniscience is the darsanam. of param-
purushartha or Mokhsa,’ Kritajna upadishtam artham’ is ‘samhitam,’—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 85 ===

492 MAHABHARATA

from righteousness is said to be a fool. One that is engaged in the
accomplishment of good deeds attains to heaven and other rewards as
the fruits of thosé deeds ; but he that is devoted to’ wicked deeds has to
sink in hell. Having acquired the status of humanity, so difficult of
acquisition, that is the stepping-stone to heaven, one should fix one’s soul
on Brahma so that one may not fall away once more. That man whose
undeistanding, directed to the path of heaven, does not deviate there-
from, is regarded by the wise as truly a man of righteousness and when
he dies his friends should indulge in grief. That man whose understan-
ding’is not restless and which is directed to Brahma and who has
attained to heaven, becomes freed from a great terror (viz, hell), They
that ate born in retreats of ascetics and that die there, do not earn much
merit by abstaining all their life from enjoyments and the indulgence of
desire. He, however, who though possessed of objects of enjoyment
casts them off and engages himself in the practice of penances, succeeds
in acquiring everything, The fruits of the penances of such a man are,
Ithink, much higher. Mothers and sires and sons. and spouses, by
hundreds and thousands, every one had and will have in this world.
Who, however, were they and whose are we?! I am quite alone. I
have no one whom I may call mine. Nor do I belong to any one’ else.
I do not see that person whose I am, nor do I see him whom I may call
mine, They have nothing to do with thee. Thou hast nothing to do
with them. All creatures take birth agreeably to their acts of past lives.
Thou also shalt have to go hence (for taking birth in anew order)
determined by thy own acts. In this world it is seen that the friends
and followers of only those that are rich behave towards the rich with
dévotion. The friends and followers of those, however, that are poor
fall away during even the life-time of the poor. Man commits numerous
evil acts for the sake of his wife (and children). From those evil acts he
derives much distress both here and hereafter. The wise man beholds
the world of life devastated by the acts performed by every living being.
Do thou, therefore, O son, act according to all the instructions I have
given thee! The man possessed of true vision, beholding this world to
be only a field of action, should, from desire of felicity in the next world,
do acts that are good. Time, exerting his irresistible strength, cooks all
creatures (in his own cauldron), with the aid of his ladle constituted by
months:and seasons, the sun for his fire,and days and nights for his fuel,
days and nights, that is that are the witnesses of the fruits of every act

1 The sense is that in course of our repeated rebirths we have got these
relations repeatedly and will get them as repeatedly, But we are, in reality,
quite unconnected with them. Their union with us like the union of
pieces of wood floating ina river, now joined together temporarily, now
separated—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 86 ===

SANTI PARVA 493

.done by every creature. For what purpose is that wealth which is not
given away and which is not enjoyed ? For what purpose is that
strength which is not employed in resisting or subjugating one’s foes ?
‘For what purpose is that knowledge of the scriptures which does not
impel one to deeds of righteousness? And for what purpose is that
soul which does not subjugate the senses and abstain from evil acts ?—’

“Bhishma continued,—‘Having heard these beneficial words
spoken by the Island-born (Vyasa), Suka. leaving his sire, proceeded
to seek a preceptor that could teach him the religion of Emancipa-
tion. "? z .

SECTION CCCXXIII

“Yudhishthira said,—'If there is any efficacy in gifts, in sacrifices,
in penances well-performed, and in dutiful services rendered to precep-
tors and other reverend seniors, do thou, O grandsire, speak of the
same to me ! Z

“Bhishma said,—' An ui standing associated with evil causes the
mind to fall into sin. In ‘this : state one stains one’s acts, and then falls
into great distress. Those that are of sinful acts have to take birth as
Persons of very indigent circumstances. From famine to famine, from
pain to pain, from fear to fear, is their change. They are more dead
than those that are dead. Possessed of affluence, from joy to joy, from
heaven to heaven, from happiness to happiness, proceed they that are
possessed of faith, that are self-restrained. and that are devoted to
righteous deeds. They that are unbelievers have to pass, with groping
hands, through regions infested by beasts of prey and elephants and
pathless tracts teeming with snakes and robbers and other causes of fear.
What more need be said of these? They, on the other hand, that are
endued with reverence for gods and guests, that are liberal, that have
proper regard for persons that are good, and that make gifts in sacrifices,
have for theirs the path (of felicity) that belongs to men of cleansed and
subdued souls. Those that are not righteous should not be counted
among men even as grains without kennel are not counted among grain
and'as cockroaches are not counted among birds, The acts that one
does, follow one even when one runs fast- Whatever acts one does, lie
down with the doer who lays himself down. Indeed, the sins one does, sit
when the doer sits, and run when he runs. The sins act when the doer

1 *Mokshadaisikam’ is explained by the Commentator as ‘Mokshahdes-
hataram.’ K. P. Singha wrongly renders this word. This Section is called
‘pavakadhyayanam,’ meaning ‘chitta- sodbakadhyayanam," that is, the
Lesson which, when read and mastered, is to lead to the ewelea ting of
the heart.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 87 ===

494 MAHABHARATA

acts, and, in fact follow the doer like his shadow. Whatever the acts _
one does by whatever means and under whatever circumstances, are
sure to be enjoyed and endured (in respect of their fruits) by the doer
in his next life. From every side Time is always dragging all creatures,
duly observing the rule in respect of the distance to which they are
thrown and which is commensurate with their acts." As flowers and
fruits, without being urged, never suffer their proper time to passaway_
without making their appearance, even so the acts one has done. in past
life make their appearance at the proper time. Honour and dishonour,
gain and loss, destruction and growth, are seen to set in. No one can
resist them (when they come). None of them is enduring, for disappear
it must after appearance. The sorrows one suffers is the result of one’s
acts. The happiness one enjoys flows from one’s acts. From the time
when one lies within the mother’s womb one begins to enjoy and
endure one’s acts of a past lifee Whatever acts good and bad one does
in childhood, youth, or old age, one enjoys and endures their conse-
quences in one’s next life in similar ages. As the calf recognises its
dam even when the latter may stand among thousands of her species,
after the same manner the acts done by one in one’s past life come to
one in one’s next life (without any mistake) although one may live
among thousands of one's species. As a piece of dirty cloth is whitened
by being washed in water, after the same. manner, the righteous;
cleansed by continuous exposure unto the fire of fasts and penances, at _
last attain to unending happiness. O thou of high intelligence, the
desires and purposes of those whose sins have been washed off by long.
continued penances well-performed, become crowned with fruition.
The track of the righteous cannot be discerned even as that of birds in
the sky or that of fishes in the water. There isno need of speaking ill
of others ; nor of reciting the instances in which others have tripped.
On the other hand, one should always do what is delightful, agreeable,
and beneficial to one’s own self.?’ "

1 Time, aga personified agent, is throwing all creatures at unequal
distances. Some are thrown near and some to a great distance. These
distances are regulated by the nature of the acts done by the: creatures
thrown. Some are cast among animals, some among men. Throwing or
burling them thus, Time drags them again, the binding-cords being always
in bis hands.—T.

2 Both the Vernacular translators have misunderstood the first line-
of this verge although there is no difficulty in it. Apastamva says ‘drishto
dharma-vyatikrama ; Sahasancha purvesham.’ What Bhishma says
here is that one should not speak of those instances of ‘Vyatikramah’
and Sabasam.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 88 ===

SECTION CCCXXIV

: “Yudhishthira said—'Tell me, O grandsire, how the high-souled
Suka of austere penances took birth as the son of Vyasa, and how did
he succeed in attaining to the highest success ? Upon what woman
did Vyasa, endued with wealth of asceticism, beget that son of his ?
We do not know who was Suka’s mother, nor do we know anything
of the birth of that high-souled ascetic. How was it that, when he
was a mere boy, his mind became directed to the knowledge of the
subtile (Brahma) ? Indeed, in this world no second person can be
seen in whom such predilections could be marked at so early an age.
I desire to hear all this in detail, O thou of great intelligence, I am
never satiated with hearing thy excellent and nectar-like words.
Tell me, O grandsire, in their proper order, of the greatness, and the
knowledge of Suka and of his union with the (Supreme) Soul !'
“Bhishma continued,—'The Rishis did not make merit depend
upon years or decrepitude or wealth or friends. They said that he
‘amongst them was great that studied the Vedas. All this that thou
enquirest about has penances for its root. That penance, again, O
son of Pandu, arises from the subjugation of the senses, Without
doubt, one incurs fault by giving one's senses the reins, It is only by
restraining them that one succeeds in earning success. The merit
that attaches toa thousand Horse-sacrifices or a hundred Vajapeyas
cannot come up to evena sixteenth portion of the merit that arises
from Yoga, I shall, on the present occasion, recite to thee the circumst-
ances of Suka’s birth, the fruits he won of his penances, and the fore-
most end he achieved (by his acts), topics that are incapable of being un-
derstood by persons of uncleansed soul. Once ona time on the summit
of Meru adorned with Karnikara flowers, Mahadeva sported, accom-
panied by the terrible spirits that were his associates. The daughter
of the king of mountains, viz, the goddess Parvati, was also there.
There at the close vicinity of that summit, the Island-born (Vyasa)
underwent extraordinary austerities. O best of the Kurus, devoted to
the practices of Yoga, the great ascetic withdrawing himself by Yoga
into his own Soul, and engaged in Dharana, practised many austerities
for the sake of (obtaining) a son. The prayer he addressed to the
great God was,—O puissant one, let me have a son that will have
the puissance of Fire and Earth and Water and Wind and Space.
Engaged in the austerest of penances, the Island-born Rishi begged
of:that great God who is incapable of being approached by persons
of ‘uncleansed: souls, (not by words but) by his Yoga-resolution.
The puissant Vyasa remained there for a hundred years, subsisting
on air alone, engaged in adoring Mahadeva of multifarious form, the

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-vdlumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 89 ===

496 MAHABHARATA

lord of Uma. Thither all the regenerate Rishis and royal sages and
the Regents of the world and the Sadhyas along with the Vasus, and
the Adityas, the Rudras, and Surya and Chandramas, and the Maruts,
and the Oceans, and the Rivers and the Aswins, the Deities, the
Gandharvas, and Narada and Parvata and the Garfdharva Viswavasu,
and the Siddhas, and the ‘Apsaras, There Mahadeva, called also by
the name of Rudra, sat, decked with an excellent garland of Karnikara
flowers, and blazed with efulgence like the Moon with his rays.
In those delightful and celestial woods populous with deities and
heavenly Rishis, the great Rishi remained, engaged in high Yoga-
contemplation, from desire of obtaining a son. His strength suffered
no diminution, nor did he feel any pain. At this the three worlds
were much amazed, While the Rishi, possessed of immeasurable
energy, sat in Yoga, his matted locks, in consequence of his energy,
were seen to blaze like flames of fire. The illustrious Markandeya
it was from whom I heard of this. He used always to recite to me
the acts of the deities. It is for this that the matted locks of the
high-souled and ( Island-born ) Krishna, thus emblazed by his energy
on that occasion, seem to this day to be endued with the complexion
of fire. Gratified with such penances and such devotion, O Bharata,
of the Rishi, the great God resolved (to grant him his wish). The
Three-eyed deity, smiling with pleasure, addressed him and said—O
Island-born one, thou shalt get a son like to what thou wishest !
Possessed of greatness, he shall be as pure as Fire, as Wind, as Earth,
as Water, and as Space ! He shall be possessed of the consciousness
of his being Brahma’s self ; his understanding and soul ‘shall be
devoted to Brahma, and he shall completely depend upon Brahma
so as to be indentifiable with it !—’”

“SECTION CCCXXV i

“Bhishma said,—'The son of Satyavati having obtained this high
boon from the great God, was one day employed in rubbing his sticks
for making a fire. While thus engaged, the illustrious Rishi, O king,
beheld the Apsara Ghritachi, who, in consequence of her energy,
was then possessed of great beauty. Beholding the Apsara in those
woods, the illustrious Rishi Vyasa, O Yudhishthira, became-suddenly
smitten with desire. The Apsara ( Ghritachi ), seeing the» Rishi's
heart troubled by desire, transformed herself into a she-parrot and
came to that spot. Although he, beheld the Apsara disguised ‘in
another form, the desire that had arisen in the Rishi’s heart ( without
disappearing) spread itself over very part of his body, Summoning

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 90 ===

SANTI PARVA 497

all'his patience, the ascetic endeavour to suppress that desire. With
all his effort, however, Vyasa did not succeed in controlling his agi-
tated mind. In consequence of the inevitability of what was to happen,
the Rishi’s heart was attracted by Ghritachi's fair form. He set him-
self more earnestly to the task of making a fire for suppressing his emo-
tion, but in spite of all his efforts his vital seed came out. That best
of regenerate ones, however, O king, continued to rub his stick without
feeling any scruples for what had happened. From the seed that fell,
was born a son unto him, called Suka. In consequence of this circum-
stance attending his birth, he came to be called by name of Suka- In-
deed, it was thus that great ascetic that foremost of Rishis and highest
of Yogins, took birth from the two sticks (his father had for making
fire). As ina sacrifice a blazing fire shed its effulgence all around
when libations of clarified butter are poured upon it, after the same
manner did Suka take his birth, blazing with effulgence in consequence
of his own energy. Assuming the excellent form and complexion that
were his sire, Suka, O son of Kuru, of cleansed Soul, shone likea
smokeless fire. The foremost of rivers, viz, Ganga. O king, coming to
the breast of Meru, in her own embodied form, bathed Suka (after
his birth) with her waters. There fell from the welkin, O son of Kuru,
an ascetic’s stick and a dark deer-skin for the use, O monarch, of the
high-souled Suka. The Gandharvas sang repeatedly andthe diverse
tribes of Apsaras danced; and celestial kettledrums of loud sound
began to beat. The Gandharva Viswavasu, and Tumvuru and Narada,
and those other Gandharvas called by the names of Haha, and Huhu,
eulogised the birth of Suka. There the regents of the world with Sakra
at their head came, as also the deities and the celestial and the regener-
ate Rishis. The Wind-god poured showers of celestial flowers upon
the spot. The entire universe, mobile, and immobile, became, filled
with joy, The high-souled Mahadeva of great effulgence, accompanied
by the Goddess, and moved by affection, came there and soon after
the birth of the Muni’s son invested him with the sacred thread. Sakra,
the chief of the gods, gave him, from affection, a celestial Kamandalu
of excellent form, and some celestial robes. Swans and Satapatras and
cranes by thousands, and many parrots and Chasas, O Bharata, wheel-

ed over his head. Endued with great splendour and intelligence, Suka,
having obtained his birth from the two sticks, continued to live there,
engaged the while in the attentive observance of many vows and fasts.
A's soon as Suka was born, the Vedas with alltheir mysteries and all
their abstracts, came for dwelling in him, O king, even as they dwell
in his sire. For all that, Suka selected Vrihaspati, who was conversant
with all the Vedas together with their branches and commentaries, for
his preceptor, remembering the universal practice.’ Having studied

1 Although the Vedas came to Suka of their own accord, yet he was

63 Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 91 ===

498 MAHABHARATA

allthe Vedas together will all their mysteries and abstracts, as also
all the histories and the science of government, O puissant monarch,
the great ascetic returned home, after giving his preceptor the tuition-
fee, Adopting the vow ofa Brahmacharin, he then commenced to
practise the austerest penances concentrating all his attention thereon.
In even his childhood, he became an object of respect with the gods
and Rishis for his knowledge and penances. The mind of the great asce~
tic, O king, took no pleasure in the three modes of life with the domes-
tic among them, keeping in view, as he did, the religion of Emancipa-
tion.

SECTION CCCXXVI

“Bhishma said—'Thinking of Emancipation, Suka approached
his sire and possessed as he was of humility and desirous of achieving
his highest good, he saluted his great preceptor and said,—Thou art well
versed in the religion of Emancipation. Do thou O illustrious one,
discourse to me upon it, so that supreme tranquillity of mind, O puis-
sant one, may be mine | —Hearing these words of his son, the great
Rishi said unto him,—Do thou study, O son, the religion of Emancipa-
tion and all the diverse duties of life !—At the command of his sire,
Suka, that foremost of all righteous men, mastered all the treatises on
Yoga, O Bharata, as also the science promulgated by Kapila) When
Vyasa beheld his son to be possessed of the resplendence of the Vedas,
endued with the energy of Brahma, and fully conversant with the reli-
gion of Emancipation, he addressed him, saying,—Go thou to Janaka
the ruler of Mithila. The king of Mithila will tell thee everything for
thy Emancipation Bearing the command of his sire, O king, Suka
proceeeded to Mithila for enquiring of its king about the truth of
duties and the Refuge of Emancipation. Before he set out, his sire
further ttold him,—Do thou go thither by that path which ordinary
human beings take. Do not have recourse to thy Yoga-puissance for
proceeding through the skies—At this Suka was not at all surprised
(for he was humble by nature). He was further told that he should
proceed thither with simplicity and not from desire of pleasure.—Along
your way do not seek for friends and spouses, since friends and
spouses are causes of attachment to the world. Although the ruler
of Mithila is one in whose sacrifices we officiate, still thou shouldst not
indulge in any feeling of superiority while living with him. Thou shouldst

in deference to the universal custom, obliged to formally acquire them from
a preceptor.—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 92 ===

SANTI PARVA 490

live under his direction and in obedience to-him. Even he will dispel
all thy doubts.! That king is well versed in all duties and well
acquainted with the scriptures on Emancipation. He is one for whom I
officiate in sacrifices. Thou shouldst, without any scruple, do what he
bids—Thus instructed, the righteous-souled Suka proceeded to Mithila
on -foot although he was able to traverse through the skies over the
whole Earth with her seas. Crossing many hills and mountains, many
rivers, many waters and lakes, and many woods and forests abounding
with beasts of prey and other animals, crossing, the two Varshas of
Meru and Hari successively and next the Varsha of Himavat, he came
at last to the Varsha known by the name of Bharata. Having seen many
countries inhabited by Chins and Huns, the great ascetic at last reached
Aryavarta. In obedience to the commands of his sire and bearing
them constantly in his mind, he gradually passed along his way on tke
Earth like a bird: passing through the air. Passing through many delight-
fultowns and populous cities, he saw diverse kinds of wealth without
waiting to observe them. On his way he passed through many delight-
ful gardens and planes and many sacred waters. Before much time had
passed he reached the country of the Videhas that was protected by the
virtuous and high-souled Janaka. There he beheld many populous
villages, and many kinds of food and drink and viands and habitations
of cowherds swelling with men and many herdsof cattle. He beheld
many fields abounding with paddy and barley and other grain, and many
lakes and waters inhabited by swans and cranes and adorned with
beautiful lotuses. Passing through the Videha country teeming with
- well-to-do people, he arrived at the delightful gardens of Mithila rich
with many species of trees. Abounding with elephants and horses and
cars, and peopled by men and women, he passed through them without
waiting to observe any of the things that were presented tohis eye,
Bearing that burthen in his mind and ceaselessly dwelling upon it (viz,
the desire'of mastering the religion of Emancipation), Suka of cheerful
soul and taking delight in internal survey only, reached Mithila at last.
Arrived at the gate, he sent word through the keepers. Endued with
tranquillity of mind, devoted to contemplation and Yoga, he entered
the city, having obtained permission, Proceeding along the principal
street abounding with well-to-do men, he reached the king’s palace and
entered it without any scruples. The porters forbade him with rough
words. Thereat, Suka, without any anger, stopped and waited. Neither
1 Vyasa was the priest or Ritwija of the house of Mithila and as such

the kings of Mithila were his ‘Yajyas’ or ‘Yajmanas.’ The duty ofa
*Yajamana’ is to reverence every member of the priest’s family. The sire,

therefore, cautions the son that he should not, while living with the king
of Mithila, assert his superiority over him in any respect.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 93 ===

600 MAHABHARATA

the sun nor the long distance he had walked had fatigued him in the
least- Neither hunger, nor thirst, nor the exertion he had made, had
weakened him. The heat of the Sun had not scorched or pained or
distressed him in any degree. Among those porters there was one who
felt compassion for him, beholding him staying there like the midday
Sun in his effulgence. Worshipping him in due form and saluting him
properly, with joined hands he led him to the first chamber of the
palace. Seated there, Suka, O son, began to think of Emancipation only.
Possessed of equable splendour he looked with an equal eye upon a
shaded spot and one exposed to the Sun's rays. Very soon after, the
king's minister, coming to that place with joined hands, led him to the
second chamber of the palace. That chamber led to a spacious garden
which formed a portion of the inner apartments of the palace. It
looked like a second Chaitraratha, Beautiful pieces of water occurred
here and there at regular intervals, Delightful trees, all of which’ were
in their flowering season, stood in that garden. Bevies of damsels, of
transcendent beauty, were in attendance. The minister led Suka
from the second chamber to that delightful spot. Ordering those
damsels to give the ascetic a seat, the minister left him there. Those
well-dressed damsels were of beautiful features, possessed of excellent
hips, young in years, clad in red robes of fine texture, and decked with
many ornaments of burnished gold. They were well skilled in agreeable
conversation and maddening revelry, and thorough mistresses of the
arts of dancing and singing. Always opening their lips with smiles, they
were equal to the very Apsaras in beauty. Well-skilled in all the acts
of dalliance, competent to read the thoughts of men upon whom.they
wait, possessed of every accomplishment, fifty damsels, of a very
superior order and of easy virtue, surrounded the ascetic, Presenting
him with water for washing his feet, and worshipping him respectfully
with the offer of the usual articles, they gratified him with exellent
viands agreeable to the season. After he had eaten, those damsels then,
one after another, singly led him through the grounds, showing him
every object of interest, O Bharata. Sporting and laughing and singing,
those damsels, conversant with the thoughts of all men, entertained
that auspicious ascetic of noble soul. The pure-souled ascetic born in
the fire-sticks, observant without scruples of any kind of his duties,
having all his senses under complete control, and a thorough master of
his wrath, was neither pleased nor angered at all this. Then those fore-
most of beautiful women gave him an excellent seat. Washing his feet
and other limbs, Suka said his evening prayers, sat on that excellent
seat, and began to think of the object for which he had come there. In
the first part of the night, he devoted himself to Yoga. The puissant
ascetic, passed the middle portion ofthe night in sleep. Very soon

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 94 ===

SANTI PARVA 601

waking up from his slumber, he went through the necessary rites of
cleansing his body, and though surrounded by those beautiful women,
he once again devoted himself to Yoga. It was in this way, O Bharata,
that the son of the Island-born Krishna passed the latter part of that
day and the whole of that night in the palace of king Janaka.’ "

SECTION CCCXXVII

“Bhishma said—The next morning, king Janaka, O Bharata,
accompanied by his minister and the whole household, came to Suka,
placing his priest in the van. Bringing with him costly seats and diverse
kinds of jewels and gems, and bearing the ingredients of the Arghya on
his own head, the monarch approached the son of his reverend precep-
tor. The king, taking with his own hands, from the hands of his priest,
that seat adorned with many gems, overlaid with an excellent sheet,
beautiful in all its parts, and exceedingly costly, presented it with great
reverence. to his preceptor's son Suka. After the son of (the Island-
born) Krishna had taken his seat on it, the king worshipped him accord-
ing to prescribed rites, At first offering him water to wash his feet, he
then presented him the Arghya and kine. The ascetic accepted that
worship offered with due rites and mantras. That foremost of regenerate
persons, having thus accepted the worship offered by the king, and
taking the kine also that were presented to him. then saluted the
monatch, Possessed of great energy, he next enquired after the king's
welfare and prosperity. Indeed, O king, Suka embraced in his enquiry
the welfare of the monarch's followers and officers also. Receiving
Suka’s permission, Janaka sat down with all his followers, Endued with
a high soul and possessed of high birth, the monarch, with joined hands,
sat down on the bare ground and enquired after the welfare and
unabated prosperity of Vyasa’s son- The monarch then asked his guest
the object of his visit. .

“Suka said,—Blessed be thou, my sire said unto "me that his Yaja-
mana, the ruler of the Videhas, known all over the world by the name
of Janaka, is well versed in the religion of Emancipation. He commanded
me to come to him without delay, if I had any doubts requiring solution
in the matter of the religion of either Pravritti or Nivritti- He gave
me to understand the king of Mithila would dispel all my doubts. I
have, therefore, come hither, at the command of my sire, for the
purpose of taking lessons from thee. It behoveth thee, O foremost of
all righteous persons, to instruct me! What are the duties of a

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 95 ===

502 MAHABHARATA

Brahmana, and what is the essence of those duties that have Emancipa-
tion for their object. How also is Emancipation to be obtained ? Is it
obtainable by the aid of knowledge or by that of penances ?—

“Janaka said—Hear what the duties are of a Brahmana from the
time of his birth. After his investiture, O son, with the sacred thread,
he should devote his attention to the study of the Vedas. By practising
penances and dutifully serving his preceptor and observing the duties
of Brahmacharyya, O puissant one, he should pay off the debt he owes
to the deities and the Pitris, and cast off all malice. Having studied
the Vedas with close attention and subjugated his senses, and having
given his preceptor the tuition fee, he should, with the permission of
his preceptor, return home. Returning home, he should betake himself
to the domestic mode of life and wedding a spouse confine himself. to
her, andlive freeing himself from every kind of malice, and having
established his domestic fire. Living in the domestic mode, he should
procreate sons and grandsons, After that, he should retire to the
forest, and continue to worship the same fires and entertain guests with
cordial hospitality. Living righteously in the forest, he should at last
establish his fire in his soul. and freed from all pairs of opposites, and
casting off all attachments from the soul, he should pass his days in
the mode called Sannyasa which is otherwise called the mode of
Brahma.— ‘

"‘Suka said—If one succeeds in attaining to an vaclecpaeiies
cleansed by study of the scriptures and to true conceptions of all things,
and if the heart succeeds in freeing itself permanently from the effects
ofall pairs of opposites, is it still necessary for such a person to adopt,
one after another, the three modes of life called Brahmacharyya, Gar-
hastya, and Vanaprastha? This is what I ask thee. It behoveth thee
to tellme. Indeed, O ruler of men, do tell me this according to the true
import of the Vedas |—

““Janaka said,—Without the aid of an understanding cleansed by
study of the scriptures and without that true conception of all things
which is known by the name of Vijnana, the attainment of Emancipa-
tion is impossible. That cleansed understanding, again, it is said, is
unattainable without one's connection with a preceptor. The preceptor
is the helmsman, and knowledge is the boat (aided:by whom and which
one succeeds in crossing the ocean of the world). After having acquired
that boat, one becomes crowned with success. Indeed, having crossed
the ocean, one may abandon both. For preventing the destruction of
allithe worlds and for preventing the destruction of.acts (upon which
the ‘worlds depend), the duties appertaining to the four ‘modes of | life
were practised by the wise/of old. By abandoning acts, good and’ ‘bad;

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 96 ===

SANTI PARVA os

agreeably to this order of acts one succeeds, in course of many birth, in
attaining to Emancipation.’ That man who, through penances perform-
ed in course of many births. succeeds in obtaining a cleansed mind and
understanding and soul, certainly becomes able to attain to Emancipa-
tion (in a new birth) in even the very first mode viz, Brahmacharyya.?
When, having attained to a cleansed understanding, Emancipation
becomes his and in consequence thereof he becomes possessed of know-
ledge in respect of all visible things, what desirable object is there to
attain by observing the three other modes of life 2® One should always
cast off faults born of the attributes of Rajas and Tamas. Adhering
to the path of Sattwa, one should know Self by Self.‘ Beholding one’s
self in all creatures and all creatures in one’s self, one should live
(without being attached to anything) like aquatic animals living in water
without being drenched by that element. He who succeeds in transcend-
ing all pairs of attributes and resisting their influence, succeeds in casting
off all attachments, and attains to infinite felicity in the next world,
going thither like a bird soaring into the sky from below. In this con-
nection, there isa saying sungof old by king Yayati and borne in
remembrance, O site, by all persons conversant with the scriptures
bearing upon Emancipation. The effulgent ray (i.e., the Supreme Soul)
exists in one’s Soul and not anywhere’else. It exists equally in all crea-
tures. One can see it oneself if one's heart be devoted to Yoga. When
a person lives in such a way that another is not inspired with fear at his
sight, and when a person is not himself inspired with fear at the sight
of others, when a person ceases to cherish desire and hate, he is then
said to attain to Brahma. When a person ceases to entertain a sinful
attitude towards all creaturesin thought, word, and deed, he is then
said toattain to Brahma.’ By restraining the mind and the soul, by
casting off malice that stupefies the mind, and by throwing off desire
and: stupefaction, one is said to attain toBrahma. When a person
assumes an equality of attitude in respect of all objects of hearing and
vision (andthe operations of the other senses) as also in respect of all

1 16 is certain that one must abandon all, acts before one can attain
to Emancipation, But then acts should not be cast off all at once. It is
according to this order that they should be abandoned, é.e., in the order of
the severs! modes.—T.

2 The ‘karanas’ are the inner faculties.—T.

8 Ie., when Emancipation and omniscience have been attained in the
very first mode of life, no further need exists for conforming to the three
other modes of life.—T.

4 ie, behold the Supreme Soul by his own Soul.--T,

5 Instead of ‘papakam’ some texts read ‘pavakam’, meaning of. the
nature of fire.’ —T, 4

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 97 ===

604 MAHABHARATA

living creatures, and transcends all pairs of opposites, he is then said to
attain to Brahma. When person casts an equal eye upon praise and
dispraise, gold and iron, happiness and misery, heat and cold, good and
evil, the agreeable and the disagreeable, life and death, he is then said
to attain to Brahma. One observing the duties of the mendicant orders
should restrain one’s senses and the mind even like a tortoise withdraw-
ing its out-stretched limbs.? As a house enveloped in darkness is capable
of being seen with the aid ofa lighted lamp, after the same manner
can the soul be seen with the aid of the lamp of the understanding. O
foremost of intelligent persons, I see that all this knowledge that Iam
communicating to thee dwells in thee. Whatever else should be known
by one desirous of learning the religion of Emancipation is already
known to thee, O regenerate Rishi, Iam convinced that through the
grace of thy preceptor and through the instructions thou hast received,
thou hast already transcended all objects of the senses-? O great ascetic,
through the grace of that sire of thine, I have attained to omniscience,
and hence I have succeeded in knowing thee. Thy knowledge is much
greater than what thou thinkest thou hast. Thy perceptions also that
result from intuition are much greater than what thou thinkest thou
hast. Thy puissance also is much greater than thou art conscious of.
Whether in consequence of thy tender age, or of the doubts thou hast
not been able to dispel, or of the fear that is due to the unattainment
of Emancipation, thou art not conscious of that knowledge due to
intuition although it has arisen in thy mind, After one’s doubts have
been dispelled by persons like us, one succeeds in opening the knots of
one’s heart and then, bya righteous exertion one attains to and becomes
conscious of that knowledge. As regards thyself, thou art one that hast
already acquired knowledge. Thy intelligence is steady and tranquil,
Thou art free from covetousness. For all that, O Brahmana, one never
succeeds in -attaining to Brahma, which is the highest object of acquisi+
tion, without exertion, Thou seest no distinction between happiness
and miserys Tiou art not covetous. Thou hast no longing for dancing
and song. Thou hast no attachments. Thou hast no attachment to
friends. Thou hast no fear in things that inspire fear. O blessed one, I
see that thou castest an equal eye upona lump of gold and a clod of
earth. Myself and other persons possessed of wisdom, behold thee esta-
blished in the highest and indestructible path of tranquillity. Thou

1 After ‘manasa,’ ‘saba’is understood. It does not mean that the
senses are to be restrained by the mind, but the words imply that the mind
and the senses are to be restrained. K.P. Singha renders the line correctly,
The Burdwan translator, as usual, is careless.—T.

2 K.P. Singha skips over this verse.—T,

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 98 ===

SANTI PARVA 605

stayest, O Brahmana, in those duties which obtain for the Brahmana
that fruit which should be his and which is identical with the essence of
the object represented by Emancipation. What else hast thou to ask

me ?—'

SECTION CCCXXVIII

“Bhishma said,—'Having heard these words of king Janaka, Suka
of cleansed soul and settled conclusions began to stay in his Soul by his
Soul, having of course seen Self by Self.1 His object being accomplish-
ed, he became happy and tranquil, and without putting further ques-
tions to Janaka, he proceeded northwards to the mountains of Himavat
with the speed of the wind and like the wind.? Those mountains
abounded with diverse tribes of Apsaras and echoed with many lofty
sounds, Teeming with thousands of Kinnaras and Bhringarajas* it was
adorned, besides, with many Madgus and Khanjaritas and many Jivaji-
vakas of variegated hue. And there were many peacocks also of
gorgeous colours, uttering their shrill but melodious cries. Many bevies
of swans also, and many flights of gladdened Kokilas too, adorned the
place. The. prince of birds, viz., Garuda, dwelt on that summit
constantly. The four Regents of the world, the deities, and diverse
classes of Rishis, used always to come there from the desire of doing
good to the world. It was there that the high-souled Vishnu had undere
gone the severest austerities for the object of obtaining a son. It was
there that the celestial generalissimo named Kumara, in his younger
days, disregarding the three worlds with all the celestial denizens, threw
down his dart, piercing the Earth therewith. Throwing down his dart,
Skanda, addressing the universe, said,—If there be any person that is
superior to me in might, or that holds Brahmanas to be dearer, or that
can compare with me in devotion to the Brahmanas and the Vedas, or
that is possessed of energy like unto me, let him draw up this dart or at
least shake it [—Hearing this challenge, the three worlds become filled
with anxiety, and all creatures asked one another, saying,—Who will
raise this dart ?—Bishnu beheld all the deities and Asurasand Rakshasas
to be troubled in their senses and mind. He reflected upon what should

1 Le., he turned his soul’s gaze on his soul and withdrew himself from
every worldly object.—T.

2 He no longer walked like ordinary men. Without trailing along the
solid support of the Earth, he proceeded through the sky.—T.

8 Popularly, Bhimaraja, the Lanius Malabaricus.—T,

64 Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 99 ===

606 MAHABHARATA

be the best to be done under the circumstances. Without being able
to bear that challenge in respect of the hurling of the dart, he cast his
eyes on Skanda, the son of the Fire-god. The pure-souled Vishnu caught
hold of the blazing dart, with his left hand, and began to shake it,
When the dart was being thus shaken by Vishnu possessed of great
might, the whole Earth with her mountains, forests, and seas, shook with
the dart. Although Vishnu was fully competent to raise the dart, still
he contented himself with only shaking it. In this, the puissant lord
only kept the honour of Skanda intact. Having shaken it himself, the
divine Vishnu, addressing Prahlada, said—Behold the might of Kumara!
None else in the universe can raise this dart! Unable to bear this,
Prahlada resolved to raise the dart. He seized it, but was unable to
shake it at all. Uttering a loud cry, he fell down on the hill-top in a
swoon. Indeed, the son of Hiranya-kasipu fell down onthe Earth.
Repairing towards the northern side of those grand mountains, Maha-
deva, having the bull for his sign, had undergone the austerest penances.
The asylum where Mah adeva had undergone those austerities is encom-
passed on all sides witha blazing firee Unapproachable by persons of
uncleansed souls, that mountain is known by the name of Aditya. There
is afiery girdle all around it, of the width of ten Yojanas, and it is
incapable of being approached by Yakshas and Rakshasas and Danavas,
The illustrious god of Fire, possessed of mighty energy, dwells there in
person employed in removing allimpediments from the side of Maha-
deva of great wisdom who remained there for a thousand celestial years,
all the while standing on one foot. Dwelling on the side of that fore-
most of mountains, Mahadeva of high vows (by his penances) scorched
the deities greatly! At the foot of those mountains, in a retired spot,
Parasara’s son of great ascetic merit, viz., Vyasa, taught the Vedas unto
his disciples. Those disciples were the highly blessed Sumantra, Vaisam-
payana, Jaimini of great wisdom, and Paila of great ascetic merit. Suka
proceeded to that delightful asylum where his sire, the great ascetic
Vyasa, was dwelling, surrounded by his disciples. Seated in his asylum,
Vyasa beheld his son approach like a blazing fire of scattered flames, or
resembling the sun himself in effulgence. As Suka approached, he did
not seem to touch the trees or the rocks of the mountain. Completely
dissociated from all objects of the senses, and engaged in Yoga, the high-
souled ascetic came, resembling, in speed, a shaft let from a bow. Born
on the fire-sticks, Suka, approaching, his sire, touched his feet. With

1 It is believed that a person, by performing austere penances, scor-
obes the three worlds. It is in consequence of this effect of penances that
the superior deities were always compelled by the Asuras and Danavas to
grant them whatever boons they solicited.—T.

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/

=== PAGE 100 ===

SANTI PARVA 607

becoming formalities he then accosted the disciples of his sire. With
great cheerfulness he then detailed to his father all the particulars of
his conversation with king Janaka. Vyasa the son of Parasara, after
the arrival of his puissant son, continued to dwell there on the Himavat
engaged in teaching his disciples and his son. One day as he was seated,
his disciples, all well-skilled in the Vedas, having their senses under
control, and endued with tranquil souls, sat themselves around him. All
of them had thoroughly mastered the Vedas with their branches. All of
them were observant of penances. With joined hands they addressed
their preceptor in the following words.

“The disciples said.—We have, through thy grace, been endued
with great energy. Our fame also has spread. There is one favour that
we humbly solicit thee to grant us.—Hearing these words of theirs, the
regenerate Rishi answered them, saying,—Ye sons, tell me what that
boon is which ye wish I should grant you !—Hearing this answer of their
preceptor, the disciples became filled with joy. Once more bowing their
heads low unto their preceptor and joining their hands, all of them in
one voice said, O king, these excellent words:—If our preceptor has been
pleased with us, then, O best of sages, we are sure to be crowned with
success! Weall solicit thee, O great Rishi, to grant usa boon. Be
thou inclined to be graceful to us. Let no sixth disciple (besides us five)
succeed in attaining to fame! We are four. Our preceptor’s son forms
the fifth. Let the Vedas shine in only us five! Even this is the boon
that we solicit ;—Hearing these words of his disciples, Vyasa, the son of
Parasara, possessed of great intelligence, well conversant with the
meaning of the Vedas, endued with a righteous soul, and always engaged
in thinking of objects that confer benefits on a person in the world
hereafter, said unto his disciples these righteous words fraught with
great benefit:—The Vedas should always be given unto him whoisa
Brahmana, or unto him who is desirous of listening to Vedic instructions,
by him who eagerly wishes to attain a residence in the region of
Brahman! Do ye multiply. Let the Vedas spread (through your exer-
tions). The Vedas should never be imparted unto one that has not
formally become a disciple. Nor should they be given unto one who is
not observant of good vows. Nor should they he given for dwelling in
one that isof uncleansed soul. These should be known as the proper
qualifications of persons that can be accepted as disciples (for the
communication of Vedic knowledge). No science should be imparted
unto one without a proper examination of one’s character, as pure gold
is tested by heat, cutting and rubbing, after the same manner disciples
should be tested by their birth and accomplishments. Ye should never
set your disciples to tasks to which they should not be set, or to tasks
that are fraught with danger. One's knowledge is always commensurate

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/mahabharata-all-volumes-in-12-pdf-files/