=== PAGE 1 ===

ao TA MTA aTAAATa
MATSYA MAHAPURANA

(An Exhaustive Introduction, Sanskrit Text, English Translation,
Scholarly Notes and Index of Verses)

Vol. I
Chapters : 1-150

Translated into English by
A Board of Scholars

An Exhaustive Introduction by
Shantilal Nagar

Edited with Scholarly Notes by
K.L. Joshi

PARIMAL PUBLICATIONS
DELHI

=== PAGE 2 ===

Published by

PARIMAL PUBLICATIONS
Office : 27/28, Shakti Nagar, Delhi-1 10007 (INDIA)
Retail Outlet : 22/3, Shakti Nagar, Delhi-1 10007 (INDIA)
ph. : +91-11-23845456, 65441516, 47015168
e-mail : parimal@ndf.vsnl.net.in
url : http://www.parimalpublication.com

© Publishers

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording or any
information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.

First Edition : Year 2007
ISBN : 81-7110-305-7 (Set)
81-7110-306-5 (Vol. I)

PRICE: Rs. 1600.00 (Set of 2 Vols.)

Printed at

J.N.Printers
251, Street No.8, Padam Nagar, Delhi - 110007

=== PAGE 3 ===

CONTENTS

Introduction

CHAPTER 1
The cause of the lord Visnu assuming the form of fish and other related details

CHAPTER 2
Conversation between Matsya and Manu

CHAPTER 3
The primary creation

CHAPTER 4
The story of Sarasvati

CHAPTER 5
Birth of the daughters of Daksa and Kumara K4rttikeya

CHAPTER 6
Description of the Kasyapa dynasty

CHAPTER 7
Birth of Maruts and description of Madana Dvadasi

CHAPTER 8
Presiding deities of each sarga and the crowning of Prthu as king

CHAPTER 9
Description of Manvantaras and seven Rsis

CHAPTER 10
The story of the king Prthu and the milking of the cow

CHAPTER 11
Genesis of the solar and lunar dynasties and the story of [la

CHAPTER 12
The story of [14 and description of Iksvaku dynasty

CHAPTER 13
Description of Pitr-vamsa and the hundred and eight names of the Goddess

CHAPTER 14

Fall of Acchoda from the heaven and her redemption at her prayer to the manes

CHAPTER 15
Description of Pitr-varnga and the method of performing Sraddha

CHAPTER 16

Different kinds of Srdddhas and the qualities of the Brahmanas to be invited in the Sraddhas

Xill

22

28

29

32

35

4()

45

50

52

55

=== PAGE 4 ===

vi

CHAPTER 17

Performing of Sraddha for achieving prosperity and emancipation 61
CHAPTER 18

Method of Ekoddisti and Sapindikarana Sraddha 67
CHAPTER 19

Distribution of havya and kavya by Pitrs in Sraddhas 69
CHAPTER 20

Story of the sage Kausika and the ants 71
CHAPTER 21

The story of Brahmadatta and the four sheldrake birds 74
CHAPTER 22

The time suitable for the performing of srdddha and some rules connected with the same 77
CHAPTER 23

The origin of Moon, his marriage, performing of Rajasilya yajfa, his attraction for Tara, his fight
with lord Siva, and ending of war at the instance of Brahma. 83
CHAPTER 24

Birth of Budha from the womb of Tara, the story of Urvasi and Purirava and that of Yayati 88

CHAPTER 25

Kaca and Devayani join Sukra for learning of Mrtasaiijivani after bearing painful situations 93
CHAPTER 26

Devayani proposes marriage with Kaca who refused and their mutual showering of curses 100
CHAPTER 27

Quarrel between Devayani and Sarmistha, Sarmistha pushes Devayani into the well, Yayati saves
Devayani, conversation between Devayani and Sukracarya 102
CHAPTER 28

History of Yayati and dialogue between Devayani and Sukra 105
CHAPTER 29

Denouncement of Vrsaparva by Sukracarya and Sarmistha becomes the slave girl of Devayani 106
CHAPTER 30

Forest sports of Devayani and Sarmistha with their handmaids, arrival of the king Yayati- his talk
with Devayani and his marriage with her. 109
CHAPTER 31

Birth of a son to Yayati from Devayani, meeting of Sarmistha with Yayati in seclusion and the birth
of a son to her as well 112
CHAPTER 32

Talk between Sarmistha and Devayani getting annoyed at the birth of a son to Sarmistha, Devayani
goes to her father with a complaint. 115

=== PAGE 5 ===

vii

CHAPTER 33

Yayati's efforts to exchange of old age with the youthful age of his sons who declined, but Puru
accepted the old age of Yayati, earning the boons 118
CHAPTER 34

Enjoying of worldly pleasures by Yayati, and then his proceeding to the forest crowning Puru as the
king 12]
CHAPTER 35

Performing of the tapas by the king Yayati and his reaching the heaven 124
CHAPTER 36

At the instance of Indra, Yayati repeats the advice given by him to his son Puru 125
CHAPTER 37

Fall of Yayati from the heaven and the question asked to him by Astaka 127
CHAPTER 38

Conversation between Yayati and Astaka 129
CHAPTER 39

Conversation between Yayati and Astaka 132
CHAPTER 40

Discussion of Yayati and Astaka on asrama dharma 135
CHAPTER 41

Discussion between Yayati and Astaka, Yayati refuses to accept the merits granted by others 137

CHAPTER 42

Refusal of the king Yayati to accept the offer of the kings including Astaka and others 140
CHAPTER 43
Description of Yayati's dynasty and the story of Kartavirya Arjuna 144
CHAPTER 44
Burning of the trees with lustre of Kartavirya, curse of Vasistha to Kartvirya and the description of
Andhaka race | 147
CHAPTER 45
The story of Syamantaka gem 154
CHAPTER 46
Description of Vrsni dynasty 156
CHAPTER 47
Life story of Krsna, history of Daityas, battle of gods and the demons 159
CHAPTER 48
Description of Turvasu and Druhya, story of Bali and the birth of Karna 181]
CHAPTER 49

Description of Puruvarhsa, Bharatavarhsa and the birth of Bharadvaja etc. 189

=== PAGE 6 ===

Vill

CHAPTER 50

Comprehensive history of the rulers of Puruvamsa 194
CHAPTER 51
Dynasty, Origin and various names of Agni 201
CHAPTER 52
Description of Dharma and Adharma, the excellence of Karmayoga over Jnana-yoga 205
CHAPTER 53
Descriptions of Puranas and merit of making the gift of a Purana 208
CHAPTER 54
About the ordinance of Naksatra-purusa 214
CHAPTER 55
The merits of the vow of Aditya-sayana 218
CHAPTER 56
Krsnastami Vrata and the merits of adoration of Siva in different months 221
CHAPTER 57
Rohinicandra-sayana Vrata, The rules of performing different vows 222
CHAPTER 58
The rules of consecration of newly built tanks, wells, pools, temples etc. 225
CHAPTER 59
The rites of dedicating trees and planting groves 230
CHAPTER 60
About the ordinance of Saubhagya-sayana 232
CHAPTER 61
The birth of Agastya and the dialogue between Narada and Siva 236
CHAPTER 62
Description of Ananta-trtiya vow 241
CHAPTER 63
Vow of “Rasakalyanini trtiya” and rite of Sahasra Agnistoma 245
CHAPTER 64
About the ordinance of Ardranandakari trtiya 248
CHAPTER 65
Vow of Aksaya-trtlya and its merit 250
CHAPTER 66
Description of Sarasvata ordinance 251
CHAPTER 67

Merits of charity at the time of solar and lunar eclipses 252

=== PAGE 7 ===

ix

CHAPTER 68
Rituals of bathing on the seventh day of a bright fortnight

CHAPTER 69
Vow of Bhima Dvadasi

CHAPTER 70
Vow of Anangadana, the method of worshipping Kama

CHAPTER 71
Description of the ordinance known as Asiinyasayanadvitiya

CHAPTER 72
The vow of Angaraka, the dialogue between Pippalada and Yudhisthira

CHAPTER 73
Method of the pacification of planet Brhaspati and Sukra

CHAPTER 74
The vow and merits of Kalyana-saptami

CHAPTER 75
The merits of the vow of Visoxa-saptami

CHAPTER 76
The ordinance of Phala-saptami

CHAPTER 77
The vow and merits of Sarkara-saptami

CHAPTER 78
The vow and merits of Kamala-saptami

CHAPTER 79
The vow and merits of Mandara-saptami

CHAPTER 80
The ordinance of Subha-saptami

CHAPTER 81
The ordinance of Visoka-dvadasi, the method of worshipping Laksmi

CHAPTER 82
The merits of gift of Gudadhenu and other symbolic images of the cow

CHAPTER 83
The benefits and greatness of all gifts

CHAPTER 84
The description of gift of salt-hill

CHAPTER 85
The description of gift of raw-sugar-hill

254

258

263

269

270

275

276

278

279

280

282

283

284

285

288

291

295

296

=== PAGE 8 ===

CHAPTER 86
The description of mountain of gold

CHAPTER &7
The description of mount of sesamum

CHAPTER 88
The description of gift of cotton-hill

CHAPTER 89
The description of mount of clarified butter

CHAPTER 90
The description of mount of gems

CHAPTER 91
The description of the mount of silver

CHAPTER 92
The description of the sugar-hill

CHAPTER 93

The performance of Santi and Pusti (Oblation to the nine planets)

CHAPTER 94
Description of the form of nine planets

CHAPTER 95
Method and merit of the ordinance of Siva-caturdasi

CHAPTER 96
The greatness of giving up of all fruits

CHAPTER 97
The method of Sunday ordinance

CHAPTER 98
The process of bringing Sarkranti to a close

CHAPTER 99
The vow of Visnu-vratam, known as the Vibhiti-Dvadasi

CHAPTER 100
Description of the vow of Visnu-vratam

CHAPTER 101
Prescribing of the sixty vratas and the related glory

CHAPTER 102
Method of taking bath and the performing of tarpana

CHAPTER 103
Anxiety of Yudhisthira, his meeting with the sage Markandeya

296

297

298

298

299

300

301

304

318

319

322

325

326

328

330

334

341

344

=== PAGE 9 ===

CHAPTER 104

The glory of Prayiga and description of various sacred places 347
CHAPTER 105

Position of those who die at Prayaga and the importance of giving a cow in charity 348
CHAPTER 106

Glory of Prayaga and description of various auspicious places 35]
CHAPTER 107

Description of the various sacred places of Prayaga 355
CHAPTER 108

The glory of Prayagatirtha 357
CHAPTER 109

Glory of Prayaga in preference to other tirthas 360
CHAPTER 110

Dwelling of all the auspicious tirthas at Prayaga 362
CHAPTER 111

Stay of Brahma, Visnu and Siva at Prayaga 363
CHAPTER 112

Glory of Prayaga as described by Vasudeva 365
CHAPTER 113

The description of Jambidvipa and its mountains and varsas 366
CHAPTER 114

Description of Bharatavarsa, Kimpurusa and Harivarsa 373
CHAPTER 115

Story of the earlier birth of Purtrava 380
CHAPTER 116

Description of Airavati river 381
CHAPTER 117

Description of the astonishing splendour of Himalaya 383
CHAPTER 118

Description of the astonishing beauty of Himalaya and the hermitage of the sage Atni 385
CHAPTER 119

Entry of Purdrava in the hermitage, description of the grandeur of the 4srama and the tapas
performed by Purirava 390
CHAPTER 120

Tapas of the king Purtrava, sports of Gandharvas and apsards, arrival of the sage Atri, the boon
granted to the king 393

=== PAGE 10 ===

CHAPTER 121

Description of Kailasa and Ganga besides Jambidvipa 397
CHAPTER 122

Description of Sakadvipa, Kusadvipa and Salmalidvipa 402
CHAPTER 123

Description of Gomedaka and Puskaradvipa 409
CHAPTER 124

Speed of the Sun and the Moon described 414
CHAPTER 125

Description of the movement of the sun and his chariot 421
CHAPTER 126

Riding of different gods over the Sun’s chariot in different months 425
CHAPTER 127

Description of the chariot of the planets and praise of Dhruva 431
CHAPTER 128

Movements of divine planets and the speed of the sun and the moon 433
CHAPTER 129

The building of Tripura 439
CHAPTER 130

Building of Tripura by Maya-danava 442
CHAPTER 131

Comfortable living of the Daityas in Tripura, witnessing of the dream by Maya 444
CHAPTER 132

Atrocities of the Daityas of Tripura, taking refuge of the gods with Brahma 448
CHAPTER 133

Building of a surprising chariot of Siva for the killing of Tripurasura | 450
CHAPTER 134

Attack on Tripura by Siva and other gods 455
CHAPTER 135

Attack on Tripura by Indra at the command of Siva, victory of the gods and the retreat of the
Danavas to Tripura 458
CHAPTER 136

Anxiety of Maya, construction of a surprising stepwell, terrific war between Nandikesvara and
Tarakasura 465
CHAPTER 137

Anxiety of Maya with the drying of the step-well, Danavas enter the nether world 470

=== PAGE 11 ===

xill

CHAPTER 138
Terrific battle between the gods and the Danavas and killing of Tarakasura

CHAPTER 139
Maya entrusts safety of Tripura to the Danavas convincing them again

CHAPTER 140
War between Gods and Danavas, killing of Vidyunmali by Nandisvara

CHAPTER 141
Purtirava’s union with the sun and moon

CHAPTER 142
Description of the Yugas

CHAPTER 143
Description of yajiia and its method

CHAPTER 144
The temperament of Dvapara and Kaliyuga, the story of the king Pramati, start of Krtayuga

CHAPTER 145
Changes in the bodies, varna with the change of the yugas

CHAPTER 146
Birth of Vajranga, his making captive by Indra and his release

CHAPTER 147
Birth of Tarakadsura with the boon of Brahma

CHAPTER 148

473

478

483

489

496

502

505

505

521

526

Performing of tapas by Tarakasura, receiving of his boon from Brahma and the preparations of war

between the gods and the Daityas

CHAPTER 149
The start of war between gods and the asuras

CHAPTER 150
Battle between gods and the demons

528

536

537

=== PAGE 13 ===

Introduction

The Matsya Purdna earns its title from the fish incarnation of Visnu, the other nine
being Ktrma, Varaha, Narasimha, Vamana, Bhargava Parasurama, Rama, Krsna, Buddha
and Kalki. The Matsya Purdna is not all based totally on the life story of Matsya, but it
deals with various other subjects, though in some of the chapters Matsya himself is the
speaker. Before embarking on the subejct of the incarnation of Visnu, it would be quite
pertinent to visualise the need for such an tncarnation. In this connection, there is the well
known passage from Bhagavadgitd in which the lord Krsna declared that whenever the evil
or adharma becomes predeomient, in the society and the virtues or dharma are on the
decline, or are relegated to the background, the lord incarnates on earth in order to uphold
the virtues and to destroy the evil forces, would be quite relevant :—

aat sat fe ence tonfatate area
MUA TAA GAAS TING It
UAT AAT Farry Hy SEPA
aT Mra a AN
Bhagavadgita
The same spirit has been conveyed in the following verses of the Brahma Purdna:—
yo YfTMget: Waa ATA: |
Baa BAA ATAAU TSA!
qel qeraqea shatata st fet:
eeay arama dal Sal WATT
Ba Ala fe Heals sae!
AAT AUN HAA Tt
gert Feremta sratet a yefeary
WATT TAU STAAS AT |A-AM (1811-4)
The number of incarnations

The incarnations of Visnu have been variously described in the Puranas, since the
Matsya Purana relates to one of the incarnations of Visnu, it would be of interest to analyse
the position of the incarnations in the Puranas:—

1. Vayu Purana

(a) Divine Incarnations

=== PAGE 14 ===

XVi

(1) Vardaha (II. 36.73) In the fourth ywga, when Suras were in distress, he was born
within the ocean for killing Hiranyakasipu.

(ii) Narasirhha (II. 36.73) The second incarnation was that of Narasimha.

(iii) Vamana (II. 36.74) The third incarnation, that of Vamana, took place in the
seventh Tretayuga, when all the three worlds were overrun
by the Daityas and were ruled by Ball.

(b) Human Incarnation

(iv) Dattatreya (JI 36.88) The fourth incarnation was Dattatreya, with Markandeya as
his preceptor.

(v) Mandhatr (II. 36.89) The fifth incarnation is Mandhatr

(vi) Parasurama (II. 36.90) The sixth incarnation was that of Parasurama, son of
Jamadagni.

(vil) Rama (II. 36.91) In the twenty-fourth Tretayuga Visnu incarnated as Rama.

(viii) Veda-vyasa (II. 36.92) Visnu took his eighth incarnation as Vedavyasa born of
Parasara.

(ix) Krsna (II. 36.93) Visnu was born as Krsna, son of Devaki and Vasudeva as the

ninth incarnation.

(x) Kalki (II. 36.165-120) Visnu in his future incarnation will be known as Kalki.

(2) Varaha Purana

The Vardha Purdna counts the ten incarnations of Visnu, in a chronological order as
follows:—

ARTHAS ASIST ATA: |
TATA FONTPT Tae Ta TM (4.2)

(Matsya, Kirma, Vardaha, Narasimha, Vamana, Parasurama, Rama, Krsna, Buddha and
Kalki are the ten incarnations of Visnu)
(3) Brahmavaivarta Purana

The Brahmavaivarta Purdna, mentions mainly at two places about the incarnations of
Visnu. Initially in the ninth Chapter of the Visnu Khanda, there is a mention of seventeen
incarnations of Visnu as under:—

TAMIaET: AaAissrs Tl
Tey alfa SHOT at Aa
Yau ae: alenatg: aAftertrra
Ud Bi: Hes Bae HAT FAN

=== PAGE 15 ===

XVli

aut greet way vacate facefay: |
ufegulaa: emt agus gel ATI
(Brahmavaivarta Purana, Krsna Khanda, 9/10,12/13)
The above verses classify the incarnations of Visnu as follows
(i) | Those which emerged Brahma, ISa, Vighnesa (Ganega), Karma, Nara-

out of amsas of Krsna Narayana, Karttikeya.
(or Visnu)

Here Nara and Narayana have been treated separately,
but elsewhere in this Purana, Nara-Nardyana have been
treated as one incarnation (Krsna Khanda 22/28)

(ii) Amsavatadras of Visnu Vamana, Kalki, Buddha, Kapila and Matsya.
(1i1) POrandvataras Ktrma, Narasimha, Rama and Krsna.
Irrespective of the above list of seventeen incarnations, the second Sthala of Krsna

Khanda of this Purana (23/37; 41-49) mentions Vamana, Varadha, Narasimha, Kirma,
Rama, Parasurama, Kapila, Nara-Narayana and Krsna.

(4) Garuda Purana
Chapter-14 of the Brahma Khanda of ithe Garuda Purdna deals with the incarnations of
Visnu. The lord is described here not only the author of everything but also as the destroyer

and as enjoyer of the best in everything. In this connection a number of things which are
excellent in each class are mentioned and the Lord is said to be its enjoyer.

Chapter-15 of the same texts provides the list of these incarnations which includes Vis
nu-Vasudeva, Samkarsana, Aniruddha, Sanandana and others. Besides the names of
Varaha, Narayana, Kapila, the expounder of Sankhya philosophy, Dattatreya (the propunder
of Anviksiki to Alarka) Svayambhuva Manu, Ktrma, Dhanvantri, Mohini, (Sri),
Narasimha, Vamana, ParaSurama, Vyasa, Raghava ( Rama), Krsna, Buddha and Kalki are
also mentioned. Some of the relevant verses are quoted hereunder :—

Tat et: mgerreren saat efeatorait:
MUA UTES FA Tete Fig GTA:

amt serge Mags safe waaha ca
segurt fefgrarat Aeren Wada aafad efacrqi
aa eft Mewar BaeAT WTS

cen ferorenfgrasy aarece dente: aetclfcaas
ail at wTaraneeat a ayameaga:|

Sade agar: rg aed & ufaq afad an

=== PAGE 16 ===

XVill

Tat Sha: Ua Yous Wa WTA aah
Taga afrarnt a ats yfart-erat aay west:
AMAA F oPaqat waareaha Tors
TRI aya tenfetrdeumie aa
(Garuda Purana, Brahma Khanda, 15.17-22)

(5) Bhagavata Purana

The texts in its first Skanda describes the number of the incarnation of Visnu as twenty-
four as follows:—

“At the time of the beginning, with the desire to create the universe, the lord assumed
the form of a man (purusa) consisting the sixteen parts created from the fattvas (primary
substances) of which Mahat (the great or intellect) is the first.

Brahma, the head of the progenitor of the universe, was born of the lotus of the deep-
lake-like navel of the Lord, who was lying on the waters (of the post-deluge ocean),
extending his yogic meditation slumber. Verily that form of the lord on the formation of
whose limbs is based the extent of the universe, is very pure, excellent, and full of sattva
(goodness) they (i.e. yogins) with their vision visualise this form which is wonderful (on
account of its having thousands of feet, thighs, arms, mouths, thousands of heads, ears, eyes
and noses, shining on account of thousands of crown, garments and ear-rings):—

TPIT MSTA MSA AAT
WeaTaMerifad AeAMtera HUSA (1.3.4)

At first, that very God manifested himself as a youth and becoming a Brahmana,
practised unbroken celibacy which is difficult to practice. Secondly also the lord of
sacrifices: (Narayana) with the object of creation, assumed the body of a boar, for raising up
the earth which has sunk down to the lower region called Rasdtala. And thirdly, he having
become the Divine sage Narada in the Arsa creation (pertaining to the sages) expounded the
religion-mystical treatise pertaining to the satvatas (the devotees of Visnu), namely
Pancardtragama by following which actions become void of their binding force. In the
fourth incarnation, having been born of the wife of Dharma (namely Marti, daughter of
Daksa-Prajapati) as the twin sages Nara-Ndarayana, He performed severe penance with fully
pacified mind.

The fifth (incarnation) was the name of Kapila, the chief of the Siddhas, who explained
to Asuri, the Samkhya doctrine which determined all the principles, which were lost
formerly in the course of time. In the sixth (incarnation), he being requested by Anasiya,
became the chid of Atri, taught Metaphysics to Alarka, Prahlada and others. Then in the
seventh incarnation, yajna was born of Huci and Akuti. He alongwith gods, of whom Yama
was the first, protected the period assigned to Manu called Svayambhu. In the eighth
incarnation, Lord Visnu, was born of Nabhi and queen Meru Devi. He as Rsabha showing

=== PAGE 17 ===

to the strong minded ones, the path of Sanydsa, the most respectable of all stages of life.
Having been explored by sages, he assumed the ninth form known as Prthu. From this
earth, he milked medicinal plants. Thereby he became most pleasant. At the time of oceanic
deluge in the epoch called Caksusa, he assumed the form of a fish and protected Vaivasvata
Manu, by making him board the earth boat. This was his tenth incarnation. In the eleventh
incarnation, in the form of a tortoise, the Omnipresent lord supported the Mandra mountain
on his back while gods and demons were churning the ocean. The twelfth incarnation is of
Dhanvantri and the thirteenth, the female form of Mohini, who after deluding others,
enabled the gods of drink nectar. Assuming the fourteenth man-lion form, he tore up the
chest of the powerful king Daityas with his claws like the weaver of mats tearing the grass.
Proposing to beg three steps of land, but desirous of recovering heaven, he assumed the
Pigmy (Vamana) form and arrived at Bali's sacrifice. In the sixteenth incarnation, being
angry at the hostility to Brahmanas, he extricated the warrior class form the earth twenty
one times as Parasurdma. In the seventeenth descent on earth, he was born of Satyavati and
Pardsara. Seeing the people of low intelligence, he divided the three in the form of Veda
into several Branches. After this, in order to help gods or to kill Ravana, he assumed
kingship and performed acts of valour such as the control of the sea by building a bridge
over it. In the nineteenth and twentieth incarnations, having taken birth in the Vrsni family
as Rama (Balarama) and Krsna, he lessened burden of earth. Then on the full advent of the
Kali Age, he will be born as Buddha and as soon of Ajana in the Kikata country. Then in
the twilight of the Kali Age, when the kings will be as good as robbers, this protector of the
world will be born of Visnuyasa under the name of Kalki.

(6) Agni Purana

In the Chapter 48 of Agni Purdna stress is laid on the recitation of the Vaisnava mantra
(3% FR Wad arqcara) from the number of Sanskrit letters entering into its composition.
Then there is an elaborate description of the twenty-four forms of Visnu. The next Chapter
(49) deals extensively with the iconography of Visnu, and his ten incarnations, Chapters 44-
47 highlight the essential points in the making of an image of Vasudeva and any other
deity; the essential points of the divine pedestal and its dimensions; the different kinds of
Salagrama stones and the process of worshipping Salagramas. Then chapters 202 and 203,
contain highlight on the worship of Hari and the fruits acquired by a man for worshipping
Hari. Chapter-305 recites the fifty names of Visnu.

The ten incarnations of Visnu are also found mentioned in the following Puranas,
besides the Mahabharata:—

(1) Varadha Purdna , 4.1-3; 48.16-23;112.27.
(1) Brahmanda Purdna 2.73, 70-126.
(111) Matsya Purana 47, 234-251.

=== PAGE 18 ===

XX

(iv) Devi Bhégavata, 105, 1-15.

But the subject of incarnations has been discussed variously in the Puranas as well as
_ other religious literature as would be evident from the following facts.

(1) The Reasons

(a) Visnu is the only god of the Brahmanical trinity, who is known in the texts to
incarnate not only in animal, or composite forms, (half animal and half human) but also in
purely human form and even is born of human parents. The theory of incarnation of Visnu
could also be traced in the Satapatha Brahmana, wherein the rescue of the Earth from the
deep sea by Brahma in the form of a Boar has been discussed:—

WY Aiea Saas AMfedtad sass wa sears west aaa she

ag SHIA Ase: Uf: maTafadtaatags Hear arat waetatt Heat

alfa Tae ase forteata saat yen WaT aT TET aT vinisgerarda Ty!
(Satapatha Brahmana, 14.1.2.11)

(Then, the earth, torn up by a Boar, he takes only thus large was she in the beginning,
for, indeed only so large was this earth in the beginning of the size of a span. A Boar called
Emusa, raised her up and he was her lord Prajapati, with that mate, her heart's delight, he
thus supplies the complete him............ ).

(b) The same version is repeated in the Vajasneyi Samhita (38.5) and some other texts as
well. However, the Matsya Purdna also declares that whenever there 1s a decay of
righteousness, Visnu takes birth in order to establish righteousness by destroying asuras :—-

Wa WA: Wafawad wise wy:
Hay MAT AATATO WONG (Matsya Purana 47.32)

(c) It also testifies that Visnu's resorting to the various incarnations on earth is due to a
curse pronounced by Bhrgu and that Visnu assumed most of these forms:—

RIAA Heat Aaa
SURE IER Gt cara Wali! (Matsya Purana 47.37)

(At the same time on account of the curse of Bhrgu, there was destructive warfare
between Devas and asuras to cause pain to Bali, when lord Visnu manifested himself in
human form to establish righteousness, for the sake of the Devas and the asuras).

(d) According to the above authority, it was Bhrgu who initially commanded Visnu to
incarnate, in order to establish righteousness over the unrighteous deeds of the asuras. Thus
the seeds of the theory of incarnation of Visnu could quite well be traced in the Vedic texts
and the Satapatha-Brahmana, but the clear vision as to the need of such incarnations has
been provided in the Matsya Purdna and the Bhagvadgitd as described earlier.

(ce) Almost identical views are contained in Chapter-II of the Devi-Mahatmya wherein
the goddess declares similarly.

=== PAGE 19 ===

Xxi

(f) The Curse of Sukra, the priest of asuras

The Matsya Purdna (Chapter-47) further goes on to testify that there were indeed twelve
conflicts between the gods and the asuras. On one occasion when Prahalada had been
overcome, Indra has gained the empire of the three worlds. Sukra, the priest of the asuras,
left them and went to the gods. They however, entreated him not to desert them; when he
reassured them by the promise of his support. They (the asuras) were attacked by the gods
and they resorted to Sukra, when their assailants left them. Sukra then referred to their
earlier discomfiture and advised them to wait for a more favourable time and resorted to
Siva to obtain a sacred text for achieving their victory. On being praised by Sukra for the
sacred book, Mahadeva advised him to practice severe austerities. The absence of Sukra
entheused the gods to attack the asuras, who feeling insecure went to the mother of Sukra,
to save them. Then mother of Sukra, was ultimately slayed by Visnu at the instance of
Indra, quite hesitatingly because she was a woman. Visnu was thereafter doomed by a curse
of Sukra to be born seven times in the world of men and in consequence of this, he
appeared for the good of the world when unrighteousness prevailed. In the consequence of
Sukra's curse, which operated periodically, Visnu had to be born seven times among men
for a sin of killing a woman, knowing that a woman under no circumstances is to be killed.

Ta wa ataaen eat Frafer
THAR TAG AS ATATITTA! (Matsya Purana 47.103)

Besides, Brahma had also decreed that all those asuras who should be disobedient to
Prahalada should be slain by man. This also explains the reasons for Visnu's resorting to the
human form for the destruction of the asuras:—

were Fest J A wrerayTey a
TyETaEITT aa Taft CMMSCHY: || (Matsya Purana 47.233)

(ii) Types of Incarnations

As to the types of incarnations of Visnu, they could be divided in following three
types:—

(a) Complete incarnations like Rama and Krsna.

(b) Partial incarnations like Parasurama, who though a Ciranjivi was endowed with
divinity for a short span of life and had finally to retire to the mountains, handing over all
his divine powers to Rama, after his mission, the suppression of Ksatriyas was over. Thus
with Parasurama the divinity was not a life-long endowment, but of a short-lived nature.
This type is called avesa.

(c) The third is characterised by a portion of the power as illustrated in samkha and
cakra, the attributes of Visnu, who are occasionally ordered to be born among the men as
embodies beings to improve them in their ways, by becoming devotional personages and
achieve the purpose of their mission. Such incarnations are called amsdvatdras or partial
incarnations.

=== PAGE 20 ===

Xxil

(iii) The Classification

These incarnations can also be classified, into human, animal and the composite forms:—
(a) Human forms, include Rama, Parasurdma, Vamana, Krsna, Buddha and Kalki.
(b) Animal forms, include, Matsya, Ktrma and Vardaha.

(c) The composite forms include Narasimha, wherein the deity had the head of a lion
placed on a human trunk. Sometimes even Varaha is conceived in the composite form of
human with the head of a Boar.

(iv) The Doctrine, its genesis and evolution

As to the number of the incarnations of Visnu, the different texts speak variously on the
subject. In this connection, J.N. Banerjea has observed as follows:—

“The doctrine of the vibhavas (Avataras, 1.e., incarnatory forms) was no less component
part of Paficaratra or Bhagavata creed than that of the Vythas. The difference between the
two lies in the fact that we have some evidence regarding the existence of the former in the
later Vedic texts, whereas there is none about the existence of the latter in them. The term
avatdra is applied to the act of the god coming down in the form of a man or an animal to
the earth and living there in that form till the purpose for which he had descended in the
universe was fulfilled; it also sometimes denotes the assumption of different forms by the
god for the attainment of particular objects. It is thus distinct form for the attainment of
particular objectives. It is thus distinct form identification (where one deity is identified
with another), or emanation (as illustrated by the Vyaha doctrine). It is also different from
the possession of one individual entity by the divinity in which the latter takes up
temporary abode in the former; but this idea of possession has to some extent been manifest
in the story of Parasurama incarnation of Visnu. In the Paricaratra theology, the Vibhavas
(Vi-bhu-as), i.e., the act of becoming in a special manner) being the Pure Creation
(Suddhasrsti) to which the Vythas also belong; these incarnations, however, may not only
be of a composite god Visnu himself, but also may be of his Vythas, sub-Vythas and
Parsidas (companions), or even of his attributes and emblems. One of the earliest reference
to the assumption of some forms by the divinity 1s to be found in the Satapatha Brahmdna
and the Jaittiriya Samhita where Prajapati is said to have assumed the forms of Fish
(Matsya), Tortoise (Kirma) and Boar (Varaha) on different occasions for the furtherence of
creation and the well being of the created. When the doctrine of incarnations in association
with Vasudeva-Visnu-Nardyana, was well established all these three were bodily
transferred to that composite god, and were regarded as some of the celestial (divya)
Incarnations......... ”

On the question of the number of incarnations of Visnu, J.N. Banerjea has observed:—

“A brief reference to a few of the Epic, Puranic and Pancardtra passages enumerating
the various incarnations will be useful for our understanding of many Vaisnava images. If
we study them together, we shall not only recognise in some of these enumeration all the

=== PAGE 21 ===

XXiil

stereotyped ten (this list also some times varies in the north and south of India) whose icons
are common, but also find the names of many Avatdras whose images, though not so
common, are also known. The Narayaniya Section of the Mahabharata refers in one list
(XII.349,37) to the Varaha, Vamana and Narasimha or the man-lion incarnations. The
human incarnations refer no doubt to Vasudeva Krsna, Bhargava Rama and Dasarathi
Rama, for in Chapter 389, (Verses 77-90) of the same section not only the stories about the
first three in the list given above are briefly narrated, but also those about his incarnations
as Bhargava Rama (Parasurama), Dasarathi Rama and Vasudeva Krsna are recounted. But a
fuller list is given in verse 104 of the same Chapter which contains the name of Harsa,
Kirma, Matsya, Varaha, Narasithha, Vamana, Rama (Bhargava), Rama (Dasarathi), Satvat,
(Vasudeva or Baladeva for both of them are of Satvat race) and Kalki. The number of ten is
to be noted here and the absence of Buddha in this list may show that Buddha has not yet
been regarded as an Avatara. In the Vayu Purdna, mention is made of the ten incarnations
of Visnu, of which the first three, Yajfia, Narasimha and Vamana are celestial, the rest
being his human incarnations; they are Dattatreya, one unnamed, in the Tretéyuga simply
called the fifth, Jimadagnya Rama, DasarathiI Rama, Vedavyasa, Vasudeva-Krsna and
Kalki, the future incarnation. Here also the Buddha is conspicious by his absence, and a few
other constituents of the stereotyped list of three- Matsya, Karma and Varaha are replaced
by Yajna, Dattatreya and Vedavyasa........”

The following tabulation shall provide a comparative picture of the number of avatdras
as contained in different texts:—

Mahabharata VayaPurdna Matsya Varaha Brahmanda Purana
Narayanlya (Chapter-98) Purana Purana (Chapters 2.72:73-
Section (Chapter-47) (Chapter-15) 126)
Harhsa Yaja Dharma Matsya Narasimha
(Partial)
Ktrma Narasimha Narasimha Karma Vamana
Matsya Vamana Vamana Varaha Varaha
Narasimha Dattatreya Dattatreya Narasimha Karma
Vamana Rama Parasurama § Parasurama Dattatreya
(Jamadgnya)
Rama Réma Rama Rama Rama
(Bhargava) (Dasarathi) (Dasarathi) (Jamadagnya)
Rama Vedavydsa Vedavyasa Krsna Rama
(Dasarathi) Vasudeva

Satvat Vasudeva Buddha undefined Vedavyasa

=== PAGE 22 ===

XXIV

(Vasudeva or Krsna

Baladeva)

Kalki Kalki Kalki Kalki Krsna
Dhanvantri Matsya Matsya Matsya Matsya
Mohini Karma Hayagriva Kirma Kirma
Narasimha Varaha Korma Varaha Varaha
Vamana Narasimha Varaha Narasimha Hayagriva
Kirma Vamana Narasimha Vamana Vamana
Parasurama Parasurama Vamana Parasurama Narasimha
Rama Rama Parasur4ma Rama Parasurama
Krsna Krsna Rama Balarama Rama
Samkarsana Buddha Vasudeva Krsna Kapila
Buddha Kalki Buddha Buddha

Kalki Kalki

Dattatreya

As to the number of the incarnations of Visnu, Gopinatha Rao has observed:—

“Some Hindu authorities do not consider Buddha to be an avatara of Visnu and
substitute in his place Balarama, the elder brother of Krsna, as an avatara.”

But a comparative study of the above tabulation would reveal that there have been
deviations in respects of the avataras, while some are omitted in one text the others are
absent in the other lists. But ofcourse Buddha is found in a number of lists from various text
describing the incarnations of Visnu. According to Hemadri, Harnsa is an addition and Krs
na is an alternative of Balarama. In this connection D.N. Shukla has observed as follows:—

“Thus the incarnations of Visnu are innumerable and those so far mentioned are only a
few types. All these show philosophically the universal character of the god as all-
pervading and all sustaining. These Avatdras are like rivulets flowing from one
inexhaustible lake. Rsis, Manes, gods, sons of Manu-— Prajapatis are all his portions. Here is
it enough to say about this great tradition of the Hindus, forming the very pillar of the high
edifice of our religious life. The philosophical idea of incarnation is given in the oft-quoted
verse— Yada yada hi dharmasya etc. Cosmologiclly if we take into consideration all these
incarnations, we find that the first four are cosmogonic in nature. Manu says that in the
beginning of the world, there was nothing but water. The fish was the first representative
creature in the process of the evolution of the world. After water, mountains came out in the
course of creation, and they are represented by the Ktrmavatara. The recovery of the land
from the water as a next stage of evolution may be represented by the incarnation of

=== PAGE 23 ===

XXV

Varaha. The Narasimha incarnation can also account for the animal and the man-kingdoms
on earth. These varieties of the Dasdvataras again......... contains some sub-varieties also,
e.g., Varahavatara in sculpture comprises three different conceptional types namely; Bhi-
varaha or Adi-varaha, Yajfia-varaha, Pralaya-varaha. Similarly Narasimha avatara has also
so many varieties. The sub-varieties of Krsna-Navanitanrtta, Venugopal, Goverdhana-
dhara, Balakrsna etc. are a common property both of sculptors and painters.”

Various texts describe the iconographical details of the Dasdvataras of Visnu, but the
iconography of the images of these incarnations in the Agni Purdna is tabulated
hereunder:—

Incarnation Body Arms ___ Attributes and Remarks

other details

Matsya Resembling - -

a Fish

Kirma should Should be made to
resemble look like the
Tortoise. prototype of _ the

animals from which
its nomenclature is
derived

Varaha Composite Four Gada and other
body with a arms weapons in his night
boar's head arms; conch shell and
fixed over a the goddess Laksmi
human trunk. seated on lotus to be

resting on the other left
elbow.

Narasimha Lion's head Four Gada, Cakra and the Daitya should be
placed over a arms other two tearing the placed over the thighs
human body belly of the demon. of the god.

Vamana Human body Two Stick and an umbrella
looking like a arms
dwarf

Parasurama Human body Two A bow, arrow and an

arms axe.
Rama Human body Two A bow and an arrow
arms besides a sword and a
conch-shell.

Balarama/Krsna Human body Two Four or two arm or a

arms conch-shell. A gada, or
a plough.

Buddha Human body, Two Should have Fair complexion,

seated ona arms comparatively larger wearing a cloth

lotus with ears and the calmness

=== PAGE 24 ===

XXVi

petals turned should be made to
upwards. reflect in his
appearance.
Kalki Human body, Not A bow and a quiver, a Should be mounted
mounted on a defined $Sarmhkha, cakra, gad&é onahorse.
horse. and padma

Other lists also describe the iconography of the incarnations of Visnu and the account
that follows, throws some light on each one of them.

(1) Matsya

While dealing individually with the ten incarnations of Visnu, it may be stated that
according to most of the texts this incarnations comes first of all and accounts of
Matsyavatara are found in the Agni, Bhagavata and several other texts. The texts in general
prescribe that the representation in art of Matsydvatdra should resemble a fish:—

‘Teaaentat ta Ua TeaeTaA|’
The Mahabharata (Vanaparva 12.297 ff) also describes it and Matsydvatara is also a
subject of discussion with the author of the Agni Purdna of the initial four of the ten

incarnations of Visnu which are of cosmogenic nature, Matsydvatdra comes first as
representing the acquitic animal.

The Bhdgavata Purdna describes that after having been addressed by Visnurata the
divine Badrayana related the deeds of Visnu achieved by him in his fish incarnation. At the
end of the past kalpa there was a practical dissolution of the universe in which the earth and
other worlds were submerged in the ocean. Then the powerful Raksasa named Hayagriva
took away the Vedas from the mouth of the creator, who from the drowsiness, which had
came on through the lapse of time, had became disposed to go to sleep. On discovering this
deed of Hayagriva, the chief of the Danavas, the divine lord Hari, took to the form of a
Saphari fish and recovered the Vedas.

Though the Puranas in general agree about the number of the incarnations to be ten, but
the Bhdgavata Purdna and other texts speak out differently on the subject, as would be
evident from the following facts:—

Avataras in the Bhagavata Purana

The Bhdgavata Purdna enumerates the avataras thrice, in the first recounting (1.2.6-
22), the number is twenty-two; in the second (11.7.1 ff) the number mentioned is twenty
three and in the third list (X1.4.3 ff) the number of avatdras mentioned is sixteen. The
names, common in these lists are as follows:—

(1) Purusa, (ii) Varaha, (111) Narada, (iv) Nara and Narayana, (v) Kapila, (vi) Dattatreya,
(vii) Yajfia, (viil) Rsabha, (ix) Prthu, (x) Matsya, (xi) Karma, (xii) Dhanvantri, (xi)
Mohini, (xiv) Narasimha, (xv) Vamana, (xvi) Bhargava Rama, (xvi1) Vedavyasa, (xviil)
Dasarathi Rama, (xix) Balarima, (xx) Krsna, (xxi) Buddha, (xxii) Kalki.

=== PAGE 25 ===

XXVil

This enumeration includes the names of all the usual ten in the steriotyped list, but the
Purdnakéra emphasises that the divine descents are innumerable (avatdrah
hyasamkhyeyah). The difference of this list from the other two is tmmaterial; the last
omitting some included in the first list, but none of them omits Rsabha (Adinatha or
Rsabhanatha, the first Tirthankara of Jainas and Buddhists). The Vardha and Agni Purdnas
contain the steriotyped list of ten incarnations while the Matsya Purdna lays down that
Visnu was born seven times among the men because he was cursed by Bhrgu for killing his
wife, the mother of Sukra. These are (1) Dattdtreya, (ii) Mandhata, (iii) Jamdagnya
(Parasurama), (iv) Rama Dasarathi (v) Vedavydsa, (vi) Buddha and (vii) Kalki, by adding
three others, those of Narayana, Ktirma and Varaha (probably meant to be the celestial
ones), the number of ten is made up, though this list of Dasavatara widely differs from the
usually accepted ones, as many as four here, Dattatreya, Mandhata, Vedavydsa and
Narayana are the substitutes of Matsya, Kirma, Varaha and Balarama (or rarely Krsna) of
the usual list.

The evidence of the early and late Pancardtra Samhitds also refers to the incarnations of
Visnu. The Satvat Samhita, one of the earliest in the series enumerates as many as thirty-
nine incarnatory forms of Visnu. This list is copied verbatim in the Abhirbudhnya Samhita
which belongs to subsequent period.

(1) Padmandbha, (2) Dhruva, (3) Ananta, (4) Saktyatmana, (5) Madhusiidana, (6)
Kapila, (7) Vidyadhideva, (8)VisSvaripa, (9) Vihangama, (10) Krodatman, (11)
Badavavaktra, (12) Dharma, (13) Vagisvara, (14) Ekarnavasayin, (15) Kamathesvara, (16)
Variha, (17) Narasimha, (18) Piyisahatana, (19) Sripati, (20) Kantataman, (21) Rahujita,
(22) Kalanemighna, (23) Parijatahara,, (24) Lokanatha, (25) Santamna, (26) Dattatreya,
(27) Nyagrohasayin, (28) Ekasrngatanu, (29) Vamanadeha, (30) Trivikrama, (31), Nara,
| (32) Narayana, (33) Hari, (34) Krsna , (35) Parasurama, (36) Rama Dhanurudhara, (37)
Vedavida, (38) Kalki, (39) Patalasayana.

Matsyavatara destroyed by Siva

This form of the deity is not available in the texts, but in the Ekambaresvara temple at
Kanchi, Siva stands depicted as a mythological bird swallowing the Matsydavatara of four-
armed Visnu having the human bust with lower part of a fish. The bird has four arms, two
legs and a composite body, partly of a bird and partly human. The bust except the neck is
human with four arms. The right hand carries an avikusa and an indistinct object, while one
of the left hands holds an antelope and the other one projects varada-mudrd. The legs
resemble those of a bird. The neck and the head too are like those of a bird; in the beak the
Matsydavatara is held.

The Matsyavatara on the other hand wears a Kirifa-mukuta and holds a club in his right
hand. The fish part of the deity is slightly curved. A human devotee with hands folded
against the chest stands to the left.

poet UY

— ee

Oo nH On VY

=== PAGE 26 ===

XXViii

The Matsydvatdra has been found represented in composite as well as the fish form.
According to the Visnudharmottara, the image of the fish incarnation is to be made in the
form of a fish, with a horn. The Mahabharata also describes the same legend in which the
fish is described as ‘Srngi’, having a horn. Here he is considered to be more a form of
Prajapati rather them Visnu.

The fish incarnation found representation in the Indian art individually as well as in the
Dasavatéra panels. A stone pillar from Sarnath depicts the Fish-god with two tails. The
upper part of the figure is human, while the lower part is that of a fish. Another
representation of the similar type is engraved on the belt of a human figure from Mathura.
R.D. Banerjea has referred to an uncommon variety of the image of Matsya from
Bajrayogini in Bengal. In this case, the bust of four armed Visnu issues from the fish
enthroned on lotus. The god holds tn his four arms, the usual attributes viz., a mace, a
conch, a disc, while the mutilated lower nght hand could be holding a lotus. The main
figure is flanked by Laksmi and Sarasvati, each perched over small lotus springing from the
main lotus stalk; on the pedestal, there is a small figure of Garuda, and a devotee flanks the
main figure on either side. The representations of Matsyavatara of Visnu are found in the
Dasavatara panels, but no individual shrine exclusively dedicated to this form of Visnu has
come to light so far, indicating his subsidiary character. The specimens described above are
mostly from the outer walls of temples. The incarnation of Visnu in the form of Matsya in
the company of his consort Laksmi, is carved on a big boulder on a hillock at Kothagattu
lying south of Karimganj in Andhra Pradesh. The shrine on hillock 1s known as Matsyagiri
Svami temple. A big fish of 8 feet length in black granite is lying in the corridor of the
temple at KalesSvaram. (Ramaiah, J., Temple of South India, p.186).

A beautiful figure of Fish in stone comes from Kari Talai temple complex, dates back to
the eleventh century A.D. This sculpture is carved exceedingly well in a most naturalistic
manner. It is partly damaged but still the execution of the fish is commendable. Another |
image of Fish incarnation of Visnu, comes from Himachal Pradesh. Here the Fish is also
shown in quite a natural way surrounded by vartous deities.

A painted jewellery box from Kangra, displays the ten incarnations of Visnu in a most
lively manner. In these the Fish incarnation is also included. Four-armed Visnu here
emerges from the fish in the ocean and is attacking the demon Hayagriva. The ocean is
painted in silver grey colour. The demon is lying before him in the water and is holding
back shield and a sword, while Visnu holds his usual attributes of samkha, cakra, gada and
padma. Four devotees are shown against the yellow background paying tribute to the lord
with folded hands.

The story of Ekaérvava doctrine has been the subject matter of discussion not only in
India but also in the foreign lands. In India, it is connected with the fish incarnation of
Visnu.

=== PAGE 27 ===

XXxIX

The Description of each incarnation

Fish incarnation

The Matsya Purana describes the fish incarnation of Visnu in the first Chapter,
according to which, a certain king named Manu, leaving his kingdom went out to Malaya
country to perform penances and there obtained a boon from Brahma that he should be able
to protect all the creatures at the time of dissolution. The boon was granted and then the
king one day at the time of offering oblation to Pitrs noticed a small fish in the palm of his
hand. He put it in water pot which the fish fully occupied by waxing during the course of
the day. Then the king threw it into a jar and the same thing happened again. The fish was
then thrown into a well and then it could not be contained there and was thrown into a
pond, after which into a river and finally the fish was consigned into the ocean. When the
piscine form filled the whole ocean by its giant size, the king became perplexed and asked
the fish of its true identity, saying, “Are you the lord of asuras or god Narayana himself.
How can any one else behave like this? O, I have know the truth; you are certainly lord Vis
nu, the cosmic deity in the form of fish.” The Fish replied, “Verily, O king, you have
known the truth. Soon the earth will be submerged into the water. Look here at this boat
which all the hosts all the Devas have improvised for the protection of living beings; place
them on the ship and when the same is rocked by the furious winds of dissolution, then
fasten it to my horn or cranial protuberance. When the storm is over, you will have saved
the creatures and then the crowned as Prajapati of the universe.”

Manu further asked as to how such a state of things would take place and was told that
for hundreds of years there would be a severe famine and the solar disc also would emit
such intense heat as would reduce everything on earth to ashes. The sea would emit the fury
of its submarine fire and the nether world would throw up poisonous fumes from the
thousand mouths of the cosmic serpent so that the three worlds, the sky, the gods and the
stars would all the consumed. Then would appear the clouds which are produced at the end
to time. They are of seven kinds viz., Samvarta , Bhimanada, Drona, Canda, Baldahaka,
Vidvatapatakad and Sona. There would be condensation is all space and even the oceans
transcend their limits creating a condition of watery flood technically called Ekarnava:—

Wala we aheat WT TIT
(Matsya Purana 2.10)

The king was also told that the boat which would come to him was the ship of the Vedas
(Vedanavam), that he should stock there seeds of all living creatures (Sattva-bijani), that he
should pilot the boat by a rope to be supplied by the divine Fish and tie it to its horn to be
protected by the glory of the divine creature. Things happened as was predicated and all the
assurances given were fulfilled. The rope was the cosmic serpent and the Fish to whose
horn the boat was enchored in the midst of watery floods was the divine creator himself.

There are several symbolical terms which have been duly interpreted by V.S. Agrawala.
(Matsya Purdna- A Study, pp.4-5) The first question is about the real nature of Matsya or

=== PAGE 28 ===

XXX

the Fish. The fish is the symbol of Egg. The Cosmos is the Egg of Brahma (Brahmdnda).
Here Brahma himself is the fish, and therefore the Brahmanda is the same as Matsy4nda.
Somewhere in the golden egg produced by Brahma is a spec of life-principle which
recreates and perpetuates consciousness on life or vitality from one aeon to another and the
same process continues through successive ages of the universe during immeasurable units
of time.

The Vedic doctrine of Hiranyagarbha is here completely repeated in the story of Fish
incarnation or Matsyavatara. The Fish is an appropriate symbol of the principle of egg; it is
borne out of the scientific knowledge of the present day. The class is the largest of all the
vertebrate classes including some 20,000 species. Within it is found a great diversity of
structure than any other class of vertebrates. Fishes live under a great variety of conditions,
at the surface of sea, in mid water, at bottom or buried in sand or mud. Their greatest
quality is found in their capacity to produce eggs. Most of the important northern food-
fishes produce a great number of eggs that float'in the sea, and in some species a single fish
sheds millions of eggs annually (Encyclopaedia Britanica 14th edition, vol. IX, p.309).
Moreover there is a resemblance between developing child in the womb called the foetus
which is suspended by umbilical cord and floats freely in the amniotic fluid as the fish in
water. The embryo assumes at a certain stage a cylindrical form, one end of the hollow tube
thus formed is enlarged to form the head and neck; the other, the tail end, becomes curved
forward and tapers to a point. Not only the tai! but also the circulation from the heart and
blood vessels at first resembles that of a fish. It should not be presumed that the
microscopic details had been observed by ancient writers, but there is no doubt that within
their comprehension was rooted the belief that the fish was the most dominant symbol of an
oviparous (Andaja) vertebrate producing a life-germ. Although human beings have
developed to a placental stage (Jarayuja) still both belong to a common ancestory extending
over geological times.

The Fish incarnation of Visnu is directly connected with the deluge or the Flood waters.
These deluge stories are commonly found in several countries of the world. The old answer
about the flood myth was that such a catastrophs which overwhelmed the world actually
occurred and many legends of the great flood which are so widely scattered among the
mankind, embody more or less different versions of the same as would be evident from the
following tabulation:—

Motif Indian Sources Foreign and Other Parallels
(1) Hero surviving with a Greece, Iceland, Greenland, Anals of
woman. Assam, Lepchas of Sikkim, Entagno

Islanders or Indonesia, Bataks of
Sumatra, Benuajakam of Malaya

Peninisula.

=== PAGE 29 ===

(ii)

(iii)

(Iv)

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

(1x)

(x)

(x1)

Male or — Female
surviving alone,
counterpart appearing
later.

Incestuous Relations
for re-creation

Survival of a number
of persons 1n pairs

Survival of a Hero,
couple of a group with
several other things for
recreation, e.g., seeds
of every sort, various
animals, birds, etc. in
pairs.

Flood warming given
by animals or divine
being in the form of an
animal.

Flood warning viven
by Human hero

Flood warning given
by divine being

Escape through an Ark,
boat or Canoe

Mountain of
Deliverance
Sacrifice of Thanks

giving

S.B.

S.B.

Mahabharata and
Puranas

Mahabharata and
Puranas

S.B., Mahabharata
and Puranas

S.B., Mahabharata
and Puranas

S.B., Mahabharata
and Puranas

S.B., Mahabharata

and Puranas

Pelew Islanders of Micronesia, Engano
Islanders of Indonesia.

Bhils of central India; Amis of
Formosa and Chriguanos of Bolivia in
South America.

Babylonia, Egypt, Hebrew, Alfors of
Ceram Islands (between Celebese and
New Guinea); Tarahumares of Mexico,
Indians of Brazil.

Persia, Hebrew, Welsh, Bahnars of
Cochin, China, New Guinea,
Melanesians of New _ Hebrides,
Michoacans of Mexico.

Greece, Bhils of Central India,
Papagos, Pimas and Charokee Indians
of North America (Coyote, Eagle,
Dog).

Greece (father); Tinneh Indians of
North America.

Sumer, Babylonia, Hebrew, Persia,
Huichol Indians of Mexico,
Montagnais of Hudson Bay Territory.

Greece, Egypt, Babylonia, Hebrew,
Finnish, Welsch, Iceland, Singaphos of
Burma, Benua-Jakun of Malaya
Peninsula, Kanchadales in East Asta:
Borneo, Figi, Newzealand, Australia,
North and South American Indian
tribes.

Greece, Babylonia, Hebrew, Some
tribes of North and South America.

Greece, Babylonia, Hebrew.

=== PAGE 30 ===

XXXil

(xii) Sin and wickedness as Mahabharata Greece, Rome, Egypt, Jews, Babylonia,
the cause of flood (Kaliyuga ends Mexicans, North and South Indian

with Deluge) tribes.

(xiii) Excessive rain as S.B., Mahabharata Greece, Babylonia, Hebrew, Finnish,
source of water. and Puranas Singhphos of upper Burma, [bans of
Sarawak in Indonesia, Figi, Malaysia,

Tribes of North and South America.

(xiv) Rising sea as_ the Bahanirs of Cochin, China, Indonesian
source of flood Islands, aboriginals of Australia,

Eskimas in North America.

Besides the above, it will be of interest to note as to what the Muslim historians speak
about the incarnation of fish in the Hindu Pantheon. In this connection a passage from Aine-
Akabari compiled by Abul Fazal during the time of Akbar, in the sixteenth century A.D. 1s
reproduced here under:—

“The deity was herein manifested under the form of a fish. They say that in the Dravida
country at the extremity of the Dekhan in the city of Bhadravati, during the Satya Yuga, on
the eleventh lunar day of the month of Phalguna (Feb.-March), Raja Manu, having
withdrawn himself from all worldly concerns, and being then ten thousand years of age,
lived in the practice of great austerities. He was performing his oblation on the banks of the
river Krtamala, when a fish came into his hands and said— “Preserve me’, it remained in his
hands for a day and night and as it increased in size, he put it into a cup, and when it grew
larger, he placed it in pitcher. When the latter could not contain it, he put it into a well and
hence transferred it into a lake and afterwards to the Ganga. As the Ganga could not hold it,
he placed it in the ocean and when filled the ocean, the Raja recognised the origin of the
miracle and worshipped it and prayed for a revelation. He heard the following answer. “I
am the Supreme Being. I have assumed the form of this creature for the salvation and a few
of the elect. After seven days the world will be destroyed and flood shall cover the earth.
Get thou into an ark with a few of righteous together with the divine book, medicinal plants
and fasten the ark to this horn which cometh out of me.” The deluge continued for one
million, seven hundred and twenty eight thousand years after which it subsided. (This story
slighty differs from the one available in the Mahabharata, the Matsya and other Puranic
texts.)

The Matsya Purdna also mentions about the sun worship and the building of a sun
temple at Multan (Mulasthan) in Pakistan, with Iranian connection is widely known. In this
connection it may be stated that the Mathura Museum, exhibit No. 894, belonging to the Ist
century A.D. shows the Sun-god holding a dagger and wearing boots, long coat and
trousers. Such motifs persist upto Gupta period in Mathura region. An image of Siirya from
the same Museum, has a flaming halo, holds a staff and sword in its left head and a lotus
bud with stalk in the right. The much damaged torso and head of an image of probably the
Sun-god in the same Museum (No. D-1), has a remarkable circular halo. The face is

=== PAGE 31 ===

XXxiil

considerably injured. He wears a hamlet fastened under the chin by means of a strap. Long
curly locks falling down on both the shoulders. Wears thin moustaches (?) and is clad in
Cuirass over which there is a very elaborate necklace. A scarf thrown over both the
shoulders is fastened in a knot on the left breast. A double card girdle is tied round the loins
and fastened in front.

According to V.S. Agrawala, there is another example which reflects the intercourse
with Iranians, thus:

“Another example which reflects the intercourse with the Parsaika (Persians) is an
imprtant bust which wears fizzled bushy hair, a bearded chin, knotted scari and a cuirass.
The bearded head reminds us of the description of Persians given by Kalidasa in his
Raghuvamsa, where the bearded heads of Persians are compared to the bee-hives carved
with black laces:

Toomer fratia: payer
TRATT ALITTA: HAR Teeter: 1

“Another marked Sassanian feature on this image 1s the Sun and the moon symbol on
the Kulah cap.”

Now the question arises, as to why this intercourse with the solar sect of Iran took place.
Though India had normal trade and diplomatic relations with many countries of the world,
but the follower of the Sun-Culi in Iran seem to be men of great significance and
importance; and probably had some special features of their own. The Sun-worship was in
vogue in India, ever since the dawn of civilzation, but in Iran, the Maga Brahmanas had
developed some aspects of the cult practices which were possibly unknown to the
contemporary priest-hood in India. That is why it became necessary to import the trained
Maga priests from Iran to India, the evidence of which is provided by the Sdmba Purdna in
the context of the episode of Samba, the Son of Krsna from Jambavati, who was inflicted
with leprosy due to a curse. Though it has not been possible to categorically state that the
Iranian Sun-cult was more emphatic on the healing power of the Sun, (which aspect is also
brought out in the literary evidence) which necessitated the import of the qualified priests
from Iran to rid Samba of the heinous disease, and of which he was ultimately cured: these
imported priests were lodged in the Sun temple at Multan, as per the evidence of the
Matsya Purana-

Toa Tava Sea Tah
ware fraft raed wearer esi
Matsya Purana, 175.49

The glimpses of other prominent episodes relating to the different gods are presented
herunder quite briefly:—

(1) Brahma
(a) It has been stated in verse 7 of Chapter-167 Matsya Purdna that the Satvik

=== PAGE 32 ===

XXXIV

Brahmanas who perform and direct the performance of sacrifice were born of Visnu. He
created Brahma, Sdmagd, Hotd, and Adhvaryu.

(b) The Chapter-168 of Matsya Purdna, states that the lord, selects out of the Jivas on
the earth, a person for the position of Brahma for the creation of cosmos after the expiry of
one thousand Mahayugas, (Each Mahayuga comprises of four yugas). The one who is a
pure soul, endowed with the power of asceticism and the highest knowledge with the yogic
powers and equipped with all the excellences, who 1s established in his self and is purified
by many births is made a Brahma. In that great ocean, the great place of pilgrimage, the
infallible Hari, the creator of the worlds plays for some time and brings forth out of his
navel, a wonderful lotus of a thousand petals shining like the sun. The beautiful lotus
looking like the hair of the high soul was brilliant like fire and bright like the sun. Then Vis
nu out of the golden lotus begot Brahma, the creator of the universe. The lotus was many
yojanas wide endowed with the qualities of earth, full of gunas and all the lustre of the
golden colour.

(c) In earlier times Brahma had five heads. Siva cut off his fifth head with the nail of his
left toe. Then Brahma said— “You have cut off my head for no fault of mine therefore you
shall keep on wandering in the sacred places. Hearing the curse Siva went to Himalaya and
begged alms from Narayana, in the skull of Brahma which was stuck up with his arm. Lord
Narayana cut off his finger nail and blood rushed out of it, but the skull could not be filled.
Thereafter the stream of blood flowed for a thousand years. Then lord Visnu said to Siva—
“How was this skull brought into existence, you tell me?” Lord Siva replied— “In ancient
time Brahma was endowed with a divine form and after thousands of years, because of his
tapas, fifth head appeared on his body which was shining like the gold. I cut it off in anger
and now it follows like Brahmahatya.” Lord Narayana said— you go back and please
Brahma and the skull will be removed from your body.” On hearing this I went to all the
sacred places, but the skull did not depart. The moment he reached the AvnimuKta tirtha the
skull left him for good. This episode is described in various other Puranas differently,
where the skull is said to have disappeared at Kapalamocana-tirtha at Varanasi.

(1) Visnu

Lord Visnu is conceived in Matsya Purdna as the imperishable Brahma— Isvara.
Brahman in the neuter form is abstract supreme spirit and Isvara is the deity in his active
nature. He is the one who is able to do or leave undone, or do anything in any other manner
than in which it is done. He having three qualities is the cause of creation, preservation and
destruction; the parent intellect, nature and the other ingredients of the universe besides
being the source of the final emanciation. There is a school of thought that Visnu is partly
Aryan, a form of the sun god and partly atleast, the deity is of Dravidian affinity, as a sky
god whose colour was the blue sky and the middle Indo Aryan or Prakrt form of Visnu,

which was inhu or vehhu (Srinivas Iynger, P.T., Life in Ancient India is the Age of Mantras,
p. 125.)

=== PAGE 33 ===

XXXV

Indeed Visnu is a mild and benevolent deity who offers salvation through, personal
devotion rather than the practice of rituals. Though the deity has its origin in the Vedic
literature, still in the later vedic texts, his personality was deified into an entirely different
deity, adding two or more arms to the existing one, making him four armed, or eight armed
and ending in his having a thousand arms and heads. He indeed is the preserver of the
world. According to Hindu ideology, at the end of the Kalpa, the universe is destroyed.
Brahma is then reborn of Visnu and recreates the universe. In each one of these great
cycles, in which is has rescued the cosmos, Visnu appeared in a different form. Among the
popular subjects of Hindu art, are the representations of Visnu, in the form of Matsya—
when he rescued the seven sages and others; then the form of Kirma, when he as
instrumental in the churning of the ocean and without him the event could never take place.
In the form of Boar, however, he rescued the earth from the depths of the oceanic water.

Of several other subjects, Matsya Purdna also variously deals Visnu, occasionally
besides his incarnations, a bird eye view of which is given here under:—

(a) Matsya is the first of the ten incarnations of Visnu and the episode of his protecting
the seven Rsis as well as the king Manu has been detalied already.

(b) Karma

In the Matsya Purdna too like other texts Karma performed a privatol role in the
churning of the ocean and it was he who served as the base for the Mandaracala, which was
used as a churning rod by the gods and the demons. Because without the base for the
churning rod, there could be no churning of the ocean at all. Accordingly fourteen gems are
said to have emerged out of the churning of the oecan:—

TAT: BTS GUAT THe:
sy: aay: fas shay watsyd urge
Tart Uday Mates San Aer USAT

Thus these were the gems emerging from the ocean as a result of the churning of the
same. Thus as Karma, Visnu performed his job well.

(c) Mohini

In Chapter-251 of the Matsya Purdna, the incarnation of Visnu as Mohini is mentioned.
The fascinated demons placed the nectar pot over the hands of Visnu, who being deluded,
placed the nectar pot over the hands of Visnu, who being deluded, placed the pitcher of
nectar into the hands of the lord and then ran towards the gods to fight with them holding
various arms. In the meantime the lord, most ingeniously, brought the pot of the nectar
before the gods and the demons and the gods started drinking the same. The demon Rahu,
assumed the form of a god and seated himself along the gods and was about to drink the
nectar. The sun and the moon drew the attention of the gods for their own benefit. When the
nectar had gone into the neck of Rahu, Visnu severed his head with his Cakra. The severed

=== PAGE 34 ===

XXXVI

head of Rahu fell down on earth shaking it, but remained alive and became immortal. It was
known as Rahu. Thus he became the enemy of the sun and the moon and 1s said to torture
them both during the solar and lunar eclipses. —

(d) Vardha -

Varaha-— the third incarnation of Visnu has been popular in the Brahmanical panthern
from the remote past. It is not possible to give any specific date from which Varaha— the
boar became popular in ancient India and when he penetrated into the religious or sacred
annals. This would be evidenced from the fact that in the Reveda (1.6.1.7 and 8.77.10)
mention is made of a myth in which Visnu is said to have carried away a hundred buffalos
and cooked rice milk which were guarded by Emusa— the boar. This boar has been regarded
as a fugitive designation of vrtra. In the same text a casual reference to Rudra as the boar of
the sky (1.114.5) could leads one to believe that there existed an Indian counterpart of the
German wodan with the boar. Yet this animal in some way or the other, is also associated
with Brahmanaspati, Soma and other gods in the Rgveda (9.97.7 and 10.67.7). The
Mahdvardhacarita has been described in Chapter 247-248 of the Matsya Purdna.

According to V.S. Agrawala, the theme of Varaha is closely associated with the history
of the country more so during the Gutpa period. He feels that Candragupta Virkramaditya
was one of the great Gupta rulers, who annihilating the vestiges of foreign rule also
extended the limits of his empire up to the ocean on the east, the sea on the west by his
conquest of Vanga and Aparanta respectively. His gigantic programme of acquiring
territory includes direct conquest of north-west up to Balhika or Bactria on the Oxus. He
had a system of peaceful alliance with kings of south (referred to as by Kalidasa in
Raghuvarhsa,7) i.e. restoration of their autonomy or sovereignty, which had been disturbed
by Samadrugupta and by this his fame perfumed the waters of the south sea (Mehrauli
Pillar Inscription of Chanda).

Besides the symbolical and philosophical aspects, the Purdnas point to the sanctity of
the episode of the rescue of the earth by Varadha. They testify to the actual place on which
the Varaha emerged with earth. The Varha Purdna (Ch. 140.4) describes it to be a sacred
place just where Koka emerged. This seems to be the location of Kokamukhasvamin. Infact
the actual name of Kokamukha appears in the same Purdna. In Chapter 122, verses 19-22,
the Varaha form of Visnu testifies to the rescue of Prthvi from the deep ocean. As to the
place where the Varaha form of Visnu first appeared, it may be pointed out that the same
text (140.24) testifies Visnusaras as the place where Varaha pulled out the earth with the
stroke of the tusk. Cunningham believes Vardha-ksetra in basti district of Uttar Pradesh as
it is the place where Varaha appeared with the earth.

Varaha form of Visnu has also been known with the following epithets:—

(i) Ekasrnga (Mahabharata, 13.149.70). Since the Varaha had a single tusk, he was
called Ekasrnga.

=== PAGE 35 ===

XXXVii

(ii) Mahasrnga (Mahabharata, 3.142.45) The one having a huge tusk.

(iii) Nrvaraha:— The one who has the composite form of a man and a boar.

(iv) Adivaraha:— The one who appeared to rescue the Earth from primeval waters.
(v) Bhitvaraha:— The one who rescued the Earth from deep sea waters.

(vi) Yajnavaraha:— The real meaning of the Varaha conception as applied to Yajna is its
significance as a symbol of Vedic cosmogony.

(e) Vamana:—

The episode of the proceeding of lord Visnu in the form of Vamana has been contained
in Chapter 244-246 of the Matsva Purdna. As Vamana's treads the whole earth shakes and
Bali asks his preceptor Sukracdrya the cause of the shaking of the earth and why the fires
do not accept the offerings of the asuras. He replied smilingly— “In Kasyapa's house, Visnu
has taken birth. He will come to your sacrifice. The earth quakes at his strides, unable to
bear his great weight. On his approach, the fire, refuse your offerings.” At this Bali felt
delighted and asked his preceptor as to how the lord should be received and entertained.”
Sukracarya said— “The lord arrives in the sattva quality, to preserve creation and to crush
you. Beware of making any promises to him inspite of their being quite petty. Just say J am
unable to give you anything.” Bali replied— “How can I refuse the lord anything when he
directly makes a request. I shall not say no to him. Please do not stand in the way of my
charity. You know, I am his devotee and he will never kill me. Of course he come in the
form of a dwarf.” Bali was greatly delighted. On the arrival of Vamana, Bali picked the
argha and said to the lord, I shall give you anything you like.”

At this, the lord said— “O king give me three feet of earth for the worship of fire by me.”
Bali gives him three feet of land. As the consecrating water falls on the hand of Vamana, he
appears in his true form. Then assigning the three worlds to Indra and bestowing many
boons to Bali, established him on his throne.

(f) Narasimha

(Chapter 161-163, Matsya Purdna) The episode about the lord has been stated in this
Purana, according to which, once the gods under the leadership of Brahma approached lord
Visnu with a prayer to deliver thern from the atrocities of Hiranyakasipu. Visnu comforted
them, promising them to kill Hiranyakasipu. Then Visnu took to the form of a man-lion and
went to the kingdom of Hiranyakasipu, who enjoyed all the worldly pleasure. His son
Prahalada, who was against his father's way of life as a demon and was a great devotee of
lord Visnu, described to his father about Visnu as the lord of the universe. Hearing that, the
demon king commanded the Daityas to captive Narasirhha. All the demons therefore struck
the lion variously with several types of weapons. Then in a moment Narasimha frightened
al the demons. Still they made a fruitless effort of kill Narasirhha together with

=== PAGE 36 ===

XXXVill

Hiranyakasipu. Suddenly Narasirmnha captured Hiranyakasipu, placed him over his thighs
and tore him apart with his sharp nails. Then the man-lion was praised by Brahma and
others. Narasimha as described is the fourth incarnation of Visnu.

(iv) Siva:

Lord Siva has been factually conceived on the one hand as the loftiest and the most
transcendental of all the gods, dwelling in inaccessible heights of spiritual perfection and
on the other hand, as the most liberal and popular of all the gods, easily approachable by
men, women and children of all classes, castes, and races. He is called Asutosa or the one
who gets easily pleased. He is not inaccessible to any one, however low he may be. The
worship of Siva does not require any elaborate rituals or valuable articles for offerings. He
is above all desires, likes and dislikes, besides the senses of worldly values. He is prepared
to drink the poison produced by the vicious and indiscreet actions of people and to save
them from distress and death, whenever they take refuge in him. He is self-absorbed, as
well as an all-absorbing, all assimilating and all-unifying force. “He is spoken of as the one
dwelling in cremation ground (smasana-— the abode of the dead), the region where all
worldly differences vanish, where all diversities are reduced to unity, where all that in
impermanent disappears any only the eternal and permanent remains. It is a place where all
creatures ultimately must take refuge. Siva waits there to receive all into his loving arm and
to bestow on them immortality and bliss.” This is the Saivite concept of the Supreme Deity
and the Saivite ideal of spiritual life. According to this viewpoint, one who transcends all
worldly limitations and attains spiritual perfection, becomes one with all in love and
compassion and transcendental experience.

Saivism had certain ideals which were alien to the Vedic society. For example, the
Vedic ideology believed in the classification of the people into four-fold divisions (Varnas)
according to their distinctive characteristics and capabilities. Saivism on the other hand
disregarded all such barriers and treated ail as equals entitled to attain the highest spiritual
good. Saivism extended identical treatment to the Aryan and the non-Aryan alike, which
was not acceptable to the early Vedic society. Thus there was ample ground for Vedic
society to disdain the ideals of Siva cult. The early attempts of the seers of both the school-
Vedic and Saiva, at reconciliation between the two, could hardly produce any produce any
positive results. The later Vedic literature as well as the Pauranic tradition kept up the
memory of the early history and referred to many anecdotes connected therewith.

He is the lord who has been mentioned not only in almost all the prominent Sakta or
Saiva Puranas, but is also held in high esteem in the Vaisnava Puranas. In the Matsya
Purdna, however, the following events of his life have been eloquently discussed:—

(a) Destruction of Daksa's sacrifice (Chapter- 13)
(b) Kalling of Tripura (Chapter-129,140,183)

=== PAGE 37 ===

XXXiX

(c) Marriage of Siva and Parvati (Chapter-154)
(d) Birth of Karttikeya in the reed forest (Chapter- 146-158)
(e) Birth of Ganesa (Chapter-154)

(f) Quarrel between Siva and Parvati, who goes for performing tapas to become Gauri,
Mutual curse of Siva-Parvati, (Chapter-155)

(¢) Killing of Taraka by Karttikeya. (Chapter-160)
(h) Killing of Andhaka (Chapter-179)

Besides the gods, the important stories about rulers of the past have also been included
in this Purana:—

(1) Story of Kartvirya Arjuna. (Chapter-44)

(ii) Description of the Syamantaka gem and acceptance of Satyabhama as wife by Krs
na. (Chapter-47)

(iii) The story of Satyavan and Savitri (Chapter-209-214)
(iv) Story of Yayati, Devayani and Sarmistha (Chapter-3 1-37)
(v) Story of Kaca and Devayani.

In Chapters 25-30 of the Matsya Purdna, there is the well known story of Kaca, the son
of Brhaspati to receive the knowledge of elixir of life from Sukracarya, the priest of the
Daityas. Inspite of Kaca being the son of the priest of the gods, he was welcomed by
Sukracarya with open arms, and not only did he impart him the full Safijivini lore, he also
saved him from the wrath of the Daityas a number of times, and who did not look kindly to
Sukra's providing training to him out of the spite for Kaca, and in order to save themselves
the demons killed Kaca who has grazing the cows and threw his dead body to the wolves
and jackals to eat it up. At the instance of Devayani, Sukra brought him back to life. Kaca
told his preceptor that he was killed by the demons. He was killed the second time when he
was collecting flowers. This time the demons burnt him alive and the ashes of his body
were mixed with wine and they made Sukra to drink the same. This time Sukra finding him
in his own body imported knowledge of Safijivini to Kaca and asked him to bring him back
to life after emerging from his belly. Kaca did as desired by his preceptor. Devayani, the
daughter of Sukra when wanted to marry Kaca, ne refused to oblige her on the grounds that
he had been in the same belly in which she herself was lodged. Then she cursed him that
the knowledge he had gained from Sukracarya shall be of no consequence when used by
him. He accepted the curse saying, “Though I may not be able to make use of the said
knowledge, but the person to whom he will import the same shall make use of the same
successfully. Then Kaca and Devayani curse each other in which Devayani was told by
Kaca that she would never be married to a Brahmana. She was ultimately married to Yayat.
This story is contained in the Siva Purana as well.

=== PAGE 38 ===

xi

Besides these stories, Matsya Purana also contains a number of chapters on scholarly
issues. Chapters 252-270 are dedicated to divine Vastusdstra or Ancient Architectural
science including iconography and related subjects such as Pratimalaksana. These chapters
describes in relative detail about the temple architecture, house architecture, town planning,
various directions and various architectural norms. It also details some astronomical
subjects such as various planets including sun and the moon, their distances from the earth,
their relative sizes, etc.

This is one of the series of the work of English translation of the Puranas, which has
been undertaken by Parimal! Publications and I am sure, it will be of significant interest to
the readers.

Shanti La] Nagar

=== PAGE 39 ===

STATON TT A: 1
stragurayfamruntdt
Ace gO

_

~~

MATSYA-PURANAM

ao AMT Wad AACA

Salutation to Lord Vasudeva

CHAPTER 1

Saunaka and other sages, questioned Sita,
the cause of the lord Visnu, assuming the
form of fish and other related details.

Yausdsarey yaar aa fenrat:
Verg fasta AAC ATUMAST: II VI

Let lord Siva, with the force of whose
tandava dance, the elephants of the directions
are thrown away, let his lotus like feet remove
all the obstructions.

WATS AMARA ST Tea
ga TenTsavccairatfatercrrraTat A
FaMaA Hargis Sear
PATRAS APTI TAT SAT AT SAT 2
At the time of the incarnation of fish, while
jumping above from the Patalaloka,! the oceans
rise above with the strike of his tail after
pervading in the form of the particles of the

globe and fall on earth covering the whole of it.
Let the words of the Srutis* (Vedic passage)

|. The world of serpents or demons and thought to be
under the earth, sometimes used as a general name
for the lower regions or hells.

2. All the sacred writings of the Hindus are divided into
two classes namely Sruti (what is heard or revealed)
and Smrti (what is remembered). The Vedas
constitute the Sruti for they are regarded by them as
revealed and the sacred Laws etc. now pass under the
name of Smrti.

emerging from the mouth of the lord, remove all
your miseries.

ANAT Aa AL da AAT
cat areal da wat was Ta 3
Offering salutation to Narayana and Nara,
the best of the humans, besides Sarasvati, one

should recite the Mahabharata? (or the other
Puranas).

sista a: Farrar sft wr:
Fron freers Areal Taya 21

The one who is unborn, is eulogised as
Narayana because of his activities. He has
threefold form, 1.e. sattva, rajas and tamas.* He
has the form of the three Vedas viz. : Rk, Yajuh
and Sdma.> Salutation to the selfborn lord.

ava Afaarcoranheas: |

Aa Sta aarT Upc ASAT 2
Tey FUUity sary crferang a
SUT VATE HAT WEdE 3
BMA WON Aaa AAT
TTA HOU MATT TAK

Once at the conclusion of a long time yajna,

3. This 1s a benedictory verse which occurs at the
commencement of every Parvan of Mahabharata.

4. An ingredient of nature, chief quality of all existing
beings (viz. sattva, rajas, and tamas, i.e. goodness,
passion, and darkness, or virtue, foulness, and
ignorance).

5. The Vedas which ts held in equal reverence will
Brahman by the Hindus for its spiritual knowledge
consisting in words.

=== PAGE 40 ===

the dwellers of the Naimisaranya! including
Saunaka and other sages, felicitated Sita? again
and again who had been seated with a
concentrated mind and expressed the desire to
reveal the mysteries of the religious Puranas,
which happen to be quite beautiful and
rewarding. Saunaka said, “O Sita, you have
narrated to us several of the Puranas which are
like the abode of nectar. We have developed a
desire to listen to the same Puranas.

ae WAS MAMTA
HTT AT ACO RATATAT: 1 UN

O Sage, how did the excellent lord create the
mobile and immobile universe? How could lord
Visnu take to the form of Fish?

ard vaene Wate a a fe
HY Sat: HUNTS WITT THAT: 1 E

How could Siva, achieve the position of
Puraritva as well as the one of Bhairava? How
was the bull-bannered lord Siva, turned as a
Kapali.?

TaN ATT Ua fae: HATA
aeleagaaa 7 dette aad ott

O Sita, you kindly narrate the details of
each one of the events in a chronological order,
because we do not feel satisfied by listening to
the nectar like narrations from you.”

Ut sareI
qos uaarrgertert syort Fes:
TRS YUU SET MATA HS

1. One of the five principal places of pilgrimage (viz.
Visranti, Saukara, Naimisa, Prayaga, and Puskara). A
most sacred place where all the Puranas are narreted.

2. The word signifies the offspring of a Ksatriya by a
Brahmin woman. This mixed caste used to keep
horses and drive cars in the days of yore. A
particular family of this caste however became
famous for its knowledge of Puranas and other
sacred writings.

3. Bearing a skull in the hand.

Matsya Puradnam

Sita said— “O Brahmanas, lord Gadadhara,4
in earlier times, I had narrated the Matsya
Purana. You listen to the details about the same.
It is meritorious, pious and prolongs the life.

UT Tat AIA Aorathaget AT: |

TA Wea GANTT Aaa SA: I 8

ATA Y HAT AYOTT AT:

WAS: GUEl aN: WHAT TAI 20 I

In ancient times lord Vaivasvata Manu, the

son of the Sun, who was merciful, possessing
all the virtues, treated pleasure and the pain
similarly, and possessed enormous prowess. He
entrusted the kingdom of his son, went to the
Malayacala mountain to perform severe tapas

(penances). Performing tapas there, he achieved
the best of success in the yoga.>

aS ATEN THAT TA Aa
At FATT YA Wht: A HATA VAN

Then with the performing of the tapas by
him, crores of years passed, after which
Brahma, having the seat of lotus, getting
delighted appeared before him in order to
bestow a boon on him. He said to him, “Ask for
a boon.”

VaTRISTagRT VOT a Trae
Vara eae A ATTA TTI 22 It
TUM TA WAT AT ai
UST TATA We AAUP 23 |
When so inspired by Brahma, lord Manu,

offering his salutation to Brahma- the grand
sire, spoke, “O Lord, | would like to ask for a

4. Bearing a mace in the hand.

5. Yoga or union with the Supreme Being. The union
can be effected by two-fold means first by a true
knowledge of the nature and being of Brahma or
impersonal Self, which is called Jnana-Yoga and
Second by doing one's own duty and religious acts
without any selfish motive which is called Karma-
Yoga. This has been explained the Bhagavad-Gita in
detail.

=== PAGE 41 ===

Chapter-1

single boon from you, that at the time of every
deluge, I should be able to protect the entire
mobile and immobile creatures.”

Vanteata fare daar
TGS: Aad GTA TUTAT Ve

At this Brahma, the soul of the universe,
disappeared from the scene, saying, “Be it so.”
At the same time the gods showered enormous
rain of flowers.

aaaIAN TT Had: FagaTary
UOT WOT EUT PT ACTA AT 2h I
SBI Ta A SAMS ah: |
THOTT ela A Aaah 26 1

Once, while performing oblation for the
manes lord Manu, carried a small fish together
with the water in the hand cup. Finding the fish
there the king was filled with compassion.
Keeping the fish in his kamandalu,! he tried to
save it.

HEAT UA WeSygeHaeyA: |
ASM US Walt ATAU Vw

In a single day and night the fish was
enlarged to sixteen finger's breadth and started
crying for safety.

a Tes Ufa wieroweranor
AAT VHA FATA TSAI VC I
The king then placed the aquatic creature in

a pitcher filled with water; where it was
enlarged to the length of three hands.

WA: Wenaled Asa UTA
@ AA: Us Walla AMS SUT WaT Ve

Again the same fish spoke to the son of
Stirya in a pathetic voice, “O King, I take refuge
in you. You kindly protect me.”

aa: BU Tt Weer Wiener:
eal A Mea AAT BT UT: WAT Volt

1. A gourd made of wood or earth used for water by
ascetics.

faaisat vgaTarMaarr aera
MATES WAS: Wife The TARTAN 2 aN
aa: M UqaT feat wTaraerasal

Fel aat AS Tt wieroafetafa: eH

After this, the son of Sirya lodged the fish
in the well, but when the fish could not be
accommodated in the well, then it was lodged in
a tank, where it grew to the size of a yojana
(distance) and feeling miserable, it spoke, “O
Best of kings, you save me, save me.” Manu
then released the fish in the Gangd. When it
further grew to a gigantic size in the Ganga,
then the king released it in the ocean.

Fel UyGAhaet Saree ayaa:
TAT Wie Wait: ASH PagTAT 1 Bs t
IA ATYCARAT SGA AAT
AATF HAMA HA Tot TART VY

When the fish expanded its size to a gigantic
proportions, then Manu, feeling panicky asked
it, “Are you a demon king? Or, are you lord
Vasudeva? Otherwise how could anyone else be
like that? How could anyone else attain the
body of such an enormous proportions
extending to crores of yojanas?

Wied ARNO Ut eas Ayre
SHAM VATA VTS AAISET TU RGN

O Kesava, I have come to realise that you
are teasing me taking to the form of a fish. O
Hrsikesa, Lord of the universe, you are the
abode of the universe, salutation to you.

Wath: FTAA FATEA: |
AY Mat Mar WAP MAKATI 2 & It

At these word of Manu, lord Janadrdana in
the form of Matsya, said, “O Sinless one, you
are correct. You have well recognised me.

aifattta aret Afet fetta
Waa Het AAT AVCSAH ATH 29 th

=== PAGE 42 ===

O King, very shortly, the earth, together
with the mountains and the forests shall be
drowned in oceanic water.

ata adearmt fara fatten
TRA AHTeT TOT HATTA 2S
Because of this, O Lord of the earth, in order

to protect all the large creatures, the gods have
made this boat.

Wawessitaal I a J a sat WAT: |
Tea FANT VareAMAAAras Fat 281

All the creatures born of sweat, eggs, those
which grow on earth and those which are
covered by membrane, should all be lodged in
this boat like orphans, and have to be protected
by you.

Parieea er vats AT
Westar WA Wary Tet ParTApAN 3 0
O King, when the boat starts shaking
because of the winds of the time of dissolution,
at that point of time, you connect it with my
horn.

ad Hat AA WAT UTA TI
yaahaea swfaar aa: vista 3 a
Ud HATTA Baal Pray:
Terra saya wPaCTPA 3 VI

Thereafter, O Lord of earth, at the end of
dissolution, you will become Prajapati of all the
living beings. In this way, at the start of
Krtayuga in the form of a patient and
omniscient ruler, you shall be the lord of
Manvantara, and you would be adored by the
gods even at that point of time.

ofa stead Hergt snfeat wafrerdare
PARTS: 1 I

Matsya Puranam

CHAPTER 2
Conversation between Matsya and Manu
Wt sara
Wagrhl ATR WTS WYSE
TTA HA AM ATT ALATA: 11 21
Tea a et Ae ere HTS
MN WE WHAT: SA aT Aaa AA VM
Sita said, “O Sages, at these words of the
lord Matsya, Manu put a question to
Madhustidana. He said, “After how many years
the deluge will occur? How shall I be able to
save all the living beings? O Madhusidana,

when shall I have the chance of meeting you
again?”

Weel Sar
TIYAsefaeats Teta
TART AT Shera yP Ta STN 3
AaSTUATaTAST WHA: VA STaUT: |

BATA aA WAATRTTATOTA 1 Yt

Lord Matsya said, “O Great sage, for a
hundred years from today, there shall be a
rainfall on earth, as a result of which there
would be terrific draught and famine. Thereafter
at the time of the delusion at the end of the
yuga, the seven scorching rays of the sun shall
start destruction of the petty creatures.

atarrenstt fash afer are
famrente Waren Reo aA :
TANT Aenea A aaeT: | Ut

The submarine fire would also take to the
horrible form. The poisonous fire emerging out
of the mouth of Samkarsana and the fire
emerging out of the third eye of the lord Siva,
shall consume the three lokas raising high
flames.

famfaceant watt were

Ua SM Wal Gat Fat TATRSTAAMTI & It
STAT A MA TTT

Ad: UCAAAT WTA PATTI 9 tt

=== PAGE 43 ===

Chapter-2

O Great sage, when the entire earth 1s
reduced to ashes, and the sky will be filled with
heat then the entire universe with gods would be
destroyed.

Gant wires sowsUSl aes:
aqras: Vlog Bad MaaTAT- Nc
These are the terrific clouds of that time

known as Samvarta, Bhimanada, Drona, Canda,
Balahaka, Vidyutpataéka and Sona.

sierra watered Aiea:

AAT: ATA aHIT SrA TAT: 1 8

Weald wd afeata sa

Aearaaat Jal Brags WaT: 11 Qo lt

IU WAI Ae Tae

TAY Aa Teas ATTA TATA: 11 22

They would spring out from the vapours of

the heat and drop heavy rains when all the
oceans are united into a great mass. All the
seven oceans shall be turned into one vast
ocean. At that poimt of time, you owning the
boat in the form of the Vedas, and carrying all
the living beings in the same, tie the rope, then
provided by me, with my horn. By doing so, O
Great ascetic, all the gods shall be reduced to

ashes, but only you people shall be saved with
my influence.

Ua: Weare say TAT WATT
WATAAE Tel UTTAR AT: | LI
Tel a Act Yost wVSAT Tera: |

Val Aer: WOT fren: Waa gTAAN 23
ware Urge feat wrercaarcaere
VAM Tet ATTA HATA 2
daryanaenta cacantel wea
UATRAT A MA AAAT TTA! 84

During this horrible delusion, only moon,
the sun, myself, Brahma with the four lokas,
river Narmada- the Puranas possessing all the
lores and this boat together with you shall

5

remain safe. O Great sage, during the delusion
of Caksusa Manvantara, when the entire earth
shall be submerged in the flood water, and the
creation shall be started by you afresh. Then I
Shall propagate the Vedic knowledge.” Thus
speaking he vanished.

Taek apt araeayarewy

ITM AY TASS Tag PAT TI VEU

Manu on his part, remained there and by the
grace of lord Vasudeva, kept on practising till
the advent of the time of destruction.

caret ae ASA ATCT TATRA

TH VSAM ATS TATA | VOM
Gael WEST WAT: TTI
TATA AAT Tafa Fe 1
ASW AAT Ye TATA
STARA: WOT SATETA 89

Thereafter, when the time for delusion
arrived, as foretold by the lord, Janadrdana, he
appeared in the form of a fish with a single
horn. At that point of time a serpent also in the
form of a rope reached there floating over the
flood waters at the living being over the boat.
With the use of his yogic powers, the boat was
tied to the horn of the fish using the serpent as a
cord. Thereafter he himself also boarded the
boat offering his salutation to the lord
Janardana.

ayers aferadia arena

Qos WAT UR Yuet aeration

Teer VARA SURAT AAT: | 20M

aware: WU Ue: Ween faa:

aeaeaTaa AA: UTS AMAA 2 2

O Best of the sages, in this way, on the

occasion of the ancient dissolution, the sage,
who was well-versed in the yoga, at the instance
or Manu, the lord Matsya had narrated the
Matsya Purdna, and the same will the narrated
by me, before you. Therefore you listen to the

same quite carefully. O Brahmanas, you have
asked me about the creation of the universe and

=== PAGE 44 ===

44

MAE: WTAE ATTN ¥ 0 II

Wal afpaeertar yas sare

TRI AHA VAST STEEATRTI ¥ 2M

Both of them adored Aurava Agni for

begetting sons. Getting pleased with their
adoration, Aurava said to them, “Either one of
you two will get sixty thousand sons and the
other one will have a single son who will
expand the dynasty.” At this Prabha, accepted

sixty thousand sons, while Bhanumati begged
for a single son.

Ch MAHL YaTTSIA TATA
aa: afeaeeritr qed Aes WAT y VI

After sometime Bhanumati gave birth to
Asamafyasa while Prabha, the daughter of
Yadu's race gave birth to sixty thousand sons.

Gat: yfseat oer fart asyaarTn
TAUAAY TTA Ais MaTATS Fay: 3

When those sixty thousand sons of Sagara
were digging the earth, they were reduced to
ashes by lord Visnu in the form of Kapila. The
son of Asamafjasa came to be known by the
name of Ansuman.

Ter at facitred facitarg waiter:
OT ATTA AST TT: HeaTaeATATN ¥ vt

He had a son named Dilfpa and Bhagiratha
was born to Dilipa. It was Bhagiratha, who after
performing hard tapas brought Bhagirathi
Ganga from the heaven.

TT TAT ATT She Pee:
ATTA AAS HTT AIT RTS HATH BI

Nabhaga was known as the son of
Bhagiratha. Amabrisa was the son of Nabhaga
who produced Sindhudvipa as his son.

TAMA: Yas yequoberats sa
TA HEMAN TAHA Ad: BANE M
Ayutayu was the son of Sindhudvipa and
Rtuparna was born to Ayutayu. Rtuparna had a

son named Kalmasapada, to whom Sarvakarma
was born as a son.

Matsya Puranam

TAMU: YASUPTAATA FaAtsTad |
Peargt sraraataary Fat viet

His son was Anaranya, who had a son
named Nighna. Nighna has a son named
Anamitra and Raghu, who was the king.

staal aT Ra A Hd TT:
Tareectag Petraes UM 6

Out of them Anamitra retired to the forest,
who would be the king in Krtayuga. Dilipa was
born to Raghu, while Aja was born to Dilipa.

UAT ETAT FT: |
TATA AAA TAATTAAN ¥ 8
Dirghabahu was the son of Aja, Aja had the

son named Ajapala, while DaSaratha was born
to Ajapala. Dasaratha had four sons.

ARTA: Tal TRAITS TAA

TAU ATRRAETE APTASA: 14 0
All of them had been born of the amsa of
Narayana. Rama was the eldest of all, who had

been the destroyer of Ravana and expanded the
race of Raghu.

arene aftd aa were aTa:
TET Ua Hoa aR HTT Y Vit
Sifted SyNay FTE UTA:
TAY TATA ATA TTT &4 2 It

The Maharsi Valmiki of the race of Bhrgu,
had described the life story of Sri Rama,
exhaustively in the form of Ramayana. Sti
Rama had two sons named Lava and Kusa, who
expanded the race of Raghu. Atithi was the son
of Kusa and Atithi had a son named Nisacha.
Nala was the son of Nisadha. Nala's son was
named Nabha.

AWA: YOST ASAT AT: BT
TA VASMAR SAMA: VATA & 31
Pundarika was born as the son of Nabha.

Pundarika had a son named Ksemadhanva,
Devanika was the valorous son of

=== PAGE 45 ===

Chapter-13

Ksemadhanva.
WETTA Ya: ATATIETT: WTI
AAT STACRT ATU SEATS AAT 4 VI

Devanika's son was Ahinagu, who had a son
named Sahasrasva; who had a son named
Candravaloka. Tarapida was born as a son to
him.

TAAL TETAS TATA
TATAAT TANT A FUTAAT: 1G GU

From Tarapida was born Candragiri as his
son who had a son named Bhanucandra.
Bhanucandra's son was Srutdyu, who was killed
in the war of the Mahabharata.

Tet gaa feat fet Ava
SAAT ARTA ATT 1 GU

This dynasty which originated from the sage
Kasyapa, had two kings known by the names of
Nala. One of them was the son of Virasena and
the other was the son of the king Nisadha.

Ud darad IH Waa Leer:
SATHAMTTA: WAT Veal eter: 11 4 9
In this way, all the kings born in Iksvaku

race of Vaivasvata, were extremely charitable. I
have narrated their stories broadly.

Sia sea TTT Waa AA
BSI SEAT: 11 22M

ke *

CHAPTER 13

Description of Pitr-vamsa, and the hundred
and eight names of the Goddess, in relation
to the episode of Sati

Wears
TAA THT PATO TT TATT
Tay Magar arrest eT fared: 11 2
Manu asked, “Now I would like to listen to
the best of Pitr-vamsa. In that too I have the

special desire to know as to how the sun and the
moon became the Srdddha-devas?

44

Weel aS
et 8 aafaents faut agree
Fant Pago: Wet TARTS: 12 Ut
Ufaeratsa Wea: WAaTATAA TA:
STAT: FATTO ALTE WATT 113 0
Wart arearron aera ster fase: |
Fy Ua Bawer: We HARA
aaa J Wet Tea:
GMS at lt Yat AT ANETTA I
fag senha arr Gatrahagerary
ATTA CATT TAT HTSST STAT NG It

Lord Matsya replied, “O Royal sage, it is
quite blissful, that I am now going to narrate to
you the story of the Pitr-varhsa. You please
listen. There are the seven ganas of Pitrs in the
heaven. Out of them three are formless, and the
remaining four are with forms. All of them are
immensely glorious. The formless! Pitr-ganas
are the sons of Prajapati Vairaja. Therefore they
are known by the names of Vairaja. They are
adored by the gods. All of them after achieving
the Sanatanalokas, fall from the yogic path and
then at the end of the day of Brahma, are reborn

1. The Vayu, Matsya and Padma Puranas and Hani
Vamsa, profess to give an account of the original
Pitrs. The account is much the same and for the most
part in the same words, in all. They agree in
distinguishing the Pitrs into seven classes; three of
which are without form (#444:) or composed of

intellectual, not elementary substance and assuming
what forms they please; and four are corporal
(aqda:). According to a legend given by the Vayu

and the Hari Varnsa, the first Pitrs were the sons of
the gods. Matsysa has Fanny aaa fiat caqaa: | 'The

Pitrs are born in the Manvantaras as the sons of the
gods. The Hart Varhsa has the same statement, but
more precisely distinguishes the Vairajas as one class
only of the incorporeal Pitrs. The commentator states
the same, calling the three incorporeal Pitrs,
Vairaias, Agnisvattas and Varhisads; and the four
corporeal orders, Sukalas, Angirasas, Susvedhas and
Somapas. The Vairajas are described as the fathers of
Mena, the mother of Uma. Their abode is variously
termed the Santanika, Sandtana and Soma loka.

=== PAGE 46 ===

46

as Brahmavadins. Then they regaining the
memory of the past, taking refuge in the
excellent Sarmkhyayoga, achieve the siddhi
which relieves them from the cycle of rebirth.
Because of this, the donors should donate the
offerings of the Srdddha! to the yogis.

Uda Aa HA Ue feract wa
THA SATE: ASIANS Wa
RST: Vat AA Bal FarMsA: IV

Mena, the mind-born daughter of the Pitrs is
known to be the wife of Himavan. Mainaka
happens to be her son. Kraunca had been born
even earlier to him. On the basis of this same
Kraufica, an island has been named after it,
which is surrounded by the clarified butter
(ghrta).

Tal @ Wye fra: Ha aaa:
SHHTTSTUT A MaAIAATT: 11 Hk

Thereafter Mend gave birth to Ekaparna,
Aparna and Uma- the three girls. All of them
were engaged in yogic practices and performed
severe tapas. They were considered to be the
best of the female ascetics in the world.

teen fadeter Seieerer ATT
CCC GIR CMCC ORIN COMILE

Out of these daughters, Himavan, gave one
to Rudra, one to Siva, and the third to
Jaigisavya.

RAT Sd:
HATA Yel AaTSIS SCHAATCAAT |
feragetent AgrHs AAT WeleTetl go

Rsis asked, “O Sita, why did Sati, the
daughter of Daksa immolate her body? Then

1. Sraddha is commonly an obsequial or funeral
sacrifice, but it implies offerings to the progenitors
of an individual and of mankind and always forms
part of a religious ceremony on an occasion of
rejoicing or an accession of prosperity, this being
termed the Abhyudaya or Vrddhi Sraddha. As. Res.
VIL. 270.

Matsya Puranam

how could she reappear in the same form as
daughter of Himavan?

Tera fase Tat at Tea
BATT Seas Ga faereat ae eeH

At that point of time, what did Daksa, the
son of Brahma, speak to Sati, his own daughter,
as a result of which she immolated herself? You
kindly narrate the entire story exhaustively to

39

Qa sare
Cae Ua faad wytataterch
UMgay say wars frat BATU
ferret ata vat FY agisfararheratar:
SAT Slt ATE SA ART WTI 31
TIAA ATA STAT
FATT Tat Ss VAT AGHA VI

Sita said, “O Rsis, in earlier times, Daksa
organised a vast yajna, in which enormous
riches were given away in daksina. All the gods
had been invited to receive their shares of the
yajna. (But Siva, the lord of the gods, remained
uninvited. Sati finding the share of her husband
in the yajna absent) asked Daksa, her father, “O
Father, why has my husband not been invited in
the yajna.” At this Daksa replied to Sati, “O
Daughter, your husband carrying a trident,
destroys the world in the form of Rudra. As a
result of this he is considered to be inauspicious.
Therefore he is not fit enough to be invited in
the yajna.”

SIM a a faa aq AS:
eaaraS Aaa UT Gara ATSTAPAA Vk It

On hearing this, Sati felt enraged and in the
height of anger she uttered, “O Dear one, I shall
finish this body born out of your sinful body.
You will be the only son of the ten Pitrs and
after having been born in the Ksatriya family, at
the time of Asvamedha sacrifice, you will get
destroyed by Rudra.”

Sea ANTATTT Tace rea

=== PAGE 47 ===

Chapter-13

Fregait dara aeargrfenat: 1126 i

fen fentafefer sient weretrorrerdi

SUT: Woraceny ¢:Raa: 1 V9

Thus speaking Sati, burnt her body with the

yogic power emerging out of her own body. At
that point of time the gods, asuras, kinnaras and
the Gandharvas cried aloud, “Oh, what is all
this happening here? What is happening? They
sounded miserable as they cried.

aT WAY WaT TTRATASaAT
efeged rear eft WaTUEATeATAT 2 1
Observing all this Daksa went close to Sati
and offering his salutation to her spoke, “O
Goddess, you are the mother of the universe. Be
graceful on me. You had been born to me at my
request showering your grace on me. You are
the deity showering your fortunes on the people
of the world.
qt waa tad fafrerave aac
VAs He TN T Ai AHSAN eI
O Goddess well-versed in dharma, you
pervade in the entire mobile and immobile

things of the universe. Be graceful on me. You
should not desert me at the present moment.

we edt wenet ans HT UT

feRrrayes TAM Wel AAA BEM? ol

Ware Hragead qa: ari wana

waTafee AAT STATS AIS TLCTTI 2 2

At this prayer of Daksa, the goddess said,

“OQ Daksa, the task which has been started by
me would surely be completed by me. After the
destruction of the yajfa by the trident bearer
Siva, and with the desire to create the universe,
you should perform tapas for me. With the
influence of the same, you would become a

Prajapati named Pracetaé and become a son of
ten fathers.

Te Ufeifaeragaeta

47

Teal TT: HAMA ATTAIN 2M
At that point of time sixty girls would be
born to you out of my arsa. Because of you
performing tapas for me, you would achieve the
excellent position in yoga.”

Ways TaEN: HY HY ASA
aay eat SST Tale ST ATTA: 23

At these words of the goddess, Daksa said,
“Q Sinless goddess, for this purpose, which are
the sacred places to be visited by me, to have
the audience with you? Which are the names by
which, you should be eulogised by me?”

eeqarel
Aaa HAYA RLM Aaa ya
aaeteny ateateated 7 war ATU vit
Tasha Ay AT Tee Fare aTCT AT: |
Ben afeartat a seat ara G Hl

The goddess said, “Though I pervade in all
the living beings on earth, and you can visualise
me everywhere. Because whatever exists in the
universe is not separated from me. Or in other
words I pervade in all the mobile and immobile
beings, still a person desirous of success and
riches or fortunes, should have an audience with
me at the sacred places, the details of which are
being given by me.

anToreat fagrrenalt Afra fergenftoin
TANT etferaT Sat ATATAM TTATETN GU
WMa HII A fasHA TASTE
At Varanasi, I live as  Visalaksi,
Lingadharint in Naimisaranya, Lalitadevi in
Prayaga,! Kamaksi at | Gandhamadana

mountain, Kumuda at Manasarovara, Visvakaya
at Ambara.

TRS Wet ATT eet TATU
Telenel Ua Wat Veg 2

1. A sacred shrine of the Hindus the junction of the
rivers Ganga and Yamuna.

=== PAGE 48 ===

48

ar TAT AT TT eTTTS A
WaT aalarat fast Faget fag: ei

Gomati at Gomanta, Kamacarini at
Mandaracala, Madotkata at Caitraratha, Jayanti
at Hastinapura, Gauri at Kanyakubja, Rambha
at Malaya mountain, Kirtimati at Ekambhaka
(Bhubanesvara) and Visva at Visvesara.

Gent Tegaid aent arterertt

ver fenad: yes Maul agar; oll
Tra Tart 7 facaet facaatran
siretet Artal ATT AST ASAT TAT 2

Puruhtté at Puskara, Margadayini at the
Kedaratirtha, Nanda at the back of Himavat,
Bhadrakamika at Gckarna tirtha, Bhavani at

Sthanesvara, Bilvapatnké at  Bulvatirtha
Madhavi at Srisaila, Bhadra at Bhadresvara.
FAT ATE F HIST BUTT
SAHIA A VITO Aleit sAteroe FrT13 VM
Tettert J alten wate Ae
Merge wereal Forafert seria 3 3 1
Tragat Hart ¢ Part wfera sam

TATA ACA HIT WITT} VI

Jaya at Varaha mountain, Kamala at
Kamalalaya tirtha, Rudrani at Rudrakoti-tirtha,
Kali at Ka€lafijara mountain, Kapila at
Mahdlinga tirtha, Mukutesvari at Markota,
Mahadevi Salagramatirtha, Jalapriya at
Sivalinga, Kumari at Mayapuri (Rishikesh),
Lalita at Santanatirtha, Utpalaksi at Sahasraksa-
tirtha, Mahotpala at Kamalaksa-tirtha.

Tava Use ae fare Tear

faUTeTATAn Teen Wee WUSaAS 4 IN

anrauit Yuva J fame vaya

Farge Fagen Art HEAT HeTATETCTN; EI

aleat ated J PTI MId TA

Ter Fea J Asta cA 3 ON

Mangala at Ganga, Vimala at Purusotama-

tirtha (Jagannathpuri), Amoghaksi at Vipasi,

Matsya Puranam

Patala at Vikiita, Vipula at Vipula, Kalyani at
Malayacala, Kotavi! at Koti-tirtha, Sugandha at
Madhavavana, Trisandhya at
Ratipriya at Gangadvara.

forage fraser afeat eferenrae!
Sent Aa F VA FATT ANIC

Nandini over to Devika river in Punjab,
Rukmini in Dvarikaé and Radha in Vrndavana.

gael Hy | Weel WT

ferrepe cer tet fereer ferearrfereanFain3 8
TaTAKaT F Beas T alsa

THU Waa T AAA PNAATY 01

Godasrama,

I am Devaki in Mathura Puri, Paramesvari in
Patalad, Sita in Citrakuta, Vindhyavasini over the
Vindhya mountain, Ekavira at Sahyadn
mountain, Candriké at MHariscandra-tirtha,
Ramana at Rama tirtha, Mrg4vati in Yamuna.

wlan Veleedtear eat fear

SAT ASAT F UTA ASMA VU
AITOMAAT Uy reat

HUSA WSs AMT FaTaT TTVAT FU 2Mt

Mahdlaksmi at Karavira (Kolhapura),
Umadevi at Vinayaka-tirtha, Aroga at
Vaidyanatha, Mahesvari at Mahakala, Abhaya
at Usna-tirtha, Amrtaé in Vindhya_ caves,
Mandavi at Mandava-tirtha, Svaha at
Mahesvarapura.

DTANVS IVS F BUsaT TATA
SA TUT WAT YER TST Y 3
CaN AAA UNTaTAS Hea
Terra een waar faseATY v1
Pracanda at Chdagalanda, Candika at
Makaranda, Vararoha at Somesvara-tirtha,

|. Kotavi is said to be an eighth portion of Rudrani, and
the tutelary goddess of the Daityas The word in the
lexicons designates a naked woman, and 1s thence
appticable to Durga in some of her forms.

=== PAGE 49 ===

Chapter-13

Puskaravati at Prabhasa-tirtha,! Devamata at
Sarasvati, Mahabhaga at Mahdalaya-tirtha over
the seashore, Pingalesvari in Payosni.

Fafeear say g aarictchea werent
TUTA AAT FAT MOTTA SG

Treat fragt Beda TATA
sree fara are fenfeereTaertiiy & It

Simhika in the KrtaSaucatirtha, Yasaskari at
the Karttikeya-tirtha, Lola at Utapalavartaka,
Subhadra at the confluence of Sona, Laksmi at
Siddhapura, Angand in Bharatasrama,
Visvamukhi over the Jalandhara mountain, Tara
at Kiskindhapura.

Saale Yfteten aArgdAsel

vita cat feast 7 yfefaydat camivien
HUTA YfeKAAT TATA TT

Wigan ara aft: Musee WMI
alent 7 TTS Fyrerearheath
SONATA ATT ATTA TATU 8 I

Pusti at Daruvana, Medha in Kasmira
region, Bhimaddevi at Himagiri, Pusti at
Visvesvara, Suddhi at Kapalamocana, Mata at
Kayavarahana, Dhvani in Sarmkhadvara, Dhrtt
in the Pinddraka-ksetra, Kali at Candrabhaga,
Sivakarini at Acchoda, Amrta in Vena, Urvasi
at Badri-tirtha.

eat AH HMI Hyrean

WAM SHE T The ATAPI ol
aye seta g Pfrdsraorera

MAA Aaaed Vaal Forara Prati e
Cae TA TAY AAT
qelfarrs WT ATT ATO SeoTaT ATG 2A

|. Prabhasa is a place of pilgrimage in the west of
India, near the temple of Somanath, and town of
Pattan Somanath. It is also known by the name of
Soma-tirtha; Soma, or the moon, having been here
cured of the consumption brought upon him by the
imprecation of Daksa, his father-in-law,
Mahabharata, Salya Parva.

49

Ausadhi in Uttarakuru, Kusodaka in
Kusadvipa, Manmatha at Hemakita mountain,
Satyavadini at Mukuta, Vandaniya in
Asvatirtha, Nidhi? in Vaigravanalaya, Gayatri in
Vedavadana, Parvati with Siva, Indrani in
Devaloka, Sarasvati in the mouth of Brahma,
Prabha in the solar disk, Vaisnavi among the
mothers.

eM Vat F Ware a fereeran
Fart Ta ATT Vile: MACAO 31
Arundhati among the chaste women,

Tilottama among the beautiful women,
Brahmakala in the mind and Sakti in the people
of the universe.

Wegeyr: Wa ATMS MTT TAT

TSA MAA MATAAS ATTY BI

a; WapUaTgIShe add: wyea

Wy TAY A: Hea SA UPA AT ATU
aauafarrieh: aed fragt qa

Te AT Get HUAAT AAT NG G1

a frat geet Veit MSTA

AAS Ae Aaa aay 9 1

In this way, I have spelt out a hundred and

eight names of mine, together with an equal
number of the holy places. Whosoever will
recite my hundred and eight names or shall
listen to them from the mouths of others, he
shall be freed from all his sins. A person who
having a bath at the above holy places shall
have an audience with me, he, getting relieved
of all the sins, shall reside in the Sivaloka for
the duration of a kalpa. Besides a person who
would remember these holy place at the end of
his life, he piercing through the globe shall
reach the place of Siva.

TATA ARYA TAT: |
TEM MSM A ACA A FTG CI

2. Nidhi is a treasure, of which there are several
belonging to Kubera; each has its guardian spirit or
is personified. |

=== PAGE 50 ===

30

taredafadt fagrra-renterrasta

Ud aaah A Ta SAIS SHAAN 8 1
A person who on the third or the eighth day

of the moon, shall recite my hundred and eight
names, he shall achieve a number of sons. A
person who would recite these names at the
time of donation of cow, Srdddha or daily at the
time of adoration, he would achieve the position
of the supreme Brahman.” Sati thus speaking,
reduced herself to ashes in yajna-mandapa of
Daksa.

TATRA Srert aI: MTerTaIS AAT

Wadd Uisuaeat frareerlanfaTtg o 1)

TAMA ying hance
AST AKAAAT ATTA TANG VU

Then at the appropriate time, Brahma's son
Daksa appeared as the son of Pracetds while the
goddess Sati was reborn as Parvati to become
the spouse of Siva. She was bom from the
womb of Mena, who bestows pleasures as well
as the salvation. By recitation the aforesaid
hundred and eight names, Arundhati achieved
the best of the yogasiddhi.

TRA Taisete STAAL
BM: FAT A MAEM DT APTA 1g VU
The Royal sage became invincible in the

world. Yayati achieved a son, while the son of
Bhrgu achieved enormous riches.

AMIS SAC GAIT: ef
aval; Wee sea: fatguradaferarqug 311

Thus several of the gods, Daityas,
Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and the Stidras,
achieved success in various ways, in their
desired wishes.

aAdiectftad fasesat sadtreh
Toa Wal etiet melfaete wraag XII

Wherever the list of these names is kept or is
adored keeping it near a god, the misfortunes or
grief can never reach that place.

sft sired vargur fagayraa
TATE AT AHA ATT ASST SEAT 1123

Matsya Puranam

CHAPTER 14

Fall of Acchoda from the heaven and her
redemption at her prayer to the manes

Ut sara
cite: STAG ATA Ga ANAT:
Seed Ca FU SAT APATITE 2

Sita said, “O Rsis, the place where the
manes of the gods of the descendants of Marica
are lodged is known as Somapatha. The gods
adore the manes.

SSA Sit Gaal Baral aa Arar: |
SBT AT VT | APTA Bley ASU!
sree AG a at: ugha GT
SHAT T AeA feet UAT TTT |
BAT: TAT eT: feet a A at acy
FERTRUET: We PEATATEA CTIA: 11

The manes who are devoted to the yajnas
are known by the name of Agnisvatta.! At their
dwelling place, a river named Acchoda flows
who happens to be the mind-born daughter of
the manes. The manes had in the earlier times
built a lake named Acchoda. In earlier times
Acchoda performed severe tapas for a thousand
years. The manes getting pleased with the tapas
reached there, getting pleased in order to grant
her the boon. All the manes were clad in divine
costumes wearing the garland of divine flowers
and their bodies were plastered with the divine
paste.

Ud Fal Gert: HEAT: |
aareSTTaR ATT ATAt Tet ISSA Ut
ad aust we agaredifeani
ATES FAT AT Saferarcoy ATTN 1

1. Agnisvattas—sons of Marici and Pitrs of the gods
(Manu-Matsya, Padma) : living in Soma-loka and
parents of Achchoda (Matsya, Padma, Hari Vamsa).
The commentator on the Hari Vamsa derives the
name from Agnisu (a9), 'in or by oblations to fire.’

and Atta (arm:), ‘obtained,’ 'invoked.'

=== PAGE 51 ===

Chapter-14

att q Ae WoT aren

frmreamraqeentiast Ua A at wit
aut TAT A Hreatarareta fase

PAU ACTA THAT ATHRT TATA C UI

All of them were quite young, valorous,
besides being beautiful like Kamadeva. Among
them there was a mane named Ama§vasu, the
beautiful Acchoda, desirous of a mate, became
excited and expressed her desire to live with
him. Because of this mental folly the beautiful
Acchoda, was deprived from yoga and fell on
earth. She had never touched the earth earlier.
The date on which she expressed such a desire
and Amdavasu, the mane, did not yield to the
passion, was subsequently known as Amavasya
tithi. Amavasya is therefore quite liked by the
manes and the offerings made to them on that
particular day are heartily accepted by them.

SBA TS GAT Mista ATA: aA
OT faqaretararea ot MISSA EA It

Acchoda after losing her powers acquired by
hard tapas felt ashamed and crest fallen. She
lowered down her head in shame and prayed to
the manes for her salvation.

facarart faghieqrar qateat
afaerarciad cada a a Wall gol

SoM: Waray FT
fafa feeamriitur afeafatenad gat: 11221!
ae THe FRI Aare
Ga: Heth Halo Saead WT AMI

Then the manes reassured the female ascetic,
who had been crying in the lonely forest. The
great manes, taking into account the future task
of the gods with the speech filled with delight
and welfare spoke to her, “O Auspicious one,
whatever auspicious deeds are performed by the
people with wisdom in the heaven, they enjoy
the reward of the same with the same body,
because the deeds performed in the devayoni,

51

yield the reward atonce. To the contrary, the
deeds in the human life yield the reward after
death.

Ae Ys ATA: WT Wer ARTA

area wife wa BITTEN PASAT 23 1

SAHA ION wa He HeTraeay a

TANT AR: HIT aS ASA ex II

Therefore, O Daughter, you will reap the

reward of your tapas in the next birth, after your
death. In the twenty eight Dvdpara, you would
be born as the fish. Because of your violating
the norms of the Pitr-race, you will achieve that
painful yoni. Then getting relieved of that yoni,

you would be born as a daughter to the king
Vasu.

HAM YN A AAAI SAT
UMS AAO YA AATCCTT 84 I

ae 7 seta Te
Baan ager faviseatt F Gage 1
Inspite of your being a girl, you shall surely
achieve to inaccessible lokas. When still a girl,
you shall conceive a son in the island of Badari
forest, who would be known by the name of
Badarayana, besides being the incarnation of
Narayana, who shall never fail in his duties.

Your only son would divide the provisions of
the Vedas.

UCaRAISSeH Bt T MARTA VAT:
fafaacteerrreim ferareet FTN Voll

Thereafter, you will give birth to two more
sons from the king Santanu of the race of Puru,
born out of the amsa of the ocean. The names of
the two sons would be Citrangada and
Vicitravirya.

SUTRA SMTA TAT:
Weave fgets wfararan ei

The intelligent Vicitravirya shall have two
sons named Dhrtarastra and Pandu. Then on the
full moon day of Bhadrapada, you shall be
reborn in Pitr-loka.

he
er

he
ur
ld
Oe
lat
‘AL,
Ns

ly
irl,
art

ru,
of
nd

wo
the
be

=== PAGE 52 ===

knox
ausy

hts

disa
enjo
beer

52

TT Uetadt ote fgets aatswa
AAMT FT AATAHCTTAT 28

Thus you will be known as Satyavati on
earth, while in the Pitr-loka you shall be known
as the goddess Astaka and you will bestow the
desired wishes to the people.

ufacata Ut are Acted | Taha
Qua ATES Cte ESTSATAAANI ol

In due course of time, you on earth would be
known as Acchoda, the best of the rivers with
auspicious water.”

SOT WTO Ta
ASHAMG U Aa thet Fated TT

Thus speaking the group of manes,
disappeared from that place, while Acchoda

enjoyed the reward of all her deeds, which have
been stated earlier.

of sie wergeit Fogg rm
ATA MNSEART: 1 2X UI

***

CHAPTER 15

Description of Pitr-vamsa and the method of
performing Srdddha

aa sara
faut ara art g fefa aha gaua:
ciel afenet aa frat: art Waar: Ne

Stita said, “O Sages, there is a loka in the
heaven, which is well known as Vibhraja, being
quite illustrious. The best of manes known by
the name of Barhis! live there. Thousands of
planes with Peacocks remain ready there.

aa ateoyeAltr fara AeA: |

1. Barhisads—sons of Atri and Pitrs of the demons
(Manu) : sons of Pulastya. Pitrs of the demons,
residents in Vaibhraja, fathers of Pivarl (Matsya,
Padma and Hari Vamsa).

Matsya Puranam

daca afeat aa fasta meter: 120
PACAMATY Wet HATA: |

Ava SATION TATA TOT: 113 11
qaramongda sated fafa cat:
FARA: MARAT TAT: 8

It is the place where barhi (kusa grass)
remaining present there and are anxious to
bestow the reward to the people, making
offering to the manes of their ancestors, finding
happiness there. These Pitrs are venerated by
the gods, Asuras, Apsaras, Gandharvas, Yaksas
and Raksasas. These Barhisadas  Pitrs,
possessing the great power by Yoga, are the
sons of the sage Pulastya.

USI AAMT SATA AIT: I
Waar Matt sea oat fafa fasraTiy i

They bestow safety and freedom from fear
to their devotees. They live there. These Pitris
had a mind-born daughter, known by the name
of Pivari.

AAT area a TIPE TereUTy
WHA WIAA AL TS | AT SN

The said Yogini as well as Yogamata known
as Pivari, performed hard tapas by which lord
Visnu was pleased. He appeared before her and
Pivari then begged for a boon from Sri Hari.

aa Tad a art fatter
tfe ta waaed Ut H aadt ATION
She said, “O Lord, in case you are pleased
with me, then you bestow a husband to me, who
should be well-versed in the yogic practice,
extremely beautiful, having control of his sense

organs, best of the orators besides the one who
should well look after me.”

Jara Sat aaa STATA AaT Ya:
Wad TA Wat wa AMI Yaa ct
Wace Ua HM Seat AM a APTA
Taga ATT AA TST I
Wt Tec aa a at: BAM

=== PAGE 53 ===

Chapter-15

POT MT: WY: MMe A YATUol

Hearing this, lord Visnu said, “O Excellent
one, when Suka will be born as son of the sage
Vyasa, then you shall be the wife of the same
yogacarya. By union with him, you shall have a
girl born to you who shall be well versed in
yogic practices. Then you should give away that
girl to the king of Paficala of the human race.
Your daughter being well-versed in yoga, shall
be the mother of Brahmadatta. She wu be
known by the name of Gau. Thereafter you
shall have four sons known by the names of
Krsna, Gaura, Prabhu and Sambhu.

Teal Hern ater Ut Te
MARTE TATA TATA 8 I

They shall have enormous self confidence,
possess enormous fortunes, and shall ultimately
achieve the supreme position (salvation).

aaftrd: frat ahaa Yat: yar:
AAT FAA: Wel Hel F TATA
waifanifag cag a cara fea: wey
faURTAT: HlSha BaF srRaTAA 3M

The manes who are the sons of the sage
Vasistha are known as the beautiful form of
dharma. All of them dwell beyond the heaven
in the Jyotirbhasi lokas. This is the place
wherein even the Siidras who perform Sraddhas
mounted over the wish-fulfilling planes enjoy
all the sports.

Taarayag faareate west:

fe UA: aTger fan aid: Feathaat: 1g

Wala Gat Aa FT ara fefa wed

Wes afaat vei Meat alta gu

What to speak of the active and devoted

people engaged in the performing of the
Srdddhas? These Pitrs were born out of Gau,
the mind-born daughter of the Pitrs who resides

in the heaven; and happens to be the loving wife
of Sukra and expands the glory of the Sadhyas.

53

acferrat Area I erat ATUSAUSeT
faatt aa farsa efreratishet: Bars 2a 1
Thus in the solar region, there are several

other lokas known as Maricigarbha, where
Havisman, the son of Angira,! live as the mane.

aswel ad Ya area: |
Tai F frared SF ar aAHE MAT: 11 V9

They happen to be the manes of the Ksatriya
kings. They bestow the heaven as well as moksa
provider.

Udat Ma HIT Agar AreaagzA
Wet GMAa: Meat KT VST ANSI

werag feces soirafoaret

Clea: AUST ATT HTTATT CAAT: 1128

_ Such of the Ksatriyas
Sraddhas in the holy places, they achieve these
lokas. These Pitrs have a well known mind-born

daughter named Yasoda. She was the daughter- .

in-law of Paficajana. She was the wife of
Amsuman and mother of the king Dilipa,
besides being the grand mother of Bhagiratha.
There is another Pitrloka called Kamadugha.

Gear ary fret aa fasta Gara:
SITT AT AAT HEMT WATTS 2 oI

who perform ,

Te
C.

—

N° =

Va

pa,
ha.

Where the Pitrs performers of the best of of

vratas known by the names of Susvadha are
dwelling. These Pitrs are known as Ajayapdas in
the lokas of Prajapati Kardama.

Tee gueael avareraaat

TA Mgt: Wa Tahar PITTA: 12 VW
Wguigugragahadarararsra4nrt|

AAT TANS A TH? VU

O Great sage, that Vaisyas, who had been
born from the body of Pulaha, adore them. All
the Vaisyas who are performers of the
Sraddhas, reaching in these lokas, meet
thousands of their relatives like the mothers,

1. Havismantas—in the solar sphere, sons of Angiras
and Pitrs of the Ksatriyas (Manu, Vayu. Matsya,
Padma, Hari Varnsa).

are
> in

‘iras
sya,

=== PAGE 54 ===

bro
rela
sari

Pitr
and

dev
Bra
Eke
thre
deti

tt

S]

3}
fA

glo
the
oft
the
the
Bré
We.
Bré
res
dw

the
flo:
livi

54

brothers, fathers, sisters, friends, kins and
relatives of thousands of births, at one and the
same place.

Wat AAA sea fare ara fag
OT Ustt AGTAS SMASH TATU 3M

Virajé is the mind-born daughter of these
Pitrs, who happened to be the wife of Nahusa
and mother of Yayaiti.

Uaeasrapagreletics TAT at
TT UA TUT: MPA F TAMIA UI

Subsequently Virajé, who was immensely
devoted to her husband, proceeded to
Brahmaloka, where she was known as
Ekastaka. Thus far I have discussed about the
three pitr-ganas and now I am spelling out the
details about the fourth one.

CARY AAA A TaUSrare Aiea:

Qa T AMA HAM AAT ATA FAT 4 I
array arr fara aa ferear yrgaat: |
qua: We UAT TAT: TATE
SUA: TIT FT Teles WT AAT:
Heal PEMieh Ad AAA Aid Faas Nl

There is a Manasa-loka lodged over the
globe, where the indestructible manes known by
the name of Somapa, live. They are the manes
of the Brahmans, while Narmada is the name of
their mind-born daughter. All the manes have
the form of dharma and are even beyond
Brahma. They were born of Svadha and were
well-versed in the yoga. All of them achieving
Brahman, getting relieved of all the
responsibilities of the universe, are presently
dwelling in the Manasaloka.

Tet aa Ast | HAM Aaaer Alea
TA A UTA STOTT 2 oH

Their daughters named Narmada, reaching
the Daksinapatha became a river with water
flowing in the same; which purifies all the
living beings.

Wa: Wa T Waa: WaT: TG Fa:
Went asia Haha aatrasha waeniee

Matsya Purinam

With the tradition of these Pitrs, the Manus
engage themselves in creation in_ their
respective times. Knowing about this secret, the
people at the time of the decline of dharma
always perform the Sraddhas.

Wey Wa YA: We Wareraraafery
faqurenfeat gy sragva aay ot
By the grace of these Pitrs, in order to again
revive the yogic traditions, at the start of the
creation, the performing of the Srdddha was
brought in vogue.
aaa Tard WTATaT Trea
ad tae Ware fasion Waar vit
For the sake of these Pitrs, in case a vase of
silver or silver mixed with other metals, is given

away in charity, reciting svadha, delights the
Pitrs always.

ATTA FT HATTA TT:
arenas fared woTaty AersmATI; 2H
AAHUS LAU AT MES AT Meteo
Papo wars fe Fea OTEATS B11

The intelligent performer of the Sraddha
during the time of the performing of the
Sraddha, the Pitrs should be pleased with the
oblation of Agni, Soma and Yama. In other
words, the food meant for the Pitrs should be
dropped into the fire or in the absence of fire,
the same should be placed over the hand of 4
Brahmana, water over the ear of a goat, or a
horse, in cow-shed or close to the river water.
Sky has been prescribed to be the place of the
Pitrs. The southern direction has been stated to
be more auspicious for them.

mrarayad fret: eae Tg a
SU Aa A US Met HITT TAT N3 I
CCUCIMIEE ECE NEIL CM IGG Ht

q q T34I
See Wee fagonirs Maat
Placing the yajfopaviita in apasavya

position, the offerings of water, sesame seeds,

=== PAGE 55 ===

Chapter-16

Savyanga, green coconut, fruit pulp, cow's milk,
sweet juice, iron, honey, kusa, Pathina, the flesh
of rhinoceros, syamaka rice, barley, wild rice,
kidney beans, sugarcane, white flowers,
clarified butter etc. are liked by the Pitrs the
most and should be offered to them. These are
liked by them always.

PEnfor Unaeait ares ATA AT TEM
TACOMA TATA CTSA: |

TefaeaAT HATTA AGI SSTAHT: 113 9 UI

4 ta: fagardy wavannfad aa
ATTA: Safe HATTA cI

Now I am narrating the things which are not
liked by the manes and should not be offered to
them in the performing of the Srdddha. These
include Mastra (lentil), hemp, ripe black
musturd, black-gram, safflower, lotus, wood-
apple, sun flower, white thorn-apple, fruit of
neema tree, Vasa,' milk of she goat, split-
chickpea, linseed and liquorice should never be
offered to the Pics by one who is desirous of
winning their favour. A person who pleases the
Pitrs by devotion, they shower their blessing on
him

waraty 4 eats fags: frac
FoearroTfet At aA A TA: MOTs ANE
eater frat: Of TAM MATACTA!
eacnratate wr: Fagard fafgrentiso i
Saat Ut frat: Yaa BAA
vihawarercacner fi: great: Fercateer: ts git
VAM: Vira: Bad fraanfer: |
TATA: YURI: AAT: YASAAT YI
Casramafeaed srgea: Tal ta:
Ua: Barret Faget Ty
Yue Uae carat Wey TAT 1s Bt
When the Pitrs are pleased, they bestow,

good health, heaven and children to their
devotees. The adoration of the Pitrs is more

1. Adhatoda-vasica

55

important them that of the gods.* Therefore the
Pitrs should be pleased first of all. They get
pleased rapidly and preserve no anger. They
cause no harm besides being affectionate. They
possess the spotless and noble soul, they like
purity in every respect. They are soft spoken
and bestow happiness, prosperity to their
devotees. The sun happens to be their lord.
Thus I have narrated to you the family of the
Pitrs and by listening to the same, one achieves
happiness in life besides all the virtues.
Therefore everyone should read and listen to the
same.

sta sitet Herget fagetenqatat ara
TSSVISEAT AT: 12h I

KKK

CHAPTER 16

Different kinds of Sraddhas, the time of
performing them, and the qualities of the
Brahmanas to be invited in the Sraddhas

aa Sart
gearranfact Wy: Wes cage
sgearet  fafaet srgve wa agi
say Marta FF a avat fT:

aferareent aT faye: STEATATTN
Hered KE Mad Mes T ATTA
fate cot aad Geet Moret afer

Stita said, “O Rsis, listening to the entire
narration, Manu asked lord Matsya, O
Madhusiidana, what are the best times for the

2. They are said indeed by Manu (III. 203), in words
repeated in the Vayu and Matsya and Hari Varna, to
be of more moment than the worship of the gods :

aa) Pagar fafseqd! These ceremonies
are not to be regarded as merely obsequial; for
independently of the rites addressed to a recently
deceased relative and in connection with him to
remote ancestors and to the progenitors of all beings,
which are of a strictly obsequial or funereal
description, offerings to deceased ancestors and the
Pitrs in general, form an essential ceremony on a
great variety of festive and domestic occasions.

=== PAGE 56 ===

56

performing of the Srdddhas? What are the
different types of Sraddhas? What types of
Brahmanas should be invited in the Sraddhas?
Which types of Brahmanas are forbidden for the
purpose? During which time of the day,
Sraddha should be performed for the Pitrs?
What type of the suitability of a person should
be there to be given the offerings of Sraddha?
How does one get the reward for the same?
What is the method of performing the Sraddha?
How does the Srdddha please the Pitrs. All
these details may kindly be explained to me.

WRT TATA
HACE: Agra? aT
walgeractalste fag: wifes
fret Afafaes areal fated orgy
fret aacraaaht sreatareratstay 1

Lord Matsya said, “O Royal ascetic, having
faith in the Pitrs-srdddha which should be
performed offering the water or the food items,
the milk or the fruits. Srdddha has been
described to be of three types viz : nitya (daily),
naimittika (occasional) or kKdmya (optional). Of
these the first one 1.e. nitya is being described
by me. It is devoid of arghya or invocation.

aed afgartrararet way BAT

Traut fafa wry Woy araaretatg
Traut & Freaker aeguper Thera
usta: citasia frguut: wsafaqiin
sifra: arargar fafrarrafagnee: |
Waal Acasa aera: Hera NSU
TTOTAAT TAT: TACT
foranmn: agar: qaeratsa Sora: 118 1

The Sraddha which is performed at the time
of festivities is called Parvana. O Lord of the
earth, the Parvana-Sraddha is known to be of
three types. You please listen about the same. O
Naresvara, I am going to spell out the person
who should be deputed for the Pdrvana-

Matsya Pura4nam

Sraddha. You please listen. The person who is
well known in the Pancagni lore, or adores the
five fires! like Garhapatya, is a researcher, or a
student of the Vedic lore, or is well-versed in
the six angas of the Vedas, is a Srotriya, a
scholar well-versed in the dharmasastras,
omniscient, well-versed in the Vedas, who is
the proper consultant, born in the well known
family, belonging to the noble and spotless race,
well-versed in the Puranas, devoted to dharma,
engaged in studies* and japam, one who is
devoted to Siva, one who is devoted to the
parents, devotee of the sun, and is a Vaisnava.
Tava afar fafa a yteary
aeata tet Mert: TTCATATN Qo ll
One who is devoted to Brahma, one who is
well-versed in the Vedas, well-versed in the
yoga, peaceful, one who could exercise his
control over the souls and the one who is
valorous, such types of Brahmanas should be
invited in the Srdddha. (Now I shall narrate the
names of the persons who should be offered
food in the Srdddha.) They include the son of
the daughter, one's own friend, preceptor,

fate ager aeyfertreanerarrar

Ay Alpert Ae BT AAT AASEATTN aM
Aaa eA TSF HUTTU TAA: |

AA SAM A ATTHIST TALATNL
Gad Yord Meg Wea TAA!

1. The Ahavaniya, Garhapatya. Daksina, Sabhya, and
Avasathya, are the five fires; of which the three first
have a religious, and the other two a secular
character. The first is a fire prepared for oblations at
an occasional sacrifice : the second 1s the household
fire, to be perpetually maintained: the third is a
sacrifical fire, in the centre of the other two, and
placed to the south: the Sabhya ts a fire lighted to
warm a party: and the Avasathya the common
domestic or cultnary fire. Manu. II. 100,185, and
Kullika Bhatta's explanation.

2. Under Niyama are comprehended purity (Sauca),
contentment (Santosa), devotion (Tapas), study of
the Vedas (Svadhyaya) and adoration of the supreme
(1Svara-pranidhana).

=== PAGE 57 ===

Chapter-16

Us WIM: Wao aataraT We3 1

Acarya, maternal uncle, kins and relatives,
Priest of sacrifice and Somapayi. They should
be invited making all the efforts and the food in
Sraddha should be served to them. Besides a
Soma-sacrificer, a grammarian, one who is
well-versed in Mimamsa (commentary),
performer of the Vedic sacrifice, one who is
well-versed in Samaveda and the chanting of it,
one who is quite well learned, one who is
respectable or learned, whose presence could
elevate and purify the people, the one who sits
for the feast with him in the same row, the
reciter of the Samaveda, a Brahmacari, a Vedic
professor or the one who is known as Brahma.
These are the sort of people who should be
invited in the Sraddha feast. When such people
are feasted, the Srdddha becomes real and
earnest.

Ufaastapred: Seite: Teer TOT: |
HAG PATASAT HUSTMCTATAT: 1 UI
Ufefaharararen Wear eT: |

Sle Tenge ST SATHTST AG I

Now you listen to the names of the people,
whose entry is prohibited in the Srdddhas. They
are the fallen people, the notorious ones, cursed,
eunuches, backbiters, deformed because of
ailments, the patients, having deformed nails,
those having black teeth, bastards, bastards of
widows, tamers of dogs, offspring of a younger
brother married ahead of the elder brother, the
servants or those who are attracted for service,
lunatic, drunkard, mad men, stone hearted,
cheats, swindlers, the conceited, the temple
priests etc. All of them are prohibited from
partaking the Sraddhas.

Seach agree ATA:
Papigea areca aSTZUIN eG I
aaaferigt: Walsatgenret Fayre: |
udeateat fattarcat Fraaaqii got

57

Similarly the ungrateful persons, the
atheists, dwellers of the Mleccha country,
Trigankus, Barbaras, Dravitas, Dravidas, people
of Konkanas and the lingis besides the
Sannyasis. These should all be particularly left
out of the Sraddha feasts.

Fatante fort softest crear

SRA West AAISSHATTOTAAI Re I

The performer of the Srdddha should invite
humbly the Brahmana for the Sraddha feast, a
day or two in advance, because the manes arrive
on the particular day and remain with them.
They follow the Brahmanas in the form of the
wind. When the Brahmanas take their seat, the
manes are also seated besides them.

alerot STATE ea aT gy Fahad:

Ua Frat Frat sraatfeagarearqi ett
aT: Virerat: Wat Taree: |
aA aE AAT AT AFATTTUMTN 2 of

The performer of the Sraddha, touching the
right knee of the Brahmana, should pray to him,
“T am inviting you.” Thus extending the
invitation, revealing the performing of the
Sraddha of father, brother and other or the king,
he should speak. (I shall perform the Sraddha
on a particular day). Therefore you should
remain without anger, purified, following
Brahmacarya-vrata. I shall also follow these
rules being the performer of Sraddha.”

fagag faraet aunt 7 asfrary
PHOSTATA HATTA AAT? 2

Thus having been relieved of the Pitr-yajna,
oblation should be performed. The performer of
the  Srdddha should perform the
Pindanvaharyaka Sraddha on the moonless day
alone.

WReaaferea I sferorraay we
Me TAS MS aT Tera AHN VU

A sloping place near the cow-pin or near a
reservoir, should be plastered with cow dung

=== PAGE 58 ===

58

and the Sraddha should be performed there with
devotion.

airfares We a aah:

faq Freranifa wd aferoratt aq 311

One who consecrates and maintains the
sacred fire, should cook caru and after offering
with equal handfuls, should say, “I am offering
to the Pitrs.” Thus speaking he should place the
caru to the Pitrs and the rest should be placed to
his nght.

awed at: HalaaaaayTd: |
asta qeaaaT: aArat

Salas J Hala lat wrathay
Ua UV SATAN TTA 2G Hl

JU FT areal a Beret wT Ala

feret: UraTfoT AEray WATTS TTT EU
Metaraed F Ua eA: Ye:

VAM AE TATA Afar Volt

Then the ghi (clarified butter) should be
poured in the three plates. The Caru should be
divided in three parts and one should place them
in the front. These parts should also be stretched
to the length of four fingers. After putting the
sacred thread over the right shoulder, the
performer of Srdddha, should put a water goblet
and a vase of bell-metal and meksana,
sacrificial wood, kusa-grass, sesamum, leaf
plates, sandal, new cloth, scent, incense and

sandal paste should be slowly placed to the
night.

Tera WATT F ATSeTA
AMT: ATT AAA TAAL 2 6 1
famrott aneraeurerahrral YA: TA: |
area etary faaraq et
sTRleanamsva yaya

at ea fagard Areagwaa a3 01)
aiaadatiswte 7 Halfgent ga:

cand Fraivaes faureaiferr ge: 113 90

oe

aike-s)

Matsya Puranam

Thus collecting all the essential things, he
should draw a mandala with the urime of the
cow over the space plastered with the cow-
dung. He should worship the mandala with
unhusked rice and flowers. Then welcoming the
Brahmanas repeatedly, he should wash their
feet. Then the Brahmana should be made to sit
over the seat of kusa-grass and should provide
water to them for dcamana as well as the
eatables. Then he should get their opinion for
the performing of the srdddha. A person with
intelligence should serve food to three
Brahmanas in the Deva-kdryas or the Pitr-
karyas. Or alternatively on both the occasions, a
Brahmana each should be served with food.
Inspite of one's possessing enough of riches, the
expansion of Pdrvana-srdddha is not advised.
Initially arghya should be offered to Visvedeva

and the Brahmanas should be adored
subsequently offering the arghya.
ar Haleteet feawfest aenferfer
TaVAaasy BAY Heat WS AT I
AHA F HASTA FT: |

afeoreal welt aT @ Wenitafesiery: 113 311

Again the performer of srdddha should, with
the permission of the Brahmanas, the Carw
should be placed in the vase of bronze and then
one should perform homa appropriately in the
fire. Thereafter the learned person should
perform oblation for Agni, Soma and Yama.
Thus the best of a Brahmana who 1s devoted to
Agni, and the wearer of vajnopavita, with the
igniting of the Daksind fire, should complete
the sraddha.

aaa Faet at: wae
Wetted Head: wa faa vi
He should perform Paryuksana with the
sacred thread on the left shoulder and one who

knows all the rites should perform it with the
sacred thread on the right shoulder.

=== PAGE 59 ===

Chapter-16

Fe A TAHA: VASA AAA
SASTRY Alter AETATATTATA & I
Waray Wat Gert SHA faa:
faara chat det Frahteratsrrq 3 § 1
aI: Hatent cat Fear ah
frara fqustches adaeaa ATA 3 911

With the remaining havi, six pindas should
be made and the sesamum with water be
dropped with left hand. Then getting free from
jezlousy, holding kusa in hand, turning the
knee, draw a line over the pedestal making all
the efforis or the kusa-grass should be spread in
lines. Then turning his face to the right the
pindas should be placed over the kuSa-grass in a
sequence.

fren sty ata: |
ay SHY FT Tet PergRATeo OTT 6 I

Then lifting up the pindas one by cne,
speaking out the gotras and the names of the
manes, the pindas should be placed over the
kusa grass one by one. Then for the satisfaction
ot the manes, the hands should be wiped out
with the ends of the kusa-grass.

Wag Wat: HAA: WITT
TSQITATH TATUM: 113 8

Thereafter the water should be sprinkled
over the pindas as before. Then all the six Pitrs
should be adored offering fragrance, incense,
and other materials for adoration, offering his
salutation to each one of the Pitrs.

Wana aad aaa et: |
Tarte Ua faaray afaet AUMTI¥ ol!
They should then be invoked with the
reciting of the appropriate Vedic hymns. Then
the one who is Ekagni, or the performer of

Agnihotra, should offer a pinda of rice with a
ladle.

39

TAHA TMATAASA HIT A:
Takase HalatatetfarasrTAy git

After completing all these procedures, the
performer of the Srdddha, should offer food for
the wives of the Pitrs. The process of invoking
and Visarjana! should again be repeated as has
been done earlier.

Aat Fela fAuSeay AAT: Hal: HAUT TI
AS FAM WISTS ATS 2H
The performer of the Srdddha, then picking
up small portions from the pindas shall give

them to the invited Brahmanas for eating, first

of all.
AMAeategat Atat waraer FETA: |
AAU TAT PATTY 3

Since the portion of the food taken out of the
pindas is consumed by the Brahmanas on the
moon-less day or Amdvasyd, therefore this
particular Srdddha is known as Anvahdryaka.

Ue ral J Tat Walaa freer
aust weeda Taearah FATS XU
qutinaed fire ut a aden
FTAA SATAN STUY GU

The performer of the srdddha_ should
initially offer the ring of kusa-grass with
sesamum seeds and water in the hands of the
Brahmana and then the portion of the pinda
should be offered. Then uttering the phrase,
“Let it be svadha for our Pitrs, the food should
be served to the Brahmanas. Then the
Brahmana, discarding anger, remembering the
name of Narayana, should speak out, “It is quite

sweet, It is quite auspicious,” and then consume
the food.

1. A rite in which the life given is sent away and the
idol is thrown away. These two peculiar religious
rites distinctly show that the Hindus do not worship
the idol but the spint which they temporarily invoke
in that idol.

=== PAGE 60 ===

60

Taare Wt: HaAliefaraaatoreay
Wek wagers Ofer warteyfanis & 1

Pleasing the Brahmanas, the host should
place food on earth, with rice and water for the
use of all other classes of people. This is called
Vikira or scattering.

AATY FACTAATMAA TAT
Tateraraaé ad frost aaretqivi
Ca WeHalat ASATNS AAT TIT
fAQTT TeoTteteaat Hea Wefeorqs ci

After the Brahmanas rinse their mouths, the
host should drop the water, flowers and
unbroken rice over the pindas and the reward of
the Sraddha should then be dedicated to the
lord, otherwise the srdddha becomes impure.
Similarly, after going round the Brahmanas,
they should be sent off.

afar feyrmrang haart Ara:
aa Asada Aat: Pafta Aue it
TSI A Al UT aragag ea a atsfeafe
ata BT ag Taaheaigs THATRIIG oN

At that point of time the performer or the
host, facing sought, should humbly pray to the
Pitrs, “Let there be increase in our giving of
charities, study of the Vedas, the progeny, our
faith in lord should never diminish, we should
have enough of niches for performing charities,
we should have enough of cereals, crowds of
guests should always visit our house.

Maas A: Gy AT a Alera Her
Unefeatt Tamrael YF WATT VII

Many should ask favours from us, but we
should never beg from anyone.” The
Brahmanas should speak out at that time, “Be it
so.” Thus the Anvaharyaka-srdddha also known
as Pdarvana, which is performed on_ the
moonless day has been completed. This
Sraddha can be performed in other tithis as
well.

Matsya Puranam

areca agente Farrer

fausieg rafal seer Bershs ary VI
famrrat or fafatgartretrargrerd

Ue F wert frog wrprefgreniaaiy 31k
arena frat mae Maa

Trageant faeratem faatstar: ty vu

After the concluding of the srdddha, the
pindas should be given over to the cow, a goat
or the Brahmanas. Or alternatively they should
be consigned in water or fire. They can also be
given over to the birds for eating in the presence
of the Brahmanas. The middle pinda out of
those should be consumed by the performer's
wife herself saying, “O Pitrs, you kindly get me
the conception for the increase of the progeny.”
With this desire, the wife of the host should
herself consume the pindas with all humility.
The host should remain standing till the
Brahmanas depart. He should then perform the
remaining rites.

avaed aa: Halfagd Trgaaton
Se: We Ad: MAN oats PAPA TY GI

After the Srdddha rites are over, the host
should make and offering to the Vaisvadevas,
by making oblation in the fire and then he
should happily enjoy the company of his
friends; concentrating his mind towards the
Pitrs.

(Aaa AAAS
MEP EISAT TAA AT I & I

On that day, the one who performs the
Srdddha as well as those who participate in the
feast, should not take the food twice. They
should not go out of the village, after the
Sraddha is performed. They should not use any
conveyance, nor should they unite with their
WIVES.

Trad aeé aa fearact a aden
ana fafert arg Fregrae Fataiy ot

The recitation of the Vedas on that particular —

=== PAGE 61 ===

Chapter-17

day is prohibited. The host should not pick up a
quarrel with anyone on that day, nor should he
sleep during the day. This is the manner of
performing the Srdddha.

SMSMGIASH AUIAT Tala
GA AI Welded AUS TH TOTAT
dart faa eaataaat eri

Thus the Agnihotri should perform the
Sraddha in the dark fortnight of the month,
when the sun is in the sign of Virgo and Taurus.
Whenever the Sapindikarana-sraddha' has to
be performed, then also the above process
should be followed by the one who adores the
sacred fire.

oft street teres Perea eS ATEN aT
UIST SEATAT: 11 2E A

** *

CHAPTER 17

Performing of Sraddha for achieving
prosperity and emancipation

Ua ave
Ba: We Waaaa faa aeeiheay!
Mg AAT ATT RHPA gH

Sita said, “O Rsis, hereafter, I shall narrate
about the Sraddha which bestows pleasures as
well as the emancipation and had been narrated
by lord Visnu himself.

ar fay at ares ura
ATTACH UHSING ANU
SURAT SONY FETAL TA
Tararareadard faftedgirarati3 i
AMG TAMA ATH afdaes a
UHM A AT AMA FT ASM
FMEA: WM Val TAMA aT: |
AM Weadtet a ee arg fasnratiiy i

1. The Sapindas or those connected by offerings of
cakes to common ancestors.

61

When the sun is in the equinoctial and the
period when the sun passes from one zodiacal
sign to another, the period when the planetary
body passes from one Zodiacal sign into
another, on the Amavasya or Astaka of the dark
fortnight, and on the fifteenth day of the moon,
the period of Ardra-sixth, the Magha-tenth,
Rohini-fourth lunar mansions, the presence of
materials and Brahmanas, the time of
gajacchaya, the day of the full moon, or on a
Monday, the days called vistis, and vaidhrtis,
the third day of the bright fortnight of the month
of Vaisakha, which is the anniversary day of
Satyayuga, the ninth day of the bright fortnight
in the month of K4rtika, the anniversary day of
the Tretayuga, the fifteenth or the full moon day
of the month of Magha- the anniversary day of
Kalityuga, the thirteenth day of the month of
Bhadra, corresponding to the August-
September- the anniversary day of
Dvaparayuga are the periods and occasions,
when by performing of srdddha, one gets bliss
and exhastless merits. In addition to the above,
on the anniversary day of the beginning of the
Manvantaras, as detailed above, the srdddhas
can be performed.

WIATAGSACHaAA Fay eAteles TAM
GAA VAM TAT AIGUST ANE HI
WITT AAA Utrera g Ta
ATS SMA ATTA ATA 9 1

On the bright ninth day of the month of
Asvin, on the bright twelfth day of the month of
Kartika, on the bright third day of the month of
Caitra, on the bright third day of the month of
Bhadrapada, on the moonless day of the month
of Phalguna, on the bright eleventh day of the
month of Pausa, on the bright tenth day of the

month of Asadha, on the bright seventh day of
the month of Magha,

TATA FIT AaTssuTat A yor
altel GIT cal Sasusreet faa
WAAL SARE Cee NSH

=== PAGE 62 ===

62

QE WAATAISSeY TTA Fea: t
TATA AAT ATT ATSAATUT IS 1

On the dark eighth day of the month of
Sravana, on the full moon day of the month of
Asadha, besides the full moon days of the
months of K4rtika, Phalguna, Caitra and Jyestha
are the fourteen fithis, of the fourteen
Manvantaras and the srdddha performed during
these tithis bestows everlasting reward. When
the initial tithi of the month of Magha, falls on
the seventh day of the bright fortnight, then lord
Sirya mounts over his chariot. That day is
known as Ratha-Saptami.

ureregy fret first
SEMA: Wa ATET: IN
Meg Hi vA AN: aa
TWRUNAART Taha I
In case, during this tithi a person, making all
the efforts, offers to his manes, a vase filled
with water and sesamum or performs oblation,
he achieves the reward for performing the

Srdddha for a thousand years. The secret of the
same has been told by the Pitrs themselves.

AMAMTTTNG FaeAETCTA
Tatarrrney Sturryey Tee
fafermyuferaty srg Sa fac
fanaa ut unig, fadtaren Frerqeei

The intelligent performer of the Sraddha,
should on the full moon day of the month of
Vaisakha, during the solar or lunar eclipses, on
special occasions, during the Pitrpaksa, at the
holy places, in the temple of the god, or in the
cowpen, lamp house, in the orchard, or a place
in seclusion plastered with cowdung, perform
Sraddha with dewotion. A day or two earlier to
the srdddha, one should humbly invite the
Brahmanas who should be humble, noble,
virtuous, beautifiy] and quite aged.

Wea aaa aa
at da Fiera for wenger aT 93

Matsya Puranam

During the Devakdryas, two Brahmanas
should be invited, while in the Pitrkaryas
number of the Brahmana invitees should be
three, or alternatively one Brahmana should be
invited in each case and served with food.

TATA AIST F wasate ferett
fread: YoTats SMTTAH TI YY II

Inspite of a person being financially well
off, there should be no expansion. At that time
offering seat to the Visvedevas, they should be
adored with flowers and barley. Then keeping
two terracotta vases, the kusa-ring should be
placed in the same. Then the Brahmana invited
for the Daiva Sraddha should be attended
offering a seat of barley and flowers.

: iy _ |
Vt At cae: Hales SarAA ey
Tay dye ayaed wit =A
faya tara seamararara fafeterar 26 ti
TQM ot aera
anal TVATATS Higa WATTATI Vy 1

Two vases should be placed with Kusa rings
and water should be poured after uttering “Om

Sanno Devi” etc. Flowers and sandal paste

should also be dropped in the vases for

Visvedevas uttering the mantra “Om

Visvedeva” etc. who should be thus invoked

pouring the barely at the same time. After the

flowers and the sandal paste are offered, the
host should offer Arghya water to them reciting
the mantra, “Yadivye” etc. After the conclusion

of the Visvedeva worship, the adoration of Pitrs
should be started.

Suet Y aratsset aftr oenfor Wea
Aufaafer Heanssel Bi at satera: fardqgei
farisaifa frerpateregented yA:

Usd SARA Ta UOT TANS

West AST Halt TAT APTTAAAT

Saat Tart arse Faq UTt ATTA oN

=== PAGE 63 ===

Chapter-17

In the Pitr-srdddha, the seat of kusa should
first be offered. Then three Arghya vases should
be readied and the rings of kusa-grass should be
dropped therein, reciting the mantra “Sanno
Devi” etc. Reciting this mantra, these vases
should be filled with water. Thereafter reciting
the mantra “Tilosi...' etc. the sesamum should
be poured into them. Then pouring the water
into the vases, the fragrance, flowers etc. should
also be offered. The vases used for the purpose
of the Pitrs should be of wood, or the tree
leaves, or the leaves grown in water or the
ocean. Or alternatively they should be of
conchshell, gold or silver.

THE SM AST att AAA aM
THAMTTALETATAT Tata 112 2

TAT HRA STATA THETA
aNSeATS ATS FUE UTT Tat ATTN IH
fread Tadtaraagacenry |

SMAge TIE SATAY ATATI 3M

In case one cannot afford the silver vase,
then the worshipper may give away a little of
silver.! In case he cannot afford it even, then he
may simply look at it or merely mention its
name. By offering even the water with devotion
out of the silver vase or the vase of alloyed
metals, the devotee gains everlasting bliss. The
silver vase is the best to be used at the time of
offering libation of pindas and of food to the
Pitrs of water. Infect silver is said to have
emerged out of the eyes of Siva and was
subsequently appreciated by the Pitrs. But it
should not be used at the time of the Deva

worship, because it is considered to be
inauspicious in that case.

Ud Wala MHeer Bares faacay: |

ar fecata faqaia mated aq wi
farararefaeatr afedeqerg t: FA:
SUTRA TATSSAY VATA ASAT AN 2 & UI

Thus making appropriate arrangements for

1. The notion originates with Manu, III. 202.

63

the vases as per one's own means, getting free
from pride, holding Awsa in his hand, the
performer, should recite the mantra, “Ya divye”
etc. and should also recite the name and gotra of
his father, place the vase on earth saying, “I
shall invoke your Pitrs.” In reply to this the
Brahmanas should say, “Do it.” After uttering
of these words, the mantras like “Usantastva”
and “Ayantu nah”, the Pitrs should be invoked
through the Brahmanas.

OT fea TANNA: |
Sega Ta TAT MAAMMAAT UE M
fagura Fara orqatat TAT

fap: write Rare ofa 2011
aaa yaarnaratrenrel faucet: |
SNATAT FeMVATATSeT UAT ATI c 11
Wadkerd: Aad SHUTiUTTeTTT:

Toned: PUM AeA ag TT: 12 8 1
a J Takeit Mat weaakaay

ara wtonft a wathagheane S97a:113 of

LS

Then reciting the mantra “yd-divye” etc.
Arghya should be offered to the Pitrs, besides
the fragrance and flowers etc. adoring them
drop it in the vase of Pitrs. Then the vase should
be kept upturned before the pedestal; reciting
the mantra, “Pitrbhyosthanamasi’ which means
that the place is meant for the Pitrs. Thus
uttering the mantra, water should be poured
over it. In this case as well, one should perform
the fire rites as explained earlier quite carefully.
Then carrying kusa in his hand, the performer
with a peaceful mind should serve the
sumptuous food including pulses, vegetables
and several other dishes, which should be
brought by him carried in both the hands. In
offering food, curd, milk, clarified butter of
cow's milk and sugar should also be put in the
dishes. The Pitrs are exceedingly fond of flesh.
This has been stated by lord Kesava.

at arat aeearnies Fare a
AION AGL: WHAT VST S13 2H

=== PAGE 64 ===

64

TOMS BMA Talhd Facer

AA WAM AT TATU F113 21

ae Tag Taha aeeAeaiae: |
VMTSNTATAT AAMTE HT F330
dant 7 Walt Waar Waa

Tea a Fara wrarws FN VI
aor aia aftretegranttent
alee UA Geared da fs 4
Fesferarefiet sheitt |
enmaraiaeag: frat: Tae 113 GU

The Pitrs say that the offering of fish keeps
them satisfied for two months, the flesh of deer
for three months, mutton for four months, the
flesh of birds for five months, goat's flesh for
six months, Parsat's flesh for seven months,
Vena's flesh for eight months, ham and buffalo's
flesh for ten months, hare and turtle's flesh for
eleven months, cow's milk and rice cooked in
cow's milk for a year, the flesh of Ruru for
fifteen months, lion's flesh for twelve years,
Kalasuka's (pot herb) and flesh of rhinoceros for
a great number of years, the cow's milk mixed
with honey and rice cooked in cow's milk,
clarified butter made of cow's milk offered even
in small quantity, satisfies Pitrs, the
Pirvadevatas, to the maximum possible extant.

as Tea TUOTaaenT A
TafawaqHag Yeahs fataenfr A391
SATA Ta Tag iHT
FHA AHHASATT AAU CI
ae VIPAT UATE

HUSH TAO TRAN TF AAU
famrormreragaa aad WyaT|
Ya AY Usa FIN ok
Adafttarar witasswerer arto
AGAMA fatentayranns vi
afraang & iar tsa: set wT

Matsya Purdnam

Yt Sat TARY War UTA TTS IH
Qa A Ue Ft fae + ay-

4 mage aasaateT
aaasa ya SrA
WARY Hay YET TAT?

The Pitrs are the supreme divinities of the
householders. Therefore at the time of srdddha
the recitation of Pitr-sikta, all the Puranas, and
the siiktas relating to the Brahma, Visnu, Sirya
and Rudra, besides Agni, Indra, Soma,
Brhadarathantara, Jyestha, Saman with Rohini,
Santikadhyaya, Madhu Brahmana and Mandala
Brahmana and other similar types of loving
Siiktas, or Strotras should be recited by the
Brahmana or by the performer himself. After
the food is finished by the Brahmana, all the
items of food should be brought and placed over
the earth before those who are required to take
food saying, “Such of the living beings of my
race, who had been cremated in the past, or
those who could not be cremated, all of them
should get pleased with the food spread on the
ground and achieve the supreme position
(Salvation). Those who have no mother or
father or brother, whose gotra has not been
purified and those who do not possess the food,
for their satisfaction, I have scattered the food
on the ground. All of them should go to the
heaven like my Pitrs for enjoying all the
comforts.

—— , Fry
Sfeoreurnea: wet fafatatya a: 1x vi
Similarly such of the brides of the race, who
met with their death without purification, or
those who had been discarded by the family, the
remaining part of the food or that part which

has been stuck to the Ausa-grass, is meant for
their alms.

Tanah AAEM TAM
TUT METS AMP ASTATOTS & I

=== PAGE 65 ===

Chapter-17

Then finding that the Brahmanas have been
satisfied, the performer should pour water over
their hands, Then the kuSa-grass should be
spread towards the south appropriately over the
ground, which has already been plastered with
cowdung and the cow's urine.

Freres aut Fea ferere FTO TTT :
ada at fusteg Prgaqaqiis «lt

Then the performer of the Sraddha, reciting
the name of his father and his gotra sprinkle the
water over the pedestal of kusa. Then he should
place the pindas made of the several types of
food over the kusa grass, as was done in the
case of Pitr-yajna.

sega J AAT Aa: |

THU TAHA WATT 9
ararea Tat Wat uiforaisa weterore)
fruity acne fatercrestarforanis 21

The pindas should then be adored offering
the fragrance, flowers etc. sprinkling the water
over them. Kneeling down, he should then
adore them with folded hands. Then holding
kusa in his hand, the Pitrs-yajfia should be
completed appropriately.

AMSAT TEHAT ATE TT:
WASSUP ASST AT TENTH AALS 8 I
The intelligent performer of the srdddha

should light the lamp as prescribed earlier and
adore the pindas with flowers.

BT YATRA HAT TT
After ANAT SETA FT STOTT 0 I

When the Brahmanas have already rinsed
their months, he would rinse his mouth himself.
Then he should, placing the water, flowers,
unbroken rise and sesamum seeds over the
hands of the Brahmanas, offer daksinds to them
according to one’s own means.

Tyfetoaaraire wens we eT
cereaas famrorarer: rata as vt

65

Again, discarding miserliness, pleasing the
Pitrs, he should give away in charity things like
the cow, land, gold costumes, beautiful beds, or
the things in charity.

fanoraat ted: fogs: wifes
Wd: WMA fayeay aaaqNy UI
Thereafter reciting Svadha, the intelligent
performer of srdddha, facing the east, shall

offer water oblation to the Visvedevas and
receive blessings from them.

Sasso: Mis taeasA: Weyl Fa:
sat: frat: We Bia: Faery 31
He should at that time tell the Brahmanas,

“Let our Pitrs be comfortable.” The Brahmanas
should ten repeat, “Be it so.”

Ta wa ada THT A: TA:
ata arstradeafats Aas IG wit

Again the host should say, “Our gotra
should flourish, and the donors in our race
should prosper.” At these words of the host, the
Brahmanas should say, “Be it so.”

Ua: Veni: Wy Aas a: FA:
Taferararrh Halervsrygrea fea &
seq J arSeratem frais: |

aat Tea walfefa enlorafeatt: yt

The host should then say, “Let the blessing
come true.” The Brahmanas should say, “Let
them be true.” Then the Brahmanas should
recite the svastivdcana. Then lifting the pindas,
he should perform the graha-bali. This is the
limit of dharma.

TST YPMTTA TRIAS STAT TT

STAT Aa MMT TeATT IG OH
Till the Brahmanas are sent off, all the
things become the left overs. The left over of

the faithful and those devoid of deceitfulness
and the food scattered on earth in connection

=== PAGE 66 ===

66

with the Pitr-karya, forms the share of the
servants, as is widely believed.
fagietd yataarearet wer
ATAU AYATOT ATTA TATA 21
O Naresvara, the oblation prescribed by the

Pitrs is also useful for those having sons or no
sons besides the ladies.

aaead: fear uftyenenrray

aS aT Sher AAMT Fer ATA TY 8

ale: Net Haters

agate ated: Taratanrat: 18 0

Then making the Brahmanas to stand in the

forefront, holding the water vase in hand,
uttering vdje-vaje the Pitrs should be sent off
from the tips of the Kusd-grass. Then going out
together with the kins and relatives he should
follow-up to eight steps the Brahmanas and
should then circumamublate them.

frgea wforocaea wdeatia waa

aed weit Aer aera UNE VI

TY Aart WYATT: |

Youlaidadge: Wa fagraraTS 1

Returning from there, he should offer his

salutation to Agni, he should perform
Vaisvadeva and nitya-bali. Finishing — the
Vaisvadeva-bali, he should take food with his

servants, sons, brothers relatives and the guests,
with all the items and padarthas.

Urearqriash Haraady Wag
MG MAU A WaAAHISANG 311

This Pdarvana-srdddha, bestows all the
desires, and can be performed by a person

without having the sacred thread, on the
occasions of festivals.

MaAlfaanseraraenshs WTA
VRS AAHAST PAA FTE VI

The intelligent person who is devoted to his

Matsya Puranam

parents, but having no wife or when he ts in
foreign land, can perform this srdddha. Even
the Siidras can perform the same in the
aforesaid manner, even without the reciting of
the mantras.

qiiaangetas searg AgeA
THATTAAL ARSTEMGARCTUIE &

Now I am going to narrate the third type of
Parvana-Sraddha which is known as
Abhyudayikavrddhi-srdddha. This srdddha can
be performed on any one of the festive

occasions or the joyful occasion, yajna,
marriage or on any other auspicious occasion.

WA: WOT Waa: Poa
Aal ATATAT Waa eAT AAAS ANG & 1

In this Srdddha initially adoring the mothers,
the Pitrs have to be adored subsequently.
Thereafter the maternal grandfather, and
Visvedevas are to be adored.

Weferanrecr see |
mena fetfavergdar a asttarqig oll

The host, should, facing east, perform the
circumambulation, should offer to the pindas
curd, unbroken rice, fruit and water with kusa.

AANA SMe FART:
aay faa: Te Tera AT: 1G 61

In this Abhyudayika srdddha, the mantra
Sampannam should be recited and arghya
should be offered to both the types of Pitrs. At

that point of time, the costumes, gold and other
things should be offered to the two Brahmanas.

faemeled aa: cal APSHA:
Tees a vation arerafgryra: 116 81
Uttering the word Nandi, barley should be
substituted in place of sesamum. Then all the

Brahmanas should be made to recite the welfare
mantras and other stotras.

Ua PRIS BMTaghgaregsht Wetan
THER TAU HASTAAT: AATI9 ot