=== PAGE 1 ===

“Narada-Bhakti-Sutra: The Value of Devotion” by His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.
NOTE FROM THE PUBLISHER: This document contains the first chapter of Narada-
Bhakti-Sutra translated and commented on by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta
Swami Prabhupada. His disciples have since completed the translation and
commentary on the total of 84 “sutras.” The complete work is available as the
publication, Narada-Bhakti-Sutra: The Secrets of Transcendental Love, by the
Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, at www.Krishna.com.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of this
book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended for personal non-
commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelines established by
international copyright laws. You may use this electronic file to evaluate the
printed version of this book, for your own private use, or for short excerpts
used in academic works, research, student papers, presentations, and the like.
You can distribute this evaluation copy to others over the Internet, so long as
you keep this copyright information intact. You may not reproduce more than ten
percent (10%) of this book in any media without the express written permission
from the copyright holders. Reference any excerpts in the following way:
“Excerpted from “Narada-Bhakti-Sutra” by the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust
International, www.Krishna.com.”
                         Narada-bhakti-sutra
                              Chapter 1
                        The Value of Devotion
                               SUTRA 1*
                                 TEXT
                     athato bhaktim vyakhyasyamah
                               SYNONYMS
atha--now; atah--therefore; bhaktim--devotional service; vyakhyasyamah--we shall
try to explain.
                             TRANSLATION
   Now, therefore, I will try to explain the process of devotional service.
                               PURPORT
   Devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead is explained in the
Bhagavad-gita, where the Lord says that a self-realized person is always in the
transcendental state known as brahma-bhuta, which is characterized by
joyfulness. When one is self-realized he becomes joyful. In other words, he is
free from the material contamination of lamentation and hankering. As long as we
are in material existence, we lament for the losses in our life and hanker for
that which we do not have. A self-realized person is joyful because he is free
from material lamentation and hankering.

=== PAGE 2 ===

A self-realized person also sees all living entities equally. For him, there
is no distinction between the higher and lower species of life. It is also
stated that a learned man does not distinguish between a wise brahmana and a dog
because he sees the soul within the body, not the external bodily features. Such
a perfected, self-realized person becomes eligible to understand bhakti, or
devotional service to the Lord.
   Bhakti is so sublime that only through bhakti can one understand the
constitutional position of the Lord. That is clearly stated in the Bhagavad-gita
(18.55): bhaktya mam abhijanati. "One can understand the Supreme Lord through
devotional service, and by no other process." There are different processes of
understanding the Absolute Truth, but if a person wants to understand the
Supreme Lord as He is, he has to take to the process of bhakti-yoga. There are
other mystic processes, such as karma-yoga, jnana-yoga, and dhyana-yoga, but it
is not possible to understand the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead,
except through His devotional service. This is confirmed in the Fourth Chapter
of the Bhagavad-gita (4.3), where we learn that Krsna spoke the Bhagavad-gita to
Arjuna simply because he was the Lord's devotee and friend. The Bhagavad-gita
teaches the process of bhakti-yoga, and therefore Lord Krsna explained it to
Arjuna because he was a great devotee. As far as spiritual life is concerned,
becoming a devotee of the Lord is the high-est perfection.
   People are generally misled by the spell of the illusory energy of material
nature. There are innumerable living entities within the material nature, and
only some of them are human beings. According to the Vedic literature, there are
8,400,000 species of life. In the Padma Purana it is said that there are 900,000
species of life in the water, 2,000,000 species of plants, 1,100,000 species of
insects and reptiles, 1,000,000 species of birds, 3,000,000 species of beasts,
and only 400,000 species of human beings. So the humans are the least numerous
species of all.
   All living entities can be divided into two divisions: those that can move
and those that are stationary, such as trees. But there are also many further
divisions. Some species fly in the air, some live in the water, and some live on
the ground. Among the living entities who live on the ground, only 400,000 are
human species, and out of these 400,000 human species, many are uncivilized or
unclean; they are not up to the standard of proper civilization. From the
historical point of view, the Aryans are the most civilized section of human
beings, and among the Aryans, the Indians are especially highly cultured. And
among the Indians, the brahmanas are the most expert in knowledge of the Vedas.
   The Vedic culture is respected all over the world, and there are people
everywhere eager to understand it. The highest perfectional stage of
understanding Vedic culture is explained in the Bhagavad-gita, in the Fifteenth
Chapter (15.15), where the Lord says that the purpose of all the Vedas is to
understand Him (Lord Krsna). Fortunate are those who are attracted to the Vedic
cultural life.
   The Hindus call themselves followers of the Vedas. Some say they follow the
Sama Veda, and some say they follow the Rg Veda. Different people claim to
follow different sections of the Vedas, but in fact for the most part they are
not followers of the Vedas because they do not follow the rules and regulations
of the Vedas. Therefore Lord Caitanya says that since the so-called followers of
the Vedas perform all kinds of sinful activities, the number of actual followers
of the Vedas is very small; and even among this small, exclusive number, most
are addicted to the processes described in the Vedas' karma-kanda section, by
which one can elevate oneself to the perfectional stage of economic development.
   The strict followers of the karma-kanda portions of the Vedas perform various
sacrifices for worship of different demigods in order to achieve particular
material results. Out of many millions of such worshipers, some may actually
engage in the process of understanding the Supreme, the Absolute Truth. They are
called jnanis. Perfection for a jnani lies in attaining the stage of brahma-
bhuta, or self-realization. Only after self-realization is attained does the

=== PAGE 3 ===

stage of understanding devotional service begin. The conclusion is that one can
begin the process of devotional service, or bhakti, when one is actually self-
realized. One who is in the bodily concept of existence cannot understand the
process of devotional service.
   It is for this reason that the Narada-bhakti-sutra begins, "Now, therefore, I
shall try to explain the process of devotional service." The word "therefore"
indicates that this process of devotional service is for the self-realized soul,
one who is already liberated. Similarly, the Vedanta-sutra begins athato brahma-
jijnasa. The word brahma-jijnasa refers to inquiry into the Supreme Absolute
Truth, and it is recommended for those who have been elevated from the lower
stage of addiction to the karma-kanda portion of the Vedas to the position of
interest in the jnana-kanda portion. Only when a person is perfectly situated in
the realization that he is not the body but a spirit soul can he begin the
process of bhakti, or devotional service.
                               SUTRA 2*
                                 TEXT
                    sa tv asmin parama-prema-rupa
                               SYNONYMS
sa--it; tu--and; asmin--for Him (the Supreme Lord); parama--highest; prema--pure
love; rupa--having as its form.
                             TRANSLATION
   Devotional service manifests as the most elevated, pure love for God.
                               PURPORT
   As stated before, after attaining the highest stage of self-realization, one
becomes situated in devotional service to the Lord. The perfection of devotional
service is to attain love of God. Love of God involves the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, the devotee, and the process of devotional service. Self-
realization, the brahma-bhuta stage, is the beginning of spiritual life; it is
not the perfectional stage. If a person understands that he is not his body and
that he has nothing to do with this material world, he becomes free from
material entanglement. But that realization is not the perfectional stage. The
perfectional stage begins with activity in the self-realized position, and that
activity is based on the understanding that a living entity is eternally the
subordinate servitor of the Supreme Lord. Otherwise, there is no meaning to
self-realization. If one is puffed up with the idea that he is the Supreme
Brahman, or that he has become one with Narayana, or that he has merged into the
brahmajyoti effulgence, then he has not grasped the perfection of life. As the
Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.2.32) states,
                 ye 'nye 'ravindaksa vimukta-maninas
                tvayy asta-bhavad avisuddha-buddhayah
                  aruhya krcchrena param padam tatah
                patanty adho 'nadrta-yusmad-anghrayah
Persons who are falsely puffed up, thinking they have become liberated simply by
understanding their constitutional position as Brahman, or spirit soul, are
factually still contaminated. Their intelligence is impure because they have no
understanding of the Personality of Godhead, and ultimately they fall down from
their puffed-up position.

=== PAGE 4 ===

According to the Bhagavatam (1.2.11) there are three levels of
transcendentalists: the self-realized knowers of the impersonal Brahman feature
of the Absolute Truth; the knowers of the Paramatma, the localized aspect of the
Supreme, which is understood by the process of mystic yoga; and the bhaktas, who
are in knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and engage in His
devotional service. Those who understand simply that the living being is not
matter but spirit soul and who desire to merge into the Supreme Spirit Soul are
in the lowest transcendental position. Above them are the mystic yogis, who by
meditation see within their hearts the four-handed Visnu form of the Paramatma,
or Supersoul. But persons who actually associate with the Supreme Lord, Krsna,
are the highest among all transcendentalists. In the Sixth Chapter of the
Bhagavad-gita (6.47) the Lord confirms this:
              yoginam api sarvesam mad-gatenantar-atmana
           sraddhavan bhajate yo mam sa me yukta-tamo matah
"And of all yogis, the one with great faith who always abides in Me, thinks of
Me within himself, and renders transcendental loving service to Me--he is the
most intimately united with Me in yoga and is the highest of all. That is My
opinion." This is the highest perfectional stage, known as prema, or love of
God.
   In the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.4.15-16), Srila Rupa Gosvami, a great
authority in the devotional line, describes the different stages in coming to
the point of love of Godhead:
          adau sraddha tatah sadhu-sango 'tha bhajana-kriya
          tato 'nartha-nivrttih syat tato nistha rucis tatah
             athasaktis tato bhavas tatah premabhyudancati
           sadhakanam ayam premnah pradurbhave bhavet kramah
The first requirement is that one should have sufficient faith that the only
process for attaining love of Godhead is bhakti, devotional service to the Lord.
Throughout the Bhagavad-gita Lord Krsna teaches that one should give up all
other processes of self-realization and fully surrender unto Him. That is faith.
One who has full faith in Krsna (sraddha) and surrenders unto Him is eligible
for being raised to the level of prema, which Lord Caitanya taught as the
highest perfectional stage of human life.
   Some persons are addicted to materially motivated religion, while others are
addicted to economic development, sense gratification, or the idea of salvation
from material existence. But prema, love of God, is above all these. This
highest stage of love is above mundane religiosity, above economic development,
above sense gratification, and above even liberation, or salvation. Thus love of
God begins with the firm faith that one who engages in full devotional service
has attained perfection in all these processes.
   The next stage in the process of elevation to love of God is sadhu-sanga,
association with persons already in the highest stage of love of God. One who
avoids such association and simply engages in mental speculation or so-called
meditation cannot be raised to the perfectional platform. But one who associates
with pure devotees or an elevated devotional society goes to the next stage--
bhajana-kriya, or acceptance of the regulative principles of worshiping the
Supreme Lord. One who associates with a pure devotee of the Lord naturally
accepts that person as his spiritual master, and when the neophyte devotee
accepts a pure devotee as his spiritual master, the duty of the spiritual master
is to train the neophyte in the principles of regulated devotional service, or
vaidhi-bhakti. At this stage the devotee's service is based on his capacity to
serve the Lord. The expert spiritual master engages his followers in work that
will gradually develop their consciousness of service to the Lord. Therefore the
preliminary stage of understanding prema, love of God, is to approach a proper

=== PAGE 5 ===

pure devotee, accept him as one's spiritual master, and execute regulated
devotional service under his guidance.
   The next stage is called anartha-nivrtti, in which all the misgivings of
material life are vanquished. A person gradually reaches this stage by regularly
performing the primary principles of devotional service under the guidance of
the spiritual master. There are many bad habits we acquire in the association of
material contamination, chief of which are illicit sexual relationships, eating
animal food, indulging in intoxication, and gambling. The first thing the expert
spiritual master does when he engages his disciple in regulated devotional
service is to instruct him to abstain from these four principles of sinful life.
   Since God is supremely pure, one cannot rise to the highest perfectional
stage of love of God without being purified. In the Bhagavad-gita (10.12), when
Arjuna accepted Krsna as the Supreme Lord, he said, pavitram paramam bhavan:
"You are the purest of the pure." The Lord is the purest, and thus anyone who
wants to serve the Supreme Lord must also be pure. Unless a person is pure, he
can neither understand what the Personality of Godhead is nor engage in His
service in love, for devotional service, as stated before, begins from the point
of self-realization, when all misgivings of materialistic life are vanquished.
   After following the regulative principles and purifying the material senses,
one attains the stage of nistha, firm faith in the Lord. When a person has
attained this stage, no one can deviate him from the conception of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. No one can persuade him that God is impersonal, without
a form, or that any form created by imagination can be accepted as God. Those
who espouse these more or less nonsensical conceptions of the Supreme Lord
cannot dissuade him from firm faith in the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Krsna.
   In the Bhagavad-gita Lord Krsna stresses in many verses that He is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. But despite Lord Krsna's stressing this point,
many so-called scholars and commentators still deny the personal conception of
the Lord. One famous scholar wrote in his commentary on the Bhagavad-gita that
one does not have to surrender to Lord Krsna or even accept Him as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, but that one should rather surrender to "the Supreme
within Krsna." Such fools do not know what is within and what is without. They
comment on the Bhagavad-gita according to their own whims. Such persons cannot
be elevated to the highest stage of love of Godhead. The may be scholarly, and
they may be elevated in other departments of knowledge, but they are not even
neophytes in the process of attaining the highest stage of perfection, love of
Godhead. Nistha implies that one should accept the words of Bhagavad-gita, the
words of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as they are, without any deviation
or nonsensical commentary.
   If a person is fortunate enough to vanquish all misgivings caused by material
existence and rise up to the stage of nistha, he can then rise to the stages of
ruci (taste) and asakti (attachment for the Lord). Asakti is the beginning of
love of Godhead. By progressing, one then advances to the stage of relishing a
reciprocal exchange with the Lord in ecstasy (bhava). Every living entity is
eternally related to the Supreme Lord, and this relationship may be in any one
of many transcendental humors. At the stage called asakti, attachment, a person
can understand his relationship with the Supreme Lord. When he understands his
position, he begins reciprocating with the Lord. By constant reciprocation with
the Lord, the devotee is elevated to the highest stage of love of Godhead,
prema.
                               SUTRA 3*
                                 TEXT
                           amrta-svarupa ca

=== PAGE 6 ===

SYNONYMS
amrta--immortality; svarupa--having as its essence; ca--and.
                             TRANSLATION
   This pure love for God is eternal.
                               PURPORT
   When a person attains to the perfectional stage of love of Godhead, he
becomes liberated even in his present body and realizes his constitutional
position of immortality. In the Bhagavad-gita (4.9), the Lord says,
           janma karma ca me divyam evam yo vetti tattvatah
          tyaktva deham punar janma naiti mam eti so 'rjuna
Here the Lord says that any person who simply understands His transcendental
activities and His appearance and disappearance in this material world becomes
liberated, and that after quitting his present body he at once reaches His
abode. Therefore it is to be understood that one who has attained the stage of
love of God has perfect knowledge, and even if he may fall short of perfect
knowledge, he has the preliminary perfection of life that a living entity can
attain.
   To conceive of oneself as being one with the Supreme is the greatest
misconception of self-realization, and this misconception prevents one from
rising to the highest stage of love of God. But a person who understands his
subordinate position can attain the highest stage of loving service to the Lord.
Although the Lord and the living entities are qualitatively one, the living
entities are limited, while the Lord is unlimited. This understanding, called
amrta-svarupa, makes one eligible for being eternally situated.
   In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.87.30) the personified Vedas pray to the Lord,
"O supreme eternal, if the living entities were equal with You and thus all-
pervading and all-powerful like You, there would be no possibility of their
being controlled by Your external energy, maya." Therefore, the living entities
should be accepted as fragmental portions of the Supreme. This is confirmed in
Bhagavad-gita (15.7) when the Lord says, mamaivamso jiva-loke jiva-bhutah
sanatanah: "The living entities are My fragmental portions, eternally." As
fragmental portions, they are qualitatively one with the Supreme, but they are
not unlimited.
   One who is convinced that he is eternally a servitor of the Supreme Lord is
called immortal because he has realized his constitutional position of
immortality. Unless one can understand his position as a living entity and an
eternal servitor of the Lord, there is no question of immortality. But one who
accepts these facts becomes immortal. In other words, those who are under the
misconception that the living entity and the Supreme Lord are equal in all
respects, both qualitatively and quantitatively, are mistaken, and they are
still bound to remain in the material world. They cannot rise to the position of
immortality.
   Upon attaining love of God, a person immediately becomes immortal and no
longer has to change his material body. But even if a devotee of the Lord has
not yet reached the perfectional stage of love of Godhead, his devotional
service is considered immortal. Any action in the stage of karma or jnana will
be finished with the change of body, but devotional service, even if not
executed perfectly, will continue into the next life, and the living entity will
be allowed to make further progress.

=== PAGE 7 ===

The constitutional position of the living entity as a fragment of the Supreme
Lord is confirmed in the Srimad-Bhagavatam and the Upanisads. The Svetasvatara
Upanisad (5.9) states,
             balagra-sata-bhagasya satadha kalpitasya ca
            bhago jivah sa vijneyah sa canantyaya kalpate
"If the tip of a hair were divided into one hundred parts, and if one of those
parts were again divided into a hundred parts, that one ten-thousandth part of
the tip of the hair would be the dimension of the living entity." As already
mentioned, this position of the living entity as a fragment of the Supreme Lord
is declared in the Bhagavad-gita (15.7) to be eternal; it cannot be changed. A
person who understands his constitutional position as a fragment of the Supreme
Lord and engages himself in devotional service with all seriousness at once
becomes immortal.
                               SUTRA 4*
                                 TEXT
     yal labdhva puman siddho bhavaty amrto bhavati trpto bhavati
                               SYNONYMS
yat--which; labdhva--having gained; puman--a person; siddhah--perfect; bhavati--
becomes; amrtah--immortal; bhavati--becomes; trptah--peaceful; bhavati--becomes.
                             TRANSLATION
   Upon achieving that stage of transcendental devotional service in pure love
of God, a person becomes perfect, immortal, and peaceful.
                               PURPORT
   The part-and-parcel living entities are entangled in the conditioned life of
material existence. Because of their diverse activities they are wandering all
over the universe, transmigrating from one body to another and undergoing
various miseries. But when a fortunate living entity somehow comes in contact
with a pure devotee of the Lord and engages in devotional service, he enters
upon the path of perfection. If someone engages in devotional service in all
seriousness, the Lord instructs him in two ways--through the pure devotee and
from within--so that he can advance in devotional service. By cultivating such
devotional service, he becomes perfect.
   Lord Krsna describes this form of complete perfection in the Bhagavad-gita
(8.15):
             mam upetya punar janma duhkhalayam asasvatam
            napnuvanti mahatmanah samsiddhim paramam gatah
"The great souls who engage in My devotional service attain Me, the Supreme
Lord, and do not come back to this miserable material life, for they have
attained the highest perfection." Both while in the material body and after
giving it up, a devotee attains the highest perfection in service to the Lord.
As long as a devotee is in his material body, his probational activities in
devotional service prepare him for being transferred to the Lord's supreme
abode. Only those who are one hundred percent engaged in devotional service can
achieve this perfection.

=== PAGE 8 ===

In material, conditioned life a person always feels the full miseries caused
by the transmigration of the soul from body to body. Before taking birth, he
undergoes the miseries of living in the womb of his mother, and when he comes
out he lives for a certain period and then again has to die and enter a mother's
womb. But one who attains the highest perfection goes back to Godhead after
leaving his present body. Once there, he doesn't have to come back to this
material world and transmigrate from one body to another. That transfer to the
spiritual world is the highest perfection of life. In other words, the devotee
achieves his constitutional position of immortality and thus becomes completely
peaceful.
   Until a person achieves this perfection, he cannot be peaceful. He may
artificially think he is one with the Supreme, but actually he is not;
therefore, he has no peace. Similarly, someone may aspire for one of the eight
yogic perfections in the mystic yoga process, such as to become the smallest, to
become the heaviest, or to acquire anything he desires, but these achievements
are material; they are not perfection. Perfection means to regain one's original
spiritual form and engage in the loving service of the Lord. The living entity
is part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, and if he performs the duties of the
part and parcel, without proudly thinking he is one in all respects with the
Supreme Lord, he attains real perfection and becomes peaceful.
                               SUTRA 5*
                                 TEXT
yat prapya na kincid vanchati na socati na dvesti na ramate notsahi bhavati
                               SYNONYMS
yat--which; prapya--having attained; na kincit--nothing; vanchati--hankers for;
na socati--does not lament; na dvesti--does not hate; na ramate--does not
rejoice; na--not; utsahi--materially enthusiastic; bhavati--becomes.
                             TRANSLATION
   A person engaged in such pure devotional service neither desires anything for
sense gratification, nor laments for any loss, nor hates anything, nor enjoys
anything on his personal account, nor becomes very enthusiastic in material
activity.
                               PURPORT
   According to Srila Rupa Gosvami, there are six impediments to the discharge
of devotional service, and also six activities favorable to progress in
devotional service.
   The first impediment is atyahara, overeating or accumulating more wealth than
we need. When we give free rein to the senses in an effort to enjoy to the
highest degree, we become degraded. A devotee should therefore eat only enough
to maintain his body and soul together; he should not allow his tongue
unrestricted license to eat anything and everything it likes. The Bhagavad-gita
and the great acaryas, or spiritual masters, have prescribed certain foods for
human beings, and one who eats these foods eats in the mode of goodness. These
foods include grains, fruits, vegetables, milk products, and sugar--and nothing
more. A devotee does not eat extravagantly; he simply eats what he offers to the
Supreme Lord, Krsna. He is interested in krsna-prasadam (food offered to the
Lord) and not in satisfying his tongue. Therefore he does not desire anything
extraordinary to eat.

=== PAGE 9 ===

Similarly, a devotee does not wish to accumulate a large bank balance: he
simply earns as much as he requires. This is called yavad-artha or yuktahara. In
the material world everyone is very active in earning more and more money and in
increasing eating and sleeping and gratifying the senses; such is the mission of
most people's lives. But these activities should be absent from the life of a
devotee.
   The next impediment Srila Rupa Gosvami mentions is prayasa, endeavoring very
hard for material things. A devotee should not be very enthusiastic about
attaining any material goal. He should not be like persons who engage in
fruitive activities, who work very hard day and night to attain material
rewards. All such persons have some ambition--to become a very big businessman,
to become a great industrialist, to become a great poet or philosopher. But they
do not know that even if their ambition is fulfilled, the result is temporary.
As soon as the body is finished, all material achievements are also finished. No
one takes with him anything he has achieved materially in this world. The only
thing he can carry with him is his asset of devotional service; that alone is
never vanquished.
   The next impediment to devotional service is prajalpa, talking of mundane
subject matter. Many people unnecessarily talk of the daily happenings in the
newspapers and pass the time without any profit. A devotee, however, does not
indulge in unnecessary talks of politics or economics. Nor is a devotee very
strict in following ritualistic rules and regulations mentioned in the Vedas.
Becoming enamored of these rituals is the next impediment, called niyamagraha.
Because a devotee fully engages in the supreme service of the Lord, he
automatically fulfills all other obligations and doesn't have to execute all the
details of Vedic rituals. As the Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.5.41) says,
                    devarsi-bhutapta-nrnam pitrnam
                    na kinkaro nayam rni ca rajan
                   sarvatmana yah saranam saranyam
                    gato mukundam parihrtya kartam
"Every human being born in this world is immediately indebted to the demigods,
the great sages, ordinary living entities, the family, society, and so on. But a
person who surrenders unto the lotus feet of the Lord and engages fully in His
service is no longer indebted to anyone. In other words, he has no obligations
to fulfill except executing devotional service."
   Finally, a devotee should not be greedy (laulyam), nor should he mix with
ordinary materialistic men (jana-sanga).
   These are six negatives, or "do-nots," for the devotee; therefore one who
wants to attain the perfectional stage of love of Godhead refrains from these
things.
   Similarly, there are six positive items for advancing in devotional service.
First, while one should not be enthusiastic to attain material achievements, one
should be very enthusiastic to attain the perfectional stage of devotional
service. This enthusiasm is called utsaha. A living entity cannot stop acting.
So when he is forbidden to become enthusiastic about material achievements, he
should at once be encouraged to be enthusiastic about spiritual achievements.
Enthusiasm is a symptom of the living entity; it cannot be stopped. It is just
like a powerful engine: if you utilize it properly, it will give immense
production. Therefore enthusiasm should be purified. Instead of employing
enthusiasm for attaining material goals, one should be enthusiastic about
achieving the perfectional stage of devotional service. Indeed, enthusing His
devotees in devotional service is the purpose for which Krsna descends to this
material world.
   The next item favorable for devotional service is niscaya, confidence. When
one becomes disappointed in his service to the Supreme Lord, that disappointment
must be rejected and replaced with confidence in attaining the ultimate goal,

=== PAGE 10 ===

love of Godhead. The devotee should patiently follow the rules and regulations
of devotional service so that the day will come when he will achieve, all of a
sudden, all the perfection of devotional service. He should not lament for any
loss or any reverse in his advancement in spiritual life. This patience
(dhairya) is the third positive item for advancing in devotional service.
   Furthermore, a pure devotee is not envious, hateful, or lazy in the discharge
of devotional service. Confident of his advancement, he continually performs his
prescribed devotional duties. This is called tat-tat-karma-pravartana.
   The last two items are sanga-tyaga, giving up the association of nondevotees,
and sato-vrtti, following in the footsteps of the previous acaryas. These
practices greatly help the devotee remain fixed on the path of devotional
service and avoid the tendency to enjoy temporary, material things. Thus the
activities of a devotee remain always pure and without any contamination of the
material world.
                               SUTRA 6*
                                 TEXT
      yaj jnatva matto bhavati stabdho bhavaty atmaramo bhavati
                               SYNONYMS
yat--which; jnatva--having known; mattah--intoxicated; bhavati--becomes;
stabdhah--stunned (in ecstasy); bhavati--becomes; atma-aramah--self-content
(because of being engaged in the service of the Lord); bhavati--becomes.
                             TRANSLATION
   One who understands perfectly the process of devotional service in love of
Godhead becomes intoxicated in its discharge. Sometimes he becomes stunned in
ecstasy and thus enjoys his whole self, being engaged in the service of the
Supreme Self.
                               PURPORT
   The Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.7.10) states,
             atmaramas ca munayo nirgrantha apy urukrame
          kurvanty ahaitukim bhaktim ittham-bhuta-guno harih
"Although those who are atmarama, self-satisfied, are liberated from all
material contamination, they are still attracted by the pastimes of the Supreme
Lord, and thus they engage themselves in His transcendental service." When Lord
Caitanya explained this atmarama verse to Srila Sanatana Gosvami, He described
sixty-one meanings, and all of them point toward the devotional service of the
Lord.
   How one becomes intoxicated in devotional service is very nicely described in
the Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.2.40):
                  evam-vratah sva-priya-nama-kirtya
                    jatanurago druta-citta uccaih
                   hasaty atho roditi rauti gayaty
                    unmada-van nrtyati loka-bahyah
"A person engaged in the devotional service of the Lord in full Krsna
consciousness automatically becomes carried away by ecstasy when he chants and
hears the holy name of Krsna. His heart becomes slackened while chanting the

=== PAGE 11 ===

holy name, he becomes almost like a madman, and he does not care for any outward
social conventions. Thus sometimes he laughs, sometimes he weeps, sometimes he
cries out very loudly, sometimes he sings, and sometimes he dances and forgets
himself." These are the signs of becoming intoxicated in devotional service.
This stage, called the atmarama stage, is possible when the Lord bestows His
mercy upon a devotee for his advanced devotional activity. It is the highest
perfectional stage because one cannot reach it unless one has attained pure love
of God.
   Neither formal religious rituals, economic development, sense gratification,
nor liberation can compare with this sweet stage of perfection of love of Krsna,
love of the Supreme Lord. The Caitanya-caritamrta (Adi-lila 7.97) describes this
stage of ecstasy and intoxication as being far above the ecstasy of realizing
oneself as Brahman, or the supreme spirit. Lord Caitanya says that the ecstasy
of bhakti (love of Godhead) is so vast that it is like an ocean compared to the
drop of pleasure derived from understanding oneself as one with Brahman. In all
Vedic literature, the highest perfectional stage is said to be the state of
intoxication of devotional service. It is not achieved by ordinary persons, the
nondevotees.
   In the stage of perfection, one's heart becomes slackened and one becomes
more and more attached to attaining the lotus feet of the Lord. Srila Rupa
Gosvami, a great acarya in the line of devotional service, has described this
stage as follows: "Although appearing just like a madman, a person in the
ecstasy of devotional service is not mad in the material conception of the term;
this ecstasy is the manifestation of the pleasure potency of the Supreme Lord."
The Lord has various potencies, one of which is called ahladini-sakti, His
internal pleasure potency. Only one who becomes a little conversant with this
potency can taste such ecstasy. The Vedanta-sutra (1.1.12) states, ananda-mayo
'bhyasat: "By nature the Lord is always joyful." This joyfulness of the Lord is
due to His pleasure potency.
   One who becomes affected by the pleasure potency of the Supreme Lord
manifests various symptoms of ecstasy, such as slackening of the heart,
laughing, crying, shivering, and dancing. These symptoms are not material.
However, exhibiting such ecstatic symptoms just to get credit from the public is
not approved by pure devotees. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Prabhupada says,
"Persons without attainment of the highest perfectional stage of loving service
cannot achieve any auspiciousness simply by artificially laughing, crying, or
dancing without any spiritual understanding. Artificial movement of the body...
must always be rejected. One should wait for the natural sequence within
devotional service, and at that time, when one cries or dances or sings, it is
approved. A person artificially showing symptoms of the pleasure potency creates
many disturbances in the ordinary way of life."
   One who attains the perfectional stage of devotional service under the
guidance of a bona fide spiritual master may preach the science of devotion as
Lord Caitanya did. When Lord Caitanya preached, He danced and showed other
symptoms of ecstasy. Once, in Benares, a Mayavadi sannyasi named Prakasananda
Sarasvati objected to these activities. He said that since Lord Caitanya had
taken sannyasa, the renounced order of life, He should not act in such an
intoxicated way.
   The Lord explained that these symptoms of intoxication had automatically
arisen when He had chanted the Hare Krsna mantra, and that upon seeing this His
spiritual master had ordered Him to preach devotional service all over the
world. While speaking with Prakasananda, Lord Caitanya quoted an important verse
from the Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya (14.36):
          tvat-saksat-karanahlada-visuddhabdhi-sthitasya me
             sukhani gospadayante brahmany api jagad-guro

=== PAGE 12 ===

"My dear Lord, O master of the universe, since I have directly seen You, my
transcendental bliss has taken the shape of a great ocean. Thus I now regard the
happiness derived from understanding impersonal Brahman to be like the water
contained in a calf's hoofprint."."
   In this way, one who reaches the perfectional stage of devotional service
becomes so satisfied that he does not want anything more, and thus he always
engages in pure devotional service.
“Narada-Bhakti-Sutra: The Value of Devotion” by His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of this
book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended for personal non-
commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelines established by
international copyright laws. You may use this electronic file to evaluate the
printed version of this book, for your own private use, or for short excerpts
used in academic works, research, student papers, presentations, and the like.
You can distribute this evaluation copy to others over the Internet, so long as
you keep this copyright information intact. You may not reproduce more than ten
percent (10%) of this book in any media without the express written permission
from the copyright holders. Reference any excerpts in the following way:
“Excerpted from “Narada-Bhakti-Sutra” by the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust
International, www.Krishna.com.”
                               SUTRA 7*
                                 TEXT
                  sa na kamayamana nirodha-rupatvat
                               SYNONYMS
sa--that devotional service in pure love of God; na--not; kamayamana--like
ordinary lust; nirodha--renunciation; rupatvat--because of having as its form.
                             TRANSLATION
   There is no question of lust in the execution of pure devotional service,
because in it all material activities are renounced.
                               PURPORT
   In pure devotional service there is no question of sense gratification. Some
people mistake the loving affairs between Krsna and the gopis (cowherd girls)
for activities of ordinary sense gratification, but these affairs are not
lustful because there is no material contamination. As Rupa Gosvami states in
his Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.285),
            premaiva gopa-ramanam kama ity agamat pratham
          ity uddhavadayo 'py etam vanchanti bhagavat-priyah
"Although the dealings of the gopis with Krsna are wrongly celebrated by many as
lust, great sages and saintly persons like Uddhava hanker for such loving
affairs with Krsna." Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja, the author of Caitanya-
caritamrta, has therefore said,

=== PAGE 13 ===

kama, prema,--donhakara vibhinna laksana
               lauha ara hema yaiche svarupe vilaksana
"As there is a difference between iron and gold, so there is a difference
between material lust and Krsna's loving affairs with the gopis" (Cc. Adi
4.164). Although such loving affairs may sometimes resemble material lust, the
difference is as follows:
              atmendriya-priti-vancha--tare bali 'kama'
              krsnendriya-priti-iccha dhare 'prema' nama
"The desire to satisfy one's own senses is called lust, while the desire to
satisfy the senses of Krsna is called prema, love of God" (Cc. Adi 4.165).
   The impersonalists cannot understand the principle of satisfying Krsna's
senses because they reject the personality of Godhead. Thus they think God has
no senses and therefore no sense satisfaction. But the devotees simply want to
satisfy the senses of the Supreme Lord, and so they take part in the pure
activities of love of Godhead. There is no question of lust in that category of
pure transcendental love.
   Lust leads to fruitive activity for sense gratification. There are different
kinds of duties for the human being, such as political obligations, performance
of Vedic rituals, obligations for maintaining the body, and social formalities
and conventions, but all such activities are directed toward satisfying one's
own senses. The gopis, however, simply wanted to satisfy Krsna's senses, and
thus they completely gave up the conventional path of social restriction, not
caring for their relatives or the chastisement of their husbands. They gave up
everything for the satisfaction of Krsna, showing their strong attachment to
Krsna to be as spotless as washed white cloth.
   It is said that when conjugal affection between a lover and beloved comes to
the point of being destroyed and yet is not destroyed, such a relationship is
pure love, or prema. In the material world it is not possible to find this kind
of love, for it exists only between Krsna and His intimate devotees, such as the
gopis. The sentiment between the gopis and Krsna was so strong that it could not
be destroyed under any circumstances. Krsna praises the gopis' pure love in the
Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.32.22):
                  na paraye 'ham niravadya-samyujam
                  sva-sadhu-krtyam vibudhayusapi vah
                  ya mabhajan durjaya-geha-srnkhalah
                 samvrscya tad vah pratiyatu sadhuna
"My dear gopis, I am not able to repay My debt for your spotless service, even
within a lifetime of Brahma. Your connection with Me is beyond reproach. You
have worshiped Me, cutting off all domestic ties, which are difficult to break.
Therefore please let your own glorious deeds be your compensation."
                               SUTRA 8*
                                 TEXT
                 nirodhas tu loka-veda-vyapara-nyasah
                               SYNONYMS
nirodhah--renunciation; tu--moreover; loka--of social custom; veda--and of the
revealed scripture; vyapara--of the engagements; nyasa--renunciation.

=== PAGE 14 ===

TRANSLATION
   Such renunciation in devotional service means to give up all kinds of social
customs and religious rituals governed by Vedic injunction.
                               PURPORT
   In a verse in the Lalita-madhava (5.2), Srila Rupa Gosvami describes
renunciation in devotional service:
          rddha siddhi-vraja-vijayita satya-dharma samadhir
            brahmanando gurur api camatkarayaty eva tavat
          yavat premnam madhu-ripu-vasikara-siddhausadhinam
         gandho 'py antah-karana-sarani-panthatam na prayati
"Activities such as mystic trance, becoming one with the Supreme, and the
religious principles of brahminism, such as speaking the truth and tolerance,
have their own respective attractions, but when one becomes captivated by love
of Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, all attraction for mystic power,
monistic pleasure, and mundane religious principles becomes insignificant."
   In other words, by discharging pure devotional service one attains the
highest stage of love of Godhead and is freed from all other obligations, such
as those mentioned in the karma-kanda, jnana-kanda, and yoga-kanda sections of
the Vedas. One who engages in pure devotional service has no desire to improve
himself--except in the service of the Lord. In such devotional service there
cannot be any worship of the impersonal or localized features of the Supreme
Lord. The devotee simply performs activities that satisfy the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and thus attains pure love for the Lord.
   Only by the combined mercy of the pure devotee--the bona fide spiritual
master--and the Supreme Lord Himself can one attain pure devotional service to
the Lord. If someone is fortunate enough to find a pure devotee and accept him
as his spiritual master, then this spiritual master, out of his causeless mercy,
will impart the knowledge of pure devotional service. And it is the Lord, out of
His causeless mercy, who sends His most confidential servitor to this world to
instruct pure devotional service.
   By the divine grace of the spiritual master, the seed of pure devotional
service, which is completely different from the seed of fruitive activities and
speculative knowledge, is sown in the heart of the devotee. Then, when the
devotee satisfies the spiritual master and Krsna, this seed of devotional
service grows into a plant that gradually reaches up to the spiritual world. An
ordinary plant requires shelter for growing. Similarly, the devotional plant
grows and grows until it takes shelter in the spiritual world, without taking
shelter on any planet in the material world. In other words, those who are
captivated by pure devotional service have no desire to elevate themselves to
any material planet. The highest planet in the spiritual world is Krsna-loka, or
Goloka Vrndavana, and there the devotional plant takes shelter.
   The Narada Pancaratra defines pure devotional service as follows:
            sarvopadhi-vinirmuktam tat-paratvena nirmalam
               hrsikena hrsikesa-sevanam bhaktir ucyate
"Devotional service to the Supreme Lord means engagement of all the senses in
His service. In such service there are two important features: First, one must
be purified of all designations, and second, the senses should be engaged only
in the service of the Supreme Lord, the master of the senses. That is pure
devotional service."
   Everyone is now contaminated by various designations in relation to the body.
Everyone is thinking, "I belong to such-and-such country; I belong to a certain

=== PAGE 15 ===

society; I belong to a certain family." But when a person comes to the stage of
pure devotional service, he knows that he does not belong to anything except the
service of the Lord.
   The symptom of unflinching faith in pure devotional service is that one has
overcome the many disruptive desires that impede pure devotional service, such
as (1) the desire to worship the demigods, (2) the desire to serve someone other
than Krsna, (3) the desire to work for sense gratification, without
understanding one's relationship with Krsna, (4) the desire to cultivate
impersonal knowledge and thereby forget the Supreme Lord, and (5) the desire to
establish oneself as the Supreme, in which endeavor there is no trace of the
bliss of devotional service. One should give up all these desires and engage
exclusively in the loving devotional service of the Lord. Except for the service
of the Lord, anything done is in the service of illusion, or maya.
   One should try to get out of illusion and be engaged in the factual service
of Krsna. Service to Krsna utilizes all the senses, and when the senses are
engaged in the service of Krsna, they become purified. There are ten senses--
five active senses and five knowledge-acquiring senses. The active senses are
the power of talking, the hands, the legs, the evacuating outlet, and the
generating organ. The knowledge-acquiring senses are the eyes, the ears, the
nose, the tongue, and the sense of touch. The mind, the center of all the
senses, is sometimes considered the eleventh sense.
   One cannot engage in the transcendental loving service of the Lord with these
senses in their present materially covered state. Therefore one should take up
the process of devotional service to purify them. There are sixty-four items of
regulative devotional service for purifying the senses, and one should
strenuously undergo such regulative service. Then one can enter into the
transcendental loving service of the Lord. (See Sutra 12 for a full discussion
of these sixty-four items of devotional service.)
                              SUTRA 11*
                                 TEXT
         loka-vedesu tad-anukulacaranam tad-virodhisudasinata
                               SYNONYMS
loka--in society and politics; vedesu--and in the Vedic rituals; tat--for that;
anukula--of what is favorable; acaranam--performance; tat--for that; virodhisu--
for what is opposed; udasinata--indifference.
                             TRANSLATION
   Indifference toward what stands in the way of devotional service means to
accept only those activities of social custom and Vedic injunction that are
favorable to devotional service.
                               PURPORT
   Material existence is a life of revolt against the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. There are many ways in which the living entities can manifest this
spirit of revolt, such as engaging in fruitive activities, mental speculation,
or mystic yoga to achieve material perfections. Generally, all conditioned souls
desire to lord it over the material nature. Everyone wants to become a demilord,
either by social or political activities or by Vedic rituals. Everyone wants to
elevate himself to a higher status of existence or, out of frustration, become
one with the Supreme. All these desires are different types of materialism; they
are not favorable for devotional service.

=== PAGE 16 ===

A pure devotee rejects demigod worship and worships only Lord Krsna or His
Visnu expansions. Until a person is completely free of material contamination,
he might want to worship God in hope of fulfilling material desires. But even if
a person has material desires, if he scrupulously worships the Supreme Lord he
will very soon become purified of all such desires. On the other hand, persons
whose activities are dictated by material desires and who are also addicted to
worshiping the demigods cannot become pure devotees at any stage of their lives.
The Lord, situated within everyone's heart, fulfills the desires of the demigod-
worshipers--but in the Bhagavad-gita the Lord says that such demigod-worshipers
are of small intelligence (alpa-medhasah). In other words, as long as one is
controlled by the modes of nature, one will be prone to worship the demigods for
material purposes, but one who curbs this tendency and worships Krsna
exclusively can rise above the modes and attain pure devotional service.
   One cannot be situated on the platform of pure devotional service, however,
unless one is freed from all kinds of sinful reactions. To counteract various
sinful reactions, there are prescribed duties in the ritualistic section of the
Vedas, and those in the lower stage of life can become freed from all sinful
reactions by strictly following the Vedic ritualistic processes. Then they can
become situated in pure devotional service. Thus it should be understood that a
person who is situated in pure devotional service must have in his past life
already executed all the Vedic rituals with great determination. In other words,
after reaching the stage of devotional service, a person does not have to
execute any process of atonement mentioned in the ritualistic section of the
Vedas. He is already sinless.
                              SUTRA 12*
                                 TEXT
           bhavatu niscaya-dardhyad urdhvam sastra-raksanam
                               SYNONYMS
bhavatu--let there be; niscaya--of certainty; dardhyat--the firm fixing;
urdhvam--after; sastra--of scripture; raksanam--the observance.
                             TRANSLATION
   One must continue to follow scriptural injunctions even after one is fixed up
in determined certainty that devotional service is the only means for reaching
the perfection of life.
                               PURPORT
   When a person becomes firmly convinced about the importance of devotional
service, he surrenders unto the Supreme Lord. There are six symptoms of
surrender: (1) One should perform only those actions favorable for devotional
service to Krsna. (2) One should give up everything unfavorable for discharging
devotional service. (3) One should firmly believe that Krsna will protect one in
all circumstances and that no one is a better protector than Krsna. This
conviction should be distinct from the monistic philosophy that one is as good
as Krsna. Rather, one should always think that Krsna, or God, is great and that
one is always protected by Him. (4) One should have the conviction that Krsna is
one's maintainer, and one should not take shelter of any demigod for
maintenance. (5) One should always remember that one's activities and desires
are not independent. In other words, the devotee should feel completely
dependent on Krsna, and thus he should act and think as Krsna desires. (6) One

=== PAGE 17 ===

should always think himself the poorest of the poor and feel totally dependent
on the mercy of Krsna.
   A devotee who follows these six principles of surrender always thinks, "O
Lord, I am Yours in every respect; I am Your eternal servant." In this way a
pure devotee becomes cleansed. There is a nice verse in this connection in the
Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.29.34):
                   martyo yada tyakta-samasta-karma
                      niveditatma vicikirsito me
                     tadamrtatvam pratipadyamano
                    mayatma-bhuyaya ca kalpate vai
"A person who gives up all fruitive activities and offers himself entirely unto
Me, eagerly desiring to render service unto Me, achieves liberation from birth
and death and is promoted to the status of sharing My own opulences." To be
elevated to such a point of devotional life, one has to execute the directions
of the scriptures. But even after becoming elevated in devotional life, one
should not think, "Oh, I am already elevated to the highest stage; therefore I
may violate the scriptural regulations for executing devotional service."
   Devotional service is dormant in every living being, for by nature every
living being is part and parcel of the Supreme Lord and it is the healthy
condition of the part to serve the whole. It is just like the situation of the
parts of the body. The hand and the leg serve the body; similarly, as part and
parcel of the Supreme Lord, every living entity is bound to serve the Supreme
Lord in his healthy condition. When he is not thus engaged, he is in a diseased
condition, but as soon as he engages all his senses in the transcendental loving
service of the Lord, he is in his normal, healthy condition.
   The devotee should engage his senses in the Lord's service according to the
directions of the authoritative scriptures and under the guidance of a bona fide
spiritual master. The beginning of one's devotional training is to engage the
ear in aural reception of the teachings of the Bhagavad-gita and the Srimad-
Bhagavatam. There are many authoritative books of spiritual knowledge, but all
of them are more or less supplements to the Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam.
Even the Narada-bhakti-sutra is a summary of the Bhagavad-gita and the Srimad-
Bhagavatam. Therefore the beginning of devotional service is to hear these two
important transcendental books of knowledge. Simply by aural reception of these
two books from the bona fide spiritual master, one becomes enlightened about
devotional service, which is dormant within the heart.
   Devotional service executed under the guidance of the spiritual master and
according to scriptural injunctions is called vaidhi-bhakti, a part of sadhana-
bhakti, or devotional service in practice. The other division of sadhana-bhakti
is raganuga-bhakti, spontaneous devotional service.
   One who wishes to advance to the platform of raganuga-bhakti must follow the
injunctions of the authoritative scriptures under the direction of the spiritual
master. According to Sutra 12, even a person on a highly elevated platform of
devotional service must execute the rules and regulations of the scripture, what
to speak of persons who are not elevated. In other words, neophytes in
devotional service must strictly and scrupulously follow the rules and
regulations of the scriptures to rise to the platform of unalloyed devotional
service.
   As mentioned above, a devotee who strictly practices regulative devotional
service, or vaidhi-bhakti. The prime principle of vaidhi-bhakti is stated in the
Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.1.5):
            tasmad bharata sarvatma bhagavan isvaro harih
          srotavyah kirtitavyas ca smartavyas cecchatabhayam

=== PAGE 18 ===

"A person serious about making progress in devotional service must always think
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, must always chant His glories, and must
always hear about His activities." These are the preliminary principles of
following the scriptural rules and regulations.
   The Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.5.2) states,
             mukha-bahuru-padebhyah purusasyasramaih saha
            catvaro jajnire varna gunair vipradayah prthak
Every person, whatever he may be, emanates from some part of the universal form
of the Supreme Lord, the virat-purusa. The brahmanas (intelligentsia) emanate
from the face, the ksatriyas (warriors and administrators) emanate from the
arms, the vaisyas (farmers and merchants) emanate from the thighs, and the
sudras (laborers) emanate from the feet. But wherever we may be situated, we
have some particular function to execute in the service of the Supreme Whole,
the Personality of Godhead. If we do not, therefore, engage our particular
propensities in the service of the Lord, then we are fallen, just like a useless
limb amputated from the body.
   According to the Padma Purana, the sum and substance of all the regulative
principles of the scripture is that Lord Visnu, or Krsna, should always be
remembered and should never be forgotten. We should therefore mold our lives in
such a way that in every activity we shall be able to remember the Supreme Lord.
Any activity that reminds one of the Supreme Lord is a regulative principle in
devotional service, and any activity that makes one forget the Supreme Lord is a
forbidden activity for a devotee.
   In the Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 22.115-28), Lord Caitanya lists sixty-four
regulative principles one must follow to be elevated to the highest platform of
devotional service. And, as stressed here in Sutra 12, even after being elevated
to the highest platform of devotional service, one must continue following the
scriptural injunctions for devotional life. The sixty-four regulative principles
are as follows:
   (1) To accept a bona fide spiritual master. (2) To become initiated by the
spiritual master. (3) To engage oneself in the service of the spiritual master.
(4) To receive instructions from the spiritual master and inquire about
advancing on the path of devotional service. (5) To follow in the footsteps of
previous acaryas and follow the directions given by the spiritual master. (6) To
give up anything for the satisfaction of Krsna, and to accept anything for the
satisfaction of Krsna. (7) To live in a place where Krsna is present--a city
like Vrndavana or Mathura, or a Krsna temple. (8) To minimize one's means of
living as much as one can, while living comfortably to execute devotional
service. (9) To observe fasting days, such as Ekadasi. (10) To worship cows,
brahmanas, Vaisnavas, and sacred trees like the banyan.
   These ten principles of devotional service are the beginning. Additional
principles are as follows: (11) One should avoid committing offenses against the
holy name, the Deity, etc. (12) One should avoid associating with nondevotees.
(13) One should not aspire to have many disciples. (14) One should not
unnecessarily divert his attention by partially studying many books so as to
appear very learned. For devotional service, it is sufficient to scrutinizingly
study books like the Bhagavad-gita, the Srimad-Bhagavatam, and the Caitanya-
caritamrta. (15) One should not be disturbed in either loss or gain. (16) One
should not allow oneself to be overwhelmed by lamentation for any reason. (17)
One should not blaspheme the demigods, although one should not worship them.
Similarly, one should not criticize other scriptures, although one should not
follow the principles therein. (18) One should not tolerate blasphemy of the
Supreme Lord or His devotees. (19) One should not indulge in idle talks, such as
those about relationships between men and women. (20) One should not
unnecessarily disturb any living being, whatever he may be.

=== PAGE 19 ===

The above-mentioned twenty items are the doorway to devotional service. And
among them, the first three--namely, acceptance of the spiritual master,
initiation by the spiritual master, and service to the spiritual master--are the
most important. Then come the following items: (21) To hear about the Lord. (22)
To chant His glories. (23) To remember Him. (24) To serve and meditate upon the
lotus feet of the Lord and His devotees. (25) To worship Him. (26) To pray to
Him. (27) To think of oneself as the Lord's eternal servant. (28) To become the
Lord's friend. (29) To offer everything to the Lord. (30) To dance before the
Deity. (31) To sing before the Deity. (32) To inform the Lord of everything
about one's life. (33) To bow down to the Lord. (34) To offer respect to the
spiritual master and the Supreme Lord by standing up at the appropriate time.
(35) To follow the spiritual master or the Supreme Lord in procession. (36) To
visit places of pilgrimage and temples of the Supreme Lord. (37) To
circumambulate the temple. (38) To recite prayers. (39) To chant the Lord's name
softly to oneself. (40) To chant the Lord's name loudly in congregation. (41) To
smell incense and flowers offered to the Deity. (42) To eat the remnants of food
offered to the Deity. (43) To regularly attend the arati offered to the Deity,
as well as special festivals. (44) To regularly look upon the Deity. (45) To
offer one's dearmost possessions to the Supreme Lord. (46) To meditate on the
Lord's name, form, pastimes, etc. (47) To water the tulasi plant. (48) To serve
the Lord's devotees. (49) To try to live in Vrndavana or Mathura. (50) To relish
the topics of the Srimad-Bhagavatam. (51) To take all kinds of risks for Krsna.
(52) To always expect the mercy of Krsna. (53) To observe ceremonies like
Janmastami (the appearance day of Lord Krsna) and Rama-navami (the appearance
day of Lord Ramacandra) with devotees. (54) To fully surrender to Krsna. (55) To
observe special regulations like those followed during the month of Kartika
(Oct.-Nov.). (56) To mark the body with Vaisnava tilaka (clay markings). (57) To
mark the body with the holy names of God. (58) To accept the remnants of
garlands that have been offered to the Supreme Lord. (59) To drink caranamrta,
the water that has washed the lotus feet of the Deity.
   Among these fifty-nine items, five are considered so important that they are
mentioned again separately, thus completing the sixty-four items of devotional
service. These five are (60) associating with devotees, (61) chanting the holy
name of the Lord, (62) hearing the Srimad-Bhagavatam, (63) residing at a place
of pilgrimage like Mathura, and (64) worshiping the Deity with faith and
veneration.
                              SUTRA 13*
                                 TEXT
                       anyatha patitya-sankaya
                               SYNONYMS
anyatha--otherwise; patitya--of falling down; sankaya--because of anticipating
the possibility.
                             TRANSLATION
   Otherwise there is every possibility of falling down.
                               PURPORT
   If a diseased person is being cured of the symptoms of his disease but does
not care for the principles of healthy living, there is every possibility of a
relapse. Similarly, the neophyte devotee serious about advancing in devotional
service must carefully follow the principles of regulative devotional service;

=== PAGE 20 ===

otherwise there is every possibility of his falling down. Strictly speaking, if
a devotee ignores the regulative principles and acts according to his whims--if,
for example, he does not eat krsna-prasadam but eats anywhere and everywhere,
such as in restaurants--there is every possibility of his falling down. If he
accumulates money without spending it for devotional service, there is every
possibility of his falling down. If he applies his energy not in the service of
the Lord but in some material activity, there is every possibility of his
falling down. If the devotee does not engage himself always in hearing and
chanting the topics of Krsna and His activities but instead indulges in idle
talk, there is every chance of his falling down. If a neophyte devotee does not
follow the orders of the spiritual master and simply officially sticks to the
principles, or if he does not strictly follow the principles, there is every
possibility of his falling down. To become greedy is another cause of falldown.
And to associate with persons who are not in devotional service is the last word
in maya's allurements for causing a devotee to fall down.
   In the Bhagavad-gita (18.5), Krsna clearly states that sacrifice, charity,
and penance are never to be given up by a transcendentalist. If he is at all
intelligent he must continue these three activities, even if he is highly
elevated. A devotee is naturally very humble, and even if he is highly elevated
he does not consider himself to be so. A practical example is found in the life
of the author of the Caitanya-caritamrta, Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami. He was a
vastly learned scholar and a first-class devotee, yet he still referred to
himself as the lowest of mankind, lower than the bacteria in the stool. He wrote
that he was so sinful that no one should even utter his name, lest that person
fall down! Of course, when a great devotee speaks this way, we should not
believe that he is actually in the lower status of life; we should rather take
it as evidence that out of humility a pure devotee never thinks he is elevated.
He always thinks he is in the lowest status of spiritual life.
   As stated above, in the Bhagavad-gita Krsna states that no one should give up
the sacrificial portion of spiritual life. And the scriptures recommend that the
best sacrifice in this Age of Kali is to chant Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna
Krsna, Hare Hare. Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. Therefore, a
devotee's prime duty is to continue chanting this maha-mantra, even if he is
highly elevated. Otherwise, at any stage one can fall down.
                              SUTRA 14*
                                 TEXT
    loke 'pi tavad eva bhojanadi-vyaparas tv a-sarira-dharanavadhi
                               SYNONYMS
loke--in social behavior; api--also; tavat--for that long; eva--indeed; bhojana-
-eating; adi--and so on; vyaparah--the activity; tu--and; a-sarira-dharana-
avadhi--for as long as one still has this body.
                             TRANSLATION
   For as long as the body lasts, one should engage minimally in social and
political activities and in such matters as eating.
                               PURPORT
   Spiritual life begins when a person understands that he is not the body. In
the material world, all our connections--whether social or political or in the
field of eating, sleeping, defending, and mating--are due only to the material

=== PAGE 21 ===

body. Unless one is completely conversant with the fact that one is not the
body, it is not possible to become self-realized.
   In the Bhagavad-gita (18.54), Lord Krsna describes self-realization as
follows:
           brahma-bhutah prasannatma na socati na kanksati
           samah sarvesu bhutesu mad-bhaktim labhate param
"Self-realization [the brahma-bhuta stage] is symptomized by joyfulness. One
never laments for any loss, nor is one very enthusiastic when there is some
gain. One sees everyone on an equal level through spiritual understanding. These
qualities are preliminary to entering into pure devotional service."
   Pure devotional service is so powerful, however, that one may at once take to
it without acquiring the previous qualification of brahma-bhuta life. A sincere
devotee who engages in the service of the Lord automatically becomes situated in
the brahma-bhuta stage. The devotee's duty is only to strictly follow the
principles of regulated devotional service, as previously mentioned. Therefore a
devotee should not be too concerned about social and political obligations,
since all such activities belong to the body. He should similarly restrict his
eating; this is essential to the execution of devotional service. A devotee
cannot eat anything and everything he likes; he must eat only foods that have
been offered to the Lord. The Lord clearly says (Bhagavad-gita 9.26) that He
will accept a flower, a fruit, a leaf, or a little water if they are offered to
Him with devotional love. (One should note that the Supreme Lord accepts only
foods from the vegetable kingdom, as well as milk products. "Water" includes
milk and its products.) The Lord is not hungry or poor, in need of our offering.
Actually, it is to our advantage to offer Him something to eat. If the Supreme
Lord kindly accepts our offering, then we are benefited. The Lord is full, but
to establish the universal principle that everyone can offer something to the
Lord, He accepts even the most meager offering--when it is presented with love.
Even the poorest of the poor can collect a flower, a leaf, and a little water
and offer them to the Supreme Lord.
   It is incumbent upon all devotees of Krsna to avoid eating anything that has
not been offered to the Supreme Lord. A devotee who does not strictly follow
this principle is sure to fall down. Similarly, one who refuses to accept
prasadam, the remnants of food offered to Krsna, cannot become a devotee.
   In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (5.5.3) Lord Rsabhadeva states that one who is
determined to become a pure devotee avoids associating with the general mass of
people, who are simply engaged in the animal propensities of eating, sleeping,
defending, and mating. The general mass of people mistake the body for the self,
and therefore they are always busy trying to maintain the body very nicely. A
devotee should not associate with such people. Nor should he be overly attached
to his family members, knowing that he has been accidentally thrown together
with his wife, children, and so on. Spiritually, no one is a wife, child,
husband, or father of anyone else. Everyone comes into this world according to
his past deeds and takes shelter of a father and a mother, but actually no one
is anyone's father or mother. While a devotee must know this, that does not mean
he should neglect his family. As a matter of duty he should maintain his family
members without attachment and instruct them in Krsna consciousness.
   So, whether in social life or political life, or in the matter of eating,
sleeping, mating, and defending, a devotee should avoid performing any action
tainted by material attachment. The word used here is bhojanadi, which indicates
the four propensities of eating, sleeping, defending, and mating. As the devotee
does not eat anything that has not been offered to Krsna, so he does not sleep
more than is absolutely necessary. In the lives of the great devotees Sanatana
Gosvami and Rupa Gosvami, we see that they did not sleep more than one and a
half hours a day, and they were reluctant even to accept that. So sleeping is
also restricted. Naturally one who is always engaged in devotional service of

=== PAGE 22 ===

the Lord has very little time to sleep. Sleep is a necessity of the body, not
the spirit soul, and therefore as one advances in devotional service one's
propensity to sleep decreases.
   Similarly, a devotee minimizes his defending propensity. A pure devotee knows
he is under the shelter of the all-powerful Supreme Lord, and so he is not very
anxious about defending himself. Although he should use his common sense in the
matter of defending, he is sure that without being protected by Lord Krsna no
one can defend himself, however expert he may be in the art of defense.
   In the same way, a devotee minimizes or eliminates sex. He does not indulge
indiscriminately in sex, begetting offspring as the cats and dogs do. If he
begets any children at all, he takes charge of them to elevate them to Krsna
consciousness so that they may not have to suffer in material life again, in
future lives. That is the duty of a devotee.
   In this material world, people in general engage in sense-gratificatory
activities, which keep them bound up by the laws of the material modes of
nature. Indeed, the more a person engages in such activities, the more he
expands his life in material existence. A devotee acts differently: he knows he
is not the body and that as long as he is in his body he will have to suffer the
threefold material miseries. Therefore to decrease his material entanglement and
help his advancement in spiritual life, he always minimizes his social and
political activities and his eating, sleeping, defending, and mating.
                              SUTRA 15*
                                 TEXT
               tal-laksanani vacyante nana-mata-bhedat
                               SYNONYMS
tat--of it (devotional service); laksanani--the characteristics; vacyante--are
enunciated; nana--various; mata--of theories; bhedat--according to the
differences.
                             TRANSLATION
   Now the characteristics of devotional service will be described according to
various authoritative opinions.
                               PURPORT
   In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (7.5.23), Prahlada Maharaja very clearly states what
the essential activities of devotional service are:
            sravanam kirtanam visnoh smaranam pada-sevanam
            arcanam vandanam dasyam sakhyam atma-nivedanam
"Devotional service consists of (1) hearing about the Lord, (2) chanting His
glories, (3) remembering Him, (4) serving and meditating upon His lotus feet,
(5) worshiping Him, (6) praying to Him, (7) thinking oneself His eternal
servant, (8) becoming His friend, and (9) surrendering everything to Him."
   One should surrender to the Lord as much as an animal purchased from the
market surrenders to its master. Such an animal never thinks of his maintenance
because he knows that his master will look after him. A soul totally surrendered
to the Supreme Lord is similarly never anxious for his maintenance. Srila
Sanatana Gosvami gives further symptoms of full surrender in his Hari-bhakti-
vilasa (11.417):

=== PAGE 23 ===

anukulyasya sankalpah pratikulyasya varjanam
             raksisyatiti visvaso goptrtve varanam tatha
             atma-niksepa-karpanye sad-vidha saranagatih
"The six divisions of surrender are: accepting those things favorable to
devotional service, rejecting unfavorable things, the conviction that Krsna will
give protection, accepting the Lord as one's guardian or master, full self-
surrender, and humility." Narada will gradually explain these principles of
devotion in the remaining sutras.
“Narada-Bhakti-Sutra: The Value of Devotion” by His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.
NOTE FROM THE PUBLISHER: This document contains the first chapter of Narada-
Bhakti-Sutra translated and commented on by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta
Swami Prabhupada. His disciples have since completed the translation and
commentary on the total of 84 “sutras.” The complete work is available as the
publication, Narada-Bhakti-Sutra: The Secrets of Transcendental Love, by the
Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, at www.Krishna.com.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of this
book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended for personal non-
commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelines established by
international copyright laws. You may use this electronic file to evaluate the
printed version of this book, for your own private use, or for short excerpts
used in academic works, research, student papers, presentations, and the like.
You can distribute this evaluation copy to others over the Internet, so long as
you keep this copyright information intact. You may not reproduce more than ten
percent (10%) of this book in any media without the express written permission
from the copyright holders. Reference any excerpts in the following way:
“Excerpted from “Narada-Bhakti-Sutra” by the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust
International, www.Krishna.com.”