=== PAGE 1 ===

Sri NARADA
PANCARATRA

of
Sri Krsna Dvaipayana Vyasa

VoLuME Two
Third, Fourth and Fifth Ratras

Translated by Bhumipati Das
Edited by Purnaprajiia Dasa

=== PAGE 2 ===

From cover;

The Narada-Pancaratra is mentioned many times in the
writings of Srila Prabhupada. One verse, especially,
was quoted by Srila Prabhupada innumer-- able times
because it serves as the definition of devotional
service. In the purport of Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya
19.170) Srila Prabhupada has written: Devotional
service is defined in the Narada-Pancaratra as follows:
sarvopadhi-vinirmuktam tat-paratvena nirmalam
hrsikena hrsikesa- sevanam bhaktir ucyate

“One should be free from all material designations and
cleansed of all material contamination. lie should be
restored to his pure identity, in which he engages his
senses in the service of the proprietor of the senses.
That is called devotional service.” This is the most

famous verse from Narada-pancaratra.

=== PAGE 3 ===

Dedicated to

His Divine Grace
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada
Sounder-acarya
International Society for Krishna Consciousness

=== PAGE 4 ===

CONTENTS

Introduction

CHAPTER 1

_ Parvati Inquires From Mahadeva about the Process of
Worshiping Lord Visnu
CHAPTER 2

The Performance of Nyasa and the Chanting of Mantras While

Worshiping the Lord and His Various Energies
CHAPTER 38

An Explanation of Various Nyasas and Mantras
CHAPTER 4

A Further Explanation of the Performance of

Various Nyasas
CHAPTER 5

Meditation Upon Lord Krsna In His Transcendental
abode, Vrndavana

CHAPTER 6

The Process of Worshiping Lord Krsna Whereby one
Can attain Samipya-Mukti, the Liberation of Becoming
an Eternal associate of the Lord

CHAPTER 7
Instructions on Worshiping the Lord and His associates
CHAPTER 8

Further Instructions on Worshiping the Lord and His
Associates

CHAPTER 9
The Procedure For Performing Fire Sacrifice

9

21

31

41

55

63

77

85

=== PAGE 5 ===

CHAPTER 10

Service to Lord Krsna after Diksa. Meditation
Upon Lord Krsna

CHAPTER 11

The Process of Worshiping Lord Krsna at Noon.
Meditation Upon Lord Krsna

CHAPTER 12

Service to Lord Krsna In the Evening
The Worship of the Gopis

CHAPTER 13

Worship of Lord Krsna In His Mantra Form The
Process of Tarpana

CHAPTER 14
The Chanting of Various Mantras and Their Results
CHAPTER 15
Description of Lord Krsna In Dvaraka

FourtH RATRA

CHAPTER 1

Mahadeva Narrates One Hundred and Eight Names
of Lord Krsna to Narada Muni

CHAPTER 2

The Glories of Lord Visnu, as Described In a
Conversation Between Parvati and Lord Siva

CHAPTER 3

The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu, as told
by Lord Siva to Parvati

CHAPTER 4
Narada Muni Glorifies Lord Visnu

CHAPTER 5
The Trailokya-Mangala-Kavaca of Sri Krsna

93

101

119

129

153

175

189

199

269

277

=== PAGE 6 ===

CHAPTER 6
Prayers to Lord Gopala
CHAPTER 7
A Description of the Gopala-kavaca
CHAPTER 8
The One Thousand Names of Lord Gopala
CHAPTER 9
The Paraphernalia Used For Worshiping the Lord
CHAPTER 10
Five Types of Worship
CHAPTER 11
Twelve Kinds of Purification Practiced by Vaisnavas

Firru RATRA

CHAPTER 1
Lord Krsna’s Instructions For the Age of Kali
CHAPTER 2

The Benefits of Chanting the Twelve-Syllable
and Eighteen-Syllable Mantras

CHAPTER 3
Methods For Meditating Upon the Lord and
Worshiping Him

CHAPTER 4

Further Descriptions of Meditation and
Worship of the Supreme Lord

CHAPTER 5
The One Thousand Holy Names of Sri Radha
CHAPTER 6

The Glories of the One Thousand Holy Names
of Sri Radha

289

295

301

357

363

371

379

405

423

435

447

505

=== PAGE 7 ===

CHAPTER 7
The Sri Radha-Kavaca
CHAPTER 8

An Explanation of the Méanings of Some of
the Supreme Lord’s Holy Names

CHAPTER 9
Worship of and Meditation on Sri Radha
CHAPTER 10
The Practice of Mystic Yoga, or Mantra-Yoga
CHAPTER I1
The Glories of Mystic Yoga

513

523

533

541

555

=== PAGE 8 ===

INTRODUCTION

The Ndarada-pancaratra is mentioned many times in the writings
of Srila Prabhupada. One verse, especially, was quoted by
Srila Prabhupada innumerable times because it serves as the
definnition of devotional service.

In the purport of Caitanya-caritémrta (Madhya 19.170) Srila
Prabhupada has written:

Devotional service is defined in the Ndérada-pajcaratra as
follows:

Sarvopadhi-vinirmuktam
tat-paratvena nirmalam
hrstkena hrstkesa-
sevanam bhaktir ucyate

“One should be free from all material designations and cleansed
of all material contamination. He should be restored to his
pure identity, in which he engages his senses in the service of
the proprietor of the senses. That is called devotional service.”

This is the most famous verse from Nérada-pajicaratra. Another
verse is quoted by Srila Prabhupada in his purport to Bhagavad-
gita (5.31):

A devotee of the Lord, always acting in Krsna consciousness,
is automatically liberated. In the Ndrada-pajicaratra this is
confirmed in this way:

dik-kalady-anavacchinne
krsne ceto vidhaya ca

tan-mayo bhavati ksipram
jivo brahmani yojayet

=== PAGE 9 ===

Sri NARADA-PANCARATRA

“By concentrating one’s attention on the transcendental form
of Krsna, who is all-pervading and beyond time and space, one
becomes absorbed in thinking of Krsna and then attains the
happy state of transcendental association with Him.”

We know that in the four yugas, four different processes of self-
realization are prescribed. This is most often explained while
quoting the following verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (12.3.52):

kyte yad dhyayato visnum
tretayam yajato makhaih

dvapare paricaryayam
kalau tad dhari-kirtanat

TRANSLATION
Whatever result was obtained in Satya-yuga by meditating on
Visnu, in Treta-yuga by performing sacrifices, and in Dvapara-
yuga by serving the Lord’s lotus feet can be obtained in Kali-
yuga simply by chanting the Hare Krsna mahd-manitra,

: PURPORT
A similar verse is found in the Visnu Purana (6.2.17), and also
in the Padma Purana (Uttara-khanda 72.25) and the Brhan-
naradiya Purana (38.97):

dhydyan kyte yajan yajniais
tretayam dvapare ’rcayan
yad apnoti tad apnoti
kalau sankirtya kesavam

“Whatever is achieved by meditation in Satya-yuga, by the
performance of sacrifice in Treta-yuga, and by the worship of
Lord Krsna’s lotus feet in Dvapara-yuga is obtained in the age
of Kali simply by glorifying the name of Lord Keégava.”

=== PAGE 10 ===

INTRODUCTION

Srila Jiva Gosvami has further quoted from the Brahma-vaivarta
Purana concerning the degraded condition of people in Kali-
yuga:
atah kalau tapo-yoga-
vidyd-yajnadikah kriyah
sdnga bhavanti na krtah
kusalair api dehibhih

‘Thus in the age of Kali the practices of austerity, yoga
meditation, Deity worship, sacrifice and so on, along with their
various subsidiary functions, are not properly carried out, even
by the most expert embodied souls.

Srila Jiva Gosvami has also cited the Caturmdsya-mahatmya of
the Skandg Purana concerning the necessity of chanting Hare
Krsna in this age:

tatha caivottamam loke
tapah sri-hari-kittanam

kalau yuge visesena
visnu-prityat samacaret

“In this way the most perfect penance to be executed in this
world is the chanting of the name of Lord Sri Hari. Especially
in the age of Kali, one can satisfy the Supreme Lord Visnu by
performing savikirtana.”’

In conclusion, massive propaganda should be made all over
the world to induce people to chant the Hare Krsna mantra, by
which human society can be rescued from the dangerous ocean
of the age of Kali.

In the previous age, Dvapara-yuga, the process of Deity worship
was prescribed and this method is explained in great detail in
the Narada-paficaratra.

=== PAGE 11 ===

Srt NARADA-PANCARATRA

In his purport to Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.9.17), Srila Prabhupada
has written:

People in general are all engaged in senseless work. They are
systematically unmindful of the real beneficial work, which is
the devotional service of the Lord, technically called the arcana
regulations. The arcand regulations are directly instructed by
the Lord in the Ndarada-pancaratra and are strictly followed by
the intelligent men, who know well that the highest perfectional
goal of life is to reach Lord Visnu, who is the root of the tree
called the cosmic manifestation.

The purpose of any process of self-realization is to engage
the practitioner one hundred percent so that his mind
becomes fully ‘absorbed in transcendence, with no chance of
engaging on the material platform. In the Dvapara-yuga, a very
elaborate performance of Deity worship enabled the devotee
to fully engage his mind and senses in Krsna consciousness.
This process is not practical in Kali-yuga, however, when the
sankirtana-yajiia is to be performed. Therefore, what we read
in the Ndarada-pancaratra is too elaborate and technical for this
fallen age. Still, the process of Deity worship is not neglected
in Kali-yuga, as we see from the following purport in Srimad-
Bhagavatam (6.3.26) where Srila Prabhupada has written:

Especially in this age of Kali, savkirtana alone is sufficient. If
the members of our temples in the different parts of the world
simply continue sankirtana before the Deity, especially before
$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, they will remain perfect. There is no
need of any other performances. Nevertheless, to keep oneself
clean in habits and mind, Deity worship and other regulative
principles are required. Srila Jiva Gosvami says that although
sankirtana is sufficient for the perfection of life, the arcana, or
worship of the Deity in the temple, must continue in order that
the devotees may stay clean and pure. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta

=== PAGE 12 ===

INTRODUCTION

Sarasvati Thakura therefore recommended that one follow
both processes simultaneously. We strictly follow his principle
of performing Deity worship and sankirtana along parallel lines.
This we should continue.

Srila Prabhupada has written in his purport to Srimad-
Bhagavatam (4.13.4):

Narada Muni is always glorifying the pastimes of the Lord. In
this verse we see that not only does he glorify the Lord, but he
also likes to glorify the devotees of the Lord. The great-sage
Narada’s mission is to broadcast the devotional service of the
Lord. For this purpose he has compiled the Narada-pafcaratra,
a directory of devotional service, so that devotees can always
take information about how to execute devotional service and
thus engage twenty-four hours a day in performing sacrifices
for the pleasure of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

In the purport to Srimad-Bhagavatam (6.8.17) Srila Prabhupada
has written:

Narada Muni, who is the guide for arcana, is the author of the
Narada-paiicaratra, which prescribes the regulative principles
for worshiping the Deity. Everyone engaged in Deity worship,
whetherat home or in the temple, should always seek the mercy
of Devarsi Narada in order to avoid the thirty-two offenses while
worshiping the Deity.

Narada-pancaratra is a very important devotional literature. It is
referred to in the following verse of Rupa Gosvami, which Srila
Prabhupada quoted numerous times, as in this excerpt from
the Bhagavad-gita purport (7.3):

Srila Ripa Gosvami writes in his Bhakti-rasdmrta-sindhu
(1.2.101):

iit

=== PAGE 13 ===

Sruti-smyti-purandadi-
patcaratra-vidhim ving

aikantiki harer bhaktir
utpatayaiva kalpate

“Devotional service of the Lord that ignores the authorized
Vedic literatures like the Upanisads, Puranas and Narada-
pancaratra is simply an unnecessary disturbance in society.”

It is our hope that the readers of this humble attempt at
presenting Narada-paficaratra will gain, at the very least, some
pleasure in hearing the glorification of Lord Krishna, as
expressed by His pure devotee, Narada Muni.

=== PAGE 14 ===

SRI NARADA
PANCARATRA

=== PAGE 15 ===

Third Ratra

CHAPTER 1

Parvati Inquires From Mahadeva about the
Process of Worshiping Lord Visnu

Text 1
$ri-Siva uvaca
Srau narada vaksyami
mantra-yantra-kriyadikan
purd vyasena ye proktah
Sukam prati mahamate
Mahadeva said: O Narada! I shall now describe to you the
mantras, yantras and various rituals that Vyasadeva had imparted
to Sukadeva, long ago. Kindly hear with attention.

Texts 24

pratah-kytya-vidhir yo ‘tra

tatha snana-vidhir mune
tatha pajadikam sarvath

mantraksara-samudbhavam
mantrarthas ca yatha

yena jrdyate purusena hi
pura kailasa-sikhare

sukha-sevye nirantaram
parvati mar pura bhaktya

paripapraccha yat sivam
tat tat srnu mahabaho

mamaikdgra-mand mune

O sage, on the peak of Mount Kailasa, Parvati repeatedly
inquired from me with great devotion about religious duties to

1

=== PAGE 16 ===

Srt NARADA-PANCARATRA * THIRD RATRA

be performed in the morning, the procedure for bathing, the
collecting of paraphernalia for worship, as well as about the
origin and meanings of various mantras.

O mighty-armed sage! Listen with undivided attention as I
speak on these subjects, which are meant for the welfare of the
world.

Text 5
parvaty uvaca
deva-deva mahadeva
Samsararnava-taraka
vaktum arhasi devesa
mantra-tantra-vidhim guro

Parvati said: O Mahadeva! O Lord of lords! O deliverer of the
fallen living entities from the ocean of material existence!
O foremost spiritual master of the demigods, you alone are
capable of revealing to me the proper understanding of mantras
and tantras.

Texts 6-8
Srt-radhayas ca krsnasya
tatha paja-vidhim mama
mantrartham ca tathaé yogan
ndadmnam astottaram satam

sahasram ca tatha namnam
prabrihi mama sémpratam
yady asti mayi karunyam
yady asti mayi dohadam
tada prabrithi radhaya
namnam astottaram Satam
Sahasram ca tatha deva
mantra-yantra-vidhim mama

=== PAGE 17 ===

THE Process oF WorsHIPING Lorp Visnu

Olord, please describe to me in detail the process of worshiping
Sri Sri Radha-Krsna, the meaning of various mantras, the
procedure for practicing yoga, the one hundred and eight
names of the Lord, and also the one thousand names of the
Supreme Lord. If you are actually merciful to me then you will
tell me Radha’s one hundred and eight names, as well as Her
one thousand names, and the process of chanting mantras and
performing tantras in relation to Her.

Text 9
$ri-mahddeva uvdca
Srnu devi pravaksyami
mantra-yantra-vidhim priye
Sukam prati pura proktam
vedavyasena dhimata

Mahadeva said: O dear one, please listen now as I explain about
mantras and tantras as it was revealed by Vyasadeva to Sukadeva,
long ago.

Text 10
tat te ‘ham sampravaksyami
Srnusvaika-manah priye
yavato mantra-varnas tu
Sri-krsnasya paratmanah

O dearly beloved, kindly hear with rapt attention as I begin my
glorification of Krsna mantras.

Text 11
wyasa uvdca
kala tu maya narakanta-mirtih
kala-kvanad-venu-nindda-ramyah
Srito hrdi vydkulayams trilokim
Sriye ‘stu gopi-jana-vallabho vah

=== PAGE 18 ===

Srt NARADA-PANCARATRA ® THIRD RATRA

Vyasadeva said: May Sri Krsna—who enchants the three worlds
by the sound of His flute, who assumes a human form, who is
very dear to the gopis, and whose separatated energy is known
as maya—reside within your heart.

Text 12
guru-carana-saroruha-dvayotthan
mahita-rajah-kanakan pranamya mirdhna
gaditam iha vivecya naradadyair
yajana-vidhi kathayami sarigapaneh

After offering obeisances to the most exalted particles of dust
from the lotus feet of my spiritual master, I shall begin to reveal
the process of worship of Lord Krsna, as taught by great sages,
such as Narada.

Text 13
Sarvesu varnesu tathdsramesu
narisu nanasu yajan makhesu
data phalandm abhivanchitanam
dragleva gopalaka-mantra esah

j
The Gopdla-mantra is suitable for members of all varnas and
asramas, as well as for women, and for all those who perform
sacrifice. It awards them their desired results.

Text 14
Srnu vatsa pravaksyami
pijanam sarnga-dhanvanah
yan naradaya kathitam
brahmana padma-yonina

My dear child, let me describe to you the process for worshiping
Lord Krsna that was previously disclosed to Narada by Brahma,
who was born on the universal lotus flower.

=== PAGE 19 ===

Tue Process oF WorsuiPING Lorp Visnu

Text 15
pratah-krty adikam vaksye
tathd pija-vidhi suta
jagat-kalpa-taror vatsa
Srnusva gadato mama

My dear son, please hear with attention as I describe the
ritualistic activities that are to be performed in the morning,
as well as the process of worshiping Lord Krsna, who is like a
desire tree because He alone fulfills the desires of everyone.

Text 16
ntinam acyuta-kataksa-patane
karanam bhavati bhaktir aiijasa
tac-catustaya-phalaptaye tato
bhaktiman adhikrio gurau harau

Devotional service is the only means whereby one can easily
attain Lord Krsna’s merciful glance. Therefore, if one desires
to obtain the four objectives of life, one should faithfully serve
his spiritual master and thereby become qualified to serve
Lord Hari.

Text 17
snato nirmala-stiksma- Suddha-
vasano dhautarighri-panyananah
sacantah sapavitra-mudrita-karah
Svetordhvapundroyvalah

praci-dig-vadano nibaddhya-
sudrdham padmasanam svastikam

’sinah sva-guriin ganadhipam
atho vandeta baddhanjalih

First of all, one should bathe and then put on clean clothes.
Next, one should wash his hands, legs and mouth with water

=== PAGE 20 ===

SRI NARADA-PANCARATRA ® THIRD RATRA

and perform dcamana, Then, one should put a ring made of
kuSa grass on his right hand and decorate his forehead with
tilaka, After this, one should offer prayers to his spiritual master
and the previous dcdryas, as well as to the demigods, with folded
hands while sitting in the padmdsana or svastikdsana (sitting
posture).

Text 18
tato ‘stra-mantrena visodhya pani
tritala-dig-bandha-hutasa-salan
vidhaya bhiitatmakam etad anigam
visodhayec chuddha-matih kramena

One should then purify his hands by chanting astraya phat and
purify the four directions for the protection of the place of
worship, or sacrifice. One after another, a sincere devotee of
Lord Krsna should purify each and every limb of his body.

Text 19
ida-vaktre dhimram satata-
gati-bijam salavakam
Smaret pitrvam mantri sakala-
bhuvanocchosana-karam

svakam deham tena pratata-
vapusd ‘pirya-sakalam

visodhya vyamuiicet pavanam
atha margena-khamaneh

One should invoke the grey-complexioned predominating
deity of the air, Vayu, by chanting salavakam. He should then
inhale air through his left nostril. After filling the lungs and
thus becoming purified, one should exhale through the right
nostril.

=== PAGE 21 ===

Tue Process OF WorsHiPING Lorp VIsNu

Text 20
tenaiva margena vilina-marutam
bijam vicintyarunam Gsusuksaneh
Gpiirya deham paridahya vamato
mujficet samiram saha bhasmana bahih

Thereafter, one should meditate upon the reddish-
complexioned deity of fire while chanting his bija-mantra. While
inhaling through the left nostril, thus filling one’s entire body
with air, the practitioner burns all his sins by that fire and air
and finally exhales the ashes from out of his body through his
right nostril.

Text 21
uparam ativa suddham
amrtamsu-pathena vidhum
nayatu laléta-candram
amytah sakalarnamayim

la-pa-ra-japan nipatya

racayec ca tayaé sakalam
vapur amrtaugha-vrstim

atha vaktra-karadyam idam

A devotee should then connect the kundalini—which is the
reservoir of all bias, and which is situated on the top of one’s
left nostril—with the nectarean moon, which is supposed to be
situated on one’s forehead. In this way, one should mentally
cleanse his entire body by showering it with nectar.

Texts 22-23
Siro-vadana-vrtta-drk-sravana-
ghona-gandausthaka-dvayesu
sa-Siro-mukhesu ca iti
kramat vinyaset

=== PAGE 22 ===

Sri NARADA-PANCARATRA ® THIRD RATRA

halas ca kara-pada-sandhisu
tad agrakesv adarat

Sa-parsva-yuga-prstha-nabhy
udarakesu yadyan atha

hrdaya-kaksa-kakut-kara-mitla-doh-
pada-yugodara-vaktragatan budhah

hrdaya-piirvam anena patha ‘nvaham
nyasatu Suddha-kalevara-siddhaye

Thereafter, one should perform the nyasa by touching one’s
forehead, face, eyes, ears, nose, cheeks, lips, teeth and mouth
with vowels. One should also perform the nydasa by touching
with consonants the joints of one’s hands and legs, two sides,
back, navel and abdomen. Next, an intelligent devotee should
perform the nydsa by touching with the letters that come after
the five sets of consonants, one’s heart, arms, palms, feet, belly
and mouth, while chanting appropriate mantras, so that one’s
entire body becomes purified. ;

Text 24
ity Gracayya vapur arna-satarddhakena
sdrddha-ksapesa-savisargaka-sobhanais taih
vinyasya kesava-purahsara-mirti-yuktath
kirty adi-Sakti-sahitair nyasatu kramena

In this way, one should perform the nydsa while touching
forms of the Supreme Lord, such as Kesava, and energies of
the Supreme Lord, such as Kirti, while decorating his body
with fifty matrka-bija mantras, along with dots. This is called the
keSava-kirti-nyasa.

Thus ends the translation of the first chapter of the Third Ratra
of Sri Narada-paiicaratra.

=== PAGE 23 ===

CHAPTER 2

The Performance of Nyasa and the Chanting
of Mantras While Worshiping the Lord and His
Various Energies

Texts 1-3
vyasa uvaca
atha kathaydmy arndnam miirtih
Saktih sakal-bhuvanamayth
heSava-kirtir ndvayana-kantir
madhavas tatha tustih

govindah pusti-yuto visnu-
dhyti sidanas ca madhvadyah
Santis trivikramas ca kriyd-punar
vamano daya ‘cyutah
Svidhara-yuta ca medha
hrstkanathas ca harsaya yuktah
ambujanabha-sraddha
daémodara-samyuta punar lazja

Vyasadeva said: I shall now describe how the various Vaikuntha.
forms of the Lord are united with Their pleasure potencies, for
the purpose of creation. The form of KeSava is associated with
the energy known as Kirtti, Narayana with Kanti, Madhava with
Tusti, Govinda with Pusti, Visnu with Dhrti, Madhustidana with
Santi, Trivikrama with Kriya, Vamana with Daya, Sridhara with
Medha, Hrsikesa with Harsa, Padmanabha with Sraddha and
Damodara with Lajja.

Texts 4-5
laksmi savadsudeva sankarsana-
yutd sarasvati-prokia

=== PAGE 24 ===

10

Srt NARADA-PANCARATRA * THIRD RATRA

pradyumnah priti-yuto ‘niruddhako
ratir imah svaropetah

cakrijaye gadidurge sarigi
prabhaydanvitas tatha khadgi

Satya Sankhi-canda halivanyau
musaliyud-bilasinika

The form of Vasudeva is combined with Laksmi, Sankarsana
with Sarasvati, Pradyumna with Priti, Aniruddha with Rati, Cakri
with Jaya, Gadadhara with Durga, Sagi with Prabha, Khadgi
with Sati, Sankhi with Canda, Hali with Vani, and Musali with
Yuddha-vilasini.

Texts 6-10
Stl vijaya past viraja
visudnvito ‘kumsoh bhiiyah
vinadé mukunda-yukta nandaja-
sunande smrtis ca nandi-yuta

nava-rddhir narakayuta samrddhir
agha Suddhi-yuk harih krsno

bhakti-yutah satya-yuta-buddhir
mati-yuk ca sasvatah Saurih

ksamaya siiro ramaya

jandardano me ca bhiidharah
hledini visvadi-mirti-

yukta klinna vaikuntha
purusottamas ca taha

vasudha balind ca parayana
bhyjopeta-bhiyah parayanakhya

baleh stiksma ursapra-sandhye ca

Savrsa prajid hamsaprabha
varaho nisa ca vimalo ‘megha

=== PAGE 25 ===

NyAsa AND Mantras

narasimha-vidyute ca pranigadita
mitrtayo ‘lam Sakti-yutah.
varnan uktva sérddha-candran purastat
miirtih Saktir ne ‘vasand ratim ca
The form of Suli is associated with Vijaya, Varuna with Viraja,
Ankusi with Visva, Mukunda with Vinada, Nandaja with
Sunanda, Nandi with Smrti, Nara with Vrddhi, Narakajit with
Samrddhi, Hari with Suddhi, Sri Krsna with Bhakti, Satya
with Buddhi, Sagvata with Mati, Sauri with Ksama , Sara with
Rama, Janardana with Uma, Bhudhara with Kledini, Visvamarti
with Klinna, Purusottama with Vaikuntha, Bali with Vasudha
Parayana, Bala with Mrjopeta Parayana, Vali with Saksma,
Vrsa with Prasandhya, Savrsa with Prajiia, Harnsa with Prabha,
Varaha with Nisa, Vimala with Amogha, and Narasithha with
Vidyuta. These are the names of various forms of the Lord and
Their energies. While chanting these holy names of the Lord
and His energies, the mantra should end with the word namah.
For example: om kesavaya kirttai namah.

Texts 11-12

uktva nyasye Gdibhih

Sapta-dhatiina ‘tha
vasuda prana-bijam

krodham apy atmane ‘svan
udyat-pradyotana-Saya-

rucim tapta-hemavadatam
parsva-dvandve jaladhi-

Sutayd visva-dhatrya ca

justam nana-ratnollasita-
vividhakalpam Gpita-vastram

visnum vande dara-kam
gadé-kaumudi-cakrapanim

i

=== PAGE 26 ===

12

Srxt NARADA-PANCARATRA * THIRD RATRA

One should perform the nydsa by touching it to seven parts
of the body, beginning with the forehead, while chanting the
names of the above-mentioned forms of the Lord and Their
energies, in the form of bija-mantras.

One should meditate on Lord Visnu while chanting the following
prayer: I worship Lord Visnu; whose bodily effulgence is like
millions of rising suns; whose bodily complexion resembles
molten gold; who is served by Laksmi and Visvadhatri, standing
by His side; who is decorated with jeweled ornaments; who is
dressed in yellow garments; and who holds a conch, disc, club,
and lotus in His four hands.

Text 13
dhydtvaivam paramdaksarair yo
vinyased dinam anu keSavadi-yuktaih
medhayuh-smrti-dhrti-kirti-kanti-laksmi
Saubhagyais ciram upavrmhito bhavet sah

A person who properly performs these above-mentioned nydsas
daily becomes endowed with sound intelligence, along duration
of life, good memory, perseverence, unfading glory, opulence,
beauty and good fortune.

Text 14
asum eva rama-purah-saram
prabhajed yo manujo vidhim budhah
Samupetya raman prathiyasi
punar ante haritam brajety asau

The intelligent devotee who worships Lord Visnu while chanting
the mantras beginning with ramd-bija attains all desirable
opulence in this life and returns to the abode of Lord Hari
after quitting his material body.

=== PAGE 27 ===

NyAsa AND MANTRAS 13

Text 15
ity acyuti-krta-tanur vidhivattu tattva
nydsam na-piirvam aparaksara-naty upetam
bhityah paraya ca tad Ghvayam atmane ca
naty antam uddharatutattvamaniin kramena

By this performance of tattva-nyasa, one attains a purified body
like that of Lord Acyuta. This ritual should first be performed
without uttering the mantras but after it has been practiced, the
names of the Lord should be chanted, ending with namah.

Texts 16-17
sakala-vapusi bijam
pranam ayojya madhye
nyasatu matim ahanrkaran
manas ceti mantri

ha-mukha-hydaya-guhyanghrisv
atho sabda-piirvam

guna-ganam atha karta
“disthitam Srotra-pirvam

vag adindriya-vargam atma-
nilayesv Ghasa-piirrvarh ganam

mirdhnyasye hrdaye sire '
caranayor hyt-pundarikam hrdi

bimbani dvisad asta-yug-dasa-
hala-vyaptani sisryodu-rad

vahninam ca yatas tu bhitta-
vasum usyanty aksair mantravit

The devotee should chant the dija-mantra while invoking the
pranawithin his body. He should then perform the nydsa while
meditating on his mind, intelligence, ego and heart. He should
perform the nydsa along with the chanting of the sabda-bija-

=== PAGE 28 ===

14

Set NARADA-PANCARATRA * THIRD RATRA

mantra while touching his mouth, heart, anus and feet. He
should then perform the nydsa, touching it to the three material
modes, ears, head, face, heart, forehead, legs, and finally, to the
lotus within the heart, the sun and moon, Agni, the aggregate
of living entities, and the eight Vasus.

Text 18
atha paramesthi-pumamsau visva-
nivrtti sarva-haty upanisadam
nyased akasadi-sthana-sthanasoya-
balavarthih salavah

vasudevah sarkarsanah
pradyumnds caniruddhakah

narayanas ca kramasah
paramesthy adibhir yutah

By performing this nydsa, according to the proper rules and
regulations, as described in the Upanisads, and by chanting the
names of the demigods who are the controllers of the material
nature, and adding the names of the Supreme Lord in His
various expansions—such as Vasudeva, Sankarsna, Pradyumna,
Aniruddha and Narayana—one attains perfection.

Text 19
tatah kopa-tattvam ksarau vindu-yuktam
nysimham nyaset sarva-gatresu tajjhah
hrameneti tattudtmako nydsa uktah
sudsdn nikyd-visva-miirty adisu syat
Thereafter, one should perform the Nrsimhadeva-nydsa,
touching it to one’s entire body while chanting the mantra,
ksaraum kopatattuaya. This is the procedure for performing the
tattva-nydsa, The same procedure should be followed while
performing the Visvamiirti-nyasa.

=== PAGE 29 ===

NYAsA AND MANTRAS 15

Texts 20-21
iti kyto ‘dhikyto bhavati dhruvam
sakala-vaisnava-mantrajapadisu
pavana-sam ya-va-la-tattvamanund caret
tattvam iha japtum asau manucchaii

athavakhilesu hi vidhi-mantra-
japa-vidhisu mitla-mantratah
Sarhyamanam amala-dhir maruto
vidhindbhyasams caratu tattva-sankhyaya

By properly following these rules and regulations, one becomes
qualified to chant the Vaisnava mantras. While parcticing mystic
yoga, one should restrain his breath and chant the tattva
mantras. A devotee of Lord Krsna can also practice restraining
his breath while chanting the tattva mantras, along with the
mitla-mantras.

Text 22
purato japasya parato ‘pi
vihitam atha tat-tritayamh budhaih
sodasa ya iha cared dhinesah
paripityate sa khalu mdasato hamsah

Intelligent sages have chalked out three kinds of prescriptions
to be followed before and after the chanting of a mantra. A
devotee who follows these procedures while chanting his mantra
sixteen times daily becomes a pure, swanlike Vaisnava.

Text 23
ayavariga-janmamamundnusu samyaman
sakalesu krsnam anujapa-karmasu
Ssahitaika-sapta-krti-varam abhyaset
tanuydt samasta-duritapa-harina

=== PAGE 30 ===

Spt NARADA-PANCARATRA * THIRD RATRA

By chanting the Krsna mantras after chanting the nydsa mantras
sixty-four times, one becomes a controller of his senses so that
his human birth becomes successful.

Text 24
astavimsati-sankhyam ista-phaladam
mantram dasarnam japan
ndyacchet pavanam susamyata-
matis tv astau dasarnena cet

abhyasyann avivaram anyam
anubhir varnanuriipam japan

kuryad recaka-pirvakarma-
nipunah prana-prayogam narah

If the practitioner is unable to retain his breath until he
completes his chanting of the dasdrna-manira twenty-eight
times, or at least eight times, if he is expert in performing the
other above-mentioned rituals, he should employ the breathing
process known as recaka.

Text 25
recayen marutam daksaya daksinah
ptrayed vamaya madhya-nadya punah
dharayed tritam recakadi-trayam syat
kalad anta-vidyakhyam atracyukam

In this practice, one should exhale through his right nostril
and then inhale through his left nostril. While restraining his
breath, he should chant his mantra sixteen, sixty-four or thirty-
two times, depending upon his capacity. In this way, he will
make advancement in the practice of the prandydma exercises
known as recaka, puraka and kumbhaka.

=== PAGE 31 ===

NYASA AND Mantras

Text 26
pranayamam vidhayety atha nija-
vapusa kalpayed yogapitham
nyasyed Gdhara-sakti-prakrti-
kamatha-ksamé-ksira-sindhin

Svetadvipam ca ratnojjvala-mahita-
mahaémandapam kalpavrksam
hyd-dese ‘miSa-dvayor idvaya-vadana-

hati-pariva-yugmesu bhityah

After performing these exercises of pranayama, one should
think of his body as the yogapitha, decorated with valuable gems
and surrounded by the Ocean of Milk, Svetadvipa, elevated
altars, and desire trees. He should then perform the nydsa by
touching his shoulders, thighs, face, waist and sides.

Text 27
dharmady adharmadi ca pada-gatra-
catustayam hydy atha Sesa-mantram
siiryendu-vahnin pranavamsa-yuktan
Gdy aksaraih sattva-rajas-tamamsih

Thereafter, the devotee should perform the nydsa by touching
his legs, his entire body and heart while aspiring for knowledge,
renunciation and opulence. He should also perform the nydsa
while meditating on the three material modes, the sun, and the
moon.

Text 28
Gtmadi-trayam atma-bija-sahitam
vyomagni-mayé-lavair
jranatmanam athasta-diksu
parito madhye ca saktir nava

=== PAGE 32 ===

18

Sri NARADA-PANCARATRA * THIRD RATRA

nyastua pitham anum ca tatra
vidhivat tat-karnika-madhyagam
nityananda-citi-prakasam
amrtam savicintayen nama tat

The devotee should next perform the nydsa while meditating
on the eight directions and chanting the atmabija-mantra, and
then while meditating on nine energies of the Lord. He should
then sit down and meditate on Lord Krsna, who is the bestower
of the most confidential transcendental knowledge.

Text 29
vimalotkarsani jnana kriya yogeti saktayah
prabhvi satya tathesana ‘nugraé navami tatha

The nine energies are Vimala, Utkarsani, Jnana, Kriya-yoga,
Prabhvi, Satya, Isana, Anugra and Navami.

Text 30
evam hrdayam bhagavan visnuh
Sarvanvitas ca bhittatma
nentah savasudevah sarvatma
yutam ca samyogam

After placing this nydsa on the nine energies, one should chant
the sublime mantra, namo bhagvate visnave sarvabhittatmane
vasudevaya.

Text 31
yogavadhas ca padmam
pitha ne-yuto natis cante
pitha-mahamanur vyaktah
paryapto ‘yam saparydsu
Afterwards, one should chant the pitha mantra: sarvatma yoga

padma pithatmane namah, for it is essential in the worship of
the Lord.

=== PAGE 33 ===

NyYAsa AND MANTRAS 19

Text 32
karayor yugalam vidhaya mantrétmakam
abhyanabhiramyamana-margat
sakalam vidadhita mantra-varnath
paramam jyotir anuttamam hares tat

While folding one’s palms in a posture of reverence, one
should chant his mantra with devotion and in this way, invoke
the effulgent Lord Hari within his heart.

Thus ends the translation of the second chapter of the Third
Ratra of Sri Narada-paiicaratra

=== PAGE 34 ===

CHAPTER 3

An Explanation of Various Nydsas and Mantras

Text 1
vyasa uvaca
atha vaksye mahaémantram
Srnusvdvahito mune
yam labdhvd na punar gacchet
Samsytim pamaro ‘pi hi
Vyasadeva said: O sage, I shall now reveal the mahda-mantra to
you. Kindly listen with attention. By receiving this mantra, even
the most sinful person will no longer be forced to accept birth
in this miserable material world.

Text 2
vaksye manum tribhuvana-
prathitatma-bhavam
aksina-punya-nicayair

munibhir vimrgyam

paksindra-ketu-visayam
vasu-dharma-kéma-

moksa-pradam sakala-
karmani karma-daksam

I am going to describe to you this most exalted mantra—
which is sought after by great sages who possess a great stock
of piety; which awards religiosity, economic development,
sense gratification, and liberation; which awards all kinds of
perfection; which awards devotional service to the Supreme
Lord; and which imparts to the chanter knowledge of the
science of self-realization.

21

=== PAGE 35 ===

22

Sr NARADA-PANCARATRA ® THIRD RATRA

Text 3
atiguhyam abodha-titla-rasi-jvalanam
vaga dhipatyadam naranam
duritapaharam visapamytyu-
graha-rogadi-nivaranaika-hetum

This understanding is very confidential and it removes the
darkness of ignorance, destroys all sinful reactions, neutralizes
the effects of poison, protects one from unnatural death, and is
the only way to counteract the influence of evil planets.

Text 4
jayadan pradhane ‘abhayadam vipine
salila-plavane sukha-taranadam
nara-sapti-ratha-dvipa-vrddhi-karam
suta-go-dharani-dhana-dhanya-karam

This mantra awards one victory in battle; fearlessness while
residing in the forest; and saves one from natural calamities,
such as floods. The chanting of this mantra naturally increases
one’s opulence—both material and spiritual. It awards one
good children, cows, land, wealth, and food grains.

Text 5
bala-virya-Saurya-nicaya-pratibha-
svara-varna-kanti-subhagatvakaram
brahmanda-koti-manimadi-gunastakadam
* kim atra bahunakhila-dam

It also bestows upon the chanter strength, valour, heroism,
ingenuity and bodily lustre like that which is possessed by
the demigods. It also enables one to possess the eight mystic
perfections. Indeed, it awards one all types of expertise in every
field of activity.

=== PAGE 36 ===

EXPLANATION OF VARIOUS NyYASAS AND MANTRAS

Texts 6-8
Sarngi sotura-dantah paro
ramaksiyuk dvitiyarnam
Siili saurir balo balanuja-
dvayam athaksara-catustayam

Stira-turtyah sdnana dvrttah

Syat sasumo ‘stamo ‘gni-sakhah
tad-dayitaksara-yugmam tad

uparigas tv evam uddharen mantram

prakdsito dasaksaro manus
tv ayam madhu-dvisah
visesatah paddravinda-
yugman bhakti-vardhanah

The ten-syllable maha-mantra of Lord Madhusudana is: gopijana
vallabhaya suaha. By’chanting this mantra, one’s devotion at the
lotus feet of Lord Krsna increases immeasurably.

Text 9
narado ‘sya munir atra kirtitas
chanda uktam rsibhir virad api
devata-sakala-loka-mangalo
nanda-gopa-tanayah samiritah

Narada is the presiding sage of this mantra. The meter virat
should be used while chanting it. The son of Nanda, Sri Krsna,
who is the benefactor of all living entities, is the ultimate
objective of chanting this mantra.

Texts 10-11
angani patica hutabhug dayita-sametais
cakrair amusya mukha-vrtta-visiipapannaih
trailokya-raksana-sujapy asurdntakakhya-
parvena ceha kathitani vibhakti-yuktaih

=== PAGE 37 ===

24 Srt NARADA-PANCARATRA * THIRD RATRA

hydaye natih Sirasi pavaka-priya
savasat-sikha-hum iti varmani sthitam

sa-phad astram ity uditam anga-paticakam
sa-caturthi-vausad uditam drsor yadi

Thereafter, one should perform the nydsa along with the
chanting of appropriate mantras. While touching the heart,
namah should be uttered. While touching the head, svaha
should be chanted. While touching the sikhd, vasat should be
said. While meditating on the kavaca, hum should be chanted.
While meditating upon a weapon, the word phat should be
chanted. While touching the eyes, the word vausat should be
uttered. The five nydsa mantras to be chanted while touching
the nydsa to the five limbs are, dcakraya sudha hrdayaya namah,
vicakraya svaha Sirase svadhd, sucakraya sudhd sikhdyai vasat,
trailokyaraksanarthaya svaha kavacaya hum and asurantaka cakraya
svaha astraya phat.

Text 12
mantrarnair dasabhir
upeta-candra-khandair
anganam dasakam
udiritam namo ‘ntam
hre-chirsam tad anu
Sikhdtanutra-mantram
parsva-dvandva-sakati-
prstha-miirddha-yuktam

With each letter of this ten-letter mantra, one should touch the
nydsa to the ten limbs of his body. For example—gon hrdayaya
namah, pi Sirase namah, and so on.

=== PAGE 38 ===

EXPLANATION OF VARIOUS NYASAS AND MANTRAS

Texts 13-15
rakse mantrasyasya bijam ca Sakticakri
Sakri vama-netra-pradiptah
Ssa-pradyumno bijam etat-pradiptam
mantrah pradyumno jagan mohano ‘yam

hamso medo vakra-vrttabhy upetah
potri netrady anvito ‘sau yugarna

prokta Saktih sarva-gtrvana-vrndair
vandasyagner vallabha kama-deyam

viniyogasya mantrasya
purusdrtha-catustaye

krsnam prakrtir ity ukto
durgadhisthatr-devata

By combining the words cakri, sakri, vdma netra and Pradyumna,
the word klim is formed. Then, by adding words such as
hamsa, medah, vakravrtta, and potrinetra, along with svdhd, the
worshipable four-syllable mantra is formed. This mantra is: klim
hrm svaha and it fulfills all of one’s desires. This mantra also
helps one to achieve the four objectives of human life. Durga is
the predominating deity of this mantra and Krsna is the prakrti.

Text 16
gopayati sakalam idam gopayati
param pumamsam iti gopt
prakytes tasya jatar jana iti
nadadikam prthivy antam

The word gopi is used for the protection of all the universes and
it is offered to the supreme enjoyer. The word jana has been
used because all rivers and oceans, in this world and in heaven,
have been manifested from the prakrti of this word.

25

=== PAGE 39 ===

Srt NARADA-PANCARATRA © THIRD RATRA

Text 17
anayor gopi-janayoh
Samirandd Gsrito vyaptya
vallabha ity upadistam
sandranandam niratijanam jyotih
To indicate the expansion of the words gopi and jana, as well
as for the sake of samirana, the word vallabha has been used. In
this way, it indicates an intense, blissful, unlimited effulgence.

Text 18
suahety Gtmanam gamayamity
atejase tasmai
yah karya-karanesah paramatmety
acyutaikatasya manoh

The actual purpose of using the word svahd is to make all living
entities surrender unto the lotus feet of Lord Krsna, who is one
without a second, and who is the director of both cause and
effect.

Text 19
athava gopi-jana iti samasta
jagad avana-sakti-
samudayas tasya Gnanyasya
svdmi vallabha ity upadistah

athava vraja-yuvatinam dayitaya
juhomi man madiyam

apity arpayet samastam brahmani
sugane samasta-sampattyai

Alternatively, the phrase gopijana refers to the energy that
protects the universes, and vallabha refers to the beloved Lord
of that energy. One should surrender everything to Lord Krsna
by offering oneself at His lotus feet as an eternal servant. Lord

=== PAGE 40 ===

EXPLANATION OF VARIOUS NYASAS AND MANTRAS

Krsna is the beloved Lord of the young cowherd damsels of
Vraja.

Text 20
krs-Sabdah sattartho nas
canandatmakas tatah
krsno bhaktagha-karsanad api tad-
varnatvdc ca mantramaya-vapusah

The syllable krs means existence and the letter na means
full of bliss. So the name, Krsna, destroys all of the devotees’
sinful reactions. The name Krsna is nondifferent from Krsna
Himself.

Text 21
goh-sabda-vacatvaj jianam
tenopalabhyata iti govindah
vettiti sabda-rasim
govindo go-vicdranad api
ete ‘bhikhye ‘nukramatas
titrya-vibhaktya
mantrat piiruam manmatha-
bijad atha pascat
syatam ced astddasa-
varno manu-varyo
guhyat guhyo vaichita-
cintamanir esah

The syllable goh means knowledge, or He who is realized by
that knowledge, or He who knows the intention of the devotees
when they address Him, or He who tends the cows. That Krsna
is Govinda. I will now reveal the most confidential eighteen-
syllable mantra. It is like a spiritual gem and it is most coveted by

27

=== PAGE 41 ===

28

Srt NARADA-PANCARATRA ® THIRD RATRA

the devotees of the Lord. The mantra is: klim krsndya govindaya
gopijana vallabhaya svaha.

Text 22
pitrva-pradiste muni-devate ‘sya
chandas tu gayatram uSanti santah
angani mantrarna-catuskair
varmavasanani yugarnamas tram
bijam Saktih prakrtih viniyogas
capi pitrvavad amusya
The predominating sage of this mantra is Narada and the
objective of chanting it is Sri Krsna. The meter of this mantra

is gayatri, and the four-letter anga-nydsa should be performed
while chanting it. Bija and prakrti should be added as before.

Text 23
piirvatarasya manoratha kathayami
nyasam akhila-siddhi-karam
vyapayyatho hastayor masta-
vahye parsve tan aruddham budhena

nyGso varnis tara-yugmantarasthair
binditstam-sauharda-krtyair vidheyah

One should perform the nydsa, with the use of the tdra-bija, on
‘all the parts of the body to achieve perfection while chanting
this mantra.

Text 24
Sakhasu trini purvany adhi dasasu
prthag-daksindngustha-pirvam
vdma angustha vasdnam nyasatu
visada-dhih srstir ukta karastha

=== PAGE 42 ===

EXPLANATION OF VARIOUS NYASAS AND MANTRAS

anga-dvandva-pirea sthitir
ubhayakare samhytir vama-pitrvo-

daksarigusthantike tat trayam api
Srjati sthity'upetam ca karyam

Oneshould perform the srsti-nydsa, sthiti-nyasaand samhati-nydsa
while chanting klim krsnaaya govinddya namahand counting with
the fingers, beginning from the thumb of the right hand, up to
the little finger of the left hand.

Text 25
tatah sthiti-kramad budho
dasangakani vinyaset
tad aniga-paticakam tatha
vidhih samiritah kare

In this way, an intelligent practitioner should perform all the
required nydsas properly so as to achieve quick and definite
results.

Text 26
putitair manunatha matrkarnair
abhivinyasya sa-bindubhih puravat
anu-sankrti-srsti-marga-bheda
kySatavani ca mantra-varna-bhanji

By performing the nydsa while pronouncing each vowel and
consonant separately, divisions of the mantra varnas will be
created, according to the procedures of the various nyasas.

Text 27
Samhytav anugato manu-varyah
Srsti-vartmani bhavet pratiyatah
uddhytih khaluh puroktavad esam
nyasa-karma kathayamy adhunaham

=== PAGE 43 ===

30

Spt NARADA-PARCARATRA * THIRD RATRA

If one performs the systi-nydsa after the samhati-nydsa, these
mantras will be revealed. Now, I shall describe to you the
performance of nydsakriya,

Thus ends the translation of the third chapter of the Third
Ratra of Sri Narada-paricaratra.

=== PAGE 44 ===

CHAPTER 4

A Further Explanation of the Performance
of Various Nyasas

Text 1
uyasa uvaca
mahi-salila-pavaka
anilaviyanti garvo mahan
punah prakrti-pirusau
para imani tattvany atha

padandhu-hrdaydsyakany adhi
patica madhye dvayam

trayam sakala-gam tato
nyasatu tad-viparyasatah

Vyasadeva said: The five separated material energies are earth,
water, fire, air, and sky. Another group of five subtle energies
are false ego, mahat, purusa, prakyti and Paramatma. One must
perform the nydsa five times, placing it on the heart and mouth,
and then two or three times on the entire body.

Text 2
guptatamo ‘yam nyasah samproktas
tattva-dasaka-pariklptah
haryo ‘nyesv api gopalam
anu jhatiti phala-siddhyai
To quickly achieve the desired result, one should follow these
rituals pertaining to the nydsa and also perform the other nydsas
that are recommanded for the gopdla-manira.

Text 3
Gkesad Gpadam dorbhyam
dhruva-putitam anu-

31

=== PAGE 45 ===

32

Srt NARADA-PANCARATRA ® THIRD RATRA

varam nyased vapurbhis
capi pirvavad amusya

miirddhany aksnah Srutyor
ghrane mukha-hrdaya-
Sira-janujathara-
patsu tathaksarani
One should perform the nydsa while chanting the appropriate

mantra, touching it to one’s head, eyes, ears, nose, mouth,
heart, knees, abdomen and legs.

Text 4
nyased vyakta srstih sthitir api munibhir
abhihita hrdadi-mukhantika
Samhdro ‘iighry adi-miirddhantas tritayam
iti viracayatu srsti-pirvam
anu-sthitim nyasah samharanto
maskava-vaikhanasesu vihito yam

According to the Vaikhanasa sages, sthiti-nydsa refers to the’
nyasa of touching the various parts of the body from the chest

to the mouth, or from the leg to the head, while chanting one’s

mantra.

Text 5
sthity anto grhamedhisu srsty
anto varninam iti prahuh
vairagya-yuji grhasthe samharam
kecid hur dcaryah
Sthiti-nyasa is meant for householders and 'srsti-nyasa is meant
for brahmacaris. Previous Gcaryashad arranged the samhdara-nyasa
for householders who are detached from material enjoyment.

=== PAGE 46 ===

FuRTHER EXPLANATION OF VARIOUS NYASAS

Text 6
Ssahajanau vanavasini sthitim
ca vidyarthinam srstim
Strasi nihita madhya
Sairaksi tarjanikanvitd
Sirasi rahitanigustha jyesthanvita
aparanisthikanesi ca

Brahmacaris should utter the word vanavasini while performing
the systi- nyasa and sthiti-nyasa. They should touch their head .
with the palm of the hand with their thumb placed on the top
of the head. In this way, one should perform these nydsas,

Text 7
mano ‘nuratjanam hari-
caranabja-bhakti-vardhanam
Sphiirtiye ‘thasya kirtyate
mirti-panjaram
Grti-graha-visadighnam
kirti-sr-kanti-pustidam
I shall now describe the murtiparijara-nyasa, which is pleasing to
the mind, which awards devotional service to Lord Hari, which
counteracts the influence of evil planets, which neutralizes the
effects of poison, and which awards one power and wealth.

Text 8
kesavadi-yuga-satka-mirtibhir
ddhah-pirvamihiranu montikan
dvadasaksara-bhavaksarath suraih
kltva-varna-rahitais ca kraman nyaset

One should perform this nydsa, placing it on the twelve murtis,
beginning with Kesava, while chanting the mantra that begins

33

=== PAGE 47 ===

34 Srt NARADA-PANCARATRA * THIRD RATRA

with the surya-bija. One should also chant the bija, klam, while
performing this nydsa in relation to Lord Krsna.

Text 9
bhalodara-hrd-gabha-tipa-tale
vdme tava-parsva-bhujanta-gale
vama-traya-prstha-kakutsu tatha
mitrdhany anu sat-ghagavantu manum

caitanyamrta-vapur ka-koti-teja
mitrddhvisthau vapur akhilam sa vdsudevah

With each letter of the twelve-letter mantra, one should perform
the nydsa, touching it to the forehead, abdomen, chest, lower
part of the body, left side, fingers, throat, back, and head.
Then, one should meditate on Vasudeva—who is supremely
cognizant, full of ecstasy, as effulgent as millions of suns, and
all-pervading—while knowing Him to be situated on one’s
head.

Text 10
adhasya vimala-pathasiva siktam
vydpnoti prakatita-mantra-varna-kilam
Srsti-sthiti dasa-pancanga-yugmam
nydsadi-tritaya kasya-hytsit

One should consider that his entire body is being submerged
in the crystal-clear ocean of mantras. Then, he should perform
the nydsa three times, touching it to the mouth and chest. He
should then repeat the srsti- nydsa and sthiti-nydsa. He should
also perform the dasdriga-nydsa and pancanga-nydsa—twice
each.

Text 11
vinyasya-tu grathayitud tu mudram
bhityo disam dasakam bandhaniyam

=== PAGE 48 ===

FuRTHER EXPLANATION OF VaRious NyAsas

taram hardam visva-mirtis ca sarigi
masantam te vayumadhye sudevah

sad-dvandvarno mantra-varyah sa uktah
sdksad daram moksa-purya agamyam

With the prescribed posture and mudrd, one should once again
purify the ten directions. The foremost of twelve-syllable mantras
is: or namo bhagavate vdsudevaya. It is just like the gateway to
liberation.

Text 12
dhatraryama-mitrakhya varundm
Subhaga vivasvadi-indra-yutah
puiisahvaya-parjanyo tvasta
visnus ca bhdnavah proktah

Dhata, Aryama, Mitra, Varuna, Arnsuman, Vivasvan, Indra, Pasa,
Ahvaya, Parjanya and Visnu are addressed as Bhanu.

Text 13
atha tu yuga-randhrarnasya
manor nyasanam bruve
racayatu kara-dvandve
‘anguli-pancakesv anga paicakam

tan mantra mandham vyapayyatha
trisah pranavam sakrn

manujalipayo nyasya bhityah
padani ca sadaram

The process of performing the nydsa for this twelve-syllable
mantra is as follows: while placing it on the five fingers of each
hand and on the five bodily limbs, one should perform the
nyasa three times, preceding each syllable of the mantra with
om. Finally, one should again perform the nydsa, placing it on
the legs.

35

=== PAGE 49 ===

36 Sri NARADA-PANCARATRA * THIRD RATRA

Text 14
kaca-bhuvi lalata bhrii-
yugmantara sravanaksinor
yugala-vadana-grivéhrn-
nabhi-katy ubhayanghrisu

nyasatu sitadhirjanv anghryor
aksarani Sirasi dhruvam

nayana-mukha-hrd-guhyanghrisu
arpayet pada-paticakam

Thereafter, a pure-hearted devotee of Lord Krsna should
meditate on the head, forehead, the space between the
eyebrows, ears, eyes, face, shoulders, chest, navel, waist and
both legs. He should once again perform the pancdriga-nyasa,
placing it on the eyes, mouth, chest, anus and legs.

Text 15
paticangani nyasodbhityo
muny Gdin asy anyat sarvam
tulyam pitrvenatho vaksye mudra
badhyad manvor yah syuh

The practitioner should perform the nydsa, placing it on the
predominating sage of the mantra, as described previously. I
shall now explain how the various mudras are formed.

Text 16
anatigustha rjavo daksa hasta-sakha
bhaven mudra hrdaye sirsake ca
adho ‘iigustha khalu mustih sikhayam
kara-dvandvangulayo varmani syuh

One should perform the mudra on his head and chest, spreading

over them all of the fingers of his right hand, except the thumb.
On the sikha, one should place his clenched fist, and on the

=== PAGE 50 ===

FuRTHER EXPLANATION OF VARIOUS NYASAS 37

kavaca, he should perform the mudrd by touching it with the
fingers of both hands.

Text 17
naraca-musty uddhyta-bahu-yugmam
vyangustha-tarjany udito dhvanis tu
visvag-visakta kathitastra-mudra
yatraksini tarjani-madhyame tu

If the clenched fists are raised with the first fingers pointing
upwards, keeping the thumb within the fist, it is called the
dhvani-mudra. If the first finger and the middle finger are waved
above the eyes, it is called the astra-mudra.

Text 18
osthe vama-karangustho
lagnas tasya kanisthika
daksinangustha-samyukta
tat-kanistha prasarita

tarjani-madhyama ‘ndmah
kincit savikucya calitah

venu-mudreha kathita
Suguplta preyasi hareh

When one joins the thumb and little finger of both hands and
holds them to his lips while slightly bending the other three
fingers of both hands, it is called the venu-mudrd, which is most
confidential and very dear to Lord Krsna.

Text 19
nocyante ‘tra prasiddhatvan
mala-sri-vatsa-kaustubhah
ucjate ‘cyuta-mudranam
bhadra bilva-phalakrtih

=== PAGE 51 ===

Srt NARADA-PANCARATRA * THIRD RATRA

Because the mudrds for the mark of Srivatsa and the Kaustubha
gem are very well known, I will not describe them here. I shall
next explain the bhadra-mudra, which resembles a bilva fruit.

Text 20
angustham vamam uddanditam itara-
karangusthakenatha baddhva
tasyagram pidayitvangulibhir
api ca tam vama-hastangulibhih
baddhva gadham hydi sthapayatu
bimala-dhir vyaharen mara-bijam
bilvakhya mudrikaisd sphutam iha
kathita gopaniya vidhijnaih

When the thumbs of both hands are attached and raised
upwards, and the other fingers are cleanched as fists and placed
on one’s chest, it is called the bilva-mudra. By this mudrd, one
should invoke the kama-bija mantra.

Text 21
mano-vani-dehair yad iha
ca divé-ratra-vihitam
amatyé matyd vd tad akhilam
asau duskrta-cayam
imam mudram janan ksapayati
naras tam suragana
namanty asyadhind bhavati
Satatam sarva-janata

The best means for nullifying all sinful reactions and
contamination from one’s life is to practice these procedures,
throughout the day and night, with one’s body, mind and
speech. This will enable one to defeat all kinds of opposition
created by the demigods, as well as human beings.

=== PAGE 52 ===

FURTHER EXPLANATION OF VARIOUS NYASAS

Text 22
pranava-hydor avasane ca caturthi-
sudarsanam tathastra-padam
uktva phad antamamunda grathayen

manum astra-mudraya haritah

Beginning with the pranava, om, the word sudarsana should be
ended in the fourth dative case and the words phat and hrdaye
added to form the mantra: om hydaye sudarsanaya phat. This
mantra is to be chanted along with the astra-mudra, for it will
help one achieve pure devotional service to Lord Hari.

Text 23
iti vidhaya samasta-jagaj-
jani-sthiti-vinasa-vidhana-visdradam
Sruti-vidhana-karam manu-vigraham
Ssmaratu gopa-vadhit-jana-ballabham

In this way, the devotee should meditate on Lord Krsna, who
is the goal of these mantras; the lover of the damsels of Vraja;
and the ultimate supervisor of the creation, maintenance and
destruction of the universe.

Thus ends the translation of the fourth chapter of the Third
Ratra of Sri Narada-pancaratra.

39

=== PAGE 53 ===

CHAPTER 5

Meditation Upon Lord Krsna In His
Transcendental abode, Vrndavana

Text 1
Sri-vydsa uvdca
atha prakata-saurabhotkalita-
phulla-madhvika-sat-
prastina-nava-pallava-prakara-
namra-sakhair drumaih

praphulla-nava-manjari-
lalita-vallari-vestitaih

Smarec chisiritam sivam
ksitu-matis tu vrndavanam

Vyasadeva said: A pure-hearted devotee should meditate on the
auspicious abode of Vrndavana. The branches of the trees in
Vrndavana bend to the ground because of being over-burdened
by abundant fruit, fragrant flowers, and newly-grown twigs and
leaves. The creepers in Vrndavana appear most beautiful, as if
embracing the trees in ecstasy.

Text 2
vikdsi-sumano-rasdsvadana-
manjulaih saticarac-
chili-mukha mukhod-gatair
mukharitantaram jhankytaih
kapota-suka-sarika-
parabhrtadibhih patribhir
virdjitam itas tato
bhujaga-Satru-nytyakulam

41

=== PAGE 54 ===

42

Sri NARADA-PANCGARATRA ® THIRD RATRA

The land of Vrndavana is permeated by the sound of bumblebees
that move from one flower to another, drinking honey. The
land of Vrndavana is decorated with many varieties of beautiful
birds, including doves, parrots and cuckoos, and it looks most
enchanting because of the dancing of innumerable peacocks.

Text 3
kalinda-duhitus calal-lahani-
viprusam vahibhir
vinidra-sarasi-ruhodara-
rajas cayot-pifijaraih

pradipita-manobhava-
vraja-vilasini-vdsasam

vilolan aparair nisevitam
andratam marutaih

The water of the ever-flowing Yamuna enhances the enthusiasm
of all the residents of Vrndavana, although it disturbs the
pollen that has accumulated within the lotus flowers that stand
in her water. The river Yamuna is constantly being served by
the breeze that scatters the garments of the gopis.

Text 4
pravala-nava-pallavam
marakata-cchada vajra-mau-
htika-prasava-korakam
kamala-raga-nand-phalam

sthavistham akhila-turbhih
satata-sevitam kamadam

tad antar api kalpakanghri
pamudancitam cintayet

One should meditate on the desire trees of Vrndavana. These
trees have newly grown twigs that appear like coral. Their leaves

=== PAGE 55 ===

MEDITATION Upon Lorp Krsna IN VRNDAVANA

are the color of emeralds and thier buds appear like pearls.
They are filled with varieties of fruit that are smeared with
pollen. They are large, they render service in all the seasons,
and they bestow all kinds of benedictions.

Text 5
sahema-sikhard-vaner
udita-bhanuvad-bhasvara
madho ‘sya kanaka-sthalim
amrta-Sikaram varinah

pradipta-mani-kuttimam
kusumama renu-punjojjvalam

Smaret punar atandrito
vigata-sat-tanango budhah

An intelligent devotee should meditate with enthusiasm and
self-control on the glittering gold mine that is situated in that
wonderful land. It is filled with spiritual gems. There are hills
with golden peaks and a mine of pearls that is decorated with
pollen.

Text 6
tad-ratna-kuttima-
nivista-mahistha-yoga-
pithe ‘sta-patram arunam
kamalami vicintya

udyad-virocana-saro
ciramusya madhye

Saticintayet sukha-nivistam
atho mukundam

Next, one should meditate on a red lotus flower having eight
petals that is located at the yogapitha, which is situated within

43

=== PAGE 56 ===

44 Srt NARADA-PANCARATRA * THIRD RATRA

an area that is filled with various mines. One should meditate
on Lord Krsna, the giver of liberation, who is present within
that lotus flower at the yogapitha.

Text 7
saddama-ratna-dalitafijana-
megha-purija-
pratyagra-nilajalajanma-
samdna-bhasam
susnigdha-nila-ghana-
huficita-kesa-jalam
rajan-manojna-sitikantha-
Sikhanda-cidam

The color of Krsna’s curly hair is dark blue, like a host of dark
clouds decorated with precious gems. The Lord’s hair increases
the beauty of His head, as do the enchanting peacock feathers
that decorate it.

Text 8
rolamba-lalita-sura-druma-stina-kiptottamsam
Samutkaca-navotpala-harna-pitram
lolalaka-sphurita-bhala-tala-pradiptam
goracana tilakam ujjvala-citra-malam

His two earrings, which are made from flowers of the desire
tree, which swing to and fro, and which are decorated with lotus
buds, look indescribably charming. His forehead is decorated
with marks of tilaka mixed with gorocana and He wears a
garland of forest flowers.

Text 9
apirna-sarada-gatanka-sasanka-bimba-
kantananam kamala-patra-visala-netram

=== PAGE 57 ===

MepiTATION Upon Lorp Krsna IN VRNDAVANA 45

ratna-sphurat-kanaka-kundala-rasmi-dipta-
ganda-sthali-mukuram unnata-caru-ndsam

His eyes resemble the full moon in the autumn season. They
are as broad as lotus leaves. His cheeks and beautiful raised
nose shine brightly because of the effulgence emanating from
His jeweled gold earrings.

Text 10
sindtira-sundarataradharam indu-kunda-
mandara-manda-hasita-dyuti-dipitasam
vanya-pravala-kusuma-pracayavak|pta-
graiveyakojjvala-manohara-kambu-kantham

The moonlike face of Lord Krsna is more beautiful than
kunkum and His enchanting smile defeats the beauty of fully
blossomed kunda and mandara flowers. His necklaces and other
omaments made of forest flowers have further enhanced His
transcendental lovliness.

Text 11
matta-bhramad-bhramara-justa-vilambamana-
santanaka-prasava-dama-pariskrtamsam
harabalibhagana-rajita-pivaroro-
vyoma-sthali-lalita-kaustubha-bhanumantam

His garland of flowers from the desire trees, which is served by
intoxicated bumblebees, is simply wonderful. A necklace of sun
stones, as well as the Kaustubha gem, enhances the beauty of
His broad chest.

Text 12
Srivatsa-laksana-sulaksitam unnatamsam
Gjanu-pina-parivrtta-sujata-bahum
avandhurodaram udara-gabhira-nabhi
bhynganganani-kara-manjula-roma-rajim

=== PAGE 58 ===

46

Sri NARADA-PANCARATRA * THIRD RATRA

Krsna’s two arms are very strongly built and endowed with
auspicious markings. They stretch to His knees. His abdomen
is slightly uneven. His navel is very deep and it is decorated
with hair that is as black as bumblebees.

Text 13
ndandé-mani-praghatitangada-kankanormi-
graiveya-sara-kala-niipura-tunda-bandham
duydnga-raga-paripinjaritanga-yastim
Gpita-vastra-paridhita-nitamba-bimbam
His entire body appears most attractive because of His jeweled
armlets, bracelets and other ornaments, and because of His
colorful markings. His hips appear most enchanting, encircled
by His yellow garments.

Text 14
cariiru-janum anuvrtta-manojiajangha-
kantonnata-prapada-nindita-kiirma-kantim
manikya-darpana-lasan-nakha-raji-rajad-
raktanguli-cchadana-sundara-pada-padmam

His thighs are supremely charming. His knees are round. His
reddish toes shine brightly. They reflect in mirrors that are
decorated with diamonds and thus appear exquisitely beautiful.
Indeed, His lotus feet are indescridably attractive.

Text 15
matsyanka-Saridava-ketu-yavabja-vajra-
samlaksitaruna-taranghri-talabhiramam
lavanya-sara-samudaya-vinirmitanga-
saundarya-nirjita-mano-bhava-deha-kantim
His lotus feet are decorated with auspicious markings, such as

a fish, anchor, flag, thunderbolt and lotus. It seems that the
creator must have collected the essence of all beautiful objects

=== PAGE 59 ===

MepitTaTion Upon LorD Krsna IN VRNDAVANA

and invested it in the creation of Krsna’s body. Because of this,
even the beauty of Cupid has been defeated by the sight of His
body.

Text 16
asyaravinda-paripirita-venu-randhra-
lolat-karanguli-samirita-divya-ragaih
Sasvad-dravi-krta-vikrsta-samasta-jantu-
santana-santatim ananta-sukhambu-rasim

He has placed His enchanting flute to His lotus-like mouth and
is playing it very sweetly while moving His reddish fingertips.
As a result, the hearts of all living entities are being melted
and merged into an ocean of unlimited transcendental ecstasy.
Who would not be enchanted by the sound of Krsna’s flute?

Text 17
gobhir mukhémbuja-vilina-vilocanabhir
tidhobhara-skhalita-manthara-manda-gabhih
dantaya-dasta-parisista-trnankurabhir
Glambi-valadhi-latabhir athabhivitam

The cows walk slowly because their eyes are fixed on the lotus-
like face of Krsna, as well as because of the burden of their full
udders. Many cows have become motionless while holding a
morsel of grass in their mouths because of the sound of Krsna’s
flute.

Text 18
Sa-prasrava-stana-vivarsana-piirga-nirma-
lasya-vata-ksarita-phenila-dugdha-mugdhaih
venu-pravartita-manohara-manda-giti-
dattocca-karna-yugalair api nartakais ca

The cows stand still at the time of milking, when they shower
an incessant stream of foamy milk. While delivering milk, they

47

=== PAGE 60 ===

48

SRI NARADA-PANCARATRA ® THIRD RATRA

engage their ears in hearing the enchating songs emanating
from Krsna’s flute.

Text19
pratyagra-Sriga-yuga-mastaka-samprahdra-
samrambha-vatkhala-vilola-khuragra-pataih
amedurair bahala-sasna-galair udagra-
pucchais ca vatsatara-vatsatari-nikayaih

Some of the cows are preparing to gore one another with their
sharp horns, in a challanging mood, while kicking the air with
their hooves. Some of them are licking the throats and bodies
of their calves, while raising their tails.

Text 20
hurikara-viksubhita-digvalayair mahadbhir
apy uksabhih prthu-kakudbhara-bhara-khinnaih
uttambhita-sruti-puti-paripita-vamsa-
dhvandmrtoddhrta-vikasi-visala-ghonaih

Huge bulls have frightened everyone by bellowing loudly.
They have become afflicted by the burden of the hump on
their shoulders. After hearing the nectarean sound of Krsna’s
flute, however, they are now standing with their ears raised in
anticipation.

Text 21
gopaih samana-guna-sila-vayo-vilasa-
vesais ca mircchita-kala-svara-venu-vinaih
mandrocca-tala-patu-gana-parair bilola-
dor-ballari-lalita-lasya-vidhana-daksaih
All the cowherd boys of Vraja are of the same age, qualities,

nature, sporting activities and mode of dressing. While hearing
the sweet sound of Krsna’s flute, they have become very excited

=== PAGE 61 ===

MEDITATION Upon Lorp Krsna IN VRNDAVANA

and are displaying extraordinary skill in the art of dramatic
performance by means of their hands and faces.

Text 22
jatighanta-pivara-katira-tafi-nibaddha-
vydlola-kirikini-ghatabalitair atadbhih
mugdhais taraksu-nakha-kalpita-karna-bhisair
avyakta-matiju-vacanaih prthukaih paritam

They have tied small bells around their thighs and have put
on earrings made with tiger’s nails. They make indistinct yet
enchanting sounds as they roam in the forest, surrounded by
their calves.

Text 23
atha sulalita-gopa-sundarinam
suprthu-visista-nitamba-mantharanam
guru-kuca- bhanguravalagna-
trivalijrmbhita-roma-raji-bhajam
The beautiful damsels of Vraja walk slowly because of their
large buttocks. They bend a little forward because of the heavy
burden of their large breasts. Three lines mark their necks.
These descriptions add to the enchantment when one meditates
on Vrndavana. '

Text 24
tad atimadhura-caru-venu-vadyamrta-rasa-
pallavitangajanghri-panam
mukula-visara-ramya-caru-romod-gama-
samalankyta-gatra-vallarinam

While hearing the sweet sound of Krsna’s flute, the twigs of the
trees in Vrndavana become filled with nectarean juice and the
creepers manifest thorns that resemble ornaments, making it
appear as if they are exhibiting symptoms of ecstatic love.

49

=== PAGE 62 ===

Sri NARADA-PANCARATRA ® THIRD RATRA

Text 25
tad atirucira-manda-hasa-candratapa-
parijrmbhita-raga-variraseh
taralatara-taraniga-ramya-viprut-prakara-
sama-bhrama-bindu-santatanam

When the shadow of the clouds, which act like a canopy, fall
on the crystal-clear water, the vision of the waves creates an
unprecedented beauty.

Text 26
tad atilalita-manda-cilli-cépa
cyuta-nisiteksana-mara-vana-vrddhya
dalita-sakala-marma-vihvalanga-
pravisyta-duhsaha-vepatha-vyathanam

Krsna’s eyes and eyebrows, which resemble a wonderful bow,
release the arrows of Cupid. It appears that His eyes are trying
to pacify everyone’s pangs caused by the three-fold miseries of
material existence.

Text 27
tad atisubhagakamra-riipa-sobha
‘myta-rasapana-vidhana-lélasinam
pranaya-salila-piira-vahininémalasa-
vilola-vilocandmbujanam
The lotus-like eyes of the gopis, who have an intense desire to
drink the necratean mellows of Sri Krsna’s exquisite beauty, are
quickening the flow of the waves of conjugal pastimes.

Text 28
visramsat-kavari-kalapa-
vigatotphulla-prastina-sravan-
madhvi-lampata-caricarika-
ghatayd samsevitanam muhuh

=== PAGE 63 ===

MEDITATION Upon Lorp Krsna IN VRNDAVANA

maronmada-mada-skhalan-mrdu-
giram Glola-katicy ucchvasan-

nivi-viSlathamana-cina-
sicayantavir nitamba-tvisam

Their hair has become scattered and the flowers that had
decorated their hair have fallen to the ground. The sweet
aroma of these flowers is making the gopis’ minds intoxicated.
They have been pierced by the arrows of Cupid and so they
are speaking like madwomen. Because their waistbands have
become loose, their buttocks are partially exposed.

Text 29
skhalita-lalita-padambhoja-mandabhighata-
kvanita-mani-tulakoty akulasa-mukhanam
calad adhara-kulanam kutmalotpaksmalaksi-
dvaya-sarasi-ruhanam ullasat-kundalanam

Because they are walking as if in a drunken state, their jeweled
ornaments make a wonderful sound that helps them to express
dramatic movements with their hands and legs. Sometimes,
their lips begin to tremble, their blue lotus-like eyes become
overwhelmed with emotion, and their earrrings begin to
tremble.

Text 30
draghistha-svasana-samiranabhi-tapa-
pramlani-bhavad arunoc ca-pallavanam
ndanosayana-vilasat-karambujanam
Glibhih satata-nisevitam samantat

Because of the hot air coming from the gopis’ deep breathing,
the tender twigs of the trees are drying up. Sri Krsna is
constantly served by the lotus hands of the gopis, who always
present various gifts to their beloved Lord.

51

=== PAGE 64 ===

52

Srt NARADA-PANCARATRA * THIRD RATRA

Text 31
tasam dyata-lola-nila-
nayana-vyakosa-nilambuja-
sragbhih samparipiritakhila-tanit
nand-vilnodasya-padam

tan mugdhdnana-pankaja
pravigalan-madhvi-rasdsvadinim

bibhranam pranamonmadaksi-
madhukrn-malam manoharinim

The gopis have made large garlands of blue lotus flowers in the
form of their blue eyes and thus have decorated Krsna’s entire
body. It is certainly a most pleasant sight. The nectarean words
emanating from the lotus-like mouths of the damsels of Vraja—
who are overwhelmed by ecstatic love—are very charming.

Text 32
gopi-gopa-pasiinam bahih
Smared agrato ‘sya girvana-ghatam
vittarthinim virinci-trinayana-
Satamanyu-pitrvikam stotra-param
Next, one should meditate on the cowherd men, women and
animals of Vraja, who are always lavishly glorified by great
personalities, such as Brahma, Siva and Indra. One should
also meditate on the statements made by these exalted
personalities.

Text 33
tad-daksinato muni-jana-nikara
vasu-dharman adaya-param
yogindran atha prsthe mumuksu-
malan samadhind sanakadyan

=== PAGE 65 ===

MepITATION Upon Lorp Krsna IN VRNDAVANA

Thereafter, one should meditate on the place where the sages,
the Vasus, Dharma, and foremost of yogis are situated. One
should also meditate on the yogapitha, where the great sages
who desire liberation are sitting in samadhi.

Text 34
savye sakdntan atha siddha-yaksa-
gandharva-vidyadhara-caranams ca
sakinnaran apsarasas ca mukhyan
hamarthino nartana-gita-vadyaih

One should meditate on the Siddhas, Yaksas, Gandharvas,
Vidyadharas and their wives, as well as prominent Kinnaras
and Apsaras, who are all accomplished in the arts of dancing,
singing and playing musical instruments.

Texts 35-36
Sankhendu-kunda-dhavalam sakalagamajian
saudamino-tati-pisanga-jata-kalapam
tat-pada-parikaja-gatam acalam ca bhaktim
vanchantam ujjhitatardnya-samasta-sangam

ndan4a-vidha-Sruti-gananvita-sapta-raga-
grama-trayi-gata-manohara-mircchanabhih

samprinayantam uditabhir amum mahatya
Saficintayen nabhasi dhaty-sutamh munindram

One should then meditate on the best of sages, the foremost
of whom is the son of Dhatr, Narada Muni—whose complexion
is white like a conch shell, the moon, or a kunda flower; who
is well versed in all Vedic literature; who has matted hair that
resembles lightning; who desires unalloyed devotional service
at the lotus feet of Lord Krsna; who is free from all kinds of bad
association; and who is always satisfying Lord Hari by chanting

53

=== PAGE 66 ===

54

Srt NARADA-PANCARATRA ® THIRD RATRA
His glories while accompanying himself with his stringed
instrument. :

Thus ends the translation of the fifth chapter of the Third Ratra
of Sri Narada-paticaratra.

=== PAGE 67 ===

CHAPTER 6

The Process of Worshiping Lord Krsna Whereby
one Can attain Samipya-Mukti, the Liberation of
Becoming an Eternal associate of the Lord

Text 1
vydsa uvaca
iti dhyatoa ‘tmanam patu-visada-
dhir nanda-tanayam
puro buddhyaivarghya-
prabhrtibhir anantopahytibhih

yajed bhityo bhaktya sua-vapust
bahisthais ca vibhavair

vidhanam tad briimo vayam
atula-sannidhyadam atha

Vyasadeva said: In this way, a pure-hearted practitioner of
devotional service should meditate on the Supersoul, $ri Krsna,
while offering various articles, such as arghya, with faith and
devotion. One should then worship Lord Krsna, who is present
within his heart. Now, I shall describe the process of worship by
which one achieves sdémipya-mukti.

Text 2
Gracayya bhuvi gomayambhasa
sthandilam nija samudra vistaram
nyasya tatra vihitaspado ‘mbhasa
Sankha-mantra-manuna visodhayet

One should build a raised platform and smear it with cowdung.
One should then further purify that place by chanting the
Sankha-mantra while spreading kusa grass all around.

55

=== PAGE 68 ===

Sxt NARADA-PANCARATRA ® THIRD RATRA

Text 3
tatra gandha-sumano ‘ksatany atho
nihkseped dhydaya-mantram uccaran
pitrayed vimala-pathasa sudhir
aksaraih pratigataih Siro ‘ntakaih

An intelligent devotee should put sandalwood paste and a
few grains of rice that have been dried in the sun in a bowl of
pure water and then sprinkle that water all over his body while
chanting the hrdaya-manira.

Text 4
pitha-Sarikha-salilesu mantra
vitvahni-vasara-nisa-krtam kramat
mandalani casaka-sravoksarair
arcayed vadana-piirva-dipitaih

A person who is learned in that art of chanting mantras should
then invoke the demigods, such as Agni, Indra and Candra by
worshiping them with water kept within a conch shell.

Text 5
tatra tirtham anunabhir ahvayet
tirtham usna-ruci-mandalat tatah
sviya-hyt-kamalato harim tatha
galinim ca sikhaya pradarsayet

Thereafter, one should display the galiné-mudra on his chest and
sikha while invoking all of the holy rivers by means of chanting
mantras.

Text 6
taj-jalam nayana-mantra-viksitam
varmana samavagunthya dor yuja
mitla-mantra-sakalikrtam nyased
angakais ca kalayed digo ‘stratah

=== PAGE 69 ===

Worsuipinc Lorp Krsna FOR ATTAINING SAMIPYA-MUKTI,

One should gaze at a pot of water while chanting the nayana-
mantra, cover it with both hands and perform the aviga-nydsa
after invoking the Lord while chanting the mila-mantra. Then,
he should protect himself in the ten directions by chanting the
astra-mantra.

Text 7
aksatadi-yutam acyutikrtam sasprham
japatu mantram astasah
kincana ksipatu vardhanijale
proksayen nija-tanum tato ‘muna

Next, one should devotedly chant eight times the mantra that
has already been purified, mix rice that has been dried in the
sun in water and then sprinkle that water on his body.

Text 8
trih-karena manund khilam tatha
sddhanam kusuma-candanddikam
Sarikha-piirana-vidhih samirito
gupta esa yajandgranir tha

Before the commencement of one’s worship, one should
establish the conch shell by filling it with water, sandalwood
paste and flowers, while chanting the following confidential
mantra:

Text 9
garige ca yamune caiva
goddvari sarasvati
narmade sindhu-kaveri jale
‘smin sannidhim kuru

O Ganga, O Yamuna, O Godavari, O Saraswati, O Narmada, O
Sindhu, O Kaveri—please make your appearance within this
water.

57

=== PAGE 70 ===

Srt NARADA-PANCARATRA © THIRD RATRA

Text 10
esa tirtham anuh-prokto
duritaugha-vindsanah
kanisthangusthakau saktau
karayor itaretaram

One should chant this mantra while folding his hands so that
the thumbs and little fingers of both hands touch each other.

Text 11
tarjani-madhyama ‘namah
samhata “bhugna-varjitah
mudraisa galini prokta
Sankhasyopari calita
By keeping the ring finger, middle finger and first finger
together and straight, one forms the galini-mudra. One should
display this mudré over the conch shell.

Text 12
atha mitrdhani miila-cakra-madhye
nija-natham gana-nayakam samarcyarh
nyasana-krama-tanuh pitha-mantrair
jala-gandhaksata- dhiipa-puspa- dipaih

Thereafter, one should worship Sri Krsna as being situated on
his head and Ganapati as situated on the miila-cakra. Then,
he should perform the nydsa while chanting the pitha-manta
and offer various items, such as water, sandalwood paste, rice,
incense, flowers, and a ghee lamp.

Text 13
prayajed atha mitla-mantra-tejo
nija-miile hrdaye bhruvos ca madhye
tritayam smarata smaret tad eki-krtam
Gnanda-ghanam tadil-latabham

=== PAGE 71 ===

WorsuiPinc Lorp Krsna FoR ATTAINING SAMIPYA-MUKTI,

Next, one should worship the effulgent Personality of Godhead
by chanting the miila-mantra, while touching his head, heart
and the space between his eyebrows. One should then meditate
on that most blissful personality, Sri Krsna, who is as effulgent
as lightning.

Text 14
tat-te yajniath savayavi-kytya vibhiity ady
ankantam vinyasya yajed asana-pirvath
bhiisantair bhityo jala-gandhadibhir arcam
huryad bhity ady anga-vidhanavadhi mantri

After placing all of the required articles, such as an dsana, in their
respective places and purifying them by chanting appropriate
mantras, one should worship the ingredients of worship such as
water, sandalwood paste, ornaments, dress and bed.

Text 15
bhityo venum vadanastham
vaksodese vanamalam
vaksojordhvam prayajec ca
Sri-vatsam kaustubha-ratnam

One should separately worship the Lord’s flute placed upon
His lips, the flower garland on His chest, as well as the mark of
Srivatsa and the Kaustubha gem.

Text 16
Sti-khanda-nisyanda-vicarcitango
milena bhaladisu citrakani
likhyad atho patijara-mitrti-mantrair
anamayo dipa-sikhakrtini
One should apply sandalwood paste to the Lord’s body while

chanting the miila-mantra and then mark His forehead with
drawings while chanting the pazjara-murti-mantra. To become

59

=== PAGE 72 ===

Sri NARADA-PANCARATRA ® THIRD RATRA

cured of a disease, an intelligent devotee should meditate on
Lord Narayana’s bija-mantra, which resembles the flame of a
ghee lamp.

Text 17
puspanjalim vitanuydd atha panca-krtvo
mitlena pada-yugale tulasi-dvayena
madhye harari-yugalena ca mitrdhnim padma-
dvandvena sadbhir api sarva-tanau ca sarvaih

After completing this, one should offer two tulast leaves at the
lotus feet of the Lord while chanting the mila-mantra five times.
One should offer flowers to the Lord’s head, lotus feet and
entire body while chanting the mula-mantra six times.

Text 18
Svetani daksa-bhage ‘pi tac-
candana-pankilani kusumani
raktani vdma-bhage ‘runa-
candana-patikha-siktani

One should next offer white flowers mixed with sandalwood
paste to the right side of the Lord and red flowers mixed with
sandalwood paste to the left side of the Lord.

Text 19
tadvac ca dhitpa-dipau samarpya
dhinayat sudharasaih krsnam
mukha-vasddyam dattua
Samarcayed-gandha-puspadyaih

In this way, one should worship Sri Krsna with utmost humility
by offering Him incense, a ghee lamp, sandalwood paste,
flowers and other paraphernalia. One should also offer to the
Lord a mouth freshener.

=== PAGE 73 ===

WorsuiPinc Lorp Krsna For ATTAINING SAMIPYA-MuKTI,

Text 20
tambiile-nartana-gita-vadyaih
Santosya ciirnaka-sdlalena
brahmarpanakhya-manuné
kuryat svdtmarpanam mantri

A devotee who is expert in the science of chanting mantras
should offer the Lord betel nuts after offering palatable food.
One should satisfy the Lord by singing His glories and dancing
before Him in the temple. Indeed, one should surrender
his very self at the lotus feet of the Lord while chanting the
brahmarpana-mantra.

Text 21
athava sankucita-dhiya
laya-vidhi-mirti-panjardvacaruh
yady astadasa-lipind svanta-
padangais ca venii-piirvaih proktah

Or, if one desires to worship the Lord briefly, he should
follow the procedure for dismantling the place of worship and
complete the worship mentally while chanting the eighteen-
syllable mantra.

Text 22
Suprasannam atha nanda-tanujam
bhavayan japatu mantram ananyah
Sdnu-samsmyti yathavidhi sankhya-
piirane svayam mano vidadhita
One should meditate on Krsna, the son of Nanda, and chant

these mantras a prescribed number of times with undivided
attention.

61

=== PAGE 74 ===

62 Sri NARADA-PANCARATRA * THIRD RATRA

Text 23
pranava-putitanm bijam
japtua satam sahitastakam
nija-guru-mukhad aptan
yogan punaktu mahamatih

sad amrta-cidanandatmayam
japam ca samapayed

iti japa-vidhih samyak prokto
manu-dviayam asritah

Anoble-hearted practitioner should receive these mantras from
his spiritual master and then chant them one hundred and
eight times. While chanting mantras to the Supreme Lord, one
should follow the prescribed rules and regulations.

Text 24
ta imam bhajate vidhimn naro
bhavita ‘sau dayitah Sartrinam
Gparaka-kamalaika-mandiram
paramante samupaiti tan-mahah

A person who worships the Supreme Lord, Krsna, according to
this procedure becomes highly respected in society, acheives an
abundance of wealth and at the end of life, attains liberation.

Thus ends the translation of the sixth chapter of the Third Ratra
of Sri Narada-paiicaratra.

=== PAGE 75 ===

CHAPTER 7

Instructions on Worshiping
the Lord and His associates

Text 1
vydsa uvaca
hathyate khalu mantra-varyayoh
sddhanam sakala-siddhi-sadhanam
yad vidhaya munayo mahiyasim
siddhim dyur tha ndradadayah

Vyasadeva said: I shall now reveal the process of attaining
perfection by chanting two mantras. By following this procedure,
great sages such as Narada have attained perfection in this
world.

Text 2
vipram pradhvasta-kaéla-prabhrti-ripu-
ghata nirmalankam garistham
bhaktim krsnanghri-pankeruha-
yugala-rajoraginim udvahantam

vettaram veda-sastragama-vimala-
patham sammatam satsu vidvamsam

yo-bhaktyé vivitsuh pravana-
tanu-mand desikam samsrayeta

One should, with utmost devotion, take shelter of a leamed
and exalted sage—who is completely attached to the lotus feet
of Sri Krsna, who is a foremost brahmana, who has become
purified by giving up service to the mind, who is charitable, who
understands the path of devotion as presented in the Vedas,
and who is accepted by other exalted personalities—to become
inclined toward the devotional sevice.of Sri Krsna.

63

=== PAGE 76 ===

64 Sri NARADA-PANCARATRA * THIRD RATRA

Text 3
Santosayed akutilardatar atmand tam
svaih svair dhanais ca vapusapy anukitla-vanya
abda-trayarh kamalanabhadhiya ‘tha dhiras
tuste vivaksatu gurav atha mantra-diksam

Aninteligent practitionershould give upall kinds of duplicity and
serve his spiritual master for three years with his body, wealth,
and favorable speech, considering him to be nondifferent from
God. The spiritual master will impart manira initiation to such
a disciple.

Text 4
prapatica-sdra-prathita ‘tra diksa
Sarismaryate samprati-sarva-siddhaih
rte yaya santata-japino ‘pi
siddhi na yad dasyati mantra-pigah

Initiation into Krsna mantras is the only essential objective in
this material world by which both the teacher and student
become benefitted. Unless one takes initiation from a bonafide
spiritual master, no mantra can bestow perfection upon him,
even if he chants it constantly.

Text 5
atha puro vidadhita stava sthalim
avisamam adhi vastu balim budhah
acala-dormita patra bhu mandapam
masrna-vedikam Gracayet tatah

One should first of all build an even platform and on the top of
it, construct a six-foot-high altar.

Text 6
triguna-tantu-yuja kusa-mdlaya
parivrtam prakyti-dhvaja-bhiisitam

=== PAGE 77 ===

Tue WorsHip OF THE LorD AND His ASSOCIATES

mukha-catuska-payas-taru-
toranam sita-vitdna-virdjitam ujjvalam

One should then cover the altar with a white canopy that covers
the four gates on the four sides as well. The canopy should
be covered with kusa grass and decorated with flower garlands.
Next, one should install four flags outside the four gates.

Text 7
vasu-trigunitanguli-pramita-
khéta-vatayanam
vasor vasupater atho kakubhi
vistham asmin budhah

karotu vasu-mekhalam
vasu-gandrdha-konam prati

java-sthita-gaja-dhvani-
pratima-yoni-samlaksitam

One should mark a particular spot on the altar. The size of
that spot should be about one foot square. Then, according to
the prescribed rules and regulations, he should arrange sitting
places for the Vasus and the Lord of the Vasus. The place where
the seats are arranged should be triangular.

Text 8
tato mandape gavya-
gandha madhu-sikte
likhen mandalam
samyagacchadabdam

Suvrtta-trayam rasi-
pithad dhi-vithi-
caturdhavasobhopasobha-yuktam

One should decorate the mandala, or place, with ‘milk, yogurt,
ghee, cowdung, cow urine, sandalwood paste, and honey. He

=== PAGE 78 ===

66

Srt NARADA-PANCARATRA *© THIRD RATRA

should then enhance the beauty of the mandala by drawing on
it three circles, rasipitha, and four kinds of samudra.

Text 9
tato desika snana-piirvam vidhani
vidhayatma-pijavasanan vidhijnah
sva-vamagratah Sankham apy arghya-
pady dcamadyani patrani sampiiritani

Adevotee whois dedicated to following the rules and regulations
should complete the rituals, which includes bathing, and then
place, on his left side, various articles for worship, such as a
conch shell, padya, arghya, and dcamaniya.

Text 10
vidhaydnyatah puspa-gandhaksatadyam
kara-ksalane prsthatas capi patram
pradipaval-dipite sarvam anyat
svato ‘iigacara-sadhanam cédadhita

On his right side, he should keep flowers, sandalwood paste,
and rice that has been dried in the sun. At his back, he should
keep a pot of water to wash his hands. After this, he should
light the lamp and begin his worship.

Text 11
pithasyodag-gauravi panktir adau
pitjyo ‘nyatrapy ambikeyah karabjaih
pasam dandan pustya-bhiti dadhanah

He should begin worshiping from the northwest corner, slowly
moving to the northeast corner of the sanctified spot. On the
other side of the mandala, he should worship Ganapati, who
holds a rope, stick, and pusti in his hands, and who displays
fearlessness.

=== PAGE 79 ===

THe WorsuHiP OF THE LorD AND His ASSOCIATES

Text 12
Gradhya “dhara-Sakty ady amara-
caranayarapy atho madhya-bhage
dharmadin vahni yaksah-pavana-
Siva-gatan diksv adharmadikams ca
madhye sesabja-tejas-tritaya-guna-
gandnatmajan kesaranam
madhye cakirna-vasadikam
abhiyajatetpitha-mantrena bhityah

One should worship the ddhara-sakti and various demigods,
including Dharma, in the middle of the mandala. Adharma
and others should be worshiped in the northeast, northwest,
southeast and southwest corners. One should then worship
the three qualities of material nature while chanting the pitha-
mantra and the Gkirnavasa within the lotus.

Text 13
tatah salin madhye kamalam
amalams tandula-varan
api nyasyet darbhams tad
upari ca diirvdksata-yutan

nyaset pradaksinyat tad
upari krsanor dasa kala
ya-karadyarnddyé yajatu ca
sugandhadibhir imah
Thereafter, one should throw rice paddy, lotus petals, rice that
has been dried in the sun, kusa grass and dirbd grass onto the
mandala and circumambulate it. Next, he should offer worship
to the ten expansions of the sanctified fire, with sandalwood
paste and other items while chanting the proper mantra.

67

=== PAGE 80 ===

Sri NARADA-PANCARATRA ® THIRD RATRA

Text 14
nyaset kumbham tatra trigunita-
lasat-tantu-kalitam
japams taram dhipaih
suparimalitam jongakamayaih
kabhddyaih kuntismistha-
uvasitibhir varna-yugalais
tathdnyasyabhyarcas tad anu
kha-maner dvuddasa kalah

Thereafter, one should install the water pot while chanting the
purusa-sukta mantra three times, and kabhddyaih kuntismistha
uvasiti once, while offering sandalwood paste and a ghee lamp.
After completing this, one should worship the twelve expansions
of the sun-god.

Text 15
evam sankalpyagnim adhara-ripam
bhanum tadvat kumbha-ripam vidhijnah
nyaset tasminn aksatadyaih samete
kiircam svarmam ratna-varyeh pradiptam

In this way, the faithful practitioner invites fire, in the form
of ddhara, and the sun-god, in the form of the water pitcher—
considering them to be decorated with gold and jewels, while
chanting the kurcca-mantra, hum.

Text 16
atha kvatha-toyaih ksakaradi-varnair
vakdravasanath samapiirayet tam
sva-mantra-trijapavasanam payobhir
gavam parica-gavyair jalath kevalair va

One should fill the pitcher with kuathajala water while chanting
the appropriate mantras. One should also add cow’s milk and

=== PAGE 81 ===

Tue Worship OF THE Lord AND His ASSOCIATES

paticagavya to the pitcher while repeating the mantra three
times.
Text 17
sakala-janasmitha su-yuga-sankhyah
sura-gana-pirvd nyasatu tathaiva
tad upa-kalds tah salila-sugandhah
$a tu sumanobhis tad anu yajec ca

Afterperforming the nydsasixteen times to the above-mentioned
demigods, the devotee should next sprinkle scented water and
begin the worship of the other demigods, who are all parts and
parcels of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 18
udicya-kustha-kunikumambu-
loha-sajjatasuraih
sasitam ity udiritam hareh
priydsta-gandhakam

Udicya, kustha, kunkum, water, gold, sajjata, dsura and sasita are
eight well known fragrant objects called astagandha. They are
all very dear to Sri Hari.

Text 19
kvdtha-toya-paripiritodare samvilarighya
vidhima ‘sta-gandhakam
Soma-siirya-sikhinam prthak-kala
seva-karma viniyojayet sudhih

An intelligent devotee should place kvdthajala in the water pot
and then add the above-mentioned eight items. Thereafter, he
should offer it separately to the sun-god, moon-god and Agni.

Text 20
tadvad Gksarabhavas tu kadibhis
tadibhih punar ukdrajah kalah

=== PAGE 82 ===

70

Sr NARADA-PANCARATRA ® THIRD RATRA

padibhir malijas tu binduja
yadibhih sura-ganena nadajah
One then has to worship akaraja by the letters known as
akaradi—ukaraja by the letters known as takaradi—alipija by the
letters known as padi—vinduja by the letters known as yadi—
and nadaja by the demigods.

Text 21
Samavahandante susamsthapanat prak
reas tatra tatratijapya budhena
samabhyarcya tas tah prthak tac ca patho ‘
rpayen mila-mantrena kumbhe yathavat

The devotee should first finish the invocation and then, before
the installation, he should chant the appropriate mantras, as
mentioned in the Vedas. He should then fill the water pots

while chanting the mula-mantras.

Text 22
Sahakéra-bodha-panasa-stavakaih
Satamanyu-kanthi-kalitaih kalasam
pidadhatu puspa-phala-tandulakair
abhipirnaya ca subha-cakrikaya

Thereafter, one should cover the water pots with branches of
either a mango tree, fig tree or jackfruit tree that has at least five
or seven leaves. On top of that, he should place fruit, flowers
and rice that has been dried in the sun.

Text 23
abhivestayet tad anu kumbha-mukham
nava-nirmalamsuka-yugena budhah
samalanikrte ‘tra kusumadibhir apy
abhivahayet parataram ca mahah

=== PAGE 83 ===

THE WorsHIP OF THE LorD AND HIs ASSOCIATES

Then, the expert sadhaka should cover the water pots (including
the branches with leaves) with pieces of new, clean cloth,
decorate them with flowers and invoke effulgent energy into
them.

Text 24
sakali-vidhaya kalasastham amsum
harim astu-tattvam anu-vinyasanaih
paripijayed gurum athavahitah
parivara-yuktam upacdra-ganaih

Then, following the prescribed rules and regulations, while
realizing Krsna as the reservior of all transcendental qualtities,
one should worship Him and His associates by offering all of
the previously-mentioned ingreidents.

Text 25
dattasanam svagatam apy udirya
tatharghya-padyacamaniyakani
sndnam ca vasas ca vibhitsanani
Sangaya tasmai viniyojya mantrt
A devotee who knows the truth of these mantras should offer an
asana to the Lord, welcome Him with prayers and then worship
each of His limbs by offering padya, arghya, Gcamaniya, snaniya,
adress, and ornaments.

Text 26
gatre pavitrair atha gandha-puspaih
pirvan yajen nyasa-vidhanato ‘sya
Srsti-sthiti suanga-yugam ca venum
malam abhijiana-varasma-mukhyau
mitlena carghyarcanavat prapiijya
samarcayed avaranani bhityah

va

=== PAGE 84 ===

72

Srt NARADA-PANCARATRA @ THIRD RATRA

One must then offer fragrant flowers to each limb of the Lord,
just as one performs the nydsa while touching the various limbs
of His body. Thereafter, he should offer a flower garland to the
Lord and after that, he should worship the accociates of the
Lord.

Text 27
diksv atha dama-sudamau
vasuddmah kinkini ca samprtjyah
tejo-riipas tad-vad-vahirangani
keSaresu sumatir yajet

On one side of the Lord, a devotee should worship Dama,
Vasudama, Sudama and Kinkini. After this worship, he should
worship the Lord’s external energy, which is located just outside
the lotus petals.

Text 28
hutavaha-nirrti-samirana-Siva-diksu
hydadi-varma-paryantam
muktendu-kanta-kuvalaya-hari-nila-
hutasa-prabhah pramadah

In the northeast, northwest, southeast and southwest corners,
one should worship the pramadas, who are effulgent like moon
rays and who resemble blue flames.

Text 29
abhaya-vara-sphurita-karah pradhana-
tanavo ‘nga-devatah smaryah
rukminy ddya mahisir astau
Sampitjayed dalesu tatah
One should then meditate on the ariga devatds, whose hands

are always ready to offer benedictions. After this, one should
worship the eight principal queens, headed by Rukmini.

=== PAGE 85 ===

Tue Worsuip OF THE LorD AND His ASSOCIATES

Text 30
daksina-kara-dhrta-kamalavasu-
bharita-supatra-mudritanya-karah
rukminyakhya satya lagnajity
Ghvaya sunanda ca
Queens such as Rukmini, Satya, Nagnajiti and Sunanda—who
hold a lotus flower in their right hands and a container of
wealth in their left hands—are always to be worshiped.

Text 31
bhityas ca mitravinda sulaksanapya
rhsaja susila ca
tapaniya-marakatabhah susita-
vicitrambaras tu etah
prthu-kuca-bharalasangayo vividha-
mala-prakara-vilasitabharanah

One should also worship Mitravinda, Sulaksana, Jambavati and
Susila—whose beauty can be compared to that of an emerald,
who are dressed in white garments, who possess heavy breasts,
and who are decorated with necklaces and other ornaments.

Text 32
tato yajed dalagresu
vasudevam ca devakim
nanda-gopam yasodam ca
balabhadram subhadrikim

/
Thereafter, the devotee should worship Vasudeva, Devaki,
Nanda, Yasoda, Balarama and Subhadra, who are situated on
the tips of the lotus petals.

Text 33
gopala gopis tad-vaktre
vilina-mita-locanah

73

=== PAGE 86 ===

74

Sext NARADA-PANCARATRA *© THIRD RATRA

jnana-mudra-bhayakarau
pitarau pita-pandurau

One should then worship the pale-complexioned forefathers—
who award fearlessness, and who sit in the posture known as
jnana-mudra—while meditating upon the cowherd men and
women as being merged within their mouths.

Text 34
divya-malambaralepa-
bhisane matarau punah
dharayantyau ca varadam
payasapitpa-patrakam

One should once again worship the mothers of the universe by
offering them new cloth, flower garlands, sandalwood paste,
sweet rice, cakes and other varieties of food.

Text 35,
aruna-syamale hara-mani-
_kundala-mandite
balah sankhendu-dhavalo
musalam langalam dadhat

One should separately worship Balarama—who is decorated
with red and black necklaces, jeweled earrings, a plough, and
a club; and whose complexion is white, like a conch shell or
moonlight.

Text 36
haldlola-nila-vasa
helavan eka-kundalah
kalaya-syamala bhadra
sutada bhadra-bhitsana

=== PAGE 87 ===

Tue WorsuiP oF THE LorD AND His ASSOCIATES 75

One should then worship Bhadra and Sutada, who are dressed
in blue garments, who wear many earrings, whose complexions
are dark, and who are decorated with enchanting ormaments.

Texts 37-38
varabhaya-yuta pita-
vasand riidha-yauvand
venu-vind-vetra-yasti-
Sarikha-Ssrigadi-panayah
gopa gopyas ca vividha
upayandatta-karambujah
mandaradims ca tad-bahye
pitjayet kalpa-padapan

Thereafter, one should worship the cowherd boys and girls, who
always bestow fearlessness and benedictions, who wear colorful
garments, and who carry a flute, vind, stick, conch shell, and
buffalo horn. One should then worship desire trees, such as
the mandara.

Text 39
mandara-santanaka-parijata-kalpa-
drumakhyan haricandanam ca
madhye caturdiksv abhivanchitartha-
danaika-diksanvita-namra-sakhan

In and around the lotus flower, one should worship various
desire trees, such as the mandara, sanatana, parijata, kalpadruma
and haricandana, which are capable of awarding one’s desired
benedictions, and are full of auspiciousness.

Thus ends the translation of the seventh chapter of the Third
Ratra of Sri Narada-paticaratra.

=== PAGE 88 ===

CHAPTER 8

Further Instructions on Worshiping
the Lord and His Associates

Text 1
‘uyasa uvaca
hari-havya-vat-taranija-ksapatanap
pati-vayu-soma-siva-Sesa-padmajan
prayajet svadiksv amala-dhih svajaty
adhisvaraheti-patra-parivara-sametan

Vyasadeva said: One should next worship Hari, Agni, Taranija,
Ksapatana, Samudra, Vayu, Candra, Siva and Sega in the four
directions while thinking of them as being eternal servants of
the Supreme Lord.

Text 2
hapisa-kapila-nila-syamala-sveta-dhiimah
mala-sita-Suci-rakta varnato vasabadyah
kara-kamala-virdjat sudyudha divya-vesa
vividha-mani-ganogra-prasphurad-bhiisanadhyah

These demigods are of various complexions, such as yellow,
blue, black, white and grey. They are pure souls and they hold
various weapons in their hands. They are dressed in celestial
-garments and decorated with many jeweled ornaments.

Text 3
dambholi-sakty abhidha-danda-krpana-pasa-
candankusarddha-gada-trisikhari-padmah
arcya-bahnir nija-sulaksana-laksita-mauli-yuktah
sva-suayudhabhaya-samudyata-pani-padmah

Thereafter, one should worship the goddesses of heaven, who
hold various weapons in their hands, such as the thunderolt,

77

=== PAGE 89 ===

78

Sri NARADA-PANCARATRA * THIRD RATRA

stick, rope, anchor, bow, and club. They are always ready to
offer benedictions and they are endowed with divine qualities.
They are situated on the outer portion of the lotus flower.

Text 4
kanaka-rajata-toyadabhra-campa
runahima-nila-javd-prabala-bhasah
kramata iti rucdtta-vajra-pirrvd-
rucira-vilepana-vastra-malya-bhiisah

With complexions resembling the color of gold, silver, a dark
cloud, snow, red and blue habiscus flowers, and coral, and
being decorated with flower garlands and sandalwood paste,
these demigods and goddesses appear like the thunderbolt of
Cupid.

Text 5
hathitam dvrti-saptakam acyutarcana-
vidhdv ati sarva-sukhavaham
prayajed athavarga-purandarasani-
mukhais tritayavaranam tv idam

It is essential for a devotee to worship Krsna’s associates while
worshiping Krsna. There are three kinds of associates of the
Lord—anigas, puranddsanis and mukhas.

Text 6
hetya japitud jala-gandha-puspaih
krsndstaketapy atha krsna-pitjam
kurydd vudhas tani samahvayéni
vaksydmi taradi-namo ‘ntikani
One should worship Lord Krsna by offering Him water,
sandalwood paste, flowers and other items. After worshiping
the Lord, one should recite the prayer, Krsnastaka, for His
pleasure.

=== PAGE 90 ===

INSTRUCTIONS ON WoRSHIPING THE LorD 79

Texts 7-8
Sri-kysno vdsudevas ca
narayana-samahvayah
devaki-nandano yadu-srestho
vdrsneya ity api
asurakranta-sabdante
bharahariti saptamah
dharma-samsthapakas cacaiva
caturthy antah kramdad ime

Each of these holy names should be chanted in the fourth
dative case, and should be preceded by om. These names are—
Sri Krsna, Vasudeva, Narayana, Devakinandana, Yaduérestha,
Varsneya, Asurakrantabharahari and Dharmasansthapaka.

Text 9
ebhir evathava karya piija
vai kamsa-vairinah
Samsdara-sdgarottirtthe
Sarva-kémaptaye budhaih

By worshiping Krsna, the enemy of Karhsa, while chanting these
mantras, the devotees are delivered from the ocean of material
existence and attain seven kinds of perfection.

Text 10
Sarangdra-dyuta-dhi-lulitair
jarjaraih samvikirnair
guggulvadyair ghana-parimalair
dhiipam asddya mantri

dadyan nicair danujam atha
maya-pravenatha dosna

ghantam gandhaksata-
sumanakair arcitam vadayanah

=== PAGE 91 ===

Srt NARADA-PANCARATRA © THIRD RATRA

A practitioner who is expert in the science of chanting mantras
should take fragrant incense made with gugula and offer it to
Krsna while ringing a bell and displaying utmost devotion.

Text 11
tad uddiptam surabhi-ghrta-
Samsikta-karpira-raktam
dipam drstya-stuti-visada-dhih
padma-paryantam uccaih

dastua puspanjalim api
vidhayarpayitud ca padyam

$4 ca sankalpayet tad vipulam
api tada-svarna-patre nivedyam

After that, one should take a ghee lamp having camphor on
the wicks and purify it by chanting the appropriate mantra. He
should then offer the ghee lamp to the Lord, followed by an
offering of flowers, padya, Gcamaniya and various kinds of food.

Text 12
surabhitarena dugdha-
havisé susrtena sita-
samudamsakai rucira-
kytya vicitra-vasaih

dadhi-navanita-niitana-
sitopala-pipanika-

ghrta-guda-narikela-kadali-
phala-puspa-rasais ca

One should offer to the Lord with pure devotion—milk, butter,

sugar candy, yogurt, fresh cakes, jaggery, a coconut, bananas,
honey, and other such food.

=== PAGE 92 ===

INSTRUCTIONS ON WoRSHIPING THE LorD

Text 13
astroksitam tad ari-
mudrikaya ‘tiraksya
vdyavyatapa-parisositam
agni-dosma

sandahya vdma-kara-
saudhara-sabhipirnam

mantramrtikrtam
athabhimrsan prajapyet

One should display the astra- mudré and sariraksana-mudra for
one’s safety and for the purification of the food to be offered.
One should then chant appropriate mantras for transforming
the food into nectar.

Text 14
manum astasah surabhi-mudrikaya
paripiirnam arcayatu gandha-puspaih
harim arthayed atha krta-prasaraijalir
syato ‘sya visarec ca mahah

One should chant this mantra eight times after displaying the
surabhi-mudrd. One should then fold his hands and offer prayers
to Lord Hari while meditating upon the glittering effulgence
emanating from His face.

Text 15
vitihotra-dayitantam uccaran
mitla-mantram atha nihksipej jalam
arpayet tad amytatmakam havir
dormajasa-kusumam samuddharan

The devotee should sprinkle water on the articles to be offered
and then offer ghee and some flowers to the Lord with love and
devotion. This should be done while chanting the mula-mantra.

81

=== PAGE 93 ===

82

Sri NARADA-PANCARATRA * THIRD RATRA

Text 16
nivedayami bhagavate
jusanedam havir havih
nivedyarpana-mantro ‘yam
Sarvarcasu nijakhyaya

While offering food to Lord Krsna one should chant one’s
favorite name of the Lord. One should pray to the Lord that
He kindly accept the food that was prepared in ghee.

Text 17
grasa-mudram vaéma-dosna
vikacotpala-sannibham
pradarsayan daksinena
pranadindm ca darsayet

One should then display with his left hand the grdsa-mudrd,
which is like a fully blossomed lotus flower. With his right
hand, he should display the prana-mudré while chanting prandya
svaha.

Text 18
Sprset kanisthopakanisthike dve
Ssdtigustha-mitrdhna prathameha mudra
tathapara tarjani-madhyame syad
andmika-madhyamike ca madhya

This particular mudré is completed when one touches his
thumb, little finger, and ring finger to his head. The devotee
should also display the madhya-mudra with his first finger,
middle finger and ring finger.

Text 19
andmiké-tarjani-madhyamah syat
tadvac caturthi sa-kanisthikas tah

=== PAGE 94 ===

INSTRUCTIONS ON WoORSHIPING THE LORD

syat paticami tadvad iti pradistah
pranadi-mudra nija-mantra-yuktah

The pranadi-mudra is displayed by touching the middle finger,
first finger, ring ring and little finger to the thumb and chanting
the suitable mantra.

Text 20
pranapana-vyaha-samanodanah
kramdc caturthya yuktah
taradhara baddha ceddhah
krsnadhvanas tato manavah

Mantras are revealed to one who chants the names of the five
kinds of air—prana, apdma, vyana, samana and udéna—ending
them in the fourth dative case. This chanting is favorable for
the execution of devotional service to Lord Krsna.

Text 21
tato nivedya mudrikam
pradhanaya karadvaye
sprsatu anamikam nijam
manum japan pradarsayet
Thereafter, one should display the pradhana-mudra and chant
the mantras by touching them with the ring finger.

Text 22
nandajo ‘mbu-manu-binda-yur-natir
vamaparsva udaratmani ca
ruddha-atmani-nivedyam atma-bhir-
mam sa parsvam anilas tathé niyuk
After doing this, one should offer water to the son of Nanda

and then offer obeisances to Him. One should meditate upon
how the Lord is accepting his offerings of food.

=== PAGE 95 ===

Sri NARADA-PANCARATRA © THIRD RATRA

Text 23
mandalam abhito mantribijankura-
bhdjanani vinyasya
pistamayan api dipan ghrta-
piirnan vinasyet sudipta-sikhan

A learned devotee should then meditate on the seed, leaves
and petals of the lotus flower that is situated in the middle of
the sacred place. He should offer sweet rice and other food, as
well as a ghee lamp, to the sacred place.

Thus ends the translation of the eighth chapter of the Third
Ratra of Sri Narada-paticaratra.

=== PAGE 96 ===

CHAPTER 9

The Procedure For Performing Fire Sacrifice

Text 1
Sri-vyasa uvaca
atha samskrte hutavahe vimala-
dhirabhivadya samyag abhipitjya
harim juhuyat sitaghrta-yutena
payah parisadhitena sitadidivina

Vyasadeva said: After completing the worship of Lord Hari by
offering Him all the aforementioned items with a pure heart,
one should perform a fire sacrifice with pure ghee and other
milk products.

Text 2
astottara-sahasram samapya
homam punar balim dadyat
vasisthadhinathebhyo naksatrebhyas
tatas ca karanebhyah

One should perform a fire sacrifice by offering one thousand
and eight oblations into the sacrificial fire while simultaneously
offering all of the articles once again for the worship of the
Lord. These articles should also be offered to vasistha adhinatha
naksatra and to the karanas.

Text 3
Sampadya pani ca-sudham samarpya
dattvambha udvasya mukharcir asye
naivedyam uddhytya nivedya
visvaksenaya prthvim upalipya bhiiyah

At this time, the devotee should display the sudha-mudra, and
offer water and various kinds of food to Lord Krsna once again.

85

=== PAGE 97 ===

Srt NARADA-PANCARATRA * THIRD RATRA

Thereafter, he should carefully clean the sacrificial arena.

Text 4
gandiisa-danta-dhavandcamandsya-hasta-
sithtyanulepa-mukha-vasaka-malya-bhiisah
tambiilam apy ati nivedya suvadya-nytya-
gitaih sudrptam abhipijayatat pur eva

After completing this, one should offer water for the Lord
to wash His hands, mouth and teeth, while reciting Vedic
hymns. Thereafter, one should offer sandalwood paste, mouth
freshener, a flower garland, ornaments and betel nuts. One
should also sing and dance before the Lord.

Text 5
gandhadibhih saparivaram atharghyam asmai
dattva vidhaya kusumdijalim addarena
stutud pranamya Sirasé culakodakena
atmanam arpayatu tac caranarvinde

Thereafter, in the sacrificial arena, one should worship the
Lord with devotion by offering ‘Him and His associates arghya
and flowers. One should also offer prayers and obeisances in a
‘mood of complete surrender.

Texts 6-7
iti pirvam prana-buddhi-
deha-dharmadhikdaratah
jagrat-svapna-susupty
akhyavasthasu manasa vaca

karmana hastabhyam padbhyam
udarena sisna yat smytam

yad uktam yat krtam tat sarvam
brahmarpanam bhavatu svaha

=== PAGE 98 ===

INSTRUCTIONS ON WoRSHIPING THE LorD

Indeed, one should surrender his very life, intelligence, body,
religious principles, mind, and speech, as well as all of the
activities that he performs with his hands, legs, and stomach,
during wakefulness or while sleeping. Every activity that one
performs should be done as an offering to the Lord.

Text 8
mam madiyam ca sakalam
haraye ‘ham samarpaye
om tat sad iti samprokto
mantrah sudtmarpane subhah

One should chant om tat satand pray: O Lord, I surrender myself
at Your lotus feet, along with everything that I may possess.

Text 9
anusmaran kalasam acyutam
japan sahasrakarh budho vapusy
athoditojhitah sama citi-vinapy
atas tad api nayet sudhatmatém

One should then meditate on Krsna as being situated in the
water pitcher that is kept in the sacrificial arena while chanting
his mantra one thousand times. He should consider himself to
be a nectarean object for Krsna’s enjoyment.

Text 10
dhvaja-torana-dik-kalasddi-gatam
api mandapa-mandala-kunda-latam
abhiyojya citim kalase kusumaih
paripijya japet punar astasatam
After completing the fire sacrifice, one should collect the flags,

pillars, pitchers and other articles from the paja altar and then
chant the mula-mantra eight hundred times.

87

=== PAGE 99 ===

88

Sri NARADA-PANCARATRA © THIRD RATRA

Text 11
atha Sisya upositah prabhate
kyta-nityah susitambarah suvesah
dharani-dhana-dhanya-go-bahulair
vinayad vipra-varan hareh prasadya

A disciple should rise early in the morning, take his bath, and
then perform his daily religious duties. After completing them,
he should dress in white cloth and decorate himself with nice
omaments. He should then satisfy the qualified devotees of
Lord Hari by giving them land, grains, wealth and cows.

Text 12
bhityah paritya pranipatya desikam
tasmai parasmai purusaya dehine
tam vitta-Sathyam parihrtya daksinam
dattva tanum svam ca samarpayet sudhih

He should then bow down to Krsna by thinking of Him as being
present in the place of worship. An intelligent devotee should
give sufficient daksina (remuneration) to his spiritual master
and take complete shelter of him.

Text 13
athabhiseka-mandape
sukhopavistam dsane
gurur visodhayed amum
pureva Sosanadibhih

The spiritual master should purify his disciple as he is seated
ona sanctified 4sana in the sacrificial arena, in the manner that
was detailed earlier.

Text 14
pitha-nydsdvasénam vapusi
vimala-dhir nyasya tasyasikaya

=== PAGE 100 ===

THE ProcepurRE FoR PERFORMING FIRE SACRIFICE

mantrenabhyarcya diirvaksata-
kusuma-yutam rocandm ke nidhdya

GSirvadair dvijandm visada-
paturavair gita-vaditra-ghosair

mangalyair dnayettam kalasam
abhivrtas tat-samipam pratitah

A pure-hearted devotee has to perform the nydsa, placing it
on his body, put diarvd grass and rice that has been dried in
the sun on a raised altar, and then beg for the blessings of the
brahmanas.

Text 15
tendbhilina-mani-mantra-mahausadhena
dhamna perana paramamyta-riipa-bhaja
Sampitrayan vapur amusya tato vitanvan
tat-samavarnyam abhisecayatat yathavat

The sincere practitioner should invite the Supreme Lord,
Krsna—whose form is full of eternity, knowledge and bliss—by
chanting these confidential mantras. After doing so, he should
perform the abhiseka (bathing ceremony) of the Lord.

Text 16
ksadyaira ‘ntima-varnair adbhis ca
parna-tanus trirvyakta-mantrantaih
paridhrta-sitatara-vasana-dvitayo
vacamyamah samacantah

While filling the pitcher with water, one must chant the mantras,
pronouncing each letter carefully, beginning from sa up to the
final letter. The sddhaka should then perform dcamana once
again, while remaining silent.

89