=== PAGE 1 ===

DP
WwW
fal
Y
pes

=== PAGE 2 ===

In the thousand thirty-six exquisite
Sanskrit verses comprising this poetical
hymn known as the Narayanecyam,
Narayana Bhattatiri, a versatile scholar,
philosopher, poet and devotee of the
16th century, gives a masterly summary
of the subject matter dealt with in the
eighteen thousand verses of the famous
Bhakti Text, the Bhagavata Purana.

A close study of this work will help
one gain an insight into the authentic
Bhakti traditions of India in a short
compass. Besides being a comprehensive
Bhakti Text, the book is noted for the
fascinating way in which it portrays the
life and achievements of Sri Krishna,
the unique Incarnation.

Among the devotees of the Krishna
cult, the Text of the Narayaneeyant is
looked upon as sacred, having the power
of a Mantra like the Devimahatmya and
similar Texts, and is studied daily as a
part of their devotional practices. The
belief is that as the author Bhattatiri
attained to ‘longevity, health and
happiness’ through its composition, so
will a person reading it with faith and
devotion attain to these highly coveted
values, and have the grace and protection
of the Lord in all difficult situations of
life.

The Sanskrit Text, a lucid English
translation, adequate Notes on doctrinal
points, and an elaborate Introduction
giving an account of the author, a critical
estimate of the contents of the Text and
an exposition of the philosophy of Bhakti,
and Appendices giving very interesting
anecdotes about the  devotee-poet
Narayana Bhattatiri and the temple of
Guruvayoor—form the important features
of the book.

=== PAGE 5 ===

i ss

NARAYANEEYAM |

BHAGAVATA CONDENSED

BY |
MEPPATHUR NARAYANA BHATTATIRI H

TRANSLATED
BY

SWAMI TAPASYANANDA

=== PAGE 6 ===

uolished by
© The President
SRI RAMAKRISHNA MATH

11, Ramakrishna Math Road,
Madras-600 004.

Third Impression
| 3C, 10 - 1982

=== PAGE 7 ===

PREFACE

The present edition of the Narayaneeyam aims at giving a lucid
and readable translation of this great Sanskrit Text to the English
reading public interested in Indian devotional literature. While
the translation is ‘free,’ it is never unfaithful to the original. It
is based on the edition of the Text by two very competent Sanskrit
scholars, Sri P.S. Anantanarayana Sastri and Sri Vatakumkur
Raja Raja Varma, published in Malayalam script with a com-
mentary.

The details given in the Introduction and Appendices con-
cerning the life and works of the author Narayana Bhattatiri
and the anecdotes about him and the temple of Guruvayoor
have been gathered from several Malayalam periodicals, chiefly
from the writings of Profs. K. Kunhunni Raja, C.G. Nair,
M.G.S. Narayanan, P. C. Vasudevan Elayath, V. S. Sarma and
K. Vasudevan Moozad. Though none can vouch for the historical
accuracy of much of these materials, they are in a sense of greater
interest than the dry details of history, as they give us a deep
insight into the versatility of the great mind we are contacting
through this poetical hymn.

The notes are strictly confined to doctrinal points, and much
of the Introduction, especially the section on the Bhagavata, is
meant to supplement these. As the Narayaneeyam is a condensa-
tion of the Bhagavata Purana, a grasp of the specific Bhakti doctrine
of the Bhagavata is very essential for the proper understanding of
the Narayanceyam, especially of the Krishna episode forming its core.
The reader is therefore advised to make a close study of the Intro-
duction.

The use of hyphens in the Text is meant to facilitate reading
and has no significance beyond that.

It is hoped that this translation of the WVarayaneeyam into a
world language like English will attract the attention of a wide
public to this great Text and through it, to the great Bhakti tradi-

tion of India.
Sri Ramakrishna Math, Madras. PUBLISHER.
March, 1976.

=== PAGE 9 ===

Canto
Ne

2
a
dy

ep ernaa

S

We
12.
13.
4;
18,
16.
WZ,
18.
1),
20.

CONTENTS

IntRopuction

Prelude

Grory oF THE Lorp

ForMru AsPECT OF THE LorD
Suppuiant DEVOTEE 30
PROGRESS OF THE SPIRITUAL AsPIRANT

Creation and Dissolution

Cosmic EvoLuTion

Cosmos As ForM oF THE Lorp

BrauMA CoMMANDED TO CREATE

Dawn oF CREATION

BRAHMA IN HIS CREATIVE ROLE 30
DIVERSIFICATION OF CREATION

Accounts of Incarnations and Devotees

PRELUDE TO THE First INCARNATION
IncarNaTION As Cosmic Boar
DesTRucTION OF HIRANYAKSHA
INCARNATION AS KAPILA

MessAcr oF KAPILA 00 =
Nara-NARAYANA AND DAKSHA-YAJNA
Story or DuruvA

Story or PrirHu 0°

Srory OF THE PRACHETAS .- oD
Srory or RisHABHA DEVA .. on

v

Page

Ix to XLIV

a0 12

20
23
27
31
34

37

30 43)
6p C7)
65 53
ae 57
De 60
26 64
Sc 66

=== PAGE 10 ===

vi

CONTENTS
Canto Page
q 21. Worsuip In DIFFERENT CONTINENTS es bio 68
i 22. Story or AyAMILA a aa A 72
23. Srory or CHITRAKETU 06 te G6 75
24, Story oF PRAHLADA 35 36 5D 79
25. INcARNATION As Man-Lion .. od oc 83
26. LiseraTION OF THE ELEPHANT-KING és He 86
27. CHURNING THE OCEAN For NECTAR oe 30 90
28. GrrTs oF THE OCEAN ob 55 do 93
29. INCARNATION AS MonInNr.. at 20 96
30. INCARNATION As VAMANA  .. os oe 99
31. Vamana Biessinc Baur ae as an 103
32. INCARNATION As Fis 06 as go. CNS
33. Story or AMBARISHA 00 3 so OS
34, INCARNATION As RAMA 30 20 oo = NM
35. INCARNATION As RaMA—(contd.) a8 oo LSS
36. INCARNATION AS PARASURAMA = oo WIG)
Sri Krishna the Perfect Incarnation
37. PRELUDE To Sri KRisHNA-INCARNATION ao UH
38. Brrtu or Sri KrisHNa 60 oo oo WF
39. Story or YOGAMAYA 50 60 pee 30)
40. SALVATION oF PUTANA 20 BG oo | NG
41. CREMATION oF PUTANA oo 36 co (NGS
42. DeEsTRUCTION OF THE CarT-WHEEL AsuURA oo GB
43. DESTRUCTION OF TRINAVARTA 20 oo (Meal
44. Naminc Ceremony ° Bie oo KS
45. CurttpHoop Pranks or KRISHNA 56 so EG
46. REVELATION OF THE Cosmic Form 00 oo NER)
47. Bounp To THE Mortar oe oo NG
48. Revease or NALA-Kusara AND MANIGRIVA oo NGS)
49. TREK TO VRINDAVANA 156

50. Catr-Demon AND Stork-Demon 158

=== PAGE 11 ===

CONTENTS a

- Canto Page
| 51. DesTRUCTION OF AGHASURA .. er cy MGI
| 52. Kipnappinc OF CALVEs bo a oo NSE
! 53. DesTRUCTION OF DHENUKASURA ab ee 167,
54, Menace or Kariya 3 ers ae 169)
55. Dance upon Katya ae a ee LT
56. BesrowAt or Grace ON KALiyaA a0 aon La
s 57. DersTRUCTION OF PRALAMBASURA 55 ee 10}
58. Rescuer From Witp Fire... 06 oo Wks
59. Catt or THE FLUTE 08 28 oo, G2
60. Rospinc Goris oF THEIR Roses Ao oo Wa
61. Bressinc THE Wives oF BRAHMANAS go ae 86
62. Brocxinc Sacririce To INDRA 90 Ba. shh)
63. Lretinc GovARDHANA 20 Bon NOB
64. Crowninc As GovINDA oo oe ce OS
65. Cominc or Goris ror Rasa-Lita 20 peALOd
‘66. Rasa-Lita 08 50 2° Pree 200)
67. Lorp DisAPPEARS AND REAPPEARS ue S202)
68. Re-Union wiTH Gopikas -- bo ae 20
69. Rasa Dance -- co So e200)
70. SALVATION OF SUDARSANA -- ae 5. DI)
7]. Krisuna Becomes Kesava -- 6° Sige 2218}
72. Axrura’s Mission TO GoxuLa ep go DIG
73. JOURNEY TO MATHURA oo a6 oe eal)
74. Entry 1nTo MATHURA bo 30 Bae All
75. SALVATION OF KAMSsA 225,
76. MEssAGE TO GOPIKAS 230
ie JARASANDHA’S InvasION be a6 Se ONE:
78. PRAYER OF RUKMINI ac on 2G)
79. MarriAcE OF RUKMINI a o oo Kl)
80. Lure or SYAMANTAKA op 56 2043
81]. SALVATION oF NARAKASURA ao co BHT
82. Conquest oF BANASURA 251
254

83, SALVATION OF PAUNDRAKA

=== PAGE 12 ===

viii

CONTENTS
Canto Page
84. PircrimAce TO SAMANTAPANCHAKA 9 ae 257
85. Rayasuya SacrIFICE ye NS ee 2260,
86. KuruksHerra War a5 oid -» 264
87. Kucueta Episope ou Go =a 269)
88. Restoration or THE DEAD CHILpREN .. oe 1212)
Devotion as the Synthesis of Yogas
89. Uniqueness or Visinu Conception 30 sa US
90. Au Scriptures Pont To THEE ae ao he)
91. Buacavata-DHarMa Be bo Be 2h
92. Rote or Buaxti In Kaui Yuca o6 B58 eaY/
93. Wispom From Lirr’s EXPERIENCES Ss Eyres 29 2)
94. Ittummnation THRoucH Buaxtr ee po 2ASls)
i 95. Supremacy oF THE Patu or Devotion oo SU
96. Devotion as a Sevr-Surrictent DiscreLine ao OLS)
| 97. Mysrery or Divine Maya .. 36 a5 S08)
| 98. IN PRatse or THE IMPERSONAL ABSOLUTE oo lB
| $9. In Praise or THE Divine Person bo oo MY
| 100. THE Biessep Vision go 68 eo 22,
| Notes Be Ee err SLi:
| Appenpix I
| The Temple of Guruvayoor 65 so. aN
| Appenpix II
Anecdotes about the Author 90 co ae
Appenpix III
References to Bhagavata sa on Bald)

Appenpix 1V
Rig-Vedic References oa O06 oo Re

=== PAGE 13 ===

INTRODUCTION
I

The Author —

Tue Narayaneeyamis a text that takes a high placein Sanskrit
literature both as a poem and as a devotional hymn. This
double role is responsible for the great popularity it has
attained wherever it has come to be known. As its author was
a poet-devotee hailing from Kerala, and as it was traditionally
connected with the great Krishna Temple at Guruvayoor in
that State, its popularity was, till the beginning of this century,
confined mostly to that part of the country; but since then it
has come to be known all over South India, and editions of it
with translation and comments in different languages have
appeared. Itis only a question of time before it gains recogni-
tion in all the Sanskrit-knowing world on a par with great
hymns like the Chandi, the Saundaryalahari, the Sivanandalahari
etc., on the one hand, and with the great Kavyas of poets
like Kalidasa on the other.

The author of this great Text, Meppathur Narayana
Bhattatiri, was a Nampudiri Brahmana of Kerala, whose date.
‘of birth, according tothe latest view expressed by Dr. Kunhunni
Raja, Professor of Sanskrit in the Madras University, is 1560
A.D. The site of his home, Meppathur Ilam, situated on the
“Forthern side of the Bharata river about two miles away front
the great temple of Tirunavay in Ponnani Taluq of Kerala,
can still be identified, although the family became extinct long
ago. Ascan be gathered from his grammatical work the Prakriya-
sarvasva, his father was Matridatta “devoted to Dharma and
an adept in Bhatta Mimamsa (Vedic ritualistic philosophy
according to Kumarila Bhatta) and other Tantras (ritualistic
lore).’ Bhattatiri studied these Sastras from his own father,
while he studied the Veda from one Madhavacharya and
Logic from one Damodararya. The identities of these two
cannot now be ascertained. Grammar, of which he had
special mastery, was taught to him by one Achyutarya, who
js identified as Trikandiyur Achyuta Pisharady, a celebrated
grammarian of those times. Tradition has it that Bhattatirt
jn his early days was both a prodigy and a profligate. While

=== PAGE 14 ===

3 NARAYANEEYAM
the former is a fact, the latter is only a popular ascrip-
tion to dramatize his later devotional developments. By about
sixteen, the prodigy is said to have mastered all learning. He
is also said to have been leading a morally indifferent li
from which he was shaken and put on right lines by the
reprimand of his grammarian teacher Achyuta Pishara
whom he seems to have admired and respected very much.
A few years after, Achyuta Pisharady fell’a victim to paralysis.
Bhattatiri attended on his great master and, according to
tradition, he took upon himself the ailment of his teacher
and became a paralytic himself. He asked himself to be
carried to the temple of Guruvayoor where he could take
shelter at the feet of Lord Krishna and get His divine inter-
vention. As his malady continued, he sent a messenger to
the great devotee-poet of Kerala, Thunchath Ezhuthatchan,
| for advice. He got the reply that he should ‘start with the
j fish’. Bhattatiri was quick to understand the implication of
the reply—viz. that he should compose a hymn in praise of
the Lord, giving an account of all His Leelavataras (Incar-
nations), beginning with the Incarnation as Fish. So sitting
in the precincts of the temple of Guruvayoor, he started
composing the WNarayaneeyam, a marvellous epitome of the
Bhagavata Purana in 1036 verses, dealing with the Lord’s
principal Incarnations and portraying His manifold excellences
and creative activity.1 As stated in the hymn itself, he
completed it on 27th November 1587 (Vrischikam 28th of the
year 763 of Kollam Era), the hundredth day after he began’
composing. At the end of it, he had complete reccvery. He
completed the Warayaneeyam in his 27th year and according to
certain traditions, lived up to the unusual age of 106. Bhatta-
tiri’s is thus one more instance, among several others, of how a
. great man’s sufferings can result in much good to the world;
for, had it not been for his crippling ailment, he might not
have given to the world this wonderful devotional poem that
has gone to enrich the life of several generations of devotees.
The main facts of his life in relation to the Narayanceyam
are clear from these traditions, but the date of his demise is
disputed. Beyond a statement in the temple traditions of
Aranmula, written two hundred years after the event, there
is no evidence for the view that he lived up to the unusual age
of 106. So the best thing, as Professor K. Kunhunni Raja

1¥or an account of the temple of Guruvayoor and for several anecdotes
sonnet ae with Bhattatiri’s life there, reference may be made to Appendices
an -

=== PAGE 15 ===

|
|
|

ANTRODUCTION xi

holds, is to leave the question open with 1655 as the latest
date. It is certain that he was alive in 1624, as he is known
to have attended at the death-bed of his Master Achyuta
Pisharady that year. Bhattatiri began his work on grammar
the Prakriya-saroasva in 1617 (at the mature age of fifty seven)
according to internal evidence from the work. When exactly
he started his Mimamsa work called the Mana-meyodaya
(Proofs and Categories) is not, however, known. It might
be later than his grammar work. Though he intended, as
stated in the work, to write on both the topics dealt with
in the book, he could complete only its first part on Mana
(Proofs) but could not take up the second part on Meya
(Categories). It was completed in about 1655 by another
scholar named Narayana. No satisfactory reason can be
given for this except that Bhattatiri must have died several
years before this date (1655), leaving the Manameyodaya
incomplete. That his devotional preoccupation must have
alienated him from concern with Mimamsa, looks a very
far-fetched assumption as an explanation, seeing that after
writing his chief devotional work, the Narayaneeyam, at the
age of twenty seven (in 1587), he had interest enough in
secylar studies to produce works on Mimamsa, Grammar
and even Panegyrics up to his fifty seventh year at least (i.e.
1617, the date of his commencing the Prakriya-sarvasva). So,
it_is best to assume that Bhattatiri_passed away several

_years before 1655.

Though Bhattatiri is today famous for his Marayaneeyam,
a devotional work, his achievements in the field of scholarship
and his fame among his contemporaries, both within Kerala
and outside, had a much broader basis. The various chieftains
of Kerala vied with one another in extending their patronage
to this erudite poet. Outstanding among them were the
Zamorin Manavikrama, Godavarma Raja of Vatakumkur,
Veera-Kerala Varma Raja of Cochin (1600-1614), and Raja
Devanarayana of Ambalapuzha (1566-1623). To all of them
he had offered poems of felicitation called Prasastis (Pane-
gytics), for which he must have received honour and rich
presents. After he wrote his grammatical work Prakriya-
sarvasva, his fame spread outside Kerala also. The noted gram-
marian, Bhattoji Dikshita, the author of the Siddhanta Kaumudi,
is said to have actually started on a journey to Kerala to meet
him, but had to give up the idea, as the news of Bhattatiri’s
passing away reached him. Bhattatiri had correspondence
with some of the leading grammarians of the Chola country

=== PAGE 16 ===

|
{
|

|
|
|

xii NARAYANEEYAM
like Someswara Dikshita and Yajna-narayana Dikshita, of
whom the latter was a minister of the king of Tanjavur
(fom 1614 to 1633) and was the author of the well-known
work the Sahitya-ratnakara. Bhattatiri was ir

nvited to Tanjavur
but could not go for reasons of health. He had also a very

large number of eminent disciples in Kerala who themselves
became authors of literary and technical works afterwards.
He seems to have commanded the deepest respect of them all
for his lofty devotion and all-round learning. One of them,
Narayana Pandita, describes him as one with supreme mastery
of Purva-mimamsa and Uttara-mimamsa (Vedanta). Another
scholar-disciple named Chandrasekhara calls him ‘a peer of
sages like Suka and Narada in devotion to the Supreme Being,
an encyclopaedic scholar, and a divinely gifted author of
great works like the Prakriya-sarvasva.’ So Bhattatiri lived a
long life, rich in devotion, rich in literary creation, rich in
honours, and rich in admirers and disciples.

si
Works

He is the author of many works, numbering about forty,
major and minor. They can be classified into the following
groups: (1) Sastric or technical works (2) Prabandhas or
narratives (3) Prasastis or panegyrics (4) Stotras or devotional
hymns.

Among his Sastric works, the best known are on
grammar. These include three books (1) the Prakriya-sarvasva
(2) the Apaniniya-pramana and (3) the Dhatu-Kavya. The
first of these, the Prakriya-sarvasva, is a work similar to the
Siddhanta-Kaumudi, but it was written a little earlier or
independently of it, and is considered a more lucid and
clearer exposition than the latter. It gives an exposition
of Panini’s Sutras. But Bhattatiri was a liberalist in his
views and maintained that in ascertaining the grammatical
correctness of words, Panini, Katyayana and Patanjali were
not the sole authorities, and that Kasika-Kara, Bhoja, Murari
and great literary men like Bhavabhuti also should be
considered as authoritative. He has pursued the subject in
his smaller book, the Apaniniya-pramana, and sought to justify
many words and forms foreign to Panini, on the basis of

usage. His third grammatical work the Dhatu-Kavya gives,

=== PAGE 17 ===

EE

ANTRODUCTION xiii

in the form of a poem on Sri Krishna’s life, the illustration
of the Dhatus or grammatical roots in Sanskrit. A difficult
subject is herein made easy for the Sanskrit student to commit
to memory.

: The other technical subject he dealt with was Purva-
mimamsa. His work on this subject, called the Mana-meyodaya,
deals with the epistemology (Mana) and the categories (Meya)
of the Bhatta school of Mimamsa. ‘Though, as stated in the
text itself, he wanted to write on both the Mana and the Meya
sections of the book, he could complete only the former.
The second section was completed by another Narayanasuri
in 1655, most probably because Bhattatiri had died some
years earlier, leaving the work incomplete.

Among his non-technical works, are first his Prabandhas
or narrative writings, which constitute the majority of his
writings. These are compositionsin Sanskrit, often in Champu
style (a style in which prose and poctry are mingled), on
episodes from the Ramayana, the Mahabharata and the Bhaga-
vata, which provided the text (Sahitya) for temple artistes
like Chakiars to give their discourses and expositions. About
thirty or more works of this kind, many of them short, are
mentioned, and have been in use among Chakiars. The
expositions of the Chakiars were meant for the instruction
of the masses in ethical and devotional matters. Through
these writings, Bhattatiri has contributed much to the religious
education of the common man in his part of the country.

Another class of his writings is called the Prasastis or pane-
gyrics. All scholars and poets had to depend on kings and
aristocrats in those days. ‘Till printing and general educa-
tion came into vogue, and a general reading public came into
existence, kings and aristocrats were the only paying patrons
everywhere. So Bhattatiri also had_ to devote his Muse
occasionally for the gratification of kings, in spite of his ex-
pressed views against itin the Narayanceyam(c. 99, v. 3). There
are four such Prasastis which he produced at different times
in praise of his royal patrons—Veera-Kerala Varma of
Cochin, Godavarma of Vatakumkur, the Zamorin Mana-
vikrama of Kozhikode, and Deva-Narayana of Ambalapuzha.

But his most noteworthy contribution, which has gained
him immortality, is to Sanskrit hymnology. He has three
such writings—the Sree-pada-saptati on the Divine Mother;
the Guruvayupura-stolra, short poem on Krishna, and above

all the Narayaneeyam, his magnum opus.

=== PAGE 18 ===

xiv NARAYANEEYAM

cok
The Narayaneeyam

The WNarayaneeyam is undoubtedly the major work of
Bhattatiri, for which he is remembered today by scholars as
well as devotees. The work is known by this particular
name for two reasons—one, that it deals with the glories of
Narayana, the Supreme Being who is the resting place
(Ayanam) of all Jivas (Naras), and the other, that it is the
composition by the poet Narayana. It is a work consisting of
1036 verses in various Sanskrit metres, divided into one
hundred cantos of approximately ten verses each, every canto
ending with a prayer to the Lord to cure the poet of his
crippling ailment. It is a unique work in the Sanskrit
language in so far as it combines in itself three distinct
features: (a) It is a literary masterpiece, a great poetical
work (Kavya), comparable to the compositions of any of the
classical Sanskrit poets. (b) It is a hymn of rare devotional
fervour having several distinctive features shared by no other
hymn. (c) It is an exposition of Vedanta with a dominance
of devotional teachings. Short remarks on these three
aspects of the text are given below:

(1) As A Kavya: The Narayaneeyam has all the features
ofa Kavya ora greatpoem. A Kavya must have an ultimate
objective in view, some great didactic purpose as a rule, for
ennobling the life of man. It must have a unified theme, an
elevated suhject matter suited for the achievement of this
objective, put in a form that is as attractive as it is instructive.
It must have in it sufficient scope for the expression of a
variety of human sentiments, emotional experiences and
beauties of Nature, and these have to be depicted artistically
with a sense of proportion and propriety. It must necessarily
be a piece of literary artistry. An adequate vocabulary,
felicity and force of expression, suggestiveness, mcdulation of
style according to the theme or situation, use of words that
echo the sense, abundance of figures of speech and stylistic
devices like Anuprasa, Yamaka etc., command of various
metres suited to the sentiments dealt with—these are some
of the elements of literary craftsmanship that constitute a
truly great Kavya. From all these points of view the Naraya-
neeyam will be found satisfactory by any literary critic. Its
purpose is the salvation of man, the most significant of alt
Purusharthas (values of life), and its theme, the whole subject

=== PAGE 19 ===

INTRODUCTION xv

matter of the Bhagavata Purana. The master sentiment it
depicts is Bhakti or God-love. There were literary critics
who would not recognize devotion as a fitting sentiment for a
Kavya, but a great authority on poetics like Jagannatha
Pandita has accorded it a place among the valid poetic senti-
ments. While dealing with Bhakti, Bhattatiri has brought
within the ambit of his poesy all the well-recognized human
sentiments like the heroic, the erotic, the terrible, the sublime,
the pathetic etc. His theme, the Bhagavata, especially the life
of Sri Krishna, which forms fifty-two of the one hundred
cantos of the JNarayaneeyam, gives adequate scope for the
expression of all such sentiments.

Among these, the sentiment of pity, however, has a
subtle but dominating place in the work even as Bhakti itself.
The pathetic sentiment permeating the work is not the product
of mere poetic imagination but born of the ‘lived experience”
of the poet. Generally a poet conveys emotional experiences
through ‘imaginary identification ’ with his theme or charac-
ters. But here, in respect of the sentiment of ‘pity’, the
author himself, his predicament in life, is the source ofit. A
talented young man, crippled by disease into an absolutely
helpless state, takes refuge at the feet of the Lord as a suppliant.
He bemoans his fate for a time in the verses of the first three
cantos, surcharged as much with pathetic griefas with suppliant
devotion. And then he feels that there is no use of wasting
his time in bewailing his lot, and that it will be more useful
to occupy himself entirely with the narration of the majesty,
power, love and other excellences of the Lord in His creative
activity and in His Leelavataras (Incarnations). But in the
course of his narration he reverts, at the end of every canto,
to his tragic predicament and ends with a prayer for relief.
There are critics of the Warayaneeyam who consider this recurring
reference to the poet’s tragic situation at the end of every
canto as a defect in the work. This criticism is made from
the standpoint of the Bhakti doctrine, that in the highest
type of devotion, there is no place for petitioning the Lord
for favours. Whatever this might be from the Bhakti stand-
point, it is little realized by such critics that itis this pathetic
background that enhances the human worth of the work,
and makes it not only a great hymn but a great poem as well.
In fact the sense of pathos percolates, whether visibly or
invisibly, through the verses of this text, and mixing with its
evident devotional sentiment, generates the emotional blend
which gives the Narayaneeyam its peculiar charm.

=== PAGE 20 ===

xvi NARAYANEEYAM

A master of the Sanskrit language, especially of its gram-
mar, as Bhattatiri was, his literary artistry and felicity of
expression are evident all through the work. Words follow
thoughts with a naturalness that fills the reader with a sense
of their adequacy and appropriateness. His descriptions of
nature, seasons, landscape etc., which must necessarily find
a place in a Sanskrit Kavya, are brief and simple, but for that
reason most effective and enchantingly poetic compared to
the spun out, highly ornate and artificial descriptions in many
a celebrated Sanskrit poetical work (Cf. c. 49, 58 & 63).
Bhattatiri is noted for his capacity to expound his theme
with brevity, beauty and effectiveness. In epitomizing and
in taking a rapid survey of events, he has his own unrivallec
technique, but for which he could not have compressed the
matter dealt with in the Bhagavata in eighteen thousand
verses into a work of one thousand and thirty six stanzas of
exquisite beauty. While many of the episodes described in
it like the life of Sri Krishna provide excellent themes for a
poetic work—and the author has concentrated on them—
there are several others which, by their very nature, are dull
and prosaic, and would have remained so in lesser hands.
Among such topics may he mentioned accounts of creation,
genealogies, descriptions of continents, rapid surveys of events
and philosophical disquisitions. Even in handling such
themes not eminently suited for poetry, Bhattatiri has given
his composition a poetic effect by the beauty of his diction,
by the proper choice of metres, and by the sublimity and the
devotional fervour he infuses into the exposition. The most
conspicuous example of this aspect of his literary artistry is to
be found in the last nine cantos dealing with abstract philo-
sophical doctrines, which cannot be poetic in themselves,
whatever else they may be. But in Bhattatiri’s hand the
profundity of their wisdom becomes enriched by the graces
of literary beauty, the magnificence of the Sanskrit metres
he employs, and the intensity of feeling he imparts to his
verses.

His mastery of literary artistry expresses itself in the most
striking manner when he employs the device of making
the sound echo the sense. In this he is very muchassisted by the
great wealth of metres that Sanskrit poetics provides and the
liberality and appropriateness with which he has employed
them for producing rhetorical and poetic effect. Outstanding
examples of this are his descriptions of the Nrisimha (Man-
lion) Incarnation (c. 25), and of the Rasa-Lila in the

=== PAGE 21 ===

INTRODUCTION saith
Krishna, episode (c. 69). In the former the rugged and
resounding expressions, together with the stirring metres
employed, invoke the picture of the mysterious and the
tremendous even by their sheer sound effect, while in the
description of Rasa-Lila the musical word-combinations
together with the rhythmic metres employed waft one up
to the summits of devotion through a highly sublimated
eroticism. The Kaliya episode (c. 56) is another striking
example, and verses of the Narayaneeyam depicting it have
become the theme for dance recitals by talented artistes.
Considered in this way, most of the cantos have their own
specific literary excellence.

Bhattatiri’s mastery of poetic devices for creating sound
effects through Anuprasa, Yamaka etc., and his capacity to
make effective use of figures of speech, euphemisms, puns,
witticisms etc., though evident all over, are prominently
displayed in four cantos (70, 71, 78, 79). But he uses these
devices sparingly and with great restraint, probably realizing
that a hymn like the one he was composing should prove
its effectiveness more through fervour and effortless poetic
grace than through highly artificial embellishments of literary
artistry. Regarding metres, however, he has made full use
of their abundant supply provided in Sanskrit poetics,
having employed eighteen out of twenty metres in active
use among poets. The quick change from one attractive
metre to another at the end of groups of ten verses has
helped immensly in warding off tediousness, in giving a sense
of freshness, and in enhancing the poetic effects of narratives
and descriptions. The depicition of the Sri Krishna In-
carnation, especially the portion dealt with in the cantos
thirty seven to seventy six, constitutes the most artistic core
of the work, and the reader is led to feel sometimes that
this abridged restatement of the Narayaneeyam is not in any
way inferior to the Bhagavata itself in its poetic effect and

jonal impact.
Beas: ie Hymn: Among the Sanskrit hymns the
Narayaneeyam is unique in many Tespects. It is perhaps
the longest hymn in Sanskrit. While many Sanskrit hymns
are highly poetical, none of them shares all the features of
a Kavya as the Narayaneeyam does. Beyond praising the
excellences of the Lord, describing His form and making
stray references to His love of devotees and bestowal of grace
on them, they generally contain no unified theme, whereas
the Narayaneeyam has an elaborate theme, consisting of the

=== PAGE 22 ===

xvili NARAYANEEYAM
whole subject matter of the Bhagavata Purana as mentioned
already. The Bhagavata itself is in the form of conversations
between several sages and disciples, wherein are set forth
descriptions of cosmic processes, the history of world systems,
the doings of saintly kings, the works and excellences of various
Divine Incarnations etc. interspersed everywhere with great
devotional hymns and expositions of the Vedantic and devo-
tional doctrines. The subject matter of this extensive literature
of eighteen thousand verses is epitomized and re-cast in the
Narayaneeyam into one thousand thirty-six verses, wrought
into a hymn of praise, wherein almost every verse is directly
addressed to the Lord as a fervent prayer and as an exposi-
tion of His divine glory and excellences. It is very doubtful
whether any other poet in Sanskrit has accomplished so
stupendous a task. The devotional excellence of the work
and its intimate relationship with the Bhagavata Purana have
won for it in many parts of India a place among the daily
Parayanagranthas (texts for daily ceremonial reading) like
the Gita, the Devimahatmya and others.

To what extent is the devotion of the author consistent
with the Bhagavata doctrine of Bhakti? The question arises
because at the end of every canto of ten verses, there is a
prayer for the cure of the author’s physical ailment, and thus
it may seem to militate against the idea that a devotee of
the highest order never asks for any favour of the Lord, but
is simply satisfied with serving Him with body, mind and
soul. In considering this question, it has to be remembered
that according to the Gita, devotees are of four kinds—the
distressed, the enquirers, those seeking fulfilment of an object
and the men of knowledge (Jnani). All these are reckoned
as noble, but the Jnani is the devotee par excellence. Bhattatiri
was a devotee of the first kind to start with, one in utter
distress caused by his incurable disease. But he shows in
the course of the work, in verse after verse, that his only
object in praying for relief from pain, was that he might
afterwards devote all his mental energies without any distrac-
tion to the practice of whole-hearted devotion to the Lord
(c. 40 v. 10; c. 92 v. 7; c. 93 v.9 & 10; c. 97 v. 10 etc.).
In fact his disease marks the point of his conversion, and on
this he touchingly remarks in verse 8 canto 93 that his body
with its incurable ailment was the greatest of his teachers,
because it was responsible for driving him to seck shelter in
the Lord. At the end of canto after canto he pleads with the
Lord to make him a devotee mad with Divine love, going

=== PAGE 23 ===

INTRODUCTION ote
about the world like Suka and Narada preaching the message
of Bhakti (c. 4, v. 8). The ring of passionate God-love rises
above the tragic situation of the poet in the verses of the
Narayaneeyam everywhere, and when one reads in verse 6
canto 74, of the poet bemoaning his fate for not being in the
crowds that greeted Krishna as he walked along the high
road of Mathura, carrying in his hand at least a few fruits
and betel to present to the Lord, no reader can help being
thrilled by the intensity of the poet’s devotional exuberance.
It is a fitting reward to the poet-devotee’s service of the Lord
through this great hymn of praise that he was blessed at the
end with the vision of the Lord described in the thrilling
language of a devotional lyric in the concluding canto of the
work.

(3) Tue PuitosopuicaL Ourtoox or NaRAYANEEYAM:
It is not only the narratives of the Bhagavata that are summa-
rised in the Narayaneeyam but also its philosophical and
devotional teachings. The teachings of the Bhagavata on
these subjects are scattered wide over the text in its various
dialogues and hymns of praise with which that great work
abounds. The teachings given by Kapila to his mother
Devahuti and by Sri Krishna to Uddhava in Book HI and XI
respectively of the Bhagavata constitute the most important
philosophical dissertations in that work. The essential
points are selectively gleaned out of all these and put in
magnificent verses in the first four and the last eight cantos
of the NVarayaneeyam wherein philosophy has been transformed
into poetry by Bhattatiri’s genius. :

Though by up-bringing Bhattatiri was a Bhatta-mimam-
saka (follower of Vedic ritualistic philosophy), he shows him-
self to be an ardent Vaishnava in his theology and an Advyaitin
in his philosophy. Lord Vishnu (who is identical with
Krishna) is depicted, as in the Bhagavata, to be not a concep-
tion of God but the very God, of whom all other Deities are
expressions. This is elaborately argued in cantos 89 and 90.
But in his metaphysics he goes all the way with Sankara’s
‘Advaitism and upholds the doctrine of the Impersonal Absolute
(Nirvisesha Brahman), from whom the individual soul is non-
different. This unity with the Impersonal Absolute, according
to the strict Advaita doctrine, is attained only through the
sublation of the world, the individual self and Iswara, whose
common substratum is the Absolute. Devotion to Ged
js valucd in this doctrine only as a base camp to be abandoned
as early as possible. Its function is purification of the mind,

=== PAGE 24 ===

|
|

xX NARAYANEEYAM

and once that is achieved, the Jnana discipline of philosophical
reilection for dissolving duality is to be adopted.

Devotional philosophy, however, recognizes Bhakti not
merely as a means but as the end also. Not dissolution in
Brahman, but service of the Supreme Personal-Impersonal
Being in various forms of loving relationship—of servant and
master, child and parent, friend and companion, or wife and
husband—is the goal of devotion. Whether such a way of
life is compatible with the pure monistic philosophy is doubtful;
but there have been great saintly thinkers like Madhusudana
Saraswati who have found no incompatibility in such reconci-
jiation. Madhusudana maintains that while the Dvaita
that precedes awakening into the truth of Non-c ality is
born of ignorance, the duality that is assumed after this awaken-
ing for purposes of devotion, is sweeter than pure Adyaita
consciousness. That it is sweeter is acceptable to devotional
schools but that their doctrine is a mere ascription or make-
believe will he disputed by them.

Bhattatiri’s position on this question seems to be some-
what ambiguous. While in many places he expounds the
idealistic Non-dualism of Kevaladvaita in a thorough-going
fashion (c.94; 95, 98 etc.) he is convinced of its uselessness
as far as he is concerned (c.94 v.6), and he is not prepared
to call the God of love as only an appearance and devotional
relations as mere ascriptions. He admits in many places that
Bhakti is the only practicable way of spiritual practice and
that it is a self-sufficient discipline (c.94 v.6-10). All other
paths are difficult to practise, or too distant in their results, or
they endanger man’s spiritual life by bogging him in pure
ritualism or intellectualism (c.94 v.10; ¢.96 v.6). The
body and the sense of ego stand as insuperable obstacles in the
path of Jnana. Bhakti, on the other hand, is sweet, natural,
introduces the new energy of Suddhasattva in overcoming
the pull of the Gunas of Prakriti, and above all opens the
way for the operation of Divine grace, by which alone Non-
dual Consciousness can be gained (c.96 v.6 & 7).

But he does not give any conclusive answer to the question
whether Bhakti is only a means or is also an end in itself.
He is prepared to admit that Bhakti is equal to Mukti (Colt,
v.11) but does not seem to go all the way with the Bhagavata
which states, with reference to Sri Krishna’s services to the
Pandavas, that Bhakti is superior to Mukti and that the Lord
hestows Mukti to many but Bhakti only to a blessed few
(Bh. 5.6.18). Bhaktas of the highest order do not seek mergence

=== PAGE 25 ===

INTRODUCTION XXL

in Brahman, which is called Brahmananda; they prefer to los
themselves in eternal service of the Personal-Impersonal
God of love and the Bhajanananda accompanying it.
Bhakti of this type which looks upon itself as the highest
end, and not merely as a secondary means, can be supported
only on the basis of the philosophical position of Achint
bhedabheda. Achintya-bhedabheda differs from Keval
dvaita in two essential respects: (1) According to it Reality
is both Personal (Saguna) and Impersonal (Nirguna). Funda-
mentally it is Personal, but it has an Impersonal aspect too.
The personal Bhagavan reveals this aspect of His, viz. the
Impersonal Brahman, to those who prefer bodiless dissolution
in it. But His fundamental nature as Ananda (Bliss) is
realized only through maintaining personal relationship with
Him, and this is a higher consummation than Mukti. There-
fore in this way, of thought either Bhakti as eternal service of
the Lord or Mukti as mergence in His Impersonal nature,
becomes available according to the aspirant’s bent of mind.
(2) Reality is simultaneously non-dual (Abheda) and multiple
(Bheda). Multiplicity is the projections of the Shakti (Power)
of the Non-dual Reality, the Bhagavan. Shakti and its
possessor or Shaktimat are inseparably one (non-dual), just
as fire and its burning power are one. Yet they are different
also, just as the burning power of the fire can be distinguished
from fire. In this conception of relationship, the non-duality of
the Supreme Being is secured in spite of His projection as
the many through His Shakti. Also as the projection is of
the Shakti, the Bhagavan is not affected in any manner. It
js the inconceivable uniqueness (Achintyata) of the Bhagavan,
that unlike relative causes of the world, He can be the many
through His Shakti but yet be unchanged and unaffected in
the least by it. Change or manifestation here is real unlike
in Kevaladvaita, though it does not affect the Bhagavan.
Consequently bondage and salvation are real, and the Bha-
gavan too is real and can never be sublated, as in Keyal-
advaita. : .
Reading between the lines of the Narayaneeyam, one is
likely to feel that Bhattatiri’s heart is more for Bhakti as
eternal service than for the Moksha of dissolution in Brahman.
But what exactly his final metaphysical position is, it is difficult
to pin-point, because in the last nine cantos of the work he
seems to approve of all forms of monism and theism known to
Indian thinkers. It looks, however, that the traditional hold
of the Sankara School of Kevaladvaita was very strong on his

=== PAGE 26 ===

xxii NARAYANEEYAM

intellect, in spite of his perception of its inadequacy and
impracticality as far as he and most spiritual aspirants are
concerned. He, therefore, makes frequent excursions into
the intellectualism of this school, but immediately after,
finding its bleak precipices too inhospitable for himself and
allied spirits, withdraws into the warm and secure mansions
of Bhakti, the adoring love and service of the Divine Person,
and loses himself in the ecstatic joy of it (see cantos 96 and 97).
Abandoning the idealistic Advaitism of Kevaladvaita, he
then expounds the realistic Advaitism of Achintya-Bhedabheda
(without however mentioning this name or awareness of it),
in which non-difference and difference, thé Impersonal and
the Personal have an equal place. In canto 7, verse 9 he
puts into the mouth of Brahma the Creator, the prayer for
an understanding of the real nature of the Lord as Dvaita-
advaita, that is, as one who harmonises in Himself both unity
and multiplicity. No such question as positing apparency
for multiplicity is raised here. He also speaks of the Divine
form, of which he hada vision, and which he describes vividly
in the last canto, as the wavy surface of the Ocean of Satchida-
nanda (c.1 v.4; c.99 v.10). The wave-ocean continuum isavery
familiar example employed in Bhedabheda as the illustra-
tion of the Non-dual Satchidananda manifesting as the many
in a real sense without any diminution of Its integrity and
spiritual excellence. In canto 99, verse 9 he makes prostrations
to the Deity, the Being who manifests Himself as the Becoming
(the world of the many) by an insignificant part of Himself
and transcends it by three-fourths of Himself. Unaffected
in the least by His real manifestation as the world, He remains
as the infinite and uncontaminated Spirit.

In the Kevaladvaita of Sankara all these manifestations
of Divine creative activity and Iswara Himself are Mithya,
appearances only, which means they never have been really
existent. They are only appearances conjured up through
ignorance. But in the WNarayaneeyam it is nowhere said
that God is also sublatable like the ego and the universe.
The ‘1’ gets merged in the Universal Spirit and not vice
versa. This is clearly expressed in a well-known verse thus:
“When differences are effaced, it is I that become merged as
a part of Thine and not Thou that dost become merged in
me. The wave is of the ocean, and not the ocean of the wave.’

Bhattatiri seems to uphold only such a realistic Advaita,
in which, even if bodilessness and mergence in the Supreme
Spirit form the ideal, there is no such idea as sublating the

=== PAGE 27 ===

4NTRODUCTION xxili
Bhagavan. It is by the Bhagavan’s grace alone that non-
dual consciousness is got. The devotee merges in His being
by His grace and not sublates Him. The * 1’ disappears in
Him, and He alone is left and not vice versa. Devotional
Advaitismn has necessarily got to be realistic and not solipsistic.
The full metaphysical implication of accepting Bhakti as the
fifth Purushartha, superior even to Mukti, which forms the
unique feature of the Bhagavata, is articulated only hesitatingly
in the Narayaneeyam, in spite of the author’s leaning towards
it.

Iv
The Bhagavata: A Perspective of Its Contents

Since the WNarayanceyam is a condensed version of the
Bhagavata, an understanding of the former will be helped by
a general consideration of the Bhagavata and its subject
matter. The Bhagavata, which received its present textual
shape between the 6th and the 8th century A.D. according to
the latest pronouncements of modern scholarship, is considered
one of the eighteen Mahapuranas, and is today the most
widely accepted religious literature of its kind. A Maha-
purana is expected to deal with the following ten topics
according to the Bhagavataitself (12.7. 9-10): (1) Sarga or
Primary Creation: It is the evolution of undifferentiated
Prakriti (Nature or Root Matter) into the twenty-four cate-
gories ending with gross material elements (cf. canto 6 and
note 7). (2) Visarga or Secondary Creation: This consists
in the latent tendencies of creatures becoming manifest, as
when trees come out of seeds. As a result, all embodied
beings, sentient and insentient, get formed by the combina-
tion of the categories evolved out of Prakriti, through the
creative activity of Brahma (cf. cantos 7 to 10 and notes
6 and 8). (3) Vritti or Means of Sustenance: It is the des-
cription of the system by which the more evolved beings are
ordained to subsist on less evolved species as prompted by
Nature and set forth in scriptures. Sometimes the subject of
Sthana or Residence for creatures js also brought under this
subject. In elaboration of it, descriptions are given of the
various regions of the earth with their diverse physical features,
inhabitants and forms of worship, as also of heavenly and
nether regions providing abode for various kinds of super-

=== PAGE 28 ===

i

XxiV NARAYANEEYAM

human beings. (4) Raksha or Protection: It includes the
accounts of all the Incarnations of the Lord in various species
of beings, wherein His sportive deeds for the establishment of
spirituality and the salvation of devotees are described besides
his bestowal of unconditioned grace even on unworthy men.
For this reason, this subject includes also what is called Poshana
or rejuvenation of spiritually dead persons through uncondi-
tioned grace. (5) Manvantara or Epoch of Manus consists
in the description of the combined activities of Manus, Devas,
sons of Manus, Indra, Rishis and highly evolved souls for
the promotion of life and the well-being of all creatures.
(6) Vamsa or Genealogy gives descriptive lists and achieve-
ments of great royal and priestly lines descended from Brahma.
(7) Vamsanucharita or Dynastic History deals with rule of
distinguished kings and their dynasties that served the cause
of devotion to God and well-being of the Universe. (8)
Samstha or Dissolution is the description of the three kinds
of dissolution of the manifested universe into finer condition
brought about by the influence of Time, Karma, and Gunas.
These dissolutions or Pralayas are: the total dissolution of the
manifested universe (Prakrita-pralaya), partial destruction
due to some special cause (Naimittika-pralaya), and daily dis-
solution in sleep (Nitya-pralaya). The salvation of man, which
implies the dissolution (Pralaya) of all his gross and subtle
bodies, also comes within this topic. It is called Atyantika-
pralaya (cf. note 6). (9) Hetu or Purpose is the discussion
of the root cause and significance of all creative activity. It is
Jiva (individual soul), the product of Avidya (ignorance)
and its ensuing effects of desire and Karma. All creative
activity is to confer on Jivas the fruits of their Karmas and
ultimately redeem them from ignorance and rebirth. So
subjects like the nature of the Jiva, the ways of his redemption,
the purpose of creation etc. will come under this topic. (10)
Apasraya or Ultimate Support: This is God who is the
ultimate Being and the Support of all relative supports.
In Him and by His will all the above-mentioned events and
processes of the relative world take place. It is to bring man
to an adequate conception of His excellences and generate
in him devotion to the Lord, that all other themes mentioned
before are discussed in the Puranas. There will be found
scattered all over the Puranas considerable matter relating
to history, geography, astronomy, natural sciences, sociology
etc. as understood in ancient days. The object of such.
accounts is not to teach these subjects as such like modern

=== PAGE 29 ===

|
|
|
]
‘
|
|

INTRODUCTION xxv
text books on them, but to engender in us a feeling that all
functioning of Nature and of human and divine agencies is
to proclaim the glory of the Supreme Being and thus generate
in us a sense of His omnipotence, omniscience and redeeming
love. So all the accounts given in the Puranas, including the
apparently non-devotional topics, converge on this great theme
of Apasraya, the Supreme Being who is the ultimate support
of everything.

While much of the Vedanta philosophy finds its place in
the Puranas, it is mostly its devotional aspect, with highly
personalised conceptions of the Deity, that is highlighted in
all of them. Generally they are based on any one of the
three cults—the cult of Siva, the cult of Vishnu, and the cult
of the Divine Mother. The cult Deity is exalted as the
Supreme Personal-Impersonal Being of the Vedanta. He is
vivified into a very tangible reality with a plethora of des-
criptive details about Him—His form, decorations, weapons,
associates, heavenly abode, its denizens and the like. Through
evocative hymns and through vivid and poetic narratives
concerning His cosmic activities and the workings of His
redemptive grace, the cult Deity and His Incarnations are
made more graphic and real to a votary than any historical
personalities of the past who are nothing but shadowy figures
of bygone ages. He is apprehended through the pages of
the Puranas as the eternally living spiritual Person with whom
one can commune and whose grace one can pray for and
obtain.

The Bhagavata for its part js a Vaishnava text and as
such exalts Maha-Vishnu as the Supreme Being (cf. canto
89 and 90 of the Narayaneeyam). While it deals elaborately
with all the topics common to Puranic literature cited earlier,
it concerns itself specifically with some themes of Vaishnava
theology like the various kinds of Divine manifestations—
the three Gunavataras known as Brahmz, Vishnu and Mahes-
wara, the four Vyuhavataras known as Vasudeva, Sankar-
shana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha and the score of
Leelavataras or sportive divine Descentsamong men and other
species of beings, of which the Incarnation as Sri Krishna
dominates its narrative. Of the eighteen thousand verses
of the Bhagavata, about fifty per cent deals either directly or
indirectly with the Krishna-Incarnation. And even the
remaining portions of the Bhagavata, devoted to the other
Incarnations and to otherthemes appropriate to it as a Purana,
are all posited as a preparation for the great event of Krishna’s

=== PAGE 30 ===

xxvi NARAYANEEYAM

advent. The life history of Krishna, embodying in it His
dealings with various devotees in different forms of loving
relationship, His destruction. of wicked Asuras and kings, His
instructions to devotees, and His revelation of divine powers
and attributes, are elaborately treated and offered to mankind
as matter for study and contemplation for the attainment of
devotion and salvation.

The dominating importance of Krishna is so great that
there are sects of Vaishnavism which hold that the Bhagavata
depicts Krishna as the Deity and Mahavishnu as an emanation
of His. This idea, rather difficult to substantiate, is
maintained on the strength of the Bhagavata verse: “ While
all the other manifestations mentioned before are only aspects
and parts of the Purusha, Krishna is Bhagavan Himself.”
Though one may not agree with the above-mentioned sec-
tarian interpretation, it has to be granted that in Krishna
all the Bhagas or divine majesties that enter into the concept
of the Bhagavan (cf. c.1, v. 10) were fully represented and
therefore he is unique among Incarnations. This uniquencss
of Krishna, the acceptance of His divine perfection, is to be
understood and accepted fully, if the special doctrine of
devotion centring on Him is to be understood in the proper
light.

Many of these Bhagavata narratives are condensed in
the Narayaneeyam, expressing fully their devotional fervour
and implication, while Krishna’s life is given an claborate and
highly poetical treatment. On reading these, an individual
brought up in the prevailing traditions of history and natural
studies, is likely to feel puzzled how these. Puranic accounts
are to be accepted and accommodated in his intellectual
melieu. Are they historical? Are they at the level of fiction ?
Are they compatible with science? These are some of the
questions that would agitate a modern mind.

The answer is that the Pauranika narratives are to be
yalued for the spiritual stimulations they give and are not to
be approached as history or science, though much of both of
these may be involved in them. History in itself consists of
events, and events are fleeting like a line on water. Events,
however, become enduring and worthy of being called history,
to the extent they make an impact on the human conscious-
mess. Most of these events are soon forgotten and remain
only in records. Some, however, remain in the memory of
peoples as a remembered tradition stimulating their thought
and action. Apart from this, mere events have no worth, no

=== PAGE 31 ===

|
|
|
|

“NTROPUCTION xxvii

reality, no existential! value. They are pure abstractions.
Now if an impact and experience of a more enduring type
could be made on the psyche of man from a dimension different
from that of space-time events, or even if the stimulation of
space-time events gets mixed up with many such psychic
factors and produce a tradition that is sufficient to inspire
and activise man in pursuit of the highest object of life—then
such experiences and traditions must be accepted as having
a much greater existerttial value than what could be extracted
from them by research in terms of so-called historical facts.
To call such tradition by familiar names like myths or fables
jn the sense that they are mere fanciful accounts or concoctions,
js to entirely forget that these Pauranika traditions are of
existential value, whatever their origin, and have become
psychic realities in the consciousness of great communities.
Even when the so-called historical facts and _ personalities
endure in the consciousness of man as a living force, as in the
case of historical Divine Incarnations, it happens only by their
first ceasing to be three-dimensional events, and then coming
to be accepted by the human consciousness as psychic realities
transcending their space-time relationship. _Had it not been
for this acceptance, they would have been like mere lines on
water or bubbles in the midmost ocean—mere facts of the
past, not realities enduring through to the present.

To trace the origins of these traditions to some clever
human brains, sitting together and concocting them, would
be as foolish as saying that the Himalayas, the Ganges or the
Indian Ocean have been formed by spade work by some groups
of men. Even as these latter were wrought by the creative
Cosmic Mind working through the internal forces functioning
within physical Nature—for they have taken meaningful
shapes that have enabled the growth of life, communities and
civilisations—the Cult Deities and the devotional narratives
and traditions about them are psychic expressions of the
supreme Spiritual Reality in human consciousness. They
are to be evaluated as neither history, nor geography, nor
science, though considerable elements of all these may be
involved in them. To interpret all Purana as factual (in the
sense of events in space-time), as some Indian fundamentalists

1The wo
only in a limited sense

> js used here and in other parts of the Introduction
does not convey all the implications of the existential-
ist philosophy. The anything that is of concern to human conscious-
ist philosophy. Tia certian impact on it must be conceded a greater reality
Bee ie purely ‘unconcerned and abstract entities of merely logical and
py it

antiquarian import.

an

=== PAGE 32 ===

eed om

4]

Pai NARAYANEEYAM

do, is as much an injustice to them as the attitude of some
moderns who equate them with stories and fables. They
belong to a supra-historical order, and their worth is existential
as enduring psychic verities in human consciousness. Their
purpose, too, is not the teaching of history, or geography, or
science, but converting these and all other available informa-
tion on the universe, creation, plants, animals, human societies,
philosophies, achievements of royal dynasties, lives of saints
and holy personages, divine beings recognised as Incarnations,
and all other kinds of traditions into one integrated literature
of high psychic potentiality, capable of stimu ating in man a
keen sense of an omniscient, omnipotent, an all-loving
Spiritual Reality, who is loving, lovable and responsive, who
can be communed with, prayed to and visualised in various
forms of spiritual glory. It is in this, their cumulative devotional
effect on the mind, and not in the investigation of their
individual statements or in a critique of their methodology
that one should seek their relevance. To do otherwise will
be only like the conduct of one going into the mango grove to
count its leaves in place of eating its fruits. It is therefore
mentioned, that of the ten subjects dealt with in the Puranas,
all the nine lead to the tenth—Apasraya or God. This
outlook of the Puranas in general is voiced forth in 12.3.14-15
of the Bhagavata as follows: “J have narrated all these
accounts of great men of ancient days, all of whom are dead
and gone, leaving behind only their reputation for good
deeds, only with a view to createin you renunciation and
spiritual enlightenment. All the descriptive details given
here should not be taken as literal or as factual history, (they
being shaped and meant for the above-mentioned purpose).
Let one who aspires to have devotion to Krishna be always
hearing the recitals of His ¢lorv. capable of eradicating all
evil tendencies.” Viewed in this light, the Puranas in general,
and the Bhagavata in particular, have succeeded more than
any other kind of literature in making God a reality to man
through their vivid and realistic descriptions and narratives.

=== PAGE 33 ===

\V

The Bhagavata: Its Teachings on the Theory
and Practice of Bhakti

For the study of the WNarayaneeyam, it will be of
considerable help to know something about the theory and
practice of Bhakti as expounded in the Bhagavata, which
forms the source book of this Text. In fact, without a grasp
of the Bhagavata philosophy of devotion, many narratives
in the Narayaneeyam like the life of Krishna will even he
misunderstood. A brief exposition of that philosophy is
therefore attempted below.

The term Bhakti comes from the root Bhaj. ‘ To adore,’
“to love’ and ‘to keep companionship with’ are a few of
the religiously significant meanings out of akout two dozen
meanings of varying import attached to this root. From these
is derived the current meaning of the term Bhakti as adoration
and loving service of the Supreme Being. As the term is
commonly used to indicate all the stages of development of
devotion, it will be advantageous to distinguish these stages.
At the lowest rung is conventional religion (Sadharana
Bhakti), which means mere conformity with the accepted
peliefs and observances of a religious community as a matter
of routine, without any inner spiritual urge or dynamism.
It may sometimes take the shape of a blind and conservative
formalism, or even of a religiously oriented and intolerent
groupism of a fanatical nature. These hardly deserve the
name of Bhakti. The next stage is Sraddha (Faith), when the
truths of relgion like God, soul, the hereafter etc., are taken
very seriously and the need for some set of practices to intensify
‘one’s spiritual perception is felt. Generally it is a calamity
in life (as in the case of the author of the Narayanceyam) or
‘contact with a really holy man that brings about this con-
version. The Bhagavata everywhere extols holy company
as the one unfailing factor in gencrating and augmenting
the devotional sentiment in man. Says the Bhagavata:
Tn close association with holy men, one hears the sweet
and inspiring accounts of My works and excellences. Soon
does a man imbibing them develop in succession Sraddha
(Faith), Rati (Attachment) and Bhakti (Love)” (Bh. 3.25.25).
A man with Sraddha persistently seeks holy company, as it
js the only source of nourishment for his infant faith. He
also seeks a spiritual teacher and practises disciplines pre-

=== PAGE 34 ===

3888 NARAYANEEYAM

scribed by him for the development of his devotional life,
The details of these devotional disciplines are given in the
last part of this article. At this stage, called Sraddha, it is
only by devotional disciplines that love of God and attraction
for Him can be stimulated. In their absence, the mind
relapses to one’s worldly pre-occupations. But with continued
practice, the aspirant begins to feel a blissful feeling in com-
munion with God. When this stage is reached, he does not
depend much or mainly on external stimulations given by
the practice of disciplines, even though he might be practising
them. The mind develops a natural proneness to God because
of the inward joy His contemplation gives. This stage of
-the mind feeling a natural joy in God and continuous attraction
for Him is called Rati. Now Rati may take an impersonal
form—what may be called Jnana-oriented or intellectual love
of God—if He is looked upon as the Impersonal Absolute,
and the goal of spiritual striving is then conceived as the
mergence of one’s self in that Absolute. Or, according to the
temperament of the aspirant, and the nature of the Sadhana,
it may take the form of intense personal love of the all-perfect
Divine Person. To distinguish these two developments at the
high levels of devotion, the former leading to Sayujya or
mergence in the Absolute may be indicated by the common
name Bhakti, and the latter by the term Priti. Or if both are
to be known by the common name Bhakti, the former may be
distinguished by the expressionJnana-bhakti (devotion admixed
with knowledge or intellectual love) and the latter by Priti-
bhakti (devotion characterised by delight in the service of the
Divine Person). The experience of Priti is possible only for
an aspirant who looks upon the Supreme Being as the Divine
Person, the Bhagavan}, .of whom the Impersonal Absolute
is an aspect. In other words the Bhagavan is both the
Absolute and the Divine Person. The Bhagavan is identified
with Vishnu or Krishna in the Bhagavata. In the Pritt
discipline He is looked upon in any of the forms of loving
personal relationship as master, child, friend, husband or
the beloved.

But such forms of loving relationship are to be clearly
distinguished from the purely dualistic attitude of separate-

__ ©The word Bhagavan implies that He possesses the six Bhagas or majesties—
Aisvarya (omnipotence), Vv irya_ (potency of goodness), Yasas (sanctifying excel-
enees), Sri (beauty and attractiveness of form and spirit), Jnana ,omniscience)

and Vairagya (non-attachment in all cosmic activits
Text, c.I., v. 10. mic activities). See the Narayanceyam®

=== PAGE 35 ===

lene Ce

INTRODUCTION Xxxi
ness. Separateness by itself can only create distance and is
antagonistic to pure love. Pure love is based on the sense of
the object of love being one’s ‘ own”; and this is possible only
when there isa sense of unity of substance in spite of apparent
distinction. The point may he illustrated by comparing the
relationship cxisting between a king and an officer of his,
with the one between the same king and his son, the heir-
apparent. The former is a purely external relationship.
It is based upon the apprehension of the king’s power only.
Tt ceases to subsist when the king loses his power. For,
basically he is a stranger, and the relationship with him
depends mainly on considerations of obtaining advantages
such as wealth, position etc., if he is pleased. The relation-
ship of the prince with his father, the king, on the other hand,
stands on quite a different footing. The relationship is
inherent and cannot be broken by any extraneous circumstance.
Though there is a sense of distinction, it is cemented by an
inseparable sense of unity expressing itself as a feeling of
“belongingness’ or an attitude of being one’s ‘own.’ As a
consequence, thesense of intimacy overcomes the awareness of
the power and the majesty of the object of love. It also results
in spontancous service of that object, without expectation of
any extraneous reward, the pure delight of such service being
the only reward, if any at all. Priti is this delight in service
of God as one’s beloved, wherein the sense of Divine power
and majesty is counterpoised by that of the Lord’s lovableness
and by the intimacy of His relationship with the devotee.

It is held by some schools of Vaishnavism that it is only to
one who is established in this relationship of Priti, personal
relationship expressing itself as the pure delight of service,
that Krishna reveals His Ananda. (Blissful) nature in its
fullness. In the intellectual love leading to Sayujya or
oneness, distinguished here from Priti by the expression
Bhakti, the Lord is revealed mainly as Being-Consciousness
and only very hazily as Bliss for want of the channel of com-
munication consisting in personal relationship. It is in this
sense that the Bhagavata speaks of Bhakti (meaning, of the
Priti variety) as superior to Mukti and that Bhaktas of the
highest order do not care for Mukti in the sense of mergence
in Him but only for love expressing itself as delight in His
service, involving them in the Leela (sportive expressions)
of the Divine Person in His redemptive role or in His transcen-
dental abode of Vaikuntha. To such devotees steeped in
personal love of Him, the Lord even subordinates Himself.

=== PAGE 36 ===

xxxil NARAYANEEYAM

Says the Lord in this connection: “O Sage! It is as if
I am not free, subject as I am to my devotees. Being
fond of my devotees, my heart is under their sway. I do not
value myself or even Sri who is ever associated with Me. as
I do these holy men who have accepted Me as their supreme
goal. How can I abandon these men who have sought
refuge in Me, abandoning their wives, children, relatives,
houses, wealth and even life itself? The holy men who have
deep-rooted love for Me and are benevolent to all beings,
win Me over as a faithful wife does a dutiful husband. Having
attained to life’s fulfilment by My service, they do not care
for the four forms of Mukti (liberation) like Salokya and the
rest, which are in their reach through their service of Me.
How little then would they care for the perishable attainments
of the world? Holy men are verily My heart, and I am
verily the heart of holy men. They do not know of anything
but Me, and I, of anything but them” (Bh. 9.4.63-68).

Thus the Bhagavata presents to us two ideal forms of
Bhakti—Jnana-bhakti or intellectual love with mergence in
the Absolute as the goal, and Prema-bhakti (Priti) with
Divine service as its consummaticn. In the former type of
love, Bhakti is a means, the end being Moksha (freedom
from embodiment), while in the latter, Bhakti is both the
means and the end. For this reason Bhakti of the Priti type
is described as the fifth Purushartha, in distinction from
Moksha considered generally as the fourth and the supreme
value of life (Parama-purushartha). The Bhagavata is unique
for its special stress on Priti-bhakti and the illustration and
exposition of it through the life and actions of the Divine
Incarnation Sri Krishna and His associates.

In a tone somewhat different from the definitions of
Bhakti by the theoreticians of its doctrines like Narada and
Sandilya, the Bhagavata gives its own description of it.
Comprehending all ramifications of Bhakti, there is the follow-
ing description of it in Bh. 3.25.32-33 ‘When all the
energies of man, including those of the organs of knowledge
and action, get concentrated as a unified mental mode directed
to the Supreme Being, spontaneous like an instinct and
devoid of any extraneous motives, the resulting state of mind
is called Bhakti. It is superior to Mukti. Like fire it burns
up the soul’s sheath of ignorance.”

Such a definition of Bhakti includes in it both these
forms of higher devotion, the Jnana-bhakti ending in mergence
in the Absolute and Priti-bhakti consisting in loving service.

=== PAGE 37 ===

inn ate

INTRODUCTION saat
Its implications are, however, still more wide and diversified.
Since it is a ‘ mental mode,’ concentrating all energies on the
Bhagavan, the nature of the urge that directs it ceases to be
of importance; only it must be directed to the Lord, it must
be spontaneous, and it must be an ultimate end in itself.
The frontiers of devotion as conceived by the Bhagavata, be-
come enlarged. For instance it finds a place for a new type of
devotional expression described as ‘communion through
confrontation’ (Vidvesha-bhakti). Mortal dread of an
enemy and the emotions of fear and anger arising therefrom
are capable of focusing the mind on that person as forcefully
as love on a beloved person. This form of communion is
possible, however, only for certain Titanic souls and not for
every one. Instances of this are Asuras like Hiranyaksha,
Hiranyakasipu, Ravana etc., described in the Bhagavata as
also in the Narayaneeyam (c. 12 & 24). In whatever way a
man approaches God, in the self-same way does He respond to
him. These Titanic souls who looked upon Him as a dreaded
enemy and spent all their time in fear of Him and in a spirit
of confrontation with Him, had their minds always focused
on Him in complete absorption. This absorption purified
their minds and brought about their salvation through death
at His hands. So the Bhagavala lays down the dictum:
“ The worm imprisoned in a cavity and guarded by the beetle
lives in constant dread of it, and by such identification through
fear, gets the lorm of the beetle. Even so, by constantly
thinking of Krishna as their dreaded enemy, they (the enemies
of Krishna) became washed of all their sins and attained to
Him” (Bh. 7.1.23-28). Only, as their attitude was one of
enemity and confrontation, the Lord approached them in a
corresponding way and met them with weapons in mortal
combat. : .
Although the idea of communion by confrontation has
no practical application in life, it is important to grasp the
principle involved in it, as it helps one understand the Bhagavata
idea that any passion of the human spirit, when directed to
God, is responded to by Him in a corresponding way, and
that in spite of its contrary appearance, it as the potency
of Bhakti and purifies and uplifts the aspirant concerned.
This theory is applied to all the other powerful passions of
the human mind, including sex love. The apparent illicit
love of the Gopikas for Krishna and His amorous dalliances
with them are depicted in all detail as the central episode in
Erishna’s life hoth in the Bhagavata ancl the Narayanceyam

=== PAGE 38 ===

XXxxiv NARAYANEEYAM

(cf. c. 65-69), to illustrate this great theory of the devotional
school. The central point to remember about this depiction
is that Krishna, according to the Bhagavata, is Bhagavan
Swayam (the very God presenting Himself as man), and that
the Gopikas in being powerfully attracted to Him, maybe
at first by His ravishing beauty, had their minds fixed in
complete absorption only in God. As a medicine taken,
with or without the knowledge of its potency, has its inevitable
effect on a man, so also absorption of the mind in Krishna,
God manifested as man, had its sanctifying effect on the
Gopikas, who were raised by the power of their love for
Krishna from Kamukis (sexually infatuated females) to
Premikas (devotees established in the Priti type of Divine
love). Krishna’s dealings with them might look like those
of a lover with his beloved, matching with the attitude of the
Gopikas, but their import is God-love of the highest order.
As it is put effectively in the Narayaneeyam: ‘‘ ‘The prompting
of cupid became a blessing to these women in so far as it
brought in them the intensity of attachment to Thee and the
consequent detachment from all worldly concerns. Attach-
ment between the sexes is spontaneous, being an instinctive
urge, while devotion to God, the means for salvation, may
result from great striving or may not. But Oh! what a
blessing, what a rare good fortune that in these women both
these haye coincided (as their passionate attachment was
fixed on Thee, the Supreme Purusha incarnated as Krishna,
on whom all spiritual aspirants also fix their minds)!”
(c. 59.10).

As for the ethical propriety of Krishna’s relationship
with the Gopikas, the question is considered redundant by de-
votecs on different grounds. Some take the depiction of Gopi-
Krishna relationship as only allegorical for portraying the
passionate longing of the soul for the Supreme Spirit. Others
contend that the Gopikas met Krishna not in a physical
sense, but in the state of Bhava (spiritual absorption). The
Bhagavata itself takes the relationship as factual and maintains
that no human standard of morality comes into the picture.
Questioned on this point by Raja Parikshit, the sage Suka
says as follows: “ Divine personages are found to over-ride
the rules of Dharma (ethics) and do actions of a seemingly
shocking nature. But just as no impurity affects fire which
consumes everything, nothing causes blemish to such persons
of immense potency. But lesser men should not imitate them
in these respects even mentally. If they do so foolishly, they

=== PAGE 39 ===

yaneeyam, as it su

INTRODUCTION =

will perish, as one will do if one drinks poison following the
example of Rudra. The instructions of goldly persons are
valid; so are some of their actions too. A wise man will
follow only such of their actions as are consistent with their
words. It is admitted that for enlightened men without
the ego sense, there is no selfish gain to be attained by their
actions nor any loss by abstinence from them, and that they
are above good and evil. How can these affect the supreme
Lord Krishna who is the master of all beings—gods, men,
animals and the rest? By devotion to His holy feet the great
sages derive their Yogic power and thus they become iree
from the bondage of all actions. How can any bondage or
sin accrue to the Universal Being who has assumed a body
out of His own will, and by devotion to whom even these
great sages derive their spiritual excellence? He who per-
meates all beings, including the Gopikas and their husbands,
and directs the mind and senses of every one—even He out
of sportive intention has assumed a body as Krishna. For
bestowing His blessings on all beings He has assumed a body,
and He sports with that body in ways that interest and attract
men to Him. By Krishna’s mystic power the inhabitants
of Vraja found their women in their homes all the time, and
had no occasion to be displeased with Krishna, He who,
with faith in Krishna in his heart (i.e, regards Him as the
Supreme Being) hears, reads and narrates these amorous
dalliances of His with the Soo pa ne man will
tain deep devotion to the Lord, and wi soon overcome
Re the ea heart disease of mankind’! (Bh. 10.33.30-40).
* Personal love taking the form of a particular mental
mode is called a Bhava. The Bhava of the Gopikas is called
Madhura, one of sweetness, which includes the attitudes of
both the wife towards a husband and of the beloved towards
a lover. This form is taken to be the acme of cease love
by all Bhakti scriptures like the Bhagavata and the Nara-
psumes in itself the ae (Bha ay
é y he other forms of love (Bhavas
different mde Oe ptars and illustrated in the Bhaga-
vata, are Santa, Dasya, Sakhya, and Nae Santa eu
the peaceful Bhava is that of the philosopher fully conscious o

pede ete
FT his i as a suggest! I

Rauislie) tO, Pe areAt people with ‘a sex story but to cradicate sexuality
Bhagavala is not to delight PEST the Biagavala has symbolism as the ultimate
itself, So while accepting er Gexeribing the illicit love of the Gopi the great
meaing: yeally describing the purest and most powerful form of God-love,

ive hint to show that the purport of the

=== PAGE 40 ===

Seyi NARAYANEEYAM

Divine majesty and excellences, and in its fullest development
it ends in Sayujya or mergence in the Impersonal aspect of
Brahman. Here Bhakti is accepted as a means for attaining
an end, which is Moksha. So it does not come under the Priti
type. For, in Priti, devotion is both the means and the end,

All the other Bhavas mentioned above come within
Priti, as they are based on personal relationship. The Dasya
is the attitude of looking upon God as one’s master. It may
also be considered as including the filial Bhava or the attitude
of a child to a parent. The Sakhya attitude consists in
looking on God as one’s dear friend, while that of Vatsalya
is to regard Him as one’s child. The Madhura or conjugal
attitude, already described, is the combination of the intimacy
and the intensity of all these forms of relationship and marks
the acme of personal love. The life of Krishna and his
relationship with the various devotees associated with Him
illustrate all these aspects of personal love. But Madhura
Bhava (amorous love) as expressed in the illicit relationship
of the Gopikas with Krishna on the one hand,} and in the
married love of His consorts like Rukmini on the other, is
elaborated in the Bhagavata and the Narayaneeyam with
special emphasis on account of its uniqueness and its compre-
hensiveness as an expression of the Priti form of Bhakti.

In all these forms of Priti, it is not that there is no compre-
hension of the Bhagavan’s majesty as in Santa Bhava, but
it is outweighed, and any sense of distance separating Him
from the devotee is overcome, by the vivid feeling that He is
“one’s own”, one’s nearest and dearest. The awareness of
Divine majesty does not in the least inhibit the expression of
intimacy between the Lord and the devotee in this form of
loving relationship. The Lord permits the devotec to appear

1 The relationship of illicit love is introduced overlooking all ethical norms
because it embodies the strongest form of affection, in which all consideration of
prestige, returns, security and even self-prescrvation are given up by a woman
who goes away with her lover out of genuine and overpowering love. Love of
God and surrender to Him should attain to this kind of uninhibited intensity
and renunciation of sclf-centredness, giving away everything to Him and asking
for nothing from Him. The love of the wife falls short of this perfection, as her
status is protected by law and social conventions and she has assvra
and security. So the Gopikas of Vrindavana, who were in illicit love with Kruhoa,
are held forth as the highest embodiment of spiritual love, the consorts of Krishna
coming only next to them. In reading about these human expressions of love,
it should always be remembered that the Bhagavata is not at all narvating an
absorbing love story. For the Bhagavata has stated in its very second verse that
what it discusses is the Dharma of the all-renoumeing Parsee Care that
abandoned the life of falsity and all the animal passions of the heart. Vicwed
in this context the spiritual import of these narratives wil] Become evident.

nces of support

=== PAGE 41 ===

INTRODUCTION xxxvii
greater, and he looks smaller, subjecting Himself to the
devotee’s attitude. So the Lord says in the Bhagavata: “I
am subordinate to my devotees, and am therefore in a sense
without freedom. Being extremely fond of my devotees of
exalted mind, my heart is under their control.” (Bh. 9.4.63)
It is because of the transcendent excellence of this kind of
devotion that Suka says in the Bhagavata that the Lord gives
Mukti liberally, but Bhakti very seldom (Bh. 5.6. 18).

_ The following few verses from the Bhagavata on the
uniqueness and spiritual authenticity and adequacy of these
forms of personal relationship will be found revealing. “‘ By
Bhava (feeling) alone the Gopikas and even unintelligent
creatures like cows, deer, elephant, serpent etc., attained to
spiritual consummation in Me. They never learnt the Vedas,
they never served any teacher, they practised no austerity,
but by mere association with Me, they attained to Me”
(Bh. 11.12.7-8). “ Lust, anger, fear, affection, friendship,
sense of oneness, whichever sentiment man entertains towards
Hari, he will attain to Him through that”? (Bh. 10.29. 15).
“Even as by Bhakti (pure devotion to God), so also through
lust, animosity, fear. personal attachment etc.. many have
attained to Him, having overcome the evil effect of these
dark passions on account of their minds being concentrated
on the Lord. The Gopikas through Kama (lust), Kamsa
through fear, Sisupala through enmity, the Vrishnis through
clannishness, the Pandavas through friendly affection and
sages through devotion (Bhakti)—attained to Him (dH Holl
30). “Through the constant focusing of their thought on
Thee, Thy antagonists attained to the same spiritual goal
as the sages who were adepts in the control of the vital forces,
mind, senses etc. and in meditation on Thee. To Thee, we
(the repositories of Vedic wisdom), and the women of Vrinda-

-vana who longed for the embrace of Thy charming arms,
care of equal worth” (10.87.22). “Hundreds of women

‘attained to Me, the Supreme Brahman, though not knowing
My real nature, through their love of Me as a paramour in
whom they took delight’” (11.12.13). “By the strength of
their attachment to Me, they (the Gopikas) became oblivious
‘of their individuality and the whole objective world, and like the
mind of the contemplative in Samadhi and the river merged
in the ocean, overcame all distinction created by name and
form” (Bh. 11.12.12). The idea is again expressed in a
clinching fashion in the words of Uddhava, the great statesman-

=== PAGE 42 ===

XXXVill NARAYANEEYAM

devotee of Krishna. Referring to the love of the Gopikas,
he exclaims, “ How low are these women, belonging, as they
do, to a forest tribe given to adulterous sex relationships!
But how deep-rooted is their devotion to Krishna, the Supreme
Being! As a potent medicine swallowed (with or without
knowledge of its efficacy) invariably cures a patient, so the
Lord brings about the spiritual regeneration of a person
whose mind settles on Him, however unwittingly (Bh. 10.
47.59).

The descriptions of the relationship between Krishna
and His devotees, because of its personal nature, will resemble
very much the portrayal of human love, the most noteworthy
feature being the highly erotic poetry employed. But it has
always to be remembered that their import is purely spiritual
in so faras: (1) The object of affection here is the Supreme
Being Himself, and hence what looks like worldly love is only
God-love in reality. (2) Such affection gradually eradicates
all evil and sublimates all lower instincts. And with this
attainment the devotee rises to a level of experience in which
the awareness of Divine majesty is felt vividly without being
an inhibitive influence on the intimate and loving persoral
relationship. As it is put in the Bhagavata: “ Just as fire
removes the stain found in gold owing to contact with other
metals, so Vishnu by His presence, removes all evil tendencies
in the hearts of persons devoted to Him” (12.3.47). Hence
jt is maintained in the Bhagavata that the reverential study
of the description of the amorous dalliances of Krishna with
the Gopikas will cure one of Kama (sexuality), the universal
heart disease of man. (3) This form of Bhakti is to be sharply
distinguished from worldly love in so far as it is free from any
touch of self-seeking. To gain or achieve something for one’s
own advantage is always the motive force behind worldly
love. It is also dominated by possessiveness and jealousy,
and it runs the risk of total cessation when the expected advan-
tages are not realised. Priti-bhakti, in spite of its formal
resemblance to worldly love, is just the reverse of it in these
respects. There is in it no expectation of any return, no
adverse reaction, and no possibility of abatement under any
circumstance. It takes the form of service of the Divine
Person with one’s entire being, which is in itself the highest
delight eyen when experiences ordinarily considered painful
are involved in it. Such joy of service is called Bhajanananda,

and the Bhagavata states in innumerable yplaces that the :

|
|

=== PAGE 43 ===

INTRODUCTION

devotees who are established in it reject even Brahmanand
or the bliss of Mukti as of lesser value. Says the Bhagavata:

The bliss that can be had by contemplating on Thee ard
hearing the recital of Thy glories by Thy devotees cannot he
had even by dwelling in the impersonal infinite Being
(Brahman), who is the Self of all, not to speak then of heavenly
uoy wl ich are threatened by the sword of Time” (4.9.10).
Bhakti thus becomes an end in itself, besides being the means
also. Hence, it is said that the Bhagavata has added Bhakti
as the fifth Purushartha (value of life), to the four usually
accepted values of Dharma (morality), Artha (wealth),
Kama (pleasure) and Moksha (liberation).

Till now the discussion has been about Bhakti in its
highest form—as Sadhya (accomplished) or as Nirguna
(transcending the Gunas of Prakriti). But what is important
from the practical point of view is the disciplines that lead
to it. These come under Sraddha, the first stage of Bhakti
referred to earlier. This is also known by the name of
Sadhana-bhakti (disciplinary devotion). It has heen pointed
out that the distinctive characteristic of this stage is that,
while in the higher stages of Rati and Bhakti, devotion has
become an automatic and in-built sentiment requ ring no
external stimulation, in this earlier stage it has to be roused
up and sustained by deliberately cultivated disciplines or
Sadhanas. Hence their supreme importance for the man
trying to build up the spiritual life. These disciplines of
Bhakti, as stated in the Bhagavala, are also collectively called
Bhagavata Dharma. They have been stated in the Bhagavata
as follows: “For aspirants who are not learned in the
Vedas and other scriptures, the Lord has given the Bhagavata
Dharma as an easy way of attaining to Him. A person
following this path never sustains any spiritual fall. Even
if he runs with eyes closed, he will not slip and topple down.
Whatever a devotee does with body, mind, senses, intellect
and spirit—not only scripture-ordained duties but all duties. |
natural to him—let him consecrate all to Narayana by making
them an offering unto Him” (11.2.34-36). And further, speak-
ing more specifically about the disciplines, it is said (in Bh,
7,5.93-24) “Sravanam (hearing narratives of the glorious deeds
and excellences of Vishnu), Kirtanam (chanting His name
and reciting hymns in His praise), Smaranam (remembering
Him continuously), Padasevanam (serving Him), Archanam
(worshipping Him), Vandanam (paying obeisance to Him)

=== PAGE 44 ===

xl NARAYANEEYAM

Dasyam (practising the role of a servant of His), Sakhyam
(looking upon Himas anintimate friend) and Atmanivedanam
(surrendering onself totally to Him)—these are the nine forms
of devotional discipline which man has to practise in a spirit
of dedication to Vishnu.” The practice of these nine specific
devotional disciplines has to he preceded and accompanied
by the discharge of one’s duties in dedication to the Lord.
Only then can the mind be comparatively freed from its
demoniacal tendencies (Asuri Sampat), standing as the most
formidable obstruction on the spiritual path. Practice of
ethical excellences has to precede and accompany spiritual
practice. So also faith (Sraddha) must be intense and deep-
rooted; it must manifest as a longing for God. Without
these pre-requisites man will make only a show of the specific
disciplines mentioned. Their practice will not be effective.
It is only in holy company that faith and longing for God
germinate and take root in the mind of man, and so the first
of these disciplines Sravanam (hearing) refers primarily to
the listening to the words of holy men on God and His excel-
lences and on spiritual life in general. Secondarily, it means
also listening to the Bhagavata and such other Bhakti scriptures
as also reverential study of them. Kirtanam is collective
singing of God’s glories and excellences, where too the pious
company is the most decisive factor. Smaranam is remem-
brance. For the successful practice of this, an aspirant should
take initiation from a Guru-and repeat the Mantra given to
him with concentration and faith, and also practise meditation
on the Deity. It is only when one’s sub-conscious mind is
powerfully influenced by such practice, that one can remember
the Lord even when there are not the external stimulations
in the shape of ‘hearing’ and ‘hymning.’ Continuous
repetition of the Divine name even when engaged in external
work helps Smarana. In fact success in Smarana is the
indication that devotion is progressing from Sraddha towards
Rati (the state of loving attachment). Continuous remem-
brance is possible only when one feels joy in such remem-
brance. Padaseva is the service of all beings with the
vision that this whole universe is His manifestation. It is
stated in the Vedanta texts that of His four Padas (aspects),
one Pada is manifested as this world of Becoming (the universe)
while the other three are transcendental. So, the service
of the manifested Pada of the Lord is Padaseva. It can also
mean the service of holy men, in whom the Lord dwells in a

|
|
|
|
|
|
|

=== PAGE 45 ===

INTRODUCTION xii
special sense. Archana is service of Him in images. It
includes all forms of devotional rituals, worship, festivals,
pilgrimages etc., undertaken with faith and solemnity born
out of a sense of the real presence of the Lord. Vandanam
is not merely making prostrations before the images of the
Deity and before holy men, but behaving respectfully towards
all beings with the fecling that God resides in every one of
them. It expresses itself in true humility, service of all, and
absence of vanity and egotism.

The next three, Dasya, Sakhya, and Atmanivedana are
the mental attitudes which have been described earlier as
Bhavas in the discussion on Priti-bhakti. They can be
successfully practised only at the advanced stage when God-
love has taken an intense personal form. But as the principle
in all Sadhanas is to make the end itself the means, one may
adopt an appropriate attitude, preferably that of Dasya,
towards the Lord, even when one is at the stage of preparatory
disciplines. It will help in re-educating and recasting our
worldly ego-sense. Our ordinary sense of identity with our
worldly situation, namely, our estimation of ourselves as men
of such and such nationality, related to such and such persons
jn such and such ways, occupying such and sucltpon are in
life etc., should be replaced by a sense of our bel longing
to the Lord as His servant or child. When one’s esoscense
is transformed in this way, devotion becomes an in-buil eS
sentiment. Sakhya or friendly attitude mae the sha8e °
growing intimacy jn which inhibitions anne rom t ae seuss
of God’s being the creator and the seat of in nite power, are

ver by that sense of intimacy which enables one to
Stl i y of the devotional attitudes (Bhavas)
Becomietestablslied i d lier. All these disciplines
upto Madhura mentioned carler. 4 : e Ph
plete surrender of one’s possessions, actions,
finally la See seers untoHim. That is Atmanivedana
pa eee cilcai os which the most noted exemplars are the
copie gf Needy are practice of this nine-limbed

Sere ee radually takes the form of Rati or inward
cisanane, cee Serie state, even without any external
attachment ba ae begins to dwell on Him with delight and
Serato ri ite of distractions arising from sufferings
sacri WET Ee lest maturity, Rati becomes Bhakti
and worries. | My e i cafetelh aed to Sayujya or liberation
cither of the Santa nee or of the Priti type, which ends in.
of mergence in the Deity, =

=== PAGE 46 ===

li NARAYANEEYAM

eternal adoration and loving service of the Divine Person.
Bhakti, it is held by the Bhagavata, brings along with its
efflorescence all the three spiritual excellences, namely,
spontancous love of God, renunciation (Virakti) and knowl-
edge of the unity of existence (Jnana) in the heart of the
devotee, just as a morsel of food simultaneously gives delight,
appeasement of hunger and physical strength (Bh. 11.2.42).
Thus Bhakti is a super-value, which is attended by all other
spiritual values.
One in whom Bhakti has become a perfected experience
is called a Bhagavatottama. The stages of evolution of the
devotional experience ending in that of the Bhagavatottama
are thus described in the Bhagavata: ‘‘ The perfect Bhaga-
vata or devotee of the Lord (Bhagavatottama) is one who
sees the glory of the Bhagavan, the inmost Self, reflected in all
beings and all beings as dwelling in Him, their inmost Self.
A mediocre Bhagavata is one who entertains an attitude of
adoring love towards God, of friendliness to His devotees, of
kindliness and sympathy to common people, and of indiffer-
ence to one’s enemies and bad people. And he is the inferior
type of Bhagavata who performs worship of God in images
with faith and devotion, but is totally indifferent to devotees
of God and other beings (on account of his incapacity to see
the Divinity dwelling in all beings). (Bh. 11, 2, 45-47).
Again speaking of the very wide range and varying stages
of devotional experience, the Bhagavata states: “ The
practice of Bhakti takes many forms, because of the differences
in people’s thought and attitude, arising from their mental
constitution, the nature of the dominant Guna of Prakriti in
them, and the tradition to which they belong. The man
dominated by Tamas conceives Me, at the prompting of his
own cruel and excitable nature, as a being entirely separate
from himself (i.e. as a tribal Deity or a polytheistic God), to
be propitiated from motives of vengeance, pride, envy, and
such other low propensities. The man of Rajasic nature
worships Me as an extrancous being in the images and the
like for the fulfilment of worldly desires like those for wealth,
fame, and the rest. The man of Sattvika nature is one
who, though still maintaining the attitude of separation from
Me, worships Me for liberation from the bondage of Karma
(ie. Moksha) by performing all his duties as an offering
unto Me, as laid down in the scriptures.

=== PAGE 47 ===

INTRODUCTION xiii

“Tn contrast to all the above (all of which are based on
Gunas of Prakriti), the highest form of Bhakti, which transcends
the three Gunasof Prakriti (Nirguna-Bhakti) hasno extraneous
motives, and is based on the inseparable intimacy of the Jiva
with the Lord. Its characteristic consists in the continuous
and unobstructed flow of the mind, like the waters of the
Ganges, towards Me residing in the hearts of all, by the mere
remembrance of My excellences. Such devotees do not
accept, even when offered, any of the four forms of liberation
(Moksha)—Salokya (living in My sphere), Samipya (living
close to Me) Sarupya (having a form similar to Mine) and
Sayujya (being one with Me). The only thing they want is
opportunity to do loving service to Me (without expectation
of any reward from it). Such is the greatness and glory of
this supreme expression of Bhakti. By means of it the Jiva
overcomes the hold of the three Gunas of Prakriti and becomes
fit for the Divine State”? (Bh. 3.29, 7-14).

Continuing the topic, the Bhagavata describes the means
by which this state of mind is attained.“ The mind attains
to such a state by adopting the following disciplines: The
duties of life have to be performed with detachment and as
an offering to the Divine. Ritualistic worship promoting
devotion and not inflicting pain on creatures, has to be obser-
ved. My imagesinstalled in holy places should be worshipped,
seen, touched, and glorified by hymns and praises capable
of stimulating devotion. My presence in all beings should
be recognised. The mind should be disciplined to have no
attachment to worldly objects... oll abide in all beings as
their innermost soul. Without recognizing this, mere worship
of Me in images is only a semblance of worship. If one dis-
regards Me present in all as their soul and lord, and offers
worship to images, such worship is as inefiective as sacrificial

oh yadein ashes. A man should, however, worship Me
offering Belong with the discharge of his duties towards others
ay aS pearly realises My presence in himself and in all
unt) ne “Holy men should be honoured, men in distress
a be shown sympathy and help, and equals should be
d with friendship and courtesy. Control of the senses
nike, ind should be practised. Scriptures skould be
pnd ue ai devotional hymns and praises sung. Holy
ee should be sought. Siaieh omeranes and an
istic frame of mind should be cultivated. A man
ac we h the attainment of God-love as the sole object
a oe urd follows the disciplines mentioned above, will

=== PAGE 48 ===

NARAYANEEYAM

lute purity of mind, as a result of which he will

at capacity to constantly remember Me with delight

sorbed in Me. As the fragrance mingled with the

1utomatically reaches the organ of smell, the mind freed

_ worldliness by the disciplines of devotion, learns to

ortlessly to the Supreme Being” (Bh. 3.29, 15-27
‘idged).

TRANSLATOR

=== PAGE 49 ===

NARAYANEEYAM

CANTO 1
THE GLORY OF THE LORD

Tae aad sTeeaafeeat

fried frogad frarcager fraterared |
aE VENA TRS TTT TAATT

TMAH AAR. ST APA TATA Ut 1 Ut

1. In the temple of Guruvayoor there shines, in truth
and in reality, what appears at first to be a mere image but
on contemplation reveals itself to be the condensed essence
of Consciousness-Bliss—the veritable Brahman Supreme—
who is the ultimate end of all human endeavours, to whom
there is none comparable, who is ever beyond the limitations
of time and space, who is eternally free, and whose nature
the numerous texts of the Vedas seek to reveal. Fortunate,
indeed, is mankind (that such a manifestation of Divinity
exists in its midst as the image of Sri Krishna) !*

ud qoraeqaiy Gert eee Faaq
qear arat faa at wsifa aa Wa: aada EeaA
fearon TeTaAT TATA: U1 2 1

2, But alas! What a pity that in spite ofthe easy
availability of this rarest of blessings, men, prompted by
their base nature, overlook it and pursue worldly objects with
all the powers of their body, mind or intellect! But we,
devotees, however, shall, with unswerving devotion, serve the
Lord of Guruvayoor, Sri Krishna, the soul of all beings, for
the total eradication of all our woes (physical and spiritual) .

aa mag corenafeadt frie Gt aa
aiataaes satel age: ae ATTATETT |

=== PAGE 50 ===

2 NARAYANEEYAM: CANTO |

a erotica rege faariitatret
afead at taRT aiorfrrat que fag TN 3

3. Sage Vyasa has repeatedly stated that Thy form is
constituted of Suddha-sattva (pure Sattva) without any
admixture of Rajas and Tamas. Because of this absolute
purity, Thy form gives an unobstracted revelation of its
underlying essence of Consciousness-Bliss, and therefore
enlightened men delight to contemplate on this, Thy Divine
formful manifestation, which is easy to grasp and which is all
sweetness to those who think or hear about it.?

frat fragt freaf-renratigret
fideo fraeaaterat |
arporded Ay faredt AaATg-AIaIAT
wea fromoeed aHe aft Tae FAT M4

4, © Infinite Being! Thy Suddha-sattva form is like
the wavy surface of the pure Ocean of Brahman, who is
unperturbed, ever-full, constituted of inexhaustible Bliss and
supremely attractive as the repository of countless pearls of
liberated ones absorbed in it. Embracing, as Thy Form does,
the whole of that Ocean, why should not Thou be termed
Nishkala (Indivisible Whole i.e. Complete Incarnation) while
all other manifestations are but Kalas (partial revelations) of
that Ocean.®

facatoristt freer, ye afcrar-aterment
aaaeta stat Tete-cafaaersht jeassheaTe |
a a de aarfe wafenfararays aa ST 15 1
5. QOBirthless One! Though by nature beyond activity,
Thou, at the beginning of a new cycle of creation, dost activate
spontaneously by a glance, Thy Prakriti (Power) which abides
in Thee latent without in any way affecting Thee, as if it

‘were a non-existent entity. O Lord of Vaikuntha, assuming
the pure Sattva aspect of Thy Prakriti (Power), which, because

=== PAGE 51 ===

THE GLORY OF THE LORD 3

ofits purity, does not in the least hide Thy glories and majesties,
Thou hast manifested Thyself as this Divine Form.

at TaTaaTafeanera-aata font
waa Gaara Wigraraaey |

wet rasa Sar - Pea a eaea a eA:
fasacifaasiat aGIGTeT ARITA 1 6 1

6. O Lord of Guruvayoor, I meditate continuously on
Thy Form, which surpasses fresh rain clouds and blue lotuses
in its dark splendour, which embodies in itself the essence of
all that is beautiful, which is, as it were, a holy Descent mani-
fested before the eyes of all virtuous men as the reward for
their good deeds, which is the playground of all the unrestricted
graces, charms and majesty of goddess Lakshmi, and which
generates an abundance of intense Bliss in the hearts of people
meditating on it.

aoer § gfeetser agaeuaearae ATT
fad qareifac-atia wat danerfaony |
at Assia. wet ar neeefae aay Bama
a: sta Creat cereegarnfag? Wer 7 1
7. O Supreme Being! Once YT thought that Thy
creative activity is a tragic sport, as it inflicts various forms of
suffering on embodied beings (Jivas) involved in the cycle of
births and deaths (Samsara), but now Ido not think so. For,
if there were no creation and therefore no embodied beings
(Jivas), who would have been there to revel in the ocean of

unparalleled joy derived from the experience of seeing this
Form of Thine replete with Consciousness and of hearing

descriptions of Thy glory?
aunt afard aaa Gece
cata arararet facia Teas aat aa 71
aa freaooent freafranes: oie gt
a ¢ mae gaAtol TA-APAAISTT M8 1

=== PAGE 52 ===

4 NARAYANEEYAM: CANTO |

8. Manifesting ever before Thy devotees, Thou grantest,
unsought, all the fulfilments of human life besides the bliss of
final liberation. O Lord! when such a unique Parijata Tree
as bounteous and accessible as ‘Thou art, is available for them,
alas, the vast body of desire-prompted men long for the trivial
blessings of the Kalpaka-Vriksha (Wish-Yielding Tree) of
Indra’s heaven (which can yield only sense enjoyments, and
that only if votaries specifically pray for them to the accompani-
ment of elaborate rituals).

HVAT BAAS salt GY Ie earcraecd fazrar-
wantdast safe Ta cara |
weegreata sfrserat Aaa: eHlaanar-
Sea FATT WAG STT TAT AT TART 9

9, OlLord! Thou art indeed unique and incomparable
in Thy greatness. Other deities grant the desires of their
votaries when they are pleased with them. But Thou art
unique in granting Thyself (i.e. identity with Thyself) to Thy
devotees. Other deities rule over the world (as being external
to it) by virtue of the power they are invested with; but Thy
miastery over all rests on Thy being the inner controller of
the essence of all beings (including these deities). All
fortunate Jivas seek delight in the inexhaustible mine of joy
that Thou art, But as for Thyself, Thou art ever self-satisfied
(having none besides Thee as equal or greater).

tat asaudivactataat feradsieatt
ada Fg farwaft sat fregéarites |
aes war attfacfaaie + rari & qevatat
TEMA BLE Wrarweq-qeaTAsg 1 10 |

10. Lord, Thou who art the resident of the temple of
Guruvayoor and the destroyer of Mura! Thy Aiswarya
(Lordliness) consists in being the controller of all gods beginning
from Sankara; Thy Virya (Prowess), in possessing the potency
to contain all forces that are destructive of the good of the
worlds; Thy Yasas (Fame), in providing material pure and
holy enough even for all-renouncing sages to sing about; Thy

ie.

=== PAGE 53 ===

THE FORMFUL ASPECT OF THE LORD »

Sri (Beauty-cum-auspici i i

luspiciousness), in becoming the very abode
ohne soudess Sri; Thy Jnana (wisdom), in being the all-
an ine and Thy Vairagya (renunciation), in being non-
at ached (in respect of all Thy creative activity). The term
Bhagayet (which means one possessing the above-mentioned

ae ee See ie os :

a aoe ivine majesties) is therefore primarily applicable

CANTO 2
THE FORMFUL ASPECT OF THE LORD

qaeatahate-qea tres ata oTeTTS
FAG OAAAaeaacaet FMAMGET |
TOS AAR UAVS HTT IASG
wage arene aera AT MN 1M
1. I adore the Form of the Lord with head crowned
with a diadem that rivals the sun in its brilliance; with fore-
head whose beauty is enhanced by the upright sandal paste
mark; with eyes brimming with mercy; with face lit up by
a benevolent smile; with nose well-proportioned and attrac-
tive; with ears adorned with fish-marked pendants that add
lustre to the cheeks by their reflection; with neck wearing the
Juminous jewel Kausthubha; and with chest resplendent with
a variety of decorations like the floral wreath, lines of pearl
necklaces and the auspicious mark called Srivatsa.

Here EAHA ETT ATL
it ATG ATH ALTA AA ALA TEI U
ae farerguegfarat aie aalfafesey 1 2 1

9, I take refuge in Thy ineffable Form glowing, as it
does, with ornaments like Keyura (epaulets), Angada and
Kankana (bracelets) and finger-rings of precious jewels; with
four sacred arms holding in them the mace, the conch, the
discus and the lotus; with waist wrapped in yellow silk fastened

4,

=== PAGE 54 ===

6 NARAYANEEYAM: CANTO 2

by a golden waist band; and with feet that resemble exquisite
lotuses and remove the woes of devotees.

qamiaaagete ated ated CICRIC

aired aiietireararatsht mt Agdeatafe |
areata Seat wera

Sarat Wat 7 Fer saa gomfa fact frat 3

3. O All-pervading Being! Who is there in all the
universe that will not be entranced by this Thy surprisingly
wonderful Form, which is superior in excellences to all objects
considered great in the three worlds; which is more charming
than the most charming of entities; whose splendour outshines
every form of brilliance; and whose sweetness and beauty

would put to shame all other objects that are noted for such
qualities.

TMS Ta agRiarer doer
a eat conta facet aed eradicate |
TTT aa HeereaG fat agers
SARAAHAT- SATIS -AOT- SATA ATA tN 4 1
4. Lakshmi, (Thy Consort), well-known as the embodi-
ment of all prosperity and auspiciousness, having obtained a
place in Thy being, has become engrossed with the sweetness
residing in it, and has consequently no inclination to remain
with her own votaries. Alas! O unchanging One! It is
indeed a pity that this firmness of her attachment to the beauty

that suffuses Thy form (for which reason she abandons her
devotees) has won for her the stigma of being a ‘ fickle goddess.”

wees MaMa edad Ioafest
wferasett cH agar sexta 1

a aera ggattsateen fe AT SAT
eaeagt aafa feata sfaareca-caret tt 5 1

5. O Lord! I shall state another reason to show that
Goddess Lakshmi is unsteady in abiding with others (including

te So os.

=== PAGE 55 ===

THE FORMFUL ASPECT OF THE LORD 7

her own devotees) only because of her enslavement to Thy
beauty. For wherever there are Thy devotees immersed in
the joy of meditating on Thee and of singing Thy excellences,
she is certainly seen to stay with them always, listening attenti-
vely to the accounts of her dear Lord sung about or narrated
by them.4

Ua arate gar -freaeaerealed

aed Paar Adee aaa |

aa: sad aft werd Carreras

arfaerate aaasafaataaqesten: 11 6 1

6. This Form of Thine, which consists of pure Bliss-

Consciousness and which showersthe sweet nectar of fascinating
beauty everywhere, captivates the minds of all who devotedly
hear the recital of accounts of Thy deeds and excellences,
inebriates them with Bliss, excites horripilation all over their
limbs, and bathes their bodies with the cool streams of tears
welling up from ecstasy of joy.

uaqacar fe aaafafedt at: @ atta

SAAT AAT ATTA |

airada eres ate ag Taraiferar

ufefasrta fraged-oeat CAacew I 7 1

7. It is for these reasons, O Consort of Lakshmi, that
the path of Bhakti (devotion) has been extolled by great sages
as superior to the other two paths of Karma and Jnana. For

Bhakti, which consists in the feeling of unbounded love for the
Pure Beauty that Thou art, is natural to man and is therefore

attainable effortlessly by all.
fran fraaereriaet aq Beat
Taga qafareainteet FA: |

aaareaafaed ade eqraat Aaa 118 i

=== PAGE 56 ===

8 NARAYANEEYAM: CANTO 2

8. The path of Karma, which consists in performing the
scripture-ordained duties unmotivated by any selfish desires,
can become fruitful only at a very distant date. The path
of Jnana, according to which an aspirant has to seek the
knowledge of Brahman taught in the Upanishads, is very
difficult for the mind to pursue because of the abstract and
subtle nature of the Truth taught. Therefore, O Universal
Being, Bhakti which consists of love for Thee, is always the
sweetest and the noblest of the paths.

ae wiewsqa-gtaca-aia fe aaa |
froveqt gaa It Ta ayaeerat GA
fariage fafara agfe: frei araraé 19 1

9. By the performance of the very difficult disciplines
of Karma, some attain to the purity of mind required for
following the path of Jnana or Bhakti. Why then follow such
a laborious and indirect path as that of Karma at all (when
one can as well start with Bhakti directly)? (But as far as
the path of Jnana is concerned, this direct approach is not
possible); for those who attempt to do so and strive hard to
attain to Thy Impersonal aspect known as Brahman, depend-
ing solely on logical reasoning, take limitless time to reach
perfection (2.¢. do not reach it at all), as they lack that mental
refinement and purity (born of the discipline of Karma)

aang Taga feisty cad
fread faresata-cadiaaeaa-eaeact |
wa: fafentt saat frat dang ® cage
SHMis Lesa FITL ATTA N10 11

10. Devotion to Thee, on the othe;
among the spiritual paths in that it best
enment directly, without any of the aforesaid difficulties,
by submerging one in the flood of delight generated by hearing
and remembering Thy deeds and excellences, O Lord of
Gurayayoor! | May I soon attain that tenderness of heart
produced by intense love for Thy feet!

r hand, stands unique
‘Ows purity and enlight-

=== PAGE 57 ===

CANTO 3
THE SUPPLIANT DEVOTEE

geal ata sreweteeet fraferen:

AGH STF ae HaMAT THAT: |

aedl 3 ware ag Ted TUTE

ae ara Fea aafera-aatfrefearsy Ut 1M

1. © Bestower of Boons! I consider them as really
blessed who repeat Thy Names until they are submerged in
the ocean of bliss, whose minds unceasingly meditate on Thy
Form, whose speech is ever occupied with the narration of
Thy deeds and excellences, and who, though always moving

about without any fixed habitation, feel all their wants ful-
filled by being immersed in the joy that Thou art.

qafrosd aed Ta ACTA

saaraad fad waft aa facot ge <aTy |

acareats-eraa Tafae-

aé ard art agaa faaceafe fast 0 2 1

2. © All-pervading Being! Bestow Thy grace on me
who find that my mind, owing to the affliction of disease, feels
no taste even for the intense joy of Thy service. If Thou art
‘gracious to me ( and removest the distractions of this painful
disease), I shall seek oblivion in some uninhabitated corner

of the country and spend my time ever immersed in the joy
of contemplating on Thee and of repeating Thy countless

names and attributes.
aa a sat aq faint 4 fe vet aqat

eae srarnacet a feat |
ah x caoferateraty aTerhrcted

rage Het: FATT AAT fazad 3 ul

=== PAGE 58 ===

10 NARAYANEEYAM: CANTO 3

3. If Thou art propitious, what is it that man cannot
attain to! How trifling it is for Thy grace to eradicate all my
ailments! Numerous are Thy devotees who have approached
Thee without any desires and have been blessed with freedom

from their worldly woes, as also with the blissful state of libe-
ration.

grister war aft ay yer
HATTA TART ALTAR: |
aeeite eat aaathefraia-aefaq-
MAMTaT ATCT: PATEL 4 I
4. Great sages like Narada, having overcome all their
early handicaps through contemplation on Thee and becoming:
established in the Truth of the subtle Atman, are moving
about everywhere in complete freedom, ever immersed in the

unabating and indivisible flow of Bliss-Consciousness that the
Non-dual Brahman is. What other state is there superior to

this!
waquics: Sha wag aa da saat
aaraeaet FT ag gfe aaa
qa AMeneeta + aad drat
wafrear Taper aaa 11 5 1

5. May my devotion to Thee become perfect! I have
not got the slightest doubt that it will remove all my sufferings.
For, if it does not, the utterances of Vyasa, of Thyself and
of the Vedas too will, indeed, be no better than the casual
words of street urchins!

ferret Fafaoaheara-serat |
Grad tard faro-cfeatsterhire
erected feat fra: TTATATTT 11 6 1

6. Devotion ito Thee is suffused with sweetness even at
the beginning of its practice owing to the influence of Thy

=== PAGE 59 ===

THE SUPPLIANT DEVOTEE Ws

sweet attributes on it. With its progress, it removes all one’s
woes; and in its maturity, it awakens one from the sleep of
ignorance and bestows the supreme Bliss of Non-dual Cons-
sciousness. What else is there to seek for!

fags Fea Be Ig A
aaa Huts as geraferat |

WaeHaAs TATA J TWagGea-
great aot sraqoafa & aTeafet 7 UN

7. O Lord! Remove my affliction so that my feet may
find delight in going on pilgrimage to Thy temples, my hands
in worshipping Thee, my eyes in viewing Thy image, my
organ of smell in breathing the fragrance of the Tulasi leaves
offered at Thy feet, and my ears in hearing narrations of Thy
charming deeds and excellences!

symfaenfrrenaiod arate

wad aed rege faqetsferd |

Beare afacagestafraet

gar faerate germiisraterary Ml 8 Ul

8. In my mind that is extremely agitated by worries
and disease, may the vision of Thy entrancing Form of pure
Bliss-Consciousness arise, so that, with thrills all over my body
and tears flowing in profusion owing to that marvellous
experience, I may become completely oblivious to my endless
woes.

aagigda aft ag qaraistt gfaat
wad aisé ae feat a fairey |
mea ATCA THATS FATAL
nagar afefa ge AT Haan 9 Ul

r ; Jinds (Guruvayoor) !
9. © Lord of the Abode of Win

Even men who are indifferent to Thee are seen to lead a happy
life. But I, a devotee of Thine, am undergoing various
sufferings Why this anomaly, © Bestower of Boons! Won’t

=== PAGE 60 ===

12 NARAYANEEYAM: CANTO 4

this tarnish Thy reputation? Therefore, O Slayer of Kamsa,
eradicate my disease and enable me to be the best of Thy
devotees!

feganinfieds fe wer aragfeat-

a@ Magea sfecfafaant-sofaa: |

3X Feet We ate aa Aware feaary

qarate aad afrafafrtar facaag tl 10

10. O Bestower of Boons! Of what avail is mere talk?

Until Thy grace descends on me, I shall, in place of bemoaning
«my fate, spend my days before this image, Thy manifested
Form, devoting my time to prostrating before Thee, singing

‘Thy praise, and performing Thy service to the best of my
ability.

CANTO 4
THE PROGRESS OF THE SPIRITUAL ASPIRANT

HAM AT HOI Tad Held Wagaiad ar 1
eqsensefqe-anTaaat PeMssY Ta TeSAIATy win

1. May I be endowed with that much of health as is
needed for Thy adoration. Soon shall I then win Thy grace
by undergoing the well-known eight-limbed discipline of Yoga.

Farad -eectlafaaa-ewatfataaster fsa: |
Hus CHM! Yalad TSAI ar wary: 11 2 1
2. After attaining to purit

y of being th: 4
vance of disciplines of self-c '§ through the obser

ontrol like strj i
(Brahmacharya) etc. as also rules of right eentict like dail
yes (Sacha) etc., a shall practise the various comfortable
ani : ics ly sitting postures like Padmasana for meditation on

=== PAGE 61 ===

THE PROGRESS OF THE SPIRITUAL ASPIRANT 13

Ted aad smrarg-afaary fier: |
Staaten fararearrg-cassea® WAANGAT: 8 Ul

3. Constantly revolving in mind the sacred syllable
Om, and regulating the operation of Prana through control
of breath, I, having attained to purity of being through these
disciplines, shall withdraw the senses from their objects as a
preparatory discipline for the practice of meditation on Thee.

aege agfe t sacaat area frst ageie:
oa APRA -eer Wace AT: Ml 4 UN
4, Engaged in Thy contemplation, I shall, with great
effort, fix my mind on the hazily perceived Form of Thine,

until the mind is filled with the sentiment of devotion and
attains to utmost softness.

farqerara-taget Bapefat anon |
aan aafe faeqarae earatifren-eaarsat: 1 5
5. Devoting myself to meditation, I, Thy devotee, shall,

by long practice, be able to get an easy mental perception of
Thy Form of beauty with all its parts vivid and clear.

earrat THe Brae ATT eT |
AAS RASTATAR FASTA STATA Ul 6 Ul

6. Toone who meditates thus on Thy formful aspect and
becomes captivated by the increasingly wie eet ae ae
sweetness, there shines in due course Abs persone. tat ue
Consciousness, vai of eae ead objects). 2
(that is not base:

aareaarefinit feafa caceaifrata faratas |
Fee earrowies rere tal

i i blished in
f the Universe! Being estal
Bis eae ite state of immediate experience of Thee,
Tonal neneret my mind slips down from that experience,
s )

=== PAGE 62 ===

14 NARAYANEEYAM: CANTO 4

resort again to Dharana (the fixing of the mind) and other
processes of concentration.

AAA fA SA-TAT MATA HeTM AAT: |
Gmamge- Aled Ta: Hal THAealfeag tl 8

8. May I, being established through spiritual practice
in the perpetual mart of Joy that Thy Brahmic Consciousness
is, be granted the unique blessing of moving about, like Suka
and Narada, as an enlightened and liberated devotee of
Thine!®

aerfatasat J a: Grisel Aterefra: AT aT |
ATARI VST RATST YGHATAT TA: 9

9. If, after mastering Samadhi, an aspirant, whether
he wants immediate or gradual liberation, can in either case
progress to his goal through several spiritual planes by slowly
raising his vital energy, brought under control by Yogic
practice, through the six centres along the Sushumna nerve
channel.

foeragatt dastaat Stadt caf 7% free: |
Seale HIM F FIaeaaAAT HUifaag 11 10 Ul

10. One who is desireless abandons his subtle body also
at death and is dissolved into Thy Being. But one who
entertains desires for the higher spiritual realms, passes out
with his subtle body through the Brahma-randhra (orifice of
Brahman) in the crown of the head.

HAART ASAT RAA-GoT FT aaa: |
sifact Ware Watt Heard Baveraaea Wh 11 Ul

ll. A devotee of the latter type is led by the deities
presiding over Fire, Daytime, Bright Fortnight and Northern
Solar Migration to the plane of the Sun, and after he has
enjoyed the facilities afforded in each realm, is next led to the
sphere of Dhruva. :

=== PAGE 63 ===

THE PROGRESS OF THE SPIRITUAL ASPIRANT 15

anfeadist aguwe gar Awaar-cedtorose a |
Sat WagTTa-eAaI Fae: TeHa: Gea AT 1 12 1

12. After having attained to Mahar-loka from the
Dhruva-loka and stayed there for long, he (along with its
other inhabitants) moves to the plane of Brahma (Brahma-loka)
when he begins to feel the all-consuming heat coming out of
the mouth of Sesha at the approach of cosmic dissolution
(occurring at the close of Brahma’s day). Or he may reach
there even earlier than the approach of cosmic dissolution.®

TA AT Tea Taste aT THIET Of AHA |
Sram ay Fast qead dfahra qrevsATAT Nl 13:11

13. While residing in Brahma-loka or Vaikuntha (the
heaven of Vishnu) he attains to liberation from embodied
existence when all the manifested realms are dissolved at the
close of Brahma’s day (Brahma-pralaya). Or he may, by
exercise of his own will, pierce the cosmic sphere and attain
liberation even earlier.

Ter ot fafe-ret-arelshte-atsteere teeters: |
aaareraaar fret set aft  TeMAad feat 14

14. O All-pervading Lord! The seven coverings of the
cosmic sphere—earth, water, fire, air, ether, cosmic intelli-
gence and primordial nature — Thy devotee transcends by
realising his identity with each of them until Thy State,
unobstructed by any barrier, is open to him.

aferarfenta- atest aang faegia twat TT |
asa MATA FAST AOA The ATL I 15 1

d of the Universe! For one who goes to higher
ethers CEE of Light described above, there is no
downfall. © Lord of Guruvayoor! O Embodiment of Pure
Consciousness! Protect me, Thy devotee, who is loudly

extolling Thy excellences.

=== PAGE 64 ===

CANTO 5
COSMIC EVOLUTION

arploumntae + fafaawad sTeaTed-rert
Herat yraraeairsal ara Say

al yepa aargd 4 aaryared a ura: feafa-
eaqaneca-Ahregar: fe TASTHTTAAT U1

1. Inthe beginning, when it was Brahma-pralaya, there
was nothing in existence, cither gross or subtle. For Maya,
Thy cosmic creative power, with its active phase neutralised
by the relapse of the three Gunas into equipoise, had gone
into the state of latency in Thee. Neither death nor death-
lessness, neither day time nor night existed. Only Thou,
the One without a second, remained as supreme Bliss-Con-
sciousness.®

ale: FH TOA Saftaer fat a ara ferwt
faedtoretarate cafe car frstrarareg: |
ai aa aarcracaaea Wi: Tact fesoat

at Aa fa WATER Yat AAT AAA: 12 1

2. Then, Time, Karma (effects of action of Jivas),
Prakriti (Nature) and Jivas (souls)—in fact all entities of the
nature of effects—had attained dissolution in Thee, whilst
Thou didst sport in the Bliss of Pure Consciousness in Thy
state of cosmic slumber. The above entities cannot be said
to have been naught at that time; they had become only latent
in Thy cosmic power. Otherwise, if they had perished and
become non-entities like sky-flowers, how could their re-
emergence (in the new creative cycle) be possible?

ud 4 farodare-farardtat frgerirat

frat cafe qay.faryadtrara ara ear |
Wad: ag seas-aeess carats =
sigta amg faarer faeqeren: aerafaera 1 3

=== PAGE 65 ===

COSMIG EVOLUTION 17

3. At the end of two Parardhas, when Thou didst
express Thy Creative will by Thy look, Thy cosmic power
Maya stirred herself into activity for the creation of the three
worlds. Out of Maya emerged Time, Totality of impressions
of the Karma of Jivas (Adrishta), and Disposition (Swabhava).
These acted as aids to the Gunas of Thy Maya (Prakriti) in
their diversification as the manifested universe.

araratatentsnaccagar aretha ata wart
Ueeai afafaraat fafaferara sitaisht tarze: |
arotfe-stcattaaisa Waa aatfadt 7 cat
Aa aT ag sfadra-ayTaise AITAT tN 4 I

4. Itis Thou alone that art extolled in the Vedas as the
Witness when Thou abidest by the side of Maya without
entering into it. When Thou art reflected in the diversities
of adjuncts (Upadhis) provided by Maya, that reflection is
called Jiva (individual soul). The Jiva has thus no indepen-
dent existence. Again, Maya, Thy Cosmic Power, manifested
as the energies of Time and the rest, and directed by Thee,
projects the category of Intelligence, which is also called
Mahat.?

ware Pagoreratstet  Aely AcaTaTA: cat
shastert ag fafaser-wefrgeta-frorres: |
aster afanerataa-rentes Fer aera
are fageraistaage faoorl WaT 15 11

5. Although a product of Prakriti with, its constituent
Gunas of Sattva, Rajasand Tamas. the Mahatis predominated
by Sattva, the pure aspect of Prakriti, and is capable of gener-
ating only a vague “J-sense’ without any particularity of
species, individuality, status etc. O Lord! By Thy will,
out of this Mahat was evolved the category of Ahamkara,
(Egoity), which has all the Gunas manifest but with
Tamas predominating and having therefore the capacity to
generate the particularised 2 I-sense that makes one aware of
one’s distinct individuality, species, status, relationships etc.

=== PAGE 66 ===

18 NARAYANEEYAM: CANTO 5

ais = fagrrard fafaaar-ararea aah eat
qaedsre-aaafafa ATA A IATA |
Sarfaa-mrfrdisae feat-araa area eat
qetrarearfaaard fag-fafa-irer ears Ul 6 1

6. The category of Ahamkara.(Egoity), by virtue of the
triune Gunas constituting it, became divided into three—the
Vaikarika, Taijasa, and Tamasa forms of Ahamkara. Out
of the first of these, namely, Vaikarika, which is predominated
by Sattva, the deities presiding over the ten organs (Indriyas)
were created, These gods are—Dik, Vayu, Aditya, Varuna
and Aswini Devas, being the deities presiding over the five
organs of knowledge viz. hearing, touch, sight, taste and smell
respectively; Agni, Indra, Upendra, Mitra and Prajapati,
being the deities presiding over the five organs of action viz.
vocal organ, hands, feet, anus and generative organ respecti-
vely; and Chandra (moon), Brahma, Rudra and Kshetrajna
(Indwelling Spirit), being the deities presiding over the
mind, intellect, ego (Ahamkara) and mind stuff (Chitta)
respectively.

TAAL fal Ta wT Traia Carga |
HARTA SAT RATATAT CTA
ROMA THR HUTT Teciosht Rasa U7 MN

7. O Lord! By Thy power, the same Vaikarika, the
product of the Sattva aspect of Ahamkara, generated that
well-known entity called the internal organ (Antahkarana)
with its four modes described as mind (Manas), intellect
(Buddhi), ego sense (Ahamkara) and mind-stuff (Chitta).
Taijasa, the product of the Rajasa aspect of Ahamkara,
produced the ten organs, five of knowledge and five of action,
and out of the Tamasa aspect originated sound (Sabda) the
subtle essence (Tanmatra) of Akasa (Sky). ae

qeqana Ta: Tats at erat gat aad
TEATGETAA ASIST + TE Ge st wei ETT |

Badin :

=== PAGE 67 ===

COSMIG EVOLUTION 19

Ua Ales Gays aeaT-aea-ani fiat
qaarafa ata wat STRATA U8 A

8. O Lord! From the subtle essence of Sabda (Sound)
came the element Skv. From the element Sky, came the subtle
essence of Sparsa(Touch), and from it, the element Air Marut).
From the element Air arose the subtle essence of Form (Rupa),
and from it, the element of Fire (Tejas). From the element
of Fire came the subtle essence of Taste (Rasa), and from it
the element Water (Jala). From the element Water came
the subtle essence of Smell, and from it the element Earth
(Prithvi). Thus out of the Tamasa aspect of Ahamkara,
Thou didst bring into existence all the elements, each of them
manifesting its own special quality and also inheriting the
qualities of the preceding elements and transmitting them all
to the succeeding one.

US ATTRA FATT STAT FAS

at tg-daas-fafatafaat taectha-eree |

a arfaa-ghrafragreacaraga aa
aaeerafa-gaa TT FEAT SCANS STMT: 119 11

9. Even though all the elements, sense organs, and their
presiding deities had come into existence, they were disparate
and so unable to produce the Cosmic Whole. Therefore, the
deities praised Thee by various hymns and sought Thy help,
whereupon Thou didst enter into these categories and activate
them and combine them into the Hiranyagarbha, the Golden
Egg, containing all the worlds in potentiality.

aud aq ay Gagreafwostrad aaa FAT:
fafreaearagerareet fatisteary |

area: PIS IC Clu CAREC CIC USELE

frataisfa weGUfat a At AT aaiaard | 10 U

ic E bsisted in the already
the Cosmic Egg had sul ¢
ioe a W aters for a thousand years, Thou didst Brea
it open and shape it into the fourteen spheres whereny Tuo
teh Pranifestest) Whysclts ims Loye COSD Gees Or.

=== PAGE 68 ===

20 NARAYANEEYAM: CANTO 6

with countless hands, legs and heads. O Lord of Guruvayoor,
who didst thus manifest the categories! Deign to rid me of
all my ailments!

CANTO 6

COSMOS AS FORM OF THE LORD
UF AGEN ATATA TAT
Tater da Tate aafea |
Trateaearafa ta Laas &
Tenet FT AelIo-AHATAT | 1 1

1. O Lord of Wondrous Form! Of Thee who hast
manifested as the fourteen spheres, Patala is the lower surface
of Thy feet; Rasatala, the upper surface; and Mahatala, the

ankles.
FSA THATSAA Fe FATT
feats farsa z 1
SIS THATS aha
aera aaeaeTs AAMT 1 2

__ 2. Thy shins is Talatala; knees, Sutala; the buttocks,
Vitala and Atala; the hip, the Bhuloka (earth) ; the navel, the

Brahmaloka; and the chest, the Svarloka constituting the
heaven of Indra.

Wat Hats Ta A ETI,
cid ICA TTA AT
Ud Sata Sea
caraitagagt TAT TAT 11 8 11

3. O All-inclusive Being! Thy neck j 2 men
Maharloka; Thy face, of Janaloka; Thy feeders colcka g

=== PAGE 69 ===

COSMOS AS FORM OF THE LORD 21

and Thy head, of Satyaloka. Salutation to Thee, who art
embodied as the whole universe, including some other entities
(to be mentiond hereafter) !

merererrediat fare.
wraife Fara FaTeTa FATA:
seorfata TORTS zl SRT TE
centr ufafearet afar a AF 4
4. O Lord! Thou who art the source of the universe!
The Vedas are Thy Brahma-randhra (psychic orifice) on the
crown of the head; the clouds are Thy lock of hair; Thy

eyebrows are the abode of Brahma; Thy eye-lashes are night
and day; and Thy eyes form the sun (and the moon).

fararafaracaar Fo erera ter:
aut featstagre ta arfaa ¢ |
Baay a wa-aaTTST
ARTA SATA SET 5 I
5. O Lord! A glance of Thy eye constitutes creation;
Thy ears are the quarters; Thy two nasal orifices are the pair

of Asvinis; Thy two lips are greed and modesty; Thy teeth
are the stars; and Thy molars form Death the leveller.

rat faeraetad fad aAtet
faeat ae aaa THATElAe: |
faareneatl Faeaha-
Jat AT: KIAHM Ta TARA: 1 6 UI
so Yost ites ee Da ee
ee Ce ene are the Siddhas and other

i 5 he gods;
ivi istes: Thy mouth is fire; Thy arms are the gods;
patie "fees of righteousness) is Thy breasts.

ges et BE 8A AAT
IFAT TUTE GA AGATA |

=== PAGE 70 ===

99 NARAYANEEYAM: CANTO 6

afrageitael Tat F Weed
are: sarafacet aT a FA 7.
7. Lord! Adharma (unrighteousness) is Thy back,
the moon is Thy mind; undifferentiated Nature (Avyakta) is
Thy heart-lotus; the ocean is Thy abdomen; the two Sandhyas

are Thy garment; Prajapati is Thy generative organ; and god
Mitra forms Thy testicles.

MANA PTT: TMT
RGIS TAT F BT: |
famfeatitad teatestaTg-
TGA BUTT FT 1 8

8. O Merciful One! The back ot Thy waist forms the
animal world; Thy foot nails constitute the species of animals
like elephants, camels, horses etc; Thy movement is Time;
and Thy face, arms, thighs, and feet are the sources of the four
Varnas of Brahmanas and others.

aerate saat Peart
at aegemnsitagents ater: |
ASA ANAT UT
Safad ageaataAa 19 1

9. O Wielder of the discus!
cycle of births and deaths)
constituted of the host of gi

x This Samsara ‘(repetitive
is Thy activity; Thy prowess is
si reat Asuras; Thy bones are the
mountain ranges; Thy blood vessels are the river systems; and

the trees are Thy hair. May thi i i ibable
Form of Thine shine within pa ieee pe sesescria

THAAMTAY ATT: |
TTATHAG fH F
arareafar Aaiseg fret Say I 10 1

=== PAGE 71 ===

BRAHMA COMMANDED TO CREATE 23

10. This Cosmic Form of Thine is fit to i
upon by embodied beings who are subject to ice
they approach the end of their subjection to Karma ie, begin
to aspire earnestly for liberation. (Or alternatively: This
Cosmic Form of Thine is fit to be meditated upon towards
the close of their worship and other devotional duties by
persons who practise such disciplines). O Purity Embodied!
O Lord of Guruvayoor! To Thee, the indwelling spirit of
ae esas Form, my salutations! May my ailments be eradi-
cated!

CANTO 7
BRAHMA COMMANDED TO CREATE

ud a ageaeasTEST STA: IA

wees ag aastefet oats oat cay I

a daft fewami-afaorster-starert

Asyq wheat faarefare-ararfagerea: 1

1. OLord! Thou, who hadst thus become the universe
of fourteen planes, didst manifest Thyself again as Brahma in
Satyaloka, the loftiest and the subtlest of all the planes.
Brahma, renowned as Hiranyagarbha (Cosmic Golden Egg)
and as the Collective Soul of the worlds, was prompted by
the upsurge of Rajas (passion) to engage himself in multitu-
dinous creation.

aid farafaetadeet: TRAAI: ea7
ated acarara frufard fargeederary |
aad & oat Ta at aaa fg aeraeT
arnaa-aeara: Aagat FATUATT U2 I
2, Brahma, contemplating within himself with a heart
set on creation, was very much disconcerted when on his own

ive in his mind the scheme of the world
i ue bine "0 Lord of all creation! Thou didst

=== PAGE 72 ===

24 NARAYANEEYAM: CANTO 7

then prompt him to perform austerities, exhorting him in a
sweet disembodied voice, ‘ Engage yourself in Tapas.’

Alsat aimaad Gatfafa Teg STAVES
feaedter fracadtfacaat TAATATIAT |
feed aHAaATAATTA Tt ATT

ead cigaarafe caret FHOMRIGAAT Ut 3 1

3. ‘Whois it that addresses me thus when the whole
of existence is engulfed in Waters?’ thinking thus, he looked
around but could find none. But understanding the meaning
of the words, he worshipped Thee for a thousand divine years
through concentration, and Thou wert then pleased to reveal
to him Thy unique abode known as Vaikuntha.

arar aa walle ay aged wid wget afe:
Rape fag aere-Gar AAT Ft TAT:
Aaa 4 IA TA Sa T HTATA

ad & ay farted farsa dgreeg fw 4

4, Transeending the fourteen planes, beyond the
pale of Maya’s influence, and out of bounds to mental modes
like sorrow, anger, infatuation, fear and the like, shines Thy
Abode of Vaikuntha, constituted of the splendour of the
supreme light of Consciousness, wherein there is the
constant flow of saturated Brahmic Bliss.

afer We age eteaf-eataracratast
ATATTT-Lorat rare UAT: t
afmroreraenfsataarer steata feoar saT-
Stet OTH PHRATATAS ARIST TAT 11-5
5. It is resplendent with towered residences inhabited
by heavenly beings with four hands, whose bodies have the

brilliant deep blue hue of Indraneela gems hi d the
lustre of whose diamond-studded See eh eee the

quarters. It is by virtue of deep devotion to Thee that they
have attained to this rare privilege of residence in this

=== PAGE 73 ===

BRAHMA COMMANDED 10 CERATE 2%

Abode of Thine. Victory to ‘TI sR WA Htoceh in
affected by any sin! ry to Thy Abode of Vaikuntha un

aT east faa ATCA Tea

frarra-ganacaar frentfaararac |

ACTA RTCA: cay we

afeay faererite-feonfarat aq & 9¢ 2fa F116 11

6. Grant unto me the blessing of residence in that Abode

of Thine abounding with unique excellences, wherein is seen
Lakshmi, (Thy consort and Mother of the universe, praised in
the scripture as the goddess of beauty, wealth and good fortune)
—Lakshmi who is surrounded by numerous divine female
attendants, whose form is tender like a creeper but stuns all
by its charming and explosive beauty which lights up all the

quarters like a streak of lightning, and whose sole delight
consists in serving Thy lotus-feet and enjoying their fragrance.

aaa sfaaine frome warerearfad
wea fe-rafen de eH ACTH |
fasaut aa eadere fafeead ft wg A 7H
7. In Thy Abode of Vaikuntha thus revealed, Brahma
saw Thee, the source of all creation, seated on a throne of
diamonds, shining amidst the prilliance like that of a thousand
suns emanating from Thy diadem, bracelets and other decora-
tions, and revealing the auspicious mark of Srivatsa on Thy

‘d crimson by the lustre of the jewel Kausthubha
Sons ae rae May this form of Thine be revealed

to me!
BAAS TSAR TSR AAT AH FAT
AAA ATH RELTT TATA ITY |
BRA SHt TIAA fal AETASATAAT tt 8

=== PAGE 74 ===

26 NARAYANEEYAM: CANTO 7

8. With a brilliant and expansive halo illumining the
quarters with its sombre radiance resembling that of fresh rain
clouds and of blue lotuses; with a calm face beaming with an
attractive smile constantly playing on it; and with four arms
holding the shining conch, mace, discus and lotus,—Thy
form did give great joy to Brahma. May it eradicate my
ailments also!

TAT MYT AN: BAS YKAAT AMA S
ealaraaal fafa: star sarees |
aaa watt aa fart art carseat
atlad- Waar AT AT 9 1

9. Overwhelmed with astonishment at that sight, the
Lotus-born One (Brahma) fell at Thy feet, full of the joy and
satisfaction of having attained to the fulfilment of his existence..
He said “O Lord! Thou knowest already the object I have
in mind. Vouchsafe unto me a true understanding of Thy
mysterious nature in which duality and non-duality exist in

harmony.’ To that Supreme Being, revealed to Brahma, my
adoration!

ae A farane t gets aA CITT

alaet wiser 4 wifafatedensit aoe |
RST FIX salen fact afeaeye: eat
Tel t He: T WaqeoraMeRAATH UI 10

10. Touching with Thy own hands the hands of Brahma
who had prostrated himself in all humility at Thy crimson-
tinged feet, Thou didst declare, ‘ You will have knowledge of
My true nature. By engaging yourself in creation you will
not be stained by attachments.’ Gladdening the heart of
Brahma by these words, Thou didst become immanent in his
mind in order to direct him in the work of creation. Thou,

O Lord, who art of such mighty powers! Deign to amelio-
rate my sufferings.

=== PAGE 75 ===

CANTO 8
THE DAWN OF CREATION

Ud Tad WHATAATT
areal wet eaTfaA seasAT |
FRM FARA Cares Feary
gfe aH aTeTTATATA Ul 11
1. Thusat the close of Brahma-Pralaya (total dissolution)
and the beginning of the new cycle of creation that is now
prevailing, a new Brahma, having come into being on the
first day of the cycle, obtained the knowledge of the Vedas
from Thyself and began the work of creation in consonance
with what had prevailed in the previous Kalpa (cosmic
period).®

dist agitaee fara
arahaarer writaget fare |
farareral cafe fercster at aye:
afafarrea-wewset Ulaq tt 2

2. This Brahma has already spent several days and
nights of his life, each day consisting of a thousand Chatur-
yugas and each night too of an equally long period. During
his night when Brahma falls into sleep, he along with all his
creation becomes latent in Thee. This night of Brahma is
called Naimittika-pralaya (i.e. dissolution caused by Brahma’s

sleep).

qemrent FRAT AGT

gic aaeagient & wacrarald |
WRATTRCTTTT F aga F

gears TAIT ET aarfa gfse: 1 3 0

f his, Brahma, by
3. Thus at the dawn of every day of his, i

; ork of creation, just as we mortals
Thy grace, commences the w oe of react ee

begin our work at dawn.

=== PAGE 76 ===

98 NARAYANEEYAM: CANTO 8

those eternal souls who existed even before Brahma-kaipa (like
Markandeya and others) also arise like people from sleep with
the full consciousness of their past.

FaMSeATA CAAA ET-

ta qadafsae fe adasat |

warauhaatrargy FIT TAT

Tafeaa F AAAS Hl 4

4, TheBrahma ruling over the present cycle, having spent
fifty divine years, which represent the first half of his span of
life, has just entered into the second half of it. O Lord! I
am now narrating Thy sportive activities that took place
during the previous night of Brahma and the beginning of his
first day in the second half of his life.

fearaarise aasaita:

guftiameata afafeet

Sfra a caseet aAty-

CCS COME CCM CEs: aT nay

5. At the end of his day the Lotus-born Brahma, desiring

to sleep, got merged in Thee. The whole cosmos too was
absorbed in Thy abdomen. Only the Causal Waters remained.

aaa ae oferafae ae

TSRAT Yaa EH TG |

ATASATaT-MALT ST:

eaaTiaT-TMa ETAT Mt 6 tt

6. When the whole univers
Waters, Thou, who art of the n
Ciousness, didst rest, wrapt in
bed of Adisesha, wha is but an

TITER AT THAT ATA
sarea-corfeerar freret 1

‘€ was reduced to the Causal
ature of saturated Bliss-Cons-
Yogic slumber, on the serpent-
‘other manifestation of Thyself.

|

=== PAGE 77 ===

THE DAWN OF CREATION 29

wat sed sheqel
aaa wafaw-statarear 7 11

7. At the start of the Pralaya, Thou, in whom all
energies had become latent along with all the Jivas, didst
enter into sleep, ordering the power called Time to awaken
Thee at the end of the Pralaya.

agar 3 agard

vata wat greta
arorerattcn: TTATGST

siataad cat fae frre v8 tl

8. O Master of all the worlds! Thou, the One without
asecond, having slept for a period of a thousand Chaturyugas,
wert awakened by the power of Time, which was the first
entity to wake up at the end of the Pralaya.

fag a of corey
faster starafaary THAT |
aeta qenTenaay fasted:-
featg fray cara efeq 1 9 11

9. O Thou Slumberer in the Waters! Waking up,
Thou didst see all the worlds to have gone into dissolution.
But as they were all only residing in Thee in a state of latency,
Thou didst now cast Thy glance on them all collectively in one

sweep.

aaecadtarats arfirceert-
gafad frat faorraTy |
dared FROTIATA Ut 10 Ut

! Then there came out of Thy navel a lotus
syeeleh ea aes containing in itself all the previously
existent entities in their potential form.

=== PAGE 78 ===

30 NARAYANEEYAM: CANTO 8

AAARE-FSAS
FOI TAT TESA |
afefredt ofa: e_xata:
Sates ASAT MW 11 1
11. Originating from Thy navel and rising above the

flood of Causal Waters, this lotus bud completely dispersed
the surrounding darkness by its brilliance.

apcord frat falas
afery wagatiga Tae |
a Taser fafrafraeita
eqagalhas-Aeaea: i 12 0

12. In that full-blown and wondrous lotus, supported by

Thy prowess, there arose the creator Brahma, known as the
Lotus-born with the Vedas self-manifested in him.

HAT TA AS TTT
catrca-gearfta-asrath:
HATTA AA CeTRAAaT

free arateaare fast 1 18 1

*

13. O Vishnu, the Supreme Being manifested in the
temple of Guruvayoor for blessing devotees! In this age
known as Padma-Kalpa Thou didst thus originate the Lotus-
born Brahma. O Thou of incomprehensible greatness!
Deign to rid me of my ailments!

=== PAGE 79 ===

Se

CANTO 9

BRAHMA IN HIS CREATIVE ROLE
feam: a aHeraeda fe aPrTEtes
ac feafec-argarated-fremeraad |
adarmragqeend sfafeat fagaraa-
wyaeTAg fawaaveeceagary U1

1. Then Brahma, the Lotus-born, though seated in
Thy navel-lotus, found it impossible to discover the source of
that lotus anywhere in the vast ocean of Causal Waters.
Intensely curious to find out the source, he looked around
turning his head, whereupon he became endowed with four
faces and with eight eyes beautiful like lotus petals.

faster aga Ta TTF THAT |
Huy HAalat Hele fee SE
gafafearrgy arate Frere | 2 1

2. Seeing only that solitary lotus tossing and quivering
in the vast ocean of Causal Waters but not Thee who wert
the support of it, he thought, © Who, indeed, am I seated here
alone in this lotus? And from where has this lotus originated ?”

anger fe qaee: Peale Fret TNA
fafa oH paras: T AG TeCHresT |
waraafaean qAaeeary Teel
eadaatrnted TF FOAL EET Ul 3 Ul

. € This lotus must have some place of origin’, thinking
thus, - desea through the stem-hole of the lotus with
the help of his supernatural power and knowledge. Though
endowed with great capacities and intelligence, he was never-

theless unable to perceive Thy most attractive Form.

=== PAGE 80 ===

32 NARAYANEEYAM: CANTO 9

aa: THe oat fae ATA
Tae Mea fate Fa escars |
fra sAelat Gatrsor cH:
AAaaSATAT WAAGASHTAEl Ul 4 -

4, Searching through alli the orifices of the lotus stem
for a hundred years, he was not able to see anything as the
base of the lotus. So he gave up the search and sat calmly
in the lotus, and with one-pointed concentration, resorted to
absorption in deep Samadhi, solely desirous of Thy grace.

aed oie tear ir-aeatieoerg-
sata-faretad: & ae oars: |
apeamand ta fe eTaTgaT

caave Teqsedl Sera U5 1

5. Practising undisturbed Samadhi for a hundred years
and with his understanding thus deepened by a new awakening,
the Lotus-born Brahma to his great delight saw with his inner
eye a hitherto unseen wonder—Thy Divine Form resting on
the serpent-bed of Adisesha.

agetafa wat wresrae eferery 6

6. I meditate on what was revealed to the Lotus-born
Brahma—Thy Divine Form shining with a diadem and other
decorations on the head; with a pearl necklace, bracelets and
Keyura (bracelets for upper arm) ; with the neatly worn yellow
cloth held in its place by a waist-band studded with precious
stones; and with a blue complexion resembling that of the
Kalaya flower.

saratataa-arqcara It
Bt 9a sa aT Taahe fara eat: 1

=== PAGE 81 ===

BRAHMA IN HIS CREATIVE ROLE 33

geod fray Y waatafaat arr
fate ghenatne-eaqoefent fe ATE U7 UN

7. ‘Hail! Hail! unto Thee whose wondrous glory the
Vedas have declared, who is the bestower of all that is auspi-
cious and the remover of all ills! It is my rare good fortune
that Thou hast revealed Thy Form to me. Now deign to
confer on me the intelligence and the capacity required for
creating the worlds!’ May the Lord possessed of countless
excellences as described by Brahma, offer protection to me!

BACT MATA VASAT ATT

TEI HgTe Fe TTA yt fae
wacafacneadt afa a wfeareaere-
wart firearaar gfertad Saaz M8 I

8. ‘O Brahma! May you be endowed with the power
of creating the three worlds to faultless perfection! Even

after receiving this blessing of Mine, engage yourself in inward
concentration (Tapas). May you also have intense devotion
to Me, which is the sure means for the achievement of every-
thing!’ With these words Thou didst delight Brahma by
granting him far more favours than what he had prayed for.

ad waa: F Ae feat

aaa a alae afaas 7 qatar \
gaen fro afer vata Tee AAT
waaae- faster: qaqa ard 1 9 UW

9. Practising inward concentration for a hundred divine
years, he gained more of spiritual and mental powers. Next,
seeing the Lotus in the Waters swaying in the breeze, he
consumed all the Waters and the winds, thanks to Thy power
manifesting in him.

aaa HAT FA: axfast aaa a:
gare art ATT TTA AT |

=== PAGE 82 ===

34 NARAYANEEYAM: CANTO 10

TaTHTTe FRACTAL
aang, ofeafe at qecatfirat-tea: 1 10

10. By Thy grace, he then engaged himself in the creation
of various species of beings, after having first fashioned the
Lotus itself into the various spheres of the universe. O Lord
of Guruvayoor! O Thou of abounding grace! Give me
protection with a glance of Thine over-flowing with mercy.

CANTO 10
DIVERSIFICATION OF CREATION

ag afatasisa Wacraral-
Saas fre saad |
eared qeerarta gar farwat
oritigeatraertt eayaryq M1

1. O Lord of Vaikuntha! The Lotus-born Brahma,
puissant through Thy blessing, began to create many embodied
beings such as vegetation, birds, animals, men, gods etc.

farcorrer-ferata-onr-faataitfa-
Taafatata tafsat T Psat |
Ra astra fayet 2

2. He created five modes of ignorance—false appre-
hhension, self-centredness, attachment, anger, and fear.
Stricken with sorrow for having originated these five modes
of Tamas (ignorance), he made atonement for it by contem-
plating on Thy lotus-feet.

Wa: at arate 4 UAHA |

=== PAGE 83 ===

DIVERSIFICATION OF CREATION 35

at gfeenuin g da frasaara-
Raerenfeearar HET ATATT 1 8

3. Then he created four mind-born offspring—the
sages Sanaka, Sananda, Sanatana, and Sanatkumara.
On being ordered by him to procreate, these sages refused
to do so, as their minds were already immersed in devotion
to Thee.

aad satrafad sfererratser
sreadisatt Jet WaCHAT: |
aratfat & He oarft a at fata
ural ede fine Fa a GATAT II 4

4, As Brahma tried to suppress his anger at the dis-
obedience of his offspring, Rudra, an aspect of Thine, emerged
from the middle of his eyebrows. He is called Rudra,
because at his very birth he cried aloud to Brahma, asking to
be provided with a name and a habitation for himself,

valeareraaa + fafrret

a faara afar afrarea ear |
araraadt A Fath WANA:

me TfaCaATs A ATA TA U5 Ul

5. Brahma, impelled by Thee, gave eleven names and
eleven forms to Rudra (thus giving to the one Rudra eleven
aspects). He gave to each one of these a wife and a habita-
tion and requested them to procreate.

arpa -yarar aaa: |
HT AT SOT: Got ATT STO
carase tf Heath ATAT 1 6 It

6. The three worlds were soon full of the fierce-looking
progeny of Rudra, which filled Brahma with alarm. There-

=== PAGE 84 ===

36 NARAYANEEYAM: CANTO 10

upon Brahma, prompted by Thee, ordered Rudra to stop
procreating, and betake himself to austerity for the good of
the world.

aera aicfaner ToPacha-
ATER: AIGA: HE: THEA: |
semana yar afecscett
SARA WTA HASSETT: 7
7. From several parts of the body of Brahma, engrossed
in creation, were born the sages, Marichi, Atri, Angiras,

Kratu, Pulaha, Pulastya, Bhrigu, Vasishtha and Daksha, as
also Thy much esteemed devotee Bhagavan Narada.

anifamratigsras tet 7

anit faa fafixerstagetsyd |
aes: AAAS ATT
weal face TAT fagary | 8 Ml

8. Next he created Dharma Deva and Kardama Praja-
pati. On creating Vani, he was himself overcome by a lustful
sentiment towards her, whereupon he was rescued from this
dark passion by his own offspring like Sanaka, Daksha and
others, who were endowed with the necessary insight to do so
by Thee!

aaa gunfaaerafa wafer:
Had AAT SAGAS |
gag ag fafa a wiafa-

HAGA Targa TT | 9 1

9. He, the four-faced Brahma, himself gave out and
taught the Vedas, the Puranas, and all other branches of
knowledge to his progeny mentioned above. But still finding
that his creative work was not progressing well, he again
resorted to Thee for help.

=== PAGE 85 ===

PRELUDE TO THE FIRST INCARNATION 37

STG Beast fest
ATAU TELATA |
areata aguas fade
aifars areagte freer GA 1 10

2 10. Knowing from Thee the proper means for the multi-
plication of created beings, Brahma divided himself into male
and female—Manu Swayambhuva and his wife Satarupa.
May Thou, O Govinda, who by means of them did multiply
the species of man, deign to rid me of my ailments!

CANTO 11

PRELUDE TO THE FIRST INCARNATION
aay a ofaeart

aarfa faeat: aaraTated |

waghasin fagronts

safat aredafeater 1

1. O Lord of Guruvayoor! As creation progressed and
creatures multiplied, the group of four divine sages consisting
of Sanaka and the rest went one day to the sphere of
Vaikuntha in order to pay their respects to Thee.

aaladdaaarrarea-
aaa faeces |
aaa & vat frac
AAPA: AGKAT HEAT: 2
2. Crossing several enclosures,

Abode, unmatched by any other sphere because ofits entranc-
ing Garden of Spiritual Freedom (Naisreyasa-Kananam)

and its numerous lakes and glittering mansions.

the sages entered Thy

=== PAGE 86 ===

38 NARAYANEEYAM: CANTO I]
wachaeert wad fafaery
great saat fasratsarerary |
ast a fad Tear Ft:
aa WaT FAT 3 Ul

3. But two gate-keepers, by name Jaya and Vijaya,
intercepted these sages who were entering Thy Abode to see
Thee. Thereupon anger flashed in the minds of the sages.
O Lord! Everything takes place as Thou willest!

agponlargfaaraset

Heat Jat eaatt WIAA |

afa wait Haarerat at
efrenfortsteafa TaGEMTy 4

4, ‘You cruel ones whose conduct is unbecoming of
the denizens of Vaikuntha! May you both be embodied as.

Asuras (demoniac beings).’ Cursed thus by the great sages,
these servants of Thine prostrated themselves before them,
praying that they might not lose their devotion to the Lord
(even in their Asura bodies).

qatar Aaa:
Rea SEM aes |
aipactentrdt-arealg-
CASA APRA 5
5. Knowing what had happened, Thou, O Lord, didst
come to the entrance of Thy Abode, accompanied by Lakshmi
and Thy attendant Garuda, Thy hand resting on his

shoulders. The sages were delighted by Thy most attractive
form.

sere tir: eadt Fata

araaaaat sat Tt A

=== PAGE 87 ===

PRELUDE TO THE FIRST INCARNATION 39
waafareardst wT: Ul 6

6. Pacifying the sages who began singing Thy praise,
Thou didst tell Thy two attendants under curse, who had no
protector other than Thyself, to come back to Thee again,
after having spent three births as Asuras communing with
Thee through confrontation.?

aeayeaTas FRAT aT
gatetrafadt fact 211
PATA GATS HEAT
wat at ore warfaareat Wt 7
7. Thereafter Thy attendants took birth as great Asuras
through Diti and her husband Kasyapa. Since the act of
procreation took place at the prohibited hour of evening

Sandhya (sun-set hour), the twins became cruel destroyers of
the worlds, as if they were two new Yamas (gods of death).

facaya: afarg: fos:

ot faxomret aft setter: |
sal wareaaTeT

ear reat famaraarat tl 8 1

8. They became notorious as Hiranyakasipu and
Hiranyaksha. Obsessed by their inherent tendencies, they
engaged themselves in cruel oppression of the worlds that
have Thee as their master.

SNe CUATA ATILAT

wns eTaatarata |
waft ent afes frase
aa Talafadtad Tatars M9 Wt

9. Of these two, the great Asura Hiranyaksha ranged
the worlds, thirsting for battle. Not finding anywhere an

=== PAGE 88 ===

40 NARAYANEEYAM: CANTO 12

enemy worthy of his steel, he submerged Thy dear earth in
Cosmic Waters and strutted about mace in hand, roaring in
overweaning pride.

Tat TM Tet HART

fT TATA TATE |

waCheM: FT SMT

frefeer Ur AeaTHAT M10 1

10. On learning from God Varuna that Thou wert a
match for him, he roamed in search of Thee. O Lord of
Guruvayoor, O Thou ocean of mercy whom Bhakti (devotion)
alone can reveal! May Thou be pleased to ameliorate my
ailments!

CANTO 12
INCARNATION AS COSMIC BOAR

AFAR AGA STATA ST
Beat AeA aioe HATA |
Ted fasta: Ae TAP 1

1. The Manu Swayambhuva, who was engaged in
creation, saw the earth being submerged in the Waters, when
it was not the time for it. So, accompanied by sages like
Marichi, he went to Satyaloka in supplication to Brahma
who resided there with his heart full of joy and peace derived
from the practice of devotion to Thee.

ase Sot: Osta Hera fara

Sa AUST FHT TST |
qeany aaah Aga aE
TAs Tt Wag apa tt 2

=== PAGE 89 ===

INCARNATION AS COSMIC BOAR 41

2. ‘Alas! The earth has been submerged in Waters
while I am engaged in multiplying living beings. O Lotus-
born One! Show a new habitation for them” Hearing these
words of Manu, Brahma, O Lord, began to contemplate on
Thee (for a solution of the difficulty).

@ ao fat send waft gee
aqarft asafe wat fad aif |
eet aaefagrs avi adlser
ARTgeT wa: alee i 3 i

3. ‘O Great One! I had at the very beginning drunk
up the Causal Waters. But nevertheless the earth is sinking.
What am I to do now?’ From the nasal orifice of Brahma
who, speaking thus, took refuge at Thy feet, there emerged
Thyself in the form of an infant Boar.

FPOATAAL RATT: TRS
qaisa efaraea: TATA |
ae wafsagiien wang
faetreai fafirong ae qafy: e  4 u
4, Ofthe size of a thumb at the time of emergence, Thou
didst soon grow to the size of an elephant. Seeing Thee thus

growing up to the region of the clouds, Brahma, along with his
offspring, looked on Thee with wonder.

alser-afarcaatent fafeeterat +

arargerd fry waafaes AT
eed fafartafa atafe tears:
aa waa fee safer STAIR U5
5. ‘Who is this that has come out of my nose as a Boar?
Can it be that Being of inconceivable greatness Emselfi
Can it be another play of the Lord’s mysterious power (Maya) ?

While Brahma was revolving thus in his mind, Thou didst
grow into the size of a mountain and burst into terrific roars

again and again.

=== PAGE 90 ===

42 NARAYANEEYAM: CANTO 12

a fragranced TATRTIEAT:
aaheaaral Frat PTAA |
aiaeiona: TI Ya
ena fageate-caraeeeay MN 6
6. Hearing Thy roar, the sages occuping the planes of
Janaloka, Tapoloka, and Satyaloka began to sing Thy glory.

Pleased with their hymns of praise, Thou, with Thy mighty
body, didst enter into the Waters.

eam aha fata

Mifeerea awa ATS S-ATATT: |
Tindtise: aiepeent

Bigg Gitq fafr-aaater aqNTU

7. With Thy erect and bluish hairs twitching, with the
tail lifted up, with the fierce snout pointed downwards and
with eyes rolling as if to comfort the hymning Rishis, Thou
didst plunge into the Waters with a terrific speed that scattered
the clouds.

arafametiage TAMAATST |
afd WITILAT TATASCAT-
aera THAA ATA MI 8

8. The Waters were filled with agitated alligators,
whirling whales and turbulent waves, as Thou didst enter
them in search of Thy beloved earth with tremendous roars
that shook the denizens of the nether worlds (Rasatala).

FEAST AAEIHT LATA
Hata afeta nefatetaat ax |
aaa Faia
SASH AGATA: AGHA U1 9 11

=== PAGE 91 ===

DESTRUCTION OF HIRANYAKSHA 43.

9. O Lord! Seeing the earth concealed by the wicked
Asura in the region of Rasatala, Thou, the simulated Boar,
didst lift her up with Thy tusks, treating with disdain the
resistance of Asuras who were but like worms to Thee.

AYRAT Il VATA THA-
ReeHuatsa garfrnttaaer |
RTA few RTT
AsTaTeAGAAT Ts WMT 10 1
10. O Lord, who didst sportively assume the form of a
Boar! Thou who, with Thy gigantic kody, didst rise from
the forbidding waters of the rough ocean, holding the earth

on thy tusk as if it were the root of a tiny grass that Thou
hadst dug up—may Thou deign to save me from my ailments!

CANTO 13
DESTRUCTION OF HIRANYAKSHA

fewarel Tagate WaeaAT TIT
aed atad cafe fromearatcfac |
wage Teal HTETEM AAA:
ASA aeaq agoafe farawa FA 1 1
1. Then the sage Narada, who was a devotee of Thine
and often engaged himself in diplomatic missions in fulfilment
of Thy purposes, approached the Asura Hiranyaksha then
wandering about in search of Thee in the Cosmic Waters
which hardly reached his knees, and spoke to him in subtle
language, extolling the Asura’s own strength and denigrating
Thine.

a mrarat fasagela wactat agrctt
saat ace acd fafirafate aarfaafad: |

=== PAGE 92 ===

}
|
i
|
|
|
|

44 NARAYANEEYAM: CANTO 13

aaq aarat aarerfate @ afar aferarat
wart TEATTGA eT eHTT | 2 Ul

2, ‘Alas! Alas! How is it that the deceitful Vishnu
is allowed to get away with the earth, your property, O mighty
one!’ Thus addressed by Narada, the Asura cried, ‘ Where
js this Vishnu? Where is he?’ Following the direction
given by the sage, he approached Thee, even as Thou wert
rising up from the Waters with the earth.

Fel areas BT aft Fat TAT
gertiacad fafagaraara wad |
Taare TeAAeGSAT Fafaat 3 ul

3, Disregarding for a moment the Asura who was ridicu-

ling Thee with the words, ‘O! This is but a wild animal! ’

and also hurling abuses at Thee, Thou, who didst see the
earth trembling in fear on Thy tusk, didst take her from there
and settle her firmly in the ocean, and then get ready for

battle.

marae at carafe fe qeltraaTat

fagadia Freq TeReCA TCL AAT |

quar fret Fat FIA

farereat: areata: TaAfafe aTaT STAT 4

4, As the Asura was armed with a mace, Thou too
didst flourish a mighty mace and give him battle, which was
but a sport to Thee. As the clang of clashing maces reverbe-
rated in the sky and as the hosts of Devas gathered eager to

see the duel, Brahma cried aloud to Thee, praying that the
‘Asura be killed before nightfall.

narae deaeta ay Tara fefrrat
marae qa atfefa titararass a:

Baers sqqetrerat
HeIah Heal HAs ATTY BRAT 115 1

=== PAGE 93 ===

DESTRUCTION OF HIRANYAKSHA 45

5. Wonderful to relate, in that combat the Asura’s stroke
suddenly knocked down Thy mace to the ground. There-
upon with a smile on Thy face, Thou didst invoke Thy discus
(Sudarsana), famous as the destroyer of the race of Asuras,
and Thou didst look magnificent when that discus made its
appearance in Thy hand.

Tet: Yo sresfrrete st fagafs
afateraaaq aeifor-aaTECTe |
THRE FEAT T ay faqeeat aaa
Teas Waals fe qT: 1 6

6. Thereafter the Asura, resembling the god of death
in his mood of anger, struck at Thee with a trident (Sula),
which was cut to bits by Thee with the discus. The Asura
then hit Thee with his fist, and also adopted various tricks of
illusory warfare against Thee, in whom illusion has no place.

wasqasatc-canrea-fares ferret

aat aaah fare era |
Tforfaraiftergtaty-<frerargt
earrareyeat Taree farcaet: 7

7. The illusions created by the Asura were all dispersed
by a modicum of the power of Thy divine discus. Then the
Asura, raving with anger, attacked Thee with punches of his
heavy fists, whereupon Thou didst deliver a powerful blow
with Thy toe at the base of his car.

Hee: Sse TA TCTTATA LAAT

Tegel TeHTeTTECaH: BTAcElet: |

aar argera-aHaNe fares

apiear: ararta: epi aeetergy | 8

Thy feet, the monstrous Asura
ee ut vr his mouth, while all the
destruction. With

8. Struck Rowenuly)
fell down with blood gushing © n
Rishis sang hymns in praise of Thee for his

=== PAGE 94 ===

46 NARAYANEEYAM: CANTO 13

hearts brimming with joy, they sang in praise of Thee, who
art the embodiment of Yajna.

afaael Caeafe serra yt
aagiartiseat arft Fat Wet EST |
wet freatat F TMTET HT A AAET

fart aa art ATE THeMs|ITTT: 19

9. ‘OSupremeBeing! OBoon-giver! Thy skin stands
for Chandas (Vedic metre); Thy hairs, for Kusa grass; Thy
eyes, for the ghee pot used in sacrifice; Thy four legs, for the
four sacrificing priests; Thy face, for the ladle used in offering ;
Thy tongue, for the Soma pot; Thy stomach, for the vessel for
keeping the ingredients for offering; Thy ears, for the Chamasa
vessel for keeping sacrificial remnants; Thy semen, for Soma
juice; and Thy neck, for the subsidiary rites called Upasat.
(Thou art verily the embodiment of holy Yajna).’

SI CHIE GEC EG LICCE ELE
nae yal fascia 4 fara |
eafrord ararcd: garalaerd waft
frereat Ot & aaeaft aaTeaI 1 10 1

10. © Lord manifest in the temple of Guruvayoor!
Delighted with the hymns of the sages, Thou, who wert
impressive with Thy all-comprehending form and taintless
glory, didst retire into Thy Abode of Vaikuntha, revelling in
Thy innate Bliss. May Thou be pleased to eradicate my
ailments!

=== PAGE 95 ===

CANTO 14
INCARNATION AS KAPILA

TARGA Maa:

TAG: TSPATTATST SEAT |
forcast

afed o waa ge frat it 1

1. Manu Swayambhuva, the offspring of Brahma, spent
his allotted period (Manvantara) in peace, free from all
adversities, and contemplating on Tliee and recounting
Thy glories.

geororraa-eaataaT |
: a ts
wraeca-agd TAT: fast 2
2. During the rule of Swayambhuva, the Prajapati
Kardama, who was born of the shadow of Brahma, worshipped.
Thee, the supremely beautiful, for ten thousand years out of

his keen interest in multiplying the species as instructed by
Brahma.

Teste He H
froaahfe-marTrTsTy |
efadieofaarat frat a
aTUaRRt HH FAA 1 8

3. OAll-pervading One! With a complexion attractive
like a blue cloud, with the face lit up by a smile, and with a
hand twirling a lotus, Thou didst manifest Thyself before
Kardama, riding on Thy eagle vehicle, Garuda.

IA FVATIAA TH
aagtt efaat aan gH: |

=== PAGE 96 ===

48 NARAYANEEYAM: CANTO 14

afte 4 ad tata WATT

canta aragres friatsy: 4

4, Before departing from the vision of Kardama, who

was praising Thee thrilled with devotion, Thou didst bless
him that he would have (Devahuti) the daughter of Manu
Swayambhuva as his wife, that nine daughters would be born
of her to him, that Thou Thyself wouldst also be born to him

as his tenth issue under the name Kapila, and that he would
finally attain union with Thyself.

a Aa: TeSTAT Afesar
GUAT GAT Sage |
waatfea-areata fare:
FAM HAA-ATTT ATTA Wh 5
5. Advised by the Rishi Narada at Thy bidding, Manu
Swayambhuva, with his wife Satarupa and virtuous daughter

Devahuti, approached Prajapati Kardama who was awaiting
their arrival.

agireat + eager
TRATES HAAS |
wacda-fracisht Teat
FEYTITAT TAY TATA 11 6 1

6. Having obtained from the Manu that jewel of a
woman Devahuti as his wife, Kardama, though delighting
solely in Thy worship, became none the less very loving towards
Devahuti because of her devoted service of him.

UGC CI GEILE Li
gfaararrad at fears |
afageaege TaTcaT
BE BaTAG AagQaAT 7

=== PAGE 97 ===

INCARNATION AS KAPILA 49

7. With the powers obtained through Thy worship,
Kardama created for the satisfaction of his love-lorn wife, a
Vimana (vehicle floating in the air) full of handsome female
attendants, and himself assuming a new attractive body,
traversed through the heavens to the gardens of the gods where
he sported with Devahuti for a long time.

aTatAy eaatey ast

TT PAT: GAIT TLTSTT: |

FAIA AIST BTaAT-

fered asrigat eraredta ui 8 1

8. Spending a hundred years thus and obtaining nine
handsome daughters as offspring, Kardama wanted to retire
to the forest to take up the ascetic life, but yielding to the
wishes of his wife, continued to stay with her at home, eagerly
awaiting Thy birth as their son.

frsmafire wafadar-
facarataa 24 agar |
afreRaraTaT TATA

wafaeay ToMeAaTafaeEy | 9 1

9. Instructed by her husband, Devahuti engaged herself
in devout worship of Thee, and Thou wert gracious enough
to be born as her son Kapila in order to teach mankind the
means for the attainment of the Supreme Spirit.

aaa wet Tart

Haaea-TITSATY TAT

afro argatatr

cated @ ofeafe at aeterg It 10 1

10. © Lord manifest in Guruvayoor! Thou who wert

born as Kapila, and who tau: ht Thy mother the quintessence
of philosophy and religion after Thy happy father Kardama
had departed to the forests—may Thou deign to save me from
my ailments!

=== PAGE 98 ===

CANTO 15
THE MESSAGE OF KAPILA

MAAS FAT TTA AT HT
aRMEgTEs winaTey ahr |
HeaGIAS AT Alara AAT
afrsaatefa df age vara: 11

1, The mind that is attached to sense objects, the
products of the Gunas of Prakriti, is the cause of bondage to the
Spirit. If unattached, the same mind becomes the means of
attaining Immortality. The practice of devotion to God
attenuates attachment to sense objects. Devotion to God,
generated by association with holy men, is the one thing to
be attained in human life. Thus didst Thou teach Devahuti
in Thy human descent as Kapila.

wafe gata earl Ger: Tata: |
fa fafaafaantt yeaciset sacar
afredaiet & Faget ATTA: 2

9. Prakriti (Primordial Nature), Mahattattwa (the
Great Element), Ahamkara (I-sense), the five Tanmatras
(Particles), the five Bhutas (Elements), Antahkarana (Mind
and its various modes), the ten Indriyas (Organs, five of
knowledge and five of action), and Purusha (Spirit)—these
are the twenty-five categories. When the Purusha realizes
the distinctiveness of these categories, he is liberated from the
pondage of Prakriti (Nature). Thus didst Thou teach
Devahuti in Thy human descent as Kapila.’

gehreya asset Tats
afe g daft Tet Te ATCT |
Hagyortaearsrat: TTT

afredgted a taget ATT: 13 11

=== PAGE 99 ===

THE MESSAGE OF KAPILA 51

3. The Purusha (Spirit), by his association with Prakriti
(Nature), is not contaminated to the extent of losing his
inherent spiritual quality, for then he would have become
matter (Prakriti) and possessed of its attributes. On the
other hand it is seen that by devotion to Me and reflection on
the nature of Truth, the Purusha is released from the hold of
Prakriti. Thus didst Thou teach Devahuti in Thy human
descent as Kapila.

fara frerrd-eaaea et
wecanfied feerqamareny |
efagiearar ava
afroagiea @ tage erat: 1 4

4, Having purified the mind through the control of the
senses and having gained proficiency in sitting in the meditative
posture, one should constantly meditate on My Divine Form
as seated on the back of Garuda, as having bright bluish
complexion like that of the Tamala tree, and as bearing divine
decorations and weapons. Thus didst Thou teach Devahuti
in Thy human descent as Kapila.

Hy PTT eae: AAT

Hf gufqa-reafaasate: |
wafa Teaafen: at fe geatfasrat
afroagielt @ tagger wat: M5

5. By long practice of devotional disciplines like * hearing”
and ‘hymning’ on My attributes, excellences and sportive
activities, the devotee attains to the state of Para-bhakti
(supreme devotion) in which the mind always flows naturally,
without any external stimulation and in spite of all obstacles,
towards Me in a continuous sree as the water ofthe Ganga

the ocean. By such devotion one overcomes
ae the Bie of Hie oral deaths). Thus didst Thou
teach Devahuti in Thy human descent as Kapila.

Wee agefeat-afaaa: gerd
sfaherrayry Aire ATOTR |

=== PAGE 100 ===

52 NARAYANEEYAM: CANTO 15

fafa fe Teaat aaa wea:
atrengiea a fag amet: 6

6. Alas! men spend their life in acquiring wealth by
unfair and cruel exploitation for the support of their own
families and in subservience to women’s charms and love of
children. Being devoid of devotion to Me, their worldly
attachment and evil ways lead them to hell. Thus didst
Thou teach Devahuti in Thy human descent as Kapila.

Jatasocfaal SraatetiscraTos
seater: eatery area |
Sate aa gears areas

aftedgea a tage amt: 7 1

7. Repeatedly entering the womb of woman for re-birth,
the Jiva passes through severe trials. Though he retains
the memory of the past in the womb, it is erased during the
travails of birth. He then passes through the various impedi-
ments of infancy and childhood, and when he enters the stage
of youth, he is once again overcome by the infatuations of
sense life. Thus didst Thou teach Devahuti in Thy human
descent as Kapila.

fagaorrarsit afar at race:
aa facafa aie aferdita |

ufa fafeqnart art gaara
afiodgita ct tage area: 8 i

8. A virtuous householder, making sacrificial offerings
to Pitris and Devas, goes along the Southern Path of Smoke
(to heavenly regions), and after having enjoyed the fruits of
his good actions, comes back to human life. Those who do
actions without self-centred desires, but merely as offerings
unto Me, pass out of life along the Northern Path of Light
leading to liberation. Thus didst Thou teach Devahuti in
Thy human descent as Kapila.1