=== PAGE 1 ===

F-23

NARASIMHA-PURANAM

aeaeT Oy,

SANSKRIT TEXT, ENGLISH TRANSLATION

AND INDEX OF VERSES

=== PAGE 2 ===

NARASIMHA-PURANAM
ae Peeg Tory

SANSKRIT TEXT, ENGLISH TRANSLATION AND INDEX OF VERSES

=== PAGE 3 ===

INTRODUCTION

The Puranic age or era in ancient India next to Vedas has its most significance.
During mediaeval period, Puranic rites assumed position even higher than the rituals
recommended in Vedas among the people. The rites performed through the
procedure mentioned in Puranas got wide acceptance among public in the form of
more benevolence and spirituality as it was the essence of Puranas. Illustrious as scen
in Padma Purana and Naradiya Purana are clear, evidence to the affirmation of this
averment. Thorough discussion and description in Puranas have becn made on its
mutual nexus with Vedas and Smrtis. Smrti is equivalent to Vedas specially for the
households in course of their behavioural or worldly life. Supremacy of Puranas
more than this, one can see in Devi Bhagavata. The seat for Vedas and Smrti is eye
but Purana is seated in the heart of spiritual man. Thus, it can be stated categorically
that behavioural aspect of worldly life in full is cmbedded in Puranas. Puranas are
ascribed to establish the gems of humanity like devotion, knowledge, detachment
and etiquette firmly among all Indians. Importance of Puranas is prima-facie from its
meaning and antediluvian.

Meaning of the Term Purana

Literal meaning of the term Purana is old or antediluvian. According to renowned
etymologist Yaska- “An innovative thing irrespective of being its old is called
Purana.’’' A beautiful derivative to this term in Puranas too is seen. According to
Vayu Purana, it is mentioned as purd asti *viz. ‘A thing alone even since most
ancient period.’’ As per Padma Purana ‘* Purana is, what desires for past (by-gone)
period.’’ As per Brahmanda Purana Purana, a derivative - ‘this happened during
ancient period’? is seen. Thus, all the above derivatives make it apparent that the
contents of Purana was related to the ancient period.

The term Purana in its meaning as per literature is not confirmed to the contents
of any particular scripture or volume but it represents the entire topic. Actually,
Puranas too were integrated or in compiled form known as Brhatsarhhita alike all
Vedic hymns integrated inseparably during their initial stage. It becomes crystal clear
on going over Puranas separately as fifth Veda like that of four divisions made of
Vedas that very fifth Veda was composed after the lapse of longer period than the
period when classification on Veda was made. The sage designated as Vyasa had
divided Vedas in four parts and he himself had classified the Puranas also.
Vedavyasa had also composed Puranic code (Purana Sarhhita) alongwith the Epic

a. Ga ad watt (Fo 3.2%)
2. FEN TT TRAE (AY 8.203)

=== PAGE 4 ===

6

(Akhyana), Episode (Upakhyana), story (Gatha, Allegory (Kalpa) ete. He had taught
or preached homaharsana, a disciple belong to siita caste on the Purana Sarihita. On
the basis of these three basic Samhita (Mila Samhita), as much as eighteen Puranas
and several other uppuranas (sub- Purana) were composed complying with the
tradition of disciple. It has been stated in Siva Purana that lord Vyasa compose.
Puranas at every end of Dvapara era. Thus, it has become clear that the subject
mattcr of Puranas is most ancient, beginningless and beyond virility (viz. not
composed by manly efforts) also. However, it is of great use for the behavioural
world specially becausc of its composition made by Vyasa.

Puranas have been accepted as onc of the branches of learning (vidya) sinee long-
long past or ab-initio. A Brahmana cannot get expertise in full cven if duly learned to
four Vedas with their six-parts (Sadvarga) and upanisads unless the read Purana
properly. As much as fourteen learnings (vidyas) have been deseribed in Yajfiavalkya
Smrti with their roots on rcligion (Dharma). Purana is an exclusive learning that
makes the religion (Dharma) its own base or ground. The Smrti therefore, forbids
teaching or preaching this supreme learning to any person unfamiliar and cven the
disciple not duly tried.

Western seholars too have aecepted Purana as complement to Vedas. Vedas and
Puranas are complement to each other. Puranas are the inseparable parts of Indian
Literature and prevalent in the Indian culture. Diligence on Puranas in course of all
Vedie rites henee, stated as mandatory. In course of sacrifice (yajiia ineites Purana
too is Veda. Puranas have becn given equal status to for Vedas in Chandogyapanisad.
Besides this, one ean sce the term ~* Purdna’’ in Taittiriya Aranyaka, Brhadaranyak
Upanisad, Agvaldyana Grhyasiitra, Apastamba Dharma Sitra, Valmiki Ramayana
and Mahabharata etc. scriptures.

According to Valmiki Ramayana, major events pertaining to trio-periods of time
viz. past, future and present are contained in Puranas. Siita Sumanta had very carly
told king DaSaratha that how will he get the son born? Sumanta could predict that
fact by virtue of his listening to the Puranie story. As per Mahabharata, it has been
stated that moonlight of Veda emanates from the full moon of Purana. Magnificence
of listening to Purana can also be seen in Manusmrti. Thus, the term Purana has becn
used in one or other way in all scripturcs found since Vedic cra up to the period when
Smrtis were composed.

Excel and Beginningless of Puranas

Puranas contain descriptions ;on divine achievements (Siddhi) of all kinds.
Puranas are as old as Vedas. All scriptures like Veda, Brahmana, Aranyaka, Upanis
ad, all aphorisms of Vedic literature, commentaries etc. furnish evidenee for Puranas
being of equal status to Vedas.

=== PAGE 5 ===

7

Atharvaveda envisages that Rk, Sama, rhyme and Puranas have been originated
with Yajurveda from sacrifice (yajiia). In context to Vratyastaumat, a deseription on
the knowledge of history, Purana, story, NarasarhsT can be scen.

A description on Puranas as scen in Vedic literature is prima-facic proof of their
being contemporary to Vedas. On aecount of being Puranas an ancient ercation, these
have been stated as Veda in Satapath Brahmana. ‘The priest doing sacrifice (yajiiau-
sthata) should preach them Puranas only are Vedas.’’ Alike Vedas, Puranas too have
cmanated from exhaling of Brahma. Rgveda, Yajusa, Sama, Atharvarhgirasa,
History, Purana, learning (Vidya), Upanisad, aphorisms, hymns and their meanings
are like fume coming out from the firc caused in wet fuel. These all are the exhaling
of the supreme soul viz. emanated without least exertion from the supreme soul. A
deep perusal and analysis on Puranas in Brahmana era too can be scen easily.
Instructions have been given in Upanisads hither and thither in dircetion to learn
Puranas. Narada says to Sanatkumara—’‘I am conversant to Rgveda, Yajusa, Sima,
Atharva and the fifth Veda i.e, History— Purana. He states while telling about the
Puranas being of most ancient period in Matsya Purana—*’Purana is the oldcst
among all scriptures. Brahma first reealled Pura as and the Vedas only then came
out from his four mouths.”’

In view of thc above statement in support of Puranas, the scholars opine that
Puranas are the deseriptive form of Vedas. Vedas import brief account of the events
while Puranas enumerate them with illustrations and examples. It is cither exclusive
peeuliarity/distinction or an abnormal/exceptional style of Puranas by which they
state even the common matters in rhetorical way creating interest and curiosity
among audience. In other words, Puranas are skill to present the past events with
their positive connotation in the light of the day. In view of the doctrine of climax as
seen in ancient stories of Puranas, these being everlasting and most ancient, no doubt
ean be raised on their complianee with Vedas and their essence as well. Renowned
Pundit Girdhar Sarma Caturvedi too have mentioned in one of his artieles— ‘*Purano
ki anadita”’ that ‘’ Puranas being existed as ancient as Vedas, thcir entity like Veda
too is beginningless.’”

In Siitra Sahitya (Litcrature on aphorisms) like Gautam Dharma Siitra and
Yajfivalkya Smrti, enumerates one after another has been made of Puranas. A
peculiar significance of Purana has been laid-down in very literature. It has been
mentioned that to know Puranas is equally necessary for common people, the elass of
administrator (king ete.) and even for the people learned to Vedas. He is only learned
or genius perfectly who has studied Purana. All divine achievements have been
described in Puranas. The procedure or methods to very achicvements like hymn
(mantra) and system (tantra) concomitantly are ready to see therein.

=== PAGE 6 ===

8

The above mentioned opinions, authorities etc. all prove that learning of Purana
too had emerged in Vedic era and the ancient sages classified, arranged, edited the
Puranas in the same fashion as they did the same for Vedas.

Number of Puranas

As we sce diverge opinions of Historians on creation, emergence and period of
Puranas, they are not of unanimous opinion the same way in the ascertainment of
exact number of them.

One can see everywhere the transformation of the expression from jargon, tough,
beyond understanding as it is in Upanisad to simple, laid and rhetoric in Puranas. The
Vedas have been composed using jargons and tough sentences but in Puranas, the
same subject-matter is made easicst to understand.

This transformation in style of expression exhibits that Puranas were also
compiled in a single Brhatsarhhita like that of Vedas. Subsequently, lord Vedavyasa
had divided the single voluminous Veda Sarmhita in four parts. The first three codes
so formed are Rk, Yaju and Sama and their appendix was compiled as Atharvaveda.
This division was made in order to easier perusal and study for the readers and
disciple of that sage. In the similar fashion, very Krsna Dvaipayana Vyasa should
have perhaps divided Puranas in eighteen parts by taking in consideration, the
convenience of the readers and disciples both.

Thus, as much as eighteen Puranas in divided form of single voluminous code
have been accepted. As per Brahmavaivarta Purana, these are — Brahma, Pada, Vis
nu, Siva, Srimadbhagavata, Narada, Markandeya, Agni, Bhavisya, Brahmavaivarta,
Linga, Varaha, Skanda, Vamana, Kirma, Matsya, Garuda and Brahmanda. Same
serial of the name is seen in Visnu, Bhagavata etc. Puranas. Besides names, number
of hymns in Puranas can be seen duly mentioned in them but it is not the same in all
Puranas henee, there is no consistency. For instance - A description on number of
hymns in Brahmapurana as found in Brahmavaivarta, tells ten thousand hymns and
this number tallies with the statement found in Bhagavata and Devi Bhagavata but in
Agni Purana and Matsya Purana, it has been stated twenty five thousand and thirteen
thousand respectively.

The so called Mahapuranas came in existence when the single but voluminous
code was divided in eighteen parts by Krsna Dvaipdyana Vyasa had got these names.
A statement to this effect has been made of Devi Bhagavata as under —

vga wed wa Gare aT AGUA

att fet heat yoni yag-gegu
Very hymn enumerates the so-called eighteen Mahapuranas as under—
Two Puranas starting with ‘‘ma’’ syllable — 1. Matsya, 2. Markandeya

Two Puranas starting with ‘‘Bha’’ syllable— 3. Bhavisya, 4. Bhagavata

=== PAGE 7 ===

9

Three Puranas starting with the letter “Bra’— 5. Brahmanda, 6.
Brahmavaivarta, 7. Brahma

Four Puranas starting with the syllable *’Va’’— 8. Varaha, 9. Vamana, 10. Vayu,
1, Visnu

Then Agni from ‘*A’’ (12), Narada from ‘‘Na’’ (13), Padma from *‘Pa’’ (14),
Linga from “Li’’ (15), Garuda from ‘‘Ga’’ (16), Karma from “*Kii’’ (17), Skanda
rom ‘*Ska’’ (18). There are the cighteen Maha Puranas. A list with same scrial has
been given for these Maha Puranas in twelfth cantos (Skandha) of Visnu Purana and
Srimadbhagavata. Korma Purana also describes the list of eightcen Puranas.!

Characteristics of Puranas

Role of Puranas in the development of Indian culture and religion has always
een of most significant. Magnificence of Purana is worth considcration and
honourable from several angles in which angle of religion and history is at the top.
Puranic expressions comply with Vedas too. Hence, religious importance of Puranas
in our physical or worldly life is peculiar and distinct. Vedas rendered the
assumption of God and Puranas carry that severe assumption of almighty to the heart
of society as a whole. According to Matsya Purana, the four major subjects of
Puranas are as under—

Akhyanaiscadpyupakhydanairgathabhih Kalpasuddhibhih.
Purdnasamhitam Cakre Bhagavana Vadrayanah.

Epic is the perceived account of events during the period so described in it.
Episode is the account of events took place recently but imperccived/scen (viz.
indirect expression of events). The expressions traditionally made and heard but for
any knowledge about the hero or karta are called story. The knowledge propounded
in theology translated in Puranic History Department relating to History subject etc.
scriptures and guidelines on duty is Kalpasuddhi (code of conduct).

Kalpasuddhi or code of conduct covers the rules on acts like Srauta-smartta,
etiquette, kinds of religion, miscellancous kinds of homage and kinds of cthics and
philosophy. Although Lord Badarayana had also prescribed the above said four
subjects in the opinion of Ugrasrava Sauti, Lomaharsana says that Puranas have five
characteristics. As per his opinion —

Sargasca Pratisargasca Vamso manvantarani ca.

Vamsanucaritam Caiva Purdnam Paricalaksanam.

2. wa Yet werd oe dora a te arta vfaet ada eg wahSTaeA geet eg
aa a a ware aaa anew at areei anes adie wafes aervefaft
ST an STROMA BAR: rah yt never GoM grat Hea AES: 12g

=== PAGE 8 ===

10

This hymn relating to the characteristics of Purana oftenly available with every
Purana. The word **Pajicalaksana’’ is considercd mandatory to the cxtent that it has
been used without by interprctation in Amarako§a. Use of any technical term without
any interpretation denotcs the universal acccptability of the same. Very fact should
be considered as applying in apropos of this word.

The scholars have cxplained the sense born by very Pafica Laksanas as under —

(a) Creation (Srsti), (b) Anti-creation (Prati Srsti), (c) Dynasty (Varnsa), (d)
Manvantara, (e) Varhsanucarita (Genealogy).

The five subjects referred to as characteristics of Purana also have five kind
difference each.

(a) Creation (Srsti)—This portion also has five kinds owing to different opinions,
introduction of incarnation and that of Brahmanda.

(b) Anti-creation (Prati-Srsti)— Sastravatarana, Kalpasuddhi, Srsti Sarihara
(dissolution), Jyoti Cakra, Geography (Bhiigola).

(c) Dynasty—Sage (Rsi), Pitr, Solar, Lunar and five dynasty.

(d) Manvantara—Era, Divine era, Nitya Kalpa, Sapta Kalpa and Trinisat Kalpa.

(c) Genealogy— Sage (Rsi), Deity (Deva), Solar etc. genealogy and Demon
gencalogy.

(a) Creation (Sarga)— Origin of world and numerous matters found therein is
called Sarga or Creation. This is thc foremost and major characteristic. This learning
of creation (Srsti Vidya) has its own distinction, freedom and personality. It has
also an impression of the element of Vedic creation—

Avyakrtagunaksanbhat Mahatastrivrto'ham.
Bhitamdatrendriyarthanam Sambhavah Sarga ucyate.

Mahat clement originates when the properties engrossed with basc nature
(Prakrti) are aggrieved. The element known as Mahat gives birth to three kinds ego
known as Rajas, Tamas and Sattva. Five kinds organs of intellect (Paficatanmatra)
and Paficabhita (physical body consisting of five clements) are originated from the
three type egos. This serial of origin is called Sarga.

(b) Anti-creation (Prati Sarga)—A thing contrary to creation (Sarga) is anti-
creation or dissolution (Prati Sarga). The word Prati Sancak has been used in place of
Pratisarga in Visnu Purana. However, Sarnstha is the word used in place of it in
Stimadbhagavata.

Naimittikah Prakrtiko Nitya Atyantiko layah.
Sanistheti Kavibhih proktah caturdha’sya Svabhavatah.

=== PAGE 9 ===

iW

Viz. very Brahmanda (Universe) meets to dissolution in usual course of time.
This dissolution is of four kinds—occasional (Naimittika, usual (Prakrtika), rotary or
routinic (Nitya) and contingent (Atyantika).

Very term Sarhstha has been given different names in other Puranas. In Brahma
Purana, it is internal dissolution (Antara Pralaya), Internal soul (Antardtma),
cessation (Upa Sarhhrti) Abhiita Sarhplava, Udapluta in Visnu Purana, Upasamhrti,
Ekarnavavastha, Lattvapratisarhyama etc. and Nirodha (injunction), sarnstha in Vayu
Purana.

(c) Dynasty—The progeny in the past, present and future of the kings born from
Brahmi is called dynasty—

Rajna Brahma Prasitanam Varhsastraikalikonvayah.
Very term as interpreted in Bhagavata covers mainly the genealogy of the kings

only. However, it is not appropriate to confine its scope up to royal dynasty. In other
Puranas, the dynasty of sages has also been included within its scope.

(d) Manvantara—It is only word that depicts the enumeration of the ancient
(Puranic) period. It has considerable significance for enumeration of the Puranic
period. There are fourteen Manvantaras and every such Manvantara has its one
particular Manu which has five more supporters or collaborators. These are—Manu
god, Manu’s son, Indra, Saptarsi, incarnation of god. The period of time having these
five characteristic is called Manvantara. As much as one thousand period of four ages
(Caturyugi) in expansion of fourteen Manvantara is ascertained. While explaining the
period of one Manvantara, Purina bears this popular sentence—Manvantararh
Caturyuganath Sadhikahyeka Saptatih. The time period of scventy onc four ages
(Caturyugi) in several Puranas has been enumerated in years.

(ec) Genealogy—A descriptive account of descendants born in the dynasties of
ings, sagcs, hermits and particular account of the principal royal persons (kings) is
called gencalogy. Puranas give particular account of genealogy pertaining to kings in
comparison with the genealogy of the sages— Varhsanucaritarh tesarm Vritarh
Varnsadharascayc. Srimadbhagavta considers religion (Dharma) within Manvantara
yy saying— Manvantaradnisaddharmah. Rajaniti Sastra (Political Science) also
considers five characteristics of Puranas having somewhat resemblance. Following
extracts from ancient scripture has been given place in Jayamangala commentary of
Kautilya Arthasastra—

Srsti Pravrtti Samhdra dharmamoksaprayojanam
Brahmabhih vividhaih proktam Puranam Pafcalaksanam.

Thus, it bears absolutely new interpretation of Pajficalaksanam (five
characteristics). Rcligion has been accepted herein as an inscparable characteristic or
symptom of Srsti. It means the religious topics also initio have been incorporated

=== PAGE 10 ===

12

with Purana. Hence, the application of religion with Purana is proved. This rclation
of religion with Purana is an event of innumerable past centuries. It had since then
incorporated other subjects also in its advanced form. However, it does not appear
true as Manvantrdni Saddharmah in Bhagavata Purana is purported to its
introduction in Manvantara.

Ten characteristics of Puranas

We have explained above the five charaeteristies ic. Sarga, Prati-sarga, Varhsa,
Manvantara, Varisanuearita of Puranas yet some scholars consider Puranas having
ten characteristics as Maha Puranas. In Srinmadbhagavata, description of ten
characteristics has been made at two places—

Sargasca Visargasca Vrttau raksantarani ca.
Vamso Vamsanucaritam Samstha heturapatrayah.
Atra Sargovisargasca Sthanam Posanamitayah.
Manvantaresanu katha nirodho muktiratrayah.

Irrespeetive of distinct names given to these ten eharaeteristies at two place in
above said Purana, there is seen resemblance. Similarly, ten characteristics of Maha
Purana have been aeeepted in Brahmavaivarta Purana.

Puranie Geography—Same style for deseribing geography and astronomy has
been followed in Puranas. The islands (Dvipas) namely, Jambi, Saka, Kuga, Kauiici,
Gomeya and Puskara have been deseribed mysteriously in Ktirma Purana.

In very imagination of topography, one or other seas filled with juice (Rasa)
around every island are cxisted. In the middle portion of the earth, there exists a
mountain known as Lokaloka. The sun ariscs on that mountain. Magnifieence of
Meru mountain ean be seen duly mentioned in almost all Puranas. According to
Puranie deseription, every island has been surrounded by seas one each. Someone is
the sea of ghee, some that of milk and thus, there are seas of several matters. Alkine
seas are adjacent to Jambidvipa. Having oecupied by the progeny of Bharata, the
considerable part of very island, it is called Bharata Varsa. Kirata (tribals) were the
residents of the region castward to Jambiidvipa. In its central part and the west-side,
there were Brahmana, Ksatriya and Sidra. The names of the rivers rising from
Himalaya and seven mountains do not match with the names as described in
Mahabharata. The dynasty of Yavana, Saka and Pallavas finds its place in Puranas.
These dynasties were in India during Ist and IInd century B.C. An aecount of Hiinas
can be scen in Puranas. Those pcople ruined the Gupta dynasty in sixth century B.C.
It has been mentioned that these islands, mountains and seas were extended up to
several lakh and crore yojana (four kosa make a yojana). The basis of yojana as given
in Puranas appear some strange of quantity. In case modern yojana (four kosa) is
accepted, the periphery of earth shall work out very short of length. As per Puranas,

=== PAGE 11 ===

13

Bharatavarsa is loeated at the down land of mountain Sumeru but so-ealled Sumeru
has no traces now-a-days. The eomposer of Puranas have given factual detail on
terrestrial existence. The modern scientists however are unable to discover the same.
the Puranic topography having seven islands has its own importance. The three
islands out of them have been so far eorreetly deseribed.

Bhuvanakoéga in Puranas is an important topic. Detailed aeeount of all Bhuvanas
have been given in Bhuvana Koa. The entire earth has been aceepted in lotus form.
The location of mountain Meru is considered s the stem of that lotus formed earth.

Alongwith this description on topography, almost all Puranas envisage the
ersons lucky for having their birth in Bharatavarsa. It is the land for performance of
acts (Karma Bhimi). Sattva property prevails here on the two others. The man born
here ean attain heavenly abode by virtue of his performance of great deeds. Even in
this Kali era, Indians ean attain absolution merely if they reeite the saered names of
God. Bharatavarsa is the supreme and seven among all land forms and regions of the
world.

The greatest peculiarity of Puranas is that of representation easiest way of the
theories tough to understand in their basie form. This excellent way of expression
conveys exceptional events to the people by knitting the same in episodes/stories and
they hear them with keen interest and curiosity. Thus, the inherent theory is duly
digested and entertained by the common people with devotion and reverenee both.
The man thus, performs common and uneommon both kinds of aets in order to
preserve the religion and the rules thereby enjoys an ideal life. The eustom of
listening Puranie stories through a reader (Katha Vaeaka) at a particular venue is still
prevailing and as we observe, this tradition is rapidly getting its wide expansion. It
depiets the unpreeedented faith of the people on Puranas and the subject-matter
vested with them. Every Purana appreciates and propitiates its prineipal deity varied
ways. In order to magnify that deity’s glory, several episodes in apropos have been
inter-twined and an easiest representation is made. The knowledge acts (Karman),
homage, yoga, austerity, holy-places, topography and astronomy etc. fairly get
expression in orderly manner in the subject-matter of episodes introdueed in each
and every Purana.

Of the above list of eighteen Mahapuranas the Garuda, Agni and Narada are
eneyclopaedias of literature containing the abstracts of all the great works in Arts and
Scienec in Sanskrit literature. In addition to that, they also deal with medicines,
grammar, dramaturgy, music and astrology. The Padma, Skanda and Bhavisya
Purapas mainly deseribe the holy places and vratas (vows). The Brahmdnda and the
Vayu Puranas are mainly historieal in outlook. The Liviga, Vamana and Markandeya
are seetarian in nature. The Varadha, Karma and Matsya are spoken in part by Varaha
(boar), Kirma (tortoise) and the Matsya or the fish inearnations respectively. The

=== PAGE 12 ===

14

Brahma, Bhagavata and Brahmavaivarta deal with Krsna legends.

Besides the Purana, there are another set of the Puranas known as upa-Puranas,
whieh are more seetarian in nature. They are comparatively later in date having as
well some historical baekground. The upa-Puranas are listed below :

1. Sanatkumiara, 2. Narasiriha, 3. Nanda, 4. Sivadharma, 5. Durvasa, 6. Naradiya,
7. Kapila, 8. Vamana, 9. Usanas, 10. Manava, 11. Varuna, 12. Kali, 13. Mahesvara,
14, Samba, 15. Saura, 16. Parasara, 17. Marica, 18. Bhargava.

Narasimha Purana

This Purana occupies an important plaee among the above listed upa-Puranas.
Like other Puranas, Narasirhha Purana is also eonsidercd to be complied by Vyasa.
On the eontrary, every Purdna dwells at length on one or more particular subjects and
in some, these five primary topics oeeupy a very subordinate position. Narasirhha
Purana also depiets these five topies, viz., (1) primary ereation or eosmogony, (2)
secondary ercation, (3) genealogy of gods and patriarchs, (4) reigns of the Manus, (5)
history of the solar and lunar dynasties. It contains various episodes of the
inearnation of Lord Visnu, especially Rama's inearnation. There are sixty five
chapters, which deseribe all topics related with Purana. It deseribes the story of Rishi
Markandeya's vietory over death including 'Yamagita'. The form of devotion,
definition of a true devotee and the eharaeter of devotees like Dhruva has been
deseribed in this Purana. Despite of it being small, it is pregnant with meaning.

eK

=== PAGE 13 ===

CONTENTS

CHAPTER |

An assembly of hermits (Rsis) at Prayaga,
Curiosity raised by Bharad before Sita,
Description of the order of creation 1
CHAPTER 2

Description of the creation of world 7
CHAPTER 3

Creation of the world by Brahma and
representation of nine types creations 9
Chapter 4
Anusarga
CHAPTER 5
Description of Rudra and othcr Sargas, the
expansion of the children of the daughters of

£2

Daksa Prajapati. 13
CHAPTER 6

An event of the birth of Agastya and Vasistha as
the son of Mitravaruna 18

CHAPTER 7 ’

Penance made by Markandeya for attaining the
grace of Lord Sri Hari, recital of Mrtyufijaya
strotra and conquest of death 22
CHAPTER 8

Yama prevents death and his Dias to visit the

devotees of Lord Visnu, departure of the hellish

organism to the abode of Lord Visnu. 28
CHAPTER 9
Recitation of Yamastaka 32

CHAPTER 10
Marriage of Markandeya, Birth of Vedasira,

Performance of penance under Aksayavata and
recital of psalm by Markandeya, Lord give
blessings and boon to him. 34
CHAPTER 11

The sage Markandeya recites hymns to the Lord
Visnu. 39
CHAPTER 12

A dialogue between Yama and Yami 44

CHAPTER 13

Power of chastity and conversation with a
Brahmacari 48
CHAPTER 14

The importance of pilgrimages and four orders

(asramas) of life. 53
CHAPTER 5
An elucidation of the world tree and the

knowlcdge competent to demolish the same. 55
CHAPTER 16
Description of attainment of emancipation by

virtue of concentration on god Visnu s7
CHAPTER 17
The eight letter hymn and its magnificence 60

CHAPTER 18

The story of birth of Manu, Yama and Yami from
the womb of Samijfia and birth of Manu, Sani and
Tapati from the womb of Chaya, and birth of
ASvinikumiaras. 63
CHAPTER 19

A prayer comprising one hundred eight names of

sun god by Visvakarma 66
CHAPTER 20
Origin of Marutas 69
CHAPTER 2f
Description of Siryavarhsa 70
CHAPTER 22
Description of Candravarhsa 71
CHAPTER 23
Descriptions of fourteen Manvantaras 73

CHAPTER 24
Devotion of Iksvaku, his departure for penance76
CHAPTER 25

Penance performed by Iksvaku and attainment of
Visnu's icon by Brahma 80

=== PAGE 14 ===

16

CHAPTER 26
Description of the generation of Iksvaku
CHAPTER 27

86

About Candra Varhsa (The Lunar Clan) 88
CHAPTER 28
Account of deeds performed by Santanu 90

CHAPTER 29

A description of the generation of Santanu 94
CHAPTER 30
A description of Dvipas and the heaven 96

CHAPTER 31

A succinct description of Dhruva's account of
deeds, the stars, plants and the nether region 101
CHAPTER 32

Description on Sahasranika, Sri Nrsiraha worship
and magnificence of god 3
CHAPTER 33

Great consequences for keeping the temple tidy -
The story of king Jayadhvaja 1s
CHAPTER 34

Magnificence of the worship of god Visnu 121
CHAPTER 35

Method of performing a lakh and crore Homas

and their rewards: 126
CHAPTER 36
Story pertaining to the incarnation of god 128

CHAPTER 37

Incarnation of Matsya and killing of Madhu and
Kaitabha demons 129
CHAPTER 38

Incarnation of god Visnu as tortoise, churning of
ocean and Visnu’s form of enchanting damsel
(Mohini) 132
CHAPTER 39

Incarnation of Varaha, Killing of Hiranyaksa 136
CHAPTER 40

Incarnation of Nrsithha, accomplishments of
Hiranyaksipu and Praise of gods 137

CHAPTER 41

Birth of Prahlada, his devotion for Visnu and
anxiety of Hiranyakasipu 142
CHAPTER 42

An episode of atroeities exercised — by
Hiranyakasipu on Prahlada 148
CHAPTER 43

Preaching by Prahlada to Daityas, drown into sca
by Hiranyakasipu and apparent perception of god

there 1S}
CHAPTER 44

Incarnation of Nysithha and Hiranyakasipu
approaching death 160
CHAPTER 45

An episode on an incarnation of Vimana 163
CHAPTER 46

Incarnation of Parasurama 167
CHAPTER 47 171

Incarnation of Rama, His birth and marriage
CHAPTER 48 182
Rama's cxile, death of king Dasaratha and
meeting of Rama with Bharata in the forest
CHAPTER 49

Jayanta| punished by Rama,
Sarabhanga, Sutiksna and Agastya, humiliation of
Sirpanakha, kidnapping of Sita, Jataya killing
and meeting with SabarT

CHAPTER 50
Friendship with

194

meeting with

204
Sugriva, Bali,
Sugriva's leniency and his humiliation, search for
Sita and Hanuman's steps in Lanka
CHAPTER S1
Wanuman's entrance into Lanka, meeting with
Sita and message to Rama after Lanka burnt into

murder of

ashes 215
CHAPTER 52
Rama's visit at sea-shore, shelter of Vibhis

ana, proposal to make him the king of Lanka,
Ravana's defeat, slaughter of Kumbhakarna,
Mcghnada and other monsters, Coronation of

=== PAGE 15 ===

7

Rama cte. 219
CHAPTER 53

An account of deeds performed by Sti Krsna and
Balarama 228

CHAPTER 54
Account of decds performed by Kalki and the

Kalki religion 235
CHAPTER 55

Regain of the lost eye to Sukracarya by the grace
of gods. 240
CHAPTER 56

Installation of icon of Visnu 242
CHAPTER 57

Charaeteristics of devotees, Description of Harita~
smrti, Duties of the Brahmanas 246
CHAPTER 58

Duties of Ksatriya and others. Descriptions of

first and sceond mode of life. 249
CHAPTER 59
About the duties of Vanaprastha. 258
CHAPTER 60
An account of ascetic 259

CHAPTER 61 ~

The essence of Yoga 261
CHAPTER 62

Vedic hymns on Visnu and their place 263
CHAPTER 63

Indra's rescue {tom the femaic sex 265

CHAPTER 64

The supremacy of the devotce and an episode on

Pundarika 277
CHAPTER 65

The holy places relating to the god and the names:
of god relating to those Pilgrim places 286

CHAPTER 66
Magnificenee of other pilgrim places Sahyadri

and Amalaka Grama 289
CHAPTER 67
Ménasa-tirtha Fast 293
CHAPTER 68

Fruits of reading Nrsithha Purana and the fruits of
listening 295

=== PAGE 16 ===

NARASIMHA PURANAM

om namo bhagavte Vasudevaya

CHAPTER 1

An assembly of hermits (Rsis) at Prayaga,
Curiosity raised by Bharadvaja before Sita,
Description of the order of creation

anrant areaee at da TTT
Rat areal Ga adh eS 211
Having saluted Narayana and Nara, the
foremost of male beings as well as Sarasvati
(the goddess of learning) let us narrate
Purana ete..'
Tagen Tea
aurea freafag was HH
Wey at afeees aEeIReTAT:
fawaaforitde: dargandareor: 113 11
O divine Simha (lion)! your eyes are
glowing like the fire erupted inside the hair
as yellow as the gold itself. A slight blow of
your nails is harder than a thunderbolt. I
salute you the supreme Igvara (god) of great
eminenee. May the plough-like nails of god
Nrsirhha turn into red owing to the mud of
the heart-field of the Hiranyakasipu demon,
provide protection to you all.

feragifen: wa Great aque:
frereran wera Aftercare: 1611
Asgenvatra: Gerrorantet:|
weaigen 3 ao a fetter 4
ania & a quearuaanfar:|
sttyetren 3 a qedtarrantar: 1611
arrada & a a a ventana:

1, This is a benedictory verse which occurs at the
commencement of every Parvan of Mahabharata.

Wat a aga: aire WAaISsAeT: N11
Area wart g ENG aie wart:

Once the hermits (Rsis) living in the
valleys of the Himalaya, well learned in the
Vedas and knowers of three Kalas (viz.
present, past and future) like munis from
Naimisdranya, Arbudaranya and Pus
karanya, Dharmiaranya,
Dandakaranya, Srigaila and munis living in
Kuruksetra as also hermits living at Kumara
mountain and Pampasara including many
more other holy hermits visited at the
pilgrim of Prayaga for taking with their
pupils in the pious month of Magha.

aa Bre sarees Gent at afer ct
Fett ¥ Wed ea Heat a fogerory

Feat Wa Was YoadtiPranfarqe 11

a after fafiota a quia:

ameng fafaay genfey aaTHTTI R01
WERT aay raat AGT: |

POAT: HM: Ta TTA GAT BVI
Sag AAA WAT wnfeaTAATT
ART HRT Ua aA eM
carafgrea: quot citredoreistea 1

ary Wor aaa Be ApeNfy ATA k3 1
safeet aerated ERAT TI

arated Ganih wee erretory
ures wea Pera ge

They (all hermits as described above)
took bath and performed Japa etc., in a
systematic and prescribed manner and

bowed before the god Venimadhava. Ticy
subsequently did tarpana rite for their

from

=== PAGE 17 ===

2

NARASIMHA PURANAM

ancestors and met the learned hermit
Bharadvaja, resident of that sacred pilgrim-
place. Those hermits offered honour and
reverence to Bharadvaja with due manner
and also received the same warm greeting
from him. Subsequently, they seated on V;
i (A special seat made of kuSa grass) etc.,
marvellous asanas (seats). Having properly
seated, they started conversation on the
episodes related to Lord Krsna with each
other. Lomaharsana Sita, the diseiple of the
hermit Vyasa arrived there in the meantime
when the holy hermits were busy with
discussing the life episode of lord Srikrsna.
Lomaharsana Sita was brilliant, very wise
and well learned on the Purana. Sita saluted
all the hermits seated there and received the
same honour from them also. He was then
scated on the appropriate dsana as allowed
by Bharadvaja. When he was thus seated on
the sana provided, he relaxed himself.

WEN Sart
VireReT URIs aTeTEreaT y fee
TAH: FM YO Oe Uatents BH
aned antares waa: throndfearq
sigfrearad Ue sitgarn st fer: eg it
aeat uftgearta wert wer
safer: Ya WiTaUt VTA 911
ae Uaeagerst Sa at uftareaa
afer at cama sree eC 11
fe wai a a qaifae: da gah
eet ¢ Hera AAT Gls TATAAN eH
aa a geufe: meaar ad WaT
wet grea wort fa at SY GATT ol
at at fagre teas ar aise weit gin
aera Sat TeFereT TATA: 112 BU
aenttr anht quanta & a quer: feretrerat:1
AIPA HT: UT: YU FON UST: YT VM

tarda at gfe: wit qi
wen faenenrétat after set aq 2 311

wea: & a Ta: & u fate wt mar:

Uda Ae HMA AMTAATIR il

Bharadvaja said- Sita, all of us had
heard the Varaha Samhita from you in the
great offering made by Saunaka sometime
in the past. All of us now are curious for
listening to the Samhita of Nrsirhha Purana.
All these hermits have gathered here for
listening to the same. We therefore, ask
you, O great hermit Sita, in the sacred
morning and in the presence of all these
hermits of great souls (Mahatman). The
question proposed is ‘from where has the
dynamie and inert world been originated?
Who protcets it? Or what does it merge
with? O you possessed of a noble soul
(Mahabhaga), what is the proof for this land
and O enthronement of great knowledge, let
us know the deeds satiating lord Nrsiriha.
Further, let know the procedure involved in
the creation of the world and how does it
last (collapse)? How are the era (Yuga)
worked out? What is the form and feature of
the four eras? What are the distinguished
dividing points between each era? State the
living standard including the . modus
operandi of the people in Kaliyuga? And
how did the gods worship Lord Nrsirhha?
Please state the names of the holy places
whieh existed on this earth? Let us further
know the names of the holy mountains?
Tell us the names of the holiest rives so
viable as to shatter the mala-fides of people
(viz. viable to elean their bodies and soul
both). How had the gods originated? How
do beeome the ereation of Manu,
Manvantara and Vidyadhara etc.? Tell the
names of kings who had given offering

=== PAGE 18 ===

CHAPTER 1

(yajfia) and tell the names of kings who had
obtaincd achievements (Siddhi) out of
them. O Mahabhaga (the generous-hearted
one), please tell all this in detail and in
orderly manner.

WW sara

SAR aTERATATA Geert aera: |

a wore weeanfit yarot area GH

uregrd weaged fayagcenatht

facet fayemfad Sedareeery

wart viftafemd ysastfernet

aera ferragmet weaisé TAA GI

Fat aaa Tet carers faa

aed wereTaeefe argeaenfTATT 1911

ghuittt werrpreaan a: uftetita:|

faonreres fart aay Serf wera cil

aenfa aafaeer warerea ASEAT

vewenfa wergud aE yop AH

quay Ya: wa afeeareast & fer:

Wut aes weet Ba TATU ol

Sita said- O great ascetics, I start with

telling the story of Nrsirhha Purana to you
all with bowed head before the revered
teacher (guru) Vyasa by whose grace I
could obtain the knowledge of the Puranas.
I salute at all moments of each day,
eminent, brilliant lord Vyasa the son of
great saint Parasara, learned, excellent
preacher, supreme man (Parama Purusa) as
Lord Visnu who is the sole cause for all
gods and worth knowing the Vedas with
their six segments (angas), I will only able
to describe this very story of god Vasudeva
with the grace of that brilliant god Vyasa. I,
therefore, salute him. Dear hermits, who
except blessed with the grace of lord Visnu

3

can provide with replies to the questions so
formed with keen deliberation. However, I
start the most holy story of Nrsirhha Purana
in reply to the questions raised by you I
pray you all to listen to the same patiently.
The hermits with their pupils present here
are also requested to listen attentively to
this story. I make you all to listen the story
of Nrsirnha Purana in detail and in its
original form.

anraoniad wed BART ATA

Bra edd aed aaferereghahr: 113 a

wa cat art at wife erafatim

ade a: gale aan seit TERING V1

quoi f aah are ara: BAT:

vetted ca WA: gear Fase A GA TNS BH

wiv virrtgea dyn waerafir a

ayngattd da qeot wareerTAN3 x11

snfgentisgeriga ag weeratir a

aengafte Sa qeRTA_ ATTA: 113 4 11

This whole movable and the incrt world

as it is observed, had been originated from
Lord Narayana and he holy maintains and
nourishes them through his varied forms
(incarnation) like Nrsirhha etc. Ultimately,
this whole universe is merged with that god
Visnu, in the form of Jyoti (flame). I tell
you the procedure by which god did the
creation (srsti). Please, listen to the same.
The story of creation has been described in
all Puranas while explaining — the
characteristics of them. Hermits, listen to
very first this hymn and only then pay your
attention to the rest of the matter. This
hymn is read as - "A Purana comprises the
five characteristics as Sarga, Pratisarga,
Varhsa, Manvantara and Vamsanucarita." I

=== PAGE 19 ===

4

NARASIMHA PURANAM

describe now the Adisarga, Anusarga,
Vamsa, Manvantara and Varhsanucarita in
an orderly manner hereunder.

sifaant wetaraq aafaenta & fist:
weraea tari Tat afta an 3g
Waa Weel a WATT AAA: |
WTS: werarged aretfenfsere faster 3 11
Tees Vifroradanory

fret Prose yori Pater Frafriorga ci
arraaT Tas Saree WEA
ag AAAS 8
afernin aerated Waa Wed
wteret J WMA AAT | AGHA: |
orci faart a AAS TTTRAY oN

O Brahmins, Adisarga is the greatest.
Hence, I choose it first for the description.
The conduct (activities) of gods and the
kings as also the mystery relating to the
essence (element) of the supreme or Eternal
soul (Paramatman) can be made easy to
understand when the description of the
creation is started from Adisarga. Brahmins,
please note that prior to creation and after
the great devastation (mahdpralaya) there
was nothing in existence except the only
Parabrahman (celestial knowledge). The
only existing element of Brahma at that
time is the cause for all and ever
illuminating. This very element is immortal,
free from all attachments (Nirafijana), quiet,
beyond the determination of quality
(Nirguna)! and always innocent. The
persons desirous of emancipation want
shelter under the supreme Isvara, full of
(ocean of) the true pleasure. Being in the

1. Saguna or immanent and Nirguna or transcendent.

form of knowledge, it is omniscient,
everlasting, unborn and indeclinable. That
omniscient Parabrahman became aware of
the embedded world within it and started
creating the same when the appropriate
time had come.

TATA TAKA HET!
wheat usage arava fret Her gi
aariteatraga yoferda ara:
fafeetsemegRy WEMTaTESTAAIy 211
WaT MAPA WE AeA A AMT: |

yarieg fagator: wreqara At: 3
TAT PTATATETCAT YT MeACATUTA
ween worst Yariv AAU st
orang fagatr: wetardt wast gt
AAAI ATRL VATU AA: YG
arrenrgt wearart Vretaet Taq

wat arghigaton wrart wast Bsa
wifrecent arireagayorgeart

astararg & arg meat TATU Sot
witfaventtt faqparat Taat wat zl
aerate adismrifa taarafor mt ys
Tanratin arsifa word waTIUIE!
fagatonts anvifa wera Wats et
weIsara wal Bet Tdyerqurferan

oral SAA TATTAT TENTUTT AAT:1NG oH
afaraferg aan oF ware Ba
aemraroafargrentr fergrar: SeereTISTAT: N14 BH
TACT S AAT ATTA

aaa TATAT ATEN WAT TANG VI

The Pradhana (Milaprakrti- Universal
Nature) was originated from that Brahman.
Mahattattva (the supreme element) emerged
from that principal. This Mahattattva

=== PAGE 20 ===

CHAPTER 1

5

consists of the three gunas'- Sattvika, Rajas
and Tamas. From the Mahatattva the
Vaikarika (Sattvika), Tejas (rajas) and
Bhita (creature) were originated. These
three had originated the ego. As the
Mahatattva is covered by the Pradhana, the
ego similarly is covered by the Mahatattva
(intellectual principle). Subsequently, the
Tamas ego consisting of the Bhotadi had
created Sabdatanmitras (subtile particles of
sound) as a result of distortion arisen in it.
The ether consisting of the Sabda-guna had
then originated. That Bhitadi had then
covered within it the Sabda-guna ether so
generated. As a result of declination, the
ether then originated the Sparsa (touch)
tanméatra. It, in turn, originated the mighty
wind. The quality of the wind has been
accepted as touch, that it contains. The ether
of Sabda-guna then covered the wind
containing the quality of touch. The wind
thereafter created the Ripa (form) tanmatra
when it was distorted. This originated the
fire full of flames. The quality that the fire
contains, has been said as Ripa. The wind
of Sparsatanmatra had then covered the
splendour of Ripatanmatra. The splendour
(Teja) as a result of declination so obtained,
created the Rasatanmatra (subtle element of
tastc), This had created the water containing
the quality of taste (Rasa). The splendour
containing the quality of complexion then
covered the water containing the quality of
essence. The water by virtue of declination
created the Gandha-(smell) tanmatra. It

1. The harmonizing or organizing tendency is called
the Sartva-guna; the isolating tendency is called
the Raja-guna and the disorganizing tendency is
called the Tama-guna. These three universal
tendencies, energics or qualities regulate the entire
creation

gave birth to the earth and it consists of
more qualities than the qualities of all
Bhitas (elements) including ether etc. as it
contains a mixture of the qualities they
possess. The formidable Pinda is originated
from the physical element found in the form
of Gandha-tanmatra. The quality possessed
by the earth is of 'Gandha' (smell).
Tanmiatras existed in the ether etc. Bhitas
ie. the words (Sabda) etc. are their only
qualities. This is the reason, they are
deemed to be in the form of tanmatra
(rapa). As there is no line to distinguish the
tanméatra of ether and wind etc. these
tanmatras are called a Visesa (common).
However, the ether etc. Bhitas having
special recognition, have their particular
name and identity. It is worth noting that all
these had originated from  tanmatras.
Bharadvaja, thus, I have succinctly
explained the creation of the five bhitas and
tanmatras which have got their existence
from the Tamas aharkara (ego).
aerarifgaroargéat Sanftar ee
ere waver aif aa Fev 311
gait wears wee arent a
afl aaanfe dat a aalfor HeTITAATNY v1
sant a apt fran fren da we
wetenminend haga west 414 411
urge garret arercert wort
faanbrefredt a meget ant are eI
The scholars, having the element of
creation and the sole subject for study, have
explained that the sensory organs have been
originated form the Tejas Aharhkara and the
corresponding ten-fold celestials and the
eleventh mind had been originated from the
distorted ego. Thus, listen Bharadvaja, the

=== PAGE 21 ===

6

NARASIMHA PURANAM

purifier of the race, there are five sensory | geRaeuarera wate araferd:!

organs and five executive organs. I am now
describing all sense organs and their
respective actions. The ear, eye, tongue,
nose, and skin are five sensory organs and
these make us aware of the worldly subjects
like word, touch, etc. The anus, genitals,
hands, feet, and tongue are called the
executive organs. Their actions are
excretion, carnal pleasure (sensual), work
(Silpa), and to speech
respectively. These are thus five in number.
arangangiaita aferet yfaat am
wreatfetintitfte agarget: 14911
amratal: yoryarerret deft fart
AMATI ALATA FETT CH
Dear Brahmin, the ether, wind, touch,
light, water and earth are the five elements
(Bhitas) containing the sound, touch, form,
taste and smell respectively. The quality of
sound (Sabda) is with ether; the word and
touch are the two gunas with wind; the
word, touch and form are three gunas with
light, Similarly, the water las four and the
carth has five gunas. These five Bhitas thus
contain distinct and separate powers. These
cannot do creation until properly mixed
with cach other.

PRATT TATA
AMATI OTL: 11% Bt
Feurfaftsrarer weet ai

nected fagerarecusyreaha Fg 011
wantin fargg | aeIqaqeareary
YMASUS MIS FErgahMATG VI
wigd Teranea fat: VAT
Taree se faoyfgagat: myLG BH

movement

Nitee AYR TASTE: 116 311
Having the objective of creating a single

impact, the declinations from Mahatattva to
the five Bhitas took assistance from each
other being governed by the Purusa and
integrated altogether. Thus, they
combinedly originated the egg (anda) under
the influence and governance of the
principal element. That egg gradually grew
up and established on the water like a
bubble. O the wisest, it was established on
water after taking combined birth from all
Bhitas. That gigantic egg as created by
Nature (Prakrti) became the best premise
(base) for lord Visnu in the form of Brahma
(Hiranyagarbha). Lord Visnu, the mastcr of
the world enshrined himself on the same in
his inexpressive form, as Hiranyagarbha.
The Sumeru mountain was the ulba (the
membrane covering the womb) to that
great soul lord Hiranyagarbha at that time.
The other mountains the ovary
(Jarayuja) and the sea was the water of the
ovary.

angarragared wRnfrctnaye: |

afergsaarad PeaTATYTANG II

wg ta: wate aft: WI

Benet PART STE Waa g 4 11

we a Urey Taacalaracerm

arfeeremtor BARI PETTING & II

The mountains, islands, oceans, and the

stars-galaxy including all worlds (lokas),
the gods, demons and the creatures like man
etc. have taken birth from that primordial
egg. The supreme Ivara lord Visnu too
obtained the form of Brahma consisting
rajas guna and tended to create the universe.

were

=== PAGE 22 ===

CHAPTER 2

He only protects this universe in the form of
Nrsirhha etc. till the creation of Kalpa exists
and destroys the same on the expiry of a
Kalpa.
Bratt BUTT YARITA
sereret ofcagfirest
wafeat og Te wie
ra BR: MeN ATTN 911
fa starfeegant wtaet wetsera:ien
The lord Ananta himself created this
whole universe under governance as
Brahma, protects and nourishes it by
attaining incarnation as Rama etc. and
finally runs it through his Rudra form.
Thus, the first chapter on description of the

order of creation in Nrsirnha Purana
approaches the end.

=== PAGE 23 ===

CHAPTER 2
CHAPTER 2
Description of the creation of world.
WW sara

Fen yar weet aa: wera

aa & aati arent fate A201
STONY STAY, TaN eet TATAG: |
seer: stheat faa Frets agra: 112 11
waned aed a weefafiretaa3 1
arenaed fautya aris cara

a we fate of ofa
sent da yat ao a1
YATRA ATTN HH

Sita said~ Bharadvaja, listen to the
procedure by which lord Nrsirtha tends to
create the universe by turning himself into

7

Brahma form; I am now going to describe
the same. O scholar, lord Brahma, the
lokapitamaha (ancestor to the universe)
popular as Narayana is Sanatana Purusa.
However, it has been said in Icgend
(Upacara) that he was born. His age in his
own sustainability (Parimana) is told as of
one hundred years. This period of hundred
years is called ‘para’. Its half is known as
Parardha. O innocent hermit, the greatest
saint, the estimate of the sustaining age of
that Brahma and the other movable and
things like earth,
mountains and oceans etc, is made on the
basis of the age of lord Visnu which I had
described earlier. Now, I am going to tell
you about the method of calculation of the
time of the men. Please, listen to this
attentively,

fora a 8 afer ager Fete 3

arent Friary ander uftatffang

erathayrencn Far HeMeayRT AT

fomieherad ygiaigqa aATI011

wercartir areata ATT TAEATTS : |

a: weft ardgsat afarvirt ci

+ efirot uA ¢ fmm

srrferd ad crabatie attryie i

qo ara: faqui gy stereagarey

STTASNTS ATG AC: BIT: 11 Ro I

eeacineay Tareas

aga penfireagart Fate Figen

The cighteen Nimesas constitute a

"kastha’; thirty 'kastha’ make a ‘kala’ and
thirty ‘kala’ constitute a 'muhirta’. Thirty
muhirta constitute a day and night of the

men. The thirty day and nights constitute a
month. Every month has two fortnights

inert creatures and

=== PAGE 24 ===

8

NARASIMHA PURANAM

(Paksa). The period of six months is called
an Ayana. These are in two numbers i.e.
Daksinayana is the night and Uttarayana is
the day for the gods. The conjoint period of
two ayanas is called the human year. The
period of one month for men _ has been said
to be a single day and night for the Pitaras
(ancestors) and the one human year has
been called a day and night for Vasu etc.
gods. The period of twelve thousand years
of gods becomes Treté etc. Caturyuga.
Listen its division from me please (that I
tcll you).

aeatt att 3 da Fare wer

frome weentir greng: Fafa: gg

werHTt: grt: HEAT Yat aa feeitaa

Pein AeA Grea fF Teg

aaa a: act ait fest

gine: a g faga: peatenfadaa nei

aed Fat gees afervafa agg

seat aceedt ¥ gen feat fat ney

Thc commentators on Purana have told
the Icngth of the Krta etc. Yuga (era) as
four, three, two and one thousand divine
years respectively. Brahmin, the sandhya of
the same length of years prior to each era as
that of sandhyarhsa after the Yuga. The base
has been taken as hundred years. The period
falling between sandhya and sandhyarhga, is
to be considercd the popular era of Satya-
yuga and Trcté etc. The combination of
Satya-yuga, Treta, Dvapara, and Kaliyuga is
called Catur-yuga. O Brahmin, as much as
one thousand Catur-yuga constitute a single
day of Brahma.

want fad ger wa agde
vata uftaot a aut arerget WN EN
wena wentsa apealfy a
waar & gear digat a wade

agar ten a arfrer sera:
werwt Hat: corer: vranreraafa fest geil
ardl weraeantin fern eA BT:
farsarerrerantt aera Fu ke
feria wy: wen: wera fem
aaaficarn Frat weg? 01
fanfaya weenie are afer: fern
TAT HST UGS TASS gH

O Brahmin, a day of Brahma consists of
fourteen Manus. Now listen to the time
length of them. According to the previous
Kalpa, the Saptarsi, Indra, Manu and sons
efo Manu are crcated simultaneously and
these are destroyed at the same time and
simultaneously too. Brahmin, a Manvantara
is the period of seventy one Catur-yuga and
some more. This very period is the period
for Manu and Indra etc. gods. Thus, this
Manvantara is the period of eight lakh fifty
two thousand years according to the
calculation of the divine years. O great
hermit, this period according to the
calculation of the human years is not in
excess of thirty crore sixty seven lakh
twenty thousand years.

ageeyON ae sare Tee: BTA

fagerardt Gara Gear career FAG {NeW

Weal WarEr ary fagrary Year

miPaenenigda ayetiga Tee BH

Vem: wretige friar

ayand aa geet Fasaeartenifoe vi

Ward Acierqaded FWY:

Me areaay Ta URAETTN GI

The single day of Brahma is fourteen

times more than this period (aforesaid).
Lord Brahma has in the initial period of the
creation of this universe, made gandharva,

=== PAGE 25 ===

CHAPTER 3

demon, demigod, devil, guhyaka Rsi,
Vidyadharas, human beings, beasts, birds,
immovable (trees, mountains etc.), pipilika
(ants) and snakcs in his merriment while
creating the gods and the pitaras. He then
classified them in four varnas and employed
them for performing the yajfia (the great
deeds). Subsequently, that everlasting
almighty destroys the three worlds (lokas)
on expiry of the time and enjoys sleeping on
the cot of Sesanaga in the night as large as
the day itself i.e. equal to the day.
TaRserae set sata:
aferareraanttsyret a Tee GI
Teatenctye Gita: uftafead:1
wa fan: wae Mer ares age: |
sag agar tai aart wefifrn 2H
On expiry of that night, the popular
Mahakalpa entered. It was called Brahma
and the god incarnated as the fish
(Matsyavatara) and the churning the ocean
was performed during that Mahakalpa? The
third kalpa known as Varaha Kalpa equal to
the length of this Bralma-kalpa had
entered. Lord Visnu appearcd in the form
of Varaha (boar) happily in order to absolve
the earth from the clutches of demons in
that very kalpa. The then hermits used to
pray to him.
TEA TATA:
WAGES YRS THAT TAT: |
Afafrearet wert wat
dara Ft aftafezazeu
ofa staefaegaat witearat fates: zit
Whose art is absolutely impossible to

understand for all terrestrial and aerobic
creatures, the lord of such eminence sleep

9

peacefully after destroying the creation as a
whole on expiry of the period prescribed for
the creation once made by himself or by his
own hands.

Thus, the second chapter on Sarga-racana in
Nrsithha Purana approaches the end.

=== PAGE 26 ===

NARASIMHA PURANAM.

CHAPTER 4
About Anusarga
WENT Tarey
FAM WSO TASHA: |
ae oT age Yar Uae AseATII a

Bharadvaja said— Sita, how did the nine
kinds of creation of inexpressively born

Brahma avail expansion? Please, tell this
very thing to us now.
WW sara

yard gen Yer Wika Ws TI

witfernges wer stigAt: Yore: HYTNRI

YRS WEA: TAT YTS a

anal ayayda afersyea werafa:11311

waa Agus Fa at frat:

squat aiharen yada ae YASH

Sita said- The names of the first cieated

Marici, etc., Rsis by lord Brahma are -
Marici, Atri, Angira, Pulaha, Kratu,
Pulastya, Praceta, Bhrgu, Narada and the
wisest of all Vasistha is, the tenth and the
last hermit. Sanaka etc. Hermits were
tended to the emancipation (Nivrtidharma)
and all hermits like Marici etc., except
Narada were engaged in the task of growth
for the creation (Pravrtidharma).

aiset wanafreart wera:

wee STAG WTA NTATTANY

arpa eared weraterafeqer: |

We Caer SITY STAT: Tae: 116 1

ugfdent amit eerafir wafer a

ghar arta aqetiquentt give

agate walt witearen wade:

PAST HEAT AION TATE: 21

The other Prajapati Daksa, born from the

right part of the body of lord Brahma, had
the daughters and the movable as also the
immovable world is generated from the
clan or the sons of these daughters. The
gods, demons, gandharva, uraga (snake) and
birds, all were religious and born from the
daughters of Daksa. The dynamic and inert
four kinds of creatures were born in

=== PAGE 27 ===

CHAPTER 5

Anusarga and obtained an appropriate
growth. O you possessed of a noble soul,
from Marici to Vasistha as aforesaid are the
offspring of Lord Brahma who were
generated by virtue of his thinking. All
these are the creators of Anusarga.

at gy aft fava wit
wart wd gat TET

Fe WrareagTreret
freed Gag
fa sitaefaeqant aqaiserasisi

By Sarga is meant the generation of the
five Mahabhita, wisdom and the senses as
aforesaid as created by the great soul Lord
Narayana just at the beginning of the
creation. Subsequently, he himself appears
in the form of Brahma with four heads and
hermits like Marici etc. during the phase of
Anusarga and thus, created the universe.

Thus, the fourth chapter on creator of Anusarga
in Sri Nrsimha Purana approaches the end.

=== PAGE 28 ===

CHAPTER 5

13

CHAPTER 5

Description of Rudra and other Sargas, the
expansion of the children of the daughters of
Daksa Prajapati.

FEM TaTT

wat 9 9 gfe freien aera

WA: Wa Uther: Taye Bt FAI

frarrenrgaed afarer at aq)

Teron WTA: YGTT ETAT

Bharadvaja said- O the wisest, please

describe now in detail the Rudra-sarga and
also tell how the hermits Marici etc., had

participated in the mission of creation.
Learned Sita, when Vasistha was created

by virtue of thinking of lord Brahma how is
it that he became the son of Mitravaruna.
QW sara

wate waeanfit amiga aA

wirert wat g ferersad: WINE

HUA Yat VATTAEAT: |

wiguethy mines gartt aterettfer: is

aedariatay: wees frgrtitary

Tan area wal fegrper wey W114

a gear tare ate wegare warafat:

fae SAH TERT GI

Sita said— O the crown of saints, I will

now provide with description on the
creation made by Rudra and the sargas
embedded with the same according to the
question raised by you. I will
concomitantly, tell in detail the Pratisarga
(Anusarga) as laid down by the hermits.
Please, listen to the same attentively. Just at
the beginning of the creation, lord Brahma
was plunged into deep thought of obtaining
a son as mighty as he himself. Very soon a
baby appeared in his lap whose form was
reddish-blue. Half of his body was of a
woman and the rest was of a man. He was
stubborn and gigantic and all directions and
angular directions were illuminating by the
light coming out from his body. Having
seen him so glowing with light, Prajapati
said~ "O wise child, go on my words and
divide your body into two parts."

sega garor farr eR WATTATH
eid eat a yaaa 11
fate your ao agen dae TA:
fat arent sent yoy F feETTIC
artarefedea: aurett % Wa aI

=== PAGE 29 ===

14

NARASIMHA PURANAM

TPT AGRI ATAPI 8 1
garafiga weyga auet tare
Wee a caterer BAAS TAT: 1120 11
wird da wen eat fate eye
sia aged usit da aaferamigen

O Brihmana, complying with the
suggestions of Brahma, the gallant Rudra
separated his masculine and feminine parts
of the body so combined at that time. He
then divided the masculine part into eleven
forms which were known as - Ajaikap4da,
Ahirbudhnya, Kapali, Hara, Bahuripa,
Tryambaka, Aparajita, Vrsakapi, Sambhu,
Kapardi and Raivata,. These eleven are
Rudra and govern the three worlds (lokas).
The feminine part of the body was also
divided into eleven parts, the same way as
that of the masculine part. Goddess Uma is
the only wife in her varied forms to all
these Rudras.

Wa: eT Tet age: | Tet TT

Rel AW QSA Sal VARA WATTATTN AN
atracr fairs sents fafeenfr a
fagrery terete Farerer ATT 3
AMEE Yay WAT:
feararrgunnt fagrareadita age
arreant ayferd Gear tata a

Ue went eater we & afar: WAG

O the crown of Brahmins, during the
long-long past the gallant lord Rudra came
out from the water of completion of his
steadfast penance. He then created a
number of creatures by virtue of his power
so obtained from the penance. He generated
the lion, camel, the devils whose mouth was
akin to that of a crocodile, the monsters and
vetala ctc., including many other thousands
of creatures. He thus generated thirty crore

fifty lakh Vindyakas who were stubborn
and of aggressive nature. He then generated
Skanda for the other wide mission. Thus, I
have described lord Rudra and the sarga
related to him.

agent wteare: aernfit fata th

Rane Ga WAT: YT: KATATE 1

wera Y Men: Wal a area Gta:

Wel AAAYA A ASMA TAT VOU

wad afar a py da merafruige it

He WeMOT Sea UT Farge TAT:

aftaya fiewvda gaya 9 ARahiee Ht

feareh vent gerarrearerih

weet at Ya F Hat WAM eho!

1am now going to describe the Anusarga

pertaining to the Marici etc., hermits, please
listen to it attentively. Svayambhu Brahma
had created the subject encompassing from
the gods to the immovable. However, the
subject so generated could not avail of
expansion and it made lord Brahm to think
of creating a son analogous to him and by
virtue of his mental power, he generated
Marici, Atri, Angira, Pulastya, Pulaha,
Kratu, Praceta, Vasistha and the wisest
Bhrgu. These people have been ascertained
as nine Brahmas in the Purana. Brahmin the
fire and the Pitrns (ancestors) too are the
sons created by the mind of lord Brahma.
Both of them had been created by
Svayambhu Brahma in the beginning phase
of creation. He then generated a daughter
Satara and entrusted her to Manu.

wetter Yeareat yeaa STATA
frosted wate da BTN gH
et waft cara aq: Tarrya: Gary

=== PAGE 30 ===

CHAPTER 5

15

Sarai et ar eave fetes AAT gH

wast arererret Wy arnt Asem

oat meniirgie: yfeter aan fram si

afgcinn ay: wife: fats: atfteraterth

sre warmre gat serait: yy

ABM F WAT Aa: HATE: YA:

eee yautareehictet farafia:2 41

The goddess Sataripa had given birth to
two sons namely, Priyavrata and
Uttanapada as‘a result of coition with the
Svayambhuva Manu. She then gave birth to
a daughter whose name was Prasiti.
Svayambhuva Manu marricd his daughter
to Daksa. Daksa gave birth to the twenty
four daughters as a result of his coition with
Prasiti. The names of those daughters were-
Sraddha, Laksmi, Dhrti, Tusti, Pusti,
Medha, Kriya, Buddhi, Lajja, Vapu, Santi,
Siddhi and the name of thirteenth daughter
was Kirti. Lord Dharma made all these his
wives for reproduction of children. The
sons Kama ete. were born from Sraddha
ctc., wives of Dharma. The race of Dharma
attained enough growth with the sons and
the grand sons.

area: fener wetrerenat arene atte

aryfavarrgan o ogft: sift: aver aT eI

eater Gen w oat wafafesie

AERA Wet Travasa WAT

Fares eet Har Tae TATE BAT

Way Sat SAT eT TPT C1

O the great Brahmin, I am going to tell
you the names of the rest of the sisters to
Sraddha etc. who were younger than them.
These were-- Sambhiti, Anustya, Smrti,
Priti, Ksama Sannati, Satya, Turya, Khyati,
Svaha and the eleventh is Svadha. O the
gencrous-hearted one! Daksa had two sons

also- Matarigva and Satyavana. Daksa had
married his daughters to the sacred heart
hermits.

atari 9 8 ganar aerenft 3

Uett wae: aayesa at aged WANS

tafivenigra: vet yet: HATHA

ferterett qegea went ayafereaM3 ol

SGA FAT ART TARTU

ard gated da card a atfirri3 a

Dsaar art TATA: |

Tera Garces Agarterat fas Bu

Was waar o ofa anit senfgrr

Sat g Geraasal aranftyrest Ws TY BH

wal agayaa fiat yard o aq)

Tatarasanags: father: 13 v1

fay geo Wet SAE BAA Aa!

Wa: Tar ya ae Tat a anf gag gu

I tell you about the sons born to the

hermits like Marici etc. Sambhiti was the
wife of Marici. She gave birth to the
hermits Kasgyapa. Smrti was the wife of
Angira. She gave birth to four daughters.
Their names are -Sinivali, Kuhi, Raka and
Anumati. Similarly, Anustya, the wife of
Atri had given birth to three innocent sons -
Soma, Durvasa and the Yogi Dattatreya.
Svaha, the wife of the cldest son of Brahma,
the egoist god of fire, had given birth to
Pavaka, Pavamana and Suci (sipping the
water). These three sons had given birth to
the other forty five children in the form of
fire as each had given birth to the fiftcen
sons. The three sons including the father
fire as also these forty five sons arc
conjointly called the fire (Agni). Thus, forty
nine fires are in cxistence. The Pitrs of

=== PAGE 31 ===

16

whom I told you earlier, created by lord
Brahma had reproduced two daughters
namely, Mena and Dhiarini by his wife
Svadha.

war: Gafa aufee: yd ear: waayan
war wat qatht der Wy AANA II
mata fe anit yd eatsgorght:
Zariiva werahryTrEM3 911
were Ta are anaaeT  fast
del Bere ao yfr: Bfesat: waTUAA Na CH
feta ator fergeyfelferer: wat: 1
afatrquearat ator waa: 13811
ufé waisyoeat drewanfafe 4: qr
adt & ae ania ayaa AEs!
wafagfa dare uratfiertien

% de aggara & dened waist
& eempara fage vance F yu!

O the crown of saints, listen to the
description on the manner by which Daksa
had created all creatures in compliance with
the order of lord Brahma in the words—
‘Generate the subjects in the long long past.
Respected Brahmin, the hermit Daksa had
at first created by virtue of his mental
power, the creaturcs like gods, hermits,
gandharva, monster and the — snake.
However, when he saw that the god etc.
sarga, created by application of mind are
not availing of the growth, he then
determined doing creation through the
coition process and solemnised marriage
with Asikni, the daughter of Virana
Prajapati. We have heard that Daksa
Prajapati had given birth to sixty daughters
from the womb of ten daughters with
Dharma and thirteen with the hermit
Kasyapa. He then entrusted twenty seven
daughters to the Moon, four to Aristanemi,

NARASIMHA PURANAM

two to Bahuputra, two to Angira and two
daughters to the learned Krsasva. Now,
listen to the description of the children born
from these sixty daughter.

fayagareg favar at wea Wes V1

Teal Weal aang AHA: GM:

aring wat tar ygatat gests 31

charade Haren arreiferra Safi

yfereh fereret We TATASTETA I ¥ 1

Meera Weer: WaT A TTA!

a ewe gaon Sar SHAFT SG

aaatset Parerareaat AATF A YOY

amit gaye Brag cepa Tei se

ware wary aHatet wattle:

aat gare targa waryitsea TEAM: woH

The daughter named Visva gave birth to

Vigvedevas and Sadhyaé to the Sadhyas.
Marutvati gave birth to Marutvan (the
wind) Vasu to Vasus, Bhanu to Bhanu
devata and Muhirta to the gods pertaining
to the Muhirta. Lamba gave birth to the son
Ghosa, Jami got a daughter namely,
Nagavithi and Arundhati generated all the
creatures of this earth. O the great learned,
Samhkalpa got birth from the daughter
Sarhkalpa. Listen to the names of the eight
Vasus whose breathing are the light and the
wealth. These are Apa, Dhruva, Soma,
Dharma, Anila, Anala, Pratytisa and
Prabhasa. The number of their sons and
grandsons have increased to many hundreds
of thousands.

MANS Aa: WaATRAYATT WEA:
ayaa Y arat arearat arent OT
wfafatefadqrda after Gra tayo 1
yehfaaan da aren ITM ST
agifva aie cquentt & yopse it

=== PAGE 32 ===

CHAPTER 5

17

Similarly, the number of the Sadhyas is
cver-increasing and they too have thousands
of sons. The names of the Daksa's daughters
who became the wives of Kasyapa were -
Aditi, Diti, Danu, Arista, Surasd, Svasa,
Surabhi, Vinaté, Tamra, Krodhavasa, Ira,
Kadru, and Muni. O learned to Dharma,
now listen to the detail pertaining to the
children of them from me.

srfeeat AyAUTSATAT: YT wae FIAT:
ard aaa aad YU eet AAG oN
amisyvartn da fistsa Teor
‘afar da eat a ferereariger FETAANY QU
TART UT aa Sa Baw fawpEe
fen: Yaad aa aapeTfee A: AATNG VU
fexoenalt wera are F At eA:
faroranfergyaa aefaes A Say 311

O the great learned, Aditi had given
birth to twelve handsome sons from
Kasyapa. Their names were - Bharga,
Arnsu, Aryaman, Mitra, Varuna, Savita,
Dhata, Vivasvana, Tvasta, Pisa, Indra, and
the twelfth is called Visnu. We have heard
that Diti had given birth to two sons from
Kasyapa. The first was the giant Hiranyaksa
who was killed by the lord Varaha and the
other Hiranyaksipu was slaughtcred by lord
Nrsithha.

art a agat dem fafagarra erat:

afters g wrrat aft ayaaraaTy wt

qrarareaiert faenercror ay

Tr SS SAaTAT BOT BTM BAT NG GI

Besides them, a number of other
monsters had also taken birth from Diti.
The sons of Danu were called Danava and
Arista had given birth to Gandharvas from
Kasyapa. Surasd gave birth to a number of

Vidyadharas and Surabhi gave birth to the
cows from the hermit Kasyapa.

ferrerat g at gat weardt wesreot

rest Satara ferwatreteeraT AT: 4 G1
areraftrarsiten sTeut: qianfa:

anal ayaIATA: TeyaRftat Ay oi
aya ser weerga Bfet WaT PT:
wreTaT SARL Tae YA FESTA G CH

BU queMTaccieoraMiiga SAR

ae 7 aaaifa QT RTG BU
SQUAT HEN Sayer featrerT:|
waft at: waa Sarasa TaAT NE ott
‘aTat Yat Were Gererearnery fest
aired fauctiarmararte arsetig 21

Vinata gave birth to two famous sons
known as Garuda and Aruna. Garuda
affectionatcly accepted to became a vehicle
for lord Visnu and Aruna became the
eharioteer of lord sun god. Tamra gave birth
to six sons from Kasyapa. They were -
horse, camel, donkey, elephant, Gavaya and
deer. All organism wicked by nature have
been generated from the disgust. Ira gave
birth to the tree, creeper, valli and the straw
species Sana. Khasa gave birth to demigods
and monsters while Muni gave birth to the
Apsaras (the divine damsels). Kadru gave
birth to the poisonous snakes known as
Dandastka. Brahmin, the twenty seven
spouses of beautiful moon had given birth
to the Budha etc., sons who were full of
vigour and valour. The wives of Aristanemi
had given birth to sixteen children.

agua faguyarat faa: aya:
wedfireegan: shat arava: 11g V1
purvae y tatdarye aa: Yat:

Wl qregard wet Waa fee 311

=== PAGE 33 ===

18

el HRATaTANaT: aia: AIA:

feact ferres Saree afer ena g vU1

at fergee fare wer & uftantfetar:

cafe Barat We Auer: 1G G1

agar Cereat H Yaa WATE gH

aatganit aafat war &

waned: Uftefagtgedt:|
vata & fame: wet aT:
3é feast farmer waraig ol
gfe atrrefeegereh efteary weaseaa: 114 1
The four colour lightning are called the

four children of the learned Bahuputra.
Their names were - Kapila, Atilohita, Pita
and Sita. The sons of Pratyangira were the
great hermits who attained honour from all
the saints and hermits. The sons of Devarsi
Kysasva became Devarsi. These run with
the cycle of birth automatically on expiry of
the eras, one each (i.e. on expiry of a kalpa).
Thus, the movable and immovable creatures
born in the race of Kasyapa have been
described. The traditional ascending of the
race of the Daksas daughters has also been
cxplained in detail. The outstanding figures,
always engaged in performing the great
deed of lord Nrsirhha, have been described
bcforc you all here. The person who takes
into account this description with due
diligence and honour, attains to the
handsome children. | have now told you all
regarding the sarga and anusarga generated
by lord Brahma and other Prajapatis for
extending the scope of creation. The people
(Dvijati) going over these contexts always
with due respect for lord Visnu, shall
definitely become sacred in their hearts.

Thus, chapter five on description of creation in
Sri Nrsitha Purana approaches the end.
He

NARASIMHA PURANAM

=== PAGE 34 ===

NARASIMHA PURANAM

CHAPTER 6
An event of the birth of Agastya and Vasistha

as the son of Mitravaruna
Wa sara
afteet afar fawintarer seat fast
RACHAARTEN BATA HRT: 11811
ayers wat ye: queghratah
freengad afar at fatten
fee aafaentt yore FIAT
Woe Hear fergraT 1131
Stta said- Brahmin, I have told you
completely the story of the worlds creation
including the origin of gods, demons and
demi-gods from the supreme soul lord Vis
nu. I will now highlight the ancient story
explaining the event which made Vasistha,
the son of Mitravaruna, as you had raised a
query on the same topic when I was
describing the origin of hermits (in
preceding chapter). Bharadvaja, please, be
attentive and listen to the same with
extreme heed.
wdentiraa: wdeefaet at:
ure: wafaerat eait are waTafa: 1x11
FA Gal YM: HAM: Wal: BACCTAT: |
PATON: HVAT FAST
avai arent eat Frater weTEATI
afefafetady: aren ygat fafgar Ane 1
Bu mle a Yrfataaar Yat Wan
agra WM da aT g tay Baw
eater SieaceM: WMeRVATT A:
rat Sot after a afefeatad fase

The Prajapati Daksa, well-versed in the
elements of all religion and the purport
allied thereto, the greatest among the Veda

=== PAGE 35 ===

CHAPTER 6

scholars and well known to all learnings
(Vidyas), had solemnised the marriage of
his thirtecn beautiful daughters, all lotus-
eyed and endowed with the best
characteristics, with Muni Kasyapa. I tell
their namcs now. Please, listen to these.
They were - Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kala,
Muhirta, Simhikaé, Muni, Ira, Krodha,
Surabhi, Vinata, Surasa, Khasa, Kadru and
Sarama (called bitch of the gods). Daksa,
was the greatest and oldest among them.

afeft: qya Yar emia

Fat anne aernfit yop Tat WANE HI

Ofte aret tet at wT: Tel

wriiqaertat da Fite aeorTATI R011

afeat da oat a fereraivea Aer

aT Yor aa ferwyetayry: TAI

Aditi had given birth to twelve sons.

These were of so fair complexion and full
of splendour as that of fire (Agni) itself. I
am going to tell their names, please listen
them from me. These were - Bhaga, Arhsu,
Aryama, Mitra, Varuna, Savitaé, Dhata,
Vivasvana, Tvasté, Pisa, Indra and the
twelfth was lord Visnu. The cycle of the
day and night incessantly and unbarred runs
under the monitoring and control of them.
These twelve Adityas provide us with heat
and rain as well.

Wt a amiqarenrt atafat a

WS HEAT: YAT ARUN AT ATT 1121

cirenaret oft Gara arevat fate wren!

ufgerrer agar weteat fafa Tee HI

arama: siteraret are ferettera:|

adem: ygaiqraconfad: gsi
aga nf Bete ATTA: YA:

mrarettyentirger Fereegerataa: 119k 11
aMfafrempiy frgreadatea:
aferad ferent araissyade Serge I

The middle son of Aditi was Varuna. He
is called Lokapala. His location has been
said to be at the Varuna-Disi (the west).
These are adorned at the sea-shore in the
west direction. There exists a beautiful
golden mountain. All its peaks arc full of
the treasure of gems. Several kinds of
metals and fountains are found thercin. The
mountain consisting these and a number of
gems looks enchanting. There are large
passages and caves as well where tigers and
lions can be seen roaring all the time. The
Siddhas and Gandharvas are accommodated
therein at all and many solitary places. The
whole world falls in the lap of dark when
the sun enters there.

wer yprereer argent yet

Ten afore: eiffeear fayaenior ge 11
get fagaradt are aye aera:

eat aemT sree Ser: FAIA SII
ufa walfntecient gedit geron eT)
SORA TT ATCAT AT ATT 28 1

There at the peak of the same mountain, a
city namely, Visvavati is situated there
which was built by Visvakarmi. It is a giant
city rendering divine pleasure and gold has
been used for its construction gem minarets
have been installed in the buildings
constructed there. That city is fascinating
and enriched with all kinds of luxuries. The
Aditya, namely, Varuna, under the
influence of lord Brahma, rests there and
provides all the worlds (three in numbcr)
with light. The Gandharva and divine
damsels always serve him.

=== PAGE 36 ===

20

NARASIMHA PURANAM

feenrengierengt feeanreoryfirt:|

warfergentt arat fedor feat aN ON

Pea TA TA war wenhiataa

ATTRA ATTA TATHET

ST aa ert WER Ta

aferedtet eerie agencies 2

araunfraent aed aa sr

One day, Varuna smeared the divine
sandal-paste on his whole body, worn the
divine ornaments and moved towards the
jungle in the company of Mitra. On arriving
at Kuruksetra, the pilgrim place, made
abode by the Brahmarsis, enriched with
several kinds of flowers and fruits, covered
with a number of sacred places, hermitages
of Urdhvareté Munis and abundant source
of water; both of the deities had worn Cira
and the hide of the black deer and seated
themselves for penance.

areafereiient feraeitat Ba: YAU

agyeneraratat arrafarratad:1

ARTES Aer area: 1g I

duster sft wat wreerataa:

aang fasrereuit aratt arenftuih

ay Set wet Sat feat ageATUIAGI

A beautiful pond, full of pure water is
situated there in one portion of the forest. It
is covered with a number of shrubs and
creepers. Numerous birds sip the water of
that pond. A cluster of trees and lotus
flowers has enhanced the beauty of that
pond. It is popular as Paundarika and
numerous fishes and tortoises live within its
water. After the initiation of penance, both
the brothers i.e. Mitra and Varuna onee
started moving in the forest in order to
identify the whole area. In course of their
walking, they found that pond.

mea aa Aal Tet Sagi | TTT:

art aera: watt: aT ae
Treat a eat @ fayeen fo EH
ae anermahr fererpenfgrteen
wenuafagrenalt TEAST TgMfAOTT 811
WeUReguaettaet: wa:

BE FT YASH Yorerrer WAM c1
freuen trrestarert
TITCMTART FRAT ATEN 8
eteeeran act qudt ferrenfaem

qolergren aren referer ol

Both of them saw that a most beautiful
Apsara Urvasi was taking a dip with her
mates in the same pond. That beautiful
Apsara used to laugh and sing without
hesitation assuming that it was altogether a
deserted place. She was of fair complexion.
Her gait was tender as that of the inner
petals of a lotus flower. Her brows were
raven coloured and smooth, eyes like lotus,
lips dark red, her tone was full of melody,
her teeth were as white as conch-shell, kund
flower and the moon. The brows, nose,
mouth and forehead of that enchanting
damsel were most beautiful. Her waist zone
was as thin as that of a lion, hips, pubic and
legs were thick and formidable. Shc was
humble in speech. Her middle portion of
body was fascinating and her smile was
dazzling. Both hands were as delicate and
pretty as a red lotus. Her body was thinly
built and feet were beautiful. Her mouth
(face) was as pleasing as the full moon and
her motion was as slow as that of an
intoxicated elephant.

Sem weary gd at Sat ferent wet
Wet Se reas fara erfeat aN tH
Wt agar da pitenrergat eran
AMAT Yeates TNR VI
getter fe tits sdyen agit a

=== PAGE 37 ===

CHAPTER 6

Start o aerator eaqenqurata
FR: Paar ater APTA 3

Both the deities fell in surprise merely at
a glance of her divine complexion. Their
mind was more enchanted by sceing her
dance, humour, gait, smiling and by
listening to her melodious song as also the
touch of breeze blowing from the Malaya
mountain and the murmuring sound of the
bees and sweet chirping of cuckoo. The
cross winking of Urvasi threw fuel to their
sensual fire which had discharged them
(i.e. their semen was discharged). O the
great Muni, the living soul (Jivatma) of
Vasistha then (inserted in the semen of
Mitravaruna) owing to the curse of Nimi.

afas frarersurenitsat-
mairgarres fe fagagar:1
Vafeunt auciseTe
afers ua gy fraragiat: 113 611

Then Vasudeva had pronounced (by
entering into the semen of Nimi) "Vasistha,
you shall be the son of Mitravaruna". The
same statement was also given by lord
Brahma. Hence, out of the three places
where the semen was discharged from
Mitravaruna, the semen dropped on the
lotus had gave birth to Vasistha.

fren BANAT: HACISA Wet Het
ankire afrey amg gfe
ST ATR: TERT eT Tea WeTEPAA 3 GH
Waa wet fra ata:
HA TT: Bees AT:
rae wetted WATT
faxer TEER Ya: 3G
The semen of those three gods got

21

divided into three parts and got dropped on
the lotus, water and into a pitcher. The lotus
semen gave birth to a radiant fish. As the
semen from Mitravaruna fell in three
places, Vasistha originated from the lotus,
Agastya from a pitcher and a fish from the
water.

Uafeta eet YF TAT aT sae fay

Stee agi Sat art ya:

arate g Tae WHET We AT BIL

Urvasi in the meantime left for heaven.

These two deities then took the hermit
Vasistha and Agastya with them and

returned to their hermitage and started again
their tough penance.

are wget at wt satfa: GATT!

arent Gest TeMTSATA TN 6 11

ferarercurant 2a yaerdt were

fafgtfeeatt ser gqaatawnret Ga: 113.311

Tarfrartor eitarmeat crenata

segerarnea gen at Feat warfereareattinx 011

Lord Brahma finally came to them and

said that they would obtain Vaisnavi Siddhi
as they had desired to attain the supreme
flame (the abode of Brahma) by virtue of
penance. Lord Brahma ordered them to hold
their position as the witness to the world.

Lord Brahma then vanished and both these
deities held their authoritative positions.

Ud 3 afad fay afar were:
Prange a aT Ny gn
Be Gare areut TTT
qrarmng & Sfrequaxié yfaam:)
BRATS FARA TT AT TTS VL
apdarat Fret cornet fein:

=== PAGE 38 ===

22

Farge forcerer Ger aha Te TSA 3 1
apereguaaed were Aa: |
Fea TYE YH fawyeias FH reasht ws wii
garareantae waft
yuri defaced
fst aq yuna wader
Wane Yast oftcirsTATS GH
gfe steefeegun Paarreat wr

WSIS ING A

O Brahmin, I have thus told all about the
context pertaining to the event of the birth
of sacred Vasistha and the wisest Agastya
from Mitraévaruna. This account of the
reproduction of Varuna deity is capable of
absolving all sins. The people desirous of
children who do the sacred resolution and
listen to this episode, definitely obtain
several sons. The Brahmin reciting it while
performing havya (offering for the deity)
and havya (offering for the pitaras), satisfies
both i.c. the gods and the ancestors. The
man reciting it early in the morning or
listening to it; lives on the earth with all
pleasures at hand and attains the abode of
lord Visnu on death. This episode as
explained by me and propounded by the
scholars of the Vedas, will make able the
persons either reciting or listening to it to
attain the abode of lord Visnu without much
effort as it automatically purifies their
hearts to the extent that they perform
philanthropic deeds.

Thus, the sixth chapter on reproduction of
hermit Vasistha from Mitravaruna in Sri
Nrsithha Purana approaches the end.

OK

NARASIMHA PURANAM

=== PAGE 39 ===

22

NARASIMHA PURANAM

CHAPTER 7

Penance made by Markandeya for attaining
the grace of Lord Sri Hari, recital of
Mrtyuiijaya strotra and conquest of death

att went art
“ardusia gern ae gq: wafer
wrenente 3 ga aaacgfad ya eH
Bharadvaja said— Sita, please tell me
how the muni Markandeya had defeated

death? You had already told that he had
conquered the death.

We sara
Be eget wea BSH
uary ae Ug TaN
HRT VETS STAUS TTT
wanit yet qorguret er
ret Fant yea: wag
Aedeeleragt weayreaferMTaA Is
wftraer wert yen: TeHenfita: |
satarighga f ures Hester: 114 U1
agfeva ad yereaas yiraa
aifaeer wads Hactelrenfearig 1

Sita replied— O Bharadvaja! listen to
this most ancient plot with all hermits
present here. I am now going to describe the
same. The religious soul Sukadeva had once
also submitted his curiosity before the great
hermit Krsnadvaipayana, an outstanding
personality in the realm of the Vedas and
the commentator of the connotations
derived from them. Krsnadvaipayana was
seated on the Vydsapitha at that time in
Kuruksetra after the due performance of the
bathe and japa. He was then surrounded by
a number of his pupils. Sukadeva bowed
before him duly with clasped hands and

=== PAGE 40 ===

CHAPTER 7

asked this very question regarding
Markandeyas conquest of death the same
way as you, the resident of this sacred place
and devotee to Nrsimha has asked me.

sity sara
amuse afar ae Oey: watt:
Uaerente & ara sitgfiranfir AsEAT 11

Sukadeva said~ Dear father, tell me
how Muni Markandeya had conquered the
death? Please give the whole account and I
am curious to listen to the same from you.

aaa Sart
masa gat ser yg: wf:
wer & eatery Woy at ARTA CH
quay Waray eae wap
ARPES YUaY AESATAATTN SH
ait: waa aga yaogata & yas
gitar ara & ust yenvshy AeA NRO NI
atan qifrtar afreeqAU TAM
eat wer Ya oa aoa TUTAAA ga
qyaet werent aerate erat:
age accra are: fiat aa Fass

Vyasa replied- O the wise son, I tell you
the episode disclosing the manner by which
Markandeya conquered the death. All
Munis and all my pupils are also advised to
listen to this plot both sacred and great, to
which I am going to unveil Khyati, the wife
of Bhrgu had given birth to Mrkandu from
her womb. The sacred soul Mrkandu was
marricd to Sumitra when he was grown up.
Sumitra was religious and learned. She
always used to keep her busy with the
service of her husband. Later on, Sumitra
gave birth to a son whose name was kept
Markandeya. Markandeya, the grandson of

23

Bhrgu, was very sharp in his childhood too.
Beloved to parent, Markandeya gradually
started keeping pace with years after
Jatakarma Sarhskara solemnised.

aferd ora g anit aipaesaitg

ad greg yot yeqrer wfarafan e311

gen aargtiet g:fadt at ayag:1

fagaargeat a frites wera esi

ent aera eT Ieee fenat Aa:

wean wat teat seta PAT gk

An astrologer, well-versed in prediction
had pronounced on the birth of Markandeya
that he would die on completion of the
twelfth year since birth. The parents were
badly shocked at hearing that prediction.
Their heart started shivering with the
apprehension of his premature death, yet
they performed all ceremonies including
Namakarana etc. Subsequently, he was
taken to the teacher. And Upanayana
Sarhskara was performed therein. He began
to live in the service of the teacher
stalwartly and involved himself deep in the
study of the Vedas.

SPANAIR TRAV: |

Tiga Seprenfor w Grea gg I
mrenfagaaepe wearer: |

welt aa Ue stay wrawsat wergA: 1 ge!

On completion of due study of the Vedas
and other scriptures, he returned to his
home. Just on approaching home, the wise
hermit Markandeya bowed his head with
due reverence at the feet of the parents and
used to live at home.

a fate aerar wat a fraerory
g.ftact at yet aa carenftet gam gel

=== PAGE 41 ===

NARASIMHA PURANAM

Jara weet Te neha TAN

ua ata verge fa et art fata on
Solacing his parent with these words, he
went into the forest of Vallivata which was

24
at Gea gaat wrausat erat:

sara ae aa famed grarigeree i tine oer sear I’ PTT
weary TET WE stra

Sequels JG UT AA PSA ON

Sq FA GAT WaT A ASIST: |

SUT ARAUTTAT AGATA FI VU

megearel git: wre wnat fat WA:

frat ard erat arent ard Zara? V1

aerentt sit yey ara art Tera:

aan ure fag: eat Ter Halas ATs

Sukadeva, having seen their son well

learned and wise, the parents were shocked
severely instead of feeling any gaicty. The
wise Markandeya fell in surprise and asked
the reason for all this from his mother.
When Markandcya stress on his enquiry for
the reason, the mother told everything once
predicted by an astrologer. Hearing this,
Markandeya said to his parents - "Mother,
father and you yourself needn't worry about
the matter. Have faith in me and IJ declare
that I will conquer the death by virtue of the
toughest penance. I will perform a penance
so acute as to bless me with longevity.

sega at wargarer frent arena

apeiaé ara a arate v1

vara gata: ander watrareg

gt cagt nist wretuset werafa 1 241

afters aarard wives w entities:

peiteryel year eat TTA aA EI

marge ait Gear wet ate weTafa: |

WPT Feat wrhosa Fat FTYAURWI

faarrasta yaa faget geet WA:

TGA area a PeATTHOTAN SH

seat POT wrhUsA Tera:

surrounded by a number of hermits. The
hermit Markandeya saw his grand-father
Bhrgu there in the group of Munis. Religion
abiding Markandeya bowed at the feet of
his grand father and saluted all other Munis
present there. He then stood with clasped
hands before him. The scholar Bhrgu saw
his grandson whose age was at the verge of
cessation and said—- "Dear son, tell mc how
have you come here? How are your parents
and all other kinsmen and tell me the reason
for your arrival?" Markandeya told
everything as was predicted by an
astrologer in his reply. Having heard his
grandson, Bhrgu enquired again - "O wise
son, what do you want to do in the present
circumstance?"
Wravsa sarT
qarcartiut yy Sighrentt array
prot wat waster aatared aaa 7113 al

Markandeya said— Lord, I want to
conquer the death, a predator of the living
beings and have come for shelter under you.
Tell me of some measure viable to achieve
the objective.

wyeara
ARTA TTT WEA Ya
at ag waqaryey werd aT; 21
Ta fag year
wedi Gans waa et YT FI} 311
aaa great yd Tae AAT:

=== PAGE 42 ===

CHAPTER 7

ATA AeA ACT ANTAOTAATA AT 3 SI
TATE ATAT TANT: YT

oat geq fafarreng dratgdeda gag «1
aga guste antes sare

&: Haaser Ye aATPTATOTAN 3 & I
aorretrat feral groot fareal fare: afer
fas ara fa wed MTT TAIZ WII

anfag neredt afe yaaa aT
aed Saha Wed St Wad A TTR CH
Bhrgu replicd- Dear son, who can

conquer the death without the grace and
pleasure of Lord Narayana obtained as a
result of severe penance? Hence, you are
advised to sit in penance for lord Narayana.
Go to the shelter of that everlasting, the
greatest god, beloved to the devotees,
unborn, solitary and Purusottama lord
Visnu. Son, Narada Muni in the ancient
ages, had also resorted to that lord Narayana
by virtue of his scvere penance and it was
by the grace of the lord that he since then
cnjoys longevity and has conquered both
old age and death. No man here can efface
the entity of the death without the grace of
the fotus-cyed, Nysirnha form, lord
Janardana. Go in the everlasting shelter of
that immortal, unborn conqueror, of dark
complexion, Laksmipati, Govinda, Gopati
lord Visnu. Dear son, you will undoubtedly
conquer the death for ever, if you could
maintain undisturbed concentration of mind
on that lord.

aa sara
san: frarreta ayo gaat
Trehusat wera ferrarecafearersy 13 811

Vyasa said- In reply to his grand-father,
Markandeya most humbly replied-

Hausa sara

anneal: afar faopfatgeryat: 3y:1
ad ga wat ardaegaer WI
tant aq geq yey etsTTAAIY O11

Markandeya said- O beloved father and
you have told
Visvapati and the god to whom | should
resort but tell me the place and the
procedure for the worship of that lord.
Since, the due process will only cnable me
to please him to the extent that he shall
drive away the death from me.

Wyeast

apts fever ar vat wart

Wa Ugae oer we wfatarer AeaTy eI

ana werd Treagenfeht: ATT

fe aeafgaond wa: deer PATS I

wqusits Faet yew

TEA TT BCMA TA TTT 3

Sor Tet ATYTATA!

ga wel fe aadt tater yoifors

iat wate fagarean yep areata xl

Bhrgu said~ Go to Sahya mountain.

There flows the popular river Tungabhadra
and a tree Bhadravata exists there. Install an
icon of lord Jagannatha KeSava under the
tree and worship him duly by offering
fragranee and the flowers. Bridle up your
senses under the monitoring of mind and
the mind too under check of all
concentrated citta and recite the twelve
letter hymn - "Orn Namo Bhagavate
Vasudevaya." Imagine while reciting this
hymn that lord Visnu is enshrined in your
heart with their weapons i.e. conch-shell,
discus, gada and the lotus flower. The

teacher, lord Visnu as

=== PAGE 43 ===

26

Visvatma lord Visnu is pleased with the
devotee who recites this twelve letter hymn
ineessantly. You should also do japa of the
same and he will definitely efface the fear
of death.

aaa sara

See MOTT TST TTT

EMI CALCIDIEG Aare AA

ATgacraTaat oh APTTMATTGT AAT G1

S ,

Tere eATaAret ATTA

wa fant sfrare weefeht: wATTvon

year eae wrausat verge:

yafarer eft wa Ta YgERTTIYCN

frre fra attrenatae

Taretaret ares fer aa TeTaFA een

wren waecfatien grat fatter

efe qrafawat fayearrTerMy on

SoTHRTATUTSTA, EeRL H RTAAANG 81

ware terienfrosenht waren

ecaferen Bt: did afer, Bet TARFTNG 2H

Taree FUT WEGTATENTT

erage: weed ureteral ay 31

gered oft carted Taya

SoA WTS ATISATANG WU

Vyasa said~ Dear son, hearing these

words, Markandeya saluted his grand father
and went to the land for penance (tapovana)
situated at the bank of river Tungabhadra,
surrounded by different kinds of trees and
creepers, flowers, gulma and Venus as also
filled with numerous _ hermit He
established lord Visnu there and started
worship by offering fragrance and flowers
in an orderly manner. He kicked off laxity,
the desire for food and sat in penance not

NARASIMHA PURANAM

lesser than the period of a year. The
material time as told by the mother then
came and he worshipped lord Visnu in the
said manner tied up body on Svastika
posture, controlled the senses in the mind
and did Pranayama with the pure heart. He
started extending the lotus heart with the
recital of the syllable Orn, imagined the sun,
moon and focused his nerves exclusively in
imagination of lord Krsna with his
Pitambara, conch-shell, discus and gada.
Thus, he started offering spiritual flowers to
the lord. At that self-forgetting penanee, he
started reeiting the hymn - "Orn Namo
Bhagavate Vasudevaya."
aa sara

sed eqrearena arose aT: |

TAS Hert Fase STTATATIG

wat SAAT TA atTAT safe: |

meng & Ag fag Feat ny gn

We: wear fest yea aye

ad frat mart geptarnfireafaiy ont

Vyasa said— Dear Sukadeva, the mind of

Markandeya was fully engrossed with the
sovereign god Jagadisvara in the state of so
severe meditation. The representatives of
Yama then came there with pasa (cord) in
their hands but the representatives of lord
Visnu had driven them away. Frightened of
the pain inflicted on them by spears, they
had to flee from there but they warned
Markandeya that the god of death himself
will come henceforth and he will predate
his breathing.

fauyga 5g:
aa a: tart ame cites enfant:
Bl AA Weal ATT: HAAAT WT UG CA

Visnuditas replied- The Yama can do no

=== PAGE 44 ===

CHAPTER 7

harm where the pious name of our lord Vis
nu, the master of this universe, holder of the
Sarga-bow is recited. The predator Kala,
death or Yamaraja has no power to act
voluntarily.

aM sart
ST TATA HY UE ETAT: |
TTSUST TUT faoHRTATZAM 811
TeEray year faye:
faoasen ehemit yeprala Ufa: 11g 011
wat fawattanar wausar wera:
Jere wort wat fads STEAL 21
faupatfed aaceia aut werent:
gaits waar a Fela ATTAIN 211
Vyasa said— Yama himself came there
on return of the Ditas and ordered him to
aceompany him to the abode of Yama.
However, owing to fear of Visnuditas he
only roamed round Markandeya but could
not dare to touch him. The Ditas of lord
Visnu too stood with the iron musalas with
the intention that they would slaughter
Yama in compliance with the order of lord
Visnu. The learned Markandeya in the
meantime started praying to the lord
without deviating his attention from Visnu.
The psalm which he was reciting, was given
by lord Visnu to him in the ear. Thus, with
the very psalm he worshipped Laksmipati.
arava Sara
. 7 . 1
wordifer eataaet fen yeq: aafeeaferne 311
Thad qustirTTTETTH
aay a wortfen fen 3 rg: aafteafaneg wi
ct meh feria
ated waster fa 8 eg: afeafrie Qu

27
Viguaart td o-raftormeray
attest worifer far 8 yeq: aafceafeng g 11
arm ane faa aefag sare
Tred a waiter fa 2 og: afterrie on
Markandeya said— I salute Sri Narayana,
who has one thousand eyes, master of the
senses the Puratana Purusa, and
Padmanabha (who had _ generated the world
(Brahm4nda) lotus from his navel). What
will the death do me? What harm the will
death do to me when I have sheltered under
the everlasting, unborn, — indeelinable,
Govinda, lotus-eyed lord Kesava’? What
harm will the death do to me when | have
come to the shelter of lord Damodara, the
place of origin of the world, full of light
like the sun, and omnipresent Vasudeva?
What harm may the death do to me when I
am in shelter to lord Adhoksaja, with
eonch-shell and diseus, who is free from the
distortions and who is in inexpressive form?
What may the death do to me when I am in
shelter to Varaha, Vamana, Visnu, Nrsirhha,
Janardana and Madhava?
Fed gent qos arcs sera
Clad waiter fest oeq: afteafang ci
aT Heat Serena ary
faved sonifen fer 3 oq: aafteafaig 1
fired td A ;
werint waster far tag: wReafii 01
What will the death do to me as I am in
shelter to saered, Puskara form or Puskala
(perfeet) form, the sced of welfare,
nourisher of world and master of lokas, lord
Purusottama? What the will death do to me
when | am in shelter to lord Visvartipa, who
in spite of being the soul, supreme soul and

=== PAGE 45 ===

28

NARASIMHA PURANAM

yoni to the world; himself Ayonija (not
born from the womb)? What will the death
do to me when I am in shelter to Mahayogi
Sanatana god, who has thousands of heads
and who is in both forms i.e. expressive and
inexpressive?

seated its er HE:

aratera Teyfeteygayes Usa: io a

fa aH fat yrgateuses etre

Wert gusitenet afee afer gehTqw V1

The god of death immediately fled from

that place on hearing to that psalm as was
recited by Markandeya (with tne graee of
lord Visnu) coupled with the pain inflicted
by the Visnu-ditas on him. Thus, the wise
Markandeya conquered the death. In fact,
nothing is left unachieved, when lotus-cyed
lord Nrsimha become gracious to the
devotee.

mrausafgaata waa faepeare Bo 31

a 3g wed ween freret fraa: gfe

Aeet TAT WY: I TATA: to ¥

4 yet ati
anTat eryarenfeear
afer qalefa wa
ye 8 anit frratecaiioy
AAA: 19 11
The lord himself had preaehed this all

sacrosanct Mrtyujijaya strota, effacing the
death to Markandeya in order to save him
from the clutches of death. The person
reciting this strota thrice in a day i.e.
morning, evening and noon with keen
devotion, scared spirit, and in a regular

manner, the devotce of such trends seldom
meets premature death. Yogi Markandeya
had established the Adideva, Purana Purusa,
and more illuminated than the sun itself; in
his heart by virtue of the imagination mixed
with the severe concentration and thus
conquered the death immediately.
Thus, the seventh chapter on Markandeya's
conquest on death in Sti Nrsirnha Purina
approaches the end,

=== PAGE 46 ===

NARASIMHA PURANAM

CHAPTER 8
Yama prevents death and his Ditas to visit
the devotees of Lord Visnu, departure of the
hellish organism to the abode of Lord Visnu.
STs sara
ware fagueda fauygt: witfea:
waaay fragt wat F TATA
Vyasa said— The god of death as also the
Yamadita started wailing and crying with
pains severely inflicted by Visnuditas, on
their return to the palace of Yama.
argfeagT Sg:
WY Ws sas es Ta aq Tae!
wae RMES Tea WR RTT SATU
eur aid a yt: Whe wa
a reat waft Sata 1
weg 3 veaed ae wd era
mramaerara: Yaa MeeAT: 1
aa fgaretdles Yep Ta: As
srenfaind dard atferetéa: 114 11
Wana wag arent aufe ferry
STR SAA FRET AE A wT
aad WET Tegel TAIT Bl

=== PAGE 47 ===

CHAPTER 8

29

aa & eared fan: & ar 3 aga aon

The death and Yamaditas said— O king,
listen to what we are going to report to you.
We went near Markandeya, the grand- son
of Bhrgu, leaving behind the death
according to your orders given. However,
he has in meditation on any god that time, O
Satpurusa. We had yet to reach him wheu
suddenly the giant Purusas appeared and
started blowing musalas on us. Frightened
of the sudden blows, we turned back
immediately and the god of death then
visited there. The Purusas did not take the
least care of him also and same treatment
was made. Thus, we including the god of
death could not bring that Brahmana here.
O master, please, tell us the penance on
which he was doing meditation, the name of
god in his imagination and further, the
reference of the people who badly hurt us.

area Sarat
segat: fagt: wehegar a wera
earent arat werafeg: wre Area AAA 1
Vyasa said— O learned son, hearing this
from the death and all other ditas, Yama,

the learned son of the sun jerked on his
mind for a little while and said-

aa sara
qua fagu: wd qqyard oF aa:
arrrerent at weTAN TA: 118
mv: Wat wernt wravsat werafa:1
WOMAN: aiet WaT Pgh Zo
yuess arto a at Wet aT:
afcorres Tere sas greyTATTA! 221
varia wre eared efe Seay
aad digg a afr fag ee

shearrrerdtan act et TET:
ARG WIRES aot Tear FeRZAT: 119311
weet gustan’ aad waaraen
uped fry 7 at fe wary Hera ee
Yama said— Listen to the matter I am
going to refer, O the death and my all other
servants. Whatever had come to my
cognisance by virtue of meditation
(yogamarga), is that the wisest Markandcya
was known to his death today earlier and he
had visited the tapovana with the sole desire
to conquer the death. He has under guidance
Bhrgu, worshipped lord Visnu and made
severe penance with recital of the twelve
letter hymn. Dear representatives, that Muni
is concentrating on lord Kegava with kcen
attention and imagination of lord in his
heart. Servants, he has thus, attained the
force of Mahadaksa for the concentration on
lord Visnu. Otherwise no other force than
that can protect the man whose time of
death has come. Who can even gazc at the

man who had enshrined lord Visnu
undeviatingly in his heart?
asf & gear fawnekhe aise gery
aa sed Fete aa A doe: feraT: ugk
a fad awed aa a Wt Tea:

wadt set fat wade Soreagfas neg

aang aa at: what aHTTI oH
aifae vered & aa: ware
Bat urge a rated gornfinehs rege 11
The people are also the messengers from
lord Visnu who have inflicted pain on you
all. See that you will leave the place where
devotees of Visnu existed. It is not a matter

=== PAGE 48 ===

30

NARASIMHA PURANAM

of surprise that those people have hurt you.
Do you get surprised that they have not
slain you. Who can even dare to see the
Brahmin so busy in his devotion to lord
Narayana? You, the evil-doer have not
good anyway in the form of effort for
bringing him here. Put car to my order that
you will not go to the sacred souls who
keep them engaged in the service of Lord
Nrsimha.
ae sara

au fagiqeen Fy a Wea: fea

amt fitter a ort araret weiter ee

rar weet gett feayacer fergie:

wreuemta arene Fit: WYN!

ea Rae aa afer

fem carer safelitt Bar: Sayre: aeTPATTA: 12 QU

SSTETATY J Feat YA: wy:

at cara waar ote a carer fet RTA

aifaet eeichet: yustientrtert: |

erorgfadat Got a erat fae a yf aH

Vyasa said~ Sukadeva, having ordered
the god of death and the messengers present
there, Yama started at the troubled people
of the hell. Whatever he had said to them in
vagary of mercy under influence of
devotion to lord Visnu, listen that very
carefully. Yama said to those suffering
organism - O consumer of fruit for vices
committed, why had you not worshipped
lord Visnu, in you life-time? Why had you
not worshipped such a god who pleases
with the worship made by only water even
in the absence of other ritual materials and
endow the devotee even his abode also?
Why had you not worshipped Nrsirhha form
and lotus-eyed lord who provides with
emancipation merely thinking of him?

sya Atay Aary FATE FT aETA

dara aa: wrenfgaqureranrad: 112 611

aera o fervaren weet farrera: |

areal dordvaga farger: Tat ATTIRE M

Wa: Mien wae ear

Fred feng: Wa WYA WAT SEU

Yama, the son of sun and devotee to Vis

nu then turned to his servants and suggested
-O servants, the words of god
(Bhagavadvakya) as said by lord himself to
Narada ad oftenly heard from other
devotees to Visnu and siddhas; is being said
by me to educate you. Listen all you people
with keen devotion for lord Visnu.

3 Hor HN Has a at ares Frag:

wet fat BM UE ATG STATA VI

qustiana tae afae fae

ward reat wet sft wet TPR

Tai worsen rut Fata SATA

oft a: put wreret SATIS STASHN I

The god said- I pick up the person from

the hell fire the same way as the lotus come
above the level of water who recites "He
Krsna, Krsna, Krsna,. I immediately
provide support (Uddhara) to the man who
calls -"Punddarikaksa, Devesvara,
Nrsithha, Trivikrama, I am sheltered by
you." ] remove all pains of a devotee who
takes shelter under me with expressive word
- "Devadhideva, Janardana, I have come in
for shelter under you.”

ara art
seqaiferarenrd gitar aaa a
are: Boor Heather AA FHY:13 ol
an aan eae aaa AAT: |

me

=== PAGE 49 ===

CHAPTER 8 31
amt aT eeifeerqgeRtsgarAeHg el with a number of subjects. Lord Visnu in
x A . the form of Vamana is saluted.
Vyasa said- O son, The organism 5
suffering from the hcll fire started reciting aferererreara SqUTeTe TAA:
loudly the names of god as ‘Krsna, Krsna, faury qo SOR TATA OH
Nrsimha etc., when they heard the agiara are Yareura yar
declaration of god himself from the mouth fanacn
of Yama. It was a phcnomenon that in .
proportion to the recital of the lord's names, TTT TATA THE AGT

the hellish organism tended to be filled with
the devotion for lord Visnu. So filled with
the devotion, they started saying -

Aa Hq:
SOAR aT Te Saya ARTA
armed Aenea: WHATS ZI
aires Sara WT EA AA:
carer MTT ARTETA 311
arrears aafaera & 7A:
ARTA TR VILALTA YI
Aefrara wea fara TA TA

arererarmaaats SareTT aA 4
aay epferne Fret arerorrer tat a1
SURAT Ua eaaTETA TTT G1

The hellish organism said- We salute
the great soul lord KeSava, by the recital of
whose name the hellish fire is immediately
extinguished. Salute lord Visnu, the Igvara
by offering Adimarti, always in peace and
master of the world. Salutation to Sri
Narayana who is everlasting, incomparable
in the form of Nrsirhha, who holds a conch-
shell, discus, gad4 and teachers the lokas.
The god, favourite to the Vedas, great and
dynamic in particular. Salutation is
conveyed to lord Varaha who is beyond the
scope of logic, in the form of the Vedas,
holder of earth. Salutation to lord Brahma,
born in Brahmin clan, learned in the Vedas
and their segments (angas) and well-versed

sea Mfrs yer 8301

He had tied Bali under promissory-
estoppel, implemented and protected the
Vedas. He is master of all gods,
omnipresent and the supreme soul, Lord
Caturbhuja is saluted. He is in the form of
purity and pure metal. God Parasurama. is
saluted as he had destroyed the wicked Ks
atriyas. Salutation is conveyed to the great
soul Sri Rama who had killed Ravana.
Govinda, we salute you frequently. Please,
pick us from this hell, full of odour.

ware sare
afer aethae fareoit areaifernyeienr
Fel AT AAT Wet wer Fat WETATAII 011
poraum: wa feerereafenyfira:|
fearrargforargr feaercongfaat: 11% 811
aria fay feety eftqeat:1
aeifaren aaery stares SaprarereTqs 211
area a wy ay eget
fae: oat yet ayaa wat efor 3H
warrantee ART: STATA
a sont war tet aefaend Fee
wer 3 aifager fairer:
wort ashe Hafe Maisdty AAA ISG

Vyasa said— Sukadeva, the organisms
suffering from the hell-fire got immediate
relaxation when they recited the pious

=== PAGE 50 ===

32

names of lord Visnu with keen devotion.
They turned in the form of Sri Krsna with
divine fragrance smeared on their parts of
bodies, divine clothes and adorned with the
ornaments. Then the servants of lord
Vishnu appeared there and took them to the
abode of lord Visnu by aircraft (vimana).
They condemned the servants of Yama.
Lord Yama again bowed his head before
lord Visnu for picking up the sufferer of
heli-fire to the abode of Visnu. I always
salute lord Visnu in the form of Nrsirmha,
the recital of whose name is so mighty as it
took the hellish organisms to Visnu-dhama.
I also salute the people frequently who
salute lord Visnu in the form of Nrsirhha.
eat went aeagy
ware wd faut
WF: 8 frrerelnerergary
at fe ag Grane: TAN

fet sitrefoeyereh arian armedisera: ie

Having seen the  hell-fire fully
extinguished and all devices in the contrary
position, Yamaraja himself had determined
to educate his messengers again to outright
direction.

Thus, the eight chapter on 'Yama's preaching to
his messengers’ in Sri Nrsirhha Purana
approaches the end.

NARASIMHA PURANAM

=== PAGE 51 ===

32

NARASIMHA PURANAM

CHAPTER 9
Recitation of Yamastaka
cara sara
ragerniaies Urgreet
aafa aa: fret wee autre
Wet HEAT
TAM FT SOTA

Vyasa said- Yama having seen his
servant ready to move somewhere with the
pasa (cord) in his hand, said into his ears -
“Dear messenger, my sovereignty covers
the creatures other than Vaisnavana. Hence,
leave the people sheltered under lord
Madhusiidana.

SENATTOAAA ATA
am sft cirafenteat gaa!
efeqefagary mente wai
aie

Lord Brahma has employed me for
taking into consideration, the account of
the good and bad deeds
performed/committed by the people, and
thus, addressed me as Yama. The people
who not obedient/devoted to the teacher and
Visnu, are only governed by me. I myself
salute the people who bow their heads
before Sri Hari.

went ATTA
Tgaerererits fer 4 ea:
wera ert TATA BOT 13 1
By taking special care for the devotee
towards god and on remembering their
penance performed, I also wish a suitable
position from lord Vasudeva. I am enslaved
to Madhusiidana and nowhere independent.
Lord Visnu is capable enough to control
me.
smrafa fares safer fate.
faaayd wadift tenfen
atigrermitg wernt
arate 7 aparama: Hearfaqs

The person opposing the god, cannot
achieve siddhi (salvation). The poison

=== PAGE 52 ===

CHAPTER 9

cannot anyway turn into nectar, the iron
cannot be converted into gold even if the
same is thrown into a furnace for many
hundred years.

a fe vivaqueta: aafa-
farata Ft efeergtfa wa:
anata a euarTeet
serafertiste farmer Ayer 4 HI

The moon similarly cannot be absolved
from the scare i.e. it cannot illumine like the
sun. However, the exclusive devotee of lord
Visnu, attains to honour and prestige in
spite of being dirty in body.

neafa gaat creat
smaguifenga 7 faftarten
weyeggeraadt at
aftercuit crcarrerstsat 116 11

On going over the essence of the world
it is only ascertained that no achievement
can be obtained but for the worship of the
god. You therefore, are advised to bring in
memory at all moments, the feet of god for
emancipation as these feet had graeed the
divine teacher (Devaguru) Jupiter
(Brhaspati).

fi qa
Parent gafaeeA:|
Tafa Hat a Wert
aeala Gea THAT: 9

The pcople indulged redundantly in the
pleasures of worldly affairs, only to destroy
the opportunity for utilisation of human
body so received as a result of hundreds of
great deeds performed in the phase of
previous life. The people not following the
path of cmancipation, arc involved in the
activity as if someone pumps wind to the

33

sandal-wood for getting its ashes.
PATRRATICUES 1
wfaerrat GATT
af at ett THISTRTANC I

The first appeared Sanatana Purusa, lord
Visnu is saluted who destroys the cycle of
birth and death, whose ever dynamic paces
do not know to stay and whose lotus feet
are worshipped with clasped hands by the
gods of sovereignty.

anreafig qos vod a: yoni at
Tam waurhal faueia a area

Vyasa said— The person either going
over or listening to this sacred Yamastaka,
attains to the abode of Visnu and his vices
are absolved in toto.

FF: want gar wat
ping Wot a aT YT FAM gol
ofa sirrefaegart saritseara:1¢ 11
This great preaching of Yama which
increases the devotion for lord Visnu, has
been described by me to you all. Now, I
will again highlight the precedent story i.e.
the activities performed by Markandeya, the
grandson of Bhrgu in the ancicnt period.
Thus, the Ninth chapter on "Yamastaka" in Sri
Nrsirhha Purana approaches the end.

=== PAGE 53 ===

34

CHAPTER 10

Marriage of Markandeya, Birth of Vedasira,
Performance of penance under Aksayavata
and recital of psalm by Markandeya, Lord

give blessings and boon to him.

sireare sara
farcdamrent yet wre vifarad:!
a arm fagite wraosat werafe: ie!
gen faaré attr yirateafagiad:1
a deferred ayer @ faarrauz
sea aah Fay ATAU)
oat 9 faqrreat arrears enfeeiq3 1
WAMTATATEL YA: Sear ae irae
AGUA MEATY Teme TTS
ae ee WT ara, BEAT:

Vyasa said~ Dear Sukadeva, after
conquest of death, the admirable resolute,
and wisest Markandeya, returned to the
home of his father. He married there on
special pressure from Bhrgu and got a son
Vedasira in appropriate course of time. He
then performed a number of offerings for
lord Narayana, performed Sraddha for
Pitaras and honoured Atithis with offering
them feast and entertainment. He then went
to Prayaga, took a dip there in the greatest
holy place Triveni (confluence of the three
rivers) and started god Narayana under the
tree Aksayavata.

a 8a qefrepa: 8 at Te ATG
arquafgat are TTT ETT
Waar | ATA HTAUSAY TNTAAA: 1G
ama med & wagenfefia: YA:
aisenrat: fea gaat THAT

NARASIMHA PURANAM

VSIA TATU Feta TESA TNO

With a keen desire for seeing god
Narayana under whose pleasure and grace
he had conquered the death, he started the
tough penance again. He gave up food and
only breathed air for many years and thus
inflicted troubles on his physique. In
course of penance, he stood before lord
Venimadhava with full concentration after a
formal worship with fragrance and flowers.
Imagination in depth of lord Visnu with
conch-shell, discus and club had been fixed
in his lotus heart and he started reciting the
psalm of the lord.

mrausa sara
at afin A
SeraaTg HATA
saith fay yet yee

Markandeya said— I salute lord Visnu,
the Purina Purusa, whose eyes are like the
full blossomed lotus, whose lotus like feet
are worshipped by numerous kings, whose
arms are lengthy and who is the supreme
Nara, Nrsirhha is also master of men
(Naranatha).

somata attcarygarat

a mreeratat girgearert
fora: Ufa stterciteritgat

anf Maar

I bow my head: before almighty, god to
all, ever illumincd god Govinda, who
nourishes the world, who resides in Ksira
ocean, who holds Sariga bow in his hands,
who is worshipped by the hermits, who is
the husband of Laksmi and always holds
Laksmi within his heart.

=== PAGE 54 ===

CHAPTER 10

at ated wag GATT
Te Gaol geared wT
anf acer eftarerarerer yo
I bow my head with keen devotion
before Adimadhava god Visnu, who is
unborn, who is teacher, Purana Purusottama
and master of all, whose brilliance is as
much as thousands of suns and who is in the
form of Aeyuta.
faritgat cirnnfa yarafey
Terrors areata
aenfey cirenarentrerfarorgnn gait
I salute lord Visnu who appears in
physical form before the devotee of sacred
soul, who is the supreme position of all,
who is the master of the earth, lokas and the
subject, who is para viz., the supreme cause
among the causes and witness to the deeds
of the three lokas.

att mater vatadt Ut:
ya fe sa sarap
a sitar wordtfen Saree zit
I bow my head before god Kesava, the
husband of Laksmi who slept on the bed of
the body of Sesanaga 'Ananta’ in the bottom
of Ksirasagara in the ancient time, who is
anadi Vidhata and who avails humidity of
the water drops sprinkled by the waves of
the Ksirasagara.
at anfad agaferdt Fert
qt quitigaerrtgpa
arerctanftet feroaa
sete ferent mart Tere TANS

35

1 always salute god Visnu, who has held
the form of him who is a great god, who is
enemy to Mura monster, who is the killer of
Madhu and Kaitabha monsters and who is
Hiranyagarbha as also who removes the
sorrows and pains of the people (worldly).

srrmorenratae fey

48 fe Wt aaa dom
anata wal wept

Fa Ta Hat SATEATN YU

I regularly bow with keen devotion my
head before the god Janardana who is
everlasting, inexpressive, beyond the power
of perception, omnipresent and who himsclf
appears in the varied forms and whose feet
are worshipped by the yogis.

trai fart A
rarert athe yr
a
santa weafireriigat Vf gG

I bow my head before the god Visnu,
beloved to devotees, who is pleasure in
himself, incomparable without the property
of rajas, who is in the form of knowledge,
who is the abode of Vrnda (Laksmi) and
who is worshipped by Yogis.

steara sara
fa Berea & argarensriifeuin
mraust Tent deisy cafe Ferm eg 11
fanned fecryadt geteaar at ta yaa
mea: waty aT AAATAT VN
saat: addy carta werafa::
PN He Wad GH da Fd wa
mee wwe sitet aife aisha was” F een

Vyasa said~ Beloved son, the akasavani

suggested to Markandeya on completion of

=== PAGE 55 ===

36

NARASIMHA PURANAM.

the psalm. O Brahman, why are you putting
yourself in troubles when it is a fact that
you cannot perceive god Madhava until and
unless you take a dip in all the holy placcs!
Complying with the suggestions delivered
by akagavani, the learned Markandeya took
a bath in all holy places yet he could not
perecive god. He then said targeting the
akasavani, I convey salutation to you
whosoever you are; and request for
suggesting any work that may ensure the
return of the same quantum as that of
bathing in holy places, if that work is
successfully performed.
ayant
anos fares ele ATAU MAT
arse wadtatat wei wea YaT e811
Akagavani said~ O the crown of the

Brahmins, and great resolute, offer a psalm
to sovereign Narayana but-for which you
will not attain to the fruit of the holy places.

wears way eit deter

aa wea Tart dharani ATI ot!

Markandeya said- O god, kindly tell me
that phenomenal psalm, by reciting which
one can avail of the fruit of bathing in all
the pilgrim places.
ayant

wa we dada we aera Saya

FM CRC EAL CERT

Wa We UGA we aqS ATTA

we wer eter a ereteATEAAI 2

wa Uae Wa citar Fa

HT STATO BT TTT 2 311

Wa Bag aE wa ye yf

wer arg aT Ta aera 2 v1

wa ahigenia a eiventen

peter Wa a AA TAF HAIGH

wa aber afaa wa arefahea!

we quaaat ae we Stee ATTN 2 «HI

wa wa aga (it)srata oa gerreree

FS ae Val HA HRT PPA OI

wa ferott agree ora Frermetant

Ware HS CAN Via Wat APTIRLI

Akagavani said— Victory to Devadeva,

Madhava, Kegava. You eyes receive the
grandeur as that of the full blossomed lotus.
Victory to Govinda. Victory to Gopate.
Victory to  Padmanabha, Vaikuntha,
Vamana, victory to you all and ever. O Hrs
ikea in the form of lotus victory to you.
Victory to Damodara and Acyuta. Victory
to the teacher of loka. Victory to picking up
the earth and holding an conch-shell and
gada in your hands. Victory to you, O
YajfieSvara, Varaha, the holder and
nourisher of the earth. Victory to you O
Tgvara to Yoga, the knower and founder of
Yoga. Victory to you O the favourite of the
Karma, the YajfieSvara, Yajfianga. O the
god appreciating the great Brahmanas and
extending honour to them and victory to the
supreme Igvara who had cndowed Narada
with siddhi. Victory to you O the shelter to
the philanthropists, the climax proportion to
the Vedic speech. Victor to you O
Caturbhuja. Victory to you O Srijayadeva,
you are the cause of fear to the monsters.
Victory to you O- omniscient and
Sarvatman. Victory to you O Sanatana Deva
and philanthropist god. O Mahadeva, Visnu,
Adhoksaja, Devesvara, be merciful to me
and please enable me to perccive you.

eae saret
gad aifée Aa araose diet

=== PAGE 56 ===

CHAPTER 10

wigdya wary WrraTAT SATEA12 21

veaeararnin: watrcoryfat:|

aaa araerat feet fae: PATA 11

a qe weet yet fronficart

werd: fercat aye wa A PYAR RH

Froetterer WA: WA: ATE WET:

wasMYTHT Tfes Yet: TTT VU

Vyasa said~ beloved Sukadeva, when

the learned Markandeya followed the
suggestion of akaSavani and offered this
very psalm to lord Visnu, the god Janardana
wearing Pitambara appeared there. That
everlasting god Visnu was illuminating all
direetions with his radianee and he was with
a coneh-shell, diseus and gada in his hands
as also adorned with all kinds of precious
ornaments. The hermit Markandeya, the
eause for exhilaration of the Bhrgu elan,
bowed his head on the ground and saluted
with keen devotion to the god, worshipped
since long. He repeatedly did Sastanga
Prandma (a salute by bowing down the
eight organs of body), then stood with
elasped hands and started offering the
psalm in the following words -

waves yard
wang & Fada were wera META FETA
wean seaagenflamegiet siinareet
enfertaeeiy B11

TeterireaaeeragT: 113 v1
fae ara waar fee Tasagerara
Sitar Sayat eryaT WPA GH

37
amet wemraet faeet ayer atid
Fnqorrara freee Serfre113 «11
fartcura fated firqact freveeti3.011
Iu EPAT|
aranforpuserafosres ert

favagina eu

Tier aayat wai tia ofaafre

argea gitamennna years ware Tol

Markandeya said- (I) salute you O the
generous heart, giant, wisest, Mahadeva,
great, illustrious, the god of the gods. Lord
Brahma, Indra, Moon and Rudra worship
incessantly your lotus feet. A grand lotus is
adorned in your hand, you have brushed the
bodies of demons, I salute you. You put
your body at rest on Sesanaga, famous with
the name of Ananta. You sleep on him. You
are that very element of emancipation,
regularly concerned but doing concentration
of the sight on the fore portion of nose as a
practice of Yoga exercised by Sanaka,
Sananda and Sanatkumara etc, ascetics.
Your divine deeds are recited by
Gandharva, Vidyadhara, Yaksa, Kinnara
and Kimpurusa in lyrics daily. Salutation is
eonveyed to Nrsimha, Narayana,
Padmanabha, Govinda, resident of the caves
in the king mountain Govardhana for
recreation and rest, the master yogi, king of
gods, the water king and the king of the
earth. Salutation to Yogadhara,
Mahamayadhara, Vidyddhara, Yasodhara,
Kirtidhara, resort to the three properties,
holder of three elements and the holder of
Garhapatya ete. three fires, Salutation to the
propounder of three Vedas - Rk, Sama and
Yajus, master of three lokas (worlds)
trisuvarna, hymn and holder of tridanda.

AEGeT

=== PAGE 57 ===

38

NARASIMHA PURANAM

Salute to god Narayana, who illumines all
directions with crown, valaya, keyira, the
rays coming from the gem-studded garlands
and who wears Pitambara as also who is of
dark complexion as that of the tender
clouds. Salute to Visvamirti, whose
forehead shines with the radiance coming
out from the gem-studded golden ear-rings.
Salute to you O Lokanatha, Yajfiesvara,
Yajfiapriya, brilliant Vasudeva, lover of
devotion, Papaharin, and adorable god
Purusottama.

are Sara
seaiftrareand war sare:
Raga: MIATA AOSTA BI a

Vyasa said— God Janardana was pleased

by the psalm recited and said to
Markandeya.
sterreargara
yelfey wat ace are Hee A:
ARR verge Teatifa are BH
at ava feats arelé Fara:

AAAI TEP KE ANAT TASTATIY 3
The Lord said- Dear son, | am very
happy to see your strict penance and to hear
the psalm you recited. O the brilliant, the
evils adhered to you have now effaced in
toto. O the great Brahmin, I am now
prepared to fulfil your desire. Picase
express the same. O Brahmin, the man
without penance cannot see me in a wind
fall.
wausa sara

werner Seer arent Ta SPAT

waquierracntat aH ef STAYS

ate wart Tey wa ATE STA

forget etter ae wat fords

Markandeya said— O the master god, I
am fully satiated now to sce you. Othe
master of this universe, boon me with your
undeviated devotion only. O Madhava,
Sripate, Hrsikesa, provide with
longevity to the extent that I can do your
worship for if you really are pleased with
me.

me

strermargara

Tee fftia: yd farged a waren

ufeareaaet &  aondt gfe & 1

sé ati erm eat east

Wed yeaTe vi a ated arrenferison

The god said— you have conquered the
death already and now I boon you with
longevity. I further and coincidentally
render you and undeviated devotion capable
cnough to ensure emancipation. This holy
place will receive popularity with your
name. You will now further see me sleeping
with Yoganidra within the milk-sea (Ks
Trasdgara)
aaa Sart

sya Wetteanatarcedan

urehosaiste eater farePTerT Ns 21

onday tater ay Ys TAT

Feuer yor qrorafacnht ase

WAR seararare Tey ATT:

sfrernt quent fagat a ATT G ot

ad: i

aa: BRL weadt aT:
WL AYR TST FE
aft Git Brera 4 eH
STO FRA LATRTT TETAS,
wit: a tht eftufergeet

=== PAGE 58 ===

CHAPTER 11

atraferarare eft Utet
ARTY Faigtaraiy V1
aft stterfeeqea arausaahtt
SPTAISEATA: 12011

Vyasa said The lotus-eyed god Visnu
vanished with these words there. The
teligious soul, crown to sages, great ascetic
Markandeya too adopted a routine of doing
meditation, worship, penance and salutation
for the monarch god Madhustidana and
delivering lectures on the holy Vedas, the
Scriptures, various Purana, various episodes
(divine), holy historic events and element of
Ptr in the commune of hermits living there.
With the passage of time, the best
commentator of Scriptures, the extra-
brilliant hermit once strolled towards the
sea to see god Visnu as the lord earlier had
pronounced, It was a long journey but with
the keen devotion in heart, he walked along
without relaxation and finally reached the
destination. He then saw god Visnu in a
sleeping posture on the cot settled body of
the king serpent.

Thus, the tenth chapter on 'the life-sketch of
Markandeya’ in Sri Purana approaches the end.

39

=== PAGE 59 ===

39

CHAPTER 11
CHAPTER 11
The sage Markandeya recites hymns to the
Lord Visnu.
oa Sart
sierra STITT BTA
aausaistagera drrigenfarg a
Vyasa said~ = Sukadeva, _hermit

Markandeya began reciting a hymn in
praise of lord Visnu who was sleeping on
the bed of Sesandga at that time with due

salute to him.
wrausa sara

wate array feo waite yearn

waite Gaede wate Wee I

waite faut cette wate exoitert

waite cientrere waite TTA VATNS

waite wade waite act

wale WER wate AGASSI

waite Qerreart wate qarrfer

wetarererea waite wa Spray 1

Markandeya said~ god Visnu, be

pleased. Be pleased O the monarch god,
Garudadhvaja. O Laksmipati Visnu, O
Dharanidhara, have a pleasure. O Jokanatha,
Adiparamegvara, be pleased. O
Sarvadevesvara your eyes are lotus like,
may it please you. O Madhusftdana, you had
held the Mandara mountain, when the sea
was being churned. May it please you. May
it please Laksmikanta, Bhuvanapati, May it
please Adipurusa Mahadeva, Kesava on my
part.

wa HOT Tenet we fait ware

we faye varerat wa fawit zag Agu
HAST ATT HT ART TTTEAT

We aiet Sat Ha ae aa Aoi!
wa aad arr ora fergeras fern

wa yaa Arr Ha ATS favitnic
wet fayerae arr re eer Ta a

FE UF SATATUBIG I

ae RARE Ba AR AAT A

BT BNE BGR FT AAS AMA Rol
We PRT Soret wre sitar sa a

HS PPA HT USHER
wa oaferag wa TH AHR a

=== PAGE 60 ===

40

We Fa Wa a SAAT

wa wayt Fa wa weit TANG 7

we Hat TET Te Yaltaccm

Wa Gat wale wa oar TANG Fe

wa wdg wee wa wig eRe

Wa aM Ta wefan TAIseT Agwi

Victory to you O Krsna, beyond the

reach of imagination, indeclinable Visnu, O
inexpressive in spite of omnipresent and
living in universal from, O Paramesvara; I
salute you. Victory to you O undefeated
god, the everlasting truth, victory to you. O
regulating authority to all, the Kala victory
to you. O Sarvamaya, Victory to you. I
salute you. Victory to you, O Yajfiesvara
Natha, Omnipresent Visvanatha, victory to
you. O Svami, Bhitanatha, Sarvesvara
Vibho, victory to you. Visvapate Natha,
Karyadaksa Isvara, victory to you. I salute
you. O Papahari, Ananta and keeping away
the fear of birth and old age, victory to you.
Victory to you O Bhadra, Atibhadra, Isa,
benevolent Prabho. I salute you. O
Madhava, you provide with respectable
position, victory to you. O Devesgvara
Saikara,  Laksmipati, Victory to you.
Salute to you. O Sri Rama, the lotus-eyed
god with radiance like kumkuma, victory to
you. O sandal smeared in all parts of body,
Si Rama; victory to you. O Deva,
Jagannatha, Devakinandana, victory to you.
Victory to teacher of all, worth knowing
Sambho, victory to you. Salute to you.
Syamasundra with radiance as the blue
lotus, the husband of beautiful Radha,
victory to you. Sarvangasundara, adorable
god, salute to you. Victory to you. O
SarveSvara, you render everything, O
Philanthropist Sanatana Purusa, victory to

NARASIMHA PURANAM.

you. O Prabhuvara, you fulfil the desire of
devotees, victory to you. Salute to you.

Fa: BUCA TH: aTOTTeR

ciemta Treg areag ai Higa

Area UGA STA

sat Senfergarea AAT ATTA ARG 1

we aTgaara THe WitarTa

saree aefaere HT vg eNfTT oH!

Wa: HOM WAT AAvaHTyaTT Al

aa: ferara Sara Tr qaVATN RS I

aa Saretaara TAs faa

FART AAA TA STAM RS

Salute to the god whose navel has given

birth to lotus and who wear lotus garland.
Frequent salute to Lokanatha, Virabhadra.
Salute to Jagadigvara in the form of
Caturvytha, Tribhuvana Natha,
Devadhideva Narayana. Salute to lord Vis
nu in the form of Nrsirhha who holds the
Sariga bow. Salute to Vasudeva who wear
Pitambara. O god existing in the form of
Bhuvanesvara, Cakradhari, Visnu, Krsna,
Rama and god Siva. Frequent salute to
everlasting god Visnu, master of all,
Sridhara, Acyuta and worth knowing from
Vedanta Scripture. Salute to Sakaladhyksa,
Jagatpijya Paramatma.

oiler SoreSS Torr a

wd mat adetart ata ana: FAT O11

rama Geta frond vitae

wa Tere aft: wralt wa afar TTT I

a gad anal oi afar gare:

wd freed agatar a gen a Atvatszz

wa ned Vaatged oet at tyr:

wi ageanered i fre a fryer:

we gfe fara: afr at Ua TTT 11231

=== PAGE 61 ===

CHAPTER I1 41
wa al orranitgred wat BEGET Siggrerarat Aeriiqa Pr 3 et

wade TT WaT STS ATT SH diag Gag Wettiwacitcay

aut art eat ata WeaGaT:| quemneyge ferme geiteq13 ol!

VSAM Ht: AYA ATAU 4

fore garererer teniggnfarmy

ata wart Gad Tent Tee GI

safe & ayda aReTTATTATTN III

You are only mother and father to the

world. You are the fricnd to the sufferers.
You are friend, beloved, grandfather to the
father, teacher, position (gati), witness,
husband master and the supreme resort.
You are Dhruva, Vasatkartaé, Havi
(oblation), Hutgana (the fire), Siva, Vasu,
Dhata, Brahma, king of gods, Indra, Yama,
Sun, wind, water, Kubera (gospel), Manu,
Day and night, Rajani, Moon, Dhrti, Sri,
Kanti, Ksama and Dharadhara, sEsanaga. O
Madhusidana. You are in movable and
immovable forms, you are the only creator,
nourisher, and destroyer of the world, and
you are the only saver of the world. You arc
the motive, cause, the subject and supreme
god. O Madhava, you hold conch, discus
and gada in you hands, please, observe my
accession to. O lotus-eyed beloved, Purus
ottama in the bed of SEsanaga, you are the
only one to whom I salute with devotion
always. O god, I salute Srivigraha, adorned
with Srivatsa, the absolute cause for the
creation, the dark complexion and eyes like
lotus and that effaces the deficiencies of the
Kali era.

ETS TRIAS VARTA TATTN 3 C1
ward fagrena varcafrtarorg

areal Gated Ttiraferagusery
gaenud Wars ee stat VTA et
Salute to Rasikasckhara, Sridhara, Hari

who holds Laksmi in his heart, whose body
is charming and adorned with the divine
garland, whose back region is beautiful and
whose arms are large, who is adorned with
nice ornaments, who has originated lotus
from his navel, whosc eyes are beautiful
and large like the lotus petal, whose nose is
long and high-lifted, whose complexion is
as dark as that of the blue cloud, whose
arms are lengthy, whose body sturdy, whose
heart is adorned with the gem-studded
garland, whose brows forehead and crown
all beautiful, teeth are smooth and eyes
enchanting, who is adorned with beautiful
arms and reddish lips, whose ear-rings are
illuminating owing to the gem-studded,
whose throat is spherical and shoulders are
fleshy.

yer Fed sega

SATE FET HUTA 2

Santeeactareretivary

wdeirafart adareet ftqN13 311

wart Vda

Ferg rad TERT SI

afer werent fet ARTO

are amd ad Gad fereqa 4H

I cordially salute god Narayana who is

unborn and everlasting still holding a
delicate form, whose hair is reven-tress and
curly, whose shoulders are high lifted and

=== PAGE 62 ===

42

chest broad, whose eyes are extended up to
ears, whose face is lotus like, who is the
situs of Laksmi and administrator of all,
who is the creator of all worlds and
destroyer of all sins, who is the treasure of
all good characteristics and darling to all
organisms, who is omnipresent, Acyuta,
Igana, Ananta and Purusottma, who is the
endower of boons, who fulfils all desires,
who is delicate, Ananta, humble and
philanthropic to all as also free from all
ailments.

santa fercat fae wer cat waa

saferrrenrate art areeeftorererserern3 & 1

SPATTER TEATRO AAT

fafa Tt Sfaa WEaTEATIIZ OI

DSRS R COCR ORICELL

Be at WAT walter eareqNy C11

O god Visnu, O gracious to devotees, I

always salute you with my head bowed
down, I have seen to the extent of my
satiation, your exclusive form in_ this
dreadful ocean, thrilling with waves created
by the lashes of devastating winds, an
excellent and fascinating bed of Ananta Ses
anaga winds, an excellent and fascinating
bed of Ananta Sesanaga with onc thousand
hoods, the pleasing breeze blowing
hercunder you and Srilaksmi bound in the
grip of arms.

serit ¢ ag.tarat wren aa Tifea:

Wate Freres eA FHI

wea ante gent g:auee From

PATA TVaRGUMTSAT: ASTI oN

lifsdtsfer yst ara Yfat area!

vreatrerene faery wera

NARASIMHA PURANAM

sere fafern wreretet wrererataeh
aia wera Set Baits uw IW
feroreraferrerearrel PUT TT: 1
wate Guerra fat weitere 311

Owing to the fall in the dragnet of the
illusion (maya) created by you, I am
severely suffering. All active and inert or
this Ekarnava would have been destroyed
for lack of support, encircled by the
ailments and full of the mud from sorrows
and pains. An inaccessible darkness, void
from all directions had been only here. I am
suffering for long within it from the cold,
heat, old age, ailments, agony and
temptations etc. O father, Acyuta,
eventually J have come near your lotus feet
badly misdirected and threatened by the
crocodile in the form of agony and
attachment in this Bhavasagara (world).
Owing to suffering caused by misdirection
up to for a long period in this tough to cross
and dreadful Eakarnava, I have tired badly
and suffered from the sorrows and anyhow
have come today to your shelter. I pray you
to please have mercy on me O Great
illusion creator lotus-eyed god Visnu.

fayadts famrene fayarnfayeraera
SAAR MAAAISA HATTA
safe At BUT FON MOTTA
AH JUST TOUT RATTAN SG I
SAAT THT ATA TAN Tl
ATRL eTaTeT HT TATA
Tat Se gates aye: |
sre Suet set Ufa waa

Ti agar Tifa ae TARY Tsoi
wae BS PENTA TT

=== PAGE 63 ===

CHAPTER I1

43

data THe stacers wa Asc

O Kulanandana Krsna, you are situs to
the origin of the world, you have giant cyes,
you are the creator of the universe and the
soul of the world. Hence, do something for
protection of the sufferer as I have taken
exclusive shelter under you instead of
searching for others. O Purana Purusottma
Pundarikalocana, salute to you. O dark
complexioned as kajala, Hrsikesa, O
Mahesvara, the only creator of illusion,
salute is conveyed to you. O god of giant
arms, pick me up from the ocean of world
where I have been drowned now. O boon
endower god, O Govinda, pick up this
pauper, baseless and miser who has now
drowned in the worldly ocean surrounded
by the gigantic crocodile like forms,
sorrows, fatigues, agony, tough to cross and
excessively deep. Salute to the master of the
three-worlds, Visnu and Dharanidhara
Ananta. Frequent salute to the god of gods
and Sri Vallabha husband of prosperity.

Fo Fa GRIT wea
Parner wate ATTEN Se
rater yet yt

sorafe eaorega TTA
Tare sara

qirat Garfaerafrqiy ot
Tey varreralaet YH

are aera
meget aft

Geareeigt words fer PTAA BI

O Krsna, you are resorted to by the
baseless and you are kind-hearted. O
Madhusidana, please have mercy on the
creatures immersed in the worldly ocean. I
salute today, god Janardana who is unique,
Adi, Puranapurusa, Jagadigvara, cause of

the world, in the form of Acyuta, master of
all, who destroys the cycle of birth and
death as also the pains, who is the god of
gods and the husband of Laksmi. I salute to
god Visnu whose arms are giant, who is of
dark complexion, delicate, fascinating, of
charming face, lotus-eyed, whose hair is as
lengthy and curly as the waves of the milk
sea (Ksirasgara), who is everlasting and
delicate.

van frat ar aft wilt afeent araefiry

aaa Bact yore at racquet wUy 11

TIRRAEAY FT Uta HTT

wl wd fers argedta atta 311

O god, that tongue only achieves from
which your psalm recited, that mind has
only gained in which concentration on you
has existed and the hands used for your
worship are only worth, full and admiring.
O Govinda, absolve all sins committed by
me in course of rotating with the thousand
cycles of birth and death when I recite your
name 'Vasudeva'.
la Sart

ha emer fempatausas src

WT: wre ference & AP TEST: IG YI

Vyasa said~ On being requested by the
wise hermit, god Visnu, whose flag was
eagle-marked, replied with pleasure -

at ararqara-

wictfer aaet fam aqrar a AI

at quite ug a wiht cfem Faery GI

God said— O Brahmin, Bhrgunandaya, I
am pleased with your penance and the
psalm you recited. I wish you the best. Ask
for any boon and I will give you whatever
you desired.

Tava SaTT

=== PAGE 64 ===

44

NARASIMHA PURANAM.

rarmauae 23yr afer 3 Be wden
ale Fer wate INARA FUTTSTINY GI
SaOr fae aeat wate Fer:
Tactiaaate wer Sf Fa ATA
auiged 9 agi wart aaa: GT
aead wnt aratert aa eer Cu
aregfiraantit Serer wer rere
aaa serrated aargeg erate: 1 811

Markandeya said— O god of the gods, I
ask for the everlasting devotion at your feet
if you actually pleased and say that I should
ask for whatever I desire. Another boon is
that the whosoever person prays to you with
recital of this hymn, provide him with the
boon to settle at Vaikuntha Dhama. The
longevity rendered you in the past, has now
actually met with success as I could see you
today. O Devesa, I want to live here for
evcr in the scrvice of your fect beyond the
grip of birth and death.

serraryart
Teng § ype ufercafirention
van yfenladia aa BIA AAAIE ol
afead vat eit art wrrerahera
afar afat got Great we oie a WEMIe a
wa aa ws fered at cafteata
wa aa arent art waragtfer 118 2H

The god said— Bhrgusrestha, May your
exclusive devotion remain with me and this
will provide you with emancipation in due
course of time. The persons reciting this
psalm composed by you in morning and
evening will live with pleasure in my abode
by virtue of their extreme devotion. O
grandson of Bhrgu, in spite of being Danta
(self-sufficient), I am enslaved to my

devotees. Hence, call me from any place
and I will be there within no time.
Ba sara

seyret a yas wrausd a Area:

fara 8 ads yafant arg BU

oft 3 afore far aft wee hat:

Tasers a Peat YT AAG YI

& faauecn aftd yori

ping deer wet fem
a garam hae
aaa TEA TTTAAT: 1G 4 1
fer attafereqerat wrauserafed ae VeReyATT: RR
Vyasa said~ god Laksmipati resisted

him with these words to the crown hermit
Markandeya and he began to sce
everywhere god Visnu in course of his
movements to and fro on the carth. O
Brahmin, I have now completed the event
pertaining to wisc Markandeya as I had
heard from him in the past. The people
recite this long-long past act of
Markandeya, the grandson of Bhrgu, with
their strong faith in Visnu in a regular
manner; reside in the abode of god Nrsithha
duly honoured by devotces and keeping
them at bay from sins.

Thus, the eleventh chapter on ‘the devotion of
Markandeya’ in Sit Nrsirhha Purana approaches
the end.

=== PAGE 65 ===

44

NARASIMHA PURANAM.

CHAPTER 12

A dialogue between Yama and Yami

WW sara
qe yout waaramonfery
aiferget: & rate Your STITH B11

=== PAGE 66 ===

CHAPTER 12

Sita said— The religious soul Sukadeva
was not satisfied only with this holy story,
sweet as nectar and with power to effaee the
evils from mind and his desire to listen to
some more stories inereased. He therefore,
said to Vyasa -

aitqe sara
waste wayeat wewsas saa: 1
a gel eft: mares Wey: Tasra 1211
a ofertas 3 art gent dere sear
quai weet ra Tey A ag 3 11
aot gefrarmard te Fada
aquagtata: wat wT ag TETANY II

Sukadeva said-- O father, the penance
performed by wise Markandeya is really
excellent and tough to exercise, which had
made god Visnu to appear in his apparent
and physical form and conquered the death.
J am not satisfied with it anyway. Hence, I
request you to highlight some other story
too. O learned father, the people of duly
controlled mind, who do not involve
themselves in prohibited activities in spite
of the contrary circumstance, the fruit for
such high stand they receive is worth
conceiving and please highlight the same.

ware sare
aut gefaarntig cites ws a

qed aearghahs wt frrer: AGI
ordered Por

BM SUE Uae ATT TATA ING
faced: yrerea yat gaat
wee a aap aa aft ata 11
at aa dfaatie fagdar at

SISA TATE TTT 11
at ah arate SAT MITT TAT

45

Vyasa said—- O the great hermit
Sukadeva, I explain the fruit for the people
having undeviated mind which they reecive
in this physical world and the metaphysical
world. Listen to it patiently. In this very
context, the scholars dcseribc the ancient
episode in a form of the conversation
between the great soul Yama and Yami.
Vivasvana (sun) was the son of Aditi and he
had two ehildren. The first was a son Yama
and the younger Yami, a daughter. Both of
them were brought up by the parents
properly. Usually as children's nature does,
they would play and walk together and

“move hither and thither voluntarily. One

day, Yami, the sister of Yama said to him.
agar

aoe air drat area a ara
IDR fe Te wagal a vfaaqugo
SYR ga TFA AY Wt:
arrat waft wat at a avatar ee
wR otat ant watt ag Tasha
orate Frere cites @ ary APTA ee
RIT Tet aTat safe fea war
BATT AT Tg: HT aALeMTA BHI
ararinefirent ates wea fei
oraard after canftresctt ferrari ee
amg ara 3 ant: fa a a areata
erent yet Tea Were AT FET Ra I
armatar: fern: art agrit wet ar fare
Sr wre Fart waagaafa 12g

Yami said~ what is the use of a brother
who has no wish for his sister though of the
sister so desires and able to desire and who
can not be a husband to his sister? He who
does not accept the offer of hi: ter mature
in age to be her husband should consider

=== PAGE 67 ===

46

NARASIMHA PURANAM

himself as if he had not been born. He eould
not be deemed as born and in existence.
From any angle. If a sister wants his brother
to be her husband but the brother on his part
neglects her desires, in spite of his being a
crown hermit, he eannot be said to be a
bother. When ones sister is burning with
sensuality to sec her brother, what is the use
in the circumstanee, if other's daughter is
made his wife? I am sinking within my
nerves and senses. Wish to do the same as
what I wish at this moment; otherwise I will
commit suicide, I will die with an empty
with for you. Dear bother, the prick of
sensuality is intolerable. Why do you
neglect me? Dear brother, the fire erupted
of scx is burning me and J am dying. So,
don't stop. O husband, I am a wife dying for
coition. Please, be enslaved to me without
any restriction. Allow the adhesion of my
body with yours.
am sara

fated cirefatae of aftfa areas

seardftg a: Hakqur Ak FATT

39 darefaent ard ares arfah

FMT AEA: AY: SM WaBAA Re

rerarrafarng: erat aferresfan

aya ad: earheeratraat BANULe

Yama said— Dear sister, the universe as a

whole condemns sueh evil-doing. Then how
are you telling the same as religion abiding?
O gentle sister, who even having an
average mind and sense ean involve in such
a forbidden evil? Sister, I will not allow the
adhesion of my body with yours. No brother
ean satisfy the sensuality of his sister. The
person who joins in coition with his own
sister has been declared a heinous offender.

Sister, such a heinous act can be expected
from the animals falling in Triyagyoni, not
any way from god or man.
ayant

THe aang dart at 7 gah

mgmt ward dani at a geafAg oil

fa greta at aH reafa vi

rari Fraitt war: apeafar a Freee: 112 @1

Yami said- Brother, both of us are twins
and lived together in the womb of our
mother. As the combination established at
the same place was not deemed sinful, this
coition too cannot be considered a sinful
combination. Brother, J am so far without a
husband. Why do you not take care of my
interests? The monster Nirrti too enjoys
eoition with his sister daily.

aa sara

werigaitirda cheat qyfterny

weryeareitoh rarengeady 112 211

werefated of veryerrat

fafed asttareneagter MOT 12311

warerettet SeeeAeay BA:

Bast Hed eaaqada 121

afaané Way ye get Fay

fasg wdeily cag a fag e 41

uRitat at weet & faferer waster!

aa aed watara 7 a wat raraET 2G

are TMA sa a a WE Gea:

Wa: wonge a: wart PyeMt 1211

Yama said— Sister, god Brahma too has

condemned the vitiated worldly dealing.
The people of this universe follow the deeds
as performed by the great men. It is,
therefore, advisable to the great man that he

should follow and practise the great deed
and kick off the condemned acts invoking

=== PAGE 68 ===

CHAPTER 12

47

the special efforts. This very is thc
characteristic or religion (deeds). The rest
of people practice the same as performed by
the great men and the deeds verified by
them are followed by the people. Gentle
sister, I consider your words trifle and full
of nuisance. Not only that but I deem it
prejudicial to all religions and particularly
to all the worlds. I advise you to live and
enjoy with the others more beautiful and
modest than me but remember that I cannot
be your husband. Sister, I abide by my great
resolution with all my might and cannot
even touch your body. The person has been
pronounced 'evil-doer' by the hermits who
entertains or accompanies with his sister in
coition.
wayaTa

gett cer weeny cites wafiegery

aa wt cava prea aa wfiftorqe cn

a fauna 3 fart aa Crafton

Sereno + earrahe MEAT eH

aa Wad WT aah SHUT TAT

agra dufeasa fraranfis yfafera3 011

Yami said- I see that such complexion
(as of yours) is tough to find in this
universe. Where can be found such a
combination on the earth where complexion
and cqual age have existed altogether. I do
not know, how your mind is so stable? And
prohibiting you from the coition with the
woman so enchanted and of equal
complexion and quality, I have come to
your shelter voluntarily alike the creeper
attached to the tree. A smile of chastity
adorns my face. I will now embrace you
definitely by gripping your body with both
my arms.
aa sara

at sera Baitfin Fat Seafetarth

ag F artes Sern fet aa: 1

wee tae Set war rafting en

Shaat wayart aat grata waar: 1

Qua areaaigt depat ofteera3 21

rena fasta + after gaorg

uftard wert a GAREY Tea: 113 311

fart 3 frist ag fawit seu diay

at: Wey Fen enifart qeat:113 v1

Yama said— O dark eycd, beauty public,

I am unable to meet your desire. Shelter
under any other god. O spinstcr, be the
goddess for a god. O spinster, be the
goddess for a god who is thrilled with
appcal for sensuality at a glance of you. The
scholar will not involve himself in vitiated
acts even for the woman beloved to all, and
decmed delicate, most beautiful,
enlightened, benevolent and acceptable as
bride from all angles. O cnlightened sister,
my resolution is all stable. I will not indulge
in. such a heinous act for regret. Gentle
sister, my mind is free from excitement and
duly devoted to god Visnu and Siva. I
therefore, do not want to submit myself to
such a sinful act; listen to this as my
declaration and firm determination.

eae Sart
TAPAS TA da Feat:
SMa OA: ered Aa FaraaMAATAN3 GH
sen afer oranges
ret wafirangerat vac waa GI
Wy qa yet TTT
waurret Yud srreTATTAATI3 ol
ayeaciad fred gearenody aa:
wegen: frereren 3 fergie ATEN C1

Srivyasa said— Sukadeva, in spite of the

=== PAGE 69 ===

48

NARASIMHA PURANAM

frequent submissions made by Yami, Yama
did not share with her in that sinful act as he
was greatly resolute and religion abiding.
He there fore, attained the element of god.
Undepleting and everlasting fruits for the
persons not indulging in sinful acts and of
well checked mind, have been explained in
the scriptures. Such religion abiding people
definitely attain to divine results. This
episode pertaining to Yami is most ancient
and everlasting. It seeps the sins and all
sacrosanct in itself. It should be listen to
with innoeent heart and in a state free from
passions. The Brahmin reciting it in the
advent of divine offering (Devayaga) and
offering for ancestors (Pitarayaga), satiates
his fore-fathers. They seldom have to enter
into the palace (abode) of Yama.

ayeaerad Fret firuragan aq
aerate aT: TYP 811

The person reciting it daily, becomes
scot-free from the liability of pitaras and
thus gets absolved from the acute pains
inflicted on Yama,

Yaaarerag war
aatfadt aeuerifatrary
faraadta aarft ga Mio
‘ofa staefeegent aterrdardt ae
PISRTSEATT LN

Son Sukadeva, I have now completed
this episode, the best and ancient which is
ascertained of the padas (feet) of Veda and
the connotation attached thereto. This
definitely tends killing mala-fides and
ser.vality of people who recite it.in a
regular manner. Tell me now, what more
should I make you to listen to?

Thus, the twelfth chapter on ‘Conversation

between Yama and Yami' in Nrsimha Purana
approaches the end.

=== PAGE 70 ===

48

NARASIMHA PURANAM

CHAPTER 13
Power of chastity and conversation with a
Brahmacari
Ws sara
fated aan aa afeat afc
arn: quae & gfe ser: women
Suka said— Father, this Vedic story is
eccentric in itself. I now request you to
describe other stories worth sweeping the
evils out from the hearts of people.
Na Fav
ag 7 eaten yay
ufacarer: arg areaferegrerenfior: 12 11
aya afer arene Faure: |
adereaicragt careart WfiFred:113 11
entarifaa: wenneya:
agerenfrmt w sire: 10s 11
aramrenterat genta atareary
ofretarnary tg aehas ST ATG
ea Wott Wer afaat AT ANAT: |
ufo Haran wg: frafet Tag
ag: gantta dfarenfifie
WAM REA YOTTATAT 9
WaT He Wate meme weTAa: |
afore aay Say AGS: 112 11
Vyasa said— Dear son, I will now
highlight that ancient story which has been
knitted as a conversation of a chaste woman
with a Bachelor (Brahmacari). Kasyapa was

a Brahmin who lived in Madhya Pradesh.
He was a master in ethics, a scholar in the

=== PAGE 71 ===

CHAPTER 13

Vedas ‘and their parts, well-versed in the
essence of the scriptures and the element,
an expert orator, prepared to perform the
acts supporting his principles and non-
oriented to the principles followed by
others. He used to enjoy coition with his
wife only in Rtukala and perform offering
to gods (Agnihotra) daily. Learned
Kasyapa uscd to serve the Brahmins and
guests who came to his home to the extent
of their desires after completing Agnihotra
in morning and evening. He had a strong
faith and devotion to god Nrsithha. His
most lucky wife was Savitri. Being a chaste
wifc she used to keep herself busy all time
in the service of her husband. On account
of her merits, she was popular in society
and people had respect for her. As a result
of prolonged devotion and service to her
husband, that chaste woman had
automatically acquired the power of
intuition. She could see the events taking
place indirectly or which cannot be seen
apparently. Learned Kasyapa, the resident
of Madhya Pradesh, used: to
Nandigrama with his very meritorious wife
and perform his routine.

ore aaterfereat fart aarerat werafi:1
wea aratwarcereret Veet area ATA Hg Ht
TaeTOTAT AYA TAT

TT Yd es Tee ReAT ot

live in

a arararahrg ya ane ferent:
Sree Tet Teh AAT YTRT AA
waveht aeta tagnift gfaary
quarg araferan q ATA wah aenfafern gen
surrennut aa aga mfa aera:

mae wes Tf eT Teferfern 2311

49

In the same period of time, one more
learned Brahmin namely, YajfiaSarma used
to live in Kosala Desa with his chaste wife
Rohini. She was all meritorious and uscd to
keep herself busy all the moments in the
service of her husband. That meritorious
woman gave birth to a son. The Brahmin
Yajfiasarma, surviving on YAyavara
profession, performed the ceremony of
Namakarana and gave him thc name as
Devasarma on the twelfth day of the birth
after Punyahavacana rite was performed.
Similarly, he was taken our from home
(Upaniskramana) in the fourth month of
birth and the ceremony of feeding was
performed in the sixth month.

Wa aa: Wot geet a enter

went wahed af gered Ta A ees!

area sara far senda

Pata cma g frat TacitennferT gg 1

WAT Were gat a fara Ga:

adurena tenet ergfe: Heat: FAH

Saenratfor gear gy Sagrat wa: Yas

Tipiteg qatig Gr Feat senfafen yon

aaa Way Une aa aT Ufa

wronrer ferga: whet Taree METAS I

franet | gaat sadanatga:1

grated gq afemt a afer

We wate TATAT YA WafHet | AT

gareg vague Frat wes FTN

Subsequently, Cidakarma at the age of

one year and Upanayana ceremony at the
age of eight years, worked out from the
womb were performed by the religion
abiding father. After the Upanayana
ceremony so performed in a prescribed

manner, he began study on the Vedas.
Before he could complete his study of the

=== PAGE 72 ===

50

NARASIMHA PURANAM

first Veda, his father expired. On the death
of his father, he started wailing with his
mother. However, complying with the
directions of the great men, he somehow
made himself bold and performed the
funeral ceremony. Devagarma then left his
home (viz. became reluctant). He took dip
in the Ganga etc. holy rivers and began to
stroll to and fro in many places. Eventually,
he finally reached the place where the
chaste woman SAvitri was living. He
became popular as a Brahmacari there. He
used to live on alms and carried on his self-
study of the Vedas and performed
Agnihotra in a regular manner and began to
pass his days in Nandigrama. His mother,
on the other hand, was suffering from a
number of pains on the death of her
husband and the sudden departure of her
son from home, as nobody was left there to
care for her.

Fa AA | Fat a gerard eaanley

fare ward pore corte ara: 112 a1

areal eral Meet UTTEMY WAY:

at quar aedarara Gagrat at fast: 112 211

fares ae 9 wager aaa

Tio Aararara @ ait afarat | AV

airrateen cet eat Profan arty

7H Sear ait feat art aferott ferent Ta: 112 ¥1

aaa Fat cafgery Ugeishet AT

ofet rat Tat Frere TTTSSTATIN GI

One day that Brahmacari spread his

towcl after a bath in the river so as to get it
dricd. In the meantime, a crow and hcron
case down, took that towel and fled.
Having seen their nuisance, Devasarma
scolded them at which thcy left that cloth
after throwing their dropping on the same.

That Brahmin then started with anguish at
them. The anguish gaze of the Brahmin had
singed the birds and they fell down dead on
the ground. The Brahmin was surprised at
this event. Then he was caught in the grip of
illusion that nobody is equal to me on this
earth to observe so strict penance. Deeming
this and with full of ego, he went to the
village for alms.

Se TOY Tea ATT

wareerayé ant We aa Ufa EI

a gear araarafe oF feat ufraan

araat wd faare wy: HATTA GI

areramra aeet Ta sas ato

arpa Taahet A Y feat aig WaAANR CI

aa: wR Tame Farad vfrrary

aera arate: Greece

feet g Frieda coat ar warata e811

3 Brat FT serene ana J At Wat

aetditser ararery Frert wet aabasFAI3 ot)

Dear son, that egoist of penance, went to

that home where the chaste woman Savitri
used to live. Without taking Icast care that
he was asking for alms; Shc kept silence.
She first took care of her husband,
complied his order, washed his feet with
warm water and only then she prepared
herself to give alms to the Brahmacari. That
Brahmin was annoyed and he started staring
at her as if he would burn her into ashes.
Savitri noticed it and said in humour - O
furious Brahmin remember that 1 am not
like the crow and heron whieh were burnt
into ashes by your anger today at the bank
of the river. Take the alms with silence and
peace if you so desire.

=== PAGE 73 ===

CHAPTER 13

51

waayat: areca frerarers Bisa:

ferrearret vem: fet gaeateit3 eu

way aS wae fret Was: |

ufaaarat yaarat yee Fate wats 211

Wns wag aTgare Ufa

He took the alms without any reaction

on his part and proceeded further. On the
way, he was regularly thinking over the
intuitive power of that woman and finally,
reached his hermitage. He carefully kept the
alms-bowl in the hermitage and again
visited the home of that chaste woman at an
appropriate time when she had taken food
and her husband went out from home. On
this visit, he said to that woman -

wearer Yeasat FT aah: 113 311
fpenifagrt samy Tara
The Brahmacari said~ O the luckiest
woman, I ask you humbly that by which
means you come to know the events taking
place indirectly? Please, tell me the reality.
sgam aa ar areat wife 7 vitaa3 wi
a gerntut we year Jeter a1
superatedt ter at Ss utara 4
mdse wate cantattsfert
eater g ufergegar ert we after: 113 11
Taking care of his revisit, the woman
replied - O Brahmin, listen to me carefully.
I am going to tell you how the power of
intuition can be increased when a man
observes his own apparent duty. You sec

that the supreme duty or religion for the
wife is to serve her husband.

ataré Wer Hal aerefet wera
fearanatant agar aftaraorg gol!
weer wa aagd fanqeriasiaa

arte 8 wants frat ot aetesfang cu
O learned man, I always observe that

religion with all my devotion and sincerity.
Other religions are valueless and void for
me. I undoubtedly serve and keep satisfied
my husband throughout the day and night.
This is the reason, I am so intuitive to
know the event to which I do not see
through my physical eyes. I will tell you
some more. Listen to me if you so desire.

frat areret: Yeqerergenettet 41

ya faaht sear g tremrifirerta: 113 311

sree Art aS gaat eat auf

arta faearas Fret areca: 011

Your father was a holy Brahmin

observing the Yayavara profession. You
had learnt the Vedas from him. You came
here just after the funeral ceremony. What
you are doing here is no more than earning
bread for your single stomach and the
widow and old mother has been left by you
for suffering as she is absolutely helpless
now.

wat mt ga: ye unferdt cnferrem
at erm fatter ent aq fam a STAI eH

O Brahmin, tell me whether you should
not feel it a shameful act that you have left
the woman who once had brought you up
and who is helpless now.

aM wa Gd Tey aed We

gifaat at oe mara fe wafeirset us eu

Weg 2a & at uferrafird wag

Facer eegett er TeTEaATTETT IY 311

vel aa: Ygds wey ard geT

an ar gat ate gar sat gat FAA
Brahmin, what result for your penance

=== PAGE 74 ===

52

NARASIMHA PURANAM

can there be except the pains when you
have left the mother who washed the urine
and night-soil in your childhood, The pains
of your mother will turn your mouth
emitting odour. Your father had performed
the ceremonies properly and the power that
you see with yourself are as a result of the
same. His all acts go futile like dive into
saced rivers, a visit at pilgrimage, japa and
oblation into fire.

a Sitaft gar gery wea Ara Yg:faat

At era WaT Ta AGATA 4 I

O wicked and evil-doer, your burnt japa

and even the offering-all is redundant.
Brahmin, man lives the life of a corpse
whose mother suffers from pains.

weet wd wet ay ae fe

TIgya aert gery Ufert FTA wg

a arora areal Be cies Wa TI

aerea Ta Tae aa ATT SAAT YON!

The son obedient to his mother and who
protects her with all his might and
devotion, his acts performed are fructified
in this and that world too. O Brahmin, the
people deserve honour and respect in both
worlds who have complied with the advices
of their mother. Hence, I advise you to go
there where your mother is and serve her till
her death.

at od wera sitasdt ager Ft wt aa:
wet uftentt wi gerefaerraqy ct!
aah: Fe a YS vos
mere apfattacrd Tat ATS eI

It is your only supreme penance to serve
her. Give up the anger as it destroys and
makes fruitless all the acts either performed
directly or indirectly. Regret for the killing

of those birds and make your heart innocent
and free from evil concepts. I have told all
these facts without any twist. Brahmacari,
do as I say if you really want to attain the
position of a great man.

rennet Fea St adhafa sat afer
sree farce fers ufearaTiy ot
‘disfi anne waist enfaet x arrears
SATA aA STAPH gu

Tren wanted wea at Blaha
marred Tere fergadt vraas VI

aa Treat Fen aif waiter gy Ya
aratfer aft & gfe aan & guia 311

That chaste woman, stopped with these
words. Brahmacari then asked for apology
for the offence he had committed and
replied - O the chaste woman, forgive me
for this unintended offence committed O
the most lucky chaste woman, you have
said for my interests. Forgive me for the
anguished stare. Please, tell me the duties I
should observe so that I could attain the
sanctifying position.

Tagen were a yard waa

aft aration cent carat attr & aOpy wt
rer aren waar aa Faget dara

OH AT TA A TerL waved a Va NG GH
aR ga ae vat wa sfercafen

at yéhea @ etter ma wafer & create G11
wre afaar wet: wafaada:
mrararteght: fagad afaeatriy ot
wyarat vata afar a frevss:1

a ae aaraeghtsas
adaerares turd warreafant 611

=== PAGE 75 ===

CHAPTER 14

wrertag afd wan aa fe yes:
Ware ad Bad He ae fe A gaye

In reply to that Brahmin the chaste
woman Savitri again said~ Brahmin, listen
to what activities you should perform there.
You should at first provide your mother
with maintenance on alms and regret for
the killing of birds to be observed either
here or there. The daughter of Yajfiasarma
will be your wife. Accept her only with
rcligion abiding. YajfiaSarma will offer you
his daughter. A son will be born from her to
extend your clan pattern. You will survive
happily on alms like your father. On the
death of that wife, you will become
Tridandi (recluse). On being observed the
prescribed rules for a recluse, You will
attain to the position of Visnu with the
pleasure of god Nrsirhha. I have told you all
that shall take place in future in order to
meet your curiosity. Follow the advice
given if you observe these us true.

Te Sart
Tran argiadiadaré vfraa
afte aga: ad aa TT YMA ol
The Brahmin said— O chaste woman, I
go for service and maintenance of my
mother instantly. O meritorious, I will
observe all suggestions delivered by you on
my visit there.
SqaeN WHA, Tar Sagal aAKATT
Tas Hat Torre faraata: 1G Bu
pen faareqerar yt agrat YT
Gey WATT AAAS: |
arfaewares wnt fafgrarerarqiig 211
ufasargfaatta waftar
eniga arg: ufterot we
wang o Peat ae

53

fort o faut: wath wag 311
fa sitgferegent geraftdaret aH
sreaTgT Sema: 1183 11
Brahmin, Devagarma left from there

with these words instantly and he served his
mother, with all care and keeping him free
from anguish and = affection. He
subsequently, married and got a beautiful
son from his wife. After some years, his
wife expired and he became a recluse. He
developed the sense of treating gold like a
of lump of clay and attained emancipation
with the grace of god Nrsirhha. I have thus
told you about the power of chaste woman
and the supreme duty to serve and protect
mother. Shattering all worldly bindings and
by collapsing the world trce from root, the
man attains to the position of Visnu.

Thus, the thirteenth chapter on ‘conversation of a
Brahmacarl with a chaste woman’ in Sri Nrsirhha
Purana approaches the end.

=== PAGE 76 ===

CHAPTER 14

53

CHAPTER 14
The importance of pilgrimages and four
orders (asramas) of life.
ara sara
Wy ara wags forearedai wt war
ware yorg waoraroneraN eH

Vyasa said- O the most learned son
Sukadeva, listen to this evil sweeping story
along with all my pupils present here.

yu fare: afvagereafarym:|
waar wee querert wena en
aa: ged fart fewer
fraER: Weafaat ACAI: 113 A

=== PAGE 77 ===

54
Fae a gt AEA ATT
yout facarma ad a
vat wararer fags frerrery
ata WL Wa WEAN
aanfa quay fit werafa:
AAG TTA
wey at Tet wae 4
In the ancient time, a Brahmin great and
well-versed in the Vedas and seriptures
went to a holy place on the death of his
wife. He took a bathe there in the prescribed
manner and seated himself for tough
penance in a deserted plaee. He then
abandoned the desire for remarriage and
started living on alms and doing great, deeds
along with a daily bath, japa etc. He took a
dip in the Ganga, Yamuna, Sarasvati,
Vitasta (Jhelama) and Gomati etc. rivers
and reached Gaya. He did tarpana rite for
his father and grandfather and reached
Mahendra hilloek. He took a bath in hilly
-reservoirs and ponds and then met the
crown hermit Parasurama, the son of the
Bhrgu. He again did tarpana for his fore-
fathers there and entered a forest eapable to
sweep off the evils.
tert va AAR
fercentreraarenit wat
faqeee: 4 aya famen
rare wa
wetpirerta ust aan
area yeifiifterera: ya
waa fate afrarger dhe
A stream of water used to fall down
from a mountain there. It was so eapable as
to efface the evils if any residue still

NARASIMHA PURANAM

remained in the minds of the people. The
Brahmin took the water from it and
sprinkled it on the head of god Nysirha.
His body became free from home and any
of the attachment of evils. He then stayed
on at the mountain Vindhydeala and he
started regular worship of god Visnu, the
Aeyuta, adored by the devotees and the
great hermits by offering the pretty flowers
grown on the land of that mountain.
a arefagt agerergtat
ge: YParrye way
apratted yeagarcat
eat Jeroen fame 1
armenia faseeuret-
aft we ayer ara
mente Prat wa der wae
raft waar meet it

He thus worshipped for many years. God
Nrsithha pleased and appeared while he
was in snoring sleep. The god said-
‘Brahmin, it is a violation of the rules made
for the eouple; if someone does not follow
the rules for any of the 4Srama. If you really
are no more interested to observe the
married life, acccpt any other asrama. | do
not pleased with the person in spite of his
being well learned in the Vedas if he does
not follow the prescribed rules for any of
the asramas. However, your loyalty has
pleased me and this is the reason why am I
suggesting you the same.

Wayed: waa
fastsft qa wfafeaa area
ated a Gear A AfraYAN go

=== PAGE 78 ===

CHAPTER 15

The Brahmin pondered upon the
suggestions dclivered by god Nrsirhha and
found it mandatory to observe. Hence, he
immediately abandoned the worldly
attachments and became a recluse.

frevegeraraferrantir-

Tqeda seein fet:
SU Hel Harter

wifes wed BIT Vee
wareafSa, MTA Teh

denfaget araraardt
rerd fern aafaegtt

erent u fret we Ya
fafaacast fager erat

fraya ad qaasee way
arat wret uifafgerott

fareita 3 aT 83 11
fagaurranst fermet

wearema draug ava
aera afer wfaers &

WAS YT: WATTS SI

The Brahmin started taking a daily bath
in that evil sweeping water of the fountain.
Since that day, he used to stand in water
with a trident and basil garland in his hands,
in decp concentration on god Visnu and
japa in his lips. To put the Vigraha of Visnu
in the form of Nrsirhha with sacred and
devoted imagination within heart and mind,
to worship him, to live in solitude, to be
satisfied with vegetarian diet and that too
through alms was the routine observed by
him. In that wide and deserted place
(Province) he would sit on the seat made of
kusa grass, merge his all affairs pertaining
to sensory organs, the senses, the
discriminative mind all in everlasting god

55

Visnu, and meditate on omniscient, unborn,
gigantic, in the form of truth, the best,
benevolent, full of pleasure and the supreme
Isvara. Thus, at death, he  attaincd
emancipation and became form of the
supreme soul.
weha & antag SA:
adore 3 ;
WL Wer Fane SU: WE FET gu
sega Ta Ya yest:
Tet yours waaay
targa fret Tt
WF: faftrereatirarted aan eeu
gfe strefeegent agdyiiseaa:u gett

The people who read this story
competent to provide with emancipation
and related to the salvation with — their
exclusive concentration on god Nrsiriha,
attain to the fruit as would avail on having a
dip in Prayaga, the pilgrim-place and lastly,
obtain the great position of god Visnu. Dear
son, I have told you this holy, sacrosanct
and ancient episode on your enquiry and
curiosity both. Now, tell me what you want
more to listen to? Express your desire.

Thus, the fourteenth chapter on significance of
asramas in Sri Nrsirhha Purana approaches the
end.

=== PAGE 79 ===

CHAPTER 15

mn
a

CHAPTER 15
An elucidation of the world tree and the
knowledge competent to demolish the same.
Ya sat
sighted aa ated ght: Ten
Panga wart Ie uftadan a

=== PAGE 80 ===

56

NARASIMHA PURANAM

aaquefe 8 at waagiad ya
ATR Aft ETAT PATE AOTN

Sukadeva said- Father, I am curious to
listen to you about the world in company of
all these hermits now. It is the world tree
that drives this entire cycle of change in the
universe. Dear father, you have earlier
indicated its existence, so I think; you only
are able to describe it. O the great scholar,
nobody other than you knows the
characteristics of this world tree.

We sat
a Pitageng ferent wer a
POTEUE: WS PATHOL

Sita said~ Bharadvaja, on enquiry so
made by his son Sukadeva in the presence
of pupils, Srikrsnadvaipayana Vyasa told
him the characteristic of world tree as
under-

ala sara
query fren: wae act at YY wafer:
tangal centr aa Bs WaT
ETAT TET ANAT: |
afarrmapda sfeaeRT: 114 11
Tenytfamrara fast: vaya
antigay Uy: HAs: I
anit: wadyart rege: WAKA:
Wrage Ui Fa TEA TT ATI
wed afert ace WarqAeATITT
gate wanes Heard Ser 2
dacie ant yag:~waatad:!
MIAO WGA Heal TATA PUTS
forn piet aba a aba gemnha:
alfa went 44 fisehat Sea: gOI

fora u fret a ae Tonfem
adtsneet & aft cee Gee!
aeermad: uelds agisht year
anita vi dat dearfirnoary
arent aefaees A: TY: YATRA
arranger

aaa yO
art arrormafares fe cites

Wer SAT: TYla: WATERS

gfe sttrefaeget wsaegttseaa: 11g 11

Srivyasa said-~ Listen all my pupils
present here and dear son, you also should
listen carefully to me about the world tree
now being described by me. This tree has
gripped the entire physical and apparent
illusion (parlance). This world tree has
sprouted from its root in the form of
inexpressive supreme soul. It is stood in this
form before us after availing growth from
that root. Its trunk is the wisdom
(Mahatattva), the senses (nerves) are its
buds and the cavities (veins) the five great
elements are its gigantic branches, the
peculiar matters arc its leaves and sub-
branches, good deeds and evils are its
flowcrs from which the grief and gaiety
fruits are obtained. This world tree is
everlasting with acceleration and it is the
same shelter to all organisms as that of
Brahma. This Aparabrahma and
Parabrahma too is the cause of this world
tree. Dear son, these are the characteristics
of the world tree about which I have told
you now. The organisms caught of physical
ego have fallen in the trap of affection
while climbing on this tree. The people non-
oriented to the knowledge of Brahma, often
are trapped in this world and always have to
feel grief and gaiety. However, on the other
side, the people known to Brahma are not

=== PAGE 81 ===

CHAPTER 16

entrapped by this world. They demolish this
tree and become scot-free. O the great
learned Sukadeva, the evil-doers seldom get
out from the trap of the object and the
action (karma and kriya). The conscious
people, on the other side, cut into pieces the
branches of this tree by the conscious sword
in their hands and attain to that immortal
position from where they seldom are
recycled to birth and death. The man
fastened firmly by affection for the body
and the wife too becomes free by virtue of
the practical application of his
consciousness. Hence, the great men keep
the attainment of knowledge of the top of
their action plan as it is the knowledge that
only pleases the god Nrsirhha. A man
without consciousness is not better than an
animal. The eating habits, rest and sleep,
sense of fear and intercourse etc. in man are
like those in the animals. It is only
consciousness that differs him from the
animals. Hence, the persons without
consciousness too are like animal barring
the structural or physical difference.

Thus, chapter fifteen on ‘description of the world
tree’ Sri Nrsithha Purana approaches the end.

=== PAGE 82 ===

CHAPTER 16

37

CHAPTER 16

Description of attainment of emancipation by
virtue of concentration on god Visnu

aga vara
HATA TS TAMAS |
wert: Yavad: ufadt Arar gn
at armaeciteg feed: uftifea:1
ag: wanifinitt: qrartaonfefir gn
a at freenyg gett wera
peorrente & at wet yfat: at TaqNAN

Sri Sukadeva said— Dear father, how can

a man climbed on the world tree, ticd with
hundreds of attachments, envies, fatigues
etc., fell into the ocean of Yoni with the
cord of affections for son and luxuries,
suffering from sensuality, anger, greed and
world affairs and fastened with the principal
tie of the acts and subsidiary ties of passion
for son (children) and wife cross this
toughest worldly ocean quickly? How can
he attain emancipation? Please provide us
with the proper solution for this query.
stteara sara

WY er HEMT Boge HfeTATyATT|

wea aunt & feat area ad GTS

aes tha GR entgferatetar:

Taafinterg a wren aa TATA GI

TeraTage aN ATT: UTA: |

anetret ane: vite eat as faeiterr 116 1

Tgiet weed ygt YeraforT

wore fafrate ane: upsell

Vyasa said~ I describe the divine

knowledge to you all which provides a man
with emancipation if properly understood as
Thad heard from Narada in the distant past.
Please, listen to it with attention O learned
son. Once Devarsi Narada got a chance to
enter into the chamber of Yama, the same
place where the gross Raurava hell is and
the men without conscious acts and
thoughts, suffer from numerous pains as a
result of their past acts. He saw that the
evil-doers have been thrown into there for
suffering. He moved out from there
immediately and reached a place where
three eyed Mahadeva was. He bowed his
head with requisite etiquette before the
great trident holder god Sankara and Ganga.
He then asked him -

=== PAGE 83 ===

58

NARASIMHA PURANAM

AN sarq

a: Wart weed: art: yay:

wrafefanddg: dear: wgfifitic

ad 7 yeaa fant wegen

wert ae F aed aighreante WEIGH

we deat qe ARES frei:

sara Aye FEY: WEIGHT EERO

Narada said— O god, how can a man tied
with the great struggles, grief and gaiety
and the word etc. worldly affairs, suffering
from six Urmis; shortly cross the ocean of
mortal world? O benevolent god Siva,
please tell me that remedy as I am curious
to listen to the same. Having seen the
curiosity of Narada, god Hara was pleased
as his face was glowing with smile. He
replied Maharsi -
Weyat sara

aang & yet a erate

seat WU yet Va TATTETI Ra

ponfe agueaet yeu ughdery

at Serer wg TET ATT RI

we fait: wanda afe afpacraqera

a frenfa dant farsi Tere e311

Shipere aT AATTITG: |

aarcguernges stort wife asaferu exit

wearer Raenft aft: argrearaq

wre Bfae a apertit sarentfegreaehai eg 1

THANG Bayt Fai FaneTaT

aaa ANY eaTeagO TATST: ge

Mahesvara said- O the great hermit, I
tell you the nectar of consciousness most
cryptic, confident and capable to drive off
the fear of worldly binding and sorrows.
The four type commune of living organisms
(creaturcs) starting from a straw to the four

headed Brahma or in other words, this
movable and inert world as a whole is
moving into the blind alley of the illusion
(Maya) spread by god Visnu. In case,
therefore, someone could avail of the grace
of god Visnu in the form of consciousness,
that only crosses this worldly ocean in spite
of its being tough for god, far to say of a
man. The man non-oriented to the
knowledge of elements and intoxicated with
the worldly enjoyments and luxuries,
immerses till death in the marsh of the
world as an old cow is dead when trapped
into the mud. I do not see a little bit
possibility for emancipation for a man even
if he dies a crore deaths who had tied
himself with the acts of varied nature like a
silk worm. O hermit Narada one should
therefore do worship and meditation on
god Visnu exclusively as he is the god of all
and everlasting.

wet faye tara fear

wedganet fey war earery fq Vou

Pafdtacd Foenst Fars Faery

argeanst ferent wet earafagerati ec ii

Pear we werrad yaa

Ram fay ferah wer arafaqeaa eel

adurcfatrfaramtranearory

Fratorred fare wer carey faqEAA2 O11

at wards waorafaatirg

werd yigt fam war dated Fea wt

Aigat GoM TeTay

aprons farm der eararayeaan 2H

The man who does concentration on god

Visnu, who is in the form of the universe,
beyond the birth and death, the sole cause
of all, existing in soul, sacrosanct and
omniscient, avails of emancipation. The
man frees from all worldly ties who always

=== PAGE 84 ===

CHAPTER 16

keeps keen devotion for the optionless,
regular, beyond the illusion, free from the
agony and ailments and unborn Vasudeva
(Omniscient god) Visnu, The man
imagining him always in the shelter of god
Visnu, who is free from all distortions,
absolute peace, Acyuta, creator of all
creatures and the situs for the origin of the
gods; is absolved from the cycle of birth
and death. The man is freed from the ties of
acts (karma) who always keeps his mind in
concentration on god Visnu, the god
innocent, beyond the proof, beyond the
characteristics, in the form of peace and
free from evils. The man is freed from the
ties of birth and death who always has
devotion for god Visnu, the god of Yogas,
Purana, without physical body, resting in
the cavity of the wisdom, beyond the
contacts of the worldly affairs and
everlasting, makes him free from the
bondage of the birth and death.

warguiatriar gftves wt fay
aferaane fay wer areata 311
wiralatad wdgataattion
ances ferent wer earaferreatn2 v1
sannianad aged wor way!

a adeard fay wer qrafaqeaae 4
Bet AAA YSAMATAAT
wermraranr fara, wat sararaqeaa 2 & 11
ales PUTT
waterart faeoj war earararger2 oil
urabanfaranernerraray|

We TR wa ferwl war earaaEAA Rc
favard fayarinart fayarg acearreq
warcnfert fara wer aren faerie 811

59
wag aarnt wdentaent eft
aduragt ferent wer carey faqeAA3 o 1
wenfezarara tat: fagart:!
anfafie: Safad faoy wer earefareraii3 g1
faut wfafiadt faye fermyfaye wfaifter:1
fayeyarast feral sidarea FEIT V1
area fears STATE: |
wate até feat wer sareferqeaa 3 31

The man is freed from the world who
has a keen devotion for Visnu, the god free
from the bondage of good and bad, beyond
six Urmis, Omnipresent, beyond
imagination and always sacrosanct. The
man imagining god Visnu as free from all
bondages and beyond sorrows, beyond the
issue for argument and unborn, becomes
frce from all bondages. The man sceing god
Visnu as beyond the name and clan (Gotra)
the supreme position beyond the three
stages including unique and awakened etc.
The man attains emancipation who always
engages his mind on god Visnu, who is
beyond complexion, true, resolute, and as
holy as the ether. The person remembering
always Visnu, the god omniform, within
nature and sensitive form of soul, attains
freedom from the worldly ties. He is always
illumining and in the form of Or (the
single letter). The man becomes free from
the bondage of world who always keeps in
mind Visnu, the god _ uninterpretable,
beyond the reach of consciousness, Om
formed, unborn and always in never form,
The god Visnu, the prime cause for the
universe saviour of the world, the destroyer
of the universe as well and endowed with
all desired things and beyond the three
stages makes free his devotee from the
worldly bondage who remembers him
always. The worldly ties are shattered by a

=== PAGE 85 ===

60

NARASIMHA PURANAM

man who always remembers Visnu, the god
who kicks off all sorrows, renders peace
and sets aside all evils committed. The man
is absolved from the troubles and evils if he
always concentrates on Visnu the god
worshipped by Brahma etc. gods,
Gandharva, Munis, Siddhas, soothsayers
(Carana) and Yogis. This universe is within
Visnu and god Visnu resides on it. A man
avails of emancipation who recites hymns
for the master of this entire universe and
who is unborn Visnu. The desirous of
freedom from the worldly ties and
otherwise may get all these duly fulfilled if
he does concentration on Visnu the great
giver.
ela sary

ARS WU Ye Ue GT:

Agana wer et aT aafert FANG wU

ata wat ante Frdist ger are

saree get Te MIRE TESTA 41

Vyasa said~ Dear, son, whatever was

told by the holder of the Ox marked flag,
god Sankara to Maharsi Narada on the
enquiry made by him, I have completely
told that to you son, do continuos
concentration on that unique and the
Brahma unborn form Visnu and you will
definitely obtain an cverlasting and
immortal position.

Ten Gratton; mmarated
a fami were wt fafgrarearqs «11
aye wet da afar:
weaaged Wants TAT WOTPAAANZ O11
faut: wrafad yoo meter aif
Wa: SAAT VStar A TESTS cI
errata & Femara

were ata a

SITE wepligat at
a ante fats went g aerrettq13 et
sta stiafaeget fawit: errata
WrSySeTT: 1G I

Devarsi Narada had obtained the
supreme axiom by virtue of worship god
Visnu as he heard from god Sankara that
Visnu was the greatest god. The man may
dash down the evil if any committed in the
phase of the hundred births if he recites this
pious psalm stated by god Sankara daily
after a bath, attains © emancipation
(Amrtapada). The people doing
concentration on Ananta god Acyuta in
their lotus hearts and recite the psalm of the
god of devotees Visnu, attain the supreme
Vaisnavi Siddhi (the position of Visnu).
Thus, the sixteenth chapter on the emancipation
through concentration on Visnu' in Sri Nrsithha

Purana’ approaches the end.

=== PAGE 86 ===

CHAPTER 18

63

CHAPTER 18

The story of birth of Manu, Yama and Yami
from the womb of S: ja and birth of Manu,
Sani and Tapati from the womb of Chaya,
and birth of Asvinikumiaras.

Wa sara
ofa gen sear: quer: waorawone: |
saraferer Pret: GUTTA: | BI

=== PAGE 87 ===

64

NARASIMHA PURANAM

wa: ued weet arent wera:

fagrave vied areas aq

ua & fae fax mrevsafee: ae:

van fafaat: weed: fe ya: sitghtresfanign

Sita said~ The hermits and learned
Bharadvaja, during ancient period, the
learned Suka engaged himself along with
the Siddhas in the worship of god Narayana
after hearing the several saered and evil
sweeping stories from Sri Krsnadvaipayana
Vyasa. O Brahmins, I have thus told you the
eccentric stories of Markandeya ete. All
those sweeping evils and now I ask you
what you want to listen to more from me.
WEN sart

aaa wen Steet wa gfteratar YT

ofgeritheat da Freitag at ais

Bharadvaja said— Sita, you have earlier
described the origin of Vasu etc. gods but
the origin of Asvinikumaras and Marutas
has been omitted. Hence, kindly tell that
very episode in detail.

Yet sara

Treat feretutredt aaranst wera

WATT wifes Yaa GT SATII HI

ufeideadivaa gfteram yfaernd

daara cents gfetat wos Aen

Sita said— O learned hermit, in the olden

days, Sti Parasara the son of Sakti in Vis
nupurana had described the origin of
Asvinikumaras in Vayupurana. I will give a
bricf account of their origin here. Please,
listen to the same.

eaerastefa: stferafara: ya:
Tea wae efent War ATT Sat SAAT N91
Ashe caret woadt witsi ora ar ae TA

wr ahaa aren augue aT
Faerie 1

aractes gai firtara fa oft aa vat afer
Perai weya wes sfaie i

wa fagdert gen tin ft wearer arene we:
weosararfefan gor

Ue gen are feat res yf aeTefafrie gn
qadtetnt af: yarorta nf: sar

arent aafimafeerararrentacreaenrat
STAT es FTAA F2 HI

One daughter of Prajapati Daksa is
renowned by the name of Aditi. She had
given birth to Aditya, the son. Prajapati
Tvasta married his daughter, namely
Sarhjfia to Aditya. Aditya too started living
peacefully with the beautiful and well
matching daughtcr of Tvasta. Sarnjiia could
not bear the temperament (tapa) of her
husband and returned to ker fathers home
after some time. Having seen the daughter
retuned from the in-laws home, her father
said— "Dear daughter, tell me whether your
husband sun provided you maintenance
with affection or did harsh treatment."
Sariijfid replied - "Dear father, I am severely
burnt of the execssive temperature of my
husband." Her father suggested her to go
again to her husband as to serve her
husband is the only duty (dharma) of the
wife. I too will reduee the temperature of
son-in-law after some days as I am planing
to visit there also.

saan wa ye wer afavaigaaray
wat at arareramferararga | yreguora-
Tae oat agenina waugaeri Ta
were reine periererareat qt

=== PAGE 88 ===

CHAPTER 18

Fag Z

Complying with the words of her father
she again came back to sun and

subsequently, in course of time, gave birth
to Manu, Yama and Yami (Yamuna)
respectively. However, she was again
feeling tough to tolerate the scorching
temperature of her husband. She then
applied her mind and generated her Chaya
(reflection) for mating with her husband
and then leaving her at home, she turned
herself into a mare form and began to move
to and fro in the province of Uttarakuru
Pradesh.

YAIR ARTISTA 8% 11
wg waved aut a ea wat aT
ort qeat am: raftrenre
ereraTAr A gH

frnfa wegeat raf wel weeraty wee
adenfarfarn gg 11

ait wat agiarrnitegara
anfgert Parana ayag: 112911

Tayo Tat: yd aah aA et eet war
afa wat agar ara wat safanige

aa: mererfertsht sragaat: wrt away 2
Wo wien a wa wa gefetemt a
Wee Aes

Ufa aadt are zat waft senfeedt rarer
dan aa ferate frarearaaniz ot

The sun, son of Aditi fell in illusion and
deeming her as if she was Samjfia, enjoyed
coition with her. Thus, she gave birth to
Manu, Sanaiscara and Tapati. Having seen
special treatment with her own children,

65

Yama, the son of Sarhjfia said to his father -
O dear father, she is not our mother. 'The
father then suggested Chaya to bchave
equally with all children. When nothing was
changed and Yama and Yami found her
doing extra favour of her own children; they
started abusing her. However, they had to
sew their lips when their father sun came
there. Chaya on sceing such a tricky deal,
cursed Yama to be the king of ghosts
(Preta) and Yami to be the river Yamuna.
Having seen such barbarous treatment on
the part of Chaya, god sun was annoyed and
cursed her own children. He cursed
Sanaigcara to be a slow moving star with
cruel sight and be counted among the evil
stars. The daughter was cursed to be the
river Tapati. Subsequently, god sun did
concentration and began to think the
whereabouts of Sarijiia.

w qeargaegey earagaredt yea ferry

TARTU 2

weafearntacqeat = aatefagraagar:

ma aT tad aT PEt a

art fire gar Ser

me im were fed

WTA

fayreat oumer anfeet amit: qe

ae err OO STATI 3 1

In the state of concentration, he saw that
Sarhjfia is moving on the land of Uttarakuru
Pradesh. He then immediately disfigured
himself in as a horse and went there. He
enjoyed coition with her there. Both

ASvinikumaras were born from the semen
of Sun as horse and Sarnjfid as mare. Thcir

=== PAGE 89 ===

66 NARASIMHA PURANAM

bodies were more beautiful than all other
gods. Brahma himself came there and
endowed them with right to gain a share in
the offering (yajfia) and the cadre of gods.
He concomitantly declared them the chief
Doctors (Physician) of gods. Brahma then
left for his abode and god Sun took his
original form. Tvasta also abandoned her
mare form and came into her original form.
God Sun then took Sarhjfia, the daughters
of Prajapati Tvasta and his wife to his
abode, Subsequently, Visvakarma came to
Sun and started praying to him with a
number of names. He then with the
permission of god Sun, reduced the
excessive heat of his body by fewer
degrees.
wa @: cafe fam arfternafirerm
quar ufsar wet AAT METAR YI
anfeagit faust gaat
fear wit fear
en war at: yfsreat
argent fea wet Ae
fa strrefaegamt afgactecafrat
SARTETSEATT RH
O learned Bharadvaja and other
Brahmins, I have now completely told the
sacred, pious and evil sweeping story of
both Asvinikumaras to you all. Both sons of
god sun are the physicians of gods. They
always illuminate with their divine forms.
The man listening to the story of their birth,
receives a beautiful complexion on this
carth and enjoys all pleasure in heaven after
deatu.
Thus, the eighteenth chapter on ‘origin of
ASvinikuméras etc.’ in Sri Nysithha Purana
approaches the end.

=== PAGE 90 ===

66

NARASIMHA PURANAM

CHAPTER 19

A prayer comprising one hundred cight
names of sun god by Visvakarma

ATEN Sart
a: eat aafires ofan fayaatom
até sightrantiy ag aa ferret: 11911

Bharadvaja said— Sita, I want to listen to
the names of sun god addressed by
Visvakarma while praying to him. Please,
unveil those names of god Sun before us.

WW sara
anf & gay ans a: waa faye
afer mit eens wearer ane

Sita said- Brahmin, I tell you all the
names applied by Visvakarma while
praying to god sun. Those all are evil
sweeping and sacrosanct.

ane: afar yt: wT: yet MATA
fafrtraer: yey Uns STET:113 11

1) Aditya the son of Aditi, 2) Savita-
creator of the world, 3) Sdrya-creator of
light and property, 4) Khaga-mover in the
sky, 5) Pisda-nourisher of all, 6)
Gabhastiman- equipped with thousands
rays, 7) Timironmathanah- destroyer of the
dark, 8) Sambhu benevolent, 9) Tvasta -
Visvakarma or generator of craft in world
form, 10) Martandah—appeared from the
dead egg, 11) ASugah-sharp mover.

fecoamt: aftererait arent war:
afermisiet: ga: wryfeatirargr: ist
12)  Hiranyagarbhah-Brahma, 13)
Kapila— yellowish complexion or in the

form of hermit Kapila, 14) Tapana— heater
or temper giver, 15) Bhaskara— light giver,

=== PAGE 91 ===

CHAPTER 19

67

16) Ravi- with the sound of three Vedas
(the sound) or absorber of the liquids from
the earth, 17) Agnigarbhah-holder of fire
within (full of splendour), 18) Adite Putra—
son of Aditi Sambhu-creator of welfare, 19)
Timiranasana— killer of the dark.

atqarigmret a atteresrat fafa:

arndt woselt wey: after: waa: NG 1

20) Arhsuman- lighted with numberless
rays, 21) Amsumali-- adorned with the
cluster of rays, 22) Tamoghna- killer of
dark, 23) Tejasa Nidhi— treasure of radiance
or light, 24) Atapi- Producer of heat or
temperature, 25) Mandali— composed with
self form, 26) Mrtyu- the father of Yama,
the administrator of death or in the form of
death, 27) Kapila Sarvatapana— heating all
with brown or golden rays.

aftfeige wero: TET:

stgarett fatter amarante 116 111

28) Hari— Sirya or remover of sins, 29)

Visva— in all forms, 30) Mahateja— great in
brilliance, 31) Sarvaratna Prabhakara-
producer of all gems and the cluster of
light, 32) Arhsumali Timira- remover of
dark by holding the garland of rays, 33)
Rgyajusdmabhavita— propounded or spirited
by Rgveda, Yajurveda and Samaveda.

wronfecacon fir: gudra watra:1

Bye Tafa: HA YA: SAMA: HN Ht

34) Pranaviskarana~ sole cause of

raining and producer of the cereals etc. the
fundament element of breathing, 35) Mitra-
Aditya known as Mitra or friend to all, 36)
Supradipa— properly illuminating — or
lighting equally everywhere, 37)
Manoratha-— with velocity equal to the mind
or more acute than mind too, 38) Yajiiesa—
the master of yajfia in the form of Narayana,

39) Gopati— the master of rays or nourisher
of land and cows, 40) Sriman- full of
radiance, 41) Bhitajfia— observer of all
creatures or to the past, 42)
Klesanasana- killer of all kind of griefs.
anftaer frat gat are: firaegia:1
Wat fatter: Saeit weary: wate
43) Amitraha— suppresser of the enemy,
44) Siva in the form of welfare, 45) Harhsa—
only rajaharnsa who swims the sky pond or
the soul of all, 46) Nayaka— leader or
regulator (controller), 47) Priyadarsana—
who wish for all welfare or observer of
welfare to all or whose glance is favourite
to all, 48) Suddha~ pure or all clean and
shining, 49) Virocana- illuminating
excessively, 50) Kesi- with ray hair, 51)
Sahastrarhgu- treasure of numberless rays,
52) Pratardanah— killer of dark etc.
particularly,
niga: uagye ferret faveaga:1
graganfa: aeasinnferderre: 19 i
53) Dharmarasmi- with the dutiful
(Dharmamaya) rays or promulgator of
dharma, 54) Patanga— in the form of sky
mover bird flying with the wings of rays,
55) Visala- giant form or specially
charming, 56) Visvasarnstuta— adorable by
all creatures, 57) Durvijficyagati- to
understand the nature of whom is tough, 58)
Sara- chivalrous, 59) Tejorasi- a treasure
of brilliance, 60) Mahayasi— great
illustrious.
mifrappatraniten fafreyfaganrat:
watery: WeRTeTAT AAT: WHTHT= 11201
61) Bhrajisnu- radiating, 62) Jyotis
amisa— master of the all illuminating stars
and planets, 63) Vijisnu-victorious, 64)

known

=== PAGE 92 ===

68

Visvabhavana-originator of the universe,
65) Prabhavisnu-— influential or cause for
the creation of the world, 66) Prakasatma—
in the form of light, 67) Jfianarasi— treasure
of knowledge, 68) Prabhakara— propagator
of the supreme light
anfartt fayagy aacat Fat ayreKe: |
faneit Atlante argh arrest: gg
69) Adityo Visvadrk— observer or
witness of world in the form of Aditya or
eye to the entire world, 70) Yajiiakarta—
giver of water and life to the world and
thus, making them able to perform the
generosity and offering, 71) Neta— shattered
of the dark, 72) Yasaskara— giver of wide
scope to the fame, 73) Vimala-— unscared or
clean form, 74) Viryavana~ mighty, 75)
Tga- god, 76) Yogajfia— preacher of the
knowledge of Karmayoga after obtaining
the same from god Sri Hari, 77)
Yogabhavana— producer of Yoga.
argereen Foret Frit atuet are: wy:
SAC: MOTE: NUS: AAS: ATTN
78) Amrtatma Siva- Siva in the form of
nector, 79) Nitya- everlasting, 80)
Varenya— worth taking resort or shelter,
81) Varada~ endower of desired boon to the
devotee, 82) Prabhuh~ capable to do
everything, giver, 83) Dhanadah- donor or
wealth, 84) Pranadah- life giver, 85) Srest
hah— the best of all, 86) Kamadah— giver of
desired thing, 87) Kamartipadhrk— holder or
varied forms voluntarily.
wrefon: PRAT: PTET PAT ETA: YT:
erat feet: reat: anferdterera: 1193 1
88) Taranih-maker of safe crossing from
the ocean of world, 89) Sagvatah-
everlasting man (Purusa), 90) Sasta~

NARASIMHA PURANAM

administrator or preacher, 91) Sastrajfia-
known to all scriptures, 92) Tapanah—
temper giver or heating, 93) Sayah- shelter
or the situs to all, 94) Vedagarbha—
producer of Sukla Yajurveda, 95) Vibhu-—
omnipresent, 96) Virai— gallant or warrior,
97) Santah— controlled (Sarhyukta), 98)
Savitri- vallabha the super god of Gayatri
hymn.

eat fagayatt wat citerrat wevat:1
TSR ToT aren Ferny hafearae: ew

99) Dhyeya- worth doing concentration,
100) Visvesvara- god of the entire world,
101) Bharta-nourisher of all, 102)
Lokanatha— protector of the world, 103)
Mahesvara— supreme Igvara (Paramesvara),
104) Mahendra— in the form of the king of
gods i.e. Indra, 105) Varuna— Aditya in the
name of Varuna the administrator of the
west direction, 106) Dhata- nourisher of the
world or Aditya in the name of Dhata, 107)
Visnu— wide spread or Aditya in the name
of Visnu, 108) Agni— in the form of fire,
109) Divakara— remover of the dark spread
in the night and producer of the day all
illuminating.!

wig aati: aa: Wats Wee
sare fargaaateh watt erat TRG I

That great soul Visvakarma worshipped
god Sun with the recital of the above
mentioned names. God sun overwhelmed
with pleasure said to ViSvakarma.

oftartrer ara qoset WA PTA
waeg fae war aeeriters yt THANE HI

Prajapati, the matter within your mind

and the purpose for which you have arrived

1. According to Slokas, we mentioned here 109
names of lord Visqu instead of 108 names.

=== PAGE 93 ===

CHAPTER 20

here is known to me. Curtail my orbit
therefore, by putting me on Sankara and it
will reduce my temperature to some small
extent.

seqerit fayaenat a ane aay fat
virion: afar eT sfeghelventar: 11 got:
Brahmin, Visvakarma followed the
advice so given by god sun. Brahmins, the
light god Savita became cool for the
daughter of ViSvakarma and his
temperature reduced. He then said toTvasta-
PaTaTvETMatEN MGRTSTTATA A,
aa TEN ats SF ATTN ANS 11
O innocent soul, as you have worshipped
me with reciting one hundred eight names, I
am therefore, ready to boon you with
pleasure. Ask anything you wish for.
at quite meng a araté carta
seqait apt Aisa fayaantaciieann eg it
aret afe 8 ta atid wae F1
Teng aafrieat a: wireafet Feast: ot!
WRT UAT Ba HE MATA ATTY
Having seen the generosity of god sun
and persuasion, ViSvakarma said- God
Bhaskara, swecp away entire sins of the
person who recites these aames daily with
kcen devotion for you.

wager fered waft
raterqarat far AeA:
vat faygt fanatic
Hea TAT Ta WATT VU
gfe sitarfaegaat warafayitsera: 199i
God Bhaskara, the cause for opening the
day, replied in affirmative to the demand of
Visvarkarma with expressive words— "Very
well’. ViSvakarma then returned to his

69

hermitage after having pleased god sun and
eliminating the cause for fear of Sarhjfia,
the resident of the sun orbit, the wife of god
sun.

Thus, the nineteenth chapter on "Psalm recited
for god sun with one hundred cight names' in Sri
Nrsithha Purana approaches the end.

=== PAGE 94 ===

CHAPTER 20

69

CHAPTER 20
Origin of Marutas
sara

ard creda aati fesrerrm

Wo tage ae Saher: ve

war: Tn: fefrer ferreqar wezatet

Gated ayeaaht carafe 1

ay we aye wie var ram

RRS TAIN I

afg a gfe: ait wreeafint wnt arfeeafr

wave weReteRT Yat ates selayaat AT

at mf arenas

Sita said- O the Great Brahmin, I will

now highlight the origin of Marutas. In the
ancient period, the demons, the son of Diti
had been defeated by the army of Indra etc.
gods when a dreadful war between gods and
demons was erupted. Diti then began to
worship her husband Kasyapa with a desire
to give birth a mighty son to the extent
competent to suppress the go of Mahendra.
Having been pleased by the penance so
intended KaSyapa did intercourse with her
and said— "the mighty son as you want to be
shall only take birth if you could retain the
womb as much as one hundred long years
and that too with taking care of ail
sanctity." Diti tool all care as suggested by

=== PAGE 95 ===

70

NARASIMHA PURANAM

the hermit Kasyapa.
Saisfa aaa Gaara
torre feferared feral
fafsagargat ati wrayiterarat
fafa: wreaaree agi vaTIIG

Wisht wenaatt awerftreneplet
wfega aaron i mt ear fared!
Tisfe 8A wfeseert wine N
untdiffa sere wets farsa
wan 8 wd net at ana
Taieyatary) WEA Vera anit wet aa
Rat ays
God Indra smelled the matter intended
and he transformed himself in the physique
of an old Brahmin in order to live in
proximity to Diti. Hc then reached there and
settled. One day when the time limit was
about to complete, Diti went to bed and
forgot cleaning her feet after supper. As
Indra was onlooker of opportunity, he
immediately cntered into the womb of Diti
and cut the womb into seven pieces with an
acute blow of his thunder bolt. The womb
started weeping so, Indra in order to resist
his crying, further, took cach piece so made
and cut the same into other seven picces.
Thus, these 7x7=49 pieces became popular
as Maruta because the god Indra, had used
the word ma rodi when the first seven parts
of the womb were wecping and when he
further divided each part in seven more
parts.
wea yfefes wafer
Ragu AAPTATATY|
faarparmft a: wefeg
yodyea wae Stites Aug
he street farprferratseara: 112 011

O hermit, I. have thus, told you all the
origin of gods, demon, man, serpent,
monster and ether etc. elements (Bhitas).
The man avails the abode of Visnu who
recites or hears with devotion this episode.

Thus, the Nineteenth chapter on ‘Origin of
Marutas' in Set Nysithha Purana approaches the
end.

=== PAGE 96 ===

NARASIMHA PURANAM

CHAPTER 21
Description of Siryavarnsa
UREN Sart
ageiva wie war fet safer
awrrat gfe denguftd a Aen

Bharadvaja said- Sita, you told about
Sarga and Anusarga, highlighted the
eccentric stories, and it is requested that a
description on the dynasty of kings,
Manvantara and the clanology
(Varhsanucarita) should also be added so
that all of us could know this all.

WW sara
Tat ae: Geely fatter waite:
daoreatrente dyrraaatin Fg
aygattd da yoy fax wera

yoag yaya sigarna a frag

Sita said- The royal dynasty has been
described in detail in the womb of Puranas
but I will tell you in brief, the dynasty of
kings, Manvantara and Varngdnucarita here.
O learned Brahmin, listen to this description
with all hermits gathered here for the same.

amet arageren Tarot wef: |

wea: aya: HyaTETeer ns

aifearag: Wilfieare: gearentfelepfaz:1
fagetelta: arereat Saregy: yal: yaya sy 11

=== PAGE 97 ===

CHAPTER 22

7

FAaTS AAT: | STATA PAT AP ETATIG 11
ARTY: Weg: TORR
qaaTAA ATTA: 1191

afrentteteut SreonerTt: 11211

radial eayarartta: 119 11

wit: gol
sine = Were: «= WheTareagemsieen
: orrearentang:

PSH:
Sea I TTT: TETRTATA:
WAC: CATT: 11231

Weregquat:1 arqrorigeaanfin: 11 gs
serait: yee yaterega:
aerereretyit Prada e411

Brahma first appeared, then Marici was
originated from him, Kasyapa from Marici,
Sun from Kasyapa, Manu from Sun, Iks
vaku form Manu, Vikuksi from Iksvaku,
Dyota from Iksvaku, Vena from Dyota,
Prthu from Vena and Prthasva form Prthu.
Similarly, in a seriatim Asarhkhyatasva was
originated from Prthasva, Mandhata from
Asarhkhyatasva, Purukutsa from Mandhata,
Drsada from Daéaruna, Harsasva from
Sagara, Harita from HarsaSva, Rohitasva
from Harita, Arnsuman from Rohitasva, and
Bhagiratha from Arnsuman. Saudasa from
Bhagiratha, Satrundama from Saudasa,
Anaranya from Satrundama, Dirghabahu
from Anaranya, Aja from Dirghabahu,
Dasaratha from Aja, Sti Rama from
Dasaratha, Lava from Sri Rama, Padma
from Lava, Anuparna. from Padma and
Vastrapani from Anuparna. Similarly,
Suddhodana from Vastrapani, and Budha
(Budha) from Vastrapani. The clan of Sun
(Siryavarhga) ceased from Budha.

qadgmrar & & mares waitftat:1
Aftt yfact yaa ata: aft: goa
ate ae: aft wer yt
Rye aa AAT: YT
Faeroe: wale:
TUS Asa TUAYAAL Vo
fer sttreferegerat wenrferstsezrrat: 112 81
The Ksatriyas born in the clan of Sun
have been described herein above
selectively and only those names have been
referred to here who had ruled ideaily
following justice. O hermit, this is the
description of Siryavarhsa in which a
number of kings had ruled. Now listen to
the description on the great kings born in
the clan of Moon (Candravarhsa).
Thus, the twenty one chapter on about
Stryavarhsa in Sir Nrsirhha Purana approaches
the end.

=== PAGE 98 ===

CHAPTER 22 7

CHAPTER 22
Description of Candravarhsa
Wt sant
areas oper wees WET
Wut ferecttuirat WerareAS TAT 811
Stita said- O great hermit Bharadvaja,
listen to the description on Candravarnga
now. It has been described in detail in other
Puranas, so I would like to give a succinct
account of this herein.

amet Wagyen weet UA:

Wat witterteeteravat aya: 11211
apatretaraiars:) smfgenegadenat Wy:113 11
wi: Gera da shales gain
gafecrat yet: amg: sat wuarai
ABTNGH

=== PAGE 99 ===

NARASIMHA PURANAM

72

agai =o aarft:) 9 get: «= wifteerat
Weng

qidvrerat wenfa:| wratatgenrat archi: |
archites atat ate: 1e

anna fag gaat Gea wees
CrCAIrAll

wae ETS | sitet yeeat yet:
Yea Wa WATT a_ROTaT YAY:

weer fafa: faferaditd-
vaiftacrrat wg:118 11

aust: «= ices) = aggre
TAFART: Nol

afimatrantat wife wife aga
SHE) SAT YUaaTaT PATH 1 gat
Waris yaa daria! weariat
Wraeanyent: | wa areaenrat
PATER

arerepaterat ara: | SAM: Wosat:
‘arredgt Fates

Brahma was born very first, then his
thought-churned (M4nasa) son Marici, was
born. Marici reproduced from the womb of
Daksayani a son namely, Kasyapa. Then the
sun was born from the womb of Aditi, the
wife of Kasyapa also. Sirya reproduced
from the womb of Suvarcala (Sarnjfia) a son
Manu. Manu reprodueed Soma from the
womb of Suripa and Soma _ reproduced
Budha from the womb of Rohini. Budha
reproduced Pururava from the womb of Ila.
Pururava reprodueed Ayu and Ayu
reproduced from the womb of Ripavati a
son namely, Nahusa. Nahusa reproduced
Yayati from the womb of Pitrvati and
Yayati reproduced Puru from the womb of
Sarmisth. Puru with the co-operation of his
wife Varnsada gave birth to Sampati and he

by virtue of intercourse with Bhanudatta
gave birth to Sarvabhauma. Sarvabhauma
with the co-operation of his wife Vaidehi
gave birth to Bhoja. Bhoja married Linga
and gave birth to Dusyanta. Dusyanta
married Sakuntala and brought in Bharata.
Bharata married Nanda and gave birth to
Ajamidha. Ajamidha married Sudevi and
gave birth to Prsni. Préni gave birth to
Prasara as a result of coition with her.
Prasara reproduced Santanu from the womb
of Bahuripa. Santanu made wife
Yojanagandha and gave birth to
Vicitravirya, Vicitravirya reproduced Pandu
from the womb of Ambika. Pandu got
Arjuna from the womb of Kunti, Arjuna
reproduced Abhimanyu form the womb of
Subhadra. Abhimanyu reproduced from the
womb of Uttara a son Pariksita. Pariksita
gave birth to Janamejaya from his wife
Matrvati and Janamejaya got Satanika from
the womb of his wife Puspavatt. Satantka
got a son Sahastranika from the womb of
his wife Puspavati. Sahastranika got
Udayana from the womb of Mrgavati and
Udayana got a son Naravahana from his
wife Vasavadatta. Naravahana got a son Ks
emaka from his wife ASvamedha. Kscmaka
was the last king of the Pandavas dynasty
and Candravarhga ceased.

a ee yupiaret csrdeagary

waar. Tare famyetas Brea gs 1

ayaé use fret org at oats

arergeanes yur egurt TARTU gu I

Tat fe arrea wer waft

aergantatest UeTErtt
yy fairs waa
Wart aft ageereTq ge 11

The man who listens to always this great
royal dynasty becomes absolved from all

=== PAGE 100 ===

CHAPTER 23

73

sins and after having a pure mind he attains
to the abode of Visnu. Anyone who reads
daily this description of royal dynasty and
makes his forefathers (Pitaras), to listen in
course of Sraddha (a rite to remember), the
things, offered by him to his ancestors
becomes undepleting. O Brahmin, I have
made you to listen to this episode pertaining
to the dynasty of the kings of Candravariga.
Now, listen to the fourteen Manvantaras
which I am going to tell you.
fa steefeegent area ATT
Biagtseaa: 2 2

Thus the twenty-second chapter on 'About
Candravarhsa' in Sri Nysithha Purana
approaches the end.