=== PAGE 1 ===

‌​
॥ॐकार॥
.. omkAra(information) ..
sanskritdocuments.org
August 20, 2017

=== PAGE 2 ===

.. omkAra(information) ..
॥ॐकार॥
Sanskrit Document Information
Text title : OMkAra
File name : om1.itx
Category : misc
Location : doc_z_misc_general
Language : Sanskrit
Subject : philosophy/hinduism/religion
Transliterated by : NA
Proofread by : NA
Latest update : November 1, 2010
Send corrections to : Sanskrit@cheerful.com
Site access : http://sanskritdocuments.org
This text is prepared by volunteers and is to be used for personal study and
research. The fi le is not to be copied or reposted without permission, for
promotion of any website or individuals or for commercial purpose.
Please help to maintain respect for volunteer spirit.
August 20, 2017
sanskritdocuments.org

=== PAGE 3 ===

॥ॐकार॥
॥ॐकार॥
Excerpts/collection from various sources.
Some sanskrit words are modifi ed for pronunciation.
Last update: September 20, 1995
From:Guidance from the guru
Letters from Sadguru Swami Tapovanam
Original in Malyalam
Translated by: Shri T . N . Keshav Pillai
OM
Narayana smriti
With loving “Narayana Smaranam ”.
Uttarkasi,
14-10-1955-
The letter had been received . The old indiff erence to external
activities such as writing letters has been growing of late . Hence
the delay.
Repetition of ‘Omkara ’ is of diff ernt kinds . Sometimes it is
uttered as part of some mantras, sometimes independently . “Om
Namasivaya ” and similar Vedic mantras . as well as many hymns
begin
with Omkara . So do sacrifi ces, acts of penance, etc . Thus “all ”
people
pronounce it as part of mantras and sacred rites . Here there is no
prohibition . Whether all people can pursue “Pranavopasana ” has
been
contraversed . “Pranavopasana ” means the repetition of Pranava
(OM)
by itself (not as part of, or in conjunction wlth mantras and rites)
and
the meditation upon its signifi cance - the Supreme Brahma.
om1.pdf
1

=== PAGE 4 ===

॥ॐकार॥
According to Sri Sankara and certain other religious teachers this
is
reserved for Sanyasins only . The reason given is only those
who have enough purity of mind and power of conoentration
can perform thc Upasana in the proper way . The gist of the
argument
is house holders and people like them lacking mental purity
and concentration should not perform Pranavopasana . In other
contexts there is
no taboo because there is no need for such purity and
concentration as
are essential for the contemplation of Nirguna Brahma (Brahma
without attributes). The independent pronunciation of Pranava
alone is
thus objected to . Whoever cares for controls imposed by
whomsoever
in these days?
There is one more diffi culty . In the previous paragraph “all ” has
been
put in inverted commas, why? It may be explained here . “All ”
in the
context means those who, like the Brahmins, have the right to
study the Vedas . The Orthodox section of the Hindus still holds
that shudras and women who
have no upanayana have no right to pronounce Pranava . The
Moderns, however, take a contrary view demolishing the
conservative
one . In these circumstances is there anything improper in holding
that all
people including householders can conduct Pranavopasana?
How can all these be expatiated upon here? Pay not much
2
sanskritdocuments.org

=== PAGE 5 ===

॥ॐकार॥
attention to such controversies . If you are already engaged in
Pranavopasana,
either according to somebody’s
advice or by your own choice, why doubt its propriety?
Do it with fi rm resolve . If you listen to each and every
advisor, the result will be doubt and confusions leading to
the slackening of your performance . It is your mind that
the Inner Being tests; it is your sincere love that pleases
Him . Whether you repeat the holiest of Vedic Mantras OM
or the meaningless “mara ” “mara ” the result will be alI
the same, provided you have full faith in what you do.
What pleases God is sincere devotion . If you have real love
in your mind all these rules, injunctions and prohibitions,
will lose their relevance . With the mantra you love best,
worship Him and develop your devotion this is the
advice of the broad minded Mahatmas, most learned and
most experienced.
With best wishes.
Swami Tapovanam
The Signifi cance of OM - What the Upanishads Say
Sreedhar Chintalapaty
Summary
The MAndukyopanishad , which belongs to the Atharva Veda and
contains twelve
verses, is an exposition of the principle of OM as consisting
of three
elements A, U, M, which refer to the three states of waking, dream
and
dreamless sleep.
om1.pdf
3

=== PAGE 6 ===

॥ॐकार॥
The supreme self is manifested in the universe in its gross, subtle
and
causal aspects . Answering to the four states of consciousness
namely
wakefulness,
dream,
dreamless
sleep
and
transcendental
consciousness,
the last aspect of godhead being all inclusive and ultimately real.
Exposition:
ॐइत्येतदक्षरंरंइदंसर्वं, तस्योऽपव्याख्यानंानं, भूतंभवद्
भविश्यद्यद्इतिसर्वंओंकारएव, यच्चान्यत्त्त्रिकालातीतंकालातीतं
तदप्योंकारमेवकारमेव।
Translation:
OM, this syllable is all this . An explanation of that (is the
following). All that is past, the present and the future, all this is
only the syllable OM . And whatever else there is beyond the
threefold
time, that too is only the syllable OM.
Explanation:
OM is the symbol of Brahman, and also the means of realizing
their
true nature . The following passages from the upanishads may be
quoted :
It should be remembered that OM is a SYMBOL for something,
and
statements like “Through this alone ... ” should be construed as
about teh
idea that OM represents, not its aural eff ect.
1- कठोपनिषद्षद्: [I.I . 15]
सर्वेवेल्दयतामनन्ति, तपाम्सि
सर्वाणिचयद्वदन्ति
,
यद्इच्चन्तो
ोब्रह्मचर्यम्म्चरन्ति
, तत्तेपदंसंग्रहेनहेन
4
sanskritdocuments.org

=== PAGE 7 ===

॥ॐकार॥
ब्रवीमि।ॐइत्येतत्ेतत्।
(Yama says to Nachiketa) That word which all vedas declare,
which all the
austerities proclaim, desiring which (people) live the life of a
religious
student, that word, to thee, I shall tell in brief : that is OM.
2- कठोपनिषद्षद्: [I.I . 17]
एतद्आलम्बनंनंश्रेश्थंथंएतद्आलम्बनंनंपरं।
एतद्आलम्बनंनंज्ञात्वााब्रह्म
लोकेमहीयते॥
(Yama says) This OM is the best support , knowing which one
becomes blessed in the world of brahma.
3- प्रश्नोपनिषद्षद्: [V.2]
तस्मैैसहोवाच, एतद्वै, सत्यकाम, परंचापरंचब्रह्म
यद्
ओंकारःतस्माद्ाद्विद्वान्ान्एतेनैवायतनेनैकतरंअन्वेति।
(PippalAda says to SatyakAma) That which is the sound OM, O
satyakAma,
is verily the higher (Parabrahman) and the lower (Aparabrahman)
Brahman.
Therefore, it is with this support alone does the wise man reach
the one or
the other.
4- तैत्तरीयोपनिषद्षद्: [I.vIi . 1]
ॐइतिब्रह्म, ॐइतीदंसर्वं, ॐइत्येतद्ेतद्अनुकृतिःःहस्मवा
अप्योश्रावयेत्याश्रावयन्ति, ॐइतिसामानि
गायन्ति
, ॐशोमिति
शस्त्राणि
शम्शंथि, ॐइतिअध्वर्युः, प्रतिगारंगारंप्रतिगृणाति,
ॐइतिब्रह्म
प्रसौति, ॐइत्यग्निहोत्रंंअनुजानाति, ॐइतिब्राह्मणःणः
प्रवक्ष्यन्न््
आह, ब्रह्मोपाप्नवानीति, ब्
रह्मैवोवाप्नोति।
om1.pdf
5

=== PAGE 8 ===

॥ॐकार॥
Aum is Brahman . Aum is this all . Aum, this, verily, is compliance
. On
uttering ‘recite’, they recite . With OM, they sing the chants of
SAma
Veda . With OM, they resite the prayers . With OM the
advaryu priest utters the response . With OM does the priest utter
the introductory eulogy . With OM, one assents to the off ering to
fi re.
The symbol OM is used to indicate the indescribable Brahman,
whose
true nature, like the riot of colors in the summer sky, can be felt,
but
the experience remains supremely personal.
हरिःःॐतत्सत्त्
Light on Yoga ( योगदीपिकाका)
by B.K.S . Iyengar (1985 edition)
Below is the excerpts from the book on the defi ntion of OM :
According to Sri VinobA BhAve, the Latin word Omne
and the Sanskrit word Aum are both derived from
the same root meaning all and both words convey the
concepts of omniscience, omnipresence and
omnipotence . Another word for Aum is pranava, which
is derived from the root nu meaning to praise,
to which is added the prefi x pra denoting superiority.
The word , therefore, means the best praise
or the best prayer . The symbol OM is composed of three
syllables, namely the letters A, U, M, and
when written has a crescent and a dot on its top.
A few instances of the various interpretations are
6
sanskritdocuments.org

=== PAGE 9 ===

Light on Yoga ( योगदीपिकाका)
given to it may be mentioned here to convey its meaning.
The letter A symbolises the conscious or waking state
(jAgrata-avasthA), the letter U the dream
state (svapna-avasthA) and the letter M the dreamless
sleep state (sushupta-avasthA) of the mind and
spirit . The entire symbol, together with the crescent
and the dot , stands for the fourth state
(turIya-avasthA), which combines all these states and
transcends them . This is the state of samAdhi.
The letters A,U and M symbolise respectively speech
(vak), the mind (manas) and the breath of life
(prAna), while the entire symbol stands for the living
spirit, which is but a portion of the divine spirit.
The three letters also represent the dimensions of
length, breadth and depth, while the entire
symbol represents Divinity, which is beyond the
limitations of shapes and form.
The three letters A, U and M symbolise the absence
of desire, fear and anger, while the whole
symbol stands for the perfect man (a sthita-prajna),
one whose wisdom is fi rmly established in the divine.
They represent three genders, masculine, feminine
and neuter, while the entire symbol represent all
creation together with the Creator.
They stand for the three gunAs or qualities of
sattva, rajas and tamas, while the whole symbol
represents a gunAtIta, one who has transcended and
gone beyond the pull of the gunAs.
The three letters correspond to the three tenses
- past, present and future - while the entire
symbol stands for the Creator, who trancends the
om1.pdf
7

=== PAGE 10 ===

॥ॐकार॥
limitations of time.
They also stand for the teaching imparted by the
mother, the father and the Guru respectively . The
entire symbol represents Brahma VidyA, the knowledge
of the Self, the teaching which is imperishable.
The A, U and M depict the three stages of yogic
discipline, namely Asana, prAnAyAma and
pratyAhAra . The entire symbol reprsent samAdhi,
the goal for which the three stages are steps.
They represent the triad of Divinity, namely,
BrahmA - the creator, Vishnu - the Maintainer, and
Siva - the Destroyer of the universe . The whole
symbol is said to represent Brahman from which the
universe emanates, has its growth and fruition and
into which it merges in the end . It does not grow
or change . Many change and pass, but Brahman is
the One that ever remains unchanged.
The letters A, U and M also stands for the mantra
‘tat.g tvaM asi’ (‘That Thou Art’), the realisation
of man’s divinity within himself . The entire symbol
stands for this realisation, which liberates the
human spirit from the confi nes of his body, mind and
intellect and ego.
OM or Hare KrishNa?
This comes from a text scan (with permission) of an article
in the July 94 Back to Godhead magazine . You can fi nd this
article, along with other articles from BTG on the Bhakti
Yoga WWW home page:
http://riceinfo.rice.edu/ vijaypai/rvc/BhaktiYoga/Welcometml
8
sanskritdocuments.org

=== PAGE 11 ===

OM or Hare KrishNa?
vijaypai at kachori.rice.edu (Vijay Sadananda Pai).
(c) 1994 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International.
Used with permission.
by Kurappiah Chockalingam
(Kuruppiah Chockalingam, an eighteen-year-old student from
Melbourne,
Australia, is an active member of Bhaktivedanta Yourh Services,
which holds
weekly programs for children and adults at the Melbourne
ISKCON temple.)
Though the sacred sound OM is often associated with
impersonalists, only the
devotees understand its full import.
Throughout the vedas there is much mention of the syllabel OM
. This
spiritual vibration, which is sometimes called omkara or pranava,
comprises
three Sanskrit sounds - a, u, and ma (the a in ma is silent). When
these
three sounds are combined, the result is the single-syllabled
vibration OM.
An unusual attribute of OM is that it has no direct translation from
Sanskrit into English . And though every Vedantist will accept
OM to be a
representation of God, exactly how OM is viewed diff ers
according to various
schools to thought . These schools can be classifi ed into two main
categories, the Mayavadi, or impersonalist, and the Vaisnava, or
devotee.
om1.pdf
9

=== PAGE 12 ===

॥ॐकार॥
The impersonalist, as the name suggests, is happy to treat OM as
an
impersonal, formless, representation of the Absolute Truth .
Therefore, the
Mayavadi will very openly chant OM, being careful to avoid
names such as
Krsna and Rama, which according to them, are limited .
A
Mayavadi might
explain his theory of pranava OM like this: “Since this whole
universe has
been created by Him (God), whatever there is in the universe is
Him alone.
As such, He has no name . But if He has to have a name, then all
names are
His, for He alone is appearing in all forms . The fi rst sound in
most
languages is a; the last sound to leave as our mouth closes is m; u
is the
center of the two . Together, they represent all the basic sounds
from which
words are produced . And threfore, these three sounds, making
up the
syllable OM, represent the entire universe of names and forms . ”
Using such reasoning, the impersonalist concludes that the holy
name Krsna
is ultimately no diff erent from any other word one can dream up .
OM, says
the impersonalist, contains all sounds, and so it is the universal
sound,
whereas “Krsna ” and “Rama ” are limited.
10
sanskritdocuments.org

=== PAGE 13 ===

OM or Hare KrishNa?
All Vaisnavas know, however, that such speculation on the Lord’s
holy name
is one of the ten worst off enses one can commit at His lotus feet
(tathartha
vadah). Lord Caitanya, therefore, has repeatedly warned us to
steer clear
of such off enders, or pasandis.
What does omkara mean to the vaisnavas?
The Gosvamis of Vrndavana have analyzed OM (a-u-m) as
follows: The letter a
refers to Krsna, the master of all planets and all living entities .
The
letter u indicates Srimati Radharani, the pleasure potency of
Krsna, and m
indicates the living entities . Thus omkara represents Krsna; His
name,
fame, pastimes, potencies, and devotees; and everything else
pertaining to
Him.
To the devotees of the Lord, thereis no diff ernece between
chanting His holy
name and reciting omkara, for Krsna has stated in Bhagavad-gita
(7-8, 9-17,
10-25) that omkara is He Himself in the form of sound . Just as
omkara is
non-diff erent from the Lord’s holy name, it is also inseparable
from the
Lord’s beautiful tow-armed form as Syamasundara . Pranava OM
is therefore
om1.pdf
11

=== PAGE 14 ===

॥ॐकार॥
used in the Vedas and Upanisads to address the Supreme Person
-VAsudeva, or
Krsna.
Thus, omkara serves no other purpose than to remind the devotee
of Krsna.
Srila Prabhupada confi rms this fact in a purport to Srimad-
Bhagavatam
(9-14-48) wherein he states that just as Hare Krsna addresses the
Lord
together with His energy, so too does omkara.
It is therefore clearly evident that OM refers to the Supreme
Personality of
Godhead, Krsna . Yet, surprisingly enough, the Mayavadis are
not altogether
wrong in thinking that omkara possesses no form . Where’s the
catch?
Three angles from which OM may be viewed
Omkara, like Krsna, can be realized or viewed from three angles,
as Brahman,
Pramatma, and Bhagavan .
The speculative Mayavadi knows
omkara to be nothing
beyond Brahman, or spiritual, and at the same time without shape
or form.
The mystic yogi sees whatever the Mayavadi sees but also realized
that
omkara is situated within the heart of everyone as Paramatma, or
the
supersoul .
And the Vaisnava knows all that the other two
transcendentalists
know, but he also realized that it is the personal aspect of omkara,
12
sanskritdocuments.org

=== PAGE 15 ===

OM or Hare KrishNa?
Bhagavan, that makes the other two aspects possible.
Srila Prabhupada likened these three features of the Lord to the
sunlight,
the sun globe, and the sun-god residing within the sun . If I were
studying
the sun, would my knowledge be complete if I could research no
further than
the sunlight or the sun globe?
Some material scientist might
answer yes,
but a more intelligent person would want to know, “Where does
the sunlight
come from? ” or “What gives the sun its power to shine? ” Just
as one
automatically knows about the sunlight and sun globe the moment
he learns
that the sun-god, Vivasvan, is the source of both, so one realizes
omkara
completely when oen understands that OM ultimately possesses
form . Srila
Prabhupada highlights this important fact in a purport to Srimad-
Bhagavatam
(8-3-2)
The understanding of the impersonalist philosopher, though not
altogether
incorrect, is therefore incomplete .
The devotee or Vaisnava,
however, knows
omkara in truth.
Hare Krishna and OM
The same in all respects?
om1.pdf
13

=== PAGE 16 ===

॥ॐकार॥
Though Hare Krsna and OM are equally potent sound forms fo
the Lord, there
is one diff erence . If at the time of death one chants Hare Krsna,
even
though unintentionally, one attains the spiritual Vaikuntha planets
without
a doubt . This is a universal truth that has been accepted by all
great
authorities . If, however, one similiarly chants OM, not thinking
of Krsna,
one attains to the impersonal brahmajyoti sky of the spiritual
world but
does not associate with Krsna .
This fact is confi rmed in
Bhagavad-gita
(8-11).
One may ask why, if omkara is ultimately personal, one shouldn’t
reciprocate
with Krsna personally on leaving one’s body withe OM on one’s
tongue . The
answer is that it is possible to chant OM and go to Krsna but the
process
involves much more than simply externally uttering OM.
According to the Gita (8-13), those who chant OM and at the
same time
remember Krsna while leaving the body do indeed go to the
Vaikuntha planets:
ओमित्येकाक्षरंरंब्रह्म
व्याहरन्ाहरन्मांअनुस्मरन्
रन्।
यःप्रयातित्यजन्जन्देहंसयाति
परमांगतिम्म्॥
“After being situated in this yoga practice and vibrating the sacred
14
sanskritdocuments.org

=== PAGE 17 ===

OM or Hare KrishNa?
syllable OM, the supreme combination of letters, if one thinks of
the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and quits his body, he will
certainly reach
the spiritual planetes . ”
In a purport to Srimad-Bhagavatam (7-15-31) Srila Prabhupada
informs us that
to fi x the turbulent, restless mind upon Krsna at the moment of
death while
thus uttering OM, there are certain rules one must follow . These
rules are
listed in Bhagavad-gita (6-11, 8-12). For example, one must sit
in a
certain precise posture, cease all the activities of the senses, fi x
the
mind on the heart, and fi x the life air at the top of the head.
In addition to all this, Prabhupada points out that only brahmanas,
or those
in the mode of goodness, can properly recite OM . When one
chants OM after
having fulfi lled all these prerequisites, only then can he reap the
same
result as he would have received from inadvertently chanting Hare
Krsna.
Then why such a thing as OM?
Since both the Lord’s holy name and omkara are transcendental
sound
vibrations, what then is the purpose of omkara?
Krsna, being all-knowing, could clearly understand that there will
always be
om1.pdf
15

=== PAGE 18 ===

॥ॐकार॥
a class of people called avyaktasakta cetasam, or those attached
to His
impersonal aspect . Since such impersonalists have no solid name
or form to
fi x their minds upon, Krsna has provided them with pranava OM.
Since OM has no direct meaning or refers to no particualr form,
the
Mayavadis assume, without complete knowledge, that the
Absolute Truth is
beyond all names and forms . To make the Mayavadis thinking
this way is
Krsna’s intention, for not everyone is capable of acknowledging
the Lord’s
transcendental name and form . Thus, their minds being absorbed
in
impersonal OM, the Mayavadis ultimately merge with the
unmanifest
brahmajyoti eff ulgence of the Lord, a type of liberation called
sayujya-mukti.
Though sayujya-mukti ensures freedom from material misery, the
Vaisnavas
consider it no better than hell, for in such a state there is no
reciprocation with the lotus feet of the Lord . Consequently, the
pure
devotees are very careful to see omkara in the light of His beautiful
form.
Devotees spread only the holy name
The pure devotee, whose mind is fi xed twenty-gour hours a day
on the form of
16
sanskritdocuments.org

=== PAGE 19 ===

OM or Hare KrishNa?
the Lord, rises above all rules and requirements for chanting OM
. Such a
devotee, having transcended the three modes of material nature,
goes beyond
even the qualifi cations of a brahmana .
Thus the devotee’s
chanting of OM is
pure, whereas a Mayavadi, who cannot relate omkara to Krsna,
chants OM
becoming submerged, to a certain extent, in ignorance . Those
who actually
follow every prerequiseite and recite OM as directed by Krsna are
generally
those mystic yogis who, as previously discussed, are more inclined
to inner
meditation on Krsna as Paramatma than to pure devotional
service.
Although all Vaisnavas are more than qualifi ed to freely chant
OM, the
Gaudiya Vaisnavas, devotees of Lord Caitanya, seldom do so . As
mentioned
earlier, one must be a qualifi ed brahmana to chant OM properly .
Most people
in this Age of Kali are no better than sudras (kalau sudra-
sambhavah).
Therefore, the Vaisnavas, who care only for the welfare of others,
do not
very much promote the chanting of omkara .
Instead, they
particularly
promote the chanting of Hare Krsna.
As explained by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, niyamitah smarane na
kalah: the
om1.pdf
17

=== PAGE 20 ===

॥ॐकार॥
requirements for chanting Hare Krsna are absolutely none .
Therefore, the
only practical means of spiritual advancement for all of us fallen
souls of
Kali-yuga turns out, once again, to be the chanting of the maha-
mantra: Hare
Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare
Rama, Rama Rama,
Hare Hare.
The Complete Illustrated Book of Yoga
by Swami Vishnudevananda
1960, Julian Press, NY
Vedantic meditation to conquer death
and develop intuition
In Vedantic meditation the most important thing is to realize that
one’s real self is the sun of suns, the light of lights . In the state of
meditation one can rise above the body and above the mind and
dehypnotize onself into the light of lights, into the sun of suns.
Meditation should be started after a few rounds of breathing
exercise and a few minutes of chanting of the name of the
Supreme
Almighty who resides in the heart of hearts as the self or atman,
and
when the mind obtains some exaltation or is elevated to a certain
height, it becomes very easy to make it soar much higher and even
to great heights . One must make the mind rise into the higher
regions
by humming the syllable OM (OM). The meaning of the syllable
OM
18
sanskritdocuments.org

=== PAGE 21 ===

OM or Hare KrishNa?
is diff erent to diff erent persons . Everyone in his own stage of
spiritual
development has to give it the meaning that suits him best.
Some people meditate on OM as the sun of suns shining within
their hearts,
while others meditate upon the ajna chakra (space between the
eyebrows) while chanting OM . One can choose and meditate on
either
of these places (the heart or the space between the eyebrows.)
While chanting OM one should meditate on the meaning
attached to it, as follows:
I am the light of lights; I am the sun; I am the real, real
sun; the apparent sun is my symbol only . [In dreams we see
objects not by the light of a lamp, nor by the light of the moon,
sun, or stars, and yet we see them . If without light we cannot
see, then with what light do we see light?] It is the light of my
real self; itis the light of my atman, and it is my light that makes
everything visible in my dreams.
I am a monarch of monarchs . It is I who appear as all
the beautiful fl owers in diff erent gardens . In me the whole
world lives, moves, and has its being . Everywhere it is my will
that is being done . I am manifested everywhere, I feed every
being, from the smallest microbes to man . I existed before the
world began.
Evil thoughts and worldly desires are things concerning
the false body and the false mind, and are things of darkness . In
my presence they have no right to make their appearance . I am
- not bound by any actions; I command elements . I am all-per
vading, like supreme ether . Like light and invisible rays, I per
- meate and pervade every atom and every object . I am the low
om1.pdf
19

=== PAGE 22 ===

॥ॐकार॥
est; I am the highest; I am the spectator, I am the showman, I
am the performer . I am the most famous people, and most dis
reputable, ignominious; I am the most fallen . Oh, how beautiful
I aml I shine in the lightning; I roar in the thunder; I ff utter in
leaves; I hiss in the winds; I roll in the surging seas . The friend
I am; the foe I am . To me, no friends, no foes . Whatever be the
state of this body, it concerns me not; all bodies are mine . I
am the whole universe; everything is in me; I am limitless, eter
nal, all-pervading . I am in each and all . I am in you; you are in
me . Nay, there can be no you and I, no diff erence . Soham,
Soham, Soham . I am that, I am that, I am that . OM OM OM.
To realize his self, a beginner gets great help from the chanting
of the syllable OM while meditating on its meaning . With this
kind
of meditation, one frees oneself from the clutches of death and
attains
immortality . No action can bind one, as there is no agency
or “enjoyership ” in one’s actions . One always identifi es
oneself with the all-pervading self by
removing “I-ness ” and “mineness. ”
Before beginning this kind of meditation, students are advised
to remove the three impurities of the mind: mala or selfi shness;
vikShepa or tossing of the mind; and avarana, or the veiling power,
if they
wish to achieve quick results . These three impurities of the mind
may
be described as follows:
1- Mala, or selfi shness, is the grossest impurity . It is to be found
in all men, in varying degrees and intensities, according to
the degree of spiritual development of their souls; and it can
20
sanskritdocuments.org

=== PAGE 23 ===

OM or Hare KrishNa?
be removed only through selSess service . Therefore every
student, low or evolved, should spend some time in serving
others without thought of reward before proceeding to deeper
meditation.
2- The second impurity is known as vikShepa sakthi, or tossing
of the mind . Mind becomes unsteady because of this impurity,
and concentration becomes diffi cult . The Yogi method
of stopping this tossing is through Yogic breathing (see
Breathing, Chapter 8), devotion, and chanting.
3- The last is the subtlest of all impurities, known as avarana
sakthi, or the veiling power of the mind . This avarana sakthi
clouds the pure consciousness or self, and produces body
consciousness . This is the most diffi cult impurity (the idea of
body consciousness) to get rid of . Vedantic meditation amd
the inquiry, “Who am I? ” removes this veiling power . Only
then can the self shine of itself.
The philosophy and meaning of the
sacred syllable OM
Several volumes have been written to explain the meaning of the
great
syllable OM . In fact, all Vedanta and all Hindu philosophy is
simply an exposition of this syllable OM . OM covers the whole
universe.
There is not a law, a force, or an object in all the world that is
not comprised within the syllable OM . We shall try to explain
how all the
planes of being, all the worlds, all phases of existence are
encompassed
by OM . The importance of this syllable will be explored from
various
om1.pdf
21

=== PAGE 24 ===

॥ॐकार॥
points of view in order that people may attempt to grasp it with
their
minds as well as accept it with their whole hearts . As we are all
rational beings, we should not take up anything unless it appeals
to
our intellect.
The literal meaning of Vedanta is the end of knowledge, the
end of speech; and the whole of Vedanta is represented by OM .
OM
consists of A, U, M, and according to the rules of Sanskrit
grammar,
A and U when joined together become O, and thus A, U, M,
produces
the sound OM . The sound of OM is the most natural sound that
can
be uttered; even a mute can produce this sound . Observe boys in
a
playground when they are very happy; their overfl owing joy fi nds
natural expressioti with a prolonged sound of O, which is simply
OM
cut short . Not only children, but all people use this sound on
occasions
when they feel exhilarated, whether it is at a football game, a horse
race, or a party . It is common to note that many people answer
“Oh,
yes, ” or “Oh, my God! ” When one is sick in bed or in trouble,
when
one is suff ering from extreme pain, this sound of oh or um, which
is a
corrupted expression of OM, comes from one’s lips . The Hebrew,
22
sanskritdocuments.org

=== PAGE 25 ===

OM or Hare KrishNa?
Arab, and English prayers end with
“Amen, ” which most
remarkably
resembles Aum.
Why should this sound be so prorninent in everybody’s life?
The answer is because it is a natural sound; it brings relief from
pain
for a sick person; it expresses mental moods in the form of sounds,
which in turn bring peace and harmony . If one gets a little relief
from I
pain by uttering this sound incorrectly, then may it not bring more
peace and harmony if it is chanted in the right way? This OM is
also
known as pranava, or that which pervades life or runs through the
prana or breath . Even the sound of bells, the noise of a fl owing
river,
the whistling of the wind, or blowing of a conch shell produces
the
sound OM.
All thought is related to language as the obverse and reverse
sides of the same coin . One cannot exist without the other . Can
anyone see an object without thinking of it? Nothing is perceived
without thinking accordingly . The very word “perceive ” signifi es
mental
thought . Thought and language are the same, and one cannot
think
without language.
Absence of language occurs primarily in two cases: in intuitive
perception and intuitive ideation . Intuitive ideation is the
formation
om1.pdf
23

=== PAGE 26 ===

॥ॐकार॥
of a mental image of an object . I see a tree and close my eyes and
see
it again in mental image . Every form is associated with a name
and
utterance of a name brings forth the picture of the object . When
I say
“chair, ” immediately the form of a chair appears in my mind .
Though
many mental images of sights and sounds occur that do not always
bring up their names, and though this intuitive process may
actually
take place without language, yet in description, analysis,
classifi cation,
judgment,
and
other
mental
elaborations,
language
is
indispensable.
One can look at the moon without remembering the name of the
moon,
but when one analyzes and thinks of what it is, then language
comes.
Therefore, nothing is perceived in this world without thought, and
there can be no thought without language . Thus the world is
related
to language; language, to thought; and thought, to the world
In the Bible it is said: “In the beginning was the Word, and the
Word was with God, and the Word was God . ” The word or
language
is not something arbitrary or invented . No man ever invented
language
because the word itself is God . The Vedic language (the original
language) was revealed by God directly to the mind and when it
was
24
sanskritdocuments.org

=== PAGE 27 ===

OM or Hare KrishNa?
corrupted, it was called human language . Now we want to have a
single word or sound that will represent the whole world . In all
languages we have some sounds that come from the throat, others
that
come from the palate, and others from the lips . There is not a
single
sound in any language that comes from organs below the throat,
as
the throat is the one boundary of the vocal organ, and none come
from
outside the lips as the lips are the other boundary . Now we have
A, U,
M . The sound A is guttural; it comes from the throat . U (oo)
proceeds
exactly from the middle of the vocal region, the palate . M is labial
and
nasal, which comes from the extremity of the vocal organ or lips
..
Thus, A represents the beginning of the range of sound; U
represents
the middle, and M represents the end . It covers the whole fi eld of
the vocal organs . Thus OM represents all language and, since
world
and language are interrelated, it represents all the world.
Sounds are of two kinds: articulate or varnatmak and inarticulate
or
dhwanyatmak . Varnatmak sounds are capable of being written,
while dhwanyatmak cannot be expressed by characters or by
written
words . Ordinary language is vamatmak, and the language of
feeling,
om1.pdf
25

=== PAGE 28 ===

॥ॐकार॥
such as laughter and weeping, is dhvanyatmak . Laughter cannot
be
t expressed in written language.
The articulate or natural language (dhwanyatmak) has a purpose
that camlot be served by varnatmak . Suppose a foreigner who
does not
know the language of another country wants some food, and
people
cannot understand his language . He may then start weeping
because
of hunger; this language of feeling (weeping) can be understood
and
people give him food . When you laugh, everyone understands that
something pleasant has happened . The language of music is also
dhvanyatmak . The language of music is diff erent from the
language of
thought . In melodious music there is a charming eff ect upon the
mind.
Similarly, OM chanting has a charm about it that brings the mind
of
one who chants under control and directly brings the feeling of
peace
and rest to the mind . In that state the individual is one with God.
Though the eff ect of the chanting of OM cannot be scientifi cally
proved, it is nonetheless experienced by all who practice it
sincerely.
There is no denying the changes within oneself when they take
place.
Now let us discuss the philosophy of OM . The sound A,
according to the tseaching of Vedanta, represents the so-called
material
26
sanskritdocuments.org

=== PAGE 29 ===

OM or Hare KrishNa?
universe, the world of the gross senses, that which is observed in
the
waking state . All the experience of the dream world and the world
of the
spirits, the astral plane, and heaven and hell are signifi ed by U . M
represents the unknown, the deep-sleep state and all those things
which are beyond the comprehension of the intellect.
Thus, OM (OM) covers all the threefold experience of man
(waking, dreaming, and deep sleep).
It is a common thing to note that generally the philosophy of
the West is based on experience in the waking state and takes little
or
no notice of the experience of the dream or of the deep-sleep
state.
Vedanta says that in order to fi nd out the reality or truth, one must
analyze all three states of experience of man; otherwise the data
will
be incomplete . Most philosophers limit themselves to the waking
state,
and all their discoveries and investigations are based on the waking
state alone . Vedanta considers all the data from the threefold
experiences . The world of the waking state disappears entirely in
the other
two states, dreaming and deep sleep.
In dreams, thougll the external world disappears, it is the same
“I ” which perceives . The intellect and personal consciousness
vanish
entirely in the deep-sleep state and yet the real “I ” or self remains
the
om1.pdf
27

=== PAGE 30 ===

॥ॐकार॥
same . Thus “I ” or self is the same in all these three states, and
this self
is the underlying reality that experiences all these states.
This unchangeable and immutable principle, this reality that
remains constant
through the threefold worlds, is the true self or atman . This is
OM.
How do we know that the wor]d exists? How do we know there
is a universe? Because we touch, hear, see, smell, and taste things;
that
is the only proof . Our senses are the only direct or indirect proof
of the
existence of this world.
Sensation is the primary cause of all perception, intellectual
understanding, etc., and it is not limited to our waking state alone
. In
the waking state our senses are in the gross form and we perceive
objects . But we perceive in our dream state also . The sense organs
operate
in the dream state even though the external ears and eyes are not
functioning . Thus in eff ect the dreaming mind evokes
simultaneously both
the object and the sense organs that perceive the object . So in
dreamland
the senses and the objects sensed are like the positive and
negative poles of the same object . In dreams the subject and the
object
spring up together . Both the subject and the object of dreams are
represented by the sound 61 in OM, and the underlying reality, in
which both the subject and the object appear as waves in the
ocean, is
28
sanskritdocuments.org

=== PAGE 31 ===

OM or Hare KrishNa?
the pure self or OM.
Although objects in dreams are produced simultaneously with
the corresponding perceiving senses, they appear to have a long
past
of their own and as long as one is dreaming, so long is the dream
reality for one’s consciousness . When we say that this solid, rigid
world
is real, the statement is entirely founded on the evidence of
perceiving
senses and is equivalent to the dreaming person calling the object
of
the dream real whereas in reality both waking and dreaming states
are unreal.
The senses themselves exist only by virtue of the elements they
perceive . Without the objective world of the elements, the senses
could
not perceive whether they were in a dreaming or a waking state;
so for
the existence of the senses the objective world is essential . In the
same
way, for the existence of the world the senses are essential . Is that
pot
reasoning in a circle? It is, indeed, and serves only to prove the
illusory
nature of the world in the waking state as in the dream state . The
objects of dreams are real as long as the dream lasts . Those
objects are
no more when one wakes . In the deep-sleep state, what happens
to the
om1.pdf
29

=== PAGE 32 ===

॥ॐकार॥
solid world of the waking state? Everything disappears . Thus we
see
that there is no reality to the world either in the waking state or in
the
dream state.
Vedanta defi nes reality as that which persists in all circumstances.
That which appears as reality at one time and disappears like
a mist after awhile must be an illusory phenomenon . The
dreamland
we call unreal because when we are awake it is not there . Just so
the
solid must be unreal because it also vanishes in the dream and
deepsleep states.
Then what is reality? The sound A in OM represents the
apparent subject (senses) and object (elements or world) of the
waking
state as mere manifestations of the underlying reality, me . The
only
hard reality is the Self or “I, ” which never changes
in any state . That
“I ” is the witness of the waking, dreaming, and
deep-sleep states . Thus
Vedanta comes to the conclusion that all the three states of man,
waking, dreaming, and deep sleep, are unreal and the real self,
which is
knowledge absolute, existence absolute, and bliss absolute, is the
only
stern reality, before which the apparent reality of the world melts
away.
Many do not like to accept this conclusion because it is derived
30
sanskritdocuments.org

=== PAGE 33 ===

OM or Hare KrishNa?
from considering the dreaming and deep-sleep states as rivals of
the
waking state . If twe analyze our lives, almost half of the time we
are
either in a dreaming or a deep-sleep state . There being night at
any
time over half the surface of the earth, almost half the population
is
always in the dreaming or deep-sleep state . Thus a man spends
almost
half of his life either in sleep or in dream . Childhood is a long
dream.
If we count the time, the hours spent in the waking state are almost
equal to the time spent in sleeping and dreaming . Therefore we
cannot
consider only those things that take place in the waking state as
all of
reality and the other states as unreal . Even the strongest man or
wisest
man without exception is bound by the law of sleep, and the
inexorable
power of sleep takes no account of his ardent desire to stay awake
and
enjoy the sense world . Since the dream and deep-sleep states are
as
powerful as the waking state, we cannot neglect these former two
states and consider only the latter . That is why Vedanta
philosophy
delves deeply into all the threefold states of man to fi nd out the
underlying reality . Again there are plants in a state of perpetual
deep
om1.pdf
31

=== PAGE 34 ===

॥ॐकार॥
sleep and there are animals in a constant state of dreaming . To
them our
world is diff erent . To the eyes of an ant, a frog, an elephant, a
fi sh, or
an owl things are very diff erent . How dare we disregard their
experience and consider the waking state of man alone as real?
Thus in OM (OM) the fi rst letter A stands for this reality, the
self, as underlying and manifesting the illusory material world of
the
waking state . U represents the dream and the psychic or astral
worlds,
and the last letter, M, denotes the absolute self underlying the
chaotic
state and represents all the unknown, the deep sleep . Thus OM
means
the underlying reality behind the scenes, the eternal truth, the
indestructible self that one is, and when OM is chanted one must
throw
the body and mind into the true self and melt into the reaT atman
or ’
pure consciousness.
ज्ञानेश्वरीरी(Marathi)
अकारचरणयुगुल।उकारउदरविशालशाल।
मकारमहामंडल।मस्तकाकारेकाकारे॥
हेतिन्हीीएकवटले।तेथशब्दब्रह्मप्रकटलेकटले।
From: The Bhagavad-Gita
by Ramanand Prasad, Ph.D.
32
sanskritdocuments.org

=== PAGE 35 ===

From: The Bhagavad-Gita
रसोऽहमप्सुु
कौन्तेयेयप्रभास्मिशशिसूर्ययोःयोः।
प्रणवःणवःसर्ववेदेषुवेदेषुशब्दःःखेपौरुषंषंनृषु॥७-८॥
O Arjuna, I am the sapidity in the water, I am the radiance in the
sun and the moon, the sacred syllable OM in all the Vedas, the
sound in the ether, and the manhood in men . (7-08)
ओमित्येकाक्षरंरंब्रह्म
व्याहरन्मा
मनुस्मरन्
रन्।
यःप्रयातित्य
जन्देहंे
हंसयाति
परमांगतिम्म्॥८-१३॥
One who leaves the body while meditating on Brahman and
uttering OM,
the sacred monosyllable sound of Brahman, attains the Supreme
goal.
(8-13)
ॐतत्सदितिनिर्देशोशोब्रह्मणस्त्रिविधःधःस्मृतःृतः।
ब्राह्मणास्तेने
नवेदाश्च
यज्ञाश्चविहिताःताःपुरा॥१७-२३॥
“OM TAT SAT” is said to be the threefold name of Brahman .
The
BrAhmana, the Vedas, and the Yajna were created from this in
the
ancient time . (17-23)
तस्मादोमित्युदाहृत्य
यज्ञदानतपःक्रियाःयाः।
प्रवर्तन्तेेविधानोक्ताःाःसततंब्रह्मवादिनाम्नाम्॥१७-२४॥
Therefore, acts of sacrifi ce, charity, and austerity prescribed in
the scriptures are always commenced by uttering “OM” by the
knowers
of Brahman . (17-24)
ॐतत्सत्त्
om1.pdf
33

=== PAGE 36 ===

॥ॐकार॥
Encoded by NA
.. omkAra(information) ..
Searchable pdf was typeset using XeTeXgenerateactualtext feature of XƎLATEX 0.99996
on August 20, 2017
Please send corrections to sanskrit@cheerful.com
34
sanskritdocuments.org