=== PAGE 1 ===

ANCIENT INDIAN 
TRADITION & MYTHOLOGY 
TRANSLATED BY 
A BOARD OF SCHOLARS 
AND EDITED BY 
Dr. G.P. BHATT 
VOLUME 47

=== PAGE 2 ===

ANCIENT INDIAN TRADITION AND 
MYTHOLOGY SERIES 
( PURAƽAS IN TRANSLATION ) 
VOLUMES 
SIVA 1-4 
LINGA 5-6 
BHAGAVATA 7-11 
GARUI;>A 12-14 
NARADA 15-19 
KORMA 20-21 
BRAH<A 22-26 
AGNI 27-30 
VARAHA 31-32 
BFLAJIMA 33-36 
VA.YU 37-38 
PADMA, PARTS I-IX 39-47 
VOLU111!8 UNDER PREPARATION 
BHAVI=YA 
BFLAJIMA V AIV AR TA 
DEVIBHAGAVATA 
KA.UKA 
>J;>EYA 
MATSYA 
PADMA, PART X 
SKANDA 
VAMANA 
VI?@U 
VI?@UDHARMOTTARA

=== PAGE 3 ===

THE 
PADMA-PURANA 
• 
PART IX 
TRANSLATED AND ANNOTATED BY 
Dr. N.A. DESHPANDE 
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LID. 
DELm

=== PAGE 4 ===

First Edition: Delhi, 1991 
C) MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD. 
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 
ISBN: 81-208-0881-9 
Also available at: 
MOTILAL 
BANARSIDASS 
41 U.A., Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007 
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Madras 600 004 
16 St. Mark's Road, Bangalore 560 001 
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004 
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001 
UNESCO COLLECflON OF REPRESENTATIVE 
WORKS- Indian Series 
This book has been accepted in the Indian Translation Series 
of the UNESCO Collection of Representative Works, 
jointly sponsored by the United Nations Educa-
tional, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
(UNESCO) and the Government of India. 
PRINTED IN INDIA 
BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS, A-45 NARAINA 
INDUSTRIAL 
AREA, 
PHASE 
I, 
NEW 
DELHI 110 028 AND 
PUBUSHED 
BY 
NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR MOTILAL 
BANARSIDASS PUBUSHERS 
PVT. LTD., 
BUNGALOW ROAD, JAWAHAR NAGAR, DELHI 110 007

=== PAGE 5 ===

PUBLISHER'S NOTE 
The purest gems lie hidden in the bottom of the ocean or in the 
depth of rocks. One has to dive into the ocean or delve into the 
rocks to find them out. Similarly, truth lies concealed in the 
language which with the passage of time has become obsolete. 
Man has to learn that language before he discovers that truth. 
But he has neither the means nor the leisure to embark on 
that course. We have, therefore, planned to help him acquire 
knowledge by an easier course. We have started the series of 
Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology in English Translation. 
Our goal is to universalize knowledge through the most popular 
international medium of expression. The publication of the 
Pura:g.as in English Translation is a step towards that goal. 
Acknowledgements 
It is our pleasant duty to put on record our sincere thanks 
to Dr. R.N. Dandekar and the UNESCO authorities for their 
kind encouragement and valuable help in the publication of 
the volumes in this series.

=== PAGE 6 ===

EDITORIAL 
We are happy to offer this forty-seventh Ahuti ('oblation') in 
the JPiiina-Yajiia ('Knowledge-Sacrifice') that we have under­
taken in the form of the Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology 
SerieN. The concept of yajna has certain noble implications, the 
foremost one being that it is a selfless venture fraught with 
difficulties and motivated not by any selfish gain or profit but 
by universal good in view. In this present yajiia dissemination 
of knowledge and popularization of the Purfu;l.as is our sole aim 
and this is our apology for calling it 'Jiiina-Yajna'. 
So far the Padma Purii!J.a, of which this is Part IX in English. 
has been the biggest one and one still bigger is yet to follow. 
The last part of this Purat;ta, that is Part X, also is almost ready 
and thus the complete set of the Purat;ta will be made available t() 
our readers within the next three months. 
This part comprises chapters 185-245 of the sixth section, 
viz. Uttarakhat;tga, of the Padma Purat;ta. The reader will find 
here also, as usual, a rich variety of interesting themes. 
The first eight chapters eulogize the saving power of the last 
eight chapters of the great Bhagavadgita supported by illustra­
tive stories. The next six chapters show the efficacy of reciting 
and listening to the Bhagavata. It has been claimed that this 
Purat;ta is capable of removing misery, poverty, ill-luck and sins, 
of overcoming passions and anger in this Kali age. The listen­
ing to it is prescribed for seven days ( Saptiiha) at a time only on 
account of lack of self-control, disease, shortening of life and 
other blemishes characteristic of the present age. The Bhiigavata 
Saptiiha has been praised as better than performing a sacrifice, 
observing a vow, practising penance, visiting a holy place etc. 
This is a form of devotion to Kršt;ta, which is said to be the only 
means of salvation fit to be resorted to in this age of unrighte­
ousness. In an allegorical representation Bhakti (Devotion), 
Jfiana (Knowledge) and Vairagya (Detachment) are depicted as 
a woman with two sons. She is said to have been born in the

=== PAGE 7 ===

viii 
Editorial 
Dravi9a country, brought up in Kal'J}.ata, then to have lived in 
Maharaᕥtra and become old along with her sons in Gurjara due 
to contact with heretics who persecuted them. This is just a 
figurative way of saying that the devotional movement originated 
in Tamil Nadu, reached its height of development in Telugu and 
Marathi speaking regions and declined in Gujarat, probably 
because of its proximity to the first entry points of Muslim 
raiders from the Arabian countries. It is further stated that she 
again became a beautiful young girl in Vrndavana, though 
Jii.ana and Vairagya remained grey-haired and old, thus showing 
their unpopularity and ineffectiveness in this age. 
In our previous Editorials we have reiterated that in view of 
obviously corrupt readings, obscure passages and ;wrong words 
frequently encountered in the existing Pura]Ja versions, there is 
a great need of bringing out thoroughly edited versions of the 
Purii.]Ja texts. A clear and convincing case is cited here. In a 
number of chapters of the text beginning with ch. 199 a name in 
the vocative case occurs very frequently as 'Sive' and sometimes 
as 'Sibe'. Now both the names 'Siva' and •Sibi' have broadly the 
same form in the vocative, except a difference of 'va' and 'ba' 
which is very likely to be ignored and has actually been ignored 
by some translators, though the person is different in the two 
cases, one being the consort of god Siva and the other an an­
cient king, son of Usinara. The dialogue in which this occurs 
and that runs into several chapters is between Narada and king 
Sibi but a reader who is not cautious enough may get the wrong 
idea that the dialogue is between Narada and Parvati. It is learnt 
that All India Kashiraj Trust in Varanasi has been doing a 
laudable work in editing the Pura]Jas butapparently the progress 
is very slow. One would wish that more bodies could come 
forward in the field. 
One more confusing situation is found in chapters 200-209 
and further up to ch. 222, where a number of holy places, viz. 
Prayii.ga, Kii.si, Sivakii.iici, Gokal'J}.a, Dvii.rakii., Kosalii., Madhu­
vana, Badarikasrama, Haridvara, Puᕥkara and Naimiᕥa which 
actually have a distance ranging from a few to hundreds of 
miles, are jumbled up together in a small place named Indra­
prastha ! This obviously needs some researcher to come forward 
and clear this geographical mix-up.

=== PAGE 8 ===

Editorial 
ix 
In chapters 224 and 225 the characteristic sectarian marks 
are prescribed for the Vaiᕥ:Qavas. One should compulsorily have 
a mark called OrdhvapuiJ.rlra on the forehead and imprint other 
parts of the body also with disc, conch and other emblems of 
ViᕥIJU heated in fire. Viᕥ:Qu's Vibhutis, Vibhavas and Vyiihas are 
the topics of chapters 227-229. 
Chapters 235 and 236 contain very interesting observations 
of the author of the PuraJ}a on the birth of heretics, the mea­
sures adopted for bringing about their downfall and destruction 
and the grouping of the sages, doctrines and texts into Siittvika, 
Riijasa and Tiimasa. In the list of heretics those who have on 
their body skulls, ash, bones and other .inauspicious things are 
prominently included, thus casting aspersions on god Siva him­
self. But in the case of Siva it is justified as deliberately done to 
delude and destroy demons and heretics. Not only this but Siva 
is also further said to have deliberately composed vicious scrip­
tures like those of Pasupatas and other Saivite sects for the 
purpose. Preaching of the Buddhist doctrines and Sailkarite 
Miiyiiviida etc. also is shown as part of the same divine conspi­
racy. Among the PuraJ}as Matsya, Kiirma, Liftga, Siva, Skanda 
and Agni are condemned as Tamasa (vicious). Ten vicious sages 
include names such as Durvasas, Kal).ada, Gautama etc. 
In the last few chapters the incarnations of Viᕥl).U in the 
forms of the Boar, Nrsimha, Vamana, Parasunima, Rama and 
KrᕥIJa are described. 
-G.P. Bhatt

=== PAGE 9 ===

PUBLISHER'S NOTE 
EDITORIAL 
ABBREVIATIONS 
CONTENTS 
v 
vii 
XV 
PADMA-PUˌA: SECTION VI: UTTARAKHAƒJ;>A 
(CONTINUED) 
185. The Greatness of the Eleventh Chapter: 
Sunanda's Story 
186. The Greatness ofthe Twelfth Chapter: Siddha­
samadhi's Story 
187. The Thirteenth Chapter: Durii.cii.rii.'s Story 
188. The Fourteenth Chapter: Story of a Bitch and 
a Hare 
189. The Fifteenth Chapter: The Story of King 
Narasirllha 
190. The Sixteenth Chapter: KhaQgabii.hu's Story 
191. The Seventeenth Chapter: Dul}.sasana's Story 
192. The Eighteenth Chapter: A Brahmat;ta Be­
comes Indra 
193. The Greatness of the Bhii.gavata 
194. Srimad Bhii.gavata, the Destroyer of All 
Miseries 
195. The Rule of Reciting and Listening to the 
Bhii.gavata for a Week 
196. Dhundhuli's Story 
197. The Seven-day Bhii.gavata Recitation 
198. Procedure to be Followed during the Saptaha 
199. The Glory of Yamuna 
200. The Episode of a Bhilla and a Lion 
201 . Sarabha's Story 
202. The Story of King Dilipa 
203. Dilipa Obtains a Son by Propitiating Nandini 
2943 
2950 
2954 
2951 
2960 
2963 
2965 
2967 
2971 
2976 
2981 
2987 
2994 
. 3001 
3010 
3014 
3021 
3028 
3033

=== PAGE 10 ===

xii 
204. The Story of a Merchant Sarabha and a 
Demon Vikata 
205. The Efficacy of Nigamabodha 
206. A Woman Should Never Desert Her Husband 
207. The Story of Vimala 
208. The Greatness of Dvaraka. 
209. The Story of Brahma:Q.a Mukunda 
210. Mukunda Goes to Heaven 
2 1 1 . Ca:Q.c;iaka's Fate 
2 12. The Efficacy of Kosala 
213. A Sniddha at Madhuvana is More Meritorious 
2 14. The Greatness of Madhuvana 
2 1 5. Budha Infuriated and Appeased 
216. The Greatness of Badarikasrama 
217. The Greatness of Haridvara 
2 1 8. The Greatness of Puᕮkara : PU:Q.c;iarika's Story 
219. The Greatness of Puᕮkara: Pu:Q.c;iarika Attains 
Absorption into Viᕮ:Q.u 
220. The Greatness of Prayaga : Mohini's Story 
221 . The Greatness of Prayaga : Hemail.gi and 
Viravarman Go to Vaiku:Q.tha 
222. Kasi, Gokama, Sivakafici, Tirthasaptaka and 
BhimakU:Q.c;la 
223. Gem of a Formula 
224. Bearing the Marks of a Disc etc. Essential for 
a Brahma:Q.a 
225. The Efficacy of OrdhvapU:Q.c;ira 
226. The Meaning of the Mantra (Formula) 
227. The Description of the Vibhiiti of Tripad 
228. Description of the Highest Heaven etc. 
229. A Description of Viᕥ:Q.u's Vyiihas 
230. The Fish Incarnation of Viᕥ:Q.u 
23 1 . Durvasas Cures Indra 
232. The Rise of Goddess Lakᕥmi 
233. Ekadasi as a Day of Fast 
234. How to Observe the Vow of Dvadasi 
235. The Birth of Heretics 
236. Characterization of Various Texts and Doctrines 
as Sattvika, Rajasa and Ta.masa 
Contents 
3038 
3047 
3051 
3055 
3060 
3065 
3069 
3074 
3078 
3082 
3087 
3095 
3099 
3 106 
3 109 
3 1 13 
3 1 16 
3 120 
3 123 
3 129 
3135 
3 140 
3144 
3 1 50 
3 1 56 
3 163 
3174 
3176 
3180 
3184 
3186 
3189 
3193

=== PAGE 11 ===

Contents 
237. The Boar Incarnation of ViJ).U 
238. The Emergence of Nrsilhha 
239. The Rise of Bali andKasyapa's Penance 
240. ViJ).u Incarnates as Vamana 
241 . Parasurama's Story 
242. The Story of Rama 
243. Rama's Consecration 
244. Rama Goes to Heaven 
245. The Brave Deeds of Knl).a 
xiii 
3195 
3 198 
3208 
32 1 1 
321 5 
3221 
3244 
3247 
3254

=== PAGE 12 ===

ABBREVIATIONS 
Common 
and self-evident abbreviations such as Ch(s)­
Chapter(s), 
p-page, 
pp-pages, 
v-verse, 
vv-verses, 
Ftn-Footnote, Hist. Ind. Philo. -History of Indian Philosophy 
are not included in this list. 
ABORI 
AGP 
AIHT 
AITM 
AP 
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Insti­
tute, Poona 
S.M. Ali's The Geography of PurOt)as, PPH, New 
Delhi, 1973 
Ancient Indian Historical Tradition, F.B. Pargiter, 
Motilal Banarsidass (MLBD), Delhi 
Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology Series, 
MLBD, Delhi 
Agni PuriiĒ, 
Guru Mandai Edition (GM), Cal­
cutta, 1957 
Arch. S. Rep. Archaeological Survey Report 
AV 
Atharva Veda, Svadhyaya MaoŴal, Aundh 
Bd. P. 
Brahmii1J4a Puriit, MLBD, Delhi 1973 
BG 
Bhagavadgltii 
Bh. P. 
Bhiigavata Puriit, Bhagavat Vidyapeeth, Ahmeda-
Br. 
BS. P. 
BV. P. 
cc 
cvs 
DB 
De or 
GDAMI 
Db. S. 
ERE 
GP 
bad 
Briihma1;1a (preceded by name such as Satapatha) 
Bhaviēya Purii1;1a, Vishnu Shastri Bapat, Wai 
Brahma Vaivarta Purii1)a, GM, 1955-57 
Caturvarga Cintiima1)i by Hemadri 
Cara1;1a Vyilha Sutra by Sa unaka, Com. by Mahidasa 
Devi Bhiigavata, GM, 1960-61 
The Geographical Dictionary of Ancient and Media­
eval India, N.L. De, Oriental Reprint, Delhi, 1971 
Dharma Sutra (preceded by the author's name 
such as Gautama) 
Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics by Hastings 
Garurja Purii1;1a, ed. R.S. Bhattacharya, 
Chow­
khamba, Varanasi, 1964

=== PAGE 13 ===

GS 
HD 
lA 
IHQ 
JP 
KA 
KP 
LP 
Manu. 
Mbh. 
MkP 
MN 
MtP 
MW 
NP 
PCK 
Pd.P. 
PE 
PRor 
PRHRC 
Uv 
Sat. Br. 
SC or SMC 
SEP 
Grhya Sutra (preceded by the name of the author 
such as.Apastamba) 
History of Dharma Saatra, P.V. Kane, G. 0. S. 
The Indian Antiquary 
The Indian Historical Quarterly 
Purii"(la (Journal of the Kashiraj Trust), Varanasi 
Kautilya Arthaliistra 
Kurma PuriJ{IQ, Veil.katehara Press Edn., Bombay; 
also Kashiraj Trust Edn., Varanasi, 1971 
Linga Purii"(la, GM, 1960; also MLBD, Delhi, 1981 
Manusmrti 
MahiJbhiirata, Git4 Press, Gorakhpur, VS 2014 
Miirka"(leya Puriil)a 
Mahiibhiirata NiimiJnukramal)l, Gita Press, Gorakh­
pur, VS 2016 
Matsya Puriil)a, GM, 1954 
Monier 
Williams' 
Sanskrit-English 
Dictionary, 
MLBD, Delhi, 1976 
Niiradlya or Niirada Puriil)a, Veilkatesvara Press, 
Bombay 
Bhiiratavarlya Priiclna Caritrakosa, Siddheshwar 
Shastri, Poona, 1968 
Padma Puriil)a, GM, 1957-59 
Puriil)ic Encyclopaedia, V. Mani, English version, 
MLBD, Delhi, 1975 
Puranic Records on Hindu Rites and Customs, 
R.C. Hazra, Calcutta, 1948 
IJ.g-Veda, Svadhyaya Maogal, Aundh 
Satapatha Briihma"(la 
Smrti Candrikii by Devanna Bhatta 
Studies in Epics and Puriil)as, A.D. Pusalkar, 
Bh aratiya Vidya Bhavan (BVB), Bombay

=== PAGE 14 ===

VI. l85. 1-17 
2943 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED EIGHTYFIVE 
The Greatness of the Eleventh Chapter : Sunanda's Story 
The goddess sard: 
1-2. 0 god, this history is a great means of accomplishing 
the good. 0 merciful one, my desire is further aroused on hear­
ing it. 0 ViriipakÇa, 0 the first (i.e. greatest) one among speakers, 
explain to me the importance of the eleventh chapter (of the 
Gita) supported by a story. 
The lord said: 
3-1 7. 
0 dear one, listen to a story resting on the description 
of the Gita. Even the greatness of the chapter (called) Visvariipa 
(-dar8ana) is purifying. 0 you of large eyes, (the greatness of) 
the chapter cannot be told. There are thousands of stories. One 
of them will be told by me. On the bank of the river Pragita 
there was a city known as Meghail.kara. It had a heavily laid 
foundation, lofty ramparts and gates. It had big (sacrificial) 
halls of hermitages adorned with golden pillars. Rich, happy, 
calm, well-behaved men with their senses controlled and speedy 
in their actions lived there. It was charming with the places 
where four roads met. It was adorned with markets and quad­
rangulars where gold in the jewelled pillars was shining. In it 
the sweet and indistinct sound of the multitude of (moving) ban­
ners and jingling bells was (heard). The atmosphere was shaken 
with the loud noise of Vedic recitation. The vast sky was full of 
the loud sounds of musical instruments. It won battles with the 
breezes due to flags and foliage (obscure). It appeared splendid 
with the jingling sounds of the anklets of women on the royal 
path and at the excellent gates, and with (sounds of) lutes, 
flutes, songs and the neighings of excellent horses. It constantly 
appeared to be equal to the cities of the regents of the quarters. 
There the lord of the world, ÈariJ.gapa:Q.i, shone. He was the 
embodiment of the highest Brahman, and the life of the sight 
of the world. His great form was worshipped by the lotus-eyes 
of LakÇmi (obscure). His body was that of Trivikrama; he was 
dark like a cloud. His lustre was mild; he had Èrivatsa (mark) on 
his chest; and was adorned with lotuses and garland of wood-

=== PAGE 15 ===

2944 
Pa dma Purii(ta 
:flowers. He was having (i.e. had put on) many ornaments and 
was, as it were, the ocean full of jewels. His lustre was like that 
of a cloud with the :flashing of the streak of lightning. On his (?) 
crown dwelt the highest soul Sar.tigapa:Q.i himself. On seeing him 
a living being is freed from the bondage of the worldly existence. 
In that city there was a great holy place called Mekhala. By 
bathing there men always obtained the position of Vi:Q.u. Hav­
ing seen Narasirl:lha, the lord of the world, the ocean of pity 
there, a man is free from a terrible sin committed during seven 
existences. 
18-27. A man who sees the lord of ga:Q.as at Mekhala al­
ways overcomes dangers, even though they are difficult to be 
overcome. In that Megha.tikara (city) there lived an excellent 
brahma:Q.a who practised celibacy and self-control, who was 
free from the feeling of mineness and from egotism. He was well­
known as Sunanda, and was proficient in the Vedas and in 
(other) holy texts. He had subjugated the group of his senses; he 
was highly devoted to Vasudeva. 0 dear one, by the side of god 
Sar.tigin he recited this eleventh chapter (of the Gita called) 
Manifestation of the Cosmic Form. The ascetic obtained know­
ledge of Brahman due to the power of the chapter. The meditat­
ing saint, enjoying liberation (even) while alive, desiring to reach 
a steady condition, always remained in profound intellectual 
meditation, praiseworthy due to the mass of great joy. Once that 
great meditating saill.t set out on a pilgrimage to Godavari when 
Jupiter was in the Zodiacal sign Leo. Having, on the first day, 
come to the excellent holy place Viraja, and having begun with 
the centre among the holy places, he bathed again and again, 
and saw Kamala (i.e. LakÁmi). the prop of the world. Having 
worshipped her, the great divine power, giving the fruit of all 
desires and then bathing at Taratirtha, then at the con:fluence of 
Kapila, he visited the eight holy places. Then having offered ob­
lations to the dead ancestors, having bowed to the lord of 
Kumari, Ƒiva, he came to Kapiladvara. 
28-40. 
Having bathed there, and washed oft' the sins of 
former existences, having worshipped, saluted and heard (about) 
god ViÁ:Q.u and having lived there for that night, he went with 
the brahma:Q.as from it in the morning. In the forest Narasirllha 
there is at the holy place a well sacred to Rama. Narasirllha wor-

=== PAGE 16 ===

VI. 185.4 1-50a 
2945 
shipped by Prahhida himself dwells there. Having seen that lord 
of gods, having devoutly worshipped him, and having passed the 
day there, he went to the city of Ambikii. Ambikii, showering 
grace on her devotees, dwells there. She fulfils all the desires of 
men. Having devoutly worshipped Ambikii with flowers and un­
guents, with various hymns, and salutations also, the brahmat;.a 
then reached the city called Ka:t;tthasthana in olden times. There 
the great power, Mahalakȧmi, of great lustre, dwells. Having 
seen her, having the orb of the brightness of nectar and the sun, 
the river of the nectar from lotuses cutting off the torment of the 
worldly existence, and served by royal swans of the lotuses of the 
hearts of best meditating saints, full of the sound produced 
without beating, and of the form having no second, having wor­
shipped with a devout heart that revered Mahalakࠪ
i, giving 
desired objects, the lord of sages reached along with the brah­
ma:t;tas, the city called Vivahamaoqapa. In every house in the city 
he. asked for taking shelter. The brahma:t;ta could not get lodg­
ing in any house. The head of the village showed to him a big 
temple to stay in. The brahma:t;ta entering it with his companions 
stayed there. Then when it was bright morning he saw from his 
place of lodging his body, where by chance all travellers were 
produced. When he was going, the village-head saw him coming 
(to him). 
41-SOa. 
The village-head said to him : "You are by all 
means a long-lived one. You are (the best) among the lucky, and 
(most) auspicious among the auspicious also. 0 child, you have 
some extraordinary power. Where have your companions gone? 
How did they get out of that house? See that, 0 best sage, I 
shall tell you. But I do not see here any other ascetic comparable 
to you. Do you know a great spell? Which science do you prac­
tise? Due to the kindness of which god have you this uncommon 
power? 0 best brahmat;J.a, then please stay in this village. 0 re­
vered one, I shall render you every service." Speaking like this, 
he made the best sage stay in the village. He devoutly served 
him day and night. When seven or eight days passed, he came 
(to him). Having come to him in the morning, he, much grieved, 
wept before him. "The devout son of me who am luckless to­
day, was eaten at night by a demon having bright fangs." When 
the protector (of the village) said like this, the restrained one

=== PAGE 17 ===

2946 
Padma PuriiiJa 
asked him : "Where is the demon ? Tell me how your son was 
devoured." 
The village-h ead said : 
SOb-59. 
In the city there is a terrible demon eating human 
beings. Everyday he comes and eats men frequenting the city. 
All the citizens formerly requested him : "0 demon, protect us 
all . We shall arrange for your food. 0 demon, eat those travel­
lers who sleep (here) at night." For protecting his life, he devou­
red the travellers that were ushered into this house by the 
village-head. You had slept in this house accompanied by other 
unlucky persons. They were eaten by him, and you were aban­
doned, 0 best brahmaJ}.a. 0 best brahma:J;ta, you know your own 
power. Today a friend of my son has come. I, being ignorant, 
(i.e. unknowingly) put that dear (friend) of my son in the {same) 
house along with other travellers. Hearing that he was put into 
it, my son went to bring him at night. He too was eaten by the 
demon. I who was affi.icted, said to the demon in the morning : 
"0 wicked-minded one, at night you ate my son also. 0 demon, 
tell me if there is a means by which my son gone down into your 
belly will be revived." 
Th e demon said: 
60-63a. 
Through ignorance I devoured your son that has 
gone into {my belly). This your son was eaten by me through 
ignorance along with the travellers. Brahma has also laid down 
(the way) in which he who has entered my belly, will be revived. 
By the power of the brahma1;1a who constantly recites the ele­
venth chapter, I shall get salvation and the dead will be revived. 
Th e villa ge-h ead said: 
63b-73. 
"How does the eleventh chapter have such wonder­
ful power?" 0 brahma:J;ta, thus asked by me, the demon said : 
"Formerly some vulture going along the aerial path dropped 
frem its beak a piece of bone somewhere in the water. Someone, 
best among the wise, having come to that lake, and taking it to 
be a great holy place, had offered oblations to the dead ances­
tors. All people said to him: 'Tell {us) how this is a holy place'. 
The restrained one muttered the eleventh chapter thrice a day.

=== PAGE 18 ===

VI. 185.74-89a 
2947 
The brahmal}.a who had observed silence, was killed by thieves 
on the way. A piece of his bone fell from the vulture's beak into 
water. Due to that this has become a divine holy place destroy­
ing sins. Then all those men bathed there in that lake. Due to 
their being free from sins, they obtained the highest position. 
Owing to the power of the eleventh chapter, I too will get salva­
tion, and the travellers will again come back to life. The brah­
maJ}.a spat out by me, will stay here only. If he constantly 
muttered 
the 
eleventh chapter, and if that best brahmaJ}.a 
throws on me the water that is consecrated by the hymn of the 
eleventh chapter, then, undoubtedly I shall be free from the 
curse." Thus told by him, I have come to you. 
The brahma l)a said: 
74-89a. 
0 protector (of the village), tell (me) due to what 
sin he had become a demon, eating men in the house at night. 
The village-head said: 
Formerly in this village there was a brahmaJ}.a farmer. Once 
he was busy with the protection of the paddy-field. Not far from 
him, a great vulture devoured a traveller. An ascetic at a dis­
tance took pity on him to free him. Just then the bird ate up 
the traveller and went by the aerial path. Then the ascetic, 
through anger, said to the farmer : "0 you wicked-minded, 
harsh-hearted, cruel ploughman, fie upon you who are selfish, 
averse to protecting others, and of an accursed life. One who 
though capable, ignores men being struck by thieves, wild boars, 
serpents, enemies, poisoned water, vultures, demons, evil spirjts, 
goblins etc., would obtain the fruit of their murder. He who be­
ing capable, does not free a brahmaJ}.a seized by thieves etc. 
goes to a horrible hell, and is again born as a wolf. He who 
(seeing one) being killed (or) harassed by a vulture or a tiger in 
a forest, says 'Leave (him), leave (him)', goes to the highest 
position. Those also who are killed while (protecting) cows by 
tigers, hunters or wicked kings, go to Vi´J].u's position, difficult 
to be obtained even by meditating saints. Thousands of horse­
sacrifices and hundreds of Vajapeya sacrifices are not worth 
even a sixteenth part of the protection of one seeking shelter. 
Even a meritorious person, by ignoring a helpless and a fright-

=== PAGE 19 ===

2948 
Padma Pural)a 
ened person, is roasted in the Kumbhipaka (hell) after (some) 
time. Since you were unkind, as you on seeing the traveller (be­
ing) eaten by the wicked vulture, did not ward off (the vulture) 
though you were capable of warding it off, you will be (born as) 
a demon." Having heard this curse of the sage, the ploughman, 
with his body trembling, saluted the brahmal)a and said (these) 
piteous words : "W:ith my eyes cast on protecting the :field here, 
I did not notice this man being killed by the vulture. Therefore, 
please favour me who am helpless." 
The briihmal)a said: 
89b-9 1 . When the water consecrated by him who knows 
the eleventh chapter (of the Gita) and mutters it everyday, falls 
on your head, then you will be free from the curse. 
Speaking like this the ascetic left, and the ploughman became 
a demon. Therefore, 0 brahmal)a, come on ; consecrate him with 
(the recitation of) that chapter. Drop with your (own) hand the 
holy water on his head. 
Mahadeva said: 
92-108b. 
Having heard this request of him, the sage, full of 
pity, saying ' All right' went with the head of the village near the 
demon. The brahmal)a, the meditating saint, dropped on his 
head the water consecrated with (the recitation of) the eleventh 
chapter (called) Visvariipa (-darsana). By the power of the chap­
ter of the Gita, he obtained freedom from the curse. Abandon­
ing the body of the demon he became one having four arms. 
Those men, the travellers who were ejected, were in thousands. 
They became four-armed ones holding conches, discs and maces. 
They got into aeroplanes. At that time he said to the demon : "0 
demon, which is my son. Show him (to me)." Thus addressed by 
the village-head, the demon of divine intellect said : "Know your 
son to be four-armed like these and having dark lustre like the 
tamala tree and having a crown of rubies, and adorned with 
divine, jewelled ear-rings, with great shoulders charming due to a 
necklace, and adorned with a golden armlet, having lotus-like 
eyes, affectionate, and holding a lotus in his hand, having got 
into a divine aeroplane, and having obtained godhead." Hearing

=== PAGE 20 ===

VI. 1 85. 108c-1 10 
2949 
these words of him, and seeing his son like that, he started tak­
ing him home. Then the son laughed (and said) : "0 protector 
(of the village), for how many times have you become my son? 
Formerly I was your son, (but) now I am a god. Due to the 
brahma:Q.a's favour I shall go to Vi´:Q.u's abode. See this demon 
also has secured a four-armed body. Due to the greatness of the 
eleventh (chapter) he will go to heaven with (these) people. 
Learn the chapter from this brahmaJ}.a and constantly mutter it. 
There is no doubt that you will obtain the same position. There­
fore, 0 father, the company of the good is always difficult to be 
had by men. That too has come up for you today. Accomplish 
your desired object. What is the use of wealth, enjoyment, gifts, 
sacrifices, penance, acts of pious liberality? Final bliss is obtain­
ed by the recital of the (chapter called) Visvariipa(-dar8ana). By 
hearing the chapter (men see) that form of Vi´:Q.U which is the 
highest, which came out of the mouth of KnJJ.a, the Brahman, 
the mass of complete joy, which-the nectar of salvation-was 
spoken by him to his friend Arjuna on Kuruk´etra, which re­
moves maladies, diseases and fears of men afraid of the mundane 
existence, which destroys the misery of many existences. I do not 
see any other (hymn) like that. Remember it." 
Siva said: 
lOSc-110. 
Speaking like this, he went to Vi´:Q.u's highest 
position with them. The village-head learnt that chapter from 
the brahma:Q.a. Due to its greatness both of them went to 
Vi´J;tu's position. Thus I have told you the account of the ele­
venth chapter, by merely hearing which great sins perish.

=== PAGE 21 ===

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED EIGHTYSIX 
Th e Gr eatn ess of th e Twelfth Chapter: Siddhasamiidhi's Stor y 
Mahiideva said: 
1-1 1 . In the southern country there is a city named Kolha­
pura. 0 good one, it is the abode of pleasures, and the source of 
accomplishment of superhuman powers for the good ones. It is 
a great seat of the Parasakti (Supreme Power), and is resorted 
to by all gods. It is well-known in the Purii:r;tas as giving enjoy­
ments and salvation. There are crores of holy places there, and 
crores of phalluses of Siva. There is Rudragayii. It is large and 
well-known in the world. The ramparts are like high mountains, 
and the banners on the gates are shining. On the top of the 
palace there is a high golden banner. The city is adorned with a 
row of high mansions and topmost of the houses resembling the 
moon. The quarters were made fragrant with the smoke of the 
incense coming out of the holes of windows. It has a great sha­
dow due to the moving banners. It is endowed with temples. It 
is inhabited by clever, handsome, affectionate, rich, pure men, 
of good conduct and having many ornaments. Women live 
there, whose eyes are like those of deer, whose faces resemble 
the moon, whose hair is curly, who resemble the blooming cam­
paka, whose breasts are stout and high, who are adorned with 
deep navels and three folds (on their bellies), whose hips are 
large, whose pairs of shanks are charming, whose feet are ex­
cellent, whose girdles are making sounds, whose jewelled ank­
lets are jingling, whose lotus-like hands have bracelets that are 
tinkling, and the rays from whose nails are flashing, and that 
fascinate even sages. The city is endowed with all objects, and 
full of all enjoyments. It possesses all auspicious things, and 
has Mahiilakȧmi (living in it) . 
12-33. 
There came some young, fair man of charming eyes. 
His neck was conch-like ; his shoulders were broad; his chest was 
large ; his arms were long. He was endowed with all (good) 
.marks ; was fair and handsome in all limbs. Entering the city he 
saw the beauty in all the high mansions. His mind was eager to 
see Mahiilakȧmi, the chief goddess. He bathed in Ma:Q.ikw;u;ia 
and offered oblations to his dead ancestors. Having seen Mahii-

=== PAGE 22 ===

lak´mi, Mahiimaya, he devoutly praised her. "The mother of the 
world, the protector, having infinite pity, brings about by her 
glance the existence and protection of the world. Lord Brahma 
ordered by that Power creates (the world). Vi´J;l.U depending 
upon that Power, maintains the world. Siva being entered by 
that Power destroys everything. I worship that great Power, 
mighty due to her creating, maintaining and destroying (the 
world). 0 you whose lotus-like feet are meditated upon by 
meditating ascetics, 0 Kamala, 0 you having a lotus as your 
abode, You grasp all our innate properties within the range of 
the senses. You alone are the mass of thoughts. You make the 
mind fit for that. You are of the form of desires, knowledge and 
acts. You are of the form of the highest consciousness. You 
desire no fruit ; you are spotless ; you are eternal ; you are form­
less ; you are unstained. You are constant ; you are free from 
agony ; you are independent ; you are free from disease. Who is 
capable of describing your greatness like this? I salute you, 
moving in the twelve (months) after disclosing the collection of 
the six (seasons) . You are of the nature of anahata sabda* 
(sound produced without beating) ; you are of the nature of 
nada*, hindu* and kala*. 0 mother, you are the river of the 
nectar oozing from the full moon. 0 affectionate one, you 
nourish children like Sanaka etc. who are naked. You are aus­
picious, consciousness attached to (the states of) waking, dream 
and deep sleep. You are in the fourth state ; you are in the com­
bination of pity and courteous language. To all living beings 
the entire wealth of Brahman is given by you who are beyond the 
fourth state after having withdrawn the group of all the reals. 
By you who are indeterminate, identity with bimba (?) is gran­
ted to the yogins. I salute the Para, Pasyanti, Madhyamii. and 
Vaikhari (the four kinds of vac-speech) also. 0 goddess, for 
the proper protection of the world you take up (various) forms. 
You are Brahmi, Vai´J;lavi, Mii.hesi, 0 mother. 0 Varahi, you 
are Mahiilak´mi, Narasirllhi and Aindrikii. You are Kaumari, 
Cal;lc;lika, Lak´mi, the purifier of everything ; you are Siivitri, the 
mother of the world, Sasini and Rohil;li. You are Svahii, Sva­
dha ; you are the divine nectar. You are Durga ; you are adorned 
*These terms are highly technical in Tantra.

=== PAGE 23 ===

with a mass of clubs and staff-like arms. 0 you with your eyes 
reeling due to drinking blood dropping from the body of Rakta­
bija (a demon), 0 you having the strong pair of arms taken out 
from the neck of an intoxicated he-buffalo, 0 you who put in 
great valour in tearing the great demon called Sumbha, 0 you 
having unlimited acts, 0 you mother of the three worlds, I salute 
you. 0 you wish-fulfilling tree to your devotees, 0 you goddess, 
favour me." Thus praised by him goddess Maha.lakМJmi then 
took up her own form and spoke to that man. 
Sr i Lak¤mi said: 
34a. 
0 prince, I am pleased, ask for an excellent boon. 
Th e prince said: 
34b-40a. 
My father, a king, while performing a great horse­
sacrifice, was unfortunately overcome by a disease and died. 
Having dried his body with heated oil, I have kept it. The 
sacrifice continued as before. The horse that had wandered over 
the earth, (was tied) to a post. Someone at night cut off the 
bond and took him somewhere. When (my) men after not find­
ing him, came back, I, addressing all priests, have sought your 
refuge. 0 goddess, if you are pleased, then may my horse of the 
sacrifice be seen, so that the sacrifice will be completed and my 
father, the king, will be free from debt. 0 mother of the world, 0 
you who love those who seek your refuge, do like that. 
Th e goddess said: 
40b-42. A briihmal}.a, known as Siddhasamiidhi, is at my 
door. By my order he will accomplish all your work. 
Thus addressed by Sri Mahiilaկmi, the prince then came to 
the place where the sage Siddhasamiidhi was. Having saluted 
his lotus-like feet, he stood there with his palms joined. 
43-60. Then the briihmal}.a said to him: "You are sent by 
Ambii. See, I shall accomplish all that is desired by you." 
Speaking like this, the miintrika (knower of spells) drew (to his 
presence) all gods. The son of the king then saw the gods having 
joined their palms and with their bodies trembling. Then the 
best brahmal}.a spoke to all the gods: "This prince's horse

=== PAGE 24 ===

meant for a sacrifice was snatched and taken away at night by 
the lord of gods. 0 gods, bring (back) his horse, do not delay." 
Having heard the sage's words, the gods gave him (back) the 
horse. He allowed the gods (to go). Having seen the gods 
drawn (by him), and having received the lost horse, the king's 
son bowed to the sage, and said to him : "0 best sage, this your 
power is a wonder. You have done a marvel by drawing on the 
gods in a moment. Having drawn the horse give me (back) my 
horse meant for the sacrifice. There is nothing else which is 
difficult to be done even by gods. You alone, and none else, will 
be capable of doing it. 0 brahmat;ta, listen. My father was king 
Brhadratha. He commenced a horse-sacrifice, but died through 
(bad) luck. Even now his body lies, dried with heated oil. 0 best 
one, please bring him back to life again." "We shall go there 
where (the body of) your father is, and where your sacrificial 
hall is." Having come (there) along with that Siddhasamadhi, he 
consecrated water and threw it on the head of the dead body. 
Then the king got (back) consciousness, and saw (the people 
there). The king asked him: "0 Dharma (i.e. pious one), who 
are you?" Then the prince toJd everything to the king. The king 
saluted the brahma.JJ.a who had given (back) his life again. He 
said: "Due to which religious merit have you this uncommon 
power by means of which you gave (back) my life and called the 
gods, and also by means of which (power) you rescued the sacri­
fice? Tell (me) that". Being thus addressed, the brahma)Ja spoke 
in soft words. "I carefully mutter the twelfth chapter of the 
Gita. Due to that (I have) this power by means of which you 
(re-)gained life." 
61-62. Hearing these words the king learnt the excellent 
twelfth chapter from that brahmat;ta sage along with brahmat;tas. 
Due to the greatness of that chapter all of them obtained good 
position. Other living beings also, after having recited it, ob­
tained great salvation.

=== PAGE 25 ===

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED EIGHTYSEVEN 
The Thirteenth Chapter : Duriiciirii' s Story 
The goddess said : 
1 . You told me the greatness of the twelfth chapter. Tell 
me the very beautiful greatness of the thirteenth chapter. 
The lord said: 
2-22. 
0 Parvati, listen to the greatness-a treasure-of the 
thirteenth chapter, by merely hearing which you will get great 
joy. In the southern country there is the great river Tuiiga­
bhadra. On her bank is a charming city named Harihara, where, 
0 goddess, revered god Harihara himself dwells. By seeing him 
(a man) gets great happiness. In that city lived a brahma:oa 
named Hari DikȲita. He was engrossed in penance and sacred 
study. He was learned and had mastered the Vedas. His wife 
was Duracara (literally 'of bad conduct') both in name and 
deeds. She who used abusive language, never slept with her 
husband. She, wandering wantonly, did not remain in her 
house even for a moment. At the door of the brahmru;ta she 
drank liquor (filling her belly up) to her throat (i.e. too much). 
She repeatedly threatened her husband's relatives. Always into­
xicated, she constantly dallied with her paramours. Sometime 
seeing the city full of citizens here and there, she herself made a 
rendezvous in a forest. The clever one, proud of her youth, 
passed a long time there only dallying with her paramours. 
When she was (thus) living in the city wantonly, the spring 
season, the friend of Cupid, set in. It was full of foliage from 
roots (of trees) ; it had brought back to life Cupid by means of 
the cooings of the cuckoos in the fifth note (of the Indian ga­
mut) due to the mango tree liable to change(?). It had tossed the 
forest-trees with breezes coming from the Malaya (mountain) 
carrying the fragrance of campaka flowers and blowing very 
gently. It was beautified all around by sound due to hummings 
of the swarms of bees breaking their fast with the fragrant 
spirituous liquor of the blooming jasmine flowers. It was smiling 
with the pleasing, charming, fragrant lakes. It was manifested by 
lakes with hosts of swans collected (there). In it the earth was

=== PAGE 26 ===

VI.l87.23-33 
2955 
beautified with trees having dense foliage and having (under 
them) young ones of deer seated comfortably in their dense 
shade. In that spring season that lady going to meet her lover 
(Abh isiirikii), being delighted, saw, at night the moonlight, giv­
ing joy to the world. It had thin drops of nectar dropping from 
the ends of the beaks of the moving cakoras. It was full of 
springs of nectar oozing from the melting moon-stone. In it the 
mass of hail was clustering together in the expanding middle 
parts of the flowers; the billows of the mass of water that were 
flashing, embraced the sky. It was a knife cutting the throats of 
unchaste women of the great lion of Cupid. It was clever in 
tearing off the mass of dense darkness. It was full of snow (or 
coolness) for others like the Himalaya mountain that had 
whitened Sati. It gave joy to the young people, due to the clos­
ing of withered lotuses. It was the witness to the piteous wailings 
of the female cakravakas. It had brightened the atmosphere 
with pure rays like a row of pearls. 
23-33. When the moonlight became profuse and filled the 
ten quarters, the lustful woman became blind with passion, and 
she, amusing herself in the high mansion, not seeing her para­
mours on the way at night, and breaking the bolt of (the door 
of) the house, went out of the city, to the place of appointment. 
She, with her mind deluded by passion of love, looking for one 
of her lovers, did not see any (lover) in any bower or under any 
tree. At every step she heard the gentle words of her lover. Then 
she playfully went to that place where there was a destructive 
sound. Having heard the notes of the cakravakas, she, mis­
understanding them for the words of her lover, again and again 
moved to all lakes. Through error (that it was) her lover, she 
awakened the flocks of deer asleep at the root of a tree, saying, 
with encouragement, 'I have come'. Taking a branchless trunk 
for the lord of her life she embraced it, and kissed a blooming 
lotus mistaking it for his face. Everywhere her exertion was 
futile. She did not see her lover. Swooning, she lamented in the 
grove with various words. '0 you of a charming fortune, 0 you 
treasure of fortune and handsomeness, 0 you having a face like 
the full moon, 0 you having eyes like lotuses, 0 dear one, 0 
you full of virtues, 0 you who are a celestial tree where fulness 
relaxes, if, through anger, you are remaining somewhere in dis-

=== PAGE 27 ===

2956 
Padma PuriilJ.Q 
guise, I propitiate you, 0 dear one, even by offering my dear 
life.' Thus through separation (from her lover) she lamented in 
all directions. 
34-49. Having heard her words, a tiger, who was asleep, 
awoke. He growled, and angrily looked in every direction along 
the path. Striking the ground with his nails and roaring in the 
sky-cavern, he speedily raised his tail suspended from the back. 
The tiger jumped and went where the abhisiirika was. She too, 
mistaking him, who was coming (to her), for her lord (i.e. para­
mour) went with her mind full of love to stand by him. Then 
blinded by the cruel sport of his nails, she gave up the idea of 
his being her lover on hearing his loud roar. Even though the 
woman was (reduced to a condition) like that, she quickly gave 
up her wrong notion (and said): "0 tiger, for what purpose 
have you come here to kill me? Tell me all this for which you 
wish to kill me." Hearing these words of her, the tiger of violent 
strides, for a moment left the food (in the form) of her, laughed 
and said: "In the southern country there is a river named Mala­
pahii. On her bank is a city called MuniparQii. There Mahesvara 
Paficali:riga actually dwells. In that city, I, being the son of a 
briihma:Q.a, lived. I acted as a priest for those not entitled to 
performing a sacrifice. On the bank of the river I ate (food) at 
a sriiddha performed for one definite individual. With a desire 
for (obtaining) wealth, I always sold the fruit of the recital of 
the Veda. Through greed I condemned other mendicants with 
bad words. I always accepted wealth not fit to be given and 
that was not given. Through the desire to seize the opportunity, 
I deceived all people. Then after some time I became old. I had 
wrinkles (on my body), grey hair, and being blind, stumbled and 
fell. My teeth had fallen, (but) again I was absorbed in accepting 
gifts. Through greed of getting wealth, I, wandering on the 
parvan days, and with darbhas in my hands, went near a holy 
place. Then I, with my limbs having become loose, went to the 
house of a briihma:Q.a to ask for food, but in the middle (i.e. 
while on my way) I was bitten on my leg by a dog. Fainting I 
fell on the ground in a moment. Then losing my life, I went to 
the stock of a tiger. 
S0-61. Remembering my former sin I live in this forest. I 
do not eat religious sages and good men and chaste women. But

=== PAGE 28 ===

VI. 188. 1-9 
2957 
I devour sinners, wicked ones, and unchaste women. Therefore, 
I shall really eat you, 0 unchaste woman." Saying so, he, cutt­
ing her limbs into pieces with his cruel nails, devoured her 
who had resorted to a sinful body. Yama's servants took her to 
Yama's city, and there by Yama's order quickly dropped her 
many times into the fierce yellow pools full of feces, urine and 
blood for crores of kalpas; and again and again bringing her 
from there, they put her into Raurava hell for a period of hun­
dreds of periods of Manu. Even after dragging her from there, 
they threw her, fully helpless, weeping, with her hair loose, 
limbs broken, into fire. Thus, having experienced the fierce tor­
ment in the hell, wholly sinful, she was again born on the earth 
in the stock of caJ}.9ala. Then, in the cal).9ala-house also, she 
growing day by day, was as bef'ore due to (the effect of) her 
former deeds. Then after some time she went to her house, 
where, goddess Jrmbhakli of Лiva, the goddess of the city, was. 
There she saw a pure brahmal).a, Vasudeva by name, constantly 
reciting the thirteenth chapter of the Gita. Then merely on 
hearing it, she was free from the body of caJ}.9ala, and getting a 
divine body, she went to heaven. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED EIGHTYEIGHT 
The Fourteenth Chapter : Story of a Bitch and a Hare 
The lord said: 
1-9. 
0 Bhavani, for freedom from the worldly existence, I 
shall hereafter narrate (the importance of) the fourteenth chap­
ter of the Gita. 0 you of a pleasing smile, listen to it. On the 
earth there is a large region of Kasmira; it is the charming 
capital of goddess Sarasvati. After staying there the goddess of 
speech goes to Brahma's world after mounting her swan. There 
the quarter attains importance after serving Sarasvati's lotus­
like feet with saffron sent by Slivitri and rising from the folds of 
the wings of the swan. Due to having no interruption the langu-

=== PAGE 29 ===

2958 
Pa dma Pura!J.Q 
age of gods is in a moment got by men who speak Sanskrit. In 
the morning the orbs of the moon and of the sun have a tawny 
tinge due to saffron rising from the courtyard of the house. 
There was king Sauryavarman, a heap of lustre, who had cut 
off the circle of his enemies with volleys of bright arrows that 
were ready. In Simhaladvipa there was a king, brave like a lion, 
named Vikramavettila, also a treasure of arts. Gradually they 
increased the friendship of each other by means of heaps (of) 
excellent (presents) produced in their respective countries. 
10-17. 
Once, king Vikramavetala saw a perfect pair of bit­
ches sent with love by Sauryavarman. He sent to his friend 
Sauryavarman intoxicated excellent elephants, horses, jewelled 
ornaments and chowries. Once, the king, eager for hunting hav­
ing got into a palanquin, being fanned by charming chowries, 
taking the pair of the bitches tied with golden chain, and with 
a collection of musical instruments and small drums went 
with the princes to a forest. A hare was taken as a prey for the 
wager. There was a great noise made by the princes. Then the 
king laying a high-priced wager with a prince of his age sported 
with eagerness. Then the king, having taken down the bitch 
from the palanquin, set her after the hare, running fast. The 
prince, of great arms, also released his object of love. Having 
loudly repeated the panegyric or laudatory poem he stopped the 
bitch. 
18-28. While all the kings were witnessing, the pair of the 
bitches was running with a speed that could not be perceived 
and was jumping. Due to great exertion the hare fell into a 
great ditch. Though fallen the hare could not be overpowered by 
the bitch. Then the hare, slowly getting up, vomitting foam, was 
angrily overpowered and seized by the king's bitch. Then the 
hare who somehow jumped and was going, tumbled and was 
seized at the neck by the king's bitch. In the din of the people, 
talking 'We have won' the hare got out of the mouth of the 
bitch that was frightened. Then the hare, having blood (on his 
body) that was dropping and that was caused by the line of the 
wounds (made) by the teeth (of the bitch), hid in a place rustl­
ing (with leaves etc.) and remained (there). He who, being just 
seen by the king's bitch, smelling that part of the land with 
great anger, was frightened, and went (from there to a distance)

=== PAGE 30 ===

VI. 188.29-40 
2959 
of just a cubit, to a place where the wind coming from the 
camphor and plantain trees and the bottom of the tiger's caves 
and kissing the cheeks of the Cola-ladies, blew. There the deer, 
with their eyes partially closed due to the pollen from the cups 
of the ketaki flowers that had opened up, confidently resorted to 
the shade. There the monkeys also, satisfied with the ripe 
mangoes, fell down along with the coconuts. There even lions 
played with the young elephants; serpents entered fearlessly into 
the peacocks' tails. 
29-36. There in a hermitage a brahma:Q.a named Vatsa, 
who had curbed his senses and was tranquil, lived, constantly 
muttering the fourteenth chapter. (The hare) going here, with 
his life just sustained and repeatedly panting, fell into the 
mud caused by the water (poured) by his disciple while wash­
ing his lotus-like feet. The hare, having crossed the mundane 
existence just due to the contact with that mud, got into a divine 
aeroplane and went to heaven. Then that bitch also, with her 
body besmeared with a few drops of mud and free from hunger 
and thirst, abandoned her canine form, got into a celestial aero­
plane charming with divine ladies and adorned with gandhar­
vas, went to heaven. Then his intelligent disciple named Svakan­
dhara, amazed after thinking about the cause of the enmity in 
the former existence, laughed. The king, an ocean of modesty 
alone, with his eyes smiling, also saluted him with great devo­
tion and asked him, "0 brahma:Q.a, tell me the story, how the 
two ignorant ones, the bitch and the young hare, that had re­
sorted to a mean stock, went to heaven." 
The disciple said: 
37-39. 
In this forest there is a brahma:Q.a named Vatsa, 
with his senses curbed. He always mutters the fourteenth chap­
ter. 0 king, I am his disciple, proficient in every (branch of) 
knowledge. Everyday I mutter the fourteenth chapter, 0 king. 0 
king, the hare along with the bitch, rolling in the water (used) 
for washing my feet, went to heaven. 
The king said: 
40. 
0 best brahma:Q.a, with what intention did you, think­
ing carefully that it has some meaning, laugh?

=== PAGE 31 ===

2960 
Padma PuriiiJ.a 
Th e disciple sa id: 
41-45. There was a great city named Pratyudaka in Mahii­
riiȲtra. There was a brahma]J.a named Kesava, a leader of 
gamblers. His wife was Vilobhanii, a wanton woman. He 
through anger, and remembering the enmity of the (former) 
birth, killed her. Then due to the sin of the murder of a woman, 
the briihma]J.a was born as a hare, and she due to her birth (full) 
of deceit, was born as a bitch. They, taking different births, 
never forgot the enmity practised in the former birth, and each 
other also. 
The king, full of faith, having understood all this, studied 
the entire Gitii, and got the highest position. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED EIGHTYNINE 
The Fifteenth Chapter : Th e Story of Kin g Narasimsha 
Th e lord said: 
1-1 1 . 0 you large-eyed one, 0 you daughter of the Hima­
laya mountain, I shall tell (you) the importance of the fifteenth 
chapter of the Gitii. Listen to it. In the Gau<;ta country there 
was a kind king named Narasirilha. In the war by the edge of his 
sword the divine groups were killed. The earth could bear the 
agony due to the heat of the sun, even in summer, by means of 
the water of the stream of rut of his intoxicated elephants. 
Intoxicated elephants, frightened due to being challenged and 
seeking his refuge, shone like moving mountains. The mountains 
respectfully echoed the trumpets of the intoxicated elephants of 
him, the kind protector. It was a wonder how the earth was not 
reduced to pieces, when it was shattered with the multitudes of (the 
strokes of) the hoofs of his running horses. When he, a friend 
of lndra, emancipated the earth, PhaJ;tisvara (Se$a; Pataiijali) 
again brightened Mahiibhii$ya. He had an intelligent soldier 
named Sarabhabheruo<;la, who was an abode of weapons, holy 
texts and arts, and had large round arms. By means of his trea-

=== PAGE 32 ===

VI. l89. 12-40 
2961 
sure, horses, brave soldiers, and very inaccessible forts he was 
equal to the king. Some time the sinful one made up his mind to 
rule over the kingdom after having forcibly killed the king to­
gether with the princes. With a desire to do like this he was 
determined (to kill the king with the princes). Due to the 
disease of cholera he died. 
12-26. 0 you of a thin belly, after death the sinful one was 
born, due to that act, as a bright horse in Sindhu country. A 
certain vaisya-son, knowing the facts about horses, bought him 
at a great price and took him (to his place) with great effort. 
After his death the king got old in course of time and looked 
after his kingdom with (the help of) his grandsons. The vaisya­
son came to give the horse to the king. He remained at the king's 
door waiting to meet him. Though the vaisya was already known, 
he was presented (before the king) by the doorkeeper. "Speak 
why (you have come).'' Thus asked by the king, he told (every­
thing) clearly. "Thinking that this horse is a gem of the three 
worlds, I (bought) this horse of auspicious marks at a price of 
a million coins." Then looking at the faces of those seated by 
his side, the king ordered the vaisya: "Bring the horse here.'' 
The great horse made the heads of those knowing the marks 
of a horse, nod, and exciting the minds of the brave, ejecting 
hisvery bright fame earned by many speedy runs across, the 
entire earth, as it were, in the form of saliva and foam, he actual­
ly became comparable to Uccail}.Sravas by means of the similar­
ity in virtues (with him). The very bright one bent his neck, as it 
were, through bashfulness. Constantly being fanned by chowries, 
white like the moon, he was like UccaiJ;tsravas, unsteady like the 
Milky Ocean. Like the beauty of the clouds he had a pair of blue 
umbrellas, and the beauty of the peak of the Himalaya, with 
clouds touching it. Repeatedly raising his handsome neck, he 
was, as it were, turned into fire by the contact with the earth. He 
tore all the enemies; he brought prosperity in the form of victory 
with his loud neighing ; he declared glory in (all) quarters. He 
was a very high heap of vitality ; was, as it were, the treasure of 
gaits. He was actually the abode of beauty ; he was the ocean of 
(auspicious) marks. 
27-40. The vaisya brought the horse: and the king saw him. 
The ministers knowing the (auspicious) marks described him in

=== PAGE 33 ===

2962 
P adma Puriiʒa 
various ways. Giving the merchant as much gold as desired and 
aked for by him, the king, full of extreme joy, quickly took the 
horse. Then having called the horsegroom, and carefully instruct­
ing him the king dismissed the assembly and went into his house 
after being taken leave of in many ways by (the members of) the 
assembly. He (took) the king, having the ornaments in the form 
of rows of scars of wounds made in battle, and resembling sattva 
(energy?). Once, the king, full of curiosity, having the sport of 
hunting (in mind), mounted him, and entered a forest. Leaving 
his soldiers behind, all of whom were running around, the king, 
being attracted by deer, was oppressed with thirst. Then the king 
got down from the horse, and looking for water, tied the horse 
to the branch of a tree, and ascended a rock. He saw half the 
verse from the fifteenth chapter of the Gitii written, and fallen 
where he looked into a fissure. When the king was reading the 
line of letters, the horse, hearing it, obtained salvation, and 
quickly fell. Then having cut off the knot, and dropping the 
saddle, he, being lifted by the king did not get up, (but) was 
dead. Then Sarabhabheru:Q.ga, talking to the king in a sweet 
tone, got into a celestial aeroplane, and went to heaven. Then 
going up the mountain, he saw an excellent hermitage. It was 
full of the trees of punniiga, plantain, mango and coconut. It 
had groves of grapes and sugarcanes, and trees like nuts, niiga­
kesara and campaka. It had young elephants and deer playing in 
it. It had the flocks of peacocks dancing. The king, being free 
from the desire for worldly existence, saluted the briihma:Q.a who 
was in the hut, and asked him with great devotion: 
41-46. "(Please) tell me, with what purpose the horse went 
to heaven." Having heard these words of the king, the briihma:Q.a 
said: "Due to his sin, he became a horse after a long time. Hav­
ing heard half a verse from the fifteenth chapter of the Gitii 
written somewhere, when you read it, the horse went to hea­
ven." Then the king, surrounded by his attendants who had 
come there, with horripilation due to joy, saluted the briihmal}.a 
and left. The king, with his eyes dilating due to joy, read that 
writing having (half the verse from) the fifteenth (chapter) of the 
Gitii and he, along with the ministers, the counsellors, consecra­
ted his son powerful like a lion, on the throne, and he of a pure 
mind, obtained salvation.

=== PAGE 34 ===

VI.190. 1 -22 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED NINETY 
The Sixteenth Chapter : Khaq.gabilhu's Story 
The lord said: 
2963 
1 -9. Hereafter I shall narrate the greatness of the sixteenth 
chapter. Hear it, 0 fawn-eyed one, 0 you showering joy and 
eagerness. In the Gurjara country there was a city by name 
Saural?trika. There lived a king Kha9gabahu by name. He was, as 
it were, another moon. The ocean is made fragrant by the string 
of the fragrance of his :flowers and Vigm with Lakl?mi sleeps 
comfortably in it. The particles of the camphor of his fame shine 
in the sky, under the pretext of stars, after they were scattered 
there by the sighs of his enemies. Kings among his enemies who 
had bathed in the holy place of the edge of his sword, (though) 
fascinated by the words of divine women, even now turn back 
from heaven. He had an elephant named Arimardana. He was 
unrestrained due to rut. He had swarms of bees (hovering round 
and) humming in the water of the :flowing ichor. It shone like 
mount Aiijana with the springs rising, turbid due to being the 
water in the form of the stream of ichor crossing his large tem­
ples. In the interior of the forest the chowries bright like the 
moonlight shone on his limbs like the rays of the moon falling 
on them. He looked splendid with his temples shining with the 
cover of the particles of red lead. He was like a portion of the 
sky pervaded with the evening clouds. 
10-22. Once, at night, he freed himself from the chains and 
fetters and forcibly broke the iron pillar (to which he was tied) 
and went out. Angrily ignoring all the hosts of drivers :flashing 
the goads by his side, he broke his abode, though he was being 
struck in various ways with bamboo sticks to which goads were 
fixed, and though the drivers frightened him much. Then on 
hearing this wonder came there the king with those adept in the 
art. of (the marks of) elephants and with princes. Having come 
(there) the king saw the mighty elephant stupefying the pride of 
brave heroes and taking away rows of lofty mansions. The citi­
zens, turning away from any other curiosity and through fear 
guarding their children, looked at the very fierce elephant by 
keeping themselves at a distance. The paths were made fragrant

=== PAGE 35 ===

2964 
Padma Pura1;1a 
by the drops of his rut and blocked by people intent on fleeing. 
Then a brahmal}.a, after having bathed and muttering certain 
verses from the sixteenth chapter of the Gitii, came along the 
path, though he was prohibited in many ways by the citizens and 
the drivers of elephants. Not caring for those who were scared of 
the elephant, he walked on . The elephant covered the people 
with hissings and crushed them. The brahmal}.a touched his 
ichor and went happily. Even when the citizens were watching, 
there arose a great wonder in the mind of the king which cannot 
be grasped by words. Then getting down from his horse, saluting 
the briihma:J}.a. the king asked him : 
The king said: 
23-24. 0 briihmal}.a, today you have done a great, un­
common thing. How did you pass by the elephant resembling 
Death ? Which god do you worship? Which hymn do you mut­
ter, 0 lord? Which divine power do you possess? Tell it, 0 
briihmru;.a. 
The brahma1;1a said: 
25-34. 
0 king, everyday I mutter a few verses from the 
sixteenth chapter of the Gitii . All these divine powers are due to 
that. 
Then leaving the elephant, the interesting object of curiosity, 
the king, taking the briihmru;.a with him, came home. Having 
pleased the best briihmal}.a at an auspicious time with golden 
coins numbering a lakh, he received from him the Gitii-hymn. 
The curious king also studied with reverence, a few verses from 
the sixteenth chapter of the Gitii. Once, with his soldiers, he 
went out of the city. Clearly not caring for the pleasures of the 
kingdom, he let loose the intoxicated elephant from his driver. 
The king offered his life like grass before the elephant. The 
king, the leader of the daring ones, took him, of large temples 
and unrestrained due to the line of the rut, and due to his confi­
dence in his ministers came there. The king got away from the 
elephant as the moon would come out of Riihu's mouth or a 
righteous person from the mouth of Death or a good one from 
that of a wicked one. Having come to the city, the king consecrat-

=== PAGE 36 ===

VI. 191 . 1 - 1 7 
2965 
ed his son (on the throne), and due to the muttering of the 
sixteenth chapter, obtained the best position. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED NINETYONE 
The Seventeenth Chapter : Du}Jsasana 'g Story 
The lord said: 
1 -9. 
I told you the power of the sixteenth chapter. Now 
listen clearly, 0 Siva, to the greatness of the seventeenth chap­
ter. Dul}.sasana was a servant of Kha9gabahu's son. He came 
to seize that elephant and was killed by the elephant. With his 
mind fixed on that desire, he obtained the stock of the elephant, 
(but)obtained the highest position on listening to the seventeenth 
chapter of the Gita. 
The godde§s said: 
I have heard that Dul}.sasana became an elephant and was 
released. 0 auspicious lord, tell me that only in detail. 
The lord said: 
There was a certain wicked-minded man. He laid a high­
priced wager with the feudal princes and then mounted upon an 
elephant. The fool named Dul}.sasana, having gone a few steps 
only, (though) warded off by people, uttered audacious words. 
Then the elephant, hearing them, was blind with fury. With the 
princes trembling, he, with his steps stumbling, fell down. Then 
the elephant, unrestrained like death, angrily uprooted some­
thing panting and fallen. The mad elephant separating his bones, 
even though he was already dead, scattered them. 
1 0-17. Then having died in course of time, he obtained 
the stock of elephant. He passed a long time (like that). The 
king of Siihhaladvipa had a close friendship with king KhaQga­
bahu. Then the honoured elephant was sent by the water-route 
by Jayadeva to Kha9gabahu. That king also took him with joy. 
Remembering his previous existence, and seeing his kinsmen and

=== PAGE 37 ===

2966 
Padma Purib)a 
his brothers, he passed a few days with great grief. Not showing 
(any recognition) he quietly lived in K.ha\fgabahu's house. He, 
some time being pleased by the completing of an incomplete 
stanza (in a contest) (by a poet) gave the poet the elephant as a 
present. The poet, being afraid of a harm from a disease, sold 
the temple-elephant to the Malava king for a hundred (coins). 
After some time had passed, the elephant suffering from fever 
due to old age difficult to be enjoyed, was on the point of dying. 
The elephant did not smell cold water, nor did he take a morsel ; 
he did not sleep comfortably, but shed tears only. 
18-27. 
Then hearing the account told by the elephant-driver, 
the king came where the elephant suffering from fever, lay. The 
elephant too, seeing the king, gave up the agony due to the 
fever, and spoke in a voice causing wonder to the world. "0 
king, 0 you who know all sacred texts, 0 you ocean of the 
science of politics, 0 you who have vanquished the host of your 
enemies, 0 you to whom Vi½J}.u's feet are dear, what is the use 
of medicines, shoots, and mutterings of hymns? Bring a brah­
mal}.a who would mutter the seventeenth chapter of the Gita. 
There is no doubt that my disease will end due to that." The 
king did as was told by the elephant. Then Dul;tsasana gave up 
his state as an elephant, and got release. When the brahmal}.a 
had thrown consecrated water on the excellent one, the king 
saw that Dul;tsasana, lustrous like Indra, got into a divine 
aeroplane. 
The king said: 
Tell me what your caste is, who you are, what your liveli­
hood is. Due to what act did you become an elephant? How did 
you come here? 
Asked by the king, Dul;tsasana who was freed, remammg in 
the aeroplane, told in definite words his account. Then the lord 
of Malava, muttering the seventeenth chapter of the Gita, was 
released after a short time.

=== PAGE 38 ===

VI. l92.1-15a 
2967 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED NJNETYTWO 
The Eighteenth Chapter : A Briihma1Ja Becomes Indra 
Piirvati said: 
1 . 0 Siva, you have told me the greatness of the seven­
teenth chapter. (Now) tell me the importance of the eighteenth 
chapter. 
The lord said: 
2-1 5a. 0 you daughter of the (Himalaya) Mountain, listen 
to the greatness of the eighteenth chapter which is holy, which 
is the essence of all holy texts, which is the elixir that has come 
to the ears, which is intent on tearing off the mass of pangs in 
the worldly existence, which is the great secret of the siddhas, 
which is capable of uprooting ignorance, which is vitality, which 
is the best, the highest position of Kaitabha's enemy (i.e. Vigm), 
which is the root of the creeper of discretion, which removes the 
dirt of passion and anger, which gave repose to the hearts of 
gods like Indra, which amused the minds of the great meditating 
saints like Sanaka, which has given a setback to the roars of 
Yama merely by its being recited, which is the cause of uproot­
ing the roots of one hundred and eight diseases. 0 you whose 
gait is like that of an elephant, there is no greater secret than 
this. It removes the three (kinds of) torments and destroys major 
sins. As I am eternal among times, as the desire-yielding cow is 
among the beasts, as Vyasa is among the best sages, or as he 
who knows Brahman is among the Vyasas, as Indra is among 
gods, as Guru (i.e. Brhaspati) is superior to Sukra, as among 
the liquids nectar is the best and well-known in the world, as 
Kailasa is among mountains, and as Indra is among gods, as 
Pu´kara is among the holy places, as lotus is among flowers, as 
in the worlds Arundhati is among the chaste and virtuous wives, 
as the horse-sacrifice is among the sacrifices, as Paradise is 
among the gardens, as among all Rudras is my follower Vira­
bhadra, as a gift of land is among gifts, as Godavari is among 
rivers, as Harik´etra is recommended for all religious rites, 
so is the greatness of the eighteenth chapter excellent in the 
world. About it, 0 Parvati, listen devoutly to this auspicious

=== PAGE 39 ===

2968 
Padma PuriiĔJ,a 
account, so that by merely listening to it a being is free from 
sins. 
l Sb-28. 
On the peak of Meru there was a beautiful city 
(named) Amarii.vati. It was formerly fashioned for my amuse­
ment by Visvakarman. It is always full of virtues, and resorted 
to by crores of gods. There, palaces giving desired objects and 
built with desire-yielding stones, excel. It (spread) up to the city 
of Brahma. It possessed a mass of lustre, and is well-known like 
the knowledge of the Supreme Spirit. There happily sitting under 
the shade of the desire-yielding tree Saci enjoyed the song sung 
by gandharva women. The divine river there turned bloody due 
to the billows of the blood of the demons whose lives were 
crushed by gods. There the gods, repeatedly remembering the 
ancient sweet ambrosia, and being emaciated with hunger, 
everyday drank the digit of the moon. In it, resembling final 
beatitude, formerly lived Indra. The prosperous one was accom­
panied by S aci, and was waited upon by all gods. When once he 
was seated comfortably he saw a great man having a thousand 
eyes, waited upon by Vi½t;.lu's messengers, coming (to him). Then 
due to his lustre lndra was overpowered. He quickly fell into the 
hall from his jewelled throne. When he went away from the 
throne, Viȧt;.lu's soldiers tied him with the strap of the sovereignty 
over the gods. Pulomajii. quickly sat on the left lap of that great 
Indra who was consecrated to the accompaniment of sounds of 
drums. Then gods along with their wives sang divine songs. The 
celestial ladies waved lights before him. Then sages gave him 
blessings with (hymns from) the Vedas. The bands of celestial 
nymphs like Rambhii. danced before 
him. Gandharvas sang 
charming songs with auspicious desires. 
29-44. Thus they served the new Indra who had not perform­
ed a hundred sacrifices. Seeing that old lndra was amazed. ''By 
me (him?) lakes were never fashioned on the path ; trees giving rest 
to travellers were never planted. God Tripurabhairava (i.e. Siva) 
was never seen. Goddess Madalasii. living in the place of treasure 
was never worshipped. Sarilgadhara residing at Meghankara was 
never seen. A bath was never taken at Viraja. The city of K.asi 
was never visited. Narahari himself residing at the divine grove 
was never seen. Erat;.l.Qa Viࠨu Heramba(?) was never contempla­
ted upon. Mother Rel;luka living in the city was never seen. The

=== PAGE 40 ===

VI.l92.45-50 
2969 
goddess living at Danapura was never devoutly worshipped. 
Tryambaka with three phalluses was not devoutly seen at Tri­
pura. Somanatha living at the Sardiila lake was never seen. 
Ghusp;.esa living at Revapura was never seen. Naganatha, well 
known in the city of Nagadanta, was never seen. Great Amrtes­
vara residing at Pan;tagrama was never seen. Harihara himself 
living on the bank of Tuiigabhadra was never seen. Srinivasa 
residing on Veiikatadri was not properly seen . Sriraiiga residing 
at Kaveri Kan;tika was not at all seen. Poor and helpless and 
wailing people were not released from gaol. Beings were not 
honoured with (i.e. by giving them) food during a famine. On 
no night a water-fountain was erected at a place without water. A 
bath was not taken in Godavari. Hari:Q.esvara was not seen. A 
bath was not taken in Knl)ave:Q.i, when Jupiter was in the Zodia­
cal sign Libra. Not a piece of land was given . Poets were not at 
all honoured. A sacrificial session was never performed at the 
holy places. Sacrifices also were not performed in villages. Water 
places containing much water were never made on the path. At 
no place temples of Brahma, Vi½l)u and Siva were built. Those 
that were overcome with fear and sought my shelter were never 
protected. Due to one act of religious merit how such a divine 
gift was got?" 
45-46. 
Being full of thought like this, Indra, being dejected, 
hastily went to ask Vi!i!:Q.U to the cave in the Milky Ocean. Having 
entered there that Indra saw Vi!i!J;l.U who was asleep. All of a 
sudden he told him of his being deprived of sovereignty. 
Indra said: 
47-49. 0 Vi!i!J;l.U, in order to please you I formerly performed 
a hundred sacrifices. Due to that religious merit I obtained the 
position of Indra. Now some new person has become Indra in 
heaven. He has not done religious acts, nor has he performed 
sacrifices . 0 Acyuta, how is my throne ascended by him? 
Mahiideva said: 
50. 
Having heard the words of him who was speaking like 
this, Vigm, with his eyes dilating due to smile, spoke sweet 
words.

=== PAGE 41 ===

2970 
Padma PuriiiJ.a 
The lord said: 
Sl . 
What is the use of gifts, giving small fruits? What is the 
use of austerities or sacrifices ? Remaining on the earth, he 
formerly pleased me. 
Indra said: 
52. 
0 lord, by means of which act, did the brahma:Q.a please 
you, due to which being pleased you gave him Indra's position? 
The lord said: 
53-63 . 
He mutters five verses from the eighteenth chapter of 
the Gitii. Due to that religious merit, the crown gem of all (kinds 
of) religious merit, he obtained your excellent sovereign empire. 
Be steady. 
Hearing these words of Vit?:Q.U, lndra, who had (thus) known 
the means, took the guise of a briihma:Q.a and went to the bank 
of Godavari. There he saw the very auspicious and excellent 
Kalikagrama. There god Kalesvara, crushing Death, resides. 
There on the bank of ·Godavari, he saw a very religious, kind 
brahma:Q.a who had mastered the Vedas, who everyday mutter­
ed the eighteenth chapter and whose mind was controlled. Then 
having rolled at his feet with great joy, he recited the eighteenth 
chapter taught by him. Then due to that religious merit he secur­
ed union with Vi½:Q.U. And knowing the position of gods like 
Indra to be small, he abandoned it, and went to Vit?:Q.U's city. 
Therefore, only this is a great truth for the sages. I have told you 
the divine importance of the eighteenth chapter, by just hearing 
which one is free from all sins. Thus I have told you the impor­
tance of the Gitii, which destroys sins, which is meritorious, puri­
fying, which gives (long) life, which leads (one) to heaven, and 
which is a great means of securing prosperity. 0 noble one, a 
man who devoutly listens to it, obtains the fruit of all sacrifices 
and would obtain absorption into Vi½:Q.U.

=== PAGE 42 ===

VI. 193. 1 .2 1 
2971 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED NINETYTHREE 
The Greatness of the Bhiigavata 
Piirvati said: 
1 -3. 0 Mahiideva, 0 god of gods, 0 omniscient one, 0 
you giving all (kinds of) wealth, showing great compassion 
for me, tell me what I ask you. I heard the greatness of the Gita, 
containing many wonderful tales. Therefore, an eagerness to 
listen to the great account of Kr½JJ.a has arisen in me. Among all 
the Pura1,1as, Bhiigavata is the best, in what by every word Kn:g.a 
is sung in various ways by the sages. Now tell me its greatness 
properly and along with the historical accounts. 
The lord said: 
4. 
Saunaka, adept in tasting the sweetness of the nectar of 
a story, said to the highly intelligent Sfita seated in the Naimi½a 
(forest) , after having saluted him : 
Saunaka said: 
S-1 0 : Narrate (to us) the account of Srimad Bhiigavata 
which is an elixir, which destroys the darkness of ignorance and 
the sins of a crore of (past) existences, . 0 Sfita. How does dis­
crimination rich with devotion, knowledge and detachment grow? 
How do Viw.u's devotees remove illusion and delusion? Here in 
this Kali-age a being has almost attained demonhood. What is 
the elixir to purify him who is overcome with afllictton? Now 
tell (us) that which is the (highest) felicity of (all) felicities, which 
is the most purifying of (all) purifying objects, and which is the 
means to please Kn:Q.a. A preceptor who is pleased gives (to his 
disciple) the desire-yielding gem, happiness in the world, the 
wealth of the position of the lord of gods, and also Vaiku:g.!ha, 
which is extremely difficult to obtain. 
Suta said: 
1 1-21 . 0 best brahma:Q.as, I am pleased with you. (There­
fore) I shall tell you that as I have heard it which is better than 
the best, which destroys the fear of the mundane existence, which 
increases devotion, which is the cause of pleasing Kn:g.a. Listen

=== PAGE 43 ===

2972 
Padma Purii1Ja 
attentively when I am telling it. In the Kali-age Kr½:Q.a has told 
the holy text of Srimad Bhagavata, which brings about the pro­
tection of the world which is held in the mouth of the tiger of 
Death. There is nothing superior to this that would purify the 
mind. It is obtained by good men by means of religious merit 
earned in many (previous) existences. Knowing the salvation of 
king Parik½it, the lotus-born one compared the holy texts and the 
great Pura:Q.as. Among them Srimad Bhagavata came to be 
greater on the earth. The talk of Bhagavata is difficult to be had 
even by gods. Thinking like this many good, pure sages looked 
upon Srimad Bhagavata as a form of lord (Vi½:Q.u). By reciting 
and listening to it a man goes to Vi½:Q.u's position. Listening to 
it for a year gives great happiness. 0 best brahma:Q.a, devotion to 
it for a month earns splendour. Listening to it for a week gives 
salvation at all times. 0 good one, what is the use of talking too 
much? The good men should everyday drink the nectar ofSrimad 
Bhagavata which records the sports of Kr½:Q.a. Sanaka and others, 
full of compassion, formerly told it to Narada who had (already) 
heard it from Brahma. The manner of listening to it for a week 
(was also told) . 
đaunaka said: 
22-23. 
Having obtained excellent knowledge called Srimad 
Bhagavata from his father, Narada who knows the facts about 
the worlds, always roams over the earth. Where did Narada 
meet those noble ones from whom the divine sage heard the 
manner of listening to it for a week? 
SUta said: 
24-26. 
About this I shall tell you an account full of devo­
tion, which formerly kind Sukra told me. Once the sages Sanaka 
and others saw at (the bank of) Visala, Narada with his mind 
dejected. The sages, given to thinking about the Supreme Spirit 
and full of amazement, seeing their brother, the divine sage, thin­
king (like that) asked him. 
Kumiiras said: 
27. 0 brahmal}.a, what are you, very much helpless and afilict-

=== PAGE 44 ===

VI. 1 93.28-44a 
2973 
ed, thinking about? This is not proper for you who are associated 
with bliss. Tell (us) its cause. 
Niirada said: 
28-42. 
Knowing the earth to be the best of all the best, hav­
ing various kinds of holy places, of an auspicious nature due to 
these auspicious places, I wandered here and there, at these holy 
places like Pu´kara, Prayaga, Kasi, the bank of Godavari, Hari­
k½etra, Kuruk½etra, Sriraliga, Setubandhana, (but) nowhere did I 
find happiness, giving delight to my mind. Now the earth is 
aftlicted by Kali, the friend of unrighteousness. On the earth 
truth, purity, pity, charity exist nowhere. People 
are selfish, 
miserable and are false witnesses. They are lethargic, dull-witted, 
and resort to highly heretical men. Householders attach impor­
tance to women ; religious students are without (i.e. do not obser­
ve) vows. Anchorites are living in cities ; those who have renoun­
ced the worldly ties are given to enjoyment. Through greed they sell 
their daughters ; they are engaged in agriculture ; they have fallen 
from (good) behaviour ; they are hypocrites ; they show wanton 
(behaviour). The hermitages, holy places, rivers, pools are besie­
ged by Yavanas. The temples at other places are destroyed by the 
wicked. A meditating saint, a siddha or a wise man doing good 
deeds is not seen. Today fulfilment (of vows) is reduced to ash 
due to the wild fire in the form of Kali. Communities are every­
where seen to sell food ; brahmaJ).as to use an auspicious object as 
a commodity ; and beautiful ladies to use their hair as commodi­
ties. Once I reached the auspicious bank of Yamuna. There I 
saw Vrndavana where Vi½J).u had sported. 0 best sages, listen to 
the wonder that I saw there. A young lady, with her mind dejected, 
was seated there. Two old men, breathing and senseless, lay by 
her side. Weeping before the two, she was nursing and waking 
them up. I saw her looking into the directions, as it were, looking 
for her protector. Repeatedly she was fanned and advised by many 
women. Seeing her from a distance, I approached her through 
curiosity. Seeing me, the young lady got up and spoke these 
words : 
The young lady said: 
43-44a. 
0 good man, stay here for a moment ; remove my

=== PAGE 45 ===

2974 
Padma Purii1;ta 
anxiety. 0 good one, the sight of (good) men completely destroys 
streams of sins. I have had your sight due to my deeds in former 
existences. Therefore, 0 you who respect others, please remove 
my mental agony. 
Niirada said: 
44b-46. 
Thus addressed by her, I with my heart affectionate 
through pity, and full of curiosity, asked the beautiful lady : "0 
good one, who are you? Who are these two? Who are these lotus­
eyed ones ? Tell me the entire cause of your grief." Thus asked by 
me, that young lady, with her mind afH.icted, told me her entire 
agony {and) the cause of the agony. 
The young lady said: 
47-52. 
I am known as 'Bhakti' (Devotion). These two are 
my excellent sons named 'Jiiana' (Knowledge) and 'Vairagya' 
(Detachment). They are hurt due to contact with destiny. These 
rivers like Ganga have come (here) to serve me. 0 Narada, by 
these I am everyday served with respect. I am not getting any 
felicity ; I am emaciated all round, 0 sage. 0 best brahmaJ}.a, 
listen to my former account, due to which I became unhappy and 
am getting happiness nowhere. I was born in the Draviga coun­
try and brought up in Kan;.ata. For a little (time) I lived in 
Mahara´tra, and became old in Gurjara. There due to contact 
with heretics, I got my limbs cut. For a long time I have become 
weak, and become dull along with my sons. 
53-66a. 
0 Narada, through luck I have reached this Vrnda­
vana : I have, as it were, again become a beautiful young girl. 
Here these two sons have their minds greatly afH.icted. Now I am 
unable to go leaving them who are very old. How have I become 
a young girl? Why have my sons become old? Due to what is 
this difference among us who were of the same condition? The 
old mother exerts herself when the sons are young. So I, with 
my mind full of wonder, am worried. 0 you who know religious 
practices, 0 kind one, 0 protector of the helpless, tell me truly 
the cause that might be there. 
Thus asked by her, I, having thought for a moment, again 
spoke to Bhakti who was emaciated for a long time : "0 sinless

=== PAGE 46 ===

VI. 193.66b-8 1 
2975 
one , through my wisdom I ·see all your account. Do not be sad, 
0 wise one ; Vi½J}.u will make you happy. 0 child, this is Kali 
age, fearful and destroying all goodness. Due to it good con­
duct, the path of Yoga and penance are violated. Sinful men, 
doing dishonest and bad acts, become deities in this (age), and 
the good are much afflicted with grief, and the bad are delighted 
at heart. No strong-minded, or wise man is seen. This earth 
having the burden of the groups of the wicked is not fit to be 
touched or seen. This is the order every year ; everyday auspici­
ousness is given up. 0 beautiful lady, no one will either see you 
or these your sons. Men, full of great attachment, have abandon­
ed you ; (therefore) you have become infirm. Due to your con­
tact with Vrndavana you have again become young. This Vrnda­
vana where Bhakti has become young, is blessed. These two, 
for want of receivers, have not become young. It appears that 
they are asleep here due to a little joy to them." 
Bhakti said: 
66b-8 1 . 
How did king Parik½it install this impure Kali? 
Why did Vi½J}.u, given to kindness, ignore impiety? Remove this 
doubt of me. I am happy with your words. 
0 brahamaJ}.a, having heard her words, I spoke again. "0 
girl, if you have asked affectionately, then listen. Since the day 
Vi½J.l.U, leaving the earth, went to his own place, Kali, obstruc­
tor of the truth, has proceeded. A king saw him in his conquest 
of the world, and he yielded like a helpless person. The seer of 
His virtues is not killed. This is common to all. In the Kali age 
an intelligent man gets that fruit by narrating the account of 
Vi½J.l.U, which he does not by means of penance, abstract medita­
tion or concentration. Seeing Kali like this, giving substantial 
fruit from the unsubstantial, Vi½J}.u established this for the good of 
those born in the Kali age. Due to bad actions, now all excellence 
has gone away from every place. Objects lie on the ground like 
husk without seeds. The brahmaJ}.as have told the Bhagavata 
story in every house out of greed for wealth. Therefore, the 
excellence has gone. Men doing very cruel deeds, atheists, and 
hypocrites stay at all holy places. So the excellence has gone. With 
their minds overtaken by passion, anger, great greed, desire they

=== PAGE 47 ===

2976 
Padma Purat;a 
commence (religious) acts. Therefore, the excellence of the acts 
has gone. The fruit of abstract meditation has gone because of 
non-restraint of mind, greed, hypocrisy, resorting to heretics, 
want of the study of holy texts. The wise dally with their wives 
like he-buffaloes. They are expert in producing sons and not in 
accomplishing salvation. Devotion to Vi½J}.U is (found) nowhere. 
All are led by tradition. All are given to censuring gods ; all are 
fond of condemning the good. This is the practice of the age. 
Who should be blamed? Therefore, remembering the lotus-eyed 
(Vi´J}.u) you will get happiness." Hearing these words uttered by 
me, she was amazed. 0 best brahmal}.as, having praised me, she 
spoke again : 
Bhakti said: 
82-84. 
0 divine sage, you are blessed. Due to my (good) 
luck you have come (here). The sight of the good gives all pros­
perity in the world. Now advise me in such a way that I will 
have a means for my happiness. 0 brahmal}.a, in this world there 
is nothing to be accomplished by you. I salute Brahma's son, 
having heard whose one sentence (Prahlada) the son of Kaya­
dhii (wife of Hiral}.yakasipu) subdued the Maya of (Viȧ:Q.u) the 
unborn one, and due to whose grace Dhruva attained to an un­
decaying eternal position. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED NINETYFOUR 
Srimad Bhiigavata, the Destroyer of All Miseries 
Suta said: 
I . 0 kind sages, listen to what was told by Narada when he 
was thus requested by that extremely helpless Bhakti. 
Narada said: 
2-10. 0 girl, do not be sad in vain. Having placed your mind 
in your heart, remember SnKf´J)a's lotus-like feet. (By that) you 
will obtain happiness. That KnJ)a who protected Draupadi from

=== PAGE 48 ===

VI. l94. 1 1 -22a 
2977 
ignominy from the Kauravas, who looked after the beautiful 
cowherdesses, has not gone anywhere (else). 0 Bhakti, you are 
dear to him, (cared for) even more than his own life. Called by 
you, the lord will come to even mean houses. In the three ages 
like Satya knowledge and detachment accomplished salvation. In 
the Kali age Bhakti (devotion) alone brings about absorption 
into Brahman. Deciding like this he, of the nature of conscious­
ness, of the form of highest bliss and consciousness, delighted in 
mind, produced you from his own body. With your palms joined 
you then asked Hari : "What do I do (now) ?" Krtt;ta then ordered 
you : "Nourish my devotees." You accepted to do so. Hari was 
then pleased. He gave you Salvation as your maid, and Know­
ledge and Detachment as your sons. Remaining in VaikUt;ttha you 
always nourished your devotees. To nourish your devotees you 
resorted to the form of your shadow (i.e. semblance). Salvation, 
Knowledge and Detachment came here (i.e. to the earth) with 
you. From the Krta (age) to the Dvapara age, Mukti (salvation) 
stayed (here) . 
l l-22a. 
But in the Kali age, she became emaciated, and 
suffered from the disease due to the heretics. By your order she 
again wt-nt (back) to Vaiku:Q.tha. On merely being remembered 
by you, she quickly comes (to this world). Looking upon these 
two as your sons, you have protected them by your side. Due to 
being ignored in the Kali age both these your sons have become 
dull and old. Yet you give up anxiety. I shall think of a means. 
0 you beautiful lady, there is no (other) age like the Kali age. 
In it I shall make you known in every house. If by obscuring 
other practices and putting forward great festivals, I shall not 
(be able to) promote you, then I am not Hari's servant. Those 
living beings, even though sinful, who are endowed with you in 
the Kali age, will, being fearless, go to Hari's abode. Those of 
pure forms, who are devoted to you, always of the form of love, 
will not see Yama even in a dream. An evil spirit, a goblin, a 
demon or an asura is not capable of touching or seeing those 
whose minds are full of devotion. Hari is not obtained by means 
of austerities, Vedas, knowledge or (religious) acts. He is obtai­
ned by devotion (only). The proof thereof are the cowherdesses. 
Men of righteous act might have devotion after a thousand 
existences. In the Kali age devotion alone (excels). By means of

=== PAGE 49 ===

2978 
Padma Purat;ta 
devotion Kn:Q.a stands before (the devotee). Those who offend 
Bhakti, perish in the three worlds. Formerly Durvasas who con­
demned Bhakti, suffered misery. Enough of virtuous conduct ; 
enough of (visiting) holy places; enough of abstract meditations ; 
enough of sacrifices; enough of narrations of wise tales ; Bhakti 
alone always gives salvation. 
22b-30. Thus addressed by me, and having heard her own 
greatness, she, with her entire body fuii of joy, again said these 
words (to me) : "0 Narada, you are blessed. You have a steady 
affection for me. I shaii never let go your attention to me. 0 good 
one, by you, kind (to me), my suffering is destroyed in a moment. 
My two sons do not have understanding. Rouse these two." 
Hearing those words of her, I, having pity, touching (them) with 
my hand, proceeded to rouse (them). Bringing my mouth near 
their ears, I loudly uttered the words : ''Jiiana, rise quickly. 0 
Vairagya, a wake." Though repeatedly being roused by the sounds 
of the Vedas, by the recitals of the Gita, they did not somehow 
get roused. Not seeing (anything) with their eyes, and languidly 
yawning, both were grey-haired like cranes, and had their 
bodies mostly dry like wood. The two, emaciated with hunger, 
having observed (me), again went to sleep. Then I was fuii of 
thought : 'What should I do (now)? Oh, how will their sleep go 
(away)? Their old age is severe.' 
3 1 -42. 0 best brahmauas, thinking like this, I constantly 
remembered Govinda. Just then there was heard a divine voice: 
"0 sage, do not be dejected. Your exertion will be fruitful. There 
is no doubt. For this purpose, 0 divine sage, do a good deed. 
Good men, ornaments of the virtuous, will tell you that good 
deed. When that good deed is done, the sleep and the old age of 
these two will disappear in a moment. Bhakti (devotion) will 
spread everywhere." 0 brahmauas, even after having distinctly 
heard this divine voice, I could not make out as to what was 
told by the voice in a secretive manner. What is that deed due to 
which the two would be endowed with understanding? Where 
would be the good ones? How will they tell that good deed to me? 
Now what should I do (about) what the divine voice told me? 
Then, 0 brahmauas, having placed them there, I went out of 
Vrndarauya, and asked the best brahmauas here and there.

=== PAGE 50 ===

VI. 194.43-57 
2979 
Having heard the entire accoWtt and with their minds amazed, 
they, not understanding the divine voice, did not give a reply. 
Some said : "It cannot be comprehended". Others said : "It can­
not be understood." Others, thinking again and again, kept mum. 
The triad, though being roused with the soWtds of the Vedas, 
and Vedantas, and also by repeated recitations of the Gita, did 
not rise. 'Oh, (how cruel) is fate ! How can other human beings do 
that which the meditating saint Narada himself could not Wtder­
stand ?' Then being thoughtful I came to Badarivana. I determined 
to practise penance for that purpose. Just then I saw the best 
sages, Sanaka and others, bright like a crore of suns. I spoke to 
those best sages : 
43-48. 
"I saw you due to great luck. Therefore, 0 noble 
ones, with your minds pleased, you may (please) tell me the 
means. You are the greatest among the meditating saints. You 
are intelligent. You are very learned ; you, Kumaras, five years 
old, are the ancestors of the ancient people. You always live in 
Vaikul}.tha ; you are always engaged in narrating (the glory of) 
Vi½l}.u. You are intoxicated by the account-the nectar-of 
(Vi½:Q.u's) sports. You are devoted to remembering Vi½:Q.U. There­
fore, (old age,) the Daughter of Time does not trouble you. Due 
just to the knitting of your eye-brows, formerly the two door­
keepers of Vi´l}.u became demons for three existences, and again 
came back to their places. (Please) tell the means which is told by 
the heavenly voice. 0 kind ones, (please) tell me what should be 
done and in what way in this matter. The wise ones should well 
tell (me) how Bhakti, Jiiana and Vairagya would secure happi­
ness, and how they would attain fame in all the worlds". 
Kumar as said: 
49-57. 
0 divine sage, do not be anxious. Have delight in 
your mind. There is a means in this matter, which can be easily 
had, and which gives happiness to the world. 0 Narada, you are 
blessed. You are the crest-jewel of the detached ones. You are 
the foremost among those who are fit for Srikf½:Q.a's love. You are 
the best among speakers. 0 divine sage, it is no wonder for you, 
engrossed in the means of devotion, to spread devotion properly 
on the earth. For (securing) divine faculties the sages have de­
signed various means. They could be secured with exertion ; and

=== PAGE 51 ===

2980 
Padma Purii1Ja 
all of them mostly give heaven as their fruit. The path leading to 
Vaiku:Q.tha is hidden in the worlds. A good man, teaching it, is 
generally not found. 0 best sage, that good act which the divine 
voice indicated to you, is known by the ancients to be jiianayajiia 
(knowledge-sacrifice). We feel that the talk (i.e. the recitation) of 
Srimad Bhagavata is a knowledge-sacrifice, told by Suka, and 
would give happiness to Bhakti, Jiiana and Viraga. All these 
sins of Kali, afraid of the sound of Srimad Bhagavata, run away 
like wolves at the roar of lion. Bhakti, along with Jiiana and 
Vairagya, producing the feeling of joy in each house, in each 
person, will sport happily. 
Suta said: 
58. 
Having heard Kumaras' words, revered Narada, with 
his mind delighted, looking to their prosperity, spoke again. 
Niirada said: 
59-62. 
The triad, covered by Kali's noxious qualities, is not 
rising (though) roused by sounds of Vedas and VedaJigas, and 
recitations of the Gita. How (then) will it rise now by the recita­
tion of Bhagavata? You, whose sight is fruitful should (please) 
remove this doubt. 0 you who are affectionate to those who seek 
your shelter, (please) do not tarry in this matter. 
Then Sanaka and others, detached and living in perpetual 
celibacy, the ancient brahma:Q.as, who had supernatural faculties, 
respectfully said to Narada : 
Kumiiras said: 
63-71. The Bhagavata-account has risen from the quintes­
sence of the Vedas and the Upani½ads. Therefore, it appears to be 
the best, and the rise of fruit is different. As the taste is present 
in a mango fruit from the bottom to the top, but is different 
when separated and drunk, and delights all, as ghee present in 
milk is not thought to be pleasant, but when separated is divine, 
and increases the joy of gods, as sugar remains pervading the 
bottom, the middle and the end (i.e. the top) of a sugarcane, and 
is sweet when separated, so is Bhagavata-story. The PuraQ.a

=== PAGE 52 ===

named Srimad Bhagavata is relish itself; it is manifested for the 
happiness of Bhakti, Jiiii.na and Vairii.gya to Brahma, remaining 
in the lotus born from his navel, by Kr´oa. The four-versed (sum­
mary) of it appears to be the entire Brahman. That account was 
narrated to you by Brahmii.. You also narrated it to Vyiisadeva, 
to destroy torment. By remembering it Biidariiyaoa (Vyiisa) 
instantly became depressed ; and in a manner delighting the 
soul, composed (the work of) the great name. Due to what are 
you amazed, that you are asking again and again? The holy text 
of Srimad Bhiigavata is capable of attracting Krδ:Qa. 
Suta said: 
72. 
Having heard these desired words spoken by the fore­
most ones like Sanaka, the best meditating saints, Narada devou­
tly seized their feet, and saluting them by bowing his head, said 
to them who destroy the misery of the world. 
Niirada said: 
73-74. 
Your sight destroys the stream of sins. It gives bliss 
· 
to those who are afllicted by the wild fire in the form of the 
misery of the mundane existence, by drinking it when fully sung 
by Se´a's mouth. I have sought your shelter for the manifestation 
of love. If due to the rise of religious merit earned in many 
existences a lucky person gets the company of the good, his great 
darkness of delusion caused by ignorance would perish, and 
great discrimination springs (in him). 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED NINETYFIVE 
The Rule of Reciting and Listening to the Bhiigavatafor a Week 
Suta said: 
1 . 
Then the divine sage, having asked for leave of the 
Kumaras, and bending down, showing respect for knowledge­
sacrifice, said :

=== PAGE 53 ===

Niirada said: 
2-4. 
With care I shall perform knowledge-sacrifice, highligh­
ted by the narrative of the holy Suka-text for 
establishing 
Bhakti, Jiiana and Viraga. 0 brahmaQas, tell me the place where 
I should perform the sacrifice. I have chosen you four only as 
the conductors of the sacrifice. 0 you proficient in knowledge­
sacrifice, for how many days should the Bhagavata-story be heard? 
What rite should be performed at that time? 
Kumiiras said: 
5-12. 0 Narada, listen. We shall tell you the place, being 
heard at which the story would destroy the heaps of sins of men, 
and increase their religious merit. Near Gaiigadvara there is a 
great city called Kamada. To the north of the divine river there is 
a bank called Ananda. It is resorted to by many hosts of sages 
and deities and siddhas. It is full of many trees and creepers, 
clean, soft sand. It is charming, is in a lonely region, and is ador­
ned with golden lotuses. In the minds of the beings living near 
it and having in their minds love for one another, there was no 
enmity due to the power of this place only. You should carefully 
perform there knowledge-sacrifice. The story (of Bhagavata) 
recited there will give unprecedented delight. Bhakti will come 
there followed by her two sons remaining on the street ofVrnda­
vana and with their bodies worn out due to old age. Bhakti with 
her sons will become a young lady after drinking the nectar of 
Kr½J}.a's glory at the place where there will be recitation of Bhaga­
vata. 
Suta said: 
13-20. 
Having spoken like this, the Kumaras, along with 
Narada, went quickly to Gaiigadvara for {performing) the know­
ledge-sacrifice. 0 best among Bhargavas, when they reached the 
bank of Ganga, there was a great din in the seven worlds like 
Bhu. The residents of the seven worlds, desirous of (enjoying) 
the flavour of Bhagavata came there running, so also the devotees 
of Vi½:Q.u like Bhrgu, Vasi½tha, Cyavana, Gautama, Medhatithi, 
Devala, Devarata, Rama, Visvamitra, Sakala, sons of Mrka:Q.cJa, 
of Atri, and Pippalada, masters of abstract meditation, Vyasa, 
Parasara, Suka and others, the chief among the followers of

=== PAGE 54 ===

Vl. 195.21-48 
2983 
Vi´J).u, who were accompanied by their disciples, who knew many 
holy texts, who were chief among those relishing Kr´J;.a's account. 
The Upani´ads, the Vedas, the hymns, the religious treatises 
teaching magical formulas for the worship of the deities, the 
digests, the ten and seven Pura:J;tas, the six Sastras (philosophical 
treatises) also came there. So also rivers like Ganga, lakes like 
Pu´kara, all holy places, all quarters, forests like Da:J;tQaka, 
mountains like Himalaya, gods, gandharvas, kinnaras, islands, 
seas, regents of quarters, and residents of the nether world came 
there. 
2 1 -25. 
Narada gave an excellent seat at the time of the 
initiation. All the Kumaras, highly devoted to Kr´:J;ta. who were 
saluted, sat (there). Devotees of Vi´J).u, those who were very 
much detached and had renounced the world, celibates, were the 
chief; they remained at the fore ; and Narada sat before them. On 
his left were the hosts of sages, on his right were the residents of 
heaven. 0 descendant of Bhrgu,Vedas,Upani´ads, so also the Holy 
Places were (seated) elsewhere. Echoing in the ten quarters the 
shouts of victory, words of salutation and the sound of conches 
touched the sky. The residents of heaven, being pleased, got into 
aeroplanes and showered flowers of desire-yielding trees over the 
assembly. 
Suta said: 
26. 
When those Bhrgu and others were seated as they 
deserved, they narrated the importance of Bhagavata to Narada. 
Kumar as said: 
27-48. 
0 Narada, listen. We shall, according to the rule, 
tell you the wonderful greatness of the holy text called Srimad 
Bhagavata. Righteous people should always resort (i.e. listen) to 
the Bhagavata-story, by hearing which they become contented. 
The treatise called Srimad Bhagavata comprises eighteen thou­
sand verses and twelve skandhas(sections), and is (in the form of) 
a dialogue between Parik´it and Suka. As long as the text of {i.e. 
narrated by) Suka does not reach the ears of a man, he, being 
deluded by ignorance, moves in the circle of the mundane exist­
ence. If men purified by devotion have not listened to Bhagavata, 
what is the use of their having listened to many holy texts,

=== PAGE 55 ===

2984 
Padma Puriil)a 
PuraJ.las, digests and scriptures? The houses of those men, in 
which the Bhagavata-story is always (narrated), are of the nature 
of holy places and destroy sins. Thousands of horse-sacrifices 
and hundreds of Rajasiiya sacrifices are not worth even a six­
teenth part of the Bhagavata-story. 0 best sage, sins remain in 
this body as long as Bhagavata is not properly listened to by a 
man. In the meritorious fruit, Ganga, Gaya, Kasi, or Pu½kara 
is not equal to the Bhagavata-story. If you desire the destruction 
of the mundane existence, then recite everyday with your own 
mouth a half or a quarter verse from Bhagavata. Bhagavata is 
the origin of the Vedas, the mother of the Vedas, so also of the 
Puru½a-siikta. The triad of the Vedas is Bhagavata ; so also the 
two formulas-twelve-syllabled and eight-syllabled. The Sun, Pra­
yaga, Time of the form of years, brahmal}.as maintaining sacred 
fire, (the desire-yielding cow) Surabhi, the twelfth day (of a 
month), Tulasi, spring season, Puruȧottama (i.e. Vi½l}.u)-among 
these, 0 best sage, there is actually no difference. 0 Narada, the 
sin of that brahma:Q.a, committed during crores of existences, who 
would everyday expound Bhagavata, perishes. To men, the listen­
ing to, reciting or thinking about Bhagavata and waiting upon 
Tulasi and fire, give salvation and devotion. He who, being full 
of devotion, free from pride, eating limited (food), with his 
senses restrained, gives grimad Bhagavata along with a golden 
throne on the full-moon day of Bhadrapada to the best brah­
mal}.a and listens to it from the beginning would obtain the 
world where absorption into Kn;l}.a is had. He who, when his 
time of death has approached, abandoning fear far away, would 
devoutly listen to Bhagavata, obtains salvation. He, the wicked 
one, who, right from his birth, has not, after properly control­
ling his mind, drunk (i.e. listened to) the account of Kn;:Q.a, has 
in vain led his life like a caJ.lࠩala or a beast on the earth, and has 
very much tormented his mother. The life of those men who have 
not listened to Bhagavata, have not worshipped the Ancient Man 
(Vi½JJ.u), have not offered oblations into the mouths of brahmal}.­
as has become fruitless. The sages, the ancient siddhas, say : "Fie 
upon that man resembling a beast, a burden on the earth, whose 
mind, wicked due to the contact with the bad, does not take 
delight in the story of Bhagavata." The story of Bhagavata is

=== PAGE 56 ===

¥1. 195.49-63 
2985 
quite difficult to be had (i.e. heard) on the earth. It is had by 
means of the religious merit due to crores of existences. 
49-56. 
Therefore, 0 treasure of abstract meditation, 0 good 
man, the story of Vi½J}.U should be heard everyday. 0 brahmal}.a, 
there is really no rule about it (i.e. about listening to it). Since 
listening to it is believed to be done with truthfulness and celibacy, 
therefore, in the Kali age there is a special rule about it of the 
nature of (its being listened to for) seven days. The listening to it 
is prescribed for seven days on account of the lack of the con­
trol of a man's mind, a disease, or shortening of his life, and due 
to many blemishes of Kali. It is possible to control the mind and 
follow a prescribed course for seven days (only). Therefore, this 
rule is formed. That fruit which is had by devoutly listening (to 
it) everyday from the beginning to the end for seven days is laid 
down by Suka. That fruit which is not had by means of penance, 
abstract meditation or concentration, is easily had by listening to 
it for seven days. The rule of (reciting or listening to) Bhagavata 
for seven days is said to be better than performing a sacrifice, 
observing a vow, practising penance and meditation, acquiring 
knowledge and visiting a holy place. When Kr½Qa was ready to 
go to his own place after having left the earth, intelligent Uddhava, 
knowing it, said (these) words to Govinda : 
Uddhava said: 
57-63. 0 revered one, after having accomplished the entire 
mission of the gods, you now desire to go to your own place, 
beyond darkness. Therefore, 0 lord, worry due to fear of separa­
tion from you has arisen in me. 0 lord of gods, remove it. I have 
sought your refuge. This terrible Kali age has come. In it all 
people will be wicked. Therefore, 0 lord, tell (me) what should 
be done. Whose shelter will this earth, full of burden, seek? 0 
Yadunandana, no other protector like you is seen here. There­
fore, 0 treasure of compassion, showing pity on us, stay here 
only. 0 lord, you have manifested (yourself) only for the protec­
tion of the good. Even though you are qualityless, formless, and 
only of the form of the good, consciousness and bliss, your devo­
tees will not remain on the earth in separation from you. There 
is difficulty in worshipping the qualityless. Therefore, do what is 
good for us.

=== PAGE 57 ===

2986 
Padma Purat;a 
Suta said: 
64-68. 
Having heard these words of Uddhava, Vi½QU thought 
for a moment and being full of great compassion, gave him 
Bhiigavata, after having deposited his own lustre into it, 0 brah­
maQa. Having given it to Uddhava, the lord entered his own 
place. Due to that this image of Vi½QU in the form of words is 
here (in the world). By constantly resorting to it the sin of men 
would perish in a moment. Therefore, listening to it for seven 
days is said to be the best. 0 brahma:J;la, its listeners, speaker or 
questioner become one with him. Bhagavata is capable of remov­
ing misery, poverty, ill luck and sins, of overcoming passion and 
anger in the Kali age. Otherwise, how can, Vi½:Q.u's Maya, difficult 
to be overcome even by gods, turn away from men without (the 
help of) Bhagavata? 
Suta said: 
69-73. 
Having thus told the greatness of Bhagavata, they 
commenced narrating the divine story of Bhagavata. When (the 
narration of) Bhagavata, the essence of the Vedas and the 
Upani½ads, was commenced by the brahma:Q.as, Bhakti in a mo­
ment manifested herself there only. She was full of love, of a 
charming body, and had held her two sons, full of joy, by her 
hands ; and was uttering the names (like) Srikn:J;la, Govinda, 
Hari, Murari, Natha (lord). The members of the assembly saw 
her, the ornament of Bhagavata and of a very fine dress ; and 
with wonder in their eyes all of them thought: 'How (has she 
come) ? Wherefrom (has she come)? Who is she?' Then the bles­
sed Kumaras said : "Now she has come out from the contents of 
the story." Having heard words like this, she, along with her 
sons, politely said to the sons of Brahma : 
Bhakti said: 
74. 
Though perished in the Kali age, you have today nouri­
shed me with the elegance of the (Bhagavata) story. Where shall 
I sit with these two ? Show me a favourite seat. 
Suta said: 
15. Having heard these words, Brahma's sons having thought 
and properly reflected in their minds, spoke to Bhakti, who

=== PAGE 58 ===

VI. 195. 76-Vl. 196. 7 
2987 
removes the disease in the form of the mundane existence, who 
gives love alone to those who have devotion for ViР:Q.u. 
Kumiiras said: 
76-78. 
When there are good devotees, having controlled 
their mind from going astray and having concentrated it on the 
lotus-like feet of Vi´QU, after being devoted to Vi´:Q.u, these blemi­
shes due to Kali, though powerful in the world, will not be able 
to see you. Led by Niirada, you alone will bring about the welfare 
of the world. In the entire world, those poor people in whose 
heart remains devotion to Vi´:Q.u alone, are, extremely blessed. 
Even Vi´:Q.u, tied by the bond of love, leaves his own world 
quickly and enters their heart. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED NINETYSIX 
Dhundhuli' s Story 
Suta said: 
1 -7. 
Seeing extra-ordinary devotion in the minds of Vi´:Q.u's 
devotees, Vi´:Q.u left his world, and went to the earth. He was 
having a garland of wood flowers ; was dark like a cloud ; had 
put on yellow garments ; was wearing a crown ; his group of girdles 
was dishevelled ; his ear-rings in the shape of crocodiles were 
shining. He was charming due to three folds ; was adorned with 
the beautiful Kaustubha ; he was handsome like a crore of 
Cupids ; he was besmeared with (the yeiiow sandal caiied) hari­
candana. He was the image of great joy and consciousness ; he 
was sweet ; and had held a flute. He entered the pure hearts of 
his devotees. Those followers of Vi´:Q.u, who lived in Vaiktu;Ltha 
and were of tranquil minds, and of concealed forms, came to 
listen to Vi´:Q.u's tale. Then there was a shout of victory mixed with 
the sound of conches, due to which (everything) inauspicious, 
very fierce due to Kali, perished. Seeing that the people there 
had forgotten their houses and themselves, Niirada knowing the 
truth about the Supreme Soul said to the Kumiiras :

=== PAGE 59 ===

2988 
Padma Puriil)a 
Niirada said: 
8- l l a. 
0 best sages, this greatness due to the seven days' 
(reading of or listening to the Bhagavata) which I saw is uncom­
mon. Even the fools, the wicked, so also the beasts and birds do 
reach the position known to be the highest. No other holy text 
so pure is laid down for the purification of the heart in the world 
of men. 0 Kumaras, in the Kali age, the abode of blemishes, it 
destroys the stream of sins, and brings about blessedness. (Please) 
tell me who are not purified by the devotional act (of reading of 
or listening to the Bhagavata) for seven days, full of the stories 
(from it) . You, the kind ones, have shown a new path for the 
good of the people. 
Kumiiras said : 
l lb-1 5. 
Those men who are sinners, very wicked, engaged 
in doing bad acts, are jealous, burnt by fire in the form of anger, 
crooked, passionate, go to Vi½:Q.u by means of the devotional act 
for seven days. Those who are without truth (i.e. are not truth­
ful), who censure their father and mother, who are full of thirst 
(i.e. desire), who are out (of the fold) of the (four) stages 
of human life and castes, who are hypocrites, who are hurtful, 
go to Vi½:Q.u by means of the devotional act (of reading or 
listening to the Bhagavata) for seven days. Those, who have 
committed the five terrible sins, who are deceitful, cruel, who 
are pityless like goblins, who have fed themselves with others' 
wealth, who are adulterous, go to Vi½:Q.U by means of the devo­
tional act extending over seven days. Those wicked ones who 
violently always commit sins with their body, words or mind, 
who are mean, ungrateful, impure, wicked-hearted, go to Vi½:Q.u 
by means of the devotional act extending over seven days. 
Suta said: 
16. 
Then, when Narada, honoured by gods, was thus plea­
sed in heart, the Kumaras who were pleased, again said to 
Narada : 
Kumiiras said: 
17-3 1 . 
About this I shall tell you an old historical account, 
by merely hearing which, destruction of sins takes place. Formerly

=== PAGE 60 ===

VI. l96.32-33 
2989 
in the city called Kohala, full of the practices (proper) for the 
castes and the stages of human life, and of wealth and grains, 
(situated) on the bank of Tuilgabhadra, there was the best 
brahmaJ}.a known as Atmadeva, who was proficient in Vedic 
learning and rites, and engaged in daily duties. His dear wife was 
Dhundhuli by name. She was always engaged in her own welfare. 
She regulated (everything) with her words ; she was beautiful, 
and was born in good family. Generally she talked much as a 
result of her former acts. She was valiant in domestic duties, 
cruel, and was quarrelsome. When the couple, having no child, 
was staying there, they crossed the age of the measure of fifty years. 
They, being childless, lived unhappily in their house. For the 
birth of a child they gave wealth etc. (to brahmal)as). So also 
they gave many cows, (pieces of) land, (coins of) gold and gar­
ments. (But) due to (the effect of) their former deeds, neither a 
son nor a daughter was born (to them). And once that best 
brahmaJ}.a Atmadeva, dejected and unhappy due to not having 
a child, left his house and went to a forest. With his mind over­
come by grief, he, emaciated by hunger, and encompassed 
by thirst, wandering here and there, luckily reached a lake. That 
best brahmaJ}.a, having drunk water in (i.e. from) that lake, sat 
after resorting to the shade of a tree, 0 Narada. By chance, just 
then, a siddha, roaming over the earth, came (there) ; he too, 
drinking the water in (i.e. from) the lake, came there only. Hav­
ing seen that tranquil anchorite, the noble-minded Atmadeva 
honoured him and touched his feet as of his own preceptor. The 
two who were seated (there), being of very affectionate minds, 
asked questions to each other like a preceptor and his disciple 
in a hermitage. That anchorite, the ocean of pity, seeing him of 
an afllicted heart and sighing, asked that Atmadeva, seated be­
fore him : 
The siddha said: 
32-33. 
0 best brahmaJ}.a, what great worry is there in your 
heart causing grief? 0 you who know religious practices, tell me 
that, tormenting you. 
Hearing those words of that very noble siddha, Atmadeva 
then told him the cause of his grief.

=== PAGE 61 ===

2990 
Padma Puriii;Ul 
Atmadeva said: 
34-37. 0 sage, what should I tell you about the grief accu­
mulated due to former deeds ? My ancestors are drinking tepid 
water. My ancestors, so also deities, are not at all accepting the 
offerings made by me. Dejected due to that grief, I have come 
here to cast my life. Fie upon my life, my house without progeny, 
my wealth and family ! Even the cow protected by me becomes 
barren. Even the tree planted by me becomes barren. What is the 
use of the life of me who am luckless and childless ? 
Kumiiras said: 
38-39. 
Speaking like this when he, oppressed by grief, wept 
loudly before him, great compassion arose in the heart of the 
sage. The wise one seeing the line of letters on his forehead and 
understanding it, spoke again in detail to the briihma:Q.a Atma­
deva : 
The siddha said: 
40-42. 
0 briihma:Q.a, listen. Today I have read your fate. 
Your having a son is not seen till the seventh existence. Give up 
your persistence for a child. The course of fate is most powerful. 
Taking to right knowledge, be happy, 0 very intelligent one. 
Hearing these words of the siddha, the best briihma:Q.a, with 
his heart fixed on having a child, and being very unhappy spoke 
to the siddha : 
The briihmaf)a said: 
43-50. 
What would happen with right knowledge? Give me 
a son even by force. Otherwise, I, filled with grief, will cast my 
life before you. 
Seeing this persistence of the briihma:Q.a, the ascetic said : 
" Sagara, king of Aiiga, obtained misery. Citraketu became mis­
erable due to wiping out the writing of fate. Therefore, 0 you 
who know religious practices, you will not be happy with a son, 
for fate is very powerful." Saying so, that siddha, honoured by 
the good, gave a fruit to the best briihma:Q.a, who persisted for a 
son. " 0 briihma:Q.a, I have given this fruit to you for obtaining a

=== PAGE 62 ===

VJ. l96.51-69 
299 1 
son. Give it to your wife. By that a son will undoubtedly be 
born to you. The wife should, for a year, resort to truthfulness, 
purity, kindness, charity, eating once a day only. The son would 
be pure due to that." Speaking like this the meditating saint 
left, (and) the brahmal;,la came home. Having given the fruit to 
his wife, he told her what the siddha had said. Then that cruel 
Dhundhuli was always eager to have her say. 
Sl-59. 
She told her friend all that the siddha had said : "If I 
would eat the fruit given by the siddha, then I would be pregnant. 
How shall I be able to bear it? I shall have little food, and will 
not have strength to move or for domestic work. If the foetus 
would be slanting, then it would be my death. How can I, so 
delicate, bear the pangs of delivery? When I shall be dull my 
sister-in-law would take away all my possessions. I am worried. 
0 you of bright smile, what do (i.e. should) I do?" She, 0 brah­
malJ.a, for fear of breaking the friendship, with her face smiling 
affectionately said : "It is just so." Due to this wrong reasoning 
she did not eat the fruit at all. When her husband asked her : 
"Have you eaten the fruit?", she told him, "I have eaten it." 
Once her sister came to her house of her own accord. She told all 
that to her (saying) : "This is my great anxiety. By being pregnant 
what shall I do? Tell me what is proper." She said : "l am carry­
ing. Mter delivery I shall give my foetus (i.e. child) to you. Till 
that time live happily in your house, as if you are pregnant, con­
cealing (the fact). I shall always nourish the child in your house 
only. 0 you of an auspicious face, today give the fruit to the cow 
to test (the siddha's words)." 
60-69. 
Speaking like this, she went home with a pleased 
mind. Dhundhuli also did as her sister had told her. She, after 
having delivered a child, quickly gave it to Dhundhuli. She too 
told her husband : "The son is comfortably born." Due to a child 
born to Atmadeva, people became happy. He gave gifts to best 
brahmal;,las, and performed the ceremony at the birth of the child. 
In his house there was the auspicious sound of songs and musi­
cal instruments. Atmadeva, the very intelligent one, was joyful. 
Then she said to her husband : "There is no milk in my breasts. 
How shall I now nourish the child born recently, 0 lord ? My 
sister also has delivered ; but soon her child died. Bring her and 
keep her in (our) house. She will nourish the child." Hearing the

=== PAGE 63 ===

2992 
Padma Puriir;a 
words of that Dhundhuli, the confused Atmadcva, the best brah­
maQa, full of joy, did just like that. The mother significantly 
named him Dhundhukari. The boy obtained nourishment from 
the milk of his mother's sister. After three months had passed, the 
cow gave birth to a child. He was handsome in all limbs, was 
divine, spotless and had lustre like gold. Having seen him, the 
brahma.J}.a was pleased, and himself performed the sacraments. 
All people that had come with a desire to see him were very much 
amazed. 
70-78a. 
(They said :) "Due to the rise of great good luck of 
the brahmaJ}a Atmadeva a boy, of a divine form, is born of the 
cow. It is a great wonder." Due to destiny nobody knew the 
secret. Seeing the boy to have ears like those of a cow, he called 
him GokarJ}a only. After some time both of them attained youth. 
Gokaf:l)a was learned and wise. Dhundhukarin was very wicked. 
He was without a bath or purity or rites, ate prohibited food, 
and was full of anger. He was a thief, hated all people, and kept 
the company of wicked caJ}c;lalas. He forcibly seized the children 
that were playing and threw them into a weii. In the same way, 
being addicted to prostitutes, he diminished (i.e. squandered) his 
father's money. Like a helpless person, his poor father wept. 
"A childless person is happy. A bad son causes grief. Now I have 
experienced that the siddha's words are true. Where should I go ? 
Where should I stay? Who would remove my misery? I shall cast 
my life in water or fire ; or I would fall from a precipice." To him, 
his father who was thinking like this and whose face was hung 
down, the wise Gokaf:l)a came and properly advised him. 
Gokarʑa said: 
78b-84. 
0 father, the mundane existence is worthless ; it cau­
ses misery and delusion to men. 0 father, who is a son ? What is 
wealth ? Who is whose wife? Who iࠣ the husband? The helpless 
world, tied by delusion, suffers, and not due to any other cause. 
Indra does not have any happiness ; a sovereign emperor has no 
happiness. 0 father, only a detached sage, given to seclusion, 
has happiness. Give up your ignorance, the delusion of the form 
of progeny, the cause of hell. Being free from the couples (of 
opposite qualities) and from pride, and giving up everything, go 
to a forest.

=== PAGE 64 ===

VI. 1 96.85-87 
2993 
Hearing these words of him, the brahma:Q.a said to GokarJ;,J.a : 
The briihmfll!.a said: 
0 good one, tell me in detail what should be done in the for­
est. 0 you treasure of pity, emancipate me who am tied down 
by the chains of delusion, who am wicked and of a mean mind, 
and who am fallen in the ditch of the worldly existence. 
Hearing these words of his father Gokar:Q.a, learned due to 
knowledge and with his mind pleased, spoke to his helpless, de­
jected father : 
Gokarl)a said: 
85-86. 
Quickly give up the feeling of mineness for this (your) 
body which is a collection of flesh and bones, and for (your) 
wife, sons etc. Note that this world is momentary. Be a wise man, 
taking interest in detachment, and be firm in devotion. Always 
resort to religious practices. Give up the practices of (common) 
people. Serve good men. Give up desire for pleasures. Quickly 
give up thinking about the faults and virtues of others, and drink 
deep the juice ofthe stories of Vi´:Q.u. 
Kumiiras said: 
87. 
Having thus known the experience told by his son, he 
who was of a firm mind and free from desire, and who had cros­
sed sixty years, abandoned his house ; and the magnanimous one, 
always followed by people dear to Vi´:Q.U, and living in a forest, 
obtained Vi´:Q.u's position.

=== PAGE 65 ===

2994 
Padma Purii1J.a 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED NINETYSEVEN 
The Seven-day Bhiigavata Recitation 
Kumiiras said: 
1 - 1 Oa. 
0 Narada, when the father had thus gone to the 
forest, the very wicked Dhundhukarin came and threatened his 
mother. 0 Narada, {he said) to his mother : "Tell me where the 
wealth is. If you do not tell me about the grains, by all means I 
shall kill you. She, frightened by his words, and with her mind 
affiicted, fell at night in a well and died. After knowing it people 
took her out. Gokan;,1a took out the dead body with the help of 
brahmat;tas, her relatives. 0 sage, the wise one, to whom plea­
sure and pain were alike, went on a pilgrimage. Dhundhukarin 
lived in his house, and was surrounded by harlots. Dueto his prac­
tice of very fierce deeds, he did not know how to feed them. The 
harlots, desiring ornaments, said to him : "0 dear one, all of us 
have been associated with you, our protector, and have stayed 
(with you). 0 you who respect others, here there is no other giver 
of wealth. Therefore, give us fine garments and bright ornaments. 
Otherwise, we shall go to another man from (i.e. leaving) you." 
Hearing these words of them, he thought for a moment, and 
then he, blind due to desire for sensual enjoyment, and not being 
aware of death, went out of his house at night, stole from some­
one's house garments and ornaments, and 0 Narada, he, full of 
joy, gave those to them to please them. 
lOb-22. 
Seeing those priceless garments and ornaments, the 
women thought : 'He has brought these by stealing them'. Decid­
ing like this, they consulted one another. Everyday he commits 
thefts. The king will arrest him. Having snatched his wealth, he 
will certainly beat him. Then, why should we not secretly kill 
him committing thefts, and collecting much wealth go to an­
other place? (Deliberating) like this , those wicked ones were 
intent on killing him, when asleep, binding him at the neck with 
very strong cords. When he did not die even after his neck was 
pressed, they threw many burning charcoals on his face. Being 
oppressed by the great affliction due to the flames of fire, he 
died. The almost rash women threw his body in a ditch . 0 best 
sage, nobody knew his whereabouts. When asked by people,

=== PAGE 66 ===

Vl. 197.23-36 
2995 
they said, "Our lord has gone away. After getting wealth he will 
come (back) after a long time." Therefore, the best learned men 
should not trust women. They always hurt the one that trusts 
them, and go to newer and newer (men). Their words are full of 
nectar, increasing the interest of the passionate ; (but) their heart 
is like the edge of a razor. Who indeed is dear to women? Then 
those prostitutes, taking the large wealth, much perturbed by the 
fear of the king, quickly went to another village. Dhundhukarin, 
doing bad deeds, became a big evil spirit. Taking up the form of 
a storm, he everyday ran (away) into the directions away from 
wicked death. He was troubled by cold and heat, was without 
food, and thirsty. 
23-29. 
Repeatedly crying loudly "Ha l ha l" he did not get 
happiness anywhere. Knowing, after some time, that he was dead, 
Gokan;ta performed a sraddha at Gaya during his pilgrimage. 
After completing his pilgrimage, he came (back) to his village. The 
villagers, his kinsmen and relatives honoured him. The brahma:r;ta 
stayed at home for a few days. Knowing that Gokar:r;ta was asleep 
in the yard of his house at night, wicked Dhundhukarin showed 
him his fierce form. For a moment he became an elephant ; in a 
moment he became a camel ; in a moment he became a buffalo ; 
in a moment he became fire ; in a moment he became a serpent ; 
and a man in a moment. Seeing this inauspiciousness, the in­
telligent Gokar:r;ta, very much amazed, mustered courage and 
thought : 'What is this? This is some mean man, reduced to a 
miserable condition.' Deciding like this to his mind, he, full of 
pity, said : 
Gokan:za said: 
30-36. 
Who are you so fierce, that have come at night to 
frighten me? Are you an evil spirit or a goblin? Due to what are 
you reduced to this condition? 0 glorious one, tell me what I 
should do for you now, since you, of a fierce form, have app­
roached me at night. 
Hearing these words 
of his brother, that very wicked 
Dhundhukarin who was reduced to the condition of an evil 
spirit, and who was very much aftlicted, wept. Confused by 
his condition of an evil spirit, he was not able to speak with

=== PAGE 67 ===

2996 
Padma Purii!fa 
words. Being thirsty, he indicated with signs (that he wanted) to 
drink water. Then that highly virtuous Gokaʰa, esteemed by the 
good, took water in the hollow of his hands, and raising it, threw 
it (on him). That water thrown by the noble Gokan;ta, his 
brother, came to satisfy the evil spirit, Dhundhukarin. Then 
having obtained consciousness due to the water given by his 
virtuous brother, Gokan;,la, he spoke, 0 Narada : 
The evil spirit said: 
37-47a. 
I am your brother named Dhundhukiirin. Due to 
the fault of my deeds, I have been reduced to the condition of 
an evil spirit. My mother, terrified by me in many ways, died 
through grief. Then eager to feed the prostitutes, I, for getting 
money, committed prohibited acts like stealing, through greed of 
money. Once they asked me for excellent ornaments. Stealing 
them from a rich man's house at night, I brought them. Then 
through greed of wealth, 0 you who give respect (to others), they 
forcibly tied me at the neck, and killed me by throwing fire on 
me. Taking that abundant wealth, all of them, having given up 
the goodness of heart, ran away from this town through the fear 
of the king. I was reduced to the condition of an evil spirit. 0 
brother, today being sprinkled by you, the kind one, with water 
due to (my) religious merit, I regained consciousness. I live on 
air. Due to my luck, the desired thing has come up. I saw you, 
my brother, asleep in the yard of your house. Then I suddenly 
exerted to attack you who did not know me. 0 good one, now I 
have been recognised by you. 0 my brother, 0 brother of the 
helpless, 0 ocean of pity, quickly free me from this condition of 
an evil spirit. There is no doubt that you are blessed. 
Hearing these words of his brother, the wise, very intelligent 
Gokaࠤ, with his mind dejected, spoke to his brother Dhundhu­
kiirin, who was afllicted : 
Gokar!JO said: 
41b-Sl . Hearing from the people's mouths that you were 
dead, I offered you a pi1,.1cJa at Gaya. How have you been reduced 
to the condition of an evil spirit, 0 brother? Even one reduced 
to a miserable condition secures an auspicious course by means

=== PAGE 68 ===

VI. l97.52-70a 
2997 
of a piࠥga offered to him at Gaya. There is no doubt about 
this. How is it that you did not go to heaven? 
Hearing these words of Gokaʰa, the noble one, Dhun­
dhukarin who was in front of him and whose mind was afflicted, 
said : "Even by the sraddha at Gaya I shall not be liberated. You 
should think of a means for my emancipation." Hearing these 
words of him Gokaʰa was amazed. 
52-57 a. 
He said : "If by means of sraddhas you are not 
getting liberation, then your reaching heaven is impossible. 0 
evil spirit, now, being fearless, resort to your own place. After 
having thought I shall adopt a means for your liberation." Hav­
ing heard these words, Dhundhukarin went from there to his 
place, the bibhitaka tree in the cremation ground. Then, 0 Narada, 
the remaining night GokarQa remained there thinking about his 
liberation. He did not find a means for that. In the morning that 
Gokaʰa told the account of the night to his relatives and mem­
bers of his family, so also to brahmaQas who knew sacred treati­
ses. When after having pondered over the matter (consulting) 
sacred treatises, they did not find the means, they eulogized the 
Sun. 
The briihmaf,laS said: 
57b-70a. 
Salutation to you, 0 Bhaskara, Aditya, Tamohanta 
(Dispeller of darkness), Gabhastimat (Possesser of rays), Loka­
sak´in (Observer of the world), Jagaddhiiman (Resort of the world), 
to you who are saluted by gods and demons, 0 Dviidasiitman, 
Harihayabhiisvan (Shining with bay horses), Lokaprabodhaka 
(Awakener of the world), you always are the resort of the people of 
pious nature. You are Brahmii ; you are Vi´Qu ; you are Siva-the 
authors of creation, maintenance and destruction. 0 lord, except 
you there is no refuge of the living beings in the world. You are 
Sarva, of the form of the earth, and Bhava, taking up the form 
of water. You are of the form of fire ; you are Rudra ; you are air, 
taking up a fierce form. You are fearful, having the sky as your 
body. You are the sacrificer, and the lord of beings. You are 
Mahiideva, ! sana, the form of the moon, so also the sun. Eight 
divine images of you pervading the three worlds are offered obla­
tions by the teachers of the Vedas for accomplishing all desires.

=== PAGE 69 ===

2998 
Padma PuriiT)a 
You are the Fish, holding the Vedas. You are the excellent Tor­
toise, supporting the mountain. You are Varaha, supporting the 
earth ; you hold the three worlds ; you are Trivikrama (i.e. Vigm) ; 
you are Bhargava (i.e. Parasurama) destroying the harmers of 
brahma:g.as. You are Raghava killing those who harm the world. 
You are Kn:g.a removing the burden of the earth. You are 
Buddha deluding the demons. You are Kalki, the killer of the 
Mlecchas in every age when piety is declining. You, taking up 
the form of Brahman, are the creator of gods, demons, men, 
beasts and birds, of beings moving in the water, of beings of 
many kinds. 0 Lord of the host of senses, you are lndra, Dhar­
maraja (i.e. Yama), Varu:g.a, Kubera. You live in the form of the 
regent of a quarter. You are of three forms ; you are to be offered 
oblations three times (a day) ; you are having three abodes ; you 
are of the nature of three constituents. You, the Sun, separated 
in three ways, are alone worshipped by people. 0 lord of the 
world, you alone cause the lotuses to bloom. 
0 best sage, when, having spoken like this, the best brah­
ma:g.as stood (there), (the Sun) moving in the sky spoke distinctly 
when they were listening : 
Sri Surya said: 
70b-84. 
0 best brahma:g.as, since you extolled me for pacify­
ing the major sin of Dhundhuli's son, listen. This Gokar:g.a, a 
calf, will emancipate him by means of (the reading of) the Bha­
gavata for seven days, due to thࠦ religious merit of Atmadeva. 
· By eulogizing (me) with the hymn composed by you, and des­
cribing my glory, a man will obtain a divine vehicle, 0 brahma­
:g.as. A man desiring sons, wealth, piety, salvation, will obtain it 
surely by reciting the Vaiichacintama:g.i hymn. 
Saying so, god Bhaskara, remaining in the sky, ceased (speak­
ing). The brahma:g.as, with their minds delighted, said 'Well 
(done)' to Gokar:g.a. Then to the assembly of the brahma:g.as on 
the auspicious bank of Tungabhadra, the citizens went to see 
the very great wonder. Gokar:g.a, who had known the truth, who 
was the reciter, was seated on a high seat. Having saluted Nara­
ya:g.a and others, he commenced (the reading of the Bhagavata

=== PAGE 70 ===

VI. 197.85-95 
2999 
for) seven days. 'If the holy text, the word of Vi´J}.u is truly a 
holy place, springing from his lotus like feet, then may the son of 
Dhundhuli obtain heaven.' Mentally resolving like this, he reci­
ted (the Pural}.a) called Bhagavata, beginning with Janmiidyasya 
yata/:1 and ending with Dhimahi. Then the evil spirit, having come 
there, and looking for a seat here and there, took up the form of 
air and entered a bamboo having seven knots. 0 Narada, while 
the brahmal}.as, the foremost among the best brahmal}.as were 
listening, the son of Dhundhuli, remaining in the hole of the 
knot everyday listened (to the PuraJ}.a). When, 0 Narada, on the 
first day the narration came to an end, one knot of the bamboo 
bursted. It was a great wonder. On the second and other days 
also the knots bursted like this. When the seventh (knot) bursted 
he instantly abandoned his condition of an evil spirit. Being one 
having a divine form , and being adorned with a garland of 
Tulasi (leaves}, wearing yellow garments, dark like a cloud, and 
full of ornaments, he shone. Saluting his brother Gokarl}.a, he, 
seeing the entire truth, said : 
85-95. "0 brother, you have kindly freed me from the foul­
ness of an evil spirit. The account of the lord is indeed blessed, 
which is known to remove the condition of an evil spirit. The 
(recitation of the Bhagavata for a) week is also blessed, leading 
one to Vi´I}.u's world. Due to its power, I who was much afHic­
ted, am freed from the condition of an evil spirit. The (recitation 
of the Bhagavata for a) week would reduce to ash deliberate, 
non-deliberate, minor or major sins of speech, mind or act, as fire 
reduces the fuel to ash. Listen to the holy text of the Bhagavata 
in this Bharata liked even by gods. (Your) position (thereby) 
would be excellent. The body is said to be an aggregate of sinews, 
bones, marrow, flesh, blood. It is said to be pure due to relishing 
the Bhagavata ; and impure otherwise. The body, polluted due 
to the blemishes of acts, is the recipient of hell. To remove the 
blemish due to that, it alone is the means. Those (who live) 
without (reading or listening to) the divine holy text, are born 
to die only like bubbles in water or gnats among beings. The 
knot of the heart is broken. All doubts are cut off (i.e. removed). 
The (effects of his) deeds diminish, when the Bhagavata is listened 
to, 0 brahmal}.as." When he was speaking like this, an excellent 
aeroplane came there from Vaikul}.tha ; getting into it, he went to

=== PAGE 71 ===

3000 
Padma Puriil)tl 
Vi̯ l}.u's abode. When he went to Vi̯ l).u's heaven, the minds of all 
were amazed, and they asked Gokarl}.a, the best brahmal}.a : 
The briihma1,1as said: 
0 glorious one, all of us, that have gathered here, have listen­
ed to the Bhagavata. For what reason has your brother alone 
gone to ViРl}.u? 
Gokar1,1a said: 
96-104. 
Listen. I shall tell (you) the reason for the good 
course of my brother, hearing which you will also go to Goloka. 
For a week (the Bhagavata) should be heard (by you) intent on 
(observing) a fast, and with (your) m inds concentrated upon 
Kr̰ l}.a . That gives an access to Goloka. 0 brahmal}.as, again 
listen to the Bhagavata for a week, with concentrated minds. It 
always gives the nectar in the form of Kr̰ l}.a's love. 
Hearing these words of that Gokarl}.a, the best brahmal}.as 
settled to listen to the Bhagavata for a week. 0 Narada, with 
restraint, and with their minds concentrated on Kࠧ
l}.a, all the 
brahmal}.as again listened to the Bhagavata. At the end (of the 
narration) of the story, 0 best sage, lord Kr̰ l}.a appeared there. 
He was lotus-eyed ; he held a conch, a disc, a mace and a lotus. 
He had put on a crown and ear-rings ; he was adorned with a 
garland of wood-flowers. He had put on yellow garments ; he 
was dark like a cloud. He was adorned with bracelets and arm­
lets. Seeing him accompanied by the excellent companions like 
Vi´vaksena, the sages, gathered on the earth, being delighted, 
saluted him. 0 sage, at that the shouts of victory and salutation 
prevailed everywhere. Then, Viհou, delighting the brahmaoas 
made the sound of (i.e. blew) his conch . 
105-1 14. 
Then, when the brahmal}.as were looking on, many 
aeroplanes, with excellent attendants, came there from VaikUl}.tha. 
(Vi̯ l}.U) having embraced Gokarl}.a, gave him similarity of his form. 
At that moment only, he made other listeners dark like clouds 
wearing yellow, silken garments and crowns and ear-rings ; (made 
them) charming, and wearing garlands of wood-flowers. There 
was a great wonder also. By Kr´oa's order all the people up to 
(i.e. including) the caJ).9alas got into the aeroplanes and went

=== PAGE 72 ===

VI. l98. 1-7 
3001 
to heaven. Kr´:Q.a, dear to the cowherds and the cowherdesses, 
went, along with Gokar:Q.a, to Goloka, situated above all (other) 
worlds. There is the charming Vrndavana, covered with a hund­
red peaks. Outside it shines a very wonderful forest covered with 
hemp. There are many pavilions, wells like Acchoda and pools. 
There are desire-yielding cows, resorting to the shades of the 
celestial trees ; the son of Nanda, surrounded by young cowherds, 
with their minds intent upon sporting, plays there. In the midst of 
this excellent grove is fixed a great fig tree, brightening the charm­
ing rampart, decked with masses of gems and gold according to 
the desire of the Lord of Vrndavana. Then shines Sri Go kula of 
a wonderful form, resorted to by cowherdesses and adorned by 
calves in every direction. In it the bright house resided in by Hari 
(i .e. Kr´:Q.a) shines, in which house of Nanda, they, the lofty ones, 
are propitiated by Radha. The great fortune of the child of a 
charming figure, meditated upon by (gods) led by (Siva) the lord 
of Uma, with their minds, shines more by means of the rays of 
the lustre of the worlds. By means of the commencement of the 
seven-day rite called (Bhagavata) Saptaha, he (i.e. Gokal'J}.a), 
born of a cow, obtained the world impossible to be got by means 
of subsisting on air, water, leaves, parching up one's body, severe 
austerities, mutterings and sacrificial rites. He who would read 
or listen to this holy account, goes to Goloka. Then what to say 
of (him who would read or lis tent to) Sri Bhagavata ! 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED NINETYEIGHT 
Procedure to be Followed during the Saptiiha 
Kumiiras said: 
1-7. 
Now we shall tell you the manner of listening to the 
(Bhagavata recitation during a) week, by which Bhagavata would 
accomplish success for those men who have dedicated their 
minds to Kr´:Q.a. A devout man, after having called an astro­
loger, and after having honoured him with wealth and garments, 
should first ask him about the auspicious time. The commence-

=== PAGE 73 ===

3002 
Padma Purai;Ul 
ment (of narrating the Bhiigavata) should be made at the auspi­
cious time which he would tell. The months of Sriiva:Qa, Bhiidra­
pada, Asvina, Kiirtika, Miirgasirኲa, Jyeኲtha (and AኲiicJha) are 
best for the commencement of the narration ; so also the Piir:Qii 
tithi (i.e. 5th, lOth, 1 5th lunar days) is auspicious. Tuesdays and 
Saturdays shall be excluded and the constellations Dhruva and 
weak ones. The commencement is always recommended on an 
auspicious conjunction (of planets) and an auspicious lagna (i.e. 
the moment of the Sun's entrance into a Zodiacal sign). 0 best 
sage, when stories from the Purii:Qas are (to be read) daily, a wise 
man should avoid Dviidasi (the twelfth day) due to the impurity 
caused to Siita. For the (reading of) Srimad Bhiigavata for a 
week there is no prohibition. Thus said those who know the 
past, 0 divine sage. The wise ones have said that (the reading of) 
Bhiigavata for a week is a great sacrifice. 
8-16. 
Therefore, invitation should be extended to devotees 
of Vi኱:QU all round : 'There will be a gathering during the week, 
0 best devotees of Viኲ:Qu. Devotees of Viኲ:Qu desiring to listen 
(to the Bhiigavata) should come for it.' For those who come he 
should carefully make arrangement for their lodging at a holy 
place, in a grove, or in the village. He should erect a pavilion on 
the land that is purified. The pavilion should have four pillars 
with plantain trees, and should have banners in the four direc­
tions. A raised seat at its front is recommended for the speaker 
(i.e. the reader), 0 sage. The seats of the listeners are to be 
arranged on both the sides of him. The speaker, the most learn­
ed one, should face the north in the gathering. A speaker who 
knows the meaning and essential nature of the Vedas and holy 
texts, who is an excellent briihma:Qa and a devotee of Viዋu, who 
is proficient in (telling) illustrative stories, who is patient, elo­
quent, free from desire, should be appointed. One removing all 
doubts should not be appointed. By the side of the speaker there 
should be another learned wise man. He should remove the 
doubts of the listeners and should enlighten the ignorant. To 
avoid any obstacle in (the narration of) the story, he should first 
worship Ga:Qesa. Then having, in the proper manner, worship­
ped Durgii, Siva, Vi኱:Qu, Brahma, the Sun and the briihma:Qas, 
he should devoutly gratify the deities and the dead ancestors. 
17-29. Then the chief listener should worship Viᕥ:Qu repre-

=== PAGE 74 ===

Vl. l98.30-44 
3003 
sen ted in the book. Then having gone round, and having held in 
the hollow of his hands money, garments and fruits he should, 0 
sage, request ViኲJJ.U (represented) in the book : "0 divine one, 
you, KrኲJJ.a, have established yourself in this world. 0 lord, I 
have resorted to you for freedom from the ocean of the mundane 
existence. You should by all means make my desire fulfilled 
without any obstacle. 0 Kesava, I am your servant." Speaking 
like this and putting the mo11ey before the book, he should also, 
with his palms folded, salute and request the speaker (i.e. the 
reader) : "0 you best brahmaJ;J.a, of the form of Suka, 0 you 
proficient in all holy texts, remove my ignorance · by means of 
explaining the Bhagavata." Having thus requested the speaker, 
he should select five brahmaJ;J.as for the recitation of the twelve­
syllabled formula, 0 best sage. Having honoured those knowing 
the rules about singing and instrumental music with money, 
garments etc., he should at the end of the narration of the story 
appoint them for the recital (i.e. singing) of the glory of the 
lord. He who, having given up the anxiety about his wife, 
wealth, house, sons, listens with a concentrated mind, would ob­
tain the entire fruit. For three watches and a half, beginning 
from sunrise, it-a sentence or a chapter, should be read and 
its meaning explained. 0 Narada, he should take rest even for a 
ghapka. at mid-day. At the end of the (narration) of the story, 
the glory of ViኲJJ.U should be sung. A fast should be observed by 
the listeners desiring its fruit. A man incapable of doing it, 
should eat the food fit to be eaten during fast or should a little 
once (only). The body should be sustained without difficulty 
with water, or fruit, or milk or ghee only. 0 Narada, listen to 
the rules to be observed by those who take the vow for seven 
days. 
30-44. 
Those who are not initiated into (worship of) ViኲJ;J.u, 
are said to have no right for this vow. 0 best sage, during the 
week one should observe celibacy, should sleep on the bare 
ground, and eat from a plate made of leaves everyday. He who 
is observing the vow, should avoid pulses, honey, oil, others' 
food, sugarcane juice, food polluted by thought, polluted by act, 
and stale food, so also onion, garlic, asafoetida, radish and grii­
jana (a kind of garlic). So also a man observing the vow of 
(reading or listening to the Bha.gavata) story should not eat lotus

=== PAGE 75 ===

3004 
Padma PuriiiJa 
stalks and pumpkin gourd. He should not indulge in sexual 
pleasure, anger, pride, greed, hypocrisy, and jeolousy, so also 
infatuation, hatred and harm. He who is observing the vow of 
(reading or listening to the Bhagavata) story, should avoid cen­
suring Vedas, Vigtu's devotees, brahmaQas, preceptors, those 
observing the vow of (serving) a cow, so also women, kings and 
great men. The wise one who is observing the vow of (reading 
or listening to the Bhagavata) should practise truthfulness, purity, 
kindness, silence, straightforwardness, politeness, and gracious­
ness of mind. A man desiring wealth, desiring a son, desiring 
victory, or thinking of salvation, should listen to the Bhagavata. 
He, having no desire, would obtain Sri Hari. For its completion, 
he should fast on the seventh day. He should honour the reader 
with a cow, land, gold, garments etc. He should cause to give 
remnants of the food offered to the deity, garlands of Tulasi 
(leaves) to the listeners. So also with the (help of) those skilled 
in singing and playing upon musical instruments a festival should 
be celebrated. The wise one should also listen to the meaning of 
the Gita on the next day. Or after every verse with the Gayatri 
hymn, he should make offerings (to ViኲJ;tu) according to the 
rules. He should also offer sweetened milk, honey, ghee, sesa­
mum-seeds, rice, barley grains, sugar, priyala, grapes, dates, 
lotuses, camphor, sandal, agaru (a kind of sandal), cloves, a 
thousand leaves of bilva separately. He should recite the (hymn 
called) Vi኱JJ.u-sahasra-nama for removing obstacles, removing 
deficiencies and excesses, and for purifying himself. He should 
devoutly offer sweetened milk to twelve, eighteen or more' brah­
maoas, and (should give them) gold or a cow as a present. 
45-52. On this day or the day of Pfirva Bhadrapada or 
Uttara Bhadrapada {constellations) he should 
fashion (the) 
golden (image of a) lion, should place the Bhagavata (text) 
on its back, and writing on it (his name etc.) should give 
it to the reader. When this is done according to the rule, the 
Bhiigavata that is listened to would remove all the sins of the 
listener and would give him good fruit, be the means of re­
ligious merit, of the fulfilment of the desire for sensual enjoy­
ments, acquisition of worldly objects and salvation, and would 
give (i.e. produces) devotion. There is no object in the world 
that is not secured by this. Therefore, in the world, the Bha.ga-

=== PAGE 76 ===

VJ. l98.53-62 
3005 
vata is regarded as superior to (other) PuraQas. The reader is 
said to be free from eighteen blemishes, and the listener is 
supposed to be free from thirty-two faults by the wise. The PuriiQ.a 
named Sri Bhagavata gives men their desired objects. Yet listen­
ing to it produces devotion only in a person free from desires. 
The divine tree called Srimad Bhagavata has starlike shoots ; has 
a good origin ; it shines with twelve large boughs (i.e. sections) ; 
it grows in the basin of devotion ;it has three hundred and thirty­
two bright branches (i.e. chapters) ; it has eighteen thousand 
leaves (i.e. verses) ; it gives desired objects ; it is easily accessible ; 
and it stands above all. Thus I have told you everything and 
have done what was desired by you. The youth of Jfiana, Vai­
ragya and Bhakti gives salvation to people. 
Suta said: 
53-54. 
Having spoken like this, the Kumaras, inundated 
with the nectar (flowing) from Kr኱Q.a's feet, devotees of the lord, 
and intent on emancipating the helpless, ceased (speaking). Hear­
ing their words, Narada, dear to the lord, and with his palms 
joined, said to them in a voice faltering due to love : 
N iirada said: 
55-62. 
I am blessed ; I am favoured by you highly devoted 
to compassion, since at the end of the Bhagavata-saptaha (i.e. 
reciting or listening to the Bhagavata for a week), you have 
presented Vi኱Q.u near me. 
While Narada, the best devotee of ViኲQ.u, was speaking 
like this, Suka, the chief among the meditating saints, (while) 
roaming, came there. His form was that of a youth of sixteen 
years ; he was lotus-eyed ; he was Vyasa's son ; he was the 
moon to the ocean of knowledge ; he was content at heart 
with whatever (given) at the end of (the narration of) the 
story, and constantly recited Bhagavata. The members of the 
assembly, seeing him of a great lustre, got up and gave him an 
excellent seat. When he comfortably sat on the seat, lotus-eyed 
VifiQ.U appeared (there). Siva with Parvati and Brahma with his 
sons came there to glorify and see him. Gods among whom Indra 
was the chief, came there in aeroplanes. The sky was covered by

=== PAGE 77 ===

3006 
Padma Purii'!-a 
them. Prahlada did the beating of time with a quick speed ; Ud­
dha va took the cymbals ; the divine sage (Narada) took the lute ; 
Arjuna, through his skill in tunes, formed the musical modes. 
Indra played upon the tabor ; the Kumaras uttered the loud 
shouts of victory. Vyasa's son, of unsurpassed virtues, was a 
(versatile) speaker and of good sentiments. The triad of Jiiana 
etc. having new forms, just danced in the middle. Seeing the 
extraordinary glorification ViኲJ;tu, with his mind pleased, spoke 
as follows : "0 devotees of Vi኿1;1u, ask for a boon from me who 
am very much pleased with the narration of the story." Hearing 
those words, they who were pleased, and with their heart flow­
ing with love, said : 
Kumiiras said: 
63-67. 
0 Murari (i.e. 0 ViኲJ;tu), you will be instantly pleas­
ed with the worship (in the form of reading or listening to the 
Bhagavata) continued for a week in the very fierce Kali age by 
men having a short life and overcome by hundreds of obstacles. 
From you, the soul of everything and the creator, sustainer and 
destroyer of the universe, we, resorting to your lotus-like feet, 
ask for this boon and not any other (boon) . 
Saying, "Let it be so", ViኲJ;tu vanished there only. Narada 
with his mind pleased, saluted Kumaras. Then those Sanaka 
and others, Bhrgu and others and Suka and others, delighted by 
drinking the nectar of the story went to their own hermitages. 
0 Saunaka, since then, Narada propagated Bhakti along with 
her two sons over the entire earth. 
Siva said: 
68. 0 dear one, having heard the great story, Saunaka 
whose heart was pleased, again asked Siita who removed all 
doubts : 
Saunaka said: 
69. 
0 you respecting (others), tell me when Suka told it to 
the king, when GokarJ;ta told it, and Brahma's sons to the divine 
sage (Narada).

=== PAGE 78 ===

VI. l98.70-87a 
3007 
Suta said: 
70-72. 
Suka commenced (the narration of) the story on the 
ninth of the bright fortnight of Bhiidrapada when the period of 
three hundred years of Kali after the departure of Srikn;:Q.a had 
passed. Gokar:Q.a told the story on the 9th day of the bright half 
of Jyel;ltha (or Aᕦagha), after two hundred years had passed from 
the time Parikl;lit had heard it. 0 brahma:Q.a, now a thousand 
years of the Kali age have passed from the time of Parikᕩit. (So) 
conclude the sacrifice. 
The lord said: 
73-Sla. Hearing these words of him, the best sage Saunaka 
completed the sacrifice that continued for a thousand years. 
These Pura:Q.as : Brahma, Padma, VaiᕦJ)ava, Kaurma, Matsya, 
Vamana, Varaha, Brahmavaivarta, Naradiya, Bhavil;lyaka, and 
half of Agneya were formerly heard by excellent sages like gau­
naka from Siita Lomaharᕩa:Q.a up to the end of the Dvapara age. 
When Baladeva came on a pilgrimage to (the forest) called Nai­
miᕩa Misrika, he was called by the best sages. There seeing Siita 
seated on an excellent seat, revered (Bala-)Rama was agitated 
like the great ocean on a parvan day. 0 Parvati, on the Dvadasi 
day of the bright half of Aᕩagha, at the time of its earlier half, 
he, R.ama, being stupefied due to what was decided by Kn;:Q.a's 
Maya, having darbhas in his hand, struck Lomaharᕩa:Q.a. Then 
all the hosts of the sages did loud wailing, and their hearts were 
overcome by sorrow and grief, 0 daughter of the (Himalaya) 
Mountain. Then they, full of forgiveness, said humbly to R.ama, 
the lord of the world : 
The sages said: 
8lb-87a. 
0 Rama, Rama, 0 you of great arms, you, the 
author of the world, have ignorantly committed harm greater 
than that due to the murder of a brahma:Q.a. This is actually 
Vyasa's disciple, an ancient sage, having a great penance (to his 
credit). We who had invited him, the narrator of the eighteen 
Pura:Q.as, gave him an excellent seat at this sacrificial rite. On 
(hearing) the story of the lord of the world one obtains long life, 
0 you who honour (others). Therefore, you who promoted the 
bridge of piety, who are capable of curbing and favouring, who

=== PAGE 79 ===

3008 
Padma Puriiˊta 
are the lord of the world, have manifested yourself for the pro­
tection of the world. 
Speaking like this to Baladeva, 0 dear one, the sages, 
remembering the force of destiny, suddenly became silent. Then 
revered Rama, killer of his enemies, following the path of the 
world and the Vedas, pleasing those brahmat;tas, said : 
Sri Riima said: 
87b-89. 
0 brahmat;tas, may well-being come to you ; listen 
after casting far away your anger. I know what you like and 
what gives success to your undertaking. Due to my blessing his 
son will be very wise. He will narrate to you the holy text desir­
ed by you. Tell me the work for which you have invited me. 
The lord said: 
90-100. Hearing these words of the very noble Rama, they 
prompted the lord to murder Balvala. Then, having killed Bal­
vala and pleased the pre-eminent sages and saluting them, he 
went on a pilgrimage after being permitted by them. 0 daughter 
of the (Himalaya) Mountain, when Rama left for the pilgrimage, 
the chief sages like Saunaka called Laumaharf.!a:Q.i, and after 
honouring him placed him in his position for the narration of 
the remaining (part). With their minds delighted, they listened 
to seven Purii:Q.as and a half (beginning with) the greatness of 
the later part of Agneya up to Bhagavata. 0 you beautiful lady, 
Satyavati's son (Vyasa) was not mentally pleased after having 
composed seventeen Pura:Q.as and Bharata also. Knowing that his 
heart was sad, revered Narada, looking like a god, came to the 
excellent hermitage of Vyasa. Seeing him, the son of Vasa vi (i.e. 
Vyasa) hospitably received Narada, offered him a seat, and 
honoured him with a rite according to the rules. Then Narada 
said to him : "Tell me fully the cause of your doubt. What do 
you, with an afilicted mind, think of?" Thus asked by the sage, 
(Vyasa) the son of Parasara, said : "I really do not know the 
cause of the disturbance of my mind. You are proficient in know­
ledge. Understand it (i.e. the cause) and tell it to me." Thus re­
quested by him, Narada, proficient in the knowledge of the

=== PAGE 80 ===

VI. l 98 . 1 0 1 - 12 1 
3009 
Supreme Spirit, told him the highest truth obtained by him from 
Brahm a. 
Niirada said: 
101-1 10. 0 son of Parasara, hear from me the cause due to 
which the mind of you, the master and the origin of holy texts, 
has become miserable. 0 innocent one, having descended on the 
earth, you have divided the Vedas into parts. You have also 
composed the Pura:Q.as along with the Itihasa, in which, having 
observed in course of time the practices of the castes and of 
those living in the four stages of life, you have told them from 
the three Vedas. All women, sfidras, the twice-born fraternity, 
those prone to the company of the good, are entitled to listening 
to it. Religious. practices, as are lasting, have been described in 
them by you. But you have not at all prominently described 
therein the greatness of Viᕦ:Q.u. 0 sage, in the Kali age, void of 
all religious practices and rites, and the reservoir of all blemishes, 
the sinners have no other course than the nectar of KrᕦQa's 
story. This alone is the merit in this terrible Kali age that men 
are freed from the bondage of their acts by means of narrating 
the glory of Krᕭ:Q.a only. Sacrifices, gifts, penance, rites, know­
ledge, meditation gave success in (ages) like Krta. In the same 
way, 0 brahmai}.a, the narration of (ViᕭI}.u's) name (leads to 
success) in Kali. Therefore, for the emancipation of men born in 
the Kali age, you should relate Srimad Bhagavata, by composing 
which, 0 dear one, your mind will be pleased and people will be 
blessed. 
The lord said: 
1 1 1 -121 . Having thus ordered Vyasa of unlimited lustre, he, 
0 dear one, constantly singing the virtues of ViᕦI}.U, went as he 
desired. Mter Narada had gone, Vyasa who saw everything, 
composed this great text, viz. Srimad Bhagavata. Having taught 
the four Vedas to Paila and others according to the rule, he gave 
all the Pura:Q.a-texts to Sfita. That text of the Bhagavata was 
heard by the son of Lomaharᕭana, when it was being told to the 
king Parikᕭit by guka. 0 daughter of the (Himalaya) Mountain, 
he properly told it to sages like Saunaka. It is above all Pura:Q.as

=== PAGE 81 ===

301 0 
Padma PUra1)a 
and best among them. Men whose heart is attached to it find 
interest in nothing else. In their minds, Kr኱IJ.a, son of Nanda, 
shines. 0 you mother of the chief of (my) attendants, I have told 
you the entire greatness of Sri Bhagavata, which you had asked 
me to narrate for crossing over the (mundane) world. A man 
who devoutly listens to or he too who reads with approval the 
greatness (of Sri Bhagavata) along with many historical accounts 
leading to devotion and salvation, obtains the highest posi­
tion. Having studied it, a brahmal).a would obtain (the know­
ledge of) the Vedas, a k኱atriya would get victory, a vaisya (would 
obtain) wealth, and a sudra gets the best position by just listen­
ing to it. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED NINETYNINE 
The Glory of Yamuna 
The sages said: 
I . 0 Siita tell us the glory of Yamuna in detail-to whom it 
was spoken, and by whom it was spoken-along with a story. 
Suta saM: 
2. 
Once PaiJ.9u's son, desiring to hear auspicious knowledge 
from Saubhari, went to his place, and having saluted him, asked 
him like this : 
YudhiÖ!hira said : 
3. 
0 brahmal).a, tell me about that holy place which is (the 
best) among the holy places on the bank of Yamuna, and which 
is (even) superior to the land of the birth of ViኲIJ.U. 
Saubhari said: 
4-8. Once the two pre-eminent sages, Narada and Parvata, 
moving in the sky, (while) looking (here and there), saw the very 
beautiful Kha.IJ.9ava forest. From the sky they descended there 
and sat on the auspicious bank of Kalindi, and having rested

=== PAGE 82 ===

VI.l99.9-19 
301 1 
awhile, entered her water to bathe. King Sibi, son of Usinara, 
hunting in the forest, saw the two, and waiting for them to come 
out, sat on the bank of the river. The two who after having duly 
bathed had put on garments, who were saluted by the king with 
his head (bent down), sat on the bank. Seeing thousands of 
golden sacrificial posts there, Sibi, free from pride, spoke to 
Narada and Parvata : 
Sibi said: 
9-10. 
0 pre-eminent sages, tell me, whose sacrificial posts 
these are. Who performed a sacrifice here-(was it) a god or a 
man? Leaving holy places like Kasi, which man performed a 
sacrifice here? What peculiarity, 0 treasures of knowledge, 
does it have (in a greater extent) than other holy places? 
Niirada said: 
1 1-14. Formerly Hira:Qyakasipu, having conquered deities 
like Indra, secured the kingdom of the three worlds, and enter­
tained great pride. His son was Prahlada, highly devoted to 
NarayaJ,la. The wicked (Hira:Qyakasipu), whose auspiciousness 
had perished, bore a great malice against him. Due to that 
malice, Viᕿ:Qu, taking up the body of Nrsimha, instantly killed 
the lord of demons, and gave the kingdom of heaven to (Indra) 
the lord of heaven. Having obtained his own position, the lord 
of gods, remembering the virtues of ViᕿJ,lu, and saluting Brhas­
pati's feet with his head (bent down) said to him : 
Jndra said: 
1 5-16. 0 preceptor, ViᕫJ;tu, the supporter of the world, 
taking up the form of Nrsiihha, gave me the kindom of deities. 
I desire to worship him with sacrifices. 0 Guru, tell me (about) 
a pure place and also (about) the brahma:Qas. You, doing good 
to us, should not delay in this matter. 
Brhaspati said: 
17-19. For you there is the charming and extremely holy 
KhaJ,lqava forest which contains (the trees like) ketaki, asoka, 
bakula and (also) bees intoxicated by honey. There is Yamuna, 
auspicious, holy and purifying the three worlds. On remember-

=== PAGE 83 ===

3012 
Padma PuriifJ.a 
ing her she gives heaven, and on death Brahma's position. 0 
lord of gods, if you desire the continuous well-being of your 
relatives, worship Vigl.U with many sacrifices on her bank. 
Niirada said: 
20-27. Having heard Brhaspati's words, and quickly gett­
ing into a vehicle, Indra came to this forest of him which caused 
happiness, along with Brhaspati and the materials of sacrifice. 
Having come here, and having seen this forest, he obtained great 
joy. Prompted by Guru, Indra, choosing the seven sages, the 
sons of BrahmS., the brahmaJ}.as, worshipped the lord of the 
world with sacrifices. The lord, pleased with him, came, along 
with BrahmS. and Siva, to Indra's sacrifice, where there was a 
great festivity. That Indra, of a crooked mind, seeing the triad 
of gods, quickly got up from his seat, and along with the sages, 
saluted them. Quickly getting down from their vehicles, they sat 
near him on seats of excellent gold, and shone like fires on 
altars. With Siva and Brahma who had white and red bodies, 
ViᕿJ}.u, of a dark complexion, wearing yellow garments, shone 
like a cloud on two peaks. Indra washed their feet and took that 
water on his head. Being full of joy, he spoke sweet words : 
Indra said: 
28-37. 
0 gods, this sacrifice performed by me has become 
instantly fruitful, since you, difficult to see even by meditating 
saints are seen (by me). 0 ViᕿJ}.u, you alone have taken up the 
three forms. Yet as in a crystal, the appearance of multiplicity in 
you in respect of qualities is false. As fire concealed in pieces of 
wood does not manifest itself without friction, in the same way you 
remaining in the hearts of your devotees (do not manifest your· 
self) without deep devotion. Devotion to you alone, would be 
helpful to all beings. By that (devotion) entertained by Prahlada, 
gods became happy. 0 god, we, given to sensual pleasures, have 
our hearts screened by your Maya. We, the servants of your 
feet, do not know your nature correctly. 0 Brahman, 0 Maha­
deva, since you two also are the preceptors of the world due to 
his greatness, you are not different from him. Whatever is said 
with words, thought of by the mind is his Maya only. So all are 
away from that pair(?). He who sees this entire visible world to be

=== PAGE 84 ===

VI. 199.38-47 
3013 
wueal, would not think of (sensuous pleasures). 0 Siva, those 
who resort to Viᕥ]J.u's feet, cross the water held by you on your 
head. 0 Brahman, may I have, in existence after existence, a 
great liking for his feet, resembling lotuses. Due to it being agi­
tated by her (Maya's) glance, the entire world, Mahat etc. 
springs up. There is none else given to kindness like you who 
give happiness (even) to your enemies. That which is described 
as your kindness, that removes the misery of your people is (just) 
(due to) ignorance, 0 Nrhari. 
Niirada said: 
38-46. 
Having thus praised Vigm, the lord of gods re­
mained bent before him. He who had applied (i.e. concentrated) 
his mind with a desire to hear his words, looked great. 
The sages, having thus heard the praise of Rama's lord, done 
by Indra in the assembly, said : "Well (done), well done." (They 
said :) "0 lndra, (even) the devotion of those who practise severe 
penance for a hundred years is not like your devotion to Viᕥ]J.u. 
The Yoga with eight parts, by means of which glory is obtained, 
is not easy. The refuge of men is renunciation with equanimity 
of mind and devotion to him. When the dedication of that act 
which is performed with the wealth earned in pursuance of the 
duties of one's own caste is made to Viᕦ:Q.u, that is devotion, giv­
ing happiness. He should not censure other deity, (and) him 
who salutes (the deity) with Viᕥ:Q.U in his mind. He should not 
ignore Vedic words. Such a devotee is dear to those who every­
day listen to the virtues of Viᕥ:Q.U, who sing his glory, who re­
member him, resort to him, worship him, who salute him with 
servitude, who form friendship with him, who offer him their 
possessions, who do not desire salvation etc. 0 Indra, you also 
devoutly propitiate the lord of the world. Do not desire any­
thing from him. Then you will be blessed." 
Narada said: 
47. 
When Indra was thus advised by the sages, Viᕫ:Q.u, the 
lord, having heard about the devotion that was done to him, that 
could be resorted to by all, and that would cause the crossing of 
the three worlds, spoke sweet words to Indra in the assembly.

=== PAGE 85 ===

3014 
Padma PuriifUZ 
CHAPTER 1WO HUNDRED 
The Episode of a Bhilla and a Lion 
The lord said: 
1-lSa. 
0 lord of gods, it is no wonder that these very wise 
sages respect and honour my devotion, (leading to) my position, 
since these who teach knowledge to those living in the three 
worlds, always propagate the Vedic path that has perished. 
You, though attached to the enjoyments in heaven, have devo­
utly approached me. What wonder is there, since Brhaspati is 
your preceptor. 0 best of gods, free from desires, worship me 
with sacrifices with many gifts. You will quickly reach my 
position which is near. At every sacrifice present many prasthas 
(particular measures) of jewels. This place will be called Indra­
prastha. 0 Brahmii, having brought Sarasvati and Galigii 
purifying the world, fashion here the best holy place (called) 
Prayiiga. 0 Siva, you establish here Kii.Si and Sivakiifici and 
Gokan;ta. Always live here along with Gauri. 0 sons of Brahmii, 
proficient in metaphysical and worldly knowledge, fashion here 
seven holy places by means of the power of your abstract 
meditation. 0 Guru, you set up the holy place Nigamodbodhaka. 
Here the knowledge of Vedas would be had even without study­
ing (them). The two highest souls would have the recollection 
of their former existence. I shall found here very beautiful 
Dviiraka, where Gomati has joined the sea. 0 Indra, I shall 
also fashion here Kosalii and Madhvaral}.ya, where I shall 
descend through the bodies of Riima (i.e. Balariima) and KnJ}.a. 
I shall also fashion here Badaryiisrama, the abode of Nara and 
Niiriiyal}.a, where, 0 chief of gods, I shall always live. With a 
desire for your good only, I shall found the two excellent holy 
places, Haridviira and Puᕫkara. I shall found here all the holy 
places that are in Naimiᕥa, on the Kiilafijara mountain and the 
bank of Sarasvati. 
Niirada said: 
lSb-26. 
0 Sibi, having heard those auspicious words of 
ViᕫJ}.U, and having done and seen that, Brahmii, Siva and others 
did as was said (by him). That lord of the gods again worshipped

=== PAGE 86 ===

VI.200.27-36 
301 5 
Lakᕥmi's lord with many sacrifices in this place full of all holy 
places. In front of Krᕥt:ta, he gave prasthas of jewels to 
brahmat;tas. 'May this Narayat;ta, the soul of all, be pleased 
with me.' Since then this holy place is called Indraprastha. One 
who dies at this holy place full of all holy places, is not reborn. 
The brahmat;tas, having received those prasthas of jewels given 
by Indra, gave him there, in the assembly, a blessing that would 
not be fruitless : "0 Indra, may Govinda be pleased with this 
gift of you. May you also have steady devotion for him. 0 lord, 
in this land of (sacred) rites formerly you, having a desire, per­
formed a hundred sacrifices. Due to that religious position you 
obtained a place among the gods. Now you, without any desire, 
have worshipped Viᕦt;tu with sacrifices. Falling from your 
position, you will be (born) as the best brahmat;ta. There (i.e. 
in that existence) also, you, worshipping Viᕥt;tu in accordance 
with your (caste-)duty, will remember the act like the sacrifice 
that you did. On remembering that, you, abandoning your 
house and going to holy places with your father, will come to 
this Sakra-tirtha. Resorting to the fourth stage of life you will 
caste your body here. Then you, having a divine body, will get 
into an aeroplane brought by the attendants and bright like the 
sun, and will reach the position of Sri Hari (i.e. Viᕿt;tu)." 
Niirada said: 
27-32. Having heard this blessing of the brahmat;tas and 
their words indicative of the future, the lord of gods was ex­
tremely delighted, 0 Sibi. Having honoured with (gifts of) 
wealth etc. Brahma's sons, the priests at the sacrifice, lndra, 
honouring Brhaspati, went to heaven. 0 Sibi, Indra, full of 
devotion for Viᕿ:Q.U, having ruled there, with his religious merit 
exhausted, came down to Hastinapura. There was a brahma:Q.a, 
Sivasarman (by name), who had mastered the Vedas and 
Vedatigas. His wife was GUt;tavati, of a very significant name. 
To her was born Indra, who served Viᕫt;tu, at an auspicious time. 
Astrologers were called. Seeing the auspicious time they said : 
The astrologers said : 
33-36 0 Sivasaraman, this your boy will be dear to Viᖀu. 
He wlll emancipate your family. We are telling the truth and

=== PAGE 87 ===

3016 
Padma PuriiiJa 
not a lie. When he will have the body of thirteen years (i.e. when 
he will be thirteen years old), he, rich with knowledge learnt (i.e. 
got) by him, will marry. Then having produced a good son he 
will be an anchorite. The wise one, wandering to holy places, 
will renounce the world. There is the excellent river in lndra's 
Kha:;u;lavavana . On her bank is Hariprastha. He will die there. 
Niirada said: 
37-44. Having heard the auspicious words uttered by 
the astrologers, he then named his son Viᕥ:Q.usarman. Having 
dismissed them by (giving them) wealth, the intelligent one 
thought : 'I whose son will be Viᕥ:Q.u's devotee, am blessed. 
This son will accomplish for me the four stages of human life. 
He will die at the holy place. Who else is lucky like me?' Think­
ing like this in his mind, Sivasarman got performed the cere­
mony to be performed at the birth of a child through the brah­
ma:Q.as on an auspicious day. And when the son completed seven 
years, the best brahma:Q.a performed, in his eighth year, his 
thread ceremony in the month of Caitra. 0 king, after having 
imparted him education till the twelfth year he united the son 
with a wife, 0 Sibi. The intelligent Viᖁusarman having pro­
duced a son on his wife made up his mind, free from carnal 
desire, for visiting holy places. Having approached his father, 
and having saluted both his feet, the very wise Viᕫ:Q.usarman, 
remembering the sages' words, said : 
Vi$ζJuSarman said: 
45-49. 
0 father, allow me. Having resorted to the third 
stage of life, causing good company, I (shall) worship ViᕥJ}.U. 
Wife, house, wealth, children, friends are perishable. A wise 
man is not attached to them like bubbles on water. By means of 
Vedic study and progeny I have paid off the two debts (of the 
sages and forefathers). I, free from desires, (now) desire to offer 
a sacrifice to Vi}:Q.u. Having given up attachment for the consti­
tuents of nature I desire to stay at an excellent holy place, as 
long as my destiny allows . 
Thus address by the son, the very intelligent father, remem­
bering the words of the astrologers, and being desireless for (i.e. 
disugsted with) the mundane existence, said :

=== PAGE 88 ===

VI.200.50-78a 
3017 
Siva8arman said: 
50-54. This is the time for resorting to the fourth stage of life 
for me also who am free from egoism. Having abandoned objects 
of senses like poison, I shall resort to the nectar in the form of 
Viß:Q.U. 0 son, in this old age, my mind does not find delight in 
the house like an elephant brought from a forest and tied. Your 
younger brother Susarman will support the family left by us two, 
like knowledge supporting a man forsaken by wealth and family. 
Your mother, a loyal wife, will (like to) follow me, renouncing 
the world, as brilliance follows the sun at the end of the day. 
Therefore, we too, not known by (i.e. without the knowledge of) 
your mother and thinking of Viį:Q.u's lotus-like feet, (shall) go, 
0 dear one. 
Niirada said: 
55-78a. 
Thus thinking, the two, desiring salvation, leaving 
(the members of) the family (that were) asleep, moved out 
of the house, and went. 0 Sibi, the two, free from egoism, 
wandered, and came to the excellent place, Sakraprastha, caus­
ing auspiciousness. Viß:Q.usarman who had come here, having 
seen the sacrificial posts laid by him in his former birth, remem­
bered his contact with Viᕥ:Q.u. And the intelligent one said to his 
father : "Formerly (i.e. in my former birth) I was Indra. With a 
desire to please Viß:Q.u, I performed sacrifices here. Here only, 
Viß:Q.U, loving his devotees, was pleased with me. The briihma­
:J;I.as, the seven sages, were pleased by me with prasthas of jewels. 
They only gave me devotion to Viß:Q.U, salvation and birth. All, 
Viß1;1u and others, have put up holy places elsewhere. This holy 
place, Indraprastha, is full of all holy places. The best sages had 
told that I would die here only. After that I would obtain 
Viß1;1u's feet. I remember all this. These two, Ganga and Saras­
vati, were brought from his own world by Brahmii ; due to their 
contact this is called Prayiiga. This is Kiisi, Siva's city, in the 
eastern region ofPrayaga. At the distance offour hastas there is 
an island. A man dead on it is not reborn. At the western region 
of K.a.si, at a distance of eightyfour hastas, there is Sivakiiiici 
founded by Siva and giving salvation to the dead. This holy 
place called Gokar1;1a, is very dear to Siva. It is established on a 
portion of land measuring eight hastas. To the west of the chief

=== PAGE 89 ===

3018 
Padma Purii{za 
holy place is this auspicious Dvaravati. A man dead within a 
distance of two hundred and eighty hastas from here gets four 
arms. Then to the eastern region of this is Kosala, dear to 
people. It measures seventytwo hastas and its sight is meritori­
ous. This is Madhuvana, 0 dear one, founded by VißJ;tu himself, 
which is to the west and which measures forty hastas. 0 dear 
one, to the north of this is the abode of Nara and Naraya.J;la. It 
stands on a piece of ground measuring fortyfour hastas. This 
holy place is Haridvara, situated in the south of it. It is seen on a 
piece of land measuring one hundred and twenty hastas. This is 
the holy place Pußkara, the crest-jewel of holy places. 0 dear 
one, it is situated on a piece of ground measuring forty-eight 
hastas. At a distance of one krosa from Prayaga, in the eastern 
direction, are seven holy places of the seven sages. This is the 
group of seven holy places. Near the seven holy places there are 
many other holy places, in which at every step a dead man be­
comes one with four arms. At a distance of one krosa from Pra­
yaga, in the western region, is the holy place named Nigamod­
bodhaka, formerly founded by Guru. The distance between the 
seven holy places and Nigamodbodhaka is great. 0 dear one, this 
is the holy place Indraprastha, formerly founded by deities. It is 
extended up to a yojana ia the east and the west. The great sages 
have said that four yojanas to the south of Yamuna is the limit 
of Indraprastha. He who casts his body here in (the confluence 
of) the three deities, is unborn." 
Niirada said: 
78b-79a. 0 Sibi, hearing these words of his son, the brahmat;ta 
Sivasarman having a doubt, said to his son, truthful of words. 
Sivasarman said: 
79b-82. 
How should I know that formerly you were the 
lord of gods ; you performed sacrifices here ; you pleased the 
brahma:Q.as with (presents of) jewels? 0 son, do that by which I 
would have the truth of what is told by you. Wherefrom did you 
hear about this limit of lndraprastha, since from the time you 
had understanding you did not leave the house? From me only 
you have studied the four Vedas with the Aligas. How did you 
have the knowledge of the acts done in the former birth ?

=== PAGE 90 ===

VI.200.83- 1 01 
301 9 
Vi$1J.uSarman said: 
83-85. Formerly the sages had given me a boon causing the 
recollection of the former existence. This recollection of this 
holy place is had by me from them only. 0 father, bathe here in 
this holy place, viz. Nigamodbodhaka. You will obtain know­
ledge difficult to obtain, giving you the ability to recollect your 
former birth. You will recollect even my behaviour in my former 
existence by touching the water of this holy place. I tell you the 
truth, 0 father. 
Niirada said: 
86-101 . 
When the best brahma:Q.a Sivasarman, after having 
heard this was ready to bathe in the holy place Nigamodbo­
dhaka for the recollection of his former birth, there came run­
ning a bhilla followed by a lion. His limbs were full of great fear ; 
he was panting ; he was overcome by fatigue. He was of a 
harmful nature ; he killed (people) on the way ; he always robbed 
merchants. His body was dark. His hair was tawny. He was 
short. His eyes were like those of a cat. He had a lance in his 
hand ; his figure was fearful. The man existed as it were by sin. 
Then seeing at a distance after him a lion the father and son 
quickly climbed a nearby tree, and remained (on it), saying, '0 
KniJ.a, free us from this untimely death.' 0 best king, the bhilla, 
seeing the lion (pursuing him) faster to seize him, was afraid, and 
proceeded to climb up the tree. The impetuous lion seized him, 
climbing (up the tree) at his feet, knocked him down with his 
back on the ground, and mounted on him. The bhilla too, who 
was pained and was under (the lion), tore the lion's belly with 
his lance in such a way that the mass of his entrails, smeared 
with a stream of blood came out. The lion, with a piteous roar, 
pounded the bhilla's head, and he died instantly. When the two 
died, there came down, 0 king, attendants with a group of two 
aeroplanes, that were fashioned with crystal stones, that were 
decorated with multitudes of jewels, that had charming pictures 
(painted on them), that were adorned with snow-walls, that had 
windows (decked) with rubies, the bells of which were tinkling, 
that had charming raised seats, that had cushions, that shone 
with lofty flags, that had high arches, that looked beautiful due 
to a hundred doors, that were clear like mirrors due to their

=== PAGE 91 ===

3020 
Padma Purii1Ja 
:floors resembling new corals, along with (i .e. in which were 
seated) two attendants whose complexion was like fresh clouds, 
on whose ears were charming rings, who had in their hands 
conches, discs, maces and lotuses, who had put on yellow gar­
ments, whose eyes resembled fully bloomed lotuses, the anklets 
round whose feet were making a deep (tinkling) sound, who had 
rows of bracelets round their forearms, whose chests looked 
charming due to pearl necklaces, whose faces had curly hair 
over them, whose couples of eyebrows had cast down the bow of 
Cupid. 
102- l l la. The bhilla and the lion, even before life left 
them, gave up their bodies and remained in a natural state due 
to the power of this holy place. The attendants of Viᕥl)u, bring­
ing the aeroplanes near them, who were having no dress or form, 
said to them : "0 bhilla, best of men , 0 lion, the lord of beasts, 
know us to be ViኲIJ.u's attendants who have come from Vai­
kuiJ.tha (or from ViᕥIJ.u). We shall take you to his place. It is 
true. There are no distresses there. Getting into your respective 
aeroplane, go quickly. Do not tarry." The bhilla and the lion, 
got into their respective aeroplanes, and full of amazement, 
spoke to the attendants of (ViᕥIJ.u), the lord of Lakኲmi : "0 best 
deities, listen to our words. Due to your sight knowledge of the 
highest truth is produced (in us). In this existence we have not 
done the slightest good act. By your favour we are having the 
recollection of our former deeds. We ate :flesh ; we were engaged 
in killing animals ; our mind and senses were cruel ; we were 
born in sinners' families ; we cause fear when looked at. In such 
a world, we were sinners. Due to what religious merit, we have 
seen (you) ? Due to what religious merit shall we have absorp­
tion into Sri Hari ?" 
The two attendants said: 
l l lb-1 17. Indeed due to your dying at this holy place, 
formerly fashioned by (Brhaspati ,) the preceptor of gods, you 
saw us, and (would get) the wonderful absorption (into ViᕥIJ.U). 
You will soon obtain (i.e. reach) the position of the lord of 
Lakኲmi. Sins like the murder of a brii.hmaua roar till the time 
this holy place of Brhaspati is not seen. As darkness perishes on 
sunrise, in the same way sins perish on seeing Nigamodbodhaka.

=== PAGE 92 ===

Vl.200.1 18-VI.201 .6 
302 1 
This holy place, called Indraprastha, purified Indra. Here he 
worshipped Viኻ:Q.u with sacrifices with many presents. Viዊ:Q.u 
pleased (by them), gave him a boon. Hear (it) : "0 Indra, those 
men, even killers, who cast their bodies at your holy place, full 
of all holy places, are equal to me." 
Niirada said: 
1 1 8. 
Speaking like this, the two best attendants took the 
two and went to Viኲ:Q.u's place, having gone to which a man 
does not get drowned in the ocean of the world (i.e. the worldly 
existence). 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED ONE 
Sarabha's Story 
Niirada said: 
1-2. The two, the father and the son, got down from the 
tree, and seeing that even sinners got the position of Viኲ:Q.u, were 
very much amazed. The best brahma:Q.a Sivasarman, having 
heard the praise, expressed by the (two) attendants, of the holy 
place, spoke to Viኻ:Q.usarman, his son : 
Siva8arman said: 
3-6. 
The bhilla and the lion have easily reached that posi­
tion which is not easy to be reached by the brahma:Q.as even with 
penance practised. Observe the greatness of the holy place. It 
is not possible to praise in appropriate terms this best holy place, 
due to the power of which those who had committed sins from 
birth to death have obtained identity of form with Vi኱:Q.u, 0 son? 
What a great disparity there is between the divine birth of 
Brahma, which is from pure Sattva and difficult to be had even 
by gods on the one hand, and the Tamas-born lion and bhilla on 
the other ! But this holy place is having a wonderful efficacy. 0 
dear one, a being after having reached the end (of the fruits) of 
his actions. falls from the position of Brahman. (But) a being

=== PAGE 93 ===

3022 
Padma Purii1;1a 
meeting death here (in this holy place), fashioned by (Brhaspati) 
the preceptor of the gods, has no fall from ViኻI).u's position. 
Niirada said: 
7-16. 0 king, the best brahmal).a, having actually seen the 
greatness of this holy place of Brhaspati, proceeded to bathe 
there. Having washed his face, teeth, feet and purified his mind, 
and having put on a garment with five hems, and having tied his 
tuft of hair, he remembered ViኻI)u, with the recitation of the 
verse Asvakriintii .
. . He touched the clay on the bank, made a 
mark (on his forehead) with it, and again got into the water. 
There, plunging into the water and facing the current, he again 
got up. Remembering ViኻI).u and Ganga, purifying the people, 
he again plunged. Again getting up he remembered the seven 
cities1 like Ayodhya ; again dedicating his mind to Govinda, he 
plunged into the water. Having bathed duly he put on garments 
that were washed ; and having come out the best brahmal).a put 
a mark (on his forehead). The restrained one put darbhas into 
his hands, on his feet and tufted hair. He duly performed the 
sandhya (prayer) and offered oblations of three kinds. The 
honoured one made a respectful offering to the Sun with flowers, 
and the best brahmal).a, putting his folded palms on his head, 
saluted (the Sun). The best brahmaQa offered worship to ViኲQu 
whose feet are revered by the world, beginning with an invocation 
and ending with an offering of eatables. Having performed the 
rites and seated comfortably, he, remembering fully the acts of his 
former birth, said to his son like that : 
Siva8arman $aid: 
17-26. 
0 ViኲQusarman, 0 dear one, your words are not 
false, since due to a bath here I had the recollection of my deeds 
in the former birth. 0 glorious one, listen to what I tell you. 
Formerly I was born in the family of wealthy and religious 
merchants. My father named Sarabha lived in the city of 
Kanyakubja. Resorting to the wealth of piety he obtained much 
1 . 
Saptapuri-The seven cities that are said to be so sacred that death at 
any one of them is the giver of eternal 
happiness. They 
are: Ayodhyit, 
Mathurii, Miiyii, Kasi, Kiiiici. Avantikii, and Dviiriivati.

=== PAGE 94 ===

¥1.201 .27-34 
3023 
wealth by trade. He, with his body seized by old age and his 
mind afflicted by anxiety, passed a long time, (but) a son was not 
born to him. The best merchant day and night thought like this : 
'My wealth, though collected to a large extent, is in vain without a 
son. Even a rich person having no son is indebted to his dead 
ancestors, as a cloud full of water but not showing (it), is to the 
ciitakas. A man conquers the three worlds by means of progeny 
having piety as the foremost (virtue), as a king conquers an enemy 
difficult to conquer by means of powerl of three kinds. Pure pro­
geny pleases parents of good minds as sweet and true words that 
are spoken please friends and foes. The glory of the father 
enhances by means of the son's prosperity, as the pure water 
of the ocean by means of the moon. Therefore, a man should 
strive with his body or wealth to beget a son. Without him the 
two (i.e. the body and wealth) of men, having (momentary) life 
like that (of a flash) of lightning, are useless.' 
27-34. When he was thinking like this, the excellent sage, 
Devala, having suprasensual knowledge, came there to give (him) 
a boon. Seeing him coming (my) father got up from (his) seat, 
and giving him a respectful offering and water to wash his feet 
with, saluted the sage with his head (bent down). Having made 
him sit on the seat offered with his own hand, my father asked 
the best sage Devala, of divine appearance : "0 best sage, wel­
come to you. (I hope) there is happiness in your family, and the 
religious observances like penance and study of the Vedas are 
free from obstacles. I hope, guests come to your hermitage at the 
(proper) time. I hope, the trees in your hermitage bear fruits as 
desired by you. I hope, tigers etc. coming to your hermitage do 
not entertain hostility towards deer etc. as brothers towards 
their brothers. Your moving about on the earth gives joy to the 
householders. How (can it be) otherwise? How can they, enga­
ged in (the affairs in) their houses, have your sight? 0 sage, 
granted that you, having your mind fixed on the dust particles on 
ViኲQ.u's feet have absolutely no desire for anything ; but quickly 
tell me about the purpose of your arrival." 
I. 
Sakti : regal power. It has three parts or constituents : Prabhu-sakti 
or Prabhiiva-sakti (the majesty or pre-eminent position of the king himself) ; 
Mantra-sakti (the power of good 
counsel) ; Utsaha-sakti (the power of 
energy).

=== PAGE 95 ===

3024 
Padma PuriiƼta 
Sivasarman said: 
35. 
Thus addressed that sage Devala, honoured by gods, 
desiring to know the thought in his mind, said to the great 
trader : 
Devala said: 
36-41 . 
0 best merchant, you have righteously collected 
much wealth, with which, 0 you knowing piety, perform obliga­
tory and optional rites. A man gets respect in the king's assem­
bly due to wealth, as a good (i.e. brave) warrior gets success in 
a battle due to valour. A householder, getting wealth, makes a 
great advance, as a bull, getting grains ripe in autumn, gets no­
urishment, 0 chief merchant. Relatives and other people do not 
leave the wealthy persons as bees do not abandon a tree with 
flowers containing honey. Due to want of wealth, the house­
holders are fully reduced to feebleness, as thelakes without water 
in summer. 0 chief merchant, that ample wealth is there in your 
house. Why then, are your limbs feeble? (Please) tell me, if it is 
not a secret. 
The merchant said: 
42-45. You are like the fathers specially engaged in instruc­
ting (people) in their welfare. What is there to be concealed by 
men like me, who are (just) like your sons? 0 best sage, due to 
your favour I am fully happy. I am unhappy only due to want of 
a son in my old age. Know that the feebleness of my limbs is due 
to that, 0 best sage. I am afraid (of the repayment) of the debt to 
my dead ancestors, and of falling down (due to the non-repay­
ment). 0 sage, suggest an expedient by which I shall have a son. 
For people like you there is nothing that cannot be done on the 
earth . 
• ivasarman said: 
46-47. Having heard these words of the best merchant, 
Devala, having made his mind steady for a moment, and with 
his eyes closed, thought. Devala, having suprasensual knowledge, 
saw the obstacle in my father's having a child, and recollecting 
(it) said :

=== PAGE 96 ===

Vl.20 1 .48-8 1 
3025 
Devala said: 
48-62. 
0 vaisya, I shall tell you what beautiful idea this 
your religious wife formerly had in her mind. '0 Gauri, 0 you 
dear to Sambhu, when I shall be pregnant, I shall please you 
with foods having the six flavours ;1 (so also) with incense, rows 
of lights, tiimbiilas, dances, songs coming out of lutes, and 
smearings of various kinds.' Your wife having promised like this 
in front of her friends remained devoutly waiting for the time (of 
pregnancy). This your wife conceived in that month only. Then 
all her friends of affectionate hearts spoke to her : "0 fortunate 
one, the pregnancy longed for by you, has been bestowed on you. 
Therefore, do what is promised to the goddess. Otherwise, there 
would be an obstacle due to the change wrought by her. Goddes­
ses give boons or curses when they are (either) propitiated or 
angered." Thus addressed by her friends your highly virtuous, 
loyal wife, full of joy, modestly said to you : "0 lord, I desire to 
worship Gauri fulfilling all desires, due to whose grace I have had 
my desired object.'' 0 best merchant, hearing these auspicious 
words of your wife, you took her to be pregnant. Being delighted 
with great gaiety you instantly ordered your servants to bring 
the requisites of worship. You then gave her all the things brou­
ght by them, so also honey, food, grapes, perfumes, etc. Then 
she, calling all her friends, said to them : "0 friends, taking the 
collection of materials brought for the worship of Ambikii, you, 
taking the requisites of worship, go to the temple of Ambikii, 
and please the goddess with worship laid down by the rules. In 
our family a pregnant woman does not move out of the house. 
Therefore, I shall not come. You (please) go to worship her." 
63-8 1. Thus ordered, the friends, taking the materials (of 
worship), went to the temple of Ambikii, which was the abode 
of intoxicated bees moving (here and there). It was crowded 
with groups of mango trees on which flocks of cuckoos were 
sporting. It was adorned with swans, cranes and geese. There 
were spotless lotuses. It was surrounded by parrots and (other) 
birds talking about the virtues of Mahiideva. There were the 
friends of Umii engaged in sprinkling garlands and creepers. 
There the ground was purified by light plantings of the steps 
1 . ˉa4-rasa: The six flavours : pungent, sour, sweet, saltish, bitter, and 
astringent.

=== PAGE 97 ===

3026 
Padma Purii(ta 
of the lord of Uma. There were celestial trees on the boun­
dary of the water bound by crystal stones. It was resounding 
with (the sound of) the gandharvas that were singing, accompany­
ing the dance ofParvati's lord. There the mango tree, campaka 
trees, koraka trees were slightly tossed by gentle breezes. The 
bowers of creepers had the echoes of the notes of the dancing 
peacocks. It was brightened by her sports, and had flashing bright­
ness like that of jewels. Those (friends) whose husbands were 
alive went there and saluted the daughter of the (Himalaya) 
Mountain ; and going round her (image) keeping {it) to their 
right, they said with devotion : "0 Jagadamba, salutation to you. 
Give us happiness, 0 you who are dear to Siva. Accept this 
offering brought for your worship. There is a merchant Sarabha 
by name. He has a charming wife. She longed for pregnancy. 
This worship of you is for having had it. Due to your grace, 0 
you dear to Sambhu, she had that foetus (i.e. she became pre­
gnant). We have laid before you this offering to worship you. 
In her family a pregnant woman does not move out of the house. 
Therefore, 0 goddess, she has not come ; be pleased and accept 
this (offering)." 0 vaisya, having said like that to her, the friends 
of your wife offered the offering duly and worshipped her with 
sandal etc. Not receiving any reply from Gauri, they returned 
home . They told their friend that Siva's beloved was dejected. 
Hearing these words of them, the vaisya woman, being uneasy, 
thought : 'Why was Gauri not pleased? She knows my devotion 
for her. She knows the worship I offered to her. How can the 
internal (thoughts) and external (behaviour) of men be not 
known to (deities) like her? She also knows the reason for which 
I did not go there. Why was she not pleased by the offering 
made by me? I do not see any other reason for her dissatisfac­
tion, except my not having gone to that charming temple. What 
has gone by cannot be changed. After I am delivered of the 
foetus, I shall go to her temple for worshipping her. Salutation 
to that wife of Mahadeva. May she cause happiness.' 0 vaisya. 
speaking like this, your wife remained carrying the foetus. 
Sivasarman said : 
82. 
OVigtusarman, the father, knowing this former account, 
asked the very wise, best sage, Devala :

=== PAGE 98 ===

VI.201 .83-96 
3027 
The merchant said: 
83-84. 
0 sage, that your daughter-in-law offered the wor­
ship as promised. Tell me the cause of Parvati's dejection ; 
since she herself knows the reason why she did not go there, 
and it was also told to her friends. Then why did she become 
dejected? 
Del' ala said: 
85-86. 
0 best merchant, listen, I am telling you the reason 
for which Parvati's disappointment, destroying the foetus, took 
place. When her friends had returned after worshipping Skanda's 
mother, Vijaya full of curiosity, said to Piirvati : 
Vijayii said: 
87-88. 0 Girija, these ladies devoutly made an offering to 
you. Then, 0 you of an excellent face, why were you not pleased? 
To please you they worshipped you with incense, lights and 
offerings of food. (Instead of being pleased) why are you, on the 
contrary, disappointed? 
Devala said: 
89. 0 merchant, hearing these words of her friend, the 
goddess, honoured by excellent gods, told her friend Vijaya, the 
cause of her dejection. 
Parvati said: 
90-96. I know, 0 friend Vijaya, that the merchant's wife was 
unable to move out of the house through lack of discrimination 
for pregnancy (corrupt reading). Her friends, prompted by her, came 
to worship me. (Deities) like me do not accept the worship offered 
through others' hands. Had her husband come that would have 
been well. Her foetus neglected by me will fall out (immaturely). 
0 friend, if a lady causes that vow which she herself cannot 
practise, to be practised by her husband, then the vow of the two 
does not fail. Or, after having asked (the permission of) her 
husband, she of a concentrated mind, (could get it practised) by 
a pre-eminent brahma1,1a. Since she did not come herself and did 
not worship me, therefore, I have made her pregnancy void and

=== PAGE 99 ===

fruitless. If again, the couple will come and devoutly worship me 
then they will have a son. 
Devala said: 
97-IOia. 0 merchant, that curse was not heard by you, or 
your wife or the friends, so also the favour granted by her. Due 
to this ignorance of you two, not knowing the counter-rite giving 
happiness in this world and the next, a son was not born to you. 
0 merchant, I have told you this reason for your not having a 
child as formerly Vasiį!ha had told king Dilipa. As having 
heard that the king propitiated Nandini, in the same way, along 
with your wife propitiate Gauri, fulfilling desires. As she, being 
propitiated by king Dilipa gave him a son, similarly propitiate 
Gauri ; she will give you a son. 
The merchant said : 
l O l b-103. 
0 sage, who is that king Dilipa, and who is that 
Nandini, having propitiated whom that best king obtained a 
son? Why did the king, leaving the gods like Siva, giving the 
fruits to the three castes, propitiate her only for (obtaining) a 
son? 0 sage, tell me all this that I ask you. Hearing it, I, with my 
wife, shall serve that daughter of the (Himalaya) Mountain. 
Sivasarman said: 
104. 0 Vigtusarman, the sage, having heard these words 
spoken by the polite merchant, my father, commenced telling 
him Dilipa's account, very holy in the world. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED TWO 
The Story of King Dilipa 
Devala said: 
l-16a. 0 very wise one, listen to the divine, wonderful 
account of king Dilipa, which removes the sin of those who hear 
it. In Vaivasvata Manu's family was (born) the best king Dilipa

=== PAGE 100 ===

like Pnicinabarhis in Svayambhuva Manu's (family). That king, 
best among the religious, protecting the earth justly, pleased the 
people with his rich virtues. The queen, the wife of that king, the 
daughter of the lord of Magadha, named Sudakᕥi:Q.a, was like Saci 
to the lord of heaven. Even after a long time had passed, a son 
was not born to the queen. The sovereign, the lord of Kosala, thus 
thought in his mind : 'I have held (under my control) the earth 
adorned with the gems like the ocean, the great Meru mountain 
etc. There is nothing wanting that should lead to my disgrace. At 
the proper time I have practised the three objects of human life. 
I have not opposed it. Yet in the mind of me who am childless, 
there is no happiness. With sacrifices I have worshipped Viኻ:Q.u ; 
so also the best gods like Indra. Everywhere on the earth I have 
got fashioned tanks, groves and wells. I have, with devotion, 
satisfied brahma:Q.as and guests with (presents of) cows, land, 
gold, garments, and with meals having the six (kinds of) tastes. 
Having justly uprooted the kings in battles for the maintenance 
(of piety), I have increased my treasury with great wealth. Those 
who went astray, who were arrogant, who violated their duties, 
who were averse to their dead ancestors and deities, and who 
(therefore) deserved punishment, were punished by me. On the 
five parvan days, the day sacred to Viኲ:Q.u, to the Sun, on a day 
on which a rite in honour of the dead ancestors is performed, on 
the tenth and eleventh days I have not waited upon my wife. I 
never ignored my wife who had bathed at (the end of her) men­
strual period ; so also (I approached her) even at other times 
when requested by her. At that time I had sexual intercourse with 
her who had a passion for it. Thus I have resorted to religious 
practices, worldly pursuits and carnal pleasures at the proper 
time. Due to what defect in my queen am I not having a child? 
VasiHha, my preceptor, who knows the past and the future will 
alone tell me the defect due to which a son is not born to me.' 
Devala said: 
16b-26a. 
Thinking like this, the king, deciding to go to his 
preceptor's hermitage, entrusted Kosala with rich treasures to 
his ministers. Then having worshipped God, the creator of be­
ings, the couple, desiring a son, proceeded to the preceptor's 
hermitage on an auspicious day. The couple, seated in a chariot,

=== PAGE 101 ===

having gone over the path, reached after some days the holy 
hermitage of the preceptor. There the sage received the guests 
that had come there after the offering made to all deities. It puri­
fied the sages in it and the guests also with the rising mass of 
smoke of the material offered into the fire. It was dull due to the 
(slow-moving) deer whose bellies were full due to the mass of 
shoots of diirvas. In the hall of the hermitage the :flock of female 
deer was entering from all sides. It was full of noise of groups 
of birds gathering on the trees which they had turned into their 
abodes. There were tigers and (other) beasts, that had given up 
their mutual hostility. The sound of the recitation of the Vedas 
made by great sages engaged there in muttering (hymns) and 
meditation, had ceased for a while. There the boys were engag­
ed in sports during intermission of study. In it the couple saw 
Vasiኲtha performing the rites. He was seated on a holy seat and 
was steady, and was waited upon by Arundhati. He (i.e. Dilipa) 
saluted the preceptor's feet, and his wife saluted the ladies of 
(the family of) him. The preceptor gave him a blessing, and 
Arundhati gave her one. Preceptor Vasiኲtha, the greatest among 
the adorable, honoured the guest with respectful offerings, and 
asked him like this : 
VasiGtha said: 
26b-30. 
0 greatest among kings, I hope everything is all 
right in your kingdom, in your family and with the people 
following their respective practices. 0 hero, I hope you have 
protected the earth righteously. (I hope) your treasury is grow­
ing like a righteous thought for good practices. 0 king, I hope 
your excellent villagers and citizens are not transgressing their 
limit like the oceans. I hope due to love, due to moving together 
and association, the couples in your cities act like Lakኲmi and 
Viኲ:QU. 0 best king, I hope, the voluntary vows of your subjects 
are fruitful like the Haricandana1 tree in heaven. 
Devala said : 
3 1 -33. 
Having asked like this, that greatest sage, Vasiኲtha, 
pre-eminent among sages, fed the king with eatables procured 
1. Haricandana : One of the five trees of Paradise. The five trees are : 
Mandiira, Parijataka, Santana, Kalpa, and Haricandana.

=== PAGE 102 ===

through the power of his abstract meditation. That old Arun­
dhati, of a generous mind, and full of respect, fed the queen with 
various dishes of cooked food. The steady sage, having held the 
hand of the king who was fed and had saluted him and who was 
seated comfortably, again asked him. 
Vasi$tha said: 
34-46a. 
0 king, what is the use of the kingdom of heaven 
to that king whose kingdom has the seven constituents,1 in which 
the subjects are engaged in their duties, in which kinsmen and 
relatives are pleased, where the soldiers know the science of wea­
pons and missiles, in which friends are obedient, where the 
enemies are subdued, where the minds (of men) are devoted to 
KnJJ.a's worship? 0 lord, the religious kings of the Ikᕭvaku 
family, having produced sons, and having entrusted the king­
dom to them, proceed to practise penance. You are young. You 
have not (as yet) seen the face of your son. Why have you, 
abandoning your kingdom like that, come here? 
The king said: 
0 brahmaJ;.a, with a desire for (going to) heaven, I, having 
abandoned my kingdom like that, have come to your hermitage 
to practise penance. 0 brahmaJJ.a, you have told the truth that 
(kings) born in Ikᕭvaku's family, entrusted their kingdom to 
their sons, and went to the penance-grove. As childhood has 
passed, so this youth that has come will also pass ; and certainly 
old age will come. There is no doubt that a man meets death 
after old age. 0 brahmaJJ.a, when I die, to whom will this king­
dom, without a son's birth, go? Tell me that, 0 preceptor. 
Therefore, I who remain in the kingdom without a child, have 
no feeling of mineness for it, without it. 0 you my preceptor, 
you know the three objects of human life. 0 you treasure of 
penance, quickly tell me the defect after seeing it through medi­
tation, due to which a son is not born to me. Having heard it, I 
shall adopt a remedy against it to obtain a child. 
1. 
Saptiiilga : the seven constituents of a kingdom : king, 
ministers, 
friend, treasury, people, forts, and army.

=== PAGE 103 ===

Devala said: 
46b-47a. Having heard these words of the king, Vasiłtha, 
seeing through concentration the cause of the obstruction in (the 
birth of) a child, spoke : 
Vasi{{ha said: 
47b-53a. 
Formerly, 0 king, you, having waited upon the 
chief of gods, and remembering this your young wife who had 
bathed (after her menstrual period) started for your home. 0 
king, on the way of you who, being eager to have a child, were 
hurriedly going, stood under a divine tree the desire-yielding 
cow. You produced great anger in her by not saluting and not 
doing pious acts like saluting the dust of her venerable feet. 
With great anger she cursed you : "A son will not be born to you 
till you do not serve my progeny." You desiring a son, and there­
fore going quickly to give her (your semen after) menstruation, 
and thinking of that only, did not hear the curse nor did your 
charioteer hear it due to the noise caused by the axles. With this 
your young wife propitiate her young granddaughter, the cow 
Nandini, along with her calf. She will give you a son. 
Devala said: 
53b-54. 
While Vasiłtha, the sage, was speaking like this 
that Nandini, with her udders having (milk) flowing from them 
through affection, came there. Seeing her, the best sage Vasił!ha, 
with his heart delighted, saw her, and showing her to the king, 
again said to him : 
Vasi#ha said: 
55-57. 
0 king, this (cow) of an auspicious name has come 
just when remembered. Therefore, know that the accomplishment 
of your object is near. There is no doubt that when you propi­
tiate her by going after her in the forest and your young wife 
propitiates her in the hermitage, she will, through her favour, 
give you a son. 0 best king, 0 archer, graze her in such a way 
that no wild ferocious animal would attack her. 
Devala said: 
58. Then the ascetic (Vasi$tha) gave the king who talked

=== PAGE 104 ===

little and to the daughter-in-law a good hut to pass their night 
in. There the king with his mind controlled along with his wife 
passed the night, sleeping on the ground covered with grass. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED THREE 
Dilipa Obtains a Son by Propitiating Nandini 
Devala said: 
1 -19. Then in the morning, the king taking (with him) the 
cow Nandini worshipped by the queen with flowers went to the 
forest. Like her shadow the king followed the divine (cow). He 
too ate roots etc. after she had eaten young grass etc. After she 
had sat in the shade of a tree, he sat there. He drank water 
after she had drunk. The king thus served the preceptor's desire­
yielding cow by (offering her) soft grass, driving away flies and 
scratching her (body). Purifying the king's body with dust-parti­
cles raised by her hoofs, she returned to the hermitage in the 
evening. Nandini, as it were, loaded with the great burden of the 
mission of the king, appeared to be going slowly bent by the 
great burden. The queen taking to her sandal, sacred rice grains, 
articles of food, incense etc. went forth to (greet) her near the 
harmitage in the evening. The queen after duly worshipping and 
repeatedly saluting her and having gone round her keeping her 
to her right, stood before her with the palms of her hands join­
ed. She (i.e. the cow) remaining steady accepted that worship 
devoutly offered by the queen and went to the hermitage with 
the two. 0 vaisya, when Dilipa of a firm vow was thus propi­
tiating her, twentyone days passed. Then, with a desire to know 
that king's devotion, she, of a fearless heart, entered Himalaya's 
cave containing young grass. A lion whose arrival was not notic­
ed by the king observing the beauty of the Himalayan peaks, 
forcibly seized Nandini. The cow, as it were, afllicted, wailed 
much with a piteous sound, (thus) producing pity in the heart of 
the king. Then hearing her wailing, the lord of the world with­
drew his eyes from the peaks of Himalaya. The king seeing a

=== PAGE 105 ===

lion of sharp claws (seated) upon the cow with tears flowing on 
her face, was afflicted. Seeing her seized by the lion, the archer 
put his right hand (on his back) to take out an arrow from the 
quiver. The lord of the earth, taking out an arrow from the 
quiver, fixing the arrow on the string, fully drew the string to 
kill the lion. When the lion looked towards him, his entire body 
was paralysed. The king could not discharge the arrow. He, 
therefore, was amazed. Seeing the king like that, the lion, mak­
ing him still more amazed, spoke in a human voice. 
The lion said: 
20-28. 
0 king, I know you to be Dilipa, born in the solar 
family. You too know me to be Siva's attendant called Kum­
bhodara. 0 hero, this devadaru (tree) which is within the range 
of your sight is protected by Parvati of an affectionate heart like 
her (own) son. Once, 0 great king, the soft bark of this (tree) 
was very much torn by a wild elephant scratching his temples 
(against it). Noticing it like that, Parvati, full of pity, kept me, 
turning me into a lion, here, to protect it. And she said to me : 
"0 Kumbhodara, listen. Living here you eat whichever animal 
would come here." Since then, 0 best king, I, obeying her order, 
obeyed by all gods, have been staying in this cave. You should 
not be amazed at your body being paralysed. On this Himalaya 
Mountain Sambhu's great Maya prevails. You cannot strike me 
like another (ordinary) lion, as the lord (Siva) mounts on Nandin 
after getting on my back. 0 hero, go back ; protect this (your) 
body, the means of (accomplishing) all objects. This cow has 
come as my prey through destiny. 
Devala said: 
29. 
Hearing these words of him, along with the address as 
'0 hero', the king with his body paralysed replied to him : 
The king said : 
30-37. 
0 lord of beasts, I salute Siva, the cause of the crea­
tion, maintenance and destruction of the world, and Parvati, the 
mother of the world. 0 lord of beasts, as their servant you are 
respectable to me. Having heard the words which I (shall) speak,

=== PAGE 106 ===

VI.203.38-47 
3035 
direct me as to what l (should) do. You know, Vasiłtha, Brahmii. 's 
son, is our preceptor. This is his cow, Nandini by name, accom­
plishing all objects. He has given (i.e entrusted) her to me to 
propitiate her for the birth of a child (to me) . For a few days 
she has been properly propitiated by me. This mother of a young 
calf is seized by you in the mountain-cave. It is not possible for 
me to release her forcibly from (you), a servant of giva. How can 
I go to that sage without her? She is the granddaughter of 
the desire-yielding cow, fit to be served by the world. There is no 
other cow like this with which I shall please him. Therefore, 
release this best cow, and have me for your meal. I give you my 
body tarnished by infamy. (Having done) like this, there will not 
be the loss of the sage's religious rite, and· you will also have 
your meal. I, giving up my life for the cow, shall reach an excel­
lent position (i.e. salvation) . 
Devala said: 
38-41a. 0 best merchant, when the lion, on hearing this, 
remained silent, the king, conversant with religious practices, 
lay, looking up, before him. On him who was expecting the very 
unbearable jump of the lion fell the shower of flowers dropped 
by best gods. Hearing the words, '0 son, get up', the king got 
up. He saw (there) the cow like (his) mother and not the lion. 
To him, who was amazed, Nandini said : 
Nandini said: 
41b-43. 
By means of the illusion in the form of the lion, I 
tested you. 0 king, due to the sage's power (even) Yama cannot 
think of seizing me ; then what other animals can to do so ? By 
offering your own body you were ready to protect me. Therefore, 
I am pleased with you. Ask for your desired boon. 
The king said: 
44-47. 
For (deities) like you there is nothing that is con­
cealed in the (hearts oO beings . Therefore, 0 mother, you know 
it. Give it to me. Give me a son, continuing my family, born to 
the daughter of the king of Magadha. For pure ones like you, 
nothing is impossible .

=== PAGE 107 ===

3036 
Padma Purii(za 
Saying so the king with his eyes fixed stood before her in 
silence with his palms joined and expecting a reply from her. 
Devala said: 
Hearing these words of the king, Nandini, accomplishing the 
objects of the manes, gods, sages, men and (other) beings said 
these words : 
N andini said : 
48-49a. 
From a cup made of leaves drink to your satisfac­
tion my milk, 0 son. Ordered by the preceptor you will again 
drink the remaining in the hermitage. You will have a son, conti­
nuing your family and knowing (the use of) weapons and missiles. 
Devala said: 
49b. 
Thus addressed by that granddaughter of Surabhi, he 
politely said to her : 
Dilipa said: 
50-53. 
0 mother, I shall drink the remnant of your (milk) 
only after the completion of the rite. Having drunk the nectar of 
your favourable words I am satiated. I do not desire anything 
else like a cataka desiring water from the row of clouds (only). 
Having served you I have had the source of everything as a dul­
lard has due to learning honoured by all men. Even the curse given 
by your grandmother has become a boon for me. Wherefrom, 
except you, can I get a son? How could I have had your sight? It 
has led to a boon only. 0 mother, (deities) like you are to be 
propitiated. Nobody would desire poison from Mahadeva, giving 
the three goals of human life. 
Devala said: 
54-58. Hearing these words, the cow, being pleased, said : 
"Well (said), well (said)", and being very proud, went with him 
to the hermitage. As on the previous day, the king's wife wor­
shipped her on that day also. The cow, as it were, the accom­
plishment of (the king's) object embodied, became pleased. The 
lotus-eyed (wife) of the king, seeing the pleased face of the king,

=== PAGE 108 ===

Vl.203.59-69 
3037 
knew that the object for which an effort was made, has been ac­
complished. Then the couple, along with the cow to whom wor­
ship was duly offered, went to the blessed preceptor. The best 
sage, the treasure of suprasensual knowledge, seeing them with 
their lotus-like faces pleased, delighting them, said : 
Vasi$/ha said: 
59-64. 
0 king, I know the cow is pleased (with you), for the 
lustre on your face today appears to be unprecedented. Surabhi 
(the divine, desire-yielding cow) and the divine tree are known to 
fulfil desires (of beings). Having propitiated her (grand-)child, if 
the object is accomplished, what wonder is there? The tree gives 
every desired (object). She (i.e. Surabhi), the innocent one, even 
though remembered from a distance (gives the desired object). 
Then, what will she not give like the divine river, when devoutly 
served (by remaining) in her vicinity only? Through my (super­
natural) knowledge, I knew the test given to you by her. 0 king, 
you too preserve your righteousness as I am favourably inclined 
to you, as devotion is to the supreme soul, Lakłmi is pleased 
with Vił:Q.U, or Parvati is attached to Siva. Highly devoted to the 
worship of the cow, you with your wife, pass the night here. 0 
great king, you who have completed the rite will go to your city 
tomorrow. 
Devala said: 
65-68. 
0 merchant, he, having, along with his wife, thus 
propitiated the cow, having obtained his desired object, having 
furnished his chariot, secured his preceptor's order, and went 
home. After a few days Raghu was born to that Dilipa. The race 
of Raghu is well-known on the earth by his (i.e. Raghu's) name. 
0 merchant, that man who will read this account of Dilipa, will 
obtain wealth, grains, sons on the earth. 0 excellent Sarabha, 
you too, along with this (your wife), worship according to your 
own way and quickly propitiate Gauri. She will also give you a 
son, the chief of your family, endowed with virtues, and sinless. 
Si'llaSarman said: 
69. The sage, having narrated this very charming and aus-

=== PAGE 109 ===

3038 
Padma Puriiʐta 
picious accoWlt of Dilipa to Sarabha, and having instructed 
him as to the manner of worshipping Ambika, took to his desired 
path. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED FOUR 
The Story of a Merchant Sarabha and a Demon Vikata 
Sivasarman said: 
1-3. 
0 Vigmsarman, then Sarabha, taking the materials of 
worship went with his wife to the temple of Sri Ca:t;J.c;iika. Hav­
ing duly bathed there, they, full of devotion, worshipped Ca:Q.­
c;iika with flowers, incense and lights with a desire for (getting) a 
son. Ambika, devoutly propitiated by them for seven days, 
spoke with a clear mind (these) words directly addressed to them : 
Parvati said: 
4-7. 0 merchant, by means of your very firm devotion I am 
pleased with you. 0 good one, I shall give you a son for whom 
you are striving. Go to the KM:t;J.c;iava (forest) of Indra. Do not 
delay. There is the excellent, very auspicious holy place called 
Indraprastha. There is the holy place, fulfilling all desires and 
fashioned by Brhaspati. With a desire to have a son, bath there. 
By means of a bath there, 0 dear one, you will have a son. 0 
dear one, by bathing there, I obtained Skanda, the killer of foes. 
Sivasarman said: 
8-14. Hearing these words of the goddess, my father, with 
his wife, came here and with a desire for (having) a son bathed 
(here). The intelligent one gave a hundred cows with household 
materials to brahma:Q.as after having gratified gods and the dead 
ancestors properly. After having stayed there with their minds 
controlled for seven nights, the couple with their lotus-like faces 
blooming due to having secured the desired object, went home. 
In the same month my mother conceived ; and when, day by day,

=== PAGE 110 ===

VI.204. 1 5-25 
3039 
nine months passed, I was born in the tenth auspicious month. 0 
VißJ)usarman, the old account which I told you, was heard by 
me from my father when I was twenty years old. Once my 
father, seeing me capable of managing the household affairs and 
being detached from everything, handed over to me (the manage­
ment of) the house. He, having his mind attached to Govinda 
and a religious nature, condemning addiction to objects of senses 
and repeatedly praising devotion for ViįJ.l.U, said to me : 
The father said: 
I S-25. 0 you intelligent one, old age has come to me. My hair 
has grown grey. I shall resort to the lotus-like feet of ViۿJ.l.U, that 
are resorted to by the good. That man whose mind becomes clear 
and quite steady due to service to him, is self-contented, and 
does not long for anything. Having no desire for pleasure and 
aversion to pain, and experiencing the natural (results of) good 
or bad deeds, he, at the end of them, casts his body and becomes 
unborn (i.e. is not reborn). Wealth gives excessive pleasure till 
the bliss of self-realization is not obtained. When it is obtained, 
it (i.e. the former) is small like buttermilk as contrasted with 
nectar. This Maya of VißJ)u is strong. It deludes a man. He like 
one intoxicated by liquor, does not know what is beneficial and . 
what is not. The lord causes, as he wills, active worldly life or its 
absence, through knowledge or ignorance ; for his sport is like 
that of a child. 0 dear one, when an act as told in the Veda is 
done by one desiring its fruit, it is great active worldly life. They 
(i.e. the acts) should be dedicated to the lord. As burnt seeds do 
not grow in spite of effort, similarly acts dedicated through 
desirelessness to the lord of the universe do not (fructify). Sal­
vation is the destruction of (the fruits ot) acts that give pleasure 
or pain. Bondage is their origin. This is the verdict of the holy 
texts. Therefore, I doing acts as told in the Vedas and not desir­
ing their fruits and having devotion for ViįJ)u in my heart, am 
moving in (i.e. visiting) the holy places. Thus experiencing the 
(fruits of) acts that were commenced, and not censuring 
others, I shall destroy the disease due to (the life in) the world 
by drinking the medicine in the form of the company of the 
good.

=== PAGE 111 ===

3040 
Padma Puriiˈra 
Siva8arman said: 
26. 
0 Viխ:Q.usarman, listen accurately to what I said to my 
father after I had heard these words of him : 
The merchant's son said: 
27-33. The people are difficult to please ; they will not give 
you any credit. (They will say :) He has gone leaving the bad 
family being dejected with it. These feet of Viᕨl).u purify the 
three worlds. (Even) when remembered from a distance they re­
move sins. Why do you leave them? 0 father, even a sinful 
person who dies in Magadha, has his sins washed in Ganga. He 
goes to heaven. Do not give up the auspicious (Ganga), (since) 
sixty thousand sons of the noble Sagara, who were burnt by 
Kapila's anger, went to heaven due to her touch. 0 father, do 
not go elsewhere after abandoning her ; that is a series (of steps) 
leading to heaven, that even brings about salvation, and is resor­
ted to by those who desire salvation. Do not disregard Ganga 
honoured by gods, (which is) in your vicinity. 0 glorious one, 
she, when resorted to, will give you what you desire. Even if 
lower animals, through ignorance, would die in her water, they 
would become Brahman. How do you abandon her? 
Siva8arman said: 
34-47a. Hearing these words my father to whom sacred 
law was dear, being averse to all objects of senses, lived in the 
house. Everyday he thrice bathed in Ganga, and always went to 
the house where a Pur8J;la would be (read). 0 son, once listen­
ing to the greatness of Yamuna-tirtha, the wise one heard about 
the greatness of this holy place. The religious merit of this holy 
place full of all holy places is a hundred times better than holy 
places like Avimukta, Haridvara, Prayaga, Puᕾkara, Ayodhya, 
Dvarika, Kaiici, Mathura and others. My father, having heard 
what the learned son had told him, went, unnoticed by all, to 
this holy place, after abandoning the house. My illustrious 
father, serving the feet of Vi}l).u like us came here with a desire 
for salvation. Bathing thrice (a day) at the Nigamodbodhaka 
Tirtha he, the wise one, doing his rites and being desireless, lived 
at this best holy place-the abode of the unborn-for a few 
months. Once he had very severe fever. Due to the great pain

=== PAGE 112 ===

V 1.204.4 7b-60a 
304 1 
(caused) by the fever he, losing his consciousness, fainted. For a 
while the father remained in the condition of unconsciousness. 
When later he regained his consciousness he thought like this : 
•Oh ! misery has befallen me. My very intelligent, religious son, 
who would console me, with my body hot due to fever, is away. 
I have not atoned for the very fearful sin of illicit intercourse. 
What would be my fate? (If) my son will come I shall give him 
the wealth which I have hidden in my house and which even I 
have not seen.' 
Sivaiarman said: 
47b-51a. 
While he was thinking like this, a traveller, troubl­
ed by rain, afllicted by cold, and with his body trembling, enter­
ed the hut. Seeing him asleep, the traveller again went near him, 
and knowing him to be an ascetic saluted him with (i.e. by 
bending) his head, and said to him : "0 sage, why are you sleep­
ing? The evening has come. This sun is setting. This is not the 
time for sleeping for you." When the traveller had just uttered 
these words, Sarabha, my father, with his body hot with fever, 
somehow spoke to him : 
Sarabha said: 
5 l b-58a. 
0 traveller, listen to the words which I anJ speak­
ing to you. Listening to the course of my fate you do (what is 
proper), 0 good one. I am a merchant named Sarabha. My 
house is in Kanyakubja. Though prevented by my wife, friends 
and son I came here on hearing the greatness of this holy place 
told by my son. 0 good one, some months have passed after I 
came here. Now for the last three days I have been suffering 
from fever. My life had departed. Today it has come (back) 
again. 0 good one, some portion of my life still remains (to be 
passed). I have come (back) after having seen Yama's place, and 
due to my good fortune you have come here. 0 friend, take me 
to my house; I shall give you much wealth after reaching home. 
0 you treasure of kindness, favour me. Dig a portion of the 
land here and take my wealth. 
Sivaiarman said: 
58b-60a. 
Having heard this, the wicked-minded rustic, addic-

=== PAGE 113 ===

3042 
Padnza Purii{la 
ted to sensuous pleasures and greedy of wealth, said to him : "I 
shall do as told by you." Speaking like this, and digging the 
wealth from that piece of land, the traveller placed it before 
Sarabha and said : 
The traveller said: 
60b-61 . 
0 chief of merchants, I have taken out this your 
wealth from the piece of land. Quickly give (some money) to me 
to bring a palanquin ; having placed you, suffering from fever, in 
it, I shall take you to your place. 
Sivaiarman said: 
62-76. Thus addressed by him, he gave him three golden 
palas. He too took that money and went to the city of Lava:;ta. 
0 son, having stayed there for a night, he, having paid a couple 
of palas, brought a palanquin with attendants and carriers. The 
wicked one took the two palas for himself only. Having put the 
excellent merchant, Sarabha, in the palanquin, the traveller, 
hastening the carriers, started for Kanyakubja. The traveller, 
repeatedly making him (i.e. giving him) who was oppressed with 
thirst, drink a small quantity of water collected from that holy 
place in a water-pot, proceeded. Then, on the way, they got to 
the bank of a lake to eat (food). Having bathed and eaten food, 
they hastily moved from that place. Having crossed some por­
tion of the land, they were oppressed by thirst. (The traveller) 
drank the water from the water-pot and made Sarabha also 
drink it. Then a very fierce demon, Vikata by name, moving in 
the solitary forest, saw them going. Seeing them, he, with his 
mouth open, and overcome by hunger, and causing the earth to 
tremble with the strokes (i.e. the plantings) of his feet, speedily 
ran (to them), and coming near them speedily, he seized the 
traveller and the carriers at their testicles and he, moving in the 
sky, whirled them. He dropped them who were dead due to being 
whirled only, on the ground. He ate their flesh and drank blood 
from their testicles. Thinking, 'Where will this man suffering 
from a disease go from my presence? I shall (first) eat him up, 
and then drink the water', that chief among the demons then 
threw water from the water-pot on his face. As soon as the water 
was thrown he had the recollection of his former birth. He turn-

=== PAGE 114 ===

Vl.204. 77- 100 
3043 
ed away from killing that Sarabha. He also got the recollection 
of the sin committed by him in his former existence, due to 
which he obtained demonhood though he was born as a br:ih­
ma:g.a. The demon, having recollected his sin, and having got 
knowledge, quickly approached Sarabha (my father) and said to 
my father : 
The demon said: 
77-78. "0 best man, who are you? And who are these men 
whom, I, a mean demon, of a fierce form. devoured? Of which 
excellent holy place is this water, due to whose power even a 
sinner like me had the recollection of my former existence?" 
The merchant said: 
79-86. 
0 best demon, I am a merchant. My home is in 
Kiinyakubja. Travelling to (various) holy places I came to Indra­
prastha. There I suffered from fever due to fate. 0 you having 
bad ways, then an idea to go home arose in me. Some traveller 
troubled by rain came there. I requested him to bring a palan­
quin and take me home. And this is that wise traveller who quick­
ly brought a palanquin and having put me in it, had proceeded 
to my house. Now that traveller and the carriers of the palanquin 
have been eaten by you. Hear of which holy place this water is. 
In the Khiil)gava Vana of Indra there is the excellent river 
Yamuna. On her bank is the best holy place called Hariprastha. 
The preceptor of gods lives there. The holy place accomplishes 
everything (and is called) Nigamodbodhaka, drinking the water 
of which you got the recollection. I have told you all this that 
you had asked me. 0 demon, I shall ask you something. Tell 
(i.e. answer) me quickly about it. Now (and) here you will re­
collect the deeds in your former existence. Tell me what sin you 
committed, due to which you became a demon. 
The demon said: 
87-100. 
Listen. I shall tell you everything. Formerly I was a 
briihma:g.a (born) in the family of those proficient in the Vedas. I 
was wicked and sinful. While playing with dice everyday with 
those conversant with it, I lost much wealth, mine as well as of 
my father. My father having reported my act to the king,

=== PAGE 115 ===

formerly got me having no wealth, out of the house. I went to a 
village nearby. There was a friend, the best briihma:Q.a named 
Devaka. He, respecting me, allowed me to live comfortably in 
his house for a long time. When my friend had gone somewhere, 
I, afflicted by sexual urge, forcibly enjoyed his beautiful wife. At 
that moment only that very chaste lady, drinking strong poison, 
died. Seeing her (dead) I ran away at the dark night. I who was 
running (away) was arrested by the officers of the king. Saying, 
'This is a thief', they cut off my head. Causing me to take up a 
body full of torment the servants of Yama threw me into the 
terrible Raurava hell by Yama's order. Having experienced 
severe torture there for sixty thousand years, I obtained demon­
hood due to that sin only. 0 chief of merchants, I have passed a 
hundred years as a demon. I (shall) tell (you) that remedy due to 
which I (shall) get salvation. 0 good one, you gave me religious 
merit. I shall speak (i.e. tell) it. Listen carefully to that by which 
this water of the excellent holy place got into my mouth. 0 mer­
chant, in that same existence I observed the vow of Viį:Q.u's day 
(i.e. Ekiidasi) due to company and not (my) desire, and kept 
awake at night. Having bathed on the Dviidasi-day I got ready 
to eat also. (At that time) some devotee of Viį:Q.u, having Viį:Q.u's 
form, came to my house. Seeing him I got angry and uttered 
abusive words : "0 hypocrite, 0 wicked one, why are you going 
amidst the ladies ?" 
101-109. 
When, addressed by me, the wise one, who looked 
equally upon respect or disrespect, silently went out of my house, 
my loyal wife, coming towards him, fell at his feet and brought 
the good man to the house. Though insulted by me, the noble 
one did not get angry. He was delighted when honoured by her, 
since he was one to whom enemies and friends were alike. She, 
having seated him on a seat (said to me) : "0 lord of my life, 
make him enjoy (i.e. offer him) food. Conquer the three worlds." 
Thus addressed by the chaste one, I, with a gloomy face, spoke 
to the noble-hearted one, of a pleasing face, "(Please) get up, 
pacify your hunger." Speaking like this, I, prompted by my 
slender-waisted (wife), again seated him on a seat and washed 
his feet. To the judicious one I offered a plate full of food. My 
good wife gave (i.e. poured) water on his hand. I was repeatedly 
prompted by her. The virtuous one, free from perturbation, went

=== PAGE 116 ===

at will, muttering. 'Hare Riima, Hare Knl)a.' 0 merchant, due 
to this religious merit which I, prompted by my wife, did in the 
previous existence, this water of the holy place was brought to me. 
Siva8arman said: 
1 10. 
0 ViᕭJ)usarman, when the demon got up after saying 
these words, the traveller and the carriers, having divine bodies, 
spoke in the sky: 
The traveller and the carriers said: 
1 1 1-1 1 5. 
0 chief merchant, 0 good one, though we met 
with death immaturely, we obtained godhead after drinking this 
water due to your favour. 0 chief of merchants, since we went 
with you through greed of wealth, our desire for wealth had not 
left (us) even at the time of death. By the power of the water of 
this best holy place in our belly, we secured at death the friend­
ship of the lord of wealth. 0 lord, we salute you ; we are going 
to the city of the lord of wealth in aeroplanes which are brought 
by his attendants, which are decorated with various jewels. Go 
to the holy place Nigamodbodhaka. Do not delay. 0 good one, 
along with you quickly emancipate him also. 
Siva8arman said: 
1 16-1 17a. 0 dear one, speaking like this, they went, all 
around, to the northern direction, producing sound in the sky 
and on the earth with small bells of the aeroplanes. Then my 
father, the merchant, spoke to the demon : 
Sarabha said: 
1 17b-1 18. Get up. Quickly take me to the holy place Nigamod­
bodhaka. I, suffering from fever, cannot go there on foot. There 
is none else except you, who (would) take me to that holy place. 
Si'va8arman said: 
1 19-122. The demon, comforting the merchant with the 
words 'All right' put him on his shoulder, and speedily went to 
that purifying holy place. Both, the chief merchant and the 
demon, just bathing at the best of all holy places, stayed there. I 
having heard about the great agony of my father, and urged by

=== PAGE 117 ===

my mother (to go to him) moved from my house. Having come 
here, I saw him, suffering from severe fever. I saluted him with 
(i.e. by bending my) head. He blessed me and said : 
Sarabha said: 
123-125. 0 dear one, why have you come here along a dis­
tant (i.e. long) path? My friend, a demon by name Vikata, has 
come here, and (is) staying here doing his own rites. Get up, and 
fall at his feet (i.e. prostrate before him) like a staff. You should 
not be afraid of him who has given up harmful acts. Now, hav­
ing reached this holy place, he stays near me. 
Sivaiarman said: 
126-127. 
Thus told by my father, that noble Sarabha, I got 
up and fell at his feet (prostrating myself} like a staff. He raised 
me (seizing me) with my arms, and closely embracing me and 
giving me a blessing said, "Welcome to you, 0 my friend's son." 
The demon said: 
128-129. 
0 dear one, you are fortunate that you have come 
here on hearing your father's very severe suffering due to fever. 
Performing the rite with water mixed with sesamum-seeds, you 
will be free from the debt of your dead ancestors. Having bathed 
perform your rites ; (thereby) you will remember your former 
existence. 
Sivaiarman said: 
130-143. 
0 dear one, thus told by him, I, remembering the 
auspicious and inauspicious acts of the former existence, entered 
the holy place having excellent water. Having duly bathed here, I 
came near my father. I asked him the account of the demon : 
"Why has he become religious-minded?" Having heard the 
account of the demon, the carriers and the traveller, I praised 
this best holy place. Thinking, 'I shall go home when my father 
will be free from the disease', I stayed there for ten days. Within 
(those) ten days, while I watched (i.e. before me) the death of my 
father occurred in the (half) quantity of the water of this best 
holy place. Then, VißQ.u, having a body like a fresh cloud, and 
holding Lakßmi close to his bosom, came after having mounted

=== PAGE 118 ===

GaruQa.. He had put on yellow garments ; had four arms ; his 
lotus-like eyes were tawny. He was served by the divine Brahma 
and others along with Andhakarin, and by the kinnaras singing 
the hosts of his virtues. He was being praised on all sides by 
Haha, Hiihii and others. Giving my father identity with his own 
form, and putting him on GarucJa, and surrounded by Brahma 
and others, ViįI}.U went up to heaven. Seeing my father's same­
ness of form with Viįl}.u, I thought, when, at that time, there 
sprang the truth in my heart : 'It is the greatness of this crest­
jewel of holy places that in half of its water a being that is dead 
becomes four-armed. I shall rightly not at all leave this best holy 
place having a strong efficacy urged by thirst for the disease in 
the form of wealth. I shall stay in this hut of my father till (I get) 
freedom from the (fruits of) acts that have been commenced on 
the earth.' Having thought like this and performed proper rites 
(in honour) of my father, I stayed (there) with a desire for salva­
tion along with the demon . 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED FIVE 
The Efficacy of Nigamabodha 
Siva.Sarman said: 
1-10. Once that best demon, having seen a milch cow plun­
ged into mud, entered it to take her up. 'There is a great religi­
ous merit in (i.e. due to) protecting a cow. The protector would 
go to heaven.' He who was thinking like this was seized by a 
crocodile (literally, a water-elephant). He was taken down into 
the water. With his belly full of water, and with his body pressed 
by him, he died instantly. He resorted to a divine form ; an 
aeroplane with an attendant was brought near him sent by gods 
led by Indra. I asked the chief of the demons, going (to heaven) 
after having died here in this great holy place, very difficult to be 
reached, and giving salvation, "0 intelligent and divine one, how 
did you reach heaven?" Thus addressed, he said, "0 innocent 
one, I longed for it." When that meritorious one had gone to

=== PAGE 119 ===

3048 
Padma Puriit:a 
heaven, the place of the meritorious ones, I, remaining alone, 
was taken to ViᕭJ}.u, the good resort. With a concentrated mind, 
I, while going, standing, sleeping, keeping awake, bathing, con­
stantly meditated upon that lotus-eyed one only. "0 ViᕥJ}.U, I 
have sought lhe shelter of your lotus-like feet. I have no longing 
for the position of Brahma, Siva or Indra." 0 dear one, making 
my mind free from the (longing for) objects of senses, and 
soliciting that Puruᕥottama (i.e. ViᕭIJ.U) only, I lived at this great 
holy place. 
Vi$t:uiarman said: 
1 1-14. When, while staying at this great holy place, you 
died, then how did you get a birth again? This is my doubt. The 
traveller and the carriers, on their having ignored the restriction 
(laid down) at this holy place due to greed for money, met with 
death from the demon (and) went to heaven on drinking the 
water of this great holy place. So also the demon meeting with, 
at his will, death from the crocodile, went to heaven while you 
were looking on (i.e. in your presence). There is no (re)birth 
(for a man whose) death takes place there. 
Nlirada said: 
1 5. 
0 Sibi, having heard the ausptctous words of his 
son, Sivasarman told him the former account, the cause of his 
birth. 
Sivasarman said: 
16-19. 
0 ViᕭJ}.usarman, listen to this cause of my birth. I am 
telling it to you. Having heard it, be free from doubts. Once when 
I had resorted to meditation while worshipping ViᕭJ}.u, Durvasas, 
irascible by nature, came to my hermitage. Not aware of his 
having arrived (there), I, intent upon meditation on Viᕭ:Q.u, 
remained in that condition recollecting (Viᕭ:Q.u's) name for a long 
time. The sage, standing for a while, full of anger and with his 
eyes red, spoke loudly to himself these (words) : 
Durviisas said: 
20-25. Oh ! I, Atri's son, born from the womb of Anasuya, 
a portion of Siva, am thus excessively neglected by this human

=== PAGE 120 ===

VI.205.26-45 
3049 
being : This wicked man even ignores me who caused lndra to 
fall from the kingdom of the three worlds ! Who are you that are 
not afraid of me who am like the destructive fire at the end of the 
world, since I have the greatest worth barring (that of) the three 
gods? How is it that that deity whom he is meditating upon, 
does not advise him that Yama has come in an embodied form? 
Indeed he is meditating upon Viß:Q.u, the lord of the world, being 
satisfied with the nectar of meditation upon whom he does not 
have the knowledge of his surroundings. Let him meditate upon 
Vił:Q.u, Brahma, Siva, or any other (deity). He should be punished 
by me by all means. He has disregarded me. 
Sivasarman said: 
26-45. Thinking like this, he roused me. and with his eyes 
red due to anger, cursed me who had become conscious. "How 
will that desire, which you, ignoring me, had in your mind at the 
time of meditation, come true at all?" 0 dear one, when, after 
having spoken like this, the sage born of Atri, moved (to go), I 
dreaded with fear, seized his feet, and said like this : "0 best 
sage, forgive me ; give up your anger. (People) like me do not 
properly know the deeds of (sages) like you. Now you have given 
a fearful curse to me who am innocent. Favour me who am 
polite. Show favour for the end of (i.e. ending) your curse." Thus 
addressed, Durvasas, giving up his anger, became cool. 0 darl­
ing, is it not proper, since he is Siva (himself)? The wise one said 
to me : "You, being the best brahma1;1a, will meet with death 
here only, and will not be reborn ." Having thus favoured me 
that Siva (i.e. Durvasas) left, after staying there that day and 
being honoured by me with a hospitable reception. I, having 
thought that the sage's words would not be untrue, and repenting 
in my mind, went home : 'Oh ! to me, having my hermitage in a 
holy place, and constantly meditating upon (ViłJ).u) the sight of 
Lakłmi's lord has become difficult to have in this existence, like 
that of a cloud to a cataka in Caitra and Vaisakha, causing heat? 
Wherefrom has this one, causing obstacle in my course to 
VaikuJ).tha come like a cloud (coming in the way) of a man who 
has set out (on a journey) ? It is not the fault of the sage. It is 
indeed the desire of that VißJ;l.U only. Having well appeared be­
fore me, he has given me another (i.e. a new) existence. I, scared

=== PAGE 121 ===

of the worldly existence, should seize the lotus-like feet of Viß:Q.U, 
as a traveller heated by the heat of summer (takes to) the shade 
of a tree. What is the use of the transient wealth, children, wife 
and other relatives to me who am muttering 'Govinda, Parama­
nanda (the highest joy), Rama.' Not censuring other acts, and 
resorting to Viß:Q.u, and remaining like a neutral person among 
the members of my family, I shall enjoy what is destined.' 0 dear 
one, thnking like this, I, after having bathed in the water sacred 
to Viį:Q.u, came home after a few days. I told my mother and 
relatives about the death of my father. Hearing (the news) they 
lamented ; they did not know that this (worldly existence) is 
transitory. Having no longing for the worlds like Satya, I remai­
ned in the house and died on the bank of Ganga, resorted to by 
the sages. Due to the curse of the sage Durvasas, I was born in 
the family of Viį:ou's devotees. Having died at this holy place, I 
shall reach Viį:Q.u's feet. 
Niirada said: 
46-51 . 0 noble one, thus the two best brahma:oas talking to 
each other about the sins committed by them in their former 
existence, and thinking about Viß:ou's foliage-like feet, remained 
at the holy place fashioned by the preceptor of gods. Thinking 
about and remembering Viß:Q.U, of lotus-like eyes, of four arms, 
having a body dark blue like a cloud, and shining with his wea­
pons and ornaments, they got absorption into Viß:Q.U. The story 
of this excellent holy place which is the one called Indraprastha 
has been told. 0 Sibi, listen to its fruit. A man obtains the 
same fruit by devoutly listening to it as is obtained by him on 
bathing in Ganga or by giving away his daughter (in marriage). 
There is no doubt that that fruit which is produced on the earth 
at the birth of a son, or by a bath in the water of Godavari when 
Jupiter is in the Zodiacal sign of Leo, is obtained by listening to 
it. There is no other holy place giving all objects than this best 
holy place, by dying at which even lower animals become four­
armed (ones) .

=== PAGE 122 ===

VI.206. 1 - 1 7 
305 1 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED SIX 
A Woman Should Never Desert Her Husband 
Saubhari said: 
1 . That religious king, the wealthy Sibi, having heard those 
words of the sage Niirada, was pleased in his mind, and (thus) 
spoke to the best one : 
Sibi said: 
2-3. 
0 sage, you have properly described the greatness of 
this excellent holy place Nigamodbodhaka. I have heard it ; that 
removes sins. 0 sage, there are hundreds of holy places in this 
Indraprastha. Tell me the greatness of some other holy place, if 
there is any. 
Niirada said: 
4-17. 0 king, I shall tell you what formerly took place in 
this Dviirakii which is situated within Indraprastha. Listen to it 
from me. In Kiimpilya there was a certain briihmal)a, Cupid 
embodied as it were. He attracted the hearts of all women with 
his excellent amorous actions. He was skilled in the science of 
music. His voice was sweet like that of a cuckoo. Once, that very 
intelligent one, holding a lute in his hand, repeatedly playing 
upon it, singing, without an equal, with voice sweet like that 
of a cukoo, moved in the city. Having heard the sound of his 
song, full of melody and protracted tones, the wives of citizens 
abandoned their domestic work and went (to him). Fascinated 
by his handsome form, they could not b዇ar the force of lust. 
Hearing the song actually they were disturbed. What other self­
controlled and wise person than the two (viz. Brahmii and Siva) 
is able to conquer Cupid who created a longing for Sarasvati in 
the mind of Brahmii, or who made half of Siva's body to be given 
to Piirvati? And women are fickle by nature. Even the chaste 
ones were unable to put up with the excitement caused by Cupid. 
What could be said, 0 king? Cupid is difficult to be conquered 
in the world. They went everywhere he, singing with his throat 
and lute and fascinating with his tone, went. Their husbands, 
sons, brothers and fathers came there, and threatening them,

=== PAGE 123 ===

3052 
Padma Purii{la 
took them (back) to their own homes, 0 king. When they again 
looking for him, approached him, the citizens told the account 
to their king. The king too called the best brahmaQ.a and asked 
him in private : "0 best brahmal}.a, tell me by means of which 
charm you fascinated the women in the city. I shall give you 
much wealth. Othewise I shall drive you out of my kingdom. 
There is no doubt about it." 
Niirada said: 
18. Hearing these words of the king, the best brahmal}.a, 
the ocean of handsomeness and virtues, spoke to him true 
words. 
The Briihmatza said: 
19-21. 0 king, I, a beggar, have neither a charm nor a herb ; 
but all the women in your city have no control over their senses. 
0 king, the women in your city cannot put up with the force of 
lust on seeing my handsome form and hearing the souud of my 
songs. 0 great king, what can I do? 0 lord, what is my fault? 
The order of the king, like (the fruits of) former acts, can never 
be resisted. 
Niirada said: 
22. 
0 king Usinara-Sibi, when the brahmal}.a was telling like 
this all citizents, coming together, spoke thus to the king : 
The citizens said: 
23-27. 0 king, this brahmal}.a has fascinated the wives of the 
citizens. They do not remain in their houses. They cannot be 
stopped by us. 0 lord, if this one who infatuates the women lives 
in the city, then today (only) we shall go to other countries. Our 
bull-god of the nature of havya and kavya {oblations to gods and 
dead ancestors) has gone(?). They have started going after him 
like a cow from the field of sinners . 0 lord of men, we, abandoned 
by glory, have no other shelter to seek. They will follow him as 
the female elephants follow their lord. How can Lakˋmi (wealth) 
remain in a vacant house? Since these three, viz. piety, worldly 
riches and house, depend upon the wife, one that depends upon

=== PAGE 124 ===

v 1.206.28-40 
3053 
the wife's piety and wealth cannot remain , when the two are 
lost. 
Niirada said: 
28. 
When the citizens were speaking like this, their wives 
came to the king, sat there, and thus spoke to one another : 
The wives of the citizens said: 
29-3 1a. 
Our minds open excessively on seeing this brii.h­
ma:Q.a of a charming form as lotuses in the water do on seeing the 
lord of the day and they clese in his absence as the white lotu­
ses close without the moon : come, together we shall seize (and 
take) him before the king. He is not fit to be killed, nor are we. 
What will the king do? 
Niirada said: 
3 1 b-33. Saying so, they hurriedly seized the best brii.hma:Qa, 
when their own husbands were watching and in front of the king 
himself; and they said to him : "0 lord of our minds, come to our 
house, and quickly pacify (the agony) tormenting our hearts. 
Today we cannot remain (i.e. live) without you." Hearing these 
words of them, the brii.hma:Q.a replied : 
The briihma1)a said: 
34-40. 
I am your son ; you are my mothers. Leaving your 
houses, why are you wandering? Propitiate your own lords, 
since, when the husbands are propitiated, wives certamly (enjoy) 
the two worlds, and Vi኱:Q.u, the lord of gods, is pleased. (And) 
when he is pleased, what is difficult to be obtained? That woman 
who, forsaking her own husband, resorts to another (man) with 
a desire for enjoyment, invites censure and goes to a fearful hell. 
She, the deceiver of her husband, lives there till the end of the 
kalpa. Again having moved out of it, she reaches the state 
of an inanimate object. Even from there, she obtains beasthood 
for many existences. Then freed from that (stock) she is born as 
a crippled one. Knowing the sinful course to be like this, turn 
away from Cupid. Otherwise at the end (i.e. fall) of your body, 
you will go to a very fearful hell. You will not have the pleasure

=== PAGE 125 ===

3054 
Padma Purava 
that you desire to get from me. It is your sin, since it is a fall of 
a human being. 
Narada said: 
41-43. 
Having heard his words like these, and seeing the 
faces of their husbands, they hung down their faces through 
shame like creepers struck by a (stormy) wind. The very terrible 
fire of lust of the women in the city went out due to the cold 
water in the form of the words of the chap. 0 king, all of them, 
condemning Cupid as one that fascinates even gods like Brahma, 
Indra, got up, and walked (away). 
The women said : 
44-52. 
Fie upon this, committing sinful acts, an axe to the 
wood in the form of good character ! He who has struck Cupid 
for the happiness of passionate beautiful women, is blessed. 
What should we say to Rukmi.Q.i, venerable to the world, who 
carried in her womb this Rahu, named Pradyumna, eating the 
Moon of the good character of women? If that mean god comes 
within the range of our sight again, we shall throw him into the 
fire of the eye of the lord (Siva) by meditating upon him. He, the 
sinful one, whom Vi!?.Q.U, delighted in self, created, made Viዃ.Q.u 
dear to (or the lover of) sixteen thousand women. Then what can 
be said about us? 
Having thus censured that Cupid, the women praised that best 
brahma:Q.a who preserved his own character and that of them also, 
0 king. 'Blessed is that mother of this (best brahma:Q.a) who gave, 
birth to this excellent brahma:Q.a who vanquished Cupid and pre­
served the virtue of others ! Fie upon us who were laughed at by 
the king's men, who were vanquished by Cupid, and by whom 
great sin was committed through speech and mind !' All the 
women who were thus thinking, who were of the same view, being 
admonished by the brahma.Q.a's words, went to their respective 
houses. Then king Kampilya also, having honoured that brah­
ma.Q.a with garments and ornaments, sent him to the house of 
that good man. 
53-63. As time went on, the powerful lord of Karii.!?a besie­
ged lord of Kampilya and his city with armies (i.e. a large army). 
A great war took place between the two. He (i.e. Karii. sa king)

=== PAGE 126 ===

Vl.207. 1 -2 
3055 
got him killed. He plundered the entire city and the brave ones 
were killed everywhere. Those women eating (i.e. drinking) 
Kii.lakii!a (poison) died. They had not made any atonement for 
that sin. Due to that sin all those were born as demonesses with 
huge bodies and causing fear in the city of the demon called 
Bhi኱al).a. All the women in the city were killed by Haniimat, 
occupying the banner of the chariot of Vi኱l).U relishing sacrifices. 
The same were again born as demonesses on the path to Maru. 
They were oppressed by hunger and thirst, and caused fear at 
their sight. Thus due to the sin committed by means of speech 
and mind, they obtained two existences, mixed with (i.e. along 
with) the existence as demonesses. Due to their sin the two cities 
along with their kings were destroyed. Therefore, 0 lord, women, 
fearing sin, should never resort to another lover even through 
speech or mind. Women desiring salvation should not desert 
their husband even though he is diseased, dull, poor or blind. 
0 Sibi, I have told you in great detail about the sin produced 
through devotion to another lover by means of speech or mind, 
so also the fruit of it obtained by these (women). By the drops 
(of water) of the pious Dvii.rakii., seen by those going to Indra­
prastha, falling on their bodies, the women in the city reached 
heaven after abandoning the severe condition of corpse-eaters, 
which they had reached due to their having resorted to another 
lover, and obtained the form of divine ladies delighting gods. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED SEVEN 
The Story of Vimala 
Saubhari said: 
1 . 0 son of Dharma, having heard these words of that noble 
Nii.rada, king Sibi politely spoke these (words) : 
Sibi said: 
2. 
0 best sage, how did those demonesses, moving on the 
path to Maru, get the water from this Dvii.rakii.?

=== PAGE 127 ===

3056 
Padma PuriiQa 
Niirada said: 
3-9. 0 king, listen to the story, pure and destroying sin, of 
a brahmal}.a named Vimala, living in the valley of the Himalaya 
(mountain) . In the Himalayan valley lived a brahmal}.a by name 
Vimala. He honoured gods, sages, his dead ancestors, and guests. 
He was engrossed in worshipping Vi኱l}.u's feet. He knew the Vedas, 
the Veda.tigas and religious practices. His mind was (devoted to) 
listening to the Pural}.a containing the hosts of Vi዆u's virtues. 
In his old age a son was born to him due to Vi኱l}.u's grace. The 
father then named him Haridatta (literally, given by Vi኱J.lu). He 
duly performed his (sacraments like) shaving etc. Haridatta 
received (the knowledge of) the Vedas from his teacher. Having 
duly studied the Vedas, having paid the fee of the teacher, he, 
being detached, took to renunciation, (having) completely (drop­
ped) the two stages (viz. the second and the third) of human life. 
On coming to know that act of him, his mother who loved her 
son, bathing (i.e. making wet) her pair ofbreasts with tears due 
to separation from her son, wept. 
The mother said: 
10-16. 0 dear one, like a bee abandoning coarse grass, where 
are you going, leaving me who am helpless, and your father 
stricken with old age? Due to service of the feet of Vi኱l}.u, I got 
you in my old age. You have resorted to his feet for salvation 
after having abandoned me. 0 dear one, I was certainly a fool, 
since having propitiated that eternal Vi኱l}.U I longed for you, the 
unsteady one, for getting happiness. 0 child, you are intelligent 
since you are resorting to Vi኱l}.U, the aU-in-all. You too are look­
ing upon this transient world as permanent. What should I do ? 
Where should I go? Maya cuts off my understanding, as a 
strong person having a weapon cuts off a plantain tree produc­
ing good fruits (right) from its roots. Blessed was king Dasara­
tha who died due to agony (caused by separation) from Rama. 
Fie upon me who am (still) sustaining my life (even) after separa­
tion from my son ! Come, appear before me, emancipate me. 0 
dear one, 0 ocean of virtues, speak to your father words con­
sisting of (the words from) the Vedas.

=== PAGE 128 ===

VI.207. 1 7-27 
j\J.) / 
Narada said: 
1 7-20a. 
Weeping like this. 0 king, the mother fell on the 
ground like a digit of the moon due to its being cut off (from 
other digits) given to Riihu. 0 best king, the briihma]J.a sage came 
there. Seeing her fallen on the ground, he said : :'What is this? 
Why has she, with her hair dishevelled and garments and orna­
ments disordered, fallen on the ground? Is Haridatta well?" All 
those her friends said to that Vimala, 0 king : 
The friends said: 
20b-2 1 . Your son, Haridatta, having studied the Vedas, 
having paid the teacher's fee, and being highly devoted to Vi኱JJ.U, 
has renounced the world. Due to the grief caused by separation 
from him she has fallen on the ground. 
Narada said: 
22. 
Having heard these words of them, the very wise Vimala 
roused his wife with this nectar of his words. 
Vimala said: 
23-26. 
0 (my) wife, get up. Listen to the words spoken by 
me. Why have you fallen down and are dejected? Your son who, 
knowing this (world to be) transient, has resorted to Vi኱JJ.u's 
foliage-like feet, is blessed. You too, his mother, whose son 
has served the feet of Vi኱JJ.U, are blessed. He will also undoub­
tedly emancipate me, (our) family, and men born in our family, 0 
auspicious one. What a lot of difference is there between this 
unsteady world, and the service of Vi኱t;tu's feet, giving an eternal 
world ! Thinking like this kings like Bharata resorted to Vi኱t;tu. 
So (has) your son (done), 0 chaste one. Unless 
a wise man, 
free from lust, resorts to the foliage-like feet of Vi኱t;tu, in every 
existence (of him) his wife, wealth, house, body, relatives cause 
grief to him. 
Narada said: 
27. 
Thus admonished by him, the wise one, she got up from 
the ground, and with a piteous voice spoke to her husband :

=== PAGE 129 ===

3058 
Padma Purii!Ja 
The wife said: 
28-3 1 . 0 darling, I understand all that you have said well. 
I am very much tormented since I do not see a leader for our 
family. What is the use of service to Vi኱Qu, when there is the 
great holy place in the form of a son? Even if we meet with death 
in our house only, we shall have (the fruit of) both the worlds 
then (i.e. when we have a son). Men indeed should try to beget 
a good son ; since sons emancipate their ancestors from the ocean 
of the mundane existence. 0 you very intelligent one, if you desire 
a son, the foremost in the family, then, with a desire to have a 
son, resort to the creator and supporter of all beings. 
Niirada said: 
32-36. 
Hearing these words of her Vimala, the briihmaoa, 
said : "With a desire to have a son, I shall go to Brahmak኱etra 
Prayaga." Saying so, the brahmal)a set out and went to Hari­
dvara. Having duly bathed there, he then went to Indraprastha 
after a few days. 0 brave one, having bathed there (at the holy 
place) giving (whatever is desired) to everyone that solicits, in the 
evening, and having eaten (food) he slept at night on the bank 
of YamWla. Near that Vimala sleeping at night, the lord of gods 
along with all holy places quickly came after having mounted 
on a swan. Having come he raised Vi mala, desiring a son ; and 
the best got spoke sweet words. 
Brahmii said: 
37-43. I know the desire hidden in your mind. Since there 
is no way to fuUU it, listen to the reason. Once all gods, led by 
me and Siva, gathered on the peak ofMeru, and praised ViዃW.u 
for success. Being praised by gods like me lord Vi኱l)u was pleased 
then, and said : "Choose (a boon)." Thus addressed by Vi኱l)u, 
all gods, having received (from him) a boon as desired, went to 
their respective houses. I said : "0 lord of gods, give me an 
excellent boon. May my holy place, Prayaga, give all the desired 
objects. May another holy place of me at Indraprastha be a 
hundredfold (meritorious). 0 sinless one, I have properly chosen 
it from you." Having heard these words of me, the lord then 
said to me : "Let it be so," and again spoke (certain) words. Listen 
to (those) words.

=== PAGE 130 ===

VI.207.44-60a 
3059 
The lord said : 
44-56a. 
In Indra's Khii:Q.c;iava forest there is an auspicious 
holy place on the bank of Yamuna, called Indraprastha. Those 
who die there are equal to me. 0 Brahman, my own city of 
Dviirakii is a hundredfold more meritorious than when formerly 
it was at the shore of the ocean. A man who, having ignored it, 
resorts to another holy place, does not obtain the fruit of (a visit 
to) the holy place. This statement is not false. A man would 
obtain the merit said to be accruing from all holy places. The 
city of Dviirakii preserves another illusory holy place. He who, 
having bathed at other holy places, and having performed vari­
ous rites, will come here, will certainly get the fruit of those holy 
places. 
0 best briihma:Q.a, having spoken these words, Vi኱:Q.U dis­
appeared. I too went to my world situated below VaikU:Q.ወha. 
Kiisi is said to be a hundredfold more meritorious than Prayiiga, 
my holy place. Similarly the hilly place Nigamodbodhaka is a 
hundredfold more meritorious than Kiisi. This group of seven 
holy places is said to have the fruit equal to the three. 0 briih­
mal)a, to him who goes to Prayiiga without ignoring these three, 
I give his desired objects. Not otherwise. Some sages say that the 
seven, Ayodhyii etc. , are equal in merit. Indraprastha is said to be 
hundredfold superior to those. 0 briihma:Q.a, having come to that 
holy place Sri Dviiraka, which gives all the desired fruits, bathe 
there with the desire for a son. When the hundred names are 
uttered, unlimited religious merit accrues from them. This holy 
place will give you a son, the foremost in your family ; and due 
to your bathing here, Vi኱:Q.U will be pleased. 
Niirada said: 
56b-58. 
Speaking like this, Brahmii, the lord of the chief of 
gods, vanished. Vimala also then bathed, and offered oblations 
to gods etc. Thus said the pious one : '•o Dviirakii, dear to Kn:Q.a, 
give me a son, your devotee. Salutation to you." When the 
briihma:Q.a spoke like this, there was (heard) a divine voice. 
The divine voice said: 
59-60a. 
Due to the favour of this holy place, the crest-jewel

=== PAGE 131 ===

3060 
Padma PuriiiJ,a 
of all holy places, you will have a son, knowing the truth of 
religious practices and continuing your family. Go home ; do not 
delay. The bath is well done. 
Niirada said : 
60b-69. 
Having heard that (divine) voice, he, trusting in the 
birth of a son (i.e. trusting he will have a son), took water of 
Dviirakii in a water-pot, and left (the place). On the way he met 
his friend living on the Malaya mountain. He was going (back) 
home after having visited all holy places. He told him all the 
account consisting of his dialogue with Brahmii. He too was 
amazed on hearing what had taken place at the holy place of 
Dviirakii. The pious one said : "0 friend, listen to my words. I 
desire to visit all those holy places that are fashioned in Bhiirata. 
0 friend, take me to that holy place, granting all desired objects 
and show it to me. On the earth those friends who oblige their 
friends are excellent. In the world none is like them-(even) the 
father, the mother, or the son. All relatives desert a poor man. 
But friends, afflicted by his grief, do not leave the friend. A 
friend emancipates his friends plunged into the ocean of mundane 
existence. Having taught me the devotion to Vi኱t;1u, capable of 
destroying existences, you have become my best friend. 0 oblige 
me. 0 briihma:J;la, show me the best holy place called Dviirakii." 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED EIGHT 
The Greatness of Dviirakii 
Niirada said: 
1 . Taking the briihmat;1a (with him) Vimala came here to 
Dviirakii. And the two wise ones with a desire for devotion for 
ViዃQu bathed there. In the sky there was again heard the divine 
voice, deep like that of clouds. 
The divine voice said: 
2. 
Listen, 0 best briihrnat;1as, this is Vi኱t;1u's holy place. You

=== PAGE 132 ===

Vl.208.3-2 1 
3061 
will have, due to the grace of this holy place, devotion for ViÞQu, 
due to which people abandon the strong infatuation due to 
Miiyii. 
Niirada said: 
3-4. 
The two best briihmaQas having heard the incorporeal 
speech, said to each other : "This is VißQu's favour." The two, 
having duly bathed there and obtained great devotion for VißQu, 
saluting him and talking to each other walked. 
The briihmal)as said: 
5-7a. 
As we two, walking on the path came in contact with 
each other, as on the earth contact with a house and wife etc. 
takes place, so the future separation of us, being on the way, is 
(but) proper. So is (the contact and separation from) the wife, 
son etc. being in the mouth of tiger in the form of Death. That 
man who realising the contact with wife and sons to be transient, 
would ever resort to and worship VißQu, is blessed. 
Niirada said: 
7b-l la. "(Please) remember me. I am your servant, resorting 
to your feet. You may send me a message." Saying like this, they 
went home. 0 king, listen, how that friend of Vimala, going along 
the path, brought about the liberation of the demonesses. The 
briihmal}a, while going, reached that place void of water, where 
the demonesses scorched by sins stood oppressed by hunger and 
thirst. Then they, seeing from a distance that briihmaQa with a 
pot containing water in his hand, said to one another: 
The demonesses said: 
l lb-13a. 
Some traveller, holding a pot of water in his hand 
is corning. Our hunger and thitst will be at least partially satis­
fied. We shall eat him up and drink the water in the pot in his 
hand. We are oppressed by hunger and thirst for a hundred 
years. 
Niirada said: 
1 3b-2 1 . One said : "Having first eaten his hot liver, then 
having drunk his blood, I shall gain life." The other said : "How

=== PAGE 133 ===

3062 
Padma Purii1;1a 
much material does he have, 0 Gajanana? Even for me,· Vyii.ghra­
nana, it is not seen to be enough for drinking." Another one called 
Rathacakra, (said) : "Hear my words. From one I shall fashion 
an ear-ring, and a girdle from (other) intestine." Another one said : 
"I, skilled in gambling, will play dice in the gambling hall with 
his sixteen teeth, made black from one side." All of them, thus 
speaking among themselves, ran to the brahma:Q.a, with their 
mouths opened, tongues lolling and bright great arms. Seeing 
them coming, the brahma:Q.a was overcome by fear. 0 king, he 
protected himself all round, as told in the Vedas. The demo­
nesses of fierce valour having come (to him), stood away from 
him. 0 king, they were repelled by his lustre and hymns. And 
they said : "Tell us, who are you? Wherefrom have you come? 
Seeing you our mind is delighted. 0 brahma:Q.a, what will be the 
fruit of touching your feet? Therefore, place your lotus-like feet 
on our heads." 
Niirada said: 
22a. Hearing their words Haridattaja (Haridatta's son?) said : 
The briihmar)a said: 
22b-23. 
I am a brahma:Q.a who has come after visiting holy 
places. Now I am going to Pu኱kara. What do you desire? Since, 
if I am able to give it, I shall do so. 
The demonesses said: 
24. 
0 brahma:Q.a, tell us in which holy places you bathed. 
All those are meritorious. Liberate us from this bad existence, 
giving terrible agony due to great hunger and thirst. 
The briihmar)a $aid: 
25-38. 
From my hermitage I went first to Haripura, A vanti. 
From there I went to Dvarakii.. Having bathed in the water of 
Somodbhava, I went to the holy place Prabhasa situated on the 
shore of the sea. Then I bathed at the highly purifying Setuni­
bandha. From there I came to the very holy Kiኻkindha where 
Rama had killed Valin, the lord of the host of monkeys. From 
there I came to the Sarasvati temple situated on the bank of 
Narmada where Sarasvati, served by all, dwells. Then I reached

=== PAGE 134 ===

VI.208.39-49 
3063 
VeJ).i, saluted her and saw the two cities Sivakaiici and Vi኱oukaiici 
in the southern part of India, due to having died where a man 
becomes Siva and Vi኱:Q.U. From there I reached Utkala where 
lord Vi኱J).u, actually giving the four ends of human life and the 
desired objects to his devotees dwells. Having duly worshipped 
him, and eaten the eatables offered to him, I went to Ganga­
sagara which was his favour only. Then having duly gratified 
gods, sages and (my) dead ancestors, I came to that place where 
Ganga had a hundred faces (i.e. flew in a hundred courses). Then 
having gone to Gaya and having duly offered pio9a, endowed 
with Tulasi blossoms, sandal and water to the dead ancestors, I 
came to Kosala, to Sarayii. which by means of her touch cloudy 
due ዉo the water, had purified all people. There is a holy place 
called Gopratara difficult to be reached (even) by gods. 0 demo­
nesses, there I did the acts like bathing etc. From there I reached 
Kasi, the capital of the lord of Uma. Having saluted god Visve­
svara, so also Bindumadhava, I devoutly bathed in the Jiianavapi 
at Ma:Q.ikarQ.ika. Having stayed there for three nights, I again 
came to Prayaga where actually Brahma (lives) on the fourteenth 
day of the bright half of Pau኱a. 
39-49. 
At a dawn of Magha, having bathed there, again 
from there I came to Naimi኱a on the bank of Gomati, where all 
holy places, with their enchantment dwell. From there I reached 
Mathur a where there is the. holy place called Visranti. Near it is 
a holy, excellent pool called Asiku:Q.Qa. There very holy Yamuna 
giving everything and having the holy places of Kr኱Q.agailga, 
Dhruva, Krii.rakesi, Kali exists. On both her banks are forests shin­
ing with splendour and producing all holy places. Having bathed in 
them and drunk (their water) a man is not born again. From there 
I came to the holy, excellent city of Hastinapura. There is the best 
river Gailga that rose from lotus-like feetofVi኱Q.u. Then coming to 
the place of Naraya:Q.a situated in the Himalayan region and seeing 
Miidhava (there) , I came to Kedara. Having worshipped Visvesa 
(there) and having drunk the water of Hamsa (lake), I came to 
the very holy Haridvara, on the bank of Ganga. Having bathed 
there and having gratified gods, sages and (my) dead ancestors, 
I came to Kuruk኱etra where there is Praci Sarasvati. There too, 
I with my senses controlled, performed all rites, and having 
worshipped ViዃJ).u's lotus-like feet I went to Puዃkara. On the way

=== PAGE 135 ===

3064 
Padma PuriiiJa 
my friend named Vimala, going from the holy place Indraprastha, 
met me. 
50-60. 
0 demonesses, the briihmal}.a, causing me to re­
turn, took me to the holy place Sakra-(i.e. Indra-)prastha, giving 
all (desired) objects. There is holy Dviirakii fashioned by Vi኱l}.u 
himself. There I actually saw Vi኱l}.u, not in form but through 
words. There he and I bathed to obtain devotion for Vi኱l}.u. 
Vi኱l}.u, of the form of Kr኿l}.a, gave it to him and me. We heard 
Vi኱l}.u's words, but did not see his form. We secured devotion 
for him. From that place I came to Pu኱kara. 0 demonesses, I tell 
you that this water in the water-pot is from that holy place called 
Dvarakii, the chief among holy places. I have told you what you 
had asked me. Seeing this bad plight of you, compassion is pro­
duced in my heart. Tell me what I should do. I am at your dis­
posal. Let knowledge come to you. 
Saying so, he sprinkled them with (that) water. Due to the 
touch of that water they remembered all the acts in their (various) 
existences, and gave up their powerful demonish bodies. Obtain­
ing divine bodies, and turning into celestial nymphs, they got 
into an aeroplane that had come from heaven, and saluted the 
briihmal}.a. And they said : "0 best briihmal}.a, due to contact 
with the water from Dviirakii we are freed from demonhood, and 
are (now) going to heaven. 0 briihmal}.a, there is no other bet­
ter holy place giving all desired objects than this Dviirakii situa­
ted in Indraprastha." 
Niirada said: 
61-68. 
Speaking like this, 0 king, they got into the aero­
planes. And ordered by the briihmal}.a, they went by that (aero­
plane) to the eastern direction. A man, hearing the greatness of 
this Dviirakii situated on the bank of Yamuna, is freed from sins, 
O king. The same fruit as is had by giving meals to a hundred brah­
mal}.as as desired by them, is produced by listening to this greatness. 
0 king, as happiness is experienced on worshipping Vi኱l}.u, simi­
larly (it is had) by listening to the greatness of this Dviirakii. That 
fruit which is got by giving twenty palas of gold (to a briihmal}.a) 
at the time of the solar eclipse and the lunar eclipse, is obtained 
by one hearing the greatness of this (Dvarakii). Having heard (the

=== PAGE 136 ===

VI.209 . 1 -24 
3065 
account of) the acquisition of a son by Vimala, (a man) obtains 
a son ; and hearing (the account of) the acquisition of his friend's 
devotion (a man) secures the best devotion. He who, endowed 
with devotion, listens to (the account of) the liberation of the 
demonesses, goes like them in an aeroplane to heaven. 0 best 
king, I have described to you the greatness of Dvaraka that 
should be resorted by men in the three worlds and that is situated 
at Sakratirtha. Tell me, what other (account) more meritorious 
than this, I should relate to you. No delay should be done in 
(securing) one's bliss. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED NINE 
The Story of Briihmaf.la Mukunda 
Yudhi$!hira said: 
1-2. 0 Saubhari, of which holy place, situated at Sakratirtha, 
did the sage Narada describe the greatness to Sibi? Therefore, a 
desire to hear it is produced in me. Tell me who have bowed (to 
you) the meritorious dialogue between Sibi and Narada. 
Saubhari said: 
3 . 
0 Dharmaraja, king Sibi, having heard the description 
(made) by Narada, and also the greatness of Dvaraka, respect­
fully asked him only. 
Sibi said: 
4-5. 
0 son of Brahma, 0 greatest god, I have heard the ex­
cellent, wonderful greatness of Dvaraka situated on the slope of 
Indraprastha. 0 sage, if there is any sacred story (about some­
one) in Ayodhya, then tell it to me who am thirsty of drinking 
the nectar of your words. 
Narada said: 
6-24. 
As to this there is a holy account, destroying great sins, 
of a barber and Mukunda, a diligent brahmal).a. Both the barber,

=== PAGE 137 ===

3066 
Padma Puriil)a 
the killer of a brahma:Q.a, and the king who died prematurely, 
went to heaven due to the favour of Kosala. The city is situated 
on the bank of Candrabhaga. There was a sinful, censurable 
barber, Ca:Q.<;iaka by name. The sinful one snatched the wealth 
of others through stealing. He killed the travellers with weapons 
and nooses etc. and robbed them (of their possessions). He was 
always engaged in gambling and (drinking) liquor, and hankered 
after others' wives. He broke the walls of temples, and sold the 
bricks and stones. Near his locality lived a brahma:Q.a, endowed 
with wealth, knowing the Vedic rites, and named Mukunda, 0 
king. Once at night he with his limbs loosened after fatigue due 
to coitus had fearlessly slept, having embraced his young wife. 
That Ca:Q.<;iaka entered at night the house of that Mukunda to 
snatch away ornaments etc. (found) in the mansion. Taking 
whatever was (found) outside the mansion, he went home, and 
again entered the brahma:Q.a's house. He made a great effort to 
break the door ; (but) he was blocked by iron bolts and was una­
ble to open it. He then climbed (over the wall) and entered the 
brahma:Q.a's house. The cruel one, holding a sword in his hand , 
entered the mansion. There he saw the couple, asleep and alarmed. 
To snatch away the golden ornaments, he approached them. The 
barber, after having taken many ornaments lying on one side of 
the bed, extended his hand to snatch away ornaments (put) on 
his body. The brahma:Q.a was awakened by the thief's touch and 
was overcome by fear. He did not say anything ; (but) closing his 
eyes remained there only. When the sinful thief took the orna­
ments from his body and moved, the brahma1;1a unable to bear 
the loss of his wealth, came from behind him, and seized him 
with his hands. 0 king, the thief also struck the brahma:Q.a with 
his sword. With his pierced belly, he cried. '0 father, 0 mother.' 
People shouting "What (happened)?" came near him. They saw 
him with his entrails coming out and his body smeared with 
blood. And they asked Mukunda : "Who has done such an act?" 
With great difficulty he too spoke like this to his relatives : 
Mukunda said: 
25-26a. 
This is the result of my deeds done in the previous 
birth. None (else) gives pleasure or pain to a human being. These

=== PAGE 138 ===

VI.209.26b-4 1 
3067 
are just (the results of) piety and impiety. Their root lies in one's 
former act(s). 
Niirada said: 
26b-28a. Speaking like this, he was troubled by great agony. 
0 king, at that time, when his friends were looking on (i .e. in the 
presence of his friends) he cast his life. 0 kind, then his mother, 
a chaste brahmal}.a-lady wept after putting his head, adorned 
with ear-rings on her lap. 
The mother said : 
28b-35a. 
0 son, you, reaching the final stage (i.e. dying) 
have destroyed me, as the day's grace is destroyed by the sun 
going to the western mountain. 0 very intelligent one, this body 
(of you) which is fit for being smeared with sandal, has, having 
plunged me into the ocean of affliction and grief, been greyish 
due to dust. Your habit of chewing tambiila is certainly being 
perpetuated by its being mixed with emission of blood. Those 
very eyes of you which formerly surpassed the beauty of lotuses 
have now become, as it were, covered with a mass of darkness. 0 
child, get up, get up. Teach your students. At the end of the 
Vaisvadeva (sacrifice), honour the guest that has arrived. Your 
friends, standing at the door, have called you. Go to them. Give 
them whatever is to be given to them, and take from them what­
ever is to be received. Oh, Oh ! Give reply to me. I fall at your feet. 
Otherwise, I shall cast my life near you. 
Niirada said: 
35b-36a. 
Saying so, the mother of Mukunda, then fainted. 
His wife, taking his head on her lap, wailed : 
The wife said: 
36b-4 1 . 0 lord, 0 ocean of virtues, listen to my words. If 
for some reason you are angry with your mother, speak out to 
me. 0 good one, formerly you never resorted to silence like this. 
Some younger brother has insulted you. This parrot in the cage 
does not eat food without you. Give him well-cooked food, so 
also to the sarika uttering indistinct but sweet words. Teach the

=== PAGE 139 ===

3068 
Padma Puriil)a 
parrot and the sarika the series of names of ViłJ;J.u (like) 'Rama, 
Rama ; Hare KrłJ;J.a'. Get up. The two are very clever. What offe­
nce have I done to you, that you are not talking to me? I have well 
preserved the wealth which you have given to me. 0 lord, I will 
not wait till the delivery of your lustre (i.e. semen) that you have 
put into me. I shall follow you. 
Niirada said : 
42-44. Having thus lamented, that dear wife of Mukunda, 
desiring to follow him, stopped weeping. 0 king, then the ascetic, 
the preceptor of Mukunda, called Vedayana, wandering over the 
earth went to his house. "Where has Mukunda gone? The mother 
and the wife of the intelligent one are not seen." Thus he then 
asked the female servant. 
The female servant said : 
45-47a. 0 preceptor, some thief killed my master at night. 
He took (away) all the ornaments and silken garments of the 
daughter-in-law. Falling dead, he (i.e. his body) is at the top of 
the mansion. His mother, the daughter-in-Jaw, his brothers, 
fallen into the ocean of great grief, are weeping near him. 
Niirada said: 
47b-49a. Having heard these words uttered by the female 
servant, the ascetic, going up to (the top of) the mansion saw his 
dead disciple. Seeing his relatives weeping excessively near him, 
the wise one desiring to take them up from the ocean of grief, 
said to them : 
Vediiyana said: 
49b-59. 
0 mother, tell me whether you are thus lamenting 
for his body or his soul. Tell me the truth. (Your) lamenting is 
not proper for both (the body and the soul). This body, an aggre­
gate of the elements, is earned due to (i.e. as a result of) deeds 
commenced {by one in one's existences). When they are exhaus­
ted, the elements get separated from them. The coming together 
of them with the deeds is the birth of men. When they perish, 
the getting separated of them (i.e. the elements) is the death {of 
men). Since the coming together or getting separated of the

=== PAGE 140 ===

V1.2 10. 1-15 
3069 
beings is due to their deeds, the wise should not lament for the 
dull body, dependent on (the deeds). Birth and death are seen in 
the soul due to the beginningless illusion. (A man) thinks them 
(to be there) due to his looking upon the body as the soul. (In 
reality) they are not there. When that (notion of identifying the 
body with the soul) is removed, he (becomes) that pure, formless 
Brahman which is self-illumined, the cause of the world, itself 
beyond a cause (i.e. having no cause), distinguished with virtues, 
which is eternal, which is knowledge, joy and which always 
illumines the world with its lustre. The tongue never licks it. The 
eyes never see it. The ears never hear it. The nose never smells it. 
The skin never touches it. It is beyond the senses. It is self-illu­
mined ; it is self-sighted. It is never the object. It is beyond the 
mind. It cannot be grasped even by the intelligence. Deities of 
pure sattva that are the forms of its incarnation serve it, but 
do not understand its form which is beyond the existent and the 
non-existent. Such is the nature of the (highest) soul. What man 
would be so foolish as to be angry with it, since it is neither 
produced, nor does it perish ? 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED TEN 
Mukunda Goes to Heaven 
Niirada said: 
1-15. 
Having thus enlightened them with words expressing 
the highest truth, the ascetic got done his (obsequial) rites. The 
learned one stopped the young, pregnant wife of Mukunda, who 
insisted on following her husband. 0 king, having taken his 
bones, his brother, along with the anchorite, went to drop them 
into the water of Ganga. 0 king, the brahmaQa (Mukunda's 
brother) and the ascetic reached along with the members of a 
caravan this holy place Indraprastha after a few days. 0 king, 
in this Kosala which is in Indraprastha on the bank of Ganga 
on earth, they slept at night. Keeping the bundle of the bones 
between themselves, the two, fatigued due to the journey, went

=== PAGE 141 ===

3070 
Padma Puriu;ta 
to sleep. When, at night the members of the caravan had slept, a 
dog came there to take away cooked food etc. The dog, repea­
tedly smelling the kitchen, licking the vessels, at times tolerating 
the stroke of a staff, moved in the entire camp. Then being struck 
by someone on the head, he ran from there like a hen-pecked 
husband struck by his wife but unable to retaliate. The dog 
again entered the same place with a desire to lick the vessels 
containing food, as he was struck with staffs and bricks, like a 
poor person loving a prostitute (enters her house) with a desire 
for enjoyment. Thus wandering, the dog (came) where the two 
were asleep, and took away the bundle of bones. Having carried 
it for a distance, he tore the bundle with his teeth and seeing 
the :O.eshless bones in it, threw them into the water of this 
Kosala. The moment the bones were thrown into this water, 0 
king, Mukunda, seated in a divine aeroplane, came there. Seeing 
his preceptor and younger brother asleep, he gently awakened 
them. 0 king, he, of a divine form, having saluted his teacher, 
said : 
Mukunda said: 
16-19. 
0 my preceptor Vedayana, I salute you. 0 my 
younger brother, my blessing to you. Due to your favour my 
bones have fallen into this holy place. This I, having died, 
having gone to hell and got its fruit, have secured a divine course 
due to the grace of this holy place. I have come here to salute 
you, my preceptor, who are a holy place. I, going to heaven in 
this divine aeroplane, saluted you, this holy place, and saw (i.e. 
met) my brother. (Please) allow me. I (shall) go to heaven causing 
happiness. 
Niirada said: 
20. Hearing these words of Mukunda, his preceptor Veda­
yana with his amazement removed, said to him seated in the 
aeroplane. 
Vediiyana said: 
21-22. 
0 Mukunda, tell me the truth. After your death, to 
which world did you go, from where you are now going to 
heaven, 0 dear one? 0 dear one, what happened there? Who is

=== PAGE 142 ===

VI.2 1 0.23-3 7 
307 1 
the ruler of that world? What kind of subjects are ther0? What 
are the religious practices? Tell all that. 
Mukunda said: 
23-28a. 0 preceptor, I shall tell you what took place after (my) 
death. Now my recollection is revived due to the favour of this 
holy place. When that wicked barber CaQ.gaka killed me, Yama's 
very fearful servants came (there). They were tawny-eyed ; their 
hair was red ; their bodies, nails and lower lips were dark. They 
were short ; had long feet, short noses and projected teeth. They 
said to one another: "Take him, take him, by the order of Yama, 
to (Yama's) city (called) Samyamani only." Speaking like this, 
very angrily they put me into a body being tormented ; fastening 
me by fierce nooses they struck me with iron mallets. I who was 
being taken by them, being overcome by grief, wept very much 
on the path having heated sand on it ; and I was again beaten by 
them. And being firm, they, very much deriding me, said : 
Yama's messengers said: 
28b-33. Since you offended against your preceptor explaining 
(to you) the eternal Brahman, what will you do before Yama? 
You will have to see his fierce face. You will have to experience 
the fruit of that fearful sin. 0 sinner, due to that sin only you 
died prematurely. 
Saying so, in a short time they took me to Sarilyamani, 
Yama's city, situated in (an area of) many yojanas, where king 
Yama himself dwelt. Having saluted king Yama, and having 
placed me before him, they reported to him about me: "This sin­
ful brahmru;1a is brought." Seeing me, king Yama said to the 
members of his assembly : 
Yama said: 
34-35a. 0 members of the assembly, being well attentive, 
listen to my words. When Brahma assigned me this charge, he, 
the grandsire of the worlds, spoke to me like this : 
Brahmii said: 
35b-37. You, the lord of Sarilyamani, will punish impious

=== PAGE 143 ===

3072 
Padma Purii{Ul 
people. 0 son of the Sun , punish them in accordance with their 
offence. You should throw into hells these two, committing major 
sins, viz. one who docs not support his parents and one who 
offends against his preceptor. The punishment would be staying 
in each hell for a myriad years. 0 you lord of the (Southern) 
quarter, you have not to show compassion to these two. 
Yama said: 
38-4 1. Therefore, 0 members ofthe assembly, by Brahmi's 
words I do not take pity on a man offending against his preceptor 
or not supporting his parents. This brahmal}a has offended 
against his preceptor. Due to that offence he met with an untimely 
death ; and he, unfit to be seen, is brought (here) by my servants 
at my order. 0 servants, first throw him into the fearful Raurava 
(hell) for a myriad years ; and taking him who has offended 
against his preceptor out of that (hell), throw him again into 
another (hell) for that much period. Then quickly let him stay for 
the proper period in all the hells. 
Mukunda said: 
42-51 . 0 preceptor Vedayana, 0 master, the servants, by 
Varna's order, took me to the fearful Raurava (hell), and fasten­
ing me with chains, threw me into it. There, 0 dear one, I experi­
enced very severe, poignant agony, so that even a moment was 
passed as a yuga by me. Staying there I passed thirty days pain· 
fully. Today on this thirty-first day I have come out (of it), when 
(my) bones fell into this most excellent holy place. Due to the 
grace of this holy place my sin due to offending against my pre­
ceptor, perished instantly ; and I went to heaven. I shall happily 
live in heaven as long as fourteen Indras (rule the heaven). The 
subjects that live in Varna's city cause fear to sinners, but are 
pleasing to the pious. The young women there have faces like 
those of lions, elephants, boars ; have large fangs, plump bellies ; 
have faces like those of cats ; have tawny hair ; and have long feet 
and long hands. When I became free from the sin due to the 
favour of this holy place, I saw in Yama's abode the subjects of 
divine forms. All of them were truthful in their speech, were full of 
modest behaviour, had worn divine ornaments, and were adorned 
with divine garments. 0 dear one, I have told this (in reply to)

=== PAGE 144 ===

VJ .2 l0.52-64 
3073 
what you had asked me. (Please) allow me to go to the city of 
the lord of gods. 
Narada !aid: 
52. That ascetic, having heard these words spoken by his 
disciple at that time, again asked that brahma:Q.a, Mukunda, 0 
king : 
Vedayana said: 
53-55. 
From your childhood and with affection for your 
preceptor, you learnt everything from me-Veda with the Pada 
(-patha) and Krama-patha (the two ways of reciting the Veda), 
along with the science of words (i.e. grammar). You excellently 
served me with devotion. 0 good one, in you reside the virtues 
of the good like tranquillity, control etc. 0 dear one, tell me, so 
that I shall understand it properly, how you committed the sin 
of offending against your preceptor. 
Mukunda said: 
56-62. I have never disobeyed them who gave me birth, 
performed my thread-ceremony, those who supported their 
daughters and the Vedas, so also him who made me wear the 
sacred thread. I served my mother-in-law and my father-in-law 
like a servant. I did not also disobey you who taught me the holy 
texts. (But) I offended against him who was the family priest, the 
preceptor of my family, and who had mastered the Vedas and 
the Veda:iJ.gas. (Please) listen to it. The settled rule of our family 
is : 'If a righteous son is born in our family, then his umblical 
cord is cut off after a cow, or a gift (equal to) her (value) is given 
to the family priest.' 0 dear one, when a son was just born to 
me only on an auspicious day, I, the foolish one, did not perform 
the rite of (i.e. befitting) my family. Due to my not performing 
it, I offended against my preceptor. I have told (you) all this as 
to how I committed a sin by offending against the preceptor. 
Now permit me. It (shall) go to heaven. 
Vedayana !aid: 
63-64. Due to the favour of this auspicious Kosala, situated 
within Indraprastha, the recollection of the previous existence

=== PAGE 145 ===

3074 
Padma Puriiw 
appears. 0 Mukunda, due to which religious merit were your 
bones dropped in this holy place? 0 sinless one, tell it (if) you 
have its recollection. 
Mukunda said: 
65-69. 
(One) evening a brahma:(l.a came to my house. I duly 
gave him a seat and food. He too, having eaten as he desired, 
slept on a good bed. At night his entire body suffered from a 
very severe fever. Troubled by it, the brahma:(l.a did not get 
sleep. In the morning only he died. When his death took place, 
0 preceptor, I performed all the rites like cremation and drop­
ped his bones, according to the sacred rule, in Ganga. Due 
to that religious merit my bones fell into this auspicious holy 
place, named Kosala, fashioned by Brahma. 
Niirada said: 
70. 
0 king, the brahma:(l.a, having thus told his account, 
and having a charming body like that of a god, quickly went to 
heaven in an aeroplane. It is told how he met his death at the 
hands of the thief and obtained heaven through the grace of 
this best holy place. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED ELEVEN 
Cal;laka's Fate 
Niirada said: 
1-3a. 0 Sibi, I have told you the entire excellent account 
of M ukunda. Listen also to the account of the barber Ca:(I.Qaka 
from me. 0 king, on the day when Ca:(I.Qaka killed the brahma:(l.a 
Mukunda, the citizens heard that news. Hearing that they clearly 
reported like this to the king: 
The citizens said: 
3b-4. 0 king, Ca:(I.Qaka has killed Mukunda, the best brah­
ma.Q.a, and has taken (away) his ample wealth. Do what is pro-

=== PAGE 146 ===

Vl.2 1 1 .5-19 
3075 
per. You are the protector of us (your) subjects, and the chasti­
ser of the bad. 
Niirada said: 
5-7. 
Hearing this, the king with his eyes red with anger, said 
to the minister who was by his side : "Listen to what these 
(citizens) say. Quickly bring that sinner. Otherwise I shall kill 
you. 0 most sinful one, get up, get up, (and) do (what leads to) 
the happiness of the good. A king in whose country his subjects 
are harassed by thieves and who does not protect them from 
them (i.e. the thieves), goes to hell." 
Niirada said: 
8-lOa. 
0 Sibi, having heard these words of the king, the 
minister quickly mounted his horse, and with a hundred foot­
soldiers went to Mukunda's house, and asked his relatives : "Who 
killed Mukunda? Tell me the truth . By the order of the king I 
shall kill the sinner." 
Niirada said: 
lOb. Hearing these words of the minister, the relatives of 
the briihmal)a said : 
The relatives of the briihmalJ,a said: 
1 1-12. 0 minister, Mukunda was killed by Cal).gaka, the 
barber. This is his turban that had fallen when he was running 
away. The young wife of Mukunda herself has seen the sinner. 
What shall we do? We have plunged in the ocean of grief. 
Niirada said: 
1 3-19. Hearing these words of the relatives of the briihma­
J}.a, the minister went to the house of that sinful barber. Quickly 
he got down from the horse and with some foot-soldiers went 
into his house and saw him asleep. Ordered by him the foot­
soldiers seized him by his hair that moment (only) and they 
raised that sinful, mean barber from (his) bed. When the sinful 
barber saying, "What is this? what is this?" opened his eyes, he 
saw him (i.e. the minister). Recollecting his act-the sin that he 
had committed at night-he, for a moment, remained with his

=== PAGE 147 ===

3076 
face hung down and realising (that) Y ama had stood over his 
head. Getting him arrested by his foot-soldiers, the minister took 
him to the king, and thus spoke to the king : "0 king, this barber 
Cat;u;taka, the killer of the brahma1;1a, has been brought. I shall 
quickly do what you order." 
The king said: 
20-22. O best minister, 0 you who know religious practices, 
0 long-lived one, listen to my words. Here there is this clean, 
best river, Candrabhaga. Those who cast their lives here go to 
the place of gods. Therefore, this wicked barber should not be 
killed here. If (he would be killed) outside the boundary of five 
krosas of this (place), he would go to fearful hells. Make no 
delay. 
Niirada said : 
23-30. Thus addressed by the king, the best minister promp­
ted cal).ᕼalas to kill him at the king's order, 0 king. The ca1;1ᕼalas 
taking him up on the other bank of Candrabhaga to a place at 
a distance of two yojanas, cut off his head. The sinner became 
a serpent having a deadly body, living in the hollow of a dhava 
tree, and with his mouth producing flames of poison. The dhava 
tree dried due to the fire from his hissing as a pool full of water 
dries due to the heat of the sun. Due to the sinner's going there 
the dhava tree and the land around it, with the grass etc. cut off, 
became a barren land. 0 Sibi, once there came a caravan from the 
southern region. It especially was going to Narayal).a's hermitage, 
called Badara. On the way a brahma1;1a had joined the caravan. 
0 king, carrying on his shoulder a holeless wooden box contain­
ingthe bones of his father and mother, he was going to drop them 
into the water of Ganga giving the desired objects even to sinners. 
31-4la. He too came there to the forest where the serpent 
was and kept the box made of red rods at a secluded place. Com­
ing there the serpent raised a rod with his hood. When the box 
was partially opened, he entered the box. The rod returned to its 
original position. The serpent, dreadful due to poison, remained 
motionless there in the box only. Then in the morning all of 
them moved from that place, 0 king. The brahmaᕽ also taking 
the box covered with a blanket on his head, proceeded to Ganga.

=== PAGE 148 ===

VI.21 1 .41b-50 
3077 
0 king, the caravan of the pilgrims reached this pure Kosali 
after some days. Then the briihmaJ;Ut, sick due to cold opened 
the blanket which covered the box there on the auspicious slope 
of Ayodhyii. The serpent too who had no food (for a long time) 
got his food, i.e. air, au.d throwing up a strong rod, moved out 
of it. Seeing the serpent to have moved out, all men, saying 'A 
serpent, a serpent', and with clods in their hands, went there. 
While the serpent was running (away) he was hit by one of them. 
While the pilgrims were watching he cast his life. Giving up his 
serpent-body, he obtained godhead, difficult to be obtained. Get­
ting into a divine aeroplane, he spoke these (words) to the people : 
The serpent said: 
4lb-44. 0 briihmal)as from the south, hear my words. For­
merly I was a mean barber named Cal)(,iaka who killed a briih­
mal)a. Due to the great sin of the murder of a briihma:t;ta, I 
became a serpent in (this) desert. Having experienced the miseries 
in the hell for five lakhs of years, I have passed two myriads of 
years in this existence as a serpent. Due to the favour of this 
holy place, I have obtained excellent godhead. Therefore, this 
sacred place giving all (desired) objects should not be abandoned ; 
from it, I, a sinner, have reached heaven. 
Narada said: 
45-50. 
Thus that sinful barber, having reached a censurable 
existence, went seated in an aeroplane to heaven. The souther­
ners, becoming ascetics, lived at that sacred place-whose grand­
eur they had seen-only, with their minds (fixed) on the lotus­
like feet of Vi኱:t;tu. That best briihma:t;ta, noticing the greatness 
of this holy place and having developed faith in it, dropped 
his parents' bones there. When the pieces of the bones fell there, 
his parents, seated in a divine aeroplane, came there at that 
moment only. And, while (other) people were listening, they said 
to their son : "0 son, live long ; be happy in the world with 
wealth and grains. Due to your having caused the liberation of 
both of us, you will obtain salvation. This is not false." Due to 
the dropping of the bones, both-the fruit that the son would 
have by offering pi:t;t{,las into Ganga and the parents' going to 
heaven-took place.

=== PAGE 149 ===

3078 
Padma PUrii1;1a 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED TWELVE 
The Efficacy of Kosa/ii 
Niirada said: 
l-6a. Speaking like that, the brahmal}.a's parents, of divine 
forms, got into the excellent aeroplane, and went to Viᕥl}.u's city. 
Their son , having lived there in Kosala only for three days, went 
home, thinking about the grandeur of the holy place. This, 0 king, 
is called Kosala by the wise. I shall tell (about) it to you whose 
mind has a curiosity to listen to it. Having gone to that Kosala, 
the brahmal}.a chaps from the south, desiring to die (there), lived 
in it giving proper objects . One of them going to Narayal}.a's 
place after ignoring it, was stopped by Vi?l}.U in the guise of an 
old brahmal}.a. He thus spoke to the brahmal}.a : 
The old brahma1;1a said: 
6b-1 5. 
0 best brahma:Q.a, ignoring this auspicious Kosala, 
where are you going? 0 brahmal}.a, this holy place Indraprastha 
is the best of all holy places . 0 son, here is this Kosala, dear to 
Viᕥl}.u, and giving salvation. Success will not come to you there, 
where you are going after ignoring this giving a position free 
from all desires ; and Viᕥl}.u will be averse to you. 0 brahmal}.a, 
if you desire salvation, then this holy place will give you that 
object, with the desire of which, you, after taking a pledge , will 
bathe at this holy place. 0 brahmal}.a , even within the range of 
your sight (i.e. when you were seeing), a serpent became a god. 
Due to the favour of this the brahmal}.a couple resides in heaven. 
How then do you, even after having reached it due to the dawn of 
good fortune, and even after being convinced on seeing its great­
ness, ignore it? 0 fool, you appear to be like one who, after being 
oppressed by thirst, leaves the ocean of nectar, and goes to muddy 
water. Your fate appears to be like that of him who, being delu­
ded, throws into a well the desire-yielding gem that was in his 
hand. Your fate is that of a foolish man who, after having pro­
pitiated Viᕥl}.u, desires the worthless pleasure of senses. No man 
goes (to another place) after having ignored this Kosala, giving 
all desired objects. One who bathes here, goes to heaven. One 
who dies here lives among the immortal.

=== PAGE 150 ===

Vl.212.16-28 
3079 
Niirada said: 
16. 
0 king, having heard (these) words of Vi኱1,.1u, upholding 
the welfare of brahmal}.as, he spoke to the brahmaJJa, "Badari­
kasrama is the best." 
The brahma1;1a said: 
1 7-2 1 . 0 best brahma1,.1a, in me who have heard about the 
grandeur of the small village, faith is produced by means of these 
words of you. I have never heard about this holy place, Indrapras­
tha. 0 old one, how is Kosala (situated) in it, where actually Vi኱JJU 
(lives), and where the meditating saints are liberated. How should 
I ignore that meritorious hermitage and stay here as Vi኱l}.u, hav­
ing himself come (here), and telling me like this, would stop me? 
0 brahmaJJa, this holy place is superior to Badari. So, though 
driven to that hermitage, I shall not proceed (to it). Desiring 
salvation (I have come here). Otherwise I would not have stayed 
here. 
Narada said: 
22-23a. 
When the brahma1,.1a spoke like this, Vi኱JJU, the 
four-armed one, giving up the ordinary form (of a man), and 
having a divine form. said to the noble brahmal}.a, desiring 
salvation : 
ViË1;1u said: 
23b-28. This Indraprastha is best of all holy places. As Siva 
is among all those who know Brahman, as Ganga is among 
rivers, as Himalaya is among mountains, as Garw,ia is among 
birds, as Sakra is among gods, as Narada is among Vi኱JJu's 
devotees, as the Sun is among luminaries, as the Milky Ocean 
is among oceans, as brahma1,.1a is among castes, as the grand­
sire is among the created, as the son of Kausalya is among the 
incarnations of Vi኷l}.U, so is this holy place Indraprastha the 
best of all holy places. A man, without or with a desire, some­
times goes to a holy place. At every place I myself am the giver 
of the fruit. A devotee who goes (to another holy place) by ignor­
ing Kosala situated in Indraprastha, does not obtain the fruit 
from the protector of the host of the givers of fruits.

=== PAGE 151 ===

3080 
Padma Purii1,1a 
Niirada said: 
29-35. Having thus heard those words, and having seen 
that excellent form, and having saluted Viኲ:Q.U, the brahma:t;1a 
left. The lord, the soul of the universe, instantly disappeared. 
He devoutly worshipped that brahma:t;1a as the supreme principle. 
Having come there to Kosala the brahma:t;1a told the entire 
account to all his companions, 0 king. Those noble brahma:t;1as 
from the south, did not eat there and abandoned their ordinary 
bodies. Just then, Sri Viኲ:Q.u mounted upon Garuc;ia came there 
with his attendants in those many aeroplanes shining with lustre. 
They, with divine forms, seeing him and the aeroplanes with at­
tendants, fell prostrate like staffs on the earth. All the brahma:t;1as, 
having divine knowledge and bodies praised that god of divine 
form whose lotus-like feet are adored by gods. 
The briihmaf)as said: 
36-44. 
Salutation to you who have a body shining like an 
atasi-flower, who have covered yourself with a yellow garment, 
who have various lotuses put on the bright ear-rings, who have 
put blue small lotuses on your ears. Devotion to you is indeed the 
desire-yielding creeper (tree) which, when resorted to, gives 
what is desired by the mind. Similar is this your Kosala with 
objects of enjoyment. The two are secured through your grace. 
We salute your lotus-like feet saluted by respectable hosts of 
gods etc., thought of by delighted groups of meditating saints, 
and the root of salvation, the source of the highest joy. 0 lord 
of Lakዃmi, we have reached your form, distinguished with 
charming marks like Srivatsa etc. ; yet we long for your service, 
secured and honoured by Narada and others. (Even) Lak!ilmi, 
residing within your chest (i.e. in your heart) does not have that 
happiness which is obtained by those who have become your 
servants. 0 lord of Lakዃmi, Sri Mahesa knows it. He and none 
else has experienced it in the world. Among us, even having no 
attachment, he is to be honoured. The best sages like Narada, 
your devotees, worship the lord of the worlds, due to him. 
Sambhu, though his heart is full of the joy due to Brahman, is 
satisfied only by serving you. Full of devotion to you he repeate­
dly dances excessively to receive your virtues. For this reason 
human beings who have secured your service, have no desires.

=== PAGE 152 ===

VI.212.45-55 
3081 
His two doorkeepers, with your marks on their bodies reach their 
own abode through delusion(?). Your desire is with reference to 
this world. Quick fall of your worlds never takes place. Who 
would know your Maya which is difficult to be known by gods 
like Brahma, Siva etc. ? 
Niirada said: 
45. That lord, eager to reach his place, being thus praised 
by them, said with a voice deep like that of clouds, to the souther­
ners. 
The lord said: 
46-52. 0 brahma:Q.as, due to the grace of this Kosala you 
have obtained absorption into me. You will also obtain my 
service. 0 brahma:Q.as, from today this excellent holy place of me 
will be known by the great name 'Dak኱i:Q.akosala', where, Rama, 
born as Dasaratha's son, will kill Rava:Q.a. That where a poor 
wise man goes up to Vaiku:Q.tha is called Uttarakosala by all 
excellent sages. Even he who would live here without that (i.e. 
knowledge) goes to heaven. They say that this Dakዄi:Q.akosala is 
ten times superior to it. Some best sages describe it to be eleven 
times superior. I think the difference between that and this is : 
My attendants carry to Vaiku:Q.tha one who dies there ; while I 
myself take him who dies here ; putting him on Garu<;la I absorb 
him into myself. 
Niirada said: 
53-55. 
0 king, having thus spoken to those brahma:Q.as, and 
taking them (with himself) and himself praising the greatness of 
this holy place, Vi኱:Q.U went to Vaiku:Q.tha. 0 lord of the world, 
I have told you the reason for which the wise call her Dak§i:Q.a­
kosala. 0 best king, I have described to you the greatness of 
Kosala which destroys the sins of Kali, which is desired for 
reaching the feet of the Lotus-eyed (Vi§:Q.u) ; (now) I shall tell 
you the account that took place in Madhuvana.

=== PAGE 153 ===

3082 
Padma Puriil)(l 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED THIRTEEN 
A Sriiddha at Madhuvana Is More Meritorious 
Niirada said: 
1 -7. 
0 dear one, 0 Sibi, Vi኶:Q.u, who was pleased, establi­
shed (this) city, this Madhuvana for Indra. Here is this holy place 
called Visranti, best in the three worlds, giving salvation to the 
very wise m en, holy and resorted to by the good. 0 king, Vi኱:Q.U, 
the universal soul, lives in the form of Sri Kola (i.e. a bear) at 
this best, meritorious holy place called Visranti. 0 king, it is said 
that he who has always propitiated Vi኱:Q.u during many existences, 
dies here. On the very bank of Kalindi (i .e. Yamuna) another 
holy place called Visranti, is fashioned by Vi኱:Q.u himself, where 
Kamsa was hurled down. 0 king, the two are equal in merits 
giving Vaiku:Q.tha. Due to the dawn of good fortune, it, giving all 
(desired) objects, is obtained. To you I shall tell the importance 
of this holy place, having heard which you will obtain the fruit 
of bathing in all holy places. 
8-16. 
0 king, there lived a poor brahma.J)a named Kusala in 
the auspicious city of Kirata in the land at the foot of the Hima­
laya mountain. His wife of a bad conduct was fondly attached 
to a man of a bad character. The unchaste woman deluded her 
husband with her (bad) acts. Her husband deluded by her was 
unable to ward her off. He, the poor one, was intent on obeying 
her orders, and was (i.e. lived), as it were, bought (by her). People 
ridiculed the brahma:Q.a, the husband of the unchaste woman. He 
too, scared of the ridicule, did not stir out of the house. She put 
on very costly silken garments and ornaments given by her para­
mours. The wicked one, though ridiculed, was not ashamed. Due 
to his servile nature she, the wicked one, contemptuously gave 
her husband old garments taken oft' from the bodies (of others). 
That her own husband who was thus slighted by the unchaste 
woman, being very much afilicted by grief, ate (i.e. drank) poison 
at night and died. The wanton woman was then scared of the 
king due to her bad conduct. She spoke (these) false words : "I 
shall follow my husband." 0 king, her friends, tutored by her 
only, went near her, and speaking like this, stopped her.

=== PAGE 154 ===

V1 .2 1 3 . 1 7-29 
3083 
The friends said: 
1 7-22. 
0 deer-eyed woman, why do you do this worthless 
act, that you are ready to destroy your body resembling gold? 
0 friend, what happiness did you get from this poor, incapable 
(husband), not industrious, and filling his own belly ? Nourish 
this young son? Except you, who is his guardian? 0 beautiful 
lady, all of us will die, if you die. 0 you beautiful lady, look 
after this your house ; rise. Let this your son, who will give 
happiness later, be victorious. All the relatives desire your life 
(i.e. that you should live). Get up. Do what is desired in their 
minds by your relatives. 0 good one, all your friends due to 
affection for you, are weeping. Stop them who are much grieved 
(from weeping) by giving (i.e . speaking to) them your words. 
Niirada said: 
23. That wicked one, having thus heard their words flowing 
from righteousness, raised her face, and making her own relatives 
listen, said : 
The friend said: 
24-28. 
I know that the proper words that you spoke are 
indeed true. Yet women must respect their husbands, giving 
(the merit of) both the worlds. 0 friends, listen to words uttered 
by me and following the code of laws . If it is proper, permit me 
(to follow my husband). That woman, even though she is a sin­
ner, who, devoted to her husband, follows her dead husband, 
lives with him for a long time in heaven. Women should never 
desert their husbands even though he is poor or diseased. He, 
alive or dead, should be followed (by them). This is (i.e. thus 
says) the ancient holy text. Thinking thus in mind, 0 friends, I 
am following my husband. He (i.e. son) will live by his fate. What 
shall I do to him? 
Niirada said: 
29. Thus addressed, her wicked friends, glVlng a wicked 
counsel, said to her, deluding all people by means of her righte­
ous words :

=== PAGE 155 ===

3084 
Padma PuriitJa 
The friends said: 
30-33. 0 you lady of beautiful eyebrows, first desert us and 
then follow your husband, 0 dear one. All of us are unable to 
put up with separation from you. You, destroying us, and follow­
ing your own husband, will have little religious merit and great 
sin. How can you obtain heaven? You well looked after this 
husband of yours, when he was alive. 0 friend, you have done 
what is laid down for a husband and his wife. As long as this 
your son is unable to have his livelihood, he will live by your 
fortune. 
Niirada said: 
34-45. Thus addressed, she turned away from following her 
husband. She got performed his obsequial rites by her son. Then 
after some time she thought of getting his thread ceremony per­
formed, got it performed by briihmaJ}.as after having given them 
the wealth given to her by her paramours. The boy born in adul­
tery1, whose thread-ceremony was performed, who knew the real 
nature of human soul, quickly went out of the house, and was 
highly devoted to Viኲt;tu. Having secured the company of the 
good, and given up his trifling body, he went up to the perpetual 
world, not accessible to the meditating saints. When the son 
went out she was unhappy in her mind. 0 king, on the same day 
she again dallied with her paramours. When she was thus dallying 
with her paramours, in course of time old age, destroying the 
arrogance of beauty, came over to her. Seeing her body stricken 
with old age, she was abandoned by the paramours. She spoiling 
the character of the group of other (women), became a go-bet­
ween. Then she snatched the cow, along with her calf, of one 
briihmat;ta ; and, 0 king, she sold it for some money. 0 king, 
thus she passed some time (working) as a messenger. Then her 
dry body became worthless. When leprosy overcame her body, 
her five limbs-hands, feet, and the nose as the fifth, dropped. 
When, she who was reduced to such a condition, did not get 
food, she was taken to the market by a maid servant. There she, 
appealing to people with piteous words, and being despised, 
filled her belly. 
1 . 
KuQ4a : A son born in adultery. A son born of a woman from some­
one who is not her husband, and when the hus band is alive.

=== PAGE 156 ===

Vl.21 3.46- 66a 
3085 
46-51 . 0 king, a brahma:Q.a, knowing all the Vedas, a great 
orator, who lived near, seeing her, spoke these words : "Sin gives 
pain to people in this world and the next. Therefore, men, afraid 
of pain, should not commit a sin. A man who, having committed 
a sin, performs an expiation, has not committed the sin ; so he 
would not get its fruit. He who, having repeatedly committed 
sins, does not perform an expiation, meets the same fate as this 
woman, in this world and in the next. In this world she commit­
ted a host of sins. She will suffer its fruit here only, and also in a 
hell. In the holy texts an expiation is seen for all sinners, but not 
for women averse to (good) deeds." 
Niirada said: 
52-63a. Speaking like this, the best brahma:Q.a, afraid of 
seeing her, again and again remembering Viᕥ:Q.U, and saluting 
the Sun, left. 0 king, she, thus suffering the fruit of her acts, 
obtained by herself, became miserable and died after a few days. 
No burning on funeral pyre of her, the sinful one, was done. 
Clil;l.Qalas dragged her by (seizing) her hair, and took her out 
of the city. At the time of her death, Yama's servants came 
(there), and making her take up a body that caused torment, they 
took her to Yama's city. That god, gentle to the pious and actu­
ally hated by the sinners, seeing her again, turned away his face. 
Yama, thus turning away his face, ordered his servants : "As 
pronounced by me, throw her into the Raurava hell." Thus 
addressed, the servants remembering the acts which she had done, 
took her and threw her, with her face (turned) down, into that 
fierce Raurava. In that Raurava (hell) she remained for one period 
of Manu. Later she was born as an alligator eating the flesh 
of the dead in a cremation ground. There also, she, eating excessi­
vely the flesh of the dead, got the fruit, viz. misery. of her acts. 
Once that brahma:Q.a who was born from her womb in the stock 
of brahma:Q.as, and who was roaming came there to the crema­
tion ground. The sage's son, seeing her eating the flesh of the 
dead, thought for a moment in his mind, and recognised her to be 
his mother. Recognising her to be his mother, he said to himeslf: 
The sage's son said: 
63b-66a. Today I shall emancipate her from the ocean of

=== PAGE 157 ===

3086 
Padma Purii;ta 
misery . Oh, a being is not freed, except at (the end of) the period 
of suffering (the fruit of his sins), from the sinful deed done by 
himself. She passed in the hell the period called (i.e. that was 
equal to) the period of a Manu, and with men she has passed 
here a hundred years. How much has she to experience (the 
fruit of) her great sin hereafter? 
Narada said: 
66b-67. 
Thinking like this, he, closing his eyes, again thought 
by means of his sacred knowledge. Having noticed the fearful 
condition , with his divine sight, of that sinner, the best brii.hma:Qa 
again said to himself, 0 king : 
The sages' son said: 
68-7 1 . Oh ! her liberation is not seen (to be possible) even 
after a hundred kalpas, except her dying at a holy place, or sub­
mitting herself to (Viᕥ:Qu) the lord of Lakᕥmi. Or she will not 
obtain heaven except by my offering pi:Qc;ias at Gayii., even for 
hundreds of kalpas. In this birth of her she will never have 
these twoዅeath in the region of a holy place, or liking for ser­
ving Vi዆u. The (only) cause of the emancipation of her, the 
sinful one plunged in the ocean of sins, will be a sriiddha per­
formed by me at Gayii. 
Narada said: 
72-73. 
Thinking like this, the pious one went to his father's 
hermitage. He told his father the entire cause of his mother's 
misery. Having heard the son's words telling (about) his mother's 
misery, the best sage spoke to his son who had bowed his neck 
(i.e. head) : 
The sage said: 
74-82. 
As a king, knowing polity, takes the sovereignty of 
his enemy in a war, 0 dear one, quickly raise your mother from 
this miserable condition. If a son, capable of emancipating his 
mother or father from misery, does not emancipate them, he goes 
to hell. Having received water and pi:QQaS from their sons at an 
excellent holy place, the dead ancestors go to heaven from hell, 
and from heaven to Viᕥ:Qu's place. Therefore, get up quickly. Go

=== PAGE 158 ===

Vl.214. 1-9 
3087 
to Kha:Q.gava-vana. There is the holy Yamuna, resorted to by the 
best sages. On her bank is Hariprastha, full of all holy places. 
Then there is the holy Madhuvana set up by Vi!?:Q.U himself. Having 
duly bathed there, and having done your (usual) rites, offer a 
sraddha to her, your mother, and (also) perform (other) rites. 
When a sraddha is offered there by you desiring heaven for her, 
she abandoning the strong body of an alligator, will reach Vigtu's 
world. 0 dear one, the good have declared that the religious 
merit (due to offering a sraddha) at Madhuvana, is a hundred 
times more than the one due to offering pi:Q.gas at Gaya. 0 deal' 
one, now the Sun has entered the Zodiacal sign Libra. 0 son, go 
and offer a sraddha to your ancestors. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED FOURTEEN 
The Greatness of Madhuvana 
Narada said: 
1-9. 0 king, having heard these words of his father, he 
quickly went to the holy Madhuvana, a hundred times holier 
than Gaya. Then the learned brahmaQa spoke to the brahmaQas 
living at that holy place, and again having invited them after some 
time, spoke to them words of welcome. Then having washed their 
feet and worshipped them with sandal etc. he made respectful 
offering at their feet, and similarly himself sipped (water). Then 
taking the brahma:Q.as he seated them at the place of the sraddha. 
And filling the pot (used) for the rite with darbhas, water, tulasi 
(leaves), flowers, sandal, sacred rice grains and sesamum-seeds, 
he remembered Vi!?:Q.U. The brahmaQas thrice recited the verse : 
Devatabhyal) . . . . Then he tied it containing sesamum-seeds with 
darbhas that were purified, in the directions beginning with the 
east, in the proper order with (the recital of) the hymn AgniÌvatta 
. . .. With the hymn RakÍobhuta . . . he tied the ends of the garment 
worn round the waist into a knot. Then taking the pledge, he gave 
darbha seat to the brahma:Q.as. Then the best brahmaQa invoked 
his dead ancestors. Then giving respectful offering into their

=== PAGE 159 ===

3088 
Padma Puriit;a 
hands, he turned down the vessel and made it lie on its face. 
Having offered sandal etc. he, with his sacred thread hanging 
down over the left shoulder, sipped water. Then the brahmal).a 
gave the pots after having his sacred thread (once) hanging 
down over the left and (once) over the right shoulder. 
10-24. Permitted by the brahma:Q.as, he offered oblations 
like ghee into the fire. Then he filled those vessels (with water), 
0 king. With his hand turned up and down he took the vessels 
and taught by the brahmal).as he recited (the hymn) Prthvi 
tva . . . With (the reciting of) the hymn AsamskrtapraÎitiiniim . . . 
the brahmal).as offered seats with the darbhas strewn (there) with 
their points in the southern direction. 0 king, with (the reciting 
of) the hymn Agnidagdha . . . he put food mixed with ghee and 
along with water on the seats made by darbhas. Again, with his 
sacred thread hanging down over the left shoulder, he sipped a 
mouthful of water. He asked them, "Are you satisfied?" They 
replied, "We are satisfied." He took the permis5ion of those 
brahmal).as to eat the remaining food. The brahmal).a made an 
altar of the measure of the length of twelve aitgulas, and drew a 
line facing the south with a darbha. He laid the firebrand with 
(the reciting of) the hymn Ye rupiiÎi . . . in the direction of fire. 0 
king, he duly offered darbha-seats and six piiJ.c;las only to them 
who were, in the former existence, his mother, father, so also to 
their parents, i.e. his grandfathers, so also, 0 best king, who 
were his maternal great-grandfather and paternal grandfather, 
along with their wives. Having worshipped them with sandal etc. 
and having cast off the middle piiJ.c;la and after having smelt the 
pot containing the piiJ.c;las, he put it on his left shoulder. Then 
taking the vessel containing water, and reciting (the hymn) Viije 
viije . . . again offering respectful oblation to their feet, he pleased 
them with presents etc. Having followed them up to the door, 
and having secured their permission, the brahmal).a dined along 
with his relatives, 0 king. 0 best king, when the best brahmal).a, 
after thus finishing the sraddha of his ancestors in the pious 
Madhuvana, and with his mind tranquil, started for his father's 
hermitage, he met on his way those who had eaten at the srad­
dha. They, seated in six aeroplanes, adorned with divine orna­
ments, wearing celestial garments thus spoke to the best 
brahma:Q.a :

=== PAGE 160 ===

Vl.214.25-37a 
3089 
The ancestors said: 
25-26. 0 child, 0 best brahma:Q.a, ask for an excellent boon. 
You, performing a sraddha at this holy place, have emancipated 
us. Due to your favour we have become Viᕨ:Q.u's attendants. 0 
you very intelligent one, ask for what is desired in (i.e. by) your 
mind. 
The sage's son said: 
27. 
Who are you? Wherefrom have you come? How did 
you become (Viᕨ:Q.u's) attendants? Why do you grant me a boon 
without my having obliged you? 
Niirada said: 
28. Hearing these words of the son in his former existence, 
the father, who had died after taking poison due to grief, said : 
The father said: 
29-35. 0 brahma:Q.a, I am your father, a brahma:Q.a, in your 
former existence. I was very much troubled by your . unchaste 
mother. Being extremely afflicted, I took poison at night, died 
prematurely, and, therefore, became a demon : 0 dear one, after 
being turned into a demon, I passed a period of Manu and one 
hundred and fifteen years (in that condition). Now in the (hund­
red and) sixteenth year, when you performed a sraddha in this 
meritorious holy place Madhuvana, I attained godhead. This 
aeroplane sent by lndra along with attendants and a host of the 
celestial nymphs has arrived from heaven for me to get in. I, 
along with the attendants and the host of celestial nymphs, have, 
while going to the heaven after getting into the excellent aero­
plane, come here to give you a boon. Ask for a boon. God bless 
you. We can't brook any delay. Indra, mounted upon the ele­
phant Airavata, is waiting for me. 
Niirada said: 
36-37a. 0 king, thus telling his son his own account, and 
giving him the devotion for ViᕥJ;J.u (as) asked by him, he went to 
heaven. Then his mother spoke to him, her son in the previous 
existence :

=== PAGE 161 ===

3090 
Padma Puriif.la 
The mother said: 
37b-41 . Due to your favour I have become a goddess and 
am freed from sins. 0 best briihma:Q.a, I, though a sinner, have 
become the friend of Saci, when you performed the sraddha at this 
holy place called Visriinti. 0 glorious one, ask for what is desired 
by your mind. I shall give it to you, since the words of us, the 
deities, are never falsified. 0 best briihma:Q.a, you know the sin 
due to which I, after staying in the hell for a long time, became an 
alligator in the cremation ground. 0 son, allow me (to go). Saci, 
surrounded by hosts of celestial ladies is waiting for me in the 
sky. 
Niirada said: 
42-43. 
0 king, his mother too, having thus spoken to him, 
her desireless son, went after being saluted by him with his head 
(bent down) to heaven. Then his grandfather, having similarity 
of form with Vit>:Q.U, again spoke (these) words to his grandson, 
the best briihma:Q.a. 
The grandfather said: 
44-46. 
0 child, 0 child, live long. Obtain what is desired 
by you. Due to your favour we have crossed over this ocean of 
mundane existence, difficult to cross. 0 child, I am your grand­
father, and this is your grandmother. The chaste lady followed 
me who had died, and soon obtained residence in the same hea­
ven (as of Vit>:Q.U). When today you performed the sriiddha-rite 
at Visriinti, we have obtained similarity of form with Vit>:Q.U in 
his heaven. 
Niirada said : 
47-48. 
0 best king, the briihma:Q.a, after having spoken like 
this, went along with her, his wife, to Vaikul).tha after having 
crossed Brahmii's world. 0 best king, listen attentively to the 
words, the briihma:Q.a, his great-grandfather spoke to him, which 
I am telling you. 
The great-grandfather said: 
49-54. 
0 child, 0 glorious one, I am your great-grand­
father. As a res ult of my causing an abortion, I obtained the stock

=== PAGE 162 ===

VI.2 14.55-66 
309 1 
of (i.e. was born as) a pig. Then I went out of it, and being op­
pressed by my sin, became a dog. Then I became an inanimate 
object on the best mountain, Vindhya. Then I who for a long 
time remained in that condition of an inanimate object, was 
forcibly uprooted by an elephant. Then at that time only you 
performed the sraddha at this excellent holy place. And therefore 
I was freed from that inanimate condition and got an excellent 
residence in the city of the lord of yakᕨas. 0 best brahma1;1a, 
permit me. Due to your favour I (shall) go. With the desire to 
see you I have come here, and have seen you of a pious appear­
ance (and) the Madhuvana, the best of all holy places. 
Narada said: 
55. 
Thus addressed by him, the sage's son, knowing religi­
ous merit, asked, after saluting his great-grandfather with (having 
bent) his head to him, his great-grandfather : 
The sage said: 
56-57. 0 dear one, you were born in a great brahmaJ;ta 
family. How did you, 0 great one, commit the sin of causing 
abortion, due to which you obtained (i.e. were born in) a series 
of censurable stocks? 0 illustrious one, tell me that if you re­
collect (it). 
The great-grandfather said: 
58-66. 0 best brahma1;1a, formerly, in the existence of a 
brahma1;1a, I maintained myself by the employment of spells and 
amulets. Due to greed of wealth, I, with my understanding des­
troyed due to (ill) luck, gave them (clients) medicine for concep­
tion and abortion ; for greed would take away the understanding 
of those having no wealth, as the sun takes away the water ofthe 
canals in the hot season. 0 dear one, when a man's understand­
ing perishes, he certainly commits a sin. Due to the sin he gets 
(into) a hell, and from there goes to (i.e. is born in) a bad stock. 
In that existence, one pregnant woman asked me : "0 brah­
maJ;ta, shall I give birth to a son or a girl?" Then I said to her: 
"A daughter will be born to you. (Therefore) I shall give you a 
medicine for the birth of a son." Thus addressed, the woman, 
the crest-jewel of the foolish, seized my feet and gave me a pala

=== PAGE 163 ===

3092 
Padma Purii7;1a 
of gold. She said to me : "I have given birth to six daughters. 
You have now told (i.e. predicted) the seventh. After her birth I 
shall not live. 0 brahmal).a do that by which I shall not give 
birth to another daughter destroying my life." 
67-79. Hearing these words of her, I again said to her : "At 
the time of your delivery I shall give you a medicine (capable of) 
generating a son." Saying, "All right" :and having heard me she 
went home and believing in my words, remained waiting for that 
time. When she had gone, I became anxious like this. Listen as 
to how I became so. I (shall) tell it. 'She convinced of the birth 
of a son, gave me a pala of gold. I did not know what (i.e. a boy 
or a girl) would be born to her. What should be done in this 
case? How would that (gold of) a measure of a pala remain in 
the house of me who am poor?' Thinking like this, I handed over 
to her maid that medicine causing abortion and made her give it 
to her. Due to that medicine she aborted in the third month (of 
pregnancy). The sign of either a boy or a girl was not noticed. 
She, dejected due to the abortion, came to my house, and having 
no hope for the birth of a son, demanded (back) the gold. Then 
I showed her powder of bricks (mixed) with ash, and mixed with 
turmeric powder and with water. "0 mother, for the birth of a 
son to you I have prepared this powder. For preparing that I re­
quired double the money that you had given me." Thus addres­
sed by me, she ignored the powder, and went home, saying to me, 
"0 brahmaQa, I shall take it from you at the proper time." 0 
dear one, I have thus caused a very fearful (sin of) abortion, due 
to which I roamed in three very censurable stocks. Now due to 
your favour I am freed from the state of an inanimate object. 0 
best sage, permit me. I (shall) go to the auspicious Alaka. 
Niirada said: 
80-82. 
0 king, his great-grandfather, speaking like this, and 
saluted by him with his head (bent down), went to the northern 
direction in a beautiful aeroplane having rows of small bells with 
gandharvas dancing (in it) and charming with jewelled ramparts. 
Then the great-grandmother of the brahmal).a seated in an excel­
lent aeroplane, spoke to her great-grandson, 0 great king :

=== PAGE 164 ===

VI.214.83-99 
3093 
The great-grandmother said : 
83-85. 0 you of a good vow, due to this religious merit you 
have not to go anywhere else except the temple marked with 
Vi኶l).u's lotus-like feet. 0 sage, this my sinful husband is your 
great-grandfather. He, of a very wicked mind, though warded off 
by me, committed a sin. He too, of a very sinful mind, is liberat­
ed by you from the ocean of misery. Who is able to describe your 
virtues ? 
Niirada said: 
86-96. 
Speaking like this, she too went to her husband's 
world, 0 best king. With that same husband she rejoiced in 
Alaka for a long time. Then all those-grandfather etc.-got 
into the aeroplanes along with their wives and went to heaven. 
The best brahmal).a went from that holy place to his father's 
hermitage. And he described to his father the full account. He 
also went along with his family to Madhuvana and prepared a 
hut of leaves near Visranti. The best sage, bathing three times (a 
day) at the holy place called Visranti, did not even long for 
Vi኱:l).u's world. 0 king, once, while bathing in the water he won­
dered : 'When shall I see Vi኱I).U ?' 0 king, when the excellent sage 
was wondering like this, Vi኱:l).u, seated on the king of birds. 
hastily came (there). He came along with Lak኱mi (close) to his 
chest ; he had four arms. The complexion of his body was like a 
fresh cloud. He was covered with a garment with the colour of 
lightning. His large chest was shining with the Kaustubha (jewel). 
He held a conch, a disc and a lotus. His neck shone with a gar­
land of wood-flowers. His earrings had the shape of crocodiles. 
His eyes resembled the blooming lotus-flowers. His hands were 
tawny, and feet had good soles. Covering the directions with the 
mass (of lustre) like that of the moon, he spoke to the best 
brahma:l).a, illumining him with his lustre : 
The lord said: 
97-99. 
0 best brahrna:l).a, this is 
the meritorious place 
known as Visranta, and sacred to me. It gives all desired objects 
on one's bathing in it. Today at the time of your bath you long­
ed for my sight. I have presented it, difficult to be obtained by

=== PAGE 165 ===

3094 
Padma Puriil)a 
gods, to you. 0 brahma:o.a, give up this human body. Take up a 
divine one. Mounting on the lord of birds, come to my place 
along with me. 
Niirada said: 
100. 
0 king, having heard these words of the lord of 
Lakᕨmi, the chief of sages, bowing down, praised him (by re­
maining) in the water only. 
The sage said: 
1 0 1 - 1 07. 
0 lord of Lakᕨmi, your beautiful lotus-like feet 
have lovely lotuses offered to them. They destroy the torment of 
the mundane existence and are saluted by gods. 0 lord, those be­
ings that are deluded by your Maya here, can never be liberated 
without your grace. 0 lord, due to their resorting to holy places, 
and their company with the good, devotion (for you) in (these) 
men is produced due to your grace. 0 Viᕨ:o.u, he who, having 
heard the narration of your merits uttered (i.e. made) by many 
good people and destroying all sins, repeats it, would not fall 
into the cavity of a mother's womb. 0 lord of Lakᕨmi, the mind 
of your man (i.e. devotee), (though) fallen into the great going 
(of the mundane existence) and covered with dust (i.e. passion), 
does not, like an excellent gem, give up its purity. The man who 
having horripilation on his body falls (prostrate) like a staff at 
your lotus-like feet, takes his family to your place, longed for by 
all meditating saints. 0 lord, this very soul, deluded by your 
Maya roams along all paths, (but) by means of the glances of 
your charming eyes, crosses the ocean in the form of the world. 
Niirada said: 
108- 1 1 1 . Praising Viᕨ:o.u like this, the best sage, saying, 
'Victory to you', fell at his feet (prostrating himself) like a staff. 
Lakᕨmi's lord, raised the best sage fallen at his feet like a staff, 
and the universal Soul put him and (the members of) his family 
on Garuc.Ia and went to Vaiku:o.tha. 0 Sibi, I have told you 
the greatness, destroying all sins, of Madhuvana, 0 king. What 
else do you desire to hear? A man who listens to this (account) 
is freed from all sins.

=== PAGE 166 ===

CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED FIFTEEN 
Budha Infuriated and Appeased 
Saubhari said: 
I . 0 Yudhiᕨthira, having heard these auspicious words of 
Nii.rada, modest Sibi Ausinara said to him : 
Sibi said: 
2-4. 0 sage, from your mouth (i.e. from you) I have heard 
about the greatness of Madhuvana ; but there is some doubt in 
my mind. How was he, of a pious mind, who liberated all his 
kinsmen, the son of a wanton woman, in two existences? 0 
revered one, tell this. You virtually know everything-the past, 
the present, and the future also, 0 Nii.rada. 
Niirada said: 
5-9. 
Once all sages gathered at Haridvii.ra on the tenth of the 
bright half of Jyeᕨtha connected with all festivals. There they 
having duly bathed and performed their (respective) auspicious 
rites, rested on the surface of Himalaya with their hearts at ease. 
Into the company of the sages, there came Budha, Tii.rii.'s son, 
full of excessive handsomeness and, as it were, another Cupid 
embodied. Seeing him coming all the sages got up. Saluted by 
him with his head (bent down), they again sat down. Seeing the 
regard shown to Budha by the pre-eminent sages, the sage's son 
thus asked his father, 0 lord : 
The sage's son said: 
10. 
0 father, who is this that has come (here), who is an­
other Cupid in handsomeness and very much respected by 
sages like Vyii.sa? 
Niirada said: 
1 1. 
The pious, best sage, having heard these words of his 
son, said to him who had insisted (on knowing who Budha was) : 
The father said: 
12. This is the intelligent, great son of Brhaspati, the pre-

=== PAGE 167 ===

.JUO 
Padma PuriiT,Za 
ceptor of gods, and born of Tara, and the perpetuator of the 
family ofthe Moon. 
The son said: 
1 3-15. 
0 father, how have you spoken irrelevant words? 
How is he the son of Brhaspati as well as the perpetuator of the 
family of the Moon? 0 father, the Moon was born of Anasiiya 
from the chief of the sages, viz. Atri. How can this son of Brhas­
pati perpetuate his family? 0 father, this is a great doubt lurking 
in my mind. 0 best brahmaQ.a, remove that doubt of your child 
who is coᕻfused. 
The father said: 
16-24. 0 dear one, formerly Brhaspati's glorious wife nam­
ed Tara was forcibly kidnapped by the powerful Candra (i.e. the 
Moon). Kidnapping Brhaspati's wife the Moon took her to his 
house and dallied with her for a long time. 0 dear one, after 
some time she conceived. Then Brhaspati appealed (to Candra 
to return) his wife. Candra too, overcome by pride and puffed 
up by his power, did not give her (back). Then, 0 dear one, 
Brhaspati, getting ready along with gods like Indra, started fight­
ing with the powerful Candra. To help Candra Sukra then came 
there to the battle that was commenced with the demons. Then a 
great war for Tara took place. All people will look upon (that 
battle called) Tarakamaya as important. In that very terrible 
war (both) gods and demons were killed. 0 dear one, no one 
was victorious or defeated. Then Brahma came there, and stop­
ping that fierce battle, gave, after admonishing the Moon, Tara to 
Brhaspati. Brhaspati, seeing Tara to be pregnant, was angry, and 
in the presence of Brahma (said to) Tara in the gathering of the 
gods and demons : 
Brhaspati said: 
25. 
0 Tara of unsteady eyes, listen to my words. Whose 
child do you bear-of Candra or of me? 
The father said: 
26-27. 0 dear one, when that beautiful (Tara) who was 
abashed and was thus repeatedly asked, did not say anything to

=== PAGE 168 ===

Vl.2 1 5.28-46 
:JU'.I I 
him, then he (i.e. Budha), who was born (ofher) and was angry, 
said to his mother when the gods and demons were looking on 
(i.e. in the presence of the gods and the demons). 
Budha !aid: 
28. Why do you not, giving up your sense of shame, declare 
my father? See the power of my curse. 
The father said: 
29-32. When, speaking like this, he was on the point of 
cursing her after taking water, she gently said : "Candra is your 
father." When the chaste lady spoke like this, Candra gladly took 
this Budha, his own son, and went home. Brhaspati also took 
that Tara and went home. Brahma, (other) gods, and demons also 
went home. I have told you all this that you had asked me as to 
how he, born of Brhaspati's wife, perpetuates Candra's line. 
Niirada said: 
33-34. Hearing these words of his father, the sage's son 
laughed loudly and said to his father : "This is the son of a wan­
ton lady, born in adultery." 
The father said to the son : 
0 son, don't speak (like) this. He, knowing (what is going on 
in) the heart of every being will, understanding your words, curse 
you. 
Niirada said: 
35. 0 king, when the sage had spoken like this, the son of 
Candra understood what he had said, and while all the sages were 
listening, he said : 
Budha said: 
36-46. 
0 best sages, may you listen to my words ; and think 
whether they are good or bad. Do not delay. To see you who 
know the truth, I have come here. I have not in the least offend­
ed anyone. (Then) why do the infatuated ones insult me through 
jealousy? I long to see you to make my life fruitful. It is the very 
nature of the wicked that they, like the cuckoos with sweet notes,

=== PAGE 169 ===

3098 
Padma Puriil)a 
sometimes upset the good though innocent. The wicked do not 
abandon their wicked nature even in the company of the good, 
as the ocean becomes saline even in the company of the water of 
Ganga. Oh ! (see) the wickedness of the hunter that he kills the 
deer leading life like sages, moving in the forest, and knowing 
their own songs(?). What offence have the fish done to the wicked 
fishermen that they kill them moving in the water at a sacred 
place? It is their very nature. The good also do not give up their 
nature in the company of the wicked, as the sandal trees, though 
surrounded by serpents, do not abandon their coolness. The good 
dance (with joy) even at the prosperity of their enemy. Then 
what to say of (the prosperity of) one belonging to their own 
party? The best sages are eager as the peacocks are (at the sight) 
of a cloud. The good sustain even their bodies for the good of 
others, as my father bears the digits for the sake of manes, 
gods and men. To the good the continual rise (of others) causes 
joy, as the cool rays of my father (the Moon) cause joy to the 
white water lilies. 
Niirada said: 
47-5 1 . Angrily speaking these words, Budha cursed that 
sage's son : "You too quickly become, like me, a son born in 
adultery on the earth." Having heard the curse given by Budha, 
the father made his son fall at his (i.e. Budha's) feet, saying, 
"(Please) forgive (him)". And he said, "This boy does not know 
your grandeur. It is not proper for (persons) like you to be 
angry with this boy. Forgiveness is the nature of a good man 
who is angry for some reason, as coolness in the nature of water 
heated by fire. Therefore, having forgiven him quickly favour 
this child having no discrimination, for forgiveness is the essence 
of the good." 
Narada said: 
52. 
(Budha,) the son of Candra, thus addressed by him, 
gave up his anger, and with a cool mind favoured him. 
Budha said: 
53-58. 0 sage, this your son after being born in adultery on

=== PAGE 170 ===

VI.216. 1-12 
3099 
the earth, will obtain the perpetual place after a sacred thread is 
given to him (i.e. after his thread-ceremony) . 
0 best king, due to the curse of Budha the sage's son obtain­
ed birth as a son born in adultery, and liberated his dead ances­
tors. Having heard this purifying greatness of Madhuvana, a 
man gets the entire fruit of a horse-sacrifice. The mind of those 
men who keep in it the excellent significance of this greatness, is 
not overpowered by objects of senses. There is no doubt that 
those highly intelligent ones who will recite and listen to this 
(description of the) greatness will go, after casting their body, to 
ViɄ:Q.u's world. I have described to you this ceaselessly pure ac­
count of Madhuvana, which delights the lord of Lakami, which 
promptly cuts off the mass of blemishes due to Kali, which is the 
cause of warding off the senses going astray (and of leading to) 
the pious form (of ViɄ:Q.u). 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED SIXTEEN 
The Greatness of Badarikiisrama 
Niirada said: 
1-12. 0 king, this Badarikiisrama is situated in the region of 
just eleven dhanus (i.e. forty-four hastas) from this Madhuvana. 
To you I shall describe the wonderful greatness of this excellent 
holy place. One listening to it is free from fear. 0 king, there was 
in Magadha a truthful, restrained brahma:Q.a named Devadasa, 
who was, as it were, another Dharma. Proficient in all lores he 
was, as it were, another Brhaspati. Like Prahlada, the king of 
demons, he pleased Via:Q.u. Though he had a wife, he had con­
quered, like Siva, Cupid. Like the sage Visvamitra he was al­
ways engaged in good acts. He was honoured in the house of 
Magadha's lord, as Dro:Q.a in Kuru's house. Like Bali, lord of 
demons, he was disposed to giving gifts to worthy recipients. His 
wife by name Uttama was excellent with virtues like Lakami. 
She was engaged in serving her husband like Janaka's daughter 
(Sita). He had one intelligent son named Ailgada ; and he had

=== PAGE 171 ===

3100 
Padma Purii7;1a 
one daughter Valayii by name, having excellent marks. Of them 
the son was elder, the daughter was younger, 0 king. The best 
briihma:Q.a got them married in due course. 0 king, that daugh­
ter, endowed with auspicious marks, who was married, went to 
her father-in-law's house after some time. The very intelligent 
Atigada who knew all holy texts and who was adorned with the 
splendour of youth, bore the burden (i.e. the responsibility) of 
the household. Once that best briihma:Q.a, seeing his son to be 
capable of managing the duties, said to his wife, 0 best king : 
Devadasa said: 
1 3-21. 0 good lady, listen to my words proper for this 
time ; (and) then quickly do what is fit, 0 good one. This old age 
has come. Causing the limbs to tremble as a storm causes to 
tremble a ripe fruit, it will cause the body to fall. 0 you of a 
good vow, it will also make dull the brightness of the eyes, as the 
morning time makes dull the brightness of the stars along with 
the moon. Like an iron fetter this old age will lessen the speed 
of the stumbling feet at every step. Therefore, 0 auspicious one, 
as long as this old age does not become advanced, we should 
quickly do what is good to us. 0 fortunate one, a house, sons, 
friends, brothers, parents are perishable. So also is wealth etc. A 
wise man is not attached to them. Therefore, I, with my senses 
controlled, will wander, in the manner of an anchorite, about all 
holy places and will see Viļ:Q.u. Then, 0 auspicious one, taking to 
renunciation at an excellent holy place, I shall cast my body at the 
end of the fructification of my karmas. If thus I would be free 
from life, salvation would be (possible) for me who have properly 
placed my mind at the lotus-like feet of Lakami 's lord. 
Uttama said: 
22-25. What man or woman (except one) having no sense 
would take delight in the perishable mundane existence, leaving 
Via:Q.u (i.e. and leave Via:Q.u), the perpetual abode? Therefore, 0 
lord of my life, take me, serving your lotus-like feet with you, and 
quickly lift me up from the ocean of the worldly existence. This 
(our) glorious son Aiigada has become capable of sustaining the 
burden of the household. This auspicious daughter-in-law will 
help him. That foolish man or woman, who, when his or her son

=== PAGE 172 ===

VI.216.26-41a 
3 101 
is capable (of looking after the household), would not be detach­
ed, is deprived of bliss. 
Niirada said: 
26. 
Having thus talked to each other, that couple called 
their son A:rigada on the same day and told him : 
The couple said: 
27-33. 0 A:rigada, know us to have our limbs drooping due 
to the appearance of old age. At some holy place we shall strive 
for our spiritual good. Devoutly worshipping Vi!;l:Q.U is said to be 
the highest good. For that only the desireless good people strive 
on the earth. They who have no attachment for objects of senses, 
who look equally upon all beings, who are neither delighted nor 
dejected due to pleasure or pain, are alone the good men, serv­
ing the feet of Vigm. By merely seeing them a man is blessed. A 
wise man, eager to see him (i.e. Via:Q.u), and wandering about the 
holy places, would see him by good luck. Therefore, 0 A:rigada, 
having placed on your two long arms the burden of (maintain­
ing) the family, allow us to go on a pilgrimage. 0 son, if, in 
course of our pilgrimage, we may see a good man, then we 
would be blessed. 
Niirada said: 
34-36. Thus addressed by the parents, the son spoke good 
words : "You have told this to be the emancipation of the entire 
family. Quickly order me what beneficial thing to you I should 
do. I always obey the orders of you whose feet are respectable 
(to me). Take with you the excellent wealth stored by you for 
giving gifts at holy places. So also take me with you as a servant 
to serve you." 
Niirada said: 
37-4la. Speaking like this, and taking money (with him) 
he went with them for a couple of krosas ; and somehow sent 
back by them, he came home. They took some money with 
them, and thinking, 'May Via:Q.u come to us' lived there for 
three days, eating bulbs, roots and fruits. 0 king, when the 
couple set off from that place, they met a siddha on their way.

=== PAGE 173 ===

3 102 
Padma Puriif)a 
Saluted by both of them with their heads (bent down) he sat 
down. When the chief of siddhas was seated, they asked him 
thus : "Tell (us) who you are, wherefrom you have come, what 
you desire to do". 
The siddha said: 
41b-46. 
0 best ascetic, I am a siddha. My house is at 
Kalpagrama. I have come from Indraprastha. There I saw a 
great wonder. There is the siddha Kapila resembling ViaI).u in 
merits. Learning Sa.rhkhya from him I lived in his hermitage. 
Once my celebrated teacher, Kapila, went from his hermitage to 
the very holy (place) called Badari, to bathe in the water of 
Yamuna. There one wild buffalo, oppressed by thirst, entered 
the water of Yamuna, and having drunk it, recollected his former 
existence. The wild buffalo, having recollected his past deeds, 
quickly came out of the water and saluted (my) teacher, Kapila ; 
and when I was listening, the buffalo spoke with a human voice, 
which I (shall) tell you today. Listen to it, (which is) very 
wonderful. 
The buffalo said: 
47-48. 0 you Kapila, 0 you who are a portion of ViaQu, 0 
you lord of the siddhas, tell me who have bowed to you, what 
the name of this great holy place is. Due to the touch of the 
water of this excellent holy place, I got (the recollection) of my 
deeds in the past existence, 0 illustrious one. 
The siddha said: 
49. Having heard these words of the buffalo, the great sage, 
though he knew his account, laughed and said these words : 
Kapila said: 
50. 
0 best of buffaloes, who were you in your former exis­
tence? What deed did you do then, due to which you obtained 
(i.e. were born in) the stock of the buffalo? 
The buffalo said: 
51-61. 0 best sage, listen to the account of my former 
existence. Formerly I was a king, the mighty chief of Kalitiga.

=== PAGE 174 ===

Deluded by passion I did not know (i.e. discriminate between) 
my wife and that of another. I took away the wealth of sinless 
merchants ofgood conduct. O king{?), I, being fearless, wandered 
at night in the city to dally with beautiful wives of others. I, 
deluded by Cupid, at night lived in th:1t house in which I saw a 
beautiful woma.::t, as an elephant lives in a field. Sporting there 
fearlessly, and snatching wealth from that house, I returned to 
my house after a few days. By day I seated in my assembly made 
two city-lads fight a base duel in front of me. Regarding the boy 
who put down (the other boy) as rich, I forcibly took the 
wealth, little or much, of his father. Saying, "This one due to his 
cowardice is not fit to live in my city", I killed him who was de­
feated, 0 sage. The citizens seeing the king to have begun be­
having like this, abandoned the city, and went to another coun­
try. Durviisas, the great sage born of Rudra, while roaming over 
the earth once came to my city. Then all citizens, gathering to­
gether approached him. Saluting him, they spoke to him these 
words acquainting him with their misery : 
The citizens said: 
62-71 . 0 son of Atri, 0 best sage, 0 treasure of pity, favour 
us. Turn to piety this king, engrossed in doing unrighteous 
deeds. Due to the dawn of our good fortune you have come 
(here). Rescue us like a raft from this ocean of misery due to the 
king who is transgressing its limits. 0 best sage, the greedy one 
took away our wealth. The passionate one spoilt chaste and 
innocent ladies. Many children aged about ten years were killed 
by him. 0 great sage, this king is the storໟ of innumerable faults. 
The buffalo said: 
Having heard these words of the citizens, that sage, the son 
of Atri, thinking , 'He must be punished', came to my assembly. 
Seeing the naked sage coming, I stopped him through my ser­
vants, saying, "Rլ is not fit to be seen." I many times ordered 
my servants : "Stop him whose figure is like that of a buffalo, 
with his entire body smeared with dust." Then the servants 
quickly went tv stop him. Just by means of a 
'hum ' sound the 
sage reduced all of them to ash , as you did Sagara's sons, pro­
tecting the sacrificial horse of their father. Seeing the servants to

=== PAGE 175 ===

be completely reduced to ash, I quickly got up and was about to 
enter my house. The best sage, addressing me as "0 sinner", 
cursed me : 
72-77. "Now become a buffalo in a great forest." Thus 
cursed by him, I gave up the royal body ; I became a buffalo in a 
great forest in the Maru country, 0 sage. 0 best sage, I lived 
there for a long time. Hear due to which religious merit I have 
come here. I had got constructed many reservoirs of water, wells, 
and tanks. I had (also) planted many mango trees on (the sides 
of) the path. 0 god, due to that religious merit, I did not fall into 
a hell. And I got the contact of the water of this holy place. I 
have thus told you about the righteous and unrighteous deeds in 
my former birth, due to which I reached this holy place, and due 
to which I had reached the buffalo's stock. Due to the touch of 
the water of this excellent place, I remembered my former exis­
tence. 0 sage, tell me how I shall be free from this miserable stock. 
Kapila said: 
78. This holy place of Lakami's lord called Badari is very meri­
torious. Bathe here, you will quickly obtain what is in your mind. 
The siddha said: 
79-80. 0 great sage, having heard these words of the king, 
he, desiring heaven, entered (the water oO the holy place to 
bathe. When, having bathed there with a desire (to go) to hea­
ven, he came to the bank from the water, Indra came there just at 
that moment from heaven. 
Indra said: 
8 1 . 0 lord of Kalinga, give up your body of the buffalo. Re­
ceiving a divine body come to my heaven. You bathed (here) with 
a desire to (reach) heaven ; you have secured that abode of gods. 
The siddha said: 
82-83. Thus addressed by him, he then abandoned his body 
of buffalo, and securing a divine body, he mounted upon the 
lord of elephants. Having mounted upon the lord of elephants, 
and remaining in the air for a moment, and saluting the god 
with his head bent down, he praised the sage Kapila.

=== PAGE 176 ===

VI.216.84-101 
3 105 
The Ka/in.ga-king said: 
84-92. 
0 highest lord, salutation to you, the cause of abso­
lute knowledge, the bridge to all Vedic sciences, and an enemy of 
those who oppose them. The flow of the samkhya (principles) 
causing the knowledge of the absolute truth among the human 
beings whose minds are overpowered by illusion, is due to you, 
0 lord. 0 sage, you punish and throw into stocks of lower 
animals those who give up what is laid down in the Vedas and 
behave as they like. All regents of quarters like Indra are under 
your control. Afraid of you, the chastiser, they do what you 
desfre. You, the soul of all, caused the gods to incarnate in each 
former yuga to destroy those opposing the practices laid down 
in the three Vedas. 0 lord, those enemies of gods who were kill­
ed by you, gave up their sorrowful bodies and reached Vigm's 
heaven. 0 lord of the world, order me to go to heaven. Also 
favour Indra, with your nectar-like glances, who is bowing to you. 
0 lord of gods, by the favour of you and (the holy place) called 
Badari, I have given up my miserable body, and have got a vir­
tuous body. 0 you treasure of grace, by your favour, I am, after 
mou11ting upon the lord of elephants, going to heaven willingly. 
The siddha $aid: 
93-96. Thus praising Kapila, the lord of gods, and saluting 
his feet, the Kalinga-king went to heaven. 0 brahmaJ}.a, I, 
attending upon my preceptor, saw this wonder and also libera­
tion from sin at Badarikiisrama. In the three worlds there is no 
better holy place giving all (desired) objects. If you desire the 
highest good, go there with your wife. 0 brahmaJ}.a, to take my 
old father desiring salvation (and) having no other yearning to 
Badari, I am going home. 
Narada said: 
97-101 . 
0 king, after having narrated the greatness of this 
excellent holy place called Badari, the siddha went home. Then 
after some time that brahmaJ}.a (Devadiisa) along with his wife, 
visiting (various) holy places, reached Indraprastha where the 
two were taken to his own abode by him (i.e. Vasudeva) (appear­
ing) in his own body (corrupt reading). The siddha also, 
having quickly brought his father from his house, bathed him,

=== PAGE 177 ===

J106 
Padma Puriif.la 
desiring salvation, there only at that excellent holy place. The 
old father of that siddha, saluted by gods, was also taken to his 
own abode by Sri ViɄJ).u. This (holy place) called Badari, is in 
Indraprastha. The lord would give all the objects desired by the 
minds of those bathing here. 0 king of a modest mind, I have 
described to you its holy greatness. Having heard it, a man will 
never fall into a mother's womb (i.e. he will bever be reborn). 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED SEVENTEEN 
The Greatness of Haridviira 
The king said: 
1-5. 0 good one, you have described to me the greatness of 
Badari, having heard which my mind has become pure, 0 sage. 
0 best sage, this excellent, wonderful greatness of Sakraprastha 
gives all the four goals of human life. 0 Narada, there is no 
other holy place than this, which is the best, which gives salva­
tion even to lower animals, which destroys sins just when it is 
seen. 0 Narada, from you, giving delight, I really desire to hear 
about the greatness of Haridvara which is in it. 0 sage, by the 
description of this holy place situated in Sakraprastha, emanci­
pate me who am a poor person due to wanton d໠eds indulged in 
because of ignorance. 
Niirada said: 
6-19. 0 illustrious one, listen. I shall describe to you the 
greatness of Haridvara, giving the fruit of a horse-sacrifice. I 
spall tell you today how a sinful caJ).c;lala went to heaven. 0 lord, 
listen to it attentively. In DharmakɄetra Kurukaetra there lived, 
outside the city, a sinful caJ).c;lala known as Kalhiga. He cheated 
the citizens' boys, five or six years old, forcibly took them to a 
forest, and killed them there, 0 king. Having killed them, the 
mean one took away silver, golden ornaments, and jewels etc. 
from their bodies. At night be entered the houses of the good to 
snatch away wealth. Aiming at the wealth of travellers, he killed

=== PAGE 178 ===

VI .217 .20-30 
3 107 
them in a lonely forest. Once, on the day of a solar eclipse, 
people desiring to make various presents came to Kurukٹetra 
from many quarters, 0 king. 0 king, having, on that solar eclipse 
day, duly bathed there, and having duly given presents, the 
people went home. One, best among merchants, having much 
wealth, proceeded towards his house after all men. He, seated 
on a horse, had twenty foot-soldiers in front of him. That 
great sinner Kiilitiga proceeded after him for (snatching) his 
wealth. After having traversed (the distance of) a few camps, the 
mean man, the cii:Q<;iiila could not wait (as) he did not get an 
opportunity to rob his wealth. Even with force he was unable 
to seize his wealth. The merchant was accompanied by twenty 
men, while he was alone. 0 king, the sinful (ca:Q.<;iiila) came for 
(snatching) the merchant's wealth. At night he entered his camp 
to take away his wealth. But one of the merchant's men keeping 
a watch, noticed the sinner while entering. 
20-25. Seeing him about to give a blow, the man keeping 
the watch, even while lying, seized him by both his feet, 0 king. 
The man, keeping the watch, seizing his feet, and awakening 
other people, was struck by the thief just with his hand. Other 
people, hearing (the sound) seized him who was running away. 
Again striking him who had seized him, he ran away. 0 king, 
one of the (merchant's) servants having a bow, struck the mean 
one who was quickly running, from a distance only. As soon 
as he was struck by the arrow, he quickly gave up his life. The 
thief killed two followers of the merchant, 0 king. The three, 
getting into excellent vehicles brought by the attendants, remain­
ed in the sky, and spoke these words to the merchant. 
KaHizga and the merchant's servants said: 
26-27. 0 chief merchant, 0 good one, this Haridvara is an 
excellent holy place in lndraprastha which is propitious even to 
sinners. 0 merchant, we three who died at this excellent holy 
place, will now go to heaven. Good luck to you. 
Sri Niirada said : 
28-30. 0 Sibi, speaking like this the three went to heaven, 
the place of those who do good deeds and where many things of 
enjoyment are obtained according to (one's) desire. 0 king,

=== PAGE 179 ===

3 108 
Padma PuriiTJa 
when the night had passed, the merchant burnt the dead bodies 
of his two servants and dropped their bones here. 0 king, when 
the bones were being dropped at this holy place, the two servants 
came back here from heaven, and said these words to the 
merchant: 
The two servants said: 
3 1-36. 0 chief of the merchants, 0 good one, due to death 
at this holy place on the earth, even sinful beings undoubtedly 
go to heaven. 0 merchant, if the bones of a being who dies on a 
dry land, fall into the water of his holy place, he would stay in 
Satyaloka. Due to the bones of us who died on a dry land being 
dropped in the water (of this holy place) we have reached Brah­
ma's world, and will stay here as long as Brahma lives (here). 
Since the bones of the thief who died on a dry ground did not fall 
in the water of this holy place, he went to heaven, 0 king. Finding 
out his body also quickly drop it into (the water of) this place, so 
that, 0 best god, he too will obtain our state. Good men should 
always oblige others. They should never mind even a very bad 
turn done by the bad. 
Niirada said: 
37-49. Speaking like this the two illustrious ones went to 
Viٹ1,1u's city(?) due to their bones being dropped into the water of 
the holy place of Haridvara. 0 illustrious one, the merchant 
looked for the thief's body to burn it ; but, 0 king, he did not 
find it. Again returning to that crest-jewel of all holy places, viz. 
Haridvara, 0 great king, he bathed there only with the desire : 
'Having produced good sons, having pleased brahma1,1as and my 
kinsmen by (giving them) wealth earned righteously, and having 
propitiated Via1,1u by serving him, and having died at you (i.e. 
at this holy place) only, I shall go to Via1,1u's abode. 0 lord 
of the holy places, salutation to you. You must do this.' With 
this desire, 0 king, the merchant bathed with all his servants at 
that holy place giving all desired objects, and then went home. 
Having gone there the intelligent one produced sons on his wife 
and pleased his kinsmen by (giving them) wealth earned right­
eously. 0 king, having propitiated Lakami's lord with great devo­
tion, he died at this holy place, due to which he would reach

=== PAGE 180 ===

Vl.218.1-9 
3 109 
Vaiku:Q.tha. 0 king, I have thus described to you the greatness of 
this holy place Haridviira. Listen to the fruit (obtained) by listen­
ing to it. A man would obtain that fruit which he would obtain 
by giving a dro:Q.a (approximately 30 kilograms) of sesamum seeds 
(to a briihma:Qa) in Miigha. The fruit due to listening to (the 
account of) the greatness of this (holy place) is the same as by 
giving gopicandana, and eating from brahma-leaves(?). The same 
fruit as is obtained on keeping awake in the last watch of the 
Prabodhini Ekiidasi would be obtained by listening to (the account 
of) the greatness of this holy place. There is no other holy place 
on the earth, giving the fruit of the four goals of human life. 
like this Haridviira in Indraprastha. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED EIGHTEEN 
The Greatness of Puέkara : PufJ4arika's Story 
Niirada said: 
1-2. 0 illustrious one, listen to the very wonderful greatness. 
causing propitiousness, of the holy place Puakara, situated here. 
Via:Qu, the lord of all gods, being pleased due to the grace of that 
holy place would live in Pu:Qgarika's house for a month. His 
younger brother, though engaged in committing sins, obtained 
salvation here only. 
Sibi said: 
3-5. Who is that righteous Pul}.garika? What act did he do, 
due to which the lord, being pleased, lived in his house? 0 sage, 
tell me all that how his sinful younger brother reached Sri Hari's 
place due to the grace of this holy place. Listening to its greatness 
I am not being satisfied. 
Niirada said: 
6-9. In the Vidarbha-city, there lived a briihmal}.a called 
Miilava, who was very famous, who knew the Vedas, who was 
tranquil, learned and highly devoted to Vial}.u, who worshipped

=== PAGE 181 ===

3 1 10 
Padma Puriil:za 
deities, sages, dead ancestors, and fed beings and men. He was 
not addicted to the objects of senses, and was free from greed 
and folly. Once that illustrious one went to bathe to the very 
holy Godavari, when Jupiter had entered the Zodiacal sign Leo. 
To offer (to brahmat)as) there he took ten thousand palas of 
gold from his house. The righteous one going along the way 
thought in his mind : 
Miilm•a said (to himself) : 
1 0- 1 6. 
From my house I have taken ten thousand palas of 
gold to be given (to brahmat)as). They are not to be given to 
anyone. They are to be given to a respectable good man. That 
which is given at the proper place and time to a worthy brahmat)a 
who has not rendered any service (to the giver), would be inex­
haustible. The righteous sage, himself living by gleaning corn, 
having given what was obtained by gleaning corn to Durvasas, 
gave up his own position, and went to the highest one. King 
Bali, the lord of the demons, knowing Vamana to be a worthy 
recipient, gave him, even his enemy, the three worlds earned 
with his own arms (i.e. power). Therefore, to please ViƻI).U, 
I should give my wealth, earned righteously, to a worthy re­
cipient. I should not long for its fruit. My sister's son, the pious 
Put).c;larika, who is the crest-jewel of all worthy recipients, will 
come when called from (the city) called Gaja. Half of the wealth 
brought by me I shall give to that worthy recipient, my sister's 
son. The remaining I shall duly give to learned brahmat).as. 
Niirada said: 
1 7-2 1 . 
0 king, then that best, pious brahmat).a Malava, 
reached after a few days the holy Godavari. His sister's son, 
Pu:t;.c;larika, the pious one, joined him. 0 king, he had come 
there before that Malava. Having duly bathed there, on the day 
when (the Sun) entered Leo, he gave half of his wealth to PuiJ.c;l­
arika, saying, "May ViɄI).u be pleased with me." That pious 
Pu:t;.c;larika also, having bathed in the water of Godavari, gladly 
gave the fourth part of his wealth to learned brahma:Q.as. He (i.e. 
Malava), having bathed there and given gifts according to his 
capacity, spoke to his sister's son who was going home, 0 king:

=== PAGE 182 ===

V1.218.22-44a 
3 1 1 1 
Miilava said: 
22-27. Tell (i.e. convey) my salutation to the elders and 
blessings to the younger, since, our union here has become (i.e. 
proved) to be momentary. Similarly our union with our sons, 
wife is momentary. Therefore, that wise man who gets detached 
from the mundane existence, where the union is momentary, 
would certainly be fit for Viᕮ:Q.u's favour. Due to viᕮ:Q.u's grace, 
a being would be interested in good company. Then in him is 
produced a desire to hear about ViᕮlJ.u's playful acts. Having 
heard ViᕮJ:tu's playful acts narrated by the good, he with a strong 
desire narrates them and then merely remembers Viᕮ:Q.u. Then he 
has love for serving Viᕮ:Q.u's feet. Then a man quickly crosses 
(the mundane existence) as a great ocean with a raft. For this 
reason, the good, the wise exert in deeds. 0 pious one, there­
fore, you also exert. 
Niirada said: 
28-34. Thus speaking, he, with his face bedewed with tears, 
dismissed his sister's son, with his eyes full of tears and went 
(home). The pious Pu:Q.<;larika also proceeded to his house. 0 
king, after a few days, he came to this auspicious place. He saw 
'his younger brother called Bharata, fallen on the ground, breath­
ing, and smeared with blood flowing out of his wounds. Weep­
ing loudly, he asked his brother : "Due to what are you reduced 
to this condition? For what purpose have you come here from 
(your) house?" 0 lord of kings, when Pu:Q.<;larika was asking like 
this Bharata affiicted by great pain, instantly died. 0 king, while 
men and his preceptor were watching, a wonderful vehicle with 
attendants descended from the sky. Having got into it, that 
Bharata, though he had committed sins, became one of a divine 
body, saluted his elder brother, and said these words to him : 
Bharata said: 
35-44a. 
0 very intelligent Pu:Q.<;larika, due to the grace of 
this holy place, Puᕥkara, I, though a sinner, secured a position 
in heaven. 0 brother, though you know my fierce deed, yet I 
shall today tell it (again), (because) some (part of it) is unknown 
to you. I dallied with the prostitute Prabha.vati, and spent much

=== PAGE 183 ===

31 12 
Padma PuriiiJ.a 
money on liquor in her house. I lost in gambling whatever wealth 
I had earned by stealing. I ate the remnants of the offering to 
Siva on Sivaratri, for which you blamed a brahmal).a named 
Jebuka. 0 Pul).<;larika, you know this deed which I did. 0 bro­
ther, you do not know the deed which I did when you went to 
Godavari. I shall tell you that also. When you had left, and a 
fortnight had passed, I learnt from people words difficult to be 
borne by a man, viz. that the maternal uncle had called Pul).<;l­
arika to give him wealth . 'Having killed Pul).<;larika, my uterine 
brother, I shall snatch away the wealth taken by him which (our) 
maternal uncle has given him ; and with that great wealth I shall 
please Prabhiivati. I shall play with a gamester and those who 
know it (i.e. gambling).' 
44b-47. Thinking like this I remained blocking your way, to 
kill you and to take much wealth from you, 0 you very intelli­
gent one. When the wealth was (to be) taken possession of (by 
me), 0 brother, from somewhere a caravan of merchants came, 
where I had slept at night, 0 very intelligent one. Then at night 
a thief entered the place full of the men of the caravan to snatch 
the wealth of the merchants. When the thief, after having taken 
some wealth, ran:away the servants, crying, suddenly ran after him. 
The servants said: 
48. Catch him, catch him. He is a thief going away hurried­
ly after having snatched much wealth in the midst of us (though) 
many. 
Bharata said : 
49-54. 
0 brother, having heard these words of them, I 
suddenly ran after him in front of them with a desire to seize 
whatever he had snatched. Then the merchants' servants with 
swords in their hands, taking me to be his protector, and having 
a sword in my hand, struck me quickly. I, a sinner, killed an 
excellent brahmal).a among them (though he was) saying , 'I am 
a brahmal).a', with a sharp -edged sword. The merchants' ser­
vants killed me with edges of swords (i.e . sharp-edged swords). 
In the morning the merchants went to the kingdom where they 
wanted to go. Then you came here and saw me breathing and 
with my body smeared with blood flowing (from the wounds).

=== PAGE 184 ===

VI.219.1-16 
3 1 13 
and dead due to unconsciousness caused by the InJury. 0 bro­
ther, I have thus told you what for I had come here, and I have 
also told you how I met with a premature death. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED NINETEEN 
The Greatness of PuÖkara ; Pu1J4arika Attains 
Absorption into ViÖIJU 
Niirada said: 
1 . Hearing these words of him, the noble-minded Pu:Q.Qarika 
spoke to his brother, when his companions were listening : 
Puή1¢arika said: 
2. 
0 Bharata, tell me if you know due to which religious 
merit you died at this holy place. Your sin is quite well-known. 
Bharata said: 
3-7. 0 Pu:Q.Qarika, listen. I am telling you which religi­
ous merit I did in this existence, which gave (i.e. brought) me 
(to) this holy place. Once, after having snatched wealth, I, while 
coming back to my house, saw a dead, helpless child of someone 
in the market. Putting it on my head, taking it to the aus­
picious bank of Ganga and adorning it with a garment etc. I 
performed his funeral rites like burning his body. I spent all 
the wealth I had obtained through gambling. Due to that religi­
ous merit I secured (i.e. I reached) this holy place, bringing 
auspiciousness. Perform funeral rites of my body after burn­
ing it. 
Sri Niirada said: 
8-1 6. 0 king, when the funeral rites were performed, even 
the sinful Bharata went to heaven by the favour of this holy 
place. Now listen as to how Vi!;:Q.U, Hari, lived for a month in 
PU:Q.Qarika's house by the favour of this holy place. The pious 
one seeing that Bharata got felicity at this holy place, thought in

=== PAGE 185 ===

3 1 14 
Padma Puriil:za 
his mind that this holy place gives desired objects. That wise 
Pu:t;t<;lᕺrika bathed at this holy place with this desire : 'May 
Viᕧ:t;tu in his original form live in my house during the month of 
Magha'. Having bathed with this desire he went home. 0 best 
king, Pu:Q.<;larika told his brothers about the death of Bharata at 
this holy place giving all (desired) objects. They too, with their 
minds covered by Miiyii, having heard it, lamented . Then Pu:Q.<;l­
arika, doing his (usual) rites at home, and being highly delighted , 
lived in his house thinking that Viᕹ:Q.U would come due to his 
penance. On the full-moon day of Pauᕥa he celebrated a great 
festival, thinking that Hari would certainly come to his house 
the next day . He adorned his house by sprinkling it with sandal 
mixed with water, smearing it with cow-dung, and by arranging 
the quadrangle with pearls. He fed two hundred briihma:t;tas with 
various kinds of food. He gratified them with profuse presents. 
17-2 1 . Singing at night with those skilled in playing on 
various musical instruments and singing sweet songs, he kept a wa­
ke with his kinsmen. In the morning having dismissed all those 
singers etc., he with his mind longing for Viᕥ:Q.u's arrival sat in 
his house. Then sending back his vehicle from the vicinity of his 
(i.e. Pu:Q.<;larika's) house, he (i.e. Viᕥ:t;tu) entered his house to do 
what was desired by his man. That Pm;t<;larika, having seen that 
Viᕥl).u to have arrived, quickly got up from his seat, and saluted 
him by (bending down) his head, 0 king. That pious one, deligh­
ted to see Viᕧ:Q.u, having worshipped him by offering him mate­
rials of worship etc. said to him, seated on a seat : 
Pw:zarika said: 
22-29. You have very clearly done what removes the torment 
of the mundane existence. 0 Viᕧ:Q.u, you, causing preservation, 
stay here, till this pure penance would come to an end. Your 
Vaiku:Q.tha, free from all blemishes, exists there only where all 
your servants, serving (you) live. We have heard from the mouths 
of the good that, 0 lord, Viᕧ:Q.u lives in that house where your 
deeds are described. They indeed are the good, in whose speech 
remains your name, in whose hearts remains your handsome 
form, and in whose ears remain your virtues. They indeed are the 
good whose heart (longs) for your service, and on whose heads 
are the remains of an offering to you. 0 lord of Lakᕥmi, they

=== PAGE 186 ===

alone are the good whose mind (views equally) their enemy and 
their friend, so also their gain and loss. 0 lord of Lakᕥmi, they 
alone are the good whose mind is not affected by emotions. The 
good live where you live ; you live where the good live. So knowing 
(me) to be good live in my house during (the month of) Magha. 
Narada said: 
30. Viᕥ:Q.u, having heard these words of that Pu:Q.c;larika, and 
brightening the quarters with the lustre of his teeth, said (these) 
words : 
The lord said: 
31-33. 0 you very intelligent one, you are the best among 
the virtuous men on the earth, since with a desire for my com­
pany you bathed at the holy place. 0 brahma:Q.a, get up. Bathe 
in the water of Ganga in Magha. At the end of Magha, on the 
full-moon day, I shall bathe you at Puᕥkara. All that entire fruit 
due to bathing in the month of Magha at Prayaga, would be 
(obtained) due to bathing (just) on one .day at the holy place, 
Puᕧkara. 
Narada said: 
34-42a. That best brahma:Q.a, Pu:Q.c;larika, thus addressed by 
Viᕧ:Q.u, bathed in the water of Ganga, when the sun had slightly 
risen. Pu:Q.c;larika actually worshipped the lotus-eyed (Viᕧ:Q.u) with 
tulasi(-leaves), blooming flowers, barley, saffron, sandal, and he 
waved five lights of camphor before the lord of Lakᕧmi, whose 
body was made fragrant with incense(of agaru. Having fed the 
lord of the world with four kinds of food, he fanned him lying on 
a jewelled bed with chowries. He shampooed the feet of the lord 
of Lakᕨmi. He gave him a tambiila with camphor. Taking a mirror 
in his hand the best brahma:Q.a stood in front of Lakᕥmi's lord 
when he was tying the turban. Thus the brahma:Q.a passed the 
entire month of Magha in worshipping (Viᕧ:Q.u) destroying the 
mundane existence and living in his house. Then on the full­
moon day at the end of Magha, he saw Garuc;la waiting in front 
of him, who had come there on merely being remembered by the 
lord of Lakᕥmi. Seeing him, the lotus-eyed (Viᕧ:Q.u) said to 
PU:Q.c;larika :

=== PAGE 187 ===

3 1 16 
Padma Purava 
The lord said: 
42b-46. 0 best brahma:Q.a, listen to the words which I am 
speaking to you. I have given you-viz. that I lived (in your 
house) for a month-( what was desired by you), when you had 
by chance gone to the holy place Puakara situated in Indrapras­
tha for a bath. 0 you very intelligent one, today having mounted 
upon the lord of birds with me go to that Puakara (again) which is 
the crest-jewel of all holy places. 0 brahmal)a, since I am at your 
disposal, I shall give you, bathing at the place giving the four 
goals of human life, whatever you desire. Your brother Bharata, 
though a sinner, desiring heaven got it when he died there. What 
else can be spoken about him? 
Niirada said: 
47-52. 
0 lord of kings, having thus spoken to the best 
brahma:Q.a and putting him on the lord of birds, he came to that 
best holy place. From PUJ;u;larika's body a :flash went out along 
with his vital breath and reached Via:Q.u's position. 0 king, 
PU:Q.garika, by means of a bath at the holy place Puļkara, situa­
ted in Indraprastha, obtained absorption into the lord. Thus by 
the solicitation of the holy place, even Viļ:Q.U happily lived in his 
house like his relative. Who can describe the greatness of Puļkara 
situated in Indraprastha? I have described only a part equal to 
one fraction of a crore. 0 king, by devoutly listening to or by 
reciting the greatness, a man obtains the fruit of a horse-sacrifice. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED TWENTY 
The Greatness of Prayiiga : Mohini's Story 
Niirada said: 
1 -4. To you I am describing devoutly the very meritorious 
greatness of the auspicious Prayaga, the principal among holy 
places. 0 king, there was a gandharva (named) Visvavasu, well­
known in the world. Once he went to Brahma's assembly on 
Sumeru to sing. Visvavasu saw there the lord of gods resorted to

=== PAGE 188 ===

by all hosts of gods, seated on an excellent seat, 0 king. 0 king, 
near the seat of Brahmii he saw Indraprastha, as if it was an­
other lord of the world, seated on an excellent seat. 
5-8. He saw the lord of gods and the chief of holy places 
waving chowries on the heads of Brahmaprastha and Indra­
prastha, 0 king. 0 king, he also saw there other divine holy 
places, standing with the palms of their hands joined in obeis­
ance, at a distance from the two. In front of the two he sang an 
excellent Giindharva-riiga. Leaving the gods he went to Satya­
loka with the holy places. Then, 0 lord of kings, the intelligent 
Visviivasu, seeing the grandeur of the holy place Indraprastha, 
spoke these words to Hiihii. 
Visviivasu said: 
9-13. 
0 best of gandharvas, in the world this holy place 
called Indraprastha is very wonderful among the heaps of (i.e. 
many) holy places, since he was seated on a seat near that of 
Brahmii who is the lord of the movable and the immovable, and 
whose lotus-like feet are saluted by the gods. Even the chief of 
the holy places standing behind, waved chowries on his head, 
(thus) becoming his servant. Then what can be said about other 
holy places? (All) the holy places that are there grant as a fruit 
(of a visit to them) the three goals of human life ; but this holy 
place Indraprastha grants (all) the four goals. The holy places 
stationed here are Dhruva in merits. Their great merits cannot be 
described even by Seᕥa. 
Niirada said: 
14. 
0 king, the intelligent Visviivasu, seeing the grandeur of 
Indraprastha like this, which was purifying and giving all desired 
objects, went home. 
1 5-20. As Sakra, lord of Saci, is the greatest among gods, 
and Brahmii is superior to him, so is this Prayiiga the best of all 
holy places. Indraprastha is superior even to that, 0 great king. 
0 king, I shall tell you the account of the prostitute Mohini, 
which took place at Prayiiga which is seen within it. 0 king, on 
the bank of river Narmada there is the city Mahiᕥmati. In it was 
a prostitute named Mohini, who had ample wealth, was endow­
ed with beauty and youth, and skilled in dancing and singing.

=== PAGE 189 ===

She, greedy of wealth, committed many sins. She killed seven 
bnihmaJ)as and many maid servants. She, the sinful one, also 
many times caused their abortions. In this way she passed her 
good (i.e. valuable) youth in sinful acts. 
21-28. Then after some time old age came to her body. She 
with her body affticted by old age and with her desire for sensual 
objects gone, did not have a longing for young men, nor did they 
have (any longing) for her, 0 king. About her wealth, earned sin­
fully, she did not confide in anyone. She did not give it (to any­
one) ; she did not enjoy it herself; she did not deposit it some­
where. Once, at night, she being awakened, thought like this : 
'Whose will this wealth earned sinfully be when I am dead? It 
will take me to a dreadful hell. The maid servants and their 
husbands will enjoy that wealth of me. Then now, why should I 
not make a good use of it?' Thinking like this, she resolved upon 
doing righteous acts and constructed gardens, tanks, wells, re­
servoirs of water and temples. Near the city she fixed a place 
where water is distributed to travellers in summer ; and she gave 
them food (also), 0 great king. Near her house she put up a 
guest house for foreigners to stay in. And she also gave them 
excellent food. 
29-37. 0 king, when that Mohini was thus engaged in 
righteous acts, in course of time old age came to her, and some­
time she thought : 'Though I have spent much money on righte­
ous acts, yet I still have much more wealth in (the form of) gold, 
silver etc. I shall voluntarily give it to learned brahmaJ)as.' Thus 
she thought. Thinking like this Mohini invited the brahmal}.as of 
the city. 0 king, when they, realising that the acceptance of the 
wealth from her was fearful, she divided her wealth into two 
parts. 0 king, she gave one part to her maid servants and the 
other to foreigners. She herself became destitute. Knowing that 
her death was imminent, her maid servants left her, took the 
wealth, and went (away) as they liked thinking that wealth which 
would be given by her when she would be free from fever (was 
already with them). She, after having observed eighteen fasts, 
was then free from fever, as (a part of the span of) her life was 
still left, 0 king. 0 king, she had one maid named Jaradgava. 
Being careful, she actively waited upon her with (i.e. by giving 
her) salutary diet etc.

=== PAGE 190 ===

38-43. After a few days she was fit to take full diet. With (a 
sense of) shame she ate in the house of that Jaradgava. 'Here 
(i.e. in the world) I have lived happily. Now misery has come 
to me. I shall not live in poverty.' Thinking like this, she went 
elsewhere. While she was going to a forest, the thieves of the 
city, thinking 'This is Mohini, going after taking wealth', struck 
her. 0 king, not finding wealth with her, they left her breathing 
in that very forest. Then, 0 king, some anchorite, ca.rrying water 
from Prayaga in a water-pot came to the forest. Then seeing her 
fallen with her body wollllded by weapons and asking for the 
water by means of signs made by her hand, 
The anchorite said: 
44-50. Who are you? Who has wounded your body with sharp 
weapons? Why have you, all alone, come to this lonely forest? 0 
auspicious one, with a desire to do good this water of Prayaga, 
situated in lndraprastha, is brought by me due to good luck. 
Thus addressed by him, she, llllable to speak, opened her 
mouth to drink water, with the desire, 'May I be a queen'. 0 
king, when this water of Prayaga was dropped into her mouth, 
that prostitute Mohini gave up her life. At the time of her depar­
ture she longed for the status of a queen. Therefore, she, being 
born in the house of the lord of Kerala, became due to drinking 
the water of the holy place, the wife of king Viravarman en­
dowed with (good) family, (good) character, wealth, prosperity, 
in the Draviga colllltry. The lotus-eyed one had a body yellow­
ish like gold. Therefore, her father named her 'Hematigi'. 
51-53. Once that Hematigi, adorned with golden ornaments, 
went to the house of Kala, her friend and the minister's daugh­
ter. There she was bathed (after being smeared) with barley oil, 
was fed with various foods, and was seated on an excellent seat. 
With her braid tied with flowers, and adorned with thin silken 
garments, and having a tambiila in her mouth, she said to Kala : 
H emiingi said : 
54. 0 Kala, speaking sweetly but indistinctly like a cuckoo, 
understand my words. Show me the thing which is wonderful in 
your house.

=== PAGE 191 ===

CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED TWENTYONE 
The Greatness of Prayaga: Hemang'i and Vfravarman 
Go to VaikUlJfha 
Narada said: 
1-3. 0 king, that Kalii, thus addressed by the king's wife, 
got brought a golden box from her treasure, and put it before 
(her). She said, "0 queen, 0 wife of the great king, this is a very 
wonderful book. There are pictures in it. Having opened the 
book a little, see what it contains. By seeing the pictures in it 
your mind will be delighted." 
4-12. Thus addressed by her, the queen got the box opened 
by her maid and took with her hand the book that was in it. In 
it she first saw succinctly (the pictures of) the incarnations. Then 
she saw the globe having an expanse of fifty crores of yojanas. In 
it she saw a region full of darkness. Between the two stood the 
Lokiiloka mountain, 0 king. Then she saw the seven islands 
surrounded by seven seas. So also in them, she saw rivers, 
mountains and continents, 0 very wise one. The wife of the king 
saw this Bhiiratakhat;u;la. She saw the chief rivers like Yamuna, 
Ganga. 0 king, the illustrious one saw this auspicious Indra­
prastha along with Vraja on the bank of Yamuna. 0 king, the 
high -minded one seeing in it the holy place fashioned by Brahmii, 
recollected the act(s) done by her in her former birth. Then 
silently getting up she, determining, 'I shall not eat (food) till I 
leave for the holy place', hurriedly went home. Then only, that 
Hemiitigi, loving the chief holy place, said to king Viravarman, 
dear to her like her own life: 
Hemangt said: 
1 3-19. 0 lord of my life, listen to my righteous words, and 
<:arry them out quickly, 0 illustrious one. (My desire) will be 
fulfilled. Formerly I was a prostitute. I committed many sins in 
my youth and in my old age I had a mind to do pious acts. I 
spent righteously the wealth I had earned sinfully. 0 king, when 
I who was penniless, went out of my city and was going in a 
forest, thieves who were sinful, who were tormented by improper 
poverty, struck me, with a desire to grab (my) wealth. The

=== PAGE 192 ===

Vl.221.20-33 
3 121 
thieves, with their desires frustrated, leaving me, with my body 
wounded with sharp weapons, and breathing (but) unconscious, 
there, went (away). Then an anchorite carrying the water of Pra­
yiiga situated in Indraprastha, came into that forest. The ascetic 
seeing me lying in that condition there asked me : "Who are you? 
Wherefrom (have you come)? Why and by whom were you hit?" 
20-24. I then did not say anything, but asked for that holy 
water. He put it into my mouth, and I abandoned (my) body. 
Hearing that that water fulfils all desires, I desired, 0 lord, at the 
time of the departure of my life: 'May I be (born as) a queen.' 
Due to the grace of that holy place I became your wife practising 
acts of a good family and of a very good character. 0 king, now 
I desire to see, along with you, that chief holy place Prayiiga 
situated in Indraprastha and giving all desired objects. 0 king, I 
have taken this pledge that I shall eat food only when I proceed 
to that chief holy place, 0 lord. 
The king said: 
25. 0 you of unsteady eyes, how would I know (to be true) 
what you said? Convince me, 0 good one ; I would do what you 
said. 
Niirada said: 
26a. When the king said like this, there was a voice in the 
sky. 
The divine voice said: 
26b-27. 0 king, your wife has spoken the truth. Having gone 
to the auspicious Prayiiga, the best of all holy places situated in 
Indraprastha, bathe there ; you will get whatever you desire. 
Niirada said: 
28-33. Having heard the words coming from the sky the 
king prostrated himself on the ground like a staff, and said, "I 
salute him who spoke those words." Then having called his 
minister, and having entrusted the kingdom to him, he, getting 
into an excellent chariot, went with her to the excellent holy 
place. Mter a few days the king came here with Hemiiligi. The 
king with his wife drank the water at the chief holy place. The

=== PAGE 193 ===

couple bathed there at that auspicious holy place, giving all de­
sired objects, desiring 'May I reach VaikUJ;.!ha with this body.' 
When the couple had just bathed there, the best gods (Brahmii 
and ViᕳI)u) hav:ing the swan and the eagle respectively as their 
vehicles arrived there. Seeing them who had come there, that 
king Viravarman, with a concentrated mind, saluted by (bowing) 
his head, and praised them. 
The king said: 
34-41 . Salutation to you, 0 best gods, having dark and 
tawny bodies and wearing garments like gold and red lead. I 
salute you, having mainly (qualities of) sattva and rajas, the 
wonderful lords of Vaikul)tha and Satyaloka, having four and 
two hands, and carried by best birds. I salute by (bowing) my 
head bent through good thoughts, you, giving good liberation 
and pleasures to men having detachment and attachment, and 
with your lotus-like feet saluted by gods. 0 you whose lotus-like 
feet are saluted by gods, nobody knows your original form, since 
you are beyond Prakrti and transcend the mind and speech of man. 
0 you highest soul, that man is blessed who, thinking this world 
to be transitory, resorts to your lotus-like feet saluted by hosts of 
sages. This holy place, where your feet are resorted to, is indeed 
difficult to be reached by men worshipping you, and it gives all 
desired objects. Yet these two are to be resorted to for salvation, not 
secured through any other (means). He who resorts to it with any 
other desire (than salvation) is (indeed) duped. Desiring to con­
quer all worlds the good, resorting to you and to this place giving 
salvation, do not long for anything except it . 
Niirada said: 
42. When having thus praised the lord of gods and the lord 
of the worlds, the king remained (silent), then that Hemangi 
spoke, 0 king : 
Hemiingi said: 
43-46. 0 lord of Lak\mi, 0 you having eyes like lotus petals, 
0 Brahman having a high seat, and venerable to Sarasvati, I 
salute you ; if you favour me of a mean heart, then (help me to) 
cross this ocean of the mundane existence. 0 lord, due to the

=== PAGE 194 ===

VI.221 .47-VI.222.8 
3 123 
grace of this holy place I became a queen. I had your view diffi­
cult to be had even by gods. You two know the hearts of all ; you 
have given us the best, which we two had longed for at the time 
of bathing. 
The best gods, thus praised by both, had their faces pleas­
ed, and they said to the couple : 
Vi$1)U and Brahrnii said: 
47-48. 0 Hemiiil.gi, you are blessed since you, due to the 
contact with this holy place, have emancipated your husband 
whose mind was attached to the pleasures of the kingdom. Such 
a salvation is difficult to get for kings attached to objects of 
senses. Your husband has a wife like you due to the grace of this 
holy place. 
Niirada said: 
49-53. 
Speaking like this, and looking at Garu9a, the best 
of birds, the two best gods (and the couple) went to Satyaloka, 
0 lord of men. There they (the couple) were all duly honoured by 
Brahm a, 0 king. Then they stayed there for some time at the re­
quest of him. 0 king, then with the ; couple Vi኱n.u, mounting on 
Garu9a, went to Sri Vaikun.tha. 0 king, I have thus told you 
the greatness of the chief holy place, which is meritorious, des­
troys all sins, leads to success and gives sons. A man who would 
listen to or read this account daily would go to his desired place. 
I have told the truth. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED TWENTYTWO 
Kiisi, Gokarl)a, SivakiiFici, Titthasaptaka and Bhimakuίuja 
Niirada said: 
1-8. 
0 king Sibi, listen. I am describing to you the excellent, 
meritorious greatness of Kiisi giving success and long life. 0 
king, formerly in the auspicious Krt:ayuga there was a tree called

=== PAGE 195 ===

3 124 
Padma PuriilJ.(l 
sirl:J.sapa in Kasi situated on the slope of Indraprastha. There 
was a crow that had made its nest on the tree ; and below it in 
the hollow (of the tree) lived a great serpent. Once his wife laid 
a couple of eggs in the nest and went somewhere. She did not 
come back to her nest. 0 king, that crow took care of the couple 
of eggs ; lived high up on that sirhsapii tree only. Once at night 
a great storm came and it broke the sirhsapii tree from its root 
though strong. Then at the root of the sirhsapii tree shattered by 
the storm, the crow and the serpent were crushed and died. The 
tree, sirhsapa tree, (the serpent and) the crow etc. had divine 
bodies, and getting into three aeroplanes, went to Vigl.U's abode. 
Sibi said: 
9. 
0 divine sage, due to what religious merit did they reach 
the city giving salvation? Who were they before that? Tell (me) 
all that, 0 Narada. 
Niirada ΰaid: 
10-14. 
There was a briihmaJ).a named SravaJ).a in the Kuru­
jiiilgala country. His wife was KUJ).gii by name, and his brother 
was KuraJ).taka. That SravaJ).a ate, without having bathed (first), 
sweetmeats. Due to that sin he became (i.e. was born as) a 
village crow. His brother KuraJ.ltaka was a strong atheist. He 
stopped (following) the path laid down by Srutis and Smrtis, and 
censured deities. Due to that fault he became a deadly serpent 
after his death. SravaJ).a's wife KUJ).ga shared the sins of both 
(of them). Therefore, she got the condition of an immobile object 
(viz. the tree) which was resorted to by both (SravaJ).a and 
KuraJ).taka). 0 king, I have told you this that happened in their 
former existence. 
1 5-20. Hereafter I shall tell you about their religious merit due 
to which they reached the charming city of the lord of the world, 
viz. Kasi, 0 king. Once they were returning home from another 
village. Seeing the cow of a traveller fallen into a well and being 
urged by him they took her out. Hearing what they told, KuJ).ga 
said : 'Well (done).' Due to that religious merit they met with 
death at Kiisi, on the slope of Indraprastha, which is difficult to 
have, and went up to VaikUJ.ltha. 0 king, I have told you this 
excellent greatness of Kiisi. Tell me what else you desire to hear.

=== PAGE 196 ===

VI.222.21-39a 
3125 
Sibi said: 
21-22. 
0 sage, you mentioned three holy places of Siva : 
Kiisi and Sivakiiiici, and the other (i.e. the third) one, viz. Go­
karl)a. 0 great sage, you have told me the greatness of one viz. 
Kiisi, Tell me, if there is any, the greatness of Gokarl)a and 
Sivakaiici. 
Niirada said: 
23-30. 0 king, Gokarl)a is a very pulifying holy place of 
Siva only. A man dying there would be Siva ; there is no doubt 
about it. If a being would die there on land, in water or in the 
air, he after becoming Siva, shines on the peak of Kailiisa. One 
dying here at the holy place of Gokarl)a is not born again. Shin­
ing like Siva, one obtains salvation at any time. 0 king, 0 lord, 
0 very intelligent one, I shall describe to you the greatness of 
this Gokarl)a also, which I had heard from Brahma's mouth. 
This frontier mountain of a meritorious appearance is seen near 
Gurutirtha at a distance of two miles from Prayiiga. 
On it 
was a very cruel bhilla named Karkata. His wife was Jarii by 
name. She had killed (her) five husbands. That Jarii prepared a 
sweetmeat (mixed) with poison to kill Karkata, (her) sixth 
husband. The noble bhilla heard about it from the mouth of his 
sister. That very cruel Karkata set about killing that young 
woman. 
3 I -39a. 
When the king of the bhillas, with a sword in his 
hand, came to kill her, she, realising that he was ready to kill 
her, went (away). Being frightened and desiring (to save) her life 
she ran to a forest. That Karkata, with a sword in his hand, seized 
her here at the holy place of Gokarl)a. Having cut off her head 
with the sword, and having dropped her body into the water of 
the holy place Gokarl)a, he went to his place. That sinful Jara 
also met with death there at Gokarl)a. She became the friend of 
Piirvati on the peak of Kailiisa. I have told you this glory of 
Gokarl)a. I shall describe to you the holy greatness of Sivakiiiici. 
0 lord, the same bliss which I told (is obtained) in Gokarl}.a is 
also obtained in Sivakiiiici situated on the slope of Indraprastha. 
Here god Siva, on propitiating Vi኱IJ.U, the lord of all gods, obtain­
ed the status of the chief devotee and metaphysical knowledge.

=== PAGE 197 ===

3126 
Padma Purii!Ja 
Therefore, we all, the sons of Brahman, always propitiate him, 
with a desire to get good devotion and knowledge. 
39b-48. 
0 king, here the demon Baoa, observing a fast, 
propitiated Mahesvara for a hwtdred years with a desire to have 
qualities like him. The god was pleased with him and gave him 
the status of his attendant. And he himself became forever the 
protector of his city. 0 king, this city formerly belonged to the 
magnanimous Vi኱ou. Vi኱ou, pleased with the penance of Siva, 
gave it to him. Here formerly a very wonderful event took place. 
A brahma1,1a, a devotee of Siva, reached Vaikuo!ha here. 0 king, 
there was a religious brahmaoa by name Heramba. With his 
body, mind and words he was always engaged in worshipping 
Siva. 0 king Sibi, once the noble one, Siva's devotee, while 
visiting places holy to Siva, came here to Sivakaiici. The intelli­
gent one did not leave this charming (holy place). Later he died 
in its water. There only the attendants of Mahadeva (i.e. Siva) 
took the best brahma:Q.a and proceeded to the Kailasa mountain 
by his (i.e. Siva's) order. In the middle came the attendants of 
Vi኱:Q.u from Vaiku:Q.!ha. They forcibly set out to take that best 
brahma:Q.a from them. There was a great battle between the 
attendants of Vi኱:Q.u and Siva. 
49-56. In that battle none got victory or defeat. Vi኱:Q.u, seated 
on Garu<;Ia, came there from Vaiku:Q.!ha. Siva, the supporter of 
the three worlds, seated on his bull, also (came) there from 
Kailasa. Then the two looking at each other's face, laughed (i.e. 
smiled) and only watched the great battle waged by their atten­
dants in the sky. Then Vi኱:Q.U warded his own attendants and 
those of Siva off the battle in the sky, and putting the brahma:Q.a 
on Garu<;Ia, Vi኱:Q.U went to Siva's abode, surrowtded by Siva, 
Siva's attendants and his own attendants. The glorious one while 
going along the way was saluted by gods. Led by Siva he entered 
his abode, showing the brahma:Q.a the beauty of it. Then from 
that Kailasa, Vi኱:Q.U, saluted by Siva with great devotion went to 
Vaiku:Q.!ha. The glorious brahma:Q.a also obtained the sight of 
Vi኱:Q.u due to the grace of this holy place and enjoyed in the 
vicinity of Vi኱:Q.U. 0 king, I have told you this grandeur of Siva­
kaiici. 
57-64. 
Listen very attentively to (the holy place) named 
Tirthasaptaka. 0 great king, this holy place gives the fruit of the

=== PAGE 198 ===

Vl.222.65-77 
3 127 
four goals of human life (to one who) visits it, comes in its con­
tact, thinks about it or even (merely) remembers it. 0 king, great 
sages like Vasiኻtha stayed there and practised severe penance for 
the creation. The religious Marici also bathed here for (getting) 
a son ; and the glorious one obtained an excellent son, viz. K.as­
yapa. Atri also pleased here the best gods by his penance, and 
obtained three sons from them-Soma, Durvasas and Datta . 
The pious Aiigiras also obtained, due to the favour of this holy 
place, sons. They, the brahma:t;1as , viz. the Aiigirasas, were born 
in his family. Pulaha also got a son, Dambholi, of excellent 
virtues, who was, 0 king, Agastya in olden times. By bathing in 
this holy place Pulastya, practising penance, got a son, the glori­
ous Kubera, Siva's friend. Kratu too had thousands of sons 
(called) Valakhilyas. 
65-67. 
Due to the favour of this holy place they were per­
petual celibates. Vasi኱tha too, practising severe penance, got seven 
sons, Raja and others. 0 best king, I have described its greatness. 
0 king, there are many other holy places also, like K.apilasrama, 
Kedara, Prabhasa. 0 king, their greatness cannot be described 
even by Ananta even during a million years ; then how (can it be 
described) by (persons) like me? 
Saubhari said: 
68-71 . Having spoken like this, Narada, the best sage, 
extolling Vi኱IJu's virtues went to Siva from the sky. 0 king, 
Ausinara Sibi, having heard about the grandeur of Indraprastha 
from the sage's mouth, regarded himself blessed. The king, hav­
ing duly bathed there at Indraprastha, and having performed all 
auspicious rites, went to his city. 0 lord, I have descl'ibed to you 
the greatness of Indraprastha, the holyplace purifying people and 
situated on the bank of Yamuna. 
72-77. 0 best king, in Kali (age), people, void of faith, will 
not have regard for this Indraprastha, the crest-jewel of all holy 
places. That fruit which is obtained by listening to the eighteen 
Pura:t;1as and Bharata is produced by (listening to) the greatness 
of Indraprastha. That fruit which is obtained by means of a lakh 
of baths at dawn in the month of Magha would be had by de­
voutly listening to (the description of) the greatness of this (holy 
place). 0 king, he who devoutly listens to (the description of) its

=== PAGE 199 ===

3128 
Padma PurlifUi 
greatness, would gratify his dead ancestors, gods and sages. 
That fruit which is had by means of the vows like Krcchra, 
Atikrcchra, Pariika, and Ciindriiya:Q.a, ·would be had by devoutly 
listening to (the description of) its greatness. 0 king, that fruit 
which is due to all sacrifices like the horse-sacrifice would be had 
by devoutly listening to (the description of ) its greatness. 
Suta said: 
78-80. 
King Yudhiዌ?!h.ira having thus heard the greatness of 
lndraprastha from Saunaka Saubhari, went to Hastiniipura. 
Then having instructed his brothers led by Duryodhana, he went 
to the auspicious Indraprastha with a desire to perform a Raja­
sOya sacrifice. Having brought from Dviirakii, Krዌ?:Q.a, his family­
deity, the king performed the Riijasiiya sacrifice. 
81-85. 
Thinking that this holy place could give salvation 
even to the abusive (Sisupiila), Kn:Q.a killed Sisupiila there. Sisu­
piila too, due to dying at that holy place only, got absorbed into 
Krዌ?:Q.a, giving all (desired) objects. Bhima fashioned a very 
extensive pool at the place where Sisupiila was killed, and the 
(Riijasiiya) sacrifice was performed. Bhima fashioned there a 
very extensive pool with his mace. It is known as Bhimaku:Q.c;ia, 
and has become purifying on the earth. There is no doubt that 
that fruit which is had by bathing in Yamuna at lndraprastha is 
had (by bathing) in that pool. 
Suta said: 
86-90. That holy place will forgive the faults of a living be­
ing who stays there by practices like going round it for a year. 
The man who goes round it every year, would not be tinged with 
the evils (committed) at the holy place and sins. He who does not 
go round (it) does not get sanctification at the holy place. There­
fore, those who desire a fruit should go round it. He who reciting 
Viዌ?:Q.U's names goes round it, obtains at every step the fruit of 
presenting a brown cow. The man who goes round Indraprastha 
on the fourteenth day of the dark half of Caitra, is blessed, and 
is freed from all sins.

=== PAGE 200 ===

VI.223.1-12 
3 129. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED TWENTYTHREE 
Gem of a Formula 
Sa unaka said: 
1-2. 
0 glorious Siita, you are blessed that you make us, 
plunged very much in the ocean of the mundane existence, drink 
a large quantity of nectar. 0 good one, tell us, desiring to cross 
the worldly existence, the gem of a formula, pure due to devotion, 
of which the mobile and the immobile are full. 
Siita said: 
3-4. 
0 Saunaka, listen. I shall tell you the very wonderful 
gem of a formula, which the noble Vasiኻኼha spoke to Dilipa. 
Once Dilipa having saluted Vasi኱tha, the best brahma]J.a, his 
preceptor, asked him as you did (now). 
Dilipa said: 
5-9. 0 revered one, you have particularly told me all the prac­
tices, so also practices with those of castes and the stages of life 
and the daily and occasional obligatory rites. 0 best sage, I have 
also heard the kingly duties, sacrifices, gifts (to be made) at holy 
places and vows etc., which give inexhaustible pleasures in heaven. 
Now I desire to hear about the ancient path leading to salvation. 
Tell me about it along which I can luckily go. What is the best 
of all sacred formulas, the only medicine for all the diseases in 
the worldly existence? What is the best formula giving salvation 
to all human beings? Tell all that truthfully and for the love and 
regard (that you have) for me. 
Vasiիtha said: 
10- 1 1 . 0 king, you desiring the good of all the world, have 
asked well. I shall, in private, tell you a great secret, emancipat­
ing (you) from the worldly existence. Formerly all holy sages 
intent on (performing);sacrifices and (giving) gifts, asked Niirada. 
Brahma's son, the best sage : 
The great sage! said: 
12. 0 revered one, by what formula shall we go to the

=== PAGE 201 ===

3130 
Padma PuraiJa 
highest position? 0 glorious one, tell that to us. Please favour 
us. 
Narada said: 
1 3. 
Formerly all meditating saints-Sanaka and others­
asked in private Brahma about the path to salvation, very diffi­
cult to be obtained. 
Brahmii said: 
14-20a. 0 meditating saints, listen to this wonderful secret. 
All gods and sages having penance as their wealth do not know 
it. The immutable god Naraya1;1a told it to me at the beginning 
of the creation. He, along with the great goddess was worshipped 
by me. Then the immutable Naraya:o.a was pleased with me. He 
gave me the status of the creator and all the literature having its 
origin in the Veda, so also illuminating formulas, pervasive and 
non-pervasive. Then I spoke to the god, the ancient Puru$ottama 
(i.e. Vi$1;1U) : "0 revered one, by what formula (can) men cross 
the mundane existence? Tell me about it truly for the good of all 
people. Which of all formulas, is the one without (i.e. not requir­
ing) initiatory rite, which gives men the highest place (even) by 
being uttered once (only)?" 
The lord said: 
20b-27. 0 glorious one, you, desiring the good of all the 
people, have asked well. Therefore, I shall tell you the secret by 
means of which men would reach me. Of all the formulas the 
gem of a formula is auspicious. It gives the highest position even 
when it is remembered just once. The two gems of (i.e. in) the 
formula (are :! Lak$mi, Naraya1;1a). Nyasa (assignment?), Prayati 
(purification?) and SaraiJagati (approaching for shelter?) are 
necessary. The formula 'Lak$mi-Narayal;la' gives all fruits. 
Understand in succession the names of the gem of a formula(?). 
Merely by its utterance I am always pleased. A man born in a 
(noble) family, an ascetic, one who has mastered the Vedas and 
Vedatigas, one who is given to (performing) sacrifices and (giving) 
gifts, one resorting to all holy places, so also one who has taken 
a vow, one who speaks the truth, or even an ascetic having know­
ledge-is not entitled to the formula. He should carefully avoid it.

=== PAGE 202 ===

¥1.223.28-44 
3131 
Brahma:g.as, k኱atriyas, vaisyas, women, and others-all are entitl­
ed to it if they are my devotees. 
28-33. The excellent formula should be given to those who 
do not seek the shelter of any other (deity than Vi኱IJU), who do 
not serve any other (deity than Vi኱:g.u), who do not (try to) reach 
any other (deity than Vi኱:g.u). Even if recited once it gives a quick 
fruit to the afflicted. It keeps away another (i.e. re-)birth even of 
haughty beings. (If) an afflicted person, or an inquisitive person, 
or one longing for wealth, or a wise person or a king seeks my 
shelter (but) once, he would obtain all his desired objects. It 
should not be told to him who is not initiated, to him who is not 
a devotee, to a proud person, to an atheist, to a greedy person, to 
one who is averse to (i.e. who has no) faith. It should not be told 
to him who has no desire to listen (to it) ; to him who does not 
abide by Siva, to him who is free from lust, anger, hypocrisy, 
greed, so also to him who resorts to me with steady devotion, this 
excellent gem of a formula should be duly told. 
34-37. (The devotee should observe) rules with regard to 
place and time, (should have) exact determination of foes and 
friends, (should know) the nyasa,1 mudrii2 etc., along with 
the initiatory rite ; he should have his body marked with (the 
impression oO my disc, so also do my worship, should dedicate 
his actions to me, should seek my shelter only. With great con­
fidence in me he should assign all fruits to me. He should not 
possess anything. He should avoid talking to non-devotees of 
Viኽ:Q.uor saluting them. He should also avoid saluting or worship­
ping other deities than (me). 
38-44. 
Rules like this are declared for him who submits 
himself (to me). To a man endowed with such qualities, the excel­
lent gem of a formula should be told. I, Naraya:g.a, ancient 
Vi኶:g.u, am its seer ; so also I, the ocean of affection, am its deity, 
along with Lak኱mi. I, Naraya:Q.a, the lord of the entire world, the 
glorious one, of a good character, fortunate, omniscient, omnipo­
tent, with my desires always fulfilled, omnipresent, having every-
1 . 
Nyiisa : Assignment of the various parts 
of the body to different 
deities which is usually accompanied by 
prayer and corresponding gesti­
culations. 
2. 
Mudra : Certain positions 
of the fingers practised in devotion or 
religious worship.

=== PAGE 203 ===

3132 
Padma Puriit;za 
one as my relative, ocean of the nectar of pity am with Lakኲmi 
said to be its deity. Its metre is said to be the goddess Gayatri, 
having twentyfive syllables. He should twice assign seven, six, 
three, five, two or six limbs(?) He should meditate upon me, along 
with Lak኱mi not separated from me, of the form of the universe, 
having in my hands a disc, a conch, a mace, and a lotus, and of 
a divine form. He, being restrainted and pure, should worship me 
along with Lak኱mi seated on my left lap, with this gem of a for­
mula, and with sandal, flowers and offerings. 0 lord of the beings, 
even if I am worshipped once I am pleased. 
Brahmii said: 
45-48. 
0 lord, you have properly told this excellent secret, 
so also the power of the gem of a formula, which gives every 
success to men. You are the father of all the worlds, so also their 
mother and preceptor. You are the master, friend, brother, 
recourse, refuge and friend. 0 lord of gods, I am your servant, 
disciple and friend. Therefore, 0 you ocean of pity, you told this 
excellent (formula) to me. Now with the desire for the good of all 
people, tell fully accurately the initiation of this gem of a formula 
for its proper practice. 
· 
The lord said: 
49-54. 
0 child, listen, I shall tell you the great rite of the 
initiation of this gem of a formula. To secure my resort, a man 
should first resort to a preceptor. The preceptor (should be) 
endowed with (the knowledge of) the Veda, (should be) Vi኱:Qu's 
devotee, free from jealousy, (should) know the formula, (should 
be) devoted to the formula, (should) always resort to the formula 
and (be) pure. He should belong to a good school ; he should be 
proficient in the science of Brahman. He should not follow any 
other (deity than me) ; should not have any other aim (than me). 
He should be a brahma:Qa, free from anger, attachment, and 
greed. He should teach good behaviour, should long for salva­
tion, and should know the highest soul. A preceptor, a friendly 
one, having these qualities, who would teach (good) practices is 
called a preceptor. He who depends upon his preceptor when 
taught good behaviour, is steady in (obeying the preceptor's) 
order, is said to be a disciple by the good.

=== PAGE 204 ===

VI.223.55-67 
3 1 33 
55-64. A preceptor should teach the excellent gem of a 
formula to a disciple having these characteristics, and endowed 
with all virtues. On a Dvadasi day, or when the Sun is in the 
Srava]J.a constellation or on some day holy to Vi኱JJ.u, a good 
preceptor should initiate the pleased (disciple). He should get 
fashioned the Sudarsana disc or the Pa:iicajanya conch out of 
gold, silver, copper or bell-metal. Having bathed it with pure 
pa:iicamrta,1 he should worship it before me. He should duly 
worship it with sandal and flowers, with (the utterance of) the 
formula. There he should establish fire in accordance with state­
ments from his own Grhya (siitras). The preceptor, the best 
brahma]J.a, should offer ghee (into the fire) to the accompaniment 
of the formula. He should make oblations one thousand and 
eight times, or one hundred and eight times with the repetition 
of this gem of a formula or other auspicious formulas sacred to 
Vi኱IJ.U. With (the recitation of) the hymns like the Puru኱asiikta 
he should offer ghee and milk into fire. The best brahma]J.a 
should drop the disc and the conch into that fire. The preceptor, 
to the accompaniment (of the formula) of six letters should offer 
ghee into the fire twenty times. The preceptor, taking a heated 
disc, should make a mark (with it) and with the conch, to the 
accompaniment of the formula, on the left and the right arms. 
Having finished the remaining rite, he should again perform the 
worship. Then having brought a pitcher full of pure water, hav­
ing consecrated it with (that) formula only, he should sprinkle 
(the water) on his head. 
65-67. 
The preceptor should teach the formula to the disci­
ple who has put on a white garment, has sipped water, is polite, 
has put on the sectarian mark. He should explain the meaning 
of the formula, and especially its operation. The disciple who 
has received the formula, should honour the preceptor with or­
naments etc. 0 best god, he who, in this manner, learns the for­
mula from a preceptor, Vi኱JJ.u's devotee, goes to (the place) of 
Vi኱JJ.U, not otherwise. 
1 . 
Paiicamrta : The collection of five sweet things used in worshipping 
deities. They are : milk, sugar, ghee, curd and honey.

=== PAGE 205 ===

3134 
Padma Purii{la 
Niirada said: 
68-70. 
The father, Vi኱JJ.U, having thus spoken to the Creator, 
marked him with his own disc, and he himself gave (i.e. taught) 
him the formula. 0 best sages, the god, that lord Bra.h.ma, my 
father, the lord of all worlds, duly gave (i.e. taught) the formula 
to me also. Therefore, 0 best sages, 0 brahma)J.as, you too, put­
ting on (the mark) of the Sudadana (disc), seek the shelter of 
Vi኱]J.u's couple of feet. 
Vasi.ytha said: 
71-80. All the sages, thus addressed by Narada, the divine 
sage, and entitled to the two (feet of Vi኱JJ.u) went to the highest 
position of Vi኱JJ.U. Therefore, 0 royal sage, you too desire absorp­
tion into Vi኱JJ.U after putting on (the mark of) Sudarsana ac­
cording to the proper rule of initiation. Seek the shelter of the 
two feet of Vi኱JJ.U alone. Brahma, the lord of all the people and 
the three worlds, himself told me and Narada also this excellent 
formula. Narada taught the formula, exclusive devotion (to) and 
seeking refuge (of Vi኱JJ.u) to the great sages like Sa unaka living in 
Naimi኱ara]J.ya. 0 king, the great sages, deities, siddhas, sadh­
yas and demons do not know this most secret formula. I too gave 
to Parasara, Sakti's son, this formula. 0 king, I shall tell you also 
this great secret-the couple of Lak኱mi and ViኲJJ.u, exclusive 
devotion (to) and seeking the refuge (of the two). There is no 
greater formula than the couple. I tell you the truth. In the worlds 
there is no practice superior to this. Formerly Brahma told the 
truth, repeatedly (told) the truth that there is no other god than 
Vi኱JJ.U who gives salvation to men. Service to him alone would be 
salvation, which would cut off (the fruits of) all acts.

=== PAGE 206 ===

VI.224 . 1- 1 1 
3 1 35 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED TWENTYFOUR 
Bearing the Marks of a Disc etc. Essential for a BriihmaiJO. 
Dilipa said: 
1-3. 0 revered one, tell me all about (it) full of the nectar of 
devotion to Vi኱IJ.U. Listening to (the account of) devotion to 
Vi኱IJ.U, that brings happiness, I am not at all satisfied. 0 best sage, 
except the ocean of the nectar of devotion to Vi኱l}.u, what else 
is the refuge in the fearful forest of the mundane existence to men 
who are always tormented by the fires with huge flames in the 
form of the three torments? 0 great sage, tell (me) in detail the 
varieties of devotion to the highest soul that are constantly prac­
tised by the sages. 
Vasi${ha said: 
4-5. 0 lord of kings, you ask well about the means of eman­
cipation of men from the worldly existence, viz. devotion to Vi኱l}.u, 
the highest lord, which always brings happiness. Formerly goddess 
Piirvati asked the same great question to Siva, worshipped by 
the world, on the peak of Kailiisa. 
Piirvati said: 
6-1 0. 
0 god of gods, Mahiideva, 0 killer of Tripura, 0 lord 
of gods, tell me about devotion to Vi኱l}.u, which gives salvation to 
all human beings. So also the different deities that are worshipped, 
the hymns, and the various ways of the worship, and the nature 
of that Viኾu. and his qualities like splendour, the nature of his 
heaven, reaching which (a devotee) does not return (to his world), 
and due to which the lord Vi኱IJ.U brings about creation, mainte­
nance and destruction. That is the great abode of Vi኱IJ.U reaching 
which (men) do not return (to this world). With this or that act 
or means, sinful men, with their minds addicted to objects of 
senses, reach the highest place. Due to your love for me tell all 
that to me in detail. 
Vasi$fha said: 
1 1 . Mahiideva, the killer of Tripura, thus asked by the great 
goddess, saluted Vi኱l}.u, and with great affection said (to her) :

=== PAGE 207 ===

3136 
Padma PuriiTJa 
Rudra said: 
12-17. Well, 0 great goddess, 0 you desiring the good of all 
people, you ask me well (to tell you) the excellent greatness of 
(Vi኱I)u) the lord of Sri. 0 Parvati, you are blessed ; you have 
earned religious merit ; you are Vi኱J}.u's devotee. 0 good one, I 
am always pleased with your (good) character, · beauty and vir­
tues. I shall, 0 Girija, tell you about the best devotion (to Vi኱J}.u), 
the manner of (reciting) his hymns, and about his form. Vi኱I)u, 
the ancient Vasudeva is the truth. He is the highest soul, the 
highest Brahman, the highest light, and greater than the great. 
He is Acyuta, Puru኱a, Kr኱I)a, the eternal one, the benevolent 
lord, the eternal and omnipresent one, the stable one, Rudra, 
the witness of everything, and the lord of created beings. He is 
the sacrifice, the lord of sacrifice, and actually the lord of the 
Veda. He is Hiral)yagarbha, the sun, the lord creating and sus­
taining the worlds. 
18-28. He is to be described by the letter A , is the lord, 
and the lord of Sri, the Earth and Nfia. He is the lord of immor­
tality, and of that which grows with food. He has a thousand 
heads ; he is the soul of all ; he has a thousand eyes and a thou­
sand feet. Having touched the earth on all sides, he has stood 
above it by ten fingers. He is Ananta, the lord of Lak኱mi, Rama ; 
he possesses qualities and is without them, and is great. He is the 
lord of all worlds, he has splendour, is omniscient, and is un­
limited. 0 Parvati, I shall tell you as I can, the greatness of that 
Vasudeva, the chief in the worlds, and the lord of the worlds. 
With Brahma and the deities it is impossible for me to describe 
it, the meaning of all Upani኱ads determined in the Vedanta. 
I shall also tell you the kinds of his worship. Listen, I shall tell 
them separately. The marking with Vi኱I)u's conch and disc is 
said to be the first (worship) of Vi኱I)U. (Other varieties are :) put­
ting on rectangular marks, accepting hymns of (i.e. holy to) him, 
worshipping (him), muttering, meditating (on him), recollecting 
his names ; so also narration (of), listening to his (accounts), 
saluting (him), serving his feet ; so also taking the water (flowing) 
from his feet, and taking food after offering it to him. (So also) 
serving those who belong to him, faith in the vow of Dvadasi, 
planting the Tulasi (plant). (Thus) the devotion to Vi኿J}.u, the 
holder of the Sarliga bow and the god of gods is said to be of

=== PAGE 208 ===

VI.224.29-46 
3 1 37 
sixteen kinds for freedom from the bondage of the mundane 
existence. Vi?I}.u is always venerable to all gods, so also to me, 
and especially to brahmal}.as. Therefore, a brahmal}.a should 
everyday duly worship Vi?I}.u. 
29-37. 
Having marks of his signs he doubtlessly reaches the 
feet (or the position) of the lord of Lak?mi. A brahmal}.a should 
have the marks of a conch and a disc at the roots of his arms, 
(and) for removing all sins the marks should be made after these 
are heated in fire. Having duly put on the mark of a disc or a 
conch and a disc or of the five weapons (of ViܘI}.u), he should 
begin his religious duties. Having worn the mark of the disc 
heated in fire at the roots of his arms, he avoids the fearful city 
of Yama, and goes to the highest position of Vigm. All that 
worship, hymns, muttering (of hymns) of him who worships 
Vi?I}.u without (having on his body) the mark of a disc perishes. 
The brahmal}.a who having marked (his body) at the roots of 
arms with a disc heated in fire, (then) mutters the hymn, would 
obtain salvation. The best brahmal}.a having put on the mark of 
Sudarsana disc heated in fire and having duly made offerings 
should appoint (a brahmal}.a) for the rites . All the sraddha (offe­
red) by him who feeds (a brahmaJJ.a) without the mark of Vi?I}.u 
o n his body, becomes fruitless, and his dead ancestors leave dis­
appointed. One should honour at a sraddha a brahmal}.a having 
(on his body) the mark of Vi኱I).u's disc, and should carefully avoid 
one without the mark of Vi኱I).u's disc (on his body). One should 
present a cow, land, gold to him having a mark of the disc (of 
Vi኱I}.u on his body). 
38-46. 
Whatever is given to (a brahmal}.a) not having the 
mark of a disc (on his body) is given to a demon. Those who 
have marks made with a disc heated in fire at the roots of their 
arms, get freed from all sins, and go to the highest position of 
ViğI}.u. To him whose body is marked with a disc heated in fire, all 
holy places and sacrifices have come. There is no doubt about it. A 
brahmal}.a, not having (the mark of) the disc (made) duly, would 
be unrefined. Nothing would come to him even if he performs a 
thousand sacrifices. A brahmaJJ,a, having knowledge not easily 
obtained, but not (having the mark of) the disc made duly, is 
condemned among all people, and would fall from the status of a 
brahmal}.a. As Vi?I}.u, holding the conch and disc is worshipped

=== PAGE 209 ===

3138 
Padma PuriiiJ,a 
by the souls (i.e. men), similarly a brahma.Q.a, having (on his 
body) the marks of the disc etc. deserves to be honoured by all. 
A brahma.Q.a, even though he knows all the Vedas, or is profici­
ent in all holy texts, would fall without having (i.e. if he does 
not have) (the mark of) the disc duly made (on his body) ; if he 
is without the mark or the marks of a conch or a disc, he should 
be put on a donkey and be driven out of the city. Vasudeva 
Jamlrdana is untouched by the primordial matter (Prakrti). 0 
goddess, a brahma.Q.a having the mark of ViኻIJ.u's disc is just like 
that. Therefore, a man should have, at the roots of his arms, the 
(marks of) heated disc and conch of Viኻ.Q.U, which burn the 
stream of sins (produced) due to the contact of matter. 
47-50. 
He should have, at the roots of his arms, the marks 
made with heated disc and conch. Women and sudras should 
always have those made with scented sandal (-paste). At the root 
of the arm of a brahma.Q.a the mark of the disc should be made 
with a heated (sign). Marks with heated (signs) must be duly 
made (on the body) of a brahma.Q.a. For the success in (rites 
prescribed by) the holy and the Smrti texts, so also for being 
entitled to worshipping Viኻ.Q.u, (the mark of) the disc should be 
duly had. For accomplishing the status of Viኻ.Q.U, and for getting 
knowledge, a man should burn his body with (i.e. have marks 
of) heated conch and disc, after duly having offered oblations 
into fire. 
51-53. A brahma.Q.a should not mark his body with any other 
symbol than that of Viኻ.Q.u-with other symbols than the conch, 
disc, mace, sword and the Saniga (bow) of Viኻ.Q.u. He should burn 
his body with marks (made with Viኻ.Q.u's symbols). He, whose 
body is burnt with (i.e. has) other marks, is not entitled to (per­
forming) rites. One should avoid a brahma.Q.a not having the 
disc (-mark) from a distance. In the world one should not look 
at a brabma.Q.a who is not a devotee of Vi኱.Q.U as (one does not 
look at) a ca.Q.Qala. Viኻ.Q.u's devotee, even if he is outside the 
castes, purifies the three worlds. 
54-59. 
Therefore, 0 you of a charming face, brahmal).as 
should duly have marks (on their bodies). Brahma:Q.as (with their 
bodies marked) with Viኻ.Q.u's disc are refined and noble for 
acquiring mastery of hymns, knowledge and for salvation. 
Brahmal).as without (marks of) Viኻ.Q.u's disc are not refined. As

=== PAGE 210 ===

VI.224.60-74 
3 1 39 
it is urged by the holy texts, especially brahmaQ.as, living in all 
stages of life, should duly have (the mark of) Vi?Q.u's disc. Those 
who know the Vedas consider that a brii.hmaQ.a should have (the 
mark of) Sudadana on his right arm, and (that of) the conch on 
the left. The wearing of (the mark of) the disc etc. is told in the 
Mahopani?ad (the great Upani?ad texts) ; so also in the Sii.man 
(Veda), Yajur (Veda) and the ܙg (Veda), 0 you of a beautiful 
face. 0 Vi?Q.u, the other ancients have the marks of your pure 
lotus, disc for crossing the ocean of existence, at the roots of 
their arms. Others have other marks of you. 
60-64. 
The extensive disc is known as CaraQ.a. Pavitra is an 
old and a uspicious word. Burnt by the disc they would cross the 
ocean of sins. Vi?Q.u's disc is the lord of the hymns (brii.hmaQ.a­
spatyam?) and has always pervaded the world. Those whose 
bodies are not burnt (with it) do not go to the highest position. 
Those whose bodies are burnt with (it) go to the highest position. 
Know from me the names of Vi?Q.u's disc in succession : Pavitra, 
CaraQ.a, Nemi, Sudarsana, Haricakra, Sahasrii.ra (having a thou­
sand spokes), Prii.krtaghna (killer of the mean), Lokadvii.ra (a 
gate to the good world), Mahaujasa (very bright). Purify us with 
the Brahmanhood, pure and burnt in fire. Purify us with that 
Pavitra, having flames of you, 0 Agni. 
65-69. 
May the Pii.vamanya (hymns) purify me with the 
thousand-edged disc with which they always protect themselves. 
The disc of the Creator is bright with metal plates and golden. 
We knowing the hymn purify it (already) purified by it. The un­
aging disc with the felly is the eye of the noble one. Having put 
it on gods reached a high position. Therefore, (the marks of) the 
weapons should be duly put on particularly by brah:nal}.as, espe­
cially by Vi?Q.u's devotees. The noble one of a pure heart, who 
having the OrdhvapuQ.c;lra (perpendicular marks of sandal on the 
forehead) and the mark of the disc, meditates on Vi?Q.u's position, 
by means of singing the hymn always reaches (god Vi?Q.u) higher 
than the highest always remaining in his heart. 
70-74. Those devotees of Vi?Q.u, having stuck to (i.e. round) 
their necks the garland of Tulasi or lotuses or a rosary, having 
the marks of conch or disc at the roots of their arms, or those 
having the OrdhvapUQ.c;lra (the vertical lines) on their foreheads, 
quickly purify the world. Beings are not sorry for those who pre-

=== PAGE 211 ===

3 1 40 
Padma PuriiT)a 
serve (but) do not properly carry (the mark of) the extensive disc 
of the lord of heaven. Those who carry the disc very firm( -ly 
marked) with (the proper) rite on their arm{s), quickly occupy, 
by means of their lustre, a high place in the sky. He who has at 
the root(s) of his arms the disc mark of Vi?J;,lu, the highest soul 
(made) by heating (the disc) in the sacrificial fire, crosses the 
great ocean of the mundane existence, and goes to the pure world 
of the highest lord. A man should make at the roots of his arms 
the marks with the heated discs etc. He should also get such 
marks put on (the bodies of) his wife, children, servants and 
beasts etc. 
75-80. 0 you of an excellent face, all holy texts tell this. In 
the history (books) and the PuraJ;,las the same thing is told. The 
mark of devotion to Vi?J;.l.U is said to be of two kinds : external and 
internal. The external (mark) is (produced) by means of a conch, a 
disc etc. The internal (one) is freedom from attachment. One having 
similarity between the external and the internal is said to belong 
to Vi?J;.l.U. Therefore, the disc etc. are said to be the first (external) 
mark pertaining to Vi?J;.lu. The internal (mark) is realising the soul 
after being free from the faults due to Cupid (i.e. passion of 
love). So also showing compassion to all beings, tranquility and 
absence of greed for the objects of senses. So also having no 
attachment for sons, wife etc. ; and delight in the study of Yoga ; 
serving the highest lord by means of undistracted application to 
devotion. Therefore, marking with (Vi?J;.lu's) weapons like the 
disc is said to pertain to Vi?J;,l.U. Vai?J;,lavatva (the status of be­
longing to Vi?J;,lu) cannot be had without the marks of the disc 
etc. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED TWENTYFIVE 
The Efficacy of Urdhvapur;ujra 
Sankara said: 
1-4. 0 you of an auspicious appearance, I shall tell you the 
greatness of the tJrdhvapuJ;,lgra (vertical Vai?J;,lava mark on the

=== PAGE 212 ===

Vl.22 5 . 5- 1 8 
3 141 
forehead). The best brahma:Q.a would be free from the bond of the 
worldly existence just on having it. Within the large and very 
charming space in the Drdbvapu:Q.c,ira, Vi?l).u, god of gods, is 
seated with Lak?mi. Therefore, the body of him, on which there 
would be the mark, is the clean, auspicious temple of the lord. 
That devotee of Viܚl).u, who has the mark made with white clay, 
has bathed at all holy places, is prepared for all sacrifices. 
5-8. The brahmal).a having the mark is honoured among all 
people, (and) getting into an excellent aeroplane, goes to the 
highest place of Vi?:Q.u. The best brahma:Q.a should put on the 
mark thrice (a day), for purification of all sins, and for obtaining 
the fruit of performing sacrifices and digging wells and doing 
other acts of charity. (A man) seeing one having the mark, is fteed 
from all sins. By saluting him devoutly he would obtain the fruit 
of all (kinds of) charity. The dead ancestors of him who will feed 
a brahmܛa having the mark are undoubtedly pleased for crores 
of kalpas. 
9-14. 
O you of an auspicious face, he who, having the mark, 
performs a sraddha, would obtain, for crores of kalpas, the fruit 
of the sraddha (performed) at Gaya. The religious merit of the 
sacrifices, gifts, penance, muttering (of hymns), sacrificial rites etc. 
of one having the mark is endless. All the sacrifices performed, 
wells dug, and other charitable acts done by him who does any act 
without having the mark, are useless. That human body which is 
without the mark should not be seen at all. It would be like a cre­
mation ground. All the rites etc. which a man without the mark 
would do, are taken (away) by demons ; and he goes down to hell. 
A brahmat;ta well-versed in the Vedas, should have the mark with 
white clay. The wise one should never have it in an oblique man­
ner even in a misery. 
1 5-18. 
Brahma:Q.as should have the mark. The mark of 
kğatriyas should be round ; that of vaisyas should be strip­
like ; that of siidras should have three lines. The mark should 
be made with clay ; the round one with musk ; the strip-like one 
with sandal ; and the three-lined one with sacred ash. Tne vertical 
mark is recommended for all. It is not prohibited. A k?atriya etc. 
also, if he is Vi?nu's devotee should have it. Brahma:Q.as are not to 
have the oblique or the strip-like mark. And they are not to wor­
ship any other (deity) than Vi?:Q.u, the highest lord.

=== PAGE 213 ===

3 142 
Padma PuriiiJQ 
19-23. 0 goddess, if a brahma:t;ta, learned and hom in a noble 
family has put on (the mark of) sacred ash, one should avoid such 
a brahma:Q.a, as a pot in which liquor is left as the remnant. The 
mark of three lines is the practice for those who are siidras and like 
siidras. There is no doubt that a brahma:Q.a having the mark of 
three lines, falls. The very noble ones, interested in the good of all 
living beings, should have a pu:Q.<;ira with a gap like the shape of 
ViȞ?:Q.u's foot. A man should have the mark in accordance with the 
precept, resembling the foot of Vi!ii:Q.U and having a gap in its cen­
tre ; for that is Vigm's temple. He should have the mark which is 
good, pleasing, has the shape of a staff, good sides, which is very 
charming, very beautiful, and which has a gap at the centre. 
24-27. Therefore, 0 you of an auspicious appearance, brah­
ma:Q.as and women should always have the mark which has a gap, 
has the shape of a staff, and is very beautiful. In the large and very 
beautiful gap at the centre of the vertical mark, Vi!ii:Q.U is seated 
with Lakܞ?mi. That mean brahma:Q.a who would have a gapless 
vertical mark, expels Vi!ii:Q.U along with Lak!iimi seated there. 
There is no doubt that there always is a dog's foot on the 
foreheads of those mean brahma:Q.as who have a gapless vertical 
mark. 
28-40. 
Therefore, in order to attain the same world as of 
Vi!ii:Q.U, a brahmaJ).a should always have a mark with a gap, with 
turmeric, and having auspiciousness. For securing absorption into 
Vi!ii:Q.U one should, with great devotion, bring the clay from the 
pool on the Venka!a mountain, and make the vertical mark (with 
it). A devoted person should bring the clay from the rootofTulasi 
of (i.e. dear to) Sri Kr!iiQa, and should make the vertical mark 
(with it). Vi!iiQU is pleased with him. Or the best brahma:Q.a, having 
brought the pleasing clay from the auspicious, charming pool (i.e. 
sacred to) Vi!ii ).U at Dvaravati, should make the mark (with it) 
in order to secure all desired objects. He who, having brought with 
great devotion, clay from the banks of Ganga, makes the mark 
with it, would obtain the fruit of all sacrifices. Due to having the 
mark (with) sandal, turmeric, so also (with) ash from the sacred 
fire one is said to control everything. He should bring the clay 
from that place which is sacred to Vi!iiJJ.U. One should get the clay 
from the top of a mountain, the bank of a river, the root of a 
bilva (tree), a reservoir of water, the coast of a sea, an anthill,

=== PAGE 214 ===

VI.225.41-59 
3143 
especially from a place sacred to Vi?l).u, and from the place where 
the water used for Vi?1,1u's bath always flows, for having the mark. 
A man, taking clay with water flowing from Vi?1,1u's feet, and hav­
ing pu1,1gra marks on the limbs of his body at Sriratiga, Veilkata­
giri, Srikiirma, the auspicious Dvaraka, Prayaga, Narasirilha 
mountain, Varaha, a Tulasi-grove would get absorption into 
Vi ?l).u. For having the mark clay should be taken from that place 
wherefrom the noble devotees of Vi?1,1u take it. A dark mark is 
said to cause peace. So also a red one is said to bring about con­
trol. They say that a yellow one leads to riches. The white one 
leads to salvation and is auspicious. 
41-50. 
They say that a round, oblique, gapless, short, long, 
protracted, thin, crooked, ugly ptark, one with its top closed or 
with its root cut off, with a line missing, inauspicious, rough, fix­
ed, one that is not drawn with the finger, not having fragrance, or 
inadequate is unfortunate. One should draw it with clay begin­
ning with the root of the nose. Starting it from the middle of the 
eye-brows, he should have a gap in it. The gap should be of the 
measure of two fingers, and the sides of the size of a finger. With 
white clay he should draw a better and auspicious mark. He should 
meditate upon Kesava (as staying) on his forehead. (He should 
meditate) upon Naraya1,1a (as staying) in his belly, Madhava (as 
stayi:1g) in his chest, and Govinda (as staying) in his throat. (He 
should meditate) upon Vi?1,1u (as staying) in the right side of his 
belly and Madhusiidana (as staying) in his right arm. (He should 
meditate) upon Trivikrama (as staying) in (the right side of) his 
neck, and Vamana (as staying) in his left side. (He should medi­
tate) upon Sridhara (as staying) in his left arm, and Hr?ikesa in 
(the left side of) his neck. (He should meditate) upon Padmanabha 
(as staying) in his back, and place Damodara in the lower part of 
his spine. And with the water for washing it (he should meditate) 
upon Vasudeva (as present) in his head. He should draw the mark 
of the measure of four fingers on his forehead, both the arms, on 
both (the sides) of the back, and on the neck. On the belly and 
near its sides a long one of the measure of ten fingers is recom­
mended. On the arms and chest a mark of the measure of eight 
fingers is recommended. Thus a brahma1,1a should always have 
twelve marks. 
51-59. 
He should, after meditating upon those images with

=== PAGE 215 ===

3 144 
Padma PuriiiJ,a 
their respective hymns, have the marks (on those respective limbs 
of his body). In the gap he should have (i.e. put) auspicious tur­
meric. They say, k?atriyas should have four marks and vaisyas 
should have two. One mark is laid down for women and siidras. 
He should have four marks on the forehead, on his chest, and on 
the arms. Two are laid down for the forehead and the chest and 
one for the place where the hair is separated. Of all the marks, the 
vertical one is said to be the first (that should be put) on the fore­
head. As laid down, it should be had in the order of the forehead 
first. One should have the images of Vasudeva etc. in the four ver­
tical marks. In two he should have the two (images of) Govinda 
and Kr?:Q.a and one of Naraya:Q.a. 0 Girija, I have thus told (you) 
the manner in which the pu:Qgra is had. The triad of one resem­
bling the asvattha-leaf, the reed-leaf, or the lotus-leaf, is said to be 
'Mohana'. A pure, great devotee of Vi?:Q.u, should, in case of a 
controversy, have a vertical mark of the shape of a staff. Those, 
the roots of whose arms are marked with Sudarsana, so also all 
of whose limbs are marked with the vertical pu:Q.gra, who have 
lotus garlands and rosaries, protect the people from contact with 
heaps of sins. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED TWENTYSIX 
The Meaning of the Mantra (Formula) 
Sankara said: 
1-5. At (the time of) a nyasa or worship, one should resort 
to Vi?:Q.u's formula (mantra). The highest position is not had by 
means of a formula not sacred to Vi?:Q.u. If the former couple of 
sacred names (i.e. the one mentioned above) is imparted by one 
who is a non-Vai?:Q.ava, then one should again receive it from a 
follower of Vi?:Q.u. Even if a man has studied a thousand bran­
ches (of the holy texts), even if he was initiated into all (kinds 
of) sacrifices, even if he is born in a good family, he should not 
be a preceptor if he is not a follower of Vi?:Q.u. That follower of 
Vi?:Q.u who properly imparts the two sacred names, should be

=== PAGE 216 ===

VI.226.6-2 1 
3145 
known as the preceptor, tearing off the bond of the mu.:1dane 
existence. A brahma:t;.a should, after resorting to a preceptor, 
live (with him) for a year. The preceptor, knowing his behavi­
our, should impart him the formula. 
6-9. 
Having first done the sacraments as burning his body 
(i.e. putting sectarian marks on it), he should then utter the 
for:.1mla, after burning, putting the sectarian mark and giving a 
name (to him). Then he should teach his disciple of a pure 
heart. The rite of burning with (i.e. putting marks like) the (heat­
ed) disc (etc.) is called tapa (or burning). The sectarian mark is 
said to be vertical and the name (accepted by) the Vai?:Q.ava seCt 
is pronounced. Then in accordance with the rule (about the 
mantra) the teachܜr should teach the formula to the disciple. (He 
should teach him) nyasa, the eight-syllabled or any other for­
mula sacred to Vi?:Q.u. 0 you of an auspicious face, here nyasa is 
of a high value to the followers of Vi?:Q.u. 
10-12. Therefore, for them nyasa is said to be superior. A 
brahma:Q.a highly devoted to nyasa is said to be the best. There 
is no greater mantra than a nyasa. I am telling you the truth. 
Nyasa and the couple of mantras are synonyms for devotion. 
Learn it from me. Mter having instruction in the two, he should 
practise all rites. He who is not entitled to both does not deserve 
to perform all rites. 
1 3-16. Therefore, the best brahma:t;.a, having studied the 
two, should study the eight-syllabled formula properly. The for­
mula is said to be eight-syllabled due to the inclusion of (the 
syllable) Om. The wise say that that is a sacred formula which 
naturally has Om at its beginning. Except at the beginning of all 
formulas Om is not naturally there. One should use it before 
(i.e. at the beginning of) all formulas. 0 you of an auspicious 
face, the sacred syllable Om is Brahman. It is the chief of all 
formulas. One should use it at the commencement of all formulas. 
1 7-2 1. 
At the root-formula Om is naturally settled. The first 
(syllable) is Om, having one letter. Then is (the word) nama}J 
having two letters. Then in proper order are the five letters 
Niiriiyavaya. Thus the formula, accomplishing all objects, should 
be known to be eight-syllabled. It removes all sorrows ; it is 
glorious ; it contains all formulas ; it is auspicious. Its seer is 
Naraya:Q.a, and (he) himself, the lord of Sri, is its deity. Its metre

=== PAGE 217 ===

3 1 46 
Padma PurO.ÏJa 
is the divine Gayatri and origin is Om. The power of the formula 
is goddess Sri who is never-failing. The first foot is said to be the 
letter Om ; the second to be Namal;z, and the third to be NO.rO.ya­
ܝaya. Thus the three feet are told. 
22-26. 
The letters a, u, and m form the syllable Om, which 
is Brahman's word, and is of the nature of the three Vedas. 
Vi?I}.u is expressed by the letter a, Sri by the letter u ; the letter 
m is the servant of these two, and is said to be the twentyfifth 
(letter). It is said by the wise that a expresses Vi\I}.u's form. The 
sages say that u expresses the form of the goddess Sri. The letter 
m expresses the soul, the puru?a, the twentyfifth (principle of 
the Sarilkhyas). The elements are expressed by the class of letters 
beginning with ka ; and the senses are denoted by the class of 
letters beginning with ca. The class of letters beginning with 
{a and that beginning with ta denote knowledge, so also the 
letters like dha (indicate the same). The mind is expressed by the 
letter pa only ; and ego by the letter pha. 
27-30. 
Mahat (i.e. Intellect) and Prakrti (Primordial Matter) 
(the principles enunciated in the Sarilkhya System) are (respecti­
vely) expressed by the letters ba and bha. The soul is said to be 
the letter ma and is said to be the twentyfifth (principle). It is 
different from the body, the senses, the mind, the vital breath ; 
and has no other means. He is the remnant of the lord, is denoted 
by ma and is sentient. Some say that ma indicates just the em­
phasis. According to them the principle of Sri is expressed by the 
Jetter va (ma?) only. As the sun's lustre does not go away from 
him, so Lak?mi does not go away from him. Vi?Q.u, the ocean of 
auspicious qualities, is expressed by the letter a. 
3 1-36. 
The lord of Sri is the remnant of all souls, is the 
seed (i.e. source) of the world, and the highest person. He is the 
author and the sustainer of the world, the lord, and people's kin. 
(Lak?mi) always controls the worlds, does not go away from 
ViʿI}.U. She is mother of the entire world and Vi?I}.u's charming 
wife. Here (i.e. in the mantra) the letter u expresses Sri, who is the 
support of the world. The wise say that the letter ma expresses 
the soul, the servant of the two (i.e. Vi?I}.U and Lakğmi). He is 
the support of knowledge, has knowledge as his quality, is senti­
ent, and is beyond Prakrti. He is not insentient ; he is without any 
modification ; is uniform in nature and has (no other form than)

=== PAGE 218 ===

VI.226.37-53 
3147 
his own form. He is subtle, eternal, pervading, of the nature of 
intellect and joy, is of the nature of ego, immutable, the soul, of 
different forms, and eternal. He cannot be burnt, cannot be cut 
off, cannot be made wet, cannot be dried, and is indestructible ; 
he is (thus) endowed with such qualities and is an effect of the 
highest (soul). 
37-42. The letter ma expresses the individual soul, always 
dependent. He is the servant of ViᕥIJ.U only and of none else. Thus 
is determined his servitude to be mediocre. 0 sinless one, the 
meaning of Om should be known like this. I have explained it 
(to you). 0 auspicious one, the exposition of Om (is done) by 
means of the remnant of the meaning, the formula(?). In this 
world, he who is the servant of another, does not get freedom. 
Therefore, with (the help of) the mind one should turn away 
Mahat and Aharilkara (i.e. Intellect and Ego). That act which is 
done by the knowledge of one's means, is also prohibited. The 
letter ma is (i.e. stands for) ego, and the letter na prohibits it. 
Therefore, with his mind only he gets freedom from the ego. 
Every accomplishment is due to the mind. Otherwise he would 
perish. Whatever is with the mind is said to be the ego. 
43-46. One having egotism has absolutely no happiness. He 
whose mind is deluded by egotism sinks in the blinding darkness. 
Therefore, his freedom through mind is not prohibited. He is 
dependent upon the lord and lives under his influence. Therefore, 
the sentient is not the author of the means. The mobile and the 
immobile exist due to the will of the highest lord. Therefore, he 
would completely give up the application of his own power. Due 
to the lord's power there is nothing that is not obtained by him . 
47-53. 
Having placed the burden (i.e. the responsibility) on 
that lord of Lakᕥmi, he should do acts of (i.e. sacred to) him only. 
The highest soul, ViᕥIJ.U, is the master. I always belong to him. His 
mind should be employed according to the desire of that lord 
only. Thus it is noble when egotism and sense ofmineness are 
abandoned by the mind. In the mundane existence the sense of 
mineness is the root of the bondage due to the deeds. Therefore, a 
wise man should avoid Mahat (Intellect) and Aharl::tkara (ego) 
with (the help of) the mind. (Now) 0 you auspicious Girija, I 
shall explain (to you) the word NarayaTJa. Nara is the assemb­
lage of the souls. This Puruᕥa (Narayal)a) is their refuge. And they

=== PAGE 219 ===

3 148 
Padma Puriil)a 
are his abode ; therefore he is said to be Niiriiyai)Q. The entire 
world-the sentient and insentient objects-is heard, is seen. He, 
who always remains after pervading it, is said to be Niiriiyal)a. 
The groups of all men are said to be Niirii. He is their refuge and 
support. Therefore, he is said to be Niiriiyal)a. The wise know the 
principles produced from Nara (i.e. the Supreme Spirit) as niirii. 
54-59. They alone are his abode. Therefore, he is called 
Niiriiyal)a, by whom the world, after devouring it even at the end 
of the kalpa, is supported, and by whom it is again created. There­
fore he is said to be Niiriiyal)a. The entire world consisting of the 
mobile and the immobile is called Niira. To it he is connected ; 
therefore he is said to be Niiriiyal)a. The Niira-the host of men 
-is his abode or refuge. Therefore, he is always called Niiriiyal)a 
by the sages ; from him spring the worlds, as the massive foam in 
the ocean. Since they again merge into him, therefore, he is said 
to be Niiriiyaf)a. He is (residing) at the eternal position, is eternal, 
and is always free and alone enjoys ; he is the lord of the entire 
world. Therefore, he is called Niiriiyal)a. Niiriiya1)a is the highest 
Brahman. Niiriiyal)a is the highest principle. 
60-64. 
Niiriiya1)a has remained after pervading whatever is 
seen or heard within and without this world. Hari, Narayal).a, 
Acyuta is the Supreme soul with the sins destroyed. He resides 
within all beings. He is divine, always (all) alone, and is eternal. 
He is the seer and is what is to be seen. He is the listener and is 
what is listened to also. He is the one that touches and is also 
what is touched. He meditates and is what is meditated upon. He 
is the speaker and what is spoken. He is the knower and what is 
known. He is the sentient and insentient world. All that is said 
to be Hari, the lord of Sri, NarayaJ}.a. He, the Supreme Being, 
has a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet. Having 
pervaded all the worlds he stands above them by (the measure of) 
ten fingers. 
65-69. 
All that was and will be is Naraya:J.la Hari. And he is 
the lord of immortality and the Virat ; the Supreme Being (grows 
beyond) by the means of food. He alone is the Supreme Being, 
Vi?J).u, Vasudeva, Acyuta, Hari, HiraJ.lillaya, and the lord ; he is 
immortal, eternal, auspicious (Siva). He is the master of the en­
tire world, is the lord of all people, and the master. He is 
Hira:J.lyagarbha, the Sun, is Ananta (the endless) and the great

=== PAGE 220 ===

VI.226. 70-88 
3149 
god. The word Bhagavat, so also the word PuruƔa and the word 
Nirupiidhi stand for Vasudeva, the soul of all. The god, the lord 
Vigm, the highest soul, the friend of the world, the only ruler of 
the movable and the immovable is the greatest refuge of the 
ascetics. 
70-73. That one who is naturally merged into the sound 
uttered at the beginning of the Veda and who is settled in the Ved­
anta (i.e. the Upaniᕦads), who is the greatest, is the great god. 
That one, viz. Viᕥ1;1u, who is (indicated by) the letter a, the one 
who is Narayat;.a Hari, is the eternal Supreme Being, the highest 
soul, the great lord. Sages use the word isvara (i.e. the lord) also 
for him in whom wonderful glory exists. Unconditional lordship 
exists in Viᕭ1;1u. The ancient words of Veda have descl'ibed him as 
the soul, the lord. Therefore, in Vasudeva the great lordship exists. 
74-88. Due to his splendour he is Tripiid (literally, having 
three feet). He is the lord of sport. He, the soul of all, has two 
kinds of grandeurs and glory. He who is the lord of Sri, Bhii and 
Nila is called the lord. Therefore, mastery over all exists in Vasu­
deva. He is the lord of sacrifice, is the sacrifice, the enjoyer of 
sacrifice, the performer of sacrifice, the lord, the enjoyer of sacri­
fice, the Puruᕥa (i.e. the deity) of sacrifice. He alone is the high­
est lord. He is the lord of sacrifice. He is the enjoyer of the ob­
lations made to gods and all offerings to the dead ancestors. He 
is immutable. He, Hari, is the lord here. All goblins and demons 
go away from his vicinity. He, Viᕥ1;1u, who became Virat and 
Hari, is himself the highest lord, who pleases the three worlds. 
With him as the complete oblation gods performed a sacrifice. 
Those who have a double row of teeth are born from that sacri­
fice. From that sacrifice with all the oblations sprang· rks, 
siimans. From it sprang horses, cows, men etc. The entire world 
consisting of the mobile and the immobile sprang from the body 
of the Supreme Being consisting of everything. The castes were 
his face, arms, thighs and feet in due order. From his feet the 
earth came up and the heaven from his head. From his mind the 
moon was produced, and the sun from his eye. Fire with a thou­
sand eyes (sprang) from his mouth, and the ever-moving wind 
from his breath. From his navel came up Brahma, the sky, the 
movable and immovable world. Since the entire world came up 
from the eternal Viᕥ1;1u, therefore, Viᕥ1;1u full of all, is called Nara-

=== PAGE 221 ===

3 1 50 
Padma Pur{ll:za 
yal].a. Hari, having thus created the world again devours it, as a 
spider does the web produced from its saliva. Since, having curb­
ed Brahma, Indra, Rudra, Yama and Varul].a, he subdues them, 
therefore, he is called Hari. This ancient Supreme Being having 
put the world in his belly, sleeps in the coating of (his) Maya, 
which has become an ocean. (In the beginning) here this Viᕥl].u, 
Narayal}.a, Acyuta was alone. 
89-93. 
Brahma, Rudra, gods, great sages, this heaven, this 
earth, the moon, the sun, the stars, the world, the (cosmic) egg 
covered by Mahat (were) not there. 0 auspicious one, since the 
entire world was held by that Hari (in his belly) and was again 
created at the time of creation, therefore he is said to be Nara­
yal].a. 0 Parvati, service to him is described in the formula by the 
dative case. This entire world, beginning with Brahma, is his slave. 
Knowing the meaning to be like this one should then use the 
formula. 0 you of an excellent face, without knowing the mean­
ing of the formula, one would not get success, so also enjoyment, 
devotion and salvation. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED TWENTYSEVEN 
The Description of the Vibhuti of TripOd 
Piirvati said: 
1-2. Tell me in detail, the importance of the meaning and 
the words of the sacred formula, so also the lord's vibhUti 
(divine properties) and his qualities. 0 lord of all gods, properly 
tell me all about that highest abode of Viᕥl].U, and about the 
kinds of his vyuhas (divine manifestations). 
The lord said: 
3-7. 
0 goddess, listen. I shall explain to you the nature of 
the highest soul ; so also the vibhuti and group of qualities of 
that Viᕥl].U. That great, Supreme Being who is mentioned as 
Viᕥl].u, Nariiyal].a, is the lord of the worlds, and the eternal high­
est soul. The lord has hands and feet on all sides, has eyes on all

=== PAGE 222 ===

VI.227.8-21 
3151 
sides. Having all worlds and great abodes in it (i.e. his body) he 
stands above the minds of men. The lord of Lak!ilmi, Puru!ilot­
tama, has thus a multiple nature. For enjoyment with the god­
dess he takes up divine and auspicious forms. His is a large 
body. His form is like that of fire. Vi!i!l}.U took to the form of a 
youth and a boy. He enjoyed with Lak!llmi, the mother of the 
worlds, as the Moon with rays (producing) nectar (enjoys with) 
his moonlight. 
8-13. This (lord) of the goddess of the world is a young 
boy, ever young. Having handsomeness like that of a crore of 
Cupids he remains at the highest place. For his enjoyment there 
is the highest sky ; for his sport the entire world. The two kinds 
of Viᕧ1J.u's vibhiiti are due to his enjoyment and sport. He always 
remains enjoying. Sometime he withdraws his sport. Due to his 
having a (special) power, he has both enjoyment and sport. The 
pervading with his third step is done in the highest abode. One 
step of him was here also. His vibhiiti with the third step is per­
petual, (while) the step (on the earth) is non-perpetual. That 
eternal auspicious form of the lord has stayed in the highest 
abode. It is infallible, eternal, divine, and has always resorted to 
youth. It is always enjoying the goddess Lak!ilmi and is surround­
ed by Lak!llmi and the earth. This Lak!ilmi of Vi!i!:IJ.U, the mother 
of the world, is eternal and imperishable. 
14-2 1 . 0 you of an auspicious face, as Vi!i!l}.U is omnipresent 
so is Lak!llmi. This ever auspicious wife of Vi?:IJ.U rules over the 
world. She has hands and feet on all sides. She has eyes and 
heads on all sides. This Naraya1}.i, the mother of the world, is 
the resort ofthe entire world. The entire immobile and mobile 
world has resorted to (i.e. depends upon) her glance. The exist­
ence and the dissolution of the world is due to her opening and 
closing (her) eyes. This great Lak!ilmi is the first of all. She has 
three constituents (viz. sattva, rajas and tamas). She is the great­
est goddess. She of a visible and invisible form, remains after 
having pervaded everything. The great goddess having seen the 
entire universe void, filled that entire (universe) with her own 
lustre. That Lakᕧmi is the Earth only, well-known as goddess 
Nila. Being the support of the world, she has resorted to the 
form of the earth. She herself would be of the form of Nila due 
to her liquid form of the nature of water etc. She has obtained

=== PAGE 223 ===

31 52 
Padma Puriil:za 
the form of Lakᕥmi. She is of the nature of wealth and speech. 
Thus, she, the goddess of the world, has resorted to ViᕥIJ.U. 0 
you of an auspicious face, all the varieties of knowledge would 
be (i.e. are) her forms. 
22-23. Everything that has a beautiful form is said to be 
her body only. It remains in women as beauty, good character 
and behaviour, and good fortune (in the form of having their 
husbands alive). 0 Girijii, her beauty is at the head (i.e. top of 
the beauty) of all women. By means of the glance of her, of a 
strong vision, Brahmii, Siva, Indra the lord of heaven, the 
Moon, the Sun, Kubera, Yama, Agni obtain ample affiuence. 
24-28. He who, after getting up in the morning would re­
cite these auspicious names of her, viz. Lakᕥmi, Sri, Kamala, 
Vidyii, Miitii, Viᕥ:Q.upriyii (dear to Viᕥ:Q.u), Sati, Padmiilayii (hav­
ing a lotus as her abode), Padmahastii (having a lotus in her 
hand), Padmiikᕥi (lotus-eyed), Lokasundari, Bhutiiniim Isvari 
(She who controls the beings), Nityii, Sahyii (literally, bearable), 
Sarvagatii (omnipresent), Subhii (auspicious), Viᕥ:Q.upatni, Mahii­
devi, Kᕥirodatanayii (daughter of the Milky Ocean), Ramii., 
Anantii. (endless), Lokamiita (the mother of the world), Bhii, 
Nflii, Sarvasukhapradii (giving all pleasures), Rukmi:Q.i, so also 
Sitii, Subha (auspicious), Sarvavedavati (possessing all Vedas), 
Sati, Sarasvati, Gauri, Santi, Sviiha (the oblations offered to 
gods), Svadhii (the oblations offered to dead ancestors), Rati, 
Niiriiya:Q.i, Viᕥ:Q.u's eternal beautiful wife never leaving him, ob­
tains wealth and faultless riches and grains. 
29-37. I here invoke Sri who has golden complexion, who 
is attractive, who has a golden and silver chaplet, who is moon­
like, full of gold, Lakᕥmi, who does not go away from ViᕥIJ.U, 
who is perceptible through her fragrance, who is haughty, al­
ways nourished, who is the goddess of wealth, who controls all 
beings. The great goddess thus praised in ᕸgveda gave all the 
pleasure of a:ffl.uence to gods like Siva. This ancient wife of 
ViᕥIJ.U controls this world. The entire mobile and immobile 
world resorts to (i.e. depends upon) her glances. He, the indes­
tructible, immutable Supreme Being, on whose chest the god­
dess like Agni's lustre, rests, is actually the lord of all. He is the 
a:ffl.uent Niiriiyal).a, the ocean of the quality of love. He is the 
lord, is good-tempered, amiable, omniscient and all-powerful.

=== PAGE 224 ===

Vl.227.38-51 
3 1 53 
His desires are always fully gratified ; he is a natural friend and 
companion. He is the ocean of the nectar of compassion. He is 
the shelter of men. He is the giver of heaven, salvation and 
happiness to his devotees. He is the mine of pity . I shall fully do 
service to that Vitl).u. In all conditions like time and place the 
form of the lord of Kamala is well-established. A man would 
easily obtain service to Vitl).U. 
38-42. 
Having thus known the meaning of the sacred for­
mula, a man should properly practise devotion to him. All this 
immobile and mobile world is under his control. Lord Srimat 
Nariiyal).a is the lord, the master of the worlds. He is the mother, 
the father, the son, the kinsman, the abode, the refuge and the 
shelter. The lord of Sri has auspicious qualities ; he gives the 
fruits of all desires. He is the lord of the world, who is described 
as qualityless in the holy texts. He is said to be so in the sense 
that he is devoid of Prakrt:i-born qualities associated with what 
should be abandoned. The falseness of the display of which is 
(indicated) by passages found in Vedanta, i.e. all that is seen, 
consists in its being transient. In this case also, the Prakrti-born 
form of the (cosmic) egg itself is perishable. 
43-48 . 
In the same way the transitoriness of the Prakrti­
born forms is explained. The meaning is : 0 great goddess, the 
Prakrti has come up for the play of Vitl).u, the god of gods, en­
titled to sport. This egg (i.e. cosmos) having Prakrti as its source 
is charming as it is complete with the four and ten worlds, oceans 
with islands, four kinds of beings and mountains with very lofty 
peaks. It is endowed with qualities more than ten ; it is covered 
with seven covers. By means of that time only which moves in the 
form of(the measures of time like) kalii.,I kiit!!hii,2 the creation, 
maintenance and destruction of the world would be (i .e. take 
place). A day of Brahmii is of the duration of four thousand 
yugas. As many years' (duration) is a night of Brahmii, whose 
birth is not known. When the end of Brahmii comes, he would be 
destroying everything. 
49-51 . The worlds existing in the (cosmic) egg are burnt by 
the destructive fire at the end of the world. Then all the souls are 
1 . 
Kala : 
A division 
of time variously computed as one minute, 48 
seconds, or 8 seconds. 
2. 
Kastha : A measure of time, 1 /30 kala.

=== PAGE 225 ===

3 1 54 
Padma PuraTJ.a 
put into the Prakrti (i.e. the personified will) of ViȞ?:Q.U. The cover 
of the egg, the beings, are merged into the primordial matter. 
That primordial matter is the support of the entire world, and 
has resorted to Vi኱:Q.u. By means of her the lord always brings 
about the creation and destruction of the world. The lord has 
created the illusion in the form of the world for his sport. 
52-54. 
She (called) Avidya (ignorance), Prakrti (primordial 
matter), Maya (illusion), Gu:Q.atrayamayi (consisting of the three 
constituents, viz. sattva, rajas and tamas), Sanatani (the ancient 
one) is ever the cause of creation, maintenance and destruction. 
This Yoganidra (Vi኱:Q.u 's sleep at the end of a yuga), the great 
illusion, the Prakrti having the three constituents, unmanifest, 
Pradhana is the sport of Viዌ?:Q.U that does not change. Due to 
Prakrti only the creation and destruction of the world would al­
ways take place. The place of Prakrti beyond calculation is 
imperishable, dense darkness. 
55-59. 
On the boundary on the side above is Viraja ; on the 
lower side the ancient one is limitless. She in her gross and sub­
tle condition has subdued the entire world. Creation and destruc­
tion are said to be the two states of expansion and contraction 
of her. Thus all beings are within Prakrti. Then all this great 
world within Prakrti is void. Thus the excellent form of (his) 
vibhii.ti is of the form of Prakrti. 0 daughter of the (Himalaya) 
Mountain, listen to the vibhii.ti of the Tripad (liberally, having 
three feet or steps). The river Viraja is between Pradhana and the 
highest heaven. She, the auspicious one, is caused to flow with 
the water produced by the sweat of the Vedatigas. At the other 
side ofher, in the highest heaven is the ancient vibhii.ti, viz. 
Tripad (i.e. ViȞ?:Q.U). 
60-63. 
(The nature of the highest place of Vi኱:Q.u is :) immor­
tal, eternal, continual, endless, the highest position, pure, full of 
sattva (i.e. goodness), divine, immutable and Brahman's place. It 
is unchanging and has the lustre equal to that of many crores of 
suns. It is full of the Vedas, is pure, and free from creation and 
destruction. It is beyond calculation, unaging, continual, free 
from wakefulness and sleep etc. It is golden ; it gives salvation ; 
it gives bliss and happiness. It is without similarity or e-xcess (i .e. 
nothing is equal or superior to it). It is without a beginning or

=== PAGE 226 ===

Vl.227 .64-80 
3 1 55 
an end. It is auspicious. It is wonderful due to lustre ; is charm­
ing ; is always the ocean of joy. 
64-67. 
Viኲ:t;tu's highest place is endowed with these and 
other qualities. The sun, or the moon, or the fire does not illu­
mine it. That is the highest place of Vi኱:t;tu, after going to which 
(beings) do not return (to the earth). That is Vi኱:t;tu's highest 
abode, which is eternal, continual and fixed. Even for hundreds 
of crores of kalpas Vi኱:t;tu's place cannot be desCl'ibed by me, or 
by Brahma, or by hosts of best sages. 0 dear one, the unfallen 
lord stays at that place ; one may or may not know him. It is 
immutable ; it is a mystery (even) to the Vedas (or it is a secret of 
the Vedas) ; in it all gods were seated. There is none who 
can describe it. What can one do with a rc? Those who know it 
are these, seated here. 
68-75. 
0 goddess, the wise ones always see that highest 
abode of Vi኱:t;tu, which is indestructible, eternal, divine, and is 
like an expanded eye. It is not impossible for deities like Brahma, 
Rudra to enter it. The best meditating sages see it through know­
ledge, the path of the holy texts. I, Brahma, gods and great sages 
do not understand the significance of all the Upani኱ads. On under­
standing it I shall tell it, 0 you of a good vow. At that highest 
place of Vi$:t;tU, called good and auspicious, cows with many horns 
and very happy created beings live. They say here is the abode of 
Vi$:t;tU, dressed as a cowherd. With the cows and cowherds of 
pleasant appellations the great abode shines. It has the comp­
lexion of the sun. The unfailing lustre, viz. Vi኱:t;tu's place is be­
yond darkness. It is Brahma's prop. That is a pure, good ancient 
world. At t his highest position, the eternal place, in which the 
vulgar do not find a place, the two, young Sri and the ancient 
(Vi$:t;tu), being watchful, stayed. 
76-80. Bhu and Nila, dear to Vi኱:t;tu, are the two sisters from 
there. Here the old Sadhyas, and all the ancient gods dwell. Those 
of an auspicious appearance, and great ones sought out heaven. 
There the learned watchful brahma:t;tas kindle (the fire). The wise 
brahma:t;tas, desiring its contact, go to that place. That highest 
place of Viኲ:t;tu is called Mokኲa (liberation). Those free from 
bondage obtain (i.e. reach) that happy place. Reaching it they do 
not come back (i.e. are not reborn). Therefore, it is called

=== PAGE 227 ===

3 1 56 
Padma Puriil)a 
Mok኱a (liberation). Mok኱a is the highest place (state) ; it is 
divine, immortal, the abode of Vi኱J;J.U ; it is indestructible ; it is the 
highest a bode ; it is · VaikuJ;J.tha, the eternal place. It is nitya 
(eternal), the highest heaven, the best and the saniitana (ancient). 
These are the synonymns of the highest abode of Vi኱J;J.u. I shall 
(now) explain in detail the form of the vibhiiti of that Tripiid. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED TWENTYEIGHT 
Deαcription of the Highest Heaven etc. 
Sri Mahiideva said: 
1 -6. 
The worlds of the vibhiiti of Tripiid are said to be in­
numerable. All they are made of pure sattva, and are called bliss 
and happiness. All they are eternal, free from change, and void 
of attachment etc. that are worthy of being abandoned. All are 
golden, pure, and have the lustre of crores of suns. They are full 
of all Vedas, are divine, and free from lust and anger. They are 
resorted to by those who take joy only in devotion to the lotus­
like feet of Vi኱J;J.u. They are completely happy due to continuous 
chanting of the Siimans. All are of the nature of the five 
Upani኱ads and have the lustre of the Vedas. All of them are 
covered with divine men and women full of the Vedas. They 
are adorned with lakes having water in the form of only the 
:flavour of the Vedas. They have the immobile objects in the 
form of the holy texts, the codes of law and the PuriiJ;J.as. It is not 
possible for me to describe the full expanse of (these) worlds. 
7-1 3. Only the distance between Virajii and the highest heaven 
is said (to be covered by them). That place should be enjoyed 
by those who resort to the unmanifest Brahman. That absolute 
position which gives joy and happiness due to the experience of 
one's own self is called Nissreyaβ. Nirva1;1a, Kaivalya and M ok$a. 
Those who are nourished by the happiness due to their interest 
in devoutly serving the lotus-like feet of the lord of Sri, and 
whose intellect is small, desire mok኱a, void of happiness. (But) 
the high-souled, noble ones who serve the feet of the lord go to

=== PAGE 228 ===

Vl.228. 14-25 
3 1 57 
that highest abode of Vi኱:Q.u which gives pleasure (derived) from 
Brahman. That place of Vi኱:Q.u (called) Vaiku:Q.tha is crowded 
with diverse communities. It is covered with ramparts, splendid 
rooms and great mansions. In it is a divine city called Ayodhya. 
It is covered with ramparts rich in gems, gold and pictures, and 
with portals. It has four gates and is covered with jewelled princi­
pal gates. It is protected by door-keepers like Ca:Q.Qa and Kumu­
da. At the eastern gate there are Caw;la and Praca:Q.Qa, and at the 
western there are Bhadra and Subhadraka. 
14-18. 
Jaya and Vijaya are in the west, and Dhii.tr and 
Vidhatr are at the northern (gate). The other doorkeepers are : 
Kumuda, Kumudii.k኱a. PU:Q.Qarika and Vamana. (So also) Sanku­
kar:Q.a, Sarvanetra, Sumukha, Suprati኱thita. These are said to be 
the regents of the quarters in this city, 0 you of an auspicious 
face. It is covered with crores of rows of houses resembling fire 
(brightness). It is endowed with eternal divine women and men, 
who have mounted (i.e. stepped into) youth. In the centre of the 
city there is the charming harem of the god. It is possessed of 
jewelled ramparts, and adorned with jewelled arched doorways. 
It has many splendid rooms, principal mansions, and palaces. 
On all sides it is adorned with bevies of divine celestial nymphs 
and ladies. 
1 9-24. 
In the centre is an open hall with a high royal place. 
It is furnished with a thousand pillars (decked) with rubies, is 
full of gems and is beautiful. It is full of divine pearls and is 
adorned with chanting of Sii.mans. At its centre is a charming, 
beautiful throne full of all Vedas. It is always surrounded by 
deities like Dharma (i.e. Righteousness), full of the Vedas, and by 
Piety, Knowledge, Great Affluence and Detachment having 
shining bodies. It is also surrounded by ኳg. Yajus, Sii.man and 
Atharvan (Vedas) in (due) order, and in a bodily form. Sakti 
(i.e. power), Adharasakti (i.e. supporting power), Cicchakti (i.e. 
power of mind) always auspicious, so also the powers of the 
deities like Dharma are called Sakti. In the centre of it live the 
rays of Fire, the Sun, andኴthe Moon. So also (there live) Kiirma, 
the king of serpents, Vainateya (i.e. Garu9a) and the lord of the 
triad (of the Vedas). All the Vedas and the hymns have resorted 
to the condition of a seat? 
25. The divine seat, full of all syllables is known as the seat

=== PAGE 229 ===

3158 
Padma Puriir;za 
of practice in abstract meditation. At its centre is an eight-petal­
led lotus, bright like the rising sun. 
26-39a. 
In it in a bright pericarp the Supreme Being, the 
lord of gods, is seated with the goddess, 0 you of a beautiful 
appearance. He is dark like the petal of a blue lotus. He has the 
light like that of a crore of suns. He is a young boy, is glossy (or 
affectionate) and is covered with (i.e. has) delicate limbs. He 
resembles a full-blown red lotus. He has delicate, lotus-like feet. 
His eyes are like the full-blown lotuses ; is marked with a couple 
of fine, creeper-like (arched) eye-brows. His nose is good ; he is 
endowed with good cheeks ; he has good ears and a lotus-like 
face. He has teeth resembling pearls. His coral-like lips have a 
smile on them. He resembles the full moon ; his lotus-like face 
has a charming smile on it. He shines with ear-rings resembling 
the colour of the young sun. He is adorned with very glossy, dark 
and curly hair. His hair is tied into a braid having (the flowers 
of) mandara and parijataka. He is adorned with the K.austubha 
(jewel) resembling the rising, morning sun. He shines with a 
conch-like neck to which garlands and golden wreaths are attach­
ed. He shines with very high, large shoulders resembling those of 
a lion. He is adorned with four plump, round and long arms. He 
is adorned with rings, bracelets and armlets. His large chest is 
adorned with good ornaments like the Kaustubha, resembling 
crores of young suns. He is adorned with a garland of wood­
flowers. He has a lovely navel which is the place of origin of the 
Creator. He is endowed with (i.e. has put on) a soft yellow gar­
ment resembling the morning sunshine. His feet are beautiful due 
to various gems. He shines with two bracelets. He has a row of 
nails resembling the moon with the moonlight. Acyuta is the 
treasure of the handsomeness and beauty of a crore of Cupids. 
He (i.e. his body) is smeared with divine sandal. He is adorned 
with a divine garland. He shines with his raised arms that have 
held the conch and the disc. So also (he shines) with the other 
two hands granting boons. 
39b-46. 
On his left thigh is seated goddess Mahalak኱mi, the 
great deity. She has a golden complexion and is deer-eyed. She has 
(put on) a wreath of gold and silver. She is endowed with all 
(auspicious) marks ; and her body has (just) the commencement

=== PAGE 230 ===

Vl.228.47-57 
3159 
of youth (i.e. the body is youthful). She has (put on) jewelled 
ear-rings. Her hair is dark and curly. Her body is smeared with 
divine sandal, and she shines with divine flowers. Her fine hair 
is decked with flowers of mandara, ketaki and jasmine ; her eye­
brows are good ; her nose is fine ; her buttocks are good (i.e. 
plump) ; her breasts are plump and raised. She resembles the full 
moon. Her lotus-like face has a charming smile on it. She is ador­
ned with ear-rings resembling the colour of the young sun. Her 
complexion resembles gold purified with fire. Her ornaments are 
made of gold purified by fire. She is endowed with four hands. 
She is adorned with a golden lotus. She is abounding in various 
beautiful gems. She is also adorned with necklaces, armlets, 
bracelets and rings. She shines with a couple of big lotuses held 
in both her hands. Her hands are graced with golden ornaments 
called citrons. 
47-50. 
In this way the lord, the great god, always shines in 
the highest heaven with Mahalak኱mi never leaving him. On his 
two sides are seated the auspicious DharaJJ.i and Nila on an aus­
picious seat. And on the tips of the petals in the eight directions 
are seated the Saktis (i.e. the powers embodied) like Vimalii. 
Vimala, Utkar኱iJJ.i, Juana, Kriya, Yoga, so also Prahvi, Satya 
and !sana, are the (eight) powers of the highest soul. Endowed 
with all (auspicious) marks, they, holding divine chowries, having 
moon-like lustre, delight their lord, Acyuta. 
5 1 -54. 
(There are also) bevies of celestial nymphs, and five 
hundred women. They live in the harem and are adorned with 
all ornaments. All they have lotuses in their hands, and have 
lustre like that of crores of fires. They are endowed with all (aus­
picious) marks, and have faces resembling the moon. The king, 
the Highest Being, surrounded by them shines. He is also surroun­
ded by Ananta, Garu9a, and other principal gods like Kartikeya. 
He is also surrounded by other servants, eternally liberated. The 
highest Being, fond of enjoyments and affluence, delights with 
Ram a. 
55-57. 
0 auspicious Girija, in this way the lord of VaikuJJ.tha 
shines in the highest place. I shall explain to you his vyiihas 
(manifestations) and worlds. In the east of the VaikuJJ.thaloka 
is the abode of Vi኱JJ.U. In the southeast is Lak኱mi's abode. In the

=== PAGE 231 ===

3 1 60 
Padma PuriiεJa 
south is Samkarኲa:Q.a's abode. In the southwest is (the abode) 
of Sarasvati. In the west is the abode of Pradyumna. In the nor­
thwest is the place of Rati. The land of Aniruddha is in the north. 
58. 
In the northeast is the Santi-loka. This is the first cover­
ing. Then there are twentyfour worlds in a sequence beginning 
with Kesava. 
59-65. The second covering of Vaiku:Q.tha is called Subha. 
The third auspicious covering consists of the worlds of Matsya, 
Kfirma, etc. The fourth auspicious covering has the worlds Satya, 
Acyuta, Ananta, Durga, Vi኱vaksena, Gajanana, Samkha, Padma, 
Nidhi. In the great directions are the worlds of ኵg. Yajus, Saman 
and Atharvan. So also of Savitri, Garuc;la, Dharma and Sacrifice. 
The fifth covering is said to be inexhaustible and full of all Speech. 
So also (there are) the conch, the disc, the mace, the lotus, the 
sword, the bow, the plough also, and the pestle. The worlds are 
(thus) equipped with all weapons and missiles. The sixth indes­
tructible covering is said to be consisting of hymns and missiles. 
Then (there are those) of Indra, Agni, Yama, Nirrti, Varu:Q.a, 
Vayu, Soma, ISana. The seventh is said to be (occupied) by the 
sages. The Sadhyas, the hosts of Maruts, the Visvedevas, all are 
eternal (residents) in the highest abode. So also are other gods. 
66-71a. In the material world they are the transient gods. 
The holy text says : 'The great ones sought out the heaven.' Thus 
the highest place shines with those liberated, eternal ones fond of 
enjoyment. The powerful lord shines with the divine queens. The 
sun does not illumine it ; nor does the moon, nor does the fire. 
Having reached it, the ascetics of acute vows do not return (to 
the earth). Those who are devoted to the formula consisting of 
two (divine names) only go to that immutable (place). (It is) not 
(reached) by means of Vedas, sacrifices, study, gifts, auspicious 
vows, austerities a;;;;ompanied by fasts, and other expedients. 
That eternal, ancient place is to be reached by means of the 
formula of a couple of names only, so also by means of con­
centrated devotion or submission. 
Piirvati said: 
7 1b-73. 
0 lord, you have well explained the nature of hea­
ven. How did he dwell in the highest heaven, in the whole terri­
tory? For what purpose did he dwell (there)? What is the pur-

=== PAGE 232 ===

VI.228.74-90 
3161 
pose of (his) sport? How did the lord, the highest god, living in 
the world consisting of pure sattva live with his vibhuti mixed 
with rajas and tamas? 
Rudra said: 
74-75. In his Tripad-vibhfiti the glorious highest lord, liv­
ing with the goddess, and always having his sole enjoyment, is 
delighted. That great illusion, Prakrti, the resort of the world, 
having joined the palms of her hands, extolled the highest god. 
M ahiimiiyii (the Great Illusion) said: 
76-90. 
Salutation to you, the dwelling-place of the three 
worlds. Salutation to you of the form of the universe. Salutation 
to you, the ancient one. Salutation to you, the cause of the 
origin of the world. Salutation to (you) the lord of Sri, Bhfi, 
Lila; to N arayat;.ta. Salutation to you the glorious one ; to Vi኱t;.tu, 
having the Saniga (bow). Salutation to you of the form of all 
gods, to Vi኱t;.tu, to the triumphant one ; to you of a thousand 
forms, and to you Ananta. Repeated salutations to Acyuta, 
the one having no modification, and of a pure, good form, and 
having a form that has no beginning, middle or end. Salutation 
to you, Hirat;.tyagarbha, Yajfia (i.e. Sacrifice), to the highest soul, 
to the soul of all beings, and to the refuge of all beings. Saluta­
tion to Brahman, to Light, to you of the form of the universe, 
to you of pure feet, to the supreme soul, the highest (being). 
Salutation to you, Sarllkar኱at;.ta, Rudra, the prop of all beings, 
to Hayagriva, to the blazing Kala (i.e. Death), to Vi኱t;.tu. Saluta­
tion to you, 0 man (i.e. the chief deity) of sacrifice, of the nature 
of the oblations made to deities and dead ancestors. Salutation 
to the lord of beings, to the Sun of auspiciousዀ lustre, to Agni, 
enjoying oblations offered to gods, and to him, the soul (or of 
the nature) of sacrifice. Salutation to the procreator, to the 
cause of creation, maintenance and destruction. Salutation to 
him who is to be known by the Upani኱ads, and of the nature of 
four souls. Salutation to you, Brahma, Vi኱t;.tu. Salutation to 
Salikara (literally, doing good) also. Salutation to you having the 
three qualities and the cause of creation, maintenance and des­
truction. Salutation to you the qualityless one, living in the 
hearts of all. Salutation to that Vi኱t;.tu, the unmanifest, watching

=== PAGE 233 ===

3 1 62 
Padma Puriil;Za 
the worlds. Salutation to NarayaQa, the lord of Sri, of the form 
of six qualities, to him fuU of unending qualities, and the giver 
of all objects. Salutation to Vasudeva having the form of five 
states. Salutation to you having the five and nine different 
vyiihas (manifestations). Salutation to Yajfia-varaha ; repeated 
salutations to Govinda, to the unchanging one, to the pure one, 
and to the adversary of what is fit to be abandoned. Salutation 
to you, Rama, Kr?:Q.a, Narasithha. Salutation to you, Kesava, 
remover of the affliction of the worlds. 
9 1 -96. 
You, Vi?:Q.u, are the refuge of all the worlds. 0 lord 
of the god of gods, be pleased for the good of all worlds. All the 
sentient beings, having no support and shelter, stay in me. They 
are bodiless, formless and without all senses. They are without 
the practices of religious austerities, and always experience misery. 
0 Kesava, please give them worlds and bodies. 0 omniscient 
one, create as before the vibhiiti (glory) of your sport. 0 great 
lord, see, the entire sentient and insentient, mobile and immo­
bile (world) is deluded by me for (your) sport. 0 Vigl.U, create 
with me the material egg. Having put into the mundane existence, 
piety and impiety, pleasure, pain, and resorting to me, please 
indulge in sport. Do not tarry. 
Sri Mahiideva said: 
97- 10 I . The highest lord, thus addressed by the deity Maya, 
entered her, and started creating the world. He who is called 
Prakrti-Puru?a (Matter and Lord), here is Acyuta. He alone is 
lord Vi?:Q.u. He entered the Prakrti. In the Prakrti he created 
Brahma and (other) beings, resorting to Mahat (i.e. intellect). 
From this Mahat, Ahathkara (Ego) 
sprang up. From that 
Ahathkara, the triad of the constituents (gU:Q.as) came up. From 
the three constituents the creator of the universe produced the 
subtle elements. At that moment only the gross elements sprang 
up from the subtle elements. From Brahman, of the nature of the 
three constituents, Othkara (i.e. the syllable Om) first came up. 
102-1 07. 
Vayu (i.e. air) sprang from Akasa (i.e. ether) ; 
from Vayu, Agni (i.e. fire) came up. From Agni, water sprang 
up ; and from water the earth is said to have sprung up. The 
elements-ether and others__:_were created one after another. 
Their qualities-sound, touch, colour, taste and odour (were

=== PAGE 234 ===

VI.229. 1 -7 
3 163 
produced). The great lord, having created and taken the gu:Q.as 
one after another, and having mixed them up, created the very 
great egg of the world and those that merged there, which are 
fourteen in number. In it Vi኱:Q.u created gods like Brahma, divi­
nities, lower animals, human beings and four kinds of immobile 
(objects). Then in him having lotus-like eyes he created the great 
creation. There, the former (souls) remaining in Prakrti, are 
born from him in the stocks of gods etc. in accordance with their 
former deeds. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED TWENTYNINE 
A Description of Vi$tzu's Vyuhas 
Piirvati said: 
1 . Tell me in detail about the excellent creation of gods. 
How were the ancient ones like Brahma, the best in heaven, 
were born? Tell me also in detail about the incarnations of the 
lord. 
Rudra said: 
2-7. 
Ether, Air, Fire, Water and Earth were created in due 
succession. Brahma created the unfathomable ocean of water 
among them. In this which had become an ocean, Vi኱:Q.u, taking 
all the beings, slept the sleep at the end of a yuga, on a leaf of a 
fig-tree in the water that was his Maya. Desiring to create the 
world, he had the sleep at the end of a yuga. Madhusiidana (i.e. 
Viᕦ:Q.u) enjoyed for a long time with that Maya. On her he gene­
rated the excellent Time. So also the divisions of Time like Kala, 
KaHha, and of the form of a fortnight, a month etc. At that time 
the lotus in the form of Viᕦ:Q.u's navel, which was of the shape of 
a bud, began to expand. The very bright one was the origin of 
the world. There the very intelligent Brahma sprang up. He, 
desiring to create the world, and impelled by the quality of rajas, 
praised the highest god having his sleep at the end of the yuga.

=== PAGE 235 ===

3 1 64 
Padma Puriil:za 
Brahmii said: 
8 - 1 5 . Salutation to you, Vi኱:Q.u, the cause of creation, 
maintenance, and destruction, to you adorned with the orna­
ment of the world, to you the affluent one and of the form of 
the universe. Salutation to god Brahma:Q.ya (i.e. the creator), 
beneficial to cows and brahma:Q.as and beneficial to the world ; 
repeated salutations to Kr኱:Q.a, to Govinda. Salutation to (you) 
of the form of Pradhana (i.e. Prakrti) and Time, to the Highest 
Being, the god. Salutation to (you) of the form of the visible 
world and not having the form of it. Repeated salutations to 
Niiriiya:Q.a, Visva, the lord of the universe, to the lord of Sri, 
Bhu, Nilii, to Brahman, the highest soul. Salutation to Vasu­
deva, of the form of the universe and having the Siin1ga bow, 
to the lord of the triad (of the Vedas), to Hari, of the form of 
the lord of the universe. Salutation to you, perfect with endless 
auspicious qualities. When you, full of the world, sleep, the 
entire world sleeps. 0 lord of the world, in the visible world, 
everything mobile and immobile is covered (by you). 
You 
alone are the cause, the agent, and the effect due to the three 
constituents (viz. sattva, rajas, tamas). You alone are the crea­
tor, the one who meditates, and the maker. You remaining in 
the pure sattva (quality) keep awake. Whence can you have 
sleep? 0 god, worlds, the. ancient ones, have abided in you. 
Siva said: 
1 6-19. Thus addressed by Brahmii, the highest god Vi኱:Q.u, 
freed from his sleep at the end of the yuga, got up from that bed. 
The inconceivable Acyuta, the lord of the worlds, having con­
trolled his sleep at the end of the yuga, commenced creating the 
world at that moment. Having thought, the Highest Being then 
created the entire world. Then the lord created in the lotus of 
his navel all the worlds, the golden egg lying in the water, the 
seven islands limited by oceans and having land and mountains, 
with the frying pan (like) egg. 
20-24. The lord, Vi኱:Q.U, took his place in the egg. Then 
with his mind devoted to the supreme spirit, Brahmii meditated 
upon Vi኱:Q.u. At the end of the meditation a drop of perspira­
tion was produced from his forehead. That drop, of the shape 
of a bubble, in a moment fell on the earth. 0 you of an excel-

=== PAGE 236 ===

VI.229.25-39 
3 1 65 
lent face, I, having three eyes, a trident, and adorned with the 
crown of the matted hair, was born from that bubble. With 
modesty I asked the lord of gods : "What shall I do?" Then god 
Vi!?:Q.U, with delight, thus spoke to me : "0 Rudra, you will bring 
about a fierce-looking destruction of the world, (after) actually 
being (my) portion, viz. Sa:rhkar኱a:Q.a, 0 you of an excellent 
face." 
25-29. 
0 goddess, from that Naraya:Q.a, I, the fearful one, 
was born . Having entrusted me with the destruction (of the 
world), Vi!?:Q.U just again produced from his eyes the moon and 
the sun, that remove darkness. From his ears he produced Vayu 
and directions, and Indra and Agni from his mouth. The lotus­
eyed one produced Varu:Q.a (and) Mitra from his nostrils, and 
all gods with the Sadhyas and hosts of Maruts from his arms. 
(He produced) gems and herbs from all the pores of his skin. 
On (i.e. from) his skin (he produced) mountains, oceans and 
beasts like cows. Brahma:Q.a was created from his face, and 
k!?atriya from his arms. Vaisya sprang up from his thighs and 
siidra from his feet. 
30-39. 
Having thus created the entire world, remaining in­
sentient, the lord of the universe remained in it in a universal 
form. As without the power of that Vi!?:Q.U it did not have wink­
ing, therefore, the ancient Vi!?:Q.U alone is the life of the entire 
world. H e alone, the highest soul, being of an unmanifest 
nature settled down. Brahma himself proceeds with creation, 
maintenance and destruction. That ancient Vasudeva is full of 
six qualities. From himself having the qualities (of sattva, 
rajas and tamas) he made his form, the world, into four. The 
lord of the form of Pradyumna is endowed with all grandeur. 
He having obtained the position of the inner controller of the 
lords of creation, time, and people, properly brings about 
the creation. Then to the high-souled one he gave the Vedas 
along with the Itihiisas. Brahma, the grandsire of the world, the 
portion of Pradyumna, (thus) born of the portion, brings about 
the creation and maintenance of the world. Lord Aniruddha, 
endowed with power and lustre, and having got the position of 
the inner controller of Manus, kings, time and people looks 
after the maintenance. Lord Sa:rhkar!?a:Q.a, Mahii Vi!?:Q.U, endow­
ed with knowledge and power, after assuming the position of

=== PAGE 237 ===

3 166 
Padma Pura1}.a 
the inner controller of time, all beings, Rudra and Yama des­
troys the world. 
40-44. 
Thus the state of the inner-controllership of self 
consists in his being the innermost soul. Matsya, Kurma, 
Variiha, Narasilhha, Viimana, Riima, 
Parasuriima, Kr኱l}.a, 
Buddha and Kalki are the ten Vibhavas (incarnations) of Brah­
man, the highest soul. The group of six qualities is said to exist 
in Nrsilhha, Riima and Kr኱l).a. The highest state of the god is 
like one lamp being produced (i.e. lighted) from another lamp. 
0 auspicious Girijii, that is the state of this Vi኱l).u. Listen. The 
highest heaven Vaikul}.tha, the excellent Vi኱l}.uloka, his own 
form Svetadvipa, the excellent Milky Ocean are said to be the 
four-fold Vyuha (manifestation of god) by the great sages. 
45-50. 
The auspicious origin of Vaikul}.tha is in the cover­
ing of water. It is (bright) like a crore of fires. All that is im­
perishable like Dharma. It is resorted to by fragrant trees like 
mandiira and fires. It is full of many gems, is divine, and cqn­
tains crores of aeroplanes. That which is said to be the highest 
abode has characteristics like those. In that excellent city of 
Vaikul}.tha, bright with various jewels there is a charming, ex­
cellent abode called Devajayfmima, which has four doors and 
has golden ramparts and arched doorways. It is guarded by 
doorkeepers like Cal}.<.la and Kumuda and others. It is filled 
with divine residences full of various jewels. On all sides it is 
extended up to five thousand billion yojanas. It is filled with 
crores of mansions as lofty as thousand yojanas. 
51-58. 
It is adorned with divine men and women who have 
entered youth. The women and men here look splendid with all 
good marks. They resemble Sri Vi኱l}.U in form, and are adorned 
with all ornaments. They are covered with divine garlands and 
garments, and are adorned with divine sandal (paste). They, 
accomplished with eight syllables of the formula (mantra), 
through devotion for the lord of gods, of sixteen kinds, rejoice 
(there), 0 you naturally charming one. Entering his place, they 
rejoice as liked by their mind. Having gone into it, and remain­
ing with Vi኱l}.u, they never return. With their souls intact, the 
auspicious ones in the company of Vi኱l}.u, the wise ones, always 
obtain happiness like that of him. (Those) ones of auspicious 
hearts having here and there entered Vi኱l).u's worlds, again ob-

=== PAGE 238 ===

tain heaven, like the beings living in heaven. Like Lak!?maJJ.a; 
Bharata and Sarhkar!?aJJ.a and others they are a:Iso born in 
Satyaloka according to their desire. Then by that (path) only 
they go to that eternal, highest place. The devotees of Vi!?JJ.U do 
not have the bondage due to acts and birth. 
59-66. The wise say that being Vi!?JJ.U's servant is liberation. 
Being bound by the lord of gods is not described as a bondage. 
Vi኶JJ.u's servants are free from all bonds and from blemishes. 
All worlds up to that of Brahma are characterized by returning 
(i.e. one has to come back to the earth after ;·esiding there for 
some time). They are marked by karniabandha (bondage due to. 
acts), have friends like (i.e. are accompanied by) misery, cause, 
fear, result in great exertion, and cause the destruction of birth, 
0 goddess. The enjoyment of pleasures by men is (just) like food 
mixed with poison. The deities, getting angry on seeing men 
with (the effects of) their (good) deeds exhausted, drop them 
into the mundane existence, having the bondage due to deeds. 
Therefore, 0 goddess, the pleasures in heaven cause trouble in 
many ways: A meditating sage should avoid it which is transi-· 
ent, fraudulent and mixed with misery. He should always re­
member Vi!?lJ.U, the medicine destroying the mass of all miseries. · 
Merely by the utterance of (Vi!?lJ.U's) name they obtain the high­
est position. Therefore, 0 Gauri, a wise man should desire (to 
go to) the heaven of Vi!?lJ.U. With undistracted devotion he 
should worship the lord, the ocean of pity. There is no doubt 
that he having all knowledge and virtues does protect him. 
67-80. 
Therefore, having muttered the very pious, auspi-· 
cious formula of eight syllables, he obtains Vi!?JJ.U's world, giv­
ing all desired objects. The glorious ViኲJJ.u, seated on the jewel­
led couch (bright) like the rays of a thousand suns, (placed) in 
a divine hall, shone. The glorious Vi!?lJ.U is seated on a divine 
lotus-seat, (placed on) a divine golden seat, which is held by 
Saktis supporting it, which is full of many jewels, which has 
many colours ; the seat is on the eight-petalled lotus, auspicious 
like the eight letters of the formula, having the auspicious 
mystical letter of Lak!?mi, and having the lustre like that of 
crores of young suns. To his right side is the world's mother, 
HiraJJ.mayi (full of gold). She is holding the divine chowries. She • 
is adorned with divine garlands. With her hands she has held a

=== PAGE 239 ===

pot of jewels, a citron, and a golden lotus. To his right is god­
dess Prthivi (the Earth), bright like the petals of a blue lotus. 
She is having various ornaments and is adorned with beautiful 
garments. In her upper hands she has held a couple of beautiful 
red lotuses. With the other two hands the goddess has held a 
couple of vessels of corn. Holding divine chowries, the Saktis like 
Vimalii who are graced with all (good) marks, are seated on the 
tips of the petals. Among them is seated glorious Acyuta, Hari. 
He is adorned with hands having divine ornaments like the conch, 
the disc, the mace and the lotus, and ornaments like armlets and 
necklaces. He shines with ear-rings like the sun rising in the 
morning. The lord, enjoying (himself), served by the eternal gods 
mentioned before, lives in the eternal city of Vaiku:Q.tha in the 
Satya (world). The rich, eight-syllabled formula takes the wise 
siddhas and never others to that Virw.u's world. 0 you of an ex­
cellent face, I have thus described to you the first Vyiiha. 
81-86. 
0 you of a good vow, I shall explain to you the 
second world of Viˀ:Q.U. This world of Vi\:Q.U is known as eternal 
and is said to be the best among the worlds. That large, merito­
rious, pure, auspicious world, full of goodness shines like a thou­
sand mid-day suns (shining) simultaneously. Even at the end of 
the kalpa that very great world would not merge (into Brahman). 
It is not possible for me or the gods like Brahma to see it. On all 
sides the whole of it is full of the groves of the desire-yielding 
trees. It is endowed with oblong lakes full of nectar-like water. It 
is graced with divine lotuses full of gold and jewels. It is covered 
with crores of divine ornaments resembling lightning. It is grac­
ed continually with samans, cooings of cuckoos etc. and with 
trees and flowers carrying fragrance. 
87-90. It is covered by divine women and men aged less 
than sixteen, rich with the grace of all (good) marks, and almost 
divine ornaments. Women, with their delighted husbands wor­
ship Lak!1mi's lord in charming regiom in that land. They al­
ways obtain the happiness fit to be obtained through his grace. 
They sing the great deeds of Kr\:Q.a, giving great joy. Very beauti­
ful, auspicious women, having lotus-like eyes, lotus-like feet, 
resembling Lak!1mi, having divine garlands and garments sport 
(there). 
9 1-96. 
Men, holding conches, discs, maces and lotuses,

=== PAGE 240 ===

adorned with ornaments, having garlands, wearing yellow gar­
ments, are there. Due to mutual touch the pleasure of devotion 
for Viኲt;lU and delight of the men and women sporting there, 
grow day by day. In it is the charming and graced harem of 
Viኲt;lU. It is endowed with sandal, agaru-sandal, camphor, saff­
ron and water. It is all around decorated with many flowers and 
halls. In it, on a divine, beautiful and soft bed which is covered 
with a bright cover, which is on the lotus-seat, and which is 
under the shade of the desire-yielding tree, and which has the 
covers of flowers, rich in the beauty of divine fragrance, the an­
cient Viኲt;lu, the lord of gods, is seated with goddess Lakኲmi. 
97-107. 
He is like crores of moons. He is adorned with 
divine ornaments. His face is adorned with a pair of soft nostrils 
of a fine complexion. He shines with glossy, large and beautiful 
cheeks. He has dark and curly hair. His eyes resemble petals of a 
red lotus. He has put flowers of mandara, ketaki, jasmine and 
white lotuses on his head. His lips are like glossy bimba-fruits. 
His lotus-like face has a beautiful smile on it. He shines with 
rows of teeth that shine like priceless pearls. His body is smeared 
with haricandana. He is having a mark made with musk. He has 
lovely elevated shoulders and four long arms. He has beautiful 
sprout-like hands resembling the japa-:O.ower. He has his broad 
chest adorned with Srivatsa and Kaustubha. He is adorned with 
very beautiful divine wreaths full of pearls. He is covered with a 
yellow garment like (the light of) the early morning sun and the 
moonlight. He is adorned with lotus leaves along with anklets 
decked with rubies. He is adorned with rows of nails like the 
moon without a spot. His feet and lotus-like hands are soft like 
red lotuses and fair. He is adorned with a couple of arms having 
a conch and a disc. With the other two he has clung Lak኱mi's 
body to his chest. With her he shines like a cloud to which 
lightning has clung. His couple of auspicious and soft feet is like 
gold purified by fire. Here the ancient Vi኱l}.u, the lord of gods, 
sports. 
108-1 17a. (Lak኱mi is) like gold purified by fire. She is 
adorned with all ornaments. She is adorned with very glistening 
and curved sapphires like the row of the digits of the moon. She 
is adorned with the divine flowers of mandiira and parijata. The 
ends of her hair are beautified by ear-ornaments, and resemble

=== PAGE 241 ===

3170 
Padma Puriib;a 
bees. With her stout and raised breasts she presses Vi኱:r;tu's chest. 
She is adorned with ornaments like armlets and necklaces. She, 
the beautiful wife of the lord of all worlds, is always full of youth 
(i.e. she is ever young). There she eternally sports with the 
lord of the worlds. That Vasudeva only, attracting the minds of 
all beings, and giving the desired objects to men, plays in this 
entire world. Around him are the eight powers-the eight bodies 
of Lak኱mi. (They are) Rama, Rukmi:r;ti, Sita, Padma, Padmalaya, 
Siva, Sulak኱a:r;ta and Susila ; they protect that place (lit. world) 
with weapons like conches, discs, maces, lotuses and sar.tigas 
(bows), and with lotus-like arrays formed around. Thus, 0 you 
of an auspicious appearance, I have properly and in brief des­
cribed to you the form of the second (Vyfiha). It is not possible to 
describe it in detail. Those who mutter the twelve-syllabled for­
mula giving pleasure always obtain (this) eternal, auspicious, 
indestructible (world). 
1 17b-123. The world of Viኲ:r;tu can never be obtained by 
means of Vedic studies, sacrifices, vows and fasting, except by 
serving (Vi኱:r;tu). Therefore, a devotee should worship Vi኱:r;tu with 
an undistracted mind. He obtains the highest divine power, free­
ing him (self) from the bondage of (i.e. due to) his deeds. 0 god­
dess, the second, indestructible Vyfiha is said to be like this. 0 
Parvati, listen. I shall describe to you the third great Vyfiha. 0 
you very intelligent one, on the northern shore of the ocean is the 
Svetadvipa. There Viኲ:r;tu stays to allow his view to the meditating 
sages like the noble Sanaka. Sanaka, Sananda, the third, viz. 
Sanatana, so also Sanatkumara, Jatas, VoQhu, Paiicasikha­
these very bright meditating sages are the sons of Brahma. They 
are detached from all enjoyments, are pure, and are always of 
pure qualities. They enjoy only the flavour of the pleasure due to 
seeing the lord. 
124- 133. Vi኱:r;tu dwells there in the vicinity so that Nara, 
Naraya:r;ta, etc. who reside in the Svetadvipa, should (be able to) 
see him. In the Svetadvipa, resembling crores of suns, bright due 
to being full of various jewels, resorted to by great meditating 
sages, and free from fear, there are charming parks (having 
trees) like parijata. (The place is) crowded with santana-creep­
ers, adorned with sandal-trees . containing blooming white and 
blue lotuses, and reservoirs of water. In it is an auspicious,

=== PAGE 242 ===

Vl.229. 1 34-145 
3 1 71 
charming city called Ainlvati. It shines with many divine halls 
full of various jewels. It is occupied by divine women and men, 
and full of many mansions. In it is a harem crowded with jewel­
led trees. It is covered with many lofty mansions, resembling the 
young sun. In it is a pavilion which is divine, which is graced 
with gems and gold, and made fragrant with the fragrance of 
sandal, agaru-sandal, camphor and saffron. It is adorned with 
canopies rich in beauty with various flowers. It is crowded with 
celestial damsels, and graced with the chanting of Samans. At 
the centre there is a throne bright like the sun or fire. In it there 
is an eight-petalled lotus like another orb of the moon. In it, in 
the pericarp, is seated Vi኱:Q.u. He is like pure gold, and is adorn­
ed with a necklace of pearl. 
1 34- 1 38. He has four powerful hands holding a conch, a 
disc, a mace and a lotus. He is graced with a necklace, armlets, 
bracelets and rings. He has lovely feet resembling golden lotuses. 
He is graced with rows of white nails like san tanaka (flowers). 
He is adorned with youth proper for the age and form of (a lad 
of) sixteen years. He is graced with an upright, fragrant mark 
(Ordhvapu:Q.c;ira) made with saffron, and the parting line of hair. 
He is well covered with a white garment resembling the foam of 
nectar that was churned (out of the ocean). He is graced with 
white ear-rings made of pearls. He, whose body fascinates the 
world, is seated on the lotus-seat. 
1 39- 145. 
On his left lap is seated the goddess of a divine 
form. She, Lak኱mi, is worthy of him in character, good quali­
ties etc. She resembles lotus-filaments, is graced with the advent 
of youth, is endowed with all (good) marks, and has ornaments 
of gold purified in fire. She has put on a divine garland and 
garment ; her hair is dark and curly. She, shining with four 
arms, is adorned with armlets. She shines with pearl-necklaces ; 
her hair is graced with mandara (flowers). Her nostrils are soft ; 
she is graced with rows of bright teeth. She has put on the mark 
of musk on her forehead. The tip of her nose is graced with 
pearls. She has stout and raised breasts like golden pitchers. Her 
body is smeared with divine saffron. She is graced with a divine 
garland. The goddess holds in her lotus-like hands a vessel con­
taining garments, a citron, a mirror, a golden lotus. Around 
Vi኱:Q.U there are these Saktis (powers) of her, resembling her :

=== PAGE 243 ===

3172 
Padma Pural)a 
146- 150. 
Isa, Vasya, Mahadevi, 
Jahn዁vi, Kama1alaya, 
Savitri, Sarvaga, Padma are said to be (her) Saktis. Sraddha, 
Medha, Dbrti, Prajiia, Dhara:t;.a, and Santi, (so also) Sruti, 
Smrti, Dhrti, Medha, Vrddhi, Buddhi, Maniği:t;J.i, are said to be 
Lak኱mi's maids, doing all (pieces of) work. The deities like 
Ananta and Garu<;ia are the usual servants. The eternal deities 
like the Sadhyas, the hosts of Maruts, pleased with enjoyments 
obtained through his (her?) favour, serve him (her?) in the 
palaces, mansions, groves and cities. The eternal ones avoiding 
what should be abandoned and what is fruitless, always and 
continually play there. 
151-153. Those who, full of faith, constantly mutter Viğ:t;.u's 
formula, those who are engaged in the Dvadasi-vow, go to his 
immutable position. 0 Girija, the ancient world of Viዂu cannot 
be reached by means of Vedas, gifts, sacrifices or even by vows. 
The place of ViğIJ.U can be reached by men with undistracted 
devotion. Therefore, one should always worship Viğ:t;J.U with un­
distracted devotion. 
1 54- 1 55. One should narrate (his account), (should utter) 
just his name, should meditate upon him, should always mutter 
his formula, should devoutly offer oblations to, and propitiate 
the omnipresent one giving all desired objects. 0 you of beauti­
ful buttocks (i.e. beautiful one), I have told you about the third 
Vyiiha and nature of the highest soul as described by the ancient 
ones. 
1 56-168. Hereafter I shall explain (to you) the excellent 
fourth Vyiiha. To protect the gods, he, resembling crores of 
moons, lies on the extensive, auspicious bed of Ananta, in the 
Milky Ocean adorned by Indra, and covered by youths like 
Indra. Padmanabha, Acyuta, Hari is seated on a divine seat. He 
resembles a dark cloud. His eyes are large like lotus-leaves. He is 
graced with a crown resembling a crore of suns. He shines with 
two divine ear-rings, bright with various jewels. He is covered 
with a yellow garment resembling the early morning sun or the 
moonlight. He is graced with the palms of his hands and soles 
of his feet resembling bright red lotuses. He is graced with neck­
laces, armlets, bracelets and rings. He is adorned with hands 
having the conch, disc, mace, Sariiga (bow) and sword. He is 
graced with the desire-yielding trees rich in good flowers, fruits

=== PAGE 244 ===

Vl.229 . 169-1 80 
3 173 
and branches. He is graced with the navel-lotus (the place) of 
the birth and death (i.e. the origin and destruction) of the uni­
verse. His body is smeared with yellow sandal. He is adorned 
with all ornaments. He has tied his very glossy, dark, curly hair 
into a braid with divine, charming flowers of mandara, parijata 
etc. He is graced with a soft, high nose and a pair of high 
shoulders and knees. He is graced with feet having anklets and 
having gems and corals. He is graced with rows of nails like the 
spotless moon. His lotus-like face has lips resembling the asoka­
flowers. He is beautified with rows of teeth bright like priceless 
pearls. He is graced with a smiling face resembling the full moon. 
He has entered youth. He is glorious. He is bright with tender 
limbs. He is the refuge of all the people and gives the fruits to 
all the people. 
1 69-175. 
The goddess is worthy of him in qualities like 
beauty, character etc. She resembles gold purified by fire, and 
has ornaments of gold purified by fire. She is young ; has a 
beautiful form ; she is endowed with charm, (good) character and 
qualities. She has covered herself with a white garment resembl­
ing the form of the Milky Ocean. Her hair is decked with the 
flowers of mandara, ketaki and jasmine. She has the mark of 
musk on her forehead. The parting of her hair is graced with a 
gem. She has the beauty of many complexions. She is adorned 
with ear-ornaments. She smiles beautifully with her red lips hav­
ing the light like the coral. She is well graced with glossy hair 
resembling intoxicated bees. Her waist is slender. Her eyes are 
large. Her breasts are stout and raised. She has four charming 
hands. She is adorned with all ornaments. The goddess has held 
a couple of auspicious golden lotuses in her raised hands. She 
has remained closely embracing her lord with the other two 
(hands). With her glances she is constantly looking at the gods. 
1 76-1 80. 0 Piirvati, the gods constantly looked at by 
the goddess are fortunate. There gods, siddhas, caraJ}.as, kin­
nars, remaining in the hall, and with their eyes full of the 
tears of joy constantly sing to the goddess. The lord of gods, 
being praised by the gods like Brahmii, Rudra harassed by the 
demons, granted fearlessness to the gods. Hari, the lord of all 
gods, having granted fearlessness to gods, started killing the 
demons for the protection of the world. 0 you sinless one, I.

=== PAGE 245 ===

3174 
Padma Puriif;za 
have thus explained to you Vi኱I,tu's fourth Vyfiha. 0 you of an 
excellent face, what else do you desire to hear? I shall tell it. You 
are fortunate; you are blessed. You are a devotee of Vi኱:Q.U. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED THIRTY 
The Fish Incarnation of ViγQu 
Piirvati said: 
1 -2 . 0 venerable one, please tell me duly taking what form 
the lord of gods, Vi኱:Q.u, killed the demons. 0 Siva, tell me in 
detail the grandeur of the forms (i.e. incarnations) of the Fish, 
the Tortoise of (i.e. taken by) the Greatest (lord). 
M ahiideva said: 
3-1 1 . 0 goddess, listen with an alert mind. I shall tell (you) 
the grandeur of Vi኱:Q.u and the nature of his incarnations of the 
Fish, the Tortoise etc. As from one lamp another is produced 
(i.e. lighted), so would be the forms of the highest lord. The 
grand incarnations of the god are said to be auspicious and of 
various forms. There are also images of the highest lord that are 
worshipped. Brahma, due to his being the Creator, is the univer­
sal lord and a great joy. Bhrgu, Marici, Atri, Dak኱a, and Kar­
dama, so also Pulastya, Pulaha, Girisa and Kratu are said to be 
the nine lords, in succession, of the created beings. Venerable 
Marici generated Kasyapa. 0 you of an auspicious appearance, 
Kasyapa had four wives : (They were :) Aditi, Diti, Kadru and 
Vinata also. Aditi gave birth to gods of shining appearance. 
Diti (gave birth) to demonic sons who were Tamasa by nature. 
Some very great demons were : Sambfika, Hayagriva, and the 
very mighty Hira:Q.yak኱a ; so also Hira:Q.yakasipu, Jambha, Maya 
and others. Makara, of a very severe penance, and very power­
ful, went to Brahma's world. 
12-14. The powerful one, having duped Brahma, seized the 
Vedas. Having seized the holy texts he entered the great ocean. 
Then the whole world became a void, and religious practices got

=== PAGE 246 ===

VI.230. 1 5-3 1 
3175 
mixed. There were no studies. There was no offering made to 
deities. The practices of the castes and the stages of human life 
were ignored. Then god Brahma, surrounded by hosts of all gods, 
went to the Milky Ocean, and seeking refuge of god (Vi኱J)u), 
praised him. 
Brahma said: 
1 5-23a. 
Favour me, 0 god, 0 lord, 0 you seated on the 
serpent-couch, 0 lord of all gods, 0 soul of all gods, 0 you full 
of Vedas, 0 Acyuta. You are the first seed of the world-tree. 
In the middle (i .e. in its maintenance) you are superior to all. In 
the end (i.e. at the time of its destruction) you are giva. You 
move according to your will. You alone sustain the ancient world 
of the form of se11tience. You are the unmanifest, the origin of 
the elements, the Pradhana (i.e. the Primordial Matter) and the 
immutable Puru኱a. You, the Highest Lord, are the original, 
middle and the final form of the world. You, the Highest Being, 
are the refuge of all worlds. You are the origin of the beings. 
You are a great being. You are the cause of the group of the 
elements. You, possessing a soul and resorting to Ahari:J.kara, 
are divided into three. You are the origin and the end. You are 
the great Vayu (air) that moves everywhere. You are, and you 
are not, the origin. You are fire, the treasure of lustres. You, the 
great lord, are the water, the life of all worlds. 0 you highly 
intelligent one, you are the earth, the support of the moving. 
You are the supporter of the earth. You are the rivers, the ocean, 
and you alone are the origin of everything. You are the divine 
sage ; you are all the beings, 0 Highest Being. People urged by 
you only indulge in good or bad (acts). 
23b-25. 
The Vedas, assaulted by the demon, have entered 
the great ocean. This entire world-immovable and movable­
has the Vedas as its support. The Vedas alone are the limits on 
all sides of all (religious) practices. The gods are eternally satis­
fied with the Vedas. Therefore, 0 Kesava, please bring (back) 
the Vedas. 
Sri Mahiideva said: 
26-3 1 . Vi኱J)u, the highest lord, thus addressed by Brahma, 
resorted to the Fish-form and entered the great ocean. Resorting

=== PAGE 247 ===

3176 
Padma Puriil)a 
to the form of a crocodile, he, honoured by the gods, killed that 
very fearful demon, after tearing him with the tip of his mouth. 
Having killed him, and taken all the Vedas, the Vedaiigas, the 
Upiiiigas, he, of a great lustre, gave them to that Brahma. The 
Vedas seized by the demon, were mixed up with one another. 
The intelligent lord, of the form of Vyasa, made them distinct. 
By Vyasa, the noble one, the Vedas were separated. Thus, he, 
with his Fish incarnation, protected all deities. Oh ! at that time 
Lak኱mi's lord made the world free from affliction by giving (back) 
the Vedas. He, the venerable Vasudeva, Hari, full of all gods, 
being extolled by groups of gods and siddhas, and with his feet 
worshipped by the meditating sages, vanished. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED THIRTYONE 
Durviisas Curses Indra 
Sri Rudra said: 
1-5. 
O dear one, I shall duly explain to you that grandeur of 
the Fish (incarnation) of Vi኱IJ.u, that is saluted by all people. 
Listen with a concentrated mind. The very lustrous son of Atri, 
well known as Durvasas, is wrathful, agitates all the world, and 
has (practised) severe penance. He, my portion, the briihmal}.a 
sage, always causing fear to all, and the treasure of penance went 
to the Himalayan surface (i.e. region). He, worshipped by kinnara 
women, lived there for a year. (Then) the sage, desiring to see 
Indra, went to heaven. At that time he, of a great lustre, saw 
Saci's lord, the great god, mounted on an elephant and being 
honoured by all gods. 
6-9. Seeing that, that Durvasas, having a severe penance (to 
his credit), with his mind delighted and full of modesty, gave him 
the garland ofparijata (flowers). The lord of the deities, received 
that garland, and placing it on the head of (his) elephant, went to 
Nandana (garden). The intoxicated elephant, took the garland 
with his trunk, pressed it and threw it on the ground. Then that

=== PAGE 248 ===

VI.23 1 . 10-22a 
3177 
Durviisas of a great lustre got angry, and with the fire of his an­
ger ablaze, cursed Indra. 
Durvasas said: 
1 0. 
Since endowed with the entire prosperity of the three 
worlds, you are slighting me, therefore, the prosperity of the 
three worlds will surely he destroyed. 
Rudra said: 
1 1- 1 8. 
Indra thus cursed went back to his city. Then Sri, the 
mother of the worlds, vanished in a moment. When Laknmi vani­
shed, the three worlds vanished. When she, to whose glance the 
entire world of the immovable and movable resorts, vanished, 
everything perished. All gods like Brahmii, gandharvas, yaknas, 
kinnaras, fiends, demons, serpents, 
men and goblins, beasts, 
birds, insects, all immovable and movable objects, all of them 
were not looked at by Lak,mi, that mother of the world. All of 
them were reduced to poverty and experienced misery. Gods, 
oppressed by hunger and thirst, and being dispirited, cried. Clouds 
did not shower. All reservoirs of water were dry. All the trees 
became dry, and were without flowers and fruits. Then gods, 
along with fiends, demons and goblins, being oppressed by hun­
ger and thirst, went to Brahmii of unlimited vigour, and said to 
him, the grandsire, the lord of the god of gods and born in a lotus : 
The gods said: 
1 9-2 l a. 
0 venerable one, the three worlds are oppressed by 
hunger and thirst. No oblations are offered into fire to a deity. 
The (three worlds) are without all religious practices. All gods, 
demons and human beings, oppressed by hunger and thirst, have 
sought the shelter of you, the protector, the lord of all worlds. 
0 lord of gods, please protect the creatures oppressed by hunger 
and thirst. 
Rudra said: 
2 lb-22a. 
Hearing these words of (i.e. uttered by) them he 
who respected others and who was the grandsire of all worlds, 
being very much pleased, spoke to them all :

=== PAGE 249 ===

3178 
Padma PuraiJ.a 
Brahma said: 
22b-27. 
Listen, 0 all gods, demons, gandharvas and men. 
All this has come to (us) due to Indra's misdeed. This great, fear­
ful fire of universal destruction has come up. 0 gods, since that 
very high-minded Durvasas became angry, all the three worlds 
perished due to his anger. The silly one, with his mind full of an­
ger, and excited by anger, has said : "Let the three worlds and 
Lak኱mi, disappear." Due to his curse goddess Lakኲmi, dear to 
Viኲ:Q.U, the mother and the supporter of the worlds, the great 
goddess, disappeared. The mother of the worlds, due to being 
looked at by whose glance the worlds become happy, did not 
look at (i.e. cared for) the worlds experiencing misery. 
28-32. 
Therefore, all of us will go to Viኲ:Q.u, the excellent one, 
staying in the Milky Ocean, and will worship the eternal god. 
When the lord of gods is pleased, this world will be happy. 
Deciding like this in his mind, Brahma, accompanied by hosts 
of gods, went to the Milky Ocean with sages like Bhrgu. On the 
northern coast of the Milky Ocean, the deities like Brahma, 
Rudra etc. worshipped Vi኱:Q.U according to rules laid down for 
worshipping the god. Muttering the eight-syllabled formula, and 
the Puruኲa-siikta, and meditating on him with undistracted 
minds, they offered oblations to the highest god. They praised 
him with divine hymns and saluted him in various ways. 
33-36. 
Then the venerable one, being pleased and being 
praised by great sages, stood within the sight of all gods (i.e. 
appeared before them). Seeing the mighty lord of all worlds, who 
was full of all gods, who had mounted upon Garuc;Ia, who had 
held a conch, a disc and a mace, who had worn a yellow garment, 
who had four arms, whose eyes resembled lotuses, who had Sri­
vatsa and Kaustubha (marks) on his chest, who was adorned 
with a garland of wood-flowers, who was graced with a crown, a 
necklace, armlets and anklets, they praised him with shouts of 
victory and continually saluted him. 
37-38 . 
The revered one kindly said to all the deities : "I am 
a giver of boons. 0 gods, choose a boon." Thus he spoke (to 
them) . Hearing these words, all gods led by Brahma and with the 
palms of their hands joined, said these words to the god :

=== PAGE 250 ===

The gods said : 
39-40. 
0 venerable one, now all these three worlds, along 
with gods, demons and human beings, are aftlicted by hunger 
and thirst. Therefore, 0 Viው?IJ.U, we have sought your shelter. 
Protect all this world. None else would ever be able (to protect it). 
Rudra said: 
4 1 . Acyuta, the highest lord, thus addressed by all deities, 
thought and spoke to these gods led by Brahma, these words : 
The lord said: 
42-46. 
Due to the curse of the son of the sage Atri Lakዎ?mi 
disappeared. The world will be endowed with grandeur due to her 
looking at it with (i.e. casting) her glance. Therefore, 0 gods, all 
of you led by giva and Brahma, extract the Mandara mountain, 
and put it into the Milky Ocean. 0 gods, making the Mandara 
mountain encircled by the king of serpents, the churning rod, 
churn with the (help of) the fiends, gandharvas and demons, the 
Ocean. Then Lakˇmi will appear for the protection of the world. 
There is no doubt that you, looked at by her, will be very lucky. 
Concealed (in the Ocean) in the form of a tortoise I myself shall 
hold the (Mandara) mountain, a..11dentering with my strength into 
all gods (I shall make them) stronger. 
Rudra said: 
47-48. 
0 you of lotus-like eyes, when all the deities were 
thus addressed by Viው?IJ.U, they, led by Brahma, spoke to the lord 
of gods : "Well, well." Being praised by best gods, and saluted 
by all the worlds, venerable, glorious Acyuta, the prop and the 
god of all, looking equally everywhere, vanished.

=== PAGE 251 ===

3180 
Padma Puriitza 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED THIRTYTWO 
The Rise of Goddess LakUmi 
Soilkara said: 
1-6. Then all the hosts of gods and the very powerful demons 
extracted the Mandara mountain and put it into the Milky 
Ocean. Then the powerful lord VisI).u, the creator of the beings, 
and of unlimited valour, supported, in the form of a tortoise, the 
mountain. The eternal, immutable, omniscient one, whose body 
has no beginning, middle or end, who is of a universal form, who 
is the lord of the worlds fit to be worshipped, supported the 
excellent mountain with one arm only. Then all gods and demons 
churned the Ocean, after encircling the Mandara mountain with 
the lord of serpents. Then when the Milky Ocean was being chur­
ned by the very powerful deities for generating (i.e. taking out) 
Lak\mi, all the great sages fasted, observed restrictions and also 
muttered Srisiikta. 
7-10. The divine excellent brahmai).as recited (the hymn 
Vi\I).u-) Sahasranii.ma. All the sages who desired to mutter (the 
formula of) Lak\mi-Narii.yˁa-Vi\JJ.U, fasted on the Ekadasi 
day of the bright fortnight when the great ocean was being ch ur­
ned and muttered the excellent Sri-hymn. The topmost brahmai).­
as, the best sages meditated upon and worshipped (the deity). 
Then at that time when the great ocean was being churned, at 
first there came up the very strong Kalakiipi poison which was 
very painful, very fierce, and which was like the fire of universal 
destruction. 
1 1-15. 
Seeing (it), all gods and demons, being frightened, 
fled away. 0 you of beautiful eyes, then seeing the best gods 
frightened and fleeing away, I said to them: "0 you all hosts of 
gods, do not be afraid of the poison. I shall drink this strong 
poison, Kalakiipi." Thus addressed by me, all the gods, led by 
Indra and bowing, very much praised me with the words 'Well, 
Well'. On seeing the strong poison, like a cloud, having come up 
I meditated in my heart upon the eagle-bannered god VisI).u, 
resembling the rising sun and holding a conch, a disc, and a mace. 
16-21. Having meditated (i.e. when I meditated) with a con­
centrated mind upon that lord along with Sri and Bhiimi, having

=== PAGE 252 ===

VI.232.22-32 
3 181 
earrings of gold purified by fire, remover of all miseries, and on 
my having muttered the great hymn of the name and form (of 
VisIJ.U) along with Mahalak\mi, all that poison, which was very 
fierce, which was the first one, which was fearful to all, which 
was (capable of) destroying all the worlds, was digested (by me) 
due to the three names of VisIJ.U, the omnipresent one. He who, 
being restrained, would devoutly mutter the three names of Vis:Q.u, 
viz. Acyuta, Ananta, Govinda, beginning with Pral)ava (i.e. Om) 
and (also) ending with Om, has no fear of death, so also the great 
fear due to poison, disease- and fire. The wise, restrained one, 
who would mutter the great hymn-the three names-does not 
have fear of Death ; then from where else (can he have it)? Thus 
with (the muttering of) the three names I drank that poison. 
22-24a. 
Then the gods, pleased and very much amazed, prai­
sed me. Having saluted me the gods again churned the Milky 
Ocean. 0 beautiful lady, when the ocean was being churned by 
me and the gods, Jyeʼʽa Devi, covered with gems, wreaths and 
garments came up. When the goddess came up, she said: "What 
should I do?" Then all the hosts of gods repeatedly said to the 
goddess : 
Gods said: 
24b-32. We give you the place in the charming interior of the 
house of those where quarrel takes place. Having inauspicious 
(qualities), live there. Giving misery and poverty to them who, 
being liars, always speak harsh words, and who of impure hearts, 
sleep in the evening, stay in their house. There is no doubt that you 
will always stay at that place where there will be potsherds, hair, 
ash, bones, fire of the chaff or charcoal. 0 you inauspicious one, 
always live, along with Kali, in that house which is marked by 
potsherds, bones, ash, hair etc. 0 great goddess, resort to him 
who, the stupid one, very much covered with sin, sips water 
without cleaning his feet. People cleaning their teeth with chaff, 
charcoal, potsherd, stone, sand, (a piece of) garment, (or of) hide, 
will be (i.e. are) mean. 0 goddess, causing poverty, always live in 
the house of those who eat sesamum, :llesh of animals struck witb 
a poisoned weapon, kaliitga, pot-herb, garlic, mushrooms, vig­
varaha, bilva, kosataki-fruit, bottle-gourd, and onions.

=== PAGE 253 ===

3182 
Padma PurafJ.a 
Rudra said: 
33-45. 
Having thus ordered Jye኷thii., dear to K.ali, all the 
gods, well-composed, again churned the Milky Ocean. 0 you of 
an auspicious face, then goddess VaruJJ.i came up. Ananta, the 
lord of serpents, took her of beautiful eyes. Then Sura (spirituous 
liquor), adorned with all ornaments, came up. She graced with 
all (auspicious) marks became the wife of Garu9a. Then bevies 
of celestial nymphs and divine and very strong gandharvas 
endowed with handsomeness and engaged in sweet singing, 
came up. Then Airavata came up. -Then the horse Uccai]J.Sravas 
came up. Then came up Dhanvantari, Parijata and Surabhi 
giving all desired objects. Indra with a pleased mind accepted 
all these. Then in the morning when the sun rose on the Dvadasi 
day, and when the Ocean was again churned by gods led by 
Indra, Sri, Mahalak኷mi, the auspicious goddess of all the worlds, 
being praised by great sages with pleasing faces, came up. She 
resembled a crore of young suns, and was adorned with golden 
armlets. She was seated on a golden lotus and was graced with all 
(auspicious) marks. Her eyes were large like lotus-petals. Her hair 
was dark and curly. Her body was smeared with divine sandal. 
She was adorned with divine flowers. She had (put on) all divine 
ornaments decked with various jewels. Her waist was slender. 
She was the mother of the world. Her breasts were stout and 
raised. She had four hands. Her eyes were large. Her face was 
like the full moon. She held with her lotus-like hands adorned 
with all ornaments, a pot of jewels, citron, and an auspicious 
couple of golden lotuses. On her bosom she wore a garland of 
unfaded lotuses. They saw that great goddess, desiring the good 
of all worlds. 
46-54. 
Seeing herኸ the controller of all beings, the mother 
having a lotus-garland, NarayaJJ.i, world's mother, having a place 
in the heart of ViኹJJ.U, all the deities were pleased. In heaven 
groups of gods beat drums strongly. The sylvan deities continuous­
ly showered flowers. The chief gandharvas sang and bevies of 
celestial damsels danced. So also auspicious breezes blew. The 
sun was very bright. The fires burnt noiselessly ; the ten directions 
were bright. Then from the Milky Ocean the Moon came up. He, 
Soma (i.e. the Moon), the brother of the mother (Lak኷mi), was 
pleasant. The Moon, the lord of the stars, became the maternal

=== PAGE 254 ===

Vl.232.55a-63a 
3183 
uncle of the world. Then Tulasi, Viᕦ:Q.u's wife, purifyingthe world, 
and the mother of the world came up for the worship of Viᕦ:Q.U. 
Then all the gods, with their minds pleased and all desires fulfilled, 
put (back) the (Mandara) mountain as before (in its own place), 
and led by Siva and Brahma, approached the mother (i.e. 
Lakᕦmi). Having praised, her with the (hymn Viᕦ:Q.U-) sahasra­
nama, they recited the text of the Srisukta. Then, 0 goddess, she, 
being pleased, said to all gods : 
Sri said: 
55a. 
0 best gods, ask for a boon. Well-being to you. I am a 
giver of boons. 
Rudra said: 
55b. With their figures bent and palms of their hands joined, 
the gods said to Lakᕦmi: 
The gods said: 
56-59a. 0 Kamala, 0 goddess, 0 you dear to all gods, be 
pleased. Always rest on ViᕦI)u's chest. Never go away (from 
there). 0 goddess, always look after the three worlds. 0 highest 
goddess, you, to whose glances the entire immovable and mova­
ble world resorts, are eternal. Gods, looked at (with favour) by 
you, are powerful. You are the mother ofgods likeRudra. (Their) 
splendour is due to your glance. We desire this, 0 goddess. 
Salutation to you, 0 mother of the world. 
Rudra said: 
59b-62a. Thus addressed by all· deities, the great goddess. 
the mother of the world, the one dear to Viᕦ:Q.u, said to the gods : 
"Let it be so." Then Viᕦ:Q.u, lord of Sri, holding a conch, a disc 
and a mace, manifested himself as before in the Milky Ocean. 
Then the gods, having saluted Viᕦ:Q.u, praised him. All the aus­
picious (gods) with their faces delighted and with the palms of 
their hands joined said : 
The gods said: 
62b-63a. 0 lord of all, accept the goddess Lakᕥmi, never 
leaving you, as your dear queen for the protection of the world.

=== PAGE 255 ===

3184 
Padnia Puriil}a 
Rudra said: 
63b-70. Having said like this, all gods led by Brahma and 
along with the sages, and with their eyes full of tears of joy, 
placed the goddess and the god, adorned with divine garments, 
divine wreath and various jewels, on a divine seat, full of vari­
ous jewels and resembling the young sun, and worshipped Vis:Q.U 
seated with Laksmi. They also worshipped the goddess with 
sandal, incense, lights, and offerings of eatables full of nectar, 
and with extraordinary fruits. Goddess Tulasi, delicate and 
auspicious, came up from the nectar. With that they properly 
worshipped Lak\mfs couple of feet. Gods overcome with tears 
full of joy, having gone round him, keeping him to their right, 
three times, and having saluted him, praised him with eulogies. 
Then venerable Vi\:Q.U was pleased. With Lakᕭmi, the Jord gave 
. them boons desired (by them). Then gods, men and others were 
very much delighted. They were purified by Lakᕭmfs glances. 
They had profuse grains and wealth. Being extremely healthy, 
they obtained great happiness. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED THIRTYTHREE 
EkiidaSf as a Day of Fast 
Siva said: 
1. Then for the good of all the world the lord along with 
the goddess, delighted in heart, spoke to the gods and great 
sages : 
The lord said: 
2-Sa. 0 all sages and deities having great power, listen. 
Ekadasr is very meritorious and clestroys all calamities. You 
have observed it as a day of fast in order to see Lakᕭmi. Dvadasi, 
dear to me, is always more meritorious than that. Since today all 
those men who observe a fast on the previous (i.e. Ekaqasi) day, 
and who, when the sun has risen on the Dvadasi (day}, worship 
with great faith and devotion me along with Lakᕭmi and Tulasi,

=== PAGE 256 ===

Vl.233.8b-19 
3185 
are freed from bondage and reach my position. Those men who 
do not wor5hip me, the Highest Being, on Dvadasi, are sinners, 
and are deluded by my Maya. My Maya, difficult to cross, 
throws the sinners, the most sinful ones, bound by objects of 
senses, averse to my worship and going (i.e. fated to go) to hell, 
into the continuous mundane existence. 
Rudra said: 
Sb-1 1 . Speaking like this, the lord, the highest soul, the an­
cient one, being praised by the sages, went to Lakᕥmi's place. 
The highest lord, along with goddess Lakᕥmi of large eyes, re­
mained near (the gods) on the bed of §eᕥa in a hall resembling 
the sun in the Milky Ocean for appearing before the gods. Then 
all the hosts of gods, devoutly worshipping the ancient Tortoise­
form (of the lord), praised him with delighted minds. Then lord 
Viᕥ:Q.u, of the form of Tortoise, was pleased. 
The lord said: 
12a. 
0 best gods, ask for a boon that is in your mind. 
Rudra said: 
12b-1 3a. Then all the hosts of gods, with their minds full of 
joy, and joining the palms of their hands, said to Viᕥ:Q.U of the 
form of Tortoise : 
The gods said: 
13b-14a. 0 you very powerful one, 0 lord of gods, to help 
Seᕥa and the quarter-elephants, please sustain the earth having 
seven islands. 
Rudra said: 
14b-19. Saying, "Let it be so", the lord, the creator of the 
worlds, with his mind pleased, sustained the earth covered by the 
seven islands. Then gods with gandharvas, fiends, demons and 
human beings, permitted by the great sages, went to their res­
pective world. 0 you of an excellent complexion, since then all 
gods led by Brahma, so also siddhas, human beings, meditating 
saints, best sages, honouring Viᕥ:Q.u's order devoutly fasted on 
the Ekadasi (day) and duly worshipped Viᕥ:Q.u on the Dvadasi

=== PAGE 257 ===

3186 
Padma Puriif)a 
(day). 0 you beautiful one, I have told you all about the origin 
of goddess (Lakᕥmi) ; so also about the splendour of ViᕥJlU in his 
Tortoise-form. What else do you desire to hear? 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED THIRTYFOUR 
How to Observe the Vow ofDviidaSi 
Piirvati said: 
1-2. 0 lord, I desire to hear about the rule about Dvadasi, 
and about (how) the worship of ViᕥJlU should be done on that 
(day). 0 great lord, due to your love for me (i.e. since you love 
me), tell me in detail the power of Ekadasi that removes all sins 
of men. 
Mahiideva said: 
3-8. 
0 goddess, listen. I shall tell you the rule about Dva­
dasi. Merely by (one's) remembering it, ViᕥJJ.U would be pleased. 
Men fasting on Ekadasi when it has come, are freed from all 
sins, and reach the highest position of ViᕥJ).u. By worshipping 
ViᕦJ).u on Dvadasi all the sin (of one) committed knowingly 
or unknowingly perishes in a moment. Thousands of horse­
sacrifices and hundreds of Vajapeya sacrifices do not equal 
even a sixteenth part af Ekadasi-fast. The excellent Dvadasi 
(vow) gives merit, wealth, desired objects and salvation also. It 
fulfils all desires of men. 0 you of beautiful eyes, there is 
nothing else that saves (one) from sins like Ekadasi. There is no 
other vow like that of Ekadasi. 
9-16. He who, ignoring Ekadasi, would observe some 
other vow, asks for begging after abandoning great kingdom 
which is in his hand. 0 dear one, all the sin that is committed 
with the eleven (sensory and motor) organs would perish by 
means of a fast on the Ekadasi (day). 0 you of an excellent 
face, the PuraJ).as repeatedly announce : "One should not eat, 
one should not eat, when the day of (i.e. sacred to) ViᕥJ).u 
has come." 0 you of an excellent complexion, there are always

=== PAGE 258 ===

VI.234. 1 7-32 
3 187 
certain articles of food prohibited for the castes and stages 
of life. The more so on the Ekiidasi of the bright half and the 
dark half (of a month). There is no doubt that the Ekiidasi­
fast should be observed. If the anniversary day of the death of 
one's mother and father is on the day on which Ekiidasi falls, 
the presents should be given on the Dviidasi day, but never on 
the Ekiidasi day. Dead ancestors and gods do not eat censured 
food. On an Ekiidasi day one should not eat, should never 
drink liquor, should not hurt a briihmal}.a. These three (sins) are 
said to be equal (in gravity). Therefore, on a pure (i.e. unmixed) 
Ekiidasi (day), one should observe a fast. In the three condi­
tions, with speech, body and deeds, an effort should be made 
(for observing a fast). 
1 7-24. 
Ekiidasi mixed with Dasami should be carefully 
avoided. (If Dasami continues) at the time of dawn (on the 
Ekiidasi day), it (i.e. the Ekiidasi) would be mixed with Dasami. 
Leaving it (i.e. that Ekiidasi day) he should, without (further) 
thought, observe a fast on the pure (i.e . unmixed) Dviidasi. 0 
goddess, if a part of Ekiidasi continues at the sunrise on the 
Trayodasi day, then Dviidasi remains on that day also. At dawn 
he should perform all rites. Even if a part of Dviidasi is there, 
breaking the fast (on that day) is recommended. In this case one 
should ignore even a pure Ekiidasi. There is no doubt about it. 
Even if a part of the Ekiidasi continues on the DviidaSi, when 
the sun has risen, one should ignore the entire Ekiidasi (on the 
previous day) and observe a fast on that (Dviidasi) day. Having 
decided the rite like this, one should observe a fast on the day 
of (i.e. sacred to) Vi኱J}.U. Avoiding four meals, one in the evening 
of the first day, another in the morning of the last (i.e. the third) 
day, and two on the middle (i.e. the second) day, one should 
observe a fast. On the Dasami day he should eat once (only), 
avoid (sexual) union with his wife, sleep on the ground, and 
should remain pure on the next day. 
25-32. With his body smeared with (the pulp of) the dhiitri­
fruit, he should bathe and offer the sandhyii (prayer). Intent on 
(observing) a fast, he should worship Vi኱J}.u at night. A devotee 
of Vi኱J}.u should not see, talk with or touch a heretic, one doing 
a prohibited act, a fallen person or a ciil}.Qiila. A briihmal}.a who 
is not devoted to Vi኱J}.U is called a heretic. One who has given up

=== PAGE 259 ===

3188 
Padma Puriil)a 
the tuft of hair on the crown of the head and the sacred thread is 
said to be one remaining (i.e. persisting) in (doing) prohibited acts. 
One having (committed) major and minor sins is said to be fallen. 
One belonging to the lowest caste is said to be svapaca. This pro­
per decision is taken by the Vedas. Having worshipped the lord 
of gods, one should keep awake. With sandal, flowers, lights, 
garments, ornaments, auspicious mutterings, hymns, salutations, 
one should devoutly worship (Vi^:Q.u) at night. Then in the morn­
ing having bathed according to the proper rule with water mix­
ed with Tulasi, and having gratified the dead ancestors and dei­
ties, one should worship Vi^:Q.U, the lord of the world along with 
Lakɷmi, with tender Tulasi-leaves, and fragrant flowers. Then one 
hundred and eight times he should wave lights (before Viɸ:Q.u's 
idol). 
33-39. To both of them (i.e. Vi^:Q.U and Lakĩmi) he should 
offer a garland made of lotuses. He should also offer them in­
cense, light, articles of food and tambiila. One should offer (them) 
charming food of rice boiled in milk along with sugar, and should 
offer a tambula with camphor. He should devoutly salute (them) 
while going round them. One hundred and eight times he should 
offer oblations into fire with ghee, offering rice boiled in milk 
with the recital of every rc, with (the recital of) the Puruĩa­
sukta and Lak^mi-sukta. He should feed the brahma:Q.as, and 
controlled in speech he himself should also eat. He should pass 
that great day by the recital of the Pura:Q.as etc. That night he, 
observing celibacy, should sleep on the ground. That lord of 
Kamala, being thus worshipped on the Dvadasi day, is pleased in 
a moment, and the lord certainly gives all desired objects. 0 
goddess, I have thus told you the excellent vow of Dvadasi. 
What else do you desire to hear? I shall tell that to you.

=== PAGE 260 ===

VI.235.1-15a 
3189 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED THIRTYFIVE 
The Birth of Heretics 
Sri Parvati said: 
1-2b. 0 lord, you told me that one should avoid conversa­
tion with heretics, and that it is more censurable than (talking to) 
a cii:r;tgaJ.a. (Tell me) of what kind they are said to be, and with 
what signs they are marked. 
Rudra said: 
2c-12a. 
Those who, deluded by ignorance, describe any 
other deity as being superior to Vi^:r;tu, the lord of the world, are 
said to be heretics. Those who use skulls, apply ash, use bones, 
have non-Vedic marks, have matted hair and bark-garments 
though they do not belong to the hermit-stage of life are (said to 
be) heretics. Those brahma:r;tas who are without such marks dear 
to Vi^:r;tu as conches, discs, firdhvapu:r;tgra (upright sectarian 
marks on the forehead) are said to be heretics. That briihma:r;ta 
who does not follow the practices laid down in the holy texts and 
codes of laws should be known as a heretic and is condemned 
among all people. Those that have no devotion for the lord are 
said to be heretics. He who is free in all acts (i.e. performs all acts 
as he likes) and offers oblations into fire and gives gifts directed 
to deities (other than) Vi^:r;tu, the enjoyer of the fruit of all sacri­
fices and the deity of the briihma:r;tas, and who independently 
does all great acts laid down in the Vedas, should be known as a 
heretic. He who looks upon god Vi^:r;tu as equal to other deities 
like Brahmii, Rudra, would always be (called) a heretic. That 
briihma:r;ta who, in the three conditions, does not recognise Vi^:r;tu 
by means of speech, body and acts, would be a heretic. What is 
the use of saying much in this regard? Those briihma:r;tas who are 
not devotees of Viɹu, should never be asked (any question), 
should never be talked to and should never be seen. 
Parvati said: 
12b-15a. 0 lord, 0 best of gods, I am asking (you) a secret. 
Through love for me tell it. There is a great doubt. The holy texts 
have condemned wearing (i.e. using) skulls, (applying) ash and

=== PAGE 261 ===

3190 
Padma Puriil;'Za 
(wearing) hide. You wear (i.e. use) them. (Then), 0 god, for 
what purpose is it condemned? 0 lord of gods, 0 you highly 
intelligent one, through fickleness of (i.e. natural to) women I am 
asking it. It may be that due to your great power what is told 
ought not to be done by you. (But) you have not formerly told 
me in detail what ought not to be done. Therefore, 0 lord, 
please pardon me my question. 
Vasi${ha said: 
15b-1 7a. Thus by the goddess Siva was asked in a lonely 
place, free from people. He told her the great secret, viz. what­
ever he did. 
Siva said: 
17b-2la. 0 goddess, listen. I shall tell you that secret which 
is very wonderful. 0 goddess, you should not speak what I have 
told you among people. 0 you of a good vow, I shall tell it to 
you since your body is not separate from mine. In the age of 
Svayambhuva (Manu) in olden times there were great demons 
like Namuci, who were very powerful, very valorous, very 
strong and great heroes. All of them were devoted to Vi!?:IJ.U, were 
pure, and free from all sins. They followed the practices (laid 
down) in the triad of the Vedas. All gods, being frustrated, led 
by lndra, and overcome by fear, approached Vi!?:IJ.U and sought 
his shelter. 
Gods said: 
2 lb-22a. 
0 Kesava, you alone can conquer these great 
demons who cannot be conquered by all gods, and who have 
washed off their sins with penance. 
Mahiideva said: 
22b-25. Hearing these frightful words of the gods, Viᕳ:IJ.U, 
Puru!?ottama, consoled those regents of the quarters, and said to 
me : 
The lord said: 
0 Rudra , 0 you of mighty arms, 0 you best god, for deluding 
the enemies of gods prepare a course of conduct to be followed by

=== PAGE 262 ===

Vl.235 .26 -43 
3191 
heretics. Narrate to them the dark Purii1;1as (i.e. Purii1;1as that will 
take them astray). 0 you very intelligent one, also fashion con­
fusing holy texts. There will be briihma1;1as and great sages who 
have given themselves away to me. 
26-33. Approaching them through devotion for me, tell the 
vicious ones : Ka1;1iida, Gautama, Sakti, Upamanyu, Jaimini, 
Kapila, Durvasas, Mrka1;1c;lu, Brhaspati, Bhiirgava and Jiimad­
agnya are the ten (?) vicious sages. Desiring to do the good of the 
world, approach them with your power of suggestion (bhiiva­
sakti ?). By your power increased in viciousness infused into them 
they will be vicious in a moment. There is no doubt about it. 
Those briihma1;1as with greater viciousness caused by you, will 
narrate the vicious Purii1;1as and doctrines in the three worlds. 0 
god, you yourself, wearing the marks like a skull, hide, ash, bones, 
fully delude the people in the three worlds. So also you, Siva, 
prepare the Piisupata order with its divisions like Kankiila, Saiva, 
Piiᕥa1;1c;la and Mahiisaiva ; so also properly prepare the doctrine 
having no particular marks and outside the Vedic fold. All the 
mean men will wear ash, bones etc. and will be insensible. The 
vicious ones will describe you as the highest (god). 
34-36a. Taking to their doctrine all the ancient demons will 
be averse to me in a moment. There is no doubt (about it). 0 very 
powerful Rudra, in my incarnations I too shall worship you in 
every age to delude the vicious ones. Having upheld this doctrine, 
they will undoubtedly fall. 
M ahiideva said: 
36b-37. 
0 you beautiful one, having heard what ViᕥIJ.U had 
said, I, though having a very large mouth (i.e. though a good 
speaker) became helpless then. Then having saluted the highest 
god, I said : 
38-43. 
"0 god, if I do what you have said on the earth, it 
will certainly lead to my destruction. 0 Viᕥ1;1u, it is possible for 
me to carry out this mission. Your command is not to be dis­
obeyed. This is very painful." 0 goddess, when I spoke like this, 
Viᕥ1;1u, having again cheered me up, said : "Let this not lead to 
your destruction. Do as I order you for the good of the deities. 
0 best god, I shall also tell you about the means for your liveli­
hood." Then with compassion he gave me his thousand names

=== PAGE 263 ===

3192 
Padma Puriif)a 
(i.e. the hymn called ViƔl)usahasraniima) : "Installing me in your 
heart, mutter my indestructible formula. The very great, six­
syllabled formula is said to be Brahman, the emancipating one. 
Those who worship me with devotion obtain salvation. There is 
no doubt about this. 
44-46. (Salutation to) him dark like the petal of a blue 
lotus, having eyes like lotus-petals, holding a conch, a disc, and 
the Sii.r.liga bow, and adorned with all ornaments. (To him) hav­
ing put on a yellow garment, having four arms, the dear lord 
of Jii...'laki. 'Salutation to Sri Rii.ma' : this excellent formula 
should be muttered. It removes all sins, and gives salvation even 
to sinners. Muttering this formula everyday you will be free from 
blemishes. 
47-Sla. All that sin produced in you due to having (applied) 
ash and having bones, has all become auspicious due to the 
auspicious utterance of my formula. 0 best god, being gratified I 
shall destroy all sin. 0 you of a good vow, devotion to other 
god than me will not come up. Worship me, the lord, the Sup­
reme Being, mentally in your heart. Obey my order. Due to my 
love, aU this will be auspicious for you." Having thus ordered 
me, 0 goddess, he dismissed the hosts of gods. The gods, dis­
missed by him went to their own abodes. Then gods, led by 
Indra, requested me. 
Indra and others said: 
S lb. 0 god, quickly do that beneficial act as told by Vig1.u 
now. 
Mahiideva said: 
52-56. 
0 auspicious one, for the good of the gods, I took to 
the way of the heretics, and had skulls, hides, ash and bones. 0 
auspicious one, as told by ViᕥJ)u, I prepared the vicious Purii:Q.as 
and the heretic Sa.iva doctrines. 0 sinless one, having entered 
through my power, Gautama and other brii.hma:Q.as I proclaimed 
the texts outside the Vedic fold. Resorting to this doctrine, all 
the wicked demons became averse to the lord (i.e. ViᕥJ)u), and 
were enveloped in viciousness. Applying ash to their bodies, 
covered with (i.e. having) very severe penance, they worshipped 
me only with flesh, blood and sandal.

=== PAGE 264 ===

VI.235.57-VI.236.4 
3193 
57-64. 
On receiving from me grants of boons, they were 
haughty with pride and power. They were very much attached to 
objects of senses, and were full of lust and anger. They, void of 
goodness and powerless, were then defeated by the hosts of gods. 
Fallen from all righteous paths, they will go to a mean position 
in (due) time. Those who, bereft of righteous paths, move on the 
earth by resorting to this doctrine of mine, always see (i.e. go to) 
hell. 0 goddess, (this) my course, that is censured, is thus (follow­
ed by me) (only) for the good of the gods. Following Vigtu's 
order I have (applied) ash and (use) bones. 0 goddess, this is an 
external mark intended for deluding the foes. In the heart how­
ever, I, always meditating upon god Viᕥ:Q.u, just mutter that 
emancipating formula, telling about Brahman. It is like the 
(hymn) Sahasranama of Viᕥ:Q.u, Naraya:Q.a. 0 auspicious one, 
constantly muttering the great six-syllabled formula which in­
creased the Raghu-race, we constantly obtain that Brahman 
which is filled with the nectar of constant joy, which is permaᕶ 
nent happiness. 0 you of an auspicious face, I have told you all 
this that you had asked. What else do you desire to hear? Ask 
me that with affection. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED THIRTYSIX 
Characterization of Various Texts and Doctrines as Siittvika, 
Rajasa and Tiimasa 
Piirvat1 said: 
I . 0 sinless one, tell me about the vicious texts which were 
composed by the brahma:Q.as bereft of devotion to the lord. 0 
lord of gods, tell me their names in a sequence. 
Rudra said: 
2-4. 
0 goddess, listen. I shall tell you about the vicious 
texts in a sequence. By merely remembering them even the wise 
ones would be deluded, First I myself proclaimed the Saiva, 
Pasupata (texts) etc. Hear about the ones which were proclaimed

=== PAGE 265 ===

3194 
Padma Puriita 
by the brahma:Q.as into whom my power had entered, after that : 
Ka:Q.ada proclaimed the great Vaiseᕥika text. 
5-7. Similarly Gautama (proclaimed the doctrine of) Nyaya, 
and Kapila (proclaimed) Siirhkhya. Dhiᕥa:Q.a (Brhaspati) in the 
same way (proclaimed) the much censured Ciirvaka (doctrine) ; 
Viᕥ:Q.u of the form of Buddha proclaimed the false Buddhist doc­
trine and those of the naked and wearing dark blue garments for 
the destruction of the demons. The doctrine of Maya (illusion) 
is a wicked doctrine and said to be pseudo-Buddhist. I myself, 
of the form of a brahma:Q.a, proclaimed it in Kali (age). 
8-12. It shows the meaninglessness of the words of the holy 
texts and is condemned in the world. In this (doctrine) only the 
giving up of one's own duties is expounded. And that is said to 
be religiousness by those who have fallen from all duties. I have 
propounded the identity of the Highest Lord and the (indivi­
dual) soul. I stated this Brahman's nature to be qualityless. 0 
goddess, I myself have conceived, for the destruction of the 
worlds, and for deluding the world in this Kali age, the great 
doctrine resembling the purport of the Vedas, (but) non-Vedic 
due to the principle of Maya (illusion) (present in it). By my 
order formerly Jaimini propounded the great doctrine of Piirva 
Mimaihsa, stating godlessness and making the Veda meaning­
less. 
1 3-17. 
0 Girija, know from me the vicious doctrines. I 
shall also nal'l'ate the names of the vicious Puranas* in success­
ion : Brahma, Padma, Vaiᕥ:Q.ava, Saiva, so also Bhiigavata. So 
also Naradiya and Marka:Q.geya as the seventh. Agneya is said 
to be the eighth, and Bhaviᕥya to be the ninth. Brahmavaivarta 
is said to be the tenth, and Litiga to be eleventh. Viiraha is said 
to be the twelfth and Vamana the thirteenth. Kaurma is said to 
be the fourteenth and Matsya the fifteenth. Garuga is said to be 
the sixteenth, and Skiinda to be the seventeenth. The eighteenth 
is Brahma:Q.ga. (These are) the Pura:Q.as in succession. 
18-22a. Know from me that Matsya, Kaurma, Laitiga, 
Saiva, so also Skiinda and A.gneya are tamasa (vicious). 0 you of 
*The immediately following list is not actually that of the vicious 
PuriiQas but of the PuriiQas in general, The vicious six Purii.l;las follow this 
list of eighteen PuriiQas. The word 'tiimasa' in this verse is not appropriately 
used. (Ed.)

=== PAGE 266 ===

VI.236.22b-VI.237 .3 
3195 
an auspicious appearance, the Purfu;tas, viz. Vaiᖂ?:Q.ava, Naradiya, 
so also the auspicious Bhagavata, similarly Garuqa, Padma, 
Varaha should be known to be sattvika (or virtuous). Know from 
me that Brahma:Q.Qa, Brahmavaivarta, Marka:Q.qeya, Bhaviᖂ?ya, 
Vamana and Brahma are rajasa (endowed with the quality of 
passion). The sattvika ones are said to give salvation and are 
always auspicious. Similarly, 0 goddess, the tamasa are said to 
be the cause of (i.e. lead one to) hell. 
22b-27. Similarly Smrtis endowed with the three qualities 
are proclaimed by the sages. 0 you of an auspicious appearance, 
they are sattvika, rajasa and tamasa. Vasiᖂ?tha, Harita, Vyasa, 
Parasara, Bharadvaja and Kasyapa are said to sattvika, giving 
(i.e. leading to) salvation and auspicious. Yajiiavalkya Atreya, 
so also Taittira, Dakᖂ?a and Katyayana and Vaiᖂ?:Q.ava are 
rajasa, giving (i.e. leading to) heaven, and auspicious. Gauta­
ma, Barhaspatya, Sarilvarta, Yama, Samkhya and Ausanasa are 
said to be tamasa, and giving (i.e. leading to) hell. What is the 
use of talking much in the case of the Pura:Q.as and the Smrtis 
also? The tamasa do lead to hell. A wise one should avoid them. 
As the occasion has come, I have told you all the auspicious 
doctrines. Listen. I shall tell you about the nature of the remain­
ing birth (i.e. of the other incarnations) of Viᖂ?:Q.U. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED TlHRTYSEVEN 
The Boar Incarnation of Vi${!U 
Sri Rudra said: 
1 -3. Kasyapa's two sons, Hira:Qyaka and Hira:Q.yftkᖂ?a were 
very powerful. They, the two sons of Diti, were great warriors 
and the lords of the demons. In Svetadvipa they were with Viᖂ?:Q.U 
(as his doorkeepers) named Jaya and Vijaya. 0 goddess, (once) 
the two very powerful ones prevented the greatest meditating 
sages who were eager to see Viᖂ?:Q.U. The two best, very powerful 
gods, the doorkeepers were cursed by them.

=== PAGE 267 ===

3196 
Padma Pural)a 
Sanaka and others said: 
4a. 
0 servants of the god, leave (this place) and be gone to 
the earth. 
Rudra said: 
4b-6a. Having cursed them like this, the best sages remained 
there. The god (Viᕥ:r.m) having come to know the affair called 
them (i.e. the sages) and the two (doorkeepers) also, to whom, 
after they had stood, the lord, the cause of the beings, said: 
The lord said: 
6b-8a. 
0 you very powerful ones, you have done a great 
wrong to the noble (sages). 0 doorkeepers, you cannot pass it 
over. lfyou desire to have seven existences, then you will be my 
sinless devotees. If you want to remain as my enemy, then you 
will have three existences. 
Rudra $aid: 
8b. Thus addressed, the very powerful Jaya and Vijaya said 
to the highest god : 
Jaya and Vijaya said: 
9-lOa. 
0 you who respect others, we can't go to (and live 
on) the earth for a long time. Therefore, know that we shall go 
to (i.e. have) those existences causing enmity (for you). 0 god, 
killed by you only, we shall come near you. 
Rudra said: 
1 Ob-14. Having spoken like this, the two. very powerful door­
keepers were born from the womb ofDiti, (the wife of) Kasyapa. 
Hira:Q.yakasipu was the elder and Hira:r;tyakᕥa the younger. Both 
of them were well-known in the wor1d. Both were very powerful 
and haughty due to their might. That Hira:r;tyakᕥa of an immea­
surable body and very haughty removed, with his thousands of 
arms, the earth along with mountains, oceans, islands, and all 
living beings. Having removed it out and put it on his head he 
entered the lower world. Then all the hosts of gods, afflicted by 
fear, cried. 
15-19. They sought the shelter of Naraya:r;ta, Viᕥ:r;tu. Then

=== PAGE 268 ===

Vl.237.20-29 
3197 
knowing . that wonder, he, Viᕥ:Q.u, the holder of a conch, a disc, 
and a mace, took up the Boar-form, existing everywhere and 
having no beginning, middle or end. The highest lord full of 
everything, having hands and feet on all sides, having large fangs 
and arms, struck the demon with one fang. The mean son of Diti, 
with his huge body pounded, died. Seeing the earth fallen (from 
the demon's head), he lifted it with his fang, and putting it on 
Seᕥa's head as before, took up the form of a Tortoise.• Seeing great 
Viᕥ:Q.u of the form of the hog, all deities and sages, with their 
bodies bowed with devotion, praised him. 
The gods said: 
20-25. Salutation to Yajiiavaraha. Salutation to you of a 
hundred arms. Salutation to the god of gods. Salutation to you, 
the omnipresent. Salutation to you of an abiding form, to you of 
the form of all sacrifices. Salutation to you (of the form of the 
divisions of time like) kala, kaᕥ!ha and nimesa, to you of the 
form of time. Salutation to you, the soul of beings. Salutation to 
you having the ʾgveda as your body. Salutation to you, the soul 
of the gods. Salutation to you, the Sarna veda. Salutation to you, 
Orllkara. Salutation to you of the form of the Yajurveda, so also 
of the form of the rc and full of the four Vedas. Salutation to you 
of the (four) Vedas, the Vedailgas and the Upangas. Salutation 
to 1 you Govinda, having no beginning or end. Salutation to you 
knowing the Vedas, and having a peculiar form. Salutation to 
you the lord of Sri, Bhii, Lila and the father of the world. 
Rudra said: 
26-29. Having thus praised god Vi\J;lU, the lord of the soul, 
and of the form of the boar, they worshipped him with sandal, 
flowers etc. He, ·being properly worshipped by the gods, gave 
them a boon desired (by them). Vi\:Q.U who (i.e. whose praise) 
was being joyfully sung by the gandharvas and celestial nymphs, 
and being praised by the great sages, vanished there only. A 
devoted man who, having got up in the morning, praises (the 
•This is rather confusing. As is well known, Vi_QU assumed the form of 
a tortoise in the second incarnation to give support to the mountain Man­
dara which 
served as a churning rod for gods who wanted to acquire 
Amrta from the Milky Ocean. (Ed.)

=== PAGE 269 ===

3198 
Padma Puriifta 
lord) with these (hymns), gets a desired (piece of) land, full of 
corn and fruits for a long time. I have told you this splendour of 
the Boar (incarnation) of Viᕥ:Q.u. In the same way I shall describe 
(his) Narasirilha (incarnation). Listen, 0 you of an excellent 
face. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED THIRTYEIGHT 
The Emergence of Nr!imha 
Rudra said: 
1-2. 
Having learnt that his brother was killed, the great 
demon Hira:Q.yakasipu practised a penance near Meru (dedicating 
it) to me. 0 auspicious one, he, the very powerful one, eating 
(i.e. subsisting on) air, muttering the five-syllabled formula, 
worshipped me for thousands of divine years. 
3. Then with a pleased mind, I said to the great demon : "0 
demon, ask for the boon that is in your mind." Then the demon 
spoke to me, who was pleased, 0 you of an auspicious face : 
Hiraf'yakasipu said: 
4-5. Grant me exemption from death from gods, demons, 
human beings, gandharvas, serpents, fiends, beasts, birds, animals, 
noble siddhas and yakᕥas, vidyadharas, so also kinnaras, so also 
all diseases, weapons, all principal sages. 
Rudra said: 
6- 14. 
0 you of a pleasing appearance, I said to the demon : 
"Let it be so." The very powerful demon, having got the great 
boon from me, conquered Indra and gods and became the lord 
of the three worlds ; and he himself forcibly took all portions of 
sacrifices. Gods, vanquished by him, did not find a protector. 
All gandharvas, gods, demons, yakᕥas, nagas, siddhas and 
sadhyas were under his control. The very mighty king of the 
demons married, according to proper rites, Uttanapada 's daugh­
ter named Kalya:Q.i. 0 you auspicious one, from her was born the

=== PAGE 270 ===

VI.238. 1 5-24 
3 199 
very lustrous Prahlada, the king of the demons. Even while (he 
was) in (his mother's) womb, he was attached to Viᕷu. He, of a 
delighted mind, never knew anyone else except the lord of gods 
in all conditions and deeds (done) with his mind, speech and body. 
The humble and very intelligent one stayed in his preceptor's 
house at a (proper) time. Having studied all the Vedas and vari­
ous sacred texts, the demon's son sometime came along with his 
preceptor to his father and saluted him with humility. The lord 
of the demons, having embraced his son of auspicious marks 
with his arms, and having put him who was much amazed, on 
his lap, said these (words to him) : 
Hirm:zyaka8ipu said: 
1 5. 
0 Prahlada, you stayed in your preceptor's house for a 
long time. 0 you of a good vow, tell me the knowledge given to 
you by your preceptor. 
Rudra said: 
1 6. 
Thus asked by his father, Prahlada, a born devotee of 
ViᕦJ).u, affectionately spoke words removing sins to the lord of 
demons : 
Prahliida said: 
17. After having saluted ViᕦJ).u, the Highest Being, the lord, 
who is the aim of all Upaniᕦads, I shall tell you. 
Rudra said: 
18-20. The lord of demons, having thus heard ViᕦJ).u's praise, 
was amazed. He angrily said to the preceptor : "What have you 
taught my son? 0 you wicked one, why did you teach my son 
such praise of ViᕦJ).U, a stupid thing not fit to be done by a 
brahmal).a? 0 mean brahmal).a, due to your favour (only) this 
my son has told mծ the praise of my enemy, which is not fit to be 
heard." 
21-24. Speaking like this and looking around, the demon­
king, in a fit of anger, said to a demon : "Bind this mean brah­
mal).a." Hearing these words of the king, he bound (Sukra,) 
Bhrgu's son. Seeing his preceptor being bound, Prahlada, to 
whom brii.hmal].as were dear, said to his father : "0 father, my

=== PAGE 271 ===

3200 
Padma Purcu:za 
perceptor did not teach me this. I have learnt it through the 
favour of ViᕦJ:lU, the speaker, the seer. The lord is omnipresent. 
ViᕦJ:lU alone is the imperishable agent, the controller ofallhuman 
beings. Therefore, 0 lord, This brahmaJ:la, my preceptor, who is 
innocent, should be released." 
Rudra said: 
25-29. Having heard the words of his son, HiraJ:lyakasipu 
then let the brahmat:la free, and with amazement said to his son : 
"0 son, why do you thus go astray (influenced) by the brahmat:1a's 
words? Who is ViᕦJ:lU? What is his form? Where does this ViᕦJ:lU 
stay? Since I am the lord in the world, the master of the three 
worlds, honour me only. Abandon this ViᕦJ:lu, our enemy, diffi­
cult to be overpowered. Or worship lord Sankara, god Siva, 
Rudra, the father of the worlds, the chief of gods, giving all 
splendour. After putting on the mark of three lines on your fore­
head with ash worship Mahadeva worshipped by demons, in the 
manner as told in the Pasupata sect. 
Rudra said: 
30-32. Hearing these words of the lord of the demons, the 
priest of the demons said : "0 glorious one, do like this only as 
your father tells. Abandon (our) enemy, Kaitabha's enemy, and 
worship the three-eyed (god, i.e. Siva). There is no greater god 
than Siva, who gives everything to men. Your father also became 
the lord (of demons) because of his favour only." 
Rudra said: 
33. Hearing these words of them, Prahlada, a born devotee 
of ViᕦJ:lu, said : 
34-42. "0 greatest ones, since the world is deluded by the 
Maya of the lord, even brahmaJ:laS knowing Vedanta and honou­
red among all the people, being proud, speak like this through 
fickleness. NarayaJ:la is the highest Brahman. NarayaJ:la is the 
highest truth. NarayaJ:la is the highest meditator and the highest 
meditation. He is the refuge of the entire world. Acyuta is the 
eternal good. Eternal Vasudeva is the sustainer, the creator of 
the world. The Highest Being is all this. Everything depends upon

=== PAGE 272 ===

VI.238.43-54 
3201 
him. His body is all golden. He is eternal. His eyes are like lotu­
ses. He is the lord of Sri, Bhfi and Lila. He is pleasing, spotless 
and of an auspicious body. He alone created the two lords, 
Brahma and Siva, the two best gods. Brahma and Siva act by 
honouring (i.e. according to) his order only. The wind blows 
through his fear. The sun rises through his fear. Through his 
fear run fire, the moon and death as the fifth. The highest, divine 
god NarayaJ).a ViᕥJ).u was alone there (in the beginning). Brahma 
was not there ; lndra was not there ; Siva was not there ; the sun 
and the moon were not there. The heaven and the earth were not 
there ; nor were the stars and the gods there. The wise men always 
see the highest abode of that ViᕥJ).U. 
43-5la. 
0 best brahmaJ).as, having ignored the significance 
of all Upaniᕥads, why do you talk like this through attachment 
or greed before me? Abandoning that ViᕥJ).u, the god protecting 
all, and the god of all, how can I, resorting to heresy, worship 
Siva? The noble meditating sages like Sanaka meditated upon 
KrᕥJ).a, the lord of Lakᕥmi, the god of gods, Ananta, the Highest 
Being, dark like the petals of a blue lotus, having large eyes like 
lotus-leaves, with his chest marked with Srivatsa, adorned with 
all ornaments, always a youth, the lord of all, eternal joy, and 
giver of pleasures, whom the hosts of gods like Brahma, Siva, 
Indra and others worship, with half a glance of whose wife, gods 
like Brahma, Indra, Rudra, VaruJ).a, Yama, Soma and (Kubera) 
the lord of wealth, are looked at. Merely by recollecting his 
name, even sinful living beings quickly obtain salvation, very 
difficult to be secured (even) by Brahma and others. That lord of 
Sri alone is always the protector of even the gods. I shall worship 
only that ViᕥJ).u united with Lakᕥmi. With great ease only I shall 
reach that highest place of ViᕥJ).u." 
Rudra said: 
5lb. 
Hearing these words of him, HiraJ).yakasipu, full of 
anger, burnt like another fire. Looking at the demons around 
him, he, in a fit of anger, spoke like this : 
Hirm:zyakaiipu said: 
52-54. By my order kill sinful Prahlada highly devoted to

=== PAGE 273 ===

3202 
Padma PuratJa 
worshipping my enemy, with multitudes offierce weapons. His 
protector Viᖂ?:Q.U alone will protect him through love. Today only 
I would see (if) his being protected by Viᖂ?:Q.U is effective. 
Rudra said: 
55-59. 
Then by the order of the lord of demons, the demons, 
with weapons raised, stood round the son of the lord of demons 
to kill him. Prahliida too, meditating upon Viᖂ?:Q.U in the lotus of 
his heart, and muttering the eight-syllabled formula , stood like 
another mountain. On all sides the heroes struck him with lances, 
iron clubs and saktis. 0 you auspicious one, due to Viᖃ?:Q.U's inviol­
able power, Prahliida's body very much became adamantine due 
to rem em bering Viᖂ?:Q.U. Then the great missiles of the enemies of 
gods, having reached his body, and being cutt off, fell down on 
the ground like blue lotuses, 0 auspicious one. The demons were 
not able to pierce (i.e. hurt) his body even slightly. 
60-67. The soldiers, being amazed and with their faces hung 
down, stood near the king. Seeing his very powerful son of that 
kind, the demon-king being very much amazed and full of anger, 
wrathfully ordered all the very poisonous, fearful snakes like 
Viisuki : "Eat him (up)." Then the very powerful, very fierce sna­
kes, with their mouths blazing, ate (i.e. started eating) the very 
powerful (Prahliida). They, full of poison, bit the devotee of 
(Viᖃ?:Q.U) the Garu9a-bannered one. The (snakes) that subsisted 
on air became poisonless and had their teeth cut off. With their 
limbs cut off by a thousand sons ofVinatii, and very much afilicted 
and vomiting profuse blood, they ran into all directions. Seeing 
the great snakes (reduced to a condition) like that, the angry lord 
of the demons then ordered the very much intoxicated quarter­
elephants. The quarter-elephants, haughty with rut, ordered by 
that king, surrounded him, and struck him hard with their very 
large tusks. Then the tusks of the quarter-elephants, with their 
roots cut off, fell on the ground. 
68-73. 
The elephants, rendered tuskless, and overcome by 
fear, fled. Seeing the great elephants (fleeing) the mighty lord of 
demons got angry. And burning a great fire, he threw it at his 
son. Fire, seeing Prahliida, dear to Viᕧ:Q.u, did not burn the wise 
one. Fire became very cool. Seeing the boy not being burnt, the 
king, who was very much amazed, gave him, good to all beings,

=== PAGE 274 ===

VI.238. 74-84 
3203 
terrible poison. Due to the power of that Viᕫ:Q.u, the poison be­
come nectar. Poison, due to one's offering (oneself) to that god, 
becomes nectar. Having thus deluded his son by means of such 
fierce and very terrible means, and seeing that he could not be 
killed, the king of demons, being full of amazement spoke mildly 
to his son : 
Hiral)yaka8ipu said: 
74-78. You have properly described before me Vigm's great­
ness. He is called Viᕥ:Q.U because (he stands) pervading all worlds. 
He who is the omnipresent god is alone the highest god. Actually 
show me his omnipresence. Having carefuJly and properly seen 
the splendour of qualities like supremacy, power, lustre, know­
ledge, heroism, strength, excellent form of him the highest one, I 
shall honour Viᕥ:Q.u from among the gods. There is no match for 
my power among the gods. 0 you who honour (others), as a 
result of grant of a boon from Siva I have obtained immunity 
from death among all living beings and invincibility for living 
beings. ViᕥIJU would receive the title of lord after having vanqui­
shed me with power and might. 
Rudra said: 
79. Hearing these words· of him, Prahlada, being amazed, 
spoke. He, of a good vow, told about the glory of Viᕫ:Q.u to the 
demon. 
Prahlada said: 
80-84. Since that Narayal).a, the glorious one, the highest 
soul, the ancient one lives in all beings, he is called Vasudeva. He, 
the sustainer of the world, is called Viᕥ:Q.u. Nothing other than 
him is the immobile and the mobile. The sentient objects every­
where are ViᕥI).u only and none else. The heaven he has pervaded 
himself with three steps and the pervasion with one step is wonder­
ful(?). That Viᕥ:Q.u, having a disc and a mace in his hands, and 
wearing a yellow garment, is seen by meditating sages through 
devotion and never without it. Viᕥ:Q.U cannot be seen through 
anger or jealousy. Having pervaded (everything) among gods, 
lower animals, immobile objects, living beings and among all small 
and great (objects), he dwells.

=== PAGE 275 ===

3204 
Padma Puriil)a 
Rudra said: 
85-87. Hearing these words ofPrahliida, that excellent demon, 
with his eyes red due to anger, reproaching his son repeatedly, 
said to him : 
Hiraf)yakasipu said: 
If that Via:Q.U is omnipresent and tbe Highest Being, then 
actually show him to me. What is the use of much nonsensical 
talk? 
Mahiideva said: 
Speaking like this, Hirauyakasipu struck a pillar ofthepalace 
with his hand, and said these (words) to Prahliida : 
Hiravyakasipu said: 
88. 
IfViaQu would be (i.e. is) omnipresent, then show him 
(to me) in this (pillar). Otherwise I shall kill you, uttering false 
words. 
Rudra said: 
89-93. 
Speaking like this, the lord of the demons, suddenly 
drew out his sword, and angrily threw it at Prahliida's chest to 
kill him. At that moment, a great sound was heard from the 
pillar. The interior of the sky was as it were broken with sounds 
of the destructive fire. Due to that big sound, striking the ears of 
the demons, all fell on tbe ground like trees with their roots cut 
off. The frightened demons thought that the three worlds were 
inundated. Then great ViaQu, of a great lustre, came out of the 
pillar. He made a very fearful sound, resembling (the one) at the 
time of the destruction of the world. Due to that great sound 
stars fell on the ground. 
94-97. Having assumed the body of Nrsirhha, ViaQU mani­
fested (himself) there only. He was covered with the lustre of 
crores of suns and fires. In his face he resembled a lion, and in 
(the other parts of) the body he had a human figure. His mouth 
was fierce due to fangs, and was raised up to the sky with his 
throbbing tongue. The ends of his hair were surrounded by 
flames. The lord had eyes like burning firebrands. Covered by a 
thousand long arms, full of all weapons, he appeared like (moun-

=== PAGE 276 ===

Vl.238.98-1 1 4 
3205 
tain) Meru, with many trees having branches. He had worn a 
garland of divine flowers, and was decorated with divine orna­
ments. 
98- 107. To destroy all demons he remained in the form of a 
man-lion. Seeing very powerful, terrible-looking man-lion, the 
lord of demons, with his eyelashes burnt and body afflicted, fell 
(down). Then Prahhida, seeing Via:t}.U like a man-lion, saluted 
Via:t}.U with the words 'Victory (to you).' On the limbs of that 
high-souled man-lion he saw worlds, seas, islands, gods, gandh­
arvas, human beings ; a thousand cosmic eggs were seen on the 
tip of his mane. Similarly in his eyes were seen the moon, the sun 
etc. In his eyes (were seen) gods Asvinas, directions and inter­
mediate directions. On his forehead (were seen) Brahmii. and 
Rudra ; in his nose (were seen) the sky and air. In his mouth Indra 
and Agni (were seen). On his tongue Sarasvati (was seen). On his 
fangs (were seen) lions, tigers, sarabhas (i.e. the fabulous eight­
legged animals), and great serpents. On his throat was seen Meru, 
and great mountains (were seen) on his shoulders. On the arms 
of the noble one (were seen) gods, lower animals and human 
beings. The atmosphere (was seen) in his navel, and the earth 
(was seen) on his feet. On his hair all herbs (were seen). On the 
rows of his nails trees (were seen). In his breaths, Vedas with 
Ailgas and Upii.ilgas (were seen). On all his limbs (were seen) 
Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, hosts of Maruts, gandharvas and celes­
tial nymphs. 
1 08-l l4. Thus were seen the splendours of the highest soul. 
The son of the lord of demons, seeing Via:t}.u having Srivatsa and 
Kaustubha (worn) on his chest, adorned with a garland of wood­
flowers, endowed with weapons like a conch, a disc, a mace, a 
sword, the Sii.rilga (bow), the goal of all Upaniaads, had his body 
sprinkled with tears of joy and repeatedly saluted him. The lord 
of demons, who was under the influence of (i.e. in the clutches of) 
death, seeing Via:t}.u, and raising his sword, ran to Nrsimha to 
fight with him. Then all the very powerful demons who had 
regained consciousness, took their own weapons, and hurriedly 
struck Via:t}.U. The weapons were reduced to ash on (reaching) the 
body of Via:t}.u, as straws thrown into fire (are burnt) in various 
ways. At that time Via:t}.u, seeing the armies of the demons, burnt 
them with his bright mane which was arranged with lines of

=== PAGE 277 ===

3206 
Padma Purii.t;a 
flames. The demons were very much burnt by the fire coming out 
of Nrsirilha's mane. 
1 1 5-123. All the attendants (were thus burnt). The army 
had none left in it. Seeing that army, except Prahliida with his 
followers, reduced to ash, the lord of demons angrily drew out 
his sword and moved (towards Vigm). The lord of gods seized 
the lord of demons with a sword in his hand with one arm, and 
dropped him down, as a stormy wind (knocks down) a branch. 
Nrsirilha, taking the huge-bodied (demon), fallen on the ground, 
placed him on his lap. He saw Via1;1u's face. At that time the sin 
due to censuring Via1;1u, and due to the blemish of not being a 
devotee of Via1;1u, was reduced to ash merely by Via1;1u's touch. 
Then Nrsimha tore off the huge body of the lord of demons with 
his sharp, hard nails resembling the thunderbolt. The lord of 
demons, with his soul purified, and with his heart torn off with 
the nails, actually saw the face of Via1;1u, and being (thus) for­
tunate, gave up his life. Great Via1;1u, having cut off his body into 
a hundred pieces, and drawn out his long entrails, put the dear 
ones round his neck (put them affectionately round his neck). 
Then all hosts of gods, sages having penance as their treasure, 
led by Brahma and Rudra, slowly came there to praise (him). 
They were afraid to propitiate the blazing (Via1;1u) having faces on 
all sides. 
124-126. (Then) they brought before their mind the goddess, 
the mother, the supporter of the worlds, of a golden complexion, 
extremely beautiful (hari1;1i)l, and destroying all troubles. Having 
prought before their mind the auspicious Lakami (wife) of Vi!?l;lU, 
always of a blameless body, with the hymns of the goddess (i.e. 
Lakami), and devoutly saluted her, the eternal one, brought be­
fore their mind by them, that goddess, having four arms, large 
eyes, and adorned with all ornaments, appeared (there). 
127- 128. 
Seeing the beloved of the god of gods, who had 
put on silken garments, and a divine garland, all gods, with the 
palms of their hands joined, said to her : "Propitiate your hus­
band. Act in such a way that the lord would give the three worlds 
immunity from fear." 
I. 
Haril).i-One of the four classes of women, also called •Citril).i', who 
is said to be a woman endowed with various talents and excellences. The four 
divisions into which writers on erotical science class 
women are : Padmini, 
Citril).i, Sankhini, and Hastini or Karil).i.

=== PAGE 278 ===

VI.238. 129-146 
3207 
Rudra said: 
129- 1 33. The goddess, thus addressed, suddenly went to 
her husband Via:Q.u and having bowed down before him and salu­
ted him, said to him : "(Please) be pleased." Seeing his own dear 
wife, Via:Q.u, the lord of all, gave up his anger due to the demon's 
body, and in a moment became pleased. That ocean of pity, 
Via:Q.u, placing the goddess on his lap and embracing her, looked 
at the gods with eyes wet with the nectar of favour. Then there was 
a joyful agitation among them, praising him and saluting him, 
and seen by him with kind eyes. Then all the hosts of gods, with 
their minds full of joy, having saluted the god, the lord of the 
worlds, with the palms of their hands joined, said (to him) : 
The hosts of gods said: 
1 34-1 35. 
0 lord of the worlds, we are not able to see your 
very wonderful lustre, and your very wonderful form, marked 
with many arms and feet. We, all gods, are not able to see and 
put up with your very strong lustre that has filled the three 
worlds. 
Mahadeva said: 
136-146. Thus requested by the gods, the lord of gods with­
drew that very fearful lustre, and became of a pleasing appear­
ance, auspicious, resembling a crore of autumnal moons, having 
eyes like lotuses, resembling crores of flashes of lightning due to 
the mass of his mane full of nectar. The great lord was graced 
with four delicate, divine arms, endowed with divine armlets and 
bracelets full of various jewels, resembling the branches with 
fruits of the desire-yielding tree. The lord was decorated with 
lotus-like hands resembling japa-flowers. The man-lion was 
adorned with two raised hands holding a conch and a disc, and 
with other two granting boons and freedom from fear. His chest 
was (marked) with Srivatsa and Kaustubha ; he was adorned with 
a garland of wood-flowers. He was also decorated with ear-rings 
resembling the rays of the rising sun. The man-lion, adorned with 
ornaments like necklaces, armlets, bracelets, shone with Lakami 
sitting on the left (lap) of his body. The deities along with the great 
sages, seeing Lakami and the man-lion, with their hearts full of 
joy, sprinkled them with tears of joy. They, plunged into the

=== PAGE 279 ===

3208 
Padma Pura(la 
ocean of joy, constantly saluted them. By offering divine flowers, 
they worshipped the lord of souls. Having sprinkled the ancient 
Nrsirhha with the nectar from jewelled pitchers full of nectar, 
having worshipped him with divine offerings of lights, they prai­
sed him with divine hymns, and repeatedly saluted him. 
147-155. Then the lord ofLakami, who was pleased, gave them 
boons desired by them. Then ViaJ}u, to whom his devotees are 
dear, along with all hosts of gods made the imperishable Prahlii.da 
the king of all demons. Having cheered up Prahlii.da, and having, 
with .the best gods, consecrated him, he gave him the boons desi­
red by him and faithful devotion. Then Nrsi.rhha, being praised 
by all hosts of gods, and his body scattered over with beautiful 
flowers, vanished there only. Then all the hosts of gods went to 
their respective abodes. And again, they, with their minds pleased, 
enjoyed the portions of sacrifices. Then the gods, along with 
gandharvas, became free from fear. When the great demon 
was killed, all were delighted only. Prahlii.da, ViaQu's devotee, 
then righteously ruled over the kingdom. The best devotee of 
viaJ}U obtained the kingdom through ViaQu's grace. He having 
worshipped Nrsi.rhha with many sacrifices and gifts etc. obtained, 
at (the proper) time, ViaJ}u's eternal place, obtained by meditating 
sages. Those who everyday listen to Prahlii.da's account, are all 
free from sins, and will obtain the highest state. 0 goddess, I 
have told you this grandeur of ViaJ}u as Nrsi.rhha. 0 goddess, 
listen to the remaining state of grandeur in due order. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED THIRTYNINE 
The Rise of Bali and Kasyapa' s Penance 
Rudra said: 
1-4. A son was born to Prahlii.da, who was known as Viro­
cana. His son, the large-armed one, was lord Bali, (like) fire. He 
was the best among those who knew the ways of the world ; he 
was veracious ; his senses were subdued ; he was the dearest

=== PAGE 280 ===

Vl.239.5-23 
3209 
devotee of Vial)U ; he was always engaged in pious practices, and 
was pure. The very mighty one, having defeated all gods with 
Indra and hosts of Maruts, brought the three worlds under his 
control, and ruled. Without being tilled, the earth grew (corn). 
It gave much corn and many fruits. All cows were full-milking. 
Trees had fruits and flowers. 
5-9. All men, free from sins, were engaged in their own 
duties. Free from torment they constantly worshipped Vial)u. In 
this way, Bali, the lord of the demons, ruled righteously. His 
servants, the gods like lndra, stood by him. Removing the pride 
of the might (of others) he enjoyed supremacy in the three 
worlds. Kasyapa, seeing his son, deprived of his kingdom, and 
desiring his good, practised penance, along with his wife, in 
honour ofVial)u. Along with (his wife) Aditi, the pious one, took 
to the vow of (drinking) water (only). He worshipped Padma­
nabha, ViaI}.u, the lord of gods. Then for thousands of years he 
worshipped ViaJ}.U. 
I 0-13. The ancient one, with the goddess (Lakami) appear­
ed there only. He saw the lotus-eyed (ViaI}.u), holding a conch, 
a disc, a mace, dark like the jewel sapphire, adorned with all 
ornaments, graced with a bright crown, armlets, necklaces, and 
ear-rings, with his chest brightened with Kaustubha, covered 
with a yellow garment, and seated on a great round seat with 
Lakami. Seeing the lord of the worlds, the best briihmal}.a, with 
his heart full of joy, and with his wife, saluted and praised him. 
Kasyapa said: 
14-23. Repeated salutations to you, 0 lord of Lakami, 0 
omniscient one, 0 lord of the world, 0 soul of all, 0 lord of all 
gods, 0 creator and destroyer of the world ; 0 you having no 
beginning, death or end, salutation to you having a body 
supporting the universe, having the body of the Vedas and the 
Vedangas, and seeing everything ; salutation to you, the soul of 
all ; salutation to you, very subtle one, full of auspicious quali­
ties ; to you whose soul is fit to be meditated upon by the medi­
tating sages ; salutation to you the youthful boy, the lord of Sri, 
Bhii, and Lila ; to you who are eternally free and the only plea­
sure ; to you who dwell in the highest abode ; salutation to you, 
0 you of four characters ; salutation to you, 0 you of four

=== PAGE 281 ===

32 1 0 
Padma Purii1,1a 
forms ; salutation to you having five conditions, and of the 
nature of five. You are always worshipped by the meditating 
sages, devoted to the five-natured one. You remain in the five 
sacraments of those who know the five principles. 0 Viļ:Q.u, your 
form superior to the five (forms) should always be known. 0 
you of a complete form, the wise certainly know you in four 
ways. Your servants purify the entire world, your creation. In a 
moment you cause the freedom from the bond of the mundane 
existence of those brahma:Q.as, full of (the knowledge of) the 
three Vedas, devoted to their duties, and loving (your) devotees. 
Salutation to the supporter of the three worlds, the self-support­
ing one, and the soul of all. Salutation to you the supporter, the 
creator, the universe, of the form of the universe ; to Naraya:Q.a, 
Kn:Q.a, Vasudeva, Sanigin ; to Via:Q.u, Jia:Q.u, of pure energy. 
M ahiideva said: 
24. The lord Janardana who was thus properly being prais­
ed with such eulogies by the great sage, was pleased, and spoke 
with a grave voice : 
The lord said: 
25. 0 greatest brahma:Q.a, I, devoutly and properly wor­
shipped by you, am pleased with you. Ask for a boon. Well­
being to you. I shall do as desired by you. 
Mahiideva said: 
26. Then Kasyapa, with his wife, thus spoke to Viļ:Q.u : 
Kasyapa said: 
27-28. 0 lord of gods, being (born) as my son, do what is 
good to the gods. 0 god, Bali has forcibly conquered the three 
worlds. Being born as Indra's younger brother known as Upen­
dra, and having, through your Maya, vanquished Bali by what­
ever manner, give eternally the three worlds to Indra. 
Malziideva said: 
29-31. Thus addressed by the brahmal}.a (i.e. Kasyapa), 
ViļQu said : "All right." Being praised by the gods, he vanished 
there only. In the meanwhile, the lord, the creator of beings,

=== PAGE 282 ===

Vl.240. 1-10 
32 1 1 
came to the womb of Aditi, (the wife) of the noble Kasyapa. At 
that time Bali, with (the help of) eight great sages commenced a 
long sacrificial session according to the rules. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED FORTY 
ViÖάu Incarnates as Viimana 
Sri Mahiideva said: 
1-Sa. Then at the end of a thousand years Aditi gave birth 
to Viimana, Viļໜu. Acyuta, Hari, the lord, who was the great 
lord of all the worlds, who had Srivatsa and Kaustubha on his 
chest, whose lustre was like that of the full moon, who was hand­
some, whose eyes were like lotuses, whose body was very short, 
who was dressed like a lad, who could be known by means of the 
Vedas and the Vediiilgas, who was marked with such signs as a 
girdle, a (piece of) deer-hide, and a staff. Seeing him of a great 
vigour, all deities led by Indra, along with great sages, praised 
and saluted him. Then the lord who was pleased, said to the best 
gods : 
Viimana $aid: 
Sb. 
0 best gods, tell me what I should do today. 
Sri Saizkara $aid: 
6a. Then the gods who were delighted, spoke to that highest 
lord : 
The gods said: 
6b-7. 
0 Madhusiidana, Bali's sacrifice is going on now. 0 
lord, this is the time for the lord of demons not to turn down (any 
request). Having asked for the three worlds from him, (please) 
give them to us. 
Sankara said: 
8-10. 
Thus addressed by all gods, Viļໝu went to Bali, seated

=== PAGE 283 ===

3212 
Padma Purii1Ja 
at the place of the sacrifice along with eight sages. Seeing him 
having come as a guest, the king of demons suddenly got up. See­
ing (as if) ViaQ.U himself had come as a guest, he, with a smile, 
seated him on a seat of flowers and properly honoured him. Hav­
ing bowed before him and saluted him, he said in a faltering 
voice : 
Bali said: 
1 1-12. 
I am fortunate, I am blessed. My life is fruitful. 0 
best briihmal}a, having honoured you, what dear to you, should I 
do ? 0 best briihmat;.a, I shall give you that for which you have 
come to me. 0 best among those who know the Vedas, speak 
quickly. 
Sankara said: 
1 3a. Then with a delighted mind (Via:Q.u) spoke to the king : 
Viimana said: 
1 3b-18. 
0 best king, listen. I shall tell you the reason for my 
arrival. 0 lord of demons, 0 you who remove the pride (of 
others, or you who respect others), give me (that much piece of) 
land measured by my three steps, for an enclosed place for keep­
ing the fire-vessel. I do not desire anything else. Of all gifts, the 
gift of (a piece of) land is the best. That king who gives even 
that much piece of land measured by his thumb, to a poor briih­
mat;.a, would be the lord of the world. In this world there is no 
other gift like that (of a piece) of land. Both of them-he who 
receives (a piece of) land and he who gives (a piece of) land-are 
meritorious and, after death, go to heaven. Therefore, 0 great 
king, give me that much piece of land measured by my three 
steps. 0 king, do not hesitate to give such a small (piece of) land. 
0 king, that will indeed be (tantamount to) the gift of the three 
worlds. 
Sankara said: 
19-20. 
Then the king, with his face delighted, said, "All 
right." He intended to make him the gift of land in the proper 
way. Seeing the king of demons, his priest, Usanas, said to him 
(these) words, "0 king, do not give him the land."

=== PAGE 284 ===

VI.240.21-35 
3213 
Sukra said: 
21-22. 
0 king, this is Vial}.u, the highest lord, who was re­
quested by the gods. He has come here to take the entire earth 
after deceiving you. Therefore, land should not be given to the 
noble one. 0 king, by my word, give him some other object. 
Sri Sankara said: 
23a. Then having laughed the king firmly said to his pre­
ceptor : 
Bali said: 
23b-25a. To please ViaQ.u, I have done all meritorious acts. 
Today I am fortunate that ViaQ.u himself has come (to me). To­
day I shall very happily give (even) my life to him. Therefore, I 
shaH give him even the three worlds. 
Sri Sankara said: 
25b-27a. 
Speaking like this, the king devoutly washed his 
feet and first (offering him) water, gave him the land in the 
proper manner. Taking him round, and having saluted him he 
gave him wealth as a present. With his heart delighted, he again 
said to the brahma:Q.a : 
Bali said: 
27b-28a. 
0 brahma:Q.a, I am fortunate, I am blessed having 
given you land. 0 best brahma:Q.a, take this land as desired by 
you. 
Sri Sankara said: 
28b-35. To the king Vial}.u said : "Near you, in your pre­
sence, I shall get the land measured with my steps." Saying so, the 
highest lord abandoned his dwarfish form, and taking up the 
body of Vial}.u, extending up to fifty crores (of yojanas) he seized 
the earth along with the seas and mountains, along with the 
oceans, islands, gods, demons and human beings. With one step 
of his body he crossed the entire earth. Then he said : "0 best 
among the demon-kings, what do I do now?" It was the very 
powerful Trivikrama-form of the lord. It was good for the well­
being of even the gods and the noble sages. It would not be possi-

=== PAGE 285 ===

ble even for Brahma or giva to see it. 0 auspicious Girijii, having 
occupied the entire earth, that step became a hundred yojanas 
long. The ancient one gave the demon-king a divine sight. He 
showed him his Janiirdana-form. 
36-37. Seeing that universal form of the god, Bali, the lord 
of demons, got matchless joy, and was covered with tears of joy. 
Seeing the god, having saluted him, having praised him with 
eulogies, he, with his heart delighted, spoke in a faltering voice : 
Bali said: 
38. Seeing you, the highest god, I am fortunate, I am bles­
sed. 0 highest lord, accept these three. worlds. 
Srf Sankara said: 
39-48. Then Via:g.u, Acyuta, the lord of all, spread up his 
other immutable foot along with stars and planets, and covering 
all gods, up to Brahmii's world. He was full of the foot of Acyuta, 
0 you of an auspicious face. Then Brahmii, the grandsire, (seeing) 
that foot of the god of gods, which was marked with (the signs oO 
a disc, a lotus etc. saying, with his heart full of joy, "I am bles­
sed," took his pot (of water), and with devotion washed the foot 
with the water from it. Due to Via:g.u's majesty that water be­
came inexhaustible. That pure holy water fell on the peak of 
Meru. For purifying the world it flowed in four streams : Sita, 
Alakanandii, Cakau and Bhadra in due order. Alakanandii is said 
to be (flowing) to the south of Meru in three streams ; she, puri­
fying the world, and having three streams is called Tripathaga. 
The auspicious river is called Mandiikini in heaven, Bhogavati in 
nether world, and the speedy Ganga in between (i.e. on the earth 
flowing) for purifying human beings. 0 you of an auspicious face, 
seeing her flowing over the Meru mountain, I held her on my 
head to purify myself. Having held (on my head) the auspicious 
water of Ganga for a thousand divine years, I obtained bliss, 
and am adored in all worlds. 
49-53. There is no doubt that he who would carry on his 
head the water of Ganga rising from Via:g.u's foot, or would 
drink it, would be respected by the world. He who would utter 
(the words) 'Gaiigii, Ganga' even from (a distance of) hundred 
yojanas, is freed from all sins, and goes to Via:g.u's heaven. Then

=== PAGE 286 ===

king Bhagiratha and Gautama having a great penance (to his 
credit) worshipped me with penance and asked for Ganga. 
0 goddess, then I affectionately gave that auspicious best river 
Ganga, (rising from the foot) of Vi!?:Q.U to them for the good of 
the entire world. Since she was brought by Gautama, she was 
called Gautami. Since she was chosen by king (Bhagiratha), she 
was known as Bhagirathi. 
54-60. I have in course (of the narration) told you the ex­
cellent greatness of Ganga. Then that glorious lord Naraya:Q.a 
loving his devotees, gave the auspicious nether world to Bali, the 
lord of demons. He made Bali the king of all the demons, ser­
pents and the aquatic animals till the (final) inundation (of the 
earth). In the guise of a lad the immutable Vi!?:Q.U, the killer of 
demons, the son of Kasyapa, affectionately gave the worlds to 
Indra. Then gods with gandharvas and the very powerful sages 
praised Via:Q.u with divine eulogies and worshipped him. For 
them to see his form, he contracted it ; and being honoured by 
them Vi!?:Q.U vanished. Vi!?:Q.U, the mighty one, thus protected 
Indra well. The lord of the three worlds (i.e. Indra) obtained the 
three worlds and gr.;:at affluence. I have thus told you the account 
of the auspicious splendour of Via:Q.u's incarnation as Vamana. 
The rest of the splendour I shall narrate in due order. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED FORTYONE 
Parasuriima's Story 
The lord said: 
1-3a. Bhrgu's son was the great, best brahma:Q.a (named) 
Jamadagni. He had mastered all Vedas and Vedangas and had 
practised a severe penance. 0 you beautiful lady, on the auspi­
cious sandy bank of Ganga the religious-minded one practised 
penance (in honour) of Indra for a thousand years. Then lord 
Indra, being pleased, said these (words):

=== PAGE 287 ===

Jndra said: 
3b. 
0 best brahma:o.a, ask for a boon that is (i.e. that you 
have) in your mind. 
The lord said: 
4a. 
Then the brahma:o.a sage spoke to Indra who was 
pleased: 
Jamadagni said: 
4b. 
0 god, give me (the desire-yielding cow) Surabhi al­
ways fulfilling one's desires. 
The lord said: 
S-8. 
Then Indra, the lord of gods, being pleased, gave him 
the divine Surabhi fulfilling all desires. That Jamadagni of a 
great penance (to his credit), having obtained Surabhi lived 
with great grandeur like another Indra. Jamadagni, of a great 
penance (to his credit) married in the proper manner, Re:o.uka, 
Re:o.uka's daughter. The pious-minded one for many years 
enjoyed with her as Indra with Paulomi, his auspicious queen. 
9-17a. 
Then the very pious one, with a desire for having a 
son, performed a sacrifice. With (that) sacrifice he pleased god 
Indra. (Indra) Saci's husband, being pleased, (promised) him a 
very strong, very powerful, mighty-armed son, tormentor of all 
enemies. Then in course of time the best brahma:o.a generated a 
very strong and powerful son with a part of a portion of Vir?:Q.U 
and having all (good) marks, on Re:o.uka, 0 you of a bright 
smile. When the very powerful son (was born), his grandfather 
joyfully gave him a name indicating Vir?:o.u's portion. He gave 
him a very auspicious name (Parasu-)Rama. Being born from 
Jamadagni he was called Jamadagnya. The best brahma:o.a of 
the family of Bhrgu grew. His thread ceremony was performed ; 
he was proficient in all sciences and arts. To practise penance 
he went to the Salagrama mountain. There he saw the brah­
ma:o.a-sage Kasyapa of unlimited splendour. The brahma:o.a, 
Marici's son, was full of delight with (i.e. on seeing) him. In the 
proper manner he gave him the indestructible formula of Vir?:Q.U. 
1 7b-23. 
Having received the formula from Kasyapa, the 
high-souled one, (Parasu-)Rama, muttering day and night the

=== PAGE 288 ===

great six-syllabled formula, worshipped the lord of Laksmi. 
That pious Bhiirgava (i .e. Parasunima) meditating upon viI).U 
having eyes like lotus-petals and the omniscient one, practised 
penance for many years. He, with senses subdued and speech 
controlled, and (practising) great penance, remained (there). The 
bnihmal).a-sage Jamadagni remained on the auspicious bank of 
Ganga. He performed pious acts according to the precepts like 
sacrifices and gifts. By the favour of Indra's cow his wealth was 
full. Sometime the king, the lord of Haihaya, surrounded by 
his entire army, having conquered all countries, reached the 
hermitage of Jamadagni, the son of Bhrgu. Seeing the glorious, 
best sage, he saluted him. 
24-29. The king, having asked the devout great sage about 
his well-being, gave him garments and ornaments. He too 
honoured the king that had come to his house. Having honour­
ed according to the precept the king with madhuparka* the sage 
fed the best king along with his army. The very intelligent son 
of Bhrgu (i.e. Jamadagni) solicited Surabhi. She, the cow of 
plenty, produced food, drink etc. at that time. The best sage, of 
a great penance, gave the inexhaustible food, dri..'lk etc. produc­
ed by her to the king along with his army. Seeing that cow of 
plenty, the king was full of curiosity. The very wicked-minded 
(king) longed for the cow. The best king then begged Jamad­
agni for Surabhi. 
Kiirtavirya said: 
30. 
0 brii.hmal).a, give me this tawny cow of plenty, gtvmg 
all desired objects. 0 you of a good vow, I shall give you thou• 
sands of other cows. 
The lord said: 
3 1 -32. 
Thus addressed by the king, Jamadagni of a great 
penance (to his credit) said (to him) : "0 king, this cow of 
plenty cannot be given to you by me. This one was protected by 
Indra, the god of gods. 0 king, how should the wealth of deities 
be given by me?" 
33-36. The king, thus addressed, was then excited with 
*A preparation of curd, clarified butter, water, honey and sugar offered 
to guests.

=== PAGE 289 ===

anger. He, surrounded by the entire army, seized the cow of 
plenty forcibly. Then, 0 you of an excellent complexion, the 
glorious cow of plenty became angry, and with her horns and 
soles of her hoofs struck his huge army. Then that goddess, the 
cow of plenty, having, in a short time, struck that army, vanish­
ed, and in a moment went near Indra. Then (Kiirtavirya) Arjuna, 
seeing his army struck, was overcome by anger. With his fist 
he struck Bhiirgava, the best briihmal).a. 
37-39. Being struck by him in many ways, he was weaken­
ed. The best briihmal).a suddenly fell on the ground and died. 
The lord of Haihaya, the wicked-minded one, having killed 
there the best sage, and surrounded by a great army entered 
his own city. Riima Bhiirgava worshipped the god of gods. 
Pleased by his worship ViaJ.l.U said : 
God Vi$1JU said: 
40-4 1 . 
0 child, with the penance of you of a controlled 
mind, I am pleased. 0 briihmal).a, I shall give you a very auspi­
cious power. Possessed of my power, kill the wicked great kings 
for destroying those who cause a burden to the earth and for 
the good of the deities. 
Mahiideva said: 
42-44. 
Speaking like this, the god gave him an axe capable 
of killing the enemies, so also the great bow of ViaJ.l.U and many 
divine missiles. Lord ViaJ.l.U, having given (these) to Jamadagni, 
said : "0 best briihmal).a, you, the killer of the enemy's soldiers, 
having killed many arrogant kings repeatedly, take this entire 
earth bound by the ocean. Full of piety and great heroism you 
protect it. In course of time, you will reach my position by my 
grace." 
The lord said: 
45-SOa. Having said like this, and having given the briih­
mal).a a boon, the god vanished. Riima also suddenly went to 
his father's hermitage. Seeing his father killed, Bhiirgava (i.e. 
Parasuriima) was filled with anger. He desired to make the 
earth, crowded with kings, clear of kaatriyas. He went to the 
city of the king of Haihaya, which was full of kings. With his

=== PAGE 290 ===

VI.241 . 50b-62 
3219 
body burning with anger, he, with his weapons raised, stood at 
the gate. The citizens of his city seeing that very powerful 
Jamadagnya, with a blazing body, looked upon him as the des­
tructive fire at the end of the world. Being afH.icted by fear, all 
ran to the king, the lord of Haihaya. They praised him of great 
energy and equipped with all weapons. Hearing their words, the 
king with an amazed mind, said : 
King of Haihaya said: 
50b-51 . Who is that forcibly standing at the gate of my city 
with weapons? Even Indra, or Yama, or Rudra, or Kubera, can 
never stand with weapons at the gate of my city. 
Mahiideva said: 
52-55. 
Saying so, the lord of kings impelled his very strong 
servants to see him, and the wicked one said to them : "Arrest 
him." Having gone, they saw at the gate a very strong hero 
burning like the destructive fire at the end of the world, and 
difficult to be seen due to his lustre. The mighty ones were not 
even able to look at him. From all sides they, desirous of seizing 
him, often went to him. Seeing all those servants of the lord of 
kings with weapons, the very powerful best brahmai}.a, Jamad­
agnya, said Ia ughing : 
Para8uriima said: 
56-51. 
0 mean men, I, Rama, the son of Bhargava, have 
come (here). I shall kill all best kings for (i.e. as a revenge of) 
my father's murder. To my (dead) father I shall offer Karta­
virya's blood mixed with sesamum-seeds, and shall offer the 
pii}.c;la with his lotus-head. 
Mahiideva said: 
58-62. Thus addressed, the very powerful servants of the 
king struck him with arrows as fire with straws. Then the very 
brave Rama of genuine valour was angry, and drawing the bow 
of Vi!?I}.U made the sound of the bow-string. With that great 
sound the three worlds were filled. Even gods were frightened. 
(Such) was the great wonder. Then the very strong Parasurama 
struck the very brave, very powerful servants with arrows resem-

=== PAGE 291 ===

3220 
Padma Purat;ui 
bling fire. Having killed the servants of the glorious king, he 
stood like the destructive fire at the end of the world, deadly to · 
all beings . 
63-68. 
Hearing that his servants were killed in the battle by 
the intelligent (Parasu-) R.ama, the brave king of Haihaya, with 
his eyes red with anger, went out with his army to the place where 
Bhargava stood. Seeing him appearing deadly and blazing with 
his own lustre, all the men there, suspecting the destruction of 
human beings were frightened. Then a very fierce battle took 
place between R.ama and the kings, with fearful strokes of wea­
pons and missiles, as between two showering clouds. Then Rama 
of a great lustre easily burnt the king's army in a moment with 
the missile of Vial}.u. Then Rii.ma of unlimited valour cut off the 
thousand arms of the wicked Kartavirya with his sharp axe. The 
very brave king could not fight with (Parasu-) Rama in the battle. 
69-74. The wicked-minded one lost his valour due to his 
own sin. The mighty son of Rel}.uka, being angry, cut off his 
head , as mighty lndra did the peak of a big mountain, and he 
who was brave and angry, killed Sahasrabahu and all the kings 
with his axe in the battle. Seeing R.ama, the very fearful one, all 
kings on the earth, struck by fear, ran away as elephants do on 
seeing a lion. The angry R.ama killed the kings even though they 
had fled due to the resentment against his father's murder, as the 
angry Garw;la killed the serpents. The valorous R.ama made the 
entire (world) clear of the kᕥatriyas, but protected (i.e. spared) 
only the very great family of Ikᕥvaku, due to its being the family 
to which his maternal grandfather was related, and due to his 
mother's words. 
75-78. Rama, the destroyer of the families of kings, depriv­
ed the kings of the family of his maternal grandfather of their 
kingdoms, but did not kill them belonging to Manu's dynasty. 
But the brave one destroyed the families of all (other) kings. The 
brahmᕵl}.a, the mighty son of Jamadagni, having made the earth 
clear of the kaatriyas, duly performed the great horse-sacrifice. 
He gave the earth with the seven islands to chief brahmal}.as. 
That brave son of Jamadagni, having given the earth to the 
brahmal}.as, went to the hermitage of Nara-Nii.rayal}.a to practise 
penance. 
79-81 . 0 goddess, I have told you this account of the incar-

=== PAGE 292 ===

VI.242.1-7 
3221 
nation of lord (Vial).u), holder of the Sarnga bow, who had 
entered Rama with his power. Due to the entrance of the power 
this (form) of the noble one cannot be worshipped. The chief, 
noble, brahmal).as, the devotees of the lord, should worship the 
incarnations of (Dasarathi) Rama and KralJ.a, perfect with 
virtues, worshipped by sages, and giving salvation to human 
beings. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED FORTYTWO 
The Story of Rama 
Rudra said: 
l -3a. Formerly Svayambhuva Manu muttered the great 
formula of twelve syllables at Naimiaa on the pure, auspicious 
bank of Gomati. For a thousand years he worshipped Lakļmi's 
lord. Lord Viļl).u said to him : "Choose a boon from me." Then 
Manu Svayambhuva joyfully said to Vial).u : 
Manu said: 
3b-4a. 
0 Viļl}.u, be born as my son in three existences, 0 
lord of gods. I am worshipping you with a desire for a son. 
Rudra said: 
4b. 
Thus addressed, Lakļmi's lord spoke with very good 
words : 
Vi$1.1U said: 
5-7. 0 greatest king, whatever is desired (by you) in your 
mind will take place. I too have a great pleasure in being your 
son. 0 best king, when you will be born in the period having 
stability as its aim, I shall also be born as your son, 0 you of a 
good vow. 0 sinless one, in every age I shall be born of you for 
protecting the good, destroying the wicked and establishing right­
eousness.

=== PAGE 293 ===

3222 
Padma Puraf)a 
Rudra said : 
8-14. 
Having thus given him a boon, ViaJ}.U vanished there 
only. From Manu Svayambhuva he had the first birth. He was 
born as king Dasaratha in the Raghu-family formerly. The 
second birth was that of lord Vasudeva in the family of the Vrat;J.­
is. He will be born as a brahmaJ}.a in the town of Sambhala in the 
last two quarters of the Kali-age of the measure of a thousand 
divine years. Kausalya was born as the wife of king Dasaratha. 
Devaki was known (to be born) to serve the Yadu-family. Deva­
prabha was born as the wife of a brahmaJ}.a Harivrata. Thus they 
obtained the motherhood of ViaJ}.u in three existences. 0 you of 
a good vow, I shall first tell you the account of Rama, by just 
remembering whom even sinners get liberation. HiraJ}.yaka and 
HiraJ}.yakaa, taking up second birth, will be born as the very 
strong Kumbhakarl}.a and RavaJ}.a. 
1 5-22. 
0 you innocent one, pious Visravas, a brahmaJ}.a, 
was the son of Pulastya. His wife, a demon's daughter, was 
Visa.Iakai. She was the daughter of Sukesi. And the demon Suma­
lin's daughter Kekasi (Kaikasi?) was his (another) wife of a firm 
vow. Being excessively full of lust, the slim, respectful lady of a 
charming appearance had sexual intercourse with the great sage 
in the evening. Due to her desire for sexual enjoyment in the 
evening two very powerful demons, Raval}.a and KumbhakarJ}.a, 
known in the world, were born to her. A daughter, SiirpaӦ;takha 
of a deformed face was also born to her. After sometime Bibhiļ­
aӦ;ta was born to her. He was of a good character, devoted to God, 
veracious, pious and pure. RavaJ}.a and KumbhakarJ}.a were 
greatest like the Himalaya mountain. The two very much pro­
pitiated me with very severe penance. 0 goddess, that wicked 
RavaӦ;ta worshipped me with just a wicked deed with his lotus­
like heads. Then, I with my mind very much pleased said to him : 
23-30. "Ask for a boon that is in your mind, 0 child." Then 
the wicked one said : "With a desire (i.e. as I have a desire) to 
conquer all worlds, let me not be killed by gods, demons or 
fiends." Then, 0 you of a beautiful face, I gave the wicked 
demon immunity from death from gods, demons or fiends. The 
very powerful demon, proud due to the grant of the boon, trou­
bled the three worlds, gods, demons and fiends. Gods, troubled 
by him, full of fear, led by Brahma, sought the shelter of god

=== PAGE 294 ===

VI.242.31-44 
3223 
(Via:Q.u), the lord of Lakļmi. Understanding their anguish, the 
ancient one said, in order to grant them immunity from fear, to 
all gods led by Brahma and Rudra : 
The lord said: 
I shall be born in the family of Raghu as the son of king 
Dasaratha. I shall kill the wicked Rava:Q.a with his relatives. 
Taking to a human body I shall kill the thorn (i.e. nuisance) to 
the deities. You too, born as monkeys due to Nandin's curse, 
help me, 0 best gandharvas and celestial nymphs. 
Rudra said: 
31-32. All deities, thus addressed by Via:Q.u, god of gods, 
were born on the earth after being turned into (i.e. as) monkeys. 
Bhargava also gave the earth girt by the ocean. It was formerly 
given to the very noble Raghus by great sages. 
33. There was Vaivasvata Manu's son, known as Ikavaku, 
the best among kings and very powerful, best among those who 
knew the ways of the world. 
34-38. In his family was born the very brilliant and power­
ful king Dasaratha, king Aja's son, truthful, pure, and of a good 
character. The king protected the entire earth with valour. He 
installed all best kings on the kingdoms (i.e. thrones). That king 
married Kausalya, king Kosala's daughter, beautiful in all limbs. 
His second wife was Sumitra by naine, Magadha king's daugh­
ter, of a bright smile. His third wife was Kekayi, having eyes 
like lotus-petals, and the daughter of Kekaya king. 
39-44. 
With these three wives the Kakutstha king (i.e. 
Dasaratha) enjoyed while protecting the earth. There was a city 
named Ayodhya situated on the bank of Sarayii. It was full of 
all jewels and wealth and grains. It possessed ramparts and town­
gates. It had golden ramparts. It had excellent elephants and 
horses as Indra's city (had). In it lived the righteous king along 
with best sages and the noble brahma:Q.a Vasiatha, his family 
priest. And he ruled over the kingdom in which the thorns (i.e. 
sources of nuisance) were destroyed. That city of Ayodhya also 
was called holy, since the revered Supreme Being would be born 
in it. 0 auspicious one, the name of that city of the abode (of 
Via:Q.u) was great.

=== PAGE 295 ===

3224. 
Padma Purii1;ra 
45-51. That is the highest place where revered Via:Q.U dwelt. 
There salvation, instantly cutting off (the bonds of) all acts, 
would take place. When Via:Q.U was born there, 0 you of an 
auspicious face, all me:t were delighted. That king (Dasaratha) 
having protected the entire earth, and longing for a son per­
formed a sacrifice in honour of Via:Q.u (to propitiate) Hari, 
Acyuta. Worshipped with the sacrifice in his honour by him, 
ViaIJ.U, the omnipresent king, the lord of Lakami, giver of boons 
said. In the fire Via:Q.u of the form of sacrifice then appeared. 
He was like pure gold. He held a conch, a disc and a mace. He 
had put on white garments. He was glorious, and adorned with 
all orname:tts. On his chest were Srivatsa and Kaustubha ; he 
was adorned with a garland of wood-flowers. His large eyes 
resembled lotus-petals, he had four arms, and was of a generous 
mind. The lord of Lakami, with Lakami seated on his left lap, 
appeared there. He who loved his devotees, said to the king : "I 
am the giver of b໓ons (i.e. I shall grant you a boon)." 
52-54a. Seein໔ him, the lord of all worlds, the king full of 
joy and with his mind full of delight, with· his wife (wives?) 
saluted him. With the palms of his hands folded, and bowing 
down, he spoke words faltering due to joy. He said to Via:Q.u, 
the lord of gods : "Be my son." Then Via:Q.u, the lord, being 
pleased, said to the king : 
Vi{ʏu said: 
54b-55. 0 best king, for the good of the gods and the earth, 
I shall be born (as your son), for the protection of the good, 
for killing the demons, for granting liberation to the worlds, and 
for establishing righteousness. 
Mahiideva said: 
56. 
Via:Q.u gave the king bright rice boiled in milk, kept in 
a golden pot and held in the hand of Lakami. 
Vi{{IU said: 
57. 
0 king, 0 you of a good vow, give this rice boiled in 
milk to your wives. On them will be born sons from my body. 
Mahiideva said: 
58-60. 
Speaking like this, Via:Q.u, being praised by all sages,

=== PAGE 296 ===

V1.242.61-79 
322S 
presented himself, and vanished in the same way. The very calm 
king, seeing the eldest andthe yoWlgest queen, divided the divine 
rice boiled in milk, and gave it to them. In the meanwhile his 
beautiful-eyed middle wife, longing for a son, came near him. 
61-62. Seeing her, Kausalya and Kekayi of a beautiful 
waist, gave half (the portion of) their divine rice boiled in milk 
to her. Eating that divine rice boiled in milk all the queens with 
beautiful waists, conceived and they, of a bright lustre, shone. 
63-68. Then Viļ:Q.u, the lord of gods, wearing yellow gar­
ments and holding a conch, a disc, a mace in his hands, appeared 
in their dreams. In this charming time, 0 you of a bright smile, 
in the month of Caitra, in the bright half of the month, on the 
ninth day, when the SWl was in the Puļya constellation, in the 
noon, and at a time when all Planets were auspicious, Kausalya 
gave birth to a son, Viļ:Q.u, the lord of worlds, who was dark 
like lotus-leaves, who resembled crores of Cupids, whose eyes 
were large like lotus-petals, and was adorned with all ornaments. 
On his chest were Srivatsa and Kaustubha. He was graced with 
all ornaments. He shone with two ear-rings (bright) like the 
rising sun, resembled many suns, was covered with great lustre. 
He, the charming one, was born from the body of the highest 
lord, as one lamp is produced (i.e. lighted) from another lamp. 
69-70. He was the lord of all worlds, who was fit to be 
meditated upon by all meditating sages, was ancient, the goal of 
all Upaniļads, endless and the highest god. He was Viļ:Q.U, the 
cause of the creation, maintenance and destruction of the world, 
the protector of all beings, the lord full of all beings. 
7 1-75. When the lord of the world was born, in heaven 
divine drums were sounded ; the best gods sent down showers of 
:flowers. Gods led by Brahma, seated in aeroplanes, and along 
with sages and with their entire bodies overcome by joy, prai­
sed (him). The chiefs of gandharvas sang and bevies of celestial 
nymphs danced. Holy, auspicious breezes blew. The sun became 
very bright. The fires burnt (after being) subsided ; the ten quar­
ters were clear. Then the king joyfully seeing his son, the ancient 
(god Viļ:Q.u), performed through Vasiļtha, the ceremony to be 
performed at the birth of a child. Then revered Vasiļtha also 
gave him a charming name. 
76-79. "This great lord is the 'rama:Q.a' or lover of Sri, living

=== PAGE 297 ===

3226 
Padma Pural)a 
in a lotus. Therefore, his ancient name Srirama is settled." It is 
equal to the thousand names of Viļ:QU (i.e. the hymn Via:Qu­
sahasra-nama) and gives salvation to human beings. Brought into 
existence by Viļ:QU, he is called Viļ:Qu. The revered sage Vasiatha, 
having named him, taken him round, having saluted him, having 
praised him with eulogies and having recited the thousand names 
(of Viļ:Qu) for the good luck of the noble one, the very lustrous 
one, went from that most auspicious house. 
80-82. 
Then the king gladly gave much wealth to chief 
brahma:Qas. He also righteously caused to give the gift of a my­
riad of cows. The best of the Raghu dynasty gave a hundred 
thousand villages (to brahma:Qas). With divine garments, and 
ornaments, and immeasurable wealth, he gratified the brahma:Qas 
to please Viļ:QU. 
83-87. 
Kausalya with expanded hands saw him resembling 
a white lotus, having a lotus in his lotus-like hand. She saw, 0 
you of an excellent face, (marks of) lotuses on his beautiful feet. 
On his body (she saw) (signs of) a conch, a disc, a mace, a lotus, 
a flag and garments etc. ; on his chest {she saw) Srivatsa 
and Kaustubha along with a garland of wood-flowers. On his 
body she saw the entire world with gods, demons and human be­
ings. The large-eyed (Kausalya) saw the fourteen worlds on his 
smiling face. In the breath of the noble one she saw Vedas and 
Itihasas (historical accounts). 0 you of an excellent complexion, 
on his buttocks (she saw) islands, oceans and mountains. In his 
navel (she saw) Brahma and Siva. In his ears (she saw) the bright 
quarters. In his eyes she saw fire and the sun and in his nose 
(she saw) the very speedy wind. 
S8. Seeing all his splendours, the goal of all the Upaniaads, 
the beautiful (lady) was afraid, and having saluted him again and 
again, and with her eyes full of tears, she, with the palms of her 
hands folded, said (these) words : 
Kausalya said: 
89. 0 lord of the god of gods, I am fortunate in having got 
you as my son, 0 master. 0 lord of the world, be pleased with 
me. Show towards me a son's affection. 
The lord said: 
90. 
Via:Qu (i.e. Rama), the omnipresent one, thus addressed

=== PAGE 298 ===

by his mother, obtaining illusory manhood, cried due to his being 
a child. 
91-93. Then queen Kausalya of a beautiful waist and aus­
piCious characteristics, joyfully embraced her son and gave him 
(i.e. fed him with) milk from her breast. The eternal one drank 
(sucked) milk from her breast as a child ; the great lord, the 
sustainer of the world remained on his mother's lap. Citizens and 
countrymen, being delighted, celebrated a festival in that auspici­
ous, charming region, giving all desired objects of men. 
94-96. Bharata produced from the Paiicajanya (conch of 
Viٸ:Q.u) was born to Kaikeyi. Sumitra gave birth to Lakama:Q.a of 
auspicious signs. The glorious one also gave birth to Satrughna, 
the tormentor of his enemies. Lakama:Q.a, the killer of the enemy's 
heroes, was born with a portion of (the snake) Ananta. Satrughna, 
of unlimited valour, was produced from Sudarsana. They all grew 
there in the family of Vaivasvata Manu. 
97-98. The sons wer.! properly taught by the very vigorous 
Vasiatha. The princes studied the Vedas and were proficient in 
general knowledge. They knew the essential nature of all branches 
of knowledge, and were skilled 
in archery. They were very 
generous and they increased the joy of people. 
99. The princes Rama and Lakama:Q.a formed a pair. Simi­
larly Bharata and Satrughna formed a pair. 
100-104. Then Lakami, the chief goddess of the worlds, who 
was beautiful, who resembled a crore of young suns, whose hands 
were like red lotuses, who was endowed with all (good) chara­
cteristics, who was adorned with all ornaments, who, the beautiful 
one, had worn on her bosom a garland of fresh flowers, was born 
in Janaka's house, at the opening of a furrow, at an auspicious 
moment in an auspicious field dug up by Indra's plough. Seeing 
that girl, auspicious and full of all Vedas, the lord of Mithila 
took her out and nourished her as (his) child. The chief goddess, 
dear to the lord of worlds, grew in the charming house of Janaka 
for the protection of the entire world. 
105-1 10. In the meanwhile, 0 goddess, the great sage, Kausika, 
well known in the w.:>rld, commenced the performance of a sacrifice 
in the established hermitage on the auspicious, meritorious bank 
of Bhagirathi. When that sacrifice of the brahma:Q.a proceeded, 
the demons of Rava:Q.a destroyed his sacrifice. Pious Kausika,

=== PAGE 299 ===

having thought, desired to bring for the good of the world, 
Via:Q.U (i.e. Riima) born in Raghu's family. Having gone to the 
charming city of Ayodhya protected by (Dasaratha, the descen­
dant oO Raghu, the best sage saw Dasaratha, the best king. The 
king of a great lustre too, having seen Kausika, got up, and with 
the palms of his hands joined, saluted, along with his sons, the 
best sage. 
1 1 1-1 12a. The descendant of Raghu, saying, "I am for­
tunate" honoured the best sage with proper rite after seating him 
on an excellent seat. Having taken himself round him, and 
saluted him, he said to him : "What do (i.e. should) I do?" Then 
Visvamitra, with great penance (to his credit), and with his mind 
delighted, said : 
Visviimitra said: 
1 12b-1 13. 0 king, give me Riima for the protection of my 
sacrifice. In Riima's vicinity (i.e. presence) may my sacrifice be 
fruitful. Therefore, 0 king, please give (me) Riima for the pro­
tection of (my) sacrifice. 
The lord said: 
1 14-1 16. 
Hearing the words of the best sage, he, the best 
among the all-knowing ones, gave the best sage, Riima with Laka­
ma:Qa. Taking Riima (with him), that best briihma:Q.a Visviimitra 
with great pe໕lance (to his credit), and being pleased, went to his 
hermitage. When the best descendant of Raghu went (with 
the sage), gods were delighted. The very lustrous ones sent down 
showers of flowers, and praised (him). 
1 I 7-1 18. Then the very powerful Garu<;Ia, delighted in heart, 
came there unseen by beings, and having approached (the best 
descendant oO Raghu (i.e. Riima), gave the two (i.e. Riima and 
Lakama:Q.a) two bows, two quivers, and two inexhaustible arrows. 
The bird also gave them divine missiles, weapons, and left. 
1 19-123. The two heroes, Riima and Lakama:Qa, were in­
formed of the fierce-looking demoness moving in the forest by 
the noble Kausika. 0 goddess, her name was Tii<;lakii, and she 
was the wife of the demon Sunda. The two great heroes struck 
her with arrows discharged from their divine bows. Struck (with 
his arrow) by Rama, the fierce-looking demoness gave up her

=== PAGE 300 ===

fierce form, and became one of a divine form. She was glowing 
with her body, was adorned with all ornaments ; having saluted 
the two (best descendants of) Raghu, she went to Vi!}:Q.u's world. 
Having killed her the celebrated and very lustrous Rama entered, 
with the noble Lak!}ma:Q.a, the auspicious hermitage of Kausika. 
124-126. Then the delighted sages, having gone forth to 
meet the best of Raghus, seated him, and worshipped the highest 
soul with materials of worship etc. The best sage Kausika, being 
initiated along with the sages properly commenced the excellent 
sacrifice. When the great sacrifice proceeded, a demon named 
Marica, along with his brother Subahu, came there to create an 
obstacle. 
127-129. Seeing the two fierce demons, Rama, killer of his 
enemy's heroes, killed Subahu, the lord of demons, with one 
arrow. With a great wind-missile, he caused Marica to fall into 
the ocean as wind causes a dry leaf (to fall down). That best 
demon, seeing the great valour of Rama, put down his weapons 
and went to a great hermitage to practise penance. 
1 30-132a. Visvamitra, of great lustre, worshipped Rama 
there with a pleased mind after the great sacrifice was over. The 
best sage, having embraced the noble one who had side-locks on 
his temples, who was dark like a lotus-leaf, whose eyes were 
large like lotus-leaves, and having smelt his head, praised 
him. 
1 32b- 141. In the meanwhile, the lord of lords, king of 
Mithila commenced, with the (help of) best sages, the Vajapeya 
sacrifice. To see it all sages of auspicious hearts led by Visvami­
tra went along with best of the Raghus (to Mithila). With the 
lotus-like foot of that Rama who was going (to Mithila), the 
land was purified, and the great stone was approached. That 
Ahalya too, who was formerly cursed by her husband Gautama, 
became auspicious by the touch of Rama's foot. Then the best 
sages having reached the city of Mithila with the two descendants 
of Raghu (viz. Rama and Lak!}ma:Q.a) were delighted at heart. 
The very powerful king of Mithila having seen the illustrious ones 
to have come, went forth to meet them and honoured them. (He 
saw) Rama whose eyes were large like lotuses, who resembled a 
lotus-leaf (in complexion), who had put on a yellow garment, 
was gentle, had tender limbs and was bright, who, the excellent

=== PAGE 301 ===

one; had slighted Cupid with his handsomeness, who was endo­
wed with all (good) marks, was decorated with all ornaments, 
who, the slender ViaIJ.u, was born in the heart-lotus of the highest 
god, with the highest virtues like good character, as one lamp 
would be produced (i.e. lighted) from another. Seeing that 
Raghunatha, Janaka was delighted at heart. 
142-145a. He looked upon Rama, Dasaratha's son, just as 
the highest lord. Saying, "I am fortunate" he honoured the 
descendant of Kakutstha. He took that to be the favour ofViaIJ.U, 
Vasudeva. The lord thought to his mind to give him (in marriage) 
his daughter. Knowing the two to be sons from Raghu's family, 
the best king honoured them in accordance with Dharma with 
bright garments and ornaments. With honour like madhuparka 
he worshipped the sages. 
14Sb-148. Then at the end of the sacrifice, the lotus-eyed 
Rama broke the divine bow of Siva and won Janaka's daughter. 
The lord of Mithila, very much pleased with the great purchase­
price in the form of(Rama's) valour, gladly gave her (in marriage) 
to him, as formerly the great Ocean gave Lakami to ViaIJ.U. The 
lord of Mithila sent a messenger to (Dasaratha) the descendant 
of Raghu. The pious one entered Mithila with his two sons. 
149-153. That best descendant of Raghu stayed along with 
the delighted Vasiatha, Vamadeva, etc. in Janaka's charming 
city. The king properly honoured by king Janaka got Rama 
married to the Earth's daughter (i.e. Sita) at an auspicious time. 
The king got Urmila, Janaka's daughter, married to Lakamal).a, 
and the two daughters of good figures and having all (auspicious) 
marks, Mal).gavi and Srutakirti to Bharata and Satrughna respec­
tively. Then having completed the nuptial rites the powerful, 
happy Dasaratha surrounded by citizens and (other) subjects 
started for Ayodhya. 
1 54-1 56. Receiving the wedding present, and honoured by 
the king of Mithila, he, along with his sons, daughters-in-law, 
horses, elephants and attendants (left for Ayodhya). On their 
way, the very strong and valorous son ofJamadagni, the destroyer 
of kings, taking an axe, like an angry lion desiring to fight, ran to 
the descendant of Kakutstha. Reaching Rama, and seeing him, 
Bhargava spoke (these) words :

=== PAGE 302 ===

V1.242. 1 57-1 76 
3231 
Parasurama said: 
1 57-1 59. 0 Rama, Rama of mighty arms, listen to my words. 
Having killed many very brave kings in battles, and having given 
the land to brahmal).as I went to practise penance. Having heard 
about your valour and power, I have come to fight with you. The 
Ikavakus born in the family of my maternal grandfather are not 
to be killed by m e . Having heard (i.e. when I hear) about the 
valour of a kļatriya and his power, I cannot bear it. 
160-162. 0 prince, you broke the fierce bow of Siva difficult 
to be assailed. Therefore, 0 best of Raghus, 0 liberal one, fight 
with me. 0 you who curb your enemies, this is Vial).u's bow which 
is like that (bow of Siva). Fix (an arrow to it). Then I am vanquis­
hed (by you) with your valour. Or abandon your weapons before 
me, the powerful one. If you are afraid in your heart, then submit 
to me, 0 Kakutstha. 
The lord said: 
163-166. Kakutstha (i.e. Rama), the brave one, thus addres­
sed by Parasurama, took his bow and the power too of him 
(given to him) by ViaJJ.U. Deprived of that power, that brave 
Parasurama became powerless and lustreless like a brahmal).a 
deprived of (holy) acts. Seeing Parasurama lustreless, the best 
kings repeatedly praised Rama (with the words) : "Well (done), 
well (done)." R.ama having easily raised the bow and fixed the 
arrow to it, spoke to Parasurama, who was amazed : 
Rama said: 
167. 0 brahmal).a, what should I do to you with this best 
arrow? Do (i.e. should) I cut off this world, the nether (world) 
or heaven, or should I destroy your penance ? 
The lord said: 
168. Bhargava, seeing that very fierce arrow of Rama and 
knowing him to be the highest self, was delighted, and said to 
Rama : 
Parasurama said: 
169-176. 0 Rama, Rama of mighty arms, I did not know 
you to be the ancient (soul). Today only I knew you by means

=== PAGE 303 ===

3232 
Padma Puro1J.a 
of your virtues like valour. You are actually the first, highest 
soul. You are the highest Brahman. You are the highest, the 
immutable one. You are Ananta (the endless one), great Vig1u, 
Vasudeva, higher than the highest. You are Naraya:Q.a. You 
are the lord of Sri. You are full of the three (Vedas). You are the 
Time (or Death). You are the entire world. You yourself are the 
one called A. You are the creator, the supporter and the des­
troyer. You are the highest lord. You are inconceivable ; you are 
of the form of a great being ; you are a great hymn. You are the 
highest being having four, six, five qualities. You are the sacrifice. 
You are thevaf:ia໖kara (i.e. exclamation used on making an obla­
tion). You are the Om consisting of the three (Vedas). You 
are of a manifest and an unmanifest form. You possess qualities. 
You are qualityless and the highest one. I am unable to praise 
you who are beyond the scope of even the Vedas. 0 lord, you, 
the absolute one (should) please forgive me my rash behaviour 
towards you. Having conquered, due to your power, all princes 
and having given the earth to the brahma:Q.as, I obtain peace 
due to your favour only. 
The lord said: 
177-185. Having spoken like this, Parasurama of a great 
penance (to his credit) having gone round and saluted Rama, 
the protector of the world, offered the heaven merited by having 
performed one hundred sacrifices to that missile. Rama of a great 
lustre, then saluted the great sage. He duly worshipped him with 
water for washing his feet, materials of worship and water for 
being sipped. Parasurama, of a great penance (to his credit), 
honoured by him went to the hermitage of Nara-Naraya:Q.a, for 
practising penance. And the mighty king Dasaratha, along with 
his sons and wives, entered his own city at an auspicious moment. 
Rama, Lak!;ima:Q.a, Bharata and Satrughna, having approached 
their wives, amused themselves with their minds delighted.Rama, 
the pious one amused himself with Sita for twelve years, like 
Vi!;i:Q.U amusing himself with Lak!;ilni. At that time only king 
Dasaratha affectionately desired to bestow his kingdom upon his 
eldest son (Rama). His dear wife Kaikayi who was given (two) 
boons (by him) formerly, asked the best king for the coronation 
of Bharata and banishment of Rama for fourteen years.

=== PAGE 304 ===

Vl.242. 186-202 
3233 
1 86-188. That king, with his mind struck by grief, (and) 
due to being veracious, banished his son. Rama, the descendant 
of Kakutstha, though capable (of snatching the kingdom), right­
eously left it for him, and to (keep) the promise of his father, 
went, with Lakamal}.a and Sita, to the forest to kill Raval}.a. 
That king (Dasaratha), afflicted by the separation from his son, 
died. 
1 89-190. 
Pious Bharata, being appointed to the kingdom 
along with the ministers showing that he was a good brother, did 
not desire the kingdom. Having come to the forest, he requested 
(Rama) his brother and the descendant of Kakutstha. Rama 
who curbed his enemies, did not desire the kingdom as a result of 
his father's order. 
1 9 1-193. He gave him his own sandals. He (i.e. Bharata) too 
received them with devotion. Bharata brought Rama's auspicious 
sandals to the kingdom, and he, Kaikayi's son, everyday worship­
ped them with sandal, with flowers. And the best king, being 
engaged in the practice of penance, remained in it (i.e. the king­
dom). Till the noble Rima came (back to Ayodhya) all the citizens 
remained engaged in vows. 
1 94. Rama with Sita enjoyed himself on the mountain like 
Citrakiipi, in the holy hermitage of Bharadvaja, and the holy 
water of Mandakini. 
195-202. Sometime the magnanimous Rama was resting 
(with his head) on Sita's lap. Indra's crow came there and went 
about him. He, seeing Janaki there and being tormented by 
Cupid's arrow, tore her plump and raised breast with his sharp 
nails. King Rama, seeing the crow, took a darbha with. his hand 
and uniting it with the missile of Brahman, discharged it. The crow, 
seeing the fierce blade of grass, with its form full of flames, and 
crying with a distressed tone, ran away. Rama's very fierce missile 
followed the crow. The crow, oppressed by fear, wandered in 
the three worlds. Wherever the crow, desiring shelter, went, the 
fearful missile of Rama went after him. The crow, tormented by 
the missile and (therefore) seeking a shelter, quickly went to 
Brahma, Indra, Rudra, Yama and VaruQa. All the wise gods like 
Rudra and the demons, seeing the crow, said : "We are not able 
to protect (you)." Then Brahma, the lord of the three worlds, 
said (to the crow) :

=== PAGE 305 ===

3234 
Padma Purii{la 
Brahmii said: 
203-205. 0 best of crows, submit yourself to him only. He, 
the glorious one alone, is the ocean of pity for all. He, the lord 
of beings, endowed with qualities like good character and affec­
tionate to those who have sought his shelter, will certainly pro­
tect you. He is the father, the mother, the companion and the 
friend of the entire world. Seek the refuge of the lord of gods. 0 
bird, there is no other refuge. 
Mahiideva said: 
206-208. 
Thus addressed by Brahmii, the crow, overcome 
by fear, suddenly approached Rama and fell on the ground. 
Seeing the crow in peril of life, Sitii politely said to her lord, the 
mighty (Rama), "Protect him, protect him." The respectable 
lady Sitii put the head of the crow that had fallen before her on 
Rama's feet. 
209-21 1 . The virtuous Rama, the ocean of the nectar of pity 
and affiicted by compassion, raised him with his hand and pro­
tected him. Rama, the treasure of compassion, said to the crow : 
"Do not be afraid. I shall grant you protection from fear. Go as 
you please." He, protected by Rama, repeatedly saluted Riima 
and Sitii, and quickly went to heaven. 
2 12-213. Then Rama, along with Sita and the intelligent 
LakamaJ).a, being praised by great sages, lived on the Citrakiita 
mountain. Rama, the best of the Raghus, being worshipped on it 
by Bharadvaja, went to the very huge hermitage of Atri. 
214-2 17. The excellent pious sage, seeing the best of the 
Raghus to have come, with joy went forth with his wife to greet 
him. Having seated him, along with Sita, on a very auspicious 
and divine seat, he affectionately offered him materials of worship, 
water for washing his feet and for sipping, and various garments, 
madhuparka, so also ornaments and unction. His wife Anasiiyii. 
affectionately gave Sita divine and excellent garments and bright 
ornaments. She fed Riima with divine food, drink and eatables, 
etc. 
2 18-219. Prince Rama, along with LakamaJ).a, very devoutly 
honoured by him, lived there for a day. When it dawned, Rii.ma 
got up, took himself round the great sage, saluted him, and set 
about going.

=== PAGE 306 ===

VI.242.220-240a 
3235 
220-22 1. Permitted by him the lotus-eyed Rama went to the 
Da໡;u;laka forest thronged by great sages. There he killed the 
very fierce demon named Viradha and then entered the auspicious 
hermitage of Sarabhanga. 
222. 
He, on seeing Rama, had his sins instantly destroyed 
and went, along with gandharvas and celestial nymphs to Bra­
hmii.'s world. 
223-224. 
One by one Rama went to the hermitages of 
Sutika!)a, of Agastya, of Agastya's brother also, and was honou­
red by them. Then Rama lived very happily and for a long time 
in Paficavati, on the auspicious bank of Godavari. 
225-227. On going there the greatest sages, the religious 
ascetics, worshipped the lotus-eyed Rama, the lord of the souls. 
They acquainted him with the threat coming from the hosts of 
demons. Having comforted them, he gave them the gift of fear­
lessness. After being honoured by him they went to their own 
hermitages. Rama passed thirteen happy years there. 
228-229a. After sometime, the demoness, Rava:Q.a's uncon­
querable sister of a fierce form, entered the charming Paficavati 
on the auspicious bank of Godavari. 
229b-235a. Having seen the excellent Raghu (i.e. Rama) 
resembling a crore of Cupids, dark like lotus-leaves, having large, 
lotus-like eyes, a raised nose, large arms, a conch-like neck, and 
a large chin, resembling a red lotus, with his palms marked with 
lotuses, adorned with a row of nails like the spotless moon rese­
mbling glossy and tender diirva (grass), an auspicious treasure 
of delicacy, wearing a yellow silken garment, adorned with all 
ornaments, of the age of a youth, having a body deluding the 
world, the demoness, oppressed by Cupid's arrows, approached 
Rama having lotus-like eyes, and said to him : 
The demo ness said: 
235b-236. Who are you, dwelling in the Da:Q.9aka forest 
in the guise of an ascetic? Why have you come to (this forest) 
difficult to be approached (even) by demons? Quickly tell the 
truth. (Please) do not tell a lie. 
M ahdvara said: 
237-240a. That Rama, thus addressed, laughed and said :

=== PAGE 307 ===

3236 
Padma Puriir)a 
Riima said: 
I am king DaSa.ratha's son, called Riima. This archer is my 
innocent younger brother, LakļmaQa. This is my dear wife Sitii, 
Janaka's daughter. By my father's order I have come to this for­
est. With a desire to do good to the sages, we are roaming in 
this great forest. 0 beautiful lady, why have you come to my 
hermitage? Who are you? In whose family are you born ? Tell 
me the whole truth. 
Mahe§vara said: 
240b. Thus addressed by Riima, she said fearlessly : 
The demoness said: 
241-24Sa. 0 king, I am the daughter of Visravas and the 
sister of Riiva:r;ta. I am SiirpaQakhii by name, and am well-known 
in the three worlds. 0 lord, this Da:r;tQaka forest is given to me 
by my brother. Eating groups of sages I roam in the great forest. 
Seeing you, an excellent sage, I, tormented by Cupid's arrows, 
and being very fearless, have come (here) with a desire to dally 
with you. 0 best king, please be my husband. 0 king, I desire to 
devour this Sitii (wife) of you. With you I shall dally in the 
forest with prominent mountains. 
Mahe8vara said: 
24Sb-252a. Seeing the demoness, after having spoken like 
this, ready to devour Sitii, Sri Riima raised his sword and cut off 
her nose and ears. The demoness, with her face deformed, and 
weeping with fear, entered Khara's house, and told him Riima's 
act. He, the killer of his enemies, surrounded by thousands of 
demons, and with Dii໗:r;ta and Trisiras, came to fight violently 
with Riima. Riima easily killed those demons of huge bodies in 
the fearful forest with arrows resembling Death (i.e. with fatal 
arrows). With arrows resembling serpents he knocked down in 
the battle Khara, Trisiras and the very powerful DiiaaQa. Having 
killed all the demons living in the DaQQaka forest, and worship­
ped by hosts of gods and praised by great sages, (Riima) lived in 
DaQQaka forest with Sitii and LakamaQa. 
252b-25Sa. Learning about the murder of the demons, 
RiivaQa, rendered violent with anger, came along with the wicked

=== PAGE 308 ===

Vl.242.255b-270 
3237 
Marica to Janasthana. That demon Raval}.a came to Pa.ii.cavati 
with Marica of an illusory deer-form, and when Dasaratha's sons 
were away from the hermitage he, desiring his own murder, 
kidnapped Sita, the wife of Rama. 
255b-257a. 
The pow.:rful Jatayu, the king of vultures, seeing 
her being kidnapped, fought due to his affection for Rama with 
the demon. Raval}.a who resisted his enemies, killed him with the 
strength of his arms and entered the city of Lanka. 
257b-261. Having kept Sita in the Asoka-grove he, desiring 
death by Rama's arrow, entered his house. And Rama having 
killed the demon Marica who had taken up the form of a deer, 
again came there (i.e. to his hermitage) with his brother LakamaQa. 
Coming to know that Sita was kidnapped by a demon, the very 
intelligent son of Dasaratha, being tormented by great grief, 
lamented. Looking for Sita in the forest, he, on his way seeing a 
very mighty vulture fallen on the ground with his feet and wings 
cut off and with his entire body full ofblood, was amazed. 
262a. The glorious Rama asked him : "Who desired to kill 
you and why?" 
262b. 
The vulture, on seeing Rama, very gently spoke : 
The vulture said: 
263. 
0 Rama, the mighty Raval}.a has kidnapped your wife. 
He, the chief of the demons, struck me in the battle. 
Mahdvara $aid: 
264-266. 
Having spoken like this, he suddenly cast his life 
before Rama. Rama performed his obsequies according to the 
Vedic precepts. And he gave him his own eternal abode, fit to be 
reached by meditating saints. The best bird, the vulture, attained 
salvation, the fiˆ position due to the common form of Vial}.u. 
Then Rama went to Malyavat (mountain), to the auspicious 
hermitage of Mataftga. 
267-270. He went to the pious, glorious g:bari. That best 
among ViaQu's devotees, seeing Rii.ma and LakamaQa, went forth 
to greet them. Having saluted and seated them on a seat of dar­
bhas, she washed their feet. With her mind full of joy she devoutJy 
worshipped them with fragrant wild flowers. She, of a firm vow, 
then offered the two descendants of Raghu (viz. Rama and Lakļ-

=== PAGE 309 ===

Padma Purii!J(l 
maQ.a) fragrant fruits and sweet roots. (Rama,) the descendant of 
Kakutstha, gave her the highest liberation. 
271-273. 
Then Rama, killer of his enemies, having gone to 
the Pampa lake killed there the demon Kabandha of a fierce 
form. The very vigorous one, having killed him, burnt him. (Then) 
he (i.e. Kabandha) went to heaven. Then the lotus-eyed Rama, 
having gone to Godavari, asked her, ''0 Ganga, do you know 
my dear (wife) Sita ?" That Ganga, covered with ignorance, did 
not tell him (anything). 
274-275. Rama angrily cursed her : "Be of red water." Then 
being dejected she through fear, led by great sages, and being 
helpless and with the palms of her hands joined sought Rama's 
refuge. Then all great sages said to the eternal Rama : 
The sages said: 
276. Ganga, purifying the three worlds, has risen from your 
lotus-like feet. 0 lord of the world, you alone can free her from 
the curse. 
Mahe§vara said: 
277a. Then the pious Rama, affectionate to those who seek 
his shelter, said : 
Riima said: 
277bc. 
May this Ganga, destroying sins, be free from my 
<:urse merely by Sabari's bath and united with auspicious 
water. 
278-279. Speaking like this, the very powerful Rama made, 
with the tip of his Sarnga bow, the Sabari-tirtha like Ganga and 
Gaya. In its water was the holy place of great d໘votees of ViٸQ.u. 
"Undoubtedly that form becomes venerable to the world." 
280-282a. Speaking like this the descendant of Kakutstha 
went to ໙ayamiika mountain. Then on the bank of Pampa 
lake he was joined by the monkey Haniimat. At his words (i.e. 
request) he came in contact with Sugriva. At the words (i.e. 
request) of Sugriva, Rama, having bound Valin, the lord of mon­
keys, consecrated Sugriva on that kingdom. 
282b-287. 
And the lord of monkeys desiring to find out

=== PAGE 310 ===

VI.242.288-306 
3239 
Sita, sent heroes like Haniimat. Haniimat, the son of Wind, ente­
red the city of Lanka and saw (there) the helpless Sita emacia­
ted due to fasting and being very much grieved, with her body 
·smeared with dirt and mud, and wearing a dirty garment. The 
monkey, having shown her the token of recognition and having 
told her the news (about Rama), having killed seven sons of the 
ministers, so also Ravat;.a's son, after having uprooted the pillar 
of th.e gateway, and having cheered up Sita, destroyed the grove, 
the garden-keepers, the servants and the chief leaders of the 
.army. 
288-291 . By chance he was arrested by Ravat;.a's son. Seeing 
the lord of demons and having also talked to him, the monkey 
burnt the city of Lanka with the fire from his (burning) tail. 
Having taken the token of recognition given by her (i.e. Sita) he 
.again came (back to Rama). The very lustrous chief of monkeys, 
approached the lotus-eyed Rama and reported to him that he 
had actually seen Sita. Rama, with Sugriva, and surrounded by 
many monkeys, went to the shore of the great ocean, and kept 
his army there. 
292-294. Ravat;.a's younger brother called Bibhiٺ?a:Q.a, who 
was pious, veracious, and best among the great devotees of Viٺ?QU, 
knowing Rama to have arrived, abandoned his elder brother 
(Rava:Q.a), so also the kingdom, sons, wife, and submitted himself 
to Rama. At the words of Haniimat the lord accepted him, and 
granting protection to the gentle one, consecrated him on the 
kingdom (i.e. the throne) of the demons. 
295-297. Then Rama, the descendant of Kakutstha, desiring 
to cross the ocean, approached him, and he, the mighty one, 
seeing the very clean water, took up the Saniga bow and dried 
up the ocean with volleys of arrows. Then the ocean, the lord of 
rivers, yielded himself to the descendant of Kakutstha (i.e. Rama), 
the treasure of pity. Then Rama again filled the ocean with the 
VarUI:,ta missile. 
298-299. Then on the ocean, the abode of alligators, Nala 
constructed a bridge with rocks brought by the monkeys. Then 
the great army entered the city of Lanka, and a great battle bet­
ween the monkeys and the demons was fought. 
300-306. Then Ravat;.a's very mighty son Indrajit bound 
both Riima and Lak11mat;J.a with magical nooses (literally, serpent-

=== PAGE 311 ===

3240 
Padma Purii!Ja 
nooses). Garu<;la, having come (there), let loose the nooses. The 
very powerful monkeys killed all the demons. In the battle Rama 
killed Rava:Q.a's younger brother, the very strong Kumbhakar:Q.a, 
with arrows resembling flames of fire. With the missile presided 
over by Brahma the angry Indrajit knocked down the monkeys. 
The mountain having great herbs was brought by Haniimat. And 
all got up (alive) by the touch of it that was brought. Then 
Rama's brave younger brother (i.e. LakamaJJ.a), knocked down 
with arrows Indra's co:1queror (i.e. Indrajit) as Indra did Vrtra. 
The very strong Raval)a set out with his complete army and 
ministers to fight with Rama on the battlefield. The battle bet­
ween the monkeys and demons took place on all sides. 
307-321 . A battle took place between Rama and RavaJJ.a ; 
so also with LakamaJJ.a. The lord of demons knocked down­
LakamaJJ.a with (the missile called) S:tkti. Then the angry Rama. 
of great lustre and the destroyer of the demons, killed the demon 
soldiers with arrows resembling Yama, the god of death, and 
destroying eveything. Rama very much covered the demon Rava­
JJ.a with thousands of blazing arrows resembling the rod of(Yama. 
the god of) Death. The demon, with his entire body pierced with 
missiles of Rama, fled through fear from the battlefield to 
Lanka. Seeing the world full of Rama, he entered his house 
through dejection. Then Haniimat brought the great mountain 
with great herbs. Due to that Rama's younger brother regained 
consciousness. Then with a desire for victory Raval)a commenced 
a sacrifice. The chief monkeys then destroyed it of a magical 
form. Then Rava1}.a again set out, after getting into a divine 
chariot and along with many demons, to fight with Rama. Then 
the intelligent Indra sent to Rama a divine chariot, yoked with 
bay horses and with a charioteer. The best of the Raghus, having 
got into the chariot brought by Matalin (lndra's charioteer), and 
being praised by hosts of gods, fought with that demon. Then a 
great, very fierce battle, with weapons and missiles took place 
day and night for a week between Rama and Rava:Q.a. All the 
go::ls, remaining in aeroplanes, witnessed the battle. The best of 
the Raghus cut off the heads of Rava1}.a, which many times 
sprang up due to the boon of Siva. Rama quickly discharged a 
very fierce missile sacred to Brahma and resembling the fire at 
the time of the deluge to kill the wicked one. That missile, dis-

=== PAGE 312 ===

VI.242.322-339 
3241 
charged by Rii.ghava, tore Ravru;ta's chest, pierced the earth and 
went to the nether world, and being honoured by serpents (again) 
came back to Rama's hand. That great demon losing his life, 
fell down and died. 
322-325. Then all the hosts of gods with their minds full of 
joy, dropped showers of flowers on the noble lord of the world. 
The chiefs of gandharvas sang (his praise) and bevies of celestial 
nymphs danced. So also auspicious breezes blew, and the sun 
was very bright. Sages, siddhas, gods and kinnaras praised (him) . 
The best of the Raghu-family consecrated the greatest demon 
Bibhiaat;.a on the throne of Laitkii., and looked upon himself as 
having accomplished his object. Having consecrated Bibhiaat;.a 
Rii.ma then said these words to Bibhiaat;.a : 
Riima said: 
326-327. As long as the moon and the sun exist, as long as 
the earth exists, as long as my account exists, the kingdom (of 
Laitkii.) will rest with Bibhiaat:ta. Being very powerful, reach, 
along with the host of your sons and grandsons, my divine, 
ancient abode accessible to meditating saints. 
The lord said: 
328-330. The very mighty one, Rii.ma, having thus given a 
boon to the demon and having approached Sitii., spoke many harsh 
and censurable words to her in the assembly of people. The chaste 
lady much censured by him entered fire. Then all the hosts of 
gods led by Siva, Brahmii., seeing the mother (i.e. Sitii.) entering 
fire, were affticted by fear, and approaching the greatest of 
Raghus, said, with their palms joined, to him : 
Gods said: 
331-339. 0 Rii.ma, Rii.ma, 0 you of large arms and of a great 
valour, listen. Sitii. is extremely pure. She never violates your 
norms of conduct. You should not abandon her wrongly, as the 
sun does not give up his light. She is the mother of the entire 
world, and is support of the whole world. Rii.vat;.a and Kumbha­
kart;.a were your former highly devoted servants. Due to the 
curse of Sanaka etc. they were born on the earth. For their 
liberation Sitii. was seized (by Rii.vat;.a) in the Dat;.c;laka forest.

=== PAGE 313 ===

3242 
Padma PuriilJa 
The two pre-eminent demons were killed by you. They are (now) 
liberated, and with their sons, grandsons and followers have 
gone to heaven. You are ViᕥJ;,lu ; you are the highest Brahman ; 
you are the ancient one meditated upon by the meditating 
saints. You alone, of all gods, are the immutable (god) without 
a beginning or an end. You are the glorious NarayaJ;,la. Sita is the 
ancient Lakᕥmi. She is the mother of all the worlds. You, 0 
highest lord, are the father. This mother of the world is eternal 
and shall never abandon you. 0 best of the Raghus, as you are 
omnipresent, so also she is. Therefore, 0 you descendant of 
Kakutstha, 0 you gentle one, accept this chaste Sita of a good 
conduct and a strong vow, as (Lakᕥmi) from the Milky Ocean. 
The lord said: 
340. In the meanwhile Fire, the observer of the world, 
brought Sita there, and handed her over to Rama in the vicinity 
(i.e. the presence) of gods. Fire, present in all bodies, then said 
to the descendant of Kakutstha : 
Fire said: 
341 . 0 lord, this Sita is of a good conduct and is sinless. 0 
Rama, accept her quickly. I have told you the truth. 
The lord said: 
342-343. Then Rama, the descendant of Raghu, having 
accepted Sita at the words of Fire, (and) being worshipped by 
the best gods, was pleased. Those excellent monkeys who were 
killed in the battle by the demons, came back to life and got up 
due to the boon of the grandsire. 
344-347. Then (BibhiᕦaJ;,la,) the lord of demons gave Rama 
the aeroplane named Puᕥpaka which resembled the sun, which 
belonged to Kubera, and which was seized (from Kubera) by his 
brother (RavaJ;,la). He (also) gave Rama garments and ornaments. 
The brave, glorious Rama, Dasaratha's son, honoured by him 
got into the excellent aeroplane along with Sita and his brave 
brother LakᕦmaJ;,la, so also along with the hosts of bears and 
monkeys, the noble Sugriva, the brave BibhiᕥaJ;,la, and the very 
mighty demons. 
348-352a. All the bears, monkeys and demons got into the

=== PAGE 314 ===

Vl.242.352b-368a 
3243 
aeroplane and the ever-liberated noble ones got into an aeroplane 
of Vaikm;ttha. Rama, being praised by best gods, proceeded to 
Ayodhya. Rama of a genuine valour went to Bharadvaja's 
hermitage, and sent Ham1mat near Bharata. The best monkey 
having gone to the fisherman's house, saw Guha, a devotee of 
Viᕧ:Q.u, and told him about Rama's arrival. Then from there he 
went to Nandigrama, saw Rama's younger brother and told him 
about the joyous occasion of Rama's arrival. 
352b-357. Having learnt from the monkey (i.e. Hanfi.mat) 
about the arrival of Rama, Bharata, along with his younger 
brother and friends, obtained incomparable joy. Having again 
come back to Rama, Hanfi.mat, the son of Wind, told all that 
Bharata did. Rama also along with his younger brother got down 
from the best aeroplane and saluted with his wife Bharadvaja, 
the treasure of penance. The sage honoured the descendant of 
Kakutstha along with his younger brother by (offering him) 
cooked food, fruits, roots etc. and garments and ornaments. 
Honoured by him, Rama saluted the best sage, and permitted 
by him, again, along with his followers, and surrounded by his 
friends went to Nandigrama in the Puᕨpaka (aeroplane). 
358-361. Kekayi's son (Bharata) with his younger brother 
and along with his ministers and chief citizens, so also strong 
best kings, gladly went forth to greet his elder brother (Rama). 
Approaching the best of Raghus, he, surrounded by his followers, 
saluted him. Rama, the tormentor of his enemies, got down from 
the Puᕩpaka aeroplane, and embraced Bharata and Satrughna. 
The very lustrous one, along with Sita and Lakᕩma:Q.a, saluted 
his family priest VasiHha, and relatives like his old mothers. 
362-368a. Bharata embraced Bibhiᕩa:Q.a, Sugriva, Jamba­
vanta, so also Aiigada, Hanfi.mat and Suᕨe:Q.a. After an auspici­
ous bath along with his brother and attendants, he, having 
divine flowers and garments and smeared with divine sandal 
and being praised by gods, Sita and Lakᕩma:Q.a, got into a divine 
auspicious chariot occupied by Sumanta. Bharata, Sugriva, 
Satrughna rand BibhiᕪQa, Aiigada and Suᕥe:Q.a, Jambavat, 
Hanfi.mat, Nna, Nala, Subhaga, Sarabha, Gandhamadana and 
other brave monkeys, so also Guha, the lord of the Niᕩadas, 
very brave demons and very powerful greatest kings, mounted 
many auspicious elephants and horses.

=== PAGE 315 ===

3244 
Padma PuriilJ(l 
368b-369. 
The highly lustrous one entered the indestructi­
ble city of Saketa to the accompaniment of many auspicious 
musical instruments, many eulogies, and along with bears, mon­
keys, demons and excellent warriors of Niᕥadas (i.e. fishermen). 
Prince Rama, on seeing the capital, and thinking only of his 
father king (Dasaratha) on the way, entered the house purified 
by the movements of the meritorious feet of Sugriva, Maruti 
and Bibhiᕥal}.a. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED FORTYTHREE 
Riima's Consecration 
Sankara said: 
1-17a. On that ausptctous day at an auspicious moment 
people performed auspicious acts for the consecration of the 
pious one. These sages-Vasiᕥtha, Vamadeva, Jabali, and Kas­
yapa, Markat;.u;leya, Maudgalya, Parvata, so also Narada, per­
formed the auspicious consecration of the best king there with 
muttering of hymns and sacrifices. Having seated Rama along 
with Sita on an auspicious golden seat full of (i.e. decked with) 
jewels, as Viᕥl}.u with Lakᕥmi, the sages who had fulfilled their 
vows, muttered the auspicious Vedic hymns in honour of Viᕥl}.U 
and consecrated the descendant of Kakutstha and the lord of the 
world with pure water which was purified with hymns, was 
(brought) from all holy places, was holy, which had auspicious 
substances in it, was furnished with tips of diirva grass, tulasi­
leaves, flowers and sandal. At that most auspicious moment 
gods beat drums in heaven and dropped showers of flowers from 
all sides. With his queen (Sita) the descendant of Raghu adorned 
with divine garments, ornaments, divine sandal and unguents 
and with various kinds of flowers looked superb in the company 
of the sages, the masters of the Vedas. At that time Lakᕥmal}.a 
held the divine umbrella and chowrie. By his side(s) Bharata and 
Satrughna stood brilliantly with fans. Bibhiᕫal}.a, the lord of 
demons, gave him the mirror. Sugriva, the lord of the monkeys, 
held a pitcher full (of water), and the very lustrous Jambavat

=== PAGE 316 ===

VI.243. 17b-30 
3245 
(held) a charming garland of flowers. Valin's son gave Rama a 
tambiila with camphor. Huniimat (held) many divine lamps, and 
Suᕥel}.a (held) an auspicious flag. The ministers, surrounding the 
noble one, waited upon him. SrHi, Jayanta, Vijaya, Sauraᕥtra, 
Raᕥtravardhana, Akopa, Dharmapala, and Sumantra are said to 
be (his) ministers. Kings, best men, lords of various countries, 
citizens, traders, old men waited upon the king. He was sur­
rounded by bears, chief monkeys, ministers, kings, demons, 
principal brahmal}.as and servants. 
17b-23. As the lord of Lakᕥmi completely united with dei­
ties in the highest heaven (shines), similarly the best glorious king 
then shone in Saketa. The hosts of gods seated in aeroplanes and 
with their minds full of joy, so also gandharvas and hosts of the 
celestial nymphs, praised with shouts of victory the descendant 
of Kakutstha, the best of the Raghus, whose hands reached his 
knees, who had worn a yellow garment, whose neck was like a 
conch, whose chest was large, who had (put on) beautiful orna­
ments, who was seated with queen (Sita), and who was consecra­
ted. Then Rama, consecrated by great sages like Vasiᕥtha. shone 
with Sita like god ViᕥJ}.U with Lakᕥmi. Siva afraid due to R.ama's 
being a great mortal, of waiting on his lotus-like feet, seeing 
Rama was pleased and with delight praised him. He folded the 
palms of his hands, was full of joy, and had a faltering (voice). 
He delighted all gods, sages and monkeys also. 
Mahadeva said: 
24-30. 
Salutation to the original source, to the eternal high­
est soul, to the one having the nature of existence, consciousness 
and bliss, to the one identical with the universe, to the creator. 
Salutation to ViᕥJ}.u the bulb, the root of continuous joy, to the 
form delighting the three worlds ; salutation to the one venerable 
to Brahma and Indra, to one bringing about the welfare and 
giving protection from fear. Salutation to the one of the form of 
ViᕦJ}.u. 0 you of the form of everything, salutation to you. Salu­
tation to (you) the cause of creation, sustenance and destruction 
(of the world), to (you) of three qualities, to you of the form 
having no limitation, to the great soul. (Salutation to you) causing 
Nescience in the form of this goddess Sita as a limiting adjunct. 
Salutation to both of you, the Puruᕥa {the soul) and the Prakrti

=== PAGE 317 ===

3246 
Padma PuriiΪa 
(the primordial matter), the author of the worlds. Salutation to 
the mother and the father of the world, to the mother (Sita) and 
to Raghava (i.e. Rama). Salutation to you, of the form of visible 
world, and of the form without the visible world. Salutation to 
you, of the form of meditation, to the form of the Supreme Soul 
fit to be meditated upon by the meditating saints. Salutation to 
both of you devoid of change and no-change. 
31-40. Salutation to you the supreme soul, of the form of 
the seed, to Sita and to Rama. Sita is Lakᕨmi ; you are Vigm. 
Sita is Parvati ; you are Siva. Sita herself is Savitri ; you are the 
four-faced Brahma. Sita is IndraQi ; you are Indra. Sita is Svaha 
(the oblation made to all gods) ; you are Fire. Sita is the destruc­
tive goddess ; you are of the form ofYama. Sita is all wealth ; you 
are Kubera, 0 best of Raghus. Sita is goddess RudriiQi ; you are 
very strong Rudra. Sita is goddess RohiQi ; you are the Moon 
giving pleasure to the world. Sita is Sa:rl:lji'ia ; you are the Sun. 
Sita is the Night ; you are the Day. Sita is goddess Mahiikali. 
You always are Mahiikiila. In the three worlds whatever is of the 
feminine gender is Sita. Whatever is marked with the masculine 
gender is you, 0 lord. 0 lord of all gods, Sita is the supporter 
everywhere. Then you are also there to protect. Her power sus­
tains the universe. Therefore, the merit marked (acquired?) by 
you two is a crore-fold. Your deeds marked (described?) by Siva 
and Sakti, give peace. 0 Riima, we two are venerable to the 
world. You two are always venerable to us. Gauri mutters your 
name. I mutter your formula. To one desiring to die at MaQi­
kal'lJ.ikii and remaining in half of its water I give your emancipat­
ing formula, giving (i.e. leading to) Brahman. 
41. Therefore, 0 lord ofJanaki, you are certainly the high­
est Brahman. All deluded by you do not know you truly. 
The lord said: 
42-50. Thus addressed by Sambhu, Rama who had assum­
ed a divine form and was of a wonderful appearance, became 
disposed to favour. Seeing him of that form, men, monkeys and 
deities were not able even to see that lustrous, great, wonderful 
(form). The best gods, through fear saluted him devoutly. Rama, 
realising that men, monkeys and deities were frightened, took up 
the illusory human form and again spoke to the gods :

=== PAGE 318 ===

VI.243.51-VI.244.6 
J247 
Ramacandra said: 
0 gods, listen. That man who will everyday praise me with the 
hymn told by Siva, will be equal to a god. Freed from all sins he 
obtains my nature. In a battle he gets victory and is never re­
pulsed. He is not tormented by ghosts, vampires and female 
deities to whom sacrifices are offered for destructive and magical 
purposes. A sonless man obtains a son. A maiden gets a husband. 
A poor man obtains wealth and would become virtuous and of 
good disposition. The glorious one has the power equal to that 
of the (highest) soul. There is no doubt about it. In all acts and 
undertakings men have no obstacle. Whatever desire, difficult to 
be fulfilled, is entertained by a man is satisfied within six months 
due to the grace of this eulogy. By means of this hymn is obtain­
ed the fruit a crore times more than the religious merit obtained 
in all holy places and all sacrifices. 
The lord said: 
51-53. Speaking like this Ramacandra dismissed Mahesvara. 
He (also) dismissed all gods like Brahma that had come there. 
Ramacandra honoured all men and dismissed with affection all 
men, monkeys and deities full of love. All of them thus dismis­
sed by him, went very much delighted, reciting the great hymn 
uttered by the lord and remembering Rama of a universal form. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED FORTYFOUR 
Rlima Goes to Heaven 
Sankara said: 
1-6. Rama enjoyed with Sita royal pleasures as desired 
while protecting directions on all sides for a thousand years. All 
inmates of the harem, so also the citizens, censured Sita who had 
stayed in the demon's house. Rama who warded off his enemies. 
through fear of public scandal, and exhibiting human behaviour, 
abandoned the princess (Sita) who was pregnant, in the assembly 
of sages in Valmiki's holy hermitage in a large forest on the bank

=== PAGE 319 ===

of Gatigii. Dependent upon her husband she stayed in the sage's 
house. Taken care of by the sage Valmiki, she was honoured by 
sages' wives. There only she gave birth to twin sons named KuSa 
and Lava. Educated and trained by the sage they grew there only. 
7-13a. Rama too, along with his brothers, protected the 
earth. He, the king, endowed with virtues like restraint, and free 
from all enjoyments, always worshipping ViᕥlJU having no beginᕬ 
ning or end, and highly devoted to celibacy, ruled over the earth. 
gatrughna, the righteous descendant of Raghu, having killed 
Lava)Ja, ruled, along with his two sons, over Mathura created by 
gods. Bharata, having killed gandharvas on both the sides of 
Sindhu, installed his two very mighty sons in that country. The 
very powerful Lakᕥma]Ja, having killed the Madras in the west­
ern Madra country, consecrated his two brave sons, and again 
going back to Ayodhyii, touched Rama's feet. (Rama,) the des­
cendant of Kakutstha brought back to life the son of a brah­
mal}.a that had met death, and then killed a siidra ascetic. 
13b-17. Then Riima, the killer of his enemy's heroes per­
formed a horse-sacrifice in the Naimiᕥa (forest) in the assembly 
of people on the bank of Gautami. Raghava, knowing the high­
est truth, fashioned a golden (image of) Janaki, and with that 
the very mighty one performed many sacrifices. The lord perform­
ed various sacrifices, complete with presents, like myriads of 
horse-sacrifices, Vajapeya sacrifices, Agniᕥtoma, Visvajit, Go­
medha and Satakratu. In the meanwhile, Valmiki of a very great 
(i.e. severe) penance (to his credit) brought Sita there, and said 
these words to Rama : 
Valmiki said: 
18. 0 you of a good vow, you do not deserve to abandon 
(i.e. please do not abandon) sinless Sitii. This chaste one is free 
from passion and is like light to the sun. 0 descendant of Kakut­
stha, she is identical with you. 0 sinless one, why did you aban­
don her'? 
Rama said: 
19-22. 
0 brahmal}.a, from your words I understand that 
Sita is sinless. The chaste lady was former]y kidnapped by 
RavaQa in the secluded Dal}.c;laka (forest). Having killed him in

=== PAGE 320 ===

¥1.244.23-36 
3249 
battle, and having properly taken Sita who was purified and who 
came out of Agni's mouth, I came to Ayodhya (again). There 
was a great public scandal among the citizens. Being afraid of it 
I abandoned her of a good conduct, near you. Therefore, for 
satisfying the people, Sita who is highly devoted to me, must 
convince the kings and great sages (of her innocence). 
Mahesvara said: 
23-24. 
Thus addressed the chaste Sitii put forward a proof 
amazing the people in the assembly of sages and kings. Showing 
those people her sole devotion to Rama, the chaste Sitii, with 
the palms of her hands folded, said in the assembly of all 
(people) : 
Sitii said: 
25-26. 
Since I have not thought of anyone except Riima, 
may goddess Earth give me a cavity. Since I spoke the truth 
that I do not know anyone else but Riima, Dhara:Q.i (i.e. the 
Earth) would at once come to her daughter Vaidehi. 
Mahesvara said: 
27-32. Then the lord of birds, the hero, knowing the mother 
(had come) from below the earth, held a seat full of jewels. Then 
goddess Dhara:Q.i, holding Sita with both her hands, greeted her 
with a welcome, and seated her on the seat. Seeing her seated on 
the seat, the hosts of gods in heaven profusely and continuously 
scattered a shower of flowers on divine Sita. She too, the ancient 
one, being honoured by divine damsels mounted on Garulja, and 
went to heaven by that path. On her front the goddess of the 
world was surrounded by hosts of maids. She reached the highest 
ancient abode, accessible to the meditating saints. Seeing her 
entering the lower world, all men shouted loudly: "Well (done), 
well (done), This is Sitii." 
33-36. Riima, overcome by grief, took both his sons and 
along with sages and best kings entered Saketa. Then after a 
long time, (Riima's) mothers who had fulfilled their vows, died 
and went to the heaven of their husband (i.e. to the heaven where 
Dasaratha had gone). Rama who had fulfilled his vows righte­
ously, ruled over the kingdom for ten thousand and ten hundred

=== PAGE 321 ===

years. Sometime the god of death came to Rama's abode in the 
guise of an ascetic and spoke (these) words : 
Death (Kiila) said: 
37-38. 0 R.ama, Rama, 0 you of large arms, I am sent by 
the Creator. 0 best of Raghus, 0 very intelligent one, listen to 
what I say. We shall carry on a conversation (lit. wordy duel). He 
who enters in between (i.e. disturbs us) will merit death. 
Mahesvara said: 
39. Promising him with the words "All right" the lotus­
eyed R.ama placed LakᕥmaJ)a at the door. Then Death spoke 
(these) words : Yama (Death) spoke to Rama, Dasaratha's son : 
Kiila (Death) said: 
40-42. 
0 Rama, listen to what led to my arrival. You des­
cended on the mortal world, saying, after having killed the two 
best demons : "I would live in the mortal world for ten thousand 
and ten hundred years." Thus (also) told by the hosts of gods 
(you have stayed for that much period). Now the time for you to 
go (back) to heaven has come. 0 sinless one, let the gods today 
have the lord in you. 
Mahesvara said: 
43. To the great sage R.ama said, "Let it be so". In the 
meanwhile the great ascetic Durvasas came to the gate of the 
royal palace and spoke (these) words to LakᕥmaJ}.a : 
Durviisas said: 
44. 0 prince, 0 descendant of Kakutstha, go quickly and 
report to Rama (about the arrival of) me. 
Mahesvara said: 
45. To him LakᕭmaJ)a said : "0 brahmaJ)a, (R.ama has 
ordered that) no person should be allowed near (him)." Then the 
best sage overcome by anger said :

=== PAGE 322 ===

VI.244.46a-59 
3251 
Durvasas said: 
46a. I shall pronounce a curse if you do not present me to 
Rama, the descendant of Kakutstha. 
Mahesvara said: 
46b-53. Due to the fear of the curse (LakᕥmaJ:ta) reported 
to Riima (the arrival of) the sage. There only Death causing 
fear to all beings vanished. The king worshipped sage Durviisas 
that had come (there). That best Raghu, LakᕥmaJ:ta, knowing 
that promise of his elder brother, gave up his human form 
in the water of Sarayii. Giving up the human form he entered 
his own body. He having a thousand hoods, and having a 
lustre of a crore of moons, having divine flowers and garments, 
smeared with divine sandal, surrounded by thousands of serpent­
damsels, well-adorned, having got into a divine aeroplane, went 
to the abode .of Viᕥ:Q.u. The best Raghu Kiikutstha (i.e. Riima) 
knowing LakᕥmaJ:ta's going to heaven, also desired to go to hea­
ven. Then Riima, having consecrated his sons Kusa and Lava, 
having divided wealth along with chariots, elephants and horses 
gave it to them. The best of Raghus installed righteously on his 
kingdom (i.e. throne) Kusa at Kusavati and Lava at Sarasvati. 
54-58. Knowing the intention of Rama who had realised his 
soul all the very powerful monkeys and demons came there. 
(They were) Bibhiᕥa:Q.a, Sugriva, Jiimbavat, (Maruti) the Wind's 
son, Nila, Nala, SuᕭeJ:ta, and Guha, the lord of the Niᕥiidas. 
Satrughna also consecrated his brave sons as kings, and all of 
them came to Ayodhyii protected by Rama. Having saluted the 
noble one, with their palms joined they said to him : 
The monkeys and others said: 
0 best of the Raghus, having come to know that you are 
ready to go to heaven, we have come (here) to follow you. 0 lord, 
0 Rama, we cannot live without you (even) for a moment. There­
fore, 0 large-eyed one, with you we shall go to the abode of gods. 
Mahesvara said: 
59. 
Thus addressed by them the descendant of Kakutstha 
said : "All right." Then the very lustrous one said to BibhiᕥaJ:ta, 
the lord of demons :

=== PAGE 323 ===

3252 
Padma Puriil)a 
Riima said: 
60. 
Rule over your kingdom righteously. Do not falsify 
your promise. Being well pleased enjoy as long as the moon, the 
sun and the earth remain. Then at the (proper) time come to my 
place. 
M ahdvara said: 
61-62. 
Speaking like this the lotus-eyed R.ama affectionately 
gave to him his ancient (image of) Vi!?:Q.U, gentle and lying (on 
Se!?a) and the family deity of the lk!?vakus . To Hanfimat Rama. 
the killer of his enemies, said : 
Riima said; 
63. 
0 lord of monkeys, as long as my stories go on (being 
narrated) on the earth, remain on the earth. At the (proper) time. 
0 you of a good vow, .go to me. 
Mahesvara said: 
64a. 
Speaking like this to him, Rama said to Jambavat : 
Riima said: 
64b-65. When Dvapara (age) will come, I shall again be 
born on the earth in the family of Yadus for destroying the bur­
den of the earth. 0 best of bears, !shall (then) fight with you. 
Mahdvara said: 
66-72. The very powerful Rii.ma, the descendant of Kakut­
stha, having thus spoken to him, said to all the bears and mon­
keys (these words) : "(Please) go." Ministers, traders, Bharata, 
the son of Kaikayi, determined to follow Rama, came (there). 
Then the celibate, wearing white garments, went to the Supreme 
Spirit. Holding kusas in his hands the restrained one went to 
the Supreme Spirit. To Rama's right side was Rama (i.e. Lak­
!?mi) with a lotus in her hand. Similarly to the side other than the 
right (i.e. to the left side) was goddess Dhara:Q.i (i.e. the earth). 0 
Parvati, in the same way Vedas with the Vedangas, Pura:Q.as with 
Itihasas, Omkara, Va!?atkara, so also Savitripurifying the world, 
followed Rama. Missiles, weapons like bows etc., all having male

=== PAGE 324 ===

Vl.244. 73-91 
3253 
bodies followed Rama. Bharata and Satrughna, so also all citizens 
with their sons, wives and attendants went after Rama. 
73-78. Ministers, hosts of attendants, servants, traders, so 
also monkeys, bears along with Sugriva and with their sons, 
wives went after the very intelligent descendant of Kakutstha. 
Beasts and birds, so also all immobile and mobile objects went 
after the noble one. So also the best men who saw the descendant 
of Kakutstha going to heaven. They who thus followed Rama , 
did not return. Then having gone over three yojanas he saw 
Sl.rayii on the western side. With his followers he entered Sarayii 
of auspicious water. Then Brahma, the grandsire, surrounded by 
hosts of all gods, and along with sages praised the best among 
Raghus with (suitable) words. He said to Rama who had entered 
the water of the Sarayii (river) : 
Brahma said: 
79-81 . 0 ViᕥJ}.u, come, prosperity to you. 0 you who 
honour (others), you have luckily come (here). With your brothers. 
lustrous like gods, enter your own body ofViᕥJ}.u, which is very 
bright, divine and ancient. 0 god, you are the refuge of the 
world ; only few do not take cognizance of you who are inconceiv­
able, noble, immutable, and comprising everything. 0 you of 
great lustre, enter that body which you desire (to enter). 
Mahesvara said: 
82-91 . When he was full of the sun's rays, and when show­
ers of flowers were dropped on him, he abandoned the human 
form and entered his own body. Both the noble Satrughna and 
Bharata, endowed with divine lustre, were with him with the 
conch and the disc, his portions. He, the four-armed one, who­
had a conch, a disc, a mace, and the Sar.tiga (bow) in his hands, 
who was possessed of divine ornaments, who had (his body) 
smeared with divine sandal, who had worn divine yellow gar­
ments, whose eyes were like lotus-leaves, who was a youth, whose· 
body was handsome, who was bright with delicate parts, whose 
hair was very glossy, dark and curly, who had auspicious marks, 
who was dark like fresh diirva-sprouts, whose face resembled the 
full moon, got along with the two goddesses into an aeroplane ,

=== PAGE 325 ===

3254 
Padma Puriil:za 
and he, the lord, of a great lustre, praised by all gods, sat on the 
divine throne at the root of the desire-yielding tree. Those bears, 
monkeys and men, just on touching the water of Sarayu, happily 
cast their life. Due to Rama's grace all they were handsome and 
had divine forms. They had worn divine flowers and garments ; 
they had divine, auspicious lustre. There were innumerable men. 
[ Sri Rama, having lotus-like eyes, surrounded by all, worshipped 
by hosts of gods and siddhas, praised by all gods, got into the 
aeroplane. 
92-95. The lord came to his own eternal, divine, imperish­
able place. 0 you of a beautiful appearance, one who would recite 
the (full) account of Rama, or would listen to a verse or half a 
verse or would devoutly remember it, would, being free from sins 
committed knowingly or unknowingly during crores of existences, 
reach, along with his sons and wife, without any effort, Vi!?J).U's 
world, to be reached (only) through abstract meditation. 0 god­
dess, I have narrated to you this great account of Rama. Due to 
the narration (of the account) of Rama, I am blessed along with 
you, 0 goddess. 0 you of an excellent face, what else do you 
desire to know? I shall narrate all that. 
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED FORTYFIVE 
The Brave Deeds of Kn{la 
Sri Parvati said: 
1 -2. 0 lord, you have told well the story of Rama. Having 
heard it through your grace, I am happy, 0 great god. 0 lord of 
gods, I desire to hear the great story removing sins, of Kr!?l}.a, the 
son of Vasudeva. 
Rudra said: 
3-Sa. 0 goddess, listen. I shall narrate (to you) the story 
giving all fruits to men, of the noble KrᕮJJ.a, Vasudeva's son. 0 
goddess, in the family ofYadus was born the son of Devamigha,

=== PAGE 326 ===

V1.245.8b-16 
3255 
called Vasudeva, the best among those knowing Dharma. The 
prince duly married Devaki of a divine complexion, the daughter 
of Devaka (Ugrasena's brother), in Mathura. Kamsa was the 
brave and very strong son of Ugrasena. With the two (Vasudeva 
and Devaki?) the charioteer was driving the excellent chariot 
{obscure). When they came on a charming path bringing on 
auspiciousness, a divine voice gravely spoke from the air : 
The heavenly voice said: 
Sb. 0 Kamsa, her eighth embryo (i.e. child) will take away 
your life. 
Rudra said: 
9. Having heard it, Kamsa set about killing his sister, Vasu­
-deva, with presence of mind, said to him who was very much en­
raged : 
Vasudeva said: 
10. 0 glorious one, do not kill your legitimate sister. 0 very 
mighty king, just kill the embryos (i.e. children) that will be born. 
Rudra said: 
1 1-13. Saying "Ail right", Kamsa having arrested Vasudeva 
and Devaki, placed them in his charming house full of all plea­
ᕯures. In the meanwhile, 0 goddess, goddess Dharal}.i (i.e. the 
Earth) very much troubled by the burden of sinners, suddenly 
went to Brahma. Having gone to Brahma, the lord of the world, 
Dharal}.i, the supporter of the people, said with a grave voice : 
Dharaf)i said: 
14-16. 0 Creator, 0 lord, I am unable to support these 
people. 0 you of a good vow, the sinful demons have put up on 
me. The very powerful ones destroy all good practices of the 
world. All men deriving their strength from unrighteousness are 
deluded by sin. In this world very little of religious merit is seen. 
0 god, I have sustained (people) because of(their) religious merit, 
truth, purity and control. Therefore, I am unable to sustain the 
world springing from unrighteousness.

=== PAGE 327 ===

3256 
Padma PuriiĚ;a 
Rudra said: 
17-18. 
Speaking like this goddess DharaQi vanished there 
only. Then all hosts of gods led by Brahma and Rudra and great 
ascetics went to the lord of the world at the northern shore of the 
Milky Ocean, and praised him with divine eulogies. Then the 
lord who was pleased, said to all those best sages : 
The lord ( Vi{Ě;u) said: 
19a. 0 hosts of gods, for what purpose have you come 
here? 
Rudra said: 
19b. Then the grandsire said to ViᕥQu, the god of gods : 
Brahmii said : 
20-22a. 0 god of gods, 0 lord of the world, the Earth is 
oppressed with burden. In the world many unconquerable demons 
are born, like Jarasandha, Kamsa, Pralamba, Dhenuka and 
others. The wicked ones torment all old people. You are fit to 
take down the burden of the Earth. 
Rudra said: 
22bc. Thus addressed by Brahma, ViᕥQu, the immutable lord 
of the world, spoke with a grave voice : 
The lord ( Vi{,u) said: 
23. 0 very powerful gods, descending (i.e. being born) in the 
family of the Yadus, I shall cooly remove the burden of the Earth. 
Rudra said: 
24. Thus addressed, all gods, having saluted ViᕥQu, went to 
their respective worlds, and thought of that highest god. Then the 
highest lord said to the NarayaQi Maya : 
The lord said: 
25-28. Taking the six sons of HiraQyakᕥa to the earth, put 
them into (the womb of) Devaki, the wife of Vasudeva. The 
seventh one, a portion of Seᕥa, has already entered (Devaki).

=== PAGE 328 ===

Vl.245.29-41 
3257 
Do not tarry. 0 you of an auspiCious appearance, give it to 
Rohi:Qi, her co-wife. Then in the eighth my portion will be born 
on Devaki. Then Mahanidra, your ancient portion, will be born 
on Yasoda, Nanda's wife. She will go to the great mountain Vin­
dhya, and there being worshipped by gods led by Indra would kill 
the very powerful demons led by the demon Sumbha. 
Rudra said: 
29-38. 
Saying, "All right" Mahamaya put the sons of 
Hira:Qyakᕥa as the six embryos in (the womb of) Devaki one by 
one. The very powerful Karl:J.sa killed them as soon as they were 
born. The seventh embryo was infused by a portion of Seᕥa. 
(Mahamaya) took the growing embryo into · (the womb of) 
Rohi::Qi. Due to drawing out (sarl:J.karᕥa:Q.at) of the embryo, the 
immutable Sarl:J.karᕥa:Q.a was born on her. On the eighth of the 
dark half of Bhadrapada (he was born) at an auspicious moment. 
RohiQi gave birth to a son, the lord Sarl:J.karᕥaQa. Then all hosts 
of gods seated in aeroplanes in the sky, and with their minds full 
of joy, praised Devaki. Then, 0 Parvati, in the tenth month (of 
her pregnancy) Viᕥ:Q.u was born on her at mid-night of the eighth 
of the dark half of Srava:Qa. He was dark like the petal of a blue 
lotus. His eyes were large like lotus-leaves. He had four arms. His 
body was handsome. He was graced with divine ornaments. On 
his chest were Srivatsa and Kaustubha (marks). He was adorned 
with a garland of wood-flowers. This ancient Vasudeva (i.e. 
Viᕥ:Qu) was born of Vasudeva. Seeing Kn:Q.a, the lord of the 
worlds, Vasudeva with his palms joined saluted him, full of the 
world, and said : 
• 
Vasudeva said: 
39-41. 0 lord, 0 desire-yielding tree to the devotees, 0 lord 
of the world, you are born of me (i.e. as my son). You, the high­
est being, are the one without a beginning or an end among the 
gods. 0 you inconceivable one, you are a great son. You are 
thought of by the meditating saints and are ancient. 0 you sus­
tainer of the earth, you have become my son on the earth. The 
sinful demons, seeing this your wonderful majestic form will not 
bear the great vigour, 0 highest being.

=== PAGE 329 ===

3258 
Padma PuraΫza 
Rudra said: 
42-55a. Thus requested by him the ancient ViᕫQu withdrew 
his form possessed off our arms. He shone as a human being only 
with two hands. All the demons, his bodyguards, that were 
there, were deluded by his Maya, and were covered by mental 
darkness. In the meanwhile Vasudeva, praised by all gods, took 
the god, and quickly went from that city. The very strong king of 
serpents devoutly covered him with a thousand hoods, and ac­
companied him, when it was raining. At that time the town-gates 
were opened due to the touch of his feet. Being broken they were 
wide open ; and those (people) that were there, became uncons­
cious. That river Yamuna, that was full, flowed with her water 
knee-deep only, when the noble one entered her (water). Having 
crossed Yamuna, the best of the Yadus, being praised by gods, 
entered (Vraja-the station of cowherds) situated on her bank. 
There, that wife of Nanda, delivered in the auspicious cow-pen. 
She who was asleep was deluded by Maya and covered with 
Tamas (darkness). That Yadava (i.e. Vasudeva) having placed 
on her bed the god (i.e. KrᕥJ}.a), and taking that daughter again 
went (back) to Mathura. Having given that daughter to his wife 
(Devaki), he remained well-composed. She who was on Devaki's 
bed, wept due to her being a child. Having heard the voice of the 
girl in the house, the bodyguards informed Karilsa of the auspi­
cious delivery of Devaki. Karltsa quickly came there, and seized 
the girl, and then threw her on a stone. She too quickly went to 
the sky. Placing her foot on his head, she stood with her full face 
(visible). The goddess with eight arms said to the lord of demons : 
• 
The goddess said: 
55b-55. 0 dull one, what is the use of having thrown me? 
He who will kill you, is born. He, who is the creator, the sus­
tainer and the destroyer of the world is born in this world. He 
will snatch your life. 
Rudra said: 
57-58. 
Having spoken like this, the goddess filling the sky 
with her lustre, and being praised by gods and gandharvas, 
suddenly went to the Himalaya mountain. Then Karltsa, with his

=== PAGE 330 ===

Vl.245.59-87 
3259 
mind dejected, and oppressed by fear, called his demons led by 
Pralamba, Ca:Q.iira, and said to them : 
Karizsa said: 
59-61. All hosts of gods, through our fear, have gone to the 
Milky Ocean, and have told everything about the destruction of 
the demons to Viᕥ:Q.u. Hearing their words, the supporter of the 
earth, the immutable one is born on the earth as a human being. 
So today, all you demons, taking any form as you desire, kill, 
without any fear children of excessive might. 
Rudra said: 
62-63. Having thus ordered (them), and having comforted 
and freed Vasudeva and Devaki, he entered his own house. 
Vasudeva then went to the excellent cow-pen (Vraja) of Nanda. 
Honoured by him, he gladly kept his son there . The descendant 
of Yadu said to Yasoda, Nanda's wife : 
Vasudeva said: 
64. 
0 honoured mother, protect as your own son, this son 
of mine, born from Rohir;ti's womb, who has come (i.e. been 
brought) here through fear of KaJhsa. 
Rudra said: 
65-70. 
Nanda's delicate wife, of a firm vow, said, "All 
right". And having received a son of the pair, nourished him 
with joy. Having kept the sons in the house of the cowherd 
Nanda, Vasudeva being confident, went to Mathura protected by 
Kamsa. Then on an auspicious day, Garga, impelled by Vasu­
deva, went to the cow-pen (Vraja) of the cowherd Nanda . The 
brahmar;ta was honour-ed by the (people) residing there. Having 
duly performed their birth-rites in Gokula of the god, he gave 
divine names to Vasudeva's sons. The brahma:Q.a gave the elder 
one such names as Samkarᕮa:Q.a, Rauhir;teya, Balabhadra, Maha­
bala, Rama. (He named) the younger one as ໞridhara, Srikara, 
Srimat, Knr;ta, Ananta, Jagatpati, Vasudeva, Hnikesa etc . 
71-87. "In this world they will be known by thenames Rama, 
KrᕨQa. "ᕰThe best brahma:Q.a, having said so, and having worship -

=== PAGE 331 ===

3260 
Padma Purii1J.a 
ped the dead ancestors and deities, and being honoured by the 
cowherds again came (back) to Mathura. At night Kamsa sent 
Piitana, the killer of children. She gave her breast smeared with 
poison to KnQ.a of unlimited lustre (for being sucked by him). 
Knowing her to be a demoness, KpᕥQ.a the very lustrous, the best 
of the Yadus, drank (i.e. sucked) her breast deeply and profusely 
along with the life of the demoness. She with her body afflicted, 
and with her sinews suddenly cut off, fell down trembling and 
making a loud sound died. With her loud sound the sky was fill­
ed. Then all the cowherds seeing the demoness fallen on the 
ground, and KTᖂ?Q.a playing on her large breasts, were frightened. 
Being dejected, they quickly took the boy, and due to the fear of 
the demon, sprinkled with the cow's tail cowdung on his head. 0 
you beautiful lady, the cowherd Nanda came and took the son. 
Having sprinkled (water) on all the limbs of his body to the ac­
companiment of (the utterance of) the names of the lord, put 
that wicked, fearful (demoness) out of Vraja. The group of cow­
herds who were frightened burnt her in that Vraja. Once Madhu­
siidana, Viᖂ?Q.U, lying under a cart, and having spread out his feet 
wept. With the stroke of his foot, he turned over the cart. With 
the pitchers and pots scattered about, it fell upside down. Then 
the cowherds and cowherdesses, seeing that great cart, were very 
much amazed, being apprehensive of what it was. The amazed 
Yasoda quickly took the boy. Within just a short time only the 
two boys, the best Yadus, nourished with Yasoda's milk, and 
growing, shone while crawling on their knees and hands. A 
fraudulent demon, disguised as a lad, set out to kill KnQ.a, mov­
ed on the earth. Krᕥ?JJ.a, knowing him to be a demon, struck him 
with his foot. In the form of the demon only he fell down and 
died. Then KTᖂ?Q.a roamed in the entire cowshed. 
88-94. 
In every house of the cowherdesses, he took away 
butter. Then Yasoda who was angry, tied him with a rope to a 
mortar and went to sell milk etc. Krᖂ?Q.a, the supporter of the 
earth, tied to the mortar with a rope, dragged it, and went bet­
ween two arjuna trees. With the mortar Krᖂ?Q.a knocked down the 
two trees. With their trunks broken, they fell on the ground 
making a sound. Due to (i.e. on hearing) that loud sound, old, 
very vigorous cowherds went there, and seeing it were very much 
amazed. Yasoda also being dejected freed the lord of the earth

=== PAGE 332 ===

VI. 245.95-1 13 
3261 
and taking him who was amazed gave the noble one her breast 
(i.e. breast-fed him). Since the lord of the world was tied with a 
rope (damna) by his mother, therefore, he was called, Diimodara 
by all the great sages. The two arjuna trees reached the status of 
kinnaras. 
95-100. Then all the old cowherds, led by the cowherd 
Nanda, regarding it to be a great portent, went to another place. 
In the charming Vrndavana on the auspicious bank of Yamuna, 
they made an abode for the cows and the cowherdesses. Then 
the growing, very strong Rama and KrᕥQa, accompanied by 
keepers of calves, looked after the calves. A great demon, nam­
ed Baka, endeavoured in the form of a crane to kill Knl}.a, the 
best of the Yadus, who was with the cows and the calves. Seeing 
him, Viᕥl}.u also easily raised a clod and struck on his wing. The 
great demon fell on the earth. Then after a few days, he, looking 
after the cows and calves in the forest, slept on the earth on 
sprouts under the shade of a jambii tree. 
101-107. In the meanwhile god Brahma surrounded by 
hosts of gods came to see Krᕥl}.a, and seeing the two best Yadus 
(i.e. Balarama and KrᕥQa) asleep, snatched the calves and the 
children of the cowherds, and again went (back) to heaven. 
When they got up they saw that the children and the calves 
were lost. They were amazed as to where the cows, calves, and 
children of the cowherds had gone. Knowing that it was the act 
done by the Creator, Krᕥl}.a, the ancient one, created the child­
ren, the cows and the calves just like that. Madhusiidana, the 
protector and the lord of the worlds, quickly created the calves 
and the cowherds of the same form. In the evening the cows­
the mothers-seeing their own calves having come (back) behav­
ed as before. When thus the period of a year was passed by the 
noble one, the creator again gave him (back) the calves and the 
children. Brahma, the lord of the three worlds, with his palms 
joined, taking 
himself round and saluting Govinda, spoke 
through fear : 
Brahmii said: 
108-1 13. 
Salutation to you, the soul of all ; to you of the 
nature of true knowledge, of the nature of eternal joy ; to the 
noble one, of a loving soul. You are minute, are of a big, gross

=== PAGE 333 ===

3262 
Padma Purii1Ja 
form. You are omnipresent, immutable. 0 you, the beginning, 
the middle and the end, salutation to you. Salutation to you of 
eternal knowledge, power and supremacy ; to you full of valour 
and lustre ; to you, 0 you of a great power ; to you of the form 
of six qualities. 0 brahman, you are the Supreme Being (des­
cribed) of the Vedas ; you are the great Puruᕦa ; you are the em­
bodied Supreme Being ; you are the Supreme Being of the sacred 
texts. You are the four (great) men ; you are the best ancient 
man. 0 Brahman, the earth, fire, air are your powers. Due to 
your words the earth and fire sprang up, 0 lord of the world. 
With your life, 0 lord, the atmosphere and air were created. 
1 14-1 18. 0 you immutable one, in the same way, from your 
eyes were created the sky and the sun ; and 0 sinless one, from 
your ears were created the quarters and the moon. From your 
mind, 0 great god, were created the flow of water and VaruQa. 
That Brahman which is manifested in the Mimamsa that is pro­
claimed, is also (manifested) in sacrifices or in a great vow, in 
the hymns that ar.:: sung, in the sky, in the heaven. It is also the 
air. It is also in the sky, so also in the herbs. It is also in the 
stars, all planets, and the sun also. In the same way it is in the 
beings. The holy texts call it 'Brahman'. That also is the highest 
Brahman, well known and immortal all round. 
1 19-122. 
HiratJmaya, 
Avyaya (Immutable), Yajiia, Suci 
(Pure), Sucipiid (of pure feet)-these are his epithets in the 
Vedas. Nowhere is his (likeness found). The holy text describes 
him as Cakʎurmaya (consisting of eyes), Srotramaya (consisting 
of ears), Chandomaya (consisting of Vedas), Manomaya (con­
sisting of mind), Viinmaya (consisting of speech), the highest 
soul, the highest god. 0 you lotus-eyed one, thus you are the 
(sole) aim of the Upaniᕦads. This one is not able to praise you, 
who has mastered the entire Vedanta. It was a great offence that 
I snatched your calves. 0 you who are affectionate to those who 
seek your shelter, forgive me. 
Mahe8vara said: 
123-1 30. The Creator, having thus praised VigJ.U, and hav­
ing repeatedly saluted him, gave him (back) the calves, and 
went home. He, delighted, nourished, and practising severe 
penance, always keeping in his mind ViᕭQu in the form of a

=== PAGE 334 ===

VI .245. 1 3 1- l43 
3263 
child, lived with the gods, 0 goddess. Kr!?I).a created the calves 
and children as before. They became one with him, when the 
gods were observing (i.e. in the presence of gods). With the 
keepers of the calves Krᖂ?I).a went to Nandagokula. Then after a 
few days the best of Yadus, Acyuta, Madhusii.dana, went with 
the cowherds to the pool of Yamuna, and there having injured 
easily with his one foot the thousand hoods of the very strong 
serpent, made him face the risk to his life. That Kaliya, regain­
ing consciousness, sought his shelter. Then revered Kr!?Q.a pro­
tected the serpent who had given up his poison. Having made 
marks with his foot on the hoods of him who was afraid of 
Garuga, the best of the Yadus banished him from the pool of 
Yamuna. 
131-137. Then that Kaliya, along with his sons and wife, 
quickly left that pool. Having saluted Govinda he went (else­
where). The trees on the bank that were formerly scorched by 
(Kaliya's) poison, on being seen by Krᖂ?t;la quickly bore flowers 
and fruits. Madhusii.dana, the lord, full of all gods, after having 
attained youth in (due) time, looked after the herd of cows. The 
best Yadu, with cowherds of his age and with Balarama, moved 
in the charming Vrndii.vana. There having killed a very fierce 
demon of a huge body and of the form of a serpent and as big 
as Meru and Mandii.ra (mountains), he reached the forest of 
Dhenuka having the arbours of palm trees like tala and hintala ; 
he entered that charming forest, full of fruits and having ar­
bours of palm trees, and having lifted Dhenuka, of the size of a 
mountain, and always having the form of an ass (or a cruel 
form), by seizing his feet, he struck him against a palm tree. At 
that moment only his keepers rejoiced near him. 
138-143. Quickly moving out from that forest they came to 
the Bhii.t;.gira forest. There they played children's sports with 
Ram a and Knt;.a. A demon named Pralam ba came there in the 
guise of a cowherd. Putting Rama on his back he quickly went 
to the sky. Knowing him to be a demon Rama angrily struck 
his head with his fist ; then he, with his body afilicted, fell 
(down). Roaring with a loud voice in his demonish form only, 
he, with his head a11d body broken, and smeared with blood, 
died. Then Nanda's son (Krᖂ?o.a) remained, in the evening, in 
Govraja (cow-pen), with the young cowherdesses, sporting in

=== PAGE 335 ===

3264 
Padma PuriiTJa 
Kaumodavarcasa. The best demon Ariᕥta went there in the 
form of a bull ; as he had come to kill KrᕥQa, he roared loudly. 
144-149. sᕱeing him, all cowherds, oppressed by fear, ran 
away. KnQa too, seeing the chief of demons to have come, up­
rooted a palm tree and hurt him with it between his horns. He, 
with his head and horns broken, and vomiting profuse blood, 
died while roaring. Thus having killed Ariᕥta, the chief demon 
of a huge body, he called the young cowherds, and Jived there 
only in Govraja (cow-pen). Then after a few days a great demon 
named Kesin came to Vraja taking up the body of a horse, to 
kiJI Govinda. Having gone to that charming Govraja, he 
neighed loudly. Due to that neighing all the three worlds were 
fi1Jed. All the hosts of gods, thinking it to be the end of the age, 
were frightened. 
1 50-154. 
All the cowherds and cowherdesses living there 
were confounded and disturbed. Coming to senses they all ran 
on all sides. Saying "Protect (us)", the cowherdesses sought 
KrᕥQa's shelter. He who loved his devotees, said, "Do not be 
afraid, do not be afraid." Then he, the younger brother of Indra, 
having comforted them, easily and quickly struck with his fist on 
the head of the demon. With his teeth and eyes broken, he roar­
ed very loudly. He (i.e. KrᕥQa) lifting a great rock, dropped it on 
his body. The great demon with his entire body crushed, and 
roaring with a fierce sound, suddenly dropped on the ground and 
died. 
155-156. 
Seeing Kesin killed, the hosts of gods in hea­
ven profusely dropped showers of flowers and said, "Well (done), 
well (done)." ViᕥQu (i.e. KrᕥQa) having thus killed in his child­
hood very powerful demons, just happily rejoiced with Bala­
riima. 
1 57-162. He was dark like the petals of a blue lotus. His 
eyes resembled lotus-petals. He wore a yellow garment. He had 
put on a garland. He was graced with P. garland of wood-flow­
ers. His chest shone with the Kaustubha (gem). He had a chap­
let on his head, and smearing (of sandal etc.). He was (adorned) 
with lovely ornaments. He was graced with earrings. He had 
worn a tulasi-garland. He had put on the mark of musk. His 
very glossy, dark, curly hair was tied into a braid. He had the 
head ornaments of a peacock's plumage with various kinds of

=== PAGE 336 ===

VI.245. 163-177 
3265 
flowers tied ; the palms of his hands, the soles of his feet and his 
lips resembled red lotus. Between the sides (shone) his face 
with the eyebrows resembling the spot on the moon. He shone 
with necklaces, anklets, armlets and bracelets. The descendant 
of Yadu, sweetly playing upon the flute remained in the very 
charming Vrndavana, graced with fruits and flowers. 
163-167. Seeing Viᕭ:g.u who had despised the beauty of 
crores of Cupids, all the cowherdesses were tormented by Cupid's 
missile. Formerly all sages living in Da:g.ljaka forest , seᕲing 
Rama desired to enjoy Rama of a beautiful body. All of them, 
turned into women, were born in Go kula. Having approached 
Viᕥ:g.u with love, they were then freed from the ocean of the 
mundane existence. Since the demons angrily came to KrᕦQ.a, 
and met with death in the battle, they after being killed, obtain­
ed liberation. In the world lust and anger of people are the 
cause of (their falling into) hell. The cowherdesses, haters of gods 
{in their former existence), having devoutly approached him, 
were liberated. 
168-173. Those who betake themselves to Viᕭ:g.u (even) 
through lust, fear or hatred reach VaikuQ.tha. Then what to 
say of those who do so through devotion ! Having heard the 
sound of his flute at night the wives of the cowherds all got up 
from their beds with their garments and hair dishevelled. Tor­
mented by Cupid's arrows, they left their husbands, sons, rela­
tives, so also sense of shame and their own family ; they came to 
the lord of the world. All the cowherdesses, having approached 
Govinda, embraced him with their arms, and enjoyed (i.e. kiss­
ed) his lower lip as the gods enjoy nectar. With all those, the 
lord of the self sported in Govraja. All those fearless women 
also sported with him in Vraj a. Thus day after day they sported 
with Kesava in the charming Vrndavana and the bank of 
Yamuna. 
Piirvati said: 
174. How would he, Janardana, who had descended on the 
earth for the protection of Dharma, approach others' wives? 
Rudra said: 
175-177. 0 you of an auspicious face, he does not differ-

=== PAGE 337 ===

3266 
Padma Puriit;ta 
entiate between his own body and those of others. The entire 
world is his body. There is nothing different from it. Due to his 
naturally being the lord, the master of the soul and the lord of 
the world, the noble one does not recognise the difference bet­
ween a male and a female. So also due to his power of removing 
sins the {all-) pervading lord, the highest soul, the god, is not at 
a fault, 0 fortunate one. 
Vasi$!ha said: 
178. 
Having thus spoken to Piirvati, Rudra, the destroyer 
of Sri Tripura, commenced telling the whole life of Kr!>Qa. 
Rudra said: 
179-183. When autumn arrived, the cowherds led by 
the cowherd Nanda started celebrating the festival of the lord of 
gods (i.e. Indra). But Kr!>Qa stopped that festival of Indra, and 
he, the powerful one, got celebrated the festival of Govardhana, 
the lord of mountains. Then the angry Indra, continuously pour­
ed down very heavy showers for seven nights in Govraja of 
Nanda. Kr!>Qa, having uprooted the great mountain Oovardhana, 
easily held it for the protection of the cows. 0 you of a good 
vow, having got the protection of the mountain, the cowherds 
and cowherdesses lived happily only as if they were in a 
mansion. 
184-186. Then the thousand-eyed Indra who was afraid, 
with his mind confounded, stopped that shower, and went to 
that Vraja of Nanda. Kr!>Q.a too put the great mountain as 
before. All those old cowherds, led by the cowherd Nanda, 
worshipped Govinda (i.e. KrᕥJ.la) and were very much amazed. 
Then god Indra, having approached KnQ.a, with his palms 
joined praised him with a voice faltering due to joy. 
Indra said: 
187-195. 0 lotus-eyed one, 0 omniscient one, 0 superior 
ViᕦQu, salutation to you. I salute you, 0 you who are beyond 
the three constituent qualities {of sattva, rajas and tamas), 0 
lord of all, and the soul of the universe. You yourself are the 
sacrifice, the formula used on making an oblation to a deity ; 
you are Omkiira, sacrifice (or power), oblation. 0 Kesava, you

=== PAGE 338 ===

VI.245. 196-21 1 
3267 
are the father and the mother of all gods. Before the creation 
you, HiraQya garbha, existed. You alone are the lord, the Sup­
reme Being, the Brahman. 0 god, you alone have supported this 
earth and heaven. 0 lord of the world, you thus give your­
self (to your devotees) and give fruits (of devotion). 0 you, the 
lord of the worlds, gods have obtained light. 0 ancient one, 
your shadow is nectar as well as death. To that god, to you, we 
offer an oblation. From him these golden ones have come up. 0 
Kesava, of him the oceans and the earth are the carrier. 0 you 
immutable one, these directions, intermediate directions and the 
air (Vayu) belong to you. To that god, to you, who growing (in 
size) again got on the earth, we offer an oblation. 0 Brahman, 
0 great lord, you supported heaven. In the atmosphere you 
remain in a mote of the sun-beam. You are omnipresent and 
immutable. 
196-204. To that god we offer our oblation, to whom, shin­
ing, of a hot lustre and full of qualities, you cry.* Sri would al­
ways necessarily see him mentally. In the highest place (i.e. in 
him) the sun, that has risen, shines. To you, that god, we offer 
an oblation. Your great water conceiving at the time of creation 
create the streams of water. Who, the immutable lord of gods 
(but you) stood before the demon? To you, that god, we offer our 
oblation. The water saw Dak!}a Prajapati. Having a sacrifice they 
first produce the oblation. You are, among the gods, the supe­
rior god, the greatest of the great. To you, that god, we offer an 
oblation. You the immutable Man, the creator of the world, 
(please) do not harm us. He, the lord, of a pious act, created 
heaven. He created the moon, profuse water and the entire 
world. To you, that god, we offer our oblation. 0 lord, all these 
created objects have been around you. 
205-21 1 . 0 lord, beings have sprung from you. You are 
Acyuta. The future and the past are due to you. Let that, desiring 
which we offer a sacrifice, come to us wholly. Due to your kind 
gaze, may we be the lords of the three (worlds). You are the 
Supreme Being called Hira:Q.maya, having golden beard and 
moustache. From the point of the nail everything is gold. The 
sun shares gold. This is omnipresent Brahman that has settled as 
* Vv. 1 96, 1 98, 199, 200, 201 etc. are not clear.

=== PAGE 339 ===

3268 
Padma Puriil)a 
the sun. That is the excellent, best lustre of god Savitr. May we 
always think of the form of you who always illumine our minds. 
0 you lotus-eyed one, 0 you lord of Sri, 0 you lord of all, 0 
Kesava, salutation to you. 0 you fit to be known through Ved· 
iinta, 0 lord of sacrifices, 0 you of the form of sacrifice, saluta­
tion to you. Salutation to you, to Vasudeva, dressed as a cow· 
herd. I have offended (you) by destroying all that. Forgive it, 0 
lord of the world, 0 you ocean of compassion, 0 Supreme Be­
ing. In a short time kill Kamsa who is unassailable. Having done 
good to the gods, live in happiness, settling on the earth. 
Mahildeva said: 
212-221. Indra, the lord of all gods, having thus praised 
Krᕳl).a, crowned him with nectar and divine garments and orna­
ments. Having worshipped the lord of gods, he went (back) to 
heaven. The old cowherds and cowherdesses saw lndra there. 
And being honoured by him, they were very much delighted. The 
very brave Riima and Kn1J.a adorned with divine ornaments, re­
mained happily in Nanda's Govraja. 0 goddess, in the mean­
while, the best sage Niirada suddenly went to Mathurii, and 
entered Kamsa's vicinity. Being honoured by the king there, he 
was seated on an auspicious seat. He informed him of the acts of 
ViᕳQu, the active exertion of the deities and the birth of Vigtu 
(as Krᕥ1J.a). So also (he told him about) Vasudeva's having put 
his son in Vraja, the death of the demons, and the expulsion of 
the king of the serpents ; so also about (Knl).a's) holding up the 
best mountain (i.e. Govardhana) and the meeting with Indra. 
Having told Karllsa everything fully he, honoured by the demon, 
went to Brahmii's abode. Kamsa, with his mind dejected a:nd 
surrounded by his ministers, deliberated with them about his 
death. There the very powerful lord of demons, Kamsa, told 
about the mission for his good to Akriira, the best among the 
intelligent ones and loving Dharma. 
Karhsa said: 
222-228. 
Due to my fear all gods led by Indra, over­
come by fear, approached Viᕥl).U and sought his shelter. He, 
Madhusiidana, the revered creator of the beings, granted them 
exemption from fear and was born from Devaki's womb. The

=== PAGE 340 ===

VI .245.229-242 
3269 
wicked-hearted Vasudeva also deceived me and at night he, the 
very wicked one, put his son in Nanda's house. Even as a child 
he killed the unassailable great demons. There is no doubt that 
he is also ready to kill me. But even gods and demons along 
with Indra cannot kill him. So having brought him here, I must 
kill him with (some) stratagem. Through intoxicated elephants, 
wrestlers, or excellent horses-with this or that means he can be 
killed here. Therefore, 0 best of the Yadus, having gone to 
Govraja, fetch here to enjoy the ceremony of arrows, KrᕥQ.a, 
Rama, so also all old cowherds Jed by Nanda, 0 descendant of 
Yadu. 
Mahadeva said: 
229-242. 
Saying "All right", the best of the Yadus, the 
powerful one, eager to see KrᕥQa, got into a chariot and went to 
the charming Go kula. Akriira, the best among the great devo­
tees of Viኲt;tu possessed of politeness, saw the una:fllicted Krᕥua 
settled among the cows. (He was) like a dark cloud ; (he was) 
adorned with all ornaments ; his eyes (were large) like lotus­
leaves ; (he had) long arms, and (was) healthy. (He had) covered 
himself with a yellow garment ; (he was) handsome in all limbs ; 
(his) chest (was) shining with the Kaustubha ; (he was) graced 
with jewelled earrings. (He possessed) the garland of tulasi 
(-leaves) and wood-flowers ; (he had put on) ear-ornaments of 
wood-flowers. Seeing KrኲQa surrounded by young cowherdesses, 
he, the descendant ofYadu, with his entire body horripilated and 
his eyes full of tears of joy, got down from the chariot and 
saluted him. Joyfully approaching Krᕥt;ta, taking himself round 
him, and saluting him, he put on his head (Krኲua.'s) feet resem­
bling red lotuses and marked with the signs of Vajra, and 
repeatedly saluted him. That descendant of Yadu then saw Bala­
rama resembling the full autumnal moon and decorated with 
pearl-necklaces, and saluted him. The two heroes, best of the 
Yadus, raised him with joy, and having embraced him, came 
home with that Akiiira, a descendant of VrኺQi. The cowherd 
Nanda, of a great lustre, seeing the best of the Yadus to have 
arrived (there), approached him, and having seated him on an 
excellent seat, gladly, duly and devoutly honoured him with 
materials of worship, water for washing his feet, divine garments

=== PAGE 341 ===

3270 
Padma Pural)a 
and adorations. Akriira, a descendant of Yadu, gave garments 
and ornaments to Rama, Krg1a, to the cowherd Nanda, and to 
Yasoda. The intelligent one seated on a kusa-seat asked the cool 
one about his well-being, and asked about all the stateaffairs, 
said to him : 
Akriira said: 
243-251 . 
This KnQ.a of great lustre, actually the immutable 
ViɄ:Q.u, requested by the hosts of gods and magnanimous sages 
for the good of the deities and the protection of the good, so 
also for the destruction of those who were a burden to the 
earth, and for establishing righteousness, was born in (i.e. from) 
the belly (i.e. womb) of Devaki at midnight in rainy season. 
Through Kathsa's fear Vasudeva brought the lord of gods, 
ViɄ:Q.u, his son, and put him in your house in that night. At that 
time only, the glorious Yasoda gave birth to a daughter of an 
auspicious face born from a portion of Maya (of the lord). She 
had deluded this entire auspicious Vraja. (Vasudeva) having put 
the best Yadu (i.e. Kra:Q.a) on the bed of unconscious Yasoda 
took the daughter and went home. Having put her on Devaki's 
bed, he came out. She (i.e. the daughter), remaining in Devaki's 
bed then quickly cried. 0 you of a good vow, having heard it 
(i.e. her crying), Kathsa suddenly took the girl and the powerful 
one, having whirled her, dropped her on a stone. That girl, (then) 
got up ; and she having eight hands and weapons, and remaining 
in the sky, angrily spoke to Kathsa in a grave voice : 
The girl said: 
252. 
0 you mean demon, he who is the Supreme Being, the 
lord of all gods, the eternal one, has gone to Vraja (is born) to 
kill you. 
Akriira said: 
253-261 . Speaking like this that Mahiimaya (the Great 
Illusion) went to the Himalaya (mountain). Since then the wicked 
one, with his mind dejected through fear, sent demons to kill the 
noble (KnQa). This intelligent boy alone easily killed them all. 
The highest god performed very wonderful acts. Having heard 
about (these acts like) holding the Govardhana (mountain),

=== PAGE 342 ===

VI.245.262-279 
3271 
expulsion of the king of serpents, meeting with lndra, death of 
all demons, which were told to him by the divine sage (Narada), 
he, tormented by fear is eager to take from here the unassailable 
Rama and KpaIJ.a of mighty arms and to get them killed by in­
toxicated great elephants or by wrestlers. He has sent me here to 
fetch KraIJ.a. The wicked one has imprisoned Vasudeva. (I have) 
told you all these acts of that very wicked one. To enjoy the 
-ceremony'of arrows all you cowherds, inhabitants ofVraja please 
go tomorrow, taking with you curd, ghee etc., and with Rama 
and Kral}a to him. There is no doubt that Ka:rhsa will be killed 
by KrɄIJ.a. Therefore, giving up your fear go (to Mathura) by the 
Qrder of the king. 
The lord said: 
262-272. Speaking like this, that very intelligent Akriira 
became silent. Hearing those fierce and awe-inspiring words of 
him all old cowherds led by the cowherd Nanda, stupefied by 
grief, were in an indescribable ocean of sorrow. Seeing them 
(like that) the lotus-eyed KraIJ.a cheered them. The powerful one 
said : "Do not entertain any fear from the demon. Accompanied 
by Rama and you, I shall go to Mathura to destroy this wicked 
Ka:rhsa. Having killed there that wicked Ka:rhsa, the chief of 
<lemons, so also having killed all demons, I shall protect the 
earth. Therefore, giving up your grief, go to Mathura." The 
cowherds led by the cowherd Nanda, who were thus addressed 
by KraQa, repeatedly embraced him, and smelt his head. Having 
thought over the immeasurable acts of the very noble one, and 
on Akriira's words, all the cowherds, were free from affliction. 
Yasoda gave Akriira many pure cooked foods-tasty, savoury, 
and sweet-so also sumptuous, agreeable meals. The best of the 
Yadus (i.e. Akr'ura) enjoyed, along with Rama, KrɄIJ.a, the best 
cowherds like Nanda, so also the young and the old people, the 
food given by Yasoda, which was tasteful, removed foulness, 
diseases, which was good, in her (house) that was well decora­
ted. 
273-279. Having properly fed them and having given them 
water to rinse their mouths with, she of a firm vow, gave him a 
tambiila with camphor. When the sun had set, the Yadava, 
having offered the evening prayer, and having, along with Rama

=== PAGE 343 ===

3272 
Padma Puriil)a 
and Krgm, enjoyed the excellent food of sweetened milk, went 
to sleep with them. KnQ.a slept as ViaQ.u on the Seᕥa, in that best 
mansion that was charming, illumined with lamps, beautiful, 
that had lovely beds, and that was graced with various flowers. 
Seeing him, the excellent bliss, Akrii.ra, marked with tears of joy 
and horripilation, gave up his sleep of ignorance, and the best 
devotee of Vial).u shampooed the feet of Viᕥl).u (i.e. KrᕥQa). "By 
(doing) this much my life is fruitful ; I have lived well. This is 
the prosperity in the three worlds ; this is the best happiness, 
this is the righteous kingdom ; this is the best joy of liberation. 
280-284. It is not possible to recollect it mentally by deities 
like Siva, Brahma, best sages like Sanaka, and great sages like 
VasiHha. That couple of feet of the lord of Sri, bright 
like the autumnal lotuses, and touched by Indira, Lakᕥmi with 
her hands, gives great pleasure. Fortunately I have secured this 
auspicious lotus-like couple of feet ofVi}l).u. " Due to that great 
joy of (having secured) Brahman, the night passed as a moment. 
Then when the morning dawned Vi<Q.U, being praised in hea­
ven by the best hosts of gods, got up from the bed. Having pro­
perly rinsed his mouth, the intelligent one, along with Rama, fell 
at the feet of his mother and made the departure agreeable. 
285-287. Having raised them, Yasoda, full of grief and joy, 
and with her face full of tears, affectionately embraced her sons. 
The respectable lady of a firm vow conferred a blessing (on them) 
and after repeatedly embracing the great heroes, she allowed 
them to go. Akrii.ra also saluted Yasoda and with his palms 
joined, said : 
Akrura said: 
288-289. 0 glorious one, I shall (now) leave. 0 sinless one. 
favour me. This KralJ.a of great arms will, after killing the very 
powerful Ka:rhsa, be the king of the entire world. There is no 
doubt about it. Therefore, 0 you of an excellent face, give up 
sorrow and be happy. 
The lord said: 
290-297. 
Thus addressed she allowed Akrii.ra, the best of 
Yadus, to go. With Rama and KrᕥlJ.a he got into an excellent 
chariot. Being praised by groups of celestial nymphs he quickly

=== PAGE 344 ===

VI.245.298-3 1 5 
3273 
went to Mathura. All old cowherds led by the cowherd Nanda, 
followed him. Seeing that KpᕥQa going the cowherdesses again 
took curd, ghee, various fruits, and followed KrᕦQa going out, 
seated in a chariot. KrᕦQa sent back all the cowherdesses. With 
their minds tormented by grief, they wept for the lotus-eyed 
one. They repeatedly wept saying, "0 KrᕥQ.a, 0 KrᕦQ.a, 0 KrᕥQa, 
0 Govinda." The helpless ones with their eyes full of tears, remai­
ned there weeping. Then Akriira, the Yadava, along with Rama 
and KnQ.a drove that chariot from Govraja to Mathura. Having 
quickly crossed Yamuna, and having placed the excellent chariot 
on the bank, having got down from the divine chariot, he set 
about to bathe there. Then to do the necessary (rites) he plunged 
in the auspicious water. 
298-304. Muttering the expiatory hymn the best devotee of 
ViᕥQu saw in the water the bright Rama and KrᕥQa. He saw 
Rama like a crore of autumnal moons, the lord wearing a dark 
garment, with his body smeared with divine sandal, and having 
beauty due to ornaments of pearls, having eyes like red lotuses, 
and having ear-ornaments of white lotuses ; and saw KrᕦQa like 
a dark cloud and wearing a divine yellow garment, having large · 
lotus-like eyes with his body smeared with yellow sandal, and grac­
ed with various gems. Seeing (them) there the best Yadu was very 
much amazed. Getting up he saw the two very mighty ones in the 
chariot. Again plunging (in the water) and muttering the couple 
of hymns, he saw ViᕥQ.U in the ocean of nectar along with Lakᕥmi 
being praised by Sanaka and others and waited upon by 
all gods. Seeing the god in the water there, he was highly amazed. 
The best of the Yadus praised the omnipresent god ViᕨQU. 
Akrura said: 
305-3 1 5. Salutation to you of the nature of Kala (time or 
death), to you without a beginning oran end ; salutation to you 
who are unmanifest and unchanging. Salutation to you, the lord 
of beings ; repeated salutations to you, 0 best being. Salutation 
to you, the controller of all beings and the highest soul. 
Salutation to you, the changing and the unchanging, the actual 
Highest Being ; to the lord of qualities and to the restraining 
(one). Salutation to you who are without such differences 
as of place and time. Salutation to you, the endless one, and

=== PAGE 345 ===

3274 
Padma Puriil}a 
the unfailing one. Salutation to you, to Govinda, to the lord of 
the three (Vedas), to the holder of the Sarilga bow, to Narayal}.a, 
Visva and Vasudeva. Salutation to you, to ViaJ}.u, of many forms ; 
repeated salutation to you, the eternal one ; to you, having lotus­
like eyes, to the eternal one, to the holder of the conch and the 
disc. Repeated salutations to you whose brilliance is graced with 
ornaments resembling crores of rising suns ; to Hari ; to the lord 
of all worlds. Salutations to Savitr (the generator), to the seed of 
the worlds, to the highest soul, to Samkaraa:Qa, Knl}.a, Pradyu­
mna. Salutation to you, Aniruddha, the supporter, the creator, 
the origin of everything, having a thousand forms, and having 
many heads, feet and hands. Salutation to you, having a thou­
sand names, to the eternal one, to the Highest Being. Salutation 
to you shining on the bed of the serpent, to you of a pleasing 
form. Salutation to you, to Kesava, having put on a yellow 
garment, having a bright lustre while pressing in embrace the 
hard breasts of Lakami, to you Sridhara, to the lord of Sri, and 
to you having innumerable forms. 
The lord said: 
3 16-3 19. A man who at the time of bathing, meditating upon 
the ancient god, devoutly recites this hymn, is free from all sins. 
Having got the fruit of (visiting) all holy places, he would secure 
absorption in ViaQU. That best devotee of ViaJ}.U thus praised 
the god (while remaining) in water and he, Akriira, worshipped 
him with water and fragrant flowers. Being blessed, Akriira then 
came out of the water of Yamuna and full of auspiciousness 
approached and saluted Rama and KraQa. Seeing him polite and 
amazed, ViaJ}.u said to him : 
Sri Knl}a said: 
320a. 0 Yadava, what wonder did you see in the water? 
The lord said: 
320b. 
Akriira spoke to the greatest of the Yadus, KrɄI).a, of 
great lustre : 
321-326. "What wonder is there, 0 lord, of the greatness of 
you, the omnipresent lord of the world? 0 Hraikesa, you yourself 
are the entire world. You are the water, the sky, the fire, the earth

=== PAGE 346 ===

Vl .245.327-342a 
3275 
and the wind. You are this entire world of four kinds, the immo­
bile and the mobile. 0 Vasudeva, there is none other than you, 
as water from cloud only. You are the sacrifice, you are the 
exclamation on offering an oblation to a deity ; you are the 
Orilkara ; you are the oblation also. 0 lord of gods, you have 
taken up the form to protect righteousness. You obtained the 
grandeur (of the forms) of the Fish, the Tortoise, the Boar. 0 
lord, you alone protect this entire world, full of you." 
The lord said: 
327-330. 
Having thus praised Govinda, and having saluted 
him, the best of the Yadus got into the divine chariot along with 
them. Then having quickly reached Mathurii created by gods, he, 
having kept Riima and Krᕦt.:la at the city-gate, went into the 
harem. Then having informed the king of their arrival, he, honou­
red by the king, entered his own house. Then in the evening Riima 
and Kᕴt;la, holding each other's hands went into Mathurii. 
33 1-335. The two very powerful, noble, best Yadus, while 
passing along the royal path, saw a washerman dyeing garments. 
KrᕦJ.:la, the powerful one, along with Riima, seeing him wearing 
divine garments and coming to the palace, asked for those gar­
ments. The washerman did not give them to him, and remaining 
there on the path spoke to him many caustic words. With the palm 
of his hand only KrᕩIJa beat him. On the way itself, he, vomiting 
much blood, was struck down. Riima and KrᕦIJa, the two heroes, 
along with their relatives, put on those charming garments. 
336-342a. The two best Yadus reached the house of a gar­
land-maker. Seeing them he honoured them with fragrant flowers. 
Being delighted, the two best Yadus granted him his desired 
boon. Then they came to the path. There they saw a hump­
backed lady of a happy face, whose body and back were crooked, 
and who had held a pot containing sandal. Seeing her they asked 
for the sandal. She, smiling, gave them excellent sandal. They 
took that divine sandal, and smeared (their bodies) as they liked. 
Giving her a beautiful form, they came to the path. Being obser­
ved by ladies, the two delicate noble ones of charming faces 
entered the sacrificial chamber with their followers. Kesava, 
Madhusiidana, seeing there a decorated, divine bow, easily took 
it and broke it.

=== PAGE 347 ===

3276 
Padma Puriil)a 
342b-343. 
Kamsa, the chief of demons, seeing that bow be­
ing broken, was very much perturbed, called the principal, pre­
eminent wrestlers and charioteers, and having deliberated with 
his ministers said to Ca:Q.fira : 
Kamsa said: 
344-345. Rama and KrɄ:Q.a, the destroyers of all demons, 
have come. In the morning kill them in wrestling without hesita­
tion. With this or that means the two, proud of their strength, 
should be killed with endeavour by intoxicated elephants or chief 
wrestlers. 
The lord said: 
346-350. Having directed like this, the king with his youn­
ger brother and ministers, mounted, through fear, on the top of 
his divine palace. He put at all gates and on all paths intoxicated 
elephants. Everywhere he put wrestlers and intoxicated elephants. 
Knowing all that the intelligent Krļ:Q.a also, along with Rama, 
stayed, with his followers, in the sacrificial chamber in the night. 
When at the end of the night, the day broke, Rama and Kn:Q.a 
got up from the bed, offered water, were well adorned, and 
having eaten (something) were eager and ready to fight. They 
went out of the house as two lions from a cave. 
351-354. Kn:Q.a saw at the gate of Karilsa's palace his 
elephant named Kuvalayapic;la who resembled the peak of the 
Himalaya mountain, bestowed prosperity on Karilsa, removed 
the pride of the elephant of god (Indra), whose body was huge, 
who was intoxicated. Seeing that great elephant, Kn:Q.a the sup­
porter of the earth, held his trunk with his hand, and jumping 
properly, easily whirled him round and threw him on the ground. 
That great elephant, with his entire body crushed, and crying 
with a fierce sound, suddenly fell on the ground, and died. 
355-361. Having killed him, Rama and Kn:Q.a drew out his 
tusks, seized them and then entered the arena to fight with the 
wrestlers. The demons that were there, on seeing the valour of 
Kr໚:Q.a were frightened·; they fled and came to the harem. Having 
very securely closed the doors they remained there in thousands. 
Seeing the doors firmly closed, the mighty K໛:Q.a easily struck 
them with his foot and caused them to fall down. The two

=== PAGE 348 ===

VI.245.362-376 
3277 
being broken were knocked down. The army and the troop were 
arranged. All remaining there were killed with bodies and necks 
crushed. 0 you noble one, then the two very strong, magnani­
mous fleshy ones, eager to fight, whirling the tusks, saw the wrest­
lers, Cat;tura and Muatika. Ka:rhsa also, seeing the very strong 
Krٷt;ta and Riima, was frightened, and then said to his best 
wrestler, Cat;tiira : 
Karhsa said: 
362. 0 wrestler, kill the two young cowherds at this time 
(i.e. now). Dividing my kingdom I shall readily give you half 
of it. 
The lord said: 
363-370. At that time Krat;ta appeared to be great to the 
wrestlers, like another great Meru mountain in the house and the 
battle. He, Acyuta, was another fire of destruction in the eyes of 
Kaihsa. To women he actually appeared like Cupid, and to his 
parents like a child. He appeared like Viļt;tu to the gods, and to 
cowherds like their friend. They there saw the omnipresent 
Viٷ:Q.u in many forms. Vasudeva, Akriira, so also the very intelli­
gent cowherd Nanda climbed upon another palace, and saw the 
great destruction. Devaki, along with ladies staying in the harem, 
remained there ; and all the auspicious ones with their eyes full 
of tears saw the boy's face. The queen consoled by them entered 
the house. Then all the hosts of gods, seated in aeroplanes in 
the sky, praised the lotus-eyed Kr໒t;ta with shouts of victory. The 
gods, and hosts of Maruts loudly said, "Kill Ka:rhsa." In the 
meanwhile, when the musical instruments were sounded, the 
very strong, best Yadus attacked the two great wrestlers. 
371-376. 
The magnanimous ones, resembling dark and 
white mountains fought with them-Krat;ta with Cat;tiira, and 
Balarama with Muƺtika. Due to the fight between the wrestlers, so 
also to (strokes of) fists and kicks, there was a great havoc, caus­
ing fear (even) to gods. Kra:Q.a, having sported with Cat;tiira for 
a long time, having crushed the body of the wrestler, easily 
knocked him down. That great wrestler who caused great unhap­
piness to gods and demons, vomiting profuse blood, fell on the 
ground and died. Similarly Rama fought with MuHika for a

=== PAGE 349 ===

3278 
Padma Puriil)a 
long time. The powerful one struck him on his chest with fists. 
With his bones and sinews broken he fell on the ground. Then 
all the wrestlers seeing the valour (of Balarama) ran away. 
377-387. 
Kamsa suffering from agony, was very much frigh­
tened. In the meanwhile the invincible, magnanimous heroes, 
Riima and Kf$:Q.a got upon the high palatial seat. KrHla, Hari, 
striking with one foot Karil.sa on his head knocked him down on 
the ground from the top of the palace. He, with all his limbs 
broken, (fell) dead on the ground. When Kmta had killed 
Kamsa, very strong Riima also struck his (Karil.sa's) younger 
brother Sunaman with the fist only. The supporter of the earth 
(i.e. Balarama) knocked him down on the ground. Riima and 
Kr$Qa, having killed the wicked Kamsa along with his younger 
brother, approached their parents, and saluted them devoutly. 
Devaki and Vasudeva repeatedly embraced them and longing 
for sons, smelled the two affectionately on their heads. Over 
them the breasts of Devaki showered milk. Then having cheered 
up their parents, Riima and Kf$:Q.a went out. 0 goddess, in the 
meanwhile divine drums were beaten, and the chief gods dropped 
showers of flowers. The divine hosts of gods having praised and 
saluted Kf$:Q.a, and being very highly pleased, went to their res­
pective worlds. Kr$Qa, the pious one, along with Riima saluted 
the cowherd Nanda and the old cowherds, and joyfully embraced 
them. He gladly gave them wealth with many gems. 
388-392. 
Kf$Qa honoured all those old cowherds with gar­
ments, ornaments etc. and with much wealth and corn. Dismissed 
by that Kf$Qa, they, led by the cowherd Nanda, and full of joy 
and sorrow, went to the divine Vraja. Having approached their 
maternal grandfather, the invincible Riima and Kr$:Q.a freed him 
from imprisonment, and having repeatedly consoled him, KT$:Q.a 
consecrated him on the kingdom (i.e. as the king). Through best 
briihma:Q.as he got performed the obsequies of Karllsa. Having 
installed the chief Yadus like Akriira on the kingdom (i.e. as 
kings) he made Ugrasena the (chief) king, and Kf$Qa, Vasudeva's. 
pious son, ruled the kingdom righteously.