=== PAGE 1 ===

ANCIENT INDIAN 
TRADITION & MYTHOLOGY 
TRANSLATED BY 
A BOARD OF SCHOLARS 
AND EDITED BY 
Dr. G.P. BHATT 
VOLUME 46

=== PAGE 2 ===

ANCI ENT I NDIAN TRAD I T I ON AND 
MYTHOLOGY SERIES 
[PURAİAS IN TRANSLATION] 
VOLUMES 
SIVA 1-4 
LINGA 5-6 
BHAGAVATA 7-11 
GARUJ;>A 12-14 
NARADA 15-19 
KDRMA 20-21 
BRAHM.Al':l":PA 22-26 
AGNI 27-30 
VARAHA 31-32 
BRAHMA 33-36 
V.AYU 37-38 
PADMA, PARTS I-VIII 39-46 
VOLUMES UNDER PREPARATION 
BHAVI::;YA 
BRAHMA VAIV ARTA 
DEVIBHAGAVATA 
KALIKA 
MAR?J;>EYA 
MATSYA 
PADMA, PARTS IX-X 
SKANDA 
VAMANA 
VI::;@u 
VI$J':WDHARMOTT ARA

=== PAGE 3 ===

THE 
PADMA-PURANA 
PART VIII 
TRANSLATED AND ANNOTATED BY 
Dr. N.A. DESHPANDE 
MO T I LA L B A N A R S I D A S S PUBL I S H E R S 
PVT. LTD. eDELHI

=== PAGE 4 ===

First Edition: Delhi, 1991 
© MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD. 
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
ISBN: 81-208-0807-x 
Also available at: 
MOTILAL 
BANARSIDASS 
41 U.A., Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 001 
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Madras 600 004 
16 St. Mark's Road, Bangalore 560 001 
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004 
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001 
UNESCO COLLEcriON OF REPRESENTATIVE WORKS- Indian Series 
This book has been accepted in the Indian Translation Series 
of the UNESCO Collection of Representative Works, 
jointly sponsored by the 
United Nations Educa-
tional, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
(UNESCO) and the Government of India. 
PRINTED IN INDIA 
BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS, A-45 NARAINA 
INDUSTRIAL AREA, PHASE I, NEW DELHI 110 028 AND 
PUBUSHED BY 
NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS 
PVT. LTD., BUNGALOW ROAD, JAWAHAR NAGAR, DEUII 110 007.

=== PAGE 5 ===

PUBLISHER'S NOTE 
The purest gems lie hidden in the bottom of the ocean or in the 
depth of rocks. One has to dive into the ocean or delve into the 
rocks to find them out. Similarly, truth lies concealed in the 
language which with the passage of time has become obsolete. 
Man has to learn that language before he discovers that truth. 
But he has neither the means nor the leisure to embark on 
that course. We have, therefore, planned to help him acquire 
knowledge by an easier course. We have started the series of 
Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology in English Translation. 
Our goal is to universalize knowledge through the most popular 
international medium of expression. The publication of the 
PuraJ;J.as in English Translation is a step towards that goal. 
Acknowledgements 
It is our pleasant duty to put on record our sincere thanks 
to Dr. R.N. Dandekar and the UNESCO authorities for their 
kind encouragement and valuable help in the publication of 
the volumes in this series.

=== PAGE 6 ===

EDITORIAL 
We are happy to add one more to the already published forty­
five volumes of the AITM series. The present one, being the 
eighth part of the Padma Pural).a in E nglish translation, com­
prises chapters 82-184 of the sixth, Uttarakhal).<;ia, Section which 
is big enough to occupy the next part and part of the tenth and 
last one. 
As an analysis of the contents reveals, out of the 103 chapters 
of the Uttarakhal).<;ia included here as many as 42 deal with the 
Holy Places of the Jambii Dvipa, highlighting their efficacy, 
with the help of illustrative stories, in the riddance of both 
major and minor sins, not only of a person who actually visits 
them with faith and takes a holy bath there but also of his fore­
fathers of a varying number of previous generations. The reader 
will notice that each and every such place is praised as if it were 
the holiest of holy places-a tendency akin to what Max MUller 
has termed 'henotheism' in the case of the Vedic gods. 
Next comes the devotion to god ViᗬIJ.U, to which about 30 
chapters are devoted narrating the various celebrations, festivals, 
rites, vows and modes of worship to be performed to propitiate 
the god. Devotion to ViᗬIJ.U is said to be of three kinds, viz. 
Sattvika, Rajasa and Tamasa. In Sattviki Bhakti, which is the 
best of the three, the devotee merges his heart in Him, dedicates 
himself to Him, practices compassion and is always intent upon 
duties sacred to Viᗬl).u; he worships the Lord three times a day 
and subsists on fruits, roots and water, and imprints his body 
with marks of a conch and a disc. Ths second type, i.e. Rajasi 
Bhakti, is the one motivated by a desire to get objects of sen­
suous enjoyment, glory and affluence. The Tamasi Bhakti which 
is the most inferior of the three types, is characterized by egoism. 
hypocrisy, deceit and destructiveness. In the practice of medita­
tion and devotion the deity with a form is preferred to a form­
less one. and this may be treated as an argument in favour of 
idol-worship. The Pural).a argues : "How can a man go along a

=== PAGE 7 ===

Vlll 
Editorial 
vacant path without a support? . . . The one (Lord) having a form 
is easily seen. The formless one is not seen. There is pleasure 
of service of the one having a form; no (such) pleasure in the 
case of serving a formless one" ( ch. 132). 
One of these chapters (ch. 90) contains the story of a demon 
Saiikha who, attributing the invincible power of gods to their 
possession of the Vedic hymns, snatches the Vedas from Satya­
loka when Viᗬt;tu was asleep, how he was killed by the Lord 
assuming the form of a big fish and then how the Vedas were 
recovered from waters by the sages at the behest of the Lord. 
Several things are indicated by this mythical account, viz. main­
ly that though Brahma, the god residing in the highest Satya­
Ioka is the custodian of the Vedas, the real keeper of a vigil 
and the protector of them is Lord Vigm; and that the sages who 
recovered the different portions of the Veda from water are the 
seers of their respective portions, not their authors. This acco­
unt most probably points to the historical fact that the Vedas 
were at some time not known to recorded history thrown by 
some foreign invaders from across the seas into the sea and 
were later recovered and restored to their original shape by some 
bnihmal).a sages. It may as well be surmised that in some remote 
antiquity a master copy of the Vedas was kept in the custody of 
a super-priest of Brahma category, and was stolen by some here­
tics, but was fortunately recovered in time, and then started the 
practice of committing the Vedas to memory and passing them 
on through oral tradition only for security reasons. 
Incidentally, chapter 88 of this part reiterates that Lord K.rᗬJ;ta 
had sixteen thousand wives, and recommends the gift of Tula­
puruᗬa (articles equal to the weight of a person) for obtaining a 
husband like Kp;J;ta from birth to birth. 
The last ten chapters of this part praise the first ten chapters 
of the Gita and show how a recitation of each wholly or partly, 
intentionally or accidentally elevates a wretch to the highest 
spiritual position. While praising chapter sixth for its efficacy 
the famous Chandogya story of king Janasruti and sage Raikva 
is reproduced with a slight variation in these names making 
them Jiianasruti and Raikya respectively. 
Next comes the story of Jalandhara which has already been 
narrated in detail in chapters 3-1 8 of this KhaJ;tᘊ (vide Pd. P.,

=== PAGE 8 ===

Editorial 
ix 
Part VII). Here it, very strangely, reappears in nine chapters, 
viz. 96-104 without any new feature at all. We have already 
hinted at the multiple authorship of this Pura:Qa in our Preface 
to Part VII and may only add here that it was a sensless act on 
the part of the author of this repetition. 
Lastly, one long chapter (122) is devoted to the details of 
Dipavali celebration, which gives a sort of religious sanction to 
the practice of gambling during the festival. It is said that Par­
vati defeated Siva in the game of dice and sent him away naked, 
and further that he who gets victory first (in gambling) passes 
the whole year happily. 
Some more observations of the Pura:Qa may be noted here : 
In chapter 112 it has been stated that religious merit or sin of 
one pe rson can pass to another person through contact, e.g. due 
to being paired together, going together, eating from the same 
pot etc., followed by a long list of what fraction of it passes 
under what circumstances. The arithmatic involved here, if not 
arbitrary, would pose a serious juridical problem for one wish­
ing to find a rational basis for the calculation. 
The Pural,.la has introduced two technical terms in chapter 
1 14, viz. suska for non-deliberate sin and iirdra for a deliberate 
one, and two more in chapter 1 32, viz. sukla dravya for money 
earned through performance of one's duty, which is equivalent 
to the current term 'white money' earned through rightful means, 
and, by implication , krslJa dravya for 'black money'. 
In chapter 1 17 it has been declared that one having no faith, 
a sinful person, an atheist, one with a split mind and a disputant 
-these five do not get the benefit of a visit to a holy place. 
At the time when this Pura:oa was composed very early marri­
age was in vogue, as is indicated by the injunction of the Pur8.J}.a 
(vide ch. 1 18) that a man should marry his daughter before she 
has attained puberty, with this further remark that wise men 
recommend a girl's marriage when she is eight years old. 
Finally, the Pura:Q.a (ch. 126) gives a list of a few apparently 
good practices which become worthless under certain circum­
stances : e.g. religious practices accompanied by hypocrisy are 
worthless ; penance becomes worthless by anger; knowledge 
without practical application is worthless; a gift given to a brah­
ma:Qa who is not learned in worthless, etc. 
-G. P. BHAIT

=== PAGE 9 ===

CONTENTS 
PUBLISHER'S NOTE 
v 
EDITORIAL 
vii 
ABBREVIATIONS 
xv 
PADMA-PURAᘋA : SECTION VI : UTTARAKHAᘌ:OA 
(CONTINUED) 
82. The Greatness of Vigm's Devotees 
2633 
83. The Swing Festival 
2636 
84. The Damanaka Festival 
2638 
85. The Sayana Festival of Vi!?:Q.U 
2641 
86. The Investiture of the Sacred Thread 
2643 
87. Monthly Offering of Flowers to Vigm 
2646 
88. Dialogue Between Satyabhama and Kr!?l}.a 
2648 
89. An Account of Satyabhama's Former Birth 
2652 
90. Kartika Best among Month's and Ekadasi among 
Days 
2654 
91 . The Greatness of Prayaga 
2656 
92. Rules for the Vow of Kartika 
2658 
93. The Bath Rite 
2660 
94. Restraints during the Kartika Vow 
2663 
95. Bringing the Vow to Conclusion 
2665 
96. The Birth of Jalandhara 
2667 
97. The Conquest of Amaravati by Jalandhara 
2670 
98. Vi!?l}.U Promises not to Kill Jalandhara 
2672 
99. Rahu Acts as Messenger of Jalandhara 
2675 
100. Siva's Attendants Fight the Demons off 
2678 
101. The Fight Goes on 
2680 
102. Jalandhara Plays a Trick 
2682 
103. Vrnda Curses Vi!?l}.U 
2684 
104. The End of Jalandhara 
2687 
105. The Greatness of Dhatri and Tulasi 
2689 
106. The Kalaha Episode 
2691 
107. Kalaha Is Emancipated 
2694 
108. King Cola and Brahmal}.a Vi!?:Q.Udasa 
2696

=== PAGE 10 ===

xii 
109. King Cola and Vig1udasa Become Attendants of 
Viᗭ:Q.U 
1 10. The Story of Jaya and Vijaya 
1 1 1 . The Greatness of Krᗭ:Q.ii and Ve:Q.i 
1 12. Portions of Merit and Demerit That go to Others 
1 13. Dhanesvara's Story 
1 14. The Seven Hells Shown to Dhanesvara 
1 1 5. Asvattha and Vata Praised as Gods in Disguise 
1 16. Alakᗭmi's Episode 
1 17. The Importance of Bathing in Kiirtika 
1 18. Siva Answers Kartikeya's Queries 
1 19. In Praise of a Fast for a Month 
120. The Greatness of Salagrama 
121. The Importance of Offering Lights etc. 
122. The Celebration of Dipiivali 
123. Instructions Concerning the Fast 
124. Haribodhini, Bhiįmapaficaka etc. 
125. The Importance of Miigha As Told by Bhrgu 
126. The Importance of Miigha As Told by Dattiitreya 
127. The Release of a Demon 
128. The Hymn Yogasiira in Praise of Viᗺ:Q.u 
129. The Deliverance of the Five Gandharva Maidens 
and Vedanidhi's Son from Imphood 
1 30. Kinds of Devotion to Viᗰ:Q.U 
131. Worship of the Salagriima Stone 
132. Ramembering Viᗭ:Q.U 
133. The Holy Places in Jambiidvipa 
134. The Greatness of Vetravati 
1 35. The Greatness of Sabhramati 
1 36. The Greatness of Nanditirtha 
1 37. Vikir:Q.atirtha and Svetodbhava 
1 38. The Greatness of Ga:Q.atirtha 
1 39. The Greatness of Agnipiilesvara 
140. Hira:Q.yiisaligamatirtha 
141. Madhuriiditya 
142. Kambutirtha and Kapitirtha 
143. Ekadhara and Saptadhariitirtha 
144. Brahmavalli and Khat;gatirtha 
145. Saligamesvara 
Contents 
2698 
2700 
2703 
2705 
2708 
2710 
2712 
271 5 
2717 
2720 
2724 
2728 
2734 
2736 
2743 
2746 
2752 
2763 
2768 
2779 
2799 
281 7 
28 1 9 
2820 
2830 
2833 
2835 
284.2 
2844 
2845 
2846 
2849 
2850 
2853 
2854 
2856 
2858

=== PAGE 11 ===

Contents 
xiii 
146. Rudramabalayatirtha 
2859 
147. Khac;lgatirtha 
2860 
148. Miilarkatirtha 
2860 
149. Candanesvara 
2861 
150. Jambiitirtha 
2862 
151. Dhavalesvara 
2863 
1 52. Biilapendratirtha 
2868 
153. Durdharᗭesvara 
2871 
154. Khac;lgadharesvara 
2873 
155. Dugdhesvara 
2878 
156. Candresvara 
2880 
157. Pippaladatirtha 
2881 
158. Nimbiirkadevatirtha 
2882 
159. Kotaratirtha 
2883 
160. Vamanatirtha 
2884 
161. Somatirtha 
2885 
162. Kapotatirtha 
2886 
163. Gotirtha 
2888 
164. Kasyapatirtha 
2888 
165. Bhiitalaya, Ghatesvara and Vaidyamitha 
2889 
166. Pii:Q.c;lurarya-tirtha 
2890 
167. Ca:t;.c;lesa, Gal;latirtha 
2891 
168. Vartraghnisaiigamatirtha 
289 1 
169. Varahatirtha 
2896 
1 70. Saiigamatirtha 
2897 
171. Adityatirtha 
2898 
172. Nilakal;ltha 
2898 
173. Durgasaiigamatirtha 
2899 
174. The Rise of Nrsimha 
2899 
175. The First chapter of the Gita : The Anecdote of 
Su8arman 
2906 
176. The Second Chapter of the Gita 
29 10 
177. The Story of Jac;la : The Importance of the Third 
Chapter 
2914

=== PAGE 12 ===

xiv 
178. The Forth Chapter : The Stor y of Two Gir ls 
179. The Fifth Chapter : The Stor y of Piligala 
1 80. The Sixth Chapter : The Stor y of Raikya 
181 . The Seventh Chapter : The Story of Salikukan;,t a 
1 82. The E ighth Chapter : Bhavas arm an's Story 
1 83. The Ninth Chapter : A Goat's Stor y 
1 84. The Tenth Chapter : A Swan's Story 
Contents 
2918 
2921 
2922 
2928 
2930 
2933 
2937

=== PAGE 13 ===

ABBREVIATIONS 
Common 
and 
self-evident abbreviations such as Ch(s)­
Chapter(s), 
p-page, 
pp-pages, 
v-verse, 
vv-verses, 
Ftn-Footnote, Hi st. Ind. Philo. -History of Indian Philosophy 
are not included in this list. 
ABORI 
AGP 
AIHT 
AITM 
AP 
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Insti­
tute, Poqna 
S.M. Ali's The Geography of PurOJ)as, PPH, New 
Delhi, 1973 
Ancient Indian Historical Tradition, F. E. Pargiter, 
Motilal Banarsidass (MLBD), Delhi 
Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology Series, 
MLBD, Delhi 
Agni Puriil;la, Guru Mandai Edition (GM), Ca l­
cutta, 1957 
Arch. S.Rep. Archaeological Survey Report 
AV 
Atharva Veda, Svadhyaya Ma:Q.gal, Aundh 
Bd. P. 
BrahmiifJ4a Purii!Ja, MLBD, Delhi 1973 
BG 
BhagatVJdgitii 
Bh. P. 
Bhiigavata Purii!JQ, Bhagavat Vidyapeeth, Ahmeda-
Br. 
BS. P. 
BV. P. 
cc 
cvs 
DB 
De or 
GDAMI 
Dh. S. 
ERE 
GP 
bad 
Briihmal;la (preceded by name such as Satapatha) 
Bhavi$ya Purii!Ja, Vishnu Shastri Bapat, Wai 
Brahma Vaivarta Puriil;la, GM, 1955-57 
Caturvarga Cintiimal;li by Hemadri 
Caral;la Vyuha Sutra by Saunaka, Com. byMahida.sa 
Devi Bhagavata, GM, 1960-61 
The Geographical Dictionary of Ancient and Media­
eval India, N.L. De, Oriental Reprint, Delhi, 1971 
Dharma Sutra (preceded by the author's name 
such as Gautama) 
Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics by Hastings 
Garuq.a PuriiJJa, ed. R. S. Bhattacharya, Chow­
khamba, Varanasi, 1964

=== PAGE 14 ===

xvi 
GS 
HD 
lA 
IHQ 
JP 
KA 
KP 
LP 
Manu. 
Mbh. 
MkP 
MN 
MtP 
MW 
NP 
PCK 
Pd. P. 
PE 
PR or 
PRHRC ֔
v 
Sat. Br. 
SC or SMC 
SEP 
Abbreviations 
Grhya Sutra (preceded by the name of the author 
such as Apastamba) 
History of Dharma Siistra, P.V. Kane, G. 0. S. 
The Indian Antiquary 
The Indian Historical Quarterly 
Purli1Ja (Journal of the Kashiraj Trust), Varanasi 
Kautilya Arthaslistra 
KUrma PurlitJa, Vetikatesvara Press E dn., Bombay; 
also Kashiraj Trust Edn., Varanasi, 1971 
Linga PurliT.Ja, GM, 1960; also MLBD, Delhi, 1981 
Manusmrti 
Mahiibhlirata, Gita Press, Gorakhpur, VS 20 14 
MiirkatJrleya Purli7Ja 
Mahiibhiirata Niimlinukrama'l;ti, Gfta Press, Gorakh­
pur, VS 2016 
Matsya Purli7Ja, GM, 1954 
Monier Williams' Sanskrit-English 
Dictionary, 
MLBD, Delhi, 1976 
Niiradlya or Niirada PurliT)a, Vetikatesvara Press, 
Bombay 
Bhliratavar$1ya Prliclna Caritrakosa, Siddheshwar 
Shastri, Poona, 1968 
Padma Purli1Ja, GM, 1957-59 
Purli1Jic Encyclopaedia, V. Mani, English version, 
MLBD, Delhi, 1975 
Puranic Records on Hindu Rites and Customs, 
R. C. Hazra, Calcutta, 1948 
&·Veda, Svadhyaya Ma:r;tqal, Aundh 
Satapatha Brlihma1JQ 
Smrti Candrikli by Devanna Bhaga 
Studies in Epics and Purli1)as, A.D. Pusalkar, 
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan (BVB), Bombay

=== PAGE 15 ===

VI.82.1-17 
2633 
CHAPTER EIGHTYTWO 
The Greatness of Vi$1JU's Devotees 
Piirvati said: 
1 . 0 lord ofthe universe, 0 master, tell what are said to be 
the characteristics of Viᗬl}.u's devotees, and what is their impor­
tance. 
Mahiideva said: 
2-9. 
Since he belongs to Vigm, he is looked upon as a 
follower (or devotee) of Vigm. Brahma should be known as the 
source of all and as one who has taken up a form. From him 
bra.hmal}.as, masters of the Vedas, are born. They should be 
known as Viᗬl}.u's devotees and never the others. He who poss­
esses purity, truth, forgiveness, who is free from attachment and 
hatred, who knows the ideas contained in the Vedic lore, is 
known as a devotee of Viᗬl}.U. He who is always engaged in 
keeping the sacred fire, who always honours his guests, who is 
devoted to his father and mother, is called a devotee of Viᗬl}.u. 
He who is having the virtue of compassion, who is averse to 
sins, who is marked with a conch and a disc, is called Viᗬl}.u's 
devotee. He who wears a garland round his neck, who always 
utters (the name of) Rama with his mouth, who would always 
devotedly sing (Viᗬl}.u's praise), is said to be Vi$l}.u's devotee. 
Those men who are always devoted to the Pural}.as, who are 
always engaged in (performing) sacrifices, should be known to 
be Vi$l}.U's devotees, and are dear to all sects. Those sinful men 
who censure them, repeatedly go to (i.e. are born in) bad stocks 
after their death. 
10-17. 
Those brahmal}.as who always honour the image 
named Gopala, fashioning it from 
a metal only with four 
hands, and well decorated, worship it, are known to enjoy 
religious merit. Those brahmal}.as who after having fashioned 
an image (of Vi$l}.U) from stone and called Kr$l}.a and beautiful 
in form, worship it, should be known to be of meritorious forms. 
Where there is the Salagrama stone, where there is the stone 
from Dvaraka, or where there is the combination of these two, 
there is salvation. There is no doubt about this. If after install-

=== PAGE 16 ===

2634 
Padma PuraTJ.fJ 
ing the image with (i.e. to the accompaniment of) a hymn, one 
worships it, then that worship gives a crorefold merit. It leads 
to religious merit, acquisition of worldly prosperity, satisfaction 
of sensual desires and salvation. Devotion of nine kinds1 should 
be shown for Viᗬ:Q.U. Therefore, you should make the image of 
stone or metal. Devotees should meditate upon it and worship 
it. A devotee should offer to the image worship with kingly 
attendance. One should always remember lord Viᗬ:Q.u, the soul 
of all, the only refuge of the helpless and the poor, and the 
cause of the existence of the worlds. One should always remem­
ber (Viᗬ:Q.u), destroyer of great sins, (as present) in that image 
and say 'This is Gopala, so also Krᗬ:Qa, and Rama.' 
18-30. 
He who worships (the lord) properly, is a man of 
the lord. The best men, the followers of Viᗬ:Q.u, should fashion 
the form (of the image) like that as was taken up by Kesava (i.e. 
Krᗬ:Q.a or Viᗬ:Q.u) in Gokula. A wise man should fashion his 
form for self-gratification. By (doing) this, ample devotion is 
produced. There is no doubt about this. In that image should 
be fashioned especially a conch, a disc, a mace and (other) 
weapons of Viᗬ:Q.u according to (proper) measure. One should 
get fashioned an image having four arms, two eyes, holding a 
conch, a disc and a mace, wearing a yellow garment, beautiful, 
very large, wearing a garland of wood-flowers, and with bright 
ear-rings of lapis lazuli, having gems on the crown, and 
always shining with Kaustubha. (It should be) of gold, silver, 
copper or brass. (He should) get it installed especially by best 
brahma:Q.as with Vedic hymns as given in the sacred texts. After 
that it should be worshipped according to the (injunctions in) 
holy texts. The worship should be duly offered with hymns and 
in sixteen ways2 of doing homage. When Viᗬ:Q.U is worshipped, all 
deities are worshipped. Therefore, the great lord should be 
worshipped in this way. The god without beginning and end, 
I. 
Navadha Bhakti-Listening to the praise of Vi¾Q.U, narration of his 
virtues, remembering him, serving his feet, worshipping him, saluting him, 
servitude to him, his friendship, and offering oneself to him. 
2. 
ǅol,l.asopaciira-Sixteen ways of doing homage to a deity etc: Offering a 
·seat, reception, offering water for washing feet, for rinsing the month, 
respectful offering, giving water for sipping, madhuparka, bath, garments, 
.ornaments, sandal, flowers, incense, lamp, eatables, salutation.

=== PAGE 17 ===

VI.82.3I-39 
2635 
holding a conch, a disc, a mace, and the lord of all gives every­
thing to his followers, of the nature of merit. As is Viᗬ:Q.u, so is 
Siva. There is absolutely no difference between the two. 0 
goddess, knowing like this, the fashioning of the images of both 
should be done. There is no doubt that he who worships Siva 
and is given to censuring Viᗬ:Q.u, lives in the Raurava hell. I am 
Viᗬ:Q.u, I am Rudra, I am Brahma, the grandsire. I repeatedly 
and constantly live in all beings. 
Piirvati said: 
3 1 . 0 Mahesvara, tell me properly about the characteris­
tics of those who are said to be the servants and followers and 
devotees of Viᘉ:Q.u? 
Mahiideva said: 
32-39. 
Siidras are his servants, Narada and others are his 
followers, and 0 daughter of the (Himalaya) Mountain, Prah­
lada, Ambariᗪa and others are his devotees. He who is always 
engaged in a rite in honour of the Supreme Being, who recites 
the Vedas and the Vedii.ilgas, and has the marks of a conch and 
a disc is said to be a VaiᗪJ).ava. That siidra who is always 
engaged in serving brii.hmal}.as, who always worships Viᗪ:Q.u, and 
listens generally to the Purii.J}.as that are acceptable to the Vedas, 
is said to be Viᗬ:Q.u's servant, 0 daughter of the (Himalaya) 
Mountain. He who resorts to (i.e. looks upon himself as a child 
of) five years and is devoted in many ways, is called Viᗬ:Q.u's 
devotee, and is approved of among (i.e. by) all good men. 0 
you beautiful young lady, Dhruva and others, so also Ambariᗪa 
and others are said to be devotees of all times by the sages. In 
the Kali age siidras very much devoted to meditation on Viᗪ:Q.u, 
are most blessed. They enjoy happiness in this world, and go to 
the eternal (position) of ViᗬJ}.u. That siidra who has the marks 
of a conch and a disc, and who is devoted to ViᗬJ}.u, and who 
celebrates especially the four festivals, is the servant of Viᗬ:Q.u, 
as it is seen and heard.

=== PAGE 18 ===

2636 
Padma Purii'f)a 
C HAPTE R EIGHTYTHRE E 
The Swing Festival 
Parvati said: 
1-3. 0 Mahesvara, tell me about the rites (performed) in all 
months. A great festival is to be celebrated (in these months). 
Which is the accepted manner (in which the festival is to be 
celebrated)? 0 lord of gods, tell me which the deity is who is 
to be worshipped, what his greatness would be, and on which 
day (of the month) it is to be performed. What is told to the 
devotees ofViᗬQ.u of meritorious deeds about the month ? I am 
blessed, I am fortunate, I am lucky on the earth, that I (shall) 
hear the story of ViᗬQ.U (from you) by seeing you and coming in 
your contact. 
Siva said: 
4-18. 
I shall, 0 sinless one, tell you the mode of the festi­
vals, hearing which you will be delighted as by songs and 
musical instruments. First, especially on the Ekiidasi of the 
bright fortnight of the very auspicious month of Caitra one 
should worship (ViᗬQ.u) mounted on a swing. 0 goddess, one 
should always devoutly celebrate the festival according to the 
rule. They (who) see KrᗬQ.a, remover of the blemishes of the 
Kali age, mounted upon the swing, are, 0 daughter of the 
(Himalaya) Mountain, free from thousands of offences. The sins 
committed during crores of existences remain as long as one 
would not swing god (ViᗬQ.u), the lord of the universe, the 
master of the universe. Those who in the Kali age see Janardana 
mounted upon the swing, are freed even though (they have 
committed) the sin of killing a cow. What then can be said 
about others? Gods, along with Rudra, being delighted at the 
swing festival, jubilantly dance, sing, and play upon musical 
instruments in the courtyard. Sages, the attendants of Siva, 
gandharvas, the groups of the celestial nymphs like Rambha, 
so also the serpents led by Vasuki, so also deities and chief 
gods, desiring to see ViᗬQ.u come to the swing (festival). On the 
swing (festival) day in the vernal season beings are present for 
(i.e. at the time of) the swing festival, and 0 great goddess, those

=== PAGE 19 ===

Vl.83.19-34 
2637 
belonging to a heavenly stock also certainly go (there) when (the 
image of) Krᘐ?:Q.a is (placed) on the swing. Seeing Viᘐ?:Q.U on the 
swing, there is a festival for the three worlds. Therefore, giving 
up a hundred other occupations celebrate a festival on the swing 
(festival) day. Prahlada comes there. Viᘐ?:Q.U mounts on the 
swing, 0 great goddess. Remembering him who grants a boon 
(one should celebrate the festival). Those who keep awake (on 
that night) remembering Kn:g.a on the swing, receive the fruit of 
all their religious merit in a moment. Those who see Viᘐ?:Q.U on 
the swing in the spring, being saluted by the god of gods, play 
with Viᘐ?:Q.U. One seeing (the image of) the god facing the south 
and mounted on the swing, 0 goddess, is free from (the sin of) 
the murder of a brahma:g.a on seeing Viᘐ?J.I.U (just) once. 'Om, we 
know the god mounted on the swing. We think of Madhava. 
May that god urge us on'. This is the worship with the Gayatri 
(hymn). 
19-34. 
'Repeated salutations to Madhava, Govinda, Sri­
kaQtha'. The worship should be done to the accompaniment of 
the hymn and according to the rule. Being composed he should 
give a gift to his preceptor according to his capacity. He should 
devoutly sing (the praise) of Viᘐ?:Q.u; then the (worship) will be 
complete. 0 you beautiful lady, what is the use of repeatedly 
saying other things? Viᘐ?QU remaining on the swing removes all 
sins. He, worshipped properly by men, always gives everything. 
Where (Viᗱ:g.u) remains on the swing, gods, and kinnaras with 
gandharvas come there. There is no doubt about this. There he 
should worship Viᘐ?QU with the hymn, Om, Namo Bhagavate 
Vcisudevaya ('Om, Salutation to the lord Vasudeva'). With this 
hymn he should worship (Viᘐ?QU). He should do the worship 
according to the rule and in sixteen ways of doing homage (to 
Viᘒ?Qu) . All his desires for virtue, material welfare etc. would 
certainly get fulfilled. 0 you of a good vow, all that like the 
assignment of (the various parts of) the body, hand etc., should 
be done with (i.e. to the accompaniment) of this hymn. The 
festival should be celebrated with the hymn as told in the holy 
text. He should keep (the image of) the deity (Viᘐ?:Q.U) along with 
Lakᘐ?mi on the swing. In front of (the image of) the deity he 
should install (the images of) Narada etc.-the divine sages. So 
also the devotees like Visvaksena should always be installed in

=== PAGE 20 ===

2638 
Padma PuriJ1)1J 
the front. The wise one should wave the light with the sound of 
five musical instruments. 0 goddess, in every watch he should 
be carefully worshipped. He should offer him respectful offering 
with coconuts and white banana plants. He should be carefully 
worshipped, 0 goddess. '0 god of gods, 0 lord of the world, 0 
holder of a conch, a disc and a mace, accept the worship. Favour 
me.' The remnants of the offering should be given to ViᗬJ;tu's 
devotees. The devotees of ViᗬJ;tu should play upon musical 
instruments and dance there. Then especially the swinging (of 
the swing) should be done. 0 goddess, all the holy and sacred 
places that are there on the earth, come there to witness (the 
festival) on that day. Knowing like this, 0 goddess, the great 
festival should be celebrated. 0 you daughter of the (Himalaya) 
Mountain, brii.hma:J;tas, kᗬatriyas, vaisyas, sfi.dras and all other 
castes should be looked upon to be holding a conch, a disc, a 
mace. 
CHAPTE R EIGHTYFOUR 
The Damanaka Festival 
Mahiideva said: 
1-19. 
In this month of Caitra itself, the Damanaka festival 
should be celebrated ; and especially on the twelfth day the rite 
should be properly performed. (This festival) meritorious and 
enhancing the joy of the people, should be devoutly celebrated 
by the devotees of ViᗬJ;tu. The blossom ·of Damanaka that has 
originated from the joy of gods should be offered by the devo­
tees, the followers of ViᗬJ;tu, desiring the fruit of the entire wor­
ship on the twelfth day of the bright half of Caitra, 0 daughter 
of the (Himalaya) Mountain. With the mind fixed on the great 
festival a man should celebrate it with great devotion. 0 you 
sinless one, having first gone to a grove, (a man) should worship 
(the deity) with Rati, according to the preceptor's order (say­
ing), 'Salutation to you, 0 Kii.madeva, deluding all. I shall look 
out (for you) for ViᗬJ;tu. (Please) favour me.' He (i.e. his image)

=== PAGE 21 ===

VI.84.I-19 (cont.) 
2639 
should be brought home to the accompaniment of the sounds 
of singing and musical instruments. 0 best among the gods, 
ViᗱIJ.u's devotees should devoutly worship him at night after 
preliminary consecration of his image at night. Then before 
him (i.e. his image) an auspicious circle should be drawn all 
round. Then he should install him there with Rati. The wise 
one should (then) cover the image with a white (piece of) cloth ; 
and should place damanaka. The best brahmal).as, the devotees 
of ViᗰIJ.U, should perform the worship there only. 'Klirh, saluta­
tion to Kamadeva. Hrirh, salutation to Rati also.' A wise man, · 
after installing (the image of) Kandarpa in the quarter of Indra 
(i.e. the east), should worship (the image). 0 chief among gods, 
at night offering of sandal, flowers, so also incense, lamp, waving of 
lights should be devoutlyᘈ and in the proper manner done. (Saying) 
'Salutation to Madana' (he should) worship in the east. (Saying) 
'Salutation to Manmatha' (he should) worship in the south-east. 
(Saying) 'Salutation to Kandarpa' (he should worship) in the 
south. (Saying) 'Salutation to Anaiiga' (he should worship) in 
the rakᗬa (i.e. the south-west) direction. (Saying) 'Salutation to 
him whose body was reduced to ash' (he should worship) in the 
west. (Saying) 'Salutation to Smara' (he should worship) in the 
north-east. (Saying) 'Salutation to isvara' (he should worship) 
in the north. (Saying) 'Salutation to Puᗬpa-ha.I).a' (i.e. having 
arrows of flowers) (he should worship) in the north-east. In all 
the four directions he should worship (the image of) him. Then 
worshipping damanaka with sacred rice grains, incense, lamps, 
offerings of eatables, tambiilas, he should salute damanaka after 
consecrating it with the recitation done one hundred and eight 
times of the Kama-Gayatri (hymn) : 'We know that Puruᗬa. 
Kamadeva. We reflect on him. May that Anatiga urge us on'. 
(Then he should say :) 'Salutation to Puᗬpabal).a giving joy to 
the world; (salutation) to Manmatha, the eye of the world, and 
to him who delights Rati. Salutation to you, 0 god of gods. 0 Sri 
Visvesa (i.e. the lord of the universe), salutation to you. Salutation 
to you, 0 lord of Rati; salutation to you, 0 ornament of the uni­
verse. 0 lord of the world, salutation to you. Salutation to you, 
0 origin of everything.' With such various types of hymns, espe­
cially with those that are told in the sacred texts, Janardana, 
along with Lakᗰmi, should be carefully worshipped. Then the

=== PAGE 22 ===

2640 
Padma PuraT)Il 
wise (man) should report the act (to the lord), and keep awake. 
{He should say), '0 god of gods, 0 lord of the world, 0 you who 
give the desired objects, 0 you dear to Kamesvari, 0 ViᗬJ}.u, fulfil 
the desire in my heart'. Srinivasa, Jagannatha (i.e. ViᗬJ}.u) who 
desires the good of his devotees, should be carefully worshipped 
with many such hymns. He should offer damanaka to deities 
like Lakᗬmi and ViᗬJ}.u. Then (he should offer) a great worship 
with incense etc. And a great festival should be celebrated with 
songs, musical instruments, dancing etc. A pitcher is placed 
before the deity. Having poured water from the pitcher on the 
feet of the deity, he should have water-sport on that day. Then 
he should devoutly worship his preceptor with garments, orna­
ments and money. Then he should eat along with his kinsmen 
-the devotees of ViᗬJ}.u. 
M ahiideva said: 
20-3 1. Then he should worship ViᗬJ}.U with damanaka­
sprouts. When ViᗬJ}.u is worshipped, I am always worshipped. 
0 goddess, on seeing the damanaka festival, he who has killed 
a brahmal}.a, or snatched away gold, or is a drunkard, or eats 
flesh, is freed from the sin. 0 goddess, those good devotees of 
ViᗬJ}.U who have worshipped the deity with damanaka, with 
damanaka-sprout, have visited all the sacred places. He who 
has worshipped ViᗬJ}.U with a (damanaka-)sprout, has studied 
the Vedas, all holy texts, and maintained the sacred fire. His 
family-whether of a brahmal}.a, kᗬatriya, vaisya, siidra or (of) 
any other (caste)-is lucky, is said to be very lucky. Being born 
in a family in which the damanaka festival is celebrated, is 
blessed. So also he who has worshipped ViᗬJ}.u. 0 goddess, 
having worshipped (Viᗬ1;1u) with damanaka when spring has 
arrived, he gets the fruit of the gift of a thousand cows. He who 
would with great devotion worship ViᗬJ}.u with jasmine flowers 
in the spring, would obtain salvation. Maruka and damanaka ins­
tantly pleased Viᗬl}.u. Therefore, the best men, Viᗬl}.u's devotees, 
should worship (Viᗬl}.u with these). When he has worshipped 
Viᗬl}.u, he has made (a gift of) a thousand cows, has given his 
daughter (in marriage to a worthy groom), has given the gift of 
the earth. Of him who, having taken but one damanaka-sprout; 
worships the lord of gods when spring has come, 0 daughter

=== PAGE 23 ===

VI.85.1-20 
2641 
of the (Himalaya) Mountain, I do not know the measure of his 
religious merit. He having four arms enjoys the fruits of merit, 
worldly objects, sensual desires here (i.e. in this world) and in 
the next world, and enjoys Viᗬ:Q.u's position. 
CHAPTER E IGHTYFIVE 
The Sayana Festival of ViŤu 
Mahiideva said: 
1 - 1 1 . A devotee of ViᗬQu should devoutly and with joy 
worship and celebrate the festival of the lord of the world lying 
in water on the full-moon day of Vaisakha. Having had songs, 
(having played upon) musical instruments, having danced and 
celebrated the auspicious great festival, he should, 
being 
delighted, see the best god on the Ekadasi (day). Devoutly 
singing a song in praise of Viᗬl)u, he should celebrate the auspi­
cious festival. '0 lord of gods, lie in this water. When, 0 lord 
of gods, you are asleep, the world also is asleep.' On the advent 
of the rainy season, those men who put Viᗬ:Q.u in water, have no 
torment in hell, 0 best goddess. The bed called Viᗬ:Q.u, should 
be made in a golden vessel, or a silver vessel, or a copper 
vessel, 0 best goddess. Or it should be made in an earthen 
vessel. Having put there cold water made fragrant, the wise 
man should install in that water (the image of) ViᗮQU. The 
image should have the name of Gopala or of Rama. Or espe­
cially a Salagrama stone should be installed. Or an image of 
that stone (should be put). Its merit is unending. As long as 
the earth, the people on it, the moon and the sun are there, no 
one in his family would be a hellish being. Therefore, 0 great 
goddess, he should worship Viᗬl)U in water. The man, free from 
torment, would exist till the final deluge. During the time of 
Jyeᗬtha and Aᗬa<;lha he should worship Viᗬ:Q.U covered with a 
Tulasi leaf in very cold water. 
12-20. 
Those who worship Viᗬ:Q.u remaining in water with 
various flowers during the time of Jyeᗬtha and Aᗬa<;lha, are free

=== PAGE 24 ===

2642 
Padma PurafJtJ 
from Yama's torment. As water is most dear to ViᗬJJ.U, as he 
lies in water, as he likes water, so, especially in summer, (a 
man) should worship ViᗬJJ.U remaining in water. He who, after 
making the image of Salagrama stone of the deity lie in water, 
has worshipped it, would emancipate his family. He, 0 beauti­
ful one, who has devoutly worshipped ViᗬJJ.U in water when the 
Sun is in Cancer (the fourth sign of the Zodiac), or especially 
when he is in Gemini (the third sign of the Zodiac), and he who 
has offered worship to the lord remaining and lying in water, 
has performed crores of hundreds of sacrifices. Those men who 
in the month called Miidhava (i.e. Vaisa.kha) worship (the image 
of) ViᗬJJ.U after putting it in water are gods on the earth. He 
who having prepared (the mixture of) sandal and water in a 
pot, would put (into it the image of) ViᗬJJ.U, and worship it at 
night on Dvii.dasi, would get salvation. These five-one who 
has no faith, one of a sinful mind, an atheist, one whose doubt 
bas not been removed, and one who acts from a (selfish) motive­
do not enjoy the fruit of the worship. In the same way, 0 great 
goddess, a man who everyday worships the lord of the world 
while he is in water, is freed from great sins. 
21-30. 
0 chief goddess, the worship to him is said to be 
offered with (i.e. to the accompaniment of) the hymn, 'Om, 
Hriih, Hriih, salutation to Rii.ma. Om, Klirh, salutation to 
KrᗬJJ.a, Govinda, dear to the cowherdesses'. With this hymn, 0 
daughter of the (Himalaya) Mountain, he should consecrate the 
water. (He should say :) '0 god of gods, 0 noble one, 0 you 
having the mark of Srivatsa, 0 great god, salutation to you. 0 
cause of the world, salutation to you. 0 god, accept the respect­
ful offering and always give me salvation'. With flowers of 
various kinds he should worship ViᗬJJ.U. Free from all troubles 
he would be absorbed into ViᗬJJ.U. Being very much concentrated 
he should keep awake on Dvii.dasi. He should devoutly worship 
the immutable and inexhaustible god, ViᗬJJ.u. Those who are 
intent on devotion and desire devotion should celebrate the 
festival called ViᗬJJ.u( -festival) in the month of Vaisii.kha. He 
should perform the rites in it as told in the holy texts. When 
this is done, 0 great goddess, it is equal to the fruit of a crore of 
sacrifices. He being free from attachment and hatred and turning 
away great delusion, goes to the eternal (position) of ViᗱlJ.U

=== PAGE 25 ===

VI.86.1-19 
2643 
after having enjoyed happiness in the world. A brii.hm.a:Q.a who 
on the earth devoutly celebrates (this) festival, gets free from 
sins, and certainly goes to Vaiku:Q.tha. A man deprived of Vedic 
studies and without the study of holy texts gets Viᗬ:Q.u's position 
on having devotion for ViᗬQu. He would be delighted in self, 
would always be free, and would have conquered his self. He 
goes to Viᗬ:Q.u's position (and remains there) as long as the 
Moon and the Sun (exist). 
CHAPTE R E IGHTYSIX 
The Investiture of the Sacred Thread 
Mahiideva said: 
1-19. 
When the month of Srii.vaQa comes the rite of the 
investiture of the sacred thread should be performed, having 
done which divine devotion is produced. 0 Pii.rvati, the wise 
ones should perform, with faith, ViᗬQu's investiture ofthe sacred 
thread. (By doing that) his worship in the rainy season becomes 
complete. On Viᗬ:Q.u's investiture of the sacred thread one gets 
pleasure. One would get various pleasures on having always 
properly worshipped Viᗬ:Q.u. Having brought a thread, a gar­
ment spun by a brii.hmaQa woman (he should do the rite). Or 
he should use there (i.e. for this rite) thread spun by himself. Or 
similarly he should get a thread spun by a good siidra woman. 
Or he should properly have one through sale. The rite of the 
investiture (of the thread) should be done with silken cloth only. 
So also (the sacred thread for) god Viᗬ:Q.u should be made of 
silver. Or, 0 chief goddess, it should be especially made of gold 
according to the rule. In the absence of all metals the wise ones 
should take (a cotton) thread. The thread reaching the feet is 
said to be the best. The one up to the knees (is said to be) 
middling. The one reaching the navel (is said to be) inferior. A 
wise one should have the investiture (of any one of these 
threads). The thread should have the knots numbering the days 
of the year, or half the number, or one hundred and eight. 0

=== PAGE 26 ===

2644 
Padma Puriir;a 
Parvati, it is also proper (to have one) having half the number. 
On the phallus it is known as liilga, and should be accompanied 
by Ganga and the serpents. 0 goddess, on the image the sacred 
thread should be of wood flowers. It should be prepared beauti­
fully, by which ViᗭIJ.U is pleased. One good sacred thread called 
gandha should always be prepared by men, Viᗭl).u's devotees, and 
it should have only one strand. In the same way the thread sacred 
to the deity ViᗭIJ.U is also said to be (so) for the gods. So also 
(for) the devotees like Ambariᗭa and Dhruva. Then, 0 Parvati, 
sacred threads should be offered here (i.e. in this rite). The first 
day is recommended for investiture with the sacred thread of 
Kubera. The second is said to be the best of days for goddess 
Lakᗭmi. The third for you, and the fourth for Gajanana. The 
fifth is for the Moon, and the sixth for Kartikeya. The seventh 
is said (i.e. recommended) for the Sun; for Durga the eighth is 
told, the ninth for the divine mothers and similarly the tenth is 
(recommended) for Yama. The eleventh is (recommended) for 
all (deities), and the twelfth for ViᗭJ}.u. The thirteenth is for 
Madana, and the fourteenth is said to be for Sarva. Similarly 
the fifteenth (day of the fortnight) is recommended for Brahma's 
worship. 
20-27. These are said to be the proper days of investiture 
with the sacred thread. Twelve is said to be inferior. Double 
(the number) is said to be middling; and thrice the number (i.e. 
thirtysix) is said to be the number of knots on the sacred thread. 
Have it dyed with camphor and saffron, sandal and turmeric. 
Having dyed all this, aud having put it in a new casket, all 
those should be placed like a deity (at the place) where the 
worship of the deity (is to be performed). First, worship of the 
deity should be done. (Then) garment with the thread (should 
be put on). After the sacred thread is put on, the worship is 
said to be done. In the sacred threads the deities would be in 
proximity. Brahmii, Viᘆl).u, and Rudra are the three deities of 
the sacred thread. Kriya, Pauruᗭi, Virii, the fourth (being) 
Aparajita, Jaya and Vijaya, Muktidii, so also Sadiisivii, the 
ninth (is) Manonmani, and the tenth Sarvatomukhi-these are 
the deities of the knots. He should install them on the threads. 
Then with (appropriate) finger position according to the rule of

=== PAGE 27 ===

VI.86.28-35 
2645 
the holy texts, he should invoke them. This is said to be properly 
placing them in proximity. 
28-35. The placing in proximity is done by the finger posi­
tion (called) sannidhi-mudra. Then having protected them with 
(the finger position called) raksa (i.e. protection)-mudra and 
having immortalised them with (the finger position called) dhenu­
mudra he should bring them before the deity. Taking water 
from the pitcher he should sprinkle them with hymns from the 
sacred texts. The sprinkling (should be done) with the hymn : 
'Klim, to KniJ.a'. Then having offered sandal, incense, eatables, 
having given tambiila etc., having worshipped the deities of the 
sacred thread in the sixteen ways of doing homage, having 
incensed the fragrant sacred thread, and facing the deity he 
should consecrate it with (the finger position) called namaskara­
mudra (i.e. mudrii. of salutation) : '0 Mahadeva, with the goddess 
and attendants etc. you are invited by means of these hymns. 
0 lord ViᗭIJ.U, come along with the regents of quarters and 
attendants for the fulfilment of the rite. In the morning we shall 
worship you. Be constantly in the proximity.' Having put in 
the morning that sandal and sacred thread at the feet of god 
Rii.ghava, ViᗭIJ.u, and having performed his rite(s) and with the 
repetition three times of the words, 'This is an auspicious day' 
and with the preliminary religious rite and with words of victory 
and with the auspicious sounds of bells, musical instruments 
and of drums he should offer the worship. He should worship in 
the proper order : first the setiiormost, then the middling and 
(lastly) the inferior. With the hymn 'We know Vasudeva, we 
think of god ViᗭIJ.u; may the god urge us on', or with his own 
hymns he should offer the great delightful worship, having 
offered which ViᗭIJ.u, the soul, is pleased. All round illumination 
should be done according to the rule. The wise man should also 
get prepared four kinds of food. 0 beautiful one, then the 
sacred threads that are worshipped should be given (to brii.h­
maiJ.as). Then he should especially worship his teacher with 
devotion. The great preceptor should be worshipped with the 
rite (of offering) garments and ornaments. After having wor­
shipped his preceptor he should wear the sacred thread. Then 
having given tii.mbiilas to those who are ViᗭIJ.u's devotees and a 
full oblation to Agni, he should report the act to Srinivasa, Sri

=== PAGE 28 ===

2646 
Padma PuriiT)IJ 
KrᗬJ}.a. (He should say :) '0 ViᗬJ}.u, may that (act of having) 
worshipped you without the (proper) hymns, the (proper) acts, 
and without devotion, be certainly well completed'. Then having 
called (his relatives) he should eat the cooked food with his 
dear relatives, Viᗬ1;1u's devotees, and brahmaJ}.as. Those best 
brahmaQ.as who listen to this divine worship are free from all 
sins and go to the highest position of Viᗬvu. 
36-41. There is no doubt that as long as the Moon shines, 
the Sun shines, he who has investiture of the sacred thread shines 
like them. On having the investiture with the sacred thread all 
the gifts and restraints that there are on the earth, become per­
fect. This rite of the investiture of the sacred thread is the king 
of festivals. A killer of a brahmat;.a is purified by it. No doubt 
should be raised about this. 0 daughter of the (Himalaya) 
Mountain, what is said is the truth, the (absolute) truth. The 
religious merit that is said (to result) from the investiture of the 
sacred thread is also said (to be had) from seeing it. 0 noble 
one, the siidras who have devoutly performed this rite of the 
investiture of the sacred thread, are said to be most fortunate. 
I am lucky, I am blessed, I am fortunate, (as) the devotion I 
had for ViᗬJ}.u, gives salvation. 
CHAPTE R EIGHTYSEVEN 
Monthly Offering of Flowers to Viюu 
яahesvara said: 
1-13. 
In Caitra ViᗬJ}.U who removes sufferings should be 
carefully worshipped with campaka or jasmine flowers. One 
should worship the lord of the worlds, the lord of the lords of 
all, viz. ViᗬJ}.u, with damanaka, maruka, and bilva flowers. Or 
(one) being very calm, should (worship him) with divine, red 
lotuses. 0 chief goddess, men worship ViᗬJ}.U in the month of 
Caitra. 0 goddess, and in Vaisakha the great lord should 
always be worshipped. He who has devoutly worshipped ViᗬJ}.u, 
taking (i.e. with) a ketaki-leaf, when the Sun is in the sign

=== PAGE 29 ===

VI.87. 14-27 
2647 
Taurus of the Zodiac, is pleased for a hundred ages of Manu. 
When the month of Jyeᗭtha comes, he should worship (Viᗭ:t;tu) 
with various flowers. When the lord of gods is worshipped, all 
gods are worshipped well. They too, (even) after having com­
mitted thousands of (minor) sins and hundreds of major sins, will 
go there where Viᗭ1,1u dwells with Lakᗭmi. When the month of 
Aᗭii<.Iha comes, they should especially worship (Viᗬ:t;tu). Those 
men who always worship Viᗭ:t;tu with (flowers of) karavira, red 
flowers and lotuses, are meritorious. Those who will worship 
ViᗭI,lu with gold-like flowers and kadamba flowers, have no 
fear from (Sani) the Sun's son. Viᗭ:t;tu worshipped with kad­
amba flowers at the advent of the rainy season, gives desired 
objects as long as the fourteen Indras (last). Vigm, the creator 
of the world, becomes as pleased on having kadamba flower(s) 
as by obtaining Lakᗭmi. 0 best goddess, Viᗭ:t;tu worshipped 
with Tulasi, black Tulasi and asoka flowers, always removes 
(the devotee's) affi.iction. (ViᗮQ.u is pleased with them) who 
worship him when the month of Snival,la comes with hemp­
flower or diirva-blade. 
14-27. 
He should especially be carefully worshipped with 
various flowers. He gives many desired objects till the final 
deluge. 0 daughter of the (Himalaya) Mountain, listen. When 
the month of Bhadrapada comes, he who worships Viᗭ:t;tu with 
campaka flowers, white flowers and red sindiira flowers, with 
white lotuses, 0 great goddess, would obtain the fruit of all his 
desires. In the auspicious month of Asvina worship to Viᗭ:t;lU 
should be offered with jasmine flowers, so also with various 
kinds of flowers. (Viᗰ:t;tu) should be carefully and devoutly 
worshipped by all people. Those men who by bringing lotuses 
only worship Viᗭ:t;tu, obtain on the earth religious merit, worldly 
prosperity, sensual enjoyments and salvation. When the month 
of Kartika comes, the great lord should be worshipped. As many 
seasonal flowers as are there should be offered to ViᗭI)u. With 
sesamum and sesamum flowers he should offer worship. When 
the lord of gods is pleased, the man obtains unending fruit. 
Those who worship Viᗭ:t;tu in Kartika with bakula flowers, 
punnaga and campaka flowers are gods, and not men. In Mar­
gasirᗭa the lord should always be worshipped with ·various 
flowers, offerings of eatables, incense and waving lights. In

=== PAGE 30 ===

2648 
Padma Purd!Ja 
Miirgasirᗭa he should worship Viᗭ:Q.U especially with divine flowers. 
0 great goddess, in the month of Pauᗮa good worship with various 
Tulasi leaves and water mixed with musk should be done, and 
when the month of Mii.gha has come, he should worship Viᗭ:Q.u 
with various flowers. When the supreme lord of the gods is wor­
shipped, a man certainly gets his desired object. The worship 
should be done with camphor or various eatables like sweet­
meats. When Phalguna comes, Viᗭ:Q.u's worship should be done. 
He should fully perform the vernal worship after bringing 
flowers, or, 0 chief goddess, he should worship him with new 
flowers. When the lord of the world is worshipped, a man gets 
the eternal position of Viᗭ:Q.u by Viᗭ:Q.u's favour. 
CHAPTER EIGHTYEIGHT 
Dialogue Between Satyabhiimii and KrsTJ.a 
Hereafter (the narration of) the importance of the month of 
Kii.rtika is commenced. 
Suta said: 
1-17. 
Once the sage (Nii.rada) came taking with him divine 
flowers and (those) of the desire-yielding tree to Dvii.rakii. to 
see Krᗭ:Q.a. Krᗭ:Q.a welcomed and honoured Niirada. Offering 
him a seat, he said : ''This is a respectful offering; this is 
water for washing your feet." And 
Narada offered those 
flowers to Krᗭ:Q.a. Krᗭ:Q.a distributed them among (his) sixteen 
thousand wives. 
The lord, forgetting Satyabhiima, 
gave 
them to all (other wives). Then getting angry Satyabhiimii 
entered the anᘇer-chamber. Calm Krᗭ:Q.a knowing that went 
there and 
bringing Satyabhamii, he mentally recollected 
Garu9a. By merely being remembered, Garu9a, coming there, 
stood before him. Having quickly mounted on the bird, the 
lord said to his dear (wife Satyabhama) : "0 Satya, do not 
be angry; for you, opposing the lord of gods with the deities, I 
shall plant the desire-yielding tree in your courtyard. 0 noble

=== PAGE 31 ===

VI.88. 1 8-25a 
2649 
one, pardon my fault." Making a pledge like this with Satya­
bh.ama, he quickly went to the world of deities (i.e. heaven) 
where that god (lndra), the killer of Vrtra, was. Being solicited 
for the desire-yielding tree, (lndra) replied to the lord : "0 god, 
0 lord, it is not proper for you to take this tree to the earth." 
Then the large-armed (KrᗬI}.a) took out the tree from (i.e. with) 
the root, and the very strong one put it on his vehicle (i.e. 
Garu9a). Then the wielder of the thunderbolt (i.e. Indra), the 
strong (god), speedily raised the thunderbolt and 
struck 
Garu9a (with it saying :) "Leave the desire-yielding tree". Then 
Garu9a, to honour the thunderhold, dropped one feather. Due 
to that stroke of the thunderbolt, three birds (animals?) sprang 
up : the peacock, the mongoose and the blue jay. KrᗬI}.a went 
to Dvaraka. Having come, he planted it in Satyabha.ma's 
house. Then only Narada came and was very much honoured 
by Satya. 
Satyabhiimii said: 
(Please) tell me how I should get such a desire-yielding tree 
and such a husband as the lord in every existence. 
Thus asked, Narada, the best sage, then said : "0 Satya­
bh.ama, he is obtained by means of the gift of tulapuruᗬa." Then 
Satyabhama having weighed Kni}.a according to the precept in 
the holy text, gave (the articles equal to his weight) along with 
the desiring-yielding tree to Narada. Taking all the articles, 
Narada went to heaven. 
Suta said: 
18. 
When Narada had gone after bidding; farewell to KrᗬI}.a, 
Satya with her face blooming with joy said to KrᗮI}.a : 
Satyabhiimii said: 
1 9-25a. I am blessed; I am fortunate. My existence is fruitful. 
My parents who certainly produced me as the (most) favourite 
wife in the three worlds, are lucky in being the cause of my 
birth, as I am (most) dear to you among (your) sixteen thousand 
wives. (I am lucky) since I duly gave, according to the rite as 
told (in the holy text), (the articles equal to the weight of) the

=== PAGE 32 ===

2650 
Padma PuraT)IJ 
lord of creation with the desire-yielding tree to Narada. That 
desire-yielding tree whose account the beings on the earth 
perhaps know, now stands in my house( ?). I am also very dear to 
Krᗭ:Q.a, the lord of the three worlds. Therefore, 0 Madhu­
siidana, I desire to ask you something. If you are my benefactor, 
then tell this in detail. Hearing1 that I shall again do what is 
beneficial to me, so that, 0 god, I shall never be separated from 
you till (the end of) the kalpa. 
Suta said: 
25b-27. 
Hearing these words of his dear (wife), Krᗭ:Q.a, with 
a smile on his face, put his hand into that of Satya, and went 
with pleasure to the foot of the desiring-yielding tree with his 
beloved after having forbidden his attendants (to follow them). 
Having laughed and called Satya, the lord of the worlds with 
the hair on his body bristling and with horripilation spoke (to 
her) to please and delight her. 
Ku1Ja said: 
28-30. 0 dear one, out of my sixteen thousand wives no 
beautiful lady other than you is dear to me. You are (just) like 
my life. For you I had a quarrel with (Indra) the lord of gods 
along with the (other) deities. Listen, 0 dear one; (I shall give 
you) whatever is solicited by you, whether it is small or big, 
even if it cannot be (easily) given, done, or expressed. Then, 0 
dear one, how shall I not tell (i.e. give the answer to) the ques­
tion put by you? Ask everything that is in your mind. I shall 
tell (i.e. answer) it. 
Satya said: 
31-33. Formerly (i.e. in my previous existence) which gift 
(did I give), which vow (did I observe), or which penance did I 
practise, that I, a mortal, have become like Parvati in this 
mortal (world), and that I always occupy half (the portion) of 
your body, always ride Garuga, and went with you to the abode 
of deities like Indra? Therefore, I desire to ask you, what aus­
picious (act) I did in the other (i.e. previous) existence, what 
(kind of) character I had, and whose daughter I was.

=== PAGE 33 ===

VI.88.34-45 
2651 
SrikrIJa said: 
34-45. 
0 dear one, listen attentively. I shall tell you all 
about the auspicious vow you observed in your former existence. 
At the end of the Krta age in Miiyiipuli there was an excellent 
brahmaJ}.a of Atri's family, Devasarman by name, who had 
mastered the Vedas and the Vedatigas. He was hospitable. He 
attended (sacred) fire. He was greatly devoted to the vow (in 
honour) of the Sun. Actually being like another Sun, he every­
day propitiated the Sun. The old man had a daughter, GuJ;J.avati 
by name. Being sonless, he gave his daughter to his disciple 
named Candra(sarman). He (i.e. Devasarman) looked upon 
him as his (own) son, and he who had controlled his passions, 
looked upon him as his father. The two, desiring to collect 
kusas and fuel, once went to a forest. The two then roamed in 
the forest at the foot of the Himalaya mountain. Then they 
saw a fierce demon coming (to them). With their entire body 
overcome by fear, and unable to run (away), they were killed 
by the demon with Death-like form. My attendants, moving 
with me, took them to VaikuJ;J.tha-abode due to the efficacy of 
the region and their religiousness. I was indeed very much 
pleased with them by virtue of just that act of them, viz. they, 
as long as they were alive, worshipped the Sun etc. As the rain­
water goes to the ocean, the followers of Siva, the Sun, GaJ;J.esa, 
Vir?J;J.U, so also the worshippers of Sakti come lto me only. I am 
one, born in five ways, and play with names-as one Devadatta 
calls his sons etc. with (various) names. Then the two lived in 
my house; moved in an aeroplane ; had the brilliance of the Sun ; 
resembled me in form; were near me; enjoyed divine beautiful 
women and pleasures like (being smeared with) sandal.

=== PAGE 34 ===

2652 
Padma Pura7Ja 
CHAPTER EIGHTYNINE 
An Account of Satyabhiimii's Former Birth 
Srikr$1Ja said: 
1 -4. 
Then Gu:Q.avati, after hearing that the two were killed 
by a demon, being overcome by grief for her father and 
husband, lamented piteously : "0 lord, 0 father, where have you 
gone leaving me (and) without me? Today without you what 
should I, a young helpless girl, do ? Who will affectionately look 
after me who am adept in nothing, who am grieved, who am 
living in the house with food, covering etc. ? I am unlucky ; my 
happiness is destroyed ; my lord is killed; my life is doomed. To 
whom should I, a helpless young (woman), resort to today?" 
Srikf$1)a said: 
5- 1 4. 
Thus having very much lamented like a much afflicted 
osprey she, being dispirited, fell on the ground like a plantain 
tree struck by (stormy) wind. Having revived after a long time 
and lamenting on the ground very piteously, she plunged into 
the ocean of grief and was overcome by it. She, doing auspi­
cious acts, sold all domestic articles and performed the rites 
beneficial to the two in the next world. She, highly devoted to 
Viᘑ?:Q.U, calm, truthful, pure and with her senses controlled, lived 
in that city only and sustained her life. From birth till death she 
properly observed two vows : the vow of Ekadasi and the vow of 
(i.e. relating to) Kartika. 0 dear one, this couple of vows is very 
dear to me. It properly brings about pleasures and salvation, and 
sons and wealth. Those, even being great sinners, who, in the 
month of Kartika, when the Sun is in Libra, bathe everyday in 
the morning, are released. Those men who sweep their house 
and present (the auspicious sign of) svastika etc. to Viᘑ?:Q.U and 
worship Viᘑ?:Q.U, are liberated while alive. Those men who bathe, 
keep awake, offer lights, resort to the Tulasi-grove ,in Kartika 
are the forms of Vigm. Those who do like this even for three days 
in Kartika, are venerable even to gods. What to say of them who 
have done it from birth ! 
15-30. 
In this way Gu:Q.avati, always devoted to Viᘐ?:Q.U's 
followers, and having fixed her mind on him, passed every year.

=== PAGE 35 ===

Vl.89. 1 5-30 (cont.) 
2653 
0 dear one, once she who was emaciated due to old age and was 
tormented by fever, slowly, somehow, went to Ganga to bathe. 
When, after she got into the water, she trembled and was 
oppressed by cold and frightened, she saw an aeroplane that 
came from the sky. From the sky it approached with (beings) 
having Viᗭl)u's form, having conches, discs and maces in their 
bands, and properly marked with banners having (the pictures 
of) eagles. She got into the aeroplane served by a bevy of celes­
tial nymphs. The attendants took her being fanned by cbowries, 
to VaikuQtha. Then she, like the flame of a blazing fire, who 
was in the aeroplane, obtained my proximity due to the religious 
merit of the Kiirtika vow. Then all the attendants went with 
me coming to the earth by the request of the deities like Brahmii. 
0 beautiful young lady, all these Yiidavas are my attendants 
only. Your father became (i.e. was born as) this king Satriijit. 
He who was Candrasarman {became) Akriira, and you are that 
Gul}.avati, 0 auspicious one. Due to the merit of the Kiirtika 
vow, you very much enhance my love. At my door you had 
formerly made this Tulasi grove. From that this desire-yielding 
tree has come up in your courtyard, 0 auspicious one. Since for­
merly in Kiirtika you made illumination, therefore, this Lakᗭmi 
living in your house, has become steady. Since you offered all 
that vow etc. to Viᗰl}.u of the from of your husband, therefore, you 
have become my wife. Due to that vow only which you formerly 
(i.e. in the former existence) observed in Kii.rtika, from birth till 
death, you will never be separated from me. Thus, those men who 
are highly engrossed in the Kii.rtika vow, also come near me, as 
you, causing delight to me (have come). Men performing sacri­
fices, giving gifts, observing vows, practising penance do not 
indeed get even a portion of the merit which one gets by the 
Kiirtika vow. 
Having thus, at that time, heard (the words) of the lord of 
the world, Satya, delighted due to the grandeur produced in the 
former meritorious existence, saluted the lord of the universe, 
Krᗭl}.a, who was the only cause of the three worlds, and spoke 
(those) words.

=== PAGE 36 ===

2654 
Padma Puriir)a 
CHAPTER NINETY 
Kiirtika Best among Months and EkadaSr among Days 
Satyii said: 
1-2. To him of the nature of time, all the parts of time are 
equal. Then how is Kartika the best among the months? 0 lord 
of the god of gods, how is it that to you Ekadasi among days 
and Kartika among months are dear? Tell (me) the reason 
for this. 
SrikrsIJa said: 
3-4. 
0 Satya, you have asked well. Listen with a concen­
trated mind a dialogue between Vena's son Prthu and the divine 
sage Narada. What you have asked, 0 dear one, formerly 
Narada was also asked by Prthu. The omniscient sage told the 
reason for the superiority of Kartika. 
Niirada said: 
5- 17. 
Formerly there was a demon, the son of the Ocean, 
named Sankha. He was able to destroy the three worlds and had 
great power and valour. The great demon, having vanquished 
the gods, drove them out of heaven. He also snatched the powers 
of the regents like Indra. Due to his fear gods along with the 
ladies in their harems and with Indra went to the cave of the 
Meru mounta'ln and lived there for many years. When the gods 
who lived in the cave of the Meru mountain, could not be 
subjugated by the demon, he thought : 'Even though the gods 
have been vanquished and their powers snatched by me, yet 
they are full of power. What should I do now? Today it is 
known (i.e. realised) by me that the gods are endowed with the 
power of the Vedic hymns. I shall snatch them. Then all of 
them will be powerless.' Then the mighty demon thinking like 
this and noticing ViᗭIJ.U to be asleep, quickly snatched from the 
Satya world the group of the Vedas. He took the Vedas. Due to 
his fear they moved out, and with the sacrifice and hymns they 
entered the water (of the ocean). Sailkha also, looking for them 
and wandering in the interior of the ocean, did not notice them

=== PAGE 37 ===

VI.90. 18-3 l 
2655 
anywhere seated at one place. Then Brahmii. with the gods 
sought the shelter of Vigm. Taking the materials of worship he 
went to Vigm's house. There the gods performed acts like 
singing, playing upon musical instruments, and repeatedly 
(offered him) sandal, flowers, incense and lights. Then the lord 
devoutly pleased by them, got up. He, having the lustre of a 
thousand suns was seen there by all the gods. The gods then 
having worshipped him in sixteen ways fell (i.e. prostrated 
themselves) on the earth like a staff. Then Vigm said to them : 
Vi֑֒ zu said: 
1 8-3 1 . 0 groups of gods, by means of the auspicious (acts) 
like singing and (playing upon) the musical instruments, I (am 
pleased and) will grant you boons. I shall give you all objects 
desired by your mind. From the Ekii.dasi in the bright half of 
Asvina till the Udbodhini Ekii.dasi men will daily do as you did 
with the auspicious (acts) like singing, (playing upon) musical 
instruments etc. They (will) do what is dear to me, and will 
ever remain in my vicinity. Since what you did-( offering) water 
for washing the feet, respectful oblation, and (offering) water 
for sipping,-has had wonderful effect, it has become the cause 
of your happiness. 0 gods, all the Vedas snatched by Sankha 
remain in water. Having killed the Ocean's son, I shall bring 
them (back). May the Vedas with the basic hymns and sacrifice 
always rest in water from today in the month of Kii.rtika every 
year. From today I (shall) also remain in water. Along with 
the chief sages you may also come with me. There is no doubt 
that those best brii.hmaQas who during this period bathe (daily) 
in the morning, have well performed the ablution at the end of 
a sacrifice. 0 Indra, those men who everyday properly observe 
the vow in Kii.rtika, should be always brought by you to my 
house on their death. And by my order they are always to be 
protected from dangers. 0 VaruQa, you should give them 
progeny-sons and grandsons etc. 0 Kubera, you have to 
increase their wealth by my order. Those men, liberated while 
alive, actually have my form. Those (men) who have from birth 
to death observed this best vow according to the rule laid down 
(in the holy texts), should also be honoured by you. Since you 
awoke me on the day of Ekii.dasi, therefore, this day is always

=== PAGE 38 ===

2656 
Padma Puriir)a 
venerable and gives me joy. This couple of vows, properly observed 
by men, always gives KrᗱI}.a's proximity. No other vow (does it). 
0 best gods, gifts, (visits to) holy places, austerities, sacrifices, 
do not always give (i.e. lead to) heaven. 
CHAPTER NINETYONE 
The Greatness of Prayiiga 
Niirada said: 
l-4a. 
Saying so, ViᗰI}.u taking up a form resembling a small 
glittering fish fell into the hollow of the hands of Kasyapa at 
his residence on the Vindhya (mountain). The sage kindly and 
quickly put him into (his) water-pot. When it could not contain 
itself there, he put it into a well. When it could not contain 
itself there, he put it into a lake. In this way it was (in the end) 
put into the sea. It grew there also. Then ViᗾI}.u, having the 
form of the fish, killed Satikha. Then taking him in his hand 
he came to the Badari-forest. Calling all the sages there, he 
ordered them (like) this. 
SrikUIJa said: 
4b-6. 
Remove the Vedas dropped into the water. Quickly 
bring them with the Upaniᗰads from the interior of the water. 
Till then I, with the group of deities, shall live at Prayaga. 
Niirada said: 
7-1 1 . 
Then all the sages, endowed with 
the power of 
penance, lifted the Vedas with the six Vedatigas and with 
sacrifices. Since then that sage who got a portion of them (i.e. 
the Vedas) became the seer of that (much portion), 0 king. Then 
all the sages together went to Prayaga. They presented the 
Vedas obtained by them to ViᗱI}.U with the Creator. Brahma, 
obtaining the Vedas with the sacrifices was delighted ; and with 
the group of deities and sages he performed the horse-sacrifice. 
At the end of the sacrifice lords of gods, siddhas, serpents,

=== PAGE 39 ===

VI.9 1 . 1 2-28 
2657 
yakᗱas fell (i.e. prostrated themselves) like a staff, and requested 
(ViᗱI).U). 
Gods said: 
1 2- 1 5. 
0 god of gods, 0 lord of the world, 0 master, listen 
to our request. This is time for our joy. Therefore, be a giver 
of a boon. 0 Rama's lord, the sages themselves have brought to 
this place the lost Vedas. Due to your favour we have received 
shares in the sacrifice. May this place always be, by your grace, 
the best one on the earth. It should increase religious merit and 
give pleasures and salvation. May this time also be highly 
meritorious, and may it purify the killers etc. of brii.hmai).as. May 
it give inexhaustible (objects). Grant us this boon. 
Srikr $1Ja said: 
1 6-28. 
0 gods, I think in the same way as you have said. 
Let it be so. May this (place) be famous as Brahmak$etra. A 
king born in the solar dynasty will bring Ganga here. She will 
be here united with Yamuna, the daughter of the Sun. All of 
you, Brahma and others, (should) live here with me. This holy 
place will be well-known as Tirtha-riija ('king of holy places'). 
May acts like (giving) gifts, (practising) penance, (observing) 
vows, (offering) a sacrifice, muttering (hymns), and worship give 
inexhaustible fruits. May they always give proximity with me. 
May sins like the murder of a brii.hmai).a committed during 
many existences perish the very moment at the sight of this 
holy place. Similarly the wise cast their bodies in my vicinity. 
Those men enter my body only and not a new existence. May 
the groups of the dead ancestors of those who come here and 
offer a sraddha intended for the dead ancestors, have the same 
world as mine. May this very auspicious period also be always 
fruitful to men. The sin of those who bathe (here) when the Sun 
has entered Capricornus, · perishes. Merely on seeing those who 
bathe (daily) in the morning in Magha when the Sun is in 
Capricornus, sins go away, as darkness on (the appearance of) 
the Sun. As a result of the (daily) bath in Mii.gha when the Sun 
is in Capricornus, I grant men the triad, viz. the same world, 
the same form (as mine), and proximity (with me) in this order. 
0 best sages, listen all of you. I am the giver of boons to you. I,

=== PAGE 40 ===

2658 
Padma PuriiT)a 
the omniscient one, always live in Badarivana. That fruit which 
you get after ten years by (practising) penance at other place, is 
always got here by you within a day. Those best men who see 
that place, are liberated while alive. Then no sin resides in 
them. 
Suta said: 
29-30. 
Having spoken like this to the gods, the god of gods 
vanished there only with Brahmii.. All gods also lived there in 
portions. And those (gods), Indra and others, vanished. That 
best man of a pure heart who would listen to this religious 
verse or make others listen to it (i.e. tell it to others), would 
obtain the fruit which is obtained in the lord of holy places, 
Badarivana, and (would) also (obtain) met. 
CHAPTER NINETYllNO 
Rulesfor the Vow ofKiirtika 
Prthu said: 
I . 
0 sage, you told me the great fruit of the vows ofKii.rtika 
and Mii.gha. 0 Nii.rada, you also (told me) properly about the 
rite of bathing and about the restraints. (Now) please tell me in 
due order the bringing to completion (of that rite). 
Niirada said: 
2- 1 5. 
You are born from a portion of ViᗰI).U. (Therefore) 
nothing is unknown to you. Yet, 0 son of Vena, listen properly 
to the importance from me who am telling it. A man, being 
careful, should observe the rule about the vow of Kii.rtika, when 
it would be the Ekadasi of the bright half of the month of 
Asvina. When a quarter of the night is left, he, the observer of 
the vow, with a vessel containing water should go out of his 
house in the south-west direction. By the day and in the evening 
1 . 
'Me' here standing for SUta obviously has no relevance.

=== PAGE 41 ===

VI.92. 1 6-30 
2659 
after having placed his sacred thread on his ear, after having 
covered the ground with grass, after having covered his head 
with a garment, having carefully controlled his mouth, without 
spitting or panting, he should pass urine or feces after facing 
the north. If it is night he should face the south. Having held 
his organ of generation he should get up. Taking pure clay, he 
should carefully make purification (i.e. wash) 
by 
which the 
smearing and odour will vanish. He should apply (clay) to his 
organ of generation once, to the anus five times, to the left hand 
ten times, to both the hands seven times, and to the feet thrice 
(and then wash them with water). Twice this (number) is told 
for a celibate, and thrice for a hermit, four times for an ascetic. 
Half (the number should be used for) purification at night. Half 
of it (should be employed when he is) travelling. Half of it is 
(recommended) for women and siidras. All the acts of him who 
does not go through the act of purification, are useless. The 
hymns of one not having his mouth pure, are said not to give 
the (desired) fruit. After that he should carefully cleanse his 
teeth and tongue, '0 tree, give us (long) life, power, success, 
vigour, progeny, animals and wealth.' Uttering this hymn, (he 
should take a piece of) wood of the length of twelve fingers of the 
kᗰira tree1 without fasting on the diminutive day (obscure) (and he 
should cleanse his teeth). He should not cleanse his teeth on the first 
day, the new-moon day, the ninth day, the sixth day, a Sunday 
and at the time of the lunar or solar eclipse. He should avoid 
cleansing his teeth with (a stick of) the kaJJtaki tree, cotton 
tree, nirgll])ᘄa tree, palasa tree, bilva tree, castor oil plant, and 
iiigudi tree. 
1 6-30. 
Then he, with a pleased mind and devoted, should 
go, taking with him sandal, flowers, good tambfilas to the 
temple of ViᗰJJU and Siva. 
Then having separately offered 
articles (and modes) of worship like water for washing the feet, 
respectful oblation etc., and bowed again, he should do auspici­
ous things like singing. He should also honour the good dancers 
having musical instruments made of bell-metal, lutes, tabors etc. , 
so also he should honour the singers with fragrant flowers and 
1 , 
K¾iravrkǄ-Name :or the four trees, viz. Nyagrodha, Udumbara, 
Asvattha and Madhoka.

=== PAGE 42 ===

2660 
Padma Purib;ta 
tiimbfi.las, since they are the forms of Viᗬ:Q.U. In the Kali age 
penance, sacrifice, gifts made with devotion to the good lord of 
the world, always give delight. 0 king, I asked, "0 lord of gods, 
where do you live?" Viᗱ:Q.u, pleased with my devotion then 
spoke to me thus : "I do not live in Vaiku:Q.tha, nor in the heart 
of the yo gins. 0 Narada, I stay there where my devotees sing 
(my praise). Those foolish men who, after hearing a good 
narrative from a Purii:Q.a or the singing of my devotees, do not 
long for me, are hated by me. Men (should) worship them 
(devotees) with sandal, flowers etc. By that I am so much 
pleased as I am not pleased with my worship," Viᗬ:Q.U should 
not be worshipped with the flowers of siriᗬa, dhattura, hill­
plantain, jasmine, salmali, sun-plant, kar:Q.ikara and with sacred 
rice grains. So also Siva should not be worshipped with the 
flowers of japii, kunda, siriᗱa. jasmine, white jasmine, ketaki. 
One should not worship Ga:Q.esa with Tulasi-leaves and Parvati 
with diirviis. A man desiring wealth should not, in the same 
way, worship the Sun with damanaka flowers. Always he should 
use fragrant and best flowers for worship. Having thus offered 
the worship, he should apologise to the god of gods : '0 lord of 
gods, may whatever I have offered as worship without hymns, 
rites and without devotion, be complete. Then having gone 
round (the deity by keeping the deity) to his right, he should 
salute (i.e. prostrate himself) like a staff. 
He should again 
apologise to the deity and the singers etc. Those men who, on 
a night in Kartika, properly worship Viᗬ:Q.U or Siva, have their 
sins completely destroyed, and their ancestors go to Viᗬ:Q.u's 
abode. 
CHAPTER NINETYTHREE 
The Bath Rite 
Niirada said: 
1-10. When the night is left as much as two nac;likas (i.e. 
fortyeight minutes), he, being pure (i.e. having purified himself),

=== PAGE 43 ===

VI.93. 1 1 - 1 9 
2661 
should (taking) with (him) sesamum-seeds, sandal, sacred rice 
grains, flowers, lights etc., go to a pond. The bath in an artifi­
cial pond, a natural pond, in a river or at a confluence of two 
rivers, is said to be giving tenfold merit in (the succeeding) order. 
(A bath taken) at a holy place is said to give unending fruit. 
Having remembered Vigm, he should take the solemn vow of 
bathing. He should offer respectful oblations to the holy places, 
deities etc. in (proper) order. (He should say) : "Om, salutation 
to Kamalaniibha. Salutation to him lying in water. Accept 
(this) respectful offering. Salutation to you. Since ViᗬQu moved 
in VaikuJJ.tha, Prayaga and Badarikasrama, he planted his foot 
in three ways. With all those sages and deities, may gods protect 
me for this reason that from here ViᗬQu moved on. In Kartika, 
to please (you), 0 best god, Damodara, lord of the god of gods, 
I shall bathe in the morning (everyday). (Be) with me. 0 lord of 
gods, 0 Damodara, I am eager to bathe in this water after having 
reflected on you. May my sin perish due to your grace. 0 Hari, 
with R.iidha accept the respectful offering made by me at (the 
time of) an obligatory or occasional (rite) in the sin-destroying 
Kartika in the Kali age. 0 Hari, with Radhii accept the respectful 
offering given by me who observe a vow in the month of Kartika, 
of me who have bathed duly." 
1 1-19. 
After having remembered Ganga, ViᘅJJ.U, Siva, the 
Sun, he should enter the water. He who observes the vow, 
should, standing in water deep up to the navel, bathe duly. 
A householder should bathe with (i.e. after applying) the powder 
of sesamum-seeds and amalaka. For the hermits and ascetics the 
clay at the root of Tulasi (is recommended). He should not bathe 
with (i.e. after applying) amalaka fruits and sesamum-seeds on 
the seventh, the new-moon day, the ninth of both (fortnights) and 
on the tenth day. First he should bathe with dust (i.e. applying 
clay etc.). Then he should bathe with the (recital of) hymns. For 
women and siidras (the bath is) not (recommended) with (the 
recital of) Vedic hymns, (but only) with the PuraQic ones. (Now 
follow) the hymns at the time of bathing : "May ViᗬQu, the des­
troyer of all sins, who formerly for the mission of the gods 
divided himself into three due to devotion for them, now protect 
me compassionately. For this Kartika vow may all gods having

=== PAGE 44 ===

2662 
Padma Pura1)a 
received ViᗬIJ.u's order, always protect and purify me. May all 
the Vedic hymns along with their seeds, secrets and power, 
so also sages like Kasyapa, always purify me. May all rivers like 
Gailga, the big rivers giving water, all tanks with the seven 
seas, purify me. May chaste women like Aditi, yakᗰas, siddhas 
with serpents, herbs, mountains, beings in the three worlds 
quickly purify me." 
20-32. 
Having bathed with (the recital ot) these hymns, the 
observer of the vow, putting a ring of kusa grass on (the fourth 
finger ot) his hand, should properly offer libations of water to 
gods, sages, human beings and (his) dead ancestors. Then the 
observer of the vow, having come out of the water and having 
covered himself with a pure garment, should, after having 
finished rites proper for the morning, again worship ViᗱIJ.U. 
Being diligent and with his mind fixed on him (i.e. ViᗰIJ.u), he 
should, after replembering the holy places etc. and deities, 
again offer worship with sandal, flowers and fruits. The prayer 
at (the time of making) the respectful offering is : "0 destroyer of 
the lord of demons, accept the respectful oblation given by me­
( oblation) of me who have properly bathed (in the morning) in 
the month of Kartika." Then devoutly (honouring) the brah­
maiJ,as who have mastered the Vedas with sandal, flowers and 
fruits, he should feed them and salute them again and again. By 
worshipping the brahma:Q.as, the holy places residing in the 
right foot, the Vedas residing in the mouth, and the deities 
residing in the entire body, would be worshipped. The briih­
ma:Q.as are the forms of the unmanifest ViᗰIJ.U on the earth. By 
one desiring (one's) good they should never be humiliated ; they 
should never be opposed. The observer of the vow should 
worship Tulasi, dear to Viᗬ:Q.u. With a concentrated mind he 
should go round and salute Tulasi. "0 Tulasi, you have been 
formerly created by gods. You have been worshipped by the 
best sages. Salutation, obeisance to you, 0 Tulasi. 0 you dear 
to Viᗰ:Q.u, remove my sin." Then the devout observer of the 
vow, of an affectionate mind, should listen to Viᗬ:Q.u's account 
(as told) in the Purii:Q.a, and should honour that briihma:Q.a, the 
briihmaiJ,a sage (who reads or tells the account). A devout 
man who properly performs the complete rite which is told 
before, obtains the same world as of ViᗬIJ.u. On the earth

=== PAGE 45 ===

VI.94. 1-1 7 
2663 
there is no vow other than that of Kartika and dear to Vigm, 
which removes diseases, which destroys sins, which is great, which 
gives good thoughts, which is the means of sons, wealth etc., 
and which is the cause of salvation. 
CHAPTER NITNETYFOUR 
Restraints during the Kartika Vow 
Narada said: 
1- 17. 0 king, listen fully to the restraints told for men 
observing the Kartika vow, which (will) be told by me. The 
observer of the Kartika vow should not at all eat any kind of 
:flesh and meat, honey, jujube fruit and beans etc. The observer 
of the Kartika vow should avoid corn (whose seeds have) two 
portions, sesamum oil, so also food polluted by tears, polluted 
by (bad) thoughts, polluted by (bad) words. The observer of 
the Kartika vow should not accept others' food, should not 
hate others, should not be an adulterer, should not accept gifts 
at a holy place. He who observes the vow in Kartika should 
avoid the censure of the god of gods, brahmaJ}.as, (his) pre­
ceptor, (another man) observing the vow, of women, kings, and 
great (men). The limb of an animal, meat, powder, jambira 
among the fruits, flesh, masiirika (a kind of pulse) among corns, 
and stale food, are said to be avoided. So also milk etc. other 
than that of a goat, a cow, a buffalo, amiᗬa. all liquids purchas­
ed by a brahmaJ}.a, and rock salt. Gavya (i.e. milk, curds 
etc.) kept in a copper-vessel, water collected in a small pool, 
and food cooked for oneself is said to be 'amiᗬa· by the wise. 
The observer of the (Kartika) vow should observe celibacy, 
should sleep on the ground, should eat from a plate made of 
leaves. He should eat during the fourth part of the day. He 
should always do this. On the Naraka Caturdasi day the obser­
ver of the Kartika vow should smear his body with oil. He 
should not smear his body with oil on any other day (than the 
Naraka Caturdasi day). The observer of the Kartika vow should

=== PAGE 46 ===

2664 
Padma Purar.za 
avoid onions, garlic, pot-herb, mushroom, small red variety of 
garlic, lotus-stalk, radish, so also asafoetida. The observer of 
the vow (in honour) of Vigtu should avoid bottle-gourd, egg­
plant, pumpkin-gourd, and the fruit (of the plant) of brhati, so 
also sleᗬmataka fruit and wood-apple. The observer of the 
Kartika vow should not talk with a woman in her menses, a 
man of the lowest caste, a non-Aryan, a fallen person, an out­
cast, and those out of the fold of the Vedas and the (three) 
twice-born castes. The observer of the Kartika vow 
should 
avoid the food seen by dogs and crows, food prepared by a 
woman who has recently delivered, and food cooked twice, and 
burnt food. He who avoids smearing his body with oil, (sleeping 
on) a bed, others' food, eating from a bell-metal vessel in Kar­
tika, would be one who fully observes the vow. The observer of 
the vow should also observe the Krcchra vow etc. according to his 
capacity. (From the first day) he should avoid in order pump­
kin gourd, egg-plant, root of brhati, bilva-fruit, kaliilga fruit, 
dhatri, coconut, large-sized bottle-gourd, (species of cucumber 
called) patola, badari fruit, bhii.rja-fruit, vikataka-fruit, lotus­
stalk and vika!a-fruit. 
18-28. 
From the first day (onwards) these vegetables are to 
be avoided in the order (given here) . . Similarly, a householder 
should always avoid (eating) dhatri-fruit on Sunday. From 
among these also the man should avoid what pleases Viᗬl).u. 
Having given that to a brahmal).a, the man should always eat. In 
the same way the observer of the vow should have restraints in 
Magha also. He should keep awake and observe the rite as is 
told. Seeing the man observing the Kartika vow as told (in the 
holy texts), Varna's messengers run away like elephants tor­
mented by a lion. This vow (in honour) of Viᗬl).U is superior to 
a hundred sacrifices. The performer of a sacrifice goes to heaven ; 
the observer of the Kartika vow goes to Vaikul).tha. All the 
holy places giving enjoyments and salvation, that are there on 
the earth, remain in the house of the observer of the Kartika­
vow. A bad dream, or whatever bad deed is done through mind, 
speech and body, goes away that moment only on seeing the 
observer of the Ka.rtika vow. Like the servants of a king, Indra 
and others urged by Viᗬl).u's words protect the man who 
observes the Kartika vow. Imps, ghosts, goblins etc. do not

=== PAGE 47 ===

VI.95. 1-24 
2665 
remain there where the observers of the Viᘐ?JJ.U vow are always 
honoured. Even Brahma, with his four mouths, would not be 
able to describe the religious merit of him who observes the 
Kartika vow as told (in the holy texts). (If) a man observes, 
along with restraints, the vow in Kartika, which is dear to Viᘐ?:Q.U, 
which destroys all sins, which gives sons, wealth, grains and 
prosperity everywhere, (then) what is the use of visiting and 
paying homage to sacred places for him ? 
CHAPTER NINETYFIVE 
Bringing the Vow to Conclusion 
Niirada said: 
1-9. 0 king, now listen properly to the rite of bringing to 
conclusion-what the rite is-being told by me in brief. The 
observer of the vow should bring to conclusion the vow on the 
fourteenth of Kartika for pleasing Viᘐ?JJ.U. Above the Tulasi he 
should put up an auspicious pavilion with a good arched door­
way and beautified with flowers and chowries. At the doors he 
should separately honour the door-keepers. He (should have) 
Jaya and Vijaya, meritorious and of good character. At the 
root of the Tulasi he should draw (an) auspicious (circle) all 
around. It should be properly beautified and ornamented with 
four colours. Above it should be a covering (decked) with five 
jewels. Having placed there a pitcher with a big fruit, he should 
worship there the god of gods holding a conch, a disc, a mace, 
having put on a silken yellow garment and with Lakᘐ?mi. The 
observer of the vow should also honour in the circle the regents 
of quarters like Indra, since he was awakened by the gods on 
Dvadasi along with Trayodasi. He was seen to be honoured 
on the fourteenth. Therefore, he is more venerable. A man, 
calm and of a restrained mind, should devoutly fast on that day. 
10-24. With his preceptor's consent he should worship the 
golden (image of) the lord of the god of gods in sixteen ways of 
worship with several eatables. By means of auspicious (acts

=== PAGE 48 ===

2666 
Padma Purii.T)a 
like) singing and (playing upon) musical instruments, he should 
keep awake at night. Those who on (the night of) keeping 
awake in honour of the Disc-holder (i.e. Viᗬ:Q.u), sing devoutly, 
are free from heaps of sins due to hundreds of existences. That 
fruit (which is obtained) by those keeping awake on the day of 
Viᗬ:Q.u, and singing and dancing, is said to be the fruit of those 
who give a thousand cows. He should sing, dance etc. and 
should present spectacles. Of him who keeps a wake on the 
night of keeping awake for Viᗬ:Q.u, in front ofViᗬ:Q.U, he who 
amuses Viᗬ:Q.u's devotees by reciting Viᗬ:Q.u's accounts, who pro­
duces the sounds of musical instruments with his · mouth, and 
who presents free talks, who with these dispositions keeps awake 
in honour of Viᗬ:Q.u, his religious merit everyday is said to be 
equal to (a visit to) crores of holy places. Then on the full-moon 
day he should invite thirty or more briihma:g.as with their wives 
according to his capacity. Since having given boons Vigi.U took 
up the form of fish, therefore, whatever is given, offered into 
fire or muttered is said to be of an inexhaustible fruit. There­
fore, the observerer of the vow should feed those brahma:Q.as 
with sweetened milk etc. He should (saying) Ato deva, offer 
sesamum-seeds and sweetened milk to two separately for pleas­
ing the god of gods and deities. Having then worshipped the 
god (Viᗬ:Q.u), Tulasi and (other) deities, he should give them 
presents according to his capacity and salute them. Then the 
·observer of the vow should duly worship there a tawny cow. 
Having honoured his preceptor instructing him in the vow with 
garments, ornaments etc. and having honoured him with his 
wife, he should give the cow to him. 'Due to your grace may · 
the lord of gods be always pleased with me. May all that sin 
committed by me during seven existences, perish due to this 
vow, and may my progeny be stable. Due to the worship may 
my desires be always fruitful. On death may I obtain Viᗬ:Q.u's 
position very difficult to be secured.' 
25-3 1 
Having thus apologised to and pleased the briih­
ma:g.as, he should dismiss them. Then the observer of the vow 
should give (the materials of) the worship with the jewels to his 
preceptor. Then the devoted one should eat with his friends 
.and elders. The rite is said to be like this in Kiirtika or Miigha. 
A man who thus duly observes the Kiirtika vow, is free from

=== PAGE 49 ===

VI.96. 1- 1 1 
2667 
sins, and getting release he would go into Viᗬ:t;1u's proximity. 
The fruit due to the proper observance of this vow should be 
known to be a crore times more than that of all vows, (visits to) 
all holy places and all gifts. Those who are engrossed in devo­
tion to Viᗬ:t;lU and who observe the Kii.rtika vow are lucky and 
very meritorious, and get all the fruits. Sins remaining in his 
body have deliberation through fear of him. They say, 'If this 
man observes this vow, where shall we go?' Those devotees 
who in this way listen to the restraints, and those who narrate 
them before Viᗬ:t;lu's devotees, would obtain the fruit due to 
their having properly observed the vow, and have all their sins 
destroyed. 
CHAPTER NINETYSIX 
The Birth of Jalandhara 
Prthu said: 
1-3. 0 brii.hmal}.a, (after listening to) the vow of Kii.rtika 
that you told in detail, and the worship of Viᗬ:t;lu at the Tulasi 
root that you told, I desire to ask about the greatness of Tulasi. 
How is she so very dear to the god of gods, Viᗬl}.u, Sii.nigin? How 
and at what place has she sprung up, 0 Narada? (Please) tell 
this in brief. I look upon you as omniscient. 
Niirada said: 
4-1 1 . Formerly when Rudra hurled down the Ocean's son, 
the lord of demons, gods like Brahmii. bowed to Rudra with 
their heads (bent). 0 king, listen. I shall tell you the greatness 
of Tulasi. I shall tell you all the old account with its history. 
Formerly, Indra surrounded by all deities and waited upon by 
celestial nymphs, went to Kailii.sa mountain, to see Siva. When 
he went to Siva's house, he quickly saw there a man of fearful 
deeds and fierce due to his fangs and eyes. He asked him : "0, 
who are you? Where has the lord of the world gone?" When 
asked repeatedly like this, he did not speak. 0 king, Indra got

=== PAGE 50 ===

2668 
Padma Pur4T)a 
angry, reproached him, and said (these) words, "0, though 
asked by me you have not given a reply. Therefore, I shall kill 
you with the thunderbolt. 0 you wicked one, who is your pro­
tector here?" Speaking like this, then Indra struck him hard 
with his thunderbolt. Due to that (stroke) his throat became 
dark blue and the thunderbolt was reduced to ash. Then Rudra 
blazed, as it were burning with lustre. Seeing (this), Brahaspati 
quickly joined the palms of his hands. And Indra prostrating 
like a staff on the ground started praising (him). 
Brhaspati said: 
12-14. Obeisance to Devadhideva (i.e. god of gods), to 
Tryambaka (i.e. having three eyes), to Kapardin (i.e. having 
braided and matted hair), to Tripuraghna (i.e. the destroyer of 
Tripura), to Sarva ; salutation to the killer of Andhaka. Saluta­
tion to Viriipa (i.e. the deformed one), to Atiriipa (i.e. having a 
superior form), to Bahuriipa (i.e. the multi-formed one), to 
Sambhu, to the destroyer, and the giver of the fruit of the 
sacrifices. (Salutation) to the destroyer of Death, to Kala (i.e. 
Death), to him, having a deadly snake; salutation to him who 
destroyed Brahma's head; repeated salutations to the brahmaJ;ta. 
Niirada said: 
1 5- 16. 
Thus praised, Siva, withdrawing the :flame capable 
of burning the three worlds, said to the best brahmaJ;ta (i.e. 
(Brhaspati) : "0 brahmaJ;ta, ask for a boon. I am pleased with 
this praise of (i.e. done by) you. Be famous as (i.e. by the 
name) 'Jiva' as vou gave back (i.e. saved) Indra's life." 
Brhaspati said: 
1 7. 
If, 0 god, you are pleased, (then) go to Indra who has 
sought your refuge. May this fire, risen from the (third) eye on 
your forhead be quelled. 
The lord said: 
18. How can this (fire) enter the eye on the forehead? I 
shall cast it (far) away so that it would not trouble Indra.

=== PAGE 51 ===

Narada said: 
19-24a. 
Saying so, and holding it in his hand, he threw it 
into the salt Ocean. It fell at the confluence of the river Gail.ga 
and the Ocean. Then it got a child's form and wept. Due to 
the sound of its weeping the earth repeatedly trembled. Heaven 
and Satyaloka became deafened due to that sound. Hearing it, 
and being very much wonderstruck, Brahma went there (say­
ing) : 'What is this ?' Just then he saw the child on the lap of 
the Ocean. Seeing Brahma coming, the Ocean too, joined the 
palms of his hands, and bowing to him with his head (bent) 
put the boy on his lap. Then Brahma said (these) words : 
"Whose wonderful child is this?" Hearing (these) words of 
Brahmii, the Ocean said (these) words. 
Brahmii said: 
24b-25a. 
0 you lord ofthe rivers, wherefrom did you get 
this very strong boy, by whose sound gods, demons and great 
serpents are frightened? 
The Ocean said: 
25b-27. 
0 Brahman, this is my boy born on the river 
Ganga. 0 lord of the world, perform for him the ceremonies 
(performed} at the birth of a child etc. 
Ocean's son seized Brahmii's beard, and repeatedly shook it. 
From the eyes of him whose beard was (thus being) shaken, 
tears came (out). Somehow getting his beard freed, Brahmii said 
to the Ocean. 
Brahmii said: 
28-30. 
Since he held these tears from my eyes, therefore, he 
will be famous by the name 'Jalandhara'. Now only he will be 
a youth, master of all weapons and sacred books and will not 
be killed by any being except Rudra; and he will go where a 
born one goes. 
Narada said: 
31-33. 
Speaking like this and calling Sukra he consecrated

=== PAGE 52 ===

him on the throne. Taking leave of the lord of rivers, Brahma 
vanished (from there). Then, the Ocean, with his eyes bloom­
ing with joy on seeing him, solicited Kalanem.i's daughter Vrnda 
for (being) his wife. Those demons, led by Kalanemi, were glad 
and gave that daughter to him (i.e. to Jalandhara). He, the 
mighty and powerful one, aided by Sukra, getting them as best 
friends, ruled over the earth. 
CHAPTER NINETYSEVEN 
The Conquest of Amariivati by Jalandhara 
Niirada said: 
l-6a. 
Those demons living in the nether world and formerly 
vanquished by gods, became fearless and came to the earth to 
serve him. Some time seeing Riihu with his head cut off, the lord 
of the demons asked the brahmru;ta, viz. Sukra : ••O lord, who has 
done this?" Bhargava told him (the account of) the cutting off 
of Rahu's head and the churning of the ocean for nectar done 
by gods. So also the snatching of the jewels and the defeat of 
the demons. Hearing about that churning of his father, his eyes 
were red with anger. He sent a gluttonous messenger to Indra. 
The messenger, going to heaven, quickly reached the assembly 
of gods, (and) with his head not bent due to pride, said to the 
lord of gods. 
The messenger said: 
6b-8. 
The Ocean's son Jalandhara is the lord of all demons. 
I. am the messenger sent by him. Listen to what he has said : 
"Why did you churn my father with a mountain? Give back 
quickly to me all those jewels taken (by you)." 
Hearing these words of the messenger, the lord of the gods 
was amazed. And with fear and anger he spoke to the fearful, 
voracious (messenger):

=== PAGE 53 ===

The lord said: 
9-12. 
Listen, 0 messenger, since the mountains afraid of me 
were put by him to his side, I formerly churned the Ocean. He 
also protected my other enemies, the sons of Diti. Therefore, 
I took away all that collection of the jewels. Formerly Saftkha, 
the Ocean's son, hated gods. He too, struck by my younger 
brother (i.e. ViᗰIJ.u), entered the interior of the Ocean. So go and 
tell him fully the reason of the churning (of the Ocean). 
Niirada said: 
13-23. 
The messenger, thus dismissed by Indra, came home. 
He then told the words (i.e. the message) of Indra to his king. 
Hearing it, the demon, with his lips quivering with anger, 
quickly exerted (himself) with a desire to conquer the gods. In 
that exertion of (conquering) Indra, the sons of Diti came in 
hundreds and crores from the directions and the nether world. 
The demon (Jalandhara) with crores of generals of the army 
like Sumbha and Nisumbba, went to heaven and stood for the 
war. Gods, furnished with armours for the war, went out of 
Amarii.vati. Seeing the demon-army, they stood surrounding 
the city. Then the war between the armies of gods and demons 
took place with (the use of) pestles, iron clubs, arrows, maces, 
axes and (the weapons called) sakti. Rushing to one another, 
they struck one another. In a moment the two armies were wet 
with the stream of blood. The battlefield appeared like the 
evening with the cover of clouds, due to the elephants, horses, 
chariots and foot-soldiers that had fallen and that were being 
knocked down. Bhii.rgava brought back to life the demons killed 
in that war with drops of water consecrated with the magic 
formulas bringing back the dead to life. In the same way 
Brhaspati also brought the gods back to life in that war after 
repeatedly bringing the herbs from the region of DrolJ,a (moun­
tain). Seeing gods again coming back to life in that war Jalandh­
ara, being angry, said (these) words to Bhargava : 
Jalandhara said: 
24. How is it that the gods killed by me in the war again come 
back to life? It is well-known that your science of bringing back 
(the dead) to life does not reside anywhere else (i.e. is not known 
to anyone else).

=== PAGE 54 ===

Bhrgu said: 
25. 
Brhaspati, bringing herbs from the DroJ;.a mountain, 
brings back the gods to life. Quickly snatch away the DroQa 
mountain. 
Niirada said: 
26-33. The lord of the demons, thus told, quickly took the 
Drm;ta mountain and threw it into the ocean and again came back 
to the great battle(fieldJ. Then seeing the gods killed, Guru went 
to the DroQa mountain. He, honoured by the gods, did not see 
the lordly mountain there. Knowing that DroJ}.a was snatched 
by the demon, he was sad and overcome by fear. He with his body 
overcome by breathlessness (i.e. panting), spoke from a distance : 
"Flee, flee; he cannot be conquered. He is born of the portion 
of Rudra. Remember Indra's act." Hearing his words, gods, 
overpowered by fear and being killed by the demons, ran in 
the ten directions. Seeing the gods rent, the demon, the Ocean's 
son, entered Amaravati with the sounds of conches, drums and 
shouts of victory. When the demon entered the city, gods led by 
lndra and tormented by the demons, reached a cave in Meru 
and lived there. Then having separately made the excellent 
demons like Sumbha in-charge of Indra etc. he (i.e. Jalandhara) 
again went to the cave on the golden mountain (i.e. Meru). 
CHAPTER NINETYEIGHT 
Vi1J.u Promises not to Kill Ja /andhara 
Nlirada said: 
1 . Seeing the demon to have come again, gods with Indra 
trembled with fear and started praising ViᗮJ;I.U. 
Gods said: 
2-4. 
Obeisance to you who are always ready for (serving) 
the purpose of the devotee by (taking) many forms like that of the

=== PAGE 55 ===

VI.98.5- 1 9 
2673 
Fish or the Tortoise; (to you) who remove aftliction, who are the 
author of the Creator etc., the creation, maintenance and 
destruction (of the world) ; who have in your hands a mace, a 
conch, a lotus etc. We bow to you, lord of Rama (i.e. Lakᗬmi), 
the killer of the demons, the lord of the first among the serpents 
(i.e. Seᗬa), (to you) wearing a yellow garment, maturing the rites 
like a sacrifice etc., the great author (of everything), fit to be 
resorted to. Salutation to that Vigm, the thunderbolt of Indra 
for destroying the mountain of the grief of the gods tormented 
by the demons, (to Viᗬ:Q.u) lying on the bed of the lord of 
serpents, having two eyes in the form of the Sun and the Moon. 
We salute him. 
Niirada said: 
5-7. 
He who would everyday recite (this) hymn, destroying 
calamities, is never troubled by calamities due to Viᗬ:o.u's grace. 
When the gods thus praised (ViᗬQu) the enemy of the demons, 
Vi$QU came to know about the calamity of the gods. The 
enemy of the demons, getting up quickly with his mind dejected 
through pity, quickly mounted upon Garuc;la, and said (these) 
words to Lak$mi. 
Vil;fU said: 
8. 
Your brother Jalandhara has played havoc among the 
gods. Invited by them, I shall quickly go to fight. 
Lakmi said: 
9. 
0 you treasure of compassion, 0 my lord, if I am always 
dear to you and your devotee, then how should my brother be 
killed by you in a battle? 
The lord said: 
10. 
Due to his being born from a portion of Rudra, due to 
Brahma's statement (about him), and due to your love (for him), 
Jalandhara shall never be kiJled by me. 
Niirada said: 
1 1- 19. 
Speaking like this, Vi$:Q.U holding a conch, a disc, a 
mace and a sword, mounted upon Garuc;la, and went there

=== PAGE 56 ===

where the gods were praising him. The demons tormented by 
the wind (produced) by the very strong wings of (Garuga) whose 
younger brother is Aru:Q.a wandered like the clouds in the sky 
turned round by a storm. Then Jalandhara, seeing the demons 
tormented, did not utter a word, (but) angrily came to Viti:Q.U. 
Then a great fight took place between Viti:Q.U and the lord of 
demons, making the sky having no room in it with their arrows. 
With volleys of arrows Viti:Q.U cut off the demon's banner. 
umbrella, bow and horses and struck him on his chest with one 
arrow. Then the demon having a mace in his hand, jumped 
quickly, struck Garuga on his head and knocked him down on 
the ground. Viti:Q.U laughed and cut off the mace with his sword. 
(Just) then he struck on Viti:Q.U's strong heart (chest) with his strong 
fist. Then the two very strong ones had a hand-to-hand fight, 
resounding the earth with their arms, fists, and knees. Having 
thus fought for a very long time, the brave Viti:Q.U spoke with a 
deep-sounding voice to the king ofthe demons. 
Vi4'!JU said: 
20. 
0 lord of demons, ask for a boon. Due to your valour 
I am pleased with you. I shall even give you what cannot be 
given-( ask for) whatever is in your mind. 
Jalandhara said: 
21. 0 brother-in-law, if you are pleased with me, then 
grant me this boon-with that my sister (Laktlmi) and with your 
attendants, you stay in my house. 
Niirada said: 
22-29. 
Saying "Let it be so", the lord with all his divine 
attendants went with Laktlmi to the city named Jalandhara. 
Jalandhara also putting the gods in the custody of the demons, 
gladly again came back to the earth. The Ocean's son brought 
under his control whatever jewels belonged to the gods, gandh­
arvas and siddhas. The strong one having placed the very strong 
Nisumbha in the Pii.tii.la-abode took Setia and others to the earth. 
Making the multitudes of gods, gandharvas, siddhas, yaktias, 
demons and human beings the residents of his city, he ruled over 
the three worlds. Having thus subjugated the gods he righteo-

=== PAGE 57 ===

usly looked after his subjects like his own sons. When he was 
(thus) ruling righteously, no one was sick, no one was afilicted ; 
similarly no one was weak, no one appeared helpless. When 
thus the lord of demons was righteously and properly ruling 
over the earth, some time, by chance, I went (to that city) to 
see his prosperity and to serve (Vi¶:r;tu), Lak¶mi's husband. 
CHAPTER NINE1YNINE 
Rahu Acts as Messenger of Jalandhara 
Niirada said: 
1. 0 best king, that lord of demons having duly and very 
devoutly honoured me, laughed and said (these) words. 
Jalandhara said: 
2. 0 sage, tell me why have you come here, 0 brahma:r;ta ; so 
also what you have seen and where, and why you have come 
here. 
Niirada said: 
3-16. 
0 lord of demons, I had, by chance, gone to the 
peak of Kailasa (mountain). There I met Siva seated with 
Uma in the great forest of desire-yielding trees extended over a 
myriad of yojanas, crowded with hundreds of desire-yielding cows, 
and well-lit with the desire-yielding gem. Seeing the great wonder 
a thought then arose in my mind. Such abundance may or_may 
not be anywhere in the three worlds. 0 lord of demons, great 
opulence is collected by you. With a desire to see that I have 
come here to you. Seeing this prosperity, except the jewels in the 
form of women of you, I certainly think that there is none else 
(as) rich as Siva. Though celestial damsels and naga damsels 
are under your control, yet they are not certainly like Parvati in 
beauty, in whose ocean of beauty formerly Brahma got murged 
and lost his fortitude. Who else can be compared with her? 
Formerly by her in the form of a bhilla woman was subjugated

=== PAGE 58 ===

by means of penance (Siva) who was without any attachment, 
who was Madana's enemy, on whom the universe depends at 
his pleasure, (but) who wandered in the forest of her beauty. 
On repeatedly seeing her form at the time of creation, the 
Creator created the celestial nymphs. (But) no one resembled 
her. Therefore, she, the best one, is the prosperity of him, the 
enjoyer of the gems of women. 0 you lord of demons, you, the 
lord of all gems, {do) not (have a gem) like that. 
When, having talked like this, I took his leave and left, the 
lord of the demons had his body tormented with the 'fever' of 
love on hearing about her beauty. Then he sent Sirhhika's son 
{Rahu) as his messenger to Siva. Then being deluded a little 
by Vi¶:.;m's 
Maya (illusory power) Rahu went to Kailasa, 
having the lustre of the moon in the bright half. But he obtained 
the lustre of the moon in the dark half through the totality of 
{the lustre) from his body (i.e. he fully resembled the moon in 
the dark half of the month). Siva was informed (of his arrival), 
and by his order he was taken in by Nandin. Urged by the 
indication of the creeper-like brow (of Siva), he said (these) 
words. 
Riihu said: 
17-19. 
0 bull-bannered god, listen to the command of the 
lord served by serpents, master of the three worlds, master of 
all gems. "How can you, the naked one living in the cremation 
ground, wearing a string of heads, have this charming wife, the 
daughter of the Himalaya Mountain? I am the lord of jewels; and 
she is called a gem among women. Therefore, she is proper for 
me and not for you eating (i.e. subsisting on) alms." 
Niirada said: 
20-26. 
When, at that time Rahu was speaking like this, a 
fierce man, with a voice like that of the violent thunderbolt was 
produced from the space between the eye-brows of Siva. His 
face was like that of a lion; his tongue was moving; his eyes 
were fiery; he was great; his hair was erect; his body was dry ; 
he was, as it were, another Nrsirhha. He set about to eat him. 
Seeing him Rahu overcome by fear, speedily ran out; but he

=== PAGE 59 ===

Vl.99.27-34 
2677 
seized him (i.e. Rahu). Then that Rah.u of big arms said to the 
lord of the god of gods with a grave voice like (the sound of) 
the clouds : "Protect me who have sought your refuge. He has 
come to eat me, a brah.ma:Q.a, 0 Mahiideva. 0 you, who love 
those that seek your refuge, protect me from him." Hearing the 
words of that brah.ma:Q.a, Mahiideva then said : "He should not 
be killed, since, being a messenger, he is dependent upon another. 
Leave him" The man hearing these words, left Rahu in the 
sky. Leaving Rahu the man respectfully said to Mahiideva. 
The man said: 
27. 
0 master, hunger oppresses me. I am fully emaciated 
with hunger. 0 lord, order what I should eat. 
The lord said: 
28a. 
Quickly eat the flesh of your hands and feet. 
Niirada said: 
28b-30. 
When the man thus ordered by Siva ate up the 
flesh of his hands and feet, and when he remained with the head 
only, Siva, seeing him with the head left, was very much pleased, 
and with amazement said to that man of fierce acts : 
The lord said: 
31. 
Having the name of 'Kirtimukha' always remain at my 
door. Those who do not honour you, do not do what is dear 
to me. 
Niirada said: 
32-34. 
Since then Kirtimukha remains at the door of the 
lord. The worship of those who do not honour him would be 
in vain. That Rahu who was left by him fell on the Barbara 
region. Therefore, on the earth he is known as BarbarodbhUta 
Then Rahu, thinking that he was reborn here, told all this done 
by Siva to Jalandhara after approaching him.

=== PAGE 60 ===

2678 
Padma Purlb)a 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED 
Siva's Attendants Fight the Demons off 
Narada said: 
1-4. 
Hearing that Jalandhara with his body overcome by 
anger went out surrounded by crores of (soldiers in the) army of 
the demons. Sukra went before him. Rii.hu remained within (the 
range of) his sight. His crown quickly slipped and fell on the 
ground. The entire sky shone with hundreds of aeroplanes 
occupied by the army of the demons as with clouds in the 
rainy season. Then seeing his exertion, gods led by Indra and 
with their hurry unnoticed, respectfully said to Siva : 
The gods said: 
5. 
0 master, how do you not know that the gods are 
respectfully speaking to you. For our protection kill the Ocean's 
son. 
Narada said: 
6. Hearing these words of the gods Siva laughed and 
calling the great Vi¶:Q.U said these words to him : 
The lord said: 
7. 
0 Vi¶:J;tu, how (i.e. why) did you not kill Jalandhara in 
the battle? Afraid of him, you left your VaikU:J;ttha and went 
away. 
Lord(ViъlJU) said: 
8. In the battle I did not kill the demon, since he was born 
from your portion, and since he is also Lڐmi's brother. (Now) 
you (please) kill that demon. 
The lord said: 
9. 
He, of a great lustre, cannot be killed by me with these 
weapons and missiles. All the gods should give me a portion of 
their lustre. 
Narada said: 
10-17a. 
Then gods, led by Vi¶:Q.u, gave their own lustres.

=== PAGE 61 ===

VI. l00. 1 7b-26 
2679 
The lord saw a great lustre (formed) by their coming together 
suddenly. Mahadeva fashioned an excellent weapon, the disc 
(called) Sudar&ana, very fierce(-looking) because of a series of 
flames (issuing forth). Then Siva fashioned the thunderbolt with 
the remaining lustre. (Just) then Jalandhara was seen at the region 
at the foot of Kailasa (mountain). 
He was surrounded by crores of elephants, horses, chariots 
and foot-soldiers. Seeing him as he came there, the gods being 
delighted went (to fight). (Siva's) attendants hurriedly got ready 
to fight. All the attendants led by Nandin, Gajanana, Kartikeya, 
and maddened to fight, got down from Kailasa by Siva's order. 
Then on the land at the foot of Kailasa a war between the 
lordly Pramathas (Siva's attendants) and the demons took place. 
It was fierce, and full of weapons and missiles. The earth that 
resounded with the sounds of multitudes of drums, tabors, 
conches, giving joy to the heroes, so also with the sounds of 
elephants, horses and chariots, trembled. 
17b-26. With the multitudes of saktis, iron clubs and arrows, 
with pestles, barbed missiles and sharp-edged spears, the entire 
sky shone, as if it was covered with meteors. The 
entire 
land shone with the chariots, elephants and horses that were 
struck down. (The ground) was as it were covered with the tops 
of mountains struck by thunderbolt. The ground was inaccessi­
ble due to the multitudes of demons killed by Pramathas 
(attendants), and with marrow, blood, mire of flesh etc. 
Bhargava brought back to life the multitudes of demons killed 
by Pramathas. Seeing (Bhargava) bringing repeatedly back to 
life by the power of the Saiijivani-vidya those that died in the 
battle, all the attendants (of Siva) were perplexed and struck 
by fear. They told the lord of the god of gods all that Sukra 
had done. Then from Rudra's mouth a destructive, very fearful 
deity was produced. Having 
shanks like tala 
(trees), fat, 
crooked, and pressing the trees with her breasts, she reached the 
battlefield, and ate the great demons. Seizing Bhargava in her 
hand she went and vanished. Seeing Bhargava 
seized the 
divisions of the demon-army had their faces dejected; (but) 
maddened for fighting, they struck through pride. Struck by 
the fear of(Siva's) attendants, the demon army was dispersed

=== PAGE 62 ===

2680 
Padma Purii.T)a 
like the scattered heap of grass struck by the speed of wind. 
(Siva's) attendants seeing the demon army broken, rejoiced. 
27-32. The three very powerful ones-the two generals viz. 
Nisumbha and Sumbha and the brave Kii.lanemi-warded off the 
army of the attendants. They discharged arrows as clouds 
(discharge water) in the rainy season. Then the volleys of arrows 
of (i.e. discharged by) the demons, like swarms of locusts, 
blocked the sky and all directions, and they made the entire 
army of (Siva's) attendants tremble. The attendants pierced 
by hundreds of arrows and shedding showers of blood appeared 
like kirllsuka (trees) in spring season. Nothing could be clearly 
seen. Then (Siva's) attendants fell, were knocked down, cut off 
and pierced. Leaving the battlefield, they all turned back. Then 
Gajiinana, lordly Nandin and Kii.rtikeya, overpowered for long, 
seeing their army broken and unable to stand (the demon-force) 
forcibly warded off the excellent demons. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED ONE 
The Fight Goes On 
Niirada said: 
1-19. Those demons on seeing the chiefs of the attendants 
like Nandin, Gajiinana and Kii.rtikeya, impatiently ran (to them) 
for duels. Kalanemi, Sumbha and Nisumbha, (each) equipped 
with an armor, speedily ran (respectively) to Nandin, Gajii.nana 
and Kiirtikeya. With five arrows Nisumbha pierced Kiirtikeya's 
peacock on his chest with speed and he fell down unconscious. 
Then, when the angry Kiirtikeya took his (missile called) sakti, 
Nisumbha forcibly knocked him down with sakti. Then Nandi­
svara pierced Kiilanemi with arrows. With seven he pierced his 
horses and banners, and with three his charioteer. Kiilanemi who 
was angry, cut off Nandin's bow. Throwing it off, he firmly 
struck him on his chest with a spear. He, with his chest pierced 
by a spear and with his horses and charioteer killed, took off

=== PAGE 63 ===

the mountain's peak and threw it at Nandin. Then Sumbha and 
Gajanana, having a chariot and a rat as their vehicles, fighting 
with each other, pierced each other with volleys of arrows. The 
lord of the attendants (i.e. Gajanana) struck Sumbha in his 
heart with an arrow and knocked on the ground his charioteer 
with five arrows. Then Sumbha, being extremely angry, pierced 
Gajii.nana with sixty arrows, (his) rat with three, and thundered 
like a cloud. The rat, with his limbs pierced with arrows, walked 
painfully. Gajanana got down (from the rat) and became a 
foot soldier, 0 king. Then Gajii.nana, having struck Sumbha on 
his chest with a spear, knocked him down on the ground, and 
again mounted the rat. Kii.lanemi and Nisumbha both simult­
aneously struck Gajii.nana through anger with arrows, like a 
great elephant with a goad. Seeing him being troubled, the very 
strong Virabhadra, along with a crore of imps, speedily ran 
(to him). KuᗬmaQ.ᘄas, Bhairavas, vampires, goblins, bevies of 
witches and (other) attendants followed him. Then the earth, 
resounding with kilakila sound (expressing joy), roars like those 
of lions, growlings, (beatings of) drums, trembled. Then the 
imps ran and devoured the demons. They jumped and fell and 
danced on the battlefield. Nandin and Kartikeya hurriedly came 
(there) and struck the demons with continuous volleys of arrows 
in the battle. The army, cut off and broken with the demons 
killed, knocked down and threatened (by the attendants) was 
perplexed, and had a dejected face at that time. 
20-3 1 . Seeing (his) army destroyed, the strong son of the 
Ocean, in a chariot with a superior banner, marched against the 
attendants. Then in both the armies there were loud noise, sound 
of conches and drums, and roars like those of lions. Then with 
volleys of arrows, as with covers of mist, Jalandhara blocked 
the space between heaven and earth. Piercing Gajanana with 
five (arrows), Nandin too with five, and Virabhadra with twenty, 
he thundered like a cloud. Then Kartikeya quickly pierced the 
demon with his (missile called) sakti. Pierced with the sakti he, 
with his mind a little agitated, rolled about. Then, with his eyes 
full of anger Jalandhara struck Kii.rtikeya with a mace. He too 
fell on the ground. In the same way he speedily knocked down 
Nandin on the ground. Then the angry Gajanana cut off his mace 
with his axe. Virabhadra pierced the demon on his chest with

=== PAGE 64 ===

2682 
Padma PurilT)tJ 
three arrows, and cut off with seven (arrows) his horses, banners 
and concealed bow. Then the very angry lord of demons raising 
a ;fierce sakti, knocked down Gajii.nana and got into another 
chariot. Then, full of anger, he speedily marched against 
Virabhadra. Then the two, resembling the sun, fought with each 
other. Virabhadra knocked down his horses with arrows. The 
lord of demons cut off (his) bow, and with an iron bar as his 
weapon, fought. That demon, quickly attacking Virabhadra, 
struck him on his head with an iron club. The demon too, with 
his head pierced, and ejecting blood, fell on the ground. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED TWO 
Jalandhara Plays a Trick 
Niirada said: 
1-12. 
Seeing that Virabhadra fallen, Rudra's attendants 
leaving the battle through fear and crying came to Siva. Then 
hearing the uproar of his attendants, Siva having mounted on 
his bull and laughing a little, came to the battle. Seeing Siva 
coming, the attendants roaring like lions, again returned (to the 
battlefield). In the battle they struck the demons with showers 
of arrows. All the demons, seeing the fierce Siva, ran away as 
sins run away through fear on seeing him who observes the vow 
of Kii.rtika. Then Jalandhara, seeing the demons fleeing on the 
battlefield, angrily ran to Siva and discharged thousands of 
arrows. Sumbha, Nisumbha, Asvamukha, Kii.lanemi, Balii.haka, 
K.haggaroman, Praca:Qga and Ghasmara went (i.e. rushed) to 
Siva. Siva, seeing the army of his attendants covered with the 
darkness caused by the arrows (of the demons), cut off the volley 
of arrows and with his own arrows covered the sky. He then 
troubled the demons with the hurricanes of his arrows. With 
fierce and continuous volleys of arrows he knocked (them) on 
the ground. Similarly he angrily cut off the head of Khaggaro­
man with a battle-axe. With a club having a skull at the top he 
.also cut into two Balahaka's head; and binding the demon

=== PAGE 65 ===

Ghasmara with a noose, he knocked him down on the ground. 
Some were struck by the bull; some were driven away by the 
arrows. The demons, like elephants tormented by lions, could 
not stand (before Siva). Then Jalandhara with his mind full of 
anger and a voice sharp like (the sound of) thunderbolt, quickly 
challenged (Siva) in the battle. 
Jalandhara said: 
13. 
Fight with me today. What is the use of striking these? 
0 you having matted hair, show me whatever might you have. 
Niirada said: 
14-27. 
Speaking like this he struck Siva 
with 
seventy 
arrows. He, laughing a little, cut them off before they reached 
(him) with sharp arrows. Then with seven (arrows) he cut off 
his horses, banners, umbrella and bow. He the powetful one, 
with his bow cut off and without his chariot, took a mace. Siva 
ran (to him) and cut into two his mace with arrows. Yet, rais­
ing his fist he went to kill Siva. (Just) then Siva drove him 
away up to a krosa with the volleys of arrows. Then the demon 
Jalandhara, thinking Siva to be stronger, created a gandharvi 
illusion which was wondetful, and deluded Siva. Then gandh­
arvas and bevies of celestial nymphs sang and danced. They 
sounded musical instruments made of bell-metal, lutes and 
tabors with one another. Seeing that great wonder Rudra was 
deluded by the sound, and he did not even notice weapons 
dropped from his hands. The demon seeing Rudra concentrated, 
was overpowered by sexual desire, quickly went where Parvati 
was seated, after putting the very strong Sumbha and Nisumbha 
in (charge of) the battle. That Jalandhara became one having 
ten staff-like arms, five faces, three eyes, matted hair, 
and 
mounted upon a mighty bull. Then seeing Rudra coming, his 
beloved came from among her friends, and remained within the 
range of his sight. When the lord of demons saw Parvati of a 
charming body, he ejected his semen and his body became dull. 
Then Parvati, recognising him to be the demon, was overcome 
by fear, and vanished and went to Uttaramanasa. Not seeing 
her in a moment like a streak of lighting, he again quickly went 
to the battle(-field) where god Siva stood. Then Parvati also

=== PAGE 66 ===

mentally recollected the great Vigl.U. Then the goddess saw him 
seated by her. 
Piirvati said: 
28. 0 ViǸ1.1u, the demon Jalandhara has done a great 
wonder. Do you not know the act of that wicked-minded 
(demon) ? 
The lord said: 
29. 
We are following the path shown by him only. Other­
wise, he well-protected by (his wife's) chastity would not be fit 
to be killed. 
Niirada said: 
30-32. 
Speaking like this, ViǸ1.1u again went to Jalandhara 
city. And Siva, followed by gandharvas remained in the battle. 
Seeing the illusion to have disappeared, he awoke. Then Siva, 
with his mind amazed, again angrily went to fight Jalandhara. 
The demon too seeing Siva to have come back again, covered 
him with volleys of arrows in the battle. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED THREE 
Vrndii Curses Vi$1JU 
Niirada said: 
1-12. 
ViǸ1.1u having gone to Jalandhara broke through his 
cover and decided to break (i.e. spoil) the vow of chastity of 
Vrnda. Respectable Vrndaraka saw in her dream her husband 
mounted upon a buffalo, smeared with oil, naked, adorned with 
black flowers, and waited upon by groups of eaters of raw 
flesh, (saw him as) having gone to the southern direction clean­
shaved and covered with darkness. (She saw) her city plunged 
into the ocean with herself. Then the young lady, (trying to) 
ascertain (the meaning of) her dream, awoke. She repeatedly 
saw the sun that had risen, as having holes and steady. Know-

=== PAGE 67 ===

VI. l03. 1 3-20 
2685 
ing it to be undesirable, she, overcome by fear and weeping 
did not find pleasure at the principal gate and upper story. Then 
with two (of her) friends she went to the city-garden. The young 
lady, even after having gone there, did not get pleasure any­
where. Going from forest to forest, she was not at all aware of 
herself. Then the young lady who was wandering, saw two 
demons very fierce, having lion-like faces, and fierce fangs and 
eyes. Seeing them, she being extremely alarmed, became wholly 
engaged in running. She saw a calm ascetic observing silence 
with his disciples. Then putting, through fear, her creeper-like 
arm round his neck she said : "0 sage, protect me who have 
sought your shelter." The sage, seeing her alarmed and followed 
by the demons, angrily turned away the fierce demons just with 
a hum sound. Vrnda, seeing them to have gone to the sky due 
to his hum sound, fell (i.e. prostrated herself) on the ground like 
a staff and spoke (these) words : 
Vrndii said: 
13-14. 
0 you treasure of compassion, you have protected 
me from a terrible fear. So I desire to say something respect­
fully. Kindly listen to it. 0 lord, 0 you of a good vow, my 
husband Jalandhara has gone to fight with Rudra. Tell me 
how he is (faring) in the battle. 
Niirada said: 
1 5- 1 8. 
The sage having heard the words looked about with 
compassion. Just then two lordly monkeys came and saluting 
him stood before him. Then ordered by the indication of his 
creeper-like brows, they went to the sky. Having gone, the 
monkeys returned within half a moment and stood before him. 
Seeing them having in their hands the head and trunk of the 
Ocean's son, she, afflicted by the grief for her husband, fell 
unconscious on the ground. She was sprinkled over with the 
water from the pitcher and was brought back to consciousness 
by the sage. Putting her forehead on that of her husband, she, 
being dejected, wept. 
Vrndii said: 
19-20. 
0 lord, how is it that you who formerly amused me

=== PAGE 68 ===

2686 
Padma Purtm.a 
with pleasing news, are not talking to me, your innocent belov­
ed. How is it that you, the conqueror of the three worlds, who 
vanquished gods with gandharvas and Indra, were killed by an 
ascetic (i.e. Siva)? 
Niirada said: 
21 a. 
Thus weeping, V fllda said (these) words to the sage. 
Vrndii said: 
21b-22. 
0 you treasure of penance, 0 best sage, his life is 
very dear to me. I think you alone are capable of bringing him 
back to life. 
Hearing her words the sage laughed and said : 
The sage said: 
23. It is not possible to bring back to life him who is killed 
by Siva in a battle. Yet full of pity for you, I shall revive him. 
Niirada said: 
24-26. 
Speaking like this, when he just vanished, just then 
the Ocean's son, with his mind pleased, embraced and kissed 
Vrnda. Then Vrnda too seeing her husband, delighted in mind; 
she lived in the forest with him, and enjoyed with him for 
many days. Once, at the end of the coitus seeing him to be 
Vi{Qu only, Vrnda getting angry censured him and spoke (these) 
words : 
Vrndii said: 
27-3 1 . 
0 Vi{QU, fie upon the conduct of you, molesting 
another's wife ! I have recognized you to be actually an illusory 
ascetic. The two door-keepers of you whom you showed me 
through your Maya (illusion), shall become demons and kidnap 
your wife. You too, afflicted with the grief due to your wife and 
assisted by the monkeys wander in the forest with him, the lord 
of all who has become your disciple. 
Speaking like this, Vrnda, though prohibited by ViĆQu, not 
having any mental attachment for him, entered fire. Then Vi{Qu,

=== PAGE 69 ===

VI. I 04.1-I 5a 
2687 
repeatedly remembering her, and having covered himself with 
the ash of Vrnda's funeral pyre, remained there only; and 
though advised by the groups of sages and siddhas, did not 
obtain peace. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FOUR 
The End of Jalandhara 
Niirada said: 
1-lSa. 
Then Jalandhara seeing Siva 
having 
wonderful 
valour, fashioned (an) illusory (form of) Parvati to delude Siva. 
At that time Siva saw her mounted upon the chariot, weeping, 
and being killed by Sumbha, Nisumbha and other :demons. 
Seeing Parvati like that, Siva too, with his mind dejected, 
remained silent with his face hung down and forgetting his 
valour. Then Jalandhara speedily pierced Siva in his head, 
chest and belly with arrows plunging up to their feathered ends. 
Then being instructed by Vigm, he realised the illusion. He 
became one having a fierce form, very fierce due to a series of 
flames. Seeing his extremely fierce form, the demons could not 
stand before him and took to the ten directions. Then the god 
gave a curse to Sumbha and Nisumbha : "After having gone 
away from the battle with me, you will be killed by Parvati." 
Again Jalandhara speedily showered (Siva) with sharp arrows, 
so that a great surface of the earth was covered with darkness 
due to the arrows. While Rudra quickly cut off his arrows, the 
mighty one quickly struck the bull (Nandin) with an iron bar. 
Due to that stroke, the bull turned away from the battlefield. 
Though dragged by Siva, he did not remain on the battlefield. 
Then Siva having a fierce form, and very angry, speedily dis­
charged the Sudarsana disc, bright like the sun. Reaching 
Jalandhara speedily, it burnt heaven and earth. It took (i.e. cut) 
off his head with big, long eyes from his body. Resounding the 
earth his body fell from the chariot; and from his body a lustre 
came out and merged into Siva's body. Seeing the lustre coming

=== PAGE 70 ===

2688 
Padma Pural')a 
out from his body and merging into (the body of) Siva, gods 
like Indra with their eyes blooming with joy, saluted Siva with 
their heads (bent down) and told him about Vigm's act. 
The gods said: 
15b- 16. 
0 Siva, you have protected the gods from fear of 
the enemy. Something else has come up. What should we do 
there? Deluded by Vrnda's beauty, ViڑQ.u is stupefied. 
The lord said: 
1 7 . 
0 gods, to remove ViĦQ.u's delusion resort to the fasci­
nating Maya, fit to be resorted to. She will do your work. 
Niirada said: 
1 8. 
Saying so, the god along with the imps and attendants 
vanished ; and gods praised the MUla Prakrti (literally, the 
original source) to whom the devotees were dear. 
The gods said: 
1 9-21. We bow to that pure (cause called) Prakrti, from 
which the constituents, sattva (goodness), rajas (activity) and 
tamas (darkness or ignorance) have come up, which is the pri­
mary cause of creation, maintenance and destruction (of the 
world), by whose desire all this existence and non-existence is 
spread. 0 lady with benumbing missiles, the twentythree divi­
sions (principles), that formerly remained in the entire world, 
are the forms and acts of that (i.e. of you). We bow to her. We 
bow to that nature of ViĦQ.U, which always loves the devotees, 
and men devoted to whom never meet with poverty, delusion, 
defeat etc. 
Niirada said: 
22-29. 
To him, who, with a concentrated mind, recites this 
hymn thrice a day, poverty, delusion, difficulties never touch 
(i.e. come). Those gods who were praising like this, saw in the 
sky, (Maya) abiding in an orb of lustre and pervading the atmo­
sphere with a series of flames. They all saw Bbarati moving in 
the sky from its midst : "I alone, divided in three ways, remain

=== PAGE 71 ===

Vl. 1 05.1-1 5 
2689 
with the three constituents. (My three forms are) Gauri, Lak¶mi 
and Svara (respectively endowed) with sattva, rajas and tamas. 
Go there, 0 gods ; they will do your work." 
Niirada said: 
0 king, when the gods with their eyes blooming with joy 
due to amazement, were hearing like this, the lustre disappeared. 
Then all the gods prompted by those words went and, greatly 
devoted, saluted Gauri, Lak!:lmi and Svara. 0 king, then they, 
loving their devotees, saw the gods bowing down (to them), gave 
them seeds and said (these) words : 
The goddesses said: 
Sow these seeds in that place where Vigtu remains. Then 
your undertaking will succeed. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FIVE 
The Greatness of Dhiitri and Tulasi 
Niirada said: 
1-15. 
0 best king, from the seeds that were thrown (i.e. 
sown) there, three plants came up : Dhatri, Malati and Tulasi. 
Dhatri is said to have come up from Dhatri (the earth), Malati 
from Lak¶mi, and Tulasi from Gauri (having) the qualities 
(constituents viz.) sattva (goodness), rajas (activity) and tamas 
(darkness, ignorance). 0 king, Vi!:liJ.U, deluded by the excellence 
of Vrnda's beauty, seeing the herbs in the form of women got 
up in confusion. Then, with his mind attached to (i.e. full of) 
passion, he saw them. Tulasi and Dhatri also looked at him 
with love only. Since formerly Lak!:lmi gave the seed decepti­
vely, therefore, the woman who came up from it, became jealous 
of him. Therefore, she is called Barbari (i.e. low), and is very 
much condemned by Vi!:liJ.U. Due to his love for them Dhatri 
and Tulasi have always delighted him. Then Vi!:lJJ.U, forgetting 
his grief, went to VaikuJJ.tha with them. He was delighted and

=== PAGE 72 ===

2690 
Padma PuriiTJa 
was saluted by all gods. Therefore, Vi¶1;1u's worship is ordained 
at the time of the conclusion of the Kartika (vow), since it is 
said always to cause delight (when done) at the root of Tulasi. 
0 king, the house of him in whose house stands a Tulasi-grove, 
is of the nature of a holy place. Yama's servants do not come 
(there). Those best men who plant a Tulasi-grove which des­
troys all sins, which is auspicious, which satisfies desires, never 
see (Yama) the Sun's son. The three, viz. seeing (i.e. visiting) 
Narmada, bathing in Ganga, and contact with Tulasi-grove, are 
said to be equivalent. Due to men's planting, protecting, sprinkl­
ing, seeing and touching Tulasi, Tulasi removes their sin com­
mitted through speech, mind and body. He who would worship 
ViĦl}.u with Tulasi-blossoms, does not go to the abode of 
embryo (i.e. is not reborn), and gets salvation. There is no 
doubt about this. In the Tulasi-leaf live holy places like PuĦkara, 
so also rivers like Ganga and gods like ViĦl}.u. 0 best king, if a 
man dies with a Tulasi-leaf (on his person), he obtains absorp­
tion with ViĦ1;1u. This is the truth (and the only) truth. 
16-29. 
Even Yama cannot look at him, even though he is 
full of hundreds of sins, who dies with Tulasi-clay smeared (on 
his body). He who would put on the sandal from Tulasi-wood, 
great sin, though committed by him, does not touch his body. 
0 king, a man should offer sraddha wherever there would be 
the shade of a Tulasi-grove. (Sraddha) offered there becomes 
inexhaustible for the manes of the dead ancestors. The dead 
ancestors in hell, of him who offers pi!}. <;las under the shade of 
a Tulasi-plant, are gratified, 0 best king. He who keeps the 
Dhatri-fruit on his head, in his hand, in his mouth, on his body, 
should be known to be ViĦl}.u himself, 0 best king. He on whose 
body the Dhatri-fruit or clay (from the root) of Tulasi from 
Dvaraka always remains, is called 'liberated while alive.' The 
fruit for that man who bathes with water mixed with Dhatri­
fruits or with Tulasi-leaves, is said to be like that of a bath in 
Ganga. The man who would worship the deities with Dhatri­
leaves or Dhatri-fruits, would obtain the fruit of worshipping 
them with various flowers (made) of gold. In Kartika when the 
Sun has resorted to the Libra sign of the Zodiac, holy places, 
sages, deities, sacrifices always remain resorted to the Dhatri. 
One who plucks a Tulasi-leaf on the twelfth day, and a Dhatri-

=== PAGE 73 ===

VI. l 06. 1 - 1 0 
2691 
fruit in Kartika, would go to very condemned hells. The sin due 
to contact with (prohibited) food, of the man who eats under 
the shade of a Dhatri plant in Kartika, perishes for the (whole) 
year. One who worships Vi¶:Q.U (while sitting) at the root of 
a Dhatri plant in Kartika, has always worshipped at all places 
sacred to Vi{:Q.U. Even the god (Brahma) having four mouths 
would not be able to narrate the greatness of Dhatri and Tulasi as 
of god Vi¶:Q.U. One who devoutly listens to or causes (others) to 
listen to the cause of the origin of Dhatri and Tulasi, has his 
sins shaken off, and he, seated in an excellent aeroplane with 
his ancestors, goes to heaven. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SIX 
The Kalaha Episode 
Prthu said: 
1-2. 
0 brahma:Q.a, you told me properly the greatness of 
Tulasi along with its history. I have listened to this great, very 
wonderful (account). Tell (me) what great fruit a man gets, who 
observes the Kartika vow; (tell) its greatness again. (Tell) also 
who observed it? and in what manner (did he observe it)? 
Narada said: 
3-10. 
Formerly in the region of Sahyadri in the city of 
Karavira there lived a brahma:Q.a known as Dharmadatta, a 
knower of Dharma. He always observed ViǸQu's vow and was 
always engaged in worshipping ViĆ:Q.u. He was fond of muttering 
the hymn of the twelve syllables and guests were dear to him. 
Once in the month of Kartika he went to ViĆ:Q.u's temple for 
keeping awake (in honour) of Vi¶Qu, when the fourth part of 
the night had remained. When he was taking the materials for 
ViĆQu's worship, he saw a demoness of a terrible voice, that 
had come there. Her fangs and face were crooked; her tongue 
had gone down ; her eyes were red; she was naked; the flesh (in 
her body) was dry (i.e. she was emaciated); her lips were long

=== PAGE 74 ===

2692 
Padma Purib)a 
(i.e. protruding); her voice was purring. Seeing her, he, afflicted 
with fear and with limbs trembling, quickly struck her with the 
materials of worship and water. She was (thus) struck (by him) 
after remembering Vi¶Qu's name and with Tulasi-water. There­
fore, all her sin perished. Then she, remembering her former 
existence due to the maturity of her acts, told him her entire 
condition, after saluting him (by prostrating before him) like a 
staff. 
Kalahii said: 
1 1 . I have been reduced to this condition as a result of my 
deeds in the former (existence). 0 brahma:g.a, how shall I again 
attain excellent and auspicious condition? 
Niirada said: 
12. 
Seeing her bowing down before (him) and narrating 
those acts of her, the brahma:g.a, extremely amazed, then said 
(these) words: 
Dharmadatta said: 
1 3. 
As a result of which act are you reduced to such a 
condition? Wherefrom (do you come)? Who are you? What is 
your disposition ? Tell all that to me. 
Kalahii said: 
14-18a. 
0 brahma:g.a, in a city in Saura¶tra there was a 
brahma:g.a named Bhik¶u. I was first his very cruel wife named 
Kalahii. t never did good to him even by words; I who broke his 
command and who always liked to quarrel, never gave sweet 
food to my husband. Then the brahma:g.a was dejected through 
grief; that my husband thought of marrying another woman. 
Then, 0 brahma:g.a, taking poison, I cast off my life. Then 
Yama's followers bound me and took me away. And Yama 
seeing me then, asked Citragupta. 
Yama said: 
l Sb- 19. 0 Citragupta, see what act she has done. Let her 
obtain good or bad fruit of her act.

=== PAGE 75 ===

Then Citragupta, censuring her, said (these) words : 
Citragupta said: 
20-25. 
She has not done any good act at all. She (herself) 
ate savoury food, (but) did not give it to her husband. Therefore, 
let her be (born) in her own feces in the stock of a cockroach. 
Then, 0 Hari, she, who hated her husband and always 
quarrelled, will be (born) in the stock of a female pig eating 
feces. Since she always ate from the pot in which the food is 
cooked, (let her be born) among female-cats eating her own 
young ones. Since she killed herself with reference to her 
husband, therefore, let this extremely censured one live among 
ghosts and goblins. Then with the demons she should be taken 
to the Maru country. Let her, having a ghosts' body, stay there 
for a longtime. Thus having undergone (i.e. passed through) three 
stocks (i.e. existences) (she will be) doing auspicious acts. 
Kalahii said: 
26-31 . That I (i.e. like that I) remained for five hundred 
years in a ghost's body. Everyday I was oppressed by hunger and 
thirst and was afflicted due to my own act(s). Then I, oppres­
sed by hunger everyday, (resorted to) a merchant's body and came 
to the confluence of Kr{J}.a and VeJ}.i in the southern country. 
When I resorted to that bank, I was forcibly thrown away from 
that body(?) by the attendants of Siva and Vi{J}.U. Then, 0 brah­
maJ}.a, I who was emaciated with hunger, who was wandering, 
and whose sin had gone away due to the contact of the Tulasi­
water thrown (by you), saw you. Therefore, 0 best bnihmaJ}.a, 
have pity on me. How shall I be free from the three very fearful 
existences, and from this ghost's body? 
Hearing like this the words of Kalaha, the brahmaJ}.a, full of 
affliction and amazement due to the maturity of her acts, and 
with his mind restless due to having seen her misery thought for 
a long time, and sorrowfully spoke (these) words :

=== PAGE 76 ===

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SEVEN 
Kalaha Is Emancipated 
.Dharmadatta said: 
1 -5. 
By means of (visits to) holy places, gifts and vows etc. 
sins perish. But you, remaining in an imp's body are not entitled 
to them. My mind dejected at seeing this misery of you will not 
be pleased without emancipating you who are unhappy. Your 
sin, giving you the three existences as a result of its maturity, is 
very grave. It cannot be exhausted by other meritorious acts. 
The state of an imp is very censurable. Therefore, obtain a good 
condition by means of half the merit of the Kii.rtika vow observed 
by me from my birth. Sacrifices, gifts, (visits to) holy places and 
vows certainly do not at all have the equivalence to the merit 
due to the Kii.rtika vow. 
Narada said: 
6-8. 
Speaking like this, when Dharmadatta sprinkled her 
with water mixed with Tulasi, repeating the twelve-syllabled 
(hymn), (just) then she was free from imphood, resembled the 
:flame of a blazing fire, had a divine form, and brightened up the 
directions with her beauty. Then she saluted the brii.hma:oa (by 
prostrating herself) like a staff on the ground, and in a voice 
stammering with joy, said (these) words : 
Kalaha said: 
9. 
0 you best brii.hma:oa, due to your favour I have been 
free from hell. Certainly you have been (the emancipator) of 
me who was drowning in the ocean of sin. 
Narada said: 
10-13. 
She who was talking like this to the brii.hma:oa saw 
a bright aeroplane with attendants having Vi¶Qu's form coming 
from the sky. Then two righteous door-keepers of good conduct 
put her into that excellent aeroplane attended upon by a band of 
celestial nymphs. Dharmadatta saw that aeroplane and was 
amazed. Seeing the two meritorious ones he fell on the ground 
like a staff. The two righteous ones of good conduct, raised the

=== PAGE 77 ===

brahmat:ta who had bowed down, and praising him spoke (these) 
words : 
The two attendants said: 
14-26. 
It's good, 0 best brahmaQa, that you are always 
devoted to Viƌt:tu, you are kind to the helpless, you know Dharma 
and are very much engrossed in Viƌt:tu's vow. From your birth 
you observed this Kartika vow. By giving half of (the religious 
merit due to) it her sins collected formerly in hundreds of 
existences, have perished. 
Due to your keeping awake in 
honour of Viƌt:tu etc. this aeroplane has come; so also (have 
come) the residence in Vaikut:ttha, proximity of Vi¶Qu, and 
absorption into him. · Those who have devoutly propitiated 
Viƌt:tu as you have done, 0 Dharmadatta, are lucky and con­
tented. Their existence is fruitful. What will Vi¶QU who formerly 
put Uttana's son (Dhruva) at a fixed place, and by merely 
remembering whose name human beings get good position, not 
give to human beings, when he is properly propitiated? For­
merly the lordly elephant seized by a crocodile became free by 
(merely) remembering his name, obtained his proximity and 
became one called 'Jaya' (i.e. came to be called Jaya). Therefore, 
Viƌt:tu worshipped by you will give you with your two wives his 
proximity for many thousand years. Then, after your religious 
merit is exhausted, when you will go to the earth, you will be a 
famous king born in the solf.tr dynasty named Dasaratha with 
your two wives and with this one as the third (wife) sharing 
half of your religious merit. There on the earth also Vi¶Qu doing 
the work of the gods, will give you his proximity after having 
made himself (i.e. born as) your son. For you sacrifices, gifts, 
visits to holy places are not superior to this your vow (taken) 
from your birth and pleasing Viƌt:tu. 0 briihmaQa, you are lucky 
that you have observed this vow pleasing the lord of the world, 
due to the fruit of the half portion of which this one is being 
taken by us to the same world as of ViƌQU.

=== PAGE 78 ===

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED EIGHT 
King Cola and Briihmal)Q ViŤudiisa 
Niirada said: 
1 . 
Hearing her words like this, Dharmadatta, being amazed, 
bowed on the ground (i.e. prostrated himself) like a staff and 
said these words : 
Dharmadatta said: 
2-3. 
By means of sacrifices, gifts, vows, (visits to) holy 
places, austerities, all devotees properly propitiate Vi{QU who 
removes aflliction. (Tell me) that which pleases Vi{Qu and which 
brings about proximity of Vi{QU and having done which all 
those are done. 
The .two attendants said: 
4-13. 0 briihmal}.a, you have asked well. Listen with a 
concentrated mind to a story, with its history, which took place 
in olden times and which is being told (by us). Formerly in 
Kiintipura there lived an emperor Cola after whom, it is said, the 
country was called Cola. While he was ruling over the globe, 
no man was poor, unhappy, of a sinful design or diseased. Of 
him, performing many sacrifices (i.e. while he was performing 
many sacrifices), both the banks of the TiimraparQi (river) were 
full of beauty with golden sacrificial posts resembling Caitraratha 
(Kubera's garden). Once, 0 briihma:Q.a, that king went to 
Anantasayana where this lord of the three worlds resorts to 
sleep. There the king having duly worshipped god Vi{QU with 
divine gems, pearls, and beautiful golden flowers, saluted him 
(prostrating before him) like a staff and sat (there). When he 
was seated he saw a briihma:Q.a called Vi{:Q.udiisa, who had come 
with Tulasi-water in his hand for worshipping the god and 
living in his own city. Having come there, the briihma:Q.a-sage 
worshipped the god of gods after having bathed him with Tulasi 
blossoms and leaves and with (the recital of) the Vi{Qu-hymn. 
Seeing that the worship done (by him) with jewels (etc.), was 
covered with Tulasi (-leaves) etc. the got angry and spoke (these) 
words :

=== PAGE 79 ===

VI. I 08. 14-30 
2697 
The king said: 
14-16. 0 Vi{oudasa, how is it that the beautiful worship done 
by me with rubies and gold is covered with Tulasi-leaves by you? 
Since you cover this very beautiful worship offered by me, I 
think you do not know devotion to Vi{ou and you are wretched. 
Hearing these words, the best brahmaoa got angry, and 
transgressing (i.e. not caring for) the greatness of the king, said 
(these) words then : 
Viыt:udiisa said: 
17. 
0 king, you do not know salvation ; you are proud of 
your wealth. Tell me which Vi{ou-vow you have observed 
before. 
The two attendants said: 
18-22. 
0 brahmaoa, hearing those words of the brahmaoa 
the best king laughed and proudly said these words to Vi{oudasa : 
"0 brahmaQa, if, being very proud, you are telling like this, (tell 
me) how much devotion to Vi{ou you poor and indigent one 
have. 0 brahmaQa, you have not offered sacrifices or gifts. Nor 
anywhere have you put up a temple before. If the pride of you 
who are like this persists due to your devotion, then may these 
best brahmaoas today hear my words. This dispute will go (i.e. 
cease). I shall have actual perception of Vi{ou so that all these 
and you will realise our devotion." 
The two attendants said: 
23-30. 
Speaking like this, 0 brahmaoa, the king went to his 
palace; and making Mudgala the preceptor he commenced a 
sacrificial session (in honour) of Vi{QU, at which hosts of sages 
had come and many presents were given, which was rich like the 
one offered formerly by Brahma at Prayaga. Vi{Q.udasa, observ­
ing the vow, remained just there in the temple, always observing 
these five restraints pleasing Vi{ou : observing properly the vow 
in Magha and Kiirtika, maintaining a Tulasi-grove, observing the 
Ekadasi-vow, and muttering the twelve-syllabled hymn. So also 
everyday he worshipped 'Vi{QU in the sixteen ways with auspici­
ous (acts) like dancing and singing. (Thus) he observed these

=== PAGE 80 ===

2698 
Padma Purlb)a 
vows. He, viewing all equally, always remembered Vi{l).u while 
walking, eating and even while sleeping, and saw Vi{l).U remain­
ing (i.e. as present) in every being. He daily observed the 
special restraints in Magha and Kartika for pleasing Vi{l).u, so 
also their proper conclusion. When king Cola and Vi{l).udasa, 
who were observing that vow, who had devoted their senses and 
acts to deeds for him (i.e. Vi{Qu), were thus propitiating (Viڒl).u) 
the lord of Lak{mi, much time passed. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED NINE 
King Cola and Vi$1JUdasa Become Attendants of Vi$ѐ;tu 
The two attendants said: 
1-13. 
When once the brahmru;ta Vi{Qudasa cooked (food) 
.after having du1y performed his daily rite, someone unnoticed 
took away (the food). The brahmal).a, not (being able to) see 
him, did not at all cook again through fear of violating the vow 
<>fhis evening worship. On the next day, when he, after having 
<:ooked, was about to offer it to Vi{l).u, somebody again took it 
away. In this way, for seven days somebody (daily) took away 
the food, 0 brahmal).a. He was amazed and thought in his mind 
thus : 'Oh, who comes daily and takes away my food? This place 
of the holy ascetics is not at all to be abandoned by me. If, 
having cooked again, I eat (the food), then how can I give up 
the evening worship (of the deity) ? I shall not eat after cooking 
some food. A devotee of Vi{l).u does not eat without offering 
everything to Vi{l).u. How can I again remain in (i.e. observe) 
this vow by fasting? Today I shall properly guard the food.' 
Thinking thus he cooked the food and remained there unnoticed. 
Just then he saw a cal).<;lala ready to take away the cooked food. 
He was emaciated with hunger, his face was melancholy, and 
only bones and skin were left (in his body). Seeing him, the best 
brahmal).a had his mind distressed with pity. Seeing the (cal).<;lala) 
stealing the food, the brahmal).a said, "Wait, wait. How do you

=== PAGE 81 ===

Vl.l09. 14-32 
2699 
eat the dry food? Have this ghee." Seeing the best brahma:g.a 
speaking like this and coming (near him), he, through fear, ran 
fast, and dropped down unconscious. That best brahma:g.a, seeing 
the ca:g.<;lala frightened and unconscious, speedily approached him 
and fanned him with the ends of his garment through compas­
sion (for him). 
14-2 1 . ViĦ:g.udasa saw him who got up, to be actually god 
ViĦ:g.u holding a conch, a disc, and a mace, (and) wearing a 
yellow garment, having four arms, having the mark of Srivatsa, 
wearing a crown, and having his chest marked with Kaustubha 
resembling atasi flower. Seeing him, the best brahma:g.a was 
full of good thoughts. At that time he was unable to praise 
and salute him. Then gods like Indra came there at that 
time ; and gandharvas and celestial nymphs gladly sang and 
danced. At that time the place was crowded with hundreds of 
aeroplanes and it resounded with the sounds of songs and 
musical instruments. Then Vi¶:g.u, having embraced his virtuous 
devotee, gave him absorption into himself and took him to 
Vaiku:g.tha. King Cola who was initiated (for a sacrifice) saw 
Vi¶:g.udasa seated in the excellent aeroplane in the vicinity of 
Vigtu. Seeing Vi¶:g.udasa going to Vi¶:g.u's abode, he quickly 
called his preceptor Mudgala and thus spoke to him : 
Cola said: 
22-25. 
That brahma:g.a vying with whom I performed that 
sacrifice etc., is, after taking up Vi¶:g.u's form, going to Vigm's 
abode. I who was initiated for this sacrificial session, offered 
oblations into fire through you and made the brahma:g.as 
completely (happy) in their minds through gifts etc. That god 
yet does not certainly become pleased. (But) that Vi¶:g.u actually 
presented himself (before the brahma:g.a) by his devotion. 
Therefore, Vi¶:g.u is not at all pleased by means of gifts and 
sacrifices. Devotion alone is the means of seeing that lord. 
The two attendants said: 
26-32. 
Saying so he consecrated his sister's son on the 
throne. Since from his childhood he was initiated for the 
sacrifice, he was sonless. Therefore, even now in his kingdom 
sisters' sons only, continuing the convention followed (previo-

=== PAGE 82 ===

2700 
Padma PuraT}a 
usly) become heir to the kingdom. Then going to the place of 
the sacrifice, and standing before the hole made for receiving 
the sacrificial tire, addressing Vi{:Qu, he loudly spoke (these 
words) three times : "0 Vi{:Qu, give me a stable devotion through 
acts of mind, speech and body." Saying like this he fell into the 
tire, when all were watching. Then Mudgala angrily extracted 
the tuft of hair on the crown of his head. Since then, even up to 
this day the Mudgalas are without the tuft of hair on the crowns 
on their heads. Just then Vړ:Qu, loving his devotees, appeared 
in the tire in the hole made for receiving the sacrificial fire. 
Vi{:QU embraced him and put him into an excellent aeroplane. 
Having embraced him and assimilated him into himself, the lord 
of gods, surrounded by gods, went to his abode in Vaiku:Q!ha 
with him. 
Niirada said: 
33. 
That Vi{:Qu dear to LakĦmi, made the two having 
similar forms, his doorkeepers. He who was Vi{:Quda.sa became 
Pu:Qyasila (by name), and he who was king Cola became SuSila 
by name. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED TEN 
The Story of Jaya and Vijaya 
Dharmadatta said: 
1 . I have heard that Jaya and Vijaya are Viڔ:Qu's doorkee­
pers. (But I do not know) what they did due to which they had 
these forms. 
The two attendants said: 
2- 14. 
Due to just being seen by Kardama, Devahiiti, Tr:Qa­
bindu's daughter, formerly gave birth to two sons, 0 brii.hmal).a. 
The elder one was Jaya by name, and the younger Vijaya. On (i.e. 
from) the other wife was born Kapila, a knower of yoga, and 
Dharma. Jaya and Vijaya were always engrossed in devotion

=== PAGE 83 ===

VI. l l 0. 1 5-29 
270 1 
to Vi¶r;tu. Controlling their senses, they were disposed to virtue. 
Everyday they both recited the eight-syllabled hymn and obser­
ved the ViĆQu-vow. Vi{QU always presented himself at their 
worship (of him). 
Sometime Marutta 
invited them for a 
sacrince. They, skilled in performing a sacrince, went there, 
being waited upon by divine sages. Jaya became the Brahma 
priest and Vijaya the sacrificing priest. Then they fully accom­
plished the sacrincial rite. Marutta, after having bathed at the 
end of the sacrince, gave them much wealth. Taking that wealth 
they went to their hermitage. 0 sage, then for worshipping and 
gratifying Vi{Qu they vied with each other and they divided the 
wealth. Jaya said : "Let it be divided into equal parts." Vijaya 
said : "Whatever is received by one is one's (share)." Then Jaya 
angrily and with his mind agitated, cursed Vijaya ; "Since having 
received (the wealth) you are not giving it, therefore, be a 
crocodile." Vijaya too, having heard that curse of (i.e. pro­
nounced by) him, cursed him: "Be an elephant", since he, erring 
due to arrogance had cursed him. Seeing lord ViĆQu at the 
time of the daily worship, they told him like that. They solicited 
Lak{mi's lord for rendering the curse ineffective. "0 god, how 
shall we, your devotees, go to the stock of a crocodile and an 
elephant? 0 ocean of kindness, turn away that curse." 
The lord said : 
1 5-29. 
The words of my devotees shall never be untrue. I 
too can never change it. Formerly due to Prahlada's words I 
appeared in a pillar. In the same way due to AmbariĆa's words 
I arose on the way(?}. Therefore, having certainly undergone 
these two curses pronounced by yourselves, obtain my eternal 
position. 
Speaking like this, ViĆQu vanished. 
The two attendants said: 
Then the crocodile and the elephant were (born) on the bank 
of Gar;t9aki. Even in that state they remembered their (former) 
birth, and observed ViĆQu-vow. Some time in Kartika the 
elephant went to Ga:QQaki to bathe. Just then, the crocodile 
remembering the cause of the curse seized him. The elephant

=== PAGE 84 ===

2702 
Padma Puriir)a 
seized by the crocodile remembered ViĆ:Q.u. Just then ViĦ:Q.U, 
holding a conch, a disc, a mace appeared (there). Then the lord, 
throwing his disc, emancipated the crocodile and the elephant, 
and absorbing them into himself, took them to Vaiku:Q.tha. 
Since then the place is known as HarikĆetra, where even (now) 
the stones bear the mark of the disc. Those two, 0 brahma:Q.a, 
known as Jaya and Vijaya, and dear to ViĦ:Q.u, are his doorkee­
pers. Therefore, you too, 0 you who know piety, always 
observing Vi{:Q.u's vow and having given up jealousy and 
hypocrisy, view all equally. Always bathe in the morning (when 
the Sun is) in (the signs of) Libra, Capricornus and Aries, and 
maintaining a Tulasi-grove observe the Ekii.dasi-vow. Always 
worship brahma:Q.as, cows, and Vi{:Q.u's devotees. Do not eat 
masiira (pulse), gruel made from fermentation of boiled rice and 
egg-plants. 0 Dharmadatta, by devotion to him (i.e. Vi{:Q.u) 
you too, on your death obtain that highest position of ViĆ:Q.U, as 
we (have obtained). Sacrifices, gifts and (visits to holy places) 
are not superior to your vow (commenced) from birth and 
pleasing Viڕ:Q.u. 0 best brii.hma:Q.a, you are lucky that you have 
observed this vow which gratifies the lord of the world, having 
got the fruit of which this meritorious one is taken by us to the 
world of ViĦQU. 
Niiracla said: 
30-32. 
Having thus instructed that Dharmadatta, the two, 
getting into the aeroplane, went with Kalahii. to ViĆ:Q.u's abode. 
Dharmadatta also, being convinced, observed the vow and on 
his death went, accompanied by his two wives, to that place of 
the lord. One who duly listens to his account which took place 
in ancient times, his mind, by the favour of the lord of the 
world, becomes disposed to reach Vigm's proximity.

=== PAGE 85 ===

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED ELEVEN 
The Greatness of Krwii and Veьi 
Prthu said: 
1-2. 
You told (me) that formerly Kalaha came out of the 
body of the merchant on the bank (of the confluence) of Kr{J}.a 
and Vel}.i (and went) with the attendants of Siva and Vi{J}.u. 
(Now) 0 you who know Dharma, tell me about the greatness 
of the two rivers and that place. I have a curiosity about it. 
Niirada said: 
3-8a. Kr{J}.a is actually the dark-bodied one, and Vel}.i is 
god Siva. (Even) the Four-faced (Brahma) is not able to describe 
the greatness of their confluence. Yet, I shall tell you about 
their origin. Listen to it. Formerly in the age ofCakĆu{a Manu, 
Manu's grandfather (i.e. Brahma) was ready to perform a sacri­
fice on the charming peak of the Sahya mountain. Surrounded 
by hosts of all gods, and with Vi{J}.u and Siva, he after making 
the preparation for the sacrifice, went to the peak of that moun­
tain. At the time (sacred to) god Brahma (i.e. the early part of 
the day) the hosts of sages like Bhrgu gathered there to initiate 
him. Then, through the brahmal}.as Vi{J}.u called the elder wife 
Svarii.. When she was coming slowly, Bhrgu said to ViĆJ}.u : 
Bhrgu said: 
8b-9a. 
0 Vi{J}.u, you called Svara; but she is not coming 
quickly. This is the transgression of the auspicious moment. 
How can the rite of initiation be done? 
Vi${ZU said: 
9b-10a. 
If Svara is not coming quickly, then put Gayatti 
here (i.e. in her place). Can this wife of him also not join him in 
the meritorious deed? 
Niirada said : 
lOb-13. 
Rudra also, in the same way, approved of ViĆJ}.u's 
words. That Bhrgu, hearing those words, seated Gayatri to the 
right of Brahma, and performed the rite of initiation. 0 king,

=== PAGE 86 ===

2704 
Padma Purii1Ja 
while they were duly performing the rite of initiation of Brahmii, 
Svarii came to the place of the sacrifice. Seeing Giiyatri initiated 
with Brahmii, Svarii due to jealousy for her co-wife, angrily 
said (these) words : 
Svarii said: 
14- 1 6. 
(When) those that do not deserve to be honoured, 
are honoured, and those that deserve to be honoured are ignored, 
three (inauspicious things) take place there : famine, death, fear. 
You have seated this younger one on my seat. Therefore, all of 
you, being devoid of consciousness will have various forms. 
Since she has sat on my seat, on the right (of Brahmii), there­
fore let her have a body of a river invisible to the people. 
Niirada said: 
17-18. 
Then hearing that curse, Gayatri trembled ; and 
getting up, she, though restrained by gods, cursed that Svara. 
"As Brahmii is your husband, so he is also mine. You have in 
vain cursed me. You too (will) become a river." 
Niirada said: 
19. 
Then all gods led by Siva and Vi¶J.lU felt grief; saluting 
(by prostrating) like a staff on the ground, they requested 
Svara : 
The gods said: 
20-21. 0 goddess, since you have cursed all of us like 
Brahmii, if we all become devoid of consciousness and turn into 
rivers, then these three worlds will certainly perish. You have 
acted imprudently. Therefore, withdraw this curse. 
Svarii said: 
22-24. 
0 best gods, since at the commencement of the 
sacrifice you did not worship the lord of the attendants (i.e. 
GaJ).esa), therefore this obstacle, due to my anger, has indeed 
come up. Nor again, these words of me will be untrue. There­
fore, with your portions dulled, turn into rivers. We, the two 
co-wives, shall become two rivers, flowing into the west, by 
means of our portions, 0 gods.

=== PAGE 87 ===

VI. l l l .25-VI. l l 2-5 
2705 
Niirada said: 
25-3 1. 0 king, then hearing her words Brahma, ViƌJJ.U 
and Siva became dulled and turned into rivers just by means of 
their portions. Vigm became Kn:Q.a, and 
god 
Siva 
VeJJ.i. 
Brahma then separately became Ganga having humps (of 
waves). The wise gods also, having dulled their portions, became 
good rivers separately (flowing) from the peaks of Sahya moun­
tain. The best rivers, (formed) with the portions of gods, flowed 
into the east. Gayatri and Svara joined together, flowing west­
ward, came to be called Siivitri. Both Vigm and Siva appointed 
at that sacrifice, became (known) by the names Mahiibala and 
Atibala. 0 king, I am not able to describe the greatness of the 
two rivers. Gods like Brahma went (from the place) and remain, 
through their portions, as rivers. Every act of him who listens 
with devotion to this great (account of) KrᗱJJ.ii, removing sins 
or causes (others) to hear it, would become meritorious, and 
gets the fruit due to seeing her and bathing in her (water). 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED TWELVE 
Portions of Merit and Demerit That Go to Others 
Sri KrэIJa said: 
1 -5. Hearing these words of him, Prthu, with his mind 
amazed, devoutly honoured Narada and allowed him to go, 0 
dear one. Therefore, this triad of vows-the two in Magha and 
Kartika, and the one of Ekadasi - is very dear to me. To me 
Tulasi among plants is dear, Kartika among months is dear, 
Ekiidasi among days is dear, and Dvarakii among the holy 
places is dear. He who with his senses conquered resorts to 
these, becomes dear to me ; not like that (i.e. so dear) with 
sacrifices etc. He w ho is devoted to these, should not, due to 
my grace, he afraid of sins as a rule.

=== PAGE 88 ===

2706 
Padma PuriJ'()a 
Satyabhamii said: 
6-8. 
0 lord what you told me, viz. that Kalaha was eman­
cipated by the religious merit given by others, causes wonder. 
This month of Kartika having such efficacy, is dear to you, 
since due to bath and (giving) gifts (in that month) sins like 
cheating one's master have gone (i.e. go). 0 lord, if one gets 
the religious merit given by another person, then in what way 
does a man get the religious merit not given to him? 
Srl Ku1.1a said: 
9-29. 
Listen properly with which act men receive religious 
merit and sins not given to them. The region, the village and 
the families should have the portion of (the fruit of) acts etc. 
But in Kali-age only the doer gets the fruit of the religious 
merit or the sin. This arrangement is said (to obtain) even 
when no contact takes place. Know as to how religious merit 
and sins pass (to another person) through contact. Due to 
being paired together, going together, eating from the same 
pot, a man would duly get half the portion of religious merit 
or sin. A man always gets one-fourth portion of the religious 
merit or sin (of another person) through teaching, acting as a 
priest at a sacrifice, or eating (after sitting) in the same line. A 
man gets one-sixth portion of the religious merit or sin (of 
another) through (sitting on) the same seat, same vehicle, and 
due to the contact of (another man's) breath with his body. A 
man always gets one-tenth portion of the religious merit and 
sins (of another person) through touching (him), talking (to 
him) or praising (that) other person. A man would obtain one­
hundredth portion of the religious merit or sin of another 
person by seeing, listening to, or thinking in his mind about 
him. He who censures another person, acts wickedly towards 
him or disregards him, gets (the fruit of) the sin committed by 
him, and gives him his own religious merit. A person, except 
the wife, a hired servant and a disciple of the man who does 
meritorious acts, serving him, and not getting the money in 
accordance with his service would also share the religious merit 
of him (who is served) in lieu of his service. A waiter at 
meals who ignores serving a man taking food after sitting

=== PAGE 89 ===

VI. l l 2.30 
2707 
in the same line as others, would share one-sixth of his sin. 
He who, while bathing or performing sandhya prayer etc., 
would 
touch or speak (with another person), would very 
certainly give one-sixth of his religious merit to that person. 
Another person who gives money to a person who asks for 
it for a religious purpose would get the fruit due to his (i.e. 
latter's) religious merit. 
He who performs a religious act 
after snatching another's wealth, incurs sin, and the fruit 
due to that (religious act) goes to the person having money 
(and giving it for the religious purpose). A rich man shares in 
proportion with his wealth the religious merit of the man who 
dies without repaying the money (borrowed from the rich man 
for the religious act). One who gives an idea, one who appro­
ves of it, one who gives the implement, one who compels, 
would obtain one-sixth portion of the religious merit or sin. A 
king would take out from his subjects one-sixth portion of their 
religious merit or sin. A preceptor would obtain half the portion 
of the religious merit from (i.e. of) his disciple ; a husband 
(would obtain half the portion of the religious merit) of his 
wife, a father of his son, and a wife also (would obtain half the 
portion of the religious merit) of her husband. She, pleasing 
him, always behaves according to his mind (i.e. desire). The 
giver of a gift for the man who gives gifts with the hand of 
(i.e. through) another person, except a hired servant or his 
son, would extract one-sixth portion (of the religious merit of 
the donor). He who gives subsistence would extract one-sixth 
of the portion of him to whom the subsistence is given, pro­
vided he does not make him serve himself or any other 
(person). 
Sri Krsr;.a said: 
30. 
In this way, the religious merit and sins earned by 
others, always go, though not given (to others). Listen to this 
excellent account, which is old, and which gives great religious 
merit.

=== PAGE 90 ===

2708 
Padma PurliT}JJ 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED THIRTEEN 
Dhane§vara's Story 
Sri KnTJa said: 
1-12. 
Formerly there was a brahmai).a named Dhane8vara 
who lived in the city of Avanti. He had fallen from the status 
of a brahmai).a, was addicted to sins, and was very wicked. He 
sold liquor, blankets, hide, and behaved falsely. His mind was 
addicted to stealing, prostitutes, drinking and gambling. That 
Dhanesvara, going from one region to another for selling 
(these articles), sometime went to Mii.hiᗬmati city. It was 
fashioned formerly by Mahiᘁa. By its rampart shone Narmada 
that destroyed sins. Seeing there men observing Kartika-vow 
and coming from different directions, he, selling (his articles) 
stayed there for a month. He, everyday wandering on the bank 
of Narmada for selling (his articles), saw brahmai).as who 
bathed (in the river) and were engaged in muttering hymns and 
worshipping deities. Everywhere Dhanesvara, full of curiosity 
saw some men reciting a Pur3.I).a, some engaged in listening to it, 
some engaged in eulogising ViᗮQU with dancing, singing and 
musical instruments, some having marks (like a conch etc. in 
honour) of ViᗬQu, and some having on their persons garlands 
and Tulasi. He, wandering there everyday, due to seeing and 
coming in contact with Viᗬ:t.lU's devotees, heard the name of 
ViglU etc. On his way he who resided there for a month, saw 
(people) keeping awake (in honour) of ViᗬQU at the time of the 
concluding rite of Kartika-vow. On the full-moon day he saw 
the worship of two kinds, so also presents and meals and offer­
ing of lights done by the observers of the vow. Then at the 
time of the sunset he saw the ceremony of illumination done 
for pleasing the enemy of Tripura (i.e. Siva). 
1 3-17a. 
Since on that day Siva burnt the three cities (of 
Tripura), therefore, a great festival is celebrated by the devo­
tees on that day. All the religious rites of him who would dis­
criminate between me and Siva, would undoubtedly be fruitless. 
That Dbanesvara, seeing dance etc. there, wandered. Just then 
he was bitten by a black serpent and deprived of strength be 
dropped. Men seeing him fallen, and full of pity, surrounded

=== PAGE 91 ===

VI. l l 3. 1 7b-34 
2709 
him. Then they sprinkled his face with water mixed with Tulasi. 
Then, when his body dropped (i.e. he died), Yama's servants 
bound him, and angrily tormented him with strokes of whips, 
and took him to Samyamini (Yama's city). Seeing him Citra­
gupta chided him and told Yama the bad deeds done by him 
from his childhood. 
Citragupta said: 
17b-19a. 
No good deed of (i.e. done by) him since his 
childhood is noticed. 0 Sun's son, his bad deeds cannot be des­
cribed even in many years. 0 lord, this one appears to be just 
sin incarnate. Therefore, till the time of the final deluge he 
should be roasted in hell. 
Sri KrslJa said: 
19b-20a. 
Hearing these words, Yama showing his form 
resembling the fatal fire, angrily said to his servants : 
Yama said: 
20b-2la. 0 you who look after thᘂ dead, take him torment­
ing him with your iron clubs. Quickly put him into Kumbhipaka 
(hell) having the sound of the boiling of oil. 
2 lb-25a. 
When he was thrown there, Kumbhipaka became 
cool, as when in olden times Prahlada was thrown into it. 
Seeing that great wonder, the official looking after the dead was 
amazed. He speedily came and told it to Yama. Yama heard 
the curious thing told by the official looking after the dead. 
Saying, "Oh, what is it?" he thought (over it) properly. Just 
then Narada, smiling, came there quickly. He was properly 
honoured by Yama after seeing him. He said these words : 
Niirada said: 
25b-34. 
0 Sun's son, he is not fit to suffer in hells, since his 
acts are those that keep away hell. That man who would see, 
touch or talk to those who do meritorious acts, obtains one­
sixth of the merit of those doing meritorious deeds. Since he had 
innumerable contacts with the observers of the ViᗬJ).u vow in 
Kiirtika for a month, therefore he shares a portion of their

=== PAGE 92 ===

2710 
Padma Purib}.a 
religious merit. Since he served them, he enjoys the entire reli­
gious merit of the vow. Therefore, his religious merit due to the 
Kartika-vow cannot be measured, (since) ViᗮQu, to whom good 
devotees are dear, does destroy even the major sins of those 
who observe the Kartika-vow. Since in the end (i.e. at the time 
of his death) he was favoured by ViᗮQu's devotees by repeating 
the names (of Vigm) and by sprinkling water mixed with Tulasi 
(-leaves), therefore he is not be roasted in a hell. Therefore, with 
his sins destroyed, he deserves to get a good position. AI> due 
to deliberate or non-deliberate sins one has to suffer from tor­
ment in hell, in the same way one has to enjoy pleasures in 
heaven. Therefore, he who unintentionally got the religious 
merit, would, living in the stock of yakᗮa, see all hells and 
would undergo the fruit of his sins. 
When Narada, after speaking like this left, Yama, realising 
his religious merit on hearing his (i.e. Narada's) words, again 
took the brahmaQa through his servant showing him all groups 
of hell. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FOURTEEN 
The Seven Hells Shown to Dhanelvara 
Sri Kr֓ IJ.a said: 
1. Then Yama's servant, the official looking after the dead, 
took Dhanesvara and showed him all hells. 
The official looking after the dead said: 
2-24. 
0 Dhanesvara, see all these very fearful hells into 
which sinners are always roasted by Yama's servants. This hell, 
appearing fearful, is called Taptavaluka in which those sinners 
whose bodies are burnt, cry. Those men who do not honour the 
guests emaciated with hunger, who have come to their house after 
having made an offering to all deities, are roasted here due to 
their acts. Those who have kicked the preceptor, fire, brah-

=== PAGE 93 ===

VI.I l4.2-24 (cont.) 
271 1 
ma:Q.as, deities, those that are crowned, have their feet burnt. 
This hell has six divisions, and is reached by those who have 
committed various sins. Similarly this is the great hell (called) 
Andhatamisra. 0 brahma:Q.a, see the body (of a man) due to his 
sinful act, is being pierced by insects of fierce mouths that have 
come in contact with him. This also has six divisions. In them 
sinful human beings are roasted with their vitals pierced by 
horses, crows, beasts and birds. The third hell is Krakaca, 
appearing fierce, where the sinful human beings are cut with 
swords. It has six divisions like (the one having) the Asipatra­
grove. Those men who separate (others) from their wives, sons 
etc., so also with other beloved persons, are roasted here. The 
sinners, crying and running here and there through fear of being 
cut with blades of swords, are roasted here. See (them). This 
fourth hell is called Argala. See. Those sinners, being bound by 
Yama's servants with various kinds of nooses, and being killed 
with iron clubs, are crying here. Those sinful men who oppose 
good men and brabma:Q.as in this world are roasted here after 
their necks etc. are seized by Yama's servants. This also is a 
hell having six divisions like Vadha, etc. See this fifth hell 
called Kiitasii.lmali, where, 0 brii.hma:Q.a, there are salmali and 
other trees resembling charcoal, where those men who are 
always engaged in adultery, snatching others' wealth and trea­
chery, are roasted cruelly in six ways. See this sixth wonderful 
hell (called) Raktapiiya where men committing sins are roasted 
with their faces turned down. These have eaten prohibited 
articles, and were engaged in censuring others and wickedness. 
Being pierced and killed, they are crying in fearful tones. This 
also is having bad smells of six kinds. 0 Dhanesvara, see this 
seventh hell appearing fierce and called Kumbhipii.ka. It is 
divided into six by means of articles like oil. Here great sinners 
are, for many thousand years, boiled by plunging them and 
taking them out (of the oil) by Yama's servants. These Raurava 
hells are said to be forty plus two. See them. A non-deliberate 
sin is called suka, and a deliberate one iirdra. The hells are 
of two kinds depending upon the two varieties, ardra and suᗬka. 
They have eightyfour separate divisions. That which is of a non­
specific or general nature, resulting in a person's not being 
allowed to dine in the same line, and arising from pollution, and

=== PAGE 94 ===

27 1 2 
Padma PuriiTJ.Il 
resulting in one's exclusion from his caste is said to be a minor 
sin. 
25-26. A very heinous sin1· is a major sin said to be divided 
into seven divisions. One by one they are roasted in these 
seven (hells). Due to your collection of religious merit as you 
had contact with the observers of the Kartika-vow, you were 
taken out of them. 
Sri KrsfJa said: 
27-29. 
Thus showing him the hells, the official looking 
after the dead, took Dhanesvara to the Yakᗬa-world ; then he 
lived there. He is the follower of Kubera, and is known as 
Dhanayakᗬa. and after him Visvamitra has fashioned a holy 
place at Ayodhya. This Kartika-vow is having such an efficacy, 
gives pleasures and salvation . By seeing an observer of this vow 
even he who has committed many sins, gets salvation. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FIFTEEN 
Asvattha and Vata Praised as Gods in Disguise 
Siita said 
1-4. 
Speaking like this to Satyabhama, very dear to him, 
Vasudeva went to his mother's house to offer evening prayer, 
etc. This Kartika is said to be powerful like this, destroying sins, 
always making one dear to Vigm and always giving pleasures 
and salvation. Keeping awake (in honour) of ViᗬJ;tu, bathing in 
the morning, using Tulasi (leaves etc.), concluding the vow, and 
offering light-these are the vows (to be observed) in Kartika. 
The Kartika-vow is complete with these five vows. The fruit 
that one gets is said to be pleasures and salvation. 
The sages said: 
5-7. 
0 RaumaharᗬaJ;ta, this religious act of Kartika is said 
1. 
Mahi.ipi.ipa-a great, or heinous sin. Murder of a bri.ihmaQa, drinking 
liquor, stealing, violating the preceptor's bed (i.e. his wife), and company of 
those who commit these sins are great sins.

=== PAGE 95 ===

VI. l l 5. 8-2 1 
2713 
to be dear to ViᗰJ}.u, giving great fruit, properly purifying and 
destroying sins. When it comes, it should be necessarily obser­
ved duly by men desiring salvation, or desiring enjoyments. If 
this is so, how should a man observing a vow, who is in a 
difficulty, who is in an impervious forest, or is suffering from 
diseases, observe the auspicious Kartika vow? 
Suta said: 
8-20. 0 best sages, listen. I shall tell all about it as to how 
it should be observed, since it is extremely fruitful. In a temple 
of ViᗰJ.l.U or Siva, or in any other temple in the absence of a 
temple of ViᗰJ.l.U or Siva, a man should keep awake (in honour) 
of ViᗰJ.l.U. If a man is in an impervious forest to which he 
might have gone by day, he should observe it under the root of 
an Asvattha tree or even in Tulasi-groves. A man, by singing 
(songs) mainly containing Viᗰ:Q.u's names, near ViᗰJ.l.U, obtains 
the fruit of presenting a thousand cows. A man playing upon a 
musical instrument will obtain the fruit of a Vajapeya (sacrifice), 
and a dancer that of bathing at all holy places. A man who 
gives wealth will obtain all this religious merit of them. He would 
get one-sixth portion by praising and seeing (the deity). 0 (sages), 
if one who is in a calamity, does not get a watery (place) for 
bathing, or one is diseased, he should purify himself with (the 
recital of) the names of ViᗰJ}.u. He who after observing the vow 
is unable to conclude it (duly), should, according to his capacity, 
feed brahma:Q.as for the (proper) completion of the vow. Since it 
gives 
great fruit, it should never be abandoned by men. 
Brahma:Q.as are the form of ViᗰQ.u whose form is not manifest 
on the earth. By their being pleased he is well pleased on the 
earth. If he is not able to present a lamp, he should light others' 
lamps. Or he should carefully protect them from wind etc. In 
the absence of Tulasi he should worship a brahmal}.a, ViᗰQ.u's 
devotee, since ViᗰJ.l.U is always present in his devotees. In the 
absence of all (this) the observer of the vow should serve 
brahmal}.as, cows and worship Asvattha and Vata trees for the 
completion of the vow. 
The sages said: 
21 . How do you equate Asvattha and Vata trees with a cow

=== PAGE 96 ===

2714 
Padma Pura1)tJ 
and a bnihmaJ}.a? How do you take them to be more venerable 
than all (other) trees? 
Suta said: 
22-23. There is no doubt that lord Viᘐ?J}.U is of the form of 
Asvattha, Vata is Rudra's form, and Palasa has taken up 
Brahma's form. Seeing, worshipping and serving them is said to 
remove sins. These certainly destroy grief, diseases and the 
wicked. 
The sages said: 
24. 0 you omniscient one, tell (us) how Brahma, Viᘐ?J}.U and 
Siva became trees. We have a great doubt about it. 
Suta said: 
25-26. Formerly, it is said, gods sent Agni in a brahmaJ}.a's 
form to create an obstacle when Siva and Parvati were cohabit­
ing. Then that Parvati, trembling and 
angry due to being 
deprived of the sexual pleasure, angrily cursed the gods. 
Piirvati said: 
27-29. 
Even these worms and insects know the sexual 
pleasure. 0 gods, you will obtain the condition of plants due to 
having obstructed it. 
Thus that Parvati of an angry mind, cursed the gods. There­
fore, all hosts of gods have become trees. Therefore, 0 chief 
sages, both these Viᘐ?J}.U and Siva have become Asvattha and 
Vata (trees). Asvattha has become fit to be touched on a Satur­
day and not fit to be touched (on other days) due to contact of 
Sani with Viᘐ?J}.U.

=== PAGE 97 ===

VI. l l6. 1 - l l 
2 7 1 5 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SIXTEEN 
Alaksmi's Episode 
The sages said: 
I. 0 Siita, how has this Asvattha tree become untouchable, 
and similarly how has it become fit to be touched on a Saturday? 
Please tell us all this in detail. 
Siita said: 
2-3. Out of the gems that the lordly gods obtained after 
churning the ocean, the gods gave Lakᗬmi and Kaustubha to 
Viᗬ:Q.u. When he accepted Laᘃmi as his wife, she respectfully 
said to'him having the disc in his hand. 
Laksmi said: 
4-5. How will you marry me, the younger one, without getting 
this elder one married? Therefore, 0 Viᗬ:Q.u, having first married 
this Alakᗬmi, my elder sister, take me. This is an old practice. 
Suta said: 
6-IOa. 
Hearing these words of her, Viᗬ:Q.u, the creator of 
the world, gave according to his own words, to sage Uddii.laka 
who had practised penance for a very long time, that Alakᗬmi, 
of a big face, white teeth, having a bright body, tall, having red 
eyes, and having rough and tawny hair. That sage, in accordance 
with Viᗬ:Q.u's words, accepted her and he, knowing Dharma, 
brought her to his hermitage full of sounds of (the recital of) the 
Vedas, rich with the fragrance of sacrificial fire, and resounding 
with the sounds of (the recitals of) lores. Seeing that hermitage, 
she who was afflicted, said these words : 
Jyesthii said: 
lOb. This abode full of Vedic sounds is not proper for me. 
0 brii.hma:Q.a, I shall not come here. Take me somewhere else. 
Do not delay. 
Uddiilaka said: 
1 1 . 
Why do you not come? What is here that you don't

=== PAGE 98 ===

27 1 6 
Padma PuriiTJa 
like? Tell me at which place an abode proper for you would be 
(found). 
Jye$!hii said: 
12- 1 5. 
I shall not stay there where the sound of (the recital 
of) the Vedas is heard, guests are honoured, and sacrifices etc. 
are (performed). So also I shall not stay there where a pair of 
lovers live, and where the dead ancestors are honoured. I love 
a place where there are men engaged in gambling and taking 
away others' wealth, and where there live adulterers. I am in­
terested in that place where cow slaughter takes place, drinking 
is indulged in, so also where sins like the killing of a brii.hma:Q.a 
take place. 
Suta said: 
1 6-1 7. 
Hearing these words of her, sage Uddii.laka's face 
was dejected; and recollecting Viᗺ:Q.u's words, he did not say 
(anything). He went here and there. Seeing his worship she 
said, "I will not come". Then through confusion, he too became 
very much afflicted. Then Uddii.laka spoke these words to that 
Alakᗬmi : 
Uddiilaka said: 
1 8. 
0 Alakᗬmi, stay -for a moment at the root of this 
Asvattha tree till I return after finding a place for (our) stay. 
Suta said: 
19-21. Thus keeping her there, Uddii.laka went (away). 
When she who was waiting for him for a long time did not see 
him, she, afflicted due to being forsaken by her husband, wept 
piteously. Lakᗬmi, in her abode in VaikU:Q.tha heard her weep­
ing there. Then with her mind dejected, she respectfully said to 
ViᗺJ).U : 
Lak$mi said: 
22 . 
0 lord, 0 kind one, my elder sister is afflicted due to 
being forsaken by her husband. If I am dear to you, then go to 
console her.

=== PAGE 99 ===

VI. l l 6.23-VI. l l 7.2 
2 7 1 7 
Suta said: 
23. 
Then Vigm, full of compassion, carne there with 
Lakᗬmi, consoled that Alakᗬmi, and said these words to her : 
Sri Vi$1JU said: 
24-25. 
0 Alakᗬrni, being in possession of this Asvattha 
tree, be stable. I have made from my portion this abode for 
you. May this younger sister of you be stable with those 
householders who everyday worship you, the elder one. 
Suta said: 
26-28. Those who listen to and recite this (account of) the 
greatness of Kartika, would live in Viᗬᘏ;m's city till the final 
deluge. There is on the earth no other (vow) than that of 
Kartika, dear to Vi!l)U, which removes diseases, which destroys 
sins, which is a great giver of intelligence, which is a means of 
getting sons, wealth etc., which is the cause of salvation. What 
is the use (the need) for going to and resorting to holy places 
for the man who, with restraints, observes the Kartika vow 
which is dear to Viᗬ:r:tu, which destroys all sins, which brings 
about prosperity in the form of good sons and grandsons, wealth 
and grains ? 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEEN 
The Importance of Bathing in Kiirtika 
Szita said: 
1 . Hearing all these words of Sri Krᗬ:r:ta, that noble Satya, 
daughter of Satrajit, then said : 
Satya said: 
2. 0 lord, I have not heard the greatness of Kartika in detail. 
How is Kartika (said to be) the best of all months ?

=== PAGE 100 ===

2718 
Padma Puriir)a 
Sri Kur.za said: 
3. 
You have well asked with respect about the vow of 
Kartika. It was formerly told to Saunaka by very noble Siita. 
Suta said: 
4. 
Listen, I shall give the auspicious answer to this question. 
Formerly the lord told it to Kartikeya who had asked about it. 
Kiirtikeya said: 
5- 1 5. 
0 lord, I, a devotee of Vigm, have heard many 
secrets of Vigm told by you. Men have come to die ocean 
of mundane existence, covered with large waves of unhap­
piness. Carefully tell (some story) for their emancipation. So 
also, 0 you best among speakers, tell about the rite of Kartika 
and the bath (in it), by which men will cross over the 
ocean of unhappiness, 0 father. Tell me about the greatness of 
illumination, of offering mango-sprouts, 0 you of a good vow, 
and the greatness of gopicandana and Tulasi, 0 lord. Tell me 
also a bout the greatness of jasmine flowers ; so also of lotuses ; 
so also tell about the greatness of dhatri-fruits and damanaka. 
0 lord, tell about the greatness of ketaki-flowers ; so also of 
the offering of eatables, the greatness of a holy place, and the 
fruit of the bath in Magha. 0 best god, tell about the fruit of 
eating from palasa-leaves, the fruit of waving the light by 
setting right the wick of another's lamp, 0 Siva. (Tell me about) 
the greatness of the holy place (called) Putikara, so also of 
Siikara, 0 lord ; so also the greatnecs of Salagrama, and the 
arrangement ofthe Svastika (symbol). Tell me also about the 
fruit of gifts, avoiding others' food, the fruit of the fast for a 
month, and of giving away a couch. 0 you of a good vow, (tell 
me) about the greatness of Dipavali, and of the Prabodhini 
(Ekadasi) ; so also tell me in detail the importance of the five 
days from the eleventh to the fifteenth of the bright half of the 
month of Kiirtika. 
The lord said: 
16-21 . 0 child, you have asked well for emancipating the people. 
I shall undoubtedly tell it. There is no other VitiQU devotee

=== PAGE 101 ===

VI. l l 7.22-32 
27 19 
like you. 0 child, there is no doubt that I am emancipated by a 
good son (like) you. 
You always have a firm devotion to 
ViᘁI).U. The best bnihmal).a who gives (i.e. tells) the VaiᗬI).ava 
practice to people gets the religious merit obtained by giving 
the earth with the ocean. That is not equal even to a croreth 
part of (the merit got from the vow of) Kartika. On one side 
are all gifts, gifts of cows, all sacrifices with presents, the resi­
dence at Puᘁkara, Kurukᗺetra, Himalaya, the residence at the 
holy place of Mathura, at Varal).asi, at SUkara, and on the other 
side i s Kartika always dear to ViᘁI).U, 0 child. 
Siita said: 
22. 
Speaking like this, 0 best sage, Siva again spoke these 
words : "I shall tell you in great detail the importance of bath­
ing (daily) in (the month of) Kartika". 
The lord said: 
23-32. 
The Krta age is said to be of brahmal).as, the Tretii. 
age is said to be that of kᘁatriyas, Dvapara is said to be of 
vaisyas and Kali is said to be of Siidras. 0 child, people 
show slackness in taking a bath in the Kali age. Yet I shall tell 
you about the bath in Kartika and Magha. A man whose 
hands, feet, speech, mind are controlled, and who has knowle­
dge, penance and fame (to his credit) enjoys the fruit of(the 
visits to) a holy place. These five-one having no faith, a sinful 
person, an atheist, one with a split mind, and a disputant-do 
not enjoy the fruit of (the visit to) a holy place. That brahmal).a 
who, getting up in the morning, woulcf always bathe in a holy 
place, is free from all sins, and obtains (i. e. goes to) the highest 
Brahman. 0 Kartikeya, those who know about a bath, have 
said that a bath is of four kinds : Vayavya, Varul).a, Divya 
and Brahmya. A bath in the evening is Vayavya ; a bath in a 
sea etc. is Varul).a ; a bath with hymns recited by brahmal).as is 
Brahmya; and a divine bath is the one bright with the water 
(directly falling) from the clouds. Of all the baths Varul).a is 
the best. A bnlhmal).a, a kᗬatriya, a vaisya should take a bath 
with the (recital of) hymns. 0 Kartikeya, a siidra, so also 
women, should bathe silently. A girl, a young women, an old 
woman, a man, a woman, a eunuch are free from all sins due to

=== PAGE 102 ===

2720 
Padma PuraT)a 
a bath (everyday) in Kartika and Magha. Having bathed in 
Kartika, they obtain the desired fruit. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEEN 
Siva Answers Kiirtikeya's Queries 
Suta said: 
1 . Having approached the listener, viz. Kartikeya, full of 
devotion, the bull-bannered lord Siva spoke again. 
The lord said: 
2-1 5. 
Kartika is ViᘁQu's month and the best of all months. 
In the Kali age all the _ thirtythree gods come together in this 
month. In the very prosperous month of Kartika men will give 
to a brahmaQa a cow, gold, silver, land, residence, cows with 
full devotion, 0 you of a good vow. Of all gifts the gift of a 
daughter is the best. Men will duly give their daughter to a 
brahmaQa of the Atri-family. They (will) live in VaikuQ!ha as 
long as the fourteen Indras (rule). When small hair appears (on 
the private parts), Soma enjoys a daughter. When she attains 
puberty, gandharvas (enjoy her) ; and when the breasts appear 
(prominent), Fire (enjoys her). A man should marry his daugh­
ter as long as 
she has not attained puberty. 
Wise 
men 
recommend a girl's mrriage when she is eight years old . She 
should be duly given to a brahmaQa who is well-versed in 
sacred learning, possesses moral virtue, has actually studied the 
Vedas, and has observed celibacy. This is said to be the rule 
regarding a daughter to be given (in marriage). He is honoured 
in Rudra's heaven for as many thousand years as the number 
of hair on the daughter's body. (The gift of) a thousand cows 
is equal to that of ten bulls. (The gift of) a vehicle is equal to 
that of ten bulls. (The gift of) a horse is equal to that of ten 
vehicles. The gift of an elephant is superior to the gift of 
thousands of horses. The gift of gold is equal to the gift of 
thousands of elephants. Giving knowledge is equal to the gift

=== PAGE 103 ===

VI. I l 8. 1 6-46 
272 1 
ofthousands of bharas of gold. The gift of (a piece of) land 
is a crorefold superior to giving knowledge. The gift of cows is 
superior to thousands of gifts of land. Giving food is superior 
to thousands of gifts of cows. All this immobile and mobile 
world has food as its support. Therefore, 0 Kartikeya, one 
should with an effort (i.e. should make an effort to) give 
(gifts) in Kartika. (These) three are equal gifts, and have equal 
fruits-a cow fulfilling all desires, earth (i.e. land) and Sarasvati 
(i.e. knowledge). 
Kiirtikeya said: 
16. 
0 great god, please tell me other (religious) practices 
doing which one having got rid of all (one's) sins, would be a god. 
Suta said: 
17. 
0 you treasures of penance, what is the use of praising 
it in many ways? Thus asked Siva again commenced speaking : 
The lord said: 
I 8-46. 
He who, observing restraints, avoids others' food in 
Kartika, gets the fruit of the Candraya:;ta (vow). The man who, 
noticing that Kartika has arrived, would avoid others' food day 
by day, obtains the fruit of the Krcchra vow. A man should 
avoid oil in Kartika ; a man should avoid honey in Kiirtika ; one 
should avoid (the use of) bell-metal in Kiirtika ; and one should 
especially avoid food prepared for a group. By eating flesh (but) 
once (in Kartika) he obtains (i.e. goes to) a demonish stock and is 
cooked in feces for sixty thousand years. Freed from that the 
sinner is born as a village-pig eating feces. When foods (gener­
ally) indulged in are restricted in Kiirtika (by a man), he surely 
obtains Viᗺl}.u's form and a position giving salvation. There is 
no (other) month like Kartika and no deity superior to Viᗺl}.U. 
There is no (other) sacred knowledge like the Vedas ; there is 
no (other) holy place like Ganga ; there is no (other) practice 
like (that of) truth ; there is no (other) age like the Krta (age). 
There is no (other) satisfaction like that of the tongue ; there is 
no (other) pleasure like that due to giving gifts. There is no 
(other) friend like righteousness ; there is no (other) luminary

=== PAGE 104 ===

2722 
Padma Purii1Jil 
like the eyes. He who would spend (Kartika), the month dear 
to Viᘐ?IJ.U, without (observing) a vow, should be known to have 
fallen from duty and he is born in low stocks. Kartika is the 
best month, always dear to Viᘐ?IJ.U's devotees. A holy river 
flowing into the sea is difficult to be had for a bath by those 
given to bathing (everyday). An unmarried girl belonging to a 
noble family and of good character is difficult to be found. A 
couple of human beings (of an amiable nature) is difficult to be 
found. In the world a (good) mother and especially a (good) 
father are difficult to be found. Honour to the good is rare. 
A 
virtuous son is rare. 
Residence at Dvaraka. is difficult to be 
accomplished. Krᘐ?IJ.a's sight is difficult to be had. A bath in 
Gomati is had with difficulty. The Kiirtika vow is difficult to be 
had. 0 child, the fruit that a man gets by giving (pieces of) land 
to brahmal).as at (the time of) lunar and solar eclipses is had by 
one who sleeps on the (bare) ground. He should feed a brahmal).a 
couple and should honour them with unguents. Blankets, gems, 
various garments, mattresses filled with cotton should be given 
along with bed-sheets. Give a pair of sandals or an umbrella in 
the purifying (month of) Kiirtika. He who everyday eats from 
leaves in Kartika, does not meet with a calamity as long as the 
fourteen Indras are ruling. He gets the fruit of all his desires, 
and would get the fruit of (visiting) all holy places. By eating 
from paliisa leaves a man does not see (i.e. have) a residence in 
hell, since this palasa is actually known to be Brahma granting 
all desired objects. 0 Kiirtikeya, in Kartika (a man) should 
avoid the middle (paliisa) leaf. In the three leaves (of paliisa), 
Brahmii, Viᘐ?IJ.U and Siva (reside). He should avoid the divine leaf, 
(since) Brahma is excellent ViᗺIJ.U (obscure). By eating from the 
remaining leaves he obtains all religious merit. 0 best sage, by 
eating from the middle leaf (of palasa) and by drinking the milk 
of a tawny cow a man would go to hell. A siidra who ignor­
antly drinks the milk of a tawny cow, is purified by giving a 
cow to a briihmal).a in Kartika. Giving sesamum, bathing in a 
river, always seeing the good, eating from paliisa leaves in 
Kartika give salvation. He who observes silence, eats from 
palasa leaves, bathes with (river-) water, always forgives, sleeps 
on the (bare) ground in Kartika would destroy sin earned during 
(many) ages, 0 Kartikeya, one who keeps awake before Viᘐ?IJ.U

=== PAGE 105 ===

VI. l l 8.47-60 
2723 
at dawn in Kartika, would obtain the fruit of (giving) a thousand 
cows. The fruit which men get by offering food in pitrpakNa (i.e. 
dark half ofBhadrapada), and by offering water in JyeNtha and 
AĚa<;lha, is obtained by them in lighting others' lamps. By 
lighting another's lamp and by serving ViN:t;tu's devotees in 
Kartika a man gets the fruit ofRajasiiya and horse sacrifices. He 
who does not bathe in a river, does not (tell) tale(s) of ViN:t;tu, 
does not see ViN:t;tu's devotees in Kii.rtika would lose the religious 
merit (collected during) ten years. 0 best sage, (the religious 
merit of) that wise man who would remember PuNkara through 
(physical) act, mentally, or through speech, would be a lakh of 
crore times more. 
47-60. Prayii.ga in the month of Mii.gha, PuNkara in Kii.rtika, 
so also Avanti in Vaisii.kha-month would destroy sin earned 
during ages. 0 Kii.rtikeya, those men are blessed especially in 
the Kali age, who by all means serve ViN:t;tu everyday. (For him,) 
0 sage, what is the use of having offered many pi:t;t<;las by means 
of (offt:ring) srii.ddhas etc. ? There is no doubt that he has 
emancipated his dead ancestors from hell. Those who for (i.e. in 
honour of) their dead ancestors give a bath with milk etc. to 
ViNQu, go to heaven and live there with gods for a crore of 
kalpas. 0 best brii.hmal)a, LakĚmi does not stay for crores of 
existences in the houses of them who have not worshipped the 
lotus-eyed KrN:t;ta (i.e. ViN:t;tu) in Kii.rtika. Those who have not 
worshipped Vigm with black or white lotuses are stung, snatched, 
have perished and have fallen into the cave of Kali. He who (even) 
with one lotus worships the chief of gods, the lord of LakNmi, 
destroys sins (collected during) a myriad thousands of years. 
The lord of gods, saluted and worshipped with (just) one lotus 
would forgive seven hundred thousands of sins. 0 best sage, he 
who would worship ViN:t;tu in Kii.rtika with a lakh of Tulasi­
leaves would obtain a pearl on ( i.e. for) every leaf as the fruit. 
ViɱQu, 0 (my) son, is pleased for crores of thousands of kalpas 
with whatever is done (i.e. offered) after being mixed with (i.e. 
having) the fragrance of Tulasi. 0 Kii.rtikeya, Kali does not 
touch him who carries in his mouth, on his head or body a Tulasi 
(leaf) taken down from (the image of) ViɱQU (after it was offered 
to him). 0 Kii.rtikeya, he who would sprinkle his body with the 
offerings like flowers after taking them down from (the image

=== PAGE 106 ===

2724 
Padma PurtiT)a 
of) Krgta, becomes free from all diseases and sins also. 0 (my) 
son, undoubtedly the sins of him perish, and diseases of him 
come to an end, whose body touches (i.e. is smeared) with the 
remaining of the (burnt) charcoal etc. (offered) to ViN:Q.U. The 
water in a conch, devotion to Vigtu, the remains of offerings 
like flowers, water (flowing from) the feet (of the image of 
ViĚQu), sandal, the remains of incense remove (the sin of) the 
murder of a bnihmaহ;t.a. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED NINETEEN 
In Praise of a Fast for a Month 
The lord said: 
1-3. 0 best of ViNl).u's devotees, listen to the importance of 
the (daily) bath in Magha. 0 you very int elligent one, there is 
no (other) devotee of Viɱl}.u like you in this world. A man gets 
that fruit by a (daily) bath in Magha, which he gets on seeing 
ViĚl}.u at Cakratirtha or Mathurii.. He who, with his senses con­
quered, with his mind tranquil, and endowed with moral con­
duct, bathes (everyday) in Mii.gha, does not again come to this 
mundane existence. 
Sri K!$1)a said: 
4 . 
To you I shall tell about the greatness of (the holy place 
called) Siikara, by merely knowing which (a man would) always 
have my proximity. 
Suta said: 
5. 
Saying so, lord KrNQa spoke to Satya in many ways. I 
shall tell it (to you). 0 you (sages) having penance as your 
treasure; listen to it. 
Sri K!$1Ja said: 
6-13. A being, even a donkey, that lives in ViNQu's temple 
at Siikara extended over five yojanas, becomes the Four-armed

=== PAGE 107 ===

Vl. l 1 9. 1 4-29 
2725 
(ViĚ:Q.u). The measure of Sii.kara is laid down to be 
three 
thousand cubits, three hundred cubits and three. 0 goddess, a 
man gets that fruit in half a watch (i.e. three hours), . (which he 
would get when) he practises penance for sixty thousand years at 
another place. The (same) fruit is said (to be obtained) by 
tulapuruĚa dana1 in Kurukশetra when the Sun is seized by 
Rahu. It is said to be tenfold in Kasi, and would be hundred­
fold in Ve:Q.i, and said to be thousandfold at the confluence of 
Ganga and the ocean. It is said to be endless in ViN:Q.u's 
temple at Siikara. A man gives duly a lakh (of gifts) at another 
place. (The fruit) would be similar by giving one only at 
Siikara. By bathing but once at Sii.kara, in Ve:Q.i, and at the 
confluence of Ganga and the ocean, a man removes (the sin 
of) the murder of a brahma:Q.a. Alarka formerly got (the king­
dom of) the earth with the seven islands after hearing the great­
ness of Siikara, 0 Kartikeya. (0 son, go there on the Dvadasi 
of the bright half of MargasirNa.) 
Kiirtikeya said: 
1 4-16. 
0 lord, I desire to listen to (the description of) the 
best of vows ; so also the proper manner and the fruit of a fast 
for a month. (So also I desire to hear) how it should be observ­
ed by men, what would be (the way of) observing the vow, (how) 
it is duly commenced and duly completed. 0 Mahesvara, tell 
me in detail how many times this vow, giving happiness and 
wealth, is to be observed, 0 sinless one. 
Sri Rudra said: 
1 7-29. 
0 Kartikeya, since you have asked all this with 
devotion, listen to me explaining it, 0 best among the intelli­
gent. As ViĚ:Q.U is the greatest of the gods, as the Sun is the 
greatest of the luminaries, as Meru is (the greatest) of the moun­
tains, as Garuga is the greatest among the birds, as Ganga is 
(the greatest) of the holy places, as vaiSya is (the greatest) of 
the subjects, similarly observing the fast for a month is the 
greatest among the vows. He who observes the fast for a month 
1. 
Tulapuruǃ-Gift to a brahmal)a of as much gold or silver as equals 
the weight of one's body.

=== PAGE 108 ===

2726 
Padma PuriiT)a 
would obtain the religious merit due to all vows, all holy places 
and gifts. A man does not get that religious merit by means of 
various sacrifices like AgniĚtoma in which many presents are 
given as he gets by observing the fast for a month. That man 
who observes the fast for a month according to the rule has 
(indeed) muttered (hymns), has offered oblations (into fire), has 
given (gifts), has observed penance, has made oblations to his 
dead ancestors. Dedicating a sacrifice to me, ViȠl}.U, and wor­
shipping me, and then receiving an order from his preceptor he 
should observe the fast for a month. Having observed all vows (in 
honour) of ViĚou and observed the auspicious (vow) ofDvadasi etc. 
he should observe the fast for a month. 0 brahmal}.a, after having 
observed the vows like Atilqcchra, Paraka,l and Candriiyaoa 
he should fast for a month by the order of his preceptor. Having 
observed a fast on the Eka.dasi of the bright half of Asvina, he 
should take up this vow for thirty days. A man who worships 
ViĚou and fasts for the entire month of Kiirtika would enjoy 
the fruit in the form of salvation. In the temple of ViĚou he 
should three times a day devoutly worship ViȠl}.U with the fra­
grant flowers of malati (jasmine), blue lotuses, arka :flowers, 
lotuses, (other) flowers, u8ira-roots, camphor etc. and with the 
offerings of eatables, cakes, lights etc. after smearing (the lord's 
image) with excellent sandal. 
30-43. 
A man, a woman or a widow, having great devotion 
and with his/her senses conquered, should worship the GaruQa­
bannered god (ViȠou) with mind, deeds and words and should 
day and night utter the names ofViĚl}.u. He should devoutly 
and without false words utter ViĚou's praise. Full of compas­
sion for all beings, of a tranquil temperament, harmless, sleep­
ing and sitting on a seat outside he should narrate (the praise 
of) ViĚou. He should avoid recollection, sight, enjoying frag­
rant articles and talking of food, and should give up (taking) 
morsels. He should avoid ilmearing his body with oil, smearing 
his head with oil, (chewing) tiimbiila, smearing his body when 
he is observing the vow, and should avoid everything that is 
prohibited. While observing the vow he should not touch any-
1 . Paraka-Name of a vow of religious penance said to consist in fasting 
for twelve days and nights, keeping the mind attentive and organs subdued.

=== PAGE 109 ===

VI. I l 9.44-53 
2727 
thing and should not disturb anyone doing a deed. A house­
holder, remaining in a temple, should certainly observe the 
vow. A man, a good woman or a widow, having duly observed 
the fast for a month, should worship ViN:Q.U properly. With his 
mind controlled and senses conquered, he should observe this 
vow without anything wanting or adding for thirty days and 
should observe the fast for a month, and then on the Dvadasi 
(day) he should worship the auspicious Garlll;la-bannered (god). 
He should worship him with garlands of flowers, sandal, 
incense, and by besmearing (his image). A man should please 
ViN:Q.U with clothes, ornaments and (by playing upon) musical 
instruments. With water (from) holy (places mixed) with 
sandal he should devoutly bathe (the image of) ViN:Q.U. He 
should (worship) the image besmeared with sandal and adorned 
with incense and flowers. Having fed best brahma:Q.as (and 
pleased them) with gifts of garments etc. he should give them 
dakNi:Q.a (i.e. presents), and saluting them he should apologise to 
them. Having thus fasted for a month, and having worshipped 
ViN:Q.U, and having fed the brahma:Q.as, he is honoured in 
ViNI).u's heaven. Thus he should engage thirteen brahma:Q.as. 
Listen to the manner in which he should dismiss them at the 
end of the fast for a month. Fasting on the Ekadasi day he 
should perform a sacrifice (in honour) of ViN:Q.U. 
44-53. Having with the permission of his preceptor wor­
shipped the lord of gods, he should, according to his capacity, 
worship the preceptor. Then saluting the brahma:Q.as of a pure 
family and character and devoted to ViN:Q.u's worship, he should 
feed them. Then ·he should honour them all. Having fed 
thirteen brahmal).as, he should salute and honour the best 
brahma:Q.as with tambiila, pairs of garments, food coverings, 
yogapattas, threads, sacred threads, and then he should get 
fashioned a bed furnished with a cover, well-covered, beautiful, 
excellent, with pillows and decorated. Then, having according 
to his capacity got fashioned his golden image, he should put it 
on the bed after worshipping it with garlands etc. On the bed 
he should put a seat, wooden sandals, an umbrella, a pair of 
garments and shoes, and pure flowers. Having thus made the 
bed, and having saluted those brahma:Q.as, he should request the 
brahma:Q.as for their consent and say : "I am going to ViN:Q.u's

=== PAGE 110 ===

2728 
Padma Purii1Ja 
world." Then the best man would go to ViN1.1u's healthy abode. 
He should repeatedly say to the briihma1.1as seated in the pavi­
lion : "0 best briihma1.1as, may all that is without the (proper) 
hymns and (proper) acts, be fully accomplished due to the 
favour of your words." I have (thus) properly told (you) the 
manner of (observing) the vow of the fast for a month. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED TWENTY 
The Greatness of Siilagriima 
Suta said: 
1 . Hearing these words, Kiirtikeya again asked about the 
worship of Siilagriima. 0 you having penance as your wealth, 
listen to it again. 
Kiirtikeya said: 
2. 
0 lord, 0 greatest among the meditating saints, I have 
heard about all religious practices. 0 lord, tell me in detail 
about the worship of Salagriima. 
The lord said : 
3-23. Well, well, I shall tell you what you ask, 0 you very 
intelligent one; 0 dear to me, listen to it. 0 you noble-hearted 
Kiirtikeya, on a Siilagriima stone the three worlds with the 
mobile and immobile always stay together. He who has seen, 
saluted, bathed and worshipped it, would get religious merit as 
the fruit, a crorefold more, of sacrifices, and that of the gift of a 
crore of cows. 0 child, he who has always drunk the water (flow­
ing) from ViN1.1u's Siilagrii.ma, has cut off the very tormenting stay 
in the embryo. 0 son, even he, always attached to passion and 
without devotion, would become ViNI.lU after worshipping a Siila­
griima stone. The round Siilagriima stone, when remembered, 
glorified, meditated upon, worshipped and saluted, destroys a 
crore (of sins). As the herds of beasts in a forest go (away) 
through fear on seeing a lion, so sins in large numbers go

=== PAGE 111 ===

VI. l 20.24-5 la 
2729 
(away) on seeing a Sii.lagrama stone. A man saluting with or 
without devotion a Sii.lagrii.ma stone at the time of its worship 
would obtain salvation. A man who everyday worships the 
Salagrii.ma stone, has no fear of Yama, so also of death and 
birth. A man who, in the Kali age greatly devoted, everyday 
worships the Salagrii.ma stone with sandal, water for washing 
the feet, respectful offerings, offerings of eatables, lights, incen­
ses, unguents, songs, musical instruments and hymns, enjoys 
for thousands of crores of kalpas in the abode of Vi!1:Q.U. How 
can those men, my devotees on the earth, have manhood (i.e. 
birth as a human being) who have devoutly saluted Salagrii.ma? 
Those of my devotees, the most sinful ones, who do not salute 
my lord, Vi!1:Q.U, are not my devotees, being deluded by sins. 
Even he, being my devotee, who eats on the Ekadasi day, 
harms me, and goes to the Andhata.misra hell. One should 
touch my (symbol, the) Phallus. No other purification is told 
for him. That day which is dear to ViN:Q.u, is dear to me. That 
mortal who would not fast on that day, is a sinner and worse 
than a cii.:Q.<;lii.la. 0 son, I always live in the Salagrii.ma stone. 
The god, being pleased, has given me that place. That fruit 
which is obtained by worshipping me with thousands of lotuses 
is obtained, a crore times more, by worshipping a Salagrama 
stone. Those men who have not worshipped a Sii.lagrama stone 
in the mortal world, have not worshipped and saluted me. 0 
Kartikeya, he who worships me before a Sii.lagrii.ma stone, has 
worshipped me for twentyone yugas. What is the use of wor­
shipping hundreds of Litigas (i.e. my symbols) without devotion 
to ViN:Q.u? If the round Sii.lagrii.ma stone is not worshipped, then, 
0 son, offerings of eatables, leaves, :flowers, fruits, water, offered 
to me, is not fit. 
24-51 a. 
Everything in front of a Salagrii.ma stone is purified. 
A man eating the eatables offered to another deity would 
observe the Cii.ndrii.ya:Q.a(-vow, i.e. would get its fruit). (But) by 
eating the eatables offered to ViN:Q.u, he would obtain the fruit of 
a crore of . sacrifices. There is no doubt that by means of the 
water flowing from the feet of god (ViN:Q.u), so also by means of 
the water in a conch, (men) having committed a crore of mur­
ders are purified. He who being a devotee of Siva, would not 
honour a devotee of ViN:Q.u, so also his hater, goes to (and lives

=== PAGE 112 ===

2 730 
Padma Purii:l)a 
in) hell as long as the fourteen lndras (rule}. He in whose 
house a householder rests for a while, drinks nectar for eight 
ages of Brahma. Mean men, avoiding KrĨ1;.1a's worship, perish 
in the painful forest of the mundane existence for thousands of 
crores of years. By means of worshipping the Liilgas coming up 
from Salagrama stones, through love, men devoid of Sari:lkh­
ya or Yoga, obtain salvation. That fruit which would be got 
by seeing crores of my Liilgas, worshipping or eulogising them, 
would be (obtained) (just) on (worshipping) the Siilagriima 
stone. There are twelve stones coming up (i.e. formed) from 
the Siilagrama. Listen to the religious merit of him who wor­
ships them daily. The religious merit (obtained by) worshipping 
thousands of crores of Litigas on the bank of Jiihnavi, by living 
for eight yugas at Kiisi, would be had in one day (by worship­
ping the Salagrama). Then (what would be the religious merit) 
of a man who would worship it for many (days)? I or deities like 
Brahmii do not endeavour to measure it. Therefore, 0 son, my 
devotees should do devoutly, to please me, the worship of 
a Sii.lagriima stone. At that place where ViĨ1;.1u in the form of 
a Siilagriima stone lives, live gods, demons, yakĨas, and the 
fourteen worlds. That fruit which a man would get by means of 
all the crores of recitals (of the names) of deities, would be got 
by the good deed, viz. recital (of the names) of ViĨ1;.1u, in the 
Kali age. His dead ancestors once gratified with a pil}.l;la in 
front of the Siilagriima stone live (in Vaiku:o.tha}. They cannot 
be counted. For those men who devoutly drink the water drop­
ping from the Siilagriima stone, what is the use of drinking 
thousands of the paiicagavyas (i.e. the five products obtained 
from a cow)? When an expiation has succeeded after having 
drunk the water (flowing) from Vi!?I}.U's feet, what is the use of 
(giving) gifts, observing fasts, and properly practising Ciindrii­
yal}.a vows? What is the use of worshipping crores of other 
deities for him who fashions an image of Vigi.U lying in water in 
a tank? They say 'Gods have Vi!?IJ.U as their chief'. 0 son, for 
the fruit of every religious act, there is a limit. (But) there is 
absolutely no measure of the fruit of the worship of the Siila­
griima stone. He who gives a stone of (i.e. sacred to) ViNl}.u 
originating from Siilagriima to a briihmal}.a, a devotee of Vi!?QU, 
has performed hundreds of sacrifices. Even though he stays at

=== PAGE 113 ===

VI. 1 20.5lb-73 
2731 
home, he has everyday bathed in Ganga. He has bathed at all 
holy places, and is initiated for all sacrifices. One should do 
sprinkling with water flowing from a Salagrama stone. 0 Kiirti­
keya, there are stones in heaven, in the mortal world, and in the 
nether world. But there is no (other) stone like the Salagrama 
stone. The life of him in the world of human beings, difficult to 
obtain, who everyday gives a prastha of sesamum is fruitful. He 
gets that fruit by worshipping a Salagrama stone. A leaf, a 
flower, a fruit, water, a root or so also a blade of diirva offered 
to the Salagrama become equal to Meru. A man may be without 
a rite or having no (religious) act or hymns; but if he has a 
mark of the disc on his arm, he gets the proper fruit as is told in 
the sacred texts. All that I have seen in Vi!ii:Q.U as destroying 
affliction, I shall tell you, 0 son. "0 Vi!ii:Q.U, where do you stay? 
What is your prop? What is your resort? 0 god, how are (can) 
you (be) pleased? Tell me all that." 
Sri Ku1)a said: 
Slb-73. 
0 Siva, I always stay in the stone produced in 
Salagrama. Listen to my names which are there on the chariot­
wheel mark. If on the wheel resembling an opening, there is no 
hole, then that should be known as Vi!ii:Q.U, pure and very hand­
some. That which has a long size, a cavity and many holes, is 
Pradyumna, having the Sun's face and of bright lustre. Anirud­
dha has a yellow lustre, is round and very beautiful, is marked 
with three lines at the opening, and has a mark of a lotus. God 
Narii.ya:o,a is dark, has a raised wheel of the navel, has long 
lines, and has a cavity on the right side. One should know that 
a stone having an opening above, and beautiful, is of the form 
of Vi!ii:Q.U, giving desired objects, salvation, and especially wealth. 
The highest lord has a white lustre and is endowed with a lotus 
and a disc. On its surface are a round figure and very many 
holes. Similarly Vi!ii:Q.U is of a dark complexion on the basic, 
very beautiful disc (like figure). Similarly on the opening, in the 
middle part, a line is noticed. Kapila, Narasimha has a large 
disc and is very beautiful. He should be worshipped with celi­
bacy; otherwise he creates difficulties. Varaha has strength as 
his symbol, the two discs are said to be unP.ven. He resembles a 
sapphire, has three lines, and is beautiful from (i.e. due to) the

=== PAGE 114 ===

2732 
Padma PuraT)a 
navel. That stone which is long, has a golden complexion, and 
adorned with three lines, is known as 'Matsya', and gives the 
fruit like enjoyments and salvation. Similarly Kiirma is raised, 
round on the surface, and is filled with a disc (like figure). 
Marked with Kaustubha, it has a green colour. Hayagriva has 
the shape of a horse, and is adorned with five lines, is full of 
many marks, and on the surface has a blue sign. VaikuাJ.tha has 
an undivided body, and has mark of a disc and a banner. 
Similarly on the hole there is a very beautiful line, of the shape 
of a guiija-fruit. Similarly god Sridhara is marked with a gar­
land of wood-flowers ; has the form of a kadamba flower, and is 
adorned with a group of five lines. The round and small one is 
called Vamana. It is like the atasi flower, and is adorned with a 
mark. Similarly the handsome god is dark-complexioned and 
very lustrous. On its left side there are a mace and a disc, and 
on the right side of it there is a line. Similarly Damodara is 
big; in its centre is a disc. It resembles diirva, is crowded with 
openings, and has yellow lines. Ananta has many colours, and 
is marked with various circuits. It is of various forms, and 
grants all desired objects. He whose face is seen in all quarters 
and intermediate quarters and above, should be known as Puru­
Ĩottama who grants the fruit in the form of pleasures and salva­
tion. That whose Liliga is seen on the top of a stone coming up 
from Salagrama, is god Yogesvara (i.e. the lord of abstract medi­
tation), and removes (the sin of) a brahma়J, a's murder. Padma­
nabha is reddish. A lotus is in contact with his face. Due to 
worshipping him daily a poor man would become rich. 
74-83. One should point out one that is marked with a 
disc, having a golden body, and a collection of rays, full of 
many golden lines, and adorned with crystal-lustre. A very 
glossy (stone) gives success; a black one gives fame; a white 
one burns sins, and gives a father long life and sons. A dark 
blue one gives wealth; a red one diseases ; a rough one gives 
dejection ; and a crooked one causes poverty. One (disc on a 
stone) should be known to be the Sudarsana ; the second (i.e. 
having two discs) the couple LakĨmi and NarayaঽJ,a. One should 
know the third one (i.e. having three discs) to be Acyuta ; the 
fourth one (i.e. having four discs) to be Janardana ; the fifth one 
(having five discs) to be Vasudeva; and the sixth one (having

=== PAGE 115 ===

VI. l 20.84-92 
2733 
six discs) to be Pradyumna; the seventh (having seven discs) to 
be SaxhkarNa:Q.a ; the eighth one (having eight discs) to be Puru­
ষottama ; the ninth one (having nine discs) to be the nine modes ; 
the tenth one (having ten discs) of his own nature ; the eleventh 
(having eleven discs) to be Aniruddha ; and the twelfth one 
(having twelve discs) is of the twelve forms. Discs more than 
these are seen on the stone called Ananta. A broken, cut or 
broken Siilagrama: does not have a flaw. He should carefully 
worship that image which is liked by him. He who carries the 
lord of stones after placing him on his shoulder, would subju· 
gate the three worlds with the mobile and the immobile. ViN:Q.U 
resides there where there is the Salagrama stone. The gift (given) 
there or the muttering of hymn or bathing done there is hundred 
times superior to 
that 
at Varii:Q.asi, KurukNetra, Prayiiga, 
NaimiNa and Pসkara. 
84-92. 
The religious merit there is a crore times more. It 
gives great fruit at Vara:Q.asi. All (such) sins like the murder of 
a brahma:Q.a that a man commits, are quickly burnt by the wor­
ship of Salagrama stone. Where there is the deity coming from 
Salagriima stone, and where there is the (deity) from Dvaravati, 
and where there is the union of the two, there is salvation. 
There is no doubt about this. Celibates, householders, recluses 
and mendicants should eat the eatables offered to ViN:Q.u. No 
doubt should be raised about it. For its worship no hymns, no 
muttering, no faith are (necessary). For the worship of a Siila­
grama stone, no eulogy, no formality is needed. The auspicious 
circle drawn before a Salagrama stone, especially (the one 
drawn) in Kiirtika purifies the family up to the seventh ( descen­
dant). He who would draw an auspicious circle even of a size 
of an atom before (the image of) ViN:Q.u, with clay or metal­
products, and he who observes the worship of the sacred fire for 
a full year, (the latter) being equivalent to drawing an auspicious 
circle in Kiirtika, come to me. The sin due to cohabiting with 
a woman not fit to be approached, due to eating what is pro­
hibited, perishes by means of decorating ViN:Q.u's temple. That 
woman who draws an auspicious circle before (the image of) 
ViN:Q.U everyday, never obtains widowhood for seven existences.

=== PAGE 116 ===

2734 
Padma PuriiTJa 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED 1WENTYONE 
The Importance of Offering Lights etc. 
The Lord said: 
1-25a. 
0 Kartikeya, of him who, resorting to the shade of 
dhatri, offers pi1,.1c;las, the dead ancestors 
obtain salvation 
through Vi$1,.1U's grace. 0 child, a man who, being adorned with 
dhiitri-fruits, holds a dhiitri fruit on his head, in his hand, 
mouth, on his body, and who eats dhatri-fruits becomes Vi$J,lU. 
0 Kartikeya, he, the devotee of ViHl.U, who has a dhiitri-fruit, 
becomes dear to gods; then what to say of human beings? A 
man should not abandon a Tulasi-garland and especially a 
dhatri-garland. As long as the dhatri-garland remains round 
the neck of a man, Vi$1,.1U, till that tim:e, remains in his body. 
The life of him in whose house these three, viz. dhatri-fruit, 
Tulasi, and clay from Dviirakii are (found), is fruitful. A man 
would live in Vaiku1,.1tha for as many thousands of yugas as 
the days he wears a dhiitri-garland in the Kali age. He who 
would wear a pair of garlands of dhatri and Tulasi round his 
neck would live in heaven for a crore of kalpas. A man who, 
having controlled the group of his senses, devoutly worships 
Salagrama stone, has the religious merit of a horse sacrifice in 
(i.e. from) each flower. As is Vi$1,.1U among gods, so is Tulasi 
among flowers. He who everyday would worship the Garuc;Ia­
bannered god with Tulasi, becomes free from birth, grief, old 
age and diseases, and would obtain salvation. In case of him 
who has worshipped Vi$1,.1U in Kartika, Vi$1,.1U rubs off the row 
of letters written by Yama. Sricandana with camphor, agaru 
sandal with saffron, so also offering ketaki flowers and lights is 
always dear to Vi$1,.1U. He who has offered ketaki ::flower or light 
in Kartika in the Kali-age would emancipate a hundred (mem­
bers) of his family, 0 Kartikeya. On the days of Kartika, offering 
of lotuses, Tulasi, ketaki-:flowers and mango-blossoms, and 
lights as the fifth (should be done). 0 child, he who has made 
in Kartika a bower with ketaki-garlands for Vi$1,.1U, obtains 
residence in heaven. Vi$1,.1U, the Garuc;Ia-bannered god, wor­
shipped with a ketaki-fl.ower only, is much pleased for a thous­
and years. 0 Kartikeya, by worshipping Vi$J,lU with ketaki-

=== PAGE 117 ===

Vl. l2 1 .25b-37 
2735 
flowers, one goes to Visnu's auspicious and happy abode. So 
also having worshipped the lord of gods when Vaisakha has 
come with damanaka, he obtains a fruit due to that worship, 
0 best of sages. 0 brahmal).a, by the sight of him who worships 
ViӪJ}.u with agasti-flowers, the fire of hell perishes. 0 brahmal).a 
sage, ViNJ}.u, pleased by penance, does not do that which, 0 
Mahiisena, he does, when he is adorned with mango-flowers. 
He who, abandoning all (other) flowers, devoutly worships 
ViᗷJ}.u in Kartika with mango flowers, would obtain the fruit of 
a horse-sacrifice. About him who offers ViNJ}.u a garland made 
of mango-flowers, even the lord of gods speaks good words. 0 
Kartikeya, the fruit which is obtained by the gift of a myriad 
cows, is obtained by offering (just) one mango-flower in Kar­
tika. As ViNJ).U is pleased with the Kaustubha gem, or with the 
garland of wood-flowers, so is he pleased with a Tulasi-leaf in 
Kii.rtika. 
Siita said: 
25b. Seeing Kartikeya bowing with politeness and full of 
devotion, Siva, the Bull-bannered god spoke again. 
The lord said: 
26-37. 
0 Kartikeya, listen to the importance of lights in 
Kii.rtika. The dead ancestors, always surrounded by hosts of 
(other) dead ancestors, desire : 'A good son, devoted to his dead 
ancestors, will be born in our family, who will please ViNJ).U by 
offering lights in Kii.rtika'. 0 Kartikeya, to him, whose lamp 
burns with ghee or oil, what is the use of a horse-sacrifice? He 
who has offered lights in Kartika before ViNJ).u, for five days 
especially in the dark half, has performed all sacrifices, and has 
plunged into the water at a holy place. He who offers a light on 
these days, would eternally obtain religious merit. A female 
rat, having brightened the lamp offered by others, obtained the 
existence of human beings difficult to obtain, and got the best 
position. A hunter also who, going without food, worshipped 
the great lord on the fourteenth day, got the highest (place) and 
went to ViNl).u's world. A prostitute Lilavati who, due to her 
resorting to a cal).Qala, caused (to burn more) a lamp lighted by 
others, became pure and went to the eternal heaven. A certain

=== PAGE 118 ===

2736 
Padma Purdr)a 
cowherd who, seeing on the new-moon day the worship of 
ViN:Q.u again and again said, "Victory (to ViN:Q.u)," became the 
great lord of kings. Therefore, at night, after sunset, lamps 
should be offered in houses, all cow-pens and all abodes, 
temples of gods and cremation grounds and lakes. Due to 
its religious merit the offering of lights with ghee for a good 
purpose should be done for five days. The dead ancestors 
who were sinful and who had missed the rites (of the offering) 
of pi:Q.<;ias and water, get the highest salvation due to the 
religious merit of offering lights. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED TWENTYTWO 
The Celebration of Diplivali 
Kiirtikeya said: 
1-2 . 0 lord, now tell me in particular the fruit of Dipavali. 
Why is it celebrated ? What would be its deity? 0 lord, tell me 
what should be and should not be given during the festival. 
What (kind of) exultation is indicated during it? What sport is 
mentioned ? 
Sii.ta said; 
3. 
Hearing these words of Kartikeya, the lord who had 
burnt up Cupid, said, 'Well' and laughed and said these words, 
0 Brahma:Q.as. 
Sri Siva said: 
4-20. 
0 Kartikeya, on the thirteenth day of the dark half 
of Kartika, a man should offer a light to Yama outside (his 
house). Thereby untimely death is avoided. "May the Sun's 
son, with Death having a noose in his hand and with his wife, 
be pleased due to this offering of the light" Those who are 
scared of sins, should necessarily bathe at moon-rise on the 
fourteenth day of the dark half of Kartika. He, being careful, 
should bathe early in the morning on the fourteenth day pierced

=== PAGE 119 ===

VI. l 22.2 1 -32 
2737 
(i.e. mixed) with the previous day of the dark half of Kartika. 
LakӪmi (resides) in oil and Gailgii in water. He who would 
bathe in the morning on Caturdasi in Dipiivali does not see 
Yama's world. To destroy (i.e. to avoid) hell, he should whirl 
(round himself) apiimiirga, tumbi, prapunnata, viihvala (twigs) 
while bathing. "0 Apamarga, being with a clod of furrowed 
land and with thorn and leaf, remove my sin, when repeatedly 
whirled." He should whirl over his head apamiirga and pra­
punniita. Then with (i.e. by reciting) Yama's names, he should 
offer libations of water. "Salutation to Yama, Dharmaraja, 
Mrtyu, 
Antaka, 
Vaivasvata, 
Kala 
and SarvabhiitakNaya 
(Destroyer of all beings), Audumbara, Dadhna, Nila, Parame̥ ­
lhin, Vrkodara, Citra, Citragupta." Having worshipped the 
deities, he (i.e. the king) should offer a light to Naraka. Then 
at the break of night he should offer pleasing lights at the 
temples of Brahma, ViN:Q.u, Siva etc., and especially at apart­
ments on the tops of the houses, sanctuaries, assembly halls, 
rivers. ramparts, gardens, wells, streets, pleasure-groves near 
houses, stables and abodes of elephants also. 0 Kiirtikeya, 
having, like this, bathed in the morning on the new-moon day, 
and having devoutly worshipped and saluted deities and dead 
ancestors, and having offered the piirva:Q.a sraddha with curd, 
ghee, milk etc., he should feed brahma:Q.as with various kinds of 
food, and apologise to them. Then, 0 dear one, in the after­
noon the king should gratify the citizens. Having chitchatted 
with them, honoured them he should converse with them. 0 
Kiirtikeya, for one year love is generated among those who 
talk. Before ViN:Q.U has got up, he should awaken LakNmi 
through the women. 
2 1-32. 
When a man has awakened LakNmi at the time of her 
getting up through a good woman, for one year Lak̥ mi does not 
leave him. The haters of gods (i.e. the demons) scared of ViN:Q.U 
obtained fearlessness from the brahma:Q.as, after knowing (that 
ViN:Q.u) was asleep in the Milky Ocean, and LakNmi had resorted 
to the lotus. "You are the lustre, Sri Ravi (i.e. the Sun), the 
Moon, the Lightning, the Golden Star; the lustre occurring in 
the lustre of the lamp is the lustre of all the lustres. That Lak̥ mi 
that lives on the earth, in the cowpen on the auspicious day of 
Dipii.vali in Kartika, may grant me a boon." Siva and Bhavani

=== PAGE 120 ===

2738 
Padma PuraT)a 
took to playing with dice as a sport. LakĨmi, propitiated by 
Bhavani remained in the form of a cow. 
Formerly Parvati 
vanquished Siva in the game of dice, and sent him away naked. 
So this Siva is unhappy. Gauri always remains happy. He who 
gets victory first (passes) the year happily. When the night 
passes like this, and people have their eyes half-closed, AlakNmi 
is driven out of the courtyard of the house by the joyful city­
women by means of sounding the musical instruments and 
drums. In the case of a defeat (in the game of dice) opposite 
will be the case. On the first day, when the sun has risen, 
Govardhana should be worshipped in the morning and one 
should play the game of dice at night. Then cows should be 
decorated ; and they should not be used to carry (loads etc.) or 
should not be milked. "0 Govardhana, 0 support of the earth, 
0 protector of Gokula, 0 you who were lifted by the hand of 
ViN:Q.U, give (us) crores of cows. That LakNmi who remains in 
the form of the cow of the regents of the quarter, and that 
carries ghee for the sacrifice, may remove my sin. May cows 
stand before me. May cows be behind me. May cows be in my 
heart. I live among cows." Thus worship of Govardhana 
(should be done). 
33-42. 
Having pleased with sincere devotion deities and 
good men, he should please others by giving food and (should 
please) the learned men by offering (i.e. speaking gentle) words. 
(He should please) the inmates of the harem by (giving them) 
garments, tambiilas, lights, flowers, camphor, saffron, food and 
eatables of superior and inferior quality. The king should please 
the chief of the village with gifts and vassals with wealth, 
and the hosts of foot soldiers good neck-ornaments and brace­
lets. The king should also please his ministers and his own 
people separately. Then having properly gratified wrestlers and 
actors, so also the bulls and large oxen fighting with one another 
and other soldiers and foot soldiers who are well-adorned being 
seated on a raised seat, he should see the actors, dancers and 
bards, and should cause to fight and roar the cows and buffaloes 
etc. which (he possesses). By means of sounding words (of 
calls) and responses he makes the cows attract their calves. 
Then, 0 Kartikeya, he should put up a divine arch over the path 
in the eastern direction in the afternoon, tied to a pillar of the

=== PAGE 121 ===

VI. I 22.43-57 
2739 
fort or a tree; (it should be made) of kusa (grass) and should 
have many hanging strings of flowers. Observing many horses 
and elephants, he should take them and bulls with cows, so also 
he-buffaloes and she-buffaloes furious with bells to the base of 
the arch. Through the best bnihmal).as who have offered a sacrifice, 
he should put up the arch. Then, he, of a good vow, should make 
obeisance by (reciting) this hymn : 
43-57. 
•'0 margapti.li, salutation to you who give happiness 
to all the world." 0 Kartikeya, at the base of the margapali 
cows and great bulls go. 
Kings, 
princes and especially 
brahmal).as on crossing the margapali, become free from disease 
and happy. Having done all this, at night he should actually 
worship Bali, the lord of demons, in a circle made on the 
ground. Having drawn, with five colours, (the picture of) Bali, 
the lord of demons, complete with all ornaments, accompanied 
by Vindhyavali, surrounded by the demons Kiiᗬmal).<;ia, Maya, 
Jambha.ru, Madhu, and with his entire face delighted, and with 
a crown and bright earrings, and again (drawing the picture of) 
the lord of demons with two arms in a small or big chamber in 
his own house, he should then worship it. The lord of kings, 
who, being pleased and with his ministers and priests, and with 
his mother, brothers, and kinsmen, worships (the demon-lord) 
with lotuses, red lotuses, flowers, white lotuses and blue lotuses, 
with sandal, flowers, offerings of eatables with milk, jaggery and 
sweetened milk, with liquor, flesh, wine, things eaten by licking 
or by sucking, (other) eatables and offerings, and by (reciting) 
this hymn, gets happiness during that year : "0 king Bali, 0 
lord, 0 son of Virocana, salutation to you. 0 future Indra, 0 
enemy of gods, accept this worship." Having thus offered the 
worship and keeping awake at night, he should make (others) 
keep awake at night with actors, dancers, singers, and make 
people place (the image of) king Bali with white rice inside the 
house on a couch, and should worship him with fruits and 
flowers. 0 Kartikeya, everything there should be done with 
reference to Bali. The sages, the seers of truth say that all those 
(objects) that are inexhaustible (come to him). Whatever small 
or big gift is made here, all that would be inexhaustible, auspici­
ous, and would pleaseViᗪl).U. May all the untractable practices of 
those men who do not worship you, Bali, at night, come to you.

=== PAGE 122 ===

2740 
Padma PuriiT)a 
58-69. 
0 child, Viᗬ:Q.u himself, being pleased, has granted 
this great festival to Bali who had obliged the demons. 
0 
Kartikeya, since then (this festival of) Kaumudi has commenced 
(for) ever. It melts all troubles and destroys all difficulties. 
It 
removes the grief of people, it fulfils desires, and brings about 
wealth, nourishment and happiness. The word 'ku' stands for 
the earth, the word 'muda' stands for joy. Due to the root 
(meaning) of the two (words coming together) the festival is 
said to be (i.e. called) Kaumudi, since the people mutually 
rejoice (during it) on the earth. They are glad and pleased, are 
happy, so it is called Kaumudi. 0 son, since during it red lotu­
ses are offered to Bali by kings for (removing) their sins, there­
fore it is called Kaumudi. To the king who every year gives the 
earth, (clean) like a mirror, for a day and night to the king of 
demons, how can there be fear from diseases? He has plenty of 
corn, happiness, health, excellent wealth. All people are free 
from diseases and free from all calamities. So, to spread devotion 
on the earth, the Kaumudi (festival) is celebrated. 0 Kartikeya, 
he who lives with a (particular) feeling during it (i.e. the festival) 
passes the year with that feeling of joy, sorrow etc. If he weaps, 
the year makes him weep ; if he is delighted, the year is delight­
ful. If he enjoys (the festival) he enjoys the year; if he is happy, 
the year will be happy. Therefore, good men should joyfully 
celebrate Kaumudi. This day in Kartika is said to be sacred to 
Viᗱ:Q.u and demons. 
70-73. 
Of the families of the intelligent ones, having happi­
ness due to (giving) gifts and enjoyments, who celebrate the 
light festival pleasing all, and who worship Bali, the entire year 
giving the lord(?), passes happily. 0 Skanda, these dates beginning 
with the second are well known. For four months and then in 
the rainy season they cause well-being. The first is in the month 
of Srava:Q.a ; the second is in the month of Bhadrapada; the third 
is in Asvina ; the fourth would be (i.e. fall) in Kartika. Kaluᗬa 
falls in the month of Srava:Q.a, Amala in Bhadrapada, Pretasaril­
cara in Asvina, and Yamyakamyata in Kartika. 
Kartikeya said: 
74. 
Why is the one (in Srava:Q.a) called Kaluᗬa? Why is the 
one (in Bhadrapada) said to be Nirmala? Why is the one (in

=== PAGE 123 ===

VI. l 22. 75-88 
274 1 
Asvina called Pretasarhciirii.? And why is the fourth called 
Yii.myii.? 
Siita said: 
75. 
Hearing these words of Kartikeya, the Bull-bannered 
lord, the cause of the beings, laughed, and spoke (these) gentle 
words. 
Mahesa said: 
76-88. 
Formerly when Vrtra was killed and Indra obtained 
the kingdom, a horse sacrifice was commenced to remove the 
sin of the briihmal).a's murder. Indra angrily killed the briihmal).a 
(Vrtra) with his thunderbolt. The (sin of the) killing was thrown 
down on the earth in six ways : in a tree, in water, on the land, in 
a woman, in one who causes abortion, and in fire after dividing it 
in due order. Due to hearing about that sin, with the day pre­
vious to the second, a woman, a tree, a river, the land, fire, and 
one who procures an abortion are polluted. For this reason it is 
called Kaluᗬii. Formerly the earth merged into the blood of 
Madhu and Kaitabha. Therefore (to the measure of) eight fingers 
she is impure. The menstrual flow of women is impure. All the 
rivers in the rainy season are impure. Fire (going) up is impure 
due to soot. Trees are impure due to exudation. Those that 
cause an abortion are impure due to contact. Filth moves on 
this day. Therefore, she is said to be Kaluᗬii.. There are the 
wicked atheists who censure the good practices of gods and 
sages. The second one is pure from the filth of their words. 
Therefore, it is Nirmalii. The Siirhkhyas, Tii.rkikas (i.e. logicians) 
teach and study the sacred texts on days forbidden for study. 
On the second (i.e. Amalii.) day the Sruti-followers are purified 
from the filth of their words and bad words. Therefore it (is 
called) Nirmalii.. 0 child, the three worlds would be purified 
due to the birth of KrᗬI).a in Srii.val).a. The wise ones have 
indicated it as Nirmalii. The Pretasarhcii.rii. is (so called) beca­
use of movements of the dead ancestors, grandsires like the 
Agniᗬvattas, the Barhiᗬads, the Ajyapas, 
and the Somapas 
also. The dead ancestors are called departed spirits. They move 
on that (day). They are worshipped with Svadhii. hymns by their 
sons, and the sons of their sons and daughters. They, moving

=== PAGE 124 ===

2 742 
PadmiJ PurdT)a 
departed spirits, leave after being gratified by means of sraddhas, 
gifts and sacrifices. The spirits are seen to move on the earth on 
the Mahalaya. 
89-103. Therefore, 0 Kartikeya, it is called Pretasarilcara, 
Since, 0 Kartikeya, on this day worship is offered to Yama by 
men, therefore, it is called Yamyaka. I have told the truth and 
the truth (only). Those best men who listen to the importance 
of Kartika, certainly get the religious merit due to the (daily) 
bath in Kartika. A man, having bathed on the Bhanuja on the 
second day of Kartika, should worship Yama in the morning. 
(Thereby) he does not see Yama. 0 Saunka, formerly, on the 
second day of the bright half of Kartika, Yama was fed and 
honoured by Yamuna in her house. On the second day a great 
gift (is given). Denizens of hell are gratified. They, separated 
(i.e. freed) from sins, are free from all bondage. They all, being 
praised, remain pleased as they like. This great festival, giving 
pleasure to Yama's region, takes place for them. Therefore, 
this Yamadvitiya is well known in the three worlds, and so the 
wise should not eat at home (on this day). They should 
affectionately take a nourishing meal at their sister's hand ; gifts 
should duly be given to sisters. Then along with the gift of 
golden ornaments and garments and honouring (their sister) they 
should eat from the hand of their sister of whole blood. The 
meal from the sister's hand should be taken on all (these days). 
It is nourishing. Yama is gratified on the second day of bright 
half of Kartika. Yama is mounted upon the seat (i.e. back) of 
a he-buffalo. The lord holds a staff and a mallet. He is surroun­
ded by his jubilant servants. Obeisance to him of the nature of 
Yamya. For those who have pleased their sisters whose 
husbands are alive, with gifts of garments etc. there is no 
quarrel (with anyone), nor any fear from their enemy during 
the year. 0 sinless one, 0 my son, I have told you the entire 
account along with its secret. It is blessed, gives success, 
increases the (span of) life, and is the means of righteous acts 
and enjoyments. Since on this day god Yamaraja was well-fed 
by Yamuna with a sister's affection (for her brother), therefore he 
who, on this day, eats from the hand of his sister, gets wealth 
and excellent riches.

=== PAGE 125 ===

VI.l 23.1-17 
2743 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED TWENTYTHREE 
Instructions Concerning the Fast 
Kiirtikeya said: 
1 -3. 
0 lord, I wish to listen to the vow which is best among 
the vows ; so also the mode of observing the fast for a month 
and the fruit of it as is told ; and also how the vow is to be 
commenced, and how it is to be duly completed. 0 lord, tell me 
in detail the number (of days) for which this vow is to be obser­
ved, 0 best of the gods. 
Sri Rudra said: 
4-17. Well, 0 kiirtikeya, hear from me who am telling you, 
all that you have devoutly asked, 0 best among the intelligent. 
As Vigi.U is among gods, as the Sun is among the shining ones, 
as Meru is among mountains, and Garuc;ia among birds, as 
Ganga is among holy places, as the trader is among the subjects, 
so is this fast for a month the best of all vows. He who observes 
the fast for a month would obtain the merit of all vows, and all 
holy places, and the fruit due to all gifts. A man does obtain 
that merit by means of sacrifices like Agniᗬtoma (performed) 
with profuse gifts, which he obtains by fasting for a month. A 
man who duly observes the fast for a month, has (indeed) 
muttered (hymns), has offered oblations into fire, has given 
(gifts), has practised penance, and performed svadha (i.e. plea­
sed his dead ancestors by offering them oblations). Dedicating 
a sacrifice to ViᗬJ}.u, and having worshipped him, and having 
secured his preceptor's order, he should fast for a month. Having 
observed all the auspicious vows as prescribed for the devotee of 
ViᗬJ}.u, such as Dvadasi, he should then observe the fast for a 
month. Having observed Atikrcchra, Paraka and CandrayaJ}.a 
(vows) he, considering his physical 
strength and weakness, 
should observe the fast for a month. An anchorite or an ascetic 
or a widow should observe the fast for a month with the 
preceptor's-brahmaJ}.a's-order. Having bathed and fasted on 
the eleventh of Asvina, he should take up this vow for thirty 
days. That man who, worshipping ViᗬJ}.u, would fast for the 
entire month of Kartika, would enjoy the fruit of salvation.

=== PAGE 126 ===

2744 
Padma Puriir}a 
In the temple of Vigm he should devoutly worship ViᗬI}.U three 
times (a day) with jasmine flowers, blue lotuses, lilies and lotuses, 
camphor and besmearing ' (the image) with saffron, sandal, and 
excellent sandal, (should worship him) with offerings of eatables, 
incense and lights. 
18-29. 
A man, a woman or a widow, having great devotion 
and with his senses conquered, should worship the Garu<;ia­
bannered (god Viᗪl}.u) with mind, deeds and words, and should 
day and night utter the names of ViᗬJ}.U. He should devoutly 
and without false words utter Viᗬl}.u's praise. Full of compassion 
for all beings, of a tranquil temperament, harmless, sleeping and 
sitting on a seat outside, he should narrate (the praise of) 
Viᗬl}.u. He should avoid thinking, seeing, enjoying fragrant 
articles, and talking of food, and should give up (taking) 
morsels. He should avoid smearing his body with oil, smearing 
his head with oil, (chewing) tambiila, smearing his body when he 
is observing the vow, and should avoid everything that is 
prohibited. Whileobserving the vow he should not touch anything 
and should not disturb anyone doing a deed. A householder, 
remaining in a temple, should certainly observe the vow. A man, 
a good woman or a widow, having duly observed the fast for a 
month, should worship ViᗪI}.U properly. With his mind controlled 
and senses conquerred, he should observe this vow without 
anything wanting or additional for thirty days, and should 
observe the fast for a month, and then on the Dvadasi (day) he 
should worship the auspicious Garu<;ia-bannered (god). He 
should worship him with garlands of flowers, sandal, incense, 
and by besmearing (his image). A man should please Viᗬl}.u 
with clothes, ornaments, and (by playing upon) musical instru­
ments. With water from holy places and mixed with sandal 
he should devoutly bath the image of Viᗬl}.u. He should 
(worship) the image besmeared with sandal, and adorneed with 
incense and flowers. Having fed best brahmal}.as and pleased 
them with dakᗪil}.a (i.e. presents), and saluting them he should 
apologise to them. Having apologised to the bra.hmal}.as, he 
should dismiss them after having honoured and worshipped 
them. 
30-42. 
In this way having observed the fast for a month 
and worshipped ViᗬI}.U according to his monetary capacity, with

=== PAGE 127 ===

VI. l 23.30-42 (cont.) 
2 745 
devotion, and having fed the brahma:Q.as according to his 
capacity he is honoured in the heaven of Viᗬ:Q.u. Now listen to 
the manner in which at the end of the fast for a month, having 
chosen thirteen brahma:Q.as, he should dismiss them. Observing a 
fast on the Ekadasi day, he should perform a sacrifice (in 
honour) of Vig1u. Having, with the consent of his preceptor, 
worshipped the lord of gods, and having, according to his 
capacity, honoured his preceptor, he should salute his precep­
tor. Then he should feed after saluting the brahmar;tas of a 
pure character and family and greatly devoted to worshipping 
Viᗾ:Q.u. Then having worshipped and fed all the brahmal)as and 
having given the best brahmaQ.as tambiilas, pairs of garments, 
food and coverings, so also yogapattas (i.e. cloths thrown over 
the back and knees of ascetics during abstract meditation), 
threads and sacred threads and then having saluted them, he 
should devoutly honour them. He should prepare a bed furni­
shed with a cover, well-covered, beautiful, excellent, with pillows 
and decorated. Then, having according to his capacity, got fas­
hioned his (i.e. Viᗬ:Q.u's) golden image, he should put it on the bed 
after worshipping it with garlands etc. On the bed he should put 
a seat, wooden sandals, an umbrella, a pair of garments and 
shoes, and pure flowers. Having thus made the bed, and having 
saluted those brahmal)as, he should request the brahmal)as for 
their consent and say : "I am going to ViᗬIJU's world." Then 
the best man would go to ViᗬIJu's healthy abode. He should 
repeatedly say to the brahma:Q.as seated in the pavilion : "0 best 
brahmal)as, may all that is without the (proper) hymns and 
(proper) acts, be fully accomplished due to the favour of your 
words." I have (thus) properly told (you) the manner of (obser­
ving) the vow of the fast for a month.

=== PAGE 128 ===

2746 
Padma PuraT)a 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED TWENTYFOUR 
Haribodhini, Bhlsmapaiicaka etc. 
The lord said: 
1-15. 
0 best god, also listen to the greatness of Prabodhini 
which destroys sins, enhances merit, and gives salvation to 
those who comprehend the truth. 
0 
Kartikeya, 
Ganga 
Bhagirathi roars on the earth till the time the Haribodhini 
(Ekiidasi) in Kiirtika has not come. The holy places and the 
lakes up to the ocean roar till the time the Prabodhini (Ekadasi) 
in Kartika has not arrived. Thousands of horse sacrifices and 
hundreds of Riijasiiya sacrifices are equal to one fast on the 
Prabodhini (Ekiidasi). 0 brahmal}.a, Prabodhini gives even that 
which is desired but which is difficult to be got or reached in the 
three worlds with the mobile and the immobile. 0 brahmaQa,Hari­
bodhini when fasted on, easily gives affluence, union, knowledge, 
kingdom, happiness and wealth. Just by means of one fast Haribo­
<lhini burns the sins resembling Meru and Mandara committed 
(by a man). 0 best among men, he who naturally observes a fast on 
the Prabodhini (day), according to the rule, gets the fruit as is 
told (in the sacred texts). The sin committed during thousands 
of former existences is burnt like a heap of cotton by keeping 
awake on the Prabodhini (day). 0 Kartikeya, listen; I shall tell 
you the characteristic(s) of the vigil, by merely knowing which 
Vi:?QU is not difficult to be secured. 0 noble one, a man should 
sing, play upon musical instruments, recite the Pural}.as, offer 
incense, light, eatables, flowers, besmear (the image) with sandal, 
offer fruits, respectful offerings, have faith, give gifts, control 
his senses, be truthful, without sleep, full of joy and (religious) 
acts, (offer worship) with energy and without laziness etc. by 
going round (the image), and preceded by obeisance, so also 
accompanied by waving of lights. With a mind free from 
dejection he should wave lights before Viᗪl}.u in every watch. He 
who, with a concentrated mind, keeps vigil accompanied with 
these characteristics, and without dishonesty regarding money, 
for the lord, is not reborn on the earth. 
16-26. 
He who thus devoutly and without deceitfulness 
keeps awake on the day of (i.e. sacred to) Vi:?QU, is taken to the

=== PAGE 129 ===

VI. 124.27-45 
2747 
highest position. He who, everyday in Kartika, worships Vigtu 
with the recital of the Puruᗪa-siikta (hymn) has worshipped 
ViᗪIJU for thousands of crores of years. The man who would 
everyday worship ViᗪIJU in Kii.rtika according to the prescribed 
manner for five days, would enjoy salvation. He who would 
worship ViᗪIJU (saying) 'Salutation to Nii.rii.yaQa', is free from 
torments in hell and goes to an auspicious position. He who 
recites in Kii.rtika (the hymn containing) the thousand names of 
ViᗪIJU, and (the account of) the release of the lord of elephants, 
does not have rebirth. He who keeps awake on the Dvii.dasi in the 
month ofKii.rtika lives in heaven for thousands of crores of yugas 
and hundreds of Manu's periods. And hundreds and thousands 
(persons) born in his family obtain ViᗪQu's position. There­
fore, one should keep awake. 0 beautiful lady, he who eu­
logises and sings (songs about ViᗪQu) in the last watch (of a 
day) in Kii.rtika, lives in'Svetadvipa with his dead ancestors. He 
who offers eatables to ViᗪIJU at the end of a day in Kii.rtika 
lives for so many yugas in heaven, 0 best sages. 0 best sage, 
he who would continuously worship the lord of gods with 
jasmine :flowers and lotus, goes to the highest position. A man 
who observes (fast on) the Ekadasi of the bright half of Kii.rtika, 
and gives auspicious pitchers (to brii.hma]Jas) in the morning, 
goes to my abode. 
Kartikeya said: 
27-28. 
0 lord, tell me about the virtuous vow, best among 
the vows, viz. Bhiᗪmapaiicaka to be observed in the month of 
Kii.rtika. Through favour to me and the sages, tell me, 0 grand­
sire, about the manner in which it is observed, and its fruit, 0 
best god. 
The lord said: 
29-45. 0 you best among the believers in vows, I shall 
explain to you the very meritorious vow which lasts for five 
days. Since Bhiᗪma got it from ViᗪQu, it is called Bhiᗪmapaii­
caka. Who, except ViᗪQu, is able to tell the merits of this vow? 
Listen to the ancient practice. In the bright half of Kii.rtika it 
was observed by Vasiᗪtha, Bhrgu, Garga etc. in the ages like 
Krta. In the yugas like Tretii. it was observed by Ambariᗪa with

=== PAGE 130 ===

2748 
Padma Purilr)a 
(offerings of) food etc. and by brahmal).as observing celibacy, 
muttering hymns and performing rites like sacrifices. So also 
(it was observed) by kᗱatriyas and vaisyas highly devoted to 
truth and purity. It is difficult to be observed by those who are 
void of truth (i.e. are not truthful) and cannot be observed by 
those of foolish hearts. They say it is difficult to be observed, 
(that is, it is) 'Bhiᗬma'. It cannot be observed by ordinary men. 
0 best brahmal).a, he who observes it, has (indeed) observed 
every (vow). 
This Bhi!}mapaficaka vow gives great merit, 
destroys great sins. Therefore, men should carefully observe it. 
Having properly and according to the precept bathed on the 
Ekadasi in the bright half of Kiirtika one should take up 
this vow lasting for five days. The observer of the vow should 
especially bathe in the morning and at mid-day in a river or 
a spring, and having obtained cowdung with 
rice and 
barley he should in due course gratify his dead ancestors. One 
of a strong vow, having bathed and observed silence, and 
having put on washed garments, should carefully offer water 
and make respectful offering to Bhi!}ma. He should carefully 
worship Bhi!}ma and give gifts. He should carefully and especi­
ally give five jewels to a brahmal).a. Lord Vi!}l).U with Lak!}mi 
should also be always worshipped. By means of worshipping 
(Vi!}l).U) during the group of five (days) Vi!}l).U is pleased for 
crores of kalpas. 
Whatever (image etc.) is made, he should 
fashion it with five metals. 
By giving water and making a 
respectful offering, a man gets the entire fruit of vows (lasting) 
for a year. One who makes (the offering) with (the recital of) 
this hymn : 'I am offering this water to Bhi!}ma who has Vaiya­
ghrapada gotra and Samkrta pravara' would enjoy salvation. 'I 
make the respectful offering to Bhi!}ma, the incarnation of the 
Vasus, the son of Santanu, and a life-long celibate.' This is the 
hymn of the respectful offering. 
46-56. 
He, who, in this way, finishes the group of five 
(days), undoubtedly gets religious merit equal to that of a horse 
sacrifice. For five days he should carefully observe restraint. 0 
son, the practice of a vow is not possible without restraint. 
Vi!}l).U gave (the highest position) to Bhiᗪma who departed in 
the Uttarayal).a ; he became1 .... Then he should get Vi!}l).U, the 
I. 
This part is unintelligible (rr.)

=== PAGE 131 ===

Vl.l 24.57-59 
2749 
destroyer of all sins. Then he should devoutly bathe (the image) 
with water, honey, milk and ghee; so also with the five products 
of a cow and water mixed with sandal. Then he should besmear 
(the image of) Viᘐ?\l.U, the Garu<;ta-bannered (god) with fragrant 
sandal, with saffron, and with camphor mixed with usira 
(sandal). He should worship (the image) with charming :flowers 
along with black aloewood and incense. He, with devotion, 
should burn guggulu (a fragrant gum resin) with ghee before 
(the image of) Kr֕? \la. During the five days he should offer 
light day and night. He should offer excellent food as offering 
of eatables. Having thus worshipped, remembered and saluted 
the god, he should mutter one hundred and eight times the 
hymn Namo Viisudeviiya. He should make an offering with 
sesamum, rice and barley smeared with ghee, with the utterance 
of the hymn of six syllables, along with the utterance of the 
exclamation sviihii. The observer of the vow, having offered the 
evening sandhya prayer, having saluted Viᘐ?\l.U, having muttered 
the hymn as before, should sleep on the (bare) ground. 
57-69. 
All this should be done for five days. Listen to the 
speciality of and that which is superior in this vow. On the first 
day the observer of the vow should worship Vif?l).U's feet with 
lotuses. On the second (day) he should worship his knees with 
bilva-Ieaves. Then, with his mind directed to him, he should 
devoutly worship the head of the Disc-holder, the god of gods, 
with jasmine flowers on the full-moon day of Kartika. Having 
succinctly worshipped Viᘐ?\l.U on the Ekadasi, he, after having eaten 
cowdung, should duly observe fast on the Ekadasi day. The 
observer of the vow should drink cow's urine on the Dvadasi, 
milk on the Trayodasi and curd on the Caturdasi with (the 
recital of) the hymn. Having eaten (and drunk these) for the 
purification of his body and having fasted for four days, he 
should, after bathing, worship Viᘐ?\l.U according to the sacred 
precept. Giving up sinful thoughts the intelligent one, observing 
celibacy, should devoutly feed bra.hma\).as, and give presents to 
them. The man, avoiding liquor and :flesh, so also sinful coitus, 
subsisting on vegetables and sages' foods, should be deeply 
engaged in worshipping Kr!?\la.. Then having first (sipped) the 
five products of the cow, he should eat at night. He would

=== PAGE 132 ===

2750 
Padma Purib:za 
obtain the fruit of the vow thus duly concluded. (Even) a drun­
kard who would drink liquor from birth to death obtains the 
highest position by observing this Bhiᗬma-vow. By the words 
(i. e. order) of a brahma:t;J.a, women should observe it, which 
enchances religious merit. Widows also should observe it for 
salvation, and an increase in their happiness. 0 Kartikeya, men 
observe the Kartika(vow) by bathing everyday and (giving) 
gifts for abundance of (the fulfilment of) all desires and for 
(obtaining) religious merit. 0 child, greatly engrossed in medita­
tion upon Viᗬ:t;J.u, they should also perform the Vaisvadeva 
sacrifice (in honour of all deities), which gives health and sons 
and destroys great sins. 
70-78. 
0 Kartikeya, with all efforts he should observe the 
Kartika (vow) at holy places. The conclusion of all the vows 
(observed) during the year is observed in Kartika. An image of 
Sin should be fashioned. It should have fearful clothes and 
should be very fierce. It should have a sword in its hand ; it 
should have come out (i.e. should be prominent); it should have 
iron fangs and be dreadful. Covered with a black piece of 
cloth it should be put on a prastha (i.e. a particular measure) of 
sesamum seeds. Its wreath should be made of red flowers ; its 
golden earrings should be bright. Having, with great devotion, 
worshipped it with (the utterance of) the names of Dharmaraja, 
he taking a handful of flowers, should recite this hymn : 'Due 
to the grace of your feet may the sin committed in another (i.e. 
previous) existence or in this, perish.' Having duly worshipped 
that golden image, and having, according to his capacity 
honoured the brahma:t;.as, expounders of the Vedas, he should, 
to please K.rᗬ:t;J.a, god of gods, of unimpaired acts, give it to a 
brahmal}.a (saying) 'May Dharma be pleased with me.' According 
to his capacity he should give presents to the reader (of the next). 
Saying, 'May KH:t;J.a be pleased with me', he should give gold 
and cows also. Having done his deeds, and being detached, he 
should be controlled. According to his capacity he should give 
excellente gifts to others also. 
79-83. (Such) a man, of a tranquil mind, and guiltless, 
would obtain the highest position. 
He should reflect upon 
Mahadeva who is dark green like the petal of a blue lotus, who 
has four fangs and four arms, who has eight feet, and one eye,

=== PAGE 133 ===

VI . l 24.84-96 
2751 
who is spike-eared and has a rough voice, who is cold, who has 
two tongues, whose eyes are red, who has a lion-like thin cover. 
He has no form. Bhiᗬma, being on the bed of arrows told this 
to me. This vow known as Bhiᗬmapaiicaka on the earth, is 
confined to five days beginning with Ekadasi. There is no 
prohibition for him who is intent on taking food. Due to that 
vow Viᗬ:Q.U gives an auspicious fruit. 
Silta said: 
84-88. 
This has more religious merit than all (other) vows. 
It is difficult to be done on the earth. This secret, the collection 
of the essences of the sacred texts, is told by me. It is a secret of 
the gods. It is a great secret. It at once gives salvation even to 
those who are engaged in illicit intercourse. It would free one 
from both the sins of selling one's daughter or one's sister. This 
sacred text leading to salvation should not be revealed to other 
people. A man hearing it at once goes to salvation. It should 
be carefully preserved. This auspicious (vow) is not to be told 
to them who give it up. This is the truth and the (only) truthᗿ 
0 Kartikeya. Thus all the fruit that Kartika has is told. 
Sri Vi$1;1U said : 
89-96. 
The god of gods told it to his son for his welfare. 
Hearing those words of his father, Kartikeya was full of joy. 
All those, with the palms of their hands joined, said to the god, 
the life of the world : "We are blessed by hearing the fruit due 
to Kartika. Nothing else is to be heard. I have obtained the 
fruit of my existence." That man who, "having heard (this 
description of) the greatness (of the vow), would honour the 
reader (of it) with (the grant of a piece of) land, gold, garments, 
is equal to Viᗬ:Q.U, since when the reader is honoured, Vigm is 
worshipped. Like that he should always give to the reader if he 
desires the auspicious religious texts, PuraQa, or Vedic texts, etc. 
to be fruitful. One who desires religious merit should give the 
book to the reader only. Those who give the Pura:Q.ic texts, enjoy 
inexhaustible fruits. He who would devoutly read this, or would 
retain it after having heard it, is freed from all sins, and goes to 
ViᗬQu's heaven. There is no doubt that merely by listening to 
the (account of this) importance, he gets wealth, grains, fame. 
sons, (long) life, and good health.

=== PAGE 134 ===

2752 
Padma Purib)a 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED TWENTYFIVE 
The Importance of Miigha As Told by Bhrgu 
The sages said: 
1 -3. 0 Siita, 0 noble S iita, you, desiring the well-being of the 
world have narrated the account of Kartika giving pleasures and 
salvation. 0 LomaharᗬaQi, now tell us about the importance of 
Magha, hearing which the great doubt of people diminishes. 
Tell us who formerly revealed the greatness of the bath in 
Magha along with its history, 0 noble one. 
Suta said: 
4-9. 
Good ! good ! 0 best sages, you are greatly devoted to 
Krᗬ:Qa. Since you with joy and devotion repeatedly ask KrǸ:Qa's 
story, I shall tell you the greatness of Magha that increases the 
religious merit and destroys the sin of those who have bathed 
at dawn. 0 brahmal}.as, once Parvati, touching the lotus-like 
feet ofSankara with modesty, asked him, the benefactor of the 
world: 
Piirvati said: 
0 god of gods, 0 great god, 0 you who grant fearlessness to 
your devotees, be pleased, 0 lord of the universe. Tell me what 
I ask you now. 0 master, formerly I heard from you many 
kinds of religious practices. Now I desire to hear the greatness 
of Magha. Tell it. Since you love your devotees, tell me who 
observed it formerly, what is the mode (of observing it), which 
is the deity. Tell (me) all that in detail. 
Siva said: 
10-24. 
King Dilipa, best among kings, whose auspicious 
rites were performed by the sages after the ablution after a 
sacrifice, who was honoured by all citizens, went out of his city. 
The king was interested in hunting. He was full of curiosity, 
and was surrounded by an assemblage for hunting. He had put 
on his shoes, a blue turban and had covered his chest. He had 
a leathern fence fastened round his left arm to prevent injury

=== PAGE 135 ===

VI. l 25.25-39 
2753 
from the bow string, had a finger-protector, and a bow in his 
hand and a sword. (He was accompanied) by archers with 
small swords, so also foot soldiers like that. The young (king), 
brave like a lion, gladly sported with them in the bowers, 
looking for game in very charming large thickets in Gandhara. 
He crossed great streams. 'Kill him, kill him ; this deer is fleeing.' 
Speaking like this to his servants, he himself jumped and killed 
it. Again he moved here and there observing at places the 
forest-ground which was crowded with groups of frightened 
peacocks, that flew to the trees and hid themselves. It was full 
of fear of the herds of (frightened) female deer. In its various 
directions young ones of deer were running. It was fierce due to 
the sharp howls of jackals at places. The forest at places bore 
the beauty of elephants due to the groups of young rhinocero­
ses (obscure). At places it was resounding with the hooting of owls 
resorting to the hollows of trees. At places it was marked with 
the impressions of the paws of lions. At places it was red due 
to the blood of the rohita deer, torn apart by the nails of tigers. 
At places it suggested to the mind (that it was) the ground in 
the courtyard of the harem due to the groups of the Mahiᗱis 
(buffaloesjqueens) troubled by the burden of their stout (udders) 
breasts. At places it was covered with dense trees, and was fragrant 
with wild flowers. It at places had doors in the form of creepers, 
and was very charming with the humming of bees. It had large 
holes fearful due to serpents whose sloughs had partly come 
out. It was fearful due to the large serpents hiding in it, and 
spreading sloughs. It at places had the flames of wild fire, and 
very beautiful due to lustre from stones ; it was full of the 
hissing sounds ; it was crowded with deer and tigers. At places 
he let loose the group of his dogs against rabbits. Having 
rested at the (banks of) ponds he went to another forest. 
25-39. 
When the lord of kings was going like this, and the 
group of hunters was swaggering, he saw a deer making a loud 
noise and moving out of a thicket. With hasty strides it crossed 
the ground having inaccessible paths. At times it jumped into 
the air, and at times it was seen on the ground. The king, 
following its footsteps, entered an impassable forest very imperi­
ous due to crooked streams and full of thorny trees. The king, 
going further and further away and from one solitary region to

=== PAGE 136 ===

2754 
Padma PurdTJa 
another, had his neck and throat dry due to the excitement 
caused by (his) not (being able) to see the deer. His palate and 
face had become red. He was perspiring. His footmen were 
tired; his voice was wavering. After having passed over long 
ways, he, oppressed with thirst, saw, when the sun had gone to 
the middle (of the sky, i.e. at noon), before him a lake that 
vied with the ocean, on the bank of which there were dense 
trees, which was a holy place, was clean and auspicious. It was 
large; the lotuses in it had bloomed ; the bees were intoxicated 
with honey. It was covered with green lotus-leaves like emeralds. 
The fish in it was leaping at will like the clean mind of a good 
man. It was full of moving aquatic animals. It was adorned 
with the rows of waves. Like the mind of the wicked, it was 
rough inside due to the groups of crocodiles; at places, it was, 
due to moss, inaccessible like a miser's house. Day and night it 
pacified all the afflictions of various birds. Like donors with all 
their belongings it destroyed the afflictions of those that resorted 
to it. With its water it gratified the wild beasts like its own dead 
ancestors. Like the moon it removed all the heat of the day. 
Seeing it, he was free from languor like a cataka on seeing a 
cloud. Having drunk water there, and having performed the 
mid-day rites, the king ate, with his companions, the flesh of the 
game. He, telling charming stories, stayed on its bank, and 
keeping his arrow fixed to the bow (string), he rested on the 
bank at night. The hunters, fixing their arrows to the bow 
strings, blocked the paths of the directions. When the warriors 
remained like this, having spread the nets, at night on every 
bank a herd of hogs moved out, and having eaten the bulbs 
in the lake, jumped (before) the crowd of the hunters. 
40-48. The king pierced the hogs ; and many were killed by 
the hunters. In a moment, the hogs that were pierced, fell on 
the ground. Seeing them, the very proud hunters made an 
uproar, and running with great joy, gathered where the king 
stayed. Bringing them through his soldiers, he left the bank of 
the lake. Desiring to go (back) to his city he saw an ascetic on 
the way. (He saw) the brahma:Q.a, old Harita, well adorned with 
a conch and disc, with his body emaciated due to restraints 
difficult to observe and intense. He remained only in bones (i.e. 
had become skeleton-like), he was highly restrained, and his skin

=== PAGE 137 ===

VI. I 25.49-60 
2 755 
had become rough. He wore a deer-skin, and put on a soft­
bark-garment. He was muttering hymns from the Vedas. He 
had long nails and hair and matted hair. Seeing that hermit, 
and giving him passage, the king, with respect saluted him with 
'his head (bent) and the hollows of his hands resembling a lotus 
joined. The brahmaJ;ta (i.e. Hii.rita), taking him to be a king 
from his ornaments, and with a desire for obliging others, and 
for bringing about his welfare said (to him) : "At this meritorious 
and auspicious time, for what purpose are you going, 0 king, 
avoiding (i.e. not taking) a morning bath in the month of 
Mii.gha?" Then the king replied, "0 best brii.bmaJ;ta, I do not 
know. 
49-57. 
Tell me in detail what kind of fruit the Mii.gha bath 
has." Hearing these words of the king, the ascetic said : "0 king, 
the glorious sun, removing the darkness, is quickly rising. This 
is the time for our bath and not the time for a talk. After 
bathing, go to Vasiᗬtha, and ask him, the master of your 
family." Saying so the anchorite, observing silence, went for his 
morning bath. The hero Dilipa too, turning back, and bathing 
there with the proper rite, and full of joy went to his own city. 
In his harem he again told the account of the anchorite. Having 
got into a chariot having white horses, and with a white umbre­
lla and white chowries (he went to Vasiᗬtha's hermitage). Being 
adorned, having put on good garments and surrounded by his 
ministers, and repeatedly hearing the cries of victory made by 
the panegyrists and bards, he remembering the words of the 
sage, went to VasiHha's hermitage. There only he saluted the 
brii.hmaJ)a sage with politeness. Being given a seat, he accepted 
the respectful offering, and was adorned with blessings; and 
when the sage asked the king about his well-being, the king, 
delighting the sage's mind spoke the words. He of a sweet form 
asked (Vasiᗬtha) about what the anchorite had told him. 
Dilipa said: 
58-60. 
0 glorious one, by your grace I have, in detail, heard 
(from you) about the practices, administration of justice, and 
the great duties of a king, so also the duties of the four castes 
and stages of human life; so also gifts, and the manners in 
which they are given; so also sacrifices and rites ; so also the

=== PAGE 138 ===

2756 
Padma PuraTJ.a 
vows told by him, and about Viᗬ:Q.u's worship. Now I desire to 
know the fruit to be had from Magha bath along with 
the manner in which it is done. 0 brahma:Q.a, 0 sage, tell it 
to me. 
Vasi!ha said: 
61-7la. 
That sage, living in the forest, has properly told 
the highest bliss, bringing about the good of the three worlds, 
and removing the sin. Those not defeated by the glances of 
beautiful women (though) in proximity, desire to bathe in the 
stream when the Sun is in Capricornus. 0 dear one, those who 
desire beatitude without (offerings into) fire, sacrifices, without 
performing sacrifices and digging wells and doing other acts of 
charity, go out to bathe every morning in Magha. 0 king, 
those who desire (salvation) without giving (a piece of) land, a 
cow, gold, rubies, cows fashioned with gold etc. bathe in Magha. 
Those who desire (to go to) heaven without parching their bodies 
with the vows lasting for three weeks, the Krcchra and Paraka, 
always bathe in Magha. Viᗬ:Q.u's worship in Vaisakha, penance 
and worship in Kartika, and the three, viz. penance, sacrifice 
and gifts, excel (everything else). A man having a pllinned con­
clusion (of these) would certainly become the lord of the earth, 
due to which there would again be no idea leading to salvation 
(obscure). That worship (including) fasting, penance and (giving) 
gifts in the month of Magha, 0 best king, was laid down by 
those having divine eyes. For (fulfilling) a desire, or for progeny, 
or for Viᗬ:Q.U or (even) without (any of these) one observing the 
vow of purifying his body (has) four kinds of fruit obtained by 
bathing. 
For twelve years Aditi without taking food bathed 
(daily) in Magha and obtained twelve sons illuminating the 
three worlds. Rohi:Q.i became a favourite wife ; Arundhati 
became exceedingly liberal ; Saci was endowed with beauty. 
71b-86. 
Those who bathe when the Sun is in the Capri­
cornus sign of the Zodiac, happily live in a palace which has 
seven storeys, is endowed with beauty due to being cleaned, the 
courtyard of which is charming with dancers, crowded with 
beautiful women, which is resounding with singing and musical 
instruments, which is charming with auspicious practices, which

=== PAGE 139 ===

Vl. l 25.87-89 
2757 
is pure due to the sounds of (the recital of) the Vedas, which 
is adorned by learned brahmaiJ.as, which is constantly used 
in worshipping deities, which is charming, which is always 
resorted to by guests. For those who have given much in 
Magha, have worshipped and praised ViᘀIJ.u, Magha always 
produces religious merit due to their abandoning dear objects 
and observing restraints. Magha cuts off the root of their sins ; 
it is the root of desired objects through giving fruits ; it without 
a desire and always gives knowledge. Those worlds which are 
secured by those disposed to (securing) knowledge, by those 
living in forests (i.e. anchorites), by devotees of ViᗬIJ.U, are 
always secured by those who bathe in Mii.gha. 0 hero, due 
to having (exhausted) religious merit, other men return from 
heaven; but men given to bathing in Mii.gha never return. 
A man who, having bathed in Mii.gha, gives a milch cow (to a 
brii.hmaiJ.a), is honoured in heaven for as many thousand years 
as are the small hair on her entire body, 0 best king. A man 
who bathes in Mii.gha and would give sesamum seeds with 
jaggery, shines spotless, having washed his sin. Of all the heaps 
of grains sesamum seeds destroy the sins. Therefore, 0 best 
king, sesamum seeds should be given with (every) effort. A man 
bathing in Mii.gha should feed brahmaiJ.as. He, of a pure soul, 
after gratifying his dead ancestors, goes to the highest position 
of ViᗬIJ.U. Therefore, with all efforts Mii.gha is passed in giving 
gifts (by men). 0 best king, a man should not pass Magha 
without (giving) a gift. Knowing his (i.e. according to his) 
wealth he should always give gifts in Mii.gha. He who would 
bathe in Mii.gha and who gives sandals and pitchers to brii.h­
maiJ.aS, certainly lives in heaven. A man practising the excellent 
penance of bathing in Magha, should never pass it without 
(giving) a gift. Heaven is obtained through charity. 
87-89. 
0 king, heaven is obtained through giving (gifts). 
Happiness is obtained through giving (gifts). Blemish due to great 
sin perishes due to giving (gifts). Penance without giving (gifts) 
does not shine like the sky without the sun, or a family without 
progeny, or a house without good practices. There is nothing 
superior to this, that is pure and that destroys sins. (This) was 
related to a vidyii.dhara by Bhrgu on MaiJ.i mountain.

=== PAGE 140 ===

2758 
Padma PurilT)a 
The king said: 
90. 
0 brahmaQ.a, when did that brahmaQ.a Bhrgu give him 
the instruction in the religious practice on the mountain. Tell it 
to me, (as I am asking it) through curiosity. 
Vasi$!ha said: 
91-94. 0 king, formerly the clouds did not shower (water) 
for twelve years. People being a:Hlicted and emaciated, went into 
all the ten directions. When, 0 king, at that time the region 
between Himalaya and Vindhya had become barren, was devoid 
of the utterances of svaha, svahda and VQ$af, and the study of 
the Vedas, when the world was in distress, when piety had 
disappeared, and when the world had become lustreless, when 
the globe was void of fruits, roots, food and water, Bhrgu, along 
with his disciples, moved out of his hermitage on the charming 
bank of Reva covered with trees of Vindhya mountain, and went 
to the Himalaya mountain. 
95- 1 10. There, to the west of Kailasa mountain, stands a 
mountain, known as Mat;likiita-a heap of gold, gems and red 
arsenic. The mountain is crystal-like white in the lower parts, 
has dark blue slabs in the middle; and surrounded by grandeur 
on all sides, and white, it shone like Siva. It is dark-blue every­
where, and has golden lines in between. It shines like a cloud 
with the streak of lightning flashing. At the top the mountain 
has dark blue rocks. Below (it) it has a golden girdle. It shines 
like ViᗬQ.U wearing a yellow garment. Appearing very dark 
green without the girdle, it has white rocks (at places) in the 
middle. The mountain shone like the sky with stars. It shone 
like another moon that had secured his own white body, that 
bore divine herbs, and that diffused great light. The mountain 
always shone with the music of kinnaris on its table-lands, with 
bamboos, and with the banners in the form of the leaves of 
plantain trees. The mountain was as it were covered with rain­
bows due to the circles of the rays of lustre of the sharp rocks of 
green stones, lapis lazuli, and rubies. It was well adorned with 
gold, full of all minerals, various gems; it was covered every­
where with lofty peaks like :flames of fire. Vidyadhara women 
overcome with sexual desire come to its slopes having grass and

=== PAGE 141 ===

VI. l25. l l l-1 30a 
2759 
big rocks and serve their husbands. The detached ones, having 
restrained their breath, and having overcome anger, day and 
night meditate upon Brahman in its caves. Siddhas, with rosaries 
and (sacred) threads in their hands, with their eyes half-open, 
propitiate Siva in the beautiful caves. This (mountain), having 
rendered fragrant the quarters with the fragrance of the mandara 
flowers, is always noisy with the murmuring sound of the water 
of the mountain torrents. The mountain is always charming 
due to the young ones of the elephants and the elephants in the 
forest playing in the lands at its foot, due to herds of musk­
deer and charming spotted antelopes, so also due to the sport­
ing flocks of camaras and strange wild beasts, cooing pigeons, 
cakoras and cuckoos also, so also due to royal swans and 
peacocks. It is always resorted to by gods, guhyakas and bevies 
of celestial damsels. 
The king said: 
1 1 1- 1 17. 
The mountain is full of many wonders ; it is the 
resort of all (kinds of) prosperity. 0 revered one, what is its 
height? What is its length? How extensive is it? 
The sage said: 
At (i.e. up to) its top it is thirtysix yojanas in height. Its 
length and expanse are ten yojanas. At the foot it is sixteen 
yojanas. It is adorned with the rows of yellow sandal (trees), 
mandara (trees) and mango (trees). It is crowded with devadaru 
trees, and is adorned with sarala and arjuna (trees). The best 
mountain, always giving flowers and fruits, shines with kalagaru 
trees, clove trees, so also with arbours and bowers. On seeing 
that beautiful mountain, Bhrgu who was oppressed with famine, 
was mentally delighted and lived there only. (On the charming 
mountain, in its caves and thickets) Bhrgu well-engrossed in 
penance, practised penance for a long time. Getting down from 
the mountain a vidhyadhara couple came (there). Approaching 
the sage, saluting him, it very much grieved, and stayed there. 
1 18-130a. 
Seeing them like that the brahma:Qa spoke sweet 
words : ''0 vidyadhara, tell me in a friendly way why you are so 
much unhappy." Hearing the sage's words, the vidyadhara said

=== PAGE 142 ===

2760 
Padma PuraTJa 
to the brahma:Qa : "0 best among the ascetics, listen to the cause 
of my unhappiness. Having obtained the fruit of my religious 
merit, I reached heaven. Though I got a deity's (i.e. a divine) 
body, my face was like a tiger's. I do not know of which deed (of 
mine) this effect came up. Again and again thinking like this, I 
did not obtain pleasure. 
0 brahma:Qa, listen to this another 
(thing) due to which my mind is afflicted. This my wife is aus­
picious, of a sweet voice and beautiful. She is proficient in the 
arts of dancing and singing; she possesses all good qualities. 
When she was a maiden, she, the spotless one, playing upon the 
lute, very much delighted, with the seven strings, sage Narada skil­
led in playing upon the lute. This one, having a lovely voice, plea­
sed, even in her childlike state, the lord of gods, conversant 
with charming tunes. Hearing the fifth note, sweet due to many 
winding modes (of singing) of her with her body horripilating 
due to eagerness while playing upon the lute, Siva nodding his 
head, and horripilated, was delighted. No other beautiful woman 
having the grace of good character, generosity, (other) hosts of 
virtues, beauty and youth, like her, is (to be found) in heaven. 
'What a great disparity is there between this divine-faced female 
and a tiger-faced male like me?' 0 brahma:Qa, always thinking 
like this in my mind, I am burning." Hearing these words, 
Bhrgu, Ik11vaku's son, having a divine eye, and knowing the 
three times, laughed and said : 
130b-138a. 
"0 best vidyadhara, listen to the strange fruit of 
(one's) deeds. Having obtained it, the wise are not deluded, but the 
ignorant are deluded. As poison, just of the measure of the wing of 
a bee is dangerous, similarly even a small act, not enjoined, is dan­
gerous in its effect. Having fasted on Ekadasi, you smeared your 
body with oil. Due to that you have become tiger-faced in the 
body of the previous existence on Dvadasi. Formerly Puriiravas, 
having fasted on the auspicious Ekadasi but having used oil on 
the Dvadasi obtained, like you, an ugly body. Seeing his ugly body, 
he was pained by that affliction. He went to the lord of moun­
tains on the lake of the deities, and staying there with great joy, 
he bathed, and being pure, (sat on) a darbha-seat. The king, 
fasting, and, having controlled all his senses, and reflecting in 
his mind on Viᗬ:Qu, dark green like a fresh cloud, having large 
lotus-like eyes, holding a conch, a disc, a mace and a lotus,

=== PAGE 143 ===

Vl. l 25.138b-1 64 
2 76 1 
covered with a yellow garment, shining with Kaustubha, wear­
ing a garland of wood-flowers, practised a very severe penance 
for three months. 
1 38b-151 . 
Pleased with the small penance, Vigm, remember­
ing his being worshipped by the king during the (previous) seven 
existences, himself appeared before him on the Dvadasi of the 
bright half of Magha when the Sun was in Capricornus . Hav­
ing quickly sprinkled that emperor with water from his conch, 
ViᘀIJ.u, reminding him of his having used the oil, gave him an 
extremely handsome, lovely, charming form, due to (i.e. seeing) 
which goddess Urvasi, the divine lady, loved him. The king 
who had obtained the boon, being blessed, went to his city. 
"Knowing the way of one's acts to be like this , why are you afflic­
ted, 0 vidyadhara? If you too desire to give up this ugliness of 
a demon, then, on my words only, quickly take bath in the 
water of the river MaiJ.ikiita which removes old sins, and which 
is resorted to by sages, siddhas and gods in the month ofMagha. 
I shall tell you its manner. Due to your (good) luck, Magha is 
near, (cop:1mencing) on the fifth day (from today). Beginning 
with the Ekadasi of Pauᗭa. and sleeping on a bare ground, and 
going without food, bathe three times (a day) for a month and 
worship ViᗬIJ.U three times (a day), giving up pleasures and re­
straining your senses till the Ekadasi in the bright half of Magha, 
0 best vidyadhara. Then, 0 god, 0 sinless one, having sprinkled 
you with auspicious water purified with hymns, I shall make the 
face of you who will have completely burnt your sins, resembl­
ing the face of Cupid on the holy day of Dvadasi. 0 best 
vidyadhara , then having the face like that of a god, sport as you 
like, with this (lady) of an excellent complexion. You who 
have known the prowess of Magha, always bathe in Magha, so 
that your desires will be always fulfilled." 
That noble and 
omniscient Bhrgu, having thus spoken to him, recited to him 
the (following) verse : 
1 52-164. "By means of baths in Magha, calamities perish. 
By means of baths in Magha sins perish . Magha is superior to 
all sacrifices, and gives the fruit of (all kinds of) charity. Magha 
roars (louder) than sacrifices. Miigha roars (louder) than abstract 
meditation. And 0 vidyiidhara, Magha roars (louder) than severe 
penance. The fruit which men obtain by (observing) restraints

=== PAGE 144 ===

2762 
Padma Purdt)a 
for ten years at Puᗭkara, Kurukᗪetra, Brahmavarta having 
profuse water, at A vimukta, Prayaga, confluence of Ganga and 
the ocean, is obtained by bathing for three days in Magha. 
There is no doubt. Those, in whose mind there is, for a long 
time, interest in heaven, should bathe in water anywhere when 
the Sun is in Capricornus. Those who desire to have qualities 
like (long) life, (good) health, wealth, handsomeness, good 
fortune, should not give up bathing in Magha. So also those 
who are afraid of hell, of poverty that is heaped, should by all 
means bathe in the month of Magha. 0 best king, for washing 
off the mud of poverty, sins and bad luck, there is no other 
remedy than a bath in Magha. Acts done without faith give 
small fruits. (But) a bath in Magha gives the entire fruit. He 
who, with or without a desire, bathes anywhere outside (his 
house) in water, does not have sorrows in this or in the next 
world. As in the two fortnights the Moon waxes and wanes, in 
the same way in Mii.gha sins decrease and the heap of religious 
merit increases. As various gems come up from a mine, so re­
ligious merit of men springs up due to a bath in Magha. As 
the desire-yielding cow fulills the desire, or the desire-yielding 
gem gives thᗽ desired object, so a bath in Magha fulfils all 
desires in the world. 
I 65-1 66. Penance is the best in Krtayuga, knowledge in Treta­
yuga, sacrifice in Dvii.para, knowledge (devotion?) in Kaliyuga, 
and Magha in all the ages. The bath in Magha, 0 king, showers 
with the streams of merit all the castes and the stages of life." 
Vasi$!ha said: 
1 67- 1 7 1 . Having heard these words ofBhrgu, that divine being 
along with Bhrgu only bathed according to the manner told (in 
sacred texts) with his wife in that hermitage on the mountain on the 
bank of a river in Magha. Then having secured, through the 
grace of Bhrgu, what was desired by his mind, he having a divine 
face, rejoiced on the MaiJ.i-mountain. Bhrgu, having favoured 
him (and so) delighted came (back) to Vindhya. The vidyadhara, 
merely by bathing on the lord of mountains full of gems in 
Magha, had his face and form like those of Cupid. Bhrgu too, 
having his body emaciated due to restraints, got down at the 
foot of Vindhya and came to Reva along with his disciples. 0

=== PAGE 145 ===

VI.l26. I-1 8 
2763 
king, this importance of Magha, the essence in the world, was 
told by the excellent brahlllal}.a Bhfgu to the vidyadhara. He who 
listens to it, wonderful due to various fruits, would always 
secure all his charming desired objects like a deity. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED TWENTYSIX 
The Importance of Miigha As Told by Dattiitreya 
Vasiшtha said: 
1 -2. 0 best king, now I shall tell you the importance of 
Magha told by Dattatreya to Kartavirya who had asked (him 
about it). The king, the lord of Mahiᗭmati, went to that brah­
ma:Q.a Dattatreya (who was) actually Viᗭ:Q.u, who lived on the 
Sahya mountain, and asked him (about the bath in Mii.gha). 
Sahasriirjuna said: 
3. 
0 revered one, 0 best among the meditating saints, I 
have heard (about) all practices. 0 you of a good vow, favour 
me and tell me about the fruit of the bath in Magha. 
Dattiitreya said: 
4-18. 
0 best king, listen to the auspicious answer to this 
question. This was formerly told by Brahma to the illustrious 
Narada. I shall tell you the great, entire fruit of the bath in 
Magha according to the region, holy place, manner and rites. In 
this Bharatavarᗭa. especially in the land of religious rites the exis­
tence of those who do not have the bath in Magha is said to be 
fruitless. A good act does not shine without the bath in Magha, as 
the sky without the Sun or the cluster of stars without the Moon, 
0 king. Viᗭ:Q.u is not so much pleased with vows, gifts, austerities 
as he is pleased just with a bath in Magha. No (other) lustre 
resembles the Sun's lustre. Similarly the sacrificial rites do not 
resemble the bath in Magha. A man should (daily) take a bath 
in Magha to please Viᗭ:Q.u, to remove all sins, and for obtaining 
heaven. What is the use of preserving the well-nourished,

=== PAGE 146 ===

2764 
Padma Pural)a 
strong, uncertain, and impure body, if it would be without a 
bath in Magha? The body is supported by bones, bound by 
sinews, besmeared with flesh and blood, covered with skin, has. 
a bad smell and is a receptacle of urine and feces. It is pervaded 
by old age, affliction and calamities. It is an abode of diseases ; 
it is sick; it is covered with dust. It is perishable. It is the abode 
of all blemishes. It torments others and is afflicted by tor­
ment. It deceives others. It is a great (i.e. strong) poison. It is 
greedy ; it is wicked, cruel ; it is ungrateful and momentary also. 
It is difficult to be filled, difficult to be borne, wicked, and is 
attended by the vitiation of the three humours. It is impure, 
exuding ; it has cavities, and is deluded by the three humours. 
It is naturally engaged in impious acts. It is full of hundreds of 
desires. It stands at the gates of hell due to sexual desire, anger 
and great greed. It is full of worms and feces. It is reduced to 
ashes. It is, in effect, an oblation to dogs. Such a body is use­
less without (i.e. if it does not have) the bath in Magha. 
Those who go without the bath in Magha are born to die only 
like bubbles in water or pus in beings. 
19-25. 
A brahma:Q.a not devoted to Vi:?:Q.U is doomed. A 
sraddha without a meditating saint is worthless. A place which 
is unholy is worthless. A family without (good) practices is 
accursed. Religious practices accompanied by hypocrisy are 
worthless. Penance is doomed just by anger. Unstable know­
ledge is worthless. Learning is doomed by errors. A woman not 
devoted to the elders is wretched. A celibate is spoilt by her. 
Sacrifice into a fire that is not blazing is worthless. Enjoyment 
without a witness (i.e. companion) is worthless. A daughter 
affording a livelihood is condemned. Cooking for oneself is con­
demned. A sacrifice depending upon (articles) begged from a 
siidra is worthless. Knowledge without practice is worthless. 
One opposing the king is doomed. A holy place (resorted to) for 
livelihood is worthless. A vow (undertaken) for livelihood 
is condemned. Speech void of truth is worthless ; so also is calu­
mny. An ambiguous hymn is worthless. Muttering prayers with 
a distracted mind is worthless. A gift (given) to a brahma:Q.a 
who is not learned, is worthless. Atheists are condemned. All 
that is done without faith for being useful in the next world is 
accursed.

=== PAGE 147 ===

VI.l 26.26-52 
2765 
26-39. 
0 king, as this world is of no use for the poor, 
so the existence of men without the Magha bath is accurs­
ed. How would he who does not bathe before sunrise when the 
Sun is in the sign of Capricornus, be freed from sins, or would 
go to heaven? A killer of a brahmal).a, he who would steal gold, 
a drunkard, he who violates his teacher's bed (i.e. wife) and the 
fifth one-their companion (i.e. abettor), become free from sin 
by bathing in Magha. In the month of Magha the waters shout 
somewhat (like this) : We shall purify the killer of a brahmal).a, 
so also a drunkard who is trembling. When a man takes the 
Magha bath, all his minor sins, so also all his major sins are 
reduced to ash. At the (time of) the union with the Magha 
bath all sins tremble : 'This is the time of our destruction if he 
will bathe in the water.' Seeing a man ready to bathe (in Magha) 
the sins cry like this. The best men shine like fires due to Magha 
baths. They are free from all sins like the Moon from the 
clouds. The Magha bath would burn sins-deliberate, non­
deliberate, minor, major, and committed through speech, mind 
or (physical) act. The Magha bath would burn sins as the fire 
(burns) the sacred fuel ; so also a sin due to error committed 
knowingly or unknowingly. That would perish just by a bath 
when the Sun is in the (sign of) Capricornus. The sinless ones 
go to heaven; the most sinful are purified. 0 king, no doubt 
should be entertained about this Magha bath. 0 king, all are 
entitled to (a bath) in Magha as they are to the devotion to 
ViᗬIJ.U. Magha (bath) gives heaven to all; removes the sins of 
all. It is in itself a great hymn. It is in itself a great penance. 
That excellent bath in Magha is a great expiation. Men have an 
inclination for Magha bath after a practice for many existences, 
as, 0 king, proficiency in metaphysical knowledge (comes) after 
practice for many existences. 0 king, the Magha bath is effica­
cious in washing off the smearing by mud in the form of the 
worldly existence. 
40-4la. 0 king, the Magha bath is the most purifying of 
all the purifying (objects). 0 king, how can those (men) who 
don't bath in Magha which gives the fruits of all desires, enjoy 
pleasures like the planets Sun and Moon ? 
4lb-52. 0 king, listen to the great wonder due to the 
Magha bath. A good br:ihmal).a lady, Kubjika by name, belong-

=== PAGE 148 ===

2 766 
Padma Purilr)a. 
ing to the Bhrgu family, was afflicted by widowhood since her 
childhood ; she practised a very difficult penance. At a great 
holy place, at the confluence of the Revii. and Kapilii. at the foot 
of Vindhya, observing a vow, and being highly devoted to 
Vigtu, she was always engaged in good practices, and always 
(living) without any company, had subdued her senses, her 
anger, spoke the truth, and talked little. She was of a good 
character, was given to charity and to parching up her body. 
Having offered oblations into the fire to her dead ancestors, 
deities and brii.hma1.1as, she took food at the sixth time (i.e. 
once in three days), and always lived by gleaning grains ; and by 
means of such vows as Krcchra, Atik{cchra, Pii.rii.ka, Taptak­
rcchra and others, she passed the auspicious months on the 
bank of Narmada. In this way the lady, practising penance, 
wearing bark-garments, of a good character, of an extremely 
good disposition, and endowed with courage and contentmentᗼ 
bathed for sixty Mii.gha months at the confluence of Revii and 
Kapilii.. 0 king, then she, emaciated due to the penance, died at 
that holy place. (And) due to that religious merit from the 
Miigha bath she lived in joy for four thousand yugas in Viᗬ1.1u's 
city. Then, for the destruction of Sunda and Upasunda, she 
was again born from Brahmii.'s heaven, as Tilottamii.. Due to 
the religious merit that was left, she was the sole object of 
beauty (i.e. was most beautiful). She, not born from the womb, 
the gem of a lady, deluding even the gods, the pool of beauty, 
slim, was the best among the celestial nymphs. 
53-67a. 
She indeed caused wonder to the skilful creator 
Brahmii. The creator, having created her, was delighted; and 
then ordered her : "0 you having (bewitching) eyes like those of 
a young one of a deer, quickly go for the destruction of the 
demons." Then that beautiful lady took a lute, went from 
Brahmii.'s heaven along the path by Puᗬkara, to the place where 
the enemies of the gods (stood). Having bathed there in pure, 
clean water of Revii., she put on a red garment bright like the 
Badhiika flowers; her bracelets were jingling, and her girdle and 
anklets were sweetly tinkling. The necklace of pearls round her 
neck was moving; she was beautiful due to the unsteady ear­
rings ; she had worn the wreath of spring flowers; she stood by 
an asoka tree. She sang with sweet tunes; she struck (the strings

=== PAGE 149 ===

VI. I 26.67b-80 
2767 
of) her lute ; she passed from one key to another of the six (keys 
of gamut}, with smoothness, delicacy and with low and inarti­
culate tones. Thus that young Tilottama stood in the Asoka­
grove. She, giving pleasure like a digit of the Moon, was seen 
by the demon-soldiers. Seeing her, the soldiers being delighted 
and without (properly) observing her, very quickly went to 
Sunda and Upasunda. Describing her again and again, they told 
about her in confusion : "0 demons, we do not know whether 
she is a goddess or a demoness, or whether she is a naga lady 
or a yakᗬa lady, but she is by all means a gem of a lady. You 
two enjoy gems in the world, and that lady is a gem. She who 
removes sorrow, is under the asoka tree, not far (from here). 
Go and quickly see her, deluding even Cupid." Hearing these 
charming words of their generals, the two abandoned their 
glass of liquor, gave up sprinkling with water, left thousands of 
excellent ladies, and from that lake they went, each one taking 
a separate mace that weighed a hundred bharas, that was made 
of iron, that was hard, that resembled the staff of Death, speedily 
by jumping to 
that place where the passionate lady ready 
with a dress suited to amorous interviews had stood, as it were 
inflaming the fire of the passion of love of the two demons, 0 
king. 
67b-80. 
The two villains, infatuated by her beauty stood in 
front of her (and) especially being intoxicated due to liquor, 
said to each other : "0 brother, wait, let me have this lady of an 
excellent complexion as my wife." "0 good one, leave her-my 
wife-of bewitching eyes." Thus inflamed with strong attach­
ment, and furious like elephants they, ordered by Death, struck 
each other with a mace, and by the strokes of each other fell 
down dead on the earth. Seeing them dead, the soldiers made a 
great noise : "Who is this, resembling the night of Death? What 
is this that has come up ?" When (the soldiers in) the armies were 
speaking like this, Tilottama, dropped Sunda and Upasunda on 
the peak of the mountain, and illumining the ten quarters she 
quickly proceeded to the sky. Having done the mission of the 
gods, she came to Brahma. Then the delighted god approv­
ed of her (mission). "0 you moon-faced one, I have allotted 
you a place on the Sun's chariot. Enjoy many pleasures as long 
as the Sun remains in the sky." 0 king, that briihmaQa lady

=== PAGE 150 ===

2768 
Padma Puril1)a 
having thus become an excellent celestial nymph, even now 
enjoys the great fruit of the Magha bath in the other world. 
Therefore, 0 king, men having faith (and desiring) to go to the 
best position, should always through effort bathe when the Sun 
is in Capricornus. There is no goal of human life not attained, 
there is no sin that is not destroyed of the man who bathes in 
Magha. All sacrifices with presents are not equal to the Magha 
bath, and especially at a holy place, 0 king, since, on the earth 
there is no other act giving heaven, or destroying sins, or giving 
salvation like the Miigha bath. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED TWENTYSEVEN 
The Release of a Demon 
Kartavirya said: 
1-2. 0 brahmaQa of a good vow, tell me for which reason 
great efficacy is said (to exist) in Magha. Also I wish to know 
the religious merit (collected) of a bath in Magha by one of 
which the merchant was free from his sins and by another he 
went to heaven. 
Dattiitreya said: 
3-26a. 
0 best among men, water is naturally holy, clear, 
undefiled, whitish, removing dirt, causing (things) to melt, 
removing heat ; it preserves all beings, nourishes them and is 
their (very) life. In all Vedas water is spoken of as the god 
NarayaQa. As among the planets the Sun is the greatest, as 
among the stars the Moon is the best, so is Miigha among (all) 
months for all rites. In Magha, when the Sun is 'in Capricornus, 
a morning bath in clear water even in a small puddle gives 
heaven even to sinners. In Miigha, 0 king, this combination is 
rare in the three worlds with the mobile and the immobile. 
During this combination even a weak person should bathe (in 
the morning) for three days and, even if incapable, should, 
with a desire for freedom from poverty, give something (to a

=== PAGE 151 ===

bnlhma:Q.a). Rich men live long by bathing thrice in Mii.gha. Or 
(they should bathe) for five or seven days. The fruit increases 
like {the waxing of) the Moon. When, the auspicious time of 
the Sun being in Capricornus, which gives religious merit to 
men, has come, all the days should be equally valued for acts like 
a bath or giving (gifts). To the doer (of the acts) they cause to 
give an eternal, inexhaustible position. Therefore, for the desire 
of his own good, a man should bathe outside (his house) in 
Magha. Hereafter, I shall tell (you) about the great rite of bath­
ing in Magha. The best men should take up some religious 
observance of the nature of a vow. A wise man should give up 
some eatable for getting excellence in the fruit. He should sleep 
on the bare ground. He should offer into fire ghee mixed with 
sesamum. He should worship the ancient Vasudeva, Viᗬ:Q.u, 
three times (everyday). He should offer a lamp (burning) con­
tinuously, dedicating it to Viᗬ:Q.u. (He) should (also) give fuel, a 
blanket, a garment, sandals, saffron and ghee. (So also) oil, 
heap of cotton, cotton bed, cotton wicks, cloth, so also food, 
according to his capacity in Magha, 0 king. Similarly he should 
give gold weighing a rati to (a brahma:Q.a) proficient in the 
Vedas. Like the ocean the gift is always inexhaustible. He 
should not eat others' food (i.e. food offered by others). He 
should give up receiving gifts ; at the end of Magha he should 
feed brahmal}.as according to his capacity, 0 king. Desiring his 
own good, he should offer them presents. He, having faith, 
should, by observing the Ekiidasi rite, conclude (the vow) of 
Magha with a desire (to live) eternally in heaven, to get unend­
ing religious merit, and to please Viᗬ:Q.U. In Magha, when the 
Sun is in Capricornus, he, having uttered the prayer, '0 god 
Govinda, Acyuta, Madhava, give me the fruit as is told (in the 
holy texts) as a result of this bath', should silently and being 
<:aim bathe and should again remember Vasudeva, Hari, Krᗬ:Q.a, 
Madhava (i.e. ViᗬQu). Even in his house he should keep a pitcher 
full of water touched by air (i.e. kept in the open) at night. A 
bath with that (water) is like one at a holy place, giving all 
desired objects. With (i.e. by taking) a vow he should give 
(articles) with food and condiments. Due to the efficacy of that 
bath a man would not go to hell. That bath which men take · 
with hot water at home when the Sun is in Capricornus, gives

=== PAGE 152 ===

2770 
Padma PuraQa 
fruit for six years. But a bath outside (the house), in a well etc. is 
said to give fruit for twelve years. A bath in a lake gives double 
the fruit, (while a bath) in a river gives four times the fruit. (A 
bath) in a natural pond gives hundred times the fruit, (so also) a 
hundred times in a great river; and a bath at the confluence of a 
great river has four hundred times the fruit. 
26b-40. 
0 king, a man merely by bathing in Ganga gets a 
thousandfold fruit of this, when the Sun is in Capricornus. 0 
best king, those who bathe in Ganga in the month of Magha, 
do not fall from heaven for (a period of) a thousand aggregates 
of the four ages. 0 king, a man who bathes in Ganga in Magha, 
has given a thousand (coins) of gold everyday. 0 best king, the 
sages have ordained that the bath in Magha at the confluence 
of Ganga and Yamuna is a hundred thousand times (fruitful). 
0 king, the lord of beings, engaged in the welfare of the worlds, 
fashioned Prayaga for burning the great burden of heaps of 
sins. Listen properly. This place having black and white water 
is formerly made for the beings in the form of sins (i.e. sinful). 
He, though full of hundreds of sins, who would bathe at (Pra­
yaga having) black and white water in Magha when the Sun is 
in Capricornus, does not sink in a womb (i.e. is not reborn). 
Even that man engaged in killing at a slaughter house, who 
would bathe at Prayaga, goes to the highest position, 0 best 
among men. The creator created that, viz. the black and white 
stream, filled with Sarasvati, as a path to Viᘐ?J}.u's world. Viᘐ?J}.u's 
illusion is difficult to cross. It is not easily overcome even by 
gods. But, 0 king, it is burnt at Prayaga in Magha. By bathing 
at Prayaga in Magha men, after having many pleasures in lus­
trous worlds, merge into the Disc-holder (i.e. Viᘐ?QU). Even 
Citragupta is not able to measure the religious merit of him 
who bathes in the black and white water at Prayaga in Magha 
when the Sun is in the Capricornus. Even Brahma is not able to 
describe the greatness of the religious merit of him who bathes 
at Prayaga in the black and white water in Magha when the Sun 
is in Capricornus. That fruit which is had by fasting for a 
hundred years is had by bathing for three days at Prayaga in 
Magha. That fruit which is obtained by the gift of gold weigh­
ing a thousand bharas at Kurukᗬetra is had by bathing daily at

=== PAGE 153 ===

VI. l27.41-58a 
2771 
the place where Ganga joins Yamuna and receives underground 
Sarasvati in Magha when the Sun is (in Capricornus). 
41-51. 0 king, the fruit of a thousand Rajasiiya sacrifices is 
not so complete as that of the baths in Magha at Prayaga (where 
the water) is black and white. 0 best king, all the holy places 
that there are on the earth, so also the seven (holy) cities, come 
to bathe at the confluence of the three rivers (Ganga, Yamuna 
and Sarasvati) in Magha. Due to the blemish of the contact 
with the sinners all holy places are darkened. Due to bathing 
in Magha at Prayaga they get a white complexion (i.e. are 
purified). The sin collected from the beginning of the kalpa, 
and during (many) existences of those bathing at Prayaga is 
reduced to ash, 0 king. The sin of a man due to speech, mind 
and body, who has bathed for three days at Prayaga in Magha 
would certainly perish. A man who bathes for three days at 
Prayaga in Magha, sheds off his sin as a serpent does his 
slough, and goes to heaven. Ganga bathed in anywhere is like 
Kurukᗬetra. When it is united with Vindhya it is ten times 
more meritorious. Ganga flowing northwards in (i.e. by) Kiisi is 
hundred times superior. Ganga in confluence with Yamuna is 
hundred times superior to Kasi (i.e. to what she is at Kasi). She 
flowing westwards would be a thousand times superior to those. 
which, 0 king, merely by her sight removes the sin of the 
murder of a brahma:Q.a. 0 king, that (stream of) Ganga flowing 
westward and joining Yamuna destroys sins committed in crores. 
It is difficult to have (a bath in) her in Magha. That which is 
called nectar is said to be the confluence of the three rivers on 
the earth. (To bathe) in it even for a short time in Magha is 
difficult even for gods. 
52-SSa. 
Brahma, ViᗬJ;,lu, Siva, Rudras, Adityas, the host of 
Maruts, Gandharvas, Regents of Quarters, Yakᗬas, Kinnaras. 
Pannagas (i.e. serpents), so also those who are endowed with the 
supernatural powers like al;.lima (i.e. reducing the body to an 
atomic size), those who are the expounders of the true nature 
(of things), so also Brahmal;,li, Parvati, Lakᗬmi, Saci, Mena, 
Aditi and Diti-all these wives of gods, so also the Naga 
females, similarly the hosts of the celestial damsels like Ghrtaci, 
Menaka, Rambha, Urvasi and Tilottama, and the hosts of the 
dead ancestors-all these come to bathe at the confluence of

=== PAGE 154 ===

2772 
Padma Pura1Ja 
the three rivers in Magha, 0 king. (They come to bathe) in 
their own forms in Krtayuga, and with their forms concealed in 
Kaliyuga. That fruit which is obtained by a man by means of 
bathing in Mii.gha at Prayaga for three days, is not obtained by 
(performing) a thousand horse-sacrifices on the earth. Formerly 
Kii.iicanamii.lini gave the fruit of bathing in Mii.gha for three 
days to a demon, 0 king. The sinner got free (from sins) due to 
that. 
Kiirtavirya said: 
58b-59. 
0 revered one, who is that demon? Who is that 
Kii.i'icanamii.lini? How did she give him her religious merit? 
What good position did he have? If you think it is fit to be 
heard by me-for I have a great curiosity (to hear it)-then, 0 
best of the meditating saints, 0 sun to the progeny of Atri, tell 
it (to me). 
Dattiitreya said: 
60-68. 0 king, listen to this wonderful, ancient account by 
merely recollecting which a 
man would get the fruit of a 
Vajapeya. Kancanamii.lini, a celestial nymph endowed with 
beauty, (used to) bathe at Prayii.ga in the month of Magha and 
go to Siva's temple. That old demon, standing in the form of a 
huge rock in a bower on the lordly mountain, saw her to have 
gone up into the sky. She was bright, resembled bright gold (in 
complexion) ; her buttocks were round ; her eyes were long (i.e. 
large) ; her face resembled the moon ; her hair was good; her 
breasts were raised and plump. Seeing her endowed with beauty, 
the demon said to her : "0 you having eyes like lotus-petals, 
wherefrom do you come? Why is your garment wet? Due to 
what is your braid wet? 0 timid one, whence do you come? 
Due to what can you move in the sky? 0 good one, due to what 
religious merit is your body lustrous, endowed with 
great 
beauty, and charming? 0 you of fine eyes, due to the drops (of 
water) having fallen from your garment on my head my mind 
which is always cruel has become tranquil (just) in a moment. 
Please tell me, what great efficacy the water has. You appear 
to me of a good character. A (fine) figure is never without 
virtues."

=== PAGE 155 ===

VI. l 27 .69-86 
2773 
The celestial nymph said : 
69-86. 
0 demon, listen. I am a celestial nymph taking any 
form I like. I have come from Prayii.ga. My name in Kii.ficana­
mii.lini. The cloth worn round my loins is wet, since I have well­
bathed at Prayii.ga. 0 demon, I have to go to Kailii.sa, the best 
mountain. There lives Pii.rvati's lord, well-worshipped by gods 
and demons. 0 demon, your cruelty has gone due to the effi­
cacy of the water at the confluence of the three rivers. I shall 
tell you all that religious merit by means of which I was born as 
the daughter of a divine form to the gandharva, Sumedhas. I 
was a courtesan of the king-the lord of Kaliilga. I was endow­
ed with a good form and beauty ; I was madly proud of my 
good fortune. In his city I was the crest-jewel (i.e. best) of other 
young ladies. 0 demon, in that existence, I enjoyed pleasures as 
I liked. Due to the excellence of my beauty I deluded the entire 
city. I, hlfving a bewitching form, obtained all 
this-gems, 
beautiful ornaments, and wealth; so also garments of various 
kinds, camphor and agaru sandal. 0 demon, in my house I did 
not know end (i.e. limit) to gold. Youths, oppressed by passion 
of love, shampooed my feet. All those were fraudulently duped 
by me (and deprived) of their wealth. Some lustful ones died as 
a result of vying with one another. In this way I moved in that 
entire beautiful city. But when old age came, my heart grieved. 
I had not given (gifts). I had not offered oblations into fire. I 
had not observed any vow. I had not propitiated any god giving 
the four goals (of human life). I had not worshipped Durgii. who 
destroyed misery. I, greedy of enjoyments, had not remembered 
Viᗬl}u who destroyed all sins. I had not gratified brii.hmaQas. I 
had done no good to beings. Through carelessness I did not 
practise merit even of the size of an atom. But, 0 good one, I 
had committed sins. Therefore, my mind burnt. Having moaned 
like this in many ways, I sought the refuge of a brii.hmal}a, the 
priest of the king, who was pious and was proficient in the 
Vedas. 0 demon, I asked him : "How would I atone for this 
sin? 0 best brii.hmaQa, how would I go to (i.e. obta in) the best 
position (i.e. salvation). You, seizing the hair of me who am 
tormented by my own acts, who am helple!.s, whose mind is 
affticted, who am sunk into the mud of sins, lift me up. Oh !

=== PAGE 156 ===

2774 
Padma Purii.T)a 
shower on me a pleasing look, the water of pity. All are good 
to a good man. But a good man is good (even) to a bad man." 
Hearing these words of (i.e. uttered by) me, he favoured me. 
The bra.hma:Q.a spoke pleasing words, full of all piety. 
The briihmaT)ll said: 
87-97. 
0 you beautiful lady, I have understood all your 
behaviour which was (really) prohibited. Do quickly what I 
say. Go to the holy place of Brahmii.. Having gone there, have a 
bath. Thereby your sin will perish. 0 good lady, all your 
thoughts have pained me. I do not see any other expiation, 
destroying sins (than) a bath at a holy place which is said to be 
excellent by the sages. One should give up at a holy place even 
an impious act done mentally. Purified by a bath at Prayii.ga 
you will surely go to heaven. There is no doubt that men obtain. 
(i.e. go to) heaven merely by means of a bath at Prayii.ga. 0 
beautiful young lady, the sin committed at any other place than 
a holy place perishes at Prayii.ga. 0 timid one, listen. Formerly 
lndra had approached the wife of (the sage) Gautama. Seeing 
her he was overcome with passion ; the libidinous one appro­
ached her secretly. Due to that severe sin the same fruit was 
produced. The body of Indra, going to (i.e. cohabiting with) the 
sage's wife, became, in her presence, censurable, condemnable 
and shameful. Due to the efficacy of her husband's curse it was 
marked with pudenda muliebre. Then, with his face hung down 
(in shame), the king of gods went from that place. He, subdued 
and ashamed, condemned his act. Having gone to Meru's peak, 
full of water and extending over a hundred yojanas, he entered 
the bud of a golden lotus. Remaining there he censured himself 
and Cupid. 
98-1 13a. 
Fie upon that lust, which at once gives (i.e. pro­
duces) sin, and due to which, a man condemned by the entire 
world, goes to hell ! So also it destroys (a man's) life, fame, 
glory, piety and courage. Fie upon Cupid, of a bad conduct, 
and the sure place of calamities, living in the body, an enemy 
difficult to be vanquished, not contented, and always uncon­
trollable !. Thus Indra, concealed in the lotus-abode, talked. 0 
timid one, heaven did not look charming without Indra. There­
fore, gods with Gandharvas, regents of quarters with Kinnaras,

=== PAGE 157 ===

VI. l 27. 1 13b-13 l a 
2775 
came with Saci to Brhaspati and asked him : "Revered sir, we 
do not know (where) god lndra (has gone). Where does he stay, 
where has he gone, where shall we look for him? With the gods 
(but) without him, heaven does not look charming, as a virtuous 
family without a good son. Immediately think about a remedy 
by which heaven will look charming. He, the lord, is endowed 
with great glory. Delay is not proper here." Hearing these words 
of them Brhaspati said (these) words : "I know where he stays as 
a result of his own guilt. That Indra undergoes the fruit of his act 
done rashly. Terrible effects would take place due to men's 
giving up the right course. Oh, being mad with pride of (posse­
ssing) a kingdom, he, not thinking what ought not to be done, 
did (this) censurable act, destroying the (effects of) visible and 
invisible (acts). The childish ones, with their minds impaired do 
(acts) due to which fault the existence in this world and in the 
next would be fruitless. We shall now go to the place where 
Indra is." On his speaking like this, all ied by Brhaspati set out. 
Seeing the grove (i.e. bed) of golden lotuses in a vast lake, they 
praised the king of gods in such a way that he would awake, 
Then due to the awakening done by Brhaspati, he came out of 
the lotus-bud. With a melancholy face, and deformed, with his 
eyes contracted due to shame, he seized the feet of Brhaspati 
who was elder (brother). "0 Brhaspati, protect me ; tell me the 
atonement for this sin." 
1 1 3b-13l a. 
Hearing the words of the king of gods, the 
brii.hma.J}a, Brhaspati, spoke : "0 lord of gods, listen, I shall 
tell you a remedy destroying your sin. By taking a bath only in 
Prayii.ga you will be instantly free from the sin. 0 lord of gods, 
with you only we shall go there." Then coming with the priest, 
Indra bathed at the holy place, Prayii.ga, and was instantly 
freed from sins. The preceptor of gods, being pleased, gave him 
a boon : "0 sinless one, merely by a bath at Prayiiga, your sin 
has vanished. 0 Sakra, due to my grace, you whose sin has 
perished, will have a thousand eyes in place of these thousand 
vulvas." Just then, by the words of Brhaspati the lord of Saci 
shone (there) with the thousand eyes like the Miinasa lake with 
lotuses. Then all the deities and sages worshipped him. And 
being praised by Gandharvas, lndra went to Amaravati. Thus 
Indra became free from sins at Prii.yiiga. 0 auspicious one, you

=== PAGE 158 ===

2776 
Padma Purań;a 
too go to Prayii.ga, resorted to by gods for instant destruction 
of sins and certainly going to heaven. 
Hearing these words of (i.e. uttered by) him along with the 
account and auspiciousness, then only I was confused, and 
saluting the feet of the brii.hmaQa, and leaving all my kinsmen 
and male and female servants and the house, so also all objects 
of senses like poisonous morsels, and, 0 demon, clearly noticing 
that the body is perishable after a moment, I went out. 0 best 
demon, being tormented in the heart with a terrible fire of 
falling into the ocean of hell, I went to (Prayii.ga) where the 
water is white and black, and bathed there. 0 old demon, listen 
to the greatness of that bath. Within three days the sins perished, 
and after the remaining twentyone days the religious merit had 
been (formed) due to which I obtained godhead. I enjoyed on 
Kailasa as Pii.rvati's dear friend. Due to the prowess, I remem­
bered my birth also. Remembering the greatness of Prayii.ga, I 
go there in every Magha. 0 demon, I have told you the entire 
account, which you with an amazed mind had asked, to please 
you. 0 demon, to please me (now) tell me your account. Due 
to which act have you become deformed and terrible, having 
moustache, long fangs, and eating raw flesh in the mountain­
cave ? 
The demon said: 
B lb-137. 
A good person affectionately gives a desired 
thing or takes it, tells or asks a secret. 0 good lady, all that 
exists (i.e. is found) in you. 0 you lady of beautiful eyes, 
honoured by you I think the atonement (of the sins) of me, doer 
of cruel acts, will instantly take place. Therefore, 0 good lady, 
I shall tell you the bad act which I myself did. A man would be 
completely happy after reporting his grief to a good man. 
0 
beautiful lady, listen. I was formerly born in Kasi as an excellent 
brahmal)a having (studied) many rks, and proficient in the 
Vedas, in a great and very pure family. 0 timid one, I received 
gifts, from the wicked-which act was fearful-from sinful kings, 
siidras and vaisyas also. I was prevented in many ways and 
many times, and was very much censured. Wicked gifts were 
not refused by me even from a caQc;lii.la. There was another sin

=== PAGE 159 ===

of (i .e. committed by) me of a foolish mind. There was no 
sinful act which I did not do. 
1 38- I SOa. 
0 you of an excellent complexion , listen to ano­
ther drawback of that holy place. The sin of the size of an atom 
(committed) in Avi mukta would attain (the size of) Meru. 
During that existence, I did not collect any (kind of) religious 
merit. Then, 0 beautiful lady, I died after a period of many 
days. Due to the power of A vimukta I did not go to hell. 
No 
sinner dying at Avimukta goes to hell . Any sin committed at 
Avimukta certainly becomes adamantine. Due to that adaman­
tine sin I was born as a demon-fearful, very cruel , and sinful­
on the snow mountain. Formerly I was twice born in the stock 
of vulture, thrice as a tiger, twice as a serpent, once as an owl, 
and after that as a hog. 0 you beautiful lady, this my birth as a 
demon is tenth. Of (this) my birth thousands of years have 
passed. 0 good one, I am not escaping from this ocean of 
misery. Here I have made (the region up to) three yojanas 
devoid of beings. I have destroyed many sinless beings, 0 you 
of beautiful eye-brows, due to that act my mind is constantly 
burning. My mind, sprinkled with the nectar of your sight, has 
become cool. A holy place gives its fruit after (some) time; (but) 
contact with the good (gives fruit) instantly. Therefore, 0 
beautiful lady, the wise recommend the company of the good. I 
have told you all this affliction lurking in my mind. 0 you 
beautiful lady, a good man whose mind is not afflicted, is rare. 
You know what is proper here. What more should I say? I am 
thinking as to how I can cross over this ocean of misery. The 
prosperity of the good is the source of livelihood to all ; does the 
Milky Ocean give milk to a swan (only) and not to a crane also? 
Dattiitreya said: 
l SOb-163. 
Hearing these words of (i.e. uttered by) him, 
Kaii.canamalini having her mind melted with compassion, and 
deciding to give (him) her religious merit, said : "0 demon, I 
shall make atonement (for your sin). Do not be grieved. Making 
a firm vow, I shall try to release you. Year after year I have duly 
taken (bath) in the month of Mii.gha. 0 good one, (I have 
bathed) with faith in the holy place of Prayii.ga. I am unable to 
tell the amount of that religious merit, 0 demon. The wise men

=== PAGE 160 ===

have said that piety should be secretly praised. The sages, 
proficient in the Vedas praise giving (gifts) to the afflicted. 
0 good one, what fruit would there be for cloud showering 
(water) into the ocean. 0 demon, I have myself experienced 
the fruit due to that religious merit. 0 friend, I shall give 
you that (merit) which instantly destroys sin." 
Then she 
squeezed her (wet) garment, and took the water in her lotus­
like hand. She gave the old demon (her) religious merit due to 
(the bath in) Miigha. 0 king, listen, strange is the prowess due 
to the religious merit (of bathing) in Miigha. Having thus 
received her religious merit, he was free from (i.e. he got rid of) 
the demonish body. He became one having the body of a deity, 
lustrous like the sun's form. With his eyes blooming with joy, 
he got into a divine vehicle. He then shone in the sky, illuminat­
ing the quarters with his lustre. He, having a divine form, shone 
like another sun. Then he congratulated that Kiiiicanamiilini : 
"0 good one, the powerful god who gives the fruit of acts, 
knows that obligation done by you to me, where no acquittal 
was possible. Even now, kindly be pleased and favour me. 0 
respectable lady, give me auspicious instruction, full of morals, 
and causing all religious acts, so that I shall not commit a sin. 
Hearing that I, permitted by you, shall later go to the abode of 
gods." 
Dattiitreya said: 
164- 177. 
Having heard these words full of righteousness, 
uttered by him, Kiiiicanamiilini told him very affectionately 
about the religious practice, 0 king : .. Always practise a good 
course. Give up harming beings. Serve good men. Kill the 
enemy (in the form) of passion. Quickly giving up praising and 
censuring the virtues and vices of others, speak the truth. Worship 
Vigm. Go to the world of gods (i.e. heaven). Give up your 
longing after the body full of bones, flesh and blood. Give up 
the sense of mineness for your wife, sons etc. Mark ceaselessly 
that this world is perishable. Being firm in abstract meditation, 
be interested in detachment. Through love for you, I have told 
you the path of piety. Bear all (this) in mind. Be one of a good 
character. Giving up your demonish body, taking up a divine 
body full of lustre, quickly and happily go to heaven." Hearing

=== PAGE 161 ===

VI. I 28. 1 -1 5 
2779 
about the religious practices, the demon, being pleased, said : 
"Be always joyful. May you always have well-being. As long as 
the Moon and the Sun last, enjoy at Kailasa in Siva's proximity. 
0 you of an excellent complexion, may you have Parvati's con­
stant love. 0 mother, always be devoted to piety and penance. 
May you not have longing after your body. Always remove the 
misery of the afflicted." Speaking like this to and saluting 
Kaficanamalini, that demon, praised by many gandharvas went 
to heaven. 
Then daughters of gods, full of joy, came and 
showered flowers on the head of that Kaficanamalii.. The girls 
embraced her and spoke sweet words : "0 good one, you have 
done a wonder freeing the demon. Due to the fear of this 
(demon) no one entered the forest. 
Now, we, being fearless, 
shall move here as we like." 0 king, hearing their words, that 
Kaficanamalini, pleased with the gift (she gave) became (i.e. 
regarded herself as) blessed. Kaficanamalini, the best daughter 
of a gandharva, having quickly freed him, and full of obliga­
tions, went, playing with them, to Siva's abode. 
A man who would devoutly listen to the dialogue of that 
excellent girl (and the demon) is never troubled by demons, and 
has a great liking for piety. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED TWENTYEIGHT 
The Hymn Yogasiira in Praise af VisIJU 
V asщlha said: 
1-15. 
I have told you the importance of Magha as narrated 
by Dattatreya. 
I shall now tell (you) which fruit Magha 
bath has. 0 hero, Magha bath is the best of all sacrifices; 
it gives the fruit of all gifts ; it is equal to all vows and austeri­
ties. Men, due to Magha bath (taken) with a pure mind, put 
the dead ancestors of both (the mother's and the father's) 
families in heaven, and themselves go to heaven in aeroplanes 
going according to the desire (of the occupants) along with ladies

=== PAGE 162 ===

of bright faces. Even those men who always commit sins, who 
are always engaged in bad practices, who go astray, but who bathe 
in Mii.gha and worship ViᗬI}.U, abandon a collection of great 
sins (committed) in this world. Even those men who are void of 
truth, who make their father and mother unhappy, who do not 
remain within (the limits) of the stages of life, who avoid the 
family practices, who are hypocrites, also get the position of the 
good due to the Mii.gha baths in this world. It is very difficult 
for men to get (an opportunity to have) a bath in the month of 
Mii.gha at holy places, since by that men obtain the position of 
the knowers of Brahman. No doubt should be raised about this. 
0 king, in Miigha (practising) penance, (giving) gifts, muttering 
(hymns) and continuous worship of ViᗭI}.u and his temple is 
inexhaustible (in giving fruit). Therefore, men should strive to 
bathe and give garments, food and gold according to their 
capacity. A giver of food in Mii.gha drinks nectar in heaven. A 
giver of gold goes near lndra. A man who offers a lamp-fire, 
garments, is full of lustre, and always lives in the world of the 
Sun. Sinners are not so much purified in this world by sacrifices, 
good gifts, severe and bright austerities, 
following proper 
celibacy, worshipping (deities) and resorting to abstract medita­
tion as by Mii.gha baths causing religious merit. Those sinners 
who bathe at holy places when the orb of the Sun has half come 
up in the month of Mii.gha, do not suffer from the torment of a 
series of miseries and the unbearable torment inflicted by Yama. 
Those who, after having bathed in Mii.gha, worship ViᗭI}.u, 
become, after falling from heaven, kings who are excellent, 
handsome, fortunate, sweet-speaking, righteous, very wealthy, 
and living for a hundred years. As a heap of pieces of wood 
offered into fire is reduced to ash just that moment, in the same 
way, due to Mii.gha bath the heap of great sins and a series 
of sins, though vile, melt away. The bath in Miigha would, like 
ViᗭI}.u existing in the heart, burn all that sin committed by men 
through body, speech or mind, so also the sin that is known 
(i.e. deliberate) or unknown. 0 king, when the Magha bath is 
taken, the fruit of the sin (committed) inadvertently, which is 
being undergone, certainly perishes just at that moment. Formerly, 
0 king, the gandharva·maidens undergoing suffering due to the

=== PAGE 163 ===

VI. l 28. 1 6-33 
2781 
sin, were freed from that as a result of Miigha bath (taken) 
at the words of Lomasa. It was wonderful. 
Suta said: 
1 6-33. 
Hearing these words, the king joyfully saluted his 
lotus-like feet, and polite due to great faith, asked that priest : 
"0 revered sir, tell me whence the maidens got the curse, whose 
children they were, what their names and ages were, how they 
were freed from the suffering due to the curse by Lomasa's 
words, where did they bathe, and in what number? 
Vasi${ha said: 
0 best king, listen to the great story full of religious merit, 
which is like the ara1;,1i (i.e. the piece of wood used for kindling 
sacred fire) pregnant with fire and producing religious merit and 
fire. There was a gandharva (named) Sukhasai:tgiti. His daughter 
was Pramodini. Susilii was Susila's (daughter) ; Susvarii that of 
Svaravedin; Sutiirii of Candrakiinta and Candrikii of Suprabha. 
0 king, these were the excellent names of those celestial nymphs. 
All the five maidens were of the same age; they had, as it were, 
come out from the Moon, and were bright like moonlight. 
Their faces were (lovely) like the Moon. They had good 
(i.e. long) hair ; their lips contained the ambrosia from the Moon. 
They gave delight to the eyes as moonlight to the water-lily. They 
were born with profuse beauty; they had charming forms; they 
were attractive; their pitcher-like breasts had come up (i.e. were 
raised) like the lotus-plants in spring. Like a creeper with 
fresh foliage they had charming youth spreading out. They 
were yellowish like gold ; had golden lustre; were adorned with 
golden ornaments. They had put on garlands of campaka 
flowers ; they had golden complexion; had put on good garments ; 
they were skilled in notes of the musical scale, and scales in 
music, in various melodies, in beating time and amusements, in 
playing upon the flute and the lute which accompanied the 
sound of the drums, in dances, in hobbies like drawing pic­
tures and (other) arts. The maidens who were like this loved 
sporting in a grove. Fondled by their parents they moved in 
Kubera's abode. Once (all) the five coming together through 
curiosity in the month of Vaisakha, collected mandara flowers

=== PAGE 164 ===

2782 
Padma Puriir)a 
from one grove and another and to propitiate Parvati some 
time went to the Acchoda lake. They took from that (lake) 
excellent golden lotuses along with excellent blue lotuses. Having 
bathed in the lake which was bright with lapis lazuli, clear like 
crystal and having corals, and having put on garments, they 
with the golden sand fashioned, observing silence , a solid image 
of Parvati with an altar. The maidens, full of devotion, honour­
ing Parvati with sandal, camphor and saffron, and worshipping 
her (image) with excellent lotuses etc. and with various modes 
of worships, danced by beating time. Having resorted to the 
excellent note of gandhara (i.e. the third note) with sweet 
sounds of strings and with good modulations, the deer-eyed sang 
a song, having sweet letters, charming theme, and sweet tunes due 
to turns. 
34-50. 
To that excellent holy place of Acchoda which had 
sweet-sounds (of music), which gave sprinkling of delight and 
joy, Agnipa, the son of a sage, the treasure of Vedas, came to 
bathe when the maidens were dancing very freely. He was 
matchless in form; had an excellent face : his eyes were long 
like lotus-leaves ; he was young ; his chest was broad; his arms 
were good ; he was very handsome; he had a darkish complex­
ion. He was as it were another Cupid. That celibate, with a 
tuft of hair on the crown of his head, shone with his staff like 
Cupid with his bow. He had covered himself with deer-hide, 
had worn a good sacred thread, and had his girdle of mufija 
grass resembling gold. Seeing that brahma:t;ta, the maidens, full 
of curiosity, were delighted (asking themselves) : 'who is this 
(welcome) 
guest 
to our eyes on the bank of the lake ?' 
Leaving dancing and singing, they, pierced by Cupid with his 
arrows like female deer pierced with arrows by a hunter, were 
engrossed in looking at him. The five innocent ones, saying, 
with great excitement (to one another), 'See (him), see (him)' 
mistook that youth, the excellent brahma:t;ta, for the god of love. 
Again and again propitiating him (i.e. gazing on him) with 
their eyes like lotuses, the maidens then debated with one 
another : 'If he is the god of love, how would he go without 
Rati ? Is he the (twin) deities Asvins? But they indeed move as 
twins. Is he a gandharva, or a kinnara, or a siddha, taking any 
form at will? Or is he a son of a sage or some excellent man?

=== PAGE 165 ===

VI. l 28.5 1-67 
2 783 
Whosoever he may be, he has been created for us by the Creator. 
As for the lucky ones a treasure is fashioned by (means of) their 
former deeds, in the same way this excellent bridegroom is 
brought for us-the maidens, by Parvati whose mind is moisten­
ed due to the flood of the large waves of the water of compass­
ion. 'l have chosen him ; you have also chosen him. As you 
have chosen him, so have 1.' 0 best king, when the maidens 
were talking thus, he, having heard their words, performed the 
mid-day rites, and thought in his mind (i.e. to himself) : 'This 
obstacle has come up. It is a wonder that gods like Brahma, 
Vigm and Siva, so also the ancient sages and siddhas, powerful 
in abstract meditation, were easily deluded by women. Whose 
deer in the form of his mindᗸ struck by the archer Cupid with 
the sharp arrows in the form of the eyes (i.e. glances) of women 
and going out from the very strong bow in the form of their 
creeper-like brows, does not fall? Men's morality shines, men 
would be afraid of people, the great strength of the mind would 
persist, the consideration of (their) family would be done, the 
maturity due to penance would persist, the maintaining of the 
vows of men would be done till men are not deluded by the 
arrows of the glances of women, with ardent passion. 
· 
5 1-53. Let women delude and madden the passionate ones with 
their charming amorous gestures. (But) by means of which 
qualities do these women delude and madden me, highly devo­
ted to piety? May the passionate ones, with their hearts very 
much deluded, not take delight in the immodest, impure bodies 
of women, produced from flesh, semen, feces and urine, imagin­
ing them (to have) charm? The wise ones of pure minds have 
declared the contact of women to be fearful. Till they do not 
approach me, I will go home?' 
54-67. Till the excellent maidens did not come (i.e. before 
they came) near him, the brahma:Q.a disappeared by means of his 
prowess due to Vi$:Q.U. Seeing that amazing act of the intelligent 
son of a sage, who had disappeared due to his magical power, 
the maidens with their eyes frightened, and afraid like female 
deer, and with their eyes confused and vacant, looked into the 
ten directions. To one another they said : "He clearly knows 
magic, or knows maya, (since) though seen, he again disappe-

=== PAGE 166 ===

2 i 84 
Padma Purar;a 
ared." Just then their hearts were pervaded with the fire of 
separation, like a very glossy, dense forest with blazing wild 
fire. '0 dear, giving up your practice of magic, quickly present 
yourself, united with our minds, and like a fly (falling) into a 
morsel before (it is put into the mouth), to us. Alas ! why did 
the Creator show you to us ? Why did he fashion you? Oh ! we 
have understood it : You have been created to give (us) great 
torment. Is your heart cruel? Have you no mind (i.e. interest) in 
us? 0 dear, are you cunning? Are you stealing our mind ? Do 
you have no faith in us? Are you testing us? Are you given to 
the art of joking? Are you proficient in trickery? Do you know 
the skill to enter into (other's) hearts? And do you not again 
know to get out of it? Are you angry with us without (our) 
fault? Do you know the affliction caused to others due to 
deception? 0 lord of (our) hearts, we won't now live without 
seeing you. And if we live, it is through the hope of seeing you 
again. Take us there where you have quickly gone. The Creator, 
depriving us of your sight has cut (our desire) just when it was 
a sprout. By all means appear (before us). By all means resort to 
pity. Good men do not at all see (i.e. do not go to) the extreme.' 
68-70. 
Having wailed like this, and having waited for him 
for a long time, they quickly started moving towards home 
through the fear of their fathers. Bound by the chains of his love, 
very much afflicted due to separation from him, they somehow 
mustered courage and came home. All they came (home) and 
dropped (themselves) near fountains. 
They were asked by 
(their) mothers : "What is this? Why were you late?" 
The maidens said: 
7 1 -80. As we were gladly sporting and singing with the 
kinnara-maidens at the lake, we were not conscious of (the 
particular time of) the day etc. 0 mothers, we were tired on the 
path, therefore, there is torment in our bodies. Due to great 
insensibility we are not able to speak. 
Speaking like this the maidens rolled there on the jewelled floor. 
The perplexed ones concealing the expression of the face as giving 
a clue to their inward thoughts spoke with their mothers. Some one 
did not make the pet peacock dance with joy. Some other did not

=== PAGE 167 ===

Vl. l 28.8 1 -9 1 
2785 
teach the parrot in the cage through curiosity. Another one would 
not fondle the mongoose, or did not delight the sii.rika. Another 
one, very much perplexed, did not play with cranes. They did 
not resort to amusements; they were not delighted at home. They 
did not much talk to their kinsmen. They did not play on the 
lute. 
They did not drink the juice of the :flowers of desire­
yielding trees, which was tasty like nectar, which was sweet, and 
fragrant with mandii.ra :flowers. The maidens with their eyes fixed 
on the tips of their noses, remained like female devotees con­
tinuously concentrating on the Unknown and having Vigm in 
their minds. For a moment they remained at the window, 
covered with the moon-stones and oozing drops of water, and 
at (another) moment they remained at the fountain. For a 
moment they arranged their beds with the petals of lotuses from 
the lakes. They were fanned by their friends with cold leaves of 
plantain trees. 
8 1-9 1 . Thus those excellent maidens thought one night to 
be equal to a yuga. Somehow they showed courage, (but) they 
were affiicted as if suffering from fever. Seeing the sun in the 
sky they thought of their life. Each one informing her own 
mother, they went to worship Pii.rvati. Having bathed according 
to the rite, and having worshipped (Pii.rvati) with :flowers and 
incense as was proper, they remained there singing. In the 
meanwhile that brii.hma1,1.a also came from his hermitage to the 
Acchoda lake to bathe. The maidens seeing the celibate had 
their eyes bloomed, as the lotus plants (have the lotuses bloomed) 
on seeing the sun at night's end. Just then the maidens went 
near the celibate and bound him with the bonds of their left and 
right hands. "0 cunning one, yesterday you had gone (i.e. you 
could go). You cannot go today. We have surrounded you. 
About this you should have no doubt." Thus addressed, the 
brii.hma1,1.a who was (caught) in the noose of their arms, laughed 
and said : "You are talking good, favourable, sweet words. But 
the vow of me staying in the first stage of life and devoted to 
Vedic studies in my preceptor's house, has not been completed. 
The wise should stick to the practice which (is prescribed) for a 
particular stage of life. Therefore, 0 maidens, I do not think 
that marriage would be a (proper) way (for me)." Hearing his

=== PAGE 168 ===

2786 
Padma Puriir;la 
words, they, with a sweet but indistinct voice, like the cuckoos. 
in spring, and with curiosity, spoke to him (these) words : 
92-106 : 
"The wise ones say that the sacred rule is fixed 
like this : Worldly prosperity (Artha) is born of righteousness 
(Dharma). From Artha springs Kiima. And the fruits of righteous­
ness (Dharma) spring from sensual eᗹoyments (Kiima) : That 
sensual enjoyment has stood before you due to the abundance of 
your righteousness. Enjoy it through various pleasures. This will 
then be heaven (only)." Hearing these words of them he spoke 
in a serious voice. "Your words are true ; but having finished 
my vow in this (stage of life) and having obtained (my) prece­
ptor's consent, I shall go through the complete rite of marriage. 
Not otherwise." They thus addressed, again said, "0 handsome 
one, you are certainly ignorant. Excellent women are a divine 
medicine, are Brahma's elixir, accomplishment of a treasure, 
excellent arts. They are a hymn, they (produce) a liking for 
success, and when they have approached, an intelligent man 
should not keep them off according to law. If an act is succeed­
ing through (good) luck, the virtuous one does not ignore it. 
Since ignoring it is not fruitful, so, procrastination also is not 
recommended. (Only) fortunate men, and not others obtain 
maidens who have intense love, who are spotless due to being 
born in a (noble) family, whose hearts are soft with affection, 
who speak sweetly, who choose their grooms, who are beautiful, 
and whose youth is charming. What a great disparity there is 
between us-beautiful maidens-and this chap? I think the 
Creator is very clever in doing a difficult job. Therefore, do an 
auspicious thing now by accepting us in the gandharva form of 
marriage. Otherwise we will not live." Hearing these words, the 
brahmaJ.la who knew well the customary observance said : "0 
you deer-eyed ones, how should men whose wealth is religious 
merit, abandon the 
customary 
observances? Righteousness, 
worldly prosperity, sensual enjoyment and salvation-these four 
(when practised) in (due) order are said to give (their) fruit. 
Opposite of this is fruitless. Therefore, I who have taken up a 
vow, would not marry at a wrong time. He who does not know 
the time of an act (i.e. the time when the act should be done) does. 
not obtain its fruit. Since, 0 maidens, my mind is attached to reli­
gious thought, therefore, listen-! do not long after a self-choice

=== PAGE 169 ===

VI.l 28. 107-128 
2787 
marriage." Having thus known his intention, and looking at one 
another, they left one another's hands, (and) Pramodini seized 
his feet. Susila and Susvara seized his arms; Suta.ra embraced 
him, and Candrika kissed his face. 
107-1 17. Yet the celibate remained uninterested; and 
resembling the fire at the time of the final deluge, and filled with 
great anger, he cursed them. "You clung to me like female 
imps. Therefore, you will be (i.e. turn into) female imps." 
Thus, they, quickly cursed by him, left him and stood (as) 
before. "0 sinful one, what have you done this to innocent 
persons? Fie upon your righteousness, since you did an unde­
sirable act when a desirable act should have been done. We have 
heard that the happiness of the man who bears malice against 
adorers that are attached and his friends, perishes in both 
worlds. Therefore, by our curse you too quickly become an 
imp." Speaking like this, those maidens, heaving sighs, smit with 
hunger, ceased (speaking). Then due to the anger towards one 
another all the maidens and that celibate became imps in that 
lake, 0 king. The female imps and the male imp, waiting 
ruthlessly, put an end to the fruit of the acts they had obtained 
formerly. 0 king, auspicious or inauspicious acts done before 
do give their fruit unavoidably even to gods, like one's (unavoi­
dable) shadow. Their fathers and mothers, so also his (father 
and mother) wept there, (saying) : "The children have not erred; 
destiny is difficult to be overcome." After that (i.e. since then), 
the imps, greatly pained in securing food, and running here and 
there, lived on the bank of the lake. When many days passed 
like this, Lomasa, the best sage, came to the Acchoda lake to 
bathe on the fourteenth of Pauњa. 
1 18-128. Seeing that brahmaᘍ;:ta (i.e. Lomasa), all the imps 
coming together and (thus) being in a group, and overcome with 
hunger, and desiring to kill him, ran (to him). Being burnt by 
his very bright lustre, they were unable to stand before him; and 
all of them remained away (from him). Just then there came the 
brahmaѝ;:ta Vedanidhi. Having seen Lomasa, 0 king, he saluted 
him touching the ground with the eight limbs of his body. 
Having put his folded palms on his head he spoke true and 
pleasant words: "0 brahmaᘎ;:ta, (one) would have the company 
of the good, when there is (a possibility of) the dawn of good

=== PAGE 170 ===

2788 
Padma PuriiQa 
fortune. Between the two, viz. a man who always bathes in holy 
places like Gailgii and who always keeps the company of the 
good the company of the good is better. 0 brahmat;.a, the 
company of the venerable gives unseen and seen fruit on the 
earth. It gives (i.e. leads to) heaven; it removes diseases; but is 
said to be troublesome. " Speaking like this, he told him the 
former, wonderful account. "These are gandharva-maidens. 
This chap is my son. 0 best sage, all deluded by cursing one 
another, stand in the form of imps with melancholy faces in 
front of you. By seeing you the children will be freed; does not 
the mass of darkness hide in a cave on sunrise?" 0 king, 
Lomasa of great l ustre, having heard it, had his mind moistened 
with pity and spoke to the sage, grieved for his son : "Due to my 
grace may the children's memory be revived at once. I am 
talking (words full of) virtue. The mutual curse would end.'' 
Vedanidhi said: 
129. 
0 great sage, describe the virtuous practice due to 
which the children will be free. This is not time for delay, since 
the fire of the curse is fearful. 
Lomasa said: 
130- 145. 
Let them duly have Magha bath with me. At the 
end of Magha they will be free from the curse. Otherwise there 
would be no atonement. 0 brahmat;.a, the fruit of the curse is 
sinful. The destruction of men's sin would take place by Magha 
bath at a holy place. Thus I certainly think. Magha bath, 
especially at a holy place, would bum all the sin committed 
during the seven previous existences and the present sin also. 
Even that sin for which the best sages do not see an expiation, 
would perish by the Magha (bath) at holy places. Magha (bath) 
at Manasa produces knowledge. Due to that it gives salvation. 
It destroys all sins at the holy places on the Himalaya. The 
teachers of the Vedas have mentioned (Magha bath) as giving 
(i.e. taking one to) Indra's heaven. Magha (bath) at Badari­
vana destroys all sins and gives salvation. (At a holy place on 
the bank) of Narmada Magha (bath) destroys sins and misery, 
fulfils all desires, gives (i.e. takes one) to Rudra's heaven and 
destroys sins. A Magha bath in Yamuna would lead to the

=== PAGE 171 ===

VI.l28. 146-155 
2 789 
Sun's world and destroy sins. One in Sarasvati destroys sins 
and gives the fruit in the form of Brahma's world. 0 best 
brii.hmal).a, the Mii.gha (bath) in the Visii.lii. (river) gives a 
large fruit. It is a wild fire to the fuel of sins, (and) destroys 
the effect of the cause of being conceived. A Mii.gha bath 
in Gatigii. is said to lead to ViÊl)u's world and to salvation. 
Rivers like Sarayii, Gal)gaki, Sindhu, Candrabhii.gii., Kausiki, 
Tii.pi, Godavari, Bhimii., PayoÊl).i, KrÊl).avel).ikii., Kii.veri, Tutiga­
bhadrii. and other rivers are there. A man bathing in any of them 
in Mii.gha quickly goes to heaven, after being free from sins. 
Mii.gha bath in NaimiÊa gives absorption into Vivl)u, (and one) at 
PuÊkara takes a man near Brahmii.. Due to (a bath) in Mii.gha 
at KurukÊetra a man goes to Indra's world. A Mii.gha bath at 
Devahrada gives the fruit in the form of the divine powers 
obtained through abstract meditation. A man would be an 
attendant of Rudra by bathing at Prabhii.sa when the Sun is in 
Capricorn. A man gets a divine body by bathing at Devaki in 
Mii.gha. 0 brii.hmal).a, by a bath in Gomati, at Hemakiita, 
Mahii.kii.la, Omkii.ra, Amaresvara there is no rebirth (for a man). 
A man is honoured in Rudra's heaven due to a bath in Mii.gha 
at Nilakal)tha and at the confluence of all rivers when the Sun is 
in Capricorn. 
146-1 55. By means of (such) a bath all the desires of human 
beings are fulfilled. 0 best brii.hmal)a, only the fortunate get an 
opportunity to bathe in Mii.gha at Prayii.ga, since the white and 
black water there gives freedom from rebirth. Gods dwelling in 
heaven always sing : 'We shall have a bath in Mii.gha at Prayii.ga, 
by having a bath at which place, men to do not see (i.e. experi­
ence) the pangs of (being conceived in) a womb and remain 
near ViÊl).u.' Those men, clothed in (i.e. full of) many sins, who 
bathe on a new-moon day at the holy place of Prayii.ga, are 
meritorious, do not go to hell, but gladly move like gods in an 
auspicious heaven. Formerly the Creator weighed the bath in 
Mii.gha at Prayii.ga with holy places, religious vows, gifts, auster­
ities, and Mii.gha proved to be greater and therefore superior. 
That (highest) position which men get by bathing in Mii.gha, is 
not obtained by means of parching up their bodies through 
eating (i.e. subsisting on) air, water, or leaves, or through severe 
austerities collected over a long period, or by means of abstract

=== PAGE 172 ===

2790 
Padma PurOJ)a 
meditations. Does not a row of bees, struck by (the fiappings 
of) the ears of elephants, adorn the doors of the houses of those 
who have bathed at the holy place of Prayaga at the confluence 
of the divine rivers (i.e. Ganga with Yamuna) when the Sun rises 
(after entering) Capricorn? How is that Prayaga which after 
having easily destroyed the sins, gives greater fruit after a bath 
there, than the R.ajasiiya sacrifice or the horse-sacrifice, not 
resorted to by (men)? In the country of Avanti formerly there 
was a king (named) Virasena. Having come to the bank of 
Narmada he performed a Rajasiiya sacrifice. He duly performed 
sixteen horse-sacrifices adorned with golden courts, and rich in 
golden ornaments and tying posts. He gave heaps of grains 
resembling mountains to brahmal}.as. He was liberal, a devotee 
of deities, a giver of cows and of gold. 
1 56-167. There was a foolish brahmal}.a of a mean family 
named Bhadraka. He was a farmer of wicked acts, and was 
excluded from all religious rites. He was fed up with agriculture; 
and his brothers had not performed any purificatory rites for 
him. Wandering here and there, he, being oppressed by hunger, 
went out (of the city). Luckily he got into (i.e. joined) a caravan, 
and came to Prayaga. He bathed there for three days in Miigha. 
Once both the king and the brahmal}.a died. I saw that their 
condition was similar in the proximity of Indra. They had 
similar power of the form of lustre, similar group of ladies 
(attending upon them), similar divine vehicles, similar ornaments, 
a garland of parijata flowers, similar dance, and similar music. 
Such is the greatness of the holy place. How can it be described? 
The Magha bath at Prayaga is said to be equal to (many) 
Rajasiiya sacrifices, 0 briihmal}.a. A man bathing in Magha at 
(Prayaga), at the confluence of (Ganga and Yamuna having) 
white and dark green water, is not reborn, (but) the performer of 
R.ajasiiyas would be reborn. Even the breezes in Magha would 
touch the white and dark green water. They would not touch 
inauspicious things, for they indeed destroy great sins. 0 
brahmal}.a, what is the use of talking much in this case? 0 
briihmal}.a, listen for certain. Magha would destroy the sin, the 
fruit of which has sprung up. In this (context) I shall tell you. 
Listen attentively. (Let the young celestial damsels listen to the 
ancient account of the liberation of the imps. Let your son also

=== PAGE 173 ===

listen to it. The imps, desiring salvation have obtained recollec­
tion through my grace.) Formerly, the brahma:g.a Devadyuti, a 
devotee ofViő:g.u and master of the Vedas, with his mind flooded 
with kindness, liberated the imps. 
Dilipa said: 
168-169. Where did he stay? Whose son was he? What was 
his vow? What prayers did he mutter? Due to what did he be­
come a devotee of Viő:g.u? Which imps were liberated? 0 great 
sage, tell all this in detail; due to your grace we are hearing an 
interesting and very auspicious (account). 
Vasi$tha said: 
170-185. On the auspicious bank of Sarasvati there is a holy 
pool called PlakÊa. His hermitage resorted to (i.e. was by) a 
charming mountain. (0 king, the hermitage was beautiful 
due to) groves of good trees like sii.la, tala, tamala, bilva, bakula, 
pii.tala, tintidi, ciri, bilva, mango, campaka, karaiija, kovidara, 
kesara eaten by elephants, tilaka, kar:g.ikii.ra, kumbha, khadira, 
tinduka, vii.nira, salva, jambira, pilu, udumbara, reeds, sakota, 
atarupa, kii.rahata and fig trees, gho:g.ta, kutaja, palii.sa, asoka 
(trees) that removed sorrow, jambu, nimba, kadamba, kőirika, 
karamardaka, and bijapfira, nii.ri:tiga, and adorned with rows 
of plantain trees, so also jack-fruit trees, and coconut trees 
always having tasty fruits; saptacchada, tripatra, siћa. and 
auspicious ii.malaka (trees), karkandhu, lakuca, akőa. pii.ribhadra 
and others: ketaka, sinduvara, tagara, kunda, mallika, white, 
red, blue lotus (creepers), (creepers of) mii.lati and yfithikii. 
(jasmine) mii.lati, mogara, jii.ti fruit, punnii.ga, kirllsuka, barvari 
and tulasi-trees. 0 king, the hermitage was always charming 
due to trees of various kinds. Through the forest flows the 
river Sarasvati of auspicious water. Cranes always warble 
there softly, sweatly and indistinctly due to ardent passion. 
Cuckoos coo there, and bees hum (there). 
0 king, the 
forest is very noisy due to parrots and sarikii.s. Many wild 
beasts move in that best forest. The forest always has fruits and 
flowers, and has a dusty colour due to pollen, and is covered 
all round with asoka trees. The charming forest is embraced on 
all sides by creepers with new foliage and sprouts that have

=== PAGE 174 ===

sprung up like a lover by his beloveds. Wind afraid of his curse 
blows on all sides. Clouds do not shower hail stones ; the 
Sun does not dry up (the water). That forest is free from harm; 
it is inhabited by siddhas and non-siddhas; it always gave delight 
like the forestCaitraratha. 
1 86-203. In that (forest) lived the pious, best brii.hmal).a, 
Devadyuti. The brii.hmal).a's son was Sumitra, obtained through 
the boon of Lak!?mi's husband. Listen to the vow of him who 
was always controlled. In summer he observed the vow called 
Paiica ( -agni), and fixed his eyes on the Sun. He remained in 
the open space in the rainy season when the row of clouds 
showered ; and when there was stormy wind blowing, he remain­
ed steady like the Himalaya (mountain). 0 brii.hmal).a, in 
winter he lived in a pool of Sarasvati-in water; and during the 
season he sipped the pure water thrice a day. He everyday 
gratified his dead ancestors, deities and sages with faith. He 
always taught the Vedas, spoke the truth, and had curbed his 
senses. Resting on the (bare) ground, he, appealing to Vi!?IJU, 
meditated on him. He offered oblations to fire with sylvan 
articles, and honoured guests with reverence. He always spent 
his time by practising Cii.ndrii.yal)a vow. He desired to sub­
sist on leaves and fruits fallen on their own. He was not dejec­
ted; he was devoted to penance; he had mastered the Vedas and 
the Vedii.i:tgas. He was frightful due to his veins (very much 
strained), and his body had just bones (left in it). In this way 
he passed a thousand years in the forest. Then the mountain 
was blazing due to the lustre ofhis penance. The beings could 
not bear the lustre of the noble one. 0 brii.hmal)a, blazing with 
penance he shone like fire. In that forest beings .were free from 
enmity. Deer, tigers, mice and cats, free from fear, played with 
one another. Listen also to another vow of him difficult to be 
secured. Everyday he worshipped Vi!?J)U three times with a 
thousand fragrant flowers that had bloomed. He was very much 
engrossed in meditating upon VivJ)u according to the Vedic 
hymns. The brii.hmal).a performed every act to please Vi!?J)U. 
Due to a boon given to him by Dadhici he became an excellent 
devotee of Vi!?I).U. Once on the Ekii.dasi in the month of Vaiќii.­
kha the great sage after worshipping Vi!?I).U offered a charming 
and lovely (hymn of) praise to him. Then only VivQu mounted

=== PAGE 175 ===

VI. l 28.204-2 1 7 
2 795 
the bird (i.e. Garu<;ia), and being very much pleased by the 
praise, himself came before him. Seeing him mounted on Garu<;ia, 
with the colour of his skin like the cloud, having four arms, large 
eyes, decorated with all ornaments, actually standing before 
him, the brahmaQa, with horripilation appearing (on his body) 
and with tears of joy, with his mind satisfied, (saluted him) 
with his head going down to (i.e. touching) the ground. 
204-2 16. 
Due to that joy he could not contain himself even 
in the interior of the universe. He did not remember (i.e. was 
not conscious of) his body. He felt, as it were, he was one with 
Brahman. Then ViᗭQu affectionately spoke to the sage, ViᗺQu's 
devotee : "0 Devadyuti, I know you are my devotee. You have 
sought my shelter. You have given up all acts. You are devoted 
to me. You always have me in your mind. I am pleased with 
this praise. Ask for a boon." Hearing these words of ViᗭQu, 
the ascetic replied : "0 god of gods, 0 you lotus-eyed one, 0 
you who have taken up a body through your divine power, 
there is no more difficult boon than (being able) to see you. All 
gods like Brahma, and meditating saints like Sanaka, so also 
siddhas like Kapila, desire to see you in person. All bonds like 
ego, sense of mineness, so also delusion and greed-auspicious 
and inauspicious, entertained with a purpose, are burnt on 
seeing you, the highest one. I have obtained the fruit of my 
existence and deeds, and the fruit of my intellect has become 
manifest in that, 0 you lord of the world, you are seen by me. 
What other than this should I ask for? 0 lord of gods, I do not 
have your lotus-like feet in my heart for (securing) a boon. 
With my mind gone (i.e. devoted) to you, I always think of you 
with devotion. I ask for this boon only that my devotion to you 
should be steady. Let it be so, 0 lord of Lakᗻmi. I do not ask 
for any other boon." Hearing these words of him, ViᗪQu, with 
his face bright, and with his mind pleased replied : "Let it be 
so, 0 best brahmaQa. The other (boon is) : There will be no 
impediment to your austerities. Those men who will recite this 
hymn composed by you will have a firm devotion to me. What­
ever religious act they (perform) will be complete. They will 
have a great unswerving faith in knowledge." 
217. Speaking like this, ViᗭQU, the god of gods, vanished there 
only. Since then Devadyuti became extremely devoted to ViᗭQU.

=== PAGE 176 ===

2794 
Padma PuriiTJa 
Di/ipa said: 
218-221. 0 great sage, I am favoured by you. I am purified 
by this account like Ganga in company with VivI)U. Tell me that 
hymn of (i.e. composed by) the sinless bni.hmai)a, with which 
VivI)U was pleased. I have a great curiosity (to know it). 0 
brii.hmat;a, I think, by your favour I have obtained my desired 
object. To whose greatness does the company of the great not 
lead? Favour me and tell me the excellent hymn of VivI)U, due 
to which the lord was pleased and obliged him by his appearance. 
Vasi${ha said: 
222-261. I shall tell you the secret, excellent hymn that is 
muttered. It was formerly received by GarU<;la and from him it 
came to me. It contains the essence of metaphysics; it causes 
great prosperity; is auspicious. It removes all sins, and is the 
great cause of the knowledge about the self, 0 king. (The hymn 
is as follows :) "Om, obeisance to Vasudeva; salutation to Visva, 
to Cakrin (i.e. the Disc-holder), to KrvQa to whom his devotees 
are dear, to Jagannii.tha and to Sii.rilgin. One who praises, the 
one that is praised, the praise-when all this is Vivo.u himself, by 
whom is he praised? The devotion of men pleases (him). Which 
praise would delight that god whose breath are the Vedas with 
the Vedii.ilgas and the Siitras? Due to my devotion I have become 
talkative. All the three worlds with the mobile and the immobile, 
revolve like a wheel. Therefore, 0 god having a disc in your 
hand and best weapons, are sung (your praises). (When) actually 
the Veda cannot describe him, or speech or mind does not know 
him, then how can one like me praise him, or would be his 
devotee? You are the first Brahman; you are Brahma-ViÊo.u. 
You are the refuge of all. You are the Creator, the cause of 
Brahman. You yourself are pure Brahman. (0 lord, which is 
this body of you that touches the one having a body after 
breaking it. Salutation to you who are not touched by blemishes 
of the body.) 0 Vivo.u, there is no doubt that you are that 
thought-the mass of happiness-which keeps awake as god, 
and does not sleep in one's soul. The Great Principles like 
Mahat, so also the guo.as that give rise to modifications (of 
Prakrti)-all that is you, 0 lord; diversity is a foolish idea.

=== PAGE 177 ===

Vl.l 28.222-261 (Cont.) 
2795 
Through the three concepts like Kesa, Kesava, you are conceived, 
0 brahman, as a man by sons etc. The entire world having 
some form without faults and with particular qualities appears 
to the poets. That truth, that pure Vivl}.u, I praise. I salute that 
Brahman, knowing which, the friends of the world having no 
desire, perform acts prescribed by the scriptures. I praise that 
Vivl}.U who is just existence, free from destruction, whom the 
meditating saints resort to after awakening, and who exists in 
all beings. I praise that Vifil}.u, seeing whom equal to you the 
best brahmaJ;tas sing (i.e. praise) 'I am Brahma', after knowing 
him. Salutation to him, of the nature of pure intelligence, who 
destroys the variety of delusions through his divine power, so 
also the ego and sense of mineness of men and heaps of sins. 
Salutation to him, of the nature of pure intelligence, ·by 
remembering whose name the heaps ofmen's sins instantly perish 
at the time of setting or not setting out, always getting into the 
shadow of whose lotus-like feet a man is not burnt in the 
worlds burning with the blazing flames of the fire of delusion. I 
salute that Ananta, by remembering whom there is no delusion, no 
misery, no diseases and griefs. The beings that sprang up from 
the intellect do not at all desire (any thing). People moving in 
one (way}, knowing him see him as their soul. If the meaning 
of a word or of a sign has VivQu as its objects, then due to that 
fact may not the worldly existence touch (me). If Vivl}.u, per­
vading the world, is highly honoured by the Vedas etc., then due 
to that fact may I have uninterrupted devotion to Vivl}.u. May 
that Vivl}.u who is not a seedless seed, who is caused by a seed, 
cut off with the sword of bright knowledge the seed of the 
worldly existence. May that VivQU who becomes one having 
three bodies like an actor, due to the (three) constituents in 
acts like creation, maintenance and destruction, favour me. May 
that Vivl}.u who, merely for protecting righteousness, descended 
on the earth in ten ways, and who was requested by all gods, 
favour me. May that god VivQU who, the pure one, lives all 
alone in the abode of the heart (of objects) beginning from 
Brahma up to a clump of grass, favour me. In front of the 
gods, that god who was one and many entered the deities. May 
that VivQU, the Creator, favour me. He is a bird in the sky in 
the form of the heart. He is like the sky. He is the origin of the

=== PAGE 178 ===

2796 
Padma PuraiJa 
sky. He is beyond the sky. His acts are (infinite) like the sky. He 
goes to the sky. The sky is Brahma. He enjoys the sky etc. In 
the end he is of the form of the sky. You enjoy the sacrifice. Due 
to your lustre, your joy, your illusion (Maya) the world becomes 
united. You are of the form of lethargy, misery and truth also. 
The universe created by you delights. Forsaken by you, it would 
be impure. Though in contact with it, you are detached ; and due 
to that you become changed. You are the consciousness born 
of combination of physical elements, whom the Carvakas 
worship. The Saugatas (i.e. the Buddhists) call you a transitory 
idea with their logic. Those who look upon the Jina as their 
deity (i.e. the Jainas) look upon you as having the size of the 
body. The Samkhyas meditate upon you, beyond the Pralqti, as 
the PuruNa. The UpaniNads think between themselves that you 
alone are Brahman, free from birth etc., the ancient one, and 
having bliss as its characteristic. You are the (five) elements 
like the sky, the body, the mind, the intellect, the senses, know­
ledge and ignorance. There is nothing else but you. You are the 
Creator of all beings ; you alone are my refuge. You are the 
fire, the oblation; you are Indra ; you are the hotr priest; you 
are the hymn : you are the act and the fruit. 0 ViNJ}.u, you are 
existence and non-existence ; I have sought your refuge. You are 
the giver of the fruit of (one's) act. You are the fruit of the 
rite of the initiated. You are the cause of all the beings. You 
are my refuge. May my love take delight in you as that of the 
young women in the young men, and as of the young men in a 
young woman. The servants of Yama do not see even a sinner 
who has bowed to you, as the owl does not see the sun. The 
three torments trouble a man through masses of sins as long as 
he does not, with devotion, remember your lotus-like feet. 
262-269. 
I offer obeisance to that revered ViĚJ}.U whom the 
qualities, birth, bodily characters, so also the movements of the 
sense do not touch ; (but) whom, the sages free from the delusion 
of attachment, touch. Wailing like-he is gross as a means, a 
(gross) means in a cause, is their cause, is without means and 
cause, the sages enter him. Salutation to that ViNJ}.u waited upon 
by sages. Salutation to that ViNJ}.u who is waited upon by sages 
and who having embraced LakNmi in the form of happiness and 
salvation, that is having the charming quality like afRuence, and

=== PAGE 179 ===

VI. l28.270-293 
2797 
that is subjugated by his meditation, shampooing and shaking, 
sleeps here in self-pleasure. I bow to ViĚ.Qu in my heart, in whom 
of a detached nature due to the modification like being born 
etc., the group of the six waves (of passions) shakes, and whom 
the faults like Cupid (i.e. love) etc. do not torment. I salute that 
ViĚ.Qu whose pure company of his meditation removes ignorance, 
the world in having fallen into the fire of whose knowledge 
perishes, the bright sword of whose knowledge cuts off the enemy 
of doubt, and who is the mass of pure knowledge. Since all the 
mobile and immobile beings are under the control of ViĚ.Qu, 
may he due to this fact remain before me. Since Viɱ.QU is the 
entire immobile and mobile world, may he, due to this fact, 
manifest his form to me. If i have the same best devotion for 
my preceptor as for ViĚ.QU, may he, due to this fact, manifest 
himself (to me). 
270-293. 
Thus thinking about (my) devotion for him, due 
to true oaths, ViĚ.QU who was pleased, showed himself to me." 
Then having given him a boon, and having fulfilled his desire, 
Lakɱmi's lord (i.e. Vi঱.Qu), pleased by the bnihma.Qa with the 
hymn, left. The briihma.Qa also being satisfied and highly devo­
ted to Viɱ.Qu, and muttering the hymn remained in the penance 
grove with his disciples. A man who narrates this hymn or he 
who listens to it, obtains the abundant fruit of a horse-sacrifice. 
A brahma.Qa always gets awakening due to his knowledge. He 
has no mind for (committing) a sin ; he does not see anything 
inauspicious. By narrating this hymn all men have peace of 
intellect, tranquility of mind, and peace of senses also. A man 
who, after having pondered over the meaning, devoutly mutters 
this hymn, shakes off his sins in this world and gets ViĚ.Qu's 
position. He who always recites it, gets his desired objects, so 
also sons, grandsons, beasts, long life, strength, power. He who 
narrates this hymn gets that fruit which is obtained by giving a 
thousand pots full of sesamum, or a thousand cows. A man 
soon obtains, by means of this hymn, whatever he desires from 
among righteousness, worldly prosperity, sensual enjoyment and 
salvation. Men who hear this hymn have always a mind for 
(good) 
conduct, 
modesty, piety, knowledge, penance and 
morality. By reciting it (just) once a man having (committed) 
major or minor sins, has his mind purified instantly. It increa-

=== PAGE 180 ===

2798 
Padma Pur41)4 
ses intellect, wealth, glory, fame, knowledge, righteousness. It 
pacifies evil Planets; it destroys all that is inauspicious. Brah­
ma:r;tas should recite this hymn removing all diseases, wholesome, 
destroying all dangers, helping to cross misery. It should at 
once be recited at the time of trouble from Planets and Stars, 
and fear from the king and thieves, calamities from fire and 
thieves. (Due to the recital of this) there is no fear from lions, 
tigers, so also from magic, spirits, imps and so also from 
demons. When this hymn is recited men have no fear at all 
from demonesses, big miseries, and dangers. He who worship­
ping ViȠ:r;tu would recite this hymn, is not contaminated by sins 
like a lotus-leaf by water. A man gets the same position by 
reciting this auspicious hymn as is obtained by baths at holy 
places like Ganga etc. He, who recites it once, twice or thrice 
a day, always and in all seasons obtains inexhaustible happiness. 
A man reciting this hymn (just) once obtains the same fruit as 
is obtained by reciting thrice even the four Vedas. He who 
remembers ViĨ:r;tu with devotion, obtains inexhaustible wealth, 
becomes dear to women and is honoured in the world. He who 
daily recites this hymn, is always endowed with wealth, never 
meets with a calamity, and is not deprived of cows. Poverty, 
misfortune, bad dreams, bad thoughts of the devotees who 
listen to this hymn, at once perish. 
294-297. 
He who, getting up in the morning, and being pure 
and greatly devoted to ViĨ:r;tu, recites this, obtains inexhaustible 
happiness in this and the next world. This hymn called Yogasiira 
is accompanied by divine lustre, gives delight to ViȠ:r;tu, is aus­
picious, produces ViĨ:r;tu's favour, and gives his direct vision. It 
is highly purifying. He who always recites it goes to the heaven 
of ViĨ:r;tu. Thus I have told you the secret hymn, destroying 
sins. Hereafter I shall tell you about the release of the imps.

=== PAGE 181 ===

V1. 1 29. 1-14 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED TWENTYNINE 
The Deliverance of the Five Gandharva Maidens and 
Vedanidhi's Son from lmphood 
Vasi#ha said: 
2799 
1-9. 
Hear as to how many imps were liberated by him in 
the forest. Formerly in the Dnlvic;la country there was a king 
named Citra. (He was born) in the Soma family, was a great 
hero, brave and had mastered the science of weapons and mis­
siles. He, the brave one, was always possessed of streams of ele­
phants, horses and chariots. His treasury was full of gold and 
many kinds of gems. He was very rich. He, with fondness, always 
sported in the midst of a thousand women. Being excessively 
fond of women, passionate, always greedy, quick-tempered, the 
king did not do (i.e. obey) the pious words uttered by his 
ministers. He very much censured Vigl.U, and always hated 
ViȠ:tl.U's devotees : (He said :) "Who is that Vigi.U? Where is he 
seen? Where does he stay? Who tells about him?" In this way, 
the king, deluded by destiny did not put up with ViN:Q.u. He, 
being angry, troubled those who worshipped ViȠ:Q.u. Remaining 
in the condition of the heretics he did not honour brii.hma:Q.as, 
the Vedas, Vedic rites or a vow, and did not think of giving a 
gift. He harassed his subjects by inflicting severe punishment 
immorally. He was cruel, pitiless, wicked, and averse to auspici­
ous acts. He was fallen from (good) conduct; he hated Vi$:Q.U ; 
he had fallen from (maintaining sacred) fire and from (religious) 
acts. The king, as it were, of the form of another Yama, ruled 
over his subjects. 
10-14. 
Then after a long time the king died. But he did not 
receive obsequies as enjoined in the Vedic texts. The king, then, 
being very much troubled by the hosts of (Yama's) servants, 
went to Yama's world along the path full of iron nails, covered 
with heated sand, heated by the rays of the hot sun, having no 
shadow of a tree, spread over with burning charcoals, and full 
of flames of fire, (and was) being struck by very ferocious 
serpents with iron-faces and being eaten (i.e. gnawed) by wolves 
with fierce fangs and fierce dogs while hearing the wailing of 
other men who had committed sins.

=== PAGE 182 ===

2800 
Padma Puriil',la 
1 5-32. 0 king, hear about his unbearable condition in that 
world. The king went in succession from one hell to another. 
First he went to the (hell called) Ta.misra, fearful and giving 
great agony. Then (he went to) Andhatamisra, where there 
was constant misery. Then he went to the very fierce Maharau­
rava, then to Kalasiitra, Mahanaraka. Then the king, insensible 
due to grief, sank into Saiijivana, Mahavici, Tapana, Sampra­
tapana, difficult to cross. (Then) the king, with his mind burnt 
by pain, went to Sampata, Kakola, Ku<;imala, Piitimrttika, 
Lohasa, Mrgiyantra, and Panthana, and to the river Salmali. 
Then he entered a hell, very fierce, difficult to see, and inacces­
sible. (Then to) Asipatravana, Lohacaraka. In this way the sin­
ful king, having fallen into all these (hells), met with terrible 
torment full of pangs. Then the king, due to his proclamation 
of great hatred of Vi4Q.u, having experienced the torment in:liict­
ed by Yama for twentyone yugas, crossed the hells, and after 
(proper) time, he became a great evil spirit. Being hungry, he 
wanders in all directions in this forest. Even on the Meru moun­
tain he does not come across food or water. The evil spirit 
oppressed by grief, while wandering, entered PlakNaprasravaQ.a 
forest (as a result) of the future good fruit. Extremely grieved he 
resorted to the shade of a bibhitaka tree. He loudly and fiercely 
cried again and again : ''Oh ! I am lost. How will this unhappy 
existence of me who am being carried by hunger and thirst, who 
have sought to hurt all beings, come to an end? Who will today 
first give a hand to me who am plunged into this ocean of sins, 
having a series of billows of miseries?" Devadyuti who was 
studying, heard this piteous wailing of the goblin of a helpless 
mind. Having then come there, he saw the imp, of a fierce face, 
fearful, of tawny eyes and weak, with his hair raised up, of a 
dark body, and as it were another messenger of Yama, with his 
tongue lolling, with long (i.e. protruded) lips, with long shanks, 
and full of veins, having long toes, with his mouth parched up, 
with his eyes like cavities, and with his skeleton (i.e. body) dry. 
Then the best sage, full of curiosity, asked him : 
Devadyuti said: 
33-35. Who are you of a fierce form? Why do you weep 
fiercely'?' Due to what are you reduced to this condition ? Tell me

=== PAGE 183 ===

VI. l 29.36-5 1 
280 1 
what can I do for you? Beings who have entered my hermitage 
never experience grief. All just rejoice as in the abode of Vigi.U. 
0 good man, quickly tell me the cause of this misery. The wise 
do not delay when the (desired) object has come (near). 
Vasi#ha said: 
36. Hearing these words, the evil spirit giving up (i.e. ceasing) 
weaping, bowing with politeness, spoke in a melancholy voice : 
The evil spirit said: 
37-46. 
Your words have removed the torment covering my 
entire body, as the showering cloud removes (the heat) due to a 
wild fire on a mountain. 0 brii.hmaQa, you are seen by me due to 
the religious merit that I have. Those who have not collected 
merit, do not meet the good. 
Speaking like this, he told him his former account. 
"I have been reduced to this condition due to great hatred for 
Vigi.U. 0 brii.hmaQa, I entertained the most sinful hatred for 
that ViNQU, remembering whose name a dead person would 
go to his position. I hated him who protects the beings, who 
maintains piety in the three worlds, and who is the inner­
most soul of beings. He who gives here the fruits of acts, who is 
sung (i.e. praised) in all Vedas, who is worshipped with penance, 
was hated by me. 0 brii.hmaQa, that ViNQU who is fit to be medi­
tated upon in the UpaniNads by ascetics who have given up 
(ordinary) acts, to whom forests are dear, and who move all 
alone without company, was hated by rne. That ViNQu, whom all 
gods like Brahmii., (all) meditating saints like Sanaka worship for 
salvation, was hated by me. The ancient supporter of the uni­
verse in the beginning, middle and end, who has no beginning, 
middle or end, was hated by me. All those good acts done by 
me in my former existence, were burnt by my hatred for ViNQU, 
and were reduced to ash. 
47-5 1 . If somehow I see the limit (i.e. the end) of this sin, I 
shall not worship any other deity except ViNQu Having, due to 
my hatred of ViNQu, experienced for a long time the torment (in­
flicted) by Yama, I have come out of the hell, and have come to 
(i.e. am born in) the stock of an evil spirit. Now due to which 
active charms am I brought to your hermitage where due to

=== PAGE 184 ===

2802 
Padma PuraT)4 
the sun of your sight the darkness in the form of (my) misery has 
perished? A man is taken by his own compulsive act to that place 
where he obtains death, bondage, happiness, wealth or a bride. 
Now tell me the proper act destroying my imphood. The blessed 
ones do not move slowly in the act of obliging others." 
Devadyuti said: 
52-60. 
Oh, this Maya steals the memory of gods, demons 
and men. Due to it a hatred, destroying piety, is produced even 
among gods. Which fool hates, and in what way, the great lord, 
the creator, protector and destroyer of the worlds, and the soul 
of all beings? Which man, averse to devotion for him, due to 
offering whom all acts are fruitful, would not meet with misery ?" 
All the four castes, always worshipping Niirayal)a, should 
practise the acts laid down by holy texts, codes of laws and 
practices of the good. Otherwise, without resorting to the holy 
texts men go to hell. Therefore, a man should abandon a deed 
laid down in religious texts which is opposed to the import of 
the Vedas. Those, deceiving childish people in this world by 
means of self-composed religious texts, mar the path to ,bliss, 
thus harming the world. They censure ViĚJ)U, the Vedas, austeri­
ties, good brahmaQas ; therefore, due to their following wrong 
religious texts, they go · to hell, as this very king of the Dravi<;la 
country, hating god Vif1QU, the lord of gods, and the master of 
the world, went to hell. Therefore, one desiring religious merit, 
should give up hatred for especially deities and brahmal)as, and 
should abandon an act outside (i.e. not enjoined by) the Vedas. 
61-71. Speaking like this, the sage told the goblin (what 
was) good (for him) : ''0 good one, go to Prayiiga. Think of the 
month of Mii.gha. There you will undoubtedly be free from 
(this) imphood. This is (what) the ancient holy text (says) ল 
'Those bathing there go to heaven.' A man casts off there (the 
fruit of) his former bad acts. There is nowhere any greater 
expiation in the form of penance, in the form of gifts, in the 
form of rites than a bath at Prayaga. Know that there is no 
sacrifice or abstract meditation superior (to that). It is a gate· 
to heaven and salvation that is (kept) open on the 
earth. 
There is no other axe barring Prayaga having white 
and

=== PAGE 185 ===

VI. I 29. 72-96a 
2803 
black water (of Ganga and Yamuna) on the earth, which cuts 
off (the fetters of him) who is bound by the fetters of sin. What 
a great disparity there is between the confluence of Ganga and 
Yamuna, ViĚQu, Sun's lustre and fire, and the poor, despicable, 
oblation of the grass (i.e. hay) in the form of a heap of sins of 
men ! A man who has bathed at the confluence shines, after his 
sin is destroyed, like the moon in the autumn, after the mass of 
impurity is destroyed. I am not able to tell you the importance 
of Prayaga, by touching a drop of which a brahma:Q.a from 
Kerala got released." Hearing these words of the sage, the evil 
spirit was delighted at heart. Free from grief, he affectionately 
asked the sage : "0 great sage, how was the inhabitant of the 
Kerala country released? Being kind to me, tell the account to 
me." 
Devadyuti said: 
72-77. 
0 evil spmt, listen to the meritorious, auspicious 
tale from me who am telling it. In Kerala lived a brahmaQa 
named Vasu, a master of the Vedas. He was robbed of his 
wealth by his relatives ; he was poor; he was abandoned by his 
kinsmen. Grieved due to great agony, he left his motherland. 
He, suffering slightly from a disease, moved from one country 
to another, and after a long time entered a great forest. While 
going to another holy place, he, being tired , and emaciated due 
to hunger, died due to scarcity of provisions on the Vindhya 
mountain and did not have (proper) funeral and obsequies. Due­
to that ripening of his acts he became a spirit in the cave of that 
mountain only and lived in the solitary forest for a long time. He 
was troubled by cold and heat, was without food and water, was 
naked, was bare-footed, and sighed and uttered (the words} 
'Oh, Oh!' 
78-96a. 
Wandering here and there that Keralite brahma:Q.a, 
turned into a spirit, obtained happpiness nowhere. Afflicted 
by grief he wailed and did not find a happy state. He 
experienced the fruit of his act of having never given a gift. All 
those who do not make offerings into fire, who do not worship 
ViN:Q.u, who do not resort to knowledge of the self, who turn 
away from hoJy places, who do not give gold, garments, tambiila, 
gems, food, fruits, water to the distressed, are without any aim

=== PAGE 186 ===

2 804 
Padma Purdr)a 
(in life). All those who snatch away the wealth of a brahmal}.a or 
another person, or of women, through force or fraud - all such 
rogues who deceive others, hypocrites, cheats, thieves, who sub­
sist on fire, who are cruel to children, old persons, patients, 
women, and are without truthfulness, who set fire (to others' 
property), who administer poison, who stand as false witnesses, 
who practise illicit intercourse, who act as priest at vulgar 
sacrifices, who abandon their fathers, mothers, daughters-in­
law, children, wives, who are miserly, greedy, atheists, and 
censurers of religious practices, who forsake their master, and 
abandon those who have surrendered to them in a battle, who 
snatch away cows and land, and who defile others' gems, who 
censure others, who are sinful, who reproach deities and 
preceptors (or elders), who are always engaged in accepting gifts 
at great holy places, who are engaged in deceiving others, so 
also those who harm beings, who accept bad gifts, are born 
again and again in the vile stocks of spirits, demons, imps, 
birds and beasts and trees. They do not get the slightest happi­
ness in this world or in the next. Therefore, one should give up 
a prohibited act and perform one that is laid down (in sacred 
texts). One should resort to sacrifices, (giving) gifts, penance, 
holy places, hymns, deities, preceptors. Even all the four castes, 
having realised the effect of their acts in crores of stocks, diffi­
cult to cross, should constantly practise piety. The brahmal}.a, 
having thus seen his condition as an evil spirit due to his 
sins, advised him about piety and again spoke to him. That evil 
spirit of the Keralite, thus living on the mountain, passed a long 
time, and saw a traveller on the path. He was carrying two 
bamboo-boxes (containing pitchers) with water, and was singing 
(the glory of) the chief god ViȠl}.u of good fame. Seeing him the 
evil spirit suddenly obstructed his way. He presented himself 
(to him), and said : "Do not get frightened. 0 best pilgrim, I 
desire to drink water from you. If you do not give me water to 
drink, my life will certainly depart." Hearing these words of the 
evil spirit the traveller spoke through curiosity to him : 
The pilgrim said: 
96b-99. 
Who are you overcome with grief, 
emaciated, 
melancholy, naked, (remaining) with just your life left, about to

=== PAGE 187 ===

VI.l29. 1 00- 1 18 
2805 
die, deformed, increasing (others') fear, having the form of a 
fresh smoke, fierce, of fickle eyes. You have not touched the 
ground with your feet. You are not having (much) flesh (in your) 
belly and arms. 
Hearing these words of him, the evil spirit said (these) words : 
The evil spirit said: 
100-1 18. 
0 most pious one, listen, I (shall) tell you the 
reason why I have become like this. I am a briihma:g.a who never 
gave gifts, who am greedy, and whose acts are dirty. I always 
ate others' food. I ate all alone, and ate sweets. I did not give 
alms. I did not make any offering to guests. I did not perform 
the Vaisvadeva (i.e. an offering to all gods) ; I never threw (i.e. 
kept) an oblation outside. I never quenched with water the 
thirst of beings that were oppressed with thirst. I, wandering 
over the earth, never gratified my dead ancestors. I never offered 
a sraddha and did not at all worship deities. I never gave (any­
one, an umbrella) a protection against rain or heat ; nor any 
(sandals) to protect the feet. I never gave a water-vessel, or a 
himbiila, or a medicine (to anyone). I never offered a residence 
in my house (to anyone), nor did I show hospitality to anyone. 
I did not satisfy the blind, the old, the poor, the forlorn, the 
helpless with drink or food. I never gave a mouthful (of grass) 
to cows ; I never gave relief to a patient. I never offered, or gave 
into fire (the oblation of) pure sesamum-seeds, 0 briihmal)a. 
On the earth, there are not givers of sesamum-seeds like me(?). At 
the time of a portentous calamity I did not give any gold having 
great fruit. I did not give (any gift) on a Sarhkriinti day and on 
the days of the solar or lunar eclipse. 0 briihmal)a, I passed the 
parvan days also void (of any gift). All the important days in 
Kiirtika were always fruitless for me. On the AĨtakii1 days or 
Maghii2 days I did not offer anything to the dead ancestors. I 
did not bathe (at a holy place) in Miigha which gives (good) 
form, fortune and desired objects. When Jupiter enters Leo, I 
did not give anything to a briihmal)a learned in the Vedas on 
1 . A$taki-A group of three days (7th, 8th and 9th) beginning from the 
seventh day after the full moon. 
2. Magha-Name of the tenth lunar mansion containing five stars.

=== PAGE 188 ===

2806 
Padma Purib)a 
the bank of Gautami, in my former existence. Similarly I did 
not bathe in KrĨ:Q.ave:Q.i, when the Jupiter entered Virgo. I never 
controlled the cold of brii.hma:Q.as afflicted by cold, who had 
bathed after kindling fire with heaps of wood in Pau̥ a and 
Mii.gha. I did not give cold water (to people) in months like 
Vaisakha. I did not plant an asvattha tree, nor did I rear a fig­
tree. I never released beings . from a prison. I never protected 
one who was afllicted through fear of (other) beings and who 
had sought my shelter. I have not gratified ViĨou by fasting for 
three nights. 
0 brahmru;ta, vows like Krcchra, Atilqcchra, 
Paraka, and so also Cii.ndrii.yaQ.a, another vow like Taptakrcchra, 
so also Sii.ntapana vows-all these auspicious vows were observ­
ed by gods like Indra. I did not observe them and parch up my 
body formerly. 0 best brahmaQa, my former existence was 
fruitless in this way. 
1 19-133. 
0 brii.hmaQa, mark the very cruel and wonderful 
fruits, very difficult to understand, of my former acts, (which I 
am having) in this existence. On this mountain there are (pieces 
of) flesh (of animals) killed by wolves and tigers, so also of 
fruits abandoned everywhere by parrots. There are good, 
fragrant and juicy fruits, so also soft, and roots very fit to be 
eaten. There are honeys of very many kinds. Everywhere there 
is water of streams and springs. Even though all these things 
are easily available on the mountain, I do not find any food (as 
it is) destroyed by destiny. I subsist on air, as do the serpents. 
0 brii.hma:Q.a, I am alive due to the prowess of the divine stock. 
(Even) with power, intellect, hymns, valour, brave acts, com­
panions and friends, a man cannot obtain the unobtainable. In 
this world destiny alone is the cause of acquisition or non­
acquisition, pleasure or pain, marriage, death, life, enjoyment, 
disease or separation. The ugly, those coming from bad families, 
fools, those of abhorred conduct, the censured ones, those that 
are without bravery or valour, enjoy kingdom due to (good) 
fortune. The squint-eyed ones, the lame, the unworthy, the 
immoral, the vicious, eunuchs, are seen to be enthroned due to 
(good) fortune. In front of those who have given sesamum­
seeds, cows, gold and garments, af air girl (in marriage), who 
have given (a piece of) land, a bed, seats, tii.mbiila, houses, 
wealth, eatables, food, sandal and agaru (sandal), stand enjoy-

=== PAGE 189 ===

Vl. 129. 1 34-1 53 
2807 
ments in a forest, at the top of a mountain, in a village, or even 
in a city, with great care. On this mountain also stay more 
powerful demons, so also very fierce demons, goblins and female 
goblins. At some time, somehow, somewhere, they, wandering 
in the forest, get food and drink in every forest. 
134-142. 
Having heard this you should not be afraid of 
them. They are not capable of even looking at you, a pure 
devotee of VisQu. Demons, evil spirits and demonesses neither 
touch nor see him whose body is protected by devotion for 
VisQu and who depends upon Vi!1QU. Ghosts, goblins, gan­
dharvas, female attendants of Durga, respectable Planets, Revatis, 
Vrddharevatis, MukhamaQqis, so also (other) Planets, Yak!1as, 
young Planets, cruel, wicked, old Planets, so also Matrgrahas, 
fierce Planets, other Vinayakas also, Krtyas, serpents, KiiĨmaQqa, 
so also other wicked beings, do not look at a pure great 
brahmaQa, ViQu's devotee, 0 brahmaQa. Imps protect a pure 
and the most religious person, and do not trouble him. The 
Planets, Stars and deities always protect a pure person. On the 
tip of your tongue is ViNQu's name. In your heart remains the 
Veda. You are pure and devoted to giving gifts. You have fear 
from nowhere. 0 brahmaQa, thus I remain undergoing the fruits 
of my acts. Thinking and deliberating like this again and again, 
I do not wail. Similarly I am not pained as long as I remem­
ber the words of the crane, which I, when I was wandering, 
heard on the bank of the JambalinL 
The brahmafla said: 
143. What kind of(i.e. which) words uttered by the crane 
did you hear? I desire to hear them. 0 evil spirit, tell them 
quickly. 
The evil spirit said: 
144-153. I shall tell you the words of the crane. 0 best 
pilgrim, listen to them. In the interior of this forest there is a 
river Dhiisara by name, rising from a mountain. She is always 
violent due to fish, and full of intoxicated elephants, rich with 
the beauty of great arjuna trees, and charming with glossy 
jambii fruits. Roaming in the dense forest, I reached her bank. 
When I remained there with a desire to eat fruits, a crane,

=== PAGE 190 ===

2808 
Padma PuriirJa 
along with a female crane, :flew from another forest and came 
there to resort to the sand-bank with many birds. Having drunk 
water and sported just there with his mate, and putting the top 
of his head (i.e. his beak) into the cavity in his left wing, he 
slept. In the meanwhile was seen a monkey, getting down from 
the tree. His face was red. His eyes were very red. He was 
proud, and had strong rows of nails. He had (profuse) hair on 
his body, had a long tail, was quick in his movements. He 
speedily came there where the crane had slept. Coming (to the 
crane), he, with both his hands cruelly seized tightly the leg of 
the crane even as many birds were watching. All the birds, flew 
and flew and went elsewhere. The female crane remained (there) 
frightened and crying. The crane, with his sleep disturbed, with 
his eyes trembling due to fear, raised his neck quickly and saw 
(the monkey). 
1 54- 160. 
Seeing the wicked and very fierce monkey, desiring 
to kill him, the bird spoke to him in a sweet voice : "0 monkey, 
why do you trouble me without any fault (of mine)? In the 
world, even the kings punish guilty persons. Good persons (i.e. 
beings) like you do not trouble harmless good birds averse to 
other (means of) subsistence, eating the moss in water, living in 
a forest, always bent upon sporting with their own mates, and 
avoiding others' mates. 0 best monkey, (beings) like you do not 
trouble birds free from censuring others and from wickedness, 
and the best servants. 0 monkey, quickly leave me who am 
fully innocent. I remember your (former) existence. But you do 
not know mine." Having heard these words of (i.e. uttered by) 
him, the quick monkey left him and remaining away quickly 
said to him : 
The monkey said: 
161. Tell me how you know my former existence. You are 
a bird having no knowledge, and I am an animal moving in the 
forest. 
The crane said: 
162-172. 
I know your (former) existence (due to my) clearly 
remembering your condition in your former life. In the former 
life you were Parvatesvara, the king of the Vindhya region. I

=== PAGE 191 ===

was the most respected priest in your family. Therefore, 0 best 
monkey, I know (the former life of) you. While protecting this 
land, you, without discrimination, and collecting much wealth, 
harassed all (your) subjects. 
0 monkey, you were first burnt by 
the flames of fire due to the torment inflicted on the subjects, 
and then were thrown into the very fierce Kumbhipii.ka. Being 
repeatedly burnt and being born, you, uttering fierce words, and 
weeping again and again, and experiencing, with your hellish 
body, a terrible agony due to the fire in the Kumbhipii.ka passed 
thirty years. After you again crossed (i.e. went out of) the hell, 
you have obtained this existence of the monkey due to the 
remaining sin, due to which you now desire to kill me. Formerly 
through your valour you took away bananas from the grove of 
a brii.hmaQa without being permitted by him. Note that the 
ripening of that act is giving its fruit. Therefore, due to it you 
are still a monkey, and are now living in the forest. The under­
going (of the fruit) of a good or bad act done previously plays 
among (i.e. is effective on) beings. Even gods cannot pass over 
it. Thus I know your (former) life properly and with its cause. 
Not being deluded by my knowledge, I too obtained this crane's 
body. 
The evil spirit said: 
173. 0 brii.hmaQa, hearing this account the monkey too 
said to the crane : "You know (everything) properly, (then) how 
were you born as a bird?" 
The crane said: 
1 74- 187. 
I shall tell you about that act due to which I met 
with misery and due to which I went to (i.e. was born in) the 
stock of a bird. Please listen to all that. To give it to many brii.h­
maQas on Carmadii. at the time of a solar eclipse you had laid 
aside (stock of) grains measuring a hundred khii.ris. Through my 
arrogance of (being your) priest and through greed, I, deceiving 
the brii.hmaQas, gave them a little and all (the remaining) I look 
(for myself). Due to the sin springing from taking the wealth 
(to be given) in common to the brii.hmaQas, I fell into the 
Kii.lasiitra hell, full of mire of blood, which was quite full of 
moving insects, having a bad odour, foamy with pus ; with my

=== PAGE 192 ===

281 0 
Padma Purii.T)IJ 
face down and licking the pus, I was plunged into it up to my 
navel. Similarly from above my body was being constantly 
eaten up by great vultures and crows, and was being cut 
off by insects. In that mire of blood I became breathless ; and 
even a short time there was as much as a kalpa for me. For 
three myriad years I experienced the agony. 0 monkey, I am 
not able to describe that misery (I had) in the hell. Priest­
hood is very fearful and naturally causes sin. In it the living 
of a brahmal)a is like that of a god. Acceptance of gifts from a 
king is fearful. Due to it brahmal)as were burnt. The priest 
would snatch away even their wealth. Due to that he becomes 
a hellish (being). The wise declare that the sin which a king first 
physically commits, is fixed on the priest. Luckily somehow I 
<:rossed the ocean of hell. Due to luck I first reached the stock 
-of a bird. I got this condition (i.e. existence) of a crane, as, 
formerly, after taking a brass-metal pot from my sister, I gave it 
to a gambler. And this was a very fearful brahmal)i, who stole 
brass-metal. Due to that she has become my lawful wife, the 
female crane. 
1 88-201 . 
0 monkey, I have thus told you the entire fruit of 
(my acts). Now listen to the past, the present and the future. 
I shall be (born as) a swan ; and you will also be (born as) a 
swan. This my wife, the female crane, will be (born as) a female 
swan. We shall live happily in the Kamariipa country. After 
that we shall go to a female devotee, (who will be) good (to us) 
in future. Then we shall obtain existence as humans, difficult to 
get, where virtue and its opposite are secured by beings. Siva, 
having thus deluded all beings with his Maya, rejoices by giving 
pleasures and pains not only to us but to all beings. This is the 
way created variously in the world, which is full of virtue and 
vice and the nature of its fruit is pleasure and pain. It is 
always or repeatedly followed by all beings, gods, demons, human 
beings, tigers, worms, insects and aquatic animals. Without 
thinking about detached meditating saints who have mastered 
the UpaniNads, no one has crossed this path having thorns of 
misery. Mahesvara, considering the place and time gives in this 
world the fruit of virtuous or vicious deed of the size of an 
.atom or a big one. Very intelligent persons, knowing the Maya 
-of the lord, knowing what is to be done according to the sacred

=== PAGE 193 ===

VI. 129.202-216 
281 1 
laws, do not grieve, nor are they tormented, nor are they 
troubled. 0 monkey, the effect of the former deeds cannot be 
changed with means or intelligence even by gods. Formerly you 
were born as a king, then were born as a hellish being. Now 
being born as a monkey, you will get an existence like that (i.e. 
according to your former deeds). Thinking like this, 0 monkey, 
being free from grief, and enjoying in this forest, wait for your 
death. I, too, bound by the Maya of the Lord, and mustering 
courage, will pass my existence as a crane in forest after forest. 
The monkey said: 
202-203. 
I honoured you before. Even now I praise you. 
You remember (our) former existence. (Now) I know everything 
about our former life. 0 crane, live with the female crane. May 
you always have well-being. I whose illusion has gone due to 
your words, will (now) always move. 
The evil spirit said: 
204-216. 
0 brahma:Q.a, when, on the bank of the river I 
. heard this charming, wonderful, highly 
purifying dialogue 
between the bird (i.e. the crane) and the monkey, I too was 
enlightened, and due to that my grief disappeared. Seeing the 
very wonderful greatness of the water of Ganga, I, 
0 best 
bra.hma:Q.a, now ask you for the water of Ganga. I desire to be 
emancipated from this state of the evil spirit. I am oppressed 
with severe thirst. 0 bra.hma:Q.a, on this mountain only I saw a 
great wonder of the water of Ganga. (Therefore,) I desire to 
drink that water. A bra.hma:Q.a, born on Pariyatra, acted as 
priest at the village-sacrifices. Due to acting as a priest at the 
sacrifices of those who were incompetent to offer sacrifices, 
he was born as a brahmarakNasa on Vindhya. Due to his 
desire for my company, he stayed there for eight years. 0 best 
brahma:Q.a, his good son collected his bones (after burning his 
corpse). Bringing them to the pure holy place of Kanakhala, 
he cast them into Ganga. That 
moment only he became 
free from the very fierce demonhood. Thus, I actually saw 
the wonderful greatness of a bath in Ganga. Therefore, I 
asked (you) for this water of Ganga. Since, formerly I procured 
many possessions at the holy place, and did not counteract (the

=== PAGE 194 ===

281 2 
Padma PuriiTJa 
effect of) them in the form of muttering (of hymns) etc., there­
fore, I, of the form of an evil spirit am not getting water and 
food easily. On this Vindhya mountain a thousand years have 
thus passed. Giving up great shame (i.e. being very shameless), 
I have told you everything. 0 most religious one, now quickly 
gratify my life being in the throat (i.e. about to depart), by 
giving me water. · In this world life even in the condition of an 
evil spirit is difficult to be obtained by beings. By all means 
men should always protect their body. Even those suffering from 
leprosy etc. do not desire to abandon their bodies. 
Devadyuti said: 
217-227. 
Hearing these words of (i.e. uttered by) him, the 
pilgrim was much amazed, and feeling compassion for the evil 
spirit, thought: 'In the world the fruit of sin or religious merit 
is actually seen as birth as a god, a demon, a man, a lower 
animal, an insect or a worm-thus birth in many stocks and 
being troubled by many diseases. So also death of children or 
old persons, blindness and hunch-backedness. So also affluence, 
poverty, wisdom, folly. These affects take place. How can 
they be otherwise? Those who in their place of work give to 
worthy recipients money earned through just ways, and (thus) 
accomplish their own well-being, are blessed. Land, gems, gold, 
cows, grains, a house, elephants, chariots, horses, garments, 
villages, ready food, fruits, water, so also one's daughter, a 
divine medicine, food, umbrella, sandals, an excellent seat, a bed, 
a tambiila, flowers, a fan, excellent seat-all this should be given 
by those desiring to win the three worlds. What is given is 
received in heaven; what is given is alone enjoyed. Umbrellas, 
chowries, vehicles, excellent horses, excellent elephants, man­
sions, excellent beds, cows, buffaloes, and excellent women, food, 
ornaments, pearls, sons, maid-servants, a noble family, (long) 
life, (good) health, affluence, skill in arts and lores-all this is 
obtained by men on the earth as the fruit of giving (gifts) only. 
Therefore give carefully. That which is not given does not stand 
by one.' 
228-239. This verse was sung by the most religious traveller. 
Hearing thus, the evil spirit, with his mind afflicted, spoke 
again : "0 traveller, I think you are almost like one coversant

=== PAGE 195 ===

VI. l 29.240-249 
281 3 
with Dharma. There i s no doubt about it. Give me jivana 
(life/water) as the cloud (gives) water to a cataka. Do not much 
delay in giving me the gift of my life." Then the traveller re­
plied in words pregnant with justice. "0 evil spirit, listen. My 
parents stay at BhrgukNetra. For them I have brought the water 
from (Prayaga) the lord of holy places. (But now) in the middle 
(i.e. on my way) you have asked for that white and black water 
(i.e. from Prayaga). I do not know whether any doubt on my 
part for a religious act is proper now. For the strength or 
weakness (of this act) I shall do (i.e. follow) the great order 
from the Vedas and the religious texts. (I will) not (do anything) 
through pride only. The sages and deities have looked upon the 
protection of the life of beings as superior to all the sacrifices 
like the horse-sacrifice. Thus giving you that excellent water 
and protecting you, the evil spirit, I shall again bring the purify­
ing water and take it (to my parents). This appears to me to be 
a powerful act giving me religious merit. The wise have said 
that all else except obliging others is inferior. Men, obliging 
others, have gladly offered even their (own) life. By giving water 
there would be an obligation. Then what is not gained by me? 
This verse, formerly sung by Dadhici is heard (i.e. well-known) 
on the earth : 'Benevolence even with (i.e. at the cost of one's) 
life or wealth, which is full of all piety and is its essence, is 
approved by all those who are conversant with Dharma. The 
religious merit due to obliging others is equivalent to hundreds 
of sacrifices'." 
240ц249. 
Speaking like this, that excellent, most religious 
brahmat;.a gave to the evil spirit, the water (from the confluence 
of) Ganga and Yamuna for the protection of his life. The evil spirit 
drank the water and sprinkled his head with it. That moment 
only he abandoned his body of evil spirit, and became one with 
a divine body. Seeing that great wonder, the Keralite said : "0h, 
due to the drops of the water from Vet;.i (i.e. Triveni), I am 
freed from the condition of an evil spirit. I think even Brahma 
cannot describe the merit of the water. Otherwise, why does 
Siva have the water of Ganga on his head '? He who would drink 
the water of Ganga as much as the size of a sesamum (i.e. even 
a small drop), whose power is inconceivable, would be a god or 
a siddha. He would not enter the womb (i.e. would not be born

=== PAGE 196 ===

2814 
Padma PuriiTJ.a 
again). There is no accomplishment like Ganga, no knowledge 
like Ganga, no salvation like Ganga, since Ganga is superior to 
all. Therefore, 0 religious one, final beatitude is in the hand of 
him who, with all efforts and great devotion, always resorts to 
Ganga. 0 traveller, live long, do not desist from piety. By 
giving me a drop of the water of Ganga, you have instantly 
emancipated me." Saying so, that evil spirit from Kerala, after 
having congratulated that excellent brother, the traveller, with 
blessings, proceeded to hevaen. That traveller also again brought 
the water, and bringing to his mind the wonder (caused by) the 
water from the holy place, went the same way (as he had come). 
Vasi${ha said: 
250-258. Thus hearing the greatness of Prayaga and saluting 
the sage, the evil spirit at once and quickly went to Prayaga in 
Miigha. 0 best briihmal}.a, that evil spirit too, having bathed at 
Prayiiga in the month of Miigha, and with his sins destroyed, 
gave up that body of the evil spirit. Then that Draviga king, 
being one with a divine body, devoutly praising god ViNl}.u, and 
free from blemishes, being praised by gandharvas, being honour­
ed by divine ladies, went in an excellent aeroplane, to the city 
of Indra. 0 brahmal}.a, I have thus told you, the former, won­
derful historical account which instantly destroys sins. You 
have thus heard (the account) giving knowledge, giving salva­
tion, and destroying misery. I have thus told you the wonder­
ful old account; 0 best brahmal}.a, you have heard the old 
account destroying misery. Now, with me these girls, this your 
son, and you-all desiring felicity, should come to Prayiiga. 
There we shall have the Miigha bath difficult to be had even by 
gods. There they will instantly give up their goblinhood caused 
,by sin. 
Siva said: 
259-286. 
Having thus gladly drunk the sweet juice of 
the story from the lotus-like mouth of Vasi঳tha, all were 
much delighted, and they crossed the ocean of hell. Being 
delighted they proceeded with him in the sky. 
0 Dilipa, hear 
all (about) that holy place Sitiisita (i.e. Prayiiga). They who were 
irresistible, having secured their desired object, quickly came

=== PAGE 197 ===

there, and that time they were happy in their heart. Then Lomasa 
kindly said in the courtyard of the sky : "Let all see this lord of 
holy places on the earth. All beings are freed at this Prayiiga, 
(even) without knowledge. The Creator, desiring to create, 
performed a sacrijice here only. (Then) he obtained the power to 
create and then created (the universe). ViNQu, desiring a wife, 
bathed here atPrayiiga. Therefore, he obtained LakNmi as his 
wife at the time of churning (out) the nectar here (only). Having 
lived here for six months, and having bathed at VeQi at will, 
the Trident-holder killed with three arrows Tripura. These three 
ponds are blazing with perpetual fires. This fire is satisfied, and 
is nourished with even water. Here the thirtythree gods, being 
contented, were much delighted. Siva, NilakaQtha, Kapalabhrt 
(literally, holder of a skull), the chap served constantly by gods, 
came here (to offer) a handful (of water). This is that ViN:QU, of 
the form of abstract meditation, in whose fit mouth, the son of 
MrkaQQa, having entered when the world was full of flames. 
stayed. This is that Siva's Bhiigirathi which removes all misery, 
For perfection she is served by siddhas, and gives enjoyment and 
salvation. She who always gives bliss, is excellent on the path 
to heaven. This is that river Bhiigirathi, the goddess, that is the 
cause of (i.e. that leads one to) heaven. This is that river 
Yamuna herself, by merely bathing in whose water, beings 
obtain the same world as that of the Sun. 0 sage, the confluence 
of these two auspicious rivers gives happiness. Those who have 
bathed here, being sanctified by knowledge, are not roasted in 
hell. All beings, (even) without (having) knowledge, are libera­
ted at this Prayiiga. 0 brahma:Qa, listen to another old histori­
cal account which destroys all sins and diseases of the listeners. 
Formerly a gandharva, cursed by ঴cika, became a crow. He at 
once got rid of the curse when he bathed here, that is at Prayaga 
only. Due to Indra's curse the celestial nymph Urvasi dropped 
from heaven. She, desiring (to go to) heaven, bathed (here) and 
soon obtained heaven. 0 sage, NahuNa's son Yayati obtained a 
propitious son after he, longing for a son, bathed at Prayaga 
having the holy white and black water (of Gailgii. and Yamuna). 
0 best briihma:Qa, formerly Indra, longing for wealth bathed 
well here. Through deceit he snatched all the treasures of 
Kubera. Kasyapa intent on propitiating Siva, practised penance

=== PAGE 198 ===

2816 
Padma PurdT)a 
here. At this holy place Bharadvaja obtained perfection in 
abstract meditation. 0 brahma:Q.a, formerly at this holy place, 
Sanaka and others, masters of abstract 
meditation and of 
tranquil minds, obtained the fruit-the object of their abstract 
meditation. Those who have bathed here at the confluence of 
Gailgii. and Yamuna in (the month of) Magha, have become of 
the form of Stars and have pervaded the entire world. Those 
desiring (some objects) obtain their desired objects, and those 
desiring salvation obtain salvation. Those desiring perfection 
obtain it at Prayaga, 0 best brahmaQa. Now these maidens 
and your son long for salvation. On my word let all of them 
bathe here at Prayaga. Due to the efficacy of the water of the 
Ve:Q.i (i .e. the confluence of Ganga, Yamuna and Sarasvati), 
may they obtain the entire wealth, the great fruit of the curse 
received by them* ." Hearing these super-sensible* *, true and 
unsurpassable words of the sage all they, with eager minds, were 
ready to bathe. Having reached Prayiiga, difficult to get, they, in 
a moment, gave up their goblinhood. 
287-289a. 
Freed from the agony of the curse, they obtained 
their respective bodies. Vedanidhi, seeing his son and those 
girls of divine forms, and with his mind pleased, affectionately 
praised Lomasa. "Due to your favour only, this great ocean of 
sin has been crossed. 0 best sage, now speak what is proper for 
(these) children." 
Lomasa said: 
289b-298. 
This young boy has studied the Vedas and has 
completed his vow. Let him accept the lotus-like hand of these, 
full of love (for him). 
Then by Lomasa's words and those of his father, that pious 
celibate had the auspicious rite performed by the sages with auspi­
cious articles and hymns. According to the religious rule he accep­
ted the hand of all the five girls. All the girls were then delighted 
and had their desires satisfied. The boy also was pleased. That sage 
Lomasa, having granted them permission, and being saluted by 
them, went to his hermitage, the Meru mountain, resorted to by 
gods. Then, 0 king, Vedanidhi, taking with him his five daughters-
*srrcaէTtAըm( ?) * *թժ (?)

=== PAGE 199 ===

VI. l 30. l - 1 9 
281 7 
in-law and his son, and being delighted, went to Kubera's city. 
0 best king, due to the religious merit arising from the bath 
in Magha at the lord of holy places, Prayaga, and due to the 
words of the excellent sage, the five gandharva girls got free 
from all sins, and due to having got the desired object had their 
desires fulfilled. He who everyday listens to this great historical 
account, which is purifying, which has become an object of 
veneration, which is the cause of the destruction of sins, becomes 
complete with all desired objects, and being rare and endowed 
with religious merit goes to the world of gods. He who, having 
heard this historical account, would honour the reader with cows, 
.gold, garments,-since the reader is like Brahma-(obtains reli­
gious merit). Since the reader is honoured, ViNQu is worshipped; 
therefore, a man who would desire his worldly existence to be 
fruitful, should everyday honour him. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED THIRTY 
Kinds of Devotion to ViчIJU 
Piirvati said: 
1 -2. 
0 lord, I have heard about the greatness of Kartika, 
so also of Magha. Now I desire to hear about the best act, 
giving salvation. 0 mighty lord of the universe, tell me what 
is called the best devotion, by merely knowing which men would 
obtain happiness. 
Mahiideva said: 
3-19. A man should have his heart merged in Him. That 
-devotion is said to be the greatest. He should also be given to 
practising compassion. He should always be intent upon duties 
sacred to ViNQu. He should subsist on fruits, roots and water. 
He should have the marks of a conch, a disc (on his body). He 
should worship Vigm three times a said. That is supposed to 
be virtuous devotion. Virtuous (siittviki) devotion is said to be 
the best. The passionate (riijasi) one is said to be intermediate.

=== PAGE 200 ===

28 18 
Padma Purdr]a 
The vicious (tamasi) one is said to be the lowest. (Thus) 
devotion is said to be of three kinds. Those who desire the fruit 
of salvation should have (devotion) for ViN:Q.u. That devotion 
which people have through egotism, hypocrisy or deceit is 
declared to be vicious. So also that devotion for the god which 
is had for the destruction of another (person), or with hypocrisy 
in mind, is declared to be vicious. That separate (i.e. another 
type of) devotion in which a man would worship me at the 
beginning of an act of worship with the aim of (getting) objects. 
of senses, glory or affluence is passionate. Brahm:Q.as intent on 
knowledge should practise virtuous devotion which is said to 
consist in the sense of dedicating oneself to ViN:Q.u. Therefore, 
0 goddess, ViNQU is always to be served. Vice is earned through 
vicious devotion, passion through passionate (devotion), and 
through virtuous (devotion) virtue is secured. A brahma:Q.a 
engaged in Vedic studies, wealthy, free from attachment and 
hatred, having (the marks of) a conch and a disc (on his person) 
is always said to be pure. He who is engaged in ceremonial 
acts and sacrificial rites, who always censures ViN:Q.u and his 
devotees is said to be a great ca:Q.Qala. 0 chief goddess, those 
who are always engaged in Vedic studies, who are always 
acting as priests at sacrifices, who are always engaged in 
maintaining the holy fire, who are averse to VaiNQava religion, 
are out of (the fold of) the Vedas. The wise, being pleas­
ed cause tranquillity in those men, the grandsire etc. bring 
about happiness, and the best sages give well-being to those 
men who have devotion for ViN:Q.u. Auspicious Planets and evil 
spirits and goblins, hosts of gods like Brahma are pleased, and 
LakNmi is steady in the houses of those men who have devotion 
for ViN:Q.u. Holy places like Ganga, Gaya, NaimiNa. PuNkara, 
Kasi, Prayaga, Kuru, Jailgala, live devoutly in the bodies of· 
those men who have devotion for ViN:Q:u. Thus a wise man should 
everyday worship the lord with LakNmi; and should · thus be 
blessed everyday. He is undoubtedly a brahma:Q.a. The man­
a kNatriya, a vaisya or a siidra-devoted especially to the best 
god, goes to (i.e. secures) salvation.

=== PAGE 201 ===

VI. l 3 1 . 1-18 
2819" 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED THIRTYONE 
Worship of the Siilagriima Stone 
Piirvati said: 
1-2. 
There are the pure images ofthe Salagnima stone on 
the earth. In how many ways is the worship of those image said 
to be done? Tell (me), 0 lord of gods, how many (images) are 
to be worshipped by brahma1;,1as? (How many) by kNatriyas ? 
How are they to be worshipped by vaisyas, siidras and women? 
M ahiideva said: 
3-18. 
The Salagrama stone is auspicious, pure and leads to 
religious merit ; even by seeing it a man, (even if he is a) killer of 
a brahma:r;ta, is purified. That house where this auspicious image 
of the Salagnima stone exists, is said to be the best of all by all 
holy texts. Brahma1;,1as should worship five, kNatriyas four, 
similarly vaisyas should worship three, or one with care. A 
siidra would obtain salvation just by seeing it. 0 goddess, those 
men who worship the (Salagrama) according to this rite, enjoy 
all pleasures and go to the eternal (position) of ViN:Q.U. This is 
the great image which always removes sins. For, 0 goddess, the 
fruit beginning with Kailasa is produced by worshipping (it). 
Gatiga, Yamuna, Godavari, Sarasvati are there where the stone 
is. There is no doubt about this. 0 beautiful 1ady, what is the 
use of repeatedly saying much? Men, desiring salvation, should 
properly worship it. A man is purified by seeing them who, 0 
chief goddess, worship ViN:Q.U devoutly. 0 chief goddess, Brahmii. 
and others are not aware of the religious merit of the siidras 
who as their servants, worship them well. Twentyone (genera­
tions of) the family of those brahma1;,1as who devoutly worship 
ViN:t;1U are emancipated in those existences. The brahma1;,1a 
having marks of a conch and a disc (on his person), who would 
worship (ViN1;,1u), has, by means of having worshipped Vi֐:Q.u, 
worshipped the entire world. The dead ancestors speak with one 
another : 'ViN:Q.u's devotees are born in our family. Till the final 
deluge they have emancipated that family. They will, after 
emancipating us, take us to ViN1;,1u's abode. That day alone is 
lucky. The mother is blessed. The relatives are blessed. So also·

=== PAGE 202 ===

2820 
Padma Puriir)a 
his father is blessed, and his relatives also.' All intent upon 
ViǢ?:Q.U's devotion should be known to be most lucky. Merely 
by seeing them one gets freed from a major sin. By seeing ViǢ?:Q.u's 
devotees, all minor sins, so also all major sins perish. 
19-29. Those men who are ViǢ?:Q.U's devotees, shine on the 
earth like fires and are freed from all sins like the moon from 
clouds. All the sins, deliberate, non-deliberate, small, big, com­
mitted through speech, mind, (physical) act, perish on seeing 
ViǢ?uu's devotees. On seeing a devotee of Vi঺?J..lU all the sin due 
to having done harm (to others) knowingly or unknowingly, 
perishes. On just seeing the good the sinless go to heaven; the 
most sinful become purified. I have told you the truth. A devotee 
of ViǢ?J..lU, skilled in washing the smearing of the mud of the 
mundane existence, is undoubtedly the purifier of the purifiers. 
Those devotees of ViǢ?:Q.U who everyday remember ViǢ?:Q.U, should 
be known to be full of ViǢ?J..lU. Vi঻?J..lU is undoubtedly there (i.e. in 
them). Those brii.hma:Q.as who meditate upon ViǢ?:Q.U as dark like a 
fresh cloud, having long(i.e. big) lotus-like eyes, holding a conch, a 
disc, a mace, a lotus, covered with a yellow garment, shining with 
the Kaustubha, wearing a garland of wood-flowers, with the 
lustre of his ear-ring being brightened up by the grace of the 
face, adorned with a crown and bracelets, armlets and anklets, 
with his lotus-like face pleased, endowed with the grace of four 
arms (i.e. with four graceful arms), are of the form of Vi!?uu. 
There is no doubt about it, 0 Parvati. One certainly obtains 
VaikUJ..ltha by just seeing them, being devoted to them, feeding 
them or honouring them, 0 chief goddess. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED THIRTY1WO 
Remembering VisŤu 
Piirvati said: 
1 . (Tell me) how is Ananta Vasudeva (i.e. ViǢ?uu) remem­
bered, hearing which there would be no delusion produced in 
human beings?

=== PAGE 203 ===

VI. l 32.2-23 
282 1 
M ahiideva said: 
2-23. 
0 chief goddess, human beings always remember 
ViNIJU on realising the truth. I remember ViNIJu, as one oppress­
ed with thirst (thinks of) water. Gods and others remember 
ViNIJU in the same way as the world distressed with cold remem­
bers (i.e. thinks of) fire. They remember ViNQu, the lord of the 
world, the lord of the master of the universe, as a loyal wife 
always remembers her husband. I remember ViNIJU, as one 
afflicted with fear remembers a refuge, a greedy person thinks 
of wealth, or one longing for a son thinks of a son. I remember 
ViNIJU, as one away (from one's house) remembers one's house, 
as cii.taka thinks of spring, as theologians think of the know­
ledge · of the supreme spirit. Swans long for the Mii.nasa 
(lake), sages for the recollection of ViNQu, devotees for devo­
tion. In the same way I remember ViNl}.u. The body where 
the soul exists is dear to the beings. Those that live long for 
a (long) life. In the same way I remember ViNIJu. As bees 
remember a flower, 
cakravii.kas the sun, those loving the 
soul think of devotion, so I remember ViglU. As people dis­
tressed with darkness long for a lamp, in the same way men 
long for the recollection of ViNIJU. As those afflicted with exer­
tion think of rest, as the addicted ones think of sleep, as those 
free from laziness think of knowledge, so I remember ViNIJU. 
Those who are afraid of sins should remember ViNIJU, as the 
elephants think of a mountainous region, or the lions of a forest 
or elephants. As fire is produced in the sun-stone due to contact 
with (the rays of) the sun, in the same way devotion is produced 
(in the minds of men) for ViNIJU by the contact of good 
people. As the moon-stone would resort to (i.e. give out) water 
by the contact (of the rays) of the moon, in the same way 
eternal release takes place by the contact of a devotee of 
ViNIJU. As the lotus-plant on seeing the moon has its flowers 
bloomed, similarly, devotion entertained for the good always 
gives salvation to men. As a frightened bee would remember a 
lotus, and would, due to that recollection, have identity of 
form with it, as the cowherdesses remembered ViNIJU (i.e. KrNIJa) 
as their paramour and they were absorbed (by him), so I remem­
ber ViNIJU. Those who think of ViNIJU with a wicked mind, with

=== PAGE 204 ===

2822 
Padma Purib)a 
a deceitful mind, with greedy thoughts, without any desire, with 
devotion, affection or hatred, those who remember him as their 
lord, those who remember him deliberately or non-deliberately 
with whatever feeling enjoy happiness in this world and go to 
the eternal {position) of ViNQU. Oh, the greatness of ViNQU is 
wonderful and thrilling. Even his recollection by chance gives 
salvation in three ways (i.e. siilokya etc.). Not by abundant 
wealth, nor by great knowledge, is he seen as he is seen through 
devotion alone in a moment. Though near he stands away as 
collyrium in the eyes. The ancient one would be seen by his 
devotees through devotion (alone). 
24-44. 
A man deluded by the lord's Maya thinks as : 'This 
is the truth, this is the truth'. When the truth of devotion is 
obtained, then the (entire) world becomes full of ViNQU. 0 beauti­
ful one, for getting happiness Indra and others secured nectar ; but 
without devotion for ViNQu, they were unhappy. Having obtain­
ed the nectar in the form of devotion, no unhappiness comes 
again. Obtaining the position called VaikuQtha he rejoices there 
in the vicinity of ViNQu. As the swan abandons water and always 
drinks milk (only), in the same way one should, abandoning 
(other) practices, resort to devotion for ViNQu. Giving up devo­
tion for (any) other (deity) one should resort to devotion for 
ViNQU. How would one succeed in binding (i.e. putting) water 
with (i.e. in) a (piece of) cloth? That stage of life passed without 
devotion after having obtained the (human) body is in vain. 
Those men who advise (people) about religious practices without 
devotion for ViNQu, always fall into a fearful hell. There is no 
doubt about it. As a fool desires to cross (i.e. swim over) the 
ocean with his arms, so a (foolish) man desires to cross the 
ocean of the mundane existence without devotion for ViNQU. 
Even if they (i.e. ViNQu's devotees) are thrown down due to (the 
effect of) their deeds, they preserve devotion for ViNQu. As a 
penniless person, full of longing, desires (to get) the Meru 
(mountain), in the same way, 0 god, I long for devotion for you, 
since that devotion of me in the other (i.e. previous) existence, 
causes it. As in this world even a small fire burns various 
forests, so the devotion of the size of an atom which I have (i.e. 
resorted to will destroy my sins). Hundreds hear about devotion. 
Thousands understand it. But, 0 goddess, among them, only

=== PAGE 205 ===

VI. l 32.45-64 
2823 
one becomes a devotee. Various people will give (i.e. instruct) 
people (in) devotion. But a man himself practising it is seen to 
be one among crores. Worship laughs at devotion ; success 
ridicules devotion. He who has such a (strong) feeling for the 
lord of gods alone takes (to) devotion. As from a fall into the 
ocean and entering into a tank there is a protection, similarly 
one takes to devotion according to his thoughts. The leaves of a 
tree sprinkled at its root are seen on the branches. 0 goddess, 
the fruit later proceeds by resorting to (ViNl}.u) only. As one who 
carries water fixes his mind (i .e. attention) on the pot (contain­
ing the water), similarly one should fix his mind on ViNl}.u and 
get salvation. In his childhood his mother gives (a child) a little 
jaggery. But the child, through greed, again asks for (more) 
jaggery. Due to ViNl).u's grace they do not notice the difference as 
when water is put into water, milk into milk, or ghee into ghee. 
As the sun is everywhere, or the fire is everywhere, similarly one 
remaining in devotion, is never troubled by (fruits of his) acts(?). 
Ajii.mila, giving up his duty and practising sin, certainly got 
salvation on remembering his son (called) Nii.rii.yal}.a. All those 
devotees who, day and night, subsist on (ViNl).u's) name only, live 
in Vaikul}.tha. In this case, the Vedas are the anthority. 
45-64. 
The fruit of the sacrifices like the horse-sacrifice is 
seen in heaven. Enjoying all that fruit they fall (from heaven). 
Similarly the devotees of ViNl}.U enjoy many pleasures. Having 
reached Vaikul}.tha when will they return (to the earth)? He who 
is devoted to ViNl}.u, lives in ViNl).u's heaven. See the example, 0 
goddess. Due to devotion to ViNl}.u, he made hundreds of stones 
float on the water. The mind of ViNl).u's devotee is the moon­
stone without water. A frog lives in water ; a bee lives in a grove 
and perceives the fragrance of a lotus-plant. In the same way 
Vi$l).U's devotee lives in his devotion. Some live on the bank of 
Ganga. Some (at a distance of) a hundred yojanas. One gets the 
fruit due to Ganga ; the other devotion for ViNl}.u. Those that 
have turned away their faces from ViNl}.U are like the camel that 
always carries the camphor and agaru (sandal) but does not 
know their fragrance. Those that are averse to ViNl}.U are like 
the deer that smell a tree, when they desire a fragrance, but do 
not notice the musk in their navels. 0 daughter of the (Himalaya) 
Mountain, as (giving) advices to fools is useless, similarly advice

=== PAGE 206 ===

2824 
Padma PuriiT)IJ 
to one averse to ViNJJ,u-devotion is in vain. Water drunk by a 
serpent becomes poison. 
Similarly devotion to ViNJJ.U for 
devotees of other deities is poison. Those who are near a lamp 
or a mirror do not see it without sight, similarly those averse to 
ViNJJ.U (do not see him). As fire is covered by smoke, a mirror 
by dirt, an embryo by amnion, similarly KrNJJ.a is covered in 
(i.e. by) the body. 0 daughter of the (Himalaya) Mountain, as 
ghee always remains in milk, oil in a sesamum-seed, similarly 
ViNJJ.U exists in the mobile and the immobile (objects). As many 
gems are held (together) by a thread, similarly the universe 
including Brahma and others is woven in Brahman of the form of 
intelligence. As fire existing in wood is seen after friction only, 
similarly omnipresent ViNQu is seen by means of meditation only. 
At first there is one lamp. Then thousands are produced (i.e. 
lighted) from it. Similarly one ViNJJ.U alone exists after having 
pervaded everything. A flash always remains in water at sunrise, 
and is seen in various ways in the pond. That ViĨJJ.U is like that 
in the world. Wind even in its natural state always carries 
various fragrances. Similarly the god, dwelling in all beings, 
enjoys the constituents of Prakrti. As sugar due to its con­
tact with water, turns into water, similarly the soul, being like 
them (i.e. the acts) enjoys the fruits of his acts. The earth, due 
to its contact with water, has many trees. Similarly (the soul) 
due to the contact with Prakrti's constituents, is born in many 
stocks. 
65-75. 
He, the steady one, lives in (the body of) an elephant 
or a gnat, a deity or a human being and is neither superior 
(in one) nor inferior (in another). As the moon is noticed in 
water, in the same way he is seen in all those beginning with 
Brahma to a clump of grass, men, gods, sacrifices, and serpents 
that are there on the earth. He that is seen is existence, intelli­
gence, bliss and Siva (auspicious). He is the great lord. He is 
also said to be ViĨJJ.U. He is omnipresent Hari (i.e. ViĨJJ,u). He 
is known from the UpaniĨads ; he is the master of all; he is 
beyond time; and is sound. 0 goddess, he who knows him to be 
like this is undoubtedly (his) devotee. Though one, he should be 
known to be many ; and though many, to be one. Due to his 
various names and forms he is said to be many on the earth. 
The sun's lustre does not grow due to the eyes, but the sight

=== PAGE 207 ===

grows due to the sun. The supreme soul (as the individual soul) 
is always present in every body, as in every jar there is space. 
(And even) when the jar is broken, it (still) exists. In every 
form he is like that (i.e. has that form) ; and when it (i.e. the 
form) is broken, he remains very stable. As a form made of 
wood drops (down) without a master, in the same way the body, 
having differences like an insect, falls without the soul. The 
various kinds (of forms) of gold, become as before (i.e. gold) 
due to (being heated by) fire. In the same way the devotees 
attain the former form. Fools see (i.e. think) the sun to be 
lustreless due to being screened by a cloud. In the same way 
fools of ignorant minds do not know 
that lord who is 
described by the UpaniNads as not admitting an alternative and 
as formless. 
76-90. 
In accordance with his will he becomes one having 
a form, from his (condition of being) formless. From him ether 
without sound and quality is produced. Air was produced from 
ether. Then it had a sound. From air sprang up light, and from 
light water was produced. In that water was Virat, having a 
universal form and of a bright interior. In the lotus of his navel 
there were crores of universes. From it (arose) Prakrti (and) 
PuruNa and then the world of three kinds was produced. From 
the union of the two arose the combination of the elements. The 
product of ViĨI}.u in siittvika. Brahma. is said to be endowed 
with the quality of rajas. Siva is said to be endowed with the 
quality of tamas. They have urged all this. In the world there 
is one condition called Brahmi (i.e. of Brahma) due to the seed 
of the act (of a being). ViĨI}.U completely withdraws the world 
due to it. This immutable lord ViĨou then remains there. Thus 
ViĨQu is present everywhere - in the beginning, middle and end. 
People determined by (the effects oO their acts do not know 
(the truth) due to ignorance. He would cause (people) to do the 
acts that are proper for the castes at (different) times. That act 
which is intended for god ViN:t;tu is not the cause of (i.e. does 
not lead to) conception (i.e. birth). This is always thought over 
by all the sages in the UpaniNads and holy texts. This knowledge 
of Brahman is in the body. I shall tell it. Mind alone is the 
cause and effect of good and bad (acts). Everything is purified 
by mind. Then it is the ancient Brahman. Mind alone is always

=== PAGE 208 ===

the kinsman and the foe (also). Some are emancipated by mind ; 
some are troubled by mind. Everything is renounced in it, but 
they have done acts outwardly. Acts when done in this fashion 
alone, do not taint (the doer), as a lotus-leaf is not tainted by 
even drops of water, (or) as fire when put into (another) fire. 
What is the use of devotion? When the flavour of devotion is 
known, then salvation is not liked. By means of the Yoga of 
eight kinds1 Vig1u is not reached in this existence. Vi঵1,1u is 
reached by devotion and would always be easily accessible. 
91-100. Knowledge is obtained through the UpaniNads. 
That which is to be known is obtained by means of knowledge. 
When that which is to be known is obtained, then the world is a 
void. ViĚIJU is reached through (mental) power. What is the 
use of the eightfold Yoga? Of all dispositions purity of disposi­
tion is commended. When the beloved is embraced by one, one 
gets the effect as is one's disposition. One having sandals on 
one's feet feels the earth to be full of hide. One looks upon the 
world as one's mind is. The nimba tree, though sprinkled with 
milk, would not give up its bitterness. Beings go to (i.e. behave 
in conformity with) their nature. Advice is useless. How would 
one obtain the fruits and the leaves of the (mango) tree after 
having cut it off? Why should one pass one's life with a desire 
for the pleasures of senses? As medicine is cooked in a pan of 
lapis lazuli and then the drug is burnt, in the same way, how 
would the existence be in vain? How would a good man, after 
putting the treasure in his house, do service? How would one 
rejoice on another path (by) leaving the lord of VaikuQ!ha (i.e. 
ViNQu)? What is the use of the recital of the Vedas by those who 
are without devotion? A caQ(,iala having devotion is worshipped 
even by gods. What is the use of mirrors for him who has put 
on a bracelet on his hand? The servants (i.e. the devotees) to 
whom affluence is given by gods like Brahma, Rudra, do not 
take anything that is offered to the lord. 
1 . A$lavidha Yoga-The eightfold means of Yoga consists of the dis­
ciplines of : (1) restraint (yama) ; (2) culture or cultivating good habits like 
purification of the body, contentment etc ; (3) posture (asana) ; (4) breath­
control (praQiiyama) ; (5) withdraw) of the senses (pratyahara) ; (6) attention 
(dharaQa); (7) meditation (dhyana) ; and (8) concentration (samadhi).

=== PAGE 209 ===

VI. l 32. 1 0 1 - 124 
2827 
101-109. It is better to give to a devotee who is poor. How 
can there be meditation on Knl}.a having no body? Many 
(devotees) seeing him of a form, have, through devotion, gone 
to his position. How can worship or devotion be possible in 
the case of one that is non-existent? The wise ones recommend 
(worship and devotion) in the case of one that has a form. How 
can a man go along a vacant path without a support? This 
master has a form. That lord is formless. The one having a 
form is easily seen. The formless one is not seen. There is 
pleasure of service of the one having a form; no (such) pleasure 
in the case of serving a formless one. The formless one himself 
is known through him who has a form. When the body is 
horripilated by the grace of the recollection of Viᗬl}.u, when tears 
of joy are in the eyes, then salvation becomes a slave. How does 
the sin committed in childhood, perish? (It perishes) by means 
of worship, gifts, vows, (visits to) holy places, mutterings (of 
hymns), sacrifices dedicated to you. How should one, giving up 
one's duty, practise severe penance? It is better to die in (i.e. 
while doing) one's duty. Another's duty is fraught with fear. 
How should one, giving up the practice laid down by holy texts, 
practise severe penance? A fool without (remaining in) the stage 
of human life, would not obtain success. The castes are made by 
Brahma, and they have been assigned their respective duties. 
1 10-124. 
Wealth that comes through the performance of 
the duty of one's own caste is said to be white. That little gift, 
given with devotion, made with white wealth, gives great reli­
gious merit and it cannot be reckoned. The gift given by men 
with the wealth brought for domestic rites through contact with 
mean people, would not be fruitful. They would not share its 
fruit. A fool, weak in knowledge, obtains that kirid of stock 
which (is in conformity with the} kind of acts he performs with 
a desire for pleasure. The (fruit of the) act done in this world is 
had in the other world. If in the case of a man doing righteous 
acts, pain is produced, then he should not be distressed. That is 
(the result of) the deeds of the former body (i.e. existence). 
Grief alone is produced in the case of the man committing sins. 
0 chief goddess, at that time one should not be delighted. As 
the master leads the beasts tied with a rope, men also are 
similarly led by the bond of their deeds on the earth. A monkey

=== PAGE 210 ===

2828 
Padma Purar.Ja 
dwelling in forest dances in every house ; in the same way the 
beings are taken through all stocks by (their) deeds. As the 
master while playing sends forth a ball according to his desire. 
similarly a being is taken to happiness or unhappiness by his 
deeds. The being bound by (the effects of) his deeds, is unable 
to remove the bond. Gods and other sages also are bound by 
(the effects of) their deeds. Even the serpents remaining on 
Rudra's body consume poison on Kailii.sa. They are unable to 
enjoy nectar. The effect of deeds (Karmayoni?) prevail. The 
charioteer or the Sun, who is said by the wise to give a sound 
body is a cripple. The effects of deeds (Karmayoni ?) pravail. A 
royal sage ladradyumna became an elephant due to his deeds. 
The result of deeds in that case was made ineffective by the 
powerful lord (?) All gods like Rudra, Brahmii., men and demons, 
being bound by (the effects of) acts, move on the earth. Vigtu 
formerly created the entire world, (and is) influenced by acts. 
125-139. Those acts, dependent on ViᗬIJU, perish by means 
of (repeating) the name of Rii.ma. Water is present everywhere; 
but that one at Prayii.ga gives salvation. To those who do the 
acts like this, worship of Kesava gives salvation. The being 
who does an act for the pleasure of senses, and would, through 
egotism think of the body, should go through an expiation, 
remembering (ViᗬIJu). He undergoes the fruits of his past acts 
(only). The (fruit of) his acts does not grow later. Some praise 
the Planets; some evil spirits and goblins. Some praise deities ; 
some have talked about the herbs. Some talk about a hymn, 
about a super-human power, about intellect or valour. So also 
about exertion, boldness, courage and prudence. All follow 
their desires talking about acts resulting from egotism. This is 
my definite idea. This is what is told by the former wise men. 
When a being is full of religious merit and there is no sin (in 
him), and when he has the two-fold knowledge, then his merit 
would be pleasant. When his sin and religious merit are equal. 
he remains in (i.e. doing) acts. When he has attained the equani­
mity of mind, he would reach the place of joy. Ofhim, who has 
discarded everything outwardly, but would long for (every thing) 
mentally, such a behaviour is useless and he will have to undergo 
(fruits of) his sins. A man does acts outwardly ; but mentally he 
is desireless. Such a sacrifice is mediocre. He would not obtain

=== PAGE 211 ===

VI.l32.I40-I 53 
2829 
its complete fruit. Discarding acts outwardly, and mentally 
depending upon (i.e. looking upon everything as) void - such a 
sacrifice is said · to be the best - difficult to be had even by the 
meditating sages. Some abandon everything through anger; 
some through the power of discussion. Some discard everything 
with difficulty. All (such) sacrifices are mediocre. A man endowed 
with devotion through good mind, and not influenced by anger 
etc., obtains a good position, though smeared with (the effects 
of) acts. He who is dropped from abstract meditation, would 
be born in the house of the pure and the rich or in the family ­
chief being that of a brii.hma:Q.a- of the intelligent meditating 
sages. In a short time he acquires complete abstract meditation. 
140-153. Due to abstract meditation, devotion (to) and 
grace (of the lord), he would reach the position of Brahman 
of the nature of) intelligence and joy. How can one wash off (the 
effect of) one's act with a harmful act as mud with mud or 
blood with blood? How can a sacrifice full of a harmful act be 
capable of destroying (the effect of one's) acts? Sacrifices per­
formed with a desire for (going to) heaven give little happiness 
in heaven. Even though many, the pleasures there are transitory. 
Without devotion for Viᗬ:Q.u, there is no eternal happiness in 
(i.e. from) them. (Except) a sovereign empire giving pleasure 
and happiness in heaven, I do not desire anything else. I am 
afraid of living in a womb (i.e. of rebirth). With (hammers of) 
iron a stone alone is broken, and not a ruby. A crane eats 
aquatic beings, (but) would avoid frogs etc. Similarly, Yama, 
the destroyer of everything, would avoid Viᗬ:Q.u's servants. He 
who protects is the one that removes difficulties, and is said to 
be the guardian. He lodges at his place him who has (commit­
ted) hundreds of faults ; since Krᗬ:Q.a favours him who has com­
mitted an offence. He gets the fruit today. What does the pro­
tector do? In the same way, the soul in this body, shows 
favour to them depending upon others.1 Along with the strong, he 
does not slowly go to the other end.2 He gave salvation to the 
hunter, and himself emancipated Kubjii.. He is difficult to be had 
(i.e. seen even) in a dream by Brahmii. and others, but is easily 
accessible in a cowherd's house. When he ate what was left over 
1 , 2. verses 148, 149 etc. and many others in this chapter are not clear.

=== PAGE 212 ===

2830 
Padma PuriiTJa 
by the cowherds, he himself emancipated them. 0 goddess, the 
highest soul, Vigm, is always praised by the meditating sages. 
The immutable Puruᘐ?a, along with Lakᘐ?mi, is amazing. Those 
who everyday recite this narration, are freed from all sins, and 
go to the eternal position of Viᘐ?:t;.lU. One who recites it with this 
devotion near (the image of) Viᘐ?:t;.lU, would obtain the highest 
position after enjoying happiness in this world. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED THIRTYTHREE 
The Holy Places in Jambiidvipa 
Piirvati said: 
1 . 
0 you of a good vow, tell me about the holy places that 
exist on this island. This island is fashioned by the lord as the 
king of all islands. 0 lord, favouring me, tell me about them 
with (i.e. counting) their number. 
Mahiideva said: 
2-12. The Omnipresent (lord) should be seen in all beings 
on the earth. Whatever primary substance, with the mobile and 
the immobile, is seen in the seven worlds, is not seen or heard 
by me to be without him. Therefore, the great god Viᘐ?:t;.lU, 
Kesava, who removes affliction, would live in the form of a holy 
place on this island, 0 chief goddess. I shall certainly tell you 
about all the holy places.ĮFirst is the holy place (called) Puᘐ?kara, 
auspicious and best among the holy places. Second holy place 
is Vii.ra:Q.asi, giving salvation. Third sacred spot is Naimiᘐ?a, said 
to be purifying by the sages. Fourth is Prayii.ga, said to be the 
best among the holy places. Fifth is said to be Karmuka that 
has sprung up on Gandhamii.dana. Sixth is the holy place called 
Mii.nasa, pleasing to the gods. Seventh is Visvakii.ya on the 
auspicious Avara mountain. Eighth is called Gautama, for­
merly fashioned on Mandara. Ninth is Madotka!a; tenth is 
Caitrarathaka. Eleventh is Kii.nyakubja where Vamana (i.e. 
Viᘐ?:Q.U) dwells. Twelfth is Malaya ; then there is Kubjii.mraka. 
(Then there are) Visvesvara, Girikar:t;,la, Kedii.ra, giving a good

=== PAGE 213 ===

VI. l 33. l 3-30 
283 1 
: position (i.e. leading to salvation). Bahya is on the surface of 
· Himalaya ; similariy there is Gopaka on Gokan;ta. On the 
Himalaya is Sthanesvara; and Bilvapatrika on Bilvaka. The 
holy place Madhava is on Srisaila; and Bhadra is on Bhadres­
vara. Vijaya is said to be on Varaha, and VaiᗬQava on Vaiᗬ:Qava 
mountain. On Rudrakota is Raudra; and on the Kii.linjara 
mountain is Paitrya. The holy place Kampila is on Kampila. 
and Karkotaka on Mukuta. 
1 3-30. 
. 
0 Chief goddss, the place holy due to Salagrama is 
on the bank of the Gallika. On (the bank of) Narmada is one 
called Siva, and on (the bank of) Maya is Visvariipaka. On the 
Raivata mountain have come up (the holy places, namely) 
Utpalakᗬa. Sahasrakᗬa. On (the bank of) Ganga is Pitrtirtha, so 
also is Viᗬ:Qupadodbhava. On (the bank of) Vipasa is Vipapa, 
and Pu:QI,iravardhana is at Patala. Nii.raya:Qa is on Supii.rsva, 
and Viᗬ:Qu temple on Trikiita. On Vipula is one named Vipula, 
and Kalya:Qa is on Malaya mountain. At Kotitirtha is Kaurava, 
and Sugandha is on Gandhamii.dana. Trisandhya is at Kubja­
mraka, and Haripriya at Gatigadvii.ra. In the region of Vindhya 
is Saila, and Sii.rasvata is said to be on Badari. On (the bank of) 
the Kii.lindi is Kalpariipa, and Sii.yaka is said to be on Sahya. 
Candra is in Candra region, and Rama:Qa is the chief among the 
holy places. On (the bank of) Yamuna is (the one) called 
Mrga; and Kuriidbhava is on Karavira. The holy place called 
Uma is on the Vinii.yaka mountain. Arogya is in the Bhii.skara 
country. Mahesvara is at Mahii.kala. A holy place is named 
Abhayada. On Vindhya is one called Amrta. Visvariipa is in 
Ma:QI,iapa. In Isvara city is one called Svaha. On (the bank of) 
Praca:QI,iii. is Vaigaleya, and Cii:QQika in Amarakat:ttaka. At the 
holy place of Prabhii.sa is Somesvara, and there is also Puᗬkara. 
Devamatra is situated on the bank of Pii.ravata on Sarasvati. At 
Mahapadma is Mahalaya, and Pitigalesvara on (the bank of) 
Payoᗬ:Qi. So also is a holy place on (the bank of) Silhhika, and 
at Saurava one called Ravi. In the Krttika-region is the holy 
place Kii.rtika ; and Saitkara on mountain Saitkara. Similarly at 
the confluence of Subhadra and Sindhu is a divine holy place 
called Utpala. Then there is Gii.:Qapatya on the mountain called 
Viᗱ:Qu. Then on Jii.landhara is the holy place which is called 
Viᗷ:Qumukha. At Tara is one called Taraka on the mountain

=== PAGE 214 ===

2832 
Padma PuriJI)a 
called VigJ.U. PauJ}.gra is in the Devadaruvana, and Pauska in 
the Kasmira region. 
The snowy Bhauma is on Himalaya, so 
also are Catu°tika and Pau°tika. Similarly 
the holy place 
Kapalamocana has come up at Mayapura. 
Then is the holy 
place Saftkhoddhara (of) the god holding the conch. At PiQga is 
one named PiJ}.Իa. and Vaikhiinasa at Siddha. On (the bank of) 
Acchoda is Vi¥J}.ukama, giving religious merit, sensuous enjoy­
ment, worldly prosperity and salvation. On the northern bank is 
Au°adhya, and Kusodaka is at Kusadvipa. Manmatha is on 
Hemakiita, and Satyavadana on K umuda. At the bank of 
Vadanti is the holy place called Asvaka, and Maqka is said to 
exist on Vindhya. 
31-40. 
On Citta is the holy place (called) Brahmamaya 
which is said to be (the most) purifying of all holy places. 0 
beautiful lady, listen to the description of the holy place best 
of all these. A holy place (like) ViǛJ}.umaya never existed {before) 
nor will be there. Merely by uttering (its) name, one who has 
killed a brahmaJ}.a, or snatched gold, or has killed a child or a 
cow, is freed (from the sin) due to Vi¥J}.u's grace. In the Kali 
age Dvaravati is charming, and god Vi¥J}.u is excellent. The 
salvation of those men who see (the image of) the lord, is certain. 
0 great goddess, I, remaining among the wise, thus think 
of that blessed lord Vi¥J}.U, the master of all. These hundred and 
eight holy places are told here. He who mutters their names 
or hears them is free from all sins. 
He who, after bathing in 
these holy places, sees (the image of) NarayaJ}.a Hari (i.e. Vi¥J;.u); 
is freed from all sins and goes to the ancient Vi¥J}.u, the lord of 
the world, said to be the holy place purifying the worlds. Those 
best men who go to (these holy places) go to the highest position 
(i.e. salvation). One should get this to be heard (i .e. recited) at 
(the time of) a rite in honour of the dead ancestors. Enjoying 
pleasures in this world, one goes to the eternal (position) of 
Vi¥J}.u. (By reciting these names) at the time of the gift of a cow, 
or the gift at the time of a sraddha, or (by reciting it) everyday, 
or at the rite of worshipping a deity, one attains the highest 
Brahman.

=== PAGE 215 ===

VI. l 34. 1 -3 1 
2833 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED THIRTYFOUR 
The Greatness of Vetravati 
M ahiideva said: 
1-10. I shall tell (you) the greatness of Vetravati. 
Listen, 
0 beautiful lady. 
By bathing there (i.e. in the river) men are 
free till deluge. Vrtra made a tank called Mahagambhira. That 
divine one, destroyer of heaps of great sins, came out from that 
tank. 0 best goddess, like Ganga this is the best river. Merely 
on looking at her heaps of sins come to an end. 0 goddess, I 
shall tell you an old account, hearing which sinners are freed 
from faults and bondage of (their) 
acts. 
A king (named 
Vidiiru:Q.a) ruled in the city of Campaka. He was always wicked, 
of a wicked form, and he very much harassed people. He was 
impious, the (very) form of impiety, and given to censuring 
Vi!?:Q.U. He disregarded deities and brahma:Q.as, and was a great 
hater of the (four) stages of human life. He was rich, and was 
given to condemning the Vedas ; he was foolish and cruel. He 
was a rogue, was interested in heterodox doctrines and outraged 
others' wives. His name was Vidii.ru:Q.a, and he was a fool. Once, 
by chance, he came to that river (Vetravati). 0 chief goddess, 
he, intent on hunting, himself became a leper due to his censur­
ing briihma:Q.as. He talked nonsense, was wicked-hearted, a 
rogue and a cruel beast. He was always engaged in censuring 
the Vedas and polluted cows and holy texts. 
1 1-31 . 
The king, surrounded by his friends, who was like 
this, was wandering in a forest ; being oppressed by thirst, he got 
-down from (his) horse, drank water and went home. Due to the 
drinking of the water, his leprosy certainly disappeared. Especi­
ally the mind of the king became clear. 0 chief goddess, at that 
time in (the mind of) him devotion for Vi!?:Q.U sprang up. From 
that time he always bathed (in Vetravati). 0 chief goddess, he 
became spotless and endowed with handsomeness. 
Having 
enjoyed pleasure in this world and having performed many 
sacrifices, he gave gifts to bnlhma:Q.as and went to the position 
of Vi!?:Q.U. Knowing this, 0 goddess, those briihma:Q.as who bathe 
especially in Vetravati, are freed, 0 daughter of the (Himalaya) 
Mountain. 
The briihma:Q.as-or a kǦatriya, or a vaisya or a

=== PAGE 216 ===

2834 
Padma PuriiTJa 
siidra-who bathe here are freed, 0 best goddess. 0 goddess, an 
outcast or a censurer of the Vedas, who, in the month of 
Kartika or Magha, bathes at the confluence of rivers, is 
free 
from sins. Especially a killer of a brahma:Q.a who bathes there 
where her confluence with Sabhramati is seen, is always freed. 
0 sinless one, the village there is a divine city, of the form of 
heaven. 0 goddess, Brahma practised many abstract meditations 
there. No rebirth is (had by one) who has bathed and eaten 
there. 0 goddess, she is said to be another Gatiga, especially in 
the Kali age. Those men who desire happiness and wealth, who 
desire heaven, bathe there repeatedly, enjoy happiness in this 
world, and go to the eternal (position) of Vi¥:Q.u. Those born in 
the solar race and the lunar race, who came here and bathed in 
Vetravati obtained bliss. She removes misery when seen, and 
mental sin when touched. 0 goddess, one who bathes in and 
drinks (her) water undoubtedly enjoys salvation. By bathing 
(in her), muttering hymns and performing sacrifices (on her 
bank) one gets infinite fruit. One should go to the holy place of 
Vara:Q.asi, and practise Candraya:Q.a-vow. 0 best goddess, the 
religious merit on having gone there is great. If a man dies 
especially on (the bank of) Vetravati, he becomes four-armed, 
and goes to the highest (position) of Vi¥:Q.u. 0 best goddess, all 
the holy places, deities, dead ancestors that are there on the 
earth, live here in Vetravati . 0 you beautiful lady, what is the 
use of talking much about other things repeatedly ? 
0 you 
ancient one, there is no other holy place like Vetravati on the 
earth. 0 great goddess, I, ViĹ:Q.u, so also Brahma, gods and 
great sages, deities all stay in Vetravati. Those who bathe in 
Vetravati, once, or twice or especially three times (a day) are­
freed. There is no doubt about it.

=== PAGE 217 ===

VI. I 35. 1-l 6 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED THIRTYFIVE 
The Greatness ofSiibhramatl 
Sri Mahiideva said: 
2835· 
1 -9. 
0 goddess, I shall aptly describe the greatness of 
Sabhramati. The best sage Kasyapa practised severe penance. 
For many years he practised severe penance on the charming 
Arbuda mountain full of various trees. Having gone there 
where the charming, sin-destroying Sarasvati flows, the sage 
Kasyapa practised penance. 0 goddess, one day he went to the 
Naimi¥a (forest where) all the sages were narrating stories in 
many ways. Then the sages properly asked that sage Kasyapa : 
"0 Kasyapa, for our pleasure, bring Ganga here, 0 lord. That 
best river will pass by your name." Having heard their words, 
and having saluted those brahma:Q.as, he came to the Arbuda 
forest, near the bank of Sarasvati. He practised there very severe 
penance. That brahma:Q.a Kasyapa propitiated me. I then appear­
ed in person in front of that excellent brahma:Q.a. "Well-being to 
you ; ask for a boon that is in your mind." 
Kasyapa said: 
10-14. 0 lord of the world, you are capable of granting a 
boon. Give me specially that Gatigii which is on your head and 
which is pure and destroys sins. 0 great god, I salute you. 
Then, 0 goddess, I said : "0 best briihmaQa, take (her)." 
Then taking off a liair from my matted hair, I gave him the 
Ganga. Taking her, the best briihmaQa gladly went to his place. 
The holy place named Kesarandhra is the abode of Kasyapa. 
Surrounded by sages, 0 chief goddess, he went there. That 
excellent river Kasyapi was brought by Kasyapa, on merely 
seeing which, (even) a killer of a brahmaQa was freed. 
Piirvatl said: 
15-16. 
Tell me about the religious merit acquired by just a 
bath, 0 lord of the world. You are kind. Show compassion to me. 
What would be the religious merit due to seeing her, and what 
due to the bath ? Tell me (that), 0 lord of gods. 0 Brahman, 
please tell me what kind of greatness (she has).

=== PAGE 218 ===

2836 
Padma PurdT)a 
Mahiideva said: 
17-35. 
I have heard about many holy places and sanctu­
aries. Due to the grace of lord ViǦJ}.u many rivers flowing into 
the ocean (like) Ganga, Yamuna, Reva, Tapi, so also Mahanadi, 
Godavari, Tuilgabhadra, Kausiki, so also Gallika, (and) Kaveri, 
Vedikii, Bhadrii, Sarayii, Papaharil}.i (destroyer of sins}, so also 
other various rivers, all instant sin-destroyers (are heard about 
by me). The king of holy places - Prayiiga, Kasi, and Pu¥kara, 
so abo the one called Naimi¥aral}.ya, so also the holy place 
Amarakal}.!aka, the excellent holy place of Dvaraka, the excel­
lent Arbudaral}.ya - such divine and other various holy places, 
I have heard about due to Vigm's grace. Formerly, Bhagiratha, 
desiring (to go to) ViʐI).u's heaven, had solicited me. 
Then, 0 
Parvati, I gave him this Ganga. On the words of the sages I 
again gave her to Kasyapa. This Kiisyapi Gailgii always removes 
diseases and blemishes. 0 beautiful lady, I shall tell you. Listen, 
what she is called in each age. In Krta (age) she was called 
Krtavati and Girikarl}.ika in Treta. 
She is named Candana in 
Dvapara, and she is known as Siibhramati 
in Kali (age). 
Those men who everyday (go to her for bathing) are freed from 
all sins and go to ViʐJ}.u's (eternal position). 0 goddess, that 
fruit which men get by bathing at the holy place PlakǦa, and in 
Sarasvati , is got by a daily bath in Siibhramati everyday. There 
is no doubt about it, since Vyasa's statement is to that effect. A 
man gets that fruit by bathing in Siibhramati which he gets by 
bathing in the later half of SnivaQa or everyday, or by properly 
offering a sraddha on the new-moon day. A man gets that fruit 
by bathing in sabhramati which he gets in Kartika when (the 
Sun) is joined with the Krttika (constellation) at Sristhala in front 
of (the image of) Madhava. 0 goddess, this is the greatest (river). 
It is purifying in all worlds. She is most blessed, is pure, and 
destroys sins, 0 goddess. On (the bank of) Sabhramati always 
live those connected with the east (i .e. the Easterners), the Nor­
therners. The Westerners and the Southerners all go to Khetaka 
everyday near Brahma, under the pretext of a pilgrimage only. 
0 goddess, there is no doubt that they come there on the 
full-moon day of Kiirtika. There they offer a sriiddha and feed 
brahmal}.as.

=== PAGE 219 ===

VI. l 35.36-60 
2837 
36-50. 
(There) men perform various religious rites daily, so 
also 
various sacrifices. 
They make 
various gifts everyday 
in all the four ages. No doubt should be entertained in this 
matter. Yavakrita, and 
Raibhya, 
KaԼivat, 
so also Usija, 
Bhrgu, Aiigiras, so also KaQva, and the intelligent Punarvasu, 
Bandin, endowed with virtues, (all) have resorted to the Eastern 
direction. So also the magnanimous ones (living) in the north ­
like Madhumat, so also the noble Subandhu, and the powerful 
Dattatreya, similarly Sikhin, Dirghatamas, so also Gautama 
and Kasyapa, in the same way Svetaketu, Kaho\ia, Pulaha and 
Devala, and Visvamitra and Bharadvaja, and powerful Jama­
dagni, ].tcica's 
son Garga, so also the sage Uddalaka, and 
Deva.Sarman, Dhaumya, A.stika, so also Kasyapa, and Lomasa , 
Nabhiketu, and . LomaharĹal)a, so also the sage Ugrasravas, 
Bhargava Cyavana, Valakhilya and others, all go there. Bathing 
(there), fasting and very highly devoted 
to 
ViĹQu holding 
conches, discs and maces, they always stay on the bank. Pitrtir­
tha, named Gaya, is auspicious and best among all holy places . 
There the grandsire, the lord of the gods, himself lives. The 
dead ancestors, desiring a portion (of the offerings) of a sniddha, 
have sung a verse : Many sons should be desired; even one of 
them would go to Gaya, or would perform a horse-sacrifice, or 
would let loose a black bull. In the same way Varal)asi i s 
auspicious, and is always dear to the dead ancestors, which due 
to my proximity, gives enjoyments and salvation. By my order 
the lord of gods called Bindumadhava, always especially dwells at 
Varal).asi, 0 chief goddess. Therefore, this my city is always the 
most blessed and the greatest. Vimalesvara is auspicious, and 
is a holy place dear to the dead ancestors. Pitrtirtha-Prayaga­
is endowed with all holy places. 
51-60. 
They come into the water of Slibhramati on my 
words. 
The noble Vatesvara is endowed with ViĹQU. 0 chief 
goddess, Dasasvamedha and the auspicious Gailgadvara always 
live in Sllbhramati by my order. Nanda, Lalitadevi and the 
holy place with seven streams; so also the (holy place) called 
Mitrapada and Saftkara's abode Kedara ; and Gailgasagara as 
they call it ; all this, being full of holy places, is auspicious. Like 
this there is the holy place called Brahmasaras in the pool o f 
Satadru. 
So also the holy place called NaimiĹa. All these, 0

=== PAGE 220 ===

2838 
Padma Purar.za 
goddess, undoubtdely live in the water of Sabhramati. The 
auspicious river Svetavalkalini, (the river) Svetahiral}.tnayi, (the 
river) Hastimati, or Arthaghni, flowing towards the ocean - all 
these are dear to the dead ancestors, and give the fruit of a crore 
of sraddhas. Sniddhas should be offered there by sons for the 
good of their dead ancestors. There is a city named Patala or 
Va<;lava, 0 beautiful lady. All these rivers have always especi­
ally reached (i.e. flowed into) Sabhramati. Those men on the 
earth who bathe there and offer gifts, enjoy happiness in this 
world and go to the eternal (place) of Vi!;l:Q.U. Jambiidvipa is very 
meritorious, where religious merit grows. 
There is 
a very 
meritorious (region), called Arya, fulfilling all desires. 
61-S l a. 
(Then) there is a holy place called Nllaka:Q.tha ; 
(then there is) Nandahrada ; so also the holy place Rudrahrada, 
and the auspicious Rudra-mahalaya. Presenting themselves, the 
very auspicious Mandakini, so also the great river Acchoda ­
these two flow into Sabhramati. Due to offering pi:Q.<;ias (i.e. 
oblations to dead ancestors) into Ganga, the wise say that 
these - Dhiimra, Mitrapada, similarly Vaijanatha, Drsadvara, 
river K!;lipra, 
Mahakala, 
so 
also 
the mountain Kaliiijara, 
Gailgodbhiita, Harodbheda, Narmadakara - are equal (in religi­
ous merit). 0 chief goddess, these places sacred to Brahma are 
on the northern bank of sabhramati, are protected by gods led 
by Brahma. 0 great goddess, they destroy people's sins merely 
by their being remembered. Then what to say of those men 
offering sraddhas, 0 chief goddess? Orilkiira, a holy place of the 
dead ancestors, the water of Kiiveri, 
Kapila, the union of 
Ca:Q.<;iavega.-bathing in this would be a hundredfold more 
meritorious than (at) Kuruk!;letra. 0 goddess, formerly ( Siva's) 
attendants took the holy place Kadamba, along with the chief 
ofthe attendants, to the confluence of Vataghni. This congrega­
tion of the holy places is narrated by me by way of illustration. 
Even the lord of speech cannot correctly (describe) the expanse 
of the holy places. Truth, pity and control of senses are holy 
places. 
One should 
certainly bathe in her holy place with 
effort. The morning is of the three muhiirtas (i.e. periods) up to 
saligava1-a bath at this time 
is dear to the gods. Mid-day 
1. Sailgava-Name of a particular part of day, said to be 
three

=== PAGE 221 ===

Vl. l 35 . 8 l b-94 
2839 
consists of three muhiirtas (i.e. period) ; after that is afternoon. 
Bathing, offering pil).Qas causes delight to the dead ancestors. 
Evening has three muhiirtas. One should not perform a sraddha 
etc. at that time. That time is called demonish, and is censured 
for all (religious) acts. Always the fifteen muhiirtas of the day 
are well-known. Among them the eighth one is said to be kutapa. 
Since at mid-day the sun becomes dull (in lustre), therefore, it 
gives infinite fruit by offering pil;i9as to the dead ancestors. 
Mid-day, a vessel made of buffalo's horns, so also a Խepala­
blanket, silver, darbhas, so also cows, daughter's son, and 
sesamum-seeds are kutapa. Sin is said to be mean. Since all 
these eight cause remorse for it, they are known as kutapa. That 
group of four muhiirtas subsequent to kutapa, and the group 
of five is desired as the time for a sraddha. Darbhas and sesa­
mum-seeds are said to have sprung from the body of ViĹJ).u for 
the protection of sraddha. Thus the residents of heaven say. 
Those living at the holy places should offer water with sesamum• 
seeds to the dead by standing in water and with darbhas in their 
hands. Thus the sraddha is not harmed. 
81 b-94. 
Giving the holy places these names and putting 
them into Sabhramati, 0 goddess, I gave (the river) to Kasyapa. 
This Kasyapa is my devotee, and he is always dear to me. 
Therefore, I gave (him) this pure Ganga destroying sins. 0 
noble one, having placed myself- I am having Sail.kara as my 
name there - at the holy place, viz. Brahmacarika, I, called 
Isa, remain there for the good of the world, and am named 
Brahmacarisa. When in the vicinity of Sabhramati, one devoutly 
worships especially Brahmacarisa in the Kali-age, one enjoys 
pleasure in this world and goes to the great position of Siva. 
Even if a man suffering from severe diseases goes there, his 
disease quickly vanishes on merely seeing the deity, 0 great 
goddess. When the man with his senses controlled, and fasting, 
and being very steady, devoutly worships (the lord), then I 
appear before him in the form of a meditating sage. I give him 
the desired objects. 0 you beautiful lady, I am telling the 
truth and the truth only. I quickly remove the disease of those 
muhurtas after Pratastana or early dawn and to form the second of the five 
divisions of day.

=== PAGE 222 ===

2840 
Padma PurlilJil 
persons who especially come to my place. 
I have described 
diseases to be of eightyfour names. Each one of the diseases 
would perish merely on seeing (the image). 0 daughter of the 
(Himalaya) Mountain, my phallus would not be there. My place 
is only there. There is no doubt about it. On one occasion the 
powerful king Brahmadatta of the solar race, of a severe penance, 
once practised penance there for a long time, 0 chief goddess. 
There he practised in many ways the (vow called) Paiicagnisa­
dhana.1 He practised many austerities like fasting for a month etc. 
95-1 13. 
In this way the king practised a severe penance for 
a long time. Then I appeared before him in person for (granting 
him) a boon, 0 beautiful lady. "0 Brahmadatta, listen to (these) 
great (i.e. important) words. 
I shall undoubtedly grant you 
everyday whatever you desire." He said : ''0 lord of gods, if 
whatever I desire is (to be) given, then always grant me one 
boon. May the lord be born by my name on the earth, 0 lord 
of gods." 0 sinless one, being pleased with those words, I 
granted him the boon. (Since) then, 0 chief goddess, I stay with 
him. (To him) who remaining here, fasts and is fully devoted, I 
grant the desired objects as long as the fourteen Indras rule. 
Listen to what I give to the brahmaQ.as who, having come here, 
especially mutter the Rudra hymn etc. A man obtains quickly 
all that is desired in the Kali-age, like pleasure from his wife, 
pleasure from his son; it increases wealth. 
It gives glory and 
affluence, and destroys diseases etc. 0 Piirvati, my devotees on 
the -earth come here and perform rites like bathing, giving gifts 
in this terrible Kali-age. 
0 chief goddess, I give the desired 
objects. 
This is the truth and the truth only. The king, having 
posted there another celibate named Gaitgadhara, and having 
lived there for five days, then went to his own kingdom. 
The 
very great Brahmadatta, famous in the world, who knew piety, 
ruled for five myriad years. Then the king, having enjoyed the 
kingdom for some time, went to Siva's world, (and) to the 
excellent position called Brahma. The two gods having my name 
stay there - one is Brahmacarisa, and the other one is said to be 
1 . Paiicagnisadhana -A kind of penance in which one has to bear five­
fires: one in front, one at the back, one on the left, and one on the right, and 
the fifth fire is the sun.

=== PAGE 223 ===

VI. l 35. l l 4- 1 35 
284 1 
Gangadhara. To those men who worship especially a t my place, 
I certainly give everything wanted by them in the world. 
The 
place itself is always the Phallus. Men should always go there. 
That wise man who offers there flowers, incense, eatables of 
various kinds, certainly obtains everything. I give all to them 
who worship at my place with bilva-Ieaves, flowers and sandal 
etc. He who everyday listens to the account of Brahmacarin, 
obtains happiness in this world, and goes to the vicinity of Siva, 
where god Gailga.dhara, Bhutida (i.e. giver of happiness) always 
dwells. 
1 14- 1 35. 
The other one called Brahmacarisa always lives 
(there). From them one certainly obtains the position of Siva by 
means of meditation. A disease perishes on seeing him. 
By 
worshipping (him) a man would obtain (long) life. 0 chief 
goddess, there is no doubt that by bathing there a man would 
enjoy salvation. 0 beautiful lady, listen. I shall describe a very 
wonderful holy place, known as R.ajakhac;lga, especially on the 
Sii.bhramati. King Vaikartana, born in the solar race, was of a 
bad conduct, sinful, and censured brahma:Q.as. He bore malice 
against his preceptors ; was always angry; censured all (religious) 
acts ; he was always interested in others' wives ; and he always 
harmed Vi¥:Q.u. He always harassed his subjects in many ways. 
Such a wicked one, as he was, lived on the earth always. 0 
beautiful lady, listen properly. When some time passed, leprosy 
was produced in (i.e. overcame) him due to his sin (and) his (ill} 
luck. Observing his body, and thinking repeatedly as to what to 
do, he was full of anxiety. Once, by chance, he went into a 
forest for sport. Having reached the bank of Sabhramati there, 
he remained there. He bathed there, and drank excellent water. 
Due to the bath there, his body instantly was seen to be divine. 
His figure was seen to be of good gold, 0 daughter of the 
(Himalaya) Mountain. Just then the king certainly became (like 
that). Having got the divine form, the king enjoyed the kingdom 
there for some time, and then went to the highest position of 
Siva, 0 chief goddess. Then this holy place, called R.ajakhac;lga, 
came up. He who bathes here and gives gifts, enjoys happiness 
in this world, and goes to the eternal (place) of Vi¥:Q.U. 
They 
have no disease and never have grief. A man who everyday 
bathes in this (holy place) called Rajakhac;lga, would obtain

=== PAGE 224 ===

heaven, and is honoured by Brahma and others. 0 daughter of 
the (Himalaya) Mountain, he was called Satyesvara in the Krta 
age, Bhuvanesvara in the Treta age, and Rajesvara in the Dvapara 
age. In this Kali age, the lord of the universe has vanished. 
Therefore this holy place, called Rajakha9ga, has come up. 
Those men who devoutly offer oblations to their dead ancestors 
here, are declared to be of religious acts on the earth. The 
killers of brahJDal)as or of children, who bathe here, get free 
from blemishes, and go to the vicinty of Siva. The dead ances­
tors of them who offer a dark (cow) on (the bank of) Slibhra­
mati, are pleased till the deluge. 0 goddess, there is no fear for 
those men who listen to this divine account called Rajakha9ga. 
In the same way diseases and blemishes vanish by listening to 
and reciting it. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED THIRTYSIX 
The Greatness of Nanditlrtha 
Piirvati said: 
1 . 
Tell me which regions that Sabhramati, having flowed out 
from NandikuQ.Qa, purified, and which holy places she, crossing 
the Arbuda mountain, brought about. 
Suta said: 
2. 
When the goddess spoke this, Siva, the lord of the 
universe, spoke (these) words to Parvati who fascinated the 
world . 
.M ahiideva said: 
3-19. 
The sages first got fashioned the holy place called 
Kapalamocana, after the very purifying holy place Nandikw;tQa. 
The holy place is more 
lustrous than all (others), and is 
extremely purifying. Here I had dropped the skull called Kapiila. 
Therefore, 
0 
Parvati, 
it became 
the 
holy place 
(called) 
Kapiilamocana. It clearly purifies all the beings, and is well-

=== PAGE 225 ===

VI . 1 36.3- 1 9 (cont.) 
2843 
known in the world. That holy place, the lord of holy places, is 
called Kapalak؍c;la, at which pure and auspicious holy place 
the noble ones (like) gods, so also nagas, gandharvas, and kinna­
ras etc. live. The holy place is known in the three worlds and 
gives knowledge and salvation. Having bathed there and having 
purified oneself, one should fast for a night, worship Kapalesa 
and feed brahma:r,tas. Even by giving (a piece oO cloth (to a 
brahma:r,ta) there, one would get the fruit of an Agnihotra. One 
who, at that holy place, has resorted to the vow of seeing (the 
lord), would certainly go to Siva's heaven after having cast one's 
body. 0 chief goddess, formerly Saudasa, on bathing at this holy 
place, was freed from (the sin of) a brahma:r,ta's murder, and 
obtained knowledge. The very powerful Sudasa was born in the 
family of Bhagiratha. His son Mitrasaha was also known as 
Saudasa. Due to the curse of Vasi~t}la Saudasa obtained the 
body of a demon. After having bathed in Sabhramati, he 
became free from the sin due to the curse. Here, at this holy 
place called Nandi, are always present the pure rivers giving 
religious merit like Ganga, Yamuna, Godavari and Sarasvati. 
Learned men should especially make the gift of a cow, land, 
bed, daughter. A bath in Slibhramati is said to be like this gift. 
Here even all the fallen are purified merely by means of the 
touch of the water. The dead ancestors of the man who, being 
greatly devoted, performs a srii.ddha here, are pleased, and go to 
the highest position. 
Those men who always listen to this divine account, are 
freed from all sins and would obtain absorption into Vi~:r,tu. For 
them who praise Mahesvara by means of their acts, mentally and 
by words, there is no grief till deluge.

=== PAGE 226 ===

2844 
Padma Purat]a 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED THIRTYSEVEN 
VikirfUltlrtha and Svetodbhava 
Mahadeva said: 
1 - 14. 
The river Sabhramati, (flowing) from the region of 
Nandi(tirtha), came to the VikirQa forest resorted to by brah­
ma:t;tas and sages. Due to the great speed of her water and the 
resistance of the mountains she was divided into seven (streams) 
and flowed toward the southern sea. The first (stream) is the 
auspicious Sabhramati. 
The second one is Setika. The third 
auspicious one is Valkini, and the fourth Hira:t;tmayi. The fifth 
one, Hastimati, is said to remove all sins. The sixth one, 
Vetravati, was formerly fashioned by Vrtra. This highly divine 
one moved (i.e. flowed) out from the pool of Vrtra. So she be­
came (i.e. came to be known as) Vetravati, destroying great sins. 
The seventh one, Bhadramukhi purifying the world, is rich in 
auspiciousness. She, purifying those regions with these seven 
streams, has proceeded with the seven streams. He who offers a 
sraddha at Vikir:t;ta-tirtha to the dead ancestors, gets that fruit 
which will be (i.e. is) the fruit of a bath at Gaya. Those who 
have violated their vows, who are fallen, who missed the pi:t;tl;las 
with oblations of water, get freed when pi:t;tl;las and water are 
offered to them at Vikir:t;ta. He who would offer a sraddha there, 
would certainly be one of Siva's attendants. Therefore, 
one 
should devoutly offer a sraddha there as is laid down in the 
three Vedas. ''0 brahma:t;tas, especially take a bath at this (place 
of) rise of the seven rivers, 0 best brahma:Q.as, longing for the 
world of sages." Kasyapa especially spoke thus to brahma:t;tas. 
If a bath is taken here, it always removes all griefs. This holy 
place (Vikir:t;ta) is best among holy places, is best among the 
best. This holy place VikirQa gives auspiciousness and removes 
diseases and blemishes. 
Those men who especially always bathe 
here in the Kali age, become meritorious. There is no doubt 
about it. Vikir:t;tatirtha is very purifying like 
Gaya-tirtha. It 
always gives religious merit to the dead ancestors, and 
destroys 
people's misery. Thus VikirQa-tirtha is described. 
1 5-23. 
A holy place superior to this, and an excellent one, 
is called Svetodbhava, wherefrom the river Sveta has sprung up

=== PAGE 227 ===

VI. I 38. 1 - 1 5 
2845 
due to the ash (applied) to my back and belly. She, the destroyer 
of all sins, is well-known in the three worlds. She has been 
produced due to the contact with the ash applied to Siva's body ; 
and is honoured by gods. A man who has bathed in it, has 
become pure and controlled, has lived there for three nights, 
is honoured in Rudra's world after seeing Mahakiilesvara. 
There is no doubt that the dead ancestors of him who offers 
(them) a pi:t}Qa with darbhas and sesamum-seeds on her bank, 
are very much gratified. Svetagailgii is very auspicious, and 
frees one from misery and poverty by bathing in which, 0 
goddess, great happiness is obtained. 0 Piirvati I always· stay 
at its confluence. The bath which men take here, and the gifts 
they give, would undoubtedly be for them infinitely fruitful. On 
the confluence at that place god Bhiitesvara certainly lives. 
Those best men who offer incense, lamp, flowers and wave 
lights are meritorious. He who, getting a bilva-leaf, offers it on 
(the Phallus of) Siva, always obtains the desired object in the 
vicinity of Siva on (the bank of) Svetii. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED THIRTYEIGHT 
The Greatness of Ga1;1atirtha 
Mahiideva said: 
1-15. 
One intent on a pilgrimage to holy places, should 
then go to Ga:t}atirtha. It is called Triviǧ?tapa by Siva's atten­
dants and is on the bank of Candanii. A man bathing on the 
full-moon day at Triviǧ?tapa, and being composed, is freed from 
(the sin of) the murder of a briihmaJ}a. No doubt should be 
entertained about this. He too, the noble and meritorious one, 
who stays at TriviԾ?tapa during the four months of the rainy season, 
is also honoured in Rudra's world. A man, having bathed at 
Ga:t;1atirtha and fasted on the Aǧ?tami (day), and having bathed at 
the confluence of Bakula, goes to heaven. A man, having bathed 
at that holy place and having seen Bakulesa, would obtai n 
the position of the chief of Siva's attendants due to the grace

=== PAGE 228 ===

2846 
Padma Puriir)a 
of the lord of Siva's attendants. A man hearing (about) this 
which is pure, very meritorious, increasing religious merit and 
(span of) life, obtains religious merit equal to (that obtained 
from) a bath in Gatigii. Having stayed here, a man, observing a 
fast, with his senses controlled and composed, who thus mutters 
the names of the charming lord of Siva's attendants, obtains all 
pleasures. This is the truth and the (only) truth, 0 you of a 
beautiful face. (There was) the powerful king, Visvadatta, of the 
lunar dynasty. He practised penance here for a long time, 0 
chief goddess. Then due to Sri GaQ.esa's grace he obtained the 
position of the chief of Siva's attendants. All the meritorious 
sages like Vasi~tha, Viimadeva, Hoc;ta, Kausitaka, Bharadviija. 
Atigiras, Visvamitra and Vamana, everyday serve (the lord) due 
. to GaQesa's grace, 0 great goddess. A sonless man obtains sons, 
a poor man gets wealth, an ignorant man obtains knowledge, 
and a man desiring salvation would obtain salvation. 0 you 
beautiful lady, what is the use of repeatedly talking profusely 
about any other thing? He who would bathe here and offer 
worship, is freed from all sins, and goes to the highest position 
of Vi~:Q.u, (and reaches) Siva of the form of Vi~Q.u, and Vi~:Q.u of 
the form of Siva. Due to Vi~Qu's grace, 0 goddess, I do not see 
any difference (between the two of us). 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED THIRTYNINE 
The Greatness of Agnipaleivara 
Mahadeva said: 
1-19a. On the northern bank of Sabhramati (the holy place 
called) Agnitirtha is known. The holy place nrthapalesvara is 
situated not far away in the north-eastern direction from her, 
where Ca:Q.c;\i has settled. That seat of the Yogamiitrs brings in 
complete welfare. There the great mothers have stayed with 
great effort and for favouring the world. A man of a firm vow, 
having stayed there for three nights, should go to that god 
CaQ.c;likesvara, the lord of gods. Having bathed in Siibhramati

=== PAGE 229 ===

VI. I 39. 1 9b-29a 
2847 
near Matrtirtha, he being fully concentrated, should go to 
MatrmaQc;\ala. A man obtains the fruit of the gift of a thousand 
cows after having bathed at Agnitirtha and seen Gi.mUQQa. For 
him there is no fear from demons, evil spirits and goblins. 0 
chief goddess, at the place where river Gokhura has joined 
Sabhramati, there are thousands of holy places. 0 Parvati, 
there a sraddha should be offered with sesamum powder. (A 
man) having offered pi:Q.Qas and fed brii.hma:J;tas, would obtain 
an undecaying position. There was a king Kukardama, who was 
most sinful, irresistible, wicked, foolish, who possessed ego, 
who censured brii.hma:J;tas, killed cows and children, who was 
most sinful and always indomitable. 0 chief goddess, when he 
was ruling in the city called PiJ;tQii.ra, he died at an auspicious 
time. He who was dead, was born here as an evil spirit, 0 great 
goddess. He, of a yellow face, with his mouth parched up, having 
yellow hair, and harsh, very tall, having profuse hair, oppressed 
by hunger and thirst, subsisting on air, moved here and there. 
Accompanied by many evil spirits he wailed 'Ha, Ha'. The evil 
spirits near him also said : "What should be done?" Those other 
wicked evil spirits also crying and oppressed by hunger, thirst 
etc., came in contact with the king. With the king they moved 
to many uninhabited countries. On the way neither water nor 
food was ever seen (by them). Those evil spirits of wicked 
forms moved on the earth. They ate the flesh of corpses and 
always drank blood. King Kukardama was thus always surroun­
ded by them. Some time by chance he went to the hermitage of 
(his) preceptor. He had done religious acts in the former 
existence. Due to that he came in contact (with the preceptor). 
Piirvati said: 
1 9b-20. 
0 master, 0 lord of the universe, tell (me).what 
religious deeds he did. This was a sinner, a wicked one, and 
troubled brii.hma:J;tas. How did he have good company. Tell it to 
me (though) difficult. 
Mahiideva said: 
21-29a. 
I shall tell (you) all that this king had done in the 
previous existence. Listen (to it), 0 daughter of the (Himalaya)

=== PAGE 230 ===

2848 
Padma Puriir;a 
Mountain. 0 goddess, in his previous existence, he was a bnih­
maQa who recited the Vedas. 
Having everyday 
worshipped 
Mahii.deva, and honoured guests, this best brahmaQa took his 
food. Due to the prowess of that religious merit, he became a 
king in the city of PiQ<;lara, and was known as Kukardama. 
Through his body and mind, he did not perform religious acts. 
Due to that (ill) luck, he died and became the king of the evil 
spirits. His face was dry, his figure was dry, his complexion was 
yellow, and he was fearful. 0 chief goddess, (the effect of) the 
religious deeds done in a former existence does not perish. Due 
to that religious merit he came in the company of the preceptor 
in the (latter's) hermitage. Kaho<;la lived there. He saw the king 
of the evil spirits, whose face was dry, figure was dry, complexion 
was yellow, and who was fearful. His eyes were deep, he was a 
great sinner, and was accompanied by wicked evil spirits. His 
hair was raised, he had matted hair, he was of the nature of 
death, and was fierce. 
Seeing him like that at that time, the 
brii.hmaQa (Kaho<;la) was affi.icted. 
Kaho¹a said: 
29b-3 1 . 
At this charming, very wonderful place, viz. at the 
holy place of Agnipalesvara, I always live. 0 king, you are our 
patron. How have your become the king of the evil spirits? On 
this auspicious earth, due to the result of which deeds have 
you become a wicked one, of a wicked form, of the nature of 
death , and fierce? 
The evil spirit said: 
32-39. 
0 briihmaQa, listen to the sin I committed in the 
previous existence. I was king Kukardama in the city called 
PiQ<;laraka 0 divine one, listen to what I, living there, did. For­
merly, (I indulged in) killing 
brii.hmaQas, telling lies etc. I 
harassed my subjects, always killed beings. I harmed the cows, 
and destroyed brii.hmar;tas' vows. 0 brii.hma:Q.a, I always remained 
without a bath. I hurt the good. I was always given to censur­
ing Vi¥Qu, and blamed the devotees of Vi¥QU. My conduct was 
bad, I was wicked, and was always accompanied by siidra 
females. I ate anywhere, and was never intent on being pure. 
Due to that (evil) deed, 0 lord of brahmaQas, I died and reached

=== PAGE 231 ===

VI. l 39.40-VI. l40. 16 
2849 
the stock of an evil spirit and have become unhappy in many 
ways. The preceptor alone is the kinsman, the preceptor, the 
mother, the father of him who does not have a mother, a father, 
relatives and kinsmen. Realising this, 0 brahma:Q.a, please 
relieve me. 
Kaho4a said: 
40-46. 
Listen, 0 best king. I shall do as you tell me. You 
will instantly attain salvation. There is no doubt about it. Even 
the pre-eminent evil spirits who are in your company, will also 
get release, especially at this excellent holy ploce. 
Then, 0 chief goddess, that brahma:Q.a, having gone to the 
holy place, made them perform rites like offering water with 
sesamum-seeds. There is no (restriction as to) month or date. 
Repeatedly going to a holy place, one should perform rites like 
a sraddha as formerly told by Brahma to me. 0 goddess, when 
the ( sraddha-)rite was performed at the chief holy place, they 
were released and seated in an aeroplane they went to my city. 
0 chief goddess, bathing and giving gifts at the place where 
Gokhura has joined Siibhramati, would secure the fruit of a 
crore of sacrifices. Salvation is said to be obtained there, where 
there would be (i.e. is) the holy place Agnitirtha called Kapales­
vara. It would certainly be true (and) true (only). 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FORTY 
Hirat:zyiisangama Tirtha 
Sri Mahiideva said: 
1 - 1 6. 
0 goddess, I shall tell you about the great confluence 
of Hira:Q.ya (with Sabhramati). When that Sabhramati Ganga 
formerly had seven streams, then she-the daughter of Brahma­
was known as Saptasrota. The seventh stream is known as 
Hira:Q.ya. A sinful man having bathed at that holy place would 
obtain heaven. The mountain Satyavan is between ᗵkᗬu and

=== PAGE 232 ===

2850 
Padma PuriJr)a. 
Mafijuma. To its east is the auspicious confluence of Hira:Q.ya 
(with Sabhramati). Having bathed there and drunk (water) one 
would obtain an auspicious course. Having seen Naraya:Q.a 
Hari at Vanasthali, one should then go to HiraQyasailgames­
vara, a holy place, auspicious for celestial nymphs, where­
Urvasi, (the most) beautiful among the celestial nymphs, was 
formerly born. There Nara and Naraya:Q.a practised excellent 
penance. At the charming and auspicious confluence of Hira:Q.yii. 
(with Sabhramati), which removes great sins, all sages, with 
their sins gone, bathe. 0 goddess, the briihma:Q.as like Vasi~tha 
and like Valakhilya, bathe there at the confluence of Hira:Q.ya 
(with Sabhramat:i). By bathing there one's form certainly 
becomes golden. A mortal always obtains that fruit (by bathing) 
at the confluence of HiraQya (with Sabhramati) which is equal 
to the fruit of the gift of a thousand cows. And at Hira:Q.yasail­
gama the fruit is said to be infinite times more than the one 
obtained at the time of lunar or solar eclipse at Dasasvamedha. 
Hira:Q.ya؎a was a great demon. He practised severe penance 
(here). His body formerly became like gold there. When king 
Janamejaya bathed at that place, his (sin due to the) murder of 
a brahmal)a vanished. The royal sage Visvamitra came here 
for a bath. Having especially bathed here he. went to my city. 
0 chief goddess, brahma:Q.as, k~atriyas, vaisyas and siidras, who 
bathe here, go to Siva's abode. 
' 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FORTYONE 
M adhuriiditya 
Mahiideva said: 
1-1 1 . 0 goddess, then I shall, after the description of Hir­
at;.yasailgama, describe the holy place where the river Dharma­
vati joins (Sabhramati). There is no doubt that a fortunate man 
bathing there goes to heaven. He who sees there the holy place­
fashioned by Yama is meritorious. Those who perform a sriid­
dha there are free from the debt of their dead ancestors. Then

=== PAGE 233 ===

VI. l 41 . 1 2-23 
285 1 
there is the Madhura-tirtha, which destroys all sins. One should 
bathe at Madhura-tirtha, and see Vi~:g.u, the killer of Madhu. 
Here, Kr~:g.a, full of the fear of Jarasandha, had rested. After 
the murder of Karllsa demon had taken place, he, desirous of 
going to Kusasthali, lived for seven nights on the bank of 
Candana, surrounded by Bhoja, Vr~:g.i, Andhaka and Yadava 
heroes. He reached Madhuratirtha and bathed as per rules. 
There Vi~:g.u established (the image) by name Madhuraditya. 
He settled (there) eighteen thousand brahma:g.as performing 
sacrifices, and left after giving them various vehicles. 0 chief 
goddess, there are thousands of holy places. One desiring the 
good of the dead ancestors, should perform a sraddha there. 
"You who are staying in my holy place, should never be afraid 
of Jarasandha." Having thus told those brahma:g.as Kr~:g.a went 
to Dvaraka. A man having bathed in that holy place, should 
worship Madhurarka. Due to the gift of a tawny cow on the 
seventh of the bright fortnight of Magha, a man after enjoying 
pleasures here for a long time, would go to the position of the 
Sun. 
12-23. 0 beautiful lady, listen, I shall tell you an ancient 
account, hearing which people are free from such sins as the 
murder of a briihmaQ.a. 0 goddess, on one occasion, the best sage 
Mii:g.gavyapractised very auspicious and severe penance at Gailgii­
dvara. He ate leaves and fruits and always ate (i.e. sub؏isted on) 
air. 0 goddess, day and night he was always greatly devoted to 
meditating on Viؐ :g.u. He was engaged in the practice of abstract 
meditation, and was always given to religious practices. 0 
goddess, king Visvamohana lived in that country. He had abun­
dant wealth (consisting) of elephants, horses, chariots and foot­
soldiers on the earth. His son, of auspicious marks, was Soma­
candra by name. 0 goddess, once he went for hunting in the 
forest. Having gone there, and having had the sports of hunt­
ing, he, surrended by his own people, amused himself. When 
he was engaged in sports, it was night, 0 goddess. During the 
night the king stayed in the forest for hunting. When the night 
passed, and when it was the period (of the day) called Brahma, 
his horse was stolen by a wicked thief. Then there was a cry, 
'Hii, ha' 'Where has the horse gone?' Then all of them desirous 
of going away and eager, through the fear of the king, said to

=== PAGE 234 ===

2852 
Padma PuriiT)a 
one another : "The horse is specially stolen by a thief." Looking 
for {it), they all came to Haridvara. There the sage MaQqavya 
always practised penance. At that time the soldiers saw him 
lost in meditation : 'This thief, always a sinner, remains in medi­
tation'. 
24-32. 
Suspecting that he had come (there) after having tied 
the horse, the king's soldiers thought like that and seized 
the great sage They reported to the king about the thief, viz. the 
best sage. ''0 king, this snatcher of the horse is brought. 0 
king, he is always a thief." Then he gave an order to transfix 
him on a stake. Then all the soldiers came together, and tied 
him. Then in a moment he was transfixed on a stake. He did 
not notice that act of being transfixed on a stake. Since 
he was engaged in abstract meditation and highly devoted to 
meditation on Vig1u, he noticed being transfixed on a stake after 
some time. "I am MaQqavya, the best of sages. Who has done 
this act?" The revered, omniscient one, who knew (the events 
of) the three times, thought : 'This must be the act of Dharma, 
and of none else'. Engaged in abstract meditation, the pious 
one went to Dharma. Having gone there, he spoke these 
(words) : "0 Dharma, listen now. You are always known as 
Dharma in the world and the Veda. How did you do the act of 
transfixing (me) on the stake? 0 sir, ᗶcertainly desire to know 
all that from you." 
Dharma said: 
33-39a. 
0 best bra.hmal).a, listen to the cause of your fall in 
the previous existence. I shall tell (you) that. Please favour me. 
In your childhood you did this act-the sin-in your previous 
existence. 0 very wise one, listen to the cause of your fall in this 
existence. 0 brahmal).a, once you had gone to a solitary forest. 
0 brahma:r;aa, having gone there, you put a living moth on a 
stake. Due to that act it was pained. 0 you of a good vow, due 
to that act, you were transfixed o·n a stake by the king. By all 
means (the effect of) an auspicious or· inauspicious act done by 
one has to be undergone. You have undoubtedly suffered (the 
fruit of that) very small act. 0 best brahmaJ}.a, be happy. Go 
at your will." Having heard these words, that best brahmal}.a,

=== PAGE 235 ===

VI. l41 .39b-VI. l 42.6 
2853 
Mal)gavya, with his eyes reddish due to anger then spoke 
(these words) : 
M iil:uJavya said: 
39b-45. 
0 most sinful one, 0 you of a bad conduct, what 
great sin had I committed, having done which, I was (thus) 
transfixed on a stake? Due to the wrath (contained) in my 
words, be a siidra by all means. 
After some time, he was born in the family called Candra. 
was known as Vidura, and was highly devoted to Vi4l)u. 0 
chief goddess, for a pilgrimage he went to the river Sabhramati, 
where there is (her) confluence with Dharmavati. Vidura, of 
the form of Dharma, bathed there only. He certainly cast his 
siidrahood in Dharmavati. Therefore, 0 goddess, those meri­
torious men who bathe here, go to the highest position. Those 
men who offer a sraddha and gifts here on the earth, get great 
prosperity in this world, and rejoice in heaven. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FORTYTWO 
Kambutirtha and Kapitirtha 
Sri Mahiideva said: 
1 -6. 
A man having bathed at Kambu-tirtha, and having 
offered oblations to his dead ancestors, should worship Ana­
maya Vi~l)u. By giving various gifts to brahmal)as according to 
the precepts he obtains Vi~l)u's. · heaven due to the efficacy of 
this holy place. 0 beautiful lady, formerly the intelligent royal 
sage ViSvamitra, desiring progeny, especially practised penance 
here. He ate (i.e. subsisted on) air, fasted, and had air as his 
food. He was always intent on Vi~l)u's worship and engrossed 
in meditation on Vi~l)u. Due to this penance he obtained pro­
geny. 
A man who desiring progeny, goes to Kambutirtha, 
always obtains progeny, 0 you of a beautiful face. This is the 
truth and the (only) truth.

=== PAGE 236 ===

2854 
Padma PuriiT)a 
This is the greatness of Kambutirtha. 
7- 13. Then, 0 best goddess, a man should go to the holy 
place Kapisvara by name, which, the destroyer of great sins, is 
near Raktasirl:lha. Formerly, during the war between Rama and 
RivaQa, when the bridge was being built, the monkeys took the 
best mountain and particularly fashioned the excellent holy 
place, KapiSvaraditya by name. Here a man, after bathing and 
offering oblations to his dead ancestors and seeing Kapisvara­
ditya is freed from (the sin of) killing a brahmaQa. Especially 
on A~tami a man should bathe there. Haniimat and others 
bathed there on three days. I have told you this efficacy of 
Kapitirtha. There is no doubt that a man, having bathed here 
and having worshipped Kapisvara, becomes handsome and 
very fortunate. A man who desires strength or piety or a son 
in the world, would obtain all (that) due to the efficacy of 
Kapitirtha. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FORTYTHREE 
Ekadhara and Saptadhiirlitlrtha 
Mahiideva said: 
1-5. Then a man should go to the very purifying holy place 
{called) Ekadhara. A man, having bathed at Ekadhara and 
fasted for a night, and worshipping the master, the lord of 
gods, would emancipate a hundred (members) of his family. 
The bath here should be regarded as equal to (a bath in) 
Svamitirtha. Due to the efficacy of this holy place a man 
would go to Rudra's heaven. By bathing and drinking (water) 
here he goes to Brahmi's heaven. Those doing meritorious 
-deeds in the three worlds, live on this bank. They do not have 
.a fear that is due to the sword's edge etc. All that would quickly 
perish at this holy place Ekapradhiraka. 
Thus is the description of the holy place Ekadhara.

=== PAGE 237 ===

VI. l43.6-26 
2855 
6- 19. Then he should go to Saptadhara, the best among 
sacred places, to which the sages have given the name Sapta­
sarasvata. The great sage Mailki made the Matikitirtha in the 
Treta age. In the Dvapara age the sons of Pa:Q.QU set up the 
Saptadhara. The holy water that dropped from Siva's matted 
hair had seven streams. All those seven auspicious forms of 
Ganga which flow in the seven worlds are here in Saptadharaka. 
The sraddha offered at Saptadhara gives satisfaction to the 
dead ancestors. 0 goddess, listen to an ancient account I shall 
tell, hearing which, 0 chief goddess, a man would certainly go 
to Brahma's world. The son of Kaupitaka was well-known by 
the name Mailki. He was always engaged in meditating upon 
Vi~:Q.u, and honoured Vi$.;tu's men. He studied the Vedas, and 
was interested in maintaining sacred fire. In his house he had 
two wives : Sarii.pa and Visvarii.pa. Seeing them childless he 
feared; worried as to what to do, he was very much thoughtful. 
'Due to a son the family is stable. Otherwise the man would go 
to hell'. Thinking like this he never obtained pleasure. Then 
leaving his house, he went to the vicinity of his preceptor. 
"Salutation to you, 0 preceptor, who obliged gods. You are 
the lord of all the worlds, and protector of brahma:Q.as. You 
are the performer of sacrifices. 0 lord of brahma:Q.as, I salute 
you. 0 brahma:Q.a sage, I am sonless. 0 lord, what should I 
do? Tell me everything by which I shall certainly have a son. 
•A sonless man does not at all get a good position in heaven. He 
should, by this or that means, beget a son'. Having remembered 
this statement I have come to you." 
The preceptor said: 
20-26. 
0 best sage go there where the river Sabhramati is. 
0 best sage, having bathed there you will_ certainly obtain sons. 
Having heard his words, and having saluted him (by prostrating 
himselO like a staff, the lord of brahma:Q.as went to Sabhramati. 
The brahma:Q.a sage Mailki, having gone there, then practised 
severe penance for fourteen years. There Mailki, the teacher 
of Vedas, made in the Treta age, a very wonderful holy 
place, 0 goddess. All that proved to be the giver of a son and 
as fulfilling his desires. Even till today there was or there will

=== PAGE 238 ===

not be a holy place · like Mailkitirtha. That best brahmaQ.a 
Matiki, having obtained sons comfortably, and having enjoyed 
pleasures of various kinds, went to my abode. This is a divine, 
pure, and very great account. By listening to it a man gets 
everything like sons and grandsons. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FORTYFOUR 
Brahmavalli and Khaf)f/atirtha 
Mahiideva said: 
1- 10. 
0 chief goddess, a man should then go to the great 
holy place (called) Brahmavalli. 0 best goddess, listen to the 
actual nature of that holy place. That Brahmatirtha where the 
water of Sii.bhramati joins the water of Brahmavalli, is said to 
be equal to Prayaga. By offering piQ.<;ias there the dead ances­
tors are gratified for twelve years-as this is the statement of 
Brahma. Knowing that the religious merit due to a sraddha 
offered there is equal to that of a sraddha at Gaya, men offer 
it, and the dead ancestors would (thereby) be pleased. A gift 
particularly at Brahmavalli has religious merit equal to that 
due to the gift of a cow, of land or of food also. Here only 
Sanaka· and others having bathed according to the precept, 
obtained ViᗬQ.u's world by meditating upon the position of the 
highest Brahman. 0 chief goddess, a man obtains particularly 
that fruit at Brahmavalli which he obtains by going to Puᗬkara, 
(bank of) Ganga, and the holy place AmarakaQ.taka. Men 
obtain that fruit at Brahmavalli which (they get when) they give 
gifts at the lunar or solar eclipse, 0 chief goddess. Those who 
have divine forms and hold conches, discs and maces, also go 
to heaven on bathing (here), 0 chief goddess. A man, holding 
a rosary made of Tulasi( -wood), and remembering ViᗬQ.u, 
goes to the divine VaikuQ.tha, the highest position (full of) bliss. 
Thus is the greatness of Brahmavalli-tirtha. 
1 1-12. 
From there a man should go to Vrᗬatirtha well-

=== PAGE 239 ===

Vl. l 44. 13-29 
known as KhaJ,lQatirtha. Having formerly bathed there the 
cows went to Goloka. The cows, the mothers of the world, 
that had fallen due to a curse were protected by Dharma in the 
form of Khat;tQa; therefore it is called Khat;tQatirtha. 
Piirvatl said : 
13. Who formerly gave a curse to the cows, the mothers of 
the world? How did they fall from (their) world? How were 
they protected by Dharma? 
Mahiideva said: 
14-29. 
Formerly VrȖa. playing with the mothers in Goloka, 
discharged feces and urine. That fell on the head of Hara. So, 
due to their fault Hara gave a curse : "0 cows, losing your 
intellect, you will go to the earth." The cows cursed by the lord, 
again went to Hara, and requested the god : "May we obtain 
(i.e. go back to) our world." "When you will bathe in the pool 
called KhaJ,lQa near Brahmavalli at the holy place on (the bank 
of) Sabhramati, you will certainly obtain heaven." Then the 
cows having bathed with the lord of cows in the pool, (became) 
most pure (and) went to heaven near Mahadeva. A 
. man 
having bathed in Gohrada, and having offered oblations to his 
dead ancestors, obtains Goloka free from heat and destruction 
The man, who, living there without food, offers pi:t;tQas to cows, 
would obtain happiness as long as the fourteen Indras (rule). 
There is no doubt that a man obtains that fruit at Khal).Qa­
tirtha which he certainly gets by the gift of a crore of cows. 
Taking a boll's urine, one who drinks the holy water gets 
purified at that moment only. There is no doubt about it. 
There was not and there will not be a holy place superior to 
Khal).Qatirtha. Those men, 0 best goddess, who go there, are 
meritorious. Having gone there, a man should worship cows, 0 
best goddess. Then having bathed and being composed he 
should worship Vr~abha. Undoubtedly by worshipping him he 
would live in Goloka for a long time. Those men who, having 
gone there, particularly offer a golden (image of a) co.w enjoy 
happiness as long as the fourteen lndras (rule). A man, who 
having fashioned (golden images of) ten cows gives them to a

=== PAGE 240 ===

2858 
Padma PuraT)a 
brahmaJJ.a at KhaJJ.gatirtha-that is said (to give) infinite fruit, 
0 best goddess. Having gone there the wise should plant a 
pippala tree. Having done so, 0 chief goddess, he goes to the 
world of the dead ancestors. Those who plant five amalaki 
trees, enjoy happiness in this world and go to ViȖJJ.u's world. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FORTYFIVE 
Sangameivara 
Sri Mahiideva said: 
1 - 1 6. 
Then (a man) should go to the great, excellent holy 
place called Sailgamesvara, where the auspicious Hastimati has 
joined &ibhramati. Having received a curse from the sage 
KaulJ,ginya, the river became dry and came to be known in the 
world as Bahiscarya. I shall describe to you that auspicious 
holy place, well-known in the world. It is auspicious, removes 
all sins, and is well-known in the three worlds. Having bathed 
at that holy place, and having seen Mahesvara; a man being 
free from all sins, goes to Rudra's heaven. 0 goddess, listen. I 
shall tell you the reason for this curse, due to which curse she 
became dry. At that place where that auspicious, great river 
Sabhramati, named Ganga (also) is, Hastimati joined Ganga. 
There the sage commenced a very severe penance. When so 
much time passed like this, the noble sage worshipped Nani­
yaJJ.a Niraiijana (i.e. Vigm). On her bank, 0 chief goddess, the 
sage particularly passed many years. 0 Parvati, sometime by 
chance the rainy season arrived. In course of time, 0 you of a 
good vow, the river was full (of water). Then at night the sage 
KauJJ.Qinya abandoned that place. At night, he was very 
unhappy, and crying 'Ha, Ha', he wept piteously. Thinking what 
to do, he was very much anxious. The very divine hermitage 
with (i.e. occupied by) the sage, went (i.e. collapsed) into 
Sabhramati, due to the flood, 0 best goddess. 0 beautiful lady, 
many fruits, roots, and even books, went (i.e. fell) into the 
river, due to the flood. That best sage Kam;tginya cursed the

=== PAGE 241 ===

VI. l46.1-8 
2859 
river: "In the Kali-age you will be without water." Having thus 
given a curse to Hastimati, 0 great goddess, the best brahmaoa 
went to the ancient heaven of Vi~QU. Even today that holy 
place called Sailgamesvara exists. Seeing that a sinner is freed 
from such sins as the murder of a brahmaoa. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FORTYSIX 
Rudramahiilayatirtha 
Mahiideva said: 
1-8. 
0 chief goddess, then a man should go to the holy 
place Rudramaha.laya resembling Kedara, and actually fashioned 
by Rudra. There he should offer a sraddha causing delight to the 
dead ancestors. By offering a sraddha there, the dead ancestors, 
along with the grandsires are gratified and go to the highest 
position of Rudra. He who lets loose a bull there in the great 
abode of Rudra on the full-moon day of Kartika or Vaisakha 
rejoices with Rudra. On drinking water at Kedara, there is no 
rebirth. Having bathed here, a man undoubtedly enjoys libera­
tion. 0 goddess, on one occasion, having left Kailasa, I came to 
Siibhramati, knowing her to be Ganga for the well-being of the 
world. Having bathed there, and drunk (her water) and having 
made (the place) an excellent holy place, I then went to Kailasa, 
my abode, 0 beautiful lady. Then the Mahiilaya (the great 
abode) became a great holy place, and will be known in the 
world as Rudra-Maha.laya. Those who go to (i.e. visit) it on the 
full-moon day of Kartika or Vaisakha, do not have the misery 
due to the entire mundane existence.

=== PAGE 242 ===

2860 
Padma Puriir)a 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FORTYSEVEN 
Khaq,gatirtha 
Mahiideva said: 
1 -7. 
0 goddess, listen to (the description) of the holy place. 
difficult to be reached even by gods. It is called Kha<;lgatirtha, 
and it desrtoys all sins. A man, having bathed at Kha<;lgatirtha, 
and having seen Kha<;lgesvara Siva, would not meet with misery, 
(but) goes to heaven; (so also he) who sees the god Khar,igdbares­
vara. One should especially worship (the god) there on the full­
moon day of Kartika. 0 dear one, this god, the lord of the 
universe, the lord of all, always gives everything in the world. 
He gives the desired objects. A man who, desiring a kingdom, 
sees the lord in Vaisakha, gets that object quickly due to the 
grace of Visvanatha. He should especially worship him with 
flowers, incense, eatables, or lamps, 0 daughter of the (Himalaya) 
Mountain. So also with ·the offerings of fruits and bilva 
(-leaves). There is no doubt that wealth, grains, sons, grand­
sons, riches are obtained due to the worship of Sri Visvesvara. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FORTYEIGHT 
Miiliirkatirtha 
Mahiideva said: 
1-9. On the bank of Sii.bhramati is the excellent Gaya-tirtha, 
called Citrai:tgavadana, auspicious and occupied by Malarka. It 
is adorned with kalpa trees, santii.na trees, · and mandara trees, 
and with mango, nimba, kadamba, kasmari, asvattha and tinduka 
trees. Even by remembering it from a yojana leprosy would be 
cured. Malarka would remove the leprosy of him who suffers 
from it. That woman whose child is dead, or who is barren, who 
bathes there according to the Vedic precept, soon obtains a son. 
The muttering (of a hymn), a sacrifice, self-study, worship of a 
deity done (there) by the Sun's devotee would be inexhaustible.

=== PAGE 243 ===

Vl.l 49.1-I l 
2861 
0 chief goddess, having gone to this place a man should observe 
the vow of Sri Ravi. Having enjoyed pleasures here, he goes to 
the Sun's world. A royal sage whose child was dead, went there 
and practised penance. The king obtained a son due to the 
grace of Sri Malarka. He who, particularly observing a fast, and 
with his senses controlled, would worship Malarka, 
would 
certainly enjoy salvation. 
0 best goddess, brahmal)as led by 
VasiȖtha and gods like Indra always stay at Miihirka near the 
Sun. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FORTYNINE 
Candane8vara 
Mahiideva said: 
1-1 1. From this holy place Malarka a man should come to 
Candanesvara, an excellent place of joy near Maliirka. Having 
drunk the blood of Dussasana, the very mighty Bhima, fulfilled 
his very fierce pledge fully, and he tied Draupadi's hair with 
his hands smeared with blood, and having given (gifts to) brah­
mal)as, he went on a pilgrimage. With his brothers he went to 
the charming bank of Sabhramati. That candana tree which was 
brought to Siibhramati from heaven, had become a Phallus due 
to the power of the auspicious holy place. A man, by bathing 
there and drinking (water there) and gratifying his dead ancestors 
would not go to hell (but) would obtain Rudra's heaven. Then 
having seen Candane8a, the lord of the universe and the cause 
of the well-being of the worlds, he should worship him accord­
ing to his capacity; having gone there he does not repent. King 
Kaivartaka, having many times worshipped (the lord) here, 
went to that Siva's world having gone where one does not regret. 
The sages bathe here; the ancient god, the highest soul Vi~J)U, 
causing welfare, always actually stays here. This Sabhramati is 
blessed. Blessed is the lord, the ruler of the universe. 0 Piirvati, 
here many holy places have come up on the earth. Here is. 
.Amardaki with auspicious fruits of many kinds. 0 beautiful 
lady, respectful offering should be made there.

=== PAGE 244 ===

2862 
Padma Puribj.a 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FIFTY 
JambUtirtha 
Mahiideva said: 
1- 14. 
From there a man should go to Jambiitirtha, the 
destroyer of sins, for a bath, which has become like a staircase 
in the Kali-age. Here formerly Ja.mbavat established 
on 
Dasailga-the best mountain-Phallus ],Uc~arajesa, worshipped by 
hosts of gods. When formerly Rama killed the demon RiivaJ}.a. 
Jambavat proclaimed with the sounds of drums •Ramacandra 
has won ; RiivaJ}.a is killed in the war. Sitii is (re-)secured.' 
Having proclaimed like this, he bathed in the auspicious holy 
place. 0 chief goddess, with his own name he installed a Phallus 
there. A man having bathed there and instantly remembering 
Riima with his younger brother is honoured in Rudra's heaven. 
0 goddess, wherever Riima is remembered, there freedom from 
the bondage of the worldly existence is noticed in the mobile 
and immobile (world). I should be known to be Riima, and 
Riima as Rudra only. Having realised like this, 0 goddess, no 
difference exists between (Rama and me). In every age they who 
mentally mutter 'Riima, Riima, Riima', obtain all objects. 0 
goddess, I always remember Riima, having heard (the name oO 
whom, there would never be rebirth. 0 goddess, living in KiiSi, 
I always remember the lotus-eyed Riima with devotion and 
according to the sacred precept. Formerly Jambavat remembered 
that very handsome Riima, and installed the lord of the worlds 
known as Jiimbavat. Having bathed, eaten and worshipped the 
deity there, a man obtains (and lives in) Siva's heaven till the 
fourteen Indras (rule). Merely by bathing here a man obtains 
strength like that of Jiimbavat due to the grace of Sri 
Visvesvara. A man who having gone here, makes a gift of land. 
gets a thousandfold fruit on seeing Jii.mbavatesa.

=== PAGE 245 ===

VI. l 5 1 . 1-19 
2863 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FIFTYONE 
Dhavalesvara 
Mahiideva said: 
1 . 
A holy place superior to this is known as Indragrama, 
having bathed where formerly Indra became free from a terrible 
sin. 
Piirvati said: 
2. 
Due to which act did Indra ·acquire that terrible sin? 
How did he become free from that sin ? Tell it (to me) in detail. 
Mahiideva said: 
3-19. 
Formerly Indra, the lo rd of gods, and Namuci, the 
lord of demons, mutually agreed to kill each other without a 
weapon. 
Due to being ordered by a divine voice, Indra took 
foam and killed Namuci. 
Then 
it 
was 
the murder 
of a 
brahmaQa. Indra asked Brhaspati the means of destroying the 
sin. And by the order of Brhaspati the lord of gods came to 
this place on the northern bank of Sabhramati, and fashioned 
(there) a (holy) place. Due to his having bathed here he became 
free from the sin instantly. On his body was produced lustre 
white like the full moon. The killer of Vrtra (i.e. Indra) installed 
the (representation of) the god (called) 
Dhavalesvara. 
The 
Phallus is well-known in the world after Indra. When a sraddha 
is offered on a full-moon day, a new-moon day, sarilkranti (day), 
at an eclipse, the dead ancestors are satisfied for twelve years. 
He who, having reached Dhavalesvara, would feed brahmaQas, 
for him, having fed one brahmaQa a thousand brahmaQas would 
be fed. A man should give (to a brahmaQa) gold, land, garments 
according to his capacity. A white milch-cow with a calf should 
be given to a brahmaQa. The muttering (of the names of) 
Rudra etc . . which a brahmaQa would do after coming here, 
becomes a crorefold (in merit) due to Sri Mahesa's grace. A man 
who would observe a fast etc. at this holy place, certainly is 
endowed with all his desired objects. There is no doubt about 
this. A man who, having brought bilva-leaves, worships the lord, 
obtains on the earth religious merit, worldly objects and sensual

=== PAGE 246 ===

2864 
Padma Puriir)a 
pleasures. Dhavalesvara will remove the disease and blemish of 
those best men who go (to this holy place) especially on a Mon­
day. 0 goddess, I have not at all understood the greatness of 
those who especially offer worship to the lord on a Sunday. 
Those men who worship (the lord) here with a durvii, arka­
flowers, white lotuses, (other) lotuses or petals, are meritorious. 
A man, having brought a flower of svetiirka and having wor­
shipped Dhavalesa, always gets his desired (object) by the grace 
of Dhavalesa. In Krta (age) he was (called) Nilaka:JJ.tha who 
always brought about the well-being (of his devotees). 
The 
revered lord was known as Hara in Tretii (age). In Dvapara he 
was named Sarva, and Dhavalesvara in Kali (age). 
20-3 1 . 0 chief goddess, listen to the old account in this 
regard. Formerly a vaisya named Nandin lived in Indragriima. 
Intent on meditating upon Siva, he worshipped Siva. There 
always stood in the penance grove, the Phallus called Dhavala. 
He 
to whom Siva was dear, having got up everyday at dawn, 
was very much engrossed in worshipping Siva. 
He was engaged 
in the worship (of the lord) with flowers according to the rite 
laid down in the holy texts. Once a greedy hunter, a killer of 
beings, a sinner of sinful acts, wandered on the bank of Siibhra­
mati, crowded with beasts of prey, and killed the deer with 
arrows. The hunter, the killer of beings, wandering like this, 
came, by chance, where the Phallus was well worshipped. He 
saw the Phallus - the well-known Dhavalesvara, full of many 
wonders - well worshipped with many flowers and fruits. Having 
embraced the Phallus, he went to the bank of Sabhramati. 
There he drank water and had his mouth full with water. 
With 
one hand he carried the flesh of deer, and in the other hand he 
carried bilva-leaves for worship. Quickly coming near the Phallus 
he struck with his foot the worship (offered by Nandin). All the 
flowers were scattered here and there. With the mouthful of 
water he bathed the Phallus. 
With one hand he offered the 
bilva-leaves for worship. 
With the other hand he offered the 
flesh of deer. With a salutation by prostrating himself he made 
a mental resolve. 
32-48. •From today I shall carefully offer worship. 0 Satikara, 
from today you are my master, and I am your devotee.' Taking 
such a vow, the hunter came home. (When) in the morning

=== PAGE 247 ===

VI. l 5 1 .49-6l 
2865 
Nandin came to the temple, he saw all that the hunter had done. 
Seeing those misplaced (i.e. scattered) and impure things near 
Siva, (and seeing) all those (things) disturbed by the wicked one, 
Nandin was anxious (thinking) 'what strange (thing) has today 
happened to me. Due to my ill-luck the o bstacles that are told 
in the case of one who is engaged in Siva-worship, have approa­
ched.' Having thus thought for a long time and having washed 
the Siva-temple Nandin went home along the same way as he 
had come. 
Seeing Nandin dispirited, 
his family-priest said 
(these) words to him : "Why are you despondent?" Then to the 
family-priest Nandin said (these) words : "0 brahmal).a, today 
I saw impurity near Siva. 
I do not know who has done it 
there". Then the priest said (these) words to Nandin : "He who 
disturbed the worship of (i.e. offered 
with) flowers 
etc. 
is 
certainly a fool. 
He is dull-witted in what to do and what not. 
Therefore, 0 lord, you should not worry. In the morning go to 
the temple with me to catch the wicked one. I shall punish him." 
Hearing these words of the priest, Nandin remained at home at 
night with a pained mind. When the night Passed, he called the 
family-priest, and with the noble one Nandin went to the Siva­
temple. 
Having washed (the Phallus) he worshipped it 
with 
brahmal).as, covering it with many jewels and doing the five ways 
·of homage. When Nandin was eulogising like this two watches 
passed. 
He (hunter), 
Great Death 
of that 
form and very 
strong, came there. He was of the form of death, very fierce, 
brave with a bow in his hand. Seeing him, Nandin being fright­
ened, hid there. The family-priest also then bacame suddenly 
scared. 
49-6 1 . 
The hunter did there as before and without making 
any mistake he disturbed the worship with his foot and offered 
bilva-leaf. 
The hunter worshipped with the eatable of meat. 
Having fallen on the ground like a staff, he got up and went 
home. 
Seeing the great wonder, he (Nandin) thought for a 
long time along with the family-priest. Then he with his mind 
afflicted, asked the brahmaQas : "Tell the truth." All the brah­
mal).as together thought and spoke, according to the holy texts, 
to Nandin who had a fear : "Danger to the lord has come up. 
It is difficult to be warded off even by gods. Therefore, 0 best 
vaisya, take the Phallus to your house." Agreeing to do so

=== PAGE 248 ===

2866 
Padma Purii.r)a 
Nandin uprooted the great (Phallus) of Siva, brought it to his 
house and installed it in the proper manner. 
He fashioned a 
golden seat, well-adorned with fresh plantain-trees. With many 
offerings he worshipped (it). The next day the hunter came to 
the Siva-temple. When he looked (for the Phallus) he did not. 
see it. Breaking his silence he suddenly said these words with a 
wailing : "0 Sambhu, where have you gone? Show yourself to 
me, today. If I do not get your sight I shall cast my despicable 
body today. 0 Sambhu, 0 Jagannii.tha, 0 Tripurii.ntaka, 0 
Sa:tikara, 0 Rudra, 
0 Mahiideva, show yourself (to me)." 
Having thus scolded Siva with taunting (but) sweet words, the 
courageous hunter pierced, with a knife, his belly. Then having 
quickly pierced his arm he loudly and angrily said : "0 Sambhu, 
show yourself(to me). Where will you go having abandoned me ?" 
62-70. 
With these words the hunter threw his intestines, 
and took out flesh from everywhere (i.e. every part of his body), 
and threw it suddenly with his hand into the pit (where the 
Phallus was). Having purified his heart, he plunged into Sabhra­
mati. Similarly having brought water and bilva-leaf, he quickly 
worshipped (the lord) properly, and fell on the ground like a staff. 
When the hunter remained in meditation near Siva, then Rudra, 
surrounded by his attendants appeared there. He was fair like 
camphor, had braided and matted hair, and had the (crescent­
moon) on his crest. Seizing him by his hand, and consoling him, 
Rudra said : "0 brave one, 0 very wise one, 0 very intelligent 
one, you are my devotee. 0 devotee, ask for a boon which you 
have in your mind". Thus addressed by Rudra the very fierce 
(hunter) was full of joy. With great devotion he fell like a staff· 
on the ground. 
Then he said to Rudra : "I do not ask for a 
boon. 0 Rudra, I am your servant, and you are my master. 
There is no doubt about this. Give this-the most praiseworthy 
(condition) in the world, in existence after existence. You are 
my mother, my father, my brother, my friend. 
You are my 
preceptor, a great hymn, always known through hymns. " 
71-78. 
Having heard the words o f the hunter without (i.e. 
expressing) any desire, Siva made him the chief of his attendants 
and his doorkeeper. Then the three worlds were resonant with 
the sound of small drums, so also with the sound of kettle-drums 
and of conches. Large drums then sounded, so also hundreds of

=== PAGE 249 ===

VI. l 5 1 . 79-89 
2867 
tabors sounded. Being amazed at hearing that sound Nandin 
quickly went to the penance-grove where Siva was surrounded 
by his attendants. Then Nandin also saw the hunter, and the 
modest Nandi, full of amazement, said many words ; he desired 
to praise the hunter with a great concentration : "You have 
brought here Sambhu ; you are a devotee (of Siva), 
and a 
tormentor of enemies. I who am your devotee, have come 
here. 
(Please) report me to Sailkara." 
Having heard those 
words of him, the hunter quickly held his hand and (with him) 
approached Sail.kara. Revered Rudra laughed and said (these) 
words to the hunter : "Tell me who this one is, whom you have 
brought near the attendants." 
The hunter said: 
79-80. 
This is your devotee, 
so he is engaged in your 
worship. Everyday with gems, rubies and with diverse flowers, 
so also with his life and wealt.h you are undoubtedly worship­
ped. 
Therefore, 0 master, to whom your devotees are dear, 
know this to be Nandin. 
M ahadeva said: 
81-89. 0 you noble one, I know Nandin, living as a vaisya. 
0 very intelligent Mahakala, you are my devotee and friend. 
Those best men who are not deceptive, whose mind is free from 
fraud - such distinguished devotees are dear to me. 
Sambhu accepted the two as his attendants. Then there 
arrived many very bright aeroplanes. 
That 
very 
lustrous, 
excellent hunter emancipated the 
excellent vaisya. The two 
reached K!ilasa-world in very speedy aeroplanes, and obtained 
absorption into the magnanimous god. Girija 
(i.e. Parvati) 
waved lights before the two attendants as before her sons, and 
the goddess with a stately elephant-like gait laughed and spoke : 
"0 Mahadeva, there is no doubt that they are (dear to me) 
as you are. You are identical, have same gait, similar laughter and 
well honoured." Hearing those words of the 
goddess, the 
hunter and the vaisya also instantly turned away their faces, 
and in the presence of Sail.kara the two attendants quickly

=== PAGE 250 ===

2868 
Padma Pura'f)a 
spoke : "0 Siva , you should pity both of us. We shall always 
stand at your door. We repeatedly salute you." 
90-100. 
Lord Siva, knowing their sincerity, spoke to them 
with great attachment : "May you get your desired object." 
Since then the two have become doorkeepers (of Siva). 0 
goddess, they remain at Siva's door, and see him 
at mid-day. 
One is Nandin, (the other is the hunter) Mahakala. The two are 
dear to Siva. Those sinners, irreligious men, blind men, dumb 
men , crippled men, who are abandoned by their families, the 
wicked men, and men like ca])Qalas, or men of whatever types, 
who have gone (back) after having worshipped Dhavalesvara, 
will also go (to Siva). No doubt should be raised in this case. A 
bath (taken) here, and a gift (given) here (lead to the) proximity 
of Salikara. Those who have bathed in Sii.bhramati and have 
worshipped Dhavalesvara, go to Rudra's heaven. 
No doubt 
should be raised in this case. Those best men who bathe and 
give gifts here, 
enjoy moral merit, 
worldly prosperity and 
sensual pleasures and go to Siva's abode. A man certainly 
obtains that fruit which he gets (by bathing etc.) on the day of 
the lunar or solar eclipse, and on the (death) anniversary day of 
his dead ancestor. 
The desire-yielding 
cow everyday comes 
there by all means. 
And having come (there) she Properly 
worships god Siva. 0 best goddess, she undoubtedly goes to 
heaven. Due to the contact with that milk (of her), the Phallus 
is whitened. 
Since then its name has always come 
to 
be 
Dhavalesvara. 0 goddess, the beings that die there being urged 
by Death, go to the position of Siva (and stay there) as long as 
the moon and the sun (remain in the sky). 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FIFTYTWO 
Biiliipendratirtha 
Mahiideva said: 
1-1 1. 
On the bank of Sabhramati is the holy place, best 
among the holy places, known as Balii.pa, which gives enjoy-

=== PAGE 251 ===

VI. I 52.1 2-23 
2869 
ment and salvation. The holy place is supported by ascetics and 
is the resort of the wise. There a maiden, of a very strong vow, 
practised a severe vow. She, the virtuous one, matchless in 
beauty on the earth, was the daughter of the sage Ka:t;tva, was 
an unmarried religious student named Balavati. With many 
restraints the beautiful girl observed the vow of Savitri with the 
resolve : 'The Sun should be my husband'. Devoutly observing 
those restraints very difficult to practise, she passed ten years on 
the bank of Sabhramati. By that vow of her, penance, and 
devotion, the lord was pleased; and due to that abundance of 
her devotion, god Divakara (i.e. the Sun) came to the hermit­
age. The large-hearted one entered (the hermitage) after taking 
the form of a brahmaQ.a sage. Seeing the brahma:t;ta, the best 
due to his penance, the best among those who knew the Vedas, 
she honoured him in the manner of an anchorite. She, the 
auspicious devotee of the Sun, said to the ascetic : "0 revered 
best sage, 0 lord, what is your order? I shall give you everything 
according to my capacity except my body. I am the Sun's 
devotee. I shall never give you my hand. 0 ascetic, by means 
of vows, restraints and austerities I have to propitiate the Sun, 
the lord of the three worlds." 
1 2-23. When she spoke like this, Bhaskara, smiling and 
observing her who remained in the vow, spoke to her as it were ؑ
on soling her : "0 auspicious one, you are practising a severe 
vow, very difficult to practise. 0 maiden, your undertaking is 
as it should be. Everything is obtained by penance. Everything 
subsists in penance. 0 good one, by means of penance godhead, 
so also salvation, is obtained. 0 fortunate one, take these five 
badara-fruits from me." Giving her the badara-fruits, and 
telling her "Cook (these)" the Sun left. He, of a great glory, 
taking the form of a briihma:t;ta, left that auspicious one, and 
waited not far away at Indragrama without being seen by her. 
The Sun desiring to know her devotion remained as a briih­
ma:t;ta. Bhiiskara (i.e. the Sun) fashioned a grove of badara 
trees. Then the restrained girl, with the palms of her hands 
joined, and free from fatigue, resorted to (i.e. took) fire to cook 
the badara fruits. 0 goddess, the great one, very lustrous, cook­
ed the badara fruits. 0 chief goddess, very long time passed 
when she was cooking (them). A great heap of ash formed

=== PAGE 252 ===

2870 
Padma PuraTJ(J 
there, and the day came to a close. A great heap of wood 
was burnt by the fire. With a desire to please the brahmaؒ; a, 
she, after washing her feet, put them into the fire, looking charm­
ing, and burnt them for the badara(-fruits). 0 sinless one, 
again and again burning her feet, she held them up. Seeing that 
act of her, the Sun was pleased. Then he manifested his form 
to the maiden; and being very much pleased, he spoke to the 
girl of a severe vow : 
The Sun said: 
24-32. 
0 girl, I am pleased with your devotion, penance 
and observance of the vow. Therefore, 0 girl, may your desired 
object be accomplished. Endowed with penance, you will stay 
in my abode at this holy place. This excellent holy place will be 
known by your name. 
It is known as Balapa. It stands on the bank of Slibhramati. 
It is well-known in the three worlds, and was formerly praised 
by brahmaQa sages. 
A pure man who stays at Balatirtha 
for three nights and having bathed at sunrise looks at the 
reddish Sun, goes to the Sun's heaven. No doubt should be 
raised in this matter. On a Sunday, or on a Sailkranti day, 
especially on the seventh, during the Sun's equinoctial passage, 
so also on the lunar and solar eclipse day, he should bathe and 
gratify gods, dead ancestors and grandsires. TJlen he should 
give a cow made of jaggery to brahmaoas, and rice mixed with 
jaggery. Those men who worship the reddish Sun.with kara­
vira and japa flowers, live in the Sun's world. A man should 
give a red cow and a bull also. That man obtains the fruit of a 
sacrifice, and would not go to hell. A sick man is free from his 
disease, and a man that is bound becomes free from bondage. 
By offering piQQ.as at this holy place, grandsires are pleased. 
M ahiideva said: 
33-45. 0 ascetic lady, like this there is another greatness of 
this holy place. Listen to an old, great account, narrated by 
Vyasa. Formerly there was an old buffalo disabled due to old 
age. He was unable to carry loads. (So) the trader abandoned 
him. In the summer he went to the great river to drink water.

=== PAGE 253 ===

Vl. l53.l-6 
2871 
Due to (ill) luck, he plunged into the mud and died. Due to 
the glory of this holy place his bones were washed away into 
the holy water. He became (after rebirth) the son of the king of 
Kanyakubja, and remembered his former birth. Remembering 
his own account, and the great glory of the holy place, he came 
(there), and after bathing (there), gave many gifts. He installed 
there (the representation of) Mahesvara, the god of gods. A 
man having bathed at this holy place, having worshipped Mahi­
ßesvara, and having seen the red Sun, is freed from all sins. 
The water of Sabhramati, which flows there from the east to 
the west, is holier than even that at Prayaga, is great, and fulfils 
all desires. The gifts given here to best brahma1;1as, the oblations 
offered into fire here, the sraddha offered here, and the mutter­
ing (of a hymn done) here would be inexhaustible. (By giving) 
the gift of a cow, land, sesamum seeds, gold, garments, grains, 
a bed, a seat, a vehicle, an umbrella, a man obtains whatever 
object he desires. Due to the grace of Sri Mahesa and the 
glory of this holy place, this holy place BiUapendra is auspi­
cious, and always removes sins. Seeing it the sages are always 
free from attachment. There the holy place named Mahißa (and) 
Sveta gives great religious merit. 0 chief goddess, having bathed 
there a man is not reborn. 0 goddess, there is no doubt that a 
man gets that fruit (by bathing) at this holy place, which a man 
gets by bathing in Godavari. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FIFTYTHREE 
Durdhar$e8vara 
M ahiideva said: 
1-6. 
I shall (now) describe another excellent holy place 
Durdha߂esvara, by merely remembering which even a sinner 
would become meritorious. When the war between gods and 
demons had taken place, and when the demon had died, Usanas 
(i.e. Sukra), the son of Bhargava, had observed h߃re a vow 
difficult to practise, had propitiated 
Mahadeva, 
not 
easily

=== PAGE 254 ===

2872 
Padma Puriir;za 
accessible and the cause of the world, and obtained the formula 
(called) Mrtasaiijivani (bringing the dead back to life) from 
Siva, for the demons. It is well-known in the world. A man 
who has bathed at Kayatirtha and worshipped Mahesvara called 
Durdharǈesvara, is freed from all sins. 0 
daughter of the 
(Himalaya) Mountain, in this respect listen to an old account. 
Formerly when the battle between Vrtra and Indra took place, 
the gods were vanquished by the demons. lndra, the lord of 
gods, thinking what to do, went to Brahaspati. 
Indra said: 
7-8. 
You are our preceptor. You are always actually the 
guardian of gods. You are famous, the best of sages. 0 treasure 
of kindness, favour me. I am vanquished by Vrtra, 0 you of a 
good vow, where shall I go ? 
Brhaspati said: 
9- 12. 0 lord of gods, listen. I shall tell you (that) by which 
you (will) always (be) happy. If you desire your well-being, then 
do as I tell you. Go to Sabhramati, and having gone there be 
happy. The god called Durdharßa. causing well-being, always 
dwells there. 0 lord of gods, he gives desired objects. This is the 
truth and the truth only. 
Having heard Brhaspati's words, 
he went to that river. 
Having bathed there, the lord of gods worshipped that Mahesa. 
Due to the bath and worship Sri Mahesvara was pleased. 
Mahadeva said: 
13. 
I will always give every object that you desire. 
Hearing (these) words, the lord of gods said (these) great 
(i.e. important) words : 
Indra said: 
14-1 5. 
You are the lord of all the worlds. You are the 
cause and the (highest) position. You are always perceived by 
me to be god Visvesvara. 0 Visvesvara, 0 master of gods, if you 
are pleased, then, 0 Mahadeva, kill Vrtra. This is my great 
desire.

=== PAGE 255 ===

VI. l 53 . 1 6-VI. l 54.5 
2873 
M ahiideva said: 
16-17. 
0 lord of gods, at your words, this Vrtra is (i.e. 
will be) killed by me. 0 lord of gods, take the weapon which 
will be given by me. Due to its contact with (his) life, you will 
certainly kill him. 
Indra said: 
18. 
0 lord of the universe, what is that missile with which 
I shall kill Vrtra? What is that which you have fashioned as 
superior to the thunderbolt? When have you fashioned it? 
M ahiideva said: 
19-23. 
This is the Pasupata missile which I have formerly 
fashioned. It was not given to anyone (else). 0 Indra, I have 
preserved it for you. 0 god, you have bathed here and wor­
shipped (me) here. Therefore, take this weapon from me, with 
which you will kill v rtra. 
Due to Sri Mahesa's favour, Indra obtained it ; and with 
that he killed the very mighty Vrtra. All that took place here 
by the grace of Durdharßesa. That was secured merely by a 
bath and worship, 0 goddess. It was secured due to the glory 
of the holy place. 0 beautiful lady, this is the truth and the 
(only) truth. Realising this, 0 chief goddess, a man should bathe 
there. Seeing Mahadeva destroys all sins. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FIFTYFOUR 
lrha¢gadhiiresvara 
M ahiideva said: 
1-5. On the bank of Siibhramati is a very great purifying 
secret holy place. Known as Khac,lgadhara, it will be concealed 
in the Kali age . A man who happens to bathe here and drinks 
water here occasionally, is freed from all sins and is honoured

=== PAGE 256 ===

2874 
Padma Purii.r.za 
in Rudra's heaven. Here that meritorious, auspicious &i.bhra­
mati, following Kasyapa, and going to the nether world, was 
held in his matted hair by Rudra. Rudra, with the name Kha9ga­
dhii.ra, dwells there only. 
0 
chief goddess, 
sinners 
having 
bathed here, have gone to heaven. In this case they narrate this 
old account about the very difficult vow practised by a moun­
taineer. 
Piirvati said: 
6-7. 
What was the name of the mountaineer? Which vow 
did he practise ? I desire to hear all that. Tell it to me properly. 
0 best among speakers, there is none else but you. Therefore, 
0 god, tell me all that (as) it is beneficial to hear. 
Mahiideva said: 
8-22. 
Formerly there was a very fearful, wicked 
(man) 
named Ca:Q.c.\a. He, the cruel one, was a rogue, was of a bad con­
duct, and fearful to beings. The wicked one constantly killed 
the fish with a net. He would cause to fall down deer, beasts, 
black antelopes and porcupines, so also many kinds of birds 
and pierce them with spear. The angry one killed birds and 
especially peacocks. The fowler was very sinful, wicked, and 
dear to wicked people. His wife was of that sort( only}-unchaste 
and suffering from severe diseases. When he was amusing him­
self like this, much time passed. Once the sinful one remained 
on a bilva tree at night with a bow in his hand to which an 
arrow was fixed to kill a boar. Thus he, without winking his 
eyes, passed the night. Even though he was angry, he cut off 
(i.e. plucked) many leaves of the bilva tree on the Caturdasi of 
the bright half of Mii.gha, 0 daughter of the (Himalaya) Moun­
tain. Those (leaves) fell on the Phallus that was at the root of 
that bilva tree through (his good) luck. All that became the 
worship of Siva. By throwing mouthfuls (on the Phallus) the 
ignorant, wicked fowler gave it a grand bath. That wicked 
fowler became free from sins at the time of moonrise in the 
bright half of the month of Mii.gha. His impetuous wife devoid 
of hope and without food, also came near him-i.e. at the place 
where the fowler remained. He had not secured any hog, or deer 
or buffalo (as his hunt). So that woman had brought (for him)

=== PAGE 257 ===

VI. I 54.23-36 
2875 
food to eat. He saw his impetuous, cruel-eyed wife coming (to 
him). That wife of him fell into water-into a river. Just then 
she said to Ca:Q.Qa : "Come on, eat quickly the :flesh of fish that 
I have now brought for you. 0 fool, what did you do the 
previous day ? Flesh is not seen by your side. You have ruined 
your family (as) it (will have to) fast (now)." 
23-3 1 . 
Having heard these words of Ca:Q.Qii, he of a fierce 
form, had become one of a pure heart due to the Sivariitri-fast 
and keeping awake at night. He of a pure vow (went) to the 
river to bathe. When the wicked o ne was bathing, a dog came 
there. 0 chief goddess, the dog ate all that flesh there. Ca:Q.Qii 
was very angry, and approached the dog to strike him. Then that 
angry Ca:Q.Qii was warded off by Ca:Q.Qa : "Do not hit him. What 
evil has he done?" She said : "This wicked 
one has eaten the 
food. 0 fool, what will you who are hungry, eat today ?" 
The mountaineer said: 
I am pleased with (the fact) that the dog has eaten the food. 
What is the use of this transient and infirm body ? 0 passionate 
woman, those who with full sincerity nourish their bodies, should 
be known as sinners, outcast from both the worlds. Therefore, 
giving up pride, passion and wickedness be composed by con­
sidering the truth; and be steady with the knowledge of the 
truth. 0 you beautiful lady, with the vow of Kha9gadhiira I 
shall today abandon this my body. What is the use of my living 
long? 
32-36. 
Saying so, when he drew his sword and (was about 
to) cut off his head, many attendants prompted by Siva came 
(there). Many aeroplanes also came near him. The mountaineer 
having seen those aeroplanes and the attendants also, spoke 
with great devotion to them : "Why have all of you, wearing 
(rosaries of) rudriik߄a. come (here) ? All of you resemble crys­
tal ; all of you have the crescent moon on your crests ; all of 
you have braided and matted hair; you have your garments 
covered with hide ; you have adorned yourselves with the neck­
laces of serpents' hoods. You are endowed with majesty. Your 
valour is like that of Rudra. 0 tell me the proper truth." The 
attendants of Rudra, asked at that time by the mountaineer, 
spoke :

=== PAGE 258 ===

2876 
Padma Purib]a 
The attendants said: 
37-41 . 
0 Caςc;la, we are sent by Siva, the highest lord. 
Accompanied by your wife, come quickly, and get into the 
carriage. Due to the effect of the act, viz. your having worship­
ped the Phallus on Sivaratri, you have obtained the highest 
position. 
Thus addressed by Virabhadra, he, laughing a little said : 
"What meritorious act have I, a sinful, foolish, wicked moun­
taineer, interested in hunting, done? I am always acting sin­
fully. How ߅hall I live in heaven ? Tell (me) how I have today 
worshipped the Phallus. I, having a great curiosity, am asking 
(you). Please tell (it to me)." 
Virabhadra said: 
42-47. 
0 Caςc;la, Maha.deva, god of gods, called Gailga­
dhara, lord of Uma, is today pleased with you and with your 
wife. Today you did what was proper for the occasion and 
worship also. While looking for a boar, 0 Caoc;la, you plucked 
the bilva leaves ; they fell on the top of the Phallus at that time. 
Therefore, 0 lord, you are meritorious. On the great (bilva-) 
tree you certainly kept awake. Due to that keeping awake the 
lord of the universe was pleased. Under the pretext of watching 
the boar, 0 glorious hunter, you observed a fast on the Siva­
ratri day, though by chance. Due to that fast and keeping awake 
the magnanimous best god was pleased. The very dignified 
giver of boons gives all boons to favour you. 
48-53. 
Thus addressed by the intelligent Virabhadra, the 
mountaineer also got into an excellent aeroplane, while the 
attendants, deities and all beings were watching. At that time 
large drums, kettle drums 
and musical instruments sounded. 
There were the sounds of lutes, flutes, tabors, with dancing and 
acting. Chief gandharvas sang, and bands of celestial nymphs 
danced. He, being fanned with chowries, and with 
various 
umbrellas (held over his head), was taken with great ceremony 
near Siva. Even the mountaineer reached (Siva) due to a bath 
at a holy place and worshipping Siva. Then what to say of 
those men who in this world offer flowers etc., fruits, sandal,

=== PAGE 259 ===

VI.l 54.54-72 
2877 
tambiila and sacred grains with faith and devotion to Siva, the 
highest soul? They are Rudras. There is no doubt about this. 
M ahadeva said: 
54-57. 
Since then that holy place is well-known as Khac;lga­
dhara. 0 chief goddess, in the Kali age, it will be hidden. 0 
you daughter of the (Himalaya) Mountain, those who bathe 
(here) in the month of Magha or Vaisakha, and especiaUy on 
the full-moon day of Kartika, are released. Vasiǈtha, Vamadeva, 
Bharadvaja and Gautama come here to bathe and to see god 
(Siva) the Trident-holder. The Phallus remained there in the 
(first) three ages. 0 Parvati, it does not remain (there) in the 
Kali age. At that time the sage Visvamitra had cursed me. 
Piirvati said: 
58. 
I certainly desire to hear from you, 0 lord of gods, 
how that curse was pronounced upon you by the sage. 
Mahiideva said: 
59-12. 
0 goddess, on one occasion the great ascetic Visva­
mitra came to this very wonderful sacred place, Khac;lgadhiira. 
Having bathed in the Sabhramati, he paid me visit. Worship­
ping (me) in various ways he always remained there. O beautiful 
lady, there was at that time a very wicked hunter of a sinful 
form. He put flesh on (the Phallus of) Siva. Seeing that flesh 
(there) again, Visvamitra then said : "Oh ! the sinner has done a 
wicked deed. The highest soul, Siva, has not punished him : 
Therefore, I shall, having determined, certainly curse him." 
Having thought like this, he then cursed me, 0 goddess. "In 
this terrible Kali age you will remain completely 
hidden." 
Having thus cursed me, that best sage left. Since then, 0 god­
dess, due to the sage's curse, I am hidden. If they especially 
offer a worship at my place, their sin perishes at that moment 
only. Those who having fashioned a clay image of me worship 
it, especially live at this place of (i.e. sacred to) me. In this 
Kali age it is called Khac;lgadha.resvara. In Krta (age) it was 
(known as) Mandira ; in Treta (age) it was known as Gaurava. 
In Dvapara (age) it was known as Visva, and Khac;lgesvara in

=== PAGE 260 ===

2878 
Padma Purdrja 
Kali (age). 0 chief goddess, my place lies on the southern side. 
Knowing this, a wise man, fashioning (my) image there, wor­
ships (it) everyday. He would obtain the desired fruit. The man 
obtains, on the earth, religious merit, worldly prosperity, sen­
sual pleasures and (ultimately) salvation. 0 chief goddess, there 
would come no misery to those who offer incense, light, articles 
of food, so also sandal etc., to Mahesvara, the lord of the 
worlds ; this is the truth, the (only) truth, 0 beautiful lady. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FIFTYFIVE 
DugdheJvara 
M ahiideva said: 
1 -4. 
To the south of Kha9gadhara is a highly purifying 
holy place called Dugdhesvara, which destroys all sins. One 
who bathes and sees Siva (called) Dugdhesvara at this holy 
place, gets instantly relieved of the pain due to sin. Dadhici 
practised penance at the auspicious bank of Sabhramati since it 
is meritorious as Candrabhaga has joined Ganga there. Every­
thing like a bath, gifts, muttering (of hymns), worship and 
penance (done) there, becomes inexhaustible by the power of 
Dugdhatirtha. 
Piirvati said: 
5. 
0 lord, I desire to hear about the origin of Dughesvara. 
0 lord of gods, tell (me about) the greatness of Dugdhatirtha. 
Mahiideva said: 
6-26. 
Formerly in the war between gods and demons gods 
were defeated by demons. 
Intent 
on fleeing they came to 
Dadhici's hermitage. Having abandoned their weapons there 
only, the gods went to the ten directions. Then having heard 
the uproar of the demons, Dadhici Bhargava, after having sub­
merged the weapons in water, drank them. After (some) time 
the gods, eager to take the missiles, (came there) with Brhas-

=== PAGE 261 ===

VI. l 55.27-40 
2879 
pati. In the hermitage serpents sported with mongooses with 
pleasure. Seeing many such wonders in that hermitage, all the 
gods were very much amazed. At the place where the auspicious 
Sabhramati has joined Candrabhii.gii, they saw the excellent sage 
seated on a seat shining with great lustre like the sun, accompani­
ed by fire 
and by his wife Suvarcii.. 
All the excellent gods 
saw after salutation the best sage like Brahmii. with Siivitri. Then 
the gods led by Brhaspati said : "It is already known in the 
three worlds that you are a donor. We have approached you 
with a request. All of us are full of fear. Please give us our 
missiles." The best, very intelligent sage, thus addressed, said 
to the gods : "0 gods, submerging them with a hymn, I drank 
them (up)." Then the gods said to the briihma:Q.a : "To kill the 
demons quickly give your bones." The bnihma:Q.a said, "(Here) 
they are given." Speaking like this to them he sent his wife to the 
hermitage. Then the delighted, very intelligent brii.hma:Q.a smiled 
and said to the gods : "0 gods, I have drunk them. Take them 
(back) properly." Saying so, 0 goddess, the briihma:Q.a, profi­
ci(mt in abstract meditation resorted to it. Then with deceitful 
words the gods said to the smiling briihma:Q.a : "0 briihma:Q.a, 
how can we get them as long as you are alive?" The brii.hma:Q.a 
sage laughed and said : ''Wait for a moment. 0 gods, I myself 
shall abandon my body today." Speaking like this, 0 goddess, 
that briihma:Q.a, proficient in abstract meditation, resorted to it, 
and instantly went to heaven, whence he does not return even 
today. Then all the hosts of gods, seeing him dead, thought : 
'How shall we cut up (his body) ?' Then Indra called Surabhi 
and said to her : "By my words lick up the body of the best 
briihma:Q.a." Saying "all right" and honouring his words, she 
licked it at that moment only. The cow instantly made that 
body fieshless. Gods took those bones, and fashioned weapons 
(with them). The 
missile (made) 
from 
his 
backbone was 
Brahmasiras. 
27-40. 
Having fashioned weapons and missiles, the very 
powerful and brave gods, intent on destroying Vrtra, quickly 
went (to him). Then Suvarcii, Dadhica's wife, who was sent for 
the accomplishment of the mission of gods, having come (there) 
saw her dead husband and (his) body cut up. The chaste lady, 
knowing that entire deed of the gods, was angry. Then Suvarcii.,

=== PAGE 262 ===

2880 
Pad11UJ PuraTJ.a 
the very angry wife of the excellent sage, pronounced a curse : 
"0 very wicked gods, you were cursed many times, and (yet) 
you are greedy. Therefore, may all of you with Indra, be child­
less from today." Thus she spoke. That female ascetic thus 
cursed the gods. Sitting at the root of the asvattha tree, she 
stayed on the bank of Sii.bhramati. That pregnant chaste lady 
cut off her belly. From her womb the child of noble Dadhica 
came out. That great lord Pippahida was actually the incarna­
tion of Rudra. The mother Suvarca laughed, and said (these) 
important words to the child Pippalii.da : ''Live near this asvattha 
tree, 0 illustrious one, and be auspicious to all." Talking just 
like that to her son, that chaste lady Suvarca went to her 
husband through profound meditation. Thus that wife of Dad­
hica followed her husband to heaven. Those gods, having 
fashioned the weapons and missiles, who were very powerful 
and brave, who were led by Indra, and who were eager (to 
fight) came to the demons. The desire-yielding cow poured out 
milk at the place where the brahmaQa (Dadhica) had perished. 
By the power of the sage the milk became of the form of a 
Phallus. 0 goddess, it is known as Dugdhesvara (situated) on 
the bank of Sii.bhramati. Since then the holy place is well-known 
on the earth by that name. Its greatness is matchless, and des­
troys sins merely by being heard. Those men too, who devoutly 
listen to the (greatness of) Dugdhesvara, getting free from sins, 
go to the great position of Rudra. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FIFTYSIX 
Candresvara 
M ahiideva said: 
1-15. 
To the east of Dugdhesvara where the river named 
Candrabhaga has joined (Sabhramati), there is a highly purify­
ing holy place. There god Candresvara, always giving religious 
merit dwells. He is Siva who is always all-pervading and who, 
the great one, gives happiness to people. Those who always

=== PAGE 263 ===

VI. l 57. 1-5 
2881 
bathe and meditate here, would get the fruit of that due to 
worshipping Siva on (the bank of) Sii.bhramati. Soma (i.e. the 
Moon) practised penance here for a long time. Therefore, (the 
Phallus of) Mahesvara called Candresvara was installed here. 
Sukra also practised penance near Candrabhii.gii.. Therefore, the 
holy place is superior to (other) holy places on the earth. 0 
chief goddess, the Phallus fashioned by the sages is concealed 
in Kali(-age). 
Undoubtedly a golden Phallus is seen there. 
Those men who, coming here, bathe 
and drink (water) and 
worship Siva, obtain religious merit and worldly prosperity. 
Those who especially do the act of giving a bull etc. enjoy (in) 
heaven, 
and then go to Siva's abode. 0 goddess, those men 
who will everyday come for a bath near Candrabhii.ga, should 
be known as meritorious. Those men who go to the other bank 
and worship Siva, Sri Hara, named Candresvara who cuts off 
sins (are meritorious). Those best men who, having come here, 
especially do the muttering (in honour) of Rudra etc., should 
be known to be of the form of Siva. 0 best goddess, those men 
who always bathe here, should be known to be Viĸ:o.u's forms. 
There is no doubt about this. Those who again offer here a 
srii.ddha with sesamum-pil.J.Q.a, also go to Vig1u's position due 
to the efficacy of the offering of the pil}.Q.a. Here gifts should be 
given and a bath should be taken according to the proper rite. 
Having bathed here men are absolved of (the sins) like killing a 
brii.hmal}.a. Those who especially plant a fig-tree on this bank, 
go, after death, to Siva's position (and stay there) as long as the 
Moon and the Sun (remain there in the sky). 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FIFTYSEVEN 
Pippaliidatlrtha 
M ahadeva said: 
1 -5. 
Near Dugdhesvara there is a charming, highly purify­
ing, holy place, well-known in the world by the name of (i.e. 
after) Pippalii.da. 
Formerly the sage desiring acquittal from

=== PAGE 264 ===

2882 
Padma PuriiTJa 
the debt of his father, the noble Dadhica, practised penance 
here, and by the words (i.e. the order) of his mother, he pro­
duced a Krtyii.l (i.e. a fearful female deity) resembling the sub­
marine fire. A man having bathed and drunk (water) here, des­
troys (the sin of) the murder of a brahma1;1a. Pippalada, the 
lord of gods, is concealed on the bank of Sabhramati. 0 
goddess, by bathing there a man would enjoy salvation. The 
planting of fig trees should be done properly. Having done this, 
0 great goddess, a man is free from the bondage of his deeds. 
Parvati said: 
6-7. 
Explain to me why that Krtya was produced. 0 lord, 
tell me what that Krtya did formerly. Which son brought her 
for the acquittance of the debt of his father? 
Mahadeva said: 
8-1 1 . 
That excellent sage Dadhica (i.e. Dadhica's 
son). 
came (here) for (practising) penance. 
The great-souled sage 
practised a great (i.e. severe) penance here. A demon named 
Kolasura came there to create an obstacle. He certainly caused 
many obstacles. That was noticed by his (i.e. Pippalada's) good 
son, the intelligent KahoQa. 0 chief goddess, for the destruc­
tion (of the demon) he produced the Krtya there. She killed 
the great demon named Kola. Therefore, 0 Parvati, the holy 
place is concealed in Kali(-age) . 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FIFTYEIGHT 
Nimbarkadevatirtha 
M ahiideva said: 
1-1 1 . 
Next to Pippalada is an excellent holy place 
called 
Picumandarka on the bank of Sabhramati, destroying disease 
1 . Krtya : A female deity to whom sacrifices are offered for destructive­
and magical purposes.

=== PAGE 265 ===

VI. 1 58. 12-VI. 1 59. 1 3 
2883 
and bad odour. Formerly in the war with (the demon} KoHi­
hala, the demons vanquished gods. (Being) subtle, they entered 
trees with a desire for (saving) their life. There Sambhu remain­
ed in the bilva (tree), the immutable Viß:Q.U in asvattha, lndra 
in siriǈa. and god Sun in nimba (tree). Thus the gods properly 
remained like that in the trees. Till the powerful Viß:Q.U killed 
the demon Kolahala, they remained resorting to the trees. The 
god that resorted to a particular tree, became one with it. 
Therefore, one should not destroy it. Thus due to the Sun's 
taking rest (here), Picumandarka is an excellent holy place 
which removes a disease after a man takes bath in it, and 
which is on the bank of Sabhramati. After going there, if a 
man would especially worship the Sun, he gets the desired 
fruit by worshipping (him). Those men who after having gone 
there, recite the twelve names, are meritorious till they live. 
There is no doubt about this. An intelligent man who would 
recite these twelve names, viz. A.ditya, Bhaskara, Bba.nu, Ravi, 
Visvaprakasaka, Tikß:Q.athsu, Marta:Q.Qa, Siirya and Prabha.kara, 
so also Vibba.vasu, Sahasrakßa and Piißan, obtains, 0 daughter 
of the (Himalaya) Mountain, wealth, sons and grandsons. 
12-14. 
A brahma:Q.a who, resorting to (i e. reciting) each 
name would worship (the Sun) on the earth, would be endowed 
with wealth and mastery of the Vedas for seven existences. A 
߆atriya obtains a kingdom. A vaisya would get wealth. A 
siidra secures devotion. Therefore, a man should recite (this) 
great hymn. There never was, nor there will be, a holy place 
superior to Nimbarka ; having bathed and drunk (water) here a 
man would certainly enjoy salvation. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FIFTYNINE 
Kotaratirtha 
Mahiideva said: 
1-13. 
A little away from it is the excellent Siddhakßetra, 
0 goddess. Formerly Aniruddha was chosen by Citralekha for

=== PAGE 266 ===

2884 
Padma Purib)a 
Ußa. He was taken to Bii:J.tasura's city formerly and he stayed 
in his (i.e. Ba:t;.asura's) house. Checked by nooses and arrows, 
he then remembered Kotara.kǈi. She is actually the power of 
Viß:Q.u, always engaged in protecting (the 
devotees). 
Krß:t;J.a 
installed (the image of) this goddess here on the bank of the 
river. Due to the hymn of Aniruddha, returning to Dvaraka, 
after having vanquished Ba:Q.asura in a battle, she actually came 
near (him). A man having carefully bathed for one year at that 
holy place, and having seen Kotarakßi's face, obtains much 
wealth. A man bathing at Siddha-tirtha, and seeing (the god­
dess) living at Kotara, is hono ured in Rudra's heaven (after 
being taken) in a vehicle of (i.e. to which) lions (are yoked). 0 
beautiful lady, even by remembering her, he too is freed. There­
fore, those men who go here, enjoy salvation. A man, after 
having gone there, should especially bathe, and should delibe­
rately recite the hymn of Kotarakßi, 0 Parvati. Kotarakßi has 
a universal form. She has great divine power. She is superior 
in strength. She in Tripurii, is the destroyer of Tripura ; is Siva 
and of the form of Siva. She is said to be the daughter of 
Sarasvati. She is Durga. She removes misery. She is Bhairavi, 
Bhairavakßi, and Lakǈmi, to whom the people (i.e. devotees) of 
the goddess are dear, 0 Chief goddess. Thus various names 
(of her) are mentioned. Those who recite them go near Siva. 
0 beautiful lady, those wise men who mutter the hymn com­
posed by Aniruddha, get freed from troublesome bondage. 
This is the truth, and the (only) truth. The holy place fashioned 
by Kotara on the earth is best among holy places. Merely on 
seeing it the heaps of sins (of a man) perish . 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SIXTY 
Viimanatirtha 
M ahiideva said: 
1-5. 
A holy place superior to this holy place is well-known 
as Tirtharaja. Here seven rivers with their water mixed 
with

=== PAGE 267 ===

Vl . l 61 . 1 - l l 
2885 
sandal :ftow. A bath here is especially a hundred times superior 
(i.e. more meritorious) to one at any other holy place. Here, 
Vamana (i.e. Vi߇ou), the greatest among gods, himself dwells. 
He who, on the Dva.dasi of the month of Magha would give 
a cow made of sesamum, is free from all sins, and would eman­
cipate a hundred (members) of his family. A devout man, who 
would give here even water mixed with sesamum-seeds to the 
dead ancestors, has (indeed) offered sriiddha for thousand years. 
The dead ancestors say this. If a man feeds briihmaoas at this 
holy place with jaggery (and) sweetened milk, then, when one 
briihmaQa is fed, a thousand would be fed (by him). 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SIXTYONE 
Somatcrtha 
Mahadeva said: 
1-7. A man (then) should go from there to Somatirtha which 
is hidden on the bank of S3.bhramati. Bhava having come out 
from the nether world, became K.alagni there. When a man 
bathes at Somatirtha and sees Somesvara Siva, he undoubtedly 
obtains the fruit of drinking Soma. The man becomes handsome, 
fortunate, enjoys (pleasures), is proficient in all sciences in this 
world, and would go to Siva after death. 0 beautiful lady, in 
this matter I shall tell you an old account ; listen to it ; hearing 
it one is free from the sins like that of the murder of a briihmaQa. 
Sage Kaußitaka especially practised a penance. He gave up food, 
and was very much engaged in eating leaves (only). Then he 
subsisted on air and was devoted to meditation on the self. Thus 
for many ages he practised severe penance there. Some time, 
fortunately (for him) Mahesvara was very much pleased. "0 
bnihmaQa, I shall (give) you all that you ask for." 
Ka¸itaka said: 
8-1 1 . 0 lord of gods, let a Phallus spring up here by your 
grace. Let there certainly be here the god called Somesvara,

=== PAGE 268 ===

2886 
Padma Puriir)4 
Having bathed and eaten here, may a man obtain his 
desired 
fruit. If the best men especially mutter hymns of Rudra etc. at 
this place, they obtain religious virtue and worldly objects. A 
sonless man gets a 
son, and a poor man obtains wealth. One 
desiring a kingdom undoubtedly gets that kingdom. 0 lord, if 
you are pleased, give all that to me. 
The lord said: 
12-1 7. 
Then the lord of gods gave everything to the twice­
born. Since then the holy place is well-known as Somaliil.ga. 
Those who worship Sadasiva with sandal or bilva-leaves, obtain 
happiness due to the birth of a son etc. in the human body (i.e. 
existence). Similarly, he who, on 
a Monday, goes to Siva's 
temple, always gets his desired objects due to the grace of Soma­
liilga. 0 goddess, having gone there, with whatever desire a man 
offers a fruit etc. all that desire is surely fulfilled. Those who 
worship god Sri Mahesa, Pinakin with karavira :flowers or pari­
jata :flowers, obtain, 0 best goddess, the best position of Siva. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SIXTYTWO 
Kapotatlrtha 
Mahiideva said: 
1-7a. 
Thence, 0 goddess, one should go to Kapotikatirtha 
where the water of Sabhramati :flows to the east. That man who 
always offers a pio9a there, after dedicating it to his dead 
ancestors, and along with wild fruits and :flowers on every 
parvan day, and who offers portions of food to the crows, dogs, 
etc., would very happily cross over Yama's path. A man having 
bathed at that sacred place with white mustard seeds on the 
full-moon day of Vaisakha, should worship the excellent deity 
Pracinesvara. He would emancipate himself, his dead ancestors 
and grandsires. Here a pigeon, having gladly offered himself 
to a guest, was praised by hosts of gods who had gone to heaven

=== PAGE 269 ===

Vl. l 62.7bc- l 8 
2887 
in aeroplanes. Since then the holy place is known as Kapota. 
Having bathed and drunk (water) there, a man removes (the sin 
of) the murder of a brahmal}.a. 
Piirvati said: 
7bc. 
0 lord, tell me, how the pigeon offered his body. What 
was the cause? 0 lord of gods, I do not know (all this). 
Mahiideva said: 
8-1 8. 
0 chief goddess, at this holy place there is a great fig 
tree. 
Its innumerable large branches are seen on the ground. 
Many beings lived there, so also birds. 0 chief goddess, a pigeon 
had built his house (i.e. nest) there. 
The lord of birds, always 
greatly devoted to Vißl}.u, verily lived along with his family on 
its branch. 0 goddess. once on the Dvidasi day, the day of (i.e. 
sacred to) Vißl}.U, a hawk came there as a guest, O beautiful lady. 
0 daughter of the (Himalaya) Mountain, he said : "0 pigeon, 
give me the :flesh of your body. Otherwise I shall curse you. To­
day on the day of (i.e. sacred to) Vigtu, I, oppressed with hunger, 
have come (here). 
Therefore, 0 lord give the :flesh to me who 
am afflicted with hunger." 
0 goddess, the pigeon, a great 
devotee of Vißl}.u, having heard the words of the falcon, offered 
his body without hesitation. 0 best goddess, due to the power 
of the gift this place became a holy place called Kipotaka, which 
is a great holy place and is the (most) purifying among the 
purifying places. 0 best goddess, a man who, having bathed 
here and worshipped Siva, offers desired food to guests, enjoys 
happiness in this world and goes to the eternal (place) of VißJ;tu. 
The pigeon, having offered his body to the noble one went to the 
heaven of VißJ;tu (and will live there) as long as the Moon and 
the Sun (are there in the sky). Therefore, O goddess, having gone 
there, a man should always worship a guest. Having worshipped 
a guest there, he certainly obtains everything.

=== PAGE 270 ===

2888 
Padma Purdrja 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SIXTYTHREE 
Gotlrtha 
Mahiideva said: 
1-5. 
The best holy place among the holy places is the well­
known Gotirtha, destroying great sins and situated near Kasyapa­
pool. There is no doubt that whatever sins, like the murder of 
a brahmat;ta, are there, they perish on bathing at Gotirtha. 
Cows that had become dark due to some former sin, again 
became white on having bathed at that sacred place. Having 
bathed there, a man on offering grass etc. to cows, is free from 
the debt of Matrs by the grace of the cow-mothers. A man who, 
having gone to and bathed at Gotirtha, gives a milch cow to 
chief brahma:o.as, goes to the position of Brahma. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SIXTYFOUR 
KaJyapatlrtha 
Mahiideva said: 
1 -9. 
0 chief goddess, here there was another holy place 
called Kasyapa, where there was a great pool made by Nagadeva. 
The god named Ku&esvara shines there ; so also there is a 
charming pool fashioned by Kasyapa. 0 goddess, a man having 
bathed there would not go to hell. 0 great goddess, 
brahmauas 
maintaining the holy fire and devoted to the daily recital of the 
Veda and very learned, live on (the bank of) Kasyapa. As is 
Kasi, so is this city built by sages. Kasyapa practised severe 
penance here, and brought Ganga springing from the matted 
hair of the lord. 
0 goddess, that Ganga is (called) Kasyapi, 
destroying great sins, merely seeing which men are freed from a 
wicked sin. 
They recommend (here) the gift of a cow, so also 
the gift of a chariot. 
Having performed 
a sraddha a man 
should, with effort, give a gift there. A holy place destroying a 
great sin like Kasyapa was never there, nor will be there, in the

=== PAGE 271 ===

VI. l 65. l - l0 
2889 
fearful Kali age. 0 chief goddess, all deities and sages with 
their sins vanished, always remain (here) by the grace of the 
chief of holy places. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SIXTYFIVE 
Bhutiilaya, Ghate8vara, and Vaidyaniitha 
M ahiideva said: 
1 -5. 
From there a man should go to the holy place Bhiita­
laya which is a place removing sin. A fig tree called Bhfitalaya 
and (the river) Candana (flowing) towards the east are there. 
A man who, having bathed at Bhfitalaya observes a fast on 
the Krl?J.lal?tami, and offers black sesamum, is not born as an 
evil spirit. He who offers a pitcher of water with sesamum, 
dedicating it to the dead ancestors, frees them from the state of 
an evil spirit. The man by uttering whose name a man bathes is 
freed from the state of an evil spirit. A man should bathe in the 
pure water at the holy place of Bhfitalaya and should see the 
fig tree called Bhfitalaya. By the grace of Bhfitesvara he would 
not have fear from evil spirits. 
This is (the description of) Bhutesvara-tirtha. 
6-8. 
A holy place superior to this is known as Ghatesvara. 
Having bathed there and seen him, a man would surely enjoy 
salvation. 
There "is that great holy place on the (bank of) 
Sabhramati, (known as) Ghata. Having seen Mahadeva there, 
a man is liberated. There is no doubt about it. The man who, 
having gone there, especially worships the fig tree, secures on 
the earth desires entertained by his mind. 
This is (the description of) Gatesevara-tirtha. 
9-10. 
Thence a man should devoutly go to the holy place 
well-known as Vaidyanatha. A man, having bathed at the holy

=== PAGE 272 ===

2890 
Padma Puriir)a 
place and engaged in worshipping Siva, and gratifying his dead 
ancestors, would obtain the fruit of all sacrifices. Vijaya, born 
from the god, and destroying all sins (is there), seeing whom a 
man always gets his desired objects. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SIXTYSIX 
Pa!f4uraryii-tirtha 
Mahiideva said: 
1-8. 
A greater holy place 
than Vaidyanatha, glVlng all 
kinds of supernormal powers and best of all holy places, is said to 
be excellent. Dharma's son, having powerfully taken a tax from 
BibhißaQa, the lord of demons, commenced the great sacrifice 
Rajasiiya. 
When the southern quarter was conquered (i.e. regi­
ons of the south were conquered), Nakula, PaQgu's son installed 
with great devotion PaQgurarya, giving enjoyment and salvation. 
A man, having bathed in the water of the Sabhramati and having 
saluted PaQgurarya, obtains the eight superhuman (yogic) powers 
like the one of becoming as small as an atom1 and great intelli­
gence. No doubt should be raised in this case. If a man with a 
pure mind salutes PaQgurarya, it should be regarded by those 
who know the truth, to be a worship offered for a year. A man, 
having cast his body near PaQgurarya at that holy place, reaches 
the peak of Kailasa and would be an attendant of CaQgesvara. 
Formerly, Haniimat practised there a very difficult penance. Due 
to the prowess of the holy place, the power to jump over the 
·Ocean was produced (in Haniimat). 
1 . 
ǂima-One of the eight supehuman powers or siddhis. The eight 
powers are : {1) Ar.tima- The power of becoming as small as an atom. (2) 
Laghima-The power of assuming excessive lightness at will. (3) Prapti­
The power of reaching anything e.g . touching the moon with a finger-tip. 
(4) Prakarnya-Irresistible will. (5) Mahirnan-The power of increasing the 
size at will. (6) Isitva-Superiority, greatness. (7) Vasitva-The power of 
-subduing passions. (8) Karnavasayitva-Suppression of desires.

=== PAGE 273 ===

Vl. l 67. 1 -VI. 1 68.4 
289 1 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SIXTYSEVEN 
COI)q,eia, Gal)lltirtha 
Mahiideva said: 
1 -2. 
The holy place superior to this holy place is known as 
Ca:Q.<;iesa, where god Ca:Q.<;iesa, giving prosperity, dwells perpetu­
ally. 
Having seen him a man is freed from the sin done through 
ignorance. All the deities coming together erected a city. 0 great 
goddess, it is known by the name Ca:Q.<;iesa. 
This (is the description of) CaQ<;iesa-tirtha. 
3-8. 
A holy place superior to this is GaQapatya well-known 
on the earth ; it is fashioned near Sabhramati (bank), 0 goddess. 
Having bathed there, 0 goddess, a man is released ; there is no 
doubt about it. I think all the holy places on the earth including 
the ocean, abandoned (their places) and came to this very wonder­
ful holy place for the good of the people. A man of a pure heart 
who has controlled his senses, performing a 
sraddha there, 
obtains the fruit due to all sacrifices. Whatever is offered after 
dedicating it to the dead ancestors at the Ga:Q.a-tirtha, all that 
is reqained quickly by the grace of the Lord of Ga:Q.as. A man, 
having bathed at the holy place, should give a bull to a brii.h­
ma:Q.a ; he, going beyond all the worlds, would go to the highest 
position. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SIXTYEIGHT 
Viirtraghnisangamatirtha 
Sri Mahiideva said: 
1 -4. 
Thence, 0 great goddess, a man 
should go where 
Vartraghni has joined Sii.bhramati and where Sakra got a contact 
with that auspicious one. 
Men with their minds controlled 
bathe there. A man, bathing there, would obtain that fruit which

=== PAGE 274 ===

2892 
Padma Purdr.Ja 
is that of ten horse-sacrifices. A man who performs a sraddha 
there, (and offers) piJJ.9as of powdered sesamum, purifies seven 
preceding and seven succeeding generations. A man after bathing 
at the confluence and worshipping Ga]J.anayaka, is not overcome 
by dangers, and is not abandoned by glory. 
Piirvati said: 
5-6. 
Please tell (me), to commence which mission Indra had 
come to this world from heaven ; so also what is the etymologi­
cal explanation (of the name of) the river Vartraghni. 
Tell me 
also about the confluence which continuously makes the city of 
Indra full of the sound (made) by gods and brahma]J.as. 
Mahiideva said: 
7- 1 5. 
In this world, this question had come in old days. 
There was a great, righteous, well-known king Yudhiσthira. He 
asked righteous Bhiσma who was but knowledge incarnate. I 
shall tell you what he had said, 0 goddess. 
The thrilling war 
between Vrtra and Indra took place for ten thousand and ten 
hundred years. Then, Indra who was defeated, entered into an 
agreement with Vrtra and abandoned the proceeding, and sought 
my shelter, 0 innocent one. On the auspicious confluence of 
Vartraghni (with Sabhramati), he pleased Sailkara (i.e. me), 0 
goddess. I then appeared to him in the sky. 
From the ash that 
fell from my body on the bank of Kasyapi, a Phallus named 
Bhasmagatra was fashioned. Brahma has installed Bhiitesvara, 
Bhasmagatra. 
Merely by its sight, (the sin of) a brahma]J.a's 
murder would perish. Having performed a sraddha there (a 
man) gets freed from all sins in the (various) ages. Then I was 
very much pleased with the veay noble Indra. (I said to him :) 
"0 god, I shall give you all that you desire. By means of this 
thunderbolt you will quickly kill Vrtra." 
Indra said: 
16-20. 
0 best god, in your very 
presence I shall kill the 
unconquerable son of Diti, by your grace. 
Saying so, Indra went to (i.e. marched against) the demon. At 
that time drums sounded, especially in the army of gods. Tabors, 
small drums, kettle-drums, musical instruments (were sounded) in

=== PAGE 275 ===

VI. l 68.2 1 -37a 
2893 
many ways. All the demons had a great longing for existence. In 
a moment Indra became powerful. Seeing him intent (on killing 
Vrtra) the sages and serpents praised Indra, the lord, with the 
praise : "Be victorious, be victorious." The form: of that Indra 
going near (Vrtra), desiring to fight, and being praised by the 
sages, was quite unbearable. 
M ahiideva said: 
2 l-37a. 
0 goddess, hear from me the marks that suddenly 
appeared in lndra's body in the battle. He was fearful with his 
mouth blazing ; there was great paleness ; his body was much 
trembling ; his breath became hot. There was severe horripila­
tion ; breathing was heavy. 
Very fearful meteors fell ; 
and 
vultures, 
hawks, herons crying fearfully, came near him, and 
revolved like a wheel round him. Then that Indra, mounted 
upon an elephant, came there. Indra, with his hand holding the 
thunderbolt raised, approached the demon. That lord of gods 
gave out a superhuman cry. Indra dropped the thunderbolt on 
the demon Vrtra who was exerting. The thunderbolt was great, 
very bright and resembled the destructive fire at the end of the 
world. Indra knocked down Vrtra on the shore of the ocean. 
Then all around there was a great sound ; 
Seeing Vrtra fearful 
to all gods killed, a large shower of flowers fell on Indra's head. 
Then the lord, having killed the fearful lord of demons, being 
praised and accompanied by gods, entered his capital. 
Then 
from Vrtra's body an excellent lustre came out. It was Brahma­
hatya (i.e. the embodied form of the sin due to a brahmaQa's 
murder}, that was very fierce, fearful and scaring the worlds. 
Her face was terribly deformed, black and tawny. 
She wore a 
string of skulls, was 
very 
emaciated, 
0 daughter 
of the 
{Himalaya) Mountain. She was smeared with blood, most sinful, 
smelling like fish, and very dreadful. 
0 great goddess, 0 best 
goddess, having moved out, she having a form like that and 
fearful, then looked for lndra. Running out, she, on 
seeing the 
very lustrous Indra seized him by his neck, and clung to it at 
that time. Confounded due to the fear caused by that Brahma­
hatya he hid in a lotus-fibre, and remained there for many 
hosts of years. Seized by her, he became motionless, 0 goddess.

=== PAGE 276 ===

2894 
Padma Purat)a 
Indra tried to destroy her. (But), 0 great goddess, he was not 
able to destroy her. 
37b-42. 
Due to being seized by her, Indra, reduced to an 
undesirable form, went to Brahma, and worshipped him with 
his head (bent down). Knowing that Indra was seized due to the 
sin of the murder of an excellent brahmat;.a (viz. Vrtra), Brahma 
then 
thought, 0 best goddess. 
She, thinking of Brahma, 
approached Brahma and spoke (these) words to him : "0 revered 
god, 0 you who cut off the pride (of the arrogant), I have 
approached you. Please tell me what I should do, 0 god." "0 
young lady, release this king of gods. Do what is dear to me. 
Tell me, what I should do for you today. What desire do you 
have?" 
Hatyii said: 
43. 
0 best man, by your words, I shall go away from Indra. 
0 god of gods, salutation to you. 
Give me an abode. You. 
desiring the preservation of the worlds, have set this limit. 
Mahiideva said: 
44-45. 
Having promised that Hatya like that, the grandsire 
thought of a means to remove Indra's sin due to a brahmat;.a's 
murder. Then calling Fire, Brahma spoke (these) words : "0 
Jatavedas, accept the fourth portion of (the sin due to) a brah­
mat;.a's murder." 
Agni (Fire) said: 
46. 
0 lord, what is the cause of my release, when this 
murder of a brahmat;.a is done ? I like to know this properly 
(from you), 0 you who are worshipped by the worlds. 
Brahmii said: 
47-53. 
Brahmahatya will just then abandon you, and shall 
live in that man who, finding you blazing, does not offer into 
you seeds, herbs, sesamum-seeds, roots, sacred fuel and darbhas. 
0 Havyavaha, let your mental torment go away. 
Then Fire accepted it, and the revered grandsire obtained 
what was dear to him. 0 noble one, then having called trees.

=== PAGE 277 ===

VI.168.54-63 
2895 
herbs, grass the grandsire started 
speaking (words 
of) this 
import : 
Then 
the trees, herbs, grass somehow said : 
"All 
right." They, afflicted like Fire, spoke (these) words to Brahma : 
" We being told 
about Brahmahatyii 
are 
naturally 
killed. 
Therefore, please do not kill us again. 0 god, we always suffer 
fire, cold, rain urged by wind, so also being cut and broken." 
Brahmii said: 
54. 
This (Brahmahatya) will go after the man who will cut 
or break you without any reason. 
Mahiideva said: 
55-57. 
Then the noble, great herbs and grass said, 'Yes', 
and after worshipping Brahmii also, they went as they had 
come. 0 best one, then the grandsire, having called the celestial 
nymphs, and comforting them with sweet words said (to them) : 
"0 you excellent ladies, this 
Brahmahatyii 
has come from 
Vrtra. Accept her fourth portion as told by me." 
The celestial nymphs said: 
58. 0 grandsire, the time of the release of us who, by your 
order, have decided to take (the fourth portion of Brahmahatya), 
should be thought about. 
The grandsire said: 
59. 
She will quickly come to the man who copulates with 
women in their menses. Let your mental torment go away 
quickly. 
Mahiideva said: 
60-63. 0 daughter of the (Himalaya) Mountain, the bevies 
of the celestial nymphs, with their minds delighted, then said, 
"All right", went to their respective places, and rejoiced. 
Then 
the grandsire, the god-the author of the worlds-thought of 
waters, and they arrived. 0 goddess, all of them, having come to 
Brahmii, of unlimited lustre, and having saluted the grandsire, 
said (these) words : ''0 god, 0 you who curb your enemies, 0 
lord of gods, here we have come by your order. So order us 
what to do."

=== PAGE 278 ===

2896 
Padma Purdr}.a 
Btahmii said: 
64. 
This dreadful Brahmahatya has come to Indra from 
Vrtra. Accept the fourth portion of her. 
The waters said: 
65-66. 
0 lord of the worlds, let it be as you say. 
You will 
please think about the time of our release. 0 lord of gods, you 
are the highest recourse of the entire world. Which favour from 
others can there be, that will emancipate us from peril ? 
Brahmii said: 
67-68. 
She will quickly go to that man and stay in him 
only, who having a small mind, and with his intellect deluded, 
will throw phlegm, urine and feces into you. Then you will be 
liberated. I am telling you this truth. 
Mahiideva said: 
69-71 Then, 0 chief goddess, Brahmabatya left the lord of 
gods, and went (away). The lord of gods became very much 
delighted due to the direction of the god (i .e. Brahma). 
In the 
former age, lndra met (i.e. faced) Bramahatya. Having practised 
penance here, and with his mind purified, he went to heaven. 
Then having performed a horse-sacrifice, he became sinless. 0 
daughter of the (Himalaya) Mountain, such is (the importance 
of) Vartraghni at the holy place (on the bank) of Sabhramati. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SIXTYNINE 
V ariihatirtha 
M ahesa said: 
1 -6. 
Then the divine river after her confluence with Vartra­
ghni, has entered with 
Bhadra into the ocean, the abode of 
Varul}.a. The ocean also, having come there with a desire to do 
what is dear to her, and due to his affection for Sii.bhramati,

=== PAGE 279 ===

VI. 1 69.7-VI. 1 70.5 
2897 
brought about the pleasing union. Bhadni who was the friend 
of Subhadra formerly, actually taking the form of Sri, helped 
her on the way. Their confluence on the northern shore of the 
ocean is meritorious. A man who, after bathing (there) offers 
pure water, after saluting Varaha, would obtain Varm;ta's place. 
Lord Vigm entered the ocean along that path, vanquished all 
the demons, the enemies of gods, then the god, Yajiiavaraha, 
agitated the ocean, sported there, for a very long time, and 
came out through Kardamala. 
Parvati said: 
7. 
0 god, tell 
me in detail the entry of Yajiiavariiha into 
the Sabhramati and his exit through Kardamala. 
Mahadeva said: 
8-1 1 . I shall tell you about this sport of VißJ).u (in the 
incarnation of) Variiha, in the interior of the earth, done for­
merly. 0 daughter of the Himalaya Mountain, listen. He who 
is actually the lord, took up the form of a boar. Having taken 
up the form for the success of the mission of the gods, the lord 
of gods, holding the divine earth (on his tusks), came out of 
the place (called) Kardama. 0 beautiful lady, a great holy 
place has come about there. A man who bathes there, enjoys 
salvation. There is no doubt about this. A man should perform 
a sraddha here for the release of his dead ancestors. Freed with 
them, he goes to the great world giving happiness. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY 
Sangamatirtha 
Mahadeva said: 
1-5. 
A holy place superior to this holy place is called 
Sailgama. Here that Sabhramati Ganga has joined the ocean. 
A man should bathe and give gifts there. Having bathed here,

=== PAGE 280 ===

2898 
Padma Purii1J8 
even those who are great sinners, get salvation. One desiring 
the good of his kinsmen, should offer a sraddha there. When 
a sraddha is performed here, the man would certainly live in 
the world of the dead ancestors. At that place where god 
Siigara (i.e. the divine Ocean) always joins Ganga, (even) the 
murderer of a brahmaqa is freed. Then what to say of other 
sinners? When dull-witted men do not know about the holy 
place there, then a holy place in my name should be fashioned. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SEVENTYONE 
Adityatirtha 
Mahiideva said: 
1-4. 
Near the confluence is a good holy place (Sattirtha) 
well-known in the world, called Aditya. There was not and 
there will not be a holy place superior to it. One should visit 
it, and bathe. Worship should be done with a blue lotus, an 
arka flower and also with karaviras. Men should always per­
form a sraddha and offer gifts there. This Adityaka-tirtha is 
pure and destroys sins. This holy place gives religious merit 
even to great sinners who visit it. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SEVENTYTWO 
Nilakar)fha 
Mahiideva said: 
1-4. 
A holy place superior to that holy place is well known 
as Nilaka:Q.tha. One desiring salvation should always visit it. 
By (offering) bilva-leaves, incense, lamps and on seeing Nila­
ka:Q.tha a man gets the desired object. In a secluded 
place he·

=== PAGE 281 ===

VI. l 73.1-VI. 1 74.4 
2899 
(i.e. the deity) highly devoted to fasting, always dwells. He 
gives to people whatever they long for. 0 great goddess, that 
Kasyapi is well-known in Kali (age). 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SEVENTYTHREE 
Durgiisangamatirtha 
M ahiideva said: 
1-6. 
One should bathe there where that river Slibhramati 
has joined Durgil. and the ocean, 0 goddess. (Such men) be­
come free from blemishes in this Kali age. There is no doubt 
about this. A man should perform a sraddha at the confluence 
of Durgil.. Having gone there, 
one 
should 
especially 
feed 
brahmal).as and offer (them) cows, buffaloes. This (river) is 
blessed, most blessed, pure and destroyer of sins, seeing which, 
0 goddess, a man is freed from sins. This river Slibhramati 
should be known as Ganga. 0 goddess. in the Kali age she 
especially gives fruits for a long time. Even if there 
were 
hundreds of tongues in my mouth I shall not be able to des­
cribe her merits. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SEVENTYFOUR 
The Rise of Nrsimha 
Mahiideva said: 
1-4. 
0 goddess, listen to a vow difficult to be had in the 
three worlds, having heard about which men are free from sins 
like the murder of a brahmal).a. The becoming visible of the 
self-manifested one is for the happiness of the devotees. A day 
or a group of days has become meritorious. 0 goddess, he, by 
uttering whose name a man gets eternal salvation, is the highest

=== PAGE 282 ===

2900 
Padma Purdr)a 
soul, and the cause of causes. He is the universal soul ; has the 
form of the universe; the revered one is the lord of all. That 
Nrsiihha, the noble one, who has held twelve suns, has become 
manifest with a desire for the good of (his) devotees. 
Piirvati said: 
5. 
0 best god, innumerable incarnations are enumerated. 
0 master, 0 lord of the universe, tell me about the greatest 
abode called Nrsirilha, by merely knowing which one would 
obtain a world (full) of happiness. 
M ahiideva said: 
6-7. 
Prahlada, the best among the wise, spoke (these) words 
to the best one who had killed his father, and who, after killing 
Hiral}.yakasipu, was seated comfortably, and on the lap of 
whom, the god of gods and the lord of world, Prahlada was 
seated. 
Prahliida said: 
8-9. Salutation to you, 0 revered VißJ}.u having the wonder­
ful form of Nrsirilha. 0 greatest god, I am your devotee; and 
am really asking you. 0 lord, in me unbroken devotion is pro­
duced in many ways. Tell me, 0 lord, how (i.e. why) I have 
become dear to you. (Tell me) its cause. 
Nrsirhha said: 
10- 1 3a. 0 very wise one, I shall tell it to you. Listen with 
a concentrated mind, the cause of your devotion and of your 
being dear (to me). In olden times you were born (as the son) 
of a bnihmal}.a. You did not study. You, Vasudeva by name, 
were addicted to prostitutes. Greedy for the company of pros­
titutes, you enjoyed honey and ghee, and did not do any good 
deed in that existence. Due to the power of my vow, devotion 
(for me) in you was produced, 0 sinless one. 
Prahliida said: 
1 3b-14. 
0 lord of gods, tell me in detail, what was the vow 
and of whose son? What bad deeds did I, addicted to a pros­
titute, do ? Favouring me, now tell all that (to me).

=== PAGE 283 ===

VI. l 74. 1 5-33 
290 1 
Nrsirhha said: 
1 5-27. Formerly Brahma observed this excellent (vow) for 
the sake of creation. Due to the power of my vow he created 
the mobile and the immobile. God (Siva) observed this vow for 
killing Tripura. Due to the power of this vow Tripura was 
knocked down. Many other ancient deities, sages, 
and very 
wise kings practised this excellent vow. Due to the efficacy of 
this vow all got success. They became dear to me. Having 
enjoyed many pleasures in heaven, they merged in me. 0 Prah­
hlda, enter 
me : since for (some) mission you had a form 
separate from my body. Even after hundreds of kalpas, they 
will not be reborn. A poor man obtains wealth like that of a 
rich man. One desiring an object will get it ; one desiring a 
kingdom will obtain an excellent kingdom ; one desiring a (long) 
life will get it (as long) as that of Siva. It makes women free 
from widowhood ; gives sons and prosperity. It brings about 
wealth, grains, and destroys grief. To those women or men who 
practise this excellent vow I give happiness, and the fruit of 
enjoyment and salvation. What is the use of talking much about 
the fruit of this vow? Neither I nor Satikara is able to tell the 
fruit of my vow. 
Prahlada said: 
0 revered one, by your favour I have heard (about) this 
excellent vow; have heard about the fruit of this vow. Now I 
desire to hear about the cause of my devotion for you, and the 
excellent manner of this vow. 0 lord, in which month and on 
what day would it take place? 0 god, please tell it in detail, (tell 
also about) the manner, having performed in which, one would 
obtain its fruit. 
Nrsirhha said: 
28-33. 
0 child Prahlada, listen attentively to the vow. One 
should observe it on the Caturdasi of the bright half of Vai­
sakha. It should be observed with my manifestation, giving me 
pleasure. 0 son, listen to my 
becoming visible for the happi­
ness of my devotees. For (some) other reason, this pure holy 
place, destroying sins and known as Maulistana, came up in the

=== PAGE 284 ===

2902 
Padma Purib)a 
Western 
direction. In that holy place (lived) a well-known 
brahmat;ta, master of the Vedas, Harita by name, and highly 
devoted to knowledge and meditation. 0 lord, his wife was very 
meritorious and always of virtuous nature. Her name was Lila­
vati and she was always under the control of her husband. 0 
son, for a long time they practised a severe vow. Surely twenty­
one yugas passed (while they were practising penance). Then at 
that holy place the lord appeared in person before the two. 
Nrsirhha said: 
34-46. 
0 brahmat;ta, I shall undoubtedly give you whatever 
you desire. 
Then the two said to him : "If a boon is to be given to me, 
then let a son like you be (born) to me now only. 
"0 son", I 
had then said, "I am certainly your son. But as I am eternal, I 
shall not remain in the womb. I am the Creator of all beings ; 
I am actually the Supreme Spirit, and greater than the great ; 
since I am eternal, I shall not stay in the womb." Then Harita 
said : "Let it certainly be so." Since then I have stayed at (this) 
holy place for my devotee. The best devotee, after coming here, 
should see me. I shall always destroy his entire suffering. And 
for this reason to those best men who observe this vow in the 
proper manner, there is no fear. A man who meditates on and 
worships him in a child's form especially along with the two, at 
night, would become Vi߈?QU. He should always worship him, 
having four arms, large fangs, of the nature of Death, and 
unassailable, resembling a crore of suns, and unconquerable for 
a crore of Yamas ; (he should always worship him who has a 
face like that of a lion, and has the body of a man, who is 
Nrsimha, a divine lion, and of the nature of Death. Knowing 
this in particular, 
he would go 
to my place, and would 
observe the vow which is very pure, which gives a large mass of 
wealth, which undoubtedly gives the devotees salvation in the 
end, and which, being practised gives the fruit of a thousand 
Dvadasi (vows). My vow should be observed on a Saturday 
when the Sun is in conjunction with the Svati constellation,

=== PAGE 285 ===

VI. I 74.47-6 I 
2903 
when there is the siddhiyoga1 of Planets and in a division of the 
day2 (a kara:r;ta) known as Va:Qija. Knowing that this my day 
destroys crores of Hatyas, is associated with all auspicious con­
junctions of stars, destroys sins (he should observe the vow). He 
who would pass my day (without the vow) is a sinner. 
47-61 . 
He who does not observe it goes to hell (and lives 
there) as long as the Moon and the Sun are (in the sky). When 
the day of (i.e. sacred to) me has arrived, 0 child, my devotee, 
after brushing his teeth and having subdued his senses, should 
(declare) before me the intention to observe this vow : "Today I 
shall practise your vow. Make it free from difficulties." He who 
observes the vow should not talk wicked words etc. Then at 
mid-day, with the accompaniment of a Vedic hymn, the wise 
one should bathe in pure water in a river etc., at home or in a 
natural pond or an auspicious lake. For the appeasement of all 
sins, he should bathe in the proper manner (after smearing his 
body) with clay, cowdung and dhiitri-fruit, so also with sesa­
mum seeds. After putting on two auspicious garments, he 
should begin the daily rite. Then having smeared his house, he 
should draw an auspicious octagon. Having placed on it a 
pitcher with jewels, he should put on it a vessel full of rice. 
Then having fashioned, according to his (financial) capacity, 
my golden image along with that of Lak~mi, he should install 
them there. Then having bathed them with (the collection of 
five sweet things called) paficamrta3, he should invite a brah­
maoa preceptor, not very greedy, and knowing the holy texts; 
keeping him in front (i.e. in his presence) he should worship 
the deity. He should erect there a pavilion adorned with 
bunches of flowers. And with flowers of the season, I should be 
worshipped in the proper manner. Then I should be wor­
shipped in the sixteen ways of doing homage to a deity, with 
hymns and restraints. Then I should be especially worshipped 
with the Purii:r;tic hymns. He who would then offer sandal with 
camphor, mixed with thick saffron and flowers of the seasons, 
so also Tulasi-leaves to Nrsimha, becomes free. There is no 
1 . Siddhiyoga-A particular auspicious conjunction of Planets. 
2. Karal)a-A division of the day. These Karal)as are eleven. 
3. Paiicamrta-A collection of five sweet things used in worshipping 
deities. They are : milk, sugar, ghee, curd and honey.

=== PAGE 286 ===

2904 
Padma PuriJT)IJ 
doubt about this. He should offer incense of krǈIJ.a agaru, 
always dear to ViǛIJ.U, to the preceptor and to Vi°IJ.U for accom­
plishing all his desired objects. A great lamp, destroying the 
darkness of ignorance should be offered. Then he should wave 
the great light with the sound of bells. "0 lord of Lakǈmi, I 
am offering you eatables, sugar along with articles of food and 
meal. Destroy all (my) sins." This is the hymn for offering of 
eatables : 
62-73. "0 Nrshhha, Acyuta, Devesa, on this auspicious 
day of your birth, I, giving up all enjoyments, will observe a 
fast. 0 lord, be pleased with that. Keep away (from me) a 
sinful existence." With the sounds of songs and musical instru­
ments, he should keep awake during the night. Everyday a 
PuraQa containing stories about Sri Nrshhha should be read. 
Then, in the morning after having bathed he should, gratifying 
me, worship me in the manner told before. With his mind 
steady, he should make an offering to Vi°IJ.U before me. Then 
gifts, to be told hereafter, should be given to worthy brahmaQas 
for winning (i.e. enjoying) both the worlds. The golden (image 
of) the deity pleases me. He (also) gives a cow, land, sesamum­
seeds, gold etc. to a brahmal)a. A bed along with a mattress 
filled with cotton and with seven (kinds of) grains should be 
given. Other (articles) also should be given to his capacity. He 
should not indulge in dishonesty with regard to wealth, with 
the des"i.re for the fruit as mentioned (before). Then he should 
feed bnihmal)as, and give them good presents. Even the poor 
should observe (this vow) according to their capacity. All the 
castes are entitled to (observing) my vow. It should be espe­
cially observed ·by my devotees highly devoted to me. Then 
(follows) the hymn containing the prayer : "0 lord of gods, 
emancipate from the painful ocean of the mundane existence 
those men who are born in my family and also those men who 
will be born therein. 0 you lord of the world lying on Se°a, 
give the support of your hand to me who am plunged in the 
ocean of sins, overcome by diseases and beings moving in 
water, and who am in a great misery. 0 lord of gods, by means 
of this vow, give me enjoyment and salvation." 
74-97. 
Having thus appealed to the deity, and having dis­
missed the deity in the proper manner, he should offer all the

=== PAGE 287 ===

VI. l 74.74-97 (cont.) 
2905 
presents etc. to the preceptor. Having pleased the brahmaQas 
with presents etc. he should dismiss them. Engaged in medita­
tion upon me, he should eat with his relatives. He who, though 
poor, certainly fasts (on) the Caturdasi, certainly gets freed 
from sin committed during (the previous) seven existences. He 
who would devoutly listen to (the account of) this vow, would 
remove the sin (even) of the murder of a brahmaQa by merely 
hearing it. A man who would narrate this pure, great secret, 
would obtain all his desired objects. That is always the fruit of 
this vow. He who, according to his capacity, observes this vow 
at the time called madhyahna (mid-day) and would, with great 
devotion, worship Lilavati along with the sage (Harita) and 
Sri Nrsimha also, would obtain eternal salvation. He who, 
having gone to that holy place, would worship Sri Nrsirilha, 
obtains his desired fruit due to the grace of Sri Nrsi.Ihha. "0 
Sri Nrsimha, 0 you of a great form, 0 you unconquerable for 
a crore of Deaths, 0 Bhairavesa, 0 Hara, 0 you destroyer of 
misery, 0 you of the form of a child, salutation to you. Saluta­
tion to Sri Nrsimha of the form of a child, and to the child, to 
the all-pervading, to Sunanda, to him manifesting his own form, 
of the nature of all beings, to the lord of all, of the nature of 
the heaven. Salutation to you, 0 ocean of pity, dwelling in 
the orb of the Sun, of the form of twenty-four, and of terrible 
fire at the time of the deluge, to Nrsimha, fully of the form of 
the world. That god Nrsimha, conqueror of Virabhadra, held 
the very much heated orbs of twelve Suns on his forhead." 
There is especially very auspicious and charming Sindhu river. 
0 beautiful lady, near her even now there is a city, always 
known as Maulistana, and fashioned by gods. There is the 
residence of the noble Harita. Liiavati also certainly stays there 
only. There would be an echo near the river Sindhu. But when 
Kali age has arrived, many sinful mlecchas certainly live there. 
If a man loudly utters the word 'Nrsi.Ihha, Nrsimha', like the 
word 'Nrsirilha' which, great and wonderful, came up at the 
time of the birth of Nrsimha, then, 0 you daughter of the 
(Himalaya) Mountain, a similar echo is produced. Those men­
a killer of a brahma:g.a, one who has stolen gold, a drunkard, 
or one who has violated one's preceptor's bed (i.e. his wife)­
after having gone to Sindhu, and bathed in her (water), are

=== PAGE 288 ===

2906 
Pad'ITIJZ Purar)IJ 
undoubtedly liberated by the grace of Sri Nrsimha. Those men 
who stay there for ten nights, should be known to be of meri­
torious acts. (These) my words are not false. Those castes, led 
by brahma:Qas, that stay there in the Kali age, should be known 
to be like the mlecchas, cast out of the fold of the Vedas by the 
best gods. They ate flesh there, and always drank liquor; there­
fore, they are certainly irreligious and most sinful. 0 chief 
goddess, like brahmaQas not performing sandhya, they, outside 
the fold of the Vedas, live there in the West. Only one sacred 
place called Nrsimha, is very extensive, having heard about 
which a man is undoubtedly free from sins. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SEVENTYFIVE 
The First Chapter of the Gitii : The Anecdote of Susarman 
Piirvati said: 
1-2. 
0 revered one, 0 you knowing the entire truth, through 
your grace I have heard various duties about Vigtu, which are 
the causes of complete crossing (of the worldly existence). Now 
I also desire to hear the greatness of Gita, having heard which 
devotion to Vigm enhances. Now tell it, 0 god, if I am dear to 
you. 
The lord said: 
3-4. 
We worship great Vi°:Qu, Acyuta, resembling the hemp­
:flower, having the lord of birds as his seat, and lying on the bed 
of Se°a. Once Laգmi, delighting the three worlds, respectfully 
asked (Vi°:Qu) enemy of Mura, comfortably seated on a charm­
ing seat. 
Lalqmi said: 
5. 
0 revered one, with what purpose are you sleeping in 
the Milky Oceon-you, like one who is neutral, having instituted 
glory in the world is it were ? (obscure).

=== PAGE 289 ===

VI. l 75.6-20 
2907 
The lord said: 
6. 
Hearing these words, proud 
through knowledge, of 
Lakǜmi, the destroyer of Mura, with his eyes doubting and 
smiling, spoke with soft words. 
The lord said: 
7-13 0 you ofa beautiful face, I am not sleepy. With my 
sight turned inside and pursuing the truth, I see my own body 
of Siva. 0 goddess, that which the contemplhtive saints see 
within with their sharp intellect, which produces a continuous 
mass of joy and which is without a second, is the immutable 
light, of the nature of the self, and unharmed, resorting to which 
the world subsists, and which is experienced by me, and without 
which there is no element in the world, mobile or immobile, 
and having secured which, Dvaipayana (i.e. Vyasa) produced 
the holy text of the Gita; after having thought in many ways the 
very intelligent one churned the holy texts of the Vedas. 0 chief 
_goddess, having resorted to it, a great joy, I, with my mind 
delighted, appear to be sleepy in the Milky Ocean. 
Having heard these limited delightful words of the enemy 
of Mura, Lakǜmi, with her rolling eyes full of joy, was amazed. 
Lakĭi said: 
1 4-20. 
0 Hrǜikesa, you alone are always to be meditated 
upon by the self-controlled ones. Therefore, I have a great 
curiosity to hear from you about that which is greater than you. 
0 Acyuta, tell me if there is someone different from you who 
are the lord, the creator and the destroyer of the worlds. 
The lord said: 
0 goddess, this my body is illusory and not real, and is 
augmented with the mass of the acts of creation, maintenance 
and withdrawal. 0 dear one, the nature of the soul is different 
from this. 
It is without duality and unity. 
It is free from 
existence and non-existence; and without beginning or end. It 
is pure consciousness, has acquired lustre, is beautiful due to 
great joy, is the form of lord, can be known only through the 
oneness of the soul, and is told in the Gita.

=== PAGE 290 ===

2908 
Padma P.urib)a 
Hearing these words of him of an unlimited lustre, she having 
doubt .due to contradictory statement said : ''If you are highest 
joy, and not known through speech and mind, then how does 
Gita make you known. Remove this doubt of me." 
The lord (Siva) said: 
21-26. 
Having heard the proper words of Lakᗬmi, the lord 
told her the Gita, the view leading one to the self, along with an 
old account. "0 greatest goddess, I am the soul (looked at) in 
two ways as higher and lower. The higher is a (mere) witness, 
qulityless, partless and auspicious. 
The 
lower 
one, I am 
Paiicavaktra; it also remains in two forms. I, Mahesvara, the 
soul, am to be explained through the difference in words and 
meanings, as, through the words of the Gita, my strong bond, of 
the nature of the objects in the mundane existence, is completely 
cut off; since (my two forms) Paiicavktra and Mahesvara, are 
dependent on its study." (obscure). Hearing these words of him, 
of the great ocean of the essence of Gita, those afraid of the 
mundane existence know it through the difference between this 
and that. Lak°mi asked this to him. He told her the entire 
greatness along with its account, remaining in major and minor 
parts. (obscure). 
The lord (Vi$QU) said: 
27-31. 0 you beautiful lady, I shall tell you about my firm 
existence in the Gita. The five faces are the five chapters in 
order. The (next) ten chapters are the arms ; one is the belly. 
and the (remaining) two are the lotus-like feet. Thus the eighteen 
chapters are the divine forms of words. It, destroying great 
sins, should be known through knowledge only. Therefore, he, 
the very intelligent one, who studies a chapter, or half of it, or 
a verse or half a verse is liberated like Susarman. 
Lak$mi said: 
0 lord. who was he named Susarman? What caste did 
be belong to ? How was his nature? Whence was he liberated? 
Due to which cause did his liberation take place?

=== PAGE 291 ===

Vl. l 75.32-47a 
2909 
The lord said: 
' 
32-47a. 
There was a wicked (man) named Susarman, who 
was the limit of sinners (i.e. the worst sinner). He was born in 
the family of brahmal).as, who did cruel deeds, an<:l had not 
realised the self. He did not meditate (upon the god), did not 
mutter (hymns), did not perform a sacrifice, did not honour his 
guests ; but due to his possessing strength he indulged in sensual 
objects only. He was always engaged in husbandry, subsisted on 
leaves, loved liquor, ate flesh; for a very long time he passed his 
time like this. Desiring to fetch leaves, he moved into a sage's 
orchard. The dull-witted one was bitten there by a deadly 
serpent. 
Having died, and having gone to many hells·, he came 
(i.e. was born) again and was born as a bull. A lame man 
bartered him for his subsistence. With a great difficulty, he, 
carrying him (i.e. the lame man) on his back, passed seven or 
eight autumns. He was maimed, his eyes rolled, and vomited 
foam continuously. He neither lived nor died due to his own 
acts. Some time the lame man made him revolve speedily. He 
suddenly fell on the ground and fainted. As this world is 
attracted by curiosity, in the crowd (around him) a meritorious 
man gave his religious merit to him. · Some others also, remem­
bering their own deeds, gave (him their religious merit). There 
was (in the crowd) a courtezan also, leading the course of the 
worldly life ; and not knowing her religious merit, she gave (him) 
some religious merit. By the servants of Death he was taken to 
the city of the dead. 
He was released due to his being meritori­
ous as a result of the religious merit given by the courtezan. 
Again he came to the earth and was born in the house of noble 
persons-brahmal).as. He remembered his (former) existence; 
after a long time he, desiring to know religious merit removing 
his ignorance, approached the courtezan, and proclaimed himself; 
he asked her. She told (him) : "This parrot, living in the cage 
daily tells me. My heart was purified due to that, and I divided 
my religious merit." The parrot, asked by the two, started 
narrating an account that,had formerly taken place, after remem­
bering his former existence also.

=== PAGE 292 ===

29 1 0 
Padma Purib)a 
The parrot said: 
47b-55. Formerly I was a learned man, deluded by the 
pride of my learning. Due to my hatred for loveliness I was 
jealous even of virtuous persons. After (some) time, having 
departed from life, I then reached abhorred worlds. Then, I who 
very much censured (my) good preceptor, was born in the stock 
of a parrot. In the summer season, I, the wicked one, was also 
separated from my parents. In the summer, in which the roads 
were heated, I was brought by best sages and was dropped in a 
cage in the hermitage, the resort of the great. Hearing from the 
sons of the sages revising with great care the first chapter of the 
Gitii., I repeatedly recited it. In the meanwhile, a fowler indulg­
ing in stealing, snatched and sold me. 
Thus the account was told. 
The lord said: 
This chapter was enunciated before. Due to that he dispelled 
his sin. With his heart purified by that the best bird was releas­
ed. Thus talking to one another, and telling its greatness, they, 
the wise ones, constantly muttering it, obtained salvation in the 
house. Therefore, for him who recites or listens to the first 
chapter, or would remember or study it, the ocean of the 
mundane existence is not difficult to cross. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SEVENTYSIX 
The lord said: 
The Second Chapter of the Gitii 
1-1 7. 
The excellent account of the first chapter has been 
narrated. 0 Lak~mi, also listen to the importance of the other 
chapters. In the southern direction, in the city called Purandara, 
(a city) of the teachers of sacred texts, there lived a rich man, 
well-known as Devasarman. He honoured guests; he was a 
learned person; he was proficient in the Vedas and (other)

=== PAGE 293 ===

VI.l 76.18-19a 
291 1 
sacred texts; he offered hosts of sacrifices and was always dear 
to the ascetics. Offering oblations into fire, he pleased the gods 
for a long time. The religious-minded one did not obtain con­
clusive peace. Desiring beatitude, he everyday waited upon 
ascetics with truthful intentions, with not a few rites. When he 
was doing like this, and when a long time had elapsed, some 
Muktakarman formerly appeared on the earth. He had direct 
knowledge (of the supreme spirit); had no desire; had fixed his 
gaze on the tip of his nose; his mind was tranquil; he meditated 
on the highest Brahman; and was full of joy. The learned one, 
having held (i.e. touched) his feet with an humble mind, offered 
him reception due to a guest in the proper manner. Bowing to 
the ascetic, pleased with his pure disposition, he asked him 
about his final beatitude. The sage told him about a teacher, a 
goatherd, named Mitravat, (living) in the city named Saupura. 
He, having saluted his feet, went to the prosperous Saupura and 
saw a large forest in the region to its north. It was charming with 
the fragrance of many flowers tossed by the wind. It had filled 
the quarters with the sound of the humming of the intoxicated 
bees. In that forest on the bank of a river, he saw Mitra vat 
with his eyes fixed and seated on a stone-slab. He was surroun­
ded by animals which, though mutually hostile, had given up 
their natural hostility, in the garden, resplendent with slow 
breezes. He was as it were sprinkling nectar on the earth, 
with (his mind) full of pity and charming with the delight of 
destiny, when the herds of deer were peaceful. He, excited and 
with his mind pleased, and with his head slightly bent, politely 
approached him too and honoured him. Then the learned one، 
with his mind concentrated, remained by the side of Mitravat. 
He, being composed, asked him whose time of meditation was 
over. 
Devasarman said: 
18. I desire to know myself. So, regarding this desire,. 
please teach me the means that has secured success. 
The lord said: 
19a. Having thought for a while, that Mitravat also spoke 
like this :

=== PAGE 294 ===

2912 
Padma Purii!)a 
Mitravat said: 
I 9b-38. 0 learned one, know an old account being narrated 
by me. On the bank of Godavari, there was a city named 
PratiǛthii.na. There was (a man) Durdama by name (born) in the 
family of the learned. There was king Vikrama, being served 
(by people) ; everyday he accepted gifts, and (thus) fed his belly. 
Binding him with the noose of Death, Death took him to Yama's 
abode. Having experienced torments in all hells, he was born 
in a family of brii.hmai}.as of a bad character. He was attended 
by learning (obtained) in the previous birth. He married a 
haughty girl from a mean family. In course of time, she aban­
doned childhood and entered youth. Her breasts were stout, 
buttocks fine, eyes perturbed with passion ; she did not put up 
with her husband of a bad character ; and loved other men as 
husbands. Desiring to earn her livelihood, she went out of the 
city. For a long time she was sexually united with a lustful man 
born as a cii.I}.Qii.la. As a result of union with him she conceived, 
and a daughter was born. She was his wife only due to a former 
sinful attachment. The same, (getting) old, was born as a female 
imp. Due to bad company and attachment to bad women she 
became wicked-minded. Having an ardent desire for tasting 
.blood she ate a diseased fowler. She roamed in the fearful 
forest, and was outcast by people, 
on seeing her. Having 
-reached the world of the dead, the fowler became a tiger, due to 
the efficacy of the killing, after having stayed in fierce hells . 
.She too, of a wicked mind, died in course of time. Having 
gone to dreadful hells, she was born as a female goat in my 
house. 0 learned one, I, not noticing a fearful tiger, as it were 
devouring everything, looked after her and others. Seeing him 
to have come, I, afraid of death, left the flock of the female 
goats, and ran (away) due to fear. The tiger, remembering former 
hostility came near. The female goat quickly went near him 
having plough-like fangs. She giving up her fear and abandon­
'ing her hostility, stood there unrestrained. The tiger too, free 
from hatred, was quiet. Seeing him like that, she started speak­
ing : "0 tiger, lift me up carefully and eat me as desired by you. 
You are not having this intention. How did you give up your 
hostile intention?" Hearing these words the tiger, free from

=== PAGE 295 ===

VI. 176.39-55 
291 3 
hatred, then spoke these words : "At this place my hatred has 
gone (away) ; my hunger and thirst have passed (away). There­
fore, 1 do not long for you who have stood by ine." 
39-55. 
Thus addressed, 
she spoke again : "How did I be­
come fearless? What do you know to be the cause of this? If (you 
know), please tell (it) to me". The tiger, thus addressed (by her), 
again spoke to the female goat : "I do not know it". · Then they 
moved out to ask the great one who had gone ahead. The two 
having come to me, asked me who was much amazed. With the 
two I asked the lord of monkeys. The monkey, 0 brahmaiJ.a, 
(on being) asked by me, respectfully said to him these words : 
"0 goatherd, listen ; about this I shall tell (you) an old account. 
See, this great abode was formerly in a forest. Here Druhil).a had 
installed Siva's Phailus: An itntelligent (person), Sukarman by 
name, practising penance, worshipped · Siva honoured by gods 
after having brought wild flowers. Having 'bathed (the Phallus) 
with the river-water, he lived there just by that deed (of worship­
ping Siva). After a long time a guest came to him. Having 
fetched fruits, he offered them to him. Being pleased with that 
hospitality, he said to Sukarman : "What is the root of the act, 
enjoying the fruit of which you are staying here? Why do you 
just desire to live in the way of servile imitation?" 
He, thus 
addressed by the sage who was mostly pleased, spoke in reply 
clear words, most beneficial to himself: 
"0 learned one, I really 
know the fruit of this act. Sambhu is served merely for the 
desire of enjoyment. The fruit-the result-of this service of 
Siva is that you will favour me, knowing my desire." : Having 
heard these true and pleasant words of him, the ascetic, being 
pleased, wrote the second chapter of the Gitդ on the . stone­
slab and ordered the brahmal).a to recite and study it quickly : 
"Your desire will easily bear fruit everywhere." The intelligent 
one, speaking like this, disappeared (even) when he was watch­
ing. He, being amazed, constantly remained (reciting the Gita) 
by his order. Then, after a long time, wherever the devout one, 
of a pleased mind, went, the penance grove became quiet. There 
was ho antagonism, no hunger, no thirst, no fear due to the 
penance of him, muttering the second chapter.

=== PAGE 296 ===

2914 
PadmiJ PurdTJ.a 
Mitravat said: 
56-62. 
Thus addressed by him, and having heard a great 
story, I, allowed by the pleased one, went with the female goat 
and the tiger. Having gone to the stono-slab I saw the chapter 
that is written (there). One should recite it. By its revision only. 
he reached the excellent, concluding limit of penance. 0 good 
one, therefore, you should everyday recite that chapter. Due to. 
that your salvation will not be a remote occurrence. 
Devasarman was (thus) advised by Mitravat himself. Bowing 
down and honouring him, he went to the city of Purandara. 
Having met there in a temple certain wise man, he told him 
this account, and then recited this chapter. Taught by him, the­
pure-minded one carefully recited the second chapter and obtain­
ed the blameless, highest position. I have thus told you the 
account of the second chapter. Now listen, 0 Indira, I shall tell 
you the impoitance of the third chapter. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SEVENTYSEVEN 
The Story of Jarja : The Importance of the Third Chapter 
The lord said: 
1-1 1 . A brahmat;ta, named Jaga, of the family of Kau8ika 
(living) in Janastbana, abandoned the acts proper for his caste, 
and fixed his mind on living as a merchant. He was addicted to. 
others' wives; he played with dice; he drank liquor; he was 
always engrossed in hunting. Thus he passed his time. When 
his wealth was exhausted, he started stealing. He seized the 
wealth of those who desired to perform sacrifices. For trading 
he went away and having secured musk, lq!?t;tagaru (sandal), 
and chowries bright like the moonlight, brought them from (a 
place) at a distance of five or six yojanas. The next day he. 
having crossed a great distance, was overpowered by robbers 
when the sun was setting and darkness was spreading, and was 
quickly killed by them. Due to his loss of religious· merit he

=== PAGE 297 ===

VI. l 77. 1 2-22a 
29 1 5 
was born a s a very fierce goblin. He was thirsty; he was 
oppressed by hunger; he licked the corners of his mouth; his 
hair was raised ; he had big shanks; his mighty belly had sunk 
into his back. His body was one in which only bones were left. 
He very much turned his eyes wickedly. In the meanwhile, his 
son who was religious-minded and conversant with Vedas, yery 
much guarded (piety) and desiring to see him, went (to look for 
him). Everyday he sought for news from the travellers, but did 
not get (any). Then, a man, his companion, arrived. Having 
learnt the account from him, he very much lamented. for his father. 
12-2la. Then the wise one, having thought, desiring to 
perform the obsequies, set out, with necessary materials, to go 
to Vardl)asi. Having passed seven or eight nights on the way, 
he began offering the sandhya prayer at the root of the tree 
where his father was killed. There he muttered the third chapter 
of the Gita. Then a terrible sound was heard in the middle of 
the sky. He then saw his fierce father falling from the sky. With 
his mind overcome with wonder and fear, he saw before him in 
the sky, (his father) full of great lustre. With a concentrated 
mind he saw in the sky a divine aeroplane which was full of a 
crore of small bells and which had pervaded the quarters with 
its lustre. There he saw his father who had got into it and who 
was surrounded by divine damsels, who was being praised by 
sages and who had put on a yellow garment. Seeing him, he 
bowed down, and he (the father) blessed him. Then he asked 
him this account, and he too told it to him : "0 son, due to the 
religious merit of my body, you, muttering (the third chapter of 
Gita) near (me) have fortunately released me from the (effects 
of) acts, difficult to be abandoned. Then now desist from 
muttering, since that for which you did (the muttering after 
going) to Varil)asi, has come to you." 
The lord said: 
21b. 
Thus addressed, he said to his father, of a blazing 
lustre : 
The son said: 
22a. 
Advise me about my well-being. What else should I 
do ?

=== PAGE 298 ===

29 1 6 
Padma PuratJa 
The lord said: 
22b-26a. 
Then the father said -to the son : "0 innocent one, 
do this. My brother has done the same act as I have done. He 
has gone to a terrible hell. Please release him (from th ere). My 
desire is : You should release others in my family who have 
gone to hell." Thus addressed, the son, with the palms of his 
hands joined, said : "Tell me, by (doing) which act I shall 
release them all." The father who was thus addressed, said to 
his son : 
The father said: 
26b-47. 
0 son do that, by (doing) which I was liberated. 
Do that and give the religious merit springing from it. Then, 
they, giving up (i.e. free from) pangs like me, will soon go to 
that highest position of Vigm. 
The son, who was advised, said : "0 father, if you like rny 
words, I shall release all those denizens of hell." "Let it be so ; 
may happiness come to you. A great dear thing bas come up." 
Having thus directed his son, the father went to -the highest 
position of Vi3:Qu. He too, having returned from him, and 
having gone to Janasthiina, spent his time in the abode of the 
beautiful city of Sauri. For years he did what his father had 
told him. He gave the religious merit which he had got, and 
liberated the denizens of hell. In the m;,anwhile the servants of 
Vi3:Qu, freeing the denizens. of hell, going to the place of torture 
came there. He honoured them in various ways with acts of 
hospitality. Asked about their welfare, they spoke about com­
plete happiness. Having thus honoured them, the wise lord of 
the world of dead ancestors asked them the reason of their 
arrival, and they told it to him : "0 lord Yama, know that 
Sauri (i.e. Viᗬ:Qu), lying on the bed of Seᗭa, has se11;t us to you 
to direct you. Through our mouth (i.e. through us) the god 
asks about your well-being. He directs (you) to release all the 
beings in hell." Having heard the order of Viᗭl}.u of unlimited 
lustre with his head bent down, having honoured it, he thought 
about something in his mind. Seeing all of them released and 
proud, he, followed by all of them, then went to Viᗮ!].u's abode. 
By an excellent vehicle he went where the Milky Ocean was.

=== PAGE 299 ===

VI . l 77.48-60 
29 l i 
Near it he saw the lord of the world, whose lustre was like 
many crores of suns that had risen, who was dark-blue like a 
blue lotus, whose lustre was mixed with that of the rays of the 
jewels on the hood of the serpent (Se°a) that was his bed, who 
was being seen with his mind full of joy and pleased, who wa s 
repeatedly and affectionately seen by Lak°mi with glances full 
of devotion, who was served by meditating saints around him 
with the pupils of their eyes steady due to meditation, who was 
being praised by Indra in order to vanquish his antagonists, 
who, the heap of virtues, was being sung by words embodied, 
issued from the mouth of Brahman at the end of (the utterance 
of) the Vedic words, who was pleased and also neutral, who 
saw himself simultaneously with the mobile and the immobile 
in all beings in all stocks having their merit collected, who 
delighted himself with glances full of lustre, who had a body, 
all-pervading, and brightened by the lustre of the serpent (i.e. 
Se°a), who was dark-blue like the petal of a blue lotus or like 
the sky seen in the moonlight. Seeing him, he extolled him 
with many prayers. 
Yama said: 
48-60. 
0 creator of all, salutation to (you) whose mind is 
pure, from whose mouths the Vedas were emitted, who are of 
a universal form, who are the creator. 0 you dreadful one due 
to the force of your strengthե salutation to (you) Vi°t;tu who 
destroyed the pride of the lord of demons ; salutation to the 
excellence in preservation(?), and to the prop of the universe. 
Salutation to (you) who conquered the multitude of sins of all 
living beings, from whose eye on the forehead, that is slightly 
opened, lustre has sprung up. You are the lord, the soul of all 
the worlds and the great god. Therefore, having sent forth all 
devotees of Vi°:Q.u, you pity them. You pervade the entire world 
nourished by Maya but you are not overcome by it by qualities 
born of it. Though you are within them, you are not overcome by 
the two (i.e. Maya and its 6J.Ualities). With your mind controlled, 
you rest within yourself in spite of your eyes turning to the 
objects of senses and moving towards the fruit. As you are 
limitless, your greatness also has no end. In this case silence 
alone is proper for me. How can you be the object of words?

=== PAGE 300 ===

29 1 8 
Padma PuraT)IJ 
Having praised him like this, he with the palms of his hands 
folded, said these words : "These vicious beings were fastened by 
me in pursuance of my duty. 0 lord of the world, order if I 
have to do some other piece of work." Thus respectfully 
addressed by him, ViᗪQU spoke, as if sprinkling (him) with 
nectar, with a voice deep like (the thundering of) the clouds : 
ª'I, acting as is proper for the occasion, emancipate people from 
-sins. Having entrusted the responsibility to you, I am not sorry 
for the embodied beings. So do your duty. Go home." (Thus) 
spoke the lord. And speaking like this, the god vanished. He 
too came to his city. He too, having emancipated all those kins­
men of him living in various hells, himself went to ViᗪQu's 
heaven by an excellent vehicle. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SEVENTYEIGHT 
The Fourth Chapter : The Story of Two Girls 
The lord said: 
1 . Now I shall tell (you) the greatness of the 
fourth 
-(chapter) also. tisten (to it), due to which the two girls, giving 
up their condition as badari trees, went to heaven. 
Lakmi said: 
2-3. 
How did the two girls, giving up their state of being 
the badari trees, go to heaven? 0 god, who were they formerly? 
How did. they attain prominence? I desire to hear this. 0 lord, 
please tell it. Hearing this great story I am not satisfied. 
The lord said: 
4-22. 
On the bank of the Bhagirathi there was a city 
(named) Vii.rii.Qasi. A saint named Bharata lived there in the 
temple of Visvesvara. Always absorbed in the soul, he muttered 
the fourth chapter carefully. Due to that study, the good one 
was not overcome by couples (of opposite qualities). Some

=== PAGE 301 ===

VI. l 78.23-37 
29 1 9 
time, he, sporting, went out of the city. The ascetic saw gods 
who were nearby. Using one as a pillow and resting on the 
other with his foot, he took rest at the root of the two badari 
trees from which fruits fell. When the ascetic went from there, 
the couple of the badari trees became dry, leafless and branch­
less within five or six days. The two (trees) then were born 
somewhere in the house of brahmaQas. The pair, growing for 
seven years, (while) sporting saw an ascetic who had come from 
distant regions. Seizing his feet, they spoke words that were 
true and pleasant. "0 sage, due to your favour only we two 
were liberated. Abandoning our condition as badari trees, we 
have obtained human birth." The sage, thus addressed by them, 
having forgotten (what he had done) replied : "0 girls, when, 
and for what reason, were you liberated by me? I do not know 
the cause of your being reduced to the condition of badari 
(trees). (Please) tell it." The two girls told him the cause of 
their being the badari trees, and also of their liberation from 
that condition, difficult to give up. "On the bank of Godavari 
there is a holy place giving religious merit to men. It is known 
as Chinnapapa and had reached great excellence. There (a 
man) named Satyatapas practised a very severe penance. In the 
severe summer he remained in the midst of blazing fires. In the 
rainy season his hair was continuously sprinkled with showers ; 
in winter he remained in water having his body horripilated. 
The restrained one, always pure and practising penance in 
(every) season, deriving great joy, fixed his mind on the (highest) 
soul only. He bore great love for trees always bearing fruit and 
having thick shadows, and for beings free from jealousy. Even 
Brahma himself everyday enquiring of him who was endowed 
with wisdom while aiming at the fruit of the penance, remained 
by his side. Due to lack of fear, that penance of him expressed 
in meditation upon Brahman who everyday approached him, 
increased. Then Indra, thinking that he was almost unseated 
from his prosperous position, and being afraid, put in a hun­
dred obstacles. Calling us two, equal (to each other) from 
among the celestial nymphs, he ordered : 
23-37. 
'Create an obstacle in the penance practised by this 
one who, displacing me from my position, desires to enjoy (my) 
kingdom.' Having received this message, we two went from the

=== PAGE 302 ===

2920 
Padma PuriiQa 
presence of Indra to Godavari where the sage stayed. Along 
with slender-bodied women, sweet and indistinct music was 
commenced there with deep-sounding tabors and sweet-sound­
ing lutes. We had large buttocks, stout and large breasts, lotus­
like smiling faces, and a little curly hair, shoulders on which 
jewelled rings were seen, eyes bright like lotuses. Our waists 
were slim, we had round thighs, our steps were even. Following 
tunes, rhythm and time, we danced ; we showed our full gait 
conforming to the emotion. When we two danced the circle of 
the quarters (i.e. all the quarters) roared after first mildly start­
ing and then increasing (the sound). Then due to the speed of 
the movement of our bodies there was a fragrant and very cold 
breeze. With the ends of our upper garments slightly blown, we 
manifested our breasts. Our excessive movement intensified (the 
passion of) love. It produced anger in the sage whose mind was 
unchanged. Then throwing water with his hand, he angrily 
cursed us : 'On the bank of Ganga turn into badari-trees.' (We), 
being polite (said to him) : 'Due to our being dependent, we 
acted badly. Pardon us for that behaviour.' (Thus) the sage 
was later propitiated. Then he, of a pious mind, brought about 
(our) freedom from the curse. The sage (said) : 'It would last 
till the arrival of Bharata. You will be born among the mortals, 
and will have the recollection of former existences; on his hav­
ing come near you, and on his remembering the fourth chapter 
(of the Gita), you shall have acquittal.' We salute you, not 
only because you freed us from the curse but also from this 
dreadful worldly existence.'' 
The lord said: 
38. The sage thus addressed and honoured by them was 
pleased, and went as he had come. The two girls would always 
recite the fourth chapter.

=== PAGE 303 ===

Vl. l 79. 1 - 1 7a 
292 1 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SEVENTYNINE 
The Fifth Chapter : The Story of Pingala 
The lord said: 
l-17a. 
0 goddess, I shall now narrate in brief the impor­
tance of the fifth chapter, respected by the world. 0 dear one, 
listen attentively. There was a bni.hmaQa named Piiigala, born 
in the city of Purukutsa in the Bhadra country. He was born 
in a pure family of brahmaQas, expounders of the Vedas. 
Having abandoned (the study of) holy texts proper for his family 
and the Vedas, he took to instrumental music, song, dance etc. 
and played upon a tabor etc. Having exerted himself in (mastering) 
singing, dancing and instrumental music, he obtained great 
fame and entered the 
king's house. (Thus) formerly he stayed 
with the king. He approached others' wives and enjoyed them 
with an undivided mind. Then he, puffed up with pride and 
unrestrained, always told him in private the weak points of 
others. His wife was AruQa by name, who was born in a mean 
family. She moving with a lover and looking for (paramours), 
took him to be a hindrance, and in her house at night she killed 
him by cutting off his head and buried him in the ground. 
Deprived of his life, he went to Yama's abode. Having lived in 
invincible hells, he was born as a vulture in a solitary forest. 
She too, casting her body due to fistula of the pudendum went 
to dreadful hells, and was born as a female parrot in that 
forest. The vulture remembering his former enmity, tore her 
wandering here and there with a desire to take grains, with his 
sharp talons. Then the vulture ran after the female parrot falling 
into a human skull, and he too was killed by bird-catchers. His 
wife (i.e. the female parrot) died there in the water in the 
human skull. The very cruel vulture having gone there, got 
drowned into that only. The two, taken by Yama's servants, 
went to the world of the manes. The two, entertaining fear, 
remembered the wicked deeds formerly done by them. Then 
Yama noticed their censurable deeds, and suddenly also noticed 
their great auspicious deed in bathing in it (i.e. in the human 
skull) and dying. Then he permitted the two to go to their

=== PAGE 304 ===

2922 
Padma PuriitJa 
desired world ; though their minds were unassailable, they were 
amazed at remembering their own sins. 
17b-24. 
Approaching and bowing they said to Yama : "We 
have collected censurable sins before. (Then) what is the cause 
for our (going to the) desired worlds? (Please) tell it to us." 
Thus addressed by them, Yama then spoke these words to 
them : "On the bank of Ganga there lived an excellent brahmat;.a 
Batu by name. He was alone, without the feeling of mineness, 
tranquil, free from attachment and jealousy. He always repeated 
the fifth chapter of the Gita. With his soul purified due to that 
religious merit, he, though a sinner, realised the eternal Brah­
man on hearing it after he cast his body. His soul, whose body 
was purified by the Gita, was purified. Having reached that 
water in his skull, you two became pure. Therefore, you go to 
the worlds desired by you who are purified by the fifth chapter 
of the Gita." Thus advised by him, the impartial one, they got 
into a divine car and went to the position of Viᗬt;.u. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY 
The Sixth Chapter : The Story of Raikya 
The lord said: 
1-20. 
0 you of an excellent face, I shall tell you the impor­
tance of the sixth chapter, hearing which men have salvation on 
hand. On the bank of Godavari there is a great city Pratiᗬthana 
where, 0 you of smiling eyes, I, named Pippalesa, dwell. There 
swans remove the fatigue of the self-controlled ones with cold 
sprays from the cavities in their wings on the bank of Godavari. 
The Godavari-water made fragrant with the pollen from the 
cups of throbbing lotuses is praiseworthy as it makes people 
free from old age. Fie upon the nectar of the lord of herbs 
(i.e. the Moon}, destroying sins ! There the best sages touch the 
faces of the Maharᗯtra women bathing (in Godavari), misun­
derstanding them to be fully bloomed lotuses. There the sporting 
Maharaᗬtra beauties snatch (by surpassing) the humming of the

=== PAGE 305 ===

VI. l 80.2 1-39 
2923 
bees the ascetics' minds also. There the Moon everyday wanes 
Qn seeing the face of a woman sporting on the top of a 
very high mansion. The sloping roof of a very high mansion is 
touched by sages and gandharvas with rays of great gems 
unsteady due to breezes (blowing) over diirva and sandal(?). In it 
the horses of the Sun's chariot when he is going, are free from 
fatigue due to the breezes from the banners that are tossed. In 
it the Malaya mountain appears to be left with stones, when the 
hosts of merchants collected innumerable (pieces of) sandal 
wood. In it even pearls are seen to be accumulated everywhere 
like the bunches of the laughter of the city-deity. There lived a 
king named Jfianasruti. When he, of a strong lustre, lifted the 
earth like a gem, even Seᗬa. resembling the Sun in radiance, was 
(just) a snake in general (obscure). The desire-yielding trees were 
as it were darkened through shame on seeing his matchless 
generosity (manifested) by the continual smoke of the sacrifices. 
Gods greedy of eating the sacrificial oblations did not at all 
leave the city of Pratiᗬ!hana. Clouds, constantly well-nourished 
by the streams of water used for gifts and the moonlight of his 
valour and the smoke of sacrifices offered by him, showered in 
time. Calamities did not find even the smallest place anywhere. 
Right courses prevailed when he ruled the earth. He everyday 
looked upon wells, tanks and lakes as the treasures remaining in 
the heart of the earth. His palace shone with white banners, 
like the Himalaya mountain with the multitude of the ripples of 
Ganga. The residents of heaven (i.e. the gods) pleased with his 
gifts, austerities, sacrifices, protection of his subjects, came 
(there) to give him a boon. 
21-39. Then, tossing their masses of wings, divine female 
and male swans, white like lotus-stalks, went out along the path 
in the atmosphere. Two or three of them, led by Bhadrasva, 
going quickly, and talking to one another, speedily moved 
ahead. All of them said together to them moving ahead 
speedily : "Why do you go speedily? Why do you remain ahead? 
Along this difficult path we should go together. Do you not see 
very clearly before you a mass of lustre, shining brightly of 
king Jfianasruti, of a virtuous form? Hearing these words of 
those that lagged behind the swans that were ahead laughed and 
contemptuously uttered (these) words loudly : "Is the lustre of this

=== PAGE 306 ===

2924 
Padma Purii(za 
king Jiia.nasruti more severe than the dreadful lustre of Raikya, 
the teacher of the Vedas?" King Jfiiinasruti, comfortably seated 
on the top of his very lofty mansion, heard these words of the 
swans. Then, he, full of amazement, called his charioteer, and 
the noble one ordered him : "Bring Raikya". The charioteer, 
Maha by name, having understood (these) words of the king 
containing nectar, manifesting joy, went out to the city VaraQasi, 
giving salvation, where god Visvesvara, the lord of the world 
and the preceptor dwells. Then to the holy place called Gaya 
where god Gadadhara, of blooming eyes. lives to emancipate 
all people. Then near Siva. Having moved many times to all 
holy places he went to (the holy place) Kedara destroying sins, 
seeing which (even) once mortals undoubtedly are released. 
Enjoying desired pleasures they are freed from great sins. Then 
he went to the Gauga country where Puruᗰottama dwells, by 
just seeing whom men go to heaven. From there he went to the 
city of Dvaravati, giving salvation, where KrᗰIJa, dear to 
Rukmi:Q.i, lived. A mortal, having bathed at the holy place of 
Gomati and having seen the five Krᗰl}.as (there), obtains salva­
tion after having enjoyed pleasures as desired. Then the wise 
one having reached the sea and seen Somanatha, 
the god 
giving enjoyments and salvation, proceeded further. He reached 
the city of Avantika giving pleasures and salvation, where 
Mahaka.la Sailkara dwells happily sporting with Uma. Then 
having reached Orilkara, giving happiness and granting enjoy­
ment and salvation on the bank of Narmada, he quickly set out 
from there. 
40-52. 
Then he travelled to the city named Asvamedhakara 
where Lakᗰmi's lord Viᗰl}.U, holder of Sarilga, actually lives. 
Then he reached in Viᗭl}.ugaya a tank called Lol}.3.ra, having 
bathed where and drunk (water of which) a man is released from 
bondage. Then he went to (a city) named Kolhapura in Rudragaya, 
where revered Lakᗰmi, giving (i.e. causing) devotion, dwells. A man 
having bathed in Paiicanadi and seen Lakᗰmi, enjoys pleasures 
as desired, and also obtains devotion. Then having visited the 
city named Amalagiri, and having seen Somanatha who dwells 
after mounting on (i.e. on the top of) Nandikesvara, who is 
auspicious, has four hands, and is ready to give gifts, he would 
undoubtedly have salvation. Then he saw, on the bank of

=== PAGE 307 ===

VI. l 80.53-67 
2925 
Tu:tigabhadra, Harihara, whose arms fall on the globe of the 
earth in every yuga. All men seeing the charming Harihara­
body, enjoy pleasures according to their desire and are freed 
from bondage. 
Having remained in heaven 
for a hundred 
kalpas and being free from the bondage of the worldly existence, 
they see the mighty lord of the worlds, seeing whom men never 
see hell. Having stayed in heaven for a hundred kalpas and 
being free from the desire for worldly existence, they obtain 
salvation. No doubt should be raised about this. Then a man 
should reach SriSaila resorted to by siddhas and gandharvas, 
where Girija's lover (i.e. Siva) called Mallinatha (lives) to draw 
out all people from the ocean of worldly existence. Having lived 
in heaven for a hundred kalpas and being free from the bondage 
of worldly existence, they obtain salvation. No doubt should be 
raised about this. 
53-67. 
Then he reached Srisaila resorted to by siddhas 
and gandharvas, where Girija's lover named Mallinatha (lives) 
to draw out all people from the ocean of this worldly existence 
and at every opportune time shows his own lustre. Afflictions and 
tortures in hell of those men who see or even remember him, 
keep away. There is no doubt that men free from the bondage 
of the mundane existence enjoy happiness in heaven and obtain 
salvation. Here Rama with his younger brother and accom­
panied by Sita (dwells). Having bathed and drunk (water) there 
a man is certainly free from hell. Men having enjoyed happiness 
in heaven for crores of kalpas, men freed from the path of worl­
dly existence undoubtedly go to salvation. Then returning from 
there, he came, seeing on the bank of Bhimarathi the two-armed 
god ViHhala, giving enjoyments and salvation, (to the place) 
where the source of Godavari, the great Brahmagiri, is situated. 
By reaching Gautamalaya where the three-eyed Siva dwells 
and after bathing and drinking (water) there where there is 
river Godavari between Aru:Q.a and VaruQa, (sin due to) the 
murder of a brahma:Q.a perishes. Men, seeing Brahmagiri, rich in 
many holy places, obtain salvation only (after) being freed from 
the agony of the worldly existence. Then the charioteer, delight­
ed by seeing holy places on both the banks of Gautami, went to 
Mathura, destroyer of sins. There gods and men worship the 
self-born god. It is the first great place of the lord, which gives

=== PAGE 308 ===

2926 
salvation. It is the birth-place of the lord of the three worlds, 
and is well-known to the Vedas and holy texts. It is resorted to 
by many hosts of gods and of bnihmaJ)a sages. It is charming 
due to the bank of K.alindi; has the form and lustre of the 
crescent moon; being full of the residence of all holy places it 
is delightfully beautiful. It is known as Govardhanagiri, Dviᗬa­
dvana, and is covered by auspicious trees and creepers. It is 
very holy. It has the essence of the holy texts resting (there). 
68-86. 
Then to the north he saw the city of Kasmira, after 
seeing on all sides the holy place Kururkᗪetra, foremost in piety, 
where the lines of houses white like conches and touching the 
sky, have become as it were the fringes of the distinct laughter 
of Siva. It is covered with golden pitchers of the garlands of 
devotion and grace which are as it were golden lotuses fallen 
from the divine river due to wind. There the banners of blue 
straps like rings of moss on the tops of mansions appear like the 
strings of pearls of the divine river. There, resorting to Kasmira, 
Sarasvati always Jives. Otherwise, how does she simultaneously 
write the (entire) Vedic literature? These swans that are dull due 
to intoxication, that have lotus-stalks in their beaks and that 
are the vehicles of Sarasvati, resting there for a long time, are 
moving. There the swans sent by Brahma to know a special 
art, shone like stars and went on all sides. The land-growing 
lotuses, pleasing to the touch by hand, are seen (to be used) by 
the enemy of the demons for the bed of the beautiful lady. There 
due to the statements (upanyiisaib?) of the brahmaJ)as distinct 
hearing was not possible. Even a dumb man, fresh in talk, had 
a mass of joyous words (obscure). There the sky pervaded by the 
smoke of sacrifices, though washed by clouds, did not give up 
its darkness. There the place of the nectar dropped due to the 
great Ĭustre of the sacrifices was seen to be distinguished by its 
mark. There boys resorting to the vicinity of the preceptor 
recite all arts by themselves due to the practice right from their 
birth. There the 'hum' sound of the bracelets of the brahmaJ)a 
wives and the humming of the wandering bees got confused. 
There the breeze touching again and again the cheeks of the 
brahmaQa wives, blows gently as it were through the fear of a 
curse. There, this god Siva called MaJ)ikyesvara, lives to give 
boons to men day by day. MaJ)ikesa, having conquered kings,

=== PAGE 309 ===

VI . l80.87-99 
2927 
worshipped and honoured him. Since then he took the name 
Mii.TJ.ikyesvara, as he was well worshipped with many majestic 
rubies by the Kasmira-king, desirous of conquest of the world. 
The charioteer saw at his door Raikya seated on a cart and 
enjoying shade and scratching his limbs. Having recognised 
him by the respective marks told by the king, the charioteer 
quickly bowed down to him and after having bowed down 
spoke to him. 
The charioteer said: 
87-98. 
0 brii.hmaJ)a, in which (family are you born)? What 
is your name? You are constantly self-willed. Why are you 
resting here? What do you desire to do? 
Hearing these words of him, he, full of great joy, remembered 
the charioteer, and said : "My desires are fulfilled. But there 
must be (something) as you, offering great adoration to me, are 
(trying to) know my mood." Taking (i.e. understanding) respect­
fully the intention of Raikya remaining in his mind, the chario­
teer slowly set out to the place where the king was. Then the 
charioteer with his arms folded and delighted to see his master, 
bowed down, and told the king the account as it took place. 
Then hearing his words, the king with his eyes smiling (i.e. 
blooming) with wonder, had a strong desire to honour Raikya. 
Taking a cart to which a pair of female mules was yoked, a 
necklace, silken garments and a thousand cows, he went to the 
Kasmira country where the meditating saint lived. Offering 
those (articles) to him, the king fell (prostrate) like a staff on the 
ground after bending with great devotion. Raikya was angry 
with the king. (He said :) "0 bad king, 0 siidra, do you not know 
my conduct? Take (back) this cart; lift it to which female mules 
are yoked; so also (take back) the garments, pearl-necklaces and 
the milch cows." The king, thus ordered, was afraid of Raikya. 
Then the king, afraid of a curse, devoutly seized the pair of his 
lotus-like feet, and himself said, "0 brii.hmaJ)a, favour me." 
The king said: 
99. 
0 revered one, wherefrom is this very wonderful great­
ness of you? Being pleased, 0 illustrious one, tell me accurately.

=== PAGE 310 ===

2928 
Padma Puriir}.a 
Raikya said: 
1 00-104. 0 king, everyday I mutter the sixth chapter of the 
Gitii. Therefore, I have a heap of lustre, difficult to be borne 
even by gods. 
Having carefully learnt from 
Raikya 
the sixth chapter 
of the Gita, the wise king Jiianasruti then suddenly became 
free. Raikya too, muttering near Mal).ikye5vara the sixth chapter 
giving salvation, 
obtained happiness. Gods also, who had 
come there, after having disguised themselves as swans for 
(getting) gifts, were amazed, and went out at their free will. There 
is no doubt that a man who constantly mutters this chapter only 
goes to Viզ:t:tu's position. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED EIGHTYONE 
The Serenth Chatper : The Story of Sankukan;a 
The lord said: 
1 -20. 
I shall tell you the greatness of the seventh chapter, 
having heard which the ears are filled with a flood of nectar. 
There was a city Pataliputra by name, difficult of access, having 
high town-gates. A brahmal).a Sati.kukar:t:ta Dayarl).ava by name 
lived in it. Resorting to the profession of a vaisyahe earned much 
wealth. He did not gratify manes, did not worship gods. Intent 
on earning wealth, he fed kings. Once for auspiciousness, the 
fourth marriage started in another house along with his sons 
and kinsmen( ?). On a night fit for religious acts a serpent having 
come from somewhere bit the forearm of him who was asleep. 
He who was just bitten, could not be cured with gems, spells or 
herbs, and in a few moments died. Covering his body with 
nimba leaves and stalks and putting it on a large bough of a 
tree the sons came home. Then after a long time he was born as 
a serpent. With his mind fixed on the desires (of the former 
birth), 
he remembered his former birth. He had thought : 
'Having deceived these sons, I shall cover (i.e. bury) this wealth, 
a crore in amount, where my (other) wealth is placed.' Then, full

=== PAGE 311 ===

Vl. l 8 1 . 2 1 -24 
2929 
of great faith, the sons of the brahmat;.a made an offering to 
Nii.rayaQ.a. Once, the father, troubled by the birth as a serpent, 
came in the dream of his sons, and told them his intention. Then 
they, greatly deluded by amazement got up in the morning, and 
being unrestrained, told each other the account. Oae of them, 
due to his love for his father, desired to emancipate him. The 
other son through greed for the wealth, desired to kill the ser­
pent. The other (i.e. the third) son, with his mind fascinated 
by the affection for his father, (thought :) 'Maybe he is (turned) 
into a serpent'. Thinking like this, he simply lamented. But the 
middle son, deceiving his two brothers, got up under some 
pretext and went to his own house. Then he gently called his 
virtuous wife. With a spade in his hand he went where his father 
(turned into) a serpent was. He who was not told about (the place 
Qf) the wealth, decided accurately about it through (certain) marks. 
Through greed, he came to that place to strike (down) the 
anthill. He made his wife take out the earth, and he himself dug 
the ground. From the anthill that was being dug, a very fierce 
serpent came out. Then the serpent with mouthfuls of poison 
and hissing, told him (these) words : 
The serpent said: 
2 1 . Who are you? Why have you come (here)? Why are 
you digging the hole? 0, fool, who has sent you? Tell that to me. 
The son said: 
22. 
I am your son, named Siva. I have a strong desire to 
take gold. Being very much amazed by the dream I had at 
night, I have come (here). 
Siva* said: 
23. 
Having heard these words of the son, censured by the 
world, the serpent, laughing loudly, started speaking clearly : 
The serpent said: 
24. 
If you are (my) son, quickly free me who am born as a 
serpent for (the preservation of) the deposit of the former birth, 
from bondage. 
*I.e. Lord Siva.

=== PAGE 312 ===

2930 
P adma Purli1Ja 
The son said: 
25. 0 father, tell me how you can be freed, since leaving 
the entire world, I have come (here) at night. 
The father said: 
26-34. 
0 son, except the seventh chapter of the Gitii., which 
is full of nectar, and which is the cause of the removal of the 
old age, death and agony of a living being, the holy places, gifts, 
austerities, sacrifices are not at all capable of releasing me. 0 
son, feed devoutly a brii.hmaQa studying the seventh chapter on 
the day ofa srii.ddha offered to me. Due to that I shall be 
undoubtedly released. 0 son, also feed other brii.hmaQas pro­
ficient in the Vedic learning according to your capacity and with 
great devotion. 
Having heard these words of the father turned into a serpent, 
all the sons did as he had told (them, and even) more than that. 
Then that wealthy SalikukarQa, having cast off the serpentine 
body, divided (the wealth) among his sons, and obtained a 
divine body. All the sons, of a good behaviour, were delighted 
at the wealth which their father gave after dividing it and which 
amounted a crore. They, of pious minds, constructed wells, 
tanks, lakes, performed sacrifices to please the god, so also 
opened free hoardings. Then, muttering the seventh chapter, 
they with their eyes fixed on final bliss, obtained release, knowing 
the eighth one (also) the most desired one. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED EIGHTYTWO 
The Eighth Chapter : Bhiivasarman's Story 
Siva said: 
1-6. 0 Pii.rvati, listen. I shall tell you the greatness of the 
eighth chapter, by merely listening to which you will get great 
joy. A city named Amardaka is well-known in the southern

=== PAGE 313 ===

VI. 1 82.7- 1 7 
293 1 
country. There 
was a brahma:Q.a named Bh.avasarman, the 
husband of a courtesan. He, very fierce, ate flesh, drank liquor, 
stole the wealth of the good, dallied with others' wives, had a 
strong desire for hunting, carried out his strong desire. Drinking 
the nectar-like juice of tali-fruit up to his throat (i.e. excessively), 
he was very much troubled by indigestion. The sinful one died 
(in due course) of time, and became a great tala tree. A couple 
turned into brahma:Q.a-ghosts, lived there resorting to its shadow, 
dense and very cold. 
The goddess said: 
7. Tell me, 0 god, what was their caste? What was their 
nature? What was their profession? Due to what deed were 
they turned into brahma:Q.a-ghosts? 
Siva said: 
8-17. 
There 
was a brahma:Q.a, Kusivala by name, who 
knew the essential nature of the Vedas and Vedatigas, who was 
proficient in all holy texts, and whose conduct was good. His 
wife, named Kumati, was of a wicked mind. He along with his 
wife, was very greedy and accepted great gifts like a buffalo, a 
Kalapuruᗬa(?), horses etc., day after day ; (but) he did not give 
(even) a chowrie to brahma:Q.as. As time passed, the two evil 
spirits, of the form of brahma:Q.a-ghosts, with their 
bodies 
oppressed by hunger and thirst, roamed over this earth. They 
then rested after having come to the root of the palm tree. 
"How will this great agony of ours go away? When will there 
be freedom from this stock of brahma:Q.a-ghosts ?" Thus asked 
by the brahma:Q.a female, the brahma:Q.a (male) spoke (to her) : 
"How can we be free from this calamity without instruction in 
the knowledge of the supreme spirit, metaphysical consideration, 
and the knowledge of the manner in which a deed is done.' ' 
The wife said: 
0 best man, what is that Brahman; what is metaphysics ? 
What is an act?* 
Listen to the wonder that took place, when his wife spoke 
*Cp. BG VIII. l a : fcf; ĩi'W f.f;l:r6ll'mf fcf; iifilf Īī11 I

=== PAGE 314 ===

2932 
Padma Purar)a 
this much. That tree listening to half a verse from the eighth 
chapter gave up its form of the palm-tree and became an excel­
lent brahmaJ)a. With his mind suddenly shaken by knowledge, 
he was free from the garb of sins. The couple became free due 
to that greatness (of the GWi). 
18-25. When these words luckily went out of his mouth, 
then from the atmosphere an aeroplane appeared, which had 
small bells tinkling, which was auspicious, which was adorned 
with faces resembling the orb of the moon, of celestial damsels, 
which was crowded with bees hovering round the lotuses in the 
form of the faces of the celestial nymphs, which was adorned 
with chowries white like the foam on the shore of the Milky 
Ocean being churned, and charming like the ripples of Ganga, 
lovely with the singing gandharvas, and with hundreds of young 
divine damsels dancing. The couple got into the divine aero­
plane and went to heaven. The entire occurrence of this place 
was amazing. Then the wise one wrote this half verse carefully. 
He went to the city named VaraJ)asi, giving salvation, seeking 
to propitiate ViᗬJ)u, god of gods. The generous-minded one 
started to practise a great penance there. In the meanwhile, 
(Lakᗬmi) the daughter of the Milky Ocean, after joining her 
hands, asked ViᗬIJ.u, the lord of the world, and the god of gods : 
"How is it that you are wakeful after having abandoned sleep ? 
Tell me". 
The lord said: 
26-28. An intelligent brii.hmaJ)a named Bha.vasarman, full 
of a flood of devotion, is seriously practising penance on the 
bank of Ganga at Kii.si. With his senses controlled, he is mutter­
ing half the verse from the eighth chapter of the Gita. 0 god­
dess, due to that penance I am very much pleased. Thinking for 
a long time desiring to give a fruit like (i.e. suitable to) his 
penance, I am now wakeful (like this). 
Piirvatl said: 
29. 
0 lord, if ViᗱI).u, though pleased, became thoughtful, 
what fruit did Bhii.vasarman, the devotee of ViᗬIJ.u, get?

=== PAGE 315 ===

V I . l 82.30-VI. l 83.9 
2933 
Sri M ahiideva said: 
30-32. 
Then that best brahma:Q.a, Bhavasarman, having 
received the grace of (Viᗭ:Q.u) the enemy of Mura, got endless 
happiness. Those born in his family who had formerly experi­
enced torture, also obtained the (highest) position due to his 
acts. 0 you fawn-eyed one, I have told a little about the great­
ness of the eighth chapter. It should be always noted. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED EIGHTYTHREE 
The Ninth Chapter : A Goat's Story 
Sri M ahiideva said: 
1-8. Hereafter I shall carefully explain (this importance of) 
the ninth chapter. Being steady (i.e. attentive) listen to it, 0 
daughter of the Himalaya Mountain. On the bank of Narmada, 
there was a city named Mahiᗭmati. There lived an auspicious 
bnihma:Q.a named Madhava, who knew the true nature of the 
Vedas and Vedatigas, who every time loved the guests. The 
pure-minded one, having earned much money by means of his 
learning only, some time commenced to perform a great sacri­
fice. He brought a goat, for killing him at the sacrifice after 
worshipping his body. He (the goat), laughing loudly, uttered 
(these) words : "What is the use of these many sacrifices, though 
performed in the proper manner, (but) having perishable fruits, 
and causing birth, old age and death ? 0 bnihma:Q.a, see my 
condition like this." Men staying in the pavilion, were amazed 
at hearing these words of the goat, that greatly excited curiosity. 
Then the brahma:Q.a, with his eyes motionless, saluting him 
devoutly and with the palms of his hands joined, respectfully 
asked the goat : 
The briihma'{la said: 
9. 
Which caste do you belong to? What is your nature? 
What is your mode of life? Tell (me that). Due to what act (of 
yours) you obtained the birth as a goat ?

=== PAGE 316 ===

2934 
The goat said: 
Padma Purib}.a 
10-24. 
Formerly I was (born) in a very pure family of 
brahma:Q.as. I was proficient in the Vedic lore and offered hosts 
of sacrifices. Once my wife, modest with devotion to Ca:Q.gika, 
asked for a goat from me for appeasing the disease of (our) son. 
Then when the goat was being killed in the pavilion of Ca:Q.gika, 
the goat's mother, expounder of the Vedas, cursed me : "0 
mean brahma:Q.a, 0 you who are performing a sacrifice that is 
not approved by the holy texts, since you are killing my inno­
cent son, you will get the stock of (i.e. will be born as) a goat." 
Then, 0 best brahmaJ).a, I, after dying after (some) time, was 
born as a goat, after having crossed (i.e. gone through) torment 
and torture of many kinds of existences. Even though I had 
gone to the stock of (i.e. was born as) a beast, I had (retained) 
the recollection of (former) births. 
The briihma1;1a said: 
My mind is curious, is intent on hearing about your birth 
due to curiosity. Tell all (about) that to all these brahma:Q.as. 
The goat said: 
Some time I was (born as) a monkey. Children saw me 
dancing in every courtyard due to instruction given to me by a 
juggler. Seeing the generous sons, and my wife also·, I became 
averse to any act and gave up the going round in dancing. Then 
the juggler, with his eyes red due to anger, se:verely beat me 
with round sticks, difficult to bear. Then I bleeding continuously, 
fainted. Smelling at food and water, I died. Then I became a 
dog wandering in every house. I, eating food that was aban­
doned and that was left after eating, filled my belly on the way. 
Sometime I entered the kitchen of my own house. Being hun­
gry, I started eating the boiled rice placed in a plate. I smelt 
the ground, looked into the ten dᗩrections slowly and through 
fear. Being afraid of the sound of people, I licked my side. 
Then my sons came and saw me at some time. And my old 
wife beat me with clubs etc. Then, I, with my waist broken 
and discharging much blood fled. 
25-33. Overcome with swoon, I somehow went out of the 
house. In course of time my limbs were stinking with pus and

=== PAGE 317 ===

VI. 1 83.34-48 
2935 
full of insects. Then I obtained the state of (i.e. was born as) a 
horse. 0 learned man, I became a horse in the house of a 
distiller and died in course of time. Some time he brought me, 
with my teeth falling due to old age, in a square crowded with 
people, for sale. My wife intent on going on a pilgrimage to 
Dvarakii., trying to buy me for a small price, bought me and 
tied me, the old one, with a rope, and mounting on me along 
with her two or three sons, started going. Slowly I got plunged 
into deep mud on the bank of a lake. There I, with my neck 
turned, and falling into the mud, was again and again being 
beaten by (my) sons having clubs and stones in their hands. 
Being repeatedly raised I died. Then having decided that I was 
dead, the sons who gave up their exertion, wailed, and having 
surrounded their helpless mother, they went home. Then having 
died there I went to the stock of (i.e. was born as) a goat. I 
passed through many stocks, low and high, giving torment and 
agony. 
The briihma7Ja said: 
34. 
0 great goat, what is the use of this collection of mise­
ries everyday? (Tell me) properly and uprightly, by what I 
would have endless happiness. 
The goat said: 
35-48. I shall, 0 brii.hmal}.a, tell another wonder comfort­
ably to you who are asking me, if you have curiosity. There 
was a city named Kuruk!?etra, giving salvation. There lived 
king Candrasarman of the solar dynasty. At the time of the 
solar eclipse he, endowed with great faith, started giving gift of 
Kalapuru!?a. Having called a brii.hmal}.a, master of the Vedas 
and Vedii.ilgas, he went with his priest to bathe with auspicious 
holy water. Then Kii.lapuru!?a, laughing, said : "0 brahmal}.a, at 
the time of the solar eclipse, at this holy place called Kuruk­
!?etra, others do not accept anything. How do you desire to 
receive a gift? Knowing that all this certainly causes sin, how 
do you proceed to do it with a mind blinded by greed of 
wealth?" Having heard these words of him, causing wonder to 
the world the brahmal}.a said : "What is the use of this fear of

=== PAGE 318 ===

2936 
Padma Purii1].a 
great gift? I do know the means properly to cross the unfathom­
able ocean of the sin due to a great gift like this." Then the 
king, having bathed, having put on two garments, being pure, 
pleased in mind, having put on white flowers and 
having 
anointed his body, having held the hand of the priest, being 
served by persons proper for the occasion, came (there). The 
king, having come there, gave the briihmal}.a, 
Kiilapuruᗰa, 
according to the proper rite. Having pierced the heart of the 
Kiilapuruᗰa, a sinful ciil}.Qiila, with red eyes, of a cruel appearance 
went out. So also, at the joy due to interest in censuring others, a 
female ciil}.c;iiilikii, viz. Censure, came to the side of the briihmal}.a 
whose death was brought near. 
49-60. 
This couple of the ciil}.Qiilas of ruddy eyes, going 
out, forcibly moved into the body of the briihmal}.a. While the 
king was looking on, the briihmal}.a stood muttering the ninth 
chapter of the Gitii in his mind, trembling a little and remain­
ing silent like the ocean with ViᗬI}.U sleeping inside trembling 
due to the movements of the wind. Then the ciiQc;iiila-couple 
that was near the briihmaJ}a, was troubled by ViᗰQu's (atten­
dants) appearing due to (the recitation of) the letters of the 
Gitii, and with its efforts rendered futile, and (deciding to) flee, 
went away. The king who actually noticed the happening like 
this, with his eyes smiling (i.e. dilated) due to wonder, asked the 
briihmal}.a : "How-by muttering what hymn, or remembering 
what god-did you go over this calamity? Who was that man? 
Who was that woman? How did they approach (you)? How 
were they appeased? 0 briihmaJ}a tell it to me." 
The briihmaёJ,a said : 
I know the couple : Strong sin had assumed the form of the 
(male) ciil}.Qiila. Censure took the form of the female ciil}.c;iiila. I 
remembered the series of the verses of the ninth chapter of the 
Gitii. 0 king, know that all this is its virtue. 0 king, everyday 
I mutter the ninth chapter of the Gitii. Due to that the calami­
ties caused by my accepting bad gifts were overcome by me. 
The king learnt the ninth chapter from the briihmaJ}a. Both 
obtained highest joy.

=== PAGE 319 ===

Vl. l 84. 1 - 1 7 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED EIGHTYFOUR 
The Tenth Chapter : A Swan's Story 
The goddess said: 
2937 
1-Sa. 0 you omniscient one, the life of all, the lord of all, 
the master of speech, 0 Siva, I am lucky since you, respectable 
and visible, have explained this auspicious grandeur of the ninth 
chapter, the honey, full of many wonderful and sweet accounts. 
0 lord of gods, I, hearing it, was not content. 0 Siva, my desire 
to hear it is not dulled. (On the contrary) it increases. My life 
is listening to the Gitii., 0 you ocean of greatness. Even in that 
(Gitii.) the sages declare the tenth chapter to be the principal. 
Tell me an account relating to that great chapter. 
Siva said: 
Sb-17. 0 beautiful one, listen to this ladder to the inaccessi­
ble heaven difficult to get. It is, as it were, the limit of grand­
eurs, highly purifying account. In the city of Kii.si, there was a 
brii.hmat;1a devoted to pious fame. His mind was tranquil, free 
from mischief, cruelty and violence. With his senses controlled, 
he was always engaged in bliss. He was known as Dhiradhi, and 
was devoted to me like Nandin. He had crossed the ocean of 
the Vedas, and was proficient in the meaning of all holy texts. 
Once while he, subservient (i.e. given) to meditation, with his 
mind plunged in (the thought of) the internal soul, having the 
eyes of (i.e. perceiving) the Supreme Spirit, was going, I, through 
affection, ran, and gave support to his hand, causing wonder. 
The absent-minded one, having sipped water, having fixed his 
eyes full of great joy on the tip of his nose, remained, with his 
senses as it were sleepy. When he, of long (broad) eyes, slept for 
a while, without fear, at night, using as a pillow the large thres­
hold of the door, 0 broad-eyed one, Bhpigiriti, saluting my 
lotus-like feet, asked me : "Due to which rite has he secured 
your sight? What (kind ot) penance has this noble one practised, 
what oblations has he made, what (hymns) has he muttered, 
that the god supports his hand at every step? Why is he not 
able to go out of this city? If, by chance, he crosses the boun­
dary of Kii.Si, he does not see even these people that are by his

=== PAGE 320 ===

2938 
Padma PuraiJa 
side. I wish to know the cause of this-(! wish to hear) the 
words of my master. If I deserve to be favoured then tell me 
what is proper." Hearing this question of Bhpigiriti, I said : 
18-26. 
Once I was in the Punnii.ga forest which was near 
Kailii.sa, the forest which was full of the hosts of the beautiful 
divine women making sounds, in which the quarters were joyful 
with the multitudes of the cooings of the cuckoos, which was 
full of the notes of (birds) like the eagle and the cii.taka, which 
was bristling with the drops shining on the rotating, wooden 
machine for raiᗲing water, which was full of the bulbs of the 
plantain trees (growing) on the sides of the drains, which was 
full of musk-deer, which was stupefied with the sounds of kin­
naras, which was at place5 resorted to by deer with the outer 
corners of their eyes dull due to rumination, which was full of 
parrots, where the swans showed their cleverness among them, 
which was stirred by the thick wind, with joyful sounds, in 
which the bees were intoxicated by the rum exuding from the 
Mii.dhavi flowers, which was full of the fragrance of the clusters 
of blooming trivali flowers, in which the bees were slow due to 
the intoxication caused by the fragrance of blooming bakula 
flowers, in which the region of the earth was washed with the 
nectar oozing from the moon. Having sat on a seat I remained 
there for a while. The wind, by way of the churning sticks in 
the form of terrific branches breaking due to friction, blew 
under the pretext of a trembling mountain. Then there was a 
great sound which resounded at the sides of the valley. 
27-38. Then from the cave of the sky a bird descended. He 
was like the autumnal cloud, and was as it were the mass of 
collyrium. He was as it were the mass of darkness, or a moun­
tain with its wings cut off. Having rested on the earth, the bird 
saluted me. Having brought a fresh flower, he put it at my 
feet. Then the bird uttered (my) praise with distinct words : 
"Victory to you, 0 god, 0 Brahman, 0 joy, 0 ocean of nectar, 
0 lord of the world, 0 billow of the continuous contact with 
good feelings, 0 you having infinite bodies, 0 you who are free 
from the three kinds of dirt due to your thought full of the 
feeling of uniqueness, 0 you who have conquered your senses, 
0 you who are dependent, · 0 you, whose body can be secured 
(only) by means of concentration, 0 you free from adjuncts,

=== PAGE 321 ===

VI. l 84.39-54a 
2939 
0 you who are free, 0 formless one, 0 pure one, 0 limitless 
one, 0 you free from egotism, 0 you having no obstruction, 0 
you qualityless one, 0 you protector of those who have sub­
mitted themselves to you, 0 you with skilful lotus-like feet, 0 
you of a terrible garland, 0 you great tiger, 0 you who burnt 
Cupid with dames, 0 you who pierced the lord of demons with 
an axe, 0 you great lord, 0 you who wiped the sindiira on the 
forehead of the wife of Tripura, 0 you who applied excellent 
saffron to the lotus-like breasts of Katyii.yani, salutation to (you), 
who are away from proofs, to (you) of the form of great intel­
lect, to (you) the lord of life, to (you) of the form of the three 
worlds. I salute your lotus-like feet which are touched by the 
excellent meditating saints and which are wonderful in going to 
the other end of the unlimited ocean of the worldly existence. 
Even the lord of speech (i.e. Brhaspati) is not able to praise 
you. Even (Seᗭa), the lord of serpents, does not have the skill 
in describing you, 0 great god ; then what to say of me, a bird, 
with a small intelligence?" 
39-54a. 
Having heard this praise made by the bird, I said 
to him : "0 bird, who are you, wherefrom do you come ? Your 
body is like that of a swan, and your colour is like that of a crow. 
Tell me for what purpose you have come here." The bird, the 
best among speakers, thus asked by me, with his neck slightly 
bent in respect spoke with a soft voice : "0 lord of gods, 0 
Dhiirja!i, know me to be Brahma's swan. (Know) due to which 
this blackness has recently come up, 0 lord. 0 you omniscient 
one, listen to what is said (in reply to) what is asked by you. 
When I came to the earth from the Manasa lake, I landed into 
a danger. Near the Sauriiᗳᗴra city, I, having taken mouthfuls of 
lotus-stalks, white like the young crescent moon, from a lake 
where the lotuses were blooming, resorted to my strength and 
quickly went into the sky. Then from the sky I suddenly fell on 
the ground. Then with my mind covered with swoon, with my 
senses fully weakened, with my body trembling, I, being touched 
by cool breezes, regained consciousness. I did not ascertain the 
cause of my fall. 'Oh, what has this come? How had I a fall 
today due to which I have this blackness on my body, white like 
perfect camphor?' Thus when I, full of wonder, thought (to 
myself), I heard, from the lotus, words like these : '0 swan, get

=== PAGE 322 ===

2940 
Padma Purli7Ja 
up; I shall tell you the cause of your fall and blackness.' Then I 
got up and came to the middle of the lake. I saw a charming 
lotus-plant, having five lotuses. I commenced asking (it) the 
cause of (my) blackness and fall. Then I saw, in the sky, six 
myriad men who were dark like clouds, who had covered them­
selves with gold-coloured garments, who had four arms (each), 
the weapons (of each) of whom were a mace, a conch, a disc 
and a lotus, who were variegated with crowns, necklaces, arm­
lets and ear-rings. Having saluted and gone round, keeping it to 
my right, the lotus-plant, I asked her everything beginning with 
my fall". 
The lotus plant said: 
54b-63a. 
0 swan, you moved in the sky passing over me. 
Due to that sin you have fallen on the ground. 0 best bird, due 
to that only blackness is seen on your body. Sixty thousand 
bees, smelling the fragrance, produced by the middle lotus that 
was talking on seeing you falling with its mind full of compas­
sion, went to heaven. Those whom you saw having a lustre like 
that of a blue lotus, were the sons of a sage in the seventh 
existence that has passed. On the bank of this very lake, they 
practised a very severe penance. Sometime, a beautiful lady, 
having breasts like clusters of campaka-ftowers, with the outer 
corners of her eyes unsteady and charming due to wavy hair, 
with the brightness of her smile being kissed by the moonlight 
released from the pearl of her nose, having put the lute between 
her breasts, sang in the forest. Hearing the sound of her who 
was singing, the brahma:Q.as, like deer, went to her, and saw her 
simultaneously. They said to one another: "I saw her (first), 
she is mine." Then a pugilistic encounter took place among the 
brothers. With their chests pounded with one anothers' fists, 
they died. 
63b-82. Having enjoyed various fearful hells, they became 
cranes on the earth. Then they killed wild beasts and were 
burnt by wild fire. Then being born as ci:Q.Qiilas they killed 
travellers on the way. Having drunk poisonous water in the 
forest, they went to Varna's abode. One by one they got the 
stock of an ass, a camel. a monkey, and a cat. Then they be-

=== PAGE 323 ===

VI. l 84.83-99 
2941 
came bees, and are (now) in the lake. Today having smelt my 
fragrance they have gone to the position of Vigm. 0 best bird, 
listen, I shall tell you (that) by which there is grandeur in me. 
In the third birth that has passed (from this birth), I was a 
daughter of a brahma:Q.a named Sarojavadana. I was devoted 
only to fidelity, and was engaged in serving the elders. Once, 
while I was teaching a sarika, there was a delay. My husband, 
who got angry, cursed me : "0 sinful one, be a sarika." After 
death I got sarikahood (i.e. was born as a sarika), (but) due to 
the propitiousness of my fidelity, a girl in the sages' house 
nourished me. It is well-known that the tenth chapter (of the 
Gita) is power(-ful). The brahma:Q.a recited it in the morning ; I 
listened to it removing sin. 0 bird, after (some) time, I cast the 
body of the sarika., and became, due to the greatness of the 
tenth chapter, a celestial nymph in heaven. I was known as 
Padmavati; and was the dear friend of Lakᗪmi. Once when I 
was going in an aeroplane through the sky, I saw this charming 
lake containing spotless lotuses. After descending, when I 
started sporting in its water, Durvasas came (there) and saw me 
without clothes. Then I myself took up this form of a lotus 
plant. I have five lotuses, two lotuses with my two feet (turned 
into them), two lotuses with my hands (turned into them) and 
the fifth lotus with my face (turned into that). The lord of sages 
looked at me with eyes blazing with anger. "0 sinful one, with 
this form only stay for a hundred years." Giving a curse like 
this, he vanished in a moment. Due to the greatness of the 
tenth chapter my (power of) speech has not vanished. By just 
going over me, you fell on the ground. 0 best bird, today, when 
you remain (by me) my curse will cease. Listen to the best 
chapter recited by me; by just hearning which you will be free 
from the curse today only. 
Saying like this, she recited the tenth chapter in a soft voice. 
Having heard it, and having taken the lotuᗫ given by her, I 
offered it, the best lotus of the lotus plant, to you. 
Speaking like this, he cast his body. It was wonderful. 
Bhrngiriti said: 
83-99. 
Who was he in his former birth '1 How did he be-

=== PAGE 324 ===

2942 
Padma Purdt)a 
come Brahma's swan? With what intention did he cast his body 
in front of you? 
Hearing these words of Bhpigiriti, I said to him : "He was 
born in the former birth in a brahmal)a's house. He was well 
known as Sutapas, was a celibate and had his senses controlled. 
Living in his preceptor's house, he studied the Vedas everyday. 
He devoutly and properly served his preceptor. (Once) he while 
asleep touched, with his foot, his preceptor who was asleep. 
Due to that sin he obtained the state of a lower animal even in 
heaven. Then the brahma:Q.a was born among the swans of the 
Lotus-born (Brahma). In this existence, when I was watching, 
the tenth chapter of the Gita was narrated before him. Having 
heard it, the bird obtained excellent knowledge. Due to the 
grandeur of the tenth chapter he was born in a brii.hmaoa 
family. Due to practice from birth, from the lotus-like face of 
him even when a child the tenth chapter of the Gita always 
flashes. As a result of its meaning he always sees the god hold­
ing a conch, a disc, living in all beings. He on whomsoever and 
whenever, he casts his affectionate glance, is released even 
though he is a drunkard or killer of a brii.hmaQa. Knowing that 
I, of the form of the Supreme Soul, brought the brahmaQa to 
this city which is naturally a holy place giving salvation. Salva­
tion is (just) on the palm of people living here. Therefore, due 
to his seeing (them) no other special effect is produced. I do 
not allow his knowledge very difficult to get, which he formerly 
obtained due to the greatness of the tenth chapter, to go out of 
him. So also this sage obtained salvation while living. There­
fore, I give him my hand when he moves and walks along the 
road. 0 Bhrngiri!i, such is the great importance of the tenth 
chapter. 
Thus I have told the same account destroying sins as was 
told before (i.e. to) Bhrngiriti. A man or a woman, whosoever 
(he or she may be) would obtain the fruit of all the stages of 
h;n· an life by merely listening to it.