=== PAGE 1 ===

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world’s books discoverable online.
It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that’s often difﬁcult to discover.
Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this ﬁle - a reminder of this book’s long journey from the
publisher to a library and ﬁnally to you.
Usage guidelines
Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:
+ Make non-commercial use of the ﬁles We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these ﬁles for
personal, non-commercial purposes.
+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google’s system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.
+ Maintain attribution The Google “watermark” you see on each ﬁle is essential for informing people about this project and helping them ﬁnd
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.
+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can’t offer guidance on whether any speciﬁc use of
any speciﬁc book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book’s appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.
About Google Book Search
Google’s mission is to organize the world’s information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world’s books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web
at http://books.google.com/

=== PAGE 2 ===

c
30) ©)!
mle

=== PAGE 3 ===

HARVARD
COLLEGE
LIBRARY

:

=== PAGE 4 ===

ogizeary GOOgle

=== PAGE 5 ===

ogizeary GOOgle

=== PAGE 6 ===

ogizeary GOOgle

=== PAGE 8 ===

mY,

ASHTADHYAYLOF PANINI.
TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH

Yr

SRISA CHANDRA VASU, B. A.,,

Provincial Civil Service, N. W. P.
a
VOX =~ mE
. ~eeSN.

Henures,
PUBLISHED BY SINDHU CHARAN BOSE,.
at the Panini Office,
1896,

(All rights reserved.)

=== PAGE 10 ===

35-3

=== PAGE 11 ===

vigiizes y GOOe
Cc

=== PAGE 12 ===

Dhed L IFA 2 19°

i
F SANSKRIT.

OPIN
Profe # * © From what
I have st ould I have given for
such a wd Panini’s Sftras and
the Coma finishing your work.
- Pro February, 1892.—* *
‘The 1 te Public shows clearly
Goes || Harward College || Bagot eh ay
7 amongst * Library iskrit Grammar. The
paper, pri kellent.
Prof trd April, 1893.—* *
* Nothi THE BEQUEST OF doubt, than to get hold
of a trust the standard work of
Sanskrit Charts RLanm an jake this valuable work
known te PROFESSOR OF SANSKRIT of ancient India in
. this coun 1880-1936
- Pro June, 1893—* * *
The wor ,and executed, doing
credit’ t Nin my opinion, very
valuable u. ta student of the native

wereeeemensenys .
grammar more help than he can find

ywhere else.” It ought to have a good
sale in Europe (and correspondingly in america).

Professor V. Fausbol, Copenhagen, 15th June, 1893.—'

eee It appears to

me to be a splendid production of Indian industry and scholarship, and I value
it particularly on account of the extracts from the Kasika,

Professor Dr. R. Pischel, Hlale (Saale), 27th May, 1893.—* * ® I have
gone through it and find it an extremely valuable and useful book, all the more
so, as there are very few Sanskrit scholars in Europe who understand Panini,

Pandit Lalchandra Vidyabhaskar, 4, RAS. ‘London), Guru to H.H,

the Maharaja of Jodhpur.

erat feade eae Tae get ARy Guat

Prorbrircattatea ggg Serra SORT RTT TET MY "
To faeregecreg Tats TSTAM NTA ANT H: |
AHIR TAMARA: ATTA THAT CT tty tt 7

target fretrerinnnt aerefaatrrantarar Te |

BeRratraaiargsy Ted THAT TATA TTT TSS |
Reiagtea erafeorinenrar area Red wpe gFe |
acratrrcraprtradter Pratrarra: sfaferare wy w

SR PraTHeA TATA AMT TTTT BT TCTATT |
SrTERea MTT aT saga het TTT: Uy
Warerar ghrrargaererdarg Prbaaraceaerearete |

Sohne aeaeaanaant weg ATS Ta EAT Mt Et
TUTTE TTT TR TTA ATT |
ecqiatengagermant niTcaTe st rat eT Ue
TRATES Sarr anes eT Faw
Ratacaererns egress re Se TT Mm

=== PAGE 13 ===

- OPINIONS OF THE PRESS. *

The Indian Union, (Allahabad), 26th November, 1891.—* * * The original
Text and Commentaries, carefully edited with English notes and explanations;
bespeak of much diligence, care and ability; and those of the English-reading
public who have a taste for Sanskrit cannot be too thankful to Babu Sris
Chandra for offering them so easy an access to the intricate regions reigned
over by that Master Grammarian. ® * ® We recommend this book to all
English-knowing lovers of the Sanskrit Language. .

The Tribune, (Lahore), oth December, 1891.—* © © The translator has
spared no pains in preparing a translation which may place Panini’s celebrated
work within the comprehension of people not deeply read in Sanskrit. The
paper, printing and the general get-up of the book before us are admirable,
and considering the size of the book (it is estimated to extend 2000 pages)
the price appears to be extremely moderate.

The Amrita Basar Patrika, (Calcutta), 18th December, 1891.—* ® * Judging
from the first part before us, we must say that Babu Sris Chandra has suc-
cecded well in the difficult work of translation, which seems to us to be at
once lucid, full and exact. It is no exaggeration to say that Babu Sris Chandra’s
translation, when completed, will claim a prominent place among similar works
by European Sanskrit Scholars.

The Hope, (Calcutta), 20th December, 1891—* © * The get-up of the
publication is of a superior order, and the contents display considerable pains-
taking on the part of the translator, .

The Arya Patrika, (Lahore), 22nd December, 1891—* * ® The talented
Babu has rendered a great service to the cause of Sanskrit literature by produ-
cing the sort of translation he is engaged upon, * * © Hiseffort is most
laudable and deserves every encouragement. tos

Karnatak Patra, (. Dharwar), 7th February, 1892—* * * Mr. Vasu gives
ample proof of his competency to undertake the work which is not an easy task
even to learned Sanskritists,

The Punjab Times, (Rawalpindi), 17th February, 1892—* * * Babu
Sris Chandra is well-known for his scholarly attainments. He has done the
translation in a lucid and clear English. We can strongly recommend it to those
who wish to study Sanskrit Grammar through the medium of English.

The Mandalay Herald, 31st December, 1891—* * * Students and readers
of classic language of India are much indebted to the learned Pandit for his
translation of this scientific work on the grammar and philology of the Sanskrit

language.

The Arya Darpan, (Shahjahanpur,) February, 1892.—* * * Such a work
has been a desideratum. It is well got up, and praiseworthy, We wish it every
success,

=== PAGE 14 ===

OPINIONS OF THE PRESS (continued).

' The Allahabad Review, January, 1892—* * * The translator has done
“his work .conscientiously and faithfully. The translation of such a work into
English, therefore, cannot but be a great boon to all students of the science
of language and of Sanskrit literature in special. The translator deserves the
help of the Government and the Chiefs of India.

The Maharatta (Poona), 4th July, 1893—* * © If we may judge from
the first part which lies before us, it wiJl prove a very valuable help to the stu-
dent of Panini. * * So faras it goes it is creditably performed, and there-
fore deserves patronage from all students of Sanskrit and the Education
Departraent.

Indian Mirror (Calcutta), 17th March, 1894—* © ® The manner in
which the publication is being pushed through, speaks volumes in favour of the
learning and patriotism of its cditor, Babu Sris Chandra Vasu. The whole
work when completed will be an invaluable guide to the study of Sanskrit litera-
ture and especially to the English speaking students of the Sanskrit language.

Lucifer (London), March 1896.—' . * We are pleased to find
that the translation is clear and easy and the extracts from the Kashika are not
only very numerous but also valuable. The large number of references to the pre-
ceding sOtras for the formation of ‘padas’ will save much time and _ trouble,
and obviate a difficulty which discourages many from the study of P&nini.
Indeed the English translation of the grammar could rightly be called “ Panini
Made Easy.” * * * It can be recommended as of great impor-
tance, not only to all who wish to have a general knowledge of PAnini but also
to the few who desire to master the great grammar thoroughly and enjoy all
its benefits,

RATES OF. SUBSCRIPTION
Payable in advance, for the complete work, including postage,
Indian ” ~ ~ Rs. 20 0 O-
Foreign on we ow  & 200

Payable by instalments, per volume, excluding postage,
Indian we oo ~ Rs 8300

Foreign we oe ~ o6o0

Payable at the end of publication, for the complete work, excluding postage.
Indian owe oe ~ Rs. 8000
Foreign... - ow BZ 300

All communications to be addressed to . .
SINDHU CHARAN BASU
PUBLISHER OF PANINI,
Benares Cantonment,
N-W. P., India,

7. P. Works, Benarce.

N : -

=== PAGE 15 ===

ogizeary GOOgle

=== PAGE 16 ===

Td BUSh 214 WHAVHAR

e YrIcaavinu : L/ .: 1?
7. “vaawats md L BHet a

HARVARD
REL - | UNIVERSITY
same LIBRARY

-__:-

=== PAGE 17 ===

TO THE

cqowble Sir John Gage, Bt, Q. C.,

CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES,
THIS WORK

Is,

WITH HIS LORDSHIP’S PERMISSION,
AND IN RESPECTFUL APPRECIATION OF HIS LORDSHIP’S
SERVICES TO THE CAUSE OF ADMINISTRATION OF
: JUSTICE AND OF EDUCATION

IN
THESE PROVINCES,

Dedicated

BY HIS LORDSHIP'S HUMBLE SERVANT
THE TRANSLATOR.

2
Qereraee

CR,

=== PAGE 19 ===

aa

wT AGUeAAey TAA: Te: |
BOOK FOURTH.

Cnaprer First... 00... ye0 0 see ene

ee _ Las ieee gatgoee oo Wumanaauvaluva Or” Collective
‘aggregate of these three words,

Q. Allaffixes are placed after the base (See Sdtra III. 1. 2); the
affixes treated of in the last Book were to be placed after the root (‘dhatu’);
the remaining affixcs taught in Books Fourth and Fifth, will therefore, be
placed after all such bases s@fa which arc not roots (dhatu); and such bases
remaining are pratipadika and feminine words, What is then the necessity

=== PAGE 20 ===

Ne

&

=== PAGE 21 ===

<=:

a ;
ora <qatearret TTA: AWE:

BOOK FOURTH.

Cuarrer First.

_ SrraenfereRreare Wk cals n St-errearferafecenrey -
eh wrarttsag, | afta aiagatreart arqearrararitanicatere rea tet
wafrataa b .
1. (From this point forward os far as the end of
Book Fifth, whatever we shall treat of, should be understood
to come), after what ends with the feminine affixes 2, or =v,
or after a Nominal stem. ;

This is an ‘adhikara’ aphorism pure and s{mple. It simply consists
of terms which other aphorisms, in order to complete their sense, are under
the necessity of borrowing. In other words, this sQtra points out the base
eta to wich the affixes beginning with g treated of in the next sdtra, and’ .
ending with aq (V. 4. 151), are to be applied,

The sftra consists of three words, The term # is a common name
for the three affixes #ty, eta, and et{ The term wry, is the common name
for the three affixes ery, <t¢ and arg These are feminine affixes and are
taught from sitra 4 to 65 of this chapter. The word srfafym means ‘a Nominal
stem’ and has been defined in sAtra I. 2. 45, 46, i. e. that which is possessed of
a meaning, not being a root or an affix; or what ends with a Kyit or a Tad-
dhita affix. The word curt mfaaftara is a Samah4ra-dvandva or Collective
aggregate of these three words,

Q. Allaffixes are placed after the base (See Sitra III. t. 2); the
affixes treated of in the last Book were to be placed after the root (‘dhatu’);
the remaining affixes taught in Books Fourth and Fifth, will therefore, be
placed after all such bases weft which are not roots (dhatu); and such bases
remaining are pratipadika and feminine words, What is then the necessity

=== PAGE 22 ===

604 . Case AFFIXES, “[ BK. IV. CH. 1. §1

of making this stra, when these pratipadike .&c, are the only bases left to us
to apply the affixes taught herein-aftep?,. sy yuu

A. To this we reply, the necessity.of: making this sftra arose from
the following considerations: that the word ear afaiiara should qualify the
words ‘ga’ ‘3g¥,’ ‘the letter a7,’ ‘srqqratig’, and ‘ary,’ wherever used in
the following sQtras, So that, where a rule says: “let such an affix be
applied to a Vyiddha word,” we must understand it to mean, “let such
an affix be applied to a Vyiddha word which is a pratipadika, or which
ends with ‘hi’ or ‘4p’; and not to every Vyiddha word.” The principal aphorism,
besides the present, which regulates the application of Taddhita affixes, is IV.
1, 82, which declares :—“The taddhita affixes, on the alternative of their being
employed al all, come after the word that is signified by the first of the words in
construction.” Thus LV. 1. 157 says;—“The affix fe31is added, according to the
opinion of Northern Grammarians, in the sense of ‘descendant,’ after a word
which is entitled to the designation of Vyiddham, provided it does not end
with a Gotra affix.” Thus the idea, ‘the son of Amragupta,’ may be expressed
either by the phrase ‘sirmaneqrera’; or by adding the affix ‘ phifi’ to the first
of the word in construction, viz, ‘Amraguptasya, which is a Vyiddha word
(I. 1.73) But can we apply the affix ‘phifi’ to the first of the word in
construction in the following, ‘grant srerrarageay, because the word ‘jiandam’
the genitive plural of ‘jfia’, is a Vyiddha word? Certainly not, because
the word ‘ pratipadikat’ must be read into this stra 1V. I. 157, and the
affix ‘phifi’ should be added after that Vyiddha word which is in its crude-
form also a Vyiddham,.and not that which becomes Vysiddham only in
construction. Now the pratipadika of ‘jnan4m’ is ‘jfia’, the latter is nota
vsiddham, therefore, the rule does not apply to it. So also the word ‘ja’ is a
vyiddham in its pratipadika state; but in the following phrase, it loses its
vsiddha nature; ‘say drerineaean’ meaning ‘the son of two wise Br&h-
man ladies’, Still the affix ‘phifi’ must be added to the word ‘jfyor’,
because its pratipadika is aviddha word. (2) Similasly the word ‘sya’
(sdtra IV. I. 160; ‘the affix phifi is applied diversely to a non-vyiddha word,
according to the opinion of the Eastern Grammarians’) must be qualified
by the word ‘ pratipadika’; otherwise it would lead to similar incongruous
results as in the last aphorism. (3) Similarly the word 81q in Sdtra IV. 1.95
(‘the affix qsq is added after a word which ends in the letter 8") must be qua-’
lified by the word * pratipadika’; that is to say, the word in its crude-form
must end in sy, and not necessarily when it is in construction. If it were not
so; then the affix ‘3x’ will apply only to the word ‘gata’ in ‘qreargert, but
will not apply to the words ‘ gri:’, or ‘garaa’ in the phrases ‘ qrqraeaa”
or “TATAMATTTTA tt Bug the affix ‘@t' applies to all these three words,

=== PAGE 23 ===

Bx. IV. Cu. J.§. 1) THE Case AFFIXES, * 603:

(4) Similarly the- word ‘erqqyreid’ in IV. 2. 44, (the affix’ ‘sysz is
added to a word which has the grave accent on its beginning), must be quali-
fied by the word pratipadika. That is, the word in its crude form must have
the grave accent on its initial, though in construction, it may or may not have
grave accent. Otherwise, the affix ‘gx will apply to the words ‘arq:"
and ‘erg’ which in construction are anudattadi as in ‘ary frame’
eat frame’ (VI. 1. 168); but which in their crude-forms (arg, ew{)
are udattadi, And conversely, the affix ‘sy¥,' will not apply to the word
‘aSarz which in construction is udattadi, as, ‘azara fare,’ but which in
its crude-form is anudattadi.

(5). Similarly the word ‘yw in IV. 4. 7, (the affix sa
is employed after words consisting of two vowels, when the sense is that of
crossing), must be qualified by the word pratipadika, That is, the word in
its pratipadika state must consist of two vowels, though in construction it
may consist of more than two syllables. Otherwise, this affix will not apply
to the word uq in the phrase ‘aéq qua’, while it will apply to the
words ‘ret’ and ‘evar in the phrases, ‘qrat ada,’ ‘rat ad’. But this
is undesirable,

Q Why have we employed the word ‘fy-4p’ in the “aphortom ? Is

not the word pratipadika wide enough to include the words ending with the

- feminine affixes, by virtue of the paribhash4:—“A pratipadika denotes,

whenever it is employed in grammar, also such a crude-form as is derived
from it by the addition of ar. affix denoting gender.” ?

A. Notso, The paribh4sha you quote applies to that case, where
there is a rule, relating to an individual word-form, given in the Sdtra itself. In
other words, “this paribhasha is applicable when a word is employed in grammar
which either denotes pratipadikas generally (as the word ‘pratipadika’ does
in this sQtra) or denotes a praticular pratipadika, (such asthe words ~t, @t@,
afsa, waa, and aq, in II. 1. 67).” That is, in II. 1. 67, the masculine form
_yuva, also includes the feminine : but not so every-where. Moreover the words,
Sr srg have been employed in the Sdtra, in order to make the Taddhita affixes

‘applicable to feminine words ending in long § (¢%) or long wr (srg), Thus the ~

feminine of ‘ars’, and ‘git’ is, ‘ara’, and ‘gitch’, the feminine of
‘agr and ‘ater’ is ‘wgr and ‘meq’ After these words we can apply the
Taddhita affix que: as ‘arfesta’, eftieray,’ wgrea’, and ‘arerra’ 4

Now, had we not used the word ‘ny-Ap’ in the Sdtra, and wished t to
express the same idea as is done, say, by the word ‘kalitara,’ we could not
have got this form at all. 3

=== PAGE 24 ===

606 . THE CrSE AFFIXES { BK IV. Cu L.§.2

EES

Q The word ara takes &ra by I'V. 1. 42; to which when avy is added,
the vowel is shortened by VI. 3. 43; and we shall get the form ana Why
“do you then say that the Taddhita affixes could not be applied, but for the
words hy-Ap ? . :
A. To this we answer, that by the rule of vipratishedha, the Taddhita
would have debarred the feminine. Thus, when feminine alone is meant and
not comparison, we shall have arét ; and when comparison alone is meant and
not feminine, we shall have @T#at; but when both feminine and comparison are
meant, then would arise the difficulty; and according to the general maxim, the
Taddhita would have debarred the feminine. But by using the word ay-4p, it
is shown that first the feminine affixes are to be added, and then the com-
parison making affixes. .
Reqs aba*TVaNATSaM AAS RTT fe A
CURT Gag, THAT, asat-frag, F-sal-s7g, eal,
Sq ara, R-arqeay ( sarenfiatrare ) #
afer u sareferahtary errr: wera: wee
2. (After what ends with the feminine termina-
tions St or ay, or after a Nominal stem the following case

affixes are employed for declension) :—

Singular. Dual. Plural.
1st. su (s) au jas (as)
and. am . aut (au) fas (as)
grd, 4. (8) bhyam bhis
4th. he (e) bky4am bhyas
5th. hasi (as) bhyam bhyas
6th. fas (as) * os an
7th, ni (i) os , sup (su)

In the above affixes, letters like gin gq are ‘anubandhas’ employed
either for the sake of facility of pronunciation, or as distinguishing marks.
The final g is employcd for the sake of forming the pratyahara gq, which is
the collective name for the above 21 case-affixes. The force and meaning of
these affixes have already been explained in a former part of this work ; and
therefore, need not be repeated here. We shall now give examples of the
application of these affixes to words formed by #%, as, gar; by #re as,
Ara; by Srias ugh ; by ery as Uy, by Fry as NET; and by wy as aTee-
smaq; and lastly to a pratipadika, as. qwqr . :

=== PAGE 25 ===

Bx. IV. Cu. 1. § 3) THE CASE AFFIXES. 607

gar!
Singular Dual Plural
Ant art grat . apart
2nd guts grat ert
38rd grat gathers, gradi
4th aa garters, aide: -
* Sth para: earthars, gaia:
6th apie: rah apts,
7th aria” grraf: garg
uaqatl
Ist at Ary on
2nd egret ay ar
3rd RT agra, ent
4th gare, + Rgre:
5th egrer egret eqre
6th agran agar agrrt,
7th Ere, aya Sug
wig
Ist wt sue we
2nd Poi et we
8rd suet wea, rae
4ta wt srLare, nee:
Sth awe: wea, Tee
6th we aut: Pi §
ath rait wert ey

The words Wé and argei are declined like sad; and a i and

ardtqrragr are declined like war”
forarn 04a varft n fora a
afer u erftrardan | afte aiagenfreart: ferarfieer eeftecan
8. When feminine nature is to be indicated, the

affixes which we shall treat of hereinafter must be employed.

This isan adhikara sitra pure and simple. The phrase ‘when feminine
nature is to be indicated’, must be read in all the following aphorisms
upto 81 inclusive. The anuvyitti of the word ‘ pratipadika’ should be read
into this sdtra, from the first sdtra, not so, however, the anuvgitti of the words

‘@t-sry’; for we are now going to form words by the application of wt and
erry affixes, : .

=== PAGE 26 ===

608 Tie FEMININE AFFIXES. [ BK. IV. CH. 1. §. 4

Ce

qarrarerg i 8 erate  aramig-srer-erg ( forare wareato ) W
afew went: mnfrat Rater rere Fara eT ea wee

_ 4 The affix arg is employed to indicate feminine
nature, after the Nominal-stem ‘aja’ &c, and after the stems.
ending in short 4&1

Of the affix erg, the letters qand q are yw, the real affix is uru The
letter {indicates that the affix has anudatta accent (III, 1. 4); the letter «is
employed to distinguish this affix from ary and argu

The words wat &c, are given below. Thus srw ‘a he goat, erat ‘a she-
goat’. The words ending in short st are such as, Yara whose feminine will be
Yat wu The word wr is used in the aphorism, the indicatory q shows (Li
70) that the short sr having one mitra should be taken ; and not the long wr
Pratipadikas that end in long wt, such as Seren or grat (IIL 2. 74) do not
form their feminine by taking erg, but are both masculine and feminine,
Thus, grrar ater: wrerft ‘the auspicious-going, nectar-drinking Brahmant’,
Had the feminine of such words been formed by erg, then the case-afix Hof
the nominative singular would have ‘been elided after them (VI. 1. 68).

Following are the words belonging to the sparft class :-—

Low oT 2 ax Wet 3. ans | afer

4, Tee ART wa NT 6, afin | afar

N.B. The above words denote ‘jati’ or kind and though they end in
short @ in the masculine, they would have taken, but for the present sftra,
the affix ‘ htsh’ (IV. 2, 63) in the feminine.

Lows et Ca i i: i i i a

loge wat ll we OFT 12, frre  Frerar

N.B.The above six words are descriptive of age, and though they
end in short 8 in the masculine, but for the present sitra, they would have
taken the affix ‘2tq’ (IV. 1. 20) in the feminine. : -—

13, qaraect, qarrecon; 4, wyaTEet TTT;

N. B. These two words are formed by the affix wag, and being Ry
would have taken #q (IV. 1. 15) but for this stra.

1

15, aw, SWAT; 16 wawR, | WaReT;
11, afr, wT HRT; 18, UTR, ToT;
19, Roses, frown; 20, Fire, Caner;

N

=== PAGE 27 ===

BK.IV. CH. 1.§.4) THe Feminine AFFIX arti 699

NV. B. The above words ending in ‘phala’ would have taken the affix
nish (IV, I. 64) but for their enumeration in the ‘ajadi’ class ; ‘ freer’ when
a Dvigu Compound forms its feminine as firnet; when a Bahuvrihi Com-
pound, its feminine is fw w

21, wey, SET; 22, sTETet, Arye,
23, wReTyH, eT IAT; 2A, SIRT GU, ATATET;
. 2 gage, wage; 26, THIS, ERI;

The above words ending in qvq would have taken gish by IV. 1. 64.
27. aE a

B. N. But the feminine of gz is aft when the meaning is ‘the wife
of a ftidra’; so also when the word gx is compounded with the word aeq as,
Aeryat ‘a woman of ‘ wergy’ class’.

The term ‘nergy’ is applied to the caste of Abhiras: and this com-
pound word would Lave taken the affix ‘erg’ by the rule of tadanta vidhi
given in I. s. 72, but forthe vartika, viz ‘(ia arpa gat wife’ It might be
objected that the tadanta vidhi cannot apply here on the strength of the
following maxim :—“ That which cannot possibly be anything but a pratipa-
dika does not denote that which ends with it, but it denotes only itself
Therefore, the word ‘Qdra’ which cannot be anything but a pratipadika, does
not denote ‘mah4-SQdra’, This objection is futile: the very fact of this

_ vArtika indicates by implication (jfidpaka), that with regard to the application
of the feminine affixes, the tadanta-vidhi is valid and does apply,. Thus we
have the forms like wfatea wfrdrra and sfirrrdt .

23. St Se 29. aig after 90. iy wir

NV. B. The above words end in consonants and would not have taken
‘ery but for their being included in the ‘sramf¥ class,

+ 81, say saur 32. whe = after 33, mem eT

B.N. The above words denoting matrimonial realtion would have
taken the affix ‘nish’ by IV. 1, 46,

34 was eRe The word ‘ma’ preceded by the negative particle
nah, would have otherwise taken ‘atsh’ by IV. 1. 64. :

» speaeg ns a gat n scater:, Sry, ( rare Sareare )
qer U gerd waroeeae arfrahae: ferat Sty wert wate w

5. The affix <tg is employed, in forming the femi-
nine, after Nominal stem ending in 9g or in qt .
: Of the affix ety, the letter @ is taken in order to make a common
term with #tq and eta; and the gis takcn to distinguish ti from those

=== PAGE 28 ===

610 Tue Feminine AFFIx atu = [ BK. IV.Cu. 1. §. 7

affixes; the real affix is {1 Thus, xg ;—/ wt; eff Ut; eat —f at;
stra —S/ oft tt .

oftrerea wn & a wath n sitra:, a, ( rat ety) 8
seen eret ete or water egret. ce fou Acree
anfterg u urdrater: sfattrrner wo nitagu wey Sears o

6. And after what has an indicatory‘uk’ (=, &y or %)
the affix vty is employed, in denoting the feminine.

” The wq is a pratyahara meaning z, @ and — 1 Wherever it is possible
to make these letters indicatory, in whatever way it may be, that word-form
is called aftrq!| That which ends with such a word is meant here. A
pratipadika pure and simple. not formed by an affix, may be vftrg, thus the
Pronoun waq among the sarvan4mas: an affix may be <ftrt as the affixes
antg and g, and therefore, the words formed by these affixes will be zftrg;
similarly a letter may be 3frq as ¥ meaning q in VI. 4. 127, (“gis the
substitute of the final of an inflective base ending in stay &c”) °

Thus, #7 ‘honored’ sir.—f waar ‘madam’. Applying the rule of
tadantavidhi, we have sfirraq—setfawadr ‘most exalted lady’. Similarly
gaa (formed by adding ug III. 2. 124), forms the feminine qed, the ga
comes by VII. 1. 82. So also aweft ‘a female sacrificing’; sriq stidt’ a
mare’,

Vért:—Prohibition must be stated in the case of verbal roots having
an indicatory ‘uk’, Thus the roots é ‘to fall down’, ity ‘to fall down’
have indicatory @ ; and we get from these roots, the padtipadikas like sara,
and qq, (II]. 2, 76). The wareg arerft, qn areniy ut Here, the feminine
is not formed by adding €rq!

Vért:—The pratipadikas ending with, the verb ‘anchu’, however,
take the affix eq! As, areft, water, Test W.

TTTANON ante naw, zs a, ( frat stg) W -
ahr u carcremantarg Raat sty werbreara taereanta tt .
arian 0 ar ET: -

7. The affix ‘S1q’ is added, in forming the feminine
to the stems that end in the syllable 4, and < is the sub-
stitute of the final of such syllable.

Thus ytaa(Unadi IV. 115) f. fra ‘a female artisan’; tet f. fat ‘a
young woman, a stout woman’, qq f. or ‘ night‘ (p+ arg TIL, 2, 75) lit, that
which destroys light, So also oohapat a

\,

=== PAGE 29 ===

Bx. IV. Cu. fb. § 10) . aeu 61

Words ending in qq are formed by the affixes gafag, (III. 2. 103)
wifra and faq (III. 2.74) These words end in q and consequently would
have taken 2tq even by IV. 1. 5; the necessity of the present sQtra arose in
order to teach the change of # into ¢ in case of words ending in TU

Vért:—If the affix qq is ordained to be added to a word ending in
eq, (a letter of yy pratyahdha), and is thus immediately preceded by a soft
consonant then this rule does not apply, that is to say, there is ncither the
application of the affix #tv nor the change of qinto ¢# Thus agg is both
masculine and feminine as, agqat Bret: or HTerat ‘a Brahman brother or sister
in arms’. In qf the "is preceded by q which is a letter of gq class, but
as qzis not ordained to be applicd to uy but to y, and we get the ¢ indirectly
by guna, the vartika does not apply to such a case. Hence qa ®

argiseraceara We wari N oTg:, aeraceare ( fat vig ) W
aPa: u onan sifatieareaacent Raat ete gear a
8. The affix ‘<ta’ is optionally employed in the
feminine, after a Nominal-stem ending with word ‘ pid.’

The word qrz becomes qrq when final in certain Bahuvrihi compounds

(V. 4.140) Thus fgarq is both masculine and feminine, or it may optionally

form its feminine by long €(2tq). In the latter alternative, the form will be
fava, the word q1q being replaced by | by VI. 4. 130, (as read with I. 4. 18)

Similarly rang or FT ; TECTy or TACT
arafr u Qn agri nary, aS, ( ferat arg: )
ata: u eiearearat cea sfrstearg Raat Te reat wate 0
9. The affix tg is employed in the feminine, after
a Nominal-stem ending with the word ‘ ‘pad *, when the word
denotes a verse of the Ri ig- Veda. -
This debars ztqu Thus fara %% ‘a Rik verse consisting of two quarter

verses’; similarly fagar wx, gry EF Why do we say “when denoting a’
Rik verse”? Observe faaé yaqat ‘ Devadatta (a woman) having two feet’.

a 7g erase: Nol azn Na, Gz, STEMaee:, ( rata )
GRE 0 ee Gas Geafoaw manta: chr a wae w
10. The feminine affixes are not employed after
the stems called ‘aa (I. 1. 24), and after ‘exe’ &e.

This prohibits all feminine affixes that would otherwise have prescnt-
ed themselves, Thus T>q srgra: ‘the five Brahmapi ladies’, So also an,
4, TI &c are feminine as well as masculine, The following words belong to the

2

=== PAGE 30 ===

or Oo fq (BK. IV. CHL §. 14

SvasrAdi class :—eqan ‘a sister’, gigat ‘a daughter’ ; qareqr ‘a husband's sister’,
arat ‘a husband's brother's wife’, atat ‘a mother’, faa: ‘three’. sraa ‘four’.
FRR Taree art: ( Sty ferat) wo
gfe: u anarentaateart sty went a wafer u
11. The affix vz is not employed after a Nomi-

nal-stem ending in the syllable wool

By. IV. 1. 5, pratipadikas ending in mq would have taken the affix
tq, in as much as they end in q; but the present stra prohibits that. Thus
qa ‘a string’ is both neuter and feminine; and is declined as follows :—tL 8,
ara; d. gary, pl. grat: Similarly qra, TAT, TAT

Here by using the term qq we mean words formed by an affix whose
effective element is qq, such as the affix afta (Unadi 1V. 144) in the words
ara (a+ aia) and ya; as well as words which end in #7 which does not re-
Present an affix. This is done on the strength of the following paribh4sha :-—
Siram agieaniza West wT aware warsafea “Wherever wqor Gor
Sy#L or Wa, when they are emyloped in grammar denote by I. 1.72 something
that ends with wrq or §% or 8a or Aq, there stq, Tq, A, and W7 represent these
combinations of letters both in so far as they possess, and also in so far as they
are void of, a meaning.” Therefore, words like eftrq and stfaaera, where wy
is not an affix, but an integral part of the word, are also governed by the pre-
sent sOtra, Thus, etn, tart, etart etaraten, srararenray and srferateart: u

areit AGATA: WARN TAT Nate: aaee:, ( frat Sty az) W
ata: u orarary agaig: farang, Sa reat af
12. The affix giqis not employed to denote the
feminine, after a Bahuvrihi compound ending in aq nt

This refers to those Bahuvrthi compounds in which the penultimate is
not elided. Of the Bahuvrihi compounds which lose their penultimate letter, it
is optional to employ this affix or not ; as it will be taught in IV. 1. 28. Thus
aris ‘ possessed of beautiful joints’ is both masculine and feminine. As qyaf,
gratet, quaim:; so also eant, guatet and quai: In these cases the penuti-
mate sy of qq or mq is not elided. See VI. 4. 137.

Why do we say “after Bahuvrihi compounds”? Because after any
other “compouds, this rule will not apply. As sams is an Avyayibhava
compound, its feminine will be srfrersft

STHATPATATATEATA Nt 83 aa Wl erg, Sarsa, aeraTeRt, (WA:

arveivagefa: feat )
ofa: He ee ne Tera eer eeeTETATE qqaiqoarcart u

‘\

=== PAGE 31 ===

BK. IV. Cx. I. §. 14] Pe 613

13 The affix erq comes optionally after both these,
viz.the Nominal-stem en ding i in #4, and a Bahuvrihi compound
ending in srz a

Of the affix er, the letter ¥ indicates that the affix is to be added
after the elision of the f& (I. 1. 64) of the base. Thus qraq+<1¢= 9+ BT = TAT,
This being an optional rule we have 1. 5 qrat d, Wt or qTATAY, £4, TWAT: OF TATA: 5
similarly with Gra, as, dor, Qt or start, deur: or Frat:

So also in Bahuvrthi compounds ending in wa. As :—-
agust, SETH or NETITA, SRO: or ARTA: W
agra, agaty or agaUT, RYANT or ETAT:

Why do we say “optionally” ? So that the option may apply to sitra
IV. 1. 7 also; i. e. when a pratipadika ending in T, which can be regarded as
ending in =, is a Bahuvrthi compound, then the ‘change of @ into { and the
application of rq are optional - we may apply the affix <tqinstead. As:—
wguitar or apitre 5 Tyfrat or ayers w

AAAS ATT WS Tae Ware Tra
ght u afte sega reartsgrasreeas etter u
14, The following rules apply to a Nominal-stem
which is not a subordinate term in a compound.

This is an adhikara aphorism pure and simple, and has governing
force upto IV. 1. 77: and prohibits the application of affixes to ‘upasarjanas’.
That is to say, whatever we shall treat of hereafter, is to be understood
to apply to such terms only, which are not upasarjana or a subordinate term
in a compound. (I. 2. 43). Thus the next stra declares “the affix atp is added.
in forming the feminine after what ends in short wy, if the affix with which it
ends has an indicatory %, & c.” Thus the word eet is formed by the affix e
(IIL) 2. 16), and ends in sf. The feminine of this word will be formed by #ra,
as §eaG, similarly arat—/ ayatt | But if these words being the last members
of a compound, are treated as upasarjana (I. 2. 43), then they will not take
the affix #rq,_ in the feminine. Now in a Bahuvrihi compound, all the com-
ponent members are upasarjana, (II. 2, 35) ; therefore, the feminine of such
compounds will not take #ty " Thus, srgeau or gaze ayT Ui Similarly IV. 1.
63 says, “the affix #q is added after words denoting jati” as, qwget, gad u
But where these words are upasarjana, ‘hish’ will not be added: as, yaar
wey TyT u

Asa general rule, tadanta-vidhi (I, 1, 72) docs not apply to compounds ; but the present
sutra indicates by implication that the tadanta-vidhi applies to compounds for the purposes

=== PAGE 32 ===

614 auu ( Bx. IV. Cw. I. § 15

of the application of feminine affixes. For had it not been so, there would have been no
necessity of making the present wfitra ; for a rule applicable toa simple word as such, would
not have applied to it when it was part of a compound—whether subordinate (upesarjana), or
principel (pradhina). But the prescnt efitra indicates that the tndanta-vidhi does apply, if
the word does not become a subordinate member, but is regurded as the principal member, of
‘ compound.

The feminine of SPAM OF ATTRTT will be grraré or areata, in as
much as the second member here is pradhana:the word ‘kumbha-k4ra’
being formed by sya (III, 2, 1 ), and thus making it possible to apply #tq by
IV. 1.15. The affix ey referred to in the next stra refers to the krit-affix
sry (III. 2. 1), as well as to the Taddhita affix syu

RASHAATTTTATA TTA SH SHHHTT: WR] ATT
Rae SASL AAA MAL ATES EH BH TCT (aa: ferat-
a Ziq) tl
ght: n afea: masa: frat ete very wag uw
STR TST s RIAA OMA TTT ETT

15. The affix ¥rqis added, in the feminine, after the
Nominal-stems ending in short &, if the affix with which it ends
has an indicatory @, or if the affix be @, or Ww, or AX
Or gaa, Or THA, Or AAA, OT qq, Or SR, Or SH or BT
or Favq ih

The word sta: ‘ending in short sy’ is understood here by anuvyitti
from IV. 1.4; and qualifies the affixes above-mentioned, wherever neces-
sary. This debars the affix erg of IV. 1.4. We shall give example of each
seriatim (1) Thus, m, gear f, Feed m., ara f, arse (act eat k 5 the
final a7 is elided by VI. 4. 148.) The word kuru-chara is formed by z (III. 2.
16). of which gis indicatory.

Q. It might be objected, “why is not the affix at added after the
words gaara, formed by the affix gra (III. 2. 124) in as much as this affix
is a substitute of sz ; and because #@-has an indicatory @, therefore, its sub-
stitute will also be supposed to have an indicatory @ (I. 1. 57).” _

A. To this we reply, ‘the affix wis not ffqas it has two indicatory
letters, @ and &.

Q.If that be so, affixes like eqz should also be called no Req
affixes, as they have also two indicatory letters,

A. To this we reply, that if "gz be not regarded fea, then the indicatory
% of egg finds no scope any where: as the indicatory & of a= has its scope in sdtra
IIL, 4. 79. Therefore, the feminine of qaara will be rvaratu Similarly, the indi-

\

=== PAGE 33 ===

Bx. IV. Cu. 1.§. 15 J . eae 615

catory % of augments will not cause the application of the affix #tz; thus
aisat frat Here the feminine of gfsar is formed by stand notg. This is
indicated by stra IV. 3. 23, which says “augment qq is added to the affixes
ga and gag”. If the & of gg could have made the affix feq for the purposes
of this present sQtra ; the anubandha ¢ had been unnecessarily added to the
affixes a and ga in the above.

(2) Of words ending in ¢ we have, m, @rqia f. Grqtrft_ so also f. Aare.
The g stands for the affix wR; and it is replaced by gq (VII.1.2) Thus
Emt+ eR (IV. 1. 120)= gat + gas data’ (VIL 2.118) There is no affix
which is merely & without any indicatory letters ; and denoting the feminine ;
the only affix, as said above, is #@ "Therefore, the following maxim does not
apply here :—" When a term void of anubandhas (indicatory letters) is im-
ployed in grammar, it does not denote that which has an anubandha attached
to it”, and we cannot say that the ¢ of this s(tra refers to the anubandha-less
tof V. 3. 102 which is always Neuter.

(3) Of words in wa, we have already said that the affix wo here
refers to both the Kyit and the Taddhita affix ‘an’. Thus with the krit affix
‘an’ we have qreware and amar (III. 2. 1), the feminine of which is
and amearé i With the Taddhita affix ‘an’ we have sity (IV. 1.92), the
feminine of which is sirqrft u Sometimes words formed by the addition of
the affix % are operated upon as if they were formed by wau Thus «td,
arqdt are the feminine of iq and arva (IV. 4. 62), sometimes words formed
by o are not so treated, as qroar, ater (IV. 2. 57).

_ (4) Words formed by srt as streg f. street, sireara, £. street, (IV. 1. 86).
Though by IV. 1. 73 the affix tq would have come after the words ending in
wt, the re-employment of this affix in the present sitra is for the purpose
of preventing the application of the affix #t¢ which would have presented
itself by IV. 1. 63; that is even when ‘jati’ is indicated, ‘gish’ is not to be
employed here,

(5) The three affixes quay, wa and ary are added by V. 2. 37; as,
sarah. aeaitaeret ‘reaching to the thigh’. Similraly sire, arg, aTgawh

(6) So also with words formed by aay, (V. 2.42). As qwadt ‘of
which the parts are five’ so also queef

(7) So also with words ending in sR (IV. 4. 1) as, enfwat ‘a female
dicer’, gretfarnt. The & is replaced by ya (VII. 3. 50).

(8) Similarly with words ending in sw (V. 1. 18): as, erator ‘elegant’.
The affixes sq and sw are separately enumerated in this sOtra,in order to
exclude the affix eq &c. For had the word ¢ merely been used, then it would
have meant all the ¢iree affixes 8%, 34 and sx, which is not desired,

=== PAGE 34 ===

616- oo equ [ BK. IV. CH. 1. § 17

(9) Similarly with words ending in apa (III. 2. 60) as, argaft, argeft 0
- (10) So also with words ending in wycq, (III. 2. 163) as ger ‘swift’,
wad « .
Vart :—In addition to the foregoing, there should have been the
enumeration of the affixes tg and ere (IV. 1. 87) and fm (IV. 4. 59) and
waa (III. 2. 56) and of the words qa and aga ‘a youth’. ‘Thus vit ‘a fe-
male’, Greft ‘a male’, ureitet ‘a female spear bearer’, wreiracet ‘enriching ;
‘eert or azft ‘a young woman’, .
asrT MeN Tah Mast, &, ( frat Sry)
afr: u asrare arfaatearg Rorat ate rere were”
TTT UW BTTTTTOL RATT
16. The affix vig is employed, in denoting the
feminine, after a Nominal-stem ending in ‘qq’ (IV. 1. 105).
Thus ard+stg=ard+t (VI. 4. 148)=art+¢ (VI. 4. 150)= arf ‘a
female descendant of Garga’ ; so also aredt
Vdrt :—This rule applies when the affix aq denotes a descendant,
and not otherwise. Therefore € will not be applied'to form the feminine of
xa of git az (IV. 3. 10). Its feminine will be Year ‘living on or selating to
an island’,
The separation of this s(itra from the last, (for the affix aq could well
have been included in the same), is for the sake of the subsequent aphorisms;
in which the anuvyitti of aa only runs and not of others.

grat eH cafe: LON Tate sat, se, afira:, ( aT feat)
gfe: u arerareratont sara asreara, Ferat ow: wera wate a ow afer: .
17. In the opinion of the Eastern Grammarians,
the affix ‘shpha’ is employed after what ends with the affix
‘yaa’, and it is to be regarded as a Taddhita affix.

Of this affix sg the letter g is indicatory (I. 3. 6), and shows that the
words formed by this affix will take ‘nish’ (IV. 1.41) The feminine nature
is here manifested by these two affixes jointly, viz by ‘shpha’ and * ish’.
The object of saying that ‘shpha’ is to be regarded as a taddhita affix, is that

_ the word so formed may get the designation of pratipadika (I. 2. 46). The
affix @ is replaced by the substitute wrat (VIL. 1.2) Thus apg+on+ate,
=nrrafaet ; so also qraaraft u This being an optional rule, we have in the
alternative, mrff and qreft

: The word #49 “every where”, of the next sftra is to be read into
this, by a process inverse to that of anuvsitti, in order to prohibit the applica-

ye

=== PAGE 35 ===

BK. IV. CH. 1. §. 19) i 617

tion of those rules even which would otherwise debar this, Thus IV. 1.75
says :—'the affix sqrg comes after sirqew’ u Here raat ends in 4, and by IV. 1,
16, the word sqrqaq would have taken the affix alp: IV. 1.75 debarred this,
But according to Eastern Grammarians, here also the affix ‘shpha’ will be
added. Thus srrearerft .
aia citantaarter we TNA ada, stanky waraya:,
Cas: faraies )
ght: u ata drigatipa: ware aa: frat ow recat wah w
18. The affix ‘shpha’ is invariably added in the
feminine after the words beginning with ‘ lohita’ and ending
with ‘kata’, when they take the affix yan.
The words afta &c. are a subdivision of Gargadi class (IV. 1. 105),
The present sfitra makes the application of the affix ©%, compulsory while
it was optional in the last. The word wa refers to the independent pratipadi-
ka qq in the said subdivision, which follows immediately after the word af%,
and not to the word @exa of the same class, where the word mq is not an
independent full nominal-stem but a member only. Thus aitearett, aiftrearaat
snrarastt w
Kérika qoareg WHA: TH! HATAT CUA |
Parad erat enn ere aTATTA
For the purposes of the application of s@ and sry, the word wae
which is enumerated in the Ganap4tha after the word qeq ( See IV. 1. 105)
should be regarded as if it stood immediately defore qoq and after man
Thus we have oracaret (with o& ), and qaer with ey, meaning greet
orat: ‘the pupils of Sakalya’,
haere mean auf nethcer-aIMETTT a, (feraivm) a
gfe: n atea arega caapat ferat om pera wate W
TEST, ATCC TAT OL HA OHTA ETT
19. The affix ‘shpha’ is added, in the feminine,
after the words ticea and arege &
The word arteq is formed by adding the affix °@ to the base @& (IV.-
1. 151); this word, ending in 8, would have formed its feminine by eq(IV. 1.
4), but for the present s(tra. So also by IV. 1. 119, the word mega is formed
by ert added to qvgy; and the feminine of manddka would have been formed
by aip (IV. 1. 15), but for the present aphorism, which supersedes that affix,
Thus arearaci, aegarertt .
How do you expain the form areft in the phrase wrcdt ear ?

=== PAGE 36 ===

618 equ [ Bk. IV. Cu. f. §. ar

We explain it by saying that ref is not the feminine of direa; but of
act, formed by adding wa to ag by sitra IV. 3. 120

Vdrt:—The word wtgit should be enumerated along with kauravya
and manddkya. Thus squat u The word wraft is formed by the affix yy
added to the word srgt; the word ‘Asuri’ would, therefore. have taken the affix
win forming the further derivative (IV. 2. 112). But according to the opinion
of Patanjali, the word, suri’ should form its further derivative (called also
“afar) by taking the affix & (IV. 2. 114). Thus tga: aeq: (Fat TRA) U

aqafa sat non wnat aaa, ser, ( feat Sg)
afer ura cate aenfastes yearree aa: Perat sty read water
SRM TCT TCT HTT
20. The affix ‘Sra’ is employed, in the feminine,
after a Nominal-stem ending in # and denoting early age.

The word qq: means the condition of the body as dependent upon
tims; such as, youth, old age &c. Words expressive of early age form their
feminine by ¢, though ending inet Thus, garf ‘a girl’. ferattr ‘a young
girl’ a&@ ‘a she-kid’.

Why do we say denoting ‘early age?’ Observe eqfr ‘an old woman’;
get ‘an old woman’. Why do we say ending in 81? Observe far, which is both
masculine and feminine.

Vdrt:—The sdtra should have been sravy Tare ‘words expressive“of
not old age’? Thus ryt ‘a young woman’, Fayét ‘a young woman’. These
words denote the second stage of life, and not the first, i. e. they denote women
who have attained their maturity. -

How do you explain the form aap ‘a girl? This is an exception, and
Panini himself uses the word ‘kanya’ showing that it is a valid form; as in
sitra IV. 1. 116,

The words like gartwar ‘an infant girl that does not know how to lie
down properly’ aifeacifeat ‘a female infant whose feet are still tender and red’
do not directly, but metaphorically, express age, and hence are not governed
by this rule. ate

faci: we W vertu fair, ( ferat sty) a
afr u fraaarg nifrafeara Reratety vert ere
21. The affix ‘€r¢ comes in the feminine after 4
Nominal-stem ending in short #, which is a ‘Dvigu’ compound.

Thus ay, tage tt But we find Frnet ‘the three myrobalans’, because
this is onc of the words spoken of as 3TH &c’ (IV. 1. 4).

=== PAGE 37 ===

Bx IV CH § 23.) ee 619

aqtamteatraraerataraneage WR Terfe w araftare-
frea-fia-araeten:, 4, aea-eee, ( Srq fast: )
aft: n wafarant intense aacarae afeagia aft Ae reat a wale ow
22. The affix <iq is not employed, when a Taddhita
affix is elided, after a Dvigu compound ending in a word not
denoting a mass or measure; or in ‘bista’, ‘Achita’, and
‘kambalya’. :

This debars ‘nip’ which otherwise would have presented itself by
virtue of the last sdtra. The words farea: ‘a weight of gold equal to 80 Rakti-
kas’, stifa@¥ ‘a measure of 10 cart-loads or 80,000 tolahs’; and geqeq: ‘a mea-
sure’, all denote measure; and are the only words expressing measure to
which this rule applies. The word qftaret means ‘measure’, as distinguished
from qzat ‘a Numeral’, Sce V. 1, 19, &.

Thus qsura is a Dvigu compound, meaning ‘purchased for five horses.’
Ilere the Taddhita affix 5 (V. 1. 37) giving the sense of ‘purchased with’
has been elided by V. 1. 28. This compound does not end in a word denoting
parimana techincally so called or a measure. The feminine of this word will not
be formed by rq but by zg, thus, ¢suaT ‘a female purchased for five horses’.

The words denoting ‘time’ or ‘number’ are not words denoting ‘mea-
sure’ as understood in this sitra by the word ‘parimana’. Thus, feat, ‘a two
years old female child’, Frvat ‘a three years old female child’ (V. 2. 37 Vart.)
So also fxaat ‘a female purchased for two hundreds’, similarly firwar So
also with the words fet &c. As faixeat ‘purchased for two bistas’, fateent,
anfrer, canta, Rearaeat, and Rrasqegr, &c,

Why do we say ‘not ending in a word denoting a ParimAna or a
‘measure’??? Observe mureat, aareat “a female purchased for two or three
Adhaka”. Here 4dhaka means a measure equal to 7 Ib. 11 oz. avoir, —

Why do we say ‘when a Taddhita affix is elided'? In ‘Sam4hara

* Dvigu’ compounds, the affix ‘hip’ will apply. Thus qsqrdt ‘an aggregate of
five horses’, so also qurgt t

career BA RH cect  eree-aare, Be ( it akraafes
ziga)u
a ererorrrar erenFeeaPs eR ere ee Te aH
23. The affix $y is not employed after an adjectival
Dvigu compound, ending in the word ‘erg’, where the Tad-
dhita affix is clided, when the compound means a field. :
3

=== PAGE 38 ===

620 ven ( Bx. IV. Ci. 1. § 25.

Thus faanrest arate: ‘a division of a field of the measure of two kan-
das.’ Here, the word fearew isa Dvigu compound ending in ‘kanda’; the
Taddhita affixes denoting measure enjoind by V. 2. 37, have been elided by
the vdrtika ‘qarh a Faimfeae given under the same s(tra, The feminine,
therefore, of this word will not be formed by ‘ap’ but by 21g; so also frarmet
ote w

The term ‘kAnda’ is a word expressive of non-measure ; and, therefore,
the prohibition contained in the last stra applies to it; the present s(tra is
made to regulate this prohibition. That is to say, the prohibition contained in
the last stra is not universally applicable in the case of Dviga compounds
ending in ‘kAnda’; it applies to cases where the compound refers to superfici-
al land measure. Therefore we have, faaredt tsy: ‘a rope two kandas long’;
rarest tsyr ‘a rope three kAndas long’.

FSTAATASTATEAT, Wt BB Ml arf i geaTey UHM, AACA,
( faa: aficarefarety )
ofa: uae oe TeTTTTEA TAY foe aas TF weaacea + Sty wera way ve
24, The affix ‘giq’ is not optionally employed
after a Dvigu compound, where the Taddhita affix is elided,
when the compound ends in the e word ‘purusha’, refining to
_ measure.

Thus fEqeat or eGEtt situar ‘a mote two purusta wide’ so also frgett
or Pareat &c. The present stra ordains an option where 1V. 1. 22 would have
made the prohibition universal. Why do we say ‘when referring to measure’?
Observe fégeat ‘a female purchased in exchange for two males; No option
is allowed here. Where the Taddhita affix is not elided, the present rule does
not apply. Therefore in Samahdra Dvigu we have faqedt or Proevt u

agaiemaet Sry 0 24 TANT Hage: Here, Sig ( Prat) u
SFT: U RTT TEMA QA: Porat Se Tent wats 0 :
25. The affix, ‘gq is employed, in the feminine, after
a Bahuvrihi compound ending in the word fidhas an udder’.
Thus the Bahuvrihi compound of greg ‘a bow!’ and ave will be geet
‘q; then the final of ddhas is replaced by the substitute wre (V. 4. 131);
thus we have Bose, ; which would have been liable to the rules IV. 1. 12, 13.
ante; the present sdtra enjoins AT instead. Thus gegp-ft (VI. 4. 134) ‘a
woman with full bosom’ ; gérft ‘a cow with udders like jars’,

Why do we say ‘ after a BahQvrihi compound’ ? Observe atat 3: =a

‘Rret: (II. 2. 4) which is a Tatpurusha compound,

a

=== PAGE 39 ===

BK. IV. Ch. 1. § 27. J “Fue 62t

The Satra IV. 1. 28 also is debarred in this case: for though the pen-
ultimate vt is elided by the VI. 4. 134, yet rule IV. 1. 28 does not apply here.

The substitution of wa for the final of aya takes place only then,
when the feminine nature is to be expressed and not otherwise. Therefore
in the masculine we have Rarar qaea? ‘the big-bosomed cloud’.

eearereng Sig n 38 W anit W eter areaa-rts, Sry ( wee
wea: fiat) 0
git u damteaats agiigarrmereara sty wert wahe a
26. The affix <1 come: in the feminine, after a
Bahuvrihi compound ending in ‘dhas’, beginning with a Nu-
meral or an Indeclinable.

This sQtra ordains ‘nip’, where by the last sOtra there would have
been ‘atsh’. Thus gt+avqt+uaet+ety (V. 4 131 )=eayt ‘having two
udders'; so also savft, ‘having three udders’. The above are Bahuvrihi com-
pounds beginning with a Numeral. Similarly weayft ‘many-uddered.; Fregt
“having no udders,’

Why do we say ‘beginning with’? So that the rule may apply to
compounds like fafrirgt and fafriryt, in which the words ‘dvividha’ and ‘ tri-
vidha’, though not Sankhy& are words which deg with a Sankhya.

ARTA ATS W VON Tare WTA area, &, ( frat vty eat
“egare: ) a
afar u decree hig traerearareracgrare Ferat vt reat waft
caffra uw erate rater eye:
27. The affix <tq comes, in the feminine, after
Bahuvrihi compound beginning with a Numerel, and ending
with the words diman ‘a rope’, and hayana ‘a year’. -

The word qa was liable to be operated upon by three rules, by, IV.
1. 13 ordaining erg, by IV. 1. 11 prohibiting totally the affixing of ¢t¥ and IV.
1. 28 ordaining hip optionally: the present sdtra ordains ap to the exclusion
of all those rules. As fart ‘a (mare) bound by two ropes’. Fararet ¥

Similarly grqq would have taken long sy by IV. 1. 4, this ordains long
iu Thus fagradt ‘two years (old girl)’, fargraoft; aqeratt Ww

Vart:—The word ‘hayana’ must denote ‘age’, for the purposes of this
sdtra, Therefore we have no hip here :—fagraat wet ‘a hall of two years ex-
istencé’, So also faetaar and saetaat > Morcover in these latter cases the 4
is not changed into @ ; for when graq denotes ‘age’, it is then only that the «
is changed into & and not otherwise,

=== PAGE 40 ===

622 : ia ( Bx. IV. Cu. I. § 3a

BT STATA SHTATEATT MRS W eat Wl ara, SoaT-athr:-at
aqaceat ( wget Sia) 0
gfe: Warmer ar MyReeTaTEaNT eeMTTeMATea AT TET ae
28. The affix <tq optionally comes after’ that
Bahuvrihi compound, which ending in the syllable az loses
its penultimate a &
Thus ages is a Bahuvrihi compound ending in sta; in applying tp,
it loses is penultimate by VI. 4. 134 (svararsa: there is elision of ey of wy
"when a dha affix follows), Thus agusit ‘having many kings’. In the alterna-
tive, when htp is not added, we may add the affix erg by IV. 1.13. Thus a@-
WaT, TETH, Aerst: w Or we may apply the prohibition ‘contained in IV. 1. 12
and have agirst, Sgarari, Sgt: when the penultimate is not elided we
cannot apply the affix gq at all: in cases of such compounds there are
only two forms of the feminine noun as gqat, av, Gat: or qTat arash,
gviie That is to say we apply IV. 1. 13 and 12 only; for in the case of g7t4
&c. rule VI. 4. 137 prevents the elision of the penultimate 4; (4 dainmarrar,
there is not elision’of the sf of syq when it comes after a conjunct consonant
ending in q or 4)
Raa darsqar: 1 20 arth u Pret, eat, wae ( waza
aiftatseqaceat Sry )
aft: 0 srr gehteerarenta: earat ae ore ares She Te was
29. The affix gq necessarily comes in the Chhan-
das and in forming Names, after that Bahuvrthi compound
which ending in the syllable aq loses its penultimate @ 4
This is an exception to the last rule ; for while that enjoined the op-
tional, the present enjoins the compulsory application of the affix ety Thus
Guat ‘the city called Surajnt’; stadt ‘the city of Atirajni’. Similarly in
the Chhandas we have @: qrmre, wnaret, feat ‘a cow having five udders,
one udder, or two udders’. wagur Tarra a .
Rae SARS ATaTS Wyo Nl sehr it
FAS ATH ATTA TA-ATAST-QUFS- ATA, A, ( tars-
ze: Sq ferat ) w 3
afew errfpa: miata: dgratoara faa Peart A wera waft 8
30. The affix &tq necessarily comes in denoting
the feminine, after the following Nominal-stems when em-
ployed to express a Name or in the Chhandas :—%ae, ava,

ara, WY, aay, Fa, area, Bays and yaw it
\

\

=== PAGE 41 ===

Bx. IV. Ci. Lb. § 32.) erie 623

The phrase dat erat! of the last sdtra is understood here also, Thus
wat in the Chhandas, as opposed to frat in the ordinary language, when
not denoting a Name; so also aniat and mfrar; arivat as frarqeertraia-

i Wet and apryer; art and qr; ev as warsvipataren fafere; (Rigveda I. 1.
13) and waa; eartt wae and aarat; wrigdt and wragar; gage? (Rigveda
X. 85. 33) gaya; West and Wesru yas takes sq also by IV. 1. 41, as
belonging to Gaurddi class No. 86. .
: emt NIQN WNT UF, a, are, (dar Gee Sry) 11
BE a giecareas eral Oe ererTeTE AE Te ANTE )
efter u ersrartayiarencey #

- 31. The affix sty comes sfter the word off in
the Chhandas, and in denoting a Name, except when the affix
aq (nominative plural) is added. .

Thus ar oft get, ovthr (3rd pl); (Rigveda X. 127. 1. I. 35. 1) but in
the nominative plural we have wyq:, the regular plural of the word ufw, as
in the sentence areat wat, instead of asa: W

Vart :—According to Katyayana, filp is not added, not only when we
apply the nominative plural termination 44; but in all other terminations

. beginning with wg also. Thus uf eeifrer; here in the accusative singular
case also the 27q is not employed,

But how do you explain the form asa: in the following fefacqern-
aarsare usa: ; This ‘ratrya’ is the nominative plural of ‘ratri’ which is
formed by the feminine affix #tp; and not by ish. The forms evolved by
adding #q or ¢ty are one and the same, except with regard to accent ; that
formed by hish has udatta accent on the final: the other has it on the initial.
The word uf is formed by the kyit affix faq (Un. IV. 67), and therefore,
it is a word which is governed by IV. 1. 45 because it is a word falling in
Bahuvadi class, by virtue of the general subrule “a word ending with the
vowel ¢ of a krit affix, other than faq belongs to Bahuvadi class; some say
that every word ending in g, if it has not the force of the affix fq belongs
to this class", Therefore it_takes etq in forming the feminine.

: araereafactga AQ i aga aeada-Waad:, Te Mt
ait: u orate ofrratgy ert stew vere 4
», 32. The augment gris added to the words arate

‘and aftraa, when the affix gt is added to form the feminine.

This stra points out the base and teaches the addition of the aug-
ment 4, When this augment is added, (and it must be added at the end,

=== PAGE 42 ===

624 qe - (Bk 1V Cit I. §. 33

by sdtra I. 1. 46), the forms become weaker and qferreg; and these words
must take atp by virtue of IV.-1. 5, if not by this sQtra. Thus we have
wreatat and qfaadt a This irregular formation of the feminine is employed
only then, when the sense of the words so formed is ‘a pregnant: female’
and ‘one whose husband is living’ respectively. Therefore we have not the
above forms in the following :—quy evar oferrdt Prat ; here the word sfiradt
qualifies the word gfirft and has not the sense of ‘having the husband living’,
therefore its formation is regular. Similarly when the sense is not of ‘a preg-
nant female’, the femir.ine will not be staat ; in fact there will be no affix-
ing of t{( AGE). Because agy is added to words possessing certain attribute,
as described in V. 2.94, while the word weat has the sense of location,
and can never be in apposition with the sense of stim “having” as required
by V. 2.94. The word wat would not therefore take aqqu It does so
irregularly by this sQtra. The wis changed tog by VIII. 2.9 in sratqu
The change of 4 to ¥ in qfaaq is however irregular. :

The augment 3& is optionally added to these words in the Vedas :—
as arate or arate PUTT Ngee or afiredt aera w .

Tega WWM TATA MN Tes, a, TTTATA, ( rat) 0
afer u ofrasten THrate: ferat Tatas w

83. The substitute q replaces the final ¢ of qf
before the feminine affix ¢ty, when the word so formed means
‘a wife, who takes part in the sacrifices of her husband’.

Thus qf art gee The feminine yar means legitimate wife, she who
is entitled to take part in the sacrifices of her husband. The word agaart is
an Instrumental Tatpurusha compound and means “ related through sacrifice”
i. e. who shares the fruits of and is entitled to participate in, the sacrifices of
her husband. But when the sense is not that of ‘ wife’, the feminine of q@ will
be aff as urea ofaita mrerft ‘this Brahmant is the head or mistress of this
village’. If the word get means ‘the wife who takes part in the sacrifices of her
husband’, it cannot be applied to the wife of a Sddra, for a Sidra cannot per-
form a sacrifice, a fortiori not his wife? The term qat is, however, extended to
the wife of a Sédra also, by analogy, as the marriage of a Sddra also takes
place by offering sacrifice to Fire and making it a witness.

_ femme UREN warfer u Rrar, ager (Geaph, frat, wgre-
a

gfe: u arreraee afta oleate Raat Porn varatar wae ete gy
aa Ue tt .

=== PAGE 43 ===

BRIV. Cu. 1. § 37] a a) 625

34. In forming the feminine with the affix vy, z is
optionally the substitute of the final ¢ of w@, when the latter

is preceded by another word.
The word agiea means when the word q7@ is not an upasarjana, but

stands at the end of a compound. Thus yaw or Fart; ezeTe or eget w
This is an example of aprapta-vibhasha. Because it is free from the limita-

tions of ‘yajfia-sanyoga’ of the last stra. Why do we say when it is ‘preceded
by another word? Observe qfafta start arrea, ‘this Brahman lady is the mis-
tress of the village.’ Here the feminine is qf@ and not qa w
Rerarranty ues varie uw Rea, aacit-anfty, ( weapt: Rae )

aha area Pra egtaraean aie Steg ae ee

35. In forming the feminine with the affix sfq, the»
word qfi always takes the substitute <, in the words like ‘aqef’
and the rest.

This enjoins the necessary and not optional substitution of for the
final ¢ of oft, before the affix zg, in the cases of certain words. The word
‘nitya’ is used in the aphorism for the sake of precision. Thus aqeft, gant wo
The compound of the following words with yet are governed by this rule:—
1 qara ‘equal’ 2 ga ‘one’, 3 ait ‘hero’, 4 fiew‘a cake’, 5 wg ‘brother’ Oana son’,
and 7 wa ‘a slave’ (this only in the Chhandas ).

qaeacita f 3g 0 want u gence: Ra, ( frat eg )
aft: u gaaguerey faataratat wre Sty rea: .
36. In forming the feminine, the letter & is the
substitute of the final of the word qamq, when the affix dq is
added.

Thus gamaret ‘the wife of Patakratu’. This and the two succeeding
s(tras, are in a way more intimately connected with IV. 1. 48, in asmuchas
the sense of the feminine words must be that of ‘wife of, otherwise these
sdtras will not apply. Thus if the meaning is not that of ‘wife of, the word
gag: will be both masculine and feminine as well, meaning ‘she by whom
sacrifices (amat:) are sanctified (qar:)’.

Trrncahirsteageargae: nzon wea Taralh-af-g fra
Sarat, sara: ( & erg frat ) w
afr u sqracardtargaen Garagar wate ferat sty we wert: w
37. In forming the feminine with the affix fq,
the letter ® having udatta accent is the substitute of the

finals of aft, mG, GGA and Feliz

=== PAGE 44 ===

626 aq ( Bx. iv. Cu. L. § 39

The words yuratt and sete have udatta accent on the middle vowel
(Phit SQ II. 19), the feminine of these has udatta, however, on the final.
The words ‘agni’ and the rest have the udatta on the final ( Phit sd I. 1)
their substitute ¥ will necessarily be udatta, by the rule of sthanivat bhava,
even if the present sQtra had not explicitly declared it to be so. Thus
qarntet ( Rig Veda X. 86. 13) ‘the wife of Vrishakapi’, watt, (Rig Ved. I.
22. 12) the wife of ‘Agni’, strani ‘wife of Kusita’, @feart ‘the wife of Kusidai.
The present rule only applies when the sense of the feminine word is that of
‘wife of. Otherwise we have gqrait: ait ‘the women Vrishakapi’ and not
garam wu For the accent of the word g¥, See VI. 1. 203.

warden We caret Naat, a, aT, (& sara: Rraisty) W
aft: u aguera faaiety cera WN SATA TT: VAT:

38. In forming the feminine with the affix ety, st
is optionally the. substitute of the final of ag, (as well as the
‘udatta &) tt

The phrases & and warm are understood. The force of at is to make

the substitution optional. Thus we have three forms, qaret or Fara or Ag:,
all meaning ‘the wife of Manu. The word "q has udatta accent on the first

vowel, as it is formed from #4 by the affix (Un I. 10), which by Up I. 9 is”

treated as having an indicatory 4, and affixes having indicatory @ throw the
accent on the first syllable. (VI. I. 197) .
qo gararaTaas: WAV TAT aug, agra, arraa,

a:, a: (ar Sraferat ) Ww . .
gfe nacre: arte Reaaree eee TUT TST, eT TT, TATE TTT
wate :

axnftreven uw Prergrgreteecrery uefa, wafereraferarats fae:

arftrat n oreterentrees w aTeTaTaEAy w ;

39. The affix Sty is optionally employed after a
Nominal-stem expressive of colour, ending in a gravely accent-
ed vowel, and having the letter @ as its penultimate letter:
and the letter & is substituted in the room of & 0

Thus of gq ‘variegated’; the feminine is gat or et ‘variegated’, so > yar
or eit ‘black’, eftar or efteft ‘green’. All ‘these words have udatta accent on

the first vowel either by Rule VI. 1. 197 ( Rawat, “word formed by
affixes having an indicatory {or Hhave udatta accent on the first vowel”)

=== PAGE 45 ===

_BK IV. CH. I. § 40.) - equ 627

because these words are formed by the Unadi affixes a (Up III. 86) and
waa (IIL. 93), or by the Phit sftra Il. 10 (qorat sofafrararara “of words
expressive of colour and ending in qm, or ft or fa or a, the udatta accent falls
on the first vowel”). .

Why do we say “expressive of color’? Observe wear, reat Ww These
words are also acutely accented on the first syllable, by rule VI. 2.49
(fivirat: “the first word retains its natural accent in a compound of a
gati word with a word formed by the affix 4/2”) But as these words do
not express color, their feminine does not take ftp,

Why do we say “ending in a gravely accented vowel?” Observe at
‘white.’ Here though the word expresses ‘color’, yet it has acute (instead of
grave ) accent on the final (by rule of Phit sutra I. 21 gar@rai@ “the words
ghrita &c, have udatta on the final”),

Why do we say “having the letter q as its penultimate letter”? Other-
wise the affix nish will be employed in forming the feminine.

The words for the application of this rule must end in the letter ¢ in
the masculine, Otherwise this rule will not apply. As fifersiraref ‘a black
Brahmagt woman’. Here fiifir is a word expressive of color, :t has a penul-
timate a, has anudatta accent on the final ( VI. 1. 197 ) as it is formed by the
affix Ga; but as it docs not end with a, its femirine is not formed with atp.

Vért :—The affix lp comes also after the word Frag; as, frogt ‘of
tawny color’.

Vért :—There is prohibition in the case of the words wfta and fra;
as wifear ‘black’ and qfsar ‘grey’. -

Vért :—According to some, the substitute mq replaces the final of
these two words waa and gfeq in the Vedic literature. As wfermt (Rig Veda
IX, 73. 29); Wert (R. Veda V. 2. 4). According to some authorities, these latter
forms are valid in literature other than the Vedic :—As mat soreqorafarfirenrare tt

ATA Bo N TANAN aera, Sq, ( autgyazrare frat) w
gfe: u wana: sfastearggeracarg frat ste gerd rene w .
40. The affix <tq is employed in the feminine after
every other word expressive of color and ending with an
anudatta accent. :

The word at of IV. 1. 38 does not govern this stitra. The word syeqa:
means in other cases than those governed by the last aphorism i.e. after words
which have not q as penultimate. The difference between nip and hish affixes
consists in accent, the former being gravely accented (III, 1. 4) and the latter
acute,. Thus aregt, aearet, owet w

4

=== PAGE 46 ===

628 aun (Bx. IV. Cu. I. §. 45

When the word does not express color, this rule does not apply. As
qr ‘a bed-sted’.

When the word does not end with a gravely accented vowel, this will
not apply, as, geo, ATer Ww :

Pagina oven wan erarsatreanten, @, (Prakere) 8
fa: 0 Rea: sotaaearar Mrafpers Porat ate recat wate w ;
41, The affix Srg is employed in forming the femi-
nine after words ending with affixes which have an indicatory
qand after the words #< and the rest.

Thus by Stra IIT. 1. 145 (fafen® egy) the affix qq is added toa
root, to form noun of agency, denoting an artist. The feminine of the words
so formed, will take fiish. As, 1&at ‘an actress’, qaait ‘a digger’; caat‘a
dyer’. So also the words dire &c ; as #8, meat! The following is the list of
words belonging to GaurAdi class.

1 fire, 2 ae, 3 saea, 4 oy, 5 figs 6 ya, 7 wa, 8 Ewa, 9 qa, 10 ge, 1I
FT 12 FM, 13 Fro; 14 efeor, 15 Aram, (ara, ) 16 ger, 17 gar, (sas) 18 wTA-
va, 19 gies. 20 fare, 21 wee, 22 whew (avat) 23 amit, 24 uale, 25 gone
26 fraew, 27 wag 22 ueRey 29 Gay 30 qua, 31 que 32 say 33 NEM,
34 grea 35 wiem, 36 wre, 37 BIPTET 38 Aue, 39 TAH ( sTaferH), 40
megs, 41 ga (at) 42 qh, 43 qe, 44 ae ( ae) 45 aE 46 aT, 47 Fe, 48
aerm, 49 uraai, 50 aerrm, 51 ater, 52 area, 53 aren, 54 Yaa, 55 ge (Ce
@) 56 saa, 57 wra. 58 wR. 59 Ag, 60 AZ, 61 Be, 62 Yu, 63 He, C4 ary
65 aay, 66 wage, 67 sraryre, 68 1 ga eT 1 69 Wy, 70 Yes, 71 eTATET
72 wares, 73 Wa, 74 ce, 75 wam, 76 Rrareathe ( Srarenty) 77 Aree (a
awa) 78 aren, 79 sae ( Ey) 80 AAR, 81 hfs, 82 AER, 88 art
84 Wy, 85 waite, 86 sata, 87 wrefee, 88 srefer, 89 Fars, 90 srqH. 91
wre, 92 az, 93 ae, 94 Ae, 95 ere, 96 Urea, 97 Tar, 98 Tas, 99 qa
Carte) 100 srreqer, 101 stfiracr, 102 arfirare 103 sragracft ( srrmeracft) 104
mearafet 105 Gara, 106 qagerirarary 1 107 weer 108 grat, 109 aves, 110
wut, 111 ame 112 ge, 113 fare, 114 qoe, 115 ag, 6 we 117 oa, 18
Be, 119 vive ( sre) 120 ee (ag) 121 qree, 122 woes ( mee) 123 Brerew, 124
ange, 125 aeat, 126 ays, 127 wen, 128 aga, 129 weare, 130 » 131 ,
132 ar, 183 Gok 118) Rie aM 113 eee mH 196 fees 187 free
138 gens 1 139 aeregifrras | fieqearga 1 140 farget, 141 eferalt ( eftaatt )
142 araraat, 143 aft, 144 3@, 145 oe, 146 oferdt, 147 srg, 148 ararne,
149 frame, 150 gi, 151 qq, 152 gd, 153 amem. 154 wnat, 155 are,
156 ga, 157 faea, 158 ag, 159 yea, 160 are, 16l ETE

N.B.—The word fire though denoting color, is finally acute by virtue
of this sOtra ; the word maq &c. being jati words having a penultimate q would

\,

=== PAGE 47 ===

Bx. IV. Cu. 1. § 42.) wren : 629.

not have taken fp (IV. 1. 63) but for this stra; sq and eer would have tak~
en arg (IV. 1. 13), aor is formed by egg and would have taken atp (IV. 1. 15)
vauster = gvott ‘a balance, a probe’. itq4 would take siln also by IV. 1. 73.
Similarly it may be shown why the several words have been included in this
list. By the vartika arate fra given under LV. 2. 36, the affix sqrqg in ararag is -
treated as having an indicatory ¢u The word srarag will take ete because
it is fa; its inclusion in the list of Gauradi indicates that the rule of eq
application, because a word is fyq, is not universal ( wifirea: Fr erat fq) 0
Therefore we have forms like ¢gt &c.
sper edreraareorgatsah rere egteorereeag wR gen? 0 Ta
AEH LSAT ATMS S-QI-AyT ITA, —_efa-sara-ata-
qa-etalet- ATO RATATAT SOTA SNE ASST STAG, (fa
atest)
ght u sravgfea garg: anfteftaoe waree peuteeding wereret &rg recat wee
42. The affix <q is employed after the eleven
words ‘janapada’ &c..in the sense of ‘profession’ &c. respec-
tively; i.e. after the words 1. sTayq 2. gvz, 3. atu, 4. wre 5.
ara, 6. art, 7. are, 8. ate, 9. gat, 10. ange, and waz; the affix
Sig is employed when the sense is that of 1.‘profession or liv-
ing’ 2. ‘a bowl’, 3. ‘a sack or vessel for keeping grain’, 4. ‘a na-
tural spot of ground’; 5. ‘a cooked food or rice-gruel’, 6. ‘stout’,
7. ‘black-coloured’, 8. ‘blue-coloured other than cloth’, 9. ‘a
plough-share’, 10. ‘a libidinous female’, 11. ‘a fellet or braid of
hair’, respectively. ;

Thus wraqit ‘a profession’, otherwise srry#, the difference. being in
accent only. For this word is formed by adding the affix w15q to janapada,
by sOtra IV. 1. 86, as it belongs to Utsadi class of words: in forming the
feminine the affix #tq will be added in this latter case, thus throwing the
acute accent on the first syllable.

(2) So also gt ‘bowl-shaped vessel’, otherwise greet ‘a name of
Durga’. (3) tireft ‘a sack’ aw urate afeica aftaa otherwise der, a particular name.
(4) suet ‘a place not prepared by artificial improvement’; otherwise eqey as
eusaret ofeyg Fa 0 (5) srs ‘cooked’, otherwise arsq, (6 ) arm ‘a stout wo-
man’, otherwise ara | The word arr when a guna-vachana word i. e. a word
expressive of quality, in the sense of ‘stoutness’, takes thé affix fish in the
feminine; otherwise erg when expressing general qualities, When it is a jati-

=== PAGE 48 ===

630 : wien [ BK. IV. Ca. 1.§ 44.

vachana word it takes €rqunder all circumstances. (7) ara ‘a black-coloured
female’, otherwise areq ‘cruel’ (8) aia ‘a blue-coloured animal or indigu’ The
word saresteq in the sitra is rather too wide, it should be confined to the two
senses above indicated i. e. when it applies to a plant called indigo or to
animals’, Such as sant: or &rét teat; or when it denotes appellative as
fr In other cases we have ‘iar ‘a blue-coloured cloth’. (9) vt ‘a
plough share’, otherwise aur ‘a rope or a kind of grass’ (10) tat ‘a libidinous
or lustful woman’ ctherwise "TAT ‘a woman desirous of wealth’. (11) aw@ ‘a
fillet or braid of hair’, otherwise aga ‘mixed, variegated’.
More Arar NBA Taher Nl atorra, sare (frat Sta) a

het u drermererarrarated aa feat arg reat wares w

43. The affix vty is employed in the feminine
according to the opinion of the Eastern Grammarians, after

the word ster # :

Thus Greft or rem qzar ‘a red or bay mare’. By Phit Sétra II. 10
referred to already in IV. 1. 39 the udatta in Got falls on the first syllable,
and by IV. 1. 40 it would have taken ¢w always; but the present sitra
makes a niyama rule and restricts the application of #ty according to the
opinion of Eastern Grammarians only, and not of others.

Sat qorersarea we cen at, ea, ger errara (Ferat wg) &
ahr u gorrearg sitaarenry sararaa Paral Tt Ste Te wae w
enfant 0 TEENY Porras SATE T ATT w
Ten RATT TATE TET
44, The affix 2tz is optionally employed in the
feminine after a word ending in short %, and being expressive
of a quality.

The word gorrya: means what expresses quality: i.e. “words not
being words formed "by primitive or secondary affixes, or other words entitled
to the name of sagkhya or sarvandman, or jati, or compound words, pro-
vided they are words denoting qualities and capable of being used as adjec-
tives qualifying substantives as the word gis, not as the word &q, which
though it expresses a quality, cannot be used as an adjective” (Guide to
Panini). Thus from q~ ‘dexterous’, we have qgt or 9g: (without a feminine
affix); so xg: or gf ‘soft’. Why do we say ‘ending in a short gz’? Observe
gfaita ergrft ‘this Brahmana lady is pure’. Why do we say “expressive of a
quality?” Observe srg: ‘a mouse’ (both masculine and feminine).

Vart :—After the word qq when expressive of a quality, the affix ftp
is employed in the feminine; in order to make the first syllable acutely acs

=== PAGE 49 ===

BK IV. CH. I. § 46) wre 631

cented. As, veftu Wg is formed by = (Vg I. 10) and is Adyudatta because
the z is frgu

Vdrt:—Prohibition must be stated after the word @%, and words
though ending in short ¥, have conjunct consonant as penultimate. As ereftt
set ‘a Brahmapt who chooses her own husband’, Similarly qeg is both
gender, as °% is a conjunct consonant. As qrogfte mrereft #

The word Guna qur ‘quality’ has been thus defined :—

ae Preraatte gaa, wifey veut t
wauriisarsre Srswenrehey: wo
agiiterer neg nn cari a dg-argea:, &, (ferat ar-etq) a
ofr u ee rernfee: sfraae: farat a ete werar waft u
45. And the affix <1q is optionally employed in

the feminine after the words ug and the rest.

As % or wit u The following are the words belonging to ‘the Bahva-
di class —

lay, 2 gala, 3 usaa, 4 sgit, 5 wef, 6 wal, (waft), 7 of
wa, 8 aft, 9 aft, 10 aff 11 aff, 12 of, 13 ufe, 14 wf, 15 afe, 16
aft, 17 eer mreammy 18 aftaraafnt: 119 ehitshaeratfieea 1 20 qew, 21 ayaa,
22 sim, 23 wae, 24 franz, 25 frame, 26 froge, 27 wen, 28 vqw, 29 qaq-
ears (TANT TAM) 30 Hea, 3l eq, 32 gay, 33 we, 34 ate, 35 TE,
36. ge 37 fire, 38ers, 390K, 40 ge un erpfactsann Wri 43 we, 44 A,
45 an cenit

The affix fish also comes optionally after words ending in short ¢
being the names of the limbs of animals; as, waft: or wrft So also after
the vowel ¢ of a krit affix, not far (III. 3. 94), as aft or att Some say that
the feminine affix nfsk may come after any word ending in 4, if it has not the
force of the affix frqu The word ay isa guna-word and would have option-
ally taken thish even by the last sitra, its specification here is for the subse-
quent sfitra,by which it necessarily takes ish in the Chhandas. It is an Akritigapa

fret cera weg nn cath n Pret, orale, (aqritea: fraizte) a
aha: uw warfog xorate Pray fred Forat ste erat raf w
46. The affix ya is always employed in the Vedic
literature, in forming the feminine of the words ag and the
rest.

Thus agig fer afrequ Here wet is the name of a herb.
The word req ‘always’ is used in the aphorism, more for the sake of
the subsequent stra, which it governs than for this sQtra. For the word

=== PAGE 50 ===

62 , vu [BK. IV. CH. 1. § 48

‘optionally’ does not govern this, and the aphorism even without the word’
‘nitya’? would have been a necessary rule and not optional: for aTeTarAatey
Preitfan’: fern, drrcenfiery arene: 0
Bran ven var qe: a, (wate Ret Rat ete) a
Qi: u wens free fered yar Pre Steg wert waft u
47. The affix #1= is always employed in the
Chhandas in forming the feminine, after the word qn ~
Thus fet, wt, Sedt, THdt a

But why not so in the case of eyeny: ? Because it ends in long &, while
Feat &c. are feminine of fry &c. ending in shortzu In fact the word aq:
“after a word ending in short ” of SQtra IV. 1. 44 governs this also. The
word w4@: is the ablative case of g irregularly formed by the substitution of
Za; this form being confined to sitras only.

Sarrerearare Wee hoary u gatera-arearal, ( rat SZ)
aha: u garnet Senteshrs feat a ga arearst wert Sty Teaar afer
enfaaqu samartat fire 0 ;
entrant u qeigearad are Tee:

48. The feminine affix <tz comes after a word

when it expresses the name of a wife in relation to her husband.

Relation (yoga) with a male (punsa) is called gat Thus the wife
of mrq ‘an astrologer’ is called sort, so also agrardt ‘the wife of a chief
minister’, mut ‘the wife of a chief’; ge &c. Thus the word spy means an
astrologer, a calculator or a mathematician; and the wife of such a person
will be expressed by the word srat But if a woman is herself an astrologer
&c, she will be called erat (by ergy) &c. Therefore when matrimonial rela-
tion is not denoted, this sdtra will not apply.

“Why do we say ‘in relation to a husband’? Observe aq-t agqar
“two women of the names of Devadatta, and Yajfiadatta, not wives of Deva-
datta and Yajfiadatta.’ .

Why do we say “sqreqt ora name”? The word formed will-be the
name of a woman whose husband is possessed of the quality denoted by the
word, and not that the woman possesses that quality. In the case of a°
woman, therefore, the word is merely a Name or a Designation, and has no
reference to the etymological meaning of the word. Moreover, the omission
of the word wraqrary would have made the sftra ambiguous, for the phrase
| aq also means ‘an effect produced by union with a man’ such as pregnan-
cy. And words afeqet and ysitar would have required € and not wu

\

=== PAGE 51 ===

BK. IV. Ch. 1. § 49. J wien 633

Véart :—Prohibition must be stated in the case of words like sirwitar
and the rest. Thus sirarfar ‘the wife of a cow-herd’.

Vart :—The affix qrz, comes after qi in denoting the wife of Sdrya,
when she is a celestial being. As gat ‘the celestial wife of the god Sdrya’,
while g@ will denote a human wife of Sirya, such as, Kunti &c. The affix
‘aq makes the word acutely accented on the final : for the word q& has acute
on the initial, and had ¢tq been only prohibited and no specific affix ordained,
then erg would have applied, and it would have left the accent unchanged.
Hence a distinct affix qr is ordained.

CHAMMTTTT SAAS AOS TATA TSA ATT een warn
sabes ORS RAAT TATA ATS ATTA, «—- ATT,
(frat Ste) 0
ger u Gata: mR feat ste reat wef age ATT a

aritent u feareaariges uo arPrana t aeTey

Ae WATT Aten TIRAATESPAt aT

Te wa wate nt erafraratar w

are W gAPTeORTS fire w .
49. The augment arg is added to the Proper

Nouns Fz, gan, wa, ud, o%, and ag, and to the words few

‘snow’, acm ‘a forest’, wa ‘ barley ‘wat ‘a Yavana’, age

“a maternal uncle’, and atart ‘a preceptor’, before the fe-

minine affix Uy a ;

The present s(tra teaches two things, the addition of the augment
staea (srg) and secondly the feminine affix #1qzW Out of the above words,
in case of those about which matrimonial relation is desired to be expressed,
i. e. the Proper Nouns up to yg, the present sftra teaches only the addition of
the augment argq, for in their case, the affix gtq would follow by force of the
preceding SAtra. In the case of the remaining words, it teaches both these
things.

Thus geqreit ‘the wife of Indra’, qemrft ‘the wife of Varuna’, wart
‘the wife of Bhava’, qareft ‘the wife of Sarva’, egret ‘the wife of Rudra’,
qefia ‘the wife of Mrida’,

Vért :—Of the words fgq and sya, there is the augment sia in
the sense of greatness. Thus fearit ‘a glacier, much snow’, sart ‘a great
forest’. Otherwise these words are always Neuter and never take feminine, _

Vért :—After the word aq ‘barley’ the feminine affix and the aug-
ment are added in the sense of fault. The fault consists in its imitating basley

=== PAGE 52 ===

634 acu ( Bx. IV. Cu. 1.3§ 50

while not being a barley. Infact the word denotes a new and inferior sort
of grain. Thus aart “a kind of grain, oat”.
: Vért :—Aiter the word wa, the affix and the augment are added
in the sense of handwriting. Thus aqarit ‘the written character: of the
Yavanas’,

Vart :—Of the words afgs ‘a maternal uncle’, and zqnarq ‘a pre-
ceptor’, when the feminine affix comes to express the wife thereof, the
augment ‘ray is optional. Thus agar or aTqar ‘the wife of a maternal
uncle’ sqnararft or Taare ‘ the wife of a preceptor’,

Vért :—And there is not the change to the lingual & of the dental q
of the augment sma (VIII. 4. 2) after the word sanju Thus rear or
wraat ‘the wife of a preceptor’.

Vart :—After the words %& and afra this rule applies optionally :
when the matiimonial relation is not intended but the word retains its own
sense. , Thus svaireft or wqaf ‘the female of the Arya or Vaishya class’, afwaro
or afwar ‘a female of the Kshatriya class’, When matrimonial relation is to
be expressed, then only tg is added. As syéf ‘the wife of a Vaishya’, afrdt
‘the wife of a Kshatriya’.

Vért :—In the Chhandas, the affix 2tq with the augment egg is
added to the word gas; and the affix is treated as if it had an indicatory & 4
The force of the indicatory @ is to make the vowel preceding the affix, take
the acute accent (VI. 1. 193 fafa). Thus efter grert oferu (Rig Veda
X. 102. 2). .

Mrarencorqata, lt %o Wt art n ware, socor-qata, (Porat eg)
wn ra reTeare MATT OTT Ferat StS Tea ATT
50 The affix ¥tq is employed in the feminine
after a compound word ending in sre, the first member of the
compound being the name of the means wherewith the thing
is bought. ,
The word aryia means that compound in which the #Tt or

‘means’ is the first member. Thus werérét ‘a female bought in exchange ,
for cloth’ ; so also qar#tet ‘a female bought in exchange for dress’,

Why do we say “when the first member of the compound is the
name of the means”? Observe grfrat ‘well purchased’, gextat ‘ill-purchased’;
But why is not the affix #tq employed in yaatgr in the following verse :—
at ferenrrfrat srmatfy wtaet ‘she purchased in exchange of riches is more
dear to him than life’. Here the word ata has first taken the affix eTq forms .

_

=== PAGE 53 ===

Bx. IV. Cu. 1. §. 52) wen 635

ing wtar and then this feminine word is compounded with wu The general
rule is ufrarcarrramt oie: avararet ate ager: “Gati, Karakas and
Upapadas are compounded with bases that end with Kyit-affixes, before a
case termination or a feminine affix has been added to the latter”. The
word yaatar is an exception, founded on the diversity allowed by wgan® gar
agey (11. 1. 32).
 SRRTOTATAE 48 cat W arg, aaTTEATINT, (ocorgater ete
ferat) 0
Ween RergTomaaary rTEeTeaa Ste Tera Tah U

51. The affix <¥% is employed after a compound
Nominal-stem in which a name denoting the means wherewith,
is the first member, and the second member is a word formed
by the Participle w, when the sense is that of ‘a small quantity’.

The word ac qafat ‘preceded by a noun denoting the means where
with’, of the last sftra governs this also, The participle in x, must be pre-
ceded by a noun in the instrumental case, and the sense conveyed by =, to the
action should give the sense of ‘little’, in connection therewith. The sqeqrea
ura, of the sOtra qualifies the whole word, Thus stafafatt at: ‘a sky covered
slightly with clouds’, qafafrt qeft ‘a dish slightly covered with soup’.

Why do we say when the sense is that of ‘little’? Observe weTaieet
erect “a Brahmant lady covered with sandal essence ?” .

agAtterratranst WG WM Tah NTE, wy, Tea-TqTETA, (HTT

feat sia) a

Piel acptteatseararevenenra Porat Be meer at "
Pan sraraTaTaTE bate n TRagardtarrd PTT
Are sragTREATS Gentes THOTT

52. The affix ¥tq is employed in the feminine
after that Bahuvrthi compound, which ending with a word
formed by the affix =, has an acute accent on the last syllable.
The word sqrq of the last aphorism governs this also, This sdtra
applies to those Bahuvrihi compounds in which the first member is a sudnga
word, But if the antecedent member is not a sudnga word, then the applica-
tion of the rule is optional. As waft ‘having a rent on the temporal
bone’, xeftrmft ‘having a rent on the thigh’. seaireneft (neqegrerrean), Boer
By Il. 2. 36 Vart snftrarmgarftsa: gore, the Nishtha stands in the second

place, otherwise by II. 2. 36 it ought to have formed the first member of the
5

=== PAGE 54 ===

jo

636 oo vga [ BK. IV. CH. 1.'§ 53

compound. The words wey &c. are jati words, and by VL 2.170, the acute is
on the final. ~

Why do we say “after a Bahuvrihi compound?” Observe wrqvitat
which is an Ablative Tatpurusha compound (II. z. 38. The compounding is
by II. 1. 32, and it has acute on the final by VI. 2. 144.

Vért:—Prohibition must be stated in the case of the Participle wre
‘born’, which is also acutely accented on the final. Thus qerurar ‘a female

_ who has cut her teeth ;’ errarat ‘a , female whose breast has been developed’,
See II. 2. 36 Vart.

Vdrt:—In the case of words Tfryetdt &c, the affix is employed in
certain senses only. Thus qfergtdt ‘a wife’; (stftranttrek aeararferyae) ; but
iferqgrat ‘a woman whose hands have been taken, but not before the sacred
fire, a concubine &c.’

Vart :—Exception must be stated in the case of compounds, the ante-
cedent member of which is any one of the following words :—ay, 43, §, words .
denoting time, ge &c. Thus aggat, HEAL FHA, WANA, TTICHTAT, FAM
or §:erarat &c.

Bahuvrihi compounds get acute accent on the final syllable when
they fall under the rules VI. 2. 170 and the following.

_ RTS TARTAN Tare a-eaiet-qaagra, aT, ( adtqrara,
care agala: frat tz) a
ahr: u sreay Garareriterart waraTe EAE: ferat ar Vtg Ten wee
ira ays CeTORTafther TREE
53. The affix tq is optionally employed: in the
feminine after a Bahuvrihi compound ending in , having
acute accent on the final, the antecedent word not being a
word denoting a part of the body.
The words satarata, and satearg govern this sitra. This aphorism
lays down an option, where by the last aphorism, it would haye been compul-
sory. Thus orgsry, is a word having acute accent on the final (VI. 2. 170),

but as the first portion of this Bahuvrihi is not a Suduga word, but a jase
word, its feminine will be argsamt or TT So also waregeteret or Taqoy-
waftrat and guaftat or garfrar tt

Why do we say ‘when the first member of the compound jis not a
svdnga word’? Observe dur, aetet which admit of only one form.
. If the final is not acutely accented, the rule will not apply. As
weroen and wateseat which are not acutely accented on the final (See VI.

\

=== PAGE 55 ===

BK.IV. Cit. 1. §. 54 J er i) «ee 637

2. 170), because the first member is a word denoting dress or wresret, which
is especially excepted from the scope of rule VI. 2. 170.
Vart :—Diversely in the Chhandas and in Names, As quaftgat or
ayatgr u
maranicastargearitcary 048 a afr a SET, @, svastar-
a searr-seara, (at frat ste)

aft: u eabragrastrrdaniny aparontantart feral ae wera Te w
entire virrerncdoe tf Tne aw .

54. And the feminine affix ye comes optionally
after what ends with the name of a part of the body, when
the word is a subordinate member in a compound, and has
not a conjunct for its penultimate letter (i. e. the final a is
not preceded by a double consonant).

The Anuvyitti of the words west, sararrarerarg does not extend
to this aphorism. But the anuvgitti of the word qt ‘optionally’ does extend
to this Sdtra. Thus qaqet or wager, saat or sfaar uw The word wfy-
‘aa is’a Tatpurusha compound meaning wiqarat Sara, and &q is upasarjana
by I. 2. 44.

Why do we say “what ends with the name of a part of the
body”? Observe agaat ‘having much barley’, Why do we say “subordinate ina
compound”? Witness wftrar “without crest” (where the firar is not subor-
dinate or epithetical), Why do we say “not having a conjunct for its penulti-
mate letter’? Witness qyeat, arnt u-

Vért :—This rule applies to a compound ending with the word wR, 1T
and avs, though in all these, the penultimate is a double consonant, Thus
BURT or TART; ETN or gars, Ferravet or FermTRCTT

The word eat has a technical meaning as given in the following
verse :—

sarkt aftr rere |
wate wget ey TTA

A word denoting a thing which not being a fluid, is capable of being
perceived by the senses because of its having a form, is svahga; it must exist
in a living being, but not produced by a change from the natural state ; or
though found elsewhere actually, had previously been known as existing in
only a living being, or is found to have actually the same relation to the being
it is in, as a similar thing has to a living being.

=== PAGE 56 ===

r]

638 qe [BR.IV.CH. 1§.56

mivatetigrawenedtra 044 0 TE A afie-secaty-
WeUr-gra-atodnra, &, (eat erat at Sty) #
gfe: u anearercreman cary Raat a Fre vet wats wo
TAN TOOTS TRL TTT TCT MOP w

Te U TTTATETATS GeoTe w
55. And the feminine gq comes optionally after
compounds ending with araat ‘a nose,’ sqe ‘belly,’ ag ‘lip’

grat ‘leg’, a ‘a tooth’, art ‘ear’, and s7q ‘horn’

This is an exception to the last and the succeeding sftra. Some of
the words above given are either such which have a conjunct penultimate
letter, and thus beyond the scope of IV. 1. §4; or they are polysyllabie words
and thus covered by IV. 1. 56. Though this rule is an exception to 54 and 56;
yet it is qualified by IV. 1.57. Thus syan@ear or gxarient, fasted or faciea,
Fesdiet or faearer, etarantt or eitar, wagdt or waEAT, aremeit or arent, drergRt
or eftgorggr wu

Vart :—So also after the word gu ‘tail’. As qeaqrigest or ararrrest Wt

Vdrt:—The affix nish comes necessarily and not optionally after
compounds of ges with awe af, fre and gen As, matgect ‘a peahen
aitgedt, Preqeet, ‘a scorpion’ and utgest & -

Vért :—So also the feminine affix ish is necessarily employed after
the words my and gus when used as a simile or as objects of comparison. As
vente tar, Tease? oer w

A MIENgaea GR Cathe Na, Hte-emQ-ag-erer:, ( atste) w
Sf a: u mtereray eEsrare aTaweary Raat Se gear at as
56. The feminine affix Yrq does not come after
a Nominal-stem which denoting a part of the body, belongs to
the class sitet ‘the flank &c, of a horse’, nor when the word is
a stem of more than two syllables. _
The class w#rg &c. is Akriti-gana, that is a class of words constituted

by usage. The following are some of the examples:—As qeqrratst, HIT
ay, RANA, HIATT, HCATTST, earn, Reaoraren t So also
grat, &c, Of the case’ where the word is polysyllabic, the examples arb
gray, Tree, rereeret, tt The word set is feminine itself, and in the Bahuvrt-
hi the feminine sign of the first member is elided by pungvad-bhava, and mi<t
is shortened to #ite because it is an upasarjana (I. 2. 48).

\

=== PAGE 57 ===

BK IV. Cu. 1. §, 60.) aun . 639

worm Rrearqats agen cant n eessrRrraraegia, a, (fr-
at sry) a .
Ferny fronerrtt gehen feed ei eed we
‘67. The affix yz does not come in the feminine
after a Nominal-stem denoting a part of the body, when the word
is subordinate in a compound, preceded by the word ag ‘with’,
at ‘not’, or feata ‘having’. .
Thus aut, warn fraser w So also. gartrar senfiar or fraara
_ aifaaru The last example shows, that the present rule governs also IV. 1. 55
ante: as wellas IV. 1. 54
TAHATRTATL MAC TENA N aa-gary Sorat, (at sea) a
ght u ccqararentiatararat fort fea Pre meat eae
58. The feminine affix <iqis not employed after
aa, and ya, when (the word at the end of which they stand)
is a Name. -

Thus qt+Aen, qo, StrpanakhA the sister of Ravana’. The 2
is changed into % by VILL. 4. 3 ( qiqqra, erararat: ) u So also qapren, Hrerer,
sareqat &c. Why do we say ‘when denoting a Name’? Witness aragqett
frat ‘a copper-faced damsel’, or q=zquft ‘moon-faced’

TSR a TA Ge ow agri an AAR, wy, age a
aha u deiandt wher orefateey Praveay wu
59. The form qhisigt ‘long-tongued’ is irregul-
arly formed in the Chhandas.

The word €rasirgt is the feminine of @réfirg but as the latter has a
conjunct consonant for its penultimate, the feminine affix i would not have
applied to it by IV. 1.54. The present aphorism enjoins frau Thus qtisingt
in the sentence Wiasiret ¥ arat De ay

The word = ‘and’ in the aphorism is used in order to draw in the
word gat from the last, so that the word atrghaythut is always a Name..
Moreover by using the feminine form dirgha-jihvt in the sQtra, it is indicated

that the application of tq is necessary and not optional, as was the case in
the last sQtras. '

Reawdvare sell ko 4 waite o eg-qsagra, ety, (frat) a
afer ure ghiwentertern cies aey emeee *

60. The feminine affix ety comes after a Nominal
stem which is preceded by a word signifying direction. -

=== PAGE 58 ===

640 Fee ; ( Bx. IV. Cu. I. §. 62

. This aphorism over-rules all the rules and prohibitions contained in
sftras 54 to 58 Whereever by those rules there would have been #tq, the
present enjoins tq instead. Though the form will be the same, the differ-
ence will be in the accent ; the affix aq being anudatta (III.1.4) Thus
sTeqet or areqgen, stefaat or siatiereat, But not so in qrgeer’ or qraehret or
arrarqat because these words do not take stg (by IV. I. 56), therefore they
never give occasion to the application of #1z The stra ought to be read
as if it contained two rules (1) the affix 2t¥ comes after a compound the
first member of which is a word denoting direction and the second is a svanga
word or is the word angar &c. the penultimate not being a conjunct consonant,
(2) but #1@, is not added to Compounds ending in are &c. or in a word
of more than two syllables, In other words the sftra may be translated
“rq is the substitute of gq when the first member is a word denoting direc-
tion”. Therefore the affix #tq will come only there, where else the
affix £1¢ would have come and not otherwise. This is the reason why the
anuvyitti of fq is taken in the next stra (iV. 1. 61) and not that of <q

are: WRN Tart A ATE: (Sq frat) w
ght: un arearemaateart Porat Fre read wafer
61. The feminine affix 2tq comes after a Nominal-

stem ending with the word are

The anuvyitti of #¥ is to be taken in this aphorism and not that of
tq, though the latter was nearer. The word ag is formed from the root ag
with the affix feq (III. 2. 64). The word argis never found alone, but as ends
of compounds, hence we apply the rule of fadanta, and have translated it by
saying a “word ending in vah.” Thus feeatét ‘sustaining the demon. This
form is thus evolved :—fyeq + 91g + S1E = fret + HE + Et Vtg (VI. 4. 132 TE BE,
Uth is the samprasarana of vah, when this is a dia)=eq+aq+ere (VI. 1.
108) éqareme ‘ after a samprasarana if a vowel follow, the form of the prior
is the single substitute’), =frarét (VI. I. 89 geteeazg ‘vriddhi is the single
substitute when efi, edhati or Oth follow’). Similarly qargt ‘a young heifer train-
ing for the plough’

ereghredifa arerara nA TATA W aedt-arfReset, ef, araTaT
aft: u eet afted ceetrretr Sera arerat Praveaa tt
62. The forms qet and arftat are irregular forms

ending in ¥tq found in secular (or vernacular as opposed to
(Vedic) Sanskrit.

Thus eefta % sree, and area: frevedify = sftt uw Why do we say :

=== PAGE 59 ===

BK. IV. CH. 1.§.64] . wee 64h

in vernacular Sanskrit? Observe gwar anrétiay and afigirt art firguie

raat .
Sometimes we find these forms in the Vedas also, though rarely, as

art wrrarfiedt o adr ance ew
aracen frerarqatrarg eal TathT Nh ste:, sreftfreara, waitq-
ara, ( frat &rq) 0

ght: u snfeate cones ve fats Poa froeararis cen frat ste
sear water
STP ATTTATY Ga TT RE RPTL TANT
63. The feminine affix <tq comes after a word
denoting a jati or species when it does not express in its
original meaning a feminine, and which moreover has not
the letter g for its penultimate. .

The word sf was defined under Sitra I. 2.52. Thus Swat ‘a hen’;
watt ‘a she-hog’, sterft ‘Brahmani’; qt ‘a woman of the Sadra caste’, arerertt
‘a woman of Nadayana class’, qraauft ‘a Charayant’, et ‘a woman of Brahmans
who read the Katha’, qgqeft ‘a woman of the class of Brahmans who read the
Rig Veda’. ?

Why do we say “expressive of a jati’? Observe goer ‘shaven’ ( where
the word expresses not a jati but a quality), Why do we say “not invariably
feminine’? Witness mitra ‘a fly’ (supposed to brced without a male). Why
do we say “not having the letter a for its penultimate ?” Witness wfwar ‘a
female of the Kshatriya class’.

Vdrt:—In_ excluding words that have the letter q as penulti-
mate, there is not involved th: exclusion of the following words which have
a penultimate @) viz, rq ‘the Bos Gaveans’, gq ‘horse’, wg ‘a sort of ani-
mal’, qeeq ‘a fish’, and ayeq ‘a man’, Thus erat, eat, Tae, (VI. 4. 150 geeatae
wea ‘there is elision of the a@ of a taddhita affix coming after a consonant
when long § follows’) edt 0 ” The 2 of matsya is elided by the vartika ‘eEqEa
sara’ ti See also VI. 4. 149. All these words are also included in the class @rafy
(IV. 1. 41.) and would have taken ¥tg independently of this vartika,

Another definition of jati is :-—

srpatatrrapad qeren saggy: t
wradfint wget at smd ara fag: (Sco translation under I. 2. 52)
THRU ITHSSAATAATS MGS Wag are et: pent-ge-
RSYSMS-TAI, F (ferat Sty) a
* ght: W TraAne TaCTATMT ATTA: aifeattanra ferat sre wera ate UW geTREgetace-
RTF TATA ATTY TA U ANT SOTHO SAAT: SH

=== PAGE 60 ===

642 few [ BK. IV. Ci I. §. 66

hrerieras feta: garg 1 FATT w

64. And the feminine affix 2tq comes after the
Nominal-stem expressive of jiti, followed by the following, ae
‘cooked ’, st ‘ear’, Wt ‘leaf’, svt ‘flower’, GB ‘fruit’, qe
‘root’, and are ‘youth’.

Here the affix applies to words which in their original sense denoted
females and therefore were not provided by the last stra. Thus sirerarat
capt, uevéf, cage, wets Tih, and strat w

When, however the affix tq is not intended to be applied to com-
pounds ending with ea, geq, and ga, then those compouds will fall under
Ajadi class (IV. 1. 4) ; such as &wer, Tarnen, SEAT, eraPT &c.

cet AQMs: WAG M TANT NM, AAT, ( erat ah)
gir: u eareraremeaieargereneantat: frat te wera vere
aU OT TTT ATTY
65. The feminine affix vtv comes after a Nominal-
stem ending in short x denoting classes or races of men.

Thus weft ‘women of Avanti’, gedt ‘women of Kunti’, mir ‘Da-
kshi’, Thur svafea+ sae (1V. 1. 171) wera: ‘men of Avanti’. In the fe-
minine this afix by IV. 1.176 is elided. cmeft “the female descendants of
Plaksha”. Why do we say “ending in short x”? Witness fag ‘Vaishya’, qq
‘Darat’. Why do we say “of men”? Witness fait: ‘partridge’. Though
the anuvyitti of the word sm@ could have been read into this aphorism from
IV. 1, 63, its repetition here indicates that ¢tq is to be applied even when
the penultimate letter is a Thus waiter 0

Vart:—This rule applies to words ending in the taddhita affix rq (IV.
2. 80) though they do not denote a jati Thus anit, Arafeeftu The
affix yg here referred to is the quadruply significant affix taught in IV. 2. 80
and ordained to come after gata &c, and does not denote a jati.

HEa WEN ware a HE, sar, (Agerata: erat) a
at: 0 varcraraqernieanea: sfaatary Raarge rer TS
TEL STATA NTS SATA TET
66. After a Nominal-stem ending in short %, not
having the letter @ as its penultimate letter, and being ex-.
pressive of races of men, the affix in the feminine is ne.

The anuvsitti of the words agers and situa shculd be ‘read into
the stra to complete it. Thus am: ‘a female of the country of the Kurus’
weeny: “a Brahmani of the class of the fallen Brahmans sg called”, stewrg:
“a woman of the Jivabandhu class”,

=== PAGE 61 ===

Bx. IV. Ch. I. § 68.) . wee 643"

Thus xe+ cq aiece: IV. 1. 172, and this affix is elided by IV..1. 176
in the feminine.

The indicatory letter ¢ in a@ is to distinguish this affix in Sdtras ‘ke
Se uteit: (VI. 1 175), for had the affix been enunciated merely as ¥, then the
Sdtra VI. 1.175 would have run as a wei: and the sense would have been
ambiguous, for we could net have known what affix was particularly
meant there.

The long & is taught to debar the affix aq, for a short ¢ would have
also given the form ae ( %+z=grE) The long & therefore, indicates that
the affix *¥, enjoined by V. 4 154, in Bahuvrihis, will not apply in the feminine
forms Egraey: and the like, by the rule of vipratishedha.

Why do we say “not having the letter ¥ as its penultimate” > Wit-
ness wayarareft ‘a woman of che class of Brahmanas versed in the Yajur
Veda’,

Vért:—The affix %&. comes under similar conditions after words
denoting non-animate jati, except the words tsq &c. Thus werg: ‘the bottle-
gourd’; wel: ‘the jujube tree.’ Why do we say “non-animate"? Witness
wari: ‘a kind of lizard.’ Why do we say “except the word rajju &e"
Witness tay : ‘rope’; wy: ‘cheek’ &c,

MTree MRO Garis N ATE-sraTa, storara, (feral sor) 8
Wt uv argaerar eafsattaretarat ee frag cee TTT
67. The feminine affix RF comes in denoting a
Name, after a Nominal-stem ending with the word "1g #

Thus garg: ‘Bhadrabahd’; wrewrg: &c. Why do we say in “ex-
pressing a Name”? Observe grratg: ‘a woman having rounded hand ’ which
is an attributive word. In other words, when the compound isa name, ag takes
long & in the femintne.

agar nc 0 cana A ein, @, (erat we)
ofa: u qreemy frase werat Mae 0
AL U CARTAN TN THRE:
68. The feminine affix R¥ comes after the word
wy ‘lame’.
As 4] ‘a female lame’.

Vart:—The feminine affix aa is added to zyx, and thereby ‘there is
clision of the letter t and of the letter 6 of the word. As 4: ‘mother-in-
law’ This debars the puhyoga Bq of IV. 1 48

6

=== PAGE 62 ===

644 : xen [ BK.IV. CHL § 72

FRSC TTET WK TATA NN HE-TICTaTE, HTT
fa: u aecrertrenfratrarttrs rent ference eras ene ol
69. The feminine affix ae comes after a stem end-
ing in xe when comparison with something (expressed by the
first term) is meant.

Thus ayerermire: ‘a female with thighs like plantain-stem’. 9pqT
arate: ‘a female with thighs like the nose of an elephant’; aoire: ‘a female
with thighs like the ulnar or tapering fleshy side of the hand’.

Why do we say “when expressing an object of comparison? Wit-
ness qxire: eft ‘a woman with round thighs’, The word atqaue “thigh like
the proboscis ( @t) of an elephant ( acy)” isa poetic irregularity in the
following frwaic y aituratreat &

SRaaneararargar 8900 canto Gita, WH, SAT, any as
SFr: 0 Gf ow earn arr cerene: MfaatearEReeTeTy erarge Tea ATs w
afta. n aferagrct wre TRE
70 The feminine affix gg comes in the Vedas after
the word %& when the words afea ‘accompanied or joined’, 1
‘a hoof’, war ‘a mark,’ and ara ‘handsome’ precede it.

This aphorism applies, when no comparison is intended. As &rfdte:
‘a female whose thighs are joined (e. g. from obesity)’ gure: ‘whose thighs
are put together like the two hoofs on a cow's foot,’ aware: ‘whose thighs
are marked,’ qrite: ‘with handsome thighs.”

Vart:—So also with the words afga and ag. As afeare: and aire: @
SQEMTEaagS nod TAA Sg, KEAN: GTS ot
ft: u aqaerenreguere Gate Fee frre Tea HTT 8
HN PUTT ATTA ATS TTT
71. The feminine affix qe comes in the Vedas after
the words = ‘tawny,’ and savegy ‘a water pot.’
Thus age’ gait w ASTRA SS GATS TOT

Why do we say “ in the Vedas.” Witness ay * and aaveq: .

-Vart:—So also after the words rag, Ty, wq and qaarg: u Thus wag,
AQ: HZ: and qearg:

Serarr WwV TAA Nera
qf: 0 agarerqueread erat Free Pararye reat Hare | ETAT TTL H .
72. The feminine affix HF comes in denoting a
Name, after the word ®{% and "AES,

=== PAGE 63 ===

BK. IV. Cu. I. § 73.) wus 645

This rule applies to other than Vedic forms, Thus my : ‘a female
named Kadrd wife of KAiyapa’, qaowg ‘Kamagdald’. Why do we say “in
denoting a Name’? Observe ‘Sq: ‘the tawny color.’ qqeeg: ‘a water-gourd.’

urgcarasht Fre WORN Tah A TFTA, ater:, wie A
A: 0 opentarsppaw mtentee: frat Src rerd wut a
73. The feminine affix gr comes after the words
ata and the rest, and that which ends with the affix =r 4

Thus argeét ‘a Sarsgrava woman’, aryee ‘a Kapatava woman’. So
also after a word formed with the affix stsq (as ordained in S. 86, and 104 &c.
of this chapter), as, &@ ‘a female descendant of Bida’. wiréf ‘a female des-
cendant of Urva’. This sQtra applies to words expressing jati or kind. In
other words, this aphorism debars the affix €rg of 1V. 1.63 &c. where it
came after jati-vachaka words; but it does not debar that #tq which is
employed in describing the relation of wife, such as, the #q of IV. 1. 48.

The difference between #tq and #tq consists in accent only, the
resultant forms otherwise being the same. The words formed by ea will
have uddtta accent on the first syllable Raeantfiert, (VI. 1. 197 a word end-
ing with an affix having an indicatory or qhas udatta accent on the first
syllable’) : while the word formed by #1 will have acute accent on the affix.
Thus ¥¥ ‘a female descendant of Bida’, and x@" ‘the wife of Baida’.

The following is a list of Sarhgaravadi class words:—

1 uriiee, 2 mreee, 3 Agee, 4 wre, 5 Uy, 6 stag These words are
formed by the affix sm the first four being formed by the wa of ( IV. 1. 83 )
from tre, GTZ, arg and wgrq; the word stay is formed from sitry by the
woof IV. 1.114. This word is also included in Gauradi class 1V. 1. 41.7
wreesa, 8 eTgseAe, 9 MPa, 10 enfata, 11 wTdtaa w These are formed by
wa (IV. 1. 123) except kamandaleya which is formed by wy (IV. 1. 135) 12
arearet, 13 atesrat These are formed by gof IV. 1. 101 and IV. 1. 99,
and denote castes or Gotra. 14 Yatra is also formed by wa (IV. 1. 123). 15 areq
16 rz are formed by sae (IV. 1. 171). 17 qe, 18 Gafe are formed by yay added
to wt +4@ ‘to try’, and ofe+ art ee (Un IV. 117 ef upg 19 HPA is for-
med by am (IV. 1. 105) 20 Wrqqa is formed by era (IV. 3. 76). 21 wus, 22
WsTs, 23 THE: are jati words, 24 wire, 25 afer «These take st when
denoting a Name. These words are formed by the affix 4ay, and are conse-
quently afirg, and should have taken rq (IV. 1.6). This ordains s1q @

Q. The word sit is formed by ysq and Mit is formed by mA (IV. 1.
95), both are Adyuddatta owing to = (VI. 1.197). When aqyis added, the
accent remains unchanged, for matup being fq is anudatta (III. 1. 4), There-

oe eee

=== PAGE 64 ===

646 co vu [BK. IV. Cu. 1. §. 74

fore whether atq be added or atx to these words, it makes no difference in
the accent, for they remain Adyudatta. Where is the necessity of including
these two words in this list.

Ans. To this we reply anftg Prem geared u For had these words
taken #4q of IV. 1. 6, then the long € would have been optionally shortened
before the affixes ¥ &c. by: VI. 3. 45. But by taking eta the shortening is
compulsory (VI. 3. 43), and not optional. Because the q in the s(tra zftrrw
(VI. 3. 45) has the force of the word qf, and means the at words formed
by adding ¢ to zftrq words, by enunciating the word zfirq are optionally
shortened. Therefore IV. 1.6 where the word afin is used is governed by
this rule of optional shortening, and not the words formed by #q a

26% 274. The word q would have taken eta by IV. 1. 5, and ag
would have taken sie as it denotes.a jatii These words take vyiddhi before
wta, the form being ar@ in both cases.

Tea Woe Test Nae, ag A .
ght: 0 qevaremacigary farat ary cert TR | ere: ES ATTA
aia u re ae:
74. The feminine affix arg coms after a stem
which is formed by the affix syq or wre A

The affix qm here denotes and includes both the affixes sq@_(as taught
in S. 171 of this chapter) and eqg (See 78) as it is the common element of
both. Thus sqreagur ‘a woman of the race of Ambashthya’, trftal ‘a woman
of the race of Sauvirya’, @raear ‘a woman of the race of Kausalya’.

Similarly eye formed words, as, qrirqrrear, qTUeN 5 TATE wo .

Vért:—The affix arg comes in the feminine after a word ending with
the affix a2 when the letter ¢ immediately precedes such yafi. As rau ‘a
female descendant of Sarkaraksha’, qi@ateat ‘a female descendant of Patima-
shya’, @ramar ‘a female descendant of Gokasha’, These words belong to
Gargadi class (IV. 1. 105), and by sftra 16 would have taken tq

“The @ of the affix arg is for the sake of forming a common term #T%
with wq and eq ; and the y regulates the accent making the final acute (VJ.
1. 163). The word @rarea is included in KraudAdi-list (IV. 1. 80) and takes
the augment eqg in the feminine, and hence it would have taken qq by force
of the present s(tra and need not be included in the VArtika, There is no
Samprasarana of the q when gw or 7@ is added to this word ( VI. 1. 13), the
form being #ramgargs: and not siteretge: 0

aTazaTeE Nt 98 aif W arrerecray, =, (Prat ara) &
aftr: u wracare ferat ary wera TR

=== PAGE 65 ===

BK. IV. Cu. 1. § 78. ] TADDINITA-AFFIXES. . 647.

75. And the feminine affix arq comes after the
word araer

The word srqz belongs to GargAdi class (IV. 1. 105) which after taking:
az, would have taken #1 (IV. 1. 16). Thus wrqear‘a female descendant of
Avata’. But sqrasatedt will be the proper form according to the Eastern
Grammarians, See aphorism IV. 1. 17. .

afcar: nok noes n afear: &
qh: 0 stiri areswngrttentathrs aerratrearrentardares Vereen
76. The Taddhita-affixes are treated of here after.
This is an adhikara or govering s(tra, Up to the end of the Fifth
Book, all the affixes that will be taught, are to be understood to have the
name of Taddhita. Thus the affix fa taught in the very next sdtra. As
gafy: The word so formed is called Pratipadika, The word afaan is in the
plural number, and not exhibited in the singular, like the words qeqm: (IIL. 1.
1) &c; and it, therefore, indicates that it includes also affixes which are not
especially taught in this book. Such as qfqeq 5rsit uw wa margierqa As
arféra, etfira, wifes, afer u See Vart IV. 3. 23. The word Taddhita is used in
Sdtras like gafeaanrare I..2. 46.
qed: noon oar a qa:, fare
qh uw prrerentadtary frat Pr: wernt waft at afecieratt wafer
W1. The feminine affix f& comes after the Nominal-
stem gag and this affix gets the name of Taddhita.
As gat: ‘a young maid’. By IV. 1. 5, #tz would have been other-
wise employed, the present stra debars it. The word zafty ending in ¢ does
not take the affix iq of IV. 1. 65, for the affix fe itself is a feminine-making

affix though a Taddhita: or the word gqq may be regarded as a non-jati word
and hence IV. 1. 65 would not apply.

siete rma: orm AR HOB agit & ULES: tate
aah, gad: we, it
shen at sumed teenth sends ateedtretrer frat oreiedt wre 1

faffeorrenter weedratrstite Paray uw gerry: orrare, Reger arereaereary Tee
etragined, Te Tiret aeq aTTEN Tt ofa 0 ,

78. In Patronymics used in a narrower sense
(counting first from the grand-child), which are formed with
the affixes aq and ys, the feminine is formed by substituting

=== PAGE 66 ===

648 . wee [ BK. IV. Cu. L § 79-

@ (aq) for the # and x of those affixes and adding the long
at under IV. 1.74; provided that they do not denote Rishi
clans, and have a prosodially long syllable preceding the last
syllable,

The wording of this aphorism requires a little analysis. It consists
of five? words?: (1) aif ‘of sriand yx,’ (2) wartar ‘of non-rishi’ (3) yee
@revaar: ‘having a heavy vowel as upottamz i. e. last but one,’ (4) tqa ‘the sub-
stitute is shyah’ (5) tir® ‘in denoting gotra.’ That is to say, the gotra affixes
syiand qj are replaced by qa before the feminine affix 4g, in those words
which denoting non-rishi gotras, have a heavy vowel as last but one. The
word uttama meaning last letter, being formed by the superlative affix samaf,
implies that the word must be of at least three syllables. Therefore, the pre-
sent sAtra does not apply to forms like aftr &c.

Of the substitute saa the letter {and € are indicatory, the real affix
is a, the letter ¢ differentiating this affix from sax and the letter & affording a
common hold for both. In forming the feminine we shall have to add rg by
IV. 1.74. Thus aéqnfy ‘having the smell of dung-cake’, is the name ofa
person. In forming a patronymic from this word, we add the affix saw
Thus wana + ey (IV.1. 92) Replace this affix by tq and we have arétqraar
yet: gives us Mtgyrar it Similarly with words taking the affix gz (as
taught in sOtra sragsy IV. 1. 75): as arate: gives us qrcren, so also ararear tt

Why do we say ‘of sy and ya’ Witness erie from eave it
Here the word "arr belongs to faufe gana, and therefore by IV. 1. 104, it
would take the affix wz in forming gotra patronymic: this affix #77 is not
replaced by sag, and the feminine is by long & (IV. 1. 15); for though, its last
vowel but one is heavy, it is a non-rishi gotra word, yet it does not fulfil the
other condition of taking the affix Woy or (yu

Why do we say ‘of non-rishi gotras’? Witness qfadt and arfinét uw
Why do we say ‘whose last vowel but one is heavy’? Observe siryrét and
aryedt | Why do we say ‘denoting Gotra?” Witness enfyeaft ‘born in Ahi-
chhatra’, areagest ‘born in Kanyakubja’. _

ravawarey We Tae A atrs-starrarer ( rat wre) a
fro efirsitete | arareen trent: gore: ghorrqhrarTorsas, ETAT AT A
ferarfort: ferat exerted waft
79. After a word denoting a non-principal gotra,
wag is the substitute of aq and gst, in the feminine, even though
the syllable preceding the final be not prosodially long.

=== PAGE 67 ===

BK. IV. Cu. 1. § 81) eu , 649

The phrase sqfrsjr: of the last sAtra’ governs this also, not so, however,
the word wrerearag: w The phrase siyerqay means insignificant or non-famous
gotras. i, e. names of kulas i. e. garear, such as families like gfwa, yiore, Fae
which are not famous and are not included in the gotra list. Thus ¢hrear,
iforear and reat w

The word wraqq in the sitra has various significations, one sense being
‘separate from’, another being ‘part of’, and ‘individual members’ &c. If
the last sense be taken, then we can evolve forms like tryear areqear tt’ These
forms may also be explained by taking them as belonging to the mreqny class
of the next aphorism. In short, those who wish to apply this aphorism to
‘the immediate descendant’, such as ‘the son or daughter *, and not to agotra
descendant, which means a grandson and down ; can also do so.

In fact the word tirareqq is equal to weanite or separTing and is a
karmadharaya sam4sa, namely gotras not enumerated inthewamare w= These
are, however. technically called gu

micrftyrt nok want n aife-wnfter:, @, (rat we)
afer we Cerenfpaw feral ere werd wefie | etry eee | eran it
80. The affix srg comes in the feminine after the
words spire and the rest.

This rule applies even where the syllable next to the final is not
heavy, and even where the word does not take the affix wqyor gyu In fact
sag is not a substitute here but an augment. Thus wrear ‘a female Kraudi”,
arear ‘a female Ladi’. The following is the list of Kraud4di words :-—

1 Wife, 2 ere, 3 Mare, 4 TfTTR, § BIGfeafy. These are formed by yz
(IV. 1.95> 6 Sirvaa, 7 Sean (Year) 8 eave (tae) 9 Yerar (Yaeveq ),
These are formed by the affix wa 10 Graaf. This is formed by yx with
the substitute wag (IV. 1.97) added to margorr gageeare The word we
takes eq@ when denoting a grown-up maiden as gem; otherwise aa‘a
daughter ’, formed by erg, or gat by ety denoting a jati. 12 rw ufwayu This
debars st of jati as airsar:, otherwise erg as Yar: (Atsrafe) 13 arate, 14 erik,
15 Uiitat, 16 Wf, 17 orenfs, 18 areredt§, 19 enfiefs, 20 sete (freee) w
All these except the last are formed by x, the last is formed by ag of Garg-
Adi class,

Raafe ihre arerght sredehceet, saarcerra net oer
Qaafe, cttafa, arenght, eesti, weqaceara A
afta: w Profs dhe areagh aethtia arerrarceaterg read eft w
81. The affix stg optionally comes after the words

Raafe, atagfa, arergit and watafe a

=== PAGE 68 ===

650 A RULE of TADDHITA = [( BK. iV. Cu. I. § 82

These words end in the affix yx, and the word gotra is not unde:stood
in the sQtra. In the case of gotra descendants, the substitute shyah would
have come by IV. 1. 78. but whereas by that sftra it would have been com-
pulsory, the present aphorism makes it optional. But if the stra be taken to
apply to ‘immediate descendants’ as opposed to gotra descendants, then this
is a new rule altogether and not a rider to IV. 1. 87. In the alternative when
sag is not added, ¢te willbe added by rule IV. 1. 65 ante, Thus Yeager or
‘eaah, so also ugar or MATRA, sTeagr=a or aren, ere or HTS frat

aula caarar nz an wari aula, waaa, aT 8

aftr u epratafeaa, aratartte s, eerafefer oe Wf, enfirarerarefrereaftenre |
sraftar Rafarie are | ening wenrant artes, Revetty ewrraftra:, & Patra.
a wrafea | eerorereanfa:— seared, ot Ck UTA, TNs, Tarr Preah | Ae are
ofa sanfifferts facta vert wrdite Witacrt n aratntaty Pratt aut endiat
ae ret rerTERTerT Preteen

82. The Taddhita affixes, on the alternative of
their being employed at all, come after the word that is
signified by the first of the words in construction | in an
aphorism. -

All the three words, viz. (1) erufat ‘of the words in construction’
(2) waar, ‘after the first ; (3) 4 ‘on the alternative’, exert a governing in-
fluence on the subsequent aphorisms, up to the aphorisms which leave to the
words their own denotation: that is to say,up tothe end of the second
chapter of the fifth Book ; before the beginning of the sdtra araftar frate
(V. 3.1) The present s(tra as a whole, of course, has no applicability to
the affixes which ‘leave to the words their own denotation (emia) ; for the
latter affixes are in many cases compulsory and not optional, as are the
affixes to be taught hereafter in Book Fourth and the first and second
chapters of Book Fifth.

These affixes will come after the word, that is signified by the first
of the words in construction, in an aphorism. Thus IV. 1.92 declares wea
qerq ‘his son’. Here the first word is ea ‘his’, therefore, the affixes forming
the patronymics will come after the word signified by ‘his’: i. e. after the
word in the genitive case. As ‘wrircrey=sirrrg ‘the son of Upagu’. Here
the affix a comes after the word wy which is the first word representing
‘tasya’ in the genitive casein the sentence zyiregemt Similarly in the
sitra wacen aera (IV. 2. 1); here the first word is #a, therefore, the affix will
be added to the word in the instrumental case in a sentence representing the
word 44 ‘by which’; as HaTay Gh Ta = Hrqay, ‘KAshdya is a cloth, coloured

=== PAGE 69 ===

BKIV. Cit I. §. 83 ) . wau- 6s"

by Kashdya’. Similarly in stra aw we: . ‘there staying’ (IV. 3. 53,),here the
first word is aq, ‘there’, in the locative case, therefore the affix will be option-
ally added to the word in the locative case in a sentence, representing the
word eq ‘there’ : as Wy wa: = eiw“who stays in Srughna’,

The word aadrargis the genitive plural of aw, and the force of
the genitive is that of specification or ‘nirdh4rana’:—i. e. ‘among the words
in construction, the first is specifically pointed out as the prakriti or base, to
which the affix is to be added’. Why do we say “among the words in con-
struction”? Witness arqs trier teyaeq ‘the blanket of Upagu; the son
of Devadatta’. Here the two words gqtittyay are not in construction, for
wait: governs arqe:; and wy is governed by Yryueatt Why do we say
“ after the first”? So that the affix may come after the first word aqin in
the genitive case, and not aftcr srqeq which is in the nominative case, Why
do we say “in the alternative”? Because the same idea may also be express-
ed by a sentence ; thus we may say aqiireyey, instead of the Taddhita formed
word sirqra: ~The same idea may also be expressed by a compound word
(samasa) ; as zqrqqexy ‘the son of Upagu’. In fact, the samAsa rule here
is not superseded by Taddhita-rule, as it otherwise would have been by I. 4 2.
because the anuvyitti of srsqateqra is understood here: so that in the alter-
native when the Taddhita affix is not employed, the sam4sa rules will find
scope, :
This sQtra has been thus rendered by Dr. Bohtlingk:* when hence-
forth the meaning is specified in which an affix is to be added, then one
should know that the rule applics to the first of those words which are
associated with one another in sense, and that the affix is optional”,

sryftsreitsoy a <8 W Tart Nr, Stora: aye
qRa: u arfeardusrary ania marae Tes Teeter SET A
83. The affix ag should be understood to come
after whatever we shall teach hereafter upto the aphorism
tena divyati &.

Up toaphorism IV. 4. 2, the affix a has a governing influence, except
where it is specifically superseded by any particular rule. This aphorism
may be looked upon either as an adhik4ra sfitra or a paribhash4 sftra or a
vidhi sQtra. The application of this aphorism will be illustrated throughout
the next three chapters. Thus in IV. 1. 92 atarte= we read the present
aphorism and add the affix st in the sense of ‘his son’. As itv: ‘the son
of a7q:" ; aTWe4: ‘the son of Kapatu’,

This affix has various meanings, such as, a patronymic (IV. 1. 92),

7

=== PAGE 70 ===

62 NYA (BK. IV: CH. L. §. 85

coloured with (IV. 2. 1), sidereal time (IV. 1. 3), revealed s4ma-veda (IV. i.
7) covered car (IV. 2. 10) &c.
wane ace TMA N ATEMNssT,
qRe a parentter mate: aertreattvertory wert wae a .

84. The affix aq comes after the Nominal-stems

‘agvapati’ &c, in the various mentioned senses taught anteced-
ently to tena divyati &e. :
This is an exception to the next aphorism, by which the affix @

would have come after words ending with ‘pati? The present stra enjoins
wa instead. Thus spaya+srq=sraqay (VIL 2 117 afeeoraraie ‘when a
Taddhita affix follows with an indicatory ¥ or 4, there is vgiddhiin the room
of the first vowel among the vowels’). The ¢ of q@ is elided by VI. 4. 148
zea w where long § follows, and when a Taddhita affix follows, there is cli-

sion of the g or §, or aq or wy, of a dha’)
The following is a list of words belonging to sp-aqeanft class :-—
1 wera, 2 aTTTR, 3 UAT, 4 TATA, 5 TOT, 6 eaTTNR, 7 ATTA, 8 UBVAe,
9 gana, 0 gene, (TYWa) U waTa, 12 wort, 13 ayn, 14 wigh, 15 ear,
16 srorara, 17 Garay
 RReaenfrearregeceqrey: 14 cart 0 AGS, APTA, amt, qe
sacra, or
“9Rr u Rit iva nite rr rence wfeafiarerefieniaontg om reat
wife a
afteatu mrete TT aTfiary n argafahigrat oT TE TIT W
after gfrea su affarcn eres w aftancn efectare uo
affairs affanuiee caren offre entrace .
afrra n srinrigarg waiter u ete archaea; ay
aiftiarn caTarA TTT TT TACT ATTA
85. The afix vq comes, in the various. senses
taught here-in-after antecedently to tena divyati &e, after the
Proper Names, Diti, Aditi, and Aditya ;,and that which has
the word W@ at its final member. .
Thus fyfq + °q=eq: ‘the son of Diti.’ snfyet: ‘the descendant of Aditi’,
wif ‘sacred to Aditya.’ Similarly with words ending with T@, as ;arTe +
oq =RTarqe’ ; so also Yargery W . :
Vért :—So also after the word a4; as, aa
Vért:—In the Chhandas, after the words a4, a, af and rgry As area,
(Vs, 13, 58.) arena and Syren

=== PAGE 71 ===

Bx. IV. CH. 1.§.85) | an: -653

Sn

Vatr :—The affixes 3 and we come after the word gfaftu Thus
vfert+ s= ata; qfirt+we=afieu The resulting forms are the same, but
the feminine of the former will be qitar by IV. 1. 4, and that of the latter
quiet applying IV. 1. 15.

Vért :—The affixes @@ and se come after the word qq ‘a god’. As
yet or Frat ‘divine’. .

Vért :—There is elision of the f& of afyg, and there is the affix 4H;
as afveta=aren ‘external’, Vdrt:—and the affix faq may be employed.
As afes + tga aidte: ‘external’. (VII. 2. 118 fats, there is vriddhi of the
first vowel when the Taddhita affix has an indicatory ™). Vdrt:—In the
Chhandas it takes the affix {arg as wifyar the difference being in the accent
(VL 1. 197) .

The word afyq is an equ, and the above vartika declares that its f2
portion is elided. This very fact indicates by implication, that the fz of other
Avyayas nced not necessarily be clided before those affixes, before which the
base is called # dha. Infact the following vdrtika weararase (the fe of
the avyaya base is elided) given under sitra VI. 4. 144 (the & of the base dha
is clided when a faddhita affix follows) is not a universal rule. Thus from
the avyaya vraag we get Myudt &c ; here the i is not clided.

Vért :—Of the word tara the f2 is replaced by ¥ as wreaTt W

Vért :—The f& of apr is replaced by = in the plural when the patro-
nymic affixes follow; as sg@rm, erm u Why do we say in the plural
number? Witness witgaitt:, rents: (IV. 1. 99).

Vdrt :—When an affix beginning with a vowel presents itself after the
word #, let the affix aq be substituted for it. Thus what is descended (or
produced, &c) from tis expressed by meqq (VI. 1.79) Why do we say
‘beginning with a vowel’? Ovserve ipa feat or ward = ineepy and tip

Vart :—These affixes oa &c, taught in this sdtra will come, to the
exclusion of all the other affixes hereinafter taught, which are employed in
especial senses, Thus sy iscmployed especially to denote adescendant. But
after the words fat &c wy will not be employed, but ea, as Yeq “a descendant
of fifar’. So also wraetert, = (wTerataTL THE:), to the exclusion of IV. 2. 37 &,
In fact the rule faufawy qeareda (I. 4. 2) does not hold good here.

If that be so, how do you explain the form Yaa This word is not

directly formed from the word f@@ but from fet, the feminine of the word *

fafa, formed by the affix Ay (IV. 1. 45, the word r@%@ being formed by the Kyit
affix Rraq and therefore it will take tq in the feminine). To the feminine
word feat is added wR and we get Yaq: The Paribhasha mfaaftanea Oy
fatueenty wera, (a rule of grammar which applies to a masculine applies also,

=== PAGE 72 ===

654 ae (BK. IV. Cu 1. §. 97)

to the same word in the feminine) is not of universal application, as this very
illustration shows. Others consider the form %%q as incorrect, as not to be
found either in the Mahabhashya or any Vartika.

Sess WRN Sete, we
gia: u seated: sretrenst teeter eet Hee | SETETCITNT ATE:
anftrary u eteargesrreltte Tencery
86. The affix asx comes after the word seq &e.
in the various senses taught antecedently to tena-divyati &c.

This debars the affix sq taught in IV. 1. 83 as well as the especial
affixes here-in-after taught. Thus seq+srg=siten, situ The following
is the list of words belonging to zeanf@ class, :

1 wey, 2 aq, 9 Pray 4 Pra, 5 meray 6 age, 7 Ae, 8 AEH,
oagt! 10 qeqera 1 11 gfrét, 12 Ya, 13 GRR 14 were, 15 frgy, 16 waEx,
17 wave, 18 wea, 19 suey 29 wer, 21 qtgga. 1 22. see WI 23 We
qu, 24 werhia, 25 crate 26 wifes, 28 wea, 28 neq, 29 aeaq, 39 He, 31 qeaTA,
32 GaTTET, 33 aftr, 34 aE, 35 Fat, 35 Fe, 37 MeTTETTA W

Vért :—Thc word seq in the above list, takes this affix, when it does
not mean ‘a metre of prosody’. Therefore it is not so here : Rot fey ‘The
Graishmi Tristup metre’, But %e7: ‘belonging to summer’, The word CAT
here means ‘metre’, and not Veda, The word qvgars® =acay wa, the phrase

. @& meaning sraaTa, (a being the name given to qara by Ancient Gram-

marians), Thus the compound will be sitacafi: The Paribhasha qgorrar
sifaaiqaa aga Rife does not apply here. Therefore, tadantavidhi ap-
plies here and we have sifirray, (srgara, gag) Ww The word aqeurq_ takes wry,
when meaning a ‘place’: as sitgearit Yur; otherwise vfrgeufti ‘the son of
Udasthana’ The word gyq takes sm when meaning ‘a share,’ otherwise it
‘will take oy, as orfaitsa: 0
a qersat ASL BN AAAS HOO A
Rn Wat re fa Rafe re Te Gee epreeeidery ote
erreurs surat Tee vert aa
87. The affixes ay and gy come after the words

ait and ga respectively, in the senses specified in tho apho-
rism reckoning from this one-as far as “dhany&nim bhavane
kshetre khai” (V. 2. 1).

Thus wi +4a=Wera ‘feminine’ The sense of the affixes taught in
qhe Fourth Book, and Chapter 1 of the Fifth Book, are various, Therefore _

=== PAGE 73 ===

Bx. IV. Cu. I. §. 88) Lux in Dvicu 655

the word aq will have all those various significations ; thus, it will mean
either eitgwe (IV. 3. 53) ‘existing in females, or wfat egy (IV. 2. 37) ‘a collec-
tion of females,; or efhasg (IV. 3. 74) ‘what has come from females’; or
erat ft (V. 1. 5) ‘suitable for females’ &c.

Similarly ga + y= Grea ‘ masculine, or existing in males, or a collec-
tion of males, or what has come from males, or suitable for males &c,” _~ .

These affixes, however, are not to be employed in the sense of the
affix qq taught in V.1 115. For Pagini himself uses the form qyq (and not
Gra) in sOtra VI. 3. 34, thus indicating by implication (gry) that in the
sense of qq, the affix eqsq is not.to be used. Thus evi, The forms eftet,
eiftar, get and geeq are exceptional. See V. 1. 121. The @ of gg is elided
before erg by VIII. 2. 23. had it not been clided, one affix az would have been
taught in the sdtra, and not two. .

fartérerra cen cari a facit:, Gey, wares
Re: n teeta: dwelt Pirreet aera: ara treahtar sverrent Tafa Aes ETT
88. A Taddhita affix, ordained to come on account

of the relation of the words being that of a Dvigu compound,
is clided by luk, when it has the sense of the various affixes
taught antecedent to tena divyati &c, but not so, the afix
having the sense of a Patronymie.

The phrase grugere: of IV. 1. 83 governs this aphorism also, and
not the phrase wqarq of the last. Thus qsuy aqiag deg = Tse ‘ pre-
pared in five cups.’ Similarly gerqqrs: “prepared in ten cups.” f%¢" ‘he who
studies two Vedas.’ fatq: “who studics three Vedas.” Here the affixcs
denoting aega (IV. 2. 16), and maa (IV. 2. 59) have been clided. Why do
we say “not so when the affix denotes a Patronymic.”? Observe ttre
‘adescendant of two Devadattas.’ %jaqr®: ‘a descendant of three Devadattas,’
Here the patronymic affix is not clided, though the compound is a Dvigu.

, Why do we say “when it has the sense of the various affixes taught
antecedent to ena divyati 2” Observe tarerafrn: W

The Dvigu compound with the sense of a Taddhita affix is formed
under IT. 1. 51. The affix will not, therefore, be elided where it does not give
tise to a Dvigu compound. Thus qsqaqmeat=asTaTee Or the genitive
case in faa may be taken as sth4na-shashtht, the sense being ‘there is the
Substitution of ga-clision in the room of Dvigu,’ the word Dvigu being here
taken by metonymy for the affix which gives rise to Dvigu. Of course, when
two words have blended into a Dvigu compound, the affixcs will not be elided

=== PAGE 74 ===

656 GoTRALUK-ELISION- [ Bx. IV. Cu. 1. § &9

after such a word, because it becomes a prAatipadika like others, as qirnqraa, Ww
If so, how is the affix elided in qewaqrears dega: = TseaqMs ? This is not so ;
there is no Taddhita added, and the word qseaqra can never be analysed into
qsqareut deqe, uw If the latter sense is to be expressed, we must use a
sentence, and no single word. In fact three are the only valid forms, and
they arise without adding of any Taddhita affix to qswaarf, viz Ts4q STAG
germ, cswaqmal deET, and qeeas: (a Samahara Dvigu). A Samahara
and a Taddhitartha Dvigu of these are analysed in the same way, while the -
third THREAT TERT: will always remain a qyeq and never give rise to a
Taddhita.

How do you explain the non-elision of the affix in WPfra:, ds4aq
and qreqr ? The word “fta: does not mean fi frar he but sever fra,
faftar, fafrarnta= Sita: uv Similarly qrseag dose not mean ¢wq vey 7e
but gurara aétart oar = fray, Paay aT =gheTgE nu So also with TeHys tt

Why the affix is not elided in (par napa ant = amigery or Para
waa? Because the elision of those affixes only take place which begin
with a vowel.

MPrsonh nen Ta A Ty, eR, we

aft: uw ceattar tienen wai Arment sowererre ary dents feet
afafrers w

89. The luk-clision of Patronymie (Gotra) affixes
in the plural, which have been enjoined by Sutras IL. 4. 63 and
the rest, is prohibited, when the affix has an initial vowel,
and it has the sense of the various affixes taught antecedent
to tena divyati &e (IV. 4. 2).

Thus the plural of mq is ay: (II. 4. 64). But the disciples of maj
will be formed by the affix @ (1V. 21. 114) which is a pragdivyatlya affix. and
for the purposes of adding this affix the base will be considered to be md: as
if there was no elision. Thus ara: +o= mpffar (VIL. 1. 2 and VI."4. 151),
and not afar | Similarly aredtar, wrrdtar:, urearanitar: disciples of Vatsyas,
Atrey: as, Kharpayanas’ .

Why do we say “ai” i. e. “ when the Gotra affix is elided”? Observe

FIL, TTT Here the affix denoting “fruit” is clided by gy by Sdtra
IV. 3. 163. Then when the pragdivytlya affix sq is added, the luk-elision
is maintained. Thus the fruit of qqz@ is qqeu; from which arya ‘belonging
to or coming from the jujube-fruit.’

Why do we say “having an initial vowel”? Observe sifpq armaa=
mre and not mmteer; and mp; and not antag Here the affix ea,

_

=== PAGE 75 ===

BK 1V..CH. 1. §: 90°] YUVAN-ELISION. 657

a pragdivyatlya affix taught in sdtra IV. 3. 81 does not begin with a
vowel; therefore it is added to mf and not aru Similarly the next affix
wa (1V. 3. 82)
Why do we say “when it has the sense of a pragdivyatlya affix” ?
Thus aba frert= wffee ‘who is fit for the Gargas’. Here the affix g (V. 1.
1) has the sense of ‘ suitable for that’, as taught in Sdtra V.1.5 not one of
the pragdivyatiya senses. Hence the /«é elision is maintained.
. The: Gotra-affixes are taught to be elided in the plural only: and
When after such supposed elision a Singular or Dual Person is intended, this
rule will still apply and there will be no elision. Thus firg will form its Gotra
derivative by war (IV. 1. 104) as fag+et= ee uw The plural of ey will be
far by the elision of sy ~=One yuvan or two yuvan descendants of these
fev will be formed by the affix gst (IV. 1. 95), for the application of which
‘the word faq will be supposed not to have lost its wz, therefore qq will be
added to @y, thus ¥q+4m; then this wy is elided by II. 4. 58 The resultant
form is we,'xq The many descendants (in the plural) of one ig or two
we will be fig:
at ae tte nae nat oe (af)
ghee warren toa afer ea Tea TI meres ee FEAR NFS we
wares erat afentarya aft at aa: anf & eet wah
90.. ‘There is luk clision of the Yuvan Patronymie
‘forming affix (IV. 1. 163) when a prigdivyatiya affix begin-
ing with a vowel is to be added.

The elision of the Yuvan affix must take place mentally ; having done
which, we should therr look out for the proper Pragdivyatiya affix to be added
to the word-form thus remaining. Thus the Patronymic (Gotra) of qreergt
‘js qreerefa: (1V. 1. 95) formed by adding yy The Yuvan form of the latter
(by Satra [V. 1. 150) will be greetgq: t When we intend to add a Pragdivya-
tiya affix to this last word, (c. g. an affix having the sense of “the pupils of” ;)
we should first mentally elide the Yuvan affix @ (IV. 1. 150) from this word
reed tt Having done which we get the form qrztgfa’; and it is with regard
to this form wrerefe that we should search out what is the proper pupil-denot-
ing affix: and that by sdtra IV. 2, 112 is woyM Thus qiverefa + B= GreeTEaT:
‘the pupils-of Phan{ahyitas’. Had we in the first instance applicd the pupil
denoting affix to the Yuvan word greta, such affix would have been g and
not 31, for the latter is ordained for those cases only where the word ends
with the Gotra affix gy (IV. 2. 112). .

Similarly the Patronymic of amfaa is urnafa (IV. 1. 25). The

=== PAGE 76 ===

658 YUVAN-ELISION. =~ ( Bx, IV. Cx. 1.§. 92

Yuvan of amfafr is arcfafera: (IV. 1. 148). The pupils of Bhagavittika will
be wmftrar by adding the affix wy (IV. 2, 112)

Similarly the Patronymic of fare is texra® formed by fasy (IV. 1. 154)
The Yuvan of %arafy is Qarefte formed by the affix o& (IV. 1.149) The
word denoting the pupils of ‘eaxrerfta will be formed by adding we (IY. 2, 114)
not to this word, but to Faraq es Thus Yervitar o

Similarly the Patronymic of afesaerg is afiswent (1V. 1.95) The
‘Yuvan derivative of the latter will be aqigsaerva; (IV. 1.151) The word
denoting pupils of the anftesera will be answer: (IV. 2. 112).

Similarly Patronymic from wax is wystatt (1V. 1. 160), the Yuvan of
the latter is iry-arat: (IV. 1. 83); the word denoting the pupils of the latter
is rarqaream: by (IV. 2. 112 formed from egyareft) u Why do we say “an affix
beginning with a vowel”? Observe qrererserqind greergaraa.w Why do we
say “a Pragdivyatiya affix”? Observe amifafirara fea = armftediawu (See the
last Sftra).

qehasteaaceamt 8828 cat a nefhsit, waraceang a
ahr u aghntchorert: arefterhtsent ret Rratiesaaceat or wef w :
91. There is optionally luk-elision of the Yuvan

affixes mand fsx when a Pragdivyatiya affix beginning with
a vowel is to be added.

By the last s(tra, all Yuvan affixes were told to be elided. The
present sftra declares an option in the case of the Yuvan affixes wg and fer.
Thus the patronymic of mt is mg (IV. 1. 105); the Yuvan of mf is formed
by wa(IV. 1. 101) areirqu: «The word denoting the pupils of Gargyana
will be arr or “raraftar:; aredtar: or arerarertar: 0 Similarly of the affix
far (IV. 1.156). Thus from aes, the Patronymic is areg (IV. 1.112) The
Yuvan of the latter is qreqrara (IV. 1. 146). The pupils of Yaskayani will be
called arexta or arenrerttar tt

TEATTETE NAW TaTAy  ET-TTETT
whew rift, Genes retiversa | rete cterubertatersy anette t
aah wafer, reat ahs THMNI TOTEM STEMTATY THY w
92. The affix aq mentioned in IV. 1. 83 and those
which follow it denote ‘the descendant of some one’.

This sQtra points out the meaning of the affixes; and it refers to the
affixes that have preceded, beginning from wm (IV. 1. 83) e. g. HL, 4, By &e
and to the affixes that follow. The affixes herein taught have the force of
denoting descendant, when they are added to the word in construction which

=== PAGE 77 ===

BK. IV. CH. L § 93. J GoTRA-AFFIX- 659

is in the genitive case. The translation given by Dr. Ballantyne of this
aphorism is:—“Let the affixes already mentioned or to be mentioned come
optionally in the sense of the offspring thereof, after what word ending with
the sixth case-affix and having completed its junetion (with whatever it may
require to be compounded with), is in grammatical relation there to”.

Thus we may either use the sentence writtwer; or by adding wy
(IV. 1. 83) to the word aq (which has the 6th. case-affix in construction in
the above sentence), form stare: “the offspring of Upagu™. spaqa: (IV. 1.
84) ‘the offspring of wraqftr’, tap (IV. 1. 85) ‘the offspring of Diti’ dee
(IV. 1. 86) “the offspring of Utsa”. @or (IV. 1. 87) ‘the offspring of a
woman”. &eq: (IV. 1. 87) ‘the offspring of a man’,

The Universal sdtra qaqa, (IV. 3. 120) will include this syyeq also
for the word yyq may be applied to any-thing like aqeq, ane, Prac, frre
&c. Since by that rule IV. 3. 120 sq &c, may be applied in the sense of
apatyam also, what is the necessity of this present sitra? The present
sdtra is mace in order to debar those affixes like g, (IV. 3. 114) which debar
the affix sq &c in the case of aexy_u How can an wifes affix debar a
Sfes affix? The vert affixes wy &c are treated like iw for this purpose.
Thus these affixes ey (IV. 1. 83-87) debar the & in the Vsiddham under
certain circumstances, Thus arittwt="1at, so also >arrra: from rary:
Ceara arises) w

Kirke qaahrarark ord gt ae!

werk: Oe creat Taraes WaT
oat ATW SEH
aia: 0 arra trang aint, aftrg Pratete 9a geared wentreafray Pree: Peay 1 a
Wea tr rif, wiser Tee
93. The one and the same affix is employed when
a more distant descendant, how low so-cver, is to be denoted.

The word Gotra is defined in Satra IV. 1. 152 and means the offspring
beginning with the grandson. There would have arisen the application of a
separate affix in denoting the descendant of every one of such persons; the
present sutra declares a restriction, Thus the son of mi: is aff (IV. 1.95).
The son of mat: {or in other words the grandson of mi) is ard: (IV. 1. 105).
This is formed by a Gotra affix. Now the son of mm will also be called
ara, no new affix will be added. In fact, in denoting the Gotra descendants
how low soever, the affix as will be added to the word mf, though there may
be several intermediate descendants. Thus the stitra restricts the application
of the affix. Or in another view of the matter, it may be said to restrict the

: 8 :

=== PAGE 78 ===

+660 PATRONYMIC {3 9 [ Bx. IV. Cx. 1. § 95

base to which the aftix is to be added. Thus the son of sp will be formed
by adding the affix qs not to the base mrg (which would-have been the case
were IV. 1. 92 strictly applied), but to the base tu So that one base is to
be taken and adhered to throughout, in applying Gotra affixes,

Tarpakrary new caf a itera, ah, aferare &
er w araaty Pram: ares Pree ieeitt wert ens, TONES:

94. When a descendant of the description denot-
ed by Yuvan (IV. 1. 163) is intended to be expressed, a new
-affix is attached, only after what already ends with an affix
marking a descendant as low at least as a grandson (gotra):

but in the Feminine the word is not termed Yuvan, and no
new affix is added.

This is also a niyama or restrictive rule. Thus the Yuvan of arg is
arate: (IV. 1. 101). Similarly qreara:, Travan, araTa:, eye, AreTAPT:

- Why do we say “but in the Feminine the word is not termed Yuvan”?
Observe qt which is the feminine of gfe: (Gotra) as well as of qraram: (Yu-
van). Similarly art feminine of gift: and grave: uw In short, Yuvan affixes
are not added in the feminine. If it is intended to denote a feminine descen-
dant of the kind Yuvan, the feminine word formed by Gotra affix will denote
such a descendant also,

What is here prohibited i. e. is the term Gotra superseded by the
term Yuvan? If it is a miyama rule, there will be no niyama with regard to
the feminine, as the prohibition is contained in the same sentence. Therefore
in the feminine, the Yuvan affix will not get the designation of Gotra, because
Gotra-name is debarred by Yuvan Name. Therefore the s(tra should be
divided in two, e. g. ttrnq aft werat ware (2) watsferargu (1) After a Gotra-
formed word a new affix is added in denoting a Yuvan descendant, (2) but
not so in the feminine. In fact the name Yuvan is prohibited in the feminine,
therefore, the feminine will be known Gotra always and never by Yuvan.

aA TT NSS
gfe: w aearveatides | srareraremtaaftantte reed wah u -
95. The affix gs comes after a Nominal-stem
which ends in short a, in denoting a descendant.
This debars wey (IV. 1. 83). Thus qreaya=qfer ‘descendant of
Daksha’. Why do we say short ¥ (for this is the force of the letter aq added

to wy, by I. 1.69 and 70)? The descendant of grat: or aterm (words which
end in long wt) will not be formed by the affix TU"

=== PAGE 79 ===

BK.IV.CH.L§ 97.) | wee : 661.

The descendant of gare by this sOtra is qresf:, but the form qwerg
formed by wa is also met with As “qftqara qracara Aft” ‘Give Sita to
the son of Dasaratha.’

ararfryaat 0 SRW oan A rganiten, =a
ger u arg cerenfha: wears Te Tea ats
rer endear estore w
aren ararfergiry at cot streone ara varaw Wat wae
are aaferreqat wv qeagarentaye: #

96. The affix "5% is added in the sense of a descen-
dant, after the words ‘Bahu’ &c.

Thus arefa: “a descendant of the clan of Bahu.” The words ‘ Bahu
&c, either do not end in short ¥, thus making the last rule inapplicable ; or if
they end in short %, then some other rule would have prohibited the applica-
tion of rg. Hence the necessity of the present stra.

This is a class of words recognizable only by the form (srgyart).

1 arg, 2 srarg, 3 arg, 4 frig, 5 Fauary, 6 very, 7 warty ( THe
8 wt, 9 gaen, 10 war, 11 waren, 12 afta, 13 gue, 14 wT ( BT
15 grat, 16 vert, 17 she, 18 gffat, 19 geacez, 20 way, 21 Yre-
22 srftraria, 29 wrait, 24 gut, 25 gar, 26 gar, 27 qqq, 284aq-
Wa, 29 sea, 30 efrarre: warre, 31 gurey, 32 wey, 33 fer, 34 Ie, 35

aretfer, 42 Srrg, 43 wrsfterd, 44 goa, 45 gitar, 46 erga, 47 anew, 48 me,
49 waa, 50 am, 51 weg, 52 sym dara, 53 dyarenar aarew, 54 ga, 55
were, 56 Gorn‘ srgerrarsag utr 1 57 are: 58 wef 59 Youth 60
SRP: Teenie a :

Vdrt:—The words qt &c must be Proper Names, being heads of
Gotras from whom clans take their name: otherwise the affix gg will not
be applied. Thus the son of a private person called ‘re will be argq:

Vért:—The operations to be effected upon words denoting relation
are prohibited with regard to the same word-forms when denoting Proper
Names. Thus the offspring of »zgt meaning ‘father-in-law’ is ~qynb, but
when it means a person called Svasura, then the derivative will be sargft:

The in the sftra indicates that other words not included in the
list also take this affix. Thus snfta:, Qaraft:, aratafe:, sirens: vege: 0

DUGHRAN VON sah 1 Garg: way, TH
gE 0 PUTgaeTTET CR ETA TS TTA aT ETHSTET TT 8
HU TTS TOT ATATPALS THNCTT,

Tee

=== PAGE 80 ===

” 662 0 me [ BK. :V. CH. 1. § 98

97. The affix gs is placed after the word sudhatri
in denoting the descendant, and the sg of sudh&tri is replac-
ed by the substitute wg befere this affix.

Thus gararrept= Gravatar ‘ the descendant of Sudhatri.’

Vdrt:—The substitute warg replaces the finals of sara, Tee, ay,
sqars and aq when the Patronymic pq is to be added. Thus Yarefer:,
reste: tare, ewes, Woah:

As GHA Ta NA, SoM HT: THT
TRE Ure TR STA TY FaPaeeTy Tear AT w
98. The affix ‘chphafi’ comes after the words
‘Kuija’ &c, when a remoter descendant (called Gotra) is to
be denoted.

This debars yu Of the affix wag the letter # is for the sake of
distinguishing this affix from the affix w=; such asin sftra V. 3. 113, by
which the words ending in affix wwe take the further affix q (s&), in order
to form acomplete word. The letter sx of this affix causes Vyiddhi (VII.
2,117). Then remains § which by s#tra VII. 1. 2,is replaced by wrequ
Thus ssa+een=aise+eraqt+aeatsard. This is not a complete word
-as yet. We must add @ by sitra V. 3. 113. Thus the full word is afssramr
‘the grandson or a lower descendant of Kufja’ dual of it is arssraeat, plural
‘is aitsaremt: ; the affix sq being elided by II. 5. 62, in the plural, it being an
affix of the grat class (IV. 1.174). Similarly srurara:, area, Brvrertr: U
Why do we say “when aGotra descendant is to be denoted?”
Observe mifm: “the son of Kufja”. Here wat is added by IV. 1. 95 in denot-
ing immediate descendant. There is difference in the accent of these words,
“‘in the different numbers, Thus in the singular and dual, the accent will be
regulated by the latter w of the affix sq which is added in those numbers,
But this affix being elided in the plural, the accent there will be regulated
by the letter vof seg That is to say, in the singular and dual, the udatta
will fall on the first syllable (VI. 1. 197); in the plural, it will fall on the last
Syllable (VI. 1. 164).
The word W®® of this sutra governs the succeeding s(tras up to
aphorism IV. 1. 112: so that all the affixes taught in these fifteen s(tras
denote grandsons or descendants lower than that.

1 xsa, 2 my, 3 cea, 4 ser 5 am, 6 arta, 7 OF, 8 TH, 9 g-
eet, 10 gw, 11 fearg, 12 eae, 13 eae, 14 URE, 15 gen, 16 fae, 17 gt
au

=== PAGE 81 ===

Bx. LV. Ch. I. § 100. J wen 663
a
wartet: THN

Pe: wore cere: erferaheRa Tree TE Tee eaAy
99. ‘The affix qe comes, in denoting a Gotra des-
cendant, after the Nominal-stems ag and the rest.

Thus rere: (ae +eR = ret wet VIL. 2. 118 and VII. 1.2) Simi-
larly qraaer: “the grandson or a lower descendant of Nada or Chara”. But
the son of aw will be arf: (IV. 1. 95).

The word wey is changed to wae before this affix. Thus qraret: «
The word urafat occurs in Yerfe class II. 4. 59, the Yuvan affix is, therefore,
elided after it, thus qréfr is a common name for ‘father’ and ‘son % It takes
1m by IV. 1. 96, as belonging to Bahvadi class which is an Akgti-gana. The
word srfirada takes GR when denoting the quem gotra, e. g. nfirantaer: = qred-
ava: ; otherwise the form will be eafirr: «The word gem will form eqreotept:
when a Brahmana is meant; otherwise a1f€r, so also comet: = anfee:, other-
wise afr | The word wrq is changed to sie as tere: #

law, 2 ae (at) Sam, 4 ge, 5 afm, 6 tau, 7 wie, 8 eH, 9 &
wet 10 ug org wt 11 ens, 12 wae, 13 fame 14 wfirateqeaet 15 gre
16 ae, 17 Gram, 18 qa, 19 fire, 20 ete, 21 Faye, 22 Faye, 23 fave 24 fee
© 2 arae, 26 eras, 27 wreaT (Raat) 28 wTEa, 29 Hea ( mIEE) 30 om,
81 wrgea ( ret) 82 geet arerrTGd | 33 wife, 34 fg, 35 Are, 36 Gare
37 wig WE TI 38 Ark, 39 gui, 40 exon, 41 firowT, 42 rm, 43 qu, 44 UH,
45 gata, 46 qua, 47 fara, 48 ew, 49 seat, 50 srqy 5L girae, 52 fam,
53 qftwy, 54 eftry, 55 fers, 56 ders, 57 aalea, 58 que, 59 ferce, 60
mre, 61 qe, 62 wyT 63 wpa, 64 UT, 65 my, 66 re, 67 UM, 63 RTEM,
69 mera, 70 agree, 71 is, 72 ware, 73 quad, 74 By, 75 wees, 76 aTA-
ea, 77 area, 78 werae, 79 were, 80 yer, 81 sre, 82 arH, 83 HTT, 84 Ta

efter ears: Nook Tare NW efta-ere eT, BST:
aft: u eftarttfierarntor: | eftrfeatr swaps FE TER TT
100. The affix qe comes after the words gfa &e,
when they end in the affix apg (IV. 1. 104). : .

The words efta &c, form a subdivision of fag class, which class by IV.
1, 104 takes the affix wa in forming Gotra words, Thus the Gotra descendant
of give will be erfte (efta+2re). The son of ence will be formed by this
sitra and not by IV. 1.95. Thus efta+«g@=eftarat: “the son of Harita or
the great-grandson of Harita”. In fact, the force of the affix wg of this Sdtra
is that of a Yuvan affix, though it is taught in the chapter of Gotra affixes ;
because according to the general rule IV. 1.98 one Gotra affix can be only
added to a word, and the word erfty being already formed by a Gotra affix

=== PAGE 82 ===

664 . wen (BK.1V. Cu. §. 103

we will not take again another Gotra affix qu Therefore, ee is here a
Yuvan-affix, — .
aftrsiter 8 RoR RN TaN TOTS, &, (HE) A
ahr u aspenftsrare miraftarene wa wera wef
101. The affix q@@ is added in denoting a descen-
dant after a Nominal-stem ending in the affixes ay and equ

The & of this sOtra has, like that of the preceding s(tra, the force of
a Yuvan affix, since it is to be added to words formed by the Gotra affixes 72
and qzu Thus mi+qe@ (IV. 1. 1os)emr 0 onrat agen a Tet
re-afer ; uft+ag=qearaT uw It is not every word which ends in wy or FR
which takes the Yuvan affix wg; but only that word where the affix ag or
a has the force of a Gotra affix. Thus the affix qq is added by IV. 3. 10to
denote proximity toa sea. As dtq+qg=*ta: wu This word will not take the
affix weu Similarly by IV. 2. 80 the affix y@ is added to the words sat
&c, the force of the affix being qrgefra u Thus ardafr. This word will not
take the affix wa m

WAGE TTAY NM LVN TTA MI YH, TaH-
H Fa, Tee, STATTITY (HB)
qr wien caret ear ren OF eed Gera wR TERA aafs aay eaTATAT
aretereawaTg w
102. The affix qq comes in denoting a Gotra
descendant after the words ‘saradvat’, ‘sunaka’, and ‘darbha’,
when they denote the descendants of Bhrigu, Vatsa and
Agrdyana respectively.
Thus orcararat: = arg: otherwise rege: (formed by way) Grraret
=areeq: ¢ otherwise trmar:, wate: = srarmm:, otherwise wfk:, (formed by 9 IV.
1.95)

The words ucgqand gm belonging to faqfe class would by IV. 1.
104 have taken the affix syst in denoting Gotra, the present s(tra prohibits
that in certain cases and enjoins qx instead,

Rrredahrarageqacearsy Nl LoB Nl TENA A Alot, Tea, Saray, A-
wraceart ( we) W
gfe: u ftreeeert Rrenfpea: mica teat Frarrerseaceat KE TN aT w
103. The affix qq comes, in the sense of a Gotra
descendant, optionally after the words ,Drona,’ ‘parvata,’ and
jivanta.’

=== PAGE 83 ===

BK. 1V. Cx. 1. § 104) we : 665

This debars yg of IV. 1.95. Thus Sraram: or wt, akaret: or ardit:
Sxerareett or efter:

The affix qe is employed in denoting a remote (gotra) offspring and
not an immediate descendant or son. How is then seqeyrat the son of
Droga, called froraa: and not wr@& in the phrase “areata fraret "? The
rt here does not refer to the Drona of the Mahabharat, but to some ancient
founder of a clan of that name, and his’ descendants were called groraar:
In modern times, by an easy error, ASvatth4ma was called Draup4yana, owing
to the similarity of sounds.

arqearaat frqriteatsy nm gow mo watt w atafe-erarad, faqr-
frra:, wet
ru trys | fenear siterrersererd rate greraroer: gareaRnaisrt
area oe wate | aqerrairerarenh, wafrarsradt weet a

104. The affix sx comes after the words ‘ Bida’
&c, in denoting a remote (Gotra) descendant: but after
those words of this class which are not the names of ancient
sages, the affix wrhas the force of denoting immediate des-
cendant.

This Sdtra consists of four words: srm& “ non-Rishi or not being the
name of a sage”; wrAaead ‘in expressing an immediate descendant.” fenfoa
“after Bidadi words” wor “the affix wa.” Thus of the words falling in Bidadi
class, the words like gw ‘son,’ g/@4 daughter,’ qareq ‘si iter-in-law’ are common
nouns and not names of Rishis, When the affix wx is added to these words,
it has the force of denoting immediate descendant. Thus gwt+er=arq
‘grand-son.’ 9feq + wraE=EneT: “daughter's son.’ But when added to other
words which express the names of Rishis, the affix srr makes the Gotra des-
cendants. Thus fag+*r%z=%¢: ‘ the grandson or a descendant lower than that
of Bida’ .

How in a context relating to Gotra affixes, we come to this two fold
meaning of this sitra? To this we reply, that the phrase wrgearaae should
be thus construed. The word ‘anrishi’ is in the ablative case, the case affix
being elided. The word straeaq is the same as warat the affx cam being
added without change of significance. Therefore the words like qr &c. denote
the smuediate (anantara) descendant of gq &c, and do not denote a remote
descendant (gotra), nor a descendant in gencral, Therefore, the above phrase
means :—‘after a Bid4di word which is not the name of a Rishi, the affix ‘afi’
is added in denoting an immediate descendant.

Ee A phen OO LC

=== PAGE 84 ===

wye ( Bx. IV. Cu. I. § 104

Q. Another way of explaining the phrase is this, the word ‘Anantarya’
is equal to ‘ nairantarya’=‘uninterrupted succession.’ Therefore, where there is
an uninterrupted succession of Rishis between the first name and the person
to be designated by a Patronymic, there the affix ‘af’ will not be added. Thus
the word aq belongs to the Bidadi class, ‘Indrabhd’ a seventh descendant
of Kagyapa, will not be denoted by areqq formed with we, because between
x-9g and #aq, there is an unbroken series of Rishis, but by wa of IV. 1. 114.
Therefore the following phrase will be valid gay awn area For az
is elided in the plural by II. 4. 64, but araqrara is plural of argaq formed with
the general patronymic wa of IV. 1. 114 and hence not elided.

A. This explanation is not to be preferred, merely in order to explain
the word areqqart in tang ane: arene un The general Patronymic q7Q affix
wr of IV. 1, 114 is not debarred by this wy u Therefore @rgqy with s73q will
denote yrg:, which may also be denoted by a#rgay formed with wan For had
the above explanation been correct, then fpafra the grandson of Kusika could
never be called afr: (formed with srg), for both Gadhi the father of Visva-
mitra, and Kudika the grand-father were Rishis,

In denoting an immediate descendant or a descendant in general,
the Rishi words fay &c, will take other appropriate affixes, Thus fq forms
“afta descendant of Bida’ by IV. 1.°96 ya and not by mem of IV. 1.114,
because faq is supposed to belong to the Akrtigana of BahvAdi.

1 fry, 2 v4, 3 wean, 4 Ofirw, 5 wears, 6 zOrg, 7 fora, 8 aT
(faot) 9 Peart, 10 fit (afer) 11 qeeamm, 12 gba, 13 fron, 14 wT
ceara, 15 waa, 16 ure, 17 gra (gre) 18 Yq, 19 sve, 20 fay, 21
faq, 22 fern, 23 araa, 24 offre, 25 srarrart, 26 eqrare, 27 warren, 28
sari, 29 gare, 30 gita, 31 faa, 32 amen, 33 ahaa (Hage) 34 Nat.
a, 35 Facey, 36 ae, 37 ufaara, 38 ora, 39 eftac (carat) 40 nfafee, 41
fram, 42 awe 43 waa, 44 ase, 45 garg, 46 para, 47 3g, 48 gra, 49 om,
50 gfeq, 51 ary, 52 qeeft ey wi 53 faery, 54 aerg, 55 ear

The word quit in the above list is replaced by yy when taking the
affix warn Thus qa@ar srqeq = aut: (the son of a Brahmana begotten on a
Stdra woman, who though married to the Brahmaga is queft ‘a strange woman’
owing to the great difference of race). ,

The ‘word qreft occurs in srqufeatfe (VII. 3. 20) and srarearfe (IV.
1. 126) classes also. Therefore when the sense is ‘a son begotten on another's
wife’ who is also called qreft, the form will be qarta:, with double vriddhi

of both members by VII. 3. 20: which docs not take place in the case of
TE: UW

=== PAGE 85 ===

BK. IV. CH. I. §. 106] GoTRA wen 667

aif Tey HOH
ght: w etree terete atrergee ay reed eat
105. The affix a comes, in the sense of Gotra
descendant, after the words ‘Garga’ &c.

Thus "1a: ‘the grandson or a still lower descendant of Garga‘, so
also aTeeq: &c.

1 ah, 2 qeag,t 3 ora 4 degra, 5 wre, 6 eanraa, 7 fereq, 8 at
sfrrart, 9 smnfer, 10 gafts, 1 qe, 12 ty, 13 fate, 14 da, 15 ue, 16
wa, 17 um, 18 ya, 19 wae, 20 arg, 21 wise, 22 gy, 23 faurta, 24 WE
ara, 25 aifen, 26 eferm, 27 wu, 28 erg, 29 wey. 30 oy, 31 dy, 92 Mg,
33 Teg, 34 Hey, 35 ary, 36 wify, 37 faritg, 33 my, 39 ery, 40 mam, 41
gy, 42 wag, 8 ace, 44 ee, 45 ge ( ger) 46 aa, 47 wee, 48 age, 49
are, 50 qaew, 51 ata, 52 aa, 53 we, 54 wa, 55 Gene, 56 HARE, 57 we, 58 ge

Bre, 59 afte, 60 wow, 61 Gas, 62 cra, 63 wre, 64 Brett 65 mares, 66 we,
7 wera, 68 Pre, 69 eT, 70 cera, 71 aes, 72 wR (TOR) 73 SEM,
77 EKG, 75 Fae, 76 BAe, 77 TIE, 78 aeRt ( wTERH ) 79 Afr, 80 Afewa, Sl
woaca, 82 okaw, 83 gferere, 64 era, 85 erqeH ( sieeR ) 86 Gore, 87 Figs, 88 Ber,
_ 89 rere, 90 wen, 91 farfere, 92 Free ( free) 93 Frows, 94 afta, 95 atewa, 96 Tem,
97 BPaat, 98 Fafaitaa, 99 tre, 100 garg, 101 gars, 102 farys, 103 geefir, 104 garteL,
105 ganfir, 106 zee, 107 afty, 108 aie, 109 gy, 110 wry, 11] yy, 112 wee,
113 a, 14 ye, 115 frsee, 116 frog

The word %@ is found in the aifgatfy sublist of this class. It ought to
take om after qin the feminine by IV. 1. 18, how then the form ara in
arrét at? The affix qx comes in denoting a Gotra offspring, but in denoting
a descendant in general, this affix will not come, and hence no shpha also,
If so, then why the immediate descendant of way is called wrageqy which
is a Name of Paraséram the son of Jamadagni, or why Vy4sa the soa of
ParAsara is called qrawa:? These are exceptions formed by arg eqnattre: i.e.
by superimposing of Gotra-form on these. Their proper apatya forms are
by wea (IV. 1. 114) i.e. art and qroet: &

agrateterorenfirerh: W tog TTT Nay, Tate, aTeToT-wRre;
(az) a
gfe: wae gy ToS Treg ay reer raf rare wre rf Te
106. The affix a comes, in the sense of a Gotra
descendant, after the words wy and ag when the words so
formed mean ‘ Brahmana’ and ‘a Kausika’ respectively.

Thus anqeq: = set: ‘Brahmana.’ Otherwise arya: “son of Madhu.”
wrava: = &rfira: Otherwise arte:
9

=== PAGE 86 ===

668 GOTRA ag a ( BK. IV. Cx I. §. 108

The word gy belongs to the Gargadi class, so it would have taken yafi
by the last sdtra also. The present sitra declares a restriction, viz. wy takes
he 4 only then when atfye is denoted. Its being read in the Gargadi class
serves another purpose : as it belongs to the sub-classs atfeatit, the rule IV. 1.
18 becomes applicable to it; so that its feminine is formed by o%. Thus
arasarret In fact, it would have been better, if in the body of the Ganapa-
tha, instead of writing q alone, there was wy @ifaa%u It would have saved
the repetition of it in the present sQtra, _

eafttraraiyeer n yoo nh TaTAA A aR, tora, aTARTa
Sha: 0 aftatrrreparniyasreaeay Ts ary geet way
107. The affix ‘aq’ comes in the sense of a
Gotra descendant, after the words aq and ara, when the
special descendants of the family of Angiras are meant.
Thus aft+esy=areg: ‘the grand-son or a still lower descendant of
‘ Kapi’ of the family of Angiras.’ So also tha: u

Why do we say of the family of Angiras ? Observe arya: (IV. 1. 122)
“the gotra-descendant of Kapi” so also @fy: formed by wy because it is a
Non-Rishi word or because it belongs to Bahvadi (IV. 1. 96) class.

The word aff occurs in Gargadi class. The present s(tra declares
a restriction i. e. the ‘yafi’ is to be applied only when Angirasa descendant
is meant. It is included in the Garg4d! class also for the purpose of apply-
ing IV. 1, 18 Thus areqreft “grand-daughter or a still lower descendant
of Kapi.”

waver toch Waa N aavera, a, ( aR, wT) W
gfe u wafer carr) carwereratgersreatee HT ay TERT TTT
108. The affix ‘ax’ comes in the sense of a Gotra

descendant, after the word ‘ aravg,’ when meaning a descen-
dant of Angirasa.

Thus qravew: = whitce:, otherwise qrare: tt _

The word qavg occurs both in the Gargadi class (IV. 1. 105) and in
the Sivadi class (IV. 1.112). It would have taken both affixes sry and wy,
The present stra declares that when it means an Adgirasa, then qqeg will

not take ayy of the rffatfy class: and when it does not mean Angirasa, then it
takes both these affixes e. g. qraew: and qa: any descendant of Vatanda.

we Parara R08 8
git 0 enfenar | saowusratkcedt ferat ay verges enrefe W

=== PAGE 87 ===

Ww

BRIV. Cu. I. §. 110 ) GOTRA equ 669

109. The affix ‘asy is luk-elided in the feminine
after the word ‘gave’ when meaning a female descendant
of Angirasa.

Thus from qaee: we get qrqvew in the masculine. In the feminine,
the qi is elided by luk, and we have qravew+ aq (IV. 1. 73) = saeat “a female
descendant of Vatanda of the clan Afigirasa.” Why do we say “of Angirasa?”
Observe arewratt formed with ‘shpha’ under lohitadi rule (V. 1 18). When
qaeg takes wu under Sivadi class, its feminine is qraevt u Though the word is
formed with wo yet in the feminine, there is not xg substitution (IV. 1. 78),
because Vatagda is a Rishi-Name.

BOMTET: HTM You
gtr w angca ot Fryers seated Apres wy Terat eTs
110. The affix ‘qs’ comes, in the sense of a
Gotra descendant, after the words aa &c.

The anuvyitti of Angirasa does not extend to this aphorism. Thus
weeny = apgs-araa( VIL. 1. 2) = eparaa: (VII. 2. 117) ‘the grandson or a still
lower descendant of Afva’. Similarly wremaq: There are some words
in this class which already have taken a patronymic affix, e. g, ria, Yea, and”
wraga ut After these words the affix © of course has the force of a Yuvan
affix. The word writg is formed by wit + eq (IV. 1. 122), tea=hHe (a Rajar-
shi)-l-sqq (IV. 1171), and wragy = wage+ ay (IV. 1. 105). The word oe
takes phafi only when it denotes an Atreya, as grarat:, otherwise ona with
© or ora: with ww ~The word rq takes ‘phaf’ only when the offspring
ofa male is to be denoted, as mraearred= stare! but @rarar wyRt= witet-
with WRU The word wrgq takes ‘phaf’ when denoting a Bharadvaja, as
wrtarat:, otherwise it will take the affix ©, which will be elided by II. 4 28,
leaving the form wie u

The words “cara 314% of the above list mean that when a person *
born in Atri Gotra is adopted by a person bclonging to Bharadvaja Gotra,
then the affix is to be added, he of course is an Atreya but gets a new Gotra
of Bharadvaja. Thus aregrsraa:, otherwise the form will be ararm with.
ersz of IV. 1. 104.

I epg 2 were 3 Ger 4 rn 5 fee 6 ge 7 OTS et (aR) 9 Erm 10-
wea 1] faqa 12 afer 13 wees 14 ase 1S fees 16 THA 17 TE 18 UT 19 ETE
20 eftgar 21 sivsiax 22 wre 23 ere 24 eqe 25 rH 26 afew 27 qq 28 Ghrw 29 fry 80
ware 31 ya 32 ya 33 aritry 34 fparat 35 EE 36 UT HTeY 37 WH 38 we 39 we 40
vitor 41 wg 42 firey 43 Freie 44 fererres 45 frit 46 ras 47 qe 48 rae 49 Yew 50 ( Fez):
greg 51 yad 52 wrayer 53 GS wre 54 IgA OS mee 56 Sram 57 PAW 58 aw 59.

=== PAGE 88 ===

670 GoTRA eq a ( Bx IV. CH. 1. §. 112

Corr) sire 60 ony 61 warty reETe 62 weer BTe 63 eee 64 Be 65 fare 66 oe
67 wa 68 are 69 fire 70 waft 71 afexm 72 tr 73 gH 74 BIT 75 AE 76
Ree, 77 ae, 78 Be, 79 ve 80 rae, 81 aH
_ aUTATS wee
gtr untae re HOT Ws A OH TART TT -
111. The affix ‘qs comes in the sense of a

Gotra descendant, after the word #4, when the meaning is a
Traigarta.

Thus ante: =e ; otherwise anit: (IV. 1. 95).

Rrantyary nek nwa on Rra-aniten, we

Peru em ate epee | sea: ge raat werat Rares | AreeparsTese we

“

112. The affix sy comes in the sense ofa descen-
dant, after the words fara &c.

The anuvyitti of the word airy (TV. 1.98) does not extend to this
sOtra. The affixes taught hereafter are generic patronymic affixes, The affix
ary debars gx &c, Thus firq+-ar= tre: ‘a descendant of Siva’. Similarly
fre

The word aarg‘a carpenter’ occurs in this class; being a common
noun denoting an artisan. it would have taken the affix gq by IV. 1, 153 ; the
present sdtra prevents that. Itdoes not, however, prevent the application of
eq ordained by IV. 1. 152. Thus ertiarqeaat: u mrieg=aee: Ww The
a is elided by VI. 4. 134, The word tr occurs in this class, as well as in Sub-
hradi class IV, 1. 123) and Tikadi (IV. 1.154). There are thus three forms of
this word :—stim: ; wferrara: and titra: «The word feqrar occurs in this class
as well as in Kufijadi class (IV. 1.98) It has thus two forms: &qrg: and
rararaea: with chphafi.

The affix sre will come after a word consisting of two syllables, when
it is the name of a river: the affix eq (IV. 1.121) would have debarred the
wart we of (IV. 1. 113) in case of patronymics formed from river names.
However, it is not so, because of this prohibition. The Patronymic from the
river name fo would be formed by woy(IV. 1. 113), as Wey: but this is
replaced by fra: #

1 fre 2 tre 3 inde 4 aoe 5 wea 6 aft 7 oe 8 Gre 9 HHL (HT) 10 vq.
Preart 11 etrige 12 ger 13 ery 14 gh 15 eager 16 agte 17 atex 18 aya 19 wee

20 thy 21 afta (Sits) 22 eras 23 gare 24 gore 25 witey 26 waRy 27 afte.

=== PAGE 89 ===

Bk IV. Cu. 1. §. 114 )- PATROAYMIC sry” : 671

28 qx 29 fle 30%ya Sl qian 32 wifrer 33 afeftat 34 wefirer 35 afiicer 36
irftce 37 38 afwcm 39 qftory 40 cree 41 ature 42 emit 43 te 44 hey 45 eRe
46 forest 47 corer 48 ela 49 citer 50 Faeq 51 Frew 52 Reve 53 rare 54 Te
55: ara 56 acenrg 57 qur 58 weary 59 gavefrer 60 qoieftar 61 gifeer 62 se

"Fae (sree) 63 Gite 64 mate 65 AYE 66 eeRt 67 expe 68 MINT 69 EAGT
70 dey 71 fare 72 wea 73 Ber 74 Ger 75 weeTT 76 yor (ga wt) 77 9h 78 aa
aa 73 fear 80 wfh 81 ger 82 aaalt 83 art war 84 FayoR reat en 85 Miah,
86 Ofefeen, 87 wary, 88 ttafen, 89 awe, 90 were, 91 were, 92 qe u It
is an WIA H .

FATA aATTATTETATAHTT: WLLL
aft: u adacararatee gat! WHAT TF wee | weet: | metre wath, eae
wert Miter sentare wa ata verre overt: | sega ar wftat

aravtet arrtarht Bear sqetsey pert els | wat seeTE:

‘113. The affix aucomes, in the sense of a des-
cendant, after words which are the names of rivers, or women,
when such words are not Vriddham words; and when they
are used as names and not as adjectives.

The word Vyiddham in the sOtra, does not mean the technical Pat-
ronymic of that name as defined in other Grammars and used in Sdtras like
IV. 1. 166, but means the Vyiddham as defined in this Grammar i. e. a word
whose first syllable is a Vyiddhi letter (I. 1. 73). The word wrrarq: shows the
orthography of the word to which the affix is to be added. The word m#ft-
nrqdha: declares the meaning of that word and both attributes refer to one
and the same base, i. e. orthographically the base should have a Vyiddhi letter
in the first syllable, and etymologically it should denote a man or a river.
The word arantara: applies both to the base and the affix.

Thus wrt—arrt: ‘a son of the Yamuna.’ aga‘ son of the Iravati’
“waea: ‘son of the Vitasta.’ ating: ‘son of the Narmadd4.’ These are all names
of rivers. Similarly tra: ‘son of Sikshita’ "aq ‘son of Rntaar #

Why do we say ‘when nota Vriddha » word’? Observe qraarrarar
srt = STANT: ; so also array: formed by hed (IV. 1. 120). Why do we say
being ‘names of rivers or women.’ Observe argu: and §aaq: uw Why do we

say “when it is a name?” Observe Grvara weet = Grtita: ‘the son of a beautiful
woman.’

y wa (IV. 1. 120) is the general affix by which patronymics are formed
from feminine bases. The present sftra is an exception to that.

acerragoreraar (ee nach, ere, after, gore: ee

ft: u cee: aferan Teer: | separ yore: |e he Tore | wate: me
TRY STH soegat wadt, SsTTT 1

=== PAGE 90 ===

672 PATRONYMIC wa # (Bx IV. Ca. 1§. 5°

114. © The affix yoy comes, in the sense of a des-
cendant, after a Nominal-stem denoting the name of a Rishi,

or the name of a person of the family of Andhaka, Vrishni,
and Kuru.

This debars the affix yyu The Rishis are like Vasishtha, Vi$vamit-
ra &c. Thus aft: Pate u So also xargem:, urya: being persons belong-
ing to the family of Andhaka; and argyt:, urqea: being persons belonging
to the family of Vrishyi, and "3, aT¥¥e being persons belonging to the
family of Kuru,

The word wn@ is the name of a Rishi, in forming its Patronymic, the
present sAtra enjoins wa; but IV. 1. 122 enjoins eg; thus there being a con-
flict, we apply the maxim of interpretation contained in I. 4. 2. So that the
Patronymic of wr@ will be formed not by wa but by seu Thus sriwa:
Similarly ga@a a person of Andhaka family, forms its patronymic wWimaep
IV. 1. 152 by e@ ; and not by wy, so also Wgaaew ‘son of Vaishvaksena’ a per-
son of Vyishgi, family ; so also trea: ‘son of Bhimasena’ a person of Kuru
family.

Nole-—The words or sabdAs are eternal ; how is it then that rules applying to them
should be made dependant uvon their occurring in particular families or not, when families
themselves are non-eternal? In other word, how arule affecting a permanent object is con-
ditioned by an impermanent adjunct ? To this, some reply that Panini has by mere coincidence
(and not as cause and effect) classified certain definite number of words as belonging to certain
families, and then the rule made applicable to them. Moreover a permaaent object is sume-
times designated by an impermanent object : as the permancat time is designated by the namé
of Saka. Others say that the familioe of Andhaka &c., are also permanent, and the words
“Nakula’ -Sshadeva’ &c., found therein are, of course, permanent.

AGRA SATA TTT: WLS A TATA AT:, TA, MRT, AA, AA,
qatar
aftr u argusrreraargated gaixagabarry so gerd AT, THCNTATTS: |
115. The affix aq comes in the sense of a descen-
dant, after the word matri when it is preceded by a Numeral,
or by the words ea or aq; and the letter Tis substituted for
the final ag of mAtri.
Thus from fearg we have targe: “son of two mothers i.e. son of one
and adopted by another.” ftarg+ W=trgq+T+H = ong s+ G4 (1. 1. 51.)
Similarly qearge, atrge, and amaTge #
This sQtra is made in order to teach the substitution of short z for the

\

=== PAGE 91 ===

Bk IV. Cu. 1. § 114)- PATROAYMIC Brum : 671

28 qa 29 fre 30 yea 31 orien 32 iifrer 33 afifiar 34 wiefiar 35 afiiver 36
intras 37 38 afar 39 qftory 40 erare 41 eters 42 anit 43 te 44 Pew 45 eat
46 frre 47 corer 48 eta 49 efter 50 Faeq 5] Frew 52 Reve 53 rare 54 Te
55: ara 56 wcenre 57 gar 58 weary 59 gavefirer 60 qaieftar 61 gafeer 62 sTe-

"Fae (seta) 63 gite 64 METH 65 AYE 66 eatcact 67 exyCH 68 mary 69 eee
70 dry 71 fare 72 wee 73 er 74 Ger 75 ETT 76 qoent (ga wt) ‘77 qh 78 4a-
aaa 73 Pexana 60 yft 81 ger 82 eet 83 art war 84 Faw raat en 85 aia,
86 Oferw, 87 wary, 88 aitefee. 89 cx, 90 aera, 91 were, 92 as ult
is an wrrgrtere tt

AAA afraraghsTeTaT AAT: W LEH
aft: u areacararntee ge! wrane 8 weret: | wébmavhe catrd, aut
arent Mites 1 sentrare we eta were owed | erent au wftat

arate x arntanit Bar sveasey werd was 1 wat STATE W

“113. The affix aycomes, in the sense of a dee-
cendant, after words which are the names of rivers, or women,
when such words are not Vriddham words; and when they
are used as names and not as adjectives. :

The word Vyiddham in the sOtra, does not mean the technical Pat-
ronymic of that name as defined in other Grammars and used in Sodtras like
wv IV. 1. 166, but means the Vrsiddham as defined in this Grammar i. e. a word
whose first syllable is a Vyiddhi letter (I. 1. 73} The word wana: shows the
orthography of the word to which the affix is to be added. The word wft-
Rrqdpa: declares the meaning of that word and both attributes refer to one
and the same base, i. e. orthographically the base should have a Vriddhi letter
in the first syllable, and etymologically it should denote a man or a river.

The word amare: applies both to the base and the affix.

Thus zrT—arrt: ‘a son of the Yamuna.’ qaqa ‘son of the Ir4vati.’
“wara: ‘son of the VitastA. ’ ating: ‘son of the Narmadd&.’ These are all names
of rivers, Similarly tra: ‘son of Sikshita ’ faq ‘son of Perera # .

Why do we say ‘when nota Vriddhe « word’? Observe qraparrarar
STTet = GMAT: ; so also aTereetre: formed by t&% (IV. 1. 120). Why do we say
being ‘ names of rivers or women. Observe arora: and Yaga: un Why do we
say “when it is a name?” Observe tnrarar srqat = Gra: ‘the son of a beautiful
woman.’

y *& (IV. 1. 120) is the general affix by which patronymics are formed
from feminine bases. The present s(tra is an exception to that.

acraraarghrgrevaar ge nach, areas, gftor, Gore:
aftr: w eee: aferan eeerra: | separ porn ger fe tone | weafte pe: wee
THR STH somrgar wet, AsTTE |

=== PAGE 92 ===

672 PATRONYMIC org # ( Bx. IV. Ca. 1§. 115)

114. ° The affix soy comes, in the sense of a des-
cendant, after a Nominal-stem denoting the name of a Rishi,
or the name of a person of the family of Andhaka, Vrishni,
and Kuru.

This debars the affix yy" The Rishis are like Vasishtha, Vifvamit-
ra &c. Thus afte, Wane: wu So also sargem:, uve: being persons belong-
ing to the family of Andhaka; and arqyt:, urqea: being persons belonging

to the family of Vyishgi, and ye, argye being persons belonging to the
family of Kuru,

The word w@ is the name of a Rishi, in forming its Patronymic, the
present sdtra enjoins ya; but IV. 1. 122 enjoins wg ; thus there being a con-
flict, we apply the maxim of interpretation contained in I. 4. 2. So that the
Patronymic of s1@ will be formed not by ww but by equ Thus area:
Similarly awa a person of Andhaka family, forms its patronymic woe
IV. 1. 152 by eq; and not by 7a, so also ygauea ‘son of Vaishvaksena’ a per-
son of Vyishgi, family ; so also typaza: ‘son of Bhimasena’ a person of Kuru
family.

Note—"The words or sabdds are eternal ; how is it then that rales applying to them
should be made dependant uvon their occurring in particular families or not, when families
themselves are non-eternal? In other word, how arule affecting a permanent object is con-
ditioned by an impermanent adjunct ? To this, some reply that Pinini has by mere coincidence
(and not as cause and effect) classified certain definite number of words as belonging to certain
families, and then the rule made applicable to them. Moreover a permanent object is some-
times designated by an isnpermanent object : as the permancat time is designated by the namé
of Saka. Others aay that the families of Andhaka &c., aro also permanent, and the words
“Nakula’ -Sihadeva’ &c., found therein are, of course, permanent.

AGRA TTT: WU TATA AI: Ta, AEA, TA, AT,
qatar: a
gf u argueqreraargatedgatar paar’ so ged AT, THCMTATTT: |
115. The affix a comes in the sense of a descen-
dant, after the word miatri when it is preceded by a Numeral,
or by the words aq or aq; and the letter J is enbatitated for
the final a¢ of mAtri.
Thus from fearg we have tage: “ son of two mothers i.e. son of one
and adopted by another.” fgarg+wy=traq+e+H=brqiw+ Gea (I. 1. 51.)
Similarly qreatge, atarge, and amaTgc &
This sQtra is made in order to teach the substitution of short z for the

\

=== PAGE 93 ===

Bx. IV. Cu. 1.§. 118 9 FATRONYMIC Ag 673

© of arq ; for the word arg would have taken the affix sry by the general rule
IV. 1. 83. The sdtra contains the word qqrar: in the feminine gender, show-
ing by implication that the rule applies where the word arg denotes female.
Thus Sat = Gary “he who measures together’. Its patronymic will be
ginrt: ‘son of a fellow-measurer’; because here the word arg does not mean
‘mother’, but a ‘measure’, Nor the word wreqarg ‘barley measurer’ wili be
affected by this rule. Why do we say “when preceded by a Numeral &c.”
Observe atara: ‘son of Sumatyi’, The word ¥areq is formed by IV. 1. 123
as belonging to SubhrAdi class,
SrUTar: weltet TE
Sha: w ara werd wale earTATE | eeatendits aftroenye ray
"+ 116. ‘The affix srt comes in the sense of a descen-
dant, after the word "=m, and when this affix is added, weiter
is the substitute of ‘Kanya’. ,
Thus aearar wqed = arta: ‘the son ofa virgin’ viz Karga or Vyasa’.
This debars the wg of IV. 1.121. The word @%ar means a virgin, the son
of a virgin is produced by immaculate conception. gfrtrarmreanrt ar gaasty
Taare aera, car gett, aT gered wo
Rest, oy, sormeracracrmatg mon waa fat, oF,
BT, Ae, ATA, Brg
fe  Ranhgresnmudear carded renreqranrerren teres Te Ht
117. The affix sm, comes after the words fret,
Sy, and gas, when the sense is a descendant of the family
of Vatsa, Bharadvaja and Atri respectively.
Thus yatr = qrer: otherwise Yafie u dye =arars: otherwise dhij: «
Orr: = saz: otherwise ernfer
; In some texts the word qm is used and not yr The former being a
feminine word, its Patronymic will be dra, by IV. 1.120 when it does not
mean a descendant of 4uqra W

drerat at Ree
aftr w toren sere aro Tera ref
118. The affix am comes optionally after the word

dtet in denoting a descendant.
The word qt being the name of a female would have taken ww by

=== PAGE 94 ===

674 7 PATRONYMIC 8& ( Bx. IV. Cw 1. § 121

IV.1. 113; but this ‘We would have been prohibited by IV. 1.121 as it is a
dissyllabic feminine word. Hence the necessity of the present sitra Thus
‘We: or Ya: ‘son of Pild’
TH HOTTA We
RE u ae qHasTeTey wR Tere wae
119. The affix 7% comes optionally in the sense
of a descendant after the word aga as well as the affix ays

Thus we get three forms, PTR + Raga: ; TER EAE;

OFS + OL — rege o
sitet gH Wl p20 8 .
aft u wttagiet erntereraran: wer gees ehatsTee ww gerd wae ow
often wearer green often ssa eTErE A
120. Words ending in the feminine affixes take
the affix zm in forming their Patronymic.

The word eit in the aphorism means ‘words ending in the feminine
affixes ery &c.’ That is, words ending in long wt and § of the feminine. Thus
fartat+we= Faas (IV. 1.2). So also Grate: “Son of Vinata or Suparnt”.
But Yefae: and arp formed by meaning sons of yefae and ye, for though
these words are feminine. they do not end in feminine affixes.

Vart:—The affix wR comes after qeq when meaning gqu Thus
areta:= 7G “bull.” Here ‘dhak’ has not the patronymic force. The patrony-
mic will be qreq: ‘the son of a mare.’

Vért :—The feminine words %s4t and aifxer take the affix so in
forming the patronymic. Thus gis: “the son of a curlew.” aitfayat: “the son
of a cuckoo,’

WIT NRA A Taran -aee: (aiteat ox)
gia: 0 ape oftrerranyna wy read we
121. The affix ‘zg’ comes in the sense of a
descendant, after a word ending in a feminine affix and con-
sisting of two vowels.

Thus qatar syet= qa: ‘son of Datta’, ta: “son of Gopi”. This
debars the sy of IV. 1. 113.

Why do we say ‘having two vowels? Observe aga: ‘son of ayat’,
which is a trisyllabic word, and not dissyllabic,

eerrfrsr WR8 Tare A Ce, &, TET
sf evant are reenrgaierh: | parcemrentrareanPrranen’s eR Tera wafer

N

=== PAGE 95 ===

BK. IV. Cu. I. § 125 ] GOTRA eI 675

122. The affix ‘zs’ comes, in the sense of a
descendant, after a dissyllabic Nominal-stem ending in shoré
x, but not, however, after a word ending in the patronymic
affix TN ‘

The anuvyitti of ‘stri’ does not extend to this aphorism. The force

of the word @ in the stra is to draw the anuvgtti of the word are: of the:
last sutra. Thus wipwa: ‘the son of Atri’. Wa: ‘the son of fry't

Why do we say “ after a word ending in short ¢”? Observe qn: “son
of gi” u Here gt though a dissyllabic word, yet ends in WW

Why do we say ‘not ending in the patronymic affix ya’? Observe
qraramt: ‘son of afer’ tt Here though afer is a dissyllabic word ending in short
4, it dees not take the affix #q for q here is the affix ga (IV. 1. 95.); so also
erarat: i Why do we say ‘having two vowels’? Observe attra: “son of aire”

parhysaar: W223 0 Tana N ga-snfeer:, w (TH)
qe: ua Rear }a: HATE A wa TER TNT

123. The affix ‘e%’ comes in the sense of a des-
cendant after the stems gw &c.

This debars qq and other affixes. The word win the sdtra shows
that some words not occuring in the list of qurft may take the wa, as it is an
ureter: w For though the words érm, qiga are not in the list, we find still
forms like nite, qexae: &e.

Thus quarrel = trie

1 gy, 2 fz ge (Frege) 3 orerea, 4aeare, 5 cera, (Waras) 6 CeTaEre, 7 Fang,
Ceara), 8 Friar, (Prara), 9 treo, 10 eferoft, 11 afte, 12 fee, 13 aren, 14 wrseafer,
15 err, 16 Feary, 17 Finger, 18 qa, 19 fre, 20 Prac 21 erat, 22 yor, 23 am, 24 era
(was) 25 gerd, 26 qarey, 27 Par@, 28 wrfarra, 29 agra, 30 qurea, 31 way, 32 orarET,
33 qagtem, 34 gard, 35 maRorEaTTaraifaw | 36 ara, 37 genera, 33 erste, 39 Tare,
40 wea (arte ) 41 eH; 42 gay, 43 afr, 44 gee, 45 seat, 46 write, 47 ge,
48 get, 49 garg, 50 grag, 51 ag, 52 ge, 53 erpara, 54 aarfear, 55 garftat,
56 FRarfent, 57 wftenr, 58 faenfaa, 59 ofire, 60 qTaya; 61 was, 62 Unrat,
G3 eayT, 64 afta, 65 stsitat, 66 avufiger, 67 wee, 68 sated, (aqRe)
69 suaa, 70 woffa, 71 fn, 72 dtm, 73 sta, 740g, 75 wTETA, 76 wpa, 77 fee
78 warat, 79 ware, 80 amar, 81 wer, 82 mag, 83 ana, 84 tye, 85 way, 86 ang,
87 az, 88 Fare, 89 wy, 90 ey, 91 giftar, 92 ors, 93 wf

Frais trararearea® RWW Tare Nl Rrant, Sirerarey aTETe A
27: 0 Pexcireregdtrnasae aay svete tay ge PTE
10

=== PAGE 96 ===

676 - _ PATRONYMIC e§ 8 (Bk. IV. Cu 0. §. 127

124. The affix ge? comes after the words ‘Vi-
karna’ and ‘Kushita’, when they mean the descendants of
KaAsyapa. 5g

Thus Yau and aretada: = Teas: ; otherwise we have Wafer: and Sree
afar formed by IV. 1. 95.
STITUTE Aa, aH, TTR)
IY: u gueryTatea Tear ware, meahrarrr wy |
125. The affix ‘eq’ comes in the sense of a des-
cendant, after the word @ and the augment q& is added when
this affix is to be applied.
Thus %+ R= Yt TH+ Te (I. 1. 46) T+ TR= Bre (VIL 1. 2)
STVATM ATE WLM TaTA N eaTe-arg iar, CTE A
ahr: u neat rere wera eH yeaa AT, ara aT ETSTTT:

126. The affix ‘cx comes in the sense of a

descendant, after the words searet &c. and the substitute mre

takes the place of the final of these words before this affix.

In the case of those words in this list which end ina feminine affix,
the present stra teachcS merely the substituion of gq@, for they would have
taken the affix sq by IV. 1. 120, Butin the case of other words, the Sftra
teaches both the substitution of gae and the addition of wt

Thus qrat+sq= arnt we= Remi ‘son of Kalyani’ gam+
R= Prat oR= Gray Ut Similarly Ysa: w In these last two words, there
is Vyiddhi of both the initial vowel g and the second vowel e of 4. This is
done by the special rule VII. 3. 19. : .

1 graf, 2 rm, 3 pin, 4 anrat, 5 Hane, 6 wage (ape) 7 wet,
8 wdragi, 9 saat, 10 afrat, 11 maT, 12 qe

HATA A NRO Tarfar Nl HFeerar, ar (sR)
afar 0 querer area wera wae, Tea TT CSTE Tat orieUTy eat
sere: Sara Fe
127. The affix ‘za’ comes in the sense of @

descendant, after the word §eet, and 4% is optionally the
substitute of the final before this affix.

The word aeet means literally one who wanders (ef) from one
family (@=) to another, i. ¢. an unchaste woman. . This stra is made to teach
substitution only, for g#et would have taken wR by the general rule IV. 1.
120. Thus gpet+eg=FAeq+wH= Fees: or Hees: ‘son of an unchaste
woman,’ This word geet being a word denoting contempt, will take also the
affix t& by IV. 1.131. Thus @Rt 0

\

=== PAGE 97 ===

Bx. IV. Ch. I. § 131.) © PATRONYMIC WIS 8 677

araray Ore WRC NTT A azar, ew
gir: u cearar oraey Yes Tet waft oem w TERT THEN aiftrart w FR
AAT FTE:
128. The word aaa takes the affix @cq in form-
ing the patronymic.

Thus 1e&t ‘son of Chataka’.

Véart :—So also after the masculine word qzqu Thus @tzqq ‘son of
Chataka ’.

Vart :—1n forming a descendant denoting a female, there is luk-eli-
sion of the affix. Thus the female descendant of qeaq will be weer, the Tt
being added as belonging to Ajadi class IV. 1. 4.

aibarar HM LAM TaTher W APTA, FS A
qha: uw strarat sre ey Tera ate
129. The affix ‘e™’ comes in the sense of a des-
cendant after the word ‘tat &
Thus trar+@e= trae: wu Of the affix ‘dhrak’, the letterg is replaced
qa (VII. 1. 2), § causes Veiddhi (VII.'2,.118) and makes the udatta accent
fall on the final (IV. 1. 165). Thus the real affix is gat, but the ais elided by
_VI. 1. 66 and so the affix that is actually added is qt u
This word strat occurs in the SubhrAdi class IV. 1. 123, also, thus it
takes the affix ‘ dhak’ as well. Thus atqa: «
araptrara Wego naar nh ares, sérara (ater: ) &
ght: u trarar sree setararearatort wat wee Veet afew
130. The affix ‘are’, comes in the sense of a
descendant after the word ‘sitat,’ according to the opinion of
Northern Grammarians.

Thus are u_ It might be objected that the syrcw contains the letter wr
unnecessarily, for = would have served the purpose as well, because tira ends
in long wt already. The objection is valid in the case of ary, but the
very fact that Panini uses this affix seg, shows by implication, that there
are other words also which take this affix, and in whose case the affix
v@ would not suffice. Thus the words we and qe also take this affix, as
‘Bree, Ween The mention of the name of Northern Grammarians is for
the sake of showing respect only.

SATS ATW RRM TAT gare, aT (FE) A

=== PAGE 98 ===

678 woe GOTRA 3% a [ BK. IV. Cu. I. § 135

aft: 0 gar agar wider) endeito aghraree: ehtfegr: sera Pffers | yaar

are Ta Tera af

131. The affix ‘gx’ comes optionally, in the
sense of a descendant, after the feminine words denoting
mean objects.

The anuvgitti of ga is to be read in this sQtra, and not of wg, though
the latter immediately precedes it. The word yt means those who are
defective or wanting in any bodily limb or organ, or who are low in social
status and religious principles. This sdtra debars ¢% which would come in
the other alternative. Thus @79m@ ‘the son of an one eyed woman’, or qToRT,
qat: or gaa ‘son of a female-slave’.

frecrarsy neat oar a feaerg:, curt
ait: u frgsrquenaa TET Tee
132. The affix ‘ow’ comes in the sense of a des-
cendant, after the word ‘ fagq--aq’.

This debars sry Thus fagery + B= "Yaereta: ‘the son of the father’s

sister’. The & of the affix is replaced by fq a
afte Ste: 3E
aha un frgsrqereareaa cfs Tat Bret wafer
133. The final vowel of ‘ f&g-sqq’ is clided when
the affix ‘gx’, in the sense of a descendant, is added.

Thus fagerr + 7H = Yarra: yw This sitra indicates by jfidpaka that the

word fagera takes the affix ‘dhak’ also. .
ATT AGT WLAN Ga aTaaDe, & (wy, sh aa: ) Wt
he u frgegtaartes, Reagqaigs aongegy wat | opera eH ATT
134. So also, after the word ‘argev@’ the affix
‘gu’ is added, and the final is clided when ‘7%’ follows,
in forming patronymics.

The Satras I'V. 1. 132, 133 above apply to argerg also. As argerite:
or aTgeraa ‘the son of a mother’s sister’.

SSAA THN LAAN GaThet W A_TargeT:, THN
af: aguretrateiha: seferatsTa waren wate
135. The affix ‘ze’ comes in the sense of a des-
cendant, after the bases denoting quadrupeds.

This debars sry &c. Thus ameeg+ ey= arena: (IV. 4. 147, the =
being elided before %). So also Giaarga: and srewa: from fafeyatg and wy w

=== PAGE 99 ===

BK. IV. Cu. 1. § 140 J. GOTRA wey w 679

arenfrerar 1 eak a ahem afeanfter:, & (eR) Ol
aha: u gear ea: ceSaree Cryer AF | . .
136. The affix ‘gs comes, in the sense of a
descendant, after the words ‘afe’ &e.
This debars “wy and we &c. Thus mrfa:; qéqu The word qe
when it means ‘a cow’ will of course get the affix st by the last Satra. The
present s(tra applies when it does not mean a four-footed animal, but means

‘a woman who has one child only’. .
1 ofe, 2 of, 3 aft, 4 ef, 5 FxPs, 6 aff, 7 erwafta, 8 reg!
TT YTTg WUBIN TINA Ul Trs- aT, TAM
Rr: Crepe yCTePATTTa aera aT
137. The affix aa comes in the sense of the des-
cendant, after the words ‘awa’ and ‘ange. °
This debars sry and wey respectively. Thus waa: (IV. 4. 168) ‘a
person of Kshatriya class’. This is the special meaning of the word; it does
not mean ‘the son of a Raja.’ The word asa: will mean ‘the son of a King.’
So also szyra ‘son of the father-in-in-law. .
ATTA: W RRE
afer: Ure erat Tera TUT
138. The affix ‘gha’ comes, in the sense of a des-
cendant, after the word ‘ Kshattra.”
Thus wfva: ‘a Kshatriya.’ This is also a class name. The son of ww
will be a: The affix 9 here should not’be confounded with the technical
q which means the affixes acqand amg (I. 1. 22).

HTT: W LIS A
afar: u Ferrera, sufrafearehrarerne’ et: Tea Ta
139. The affix ‘kha’ comes, in the sense of a
descendant, after the Nominal-stem ‘ kula’ and a compound
word that ends in ‘ kula.’

In the next stra, it will be taught that the word @= when not preced-
ed by any other word, takes the affixes ‘yat’ and ‘dhakafi’ That indicates
by implication that the present sdtra applies to the simple word $4 and to the
words ending in also, Thus gf, wrrgata:, 2 Aragata: w

apirarraceat age Meo doar a aga. arraceat.
aa, THT A

=== PAGE 100 ===

80 . -  PATRONYMIC eau _ (BK. iV. Cx. 1. § 144

Shr uw aPrarrt giae wea eTETat, TATA ATT: afereret run te we
Seerqrocreaaceal ay vam cea ord ee: Vaal av cay

140. The affixes ‘aa’ and ‘east’ come optioually
after the word ‘kula,’ when it is not preceded by any other
word which gets the designation of pada (I. 4. 14).

The word sryiqz means when the word ‘kula’ is not the last member
of acompound. Thus ere: @eaw: By the use of the word ‘optionally, _
we get the affix q also. Thus eq: The word ee he has udatta on the first
syllable (VI. 1. 213).

The word qq has been defined in I. 4. 14. The word ag is not
a pada. Therefore #gxq will take these affixes. Thus "egea:, aigqraw: and
wggeit:
ASOT GH NWN TAP ll aEl-wera, AE, aH, o
fer n arorercearPreraae | Ger et
141. The affixes ‘as’ and asx’ come option-
ally after the word ‘ mahakula.’

Thus arerge:, arergtt: and aergeta: wu The last is formed by the
affix q of IV. 1. 139.
ZHSTS UWUVM VHA UW Hers, THN
aha: uw gegrawnqyea wx TEMA ANT |
142. The affix ‘zg’ comes optionally, in the sense
of a descendant, after the word ‘ dushkala.’
Thus tregaa: By the force of the word ‘optionally’ we get @ also.
Thus qogeta: 0 :
SqARS: NVM TATA eaG:, Bn
aft: U ergaengTe & : Tat ATS
143. The affix ‘chha’ comes in the sense-of the
descendant, after the word eq
This debars wy Thus erefta: ‘the sister’s son.’
aractes een sana ll ara, aa, Te
UU MTQTET ET AY TAA TT | THTTESH
144, The affix ‘vyat’ also comes, in the sense
of a descendant, after the word ‘arg’ 0 .
By the force of the word @ in the s(tra, we get the affix & as well.

=== PAGE 101 ===

Bx. IV. Cu. 1. § 147-) - PATRONYMIC @ 8 : 681

This debars srq uw Thus wraeq: or wrefte: ‘the brother’s son’. The q of org
regulates the accent, making it svarita.
PITTA Nes A TTA Ml eae, Ter (ara?) &
we u vargeary surrey wate geTaeT Pe: Sa Te
145. The affix ‘vyan’ comes after the word ‘gry’
when the sense is that of ‘an enemy’ - :
The word a@qa means ‘enemy’. The sense of descendant is not
connoted by this affix. The difference between eqq and erg is in accent (VI.
1.185 and VI. 1. 197) Thus qreaat wtasae “by the sinful cnemy™. wigee:
aes: “the enemy is a thorn”.
Racal yTTH lt WBE M matte u acter, SEM
aft: n tadteerniedrssey oy vera wafer
146. The affix ‘s%’" comes, in the sense of a des-
cendant, after the words tat &c.
This of course debars we &c. Thus teedt+se=tafta: ‘the son of
Revati’. So also wpaqtfere: (VII. 3. 50)

Ltet, 2eraaet, 3 afr, 4 eres, 5 yaeey, 6 yay, 7 yaTTe,
8 exter, 9 qoecrg, 10 gerRerey, 11 (Gee) 12 aracaTe,
arafSrat: Gear oT TU VON Tana aera: Hea, o1, wt (SH) W
qh ware Genrafe ine geht aint ar et aefrahe cera ow TER wee;
TTS RT, FOG THAT | Ree are carer |e
147. And when contempt is to be expressed, the
affix of comes, in the sense of a descendant, after a feminine
word denoting a Gotra-descendant.

By the force of the word qin the sftrawe get the affix smalso,
When one’s father is not known, and he is called by a name derived from his
mother, it casts a slur upon his legitimacy ; hence such an epithet is a geator
*a defamatory or contemptuons epithet’. Thus «mf is a female gotra-descen-
+ dant. Her son will be called apit:, as wmf: sea: t So alsomifra: Similarly
the son of sqarerit will be srgarat: and sargarafrar &
This affix being added to a Gotra word has the force of a Yuvan affix,
Why do we say ‘a Gotra descendant’, Observe anft®ar set: (formed
by wm IV. 1.120). Why do we say ‘female descendant? Observe aan
sHtea: «Why do we say ‘when contempt is meant’? Observe myttat arora:
which is to be explained as ora aTteq FATT TT rw UO aTaPTErzeTeRTUUTS TAT
aa safer great uw