=== PAGE 1 ===

. THE |
SIVA-PURANA

PART IV

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS
PRIVATE LIMITED @ DELHI

=== PAGE 2 ===

First Edition: Detht, 1950
Reprint: Delhi, 1974, 1978, 1983, 1988, 1992, 1995, 1998, 2002

Also available at

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS

41 U.A Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110007
8 Mahalaxm: Chamber, 22 Bhulabha:r Desa: Road, Mumba: 400 026
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004
236, 9th Main TIT Block, ayanagar, Bangalore 560 O11
Sanas Plaza, 1302 Baji Rao Road, Pune 411 002
8 Camac Street, Kolkata 700 017
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001

UNESCO COLLECTION OF REPRESENTATIVE WORKS—Indian Series.
This book has been accepted in the Indian Translation Senes of the UNESCO
Collecuon of Representative Works, jorntly sponsored by the United
Nations Educational, Snentific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) and the Government of India

Pnated in India
BY JAINFINDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS,
A-45 NARAINA, PHASE-I, NEW DELHI 110 028
AND PUBLISHED BY NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED,
BUNGALOW ROAD, DELHI 110 007

=== PAGE 3 ===

CONTENTS

UMASAMHITA
29. Primeval creation
30. Description of creation
31. ” ”
32. Family of Kasyapa
33. Description of creation
34. Manvantaras
35. Description of Vaivasvata
36. Nine sons and the race of Manu
37. Race of Manu
38. Satyavrata to Sagara
39. Kings of the solar race
40. Power of the manes
41. Seven hunters, their attainment
42. Power of the Pitrs
43. Mode of worshipping Vyasa
44. Birth of Vyasa
45. Incarnation of Mahakalika
46. Incarnation of Mahalaksmi
47. Dhimraksa, Canda, Munda and Raktabija
killed
48. Manifestation of Sarasvati
49. Manifestation of Uma
50. Incarnation of Sataksi
51. Review of holy rites
KAILASASAMHITA
1. Discussion among Vyasa, Saunaka and others
2. Dialogue between the God and the Goddess
3. Way of Sannyasa
4. Daily conduct of a Sannyasin
5. Mystic diagram of the ascetic
6. Nyasa in the path of renunciation

1573
1575
1580
1583
1587
1589
1594
1597
1602
1607
1612
1615
1619
1624
1626
1627
1638
1645

1650
1655
1660
1663
1667

1674
1678
1680
1686
1689
1692

=== PAGE 4 ===

22.

23.

Worship of Siva

Mental worship of Siva

Mode of interpreting the Pranava

Siita’s instructions

Brahma Vamadeva

Procedure of Sannyasa

Procedure of Renunciation

Pranava in the form of Siva

Idol of Siva for worship

Siva’s Principle

Non-dualistic nature of Siva

Procedure of initiating a disciple

Rules of Yogapatta

Rules for hair-cutting and ablution

The first ten days rite on the death of an
ascetic

Rites on the eleventh day on the death of an
ascetic

Twelfth day rites for Yatis

VAYAVIYASAMHITA, SECTION I

CENOUVPENS

Origin of the sacred lore
Problem of the sages
Naimisa episode
Advent of Vayu
Principles of Siva cult

” ”
Glory of Time
Span of life of the Trinity
Creation and sustenance
Description of Creation

” ”

” »
Creation of Brahm and Visnu
Manifestation of Rudras
Song of Prayer addressed to Siva and Siva
Manifestation of divine Sakti
Narrative of Creation

1697
1703
1706
1710
1713
1718
1725
1731
1734
1738
1744
1749
1752
1757

1760

1766
1769

1774
1778
1781
1787
1788
1794
1799
1802
1804
186
1810
1812
1817
1821
1822
1825
1827

=== PAGE 5 ===

18. Abandonment of the body by Sati

19, Origin of Virabhadra

20. Destruction of Daksa’s sacrifice

21. Punishment of the Gods

22. Destruction of Daksa’s sacrifice

23. Siva’s Fury

24. Siva’s sports on the Mandara mountain
25. Goddess attains fair complexion

26. Attainment of higher status by the tiger
27. Gauri’s embellishment

28. Glory of Bhasma

29. Analysis of Vag-Artha

30. Principle of Siva

31. Instruction in perfect wisdom

32. Description of excellent practice

33. Rules Governing Pagupativrata

34. Penance of Upamanyu

35. Story of Upamanyu

VAYAVIYASAMHITA, SECTION II

Acquisition of sons by Srikrsna
Glory of lord Siva
Upamanyu’s advice to Srikrgna
Magnificence of Gauri and Siva
Knowledge of Pasupati principle
Principle of Siva

” ”
Incarnations of Vyasa
9. Siva Yogacarya
10. Devotion to Siva
11. Saivite knowledge
12. Glory of the mantra of Siva
13. ” ”
14, ” ”
15. Greatness of the preceptor
16. Consecration of the disciple
17. Rules of Saivite initiation
18. Purification of the six paths

ONAAr ON =

1831
1836
1841
1844
1847
1852
1857
1862
1865
1868
1871
1872
1875
1879
1887
18)1
1899
1904

1910
1912
1916
1919
1926
1929
1932
1935
1938
1940
1946
1951
1954
1959
1965
1971
1977
1980

=== PAGE 6 ===

Consecration of the aspirant and the greatness

of the Mantra
Special consecration
Nitya and Naimittika rites

Compulsory and optional Saiva rites

Rules of worship
Ritual of lord Siva
Worship of Siva

Worship of Siva with the ancillary rites

Rite of sacrifice
Compulsory and optional rites
Kamya rites

Hymn to lord Siva

Rites for prosperity

Rites for bliss hereafter

Delusion of Visnu and Brahma
” »

Installation of Siva

Goal of Yoga

Obstacles in the path of Yoga

Saivite Yoga

. Journey of the Naimisa sages

Instructions of Vyasa
INDEX

1985
1988
1991
1995
1999
2001
2007
2013
2014
2021
2024
2027
2034
2047
2054
2056
2059
2065
2070
2075
2081
2086
2089
2095

=== PAGE 7 ===

UMASAMHITA
CHAPTER TWENTYNINE
( The primeval creation)

Saunaka said:—

I. The great narrative of the conversation of Sanatkumara
and Vyasa has been heard by me as narrated by you. It has
bestowed the knowledge of truth.

2. NowI wish to hear about the creation of Brahma,
the manner of its origin and the way in which you heard it
from Vyasa.

Sita said :—

3. O sage, listen to the divine story that destroys all sins;
the variegated story that is being described by me; the story
full of meaning and well known details.

4. He who teaches or hears this story repeatedly sustains
his family and is honoured in the world of heaven.

5-6. Purusa is eternal and he is of the nature of Sat and
Asat as Pradhana and Purusa. The creator of the worlds created
Pradhana after becoming Purusa. He created the Creator of
all living beings devoted to Narayana. O great sage,
understand him to be Brahma of immeasurable strength and
prowess.

7. O leading sage, obeisance to that Self-born being from
whom the Kalpas and all beings originate.

8. After bowing to that Purusa, lord Hiranyagarbha,
I shall explain the excellent mode of creation again.

9. Brahma is the creator; Visnu is the protector and
Siva is the annihilator. Even when the time passes there is no
other cause of that creation.

10, Being self-born himself the lord, desirous of
creating various subjects, created only the waters first. He then
instilled virility into them.!

11. The waters are called Nara (belonging to Nara).

1. Manu 1, 8,

=== PAGE 8 ===

1574 Sivapurdna

The waters are the progenies of Nara. Since waters had been
his abode he is called Narayana.?

12. The Egg floating in the water assumed golden
colour. Brahma himself famous as the self-born was born
there?

13. After staying there for a year, lord Hiranyagarbha,
dichotomised that egg and created heaven and earth.‘

14. Fourteen worlds were created including those
above and below. With the intervening space between those
two pieces the lord created the ether.®

15. He created the earth floating in the waters and
the ten quarters in the firmament. Then he created the mind,
the speech, love and anger and the sexual delight.

16. The excessively brilliant creator created seven
mental sons, the sages, Marici, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya,
Pulaha, Kratu and Vasistha.®

17. They have been decisively termed the seven
Brahms in the Puranas. Brahm again created the Rudras
arising from anger.

18. He created the sage SanatkumAra too, the eldest
of all. They are thus seven born. The Rudras were born
afterwards.

19. Sanatkumara stays with controlled brilliance. From
them seven great families originated, all being divine and
worshipped by the celestial sages.

20. Endowed with sacred rites they were born along
with the other Sages. The lightning, the thunderbolt, the
red clouds and the rainbow were created.

21. He created water at the outset. He created the
Tain-bearing cloud. He created the Rks, the Yajus and
the Samans for facilitating Yajfias.?

22. With these he worshipped the gods worthy of being
adored. This is what we had heard. He created the gods

+ Ibid. 1. 10.

Ibid 1.9.

Ibid. 1.19 14,

+ Ibid. 1. 13-14.

Manu adds Pracetas, Bhrgu and Narada Ibid. 1. 35.
» Manu. 33,

WAG FOOD

=== PAGE 9 ===

Umdsarmhita 1575

from his mouth, the manes from the chest, men through
impregnation and the Asuras from his loins.

23. Living beings high and low were born of his
limbs as the patriarch Apava generated the creation of the
aquatic beings.

24. When the beings created did not increase he dicho-

tomised his body and became man and woman.®

25 With his greatness hc persuaded the universe and
created the people. Visnu created the Virat (the cosmic being).
Thus the Purusa Vira, was created.®

26. Know that he was another Manu that began the
age. That lord, Purusa, created all the subjects out of Vairaja.

27. The creations of Visnu were not born of womb.
They were long-lived, famous, blessed and possessed of
progeny.

28. Oexcellent sage, thus the premeval creation has
been nairated to you on knowing which one attains his
cherished goal.

CHAPTER THIRTY
(Description of Creation)

Sita said:—

1. When the subjects were created the patriarch
Apava as Purusa acquired as his wife Sataripaé who was not
born of womb.!°

2. With his greatness Apava enveloped the heaven and
stood virtuously. He the noble soul became Sataripa thus.

3. She performed a penance for a hundred years and
attained the Purusa of illumined penance as her husband.

4. ‘The Purusa who was born is called Svayambhuva
Manu. His age is said to be seventyone Yugas.

8. Ibid. 1. 32; MP. 3. 31.

g. Manu tr. 32-

10. On the origin of Satariipa see LIM. under Satariipa and Viraj
PP. 286, 359. For the mystic interpretation of the same see MP-—A study
P.

- 47+

=== PAGE 10 ===

1576 Sivapurdna

5. The intelligent Satarapa bore the Vairaja Purusa
two sons Priyavrata and Uttanapada of heroic prowess.

6. The blessed lady Kamya, wife of the patriarch
Kardama, gave birth to three sons Samrat, Saksi, and
Avitprabhu.

7. Lord Uttanapada begot sons equal to Indra. He
begot another son Dhruva of divine nature who had the
excellent lustre and the inner bliss.

8. Dharma’s daughter, the virtuously born beautiful
woman named Suniti was the mother of Dhruva.

9. Even asachild Dhruva performed penance for three
thousand divine years wishing for an imperishable status.

10. Lord Brahma, being delighted gave him a stable
position as his own, facing the seven sages.

11-12. Two sons, Pusti and Dhanya were born of
Dhruva. Pusti begot of Samutthd five pious sons viz Ripu,
Ripufijaya, Vipra, Vrkala and Vrsatejas. The queen of Ripu
gave birth to Caksusa Manu.

13-16. Caksusa Manu begot Varuna of Puskarini.
O excellent sage, from Manu of great prowess, in Nadala the
daughter of the patriarch Vaisyajanma (?) were born ten
sons viz Puru, Masa, Satadyumna, Tapasvin, Satyavit, Kavi,
Agnistoma, Atiratra, Atimanyu and Suyagsas. To Puru,
Agneyi bore six sons of great lustre viz Anga, Sumanas, Khyati,
Srti, Angiras and Gaya. Sunitha, wife of Anga, bore him a
son Vena.

17. Due to the misbehaviour of Vena the pious sagcs
became very furious and killed him by very hunkara."!

18. Sdrasvata Sages were requested by Sunitha for the
birth of a son. They then churned and pressed his right
hand.

19, When the hand of Vena was churned Prthu was
born. He had a bow and a coat of mail even as he was born
and was equal to the sun in brilliance.

20. He was indeed an incarnation of Visnu, for protec-
ting the subjects, for the maintenance of virtue and for
punishing the wicked.

11. Manu 7. 41.

=== PAGE 11 ===

Umdasarhhita 1577

21. Prthu, son of Vena, the ancestor of all Kesatriyas
protected the earth. He was the first lord of Earth, the first
among those anointed in the Rajasiya sacrifice.

22. The two efficient persons Sita and Magadha were
born of him. O great Sage, by him the earth in the form of
cow was milked for the common welfare.

23. Performing a hundred sacrifices he as a king be-
come the provider of livelihood to all the gods, sages and
Raksasas and to men in particular.

24. Two virtuous princes, Vivitasva and Haryaksa
were born to Prthu. They were great heroes who had become
very famous.

25. Sikhandini gave birth to a son Pracinabarhis.
While he roamed on the earth Kusga_ grasses had their tips
towards the East.

26. The daughter of the lord of the Ocean was duly
married by him. The great lord, shone all the more when
he had a wife.

27. Ten sons were born to Pracinabarhis the great
sacrificer, of his wife Samudratanaya.

28. They were Pracetas by name. They had mastered
the science of archery. Together they practised virtue and
performed penance.

29. They lay sunk in the waters of the ocean for ten
thousand years, repeating the Japa of Rudragita and medita-
ting on Siva.

30. While they were performing penance trees grew on
the earth. When the Earth stood unprotectea there was a
great destruction of subjects.

31. O great king, after attaining boons when they
returned they saw the trees. They were furious and wanted
to burn them by the power of penance.

32. The Pracetasas created fire and wind from their
mouths. The wind uprooted the trees and the fire burnt
them.

33. On seeing the destruction of trees and observing
that only a few trees were left, the valorous king Soma
approached them and said.

=== PAGE 12 ===

1578 Sivapuraga

Soma said :—

34. O Pracinabarhigsas, O kings, subdue your anger. This
daughter of the trees, Anubhita, is a woman of fair com-
plexion.

35. O fortunate ones, she was conceived by me in my
womb as I knew the future. Let her be your wife and make
the race of the moon flourish.

36. The patriarch Daksa will be born of her. He, the
ancient son of Brahma, will become a creator of great
brilliance.

37. With half your brilliance, and with half my brilli-
ance this king full of Brahma’s brilliance will make the sub-
jects flourish.

38. Then at the instance of Soma the Pracetasas
lovingly took the fair-complexioned lady, daughter of
trees, as their wife.

39. To her, through them was born the patriarch
Daksa. O sage, that boy of great brilliance was born of the
moon’s parts as well. .

40. After creating mentally the mobile and immobile
beings, the bipeds and the quadrupeds, Daksa began creation
though copulatory process.

41. In accordance with the Sastric injunctions, he
virtuously married the daughter of Virana the partriarch, the
chaste lady Virani.

42. He begot of her ten thousand sons Haryagvas. At
the instance of Narada they became detached from the
world.

43. On hearing of it Daksa again begot of her a
thousand sons Subalaévas.

44. Thanks to the instructions of the same sage they
too followed the footsteps of their brothers. Unattached
and following the path of mendicants they never returned to
their parents.

45. On hearing of it he became very furious and cursed
the sage thus—Q wretch, fond of quarrels, you will never stay
permanently anywhere.!?

12, Repeated. See Ch. 31. Verses 14-15.

=== PAGE 13 ===

Umdsathhita 1579

46. Consoled by Brahma, O great sage, he afterwards
created women endowed with qualities and in the form of
great fames.1!9

47-48. He gave ten daughters to Dharma and _ thir-
teen to Kafyapa, two to Brahmaputra and_ two to Angiras
and two to the learned sage Krsasva. O excellent sage, the
remaining twentyseven daughters, named after the constella-
tions lord Daksa gave to Soma.'4

49. Asuras and others were born of the daughters of
Daksa and had become famous. The universe was filled
with them.

50. O great brahmin, the subjects thereafter were born
of sexual union. The creation prior to this was through
mental concepts, visualisation and touch.

Saunaka said: —

51. Formerly it was said by you that Daksa was born
of the thumb of Brahma. How then did he of great penance
become the son of Pracetasa again ?

52. O Sita, it behoves you to clear this doubt of
mine. This is also surprising how he attained the status of
of the father-in-law of Soma.

Sita said:—

53. Birth and destruction happen everyday among the
mortals, O sage, in every Kalpa these, Daksa and others are
born again.

54. He who knows this mode of creation of Daksa of
the mobile and immobile beings becomes endowed with pro-
geny and longevity. After death he is honoured in the
heavenly region.

1g. The first half of this verse is repeated. See Chs. 31. 15.
14. The Verses 47, 48 are repeated. See Ch. 31. Verses 17, 18.

=== PAGE 14 ===

1580 Sivapurdna
CHAPTER THIRTYONE
(Description of the Creation)

Saunaka said:—

1. O son of Sita, tell me quickly about the details
of the creation of the gods, Danavas, Gandharvas, serpents
and Raksasas. .

Sita said:—

2. When the creation did not multiply, the patriarch
asked the daughter of Virana, endowed with penance, for
the purpose of creation

3. He created different people by the process of
copulation. O intelligent one, listen to them. I shall ex-
plain in brief.

4. Uniting with her, the powerful patriarch begot of
Virini five thousand sons.

5-6. Narada, son of Brahma, had heard at the Satra
that the creation can take place only through Kafyapa in
the daughters of Daksa. So, on seeing the created sons, the
sage Narada addressed them thus.

7. “You do not know any direction in the world.
Without knowing that what can you create ? You are very
childish. Proceed only after knowing the world.”

8. Thus addressed by him they all proceeded to
know the direction by means of their power. Without being
able to reach their end they never returned to their father’s
house.

9. On knowing that he created five hundred sons,
Narada, the visualiser of all, spoke to them also.

Narada said:—

10. How can you create without knowing the extent
of the world ? All of you are childish. What creation do
you propose to make ?

Sata said:—
11. On hearing his words, Subalaévas, sons of Daksa,

=== PAGE 15 ===

Umésamhita 1581

as did the Haryasvas formerly, started in quest of all
directions.

12. After reaching Puskara and attaining despair due
to the endlessness of the world they do not return even now
at the rivers from the ocean.

13. Ever since, O sage, if a brother goes in quest of
a brother he perishes. That should not be done by any
learned man.

14. Realising that his sons had perished, the patriarch
Daksa cursed the noble sou) Narada in anger.

15. “O wretch, fond of quarrels, you will never stay
anywhere permanently. Quarrel will always occur among
the people where you happen to be present.”

16. We have heard that Daksa the patriarch was
consoled by Brahma afterwards and that he begot of Virini
sixty daughters.1>

17. He gave ten of them to Dharma ; thirteen to
KaSyapa; twentyseven to the moon and four to Aristanemi.

18. Two to the son of Brahma, two to Angiras and
two to the learned KréaSva. Now listen to their names.

19-20. O sage, the wives of Dharma are Arundhati,
Vasu, Yami, Lamba, Bhanu, Marutvati, Sankalpa, Muhirta,
Sadhya and Visva. Now listen to their children. ViSsve-
devas are the sons of Visva, and Sadhya gave birth to
Sadh yas,

21. Marutvats were born of Marutvati, Vasus were born
of Vasu; the suns were born of Bhanu and the Muhirtajas
were born of Muhiarta.

22. Ghosa was born of Lamba; Nagavithi was born
of Yami and Prthivivisama was born of Arundhati.

23. Sankalpa of the nature of Truth was born of
Sankalpa. Aya and others were born of Vasu. They are
eight. O Saunaka, listen to them. °

15. According to the present text Daksa had sixty daughters. Of
these he gave 10 to Dharma, 13 to Kasyapa, 27 to Soma, 4 to Aristane-
min 2 to Brahmaputra, 2 to Angiras and 2 KySdsva. But the assignment
is not uniform in all the Puranas. For instance MP (5. 13-14) assigns
15 to Kasyapa instead of 13 and omits 2 of Brahmaputra to complete the
given number.

The accomt is found also in RS. Srsti. Ch. 16.

=== PAGE 16 ===

1582 Sivapurana

24. Aya, Dhruva, Soma, Dhara, Anila, Anala,
Pratydsa and Prabhisa are the eight Vasus by name.

25. Aya’s sons are Vaitanda, Srama, Santa and Muni.
Dhruva’s son was lord Kala influencing the worlds.

26. Soma’s son was lord Varcas imparting lustre to
others. Dhara’s sons were Dravina and Hutahavyavaha.

27-28. Manohara’s sons were Sasira, Prana and
Ramana. Anila’s wife was Siva whose sons were Purojava
and Avijnatagati. Anila had only two sons. Kumara was
the son of Agni in the grove of Sara grass surrounded by
glory.

29. His sons were Sakha, Visakha and Naigameya.
The son of Krttikas was called Karttikeya.'6

30. Pratyiisa’s son was Devala a sage. Devala had
two sons who too had children and who were intelligent.

31-32. Brhaspati’s sister was a woman of excellence,
well-versed in Yoga and she traversed the entire world
maintaining celibacy. She became the wife ot Prabhasa the
eighth of Vasus. O fortunate one, Visvakarman the patriarch
was born of him.}7

33. He was the creator of thousands of skilled arts.
He is the architect of the gods. He was maker of all sorts
of ornaments. He was the foremost among artisans and
craftsmen.

34. He built the aerial chariots of all gods. He is a
great Atman whose craft is emulated and made use of by men
too.

35-36. According to another version his wife Saripa
gave birth to crores of Rudras such as Raivata, Aja, Bhava,
Bhima, Vama, Ugra, Vrsakapi, Ajaikapad, Ahirbudhnya,
Bahuripa, Mahat etc. Eleven of them are important. O
sage, listen to their names.

16. Kumara Karttikeya is one of the four brothers, the other
three being Sakha, Visakha and Naigameya. He is the son of six Krttika
mothers and therefore named Karttikeya and Sapmatura (MP.527). The
legend is found in all the Saiva Puranas. Prof. Agrawal gives a mystical

interpretation of the episode. MP—A study PP. 68-71.

17. The patriarch Vifvakarma, son of Vasu Prabhasa, was the
craftsman of the gods and entrusted with the work of building chariots,
ornaments, palaces ctc. MP 5. 27-28, See P. 389 note 295.

=== PAGE 17 ===

Umasarhita 1583

37-38. These eleven are the Rudras, lords of the three
worlds viz:—Ajaikapad, Ahirbudhnya, Tvastr, the powerful
Rudrahara of many forms, Tryambaka, Aparajita, Vrsakapi,
Sambbu, Kapardin and Raivata.!8

39. Thus a hundred Rudras of immense prowess have
been mentioned to you. Now listen to the names of
Kafyapa’s wives, O excellent sage.

CHAPTER THIRTYTWO

( The family of Kasyapa)

Sita said :—

1-2. O brahmin, they are Aditi, Surasa, Aristela, Danu,
Surabhi, Vinata, Ila, Tamra, Krodhavasa, Kadru and Muni.
Now listen to the names of their sons. In the previous
excellent Manvantara twelve excellent gods were born.

3-6. They are Tusitas. During the intervening period
of the Vaivasvata and Caksusa Manvantaras they consulted
one another for the welfare of the worlds. After meeting
together they spoke—‘We will enter Aditi and be born.
This will happen for the welfare of the gods.” After con-
ferring they were born of Aditi daughter of Daksa and
Kasyapa son of Marici. Visnu and Indra were born again.

7-9. They along with Aryaman, Dhatr, Tvastr,
Pisan, Vivasvat, Savitr, Mitravaruna, Arhéa, Bhaga and
Atitejas are the twelve Adityas. Those who were born before as
Tusitas were born again as the twelve Adityas in the Caksusa
Manvantara, O Saunaka thus the names of Aditi’s sons
have been mentioned to yau. ,

18. Sivapurana proposes to recount the names of cleven Rudras
but actually mentions twelve names. As a matter of fact Tvasti and
Bahurupa are identical names. Compare MP (5. 29-30) where Tvasia
is replaced by its corresponding name Bahuripa.

In regard to the uames of the eleven Rudras the Purdias are not
unanimous,

=== PAGE 18 ===

1584 Sivapuréga

10. Diptis of immeasurable splendour became the
children of the twentyseven women of sacred rites and the
wives of Soma.

11-12. The children of Aristanemi’s wives were sixteen
in number. “O celestial sage, the learned Kréaéva had
many sons. Four of them are known as Devapraharana.
O sage, in his wife Arcis, DhimrakeSa too was born.

13. Two wives were Svadha and Sati of whom Svadha
was the elder and Sati the younger. Svadha gave birth
to the Pitrs and Sati to the Atharvangirasaveda.

14, At the end of a thousand Yugas these will be born
again. All the groups of the gods are thirtythree.

15. Just as the sun rises and sets every day so also the
groups of gods are born in every Yuga.

16. We have heard that Hiranyakasipu and Hiranydksa
were born as the sons of Diti and Kasyapa.

17. Simhika their daughter Decame the wife of Vipra-
citti. The four sons of HiranyakaSipu were famous for their
strength and prowess.

18. They are Anuhrada, MHrada, Samhrada and
Prahlada. The youngest Prahlada wa; a devotee of Visnu.

19. Piloman and Mahisa were the sons of Anuhrada
born of Siirya. Hrada’s wife Dhamani gave birth to Vatapi
and Ilvala.

20. Sarnhrada’s wife Krti gave birth to Paficajana.
Virocana was the son of Prahlada. Bali was born of his queen
Devi.

21-22. O great sage, Bali begot hundred sons of his
wife Agana. He was a great devotee of Siva. He engaged
himself in the activities of devotion to Siva. He was chari-
tably inclined and liberal-minded. He attained meritorious
fame and austerity. His son Bana was foremost among the
devotees of Siva. By propititing Siva he attained the leader-
ship of Ganas.

23. The story of Bana has already been heard by you.
In the battle Krsna was delighted with him.

24-25 Hiranyaksa’s five sons were strong and learned.
They were Kukura, Sakuni, Bhita Santapana, Mahanada
and Kalanabha. Thus the sons of Diti have been mentioned.
O sage, now listen to the names of the sons of Da

=== PAGE 19 ===

Umdsarhhita 1585

26-28. Danu’s sons were hundred in number and were
of severe exploits. Ayomukha, Sambara, Kapola, Vamana,
Vaisvanara, Puloman, Vidravana, Mahasira, Svarbhanu,
Vrsaparvan and the powerful Vipracitti—these were the sons of
Danu begot by Kagyapa. O sage, now listen to the names of
their sons. O sinless one, incidentally I shall mention a few
of them.

29-30. Prabha was the daughter of Svarbhanu. Saci
was the daughter of Puloman. So also Upadanavi, Hayasira
and Sarmistha were daughters of Vrsaparvan. Puloma and
Pulomika were the daughters of Vaisvanara. They were
the wives of KaSyapa son of Marici and had many heroic
sons.

31. Kagyapa, son of Marici, endowed with great penance,
begot of them sixty thousand sons delighting the Danavas.

32. Kalakhajijas, the powerful sons of Puloma, lived in
Hiranyapura.!® They could not be killed either by the Danavas
or by the gods.

33. Vipracitti’s sons, born of Sirnhika, were later killed
by Arjuna by the grace of Brahma.

34. Due to the intermixture of Daityas and Danavas
these sons became valorous and famous as Saimhikeyas. They
are thirteen in number.

35-36. They were the very powerful Rahu and Salya,
Bala, Mahabala, Vatadpi, Namuci, Ilvala, Svasrpa, Ajika,
Naraka, Kalanabha, Saramana and Sarakalpa. These in-
creased their races.

37. Many sons and grandsons were born of them increas-
ing the race of Danu. Being innumerable they are not
mentioned in detail.

38. In the family of Sambhrada the Daiteyas
Nivatakavacas and Maruts were born and they were purified
by penance. .

39-40. Sanmukha and others are glorified as the sons of
Tamra. Kaki, Syeni, Bhasi, Sugrivi, Suki, Grdhrika, Aévi, and

19. This city of the Paulomas and Kalakhafijas (or Kalakeyas)
as mentioned in the Mahabharata (Vana P, CLXXIII. 13) and the
Kathasaritsigara (XLV. 135) stood on the sea-route leading to Patala.
Its exact locus remains still unidentified.

=== PAGE 20 ===

1586 Sioapurdna

Uliki were the daughters of Tamra. Kaki gave birth to
crows and Uliaki to owls.

41. Syeni gave birth to vulturcs, Bhasi to Bhasas
Grdhri to Grdhrakas. Suki gave birth to parrots and Sugrivi
to auspicious birds.

42. Tamra the beloved of Kasyapa gave birth to horses,
camels and donkeys. Thus the family of Tamra has been
described to you.

43. Vinata had two sons Aruna and Garuda. The latter
was the most excellent among birds. He was terrible by virtue
of his activities,

44-47. Surasa gave birth to a thousand serpents of
immeasurable power. They had many hoods. They were
powerful enough to traverse the sky, the important among
them were the kings Scsa, Vasuki and Taksaka, Airavata,
Mahapadma, Kambala and Aévatara. The sons of Aila were
Padma, Karkotaka, Dhanafijaya, Mahanila, Mahakarna,
Dhrtarastra, Balahaka, Kuhara, Puspadanta, Durmukha,
Sumukha, Khararoman, Kharapani and many others.

48. Krodhavasa gave birth to many who, were the
fanged animals and birds both of land and water. Vara’s
sons were animals.

49. Andyusa’s sons were fifty. They were very strong.
The chief amongst them were Bala, Vrtta, Viksara and
Brhan.

50-51. Surabhi gave birth to rabbits and buffaloes;
Ila to trees, creepers, spreading vines and all kinds of grass ;
Khaéa gave birth to Yaksa and Raksasas, Muni gave birth to
the celestial damscls. Arist gave birth to serpents more ex-
cellent than human beings in their power.

52. O great sages, thus the descendants of Kasyapa
have been explained to you. They had hundreds of sons and
grandsons.

=== PAGE 21 ===

Omasamhita 1587
CHAPTER THIRTYTHREE

(Description of the creation)

Sita said:—

1-5. Such is the creation as mentioned in the Man-
vantara, Svarocisa, O dear. Now I shall describe the creation
as evolved by Brahman while offering oblations in the ela-
borate Varuna sacrifice in the great Vaivasvata Manvantara.
All the Brahmarsis born in the beginning, Pitimaha made
his mental sons. When a great fight ensued between the
gods and the Danavas, Diti lost all her sons. She approached
Kaégyapa and propitiated him. The delighted KaSyapa asked
her to choose a boon as she pleased. She chose the boon
that she be favoured with a son of immeasurable power
capable of slaying Indra.

6. He granted her the boon of her choice. The sage
of great penance advised her celibacy and other restraints for
a hundred years.

7. The pious fair-comlcxioned lady conceived. She
began to observe celibacy and other restraints.

8. After impregnating Diti, Kasyapa of noble sacred
rites went away satisfied for the performance of penance.

9. Indra waited for finding out a weak point in her.
He found one such when the period of hundred years was
short by a year.

10. Due to the gravity of the event destined to
happen, once Diti did not wash her feet. She went to sleep
with head hanging down.

1]. In the meantime Indra entered her belly with the
thunderbolt. He cut off the foetus into seven pieces.

12. While being split into seven the foetus began to
cry in seven different tones. Indra told the foetus “Do not
cry, Do not cry” repeatedly. He cut them again but they did
not die.

13. O sage, being felled down they told him with

20. For full details of the legend see MP. Ch. 7.

Maruts are so called that when Indra split the foetus of Diti they
cried and did not stop. Then Indra ordered them not to weep, henée
they became known as Maruts.

=== PAGE 22 ===

1588 Stvapurana

palms joined in reverence. “O Indra, why do you wish to
kill us? We are your brothers, the Maruts.”

14. © brahmin sage, at the will of Siva, they eschewed
their Daitya nature. They were accepted by Indra with due
fraternity.

15. In the name of Maruts they became gods of great
prowess. Thus traversing the sky the fortynine Maruts be-
came assistants of Indra.

16. When they flourished, Visnu the patriarch, offered
them kingdoms beginning with Prthu. Listen to that.

17. Arista was the heroic person. Krsna the patriarch
was ever victorious. Parjanya was the presiding deity of
clouds. This entire universe belongs to him.

18. O great sage, I have explained the creation of
living beings to you. Listen to the division of kingdoms. I
shall explain that duly now.

19. After crowning Prthu the son of Vena in the
emperorship, Brahma began to assign the kingdoms in due
order.

20. He crowned Soma in the kingdom of birds,
creepers, stars, planets, sacrifices and austerities.

21. He crowned Varuna in the kingdom of waters ;
Vaisravana as the lord of kings ; Visnu as the lord of
Aditvas and Pavaka as the lord of Vasus.

22. He crowned Daksa as the lord of patriarchs,
Indra as the lord of Maruts, and Prahlada of great strength
as the lord of Daityas and Danavas.

23. He crowned Vaivasvata Yama in the kingdom of
Pitrs, Matrs, Vratas, Mantras and cows.

24. He crowned the trident-bearing Siva, in the king-
dom of Yaksas, Raksasas, kings, goblins and ghosts.

25. He crowned Himavat as the lord of mountains,
the ocean of rivers, the tiger of deer and Bull as the-lord
of cows.

26. He crowned the banyan tree in the kingdom of
plants and trees. Thus the kingdom was assigned every-
where by the lord of subjects.

27. The lord of the universe, the soul of all, established
the son of patriarch Vairaja in the kingdom in the east.

=== PAGE 23 ===

Umasamhita 1589

28. Similarly, O great king, he established Sudhanvan,
son of Kardama, the patriarch, in the kingdom in the south.

29. The lord directed and assigned the unfailing noble-
minded son of Rajas, Ketumat as the king in the kingdom
in the west.

30. He crowned the indefatigable son of Parjanya the
patriarch, Hiranyaroman, in the kingdom in the north.

31 O Saunaka, the details of Prthu the son of Vena
have been narrated to you. This base is glorified as the
most ancient spot of great prosperity.

CHAPTER THIRTYFOUR
(The enumeration of Manvantaras)

Saunaka said:—
1. Please describe in detail] all the Manvantaras.
I wish to hear of all the Manus too.

Sita said:—

2-3. O great sage, six Manus have already been
mentioned to you viz. Svayambhuva, Svarocisa, Uttama,
Tamasa, Raivata and Caksusa. The present Manu is called
Vaivasvata, O great sage.

4-6. The Manus of future are Savarni, Raucya,
Brahmasavarni, Dharmasavarni, Rudrasavarni, Devasavarni
and Indraasvarni. All these constitute the Manus of the
past, present and future. Thcse have been enumerated by
me as I have heard.

7. O sage, these fourteen Manvantaras extending over
the period past, present and the future have been mentioned
to you. A Kalpa consisting of a thousand Yugas is constituted
by these.

8. O Saunaka, listen. I shall explain the sages, their
sons and the gods; all are famous. Listen with pleasure.

9. Marici, Atri, the holy lord Angiras, Pulaha, Kratu,
Pulastya and Vasistha—these seven are Brahma’s sons.

=== PAGE 24 ===

1590 Sivapurdna

10. O sage, the seven sages are in the northern
quarter. In the Svayambhuva Manvantara there were the
gods named YAmas.

11-12. The ten noble-souled sons of Svayambhuva
Manu were—Agnidhra, Agnibahu, Medha, Medhatithi, Vasu,
Jyotismat, Dhrtimat, Havya, Savana and Subhra. O great
sage, the Indra there was Yajjia.

13. Thus O dear, the first divine Manvantara has
been mentioned to you. I shall explain the second one.
Know as it is.

14-15. In the second Svarocisa Manvantara these must
be known as the great sages, viz-Urjastambha, Parastambha,
Rsabha, Vasumat, Jyotismat, Dyutimat and the seventh
Rocismat. Then the Indra was Rocana. The gods were
known as Tusitas.

16-17. O great sage, the ten noble-minded sons of
Svarocisa Manu, all of great heroism and exploits were
Harighna, Sukrti, Jyotis, Ayomirti, Ayasmaya, Prathita,
Manasyu, Nabha and Sirya.

18. O sage, the second Manvantara has been men-

tioned by me. I shall explain the third one. Know it
factually.

19-20. Vasistha’s seven sons famous as Vasisthas and
Hiranyagarbha’s sons of great splendour known as Urjas are
mentioned as the sages. Uttama the Manu had ten sons,
O great sage.

21-22. They were Isa, Orjita, Orja, Madhu, Madhava
Suci, Sukravaha, Nabhasa, Nabha and Rsabha. The
gods were Satyavedasruta and others. O sage, the Indra
then was Satyajit. He was the ruler of the three worlds.

23. The great third Manvantara has been explained.
O sage, listen. I shall mention the fourth Manvantara.

24. The seven sages were Gargya, Prthu, Vagmin,
Janya, Dhata, Kapinaka and the seventh Kapivat. The
groups of gods were Satyas.

25-26. The Indra there was Trisikha. O sage, listen
to the names of Manu’s sons. The ten sons of great rites
of the Manv Tamasa were Dyutipota, Sautapasya,
Tapahsila, Tapana, Taporati, Akalmasa, Dhanvin, Khadgin,
Mahat and Rsi.

=== PAGE 25 ===

Umdsarhhita 1591

27, The fourth Manvantara of Tamasa Manu has
been mentioned to you. O dear, now listen to the great
fifth Manvantara.

28-29. Devabahu, Jaya, the sage Vedasiras, Hiran-
yaroman, Parjanya, Urdhva Bahu, Somapa—These and
others constituted the seven sages. They were engaged in
truth. The gods were Bhitarajasas of the nature of performing
penance.

30. Indra was named Vibhu and he was the lord of
the three worlds. The name of the Manu was Raivata. He
shall be known as the brother of Tamasa.

31. Osage, Arjuna, Panktivindhya and others shall be
known as his sons. They are endowed with great penance.
They stay on the mountain Meru.

32. Raucya son of Ruci the patriarch was the Manu.
His son born of the queen Bhiti was Bhautya.

33. The future Manus in this Kalpa will be seven. The
future great sages will also be seven in each Manvantara in
the heaven.

34, Rama, Vyasa, Atreya, Diptimat, Subahufruta,
Bharadvaja, and the lustrous Agvatthaman son of Drona
will be seven sages in this Manvantara.

35-37. Saradvat son of Gautama, Gautama, Krpa,
Kausika, Galava, Ruru and Kafsyapa will be future seven
sages. The future gods are three in number as mentioned by
Svayambhu. They are the sons of the noble-souled Kasyapa
the son of Marici. Bali the son of Virocana will become
their Indra.

38-39. O Saunaka, the future ten sons of Savarni the
Manu will be Visanga, Avanivat, Sumanta, Dhrtimat, Vasu,
Siri, Sura, Visnu, Raja and Sumati. Thus the eighth
Manvantara has been mentioned. Now listen to the ninth
Manvantara.

40-42. I shall mention Daksasavarni Manu at the out-
set. Listen. Medhatithi, Paulastya, Vasu, Kasyapa, Jyotismat,
Bhargava, Dhrtimat, Angiras, Savana son of Vasistha, Havya
son of Atri, and Pulaha—these seven are the sagesin the
Rauhita Manvantara. O great sage, the groups of gods are
three.

43-44, They are the sons of the patriarch Rohita, son

=== PAGE 26 ===

1592 Sivapurdga

of Daksa. These are the nine sons of great strength of the
first Savarni— Dhrstaketu, Diptaketu, Paficahasta, Nirakrti,
Prthufravas, Bhiridyumna, Rcika, Brhata and Gaya.

45-47. In the tenth Manvantara of the second Savarni
the following are the sages, viz. Havismat, Pulaha, Prakrti,
Bhargava, Aya, Mukti, Atreya and the imperishable Vasistha
along with the seven great sages viz,' Paulastya, Prayati,
Bhamara, Kaéyapa, Angira, Anenasa, and Satya. Those
known as Dvisimant are the groups of gods.

48-49. Sambhu, Mahegvara himself is as their Indra.
The ten sons of the Manu are Aksatvat, Uttamaujas, Bhirisena
the powerful, Satanika, Nirdmitra, Vrsasena, Jayadratha,
Bhiridyumna, Suvarca and Arcis.

50. In the eleventh Manvantara of the third Savarni
there are seven sages. Understand them as they are glorified
by me.

51-52. Havismat Kasyapa, Vapusmat Varuna, Atreya,
Vasistha, Anaya, Angiras, Carudhrsya, Paulastya, Nihsvara,
Taijasa Agni. The first seven are the sages and the last
three groups are of gods.

53-54. There are the sons of Brahma known as
Vaidhrtas. The grandsons of Savarna and the sons of the
third Savarni are—Sarvaga, Sugarman, Devanika, Ksemaka,
Drdhesu, Khandaka, Darga, Kuhu and Baha, nine in all.

55-57. Now know the seven sages of the fourth
Savarni from me—Dyuti son of Vasistha, Atreya of good
penance, Angiras an embodied form of penance, KaSyapa the
ascetic. Paulastya the sage, Pulaha interested in penance and
Bhargava the storehouse of penance. The groups of gods are
known as five and they are the mental sons of Brahma.

58-60. The Indra then is Rtadhaman. He is the
happy ruler of the three worlds. In the future twelfth
Manvantara, O, sage, the seven great sages are Dhrtimat,
Angiras, Havyavat Paulastya, Tattvadargin Paulaha, Nirutsava
Bhargava, Nisprapafica Atreya, Nirdeha, Kasyapa and
Sutapa the descendant of Vasistha.

61-62. The groups of gods are three in number as
mentioned by Svayambhi. They are: Divaspati Indra, Vicitra
and Citra. Naya, Dharmadhrta, Andhra, Sunetra, Ksatravrd-

=== PAGE 27 ===

Umésarbhit 1593

dhaka, Nirbhaya, and Sutapas Drona are the sons of Raucya
Manu.

63-65. In the fourteenth Manvantara of Satya Manu
the seven sages are Agnidhra Kasyapa, Magadha, Paulastya
Atibahya Bhargava, Suci Angirasa, Yukta Atreya, ‘Ajita
grandson of Vasistha, and Pulaha. They are the final seven
sages. The gods are the holy Caksusas. Suci will become Indra.

66. After getting up early in the morning the repeti-
tion of the names of these sages of the past and future
increases the happiness of men.

67-68. O great sage, listen. The groups of gods are
five. The sons of this Manu are—Tarangabhiru, Budhna,
Tanigra, Anugra, Abhimanin Pravina, Visnu, Sankrandana,
Tejasvin, and Sabala.

69. The earlier Kalpa is in the authority of Bhauma,
Thus I have explained the Manus past and future.

70-71. These were mentioned to Vyasa by Sanatkumara
of great splendour. When the thousand Yugas are complete
they, of good penance, return to Brahmaloka when their task of
protecting the people is over. Each Manvantara consists of
seventy one Yugas with some period left over.

72. These fourteen Manus are glorified. In each Man-
vantara there is re-creation after annihilation.

73. It is difficult to explain Manvantara even in
hundreds of years. The Kalpa that follows a hundred thou-
sand Kalpas is named Niséesa.

74-75. There all the living beings are burnt by the sun’s
tays. O sage, all of them enter Visnu at the end of Kalpas
along with the Adityas. Visnu then creates all living beings.
This happens again and again.

76-77. Lord Rudra annihilates them I shall explain it
at the end of Vaivasvata Kalpa. Thus I have mentioned all
about the Manvantaras to you. It is a holy narrative condu-
sive to wealth and increase of the family.

=== PAGE 28 ===

1594 Sivapurdga
CHAPTER THIRTYFIVE
(The description of Vaivasvata)

Sata said:—

1, Vivasvat was born of Daksa’s daughter and Kasyapa
the great sage. His wife was Sarnjfia, daughter of Tvastr and
also known as Surenuka.

2. Due to the unbearable heat of her husband she in her
prime of youth was dissatisfied.

3. Being scorched and not being able to hear the brilliance
of the lustrous sun, the fair-complexioned lady was excited and
sorrowful.

4-5. O sage, the sun begot three offsprings of her: the
patriarch Manu Sraddhadeva, Yama and Yamuna born as
twins.

6. On seeing the brilliance of the sun as unbearable as
the fire at the final dissolution she created Chaya of herself.

7. She of illusory form told Sarnjfia : “O sweet-smiled
auspicious lady, what shall I do for you, please tell me”.

Samjia said:—
8. ‘Welfare unto you. I go to my father’s house alone.
Indeed you have to stay in this house without aberration.

9. These two well-behaved sons and this pretty girl
should be happily protected if you wish to please me.”

Chaya said :—
10. “O lady, I shall brook their misdeeds even as much

as pulling out my hair. I shall make no complaint to you.
O goddess, you can go away happily.”

Sita said:—

11. Ashamed on being addressed thus, the lady went
to her father’s house but was rebuked by him. He urged her
again and again to return to her husband.

12. She assumed the form of a mare. Going to Northern
Kurus she wandered among the people.

13. The sun took her for Sarhjfia and begot of hera
son the Manu Savarni.

=== PAGE 29 ===

Umdsarbhité 1595

14. Though requested by Sarnjfia, Chaya did not love
the elder children. She loved her own son more and fondled
him always.

15. The younger brother Yama could not hear that. He
did not forgive. Ever since childhood he was furious and
and ill-tempered due to the gravity of what was destined to
happen later.

‘16. When Yama, son of Vivasvat threatened Chaya
she became infuriated and cursed him angrily.

17. Due to excessive anger she cursed—‘‘Let your leg
fall off”. Yama approached his father with palms joined in
reverence and said.

18-20. <I was agitated due to Chaya’s words. I am
sorry and frightened of the curse. I had only said that a
mother shall have impartial and equal love for all her children.
She has lost affection for us. She nurtures only the youngest
one. Hence I raised my foot. It behoves you to forgive me.
O lord of gods, O foremost among the refulgent ones, I have
been cursed by my mother. O lord of rays, let not my leg fall
off by your grace.”

The sun said:—

21. O son, there shall be a great cause for this. That
was why you too who know virtue and speak the truth had
been infuriated.

22. It isnot possible to make your mother’s words
false. Worms will take away the flesh from your leg and go to
the earth.

23. Her words will come up true and you will also be
saved. Have no doubt, O deer, cheer up your mind, O lord.

Sita said:—

24. O great sage, after saying thus to his son Yama,
the sun angrily spoke to Chaya.

The sun said : —

25. O beloved wife, O evil-minded angry lady, what
it is that you have done ? Why do you love one son more?
You shall tell me.

=== PAGE 30 ===

1596 Sivapurdga

Sita said:—
26. On hearing the words of the sun she told him the
truth. Scorched by him she consoled him thus.

Chaya said: —

27. This fierce form of yours was not pleasant to
Samjfia. She was scorched by your excessive brilliance. She
could not bear it. She now resides on the grassy plain in
a forest.

28. Olord of rays, she is endowed with the power of
Yoga. She has resorted to yogic practice. She is praiseworthy.
O lord of gods, be favourable to her by sending the message
of your opinion.

29. I shall change your form. I shall make it pleasingly
brilliant.

Sata said:—

On hearing this, the sun was appeased.

30. The sage Tvastr put him on the turner’s lathe and
sharpened him further. His blazing form was slightly redu-
ced in brilliance.

31. When the form was made more pleasingly brilliant
by Tvastr it shone splendidly. Then resorting to Yogic prac-
tice he saw his wife Sarhjfia.

32. He assumed the form of a horse and approached
her for sexual indulgence with her who could not be overwhel-
med by any living being due to her lustre and observance of
restraint.

33. O sage, in the course of the sexual activity she
suspected him to be another man. Hence she received the
semen through the mouth into the nostril.

34. Thence were born the twin gods Aévins, the fore-
most among physicians. They are known as Nasatyas and
Dasras.

35. The sun showed his pleasingly splendid form to
them. On seeing her husband she was extremely delighted.

36. The chaste lady returned to the house with her
husband with the face beaming with pleasure. The pair
rejoiced more than before.

=== PAGE 31 ===

Uméasamhita 1597

37. This incident distressed the mind of Yama. As
pious king he gladdened the subjects virtuously.

38. Yama of great lustre attained the lordship of the
names and the guardianship of the quarters.

39. Savarni Manu became the oppatriarch. In the
Savarnika Manvantara he will become the future Manu by
virtue of his action.

40-42. The lord is performing penance even today on the
top of Meru?!. Their younger sister, the famous Yami, became
the most excellent river Yamuna, the sanctifier of all the worlds.
He is called Savarni Manu in the world. He who listens to or
retains in memory this origin of the gods attains great fame.
Should he suffer from any adversity he will be rid of it.

CHAPTER THIRTYSIX

(The description of the nine sons and the race of Manu)

Sata said:—

1. Nine sons all equal to him were born of Vaivasvata
Manu. Later they became very lofty, bold and devoted to
the virtues of Ksatriyas.

2. They were Iksvaku, Sibi, Nabhaga, Dhrsta, Saryati,
Narisyanta, Nabhaga, Kariga and Priyavrata.*?

3-5. Desirous of sons, Manu the patriarch performed
a sacrifice. O great sage, when no sons were born as a
result of the sacrifice, the famous I]4 was born, wearing
divine garments, bedecked in divine ornaments and with a

at. See P. gro not and P. 623 note.

22, There is no consensus of opinion im the Puragas about the
names. Pargiter who collated the Puranic texts on the topic suggested

the following names R&4TE, ATA, ee, qaife, afear, wey,
xiq, avatafase and qu: SP agrees in respect of the first five but it
substitutes. firfa, trart (feetr) and free Shy, for AraTafece and
qa. Probably the second ATANT is identical with ATHAfecz, The
identification of fafa and faaaa with ST JIT is doubiful.

=== PAGE 32 ===

1598 Sivapurdga

divine body. Manu the chastiser addressed her as [la and
said “Follow me”. 114 replied to him.

Id said:—

6. She spoke these words to the patriatch desirous of
a son—O foremost among the eloquent, I am born of the
parts of Mitra and Varuna.

7-9. I am approaching them. I shall never be
interested in sinful things.” After saying this, the chaste
lady approached Mitra and Varuna and spoke with palms
joined in reverence ‘‘O great sages, I am born in the sacri-
fice of Manu through your parts. I have come to you.
Please tell me. What I can do for you. O lord, create
other sons so that your race may flourish.”

Sita said:—

10. When the chaste lady born in the sacrifice of
Manu said, the sages Mitra and Varuna spoke thus respect-
fully.

Mitra and Varuna said:—

11. O virtuous beautiful lady of fair complexion,
both of us are pleased with your self-control, humility and
truth.

12. O blessed lady, you will attain our fame. You alone
will become the son establishing the family of Manu.

13. You will be famous in the three worlds as
Sudyumna, beloved of the universe, virtuous in conduct and
enhancer of the race of Manu.

Sita said:—

14. On hearing that she returned to her father’s
presence. On the way, getting an opportunity, Budha in-
vited her for sexual intercourse.

15. King Puriravas was born of her out of the
union with Budha. O intelligent one, this son was the
handsome and intelligent man who later became the husband
of Urvaigi.

=== PAGE 33 ===

Umésarhhita 1599

16. After bearing the son Puriravas she became Sudyu-
mna as a result of Siva’s grace.

17. Sudyumna had three very virtuous heirs Utkala,
Gaya and the powerful Vinatagva.

18. O brahmin, O great sage, Utkala was assigned
the country Utkala;#* Vinatasva was given the territories on
the West and Gaya was given Gaya and the eastern
territories.

19. O dear, when Manu passed away, the earth was
divided into ten regions.

20-24. Iksvaku the eldest son got the central territory.
At the instance of Vasistha, Sudyumna_ gave the virtuous
territory Pratisthina™ to Puridravas. O grart sages, Sudy-
umna had the characteristics of both man and woman. The
Sakas were the sons of Narisyanta. Nabhaga’s son Ambarisa
got the region Bahlaka® and so was known as Bahleya.
Saryati had a son and a daughter. The son was known as
Anarta and the daughter as Sukanya who later became
the wife of Cyavana. Anarta’s son was Raibhya known also
as Raivata.

25. In the territory®* of Anarta he got the city
Kufasthali which was extremely brilliant and was the seventh
among seven cities.

26. He had a hundred sons of whom the eldest
and the most excellent was Kakudmin. He was brilliant,
strong, virtuous and a protector of brahmins.

27. A daughter Revati was born to Kakudmin. She
was endowed with great beauty, She was another Laksmi.

28. The king Kakudmin the lord of all went to

23. It is modern Orissa.

24. Here Pratisthina is Prayaga but the Puranas are not agreed
upon its locus. Some place it on the nosth and some on the east side of
the Ganges. Others place it on the north bank of the Yamuna.

There is another Pratis{hana=Paithan in the Aurangabad District of
the former Hyderabad State.

25. Bahlaka is identical with modern Balkh in the northern part of
Afghanistan, Sec KM Ch, XVII.

26, It is identical with Gujrat and part of Malava. Its chief city
was Kufasthali also called Dvaraka.

=== PAGE 34 ===

1600 Sivapurdna

Brahméa’s region near Brahma, accompanied by his daughter
in order to ask him about a suitable bridegroom for her.

29. While dance and music was going on, he stood
there waiting for a moment near Brahma.

30. Although it was only a Muhirta in Brahma’s
region many Yugas had passed by. But O sages, the king
Kakudmin did not know anything about it.

31. Then he bowed to Brahma the great Atman,
humbly and with palms joined in reverence told him about
his mission.

32. On hearing his purpose the patriarch Brahma
laughed. Addressing the great king Kakudmin, he said.

Brahma said:—

33. Listen, O King Kakudmin, O lord of the earth,
son of Raibhya, to my words with attention. I shall tell
you the truth particularly.

34. All those bridegrooms you had in view have been
killed by the efflux of time. Even their family is extinct.
Time is the devourer of everything.

35. O king, your city too has been’ destroyed by
Punyajanas, the Raksasas. It is now the twenty-eighth
Dvapara Yuga and the city has been rebuilt by Krsna.

36. In the name of Dvaravati because it has many
entrances, it is very beautiful. It is protected by the Bhojas,
Vrsnis and Andhakas with Krsna as their leader.

37. O king, now go there and give this daughter of
yours to Baladeva the son of Vasudeva.

Sita said:—

38. Thus commanded. the king bowed to him and
went to that city. On realising that many Yugas had elapsed
he was surprised along with his daughter.

39. Then he gave his daughter, the youthful maiden,
Revati to Bala the brother of Krsna in conformity with the
Sastric rituals.

40. Then he, the great lord, went to the celestial
summit of Meru and propitiated Siva observing penance,

=== PAGE 35 ===

Umdsamhita 1601

The sages said:—

41. Raivata stayed in Brahmé’s region for many
Yugas. He returned to the mortal world as a young man.
This is my great doubt.

Sita said:—

42. O sages, near Brahma there is no old age,
hunger, thirst, aberration or premature death to any one.

43. Therefore the king did not attain old age or
death, nor his daughter. After consulting Brahma about
the bridegroom he returned still a young man.

44. Going to the divine city Dvaravati?? rebuilt by
Krsna, he got his daughter married to Bala.

45. Hundred sons were born to that virtuous great
lord. Through many wives Krsna too had innumerable
sons,

46. The family of the two noble souls was very great.
All the Ksatriyas in every quarter became delighted and
virtuous.

47. Thus the race of Saryati has been narrated to
you. O brahmins, I shall succinctly mention the details of
others too. Listen attentively.

48. Nabhaga had a son Dhrsta. After establishing
the Ksatriya race and performing the brahminical rites he
attained brahminhood.

49. Dhrsta’s race originally Ksatriya became brahmin
family on the earth. Kariisa’s descendants the Kariisas were
Ksatriyas, insubjugable in war.

50. Nrga who was also a son of Manu was a liberal
donor of riches to brahmins and of cows.

51. Once due to an error in his charitable gift of a
cow, prompted by his own sins and crooked intellect, he
became a chameleon .and was redeemed by Srikrsna.

52. An excellent son was born to him named Prayati,
the knower of virtues. This I have heard from Vyasa and
have now briefly mentioned to you.

53. Prsadhra, a son of Manu was made the keeper of

27. See P. 1229 note go.

=== PAGE 36 ===

1602 Sivapurdga

cows by his preceptor. During the nights, observing the
posture of heroes, he diligently looked after the cows.

54. Once a tiger entered the cowshed to attack the
cows. On hearing the shrieks of the cows he woke up.
Strong that he was he seized a sword to kill it and started.

55. On seeing the lord armed with a sword the frigh-
tened tiger slipped away. Not knowing it and mistaking a
reddish brown cow as the tiger he hit it with his sword on
its head.

56. Due to rain and gust of wind in the night he was
deluded. Thinking. that the tiger had been killed he
returned to his place.

57. When the night dawned into day he got up and
went there. He saw only the cow killed and not the tiger.
He felt dejected.

58. On hearing about the incident and realising that
he had committed a sin unconsciously and not wilfully, the
preceptor cursed him—‘“Become a Sidra, not a Ksatriya.”

59. On being cursed by his preceptor, the family
priest out of anger, Prsadhra started from there and went
to the great forest.

60. Dejected by sufferings he became detached and
practised Yoga. He burnt himself in conflagration and
attained the greatest goal.

61. Kavi, son of Manu, was highly intelligent due to
Siva’s blessings. Afier enjoying divine pleasures here he
attained the rare salvation hereafter.

CHAPTER THIRTYSEVEN
(The race of Manu)

Sata said:—

1. Formerly Iksvaku was born as the son of Manu
through the nose. He had a hundred sons who were liberal
in bestowing gifts.

=== PAGE 37 ===

Umasamhita 1603

2. Before them O brahmins, there were no kings in
Aryavarta. Of them the eldest was Vikuksi. He became the
king of Ayodhya.

3-4. Listen to one of his misdeeds. He wanted to
perform Sraddha but before performing the same he ate a
rabbit and came to be known as Sagada. Abandoned by
Iksvaku, he entered a forest.

5. When Iksvaku passed away he was installed a king
at the instance of Vasistha. He had fifteen sons of whom
the chief was Sakuni.

6. They all became kings and protectors of the
northern country. Ayodha’s son was the powerful king
Kakutstha.

7. Kakutstha’s son was Arinabha. His son was
Prthu. Prthu’s son was Vistarasva. From him was born
Indra the lord of people.

8. Indra’s son was Yuvanasva, the ruler of Sravasta.
His son was Sravastaka who built Sravasti.28 Sravastaka’s son
was Brhadagva.

9. His son was Yuvanasva and Kuvalaéva was his
son. Since he slew Dhundhu he became the excellent king
Dhundhumara.

10-11. Kuvalagva had hundred sons who were excellent
archers. He was entrusted with the kingdom by his father.
After transferring the royal glory to the son the king entered
the forest. But Uttanka prevented him.

Uttanka said:—

12-14. Listen. You shall protect the earth virtuously.
O king, only when protected by you can the earth be
relieved of excitement and sorrow. It does not behove you
to go to the forest. There is a Danava, proud of his strength
near my hermitage, in the snow-covered wilderness, full of
sea-sand. He is indestructible even’to the gods. He has a
huge body and is very strong.

15. He stays underground concealed by the sand.
The terrible Raksasa son of the demon Madhu is Dhundhu
by name.

28. This celebrated city is situated in the modern gonda district of
Uttara Pradesh

=== PAGE 38 ===

1604 Sivapurapa

16. He stays there performing a terrible penance for
the destruction of the worlds. At the end of every year he
exhales terribly.

17. When he exhales, the whole world including
mountains, forests and wilderness, quakes. Blazing flames
with pink smoke smoulder everywhere.

18. Hence, O king, I cannot stay in my hermitage.
O strong one with huge arms ward him off desiring the
welfare of the worlds.

19. Let the wordls become happy and peaceful after
he had been killed. by you. O lord of earth, you alone can
slay him.

20. O sinless one, a great boon has been granted to
you. Visnu will heighten your splendour by his own splendour.

21. Great virtue accrues from the protection of the
subjects. A similar opportunity is wanting in the forest. Let
not your mind be directed that way.

22. O leading king, nowhere such a virtue exists as it
does in the protection of the subjects. This has been pursued
by: the saintly kings of yore.

23. Thus requested the saintly king entrusted his son
Kuvalasva with the task of thwarting Dhundhu.

24. “O holy lord, O excellent brahmin, I have
already laid aside my weapons. Here is my son who will
surely destroy Dhundhu.”

25. Having said thus and instructed his son the king
proceeded with penance. Kuvalasva accompanied by Uttanka
went to fight with Dhundhu.

26. At the approach of Uttanka and for the benefit
of the worlds, lord Visnu entered him with his splendour.

27. When the invincible Kuvalasva started there was
a loud shout in the heaven. ‘This glorious prince will slay
Dhundhu.”

28. The gods surrounded him with garlands of flowers.
They praised him saying “Be victorious, Be long-lived.”

“29. The most excellent among the victorious, the king
went there accompanied by his sons. He caused an ocean
“o be dug in the midst of that vast expanse of sand.

=== PAGE 39 ===

Umasamhita 1605

30. O brahminical sage, heightened in strength by
the splendour of Visnu he became very brilliant and
stronger.

31. O brahmin, the demon Dhundhu was found out,
concealed beneath the sand towards the western quarter as
the sons of the king dug up the place.

32. He appeared to consume all the worlds out of
fury in the fire emerging from his mouth. Water too gushed
out from him as from the moon-stone at the moonrise.

33. The hundred sons were scorched and burnt in
the fire. O great sage, among them only three survived.

34. O leading brahmin, then the king of great splen-
dour rushed at the very powerful Raksasa, the brahmin-
slayer Dhundhu.

35. The king quaffed off the gushing water through
fiery arrows and quelled the fire through water.

36. After killing the aquatic demon of huge body
with his strength, the king requested Uttanka to survey his
work.

37. O great sage, Uttanka granted him boons. He
gave him never-ending wealth and invincibility to enemies.

38. He blessed him with interest in virtue, perpetual
residence in the heaven and the imperishable world to his
sons who were killed in the battle.

39. Three of his sons survived. The eldest of them
was Drdhaéva. Harhsasva and Kapilafva were younger
princes.

40. Haryasva was the son of Drdhasva who was the
son of Dhundhumara. Nikumbha who was always engaged
in sacred rites was the son of Haryagva.

41. Sarhatdéva an expert in war was the son of
Nikumbha. AksaSva and Krtafva were the sons of
Sarnhataéva.

42. He had two daughters Haimavati and Drgadvati
honoured by the good. She was famous in the three worlds.
Her son was Prasenajit.

=== PAGE 40 ===

1606 Sivapurina

43. Prasenajit had a chaste wife Gauri.” She was cursed
by her husband and turned into the river Bahuda.

44. His great son was Yuvanaéva, the lord of the earth.
MaAndhata famous in the three worlds was Yuvana§va’s son.

45-46. Sagabindu’s daughter the chaste Caitrarathi
was his wife. She was the eldest sister of ten thousand
brothers. Mandhaté begot of her two sons, Purukutsa, the
knower of sacred rites and Mucukunda the righteous.

47, Purukutsa’s son was Trayyaruni. His son was
Satyavrata.

48-50. He was evil-minded. Whenever sacred mantras
were recited he put obstacles. After the marriage was cele-
brated he abducted the brides of others with force, out
of lust, delusion, fun or arrogance. He abducted the
virgins to satisfy his lust. The king Trayyaruni forsook him
for such evil practices. Infuriated he called him a disgraceful
wretch.

51. When cast-off he asked his father where to go. The
king asked him to stay with the outcastes.

52. Cast off by his father the righteous king and pro-
tector, the heroic Satyavrata lived with the outcastes.

53. Becoming detached due to the activities of his son,
the king Trayyadruni forsook everything and went to the forest
in order to perform penance to propitiate Siva.

54. O brahmin sage, due to that sinful misdeed Indra
did not rain in his kingdom for twelve years.

55. Visvamitra of great penance abandoned his wife
in that land and performed extensive penance in the marshy
foreshore of the ocean.

56. His wife tied her middle son round her neck and
offered him for sale in exchange for a hundred cows in order
to sustain the other children.

57. On seeing her offering her own son, tied round
her neck, for sale, Satyavrata released him.

58. The mighty Satyabrata sustained him just to satisfy
Visvamitra and out of human sympathy.

29. Gauri, wife of king Prasenjit or grandmother of Mandhata was
cursed by her husband and transférmed into Bahud4 or Bahuka or Saitava-

hini, a river of Eastern India. The hermitage of Safkha ard Likhita are
said to have been situated on its bank (Mbh. XII. 23. 18-19.)

=== PAGE 41 ===

Umdsarhita 1607

59. Ever since then, that son of sage Viévamitra came
to be called Galava because he was tied round the neck. He
too performed great penance.

CHAPTER THIRTYEIGHT
(From Satyavrata to Sagara)

1. By his devotion to Visvamitra his compassionate
nature and his vow, Satyavrata nurtured and looked after
Visvamitra’s wife.

2. O sage, he killed deer, boars and buffaloes of the
forest and he cast off their flesh near the hermitage of
Visvamitra.

3. Invirtue ofhis being the priest and the teacher
the sage Vasistha looked after the holy centres, cows, clans
and the harem.

4. Vasistha nursed more and more grudge against Satya-
vrata forced by the gravity of what was destined to happen.

5. Vasistha had not prevented the father from exiling
the son from the kingdom because there was sufficient
cause for the same.

6. When the seventh step is taken (round the fire in
the altar) the marriage becomes valid. But Satyavrata did
not understand this secret.

7. Only for the satisfaction of his father did he do
the same thinking that the family customs should remain
unviolated.

8. When he was abandoned by his father Vasistha did
not interfere on his behalf. The sage proclaimed that he
would never install him in this kingdom.

9-12. During the twelve years of famine and drought
Satyavrata observed his vow. When there was no meat
available the prince saw the wish-yielding cow of Vasistha.
O sage, the king who observed the ten tenets®® of Dharma

30. Cp. Manu. VI. ar
afa: aur sateste atafafeafras: |
afrear aera are Tiwary 1

=== PAGE 42 ===

1608 Sivapurina

killed the cow either due to anger or greed or exhaustion or
hunger. The meat of the same he utilised to feed Viévamitra’s
son. On hearing of it the sage Vasistha became angry and
said.

Vasistha said

13. Ifthe two iron stakes thrust by me fail I shall
fix another cruel one.

14. Your transgression is threefold. You have displea-
sed your father, killed the cow of your preceptor and
used things unsprinkled with holy water.

15-16. He called him Triganku and ever since he is
known as Trisanku. When Visvamitra returned he was plea-
sed with Tri§anku for having maintained his family during
his absence. When pressed to choose a boon the prince chose
it.

17. When there was drought for twelve years he had
helped his family, therefore the sage anointed him in the
kingdom of his father and officiated as priest in his coronation.

18. Ever as the gods and Visistha were watching, the
saintly lord Vigvamitra made him ascend heaven in his physi-
cal body.

19. His wife Satyaratha, hailing from the family of
Kekayas®! bore him a son who was named Hari$candra.

20. That king Harifcandra is known as Traigankava.
He is famous as_ the performer of the Rajasitya sacrifice and
as an Emperor.

21. Harifchandra’s son Rohita was famous. Rohita’s
son was Vrka and Bahu was born of Trka.

22. Haihayas and Talajanghas removed that king.
O brahmin, he was very virtuous.

23. Bahu begot a son. Sagara was born with poison.
Reaching the hermitage of Aurva, he was saved by Bhargava.
24. Securing fiery missiles from Bhargava king Sagara

31. Kekayas lived between the Jhelum and the-Beas and had their
capital at Girivraja (Girijak or Jalalpur) on the Jhelum.

=== PAGE 43 ===

Umésamhita 1609

conquered the earth after killing Talajanghas®® and Haihayas.®*

25. He defeated Sakas,%* Bahiidakas, Paradas®® taganas**
and Khafgas.’? He established a good religious cult and ruled
over the earth virtuously.

Saunaka Said :—

26. How was he born with poison ? How did he con-
quer the Ksatriyas ? O son of siita, please narrate this in
detail.

Sita said:—

27. O. sage, listen with attention. I shall narrate
what Vaifsampayana said on being asked by Janamejaya, son
of P&riksita.

Pariksita said :—
28. O sage, how was the king born with poison ?
How did he kill the kings ? Please narrate this.

Vaisampayana said :—

29. O dear, O lord of the subjects, the kingdom of
Bahu who indulged in vices was captured by Haihayas and
T4alajanghas and the Sakas.

30. Five groups of Rakgsasas are mentioned, viz.—
Yavanas,** Paradas,®® Kambojas,* Pahlavas*! and Bahiidakas.“

32. These constituted one of the five clans of Haihayas, the other
four being dtfaeta, Wr, wafer and qivesz |

33. Haihayas formed a branch of the Yadavas who ruled at
Mahismati (Mod. Mandhat4 in the Nimar District, M.P.) on the Narmada
river.

34- The original home of the Sakas was the Valleys of the Jaxartes
and Oxus. But they had settled in India after they had conquered the
country.

35. Paradas are identical with the Parthians who lived in the
Khorasam region.

36. The Taganas or Tanganashad their headquarters at Tangana-
pura near jyotirmatha in Garhwal (Ep. Ind. Vol. XXXI. P. 286).

37. According to Al-Biruni, the Khasas were a Himalayan tribe now
represented by the Khakkas of Kashmir.

38. Yavanas are identical with the Indo-Greeks who settled in the
northwestern part of India and adjoining lands,

39. See No. 35 above.

40. K&mbojas lived in the land between the Rajauri Valley in
Kashmir and the Hindukush mountains. Some scholars locate the tribe
near Badakhshan beyond the Hindukush,

41, Pahlavas or the Pahlavis are identical with the Persians,

42. Bahidakas remain unidentified.

=== PAGE 44 ===

1610 Sivapurdna

31. O king, these five groups of Raksasas pursuing
activities of exploit on behalf of the Haihayas seized the
kingdom of Bahu and gave it to the Haihayas.

32. Having lost the kingdom, Bahu went to the forest
along with his wife. Distressed that he was he abandoned
his life.

33. One of his wives belonging to the house of Yadu
followed him in pregnancy. Due to jealousy as a result of
her expected son before her, the co-wife administered poison
to her.

34. She made the funeral pyre of her husband ready
and was about to enter the fire, Aurva Bhargava mercifully
prevented her.

35. The queen stayed in his hermitage for the sake of
her child in the womb. She served the sage, mentally remem-
bering Siva.

36. Once when the Muhirta and the Lagna were good
when the five planets were ascendant the child was born
along with the poison administered to the queen.

37. In that auspicious Lagna, O excellent sage, the
king Sagara, of mighty arms, was born.

38. Aurva performed the postnatal rites of that prince.
He taught him Vedas and Sastras and instructed him in the
use of missiles.

39. The blessed Sagara, earnestly learnt the lore of
the fiery missile, in accordance with the rules of procedure,
the missile that is unbearable even to the gods.

40. The infuriated Sagaras, equipped with this mira-
culous and other weapons and with his own natural strength,
killed the Haihayas.

41. This Sagara became foremost among the famous,
earned fame in all the worlds and established piety on the
earth.

42. Then the Sakas, Yavanas, Kambojas and Pahlavas,
being destroyed sought refuge in Vasistha.

43. After deceitfully compelling them to enter into an
agreement, Vasistha of great brilliance offered them freedom
from fear and brought them to king Sagara.

44. At the instance of his priest Sagara maintained

=== PAGE 45 ===

Umdsarhita 1611

his vow by destroying their mode of worship and effecting
alterations in their hair style.

45. He released the Sakas after shaving off half of
their heads. Complete tonsure was assigned to Yavanas and
Kambojas.

46. Paradas were given close hair-cut and Pahlavas
were asked to grow beard and moustache. All of them
were deprived of the right of the Vedic study and the use of
Vasatkara.

47. All those Ksatriyas who had been deprived of
virtue were re-instated in piety. The entire earth was con-
quered by him virtuously.

48. Thus conquering the earth virtuously the king
instituted a horse-sacrifice.

49. O sage, the sacrificial horse was let loose, followed
by his sixty thousand sons. It reached the shore of the
ocean in the south-eastern region.

50. It was stealthily removed by Indra, king of the
gods, for his selfish ends near the sea-shore and taken under-
ground.

51. In order to search out the horse, king Sagara
caused the country around dug up through his sons.

52. While it was being dug near the ocean, they met
the sage Kapila, the primordial Purusa of cosmic form.

53. As he woke up from trance all but four of the
sixty thousand sons were burnt by the fire from his eyes.

54. The four who were spared were Harsaketu, Suketu,
Dharmaratha and Pajficajana. They became the kings es-
tablishing his line.

55. Lord Visnu granted him five boons, viz. flourishing
family, intelligence, fame, the ocean as son and wealth.

56. By that virtue he attained the fatherhood of
ocean. He regained the sacrificial horse from the ocean.

57. He performed a hundred horse-sacrifices and
became famous. He acquired wealth bestowed by Siva. He
propitiated the deities by performing the sacred rites.

=== PAGE 46 ===

1612 Sivapurdna
CHAPTER THIRTYNINE

(Kings of the solar race)

Saunaka said:—
1. How were the heroic sons of Sagara born? By what
means did the sixty thousand of them become valorous?

Sita said:—

2. Sagara had two wives. They had wiped off their
sins by penance. When Aurva the sage was propitiated ‘by
them he granted them a boon.

3. One of them chose the boon of sixty thousand sons.
The other chose one son who would maintain the line of
succession in the race.

4. Having received the boon of heroic sons she gave
birth to a big gourd of seeds which were separated.

5. They were put in jars of ghee and nurtured by
nursing maidens. They became princes and enhanced the
delight of all.

6. When they were burnt by Kapila one Pajficajana
became king.

7. Paficajana begot a son Athgumat whose son was
Dilipa. Dilipa’s son was Bhagiratha.

8. It was this Bhagiratha who brought Gafiga to the
sea and made her his daughter.

9. Bhagiratha’s son was Srutasena. His son was the
virtuous king Nabhaga.

10. Ambarisa was the son of Nabhaga. Sindhudvipa
was his son. Ayutdjit was the heir and successor to
Sindhudvipa.

11. His son was king Rtuparga, who knew the secret
of the dice and was a friend of king Nala.

12. “Rtuparna’s son was Anuparna. His son was
Mitrasaha who was known as KalmAgapada also.

13, Kalmasapada’s son was Sarvakarman. Anaranya
was the son of Sarvakarman.

14. Anaranya’s son was king Mundidruha. His sons
were Nisadha, Rati and Khatvanga.

15. Khatvanga returned from the heaven, lived for a

=== PAGE 47 ===

1613
Muhirta and attained all the three worlds, O sinless one,
through his intellect and truthfulness.

16. Dirghabahu was his son. Raghu was his son. Aja
was his son and Dagaratha was born of him.

17. Rama was born of Dafaratha. He was very pious
and famous, a part of Visnu and a devotee of Siva. Ravana
was killed by him.

18. His story has been described in the Puranas. It is
famous in the Ramayana. It has not been mentioned here in
detail.

19. Ra&ma’s son Kufa was very famous. Atithi was
born of Kuga. His son was Nisadha.

20. Nala was the son of Nisadha. Nabhas was the
son of Nala. Pundarika was the son of Nabhas. Kgsema-
dhauvan was his successor.

21. The powerful Devanika was the son of Ksema-
dhanvan. Devdnika’s son was the king Ahinagu.

22. Ahinagu’s heir was the powerful king Sahasvat.
Virasena was his son, a scion of the family of Iksvaku.

23. Virasena’s heir was Pariyatra. From him a son
Bala was born. Sthala was his son.

24. His son was the valorous Yaksa born of a part
of the sun. His son was Aguna and from him was born
Vidhrti.

25. His son Hiranyanabha was a great preceptor of
Yogic science. He was the disciple of the sage Jaimini and
an expert in the spiritual science.

26. It was from this great king that Kaufalya
YAjiiavalkya studied the spiritual science of Yoga that un-
revels the knotty mesh of the heart.

27. His son was Pusyanadman. His son was Dhruva.
Agnivarna was his son. His son was Sighra.

28. His son was Marut. He became a Siddha by
means of Yoga. This king is alive even now in a village
Kalapa.®

Umdsarhhita

43. Kalpagrama is in the eastern land on the Himalayas, having
hundreds and thousands of the hermitages of the sages. See Geo. of the
Purauas P. 57. . .

The versc suggests the probable date of SP, in the reign of
King Marut, son of Agnivarna of the solar race.

=== PAGE 48 ===

1614 Sivapurdpa

29. At the end of Kali he will revive the extinct solar
race along with the contemporary sages.

30. Prthugruta was his son. Sandhi was his son.
Amarsana was his son and Marutvat was his son.

31. Visvasa was his son. His son was Prasenajit.
Taksaka was his son and his son was Brhadbala.

32. These are the kings of Iksvaku family who had
gone before. Now listen to the future kings of this family,
the most excellent of those who know sacred virtue.

33. Brhadbala’s son will be Brhadrana. Urukriya will
be his son.

34. His son will be Vatsavrddha. His son will be
Prativyoman. Bhanu will be his son whose son will be
Divarka, lord of a vast army.

35. His son will be a great hero, Sahadeva. His son
will be Brhadagva. The powerful Bhanumat will be his son.

36. The powerful Pratikasva will be the son of
Bhanumat. King Supratika will be his son.

37-41. Marudeva born of an auspicious star will be
his son; his son will be Puskara; his son Antariksa; his son
Sutapas; his son the heroic Mitrajit; his son Brhadbhaja
and his son Barhinadman; his son Krtafijaya; his son Ranafi-
jaya; his son Safijaya; Sakya his son, Suddhoda_his son,
Langala his son; his son Prasenajit; his son will be Sidraka;
Runaka his son; Suratha his son and Sumitra his son. There-
after the family becomes extinct.

42. The family of the Iksvakus will end with Sumitra,
the family with kings of variegated exploits, sacred rites and
virtuous practice.

43. Reaching upto Sumitra the king in the Kali age
that auspicious race will become merged in outside families.
It will flourish again in the Krta age.

44, These are the kings in the solar race who made
profuse monetary gifts. Those mainly mentioned belong to
Iksvaku’s family.

45. This is the auspicious creation of the sun
Vivasvat, who is glorified as Sraddhadeva, the bestower of
nourishment to all living beings.

46. Reading and listening to this creation of Vivasvat,

=== PAGE 49 ===

Umasamhita 1615

man attains Sayujya after enjoying happiness here. He will
be blessed with progeny.

CHAPTER FORTY

(The power of the Manes)
Vyasa said: —

1, On hearing about the excellent solar race of
Sraddhadeva, the sage Saunaka respectfully asked Sita.

Saunaka said

2. O Siita, disciple of Vyasa, of long life, obeisance be
to you. A divine and pious story has been narrated to us.

3. It has been mentioned by you that Sraddhadeva
is the progenitor of the solar race. I have a doubt therein
which I shall mention before you.

4. How did the sun become Sraddhadeva? I wish to
hear this. Please clear this doubt with pleasure.

5. O holy lord, please mention the glory and the bene-
fit of Sraddha rite whereby the manes are pleased and bless
the performer with prosperity.

6. I wish to hear this too, namely the creation par ex-
cellence of the manes. O intelligent one, please mention
this particularly. Have mercy on me.

Sita said:—

7-9. O Saunaka, I shall mention everything concerning
the creation of the manes. This was narrated to the intelligent
Markandeya by Sanatkumara. I shall mention it to you. It
bestows the benefit of all cherished desires. Bhisma the fore-
most of the virtuous lying on the bed of arrows was requested
by Yudhisthira to whom he spoke thus.

Yudhisthira said:—
10. How is nourishment achieved by a man desirous

of nourishment? I wish to hear this. What is it that makes a
man free from distress?

=== PAGE 50 ===

1616 Stoapurdpa

Sita said:—

ll. On hearing the question of Yudhisthira, Bhigma
the knower of Dharma spoke with pleasure even as every one
was listening.

Bhisma said: —

12. O Yudhisthira, those who perform Sraddha rites
with pleasure delight everyone through them as a result of
the favour of the manes.

13-15. Men desirous of benefits perform Sriddhas,
keeping in view, the father, the grandfather and the great-
grandfather in three balls of rice. O Yudhisthira, the manes
bless the man desirous of piety with piety, desirous of progeny
with progeny aad desirous of nourishment with nourishment.

Yudhisthira said:—

16: Some manes are in the heaven and some are in
the hell. The fruit accruing to the living beings is determined
by their activity.

17. How do the Sraddhas go to the manes? How
those in the hell can derive, the benefit ?

18. I have heard that even the gods worship the
manes. I wish to hear this. Please mention this in detail.

Bhisma said:—

19. O suppressor of enemies, in this context, I shall
narrate an event as I have heard from my father who had
left this world.

20. At the time of Sraddha, the ball of rice for my
father was kept ready by me. My father split the ground
and requested me to offer the same into his hand.

21. Thinking that it was not the procedure enjoined
in the Kalpa texts I placed the Pinda on the Kuéa_ grass
without further thought.

22. *‘O sinless one, O most excellent of the descendants
of Bharata, gladdened by me my father spoke in sweet words.

23. O most excellent of men, I only tested you. I
have been redeemed by you the knower of sacred rites and a
good scholar. I have been blessed with a real heir in you.

=== PAGE 51 ===

Umasarhhita 1617

24. What the king does by virtuous or authoritative
rites, the subjects too emulate, taking them to be backed by
precedent.

25. O most excellent of the descendants of Bharata,
listen to the eternal virtues of the Vedas. Proof of the Vedic
rite has been shown by you.

26. Being delighted I shall grant you excellent boons
lovingly. Accept them. They are difficult to obtain in the
three worlds.

27. Death will have no hold on you as long as you
wish to live. With your permission it may be effective again.

28. What is it that you wish for ? I shall grant you
an excellent boon. O foremost among the descendants of
Bharata, what is in your mind ? Mention it’.

29. When he had said this, I saluted him with palms
joined in reverence and said—‘O bestower of honour, if you
are pleased, I am content. I ask you a question. Please
answer it.

30. He said to me—*“Tell me. If you wish I shall
grant it to you”. When I asked him again the king told me.

Santanu said :—

31. O dear, listen. I shall explain your question
factually. The entire ‘Pitrkalpa” has been heard by me
from Markandeya.

32. Odear, what you ask me now I had asked the sage
Markandeya. He, the knower of sacred rites, replied to me.

33. O king listen. Once asI looked up into the sky,
I saw a great aerial chariot coming over the mountain.

34-35. I saw in the aerial chariot a great blazing mass
of splendour as brilliant as glowing coal and very pleasing to
the mind having nothing to excel, it. I saw a man of thy
size of a thumb lying therein. He was very brilliant as if
fire had been placed over fire.

36. I bowed to him. With my head bent down,
I asked the holy lord. “O holy lord, how may we know
you ?”

37. The pious soul told me “you have not that penance

=== PAGE 52 ===

1618 Sivapurdga

and austerity, O sage, whereby you may know me, the son of
Brahma. ‘

38. I am Sanatkumara. What can I do for you ? The
other sons of Brahma are younger to me.

39. My seven brothers are invincible and their families
are established. But we pursue the rites of ascetics restraining
the Atman in the Atman.

40. Even as I was born I became famous as Kumara.
O sage, hence I am called Sanatkumara (the eternal
bachelor ).

41. Since you have piously performed penance with a
desire for my vision I have appeared before you. Welfare be
to you. What wish of yours shall I carry out ?”

42. When he said this I told him—‘O holy lord, listen.
Please narrate factually the original creation of the Pitrs.

43. When requested thus he said to me. Listen to
everything factually. OQ dear one, I shall explain to you the
auspicious creation of the Pitrs truthfully.

Sanatkumdra said :—

44. Formerly Brahma created the gods and said to
them, ‘Worship me’’. But they who sought benefits eschewed
him and worshipped the Atman.

45-46. They were cursed by Brahma thus. You will be
deluded and become senseless”. Hence unable to know any
thing and being insensible they bowed to Pitamaha and said
“Please bless us.” Being requested thus he said to them for the
sake of expiation.

47, ‘Ask your sons. You will then attain perfect
knowledge”. Urged thus the senseless ones asked their sons
boldly.

48-50. They were asked to perform expiatory rites.
O sinless one, the gods were thus addressed by the sons.
“Let the sons be approached.” The gods who had been
cursed by Brahma told him that the sons had gone away.
Then Brahm told the gods thus ‘O gods, listen, You are
not Brahmavadins, the believers in Brahma’s cult.

51 Hence what has been mentioned by the sons, the

=== PAGE 53 ===

Umasarhita 1619

most excellent of the perfectly wise shall be followed without
hesitation and not otherwise.

52. O dwellers of heaven, let the gods and the Pitrs
worship one another with great delight. This will confer the
cherished desires.”

53. Sanatkumara said :—O great sage, then their
doubts were cleared. With delight they became the mutual
bestowers of happiness at the instance of Brahma.

54. Then the gods said “Since you addressed us as
sons you will undoubtedly become Pitrs.

55. In the Sraddha of the Pitrs, undoubtedly the per-
former will propitiate Soma who being delighted and enhan-
ced by the offering shall gladden the worlds.

56-58. They will delight the ocean, the mountain and
the forest, all consisting of the mobile and immobile beings.
Those who desire nourishment and perform Sraddha rites
are given nourishment by the Pitrs who are propitiated.
Those who give three Pindas in the Sraddha mentioning the
names and Gotras delight the Pitrs wherever they be and
are looked after by them.

59-60. Let these words be truthful. Whether gods or
Pitrs we are father and sons successively. Thus the Pitrs who
became sons virtuously were famous in the world as mutual
beneficiaries.

CHAPTER FORTYONE
(The attainment of the seven hunters)

Sanatkumdara said:— .

1. O foremost among the performers of penance, the
Pitrs in the heaven are seven in number. Four of them are
embodied and three bodiless.

2. The primordial groups of gods, brahmins and others
worship them. With the power of thcir Yoga they streng-
then and gladden Soma.

=== PAGE 54 ===

1620 Sivapurdga

3-6. Hence people shall offer Sraddhas especially to the
Yogins. A silver vessel or a vessel with silver when offered
with Svadha, delights the Pitrs). When the sun is in the
northern transit he shall make offerings in the fire or in its
absence in water. He shall propitiate fire-god, Soma or Yama.
Those wha delight the Pitrs with devotion are delighted by
Pitrs. The Pitrs bestow nourishment, offspring, heaven, health
and other desired objects.

7. O sage, the rites of Pitrs are better than the rites
of the gods. O brahmin sage, since you are a devotee of the
Pitrs you shall be free from old age and death.

8. Osage, the goal attained by devotion to the Pitrs
is not attained by the practices of Yoga. O great sage, so
devotion to the Pitrs shall be pursued with care.

Markandeya said :—

9. After saying thus and immediately bestowing the
vision of perfect knowledge the lord of the gods disappeared.

10. O Bhisma, listen again. Formerly, even after
learning the code of Yoga, the brahmin sons of Bharadvaja
were degiaded due to their evil course.

11. Their names which indicate their activities are
Vagdusta (defiled in speech), Krodhana (angry), Hirhsra
(violent) , Pisuna(backbiter ), Kavi (poet ), Svasrsa (self-creating)
and Pitrvartin (worshipping the pitrs)

12. O dear, the sons of Kausika became the disciples
of Garga. When their father had expired they went in exile.

13. At the instance of their preceptor they looked
after his cow and her calf. All of them were unjust in their
actions.

14. O descendant of Bharata, once in their course of
wandering in the forest, they were oppressed by hunger.
They had the cruel intention of injuring the cow then.

15. Kavi and Svasrsa forbade them do so. But they
could not be prevented from that act.

16. The brahmin Pitrvartin who performed Sraddha
everyday with devotion to the Pitrs spoke to them angrily.

17. If it is not possible to stop this do it with the
Pitrs in view. Perform the Sraddha, ye all cautiously.

=== PAGE 55 ===

Umdsarhhitd 1621

18. If performed thus, the cow will attain picty undoub-
tedly. By worshipping Pitrs we shall not be affected by sin.

19. O descendant of Bharata, on being advised thus,
they all sprinkled the cow with sacred water, dedicated it to
the Pitrs and used it as their food.

20. After eating the cow they said to the preceptor
saying—“The cow is killed by a tiger. Let the calf be accepted.”

21. The sage accepted the calf with great distress. The
killers of the cow became sinful by their false reverence and
service.

22. Odear, in due course, when their term of life ex-
pired the seven brothers passed away.

23-24. They were reborn as the sons of a hunter as a
result of their cruelty, violence, being ignoble towards the
preceptor and their over-indulgence in fierce violence. They
were reborn in the country of Dasarnas.4¢ They were strong,
intelligent and experts in piety.

25. They were engaged in the practice of sacred rites.
They were free from the delusion of hunting animals. On the
beautiful mountain Kalafijara they passed their time with
distress.

26. Recollecting the event of their death the forest-
roamers became forbearers, free from Dvandvas and averse
to taking gifts.

27. The hunters performed auspicious rites, and holy
deeds, disassociating themselves from the wicked. They had
the power of the memory of the previous birth.

28. Whatever sacred rites they had heard in the pre-
ceptor’s hermitage in the previous births were retained in
their minds. So also the goal of non-return to this world.

29-30. They performed their penance, had their food
and finally cast off their lives on that mountain. O descen-
dant of Bharata, O king, the different places where they
fell dead are still seen in the same manner on_ the
mount Kalafijara.4® Thanks to their activities neither auspi-

44- The Western DaSarra comprised the Eastern Malwa including
the kingdom of Bhopal with its capital at Vidisa while the eastern
Dasarna formed a part of Chatusgarh district in the Madhya Pradesh

(B.H.D, Sec. III).
45. See P. 1273 note 128,

=== PAGE 56 ===

1622 Sivapurdna

cious nor inauspicious, they were reborn in a life neither
auspicious nor inauspicious.

31. On an island in an auspicious spot the seven be-
came aquatic birds. They were reborn as Cakravaka birds
in a life that is neither auspicious nor inauspicious.

32. They abandoned the contact with their mates.
They were like sages practising sacred rites, free from
associations and Egotistic feelings. They remained calm.
They did not accept gifts. They were free from Dvandvas.

33. They were birds only in name. They were holy
bachelors delighted in renunciation. They were birds practising
sacred rites.

34. They could remember their previous births. They
grew old even as they were bachelors. They remained to-
gether free from aberrations and performed good rites.

35. When they were born as brahmins they acted
falsely to their preceptor. Still in their birth as birds they
attained knowledge as a result of the Sraddha they had
performed.

36. They had performed the Sraddha for the Pitrs
with due rituals. They retained memory of previous noble
birth.

37. The knowledge of Brahma practised by the
ancients or found in the preceptors’ families stands as of
yore even today. One shall practise that knowledge there-
fore. :

38. They were of noble birth and were named
Svatantra. Suyajfia, Sumanas, SuvakSuddha and the fifth one
Chidradarsgaka.

39. While they were practising sacred rites an auspicious
event happened there. O great sage, please listen to that.

40. The prosperous king of Nipas,“6 endowed with
strength, and accompanied by his harem entered that forest.

41. The Cakravaka Svatantra yearned much, on
seeing the happy king endowed with the glory of the king-
dom pass along.

46. Nipa signifies a land lying at the foot of a mountain. Whether
a pat:icular locus is meant to be conveyed by this word is not clear,

=== PAGE 57 ===

Umédsarhhitd 1623

42-43. I have become weary with the observance of
fasts and steady penance. If there is a merit accruing from
penance or the observance of checks and restraints lei me
become like him the abode of fortune and bliss.

Markandeya said:—

44. Then two of his comrades said. ‘We shall be your
ministers, your delighters and well-wishers.”

45. After saying “So be it”, the Yogic soul attained
his goal. The two Cakravakas replied to him.

46. After renouncing action by the Yogic practices
why do you long for such a boon? Hence hear my statement.

47. Odear, you will become a king in the excellent
city of Kampilya.47 These too will be your ministers who will
not go astray.

48. The three did not speak about the kingdom to
their four comrades. Being delighted Sumanas said again.

49. When the curse is over you will attain Yoga.
Sarvasattva, Suyajfia and Svatantra too will attain yogic powers.

50. Due to their favour you will attain merit. You have
sprinkled the cow and offered it to the Pitrs.

51. We shall acquire knowledge which shall work as
the means of Yoga for all. This statement is bold and
spirited and is quoted as a verse.

52. After attaining human life you will attain “Yoga”.
After saying this the learned bird Sumanas became silent.

Markandeya said :—
53. Thus I have menioned their story to you. What
more do you wish to hear?

47. Kampilya was the capital of South Paiicala identical with
modern Kampil in the Farrukhabad District to the south of the Ganges.

=== PAGE 58 ===

1624 Sivapurdna
CHAPTER FORTYTWO

(Power of the Pitrs)

Bhisma said :—

1. Markandeya of great intellect, O foremost among
the devotees of the Pitrs what happened after that? O excel-
lent sage, please tell me.

Markandeya said :—

2. Those seven traversers of the lake Manasa engaged in
sacred rites and Yoga got their bodies withered up taking
in only air and water.

3. After sporting about for a long time there, like
Indra in Nandana,‘® the king, accompanied by his wives and
the members of his harem returned to his city.

4. A son Aniha was born to him. He was highly
virtuous. King Vaibhraja established his son in the kingdom
and went to forest.

5. Without taking in any food, breathing in only air
he began to perform a great penance in the spot where those
comrades were present.

6. Then that forest Vibhraja shone splendidly. It
became very famous as the bestower of Yogic Siddhi.

7. It was there itself that the four birds of Yogic rites
and the three that tell from Yoga cast off their bodies.

8. They were reborn in Kampilya as _ seven noble
souls Brahmadatta and others. All of them were free from
sins.

9. Four of them had the memory of their previous
births but three of them were deluded. That Svatantra of
great Yogic power was now called Brahmadatta.

10. Chidradarsin and Sunctra were the masters of the
Vedas and Vedangas. They were born as sons of brahmins
well-versed in the Vedas. They had the memory of the
previous births.

11. Paficdla was conversant with many Kk mantras. He
became a preceptor. Pundarika became the master of

48. Itis a grove of Indra lying to the north of Meru.

=== PAGE 59 ===

Umdsarhhita 1625

two Vedas. He was a Chandoga (master of prosody) and
an Adhvaryu (priest of sacrifice).

12 On seeing his son Brahmadatta free from sin, the
king crowned him in kingdom and attained the supreme
goal.

13. Pafcala and Pundarika established their sons in
the house and went to forest. There they attained the
great goal.

14. O descendant of Bharata, Brahmadatta’s wife
Sannati sported with her husband with single-minded
devotion.

15. The other three Cakravaka comrades were born
as brahmin sons in the family of a poor man, O king.

16. The four sons of Chidradarsin were endowed with
Vedic study. They were Dhrtimat Sumahitman, Tattva-
dargin and Nirutsuka.

17. They were engaged in Yogic practice. They took
leave of one another, bowed at the lotus-like feet of Siva
and set out.

18. The enthusiasts desiring freedom from rebirth
resort to Siva’s feet. May those feet of Siva destroy sins.

19. O great sage, if any physical, mental or verbal
sin is committed, one shall read this narrative with full
devotion.

20-22. By repeating the names of Siva, one gets rid of
all sins soon. As soon as the name Siva, the lord of the gods,
is uttered sins are quelled like an unbaked pot in water,
O great sage. In proportion to the sins committed and in
order to quell them the Japa of Siva’s names shall be per-
formed by the faithful. In order to achieve the fruits of all
desires too, this Japa shall be performed accordingly.

23. He who reads or hears this for prosperity is
liberated from sins and attains ,salvation. There is no
doubt in this.

=== PAGE 60 ===

1626 Sivapuréna

CHAPTER FORTYTHREE
(The mode of worshipping Vyasa)

Saunaka said:—

1. O Sita having Vyasa as preceptor, please tell me
now the mode of worshipping the preceptor. What shall be

done at the end of listening to the holy book ? Please mention
that also.

Sita said:—

2. After hearing the story the devotee shall worship the
preceptor duly with devotion. Delighted in mind he shall
make liberal gifts duly to the preceptor at the conclusion of
the holy book.

3. The intelligent devotee shall bow to the propounder
and worship him duly. Gifts of ornaments for hands and
ears and fine garments shall be made.

4-5. After the worship of Siva he shall present to the
preceptor a cow and its calf. He shall make a book-seat
with gold, a Pala in weight and cover it with a good cloth.
The manuscript of the holy book written in beautiful hand
shall be placed on it and given to the preceptor. The in-
telligent devotee will be liberated from worldly bondage.

6. O sage, a village, an elephant ora horse or other
things shall be given as possible to the noble preceptor who
reads and propounds the story.

7. O sage Saunaka, Purana is efficacious if it is
listened to in accordance with the rules. I speak truth to you.

8. © sage, the Purana full of the meanings of the
Vedas, the heart of the Vedas, the meritorious holy book
shall be listened to with devotion and in accordance with
the rules.

=== PAGE 61 ===

Umasamhita 1627
CHAPTER FORTYFOUR
(The birth of Vyasa)

The sages said:—

1-3. O Sita of great intellect, O store-house of mercy,
please narrate the birth of Vyasa. O holy lord, please
satisfy our curiosity. Vyasa’s mother is known as Satyavati.
She was married to king Santanu. How was Vyasa the great
Yogin born of her from Pardsara? There is a great
doubt in regard to that. It behoves you to remove that doubt.

Suta said:—

4. Once, while he was making his pilgrirnage,
Paragara the yogin casually came to the auspicious and
beautiful banks of the Yamuna.

5. The righteous soul spoke to the ferryman who
was taking his meals “Take me across the Yamuna quickly
in your boat”.

6. When the ferryman was thus urged by the sage
he spoke to his daughter Matsyagandha :—Girl, quickly
take this sage to the other bank in the boat.

7. This sage, O fortunate girl, is born of the womb of
Dr’yani. He is the ocean of sacred rites. He has mastered
the for Vedas. Now he desires to cross this river.

€ Thus directed by her father, Matsyagandha began
to tale the great sage of solar splendour seated in the boat
acros the river.

9. That great Yogin whohad never been fascinated
eves on seeing the beauty of the celestial damsels became
ovewhelmed by lust towards her, in the circumstances.

10. Desirous of clasping the beautiful daughter of the
fiherman, the sage touched her in the right hand with his
ught hand. .

ll. The wide-eyed lass spoke to him smilingly—“O
sage of controlled speech, why do you intend to perpetrate
this despicable deed ?

12. O most intelligent one, you are born of the beanti-
ful family of Vasistha. O brahmin, I am the daughter of
a Nisada. How can our union be proper ?

=== PAGE 62 ===

1628 Sivapurdna

13. O excellent sage, birth as a man is very difficult to
obtain; especially that as a brahmin. Even there the state
of an ascetic is very rarely achieved.

14, It is extremely surprising that you endowed with
learning, good physique, speech, noble birth and good con-
duct have become subservient to the arrows of Kama!”

15. Then she thought within: “If this Yogin engages
himself in the vicious act there is none in the world to prevent
him due to his power of inflicting curse.”

16. After thinking in the mind thus she said to the
great sage—“O holy lord, please forbear till I take you to
the other bank.”

17. On hearing her words the king of Yogins
Parafara left off her hand. He reached the other shore.

18. Afflicted with lust the sage caught hold of the
lass. Tremblingly the lass spoke to the merciful sage.

19. “O great sage, I have foul smell and black com-
plexion. I am the daughter of a Nisdda. You are the
most excellent of Yogins of extremely liberal thoughts.

20. The union between us is not proper as of a
piece of worthless glass with gold. The sexual uaion of
two persons of the same class and features may be conducive
to bliss.”

21. As the sage addressed her thus, the damse was
instantly converted into Yojanagandha, (one whose fragrant
odours spread to a Yojana), one of fine features and beuty.

22. Afflicted by lust the sage caught hold of her
again. On seeing him bent upon seizing her she said agin.

23. ‘It is mentioned in the Vedas that sexual intercourse
shall be indulged in at night; not during the day. Thee
is great harm in having sexual intercourse during the day
time. It is censured.

24, Hence please wait till the night falls. Now all the
men will see us and so shall my father who stands at the
other bank.”

25. On hearing the words uttered by her, the leading
sage immediately created a screen of snow, thanks to the
strength of his merit,

26. When the sheet of mist spread and it looked just

=== PAGE 63 ===

Umésamhita 1629

as night, the girl, afraid of submitting herself to sexual
intercourse, spoke to the sage again.

27. “OQ Yogin, your semen never fails. You may
enjoy me and go away. O holy lord, I shall become
pregnant, what will be my fate then?

28. O intelligent sage, my virginity will be ruined,
People will laugh at me. What will I tell my father?”

Pard$ara said: —

29. O maiden, O beloved girl, sport with me freely
with loving emotion. You tell me what you desire. I shall
fulfil it.

30. By making my advances fruitful you will be known
as Satyavati. You will deserve the respect of all Yogins
and even the gods.

Satyavati said:—

31-32. If neither my father nor mother nor anyother
person on the earth comes to know of this, if my virginity
is not affected, O lord, if the son born of me attains won-
derful power like you, if there be sweet odour in my body
for ever and if there be fresh youth in me, accept mc then.

Pardgara said:—

33. Listen to me O beloved girl, all your desires will
be fulfilled. A son of great fame of Visnu’s part will be
born to you.

34. Know that there is a reason that I have become
lustful. Even on seeing the beauty of celcstial damsels my
mind was never deluded anywhere before.

35. On seeing you of fish odour 1 was enamoured.
O lass, lines drawn by Brah na on the forehead cannot prove
untrue. °

36. O comely lady, your son will be the author of the
Puranas, the classifier of the Vedas and renowned in the
three worlds.

37. O great sage, after saying this and enjoying the
beautiful lass, the sage, an expert in Yoga, took his bath in the
Yamuna and went away quickly.

=== PAGE 64 ===

1630 Sivapurdna

38. She conceived and immediately gave birth in an
island on the Yamuna*® to a son with the lustre of the sun and
resembling Kamadeva.

39. In his left hand he was holding the water pot and
in his right he had an excellent staff. He had matted hair
of tawny colour and shone like a mass of splendour.

40. Immediately after birth the brilliant sage spoke to
his mother “O mother, go as you please and I also go at my
will

41. O mother, whenever you have some work, whenever
you desire in your mind, please remember me. Immediately
I shall come to you to fulfil your desire.”

42. After saying this and worshipping his mother’s feet
the sage, a storehouse of penance, went away to perform
penance to holy centres quelling sins.

43. -She too returned to her father. The chaste lady
was overwhelmed by her love for her son. She recollected
his activities and described the event as her great fortune.

44. As the boy was born in an island he was known
as Dvaipayana. Since he classified the various branches of
the Vedas he is glorified as Vedavyasa. 7

45-49. Hc went to these holy centres :—Tirtharaja® at
the outset, which bestows virtue, love, wealth and salvation,
Naimisa,™ Kuruksetra,®? Gangadvara,®3 Avantika,® Ayodhya,®*
Mathura,®* Dvaraka,5? Amaravati,®8 Sarasvati,®® Sindhusanga,©

49. The river Yamuna is personified as the daughter of the sun by
his wife Sarnjna.

50. It isa famous place of pilgrimage on the northern bank of the
Ganga in Uttara Pradesh. See P. 35 note 27.

51. P. 76 note, P. 432 note.

52° It lies south of Thanesar, not far fiom Panipat in Haryana
province.

53. P. 1082 note.

54- P- 1314 note.

43. Itis situated on the Sarayu river in Audh near Faizabad, U.P.

56. It is situated on the right bank of the Yamuna river. Originally
it was called Madhuvana from the demon Madhu who ruled there.

57. P. 1229 note.

58. Itis situated on the bank of the Krsna river in the Madras
Presidency.

59. P. 47 note. It may also refer to Mallika Sarasvatii, KRS Ch.
1, V. 41.

6v, It is the place where the Indus joins the Western Seca.

=== PAGE 65 ===

Uméasambhita 1631
the confluence of the Ganga with the ocean,*! Kajici,*? Tryam-
baka,** the seven holy banks of the Godavari,“ Kalafijara,
Prabhasa,®° Badarikasrama,® Mahalaya,*? Ormmkaraksetra,®*
Paurusottama,® Gokarna,” Bhrgukaccha,” Bhrgutunga,7?
Puskara,”? Sriparvata and Dharatirtha He took ablutions
duly at these places and performed penance.

50-51. Wandering thus ovcr the various, holy centres
situated in different countries, the son of Kalika rcached the
city of Varanasi?> where Visvesvara himself and Annapirna
the great goddes», the storehouses of mercy shine in order
to give salvation to the devotees.

52. After reaching the holy centre of Varanasi and
visiting Manikarnika the great sage discarded the sin accu-
mulated in crores of birth.

53-57. After seeing Visvesa and other Lingas, taking
bath in puddles, tanks, wells and lakes, after bowing to all the
Vinayakas, after kneeling before all Gauris, aficr worshipping
Kalaraja and Bhairava the devourer ofall sins, after strenuo-
usly eulogising Dandanayaka and other important Ganas, after
propitiating Adikesava and other important Keéavas, after
repeatedly bowing to Lolarka and other important suns and
after offering balls of rice in all the holy spots alertly, the
meritorious soul installed the Linga Vyasesvara on secing

61. The upper part of the Bay of Bengal is known as Ganga-Sagara
for here the Ganga joins the sca.

62. Identical with the modern Conjecvaram. Sce P. 1365 note.
63. It is a sacred mount, source of the Goda river.

64. The Goda rises in the Western Ghats, flows through the Deccan
into the Bay of Bengal. SP omits to mention the seven sacred places on
its bank.

65. P. 1084 note 19; P. 1310 note 141.

66. P. 1327 note.

67. This peak of the Himilayas has not been identified so far.
58. P. 1254 note.
6y. P. 1264 note 125.
70. P. 1083 note 12; 1285 note 133.

71. P, 1262 note 116.

72. P. 1081 note,

73. A sacred “place near Ajmer famous for the lake Puskara
74. P. 1254 note

75. P. 266 note.

=== PAGE 66 ===

1632 Sivapuréna

whom, O brahmins, man becomes a master of all lores like
Brhaspati.

58-59. Afler worshipping devoutly Vigveéa and other
Lifgas he began to think frequently—‘‘What is that Linga
that bestows Siddhi instantancously and worshipping whom
the great god, we shall be able to attain all lores and by
whose blessings I may have the power to compose the
Puranas.

60-73. There are crores of Lingas; from the midst of
these what shall I instal, what shall I resort so ? Can it be
Onkaranatha, or Krttivasesvara or Kedarega, or Kameéa,
or Candrega, or Trilocana, or Kaleéa, or Vrddhakalesa, or
Kalasesvara, or Jyesthesa, or Jambukesa, or Jaigisavyesvara, or
Dasasvamedhesana, or Drumacandesa, or Drkkega or Garudega
or Ganesvara, or Prasannavadanega, or Dharmesa, or
Tarakeévara or NandikeSa or NivaseSa, or Patriéa, or Priti-
keSvara, or Parvatesa, or Pasupati, or Hatakesvara or
Brhaspatisvara, or Tilabhandesa or Bharabhitesvara, or
Mahajlaksmisvara or Marutega, or Moksesa, or Ganges.., or
NarmadeSvara, or KrsneSa, or ParameSana, or Ratnesvara, or
Yamunefa, or Langalisa, or Vifvesvara or AvimukteSvara, or
or Visalaksiga, or Vyaghresvara, or Varahesa, or Vidyesvara
or Varunega, or Vidhisa, or Har'kesesvara, or Bhavanisa,
or Kapardiga, or Kanduke‘a or AjeSvara or Visvakarmesvara,
or VireSvara, or Nade’a, or Kapilesa, or Bhuvanesvara, or
VAskuliga or Mahadeva, or Siddhiévara or VisvedeveSvara or
Virabhadrega or Bhairaveévara, or Amrtega; or Satifa or
Parvatisvara or Siddhesvara,Matangega or Bhitiévara, or Asad-
hisa, PrakaSeSa, or Kotirudresvara, or Madalasegvara, or
Tilaparnesvara, HiranyagarbheSa or shall it be Madhyames-
vara?”

74. Pondering thus, Vyasa, devoted to Siva with his
mind steady in meditation, thought for a short while.

75-77. “O I remember it now. I had forgotten it
before. My desire has been realised. There is a Linga
which is worshipped by the Siddhas. It bestows virtue, love,
wealth and salvation. Its sight and touch purifies the mind.
It opens the door to heaven. It is in the great holy centre,

=== PAGE 67 ===

Umasamhita 1633

the holy centre of the Siddhas, in Avimukta. There is the
great Linga Madhyamegvara by name.

78. There is no other Linga at Kasi than Madhyame-
$vara for the sight of which the gods come here on every
festive occasion.

79. Hence lord Madhyameévara shall be resorted to.
Many brahmins have attained Siddhis by propitiating Him.

80. Siva is called Madhyamegvara since he is stationed
mainly in the centre of Kagi for bestowing happiness
on the people.

81. It is by worshipping this deity that the Gandharva
Tumburu and the celestial sage Narada became proficient
in the art of music.

82. It is by propitiating Him that Visnu acquired the
art of bestowing salvation; and Brahma, Visnu and Rudra
became the creator, sustainer and the annihilator respec-
tively.

83. Kubera became the lord of wealth; Vamadeva the
head of the devotees of Siva; the childless Khatvanga was
blessed with children.

84. The celestial damsel Candrabhéma of cuckoo-
like sweet voice was merged into the Linga even as she was
dancing emotionally.

85. Srikara, son of the cowherdess, resorted to
Madhyamevara and attained the chieftainship of the Ganas
of the benevolent Siva.

86. Thanks to the favour of Madhyameévara the two
gods Sukra and Brhaspati honoured and respected by the
Asuras and gods became the master of all lore.

87. I too shall worship lord MadhyameSvara and
attain the power to compose the Puranas immediately.

88. After resolving thus the sage Vyasa, son of
Satyavati, took his bath in the waters of the Ganga and
performed the sacred rites and observances.

89. Sometimes he took in only leaves, sometimes he
lived on fruit and vegetable diet, sometimes on wind or
water and sometimes he observed complete fast and performed
the sacred rites.

90. Thus by these observances of restraints the holy

=== PAGE 68 ===

1634 Sivapuriina

sage worshipped Madhyamesvara thrice a day with flowers
of various trees,

91. A long time elasped thus. One day early in the
morning the sage was returning after his bath in the waters
of the Ganga.

92. The holy sage saw lord Madhyameégvara, the
bestower of desires of the devotees, in the midst of the
Linga.

93. His left side was adorned by Uma. He was
wearing the hide of a tiger as his upper cloth. His body
appeared beautiful with the surging waves of the Ganga
amidst his matted hair.

94. The moonlight of the autumnal crescent moon
was forming bright patches in his forelocks. Bhasma was
smeared all over his body. His body was as white as camphor
or the Arjuna tree.

95. He had assumed the form of a five-year-old boy
with eyes extending upto his ears. His lips were as red as
the coral. He was wearing ornaments befitting a boy.

96. The lustre of his body subdued the arrogance
of a crore Cupids. He was naked. His lotus-face was
beaming with smiles. He was sportively singing Saman
hymns.

97-98. On seeing Siva, the lord of Uma, the shoreless
ocean of mercy, known for his fondness of devotees and easily
propitiated with delighted pleasing face, inaccessible even to
the Yogins, the kinsman of the distressed and the Cit-formed
lord, the sage sang the song of prayer with words choked
with devotion.

Vyasa said:—

99. “O lord of gods, O fortunate one who are favour-
ably disposed to the refugees, O lord inaccessible to words,
mind and activities, and the one that are invisible even to
the Yogins.

100. O lord of Uma, the Vedas too do not realise
‘our greatness. You alone are the creator of the universe,
(he sustainer and the annihilator too.

101. You are the first and foremost of all gods. You

=== PAGE 69 ===

Uméasarhhita 1635

are the existence, knowledge and bliss. You have no name
or family lineage. O Sadafiva you are omniscient.

102. You alone are the great Brahman; the untier of
the knot of Maya, unsullied by the three attributes as the leaf
of the lotus unaffected by water.

103. You have neither birth nor conduct of life. You
have neither a native land nor a family. Even so you are
the lord of the three worlds. You fulfil the desires of the
three worlds.

104. Neither Brahma nor Visnu nor the gods including
Indra nor the leading Yogins know your reality. We worship
you of such features.

105. Everything originates trom you. You are all—the
lord of Gauri, the slayer of the Tripuras, a boy, a youth, an
aged man. I unite you with my heart.

106. Obeisance to lord Siva, who deserves the worship
of devotees, Obeisance to the Ancient Being; to Siva the
great Atman,”

107. After eulogising thus when the sage Vyasa
prostrated on the ground the delighted boy spoke to him.

108. O Yogin, choose your boon, whatever be in your
mind. There is nothing which cannot be granted to you
since I am subservient to my devotees.

109. Then the delighted sage Vyasa of great penance
stood up and replied—‘O lord what is hidden from you the
omniscient ?”

110. You are the immanent Soul and bestower of
everything. Why does the lord force me for begging which
is the cause of misery?

111. On hearing these words of Vyasa of pious mind,
lord Siva who had assumed the form of boy smiled “nd seit:-—
The boy said:—

112. O most excellent of those who now brakman,
the desire you have cherished in your heart will undoubtedly
be realised ere long.

113. I the immanent lord shall station myself in your
throat, O brahmin, and shall make you compose the Itihasa
and the Puranas efficiently.

114. The holy hymn “Abhilasastaka” (Eight Verses

=== PAGE 70 ===

1636 Stoapurdga

of Desire) that you uttered now shall fulfil the desires of
men who read or recite it in Siva’s temple thrice a day
for a year.

115. The recital of this hymn is conducive to the
increase of learning and intellect. It is the cause of all
riches and the bestower of virtue and salvation to men.

116. Even a fool, getting up early in the morning
taking his bath, worshipping the linga of Siva and reciting
this hymn for a year shall attain the status of Brhaspati
(preceptor of the gods. )

117. This hymn repeatedly recited for a year in the
presence of the Linga whether by a woman or a man,
duly observing restraints, shall increase the intellect and
learning.

118. After saying this the boy Siva merged himself
into the Linga. Shedding tears of love, Vyasa was overcome
with emotions.

119. Vyasa who thus secured the boon from the great
lord Madhyamesvara composed the eighteen Puranas spor-
tively.

120-122. The eighteen Puranas Brahma, Padma.
Vaisnava, Saiva, Bhagavata, Bhavisya, Naradiya, Markandeya,
Agneya, Brahmavaivarta, Lainga, Varaha, Vamana Kaurma,
Matsya, Garuda, Skanda and Brahmanda are conducive to
fame and merit to those who listen to the glory of Siva.

Sita said:—

123. You have enumerated the eighteen Puranas. O
foremost among the knowers of the Vedas please define
them now.

Vyasa said:—

124. This selfsame question was put to Nandike$vara
by Tandi the Brahminical Yogin. I shall tell you what he
had said.

Nandikesvara said:—

125. O Tandi, Brahma the four-faced deity is the
main speaker. Hence, O sage, the first Purana is called
Brahma.

=== PAGE 71 ===

Umasathhit a 1637

126. The second Purana is called Padma. It is so
called because it mentions the greatness of the Padmakalpa.

127. Another Purana composed by Parafara and en-
lightening the details of Visnu is called Vaisnava Purana. It
is said to be composed by Vyasa since there is no difference
between father and son.

128. Those who know the Puranas speak that purana as
Siva Purana wherein there are many stories of Siva in its
earlier and later forms.

129. Where the stories of the goddess Durga are
mentioned, it is said to be Bhagavata Purana as well as
Devipurana,’*

130-131. The Purana narrated by Narada is called
Naradiya. The seventh Purana is called, O Tandi,
Markandeya because the great sage Markandeya is the
speaker therein. Since it is related to the fire-god, the
Purana is called Agneya. Since it recounts future events
the Purana is called the Bhavisya Purana.

132. Since the transformation of Brahman is narrated
the Purana is called Brahmavaivarta. Since the story of
Linga is mentioned it is called Linga Purana.

133-135. O sage, the twelfth Purana Vardha is so called
because it contains the story of Varaha, the great Boar. In
the Skanda Pur4na the speaker is lord Siva himself and the
listener is Skanda. In the Vamana Purana the story of
Vamana (the Dwarf-god) is mentioned. The Karma
Purana contains the story of Kirma (the tortoise-god). The
Matsya Purana is so called because it is expounded by
Matsya. The Garuda Purana is so called because the speaker
is Garuda himself. Since the story of the entire cosmic egg
is mentioned, the last Purana is called Brahmanda Purana.
Sita said :—

136. This question was put by me to the intelligent
Vyasa. From him the definitions of the Puranas were heard
by me.

137. Thus was Vyasa born of Satyavati and Paraéara.

76. According to SP., the Saivite Purina Devibhagavata, and not

the Visnuite Purana ‘Mahabhagavata’ belongs to the eighteen Puranas See
Winternitz H.1.L. Vol 1 Pt. IJ PP. 466-87.

=== PAGE 72 ===

1638 Sioapurdna

He composed the excellent Mahabharata and the Purana
Sarhhitas.

138. O brahmin, you shall not entertain a doubt as
to why Satyavati had sexual intercourse with Paragara and
Santanu.

139. This wondrous birth has sufficient reasons behind
it. Inthe story of great men the good qualities shall be
grasped by the intelligent people.

140. He who reads or listens to this great secret is rid
of all sins and is honoured in the world of sages.

CHAPTER FORTYFIVE”
(The incarnation of Mahakdlika )

The sages said :—

1. The beautiful episode of Siva with various in-
cidental anecdotes and narratives of various incarnations,
is heard. It yields both worldly pleasures and salvation to
men.

2. O foremost among those who know Brahman, we
wish to hear from you the beautiful story of the mother of
the universe, the goddess.

3. The first primordial Sakti of Siva the great
Brahman, who is called Umi, is the great mother of the
three worlds.

4. Her two incarnations—Sati and Haimavati, have
been heard, O intelligent Sita. Please mention her other in-
carnations too.

5. Which intelligent man will be reluctant to hear
the good attributes of the glorious mother? Wise men never
abandon them.

Sita said:—
6. You are all blessed and contented noble souls in as

77. For the close similarity of the form and contents of the present
and succeeding chapters ending with Umiasamhita compare Mar. P: the
narrative of Durga.

=== PAGE 73 ===

Umasarhita 1639

much as you inquire about the great story of Uma, the great
mother.

7. Sages consider the dust-particles of the feet of those
who listen, narrate and inquire about it, on a par with holy
centres. ;

8. Blessed and contented are they, their parents and
their family, whose mind is merged in the goddess, the great
Knowledge.

9. Those who do not eulogise the goddess of the gods,
the cause of all causes are deluded by the attributes of Maya.
They are unfortunate. There is no doubt in this.

10. Those who do not worship the great goddess, the
ocean of the juice of mercy, fall in the blind well in the form
of the cruel worldly existence.

11. Abandoning the goddess and resorting to another
deity is as bad as abandoning the Ganga and resorting to
water in the desert for the sake of satisfaction.

12. Which excellent man will abandon her whose
very remembrance bestows all the four aims of life without
any strain?

13. This same question was put to Medhas by the
noble Suratha. Please listen. I shall narrate what was
mentioned by Mcdhas.

14. Formerly in the Svarocigsa Manvantara there was
a king Viratha. Suratha his son was of great strength and
exploit.

15. He was very munificent, truthful, efficient in
duties, a devotee of the goddess, an ocean of kindness and
the protector of his subjects.

16. While he was thus ruling over the earth, with
the brilliance of Indra, nine other kings became desirous of
seizing his land.

17. They laid siege to his capital Kola.”* The king had
a terrible war with them.

18. That king was defeated by his powerful enemies
in the war. His kingdom was seized and he was banished
from his city Kola.

78. Kola is identical with the modern Kolbapur in the Mahar4gtra
State,

=== PAGE 74 ===

1640 Sivapurdna

19. The king went to another city of his along with
his ministers. There too he was defeated by his enemies
who had a large following.

20. His ministers and officers became inimical to him
due to adverse fate. They took away all the wealth from
the treasury.

21. The king left his city pretending to go out for
hunting. Alone he got up on a horse and went to the dense
forest.

22-23. Going about here and there, the king saw the
hermitage of a great sage. It was shining all round with
flower gardens. Everywhere the sound of Vedic hymns was
heard. All the animals there were quiet and peaceful. The
disciples and the disciples of their disciples moved here and
there.

24. O intelligent one, tigers and other ferocious and
powerful animals did not harass the animals of less strength in
that hermitage, thanks to the power of the leading brahmin.

25. The king who was very kind and learned was wel-
comed and honoured by the leading sage with pleasing words,
accommodation and food and stayed there.

26-27. Once the king began to think anxiously—‘Alas,
my kingdom has been seized by my haughty enemies. I am
unfortunate. My intellect is confounded. I have lost my
splendour. The kingdom which had been well guarded by
my ancestors is now enjoyed by my enemies.

28. There was no king in this family as weak as I.
What shall I do? Where shall I go? How shall I get the
kingdom back ?

29. My hereditary ministers and counsellors have left
me. I do not know which king they serve now.

30-32. I do not know what plight they are in, after
the ruination of the kingdom. My heroic soldiers, very
enthusiastic in the battle, slayers of enemies, now serve
another king. Huge elephants like mountains, horses fast
as wind have gone away. Is the traditional treasury accu-
mulated by my ancestors well guarded or not? Thus the
very virtuous king became much deluded.

=== PAGE 75 ===

Umdsamhita 1641

33-35. In the meantime a certain Vaigya came there.
The king asked him—“Sir, who are you? Why have you
come here? Why do you appear to be very morose and
dejected? Please tell me this, now.”

On hearing the sweet words of the king, the leading
Vaisya Samadhi shed tears. He spoke to the king in words
full of humility and friendship.

The Vaisya said:—

36-38. “O king, I am a Vaisya Samadhi, born of a
rich family. Out of greed for my wealth I have been
abandoned by my wife, sons and others. I am depressed
by my past Karman. O king, I have come here to the
forest. I am worried about my sons, grandsons, wife,
brothers, their sons and friends. O lord, ocean of mercy,
I am in dark about their welfare.

The king said:—

39. How is it that you love, even as senseless animals
do, those sons and others who are of evil conduct and
covetous for wealth and by whom you have been ousted?

The Vaisya said:—

40. O king, words pregnant with substantial sense
have been uttered by you. Still my mind is deluded by the
tie of love.

41. O excellent sage, the king and the Vaisya, both
of them equally deluded then approached the sage Medhas.

42. The valorous king accompanied by the chief of
the Vaisyas bowed his head to the leading Yogin.

43. With palms joined in reverence the king spoke
to the sage:—“O holy lord, it behoves you now to dispel
our delusion.

44. Abandoned by the royal glory I have resorted to
this dense forest. Still I am not content and happy since
my kingdom has been taken away.

45. This Vaigya has been expelled from his house by
his people, wife and others. Still his sense of affinity and
kinship with them does not go off.

=== PAGE 76 ===

1642 Sivapurana

46. What is the reason hereof? Please say. Wise
though we are, our minds are afflicted and agitated by
delusion. This is great foolishness.

The sage said:—

47. The great Maya in the form of the eternal Sakti
is the material cause of the universe. It is this that drags
the minds of all and makes them deluded.

48. O lord, Brahma and other gods deluded by this
Maya do not realise the truth. What then is the story of
men?

49. That alone, Paramesvari of three attributes,
creates the universe; she alone sustains it and she alone
destroys it at the proper time.

50. O excellent king, only he surmounts this delusion
on whom the favourite goddess who assumes forms as she
pleases becomes delighted.

The king said:—

51. O sage, who is that Goddess? Who is that great
Maya who fascinates all? How was that goddess born? Please
tell me.

The sage said:—

52-53. When the whole universe had been one great
expanse of water,” a vast sea, when KeSava, the king of
Yogins, resorted to Yogic slumber aad was sleeping on Sesa,
two Asuras were born of the dirt in the ears of Visnu.
They became notorious on the surface of the world in the
names of Madhu and Kaitabha.

54. They were terrible with huge bodies. They had
the dazzling brilliance of the sun at the time of dissolution
They had huge jaw bones. Their faces were hideous with
curved fangs. They seemed to devour all the worlds.

79. P. 1071 note. For details see Agrawal. MP—-A Study PP. 9.
266, 321. We find a rock-cut image of Ekaruava at Udayagiri(c 400 A.D.)
The idea is often repeated in the Puranas Cf. Viynu P. 1. 3,24.

CHAT F AMAT TAT WTA: |
wfierearrs: Ta Fataaatag fas: 1

=== PAGE 77 ===

Umasamhita 1643

55. On seeing the lotus-seated deity in the umbilical
lotus®® of the lord, the two Asuras®! shouted “Hey, who are
you?” and attempted to kill him.

56. On seeing the two Daityas and observing that
Vignu was still lying in the vast milky ocean,®? Brahma
eulogised Paramesvari.

Brahma said:—

57. O Mahamaya, save me, save me, O goddess
favourably disposed to those who seek refuge in you, O mother
of the universe, save me from these Daityas of hidcous
features.

58-59. I bow to the great Maya, the Yogic slumber,
Uma, Sati, Kalaratri, Maharatri, Moharatri, greater than
the greatest, the mother of the three deities, the eternal,
the bestower of the fruits of the cherished desires of the
devotees, the protectress of the gods and the ocean of mercy.

60. It is by your power that Brahma creates the
world, Visnu protects it and Siva destroys it at the opportune
time.

61. O Mother, you are Svaha, Svadha, Hri, the un-
alloyed intellect, Tusti (satisfaction), Pusti nourishment),
Santi (peace), Ksanti (forbearance), Ksudha (hunger) and
mercy itself.

62. O mother, you are the Maya of Visnu, the very
consciousness, the great Sakti, Lajja (bashfulness) and Trsna
( thirst) .

63. You are Bhranti (Illusion). You appear in the
form of Smrti (Memory): you stay assuming the form of
mother. You are Laksmi in the house of those who engage
themselves in meritorious activities.

80, The idea is often repeated in the Puranas. Cp M. 168. 15.
‘qaq Treagaa FacTAeferaiedar |
aaah free wrencra fecraq i
81. Sprung from the ears of Vignu while he was, asleep at the end
ofa Kalpa, Madhu and Kaitabha were about to kill ‘Brahma but were
killed by Visnu. Prof. Agrawal however offers a symbolical interpretation

of Madhu and Kaitabha as Rajas and Tamas.
82. See ?. 224 note.

=== PAGE 78 ===

1644 Sioapurtna

64. You are Jati (Birth), Vrtti (cause of activity) and
Vyapti (pervasiveness.) You pervade everything in the
form of intelligence.

65. O Mother, please delude these unthwartable
Asuras. O origin of the universe, please waken Visnu the
unborn lord.”

The sage said:—

66-67. O king, on being requested by Brahma for the
destruction of Madhu and Kaitabha, the mother of the
universe, the great Vidy4, the presiding deity of all Vidyas,
Sakti the enchantress of the three worlds manifested herself
as Mahakali on the twelfth Tithi of the bright half of the
month of Phalguna.

68. Then a celestial voice arose:—‘O lotus-seated one,
do not be afraid. I shall remove the thorn after killing
Madhu and Kaitabha in the battle.”

69. After saying this and coming out of the eyes,
mouth etc. of Visnu, the great Maya stood before Brahma
of unmanifested birth.

70. Visnu, the lord of gods stood up and saw in
front of him the Daityas Madhu and Kaitabha.

71. A battle ensued between Visnu of unequalled
splendour and the two Daityas lasting for five thousand
years. Then there ensued a hand-to-hand fight.

72. Deluded by the powerful great Maya, the excellent
Danava spoke to the lord Visnu—‘Ask for whatever boon
you desire to choose.”

Narayana said:—
73. If you are pleased with me grant me this boon
that I may kill you. I do not request for any other boon.

The sage said:—

74, On seeing the earth covered by a great expanse
of ocean they spoke to KeSava:—Kill us in a spot where
the earth is not covered with water.”

75. After giving his consent the lord lifted up his
dazzling discus, placed their heads on his loins and cut
them off.

=== PAGE 79 ===

Umésarmhita 1645

76. O king, thus I have told you about the origin
of Kalika. O intelligent one, listen to the origin of Mahi-
laksmi now.

77. Although free from aberrations, and devoid of
forms and features, goddess Uma manifested herself in
different Yugas for the destruction of the distress of the
gods, after assuming different forms and features.

78. Thus I have described to you her manifestation
in bodily form whose wish alone manifests as everything
efficaciously. Thus she conducts her sports in that way and
thereby gives chance to her devotees to describe her attributes.

CHAPTER FORTYSIX
(Incarnation of Mahalaksmi)

The sage said:—

1. There was a demon Rambha who was the crest-
jewel of the race of Daityas. From him was born Mahisa%
the Danava of great splendour.

2. That king of Danavas defeated all the gods in
battle and ruled over the kingdom of heaven seated on the
throne of lord Indra.

3. The defeated gods sought refuge in Brahma. With
them Brahma went to the place where Visnu and Siva® were
present.

4. After reaching there and bowing to Siva and
Visnu the gods narrated all their woeful tale in the proper
order.

5. O lords, we are harassed by the wicked Mahiga.
We have been ousted from heaven after our defeat in the
battle-field.

6. We are wandering in this world of mortals with-

83. According to MB. the Asura Mahisa was killed by Karttikeya.

SP. mentiors his death at the hands of Candi.
84. The word ‘Vryakapi’ in the dual form signifies Viynu and Siva.

=== PAGE 80 ===

1646 Sivapurdna

out peace or happiness anywhere. O what pitiable plights
we—Indra and others—have been led to !

7-8. The sinful Asura who has offered freedom from
fear to the partisans of the Daityas, himself performs the
ordained task of these—viz, the sun, the moon, Varuna,
Kubera, Yama, Indra, Agni, wind, the Gandharvas, Vidya-
dharas and the good Caranas and others as well.

9. Hence it behoves you to save us the gods who
have sought refuge in you. O lords, please think of the
means of killing him immediately.

10. On hearing the gods, Visnu and Siva were very
angry. Their eyes rolled through anger.

ll. Then a great splendour issued forth from the
mouths of the infuriated Visnu and Siva and from the
bodies of other gods.

12. The gods who were devoted to meditation on
Durga saw the mass of splendour blazing in all the ten
directions.

13. That highly terrible splendour issuing forth from
the bodies of the gods joined together and became a woman
Mahisamardini herself.

14. Her dazzlingly brilliant face constituted the
splendour of Siva, the hairs the splendour of Yama and
the arms the splendour of Visnu.

15-18. Her breasts were formulated by the splendour
of the moon; the waist by that of Indra; the calves and
thighs by that of Varuna; the hips by that of the earth;
the feet by that of Brahma; the toes by that of the
sun; the fingers by that of Indra; the nose by that of
Kubera; the teeth by that of the patriarch; the eyes by
that of fire; the eyebrows by that of the dusk; the
ears by that of the wind, her other limbs by that of other
heaven-dwellers. Thus the goddess manifested herself on
the lotus-seat.

19. On seeing her thus formulated by the mass of
splendour of the gods, they attained great delight.

20. Observing that she had no weapons, Brahma and
other gods decided to make her fully equipped with

weapons.

=== PAGE 81 ===

Umasamhita 1647

21. Then lord Siva offered her a spear; Lord Krsna
gave her a discus; Varuna conch and noose.

22-23. The fire-god gave her Sakti; the wind-god a
bow and a quiver full of arrows; Indra the thunderbolt
and a bell; Yama a big staff; Prajapati a garland of beads;
Brahma a water-pot and the sun the lustrous hair.

24-27, Kala gave her a sword and a shining shield,
the milk ocean a beautiful necklace, two fresh pieces of
cloth, the crest-jewel, car-rings, bangles, crescent-shaped
ornaments, beautiful anklets, shoulder-pieces, a necklace and
finger-rings. Visvakarman gave her a beautiful axe and the
Ocean various weapons, an impenetrable armour, a beauti-
ful garland and a lotus.

28-29. Himavat gave her a lion and gems of various sorts.
Kubera a vessel filled with winc. Sesa a Nagahara of
wonderful workmanship, studded with various precious gems.

30. Thus honoured, the goddesss with these and
other similar objects, ornaments, weapons etc. shouted loudly
again and again.

31. The sky was filled with her terrible noise that
echoed tremendously and made the three worlds agitated.

32. The four oceans shook and rolled. The earth
quaked. Cries of victory were shouted by *the gods harassed
by Mahisa.

33. Then the gods eulogised the great Sakti, Ambika
in the form of Mahalaksmi with words choked with devotion.

34. On seeing the world agitated, the enemies of the
gods got up with uplifted arms and with their armies ready
for war.

35. The infuriated Mahisa rushed at the direction of
the sound and saw the goddess who had pervaded the three
worlds with her beautiful lustre.

36. In the meantime, crores of great heroes led by
Mahisasura came there with weapons.

37-38. Ciksura, Camara, Udagra, Karala, Uddhata,
Bagkala; Tamra, Ugrasya, Ugravirya, Bidala, Andhaka,
Durdhara, Durmukha, Trinetra Mahahanu—these and many
others, heroic and efficient in battle, came there.

39. As they, the masters of weapons and _ missiles,

=== PAGE 82 ===

1648 Sivapurdna

fought with the goddess in the battle a terribly long time
elapsed.

40. Different weapons and missiles hurled by the
hosts of enemies were rendered futile instantaneously by the
power of the goddess.

41. Then the goddess hit and struck the hosts of
enemies Ciksura and others with her club, arrows, spear,
Sakti and axe.

42. When his armies fell the demon Mahisa struggled
with the hosts of soldiers that issued from the breath of the
goddess.

43. He kicked some with the hoofs, hit some with
the horns and others with his tail and snout.

44. After slaying the Ganas the chief of Asuras rushed
at the lion of the goddess in order to kill it. Then she be-
came wrathful.

45. He of great virility thrashed the ground with his
hoofs, uprooted a mountain with his horns, hurled it and
shouted.

46. O excellent king, heavy mountains hurled by
him as he rushed all round fell in the battle-ground from
the sky.

47. Clouds split by his horns were shattered to pieces.
The ocean struck at with his tail throbbed and splashed
water beyond the shores all round.

48. On seeing the demon Mahisa thns_ infuriated,
Ambika, the protectress of the gods, became ready to kill
him.

49. She took up a noose and hurled it at him. She
bound the Asura Mahisa. Then the demon abandoned his
assumed guise.

50. Wielding Maya, he became a lion. Soon as
Ambika tried to cut off his head he became armed with
a sword.

51. She then struck him with the arrows, as he stood
there with the sword and shield. He then became an
elephant and struck at the lion with his trunk.

52. The goddess cut off his hand with her sword. The
Gemon then assumed his original form.

=== PAGE 83 ===

Umasarhhita 1649

53. He then agitated three worlds including the
mobile and immobile beings. Then, Candika of great honour
and exploit became infuriated.

54. She drank the beverage again and again. With
eyes rolliug she laughed aloud. The haughty Asura too,
proud of his strength and exploit, roared.

55. He uprooted the mountains and hurled them at
her. She too reduced them to powder and struck them
with arrows.

56. With her face reddened as a result of the inebria-
tion after drinking wine, and with her scnses excited, she spoke
in a tone as majestic as the rumbling of the clouds.

The goddess said:—

57. ‘QO stupid fellow, O demon of ruined intellect, why
are you stubborn in vain ? None of the Asuras in the three
worlds can stand before me’’.

The sage said :—

58. Thus saying the goddess pounced on him, stamped
on his neck and pierced him with her fierce spear.

59. Pressed with her foot and overwhelmed by her
might the Asura seemed as good as half dead.

60. Still he continued to fight. His head was cut off
with the sword and he was felled down on the ground.

61. Crying “Alas ! Alas” loudly, his followers, afraid of
the battle fled from the scene shouting ‘‘Save us, O save us’’.

62. The god Indra and others, eulogised the goddess.
‘The Gandharvas sang songs; the celestial damsels danced.

63. Oking, thus the origin of Mahalaksmi has been
narrated to you. Now listen to the origin of Sarasvati with
a calm mind.

=== PAGE 84 ===

1650 Sivapurdna
CHAPTER FORTYSEVEN

(Dhiimralocana, Canda, Munda and Raktabija are slain)

The sage said :—

1, There was a Daitya Sumbha and another equally
powerful Nigumbha. The three worlds including mobile and
immobile beings were attacked by the two brothers.

2. The gods afflicted and harassed by them went to
Himalaya and saluted the mother of all living beings, the
bestower of all desires.

The gods said :—

3. O goddess Durga, Victory be to you. O, beloved
of your kinsmen, be victorious. Obcisance to you, the cause
of the protection of the three worlds.

4. Obeisance to you, the bestower of salvation,
obcisance to the great mother, the cause of the creation,
sustenance and annihilation of the world.

5. O goddess of the form of Kalika, Tara. Chinnamasta,
Srividya, Obeisance to you.

6. O goddess of the worlds, of the form of Bhairava,
obeisance to you. Obeisance to Bagalamukhi (stork-faced).
Obeisance, to Dhimavati.

7. Obeisance to Tripurasundari, to Matangi, to Ajita
(the unconquered ) and to Vijaya.

8. Obeisance to Jaya, Mangala Vilasini, to you of
the form of milking maid and of terrible form.

9. Obeisance to you, O goddess, of the form of the
unconquered, of permanent form, the protectress of those
who seek refuge in you.

10. Obeisance to the one knowable through Vedanta;
obeisance to you the great soul, the heroine of infinite worlds
of this universe.

11. Eulogised thus by the gods the delighted goddess
the bestower of boons, spoke, to the gods—‘‘Who is _ being
eulogised by you here ?”

12. Then a virgin came out of the body of the
goddess. Even as they were winking she spoke to the
goddess with great reverence. ‘

=== PAGE 85 ===

Umasarhhita 1651

13. “O mother, this eulogy is addressed to me by
the heaven-dwellers harassed by the powerful Daityas
Sumbha and Nigumbha.”

14. Since she emerged out of the inner vestures of
her body she is called Kaugiki. The destroyer of the Asura
Sumbha is being sung in that name.

15. She alone is said to be UgratarikA and great
Ugratarika. She is called Matangi after the source from
which she manifested herself.

16. She addressed the gods—‘All of you stay here
fearlessly. I shall carry out your task without any strain.
I am independent”’.

17. After saying this, the goddess vanished. Canda and
Munda—the attendants of Sumbha and Nisumba saw the
goddess.

18. On seeing her beautiful form pleasing to the eyes
they were fascinated. They lost their consciousness and fell on
the ground.

19. Returning to their king they narrated the details
to him “O king, a certain beautiful lady hitherto unseen has
been seen by us.

20. Seated on a lion, on the beautiful peak of the
Himavat she was served by the virgins of the gods with
palms joined in reverence.

21. They massaged her feet and hands, decorated her
tresses, and applied collyrium to her eyes.

22. A certain damsel held out the mirror to her face.
Another handed over the betel-leaf along with cloves and
cardamom.

23. Some picked up the fallen dice and stood in front
of her. Some bedecked her body with ornaments and
clothes.

24. Her calves and thighs are like the stem of the
plantain tree. Her nose is like that ‘of a parrot. Her arms
are like serpents and creepers. She wears a beautiful girdle.
The anklets round her feet are jingling.

25. Pearl necklaces heave over her breasts rendered
fragrant with the musk. Neckiaces shine round her neck.
She was sporting about bedecked in chaplets.

=== PAGE 86 ===

1652 Sivapurdna

26. She has semi-circular marks on her forehead. She
wears ear-rings set with gems. Her plaited hair are pretty.
The wide three eyes bedeck her face.

27. She is imperishable, possessed of garlands. Bangles
shine in her hands. There are gold rings round her
fingers. Shining bracelets make her hands dazzle.

28. She is clad in white garments. She shines in her
lotus-pose with the marks of saffron on her forehead which
is also bedecked with the moon.

29. She has the brilliance of lightning. She wears
precious garments. Her breasts are elevated within her
bodice. She holds excellent weapons with her eight uplifted
arms.

30. There is no lady among the Asuras, Nagas,
Gandharvas or Danavas in the three worlds as beautiful as
she.

31. Hence the fitness for sexual indulgence with her
rests only in you since she is a gem among ladies and O
lord, you are a gem among men.

32. On hearing the words of Canda and Munda that
great demon Sumbha sent a messenger Sugriva to her.

33. ‘O messenger, there is a certain beautiful lady on
the snow-capped mountain. Méentioning these words of mine
she shall be strenuously brought here’’.

34. Thus urged by him, the exccllant Danava Sugriva
went to Himacala and spoke to the great goddess, the
mother of the universe.

The messenger said:—

35. O gentle lady, the Daitya Sumbha and his brother
Nisumbha are very strong and valorous. They are famous
in the three worlds.

36. O goddess, I am a messenger of Sumbha. I have
come with his message to which you will listen please.

37. ‘I have defeated Indra aud others in the battle
and taken away their jewels. I enjoy the share of the gods
offered to them in the sacrifices.

38. You are a jewel among women, more precious
than cther jewcls. Resort to me or to my younger brothet,
exhibiting your loving emotion.

=== PAGE 87 ===

Umdsamhita 1653

39. On_ hearing the message of Sumbha conveyed by
the messenger the Mahamaya, the beloved consort of Siva,
spoke.

The goddess said:—

40-41. © messenger, you speak the truth, not the lic.
But I have taken a vow that I shall endcavour to make one
alone as my husband who can shake off my pride, who can
conquer me in the battle. None else.

42. Hence you convey my words to Sumbha and
Nisumbha. Let cither do whatever is proper in this matter.

43. On hearing these words of the goddess the
Asura Sugriva returned to his king and acquainted him
with every dctail.

44. On hearing the report of the messenger Sumbha
of stern rule angrily said to Dhimrakga, the foremost of his
generals.

45-46. O Dhimraksa, there is a beautiful lady on the
snow-capped Himalaya mountain. Go quickly and fetch her
here. O excellent Asura, do not be afraid of this expedition.
If she wishes to fight, you shall fight strenuously.

47. Thus directed the Daitya Dhamraksa went to
Himilaya and spoke to the goddess who was a part of Uma.

48. “© lady, approach my lord. Otherwise I shall
kill you. I am accompanicd by sixtythousand Asuras”

The goddess said: —

49. «O hero, you are commissioned by the king of
Daityas. If you kill me what can I do for you ? But I
consider it impossible to go without a fight.’’

50. Thus addressed, the Danava Dhimraksa rushed
at her but was burnt with a mere Hunkara uttered by her.

51. Since then, that goddess is called Dhimavati in
the world. When propitiated she destroys hosts of enemics
of her devotees.

52. After Dhimraksa was killed, his army was crunched
and munched by the infuriated lion. Those who were
spared fied away.

53. On hearing that the Daitya was killed by the
goddess, the valorous Sumbha was angry and bit his lips.

=== PAGE 88 ===

1654 Sivapurdna

54. He sent the Asuras-Canda, Munda and Raktabija in
order. The Daityas, thus ordered, went to the spot where
Ambika was stationed.

55. On seeing the goddess seated on a lion, possessed
of Anima® and other Siddhis and dazzling the quarters with
her brilliance, the leading Danavas said.

56. “O lady, hasten to approach Sumbha and
Nifumbha. Otherwise we shall kill you along with your
Ganas and your lion.

57. O lady, choose him as your husband. He is eu-
logised by the guardians of the quarters and others. You
will attain a great bliss rare to attain by the gods.”

58. On hearing these words the goddess Amba smiled
and spoke interesting and truthful words.

59. Lord Siva, the great Brahman, the eternal god is
without a second. Even the Vedas do not understand his
reality. What then of Visnu and others?

60. I am His subtle Prakrti. How can I choose
another as my husband ? Even if she is overwhelmed by
love does a lioness choose a jackal as her mate?

61. A female elephant does not take an ass nor does
a leopardess take a hare. O Daityas, overcome by the
Serpent of Death you speak in vain.

62. Descend to Patala% all of you. If you have the
power, fight.’? On hearing her provocative words the Asuras
said to one another.

63. ‘We do not kill you as you are a woman. But
if you desire for battle be ready with your lion.”

64. While they spoke thus the fight ensued. The
arrows rained in the battle, sharp arrows from either side.

65. Thus fighting with them sportively the goddess
slew the Asura along with Ganda and Munda.

66. Though they had an inimical feeling these enemies
of the gods attained in the end that world which her followers
go to.

8&5. See P. 235 note.
86. According te the Puranic Mythology it is the seventh region
eseending from the earth below.

=== PAGE 89 ===

Umdsarhhita 1655
CHAPTER FORTYEIGHT

(The manifestation of Sarasvati)

The king said:—

1-2. O holy lord, O brahmin, what did Sumbha, the
suppressor of the gods, do on hearing that Dhimraksa,
Canda and Raktabija were killed by the goddess? Please
tell me this now. I desire to hear the purifying tale of the
goddess, the cause of the universe.

The sage said:—

3. O king, on hearing that the leading Daityas had
been killed, the great Asura of commendable valour ordered
his invincible followers who were thrilled at the very mention
of the war.

4. At my behest the Daityas born of the race of
Kalaka®’ have all assembled here with their armies and along
with Kalakeyas,®® Mauryas,®® Daurhrdas® and others. Let
them march on with hopes of victory.

5. After ordering the demons, Sumbha and Nisumbha
mounted on their chariots and set out. Their armies too
followed them like swarms of moths rising up from a
mountain definitely for their destruction.

6. Mrdangas, Mardalas, Bherikaés Dindimas, Jhar-
jharas and Anakas were sounded. The warmongers rejoiced
in the battle-ground. Those who were afraid fled away for
their life.

7. Clad in their martial dress the soldiers came in
their healthy spirits to the battleground. Holding various
weapons and missiles they teased one another cach eager for
his victory.

8. Soldiers on clephants, looked at the enemy with

.
87. In respect of this House no details are available either from the
MB. or the Purdras.

88. Kalakeyas, dscendants of Kalaki wife of Kasyapa, are often
mentioned as powerful demons in the MB, and the Puranas.

89. Mauryas are the descendants of the Asura Mura who is
generally mentioned in connection with Piagjyotisa

go. Daurhrdas are the descendants of the Asura Durhgda.

=== PAGE 90 ===

1656 Sivapurdna

indifference. In the company of the lord of Asuras they
rejoiced in the battle.

9. The sound arising from the guns rose up repeatedly
making the gods tremble. A great darkness enveloped the
sky. Even the chariot of the sun was not visible.

10. Foot-soldiers set out in excessive numbers desirous
of victory. Soldiers in chariots, on horsebacks, elephants and
others set out joyously in crores and crores.

1l. The rutting clephants like massive black mountains
spread their trumpeting sound in the battle-field. Camels
resembling small hills produced hoarse sounds from their
throats.

12. Neighing horses hailing from exalted lands, with
big ornaments round their necks, expert in the knowledge of
their gaits planted their legs on the heads of elephants and
flew like birds.

13. On seeing the army of the enemy advancing
thus, Ambika kept her bow well-strung. She sounded her
bell that distressed the enemy. The lion too shook his manes
and roared.

14, Seeing her bedecked in fine ornaments, holding
weapons and stationed on the Himalaya mountain Nigumbha
spoke words full of sentiments like a man clever in under-
standing the emotions of beautiful women.

15. “Even a petal of the Malati (Jasmine) flower
thrown on the beautiful body of women like you may distress
you. O goddess, how will you carry on a terrible war with
the self-same handsome body of yours ?”

16. After saying thus the great Asura became silent.
Candika spoke to him—“O foolish Asura, why do you
prattle in vain? Either fight or else return to Patala.**

17. The heroic demon, becoming infuriated, made a
wonderful shower of arrows on the battle-field just as masses
of clouds shower water during rains.

18. Along with his arrogant followers the demon
fought with sharp weapons as spears, axes, iron clubs,

gt. It is the lowermost of the nether regions where Vasuki reigns
over the Nagas.

=== PAGE 91 ===

Umdsamhita 1657

parighas, bows, Bhusundikas, javelins, horseshoe-edged
arrows and great swords.

19. In that war great elephants looking like black
mountains with foreheads pierced ran here and there. The
banners of Sumbha and Nisumbha white like flying cranes
fluttered herc and there.

20. The demons were shattered by Kalika like fishes.
The dreadful horses were beheaded and killed in the battle.
The other demons were devoured by the lion.

21. In the battlefield streams of blood flowed. The
dead soldiers floated. Their tresses of hair resembled the
moss. Their upper cloths resembled the white foam.

22. A great fight ensued where soldiers of equal rank
fought with one another. The cavalrymen fought their
counterpart; the elephant-riders with those on elephants:
the charioteers with those on chariots and the footsoldicrs with
footsoldiers.

23. Then Nisumbha thought to himself—‘‘A terrible
period has set in now. Even a poor man may _ become
rich and rich man poor if the time is adverse.

24. A senseless fellow may become intelligent and an
intelligent man dull. A wicked man may be praised by the
noble. The great and the powerful may be vanquished. The
weak may come out victorious in the war.

25. Victory or defeat come naturally at the stance of
the lord. Neither Siva nor Brahma nor Visnu has been able
to transgress his law.

26. Heroes do not come to the battlefield for turning
back. But how can I attain victory ina battle with this
lady who has destroyed my entire host ?

27. Indeed this lady is the ancient Prakrti, the great
Siva come here to achieve the task of the gods and harass
the army of the Daityas. She can never be an ordinary
woman .

28. It is inglorious to be killed by a woman or to
kill a woman for those who desire to taste the pleasures of
war. Still how shall we show our faces to the king of
Asuras without fighting ?

29. After thinking thus and sitting in a great chariot

=== PAGE 92 ===

1658 Sivapurdna

driven by a charioteer he hastened to the spot where the
lady consort of Siva was present; the goddess whose youth
was sought after by the celestial damsels.

30. He addressed her thus—«O goddess, of what
avail is it if the mercenary soldiers are killed ? If you
desire to fight, let both of us clad ‘n martial dress fight with
each other.

31. The goddess addressed K4li then—See the foolish
ambition of the two Asuras. Time the instigator of good
and bad actions renders the mind work in a different way
when adversity is imminent.”

32. Then Nisumbha attacked Candika as well as Kali
with thousands of arrows. With the volleys of her arrows
Siva split into a thousand pieces the arrows discharged by
the Asura.

33. He then lifted up his lustrous sword along with
the shield and struck the lion on its head. With her great
sword she split it too as the woodcutters do to a tree with
the axe.

34. When the sword was split he thrust an arrow into
her chest. The arrow too was cut. He then hurled the
trident which powdered it with her fist.

35. Prepared to die the heroic Asura seized a mace
and rushed at her. She reduced the mace into powder with
the edge of her trident. The demon shattered the trident
with another mace.

36. Then she struck Nisumbha with her sharp, terrible
serpentine poisonous arrows that were accustomed to drink
the blood of Asuras and brought him down to the earth.

37. When his younger brother of great honour and
strength fell Sumbha was furious. The eight-armed demon
seated himself in a chariot and came to the place where Siva
was present.

38. She blew the conch Arindama, produced unbear-
able bow-twang; the lion shaking its manes roared. The
whole sky reverberated with the threefold round.

39. Then the mother of the universe laughed bois-
terously making all the demons tremble with fear. The gods
shouted cries of ‘‘Victory” when she challenged the Asuras
in the battle.

=== PAGE 93 ===

Umdsarnhita 1659

40. The king of Daityas hurled a spear of shining
flames which was struck down by a meteor. Siva shattered
the arrows discharged by Sumbha. He too split the arrows
discharged by Siva into a thousand picces.

41. She lifted up her trident and struck the great
Asura. He fell down unconscious shaking heaven and earth
along with the ocean like a mountain whose wings had been
chopped off by Indra.*4

42. Suffering the pain arising from the trident, the
powerful demon, the suppressor of the gods, created ten
thousand hands and struck Kali and Candika along with the
lion, by means of his discus.

43. Splitting sportively the discus hurled by him, she
hurt and struck the Asura with the trident. ‘Thus both of
them met their death at the lotus-hands of Siva that
sanctify the universe and attained the great region.

44. When the powerful Nisumbha, and Sumbha of
terrible exploit were killed the Daityas cntcred Patala.*?

45. Others were devoured by Kali’s lion. The remain-
ing Asuras being excessively frightened fled in the quarters.

46. The rivers with clear water flowed along their
paths; the winds blew very gentle to the touch; the sky be-
came clear.

47. Sacrifices were revived by the gods and the sages,
Lord Indra and the gods felt blissful again.

48-49. O lord, this story of Uma is holy and meri-
torious. It describes the destruction of the king of Daityas.
He who regularly reads this with faith enjoys all worldly
pleasures inaccessible even to the gods and attains the abode
of Uma hereafter by the very grace of the goddess.

50. Thus was the goddess, slayer of Sumbha born.
She is said to be Sarasvati. O king, she has manifested
herself as a part of Uma.

g2. See P. 645 note.

93- Patala is called Balisadman—the abode o! Bali, According to a
legend God Visnu in the form of a Brahinin dwarf craved from Bali the
boon of three steps of ground and having obtaincd it stepped over
heaven and earth in two strides but then out of respect to Bali's devotion
and his grandson Prahlada’s virtues, he stopped short end Jeft to him
Pitala, the nether region. See P. 955 note 271; P. 750 note 147.

=== PAGE 94 ===

1660 Sivapurana
CHAPTER FORTYNINE

(The manifestation of Uma)

The sages said:—

1. O Siita, the most excellent among the omniscients
please mention the incarnation of Uma, the goddess of all
the worlds and the mothcr of Sarasvati.

2. She is sung as the primordial Prakrti of the sup-
reme Brahman. She_ is both possessed and devoid of forms.
She is of the form of eternal bliss. She is Sati.

Siita said:—

3. O sages, listen lovingly to the great story, the per-
fect knowledge of which alone helps man to attain the great
goal.

4. Once there was a clash between the gods and the
Asuras. Thanks to the power of the goddess the gods became
victorious.

5. Then the gods were proud and haughty. They
boasted—‘‘We are blessed. What can the Asuras do to
us ?°

6. Of our unbearable prowess, the Asuras are afraid.
They have gone to Patala saying, “Run, run”.

7. Then all of them proclaimed thus: “Wonderful is the
strength, splendour and good luck of the gods that has reduced
the race of the Daityas.

8. Then a mass of splendour appeared, at the unpre-
cedented sight of which the gods were surprised.

9. Ignorant of the real glory and the intention of the
goddess to quell their arrogance, the Asuras said with choking
throats ‘‘What is this ? What is this ?”

10. Then the lord Indra ordered the gods—‘Go ye all
and examine it and ascertain what it is.”

1]. Urged by Indra, the wind-god approached splen-
dour and addressed it, ‘‘Who are you ?” The splendour too
put the same question to him.

12. Thus asked by the big mass of splendour the
wind-god replied arrogantly.—“I am Vayu the vilal breath
of the universe.”

=== PAGE 95 ===

Umésamhita © 1661

13. Everything in the universe, mobile or immobile, is
woven like warp and woof into me. I am the support of
everything. I move the entire universe.”

14, Then the great splendour said:—“If you are com-
petent to move, O wind-god, please move this blade of grass
T have set before you. Move it as you please.”

15. Then wind-god put forth all his efforts. But the
blade of grass did not stir from its position. Then he was
put to shame.

16. The wind-god went silently to the assembly of Indra.
There he narrated the details of his discomfiture.

17. “False is our pride that we are the lords. In fact
we are helpless, insignificant creatures.”

18. Then Indra sent all the gods. When they could
not realise anything Indra himsclf went there.

19. On seeing Indra come, the unbcarable splendour
vanished immediately. Indra was surprised.

20. Then Indra thought to himself again and again—
“I seek refuge in him alone whose conduct is such as
this.’?

21-22. In the meantime, in order to bless them an’
remove their arrogance, Siva, the embodied form of unde
ceitful mercy, existence, knowledge and bliss, manifested her-
self on the ninth day of the bright half of the month Gaitra
when the sun was in the middle of the day.

23. Shining among the mass of splendour she bright-
ened the quarters with her brilliance. She enlightened the gods,
saying “I alone am Brahman.”

24. In her four hands she held boons, noose, goad and
the mystic gesture of protection. She was served by the Vedas
and looked beautiful and proud of her blooming youth.

25. She wore red garments and red garlands. Red
sandal paste was smeared over her body. She was as dazzling
as a crore of cupids. Her lustre was that of a crore moons.

26. The great Maya, in the ‘form of the immanent
soul of all, the cosmic witness of all living beings. and the
great Brahman, spoke.

Uma said: —
27. Neither Brahma nor Visnu_ nor Siva the slayer of

=== PAGE 96 ===

1662 Sivapurépa

the Tripura demon can bluff before me. What about the
other gods ?

28. The great Brahman, the great light in the form of
the two Pranavas, I alone am. I am all. There is none
other beside me.

29. Though devoid of form I possess forms. I consti-
tute all principles. I am eternal and my attributes cannot
be disputed. I am both the cause and the effect.

30. Sometimes I have the form of a woman, sometimes
of a man. Sometimes both. I am goddess assuming all
forms.

31. I am the creator, the protector and the destroyer
of the world. I am the enchantress of the universe.

32. All the Saktis—Kali, Lakgmi and Sarasvati as well
as others are born of my parts. So also the arts originate
from me.

38. Due to my power alone the demons are con-
quered by you. Without knowing mc of this nature you
bluff as the lords of all.

34. Just as a magician makes the wooden doll of a
woman dance so also I the goddess make all living beings
dance.

35. Being afraid of me the wind blows, the fire-god
burns and the guardians of the quarters carry on their duties.

36. Independent that I am, I sportively bestow victory
on the gods sometimes and on the Daityas sometimes.

37. It is my form that is described in the Vedas as
indestructible, the great abode, the one beyond Maya and
that which is greater than the greatest.

38. My form is two-fold—Saguna and Nirguna. One
is mixed with Maya and the other is free from it.

39. O gods, endowed with devotion, realise this and
eschew your arrogance, worship me, the eternal Prakrti.

40. On hearing the merciful words of the goddess, the
gods eulogised her, with their shoulders drooping with devotion.

41. O goddess of the universe, forgive us. O goddess,
be pleased. O mother, let us not be arrogant again.
Please be merciful.

42. Since then the gods began to propitiate her as

=== PAGE 97 ===

Umdasarhhita 1663

before. They eschewed their arrogance and became pure
in mind.

43. O Brahmins, thus I have narrated to you the
menifestation of Uma. By only hearing this men attain
the great region.

CHAPTER FIFTY

(The incarnation of Sataksi etc.)

The sages said:—

1. O intelligent one, all of us are anxious to hear
the episode of Durga every day. Please tell us another
wonderful tale of the goddess.

2. O Sita, the most excellent of the story-tellers,
we are not satiated even as we hear different nectarine
stories narrated by you.

Sita said:—

3. The most powerful son of Ruru, famous as Durgama
secured the four Vedas as a result of the boon granted by
Brahma.

4. Securing this strength that cannot be thwarted even
by the gods he wrought havoc on the earth, making the
gods tremble in heaven.

5. When the Vedas were destroyed the sacred rites
were ruined. Brahmins and the gods fell off from their
right conduct.

6. None offered charitable gifts; none performed
penances; there was neither worship nor sacrifice. Then a
great drought befell the carth extending to a period of a
hundred years. .

7. There was a great hue and cry in all the three
worlds. The people felt miserable being afflicted by hunger
and thirst.

8. Rivers, oceans, tanks, wells and lakes dried. Trees
and plants withered.

=== PAGE 98 ===

1664 Sivapurdna

9. On seeing the misery of the distressed subjects the
gods sought refuge in the Yogic Maya, MaheSvari.

The gods said—

10. O Mahaméyé, save all your people. Check your
fury or the worlds will be ruined.

11-12. O ocean of mercy, O supportress of the distress-
ed, kill this demon too just as you have killed Sumbha,
Nigumbha. Dhimraksa, Canda, Munda, Raktabija, Madhu,
Kaitabha and Mahisa.

13. Boys are guilty of offence at every step but who
on earth brooks it except the mother ?

14. When miseries afflict the gods and the brahmins
you incarnate for the welfare of the people.

15. On hearing the distress of the gods the merciful
goddess revealed to them her form possessed of many eyes.

16. The goddess with her lotus-face beaming with
delight held in her four hands the bow, the arrows, the lotus
and different fruits and roots.

17. Onseeing her people scorched and distressed, the
goddess was dejected. With her eyes full of mercy she cried
for nine days and nights.

18. The tears took the forms of thousands of water-
currents released from her eyes. The worlds, the plants and
medicinal herbs were delighted by them.

19. They turned into the rivers and occans of deep
waters. Vegetables, roots and fruits grew on the earth.

20. To the lIcarned and the gods she distributed the
fruits in her hands. To the cows she gave the tender blades of
grass and to others the things they deserved.

21. All including the gods, brahmins and men were
satisfied. Then the goddess said—‘*What else shall I do for
you ?”

22. The gods then gathered together and said, “The
people have becn rendered happy and satisfied. O goddess,
be pleased and redecm the Vedas taken by Durgama.”

23. After saying ‘So be it” she said. ‘Go ye all to
your abodes. Ere long I shall give you the Vedas.”

24. Then the joyous gods returned to their abodes after

=== PAGE 99 ===

Umasarhhitd 1665

bowing to the goddess the cause of the universe with her
eyes that resembled full-blown blue lotus.

25., Then a great bustle arose in the three regions
heaven, earth and sky. On hearing it the son of Ruru
besieged the city immediately.

26. Then after creating a big circle of splendour all
round for the protection of the gods, Siva herself came out
of it.

27. A great battle ensued between the goddess and
the Daitya. Both showered arrows in the battle, piercing the
armour of each other.

28-29. In the meantime ten beautiful forms came out
of Kali Viz Tara, Chinnamasta, Srividya, Bhuvaneégvari,
Bhairavi, Bagala, Dhimrd, Srimattripurasundari, Matangi and
Mahavidya with weapons in their hands.

30. Then appeared innumerable mothers of divine
forms, wearing the digit of the moon and with a lustre
resembling the splendour of lightning.

31. Then a terrible combat ensued between the Asuras
and the mothers. The army of the son of Ruru, consisting of
a hundred Aksauhinis was killed in the battle.

32. Then the goddess struck Durgama with the edge
of her trident. He fell on the earth like an uprooted
tree.

33. Thus after killing him the goddcss redeemed the
four Vedas and gave them to the gods.

The gods said:—

34. O Ambika, for our welfare that form of infinite
eyes was assumed by you. Hence sages will glorify you as
Sataksi.

35. Since the worlds were sustained by you with vege-
tables sprouting from your body, you will be famous as
Sakambhari. .

36. O Siva, since you killed the Daitya Durgama you
will be known as Durga.

37. O Yogic slumber, O Mahabala, O  bestower of
knowledge, O the mother of the universe, Obcisance be to
you.

=== PAGE 100 ===

1666 Stvapurdna

38. Obeisance to the heroine of infinite universes
known as the supreme goddess in the Mahavakyas as Tat-
tvamasi.

39. O Mother, we who are unaware ot your power and
greatness, cannot adequately eulogise you who are inaccessi-
ble through words, mind or body and whose eyes are the sun
and the moon.

40. Who else will bestow mercy on seeing us the gods
except the great goddess Sataksi the mother ?

41. Effort shall be made by you so that the three
worlds will not be pestered continuously with obstacles and
our enemies shall be destroyed.

The gods said:—

42. Just as the cows run about in excitement quickly
on seeing their calves in distress, so also I, Sati, am excited on
seeing you in distress and run about.

43. Even a moment appears to be a Yuga if I do not
see you since I look at you as my own children for whom I
am ready even to lay down my life.

44. No worry or anxious thought need be entertained
by you endowed with devotion as long as I stand by you
destroying your distress.

45. Inthe manner I have killed the Daityas I shall kill
the Asuras. You need not entertain any dovbt in this regard.
Truth, I am speaking the truth.

46-47. I shall be born of the womb in the family of
cowherds as the daughter of YaSoda wife of Nanda, when
Sumbha and Nigumbha will be born as Daityas. I shall kill
the demons and become famous. Men will therefore call me
Nandaja.

48. Since I shall be taking the form of a bee and
killing the demon Aruna, men will glorify me as Bhramari

49. Again I shall take a terrible form and devour the
Raksasas. I shall then be famous as Bhima Devi.

50. Whenever there is harassment caused by the Asuras
I shall surely incarnate and work for your welfare.

51. The goddess Sataksi, Sakambhari and Durga are
identical. In all the three the individual is the same.