=== PAGE 1 ===

THE
SIVA-PURANA

PART Il

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS
PRIVATE LIMITED @ DELHI

=== PAGE 2 ===

First Edition: Dellu, 1950
Reprint: Delhi, 1973, 1977, 1982, 1987, 1991, 1994, 1997, 2000

Also avatlable ai

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS

41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007
8 Mahalaxmi Chamber, Warden Road, Mumbai 400 026
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004
236, 9th Main HI Block, Jayanagar, Bangalore 560 011
Sanas Plaza, 1302 Baji Rao Road, Pune 411 002
8 Camac Street, Calcutta 700 017
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001

Pnnied in India
BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS,
A-45 NARAINA, PHASE-I, NEW DELHI 110 028
AND PUBLISHED BY NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED,
BUNGALOW ROAD, DELHI 110 007

=== PAGE 3 ===

PENA >

CONTENTS

Marriage of Himacala

Sanaka etc. curse Mcna and her sisters

Gods praise Siva

Goddess Durga consoles the gods

Menai obtains the boon

Parvati’s birth

Childhood sports of Parvati

Narada-Himalaya Conversation

Parent’s advice to Parvati and Siva appears
before Parvati in dream

Mars is born and raised to the status of a
planet .

Siva and Himavat meet together

Siva-Himavat dialogue

Siva-Parvati dialogue

Birth and Penance of Vajranga and Taraka

Penance and reign of Taraka

Brahma consoles the gods harassed by Taraka

Dialogue between Indra and Kama

Kama causes perturbation in Siva’s grove

Kama’s destruction by Siva

The submarine fire

Narada’s instructions to Parvati

Parvati’s penance

Himavat dissuades Parvati, gods go to meet Siva

Siva’s consent to marry Parvati

Parvati’s test by seven celestial sages

Parvati-jatila dialogue

Fradulent words of Brahmacarin

Parvati secs Siva

Siva-Parvati dialogue

Pages
475
478
482
485
489
494
499
501

506

510
512
516
520
525
528
533
537
540
544
548
550
554
560
564
37]
578
982
585
589

=== PAGE 4 ===

30. Parvati returns home

31. Siva’s magic .

32. Seven celestial sages arrive ..

33. Appeasement of Himavat ..

34. Anaranya

35. Padma and Pippalada

36, Speeches of seven sages

37. Letter of betrothal despached; arrangement
for the celebration of marriage; arrival of
the mountain-invitees

38, Description of the dais

39. Arrival of the gods and Siva’s preparations

40. Marriage procession of Siva

41. Description of the altar-structure

42. Meeting of Siva and Himavat

43, Siva’s wonderful sport

44, Mena regains consciousness

45. Jubilation of the citizens at the sight of Siva

46. Arrival of the bridegroom

47. Siva enters the palace of Himavat

48. Description of Marriage

49. Delusion of Brahma

50. Description of fun and frolic

51. Resuscitation of Kama .

52. Marriage party is fed and Siva retires to bed

53. Description of Siva’s return journey

54, Siva returns to Kailisa

RUDRASAMHITA
KUMARAKHANDA SECTION IV

Dalliance of Siva

Birth of Siva’s son

Boyhood sports of Karttikeya

Search for Karttikeya and his talk with Nandin
Karttikeya is crowned

Miraculous Feat of Karttikeya

Commencement of the war

Battle between the gods and asuras

Taraka’s fight with Indra, Visnu and Virabhadra

SONA Nop =

593
997

607
613
617
623

626
631
634
639
643
648
650
656
664
668
671
675
680
685
690
694
697
706

711
716
722
726
732
738
741
745
749

=== PAGE 5 ===

10. Death of Taraka and Jubilation of the gods .. 754
11. Victory of Kumara and the death of Bana

and Pralamba +e _ 758
12. Gods eulogise Siva - v.76
13. Birth of Ganega . .. 765
14. Ganas argue and wrangle .. . 769
15. GaneSa’s battle we 775
16. Ganega’s head is chopped ‘off .. 780
17. Resuscitation of Ganega_ .. .. 783
18. Ganega crowned as the chief of Ganas we 788
19, GaneSa’s marriage .. ws 793
20. Celebration of Ganega’s marriage . 798

RUDRASAMHITA : YUDDHAKHANDA SECTION V

I. Description of the Tripuras 7 802
2. Prayer of the gods . .. 809
3. Wirtues of the Tripuras .. ; 815
4. Tripuras are initiated . . 820
5. Tripuras are fascinated .. 826
6. Prayer to Siva . 831
7. Gods pray to Siva and Siva" s instructions
to the gods a 836
8. Construction of the cosmic | chariot .. 840
9. Siva’s campaign _ .e 843
10. Burning of the Tripuras .. 1. 846
11. God’s prayer .- 850
12. Gods return to their abodes . 854
13. Resuscitation of Indra ve 7 858
14, Birth of Jalandhara and his marriage . 863
15. Fight between the gods and Jalandhara oe 866
16. Battle of the gods we 873
17, Fight between Visnu and Jalandhara .. 877
18. Dialogue between Narada and Jalandhara os 881
19. Jalandhara’s emissary to Siva ee 886
20. Fight between the Ganas and Asuras - 891
21. Description of the Special war os 896
22. Jalandhara’s battle wes ee 900

23. Outraging the modesty of Vrnda .. 904

=== PAGE 6 ===

24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34,
35.

36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45,

47.

49,
50.
51.

53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.

Jalandhara is slain

God’s prayer to Siva

Vanishing of Visnu’s delusion

Birth of Sankhacida

Penance and marriage of Sankhacida

Previous birth of Sankhaciida

Prayers to Siva

Siva’s advice to the gods

Siva sends emissary to Sankhacida

March of Siva

March of Sankhacida

Dialogue between Siva and the emissary
of. Sankhaciida

Mutual fight

Fight of Sankhacida

Fight of Kali

Annihilation of the army of Sankhaciida

Death of Sankhaciida

Curse of Tulasi

Death of Hiranydksa

Death of Hiranyakasipu

Andhaka attains the leadership of Ganas

Andhaka sends his emissary to Siva

Andhaka’s fight with Siva

Swallowing of Sukra

Swallowing of Sukra and his emergence

Andhaka obtains the leadership of Ganas

Sukra learns Mrtasafijivani lore

Narrative of Usa

Narrative of Usa (continued)

Dalliance of Osa and Aniruddha

Fight among Bana, Siva, Krsna and others

Chopping of Bana’s arms and his humiliation ..

Bana attains the pcsition of Siva’s Gana
Gajasura is slain

Dundubhi Nirhrada jis slain

Vidala and Utpala are slain

909
914
917
923
926
930
935
938
943
946
950

953
957
960
963
966
970
973
978
984
989
997
1002
1007
1012
1016
1021
1026
1031
1036
104]
1047
1951
1054
1061
1065

=== PAGE 7 ===

PARVATIKHANDA
SECTION III
CHAPTER ONE
(The marriage of Himdcala’)

Ndrada said :—

1. O Brahma, how did the goddess Sati, the daughter
of Daksa who forsook her body in her father’s sacrifice,
become the daughter of Himacala, and the mother of the
universe ?

2. How could she secure Siva as her husband after
performing a severe penance ? Please explain this clearly
to me who ask you about it,

Brahma said :—

3. © foremost of sages, listen to the story of Siva
which is excellent, sanctifying, highly divine, auspicious and
destructive of all sins,

4-5. When the great goddess Sati, the daughter of
Daksa, was sporting about on the Himalayas with Siva,
Mena,? the beloved of Himacala thought that she was her
own daughter and loved her like a mother with all kinds of
nourishments.

6-7. When the great Goddess Sati, the daughter of
Daksa who had been to her father’s sacrifice and who did
not receive his due attention became angry and cast off
her body, at the very same time, O sage, Himacala’s
beloved Mena wanted to propitiate her in Sivaloka.

1. Himavat or Himacala is represented in two forms (1) the mobile
and (2) immobile. The former is the subile human form while the latter
is the gross, stationary form identical with the mountain Himélayas

The present section recounts the marriage of Himavat with Mena in
his mobile form. See RS III 1.15.

a. Mena or Menaka, the wife of Himavat and the mother of
Parvati, was one cf the three daughters of Svadh4, the wife of Kavi, a
class of Pitrs. Svadhi was one of the sixty daughters of Daksa and Pra-
siti who gave birth to Mend, Dhany& and Kalavati.

=== PAGE 8 ===

476 Sivapurdna

8, Sati thought to herself :—‘I shall be her daughter”
and cast off her body in order to become the daughter of
Himacala.

9. At the proper time Sati who had cast off her body
and who was worshipped and eulogised by the gods became
the daughter of Mena out of sheer joy.

10. On being advised by Narada, the goddess who
was named Parvati, performed a severe penance and thereby
secured Siva as her husband.

Narada said :—

Il. O Brahma, of great intellect and foremost of
eloquent gods, please tell me the origin and details of the
marriage of Mena.

12. Blessed indeed is the gentle lady Menaka of
whom Sati was born as a daughter. Hence that chaste
lady is worthy of the honour and blessings of everyone.

Brahma said :—

13. O sage Narada, you listen to the story of the
origin of Parvati’s mother and her marriage and other
details both sanctifying and conducive to the growth of
devotion.

14. O excellent sage, there in the northern region is
a mountain called Himavat who is the lord of mountains
and has great splendour and prosperity.

15. His twofold aspects—that of a mobile nature and
that of the immobile one—are well known. I succinctly
describe his subtle form.

16. He is beautiful and is the storehouse of multi-
farious gems. Extending from the eastern to the western
ocean he appears like a measuring rod of the Earth.°

17. He abounds in various trees. Being of variegated
shape and features he is adorned by many peaks on him.
Lions, tigers and other animals frequent it. Many happy
persons live there for ever.

18. He is the storehouse of snow (and yet) very fierce.
He is the resort of wonderful things. He is resurted to by

3. For the similarity of ideas and verbal expression, compare Kali-
d&isa's Kum4rasambhava I

=== PAGE 9 ===

Rudrasamhité 477

the gods, sages and seers. He is a great favourite of
Siva.

19. He is of pure soul, an abode of austerities. He
sanctifies even the great souls. He is the bestower of the
benefit of austerities. He is the auspicious storehouse of
multifarious minerals.

20. Heis of a divine form. He is beautiful in every
part. He is the unaffected part of Visnu. He is the king
of leading mountains and a great favourite of the good.

21. Due to the desire for the benefit of the manes
and the gods and for the stabilisation of his race as well as
for the increase of virtue, Himacala wanted to marry.

22. At that time, considering their own _ interest
entirely, O excellent sage, the gods approached the celestial
forefathers and said lovingly to them.

The gods said :—

23. “OQ ye forefathers, listen to our words with
pleasure. If you desire that the affairs of the gods be ful-
filled you must act accordingly soon.

24-25. Uniting your eldest daughter Men4 of auspicious
features with Himacala, a great benefit will accrue to every=
one. At every step, the miseries of the gods and those of
yours as well can be reduced”,

Brahmd said :—

26. On hearing these words of the gods, pondering
over them and remembering the curse incurred by their
daughters, the forefathers said ‘‘Amen” to their proposals.

27. They gave their daughter Mena to Himavat. In
that auspicious marriage there were great festivities.

28. Visnu, the other gods and the sages reached there
with their hearts set on Siva.

29. Giving many charitable gifts they made the
celebration a great success. They praised the celestial fore-
fathers and the Himavat.

30. All the gods and the sages rejoiced and returned
to their own abodes with their hearts set on Siva.

31, After receiving many articles as gifts and

=== PAGE 10 ===

478 Sivapurdna

marrying the beloved lady Mena, the lord of mountains
returned to his abode and rejoiced.

Brahma said :—

32. O excellent sage, the pleasing details of the
splendid marriage of Himavat with Mena have been re-
counted to you thus. What more do you wish to hear?

CHAPTER TWO
(Mend and others incur the imprecation of Sanaka etc.)

Nérada satd :—

1. O Brahmi, the intelligent one, please now tell me
reverently about the origin of Mena as well as the impreca-
tion. Please clear my doubts.

Brahma said :—

2. QO Narada and the sages, listen to the narrative of the
origin of Mena. O excellent son, O great scholar, I shall
mention it now,

3. O sage, I have already told you about my son
Daksa. He had sixty daughters all of whom were the
instruments of creation.

4. He celebrated their marriages with KaSsyapa and
other bridegrooms. You know all that already. O Narada,
now, listen to the present story.

5. Among those, the daughter Svadha was given to
the forefathers. She had three daughters all of whom were
of handsome features and virtuous forms,

6. O excellent sage, listen to their holy names which
remove obstacles and confer blessings.

7. Mena was the eldest. Dhanyad was the middle.
Kalavati was the youngest. All these were mentally
conceived daughters of the forefathers,

8. They were not born of the womb of Svadha.
They were conventionally considered her children. On
reciting their names, men can achieve their desires.

=== PAGE 11 ===

Rudrasamhita 479

9, The mothers of the worlds are worthy of reverence
of the entire universe always. They are the bestowers of
great joy. They are great yoginis, storehouses of knowledge.
They pervade the three worlds.

10. O excellent sage, once the three sisters went to
Svetadvipa (white island)* in the world of Visnu for sight-
seeing purpose.

11. After bowing to and eulogising Visnu with great
devotion they halted there at his bidding. A great con-
course of people was held there.

12. O sage, at the same time, Siddhas, sons of Brahma—
Sanaka and others came there. They bowed to and
lauded Visnu and stayed there at his bidding.

13. On seeing those sages Sanaka and others and the
persons who had assembled there, stood up. When they, the
elders of gods respected by the people, sat they all bowed
to them.

14. Helpless by misfortune and deluded by lord Siva’s
illusion O sage, the three sisters did not stand up.

15. Siva’s illusion is weighty and capable of deluding
the worlds. The entire universe is subservient to it. It is
also called Siva’s Will.

16. The same is also called an action that has begun
to fructify. Its names are many. Everything takes place
on Siva’s wish. There is nothing to be pondered over in
this respect.

17. Becoming a victim thereof, the sisters did not
make obeisance to them. They remained surprised and
stunned thereaftar secing them.

18. On seeing such a behaviour on their part the
great sages, Sanaka and others, despite being wise, became
unbearably furious.

19. Himself deluded by Siva’s illusion Sanaka, a
perfect Yogin, furiously told them giving a curse as punish-
ment,

Sanatkumdra said :—
20. Inspite of being the daughters of the forefathers,

4- It has not been possible to identify pbs island. Colonel Wilford
attempted to identify it with Britain. Sec. H. M. P. 315.

=== PAGE 12 ===

480 Stoapurtya

ye three sisters are foolish, bereft of wisdom and ignorant
of the essence of the Vedas.

21. You did not stand up nor did you pay any
respects to us. You were haughty and deluded and so
evinced a deluded disposition of human beings. Hence all
of you shall leave heaven.

22. May the three sisters deluded by ignorance be
born as human womenfolk. May ye reap this fruit as a result
of the power of your own action.

Brahmé said :—

23. On hearing this, the chaste maidens got perplexed.
The three fell at his feet and spoke with their heads bent
down.

Whe daughters of the forefathers said :—

24. “O excellent sage, ocean of mercy, be pleased
now. Because we were mentally confounded we did not
bow to you.

25. ©O Brahmin, the result thereof has been achieved
by us. O great sage it is not your fault, Bless us now
whereby we shall regain heavenly abode again.”

Brahmd said :—

26. On hearing their words, O dear, the sage spoke
to them. He had been induced by Siva’s illusion to give
them redemption from the curse. He was a bit consoled.

Sanatkumdra satd :—

27. “QO ye three daughters of fofefathers, listen
with pleasure to my words that will dispel your sorrow and
bestow happiness on you.

28. May the eldest among you become the wife of
Himavat the mountain that is a part of Visnu. Parvati
shall be her daughter.

29. The second daughter Dhanya shall be the Yogini,
the wife of Janaka. Her daughter shall be Mahalaksmi in the
name of Sita.

30. The youngest Kalavati shall be the wife of the
Vaidya—Vrsabhana. At the end of Dvapara, Radha shall be

=== PAGE 13 ===

Rudrasarhhitd 481

her daughter.

31. The Yogini Mena shall attain the great region
Kailasa along with her body and in the company of her
husband due to the boon of Parvati.

32. Janaka shall be blessed by Sita born in Janaka’s
race and he shall be a living liberated soul. A great Yogin,
he will attain Vaikuntha.

33. Kalavati by the virtue of Vrsabhana shall become
a living liberated soul and attain Goloka’ along with her
daughter. There is no doubt about it,

34. Without adversity how can one attain greatness ?
To persons of good rites, if misery vanishes happiness is
likely to be difficult of access.

35. Ye the daughters of forefathers shall shine in
heaven. By the vision of Visnu your evil actions have been
quelled.”

36. After saying this, the sage was freed of his fury
on thinking of Siva, the bestower of wisdom, worldly
pleasures and salvation.

37. Listen further to my words always pleasing to you.
You are all blessed by Siva’s pleasure. Hence you will be
worthy of honour and respect immediately.

38. Mena’s daughter, goddess Parvati, the mother of
the universe shall become Siva’s beloved after performing
severe penance.

39. Dhanya’s daughter Sita will become Rama’s wife.
Based on worldly conventions she will sport about with Rama.

40. Kalavati’s daughter Radha, resident of Goloka
shall become the wife of Krsna united with him in secret love,

Brahma said

41. After saying this, that holy sage Sanatkumara vani-
shed there itself along with his brothers after he was culogi-
sed duly.

42. The three sisters, the mentally conceived daughters
of the forefathers were freed of their sins and attained happi-
ness, They returned to their residence quickly.

Goloka : [t is a modern addition to the original series of fourteen

lokas.” It is identified with Gokula, a pastoral district on the. Yamuna
about Mathura where Krsna passed his boyhood wita th cowherd.

=== PAGE 14 ===

482 Sivapurdna
CHAPTER THREE
(Hymn to Swa by Visnu and other gods)

Narada satd:—

1. O Brahma, the best of eloquent ones, of great wis-
dom, please tell me. What is the subsequent story of the
good auspicious mountain ?

2. You have narrated the wonderful story of the auspi-
cious antecedents of Mena. The details of the marital rites
too are heard. Please continue the subsequent narrative.

3. After marrying Mena what did the mountain do
afterwards ? How was P&rvati, the mother of the universe,
born of her ?

4. How did she secure Siva as her husband after perf-
orming a severe penance ? Narrate all these things in detail
regarding the glory of Siva.

Brahma said:—

5. O sage, lovingly listen to the auspicious glory of
Siva on hearing which even a slayer of a brahmin becomes
pure and attains all desires.

6. O Narada, there was great pomp and ceremony in
the three worlds when Himacala returned to his abode after
marrying Mena.

7. The delighted Himacala too celebrated a great [esti-
val. With good intention he worshipped and revered brahmins,
kinsmen and _ others.

8. The contented brahmins returned to their respective
abodes after blessing them. [he kinsmen and the others also
returned.

9. The delighted Himacdla® sported with Mena in his
cosy abode, Nandana and other parks as well as in several
nice places.

10. At that time, O sage, Visnu, the gods and the
noble-sould sages approached the mountain.

11. On seeing the gods after their arrival, the noble

6, It is a grove of Indra, lying to the north of Meru.

=== PAGE 15 ===

Rudrasamhita 483

Himacala bowed to them gladly and honoured them with
devotion. He praised his own good fortune.

12. With the head bent down and palms joined in
reverence, he eulogised them with great devotion. Himacala’s
hair stood on end and tears of love fell from his eyes.

13. O sage, after bowing to them, the delighted
Himacala spoke thus to Visnu and other gods.

Aimacala said:—

14. Today my life has become fruitful. My good pena-
nce has become fruitful. Today my knowledge has become
fruitful. Today my sacred rites have become fruitful.

15. I have become blessed today. My entire kingdom,
my wife and family have become blessed. Everything has
become blessed. There is no doubt about it.

16. Wherefore have all of you come in a body ?
Lovingly command me, considering me your own servant,

Brahma said:—

17. On hearing these words of Himacala, Visnu and
other gods considered their affair fulfilled and were delighted.
They spoke.

Gods satd:—

18. ‘O Himicala of great intelle:t, please Jisten to our
beneficent words. We shall gladly tell you why we have
come.

19. O Himacala, the mother of the universe Uma,
who was born as Daksa’s daughter, became Rudra’s wife and
sported for a long time on the earth.

20. On being disrespected by her father, Sati rememb-
ered her vow, abandoned her body and returned to her own
region.

21-22 O Himiacala, this story is well known in the world.
You too know it. If this takes place it will be an asset to
all gods as well as to you. The gods too will be under your
control.”

Brahma said:—
23. On hearing these words of Visnu and others the

=== PAGE 16 ===

484 Sivapurdna

delighted lord Himdacala said—‘So be it” and worshipped
them with respect.

24. After instructing him in the method to be followed
with great devotion they approached Uma, the consort of
Siva.

25. They stationed themselves in a good place and
remembered the mother of the universe, and bowing to her
repeatedly culogised her with devotion.

The gods said:—

26. O goddess Uma, mother of the universe, resident
of Sivaloka, favourite of Siva, O great goddess, O Durga, we
bow to you,

27. With great devotion we bow to the illustrious Ene-
rgy, the holy, the tranquil, the holy nourishment and the one
with the forms of Mahat and the Avyakta.

28. We worship you, Siva the cause of welfare, the
pure, the gross, the subtle, the great goal and the one deli-
ghted with the inner and good learning.

29. You are faith, fortitude and prosperity. You alone
have control over everything; you are the splendour and
energy of the sun illuminating your own universe,

30. We bow to her who promotes robustness in all the
beings of the universe from Brahma to a blade of grass in the
whole Cosmos.

31. You are Gayatri, the mother of the Vedas, Savitri,
Sarasvati, the sustenance of all the universe; you are the triad
of the Vedas having Dharma for its form.

32. You are sleep in all living beings; you are hunger,
satiety, thirst, splendour, brilliance and contentment. You are
the delighter of every one for ever.

33. To those who perform meritorious actions you are
the goddess of fortune. To the sinners you are the eldest
sister, the deity of Ignominy; you are peace for the universe,
and the mother sustaining lives.

34. You are the essential feature of five elements. You
are Justice in those who uphold justice. You are endeavour
personified.

35. Of the Rgveda you are the invocation; of the
Yajurveda you are the blending knot of the mantras; of

=== PAGE 17 ===

Rudrasarhhita 485

Samaveda you are the song and of the Atharvana Veda you
are the measure of time, you are the final goal.

36. She who is the Tamasika power of all the Gods,
she who is visible in the Raiasika quality of the Creator, she
who is heard by us as the benefactress and of the form of
Siva is eulogised here.

37. Let us bow to her who is interested in residing on
the Vindhya mountains;’ who is clever in the playful activity
of affording protection to Astanga Yoga; who is devoid of
cessation and who acts like a raft that enables the crossing
of the ocean of worldly existence with its terrible miseries.

38. May she be pleased with us, for keeping up the
sustenance of the world, she, who in the form of slumber
that is extremely exhilarating to all born in the universe, ex-
tends pleasure in the nose, eyes, face, arms, chest and the
mind.

Brahma said: —

39, Thus eulogising the great Goddess Sali, the
mother of the universe, all of them stood waiting lovingly
desirous of seeing her.

CHAPTER FOUR
(The Goddcss consoles the Gods)

Brahma said:—

1. Thus eulogised by the Gods, the Goddess Durga, the
mother of the universe, the destroyer of impassable distress,
appeared in front of them.

2. She was seated in a wonderful divine gem-set
chariot over which a soft cushion had been spread and which
was decorated with tinkling ornaments.

3, She was shining with the brilliance of her limbs that
surpassed even the lustre of a crore of suns, She was sur-

As Vindhyavasini, dweller in the Vindhyas, the Goddess is

worshipped at a place where the Vindhyas approach the Ganges, near
Mirzapur. .

=== PAGE 18 ===

486 Sivapurdna

rounded by a halo created by her own lustre. She was of
symmetrical splendour.

4. She was the unequalled supreme illusion, the beauti-
ful wife of Sadasiva. She had all the three qualities and was
devoid of attributes® also, she had been staying in the region of
Siva.

5. She was the mother of the three deities’, Candi,
Siva, the destroyer of the distress of all, the mother of all
supreme slumber and the redeemer of all her own people.

6. Siva was seen by the gods through the power of
huge column of brilliance. Again the gods eulogised her in
order to have a sight of her.

7. Then Visnu and other gods who were desirous of
seeing her saw the mother of the universe there itself after
receiving her favour.

8. The dwellers of heaven were extremely pleased,
they bowed to her again and again and particularly eulogised
her.

The gods said :—

9. O Siva, O great Goddess, O mother of the universe
we gods bow to you, the destroyer of all distress.

10. O Goddess, neither the Vedas nor the sacred texts
know you perfectly. Your greatness, O Siva, is beyond the
scope of speech and mind and cannot even be meditated
upon.

1]. Even the Vedas mention you, trembling with
fright, by negating what you are not. What will be the
matter in regard to others ?

12. Many devotees know the same after getting your
favour through devotion. There is no cause for fear to the
devotees who seek refuge in you.

13. O great Goddess listen to our submission which we,
your slaves for ever, are going to explain.

8 As the personified energy of the gods Visnu, Brahma and Rudra,
representing the three qualitics Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, the Goddess is
called ‘Triguna’ i.e. possessed of three qualities. But as the personified
energy of Siva, who is the Supreme Being, devoid of attributes she is
called Nirguua.

She is the mother-goddess uf Visnu, Brahm& and Rudra, the
synthetic form of three qualities responsible for the creation, maintenance
and dissolution of the universe.

=== PAGE 19 ===

Rudrasarhhita 487

14, Formerly you were born as the daughter of Daksa
and were married to Siva. You destroyed the great misery
of Brahma and others.

15. Being disrespected by your father, you cast off your
body in accordance with your vow. You then went to your own
world and Siva became miserable.

16. O great Goddess, the purpose of the gods has not
been completely carried out. The sages are agitated.
Hence we, Gods, have sought refuge in you.

17. O great Goddess, please fulfil the desire of the God,
O Siva, so that the words of Sanatkumara may be fruitful.

18. O Goddess, incarnating again on the earth please
be the wife of Rudra (Siva) again. Carry on your sports in
a fitting manner and let the Gods be happy.

19. O Goddess, may Rudra too, the resident of Kailasa
be happy. Let all become happy. Let misery perish entirely.

Brahmd said :—

20. Saying so, Visnu and the other gods, full of loving
devotion remained waiting silently and humbly.

21-22. Siva too was delighted on hearing the eulogy of
the gods and ascertaining the course of the same after
remembering her lord Siva, the compassionate Uma addressed
smilingly the gods, chief of whom was Visnu. ‘The Goddess,
favourably disposed to her devotees, said :—

Uma said :—

23. O Visnu, O, Brahma, O Gods and sages who are
free from sorrow and pain ye listen to my words. I am
delighted undoubtedly.

24. My activities are conducive to happiness every-
where in the three worlds. The delusion of Daksa and other
things were carried out by me alone.

25. I shall take a full incarnation on the earth. There
is no doubt in this, There are many reasons for the same. I
shall mention them with respect.

26. Formerly, O gods, with great devotion Himacala
and Mena rendered service to me in my life as Sati, like my

parents.
27. Even now they continuously render me service and

=== PAGE 20 ===

488 Sis vapurdga

Mena particularly (does so). There is no doubt about my
becoming their daughter.

28. Just as you, Rudra too, desires my incarnation in
the abode of Himavat. Hence I shall incarnate. That shall
be the end of misery in the world.

29. All of you return to your abodes. You shall be
happy for a long time. After incarnating I shall give Mena
full happiness.

30. I shall become Siva’s wife. But this desire is a
great secret with me. Siva’s divine sport is wonderful. It
deludes even the wise.

31-32. Ever since I cast off my body born of Daksa
on seeing my lord’s disrespect at the hands of my father at
the altar of sacrifice, my lord Rudra is tormented by thoughts
about me.

33-34. He saw my anger at the altar of my father’s
sacrifice. Thinking that the virtuous lady had cast-off her
body out of love for him he became a Yogin and abandoned
home-life. He assumed an unearthly form and features. But
he could not bear my separation.

35. On account of me he was much distressed. He
put on an abnormal dress. Ever since he forsook the excellent
pleasure of love.

36. Hear further, O Visnu, O Brahma, O sages and
O gods, the divine sports of the supreme lord Siva, that
protect the universe.

37. Oppressed by the pangs of bereavement He wrea-
thed a garland of my bones. Although He is the sole en-
lightened god He did not get peace anywhere.

38. Like a non-god, like a helpless creature he roamed
about here and there and cried aloud. The lord Himself
could not distinguish between the proper and the improper.

39. The lord Siva did this just to show the behaviour
of a love-lorn lover. He blabbered like a lover in despair
due to separation.

40. But really the supreme lord has no aberrations, is
not distressed and remains unconquered. My master Siva is
perfect, lord of all and the controller of illusion.

41. He is not tarnished by illusion. Of what avail
are illusion, love and other emotions for Him?

=== PAGE 21 ===

Rudrasamhita 489

42. Rudra, the lord, is anxious to marry me and hence
my incarnation on the Earth at the residence of Mena and
Himacala, O gods.

43. In order to propitiate Rudra, I shall incarnate as
the daughter of Mena, the wife of Himacala, in accordance
with the way of the world.

44. After performing a severe penance as His devotee
I shall become Rudra’s beloved and then perform the work
of the gods. This is truth, real truth, there is no doubt
about it.

45. All of you return to your abodes. Continuously
worship Siva. Undoubtedly your miseries will be quelled by
His favour.

46. By the grace of merciful lord Siva, you will achieve
auspicious results. As the wife of that lord I shall be hono-
ured and worshipped in the world,

Brahma said :—

47, O dear, even as the gods were watching, Siva,
the mother of the universe, vanished after saying this and
returned immediately to her world.

48. After making obcisance to the direction in which
she went, the delighted Visnu and others, sages and the
gods, returned to their abodes,

49, O excellent sages, thus I have narrated to you
the auspicious narrative of the goddess Durga. It is always
pleasing to men and it bestows worldly pleasures and salva-
tion,

50. Whoever hears or recites this with concentration,
reads or teaches this, will obtain the fruits of all desires,

CHAPTER FIVE
(Mend obtains the boon)

Narada said :-—

1. When the Goddess Durga vanished and the gods
returned to their abodes, what happened next?

=== PAGE 22 ===

490 Sivapurdna

2. © dear, how did Mena and the lord of the
mountains perform the great penance ? How did he beget a
daughter of Mena. Please narrate.

Brahmd said :—

3. © best of brahmins, O most excellent of my sons,
listen to that great account. After bowing to Siva with
devotion I shall narrate that story which increases devotion.

4. When Visnu and other gods returned after instruc-
ting him, the lord of the mountains and Mena performed a
great penance.

5. Meditating on Siva and Siva day and night with
devout mind, the couple worshipped them continuously.

6. The beloved of the mountain worshipped the god-
dess along with Siva, joyously. She gave charitable gifts
always to the brahmins for their satisfaction.

7. Desirous of obtaining a child, she worshipped Siva
everyday for twenty-seven years beginning it in the month of
March-April.

8, Observing a fast on the eighth day of the lunar fort-
night, she made charitable gifts of sweets, offerings of oblation
rice cakes, puddings and fragrant flowers on the ninth day.

9. She made clay idol of the Goddess and worshipped
her by offering various things on the banks of the Ganga in
Ausadhiprastha.?°

10. On some days she observed a complete fast. On
some days she observed sacred rites. Some days wind alone
constituted her food and some days she drank only water.

11. With her mind fixed on Siva, Mend passed twenty
seven years with pleasure and brilliant lustre.

12. At the end of twenty-seven years, Uma the beloved
of Siva, the mother of the world and identical with the uni-
verse became highly delighted.

13. The goddess Siva, delighted by her good devotion
appeared in front of Mena in order to bless her.

14. Appearing to her in a form of divine limbs
through a lustrous zone, she smilingly said to Mena.

1o. It was the capital of Himavat. Cf. Kaliddsa’s Kum4ra 6. 33, 36.
The name indicates that it was a market place for the mountainous herbs,

=== PAGE 23 ===

Rudrasamhttad 491

The Goddess said :—

15. © beloved of the mountain, I am delighted by
your penance. O chaste lady, tell me what you desire in
your mind.

16. O Mena, whatever is desired by you by penance,
sacred rites and ecstatic contemplation I shall grant you and
that too whenever you wish for it.

17. Then seeing the goddess in her presence Mena
bowed and spoke these words :—-

Mena satd:—

18. © Goddess, your form has been perceived by me
directly, just now. I wish to culogise you. Be pleased.

Brahma said:—-

19, On being thus requested by Mena, the goddess
Uma, the enchantress.of everyone, embraced Mena and was
highly delighted.

20. Acquiring very great wisdom, Mena culogised
Siva, who had appeared in person, by means of pleasing
words with great devotion.

Mend said:—

21. I bow to the great goddess," the bestower of all
desires, I bow to her who wields great illusion, the creator
and sustainer of the universe.

22. I bow to her of contemplative sleep, and to her the
wielder of great illusion and the cause of permanent bliss. I
bow to the mother of the universe. I bow to Siddha having
the garland of auspicious lotuses.

23. I bow to the grandmother, of perpetual bliss. I
bow to the goddess who dispels the sorrow of the devotees,

11, The Goddess Siva is mentioned here under a variety of names,
forms, attributes and actions She is contemplated upon by the ascetics for
the deliverance from the bondage of this world, She is Propitiated for the
Satiation of desires with the bloody sacrifices perform according to
Atharvanic rites.

She is represented in her milder and fercer forms, In her milder
form she is pleasing as the moon, gracique as the mothert In her terrible
aspect she is furious as the fire and scorching as the sun

=== PAGE 24 ===

492 Sivapurdna

who is a model for all women and who constitutes the
intellect of all living beings.

24. You are the cause of the snapping of all fetters of
ascetics. Which one of your powers can be sung by women
like me? You are violence mentioned in the Atharvaveda.
You (of such powerful means} fulfil my desire.

25. The living beings are being united to the different
principles of the nature of permanence and otherwise and
those without substance are discarded. You are the inherent
power of those permanent principles. In the proper time you
become a woman of ability with Yogic powers,

26. You are the origin and the sustainer of the worlds.
You are the eternal Prakrti, the great, by whom even the
Brahman is brought under control. O you, of noble nature,
O mother, be pleased with me.

27. You are the great power latent in fire; you are
the burning power of the sun’s rays; you are the pleasing
power of the extensive moonlight. O Goddess, I bow to you.

28. To good women you manifest yourself as their
beloved; to persons of perfect self-control and sublimation you
manifest yourself as eternal; to the entire universe you mani-
fest as desire; as of Visnu you are the Maya so you are of
Siva.

29. You assume different forms as you please for the
purpose of creation, sustenance and annihilation and give
birth to the bodies of Brahma, Visnu and Siva. You, of such
potentiality, be pleased. Obeisance to you again.

Brahma said:—

30. Thus eulogised, the goddess spoke to Mend desiring
her to choose a_ boon.

Uma said:—

31. O Himiacala’s beloved, you are as favourite to me
as my vital air. Whatever you desire I shall give you. There
is nothing that I can withhold from you.

32. On hearing these nectar-like words of the Goddess,
the delighted Mena, the wife of Himacala, said.

=== PAGE 25 ===

Rudrasarhhitd 493

Mend said:—

33. O Siva, Hail, Hail ! O great goddess, If you con-
sider me worthy of a boon, I shall choose one.

34. ©O mother of the universe, at first let me have a
hundred sons endowed with longevity, heroism, prosperity and
accomplishments.

35. After that let me have a daughter of comely feat-
ures and good qualities who will delight both the families
and who will be revered by the three worlds.

36. O Siva, be my daughter for fulfilling the needs of
the gods. O Goddess, be Rudra’s wife and indulge in divine
sports with the lord.

Brahma said:—

37. On hearing the words of Mend, the delighted godd-
ess spoke smilingly, fulfilling her desire.

The Goddess said:—

38. May hundred heroic sons be born to you. One of
them very strong will be born at first.

39. I shall be born as your daughter since I am deligh-
ted by your devotion. Since I have been served by the gods
I shall fulfil their desire and carry out their activities.

Brahma said:—

40. Saying so, the Goddess Siva vanished from there
even as Mena was watching.

41. O dear one, on getting the desired boon from
the Goddess, Mena attained immeasurabie joy. Her misery
occasioned by penance vanished.

42. Bowing down in that direction, the chaste lady of
delighted mind returned to her abode repeating the benedic-
tory word ‘‘Jaya” (be victorious).

43. She told her husband about the boon, which had
already been understood by him through good omens, by
her words which were rendered useless.

44. On hearing the words of Mend, the lord of moun-
tains became delighted. He praised his wife who was devoted
to Siva lovingly.

45, O sage, when their mutual sexual intercourse took

=== PAGE 26 ===

494 Sivapurdna

place, Mena conceived and the child in the womb gradually
grew up.

46-48. She gave birth to a beautiful son Mainaka’* who
later on became the worthy recepient of the love of Naga
ladies and who later on entered into an alliance with the lord
of ocean.O celestial sage, when Indra, the slayer of Vrtra, be-
came angry and began to chop off the wings of mountains, he
retaincd his wings, nay, he did not even feel the pain of
being wounded by the thunderbolt. He had good limbs.
He had neat strength and prowess. He was the most impor-
tant of all the mountains born of him. He too became the
lord of mountains.

49, In the city of Himacala there was a wonderful
celebration of the event. The couple were highly delighted.
Their pain was at an end.

50. He gave monetary gifts and charitable offerings to
brahmins. Their devotion to Siva and Siva became increased.

CHAPTER SIX
( Parvati’s birth)

Brahma satd:—

1. Then the couple, with great devotion remembered
the goddess for her birth in order to carry out the work of the
gods,

2. Then the Goddess who formerly had cast off her
body to spite her father, by means of her Yogic powers, desi-
red to be born of the wife of the mountain.

3. In order to make her own words true, the great
goddess, who bestows everything desired, delightedly entered
the mind of the mountain with all her constituent elements.

4. Hence he shone with an extraordinary splendour

12. Main&ka, the son of Menaké and Himavat, is represented os the
most valiant of a hundred sons of his parents. When Indra clipped the
wings of the mountains he is said to have been the only one who escaped

He 15 placed near the southern sea between India and Ceylon, for the
present text glorifies his friendship with the ocean. Cf also Skanda P. VI
g. ro-rt *‘Mainakah Sumudrantah”.

=== PAGE 27 ===

Rudrasamhita 495

and great joy. With a resplendent brilliance, he, of lofty mind,
became invincible like a blazing fire.

3, Then, in a beneficent hour, the lord of the mountains
deposited in his beloved the entire constituent clement of Siva
by means of ecstatic contemplation.

6. The wife of the mountain, by the grace of the
goddess who had sympathetically stationed herself in the mind
of the mountain, conceived.

7. The beloved of the mountain, Mena, shone all the
more by the presence of the goddess who bore the entire uni-
verse. She appeared as if she was ina brilliant sphere.

8. Mena bore the characteristic signs of pregnancy
which almost indicated the imminent rise in pleasure ,of her
lord and served as the auspicious cause for the future bliss of
the gods.

9. ‘The weakness of her body did not allow her to wear
ornaments. Her face became pale like the Lodhra flower. She
resembled the night when there are very few stars and the
moon is in a waning state.?3

10. Kissing her face, emitting the fragrance of the earth
in the course of his secret dalliance, the lord of the mountains,
was not satiated. His love increased."

11. The Jord of mountains asked Mena's friends freq-
uently—“What are the desires of Mena ? She herself does
not express them out of bashfulness.”5

12. Whatever product of the mountain she wished to
have in the course of her pregnancy she found brought to
her. There was nothing which he, the lord of the mountain
could not accomplish in the heaven too.

13. Surmounting the difficulties of the early days of
pregnancy, she grew more plump in her limbs. Mena then
shone like a tender creeper putting forth more leaves and
flowers.

14. The lord of the mountains considered his pregnant
queen like the earth with a treasure within and like the Sari
twig with latent fire in it.?°

13 For the similarity of idea and verbal expression compare Kiali-
dasa’s Raghuvamsa. II]. 2.

14. Cf. Ibid. IIL. 4.

1. Cf Ibid. HT, 5.

16. Ibid. ITT. g.

=== PAGE 28 ===

496 Sivapurdga

15. The intelligent lord of mountains performed all the
sacred rites befitting his love for his wife, the loftiness of his
mind, the vastness of riches earned by him and the injunctions
of the Vedas.

16-17. At the proper time, he saw his wife Mena about
to be delivered of the child, with delight, as one sees the
sky enveloped with clouds. The lord of the mountains felt
greatly rejoiced on seeing his wife of sound and auspicious
in limbs the “Jabour-chamber” presided over by physicians.
She felt very brilliant with the mother of the universe in her
womb.

18. In the mean time, O sage, Visnu, and other gods
as well as the sages came there and eculogised Siva who was
in the womb.

The gods said: —

19. O Goddess, be victorious, O intelligent one, O
mother of the universe, O great Goddess, O you of true rites,
prone to truth, true in three things, O truth-formed.

20, O you stationed in truth, we have sought refuge in
you. O you delighted with truth, Origin of truth, Truth of
Truth, of truthful sight.

21. O beloved of Siva, great goddess, O destroyer of
the miseries of gods, you are the mother of the three worlds,
consort of Siva, pervasive and favourably disposed to your
devotees.

22. O goddess of the three worlds, manifest yourself
and perform the function of the gods. O goddess, all of us
are well protected only due to your favour.

23. Happy persons attain their happiness only from you.
Nothing shines in the three worlds without yon.

Brahma said:—

24. Thus eulogising, in many ways, the great goddess
stationed in the womb, the gods returned to their abodes,
highly delighted in their minds.

25. When nine months were completed, in the tenth
month, the goddess, the mother of the universe, bore all the
states of a child in the womb in the complete form.

26. The time was good. The planets, stars and the

=== PAGE 29 ===

Radrasamhita 497

luminary heavenly bodies were quiet; the sky was clear and
there was brilliance in all the quarters.

27. The carth consisting of forests, villages and oceans
was very auspicious. Lotuses blossomed in lakes, rivers and
tanks,

28 O excellent sage, diverse winds gentle to the touch
blew; good men rejoiced and bad people became unhappy.

29. The gods stood in the sky and sounded big drums.
A shower of flowers fell. Excellent Gandharvas sang sweet
songs. :

30. Vidyadhara women and the celestial nymphs danced
in the sky; in the heavenly region great festivities were cele-
brated by the gods and others,

31. At that time Siva, Sati of perfect power formerly
appeared in front of Mena in her real form.

32. She was born at midnight when the constellation
Mrgafiras was in conjunction with the moon on the ninth day
in the month of Madhu (March-April) in the spring season
like the Ganga from the moon’s sphere.

33. Coming out of the belly of Mena at the proper
time in her real form, she resembled Laksmi coming out of
the ocean.

34. When she was born, Siva was glad. A slow, fra-
grant and auspicious wind blew favourably.

35. Along with the rain there was a shower of flowers.
Fires calmly glowed and the clouds rumbled.

36. At the time of her birth, riches and prosperity
flourished in the city of Himavat. All miseries perished.

37. Visnu and other gods reached there in time and
saw the mother of the universe. They were delighted and
happy.

38. They eulogised Siva the mother of the universe,
the beloved of Siva, of great illusory power, of divine
features and resident of Siva’s region.

The Gods said:—

39. O great goddess, O mother of the universe, O
achiever of all accomplishments, you alone can carry out the
work of the gods. Hence we bow to you always.

40. © you favourably disposed to the devotees, do

=== PAGE 30 ===

498 Sivapurdna

everything conducive to the happiness of the Gods. You
have fulfilled the desire of Mena. Now, you fulfil that of
Siva.

Brahma said :—

41, After culogising Siva thus, Visnu and other gods
bowed to her again delightedly and returned to their abodes
praising her great divine ways.

42. O Narada, Men§ rejoiced much on seeing goddess
Uma of the splendour of the blue lotus as her daughter.

43. On seeing her divine features, the beloved of the
mountain attained perfect knowledge. After that realisation
she eulogised the supreme Goddess with very great delight.

Mena said :—

44. ‘Great favour has been shown by you, O Goddess,
O mother of the universe, inasmuch as you have manifested
yourself in front of me brilliantly.

45. You are the primordial one among all Energies.
O Siva, you are the mother of the three worlds. O Goddess
you are the beloved of Siva, you are great goddess eulogised
by the gods.

46. O great Goddess, be pleased. Remain in my
meditation in this form, but have the form of my daughter
in public view ”

Brahma said :—
47. On hearing these words of Mena, the wife of the

mountain, the delighted goddess Siva replied to Mena, the
beloved of the mountain thus.

The Goddess said :—

48. ‘O Mend, formerly you served me excellently. J
am delighted by your devotion. I have come near you to
grant you a boon.

49. On hearing my words “Express your wish and
choose a boon’ you had chosen the boon “great Goddess,
become my daughter. Do what is beneficent to the gods.”

50. Accordingly granting you the boon I returned to

=== PAGE 31 ===

Rudrasamhita 499

my abode. O beloved of the mountain, I have become your
daughter at the proper time.

Sl. I have assumed the divine form now, so that
you may be reminded of me. In a human form if I had
appeared, it would have put you out of knowledge about me.

©2, Constantly thinking of me in the form of your
daughter, or in the divine form with love, both of you will
surely attain my region, the great goal.

53. I shall do the work of the gods showing my wonder-

fully divine sports. I shall become the wife of Siva and red-
eem good men.”

Brahmd said: —

54. After saying thus Siva kept quiet. Even as the
mother was watching with pleasure, she assumed the body
of a daughter by her power of illusion,

CHAPTER SEVEN
(The childhood sports of Parvati)
Brahma said:—

1, The goddess of great brilliance assumed the form of
her baby child in front of Mena and began to cry in accor-
dance with the ways of the world.

2. On account of her splendour that diffused all round
the lying-in-couch, the midnight lamps that burnt in the
lying-in-chamber were rendered dim in a trice, O sage.

3. The women in the house were extremly glad on
hearing the gentle cry of the child. In their excited flutter
and great pleasure they rushed in.

4. The superintendent of the harem immediately infor-
med the king about the birth of Parvati which was pleasant
and conducive ‘~ the work of the gods.

5. To the superintendent of the harem who brought
the news, there was nothing which the king could notgive
even including his royal white umbrella.

6. Accompanied by the chief priest and learned brah-

=== PAGE 32 ===

500 Sivapurdna

mins, the lord of mountains came there and saw the child
who shone in her lovely clothes.

7. The lord of mountains rejoiced on seeing the child
shining in dark splendour like that of the blue lotus.

8, All the citizens there, both men and women, rejoic-
ed much. There were great festivities. Different sorts of
musical instruments were played.

9 Auspicious songs were sung. The dancing girls
exhibited their saltatorial skill. The lord of mountains per-
formed post-natal sacred rites and made charitable gifts to
the brahmins,

10, Himavat came to the outer gate of the palace and
joined the festivities. With a delighted mind he distributed
monetary gifts to the beggars.

1]. In an auspicious hour, in the company of the sages,
Himavat named his daughter K4li and assigned other plea-
sing names to her.

12, He gave charitable gifts to the brahmins out of love
and respect. Varieties of festivities were gone through with
suitable music.

13. Though he had many sons, the lord of mountain
and his wife rejoiced more on seeing Kali frequently, after
these celebrations.

14. There in the palace of the lord of mountains the
goddess Siva grew up like Ganga in the rainy season and
like the moon-light in the autumn.

15. The goddess Kali of exquisite body and comely
appearance acquired more and more splendour like the disk
of the moon acquiring more and more digits day by day.

16. The child was fondly attached toevery member of
the family, Hence the kinsmen called her Parvati, a name
befitting her family. The girl had all the qualities of good
conduct and behaviour.

17. Afterwards when Kali wanted te perform a pena-
nce she was forbidden by her mother who said—*O, no(U ma).
Hence O sage, the sweetfaced Jady came to be called Uma
in the world.

18-19, Although he had many sons, the eyes of the moun-
tain were never satiated on seeing the child Parvati endowed
with good fortune. In the spring season there may be many

=== PAGE 33 ===

Rudrasamhitd 501

flowers in full bloom but the swarms of becs, O excellent sage,
are specially drawn to the mango blossom.

20. The mountain Him4dlaya was both embellished and
sanctified by his daughter like a learned man by his speech
of grammxtical purity.

Just as a lamp in the house is praised by leaping flames
of brilliance, just as the path of the good by the Ganga, so
also the lord of mountains was respected on account of
Parvati.

22. During her childhood, the goddess played frequen-
tly on the sandy banks of the Ganga in the middle of her
playmates with balls and dolls.

23. O sage, the goddess Siva when the suitable time
for her education arrived learnt all the lores from a good
preceptor, with concentrated mind and great pleasure.

24. Just as the flock of swans returns to the Ganga in
the autumnal season and just as the brilliant lustre manifests
itself in the medicinal herbs during the night, so also all the
learning of the previous birth returned to Kali,

25. Osage, thus I have described one of the divine
sports of Siva. I shall narrate another one of her divine sports.
You listen to it lovingly.

GHAPTER EIGHT
(Narada-Himdlaya Conversation )

Brahmd said:

1, Once, induced by Siva, you went to the abode of
Himacala lovingly, you who have the knowledge of Siva and
who are the foremost among those who know the divine
sports of Siva.

2. O sage Narada, on seeing you, the lord of the
mountains bowed to you and worshipped you. He called his
daughter and asked her to fall at your feet.

3. O excellent sage, he bowed to you again, Himavat
joined his palms in reverence and bent his head considering
it his duty and spoke to you.

=== PAGE 34 ===

502 Sivapurdna
Himavat said :—

4. O sage Narada, of good knowledge, O lord, fore-
most among the sons of Brahma, you are omniscient. You
are sympathetic. You are engaged in rendering help to
others.

5. Please read the horoscope of my daugther and tell
me about her good and bad fortune. Whose beloved wife
will my fortunate daughtcr be ?

Bramhd said :—

6-7. O excellent sage, being thus requested by Hima-
vat the lord of mountains, you looked at Ka4li’s palm and
the limbs as well, O dear, you are wise. You know many
facts, You are eloquent in speech. You then spoke.

Narada said:

8. “OQ Mena, O king of mountains, this daughter o
yours has all auspicious signs. Like the first digit of the
moon she will increase day by day.

9. She will delight her husband, and heighten the
glory of her parents. She will be a great chaste lady. She
will grant bliss to everyone always.

10. Isee all good signs in the plam of your daughter,
O lord of mountains. There is an abnormal line also. Listen
to the indication thereof.

11. Her husband will be a naked Yogin, without any
qualities. He will be free from lust. He will have neither
mother nor father. He will be indifferent to honours. His
dress and manners will be inauspicious.

Brahmd said: —

12. On hearing your words the couple thought them
true. Both Mena and Himavat were much distressed.

13. O sage, on hearing your words, and inferring that
indications referred to Siva, Parvati’s joy knew no bounds.

14. Convinced that Narada’s words could not be false,
Siva turned her mind and love to Siva’s feet.

15. The lord of mountains who was very much grieved
in mind spoke to you, “O Narada, O sage, what is the way
out ? What shall I do ? A great misery has befallen us’’.

=== PAGE 35 ===

Rudrasarthitd 503

16. On hearing that, O sage, you who are eloquent
in speech, delighted Himavat by your sweet words of auspi-
cious import and spoke to console him.

Narada said :—

17. “O lord of mountains, listen to my words with
affability. They are true. They cannot be false. The lines
in the palm are the lines of Brahma. They cannot be un-
truc.

18. O lord of mountains, there is no doubt that her
husband will be such a person. You now hear what you have
to do whereby you will be happy.

19. There is a bridegroom like that. He is lord Siva
who has sportively assumed a physical form. In Him all bad
characteristics are equal to good characteristics.

20.In a majestic person a defect does not produce
misery. It may well cause misery in a non-majestic person.
Sun, fire and Ganga may be cited as examples.

21. Hence you give your daughter in marriage to Siva.
That will be a wise step. Lord Siva who. is the sole lord,
unchanging and without any aberration is worthy of being
resorted to,

22. By performing penance, Siva can be propitiated
quickly and He will accept her undoubtedly.

23. In every respect, Siva, the lord of all, is the most
suitable person. He cannot be slain even by thunderbolts.
He can render Brahma and others distressed.’!?

24. O dear sage, after saying this you continued. You
delighted him with auspicious words. You spoke to the king
of the mountains.

25. ‘© lord of mountains, she will be the wife of Siva
and will remain his favourite always. She will be a chaste
Jady of good rites. She will increase the pleasure of her
parents.

26. Performing a penance she will fascinate Siva’s

mind towards herself. He too will marry none else except
her.

17. Our translation is based on the following emended text:

‘gto cafaetet wendiaranT:”

=== PAGE 36 ===

504 Stvapurdna

27. A love akin to this pair will not be found any-
where. Never in the past was it seen nor will it occur in
future. Nor it is current now.

28. O best of mountains, the two will fulfil the work
of the gods, They will resuscitate those who have breathed
their last.

29. O lord of mountains, Siva will become Ardhana-
rifvara (half male and half female), with your daughter forming
half the part of your body. Their meeting once again will be
delightful.

30. After propitiating lord Siva, the lord of all, by the
power of her penance, your daughter will take away half
the body of Siva.

31. By propitating Siva with her penance she will
acquire the lustre of gold and will be known as Svarnagauri.
Your daughter will be as fair-complexioned as lightning.

32. This girl will be famous in the name of Gauri,
She will deserve the respect of Visnu, Brahma and _ the
other Gods.

33. Ovexcellent mountain, you shall not give her to
anyone else. This is a secret of the gods. This shall not
be revealed to any one else.

34. O cclestial sage, Narada, on hearing these words
that you spoke O, sage, the eloquent Himavat spoke thus:

Himavat said:—

35. O sage Narada, O intelligent one, 1 have one sub-
mission to make, Pilcase listen to it lovingly and make us
delightful.

36. It is heard that the great God abhors all attach-
ments. He has perfect self-control. He is ever busy in
penance and is out of reach of even the Gods.

37. O celestial sage, He is in the path of meditation.
How can He withdraw His mind from the supremc
Brahman? I have a great doubt in this respect.

38-39. The supreme Brahman is great and imperishable.
It is like the streak ofa lamp. It is tcrmed Sadasiva. It is
without aberration. It is beyond Brahma. It is both full

=== PAGE 37 ===

Rudrasarhitd 505

and devoid of qualitics. It has no specia! traits, no desires.
It sees within’® and not without.

40. O sage, from the Kinnaras who come here, such
are the things heard about Him. Can it be untrue ?

41. This is also heard that Siva had entered into a
contract with the lady Sati. Listen to what I say ?

42, “O Sati, Daksayani, my beloved, | shall not take
the hand of any woman except you as my wife. This is the
truth that I say.”

43. This was the agreement that He made with Sati
formerly. She is dead. How then will He take another
woman to be His wife.

Brahmd said:-—

44. After saying these words, the lord of mountains
kept quiet in your presence. O celestial sage, on hearing
that. you spoke words that revealed the truth.

Narada said:—

45. *O lord of mountains, of great intellect, you need
not worry. This daughter of yours, Parvati, was formerly the
daughter of Daksa.

46. Sati was her auspicious name. Sati who was
Daksa’s daughter became Rudra’s wife.

47. Being dishonoured at the sacrifice of her father,
and being the witness of Siva’s dishonour she was furious
and she cast off her body.

48. She herself is born in your house as Parvati.
There is no doubt that she will become Siva’s wife.”

Brahma said :—

49-50. O sage, all these details you mentioned to the
lord cf mountains. You told the previous history of Parvati
that increased her pleasure and on hearing which, the lord of
mountains, his wife and children were freed from all sus-
picions.

51. On hearing the story from Narada, Parvati bent

18. We have adopted the reading aq: for aa:

=== PAGE 38 ===

506 Sivapurdna

down her head in bashfulness but her smile heightened the
beauty of her face.

52. On hearing the story, the lord of mountains strok-
ed her fondly, kissed her on the head and placed her on his
seat.

53. O sage, on secing her seated there you spoke
again delighting the lord of mountains, Menaka and her
sons.

54-55, “© king of mountains, she will have a better
throne than this. Siva’s thigh will be her permanent abode.
On getting the seat on the thigh of Siva your daughter will
go to the world where no eye or mind can reach.”

Brahma said : —

56. O Narada, after saying this to the lord of mount-
ains, you went to heaven immediately. The lord of mountains
too, whose mind was filled with joy, returned to his palace
endowed with all riches.

CHAPTER NINE

(The parents advise Parvati to propitiate Siva. Siva appears
before Parvati in dream)

Narada said:—

1. O Brahma, O dear one, O foremost among the
devotees of Siva, O intelligent one, taking pity on me you
have narrated a wonderful story to me and have increased
my pleasure thereby.

2. O Brahma, when I, of divine vision, had gone to
my abode what happened thereafter? Please tell me now.

Brahmd said:—

3. After you had gone to heaven, some time passed.
Once Mena approached the lord of mountains and bowed
to him.

4. After waiting there for some time with humility, the

=== PAGE 39 ===

Rudrasamnhitd 507

beloved of the mountain addressed her lord; the chaste lady
who loved her daughter as ardently as her own life spoke
to the lord of mountains thus.

Mend said :—

5. As but is natural to women, the words of the sage
have not been understood by me well. (1 think it is better)
that you perform the marriage of our daughter with a hand-
some bridegroom.

6. Let the bridegroom of Parvati be born of a good
family endowed with good characteristic signs. In every res-
pect that marriage will yield an unprecedented happiness.

7. QObeisance to you. Do everything necessary to fnake
our daughter, as beloved to us as our own lives, very happy
and delighted after being united with a good bridegroom.

Brahma said :—

8. After saying this, with tears in her eyes Mena fell
at the feet of her husband. Raising her, the lord of moun-
tains, the most excellent among intelligent people, made a
true slatement.

Himacala said:—

9. O gentle lady Menaka, listen. I shall tell you the
truth. Do not be under false impressions. The sage’s state-
ment will never be false.

10. If you feel affectionate towards your daughter,
zealously instruct your daughter. Let her perform the penance
with Siva as the object, devotedly and steadily.

Il. If Siva is delighted, O Menaka, He will marry her.
Everything shall be auspicious. The inauspicious features
indicated by Narada will perish.

12, All inauspicious things are auspicious in Sadasiva.
Hence immediately teach your daughter to hasten to peric.m
the penance for attaining Siva.

Brahma said :—

13. On hearing these words of the iord of r.ountains,
Mena was greatly delighted. She approached hey «.aughter to
advise her to take interest in penance.

=== PAGE 40 ===

508 Sivapurdno

14. On seeing the tender limbs of her daughter, Menaka
was greatly distressed. Her eyes welled up in tears immediately.

15. The beloved of the lord of mountains was una-
ble to advise her daughter to perform penance. Parvati
understood the implied wish of her mother quickly.

16. Then the omniscient supreme goddess Parvati
immediately spoke to her mother after consoling her again
and again,

Parvati said :—

17. O mother, of great intelligence, listen in the early
dawn to-day. At night I had a dream I shall tell you. Be
pleased.

18. A brahmin sage advised me lovingly and compass-
jonately to perform the penance of Siva, O mother.

Brahma said :—

19. On hearing that, Menaka called her husband there
and told him the dream as seen by her daughter.

20. After hearing the dream of his daughter from
Menaka, the lord of the mountains was pleased and he spoke
thus to his wife.

The lord of the mountains said :—

21. O dear, at the end of the latter half of the night,
I too had a dream. Please listen to it lovingly. I shall zeal-
ously explain it.

22. A great saint of exquisite limbs, as mentioned by
Narada, arrived near my city with very great pleasure in
order to perform penance there.

23. Delighted much I took my daughter there with me.
He was recognised as Lord Siva, the bridegroom as mentioned
L v Narada

24. Advising our daughter to render service to that
saint I requested him to approve of it but He didn’t.

, 5. A great discussion took place (between her and Siva
based o, © Sankhya and Ved4nta.!* Thereafter at His bidding
my daugt,:.¢T stayed there.

19. Com, “2re a dialogue between Siva and Parvati who represent
the different pha es and aspects of Purusa and Trakgti respectively. Cf.

Ch. 13 of this ie '°™

=== PAGE 41 ===

Rudrasamhita 509

26. Concealing her love in the heart she served Him
with devotion. This is the dream I had, O bright-faced
lady and I have told you all.

27, Hence, dear Mena, for some time the result of
this has to be watched. Certainly know this to be the
proper step for me.

Brahma said :—

28. O excellent sage, the lord of the mountains having
thus explained to Menaka, both of them remained watching
its result, pure in mind.

29-30. When a few days passed by, lord Siva, the
goal of saintly men, the cause of protection and enjoyment
wandering here and there in his flutter and excitement due
to the separation from Sati, came there with pleasure
accompanied by a few of his Ganas, in order to perform
penance. The lord was completely agitated due to Sati’s love
and separation from her.

31. He performed his penance there, Parvati engaged
herself in His service continuously accompanied by two of
her maids,

32. Although the lord Siva was hit and wounded by
the arrows of Kama who was sent thither by the gods to
enchant Him, He was not swayed at all.

33. Burning Kama there by His fiery eye, on remem-
bering my words, the lord became angry with me and
vanished from the scene.

34. After sometime, Lord Siva quelled the pride of
Parvati but he was propitiated by her again performing great
penance.

35. Following the conventions of the world, the lord
married Parvati after being sponsored by Visnu. Then
everything auspicious ensued.

36. O dear, thus the story of the lord, the divine
story of Siva, has been narrated in brief. What is it that
you wish to hear again ?

=== PAGE 42 ===

510 Siva purdna
CHAPTER TEN

(Mars is born and is raised to the status of a Planet by
Siva’s grace)

Narada said :-—

1. O Brahma, the fortunate disciple of Visnu, O lord,
foremost among the devotees of Siva, please narrate the
divine sport of Siva in detail to me.

2. What did Siva, separated from Sati, do? When
did He go to the excellent ridge of the Himavat to perform
penance ?

3. How did the discussion between Siva and Siva
take place ? How did Parvati attain Siva by performing
penance ?

4. O Brahma, these and other things, connected with
the divine life of Siva, pleasing and auspicious, you kindly
narrate.

Siita said :—

5. On hearing this inquiry of Narada, Brahma, the
excellent lord of the worlds, remembered the lotus-like feet
of Siva and spoke.

Brahmd said :—

6. O celestial sage, most excellent among the devotees
of Siva, listen to His glory that sanctifies, renders every-
thing auspicious and increases devotion.

7. Returning to His mountain, Siva in his excitement
caused by his separation from his beloved, remembered Sati,
who was dearer to Him than his very life.

8. Addressing His Ganas, He bewailed her and narrated
her good qualities heightening love. In this way He showed
the way of the world to the people.

9. Abandoning the polished manners of a householder,
He cast off his dress and roamed about all the worlds, clever
in divine sports that He was.

10-11. Not seeing her anywhere, the pangs of his
separation from Sati increasing, Siva, the benefactor of His
devotees, returned to His mountain and entered into trance

=== PAGE 43 ===

Rudrasamhitd 511

for the destruction of misery. Thereupon He saw His
imperishable real form.

12, Thus Siva remained for a long time eliminating
the three attributes, and unaffected by aberrations. The lord
Himself, the controller of illusion remained in the state of
the Supreme Brahman.

13. Then He gave up trance. Many years elapsed.
What happened thereafter, I shall now recount to you.

14, The drops of sweat caused by exhaustion fell on
the Earth from the lord’s forehead and took the shape of a
child immediately.

15. O sage, the child was tawny-coloured and had
four arms. He was comely in features. His brilliance was
supermundane and unbearable to others,

16. Like a common child he cried in front of the Great
lord who was engaged in worldly activities.

17. Afraid of Siva, the Earth pondercd deeply over
it and appeared before him in the guise of a good lady.

18. She lifted up the child immediately and held him
to her chest. Lovingly she suckled the child with her
excellent breast milk that flowed over her body.

19. She kissed the child’s face lovingly and petted
him smilingly. In the absence of Sati she herself acted as
his mother in the interest of lord Siva.

20. Siva knew that she was the Earth. Siva, the cause
of protection and enjoyment, the immanent soul, on seeing
her activities became contented and eagerly said to her
laughingly.

21. “O Earth, you are blessed. Rear this child of
mine lovingly, born of my glittering drops of sweat over you.

22. Although the child is born of the sweat of my
body, O Earth, he will be famous in the world after your
name. He will be a bestower of pleasures and will be free
from the three distresscs always.

23. This boy of yours will be a bestower of tands and
will have good qualities. He will make me too happy.
Accept him with pleasure”.

Brahma said :—
24. After “saying this He stopped. He was a bit

=== PAGE 44 ===

512 Sivapurdna

relieved of His pangs of separation. Siva, free from aberra-
tions, and a lover of good men, acted thus only for following
the worldly conventions.

25. The Earth too, as Siva bade her, returned to her
abode along with the child. She was extremely happy.

26. The child acquired the name Bhauma (son of the
Earth). He attained youth immediately. For a long time
he worshipped lord Siva at Kasi.

27. By the grace of lord Siva, the son of the Earth,
acquired the status of a planet. He went to the heavenly
sphere beyond the region of Venus.

28. © sage, thus I have told you the story of Siva
and His separation from Sati. Now listen to the story of
His performance of penance.

CHAPTER ELEVEN
(Siva and Himavat meet together)
Brahma said :—

1-2. O Narada, the daughter of the mountain, honoured
in the three worlds, was brought up in the palace of Himacala.
When she was eight years old, Siva distressed by Sati’s
separation came to know of her birth. Keeping her wonder-
ful memory within his heart He rejoiced much.

3. In the meantime, foilowing the conventions of the
world, Siva wished to perform penance in order to con-
centrate his mind properly.

4-5. Taking some important Ganas of quiet nature,
Nandin and others, with Him, He went to the excellent
Himalayan ridge—Gangavataéra, O sage, where the great
holy river Ganga flowed from Brahmapura® formerly, in order
to quell sins.

20. Cunningham (A. G. P. 299) identifies: Brahmapura (the Po-lo-
ki-mo-pu-lo of Hwen Thsang: Waters, I. P. 324) with the capital city
Vair&tapattana of the hilly country lying between the Alakanandd and the
Karnali rivers. The territory covered the districts of Garhwal and Kumaon
(Cf. Br. S. ch. 14 and G.D. P. 40) and was stretched within 667 miles
in circuit,

=== PAGE 45 ===

Rudrasarhhitd 513

6-7. Staying there, Siva of full self-control, started
His activities of penance. With full concentration and alert-
ness He thought on His own Self, the cause of mental know-
ledge, the eternal, the luminous, free from affliction, identi-
cal with the universe, consciousness and Bliss, without a second
and having no support.

8-9. When Siva began His meditation, the Pramathas
also began their meditation as well as some Ganas, Nandin,
Bhrngi etc. Some of the Ganas rendered service to Siva, the
Supreme Self. Some of them became His gatekeepers. They
observed silence and did not shout.

10. In the meantime on hearing that Siva had come
to Ausadhiprastha™, the mountain Himavat too went there,

11. Accompanied by his attendants, the lord of the
mountains bowed to the lord Siva, worshipped Him with
pleasure and eulogised Him wlth palms joined in reverence.

Lord Himavat said:—

12. O great god, lord of the gods, O lord Siva, the
three worlds are sustained by you alone who are lord of the
worlds,

13. Obeisance to Thee, O lord of gods, obcisance to the
one who has assumed the form of a Yogin, obeisance to Thee
that art possessed and devoid of attributes and obeisance to
Thee who art sportive.

14. O Siva, obeisance to the resident of Kailasa,
obeisance to one who wanders all over the worlds, obeisance
to thee the great lord, to the one indulging in divine sports,
obeisance to the trident-holder.

15. © lord, of complete and perfect qualities, obeisance
to Thee, devoid of aberrations. Obeisance to Thee without
aspirations, Obeisance to Thee without desires. Obeisance to
the bold one, to the great soul.

16. O overlord of the three attributes, O lord of
delusion, favourably disposed towards the people, obeisance
unto you, who grant inner pleasures of the soul. Obeisance
to Brahman, the great soul.

17. Obcisance to Thee, worthy of being served by Visnu

ai, See Not® No. 1o

=== PAGE 46 ===

514 Sios,.rdga

Brahma and others: obeisance to Thee of the form of Visnu
and Brahma; obeisance to Thee, the creator of Visnu and
Brahma, obeisance to Thee O one favourably disposed to the
devotees.

18. OQ one engaged in penance, O one the
venue of penance; obeisance to Thee the bestower of
fruits of penance; obeisance to Thee who lovest penance;
obeisance to Thee of the form of Brahman and quiescent.

19, Obeisance to Thee who lay down the principles of
dealings and worldly conventions; obcisance to the great
Siva full of attributes; obeisance to Thee the great soul.

20. O- great lord, your’ divine sports are
incomprehensible. They bestow happiness on saintly men.
Your nature is subservient to the devotees and you are under
their control. You are the performer of all activities,

21. O lord, you have come here because my fortune
is in its ascendancy, You have been described as a bestower
of favours to the distressed. You have put me under your
patronage and protection.

22. Today my life has borne fruit, in fact everything
connected with me has become fruitful since you have come
here.

23. Knowing me to be your slave of great composure,
O great lord, you can freely command me. With my mind
not fascinated by other things I shall serve you with great
pleasure.

Brahmd said :—

24. On hearing these words of the lord of mountains,
lord Siva slightly opened his eyes and cast a glance on the
lord of mountains who was accompanied by his attendants.

25. On seeing the lord of mountains with his fol-
lowers, the bull-bannered god Siva, the lord of the universe
permanently engaged in meditation and Yogic practice said
smilingly.

Lord Siva said:—

26. I bave come to perform penance in secret on your
top. Make arrangements so that none should be able to come
near me.

=== PAGE 47 ===

Rudrasamhitd 515

27. You are a noble soul, the abode of penance and
permanent residence of sages, gods, demons and other great
men.

28. You are the permanent residence of brahmins and
others; you are always sanctified by Ganga; you render help
to others and you are the lord and king of al] mountains.

29. Oking of mountains, delighted in resorting to you
and controlling my senses and mind I am going to perform
penance here at Gangavatarana.™

30. O lord of mountains, O best of mountains, now
put forth all endeavour whereby my penance can be con-
ducted without obstacles.

31. O excellent Mountain, this alone is the greatest
service that you can render. Please arrange for it with
due effort. Please return to your abode with your mind
full of pleasure.

Brahma said :—

32. After saying this, the lord of the worlds, the cause
of protection and enjoyment kept silent. The lord of the
mountains then spoke to Siva with affection.

Himécala satd :—

33. O great lord of the universe, I have come myself
and worshipped you. What shall I ask you who stay in my
own kingdom?

34. © great lord, you cannot be attained by great
penance even by the gods who put forth great efforts. But
you yourself have come here.

35. There is none more fortunate than me; there is
none more meritorious than me, since you have come to
perform penance on my summit.

36. O great lord, I consider myself greater than the
god of gods. You have come here with your Ganas and
made me blessed.

37. O lord of gods, independently and without any

22. It is a sacred place celebrated in the Matsya and Vayu
Purinas where the river Ganhg& emerges from the Vindu Sarovara through
visible outlets and subterranean channels.

=== PAGE 48 ===

516 Siva purdga

obstacles perform your great penance. O lord, I am your
slave always. I shall do all service to you.

Brakmd said :—

38. After saying this, the lord of the mountains
returned at once to his abode and enthusiastically narrated
everything to his beloved wife.

39. O Narada, calling together all his attendants with
the members of their families, the j‘ord of the mountains
said emphatically.

Himdcala said :—

40. From now onwards, none of you shall go to the
ridge of mine, called Gangavatarana. This is my command.
I am telling you the truth.

41. If anyone of you goes there I shall punish that
rogue particularly. This is the truth I am speaking.

42. O sage, after thus checking all of his attendants,
the mountain made other arrangements also. I now tell you
all about the same.

CHAPTER TWELVE
(Siva-Himavat dialogue)

Brahma said

1. Then, the delighted lord of the mountains, took some
fresh flowers and fruits with him and approached Siva along
with his daughter.

2. Approaching the lord of the three worlds, engaged
in meditation and bowing to Him he mentally dedicated to
Him, his wonderful daughter.

3. Placing the fruits and flowers in front of Him and
making his daughter stand before Him, the lord of the
mountains spoke to Siva.

Himdcala said:—
4. O lord, my daughter who is eager to serve you, the

=== PAGE 49 ===

Rudrasarhhita 517

moon-crested lord, I have brought here with a desire to
propitiate you.

5. Let her serve you, the benefactor, for ever, along
with two of her maids. O lord, if you wish to bless me,
please permit her.

Brahma said :—

6-10. Then Siva looked at her in the first flush of her
youth. Her complexion resembled the full blown blue lotus
petals. Her face appeared as the full moon. Her auspici-
ous dress and features were the repositories of all graceful
charms. Her neck had the shape of the conchshell. Her
eyes were wide and her ears shone exquisitely. On either
side, her long-rounded arms resembling a lotus-stalk shone
beautifully. Her two breasts resembling lotus-buds were stout,
plump and firm. Her waist was slender and the curly locks
of her hair shone well. Her feet resembled the land-lotus and
were comely in appearance. She was competent to shake
the minds of even the sages deeply engrossed in meditation,
even at the very sight. She was a crest-jewel of all the
maidens in the world.

11-12. On seeing her in that exquisite form as increased
the pleasure and love of even those who meditate, the great
Yogin Siva closed His eyes immediately and meditated upon
His real form, the great principle that is beyond the three
attributes and is imperishable.

13-14, On seeing Siva the lord of all, the chief of
those devoted to penance, the lord with the moon as his
ornament, who can be known through spiritual insight
and who was sitting in the meditative posture closing His
eyes, Himacala saluted Him again. ‘Though he was not
disheartened, he entertained some doubts. Thus he, the lord
of mountains, foremost of the eloqueut, spoke to Siva, the
sole kinsman of the universe.

Himdcala said: —

15. O great lord of the gods, O Siva, the merciful, O
lord, open your eyes and look at me who have sought refuge
in you.

16. O Siva, O great lord, the delighter of the universe,

=== PAGE 50 ===

518 Sivapuréna

O great God, I bow to you who destroy all adversities.

17. O lord of gods, the Vedas and the sacred lore do
not know you entirely. Your greatness is beyond the sphere
of words and minds, inexpressible by means of words and
incomprehensible,

18. Not to speak of others, even the Vedas describe
you with awe and timidity not positively but negating what
you are not.

19. Securing your grace through devotion, many devot-
ees become acquainted with you. Seeking refuge in you they
get correct knowledge about your real self.

20. Please listen to my entreaty with a long heart.
I am your slave. O dear lord, in humility I shall explain
the same to you.

21. O great god Siva, by your favour I feel most fort-
unate. O lord, consider me your slave and be sympathetic
towards me. Obeisance to you.

22. ©O lord, I shall be visiting you daily along with
my daughter. O lord, be pleased to command me _ accord-

ingly.
Brahma said:—
23. On hearing his words, the great lord of the gods

broke His meditation, opened His cyes, thought a little
and spoke.

Lord Siva said:—

24. ‘O mountain, you shall come every day to see me,
leaving your daughter in your abode. Otherwise I cannot be

”

seen

Brahma said :—

25. On hearing the words of Siva in that view, the
father of Siva the mountain, bowed his head and replied to
Siva.

Himdcala said:—

26. ‘Let this be kindly mentioned why this girl cannot
accompany me here. Is she unworthy of your service ? I do
not know the reason thereof.”

=== PAGE 51 ===

Rudrasarhitd 519
Brahma said:—

27. Particularly pointing out the worldly conduct of
fake ascetics, the bull-bannered god Siva laughingly spoke to
the mountain.

Siva satd:—

28. This auspicious slender-bodied maiden of comely
hips and moon-like face should not be brought near me. I
forbid you again and again.

29. A woman is a phase of illusion. As the scholars
who have mastered the Vedas say particularly, a young damsel
is a hindrance to ascetics.

30. O mountain, I am an ascetic, a yogin, never affected
by illusion. Of what avail is a woman thrust on me ?

31. O friend resorted to by great ascetics, you shall

not say so again, since you are an adept in Vedic religion,
a scholar and one foremost among the wise.

32. O mountain, by contact with a woman, worldliness
springs up; non-attachment perishes and the virtuous penance
is destroyed.

33. Hence, O mountain, no ascetic shall have any truck
with women. A woman is the root of all worldly attachments.
She destroys all wisdom and detachment together.

Brahmd satd:—

34. Speaking these and many other similar things to
the lord of mountains, lord Siva the great Yogin, stopped.

35. On hearing these ruthless words of Siva free from
sickness and desire, the father of Parvati became nervous, O
celestial sage, and a little agitated. But he kept quiet.

36. On hearing the words of the ascetic and finding her
father, the lord of the mountains, frightened, Parvati bowed
to Siva and spoke these words clearly.

=== PAGE 52 ===

520 Sivapurdpa
CHAPTER THIRTEEN

(Siva-Parvati dialogue)

Parvati said:—

1. O Yogin, O lord, wise and clever, please listen to
the reply to what you, as an ascetic, said to the lord of
mountains.

2. O Siva, you perform this great penance because you
possess the energy of penance. Your intellect is inclined to
perform penance because you are a noble soul.

3. That energy is the Prakrti, the cause of all activities.
Everything is created, sustained and destroyed by it.

4. ©O lord, please ponder over who you are and who
this subtle Prakrti is. Without Prakrti how can the great
lord of the phallic form exist ?

8. You are worthy of the worship, respect and
meditation of all living beings for ever, thanks to Prakrti.
Thinking of this in your heart, please rep ly.

Brahma said: —

6: On hearing these words of Parvati, the great lord
engaged in the causation ofgreat enjoyment and protection
became delighted. He laughed and said.

The great lord said:—

7. I am destroying the Prakrti with my great penance.
I remain in reality without Prakrti.

8 Indeed Prakrti should not be taken in by good
people. They should remain unaffected eschewing all worldly
conduct.

Brahma said:—

9. © dear one, this was said by Siva in accordance
with worldly conventions and dealings. Parvati thereupon
laughed to herself and spoke these sweet words,

Pdrvali said .—
10. O Yogin, O lord Siva, based on what you said

=== PAGE 53 ===

Rudrasamhitd 521

how can that Prakrti cease to exist and how can you
be considered beyond that Prakrti ?

11. You shall ponder over this and say with reference
to the facts as they are, All these (the universe etc) are
bound by Prakrti continuously.

12. Hence you shall not say anything, not do any-
thing. Know that speaking, doing etc. is a Prakrta activity.

13. What you hear, what you eat, what you see and
what you do—all these are (essentially) the activities of
Prakrti, To say that it is unreal is meaningless.

14. O lord, if you are greater than Prakrti, wherefore
do you perform penance, O Siva, now, on this mountain
Himavat.

15. O Siva, you have been swallowed by Prakrti,
youdo not know your own situation. O lord, if you do
not know your own situation why do you perform penance ?

16, O yogin, what have I to do with an argument
with you ? Scholars say that without perception inference
has no authority at all.

17. As long as the embodied beings remain the objects
of the sense-organs, everything is Prakrta. Wise men
consider it so.

18. O lord of ascetics, a longwinded talk is of no
avail. Listen to my emphatic statement. I am Prakrti
and you are Purusa. This is the truth. There is no
doubt about it.

19. With my blessings you become qualitative and
embodied. Without me, you are attributeless and incompe-
tent to perform any activity.

20. Being always subservient to Prakrti you per-
form all activities, Self-controlled, free from aberrations and
untainted by me how can you perform them ?

21. If you are really superior to Prakri, if what
you say is true, you need not be afraid to be near me, O
Siva,

Brahmd said:—

22, On hearing these words of Parvati based on the
Sarmkhya system, Siva replied to her, upholding the Vedantin's
point of view...

=== PAGE 54 ===

522 Sioapurdga

Lord Siva said:—

23. O Parvati, O upholder of the Samkhya system,
if you say so, O sweet-voiced lady, you render me unfor-
bidden service every day.

24. If I am the Brahman, the supreme lord, unsullied
by illusion. comprehensible through spiritual knowledge and
the master of illusion what will you do then ?

Brahmd said :—

25. Having spoken to Parvati thus, the lord, the
conciliator and the blesser of the devotees spoke to the
mountain thus.

Siva said :—

26. O lord of mountains, here itself on your beautiful
excellent ridge, I shall perform my penance showing to the
world my real blissful form and nature.

27. O lord of mountains, permission shall be given to
me to perform penance. Without your permission it is not
possible for me {or any one else) to perform any penance
here.

Brahmd said :—
28. On hearing these words of Siva, the lord of gods,
Himavat bowed to Siva and said.

Himavat said :—

29. The entire universe consisting of gods, Asuras
and human beings, is yours. O great god, though insigni-
ficant, I blabber something to you.

Brahmd said:—

30. Thus addressed by Himavat, Siva, the benefactor
of the worlds, laughingly permitted him to go.

31, Permitted by Siva, Himavat returned to his abode
along with Parvati. He wanted to visit Him daily.

32. Even without her father but accompanied by her
maids, Parvati approached Siva everyday for serving Him
with devotion.

83. O dear, at the bidding of lord Siva, none of the

=== PAGE 55 ===

Rudrasamhitd 523

Ganas, Nandifvara and others, purely carrying out the orders
of Siva, prevented her.

34. The discourse of Siva and Siva who represented the
principles of Samkhya and Vedanta and who, if thoughtfully
considerd, are not different from each other, was very happy~
and pleasing for ever.

35. At the request of the lord of mountains, Siva permi-
tted Parvatito remain with Him being true to His words
though with all gravity and seriousness.

36. He, the lord of individual souls, said to Parvati in
the company of her maids—“*You can serve me_ everyday
You can go (as you please). You can stay here fearlessly.”

37. Saying this, He accepted the goddess in his service.
Siva is free from aberrations. He is a great Yogin, the lord
who indulges in different kinds of divine sports.

38. This is the supreme courage of great ascetics poss-
essed of fortitude that though surrounded by obstacles they are
not overpowered by them.

39, Then, the lord of mountains, returned to his city
and rejoiced in the company of his wife, the sages and
attendants.

40. Siva mentioned the Yoga of meditation on the
great Atman with His mind freed from obstacles.

41. Parvati, along with her maids, continued her daily
service to the moon-crested lord, coming and going without
any hindrance.

42. She washed Siva’s feet and drank that holy water.
With a cloth heated in fire she wiped his body.

43. After worshipping Him with sixteen types of offer-
ings duly, and bowing to Him repeatedly she used to return
to her father’s abode.

44. O excellent sage, a long time elapsed as she conti-
nued her service to Him who was engrossed in meditation.

45. Sometimes accompanied by her maids, she sang
exquisite songs of good note that increased love in the hermi-
tage of Siva.

46. Sometimes she brought KuSa grass, flowers and sac-
rificial twigs. Sometimes, assisted by her maids, she scubbed
and cleaned the place.

47. Sometimes she stayed in the house of the moon-cre-

=== PAGE 56 ===

524 Sivapurdna

scent lord, pure and holy. Sometimes she used to gaze at the
lord lovingly and with surprise.

48-49 In the course of his penance sometimes the lord of
the goblins thought about her as free from attachment. But
as she was in her physical form He did not take her as His
wife though she was near Him, though she was endowed
with every feature of beauty, though she was capable of
deluding even the sages.

50. On seeing her with perfect control over her sense-
organs and engrossed in serving Him always, the lord merci-
fully thought.

51. “TI shall take her only when the last seed of ego
goes away from her; when she herself performs a penance.”

52. Thinking thus, the lord of the Bhitas reverted to
meditation. The lord who could indulge in great sports bec-
ame a great Yogin.

53. O sage, when Siva, the great Atman, sank into
meditation, no other thought entered His mind.

54. As for parvati, she served Him everyday with great
devotion, always thinking on the form of that Great Soul.

55. Siva who was engrossed in meditation saw her every
day in full composure. Forgetting His previous thoughts
about her, He did not see her although He saw her.

56. In the mean time Indra, other gods and the sages
eagerly sent Kama there at the bidding of Brahma.

57. They had been harassed by the demon Taraka. the
demon of great strength. Hence they wanted to unite Parvati
and Siva in love.

58. After reaching there Kama tried all his tricks but
Siva was not at all agitated. He reduced Kama to ashes.

59. O sage, Parvati too was divested of her ego. At
his bidding she performed a penance and obtained Him as
her husband.

60. Parvati and Siva were very happy. Engrossed in
helping others they carried out the work of the gods.

=== PAGE 57 ===

Rudrasamhita 525
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
(The Birth of Taraka and Vajranga and their Penance)

Narada said: —

1. O Brahma, great devotee of Siva and disciple of
Visnu, this great story of Siva and Siva has been narrated
very well by you.

2. Who was this Taraka demon, O Brahma, by whom
the gods were harassed. Whose son was he ? Narrate his
story with reference to Siva.

3. How did Siva of full control reduce Kama to
ashes ? Please narrate that too with pleasure. The story
of the lord is indeed wonderful.

4. How did Siva perform the severe penance for the
sake of happiness ? How did the primordial energy who is
greater than the universe secure Siva as her husband ?

5. O great scholar, narrate all these complete in
every detail to me, your son, who has dedicated his soul to
Siva and who has developed full faith in Him.

Brahmd said:—

6. O celestial sage, of great intellect, QO foremost of
my sons, whose sacred rites are laudable, I explain the entire
story after thinking on Siva. Listen.

7. O Narada, first ‘of all, you hear the birth of Taraka
himself, to secure whose death great effort was made by the
gods depending on Siva.

8. My son Marici begot Kasyapa who married thir-
teen daughters of Daksa.

9. The eldest of them Diti bore two sons: Hiranya-
kagipu the elder and Hiranyadksa the younger.

10. When these two began to harass the gods, Visnu
assumed the forms of Man-lion and Boar and killed them.
Then the gods became fearless and happy.

11. The distressed Diti sought refuge in Kasyapa and
and serving him with devotion and observing the sacred rites
she conceived.

12. On coming to know of it, Indra entered her womb
forcibly and cut it off many. a time with his thunderbolt.

=== PAGE 58 ===

526 Sivapurdna

13. By the power of her sacred rites, the child in the
womb did not die as she was sleeping at that time, by a
stroke of good luck. They were cut into seven pieces and
so she had seven sons.

14. These sons became gods by the name of Maruts.
They all went to heaven along with Indra and were taken
as his own attendants by the king of gods.

15. Diti resorted again to her husband repenting for
her action. She made the sage pleased by means of great
service.

Kasjapa said:—

16. Be pure and perform penance for ten thousand
years of Brahma. When it is completed you will have a son.

17. O sage, the penance was completed by Diti who
performed it with faith. Thereafter from him she conceived
and delivered of a son.

18. Thatson of Diti named Vajranga (of adamantine
limbs) was on a par with the gods. Befitting his name, his
body was strong and powerful even from his very birth.

19. At the bidding of his mother, he immediately
abducted Indra, the lord of gods, the other gods and punished
them in various ways.

20. Seeing the distress of Indra and others, Diti became
very happy. Indra and other gods became miserable due
to their own actions.

21. Always engaged in the welfare of the gods, I went
there accompanied by Kasyapa. Employing gentle and
peaceful words I got the gods released.

22. Releasing the gods with respect, Vajranga, a
great devotee of Siva, was delighted in his heart, and he of
pure soul, without any aberration, spoke.

Vajrdnga said:—

23. In order to achieve his interest, Indra killed the
foetus of my mother. He has now tasted the fruit thereof.
Well may he rule over his kingdom.

. 24. O Brahma, I did this only at the bidding of my
mother. I have no desire for the enjoyments of any one of
the worlds.

=== PAGE 59 ===

Rudrasanhita 527

25. O Brahma, foremost of those who know the Vedas,
tell me the essence of real philosophy whereby I can ever
remain happy, pleased in heart and free from aberrations.

26. On hearing that, O sage, I said—‘Sattvika feelings
constitute the essence of real philosophy. I shail lovingly
create an exquisite lady.”

27. After offering her who was named Vardangi, to
that son of Diti, I went to my abode in great delight. So
also Kagyapa, his father.

28. Thereafter the demon eschewed his diabolical
feelings and resorted to sublime thoughts. Since he was free
from fiendish feelings he became happy.

29. But no sublime feeling entered in the heart of
Varangi. With chastity and faith she served her hasband
lovingly in diverse ways.

30. Her husband Vajranga of great lordly status was
glad very soon on account of her service . He then spoke
thus ;—-

Vajrdnga said:—

31. O beloved, what do you wish ? What is it that
you cherish in your mind ? On hearing that, she bowed to
her husband and revealed her desire.

Vardrigi said:—

32. “O my good husband, if you are so pleased grant
me a powerful son who will conquer three worlds and
cause misery to Visnu.”

Brahma said :—

33. On hearing the words of his beloved, he was
disagreeably surprised and vexed. He was free from in-
imical thoughts. With perfect wisdom and Sattvika feelings
in his heart he said :—

34. My beloved wishes enmity with the gods. It does
not appeal to me. What shall I do? Where shall I go?
How can my vow be preserved from destruction ?

35. If my wife’s wishes are fulfilled, the three worlds
will be much distressed, so too the gods and the sages.

36. If iy beloved’s desires are not fulfilled, I am sure

=== PAGE 60 ===

528 Sivapurdga

to be cast into hell. In either case righteousness will be lost.
This is what we have heard.

37. O sage, thus Vajranga whirled a lot in a dilemma.
Intelligently he considered the corresponding strength and
weakness of both the alternatives.

38. Osage, as willed by Siva, though intelligent the
king of demons agreed to the proposal. He told his wife
“So be it.”

39. For that purpose he performed another very diffi-
cult penance with great zeal with me as the object of
worship, for number of years.

40. On seeing the great penance I went to him for
granting the boon. With a delighted mind I told him
“speak out the boon you wish to have.”

41. On seeing me in the firmament in the pleasant
mood he worshipped and eulogised me as well as craved
for the boon as desired by his wife.

Vajrariga said :—

42. O lord, give me a son who will be carrying out
what is beneficent to his mother, who will be strong, valorous
and efficient, who will be a storehouse of penance.

Brahma said :—

43. On hearing his words, O sage, I said “So be it.”
After granting the boon [ returned to my abode thinking on
Siva, though a bit distressed.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN
(The penance and reign of Térakdsura)
Brahma said:—

l. Then that Varangi. devoted to him, conceived.

The child within her body developed in many years with its
brilliance.

. 2. That Varadngl, when the time was complete, delivered

of a son of huge body and great strength dazzling the ten
quarters.

=== PAGE 61 ===

Redrasanhitd 529

3. At the same time, several phenomena of evil portent
forboding misery and distress happened, when the son of
Varingi was born making the gods miserable.

4. O dear, the phenomena of three varieties indicat-
ing great calamity and terrifying the worlds occurred in the
sky, heaven and earth. I shall narrate them.

5. With a terrifying noise, thunderbolts fell along with
comets; shooting meteors rose up, making the world miserable.

6. The earth with all the mountains quaked; the
quarters blazed; the rivers and oceans were particularly agi-
tated.

7. The rough wind blew with a hissing noise. Gusts
of wind with troops of tempests and dust for banner uprooted
several trees.

8. O great brahmin, the misty haloes around the sun
and the moon in the grip of Rahu became the harbingers of
great fear and unhappiness.

9 At that time terrifying sounds that resembled those
of the chariot issued forth from cracks and crevices in the
mountains.

10. Within villages, inauspicious vixens howled hide-
ously vomitting fires; as it were, through their mouths along
with the hissing and twanging sounds of the hootings and
howlings of owls and jackals.

11. Lifting up their necks, the dogs barked in diverse
ways producing sounds of singing or lamenting here and there.

12. O dear, groups of mad asses ran here and there
braying loudly and digging the ground with their hoofs.

13. Terrified by the asses, birds flew up from their
nests. In their excitement and flutter they honked and
cronked. They did not find a peaceful perch anywhere.

14. Beasts in sheds and forests roamed here and there
in great fright as though beaten and driven about, passing
urine and shitting dunys as they pleased.

15. Frightened cows sprayed blood through their
udders; their eyes brimmed with tears, clouds showering
putrid matter became terrifying.

16. Idols and images of deities appeared to cry and fly
up. Even when there was no gale, trees fell down. Planets
in the sky clashed. with one another.

=== PAGE 62 ===

530 Sivapurdga

17. O excellent sage, these and similar portending
phenomena occurred : Ignorant persons thought the sub-
mersion of the whole universe was imminent.

18. Then Kasyapa Prajdpati thought well and named
the powerful demon Taraka.

19. That heroic demon, with his manliness and valour
manifesting quickly grew and developed with his steely frame
like the lord of mountains.

20. Then the demon Taraka, of great strength and
exploit, endowed with a lofty mind, requested permission of
his mother for performing penance.

21. The permission having been secured, that demon
possessing great power of illusion and capable of deluding even
experts in the magical art, thought of performing penance in
order to conquer all the gods.

22. Strictly adhering to the directions of his elders
and preceptors he went to the forest of Madhu and perfor-
med a severe penance duly, having Brahma as his objective.

23. For a hundred years he performed penance with
his hands lifted up, standing on only one leg and gazing
at the sun. With his mind steady and firm he observed
all sacred rites. ;

24. Then for a hundred years, the lord and king of
Asuras, Taraka performed the penance : stood steady
touching the ground with the single big toe.

25. For hundred years he performed penance by
drinking only water; another hundred years by sustaining
himself on air alone, another hundred years standing in
water and another hundred years standing on dry land.

26. A hundred years he performed the penance amidst
fires, a hundred years in a topsy-turvy position and a
hundred years supported on the ground by the palms of his
hands.

27. © sage, a hundred years he remained with his
head down and feet up clinging fast to the branch of a tree
and inhaling the pure smoke of the sacrificial fire.

28. Thus with ardour, the king of the demons perfor-
med the severe penance duly unbearable even to those who
heard about it.

29. O sage, in the process of such a penance, a huge

=== PAGE 63 ===

Rudrasamhitd 531

mass of light shot up from his head and spread all round.
It caused great havoc.

30. All the worlds of the gods were well nigh consu-
med by it alone. O sage, all the celestial sages were hard
hit and distressed.

31-32. Indra, the lord of gods, was extremely terrified.
He thought “Some one is performing a penance. Surely he
will usurp my position. This master mind shall! in a trice
destroy the whole cosmos’’. All those who entertained similar
doubts could not decide what to do.

33. Then all those gods and sages consulted one another
and in their great fright they came to my world and appro-
ached me in a piteous plight.

34. Bowing to and eulogising me with palms joined in
reverence, all of them explained everything to me distressed in
mind that they were.

35. Coming to a definite conclusion with adequate thou-
ght as to the reason for the same, I went where the demon
was performing penance in order to grant him the boon.

36. O sage, I told him thus—‘‘Tell me what boon you
want. A severe penance has been performed by you. There
is nothing which cannot be granted to you”’.

37. On hearing these words of mine, Taraka, the great
demon, bowed and culogised me and requested for a terrible
boon.

Tdraka said :—

38. “O Pitamaha, if you are glad and ready to grant
me the boon what is it that cannot be achieved by me?
Hence I request you for this boon. Please listen.

39. O lord of gods, if you are pleased and if a boon is
to be given to me, be kind enough to grant me two boons.

40. O great lord, there should certainly be no man
equal to me in strength in this entire universe created by you.

41. If ason born of Siva becomes the commander-in-
chief of an army and discharges weapons against me, let my
death occur then”.

42. Ovexcellent sage, thus requested by that demon, I
granted him two™boons and hastened back to my abode.

=== PAGE 64 ===

532 Sivapurdna

43. Securing the excellent boon in accordance with his
cherished desire, the demon was very glad and went to the
town Sonita®.

44. That great demon was crowned the king of the
three worlds with the permission of Sukra, the preceptor of
the demons.

45. Then the great demon became the leader of the
three worlds. He inaugurated his commanding position
by harassing the mobile and immobile beings.

46. He duly established his suzerainty over the three
worlds. He protected his subjects but inflicted pain on the
gods and others.

47. Then the demon Taraka seized gems and jewels of
all the guardians of the quarters, Indra and others, offered
under duress by them on being afraid of him.

48. Afraid of him, Indra surrendered his Airavata
(white elephant) and Kubera all his nine treasures.

49. White horses were surrendered by Varuna, the wish-
yielding cow Kamadhenu by the sages, and the sun out of fear
for him surrenderad his divine horse Uccaihfravas.

50. Wherever a fine article was espied by the demon,
he seized it immediately. The three worlds became void of
all valuable things.

51. O sage, the oceans tho offered him their gems on
account of fear. The entire earth became exuberant in pro-
ductivity without being tilled and yielded what his subjects
desired.

52. The sun glowed gently and mildly as not to make
him distressed. The moon was always visible with his bril-
lant light and the wind blew always favouring him.

53. Whatever riches the gods possessed or the manes
or others had, were forfeited by the wicked demon.

54. Bringing the three worlds under his control, he
declared Indra himself. He became the undisputed lord and
ruled over them with perfect self-control.

23. It was the capital of the Asura territory, later on called
B&papura, as it was ruled by the powerful Asura Baga, the devotee of
Siva. According to Dey (G.D. PP. 21, 189) Sonitapura is still called by
that name, and is situated in Kamaun on the bank of the river Kedara-
Gatgh or Mandiakini about 6 miles from Usdmatha at a short distance
from Guptakail’.

=== PAGE 65 ===

Rudrasamhita 533

55. Dismissing the gods he installed demons in their
places. Some gods he engaged in his personal service.

56. O sage, the gods harassed by him, led by Indra,
sought refuge in me. They were helpless and extremely
agitated.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

(Brahmd consoles the gods harassed and frightened
by the demon Taraka)

Brahma said :—

1. The gods terribly tormented by Taraka, bowed to
and eulogised me, the lord of subjects with great devotion.

2. On hearing the eulogy of the gods pleasing and true
to facts I was highly pleased and replied to the heaven-
dwellers thus.

3. O gods, welcome to you. I hope you are all
fulfilling your duties without obstacles. Why have you all
come here? Tell me.

4. On hearing my words those gods bowed to me
duly and spoke. Being tormented by Taraka they were in a
piteous plight.

The gods said :—

5. ©O lord of the worlds, thanks to the boon received
from you. The demon Taraka is very haughty. Driving us
out with force he has taken ‘possession of our positions.

6. Is it not known to you what misery has befallen
us ? Please dispel our misery quickly. We seck refuge in
ou.

7. He torments us wherever we happen to stay by
day or at night. Wherever we flee we see Taraka.

8. O dear, lord of all, we are extremely harassed
and agitated due to Taraka.

9. Agni, Yama, Varuna, Nirrti, Vayu and other
guardians of the deities are under his control.

=== PAGE 66 ===

534 Sivapurdna

10. None of them is ever independent. All serve him
in the manner of human beings accompanied by their followers.

ll. Being harassed by him, the gods have become
subservient of him. They are engaged in carrying out his
wishes. Allofus are his servants.

12. Our woman folk, the groups of heavenly nymphs
have been captured by Taraka, the powerful.

13. No sacrifice is in the making. No ascetic is in
penances. The charitable and virtuous activities are being sel-
dom pursued in the worlds.

14. His commander-in-chief is a simple demon-K rauiica.
He has now gone to the nether worlds and is harassing the
people very much.

15, The regions of our three worlds have been forcibly
taken, O Brahama, by this Taraka of sinful and ruthless tem-
perament.

16. © lord of the worlds, we were in heaven but now
that we have been turned out by that demon we shall go to
any place which you may kindly suggest.

17. You are our final resort. You are our ruler,
creator, and protector. But we are scorched in the fire of
the name Taraka. We are extremely agitated.

18. Our ruthless activities against him have turned
out to be weak and ineffective, even as medicinal herbs of
great potency are rendered ineffective in an ailment brought
about by the combination of all deranged humours.

19. We had some hope of victory in SudarSana the
discus of Visnu. But even that discus has become ineffect-
ive in his neck where it has fallen as though it were a floral
offering to a deity.

Brahma said :—

20. O sage, on hearing these words of the gods, I told
them befitting the occasion.

21. O gods, the demon Taraka has flourished, thanks
to my words of blessings. His destruction through me does
not seem proper.

22. Improper is the destruction through that source
wherefrom he has flourished. Even a poisonous tree tended and

=== PAGE 67 ===

Rudrasamhitd 535

nurtured by one cannot be cut and felled down by oneself.%

23. Siva is the most suitable agent to carry out your
task. But I myself cannot do anything remedial in this case.

24, Taraka will be destroyed by his own sin. How
that shall be done you know from me. I shall advise you.

25. Thanks to the power of the boon granted by me.
Taraka cannot be killed by me or by Visnu_ or by Siva or
by any one of the gods. It is true.

26. O gods, if there is a son born of Siva, he alone
can kill the demon Taraka.

27, O best of gods, you carry out the remedy I am
suggesting. By the grace of lord Siva, it can be successfully
accomplished.

28. Sati, the daughter of Daksa, formerly cast off her
body. She is now born of Menaka’s womb. That event is
already known to you all.

29. O gods, it is certain that lord Siva will marry her.
Still you shalJl pursue your endeavour.

30. Make such arrangements as to ensure the discharge
of semen into Parvati, the daughter of Menaka.

31. Siva is a great Yogin who can make semen flow
upwards in the body. Only Parvati can make him discharge
the semen downwards, out of the body. There is no other
woman capable of it.

32. That daughter of the lord of the mountains is now
in her prime of youth. She is serving Siva in his penance on
the Himalayas.

33. As a result of the tenacious pleadings of her
father, she is serving Him in meditation.

34. She is the most beautiful lady in the three worlds.
She stands in front of Him and worships Him. Still lord
Siva who is engrossed in His meditation is not distracted by
her presence.

35. Itis your duty to ascertain means to make Him
desire Parvati for His wife. O gods, do something in that
direction very quickly.

36. I shall go to the demon’s abode and try to dissuade
him from his obstinacy. O gods, you can go to your abode

24 «For the similarity of idea and verbal expression, cp. Kalid&sa’s
Kumara. on

=== PAGE 68 ===

536 Sivapurdns

37. After saying thus to the gods I hastened to the
demon Taraka. 1 addressed him thus.

Brahmd said:—

38. You are ruling over our heaven which contains
the essence of all brilliance. You are desirous of getting
more than what you bargained for at the time of your
penance.

39. I granted you a boon but not the kingdom of
heaven. Hence leave off this region. You can rule over the
earth.

40. © best of Asuras, even there you can achieve the
fruit of your activities as here in Devaloka. There is
nothing to hesitate in this matter.

41. After thus exhorting the demon to leave off heaven
I, the lord of all, remembered Siva and Siva and vanished
from the scene.

42. Leaving the heaven, Taraka descended to the earth.
Stationed in the town Sonita, he ruled over the entire king-
dom.

43. On hearing my words, the gods bowed to me
and went to Indra’s abode. They were duly received by
Indra.

‘44, After reaching there and consulting one another, the
gods in a body lovingly told Indra.

The gods said :—

45. *O lord, you should carry out the suggestions of
Brahma and see that Siva is lovingly inclined towards
Siva.

Brahmé said :—

46. After explaining every thing to the lord, the gods
went in all directions to their respective abodes with great
pleasure.

=== PAGE 69 ===

Rudrasamhita 537
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

(The dialogue between Indra and Kamadeva)

Brahma said :—~

1. When the gods had gone, Indra remembered Kama.
He was so afflicted by Taraka, the wicked demon.

2. In an instant, Kama, the lover of Rati, came there
along with Vasanta. He was accompanied by Rati too.
Being powerful enough to conquer the three worlds he was
very haughty.

3. Making due obeisance standing in front of Indra,
the lofty-minded Kama joined his palms in reverence and
said :—

Kama said :—

4. “What is the matter that has cropped up now ?
Wherefore was I remembered ? Please tell me. I am _ here
to carry it out”.

Brahmd said :—

5. On hearing the words of Kama, Indra, the lord of the
gods, said praising him lovingly saying ‘well done, very
proper”’.

Indra said :—

6. O Kama you are blessed indeed, since you are
in readiness to carry out the affair I have on hand. You
have begun well.

7. Listen to what is relevant to the context. I shall
tell you everything. My job is equally your job and not
otherwise.

8. I have many friends and great friends at that.
But, O Kama, I have no other friend on a par with you
anywhere.

9, O dear, for my conquest, the unparallelled thunder-
bolt has been made. Even that weapon may sometimes be
ineffective but you are never so.

10. Who can be dearer than the person from whom

=== PAGE 70 ===

538 Sivapurdna

one derives benefit? Hence you, my greatest friend, must
carry out my task.

11. Time being accursed, a great irremediable misery
has befallen me. None other than you can dispel it.

12. The test of a donor is at the time of famine; the
test of a warrior is at the time of battle; the test of a friend
is at the time of adversity and the test of a woman is in the
financial weakness of the family.

13. O dear, the test of a real friend is in the time of
distress and is also based on what he does behind the back.
It is not otherwise. This is truth.

14. Now that an adversity has befallen me, which
cannot be thwarted by anyone else, O dear friend, it shall
be a test for you today.

15. This is not a matter that brings pleasure to me
alone. This is a matter that concerns all the gods and
others too.

Brahma said :—

16, On hearing these words of Indra the fish-bannered
god Kama spoke smilingly in words indicating love and
gravity.

Kama said :—

17. Why do you say like this? I make no answer
to you. A helping unreal friend is neither seen nor
spoken of in the world.

18. He who speaks much at the time of adversity
will not turn out much. Yet, O king, my lord, I shall say
something. Please listen.

19. O dear friend, I shall cause the downfall of that
enemy of yours who is performing a severe penance to
usurp your position.

20. I shaJl. topple gods, sages, demons and others
through the side-glances of a beautiful woman. I do not at
all take human beings into consideration.

21. Let your thunderbolt and other weapons of in-
numerable varieties be set aside. What will they do when I,
your friend, am present ?

22. I can undoubtedly make Brahma and Vignu go

=== PAGE 71 ===

Rudrasamhita 539

astray, Others are of no consideration. I shall make even
Siva fall.

23. I have only five arrows that are soft and flowery.
My bow is of three types. That too is flowery. The bow-
string consists of bees.

24. My support and strength is my beloved wife
Rati Spring is my minister. O god, I am having five
forces. The moon, the storehouse of nectar, is my friend.

25. The sentiment of love is my commander-in-chief.
The coquettish gestures and emotions are my soldiers. All
these are soft and gentle. O Indra, I too am of that sort.

26. An intelligent man shall put together things that
are mutually complementary. You shall therefore engage me
in a task that accords with my capacity.

Brahma said :—

27. On hearing his words, Indra was much pleased.
Pleasing Kama, the bestower of cherished happiness, by
means of his words, he spoke.

Indra said :—

28. O dear Kama, you are competent to carry out the
task which I have conceived in my mind. It cannot be
realised through anyone else.

29. O Kama, foremost among my friends, listen. I
shall explain truly for what I remembered you and desired
your presence, O Kama.

30. Securing a wonderful boon from Brahma, the great
demon Taraka has become invincible and a pest for everyone.

31. The entire world is harassed by him. Many virtu-
ous rites are destroyed. The gods have become miserable and
so also the sages.

32. He had been fought by the gods to the utmost of
their ability formerly. But the weapons of all the gods became
quite futile. .

33. The noose of Varuna, the god of waters, snapped.
When hurled at his neck by Visnu, the discus Sudargana was
blunted. ~

34. The death of this wicked demon has been foretold

=== PAGE 72 ===

540 Sivapurdna

by Brahma, the lord of the people, at the hands of the boy
born of Siva. the great Yogin.

35. O dear friend, this task must be achieved by you
diligently. Then we, the gods, can be very happy.

36. It will be beneficent to me. It will render the
whole world happy. Realising the duties of a friend you are
now to act.

37. Siva is at present engaged in a great penance. The
supreme lord is always independent. It is not to achieve
any desire that He performs the penance.

38. For the sake of gods, at the bidding of her father,
Parvati is attending on Him, I[ hear.

39. O Kama, you shall certainly do everything neces-
sary to bring about an interest in her in the mind of Siva
who has self-control.

40. You will become contented after this. Your mis-
eries will be destroyed. Your exploit will be permanently
established in the world, Not otherwise.

Brahma said :—

41. On being thus addressed, Kama was glad, his face
beaming like a full blown lotus. He lovingly said to the
lord of gods, ‘I shall undoubtedly do it.”

42-43. After saying this when he said “So be it” he
said ‘‘yes,”” Kama accepted it because he was deluded by
Siva’s illusion. Accompanied by his wife and Spring he went
to the place where Siva, the Yogin, was performing penance.

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
(Description of the perturbation caused by Kama)

Brahma said:—

1. After going there, the haughty Kama, deluded by
Siva’s magic power, stationed himself, after first spreading the
enchanting power of Spring all around.

2, The enchanting influence of Spring spread every-

=== PAGE 73 ===

Rudrasamhité 541

where around Osadhiprastha, the penance-grove of Siva, the
supreme lord, O excellent sage,

3. O great sage, the groves bloomed with special ex-
uberance, O excellent sage, due to his power.

4. The fragrant flowers of Mango and Asoka trees
shone heightening feelings of love.

5. The water lilies with bees hovering on them proved
to be the causes for the rise of love in the minds of everyone.

6. The sweet cooings of the cuckoos heightened emo-
tions of love. They were exquisite and pleasing to the
mind.

7. O sage, diverse sounds of the hummings of the bees
rang sweet in the ears of everyone heightening temptations of
love.

8- The bright light of the moon scattered all around
appeared to be the emissary of lovers and their beloveds.

9. At that time the Kaladipika (brilliant Jamp) in-
duced reticent haughty persons to love. O good sir, the wind
blew gently but distressed those who were separated from
their beloveds.

10. Thus the vast diffusion of Spring caused the dis
play of emotions of love. It was unbearable to the forest-
dwelling sages,

11. © sage, then, even the insentient beings had the
emotions of love. What about the state of sentient ones ?

12. Thus spring employed his unbearable power heigh-
tening the love of all living beings.

13. On seeing the untimely display of spring, Siva the
lord, who had assumed a physical body indulging in divine
sports, thought it surprising.

14. But He, the chief of the self-controlled and the
remover of man’s misery continued his severe penance.

15. When spring spread everywhere, Kama accom-
panied by Rati stood on his left side, with the arrow of mango
blossom taken out and kept in readiness.

16. Enchanting all people, he spread his influence.
Who was not enchanted on seeing Kama in the company of
Rati ?

17. Thus they initiated their dalliance. The senti-
ment of love too accompanied by coquettish gestures and

=== PAGE 74 ===

542 Sivapurdpa

emotions reached the vicinity of Siva along with his attend-
ants.

18. Kama, usually stationed within the mind mani-
fested himself outside. But he could not find any vulnerable
loop-hole in Siva whereby he could enter Him.

19. When Kama did not secure any entry within the
great Yogin, he became deluded and frightened much through
the magical power of Siva.

20. Who could gain access to Siva in meditation, who
could fix an eye in his forehead that resembled fire with
shooting blazing flames ?

21. In the mean time Parvati came there along with
her two maids and brought various kinds of flowers for Siva’s
worship.

22. Certainly Parvati had a greater beauty than the
most exquisite lady described by people on the earth.

23. When she wore pretty flowers of the season how
could her beauty be described even in a hundred years ?

24. No sooner did she enter within the proximity of
Siva than He came out of his meditation for a short while.

25. Profiting by that opportune moment, Kama, by
means of his arrow Harsana delighted the moon-crest god
Siva who was nearby.

26. O sage, in assistance to Kama, Parvati reached
the place near Siva with emotions of love and accompanied by
Spring.

27. In order to make the trident-bearing lord take
interest in her, Kama drew his bow very carefully and dis-
charged his flowery arrow on Him.

28. As was her usual practice she approached Siva,
bowed to Him, worshipped Him and stood in front of Him
(awaiting further instructions).

29. Parvati was stared at by lord Siva, while she was
laying bare some of the limbs bashfully, as is natural to
women in such circumstances.

30. Remembering the boon granted to her by Brahma
formerly, O sage, lord Siva began to describe her limbs joy-
fully.

=== PAGE 75 ===

Rudrasarhhitd 543

Siva said :-—

31. ‘Is this your face or the moon? Are these your
eyes or lotus petals ? These two eyebrows are the bows of
Kima of noble soul.

32. Is this your lower lip or Bimba fruit? Is this
your nose or the beak of a parrot? Do J hear your voice
or the cooing of the cuckoo? Is this your slender waist or
the sacrificial altar ?

33. How can her gait be described ? How can her
comely appearance be described ? How can the flowers be
described ? How can the clothes be described ?

34. Whatever is graceful and swect in the creation has
been incorporated here. Indeed, all her limbs are exquisite
in every respect.

35 How blessed is this Parvati of mysteriously wonder-
ful features. There is no other woman equal to her in beauty
in the three worlds.

36. She is a storehouse of the finest beauty. She has
wondrous beautiful limbs. She is an cnchantress of even sages.
She increases great happiness.”

Brahma said:—

37. After describing her body again and again, recoll-
ecting the boon granted by Brahma, Siva stopped.

38. When Siva put His hand within her garment and
moved it, she, as is natural to women, bashfully withdrew
and kept aloof.

39. O sage, then Parvati smilingly laid bare some parts
of her body and cast graceful glances at Him with great
pleasure.

40. On seeing these movements and gestures Siva
became fascinated. Lord Siva indulging in great divine
sports spoke these words.

41. <I feel great pleasure on merely seeing her. What
pieasure shall I derive by embracing her ?”

42. Thinking thus only for 4 moment, the enlightened
Siva became detached, honoured PArvati and spoke.

43. «How wonderful and mysterious is the situation that
has arisen | How is it that | have been deluded and fascin-

=== PAGE 76 ===

544 ‘. Sivapurdna

ated ? Though I am the lord and master, I have been pert-
urbed by Kama.

44. IfI, the master, were to yearn for the touch of a
woman’s limbs what will not be done by other incompetent
and insignificant creatures’.

45. Thus resuming detachment, lord Siva forbade her
sitting on the couch. How can there be a downfall for the
great lord Siva ?

CHAPTER NINETEEN
(Kama’s destruction by Sta)

Narada said:—

1. O Brahma, the most fortunate one, what happened
then ? Be pleased to tell me that story that destroys our sins
altogether.

Brahma said:—

2. O dear one, hear the story of what happened there-
after. Out of love for me I shall recount Siva’s sports that
bring about joy.

3. On seeing the dissipation of His courage, lord Siva,
the great Yogin, thought within Himself wondering much.

Siva said:—

4. How is it that obstacles have cropped up while I
am performing the great penance ? Whocan be that wicked
person who has made my mind highly perturbed ?

5. With love I have described in bad taste another
man’s woman. I have contravened rules of virtue and
transgressed the bounds of the Vedas.

Brahma said:—
6. After thinking like this, the great Yogin, the goal
of the good, surveyed all round, his suspicion having been

aroused.
7. He saw Kama stationed on His left side with his

=== PAGE 77 ===

Rudfasarhhita 545

bow fully drawn and ready to discharge the arrow. Kama
was haughty and so was very senseless.

8. O Narada, on seeing Kiama in that attitude, instan-
taneously anger was arouscd in Jord Siva, the supreme soul.

9. Osage, standing high up in the air, holding the
arrow and the bow, Kima discharged his arrow, usually
unerring on Siva

10. The infallible weapon became futile on the great
lord. The furious weapon calmed down in regard to the
great soul, Siva.

1]. Kama was frightened when his weapon failed.
Standing there and seeing lord Siva, the conqucror of death
in front, he trembled.

12. O great sage, when his endeavour became futile,
Kama who was frightened much remembered Indra and all
other gods.

13. O great sage, remembered by Kama, Indra and
other gods came there, bowed to and eulogised Siva.

14. When the gods eulogised thus, a great flame of fire
sprang up from the third eye of the infuriated Siva.

15. That fire originating instantaneouly from the eye in
the middle of His forehead blazed with flames shooting up
and resembling the fire of final dissolution in refulgence.

16. After shooting up in the sky, it fell on the ground
and rolled over the earth all round.

17. Even before the gods had the time to say ‘‘Let him
be forgiven, let him be excused” it reduced Kama to ashes.

18. When the heroic Kama was thus slain, the gods
became miserab'e. In their agitation they lamented much
and saying ‘‘O what has happened ?” they cried aloud.

19. With pallid face and limbs, the extremely agitated
daughter of the king of mountains returned to her palace tak-
ing the maids along with her,

20. Due to the misery on account of the death of her
husband, Rati fell down unconscious, as if dead.

21. When she regained consciousness after a while,
Rati in her great agitation lamented loudly and said:—

Rati said: ~
22. ‘What shallI do ? Where can I go? What is it

=== PAGE 78 ===

546 Sivapurdna

that the gods have done in making my husband a victim
thus ? They have called him here and destroyed him.

23. O!0! O lord Kama, dearer to me than my
vital airs, O bestower of happiness, what has happened here ?
Ha, Ha, my dear, my dear !”

Brahma said:—

24. Lamenting thus and crying out various piteous
words she beat with her hands, kicked with her legs and
plucked her hairs.

25. O Narada, on hearing her lamentation even the
beasts and residents of the forest, nay all the immobile trees
and bushes became miserable.

26. In the meantime Indra and other gods remem-
bered lord Siva and consoled Rati saying as follows:—

The gods said:—

27. Take some ashes and preserve them. With effort
check your fear. The lord will resuscitate your lover. You
will regain your lover again.

28. There is none who gives us happiness or misery.
All enjoy and experience the fruit of what they do. In
vain do you curse the gods.

Brahma said :—

29. After consoling Rati thus, all the gods approached
Siva and propitiated Him. With great devotion they spoke
these words to Him.

The gods said :—

30. O lord, O great god, favourably disposed to those
who seek refuge in you, be pleased to listen to these well
intended words of ours.

31. O Siva, be pleased to ponder over the action of
Kama. O lord Siva, there is no tinge of selfishness in what
Kama has done.

32. © lord, he had been induced to do so by all the
gods harassed by the wicked Taraka. O Siva, please know
that it is not otherwise.

33. Olord, the chaste Rati is lonely and miserable

=== PAGE 79 ===

Rudrasarbhita 547

now. O lord Siva, she is in great lamentation, O bestower
of everything, please console her.

34. Ifyou have finally disposed off Kama, O Siva, you
are desirous of annihilating all the gods by means of your
fury.

35. On seeing the distress of Rati, the gods are almost
doomed. Hence you must remove the distress of Rati.

Brahma said :—
36. On hearing their words, lord Siva was pleased.
He said this to all the gods.

Siva said :—

37. O gods, O sages, all of you listen attentively to
my words. What has happened, thanks to my fury, cannot
be altered.

38. The lord Kama, the husband of Rati, shall
remain bodiless till Visnu incarnates as Krsna on the earth
and marries Rukmini.

39. Krsna will beget Kama in Rukmini when he
goes to Dvarak4?5 and begins to procreate children.

40. His name will certainly be Pradyumna. The demon
Sambara will abduct the boy at the time of his very birth.

41. After abducting the boy, the great demon, Sambara,
will throw him in thesea. The foolish fellow will take him
for dead and will return to his city.

42. O Rati, you shall stay in his city till then. There
alone you will get back your husband Pradyumna.

43. Kama in the name of Pradyumna will regain his
wife after killing Sambara in a battle. - O gods, he will be
happy thereafter.

44. After taking all the valuable properties of Sambara,
O gods, he will go to the city again along with her. These
words of mine are true.

Brahma said —-

45. On hearing these words of Siva, the gods heaved a
sigh of relief. Joining their palms in reverence and bowing
to Him they said :—

25 This town, associated with Lord Krqna, is situated in Kathiawar.

=== PAGE 80 ===

548 Siwapurdna

The gods said :—

46. “O great god, lord of the gods, O lord, the ocean
of mercy, please resuscitate Kama quickly. O Siva, save the
life of Rati.’

Brahmd said :—

47, On hearing these words of the gods, great God
became delighted. The lord of all, the ocean of mercy, spoke
again.

Siva said :—

48. O gods, I am delighted. I shall resuscitate Kama
within myself. He will be one of my Ganas and will sport
about always.

49. O gods, this story should not be narrated in the
presence of any one. All of you return to your abodes. I
shall destroy all miseries.

Brahma satd :—

50. After saying this Rudra vanished even as the gods
were eulogising Him. The gods became delighted and free
from mental suspense.

51. O sage, abiding by the directions of Siva and
consoling Rati by means of the conciliatory words of Siva,
the gods returned to their respective places.

52. O excellent sage, then Rati, the wife of Kama
went to the city and waited for the time mentioned by Siva.

CHAPTER TWENTY
(The story of the submarine fire)

Narada said :—

1. O Brahma, please tell me ‘‘Where did the flame of
fire emerging from the eye of Siva go?’ Please tell me also
the further story of the moon-crested lord.

Brahmd said :—
2. When the fire from the third eye of Siva reduced

=== PAGE 81 ===

Rudrasarhhitd 549

Kama to ashes it began to blaze all round without burning
anything.

3. A huge hue and cry was raised in the three worlds
consisting of the mobile and immobile creatures. Immediately
the gods and sages sought refuge in me.

4. All of them in their agitation bowed to and eulo-
gised me with their palms joined in reverence and the heads
bent down. They intimated to me their grief.

5. On hearing that I pondered over the reason for
the same, and remembering Siva humbly I went there in order
to protect the three worlds.

6. That fire, out to burn everything, very brilliant with
its shooting flames, was thwarted by me as I had the capa-
city by Siva’s grace.

7. © sage, then I made that fire of fury, out to burn
the three worlds, tender in its blaze and mare-like in
shape.

8. Taking that fire mare-like in form, at the will of
Siva, I, the lord of the worlds, went to the sea shore, for the
benefit of the worlds.

9. O sage, on seeing me arrived there, the sea took
a human form and approached me with palms joined in
reverence,

10. Bowing to and duly eulogising me, the grand-
father of all the worlds, the ocean said lovingly.

The ocean said :—

11-12. “O Brahma, the lord of all, why have you
come here? Please command me with pleasure knowing me
to be your servant’. On hearing the words of the ocean
I remembered Siva. I spoke with love in order to benefit
the world.

Brahma said :—
13. O dear, intelligent one, causing the welfare of all
the worlds, O ocean, induced by Siva’s will, I shall explain

to you.
14. This is the fire of fury of lord Siva, the great
lord. It is in the form of a mare now. After burning

Kama it was about to burn everything.

=== PAGE 82 ===

550 Sivapurdna

15. At the will of Siva I was requested by the gods
who were harassed by it, and so I went there and suppressed
the fire.

16. I gave it the form of a mare. I have brought
it here. O ocean, I ask you to be merciful.

17. This fury of lord Siva, now in the form ofa
mare, you will bear till the final dissoluticn of all living
beings.

18. O lord of rivers, when I shall come and stay
here, you shall release it. This is Siva’s wonderful fire of
fury.

19. His perpetual diet shall consist of your waters.
This shall be preserved by you with effort lest it should go
down.

20. Thus requested by me, the ocean agreed. None
else could have grasped Siva’s fire of fury thus.

21. That fire in the form of a mare entered the ocean
and began to consume the currents of water. It blazed
with all its shooting flames.

22. O sage, then, delighted in mind I returned to
my abode. The ocean of divine form bowed to me and
vanished,

23. O great sage, the entire universe, freed from the
fear of that fire became normal. The gods and the sages
became happy.

CHAPTER TWENTYONE
(Narada instructs Parvati)

Narada said :—

1. O dear Brahma, O disciple of Visnu, of great
intellect, O Creator of three worlds, this is a very wonderful
story of the great soul Siva that has been narrated.

2. When Kama had been reduced to ashes by the
fire from the third eye of Siva and when that fire had been
deposited in the ocean what happened thereafter ?

3. What did Goddess Parvati, the daughter of the lord

=== PAGE 83 ===

Rudrasamhitd 551

of mountains, do? O storehouse of mercy, please tell me
now where she went along with her maids.

Brahmd said :—

4. O dear, of great intellect, listen to the story of the
moon-crested lord, my master and the cause of great enjoy-
ment and protection.

5. A wonderfully loud sound arose covering the
whole firmament when the fire issuing from Siva’s eye
burnt Kama.

6. On hearing that loud report and seeing Kama
burnt, Parvati was terribly frightened and she returned to
her abode along with her maids.

7. Himavat along with his attendants and relatives
was surprised on hearing that loud report. He was agitated
on remembering that his daughter had gone there.

8. On seeing his daughter excessively agivated, the lord
of the mountains was sorry. The lord of the mountains
approached her gently as she was crying due to her separa-
tion from Siva.

9-10. Approaching her and wiping off her eyes with
his hand he said—*‘Dear daughter, do not be afraid, do not
cry. He took her on his lap and consoled her. The lord
of the mountains took her immediately to his palace.

11. When Siva had vanished after burning Kama,
Parvati became extremely agitated due to His separation. She
did not attain pleasure anywhere.

12. Returning to her father’s abode and meeting her
mother, Siva, the daughter of the mountain, considered
herself born again.

13. She cursed her own beauty. She said to herself.
“O, I am doomed”. The daughter of the lord of mountains
did not regain composure though consoled and assuaged by
the maids.

14. She did not achieve happiness and peace in
sleeping, drinking, bathing, or sitting amidst her maids.

15. Remembering the various gestures and movements
of Siva, she muttered to herself ever and anon—‘Fie upon
my beauty. Fie on my birth and activity”.

16. Thus Parvati was much distressed in mind due to

=== PAGE 84 ===

552 Sivapurdna

separation from Siva. She did not at all feel happy. She
always muttered ‘Siva, Siva.”

17. O dear, with her consciousness centred round the
Pinaka-bearing lord, she continued to stay in the palace of
her father. Siva bewailed much and fainted frequently.

18. The lord of the mountains, Menaka, and their sons
chief of whom was Maindka of undisturbed mind, tried to
console her but still she did not forget Siva.

19. O celestial sage, O intelligent one, employed by
Indra, the slayer of Bala, you came to Himalaya mountain
roaming here and there as you pleased.

20. You were then worshipped by the noble-souled
mountain. You enquired of his health and happiness and
you were scated in a noble seat.

21, Then the lord of the mountains told you the story
of his daughter from her service to Siva to the burning of
Kama by Him.

22. ©O sage, on hearing that, you told the lord of the
mountains—‘“Worship Siva.” You stood up, remembered
Siva mentally and took leave of him.

23. O sage, leaving him you hastened to meet Parvati
secrotly, you a favourite of Siva, perfectly wise and engaged
in helping the world.

24. Approaching Parvati and addressing her, you spoke
to her respectfully. You are foremost among the wise and
you were interested in her welfare. Your words were true.

Narada said: —

25. O Parvati, listen. I am sympathetic to you, I
shall speak truly. My words will be beneficent to you in all
respects. They will lead to the achievement of your desire.
They are free from aberrations.

96. The great god has been served by you without
austerities. You had some pride which He, the blesser of the
distressed, eradicated.

27. © Siva, after burning Kama, lord Siva though
favourably disposed to His devotees, left you, since the lord
is a great Yogin and so unattached to you.

28. Hence you shall propitiate Him by performing a

=== PAGE 85 ===

Rudrasarhhita 553

great penance. Siva will take you as His wife, after you
have been sanctified by austerities.

29. You will never forsake the auspicious Siva. O god-
dess, you will not take any one other than Siva as your
husband,

Brahma said :—

30. On hearing your words, O sage, Parvati, the daugh-
ter of the mountain, heaved a sigh of relief and gladly spoke
to you with palms joined in reverence.

Parvati? said:—

31. Osage, O omniscient one, you help all the worlds,
please tell me a formula for the propitiation of lord Siva.

32. No sacred rite will ever fructify without a good
preceptor. Truly this eternal statement of the Vedas was
heard by me before.

Brahmd said :—

33. On hearing these words of Parvati, O excellent sage,
you taught her the five-syllabled mantra of Siva* in accord-
ance with the sacred law.

34. O sage, generating her faith you told her the
supreme efficacy of the great formula thus.

Narada said :—

35. O goddess, listen to the wonderful efficacy of this
formula on hearing which Siva becomes excessively pleased.

36. This formula is a king of ali formulas. It yields
all cherished desires, bestows all worldly pleasures and salva-
tion, and appeals much to Siva.

37. Repeating this formula in accordance with the in-
junctions you shall propitiate Siva. He will certainly
appear before you.

38. O Siva, meditate on His form, observing all restr-
aints. Repeat the five-syllabled mantra. Siva will be pleased
quickly.

39. O chaste lady, perform the penance thus. Lord

* The fiveayllabled Mantra of Siva: aq: Rata

=== PAGE 86 ===

554 Sivapurdna

Siva can be attained through penance. Every one attains the
desired fruits in penance and not otherwise.

Braivnd said :—

40. O Narada, after saying thus to Parvati, you, the
favourite of Siva, went to heaven, a casual visitor engaged in
the welfare of the gods.

41. O Narada, on hearing your words and securing
the excellent five-syllabled mantra, Parvati was extremcly
pleased.

CHAPTER TWENTYTWO
(Description af Pdarvati’s penance)

Brahma said :—

1. After your departure, O celestial sage, convinced
that Siva could be achieved by means of penance, Parvati
became glad and decided to perform penance.

2. She took her maids Jaya and Vijaya into confidence
and through them made her parents acquainted.

3, First she wanted her father Himavat, the lord of
mountains, to hear her humble words.

The maids said :—

4-5. O Himavat, let the words of your daughter be
heard through us. She wishes to make her body, beauty and
family fruitful. This can be achieved through penance and
not otherwise.

6. O excellent mountain, the permission may kindly be
given—‘‘Let Parvati go to the forest and perform penance
there’.

Brahma said:—

7. O excellent sage, thus requested by Parvati through
the maids, the lord of the mountains carefully considered the
proposal and said:

Himdcala said:—
8. This appeals to me. I it appeals to Mena as it
ought to be, what else can be a better course ?

=== PAGE 87 ===

Rudrasarhhitd 555

9. There is no doubt about it that my House will be
fortunate. If her mother also likes this, what can be more
auspicious than this ?

Brahma said: —

10. After hearing the words spoken by her father and
(in a way) commanded by him, the two maids went to her
mother along with her.

11. OQ Narada, approaching Parvati’s mother, they
bowed down and with palms joined in reverence they respect-
fully spoke thus.

The maids said:—

12. O mother, O gentle lady, please listen to the words
of your daughter. Obcisance be to you. You will listen
with pleasure and act accordingly.

13. For the sake of attaining Siva, your daughter wishes
to perform a severe penance. She has secured the permission
of her father. She now wants to seek it from you.

14. O chaste lady, she is desirous of making her beauty
fruitful. If your permission too is received, the penance can

be performed.

Brahma said:—
15. O excellent sage, after saying this, the maids
became silent. Distressed in mind, Mena did not accept the

proposal.
16. Then Parvati herself spoke to her mother joining

her palms in humility and remembering the lotus-like feet of
Siva.

Parvati said: —

17. O mother, I shall be going in the morning for
performing penance to achieve Siva. Please permit me to go
to the penance-grove for the task.

Brahma said:—

18. On hearing the words of her daughter, Mend was
distressed. That chaste lady called her daughter near and
spoke to her in dejection.

=== PAGE 88 ===

556 Sivapurdna

Mend said :—

19. O daughter Siva, if you are distressed, if you wish
to perform penance, you can do it at home. O Parvati, do
not go out.

20. Where do you wish to go for performing penance ?
All the deities are in my house. All the holy centres and the
different temples too are here.

21. Do not be stubborn, dear daughter. You shall not
go out of your home. What did you achieve when you went
out previously? What are you going to achieve at present ?

22. Dear child, slender is your body and hard is the
penance. Hence you shall perform penance here. You shall
not go out.

23. For a woman to go to a penance-grove for the
realisation of her desire is what we have never heard of
before. Hence, dear daughter, do not go out for penance.

Brahma said :—

24. Thus, in various ways, the daughter was dissuaded
by her mother. But she did not find any pleasure except in
propitiating Siva.

25. Parvati acquired the name Uma since she was
prevented from going to forest by Mena and forbidden to
perform penance.

26. O sage, on realising that Parvati was quite deject-
ed, Mena, the beloved of the mountain, permitted her to
perform penance.

27. O excellent sage, on getting permission from her
mother, Parvati remembered Siva and felt happy.

28. Bowing to her parents with joy, Parvati remember-
ed Siva and set out for performing penance along with her
maids.

29. Discarding all the fine clothes of her taste, she
wore tree-barks and the fine girdle of Mujfija grass.

30. She eschewed necklace and wore the pure deer
skin. She arrived at Gangavatarana™ for performing penance.

31. The Gangavatarana was in the Himalayan ridge

a6. See No. 22, P. 515

=== PAGE 89 ===

Rudrasamhita 557

where Kama was burnt by Siva who was performing medi-
tation.

32. Oh dear, that Him4layan ridge devoid of Siva was
painfully seen by Parvati, the mother of the universe, the
daughter of the mountain.

33. She stood for a while in the place where formerly
Siva had performed penance and became dispirited by the
pangs of separation.

34. Crying aloud “Alas O Siva” she, the daughter of
the mountain, lamented sorrowfully and anxiously.

35. Suppressing the delusion with fortitude after a
long time Parvati, the daughter of Himavat, got herself initia-
ted for the observance of ritualistic activities.

36. She performed penance in the excellent holy
centre Srfgitirtha which (later) acquired the title “Gauri-
Sikhara®”’ due to her performance of penance thereon.

37. O sage, many beautiful holy plants were laid there
by Parvati for testing the fruitfulness of her penance.

38. Neatly cleaning the ground, the beautiful lady
built the altar, Then the penance, difficult to be performed
even by the sages, was begun.

39. Suppressing her sense-organs with her mind, she
started the great penance in a place within the proximity.

40. In the summer she kept a perpetually blazing fire
all round and remaining within continued muttering the
mantra.

4]. In the rainy season she continuously remained
sitting on the bare ground on the rock and got herself drench-
ed by the downpour of rain.

42. During the winter, with great devotion she remain-
ed in water throughout. During snowfall and in the nights
too she performed her penance observing fast.

43. Performing such austerities and engrossed in the
muttering of the five-syllabled mantra, Parvati meditated on
Siva, the bestower of fruits of our cherished desires,

44. Everyday during leisure time she used to water the
trees planted by her along with her maids and extended acts
of hospitality.

27. It it one of the famous peaks of the Himalayas.

=== PAGE 90 ===

558 Sivapurda3

45. Chill gusts of wind, cool showers, and unbearable
heat she bore with equanimity.

46. Different sorts of worries she did not mind at all.
O sage, fixing her mind in Siva alone she remained firm and
steady.

47. The first year she spent in taking fruits, the second
in taking leaves, in the course of her penance. She spent
many years thus.

48. Then Siva, the daughter of Himavat, eschewed
even the leaves. She did not take any food. She was
engrossed in the performance of penance.

49. Since she, the daughter of Himavat, eschewed
leaves from her diet she was called Aparna by the gods.

50. Then Parvati performed great penance standing on
one leg and remembering Siva, she continued muttering the
five-syllabled mantra.

51. Clad in barks of trees, wearing matted hair and
eager in the meditation of Siva, she surpassed even sages by
her penance.

52. Parvati thus spent three thousand years in the pen-
ance-grove performing penance and meditating on lord Siva.

53. Remaining for a short while in the place where
Siva had performed penance for sixty thousand years, Parvati
thought like this.

54. Does not the Supreme lord know me observing
these ritualistic activities now ? Wherefore am I not followed
by him though engaged in penance ?

55. In the Sastras and the Vedas, lord Siva is always
sung in praise by the sages as the bestower of welfare, omni-
scient, all-pervading and all-seer.

56. The lord is the bestower of all riches, the moulder
of fine emotions, the bestower of the desires of devotees and
the remover of their distress.

57. If I am devoted to the bull-bannered lord, dis-
carding all desires, may He be pleased with me.

58. If the mantra of the Narada Tantra, consisting of
five syllables has been continuously repeated by me with
great devotion may He be pleased with me.

59. IfI ama devotee without aberrations of Siva, the
lord ofall, may He be extremely pleased with me.

=== PAGE 91 ===

Rudrasamhitd 559

60. Pondering frequently like this incessantly, she per-
formed penance for a long time, with her face turned down-
wards, her apparel of bark and mind without any aber-
rations.

61. She performed penance difficult to be performed
even by the sages, so much so that people were struck with
surprise.

62. All of them came there to witness her penance.
Considering themselves blessed, they proclaimed thus approv-
ingly.

63. “To follow the standard of the virtuous personages
is declared to be conducive to greatness. There is no delimi-
tation in penance. Virtue shall be honoured by the wise
always.

64. After seeing or hearing about the penance of this
lady what penance will be pursued by a man? A penance
greater than this has mever been before, nor will it
ever be’’.

65. Saying thus, they praised the penance of Parvati
and joyously returned to their abodes, Even persons of
sturdy countenance praised her penance.

66. O sage, listen to another surprising influence
of the penance of Parvati, the mother of the universe.

67. Even the naturally inimical beings in and around
her hermitage became free from animosity due to her
power.

68. Lions and cows prone to the passions of love,
hatred etc. ceased to harass one another, thanks to her
greatness.

69. O excellent sage, creatures like cats, mice etc.
who are born enemies to one another did not exhibit any
bad characteristics there.

70. O excellent sage, trees bore fruits, grasses grew
in plenty and flowers of variegated nature and colour
blossomed there.

71. The entire forest became comparable to Kailasa as
it were the achievement of her penance.

=== PAGE 92 ===

560 Sicapuréna
CHAPTER TWENTYTHREE

(Attempt of Himavat to dissuade Parvati; gods go to
meet Siva)

Brahma said :—

1. O excellent sage, while Parvati was engaged in
penance thus for attaining Siva, a long time elapsed but Siva
did not appear.

2. Then Himavat came there along with his wife,
sons and ministers and spoke to Parvati, who had resolved to
continue her penance.

Himavat said :—

3. O Parvati, O fortunate one, do not torture your-
self by this penance. Dear girl, Siva is not to be seen.
Certainly he is detached

4. You are a young woman of tender limbs. You
will be overpowered and exhausted by this penance. There
is no doubt about it. I am speaking the truth.

5. Hence, O comely lady, get up. Come back to our
house. Of what avail is Siva by whom Kama has been re-
duced to ashes ?

6. O goddess, hence not being emotional, Siva will not
come to claim you as the excellent lady. Why do you yearn
for him ?

7. Just as the moon in the sky cannot be caught, O
sinless girl, so also Siva is inaccessible. Know this.

Brahma said:—
8-9. The same thing was said by Mena, Sahya®® moun-
tain, Meru,2* Mandara®, Mainadka*! and Krauiica® and

28. It is one of the seven principal mountain ranges in India, a
part of the Western Ghats at some distance from the sea. For details
ace P. 164.

aq. It is a fabulous mountain, variously identified, su posed to be
situated in the centre of the earth.

go. It is a great mountain which the Gods used for churning the
ocean. It is supposed to be the mountain so named in Bhagalpur. For
details see P. 48.

gr. See Note No. 12. P. 494

32. It is a mountain in the Himalayas stretching from Kailisa to
the south. I¢ is personified here.

=== PAGE 93 ===

Rudrasamhitd 561

others, The unafflicted Parvati was thus sought to be dissuad-
ed by various arguments.

10. When she was thus addressed by all of them, she
with a broad smile, spoke to Himavat.

Parvati said:—

11. © father, O mother, O  kinsmen, have all of you
forgotten what I had said formerly. Even now listen to my vow.

12. This great God by whom Kama has been burnt in
fury is detached (you say). I shall propitiate him, by means
of penance. He is favourably disposed to His devotees.

13. All of you please go to your respective abodes with
delight. He will certainly be pleased. You need not be
anxious over this.

14. With my penance alone here itself, I shall bring
Him who burnt Kama and the mountainous forest.

15. Sadasiva can be easily served through penance.

Ye fortunate Sirs, please know this truth. I am telling you
the truth. :
16. After addressing thus, her father Himalaya, her
mother Menaka, her brothers Mainaka and Mandara, the
eloquent Parvati, the daughter of the king of mountains, kept
quiet.

17. Thus addressed by Parvati, the lord of mountains
and the other mountains went back the way they came, sur-
prised within and praising her.

18. After all of them had departed, she with firm re-
solve in the great Truth, accompanied by her maids per-
formed a severe penance.

19. O excellent sage, by that great penance the three
worlds including the gods, Asuras and men, nay all the mo-
bile and immobile beings, became heated.

20-21. The Prajapatis, the Guhyakas and others experi-
enced great distress but could not understand the reason
thereof. The gods, Asuras, Yaksas, Kinnaras, Caranas, Siddhas,
Sadhyas, the sages, the serpents and the Vidyadharas too had
the same experience®,

33- Siddhas, Sidhyas, Yaksas, Kinnaras, Vidyadharas, Nigas and
Guhyakas are a class of semi-divinc beings, thousands in number, of
great purity and holiness, who reside in the HimBlayas attending on Siva.

=== PAGE 94 ===

562 Siva purdga

22. All of them, Indra and others, who were extremely
agitated, took leave of their preceptor and sought refuge in
me on the mountain Sumeru. All their limbs had been
scorched.

23. Devoid of splendour, and agitated excessively they
bowed to and eulogised me. They spoke simultaneously
thus,

The gods said :—

24. “QO lord, the whole of this universe consisting of
the mobile and immobile has been created by you. Why is
it scorched so much ? We do not understand.

25. O Brahmi, please tell us the reason. O lord, you
shall protect us, the gods whose bodies have been scorched.
There is none else to protect us’’.

Brahma said :—

26-27. On hearing their words I remembered Siva and
pondered over everything. I realised that the universe was
scorched as a result of Parvati’s penance. Accompanied by
them I hastened respectfully to the milk occan to inform
Visnu about it.

28. Reaching that place along with the gods, I saw
Visnu shining lustrously on a splendid scat. Bowing to and
eulogising him with palms joined in reverence I spoke.

29. “Save, save, O Visnu, save us who have sought
refuge in you, being scorched by the great and severe pen-
ance of Parvati.

30. On hearing these words of mine on behalf of the
heaven-dwellers, lord Visnu seated on the Serpent couch
spoke to us :—

Visnu said :—
31. The entire reason has been known to me. It is

Prajipatis are the ten lords of created beings first created by
Brahma.

34. Visnu is represented in human form slumbering on the serpent
Sega and floating on the waters of the ocean.

=== PAGE 95 ===

Radrasamhhitd 563

caused by Parvati’s penance. I shall now go to lord Siva
accompanied by all of you.

32. O gods, we shall request lord Siva to approach
Parvati and marry her for the welfare of all the worlds.

33. We shall do everything necessary to make the
Pinadka-bearing lord of the gods go there to grant the boon
to Siva.

34. Therefore now we shall go to the place where
the great lord Siva of severe penance, the conferrer of all
auspicious things, stays.

Brahmd said :—

35. On hearing those words of Visnu, the gods and the
rest became excessively afraid of Siva, the furious, the annihila-
tor and the one desirous of burning everything.

The gods said :—

36. We dare not go near the great lord Siva who is
very terrifying, furious and who has the burning brilliance
of the deadly fire of dissolution.

37. Undoubtedly he will burn us all in His anger
as Kama, the indefatigable god, has been burnt by him.

Brahma said :—

38. O sage, on hearing the words of Indra and others,
Visnu, the lord of Laksmi spoke these words, consoling all
the gods.

Visnu said :—

39. O gods, listen with pleasure and attention to my
words. The lord, the destroyer of the fear of gods, will not
consume you in fire.

40. Considering Siva to be benevolent you shall
shrewdly seek refuge in Him,

41, We shall all seek refuge in Siva, the ancient
Purusa, the lord, of excellent features, greater than the
greatest, the supreme self, the great one resorting to
penance.

=== PAGE 96 ===

564 Sivapurdna

Brahma said :—

42. Thus urged by the great lord Visnu they set out
desirous of seeing the Pinaka-bearing lord Siva.

43. At first Visnu and others who were anxious to see
the penance of Parvati went to her hermitage which was on
the way.

44. On seeing the excellent penance of Parvati and
being enveloped by her refulgence they bowed to her who
was engaged in penance and who had brilliant featurcs.

45. After praising the penance of Parvati whose body
was achievement personified, the gods went to the place
where the bull-bannered lord was present.

46. After reaching there the gods sent you in, O sage,
and stood at a distance from Siva who had reduced Kama
to ashes. They were watching.

47, O Narada, you the fearless devotee of Siva
approached Siva and saw the lord extremely pleased.

48. O sage, you came back again and beckoning to
the gods, with effort you took them, Visnu and others, to
Him.

49. Then Visnu and other gods went there and saw
lord Siva, favourably disposed to His devotees, delighted and
comfortably seated.

50-51. Then Visnu, the gods, the Siddhas, the sages
and I bowed to and eulogised Siva seated in the Yogic
posture, surrounded by the Ganas. He was seated in the
form of penance. We eulogised Him with hymns from the
Vedas and Upanisads.

CHAPTER TWENTYFOUR
(Siva consents to marry Parvati)

The gods said :—

1. Obeisance to lord Siva, obeisance to the destroyer
of Kama; obeisance, obeisance to one worthy of eulogy;
to one of profuse splendour, to the three-eyed lord.

2. Obeisance to Siva clad in skin; obeisance to the

=== PAGE 97 ===

Rudrasarhhitd 565

terrible, to the terrible-eyed, to great lord and to the lord of
the three worlds.

3. You are the lord of worlds; you are the father,
the mother and the lord; you are Siva the benefactor. You
are particularly compassionate.

4. You are the creator of all the worlds; O lord, you
shall save us. O great God, except you who else is compe-
tent to destroy misery ?

Brahmd said :—

5- On hearing these words of the gods, Nandikesvara
who was endowed with great sympathy began to inform
Siva.

Nandikefuara said :—

6. O foremost among the gods, Visnu, other gods, the
sages and Siddhas evlogise you in order to see you. They
are being threatened by Asuras. Hence they seek some
remedy and resort to thy feet, the seat of great fearlessness.

7. Hence, O lord of all, the sages and the gods shall
be protected by you. You have been particularly mentioned
asthe kinsman of the distressed and favourably disposed
towards your devotees.

Brahma said :—

8. Siva, who was thus informed by Nandin and who
was extremely sympathetic, slowly reverted from His medi-
tation and opened His eyes.

9. Then lord Siva, the highly efficient great Atman,
reverted from His trance and spoke to the gods.

Siva said .—

10. “O great gods, Visnu, Brahm4 and others, why
have you come near me? Mention the reason for the
same.”

Brahmdé said :—

11. On hearing these words of Siva, all the gods rejoic-
ed. They looked at Visnu as if to induce him to speak.
12. Then Visnu, the great devotee and benefactor of

=== PAGE 98 ===

566 Sivapurdna

the gods mentioned the matter of great importance of the
gods as mentioned by me(before).

Visnu said :—

13, ‘© Siva, all the gods have come here to submit to
you their misery perpetrated mysteriously by Taraka.

14-15. O Siva, the demon Taraka will be killed only by
your self-begotten son and not otherwise. Ponder over what
I have said and take pity on me. Obeisance, O great lord,
to you. O lord, redeem the gods from the misery brought
about by Taraka.

16. Hence, O lord Siva, Parvati shall be accepted by you
and grasped with your right hand. Accept her hand as offered
in marriage by the lord of mountains. She is full of noble
attributes.

17. On hearing those words of Visnu, Siva was pleased
and said indicating to them the goal of the good, eager in
Yogic feats as He was.

Siva said :—

18-19. “If goddess Parvati, the most beautiful lady were
to be accepted by me, she will be able to resuscitate Kama
on account of the marriage. Then all the gods, sages and
ascetics will become lusty and incompetent in the great
path of Yoga.

20. Kama was burnt by me for the achievement of
universal goal. It was at the suggestion of Brahma, O Visnu.
No anxiety need be felt in this connection.

21. O lord of gods, O intelligent one, it is your duty
not to be obdurate after considering the situation of what
shall be done and what not.

22. O Vigsnu, a great favour to the gods has been
done by me when Kama was burnt. May ye all stay free

from lust certainly along with me.
23. Just as I, so also you, O gods, can without effort

perform difficult tasks being endowed with the energy of great
penance.

24. Kama not being with you, you can be endowed
with the supreme bliss and be free from aberrations by means
of spiritual contemplation, O Gods.

=== PAGE 99 ===

Rudrasanmhitd 567

25. O Brahma, O Visnu, O Indra, O sages and O
gods, what had been done by Kama formerly and forgotten
by you may be recollected and pondered over.

26. O gods, meditation of everyone had heen spoiled
by the stubborn Kama, the great archer formerly.

27. Kama leads to hell; lust to anger, anger to delusion
and delusion destroys penance.

28. Anger and lust shall be eschewed by you, the best
of gods. My words shall be heeded by you all and not
otherwise.

Brahmd said :—

29. After saying thus, the bull-bannered lord Siva expres-
sed the wish that Brahma, Vignu, the gods and the sages,
should speak.

30. Siva became quiet after resorting to meditation
again. Siva, as before, was surrounded by His Ganas.

31-33. Siva thought within Himself His own Soul, the
form that is unsullied, free from distortions, aberrations and
ailments, the form which is greater than the greatest, eternal,
free from sense of possession, free from obsessions, beyond the
ken of sounds and words, devoid of attributes and knowable
through perfect wisdom. Thinking upon His own features
thus in His meditation, the lord, the cause of great enjoy-
ment and protection became engrossed in supreme bliss.

34. On seeing Siva again engaged in meditation all
the dwellers of heaven, Visnu, Indra and others, humbly told
Nandin.

The gods said :—

35. What shall we do now? Siva has become deta-
ched and has gone on meditation. You are a comp-
anion of Siva and pure assistant. You are omniscient,

36. O chief of the Ganas, we seek refuge in you.
Please guide us. What is the remedy by which Siva can be
propitiated ?

Brahma said :—

37. O sage, thus urged by the gods, Visnu and others,
Nandin, the favourite Gana of Siva replied to the gods,

=== PAGE 100 ===

568 Sivaperdna

Nandtfvara said :-—

38. O Visnu, O Brahma, O Indra, O gods and O
sages, pay heed to my words gratifying to Siva.

39. If you persist still in your wish that Siva shall
marry, you shall eulogise with respect and piteous request.

40. O gods, great lord cannot be made subservient by
ordinary devotion. The supreme lord does even what shall
not be done when moved by extraordinary devotion.

41. O Brahmé, Vignu and other gods, then act accor-
dingly, otherwise go the way you have come. Tarry not.

Brahma said :—
42, O sage, on hearing his words, Visnu and other
gods, considering that it must be so, eulogised Siva with

pleasure.
43. O great lord, lord of the gods, O ocean of mercy,

lift us up from the great distress. Save us who have sought
refuge in you.

Brahma said :—

44. Thus the gods eulogised Siva with many piteous
entreaties. They cried loudly being agitated by their
devotion.

45. Visnu accompanied by me spoke out many piteous
words, remembering Siva with great devotion.

46. Siva was thus eulogised by the gods, Visnu and me.
He, the great lord, ceased His meditation due to His attach-
ment for His devotees.

47. The delighted Siva said heightening the pleasure
of Visnu and other gods, after glancing at them with merci-
ful looks. Siva is favourably disposed to His devotees.

Siva said :—

48, O, Visnu, O Brahma, O Indra and other gods, why
have you all collectively come here in my presence ? Tell
me the truth.

Visnu said :—
49. © great lord, you are omniscient. You are the