=== PAGE 1 ===

THE

SKANDA-PURANA

PART I

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS
PRIVATE LIMITED. DELHI

=== PAGE 2 ===

First Edition: Dethi, 1950

Also available at:
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS
41 U.A., Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110007
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Madras 600 004
16 St. Mark’s Road, Bangalore 560 001
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001

PRINTED IN INDIA

BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS, A-45 NARAINA

INDUSTRIAL AREA, PHASE 1, NEW DELHI 110028 AND PUBLISHED BY
NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS
PVT. LTD., BUNGALOW ROAD, JAWAHAR NAGAR, DELHI 110 007

=== PAGE 3 ===

CONTENTS

Book I: MAHESVARAK HANDA
Section I: KEDARAKHANDA

Chapters

I.

SK SW KCI DUN BW YD

—

12

13.

Daksa’s Insolence

. Sati’s Arrival at Daksa’s Sacrifice

. Virabhadra Comes to the Yajiia

. A Fight between Virabhadra and Visnu and Others
. Meritoriousness of Devotion to Siva

. Curse to Brahma and Others

. Worship of the Linga

. The Story of a Thief: Incarnation of Rama

. The Churning of the Occan

. Siva Swallows the Poison

. Procedure of Ganesa Worship: Manifestation of
Laksmi

Devas Taste the Divine Nectar

The Fight between Devas and Asuras

14. Resuscitation of Dead Daityas

15.

Nahusa and Yayati: Their Indrahood and Fall

16. Dadhici’s Gift of His Body

17.
18.
19.
20.

Vrtra Killed: Bali Prepares for War

Vamana’s Arrival at Bali’s Sacrifice

Sukra Curses Bali: Vamana Grants Boon to Bali
The Nirgunatva of the Siva Liga: The Manifesta-
tion of Bhavani

21. Parvati’s Penance

13
0
26
2
47
53
64
14

82
90
96
106
109
118
126
151
169

176
18]

=== PAGE 4 ===

22.

23.
24.

25.
26.

27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.

Contents

Sankara’s Revelation of Himself to Parvati: Their
Dialogue

Siva’s Marriage

The Marriage Ceremony of Siva: The Arrangement
for Accommodating Devas and Others

The Marriage Ritual

The Marriage Celebration of Siva and Parvati: Aus-
picious Festivities

The Birth of Kumara Karttikeya

Preparations of Devas and Daityas for War

The Battle between Suras and Taraka

Taraka Is Slain

The Greatness of Sivalinga

The Burning of Kala

The Greatness of Sivaratri Vrata

Siva Loses to Parvati in a Game of Dice

Parvati as Sabari Brings Back Siva: Siva’s Coronation

INDEX

196
207

214
220

227
232
242
247
254
258
268
271
287

301

37

=== PAGE 5 ===

SKANDA PURANA

Book I: MAHESVARAKHANDA
S:c1ion T: KEDARAKHANDA

CHAPTER ONE

Daksa’s Insolence

Obeisunce to Sri Ganesa. Om, obeisance to Lord Vasudeva.
Om. After bowing down to Narayana! as well as to (Sage)
Nara.” the most excellent one among men, and to goddess Sara-
svati (the goddess of learning), one should narrate the Jayu.3

1. Nardyana—-l ts significant that a Purana specifically compiled for
the glorification of Siva begins with an obetsance to Narayana.

Etymologically “Nardyana’ means ‘one whose abode is waters’ (Manu
1.10, Mbh, Sanzi 328. 25). But Purana-writers ascribed a number of mean-
ings to Nara, e.g. in the Brahma-Vaivarta Purana it means +a form of libe-
ration called Sdardpya’, final beatitude’ (Afoksa), ‘sins committed’. Thus
Narayan. = Destroyer of sins.

In carly Visnuism, Visnu and Narayana are not identical. The Vedic god
Visnu was later amalgamated with Narayana of the Paficardtra system. See
J. Gonda, Aspects of Early Visnuism; G.V. Tagare, Intro. to BhP, pp. XII-
XIV).

2. Nara.=Anincarnation of Visnu, the son of Dharma and Murti, a
daughter of Daksa; 4 permanent companion of Narayana while performing
penance at Badarikasrama. They are supposed to have incarnated as Krsna
and Arjuna in Dvapara Age.

3 Jaya—Originally this epithet was restricted to the Jrihdsa called Maha-
bharata (Mbh, Udyoga 136.18; Svarrgarohanika 5.51). Later some Puranas
like BdP (ILL. iv. 4.47-54), VaP (1L.41.48-51) claimed the epithet ‘/tihdsa’
to themselves. Some Puranas like BhP 1.2.4, VaPL.1.1 adopted the verse
Naréyanam namaskrtya etc. along with the epithet Jaya. Kalpataru (Brahma-
cari-Khanda, p. 25) on the strength of Bhavisya Purdna states that the appel-
lation Jaya is applied to18 Puranas, Ramdyana, Mahabharata and Manu-
smrt. Hence our Purana is justified in adopting the epithet Jaya.

=== PAGE 6 ===

2 Skanda Purana

Vyasa said:

1. Obeisance tothat Lord, the wielder of Pinaka bow, at
whose bidding Virifici (Brahma) creates the universe, Hari
(Visnu) protects it and the god named K4larudra annihilates it.

2. There, in the Naimisa? forest which is the holiest among
all holy places and sacred-most among all the sacred spots (in the
world), ascetics with Saunaka® as their leader—ascetics who were
(usual) performers of sacrifices and whose minds were (always)
inclined towards holy rites, started a sacrifice of along duration.

3. The excessively (highly) intelligent disciple of Vyasa, an
ascetic of great austerities, named Lomasga‘, came there with an

ardent desire to see them.

4. As soon as they saw him coming, all the sages engaged
in that sacrifice of long duration, stood up simultaneously with
great eagerness to receive him, with materials of worship in their

hands.
5. After offering him water for washing his feet and present-

ing him respectfully materials of worship the sinless sages receiv-

1. Vydsa—Kysna Dvaipayana, the son of Satyavati and Pardsara, out of
wedlock. He was dark in complexion and was brought up in an islet in the
river Yamuna by Satyavati (Mbh, Adi 63.86). His great achievement was the
arrangement of the floating Vedic Mantras into Sanihitas. Hence he came to
be known as Vydsa (‘The Arranger’). Puragas use Vydsa as a title and state
that in every Dvapara Yuga, there is born a Vyasa whose job is to arrange
the Vedic Mantras and there have been 28 Vydsas (VP IIL3; KP 1.52.1-11;
VaP 11.23.107-213; BdP Lii. 35.116-126). Some Puranas, however, give
less than 28 Vyasas (e.g. KP) while some give more than 28 (€.g. BdP).

2. Naimisa forest—The ancient site at modern Nimsar at a distance of 20
miles from Sitapur and 45 miles northwest of Lucknow.

3. Saunaka—Name of various authors of important works like Rgveda-
pratisakhya, Brhad-devatad. One is identified with the Vedic Seer Grtsa-
mada. Mbh states that the Saunaka at whose sacrificial session Mbh
was recited by the Sita Ugrasravas belonged to the Bhrgu clan (Adi 1.19)
and was the son of Sunaka (Anusasana 30.65).

Purdna-writers have adopted him as the listener of their Purdnas.

4. Lomasa—A sage from the North who associated closely with Panda-
vas during their long stay jn forest and narrated ancient legends and impor-
tance of sacred places etc. to them (Mbh, Vana, AnuSdsana). But Mbh does
not regard him as the disciple of Vyasa as claimed by the SkP here. Our
Purdna-writer substituted him for the usual Sota due to Lomaga’s story
telling throughout Mbh, Vana and automatically SOta’s discipleship of Vyasa
was attributed to him.

=== PAGE 7 ===

1.i.1.6-18 3

ed him with due hospitality. The sages of exalted nobility then
asked him to explain in detail Sivadharma (pious activities per-
taining to Siva).

The sages said:

6. ‘Recount, O sage of extraordinary intellect, the greatness
of the Trident-bearing Lord of Devas. O exalted one, describe
everything along with the modes of meditation and worship.

7-11. What is the benefit in sweeping (the temple premises)?
What is the benefit in making (mystic diagrams) of various
colours, in making gifts of mirror, chowries etc. (or in offering
these to Siva), in constructing canopies as well as fountains? What
will be the benefit in offering lamps? What will be the fruit of the
worship? What are the meritorious results in worshipping Siva?
Men read and recite the Itihasas and Puranas in front of the idol
of Siva, They study (recite) the Vedas in front of him, and make
others do the same. What benefit do those men derive? Let it be
mentioned in detail. There is no one else in the world, O sage,
more devoted to the narratives about Siva.

12. On hearing these words of those sages of sanctified
souls, the disciple of Vyasa recounted (to them) the excellent
greatness of Siva.

Lomasa said:

13. In all the eighteen Puranas, Siva is sung about as the
greatest (lord). Hence no one is competent to recount the great-
ness of Siva (adequately).

14. Heaven and liberation (from Samsara) will be attained
by those people who repeatedly utter the two-syllabled name
Si-va.1 Not otherwise.

15. Munificent indeed is Mahadeva (the great god), the
lord of Devas, the Supreme Ruler. Since everything has been
given by him, he is named Sarva.

16-18. Blessed are they, noble-souled are they, who always
worship Siva (or the ever-auspicious god). Aperson who wishes

1. God’s name is regarded as highiy efficacious in the Bhakti-cult, the

roots of which go back to the Rgieda (See H.D. Velankara, Bhakti in the
Vedas, pub. in Kausika Lectures Series in Marathi).

=== PAGE 8 ===

4 Skanda Purana

to cross (the ocean) of worldly existence without Sadasiva, is
indeed foolish and confounded. There is no doubt that he, the
hater of Siva, is a great sinner. It was by him thaf (Haldhala)
poison was swallowed, Daksa’s sacrifice was destroyed, Kala
(god of Death) was burnt down and the king was released.

The sages requested:

19. We are very cager. Recount unto us how the poison was
swallowed and how Daksa’s Yajfia (sacrifice) was destroyed.

Sita narrated:

20. Formerly at the instance of Brahma Parmesthin, Daksa-
yani (Daksa’s daughter) was given (in marriage) to noble-souled
Sankara by Daksa, O brahmanas.

21-22, Once, by chance, Daksa came to the Naimisa forest.
On arrival, he was duly honoured by the sages as well as by
ali Suras and Asuras by means of eulogies and obeisances.
Mahadeva who was present there, did not stand up nor did he
offer any reverential salutation to him. Therefore, Daksa became
furious and he spoke these words:

23. “Everywhere all the Suras and Asuras as well as excel-
lent brahmanas repeatedly bow down to me with great eagerness.
How is it, then, that, like a vicious fellow, this noble-souled one
does not pay obeisance to me now. Accompanied by vampires,
goblins and others, he is a shameless permanent resident of the
cremation ground.

24. Heretics, wicked people and habitual sinners become
haughty and arrogant on seeing a brahmana. Indeed, people like
these deserve killing or excommunication by good people. Hence
1am intent on cursing him.”

25-27. After saying thus that (Daksa) of great austerities,
became angry and spoke to Rudra these words:

“May these excellent brahmanas listen to these words of
mine. It behoves you all to carry out my words. This Rudra is
considered by me as banned out of all Yajfias because he has
gone beyond the Varnas (castes) and has transgressed the dis-
cipline of the Varnas.”’

Nandin, son of Silada, became furious on hearing those

=== PAGE 9 ===

Li.1.28- 39 5

words. He promptly said to Daksa who had great refulgence but
who uttered that curse:

Nandin said:

28-30. Why is my lord Maheéga excluded from Yajfias?
Merely by remembering him all these Yajfias become fruitful.
Sacrifice, charitable gift, penance, different kinds of holy spots of
pilgrimage—all these became sanctified by his name. Why has he
been cursed now? He has been cursed by you foolishly and im-
properly due to your brahmanical rashness, O evil-minded
Daksa. Tt is by the noble-souled Sarva that this universe is pro-
tected. How is it that Rudra has been cursed, O sinful base
brahmana?

31. On being rebuked thus by Nandin, Daksa, the Praja-
pati, became furious and he cursed Nandin:

32-33. ‘All of you devoted to Rudra have been completely
excluded from the Vedas. You are indeed cursed by the followers
of the Vedic path and excommunicated by the great sages. You
all cling to heretical doctrines. You are out of the pale of refined
breeding and good conduct. All these Kapalins (followers of the
skull-cult) are black-faced and addicted to drinking liquor.’”!

34. Thus the servants of Siva were then cursed by Daksa.
Then the infuriated Nandin began to imprecate Daksa:

35. “O brahmana, although we, the servants of Siva, are
good and pious, we have been cursed by you improperly (and
unnecessarily) out of your brahmanical rashness. Now I shall
curse you.

36-39, Arguing that there is nothing else you all adhere to
Vedic doctrines. (But) you are lustful, desirous of heaven, greedy

1, Kapalikas were then beyond the pale of Vedism (like Jainas and Bud-
dhists). This episode reflects the conflict between orthodox Vedism and
heterodox followers of Siva. The obnoxious practices of Kapalikas offended
orthodox Brahmanism so much so that they were not allowed even to have a
look at Sraddha food lest it should get polluted. (Vide Gautama DhS
15.25-28, Manu I11.239-42, KP 11.22.34-35; also G.V. Tagare’s Introduc-
tions to BdP and VaP.)

The prejudice against Kapalikas is found even in classical Sanskrit
literature,

=== PAGE 10 ===

6 Skanda Purana

and deluded. Keeping a follower of the Vedas in front, brahma-
nas will perform sacrifices on behalf of Siidras. They Will always
be impoverished and greedy of monetary gifts. O Daksa, some
brahmanas will become brahmaraksasas (brahminical demons).”

Lomasa said:

Those brahmanas were (thus) cursed by Nandin who had _ be-
come excessively angry.

On hearing the words of Nandin, Sadasiva smilingly
spoke these sweet enlightening words:

Mahadeva said:

40. It does not behove you to be angry always towards
brahmanas. These brahmanas, devoted to Vedic doctrines, are
always our elders and preceptors.

41. The'Vedas are full of mantras and of siiktas (hymns).
The adtman of every embodied being is established in the hymn.

42-43. Hence those who have realized the &tman should not
be censured. J am the atman myself, no one else. Who is this?
Who are you? Where am I? Why are the brahmanas cursed?
Avoid the concept of diversity, O highly intelligent one, and_be-
come enlightened. Manage (everything) through the knowledge
of reality. Be established in your own self and avoid anger etc.

44. On being advised and instructed thus by Sarnbhu, the
Supreme Being, Nandin (Silada’s son) of great austerities, be-
came aware of true knowledge and discernment. Closely associa-
ting himself with Siva, he became immersed in (the ocean of)
great bliss.

45. Overwhelmed by anger, Daksa went to his abode
accompanied by the sages. He entered his abode still indignant.

46. Abandoning his great faith inthose who worship Siva
and engaged in censuring them, he bacame the basest of men.
Reaching that place along with all the great sages, he continued
to censure lord Siva. He never became calm.

=== PAGE 11 ===

1.i.2.1-6
CHAPTER TWO

Sati’s Arrival at Daksa’s Sacrifice+

Lomasa said:

1. Once, a great sacrifice was commenced by him (Daksa).
All were invited to be present there by the ascetic (Daksa)
(who was) initiated for the sacrifice.

2-3. A number of sages including Vasistha and others came
there. Agastya, Kasyapa, Atri, Vamadeva, Bhrgu, Dadhica, holy
lord Vyasa, Bharadvaja and Gautama, these and many other

great sages assembled there.

4. Similarly all the groups of Suras (gods), the Guardians of
the Quarters and others, Vidyadharas, Gandharvas, Kinnaras
and groups of celestial damsels (came there).

5. Brahma, the grandfather of worlds, was invited from
Satyaloka. Similarly Visnu was invited from Vaikuntha to the

place of sacrifice.
6. Devendra of great lustre came along with Indrani. Simi-

larly the Moon-god came along with Rohini and Varuna came
in the company of his beloved.

1. Chs. 2 and 3 describe the self-immolation of Sati, the daughter of
Daksa and the consort of Siva, in Daksa’s sacrifice, when she and her hus-
band Siva were insulted by bim. But there is no Vedic evidence to show that
Siva married Daksa’s daughter (Rudra-Siva, pp. 70-80). Mbh, Santi, ch. 283
describes destruction of Daksa’s sacrifice by Siva with Yogic power (Yoga-
balam: krtva—283.32) in order to mollify his consort Uma, the daughter of the
King of Mountains (Saila-réja-suta—283.7 and 22) and not Sati, Daksa’s
daughter. Uma did not know who Daksa was and Siva had to inform her
that a Prajapati called Daksa was performing a Horse-sacrifice (Dakso ndma
prajanam patih hayamedhena yajate).

This clearly shows that the story of the self-immolation by Sati, Daksa’s
daughter, in Daksa’s sacrifice described here is a post-Mahabharata develop-
ment. In the next ch, (284) the appeasement of Uma’s anger is affirmed as
the cause of the destruction of Daksa’s sacrifice:

devya manyu-vyapohartham
hato daksasya vai kratuh
—Mbh, Sant: 284.31

This story of Sati’s self-immolation in yogic fire created by herself (Sati
++. prajajvala samédhijagnind) is however supported in BhP IV. 4; BdP
Lii.13.60-61; VaP I.30,52-55).

=== PAGE 12 ===

8 Skanda Purana

7. Kubera came there riding in his aerial chariot Puspaka,
Wind-god riding on his deer, Fire-god riding on His goat and
Nirrti riding on a ghost.

8 All these came tothe sacrificial enclosure of the Brah-
mana. All of them were received and honoured by the evil-mind-
ed Daksa.

9. Great and divine abodes of great value and good splend-
our were skilfully constructed by the noble-souled Tvastr.

10-13. (The visitors) occupied all those abodes according to
their pleasure.

When the great sacrifice commenced in the holy spot Kana-
khala,' the ascetics beginning with Bhrgu were appointed as
Rtviks by him. Then Daksa underwent due initiation. The
solemn, auspicious ceremony was duly performed. Benedictory
tites were completed by the Brahmanas for the sake of Daksa
accompanied by his wife. Always surrounded by his friends, he
shone remarkably, thanks to his greatness. In the meantime,
Dadhici spoke these words there:

Dadhici? said:

14. These leading Suras (gods), the great sages and the
Guardians of the Quarters have come to your (sacrifice). Still the
Yajfia does not shine properly without (the presence of) the
noble-souled Pinaka-bearing Lord.

15. Great learned men say that everything becomes auspi-
cious and splendid through him. That primordial Purusa (person),
the bull-bannered, bluc-throated lord with matted hair, is not seen
here.

16. Presided over and authorized by him, O Daksa, even
inauspicious things become auspicious. (Without) the Three-eyed
Lord, very auspicious things become instantly bereft of their
auspiciousness.

17-20. Hence he must be invited only by you immediately
through Brahma, Visnu the powerful lord and Sakra. All of them

1, Kanakhala—A village two miles to the east of Haridwar (U.P.), at the
junction of Ganga and Niladhara.

2. Dadhici’s objection to non-invitation of Siva and his quitting of the
sacrifice (infra vv. 31-33) with the prediction (curse) about the non-comple-
tion of the sacrifice is found also in Mbh, Santi 284.12-21.

=== PAGE 13 ===

Li.2.21-31 9

should go where lord Maheévara is present. Bring him along with
Daksayani. Hurry up. Everything shall become extremely sancti-
fied through that Yogin Sarnbhu by remembering whom and by
uttering whose names, merits become well-accomplished. Hence,
with all your efforts, the Bull-bannered Lord should be brought.

21-26. On hearing these words of his, the evil-minded
(Daksa) said laughing (derisively): “Indeed the root cause of
Devas is Visnu in whom the eternal virtue (Dharma) is present. In
him Vedas, Yajfas and the different kinds of holy rites are
established and that Visnu has come here.

Brahma, the grandfather of the worlds, has come from Satya-
loka along with the Vedas, Upanisads and various kinds of Aga-
mas (scriptural treatises).

Similarly the king of Suras (gods) himself has come along
with the groups of Suras. So also you, the sinless sages, have come.

All those tranquil ones who are worthy (of being present) in
a Yajfia have come. Allof you are conversant with the Vedas,
Vedic expositions and reality. All of you are steadfast in your
holy rites and observances.

Of what avail is Rudra to us in this matter? Of course, my
daughter has been given to him by me, O Brahmana, (but that
was) when I had been urged by Brahma.

27. He is not of noble birth, O Brahmana. He is doomed
and he is always a favourite of the dcomed. He is the sole lord
of goblins, ghosts and vampires. He is unfathomable.

28. He esteems himself very much. He is deluded and stub-
born. He is tacitern, jealous and malicious. In this holy rite he is
utterly unworthy. Hence indeed he was not invited by me now.

29. Hence, words like these should not be uttered by you
again, O Brahmana. My great Yajfia should be made successful
by all of you collectively.”

30. On hearing these words of his, Dadhici made the
following statement:

Dadhici said:

31. Great injustice has been done to all these excellent sages
and Devas of sanctified soul by not having the noble soul with
them.

=== PAGE 14 ===

10 Skanda Purana

32-33. A great ruin will soon befall all those who are present
here.

After saying thus, Dadhici alone walked out in protest from
the sacrificial enclosure of Daksa and hurriedly went to his
hermitage. When the sage went out, Daksa said this laughingly :

34-36. ‘There, a heroic supporter and friend of Siva named
Dadhici, has gone out. All those slow-witted rogues whose minds
are possessed by evil spirits, who are enamoured of heretic
doctrines, who are excluded from the Vedas and whose behaviour
and acts are vicious, should leave this holy rite.

You are all devoted to Vedic doctrines having Visnu as your
leader. O Brahmanas, make my Yajva fruitful ere long.”’

Then all of them along with the sages performed the worship
of the lord.

37-40. Inthe meantime there on the mountain Gandha-
madana! the great goddess Daksayani was engaged in various.
kinds of sports. She was surrounded by her female friends. Some-
times she played beneath in the Dhdaragrha (chamber fitted with
fountains and water-jets). Sometimes she moved about in an
aerial chariot. Sometimes she stood in the middle of the aerial
chariot and indulged in thousands of sports with balls etc.

While engaged in playing the games, the great goddess Sati
saw the Moon-god going to the place of sacrifice along with
Rohini.

She said to her maid Vijaya, ‘‘Where is Candra going now?
O Vijaya, go and enquire immediately.”

On being thus instructed by her, the gentle lady Vijaya asked
him suitably.

41. Everything about Daksa’s sacrifice and other things
were told by him. On hearing it the gentle lady Vijaya became

1. Gandhamadana—The northern ridge of the great Hindukush arch with
its northern extension Khwaja Mohammud range (AGP 58-59). The extent
of Puranic India was much larger than the pre-partition map of India which
was based on the political realities of the 19th century A.D. Soviet Indo-
logists and archacologists now testify to the existence of Vedic Aryans from
the lower reaches of the Dnieper, the area to the north of the Black Sea
through the Sovict republics of central Asia. Vide for example B.A. Ryba-
kov’s Indo-Aryans in Northern Black Sea Area, O.N. Trubachev’s Lingu-~
istic Periphery of the Ancient Slaves.

=== PAGE 15 ===

1i.2.42-55 . 11

agitated. Hurriedly (she went to Sati) and told her everything
exactly as it was said by the Moon-god.

42-43. The goddess began to ponder over the reason thus:
‘Why does he not invite (us)? Daksa is my father. Why has my
mother forgotten me now? I shall ask Sankara now about the
reason (thereof).’ After deciding thus, she asked the friends to
stay there and approached Sankara.

44-49. She sawthe Three-eyed Lord in the centre of the
assembly stationed there, in an extremely wonderful seat, and
surrounded by all his Ganas (attendants) beginning with Canda
and Munda, Bana, Bhrngin, Nandin of great power of penance,
the son of Silada, Mahakala, Mahacanda. Mahamunda, Maha-
Siras, Dhimraksa, Dhimraketu and Dhimrapada—these and
many other Ganas, the followers of Rudra, (were present there).
Some were hideous and terrifying. Others were mere headless
trunks. Some had no eyes. Others were devoid of chests. There
were hundreds like these. All of them had elephant-hides for
their clothes. Clusters of matted hair were their ornaments. All
were adorned with Rudraksa beads. They were devoid of attach-
ment. They had conquered their sense-organs. They were anta-
gonistic to objects of sensual pleasure. Sankara, the benefactor of
the worlds, was seen by her surrounded by all these.

50-52. Bewildered in her mind, she suddenly went to Siva’s
presence. The beloved wife was placed in his lap by Siva who
was pleased. She was addressed with loving words with due res-
pect: *‘O lady of excellent waistline, what is the purpose of your
arrival? Tell me quickly.”

On being spoken thus by him, the dark-eyed lady said:

Sati said:

53. Olord, O lord of the chiefs of Devas, how is it that
going to the great sacrifice of my father is not approved of by
you? Tell (me) everything.

54-55. This is the duty of friends, O Mahadeva, that they
(regularly) associate with their friends, thereby increasing the
pleasure and love of their friends. Hence make all efforts (to be
present there). Oh, go there even if you have not been invited.
Go to the sacrificial enclosure of my father today at my request,
O Sadafsiva.

=== PAGE 16 ===

12 . Skanda Purdna

56-57. On hearing her words (Siva) spoke these kind and
sincere words: .

“O gentle lady, you must not go to the sacrifice of Daksa.
All those persons who honour Daksa, including Suras, Asuras
and Kinnaras, have undoubtedly gone to the sacrifice of your
father.

58-59, O lady of fine eyebrows, those who go to others’
mansions without being invited, meet with insult which is more
(painful) than death. Even Indra who goes to the abode of
others meets with contempt and disrespect. Hence, O splendid
lady, you must not go to Daksa’s sacrifice.”

60. On being told thus by the noble-souled Siva, Sati, the
most excellent one among those who are conversant with modes
of expression, spoke these words full of anger:

61. “It is true that you are (the rea!) Yajfia in this world, O
most excellent lord of Devas. (How is it) that you have not
been invited by my father of evil conduct today? Hence1 wish to
know thoroughly the attitude of that evil-minded one.

62. Hence J shall go to the sacrificial enclosure of my father
today itself. Grant me permission, O my lord, lord of the uni-
verse, lord of Devas.”

63-65a. On being told thus by that goddess, Lord Siva him-
self, who has knowledge and vision of everything, the lord who
is the sanctifier of all living beings, the lord of Devas, Mahesa,
the bestower of all Siddhis said to her:

“Go quickly, O gentle lady of holy rites, at my instance, rid-
ing on this Nandin and accompanied by various kinds of Ganas.”

656-68. At the bidding of Siva, sixty thousand of the terrify-
ing Ganas went (along with her). Surrounded by those Ganas,
the goddess went to the abode of her father. Observing the
entire army, Mahadeva became excessively surprised. Mahadeva,
the unperturbed scorcher of enemies, sent very valuable crna-
ments to her through his attendants. He sent them immediately
after her.

Pondering over the departure of the goddess to her father’s
abode, Lord Maheéa exclaimed:

“On being insulted by her father, Sati, the daughter of
Daksa, will never come back to her city again.”

=== PAGE 17 ===

Li.3.1-11 13
CHAPTER THREE

Virabhadra Comes to the Yajfia

Lomasa said:

1-4a. Daksayani went to the place where the great sacrifice
was being performed. After going to the abode of her father, the
abode which was full of various wonderful things, she stood at
the entrance. The Devas of exalted fortune became delighted.
They got down from their seats. After seeing the congregation
of the Devas, her parents, friends, relatives and kinsmen, she
made obeisance to her father and mother with delight. Then the
goddess spoke these words in a manner suitable to the occasion:

4b-9. “Why was Sarnbhu, the extremely splendid (lord),
not invited by you? (He is tke lord) by whom this entire uni-
verse consisting of the mobile and immobile beings has been
sanctified. He is Yajfia (incarnate), an (important) part of
Yajfia, the sacrificial gift offered therein, the material offered
therein, the Mantras etc., the Havya and Kavya—he is identical
with all these things. He is the most excellent one among those
who are expert in performing Yajfas. Everything performed
without him will become impure. How can a sacrifice function
(at all), Odear father, without Sambhu? How did these come
here, O father, along with Brahma? Don’t you know? O Bhrgu,
O Kasyapa of great intellect, O Atri, O Vasistha? You are alone,
O Sakra, what has been done by you today? O Visnu, you do
know the supreme lord Mahadeva. O Brahma, don’t you
know the valour of Mahadeva?

10. Formerly you happened to be five-faced. You (spoke)
arrogantly to Sadasiva and you were made four-faced. It is sur-
prising that you have forgotten that miracle.

11. He is the lord Rudra who formerly begged for alms in
the forest of Daruvana,! when this mendicant was cursed by you
(and) your friends.

1. This refers to Lord Siva’s visit to Daruvana to teach Pagupata Yoga
to the sages thereof. He adopted the queer behaviour called Dvdra (Vide
PaSupata Sitra ch. T11.1-19 and Kaundinya’s com.). The sages were infuria-
ted at it and they cursed Siva and suffered disastrous results (BdP L.ii.27
and Tagare’s Introduction to BdP on ‘Liriga worship’). The story is narrated
in LP and KP also.

=== PAGE 18 ===

14 Skanda Purdna

12-14. Even after cursing Rudra, how was (this incident)
forgotten by you? He is the lord by whose limb alone the uni-
verse including the mobile and immobile beings has been
filled up. The entire universe became the Linga at that very
instant. They call it Linga because of the dissolution (of the
universe in it).1 All the Devas along with Vasava (Indra) are
born of the Trident-bearing Lord. Such a lord who is to be reali-
zed through the Vedantas, cannot be comprehended by you.”

15-19a. On hearing her words, Daksa became angry and
spoke these words:

“Of what avail is your verbal prolixity. It has no relevance
to the present occasion. O gentle lady, (you may) go or stay.
‘Why did you come at all? Your husband is an inauspicious
fellow, not conducive to propitiousness, O lady of good waistline.

He is ignoble, excluded from the Vedas. He is the king of
goblins, ghosts and vampires. Hence he was not invited to the
sacrifice, O gentle lady of sweet speech.

O lady of excellent loins, it is to Rudra who is haughty and
evil-minded and of unknown antecedents that you had been
given in marriage by me, a dull-witted sinner. Hence, abandon
this body (of yours), O lady of pure smiles, and be happy.”

19b-23. It wasthus that his own daughter Sati who was
worshipped by all the worlds, was addressed by Daksa then.

On seeing her own father full of contempt (for Siva), Sati
became excessively furious. Then the goddess thought thus:
‘Though I am desirous of seeing Sankara, how can I go back to
our mansion? What will I say if I am asked (about this incident)
by him? He who censures Mahadeva and he who listens when
Mahadeva is being censured—both of them goto hell and remain
there as long as the moon and the sun (shine). Hence I will aban-
don this body and enter fire.’ Pondering thus and being over-
whelmed by insult, she entered fire? uttering the words ““O Rudra,
O Siva”.

1. A popular ctymology of Liriga from +/li ‘to dissolve’, It is to be
derived from /lig, /ling, ‘to go’. MW 901 conjecturally traces it to ./lag
‘to adhere’, ‘to stick’.

2. Ascontrasted with older Puranas mentioned in Supra p. 7. fn 1,
this text does not bring in ‘Yogic fire’ for self-immolation.

=== PAGE 19 ===

1.i.3.24-36 15

24-30. The entire quarters became pervaded with the great
uproar of “Alas! Alas!”’. Allthose (who had come with Sati)
climbed on to the platform. Laden with weapons they crowded
the place without any gap. They hit and struck themselves with
their weapons. They cut off their own bodies. Some of them cut
off their heads and eagerly performed the Nirdjana (waving of
the lights in circles) rites with them. Immediately they were
reduced to ash. Then everyone said thus: ‘‘Twenty thousand of
the Ganas roared terrifically. Those dreadful ones cut off their
limbs by means of weapons. Thus they all perished there along
with Daksayani.”?

That was a great miracle. All sages, the Devas beginning
with Indra, along with the groups of Maruts, Visvedevas,
Asvins andthe Guardians of the Quarters—all these became
silent then. Some of them (walked) round requesting Visnu, the
most excellent one. This was the end of the Yajna of that evil-
minded one. The Yajfia of the unworthy Brahmana Daksa (was
ruined) and the sages became afraid.

31. Inthe meantime, O Brahmanas, all these activities and
behaviour of Daksa were communicated to Rudra by the noble-
minded Narada.

32. On hearing Narada’s report the supreme Lord Siva be-
came extremely infuriated. In his anger he as if jumped up from
his seat.

33. Uprooting a plait of hair from his (matted hair), Rudra,
the cause of the annihilation of all the worlds, angrily dashed it
on the top of the mountain.

34. Asa result of this dashing, Virabhadra of great fame
rose up. So also did Kali surrounded by crores of spirits and
goblins.

35. Through the wrathful breath of the noble-minded Rudra
a hundred (types of) Fevers and thirteen Sannipatas (combined
derangement of all the three humours causing deadly varieties of
fevers) rose up.

36. Rudra of fierce and dreadful exploits was entreated by
Virabhadra ‘“‘O Lord! what task of Your Lordship is to be carried
out? Tell me quickly.”

1. The Yajfiu was disturbed by the Harakiri of Sati’s attendants. This is
not mentioned in V4P and BdP in contexts noted in fn 1 of p. 7.

=== PAGE 20 ===

16 Skanda Purana

37. On being requested thus, lord Rudra hurriedly commis-
sioned him, ‘“‘Destroy Daksa’s Yajfia.”’

38. Recciving the behest of the Trident-bearing Lord of
Devas with his head (i.e. humbly accepting the order), the heroic
Virabhadra of excessive refulgence, who was kiss2d (d-lidha) by
Kalika and was surrounded by all goblins rushed to Daksa’s
sacrifice.

39-40. At that very time, ill-omens occurred suddenly. A
rough wind blew carrying with it gravels and sand. The Rain-god
showered blood. The quarters were enveloped in darkness.
Thousands of meteors fell on the earth.

41. The Devas and others saw such phenomena foreboding
evil. Becoming frightened, Daksa sought refuge in Visnu.

42. “Save mc, save me, O great Visnu. Indeed you are our
greatest preceptor and elderly one. You are (identical with)
Yajfia, O most excellent one among Suras. Save me from
this fearful danger.”

43. On being requcsted and prayed to by Daksa, the slayer
of Madhu (Visnu) said: ‘‘Protection should be accorded to you
by me. There is no doubt about it.

44. Disrespect has been shown by you, O Daksa, without
understanding genuine Dharma (Virtu2). Due to the contem-
ptuous disregard of Lord Siva, everything will become fruitless.

45. Where those who are not worthy of respect are worship-
ped, where he who is worthy of being worshipped is not wor-
shipped, three consequences, viz. famine, death and fear, prevail
there.

46. Hence, the Bull-bannered Lord (Siva) should be honoured
with all efforts. Great fear and danger beset you because the
great lord was not honoured.

47. All of us are not powerful enough now, because of yout
evil behaviour. There is no need to discuss this matter further.”

48. On hearing those words of Visnu, Daksa became lost in
(anxious) thoughts, Turning pale in the face, he remained silent
and sat on the ground.

49-51. Expressly commanded by Rudra himself the ex-
tremely powerful Virabhadra came to the sacrificial enclosure
accompanied by the nine Durgas and others.1 The nine Durgas

1. The legend of destruction of Daksa’s sacrifice is mentioned in the

=== PAGE 21 ===

1L.i.3.52-59a . 17

were Kali, Katyayani, Isana, Camupda, Mundamardini, Bhadra-
kali, Bhadra, Tvarita and Vaisnavi. A big multitude of Bhitas
also entered the sacrificial enclosure of great refulgence. Sakinis,
Dakinis, Bhitas, Pramathas, Guhyakas,a host of Yoginis (in
circular formation) along with the sixtyfour (Jantras)!—all these
entered the sacrificial enclosure suddenly.

52-55. Hundreds and thousands of Ganas who accompani-
ed Virabhadra were all the Pdrsadas (attendants) of Sankara.
All of them had the form of Rudra. They had five faces and
blue throats. All had weapons in their hands. They were duly
served with umbrellas and chowries. All were as valorous as
Siva. They had ten arms and three eyes. Their hair was matted.
They wore the ornaments of Rudra. Bearing crescent moon
(on their heads), all of them had (different kinds of) robes and
ornaments.

56. Accompanied by these, the noble-souled, three-cyed,
dreadful Virabhadra of terrible might, who had a thousand arms
and was entwined by great serpents, marched towards the
sacrifice.

57. His chariot was drawn by two thousand horses and a
million lions.

58-59a. The armoured defenders of his sides were many lions,
tigers, sharks, fishes and thousands of elephants. He had different
kinds of umbrellas and chowries held over the head of everyone
everywhere.

Satapatha and Kausitaki Brahmanas. But the cause was Daksa’s illicit
relations with his daughter. The destruction of the sacrifice mentioned in
Puranas (e.g. BhP I[V.5, LP 1.99 and 100, NP I1.5-16, BdP and VaP
mentioned above) is caused by the insult of Sati, Sankara’s spouse and
Daksa’s daughter.

1. Tantras are scriptures promulgated by Siva. SkP gives a list
of 64 Tantras such as JAdndrnava, Malini-vijaya, Yamala and others. Some
of them are still unpublished. They generally contain: (1) Creation of the
world; (2) Dissolution of the world; (3) The procedure of worshipping the
deity: (4) Penance (Sadhana); (5) Repetition of the name of the deity ; (6) Six
daily sacred duties (Saskarma); (7) The Yoga of meditation. The Varahitantra
gives the number of verses in each Tantra. Schools of Saivism such as Trika
Saivism of Kashmir, the Saktivigistadvaita of Lingayatas are based on Saiva
Tantras (Agamas). Even Vaisnavas had their own Tantras as one finds in
Ramanuja’s Sribhdsya and the ten topics of Paficaratra Agama have close
similarity with these topics.

=== PAGE 22 ===

Skanda Purdua

59bc. Then high sounding Bheris (war-drums), conchs of
various (degrees of) sounds, Pafahas (kettle-drums), musical
instruments like Gomukha, different kinds of horns wefe sounded.

60. Cymbals, gongs and wind instruments were played. All
of them were engaged in singing pleasantly. All of them played
on Mrdangas (special drums).

61. The Ganas proceeded ahead in front of Virabhadra
indulging in different kinds of dances. Those Ganas of unmea-
sured power and potency roared along with the martial sounds
of the musical instruments.

62-63a. By that great sound the three worlds echoed and rever-
berated. Thus all those Ganas ordered (urged) by Rudra came
there to the sacrificial enclosure of Daksa and began to smash
for the sake of destroying it.

63b-64a._ The sky was covered with dust and all the quar-
ters were enveloped in darkness. The earth consisting of the
seven islands (continents)? shook along with the mountains and

18

forests.
64b-65. Those Devas, Daityas and night-wanderers obsery-

ed this wonderful spectacle foreboding the ruin of all the worlds.
All of them stood up simultaneously. They saw the dreadful
army of Rudra advancing.

66-67. Some of them were coming over the earth. Some
were coming through the sky. Others covered the quarters and
the intervening spaces and rushed on. All of them were of
inexhaustible strength; infinite (in number), they were heroic on
a par with Rudra in battle. On seeing such an army surrounded
by (the followers of) Rudra, all of them said in great surprise
and dismay: “Let us advance (against them) with weapons in the
hands.”

68-70. Indra rode on his elephant. The Wind-god rode on a
deer. Yama equipped with the rod of death rode on a buffalo.
Kubera drove in the aerial chariot Puspaka. Varuna rode on a
shark. The Fire-god rode on a goat. Nirrti rode ona ghost.

1, Dvfpas—‘Dvipa’ originally means a land-mass between two arms of
water. According to Puranas the earth consists of the following seven conti-
nents (dvipas) : (1) Saka, (2) Kuéa, (3) Plaka, (4) Puskara, (5) Salmala
(li), (6) Kraufica, (7) Jamb0. Scholars differ about their identification with
modern parts of the world.

=== PAGE 23 ===

Li.3.71-82 19

Similarly other groups of Suras, Yaksas, Caranas and Guhyakas,
valorously rode on their respective vehicles.

71. On seeing the preparations of his own people, Daksa’s
face was covered with tears. He prostrated himself on the ground
and spoke to all of them:

72. ‘‘O (friends) of great lustre, it was on the strength of
your support that this great Yujfia was begun by me. For the
accomplishment of this good rite, you are the final authority.

73. ©O Visnu, you are the protector of holy rites and Yajfias
as well as the virtue described in the Vedas.O Madhava, you
are the promoter of Brahmana’s rites.

74. Hence, O great Lord, proper protection should be
accorded to this Yajfia.”’

On hearing the words of Daksa, the slayer of Madhu (Visnu)
teplied :1

75-76. ‘When you say that protection should be accorded
by me to maintain holy rites, it is true. But the transgression is
of your own doing in regard to this Yajfia. You said something
to Sadasiva in the Naimisa forest, the holy spot of Devas. Is
it not remembered by you?

77-78. ‘Rudra, Sadasiva, who has great splendour, who is of
the form of Yajfia, was excluded from the Yajfias,O deluded
one. That was the wrong advice of yours. Who is competent
to protect you from Rudra’s wrath? I do not see anyone, O
Brahmana, who can protect you, the evil-minded one.

79. You do not distinguish between good and evil acts, O
evil-minded one. A holy rite alone is not (necessarily) efficacious
always (to produce results).

80. Understand that a holy rite with the support of Igvara
(Siva) is competent to produce results. Excepting Ivara, there
is no other bestower of the fruit of Karman (a holy rite).

81. Sadasiva grants the benefit of the holy rites of those
persons who are the devotees of ISvara, who are calm and whose
minds dwell on him.

82. Those people who solely depend upon Karman and are

1, The author of the Purana takes every opportunity to reduce the gulf
between Saivism and Vaisnavism and to assert the oneness of Siva and
Visnu. Visnu’s reply is thus remarkable.

=== PAGE 24 ===

20 Skanda Purana

engaged in denying Jévara, go to hell even if they perform hund-
red crores of Yajfias.

83. Those who put faith in the Karmans alone are bound
by the fetters of Karman in birth after birth. They are roasted
and cooked in the hells.””

CHAPTER FOUR
A Fight between Virabhadra and Visnu and Others

Lomaga said:

1, On hearing the words uttered by Visnu, Daksa spoke
these words:

“O slayer of Madhu (Visnu), you have made it appear that
Vedas are not authoritative (pramdana).}

2. How can one forsake the Vedic rite and accept the doc-
trine of the authoritativeness of Iévara? Let this be explained, O
Mahavisnu, by whom Dharma has been established?”

3-5. On being asked by Daksa, Mahavisnu said to him
consolingly : “The Vedas have the three Gunas for their object.?
They cannot be otherwise. How can the rites mentioned in the
Vedas become fruitful without Isvara? They definitely become
fruitless. Hence seek refuge in Igvara by all means.”

Even as Govinda (Visnu) was saying thus, the ocean of an
army, similar to Virabhadra’s came there. All the Suras (Devas)
saw it.

6. Indra laughed at Visnu who was engaged in explaining
the doctrine of Atman then. With the Vajra (thunderbolt) in

1, This shows a stage of conflict between the traditional Vedic religion
and Saivism. Vedic tradition prohibited its followers from even speaking
with the non-Vedic Saivas and Paficaratras. These Sastras were regarded as
authoritative so far as they are not opposed to the Vedas (Sita-Samhita
IV.4.16-18). Parijata as quoted in the Krtyaratnakara (p. 37) states the view
of the mediacval writers on Dharma Sastra as follows:

Paiicaratrapasupatadinyapi Sastrdni vedaviruddhani pramaénam

2. Cf. traigunya-visaya vedah—BG 11.45. .

=== PAGE 25 ===

1i.4.7-22 21

his hand, he became desirous of fighting, accompanied by the
Suras.

7. He was made to go hurriedly by Bhrgu who was bent
upon routing (the Ganas). Then, the Ganas in the formation of
groups fought with the Suras.

8. They struck one another with arrows, iron clubs and
sharp-pointed missiles. In the course of that great festival of war,
many conchs were blown.

9. So also drums like Dundubhis, Patahas, Dindimas etc.,
were sounded. Thanks to that great sound, the Suras considered
themselves flattered. Accompanied by the Guardians of the
Quarters, they killed the servants of Siva.

10. Some were killed by means of swords. Some were
smashed by means of iron clubs. All of the hundreds and thou-
sands of the Ganas were entirely routed by the Devas.

ll. It was by the power of the Mantras of Bhrgu, that
those Ganas were instantaneously defeated and driven back by
the Guardians of the Quarters headed by Indra.

12. Their extermination was effected by Bhrgu who perform-
ed the Yaga as the fire-worshipper. He was initiated in this for
the sake of the worship, on behalf of the Devas and for their
pleasure too.

13. By that alone did the Devas become victorious at the
very instant. On seeing the defeat of his own army, Virabhadra
became angry.

14-15. He made the goblins, ghosts and vampires go to the
rear and the bull-riders advance at the front. The leader of great
strength took up a sharp trident and struck down the Devas,
Yaksas, Pisacas, Guhyakas and Raksasas in the battle. Striking
with spears, all the Ganas began to kill the Devas.

16. Some of them were split into two by means of swords.
They were smashed with iron clubs. In the course of the battle,
some were cut into pieccs with battle-axes.

17. Hundreds were pierced with spears; some were torn to
pieces. Thus, all of those being defeated, began to run away.

18. Embracing each other, they went back to heaven. Only
the guardians of the worlds led by Indra remained there, eager
(to fight). They consulted Brhaspati, “How can we have victory?”

19-22. Brhaspati immediately replied to Indra thus:

=== PAGE 26 ===

22 Skanda Purdna

Brhaspati said:

What had been spoken by Visnu formerly has become true
today.

If there is ISvara as (bestower of) the benefit of a holy rite, he
assigns it (the benefit) to the performer (of the rite). He is not
powerful over one who does not perform (the rite). Neither Mantras
nor all the medicinal herbs, neither black magic nor secular rites,
neither holy rites nor the Vedas, nor the two systems of Mimamsa
are capable of understanding Igvara. He can be known only
through unswerving devotion. By calmness and great content-
ment, Sadagiva should (i.e. could) be known.

23. It is through him that the entire universe with happiness
and misery as its characteristic features, takes its origin. But I
shall speak further with a desire to explain (what are the) right
and wrong actions.

24. O/JIndra, you have been foolish in accompanying the
(other) guardians of the worlds here. What can you do further
now with the self-same folly?

25. These extremely splendid Ganas, the assistants of Rudra,
have become infuriated. Those persons of exaltcd fortune cause
nothing to be left over.

26. On hearing these words of Brhaspati, all the heaven-
dwellers and all those great gods, the guardians of the worlds,
became anxious.

27-28. Then Virabhadra who was very closely surrounded
by the Ganas, said:

“On account of your ignorant nature, you have come here
for the sake of Avaddna (glorious achievement). For the sake of
your satisfaction, I shall immediately give you Avaddnas (cutting
into pieces).””

After saying this, he furiously hit them with sharp arrows.

29. Hit by those arrows, all of them fled in all the ten
directions.

30. When the guardians of the worlds had left the place and
when the Devas had fled, Virabhadra came into the sacrificial
enclosure accompanied by the Ganas.

31. At that time all those sages who were desirous of inti-
mating everything to Janardana (Visnu), the god of gods, said to
him all at once:

=== PAGE 27 ===

1.i.4.32-42 23

32-33. “Protect the Yajfa of Daksa. Indeed, there is no
doubt that you are Yajfia incarnate.”

On hearing these words of the sages, Janardana, the all-per-
vading lord, the illuminator of spiritual faculties, became desirous
of fighting and stood there ready for the battle. Virabhadra of
powerful arms spoke these words to Kegava (‘Visnu):

34. ‘Why have you come here, O Visnu, you who know the
great strength (of mine)? How will you be victorious by taking
up Daksa’s side? Tell me that.

35. Did you not observe? What has been done by Daksa-
yani, O sinless one? You too have come for the sake of a share
in the course of the Yajfia of Daksa. O lord of powerful arms, I
shall give oblation to you also.”

36. After saying this, at the very outset, he bowed down to
Visnu whose form was similar to his. Virabhadra then went in
front of Visnu and spoke these words:

37. “You are to me just like Sarhbhu.! There is no doubt
about this. Still, O lord of powerful arms, you face me with a
desire to fight. If you continue to stay here yourself, I shall give
you liberation (Apunaravrtti).”

38. On hearing those words of the intelligent Virabhadra
lord Visnu, the lord of all lords, said laughingly :

Visnu said:

39-41, O highly intelligent one, you are born of the splend-
our of Rudra. You are very pure and holy. I had been requested
by this (Daksa) before repeatedly for attending this Yajfia.T am
subservient to my devotees. So also is the case of Maheévara. It
is for that reason that T have come to this sacrifice of Daksa, O
Virabhadra, born of the wrath of Rudra. Either I shall restrain
you or you shall restrain me.

42. When Govinda said this much, that (Virabhadra) of
mighty arms laughed and after bowing down humbly said this
to Janardana (Visnu):

, 1, The Puraya reiterates the identity of Siva and Visnu. Virabhadra calls
himself the servant of both Siva and Visnu and bows down humbly to Visnu
before fighting (vv 42-43 below).

=== PAGE 28 ===

24 Skanda Purana

43. «Just as Siva, so also you. Just as you, so also Siva. All
of us are servants both of you and of Sankara.”

44. On hearing his words, Acyuta, Visnu, the greatest lord,
spoke these important words laughingly :

45. ‘Fight with me unhesitatingly, O lord of powerful arms,
I shall goto my own abode when I am surfeited with your
arrows and missiles.”

46. Saying ‘so be it”, Virabhadra, the hero of great
strength, took up the greatest of his missiles and roared like a
lion.

47. Visnu too blew his conch of loud report. On hearing it,
those Devas who had fled away from the battlefield, returned
once again.

48-50. Allthe Guardians of the Quarters including Indra
made an array (of their soldiers). Then Nandin was struck by
Indra with his Vajra (thunderbolt) that had a hundred spikes.
Sakra was hit in the middle of his chest by Nandin with his tri-
dent. Bhrngi was struck by Vayu and Vayu was struck (in return)
by Bhrngi. Standing well prepared with his trident of sharp edge,
Mahakala, endowed with great strength, fought with Yama
holding the heavy rod.

51-55. The lord of Kismandas clashed with Kubera.
Munda of great strength fought with Varuna. He fought with
such a great strength as surprised the three worlds. The cxceed-
ingly powerful Canda clashed with Nirrta and fought with a very
great missile, mocking his demoniac nature. Bhairava, the great
leader, accompanied by the circle of Yoginis tore through all
the Devas and drank their wonderful blood. All the Ksetrapalas,
Bhitas, Pramathas, Guhyakas, Sakinis, Dakinis, the terrible
nine Durgas, Yoginis, Yatudhanis, Kigmandakas and others
roared, drank blood and devoured a lot of flesh.

56. On seeing that his army was being devoured, the king of
Suras left Nandin behind and challenged Virabhadra.

57. Leaving off Visnu, Virabhadra engaged Devendra. The
battle between them was as terrible as that between Mars and
Mercury.

58-61. When Sakra was desirous of killing Virabhadra and
hastily prepared for the same, Virabhadra became furious and
filled Indra who was seated on his elephant, with a mass of

=== PAGE 29 ===

1i.4.62-71 25

arrows. The extremely mighty Virabhadra who was unrestrain-
able, was immediately struck by Indra with his Vajra of a hundred
spikes. Then he (Virabhadra) attempted to swallow Indra along
with his elephant and thunderbolt, All the Bhittas who saw Vira-
bhadra like that desirous of killing Indra, raised the loud shouts
of “Ha-Ha” (Alas-Alas). Seeing Virabhadra desirous of killing
Indra, Visnu came there ina hurry and stood in front of Vira-
bhadra.

62. He pushed Sakra behind and fought with Virabhadra.
The battle between them was very tough.

63-64. They then fought with various kinds of weapons and
missiles. Seeing Nandin once again, Sakra who was an expert in
battle, cngaged him in a tumultuous duel.

There was a great clash between Devas and Pramathas.
Pramathas were smashed by Devas and all of them fled from the
battle.

65. On sceing the Ganas turning their faccs away (from the
battle), all those (bacterial) ailments! that had originated from
the fury of Rudra rushed against Devas.

66. On sceing Devas afflicted with the fevers, Visnu laugh-
ingly seized Devas alive separately.

67. He called Agvini Devas in order to quell the ailments.
The highly intelligent (lord) made them carefully work out and
consider the requisite nourishment (medicine) and sustenance,
and gave the same to them.

68. Asvini gods caught hold of the fevers and Sannipdata
(fevers) as well as other inimical elements and quelled them.
They joyously made Devas free from fever and rejoiced for a
long time.

69, The Yogini Cakra also was subdued by them. With
sharp-pointed arrows, they toppled down Bhairava who was
highly excited and felled the Ganas too.

70. On seeing his army routed by Suras and felled down by
them, Virabhadra became furious and spoke these words to
Visnu:

71. “You are a heroic warrior, O mighty one. Indeed you
are the protector of Devas. If you think so, come on, fight with
me strenuously.”

1. An imaginative precursor of modern bacterial warfare?

=== PAGE 30 ===

26 Skanda Purane

72. After saying thus, Virabhadra of great strength, appro-
ached Visnu, the lord of all lords, and showered him with sharp.
arrows.

73. Then the lord attacked Virabhadra with his discus. On
seeing the discus coming, it was instantaneously swallowed (by
Virabhadra).

74-75. On seeing that his discus was swallowed, Visnu, the
conqueror of the cities of his enemies, stroked and pressed his
mouth. Thus the (discus) was caused to be spitted out by Visnu.

Taking his discus, Visnu of exalted nature, the sole lord of
the universe, went to heaven. On understanding everything that
had been done and was unbearable to the enemies he became
satisfied (of having done his job).

CHAPTER FIVE

Meritoriousness of Devotion to Siva

Lomasga continued:

1, When Visnu went away, all those Devas along with the
sages and all those who subsisted on that Yajfia were totally
vanquished by the Ganas.

2. He (Virabhadra) made Bhrgu fall down and his beard
and moustache were plucked and cut.! He got the teeth of
Piasan uprooted after distorting and deforming them.

3. Svadha was ridiculed and the sages were mocked there.
In their fury, they showered the sacrificial fire with faccal matter.

4. The Ganas who had become excessively infuriated creat-
ed unspeakable havoc. Out of great fear, Daksa hid himself be-
neath the altar.

5. After realizing that he was in hiding, he angrily dragged
him out. Holding by the cheeks, he struck his head witha
sword.

1. Cf. BhP LV.5.13-26 for aclose similarity in the description of the
destruction and humiliation of persons in Daksa’s sacrifice.

=== PAGE 31 ===

1.i.5.6-17 27

6. Thinking that the head could not be pierced or split
through, the valorous Virabhadra pressed the shoulder down
with his feet and wrung the neck.

7. On being wrenched off from the neck, the head of the
vicious Daksa was taken away by the intelligent Virabhadra and
thrown (lit. offered as oblation) into the blazing sacrificial pit
instantaneously.

8. Other sages, Devas, Pitrs, Yaksas and Raksasas who yet
stayed on were assaulted by the Ganas. All of them fled from the
place.

9. The Moon, the groups of Adityas, all the Planets, Stars
and Constellations—all of them were displaced and shaken.
They too were attacked by the Ganas.

10. Brahma returned to Satyaloka. He was afflicted with
sorrow for his son. He thought without being perturbed: ‘What
action is to be taken now?’

11-15. As his mind was suffering, the grandfather of the
worlds did not derive any happiness. With great effort, he under-
stood all the wicked deeds of that sinner. He decided to go to
the Kailasa mountain.

Riding on his swan, accompanied by all the Devas, the lord
of great splendour reached the most excellent mountain. There
he saw Siva, Rudra, accompanied by only Nandin, staying alone.

He had matted hair and possessed great splendour. It was the
lord who could not he grasped by the Vedas or their A/gas
(Ancillaries). On seeing such a lord, Brahma became greatly
agitated.

He prostrated himself on the ground like a staff and
began to plead for pardon, touching his lotus-like feet with the
tips of the four crowns. He began to eulogize Siva, the supreme

soul.

Brahma said:

16. Obeisance to Rudra, the quiescent Brahman, the sup-
reme soul. You are the creator and sustainer (protector) of the
universe; you are the great-grandfather (of the world).

17. Obeisanve to the great Rudra, to the blue-throated one,
to the creator, to the lord identical with the universe, to the seed
of the universe, to the cause of the bliss of the worlds.

=== PAGE 32 ===

28 Skanda Purana

18-19. You are Omka@ra; you are Vasatkara, the prompter of
the functioning of all enterprises. You are Yajfia; youeare the
YGjnic rite. You are the cause of the functioning of Yajfia; you
alone are the protector of all the performers of sacrifice. You are
worthy of being the refuge, O great lord, to all living beings. Save
me, save me, O lord Mahadeva, I have been afflicted with the
grief for my son.

Mahddeva said:

20. O grandfather, listen attentively to my words. The des-
truction of the Yajfia of Daksa has not been carried out by me at
all.

21-22. O Brahma, there is no doubt about this that Daksa
was killed by his own deeds. An act (rite) that causes pain to
many others, should not be performed at all, at any time. O
Paramesthin, what befalls others will befall one too.

23. After saying this, Rudra accompanied by Brahma and
Suras went to the holy spot Kanakhala and to the sacrificial en-
closure of the Prajapati (Daksa).

24-26. ‘Rudra saw what had been committed by Virabhadra.
Svaha, Svadha, Pisan, Bhrgu the most excellent one among
intelligent beings (all had been injured by the Ganas). So also
all the other sages and all the manes had been driven to that
miserable plight. Many other Yaksas, Gandharvas and Kinnaras
who had been there were wounded, split and torn off. Some died
in the battle.

27. On seeing that Sambhu had come, Virabhadra prostra-
ted himself like a log of wood by way of obeisance, along with
his Ganas. Then he stood in front of Siva.

28. On seeing Virabhadra of great strength standing in
front, Rudra spoke these words laughingly: “‘O hero, what is
this that has been done here?

29. Immediately bring here that Daksa by whom this un-
usual and inauspicious thing has been committed in the course
of a Yajfia, in consequence of which was (the present) fruit.”

30. On being ordered thus by Sankara, Virabhadra hurried-
ly brought the headless trunk and placed it in front of Sarhbhu.

31-32. Then Virabhadra of noble mind was enquired by

=== PAGE 33 ===

1.i.5.33-40 29

Sankara: “By whom has the head of the vicious Daksa been re-
moved? Though he is a crooked fellow, O hero, I shall now give
him life (revive him).”

On being told thus by Sankara, Virabhadra submitted again:

33. ‘The head was dropped by me into the fire at the very
instant, O Sankara. The head that is left, O Sambhu, is that of
an animal and the face has been distorted.”’

34. After knowing (the position), Rudra placed upon the
headless trunk the deformed head of the animal. The head had
a beard and it was terrible.

35. Thankstothe grace of Sankara, Daksa regained his
life. On seeing Rudra in front of him, Daksa became ashamed,
Bowing down he eulogized Sankara, the benefactor of all the
worlds.

Daksa said:

36. I bow down to the excellent lord, the bestower of boons.
I bow down to the most excellent lord of Devas, the eternal lord.
J pay obeisance to Igvara, the lord of Devas. I bow down to
Hara, Sarhbhu, the sole kinsman of the universe.

37. I bow down to the cosmic form of the lord of the uni-
verse, the eternal Brahman in theform of one’s own soul. I salute
Sarva (Siva) having the existence of one’s own mental creation.
J pay obeisance to the excellent one, the bestower of boons.

Lomasga said:
38. Rudra who was eulogized by Daksa, spoke laughingly
in secret:

Rudra (Hara) said:

39. Four types of meritorious people always worship! me.
They are: (those who are in misery), those who are thirsting for
knowledge, the seekers of wealth and the possessors of spiritual’
knowledge, O excellent Brahmana.

40. Hence undoubtedly sages, possessors of true knowledge,
are my favourites. Those who strive to attain me without spiritual
knowledge are ignorant.

1. Anecho of BG VII. 16.

=== PAGE 34 ===

30 Skanda Purana

41. Merely by means of Karman (holy rites) you wish to
cross the (ocean of) worldly existence.

42. Neither by means of the Vedas nor by means of charit-
able gifts, neither by sacrifices nor by penance at any place can
they attain me. But due to the power of Karman men get
deluded.

43. Hence, be devoted to knowledge and perform holy rites
with concentration and purity of mind. Be equally indifferent to
happiness and misery and attain eternal happiness.

Lomasa said:

44. Thus Daksa was advised by Sarmbhu, the greatest god.
After establishing Daksa there itself, Rudra went back to his
mountain.

45. Similarly all the great sages beginning with Bhrgu were
consoled and enlightened by Brahma. Instantaneously they be-
came endowed with true knowledge.

46. Thereafter Brahma went to his abode.

47. Daksa too achieved the excellent enlightenment through
the utterance. Engrossed in the meditation of Siva, the noble-
minded one performed penance.

48. Hence Lord Siva should be served by means of all pos-
sible efforts.

49. Those men who sweep the courtyard of Siva (i.e. Siva’s
temple) attain Siva’s city and become worthy of the praise of the
whole universe.”

50. Those who offer a mirror of great lustre to Siva become
attendants of Siva and will be standing in front of Siva.

51. Those who give chowries to the Trident-bearing Lord of
Devas will themselves be fanned with chowries in all the three
worlds.

52. The men who offer lamps to the temple of Mahadeva
will become refulgent. They will be the illuminators of the three
worlds.

53. Those who offer incense to Siva, the great Atman, will

1. Cf. BG X1.46.

2. VV 49-62 describe the fruit of different types of services rendered to
Siva. Some of these verses are illustrated by stories of Siva’s devotees, the
benefit derived by them by their particular act of devotion.

=== PAGE 35 ===

1.i1,5.54-65 31

become famous. They redeem both the families (their own as
well as that of their mothers).

54. Those men who offer eatables (Naivedya) in front of
Hari and Hara with great devotion, attain the fruit of a sacrifice
for every lump of boiled rice offered by them (as Naivedya).

55. Those excellent men who repair a Siva temple in ruins
attain two-fold benefit. There is no doubt about it.

56. Those who build anew temple by means of bricks or
stones rejoice in heaven as long as their spotless fame stays in the
world. O excellent brahmanas, no doubt need be entertained
about this.

57. Those highly intelligent brahmanas who cause to build
a’ palatial temple of many floors for Siva, attain the greatest goal
{i.e. Moksa).

58. Those who clean or whitewash a temple of Siva built
by themselves or by others attain the greatest goal.

59. Those who offer a canopy are meritorious men. They go
to the world of Siva and redeem their entire family.

60. Those who tie a ringing bell in a temple of Siva will
become refulgent and well reputed in the three worlds.

61. He who visits (Siva’s temple) once, twice or thrice (a
day) attains happiness whether he is rich or poor. He gets releas-
ed from misery.

62. A religious faithful who offers worships unto Siva, the
great Atman, redeems ten million members of his family and
rejoices in the company of Siva.

63. Inthis context they cite this ancient legend, the con-
versation between the son of Indradyumna and the noble-minded
Yama.

64. Formerly, in Krtayuga, there was a king named Indra-
sena. He was a great warrior ruling Pratisthana. He was always
interested in hunting.

65. Unfriendly to brahmanas, he always indulged in horri-
ble and cruel misdeeds. He was always devoted to worldly plea-

1. VV 63-86 narrate the legend of Indrasena to show the efficacy of the
syllables HA-RA uttered as a part of words of different meaning (e.g. Ghara
‘pring’) simply because the name of god Siva is indirectly pronounced by
him.

=== PAGE 36 ===

32 Skanda Purana

sures only. That wicked king nourished his own self through the
lives of others. .

66. Ever-addicted to drinking wine, he very much sought
the company of other men’s wives. He coveted other men’s
wealth. Brahmanas were killed by him.

67. Hedefiledthe bed of his preceptor. He always stole gold.
All his followers too were of that nature. All the followers of
that evil-minded king committed sins like him.

68. Thus that vicious king ruled the kingdom indiverse
ways. Then, after a great decal of time, the wicked king died.

69. Then, this evil-minded Indrasena was taken away by the
followers of Yama. The sinful king thus came to the presence of
Yama.

70. Indrasena who was standing in front there, was seen by
Yama. He stood up and bent his head (in honour of) Siva.

71. Yama, the most excellent one among those who uphold
virtue, rebuked his messengers. After releasing Indrasena who
had been bound with nooses Dharmaraja (god Yama) spoke:

72-73. “O most excellent one among kings, go to the meri-
torious worlds and enjoy them as long as Indra stays in heaven,
as long as the sun is in the sky. Be happy as long as the five ele-
ments cxist. O great king, you are a man of meritorious deeds.
You are a permanent devotee of Siva.”

74. On hearing the words of Yama, Indrasena spoke: “I do
not know Siva. I am only a person interested in hunting.”

75-76. On hearing his words Yama spoke by way of cxpla-
nation: “The words ‘ahara’ (eat), ‘praharasva’ (attack) were always
uttered by you. As a result of that holy act, O bestower of
honour, you are permanently purified. Hence you do go to the
Kailasa mountain, to Sankara.”

77-78. Even as the noble-minded Yama was talking thus,
the messengers of Siva came there riding on bulls. They had
great refulgence. They were blue-throated, with ten arms, five
faces and three eyes. They had matted hair and wore ear-rings.
Their heads were markedly adorned with the crescent moon.

79. On seeing them, Yama, the most excellent one among
the upholders of virtue, stood up. He worshipped them all who
resembled the great Indra.

80. All of them hurriedly spoke to Yama, the son of Vivas-

=== PAGE 37 ===

1.i.5.81-91 33

van: “O lord of exalted fortune, did Indrasena of unmeasured
splendour come here? He is the person who continuously uttered
the name of the noble-minded Rudra.”

81. On hearing their words, Indrasena was honoured by
Yama and placed in an aerial chariot. He was then sent to the
abode of Siva.

82. He was brought in by the excellent attendants of Siva.
Then Indrasena of unmeasured splendour was seen by Sarhbhu.

83. Rudra stood up to welcome him, approached him and
embraced the king. He made Indrasena sit on half of his seat and
then said:

84. “O excellent king, what shall be given to you? What is
your desire? I shall give you whatever is desired by you.”

On hearing the words of the great Siva the king shed tears
of joy. (Overwhelmed) by love, he could not say anything.

85. Then he was made a Parsada (Attendant) by the noble-
minded Mahesga. He became famous by the name Canda. He
was a favourite friend of Munda.

86. Merely by uttering the name of Rudra, the supreme
soul. (former) sinful king Indrasena attained Siddhi.

87. By merely uttering ‘O Hari’, *‘O Hara’, the names of
Siva, the supreme soul, and of Visnu, the wielder of discus, many
men have been saved by Siva.

88. No other god greater than Mahega (Siva) can be seen
(found) in the three worlds. Hence Sadasiva should be worship-
ped by all the means.

89. He should always be worshipped with leaves, flowers,
fruits, even pure water, and with Karavira. And he becomes a
bestower of boons.

90. The flower of Arka (calotropis gigantea) is ten times
more efficacious than Karavira. The entire universe consisting of
mobile and immobile beings is made with Vibhiti (the sacred ash).

91. It is always present in the courtyard of Siva. Hence one
should always besmear oneself with it.

Henceforth, listen to the merit, O excellent brahmanas, of
Tripundra' (three parallel horizontal lines on the forehead)
drawn with sacred ash.

1. VV 91-96 describe the redeeming power of Tripundra.

=== PAGE 38 ===

34 Skanda Purana

92. It is meritorious and it dispels all sins. Listen to it, O
excellent brahmanas.

There was a certain thief who was a great sinner. He was
executed by the servants of the king.

93-95. A certain dog came there to eat him (his flesh) and
stood over his head. Some ash sticking between the claws of the
dog fell on the forehead of that sinner in the form of an impres-
sion similar to Tripundra. His body was without consciousness
but the ash fell on it. Therefore the thief was taken to Kailasa
by the messengers of Rudra. Who can specifically describe the
greatness of Vibhiiti (holy ash).

96. The men whose limbs are adorned with holy ash are
men of meritorious deeds. The men in whose mouth the
five-syllabled (Mantra), viz. namah Sivaya exists are undoubtedly
veritable Rudras.

97. Those who have a cluster of matted hair on their heads
and those who have Rudraksa beads as their ornaments, are
themselves Rudras in human form. There is no doubt about it.

98. Hence Sadasiva should be regularly worshipped by men
in the morning, at midday and in the evening. The time of dusk
is very excellent.

99. By seeing Sambhu during the morning, the sin of (com-
mitted at) the night is dispelled. By visiting Sarnbhu at midday
the sin incurred by men in the course of seven previous births
becomes quelled. (The merit of seeing Sarhbhu) at night cannot
be adequately calculated.

100. The two-syllabled name Si-va is destructive of great
sins. The whole universe is sustained by those men from whose
mouths the name issues out.

101. Even heretics and those who cling to false and hetero-
dox doctrines attain the greatest goal and people who are devo-
ted to sinful activities become sanctified if they hear the sound
of the Bheri (big drum) placed in the courtyard of Siva’s temple
by people of meritorious deeds.

102. There isno doubt about this that even that animal
attains Siva’s presence, whose hide is used in connection with
the Bheri, Mrdanga, Muraja and other types of drums placed in
Siva’s temple by men.

103-104, Hence the devotee should offer various things

=== PAGE 39 ===

1.i.5.105-112 . 35

pleasing to Sarhbhu in accordance with the injunctions, viz.
Tata and Vitata (stringed musical instruments such as lute etc.),
Ghana (cymbals, bells and gongs), Susira (flutes), very valuable
chowries, palanquins, beds, (singing) story poems, legends,
devotional music etc.

105-108. By offering these things even sinners go to the
world of Siva. (The following people get even better benefits:)
Men of good holy rites, noble-souled men proficient in the wor-
ship of Siva, those who are engaged in the worship of Siva
according to the procedure acquired directly from the (oral)
instructions of the preceptor, those persons of firm resolve who
see the universe as the form of Siva, persons of good conduct
with perfect intellect, men who adhere to the discipline of castes
and stages of life as well as others, brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisgyas,
Sidras and other men. Even a candala (devotee of Siva) is excel-
lent. He shall be a great favourite of Sarnbhu. The whole of this
universe including mobile and immobile beings is presided over
by Sarnbhu.

109-110. Hence it should be especially understood that
everything is identical with Siva. Sarnbhu should be known by
means of Vedas, Puranas, sacred treatises, Upanisads and
different kinds of Agamas. Sadasiva should be worshipped by
all people irrespective of their being with or without desires.

Lomasga said:

111. Ishall narrate an old legend describing an event that
happened long ago.

Formerly there was a vaisya named Nandin who lived in the
city of Avanti.2

112. He engaged himself in meditation on Siva and per-
formed his worship. Everyday he worshipped a Linga that was
in the penance grove.

1. VV 111-193 relate the legend of two devotees—Nandin, a vaisya, and
Mahdakala, a Kirfta (a tribal). Siva approved of the selfless devotion of
theignorant Kirata and not the ostentatious worship of Nandin, the vaisya.
It was due to the request of the Kirta that the rich vaisya was redeemed by
Siva and absorbed as his gaya (attendant).

=== PAGE 40 ===

36 Skanda Purana

113. He used to get up very early in the morning everyday.
Nandi, the lover of Siva, became excessively devoted to the
worship of the Linga.

114. He bathed the Liga in Paficamrta in the manner
prescribed (in scriptures). He was always surrounded by brah-
manas who had mastered Vedas and Veddngas (ancillaries to
Vedas).

115-116. He was devoted to the worship of the Liriga in
accordance with the injunctions of the sacred treatises. After
bathing the Linga duly, he always worshipped it with different
kinds of wonderful flowers, pearls, aspphires, Gomedas (Himalayan
gems), lapis lazuli, emeralds and rubies.

117. Thus Nandi of exalted fortune worshipped for many
years that Liga stationed in a lonely spot with different kinds of
offerings.

118. Once there was a Kirata (a forester) who was interested
in hunting and used to injure and kill animals. Being wreckless
he always cnjoyed hunting.

119. That wicked fellow of sinful activities used to wander
in mountains and caves teeming with beasts of prey, killing the
animals here and there.

120. In the course of his wandering that Kirata, a habitual
killer of animals, came by chance where the Liviga had been duly
worshipped.

121. He was extremely afflicted with thirst and looked for
water (everywhere). He saw a lake in the forest and immediatcly
entered the water.

122. The wicked fellow had placed everything he had got
by hunting, on the shore. He gargled, drank some water and
came out.

123-126. He saw in front of him the temple that had been
wonderfully embellished. The Liriga that had been excellently
worshipped by means of different kinds of gems was seen
(by him). After seeing the Liriga, when he began to offer his
worship, all the gems were tossed about here and there. Bathing
of the Liga was performed by him by means of a mouthful of
water. With one of his hands he offered Bilva leaves (aegle
marmelos) for the purpose of worship. With the other hand he

=== PAGE 41 ===

1.i.5.127-140 37

offered venison. After prostrating himself like a stick he men-
tally took the solemn vow to perform worship (as follows):

127. “From today onwards I shall strenuously perform the
worship. From today, O Sankara, you are my master and lam
your devotee.”

128. After having thus become a regular worshipper, the
Kirata returned home.

Nandi saw everything scattered here and there by the Kirata.

129. Nandi became anxious and worried: ‘What flaw is
this that has befallen me? Many obstacles have been mentioned
in the case of one who is engaged in the worship of Siva. Owing
to my misfortune all those obstacles have beset me.”

130. After pondering thus for a long time, he washed the
temple of Siva. Nandi then returned to his house along the path
by which he had gone.

131. The priest approached Nandi (as he was found) dejec-
ted in his mind. He spoke these words: ‘‘Why have you become
dejected in your mind?”

132-133. Nandi then spoke these words to his priest: ‘‘O
brahmana, impure things have been seen by me today in the
vicinity of Siva. I do not know at all by whom this has been
caused.”

134-140. Then the priest spoke these words to Nandin:
“The person by whom the offerings of gems etc. have been scat-
tered is a deluded one. There is no doubt. He is a stupid fellow
not aware of what should be or should not be done. Hence, O
lord, do not worry in the least. Be pleased to go to that temple
of Siva in the morning along with me in order to see that wicked
fellow. Thereafter, 1 shall do what should be done.”” On hearing
these words of his priest, Nandin remained in his house during
the night with his mind extremely pained.

When the night passed, he called the priest and went to the
temple of Siva. Nandi went there along with that noble-souled
one. Thereafter, what was done by that wicked one the previous
day was seen.

Nandi performed the worship elaborately with different
kinds of gems for the requisite things. The five Upacaras (modes
of service in the course of the worship) and recitation of Rudra
hymns eleven times while bathing the god were duly performed.

=== PAGE 42 ===

38 Skanda Purdna

He eulogized Giriga with various hymns and prayers in the com-
pany of brahmanas. Two Yamas (i-e. six hours) were thus spent
by Nandi engaged in eulogy.

141, Indeed, at that time, there arrived (the Kirata called)
Mahakala who was of the same form (as before). He was extre-
mely powerful, very hideous and dreadful like the god of Death.
He was valorous and armed with a bow in his hand.

142. On seeing him Nandi was excessively frightened and he
cried. The priest too was suddenly struck with fear.

143. Everything was done by the Kirata scrupulously as
before. With the forepart of his foot he kicked aside the (pre-
vious) worship by Nandi and offered leaves of Bilva (instead).

144. The bathing rite was performed by means of the
mouthful of water. The Naivedya (food offering) was the picce
of flesh. Thus the Kirata offered everything to Siva.

145-147. He prostrated himself on the ground like a staff of
wood. Then he rose up and went to his abode. On seeing that
extremely wonderful incident, he (Nandi) thought about it for a
long time. Along with the priest, Nandi was agitated in his mind
as he pondered over this. Many brahmanas, expounders of the
Vedas, were invited by him. He recounted to them everything
performed by the Kirata and asked them: ‘““What should be done,
O brahmanas? Let everything be explained accurately.”

148. Allofthem met together and ascertained the matter
from the point of Dharma Sastra. Then, all those brahmanas
spoke to Nandin who was extremely frightened and suspicious:

149. “This obstacle that has sprung up cannot be warded
off even by Devas. Hence, O excellent vaigya, bring that Linga
to your own abode.”

150-151. He honoured their suggestion saying, ‘“‘So be it’’.
Then Nandi dug out that Sivalinga, brought it to his own house
and consecrated it duly after placing it on a golden pedestal
rendered splendid by means of the nine precious stones. He then
performed the Pajd with various kinds of rites and articles of
worship.

152. The next day the Kirata came to the temple of Siva
and on glancing about could not see the Liriga of Iga.

153-157. Breaking his silence suddenly he shouted loudly
and spoke thus: “O Sambhu, where have you gone? Reveal your-

=== PAGE 43 ===

Li.5.158-173 39

self to me now. If you are not seen now, I will give up my body.
O Sarhbhu, O lord of the universe, O destroyer of Tripura, O
Rudra, O Mahadeva, reveal your form yourself.”’

Thus, by means of sweet words of apparent rebuke Sadasiva
was disrespected by the Kirata. Then that heroic forester tore up
his belly with his nails. Stroking his arms he said angrily, “O
Sarnbhu, reveal yourself. Where will you go abandoning me?”

158. After scolding thus, the Kirata cut the flesh all round
and took out the intestines. With his hand he threw them
suddenly into that pit.

159-161. He steadied his heart and took bath in that lake.
Similarly he brought water and Bilva leaves hurriedly. He wor-
shipped the lord duly and prostrated on the ground stretching
himself like a stick of wood. Thereafter the Kirata remained there
in the presence of Siva engaged in meditation. Thereupon, Rudra
surrounded by Pramathas, revealed himself to him.

162. The moon-crested lord Rudra who was white like cam-
phor and who was refulgent with matted hair, grasped him by the
hand and assuaged him consolingly.

163. “O heroic one of great intcllect, you are my
devotee. Choose a boon conducive to your own welfare. O highly
intelligent one, (speak) whatever is intensely desired by you.”

164. On being addressed thus by Rudra, Mahakala became
joyous. Endowed with great devotion, he fell down on the ground
like a stick of wood.

165-167. Then he spoke to Rudra: “I request for the boon.
O Rudra, there is no doubt about (the fact) that I am your slave.
You are my lord and master. Realizing this, grant me devotion
unto you in every birth, You are my mother. You are my father
too. You are my kinsman and friend. You are the preceptor. You
are the great Mantra. You are always worthy of being known
through the Mantras. Hence in the three worlds there is nothing
else than you.”

168. On hearing these words of the Kirata, devoid of desire,
Siva granted him the position of the chief of his attendants and
the post of his doorkeeper.

169-173. Then the three worlds were filled with the sound
of Dumaru (a kind of drum), with the booming sound of the big
drum Bheri and the sound of conchs. Then thousands of Dun-

=== PAGE 44 ===

40 Skanda Purana

dubhis and Patahas (different kinds of drums) were sounded. On
hearing that sound Nandi was surprised. He hurried to the place
in the penance grove where Siva was present surrounded by
Pramathas. The Kirata too was scen exactly like that by Nandi.
Nandi who was surpriscd much, spoke these words humbly. He
became desirous of eulogizing the Kirata with great intentness:
“§armbhu was brought here by you. O scorcher of enemies, you
are (his real) devotee. Iam your devotee and have come here.
Mention about me to Sankara.”

174. On hearing his words, the Kirdta grasped Nandi by the
hand and hurriedly approached Sankara.

175. Lord Rudra laughingly spoke these words to the
Kirata: ‘Who is this person brought by youin the presence of
the Ganas?”

176. Sankara, the benefactor of all the worlds, was then in-
formed by the Kirata:

Kirdta said:

This is your devotec, O lord. He is always engaged in your
worship.

177-178. Everyday you have been worshipped by him with
gems and rubies, flowers of various kinds, with his own life as
well as wealth. There is no doubt about this. Hence know that he
is my friend, Nandin, O lord favourably disposed towards your
devotees.

Mahddeva said:

179. T donot know, O highly fortunate one, Nandi, the
vaisya mentioned (by you), (but) O Mahakala of great intellect,
shall accept him) because you are my devotee as well as friend.

180. Those who are free from fraud, and are of lofty mind,
are dear devotees of mine. They are excellent men.

181. Heis your devotee and hence he is a dearer friend to me.

Thus both of them were accepted by Sarnbhu as his atten-
dants.

182. Then many aerial chariots of great lustre arrived there.
That excellent vaisya was redeemed by that excellent Kirata of
great refulgence.

=== PAGE 45 ===

1.i.5.183-197 41

183. By means of aerial chariots of great speed both of
them arrived at Mount Kailasa. They attained the state of hav-
ing the same form as that of the noble-souled Isvara.

184. Waving of the light was performed by Girija to both
of them along with Siva. Thereupon, the goddess with a graceful
gait of an elephant laughingly said to Siva:

185-188. “Just as you are, so also are these, undoubtedly
in form as well as mode of walking. They are well-honoured with
smiles and friendliness. Hitherto you alone had been served by
me, no doubt.”

On hearing the words of the goddess, the Kirata and the
vaisya turned their faces aside immediately even as Sankara was
observing. (They said:) ‘“We are to be sympathized by you alone,
Othree-cyed lord. We shall perpetually stand at your door.
Obeisance, obeisance to you.”

189. Knowing their intention, Bhava laughingly said: “On
account of your great devotion may your desire be fulfilled.”

190. Ever since then both of them became the gatekeepers.
They stood at the doorway of Siva, O brahmanas. They had the
vision of Siva during midday.

191. One was Nandi and the other Mahakala. Both of them
were lovers of Siva. Both of them joyously talked to Sadasiva
who was one.

192-193. Mahadeva talked to them lifting up one of his
fingers. Similarly Nandi said lifting up two of his fingers. Thus
with the gestures and signs they stand at the entrance to the
abode of the noble-souled (lord) Sankara. O highly fortunate
sages, listen.

194-197. Formerly the unlimited pious rites of Siva had
been proclaimed by Sailida out of sympathy, O brahmanas, for
evil-minded living beings, sinners, impious people, blind ones,
dumb beings, lame ones, those of ignoble births, evil-minded
ones, candalas, and other persons whatever their nature may be.
If they are endowed with devotion to Siva, they go to the pre-
sence of the trident-bearing lord of Devas. Those learned men
who worship a Linga made of sand, go to Rudraloka un-
doubtedly.

=== PAGE 46 ===

42 Skanda Purana
CHAPTER SIX

Curse to Brahma and Others

The sages enquired:

1. How did the pre-eminence of Linga, exclusive of Siva,
come to be established? O highly fortunate sage, let this be
narrated to us who are eagerly desirous of learning it.

Lomaga said:

2-4. Lord Sarnbhu wandered about in the forest Daruvana
for the sake of begging alms.! The sole lord of the worlds with
quarters for his garments (i.e. naked), having the cluster of his
matted hair loosened, that lord who can be understood only
through Vedanta (i.e. Upanisads), the great lord, the greatest
among leading Yogins, the sole supporter of the group of worlds
is greater than the greatest. He isthe great lord of the worlds
with exalted dignity. That noble-souled Igvara assumed the form
of a mendicant; begged for alms in the Daruvana forest.

5. At midday the sages, O brahmanas, went to the sacred
places (for bath) from their hermitages. At that very time, all the
wives of those sages came there.

6-8 Onseeing Sarhbhu they spoke to one another, “Who is
this personage of uncommon appearance, who has come here in
the form of a mendicant? We along with our friends shall give
him alms,” Saying, “So be it”, they went home and joyously
brought various kinds of food as alms. They were fine and
delicate. They offered everything in accordance with their
capacity but with due honour and gentle behaviour. The alms
begged for by the Trident-bearing Lord of Devas were (duly
given to him).

9-12. One of the ladies who was struck with wonder asked
Sarnbhu who endeared himself very much to her: ‘Who are you,
O excessively intelligent one? Why have you come here asa
mendicant? This is the sacred hermitage of sages. Why do you

1. The story of Siva’s visit to Daruvana and dropping of his Phallus
when cursed by sages, is found in other Puranas also (e.g. KP II.3.8-39,
BdP L.ii.27). The peculiar behaviour of Siva is called Dvdra in Pasupata
Sutras.

=== PAGE 47 ===

1Li.6.13-23 43

not sit here in our hermitage?’’ On being asked thus by her,
Sambhu said laughingly:

“I am Ivara, O lady with excellent tresses; I have come to
this holy place.”” On hearing the words of Isvara (Siva) the wife
of the sage asked him:

“(You say that) you are Igvara (Siva), O gentle Sir, of
exalted fortune. You are the lord of the Kailasa mountain. But,
O lord, how does it happen that you are begging for alms alone
and single?’

13-14. On being asked thus by her, Sarhbhu said to her once
again these words: ‘Iam bereaved of Daksayani. Hence I wander
about nude for the purpose of begging alms, O lady of excellent
hips. I am free from any wish or desire or any expectation of
advantage from anybody. O beautiful lady, without Sati all the
women in the world do not at all appeal to me. I am speaking
the truth to you, O lady of large eyes.”

15-16. On hearing the words spoken by him, the lotus-eyed
lady said: ‘‘There is no dcubt that women really accord pleasure
by their touch unto man. Such pleasurable women, O Sambhu,
have been eschewed by a learned man like you!”

17-21. In this manner all young women gathered together
at the place where Sankara was (standing). The alms-bowl of
Sarnbhu was filled with cooked food of very good quality. Four
types of foodstuffs with all the six tastes filled his bowl.

When Sambhu was desirous of returning to the Kailisa
mountain, all those wives of brahmanas joyously followed him
forsaking their domestic duties. With their minds attached to
him, they walked on and on (after him).

When all those wives (of sages) had left thus, the excellent
sages reached their hermitages and found them empty and
vacant. They spoke to one another, “Where have all these women
(our wives) gone? We do not know by what damned fellow they
have been abducted.’’ Pondering and deliberating thus they
searched here and there.

22. Thereupon they saw that they had been following Siva.
On seeing Siva, the sages angrily closed in upon him.

23. Standing in front of Siva, all of them said with impetuo-
sity, ‘What has been done by you, O Sarhbhu (who profess to be)

=== PAGE 48 ===

44 Skanda Puradna

detached and noble-souled? You are no doubt the kidnapper of
the wives of others, i.e. of us, the sages.”

24. Although rebuked thus, Siva silently went of towards
his mountain. Then that immutable Mahadeva was overtaken
by the sages. (They then cursed him thus:) “Since you are the
abductor of (our) wives, be instantaneously a eunuch.”

25. Thus cursed by the sages, his penis fell down on the
ground. As soon as it reached the ground, it became very large
immcdiately and it increased in size (enormously).

26-31. From beneath and above, the Linga covered the seven
Patalas in an instant. Then it pervaded the entire earth and
enveloped the firmament. Allthe heavens were covered. Then
it rose beyond the heavens. There was no earth, no quarters,
neither water nor fire, neither wind nor ether, neither Cosmic
Ego (Ahmkara) nor the Great Principle (Mahat), neither the Un-
manifest One (Avyakta) nor the Time and no great Primordial
Matter (Prakrti). There was no dualistic division. Everything
became merged in an instant. Since the entire universe became
Lina (merged) in that Linga of the great Atman (it came to be
called so).

‘Learned men say that it is called Liiga because of
Layana (merging of the universe). On sceing such a Liriga rising
further and further, the celestial sages, Brahma, Indra, Visnu,
Vayu, Agni and the Guardians of the Quarters and the serpents
were filled with surprise in their minds. They spoke to one an-
other:

32. “What is the length (of this Linga)? What is its girth?
Where is its top? Where is its pedestal?” All the Suras who were
worried with thoughts like these then said to Visnu:

Devas said:

33. Its root must be seen by you, O Visnu. O lotus-born
Brahma, its head must be seen by you.! Then you can justifiably
be called protectors,

1. This legend explains why the leaf of Ketaki is not used in Siva’s
worship and why god Brahma is not generally worshipped. This legend has
no basis in Mahabharata and Valmiki’s Ramayana. Here gods requested
Visnu to trace the root of the Linga as he was a Varaha and due to Brahma’s

=== PAGE 49 ===

Li.6.34-45 45

34. Visnu and the Lotus-born god Brahma both of whom
were (gods) of exalted fortune, heard this. Visnu went to the
nether worlds and Brahma went to heaven.

35. When he reached heaven, Brahma eagerly looked (every-
where) but that clever (lord) did not see the top of that Linga.

36. So the Lotus-born (Lord) returned along the path he
had gone and reached the top of Meru. There he was seen by
Surabhi (Divine Cow).

37. She was standing inthe shade of a Ketaki plant and
spoke to him in sweet words. On hearing her words, the grand-
father of all the worlds spoke laughingly to Surabhi in deceptive
words:

38-41. “An extraordinarily wonderful Liriga which has per-
vaded the entire region of the three worlds was seen; 1 was
deputed by Devas to see its top. Iam extremely worried as to
what I should report in the presence of Devas as the top of
that all-pervading Linga of the noble-souled (lord) was not seen.
Though it is untrue, you should tell Devas that the top
ofthe Liga has been seen. If all the groups of Devas like
Indra and others were to ask you, ‘Have you witnessed?’, you
shall say quickly, ‘In this matter, O Devas, there are witnesses’.
In this matter, O lady of good holy rites, you do be my wit-
ness along with the Ketaki flower.”

42-43. Accepting the suggestion of Brahma Paramesthin
with her head (bent down respectfully), Surabhi in the company
of the Ketaki flower honoured it. Arriving thus in front of
Devas, Brahma spoke:

Brahma said:

44. Thave seen the wonderful top of the Linga,O Devas.
It was duly worshipped by me with Ketaki petals. It is large,
soft and spotlessly pure.

45. It is beautiful and fascinating. It is wonderfully lustrous
and excessively refulgent.

association with swans, the latter was sent to explore the top. In other Pura-
mas we are told that Siva appeared in the form of a column of fire to resolve
the conflict between Brahma& and Visnu about personal superiority and
showed them that he was superior to them both.

=== PAGE 50 ===

46 Skanda Purana

46. Such a Linga was seen by me. Like that I have not seen
anything else anywhere else.

On hearing the words of Brahma, Devas were struck with
wonder.

47-52. Even as the groups of Devas beginning with Indra
stood thus filled with wonder, Visnu, the lord of all, the bestower
of spiritual illumination, came there from Pataéla. Immediately
he reported to all: (Although) I was eager to see its end, it (the
end of the Liga) has not been seen by me. As I was moving further
from Patala, I was struck with great wonder. I went through
Atala, Sutala, Nitala, Rasatala, Patala and Tala and Talatala.
Everything appeared empty and void. Even the most vacant
place of all was examined well. But it has neither root nor
middle nor top. Mahadeva by whom this universe is sustained
is the one in the form of Liga. It was due to his grace that you
and the sages were born.”

53. On hearing his words Suras and sages honoured him.
Then Visnu spoke thus laughingly to Brahma:

54. “If, O Brahma, the top has been truly seen by you, who
are the witnesses you have had in this matter?”

55-58. On hearing the words of Visnu, Brahma, the grand-
father of the worlds, hurriedly said, ““Ketaki and Surabhi. O
Devas, these two may be known as my eye-witnesses.” On hear-
ing the words of Brahma, all Devas hurriedly sent for Surabhi
along with Ketaki. The two instantaneously came there for the
work of Brahma.

Thereafter Surabhi was asked by Devas beginning with
Indra. She said thus together with Ketaki: “Indeed, O Devas,
The top of the Liga was seen by Brahma and worshipped with
the petals of Ketaki.”

59-60. Even as all of them listened, an ethereal voice was
heard from the sky: ‘‘Understand, O gods, that what is deposed
by Surabhi and Ketaki is a false statement. Its top has not
been seen (by Brahma).”

61. Then all Devas along with Indra and Visnu angrily
cursed Surabhi who was intent to utter falsehood:

62. ‘O splendid one, today a lie has been thus uttered by

=== PAGE 51 ===

1.i.6.63—L.i.7.3 47

your mouth. Let your mouth be unholy and impure. Let it be
excluded from all religious rites.

63. Even though fragrant, O Ketaki, you shall be unsuitable
for the worship of Siva. There is no doubt about it, O good
lady, that you have lied.”

64-68. Then the ethereal voice cursed Brahma: “O stupid
one, why has falsehood been uttered childishly by you? (Why
have you done this) along with Bhrgu, the sages and the priest?
Hence you will never be worthy of worship. You will suffer from
pain. The sages (who ought to be) virtuous will be excluded from
truthful statements. They will be deluded, engaged in disputes,
jealous and unaware of true knowledge. They will be beggars
and worthy of being cut to pieces. They will perpetually ruin
their own knowledge. They will boast tof themselves. They will
be stubborn and will censure one another.”

Thus Devas beginning with Brahma, as well as the sages were
cursed. All of them, cursed by Siva sought refuge in Lirga.

CHAPTER SEVEN

Worship of the Linga

Lomasa said:

1, Then all those Suras and even the sages became fright-
ened. Brahma and others who became perturbed and distressed
on account of their knowledge (of their mistake) eulogized the
Liga of Lord Siva.

Brahma said:

2. Youwho have assumed the Lirigaform, are of great
miraculous power. You who are of the form of the Supreme
Soul, are knowable (only) through Vedanta (Upanisads). It
is by you who is ever engrossed in Bliss that the universe which
is rooted in you, has been created.

3. You are the witness unto all the worlds. You are the

=== PAGE 52 ===

48 Skanda Purana

annihilator of all. You are the protector, O Mahadeva. You
are Bhairava, O lord of universe.

4. This unit of the three worlds has been pervaded by you
in the form of Liga. O lord, we are insignificant creatures
whose minds are deluded by Maya.

5. We, viz. 1, Suras, Asuras, all the Yaksas, Gandharvas
and Raksasas, serpents, Pisacas and these Vidyadharas, are all
deluded.

6-7. You are the creator of the creators of the universe.
You are indeed the lord and ruler of the universe. You, the
Supreme Person, are (both) the creator and annihilator of the
universe.

Protect everything belonging to us. O Mahadeva. Obeisance

to you, O god of Devas.

Thus the great lord in the form of Linga was eulogized
by Brahma.

8. The sages who were desirous of eulogizing Mahesvara.
the sinless one, eulogized with very great eagerness and respect
by means of excellent words recorded in the Vedas.

The sages said:

9. We are all ignorant. On account of lust, we do not re-
cognise your status. Indeed you are the Soul, the Supreme Soul.
You are the Prakrti, the evolver (of everything).

10. You are our mother. You alone are our father. You
are our kinsman. You alone are our friend. You alone are
Igvara. You are conversant with the Vedas. You are always
meditated upon by persons of great magnanimity.

11. Youarethe immanent Soul of all living beings, like
flame of all fuel. Since everything takes its origin from you, you
are forever Sarva.

12. The lord is called Sarnbhu because Samm (happiness)
takes its origin from him.

13. All of us, Devas and others (such as) sages, celestial
Gandharvas, Vidyadharas, great serpents have resorted to your
lotus-like feet.

14. Hence, with mercifulness, O Sarnbhu, O lord of the
universe, protect us.

=== PAGE 53 ===

1.1.7.15-24 49

Mahadeva said:

15. Listen to my word now. Let it be carried out immedia-
tely. May all of you pray to Visnu,! O ascetics, with immediate
effect.

16. On hearing the word of the noble-souled Sankara, all
those Suras bowed down to Visnu and eulogized him.

Devas said:

17. Vidyadharas, groups of Suras, all the sages, everyone
has been saved by you today, O sole kinsman of the universe.
In that manner, O merciful one, O lord of the three worlds, O
lord of the universe, O abode of the universe, protect all the
people.

18-19. Lord Visnu laughed loudly and spoke these words
then: “Formerly you were oppressed by Daityas and protected
by me. But today a great danger of everlasting nature has
arisen from this Linga. It is not possible for me to protect
you, O Suras, from the danger from this Linga.”’

20. On being told thus by Visnu, Devas became worried.
Thereupon an ethereal voice spoke thus, consoling all the Suras:

21. “O Janardana, choose this Liga for worship. Becom-
ing a mass of refulgence, O mighty one, protect the mobile and
immobile beings.”’

Saying ‘‘so be it” and honouring it, Lord Virabhadra worship-
ped it.?

22. At that time, the noble-souled Virabhadra, having the
moon for his crest and engaged in carrying out the orders of
Siva, was worshipped by the groups of Suras beginning with
Brahma, collectively. Virabhadra was a favourite of Siva and
was on a par with Rudra in the three worlds.

23-24. Then Virabhadra was absorbed in worshipping the
Linga. It (the Liga) had the same form wherefrom the entire
universe takes it origin, derives sustenance and gets merged with
it. The excellent ones among those who are the knowers of the

1, This is how Puranas tried to bring together followers of Saivism and
Vaisnavism.

2. Or, was Virabhadra worshipped by them? The next verse shows that
Virabhadra was worshipped by Suras,

=== PAGE 54 ===

50 Skanda Purana

Reality call it Linga, because of its being a place of rest (to the
absorbed).

25. The Linga became pervaded by the spheres of the
Cosmic Eggs. It was embellished with Rudradksas. It grew so
large that it could not be surpassed by anyone.

26-27. Then all Devas and sages of great lustre eulogized
the great Liga by means of the Vedic words (Mantras) sepa-
rately:

“O lord, you are minuter than the atom. So also you are
greater than the greatest. Hence, O lord Siva, you must make
such arrangements as to make the worship of the Liga easy for
everyone.””

28-35. At that time itself, many types of Lingas were evolv-
ed by Sarva (Siva)!, viz. the Brahmegvara Lingain the world
called Satya (god Brahma’s region), Sada@iva Liga in Vaikuntha,
a well-established Liga named Amare§vara in Amaravati
(Indra’s capital), Varupesvara Linga in the city of Varuna, Lord
Kalesvara in the city of Yama, Nairrtesvara Linga in the city of
Nirsti, Pavanes§vara Linga inthe city of Vayu, in the Mrtyu-
loka? Kedara Linga as well as Amaresvara, Omkara Linga as well
as Mahdakdla in the Narmada (region), Lord Visvesvara in Kasi,
Lalitesvara in Prayaga, Triyambaka in Brahmagiri (Nasik Dis-
trict) as well as Bhadre§vara in Kali, DradksdrameSvara' Linga
in the place of the Union of Ganga with ocean, the Linga
remembered as SomeSvara in Saurastra, Sarvesvara Linga
onthe Vindhya, Sikharegvara Linga on Srigaila, Mallalanatha®
(2) in Kanti, Simhanatha in Singala (Simnhala), so also many
Lingas such as Viriipdksa Linga, Kofisankara, Tripurantaka,
Bhime§a, Amaresvara, Bhoge§vara and Hatake§vara in Patala.
These and many other Lingas of this sort were installed in all
the three worlds by Devas for helping the entire universe.

1. The list of Lizigas and their locations shows that the Lifiga is worship-
ped in the three worlds and by great gods like Brahma, Visnu, Indra and
others,

2. This list covers most of the Jyotirlingas in India.

3. G.M. (Guru Mandala edition of SkP) reads instead: kamadam malli-
natham ‘Mallinatha who confers desired objects’.

=== PAGE 55 ===

1.1.7.36-46 51

36. And thus all the three worlds became full of great
Lingas. Similarly, gods created VirabhadramSas (portions of
Virabhadra) for worship.

37. There were twenty-eight Samskaras (consecratory rites)
there in the process of worship of Liviga. They were mentioned
by Sankara himself.

38-41. There are eternal Sivadharmas mentioned by Rudra
where Virabhadra, Rudra and other Gurus (preceptors) are re-
membered. The sons of Gurus also have become famous in the
three worlds as Gurus. Only Nandi knows factually the great-
ness of Linga. So also lord Skanda and those others who bear
his names.

Allthe Sivadharmas have been glorified as mentioned by
Nandi, the son of Silada. Many wonderful persons of exalted
nature have been glorified as bearers of Lingas.}

‘Linga is held above a dead body by the ancient people.

42. Living with Linga and dying with Linga—these virtuous
rites have been established by Sailada (Nandin).

43-45. The religion of the Pasgupata established by Skanda
is the most excellent one. The five-syllabled Mantra (Na-mah-
Si-va-ya) is the purest. Then comes the Prdsadi (Omkdra)
Mantra. The six-syllabled Mantra (Om, na-mah-Si-vd-ya) is the
illuminator of the Pranava.?

From Skanda it was acquired by the noble-souled Agastya.
Afterwards due to the difference in the preceptors, many Agamas
were composed.

46. Of what avail is much talk? Those who utter the two

1. This is not a reference to the Lingayata cult. Inscriptions from North
Karnatak and (western) Andhra testify to the existence of a Saiva cult
(Simmha Parisad) of Kashmira Brahmins who followed Lakuldgama. They
worshipped Siva in the Liriga-form and wore Linga on their persons. They
received royal grants for conducting Pdthasalas to teach Veda, Vedanta,
Yoga. Their temples and Mathas along with educational institutes were
taken over by Lingayatas in the 13th century. (Vide S.C. Nandimath, A Hand
Book of Virasaivism, Dharwar 1942.) I have dealt with this problem in my
work Saiva Philosophy which is being published by MEP (Marathi Encyclo-
paedia of Philosophy) Council, Pune. (Translator)

2. In Mantra Sastra, Omkara Bija is called Prasdda.

=== PAGE 56 ===

52 Skanda Purdya

syllables Si-va everyday are Rudras themselves.! There is no
doubt in this matter.

47. Those who follow the path of good people are all
Purantakas (Siva), They should be known as heroes of Mahes-
vara.? They destroy the sins of men.

48. Those who perform rites of devotion incidentally, as a
consequence of something else, by chance or as an act of faith,
attain the goal of the good.

49. Listen. I shall narrate an old legend in this connection.
Sweeping was performed formerly by a female bird in a temple
of Siva.

50. It had come (into the temple) for the sake of food. The
Naivedya was offered by someone. When it fluttered its wings,
the dust particles happened to be swept away.

51. Asaresult of that meritorious deed, she went to the
excellent heaven. After enjoying the heavenly pleasures, she came
back to the fierce world once again.

52. She was born as the daughter of the king of Kasi. She
became famous by the name Sundari. Thanks to the previous
experience, that girl of auspicious features became a great chaste
lady.

53. Early in the morning, the lady of slender limbs was
always present at the doorway of the temple of Siva. With great
devotion she used to sweep the premises.

54. The gentle princess, Sundari, did everything herself. On
secing her in that activity, Uddalaka, the sage, enquired:

55-56. “O girl of splendid features, youare delicate in body.
Why do you sweep yourself, O girl of bright smiles? O gentle
lady, you have in front of you many men and women servants.
At your bidding they will do all the sweeping work etc.”

57. Onhearing those words of the sage, she laughingly
said thus:

58-60a. “The men and women who render service to Siva,
those who are prompted by devotion to Siva, do go to the

1. The importance of uttering God’s name has been emphasized all over

India by Saints and Acdryas even today.
2. Vira Mahesvarah. Is the term (name of a sect) ‘Vira-Saiva’ derived

from this?

=== PAGE 57 ===

1i.7.60b—Li.8.5 53

world of Siva. The sweeping must be done by one’s own hands.
One should go to the temple on one’s own foot. Hence, sweeping
is done by me unweariedly. I do not know anything else, except-
ing the single act of sweeping.”’*

60b-62. On hearing her words, the sage pondered: ‘Who is
she? What has been done by her previously? By whose favour
(did she get all these)?’ Then everything was understood by the
sage through the eye of (the power of his) spiritual knowledge.

63. Struck with wonder, he became silent. After knowing
it, he became surprised. Thinking about the power of Siva,
Uddalaka, the most excellent among the learned ones, attained
the greatest enlightenment. He became calm and quiescent.

CHAPTER EIGHT

The Story of a Thief: Incarnation of Rama

Lomasga said:

1-3. O Brahmanas, once there was a great sinner.2 He was
a thief. He was excommunicated from all religious rites. He was
a Brahmana-slayer, a drink-addict and a thief of gold. He sought
the company of excellent women in an illicit way. He was stupid
and slow and always engaged in gambling along with gamblers
and cunning fellows. Once while playing, he lost wonderfully
(large amount). Smashed and hit by rogues and gamblers, he did
not speak anything.

4-5. Though he was harassed and tormented, he kept quiet.
Then that great sinner was asked thus by them: “‘You have lost
this much wealth in the game of dice. Are you going to give it
or not? O wicked fellow, let this be told immediately and

1. The fruit of rendering slightest service to Siva, even unknowingly, is
highly efficacious. The Purana abounds in such legends.

2. Lord Siva is extremely kind even to wicked robbers. The superb
magnanimity of Siva is illustrated in this story in which a gambler-thief is
elevated as his Gana by Siva.

=== PAGE 58 ===

34 Skanda Purdna

precisely.” Then he said: ‘What has been lost by me, I shalt
give at night.”

6. Thanks to that statement, he was released by them. Those
gamblers and rogues then went away. Then at mid-night he
went to the temple of Siva.

7. Climbing on tothe head of Sathbhu, he attempted to
take the bell. At that time on the peak of Kailasa, Sarnbhu said
to his servants:

8. ‘What has been done by this fellow today is far superior
to anything done by anyone on the earth. He isthe most excel-
lent one among all my devotees, hence he is my great favourite.”

9. After saying this, he commanded the Ganas beginning
with Virabhadra to bring him (the thief-gambler). They hurriedly
started from Kailasa, the favourite (resort) of Siva.

10. The three worlds were filled with the sound of Damarus
by all of them. On seeing them, the evil-minded thief got down
suddenly from the top of the Lifga and took to his heels im-
mediately.

11-14. On seeing him fleeing, Virabhadra called him: “Whom
do you fear, O stupid fellow? Maheégvara, the lord of Devas,
has been pleased with you, as he is very liberal-minded.””

After saying thus and placing him in the aerial chariot, he
came to Kailasa. The thief was made an attendant by that noble-
souled (lord).

Hence, devotion to Siva must be preserved and cultivated by
all embodied beings. Even animals will be worthy of being wor-
shipped thereby. What to say of men on the earth?

15-16. The followers of Tarka-Sdastra are engaged in abstract
reasoning and arguments.! So are the followers of the Mimamsa
School. They go on arguing and disputing among themselves.
And there are others who deliberate on and discuss about the
existence, nature etc. of the Soul, but never reach any unanimity,
or reconciliation of (their) differences. They are excluded from
the worship of Siva. Without Siva, of what significance are
they, by whom only arguments are forwarded?

17. Of what avail is much talk? All mobile and immobile
beings, all animals too, are born bearing the Lirga.

“1. Devotion to God is superior to learning. This teaching has been incul-
cated by all Indian saints since the days of this Purana.

=== PAGE 59 ===

Li.8.18-28 55

18. Just as the Linga is placed (and consecrated) in con-
junction with the Pingf (globular solid pedestal), so also men
are endowed with Lingas and women are Pindis.

19. The entire universe consisting of the mobile and
immobile beings is endowed with (the union of) Siva and Sakti.
Those are foolish fellows who, out of delusion, eschew devotion
to such Siva and worship others.

20. Their Dharma is extremely insignificant, perishable and
momentary. He who is Visnu should be known as Siva. He
who is Siva is Visnu alone.?

21. The pedestal is the form of Visnu and Mahesgvara is in
the form of Lirga. Hence the worship of Linga, O Brahmanas, is
excellent for everyone.

22. Brahma worships a Ruby-Livga always, Indra worships
a Linga made of gems and Candra (the Moon-god) one of pearls.

23. Bhanu (the Sun-god) always worships a splendid copper
(-coloured) Linga. Kubera worships a golden Liiga and Varuna
a Linga red in colour.

24. Yama worships a sapphire Linga, Nairrta worships a
silver Linga, Pavana (Wind-god) always worships a saffron Liriga
of the lord.

25. Thus, all Guardians of the Quarters including Indra have
been characterised as worshippers of Linga. So are all (persons)
in the nether world and also Gandharvas and Kinnaras.

26-27. Among Daityas, O Brahmanas, there are certain
devotees of Visnu, the chief of whom was Prahlada.? So also
among Raksasas, those having Vibhisana as their leader.
So also (were) Bali, Namuci, Hiranyakasipu, Vrsaparvan, Vrsa,
Sarnhrada and Bana.

28. These and many others who were the disciples of the
intelligent Sukra were engaged in worshipping Siva. All these
Daityas and Danavas (were devotees of Siva).

1. The identity of Siva and Visnu is repeated ad nauseam. The pedestal
which was stated as Sakti above in v. 19, is now stated to be Visnu and the
Linga is Siva. Thus Siva and Visnu become identical and therefore Vaisna-
vas are advised not to express aversion to Siva.

2. As Visnu and Siva are united in the Liriga and its pedestal, worship of
Siva-Linga is automatically the worship of Visnu who is there as the pedestal.
So the Vaignavas need not entertain any aversion to Liriga-worship.

=== PAGE 60 ===

56 Skanda Purdga

29-32. All the following were Raksasas and they were al-
ways engaged in the worship of Siva. They were: Heti, Praheti,
Sarnyati, Vighasa, Praghasa, Vidyujjihva, Tiksnadarstra, Dhim-
raksa of terrible valour, Mali, Sumali and the extremely terrible
Malyavan, Vidyutkesa, Tadijjihva, Ravana of great strength, the
invincible Kumbhakarna and Vegadarsi of great valour. These
were great Raksasas, who were always engaged in worshipping
Siva. After worshipping the Linga formerly, they had always
attained Siddhi.

33. A severe penance unbearable to all was performed by
Ravana. Then Mahadeva, the lord of penance, became much
pleased.

34-35. He granted him boons very difficult to be achieved
by all others. Wisdom with perfect knowledge was obtained by
him from Sadasiva. He further obtained (invinicibility) in battle
and twice the number of heads (as those of god Siva), for Maha-
deva had only five faces, whereas Ravana had ten faces.

36. Thanks to the grace of Mahesa, that powerful (Rak-
sasa) defeated Devas, sages and manes by means of his penance
and became superior to all.

37. He was made the great king and ruler of Trikita by
MaheSa. He occupied the greatest and most excellent position
(seat) among Raksasas.

38. It was for testing (the enduring capacity of) the sages
that he harassed them. Violence towards the sages was indulged
in, O Brahmanas, by Ravana who was himself an ascetic, only
because he wanted to test them.

39. Ravana who made the whole world cry and scream, be-
came great and invincible. Thanks to the grace and favour of
Sankara, another creation was evolved by him.

40. The guardians of the worlds were conquered by that
ascetic by means of his valour. Brahma too was subdued by him
only through great penance.

41. By becoming the nectar-rayed one, he conquered the
Moon, O Brahmanas. Through the power of burning, the Fire-
god was conquered and Iga (himself) was conquered by lifting
up Kailasa (mountain).

42. Indra was conquered by means of his Aisvarya (power
and prosperity). So also Visnu, the omnipresent one. By wor-

=== PAGE 61 ===

1.j.8.43-53 357

shipping and propitiating the Li7iga, all the three worlds were-.
controlled by him.

43. At that time, all the groups of Suras, with Brahma and
Visnu as their leaders, gathered together on the top of Meru
and began their deliberation and discussion:

44-45. “We have been tormented by Ravana through his
penance, very difficult to be performed (by others). O Devas, let
this wonderful story be listened to. On the mountain named
Gokarna, worship of the Linga itself was performed by that
noble-souled (hero). What could be known only through know-
ledge, what could be achieved only through knowledge, whatever
great miracle was there, that which is very difficult to be surpas-
sed by everyone—all these were done by Ravana alone.

46. He had adopted the greatest vairdgya (detachment) as
well as liberal-midedness greater even than that (vairagya). The
feeling of mamatd (mineness) was eschewed by the noble-souled
Ravana.

47. After a period of a thousand years, that (hero) of great
arms cut one of his own head and offered it with his own hand,
for the sake of worshipping the Liniga.

48. Ravana’s body short of one head stood in front of it in
the vicinity. It was endowed with Yogic dharanda (steady abstrac-
tion) and the greatest samadhi (concentration).

49. Fixing his attention deeply on the Linga after about a
kala, he cut off another head and worshipped Siva with it. Such
(performance of) worship was never done by any sage nor by any-
one else.

50. Thus many heads were chopped off and offered by him
in worshipping Siva. Again and again he became a_ headless
body. Then Siva became a bestower of boons.

51. ‘Formerly without being myself transformed into a
Pindi...1O descendant of Pulastya, choose boons as you please.
I shall grant you the same.’

52-53. Then Siva of greatest auspiciousness was requested
by Ravana: ‘If Your Lordship ate pleased, the excellent boon
should be given to me. I do not wish to seek any other boon. If
you have merciful favour towards me, you should give me such a
boon whereby I (always) resort to your feet.’

1. Some lines are missing in the text.

=== PAGE 62 ===

58 Skanda Purana

54. Then Ravana who made the world cry and scream was
told by Sadagiva: ‘By my favour, you will obtain everything
mentally desired by you.’

55-59. It was thus, O leading Suras, that everything was
obtained by Ravana from Siva. Hence this Ravana should be
subdued by you all only through great penance. This is what I
think.”

On hearing the words of Acyuta, the groups of Devas begin-
ning with Brahma became anxious, because all of them had been
addicted to sensual pleasures.

Brahma was overpowered by sexual desire and he attempted
sexual act with his own daughter. Indra was an adulterer.
Candra (the Moon-god) defiled the bed of his Guru (preceptor
Brhaspati). Yama has been avaricious and stingy. Sadagati
(the Wind-god) has been fickle. Pavaka has been indiscriminate
in cating anything and everything. The others among the groups
of Devas (had similar defects). Hence, all these were incapable
of conquering Ravana who had become very great by means of
penance.

60. Sailada was an elderly excellent Gana of great splend-
our. He was intelligent, an expert in adopting the right course of
action, highly powerful and very valorous.

61-62. He was a favourite of Siva and was identical with
Rudra. The noble-souled one asked all of them led by Indra,
“Why have you all come here in great excitement? Let the whole
thing be reported in detail.”

On being asked by Nandi, all of them hurriedly said then:

Devas said:

63. All of us along with the sages have been conquered by
Ravana. We have come to propitiate Siva, the lord of the lords
of the worlds.

64. Lord Nandi laughed and said to Brahma: ‘‘Where are
you? Where is auspicious Sarnbhu? (There is a world of differ-
ence between you two.) By means of great penance, he should
be seen seated in the middle of the heart. He cannot be seen
today.

65. As long as the emotional attitudes are too many, the

=== PAGE 63 ===

1.1.8.66-79 59

objects of senses are plentiful and there is the feeling of mine-
ness, so long Ifa is very difficult to be attained.

66. Siva in the form of the Liriga is easy of access to those
noble-souled ones who have subdued the senses, are quiescent
and have stabilized themselves in him. He is very difficult to be
obtained by you all.”

67. Then Brahma and other Devas as well as the learned
sages bowed down to Nandi and said:

“Why do you have the face of a monkey?! Tell us everything
about it. Tell us about the power of the penance of Ravana.”

Nandi§vara said:

68-70a. Kubera had been made by the noble-souled Sankara
the over-lord of wealth and assets. Ravana came here to see him,
riding in his own vehicle. He was in a hurry. On seeing me, he
said furiously: “Did Kubera come here? Was he seen by you
here? Let this be told immediately.”

70b-72. He was asked by me: ‘““What have you to do with
Dhanada (Kubera) today?”

Then Ravana of great splendour, who made the world scream,
said: “At the outset he (Kubera) had been indifferent towards
me. He did not care for me. Addicted to sensual pleasures, as he
is, he has been highly arrogant. He began to teach me saying,
‘O lord, it should not be done like this. Just as I am
endowed with glory and splendour, just as Iam rich and strong,
so also you do become, O fool. Do not get into delusion and
stupidity.’

73. Ihave been made a fool and a deluded person by the
noble-souled Kubera. On being turned out by me angrily, that
Guhyaka (i.e. Kubera) performed penance.

74, Did that Kubera come, O Nandi, to your abode? Let
that Kubera be handed over (to me). You need not hesitate in
this matter.”’

75-79. On hearing the words of Ravana, I hurriedly replied:
“You are a Liigaka (worshipper of Linga), an exalted one. I too

1. Astory to explain why Visnu incarnated in human form as Rama and
with his army of monkeys killed Ravana, This story, as in SkP, here, has
no basis in Valmiki Raémayara.

=== PAGE 64 ===

60 Skanda Purana

am one like that. Knowing the equality between us both you are
prattling in vain, O vicious one.”

As he was told thus, he in his arrogance due to his might,
asked me about my face in the same manner as I have been asked
about my face by you noble-souled ones. The old story was re-
counted by me about the benefit of the holy rite of the worship
of Siva. “‘Sariipya (having the same form as that of the lord) was
granted by Siva, but it was not accepted by me then. The face of
a monkey was requested by me from Sarhbhu. It was then gran-
ted to me kindly by Siva who is by nature compassionate.

Those who are devoid of false prestige, those who are free
from arrogance and those who have no property or possessions,
should be known as favourites of Sarnbhu. Others are excluded
by Siva.”

80-86a. Then Ravana said to me: “On the strength of my
penance, I had been sensible enough to request for ten heads.”

At his derisive statement, Ravana who made the world scream,

was cursed by me then:

“When an excellent man of great penance accompanied by
those who have faces like this (monkey faces like mine) (Comes
to your city) keeping me at the head, he will undoubtedly kill
you.”

Thus, O Brahma, Ravana who made the world scream,
was cursed by me. Only the Liga was worshipped by Ravana
without the noble-souled Visnu stationed in the form of the
pedestal, O excellent Suras. Hence, O excessively fortunate
ones, Mahesvara, Mahadeva, the lord of Devas, in the form of
Visnu will carry out everything. May all of you pray to Visnu
lying within the cavity of the heart of everyone. Therefore, I
shall be at the head of all Devas.

86b. On hearing the words of Nandi, all of them became
joyous in their minds. They came to Vaikuntha and began to
eulogize Visnu by means of (good) words.

Devas said:

87. Obeisance to you, the lord, O lord of Devas, O lord of
the universe. This entire universe consisting of mobile and
immobile beings has you for its basis and support.

=== PAGE 65 ===

11.8.88-100 61

88. This Lirga has been held by you, O Visnu, in the form
of the Pindi (globular pedestal). In the form of Mahavisnu (the
demons) Madhu and Kaitabha were killed by you.

89. Similarly, in the form of a tortoise, the Mandara moun-
tain was held up and supported by you (at the time of churning
of ocean for nectar). Assuming the form of a boar, Hiranyaksa
was killed by you.

90. Hiranyakasipu, the Daitya, was killed by you by
assuming the form of Nrhari (Man-lion). Bali, the Daitya, was
held and bound by you in the form of Vamana (Dwarf).

91. The son of Krtavirya (Sahasrarjuna) was killed by you
after taking birth in the family of Bhrgus. Hereafter too, O great
Visnu, protect us in the same manner.

92. It behoves you to protect us instantaneously from the
fear of Ravana.

93. On being entreated thus by Devas, the lord Vasudeva,
the sanctifier (the creator) of all living beings, who is immanent
in the universe, said to all those Suras:

94. “O Devas, let this important statement he heard. It is
relevant to this occasion. With Sailadi (Nandin) as your head
(leader), all of you immediately take incarnations in the form
(bodies) of monkeys.

95. Ishall become a human being enveloped by Ajfdna
(Ignorance). I shall be born in Ayodhya in the abode of Dasga-
ratha for the attainment of your objectives. I am having Brahma-
vidya (the knowledge of Brahman) as my assistant.

96. Brahmavidya@ herself will be born in the abode of
Janaka.1 In fact, Ravana is (my) devotee as he is directly engag-
ed in the meditation on Siva.

97. When aman endowed with great penance desires for
Brahmavidyda, he can be easily managed and won over by means
of virtue.”

98-100. After saying this, lord Visnu, the highly auspicious
one (vanished).

1. Valmiki Ramayana 1.1. 27-30 compares Sita to Devamay& (devamdyeva
nirmitd) but our text claims her as an incarnation of Brahma-vidyad as a
suitable consort to Visnu (the future Rama). The important persons in the
Ramayana are incarnations of various gods.

=== PAGE 66 ===

62 Skanda Purana

Vali was born of a part of Indra. Sugriva was the son of the
Sun. Jambavan, the leading Rksa (bear), was born of a part of
Brahma. Nandi, the son of Silada, who was a favourite follower
of Siva, incarnated as the great monkey Haniman for rendering
assistance to Visnu of unmeasured splendour.

101. The monkeys beginning with Mainda were all the ex-
cellent Suras. Thus, all Suras incarnated in a befitting manner.

102. Similarly, Visnu was born as one who increased the
delight of Kausalya. He is called Rama by learned men, be-
cause he pleased and gratified the entire universe.

103. Due to his devotion to Visnu, Sega descended on
the earth by means of the power of his penance.

104. The mighty arms of Visnu incarnated as the valorous
(Princes) named Satrughna and Bharata well-renowned in the
three worlds.

105. She who was mentioned as Brahmavidya by the ex-
pounders of the Vedas, incarnated as the daughter of the ruler of
Mithila for the fulfilment of the task of Suras. She was born from
a furrow arising from the ploughing of the field with the plough-
share.

106. Hence, she became famous as Sita. She was the Science
of Metaphysics (personified). Since she was born in Mithila, she
is called Maithili.

107. She was born in the family of Janaka. Hence, she is
well-known as Janakatmaja (Janak!). This Brahmavidya, the
destroyer of sins, was formerly known as Vedavati.

108-110. She was given by Janaka himself to Visnu, the
Supreme Soul. Along with her, the Vidya (incarnated), Visnu
the greatest among the auspicious ones, the lord of Devas, the
lord protector of the universe, became engaged in a severe
penance. As he was desirous of defeating Ravana for the sake of
the fulfilment of the task of Devas, the lotus-eyed Rama stayed
in forest (for the same purpose).

1. Sita means ‘a furrow’. In Reveda IV.57.6, Sita is invoked as a presid-
ing deity of Agriculture. In Vajasaney! Samhita X11.69-72 Sita (a furrow) is
personified. Here, Sita is said to be ‘born’ of the furrow while ploughing. She
is called the incarnation of Anviksiki and Brahmavidya.

=== PAGE 67 ===

1i.8.111-123 63

111. Though the great incarnation of Sega, (Laksmana)
performed an exceedingly difficult penance by means of his great
Sakti (power), for the sake of the fulfilment of the task of
Devas.

112-115, Satrughna and Bharata too performed very great
penance. Rama who was thus endowed with the power of
penance and was assisted and accompanied by those groups of
Devas, killed Ravana along with his followers within six months,
Killed by Visnu by means of weapons, O sages of holy rites, he
attained Sdriipya (having the same form as the god) of Siva,
along with his kinsmen and followers. By the grace of Siva, he
became (realized) the entire Dvaitddvaita (the essence of the
philosophy of dualism and non-dualism).! Even the sages are
deluded inthe matter of discrimination between dualism and
non-dualism. Men who are engaged in worshipping Siva derive
all those things.

116. Those who continuously worship Siva in the form of
Linga, whether they be women or sidras or candalas or other
low-caste pcople, do attain Siva, the destroyer of all miseries.

117-118. Even animals have attained the supreme lord. What
then to say about human beings? The twice-born castes who
have practised great penance observing the vow of celibacy and
who have performed Yajfias for many years have attained (mere-
ly) Svarga (Heaven).

119-123. There are many Yajfias® such as Jyotistoma, Vdaja-
peya, Atiradtra and so on. These Yajfias undoubtedly do bestow
heavenly pleasures on those who perform them. After enjoying
the heavenly pleasures, when their merits become exhausted,
those sacrificers come back to the mortal world. Having descend-
ed to the world, they are born inthe different species with their

1. The Purdna-writer has respect for Dvaitddvaita philosophy. This
school holds the reality of both Dvaita (dualism between man and God) and
Advaita (non-dualism between them). Nimbarka (11th cent. A.D.) in his
Com. Veddanta-Parijata-Saurahha on the Brahma Sitra has advocated this
doctrine. But this theory is older than the Brahma Sitra itself, as we find
such views of Audulomi, Asmarathya quoted by the author of the Brahma
Siitra.

2. VV 119-128 emphasize the Liviga-worship as superior to performance
of sacrifices. Sacrifices lead to a temporary stay in Svarga, while the Liriga-
worship dispels Maya and leads to Moksa.

=== PAGE 68 ===

64 Skanda Purdya

intellect of the nature of the three Gunas of Sattva, Rajas and
Tamas. Thus, many souls wander about in cycles of birth and
death. By chance or as good luck would have it, some of them
serve Siva.

124. Instantaneous removal of Mdayd takes place in the case
of men who are engaged in regular meditation on Siva and who
have restrained their minds and not otherwise.

125. When Maya is dispelled, the three Gunas perish. Then
a person transcends the three Gunas and becomes liberated
thereby.

126-128. Hence, the worship of Liga should be thought of
and pursued by all embodied beings. Siva assumes the form of
Linga and protects all mobile and immobile beings.

Formerly I have been asked by you about how Siva assumed
the form of Linga. Everything has now been truthfully spoken
(by me), O Brahmanas.

How Siva, the great lord of the worlds, swallowed poison
(Halahala), may be listened to, O Brahmanas. I shall recount it
to you as it actually took place.

CHAPTER NINE

The Churning of the Ocean

Lomasa said:

1-2. On one occasion Indra, the lord of Devas, was seated
in the middle of the assembly surrounded by the guardians of
the worlds, Devas and Sages. He was encircled by bevies of
celestial damsels and was honoured by Gandharvas. Songs in

1, This is a favourite topicof Puradna-writers as can be seen from its
description in Mbh, Adi. 18, VR 1.45.17-18, BhP VIII.5.11-18, BdP
1.ii.25, MtP 249-250 to mention afew. The background of the churning
of the ocean is different in our text. It is for the recovery of the gems of
Indra which were sunk into the sea that Devas and Asuras agreed to churn
the ocean. In Mbh it was god Narayana who advised god Brahma to
churn the ocean for getting Amrta (Adi. 17.10-13).

=== PAGE 69 ===

1.1.9.3-15 65

praise of his conquest were being sung by Siddhas and Vidya-
dharas.

3. At that time Brhaspati who was the scholarly preceptor
of the king of Devas and was of exalted fortune and liberal-
minded, came there surrounded by his disciples.

4. On seeing him Devas who had been sitting there prompt-
ly bowed down to him. Indra too had seen Vacaspati’s (Brhas-
pati’s) arrival.

5. But the vicious-minded lord did not utter a single word
in his honour. No word of welcome, no offer of seat, no formal
permission to Icave was accorded to him.

6. Knowing that Sakra had become arrogant and evil-
minded due to royal authority, Brhaspati became angry and he
vanished.

7. When the preceptor of Devas had departed, Suras be-
came dejected. Yaksas, Serpents, Gandharvas and sages also be-
came depressed in mind, O Brahmanas.

8. At the end of the music recital, Indra (as it were) regain-
ed consciousness. He asked Suras immediately, “Where has (the
preceptor) of great penance gone?”

9-10. At the very same time, Sakra, the lord of Devas, was
informed by Narada: “The preceptor has been insulted by you.
There is no doubt about it. O slayer of Bala, your kingdom has
gone due to the disrespect (shown by you) to the preceptor.
Hence, by all means, you have to plead to him for forgiveness.”

11. On hearing these words of the noble-souled Narada,
Sakra suddenly got up from his seat. Surrounded by all of them
(Devas etc.), he hastened to the abode of his preceptor promptly
(without any slackness).

12. He bowed down to Tara at the outset and asked her,
“Where has (our preceptor) of great penance gone?” Tara star-
ed at Sakra and said, “I do not know.”

13-15. Thereupon, Sakra became worried and returned to
his own house. In the meantime, there appeared mysterious ill-
omens in heaven, causing misery to everyone including the
noble-minded Sakra himself.

All the activities of Sakra were known to Bali who was statio-
ned in the nether worlds. Surrounded by Daityas, he went from

=== PAGE 70 ===

66 Skanda Purana

Patala to Amaravati. Thereupon a great fight ensued between
Devas and Danavas.

16-18. Devas were defeated by Daityas. Instantaneously
the whole of the kingdom of Sakra, the deluded and evil-
minded one, was conquered by them and everything (belonging
to Sakra) was quickly carried to Patala. It was by the grace of
Sukra that all of them became victorious. Sakra became bereft
of glory and splendour. So he was utterly abandoned by Devas.
The goddess (of fortune) with lotus-like eyes vanished.

19. The great elephant Airavata, the horse Uccaihsravas
and many other precious things and jewels were taken away
immediately by Daityas of evil behaviour due to greed.

20. The good ones among them fell into the ocean. Bali
who was surprised at this, remarked to his preceptor:

21. “It is mysterious that many jewels brought by us after
defeating Devas have fallen into the ocean.”

22-23. On hearing the words of Bali, Usanas (i.e. Sukra)
teplied to him: “One can attain the heavenly kingdom only
through performance of a hundred horse-sacrifices. There is
no doubt about it that it will be acquired by one who is
initiated in it. Hence, the enjoyer is also he himself. Without
performing a horse-sacrifice, heavenly pleasures cannot at all be
enjoyed.”

24. Understanding the utterance of his preceptor, Bali be-
came quite silent. What was proper and befitting was carried
out through and along with Devas.

25. Indra too, on attaining a miserable plight, went to
Paramesthin (Brahma) and informed him of everything, such
as the danger to his kingdom and other things.

26-28. On hearing the words of Sakra, Paramesthi said:
“We shall gather together all the Suras and go immediately along
with you to Visnu, the lord of all lords, in order to propitiate
him.”

Saying ‘So be it”’ all those guardians of the worlds beginning
with Sakra went to the shore of the Milk Ocean with Brahma
at their head. After sitting there all of them began to eulogize
Hari.

=== PAGE 71 ===

Li,9.29-40 67

Brahma said:

29-31. O lord of the universe, O lord of Devas bowed down
to by Suras as well as Asuras, obeisance to you, O great
Atman, of auspicious reputation, O infinite one, O immutable
one, free from decay.

You yourself are Yajfia. You are of the form of Yajfia, O
consort of Laksmi. Hence, be the bestower of boons unto the
Devas.

By insulting his preceptor, Indra has lost (everything)
from his kingdom along with the celestial sages. Hence redeem
him.

The Lord said:

32. There is no wonder in the fact that everything perishes
by insulting the preceptor. Those who are sinners, who are
completely engaged in evil activities, who indulge only in sensual
pleasures and by whom parents are censured, are undoubtedly
godless ones.

33. Immediately he has acquired the fruit,O Brahma, of
what he has committed. Difficulty and misfortune have befallen
all due to the act of this Sakra.

34. When a person faces adverse circumstances, they say
that, he must be friendly with all living beings in order to achieve
all his purposes.

35. For that reason, Indra, do as I suggest. For the realiza-
tion of your purpose, alliance should be formed by you with
Daityas.

36. On being commanded by the lord, the highly intelligent
Sakra left Amaravati and went to Sutala along with Devas.

37. On seeing that Indra had come, Indrasena became
furious. Along with his army, he was desirous of killing Indra.

38. Then by means of different types of (consoling) words,
Daityas and Bali, the most excellent one among strong persons,
were prevented from killing him by Narada.

39-40. At the instance of that same sage, Bali controlled
(abandoned) his anger. Indra then came in along with his army.
He was seen by Indrasena surrounded by the guardians of the
worlds.The king of Daityas hastened to tell him laughingly:

=== PAGE 72 ===

68 Skanda Purana

41. “Wherefore have ‘you come here to Sutala, O Sakra?
Let it be mentioned.” On hearing these words, he said smilingly:

42. “We are the descendants of Kasyapa. All of you are
also so. Just as we are, so also you are. Clash and quarrel is
meaningless.

43. As fate would have it, my kingdom was seized by you
instantaneously. So also many gems were taken away by you.
Though brought with very great effort, they too have gone.

44. Hencea learned person must deliberate and ponder.
One gets knowledge by means of deliberation and liberation
originates from knowledge.

45. But alas! of what avail is my utterance in front of you?
Ido not know. T have approached you along with Suras as a
person seeking refuge.””

46. On hearing these words of Sakra, the intelligent (Daitya),
the most excellent one among knowers (learned), the most exccl-
lent one among those who know what to say, said laughingly to
Sakra:

47. ‘For what purpose, O Devendra, you have come, 1 do
not know.”

48. On hearing thos: words, Sakra’s eyes became filled
with tears. He did not say anything. Narada spoke to him the
following words:

49. “O Bali, don’t you know the difference between right
and wrong activities? This is the virtue of great men. They pro-
tect those who seek refuge in them.

50. Thos2 who do not protect the one who seeks refuge, a
Brahmana, a sick man and an old man, are (really) slaughterers of
Brahmanas.

51-52. He has come to your presence with words asking for
refuge. He is worthy of being protected by you. There is no
doubt in this matter.’’ On being told thus by Narada, the lord of
Daityas himself pondered over everything with great understand-
ing regarding what was right and what was wrong. With great
respect, he honoured Sakra along with the guardians of the
worlds as well as the groups of Devas.

53. For the sake of credence, Puranadara performed many
good holy observances of the Sattvika quality which created con-
fidence in Bali.

=== PAGE 73 ===

1.1.9.54-68 69

54, Thus Sakra entered into an agreement with Bali in order
to further his selfish ends. That great lord stayed with Bali solely
devoting himself to the (precepts in the) science of political
economy.

55. Thus Indra passed many years living in Sutala. Remem-
bering the words of Visnu and pondering over them again and
again, he thought of a plan.

56. Once the king of Devas himself was sitting in the middle
of the assembly (of Bali). Conversant with the right policy, he
spoke laughingly these words to Bali:

57-58. ‘Many gems and jewels, elephants etc. have dropped
into the ocean, while you were bringing them here. They belong-
ed to us then. They should be recovered from the ocean by you
as well as by us, O heroic one.

59. We must hurry up in exerting ourselves to recover those
jewels from the ocean. Hence, it must be churned by you for
the purpose of achieving the desired result.”

60. Induced thus by Sakra, Bali, the slayer of Suras,
spoke to Sakra immediately, “By whom and with what should
the churning be done?”

61-63. Then anethereal voice with the majestic rumbling
sound of cloud said: ““O Devas, O Daityas, do churn the Ocean
of Milk. There is no doubt about this that your strength will
increase. Make the Mandara mountain the churning rod and
Vasuki the requisite rope. Afterwards, O Devas and Daityas,
join together and let the ocean be churned.”

64. On hearing the words of that ethereal voice, all Suras
exerted themselves along with Daityas.

65. Those Suras and Asuras came out of Patala. They all
came to the matchless, excellent mountain Mandara.

66. Daityas were ten million in number. So also were Devas
undoubtedly. Preparing themselves, they came to Mandara hav-
ing golden lustre.

67-68. It abounded in gems and precious stones. It was
globular in shape. It was very big and exceedingly lustrous.
Many gems were (lying scattered) all round. It had many trees
such as sandal tree, Parijata, Naga, Punnaga and Campaka., It
was full of various kinds of animals and deer, lions and tigers.

=== PAGE 74 ===

70 Skanda Purdna

69. On seeing such a great mountain, all the excellent Suras
joined their palms in reverence and said:

Devas said:

70. O mountain, all of us, the Suras have come here to
submit to you. Listen to it, O great mountain, the helper of
others.

71-72. On being requested thus by Devas and Daityas then,
the mountain Mandara came out in an embodied form and in
that form the mountain Mandara said: ‘What for have all of
you come to me? Let that be mentioned.”

73. Then Bali said these words befitting the occasion. Indra
too hurriedly spoke these courteous and sincere words:

74. “O mountain Mandara, you cooperate with us in a
great undertaking. O observer of holy vows, you should be the
churning rod for the production of nectar.”

75. Saying “‘So be it” and honouring their words, because
it was for the accomplishment of the task of Devas, he spoke
these words to Devas and Asuras and particularly to Indra:

76. ‘My wings have been cut (by you) with the thunderbolt
of hundred spikes. How is it possible for me to go for realizing
your purpose?”

77. Then all Devas and Asuras praised the mountain. They
then uprooted that incomparable and wonderful Mandara
mountain.

78. But, though they were desirous of taking it to the Milky
Ocean, they proved incapable of doing it. The mountain fell on
Devas and Daityas.

79. Some were crushed. Some died. Some fell into a swoon.
Some of them began to blame and censure and some suffered
great pain.

80. Thus, Asuras, Suras and Danavas failed in their attempt.
When they regained consciousness, they eulogized the Lord of
the universe:

81. ‘Save us, save us, O great Visnu, O lord compassionate to
those who seek refuge. The entire world, mobile as well as im-
mobile, is pervaded by you.”

82-83. Then Hari appeared before them for the accomplish-

=== PAGE 75 ===

1.1.9.84-94 71

ment of the purpose of Devas. Visnu who was seated on Garuda,
saw them and suddenly and sportingly lifted up the excellent
mountain and placed it on Garuda.! Then, the lord granted all
of them protection from fear.

84. Rising from there (and taking leave of) those Devas,
he took the old mountain to the northern shore of the Ocean of
Milk. After placing it in the waters, he went away from that
place.

85. Then all those groups of Suras arrived there along with
Asuras, taking Vasuki with them. Then they made the agreement.

86. After making Mandara the churning rod and Vasuki
the rope, all of them, Suras and Asuras, churned the Ocean of
Muiik. ‘

87. As the Ocean of Milk was being churned, the mountain
sank deep into Rasatala. At that very instant, the Lord of Rama,
Visnu, became a tortoise and lifted it up. That was something
really marvellous.

88. When the mountain rotated, it was further pulled and
pushed by Suras and Danavas. Now it rotated without any basis,
like the understanding without a preceptor.

89. Visnu, the supreme soul, then became the basic support
of the Mandara mountain. With his four hands he gathered it
up and churned pleasantly.

90. Then all Suras and Asuras churned the Ocean of Milk
after uniting together. Very powerful themselves, by uniting
together, they became all the more powerful.

91. The excellent mountain had adamantine strength. It
rolled on the back, neck, thighs and the space between the knees
of the noble-souled tortoise. Due to the friction of these two,
submarine fire was generated.

92. The Halahala poison too emerged and it was seen by
Narada. Thereafter, the celestial sage of unmeasured splendour
spoke these words:

93-94. “The churning of the ocean should not be carried on
by you all now. O Devas, all of you pray to Siva.? Have you

1. In Mbh, Adi 18.8 it was the serpent Sesa who carried Mt. Mandara
to the sea. Here the credit is given to Garuda, Visnu’s vehicle.
2. Our text is a propagandist of Siva. In the Mbh it is Narayana who

=== PAGE 76 ===

72 Skanda Purdna

forgotten the sacrifice of Daksa and what Virabhadra did there?

Hence, let Siva be immediately remembered, O Devas.
He is greater than the greatest; he is beyond the greatest. He
is the embodiment of supreme bliss. He is worthy of beiag medi-
tated upon by Yogins; he has no form. (Asa matter of fact)
however, he is formless and unmanifest (or without diversity).”

95. Devas were eager to achieve their purpose. Therefore,
they hurriedly went on churning the ocean. All those who are
overwhelmed by desires do not listen (to the advice of others),
because they become irrational and stupid.

96. They should not be given many pieces of advice and
instructions. They are subject to Raga (desire) and Dvesa (hat-
red). All of them are averse to Siva.

97. With their sheer continuous exertion, they churned the
Ocean of Milk. Due to excessive churning, the poison called
Halahala was generated from the Ocean of Milk.?

98. It was strong enough tu burn down the three worlds.
It came up to kill the heaven-dwellers. It went up still further
and spread to all quarters. The entire sky was pervaded by it.
The Kalakita poison advanced to consume all the living beings.

99. They observed the huge king of serpents grasped by
their own hands. They left him there along with the mountain
and then went (immediately) away. They fled along with Asuras.

100. So also the sages beginning with Bhrgu, sages in
hundreds (fled in all directions). It was like what happened at
the sacrifice of Daksa.

101. Earnestly urged by Bhygu, all of them went to Satya-
loka: “This poison Kalakita will be quelled by means of various
Vedic Sentences. O Devas, there is no doubt in this matter. It is
true; I am speaking the truth unto you.”

guides Devas and Asuras in churning the ocean. Siy. is not mentioned at all
in this context (Mbh, Adi 18).

1. VV 97-113 describe the disastrous effect of the poison Kalakita, viz.
burning down of the entire three worlds. The author’s object is to heighten
the greatness of Siva in drinking the poison (see the next chapter), Mbh

sums it up in one line:
pragrasal loka-raksartham brahmano
vacanac chivah (Adi 18.42b)
‘At the instance of god Brahma, Siva consumed it (the poison) for saving

the world.’

=== PAGE 77 ===

1.1.9.102-113 73

102. On hearing these words uttered by Bhrgu, all of them
distressed by the poison Kalakita went to Satyaloka and sought
refuge in Brahma.

103. Brahma saw the blazing Kalakita with sparkling lustre.
He found that Suras and Asuras were ignorant of their duties.
He was about to curse them, but he was prevented by Narada.

Brahma said:

104. O Devas, what a wrong thing has been committed by
you? Why has this explosive thing cropped up? It is Igvara’s
anger. My speech cannot be otherwise.

105. Thereupon, surrounded by Devas, the Vedas, the
Upanisads and the different kinds of Agamas, he proceeded ahead
out of fear of the Kalakita.

106. Then, Devas who were worried said to to one another,
“We are enveloped in Avidyd (nescience) and lust. How can we
do anything to Sankara?”

107, Then Devas kept Brahma at their head and hurriedly
went to Vaikuntha, because they were afraid of Kalakita.

108. Brahma and others as well as the groups of sages
svught refuge in the great lord Visnu, the primordial Purusa, the
mighty lord who had resorted to Vaikuntha, Madhava, Adhoksaja.
The groups of Suras and Asuras sought refuge in lord Visnu.

109. By that time, the great poison ‘Kalakiita came there.
After burning Brahma’s world at the outset, it burned Vaikuntha.

110. Visnu who dwells in the cavity of the heart of every-
one, was burned by the fire of Kalakita also with his attendants.
Immediately he acquired the colour of Tamala.

111. Vaikuntha also became blue in colour. It was surroun-
ded by all the worlds. Hence, all the worlds became encircled by
the poisonous substance from the waters.

112. The wonderful poison of the waters reduced to ash the
whole of the Cosmic Egg with its eight outer coverings and along
with Brahma.

113. There was no earth, no water, no fire, no wind, and
no ether. There was neither Ahamkara (Cosmic Ego), nor Mahat
(the Great Principle). There was no Mulavidya. On account of
Siva’s wrath, the entire universe became reduced to ash.

=== PAGE 78 ===

74 Skanda Purdna
CHAPTER TEN

Siva Swallows the Poison

The sages said:

1. Oholy Sir, you said that the Cosmic Egg including the
mobile and immobile beings was entirely reduced to ash by the
fire of Kalakita on account of the wrath of Rudra.

2-4, But, we consider Rudra to be within the Cosmic Egg.
Then the mobile and immobile beings with Brahma and
Visnu as leaders were destroyed and reduced to ash through the
wrath of Rudra. How was creation resumed and made to func-
tion? Wherefrom did Brahma, Visnu and other Suras and Asuras
with the Moon at their head (originate again)? Where did they
get merged? Where were thcy reduced to ash? What happened
after that? It behoves you to recount everything.

5. By the grace of Vyisa you know everything. No one else
knows it. Hence you understand the holy scripture full of know-
ledge as no one elsc does.

6. Asked thus by all those sages of sanctified souls, Sita
bowed down to Vyasa and spoke these words:

Lomasga said:

7. When Devas beginning with Hari and Brahma, stationed
in the middle of the Cosmic Egg, as well as the guardians of the
worlds including Indra were enveloped by the fire of poison,
Sarnbhu was informed by the noble-souled Herarnba (Ganesa):

Heramba said:

8-9. O Rudra, O Mahadeva, O Sthanu, the lord of the uni-
verse, an obstacle very difficult to be surmounted has been creat-
ed for them by me by way of amusement.! There are persons
who start an enterprise, but either because of their fear or
through the delusion of their minds, they do not worship you
or me. The distress unto them will be very great.

1, The destruction of the universe by KalakOta is a ‘diversion’ (vinoday
to god Ganega, because people do 1.ot worship him and Siva through
delusion.

=== PAGE 79 ===

1.i.10.10-19 75

10-11. On being requested thus by the over-lord of Ganas,
who dispels obstacles like the sun dispelling darkness, the Pinaka-
bearing Lord with a bull for his emblem, the Lord Nilalohita
with matted hair, the lord devoid of ailments, the lord in the
form of Liriga, the unsullied lord without form or features,
the sky-haired lord Siva, Sarnbhu spoke thus:

Mahe§gvara said‘:

12-14. O Heramba, listen to my words with great faith and
attention. This universe consisting of the mobile and immobile
beings is of the form of Ahamkara (Cosmic Ego). This Ahamkara
creates, sustains and destroys. At the beginning of the universe,
O Ganapati, Vijfapti (Intelligence, Consciousness) alone (remai-
ned). It was devoid of Maya. It was quiescent and of the form
of Dvaita and Advaita (duality and non-duality). It was in
the form of intelligence alone characterized by existence and
eternal bliss.

Ganapati said:

15. Ifyou are the sole Atman, characterized by supreme
bliss, O Scorcher of foes, then there is nothing other than you.

16. Then how did the different forms originate, differentiat-
ed as Suras and Asuras? It is of variegated form observed by
the three Devas. It is the cause of delusion.

17. The cycle of worldly existence originated as different
from Nitya (eternal) and Anitya (transient). It consists of four
types or species of living beings endowed with many distinctive
features etc.

18. People are deluded by various doctrines and tenets of
knowledge antagonistic to one another. Some are devoted to
the doctrine of Karman. Some resort to their (intrinsic) qualities.

19. A few are adherents of the path of knowledge but they
are opposed to one another.

O Bull-bannered Lord, thus I have been overwhelmed by
doubts. Save me (by dispelling the doubt).

1, One wonders whether this was the proper occasion for expounding
the Dvaitadvaita philosophy when the entire universe was being burnt down
by Kalakata.

=== PAGE 80 ===

76 Skanda Purana

20. ‘Where do I and the Ganas belong to? Whence is this
bull, O'Lord? From where are these and many others born?
Where (do they go)?

21. Whence are all these exceedingly fortunate ones made
into Sattvikas, Rdjasas etc.?

Lord Sarnbhu laughed and began to speak to Ganega:

MuahesSvara said:

22. Rajas, Sattva and Tamas are produced by Kalasakti
(Power of Time). The entire universe including Devas, Asuras
and human beings is enveloped by them.

23. This (world) that is being seen is imperishable ultimately,
but, understand that as an evolved effect it is perishable. It is
evolved by means of all Siddhis.

Lomasa said:

24-25. While Sadasiva of Cosmic Form and in the form of
the Linga was conversing with Ganesa, His Power (Sakti called
Siva), the source of the universe of the nature of cause and effect
was born of Sadasiva. At the same instant, the Lord in the
form of the Linga became submerged.

26. The single supreme Sakti, characterized as the Arman
of Brahmavidya abided (there). Overwhelmed by wonder,
Gane§a became engrossed in looking (at that form).

The sages asked:

27. Ifthis entire universe consisting of the mobile and immo-
bile beings is included within Prakrti, how is it thenthat Ganesa
was able to preserve his separate entity? ‘Let this be explained.

Lomasa replied:

28. Lord Ganega was directly born of Prakrti herself.
Gancésvara has the same form as that of Siva himself.

29-30. A battle ensued between Siva and that noble-souled
one who had been Prakrta (born of Prakrti) due to ignorance.
That battle continued without a break for a long time. -

1. VV 28-38. This is another version how Ganega became elephant-headed
and why he is called ‘the king of obstacles and difficulties.”

=== PAGE 81 ===

1.i.10.31-40 77

On observing that he was invincible as long as he was riding
an elephant, Sarnbhu hit him with his trident and toppled him
down along with the elephant.

31. Then Mahadeva the scorcher of enemies, was eulogized
by the Supreme Power (Prakrti). The lord then said to the great
Sakti, “O splendid lady, choose your boon.”’

32-33. Then an excellent boon was chosen from Maha-
deva: “O lord, he who was killed by you was undoubtedly my
son. Being born of a part of Prakrti, he is deluded. Hence he
does not know you. In order to gratify me, resuscitate this son
of mine.”’

34. Lord Rudra laughed loudly and revived the son of Maya.
He fixed the head of an elephant to his body.

35. Thus the elephant-faced lord was born by the grace of
Sankara. Although he was the son of Maya, he was free from
the clutches of Maya and became endowed with (spiritual) know-
ledge.

36. He was perpetually contented with the nectar of the
knowledge of Atman. He was free from ailments. Sitting in deep
meditation, he became very fierce and then destroyed Kala (god
of death) of black complexion.

37. He pulled out his own huge tooth for the sake of
Yogadanda' (the mystic wand of Yogic practice) and held it in
his hand. He was the presiding deity of the Ganas. He surpasses
the Sabdabrahman (the Vedas or the supreme spiritual know-
ledge expressed in words). Though accompanied by both Rddhi
and Siddhi, he shines in his aloneness.

38. The groups of Ganas and Vighnas (obstacles) and many
others superior to these—whatever there was on the earth, he
became the lord thereof. He was made so by Sarbhu then.

39. Hence he was able to see Prakrti which has the Cosmic
form. He remained separate and was able to realize the Linga as
well asthe Prakrti. He saw the pure Linga naturally abiding in
the Prakrti.

40. Herammba who was equipped with perfect knowledge

1. In BdP Paragurama is said to have cut down one of Ganega’s tusks
with his axe (ILiii.41.2-4), Here it is self-extraction of the tusk by Ganesa
himself,

=== PAGE 82 ===

78 Skanda Purana

saw himself along with the Ganas as well as the three worlds
entirely merged in the Liriga.

41. Though he was endowed with perfect knowledge, he
lost his consciousness. He regained it with very great effort. The
lord of the Ganas bowed down his head to those two supreme
powers.

42. Then he saw there itself Brahma, Rudra, Visnu and
SadAasiva in the form of the annihilator of the worlds.

43-45. He saw some beings resembling ghosts. They were the
LingaSaktis. He saw crores of spherical Cosmic Eggs like so
many atoms. They were getting merged and dissolved in Mahegéa
who was in the form of a Liziga.

The Linga was inside the Prakrti and the Prakrti was within
the Liga. The whole of the Linga was seen covered by Sakti.
The Sakti was covered by the Liriga. Thus the two encompassed
each other.

46. The whole world consisting of the mobile and immobile
beings stayed supported by both Sivas (i.e. Siva and Sakti). Only
GaneSa and none else, though great, had that knowledge.

47. The presiding deity of the Ganas (Lord Ganeéa), of
great splendour, accompanied by the Ganas eulogized with great
strength, the Lord accompanied by Sakti.

GaneSa prayed:

48. I bow down to the god accompanied by His Sakti
(Power)—the Lord who is the embodiment of knowledge, who
is kindly disposed (but) beyond the ken of knowledge and of the
form of supreme Light, who transcends forms, is the Supreme
Reality incarnate, who is beyond the principles (categories of
Sankhyas), supremely auspicious, who is called Bliss undivided
and uncontaminated by sorrow.

49-50. The fire in (a ball of) iron is beyond smoke (smoke-
less), but it appears as though filled with smoke. You who are the
source of knowledge, appear to be within Prakrti. You who are
present within the Prakrti by Mayd, are spoken of as manifested.

You whose nature is such, O lord, create, annihilate
and protect the universe by your Maya. On account of this

1. This peculiar mutual relation between Siva and Sakti shows the influ-
ence of Trika Saivism of Kashmir. -

=== PAGE 83 ===

1.4.10.51-62 79

poison, the entire universe consisting of the mobile and immobile
beings and accompanied by Brahma, Visnu and Indra, has been
destroyed.

51. You are lord Mahesa. You are the lord of the three
worlds. You are the immanent soul of the mobile and immobile
beings. The mobile and immobile beings along with the
vestures of individual souls, have been completely burnt down.
Please revive them quickly and make it (the world) as it was
before.

Lomasa said:

52-54. On being culogized thus by Ganesa, the Lord (Siva),
the sanctifier of all living beings, assumed the form of a Linga
and consumed the Kalakita that arose there and caused the
destruction of all the worlds. He made everything free from
impurities. Since the lord was endowed with great compassion
and considerateness, all Devas, Asuras and human beings and all
the three worlds were instantaneously saved.

Brahma, Visnu, Surendra, the Guardians of the Quarters
along with the sages, Yaksas, Vidyadharas, Siddhas, Gandharvas
and groups of celestial damsels—all of them got up as though
from sleep.

55. They were struck with wonder. They were agitated and
frightened. All Devas and Asuras said in dismay:

56-62. “Where is that immense Kalakita by which we had
been compelled to flee and made almost dead along with the
Guardians of the Quarters?”’ So said they, but Daityas remained
silent. The Guardians of the Quarters beginning with Sakra, who
were able to regain strength and happiness with god Brahma as
their leader, said this after honouring Visnu, the lord of all lords:

“By whom has this been caused? We do not know as we are
deficient in intelligence.” Then Visnu laughed at Brahma and all
those (Suras). All of them then began to meditate with great
concentration of their minds. O Brahmanas, that dispelled base
emotions such as lust and anger as well as other feelings by
means of the knowledge of Reality. Then Devas and others saw
the Liziga present in their own Atman (Soul). Keeping Visnu at
their head, they eulogized the Lord for the attainment of the ulti-
mate truth:

=== PAGE 84 ===

80 Skanda Purana

“Yogins worship the Supreme Soul through their own souls.
The Lirga alone is the greatest knowledge. The Lingh alone is
the greatest penance. The Linga alone is the greatest Dharma.
The Linga alone is the greatest goal. Hence, there is nothing at all
which (can be called) greater than the Liviga.”

63. After saying thus, Suras and Asuras along with the
Guardians of the Quarters and sages kept Visnu whose complexion
is dark like the Indian cinnamon, at their head. They then sought
refuge in Sarnbhu who is worthy of being resorted to:

64. “Save us, save us, O Mahadeva, O merciful lord, O
Supreme God. It behoves you to save us as we had been saved
before (by you).

65. O Lord of Devas, your lotus-like feet possess greatness
befitting our repeated service. They have infinite forms. We have
resorted to them. (Save us) with the greatest mercy. Obeisance
to you, O excellent one among Devas. Be pleased.”

66. Lord Ramapati (Visnu), the sanctifier of the living be-
ings, stood in the middle of the form of Linga along with all the
groups of Suras and spoke thus:

67-69. “You are the Lord in the form of the Liga. You
bestow protection from fear on all the worlds. All those who
died on account of the poison, have been saved. Hence, O Lord,
the conqueror of Mrtyu (Death), save us, save us. O Mahakala,
the destroyer of Tripura, obeisance to you.”

On being eulogized by Visnu, Lord Maheégvara in the form
of the Liriga appeared before them along with Amba (goddess
Parvati). He appeared to awaken (i.e. enlighten) those Suras:

70-74. “O Visnu, ye all Suras and Sages, let this be heard.
Ordinary people think that the worldly existence is eternal, while
it is only transitory. Thereby, they are agitated. O Devas and
others, of what avail are the Yajfias, austerities and activitics
connected with holy rites, if one does not perceive the (Supreme)
Atman by means of (his individual Aman)? There is no benefit
therefrom, whether they are performed collectively or separate-
ly. All of you joined together and carried out a very difficult
task, namely the churning of the ocean. T....: you did for the sake
of getting nectar. But why was it performed after rejecting
Mrtyufijaya and always disrespecting me? Hence all of you un-
doubtedly felltinto the mouth of Death.

=== PAGE 85 ===

1.i.10.75-86 81.

‘Lord Ganesa has been created by us for the purpose of
achieving success in an undertaking.

75. Those who do not bow down to Ganega as well as
Durga of similar nature will be victims of distress. There is no
doubt about this.

76. All of you are sinful and stubborn. You profess to be
learned without knowing what is right and what is wrong. You
are deluded by mere false prestige.

77-78. All of you, groups of Devas beginning with Indra,
are devoted to the Vedas. All those beginning with Indra are
mediocres, pleasure-seekers, praisc-mongers and useless ones. O
consort of Saci (i.e. Indra), you do not understand yourself on
account of delusion.

79. A great effort has been made by you for getting nectar,
O regue. You attained a kingdom by performing a hundred horse-
sacrifices. Even that is under the control of your enemies now.
O vicious one, you do not know that.

80. O deluded one, you have been eulogized by ascetics
through the Vedic statements (jmns). Those ascetics are fools.
They propitiate you, because they are prompted by different
passions,

81. O Visnu, on account of your partiality you do not know
what is good and what is otherwise. Some persons are killed by
you. O Visnu, and some have been protected.

82. You are desirous of certain things in this matter. You
are always childish in your activities. Why talk of all the other
Guardians of the Quarters?

83. Ifa matter is pursued in a way other than what is pro-
per, the result is bound to be in a way other than (what is expec-
ted). You all forgot that thing whereby your efforts are crowned
with success.

84-85. It is he by whom all (of you) have been saved from
the great fear of Kalakita today. It is he by whom you have
been saved from a poison by which Visnu is turned blue (dark-
complexioned), by which all of you were defeated and by which
all the worlds have been reduced to ash. Hence, the worship of
that noble-souled Ganega should be performed by you.

86. If at the beginning of any holy rite, people do not wor-

=== PAGE 86 ===

82 Skanda Purana

ship Ganadhipa (Ganesa), they will never realize their objectives
as in your own case.”

87. On hearing these words of Mahesa, Suras, Asuras,
Kinnaras and Caranas asked Giriga about the method of worship
in the proper manner.

CHAPTER ELEVEN?!

Procedure of Ganesa Worship: Manifestation of Laksmi

Mahesvara said:

1. In every fortnight Ganeéga should be worshipped on
the fourth day. (But) in the bright half of the month a devotee,
after taking bath, should worship always with white sesamum
seeds.?

2. After finishing all necessary daily routine religious duties,
the devotee should perform the worship of Ganesa with great
care, by means of scents, garlands, aksatas (raw unbroken rice

grains) etc.
3. At the outset, meditation on GaneSsa should be perform-
ed in accordancewith scriptural injunctions.

1, The chapter consists of two topics:
(i) The procedure of worshipping GaneSa,
(ii) The emergence of various “Gems” during the churning of the ocean.
2. VV 1-18 describe the procedure of worshipping Ganesa, It may briefly
be outlined as follows:
(1) Special day—every fourth day in a fortnight (vv 1-2).
(2) Matcrials of worship (v 3).
(3) Names of GaneSa (v 5).
(4) The five faces of Ganesa—their different complexions ctc. (vv 7-8).
(5) Weapon: in Ganesa’s ten hands.
(6) Three types of Ganega image for meditation:
(A) Sattvikaqvy 11-12a).
(B) Rajasa (vv 12b-13).
(C) Tamasa (v 14).
(7) Offering of twenty-one Dorva grass blades—one pair of blades per
name of Ganesga and Modakas (sweet eatables) (vv 15 and 16).
(8) Ten names of Ganega for worshipping as above (vv 17-18).

=== PAGE 87 ===

¥.4.11.4-15 83

4. As the worshippers are of various types having Tamasa,
Sattvika and Rdjasa traits, the names also (of Ganega) became
many in number according to their class (characterized by a
particular Guna).

5. They are as follows: Paficavaktra (Five-faced), Ganadhya-
ksa (Chief of the Ganas—Siva’s attendants), Dasabahu (Ten-arm-
ed), Trilocana (Three-eyed), Kantasphatika-sankaSa (Resembling
a shining crystal), Nilakantha (Blue-throated), Gajanana (Ele-
phant-faced).

6. I shall describe his five faces correctly.

7. The middle face is fair in colour with four teeth and three
eyes. It is beautiful with a long trunk. Inthe trunk he keeps a
modaka (a round piece of sweetmeat).

8. The other faces of Ganesa are yellow, auspicious blue,
tawny and grey. The faces are splendid and characterized by
good features.

9-10. T shall tell you the weapons in the ten hands (of
Ganesa). They are: noose, axe, lotus, goad, tusk, rosary, plough-
share, pestle, varada(mudrad—gesture) (the hand _ indicating
bestowal of boons) anda vessel containing modakas. One should
meditate that he is holding the vessel in his hand.

11-14. The meditation is of three types. In Sattvika medi-
tation contemplate thus: (He is) Lambodara (Pot-bellied). Virit-
paksa (of uneven eyes =three-eyed), Nivita (sacred thread worn
like a garland). He is having a girdle. He is scated in the Yogic
posture; the crescent-moon adorns his head.

Rajasa meditation is as in the case of men. The deity has
pure golden complexion. (He is) elephant-faced and super-natu-
ral. He has four hands, three eyes, one tusk and huge belly.

In Tamasa meditation he holds a noose and a goad (in his
hands). The lord holds a tusk and a vessel of modakas. He is
blue in colour.

Thus there are three types of Dhyana. Thereafter, the wor-
ship should be begun quickly by you all.

15. Twenty-one Dirva grass-blades are (to be) taken. Two
blades of grass are offered aftcr uttering one name. (Thus ten
names are uttered and twenty blades of grass are offered.) In the
end, all the names are uttered and one blade of grass is offered

to the Lord of Ganas.

=== PAGE 88 ===

84 Skanda Purana

16. Similarly twenty-one modakas should be offered. I shall
mention the ten names intended for worshipping separately.

17-18. The names are: 1. Ganddhipa (Lord of Ganas),
2. Umaputra (Son of Uma), 3. Agha-ndgana (Destroyer of sins),
4, Vinayaka, 5. ISaputra (Son of Lord Siva), 6. Sarva-siddhi-
pradadyaka (Bestower of all Siddhis), 7. Ekadanta (One-tusked),
8. Ibha-vaktra (Elephant-faced), 9. Miisaka-vahana (Mousc-
vehicled) and 10. Kumdra-guru (The elder brother of Kumara).
At the end of every word namastestu (Obeisance to you) should
be added. In the case of the last, the words Kumadragurave tubh-
yan namo’stu, ‘Obeisance to you, O Kumiaraguru’ should be
uttered. Thus Ganesa should be worshipped with care.

19-20, After speaking thus to Suras, Sadasiva, Sarnbhu,
the highly splendid lord, eagerly embraced Visnu who abides
in the cavity of heart, as well as Brahma, and (he) immediately
vanished. All of them bowed down to Sarnbhu and then became
engaged in worshipping Ganddhyaksa (GancSa).

2t. After worshipping him in accordance with the injunc-
tions, they became engaged in honouring him with various Upa-
cGray (ways of service) and the Dirva grass blades separately.

22. Ganesa who was contented and delighted (by their wor-
ship) bestowed boons on Devas. They circumambulated him,
bowed downto him and propitiated him.

23. Asuras who possessed only Tamas Guna did not worship
Ganesa.! The excellent Asuras were engaged _ in ridiculing Devas.

24-25. Devas finished worshipping the son of Sankara and
went to the Milk Ocean once again. Brahma, Visnu, the excel-
lent Suras, Devas, Daityas and sages made Mandara the churning
rod and Vasuki the churning rope. Keeping Visnu near them,
Devas began the churning.

26. ‘When the ocean was being churned, it was the Moon
that came out at the outset,? for the purpose of realizing the
objectives of all Devas, He was full of nectar.

1. Due to their negligence in worshipping Ganesa, Asuras did not get the
fruit (Ratnas—jewels) of their labour of churning the ocean.
2. The following is the serial order of the ‘Gems’ that were churned out
from the ocean:
1. The Moon

=== PAGE 89 ===

1.i.11.27-37 85

Saunaka said:

27-29. Osage of holy rites, was the Moon formerly placed
inthe ocean? By whom was he placed? It was told by you
formerly that the excellent gems like the elephant etc. (had been
cast into the ocean). O lord, tell me all these things briefly in the
beginning. After understanding these, all of us shall later describe
them.

On hearing their words, Sita began his narrative:

30. Candra (the Moon) is watery by nature, O Brahmanas.
He was born as the son of Atri. He was endowed with all good
qualities. He was born of Anasiiya from a part of Brahma.
Durvasas was born from a part of Rudra and Dattaka (i.e.
Datta) was born from a part of Visnu.

31. Onsceing the MiJk Ocean being churned, Candra_ be-
came delighted. On seeing the Moon, the Milk Ocean too became
extremely attached to him.

32. Since both of them liked each other, Candra entered the
Ocean. Let this be heard, O excellent Brahmanas. In front of and
inthe presence of Devas, Candra became filled with nectar.

33. Onseeing the splendour of Candra, the Nirdjana tite
(waving light around the face) was immediately performed by
the groups of Devas with respect to Candra, along with the loud
and tumu!tuous sounds of musical instruments, drums of many
types and conchs.

34. They all then bowed down to him along with Suras,
Asuras and Danavas. Then they asked Garga about the genuine
inherent power of Candra.1

35-37. Thereupon, Garga told them, “All the Planets are
powerful today. All the excellent Planets are in their central

. Surabhi—Wish-yieiding cow and other cows
. Kalpavrksa (Wish-yielding divine trees)
Kaustubha, Cintamani
Uccaibérava horse
Airavata elephant
Wine and intoxicants
Laksmi
1. This is known as ‘Candra-bala’. All Planets became favourable duc to
this.

PAAWAYI

=== PAGE 90 ===

86 Skanda Purana

positions. (Therefore they are beneficial) to you. Guru
(Jupiter) has come in conjunction with Candra (the Moon).

Budha (Mercury) has also come in his contact. So also the Sun,

Sukra (Venus), Sani (Saturn) and the great Planet Angaraka
(Mats). Hence the power and influence of Candra is very excel-
lent for the realization of your objectives. This Muhirta (auspi-
cious time) named Gomanta’ is the bestower of victory.”

38. At thisencouraging assurance of the noble-souled Garga,
the mighty Devas began to churn the ocean vigorously and roar-
ed (lustily in their eagerness).

39. Remembering Mahega and Ganega again and again,
those noble-souled (Devas) of firm holy rites attained double
strength.

40. During churning, Surabhi (divine cow) came out
directly for the sake of the accomplishment of the tasks of
Devas, from the ocean that was roaring with a rumbling sound
on all sides.

41. Tawny in colour and with quite heavy udders, the cow,
in a contented mood, came very slowly floating ove: the waves.

42. On seeing Kamadhenu (Wish-yielding Cow) coming up,
all Suras and Asuras showered flowers on that (cow) of un-
measured splendour.

43. Various kinds of trumpets and musical instruments were
played and drums were beaten. She was brought from the
middle of the waters (though) surrounded by hundreds of cows.

44. Among them there were cows of various colours such as.
blue, black, tawny, partridge-coloured, smoke-coloured, dark-
coloured, red ones, wood-apple-coloured and_ reddish-brown
ones. Surabhi was seen accompanied by these cows.

45. Sages who were delighted instantly entreated Devas and
Asuras (to give to them) Kamadhenu which was closely sur-
rounded by them (Devas and Asuras).

46. “These cows along with Surabhi should be given to all
Brahmayas belonging to various Gotras. There is no doubt
about it.”

47. On being requested by them, Suras and Asuras gave
those cows to them in order to gratify Siva. Those Surabhis

1. Gomanta—It may mean at the time of sunrise.

=== PAGE 91 ===

1.i.11.48-61 87

(cows) were accepted by the noble-minded sages of great auspi-
ciousness and excessive merit.

48. Then Punydhavacana: (the formal religious declaration
‘This is an auspicious day’) was performed for Suras by all those
sages in order to enable Devas to achieve their objects and to
cause the destruction of Asuras.

49-50. All of them once again exerted themselves very well
and churned the Milk Ocean. From the ocean that was being
churned rose up Kalpavrksa, Parijata, Cita and Santanaka.
They set apart those trees on one side, like the city of Gandhar-
vas. Immediately those wise (Suras and Asuras) resumed the
churning of the Milk Ocean powerfully in all earnestness.

51. From the ocean that was being churned emerged a high-
ly refulgent, extremely bright, most excellent gem having the
brilliance of the Sun. It was called Kaustubha.

52-53. With its brilliance, it illuminated the three worlds.
Keeping the Cintamani (a miraculous stone) in front, they saw
the Kaustubha brightening the worlds. All those Suras gave the
Kaustubha to Visnu. Suras and Asuras of enhanced strength
lustily roared again and began to churn the ocean keeping
Cintamani in the middle.

54-58. From the ocean that was being churned rose up
Uccaihsravas, the wonderful gem of a horse, and then Airavata,
the gem of an elephant, along with sixty-four other white ele-
phants each with four tusksand in the rut. They set apart all
these in the middle and churned once again. Many precious
things then arose from the ocean that was being churned, viz. the
wine Vijaya, Bhrngi, garlic, turnip, the poisonous and highly
intoxicating Dhattira (Datura Alba) which causes too much
of madness, and Puskara. All these were placed on the shore
of the ocean without any hurry. Again those great Asuras churned
the occan along with the excellent Suras.

59-61. Asthe ocean was being churned once again, that

1. Punyahavacana—When a person intends to perform an auspicious
rite, he invites Brahmanas, honours them, requests them with palms folded:
«May you declare the day auspicious for such and such a rite’, and the
Brahmanas respond ‘Om, may it be auspicious.” Each of the Brahmanas is
to repeat it with words, ‘Svasti’, “Punyaham’ and ‘rddhim’ (Apastamba Dh. S.
1.4.13.8; cf. Baudhayana Gr. Sesa Siitra 1,10).

=== PAGE 92 ===

88 Skanda Purdna

divine Laksmi,! the sole protector of the worlds, rose up from it.
Those who are the knowers of Brahman call her Anviksikt
(Metaphysics). Others praise her as Milavidya. Some com-
petent persons call her Brahmavidyd. Some call her Siddhi
(Success), Rddhi (Prosperity), Ajfia@ (Command) and Asa
(Hope). Some Yogins call her Vaiswavi. Some exponents of
Maya always engaged in Yogic practice call her Mayda. All
people call her Kenasiddhantayukta (the one associated with
Brahman—the Principle spoken of in the Kenopanisad). Those
who are equipped with the power of knowledge call her Yogamaya.

62-69. They saw Mahdalaksmi coming slowly. She was very
fair. youthful and tender with the filaments of the lotus for her
ornaments. She was sweetly smiling with beautiful teeth. A lady
of slender shade, she had the fresh youthfulness as an adorn-
ment. Her garments and ornaments were varicgated with the
refulgence of many gems. Her lips were red like the Birnba
(Memordica Mcnadelpha) fruits; the nose was very beautiful
and the neck and the eyes were very splendid. She was very
slender with fine waistline and splendid buttocks. The hips were
large. Her lotus-like face was brilliantly illuminated by means of
a number of gems that served the purpose of the lights in a Nira-
Jana rite for her face. Her face was fascinating and delightful.
She was remarkably splendid with her necklaces and anklets. An
umbrella was gorgeously held above her head. She was being
fanned with chowries gently shaken by the waves of Ganga. She
was riding a white elephant and was being eulogized by great
sages. With the ends of her hands, she held a garland of the
flowers of heavenly trees along with jasmine flowers.

On seeing her Devas were eager to look at her at close quar-
ters. But she, Mahdlaksmi, the chaste ilady, looked at Devas,
Danavas, Siddhas, Caranas and Serpents in the same manner as
a mother looks (affectionately) at her children.

70. Devas were glanced at by that Laksmi. So they became

1. Laksmi is identified with Brahma-vidya, Anviksik!, Vaisnavi, Rddhi,
Siddhi and also with Uma as in the Kenopanisad 25 (umarh haimavatim). She,
being the mother-goddess looked with affectionate glance at all beings but
married Visnu.

=== PAGE 93 ===

1.i.11.71-79 89

Prosperous instantaneously and were characterized by those
indications of attainment of the kingdom. Daityas who were not
glanced at by Laksmi became devoid of splendour (royal glory).

71-72. She glanced (lovingly) at Mukunda who was blue in
complexion like Tamala (Xanthochymus Pictorius), whose cheeks
and nose were very handsome, who shone brilliantly with his
superior person and was characterized by Srivatsa and looked
(at everyone mercifully).

On seeing him, Laksmi suddenly got down from her elephant
with the garland of forest flowers (still in her hands). With a
broad smile, she put round the neck of the Supreme Being Visnu,
the garland that was wreathed by Sri herself and wherein bees
swarmed together.

73. She then sat there leaning on the left side of the great
Atman. On seeing them both, Suras and Daityas experienced a
wonderful joy. So also Siddhas, Apsards (celestial damsels),
Kinnaras and Caranas.

74. At that union of Laksmi and Narayana, the delight of
everycne was very great. All the worlds, all the people every-
where were simultaneousiy happy and joyous.

75. Mahavisnu was sought and wooed by Laksmi. Laksmi
was wooed by him alone. Thus through mutual love they became
absorbed in looking at each other.

76. The sound of the various musical instruments and drums
such as Pafahas, conchs, Mrdangas, Anakas, Gomukhas, Bheris
and Jharjharis was very tumultuous.

71-19. The songs of the musicians were immensely splendid.
With the four types of musical instruments, viz. Tata, Vitata,
Ghana and Susira, the groups of Gandharvas and celestial dam-
sels propitiated the all-pervading Lord Hari in every way. Gan-
dharvas, being proficient in the art of music delighted the lord.
Narada, Tumburu and other Gandharvas and Yaksas then sang
sweetly. The groups of Suras and Siddhas served thus lord Nara-
yana who is in the form of the Supreme Atman and whose
enlightenment was boundless, deep and profound.

=== PAGE 94 ===

90 Skanda Purana
CHAPTER TWELVE

Devas Taste the Divine Nectar

Lomasa said:

1. After bowing down to Janardana, the Supreme Being,
along with Rama, the groups of Suras and Asuras once again
churned the ocean for the sake of Nectar.

2. From the ocean that was being churned, came outa
youthful person of very great fame, well-known as Dhanvantari.?
He was the great conqueror of Mrtyu (Death).

3-4. He held in his hands a pot filled with nectar. While all
Suras were (gladly) looking at the fascinating Lord Dhanvantari,
Daityas wanted to attack him in a body and snatch away the pot
(of nectar) that had been held in the hands of Dhanvantari.

5. The excellent physician surrounded by a scries of waves
was advancing slowly when he was seen by Vrsaparvan.

6. The pot that was in his hand was forcibly taken by him
(Vrsaparva). Thereupon, Asuras roared in a terrific manner.

7. Seizing and taking the pot filled with nectar, the impa-
tient Daityas came down to Patala. Then Devas became confused
and embarrassed.

8. They (Devas) who were well-prepared and ready for a
battle, pursued them with a desire to fight. Turning towards
Devas, Bali spoke thus:

Bali said:

9. O Devas, we are contented and gratified with the nectar
only. You excellent Suras do go back quickly.

10. Please go back to Trivistapa (Heaven) joyously. Of what
avail are we to you? Formerly we entered into a friendly alliance

1. This chapter describes how Asuras were cheated by Visnu by assuming
the form of an enchantress and were deprived of their share of Amrta.

2. Dhanvantari: Mbh, Adi 18.38 also states that Dhanvantari came out
of ocean along with a pot of Amrta. He is regarded as an incarnation of
Visnu. This divine physician Dhanvantari is different from Dhanvantari,
the physician-king of Varanasi. He learnt 4)urveda from sage Bharadvaja
and composed a systematic work of eight parts on Ayurveda and taught it to
different disciples (BdP II.3, 67.1-24).

=== PAGE 95 ===

1i.12.11-20 91

with you only because we wanted to realize our common objec-
tives. Now it has been known to you. Do not have any doubt
in it hereafter.

11. Thus rebuked and repulsed by Bali, those excellent Suras
went back to Lord Narayana along the path by which they had
come.

12. On meeting him, all the Suras whose desires were frus-
trated, were consoled by Visnu with various kinds of words cap-
able of pacifying them:

13-14. “In this matter, do not be afraid unnecessarily. I shall
bring back the nectar’, said Lord Visnu, the refuge of those who
are helpless. The slayer of Madhu (Visnu) having asked all the
Suras to stay there itself, assumed the form of a charming lady,
Mohini, and appeared before Daityas.

15. Bythat time Daityas had become highly excited and
agitated. They spoke to one another (about this). For the sake of
nectar, all the Daityas began arguing with one another.

16-17. While this was going on, fortunately they saw a wo-
man fascinating the minds of all living beings (who had assumed
the form of Mohini). They were struck with wonder and with
covetous eyes (they stared at her). Honouring her, Bali, the king
of Daityas, said:

Bali said:

18. O highly fortunate lady, this nectar should be (properly)
distributed by you, so that it can reach all. Be quick about it. Do
as I request.

19. On being requested thus, she smilingly said to Bali:
“Women should never be trusted by a wise man.t

20. The following are the inherent natural defects of wo-
men: Falsehood, daring, deception, foolishness, excessive greed,
uncleanliness and ruthlessness.

1, These traditional verses are meant for creating disaffection about
Samsara. Mohini (Visnu) cleverly uses them to create confidence about her
in the gullible Asuras. The whole chapter shows how Mohini cunningly
appeals to the noble qualities of Asuras and cheats them.

=== PAGE 96 ===

92 Skanda Purana

21. Lack of genuine affection as well as mischievous cunn-
ingness should also be known as existing in them, in fact. These
defects should undoubtedly be known as existing (even) in one’s
own wives.

22. Just as wolves among beasts of prey, crows among birds
and foxes among wild animals are givento killing, so also wo-
men among human beings should always be understood by the
wise as exceedingly mischievous and cunning.

23. How can there be friendship and alliance between me
and you all. Should this not be considered? Who are you and
who am I?

24. Hence everything should be done by you after careful
consideration with your keen intellect. Of course, you are very
efficient in knowing what should be done and what should not
be done, O excellent Asuras.”

Bali said:

25-26. The women mentioned by you are the uncivilized
ones of the rural area. They have no culture and they are ‘the
favourites of the vulgar and the rustic people. But, O splendid
lady, you are not one among those women mentioned (by you).
Why do you talk much? Do according to our directions.

After Bali had spoken, Mohini said this:
27-29. *O lord, I shall follow your instructions whether
they are good or bad.”

Bali said:
Today distribute the nectar among all in a befitting manner.

We shall take what is given by you. It is true. I am speaking the
truth.

On being told thus, goddess Mohini who was auspicious in
every respect, spoke to all the Asuras desirous of following the
conventional propriety:

The Lord (i.e. Mohin!) said:

30-32. By a stroke of good luck, all of you have become
blessed and achieved your desired objective, O excellent Asuras.

=== PAGE 97 ===

1.i.12.33-45 93

Do observe fast today and let the preliminary consecratory rite
of the nectar be performed. Something is yet (to be observed)
with a desire for your welfare. Tomorrow you can have the
Parana (ceremonial breakfast). Your desire for observances and
worships (is commendable). For the sake of propitiating Iga, the
Viniyoga (ceremonious disposal) rite should be performed by an
intelligent (devotee) with a tenth part of the amount legally and
justifiably earned by him.

33. Saying ‘So be it’’, they all honoured whatever was said
by Devamaya. Deluded and not being very proficient and ex-
perienced, they did everything advised by Devamaya.

34. Very big, fascinating, lustrous and rich mansions were
built by the Asura, Maya.

35. They sat in those abodes after taking bath and adorning
themselves befittingly. Excited much, they placed the full pot (of
nectar) in front of themselves.

36. With very great joy, all of them kept vigil during the
night. At dawn, they engaged themselves in taking early morning
ablutions.

37. After finishing all necessary daily routine duties, Asuras,
the chief of whom was Bali, sat in rows in due order. They were
eager to drink (the nectar).

38-41. The following were the important ones among
Daityas etc.: Bali, Vrsaparvan, Namuci, Sankha, Sudarhstra,
Samhladi, Kalanemi, Vibhisana, Vatapi, Ilvala,Kumbha, Nikut-
bha, Pracchada, Sunda, Upasunda, Nigurnbha, Sumbha, Mahisa,
Mahisaksa, the valorous Bidalaksa, the mighty-armed Ciksura,
Jrrnbhana, Vrsdsura, Vibahu, Bahuka, Ghora, Ghoradargana,
Rahu and Ketu. These and many other Daityas, Danavas and
Raksasas sat there in due order.

42-43. There were rows and rows of those Daityas number-
ing crores and crores. Now, O Brahmanas, listen to what happen-
ed thereafter and what great things were done by that goddess in
the matter regarding (the distribution of) the nectar.

44-45. All were informed by her immediately (to be ready).
She took up the pot. That Vigvumohini was endowed with the
greatest splendour. The goddess appeared splendid with the pot
Testing in her hands. The (goddess) conducive to the auspicious-

=== PAGE 98 ===

94 Skanda Purana

ness of all auspicious things in the universe shone with the great-
est lustre.

46. At the very same instant, all the Suras who had halos
around them, came to the place where those excellent Asuras
were present.

47. On seeing them, Mohini, the most excellent one among
young women, said immediately:

Mohini said:

48. These (people) should be known as guests. They are
conducive to the accomplishment of every thing virtuous. If you
keep the promise given to me, something should be given to
these in accordance with your capacity. You are the authority in
this regard. Do everything now. Do not delay.

49. Those who render help to others in accordance with
their capacity are blessed ones. They should be known to be very
pure and protectors of the worlds.

50-51. Those who endeavour only for (filling in) their belly
should be known as destined to suffer. There is no doubt about
this. Hence, O (friends) of auspicious rites, this should be divided
by me. You give Devas whatever you like or dislike.

52. When these words were spoken by the goddess, the
energetic and alert Asuras did so. The Asuras invited all Devas
including Vasava.

53. All of them sat, O Brahmanas, for the sake of receiving
the nectar. While they were occupying their seats, Mohini who
was conversant with all holy rites and virtuous acts, smilingly
said to the Asuras these great words:

Mohint said:

54-55. The Vedic Text prescribes that the guests should be
honoured at the very outset. Hence, you who are all devoted to
the gods and the Vedas speak out immediately. So whom shall I
give the nectar at the very outset? Indeed, let those whose leader
is Bali, let those persons of exalted fortune say.

56. Then the goddess was told by Bali. ‘‘(Do) what appeals
to your mind. O lady of beautiful face, you are our mistress.
There is no doubt about it.” .

=== PAGE 99 ===

1.i.12.57-68 95

57-58. On being honoured thus by that Bali of pure soul, the
goddess hurriedly took up the pot for the purpose of serving.

A silk cloth shone over her thighs resembling the trunk of a
royal elephant. She walked rather slowly on account of the (huge)
buttocks. Her limbs were agitated and excited due to inebriation.
With the tinkling of the golden anklets, she appeared to be coo-
ing (like a cuckoo). Her breasts resembled pitchers. With the
pot (of nectar) in her hand, she entered (the place where they
were seated).

59-60. Then the goddess Mohini proceeded serving the group
of Devas directly. She showered on Devas the juice of the nectar
again and again as though their sole diet consisted of this nectar.
The groups of Devas, the chief among whom was Devendra, and
the groups of Gandharvas, Yaksas and celestial damsels along
with Guardians of the Quarters swallowed again and again the
juice of nectar served by that great (goddess) of cosmic form.

61. All Daityas, the chief among whom was Bali, O leading
Brahmanas, continued to be seated there. They were anxious and
afflicted with hunger. The resolute Daityas kept quiet and were
engaged in meditation.

62-63. On seeing those Daityas in such a plight after resort-
ing to a delusion, the two leading Daityas Rahu and Ketu assum-
ed the forms of Devas and hurriedly sat in the row of Devas for
receiving the nectar.

64-65. The exceedingly invincible Rahu was desirous of
drinking the nectar. When this was reported to Visnu of un=
measured splendour by the Sun and the Moon, the head of Rahu
of deformed body was cut off. The head went up into the sky.
The headless body dropped down on the earth. Rolling down, it
crushed many mountains into small particles.

66-68. The entire world including the mountains was reduc-
ed to fine dust. On seeing that the entire universe consisting of
mobile and immobile beings was smashed to fragments by her
{ie. Mohini) through that body (of Rahu), Mahadeva stood
above it. The abode of all Devas was at the soles of her feet. The
affliction (7) was near her, hence the name Nivdsa' (abode)
(obscure).

1. The name Nivésa reminds one of Nevasa, a village in Ahmednagar
District in Maharashtra where the incident is traditionally said to have taken

=== PAGE 100 ===

96 Skanda Purana

69. Since her lotus-like feet had been the abode (Glaya) of
great ones (mahatam), the enchantress of the three worlds became
reputed as Mahdlaya.

70. Ketu vanished into the sky in the form of smoke. It was
after handing over the nectar to the Moon that he vanished thus.

71. Vasudeva is the origin of the universe. He is the sup-
reme cause of all the worlds. It was due to Visnu’s grace that
everything took place favouring the realization of Devas’
objectives.

72. Since the fate was adverse, the enterprise of Mohini was
conducive to the destruction of Asuras. Understand that all exer-
tions without (favourable) fate are useless.

73. The churning of the ocean was conducted by all of
them simultaneously. But, it ended in the success of Devas, while
Asuras failed (in their objective).

74. Therefore, they were furious at the excellent Devas.
Daityas who were deluded took up many weapons and missiles.
When Visnu went away they began to roar.

CHAPTER THIRTEEN
The Fight between Devas and Asuras

Lomasa said:

1-2. Then (those Asuras) roared at the Suras. the chicf
among whom was Indra, and whose strength and valour was
great. They challenged them for a fight. The noble-souled son
of Virocana got into his aerial chariot. He was accompanied by
Daityas who were very powerful and who came in various
(groups). With his entire army he rushed at Suras in a terrible
way.

3. They had assumed their (original real) forms. They

place. There is an old temple of Mohini (Mahalasa, Oya). Archaeologically
that is a very ancient site in Maharashtra. If the conjecture be correct, the
author might have probably belonged to this part of the country. But vv 66-
68 mention the name of Somanatha (Saurashtra).