=== PAGE 1 ===

THE
SKANDA-PURANA

PART II

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS
PRIVATE LIMITED @ DELHI

=== PAGE 2 ===

First Edition: Delhi, 1950

Also available at:

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS
41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Madras 600 004
16 St. Mark's Road, Bangalore 560 001
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001

PRINTED IN INDIA

BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS,

A-4S NARAINA, PHASE I, NEW DELHI 110028 AND PUBLISHED

BY NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR MOTILAL BANARSIDASS
PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD., BUNGALOW ROAD, DELHI 110 007

=== PAGE 3 ===

CONTENTS

Book I: MAHESV ARAKHANDA
SECTION I: KAUMARIKAKHANDA

Chapters

1.

Pen

Redemption of Five Apsaras by Arjuna

Glorification of Holy Places

Greatness of the Tirtha at the Confluence of Mahi and Sea

Dialogue between Narada and Arjuna: Different Kinds of
Charitable Gifts

Dialogue between Narada and Sutanu

Narada Settles Brahmanas at the Holy Spot

Nadijangha’s Story

Prakarakarna’s Story

The Vulture’s Story

Revival of Indradyumna’s Renown

The Previous Births of the Tortoise

Great Efficacy of the Worship of Siva: The Story of
Sage Lomasa

Satarudriya Lingas

The Legend of Vajranga

The Birth of the Asura Taraka

Taraka and Devendra Prepare for War

The Fight between Yama and Grasana

The Battle between the Armies of Taraka and the Devas

The Battle between Visnu and Kalanemi

Visnu Fights with Daityas

Taraka’s Victory in the Battle

The Birth of Parvati

Himavan Consoled

10
21

51

74

BRE

136

155
161
169
193
199

=== PAGE 4 ===

24.
25.

26.
27.

29.
31.
32.
33.
35.

37.

39.

41.

42.
43.

45.

47.

49.

51.

52.
53.

IRA

Contents

Kama is Burned

Mahadeva Meets Parvati:Eagerness for Marriage
with Parvatt

The Marriage of Hara and Gauri Celebrated

Parvati Enraged: The Origin of Ganesa

Parvati Goes to the Mountain for Penance

Kumara Becomes Cominander-in-chief of the
Deva Army: (i) Legend of Arbuda

Skanda Installed as the Commander-in-chief

Kumira’s March against the City of Tarakasura

Taraka is Slain

The Greatness of Lingas Installed by Kumara

The Greatness of Kumaresa

Greatness of StarnbheSvara

Description of the Five Lingas Concluded

BhuvanakoSa: Evolution of the Universe: Description of
Dvipas or Continents

The Position of the Higher World

The Greatness of Barkaresvara

The Birth of Mahakala: The Arrangement of Four Yugas

Kinds of Sins; Procedure of Siva Worship; Rules of
Good Conduct

The Story of Brahmana Aitareya

Establishment of Bhattaditya

Description of the Divyas (Ordeals)

The Story of Nandabhadra

Events Connected with Baladitya

Installation of Goddesses at Bahidaka Tirtha

The Description of Somanatha

Dialogue between Kamatha and the Sun-god

Human Body--A Miniature Cosmos:-Departure of the
Soul to the Next World

The Greatness of Jayaditya

The Story of Kotitirtha

Greatness of Tripurusa$4la and the Glory of Narada’s Lake

The Glory of Narada Idol

The Characteristics of Yoga

Brahmesvara, MokseSvara and GarbheSvara

The Glory of Nilakantha

204

ZERIRRIB BRBB

gs

315
335

378
401
410
418
430

453
456

470
488
482

491
50S

=== PAGE 5 ===

Contents

58.
59.
Oo.
61.
62.
63.
“4

INDEX

End of Arjuna’s Pilgrimage

The Departure of Ghatotkaca to Pragjyotisa

The Birth of Barbarika

The Liturgy of Ganesvara

The Practice of Mahavidya

Vijaya’s Accomplishment of Siddhi

The Greatness of Bhimesvara

Disagreement between Bhima and Yudhisthira:
Installation of Kale$vart

Krsna beheads Barbarika: Greatness of Guptaksetra
Concluded

513
519
325
531
538
S45

551

562

575

=== PAGE 7 ===

SKANDA PURANA

Book 1: MAHESVARAKHANDA
Section Il: KAUMARIKAKHANDA!

CHAPTER ONE

Redemption of Five Apsaras by Arjuna®

Obeisance to Sri GaneSa. Om, salute to Brhaspati. Obeisance
to that Brahma. Bow to Visnu.

The holy sages said:

1. O wide-eyed one, recount those five Tirthas (i.e. holy places
of ablution) which are on the shores of the Southern Sea. They
are spoken of very highly (by people).

1. The section called Kaumarikakhanda appears to be an independent
work mainly for the glorification of the sacred place Mahisdgara-San-
gama (‘Confluence of Mahi with the Sea’). In concluding this Khanda the
author specifically states that the sacred episode of the Confluence of Mahi
with the Sea is thus described (ii.66.126) and this is followed by the Phala-
Sruti of hearing etc. of this. There isa deliberate attempt to integrate the
followers of Siva and Visnu in the last two verses: The devoted listener
of this Khanda “will go to the region of Rudra” (Rudrasalokatam vrajet|—
ii.66.134) and ‘will go to the region of Visnu"’ (Visnupadam prayati—
ii.66, 135).

The author of this work (as will be pointed out at relevant places)
differs from the legends about Siva and Skanda as described in the previous
section, viz. Kedarakhanda. Both Kedarakhanda and Kauméarikakhanda
have their own independent Phala-Sruti verses. Even stylistically the
authors of these sections appear different unless we suppose that the author
improved his style in the second section, viz. Kaumarikakhanda.

2. This refers to Arjuna’s self-exile as an expiation for his entry into
the armoury to protect a Brahmana’s cows, while Draupadi and Yudhi-
sthira were together there (Mbh, Adi 212.19-35). During his exile, he went
to the South for pilgrimage, where he bathed in five lakes avoided by the
public due to the crocodiles therein. Arjuna bathed in them and dragged out

=== PAGE 8 ===

2 Skanda Purana

2. Narada and others say that these Tirthas yield the benefit
of all the Tirthas. We wish to hear the story and the greatness of
those Tirthas.

Ugragravas said:

3. Listen to the great power of Kumaranatha with wonder-
fully meritorious holy stories. It is what Dvaipayana (Vyasa)
formerly recounted to me with body covered with hair standing
on end and drops of perspiration of delight.

4. In this connection, let the Garhd (i.e. religious verse) sung
by Kumara be heard, O excellent sages. It has been adored by all
the Devas, Sages and Manes.

5. “If aman resorts to Madhvacara-Stumbha-Tirtha (Sadh-
vacara-S tambha-Tirtha) his residence will invariably be in Brah-
maloka like that of mine.

6. Visnuloka is greater than Brahmaloka; Siva’s world is
greater than that; since he loves his son, Guhaloka is the
greatest.”

7. Inthis connection, there is a wonderful story of Phalguna
(i.e. Arjuna) formerly described by Narada. I shall tell that story
in detail to you, O excellent sages.

8. Formerly, fora certain reason, from Manikiita’, Kiriti
(Arjuna) went to the five Tirthas on the Southern Sea in order
to take his holy bath.

one by one the crocodiles, when they caught hold of him while bathing.
Their curse was thus terminated and they became celestial damsels again
(Mbh, Adi, Chs. 215-216).

The author of the Purana has not only borrowed the story but also most
of the verses from the above chapters of Mbh, as can be secn from the com-
parative table of identical verses in Mbh and SkP:

Mbh, Adi, Ch. 215 SkP /. ii. 1
Verse No. 7 14
8-23 23-37
Ch, 216
1-7 39-44
9-19a 66-75

1. Khambhata or Cambay in Gujarat (De 194).

2. V.1. Maniparatah is better as it is supported by Mbh, Adi, Ch. 214.
This Manipfira was the then capital of Kalinga. It is identified with Manika
Pattam, a sea port at the mouth of Chilka lake (De. 126).

=== PAGE 9 ===

1.4i.1.9-19 3

9-12. Out of fear, ascetics always cused to avoid those Tir-
thas. The first Tirtha of KumareSa (Lord Karttikeya) is a favourite
of the sage Kumfrega.! The second one of StarmbhefSa is a favou-
rite of the sage Saubhadra. The other (third) one is Barkaregvara.
Jt is an excellent Tirtha loved by Paulomi. The fourth one is
Mahakala, a favourite of the king Karandhama. The fifth one
is called Siddhega. It is a favourite Tirtha of Bharadvaja. The
leading scion of the family of Kuru saw all these five Tirthas.
They were highly meritorious but they were avoided by ascetics.

13-15. On seeing them nearby, he asked the great sages, the
followers of Narada: «These Tirthas are very beautiful and have
wonderful powers. Tell me, why are they always avoided by the
expounders of the Vedas?”

The Ascetics replied:

Five crocodiles live in them. They take away the ascetics.
Hence, O Scion of the family of Kuru, these Tirthas are avoided.

On hearing this (that warrior) of great arms made up his
mind to go to those Tirthas.

16-17. Then those ascetics told him: “O Phalguna, it does
not behove you to go therein. Many kings and sages have
been killed by crocodiles. In the course of the last twelve years,
you have taken holy dips in millions of Tirthas. Of what worth
are these Tirthas unto you? Do not become one observing (the
suicidal vow of) Patangavrata (i.e. way of moths falling into the
fire).”’

Arjuna said:

18. May the quintessence of what has been spoken (advised)
by (you) people showering kindness (on me) be explained here
(and now). A man seeking piety and virtue should not be pre-
vented by noble-souled ones.

19. Ifa foolish-minded person prevents a man desirous of
performing holy rites, he will be reduced to ash by the deep sighs
of the people dependent on him.

——_—____

1. Mbh, Adi 215.3 attributes this to sage Agastya and not to sage
KumireSa. But as no name of a sage is given in the text, textually Kumareéa
becomes the sage attached to this Tirtha.

=== PAGE 10 ===

4 Skanda Purdna

20. Life is momentary like the lightning-streak. If that is
spent for the sake of holy rites, let it pass away like that. What
is the harm therein? .

21. Only they are the genuine men on the earth, whose
life, wealth, wives, sons, fields and abodes are utilized (and sacri-
ficed) for the sake of Dharma.

The Ascetics replied:

22. Since you say in this manner, O Partha, let your life be
prolonged; may your love be always directed towards righteous
life. Go ahead and do as you desire.

23. On being told thus, the most excellent one among the
descendants of Bharata bowed down to them. He was encoura-
ged with blessings. He went ahead to visit those holy Tirthas.

24. Thereafter that hero, the scorcher of enemies, went to
the excellent Tirtha of the great sage Saubhadra. He plunged
into it and began to bathe in it.

25. Thereupon a great crocodile that had been moving
about under the waters caught hold of Dhanafijaya, the son of
Kunti, a tiger among men.

26. Kaunteya seized that tremulous aquatic animal with
force. That hero of mighty arms, the most excellent one among
mighty persons, rose up along with it.

27. On being raised up by Arjuna of great renown that
crocodile became a woman of auspicious features adorned with
all ornaments.

28-30. Her tresses were lustrous, O Brahmanas. She was
very charming and had a divine form.

On seeing this great miracle, Dhanafijaya, the son of Kunti,
became excessively delighted. He spoke these words to that
woman:

“O lady of auspicious features, who are you? Whence did
this happen that you became an aquatic animal? What for have
you committed this great sin?”

The woman replied:
lam a celestial damsel, O son of Kunti, and I used to roam
about and stay in the forests of Devas.

=== PAGE 11 ===

Lit. 1.31-43 5

3]. Tama permanent beloved of Kubera, named Varca. O
warrior of powerful arms, I had four other friends, all of whom
were splendid ones, capable of going (anywhere) as they pleased.

32-36. I started along with them from the abode of the king
of Devas. Then all of us saw a Brahmana who was abodeless
(i.e. a Sarnydsin). He was handsome. He was reciting the Vedic
Mantras. He was residing in a lonely place. O hero, that forest
was enveloped in the splendour of his penance. Like the sun, he
brightened the entire region (around him). On seeing his penance,
wonderful appearance and handsome features, I descended down
to that spot with a desire to cause some hindrance to his penance.
All of us, Saurabheyi, Sameyi, Budbuda, Lata and I simultaneo-
usly approached that Brahmana, O descendant of Bharata, sing-
ing, sporting, cajoling and enticing him.

37-38. That sage of great heroism did not turn his mind or
attention towards us. That excessively refulgent one did not
waver at all. He remained engaged in the spotless penance. O
great Ksatriya hero, that Brahmana became angry with us and
cursed us: “You will become crocodiles and stay under water for
a hundred! years.”

39. Thereupon all of us became distressed and pained, O
most excellent one among the descendants of Bharata. We sought
refuge in that Brahmanga ascetic devoid of sins:

40. «We had become arrogant due to our beauty, youthful
age and love. We have committed an improper thing. O Brah-
mana, it behoves you to forgive us.

41. This aloneis a slaughter (death) of us that we came
here to tempt you whose soul has reached a praiseworthy state.
That is enough for us, O ascetic,

42. People who deliberate on virtue and piety consider that
women have been created as those who should never be killed.
Hence, O sage conversant with Dharma, this view of learned
men (should be accepted by you) righteously.

43. Good men protect and defend those who seek refuge

1, At the time of cursing, the Brahmana meant ‘permanently’ by the
term ‘fafam’, but when the celestial damsels begged pardon, he restricted
the term to one hundred years only, Vide v 65 below which is a quotation
from Mbh, Adi 216.8.

=== PAGE 12 ===

6 Skanda Purdna

in them. You are worthy of being sought refuge in. We have
approached you. Hence it behoves you to forgive us.” ‘

44. On being told thus, that righteous Brahmana,, the per-
former of splendid rites, having the lustre of the sun and the
moon, condescended to favour us, O heroic warrior.

The Brahmana said:

45. Considering the conduct of all of you I am a bit con-
fused in my mind. Alas, yourimpudence and temerity! Alas, your
delusions! Your inclination towards sinful activity!

46. If people were to be aware that deathis always perched
on their heads, they cannot even relish their food; much less
would the commission of a misdemeanour appeal to them.

47. Alas, the birth of one among human beings is the
rarest among all births; even that is being slighted by certain
vicious ones deluded by women!

48. We put to them this question: What is the cause of your
birth? What is the gain thereby? Think about this seriously in
your minds and then let it be replied.

49. Wedo not blame these (women) from whom comes
birth. We censure only those persons who are reckless with them,
who associate with them without any restraint.

50. Since couples are created by the Lotus-born Lord for
the growth of the universe, that process should be maintained.
There is no sin or harm in it.

51. The maintenance of the stage of a householder is bless-
ed, if it is carried out with that woman who is given (in marriage)
by kinsmen in the presence of Fire-god and in the assembly
of Brahmanas. Only then can it yield all benefits.

52-53. The union of Prakyti and Purusa with each other can
be conducive to Guna only when it is achieved. If it is not achie-
ved, it is for Aguna (absence of Guna). In this manner, one’s
own householdership achieved with effort is excellent and is con-
ducive to great Guna (i.e. goodness, welfare). If it is not achieved,
it is for Aguna (i.e. evil).

54. In the city with five entrances, the gatekeeper is accom-
panied by eleven soldiers. (Though) he is with his woman, how
can he have many children if he is insentient ?!

1, City=body; five entrances =five seats of the sense organs; eleven sol-

=== PAGE 13 ===

Lii.1.55-61 7

55. The union with a woman is for the service to the whole
universe through Paficayajitas’ (‘five holy rites’) and other sacred
activities. Alas, it is being utilized otherwise by foolish persons!

56. Oh, listen. If not, your desire of listening becomes
splendid (2). Still we cry and shout with our arm raised. But
who hears??

57. The semen virile is the essence of the six Dh@tus* (‘essen-
tial constituents of the body’). If a good Yoni (vagina) is
avoided and it is deposited in a Kuyoni (despicable Yoni), the
defects are many as told by Yama.

58. At the outset he is the enemy of medicinal herbs. Then
he is the enemy of self, enemy of departed parents, enemy of the
whole universe. He goes to the hell of Andha (Tamisra) and re-
mains there for endless years.

59. Pitrs, Devas, sages, common people and all living beings
depend upon man. For that purpose one should put restraint on
oneself.

60. They say that a man of self-restraint is a Sattirtha (‘a
holy spot’). That man has perfect control over speech, mind,
tongue, hands and ears. Others are Kakatirthas (‘contemptible
ones’).

61. Men of Tamasa nature take delight in a crow-like (i.e.
evil-natured) person (mis)taking him for a swan. What benefit do
Devas derive thereby? Let this be thought of.

diers =five organs of sense, five organs of action and mind, Woman = Prakrti.
Children=created objects. Gatekeeper = Individual Soul.

1. The Paficayajfias are known as ‘Five great (Mahda-sacrifices’. They
are the obligatory daily observances prescribed since early Vedic period.
They are as follows:

(1) Deva-yajna: Offerings in fire (even fuel sticks) or Fire worship.

(2) Pitr-yajfia: Offering Svadha (Srdddha repast) even with water.

(3) Bhita-yajfia: Offering Bali (at least a ball of food) to beings (animals

etc.).

(4) Manusya-yajfia: Giving food to guests.

(5) Brahma-yajna: Recitation of the Veda—at least one Mantra,

These prescriptions are found in Satapatha Br. (X1.5.6.1), Tait. Aranyaka

(IL.10) etc.

2. Anecho of Mbh, Svarga 5.62.

3. Constituents of the body, viz. chyle, blood, flesh, fat, bone, marrow.

=== PAGE 14 ===

8 Skanda Purdna

62. If one reflects in one’s heart about the structure of the
universe in this manner, how can one’s mind indulge in and be
diverted by sinful activities even for the sake of the three worlds?

63. This (fact) has been read by other men in the sacred
literature. It has been directly perceived by me in the world of
Yama. How will I become deluded then, O women?

64. What anger (should I feel) towards you all? People carry
out those things for which they have been created, whether they
are real or unreal.

65. (The words) Satam (hundred), Sahasram (thousand)
and Visvam (all}—all denote inexhaustibleness. The measure
‘hundred’ only does not denote ‘inexhaustibleness’ (or unending-
ness).

66-67. As crocodiles you will be catching hold of persons
in the water. If an excellent man takes you out of the water and
throws you on the ground you will all regain your own respec-
tive forms. Falsehood has never been uttered by me even in jest.
The purification by his auspicious contact will be conducive to
your good?

The woman said:

68-72. Thereafter, we saluted that Brahmana. After circum-
ambulating him, we went away from that place and thought
thus as we were extremely miserable and dejected: ‘Where can
all of usin the shortest possible time meet that man who will
give us back our own respective previous forms?’ After think-
ing thus for a short while, O descendant of Bharata, we saw the
celestial sage Narada of great fortune. On seeing that celestial
sage of unmeasured lustre, all of us became delighted. After salu-
ting him, O son of Pytha, we stood there with our misery (visi-
ble) in our faces. He asked us the cause of our misery and we
told him the same.

73-76. After hearing the same exactly, he spoke these words:

“Jn the southern ocean there are five Tirthas in a marshy
place. Go to those beautiful and meritorious places. Do not
delay. Dhanafijaya, a son of Pandu, a tiger among men, (a
hero) of pure soul, will liberate you all stationed there, from
this misery. There is no doubt about it.”

After hearing his words, O warrior, we have all come here.

=== PAGE 15 ===

Lii.1.77-85 9

It behoves you to make those words true, O son of Pandu. Indeed
the birth of good men like you is for the help of the wretched and

miserable people.

77. On hearing her words, the son of Pandu took bath in all
the Tirthas one by one and redeemed them who had become
crocodiles. He made them regain their original forms.

78. Then they bowed down to that warrior. They uttered
blessings and good wishes for his victory. As they were about
to go, Dhanafijaya, the son of Prtha, said to them:

79-80. ‘This isthe doubt surging in my heart. Why did
sage Narada permit you to stay (here) in your exile? Even the
basest fellow works in the interest of persons whom he adores.
Why did Narada say that you could stay in these Tirthas worthy
of his adoration?

81. Similarly, how could you all stay here in spite of the
fact that the very powerful Navadurgdas (nine Durgas i.c. goddes-
ses), Siddhega and Siddhaganapa (‘Lord of the Siddha groups’)
are here?

82. Each of these is competent to ward off even Devas.
How was it that none of them prevented you all from obstruct-
ing (the functioning of) these Tirthas?

83. AsI think of this my mind wavers. My curiosity has
been aroused much. It behoves you to tell only the truth.”

The celestial damsels said:

84-85. You have put a relevant question, O son of Kunti.
Now look in the direction of the North. Here comes the
praiseworthy sage Narada surrounded by his Brahmana (follo-
wers). He will answer every questions you have put."

After saying this, they went up into the sky.

1. This chapter, a borrowal from Mbh, is used as a setting for the
Kauméarikakhagda, the main narrator of which is Narada. After the arrival
of Narada, the celestial damsels disappear from the scene.

=== PAGE 16 ===

10 Skanda Puraua
CHAPTER TWO
Glorification of Holy Places

Siita said:

1. Thereupon, the son of Pandu approached Narada who
was adored by Devas and surrounded by Brihmanas. He made
obeisance to all and grasped (their feet).

2. Then Narada said to him: “‘O Dhanaiijaya, be victorious
over your enemies. May your mind be inclined towards virtue
and piety as well as (respectful to) Devas and Brahmanas.

3. Engaged in this journey of pilgrimage lasting for twelve
years, O heroic warrior, Ihope you are not tired and afflicted
nor have you become desperately furious.

4. Even the minds of sages, O son of Pandu, become tired
and afflicted by journeys of pilgrimage. They become desperately
furious, despite its being the cause of obstacles to (spiritual)
welfare.

5. O sonof Pandu, are you not (in the way) affected by
this defect? In this connection, we have heard this Garhd' sung
by Angiras:

6 ‘Only he whose hands, feet and mind are well-restrained
and whose rites are all devoid of aberrations, derives benefit from
(visits to) holy places.’

7-9. This fact should be borne in mind by you. O dear one,
what do you think? Your brother is Yudhisthira and your friend
is KeSava. (Hence it is proper that you should be virtuous.) Fur-
ther, this is but proper that men should be guided and trained by
Brahmanas. We are indeed the preceptors and instructors in
virtue and piety, established therein by Vispu. We hear this Garha
sung by Visnu in the connection, in regard to Brahmanas:

10. ‘I. am Vikuntha. Listening to my spotless, immortal fame
is like a holy dip. It immediately sanctifies the universe down to
a Svapaca (‘one who cooks dog’s flesh’, a Candala). I have attain-
ed fame as a Sutirtha (‘holy and pious one’) through you. So 1

1. These are floating traditional verses ascribed to some great sage like
Manu, Angiras etc. Many of them are untraceable even in Smrti works as-
cribed to these sages, For example this verse is untraceable in Avigirasa
Smrti (G.M. edition).

=== PAGE 17 ===

L.ii.2.11-21 11

will (not hesitate to) cut even my own arn, if it were to be
adverse.’

11. We shall say something pleasing to you, O son of Prtha.
All of those whom you desire to be happy and prosperous are so,
namely the Yadavas and the Pandavas.

12. Now, atthe bidding of Dhytarasjra, Viravarma,' the
king who had harassed Kurus, has been killed by Bhimasena.

13. Indeed, he had been invincible to all the kings like the
powerful Bali of yore. In the manner in which a thorn is remov-
ed by another thorn, Dhytarastra conquered him.”

14. On hearing these and other words uttered by Narada,
Phalguna (i.e. Arjuna) became extremely joyous. He said:
‘Whence can there be absence of welfare in their case?

15. They always abide by the opinions and suggestions of
Brahmanas. They are the adorers of Brahmanas. 1 too am going
on pilgrimage to holy places with mental restraint, in accordance
with my ability.

16. Lcame to this Tirtha. There is great joy in my heart.
Blessed indeed is the visit to the Tirthas. A holy dip in them is all
the more so.

17. Listening to the greatness is still further so, as even Sage
Aurva has said so. Hence, O sage, | wish to hear the good fea-
tures of this Tirtha.

18-19. Along with this alone should it be listened to as (to
why pilgrimage has been) accepted by you, O sage. You have
wandered in the three worlds. Hence you know all the essen-
tial things. I consider this Tirtha better than the other Tirthas,
because this is honoured by you.”

Narada said:

20-21. This is proper on your part, O son of Prtha, possess-
ing good qualities, that you enquire about the merits. Only
meritorious persons can befittingly listen to the merits arising
from holy rites. Time is spent everyday by good men in listening

1, Mbh does not refer to any Viravarmé who was killed by Bhima. The
Jaimini Advamedha refers to one Viravarma who stopped the sacrificial
horse of Pandavas but was persuaded by Krsna to let it go. But this Vira-
varma also is not killed by Bhima, Probably the author of this part of SkP
has used a different version of Mbh.

=== PAGE 18 ===

12 Skanda Purana

to holy rites and devout activities as well as in praying and eulo-
gizing, (while) the whole life is spent by sinners in evil conver-
sations and idle talk everyday.

So I shall glorify the many merits of this Tirtha.

22-25. On hearing the same you will know that what has
been accepted and adopted by me is proper.

Formerly, O son of Prtha, in the course of my wanderings in
the three worlds, as a follower of Kapila, I went to the world
of Brahma. There I saw the grandfather (of the worlds). Brahma,
devoid of impurities and surrounded by saintly kings, celestial
sages as well as by embodied and unembodied beings, shonelike
the moon surrounded by the stars. I bowed down to him. I was
offered welcome by means of a glance. I sat there joyously along
with Kapila. In the meantime his spies and emissaries came
there.

26-29a. They are sent everyday by Brahma to visit (the
whole of) the universe. They bowed down and took their seats.
With his gracious glances as sweet as nectar he seemed to flood
them, as he spoke thus: «What are those places you have wan-
dered over? What are the wonderful things seen or heard by you?
Recount them. Merit accrues on listening to them.”

When this was said by the Lord, a person named Susfravas,
who was considered to be their leader, bowed down to Brahma
and spoke thus:

29b-32. «Our submission (of information) in front of the
Lord is like showing a lamp in front of the sun. Still the matter
must be reported by me as I have been urged by you for the sake
of others. After listening to and understanding many holy rites
and pious pursuits, a sage named Katyayana wanted to know
the essence. (He performed a penance) standing on a single big
toe for a hundred years. Thereupon a celestial voice spoke to
him: ‘O Katyayana, listen. Ask sage Sarasvata? on the banks

1. New information. Neither Purdgic Encyclopedia nor Chitrava's Pra-
cina Caritra Kosa mention Narada’s being a follower of Kapila, Nor the
story of his bringing Brahmins from Kalapa-grama and settling them at
Mahisdgara-sangama is traced in the above mentioned reference books.

2. This Sarasvata appears to be the son of Dadhica and the river Saras-
vati (Mbh, Salya 51.13-14), He mentions Sarasvati being his teacher (v 40).

=== PAGE 19 ===

Lii.2.33-42 13

of Sarasvati. He is conversant with Dharma. He will explain to
you the essential features to be achieved through Dharma.’

33. On hearing this, the excellent sage approached that re-
nowned leading sage, bent down his head touching the ground
and asked him what he had in his mind:

34-35. ‘Some praise Truth. Others praise penance and
cleanliness. Some praise the Sarnkhya system of philosophy.
Others speak (highly) of Yoga system. Some praise forgiveness
and forbearance as well as excessive straightforwardness. Some
praise (the vow of) silence. Some say that learning is the greatest
thing.

36. Some praise perfect knowledge. Some praise excellent
detachment. Some know the holy rites of Agnistoma as the
greatest thing.

37-39. Some praise the knowledge of Atman whereby one
views a clod of earth, a stone anda lump of gold alike. When
this is the position in the world, people are deluded and _perplex-
ed in the matter of what should be done and what should not be
done. They begin to argue as to which is the best one among
these and contributes the most towards our welfare?’ It behoves
you to say which of these is the greatest thing to be pursued by
noble souls, O sage conversant with Dharma. Which is the thing
that achieves all objectives?”

SGrasvata said:

40. I shall speak about the essence that Sarasvatitold me.
Listen to it. The entire universe is of the nature of a shadow.
Origin and destruction are its characteristic features. It is transi-
tory like the bending and breaking (i.e. knitting) of the eyebrows
by a courtesan.

41. Wealth, life, youth and worldly pleasures are unsteady
like reflection of the moon in water. After pondering over this
intelligently, one should resort to Sthanu (i.e. Siva) (the deity)
and Dana (i.e. the holy rite of charitable gifts).

42. A person inclined towards the rite of Dana is not liable
to commit sins—so says the Sruti. Similarly the Sruti avers

The SArasvata Patha of Taittiriya Samhita attributed to him was taught to
him by Sarasvati (PE pp. 694-95).

=== PAGE 20 ===

14 . Skanda Purana

that a devotee of Sthanu does not undergo (frequent) births and
deaths.

43-45. Listen to the two Gathds formerly proclaimed and
sung by Savarni. The Lord whose vehicle is the Bull, is veri-
table Dharma indeed. That Mahadeva is honoured and ador-
ed. He is called the greatest Dharma. Only Lord Hara redeems
one from the ocean of worldly existence,’ where one gets immers-
ed in its waters, where misery is the whirlpool, darkness is terri-
ble, Dharma and Adharma constitute the waters, anger is the
marsh and mud, arrogance and inebriation is the crocodile,
greed, the cause of all pain and difficulty, is the bubble and false
pride and prestige is the majestic depth extending as far as the
netherworlds. But it is adorned with the vehicle (i.e. ship) of the
Sattva Guna.

46-50. Though the body is Asdara (‘worthless’), one must
extract the essence from it, viz. Dana (‘charitable gift’), Vrtta
(‘good conduct’), Vrata (‘holy observance’), Vacah, (i.e. words—
auspicious, truthful and pleasing words), Kirti (‘fame’), Dharma
(‘virtue’), Ayusah (i.e. longevity or means of increasing longevity
such as use of medicinal herbs, yogic procedures etc.) and
Paropakarana (‘rendering help to others’).

Attachment of virtue, anxiety for renown, good indulgence
in charitable gifts, absence of interest and attachment in the
sensual objects—if one gets all these, one has attained the benefit
of one’s birth.

In this country called Bharata,? after taking the birth as a
man, which is not stable and permanent, if one does not pursuc
activities conducive to the welfare of Atman, Atman is indeed
deceived by him.

Human birth is difficult to be obtained by (even) Devas and
Asuras. After obtaining this, one should perform those things
which would prevent him from falling intohell. Human birth is the
root of everything. It is conducive to the achievement of all aims.

J, The comparison of Sarhsara with a river and the analogy described
here is common to all Puranas and is found in the works of modern saints as
well.

2. The special mention of Bharata is due to its holiness as a Karma-
bhimi whence one can attain Moksa, Its being a Karma-bhimi is mentioned
in other Puranas also, ¢.g. BP 27.2, MkP 55,21-22, MtP 114.6-7, BdP 1.2.16.4,

=== PAGE 21 ===

Lii.2.51-59 15

51-54. Even if you (have put in) no effort to gain anything,
at least save the capital by all means.

The ship of your body has been bought by you at a great
cost of merit in order to cross the ocean of misery. Cross it be-
fore it (i.e. the boat) breaks.

Even after obtaining a body having no malady or defect,
which is very difficult to get, if one does not get away from the
world, he becomes the slayer of Atman, the basest man.

Ascetics perform penance; sacrificing priests perform Havana
and charitable gifts are given—all these are eagerly pursued for
the sake of obtaining the other world.

Katyayana asked:

Of these two, namely charitable gifts and penance, O holy
lord, which is more difficult? Which yields greater benefit after
death? O Sarasvata, tell it.

Sdrasvata said:

55. There is nothing more difficult to perform on the earth
than Dana (charitable gift). O sage, this is perceived directly with
the world as the witness.

56. Abandoning (i.e. risking) their own dear life for the sake
of wealth, they enter the oceans, forests and mountains out of
great greed. They face the great dangers therein.

57. Others adopt service which is known as Sva-vrtti (‘canine
way of life’). Others pursue agricultural activities involving great
strain and much violence.

58. It is very difficult to give up the wealth that has been
acquired with great pain and strain, which is more important and
beloved than the vital airs and which has been obtained by means
of hundreds of strenuous exertions.

59. Whatever a rich person donates! (as a gift) or whatever
he (enjoys and) consumes is the real asset of the man. (For after
his death) other persons amuse and enjoy themselves with the
womenfolk and the riches of the dead man.

1. This and the following verses up to v 80 arc in praise of Dana (Dana-
stuti). They are found in different Puranas and works on Dharma Sastra.
These eulogies of gifts (Dana-stutis) are found since the Vedic times.

=== PAGE 22 ===

16 Skanda Purana

60. I consider the person who begs day by day as my pre-
ceptor because he wipes and cleanses (our minds) like one who
wipes off a mirror. .

61. That whichis being given is not wasted. It increases
more and more. If the well (is dug up deeper and) water is pump-
ed out, it becomes pure and has abundance of water.

62. For the sake of pleasure in one birth, one gives up thou-
sands of births. An intelligent man (through the meritorious
deed of charitable gifts) amasses in a single birth all the happi-
ness and pleasure of a thousand births.

63. A foolish man does not gift away wealth because he is
afraid of poverty in this world. An intelligent man gifts away
wealth because he is afraid of the same in the other world.

64. What will those persons resorting to what is fragile and
brittle, do with their wealth? The body for the sake of which they
desire wealth, is not permanent.

65. Formerly the two syllables ‘na-sti’ (‘there is nothing’) had
been habitually repeated by them. That had become adverse to
them now with the two syllabled ‘De-hi’ (‘give’).

66. Al! the people (who beg) enlighten a miser thus: “Give.
This is the result of not giving. May not you too be like this.”

67. Itis for helping the donor himself that the suppliant
says, ‘Give me”’, since the donor goes up (to heaven) and the
donee stands below.

68. The following persons are born so, because they have not
given anything in charity: They are indigent persons, sickly ones,
foolish ones and those who run errand for others. They are al-
ways victims of misery.

69. Arich man who does not givein charity, a poor man
who is not an ascetic (i.e. does not perform penance)—these two
should be thrown into water after tying a big rock round their
neck.

70. One in a hundred is born as a heroic warrior; one ina
thousand is a scholar; one in a hundred-thousand is an orator;
a donor may or may not be born.

71. The earth is sustained by these seven: cows, brahma-
nas, Vedas, chaste women, truthful persons, persons who arc
not greedy and those who habitually gift away (i.e. donors).

=== PAGE 23 ===

Lii.2.72-80 17

72. Sibi,! the son of Usinara, went to heaven from here after
dedicating his limbs and his own bosom-born son for the sake of
a Brahmana.

73. Since he gifted away his own eyes to a Brahmana,
Pratardana,? the lord of Kasi, attained unparalleled renown both
here and hereafter.

74. Nimi? of the land of Videha gave his kingdom to Brah-
manas. Jamadagnya (i.e. Parasurama) gave the earth and Gaya,
the earth along with the cities.

75. When Parjanya (i.e. god of rain) did not shower, Vasistha,
the creator of abodes for all living beings, enlivened the subjects
like Prajapati.

76. Brahmadatta,‘ the king of Pajicala territory, the most
excellent one among intelligent persons, gave the treasure Sankha
to eminent Brahmanas and attained heaven.

77. The saintly king Sahasrajit® of great fame forsook his
dear life for the sake of Brahmanas and attained very excellent
worlds.

78. These and many others who were tranquil in their minds
and who had conquered their sense organs went to the world of
Rudra due to their devotion to Sthinu and their charitable gifts.

79-80. As long as this earth will exist, the reputation of
these persons will remain well-established.

Thinking thus you should seek the essential thing. Be devoted

1. Instances of great donors of the past are given in this up to v 78,
Sibi's offer of his own flesh to the pigeon protected by him is described’ in
Mbh, Vana 197.21-28 and sacrifice (i.e. cooking) of his son is narrated there
in ch, 198.

2. Pratardana, the son of King Divodasa of Kasi and queen Madhavi,
the daughter of Yayati, became king of Kasi and offered his merits to his
grandfather Yayati (Mbh, Udyoga 117.18; 122.6-7). His gift of his own cyes
to a Brahmana is noted in Mbh, Santi 234,20.

3. Nimi, a king of Videha, is famous as a royal sage in Buddhist
Jatakas, His gift of kingdom to Brahmanas is recorded in Mbh, Vana 234,26,

4. Brahmadatta, an ancient king of Paficalas, is another famous king in
Buddhist and mediaeval literature. His donation of all his treasure (Sa#kha-
nidhi) to Brahmanas and proceeding to Brahmaloka is noted in Mbh, Sénti
234.29; Anusdsana 137.17.

5. The great self-sacrifice of Sahasrajit, giving his life for Brahmanas
and going to heaven, is recorded in Mbh, Santi 234,31,

=== PAGE 24 ===

18 Skanda Purdua

to Sthanu and the holy rite of charitable gift. Katyayana too
eschewed his delusion and was (devoted to Sthanu and the holy
rite of charitable gifts).

Narada said:

81. On hearing this story recounted by Susravas, the Lotus-
born Deity was much filled with tears of joy. He praised (him)
again and again:

82. «Well said, O dear one. This is thus and not otherwise.”
Sarasvata spoke the truth. Similarly this Sruti is also true:

83. Gift, monetary gift, is a shield unto Yajfas. In this
world, all living beings derive livelihood from donors. They
dispelled enemies through gifts. Through gift, enemies become
friends. Everything is established in gift. Hence they speak of
Dana (‘gift’) as the greatest (holy act).

84. In the terrible ocean of worldly existence which is dis-
turbed and turbid due to the billows of Dharma and Adharma
one should resort to Dana. It is made like a ship.

85-87. It is after thinking thus that Brahmanas were estab-
lished by me at Puskara; in Krtayuga Brahmanas were estab-
lished by Sri and Hari between Ganga and Yamuna, inthe middle
land (‘doab’). Most excellent ones among the knowers of the Vedas
were established by Srigauri; Nagaras! were established by Rudra
and Saktipirbhavas were established by Parvati. Similarly (Brah-
manas were established) at Srimala by Laksmi. Thus, these and
other Agrahdras (i.e. villages gifted to Brahmanas) were provided
by excellent Suras with a desire for uplifting the worlds.

88. We do not have any desire for the benefit of the holy
rite of Dana, O excellent Suras. It is for the sake of protecting
good people that Dana has been glorified by us.

89. Brahmanas who have been allotted proper abodes, up-
lift the other three castes by means of instructions of various
sorts in the matter of piety and virtue. Therefore Brahmanas are
extremely worthy of adoration.

1, VV 85-87 record the traditional information about the settlement of
certain Brahmanical castes in Gujarat. The author's devotion to Mahi-
sfgara-sahgama and other local information shows that probably he belong-
ed to that part of Gujarat.

=== PAGE 25 ===

Lii.2.90-101 19

90-91. Dana is of four types!: Dana, Utsarga, Kalpita and
Samsruta. They are of different nature; they have been glorified
in this order. The gift of tanks, wells and lakes, trees, educa-
tional] institutions, temples, monasteries, water booths, houses,
fields—this is called Utsarga.

92. If any man were to perform any meritorious rite while
resorting to these, one-sixth ofthe merit accruing therefrom is
obtained by the Brahmana who has gifted the same.

93. Among all these, settling Brahmanas (in a good place) is
the greatest. Settling deities also is an act of Dharma, because it
has that as its root.

94. The share of the ancestors of the donor in the merit
remains as long asthe temple lasts or the abode of the Brahmana
remains steady.

95. This is a small form of trade (i.e. investment) yielding
much benefit. When old ruins are restored and renewed the
benefit is stated to be double the same.

96. Hence J too say this, O excellent Suras. There is nothing
equal to Dana. What Sarasvata said was true.

Narada said:

97. The Suras applauded what had been said by Sarasvata
and the Lotus-born Lord said approvingly: «Well said! Well
said!’ The Suras and 1 were struck with wonder.

98. Then, when the assembly dispersed, I sat on a slab on
the beautiful top of Meru and thought thus:

99-101. ‘Virafici (Brahma) spoke the truth. Why does he
live, he by whom not a single thing has been done whereby he
could have the satisfaction of having done the duty? Therefore,
how can I clearly perform the rite of charitable gift? My only
asset is a loin-cloth and a staff. I don’t have even a little of
wealth. If one gives to a non-deserving person or if one does not

1. Though Dana is said to be of four types, there are technical differen-
ces, Dana constitutes the donor's giving up of ownership over a thing and
making another the owner of it and the donor then cannot use it. But in
Utsarga the owner gives up ownership for the benefit of all (sarvabhite-
bhyah), An Utsarga consists of construction of temples, tanks, parks etc. for
the public, The original owner (donor) as a member of the public however
can use it. In Dana he cannot do so.

=== PAGE 26 ===

20 Skanda Purdna

give to a deserving person (one incurs sin). Hence the holy rite of
charitable gift is a difficult one, because one has to distinguish

between the deserving and the non-deserving. °

102. Ifa gift is made at the proper place and time to a
deserving person, with a pure mind, of what is acquired by justi-
fiable means, the benefit is enjoyed at the time of youth.

103. Ifthe gift is made with a Tamasa attitude or in an
angry mood, the benefit is enjoyed while he is in the womb.
There is no doubt about it.

104-105. Even during boyhood, the benefit is enjoyed if the
gift is made out of arrogance or hypocrisy.

If the gift is made with unjustly acquired wealth or if it is
made with an ulterior motive, the man enjoys the benefit during
old age. There is no doubt about it. Hence gift is to be made in
this manner. The time and place must be proper. The person
receiving must be deserving. The gift should be made in accord-
ance with the injunctions. The wealth should have been acquired
by fair, auspicious means. There must be respect (for the recipient)
inthe man making the gift. He should not have roguish tendency
or stubbornness."

106. How can this take place in the state of poverty? The
ancient sages devoid of impurities have spoken truthful words.

107. A man devoid of wealth has neither this world nor the
other world at any rate.? People see an indigent person standing
by as a despicable one.

108. Poverty is a sin in this world. Who dares or deserves to
praise it? A fallen man is pitied by all. A poor man is also
pitied.

_ 109. Aman who is bodily lean is not actually lean. Lean
are those who are deficient in horses, wealth, servants and guests.
Only such a person is called XrSa (‘lean’).

110. A man with plenty of wealth is highly praiseworthy in
the world, though his family may be a bad one. An indigent

1, For a classification ot Dana, cf. B.G. XVIL 20-22.
2, VV 107-112 are Subhdsitas disparaging poverty.

=== PAGE 27 ===

1.ii.2.111—Lii.3.5 21

person is censured even if his family is on a par with the bright
moon.

111. People who have become superior in knowledge, those
who have grown rich with penance, those people who have
acquired vast learning—all these stand at the doorway of one
who is rich in (i.e. has accumulated) wealth, as his servants.

112. Although in the three worlds wealth is not averse to
us, it yields fruit only when solicited by another.”

113-114. Ithought over all these things clearly. 1 looked
ahead for a suitable place.

After thinking in various ways, I wandered over countries,
villages, cities and many hermitages. There I got a place which
was good and where I could settle Brahmanas.

CHAPTER THREE
Greatness of the Tirtha at the Confluence of Maht and Sea

Siita said:

1-5. (Narada said :) Thus I wandered, O excellent one among
warriors. I, Narada, went on visiting the different holy places
on the earth. While | wandered over the whole of the earth, |
reached the hermitage of Bhygu. It is here that the highly meri-
torious river Reva flows. It is the most excellent river. By re-
membering it once, one obtains excellent happiness lasting for a
period of seven Kalpas. It is auspicious and comprises within it
all the Tirthas. If it is glorified, it sanctifies him (i.e. the glorifier).
More particularly so, if one has a glimpse of it (by paying a visit).
If one takes bath in it, O son of Prtha, that being is liberated from
sins. Just as the Pingala Nadi (a tubular vessel of the body) is
established in the middle of the body, so also this river is
established in the middle of the entire universe. It is glorified as
such. There ison Reva, a Tirtha named Suklatirtha! which is
destructive of sins.

1. Suklatirtha is described in details in SkP, Revakhanda, Chs. 155.47-
119 and 156 but there is no mention of Bhygu’s hermitage there, though

=== PAGE 28 ===

22 Skanda Purana

6a. Ifone takes bath therein even the sin of Brahmana-
slaughter is destroyed.

6b-7. Near it, onthe northern bank of Reva, ‘is the her-
mitage.! It was full of many kinds of trees. And it was rendered
splendid by creepers and hedges. There were different kinds of
flowers and fruits. The region was beautified with plantain
trees.

8. There were many beasts of prey. It reverberated with
the sounds of birds. It was rich in the splendour of fragrant
flowers and resounded with the characteristic cries of peacocks
spread everywhere.

9. Bees forsook everything and lay concealed humming in
the same way as a devotee forsakes the world and lies at the feet
of Hara.

10. Cuckoos caused reverberation all round with their sweet
cooing sound, just as Brahmanas pacify sages afraid of the
worldly existence through nectar-like narration of stories.

1]. With their fruits, flowers, leaves, shades and logs (i.e.
pieces of branches), the trees delighted everyone like people who
perform holy rites of Hara.

12. Birds fond of their youngs chirped ‘Putra-Putra’ (‘O son,
O son’) like Saiva devotees fond of Siva ever repeating the words
‘Siva-Siva’ etc.

13. Such was the penance-grove and the environment of the
hermitage of that sage. It was adorned all round by Brahmanas
knowing the three Vedas (or branches of learning).

14. The cardinal points were filled with the loud chanting
sounds of Rk, Yajus and Sama Vedas just as the three worlds
(were filled with the sounds of his prayers) by a resolute devotee
of Rudra.

15. O son of Prtha, I reached that place where the excellent
sage Bhygu, of the greatest and the most virtuous soul, was seat-
ed. The refulgence of his penance illuminated the whole place.

Bhygukaccha (mod. Broach) is regarded as a hermitage of Bhrgu (De 34).
The author perhaps refers to the same here,

1. VV 7-15: A beautiful description of Bhrgu’s hermitage. Puranas seem
to have same sets of descriptions of jungles, hermitages, some phenomena in
nature etc They, however, do not appear mechanical due to varicty of
ideas, similes etc,

=== PAGE 29 ===

Lii.3.16-30 23

16. I was both distressed and delighted. On seeing me arrive
at the place, all those Brahmanas with Bhrgu as their leader,
stood up in great reverence.

17. They welcomed me and accompanied by Bhrgu offered
me Arghya etc. and permitted by me those prominent sages took
their respective seats.

18-19. After realizing that I had taken (sufficient) rest,
Bhygu asked me: «Where have you to go, O excellent sage? Why
have you come here? Clearly specify the reason and purpose of
your arrival.”” Thereupon, O son of Prtha, anxious that I was,
I spoke to Bhygu:

20-22a. ‘‘Let it be heard. I shall tell the purpose for which
I have come here. The entire ocean-girt earth has been roamed
over by me. For the sake of gifting land-grants to Brahmagas I
am seeking at every step beautiful and pleasing pieces of land,
holy and devoid of defects, connected with holy Tirthas as
well. But Ido not see anything at all.”

Bhrgu said:

22b-24. O sinless one, 1 too had wandered before. The entire
ocean-girt earth had been seen then by me. My intention had
been (to find a suitable place) for settling Brahmanas.

There is a splendid holy river named Mahi-! It consists of all
Tirthas. (It is identical with all Tirthas.) Itis divine and charming,
gentle and destructive of all great sins. There is no doubt about
it that the earth itself is present there in the form of the river.

25. Whatever holy spots and sacred bathing places there
are, both visible and invisible, all of them reside in the waters of
that river Mahi, O Narada.

26. Where that great river of sacred waters joins the ocean,
O celestial sage, there has arisen (a holy Tirtha called) Maht-
Sagara-Sangama (‘the Confluence of Mahi and Sea’).

27-30. There is a Tirtha there named Starhbha.? It is well-

1, This is the most important river in this Khanda. It rises in the Purdnic
Pariyatra mountain (in Malwa) and joins the gulf of Cambay (Khambhat or
Khambayat).

2. Mod. name Khambhat is derived from Stambha Tirtha.

=== PAGE 30 ===

24 Skanda Purana

known in the three worlds. The learned men who take bath there
become rid of all sins. They never approach Yama. Formerly
when I went to take my holy bath there, a wonderful ¢thing was
observed by me. That miracle I shall describe in detail, O sage.
Listen to that great and wonderful thing. When I went to the
meeting place of Mahi and Sagara (ocean) for bathing, I saw a
leading sage seated on its bank (brilliant) like fire. He was very
tall and old. Only the skeleton remained (but) he was adorned
with the glory of penance.!

31. Raising his hands, he was crying repeatedly. On seeing
him grieving, 1 too became distressed.

32. Thisis a characteristic of good people that on seeing
miserable people they too become miserable « hundred times
more. So I too cried.

33. Non-violence, truthfulness and non-stealing—these are
rare in spite of Manusya (i.e. state of being a man). Then I appro-
ached him and asked:

34. -*Why do you cry, O sage? What is the cause of your
grief? Even if it be a great secret, tell me it as my desire to
know it is intense.”

35. Thereupon, the sage told me, *‘O Bhrgu, | am unfortun-
ate. Hence I cry. Do not ask me. What person will speak about
his misfortune?”

36. Iwas struck with wonder and I said to him once again:

“Rare indeed is the birth in the land of Bharata; there too.
Manusyata (i.e. birth in human species) is still more so.

37-38. Even if (such) birth as man (is acquired) it is rare to
be born as a Brahmana. There too the state of being a sage is
rare. In sage-hood the acquirement of power of penance is still
more rare. After having obtained all these five, why do you cry,
O sage? In this connection my wonder is great.”” Even as I was
asking thus, a sage named Subhadra came there.

39-40. He had understood the greatness of this Tirtha. So
he had left Meru and built his hermitage here. The sage used to

1, VV 30-80 describe the story of a Brahmin Devasarma who imparted
one fourth of his penance to Brahmin Subhadra for performing Sraddha on
behalf of Devasarma at the confluence of Mahi and the Sea. This confluence
is shown to be more efficacious and holier than that of Gang& and the Sea.

=== PAGE 31 ===

Lii.3.41-51 25
worship Starmnbhesvara always. Like me, he too asked the sage
the cause of the lamentation.

41. Then that sage performed the rite of Acamana (i.e. cere-
monial sipping of water) and said: ‘‘O sages, let the cause (of
my grief) be heard. IT am a sage named Devasarma. I have
restrained my tongue (speech) and mind.

42. Ihave my own abode wherein I used to stay in the spot
where Ganga meets the ocean. I used to perform the Tarpana
tite during the New-Moon days for the Manes.

43. At the end of the Sraddha, they used to manifest direct-
ly to me and offer benedictions. Once the delighted Pitrs said
to me:

44. ‘O Devasarmia, we are always coming here near you.
But never do you come to our abode. Why so, O dear son?’

45-47. I was desirous of seeing that abode, but I was un-
able to convey this to them. Then after saying ‘Let it be’ I
went along with the Manes to the sacred mansion of the Manes
which was on a level with Bhaumaloka (i.e. the world of
Mars). I stayed in various places and saw in front of me some
praiseworthy people very difficult to be seen on account of the
halo of brilliant splendour. So I asked my own Manes: ‘Who
are these coming? They are much contented and duly worship-
ped. They are extremely joyous. You are not like these.’ ”

The Pitrs (Manes) said:

48. Welfare unto thee. They are the meritorious Pitrs of
the great sage Subhadra. They have been propitiated (with the
Tarpana rite, with gingelly seeds and water) by that sage, at the
place where Mahi meets the ocean.

49. Itis the place where the holy river Mahi which com-
prises all the Tirthas merges with the ocean. There during Darsa
(‘New-Moon day’) Subhadra performs the Tarpana rite of those
persons, dear son.

50. On hearing their words, 1 became much ashamed. I was
struck with wonder. After bowing down to these Manes, I

returned to my own abode.
51. I thought thus: ‘1 will go there surely where the ‘river

=== PAGE 32 ===

26 : Skanda Purana

Mahi joins the ocean, which is well-known as Mahisagarasan-
gama.

52. I will make my hermitage there and perform the rite of
Tarpana to my Pitts on every New-Moon day inthe same manner
as this Subhadraka of praiseworthy name.

53. Of what avail is that sinner, the destroyer of his own
family, if in spite of his being alive, his Pitrs desire for other
things?

54-55. After thinking thus, I joyously said to Ruci, my wife,
“O Ruci, accompanied by you I will go to Mahisaégarasahgama
and will stay there alone. Be disposed to come quickly. You
are chaste, pure, and of noble birth. You are famous too. Hence,
O splendid lady, it behoves you to do according to what has been
thought of by me.”

Ruci said:

56-59a. O Sinner, I have been (well nigh) killed by you, O
pillar in a cremation ground! [ would rather that he was not
born; he, the wicked fellow, by whom I have been given to you
(in marriage). Enough of you. Even with the diet of bulbous
roots and fruits (your stomach) is not filled. You wish to take
me there where only salt water is always obtained. You alone
go there. Let your ancestors be delighted. O old man, you may
go or stay like a crow for a long time.

59b-60. When she said thus, I closed my ears. I directed
(ordered) my disciple Vipula to look after my house and came
here alone, I take my holy bath here and perform the Tarpana
rite to the Pits with great reverence.

61. Iam now worried much like a sinner in hell. If 1 con-
tinue to stay here, 1 will be only Ardhadehadhara (‘having only
half of the body’).

62-63. A man without his wife is known as Ardhadeha (‘half-
bodied’). Just as without the Atman (i.e. one’s self) nothing
can take place in the body, so also one without wife is not
eligible for (performing) holy rites. A man who is very fond-
ly attached to the bodies and wives is a brute.

=== PAGE 33 ===

1.ii.3.64-76 27
64. Only the fruit is to be reaped from these two. There is

nothing essential or substantial in them. A half-bodied man is

considered not worthy of being touched by good people.

65-68. Uttama,! the son of Uttanapada, was made Asprsya
(‘not worthy of being touched’) by Suras.

If I go there, there is no Mahisaégara there. How can I even
go? My feet do not move at all. In this dilemma of ignorance,
my wounded mind is extremely distressed. Hence I have lost
much of my sense. I feel extremely sorry. 1 lament and cry.

On hearing his words full of emotion, Subhadra and I
said, “Good! Good!” We prostrated in front of Mahisagara-
Sangama.

69-70. Both of us thought of the remedy on behalf of the
sage. After attaining human birth which is as transient as a water-
bubble, one should work for others. He alone is a genuine Purusa
(man). Others are Purisakas (‘faeces’). Thereupon Subhadra
thought well and said to the excellent sage:

71-72. «O sage, do not be distressed and dejected. O Deva-
Sarma, be steady. | shall dispel your grief like the sun dispelling
darkness. I shall go to my hermitage. You will not be laughed at
(by anyone) here. Listen to the cause thereof. [ shall perform
the Tarpana to your Pitrs on your behalf.”

Devasarmd said:

73. May your life be a hundred years, since you speak thus.
On my behalf and for my sake you wish to perform a great task
which is (well nigh) impossible.

74-76. In the place of delight, sorrow affects me again.
Listen, good people do not take an auspicious statement in vain,
O sage. How can I make you do this great rite in vain? Say, I
shall say something whereby | can have expiation.

1, To illustrate how a half-bodied, i.e. wifeless man is of an untouchable
status, he gives the instance of Uttama, the step-brother of Dhruva, the son
of King Uttanapada. He was regarded as untouchable by gods as he was
killed in an unmarried state by a Yakga.

BhP [V.8.9 and IV.10.3 support the fact of his so dying during a hunting
expedition but not his treatment as an untouchable by gods.

=== PAGE 34 ===

28 Skanda Purana
You are adjured by my vital airs. Do as I suggest. I shall
always perform Srdddha on the Darga day, with your Pitys in
view. I shall perform it in the meeting place of Ganga and the
ocean. Here, you perform the same rite for my Pitrs.

77. shall give you a fourth part of the penance accumula-
ted by me in the course of this birth. Do it in this manner alone.

Subhadra said:

78. If you are satisfied in this way, let it be so, O great sage.
Everything should be done by a person who knows in a manner
whereby good people are delighted.

Bhrgu said:

79-80. Devasarma became delighted thereby. He offered a
fourth of his merit repeating the offer thrice (in words). He went
away to his place. Subhadra remained there.

O Narada, Mahi-Sagarasangaina is of this nature. On remem-
bering it I experience a great thrill even now.

Narada said:

81-82. I heard this,O Phalguna, like a dead man obtaining
nectar. I said with words choked due to delight to Bhrgu:
“Excellent! Excellent! You and we shall go to the extremely
splendid banks of Mahi. We shall look over the entire place,
the excellent region.”

83. On hearing my words, Bhrgu went along with me. The
whole of the excessively meritorious bank of Mahi was seen.

84. On seeing it 1 became excessively delighted with hair
standing up all over the body. I spoke to the tiger (i.e. eminent)
among sages with words choked with delight:

85-86. ‘O Bhygu, thanks to your grace, I shall make this abode
very excellent. O Brahmana, may you be pleased to go to your
abode. I shall think about what should be done.”

After bidding adieu to Bhrgu thus, I sat on the bank of that
river which had ripples and waves producing a tumultuous sound
with great enthusiasm. Just as a yogin meditates on the Atman,
I thought about my (subsequent) duties.

=== PAGE 35 ===

1ii.4.1-10 29
CHAPTER FOUR

Dialogue between Narada and Arjuna:
Different Kinds of Charitable Gifts

Narada said:

|. Then I began to think: ‘How can this place come in my
possession? For, this earth is always under the control of kings.

2. If Igo to Dharmavarman! and beg for the land, he will
surely hand it over to me but what is acquired by begging is not
very decent.

3. Indeed, it has been so declared by the sages. Wealth is
of three kinds:? The most excellent one is Sukla (‘white’), the
mediocre one is Sabala (‘of variegated colours’) and the basest
one is called Krsna (‘black’).

4-5. What is obtained from disciple through the teach-
ing of the Vedas is Sukla.

What is obtained through a daughter, usury, business opera-
tion, agricultural activities or begging is called Sabala by good
people.

What is acquired through gambling, stealing, daring adven-
tures and frauduJent means is regarded as Krsna.

6. Ifa person performs a holy rite by means of Sukla wealth
with great faith and sincerity, in a holy spot and on behalf of a
deserving person, he will enjoy the benefit thereof as a Deva.

7. Tf one were to offer charitable gifts to those who seek
them with Rajasu emotions and feelings, by means of Sabala
wealth, one enjoys the benefit thereof as a human being.

8. Ifa man, the basest among men, is actuated by Tamasa
emotions and feelings and offers charitable gift by means of
Krsna wealth, he enjoys the benefit thereof after being reborn as
an animal after death.

9-10. The wealth acquired by me by begging will clearly be
of the Rdajasa nature. Or, in the capacity of a Brahmana I may
request the king for monetary gift. That also is very bad for the

1. This king of Saurastra is not mentioned in other Puranas.

2. For the classification of wealth into Sukla (i.e white, pure), Sabala
(i.e, dark-white, mixed) and Krsna (i.e, dark) cf. Narada Smrti, Rnadana wv.
40-43; Visnu Dh, S. ch, 58 also divides wealth in the same way.

=== PAGE 36 ===

30 Skanda Purana

same reason, in my opinion. This Pratigraha (‘acceptance of
monetary gift’) is terrible. It may taste like honey, but it is com-
parable to poison in its injurious effects. .

11. Distress and affliction is always associated with Prati-
graha and it affects the Brahmana.’ Hence, I refrained from the
sinful Pratigraha.

12. Then I began to think again and again: ‘We shall make
the region come into our possession by any of the means, by
either of the two means.’

13. Just as the husband of a vicious wife never ceases to
worry, so also pondering and deliberating on this I never came
to the end of my anxious thoughts.

14. Inthe meantime, O son of Prtha, many sages came there
to take their holy dip in the sacred Mahisagarasangama.

15-16. I asked them all: «From where have you come?”
They bowed down to me and said: “O sage, there is a king
named Dharmavarma in the land of Saurastra. He is the over-
lord of this territory. Desirous of knowing the truth of Dana,
he performed penance for many years.

17-18. Then an ethereal voice pronounced a verse?: ‘O king,
listen. It is said that Dana has two Hetus .(causes, motives), six
Adhisthanas (bases), six Angas (ancillaries), two Pakas (places of
fruition), four Prakdras (varieties), three Vidhis (procedures)
and three Naas (destructive factors or agents).’

After pronouncing this verse the cthereal voice stopped.

19. In spite of being asked, it did not explain the meaning
of the verse, O Narada. Thereupon, King Dharmavarma an-
nounced through the beating of drums:

20. ‘I wil! give the following things to that person who gives
the correct interpretation of this verse that has been acquired by
me through penance.

21. Iwill give seven million cows, gold (coins) to that extent
and seven villages to the person who explains this verse.”

22. Onhearing the important announcement of the king
through the drum, O sage, crores of Brahmanas of many
countries came.

23. But the words of the verse were difficult to understand,

1. For explanation of the verse, see below vv 41-84.

=== PAGE 37 ===

1.ii.4.24-37 31

O sage. Those prominant Brahmanas could not explain it like a
dumb man who could not express (the taste of) treacle.

24. But out of covetousness for the prize, we too went
there, O Narada. But since the verse was very difficult to under-
stand, we gave it a low bow and came to this place.

25. As this verse was inexplicable, the prize was not ob-
tainable by us. How are we to conduct this pilgrimage? Think-
ing over all these things, we came away to this place.”

26. O Phalguna, on hearing these words of those noble souls,
I was much delighted. After bidding them adieu I thought thus.

27. ‘Oh! I have got the means to acquire the place. There
is no doubt about it. By explaining the verse, I will get the place
and the prize from the king.

28. Iwill get them as a price of my learning. Thus (the
question of) begging or accepting monetary gifts does not arise.
Truthfully did Vasudeva, the ancient sage, the preceptor of the
universe, say:

29-31. If one has faith in holy rites, that faith is never un-
fulfilled; if one has great keenness for sinful activities that too
is never unfulfilled: Thinking thus, learned men do according to
their taste. This statement of the lord is true. Though my desire
was great and very difficult to be fulfilled, it has germinated,
grown up and borne fruit clearly. I know clearly (the meaning
of this verse which is inscrutable (to others).

32-33. This had formerly been explained to me by the unem-
bodied Pitrs.’ Thus, O son of Pytha, I thought over it frequently.
After bowing down to the Tirtha Mahisdgara-Sangama re-
peatedly, I started from there in the guise of an old Brahmana.
Then I went to the king.

34. I told him thus, «O king, listen to the explanation of
the verse. Please increase the gift which you have announced by
beating the drums.”

35. When it was said (by me) thus, the king said: «Crores
of excellent Brahmanas have said thus. But they are not able to
explain its meaning.

36-37. What are the two causes? What are those bases
mentioned to be six? What are those six ancillaries? What are
those regarded as the two places of fruition? What are those
four varieties? What are the three types of Danas, O Brahmana?

=== PAGE 38 ===

32 Skanda Purana

What are said to be the three destructive agents of Dana? Explain
this clearly.

38-41. If you clarify these seven questions, O Brihmana, |
will give you seven million cows, gold (coins) to that extent and
seven villages. If not, you will (have to) go back to your house.”

When the king Dharmavarmi, the lord of Saurastra, spoke
these words I said to him:

“Let it be so. Listen attentively. I shall clearly explain the
verse.! Hear the two causes of Dana. Sraddhd (‘faith’) and Sakti
(‘capacity’) are the two causes of growth and imperishability of
the act of charitable gifts. The quantity of the thing gifted away
(is immaterial). It may be small or great. Both of them cause
prosperity.

42-43. There are some verses about Sraddha:

‘Dharma (‘virtue, piety’) is subtle. It is not acquired through
many bodily sufferings or physical strain. Nor is it obtained
through heaps of wealth. Sraddha is (the cause of) Dharma. It is
a wonderful penance. Sraddha is both heaven and liberation
(«Moksa’). Sraddhd is the entire universe.

44. Even if one gifts away one’s entire assets, nay, the very
life itself, without Sraddha (‘faith and sincerity’) one will not
obtain any benefit. Therefore, one should be faithful and sincere.

45. Dharma is achieved through Sraddha@ and not through
great heaps of wealth. Indeed, the sages who were poor and
intelligent went to heaven as they were endowed with Sraddha.

46. Listen, Sraddha is inherent in the nature of the embo-
died beings. It is of three types, viz. Sdattvika, Rdjasa and
Tamasa.*

47. Persons of the Sattvika type worship Devas. Those of
RGjasa type worship Yaksas and Raksasas. People of the Témasa

type worship ghosts, goblins and spirits.’*

48. Hence, lord Rudra is gratified with that charitable gift
offered by a faithful one and given to a deserving one. The wealth

1. This discussion on Ddna shows considerable influence of BG, ch,
XVII.

2. Quotation from BG XVII. 2.

3. Quoted from BG XVII. 4.

=== PAGE 39 ===

Lii.4.49-55 33

must be one that is acquired through fair, justifiable means. It
does not matter even if it is of a very small quantity.

Verses about Sakti

49. The surplus that one has after having properly fed and
clothed the members of the family, may be given as gifts. If it is
otherwise, the Dharma of the donor is like honey in taste but
poison in effect (afterwards).

50. When one’s own people are leading a life of hardship,
if one offers any gift to other people who are well-off, one is act-
ing like a person who swallows poison thinking that he is drink-
ing honey. His charitable gift is only a semblance of righteous-
ness.3

51. If one performs the funeral rites and obsequies with
great deal of trouble and disturbance to the servants, the same
will ultimately cause unhappiness to one who is alive as well as
to the dead man.

52-54. Even during emergency the following nine things
should not be given away as gifts by wise men’: Samanya (i.e. a
property shared with others or commonly or jointly owned by
many), Yacita (i.e. what has been obtained by begging), Nyasa
(‘deposited amount’), Adhi (i.e. what is pledged or mortgaged),
Darah (‘wife’), Darganam (‘bail-amount’), Anvahita (‘security
deposit’), Niksepa (‘amount held in Trust’), and Sarvasva (‘the
entire property’) when one’s family is not extinct. A man who
gives these as gifts is a foolish person. He will have to perform
PrdyaScitta (i.e. expiatory rites for it).

Thus, O king, the two causes have been mentioned.

Be pleased to listen. Now I shall mention the bases. They are
six in number. Hear them.

55. Dharma, Artha (‘wealth’), Kama (‘desire’), Vrida (‘shame’),
Harsa (‘delight’) and Bhaya (‘fear’): They say that these six are
the bases of Danas.

“1. Saktiis the capacity of the donor. The verses here summarise the
limits to generosity laid down in Dharma SAstra.
2. Verse from Brhaspati, quoted in Apararka (p. 780).
3. Quoted from Manu XI.9.

4. Vide Manu XI.10.
5. Quoted from Daksa IIT. 19-20; cf, Narada, Dattapradanika 4-5,

=== PAGE 40 ===

34 Skanda Purana

56. Ifa gift is made to a deserving person everyday without
expecting anything in return (here or hereafter), only with the
idea that it is one’s duty, it is called Dharmadana (i.¢. gift based
on Dharma).

57. After tempting a rich man with the offer of some money
if one gains a lot of wealth, the money so offered (? a bribe) they
call Arthadana. Henceforth (I shall mention) Kamadana. Listen.

58. Expecting something in return, if a gift is made on cer-
tain occasions with great attachment (but) to undeserving per-
sons, it is called Ka@madana (i.e. Dana based on a desire).

59. Out of shame, if, in the open assembly, one promises to
the suppliants something and offers a gift, the Dana so given is
well known as Vridadana (i.e. Dana based on sense of shame).

60. If, after seeing or hearing something pleasing, one is
pleased and offers a present as a token of his delight, this Dana
is called Harsaddna (i.e. Dana based on delight) by people who
discuss (the problems of) Dharma.

61. If something is given to persons who never help, in order
to avoid rebuke or revilement, censure or injury, it is called
Bhayadana (i.e. Dana based on fright).

62-64a. The six bases (of Danas) have been mentioned.
Listen to the six ancillaries (of Dana viz.) Data (‘donor’), Prati-
grahitd (‘the recipient’), Suddhi (-purity’), Deya (‘the thing gifted’),
Dharmayuk (‘the thing associated with Dharma’) and Desa-Kdla
(‘place and time’). These are known as six ancillaries of gifts."

The donor is highly praiseworthy on the basis of six counts:
(1) he should be free from sickness; (2) he should be a righteous
soul; (3) desirous of giving; (4) free from vices or danger; (5)
pure in conduct; (6) his vocation as well as activities should be
free from reproach.?

64b-66. The donor who is not straightforward, who enter-
tains no faith, whose mind is restless and disquiet, who is inso-
lent and cowardly, who is dishonest (lit. who gives false promises)
and who is always sleepy is the meanest one of Tamasa nature. A
Brahmana who is white (i.e. pure and exalted) in three® respects,

1. Cf. Devala quoted by Hemadri in caturvargacintamaui, Dana Section.

2. Quotation from Devala in Apararka, p. 199,

3. Trifukla—(i) exalted in family pedigree, (ji) in learning and (iii) in
behaviour; vide infra 5.120.

=== PAGE 41 ===

L.ii.4.67-76 35

viz. family, learning and behaviour, is of meagre means of liveli-
hood, who is kind and considerate, whose sense-organs are un-
impaired, and who is free from the defects of source of origin, is
called Patra (‘a deserving person’).

If the donor’s immediate reaction on seeing suppliants is one
of excessive pleasure with delighted face, if he shows hospitality
and absence of malice, it is called Suddhi (‘Purity’).

67. The wealth that has been earned by one without haras-
sing others or by giving undue pain to others (and by) one’s own
effort, is called Deya (i.e. that which deserves to be gifted). It
may be small or large in quantity.

68-70. If the gift is associated with some holy rite or pious
activity, it is called Dharmayuk. If there is dejection (in the
heart), the benefit is nil. (If a rare thing is gifted it has special
merit. If a thing out of season is gifted it has special merit. If a
gift is made when the recipient is in need of if, it has special
merit.) Therefore the place and time should be chosen properly
for Dana. If they are befitting they are excellent and not other-
wise. The six ancillaries have been mentioned. Listen to the two
places of fruition. They say that the two places of fruition are
this world and the other world.

71. If anything is gifted to good people, the benefit thereof
is attained in the other world. If any gift is made to bad people,
the benefit thereof is enjoyed here (in this world) itself.

72. The two places of fruition have been pointed out thus.
Listen to the four varieties?: They are in order Dhruva, Ahustrika,
Kamya and Naimittika.

73-76. This is the Vedic path of charitable gifts. It has been
divided into four as explained by Brahmanas. Gift of water
booths, parks, lakes etc. where the fruit is desired (and enjoyed)
by all is called Dhruva.

1, Cf. Devala as quoted in Apararka, p. 288.

2. Normally danas are classified into three types, viz. Nitya, Naimittika
and Kamya but our author, probably under the influence of Devala, adds
Ahustrika (called Ajasrika by Devala) for nitya (i.e. everyday gifts such as
food after Vaisvadeva).

The lines from: Prapdraématadagadi (v.73b) to sada homavivarjitam (v.76b)
are a quotation from Devala; vide Apararka, p. 289 where he quotes these
lines of Devala.

=== PAGE 42 ===

36 Skanda Purdna

What is given everyday they call Ahustrika (i.e. gift without
any motive or desire).

What is given with a desire to obtain progeny, victory, pros-
perity, wife and children is called Kamya. It is based on a desire.

In the Smyti texts the Naimittika (dana) is mentioned as three-
fold, viz. Kalapeksa (i.e. caused by a particular time), Kriyapeksa
(i.e. necessitated by a certain holy rite) and Gundpeksa (based on
certain qualities). Always these rites are performed without Homa
(i.e. ghee offerings in the sacred fire). Thus the varieties have been
described to you. The three types are (being) mentioned now.

77. The three types are Uttama (‘best’), Madhyama (‘medio-
cre’) and Kaniyasa (inferior)'. There are eight Danas of the supe-
rior type in accordance with the injunction; four Danas of the
mediocre type and the remaining ones are of the inferior type.
This is the Trividhatva (i.e. three types of dana).

78. The Uttamadanas are the following: (The gift of:)
houses, palaces, learning, earth or land, a cow, a well, market-
place and saving lives by means of medicines, foodstuffs or by
way of withstanding attacks on them. They are called Uttama-
danas because excellent things are offered as gifts.

79. Food grains, resting places, garments and vehicles such
as horse etc: These are the Madhyamadanas because these
mediocre things are offered as gifts.

80-81. The gifts of footwear, an umbrella, vessels etc., curds,
honey and seats, lamps, staff, (precious) stones etc. are called
Kantyasas. The last one is of the duration of many years (7).
Listen to the three destructive agents of Danas.

82-83. If the donor regrets much after making a gift it is
called Asura (‘demoniac’). It is devoid of benefit. If the donor
gives without faith or sincerity, it is called Raksasa. This is also
fruitless. If the donor rebukes and then makes the gift, or if after
giving, the donor reproaches the Brahmana, it is called Paigdca
(‘pertaining to ghosts and vampires’). It is also fruitless. These
three are the destructive agents of Dana.

1, Although v. 81a is a quotation from Devala, the classification of
danas given here is somewhat different from that of Devala. Vide Apardrka,
pp. 289-90,

=== PAGE 43 ===

1.ii.4.85-93 37

84. Thus the excellent greatness of Dana connected with the
seven words (i.e. questions) has been explained, O king, accord-
ing to my capacity. Tell me whether it is correct or not.”

Dharmavarma said:

85. Today my birth has become fruitful. Today my penance
has borne fruits. O most excellent one among persons of good
actions, I have been made contented and blessed today.

86-88. If a Brahmacarin studies the whole of his life, his
life is fruitless. If a person gets a wife after undergoing great deal
of sufferings and she happens to be one speaking displeasing
words it is vain. If one digs a well with great strain and the water
happens to be saltish, the digging is vain. If life is spent without
pious activities and many sufferings are undergone, the life is
vain. In the same manner my name had been vain but now it has
been made fruitful by you. Hence obeisance to you. Repeated
obeisance to the Brahmanas.

89-90. Truly did Visnu say to Sanatkumara and others in
the abode of Visnu:

“When I partake of the offerings of ghee in the sacrifice
through my mouth, i.e. the Fire-god (I am happy but it is not as
much as) I get from the mouth of a Brahmana who gets satis-
faction while eating every morsel (of food) with all his holy rites
and fruits thereof dedicated to me. (When I see him taking food
1 am happy. This happiness is more than in the previous case.)’”

91. I have done something not pleasing to the Brahmanas.
Hence I am not happy. Brahmanas are the lords of all. Let them
forgive my misdemeanour. I entreat them.

92. Who are you, holy Sir? You are not an ordinary person.
I bow down to you for the favour you have shown. Reveal your-
self, O Sage.

When told thus, I spoke to him then:

Narada said:

93. O excellent king, I am Narada. I have come here for the
sake of a plot of land. Give me the money and the land for
erecting a holy shrine as promised (by you).

=== PAGE 44 ===

38 Skanda Purana

94, Although this earth and wealth belong to Devas, O
king, it is necessary that the king of the day and of the place
should be requested.

95. He is the incarnation of Isvara. He is the lord and the
bestower of freedom from fear. Similarly I request you to attain
the purity of the wealth. At the outset give me an abode, be-
cause you are the person to fulfil my request.

The King said:
96. If you are Narada, O Brahmana, let the entire kingdom
be yours. Undoubtedly I shall render service to your Brahmanas.

Narada said:

97. If you are a devotee of ours, you must carry out our
suggestion.

98. Give me all the amount that you have promised. But
give me land only to the extent of seven Gavyittis (7x3--21
kms). Its protection is only through you.

He agreed to it. I began to think about the remaining affairs.

CHAPTER FIVE
Dialogue between Narada and Sutanu

Narada said:

1, ThenI said to Dharmavarma, «Let the wealth remain
with you. 1 shall take it at the time of need” and I came over to
the mountain Raivata (i.e. Mt. Girnar in Gujarat).

2. I was delighted to see that excellent mountain which rose
up like the hand of the Earth beckoning all good men.

3. Different kind of trees shine onit like the sons, wife and
others (i.e. other members of a household) who have a righteous
lord of the house.

=== PAGE 45 ===

Lii.5.4-15 39

4. Joyous and contented cuckoos cooed and chirped there
like groups of pupils who had acquired good knowledge from an
excellent preceptor on the earth.

5. By performing penance there men can obtain whatever
they desire, like a devotee who derives all that he wishes for,
after resorting to Sri Mahadeva.

6. After reaching the great rocky ridge of that mountain,
O son of Pytha, I became delighted by the cool breeze of great
fragrance. I thought thusin my mind:

7. ‘I have now acquired a spot which (ordinarily) is very
difficult to get. Now I shall begin (my attempt) for getting the
Brahmanas (to be settled there).

8. Indeed those Brahmanas who are considered to be the
most deserving of all should be looked for by me. Statements of
the expounders of the Vedas are thus heard in this connection.

9. Just as a rudderless boat is incompetent to cross a water-
way, so also even an excellent Brahmana is incapable of redeem-
ing (others) if he does not practise good conduct.

10. A Brahmana who does not study (scriptural texts) ceases
to be (a Brahmana) like (the quickly extinguishing) grass-fire.
Havya (‘sacrificial offerings’) should not be given to him. Indeed
the rite of Havana (‘sacrificial oblations’) is not performed on ash
(but a blazing fire).

11. If deserving persons are ignored and a charitable gift is
offered to an undeserving person, it is (as bad as) offering
Gavahnika (‘daily measure of food given to a cow’) to a donkey
after ignoring a cow.

12. The charitable gift offeredto a fool is transitory and
worthless like the seed sown in a barren land, or milking (a cow)
in a broken pot, or the Havya offered on ash.

13. If a monetary gift is offered to an undeserving person
and contrary to the injunctions, not only does the money so
offered vanish but also the remaining merit is destroyed.

14-15. The following things acquired by undeserving persons
kill them (i.e. cause harm): land and cow destroy worldly
pleasures; gold destroys the body; horse causes harm to the eye
and garments; ghee causes harm to the brilliance; and gingelly
seeds cause harm to the progeny. Hence a person not learned
should be afraid of accepting monetary gifts and the like. Even

=== PAGE 46 ===

40 Skanda Purana

with a small quantity of these (if accepted) the unlettered one
suffers from pain and disaster like the cow bogged in a marshy
place. .

16. Hence a gift offered to the following is everlasting and
imperishable: those with hidden (power of) penance, those who
secretly study and recite (the Vedas), those who are devoted only
to their wives and those who are tranquil.

17. Ifa gift is offered toa deserving person at the proper
place and time and the thing so given is acquired by good means
and if it is offered with sincerity and ardent faith, that would be
an index of good piety.

18. One does not become a deserving person by learning
alone or austerities alone. Where there is good conduct along
with these two, people call them deserving persons.

19. Among these three qualities, learning is the most im-
portant quality. One without learning is like a blind man. Those
with learning are considered to be blessed with (perfect) eyesight.

20. Hence learned persons, persons with perfect vision
should be tested (i.e. found by test) in every land. I will make the
gift to those who will answer my questions.’

21. After thinking thus in my mind, I started from that
place and visited the hermitages of great sages, O Phalguna.

22-29. Iused to sing the following verses in the form of
questions.’ Listen to them. “‘Who knows Matrkd (‘alphabet’)?
How many types? What are the syllables? Which Brahmana
knows the five times five wonderful house? Who knows how
to make the multiformed woman into a single-formed one?
Which man of the world knows the Citrakathabandha?? Which
man devoted to Mantras and learning knows the great crocodile
of the ocean? Which excellent Brahmana knows the eightfold
Brahmanahood? Who will tell the ‘root’ days (i.e. the days
of the beginning) of the four Yugas? Who knows the ‘root’ days
(i.e. the first day of the advent of each Manvantara) of fourteen
Manus? On which day did the Sun formerly get his chariot? Who

1, The questions asked here are explained in vv. SOff. (being the reply of

Sutanu to Narada).
2. Vide vv. 97-98 below.

=== PAGE 47 ===

Lii.5.30-38 41

knows that which causes affliction to all living beings like a black
serpent? Who shall be the cleverest of all clever people in this
cruel and terrible world (i.e. worldly existence)? Which Brahmana
knows and expounds the two paths?”

These are my twelve questions. Those excellent Brahmanas
who know these, are the greatest among those worthy of being
praised. I will be their worshipper for a long time.

Singing thus I wandered over the whole of the earth.

30-31. They said: “The questions put by you give pain. We
do salute you.” Thus 1 roamed over the entire earth. Even after
seeking them over the entire earth, I did not get a single Brah-
mana. I sat on the top of the Himalaya mountain and began to
think again: ‘All the Brahmanas have been seen. What should I
do next?’

32. Even asI was thinking thus, this struck my mind: I
have not gone yet to the excellent village of Kalapa.*

33. Eighty-four thousand Brahmanas who are devoted to
the study (i.e. listening and learning) of the Vedas, live there like
embodied forms of penance.

34. I will go to that place: Saying so, I started then. Walking
through the sky, I crossed the snow (-clad peak) and reached the
other side.

35. I saw the great jewel of a village situated on that holy
spot. It extended to a hundred Yojanas. It was full of different
kinds of trees.

36. There were hundreds of excellent hermitages of
meritorious persons. All the animals and other living beings did
not have any animosity or wickedness inter se.

37. The whole village always rendered help to the sages
performing sacrifices. Similarly the assistance of good and
virtuous persons never ceased (i.e. was always available).

38. There was the great abode of sages, the imperishable
abode in that village. (The recitation of) Mantras (with words)

1. A mythological place where Maru and Devapi, the last kings of the
Solar and Lunar races await the dawning of Krtayuga to re-establish their
dynasties, It was a pleasure haunt of Urvasi and Purdravas, It is supposed
to be near Badarikasrama, Though the author's description of Kalapa-grama
is imaginary, the location is mythologically approximate.

=== PAGE 48 ===

42 Skanda Purana

such as Svaha, Svadhd, Vasat(-kara) and Hanta(-kara) never
ceased there.

39. It is here, O son of Prtha, that the seed for the sake of
XKrtayuga is kept in reserve. So also that of the Solar and Lunar
races as well as that of Brahmanas.

40. After reaching that place, I entered the hermitages of
Brahmanas. There, excellent Brahmanas were engaged in dis-
cussing various doctrines.

41-43. They were discussing and arguing mutually. They
appeared like the Vedas in embodied forms. Some of those
intelligent ones, of noble souls, refuted others as (crows) scatter
the pieces of flesh in the sky. There I raised my hand and said:
“O Brahmanas, of what avail are your shouts like the cawings
of crows? Let this be heard. If you possess perfect knowledge,
clarify my questions, the many unbearable questions I will ask.”

Braéhmanas said:

44. Tellus, O Brahmana, your questions? On hearing them,
we shall answer them. This is indeed a great gain for us that
Your Honour put these questions.

45. With a desire to be the first to answer (and saying “I
first’) they (vied with one another and) denied the opportunity
to others to answer. Just as brave warriors go ahead saying “1
will go first, I will go first’’, so also (they came forward).

46-47. ThenI put to them the old twelve questions. On
hearing them, those leading sages said in a playful mood: “O
Brahmana, of what use are these childish questions put by you?
These questions will be answered by one among us whom you
consider the least learned (i.e. these questions do not deserve to
be answered by a learned man).”’

48. Ibecame surprised thereby. I considered myself con-
tented and blessed. Thinking one of them to be the least learned
among them, I said: ‘Let this one reply.”

49. Thereupon that boy named Sutanu, a boy having no
boyishness (i.e. ignorance), spoke to me:

Sutanu said:
My speech proceeds slowly, O Brahmana, on account of your

=== PAGE 49 ===

L.ii.5,50-61 43

silly (i.e. very simple) questions. Still I shall reply because you
consider me the least (learned).

50-53a. The letters of the alphabet are known to be fiftytwo.
The syllable OM is the first among them. Then there are fourteen
vowels. The SparSas (i.e. the consonants) are thirtythree. Then
there is Anusvara (tn). There are the following too: Visarjantya
(h=:) and Jihvamiliya (hk, hkh) and Upadhmaniya (hp, hph).
Thus these are the fiftytwo.

Thus the number has been explained to you. O Brahmana,
listen to the meaning of these:

53b-55. In this context, I will tell you an ancient legend.
The events took place formerly in Mithila, in the abode of a
Brahmana.

Formerly, in the city of Mithila, there was a Brahmana named
Kauthuma. All the lores that are on the earth had been master-
ed by him, O Brahmana. He exerted himself earnestly in this
matter for thirtyone thousand years.

56-57. Without the break of even a single moment, he con-
tinued to read (i.e. learn). Then he married. After some time a
son was born to Kauthuma. Behaving like a dullard, he learned
the Matrkas (i.e. letters of the alphabet) only. After reading the
Matrkas, he did not learn anything else at all.

58-59. Then the father who was extremely dejected and
distressed, spoke to that sluggish fellow: “Study, son, study. I
will give you sweetmeats. Else I shall give them to others and
twist your ears.”

The Son replied:

60. O father, is it for the sake of sweetmeats that one
should study? Should covetousness be the reason? Study for
men, it is said, should be for the sake of the attainment of the
greatest good.

Kauthuma said:

61. May you get the duration of the life of god Brahma,
since you say this. Let this good sense be in you (for ever).
Why do you not study further?

=== PAGE 50 ===

44 Skanda Purdna

The Son said:

62. Everything that should be learned and understood has
been learnt here (in Matrkas) itself. Thereafter why should the
throat be made more and more parched? Tell me.

The Father said:

63. O boy, you are speaking in a mysterious manner. What
thing has been understood by you here. Say it again, O dear one,
I wish to hear your words.

The Son said:

64. Even after learning for thirtyone thousand years, O
father, only different kinds of argumentsand mistaken notions
have been retained by you in your mind.

65. Various Dharmas have been mentioned in the Darsanas
(‘systems of philosophy’) by specifically pointing them out. But
your mind is acting like a gaseous matter in regard to them. I
shall destroy that.

66-67. You are making a study of the instructions but you
are not conversant with the real meaning. Those Brahmanas
who rely solely on the wordings of the text are indeed biped
brutes. Hence I shall tell you those words which will wonder-
fully act as the solar splendour dispelling the darkness of delu-
sion,

68. Akdra (i.e. the letter A) is described (i.e. it means) to be
Brahma. Ukara (i.e. letter U) is called Visnu. Makdra (i.e. letter
MA) is declared as Rudra. These three are spoken of as Gunas.

69. The half Matra at the top of 3% is the greatest one.
It is Sadasiva himself. This is the greatness of Okara. This is
the eternal Sruti.

70. The greatness of Orrkdra cannot be exactly described
even in ten thousand years, even by means of a crore of Granthas
(i.e. books, verses).

1. VV. 68ff explain the mystic significance of Om, the Mdatrkds etc. It is
beyond the scope of an annotator to assess the rationality regarding the
presumptions A=God Brahma, U=Visnu, M=Rudra or the 14 Vowels from
A to Ah (Visarga) as representing 14 Manus and such other esoteric expla-
nations offered in these verses,

=== PAGE 51 ===

Lii.5,71-85 45

71-75. Again let what is mentioned as the utmost essence
be listened to. The letters beginning with Akdra (letter A) and
ending with Akdra (letter H i.e. Visarga) are the fourteen
Manus. They are Svaharhbhuva, Svarocis, Auttama, Raivata,
Tamasa, Caksusa the sixth one, Vaivasvata the current one,
Savarni, Brahmasavarni, Rudrasavarni, Daksasavarni, Dharma-
savarni, Raucya and Bhautya. They have the complexions in
the following order: white, pale-white, red, coppery, yellow,
tawny, black, dark. smoky, and reddish brown, brown, three-
coloured, variegated, karkandhura (i.e. having the colour of the
jujube fruit).

76. Vaivasvata is Ksakara also, O dear father. He is seen as
black in colour (also). The thirty-three letters beginning with
letter KA and ending with HA are the (thirty-three) Devas.

77-18. The letters beginning with KA and ending with THA
are known as the twelve Adityas, viz. Dhata, Mitra, Arya-
man, Sakra. Varuna, Arngu, Bhaga, Vivasvan, Piisan, Savitr the
tenth one, Tvastr the eleventh and Visnu who is called the
twelfth (Aditya).

79-80. Heis the last born among the Adityas but he is
superior to others (in goodness and power). The letters beginning
with DA and ending with BA are known as the eleven Rudras.
They are Kapali, Pingala, Bhima, Viripaksa, Vilohita, Ajaka,
Sasana, Sasta, Sarnbhu, Canda and Bhava.

81-82. The eight letters beginning with BHA and ending
with SA are considered to be the eight Vasus. They are Dhruva,
Ghora, Soma, Apa, Anala, Anila, Pratyiisa and Prabhasa. These
are known as the eight Vasus. The two letters SA and HA are
reputed as the Agvins. Thus these thirty-three are known.

83-84. The Anusvara, Visarga, Jihvamiliya and Upadhmdaniya
are the four types of living beings, viz. Jardyujas (‘those born of
the womb’), Amdajas (‘those born of eggs’), Svedajas (‘born of
sweat’) and Udbhijjas (‘trees and creepers that break the ground
and grow’). Thus, O dear father, the living beings are ‘declared.
This is the implied meaning that is mentioned just now, Listen to
the true meaning now.

85. Those men who resort to these Devas and are devot-
ed to holy rites, become merged in that eternal position of the
half Matra (i.e. Sada giva).

=== PAGE 52 ===

46 Skanda Purana

86. These living beings belonging to the four species of
creatures become liberated, when mentally, verbally and physi-
cally they worship Suras. .

87. If in any treatise these Devas are not honoured by
sinners, that treatise should not be held sacred even if god
Brahma himself were to speak it out.

88. These Devas are well-established in the path of Vedas.
In all heretical treatises, they are denounced by men of evil
action.

89. Those vicious people who transgress these Devas and
perform the rites of penance, charitable gifts and repetition of
names, do tremble (i-e. wander) in the path of the Maruts.

90. Alas! See the might of delusion of those who have not
conquered themselves (i.e. controlled themselves). Those sinners
study Matrkd but do not honour Suras.

Sutanu said:

91. On hearing his words, the father became extremely sur-
prised. He asked him many questions and he (i.e. the son) replied
then and there.

92. Your first question about the Matrka has been clarified
by me. Listen to the clarification of the second question on the
wonderful abode of five times five.

93-95a. The five elements, the five Karmendriyas (‘organs of
action’), JAdnendriyas (‘organs of sense’), thefive Visayas (‘objects
of senses’), the mind, the intellect and Ahamkara (‘Cosmic
Ego’), Prakrti and Purusa, the twenty-fifth one, i.e. Sadagiva
—these are the principles called five times five.! The house made
by them is the body. He who understands this exactly, attains
Siva.

95b. Expounders of Vedanta call Buddhi (‘intellect’) as the
multi-formed woman.

96. Since it refers to various objects, it undergoes various
forms. But with the contact of the one object—Dharma—it is
only one though it might have had many forms.

1. The influence of Sankhyas is obvious but it is theistic.

=== PAGE 53 ===

Lii.5.97-109 47

97-98. The knower of this true meaning does not fall into
hell. What is not mentioned by the sages, what does not honour
and accept the deities, and that which is full of lust: learned men
call such statements, Bandham Citrakatham (‘the bondage caused
by strange talk’ ?).

Now listen to the (answer of the) fifth (question).

99. The one, Lobha (‘greed’) only is the crocodile. It is due
to greed that sins are committed. It is from greed that anger is
aroused and lust too takes its origin from greed.

100. Infact everything (mentioned below) proceeds from
greed: delusion, deception, false prestige, stiffness, desire
to take away other people’s wealth, ignorance and absence of
wisdom.

101. The robbing of other people’s wealth, molestation
of other men’s wives, all risky adventures and the commission of
atrocities—all these are the results of greed.

102-104a. This greed along with delusion should be conquer-
ed by one who has conquered his own self. Hypocrisy, hatred,
censure, slander-mongering and malice—all these occur in greedy
people who have not won over their own selves.

They may be persons knowing all the great Sastras thorough-
ly, they may have learned much and they may be the dispellers
of doubts, but being victims of greed they face downfall.

104b-109. Those who are affected by greed and anger are
devoid of the conduct of Sistas (‘well-behaved, respected
people’). They are like persons with sweet speech who keep a
razor within. They are like wells covered with grass.

These people who have the motive and capacity try in various
ways. These ruthless ones among human kind destroy the ways
of all, out of greed. (OR: Out of greed, cruel people destroy all
the pathways which people having the motive and the capacity
make.)

These pretenders to piety are insignificant creatures. They
adorn themselves with the external symbols of piety, but they
rob the entire universe. These persons who are greedy should
always be knownas great sinners. Janaka, Yuvanasva-Vysadarbhi,*

1, The reading Vrsddarbhi shows that this YuvanAsva was a supremely
generous king who donated everything and went to heaven as mentioned in
Mbh, Santi 234.15,

=== PAGE 54 ===

48 Skanda Purdna

Prasenajit! and many other overlords of people have attain-
ed heaven because they had eschewed greed. Hence those who
avoid greed cross the ocean of worldly existence. Others will be
swallowed by the crocodile undoubtedly.

Then, O Brahmana, understand the eight classes of Brah-
manas.”

110-111. Matra, Brahmana, Srotriya and Aniicdéna, Bhrima,
Rsikalpa, Rsi and Muni: these eight types of Brahmanas have
been mentioned at the outset in the Vedas. The later ones men-
tioned in the above list are (consecutively) greater than the earlier
ones on account of the excellence of their learning and good
conduct.

112. A person who has been born ina Brahmaga family, his
caste alone is that of Brahmana. But if he has not approached
(a Guru for learning) and is devoid of holy rites, he is called
Matra.

113. A person who is straightforward, has eschewed ulterior
motives, practises (the precepts of) the Vedas, is quiet and merci-
ful and always utters the truth is called a Brahmana.

114. A person who has learned (at last) one branch (of the
Vedas) along with its Kalpa and all the Angas and who is habi-
tually engaged in all the six holy duties and is well conversant
with Dharma is known by the name Srotriya.

115. A Brahmana who is well conversant with the Vedas and
Vedangas and their (essential) principles, who is of pure mind,
who has got rid of sins, who is excellent and intelligent and who
has a number of disciples eagerly engaged in the study of the
Vedas etc. is known as Aniicdna.

116. A person endowed with all the good qualities of
Aniicdna, who has restrained his senses with regular performance
of Yajfia and study of the Vedas, and who partakes of the food
that remains (after everyone has taken his food) is called Bhriina
by good people.

1. Another ancient king noted for generosity. According to Mbh, Sénti
240.36, he gifted a hundred thousand cows along with calves.

2. The classification of Brahmanpas, their nomenclature and character-
istics of each class given in vv. 110-19 is based on Devala (vide Apardarka,

pp. 284-85).

=== PAGE 55 ===

Lii.5.117-124 49

117. He who has attained all knowledge, both Vedic and
secular, who has restrained his senses and who always stays in a
hermitage is called Rsikalpa (‘nearly equal to a Rsi’).

118. A person who has sublimated his sexual urge, who is
very excellent, who has regular and simple food habits, who is
free from suspicions, who is truthful and is competent to curse
or bless shall be a Rsi.

119. A person who refrains (from worldly activities com-
pletely), who is conversant with all principles, who is devoid of
lust and anger, who is engaged in meditation and is free from
activities, who has subdued the senses and who considers a lump
of clay and a block of gold ona par is a Muni.

120. Those who are exalted by family pedigree, learn-
ing and good behaviour are the leading Brahmanas designated
as Triguklas. They are adored in Savana and other sacrificial
rites.

121. Thus the types of Brahmanas have been described.
Now listen to the days of the beginnings of the Yugas.1 The
ninth day in the bright half of the month of Karttika is glorified
as the first day of Krtayuga.

122. The third day in the bright half of the month of
Vaisakha is said to be the first day of Tretayuga.

The new-moon day in the month of Magha is known by
learned men as the first day of Dva@parayuga.

123. The thirteenth day in the dark half of the month of
Bhadrapada is known as the first day of Kali. These first days
of the Yugas are known asthe days causing everlasting benefits
if charitable gifts are offered (on these days).

124. One should know that gifts made and Havanas (i.e. Fire
worship, oblations to gods) performed on these four Yugadi
days (‘first days of the Yugas’) yield ever-lasting benefits. Charit-
able gifts made over a period of hundred years in the course of

1, There seems to be some difference of opinion in Puranas about the
days on which the Yugas commenced. Thus MtP 17.4-5, VP III.14.12-13
give 3rd Tithi of bright half of Vaisakha, 9th of the bright half of Karttika,
13th of the dark half of Bhadrapada and 15th Tithi of dark half of Magha
as the Yugddi (i.e. days of commencement) of Krta, Treta, Dvapara and Kali
respectively (vide HD IV, p. 374, footnote 841 for other differences).

=== PAGE 56 ===

50 Skanda Purana

a Yuga and those made on a single day, i.e. on the first day are
of equal benefits.

125-128. The first days of the Yugas have beer described.
Now listen to the first days of the Manvantaras.

The order is the same as that of the Manvantaras mentioned
before (in verses 72 etc.): (1) The ninth day of the bright half of
the month of Agvayuj, (2) the twelfth day (of the bright half) of
Karttika, (3) the third day of the bright half of the month of
Caitra,(4) the third day of the bright half of the month of Bhadra-
pada, (5) the new-moon day in the month of Phalguna, (6) the
eleventh day of (the bright half of) the month of Pausa, (7) the
tenth day of the month of Asadha, (8) the seventh day of the
month of Magha,(9) the eighth day of the dark half of the month
of Sravana, (10) the full-moon day of the month of Asadha, (11)
the full-moon day in the month of Karttika, (12) the full-moon
day of the month of Phalguna, (13) the full-moon day of the
month of Caitra, and (14) the fullemoon day of the month of
Jyestha.

These are the first days of the Manvantaras causing ever-
lasting benefits for the charitable gifts made on these days.

129. The seventh day in the month of Magha called by
Brahmanas Rathasaptami is the day on which formerly the
Sun obtained the chariot.

130. If charitable gifts are made, Havana is performed or
sacrifice is made on that day, all these yield everlasting benefit.
It eradicates all poverty and it is considered as causing pleasure
to the Sun.

131-132. Listen exactly to that person whom learned men
call Nityodvejaka (‘one who always causes affliction to living be-
ings’). He who begs everyday cannot attain heaven. Just like
thieves, he afflicts the living beings. That man of sinful soul goes
to Naraka (‘Hell’) since he causes perpetual affliction (to others).

133. The person who, having pondered over: ‘By what acts
(of mine) have I been born here? Where (shall) I have to go from
this place’, adopted suitable measures, is called Daksa-daksa
(‘cleverest of all the clever people’).

1, This list of the Manvadi Tithis (i.e. Tithis of the commencement of the
14 Manvantaras) agrees with that in MtP 17.6-8 and AP 117, 59-62.

=== PAGE 57 ===

Lii.5.134—Lii.6.4 51

134. In the course of eight months, in a day, in the early
stage of life or in the course of the whole life a person must do
that Karman (‘act’) whereby he attains happiness in the end.

135. The expounders of Vedanta have mentioned two

paths—that of Arcis (‘flame, bright light’) and that of Dhiima
(‘smoke’). The person who proceeds through the path of Dhiima
returns (to Samsara). He who goes along the path of Arcis attains
liberation.

136. The path of Dhiima is attained through Yajfas and
the path of Arcis is obtained through Naiskarmya (i.c. cessation
of all activities with motives and desires). The path other than
these two is called Pakhanda (‘heretic path’).

137. He who does not accept Devas or performs none of the
holy rites enjoined by Manu, does not go through any of these
two paths. This is the essential principle.

138. Thus O excellent Brahmana, your questions have been
clarified in accordance with my capacity. Tell me whether it is
good or otherwise. Reveal yourself too.

CHAPTER SIX
Narada Settles Brahmanas at the Holy Spot

Sri Narada said:

1. On hearing this, O Phalguna, I had a thrill of joy. After
revealing my identity, I spoke to the Brahmanas thus:

2. ‘Blessed indeed is our father since eminent Brahmanas of
your type are the defenders of what has been created by him.
Formerly Hari revealed this truth:

3. ‘Other than the eminent Brahmanas, the expounders of
my path, can there be anything greater than me? I am_ infinite
and I am the overlord of all living beings. There is nothing else
greater than I.’

4. Hence, in every respect I am blessed to-day. The fruit of
my birth has been obtained, since all of you who are free from
sins and calamities, have been seen by me.”

=== PAGE 58 ===

52 Skanda Purdna

5. Then those Brahmanas, the leader among whom was
Satatapa, got up suddenly. They honoured and adored me by the
offerings of Arghya, Padya etc. .

6-7. They said to me, Oson of Pytha, the following words
befitting good people: “Blessed are we, O celestial sage, since
you have come here to us. Where are you coming from? Where
have you to go now? What is the purpose in coming here? Let
this be said, O excellent sage.”

8. On hearing these pleasing words of the Brahmanas, O son
of Pandu, I replied to those eminent sages: ‘Let this be heard, O
excellent Brahmanas.

9-10. At the instance of god Brahma, I wish to give a charit-
able gift, an auspicious holy spot, to the Brahmanas in the great
Tirtha (named) Mahi-Sagara-Sangama I had been testing the
Brahmanas on my way to this place. You have been examined. I
shall now settle you (in a colony), O Brahmanas. Agree to it.”

11-15a. On being told thus, Satatapa looked at the Brah-
manas and said: “It is true, O Narada, that Bharata (India) is
inaccessible even to Devas. What then about Mahi-Sagara-
Sangama there itself? A person taking his holy plunge there,
attains all the benefits of a great Tirtha. But there is a great risk
by which we are extremely frightened. There are many thieves
there. They are merciless and fond of daring adventures. They
are taking our wealth denoted by the sixteenth and twenty-first
letter among Sparsas (i.e. TA and PA. So TAPAS, penance,
is indicated here). Without that wealth, how can we lead our
life? Better to live fasting than to be within the grip of

thieves.”

Arjuna said:

15b-16a. A strange thing is being told, O Brahmana. Who
are the thieves referred to? What is the wealth they are taking
away? Who are these of whom the Brahmanas are afraid?

Narada said:

16b-19. Lust, anger etc. are the thieves and penance is the
wealth. Since they were afraid that this would be taken away, the
Brahmanas said to me this, I told them subsequently, “Let it be

=== PAGE 59 ===

1.ii.6.20-31 53

known, O excellent Brahmanas. What will the roguish thieves do
to those men who are alert and watchful? Ifa person is frigh-
tened, idle and unclean, what indeed can be accomplished by
him? The earth will swallow that man.”

Satatapa said:

20. Weare afraid of the thieves. Indeed they take away a
great deal of our wealth. Then how can we continue to be awake?

21. The roguish thieves went away somewhere. Hence we
bowed down and came. Thus we abandon everything. We are
frightened, O sage.

22. Accepting gifts too is terrible. It gives only one-sixth
benefit.

Even as he was saying thus, a sage named Harita said:

23. “Who will foolishly abandon (the holy place) Mahi-
Sagara-Sangama where heaven and liberation can be easily
attained?

24. Which clever man will continue to stay in Kalapa and
other villages if residence in Stambhatirtha! can be obtained even
for half a moment?

25. What willthe fear of thieves and all do to us if we
steadfastly retain Kumaranatha, the protector, in our mind?

26. Without daring, prosperity cannot be obtained at all.
Hence, O Narada, I will go there at your instance.

27-31. I have under me twenty-six thousand Brahmanas.
They are all engaged in the six holy acts (i.e. duties) of Brahmanas
(viz. study and teaching of Vedas, performance of sacrifice by
oneself or through others, acceptance of gifts and giving religious
gifts). They are devoid of greed and arrogance or fraud. I will
come along with them. This is excellent in my opinion.”

When these words were uttered, [ took them on the top of my
staff and returned at once, O son of Prtha. [ walked through
the firmament with great joy. I passed through the snowy path
extending to a hundred Yojanas and came to Kedara? accompa-

1. Khambhat or Cambay in Gujarat.
2. Ked&ranatha, one of the twelve great Lirigas. It is in Garhwal district
of U.P.

=== PAGE 60 ===

54 Skanda Purana

nied by those excellent Brahmanas. That place could be approach-
ed through sky as well as through a Bila (‘subterrahean passage’)
and not otherwise, due to the favour of Skanda.

Arjuna said:

32. Where is that village Kalapa?! How can it be approach-
ed through subterranean passage? How is it due to the favour
of Skanda? O Narada, tell this to me.

Narada said:

33. It is told (by the Smrtis) that there isa snowy path ex-
tending to a hundred Yojanas. At the end of it is the Kalapa
village which too extends to a hundred Yojanas.

34. Atthe end, it is said, there is a Vdlukarnava (‘sea of
sand’) extending to a hundred Yojunas. Hence that land (in the
middle) extending to a hundred Yojanas is described as Bhimi-
svarga (‘heaven on the earth’).

35. Listen how it is possible to go there through a Bila
(‘underground passage’). One should worship and propitiate
Lord Guha without taking food or water.

36. When Guha considers him to be free from sin, he directs
him in dream, O descendant of Bharata, saying, ‘Go to the
southern direction.”

37. To the west of Guha, there is a big cave, a subterranean
passage. He should enter it and go ahead seven hundred steps.

38. There is an emerald Linga of the lustre of the sun there.
Ahead of it, there is the soil of golden colour free from impurities.

39-41. The person shall bow downto that Linga and take
up some soil. He should then come to Stambha Tirtha and propi-
tiate Kumaraka. Then a Kolam ( -- weight of one Tola) of its water
must be taken from the well after nightfall. Mixing the clay with
that water, the person shall apply the same over the eyes like

1. From the description of the location of Kalapagrama, it appears to
be a hundred Yojanas (1200 kms) to the north (east?) of Kedara (in Garhwal
District in U.P.) and beyond Kalapagrama is a desert extending one hundred
Yojanas. Kalapa is thus a fertile strip of land between the snowy Himalayas
and the desert. It may be in a fertile valley in the northern range of the Hima-
layas. But the subterranean path described in vv, 34-43 appears ficititious.

=== PAGE 61 ===

Lii.6.42-54 55

collyrium and smear it over parts of the body like unguent. Per-
haps at the sixtieth step, he sees the splendid hole (i.e. under-
ground path) through the power of the collyrium.

42. The person then goes through that passage. By the power
of unguent-like application over the body, the person is not eaten
by the extremely terrible worms named Karisa.

43. He may be able to see Siddhas resembling the sun in the
middle of the passage. Going ahead like this, O son of Prtha, he
reaches the excellent village of Kalapa.

44. Life expectation is reputed to be four thousand years
there. The fruits may be eaten. There is no necessity to acquire
any further merit.

45-47. Thus it has been revealed to you. What happened
subsequently; listen to it. On account of my power of penance I
placed the Brahmanas in minute forms on the top of the staff and
came over to Mahi-Sagara-Sangama. Having got down there
then, they were released on the bank of the sacred waterway.
Then a holy plunge was taken by me along with those excellent
Brahmanas.

48. We took our bath in the meeting place of Mahi and the
ocean, which dispels all defects and sins, like the forest fire (con-
suming forest trees). We then performed the good holy rites of
Tar pana (‘water libations’).

49. We repeated the most excellent of the names to be re-
cited. We entered the holy meeting place (of the river and the
ocean) and looked at the Sun, thinking about Hari in the heart.

50. In the meantime, O son of Prtha, the Devas with Sakra
at their head, the Planets beginning with Aditya (‘the Sun’) and
all the Guardians of the Quarters gathered together.

51-52. The eight species of Devas, groups of Gandharvas
and of celestial damsels assembled there. There was vocal and
instrumental music in the course of that great festival. I made
the preparation for washing the feet of the Brahmanas. At that
time, I heard the words of some guest.

53. It had the sound of Samans; it had the third note
(i.e. Gandhdra or the third accent, Svarita). It was very pleasing
to the mind like the excellent devotion to Siva.

54. He was asked by the Brahmanas who got up (at that

=== PAGE 62 ===

56 Skanda Purana

time): ‘Who are you, O Brahmana? Where have you come
(from)? What do you seek? Tell us what you wish.”

The Brahmana said:

55. Iam the sage named Kapila.! Let this be intimated to
Narada. I have come to request him.

56. On hearing that I said: ‘‘Blessed am I, O great sage
Kapila, since you have come here. There is nothing which cannot
be given to you by us. There is no deserving person better than
you.”

Kapila said:

57-58. O Narada, son of Brahma, listen to what should be
given by you to me. Give me eight thousand Brahmanas. | shall
make a gift of lands to those Brahmanas, the residents of the
village Kalapa. Let this be done, O holy lord.

59-61. Thereupon I promised thus, “Let it to be so, O great
sage. O Kapila, let the excellent holy spot Kapila be made by
you. If at the time of Sraddha or at an auspicious time, a guest
were to be turned away (i.e. disappointed after approaching one in
one’s hermitage), every rite of the one shall be futile. He who does
not adore a guest shall go to the world of hell (named) Raurava.
He by whom the guest is worshipped is adored by Devas too.”

62-63. Sage Kapila was fed and propitiated with gifts and
Yajfas. Thereafter, the glorious great sage Harita was invited for
the purpose of washing the feet in the assembly of Siddhas and
Devas. Then Harita placed his left foot forward.

64. Thereupon, a loud laughter arose among the Siddhas,
celestial damsels and the Devas (?). But thinking more about
the earth, the Brahmanas said ‘‘Well done! Well done!’’(?)

65. Then, in my mind, there arose a sudden and great spasm
of grief. I thought that the Gath (‘verse’) sung by the previous
wise men was quite true.

1. As noted in supra fin to v.22, ch. 2, Kapila is the preceptor of Narada,
the narrator of this Kaumdrika Khanda. But this Kapila is not treated like
a Guru and hence must be another Brahmin of the same name.

=== PAGE 63 ===

1.11.6.66-79 57

66. Inall actions and rites the Sabda (‘word, syllable’) HA is
despicable. Certainly auspicious words should be uttered by those
who perform great tasks or holy rites.

67. Then I said to the Brahmanas: “You will become fools.
You will be subjected to all confusion and chaos due to poverty.
You will have only a very little quantity of wealth and grain.”

68-70. When this was uttered, Harita laughed and spoke
thus: “It will be your own loss, O sage, if you curse us. What
curse is to be given to you? This curse alone will be your curse.”
Then [ thought over and said: “O Brahmana, what else could |
(do), after you had placed your left foot forward?”

Harita said:

71-75a. Listen to the reason, O intelligent one, why there
has been listlessness (in my heart). It was because I thought thus
to myself, ‘Alas, acceptance of gifts is a miserable thing. The
Brahminical splendour of Brahmayas becomes diminished by
accepting gifts. A Brahmana who accepts a Mahddana (‘great
charitable gift’) gives to the donor all his merits and auspicious-
ness and the donor gives him his inauspiciousness (and sins) too.

A donor and a recipient may argue with each other (?). He
whose hand is placed beneath (with the palm upwards) (for
accepting gifts) is abandoned as one of less intellect.’

Tt was because I was thinking thus that there was listlessness
in my heart, O Narada.

75b-77a. The following do become listless and inattentive:
One who is distressed due to (want of) sleep; one who is exces-
sively frightened; one who is greatly passionate and lustful; one
who is afflicted due to sorrow; one who has been deprived of the
entire belongings; and one whose mind is engrossed in another
matter or person. A sensible man should not be angry with these.
If you have become angry, Osage, it shall be harmful to you
alone.

Thereupon, being repentent | spoke to them:

77b-78. ‘‘Fie upon me, the evil-minded one who has not
pondered before action. What is it that does not befall those who
commit themselves before pondering over anything?

79. One shall not jump into an action all of a sudden. It is

=== PAGE 64 ===

58 Skanda Purana

the cause of great disasters. All the riches woo the self-possessed
one who thinks well before doing anything.!

80-82. Truthfully did Cirakari say formerly: Formerly there
was an extremely intelligent famous Brahmana named Cirakari*
in the family of Angiras. He was the son of Gautama. Since he
used to undertake all activities after some delay in pondering
over them, and in view of the fact that he accomplished his tasks
only after some delay, he was called Cirakari. Undertaking (acti-
vities) with lethargy, he was called silly and dull-witted by the
people with versatility of intellect but (really) not far-sighted.

83-87. Once his father became angry with his mother be-
cause of her moral laxity.? Passing over other sons, his father
said to him, ‘Kill this mother (of yours).’ On account of his
natural quality of delaying in all activities, he said after some
time, ‘So (it shall be).’ In view of his habit of doing everything
after a delay, he thought over this for along time: ‘How shall [
carry out the behest of my father and how shall I refrain from
killing my mother? Under the pretext of doing a Dharma, am |
to sink in this (sin) like an evil one? If father’s command is
Dharma, sparing mother may be an Adharma.4 There is no free-

1. Cf. Bharavi's Kiratarjuniya 11.20. Apologetically Narada attributes
his curse to Harita due to his thoughtlessness (v. 78) and in support, quotes
this verse equating thereby slowness in action with thoughtfulness (Vimrsya-
karitva).

2. The episode of Cirakari appears in Mbh, Santi 266.3-78. Our text
(SkP) adopts about 85 lines or so from Mbh and adds a few different lines of
its own. But there are important differences between the two versions.

(1) The Mbh Story seems to be influenced by the story of Gautama and
Ahalya, while that in SkP by Parasgurama-Jamadagni episode with the
difference that Paragurdma kills his mother instantly despite his love for her
and gets her resuscitated again immediately. Here Cirakari delays till his
father cools down and reverses the order.

(2) In SkP Indra, the ravisher of Cirakari’s mother appears as an adviser.
Strangely enough Gautama condones his wife's lapse, as she took Indra
disguised as Gautama as her bonafide husband.

(3) As pointed out by Nilakantha, the commentator of Mbh, the Cira-
kari legend advises delay in executing an order involving Himsd. Here delay
in action is interpreted as thoughtfulness.

(4) The sober attitude to women’s lapses is an advanced outlook in SkP.

3. Vide v.108 below.

4. (otherwise it is the duty of the son always to protect his mother.)

=== PAGE 65 ===

L.ii.6.88-99 59
dom in the state of being a son. Does it not afflict me much?
Who can be happy after killing a woman and that too one’s own
mother?

88. Whocan gain renown after disrespecting his father? It is
proper to respect one’s father and it is also proper to protect
one’s own mother.

89. Both of them are worthy of forbearance. How can one
overstep them? Father re-creates himself in his wife. He is re-
born in his own wife (and that is the son).

90. Itis to preserve and uphold morality, chastity and
spiritual lineage of the family (that he does so). I am his own self.
I have been assigned the status of a son by my father.

91. What the father says in the post-natal holy rite and what
he says at the time of the investiture with the sacred thread, is
sufficient to stabilise (the relationship) with a desire to attain the
honour of being a father.

92. It isthe father alone who gives everything worthy of
being given, beginning with (our very) body. Hence, the directive
of the father should be carried out. It need not be deliberated
upon.

93. Sins of one who carries out the instructions of his father
are blown away. Father is heaven. Father is Dharma. Father is
the greatest penance.

94. If father is pleased, all the deities are pleased. If father
pronounces the blessings, they immediately resort to him (to
fructify).

95-97a. If father hails with joy, that is the expiation for all
sins. The flower breaks away from its peduncle. The fruit falls off
from the stalk. A son (by his misdeeds) may try to harm the filial
affection. But father does not cast it off. It is (the duty) of the son
to think thus about the importance of father. The position of
father is by no means insignificant. (Now) | shall think about my
mother.

97b-98. My mother is the cause of this mortal frame of
mine, this human form evolved out of the five elements, just as
Arani (i.e. a piece of wood used to kindle sacred fire) which
causes fire. Mother is the Arani for the body of a man. She is the
completion or accomplishment of all the aims in life.

99. On the acquisition of a mother, one is accorded good

=== PAGE 66 ===

60 Skanda Purana

protection; otherwise one is helpless and devoid of guidance. If
anyone adopts (a lady) as his mother, he never comes to grief
even if he is devoid of wealth. Even old age does not overpower
him.

100-102a. Though a person is bereft of wealth, yet he approa-
ches (his mother) in the house calling her‘O mother’. One who
has resorted to one’s mother will act like a two-year old infant
even in his hundredth year, even when he is surrounded by sons
and grandsons.

[t is the mother who brings up the son in accordance with the
injunctions regarding nourishment whether he (i.e. the son) is
efficient or inefficient, whether he is lean or fat. No one else
does this.

102b-105. When he grows old, he becomes miserable. When
one is separated from one’s mother, one becomes aged and dis-
tressed. The whole of the universe becomes a void for him then.

There is no shade (i.e. protection from the blazing sun) like
mother; there is no goal (of spiritual attainment) like mother;
there is no other protection like mother; there is no water booth
like mother (as she breast-feeds her child).

A mother is called Dhatri! because she holds us within her
belly. She is Janani because she gives birth to us. She is Amba be-
cause she causes the growth and development of our limbs. She
is called Virasi by giving birth to heroic sons, Since she renders
service to infants, she is called Svasri.2 She is called Mata be-
cause she (deserves ?) honours and respects.

106. They know that father is the single aggregation of all
deities. The multitude of human beings and deities do not excel
mother.

107. Preceptors if fallen are to be abandoned, but not at all
mother (even though fallen) because mother is more important
than anyone else in view of her holding the children in her
womb and nurturing them.’

108. Onthe banks of the river Kaugiki, his mother was
wistfully watching king Bali who was sporting with his woman-
folk. Since she took a long time (to return to the hermitage) he
was directed (by his father) to kill his own mother.

1. Cf. Mbh, Santi 226,32, 33 for similar etymologies.
2. Mbh reading ‘susri’ (Santi 266.33) is better.

=== PAGE 67 ===

1.ii.6. 109-120 61

109-111. Though he was pondering over the whole thing,
even after a long time he did not come to the end (i.e. decision)
of his deliberation. In the meantime Sakra assumed the form of
a Brahmana and came near the hermitage of his father singing
the following verse:

‘All women are false as Siitrakadra (composer of aphorisms’)
has said it. Hence only the fruit must be taken from them. The
learned one, the intelligent one must not keep his eyes on their
defects.’

On hearing this the liberal-minded Medhatithi (?Gautama’)
worshipped him.

112. He was miserable and worried. He returned shedding
tears profusely: ‘Alas, 1 have been swayed by malice; I have sunk
down in the ocean of misery.

113. I have killed a chaste woman, my wife. Who will
redeem me (from the sin)? The liberal-minded Cirakari has been
ordered by me ina hurry.

114. If he is Cirakdri (‘delaying in action’) he may save me
from sin. O Cirakarika, welfare unto you. Welfare unto you,
O Cirakarika.

115. If you are delayed in acting to-day you really are
Cirakdarika. Save me, your mother and the penance acquired by
me.

116. (Save) my soul that has entered sinful activity, O
Cirakarika of splendid name.’

Thinking thus the dejected Gautama reached the place.

117-120. He saw his son Cirakarika near his mother. On
seeing his father the extremely distressed Cirakari abandoned
the weapon and stood near him with the head (bent down). He
began to pray for his favour. On seeing his son prostrating on
the ground with the head (bent down), and his wife still alive, he
experienced greatest joy. When the son had stood near her with
the weapon in his hand, she had not understood that he was
about to kill her. On seeing the son bowing down at the feet of
his father this idea occurred to her: ‘From fear he is trying to
hide his fickleness in taking up a weapon.’

1, Gautama appears to be the Gotra and Medhatithi is the personal name
of Cirakari’s father.

=== PAGE 68 ===

62 Skanda Purdna

121. His father smiled for a longtime, sniffed at his head
for a long time, embraced him for a long time with his arms and
blessed, ‘Live for a long time.’ .

122. Medhatithi who was joyful for a long time said to his
son: ‘O Cirakarika, welfare unto you. Be Cirakari (‘delayer in-
action’) for a long time.

123. O gentle son, what is being done by you after a great
deal of delay in the course of a long period, does not make me
grieved.’

The learned one, the excellent sage Gautama, quoted the
following verses too:

124. «One should take counsel for a long time. One should
abandon what is done (by one) only after a delay. One should
contract friendship only after a prolonged (test). But that friend-
ship should be maintained for a long time.

125. In sickness, in pride, in haughtiness (i-e. arrogance), in
a sinful act and in a displeasing activity he who delays is praised.

126. He who delaysto take action when the guilt of the
following persons is not clear, is praised. They are kinsmen,
friends, servants and womenfolk.

127. One should pursue righteous activities for a long time.
One should continue search and research for a long time. One
should associate with learned men for a long time. One should
serve persons liked and loved, for a long time.

128-129a. One should train and educate oneself for a long
time. In the case of telling others even what is virtuous and
righteous by way of advice, if one delays in it, one is not des-
pised. One should ask others and listen to others for a long time.
By such delay one is not insulted.

129b-131.1 In doing the righteous thing, when the enemy has
weapons in his hands, when a deserving person is near at hand,
when there is danger and in the case of worshipping good people,
the person who delays in not praised.”

After saying this, he reached his hermitage in the company of
his wife and son. He performed worship for a long time. The
sage went to heaven where he stayed for a long time.

1, This shows that prompt action in emergencies is advocated by the
Purana.

=== PAGE 69 ===

Lii.6.132-138 63

As for us, though we speak thus, we have been duped by
delusion.

132. In the age of Kali, O Brahmanas, my curse will fall on
you. Some Brahmanas will always be equipped with all good

qualities.”

133. After washing the feet (of the Brahmanas) I made the
Devas the witnesses near Dharmavarman and performed the rite
of Samkalpa (i.c.ceremonious announcement of what is proposed
to be done).

134. The Brahmanas were made satisfied by means of vari-
ous gifts of gold, cows, houses, ready cash etc., wives, ornaments
and garments.

135-136. Then Indra raised his hand and said in the assem-
bly of Devas: “As long as the daughter of the Mountain, who
has occupied the left part of the body of Hara, aslong as Ganeéga,
as long as we all stay, as long as the three worlds continue to
exist, O Suras, this holy spot established by Narada shall flourish
and rejoice.

137. Ifa person were to harass (by troublesome acts, thefts
etc.) the people here or spoil this place, he should be the victim
of Brahma’s curse, Rudra’s curse, Visnu’s curse and the curse of
the Brahmanas.”’

138. Thereupon all of them became delighted and said ‘*Let
it be so”.

Thus in the holy spot established by me, the sage founded the
holy region of Kapila. Both of them were for the sake of Devas.
Thereupon, the delighted Devas went to the celestial abode.

=== PAGE 70 ===

64 Skanda Purana
CHAPTER SEVEN

Nadijangha’s Story

Arjuna said:

1. The miraculous greatness of the place of meeting of Mahi
and the ocean has been described by you. | am very much sur-
prised and am highly delighted.

2. TI, therefore, wish to hear this in detail, O Narada. In
whose Yajfa did Mahi become wearied and highly distressed due
to the scorching heat of the fire?

Narada said:

3. I shall recount the great narrative as to how the river
Mahi was born. Listening to this holy story, O Son of Pandu,
you will obtain merit.

4. Formerly, there was aking onthe earth well-known as
Indradyumna.1 He was a liberal donor, conversant with all
Dharmas. The lord was worthy of honour and he honoured
others.

5-6. He knew what was proper and what improper. He was
an abode of discriminating knowledge, an ocean of good
qualities.

There was no city, village or town which was not characterized
by the signs of his Parta Dharma (i.e. building of temples, shrines,

1, The story of Indradyumna which is told here in extenso, 1s briefly
stated in prose in Mbh, Vana 199.

Indradyumna, an ancient king, was driven out of heaven on the ground
that his renown was forgotten on the earth. He came down to the earth and
enquired of the following oldest living beings on the earth:

(i) Markandeya, the sage,

(ii) Pravaraka, the owl,

(iii) Nadijangha, the crane, and
(iv) Akdpara, the tortoise.

The last remembers Indradyumna for his sacrifices. When there was one
witness to remember him, he was invited again to heaven by sending a
chariot.

SkP tells this story in details as Mahi, the central point of this Khanda,
rose due to Indradyumna’s sacrifices. In our text, Indradyumna refuses to go
to an ephemeral world like Svarga.

=== PAGE 71 ===

Lii.7.7-17 65

parks, tanks etc. for public good) on the whole of the earth. He
performed the offering of many girls in marriages in accordance
with the Brahma! form of marriage.

7-11. This king gave thousands and thousands by way of
charitable gift to those who sought wealth. On the days of Dasamt
(‘tenth day of the lunar fortnight’), Dundubhis (i.e. big drums)
were placed on elephants and beaten to announce throughout
the city that the people should perform the holy rite (of fasting)
of Ekadagi the next day in the morning. That king performed
many Yajfias continuously, where they drank the Soma juice. This
continuity was broken only when the king was engaged in battle.
With the Darbha grass spread over it, the earth rose up two
Angulas in level. It is possible to count the sand particles in
Ganga, the torrents of rain, as well as the stars in the sky, by
wise men but not his meritorious deeds. On account of meritori-
ous deeds like these, the king attained the abode of Prajapati
along with his physical body, by means of an aerial chariot, O
son of the Kuru family. Then he enjoyed all those pleasures which
even the immortal ones (i.e. Devas) found it difficult to attain.

12. At the end ofa hundred Kalpas, once, when the king
approached him at the time of service and attendance, Prajapati
(Brahma) spoke to him:

Brahma said:

13. Oexcellent king Indradyumna, go immediately to the
earth’s surface. You must not remain in my world even for a
moment to-day.

Indradyumna asked:

14. Why do you despatch me to the earth from here now,
O Brahma, when much of my merit still remains. Tell me the
reason.
Brahmé replied:

15-17. Well-protected merit alone, O king, is not the cause
of enjoying heavenly pleasures, without spotless fame extending

1. Braéhma—The most excellent form of marriage. In this one’s daughter
with valurbles is gifted to one well-versed in Vedas.

=== PAGE 72 ===

66 Skanda Purana

to the three worlds. Due to the lapse of a great deal of time there
has resulted loss of your renown now on the surface of the earth.
Go and revive it, O king, if you have any desire to stay in my
abode.

Indradyumna said:

18. How can my meritorious deeds continue to be on the
earth, O Brahma? What should be done by me? The means (for
doing so) do not occur to my mind.

Brahma said:

19-21a. Kala (‘Time’) is very powerful indeed. It takes up
even me as well as all the Cosmic Eggs. What then in the case of
people like you? Hence I consider, O king, that this is the pro-
per thing for you to do, that you return to the heaven after mak-
ing your renown clearly manifest once again.

21b-24a. The king heard these words of Brahma and found
himself come down to the earth in the city of Kampilya He
himself asked (the people) about himself, his city and his country
with great surprise.

The people said:
We do not know king Indradyumna or his city, which you
are asking us. Ask someone of a very long life.

Indradyumna enquired:

24b-28. O people, on this earth, in this kingdom of the
conqueror of the earth, who is reputed as the oldest living per-
son? Tell me where he is. Do not delay.

The people replied:
It is heard that there is a sage in the forest of Naimisa, who

1, Karhpilya --Modern Kampil, 28 miles north-east of Fatehgarh in
Farrakkabad District U.P. It was the capital of king Drupada of South
Paficdla, It was presumably Indradyumna’s capital city ages back as he
started his search for someone knowing him here,

=== PAGE 73 ===

Lii.7.29-36 67

is well-known as Markandeya and who can remember (events) of
the last seven Kalpas. Go to him and clarify your doubts.

Advised thus by them, he went there, saw that sage, bowed
down to him and asked him what he had in his mind.

Indradyumna said:

Your Holy Lordship are well-known in the world now as the
oldest living person. Hence I ask whether Your Lordship know
king Indradyumna or not.

Sri Markandeya replied:

29. Within the last seven Kalpas there was no one named
Indradyumna. O king, what shall I say? Ask me some other
doubt of yours.

30. On hearing those words the king became disappointed.
He attempted to gather material to make fire. On seeing it, the
sage said:

Markandeya said:

31-34. O gentle Sir, do not commit this rash act. Listen to
my words. Even after a hundred years, bliss may come to a man
if he remains alive.

So I shall do something to prevent and assuage your misery.
Listen, gentle Sir. I have an aged friend, a crane well reputed as
Nadijangha. He will know you definitely. Hence, come quickly;
we shall go to that place.

Indeed the life of noble-souled ones has mutual help as its
sole benefit and purpose. If he were to know (Indradyumna),
without any trace of doubt, he will say so.

35. Thusthe prominent Brahmana and the leading king
started with pleasure towards Himalaya, the abode of
Nadijangha.

36. On seeing his friend Markandeya who had come after a
long time, the crane became delighted. He along with (other) birds
welcomed him with great longing for him and stood face to
face.

=== PAGE 74 ===

68 Skanda Purana

37. At the outset he made all the customary demonstration
of pleasure by means of welcome and enquiry after the health.
Thereafter he asked him the purpose of his visit, saying ‘Tell
me the reason for your visit.””

38-40. Thereafter, Markandeya told the crane about the
matter on hand as desired by him: ‘Do you know Indradyumna
who had been a king on this earth? This, my friend, wants to
know the same. If not, he would rather forsake his life by enter-
ing fire. In order to save his life, tell me if you know the king.”

Nadijangha replied:

41-42. O leading Brahmana, now I remember (the cvents
of the last) fourteen Kalpas. Far from seeing him, I never remem-
ber having heard any news about him. There was no king named
Indradyumna on the earth. Only this much do I know, O lead-
ing Brahmana.

Narada said:

43. On hearing that his age was so much, the king was sur-
prised and asked: ‘“‘What is it on account of which there was
such a long life of yours? Is it charitable gift or penance? I am
surprised (at it).””

Nagijangha said:

44. On account of the greatness of Ghytakambala! and
of the boon of the Trident-bearing Lord, [ secured this long
life. This body of a crane is due to a curse.

45. In my previous birthI was a Brahmana’s son on the
earth, the son of the good sage Visvaripa, of the same spiritual
lineage as Parasarya.

46. Iwasa boy (‘Balaka’), a great favourite of my father,
fondly called Baka (‘a crane’) by him. O gentle Sir, during my
boyhood I was naturally very rash.

1. Originally Ghrtakambala as described in AV Parisista 33 was different.
The Purdnic rite is described in vv. 47ff. Ghrtakambala Pija is to be per-
formed on Makara-Sankrénti day. The chapter describes the great efficacy
of such a Paja.

=== PAGE 75 ===

Lii.7.47-60a 69

47-51. Once on a Makarasankranti day in (the beginning) of
Uttardyana (‘Northern transit of the Sun’), I took away the
emerald Sivalinga of my father while he was busily engaged in
the worship of the deity. On account of my childishness and
rashness I took it away and put it in a pot of ghee. In the
morning, when the night came to a close, as my father removed
the remnants of the previous day’s worship, he found the Siva
shrine vacant. On seeing it (so) he became terrified. He asked
me in a sweet voice: “Dear boy, tell me where you have kept the
Liaga concealed. I shall give you whatever is desired by you,
something to eat or anything else liked by you.”

Thereupon, due to my childish nature and because 1 was
greedy of the foodstuff (promised), the auspicious Liiga was
taken out of the pot of ghee and handed over to my father.

52. After some time I died and was reborn in a palace as
the son of the overlord of Anarta.! I could then recollect the
(events of the) previous birth.

53. It was all due to the greatness of ghee-covering (of the
Linga) [‘GArta-Kambala’] when the sun was in Capricorn. It was
due to the contact of the ghee and the Linga, although due to
childishness and contemptuous disregard.

54. Thereupon, the Linga was installed by me remembering
the previous birth. Ever since then, I used to smear (i.e. cover),
Lifgas with ghee.

55. I continued to do this in accordance with my capacity
after inheriting the kingdom of my forefathers. Then the delight-
ed Lord, the consort of Parvati, said to me:

56. “I am delighted with your Ghrtakambalapija in the
previous birth. I have given you the kingdom (on that account).
Now choose whatever you desire.”

57-60a. On being chosen by me Siva granted me the lord-
ship of the Ganas on Kailasa as desired by me. Even asI
bowed down to him and stood before him in the same body,
Siva who was perpetually delighted, said to me: ‘‘From today
onwards if any other man were to worship me with ghee on the
Makarasankranti day, he shail surely become a Gana of mine.”

1, Anarta is North Gujarat here (De 7).

=== PAGE 76 ===

70 Skanda Purdna

After saying this, O gentle Sir, Siva made me the lord of a crore
of Ganas with the name Pratipa Palaka and I stood by the order
of Siva.

60b-63. Though | obtained the royal glory, yet, as the Pro-
vidence would have it, I was not competent to retain it. This
glory was like a bee that hovered round and round with the six
feet such as Kama (‘Lust’) etc. and was naturally very fickle. Like
a mad elephant I wandered (everywhere). I was devoid of the
thought of what should be done and what should not be done.
I was exceedingly haughty and proud. Just as a mean, base-
born man, in spite of obtaining learning, nobility of birth and
riches, becomes a victim of calamities, in the same manner as
rivers fall into ocean (I too became overwhelmed by calamities).

64. When some time elapsed thus, in the course of my
wanderings, I casually went to a mountain where the caves were
blocked by ice (boulders).

65. The sage Galava! (was staying) there with his wife and
was engaged in penance for ever. He was lean and emaciated
due to severe austerities with the network of blood vessels (clearly
visible).

66. This physical body of the Brahmana was not at all
fond of worldly pleasures and benefits. He was devoted to
severe penance for the sake of endless happiness after death.

67-68. His wife, a lady of excellent complexion, vanquished
the whole universe with her excessive beauty. She was a slender-
bodied, dark-complexioned, fawn-eyed lady with plump and pro-
truding breasts. Her speech was slightly faltering like the inarti-
culate sound of a swan expressing joy. In her gait, she resembled
an elephant in rut. She had ample buttocks but very slender
waist. She had very long tresses.

69. Her navel was depressed. (It seemed) that she was crea-
ted by Brahma who desired to see all beauty, scattered (in differ-
ent objects), concentrated in one individual.

70-74a. I became immodest on seeing that beloved wife of
Galava, O gentle Sir. I became hit with volleys of arrows by

1. He is a different person from the son of Visvamitra or the sage who
married king Yayati’s daughter Madhavi mentioned in Mbh, Udyoga, Chs.
106-21 and other sages of the same name mentioned in Chitrav's Prdcina
Caritra Koga (PCK), pp. 319-20.

=== PAGE 77 ===

Lii.7. 74b-83 71

the Flower-bowed Lord (i.e. Kama Deva), Even the sages who
are supposed to possess discretion are so, only as long as they are
not looked at with the side-glances by fawn-eyed women.

This was resolved by me in my mind asI desired to abduct
her. (I mentally planned) that I would kidnap in such and such
a manner, that lady well-guarded by the power of penance of the
sage. (I thought) ‘If the sage curses me for her sake, it will be
my discomfiture. Either she becomes my wife or I court death.
So I shall become a disciple of this sage and be devoted to his
service. On getting an opportunity, I will kidnap her. This lady
is not suited to this sage.’

74b-82. I came to that decision and so assumed the form of
a disciple. Urged by the inevitable future, I bowed down to
Galava and spoke the following words.

In the case of the following things, everything will be in
accordance with what has been formerly done by men, viz.
intellect, friendship and endeavour. “I am endowed with discri-
mination and detachment, O holy lord, and I have approached
you. I am your disciple. I have to be taught (by you). I bow
down to the sentient Brahman, visible in the form of Galava.
He is the great sage who is my helmsman and who is to take me
across (the ocean of worldly existence) which is boundless. He
is Visnu who has taken the form of a Brahmana.

I have been bitten bythe blackserpent of Avidyd (‘Ignorance’).
I am afflicted with its poison, O Jdrgulika (‘Snake-doctor’),
tevive me by means of the great Mantras of sound advice.

The great tree of excessive delusion is growing within the
Avapa (‘water-basin round a tree’) of the heart. Let it be destroy-
ed by the sharp-edged hatchet of your (wise) sayings.

Let this tree which grows (as an obstruction) in the path of
liberation and which is watered by the association of the foolish
ones, be cut now by means of the axe of learning by (you), the
carpenter.

I resort (to you). I am your disciple devoted to your service
for a long time. I shall bring sacrificial twigs, Darbha grass,
fruits and roots, logs of wood and water. Bless me, the humble
one, who have approached you.”

83. Already I had been nicknamed Baka formerly (i-e. in
previous birth) and now I resorted to the deceitful tactics of a

=== PAGE 78 ===

72 Skanda Purana

Baka thus. Thereupon, the sage who had always fixed his mind
on straightforwardness blessed me.

84. I became excessively humble and began to please him
along with his wife. Everyday, I tried to delight them strenuous-
ly in order to gain their confidence.

85. The sage was wise. He did not have full confidence in
his wife who could be a target (of attack of vicious persons).
Moreover, he knew about the general conduct of women. Hence
the Brahmana used to sleep keeping her in his lap (guarding her
closely).

86. On another day that Brahmaga lady happened to be in
her monthly period. Having confidence in me, the poor lady
slept in a place away (from the sage) at night.

87. Thinking this to be a good opportunity, I became delight-
ed. At midnight I assumed the guise of a robber and abducted her.

88. On being taken away by me, the lady lamented loudly.
I (pacified her saying) ‘no’, ‘no’, Recognising me by my voice, she
spoke to the sage:

89-90. “This wicked fellow of fraudulent tactics like those
of a crane, covering himself with the cloak of piety and misbe-
having much, is taking me by force. Save me from him, O
Galava.

He has been your disciple. Now he has become a robber.
He desires to abduct me. Hence protect me (O Sage). Worthy
of being sought refuge in, be my resort and refuge.”’

91. Simultaneously with her utterance of these words the
sage Galava awoke. Saying “‘Stop, stop” to me he paralyzed my
movement.

92. Paralyzed by the sage, I stood motionless like a form
painted in a picturé. I became ashamed and felt as though I was
entering my own limbs.

93. Then the infuriated Galava approached me and said
those words as unbearable as thunderbolt, whereby I became a
crane.

Galava said:

94. Since I have been deceived by you, O meanest among
men, by adopting fraudulent tactics of a crane, you will be a
crane for a long time.

=== PAGE 79 ===

Lii.7.95-107 73

95. Thus, because I resorted to an evil thing, I was cursed by
the sage. By trying to enjoy another man’s wife I came to this
disaster.

96. There is nothing else which shortens the life-span of a
person than enjoying another man’s wife.

97. That chaste ascetic lady whose limbs had been defiled
by my touch, took her bath after being released by me and curs-
ed me in the same manner.

98. On being cursed by both of them, I trembled like the
leaves of the holy fig tree. I bowed down to the couple there and
said:

99. “Iam a Gana of Iévara himself. Still I was rude and
immodest (and harmed) you both. Just as you have restrained
me, in the same manner kindly bless me too.

100. Indeed in the case of a Brahmana, there is a razor in
the speech, but the heart is butter-like. They may be angry but
when entreated they become pleased in a moment.

101. Since I opposed you, you alone must be my refuge. To
those who falter in their steps on the ground the ground itself is
their support.

102. Even the lordship of Ganas has become a cause of
regret for me. The riches of a rude and immodest fellow come to
an end in disaster.

103. Men of discrimination know by means of their intellect
the calamity coming from others. But the mean-minded do not
know both (7?) without their own exprience.

104. After attaining splendour, learning and prosperity an
immodest fellow becomes proud and haughty like me and never
retains his position for a long time.

105. To those who are blind with pride, the cause of pride
are learning, wealth and nobility. These alone cause restraint in
good persons.

106. The intellect of those who have not ‘conquered their
own self is not inclined towards good result and consequence.
Those people like me cause the bad reputation of being ‘Fickle’
to Sri (i.e. wealth and glory).

107. Hence, O excellent sage, be pleased. Put an end to my
curse. Good men are always of forgiving nature, even in the
case of impolite persons.”

=== PAGE 80 ===

14 Skanda Purdga

108. When I put forward such pleading words humbly, the
sage became inclined to be pleased and he put anend to my
curse.

Galava said:

109. When you assist King Indradyumna in reviving his lost
reputation, you will attain liberation.

110. Thus due to the curse of the sage, I became a Baka in
the family of Kasyapa. Ever since, I am staying on the Himacala
mountain.

111. Asaresult of the Ghrtakambala (i.e. worship of the
Linga by smearing it with ghee), I obtained kingdom and long
life. Now I have the ability to know the events of the previous life
and other similar powers. Through the curse of the sage Galava
I got the form of a crane. So, O gentle Sir, everything asked by
you today has been recounted.

CHAPTER EIGHT
Prakdarakarna’s Story}

Narada said:

1. On hearing the words uttered by the crane Nadijangha.
the king became extremely miserable in the company of Markan-
deya.

2. On seeing the king miserable with tears in the eyes, the
sage who too was equally sorry, spoke to the crane on his behalf:

3-4. ‘O highly fortunate bird, after creating hope in Indra-
dyumna, I came here along with him to you, hoping that since
we two are long-lived, we may know Indradyumna partially.

But his purpose is not achieved. He will give up his life by
entering fire, since he has come to the stage of frustration and
dejection.

1. This chapter describes the great efficacy of Siva’s worship with Bilva
leaves. .

=== PAGE 81 ===

L.ii.8.5-15 75

5. He approached me. I approached you. But his desire
was not fulfilled. So I shall follow him. I adjure you with death.

6. Good people cannot tolerate seeing that the person who
has been given hope and allowed to come near is disappoint-
ed. Hence death is far better than life.

7. What he had in his heart was requested for by him and
it was promised by me, keeping in my mind you, my friend
of very long life, in the matter of knowing him.

8. There is no purpose in my long life since I was not able
to accomplish what had been promised. O friend, now, it fulfils
the hope and desire of those who request (for help) by deception
alone.

9. If what is promised is carried out, the state of being a
slave in the village of the meanest folk is praiseworthy in the
case of (all) men as in the case of Hariscandra. Not sticking to
truthfulness is not praiseworthy at all.

10-11. Mitra (‘Friend’) isa synonym of Sneha (‘affection’)
and that is known as Saptapada (i.e. effected by speaking seven
words or going seven steps together). Of what nature is that
affection which is not perceptible towards a distressed friend?

Hence I shall gather together means of making fire along
with (this king) for the sake of one whose body is renown. This
is true, O friend.

12. Allow me (to go), O highly fortunate Nadijangha, O
most excellent one among birds. This is my last meeting with

you.

Narada said:

13. He heard these words uttered by Markandeya, which
were as unbearable as thunderbolt. He meditated for a moment,
Then (apparently) pleased he spoke to them:

Nadijangha said:

14, If it is so, O excellent sage, prevent this friend of yours
from entering the fire now. There is a person who has lived
longer than I.

15. He is an owl named Prakarakarna on the mountain
Sivaparvata (i.e. Kailasa). He will know king Indradyumna
certainly.

=== PAGE 82 ===

76 Skanda Purana

16. Hence I shall go to that mountain, the abode of Siva,
along with you and this (king) for the sake of accompfishing the
task of (our) friend.

17. After he had said this, those three leading Dvijas
(‘twice-borns’)—a bird, a brahmana, a ksatriya) went to Kailasa
and saw that owl (staying) in his own nest.

18. With due welcome and honour he received them. The
Baka was asked about the other two. He then told him about
everything that they wanted.

19. “You are long-lived. If you know king Indradyumna
tell us. There is something to be done by knowing it. We (three)
will then remain alive.”

20-21. On being asked thus, the owl became sad, because
it had to accomplish the task of a friend (but could not do so).
He said, “I do not know king Indradyumna. Twenty-eight Kalpas
have passed since I was born on this earth. This king Indra-
dyumna was neither heard of, nor seen on this earth.”

22-23. On hearing this, the king was surprised that the span
of his life was so great. Although he was sad, he asked (the owl)
about his longevity: “If your life is so long, say how it was
obtained by you. How did you get this excessively contemptible
state of an owl?”

Praka@rakarna said:

24. Listen, O gentle Sir, how I got a long life. It was due
to the worship of Siva. This contemptible form of an owl is due
to the curse of a great sage.

25. Formerly I was a Brahmaya born in the family of
Vasistha. I was well-known as Ghanta. I was engaged in the
worship of Siva at Varanasi.

26. I habitually listened (to the discourses) on Dharma in
the assembly of good men. I heard (the mode of worshipping).
I worshipped Lord Siva with unbroken Bilva (Aegle Marmelos)
leaves.

27. Neither jasmine nor Mandara (Erythrina Indica) not
lotus nor Mallika (Jasminum Zambac) are such a favourite of the
enemy of Madana (i.e. Lord Siva) as $rivrkga (i.e. Bilva).

=== PAGE 83 ===

1.ii.8.28-38 77

28. Ifa single (i.e. three in a cluster) unbroken Bilva Jeaf is
placed on the head of Siva, the merit of (the worship with) a
hundred thousand flowers is obtained.

29. One can live for a hundred-thousand years in heaven by
worshipping the Linga faithfully with unbroken Bilva leaves
brought by oneself.

30. Hearing this from good scriptures, I used to worship
Tgvara faithfully thrice a day with Bilva leaves, each being a
cluster of three leaves.

31. Then at the end of a hundred years, the Moon-crested
Lord became satisfied. He appeared before me and spoke to me
in a voice as majestic as the sound of cloud:

I8vara said:

32. Oeminent Brahmana, I am satisfied and delighted with
your worship with the Bilva leaves. Choose what you desire,
which I shall give unto you even if it be very difficult to get.

33. Iget extremely great satisfaction and delight (when I
am worshipped) with even a single unbroken Bilva leaf; not so
with crores of other (flowers etc.).

34. On being told thus by Lord Sarnbhu, I chose the boon
that had been in my mind. ‘“O Lord, make me an immortal one,
devoid of old age.”

35. Then the Lord with sportive grace said to me unhesita-
tingly, “So (it shall be)” and vanished. I derived great delight
and pleasure.

36. I knew myself to be the most blessed and contented on
the earth. At this time itself there was a certain Brahmana born
in the family of Bhrgu.

37. Virtuous and meritorious in the course of three births,
he was an Aksavit (‘conversant with the sense organs’) as well as
Aksararthavit (‘one who knows the letters and their meaning or
one who knows the imperishable one’). A chaste woman well-repu-
ted as SudarSana was his beloved wife.

38. She was the daughter of Devala. She was unparalleled
on the earth in regard to her beauty. She used to be joyous at
the sight of her husband, on seeing his face.

=== PAGE 84 ===

3 Skanda Purdna

39. Inher he begot a daughter who was considered not
different from her mother. She (i.e. the girl) ceased to be a child
and was heading towards youthful (form and features).

40-41. The father was unable to give the daughter endowed
with all good qualities, to anyone. She was seen by me at the
time of transition from one stage to another (i.e. childhood to
maidenhood). She was very charming due to the emotions and
sentiments of the developing youthfulness awakening in her. The
two stages had a happy mingling in her body like that of rice
and gingelly seeds. All the other emotions and sentiments were
being expelled from her body.

42-45. She was playing along with her friends. She was like
a doll of excessive beauty. O Brahmana, on seeing the slender-
waisted lady with shapes and features not to be found in others,
I thought thus: ‘The creator by whom she has been made is a
different one.”

Thereupon I was made an object of Sattvika Bhdvas (i.e.
external symptoms of inner feelings, such as perspiration, hair
standing on end through thrill etc.) by the Flower-bowed (i.e. god
of Love) after sportingly hitting me with arrows.

Then her friend was asked by me in faltering speech, “Whose
(daughter) is she?” She said, “‘She is the daughter of a Brahmana
belonging to the family of Bhrgu. She has not yet been married
to anyone. She has come here to play.”

46. Extremely struck and hurt by the Flower-arrowed (i.e.
Lord Kama) with volleys of arrows, I went to her father, a scion
of the Bhrgu family. Bowing down to him, I requested him
(to give) her (to me).

47. On coming to know that I was equal (to them) in con-
duct and nobility (i.e. family-status) and that I was seeking her
earnestly, he gave (her) to me verbally in the first instance.

48-50. Thereupon the daughter of Bhargava heard that she
had been given to an ugly Brahmana, from persons who were
speaking (about it). Lamenting, she said to her mother: “See
what has been done. By giving me to such a bridegroom, a very
improper thing has been perpetrated by my father. I shall stir
poisonous liquid and drink it or I shall enter fire. It is better.
I will never become the wife of an ugly husband at any cost.”

=== PAGE 85 ===

1.ii.8.51-61 79

51. Afterwards the mother enlightened her daughter and
spoke to Bhargava with insistence, “Our daughter should not be
given to an ugly man.”

52-53. After hearing the words of the beloved wife and after
going through the treatises on Dharma Sastra he decided thus:
“If a better bridegroom arrives he can take away the girl offered
(verbally). It is only after the foot has been placed on the rocky
slab, at the seventh step, that there shall be the culmination (i.e.
ratification) of the marriage ceremony.”! After deciding thus the
Brahmana gave that daughter to another person.

54. On the day previous to the actual marriage the entire
thing was heard by me. Therefore, I got extremely ashamed
in front of the friends.

55. O gentle Sir, I was unable to show my face. Very much
afflicted with lust, I abducted her late in the night when she was
asleep.

56-58. I took her to a lonely place very difficult to be
approached and performed the rite of marriage in accordance
with the Gandharva form of marriage and carried out what was
desired in the heart.

Although the lass did not like it, Iforcibly had sexual inter-
course with her. Her father came closely behind. In the morning
of the next-day, he came there surrounded by (some) Brahmanas.
On secing his daughter married, Bhargava who was infuriated
cursed me, O gentle Sir.

Bhargava said:

59. Since my daughter was married by you through the rite
of a Nisacara (‘Night-wandercr’, i.e. demon), you shall, O sinner,
become ere long a Nifacara.”

60-61. On being cursed thus, I bowed down to him after
clasping his feet. ‘Alas! Alas!” said I in faltering tone and with
eyes filled with tears. Thereafter I said, ‘Why do you curse me
though I am free from blame? In fact your daughter was in the
first instance given to me verbally by you.

1, This seems to be based on Vasistha Dh.S. 17.73 and Manu VIIT.165
and 168.

=== PAGE 86 ===

80 Skanda Parana

62-64. The girl was married by me. Smrpti says that gifting
away can take place only once. Kings speak out only once;
learned men speak out only once; girls are offered (n marriage)
only once. These three are to take place only once.

65-66. Your Honour cursed me in vain. Let this be ponder-
ed over. The evil-minded one who after having given away the
daughter verbally, backs out (of his promise) later on, falls into
a hell. This is decided in the sacred treatises.”

67. On hearing it, he came to the conclusion that my words
were true. He mentally repented. The sage then spoke to me
thus:

68. “My words cannot be otherwise. You will become an
owl. O excellent Brahmana, even an owl is called a NiSdcara
(‘night-wanderer’).

69. When you become one helping in recognizing Indra-
dyumna, O Brahmana, you will regain your original form.” So
said he to me.

70. Simultaneously with the utterance of those words by
him, I obtained this owl-hood. So many days (in human reckon-
ing) have passed by equivalent to twenty-eight days of Brahma
(i.e. twenty-eight Kalpas).

71. Formerly I gained a very long life by means of worshipp-
ing the Moon-crested Lord with the leaves of the Bilva tree.
Now due to this sage’s curse this contemptible form of a Nifdcara
(i.e. owl) became mine on the (banks of the river Mandakini on
the) montain Kailasa.

=== PAGE 87 ===

Lii.9.1-9 81
CHAPTER NINE
The Vulture’s Story!

The Owl said:

1. Thus everything connected with my previous birth has
been told, viz. the form, the cause of long life and the birth as
an owl.

2. After saying this to that one having the same name as
Indra (i.e. King Indradyumna), when he stopped, the crane
Nadijangha who was sad, spoke these words to his friend:

Nadijangha said:

3. The purpose for which we all have come, O highly intelli-
gent one, has not been achieved. Therefore, it has come to this
that all the three of us should die.

4. If Indradyumna is not recognized and known this, gentle
Sir, will wish to die. Following him, Markandeya (will die) and
it is clear (that) I (will die) after him.

5. Fie upon the life of the affectionless evil-minded one
who watches (his) friend dying as the task of (his) friend is
unaccomplished !?

6. Therefore, O bird, I shall follow these two who are dying.
I take leave of you. Here is my final obeisance and embrace.

7. After being unable to accomplish what has been promi-
sed to a friend or to a guest, how is it that those who have
shattered hopes, but, yet desire to live, do not feel ashamed?

8. Hence I shall undoubtedly enter fire along with these
two. I have taken leave of you. Out of affection, kindly offer
me water libations.

9. When Nadijangha said thus, the owl steadied himself
and spoke these words of nectar-like sweetness, in a faltering
voice and with tears in his eyes.

1, Here the great efficacy of worshipping Siva with Damanaka (Artemisia
indica, called Davand in Marathi) is shown, We still worship Siva with
Damanaka on the 14th day of the Bright Half of the (Lunar) month Caitra.
This festival includes rocking the god in a swing (aol).

2. The word ‘vinirvrtte’ in mitrakdrye vinirvrtte should be emended as ani-
rvptte.

=== PAGE 88 ===

82 Skanda Purana

Ulaka (the owl) said:

10. (Defective verse) If you die when I, your friend, am
alive, from to-day onwards who will take (i.e. covet) my heart
(i.e. friendship)?

11. There isa great means of escape (i.e. wayout) in this
matter. There is a friend of mine on the mountain Gandhama-
dana. He is a friend as dear to me as my own life. He is a vulture
who has lived a longer life than I.

12-13a. He will know and recognize king Indradyumna.

After saying thus, the owl stepped forward and stood there.
He, the king, (sage) Markandeya and the crane went to
Gandhamadana.

13b-15a. On seeing his friend coming and standing in front
of him, the vulture (came out) from his nest. He was very de-
lighted. He came before all of them. After duly welcoming and
honouring them at the outset with great hospitality, offering of
seats and foodstuffs, the king of vultures asked the owl his
object (of visit).

15b-16. He replied: “This crane is a friend of mine. The
sage is his friend. The third one is a friend of the sage. It is on
his behalf that this matter has been taken up. He will himself
live when Indradyumna is seen and recognized and not otherwise.

17-18. Clearly he will enter fire. After that we will (also do
so). He has been forbidden by me because I know you to be
long-lived.

So if you know him, tell us. Grant the lives unto the four of
us. After protecting us, obtain good reputation and the des-
truction of all sins.”

The Vulture said:

19. Since my birth, O owl, fifty-six Kalpas have elapsed, but
king Indradyumna has neither been seen nor heard of.

20. Indradyumna was struck with wonder on hearing it.
Though he was distressed, he asked the bird the cause of his long

life.

=== PAGE 89 ===

Lii.9.21-32 83

The Vulture said:

21. Listen, O gentle Sir, formerly I was born as a monkey.
I was very fickle. Once in the due order of seasons, the season
of spring appeared.

22-23. On the fourteenth day in the bright half of the month
of Caitra, the constellation being Hasta and the Yoga being
Harsaga, the Damanaka festival was celebrated in a Siva temple
in the middle of the forest, (in the temple) named Jagadyoges-
vara, in front of the lord of Devas, the origin of the world.

24-27. The Linga had been placed here in a golden swing by
the people. At night I climbed on to it and rocked the swing
again and againfor a long time on account of the fickleness
natural to my species.

In the morning the people who came there for the purpose of
worship saw a monkey in the swing. They beat me with sticks
and rods. I died even as I was within the swing in the temple of
Siva. I died due to their many hard beatings and blows as un-
bearable as thunderbolt. Thanks to the greatness of swinging
Siva, I was reborn in the palace of a king.

28-31. I was known as KuSgadhvaja! and was the son of
the lord of Kasi. I had the power to remember (the incidents of)
the previous birth. I succeeded to the kingdom and inherited
great fortune and power. I celebrated the Damanaka festival
popular all over the earth, in the month of Caitra.

As one swings Siva stationed in the Dola (‘Swing’) all in-
auspiciousness vanishes and merit comes, O gentle Sir.

I took Siva-Diksa (‘initiation for the purpose of the worship
of Siva’). I was consecrated by means of all consecratory rites by
Sivacaryas (i.e. preceptors in the sacred ritesand literature pertain-
ing to Siva). After getting all the consecratory rites ending with
Nirvaha-Diksé (the Diksa of completion and conclusion) from
the Agamas, I became rid of Pasupasas (‘the bondages of indivi-
dual souls’).

32. With the mind internally directed, I thus propitiated the

1, This king is different from his namesake, the king of Videha. It is only
in this Purana that the name of the king is used to illustrate the efficacy of
Damanaka-Vrata,

=== PAGE 90 ===

84 Skanda Purana

lord of Devas, the consort of Uma, the preceptor of the worlds,
and the cause of the destruction of all distresses. .

33. Irestrained the activities of the mind and practised
Vairdgya (i.e. detachment, having no attachment to the worldly
affairs). I repeated the Udgitha Mantra and meditated upon its
meaning. I thought of the eighth sentiment (ic. Adbhuta or
wonder).

34. Onknowing that I was unaffected by Antarayas (i.e.
obstacles, hindrances) through Pranidhana' (‘abstract contem-
plation’) and deep-rooted practice, Hara became pleased and

said:

Ivara said:

35. O Kusadhvaja, I am satisfied. Choose whatever is desir-
ed as your boon. None else has such a steady (spiritual) practice
on the whole of the earth.

36. On hearing this, Sambhu was told by me, “I shall be
one of your Ganas with this body itself”. The Lord spoke the
words, “So be it.”

37. Then he brought me to Kailasa and granted me an aerial
chariot which was studded with all precious stones. It was a
divine aerial chariot equipped with divinely miraculous features.

38-39. Seated in it and delighted very much, I used to move
about. After the lapse of some time on this very mountain in
spring when the gentle southern wind was blowing, I was seated
near the window (of my Vimdna) and saw the daughter of a sage.
The fire of love blazed in me,

40-44. O gentle Sir, I saw the daughter of sage Agnivesya?
standing in water without any clothes on. She was on the thres-
hold of youth. She was a Syama,? with slender waist. She was
fawn-eyed. She had ample buttocks. Her thighs resembled the
interior of a plantain tree (full, round and lovely). Her breasts

1, The term is taken from Patafijali’s Yoga-Siitra 1.23 where it is trans-
lated as ‘devotion’ (J.H. Woods, Yoga System of Patafijali).

2. He is different from Agnivesya mentioned in Mbh, Adi 12 9,39-40,
Vana 26.23.

3. A beautiful lady of golden complexion.

=== PAGE 91 ===

Lii.9.45-56 85

were very Close to each other. Beauty was gradually sprouting in
her body. Her face resembled the lotus that was in full bloom.
She could be adequately described only by good scholars and that
too in accordance with their intellect and not in accordance with
her instrinsic nature. Her side glances were like volleys of arrows.
Smara (‘god of Love’) seemed to occupy her body himself and
struck me hard with those arrows. She was playing as she liked
surrounded by her friends. Impatient with love I got down from
the aerial chariot and abducted her.

45. On being seized by me and placed in the aerial chariot
she lamented loudly for a long time shouting ‘“O father, O
father’, O gentle Sir.

46-47a. Her friends were very sad. They ran to the sage and
said to him, ‘‘Your daughter is being taken away by a certain
Vaimanika (‘one moving about in an aerial chariot’). O holy lord,
she is crying. Save her. Get up.”

47b-49a. On hearing these words of those (girls) from all
round, the gentle sage, the storehouse of austerities, Agnivesya,
hurriedly came up to her in the sky. ‘Stop, stop,”” said he to me
and restricted my movement through the power of his penance.
The infuriated sage then spoke these unbearable words to me:

Agnivesya said:

49b-Sla. My daughter was carried away by force by you in
the manner in which a piece of flesh is carried away by a vulture
in the sky. So, be a vulture now immediately.

My daughter, an ascetic girl, has been abducted by you
against her will. O vicious one, obtain its fruit now itself.

51b-52a. On hearing this I was overcome with fear. I bent
down my face with shame. I grasped the feet of the sage. I fell
down at his feet and grasped them. I lamented loudly.

52b-S4a. (I then said thus:) “She has not been abducted by
me after knowing (that she is an ascetic girl). She has not been
outraged till now. O ascetic, be pleased. Take back your curse.
Ascetics naturally forgive those who bow down. They are good
people. So, be pleased. Let me not become a vulture.”

54b-56. When I sought refuge in him and bowed down to
him thus, the great sage became appeased and said, “My words

=== PAGE 92 ===

86 Skanda Purdya

cannot at all be untrue. But when you assist in recognizing King
Indradyumna, you will get freed from the curse.”

57. After saying this that sage took with him his daughter
whose modesty had not been violated and went to his own abode.
I became a vulture then.

58. Thus, O gentle Sir, everything has been recounted to
you. My birth in the royal abode was due to the rocking of the
swing of Igvara at the time of the celebration of Damanaka
festival. This is how I became an attendant of Siva and (later)
was transformed due to the curse of Agnivesya into a vulture.

CHAPTER TEN

Revival of Indradyumna’s Renown

Narada said:

1. On hearing the words of the vulture, Indradyumna be-
came afflicted with sorrow and surprise. He took leave of him
and got ready for his death.

2. On seeing him desirous of dying along with the owl and
others, and considering his (i.e. the vulture’s) longevity to have
some connection with it, he (i.e. the vulture) said:

3. “Do not do like this. Listen to my words, O gentle Sir.
There is someone longer-lived than I. He will certainly know
what has been desired by you.

4. Inthe Manasa lake there is a tortoise well-known by the
name Mantharaka. There is nothing unknown to him. Come, we
shall go there.”

5. Thereupon, the king, the sage, the vulture and the crane
along with the owl, became delighted. With a desire to see the
tortoise they started on their journey.

6. The tortoise had settled himself on the bank of the lake.
On seeing these from a distance, he became terrified and so he
went down under the water very quickly.

7. The owl then laughingly said to him these words: “Why

=== PAGE 93 ===

L.ii.10.8-17 87

have you, O tortoise, vanished? Why have you turned your face
away from your guests?

8. Agniisthe sire of Brahmanas; the Brahmana, of the
people of all the castes; the lover, of women; the father is the
sire of the sons; and the guest is the sire of all.

9. Why have you become averse to all (etiquettes regarding)
hospitality after eschewing this great virtue? Why do you take on
yourself the sin of everyone?! Speak out, O tortoise. Reply to
this now.”

The Tortoise said:

10. Tam a long-lived one. I know how to perform the good
Tite of hospitality. I know that honouring visitors has been laid
down decisively in the sacred treatises.

11-16. Let the great (and important) reason thereof be
heard. I shall tell it to you. In all these days I have never been
averse to any guest. I have been performing the holy rite of
honouring and welcoming all.

But I am afraid of this king Indradyumna who appears to be
honest and simple-minded and who is the fifth among you.

This king had been performing a Yajfia formerly in the city
named Raucaka. At that time my back (shell) was burnt by the
sacrificial fire. The wound thereof has not yet healed.

So I have become afraid once again that he will burn me here
on the earth by means of the power of distillation (i-e. squeezing
of Soma juice).

At the end of this statement of the Tortoise, O most excellent
oneamong the descendants of Kuru, there fell a shower of
flowers from the sky released by groups of celestial damsels.
When the fame of the king was revived, divine musical instru-
ments were played.

17. They were surprised much. They saw an aerial chariot
standing in front. It had been brought there for the sake of
Indradyumna, presided over (ie. occupied and driven) by a
messenger of Devas.

1, Vide Manu IIT.100.

=== PAGE 94 ===

88 Skanda Purdua
18. Suras and Brahmanasoffered him fresh blessings. Shouts
of praise were heard in the sky.
19. Then, stopping the aerial chariot, the méssenger of
Devas said (thus) loudly to Indradyumna, even as the heaven-

dwellers were listening:

The Messenger of Devas said:

20. Your spotless renown has been revived, O King, in all
the three worlds. Hence get into this aerial chariot quickly.

21. Be pleased to go to the world of Brahma for a stay
there for a period of a Kulpa. Ihave been sent by him for the
purpose of bringing you.

22-23. (Even) if there is limitless quantity of merit, one shall
be staying in heaven only as long as his renown spreads over the
whole of the earth. It is for this purpose of attaining the abode
of Suras that the holy rite of Parta, such as the construction of
lakes, parks, wells etc. has been laid down in Dharmasastras.

Indradyumna said:

24. These are my friends, viz. (sage) Markandeya, the Crane,
the Owl, the Vulture and the Tortoise. The power of these has
been the cause of my prosperity.

25. Therefore, if these too proceed to the world of Brahma
along with me staying at the head, I shall go to the world of
Brahma myself and not otherwise.

26. He who acts (favourably) without depending upon the
action and reaction of others is called a (true) friend by learned
men.

27-30. Those who are engaged in selfish activities are mere
Asundharas (‘bearers of vital airs’). While death is natural, life is
an aberration.

The greatest acquisition of living beings is the affection and
friendship of other living beings. The following are sinners:
wretched people, lustful ones, those who do not truthfully abide
by their promises, those who are inimical to elders and those who
cause the death of friends—all these fall into hell.

But these five who (are prepared to) die for others’ sake are
good persons. The redemption of my fame and renown is (due to)

=== PAGE 95 ===

Lii.10.31-41 89

the power of these noble-souled ones. If they goto heaven along
with me, O messenger of Devas, I will also go and not otherwise.

The Messenger of Devas said:

31-32. All these were Ganas of Hara. They were cursed and
so they had fallen (from their positions) and come to the earth.
At the end of their period of curse, O king, they will go back to
Siva. So, O king, leavethem off and you alone come with me.
They do not like to leave lord MaheSvara. Heavenly pleasures
do not appeal to them.

Indradyumna said:

33. If it is so you can go, O messenger. I will not come to
heaven.

34. I shall try to become a Gana myself. Heaven and heaven-
ly pleasures are censured for the various defects such as impurity,
utter destruction etc.

35-39. Though laid down in the Vedas, I do not desire
heavenly pleasure. He who is stationed there faces downfall again.
This fear does not disappear from his mind. I do not desire
heaven from which a man is sure to fall off.

Even when I had the (balance of) merit, I had been dropped
down by the Four-faced Lord from his world. I am ashamed
thereby. How will I go back to him?

After saying this to the messenger, the king asked the tortoise
the reason for his longevity even as the messenger was listening
with wonder: ‘‘O tortoise, how did you get this long life? You
are my friend and comrade. You are my preceptor by whom my
renown was redeemed.”

The Tortoise said:

40-41. Listen, O king, to the divine story that destroys sins
through the listening. The story is sweet and is connected with
the greatness of Siva.

A man who listens to this story with attention, O king, be-
comes rid of all sins. It is after attaining the favour of Sambhu
that I gained this longevity and the birth as a tortoise.

=== PAGE 96 ===

90 Skanda Purana
CHAPTER ELEVEN
The Previous Births of the Tortoise

The Tortoise narrated:

1-2, Formerly I was a Brahmana well-known as Sandilya.
During my childhood, O king, even as I was playing, a lofty
shrine of Siva was made by me. It was made of wet sand and dust
particles during the rainy season. It was rendered splendid by a
lofty rampart-wall.

3-4, It was highly charming due to the five Ayatanas’ (i.e.
separate abodes of the deities), O king. It contained the idols of
Vinayaka, Siva (i.e. the goddess Parvati), Sun-god and the Slayer
of Madhu (i.e. Visnu). Yellow clay was used to make a replica of
the KalaSa (i.e. rounded pinnacle on the top of a temple). It was
beautified with clusters of banners and festoons. The arched
gateway was made of wood. It was adorned with a swing.

5. It was rendered brilliant with a series of steps made very
firm. It was sufficiently high. It was full of many wonderful fea-
tures and very divine. I did all these things in the company of my
friends.

6. Due to my childishness, a pebble that had been rendered
clean by means of rainwater, was made into JageSvara Linga and
established within (the shrine).

7-11. Bakapuspas (‘Agati Grandiflora’) and other flowers were
fetched from the fields. Other tender flowers plucked from creep-
ers such as Kiismdndas (a variety of pumpkin gourd) etc., many
thousands of flowers from the thorn-apple plants having excel-
lent colours, Mandaras, Bilvapatras, Dirva grasses and fresh
sprouts were used by me to worship Siva. A beautiful worship
was arranged by me. Thereafter the Taydava dance was started
wherein no particular holy rite had to be performed. Due to my
childishness, I sang too in front of Siva but the tone was devoid
of musical charm. I did this worship only once in the course of

1, A synthesis of the five sects of Siva, Visnu, Devi, Ganesa and the Sun-
god. If Siva is given the central position and the above four gods around
him it is Siva-paficdyatana; if Vignu is in the central position and other four
gods around, it is Visnu-paftcayatana, Here it is Siva-paitcdyatana.

=== PAGE 97 ===

Lii.11.12-22 91

my childhood, surrounded by groups of other children. Then I
died, O king. I was reborn as a Brahmanga withthe power of re-
collecting (incidents of) the previous birth. I was born in the
city of Vidisd where I performed a special worship of Siva.

12-15a. Ihad due initiation in the worship of Siva and
was blessed by the Sivagamas (i.e. sacred literature of the cult of
Siva).

He who constructs a temple of Siva and instals with great
faith, the Linga, in the palace of Siva, shall live in heaven for a
crore of Kalpas. A maker of a temple of Siva staysin the abode
of Siva for as many years as there are atoms of earth, O king,
in the shrine of Siva.

These statements of the Puranas were remembered by me,
and T made a beautiful temple of Siva by means of rocky slabs
in accordance with the injunctions of Visvakarman.

15b-17. The abode of Siva can be made of clay, wood,
burnt bricks or rocky slabs. The merit accrued in each case is ten
times greater than that in the previous case. (I practised all the
rituals,? viz.) I lay on ash; T took bath three times everyday;
Ihad my meal of food received as alms while begging; 1 wore
matted hair and performed penance eagerly devoted to the
propitiation of Siva. Even as I was practising all these rites, O
king, I had my death once again.

18-19. In my third birth I was born as an Emperor of all the
earth ruling in the excellent city of Pratisthana.’ I could then
remember (the incidents of) the previous birth. Born in the Solar
race, I was well-known by the name Jayadatta. Then, O king,
many kinds of palaces were built by me.

20-22. In that birth I was eagerly absorbed in propitiating
Sarhbhu. Flowers, of which Bakapuspa (‘Agati Grandiflora’) was
prominent, were simply selected. I performed the worship with

1, A town 26 miles north-east of Bhopal (Madhya Pradesh). Kalidasa
mentions it in the Meghadata and his play Mdlavikagnimitra. In British days
it was called Bhilsa but now its original name is restored.

2. This is the Pasupata way of asceticism (vide Lakuliga’s Pasupatasitra
with Com. of Kaundinya).

3. Probably Jhusi opposite to Allahabad. It was the capital of PurGravas.
The life of this king cannot be connected with Paithan (old name Pratisthana)
in Maharashtra,

=== PAGE 98 ===

92 Skanda Purdna

the flowers made of gold, silver and precious stones, O king.
Charitable gift of cooked food etc., O excellent king, I made in
such (dishes) (i.e. made of gold, silver etc). The worship of Siva-
lingas only I performed with (genuine, real) flowers. Thereupon
Lord Sarnbhu was pleased with me and granted boons.

23-25a. Siva granted me, O king, the boon of immortality
and freedom from old age with the same physical body.

Having acquired such an extra-ordinary boon, I wandered
over the whole of this earth like an elephant (as if) blinded with
intoxication. 1, the king, abandoned devotion to Siva. Being
affected with lust, I began to molest women (who were) the wives
of others.

25b-30. Molestation of other men’s wives is the main cause
of destruction of longevity, penance, fame, splendour, renown
and glory.

Though he (such a person) has ears, i.e. the power of audi-
tion, he becomes (behaves) as if bereft of that (power). Though
he has eyes, he becomes dull (or senseless) like a (really) blind
person. Though he is endowed with consciousness, he behaves as
if he is lacking in it. Though he appears to be learned, he clearly
becomes a fool.

O king, a man becomes like this within a moment when he
becomes the object of the gaze of fawn-eyed women.

If he dies he has to stay in hell; if he is alive he has to be
afraid of the ruler. Thus molestation of other men’s wives ruins
both the worlds.

Since I had the firm knowledge that I was free from death and
old age, I gave up fear of this world or of hereafter and so, O
king, I began to molest and outrage the women of others.

31. Having come to know that I was transgressing all bounds
of decorum and propriety, due to the fact that Iga had bestowed
some boons on me, Yama approached Sarhbhuand he informed
him about my transgression of piety and virtue.

Yama said:
32-36a. O lord, I am unable to curb and restrain this sinner,
because he is well protected by your might and greatness. Direct

someone else for my job.
O Iga, O lord, the following have been mentioned by you as

=== PAGE 99 ===

Lii.11.36b-46 93

the basis and support of the universe: chaste women, cows, Brah-
manas learned in Vedas, liberal-minded people who are not
greedy and those who abide by truth. The most important among
them are chaste women.

Chaste women have been outraged by him. My rule of virtue
has been violated by Jayadatta, the resident of Pratisthana, who
has become mad and proud due to boons granted by you, O lord
of Devas. He has vanquished and humiliated me.

36b. On hearing these words of Dharma, the lord became
infuriated. He brought me to his presence even as I was trembling
with palms joined in reverence. He cursed me.

I$vara said:

37-39. O (fellow) of wicked conduct, chaste women have
been outraged by you who are mad with lust. So you are cursed
by me to become a tortoise instantaneously.

Thereupon after humbly bowing down to him, the lord, the
dispeller of the grief of the curse, was entreated by me. He said,
“In the sixtieth Kalpa you shall become free from the curse. You
shall become a Gana of mine.”

After saying this, Siva vanished.

40. Then I became a tortoise extending to ten Yojanas. 1
was taken to the waters of the sea by you for the performance of
Yajiia.

41. You were a great performer of Yajfias and you took me
ahead. Even as I remember it, I am afraid. My back has been
burnt by you. See these wounds on any back.

42. At that time, O Indradyumna, many Cayanas(i.e. keeping
the sacred fires) were conducted by you on my back in accord-
ance with the injunctions of the Kalpasitras (i.e. liturgical treatises
inthe form of aphorisms).

43. O lord of the earth, on being scorched bythe Yajfias,
the earth exuded the essence of all the 7irthas and that became
the river Mahi.

44-46. One is liberated from all sins by taking bath in it.
Once, during a certain Naimittika Pralaya (‘periodical deluge’),
O king, I came to this Manasa lake that was being flooded to the

=== PAGE 100 ===

94 Skanda Purdya

extent of a hundred Yojanas. Fifty-six Kalpas have elapsed. Four
more remain. Thereafter, I will have liberation. Thus I obtained
long life and due to a curse of Igvara, O king, I, the outrager of
the modesty of chaste women, became a tortoise.

47-49. Tell me what shall be done unto you who happen to
be my enemy and now a guest in my house. My back was scorch-
ed by you for a long time by fire formerly. Even now I perceive
the back burning as it were due to the fire. (Hence due to
the continuance of the memory of your reputation, you have
been eligible for Svarga.) Why was that aerial chariot attended
by messengers of gods that had come here rejected by you?
Enjoy the pleasures earned and acquired by you.

Indradyumna said:

50. Ihave been banished from heaven by the Four-faced
Lord himself. Ashamed that I am, I will not go back (to heaven)
which is defiled due to the great dangers of downfall etc.

51-52. Hence I will practise discrimination and detachment
which destroys ignorance and sin. I shall endeavour to obtain
enlightenment for the sake of liberation (from Samsara). Just as
you receive me with hospitality because I have come to your
abode, in the same manner, kindly advise me as to who will be
my preceptor and take me across the ocean (of worldly existence)
that is boundless.

The Tortoise said:

53. There is a great sage named Lomaga who has lived
longer than I, O king. He has been seen by me in the village of
Kalapa formerly somewhere.

Indradyumna said:

54-55. So come. We, all of us together, shall go to him
(i.e. Lomaga) only. Learned men say that association with good
people is more sacred than visits to Tirthas.

On hearing these words of the king, all those six persons
thought about that prominent sage and were delighted.

Desirous of knowing the cause of his great longevity, they
started immediately to meet that eminent Brahmana.