=== PAGE 1 ===

THE
SKANDA-PURANA

PART III

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS
PRIVATE LIMITED DELHI

=== PAGE 2 ===

First Edition: Dethi, 1951
Reprinted Dethi, 1982, 1990

Also available at:

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS

41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Madras 600 004
16 St. Mark’s Road, Bangalore 560 001
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001

PRINTED IN INDIA

BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS,
A-45 NARAINA, PHASE I, NEW DELHI 110 028 AND PUBLISHED
BY NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR MOTILAL BANARSIDASS
PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD., BUNGALOW ROAD, DELHI 110 007

=== PAGE 3 ===

CONTENTS

PURVARDHA

Chapters

WRONIAWAWH =

The Manifestation of the Taijasa Linga--Arunacala
Greatness of the Immovable Linga of Sankara
Paryati Goes to Kafict for Penance

Parvati Goes to the Hermitage of Gautama

The Greatness of Brahmapuskara

Description of Various Holy Places at Arunacala
Different Tirthas on Arunacala

The Propitiation of Arune$vara

The Efficacy of the Circumambulation of AruneSvara
The Fight with Mahisasura

Mahis&sura Slain: His Head Stuck to Gauri’s Hand
The Reunion of the Goddess with Siva

Granting of Boons to Parvati

UTTARARDHA

Introduction: Markandeya’s Query

A List of Different Sacred Places of Siva on the Earth
Markandeya’s Further Query

The Greatness of Arunacala

Rewards and Punishments Resulting from Previous Karmas
Expiatory Rites

Holy Rites for Special Attainments

The Description of Creation

Dispute between Brahmi and Visnu

13
19

3]
43

SSBrars

=== PAGE 4 ===

Manifestation of the Fiery Linga

Visnu’s Exploration of the Lower Part of the Linga

Brahma’s Exploration of the Top of the
Column of Splendour
Brahma Requests the Ketaka Bunch to Perjure
Manifestation of Sankara
Brahma Prepares to Eulogize Siva
Description of the Temple of Arundcala
by Brahma and Visnu
The Sports of Siva and Parvati
Parvati’s Devotional Service to ArunacaleSvara
Demon Mahisa Slain by Durga
Parvati’s Eulogy of the Lord of Arunacala
Siva Praises Parvati
The Story of Vajrangada
The Story of Kaladhara and Kantisali
Vajrangada Attains Salvation

Contents

131
133

136
138
140
143

=== PAGE 5 ===

SKANDA PURANA
Book I : MAHESVARAKHANDA
Section III: ARUNACALAMAHATMYA
PORVARDHA!

CHAPTER ONE

The Manifestation of the Taijasa Linga—
Arunacala

Obeisance to Sri Ganesa.

Now begins the Piurvardha (‘First Half’) of the narrative of
the greatness of the excellent Arunacala.?

1. Hehasthe Tripundra (i.e. three parallel lines of ash as
sectarian mark) on his forehead. In the middle of the forehead, he
has a Tilaka (i.e. a circular or vertical sectarian mark) made with
musk. He has a sparkling garland. A piece of cloth worn on his
loins is his only garment. On his head he holds the king of ser-
pents that cannot bz subdued. He has the digit of the moon too.
He is a lamp (i.e. a spiritual guide) unto all. Thus stands supreme
the Yogin of Arunagiri.

Vyasa said:

2-5. The sages residing in Naimisa forest said to Sita: ‘‘We
are desirous of hearing the greatness of Arundcala from you.
Kindly recount its greatness.”

1. The third section of the Mahesvarakhanda of SkP is called Arurdcala-
mahatmya. It is divided into two parts. The first part consists of a dialogue
between god Brahma and Sanaka and contains thirteen chapters. The second
part has a different pair of interlocutors, viz, Nandikesvara and Markandeya
and contains twenty-four chapters. There is the inevitable duplication of
topics in these parts, but they are treated as different, as recorded in the
Narada Purdéna, probably due to the difference in the pair of interlocutors.

2. Variously called: Arunagiri, Sonddri etc., all of which mean ‘Red
Mountain’. The hill is Tiruvannamalai in the South Arcot District of Tamil
Nadu,

=== PAGE 6 ===

2 Skanda Purdna
On being requested thus, Sita spoke to those sages.

Sri Sita said:

Formerly Sanaka! asked the Four-faced Lord Brahma the
same thing. Listen attentively. I shall recount it to you now. It
is conducive to the destruction of the sins of those who hear it
devoutly.

Formerly, Sanaka bowed down to the lotus-seated Lord
Brahm4 who was residing in Satyaloka. Standing with palms
joined in reverence, he asked him:

Sanaka said:

6. O Four-faced Lord of Devas, the support of the universe,
one who can be known only through the Vedas, by your grace
perfect knowledge has come to me.

7. Even bya single instruction, the entire range of knowledge
reflectsin the mirror of my mind which is cleansed with the sacred
ash? of devotion to you.

8. Thanks to the benign glances of your who are the pre-
ceptor of the universe, I have fully acquired in an orderly man-
ner the knowledge of (the cult of) Siva, the essence of all the
Vedas.

9. Oreceptacle of mercy, Lingas of Siva, those on the earth,
those in the heaven, and those belonging to human beings, to
Siddhas, Bhitas (Spirits) (have been heard of by me), O leader
of Suras,

10. Tell me about the Taijasa (‘Refulgent’) Linga which is
divine, free from impurities, capable of destroying the enemies
(such as lust, anger etc.), the Livga which manifested itself in the
continent (called) Jambi.

11. O storehouse of kindness, enlighten me (about the
Linga) that is destructive of sins by merely remembering its

1. Sanaka—One of the four earliest mind-born sons of god Brahma.
The four brothers, viz. Sanaka, Sanandana, San&tana and Sanatkumara are
generally grouped together as Sanakadi. But here Sanaka as an independant
sage is intended by the author.

2. A pun on Vibhiti which means ‘greatness’ as in BG X.41 and also
“sacred ash’ to be applied for purification.

=== PAGE 7 ===

1.iii (P).1.12-21 3

name, that is eternal and grants the Sariipya (‘similarity of form’)
of Siva.

12. Let that (knowledge) be imparted to me about the im-
mutable, beginningless, fiery splendour of Siva, the support of the
universe, by the sight of which (splendour) one becomes happy
(with all his objects achieved).

13. On hearing these eager and enthusiastic words (of Sanaka)
endowed with devotion, the Lord (Brahma), the storehouse of
penance, became gracious unto him.

14. Seated on his lotus-seat, the Four-faced Lord meditated
upon Sarhbhu for a long time and had his mind immersed in the
ocean of internal bliss.

15. Inthe course of his meditation, he saw Siva in the form
of a column of fire in the manner he had already seen.! It had
surpassed all supports and bases. On seeing it he became un-
aware of anything else.

16. Thereafter, in order to carry out the behest obtained
from Siva the Lord withdrew his heart from that Yogic state and
remembered his son who had been bowing to him.

17. Dueto the vision of Siva his body had all its hair erect-
ed through the thrill of joy. His eyes were filled with the tears of
joy, and he spoke in a faltering tone:

18-20. ‘O dear son, I have been reminded internally of you.
Meditating on the ancient Yoga pertaining to Siva, I remembered
you and your respectful eagerness. It was on account of many
performances of penance that great devotion to Siva was engen-
dered in you. My heart is attracted by it as it were in a moment.
Those persons whose perpetual devotion to the calm and un-
agitated Sadasiva increases, sanctify the entire universe by means
of their own conduct.

21. Talking to, living with, playing with, mingling and mix-
ing with, seeing and remembering devotees of Siva is destructive
of sins.

1. This refers to the manifestation of Siva in the form of a beginningless
and endless column of effulgence to Visnu and Brahma who were fighting
with each other to establish their personal superiority at the beginning of
creation of the world. Vide below vv 23-72.

=== PAGE 8 ===

4 Skanda Puréya

22. May it be heard how that wonderful splendour of Siva
formerly manifested itself. It is called Arunadri and it is full of
natural mercifulness.

23. Narayana and I, both of us are born of Sadasiva whose
rise surpasses (i.e. precedes) the entire universe and who engaged
himself in the mental resolve ‘Let me be many.”!

24. We beganto argue mutually that we have been born
naturally. With great haughtiness, we engaged ourselves ina
combat in which we never became tired at all.

25. Observing our exceedingly terrible determination in our
mutual fight, Igvara, the very embodiment of mercy, thought
thus:

26-30. ‘What for is the fight between these two causing
destruction to the worlds? They are having this idea (as the
cause of dispute)—Creation is carried out by me; I am the
protector.

These two are extremely mistaken and silly. If I do not reveal
myself at this time to them and stop their battle, the whole
universe will come toruin. My greatness surpassing the entire
universe is heard in the Vedas. Stupid and silly that they
are with their faculty of memory impaired on account of
anger, these two do not know it. Every creature thinks itself
as exceedingly supreme. The wicked and foolish-minded one
who does not accept another man’s superiority meets with a
downfall. If I demonstrate anywhere in the universe any proof
of (the dimension of) my Atman, someone through the perfect
knowledge of that form may attain me.’

31. Deciding in his mind thus, Sadasiva himself rose up as
a column of fire in our midst while we were fighting.

32-36a. Going beyond all the worlds, he blazed all round
like fire. Since the column had neither the beginning nor the end
we remained there with our eyes agonized. On seeing the fiery
column blazing, we became unnerved.

An ethereal voice rose up in front of us:

‘Wherefore, O children of deluded minds, do you think of
fighting? Siva himself will decide about the inequality in your

1. Anecho of Chandogya Upanisad V1.2.3.

=== PAGE 9 ===

Lili (P).1.36b-52 5

strength. Here stands the form of Sammbhu consisting of a fiery
column.If you are able to see the end and the beginning (of
this column of fire) you (may be considered) superior in strength.’

36b-37. On hearing these words, we desisted from the
mutual combat. Visnu and I set out to seek out that form of
Sarnbhu of the nature of the fiery column which was devoid of
beginning and end.

38-43a. We endeavoured to see the beginning and ending
portions (of the fiery column). Just as children try to grasp the
moon in the sky reflected in water, so also we attempted to
measure that refulgence.

Then with great zeal, Vigsnu became a Boar of very huge
body. For the investigation of its root, he dug up the interior of
the earth. I assumed the form of a swan and flew up with great
speed. Desirous of seeing his head, I flew up in the sky. Ma-
dhava went down farther and farther tearing up the entire carth.
He saw the fiery column appearing still farther down. Even
after searching for many crores of years, he did not see the
imperishable beginning. He became agitated and bewildered.

43b-45a. His curved teeth became shattered. All the joints
(of his body) became loose and impaired. He became distressed
due to fatigue. He was overwhelmed with thirst. Hari became
unable to proceed further. He became too feeble and incompe-
tent to retain as well as to get rid of the inimitabie form of a
boar. The consort of Rama became weary and afflicted.

45b-52. The Lord of unmeasurable soul thought thus as his
body became extremely tired, his glory faded and he had been
exhausted due to his activity. He resorted to Siva who is worthy
of being a refuge: ‘Fie upon this great stupidity of mine arising
from arrogance whereby I did not realize my own Lord, my own
self! This is indeed Siva, the root cause of all Vedas, Devas and
the worlds. How can there be a root (cause) unto him? It was
from him alone that I have been born—from him who is devoid
of beginning and end. (It isa pity) that I started to seek (the
root cause of) Siva after taking the physical form of an animal.
By the favour of Sarmbhu, my father, a kinsman of unpretend-
ed (i.e. sincere) kindness, I have regained this intellect enligh-
tening my own Soul. If Sarmbhu, the great Lord, himself wishes
to protect anyone, he will have perfect knowledge immediately,

=== PAGE 10 ===

6 Skanda Purdna

arising from his own soul and devoid of arrogance. NowI am
(physically) unable to perform the worship of this preceptor of
the universe. I shall dedicate myself to Sankara and seek refuge
in him.’

Thus Visnu who dedicated his mind to (Sankara’s) eulogy,
meditated on Siva.

53-55a._ On account of the excellent favour of the Lord of
Goblins, he was once again lifted up on to the earth.

(Soaring up) I wandered in the sky for many years, with the
eyes rolling and with wings feeble and slackened. I was extremely
tired. In front of me I saw the column of fire, the splendour of
Siva worshipped by Suras, resembling a huge Liga,’ being
higher and higher still.

55b-61a. As Iwas desirous of seeing the eternal, ultimate
extremity of Sambhu and made attempts for the same, some
Siddhas born of parts of his (Siva’s) splendour, saw me and spoke
thus: ‘Alas, it is true that this one still persists in his stupidity!
Although the fall of his physical body is imminent, his arrogance
has not left him. His wings are being shattered. He is extremely
tired with rolling eyes. In vain will be this deluded (adventure on
his part) in regard to Siva of boundless refulgence. This Janar-
dana who had assumed the form of a boar and had been agitated
in his mind thus, was turned back by Siva himself, endowed with
sincere mercifulness. From the atoms of the splendour of the
Lord it is possible that crores of Suras, the chief of whom is
Brahma, may issue forth (i.e. be born). Still he who has come
out of the self-same Atman desires to see the limit of that Lord.
If Lord Siva thinks about this at the proper time and grants
intelligence unto him (i.e. Brahma), his arrogance may end.’

61b-67a. On hearing the sympathetic words of the Siddhas
who spoke thus, my pride got shattered and I thought within
myself: ‘Neither by learning the (huge) collection of the Vedas
nor by performing penances nor by frequenting the holy spots
does the perfect knowledge of Siva dawn upon (i.e. occurs to) me

1. This shows that Puranas regarded the Lirga of Siva as representing
this beginningless and endless columa of fire and not his phallus.

=== PAGE 11 ===

L.iii (P).1.67b-72 7

without the blessings of Siva himself.! Even when the wings are
shattered, when the limbs become feeble and benumbed, the mind
still yearns for nurturing its arrogance. Fie upon me who have
been overwhelmed by arrogance and who have not realized the
strength of the Atman! Perpetual obeisance to the Siddhas who
have dedicated their minds to Siva. My mind has become purified
by the power of penance acquired by the contact with those
Siddhas. Therefore, I know and realize Siva, my own cause (i.e.
source of birth) standing in front of me. All the Devas are
endowed with prosperity and magnificence acquired therefrom.
His grace will thereby continuously subdue their enemies.

67b-69a. I seek refuge in Sarhbhu alone whose ultimate truth
the Vedas along with the great Agamas, do not understand. Sarh-
bhu is different from the universe. Having regained my body I
resorted devoutly to the moon-crested Lord Siva and addressed
the lotus-eyed Visnu:

69b-72. ‘Alas, what is this mysterious thing that has befallen
even persons full of heroism. We are born of Sambhu, yet we
have become arrogant. He heard about our mutual quarrel that
turned out to be extremely great. Lord Sankara himself of un-
measurable soul dispelled the entire arrogance of both of us by
revealing his own greatness. He who strives to worship this
Sadasiva, the Lord who is bowed down to by the Suras and
who is of the form of a fiery column, shall become a boat (to
cross) the ocean of worldly existence.’ ”

1. This idea of the necessity of divine grace for self-realization is stated

in Upanigads:
+. .yam evaisa vrnule tena labhyab, tasyaisa dtm vivruute tanitm svdm|
—Karha 1.2.23; Mundaka 3.2-3

=== PAGE 12 ===

3 Skanda Purdipa
CHAPTER TWO

Greatness of the Immovable Linga of Sankara

Brahma said:

1. LIrecited the Vedas through all my mouths. After per-
forming a mental worship, I eulogized Siva with great devotion:

2. ‘Obeisance to the great Siva, the sole cause of all the
worlds. Salute to that Lord by whom everything is illuminated
and sustained forever.

3. This splendour (of yours) always pervades the whole uni-
verse and illuminates it always. But those deprived of your grace,
do not perceive it, like those who are born blind and (hence) do
not see the sun.

4. This is indeed the Bhilinga (i.e. terrestrial Linga) without
impurities. It is experienced (i.e. realized) by means of spiri-
tual vision by your devotees, whether it is stationed within or
without.

5. O Lord of Devas, this form of yours, that cannot be ac-
curately defined, shines in the inner soul of the Yogin as though
in a mirror.

6. Or, the Sakti of Sankara is true; it is minuter than the
minutest. It is not something different from me since it merges in
me too.

7. The atom that becomes the recipient of your kindness
certainly attains greatness. There is no one superior to you, nor
to me because of my resorting to you.

8. The mind dedicated to you does not expect separation
from you. How can speech function adequately in glorifying your
greatness!

9. O Mahadeva, O Lord, be pleased yourself, O Lord superior
to the universe. Command your diligent devotee in the requisite
engagements.”

10. After humbly submitting this, I bowed down again and
again to the Lord of the Chiefs of Devas. Then with palms joined
in reverence, I sat near the Lord.

11. Thereupon, making his words pure and blessed by means
of the eulogies of Sankara, Visnu with a voice as majestic as the
rumbling sound of a fresh cloud, spoke thus:

=== PAGE 13 ===

Liii (P).2.12-24 9

12. “Be victorious, O Overlord of the three worlds; be vic-
torious, O Lord holding Ganga. Be victorious, O Lord with un-
even (three) eyes. Be victorious, O Lord with the crescent moon
on the crest.

13. Unmeasured and genuine, © Sambhu, is your compassion
whereby the entire sin of the devotees has been washed off and
perfect knowledge has been instilled.

14. (Defective Text) You maintain all Vidyds. You lead them
to the status of Puranas by means of prosperities(?) Like a father
you nurture and develop those having sons.?

15. OTsana, we are not capable of eulogizing (adequately)
even a single idol from among the hundred of idols (of yours),
by means of fresh prayers. What then about the collection (of
all)!

16. You alone are competent enough to understand yourself,
or by means of your grace. Does not a bee. having dragged a
worm to itself, transform it into itself (a bee)?

17. Dothe Devas not become lords by being born by a
digit from you? Does the heated iron nail not have the power of
burning?

18. Just as it is possible that there may be different kinds
of fire due to difference in place, time, activity etc., so also
although you are one, you become different as the objects
differ.

19. O benevolent Lord Sankara, reveal your form to us, the
form that gives delight to our eyes, O support of all.”

20. As we two bowed down with faith and devotion, as we
two culogized (him), Lord Sarhbhu became extremely delighted.

21. From that column of effulgence, the Lord with the cres-
cent moon on his crest came out as a person of tawny complexion
with black throat.

22. Withhis ((wo) hands he was holding an axe and a fawn
and with (his other two) hands he was giving (us) immunity
from fear and rest. The Purusa, the Lord (himself) spoke to us as
his sons.

23-24. ‘Iam delighted with you both and your devotion to

1. sa-putranam. But this should be emended as su-putrdndm ‘of good
sons’,

=== PAGE 14 ===

10 Skanda Purdna

me. You both have joined yourselves with the Atman. You two
shall be the lords of creation and sustenance.

Since I have manifested myself for the sake of your realization
of what you two desire, choose another boon too. I have come to
you as the bestower of boons.”’

25. At these words of the Lord, both of us became exceed-
ingly delighted. With the palms joined in reverence, we individu-
ally expressed our respective wishes.

26. Making the three worlds mostly as my infant I eulogized
the unconquered Sana by means of the Vedic Mantras:

27. ‘I bow down to the Lord of the form of this visible
world, the perpetual bestower of boons, the great Lord full of re-
fulgence, the unsullied one worthy of being meditated upon by
Yogins.

28. The void space of the sky when filled with refulgence by
you, O Lord, becomes in a moment the residence of Suras, which
becomes one-that is asked about and sought after.

29. Siddhas, Caranas, Gandharvas, Devas and great sages
would not have lived in the firmament if they had not acquired
the ability to move about in the sky through your refulgence.

30. Being scorched by your refulgence, the entire earth will
cease to be capable of producing the mobile and the immobile
living beings.

31. For the sake of blessing the worlds, withhold and with-
draw your refulgence, and become an immobile Linga with the
name Arunacala.

32. Those men who devoutly bow down to this fiery form
named Arunacala become superior even to the immortal ones.

33. May all the worlds, Siddhas, great sages and different
Ganas assume human form and serve you.

34. May the celestial trees beginning with Kalpaka growing
in the divine gardens, serve you and thereby grow laden with dif-
ferent kinds of fruits.

35. Let the groups of the celestial medicinal herbs (be so).
Let the animal species beginning with lions become calm and
move about. Let there be washing off of the dirt of sins.

36. Though he has two different types of transit, the Sun
will not transgress your peak while you are in the form ofa
Linga.

=== PAGE 15 ===

Liii (P).2.37-50 11

37. O Lord, be served through the dances and songs of
celestial damsels, the sounds of the divine Dundubhi drums and
conchs and showers of flowers.

38. Let the human beings who come to your presence, obtain
immortality, Siddhahood, skill in alchemy and extreme bliss.

39. OArunacala, may all men resorting to you obtain [sitva
(i.e. mastery over everything), Vasitva (i.e. ability to win over
others), Saubhdgya (i.e. good fortune) and Kdlavaficana (i.e. abi-
lity to defy death).

40. Be visible on the earth through blessings granting all
limbs, destroying all ailments and bestowing everything desired.”

41. The Lord of Kamala (i.e. Visnu) too prayed in the same
manner to Lord Siva, the bestower of boons, the Lord of the
Aruna mountain. He bowed down and spoke thus:

42. “Be pleased, O Lord of Sona-Saila (i.e. Arunacala), full
of mercy. O Mahega, you have manifested yourself for the sake
of the welfare of all the worlds.

43. Just as I, by resorting to you, became capable of protec-
ting the universe and acquired the husbandhood of Laksmi, so
also let your devotees be so.

44. Your great and wonderful form cannot be adored by the
persons of insufficient merits, O Lord whose foot and crest have
not been seen by me and by Brahma.

45. Those men who worship you by means of circumam-
bulations, obeisances, dances, songs and adorations are blessed
with all their sins gone.

46. Let those human beings who worship you by observing
fasts, performing holy rites, sacrifices, offerings as well as ado-
rations, become emperors.

47. OLord of Arunacala, be in the vicinity of those who
build and maintain parks, platforms, sacrificial halls and wells
for freedom from adverse fate.

48-50. May a man who circumambulates you rolling on the
ground, become endowed with all the eight Aifvaryas (‘super-
human powers’). Let him be immediately liberated from all sins.
Let him be pure in mind. Let us both ‘not leave off your lotus-
like feet that should be meditated upon by all men who come to
your vicinity.”

After granting the boon saying “‘So beit”’ to Visnu, the Moon-

=== PAGE 16 ===

12 Skanda Purdya

crested Lord assumed the state of an immobile Liga in the form
of Arundacala.

51. Indeed this Liziga which is well-known as Arunadri and
is seen on the surface of the earth, is Taijasa (i.e. of fiery or efful-
gent nature) and the sole cause of all the worlds.

52. The ground near it is not at all touched by the four oceans
that become agitated at the close of the Yuga and that have the
extremities of the worlds submerged in them.

53. The great clouds beginning with Puskara fill the three
worlds with drops of water of the size of elephants. They take
rest on its ridge.

54. When the annihilation of all living beings takes place,
when all created things are reabsorbed into Prakrti, all the future
seeds are certainly deposited there.

55. Brahmanas who resort to the foot of that mountain are
called again by me (i.e. Brahma) after the deluge and I make them
study the Vedas and make the collections thereof.

56. All the lores, arts, wealth of scriptures, Agamas and the
Vedas are truthfully well arranged there.

57. Sages of well-praised holy observances and rites, who
abide within the caves of that mountain, shine with their matted
hair. They have the refulgence of a crore of suns and fires.

58. Sadasiva who is of the nature of Ndda (i.e. the divine
sound) is seated on the Akdrapithikad (i.e. the pedestal of the
letter ‘A’) along with the five Vedic Mantras that assume the
forms of the five syllables (i.e. namak Sivaya).

59. He is worshipped by the Guardians of the eight quarters
always by means of the eight Lingas.

Having the eight physical forms,} he bestows the eight Siddhis?
(‘superhuman powers’).

1. The eight forms of Siva are the five elements, the sun, the moon and
the sacrificing priest. Cf. the marigala (Nandt) of Saknutéla. The names given
to these in Tantra works are as follows:

(1) earth-form: Sarva; (2) water-form: Bhava; (3) fireform: Rudra;
(4) wind-form: Ugra; (5) sky-form: Bhima; (6) Yajam4na-form: Pasupati;
(7) moon-form: Mahddeva; (8) sun-form: Iédna.

2. These eight supernormal powers are enumerated as follows:

anima laghimd praptih prakamyam mdhimd tatha/
isitvam ca vasitvam ca tatha kamavasayital|

=== PAGE 17 ===

L.iii (P).2.60—L.iii (P).3.4 13

60. Siddhas leave off their own respective worlds and leading
Suras abandon the Meru mountain and stay there (i.e. in Aruna-
cala) waiting for their salvation.

61. Thus the entire collection of the ultimate fruits of all the
merits of the earth is well-known as Arunacala. It yields devotion
to devotees as a boon.

62. Sarnbhu, the bestower of all boons, of the nature of
Sonagaila (ie. Arundcala) is worshipped by the groups of Devas
coming from Kailasa and the summit of Meru.

63. After hearing devoutly these words orally transmitted
by the Lotus-born Lord, Sankara became delighted in his mind.
The son humbly bowed down to the father and asked him the
essence of the Veda.

CHAPTER THREE
Parvati Goes to Kafict for Penance

Sanaka said:

1. OLord, this wonderful greatness of the Lord of Aruna-
cala has been heard by Siva’s grace as well as the favour shown
by you, the preceptor of the universe.

2. This greatness is very wonderful. It is conducive to the des-
truction of all sins. Who are those who worshipped and propi-
tiated the Sona mountain, the bestower of boons?

3. Siva who has neither the beginning nor the end, has
assumed the form of Sonacala. O Lord, it is on account of
the penance of you both that he has been abiding here for offering
boons.

4. When the name Sonadri that yields salvation is uttered
even once, all the desired objects come to one’s presence. It is des-
tructive of sins.

=== PAGE 18 ===

14 Skanda Purana

Sa. The word Siva has the taste of nectar. Let the
procedure of the worship of Siva and the story thereof (be des-
cribed).

5b-6a. On hearing these words, Brahma, the Lord of Devas,
who is Mercy itself incarnate, spoke after bowing down to the
Lord of Arunacala.

Brahma said:

6b-9. O dear one, let the ancient legend of Parvati, how she
resorted to the Lord of Arunacala and became happy, be heard.

Once Mahadeva, the Lord of Parvati, came to his divine
gem-set throne fitted with festoons. It was as charming as the
Kalpa-tree laden with gems as its fruit and flowers. It was covered
with precious stones. It hada canopy bedecked with pearls. It
was full of fragrance due to the clusters and nosegays of flowers
and divine incense.

10. Swarms of bees from the hanging clusters of garlands
hummed and hovered around it. The vehicle of Guha (i.e. the
peacock) danced (near it) at the sound of the divine instruments
of music, taking it for the sound of thunder.

11-12. Great elephants were afraid as the lion of Parvati
moved (up and down). The stage (i.e. space) in front of it was
resorted to exclusively by the dancing and singing celestial dam-
sels. It was frequented by the Guardians of the Quarters. It was
surrounded by prominent ascetics and Brahmana sages eulogizing
(the Lord) with Mantras (selected) from the Rg (-), Yajur (-) and
Sama-Vedas and by gods, Siddhas and saintly kings.

13-17a. It was filled with the Garas of different forms and
sizes, whose bodies were adorned with sacred ash. They appeared
handsome as they wore Rudradksa beads and were devoted to
Siva. It was fascinating with the tinkling sound of bells and the
sounds of three types of musical instruments such as lute, flute,
drum etc., mixed with the sounds of Vedic Mantras. With a
desire to bless devotees, the Lord, the consort of Parvati,
graced the great divine seat. Adopting the pure and auspicious
form full of splendour, the glorious Lord, the storehouse of

=== PAGE 19 ===

Liii (P).3.17b-33 15

mercy, sported along with Ambika.

17b-23a. He delighted Parvati by means of music, diverse
kinds of tales, different sorts of games at dice and the hideous
dances of the Ganas. After bidding farewell to allthe Devas, sages
and the members of his court, and after granting different kinds
of boons to devout people as desired by them, be sported about
along with Uma in the parks of variegated and wonderful
features abounding in flowers blossoming in all seasons, in rows
and studded with gems and jewels; in the fascinating tanks with
rows of steps studded with gems; on the peaks of the mountains
of sports and pastime and in the groves of golden plantain trees.
His fatigue due to these sports was dispelled by the gentle
breeze that was cool (as it blew from) the waves of Ganga and
fragrant due to the full blown lotuses. In accordance with his
desire, the Lord delighted goddess Siva, his beloved one, the
beautiful lady endowed with all felicity, the splendid one in the
form of Rati.

23b-28a. The delighted goddess (like) a young girl of
youthful simplicity, once thought her lover to be under her
absolute control. So once, she went stealthily behind him. With
her hands of lotus-like (tenderness and lustre) she sportingly
closed the three eyes of Sarbhu, the sire of the world, just out
of curiosity to know what it was.

When the eyes in the forms of the moon, the sun and the fire
respectively were closed, there appeared a terrible darkness of a
very long duration. With half a moment of the Lord crores of
(human) years passed by. The universe came to its destruction
on account of the darkness caused by the playful sport of the
goddess. The universe was filled all over with boundless darkness.
Being deprived of the movement of the luminaries, the universe
met with its destruction.

28b-33. Devas did not flourish nor did the Vedas shine. No
living beings existed. Only the Unmanifest (i.e. Prakrti) remained
by itself.

On seeing this untimely destruction of the worlds, it occurred
to those (venerable persons) who through their penance had

=== PAGE 20 ===

16 Skanda Purdna

gained a flash of inspiration in their minds: ‘(What) is the source
of this darkness causing destruction of the worlds. Certainly,
the Lord, the immanent soul of everyone, has not impelled the
god of Death. Playfully the goddess has closed the eyes of the
conqueror of Tripura. Therefore, the entire unit of the three
worlds has become deprived of light. If the three worlds have
been pervaded by untimely darkness, what course is left to those
of divine origin (i.e. gods) who have acquired their realms by
means of penance? Yajfias are not being performed on the earth.
Suras are not being worshipped.’

34. On determining this by their mental powers and observ-
ing this through their vision born of knowledge, those eternal
Suris (i.e. persons of spiritual wisdom) devoutly bowed down to
Sarbhu and prayed:

35. “Obeisance to Siva, the Supreme Soul, the maker of the
entire universe, who has assumed separate forms in the nature of
Saktis through Maya.

36. The inevitable one primordial Sakti in theform of Siva
is the cause of creation, sustenance and annihilation in a sport-
ful manner.

37. She is half of your body, O Lord, Your body is in the
form of Siva and Sakti. Mahadeva is one and only one (without
a second). O Lord, without you none else exists.

38. Thanks to your sporting activity, this world has met
with untimely destruction. May your genuine mercifulness
making the worlds flourish, increase.

39. Due to the withdrawal of lights for the duration of half
a winking of yours, innumerable years of the worlds have gone
by causing their destruction.

40. Therefore, be pleased, O Sadagiva, the embodiment of
mercifulness; O Kala (i.e. god of Death), stop this destruction of
the worlds initiated through love’s sport.”

41. On hearing these words of those devotees endowed with
Siddhis the Lord, the embodiment of mercifulness, said, ‘“‘O
Gauri, leave off my eyes.”

42. The goddess desisted from continuing the closure of the
eyes of Hara in the form of the moon, the sun and the fire. The
universe became bright and brilliant.

=== PAGE 21 ===

L.iii (P).3.43-55 17

43. On being asked ‘‘“How much time has passed?”’, Siddhas
bowed down and said, “Along with your half a winking crores
of (human) years have elapsed.”’

44. Looking smilingly at his beloved, the exceedingly
liberal-minded Lord, the embodiment of mercy, spoke about a
few points of great piety and righteousness :

45-47. “O pretty girl of youthful simplicity! You have done
this thoughtlessly as it caused the destruction of the world. I
regard it improper on your part, you being the mother of the
universe. I too destroy all the worlds when the proper time of
dissolution comes. On account of your immaturity the worlds
have met with destruction at the most improper time.

Which lady (in a position) like you will commit this sort of
improper action despised by good people, even for fun? A
person who is an embodiment of sympathy and mercy does not
harass (others).”’

48. On hearing these words of Sambhu she became agitated,
because she was afraid of the loss of Dharma. The beloved wife
of the Lord asked him, ‘“‘What shall I do in order to countervail
it?”

49. Being pleased at that repentance and devotion of the
goddess, Lord Siva, the storehouse of sympathy, spoke:

50. ‘You constitute my own person. Hence what expiation
is to be suggested? Still, this path of virtue is being maintained
by you.

51-52. (Defective Text) You are the embodiment of Srutis,
Smrtis, holy rites, liturgical texts, lores, Devas and others. I am
the great principle (?) and am identical with it. You, the goddess
inseparable from me, should be one entertaining a desire for
creating the worlds.

53. Hence the expiatory rite for youis being laid down in
the manner befitting the world.

After pondering over Srutis and Smrtis Dharma has been
ascertained as of six types.

54. If it is not abided by the master it is likely to be
abandoned by the dependents and followers. I am not able to
stay anywhere even for a single moment after leaving you.

55. I myself shall perform the entire penance, stationed in

=== PAGE 22 ===

18 Skanda Purana

the Atman. The entire earth shall be fruitful through your
penance.

56. By the contact with your lotus-like feet and the sight of
your penance and your own presence (the people) will dispel the
trouble caused by defilement.

57-58. Perform meritorious deeds for the uplift of the land
of Karmans. On observing your austere rites in the world, all the
people will have firmer inclination towards righteousness. There
is no doubt about it. Your sympathy will make the earth
contented and blessed through your activities in maintaining
piety and virtuousness. You have been told about all these
things, O gentle lady, by the eternal Vedas.

59-63. There is a city named Kaijici.? It is endowed with all
riches and is well-known. It is a direct representation of heaven
full of Devas on the surface of the earth. It is said that any
penance performed there has infinite benefits.

Devas and all the sages desire to stay there forever. There (is
a river) well-known as Kashpa.? It is destructive of all great
sins. Crores of sins of the men staying there tremble (with fear).

There is one mango tree there.* It shines with perpetual
sprouts. It has perfectly cool shade along with flowers, fruits
and sprouts. Japa, Homa and charitable gifts performed there
yield infinite benefits.

64. Let the Ganas of different forms and sizes, Dakinis, the
groups of Yogins and others, the chief of whom is Visnu serve
you all round.

65. I shall be devoid of attributes and be undivided. I shall
be present in your lotus-like mind. O gentle lady, do not become
agitated due to separation from me.”

1. Kafici—Kanchipuram on the river Palar in Tamil Nadu 43 miles south-
west of Madras. The eastern portion of the town is Vaisgavite (Visnu-K aiici)
and the western portion is Saivite (Siva-K4aiici), Siva hereof is known as
Ekamranatha (with Kamakhyé as his consort). It contains the famous Tirtha
Siva Ganga. One of the seats of Sahkardcarya is here.

2. Probably the river Palar.

3. According to authority the Ekamra is a single mango tree under
which, it is described in Arundcala Méhatmya, Parvati had performed pen-
ance, It has been flourishing in the temple of Ekamreévara at Kaficl from
time immemorial. It appears that god Siva got his name Ekamreévara from

this “Single Mango Tree”.

=== PAGE 23 ===

Liii (P).3.66—L iii (P).4.3 19

66. On being told thus by the Lord of Devas, the goddass,
with surprise in her eyes, went near Karhnpa along with her
friends in order to perform penance.

67-68. On seeing Kampa, the river without impurities
resorted to by groups of ascetics, and the single mango tree
Ekamra with tender sprouts, warding off the (evil) eye, laden
with fruits and flowers and completely agitated with the chirping
sound of cuckoos, she became pleased. Then she remembered
Lord Maheésvara.

69. With her limbs enveloped by the fire of love, she became
as though emaciated on account of penance.

Gauri addressed Vijaya who was present near her at her side. :

70-72. Her limbs were enveloped by (the feelings of) love
and grief (because) she was agitated on account of the separation
from Purari (i.e. Siva): “I have come here for perpetually
worshipping the Lord, the dispeller of sins, by means of austeri-
ties. But this single mango tree, the kinsman of the god of Love,
with fresh outcome of sprouts and flowers reminds me (of
Siva). My mind has been agitated much by the mind-born lord of
love. How can I bear the separation from Siva? Therefore the
sole antidote for the same is seen in remembering the feet of the
Lord who has the young moon on his crest.”

CHAPTER FOUR

Parvati Goes to the Hermitage of Gautama

Brahma said:

1. After bowing dowmto the Mother of the universe and
consoling her by means of hundreds of eulogies from the scrip-
tures of Siva (?) Vijaya said to her:

2. *O goddess, you are always inseparable from Lord
Sambhu. You are the goddess of his very life, the only Sakti of
that Supreme Soul.

3. You wish to show your own Maya in such a way that
Téana does not himelf reveal any separate existence (from you).

=== PAGE 24 ===

20 Skanda Purana

4. It was only after receiving his command that you have
come (here), O Parvati. The behest of Sarhbhu regarding service
(unto him) should never be transgressed by you.

5. Abstaining from all desires, you who have resorted to
Sambhu, should perform the penance in this place assigned to
you by Siva.

6. Even otherwise, the protection of the universe is under
your control, O goddess identical with the universe. The pro-
ection and further maintenance of Dharma is yours along with

iva.

7. Eagerly meditatifig on Siva who is devoid of divisions
and parts, and stationed in your own soul, O Parvati, you will
not at all remember the pangs of separation.

8. All your leading devotees will take up your conduct (as
the ideal to be followed). O gentle lady fondly devoted to Dharma,
let it spread in the world by preaching.”

9. On hearing her statement thus, Gauri perfectly steadied
her mind and began to perform penance on the splendid banks
of the river Kampa.

10. Setting aside her ornaments of various kinds, she
adorned herself with clusters (i.e. rosaries) of Rudraksa beads.
Laying aside the divine garments, she wore two auspicious bark
garments.

11. She immediately turned artistically her forelocks into
matted hair. Giving up (the use of) saffron (as unguent), she
besmeared her entire body with holy ash.

12. Gleaning ears of corn alone with the deer, she became
contented (with what she got as food). Strictly maintaining her
observances, she continuously repeated the five-syllabled Mantra
of Siva (i.e. Namah Sivaya).

13. Shetook bath three times a day in the clear limpid
waters of Karnpa. She made a Linga of sand and worshipped it
respectfully.

14. She removed the fatigue and weariness of all living
beings by planting trees, making charitable gifts and worshipping
guests without leaving anyone. Thus, the goddess observed the
code of religious conduct.

15. She performed penance seating herself in the middle of
five fires during summer; she lay on the bare ground during

=== PAGE 25 ===

Liii (P).4.16-27 21

rainy season and she remained in water during early and late
winter.

16. She caused surprise in the minds of meritorious-souled
Sreat sages who came to visit her. She respectfully adored them.

17. Sometimes she herself gathered and brought from the
forests bunches of flowers along with sprouts and sat down for
cleansing them particularly.

18. On the sacred banks of Kampa, she made a Linga out
of sand and began to worship it with the ancillary rites of Nyasa!
and Avdhana (‘invoking’).

19. After duly worshipping the Sun with red flowers and
sandal paste, she gradually worshipped Sankara equipped with
five converings.

20. She looked in front of her Igana, the cause of welfare,
made perceptibie by means of incenses, lamps, food offerings etc.
with feelings of devotion.

21-22. (Once) Lord Siva himself, to test Ambika, caused a
big flood in the river Kampa (which) surrounded her. On seeing
that exceedingly great flood approaching, the friends said to
Ambika who was seated (there) in the course of her holy observ-
ances:

23. ‘O goddess, get up. A big flow of water is rushing on.
It will fill the quarters quickly and flood everything.”

24. As she was in her meditation with closed eyes, she heard
these words. On opening her eyes she saw that unparalleled force
of the current of waters of the river.

25. Worried at the possibility of an obstacle in her wor-
ship, the goddess thought : ‘What shall I do? I cannot forsake the
worship that has been begun.

26. Generally it is in the case of meritorious-souled per-
sons that the association of holy rites, the bestower of desired
benefits, is actively conducive to the acquisition of welfare with-
Out obstacles on the earth.

27. This Linga made of sand will be swept away by the un-
paralleled force of the current. If the Linga is destroyed good
devotees should give up their lives.

1. Nyisa—Mental assignment of various parts of one’s body to the
tutelary deities—MW 572 A.

=== PAGE 26 ===

22 Skanda Purana

28. This flocd is created by the Maya of Siva. It comes to
test Atman whether it is endowed with devotion to his feet or not.

29. With my pair of arms, I will closely embrace this Linga
and will remain here unaffected and unagitated’: ‘“‘Dear friends,
all of you go far off quickly.”

30. After saying thus, Ambika closely embraced the Linga.
Although she was engulfed by the spcedy flow, she did not let
it go.

31. The nipples of her breasts pressed so hard against the
Linga that an impression was left appearing like a scar on it.
Then (the goddess) respectfully bowed down to the Linga clinging
to it.

32. Remembering Sadasiva, she experienced a thrill all over
her body making her hair stand on end. She remained with her
eyes Closed and her heart engrossed solely in meditation.

33. She was motionless and did not want to be separated even
for a moment from that Linga which caused tremor, perspiration,
protection, bashfulness and love-sport in her.

34. A certain (mysterious) incorporal divine voice addressed
her: “O girl, leave off that Linga. The great flood has receded.

35. The sandy Linga worshipped by you will have a per-
petual greatness. O exalted lady, it will be worshipped by Suras
and will be a bestower of boons.

36. On seeing your penance (a test of your observance of
Dharma) has been arranged. Let human beings become blessed
and satisfied by bowing down to this Livga.

37. I shall assume an effulgent form and stay here under
the name Arundcala for the sake of (men’s) achievement of Siddhi
on the surface of the earth (itself).

38. The word Runa means collection of sins because it pre-
vents a man from all the worlds. When the gocd is seen there is
no Runa. Hence Arundacala.*

39. The sages, Siddhas, Gandharvas and noble-souled
Yogins leave off the peak of Kailasa (mountain) and of Meru
and resort to this (mountain).

1. A strange etymology. The word suga is probably a Sanskritization
of some local word.

=== PAGE 27 ===

Liii (P).4.40-51 23

40. Formerly, in order to dispel the delusion of Brahma
and Kysna (i.e. Visnu) who were born of a part of mine but were
fighting with each other, I stood here (between them) in the form
of a fiery brilliance.

41. My crest was not seen by Brahma who assumed the form
of a swan and my foot was not seen by Visnu who took the form
of a boar. I was bowed down to by them with d2votion.

42. Then I was pleased. I become visible to them. I granted
them the boons desired by them. I granted them proficiency in the
protection of the three worlds.

43. Requested once again by them I assumed this fiery form
with the name Arundcala. I was persuaded by them to assume the
state of an immobile Linga.

44. Goto Sage Gautama of exalted fortune and ask him
about devotion unto me. After hearing about the greatness of
Arunacala, perform penance there.

45. There I shall reveal to you th effulgent form of mine
for the sake of dispelling all sins and for the sake of the welfare
of the worlds.”

46. On hearing these words uttered by Siva, the entire
one without divisions, the goddess said ‘So be it”? and began to
go immediately.

47. Then looking with affectionate eyes all the Devas and
sages who had followed her for rendering service tc her, Ambika
spoke: |

48. “O Devas, and the sages of steady holy observances,
stay here on the sacred banks of Kamp4 maintaining your holy
VOWS.

49. Let this Linga made of sand and marked by (my) breast
and bangles be worshipped by you. It causes the destruction of
all sins and increases all types of good fortune.

50. Day and night I assume an entire, undivided, attributeless
form and propitiate this Sonegvara, the bestower of boons, by
means of Mantras.

31. In this world let all types of desired prosperity be achiev-
ed dueto my performance of the penance and observance of
piety and righteousness as well as by seeing the Linga (installed)
by me.

=== PAGE 28 ===

24 Skanda Purdga

52. Iam called Kamaksi on account of my bestowing every-
thing desired. Let my devotees here obtain the desired boon after
bowing down to me under the name Kamakgi as they please.

53. Indeed I shall go to the mountain Arunacala and carry
out the behest of Sarnbhu, the Lord of Devas, the Lord of unobs-
tructed prowess.

54. I shall go there, perform a severe penance and please
Sarhbhu. Afterwards you all shall gather together and see me
when I will have obtained the boons.”’

55. After instantly bidding farewell thus to all the good
devotees serving her feet, the gentle ‘girl’ went to Arunacala for
the sake of penance at the bidding of Sankara.

56-58. She was perpetually servcd by female friends and
attendants devotedly. She approached the Lord of Arunacala for
whom the divine Dundubhi drum was sounded. Though the Lord
of Arunacala is of a fiery nature, he is internally quiescent. He is
worshipped by the celestial damsels through dances, songs and
showers of flowers. With great enthusiasm she bowed down
to the immobile Linga and saw the group of Siddhas, Yogins
and sages.

59-60. Atri, Bhrgu, Bharadvaja, Kasyapa, Angiras, Kutsa
and Gautama as well as Siddhas, Vidyadharas and the immortal
ones always perform penance here for the sake of getting the ex-
pected boons. Ganga and other rivers serve and attend to him
all round.

61. “This is a divine Liga remembered as Arunadri (or
Arunacala). Salute.” On being told thus by the Suras, she bowed
down again and again.

62. On being requested to receive their hospitality by all the
great sages, she said, “As per order of Siva, Gautama should be
seen by me.”

63. She went to him as he was pointed out by the sages
saying, ‘“‘He is here’. That sage was the first and foremost among
the devotees of Siva. He was a storehouse of austerities.

64-65. He had gone to the forest in the morning for fetching
sacrificial twigs, Kuga grass and fruits after bidding the disciples
of steadfast holy rites, ‘““Worship the guests who come to the
hermitage.” The righteous-souled sage went to the forest. Then
she came to the hermitage to see Gautama.

=== PAGE 29 ===

Lifi (P).4.66 —Liii (P).5.2 25

66-7la. When the disciples were asked, ‘“Where has the sage
gone?’’, they said, “He will come back in a short while.” After
saying this, she was received by the disciples standing up in hon-
our of her arrival, and offered fruits, roots, sweet scents, a seat,
water to wash the feet, Arghya and courteous words of welcome.
She was duly honoured with fruits and roots that constitute the
assets of the disciples. They said to her, ‘‘Please wait for a
moment.” Others went near her.

The moment the goddess entered it, the great hermitage of
the noble sage became one full of jewel-set mansions with plenty
of requisite furnishings.

After returning from the forest carrying sacrificial twigs, Kuga
grass and fruits, the eminent sage saw from far his hermitage
sparkling splendidly with hundreds of vehicles. He thought with
wonder, ‘What is this?’ By means of his vision born of know-
ledge, he saw that Gauri had come there.

71b-73. In order to see Mother of the worlds, he hastened
(back to the hermitage). The disciples, with great haste, intima-
ted to him the news.

The great sage thought that her arrival was the fruit of his
own penance. It was coupled with the kindness of Siva. With
great eagerness he came into the hermitage. He who was fond of
those who resorted to him, came to the hermitage, thinking
about all these things.

CHAPTER FIVE

The Greatness of Brahmapuskara

Brahma said:

1. Sivabhakti ( ? Sivagskti), Siva’s devoticn (? Siva’s power),
identical with the universe prepared to welcome the quiescent
Gautama who came back to the door of the hut from the forest.

2. She saw Gautama served by his disciples as he returned.
His head was covered with long flowing hair. His face was fully
covered with a heard.

=== PAGE 30 ===

26 Skanda Purdna

3. He shone like fire with flames on account of the exceed-
ingly copper-coloured matted hair that had become clean and
pure on account of the holy bath in the Tirtha andin which beads
of Rudraksa had been placed. .

4. He was resplendent with the Tripundra marked with sacred
ash on his wide forehead. He wore a white sacred thread as well
as rosaries of Rudraksa beads.

5. He wore two red bark garments. His body was lean and
emaciated due to penance. He repeated many Vedic Mantras
causing delight to Rudra.

6. On account of his highly dignified speech he was (as if)
possessed by Sarnbhu and hence had a sameness (of the exalted
tone like that) of Sarmmbhu. He was full of kindness and was a
treasure of refulgence like the veritable Sun-god.

7. On seeing that noble-souled old sage who had resorted
to the feet of Sarmbhu, Gauri joined her palms in reverence and
began to bow down to him.

8. On seeing the Mother of the entire universe with palms
folded in reverence, the sage wondered what the matter was.
Preventing (her from bowing down), he himself saluted her.

9. “O Gauri of great magnificence, welcome (unto you). O
mother of the worlds, O storehouse of mercy, under some pre-
text you have come here to protect the devotees.

10. O goddess worthy of being honoured, it was as though
you had realizedan objective worthy of being respectcd formerly.
Assuming separateness, We have come here along with (her) dis-
ciples and others. (obscure)

11. O goddess, if you have no sportive flash of your own
Maya, how can the worldly existence continue to be? (obscure)

12. Let it be. 1 am not competent to speak of the sportive
flash of your own Maya which it is ever impossible to decide
specifically by your (people i.e. devotees). (obscure)

.13. Be pleased to sit on the clean holy seat made of KuSa
grass. Let the Padya and Arghya' duly offered by me be ac-
cepted.”

1. After giving water to aguest on his arrival to wash his feet (Pddya)
he was traditionally worshipped by offering Arghya consisting of water,
flowers, darvd grass, unbroken grains of rice.

=== PAGE 31 ===

Liii (P).5.14-26 27

14. After saying this, the old sage devoutly worshipped
Ambika who was seated onthe excellent seat made of Darbha
grass brought by the disciples.

15. After completing the entire worship, (the sage) endowed
with the feelings of devotion, himself sat ona seat after being
permitted by Gauri.

16. Washing the faces of the quarters with the moon-light-
like splendour of his teeth, with the hair standing on end all over
his bedy through joyous thrill, he spoke in a choked voice with
tears of joy:

17. ‘Oh, the greatness of lord Sarhbhu of unmeasured splen-
dour! The Lord fond of his devotees has directed you to protect
good devotees.

18-20. O Amba, is there anything not acquired, anything
else yet to be obtained, by you? It is to point out the greatness of
devotion that god Siva (has directed you). The events at Kailasa,
the stay on the banks of Kampa for penance and the directive
of Arunacala—all this is known to me. O highly fortunate lady,
you have yourself come to this hermitage of your devotee,
out of affection. O goddess, the embodiment of mercifulness, tell
me what Iam to do.”

21. Onhearing these words of that great sage who knew
everything, Ambika eagerly spoke to him eulogizing him:

22. “This is the great magnificence of yours that Siva, the
Lord of Devas, himself commanded me that you should be seen.
Among all the ascetics (it was you that he selected).

23. Youare master of the Vedas and the Agamas uttered by
Siva. It ison account of your penance that among the devotees
er Siva, you alone are (regarded as) the most honoured one by

iva.

24. ‘Iam staying here by the name Arunacala’, said Siva.
The greatness of this Acala (mountain) should be heard directly
from you.

25. I have come to the presence of Arunacala in order to per-
form penance. It is only due to the sight of Your Holiness that
Iga himself becomes delighted.

26. (The opportunity) to converse with the devotees of
Siva and to worship Sivaliriga—this is the benefit of being em-
bodied (born) in the world.

=== PAGE 32 ===

28 Skanda Purdna

27. Hence, this greatness orally transmitted by you directly
should be heard by me. Due to your knowledge and teaching,
you are clearly (like) a father unto me.”

28. On hearing her words, Gautama, the storehouse of
austerities, recounted the greatness of Arunacala after meditating
on Giriga:

29. ‘Whatever is being asked by you, as though it is not
known to you, I know that you alone are the Mayd of Siva, which
is the (repository) of all knowledge.

30. Listening to the greatness of Siva uttered by a devotee
and to the teachings of Sarnbhu (handed over to them)—this is
the cause of your delight.

31. Those who glorify or listen to the glorification of Siva
in the world attain the same merit as the study and recitation of
the Vedas.

32. All the austerities performed by me have become fruit-
ful today, because I glorify the greatness as heard (by me) and as
directed by Sarhbhu.

33-39a. This wonderful greatness (has been obtained by me)
by the favour of Siva and Siva.

O lady of faultless limbs, let this great ancient lore, the great-
ness of Arunacala, the cause of the destruction of sins, be heard.
Listen how the Lingain the form of Arunacala manifested itself
formerly.

The entire greatness of Arunacala cannot be expressed with a
crore of mouths by a crore of Brahmanas. Lord Siva, the Lord of
Arunacala, has been worshipped for the attainment of the eight
(super-human powers) by Brahma, Visnu, the Moon, the Sun,
the Fire-god and the Guardians of the Directions beginning
with Indra. He has been adored by Siddhas, Caranas, Gan-
dharvas, Yaksas, Vidyddharas, serpents, birds, divine sages and
Siddhayogins for dispelling different kinds of sins, for fulfilling
different kinds of wishes. This Lord has thus been propitiated.

39b-42a. On being visited, the Lord dispels sins, On being
served he bestows whatever is desired. If he is glorified as SonAdri
(i-e. Arupacala) by the people even from far he bestows salva-
tion. The Yogins who meditate in their minds on the form of the

=== PAGE 33 ===

Liii (P).5.42b-53 29

column of effulgence well-known as Arunadri, shall obtain salva-
tion in the form of Sdyujya (‘perfect merger’) with Siva. What is
given as charitable gift, whatever is offered as Homa, the Japa
performed and the penances practised in the presence of Aruna-
cala acquire everlasting benefit.

42b-46. Brahma and Visnu who are born of parts of the
splendour of Siva, became proud and arrogant. With a desire to
conquer each other, they fought arrogantly. In order to quell their
pride, Sadasgiva, worthy of being meditated upon by Yogins,
assumed the form of fiery splendour devoid of beginning, middle
and end. Illuminating the ten quarters, he stood in between
them. In order to see the beginning and end portions of that fiery
column (Brahma and Visnu) assumed the forms of a swan and
a boar and went to the firmament and to the nether worlds.
On seeing them weary and distressed, the Lord, the store-
house of mercy, appeared infront of them and granted them the
boon they desired.

47. On being requested by them the Lord of Devas assumed
the form of an immobile Linga, well-known as Arunadri. He
shines calmly yet brilliantly.

48. This effulgent Linga is always worshipped to the accom-
paniment of the sounds of divine Dundubhi drums, the songs and
dances of celestial damsels and hundreds of showers of flowers.

49. Formerly ninety-six Brahmas had come up and passed
away. Then a Brahma came out of the navel of Visnu and created
the worlds.

50. Once that Brahma was requested by Indra who was
desirous of causing obstacles to the penance of Yogins. (So) he
created a lovely and graceful woman.

51. On seeing that lotus-eyed lady full of graceful charms
and other good qualities, Brahma was pierced in his heart by the
arrows of Kandarpa (i.c. god of Love). He became deluded.

52. On observing the lotus-seated Brahma desirous of tou-
ching her, the excellent celestial damsel bowed to him and under
the pretext of circumambulating him, she wished to go away.

53. While she was devoutly circumambulating, there sprang
up four faces of Brahma in the four directions instantaneously.

=== PAGE 34 ===

30 Skanda Purana

34-57. That maiden then assumed the form of a bird and
flew into the sky. On seeing him approaching in the form of a
bird, she resorted to Arunacala seeking refuge.

‘You are the Lord whose foot and head have not been seen
by Brahma and Visnu. O Lord of Arunacala, protect me. O
Lord worthy of giving refuge, I have sought refuge in you.’

While she was lamenting with excess of agony and fright, a
certain hunter wielding a bow rose up from the immobile Linga
Arunacala. He had the lustre of the sky overcast with clouds and
he had fixed an arrow to his bow. When the hunter was seen in
front (of him) his (Brahma’s) delusion was dispelled.

58-63a. Then the Lotus-born Lord became extremely humble
and delighted in his heart. Then he bowed down to the Lord of
Sonadri who is worthy of being resorted to:

‘Obeisance to you, the cause of the destruction of all sins, to
the Lord wielding the Pinadka bow. Obeisance to Sambhu who
has assumed the form of Arunacala and who is under the
control of his devotees. Who, other than you, is competent
to make his ignorant devotees refrain from misdeeds? This is
impossible for (ordinary) persons to do. Destroy my physical
body with your splendour because it has become sinful by (bad)
intention. O Lord, the immanent soul of the universe, create
another Brahma for the purpose of the creation of the worlds.’

On hearing these words of Brahma who was in a wretched
condition, Siva, the moon-crested Lord, the embodiment of
mercy said:

63b-67a. ‘The period that has been formerly allotted to you
cannot be changed or taken back. Which person in a position
of power, defects such as Raga (attachment) and others do not
affect? Hence even if you are far way, worship this fiery Linga
named Arunacala for dispelling all defects. All sins whether they
are mental, verbal or physical perish quickly by visiting Aruna-
cala. This Arunacala is destructive of all the sins of men through
circumambulations, prostrations, recollections, worships and
culogies.

67b-71. I can rarely be seen if Kaildsa, peak of Meru or in
my abodes on the various Kula mountains. I myself am Aruna-

=== PAGE 35 ===

L.iii (P).5.72—Liii (P).6.1 31

cala, on seeing the peak of which people will not only have the
benefit of having their eyes but also the destruction of all sins and
the acquisition of the vision born of knowledge.

Brahma, born of a part of mine, formerly took his bath in
Brahma Puskara! named after him. Thereby the delusion of that
Lord of the universe vanished. You too take your bath in this
Brahma Tirtha, worship me, keep your palms joined in reverence,
keep silent and circumambulate me. O soul of the universe, you
will become free from ailments.’

72. Maheéa, the Lord of the universe, remained in the form
of Arunacala after uttering these words. The Lotus-born Lord
had a plunge in the lake. He duly worshipped the Lord, the des-
troyer of sins.

73. With his mind purified by means of the Yogic exercises
of Yama, Niyama etc., the Creator duly worshipped the Lord of
Arunacala clearly and with all requisite offerings and services.
Thereby his sins being dispelled, he regained the lordship (of
the universe).”’

CHAPTER SIX
Description of Various Holy Places at Arunécala*

Gautama said:

1. Once upon a time, formerly, in another Ka/pa, Narayana
was lying on his serpent couch in the vast ocean and he did not
wake up.

1. The beautiful lake Pugkara near Ajmer in Rajasthan is famous since
Mahabharata days. Its association with god Brahma is well-known in
Puranas. We still have a famous temple of god Brahma there.

2. This chapter tries to enhance the importance of Arunicala by
showing in it the concentration of all important Tirthas in the world. These
Tirthas are located on the way of the Parikramdé or circumambulation of
Arunacala.

=== PAGE 36 ===

32 Skanda Purdga

2. The eternal Siris (i.e. great sages) saw that even at the
end of the Kalpa the universe was enveloped in darkness, lying
concealed and featureless. They were deeply grieved at this.

3. ‘Alas! the form of this darkness enchants and deludes
the entire universe whereby even now at the end of the Kalpa,
Visnu does not get up.

4. When the perfect luminous Purusa cannot be seen, how
can Suras get peace from the darkness that attacks (them)?

5. After resolving thus in their mind they thought of the
Lord of Uma, the Lord of Devas, the unsullied mass of reful-
gence, stationed in the Atman.

6. Then Lord Mahe§gvara, the mass of refulgence, became
pleased. He was requested to protect the universe by the eternal
wise sages who bowed down.

7. Then thirty-three crores of Devas emanating from the
rays of the flames of Sarnbhu in the fiery form came forth.

8. On being awakened by all the Devas, the Lord of Rama
got up, found that it had completely dawned and thought thus
in his mind:

9. ‘Since Tamas (i.e. darkness) had predominated I slept at
a wrong time. For the sake of waking me up Sadasiva himself,
the great luminary, had to be seen.

10. He himself attempts to carry out the duties of creation
of the universe. What other function has to be carried out by me
in this matter or by the Self-born Lord Brahma?

11. Fie upon me who remained ignorant of the Atman, with
the mind overpowered by sleep ! 1 shall seek refuge in Sankara,
the maker of all.

12. The vision of Sambhu quells all defects. It bestows all
the desired benefits. It is sacred. It is difficult for the persons
deficient in merit to get it.’

13. Meditating thus on Sadasiva, the fiery Linga stationed
in the Atman, Hari devoutly bowed to the Lord frequently with
the eight limbs (touching the ground).

14-20. Then Sarshbhu in the form of refulgence, the Lord
who was worthy of being sought refuge in, blessed (Lord Vignu)
who had sought refuge, by means of benign glances and spoke
to him, “‘Get up.”

=== PAGE 37 ===

Liii(P).6.21-28 33

After getting up, he eulogized Sambhu, the Lord who had
created the universe, who dispelled sins, who was full of mercy
and who had the crescent moon on his crest:

‘““Obeisance to the Lord of the three worlds, to the Lord who
has three forms corresponding to the three Gunas. Obeisance to
you With the body of the three Devas, to the Lord with three
eyes, to the enemy of the three Puras.

You alone are the Lord of all worlds. You perform all acts
through your own parts in the forms of Devas, by way of cause
and effect.

You have engaged me inthe act of protecting the universe,
but you have deluded me by means of the Maya. But you do not
wish to eschew the defect (of Mayda) or even the intention (viz.
my assignment of protecting the world).

What shall Ido? Ihave placed all the burden on you, the
Lord having the universe for your form. You do not wish to
find fault with me for this untimely sleep. O Hara, O Sazhbhu,
remove the agony and distress of Hari.’? On seeing Hari’s
distress thus, the glorious Hara directed the expiation for Hari
in this form:

21-24. “Istay onthe surface of the earth in the form of
Arunacala. Merely by visiting it, your Tamas will be destroyed.

To a previous Visnua boon had been granted by me for-
merly. It was at that time itself that this fiery Linga named
Arunacala (came into being). For the purpose of protecting the
worlds this effulgent form has become subdued and quiescent,
since itis unmanifest and fiery as well as it has unlimited wealth
of good qualities. Since it is internally fiery in form, the waters
of the rivers, streams and those shed by clouds are seen merging
with it.

25-26. It abides as the bestower of all Siddhis—such as
regaining eyesight to the blind, the ability to walk on (one’s own)
feet to the lame, begetting a son to the childless, ability to talk
(fluently) to the dumb, conferment of all types of siddhis, dispel-
ling all ailments and quelling of all sins.”

27. After saying this, Sarhbhu vanished. Hari came to
Arunacala, performed penance and adored Sonacala.

28. After surveying the mountain all round, Hari made the
Suras resort to the forests. He established the sacred hermitages

=== PAGE 38 ===

34 Skanda Puriga

of the sages. He established the Vedas along with their ancil-
lary subjects and Upanisads all round, causing them to take
up physical forms.

29. Hecreated a hundred families of celestial damsels with
divine beautiful form and commanded them: ‘You serve (the
Lord) by means of dances, songs, and instruments of music.”

30. After taking his holy dip in the Brahma lake, the lotus-
eyed Visnu circumambulated the mountain Arunacala that was
worshipped (by him).

31. He became free from sins and acquired the overlordship

‘of all the worlds. He is always accompanied by Rama who is
beautiful, delightful and suitable to him.

32. On the advice of Brahma, Bhaskara (i.e. the Sun-god)
who is a mass of refulgence but who was harassed by Asuras,
devoutly worshipped the Lord of Arunacala.

33. After plunging into the sanctifying pure Tirtha created by
Brahma, he circumambulated Arunacala, the Lord himself.

34. After gaining victory over all the Daityas and (the pri-
vilege of) circumambulating Meru, he gained supreme refulgence
that destroys the brilliance of enemies.

35. Soma (i.e. the Moon-god) overpowered by the fire of
Daksa’s curse, worshipped Arunacala and regained his (original)
form on the strength of Siva’s words.

36. Agni (the Fire-god) was afflicted with tuberculosis on
account of the curse of a Brahmana sage. Although he was im-
pure, he became pure due to the service he renderedto Arunacala.

37-40. Formerly Sakra had killed Vrtra, Bala, Paka, Namuci
and the haughty Jambha, the Daityas who had obtained boons
from Siva and become lords of the worlds. So he became exhaus-
ted due to sins and resorted to the objective of the world (viz.
Siva). He propitiated Siva by means of penance. Directed by
Siva, he worshipped Arunacala. Thus the Lord of Suras became
absolved of sins. He propitiated Sankara by the performance of
a horse-sacrifice. After attaining the position of Indra, the glorious

Sakra directed a group of one hundred celestial damsels to
serve (the Lord) through the service (i.e. beating) of celestial
Dundubhi-drums.

41. After commanding the flower-clouds, he regularly wor-

=== PAGE 39 ===

Liii(P).6.42-53 35

ships Sonadri (i.e. Arundcala) by means of divine showers of
flowers and salutes (it) from heaven.

42. Atthe bidding of Siva Sesa worshipped the Lord of
Sonasaila and attained the ability of having any form he wished.
He became the supporter of the globular earth.

43. Others too, Nagas, Gandharvas, Siddhas, groups of celes-
tial damsels and Guardians of the Quarters worshipped him and
obtained the expected boons.

44. Arunacala, the bestower of desired boons, was prayed to
by allthe Devas who had attempted to fight, because they were
desirous of defeating Daityas and others. They prayed to the
Mountain, standing all round it.

45-48a. Aditya whose shape was formed by Tvastr blazed
with his brilliance. The Lord of Planets attempted tocross Sonadri.
The horses of his chariot lost their power and became tired. Due
to the refulgence of Sonadri he became devoid of glory. Even
with all the (attempted) motion of the possessor of cluster of rays
(i.e. Sun), he became unable to go to the heaven. On the advice of
Brahma he propitiated Arunacala. When the Lord was pleased,
he obtained the path of the sky and splendid horses.

48b-49a. Ever since then the Sun never crosses the mountain
named Sona but goes circumambulating him.

49b-S5la. Formerly the Devas who were either killed or
became mutilated in their limbs, propitiated Arunacala and
obtained fresh limbs. Piisan got back his tooth, the Fire-god
his hand, Bhaga his eye and Vani the unbroken nose by serving
Arunacala.?

51b-53. When he obstructed the flow of water at the time
of the gift of the earth by Bali (to Vamana), Bhargava(i.e. Sukra)
lost his eye on being pricked with the tip of the Darbha grass
held in his hand by Visnu (ie. Vamana). He went to Sonacala
and performed a very difficult penance. With his soul purified,
he regained his eye.

He (i.e. Aruna—Garuda’s brother) was stationed on the
mountain named Bhaskara. By serving the Lord of Arunacala, he
became the charioteer of the Sun-god.

1. These gods suffered these injuries during the destruction of Daksa’s
sacrifice by Virabhadra.

=== PAGE 40 ===

36 Skanda Purdsa

54-56. A king named Pratardana! became eager to abduct a
celestial maiden who was singing the songs of the Lord of Aruné-
cala. Instantaneously he became monkey-faced. Urged by his
ministers, the king returned her and gave other girls to the Aruna
mountain. Thereupon by the grace of the Lord of Arunacala he
became handsome in his face. On account of his devotional fee-
lings the Lord gave him complete Sayujya.

57-59. Formerly a Gandharva named Puspaka, weak in
knowledge and devoid of devotion, wentto the vicinity of the Lord
of Arundcala. Then the attendants saw him as one with the face of
atiger. With great surprise they asked one another, ‘What is
this?” Thereupon, when pointed out by Narada, he realized that
it was the result of his insult (to Arunacala). He then worshipped
Arunacala and became handsome in his face (as before) once
again.

60. The ground all round to the extent of two Yojanas is well-
known as Siva-Bhimi. There is no destruction of the persons who
die there. They get salvation.

61-63a. Formerly, the Seven Sages who had been cursed,
served Arunacala on the earth. The glorious Lord understood
their resolve and granted salvation to the noble-souled Seven
Sages. The Tirtha made by the Seven Sages is seen near Sonacala.
It is auspicious, sacred and destructive of all sins.

63b-64. A certain lame sage came there in order to regain
his feet through (the blessings of) Sonagaila. The object of his
desire was kept suppressed in his mind. He was holding two
wooden spoons. Crawling eagerly on his knees, he reached the
banks of the Sona river.

65-69. He left the wooden spoons at the Jirtha for the sake
of thirsty people. While he was crawling on his knees, a certain
rogue wanted to drink water. Somehow the wooden spoon
reached Sonacala. Eager to pick up a quarrel he(?) rushed at him
asking ‘‘What is this?’ Suddenly he regained his feet and went
back to his abode but did not see that man. The wooden spoons

1. This is a king totally different from Pratardana, a Vedic Seer of RV,
a philosopher-king in Kausgitaki Upanisad and the king of K&si, the vanqui-
sher of Haihayas, the celebrated philanthropist. of Mbh (Santi and Anuéa-
sana), None of these great personages stood so low as this Pratardana of SkP.

=== PAGE 41 ===

L.iii(P).6.70-79 37

were in front. Seeing them he took them himself and saluted
Arunacala. Having regained his feet and handsome form the
great sage became pleased. On his getting back his feet he was
worshipped by the noble-souled devotees of Siva with the eyes
beaming and bulging due to surprise. He then went back the
way he had come.

70. Vali, the glorious son of Indra, attempted to go from
the peak of the mountain of the rising sun to the mountain of the
setting Sun.

71. He saw the Arunacala mountain in the middle, bowed
to by Devas. (Though) he attempted to cross it, he lost his vigour
and fell on the earth.

72. Urged by his father who came into contact with him,
he worshipped the Sona mountain, the fiery Linga, and once
again regained his vigour.

73. The righteous-souled Nala worshipped (Arunécala)
formerly and protected the beloved ones of Manu created by him
(i.e. men, his subjects). He was equipped with the essence of the
science of ethics and politics.

74-75. Ila? suddenly entered the untransgressed forest of
Gauri and became a woman. He asked his priest. On being
directed by Vasistha he worshipped Sonadri. After propitiating
the Lord of Devas he regained manhood.

76-77a. Then on the advice of Soma (i.e. the Moon-god) he
devoutly remembered Arunacala. By the blessings of Iga, he
attained redemption from the curse. He possessed increased
power of penance and attained the greatest abode inaccessible
even to the immortal ones.

77b-79. Since he remembered a fawn at the time of death,
Bharata did not attain salvation through Yoga. He was born in
the species of deer.

Hari (i.e. Rama) had to meet with immeasurable sorrow and
pain arising from the separation from his wife. On the advice of
Bhrgu he worshipped Sonadri. (Thereby) he dispelled all sorrows
in all of his incarnations.

. 1. This episode about Valin in unknown to VR.
‘ 2, The story is based on VR VII.87-89, though Sonddri is not mentioned
there,

—

=== PAGE 42 ===

38 Skanda Purdua

80. Sarasvati, Savitri, Sri, Bhiimi as well as the rivers wor-
shipped the Lord of Sonaégaila and surmounted adversities.

81-82. The deity Bhaskara on the eastern side, Visvamitra
on the southern side, Varuna on the western side and Trisila (the
trident) resorting to the north—these are stationed in the moun-
tains as the boundaries to the extent of two Yojanas(?). These four
deities serve the Sona mountain.?

83. Thcy are stationed on the edges of the borders. The four
Devas bow to Siva in the form of Sonacala, the Lord of the Sona
mountain stationed there.

84. On the northern peak of this (mountain) a certain banyan
tree is seen, at the root of which stays Maheésvara perpetually in
the guise of a Siddha.

85. Its shade is very extensive and is always circular in shape.
It is always seen by Devas and human beings overwhelmed with
surprise.

86. It shines splendidly on being served by eight Lingas all
round, worshipped by the eight Guardians of the Quarters and
stationed in the eight directions.

87. It was here alone that a great abode was created by the
primordial Lord for the sake of the kings who are devotees of
Sarnbhu and who carry out the behests of Sankara.

88. There is a great Bakula tree (Mimusops Elengi) there.
It always bestows whatever is requested of it. At its root it is
resorted to by Vamadeva, conversant with the topics in the
Agamas.

89. Agastya and Vasistha worshipped Arunacala, installed
two Lingas free from impurities and performed a similar penance.

90. Formerly the manly Sonanada, the son of Hiranya-
garbha, performed a severe penance here and flowed in the
direction of Ganga.

91. Here flows the holy and meritorious river Sona with
waters free from impurities. Vena, the sacred river, serves the
mountain all round.

92. In the quarter pertaining to the Wind-god (i.e.
north-west) shines splendidly the Vayutirtha. It was here that

1. VV 81 ff. give the special features (or places worth seeing) at Arugd-
cala. Most of the holy spots are met while circumambulating Arunacala.

=== PAGE 43 ===

L.iii(P);6.93-105 9

formerly the Wind-god took his holy bath and attained the status
of Jagatprana (‘the vital breath of the universe’).

93-95. To the north of this mountain, there is a Tirtha
shining brilliantly with golden lotuses. It is full of the divine
Saugandhika flowers. It is charming with swans and bees. It is the
Kaubera Tirtha.

In the north-east there is the excellent Aifanya Tirtha (‘Holy
spot pertaining to I4na’).

To the western side of the same, the lotus-eyed Visnu took
his holy bath and attained the status of Visnu. His features were
fondled by Kamala (goddess Laksmi).

96. Formerly the nine Planets took their bath there and
attained the position of the Planets. Those who take their holy
dip there obtain the favour of the nine Planets.

97-100. Durga, Vinfyaka, Skanda, Ksetrapdla and Saras-
vati—these protect his Brdhmya (pertaining to Brahma) Tirtha
all round continuously (without any break).

Ganga, Yamuna, Godavari, Sarasvati, Narmada, Sindhu,
Kaveri. Sona and Sorna river(?)—these always serve this holy
spot in the different quarters beginning with the East. They lie
concealed. They destroy all the sins pertaining to their respective
regions.

By the favour of the Lord of Sonacala other rivers too, both
divine and terrestrial, came up suddenly with splendid waters.

101. Inthe southern sidea great Tirtha has been spoken of,
viz. Agastya Tirtha. Those who take their holy bath there attain
the ability to understand all languages.

102. Always in the month of Bhadrapada Agastya sur-
rounded by groups of sages comes there, takes his holy bath and
worships Sonadri.

103. In the northern side is the divine Tirtha of splendid
prosperity namely Vasistha. By taking the holy bath there one
attains the ability to know the meanings of all the Vedic
(passages).

104. The holy lord and saint Vasigtha comes there from
Meru in the month of Agvina and serves the Lord of Sonadci.

_ 105. Thereis a great Tirtha located in the north-eastern
quarter named Ganga. By taking holy bath there, allthe sins of
men are destroyed.

=== PAGE 44 ===

40 Skanda Purdya

106. All the rivers beginning with Garigd gather together in
the month of Karttika and respectfully serve the Lord of
Arunadri.

107. There is a great Tirtha named Brdhmya in the presence
of the Lord of Arunddri. Due to the contact with it (the sins of)
Brahmana-slaughter etc. are immediately dispelled.

108. Inthe month of Margasirsa Brahma comes here from
his region, takes his bath everyday and worships Lord Arunacala.

109. In the month of Pausa Mahendra comes here and
takes bath in the TJirtha along with his Suras. He worships
Sankara, the Lord of Sonagaila.

110. There is a great Tirtha nearby named Saiva Tirtha. It
was here that Rudra took his plunge along with the skull of
Brahma.

111. Inthe month of Magha Sambhu occupies this place
along with his Ganas and is delighted. He makes all the expiatory
rites of men on the earth fruitful.

112. The Agneya (i.e. pertaining to Fire-god) Tirtha is in the
south-eastern side. It bestows Good fortune. Formerly Agni
took his holy bath here and became happily united with Svaha.

113. Smara, devoid of body, took his holy bath here in
the month of Phalguna and became united (with Rati). After
worshipping the Lord of Sonagaila, he became the lord of all
happiness.

114. In the south-eastern quarter there is the wonderful
Vaisnava Tirtha. Brahmana sages stay there always with great
enthusiasm.

115. In the month of Caitra, Visnu, the Lord of Rama, comes
there, takes his holy bath and worships the Lord of Arunadri.
(Thus) he became the Lord of the worlds.

116. Inthe northern quarter there isa Tirtha named Saura

Tirtha. By taking holy plunge there, one gets all the ailments
dispelled.

117. Inthe month of Vaigakha, the Sun-god takes his bath
there and serves Iga. The glorious Lord is accompanied by the
Valakhilyas and the Vedas.

118. The sacred Tirtha of Aévina is situated to the north of
Iga and Brahma. The physicians Dasras (ic. Aévinikuméras)
took their holy bath and became sanctified thereby.

=== PAGE 45 ===

Liii(P).6.119-130 41

119-120. The Asvins come here regularly, take their bath
and worship Sankara.

Near the Sonagaila, to the south of it, is the splendid Tirtha
named Pandava. It bestows love and salvation. Indeed, formerly,
by taking their plunge therein, the Pandavas became lerds of the
earth.

121. Inthe month of Jyestha, the Earth equipped with all
medicinal herbs and fruits worships Arunacala along with Devas.

122. The Visvedevas of great strength, who had been aban-
doned, worshipped the Lord of Sonagaila in the month of Asadha
and attained the worthy quality of being propitiated in the course
of sacrifices.

123. The great Tirtha Vaifvadeva (i.e. pertaining to Visvedevas)
is situated to the north of the 7irthas pertaining to the Moon and
the Sun. By taking holy bath therein one attains the incom-
parable overlordship of the entire universe.

124. All round in the splendid quarter of east is seen a Tirtha.
Formerly Laksmi took her bath there and obtained the excellent
Purusa (i.e. Visnu).

125. In the northern quarter is situated the holy Skanda
river. By taking his holy bath here Skanda obtained enormous
strength.

126. Inthe western quarter is the exceedingly splendid and
famous Kumbhanadi. Agastya, Kumbhaka and Kumbha are
always present there.

127. Ganga is stationed at the root. Yamuna is in the sky.
Somodbhava (‘arising from the Moon?) is at the top. All these
serve the Sona mountain.

128. There are many Tirthas that have come up all round.
Formerly, Markandeya (despite his long life) was unable to under-
stand their difference.

129. By means of many austerities he made the Lord of
Sonadri delighted. The lord of the sages prayed to him for a boon
when he was delighted.

Markandeya said:

130. O Lord of Arunadri, there are thousands of different
Tirthas. They are famous. They shine but are very difficult for
persons with deficient mental ability to comprehend.

=== PAGE 46 ===

42 Skanda Purdna

131. Howcan men get their presence in one place on the
earth? It is not enough, if they are separately resorted to.

132. Your refulgence is hidden within. See to this that you
are worshipped by all the Suras who are afraid of touching
Sonadri.

133. I worshipped Sarhbhu. I propitiated Arunacala by means
of penance. For the sake of helping all the worlds, I worshipped
the subtle Liga.

134. I mentally offered the divine aerial chariot made by
Vigvakarman. It was endowed with various kinds of festivities.
It caused all kinds of eternal enjoyment of pleasures.

135. Leading sages got different kinds of Dharmasastras.
With great devotion, they performed all the holy rites of Siva.

136. After worshipping Sambhu, seven beautiful virgins
born(?) of the Ahutis made in the fire were engaged for the pur-
pose of worship. '

137. The Lord of Sonagaila was formerly worshipped
through different offerings by kings whose hosts of enemies were
killed and who regained their kingdoms.

138. Worship this excellent Sivalinga in the form of a moun-
tain. His greatness is experienced. He is of a variegated nature.
He dispels sins. He is devoid of impurities. He is the excellent
Lord of Arunadri. His name is inaccessible(?).

139. Obtain the great (opportunity of) worshipping Aruna-
cala, the blessed one, who is accustomed to protect the people
who bow down, who dispels all sins merely by recollection.
Obtain it through the mass of unmeasured merit.

=== PAGE 47 ===

Liii(P).7.1-9 43
- CHAPTER SEVEN

Different Tirthas on Arundacala

Parvati enquired:

1-2. How did this fiery Linga become approachable to all
living beings on the earth? How did it become calm?

How did the Tirthas issue forth from the meritorious Aruna
mountain? Tell me, how the mountain withdrew all the limbs.

Gautama replied:

3. This mountain is fiery in the Krta Yuga; in Tretditisa
mountain of jewels; in Dvdpara it is a mountain of gold; and in
Kali it is an emerald mountain.

4. During Kyta when it stood, completely of a fiery nature,
to the extent of many Yojanas together, the great sages per-
formed the external circumambulation till it subsided.

5. The Lord of Arunadri became calm slowly. The glorious
Arundcala when thus requested by Suras for the protection of
the worlds, became completely calm.?

6. Then Gauri asked the sage: ‘How did Arunacala become
calm? How did Devas request the Lord of Devas ?”

7. On hearing her words thus, Gautama praised her unparal-
leled devotion conducive to knowing the essential thing and
spoke:

Gautama said:

8. Formerly, the Suras who were incompetent to approach
the fiery mountain, worshipped the Lord and eulogized him
through the (prayers) originating from (i.e. included in) sacri-
fices :

9. “Oholy Lord, O Lord of Arunacala who are conducive
to the welfare of all the worlds, though your form is that of fire,
be completely calmed down and shine on the earth.

1. This consistent traditional belief shows the possible volcanic nature
of Arundcala in ancient times.

=== PAGE 48 ===

4 Skanda Purdva

10. All the Vedas eulogize you, the body of Siva, thus: ‘This
one who is copper-coloured or reddish-brown or tawny-coloured
is highly auspicious.”+

11. Obeisance to the copper-coloured pink Siva, the sup-
reme soul,? to the Lord whose form can be comprehended through
the Vedas, who is accompanied by Uma and whose form is happi-
ness.

12. OLord, this entire universe consisting of mobile and
immobile beings is your form. This form of yours is seen as the
receptacle of Devas.

13. You have arrangedfor the withdrawal of waters of the
raining clouds and abundant streams at the close of Yugas.

14-15. The waters have originated from fire—indeed from
you, the Supreme Soul. They carry on the creation of the universe
on account of the wonderful richness of Gunas.

O great Lord, become cool, O Sonacala the receptacle of
mercy. O Lord, be accessible to all living beings.”

16. On being eulogized thus by all the Suras who bowed
down, the Lord, fond of his devotees, became cool and accessible.

17-20. Then the rivers began to function, so also the streams
with plenty of water. He did not(?) take up much water of the
clouds that was poured down.

Although, he had a lustre on a par with hundreds and crores
of midday suns and rising world-destructive fires, he became
approachable to living beings.

After letting off the waters of the universe and after filling the
rivers with waters flowing out (unto them) the Lord shines for
ever. There arose the different Tirthas around (Arupacala) due
to the prayers of the Guardians of the Quarters, of Suras and of
the noble-souled great sages.

Brahma said:
21. Onhearing his words thus, Gauri became curious to
hear about the origin of the Tirthas. She began (to enquire):

Parvati said:
22. Which Tirthas issued forth from Sopadri for the pro-

Cf. TS 3.5.1.2a, VS 16.6a.
Cf.

1.
2. TS 4.5.8.1, VS 16.29,

=== PAGE 49 ===

Liii(P).7.23-31 45

tection of the worlds? O holy Lord, recount to me entirely the
origin of the Tirthas.

23. Onhearing her words thus, he began to expound in
detail the origin of the Tirthas! as he had formerly heard from
Giriga.

Gautama said:

24. The great Tirtha named Aindra rose up in the eastern
side. By taking his bath there formerly, Sakra dispelled the sin of
Brahmana slaughter.

25. The divine Tirtha named Brahmatirtha rose up in the
south-eastern corner. By taking his bath here Vahni (the Fire-
god) got rid of the sin due to the contact with other people’s
wives.?

26. A great Tirtha named Yamya exists in the southern side.
By taking his bath here, Yama rid himself of the fear originating
from Brahma’s missile.

27. The great Tirtha named Nairrta shines in the south-west
quarter. By taking bath there, the sages attained victory over
Bhitas and Vetalas (goblins and vampires).

28. In the western side shines the Varuna Tirtha. By taking
his bath here formerly Varuna got back his Salyakoéga (‘the sheath
of the lance’).

29. In the north-western quarter shines the Vayaviya Tirtha.
By taking his bath there Vayu attained the exalted status of the
vital breath of the universe.

30. Inthe northern quarter Soma tirtha is remembered (i.e.
said to exist). By taking his bath there formerly Soma freed
himself from the ailment of tuberculosis.?

31. Itis known that Vignu Tirtha is in the north-eastern

1. As stated in the last chapter, these Tirthas are on the way of circum-
ambulation of Arun&cala.

2. This refers to the Fire-god’s attempt at illicit contacts with the wives
of Saptarsis in the episode of the birth of Skanda.

3. Soma contacted T.B. due to Daksa’s curse. Puranas attribute its cure to
Somandtha at Prabhasa-pattana (Gujarat); that credit is claimed to Aruné-
cala here as both are the forms of Siva.

=== PAGE 50 ===

46 Skanda Purdna

quarter. By taking his bath there formerly Visnu became united
with Sri.

32-33. O goddess, formerly Markandeya prayed to Sankara:
“‘O great Lord, O Sadasiva, O Lord of Devas, O Lord of the
universe, by what means can there be the assembly of many
Tirthas in one place? O Lord Sankara, kindly tell this.”

34. On hearing his words thus, the Lord of Uma, the Lord
of Devas, who was delighted in his mind, showed the means to
the sage.

MaheSvara said:

35. Always at the time of oblation all the collection of the
Tirthas reach my presence and serve me in a hidden form.

36. O great sage, no other Tirtha need be sought by you.
At the time of the offering of oblation unto me the assembly of
the Tirthas is seen.

37. Hence let the gathering together of all the Tirthas be
seen at the end of the Naivedya (i.e. food offerings) always by the
sages endowed with perpetual devotion and by the Suras.

38. Thus O goddess, Sankara, the unmeasurable soul
formerly pointed out to Markandeya the procedure for visiting
the Tirthas.

Gautama said:

39. All the meritorious and holy Tirthas can be seen by men
always at the time of oblation in the presence of Siva.

40. Holy rites, Tirthas, penance, Vedas, Yajflas, observances
etc. and Yogas can be seen by visiting the Lord of Sonaéaila.

41. On hearing the statement of the eminent sage, the daugh-
ter of the King of Mountains became pleased. She said: “This is
extremely wonderful, the group of Tirthas on the earth recounted
by you.

42. O foremost one among those who performed penances,
I am blessed and contented by the contact with you now. I have
come to the group of the Tirthas. Obeisance to you. Siva too has
commanded me to perform a special type of penance here.

=== PAGE 51 ===

Liii(P).7.43—Liii(P).8.1.11 47

43. How is Lord Paramegvara, Girisa, to be worshipped here?
Though he had assumed the form of a great sparkling fire, he has
(now) become calm. How is he to be worshipped by groups of
mortals on the earth?”

CHAPTER EIGHT

The Propitiation of Arune§vara"

Gautama said:

1. ‘Listen, O gentle lady, to the events that happened former-
ly in Kailasa. I was asked by Siva who wielded the Meru as his
bow, to perform a pilgrimage and to see (i.e. pay a visit to)
the Lingas.

2-8a. Iwentto various places, viz. Rudraksetra, Kedara,
Badarikagrama, KAsi in holy countries, the auspicious Sriparvata
etc. I visited the sacred cities, the chief of whichis Kajici. I saw
many self-born (i.e. natural) Lingas as well as those installed by
sages, Devas, groups of learned men, Ganas and excellentYogins.

O lady of great fortune and excellence, resorting to the diffe-
cent Tirthas in the vicinity of Siva, I wandered all over this earth
along with my disciples. Thus, I visited all the Tirthas, performed
holy rites, penance and sacrificial rites and roamed over the earth.
Always engaged in mentally reciting the name of Siva, I bowed
down to Sivalingas. After visiting all the holy places over the
earth, I resorted to this region. Here I saw three-eyed Lord Maha-
deva with hair hanging down. I saw the mountain Linga well-
known as Arundadri.

8b-11. Here the noble-souled Siddhas, the sages steadfast in
their holy observances, serving Sonadri and taking fruits, roots
and bulbous roots alone as their food, were seen by me.

I eulogized the great primordial Linga in the form of Aruna-
cala which was formerly worshipped by the first Brahma endow-
ed with divine vision:

1. This chapter gives the Agamic way of Siva worship.

=== PAGE 52 ===

48 Skanda Purdna

“The Vedas always eulogize you, O Lord of Arunacala, thus:
‘He is copper-coloured, ruddy, tawny. He is very auspicious.’

Obeisance to the copper-coloured one, one of morning-like
hue, ruddy, to Siva, the Supreme Soul.

12. Obeisance to the Lord, the embodiment of all the Vedas,
to the eternal one, to the Lord of immortal form. Obeisance to
Kala melting with compassion, to the ocean of nectar worthy of
being drunk through the eyes.

13. Obeisance to you full of fondness for your devotees, to
the sanctifying one, to the destroyer of the Puras. O Lord of the
Devas, visiting you bestows the benefits of all the holy rites.

14-18a. To the persons who have obtained your vision on
the earth, there is no necessity to perform any other penance any-
where. This land of Karmans (i.e. Bharata) has been obstructed by
you (to the Devas). Devas themselves seek a residence here under
your refuge. The fruit resulting from grasping the opportune
time (7?) has been obtained by me today. Whatever other penance
has been performed by me is entirely the fruit of visiting you. O
Lord of Devas, your form is wonderfully prosperous. Nowhere in
the world a Liriga in the form of a mountain have I seen on the
earth.

O Lord of Devas, having three forms, your great body is seen
as very charming with the three angular points united with the
Sun, the Fire and the Moon (which are regarded as your eyes).
(obscure)

18b-25a. Your wonderful Liviga has been seen—the Linga
that causes the three KGlas (i.e. Times, viz. Past, Present and
Future) with the forms of the three Saktis, which is of the nature
of the three Vedas, and which has three angles as its parts.
(obscure)

The Lord well-known as Sonadri is seen on the terrestrial re-
gion. He has assumed an extended form for the sake of protecting
the three worlds.

Even if ignorant people merely have a view of him, he distri-
butes all kinds of enjoyment among them, as he is a storehouse of
sincere, unpretended mercifulness.

There is another Liga without worship. It is said to be Sanya
(‘void’). It is worshipped by Devas. It always bestows all boons.

=== PAGE 53 ===

Liii(P).8.25b-37a 49

Be pleased, O Sonacala, full of mercy; O Maheégvara, protect
me. I am afraid of (this) worldly existence.

I sought asylum in you, O Lord, (as) you are affectionate to
your devotees. Your wonderful and great form that is pleasing to
the sight, has been seen.

Make me blessed, O ocean of mercy. I seek refuge in you who
are worthy of being sought asylum in, O Lord.”

On being eulogized by me the Lord of Sonacala showed me
the great divine form and said to me:

25b-30a. ‘I am much delighted with your eulogies and great
devotion. Let your perpetual residence be here near me. Worship
me always with the eternal offerings and enjoyments (available)
on the earth. Perform austerities and show to everyone the great-
ness of this place. Formerly as you were residing on the peak of
Kailasa endowed with power of penance, I directed you to wor-
ship me on the Sonadri in the terrestrial region.

It is the form of my worship followed by the Seven Sages that
shines in heaven. As you are superior (to others) by your penance,
demonstrate similar (type of) respectful worship on the surface of
the earth for the welfare of all beings. (obscure)

30b-34a. Worship me with great respect on the earth follow-
ing the modes of worship prescribed in the Agamas.

The divine form of my great worship can be seen in heaven by
Devas. The terrestrial form (of worship) should be revealed and
extended by you on the surface of the earth.

The greatness of my Arunacala form on the terrestrial region
has already been described. Iam much delighted with you. You
are superior to those meritorious persons who worshipped me
formerly. You reveal the mode of worship of Siva on the earth.”

On being commanded thus, I bowed down to the Lord of
Devas with great devotion to Bhava (i.e. Siva). Paying obeisance
to the Lord of Arunadri, I (respectfully) asked the Lord full of
mercy:

34b-37a. “This fiery form is unapproachable. How can I
worship this Mahesvara through the materials of worship befit-
ting the mortal world? How can I literally carry out this behest?
Suggest the means, O glorious Lord, whereby Your Lordship may

“-be approachable.” '
On being petitioned thus, the glorious Lord, the Lord of

=== PAGE 54 ===

50 Skanda Purdya

Sonacala, the immanent soul of everyone, the storehouse of
mercy, blessed me as I bowed down:

37b-41. “Ishall reveal the subtle Lingas on the surface of
the earth. Offer me the requisite worship through the different
types of holy rites prescribed in the A4gamas. Worship my subtle
wonderful Linga endowed with the five sheaths, named Arurta-
driga. Worship it by means of the power of your penance.”

After commanding thus, the self-born Siva, the great Lord,
showed me his form of the nature of subtle Linga, devoid of im-
purities.

On seeing that subtle Liga devoid of impurities, the Linga
that rose up by itself and which is enveloped by all the coverings,
I became contented in my heart. Once again I submitted to Lord
Sarnbhu who is affectionate to those who resort to him:

42-47a. “It hascometo this that the different types men-
tioned in the A4gamas cannot be seen directly. How can I know
the different names of your forms that have become separated, O
Lord of benign form, O my Lord? Who shall be your worshipping
(priests)? Of what type is the temple? How are you to be eulogiz-
ed? What is the procedure of the worship? Who are the atten-
dants here? How should the region be protected? Who are your
personal guards? How shall your human type of perpetual wor-
ship flourish? How can this be believed by men that many Devas
have come? Be pleased, O great Is4na. Command everything
yourself.”

On being appealed thus the Lord of Sonddri himself com-
manded Visvakarman who came (there):

47b-49. ‘You create a divine city named Aruna. Create also
a divine temple of mine that shall be superior in qualities and
brilliant with a number of great jewels. Make arrangements for
all the ancillary things for the worship, such as the three types of
musical instruments etc.”

The glorious Siva mentioned the different names and the pro-
cedures of worship. Siva, the embodiment of mercy and Lord of
Arunacala, proclaimed Vratas (i.e. vows and observances) also.

50-52. Listen from me about the attendants who have been
created for the sake of worship:

“O Gautama, listen from me to the entire procedure of wore

=== PAGE 55 ===

Liti(P).8,53-62 51

ship in the way of mortals. It is popular all over the world, for
the sake of the welfare of all the worlds.

This incomparable, great fiery Linga named Arunadriévara is
seen (in front of you). Let it be worshipped by you regularly.

Sakti, of perpetual rise and prosperity, who (resides) on the
northern side of mine, should be joyously worshipped.

53. Her name is Apitakucd (‘one whose breast has not been
sucked’). The greatness of her abode (is noteworthy). This Lord
of Arunacala is inseparably accompanied by his beloved.

54. For the sake of festivities, Mahadeva should be worship-
ped, accompanied by Agasuta (‘daughter of the mountain’). Siva
is the bestower of enlightenment on the devotees. With the ges-
ture of his hands, he offers freedom from fear.

55. He holds a deer and an axe in his hands. His face is al-
ways beaming with smile. Sambhu, the Lord of Uma and Skanda,
has divine jewels and gems as his ornaments.

56-57. With his refulgence he brightens all the worlds. He
is endowed with unimpeded glory. In the auspicious festival of
Sakti, Sundaresvari should be worshipped. She shall be bedecked
in all ornaments increasing the sentiment of love.

At the outset, the boy Ganapati, the delighter of prosperity
should be worshipped.

58-60. Ganapati shall grace the place near me. He shall be
worshipped with the food offerings (of various types) conducive
to great prosperity.

Let the supreme Sakti be worshipped as stationed near me.
She never leaves off my side. There isa red line beautifying her
eyes. Let her be worshipped for the sake of festivities.

For the sake of festivities, Amrtesvara (‘Lord of Nectar’) shall
be worshipped at the tip of the eye. He is glorious. He is an ex-
pert in the Tandava (i.e. the violent dance of Siva), with his feet
sounding resonantly.

Another Sakti of great fortune, namely Bhivinayaka shall also
be worshipped.

61. Atthe entrance, Nandin and Mahakala resembling the
Sun (shall be worshipped). Let there be the arrangement for the
worship of all my devotees.

62. The Mothers should be worshipped on the southern side

=== PAGE 56 ===

352 Skanda Purdna

along with Vighnafastr (‘the chastiser of obstacles’). In the south-
west, Vinayaka, the destroyer of obstacles, shall be worshipped.

63. Let Skanda holding the Sakti be worshipped in the
north-east corner. Thereafter the charming Lingas should be wor-
shipped.

64-68. After worshipping in my temple, Daksinamirti (shall
be worshipped) in the southern side. The idol in the west shall be
the idol of the form of the Fire-god. In the north the idol of the
form of Brahma (shall be adored). In the east the idol with the
deer and the earth (shall be worshipped). It shall have the quali-
ties of all the Devas and shall be endowed with all Saktis (pow-
ers). Then (the devotee shall worship) in the temple of goddess
Apitakuca. It shall have (the installation of) all the Saktis, sur-
rounded by the wives of the Guardians of the Quarters. For the
protection of the temple, one shall worship the goddesses Vaibha-
vanayikas. After worshipping the Ksetrapala endowed with all
the Avaranas (coverings), Arunagirisvari who comes to protect
her son, shall be worshipped.

69. Kaliand other deities and goddesses of many kinds,
such as Vidhipalakas (shall be worshipped). Every month arrange-
ments should be made for celebrating different kinds of festivals
with great display.

70. Create girls of divine forms engaged in the worship of
Lord Siva. They shall be conversant with the arts of dancing and
singing. They shall be endowed with beauty of form and good
fortune.

71-75. They must possess beautiful graces and charms. They
shall be the bestowers of love and ever-pure and sacred.

For doing divine services command your disciples who are
conversant with the Vedas and are brilliant due to their good
conduct. They shall be amiable and well-behaved with pure
minds. They should have had the (Saiva) initiation. They shall be
experts in the Agamas pertaining to Siva. They shall be clean and
free from impurities.

For the popularization of the cult and conventions of Saiva
philosophy, command them to worship me.

Create persons who play on drums, who blow conchs, who
play on the lute, cymbals and flutes. Create coppersmiths, people

=== PAGE 57 ===

Liii(P).8.76-86 53

of good learning, experts in the four lores, different kinds of
Ksatriyas, Vaigyas and Siidras approved of by Siva.

In the four quarters, four Mathas (‘monasteries’) should be
erected for the sake of the pilgrims and those who live in the holy
spots as well as for the residence of sages and devotees of Siva
who have renounced (worldly) desires.

76-80. May the eminent sages staying in them protect the
system of the worship of Siva, The devotees of Siva and the Pasu-
Patas shall beg for alms (for their sustenance). Let these and the
others of Yogic power and practice, as well as the Kapdlikas al-
ways protect this holy spot. All the kings of the past, present and
future shall protect this spot without any disobedience to their
commands.

Here is seen a great divine tree, the Bakula (Mimusops
Elengi). Let the devotees discuss and come to a conclusion in
regard to the rites of Siva here (under the tree).

Whatever monetary gift is offered here unto me for the acqui-
sition of the other world not yet seen, shall yield everlasting bene-
fit. That should be protected by the servants and followers of
Siva. I shall listen to the matter submitted by the devotees stand-
ing in front.

81. Ishall get everything (procured) in accordance with their
mental desire. I shall forgive thousands of the offences of those
who worship me well.

82. Since this worship formulated as a human activity is
mentioned in the Agamas, I shall accept the entire worship men-
tioned in all the Agamas.

83-85. The holy rites and activities of my followers and
devotees shall be pleasing to me. Even what they resolve within
themselves is pleasing to me. O sage, go through all the Agama
topics; make different kinds of procedures of worship suitable to
the occasion for protecting the worlds.

On the full-moon day a great worship shall be respectfully
performed. Thousands of different kinds of Satras (‘sacrifices’)
should be performed here. In the presence of this (Liriga) different
kinds of charitable gifts shall be made.

86. Those who offer inextinguishable lamps in my presence
shall undoubtedly attain this brilliant fiery form.

=== PAGE 58 ===

54 Skanda Purdua

87. Those who devoutly offer flowers growing in water, on
trees, climbing plants and creepers to me shall become kings.

88-90. I shall myself be in front of them and defeat their
enemies. The king who is superior in penance in any country will
be given a better and more prosperous rebirth by me. After ap-
proaching (me) even the wicked-minded kings will undoubtedly
become perfect devotees of Siva.”

91. On hearing these words coming out of the mouth of
Sarmbhu, I got rid of all my sins. I bowed down to Siva, the Lord
of the mountain Sonacala, and submitted eagerly.

CHAPTER NINE

The Efficacy of the Circumambulation of Arunesvara

Gautama said:

1. OLord, O Lord of Arunacala, I wish to hear in parti-
cular your names in this holy spot worshipped by Suras.

Mahe§vara said:

2. O holy sage, O excellent Brahmana, listen to the most
important of my names. They are difficult to be known by
persons of very little merit. On the earth they always bestow
the desired objects:

3-15. The names are:

SonddrtSa (‘Lord of the red mountain’), Arunddriga, Devadhiéa
(‘Overlord of Devas’), Janapriya (‘Popular with or fond of the
people’), Prapannaraksaka (‘Protector of those who resort to him
devoutly’), Dhira (‘Bold’), Siva-sevaka-vardhaka (‘One who
increases the prosperity of a servant of Siva’), Aksipeyamyta (‘One
who is a nectar to be drunk through the eyes’), [Sana (‘Lord’)
Stri-pum-bhava-pradayaka (‘One who grants the form of a male
and a female’), Bhakta-vijiapti-sandhata (‘One who grants the
submission of the devotees’), Dita-bandi-vimocana (‘One who
releases a distressed prisoner’), Mukharadnghripati (‘Lord whose

=== PAGE 59 ===

Liii(P).9.3-15 55

feet sound resonantly’), Srimdn (‘Glorious’), Mrda (‘Compassion-
ate’), Mrgamadegvara (‘Lord of Musk’), Bhaktapreksanakrt
(‘One who glances at or looks after the devotees’), Saksin
(‘Witness’), Bhaktadoganivartaka (‘One who dispels the defects
of the devotees’), Jiidnasambandhanatha (‘Lord who blessed
the saint Jiianasambandha”!), Srihaldhalasundaka (‘One who
swallowed the poison Halahala’), Ahavaifvaryadata (‘One who
bestows glory in war’), Smartrsarvaghandsana (‘Destroyer of
all the sins of those who remember him’), Vyatyastanrtyad-
dhvajadhrk (‘One who holds the banner while dancing in
reverse’), Sakanti (‘Highly lustrous’), Nafanegvara (‘Lord of
dance’), Sadmapriya (‘One who is fond of the Saman hymns’),
Kalidhvamst (‘One who destroys Kali’), Vedamiirti (‘Embodiment
of the Vedas’), Nirafjana (‘Unsullied one’), Jaganndatha (‘Lord of
the universe’), Mahadeva (‘Great god’), Trinetra (‘Three-eyed’),
Tripurantaka (‘Destroyer of the three Puras’), Bhaktdparddha-
sogha (‘One who bears with the offences of devotees’), Yogtfa
(‘Lord of Yogins’), Bhogandyaka (‘Lord of enjoyment of
pleasures’), Balamirti (‘One who assumed the form of a boy),
Ksamdripi (‘One who is forgiveness incarnate’), Dharmaraksa
(‘Defender of dharma’), Vrsadhvaja (‘Bull-emblemed’), Hara
(‘One who dispels sins’), Girlfvara (‘Lord of the mountain’),
Bharga (‘Highly effulgent’), Candrarekhdvatamsaka (‘One with
the digit of the Moon as an ornament’), Smardntaka (‘Slayer of
the god of Love’), Andhakaripu (‘Enemy of the demon Andhaka’),
Siddhardja (‘King of Siddhas’), Digambara (‘Naked’), Agama-
priya (‘Fond of the Agamas’), [§ana (‘Lord’), Bhasmarudrak salai-
chana (‘One characterized by the sacred ash and the Rudraksa
bead’), Sripati (‘Lord of wealth and splendour’), Sankara (‘Bene-
factor’), Srasta (‘Creator’), Sarvavidye§vara (‘Lord of all lores’),
Anagha (‘Sinless’), Gangddhara (‘One who holds Ganga’),
Kratudhvamst (‘One who destroyed the sacrifice of Daksa’),
Vimala (‘Devoid of impurities’), Nagabhigana (‘Having serpents
for ornaments’), Aruna (‘Red one’), Bahuriipa (‘Multi-formed’),
Virup&ksa (‘One with uneven three eyes’), Aksarakrti (‘One of
imperishable form’), Anddi (‘Beginningless’), Antarahita (‘Devoid
of end’), Sivakdma (‘One who wishes for welfare’), Svayamprabhu

1. Name ofa Tamil Saint.

=== PAGE 60 ===

56 Skanda Purdue

(‘Master of oneself’), Saccidanandariipa (‘Embodiment of exist-
ence, knowledge and bliss’), Sarvdtmd (‘Soul of all’), Jivadhdraka
(‘Sustainer of lives’), Strisangavamasubhaga (‘One who is grace-
ful and charming with the contact of a lady, Parvati, on his left
side’), Vidhi (‘Ordainer’), Vihitasundara (‘One who created a
beautiful form’), Jfdnaprada (‘One who bestows knowledge’),
Muktida (‘One who bestows salvation’), Bhaktavafichitadayaka
(‘Bestower of what is desired by the devotees’), Ascaryavaibhava
(‘One of wonderful magnificence’), Kami (‘Lover’), Niravadya
(‘Blameless’), Nidhiprada (‘Bestower of treasure’), Salt (‘Trident-
bearer’), Pasupati (‘Lord of the animals or the individual souls’),
Sarhbhu (‘One who bestows welfare’), Svayarhbhit (‘Self-born’),
Girlfa (‘One who lives on a mountain’), and Mrda (‘Compassio-
nate’). These are my important names here, O great sage.

16. Remember the other divine names too mentioned in the
Puranas. Particularly worship me regularly with circumambu-
lation.

17. Since Iam fond of circumambulation (pay particular
attention to me) in the form of Sonacala.

On being ordered thus, O daughter of the Mountain, I conti-
nued so stay in this place without leaving. I continued to worship
Mahadeva (in the form of) Arunacala.

Gaurt said:

18. O holy lord Gautama, O noble leader of sages conver-
sant with all holy rites, tell me the importance of the circumam-
bulation of the Sona mountain.

19. At what time should it be done? How should it be done?
Who are those persons by whom circumambulation of the Lord
of Sonadri was performed formerly and the desired excellent
position had been obtained?

Brahma said:

20. On being asked thus, sage Gautama said to the daughter
of the mountain:

=== PAGE 61 ===

Liii(P).9.21-33 57

Gautama said:

O goddess, let the importance which Mahesvara told me,
be heard.

Mahadeva said:

21-26. Ihave manifested myself and I shine on the surface
of the earth in the form of Sonagaila. There are Suras along with
sages all round me. Whatever sins have been committed in pre-
vious births, perish at every step of the circumambulation. The
benefits of thousands of horse-sacrifices and of (visiting) all the
holy spots are achieved at every step of circumambulation.

If he circumambulates the Moon-crested Lord and goes ahead,
which man does not achieve spiritual perfection even if he is
devoid of all good qualities, does not perform holy rites and is of
very low birth?

27. It is true that the merit that one gets in making pilgrim-
age to all the Tirthas, the virtue accrued from (performing) all
Yajfias and (obeying) Agamas, is achieved by means of the cir-
cumambulation of Sona mountain. It is true.

28. The sins committed by the mind are destroyed by the
first step, the sins committed in speech by the second and the sins
perpetrated by the body by the third step of the men.

29. One shall wipe off all sins by means of one step and ac-
quire (the merits of) all types of penance by means of the second
step of circumambulation.

30. There are thousands of the hermitages of great sages and
Siddhas and thousands of the abodes of Suras here.

31. reside here like a Siddha always worshipped by Suras.
Within me should be meditated a cave of divine features endow-
ed with means of enjoyment of pleasures.

32. The devotee should meditate upon ‘the form of the
nature of a fiery pillar. He should meditate upon the Liviga well-
known as Arunadri. Meditating upon this huge Litiga, the devo-
tee should circumambulate slowly.

33. Meditating duly upon this fiery Linga having eight
forms and circumambulating it (the devotee) shall burn his sins.

1. VV 21 ff. deal with the meritoriousness of circumambulating the moun-
tain Arundcala and its procedure.

=== PAGE 62 ===

58 Skanda Purdya

34. If anyone regularly circumambulates the Lord in the
form of Sondcala, he has no rebirth. He shall certainly attain
eternity.

35. Ifa person takes even a step by way of circumambula-
tion, the entire earth is sanctified by coming into contact with the
dust of his feet.

36. With palms joined in reverence he should make obei-
sance in every direction. He should then meditate and eulogize.
He should circumambulate slowly without his hand touching any-
one else.

37. Without any agitation, without even hearing the sound
of his own steps, the devotee should circumambulate in the man-
ner a woman walks when delivery is imminent.

38. The learned devotee should put on aclean dress after
bath. He should apply sacred ash over his body and adorn him-
self with Rudraksa beads. Remembering Siva he should take steps
slowly.

39-40. He should think about the likelihood of collision
with thousands of Devas, invisible Siddhas and others of gaseous
forms as well as Manus who walk ahead. He must think about
the consequent rush and obstruction to the path. He should be a
true devotee and go ahead slowly putting down his steps along
the path.

41. Or the devotee should circumambulate along with other
devotees chanting the names of Siva, singing excellent songs and
dancing like Siva.

42. Or he should, with his mind not dwelling on anything
else, listen respectfully to my greatness and circumambulate slow-
ly feeling the thrill of the bliss.

43. He must offer different kinds of charitable gifts. He must
perform meritorious deeds. He should render assistance to sup-
pliants. He should be pious and merciful in a manner he thinks
best. Thus he should move round.

44. In Krtayuga the Linga is fiery. In Tretd it is a jewel
mountain. In Dvdpara one should think about it as golden and in
Kaliyuga it is an emerald mountain.

45. Or hecan meditate upon the red crystalline form that is
self-luminous. Meditating thus, he will be freed from all sins. He
shall go to the city of Siva.

=== PAGE 63 ===

Liii(P).9.46-64a 59

46-50a. This Linga with the name of Arunacala is the great-
est on account of its inscrutability resulting from its state of not
being an object of speech and mind and also because of its fiery
nature. It is unapproachable. But I become approachable imme-
diately to the person who circumambulates after meditation.

If a person holds at least one form (7?) in the course of the
circumambulation of the Lord of Sonacala, the dust of his feet be-
comes the cause of unaging immortality.

The vehicles of the groups of Suras vie with one another to
bear the feet of those who circumambulate Arunacala.

The trees of Suras beginning with Kalpaka offer shade to those
men who circumambulate Arunacala on the earth.

50b-54a. Hundreds and crores of aerial chariots filled with
the Ganas (i.e. Siva’s attendants) and surrounded by thousands
of Devas, Gandharvas and others serve them.

The great path leading to Siva’s region is seen sanctified by
the dust-particles of the feet of those who circumambulate me on
the earth.

One who performs Angapradaksind (i.e. going round by roll-
ing) shall have a heavenly body instantaneously. He shall attain
adamantine body. No one will dare to challenge him on the sur-
face of the earth.

Devas eagerly moving about in their aerial chariots, Siddhas
and great sages roam about in this place in invisible forms and
they visit my presence.

54b-57a. On seeing their humility, devotion to me, circum-
ambulation and ardour, they become delighted and grant boons
unto men.

Formerly thirty-three Devas circumambulated everyday seat-
ing themselves on the way. Each of them became a crore.

All the Planets beginning with the Sun, circumambulated and
all of them became the rulers of Planets (grahapati?) over the
whole of the universe.

57b-64a. One who circumambulates on Sunday becomes
liberated.! Piercing through the solar disc, he shall go to Siva’s
city.

1. VV 57b-64a detail the fruit of circumambulating’Sonacala on different
days of the week.

=== PAGE 64 ===

60 Skanda Purana

The man who circumambulates Arunadri on Monday attains
immunity from old age and death. He never becomes rough or
cruel (asaumya) on the earth.

The man who circumambulates Arunddri on Tuesday be-
comes free from all indebtedness. He shall certainly become an
Emperor.

The man who circumambulates the Lord of Arundadri on
Wednesday shall attain omniscience and become lord of elo-
quence.

The man who circumambulates Sonadri on Thursday shall be
bowed to by all the Devas. He shall be the preceptor of the
worlds.

The man who circumambulates Arunadri on Friday shall
attain great fortune and thereafter the region of Visnu.

The man who circumambulates the Lord of Sonadri on
Saturday shall be rid of the tortures caused by evil spirits and
adverse Planets and becomes the conqueror of the entire universe.

64b-68a. All the stars along with their presiding deities shall
become propitious immediately to the person who circumambu-
lates me.

The Tithis (‘Lunar days’), Karanas and Yogas (i.e. peculiar
combinations of stars and the Moon) approved of by me shall be
the bestowers of the desired benefits on those who circumambu-
late me.

The different kinds of Muhirtas and Hords (i.e. periods of
astrological importance) shall be gentle and conducive to perpe-
tual prosperity of those who circumambulate me. They shall be
auspicious always.

In the word Pra-Da-Ksi-N@ the syllable Pra dispels sin, the
syllable Da bestows what is desired, the syllable Ksi causes the
destruction of Karman and the syllable N@ is the bestower of
salvation.

68b-7la. Feeble persons, emaciated ones, persons with ex-
cess of mental and physical ailments become liberated from all
sins by circumambulating me.

1. A folk etymology only.

=== PAGE 65 ===

Liii(P).9.71b-83 61

I see that the circumambulation of the three worlds in an
instant can be performed through the devotion of one who cir-
cumambulates me regularly.

The lords of the worlds, the lords of the quarters and other
lords of causes became established in their (respective) realm
formerly by circumambulating me.

71b-74a. Atthe time of Uttardyana (‘Northern transit of
the Sun’) [too circumambulate myself accompanied by the Ganas
and all the celestial sages.

For the sake of the welfare of the three worldsI perform the
circumambulation of my own form, the fiery Linga, well-known
as Arunadri.

At the end of the Para (i.e. Brahma’s life-time) Gauri will be
coming here to perform a wonderful penance. By circumambula-
ting me the sinless lady will come back to me.

74b-75a. Inthe month of KaArttika, on the day when the
constellation Kyttika appears Gauri of great penance will circum-
ambulate me at the time of dusk.

75b-78a. That circumambulation of that fiery Linga seen on
account of the request of the goddess, is very difficult of access to
men of meagre merit.

That goddess named Apitakuca accompanied by me shall
attain it and console all the Suras at the time of Uttarayana.

Devas, Gandharvas, Yaksas, Siddhas, Raksasas and all those
of divine species shall gather there.

78b-83. Those who are superior in penance, come there and
worship me, will have expiated for the multitudes of sins com-
mitted in the course of all their births.

That day, during Uttardyana, is very rare unto men. Let the
men become blessed by worshipping my form then.

If kings perform the divine rite of circumambulating me, I
shall stand ahead of them myself and conquer their enemies.

If the king of any land, should he be superior in the perform-
ance of penance, makes leading Brahmanas well-versed in Vedic
lore circumambulate me on his behalf for a period of forty days
or half that time in accordance with the injunctions and also
along with the rite of Samkalpa (i.e. formal rite of resolving to
perform any holy rite), I shall make his land firmly established. I

=== PAGE 66 ===

62 Skanda Purdue

shall defeat his enemies, O sage. I shall myself be standing ahead
in this matter.

84. One who is earnestly desirous of merit should never cir-
cumambulate me by means ofa vehicle. He should know fully
well the transgression of the Saiva cult involved therein.

85. Formerly, the king Dharmaketu who returned from the
world of Yama, desired to circumambulate me by means of (i.e.
riding) a horse.

86. Instantly the horse became the lord of Ganas and was
adored by Suras. The horse then left off the king and attained
the region of Siva.

87. On seeing his vehiclein the guise of the lord of the
Ganas, (the king) performed the rite of circumambulation on foot
and he himself became the lord of Ganas.

88. Ever since then Suras beginning with Sakra accom-
panied by Visnu perform the rite of circumambulating me only
on foot.

89. A certain Siddha who was thrown out of heaven at the
(proper) time due to the exhaustion of the power of penance,
circumambulated me and regained his original region.

90. If blood were to flow from the foot of one who circum-
ambulates me, it is wiped off by the filaments of the Manddra
flowers from the crown of Devendra.

91. When the foot of the man who circumambulates me hits
against the rocky pebbles in the highway of circumambulation, it
is mollified by the saffron powder from the breasts of Sri (i.e.
goddess of prosperity).

92. By circumambulating me men will always wander on the
peaks of the Maniparvata in the midst of the grove of Kalpa
trees.

Gaurt said:

93. Osage of holy rites, recount to me the benefit of those
people who engage themselves in various services (of the deity),

1, The circumambulation consists of 30 kms but no vehicle is to be used.
Vide infra the story of King Vajrangada—Uttarardha Chs. 22-24, It (the
circumambulation) must be covered on foot.

=== PAGE 67 ===

Liii(P).9.94-104 63

the services whereby people will become blessed after displaying
their reverence and eagerness in accordance with their ability.

The sage said:

94. O goddess, listen. I shall recount the benefit of services
to you.! Parameégvara had formerly described this to me out of
mercy:

95. “A certain she-spider spun a cobweb of threads in some
place (around) me. It became another being who could remember
the previous births. It came to this mountain and covered me
with silk cloths.

96. Acertain thirsty elephant spilt honey (on me) in a cer-
tain place. He uprooted forest sprouts. Thus he became liberated
and was transformed into the lord of Ganas.

97. The worms rolling near me become free from sins. In
the guise of Siddhas they go over to my world.

98. He who places the wick of a lamp that is not put out
even for a moment becomes self-luminous and attains Saripya
(i.e. having the same form as of Siva) with me.

99. Acertain glowworm of green colour came and had his
nest in a branch near me. Since his glow served as a lamp during
the night he attained salvation.

100. Cows yielding streams of milk on remembering their
calves (while) standing at my side attained salvation and they re-
sorted to my world.

101. A certain crow was eager to seize the oblation. It
fluttered its wings and the wind arising therefrom swept the place
in front of me. Instantly he attained liberation.

102. A certain mouse dragged a cluster of jewels into my
sanctum sanctorum and made it free from darkness by brighten-
ing it. He attained my form.

103. Sages, Devas etc. pray that they should be shady trees
at my side, because they desire never to be born again.

104. Riches and desired objects are achieved by those who
make ornamental gateways, towers and minarets, assembly halls,
platforms and tanks in my front.

1. VV 94-102 give instances of how non-human beings received benefit
by their service rendered unknowingly to Siva.

=== PAGE 68 ===

64 Skanda Purana

105. This fiery Liiga of mine is always unapproachable to
human beings. It is called Andsddydcalega (‘the god of an in-
accessible mountain’). Let it be worshipped on the surface of the
earth.

106. The Parafakti named Apitakucaé who nourishes the en-
tire universe that has become her own by means of glances,
touches and meditations, should be worshipped.

107. The sole mother of all the worlds who is named Apita-
kuc&, who has attained eternal youth, should always be served by
those who seek freshness of youth.

108. To the living beings that stay even for a moment in
front of her, there is no desired object here or hereafter that can-
not be attained.

109. Worship the Lord of Sonadri, the supporting basis of
immeasurable good qualities, the bestower of expected boons and
the abode of all enjoyment of pleasures.”

110. O lady of good holy rites, after realizing your desired
object you will resort to Sarnbhu once again. This performance
of penance by you shall be conducive to the welfare of all the
worlds.

111. Your penance is not only the bestower of the benefit
desired by you but also it is conducive to the welfare of the sages
who perform penance.

112. Suspecting (? thinking of) another cause, the deities
perform penance. The secret of the deities can be inferred only
through the result. (obscure)

113. We shall stay with you, O goddess of Devas. Let us be
contented and blessed by observing your holy rites. It is only
through penance that we attain contentment and blessedness.

114. On hearing these words pregnant with meaning, of
that sage, Gauri became endued with eagerness. She praised the
great sage.

115. What other penance has to be performed? Your vision
has been obtained. This Arunacala is seen and his greatness has
been heard.

116. How wonderful is the peculiarity of the earth that it is
seen as superior to heaven! It is here that there is the fiery Linga,
the bestower of boons on the deities.

=== PAGE 69 ===

Liii(P).9.117—Liii@P).10.1 65

117. The favour of Siva has been won by me. His own
abode has been pointed out to me. I shall propitiate Siva here it-
self and win over the preceptor of the universe.

118. Let there be my inseparable unity with the Lord for
wee With the help rendered by you, I shall become the beloved
of Siva.

119. Thus the Goddess took a vow in the presence of Gau-
tama to perform the penance with great respect. With great devo-
tion she was allowed to do so by the sage saying “‘So be it”. She
resorted to a beautiful hut of leaves and twigs.

120. The Daughter of the Mountain, of a delicate body with
eyes like lotus, placed an upper (bark) garment over her thickest
protruding breasts and wore matted hair. She who had the lustre
of sapphire gem shone like the glory of penance in an embodied
form.

121. By means of many holy observances, by various kinds
of special austerities, by means of various wonderful yogic feats
obtained in the course of the sacrifice. She did full justice unto the
entire pathway of virtue revealed by Nigamas and Agamas.

122. The Slender Lady never had any sort of fatigue at any
time while performing the different kinds of penance. The Young
Maiden became an indescribable sapphire-set tender creeper full
of brilliant lustre.

CHAPTER TEN
The Fight with Mahisdsura'

Brahma said:

1. Then oppressed by the demon Mahisa, Devas left the
earth. Being distressed they bowed down to Gauri who was per-
forming penance and sought refuge in her.

1. The chapter describes how the demon Mahisdsura was attracted to

the goddess Parvati due to her beauty and how he was discomfited by her.
He was lured through Brhaspati and led to meet his fatal end.

=== PAGE 70 ===

66 Skanda Purdya

2. On seeing those terribly frightened Immortal Ones, pray-
ing, “O Goddess, grant freedom from fear”, that Goddess asked
them, ‘‘What is the matter?”

3. Thereupon, with palms joined in reverence, Devas
with Indra as their leader, submitted to the Goddess the terror
from the leading Daitya to which they were subjected.

Devas said:

4.6. (The Asura) joyously playsin the Nandana park sur-
rounded by celestial damsels. For the sake of sport and pastime,
he keeps all the elephants of the quarters, the leader of whom is
Airavata, who have come to his abode along with their mates.
He enjoys the vehicles, the chief of whom is Uccaihégravas. In
his beautiful stables lakhs and crores (of horses) are seen. He
wishes to acquire the ram, the vehicle of Fire-god, for his son to
ride.

7. He brought the buffalo of Yama and yoked it to (his
own) cart. He dragged all the Siddhis and engaged them in his
domestic chores.

8-11. He brought the entire group of celestial damsels for
his personal service. If there is anything else of great value in the
three worlds which has not been acquired, he becomes furious
and does not rest till he has brought it.

We have become his servants tormented with perpetual fear.
We adore him. We obey his commands. We do not find any other
option to take. It has been said that the protection of those who
seek refuge is the fruit of austerities.

This Daitya is invincible. He is the most excellent one among
powerful persons. He cannot be conquered by Suras or Daityas,
because he has been granted boons of prosperity by Siva.

12. The Ocean, when struck by his horns, says, ‘“‘I give up”
and offers him gems and jewels as present. Thereby the Ocean
wishes to seek his favour.

13. This exceedingly haughty demon lifts mountains by
means Of the tips of his horns, throws them up and plays smear-
ing himself with the finely powdered minerals.

14. Hisincomparable strength cannot be crushed. He is un-
assailable unto others. You understand it yourself after striking
him with your own brilliance and prowess.

=== PAGE 71 ===

L.iii(P).10.15-27 67

15. This is the great Sakti of Sarhbhu visible in the form of
a woman. He has obtained boons from Siva. He should be killed
by you alone.

16. O Goddess, we do not know anything about the working
of Sarnbhu. Only we should always be protected by you, Mother
of the universe.

17. On hearing these appropriate words of (Suras) who
had been extremely frightened, the Goddess became kindly dis-
posed in her mind. Granting them freedom from fear, she spoke
to them then:

18. ‘“OImmortal Ones, the protection of those who seek
refuge in me should be carried out by me, even as I am engaged
in a penance. The enemy will become feeble and exhausted due to
Kala (i.e. in due course).

19. I will drag the great Asura by clever means and kill him.
It is not proper on my part to kill a sinless one who has not com-
mitted any offence today.

20-21. Indeed those who transgress virtue and piety will be-
come (i.e. suffer the fate of) moths in the fire of Dharma.”

On hearing her words Devas bowed down to the Daughter
of the Mountain and went back the way they had come. All of
them were rid of their fear and they became delighted in their
minds.

22. When Devas had departed the lotus-eyed Gauri be-
came a fascinating Sakti (i.e. enchantress) endowed with splend-
our and concealed belly.

23. That Goddess established four excellent Batukas on four
mountains in the four quarters of Arunacala for the sake of pro-
tection.

24. When the Daughter of the Mountain came from the peak
of Kailasa, the four Mothers had followed her in order to serve
her.

25. Four lady attendants had followed her, viz. Dundubhi,
Satyavati, Anavami and Sundari.

26. “Let in only a guest overwhelmed with hunger and
thirst on a visit to this Arunacala and no one else.” So she
instructed them.

27. After giving directions to those heroic powerful (Batu-

=== PAGE 72 ===

68 Skanda Purdna

kas) stationed on the bordering mountains, the Daughter of the
Mountain performed penance in the vicinity of the hermitage of
Gautama.

28. While that slender-bodied lady was engaged in penance,
there was no type of distress at all. The clouds showered timely
rains and the trees became fruitful.

29. The animals antagonistic to one another by nature gave
up their previous animosity. That hermitage dispelled all fears
and became worthy of being sought refuge in.

30. That part of Arunacala extending to two Yojanas (i.e.
24 kms) was guarded by those four brave Batukas stationed on
the mountains over the boundary.

31. No cause of fear rose up. Nothing striking terror was
observed. No one was afflicted with sickness. Neither external
enemies nor internal enemies (like lust and wrath) prevailed
there.

32. All the sages became contented and felt relieved. They
praised the Daughter of the Mountain. Some praised that hermit-
age as the (veritable) region of Siva’s world.

33. By day and night, Gauri continued to perform severe
penance causing satisfaction to Siva. But the young maiden was
not fully satisfied.

34. Mahisa of great power and vigour intended to go ahunt-
ing. He wandered over the entire forest away from the Sona
mountain.

35-37. He was accompanied by the Daitya army. He killed
many herds of deer in the forests with great force. He wandered
(here and there) quickly eating them (on the way). Some deer
were chased by powerful and brave (Daityas) holding bows. Dis-
tressed with fear they fled and entered the hermitage. The Daityas
who chased them were on the point of killing those deer but were
prevented by the heroic Batukas hurriedly (shouting), ‘“‘Do not
come here”’.

38-40. Then the Batukas were asked by the wicked Danavas,
‘‘What is here?”’ They replied immediately, ‘A beautiful maiden
is performing penance here. No strong man should enter here. It
is frequented by sages. This is the place of penance of the
Goddess. It accords protection to those who seek refuge
therein.””.

=== PAGE 73 ===

Liii(P).10.41-52 69

On hearing these words of those (Batukas), the powerful and
vicious Danavas said, “So be it’? and retreated. Thereafter,
they thought about what should be done by them.

41. By means of their Maya they assumed the forms of
birds and entered the hermitage eagerly. They perched themselves
on the branches of the trees in the park in order to see this place
from the sky above.

42. Inthat beautiful forest containing the flowers of all the
seasons, she was seen engaged in penance by those soldiers of the
Daitya who were skilful in Maya.

43. On seeing her beauty and grace as well as her firm deci-
sion to be engaged in penance, they were extremely surprised.
They went (to Mahisa) and informed him of this.

44. Distressed by Smara (god of Love) he assumed the form
of an old man and entered the hermitage. Then he was honoured
by her friends and attendants. He stayed there as though he was
rid of his fatigue.

45-49. The old man enquired of them, ‘‘What for is her
penance?” They replied, ‘‘This maiden has been performing this
penance for a long time for the sake of pleasing her husband. But
that powerful husband is never pleased. At the time of marriage
whatever is wished for must be done. But an unusual lord that he
is, a great deal of materials, means and implements have been
(demanded) by him. A new-born potter shall make fresh pots and
bake them in the kiln. These fresh pots should be used for cook-
ing the rice. Similarly all the articles should be freshly acquired
and accumulated. They should never be the things seen before.
When these materials are ready, let the marriage be celebrated
immediately.”

50. On hearing their words thus, Mahisa said laughingly,
“It is certain that she will obtain me as the fruit of her penance.
O young maiden, ascetic lady, listen to my entire wealth and
assets.

51. Iam Mahisa, the excessively powerful lord of Daityas. I
am saluted by Suras. The entire space of the three worlds is seiz-
ed by me.

52. On account of the prowess of my arms, the (title of) un-
rivalled hero rests in me. O young maiden, I can assume any form
I wish. I am the bestower of all enjoyable pleasures.

=== PAGE 74 ===

70 Skanda Purdya

53. Resort to me as your husband. Through the Kalpa trees
brought (by me), I shall get for you fulfilment of all your desires.

54. By means of my penance, I shall create even Visva-
karman from the beginning. By means of my penance, I shall in
an instant create thousands of Kamadhenus.

55. With the nine Nidhis (‘Treasures of Kubera’) acquired
by me and kept always at my side, it is possible to achieve every
object (you) want. It can be achieved instantaneously.”

56. On hearing his words, Gauri remembered the Lord.
Duly she broke her silence slowly. She spoke to him laughingly:

57-60. (Partly defective text) I will become the wife of a
strong person. It is for that purpose that I have been practising
penance for a long time. If you are strong, show me your
strength.”

On hearing her words uttered in a manner revealing the
nature of women, the Asura, Mahisa shouted furiously, “You
despicable girl! Who is this?”

On seeing that Mahisdsura approaching her with a desire to
catch hold of her, that young maiden became unapproachable
Durga with fiery form.

On seeing Mahamaya blazing and standing in front of him,
the demon who himself had the form of a buffalo, increased in
size like Meru.

61. With the pair of his horns he constantly struck against
the peaks of the Kula mountains. He called together his army
that had filled the inner spaces of all the quarters.

62. Thereupon Devas, the chief of whom was Brahma,
bowed down to Durga who had assumed the form of the Uni-
verse-destroying Fire. They worshipped Her with their different
kinds of weapons.

63. Remaining concealed by means of their Maya, Brahma,
Visnu and Sadaéiva gave her four, five and ten missiles and wea-
pons respectively.

64. The Guardians of the Quarters, other Suras, the Moun-
tains and the Oceans—all of them unassailable, worshipped her
with their own ornaments and weapons.

65. With many hands blazing due to multitudes of arms and
weapons, Durga, the great Maya, wore a coat of mail and im-
mediately rode on her vehicle, the lion.

=== PAGE 75 ===

L.ifi(P). 10.66-78 7

66. Mahisa was unable to bear her refulgence that filled all
the quarters. On seeing the terrible form and features of Durga,
he fled.

67. Thereupon, seeing Mahisa fleeing because he was unable
to bear her own terrible resplendent effulgence, She thought:

68. ‘This wicked Mahisasura must be killed through clever
means. With great haughtiness (?) deer are made to turn back by
the hunters in the forest.

69. By means of the words of messengers, soft and touching
the vulnerable points, I shall attract him, produce anger in him
and within a moment face him (in a direct combat).

70. In the case of persons with sinful proclivities, anger may
be provoked suddenly when they hear words of righteous import
and this will be the cause of their destruction and loss of life.

71. Or, if he happens to be righteous-minded and becomes
calm, a violation of duty can be prevented by giving him some
advice for his own welfare.

72. Anger must always be eschewed by persons engaged in
penance if it is to be fruitful. Violation of duty should never be
brooked. Indeed the anger on seeing violation of duty is the
greatest penance.’

73. Thinking thus Gauri mentally called the sage, the pre-
ceptor of Suras, by his name (and when he came) sent him to-
wards the Asura. He was asked to assume the face of a monkey.

74. ‘O monkey-faced great sage, use all your Mayic powers
and go. After delivering this message to Mahisa come back
quickly:

75. ‘Ovicious one, do not torment the Lord of Arunadri
thus. Here the prowess of the evil-minded ones disappears in a
moment.

76. Neither the harassment of Kali nor the attack and inflic-
tion of pain through the Asuras, nor foolhardiness can bestow
Se onsness even with regard to persons with devotion to

iva.

77. O Asura, by means of the meritorious deeds of the pre-
vious births you have acquired great prosperity and prowess. Do
not become a moth in the fire of the Lord of Sonadri.

78. The riches and prosperity given by Siva to you on the

=== PAGE 76 ===

72 Skanda Purdya

strength of your previous austerities, may be burned here imme-
diately like trees in a forest-conflagration.

79. Itishere that pious souls and persons endowed with
devotion to Siva always live. This place is likely to be one infes-
ted with hundreds of ailments in the case of those who are engag-
ed in torturing others.

80. You have acquired matchless wealth and prosperity.
Your strength is unassailable to others. Why are you mean-
minded and why do you invite destruction by your own defects?

81. That girl has been seen by me. She is considered to be
feeble. But the Lord of Arunadri has permeated into her. Hence
she is more powerful.

82. Orif youcannot control your mental predilections in
spite of various cogent arguments and quotations from scriptures
approved of by Siva, bring your army.

83. With my brilliance I shall instantly burn your growing
army whereby you are proud of your strength and through which
you harass all the worlds.

84. Bring your entire army and place it in front of me along
with their weapons. I shall immediately destroy it through my
own soldiers created (by me).

85. Along with your army you will be cut down and you will
be freed here itself from this life. Who knows what Siva wishes?

86. Though prevented, people are induced by their previous
Karmans. Being helpless, they commit sins again and reap be-
fitting fruits.’

87. In order to make him turn away from evil pursuits and
urge him to acquire virtues of eternal value, more and more
kind words and sympathetic suggestions must be offered by you
too.”

88. The monkey-faced sage went as a messenger and stood
in front of Mahisa. He repeated everything uttered and com-
manded thus by Gauri.

89. He (the demon) heard everything and became very furi-
ous. He rushed at the sage and began to swallow him but, thanks
to his Mayic power, the sage managed to get away.

90-91. Thereafter, the evil-minded one called together all his
army. It was fully armed and ready for battle. It was terrific unto
ali the worlds. It resembled the four oceans that come surging up

=== PAGE 77 ===

L.iii(P).10.92-103 73

at the end of the Yuga. He ordered it to fight and the matchless
group of selected soldiers from the army besieged Sonadri.

92. Onseeing the wonderful army of the Daityas, Gauri
created many terrible fiery heroes, many groups of Bhiitas (i.e.
goblins).

93-95. The goblins were of various sorts: single-footed
ones, single-eyed .ones, single-legged ones, those with hanging
ears, those with flabby breasts etc. Some of them had their faces
in hands and feet ; some had their heads in their bellies. Thus they
set out. They spoke to one another like this: “I will swallow
everyone. This is not sufficient for me. I myself will kill the entire
army of the Daityas. What is there to be done by you? You may
simply stand here looking on. I alone will be fighting here.”

96. Even as they were talking thus, even as the Ganas were
engaged in these conversations, the Goddess blew her conch in
order to kill the multitude of the Daityas through the groups of
Yoginis.

97. On seeing Her in that form the soldiers of the Daitya
rushed in. Holding their weapons aloft they displayed their pro-
Wess in front of their master.

98. The Daityas showered weapons in every quarter. She
checked them all by means of the arrows discharged from her
bow.

99. The goblins and the vampires created by the Goddess
were invincible. They fought with the lakhs and crores of cha-
riots, lordly elephants and horses.

100. Mothers of different kinds and features, Dakinis (‘wit-
ches’), groups of Yoginis, Pisacas (‘ghosts’), Pretas (‘spirits’) and
demons were created once again by her refulgence.

101. The great Asuras were swallowed, ground into powder,
split, torn and killed instantaneously by the invincible army
created by the Goddess.

102. The Goddess with the weapons was seen blazing bril-
liantly along with the groups of Bhitas who had killed the Asuras,
who were dancing and who were satisfied with the blood and
flesh they consumed.

103. When She (the Goddess) came to the penance ground
from the Kailasa peak, some Mothers had come along with her
in order to protect her body.

=== PAGE 78 ===

14 Skanda Purdra

104. They were Dundubhi, Satyavati, Antavati (Anavami)
and Sundari. These four attendants followed her.

105. Camunda created by the Goddess was highly terrible
on account of her curved teeth. She moved about fully contented
with the blood, flesh, suet and hides of the Daityas.

106-110. She caught hold of a certain Asura and began to
dance. On seeing her the haughty demon (appeared to) blaze her
with the fire of his anger. With the tips of his horns he tossed
the groups of clouds. His terrible eyes reaching the ears, rolled
in a fierce manner. With his long tongue that resembled the flame
of blazing fire, he licked the peaks of the lofty mountain.
Kicking with the hoof, he tore up the ground. The dust particles
were raised up frequently. With his roar he made the quarters.
resonant. His continued harsh roar was terrible. Devas had the
erroneous notion that the Cosmic Egg would split thereby. They
became deluded. He held up his tail like a rod. Striking with it
he shattered the innumerable weapons that were showered on
him. Only for his sure death did he rush towards Bhavani who
was seated ona lion. She shone brilliantly with three folds over
her navel.

CHAPTER ELEVEN
Mahtsdasura Slain: His Head Stuck to Gauri’s Hand

Brahma said:

1. As Goddess Gauri seated on a lion shone brilliantly with
different kinds of weapons, the infuriated demon (covered) her
with a great shower of mountains.

2. Witha great volley of arrows She checked it from afar
and rived the whole of his body with very sharp weapons.

3. Though he was being split and pierced, the leading
Daitya whose body was as hard asa rock, did not get disheart-

=== PAGE 79 ===

Liii(P).11.4-14 75

tened in the least; (on the contrary) his ferocity of fighting
increased.

4. While being split and pierced by sword, discuses, daggers,
spears and other weapons, he vanished from the scene.

5. Thereafter, with the terrible form of a lion with sharp
curved teeth and sharpened claws, he moved round roaring
fiercely again and again.

6. The lion of the Goddess struck the other lion with his
paw. With his claws he tore open the chest of that demon-lion.

7. Thereafter, he approached in the form of a great tiger
with wide gaping jaws. In order to kill him the Goddess thrust
her hand with great force rapidly.

8-9. His tawny-coloured body was covered with long blue
stripes. He moved about like a golden mountain full of vehicles
lined up on it. The strong (demon) appeared to be like (an
animal) sent ahead by the deer and other animals to save (them-
selves). He appeared to exhibit the blazing fire of his wrath with
his flame-like lolling tongue.

10. As he rushed at her with gread speed, the Goddess hit
that tiger with her Bhallatype of arrow that had a moon-like
refulgence, in the manner with which Iévara struck at the three
Cities. ?

11. That arrow penetrated his mouth, pierced through his
body, came out of it besmeared with blood and entered the sky.

12. That Daitya then became an elephant and rushed quick-
ly at the Goddess. Offering her (as it were) the many animals that
had been struck and torn as an oblation, he appeared to strive to
please her.

13. On seeing that lordly elephant coming on drenching the
surface of the earth with his ichor, the lion of the goddess roared
and struck him.

14. Thereupon, a warrior holding the sword and the shield

1, The reference is to the famous fable in the Paficatantra, which tells
how all the animals approached the lion and agreed to send one animal per
day to him, on condition that he should not harm other animals. Harsa’s
Piay Ndgdnanda mentions a similar agreement between Garuda and Serpents.

2. This refers to the destruction of the demon city complex Triprua by

(Mbh, Karna 33,34).

=== PAGE 80 ===

76 Skanda Purdna

in his hands rose up with a face terrible on account of curved
teeth. He moved here and there.

15. With a number of swords and discuses shining in her
hands, the Goddess fought with that warrior and broke his head.

16. Again he assumed the form of a buffalo resorting to the
demoniacal Mayic power. Without any agitation he began to
fight with the Goddess as before.

17. Thereupon, urged by the Devas and leading sages,
sage Gautama began to enlighten the Mother of the universe by
means of eulogies:

18. “It is accepted that the great PrdapaSakti (‘vitality’) of
the entire universe is (concentrated) in you. The other Saktis too,
viz. Ojassakti (‘vigour’), Jidnasakti (‘knowledge’) and Balagakti
(‘physical strength’) are inferred.

19. Why is this long-drawn fight resorted to by you today to
delude (everyone). Let this Daitya be done away with for the
protection of the universe.

20. Itis by gathering together his bodies that have been
broken and split by you that oblations unto you can be had as
instructed in the Nigamas. They are the bestowers of boons.

21. Otherwise, why should there be this much of excitement,
O Goddess, in slaying this enemy who is as insignificant as a
blade of grass, since you have the refulgence of the fire of destruc-
tion (of the universe)?

22. (O Goddess) who have assumed a body made of the
three gunas, strengthening and fixing your own Sakti, draw out
that Pranasakti (‘vitality’) of the enemy by means of your tri-
dent.”

23. On being addressed thus by that (sage) the Goddess
attacked Mahisdsura with her trident and made him bear (Her)
(i.e. sat on him).

24. Unable to bear the weight of the physical body of the
Goddess equal to a number of mountains, Mahisasura was dis-
tressed.

25. He was crushed and pounded. He rolled this way and
that way and screamed. On being assailed, he trembled. The Lord
of the Asuras tried to raise his head in order to escape but could
not do so.

26. Pierced by the tips of the trident it appeared as though

=== PAGE 81 ===

L.iii(P).11.27-38a 77

an ocean was formed there by a stream of blood, an ocean with
its body (surface) turned red on account of the dusk.

27. Then, the Goddess who tormented Mahisa, cut off his
head with a sharp-edged sword and stood on his head and danced.

28. Siddhas, Gandharvas and great sages praised Durga. A
great shower of flowers was released by Devas all round. The
Lord of Devas bowed down to the Goddess and eulogized her
with palms joined in reverence.

Indra said:

29-32. Obeisance to you, to the mother of all the worlds, to
the seed-consciousness of all living beings.

O Ambika, you are the devotion, faith and Sakti (‘energy’) of
those who worship you. You are the cause, the supreme fame,
peace, control, skill and forbearance (incarnate). You are the
only one having the universe as your form (i.e. omnipresent)
though you are called by different names.

You have employed us in the various offices according to the
achievements befitting our Tapas (‘penance’). You have split the
enemy. You shone as Siva, worthy of being known. O Spouse of
Sambhu, this wicked demon Mahisa has been cut down and
killed.

33-38a. His head that has been chopped off appears to be
alive.

Let this form of yours be always in our (minds)—the form
wherein you overpowered his head that has red eyes, sharp horns
and blazing tongue and that shakes (always) and stands (towering
above him).

With the weapons of all the deities, viz. discus, horn, bow,
arrow, sword, shield, trident, belt, goad, whip, skull, thunder-
bolt etc. and with the gestures of granting boons and immunity
from fear, you have the forms of all the deities. O Mother, you
alone permeated them with all the weapons and thereby kill all
our enemies. You have thousands of weapons. They consist of
your superhuman powers.

All the enemies conquered by you, though they were equipped
with different kinds of weapons and vehicles, although they were
kings endowed with chariots, elephants and horses and all the

=== PAGE 82 ===

78 Skanda Purana

armies, shall have all their vitality and power burnt up, if they
are devoid of your favour.

38b-44a. One who serves your lotus-like feet attains the
lordship of the three worlds, though he might have been without
any position or be of meagre prowess. He becomes popular,
adorned with fame. Those who always meditate upon and wor-
ship this terrible form of yours, need not at all be afraid of
enemies. They will be always victorious.

It is your form like this that is bowed to by Devas in all the
worlds. Let it always be worshipped by Devas and your servants
for the sake of achieving the desired objectives.

Mothers?! have been created by you and they bestow all desir-
ed benefits. Let them be worshipped always along with the Ganas,
in all places and regions.

This Daitya who has been killed by you has an imprint made
on him by your foot. Thanks to your grace, he is always to be
worshipped by your devotees, before you.

The Goddess who was praised thus by the Lord of Suras, and
was served by all the sages and Suras and was a bestower of
boons, said, ‘“‘So be it” and sent them off to heaven.

44b-48. She herself established there that form of hers
wielding different kinds of weapons, along with the Mothers.
Thereby she made arrangements for the protection of the holy
spot. She assumed her own form, devoid of impurities. Surround-
ed by her female attendants, she looked at the head of Mahisa
deformed by the keen edge of the sword. Speaking about his
diverse ways of harassment (?) of the worlds, the Young Maiden
looked into his throat along with her friends. She saw there a
Linga. She took it up in order to worship it. Gauri suddenly
grasped the Linga that was on his neck.

49. She looked for a long time at the Litga which was
smeared with blood. That Liga got stuck to her palm. She tried
to lay it aside but could not do so quickly, as it had stuck to
her.?

1. Maty-devatds, subordinate deities of the Goddess Gauri.
2. Like demon Taraka, Mahiga was a devotee of Siva, Parvati, theagh

=== PAGE 83 ===

Liii(P).11.50-64 79

50. With great surprise the Goddess thought thus: ‘What is
this?’ She stood in front of the great sages with great distress and
dejection.

51. She was overcome with the grief of having killed a devo-
tee of Siva. She censured much her own foolishness caused by the
peculiar feminine nature.

52-57a. Completely filled with remorse at (her) thoughtless
commencement of the slaughter of devotees of Siva. She approa-
ched Gautama, the excellent sage. The Young Maiden spoke to
him about the rash act committed by herself: ““O holy lord con-
versant with all pious activities and holy rites,O Gautama, O
noble leader of sages, a sinful thing has been committed by me
thinking it to be a pious and righteous act. In order to protect
Devas, I attempted to grant them freedom from fear. Out of
ignorance I have crushed the Daitya Mahisa, a devotee of Siva. In
the case of those whose intellect is overpowered by rajas, there
cannot be accumulation of merit, as it is always disturbed by
hundreds of obstacles that spring up but is easy (for accomplish-
ment) with the favour of the preceptor.

Those who resort to Siva are unassailable. They cannot be
easily suppressed even if they are of bad conduct, especially those
who wear Lingas. Siva honours them very much.

57b-58a. Formerly the demons who resided in the three
Puras (‘cities’) used to wear Lingas. Then they could not be con-
quered by Sarnbhu. When they abandoned the Lingas they were
killed.

58b-6la. The Lingain his (i.e. Mahisa’s) throat does not
leave my palm. How can I dispel the sin, the result of slaying
a devotee of Siva? Holding this Liriga of his (Mahisa’s) throat, I
shall perform penance and pilgrimage until Sarmbhu becomes
pleased. Thereafter I shall take holy bath in the sacred centres of
Sambhu, the chief of which is Kailasa and most of the other
sacred places. Thereby I shall get redemption from sin.”

61b-64. On hearing her weariness and worry due to the sus-
picion of unrighteousness and sin thus, (the sage) conversant with

consort of Siva, had to atone for killing a devotee of Siva, though he might
be uninitiated and wicked by nature. The greatness of Siva’s devotion is thus
earphasized (vide the following verses).

=== PAGE 84 ===

80 Skanda Purdne

the tenets of Siva-cult spoke to her, as she appeared to be terri-
fied:

“Do not be afraid, O Daughter of the Mountain, due to the
delusion that a devotee of Siva has been killed. O Daughter of the
Mountain, it is difficult to find persons fully conversant with the
subtle meanings of Dharma (Texts).

Twenty-eight crores of Agamas have been uttered by the five
faces of Sadasiva occupied by Sadyojata etc. They are to decide
(doubtful cases) in the path of Siva (i.e. Saiva cult). They are the
splendid guides to the devotees of Siva.

65-67. Even leading sages are unable to comprehend (sub-
tleties) in them. There are five manifestations (sects) of the Saiva
cult, viz. Kalamukha, Kankala, Saiva, Pagupata and Mahavrata.
There are various types and divisions among them, but all are
devoted to Siva. The only Godhead to be achieved or realized by
all of them always is the powerful Siva. All of them are always
worthy of being worshipped (respected) by those who closely
adhere to their own duties.

68-72a. A devotee of Siva (is to be worshipped) by the devo-
tees of Siva devoid of jealousies and the obedient observers of
the behests of Siva.

Siva is devoutly propitiated by many Vedas and Yajfias.
Mahadeva is always the bestower of everything. Violence to
living beings shall not be committed particularly by sages. But
those who transgress Siva-dharma (i.e. the tenets of Siva-cult)
should be immediately killed. Neither the sex nor the parentage
should be taken into account of a person having the guise (of a
devotee of Siva). One should, without hesitation, kill a trans-
gresser of Saiva tenets and principles.

When a decline of Siva-dharma is noticed by many persons
conversant with Dharma by means of (their) keen intellect Sakti
begins to act immediately. .

72b-77. He is fortunate in having this Liga endowed with
power and prosperity. That was why he could not be conquered
by all the Devas.

It was because he had been overwhelmed by the curse of the
great sages that he was killed, O Goddess, by you who are worthy
of being honoured by Sankara. Because of the support of Siva,
he insulted them (the sages) and acted contrary to their.interest..

=== PAGE 85 ===

Liii(P).11.78-87a 81

Hence they became angry. They cursed him: ‘Let him become a
buffalo, because he has been as wicked as a buffalo.’

Thereupon immediately after their imprecation he became a
buffalo. He bowed to them in order to please them. He requested
them to grant him release and redemption from the curse. On be-
ing propitiated and pacified, they granted him the release along
with the ability to assume any form he wished. In spite of being a
buffalo he was granted death at the hands of the Goddess at the
bidding of Siva. You should not feel dejected by seeing a part(?)
(? i.e. head sticking to your palm along with the Linga).

78-82. If Siddhas of the form of Siva are insulted and dis-
honoured, whom does not that insult afflict? When he had the
form of a buffalo and when all the defects were present, the
cessation of the curse brought about by you was secured by him
by the favour of the Siddhas.

All the worlds have been saved. This wicked fellow too
was saved when he was released from the state of being a
buffalo that had resulted from the curse.

O Daughter of the Mountain, the fiery Liga named Aruna-
cala should be seen by you who are engaged in penance for the
delight of Giriga.

Clearly this (demon) had been a devotee of the Lord of
Arunadri in the previous birth. In the state of a buffalo he be-
came too arrogant, but was associated with Linga. In all the three
worlds who is competent enough to kill one who wears a Linga
with devotion?!

83-87a. Formerly in the three cities (even) the three wicked
ones were honoured by Siva.

O lady of excellent face, by his neck (having been) cut off by
your sword this has been indicated that a Liviga handed over with-
out proper initiation etc. does kill. Of course, the Linga had been
worn by Mahisa with great devotion. When it was reviled and
defamed by a Jaina mendicant(?) he got enough proof and be-
lieved in its efficacy. Due to the contact with (the merit of) the
penance of the previous birth he remembered and recollected (the
events of the) previous birth. There is no doubt about this that

1, Throughout the Purana (from Kedarakhanda to the end of Arupacala-
Mahatmya) the importance of Litga-worship is emphasized,

=== PAGE 86 ===

82 Skanda Purana

he became liberated because of the contact and touch of your
lotus-like feet. By means of the expiation suggested by me,
(your) sins can be destroyed. Visiting the excellent Mountain is
considered to be the greatest of all types of atonement.

87b-90. You establish the various followers of Siva conver-
sant with the principles of Siva cult. For the sake of dispelling all
defects invoke all the Tirthas (‘holy waters’) and build up a lake.
O lady of excellent face, take your bath therein. Repeat the
Aghamarsana Mantra’ and take the holy dip along with the Linga.
This shall be done three times a day. At the end of the month,
during the great festival of the sacrifice of Devas, propitiate Siva
in the form of Arunadri rendering all services in the course of
the adoration.”

91. On hearing these words of the sage impregnated with
Saiva ideas the Goddess, the Daughter of the Mountain, bowed
down to by Devas, the Protectress of the universe, became
pleased. She decided to perform this Saiva holy rite because it
was proper to have it in the presence of Sonacala. She wanted to
wash off her sins. Hence she became inclined to take the holy
plunge in the Tirtha.

CHAPTER TWELVE
The Reunion of the Goddess with Siva

Brahma said:

1. When the great sage served by the ascetics spoke thus,
Girija cast off her suspicion (about sin) based on the slaughter
of a devotee of Siva.

2. Then from the firmament there spoke a voice delightful
to the ears: |

“QO Daughter of the Mountain, do not go for the atonement
of the sin.

3-4. Let the nine holy rivers (Tirthas), viz. Ganga, Yamuna,
Sindhu, Godavari, Sarasvati, Narmada, Kaveri, Sona and

1. viz. Apo hi sth mayobhavat etc, RV X.9.1; TS 4.1.5.1, VS 11.50.

=== PAGE 87 ===

Liii(P).12.5-15 83

Sonanadi_ be present here in the rocky surface torn off by your
sword, O Goddess. Perform the rite of expiation of sin (i.e. agha-
marsana) here.

5. Inthe coming Agvayuja (i.e. ASvina) month on the day
with the constellation of Jyestha take your plunge in the Khadga-
tirtha! (i.e. the holy lake made with the sword) along with the
Linga. Stay here for a month.

6-12a. After completing the ablutions corresponding to the
three times (morning, midday and evening) prescribed for the
pressing of Soma, lasting a month which is measured(?) by the
Guardians of the Quarters, you will attain purity from sins.
Then you install the Liga sticking to your hand in front of the
Tirtha (for the purpose of blessing the worlds) and come up. By
taking bath in this excellent Tirtha and worshipping Siva in the
Linga, one can attain the destruction of the three kinds of dis-
tress. There is no doubt about it that all the three worlds will
attain the same. Install the Linga that removes all the sins in the
presence of the holy water. Install it with firm devotion for the
perpetual welfare of the worlds. During Uttardsadha associate
with Devaki(?) with great festival for ten days. Take the sacred
valedictory bath on the day of Krttika which is the holy star
pertaining to the Fire-god. In the evening worship my body, i.e.
the mountain Sonacala, duly. Thereafter I shall show you my
fiery form. If this is done by you, it will be conducive to the
protection of the worlds.”

12b-13. On hearing these words as well as the words of the
great sage, the Daughter of the Mountain began to carry out both
the suggestions by means of penance. Without any excitement
{i.e. calmly), she pierced and tore open the rocky surface with
her sword.

14-15. Instantaneously there arose the nine holy rivers
there. Meditating upon the Linga that remained in the demon’s
throat, the Daughter of the Mountain plunged into that Tirtha
with the permission of the sages. All the nine Tirthas had a
crystalline lustre.

1. Socalled as Parvati’s sword pierced the rocky earth. The emerging
water is a mix of the nine sacred rivers mentioned in vv 3-4 above. Some
streams representing these rivers are still shown on the hill.

=== PAGE 88 ===

84 Skanda Purdue

16-18. But since Gauri remained within, the entire Tirtha
became dark in colour, thanks to her lustre. While the Daughter
of the Mountain remained within the Tirtha for thirty days, the
mind of Sarhbhu that had been scorched by the pangs of sepa-
ration became restless. She created within the water lotuses by
means of her glorious splendour, a forest of blue lotuses by
means of the eyes and lilies by means of her smile.

By that stay in water of the Goddess all the worlds became
free from torments, contented and blessed with the fruits belong-

ing to the different seasons.

19-21a. At the end of the month, she got up and performed
the festival of the Goddess. In the month of Karttika with the
constellation named Krttika! at the beginning of the night, she
worshipped the Linga in the form of Arunadri with requisite
materials and services achieved through penance. The Mother of
the universe eulogized the Linga:

21b-27a. ‘‘Obeisance to you having the form of the universe,
to the Lord having Sonacala for your body; obeisance to the
Lord with the Linga in the form of the fiery mountain; to the
destroyer of all sins. Your pervasive extent and greatness could
not be measured and determined by Brahma and Visnu. You are
calm, though you have the fiery form, for the sake of bringing
about the blessing of the worlds. You create the groups of Tattvas
(i.e. cosmic constituents) through Sakti. You have the features of
the (universe-destroying) Kala (‘god of Death’).

O Lord of Arunadri, O excellent one among mountains, O
ocean of beauty and charming grace, this is a wonderful form of
yours comprehensible through the Vedas and worshipped by
Suras. You are mentioned as the seed of all refulgences. O Mahes-
vara, O Lord, indeed your refulgence is divine and supreme, the
refulgence that was seen formerly by Brahma and Visnu who were
seeking the same. O Lord of Devas, I am sanctified by your vision
today. Show me your divine form, the supreme one that dispels
all defects.”

27b-3la. While the Goddess was praying to Siva in the form
of Arunadri (he) became manifest and covered the entire universe

1. This means the full-moon day in Karttika—the most important day
of the festival of Arunacala.

=== PAGE 89 ===

L.iii(P).12.31b-44a 85

with his refulgence. A supreme effulgence was seen—a splendour
resembling crores of rising suns, equal toa crore of moons and
ona par with a crore of universe-destroying fires. Along with
the sages, the Mother of lotus-like eyes, with her heart filled with
surprise and wonder, bowed down with great devotion. She was
delighted too. Then from that massive storehouse of brilliance—
Arunadri—stood up a Purusa of sweet tone and golden com-
plexion who spoke these words:

31b-35. “I am delighted with your austerities performed in
my abodes and holy spots. This fiery form has been seen by you
now. O Goddess in the form of the universe, you shall protect the
worlds by various means. You do perform penances on the earth.
What else is desired by you? The mass of darkness of yours that
had risen up has entirely become calm and subdued due to the
brilliance of my eyes and by looking at this fiery brilliance. This
wicked Mahisa who worships the Linga, has adopted my devo-
tion in an irregular manner without proper initiation. On the
advice of an atheist, this Linga that was placed in his throat, had
been (once) swallowed by him.

36. He had no belief and faith in me, though I stayed in his
throat in the form of the Linga. Gradually he attained the charm-
ing life (birth) of a sage.

37. This Mahisa who has been killed by you, had been a
devotee of mine. Meditating on and worshipping me, he attained
the state of a leader of Ganas.

38-44a. Since he had been wearing my Linga for a long time,
O Goddess, he had his own Siddhi. Hence neither lack of faith
in the Sivalinga nor dishonour to the devotees of Siva should
ever be indulged in by the devotees desirous of liberation. If
the Linga is worn by anyone out of campulsion without any
initiation, it does not give him any benefit. Further it kills him
like a thunderbolt.

But inthis matter there is no blemish in you because you
have destroyed all defects by looking at Sonacala. Your eyes
have become fruitful. (Defective Text) The wet nurse has render-
ed help unto you by suckling your son(?) She has made you
Apitakuc& (‘one whose breasts have not been sucked’) and there-
fore endearing to the devotees and their protectress. Expiation
has been spoken.to you by being present here on the day with the

=== PAGE 90 ===

86 Skanda Purana

constellation Krttika. Be therefore the deity named Apitakucd.
Conclude the remaining part of the worship for the sake of bles-
sing the devotees. Be the personification of sympathy and wor-
ship me. Be the heroine Apitakucd.”’

44b-48. On hearing these exceedingly consoling words of the
Lord, Ambika bowed down to him and requested him: “‘O Lord
of Devas, this refulgence has been shown by you who are endow-
ed with grace. It has been seen by Devas and human beings
directly in the month of Karttika at the great festival on the con-
clusion of my holy observances. Let your great refulgence be seen
(on the day) with the constellation named Kyttika. By seeing this
supreme brilliance every year, let all the creatures be liberated
from all sins.” The words, ‘So be it” were uttered by the Lord of
Devas. He then vanished within the mountain.

49-54. Thereafter, Ambika circumambulated the (mountain)
along with her companions and attendants. She made the Linga
of the form of Arunadri one of the emeraldine lustre by means
of her refulgence of cloudlike dark brilliance spreading all round.
While she walked slowly emitting the lustre of her lotus-like feet,
she (appeared to) spread on the ground all round petals of lotuses
along with sprouts.

By means of the refulgence of her eyes she appeared to wor-
ship Sonadri all round with innumerable petals of full-blown
golden lotuses and blue ones.

She was served by the womenfolk of the Guardians of the
Quarters beginning with Indra. She was propitiated by the groups
of Mothers, with the offerings of scents, ornaments etc.

She was surrounded by the women of the Suras who carried
umbrellas, chowries, golden pitchers, fans, fruits etc. She was
accompanied by the maidens of ascetic families. Thus, she
circumambulated Arunadri which was self-luminous.

55-61. She was desirous of Sdyujya (union) with Siva. There-
fore the Daughter of the Mountain circumambulated the moun-
tain Arunadri as if it were the sacred marital fire.1 While she was

1. Marriages are to be solemnized in the presence of fire. The most
important rite in marriages is Saptapad!. But this isto be done on the north
of the marital fire. Parvati was the consort of Siva. Hence the semblance
between Arunadri and marital fire.

=== PAGE 91 ===

Liii(P).12.62-72 87

circumambulating step by step, with great devotion, the Devas,
the leading Suras sent by Sarnbhu, surrounded her. Sarasvati
came there along with Brahma and Rama (i.e. Laksmi) along
with Visnu. The Daughter of the Mountain was accompanied by
all the wives of the Guardians of the Quarters. Granting boons
by (pouring) water, she appeared to obstruct Devendra(?) (the
Rain-god). She appeared to cool down the Lord in the (fiery)
form of the Lord of mountains. By means of the penance she
remembered the Lord as inseparable from her. She seemed to
make it known how proper it was to undertake the difficult task
of staying under water. She wanted, as it were, to advise the sages
about the means of measurement of the Devas(?) gradually and
so she engaged herself in penance to continue, as it were, the
play she had learned and practised formerly. She thought about
herself scorched by the pangs of separation and also about Siva
in a similar state, and therefore to cool both she stayed under
the water of all the Tirthas that rose up on the rocky surface.

62-65a. She stood herself in the midst of the five fires (as if)
desirous of speaking out the superiority of the world(?)—the
Pajicagnis (‘five fires’) that destroy sins, that could not be easily
performed and that brought about the culmination of desires.
After having attained it, she stood there to calm it down.

She wanted to wash the Linga that had been smeared with
the blood flowing from the neck of Mahisasura. She wanted
to wash it with the pure waters of that Tirtha.

A beautiful city named Aruna was built by Visvakarman for
the pleasure of the Lord of Sonadri, the Lord of the Goddess
Apitakuca.

65b-72. The courtesans staying on the tops of the mansions
of that city appeared to be desirous of conquering the Amara
(celestial) ladies. They had surpassed the clouds and lightning [(1)
because the mansions were very tall and (2) because they had
brilliant refulgence]. On the lofty tops of the mansions in that
city the courtesans sat and sang.

The city shone with Siddhas, Caranas, Gandharvas and Vidya-
dharas. Golden chariots moved about in that city. It shone with
eight main highways that appeared to be the feet of the fabulous
animal Sarabha. It was adored by the eight Guardians of the
Quarters. It consisted of Siddhas (i.e. persons endowed with the

=== PAGE 92 ===

38 Skanda Purdya

eight Siddhis (or super-natural powers). They were the depen-
dents of Astamiirti (‘eight-formed god’ i.e. Siva). They had the
eight-fold (eight different types of) devotion. They had their
attention turned towards the eight parts of the army or court. It
consisted of the people of the four castes and was further deve-
loped by the people of subsidiary castes.

It contained many halls and chambers where gold dazzled and
made it difficult to be looked at. Various kinds of musical instru-
ments—conchs, Dundubhi drums, Nissanas (wardrums), Mrdan-
gas and Murajas (types of drums), flutes, lutes, cymbals etc. were
being played there. It was rendered brilliant and resonant with
the talks of people and the sound of the recitation of Vedic Man-
tras of great sages with their minds directed towards Siva. It can
be resorted to in the day in order to have the vision of the divine
form of the Bull-emblemed Lord. Both in the night and the day,
always equal brilliance is seen because of the sparkle and reful-
gence of the nine gems through which the nine Planets exhibit
their power to grant prosperity.

73-75. Visnu stood in front and lovingly served the Lord.
The thousand-eyed Sakra came there along with the groups of
Suras. A shower of flowers endowed with divine fragrance fell all
round.

The wind, cool on account of its close contact with the waters
of the celestial Ganga, blew rendering the faces of the quarters
wholly fragrant by means of its sweet scent.

76. Tossing and shaking the clusters of vegetation with the
tips of his horns, the haughty and excited bull bellowed fre-
quently.

77. All the seasons themselves gladly served him by means
of their proper seasonal and pleasing flowers.

78. Siddhas of different kinds of features and the great sages
as well as Suras with great enthusiasm and eagerness came there
along with Ganas. They were desirous of seeing (the Lord and
the Goddess).

79. A handful of the great essential extract as a token of the
Observance of the holy rites and consisting of powdered saffron
mixed with camphor dust was scattered all round.

80. Then the whole universe was filled with the sounds of
conchshells, flutes and trumpets accémpanied by the sounds of

=== PAGE 93 ===

L.iii(P).12.81-88 89

various kinds of drums such as Mydanga and Mardala as well as
Pataha and Dundubhi and also that of Jhallari (‘cymbals’). These
instruments were played by Suras.

81. Surrounded and accompanied by sages and Devas and
in accompaniment to the songs of the music party of Tumbura
interspersed with the continuous dances of the celestial damsels,
the Bull-emblemed Lord was seen there seated on his bull.

82. Siva, the receptacle of sympathy, the enemy of the god
of Love and great on account of his fortitude, gracefully approa-
ched Siva who was standing with the head bent low. Dispelling
her bashfulness he placed her on his lap and became delighted.

83. Accompanied by Lalita, his beloved, and surrounded by
the assembly of Suras and leading sages, he witnessed the grace-
ful dances of the celestial damsels to the accompaniment of
music. He repeatedly witnessed this with great eagerness.

84. Then Siva accepted the extremely fragrant collections of
scents, the chief among them being sandalwood of great auspici-
ousness, handed over by the Lord of Suras, along with the varie-
ties of musk sent by mount Himalaya.

85. His excellent hands were eagerly moving restlessly for
the close embrace of the covering of the budlike breasts of Apita-
kuca. They were adorned. They were beautified by means of gar-
lands. They were smeared (with unguents) whereby they turned
white.

86. After getting the Daughter of the Mountain who was
fascinating on account of the auspicious scents applied over the
hard, protruding, plump, budlike breasts, Siva dispelled all his
pangs of separation.

87. Then the Lord of Arunasaila himself asked the Daughter
of the Mountain to request for the desired boon. She had become
emaciated because of the separation from him, but jt was miti-
gated by means of hundreds of diversions and amusements.

88. The Daughter of the Mountain bowed down to the
Enemy of the Puras (i.e. Siva) with great eagerness. For the sake
of the protection of the three worlds, she requested for the follow-
ing boon from the Lord of Sonagiri who was liberal-minded and

joyous and ready to bless.

=== PAGE 94 ===

90 Skanda Purdya
CHAPTER THIRTEEN

Granting of Boons to Parvatt

Brahma said:

1. Then Gauri of that sort (i.e. as described above), the
mother of the universe, bowed down to Siva Sarmbhu and prayed
for non-separation from him.

2. Gauri, the beautiful lady, who was clever in conversation
and full of compassion submitted thus to him for the sake of con-
ferring blessing on the worlds:

3. “This form of yours which is very charming, should not
be abandoned. I should never be abandoned even if I am guilty
of offence. This fascinating form of yours is conducive to the
auspiciousness of all the worlds.

4-5. Let this form endowed with divine fragrance be always
seen by everyone. O [§ana, be victorious. (But) Enough of your
assuming terrible forms and guises through serpents, poison, the
skull of Brahma and the sacred ash. Be gentle and tender with
divine garlands, scents, garments etc.

6-7. Bedecked in gemset, bejewelled ornaments, sport about,
O Mahe§gvara, O Isana. Letthe maidens of Devas and Gandharvas.
come here everyday and serve the Lord of Devas with dances,
songs and instrumental music.

Let the Ganas too become human beings and serve you day
and night.

8. Through your favour let our union be highly fragrant and
promoter of welfare and be seen (as) the bestower of all wealth
and prosperity.

9. O Lord of Devas, it is here that the bodily form consisting
of all the Mantras was assumed. Let service be rendered unto
you. Let there be devotion (unto you) forever.

10. O Lord who are the sole refuge of all, let thousands of
offences committed everyday knowingly or unknowingly by your
devotees be excused by you by glancing at them (kindly).”

11. On hearing these words of the Goddess, Sarmbhu, the
Lord of Sonacala, the bestower of boons, granted everything
desired by her as a boon.

=== PAGE 95 ===

Liii(P).13.12-27 91

12. He was desirous of having sexual intercourse with her.
Out of eagerness Siva asked her to apply the fascinating musk
(to herself).

Mahadeva said:

13. There was a great Daitya named Pulaka.! He assumed
the form of a deer and performed a great deal of penance. He ob-
tained exceedingly wonderful fragrance as a boon from me.

14. After obtaining the boon, he fascinated celestial young
women through his fragrance. In the same way he took up an evil
course and harassed the entire universe.

15. On being requested by Devas I called the leader of Asuras
and commanded him, ‘“‘“Give up your demoniac form for the sake
of the protection of the worlds.”

Pulaka said:

16. I shall abandon this body at your bidding, O Lord of the
Chiefs of Devas.

Then with great devotion in his mind, he bowed to me. Re-
questing me, he said thus:

17. “This scent originating from my limb is divine and
fascinating to the universe. O Lord of the Chief of Devas, let
this be taken up by you with eagerness in your mind.

18. Let this become famous always as one born of the sweat
of Pulaka. This musk shall be conducive to the increase of the
romantic sentiment in the world.

19. Let it be your favourite, the bestower of splendour, good
felicity, beauty and graceful charm.

Iam leaving off my body. O Lord of Devas, O Lord of
the universe.

20-27. Let it be always honoured by the Goddess who is cove-
tous of divine fragrance. Those who are born of a part of mine
and who acquire fragrance through my penance, may please
be merged in your form, O Lord of Devas, in the form of unguent
smeared (over your body).” When I said, “So be it”, that Daitya
named Pulaka renounced his life in me and cast off his body.

1. This story explains how musk-deer came into being and why musk is
an important article in Siva-worship.

=== PAGE 96 ===

92 Skanda Purdna

Thereafter, with great affection, I used to apply the musk of
excessive fragrance originating from his body. It increases feelings
of love hundreds of times. O Goddess of the Chiefs of Devas,
your body has become lean on account of the penances you have
performed. My limbs too have become scorched due to separation
from you. Give it the necessary satiation now.

After praising the wonderful devotion of Pulaka thus in
diverse ways, Mahadeva anointed Parvati, the shrine of love. The
Lord laughingly asked Parvati of graceful features, ‘‘What is this
raised in your hand?” The Mother of the universe looked at him
and spoke after bowing to the Lord of Arunadri about the arrival
of that flower which was always in her hand.

The Goddess said:

28. At your bidding, O Lord of Devas, I came to Kaiici of
golden gates and archway from the peak of Kaildsa in order to
perform penance.

29-33. I got this excellent Kalhara (‘golden lotus’) origina-
ting from Manasa lake. It never fades. It has great fragrance.
(With this) I propitiated Mahadeva. This flower which had been
employed by me in worshipping incessantly is never fading.

The great refulgence that never diminished is sprinkled with
ghee (obtained from the milk) of Kamadhenu. This (Lord) is to
be visited by kings and protected by them always. The charac-
teristic features of Dharma should be laid down(?) for the sake
of the eager protection of the worlds, for the achievement of all
desired things and to cause pleasure to me. The thirty-two
Dharmas established by me for the protection of the worlds
should be preserved scrupulously by those who come to his pre-
sence.

Let this shining form of mine be visited when the Sun enters
Virgo (i.e. a sign of the Zodiac). This form is endowed with all
ornaments. It has festivals with all kinds of enjoyment of pleasure.

Brahma said:

34-39a. On hearing these words of the Goddess, Sarmmbhu, the
Lord of Sonacala, the bestower of boons, said; ‘So be it” and”
granted her as boon all that she desired. This is Sonacala seen as:

=== PAGE 97 ===

Liii(P).13.39-48 93

a glorious (deity) worshipped by the worlds. .He is always accom-
panied by Gauri, the bestower of boons. He is always surrounded
by all kinds of enjoyment of pleasures.

All those who visit and bow down to this form of Sarnbhu
stationed in the form of Arunadri are blessed.

The persons on the earth who listen to the greatness of Aruna-
cala will have the full complement of riches perpetually.

By retaining (in memory) this greatness one attains glory,
fluency of speech, handsome features, unobstructed power and
destruction of sins.

39b-40. Visiting Sonadri yields the benefit of taking holy bath
in all Tirthas and the benefit of all Yajrias and holy rites. It yields
the favour of Sadasiva too.

41. Thus the Goddess who came from the peak of Kailasa
at the bidding of Siva, attained redemption from the curse by
visiting Sonacala.?

‘42. Even when there are other highly meritorious holy spots
on the earth as well as in heaven, Sambhu took delight in being
persent here.

43. This Sadasiva himself is seen inthe form of Arunacala.
It is the supreme refulgence that is the cause of creation, suste-
nance and annihilation (of the universe).

44. This refulgent Lingais bowed down to by all the Devas
and is seen. This (Bharata) is the land of Karmans; therefore it is
superior in Virtue (Dharma).

45. Men with devotion whose sins have been dispelled by
the brilliance of the Lord of Arunacala will get happiness every-
where in this world.

46. Sarnbhu is under the control of those people who worship
the Lord of Arunadri by means of circumambulations, prostra
tions, austerities and holy observances.

47. Neither with penance nor by Yogic exercise nor by charit-
able gifts is Sankara pleased so much as by the sight of Aruna-
cala even if it is obtained only once.

48. The self-born Vedas along with the Jtihdsas are stationed
always in the firmament all round in the forms of mountains and
eulogize the Aruna mountain.

1. This is the crux of the greatness of Arundcala.

=== PAGE 98 ===

94 Skanda Purdga

49. Neither by menor by Visnu can the greatness of this
mountain be recounted in words even in the course of hundreds
of crores of years.

50. Devas, the Chief of whom is Indra (or Visnu), the celes-
tial trees beginning with Kalpaka, remained concealed in form
and serve Arunacala always.

51. Neither the defects of Xali nor the eruptions of ailments
and worries will be present there where the Liga named Aruna-
cala is worshipped.

52. Thus everything has been narrated to you regarding
the region of Sambhu, the story of Arunacala which is difficult of
access even through the merits accumulated for a period ofa
Kalpa.

Sita said:

53. Drinking through the pair of ears this charming nectarine
river of the story of the Lord of Aruna mountain—the river of
great liberal-mindedness arising from the month of Brahma—sage
Sanaka acquired the benefit of all his austerities.

:: End of Arunacala Mahatmya (Pirvardha) ::

=== PAGE 99 ===

SKANDA PURANA
Book I : MAHESVARAKHANDA
Section II] : ARUNACALAMAHATMYA
UTTARARDHA

CHAPTER ONE

Introduction: Markandeya’s Query

Obeisance to Sri Ganega. Here begins the second half of the
Greatness of Arundcala.

Vyasa said:
1. The sages residing in the forest of Naimisa spoke to Sita:

The sages said:

Describe to us the most excellent one among the holy places
of Siva.

Sita said:

2. Listen ye all to what has been formerly heard by Mar-
kandeya directly from Nandisvara. I shall narrate it, O sages.
Listen with respect.

Markandeya’ requested:
3. O Nandiévara,? the greatness of Madhyamesvara’ has

1. A famous ancient sage,son of Mrkandu. He became immortal by
Siva’s grace. He is said to survive the extinction of the world (Pralaya), He
played an important advisory role to Pandavas by narrating old legends etc.
(See Mbh, Vana, Chs. 188-191, also Santi and Anuddsana Parvas).

2. The chief of the attendants of Siva—another body of Siva’’ accor-
ding to VR VII.16.15. He was the (adopted?) son of sage Silada and was
himself a great sage credited with a treatise on grammar. His close associa-
tion with Siva transformed him in public imagination as being a vehicle of

iva,

3. A placeon the bank of Mandakini sacred to Siva. It is one of the

=== PAGE 100 ===

96 Skanda Purdne

been recounted by you. Everything has been listened to with
attention by me also with a mind melting with devotion and
faith.

4. Still, O lord of Devas, O storehouse of mercy, tell me
further what I am going to ask you with reverence.

5. Thereis nothing here in the three worlds that is not
known to you in all the Agamas and Puranas externally and
internally.

6. Inthe matter pertaining to heavenly pleasures and ulti-
mate salvation of menit is the earth that is of special signi-
ficance in order to make different persons devoted to different
aims and purposes do all the requisite holy rites (here).

7. Asit has been mentioned by yourself, the aim of men is
of three types, viz. happiness on earth, enjoyment of pleasures in
heaven and final liberation.

8. The first two become exhausted and used up by the
dwindling-down of merit, but the third one does not become re-~
duced or wasted away because it does not depend upon Karmans
at all.

9. It has been mentioned by you that it can be achieved
through pure (spiritual) knowledge. But pure knowledge is diffi-
cult to be obtained by all embodied beings.

10. Where, in which holy place, is that pure knowledge
secured by all embodied beings merely through the worship of
Siva without making a detailed study of the scriptures etc.?

11. The intellect of all embodied beings does not engage in
the various activities connected with the acquisition of know-
ledge, yogic practice and holy rites, and regular behaviour—not
even those prescribed in Saiva Agamas.

12. ‘Let this be told to me: What is that holy spot, by the
greatness of which embodied beings will acquire pure knowledge
through a modicum of holy observances.

13. ‘Let that holy spot be mentioned where salvation can be
obtained even by immature ones by applying sacred ash, wearing
Rudraksa beads or by remembering the Lord (even) once.

Pafica-K edaras, viz. Kedaranatha, Tunganatha, Rudranatha, Madhyameégvara
and Kalpesvara—all situated in the Himalayan chain in Garhwal (U.P.).