=== PAGE 1 ===

4 990010 059334
Barcode : 4990010059334
Title - The Skanda-Purana Part. 5
Author - N.A.
Language - english
Pages - 284
Publication Year - 1951
Barcode EAN.UCC-13

=== PAGE 2 ===

THE
SKANDA-PURANA

PART V

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS
PRIVATE LIMITED @ DELHI

=== PAGE 3 ===

First Edition: Dethi, 1951
Reprint: Delhi, 1998

Also available at:

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS

41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Madras 600 004
16 St. Mark’s Road, Bangalore 560 001
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004
Chowk, Varanasi 22! 001

PRINTED IN INDIA

BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS.
A-45 NARAINA, PHASE I. NEW DELHI 110 028
AND PUBLISHED BY NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT LTD..
JAWAHAR NAGAR, DELHI | 10 007

=== PAGE 4 ===

CONTENTS

SKANDA PURANA
Book II : VAISNAVAKHANDA
Section II : PURUSOTTAMA-KSETRA-MAHATMYA

Chapters

1.
. Yama’s Prayer

. Story of Markandeya and the Greatness of YameSvara
. The Redemption of Pundartka and Ambarisa

. Pundarika and Ambarisa Attain Salvation

. Description of the Land of Utkala

. The Story of Indradyumna

. The Messenger Vidyapati Returns

. Vidyapati Reports to Indradyumna

. Dialogue between Narada and Indradyumna

. Dialogue between Narada and Indradyumna

—_O wo conrnaunkh W dy

— — a
nN

Bw

15.

A Dialogue between Jaimini and the Sages

(Continued)

. Description of the Holy place Ekamravana

(BhuvaneSvara)

. The Greatness of Kapotesa and Bilvesvara
. Narada Consoles Indradyumna and Urges Him to

Perform Horse-sacrifices
Indradyumna’s Grief Dispelled:
Manifestation of Four-formed Visnu

. Installation of the Idol of Nrsirnha

. Indradyumna Performs a Thousand Horse-sacrifices

. The Eternal Banyan Tree Emerges

. The Lord Manifests Himself as Wooden Idol

. Origin of the Indradyumna Lake

. Indradyumna Gets the Royal Shrine Built

. Indradyumna Goes to Brahm&’s Abode along with Narada
. Indradyumna Returns after Visiting Brahma

. Deyas Eulogize the Lord: Padmanidhi’s Reception

=== PAGE 5 ===

Skanda Purana

. The Construction and Installation of the Chariot

of the Lord

. Indradyumna Worships the Lord: King Gala

Submits to Indradyumna

. Insta!lation of the Four Deities
. The Lord Adopts the Form of Nrsimha:

Dialogue between Brahma and Indradyumna

. The Lord Grants Boons to Indradyumna
. The Greatness of Pajicatirtha
. The Procedure for the Sacred Ablution of the

Lord in the Wooden Body

. The Rite of Jyestha Paficaka

. The Chartot-Procession Called Gundica Yatra

. In Praise of the Chariot-Procession

. The Procedure of Preserving the Chariot

. The Festival of the Lord’s Retiring to Sleep

. King Sveta Attains Salvation

. The Great Efficacy of Nirmialya etc.

. Festival to be Celebrated during Caturmasya

. Pravarana (Covering) Festival of Nrsirhha

. The Festival of Holy Bath on Pusya Day

. The Festival of the Transit (of the Sun) to Capricorn
. The Festival of the Swing

. Description of the Jyesthapaficaka Vrata

. The Procedure of Splitting Damanaka Grass

. Celebration of Yatra by Daksa (on Aksayatrtiya)

. Meditation on the Lord in Different Forms

. Popularization of the Lord’s Worship by Indradyumna
. The Merit of Listening to a Purana

139

145
149

158
163
168

181
188
194
203
207
209
214
219
229
235
237
239
241
245
248
250
254
255
258

263

=== PAGE 6 ===

SKANDA PURANA
BOOK II: VAISNAVAKHANDA

SECTION II: PURUSOTTAMA-KSETRA-MAHATMYA

’ CHAPTER ONE
A Dialogue between Jaimini and the Sages

Obeisance to Sri GaneSa. Here begins (description of) greatness of the
holy place of Purusottama (Jagannatha).

1. After bowing down to Narayana and then to Nara, the most
excellent one among men, to goddess Sarasvati as well as to Vy4sa,
one shall utter ‘‘Jaya”' (the Purana).

The sages said:

2-6. O holy Lord, conversant with all the scriptural texts, the knower
of the greatness of all the Tirthas, formerly, when the glorification of
the Tirthas was taken up, it was mentioned by you that a great Tirtha
named Purusottama? was extremely sanctifying. It is there that the
Lord of Sri abides as a wooden idol in the course of his sports as a
human being. On one paying a visit to him he bestows salvation. He
directly grants the benefits of all the Tirthas.

Do recount it in detail to us. By whom was that sacred place cre-
ated?

Lord Narayana is refulgent and self-luminous. He is the Supreme

1. Jaya: Originally it was the name of Vydsa’s composition on Kaurava-Pagdava
War. In course of time it came to be used for all Purinas and even the RAm&yana.

2. Purusottama Ksetra: (Jagannitha) Puri, Orissa. It is also known as Sr:
Ksetra, Bhauma Kgetra, Divya Keetra. The Purina regards this region conch-
shaped and it is hence called Sankha Ksetra. Our Purina states that it was origi-
nally the area of Sabaras (aboriginals) who worshipped NTlamAdhava.

=== PAGE 7 ===

2 Skanda Purana

Purusa. How does he stay there in a form made of wood?! Do narrate
it, O most excellent one among eloquent speakers, O Sage, O Sire of
all the worlds. O Brahmana, we wish to hear it as we have great eagerness
and interest in (listening to) it.

Jaimin? said:

Listen ye all, O sages. It is a great secret.

7. Those who are not the followers uf Visnu will not have any
devotion to him. By glorifying him the entire darkness disappears.

8-9. Formerly, having heard it from the lotus-like mouth of Sarnbhu,
it has been said by Skanda that the Lord of the universe is omnipresent
and sanctifier of all. There are other shrines and holy places which
dispel all sins, but this holy place is the very physical body of that
great soul. He himself stays here in his (actual) physical form. It is
well-known by his own name.

10. All those who wish to stay there, have their sins destroyed.
What to say of those who actually stay there and visit Gadadhara (i.e.
Visnu)!

11-12. Ohh, it is indeed a great holy spot extending over ten Yojanas
(i.e. 120 Kms). It has emerged out of the waters of Tirtharaja (‘Chief
of Tirthas’ i.e. the Ocean). It is full of sands. In the middle the great
mountain Nilacala shines like a single breast of the Earth. It can be
contemplated upon from very far-off places.

13. Formerly the Earth was lifted up (by the Lord) in the form of a
Boar; he levelled it up everywhere and rendered it stable by means of
mountains.

14-15a. Formerly Brahmi created the entire (universe) of mobile
and immobile beings, all the Tirthas, rivers and oceans. As before he
‘fixed up all the holy spots and thought thus as he had been overburdened
with the function of creation:

15b-17a. ‘How can I avoid the great task of creation once more?

1. The whole Purana defends the wooden material used for god Jagann&tha as
‘D&ru-Brahman’ (Wooden-Brahman, the Brahman of wooden material).

2. Jaimini: Jamini is said to be the author of a section of the SAmaveda, of
(Jamintya) Brahmana and Upanisad, of the (Parva) Mim&rns4, of a Grhyasitra and
of a late version of ASvamedha part of Mbh. Most probably there were more than
one Jaimini. Mbh, Adi 67.89 regards him as a disciple of Vyasa and he was the
Brahma (Superintendent) of King Janamejaya’s Serpent-Sacrifice (Adi 53.6).

The present narrator may be a different person, a namesake of that ancient sage.

=== PAGE 8 ===

ILii.1.17b-26 3

How can the creatures afflicted with Tapatraya (‘the three types of
miseries'’) be liberated?’

Even as Prajapati (Brahma) was musing thus an idea occurred to
him: ‘I shall eulogize the great Lord Visnu, the sole cause of salvation.’

Brahma said:

17b-21. Obeisance to you, O Lord holding the conch, the discus and
the iron club. O support of the universe, it is from the lotus coming out
of your navel that I, the creator of the universe, was born. But, O Lord
immanent in the universe, you alone know your own real form.

It is by your Maya that the entire universe beginning with Mahat
has been created. Sabda-Brahman (i.e. the Vedas which are considered
the revealed word of Brahman and hence identical with Supreme Brah-
man) arose from your breath and became threefold (viz. Rg, Yajus and
Saman Vedas). Depending on that only as my source I created the
world.

(Defective Tex) You do not possess any attribute such as grossness,
subtleness, longness, shortness etc. Just as the bangles and other (gold
ornaments) are identical with gold, so also this universe of mobile and
immobile beings is identical with you,” O Lord, in spite of different
forms on account of the three different Gunas (Sattva etc.)

22. O great Lord, O Lord of the universe, you are the creator and
that which is to be created. You alone are the nourisher and what is
to be nourished. You are the support and what 1s being supported as
well as the upholder.

23. With a mind urged by you everyone performs auspicious as well
as inauspicious acts. Thereby he attains the suitable goal ordained by
you alone.

24. You are the goal, the Lord (the supporter) and the witness, O
Supreme Lord. O sire of the mobile and immobile beings, O Lord, the
immanent soul of everyone, O merciful one, O Lord of the universe, be
pleased with me now (because) I have (submitted to) you as my refuge.

Jaimini said:
25-26. On being eulogized thus by Brahmi the Garuda-emblemed

Lord, resembling a dark cloud, having the conch, the discus etc. as his
symbols, appeared before him seated on the Lord of birds. O excellent

1. The miseries are classified as Adhydtmika. Adhibhautika and Adhidaivika.
2. Bratiman or Visnu is also the material cause of the universe.

=== PAGE 9 ===

4 Skanda Purana

Brahmanas, his lotus-like face gleamed. His lips throbbed as he was
desirous of speaking (something).

Sri Bhagavan said:

27-30. O Brahmi, it appears that the purpose for which you eulogize
me cahnot be achieved. The beginningless Avidyd is firmly rooted. It
cannot be severed by the bonds of Karmas. How can birth and death
cease to be when it (i.e. Avidya) predominates! Still, O sinless one,
if you strive in regard to this, I shall tell you the means whereby it
shall occur gradually. O Brahm, I am you; you are I. The entire universe
is identical with me. Think that your interest lies where my interest
also lies and not otherwise.

31. There is a region on the northern shore of the sea and the south-
ern bank of Mahinadi. That region bestows the benefit of all the Tirthas
on the earth.

32. O Brahmi, those men of good intellect who reside there enjoy
the fruits of the merits earned in the previous births.

33-36. Men deficient in merits, or those who are not my devotees
are not born there, O Lotus-born one. From the forest of Ekamra (mod-
ern Bhuvaneshwar in Orissa) and up to the shore of the Southern Sea
(the Bay of Bengal) every step is better than the previous one. It is
gradually (one step after another) sanctifying. The Nila' mountain that
shines on the seashore, is a well-guarded holy spot on the earth, very
difficult of access even unto you. It is difficult to be comprehended by
Suras and Asuras. It is enveloped by my Maya. Eschewing all (exter-
nal) contacts, | dwell there in physical form. I dwell in Purusottama
after going beyond the perishable and the imperishable.

37-40a. My shrine and the holy place of Purusottama is not at all
affected by creation or dissolution.” After going there, O Pitamaha,
you will see me like this in the form in which you see me now, O
Brahmi, the form that is marked by discus etc. Within the Nila moun-
tain, at the root of the holy fig tree, on the western side there is a pool
well-known as Rauhina’. I dwell on its bank. Those who see me there

1. The low range of sand-hills on which the temple of Jagannatha is situated
(De 141). The epithet ‘mountain’ (-giri, -acala, -parvata) apptied to this low sand-
hill is a Puranic glorification.

2. Every Sthala-Purépa claims this eternity to its Ksetra, be 1t Puri or Karavira.

3. Rauhina Kunda: The tank in the compound of Jagannitha Temple. But the
kunda mentioned here is probably lost. Another tank was actually built when the
great Jagannatha Temple came up in the 12th cent. CE.

=== PAGE 10 ===

TL... 40b—ILi1.2.7 5

with the mortal eye and those whose sins are washed off by its water
shall attain Sdyujya with me.

40b-44. Go there, O Lord of exalted magnificence. After seeing me
if you go on meditating, another greatness of that sacred place shall
become manifest to you. It will appear very strange even to you. It is
not revealed by Srutis, Smrtis and Itih’sa and Purana. On account of
my Maya it is not visible to anyone. Since you have eulogized me
now, everything will be visible and manifest to you by my favour.

By staying there for a day (only) one attains that benefit which is
mentioned as the merit acquired by pure souls (by visiting) all the holy
Tirthas, (by performing) rites, Yajfias and charitable gifts. (Defective
text) By residing permanently there one attains the benefit of a horse-
sacrifice.

After directing Brahma thus, O Brahmanas, Lord Purusottama van-
ished there itself, even as he was looking on.

CHAPTER TWO
Yama’s Prayer

Jaimini said:

1. Then Brahmi hastened to the place where the Lord was present.
He then saw the Lord in the same form as was seen at the end of the
prayer.

2. On seeing the great Lord, he recognized him and became ex-
tremely delighted. Then, O excellent Brahmanas, he became the store-
house of excessively wonderful knowledge.

3-7. With his eyes beaming with delight, he began to eulogize
when an excellent crow arrived there from somewhere. It plunged into
that holy pit full of merciful waters. On seeing Madhava, the receptacle
of mercy, having the lustre of blue gems and jewels,' it cast off its
physical body of a crow and rolled on the ground. The Lord with the
conch, the discus and the iron club stood at his side.? On seeing that

1. Nila-madhava: The ancient form of Jagann&tha as originally worshipped by
Sabaras was an idol of azure blue stone and not the present wooden form.

2. This crow was named Bhusan za K&ka and is installed near the Rohina
Kunda inside Jagannatha Temple. Th’ crow image has four hands holding a d:,c,
a conch-shelt;-a club and a lotus-like Lord Visnu. In view of this, the line may

=== PAGE 11 ===

6 Skanda Purana

achievement of a creature of lower order, not easily accessible even
to eminent Yogins, O sages, Brahma thought that the creation would
gradually wear away. He then began to doubt the truth of the Upanisadic
statement that only humans beings are entitled to salvation. There is
nothing in this world which is difficult for a devotee of Visnu to get.

8-11. He was able to see directly the truth of what had been said
by the ancient Lord, O excellent Brahmanas. By pronouncing his name
a man is liberated from all sins. Is salvation difficult to get, O Brahmanas,
on his direct perception? If one casts off one’s life mentally meditat-
ing on Visnu, one is liberated. What wonder is there that anyone having
the direct perception of the Lord attains salvation?

Wonderful indeed is the greatness of the sacred place named Purusottama,
where, O Brahmanas, even a crow perceived Hari directly.

Rare indeed is this holy spot that releases even ignorant ones. Won-
derful is the greatness of this holy spot bestowing liberation on even
a crow. What then in regard to those who are always endowed with
calmness, detachment and perfect knowledge!

The sages said:

12-17. What did Brahma do on seeing Madhava called Nila, as
well as the crow that destroyed all physical bondage within a moment
after seeing him?

Jaimini said:

On seeing that wonderful event, Brahma began to meditate on Madhava.
By that time Pitrpati (god of Death, Yama) came hurriedly to that
piace. He was agitated in the matter of retaining his authority. His
face indicated distress. He heaved sighs. On seeing Madhava on the
Nila mountain, he prostrated before him with eight limbs (touching the
ground). He eulogized the Lord for the stabilization of his authority.

Yama said:

Obeisance to you, O Lord of the chiefs of Devas, O cause of cre-
ation, sustenance and dissolution. All the worlds are fixed and fastened
to you like groups of beads strung into a garland. The universe is sup-
ported by you, created by you and nourished by you.

be interpreted ‘‘The crow \. as transfigured as holder of a conch-shell, discus and
iron-club.”

=== PAGE 12 ===

I1.ii.2.18-30 7

18-24a. You always illuminate everything in the form of the Moon
and the Sun; I bow down to the Lord of the universe, the source of
origin of ail the worlds, the abode of the whole Cosmos, the sire of the
worlds, the witness of the entire universe, the Lord devoid of beginning
and end. Obeisance to the origin of the universe, to the ocean full of
the waters in the form of the highest mercifulness, to the Lord whose
power transcends the highest, the lowest and what is beyond the highest.

Obeisance to the Lord who is like the Sun unto the frost of the
distress of worldly existence. Hail to the kinsman of the wretched
ones, to the Lord who has created all other powerful Lords by means
of his own Maya. Obeisance to Him whose ropes (controlling powers)
are Gunas (like Sattva etc.). I bow to the Lord whose robes are yellow
and devoid of impurities like the filaments of a lotus flower; to the
discus-bearing Lord whose discus cuts off the shoulders of the enemies
in great battles.

Obeisance to the Lord who held the Earth uplifted by means of his
curved teeth. Obeisance to the Lord, the embodiment of the three Vedas.
Obeisance to the Varaha form of Yajfia; salute to the Lord whose eyes
are the Moon, the Sun and the Fire. Obeisance to the Lord Narasithha
(Man-Lion), who has driven away the enemies through his fierce form
with curved teeth.

24b-30. The creation, sustenance and annihilation of the universe is
a graceful sport of his side glance and thereby the creation of the
variegated world consisting of beings of higher and lower order takes
place frequently. I bow unto that Lord of the lustre of the blue clouds,
whose appearance is like that of the precious stone sapphire, whose
abudc is a cave within the Nila mountain and who is the storehouse
of mercy.

I bow down to the enemy of Mura. the Lord who holds the conch,
the discus, the iron club and the lotus, who grants auspiciousness and
who dispels the entire mass of sins of those who bow down (to him).

Hail to you whose eyes are consecrated by contact with the outer
corners of the eyes of Kamali, to you whose chest is broad, fascinating
to the minds and shining on account of the Srivatsa' and the gem Kaustubha.

Sri possesses prosperity and glory by resorting to the pair of lotus-
like feet of the Lord. On being resorted to by the people, Sri grants
them separately prosperity and perpetual glory.

Laksmi is Prakrti and is of two different forms, viz. the Para (superior)

1. Srivatea is the curl of hair on the chest of Visnu.

=== PAGE 13 ===

8 Skanda Purana

and the Aparda (inferior). Because of your desire to create, the Supreme
Brahman without any modification or change has been immediately
created (transformed) into one characterized by changes. I bow down
unto that Laksmi who is full of all good characteristics, who is marked
with auspicious features and who is permanently stationed on the chest
of Visnu.

Jaimini said:

31. Srikdnta (Lord Visnu) who was thus propitiated by Dharmaraja
(Yama) directed Sri who was at his side with the lute in her hands.
The Lord gave the directive by means of the outer corner of his eyes.

32. Honoured by him, Laksmi, the destroyer of the misery of worlds,
sportingly said to Yama for the sake of the welfare of all the people:

Laksmi said:

33. The object with which you eulogize us both in this holy place
is indeed difficult to be acquired. This sacred spot of Sripurusottama
cannot be abandoned by us.

34-39a. Even at the close of the Kalpa this abode is sustained by
Paramesthin. Brahm, the Lords of the Quarters etc. have no jurisdic-
tion over this place.

Fruition of Karmas cannot take place here. (Sins) of men staying
here, even if they be wicked, as well as of the creatures of lower order
are burned like a heap of cotton in a blazing fire. Formerly you were
created as the restrainer of those who, day and night, are fettered by
the shackles of sin and merit. But (now) one is liberated from the
bondage of Karma by seeing Lord Narayana here, who has taken up a
physical form and is as beautiful as sapphire. O son of Sun, your au-
thority is restricted to the land of Karma (which is) other than this
place. O Yama, do not be disheartened by this restriction being im-
posed on your jurisdiction so far as this holy spot is concerned.

39b-42. Brahmi, the grandfather (of the universe), is a Lord supe-
rior to you. He watches out of curiosity the lower animals attaining
identity with Visnu. This Lotus-born Lord knows the ripening of Karmas
of everyone. After knowing the greatness of this holy place, he eulo-
gizes Lord Gadadhara. Creatures which come under your jurisdiction
do not remain here. O son of Sun, those who are liberated while living
and those who are desirous of liberation reside here.

=== PAGE 14 ===

1.11.2.43—H.ii.3.5 9

On being addressed thus by her, by Visnu in female form, Yama who
was devoid of pride and shyness (?) spoke these words:

Yama said:

43-46. O Mother, what has been ordered hy you now has never
before been heard by me. I am overwhelmed by ignorance. How can
I know the excellent secret? I am deluded by egotism. How can |
understand the greatness of that Lord whose form neither Brahma nor
the Vedas know? O Goddess of Suras. it has been commanded by you
that this holy spot is the bestower of salvation due to the presence of
Vasudeva. God’s will cannot be resisted. Visnu who causes bondage
elsewhere grants salvation here.

47-49. He is the creator of hells under my control as well as of
heaven. If all those who die here attain salvation, O Mother, tell me
in detail all these things: e.g. the area of the holy land; the situation;
the benefit of residing there; what are the various Tirthas that are
present here; if there is any thing by way of secret etc.; who is the
presiding deity of this (particular) holy spot? Recount all these, so that
I can move about fearlessly avoiding (what should be avoided).

CHAPTER THREE
Story of Markandeya and the Greatness of YameS$vara*

Sti said:

1. A good understanding due to the proximity of Visnu has been
engendered in you. I shall recount to you the wonderful story of this
holy spot, O son of Sun.

2-5. Formerly stationed on the broad chest of the Lord, O Yama, I
looked out as this universe consisting of mobile and immobile beings,

*The story of Markandeya, the ageless sage, and his vision of Pra/aya and the
existence of the universe within the belly of the young babe lying on a leaf of
Nyagrodha tree in the cosmic flood is described in Mbh, Vana 188, BhP XII.8.i0,
BmP chs 52-56 and elsewhere. But here as in NP chs 54-61 and BmP the main
object is the glorification of Purugottama Ksetra. The Ksetra is unaffected by the
Deluge; the Nyagrodha on the leaf of which Vignu lies as a babe stands eternally
at this sacred place.

=== PAGE 15 ===

10 Skanda Purana

got dissolved in Pralaya. At that time only two (survivors) were there,
viz. this holy spot as well as I. At that time the son of Mrkandu, the
sage who had a span of life extending to seven Kalpas, did not get any
place (shelter) to stand, as everything mobile and immobile had per-
ished. He was not happy anywhere. Roving around on that vast sheet
of water of dissolution he saw a Banyan tree at a spot resembling
Purusottama.

6-11. Floating and wading (gradually) he reached the foot of the
Banyan tree. Near it he heard the words of a boy, ‘‘O Markandeya,
come near me. Entering (unto me) cast off your immense misery. Do
not be aggrieved.”

On hearing those unimaginably wonderful words the sage experi-
enced great surprise. He did not even think of his personal misery.

(The holy spot) was not shattered by the waters of the Deluge; it
was not burned by the Kalavahni (the Fire of Destruction), nor was it
dried up or carried away by Samvartaka (i.e. Cloud of Universal De-
struction etc.) in that extremely terrible, vast sheet of water. The holy
spot looked like a boat. There a great Banyan tree appeared standing
like a sacrificial post.

The Banyan tree was the body of the Lord. This holy spot held on
to it. Its branch was not moved by the violent gusts of wind at the time
of dissolution. The sage stood beneath it and thought thus:

12-16. ‘How does this piece of land appear stabler while all the
mobile and immobile beings have perished in the vast sheet of water
of dissolution (of the universe). This excellent tree appears to be very
tender. Whence is this humble utterance ‘“O Markandeya, come” re-
peatedly coming without any (visible) source?’ Thinking thus he floated
on and saw Narayana with the conch, discus and iron club in his hands.

O son of Vivasvan (i.e. Yama), he saw me also seated on the lotus
of his body. He was helpless on account of water and gusts of wind,
but then he regained composure and steadiness.

Delighted in his mind, that sage prostrated before us with eight
limbs touching the ground. In order to propitiate the Lord he uttered
this prayer:

Markandeya prayed:

17. O ocean of mercy, save me. I have close association with those
who follow your lotus-like feet. I possess the wealth of Rudra, Indra
and the Lotus-seated Lord. But I am devoid of your devotion and am
wretched. I am scorched from all around.

=== PAGE 16 ===

I.ii.3.18-26 1]

18. O ocean of mercy, save me. I am wretched. Your lotus-like pair
of feet served by Brahma and others have unimaginable power. It is the
real primary cause of the acquisition of (future) happiness and pros-
perity.

19. As a part of your person, this Cosmic Egg appears to be many
crores of times (smaller). I have become distressed as this universe has
become merged (in you) after having been sustained by you with your
graceful charms.

20. The same gold appears different in the forms of bangles etc.
The same Sun shining in the sky appears different in the waters con-
tained in different (types of vessels) supporting them.' In the same way
though you are one and devoid of attributes (yet) you appear in differ-
ent forms.

21. Though you have no particular and exclusive interest (in any
thing), though you are devoid of the will of taking up (any particular
form), O Lord of boundless power, you take up physical bodies in every
Yuga, conforming to your sympathy with the distressed.

22. Formerly, O Lord of the universe, your lotus-like feet were served
by me, not with the understanding of the Atman, and so I have become
victim of the terrible consequences of that action. O ocean of mercy,
save me. I am wretched.

23. O great soul, your body of the three Gunas , that is the agent of
the sportive actions of creation, sustenance and annihilation of all the
worlds is the cause of Mahat etc. Obeisance unto you who are greater
than Prakrti.

24. The form of Brahman is omnipresent. It is very large and im-
measurable. It goes on increasing in you. It has assumed the full-grown
form. It is the cause of transformation. I resort to it that is my own soul
and the soul of the universe.

25. In this extremely terrible, vast sheet of water there is no piece
of land for standing, O Lord of Laksmi, on account of the showers of
the cloud and the violent agitation caused by winds.

26. Save me who have become immersed in the ocean of worldly
existence, O Visnu, O Lord of the universe. Redeem me from this, O
Govinda, by means of your benign glance from a corner of your eyes.

1. Such illustrations and the repeated references to Mayavada show the influ-
ence of Sankara. Such portions belong to post-Sankara period.

=== PAGE 17 ===

12 Skanda Purana

Sri said:

27. As the Brahmanical sage was eulogizing thus, Lord Narayana
directly looked at him with benign eyes and spoke these words:

Sri Bhagavan said:

28-29. O Markandeya, O excellent Brahmana, you are extremely
distressed because without knowing me a very severe penance has been
performed by you. Only a long span of life has been the result thereof.
See me lying on a leafy cup above this Kalpavata (divine Banyan tree).
I am in the form of a baby, O great sage. I am Kala (Time) and the
Atman of everyone. Enter the widened mouth. It behoves you to remain
there.

Sri said:

30-39. On being told thus by the Lord, the sage had expressions of
wonder on his face. He climbed (the tree) and saw the form of the baby.
He entered his mouth. Through the throat he entered the huge belly of
great extent. There the Brahmana saw the fourteen worlds, Brahma
and others, the Guardians of the Quarters, Suras, Siddhas, Gandharvas,
Raksasas, sages, celestial sages, the Earth marked by the oceans, dif-
ferent kinds of Tirthas, rivers, mountains and forests. Cities and towns
were seen along with villages and market-towns. The Seven Patalas!
were seen and thousands of Serpent-girls too.

He saw Sesa holding up all the worlds. He was attended upon by
serpents brilliant with exceedingly valuable gems. There were highly
praiseworthy mansions set with gems and vessels of nectar. Sega was
exceedingly wonderful. He was adorned with a thousand hoods. He was
expounding and analysing all the scriptural texts. He was in the midst
of his disciples. That great sage saw within the Lord’s belly everything
that was created by Brahma and everything that was within the bowels
of the Cosmic Egg.

Moving about here and there he never saw the extremity of the
belly. He came out of the belly and saw once again Purusottama seated
as before, when he saw him along with me. With his eyes full of
surprise, he bowed down and spoke these words:

_ 1. The seven nether worlds (Pat&las) are: Atala, Vitala, Sutala, Nitala, Taldtala,
MahStala and P&t&la.

=== PAGE 18 ===

I1.i1.3.40-48 13

Markandeya said:

40-41. O-Lord, O Lord of chiefs of Devas, what a wonderful thing
is this, O Lord? Within the confines free from the Mahapralaya, cre-
ation too is seen. Your Mayd cannot be comprehended. How can it be
known by me?

Sri Bhagavan said:

42-44. Osage, know that this wonderful holy spot of mine is eternal.
There is neither creation nor dissolution here. There is no worldly
existence (with transmigration from body to body).

Know that this holy spot is always of the same form. To those who
realize me it gives salvation. This is the holy spot named Purusottama.
One who has entered this does not go back to stay in a womb (i.e. he
gets liberation). He becomes the embodiment of perfect happiness as
his form.

On being advised thus by the Lord, the great sage Markandeya be-
came averse to other Tirthas and said, ‘'] will stay here”. He bowed
down to the Sire of the world and said with great delight visible on
his face:

Markandeya spoke to Visnu with great devotion and faith:

45.O Lord, bless me in this holy spot Purusottama. By staying
here, O Purusottama, I will not be subjected to the control of (the god
of) Death.

Sri Bhagavan said:

46-48. I shall make your stay here, O Brahmana sage, in the holy
spot that is conducive to the achievement of salvation till the annihi-
lation of all living beings. There is no doubt about it. At the end of
the Pralaya I shall create (another) eternal Tirtha for you. On the banks
of that Tirtha you shall perform penance and propitiate my second body
Siva.2 With my compassion you will certainly conquer Death.

1. This eternality is a special feature of this Ksetra. All Sthala-Purdnas \ay
the same claim for their specific areas (e.g. Varfiinasi, Karavira).

2. As in the Mahefvara Khanda, this (Vaisnava) Khanda also affirms the
identity of Siva and Visnu.

=== PAGE 19 ===

14 Skanda Purana
Jaimini said:

49-51. Thus Markandeya, the great sage, was formerly granted boons
(by the Lord). He resorted to a holy pit dug by the discus of Hari in
the north-western quarter of the Banyan tree.' He worshipped MaheSvara
with great penance. The Brahmana thus conquered Death immediately.
This excellent pit became famous by the name of that sage. By taking

the holy bath there and by visiting Siva one shall derive the benefit
of a horse-sacrifice.

Sri said:

52-55. This holy spot extends to five KroSas? (i.e. 5 x 3 = 15Kms)
inside the sea. Two KroSas of the great holy spot fall within the shore.
It is devoid of impurities. It is scattered with golden sands. It is splen-
did with the Nila mountain. The Lord of Visva (Siva) is directly iden-
tical with Narayana. One should restrain sensual feelings and avoid
sensual objects and stay on the seashore for worshipping the Lord of
the universe. The sixty-fourth Lord (?) is well known as Yamesvara.
He destroys the control of Yama. By visiting this Lord and worshipping
him, one shall attain the benefit of (the worship of) a crore of Lingas.

CHAPTER FOUR
The Redemption of Pundarika and Ambarisa*

Sri said:

1. The Bull-emblemed Lord who bestows everything dwells on the
tip of the holy spot of the shape of a conch on the western border.

2. Nilakantha is at the tip of the conch. This spot extending to
a Kroga (3Kms) is the very rare, excellent and sanctifying holy spot
of Narayana himself.

1. This is the Markanda (Markandeya) Tirtha, one of the five important Tirthas
(Paficatirthi) at Puri. Markandesvara (Siva) is on its bank.

2. VV 52-55 give the usual dimension of this sacred place. But it does not
indicate its conch-shell shape mentioned in the next chapter vv 1-5.

* This chapter gives inter alia the locations of important sacred spots (deities,
tanks) in the conch-shaped Purusottama Ksetra.

=== PAGE 20 ===

I1.ii.4.3-14 15

3. The interior of the conch is flooded with the waters of the ocean,
the Lord of rivers, up to the root of the Banyan tree.

4-10. The ocean at this place attained the status of the chief of all
the Tirthas because of its contact with the Banyan tree.

Just as the Lord, when perceived, is the bestower of salvation, so
also this holy spot is conducive to salvation if a person dies here, and
the ocean bestows salvation if a person takes his holy bath here.

Formerly out of anger Rudra cut off the fifth head of Brahmé. He
could not get rid of that head (which clung to him). Holding it he
wandered over all the regions of the Cosmic Egg. It was only after
coming here that he could get rid of the skull.

The Linga named Kapdlamocana is situated in the second A varta
(turning) of the conch-shaped region (7). One who visits Kapalamocana,'
worships it and bows down to it, gets rid of the sins of Brahmana-
murder etc. One who dies in the region on the right side of it, is lib-
erated from worldly existence.

My primordial Sakti named Vimala? is in the third (turning) of the
conch-shaped Ksetra. O Dharmaraja, know that it bestows the Benefits
of worldly pleasures and salvation. He who devoutly worships, bows
down to and glorifies it, attains everything desired and on death attains
salvation.

11-14. These three are stationed in the naval region, viz. the holy
pit, the Banyan tree and the Lord. From the (Tirtha named) Kap&lamocana
and as far as the place where Ardhasini is installed, should be known
as the central region of the conch. It is well-protected by the Discus-
bearing Lord.

O Dharmarija, at the beginning of creation, this Sakti of mine drinks
up half of the water that was increasingly accumulated at the time of
the Great Deluge. So she is known as ArdhaSini.> He who visits her
and bows down to her, enjoys perpetual worldly pleasures.

From the water-front of the seashore to the root on the Banyan tree
the region is considered to be the bestower of salvation on insects,
birds and human beings on dying here.

1. A Tirtha called Kapdlamocana with a similar legend of dropping of a
sticking skull is found in many other sacred places in India.

2. This deity existed before the composition of MtP as it refers to its existence
as ‘vimalapurusottame’ (MtP 13.35). Its temple was built circa CE 740-940 during
the reign of Kara dynasty (H.K. Mahtab, Odjisd Itihdsa).

3. A popular etymology of the name of the goddess.

tiliarpara Jaikriehna Public Libra
Aceon. Nowdtett been DM 5. oP cOF -

=== PAGE 21 ===

16 Skanda Purana

15-21. The interior of this sacred place is highly meritorious. It is
desired even by Devas. People see all persons dwelling here as-holding
discus and lotus.

All the Tirthas together on the earth, in the firmament and in heaven
are three and a half crores in number. They bestow heavenly pleasures
and liberation. .

This holy spot Purusottama is glorified as the king of all those
Tirthas. Among all the sacred places that bestow salvation this one is
considered to be one which bestows (liberation called) Sayujya. Those
who dwell here do not become afflicted with sorrow due to old age,
birth and death.

This holy tank named Rohina! is full of water called mercifulness.
It exists permanently. Merely by its contact it bestows liberation from
bondage. The water within this increases during the period of dissolu-
tion and afterwards it dissolves here itself. Hence it is called Rohina.

So do not feel aggrieved due to the loss to your authority here. O
king of the dead, you are not the Lord of those who are entitled for
liberation.

After instructing Dharmaraja thus Laksmi, the mother of the worlds,
spoke courteously to Brahma who was seated in front:

22-26. ‘‘O Lord of the worlds, O Brahmi, everything is known (to
you). Declare that this holy spot bestows salvation on all creatures.
Perform penance with Kamakhya (‘one whose name is Kama’) and
Ksetrapala (the Guardian of the holy spot) or Vimala in view (Defec-
tive Tex).

Nrsirhha (Man-Lion) to the right of the Lord is the embodiment of
Brahman itself. He is refulgent after tearing off the chest of HiranyakaSipu.

By simply seeing this deity all the sins will be destroyed. There is
no doubt about it. The devotee will be worthy of enjoyment of worldly
pleasures as well as salvation. There is no doubt about it.

A person who forsakes his life in front of this deity, shall attain
Sayujya with Brahman. Whatever holy rite he performs here, shall have
crores and crores of times the merit thereof.

27. This is the shade of the Kalpa tree. It is illuminated by the Sun
Nrsithha. On death therein Avidy& (Nescience) perishes with or with-
out perfect knowledge.

1. In Oriya language ‘Rohina’ means a banyan tree (Vafa). Its association
with the Banyan tree called ‘Kalpa Vrksa’ gave it the name Rohina. This tank
is in the compound of the Jagannitha Temple.

=== PAGE 22 ===

1L.ii.4.28-41 17

28. Without the perfect knowledge resulting from Sravana (listen-
ing) and other things prescribed by the Vedanta texts, which is very
difficult for the ignorant people to acquire, O Brahmana, liberation is
possible (to them) here.

29. In Avimukta (Varanasi) the great Lord Siva, the storehouse of
mercy, whispers the knowledge of Brahman into the ears of the person
who is desirous of salvation. He imparts the means of enlightenment
also.

30. By means of that, by practising it intelligently, one shal] attain
salvation gradually (by degress). Thanks to the greatness of the in-
structor, his knowledge does not become deficient.

31. Those who give up their lives here shall instantaneously attain
liberation from their own forms. O Yama, you need not entertain any
doubt in this regard.

32. Those persons of confused minds who are bound by Karmas and
those who are subject to coming into and departing from (this world),
O son of Vivasvan, never get any faith in this matter.

33. They are as much confounded in their minds as a thirsty person
who forsakes the sweet, cool water of Ganga free from impurities and
goes to a puddle.

34. (Defective Text) Those who leave this excellent holy place and
wander over to other holy spots.are like those who are satisfied with
the sweet smell of a Paldga flower (merely). The only result they get
is weariness.

35. This ocean bestows salvation through holy bath. The Lord bes-
tows salvation through his vision; the Kalpa-tree bestows salvation
through its shade and the holy spot bestows salvation on men on their
death anywhere (in it).

36. A man is liberated by means of that in which he has devout
faith. There is no other Tirtha like this.

37. He who abandons this Tirtha and entertains interest in another
Tirtha is certainly deceived by the Maya of Visnu because he is too
greedy and covetous.

38-41. There is no need of giving you more advice. You have di-
rectly. experienced thus (when) the crow assumed the form of Visnu.

Eight Saktis have been glorified for the protection of the interior'
of the shrine and the sacred spot. Formerly for the sake of a wife | was

1. AntarvedTis the area between the sea and the Banyan tree. It is the sacredmost
spot in Purusottama Keetra.

=== PAGE 23 ===

18 Skanda Puréna

meditated upon by Rudra by (undertaking) a severe penance. Gauri who
is going to be his wife has been created by me. She is the abode of
all beauty and she came out from my body. At the time she was com-
manded by me: ‘O gentle lady, do something pleasing to me in accor-
dance with my suggestion. Protect the interior of the body shrine all
round me by means of your Martis (different forms).’

42-45. Out of love for me she stands in the quarters in eight forms:
Mangala stands at the root of the Banyan tree. In West stands Vimali.
Sarvamangala stands in the posterior of the conch (Ksetra). In North
ArdhaSini and Larnba are stationed. Kalaratri stands in South and Maricika
is in East. Candariipa is well established behind K4laratri. This holy
spot is guarded by these Saktis of very fierce forms. This is indeed very
difficult of access to a man deficient in merits.

46-50. By visiting and glorifying these eight Saktis all the sins
will perish. One shall obtain the benefit of a horse-sacrifice.

On seeing the eight different forms of Rudrani Rudra, Sankara, split
himself into eight forms and began worshipping the great Lord.

After propitiating Visnu by means of penance he requested for an
excellent boon: ‘I shall. stay very happily and comfortably wherever
you stay, O Lord. Excepting you, O Lord of Kamala, there is no other
cause of bliss and salvation. O Lord, you are my immanent soul. With-
out you whence is a physical body? Those foolish persons who do not
know you, take delight in unclean worldly pleasures. 1 have sought
refuge in you who are like pure (cloudless) sky.’ ”

Jaimini said:

51-57. The Lord stationed himself in the middle and established
Rudra as Ksetrap§la all round. There are eight Lingas of MaheSvara
(around), viz. Kapalamocana, Ksetrapala, Yamesvara, Markandeya, ISana,
Bilvega, Nilakantha and VateSa at the root of the Banyan tree. By
visiting, touching and worshipping these Lingas one becomes liberated.

Yama has no jurisdiction over those persons who die here in the
holy spot. Achieve that object elsewhere, the object for which you
came here. Yet the Lord of the universe is willing to dedicate himself
to a devotee.

On being devoutly propitiated by Yama the Lord who dispels the
distress of those who seek refuge in him, will cover up his Maya by
means of his discus SudarSana.

In this excellent holy spot covered with golden sands, which could
not be abandoned, she deceived Yama and made him proceed to his

=== PAGE 24 ===

I1.i.4.58-74 19

own abode. She considered it good and thereafter spoke to Brahma who
was present in front.

Sri said:

58. There will be a king named Indradyumna in Satya Yuga. He
will be a follower of Visnu and a knower of sacred texts. He will
perform all (types of) Yajiias.

59-62. That excellent king will come here and perform great wor-
ship. For the propitiation of the Lord he will perform a thousand horse-
sacrifices. The Lord of the subjects will do everything for the sake of
his blessings.

One tree will split into four. Vigvakarma will make the idols out
of the wooden pieces. Propitiated by Indradyumna you will be the person
who will install them. O grandfather, there will be the installation of
idols resembling us.

63. On hearing these words of Sri the Four-faced Lord and Yama
went back to their respective cities with great joy.

64. Remembering the greatness of the holy spot repeatedly they had
their hair standing on end all over the body on account of amazement
and delight.

65-66. Now, O sages, the Lord still dwells there for the sake of
helping the world. He is accompanied by Bala and Subhadra. It is the
same Lord who was propitiated by Indradyumna, the glorious Lord holding
the conch and the discus, who resembles a dark-bdlue cloud and resides
in a cave of mount Nila and has wooden physical body.

67-74. The Lord who destroys the distresses of those who bow down
to him, the ocean of mercifulness, is equipped with the discus Sudarsana
made of wood.

By visiting him one will be relieved from the strong bondage of sins.

O excellent sages, it is as though all the good and meritorious ac-
tions of those who see the Lord (who dispels) the threefold distress like
the Moon that dispels heat, have come to fruition simultaneously.

Indeed there are many incarnations of Visnu, both divine and hu-
man. (His) wonderful deeds and greatness have been described. On
account of great familiarity Suras do not honour human beings (7).

O Brahmanas, the minds of Devas, Asuras, human beings, Gandharvas,
Serpents, Raksasas and lower orders of beings dwell on Hari in that
wooden idol. He is the soul of everyone and he causes happiness unto
everyone. ~

=== PAGE 25 ===

20 Skanda Purana

They sustain themselves by this happiness of the Lord having a
unique form. One experiences there what the Vedic words of Brahman
have said, viz. ‘‘It dispels all the miseries of worldly existence and
gives imperishable happiness. Therefore Brahman is sung about in the
Upanisads as ‘Darumaya’ (Brahman made of wood). Indeed the idol of
wood will never bestow salvation anywhere.

75. O Brahmanas, a natural state cannot be obtained through an
artificial one. Salvation is not an artificial one. How can it be the
effect of an artificial wood?

76. The blessedness and prosperity of Brahman cannot be achieved
without any basis. This excellent abode of Visnu is a great mystery.

77. That idol is supramundane. It was revealed as though it was a
worldly one. Where has it been heard or seen that an idol speaks?

78-82. At that time the Lord with wooden idol granted boon to
Indradyumna. O sages, seek refuge in Hari, the Lord, without (seeking)
anyone else as your shelter. He is the sole asylum for the wretched and
helpless ones. He takes us across the ocean of worldly existence.

His feet always deserve to be saluted by the mobile and immobile
beings. He is the ultimate resort. Narayana is the source of origin of
the universe. He is the cause of creation and annihilation. He liberates
(us) from all sins. He dispels all miseries. He enhances prosperity and
glory. He is the protector of all Yogins. He nourishes all the creatures.
He holds up and sustains all the worlds. He is the speech of all the
languages. He condemns all the wicked ones. He dries up all marshes
(i.e. sins). He resorts to the Nila Mountain, O sages, seek refuge in
the all-pervading Lord, the only support of all.

83. Though he is motionless and wooden-formed, he indulges in
graceful divine sports. Even if there is only very little of devotion, he
forgives a hundred offences of men.

84. In this connection I shall narrate to you a story of the Supreme
Soul abiding in a wooden body out of sport, O sages. That story ab-
solves (one) of sins.

85. There was a Brahmana and a Ksatriya who hailed from Kuruksetra.'
They became loving friends who moved about taking food together and
playing together.

!. As stated in v 91 below,their names were Pundarika and Ambarisa. These
are imaginary. They are in no way connected with the great royal sage and the
Brahmin ascetic of the same name mentioned in the old Puranas.

As described in the next chapter, these confirmed sinners were liberated at the
sight of Jagannftha. Such is the great merit of merely seeing the Lord.

=== PAGE 26 ===

I11.ii.4.86-100 21

86-88. They deviated from decent behaviour. They ate forbidden
things and got deluded. They did not study the Vedas, nor ever uttered
Vasat (i.e. never performed holy rites). They were devoid of Svaha and
Svadhi (i.e. they gave up sacrificial rites and Sraddha to Pitrs). They
became ineligible for the practice of religious rites. They were defiled
by great sins. They imbibed liquor and rejoiced in the company of
harlots. Thought about the next world never occurred to them even in
dreams. Behaving in this way they spent half of their life.

89-90. Once in the course of their wanderings they came to a place
enclosed for sacrifice. Hearing from afar the hymns and the fascinating
words of the scriptures and seeing all those holy rites prescribed in the
Srutis; O Brahmanas, those two irreligious ones developed some faith
in the path of piety.

91. They remembered their caste. Pundarika and Arbarisa cen-
sured their own evil deeds and spoke to each other:

92-93. ‘‘How will we cross this vast ocean of our sins incurred by
us in this very birth and that too knowingly. It cannot fade away. Even
the sacred treatises do not know what extremely rare expiation for the
terrible sins that we two have heaped up is available.

94. Still let us ask these Brahmanas in the sacrificial assembly
about the redemption. They are well-versed in the Vedas and they have
realized Brahman. They will accept us on our prostrating (in front of
them).”

95. After deciding thus, they paid their respects to those Brahmanas.
They repeatedly confessed their sinful crimes and asked them (about
the modes of atonement).

96-99. On hearing their words, those excellent Brahmanas kept
their eyes closed. They did not say anything. With great surprise vis-
ible on their faces they looked at one another (as though they wanted
to say), ‘‘Alas, extremely terrible sins have been accumulated by these
vicious ones. The sacred texts cannot step in to suggest a suitable
atonement. Therefore we are not competent to redeem them.”

Among them there was a prominent devotee of Visnu who was the
chief of the Assembly. He had destroyed all sins due to the greatness
of his devotion to the Lord. He was the most excellent one among
those conversant with apt utterances. He laughingly spoke to them:

The Vaisnava said:

100.O Brahmana, O Ksatriya, if you desire liberation from the ter-
rible heap of sins, go immediately to Purusottama.

=== PAGE 27 ===

22 Skanda Purana

101-107. It is the most excellent one among holy spots. It is there
that Purusottama of wooden idol is present. The Lord had blessed the
saintly king Indradyumna on account of his devotion. By propitiating
that Lord of the universe, the wielder of conch, discus and iron club
you will certainly attain the destruction of your sins or you will get
liberation as you please.

He is like a forest-fire unto the mass of cotton (in the form) of the
terrible evil deeds. This (mass of sins) cannot be wiped off by means
of penance even in the course of crores of births. On seeing that Lord
all the sins will be instantaneously destroyed. So do not delay. Go
there quickly. Seek refuge in the Lord whose abode is on the peak of
the Nila mountain in the holy land of Utkala (Orissa) on the shores of
the southern sea. That Lord, the storehouse of mercy, will grant you
the accomplishment of what you desire.

On being directed thus, the Brahmana and the Ksatriya became de-
lighted. O Brahmanas, they started towards Purusottama by that very
path.

CHAPTER FIVE
Pundarika and Ambarisa Attain Salvation

Jaimini said:

1. They were disgusted in their minds. They gave up their associa-
tion with harlots and others. They mentally meditated on Visnu. They
took to pure diet and holy rites.

2. After some time, they reached Hari’s abode in the Nila moun-
tain. They took their holy bath in accordance with the directions and
injunctions (in the scriptures) in the water of the Tirtharaja.'

3. They stood at the entrance to the palace (i.e the shrine of Jagannatha).
They prostrated with eight limbs (touching the ground), O Brahmanas.
They looked at the Lord but could not see him.

4. Not being able to see the Lord, their face became pale. They
were agitated and anxious. They began the observance of a fast till the
Lord could be perceived.

1. Tirtharaja: sea, as all sacred rivers join the sea. Here it means the Bay
of Bengal on the shore of which stands Purusottama Ksetra.

=== PAGE 28 ===

ILii.5.5-20 23

5. They began to recite the name of the Lord that is conducive to
the destruction of sins. On the third night they saw a mass of reful-
gence.

6. Again for three days they steadfastly continued their fast. In the
middle of the seventh night they saw the Lord.

7. By hearing the eulogies of the Devas they became endowed
with divine knowledge. After shedding off the slough of sins they saw
the Lord directly.

8-13. He had the conch, the discus and the iron club in his hands.
He was adorned with divine ornaments. He had placed his lotus-like
feet on the back of (i.e. had put on) gem-set sandals. His eyes re-
sembled full-blown lotuses. The Lord had a smiling face. With his left
arm he had embraced Laksmi who stood on his left. He was seen accepting
a folded betel leaf offered by Laksmi.

Some of his lady attendants had bejewelled canes in their hands.
Others had chowries in their hands. Some held lamps with fragrant oil.
Some held lamps with gems and jewels for their wicks in their hands.
All of them were well-adorned and were in the prime of their youth.
There stood a certain bright-looking (lady) behind him holding a gem-
studded umbrella. A certain lady who scorned at (i.e. surpassed) Pramloca
(an Apsaras) by means of her resplendent bodily lustre, held the vessel
of incense near his face. It was kept fumigated with Agallochum. The
Lord was seen blessing the Devas in front (of him) by means of his
eyes over which a lock of hair gracefully swung.

14-20. The Lord blessed with his smiles Siddhas, groups of sages
and divine sages, Sanaka and others, who kept their palms joined in
reverence, with shoulders lowered in humility. They eulogized the Lord
separately. Gandharvas beginning with Narada were engaged in singing
sweet and fascinating divine songs. The Lord attentively listened to
them and gracefully blessed them with compassion.

In front of the Lord eminent Vaisnavas, Prahlada! and others, were
meditating on his form. The Lord kept their minds attracted towards
his person.

The Lord revealed his Cosmic form by means of the Devas and
others who were reflected in the Kaustubha jewel that adorned his
chest.

From above a shower of divine flowers was falling and the Lord

!. Son of demon Hiranyakasipu. He was a very great devotee of Vignu. It
was to save him that Visnu incarnated as Nrsithha and killed HiranyakaSipu. BhP
regards him_as a great Vaisnava.

=== PAGE 29 ===

24 Skanda Purana

stood below. He looked at the group of celestial damsels whose splendour
faded on account of the proximity of Laksmi. The Lord had many graceful
movements of his body and he looked fascinating. On seeing the Lord
with such divine grace and charm the Brahmana and the Ksatriya be-
came masters of all lores ina moment, O Brahmanas. They circumambulated
the Lord of Devas three times. They joyously prostrated (at his feet).
With palms joined in reverence they eulogized him with great joy.

Pundarika said:

21. Obeisance to you, O supporter of the universe, O Narayana, the
cause of creation, sustenance and annihilation. Salute to you, O su-
preme soul, O ultimate resort.

22. You alone are the greatest truth, free from origin and destruc-
tion. Those who have the vision born of meditation know you as of the
nature of eternal bliss.

23. How can those with confounded hearts know you who are pure
consciousness, who are the Lord of the worlds, the basis (of the uni-
verse), greater than the greatest and absolutely free from impurities?

24. Those whose minds are perturbed on account of their desire to
acquire sensual objects are excessively miserable. They are exhausted
in the path of coming and going (transmigration of the soul in Sarhsara).
Are they ever happy?

25. Be compassionate and merciful towards me, O Lord. I have
sought refuge in you. I am extremely wretched. I am confounded and
foolish. I have committed misdeeds. I have fallen into the ocean of
worldly existence.

26. In the whole of this world, O Lord, who else is our kinsman?
Who is that person showing kindness to the wretched and the helpless
even after neglecting his (more urgent) duties?

27. O ocean of mercy, do save me who am perpetually moving up
and down like a machine for drawing water, undergoing the torture of
high and low movements.

28. You are the person who bestows salvation gracefully and sportingly.
Those foolish persons who worship you with Yogaksema (acquisition
of what is not acquired and preservation of what is acquired) as their
motive are deluded by your Maya.

29. If your name Narayana is pronounced even by chance, O Lord
of the worlds, it becomes superior even to you.! It is the sole means

!. A reference to Ajimila, a sinner who was liberated by pronouncing the
name Narfyana (BhP VI, Chs 2 and 3). It illustrates the efficacy of God's name.

=== PAGE 30 ===

ILii.5.30-38 25

for achieving the fourfold aim (of life).

30. But you grant different Siddhis through several Yajfias (per-
formed by men). You are the only refuge, O Lord, to those who have
fallen into the ocean of worldly existence.

31. In order to take a senseless person to the other shore of the
ocean of worldly existence, you are seated in the boat of knowledge
with your hands on the oar of mercifulness.

32-33. You alone are powerful enough to grant salvation on being
moved by exclusive devotion. Other Devas who have been mentioned
in the scriptural texts as bestower of salvation lead (persons) to devo-
tion unto you who like the Pot-born Sage (Agastya)!' dries up the ocean
of misery.

34. Hence, O Lord, be pleased. Grant me a firm devotion unto your
lotus-like feet, whereby I can cross the sea of frightful worldly exist-
ence that is very difficult to cross (otherwise). I could then spare my-
self the strain of seeking the help of the Yogic path of eight ancillaries.”

35. I have nothing to do with the three things (aims in life) viz.
virtue, wealth and love. They are sought after by persons of bad inte)-
lect. They are worthless. They give little happiness but great disadvan-
tage. Command me to immerse myself in the ocean of happiness that
surges up by meditating upon the pair of your lotus-like feet.

36. After eulogizing thus, the Brahmana fell at the lotus-like feet
of the Lord of the universe saying ‘* Save me, O Krsna”. His words
were drenched (and choked) with tears. He got up again and remained
praying with palms joined in reverence.

Ambarisa said:

37. Be pleased, O Lord, O soul immanent in everyone, You have
innumerable heads and arms. Obeisance to you, O Lord with countless
noses, eyes, hands and feet.

38. You are beyond the thirty-six principles.’ Though devoid of ex-
tension, you display and manifest the illusory phenomena of the uni-

1. This exploit of Agastya (drinking-up of all the waters of the sea) is mentioned
in Mbh, Vana 105.3-6. .
2. The eight angas (ancillaries) of Yoga are: Yama, Niyama, Asana, Pranayama,
Dhy&na, Dharan& and Samadhi.
3. Saivas and Saktas add twelve intangible principles to the list of twenty-four
principles of S&fkhya. The cult of Jaganndtha synthesises both Vaisnavism and
aivism. Hence Jagannatha’s transcendence of 36 principles.

=== PAGE 31 ===

26 Skanda Purana

verse. You are the abode of the four types of living beings. O Lord with
Cosmic Form, obeisance to you.

39-40. You are single-footed, three-footed and firmament-footed.
Your feet are Tirthas. Obeisance to that splendid soul from whose feet
Ganga rises and sanctifies the three worlds, whose name is glorified
as purifying the sins including Brahmana-slaughter, and who is the
bestower of all auspiciousness.

41. OLord, all Siddhis are achieved even by glorifying your name,
yet out of curiosity the learned men of great intellect seek you.

42. If we resort to it, O Lord, the sacred water from your feet dis-
pels all distresses. Make my devotion to your feet firm and steady. I
have been assailed by the three kinds of distress.

43-44. I have no other Lord. Today | have nothing else to request
you, prostrating myself before you. O Lord of the universe, I request
a thousand times that my devotion to your lotus-like feet may be stead-
fast as long as | am alive. It is the seed, as it were, of all Purusarthas
(aims of human life).

45. It is due to that devotion that Brahma accomplished the cre-
ation of the universe, that Rudra annihilates everything and that Laksmt
bestows prosperity.

46-47. O Lord merciful unto the wretched, with my mind dwelling
exclusively on you, I request you for that devotion. I am sinking in the
mire of the primordial Avidyd (nescience) which is very difficult to
cross and is very dense. O Lord of the universe, I perish in the absence
of a support. There is no other ultimate resort for me than devotion
unto you of exalted majesty.

48. The different paths opened up by Srutis, Smrtis etc. are causes
of delusion. These are incompetent to function if they exclude devotion
to you.

49-52a. O Lord, I have no other refuge. Be merciful unto me.

After eulogizing thus joyously he fell down like a rod on the ground
near the lotus-like feet of the Lord of the universe, repeatedly uttering
**Be pleased”.

Then all those Devas duly eulogized and worshipped KeSava. They
went back to heaven fully satisfied by his graceful, benign glances
(fallen on them).

Pundarika and Arhbarisa then opened their eyes. Since they were
deluded by the Maya of Visnu, they thought that what they had seen
was only a dream.

=== PAGE 32 ===

1Li1.5.52b-68 27

52b-58. After seeing the divine grace and charm with the mortal
eye directly, now they reverted to human feelings and emotions. Then
they saw the Lord (in the shrine) seated on the divine throne. He re-
sembled a dark cloud. His eyes were large like full-blown lotus. His
lips were red and the nose charming. He was adorned with divine ear-
rings. He held the conch, the discus, the iron-club and the lotus. He
wore a garland of sylvan flowers. His chest was stout (and muscular).
He had a charming necklace. He was brilliant with a valuable crown.
He had on his chest the Srivatsa mark and the jewel Kaustubha. He
was adorned with divine armlets. He had long arms. He was in com-
plete readiness for saving the wretched and the distressed. He had a
golden thread (round his neck ) with a big jewel set in the middle. He
wore divine yellow garment and had divine garlands and sweet-smell-
ing unguents. He was seated on a golden lotus-like seat. He was closely
embraced by Sri. He dispelled the distress of those who resorted to
him. He was an ocean of nectar that had surged up. He was like the
Kalpa tree in full bloom bestowing the fruits of all desires.

59-63a. They saw the wielder of plough as a weapon (Balabhadra)
seated on his right side. It is he with whom the Lord supports the
universe with great strength.' He was the king of Serpents adorned with
seven hoods. He was as lofty as the peak of Kailaisa. He was white in
complexion and resplendent with. gold ear-rings. He had a garland of
variegated forest-flowers. He wore a divine, dark-coloured, silken robe.
Inebriated with liquor, his lotus-like eyes rolled always. His back was
slightly bent and the chest projected forward. His body was coiled up.
His four arms were brilliant with the conch, the discus, the iron-club
and the lotus. He was handsome with different kinds of ornaments. He
was a destroyer of the sins of those who bowed down (to him).

63b-68. They saw the gentle Jady Subhadra in between them. She
was as pink as saffron.

They saw Laksmi who was the abode of all beauty, who was bowed
down to by all the Devas. She was stationed in the lotus-like heart of
the Lord of Laksmi. She was sitting separately. The goddess held an
excellent Jotus. Her garments and ornaments were of divine nature.
She was the destroyer of all sins. She redeemed those who were immersed

1. Balabhadra is an incarnation of Sesa, the serpent who supports the Earth.
Hence his (Sesa’s) attributes are applied to Balabhadra. Our Purana, like HarivarhSa,
describes him as a liquor-addict but, strangely enough, he proclaimed total pro-
hibition at Dvdrak4 at a late stage (Mbh, Mausala 1.29).

=== PAGE 33 ===

28 Skanda Purana

in the ocean of worldly existence. She was the source of origin of
deities. .
They saw the excellent discus of Visnu stationed on his left side.
O Brahmanas, it was made out of wood. It was brilliantly embellished
in gold. :

On seeing Visnu stationed in four forms,' that Brahmana and the
Ksatriya considered their exertion in the early dawn fruitful. Recol-
lecting that charming dream of sport, they were surprised. |

69. ‘‘This is not a mere wooden idol. It is Brahman itself that shines
here.” They believed in this utterance of the Brahmanas in the sac-
rificial assembly.

70-72. ‘Where are we (what great difference there is), the great
sinners who deserve only tortures; where is this manifestation of Visnu
in the assembly of the Suras! We had been fools. Now we have mas-
tered the eighteen lores.? Hence this is not an error on our part. It is
real knowledge unto us. That has been proved. They had said that the
Brahman of wooden form stood at the root of the Banyan tree on the
shore of the Tirtharaja. On seeing it directly, a creature is liberated.

73-75. This Lord of the worlds is that very same (Brahman). He
has four forms when he incarnates on the earth. He shines in four forms.

Therefore let us retain our life and stay in his presence. We shall
not go elsewhere. We shall be averse to worthless pursuits of lust.’

After deciding thus, O sages, those two became engrossed in devo-
tion to Visnu. Always repeating the names of Narayana, they attained
salvation.

Jaimini said:

76-77. It is just incidentally that this secret conducive to the des-
truction of sins has been told. Those who listen to this story of Pundarika
and Ambarisa and those who recite it always with great joy, go to the
abode of Visnu with great joy. They will go to the abode of Visnu with
all sins dispelled.

1. In Jagann&tha Temple at Puri the four images, viz. Jagannatha, Balabhadra,
Subhadr& and Sudar§ana are worshipped. They as if constitute one object of worship,
viz. Jagann&tha and are called caturdha marti. Hence the epithet caturdhavasthita.

2. Eighteen Lores: Normally four Vedas, six Angas of Vedas (such as Siks&,
Kalpa etc.), Mimarhs4, Nyfya, Dharmag&stra and Purana constitute 14 lores. To
these are added Ayurveda (Science of Medicine), Dhanurveda (Military Science),
‘Gandharva Veda (Science of Music) and ArthaSastra (Political Economy) totalling
to eighteen Lores.

=== PAGE 34 ===

11.i1.6.1-9 29
CHAPTER SIX

Description of the Land of Utkala*

The sages enquired:

I. In which land is that holy spot Purusottama, O excellent Brahmana,
where Narayana reveals himself directly in the form of a wooden idol?
Jaimini said:

2. There is a land named Utkala. It is famous and is very sacred.
There are many Tirthas and holy shrines there.

3. The land is situated on the shore of the Southern Sea. The per-
sons living there are models of good conduct.

4-6. The Brahmanas there are given to good behaviour and the study
of the Vedas. They perform Yajfias. Ever since the beginning of the
creation there have been Vedas and expounders of Vedas and Sastras
(sacred literature). This land is glorified as the home of eighteen Vidyas
(lores). At the behest of Narayana Laksmi dwells in every house (there).
The people are by nature shy and humble. They are free from mental
agony and physical ailments. They are devoted to their parents. They
are truthful in speech and are followers of Visnu.

7. There is no one here who is not a devotee of Visnu. There is
no atheist here. All the people are ever ready to bring about the welfare
of others. No one is greedy, knavish or wicked.

8. All the people are long-lived. Women consider their husbands
gods. They are well-behaved and righteous and they are well-adorned
with bashfulness and charity.

9. They have pride in their beauty and youthfulness. They adorn
themselves with all kinds of ornaments. They are great experts in the
conduct of life, befitting their nobility, chastity, age and decency.

*Utkala is a part of modern Orissa. According to our text (vv 27-28 in this
Chapter) the country Utkala was situated between the Southern Sea (The Bay of
Bengal) and the river Rsikuly&; on the other side it extended from Mahiaad! to
the river Suvarnarekh&. According to BmP 47.7 Utkala and Kalinga were separate.
In Purfnic age the names Utkala or Odra were mostly used for Puri region.
Strangely enough, Utkala and Odra are not included in the 72 countries of Kaumérika
Khanda of the SkP unless we presume Oddilial in the list is Odra.

This chapter depicts Utkala as heaven on the earth (BhOsvarga).

=== PAGE 35 ===

30 Skanda Purana

10. The Ksatriyas there are devoted to their duties. They are scru-
pulously engaged in protecting the subjects. They are liberal in chari-
table gifts. They are well-versed in the use of weapons and learning
sacred treatises.

11-13. All of them always perform Yajiias with plenty of mone-
tary gifts. Their sacrificial altars have the sacred posts decorated with
gold. In their homes guests are worshipped far beyond their expecta-
tions. The VaiSyas are engaged in such activities as agriculture, trade
and breeding cattle. They please and propitiate with devotion and also
plenty of wealth Devas, preceptors and Brahmanas. If any suppliant
goes to any house, he has no need to go to any other house.

14. They are experts in music, poetry, arts and crafts. They are
pleasing in speech. The Sidras there are virtuous and engaged in holy
baths, charitable gifts and other pious activities.

15. They serve Brahmanas, Ksatriyas and Vaisyas, physically, mentally,
verbally and by means of wealth. Persons of mixed castes too are well-
established in their respective duties.

16. The seasons do not have any vagaries; the clouds do not shower
untimely. There is no damage to plants and vegetation. There is no
desert land. Hunger does not afflict the subjects.

17. There is neither famine nor any epidemic (in the land). There
is no split or division in the realm. There is no object not available
there, if at all it exists on the earth.

18-26. This land is full of all good qualities and different.kinds of
trees and creepers, viz. Arjuna, ASoka, Punnaga (Calophyllum inophyllum),
Tala (Palmyra), Hintala (Phoenix tree), Sala (Sal tree), Pricinamalaka
(Flacourtia cataphracta), Lodhra (Svamplocos racemosa), Bakulas, Naga-
kesaras, Coconut Palms, Priydlas, Saralas, Himalayan cedars, Dhavas,
Calectu, Marmelos, Jackfruits, Wood Apples, Cathpakas, Karnikaras,
Kovidaras, Patalas,Kadambas, Margosa, Niculas, Mangoes, Embylic
Myrobalans, Oranges, Citrons, Nipakas, Pomegranates, flowering plants
of various varieties such as Mand§ra, Parijata etc., Holy Fig Trees,
Agallochum, Sandal trees, Kharjiiras (Date Palms), Amratakas, Siddhas,
Mucakundas (Pterospermunt acerifolium), Kirhéukas, Findukas , Saptaparnas,
A&vatthas, Bibhitakas and various other trees of very charming nature.

There are Malatis, Kundas, Banas, Black Karaviras, Ketakis, Atimuktas,
Kubjas, Cardamom, Lavanga (cloves), Karhkolas, Dadimas, Bijapirakas
etc. There are rows of areca-palms and many hundreds of parks and
gardens. The land is surrounded by mountains and rivers. This excel-
lent land, O brilliant Brahmanas, is named Utkala.

=== PAGE 36 ===

I.i1.6.27—I1.11.7.8 3]

27-28. This land is situated between Svarnarekhad and Mahanadi re-
aching as far as Rsikulyd that falls into the Southern Sea. In this holy
spot there are many excellent shrines and sacred temples. Formerly
they have been described to you, O Brahmanas, in the course of the
pilgrimage by me. This land of Purusottama is said to be now Bhdsvarga
(‘Heaven on the Earth’).

CHAPTER SEVEN
The Story of Indradyumna

The sages asked:

1-3. O sage, in which Yuga did Indradyumna! live? In which land
was his (capital) city? How did he go to Purusottama and how did he
cause the idol to be made? Describe all these truthfully and in detail,
O great sage, O omniscient one. We have great eagerness (to hear).

Jaimini said:

4-5. Very well, O excellent Brahmanas, what you ask for is rele-
vant. His (Indradyuimna’s) ancient anecdote helps to dispel all sins. It
is meritorious and splendid. It yields worldly pleasures and salvation.
I shall recount it as it happened in Krtayuga. Listen ye all, O sages,
with great attention and with all the sense-organs under control.

6. -There was a great king in Krtayuga, O Brahmanas, (named)
Indradyumna. That righteous-souled one belonged to the Solar race and
was the fifth person (i.e. descendant) from the creator (Brahma).

7. He was truthful in speech and of good conduct. He was of spot-
less fame and was the most prominent among sattvika persons. He
protected his subjects like his own children with justice.

8 He was expert in the Science of Spirit (i.e. perfect knowledge
of Brahman). He was a hero with increasing (interest) in war. He was
always active with devotion to his parents. He always worshipped Brah-
manas.

1. This king is different from the Indradyumna who was expelled from heaven
for becoming obliterated from public memory (Mbh, Vana, Ch. 199). This Indradyumna
is a legendary king of Avanti who built the temple of Jagannitha at Puri. His life
story forms an essential part of this Purana.

=== PAGE 37 ===

32 Skanda Purana

9. He had mastered the eighteen branches of learning and was like
another Brhaspati (i.e. Preceptor of gods). In prosperity and glory he
was another Indra and in the accumulation of wealth in the treasury
he was (another) Kubera.

10. He was handsome with charming features and excellent grace.
He was of good behaviour. He was charitable, an enjoyer of pleasures
and one of sweet speech. He performed all Yajfias. He was friendly
with Brahmanas. He truthfully kept his promises.

11. He was the beloved of men and women like the moon on the
full-moon day. (At the same time) he, being the exterminator of his
enemies, was too dazzling to look at.

12-14. He was a devotee of Visnu and very truthful. He had sub-
dued anger and the sense-organs. He performed RAjasiya, the most
excellent Yajiia, and a thousand horse-sacrifices. He was highly glo-
rious, desirous of salvation and devoted to virtue and piety. Thus en-
dowed with all good qualities the king ruled over the earth at the
(capital) city named Avanti situated in Malava' country and well known
all over the earth. He lived in that city which was rich in all kinds of
precious stones and like another Amar4vati (the capital of Indra).

15. Living there, the king carried on excellent and exceedingly won-
derful devotional activities in regard to Visnu mentally, verbally and
physically.

16-18. While he was thus (devotionally) active, once, at the time
of the worship of the Lord, the consort of Laksmi, within the sanctum
sanctorum, he respectfully addressed his priest who was seated along
with learned men, poets, Brahmanas well-versed in the Vedas as well
as Astrologers of great fame, ‘‘Let that excellent holy spot be known
where we can see Jagannatha (‘Lord of the worlds’) with these (mortal)
eyes.”

19. On being asked thus by the excellent king, a follower of Visnu,
the priest faced the assembly of pilgrims and spoke these words with
humility.

20. ‘‘O, O ye virtuous ones, experts in the knowledge of holy spots,
eager to undertake pilgrimages, what our Lord intends has been heard
by you all indeed.”

: $.MModern Ujjain. Old Puranas used it as the name of a country up to circa
200 CE. Avanti came to be known as Malava after 700-800 CE (AGP 158-59).
The mention of M&lava as a country here shows that this portion of the Purina
was composed after 700-800.

=== PAGE 38 ===

11.ii.7.21-39 33

21. After knowing his intention, a certain eloquent person who had
visited a number of holy spots said to the king joyously, as he stood
there with palms joined in reverence:

22. ‘‘O Lord, O king, I have travelled through many holy places on
the earth ever since my childhood. These (Tirthas) have only been
heard of by others.

23. There is a land in the subcontinent of Bharata, famous as Odhra
De§a (i.e. Utkala, Orissa). It is on the shore of the Southern Ocean. The
holy spot is Sri Purusottama.

24-25. There is a mountain named Nilagiri there. It is surrounded
by forests all round. In the middle thereof 1s a Kalpa tree (i.e. a Banyan
tree) extending to a KroSa(3 Kms.). If one enters its shade one dispels
the sin of the slaughter of a Brahmana. To the west thereof is the
famous holy pool named Rauhina.

26-28. It is filled with primordial waters (karandmbhobhih). By
means of its mere contact it bestows salvation. On its eastern bank is
the body (i.e. idol) of Srivasudeva made out of sapphires.' It is directly
the bestower of salvation. He who takes his holy bath in the Kunda
(holy pool) there and visits Purusottama acquires the benefit of a
thousand horse-sacrifices and then becomes liberated.

There is an excellent hermitage there, famous as Sabara Dipaka.’

29-30. Itis on the western side of the Lord and ts encircled by the
abodes of Sabaras (hunters). There is a footpath leading to the temple
of Visnu . It is there that Jagannatha himself is present holding the
conch, the discus and the iron club. The storehouse of mercifulness
grants salvation to all living creatures who visit (the Lord).

31. O king, I spent a year there in Sripurusottama observing holy
rites and staying in the forest for the propitiation of the Lord of Devas.

32-33. The divine scent, O great king, of the heaven-dwellers who
came there every night for visiting the Lord, is superhuman. Different
kinds of prayerful words are heard. Showers of the flowers of Kalpa
tree are seen. This greatness is not revealed in any other shrine of
Visnu.

34-39. An ancient legend too is heard there, O king. After seeing
Madhava a crow, a being of lower species, became liberated, though
it is not authorized to perform any meritorious deed and though it was

1. The idol of Vasudeva may as well be of black stone as ‘aia’ means ‘black’
also.
2. Jagagnitha appears to be originally a god of a hill-people called Sabaras.

=== PAGE 39 ===

34 Skanda Purana

devoid of knowledge, O king. Being thirsty it came to the Rauhina
Kunda in order to drink water. As the time had come, it gave up its
life and attained Saérupya with Visnu.

Formerly I had been stupid and ignorant. But thanks to his favour,
now perhaps Sesa is second to me in the knowledge of the eighteen
branches of learning. My mind has become free from impurities.

I do not see any Lord other than Visnu. Since you are a devotee of
Visnu and are always steadfast in holy rites, I have come to you for
the sake of instructing you. Neither wealth nor a plot of land is being
requested from you now. This is understood by me as useless. Worship
Sridhara dwelling there.”

40-41. After saying thus that man with matted hair vanished imme-
diately even as everyone was looking on. The king was struck with
great wonder. He became excited thinking, ‘How can | carry this on?’
He spoke to the priest in regard to the accomplishment thereof:

Indradyumna said:

42. This incident is superhuman. After hearing this from a super-
human person my intellect prompts me (to go) to the place where that
Gadadhara is present.

43. O excellent Brahmana, my virtue, wealth and love are under
your control. The three aims in life have been accomplished through
your grace which was not against me (i.e. you were favourable to me).

44. If now, O excellent Brahmana, you go on this errand, all the
four aims of my life shall be achieved by me.

The priest said:

45. Of course, I shall do this so that you will be able to see with
your eyes covered with skin (i.e. your physical, human eyes) KeSava,
the Lord who directly confers liberation (from Sarhsara).

46. 1 shall endeavour in this matter (so carefully) that we all shall
reside in the holy spot (called) Sri Purusottama along with our asso-
ciates and assistants.

47. What can be a better success than this, O king, in the birth of
a human being, if you can directly perceive Madhava, the Purusa be-
yond Tamas.

48. My younger brother named Vidy4pati will also go now along
with your spies who frequently tour many lands.

49-50. He will go there and after visiting the Lord of the universe

=== PAGE 40 ===

IL.ii.7.51-61 35

there on the mountain, he will make a piece of land fit for the resi-
dence of your camp. He will soon bring the news (that everything) has
been fully arranged. It will be for our welfare.

On hearing his words the king said again:

Indradyumna said:

51-54a. Good, O Brahmana! Excellent arrangement has been thought
of after due contemplation. Even at the outset, on hearing about this,
I have decided that | will reside in that holy place in the presence of
the Lord. So let your brother go. He will accomplish everything as
desired.

After saying this the king entered the inner apartment joyously. At
the behest of the king the priest honoured all of them duly and made
them go to their respective hermitages.

54b-56. An auspicious hour was fixed by the astrologers. After per-
forming the holy rites (called Svastyayana')for his safe journey, the
Brahmana bade him farewell. He got into a flower-bedecked chariot
along with trustworthy emissaries.

Then, O Brahmanas, seated in the middle of the chariot that Brahmnana
Vidy4pati thought thus in his mind:

57. ‘Oh! my life is fruitful. My night has dawned into a fine morning
since I will be viewing the lotus-like face of the Lord that dispels sins.

58-59. Ascetics strive day and night through various means begin-
ning with Sravana (listening) etc. and then see the Lord dwelling in
(their) lotus-like heart. I will now see that Discus-bearing Lord dir-
ectly, the Lord who is residing on the peak of the Nila mountain, who
holds a physical form but who dispels all connections with physical
bodies.

60. It is not possible to fix and visualize the form of the Lord
through the words of Sruti, Smrti, Itihdsas and Puranas. | will now see
that extraordinary form of the Storehouse of Fortune and cross the ocean
of worldly existence.

61. To-day | will directly visualize that Lord of the universe who
is incomprehensible and immeasurable, who dwells on the mountain
and by glorifying whose names the three groups of sins’ of those who
remember him perish.

1. An expiatory rite to avert evil. Benedictory mantras are used therein.
2. Sins committed by thought, word and deed.

=== PAGE 41 ===

36 Skanda Purana

62. In the case of one who does not meditate on the lotus-like feet
of the Lord, the abundant darkness that has settled in his soul does not
perish through his Karmas. At every step he will be acquiring more and
more misery.

63. The Vedantic passages say that one may propitiate the subtle
spirit dwelling in the soul encased in five sheaths (i.e. those of Anna,
Prana etc.) and enclosed in its own cavity, but one may not realize it.
I salute that Primordial Being that can be realized only by its own
Vidya (knowledge).

64. I seek refuge in that Lord of the entire universe, each of whose
bodily hair supports a Cosmic Egg, who has a thousand (innumerable)
heads, feet and eyes, who is ancient and eternal and from whose breath
the mass of the Vedas has come out.

65-66. I seek refuge in that Lord who has Pranava (Omkara) for
his body, who is devoid of all despicable forms fashioned or super-
imposed and through whose Maya this illusory visible world has been
created with creation, sustenance and annihilation as its nature. I will
directly view that Lord near whom a being of the lower order came
casually for the sake of quenching its thirst and attained the Saripya
type of salvation with that very body.

67. Ah! How wonderful it is that one merit of mine acquired in the
course of a crore of lives has cropped up indicating my good luck! With
these mortal eyes I will see the bulbous root (i.e. cause) of the uni-
verse.’

68. Thinking thus, with a delighted mind, the Brahmana did not
notice that a long distance had been covered, thanks to the speed of
the chariot.

69-70. After midday had passed and a greater part of the day yet
remained, the land named Odhra was seen ahead on the way itself.
O Brahmanas, this land is an ornament unto the universe.' It sanctifies
the sphere of the earth.

Thus observing forest regions, mountains, forts etc. on the way he
reached the banks of Mahanadi? at the time of sunset.

1. Such complimentary references to Odhra or Utkala ( a part of Orissa)
throughout the work and a eulogy of that land in one complete chapter (Ch. 6)
ca ling. it ‘a Bhdsvarga’ (Heaven on earth), the ornament of the universe show
that éhe author was a resident of Odhra.

2. A famous river in Orissa. Formerly it marked the border of Kalinga.

=== PAGE 42 ===

IL. ii.7.71-88 . 37

71. The Brahmana got down from the chariot and performed the
daily religious rites with sincerity. After performing the evening Sandhya
prayer he meditated on the Slayer of Madhu.

72-75. He spent the night within the chariot itself. Early in the
morning, he concluded his daily religious rites and hurriedly crossed
Mahinadi.

Contemplating on Govinda as he was seated in the chariot, he set
vut. On the way he saw, O Brahmanas. the villages of those well-
versed in Vedas, who performed Yajiias and were of fiery splendour.
The villages were adorned with areca palms. After passing through the
Ekamraka forest' the Brahmana_ saw the people holding a conch, a
discus, an iron-club and a lotus. He thought as though he had taken a
new birth and had adopted a divine form.

76. He immediately got down from the chariot and prostrated with
eight limbs touching the ground. His eyes became filled with tears of
joy. He did not see anything else.

77-78. O Brahmanas, he saw Visnu mentally and externally. He
proceeded thus seeing, meditating on and eulogizing Hari. He saw the
Nila mountain covered with forests and adorned with Kalpa and banyan
trees. It scraped the sky and destroyed the sins of those who visit it.

79-80. It is the extremely wonderful abode of Hari in embodied
form. Climbing on to the top of the mountain, the Brahmana who was
eager to see Mukunda, sought the path all round but could not see one.
Therefore he spread Darbha grass on the ground, and controlling his
speech slept there.

81. For the vision of the Lord, he sought refuge in him alone. There-
upon he heard a superhuman speech behind the mountain.

82-84. It was the voice of those who were talking together on the
subject of devotion to the Lord. Therefore, Vidyapati became de-
lighted and followed the voice, O Brahmanas. He saw the seat of light-
ing of the holy shrine?? It was known as Sabaradipaka. All round, it
was surrounded by the houses of Sabaras (hunters). The Brahmana went
there slowly and entered the premises with great humility. (There) he
saw those devotees of Visnu holding conch, discus and iron-club.

85-88. The Brahmana bowed down his head and stood there with
palms joined in reverence. Then a Sabara called Visvivasu, whose
body was covered with grey hair and who had completed the worship

1. Forest area round modern Bhuvaneshvar.
2. Probably ‘the ksetra shaped like a lamp’ (Ksetrasya dipasamsthdnam).

=== PAGE 43 ===

38 Skanda Purana

of Hari, came out from the middle of the mountain that very moment.
He appeared splendid with the remnants of the worship (in his hand).
On seeing him the Brahmana was delighted. He thought thus: ‘This
leading devotee of Visnu has come here from the abode of Hari. He
is tired. He is bedecked with the remnants of the worship. From him
I shall get the rare details of Visnu.’

Even as the Brahmana was thinking thus, he was addressed by the
Sabara:

The Sabara said:

89-90. From where have you come to this impassable forest region?
You are extremely tired with hunger and thirst. Be pleased to sit here
comfortably for a long time.

He gave him Padya and a seat as well as Arghya. Visvavasu then
said to the Brahmana with humility in his speech, explaining the thing
under reference:

91-92. ‘How do you wish to sustain your life (i.e. satisfy your hunger)?
O Brahmana, with fruits or with cooked food? Whatever is liked by you
will be given to you by me, O Brahmana. It is my good luck, O holy
lord. My life has become fruitful since you have come to my house like
another Visnu himself.”

93-99. As the Sabara said this, the eminent Brahmana said to him:
‘*O great devotee of Visnu , I have nothing to do with fruits or cooked
food. O good Sir, see that the purpose for which I have come from a
great distance is fulfilled. J am the priest of king Indradyumna, a resident
of the city of Avanti. I have come here desirous of seeing Visnu.

In front of the king there was an assemblage of pilgrims. At that
time this was heard. In the context of Tirthas and holy spots, this was
referred to by someone. This holy spot was mentioned in front of the
king by a person with matted hair. That Brahmana mentioned every-
thing in the proper order. It is for this purpose, O gentle Sir, that I have
been sent by the anxious king, i.e. to see Hari Nilamadhava dwelling
here. Until I see the Lord and take the news to the king, I shall be
observing fast surely. Hence, O gentle Sir, show Visnu unto me.”

=== PAGE 44 ===

ILii.8.1-16 39
CHAPTER EIGHT

The Messenger Vidyadpati Returns

Jaimini said:

1-4. On being told thus by the Brahmana, the Sabara became wor-
ried. He thought thus: ‘Janardana who is kept secret is our means of
sustenance. Our bad luck appears impending due to which he is to
become known to all people.' If I do not show (Lord) to this Brahmana,
he will curse me. A Brahmana is to be honoured by everyone, particu-
larly when he is a guest. If his desires are not fulfilled, both the worlds
of mine will be fruitless.

5-10. When this Lord vanishes, when Madhava becomes invisible
beneath the ground, King Indradyumna of exploits comparable to Indra,
who is to go to the world of Brahmi along with his physical body, will
come here along with his subjects and perform a hundred horse-sacri-
fices. He will install the four forms of Visnu in wood. If the Brahmana-
guest be highly fortunate, the disappearance of the Lord will be im-
minent. Hence | will show him Acyuta of Nilendramani (having the
colour of blue sapphire). When a duty has been ordained by fate, no
manly effort to avert it is advisable.’

(Pondering over this repeatedly) in his mind the Sabara said to the
Brahmana who was meditating on the immutableVisnu in front:

The Sabara said:

11. The news that King Indradyumna will come and reside here has
already been (traditionally) heard by us before.

12. You are more fortunate than he. because, O Brahmana, you will
be seeing Nilamadhava (directly) even prior to him. Come. Let us go
to the ridge.

13-16. After saying this, he grasped him by the hand and went to the
forest along the path. He climbed up and up along the rugged and rocky
path full of difficulties. Only one man could walk along that path at

1. The Sabara correctly and helplessly anticipates the danger that a new ad-
vanced culture is going to swallow up the simple primitive culture of the aboriginal
Sabaras.

=== PAGE 45 ===

40 Skanda Purana

a time. The way was even more difficult to traverse on account of
thorns. As the path was nearly enveloped in darkness he guided the
Brahmana by oral directions.

Within two Muhirtas they reached the bank of the holy tank Rauhina.
On seeing it he said to the Brahmana, ‘*O excellent Brahmana, this
tank is a great Tirtha named Rauhina. It is the source of all waters.
By taking holy bath here one goes to the abode of Lord Visnu, O Brahmana.

17. To the east of it there is the great Banyan tree like the Kalpa
tree with plenty of shade. One who comes within the shade of this tree
dispels the sin of Brahmana-slaughter.

18. Between these two, inside the bushy growth of trees, see di-
rectly the Lord of the universe expounded in the Vedantas.

19. By having a view of him you shall shed off the mass of your
sins. After this you will have no grief of falling into the ocean of
worldly existence.”

Jaimini said:

20-21. The Brahmana took his holy bath in the Kunda. Highly de-
lighted in his mind, the extremely intelligent one bent down and low-
ered his head from a distance. Mentally and verbally he eulogized Hart
with concentration and words choked with delight.

Vidyapati said:

22. O Purusa beyond Pradhina, O all-pervading one, O Lord greater
than the greatest, O Lord transforming yourself into the mobile and
immobile beings, O highest reality, obeisance to you.

23. O Lord of the universe, you are the only person worthy of being
propitiated by means of all holy rites laid down in Srutis, Smrtis,
Puranas and Itihdsas.

24-25. O Supreme Lord, it is from you that the whole of this uni-
verse is evolved at the time of creation. O God, it has you as its
support and it is protected by you alone. At the end of the Kalpa everything
is withdrawn in the space in your belly and it stays there comfortably. !
O Soul of all, O Immanent Soul, obeisance to you.

26. Salute to you, the Lord of Devas; obeisance to you in the form

t, It is believed that when at the end of the Kalpa the universe 1s destroyed
externally, actually it is taken in the belly of the Lord where with its mobile and
immobile beings it remains intact.

=== PAGE 46 ===

I1.ii.8.27-37 4]

of the Tray? (three Vedas). Hail to you who always illuminate the
universe (assuming) the forms of the Sun, the Moon etc!

27. Obeisance to that sanctifier due to the contact with whose lotus-
like feet Gahga becomes filled with all the Tirthas and purifies all the
worlds.

28. Hail to you who enliven the universe and transform the Havis
(ghee offerings in sacrifices) that have been sanctified by Mantras and
been duly poured in the (sacred) fires!

29. Obeisance to that Atman (Soul) identical with Brahman, who
is devoid of all blemishes and is an embodiment of bliss, on a part of
whom all the worlds subsist.

30. Hail to you, the witness unto the universe, to the form free from
impurities, to the Lord of auspicious forms, who are the master of
Maya and devoid of all attachments!

31. Obeisance to you who have all forms, have many (innumerable)
feet, eyes, heads, mouths and arms, who conquer everything and who
have the forms of all Jivas.

32. Obeisance to you, O lover of Kamala (Laksmi). Bow to you, O
lotus-seated one; obeisance, O Lord with eyes like petals of lotus; save
me, O Purusottama.

33. Redeem me from this multitude of miseries of worldly exist-
ence. I am suffering by transmigrating in this worthless world. | am
harassed by ailments and griefs. I have sought refuge in your lotus-like
feet.

Jaimini said:

34-35. After thus eulogizing the Lord of Suras, who has Pranava
(Om) for his form, the Brahmana bowed down in front of Hari and
repeated the Pranava Mantra. At the end of his Japa he became calm
in his mind. With palms joined in reverence he approached the Lord
and stood thinking his objects as being achieved and blessed. Then the
Sabara spoke to the Brahmana :

Visvavasu said:

36. | Oeminent Brahmana, you are satisfied on seeing the Lord
now. It is the close of the day. We shall go home. You are hungry and
tired.

37. Residence in the forest suits wild animals. It is not proper for
us to stay-here. While there is yet sunlight, let us go home.

=== PAGE 47 ===

42 Skanda Purana

38. After saying thus, the Sabara caught hold of the hand of the
Brahmana and returned to his hermitage hurriedly, O excellent Brahmanas.

39. Meditating upon the Lord of the universe, the ocean of bliss, the
Brahmana was not at all aware of the pain of hunger, thirst and exhaus-
tion.

40. On account of his joy and indifference to (his) physical body,
he did not feel pain when he walked on the uneven and rugged rocky
path, very difficult to tread upon on account of a great deal of thorns
as well.

41. Going thus, the Brahmana and the Sabara, both great devotees
of Visnu, reached the abode of Sabaras in the evening.

42. There the excellent Sabara duly honoured the Brahmana who
had come as a guest by means of different kinds of dishes.

43. He became satisfied with the royal welcome, honour and ser-
vices offered by him. He became surprised very much at the rare hos-
pitality of the Sabara.

44-46, ‘This Sabara lives in the heart of the forest full of difficulties
and inconveniences. He sustains himself with the products of the for-
est. How then did these dishes befitting kings become available within
his house? It is a great mystery.’

As the Brahmana was wondering thus, the Sabara spoke to him with
great humility.

The Sabara said:

47-50. O Brahmana, have you been relieved of your weariness? Have
you got rid of your hunger and thirst? How can city-dwellers get com-
fort and happiness in the house of forest-dwellers? The customs and
manners of city-dwellers are not known to others, especially to Sabaras.
Among the persons who live in a royal palace the minister and the
priest of a king are the most superior ones. Between these two, the
priest should be revered like the king himself. This is approved by the
scriptural texts. King Indradyumna is a powerful Emperor. If you are
satisfied, O Brahmana, he will certainly be satisfied.

When the forest-dweller said thus, the Brahmana became more pleased.
He lovingly spoke these words to the Sabara who spoke with wonderful
humility:

Vidyapati said:
51-52. O gentle one, for serving me you have brought supeshuman

=== PAGE 48 ===

IL.ii.8.53-67a 43

and divine objects not seen even by kings. It is surprising that these
divine objects could be in store in the abode of a Sabara. I have in-
creasing curiosity to know this, O gentle one.

The Sabara replied:

53. My mind is not very enthusiastic to reveal this, O Brahmana.
Still because of our devotion to you as guest, O excellent Brahmana,
I shall tell you.

54-59a. Every day, O Brahmana, multitudes of Devas including Sakra
come here taking divine articles of worship and services with them,
for worshipping the Lord of the universe. After worshipping the Lord
of the universe, after eulogizing and bowing down to him with devo-
tion, they propitiate Purusottama by means of vocal songs, instrumen-
tal music and dances. Then the excellent Suras return to heaven. These
divine articles given to you are the Nirmalyas (i.e. remnants of the
worship) of the Lord of the universe. You are a learned man. How is
it that you are surprised? It is because we have been subsisting on the
Nirmalyas of Visnu that we are devoid of ailments and old age. All
of us are staying here along with our sons and kinsmen with our life
span extending to ten thousand years. By consuming the Nirmalya of
Visnu the mass of sins perishes. It is not surprising, O excellent Brahmana,
that one shall attain liberation thereby.

59b-63a. On hearing about this rare achievement the Brahmana ex-
perienced a thrill. His eyes became full of tears of joy. He considered
himself blessed: ‘Ah, this person born as Sabara (can) sees the immu-
table Lord. Day and night he enjoys the divine pleasures by (subsisting
on) the leavings (remnants of offerings) of the Lord. There is none else
in the world consisting of the mobile and immobile beings, who can
be considered equal to him. There is no other devotee of Visnu on a
par with this Sabara of the Nila mountain. Of what avail is going back
home now? Family is a cause of unpleasantness. [ shall become an
intimate friend of this (Sabara) and shall stay here in the forest region.’

63b-67a. The Brahmana whose mind was devotedly attached to Sri-
krsna spoke once more to the Sabara: ‘‘If you wish to bless me, O
gentle one, my great resolve is that I should form a close friendship
with you. Of what use is returning and carrying on the service of the
king, which is the cause of unhappiness in the other world? I shall stay
here and worship the Slayer of Madhu. Thereby, I shall strive to pre-
vent a subsequent embodiment (i.e. birth) of my soul. Very well, friend!

=== PAGE 49 ===

44 Skanda Purana

It is my good luck that I have come into contact with you. Thanks to
your favour, I shall cross the ocean of worldly existence that is very
difficult to cross.

67b-72. They praise this as an essential thing in this ocean of worldly
existence, viz. the friendship with a devotee of Visnu, which takes one
across the ocean of misery. By association with the friend, Lord Punda-
rikaksa (Lotus-eyed Lord Visnu) holding the conch, discus and iron
club becomes visible once again. When I return, O friend, King Indra-
dyumna will reside here itself in order to propitiate the Lord. He is
desirous of building a big Mansion (temple) there pleasing to the Lord.
It has been a great vow of the king that he would do a thousand (kinds
of) services for the worship of the Lord. This has been promised in his
presence. Hence grant me lovingly this permission.”

The Sabara said:

73-79. O friend, a traditional legend like that is well-known here.
You have said, Indradyumna will come here. But the king will not see
Madhava. Ere long the Lord will be covered with golden sands. The
Lord has promised this to Yama that he will vanish. It is a great luck
that you are able to perceive the Lord. If the arrival of Indradyumna
is imminent, the Lord shall certainly vanisk. But, O friend, this fact
should not be mentioned by you in front of the king.

After coming here if the king does not see the great Lord, he will
undertake a fast unto death. He will then see Gadadhara in a dream.
At his behest he will install four wooden idols of the Lord. He will

_then worship them. As long as the idol is present here our family shall
also be present, thanks to the blessings of the Lord. There is no doubt
about this.

80-82. Hence, my friend, do not feel sorry in this respect. Everything
will be carried out quickly. Now, friend, sleep soundly. In the morning
we shall see the Lord in the form (of an idol of) blue sapphire after
taking bath in the ocean. We shall find out a place fit for the stay of
the king on its shore as you desire, O my friend.

83-86. After discussing this and other things and narrating splendid
stories to each other, they slept on a bed of tender leaves and sprouts
in a splendid place.

When the day dawned, they took bath in the Tirtharfja's waters in
accordance with the injunctions, bowed down to Madhava and found

=== PAGE 50 ===

11.ii.9.1-16 45

out a place for the residence of the king. He took leave of his friend.
In accordance with the directions of the king, the Brihmana got into
the chariot and returned to the city of Avanti.

CHAPTER NINE
Vidyapati Reports to Indradyumna

Jaimini said:

1-8a. When the Brahmana returned in the evening and when (the
place) was crowded with Suras, at the time of the worship of Madhava,
a violent gust of wind blew. It scattered the golden sand everywhere.
Thereby the eyes of the Devas became afflicted and they were unable
to see Srikanta. Then, O Brahmanas, they meditated on Purusottama.
Those heaven-dwellers remained steady for a Muhirta in meditation.
At the conclusion of their meditation they saw the heap of sand par-
ticles and not Madhava. Nor did they see even Rauhina Kunda.' Then
they became agitated. They became extremely anxious and lamented
much: ‘‘Alas! Alas! What a great misfortune has befallen us all of a
sudden! Sriga (the Lord of $ri) who is charming unto the eyes became
invisible within a moment. O Purusottama, what is the fault that has
been seen in us? You have abandoned all your servants simultaneously.
You are not to be seen. It is for our sake, O Lord of the universe, that
you adopted a physical body. Why do you then leave us helpless in the
forest?

8b-16. O Lotus-eyed One, you have abandoned us who are only the
glorious powers of your own person. Why do you render us, the heaven-
dwellers, as good as dead all of a sudden?

It is because we constitute your own parts that all those who per-
form Yajfias worship us for propitiating you, O Yajiiapurusa (Lord, the
personification of Yajiia). We grant the benefits as directed by you.
Your own (Cosmic) Ego forms our body. We sustain ourselves by means
of your blessings.

1. This might be factually correct. The Coromandal Coast (including the coast
of Orissa) is devastated with stormy winds every few years. The small stone idol
of those primitive people must have disappeared under some sand-dune. The total
disappearance of Rauhina pond shows that the storm was very powerful.

=== PAGE 51 ===

46 . Skanda Purana

(We are afraid) where are we to flee now that you have become
indifferent to us. Of what avail are our abodes in the firmament with-
out being able to see you, O Madhava?

Without you we shall be unsuccessful and unhappy, roaming about
in wilderness. Your face is like the full moon without the spot. It
exudes exquisite beauty and happiness. If we are not going to see your
face, we shall not go to the heavenly abode. We shall undertake a great
penance and stay here itself, observing all holy rites. We shall subsist
on the products of the forest. We will grow matted hair and put on bark
garments until we can see you, O Lotus-eyed One.

O ocean of natural sympathy and mercy, it behoves you to save us,
the wretched ones. We are helpless and in a dejected state of mind.
We have resorted to you alone as our refuge.

Being unable to see you, we are sinking in the ocean consisting of
grief only. O Lord of the universe, redeem us by means of your aus-
picious, benign glance acting like a boat.”

17. Even as all the heaven-dwellers were talking thus (incoher-
ently) an unembodied speech issued forth:

18-19. ‘In this matter, O Suras, it does not behove you to engage
yourselves in futile efforts. From now onwards the vision of the Lord
will be very difficult to get on the earth. One shall attain the same
benefit of direct vision by bowing down to this place (where the Lord
was Originally). Go to Brahma and know the exact reason.”

20-25. On hearing it all the Devas approached Brahma. When they
heard the details of the blessings of Yama and the incarnation of the
wooden form, all of them were satisfied in their mind and returned to
heaven.

The Brahmana Vidyapati who got into the chariot thought thus:

“My purpose has been achieved, since Nilamadhava was seen. |
shall go all round this holy spot and observe. I shall circumambulate
this excellent holy spot named Sripurusottama which has not been visited
before. It is exceedingly meritorious and its glorification dispels sins
and impurities. I shall then go away quickly.

My friend has advised me that this holy spot on the shore of the sea
is adorned by the Nila Mountain. Those who circumambulate the forest
that dispels all sins acquire hundred times the benefit that one gets by
circumambulating the earth.’

After thinking thus, the excellent Brahmana wandered all over the
holy spot observing the forest full of different kinds of trees.

26. It was resounded with the chirping of the different kinds of

=== PAGE 52 ===

11.ii.9.27-41 47

birds. The humming bees hovered there. The sun’s rays did not pene-
trate it. It was full of groves of shady trees.

27. It was full of the flowers of all the seasons. It had been ren-
dered splendid by creepers, bowers and hedges. It was noisy with the
quacking of ducks and the cackling of geese in their different watery
resorts.

28. It shone with red lotuses, white lotuses, lilies and full-blown
blue lotuses. Neither the water nor the creepers etc. were without flowers.

29. After circumambulating the holy spot quickly, the excellent
Brahmana proceeded ahead observing fast and meditating. The intel-
ligent one reached Avanti by the close of the day.

30. Even while he was far off, the messengers had informed the
king about his arrival, O Brahmanas. On hearing it King Indradyumna
became exceedingly pleased.

31. After worshipping Janardana he sat there with a delighted mind
along with the learned Brahmanas eagerly waiting for his arrival.

32-34. In the meantime, O Brahmanas, that Vidyapati hurriedly en-
tered and came in front of the king. The pathway was ceremoniously
shown to him by the ushers with canes in their hands, while the gatekeepers
went ahead (of him). He was followed by the curious and enthusiastic
citizens. He had kept the excellent Nirm4lya of the deity called Nila
Madhava in his hand. )

On seeing him the king got up from his excellent seat. Saying *‘O
Lord of the universe, be pleased”, he approached him.

35-41. ‘*Today my life has become fruitful by realizing the Karma
of this birth, because I see Madhava here in the form of this Nirmalya
garland.

I bow down to the garland that has surpassed the fine fragrance of
the celestial trees through the acquisition of a matchless perfume from
the head of Mukunda. It (the garland) has made the swarm of bees blind
and has destroyed the sins of all the worlds by means of its sweet scent
wafted by the wind.

I bow down to the garland consisting of the flowers that have come
into contact with the brilliant unguent on the body of Visnu, by coming
into contact with the dust issuing from whose lotus-like feet Brahma
and others have attained great wealth.

(I bow down to that garland) which laughs at her co-wife Padma
(Laksmi) whose abode is (also) the lotus-like heart (of Visnu) and
which is proud of having stayed in the lap of Visnu. (It appears to
laugh) by means of the opening flowers.

=== PAGE 53 ===

48 Skanda Purana

Where did this brilliant garland stay and acquire greatness (as a
result of which) it stayed on the body of the Lord, the storehouse of
fortune and prosperity, for a long time pervading (encircling) all his
limbs? :

Be victorious (O Lord), an ornament unto the peak of the Nila Mountain,
O glorious (Lord) who dispels sins and agony of those who bow down.
Save me. I have sought refuge in you.”

Saying thus in words choked with tears, the king bowed down his
head (till it touched) the ground. He experienced a thrill.

42-47. The Brahmana Vidyapati who had destroyed all his sins, stood
in front of the king in a divine body meditating on Madhava.

With his refulgence the highly intelligent one (seemed) to wash off
the sins of all the worlds. He spoke thus: ‘‘May the Lord whose abode
is on the summit of Nila Mountain bless you. This is the command of
the Lord of Sri, revealed in the form of this garland. You are to visit
him who is abiding in the excellent holy spot. He is the bestower of
salvation directly.”

Having spoken thus, he put the garland round the neck of the king.
The king got up and on seeing the garland suspended over his chest,
considered that the Lover of Sri had directly come to his heart. He
placed both the hands on his own head with half-closed eyes. With his
face wet with tears of joy he eulogized Hari.

Indradyumna prayed:

48. Be victorious, O Lord who are skilled in the art of creation,
sustenance and annihilation of all the worlds, who have sportingly
assumed the Cosmic Body and who bear the burden of as many Cosmic
Eggs as there are hairs (on your body).

49-51, O Immanent Soul of all, O Lord, the dispeller of the agony
of those who bow down (to you), O Lord whose lotus-like feet have
become variegated due to the crowns of Brahma, Indra and Rudra, O
Lord, always interested in saving the wretched, the helpless and those
who have fallen into adversity, O ocean of the waters of sympathy that
is genuine (never pretended), O Lord greater than the greatest, O Lord
of the universe, O Lord ever affectionate to your devotees, save me,
the miserable one. I have you alone as my refuge. I am completely
overpowered by the primordial Nescience (A vidya).”

52-56. After eulogizing thus, the king sat on his throne. He was sur-
rounded by householders, religious students, ascetics and forest- dwellers.

He honoured and revered Vidyapati in the company of Brihmanas

=== PAGE 54 ===

ILii.9.57-66 49

who had performed Yajiias and were well-versed in the eighteen Vidyds
(lores) and who were in the company of many old servants whose lead-
ers were the ministers and (who sat there) silent.

The king made Vidyapati sit on a high pedestal of honour and asked
him the full details beginning with enquiry about his welfare.

With joy and very great attention he enquired about the greatness
and features of the holy spot Purusottama and of Visnu with blue sap-
phire for his body.

On being asked about his own experience by the Ksatriya, the Brahmana
narrated in detail (all his activities) beginning with the entry into the
island of Bhillas and ending with the plunge into the ocean. He gave
full report about the excellent holy spot.

57-59. He mentioned everything in due order such as the climbing
of the Nila Mountain, the viewing of Nilamadhava, the holy bath in
the Rauhina Kunda, the greatness of the Banyan tree, the eight benefi-
cent deities such as Nrsirhha, the situation of the eight Saktis and
the length and extent of the holy spot as noticed (by him) while driving
in the chariot.

60. On hearing that matchlessly wonderful story previously men-
tioned by that pilgrim, the king became extremely pleased. Delighted
in his mind he spoke to him once again:

Indradyumna said:

61-62a. O holy lord, I heard from you what has been already heard.
O excellent Brahmana, now describe unto me the form of Visnu idol
of blue sapphire. Describe it as it actually is.

Vidyapati said:

62b-65. Verily, I shall describe to you the divine idol of the Lord
of the universe. By seeing this idol with the ordinary mortal eye one
becomes a person deserving salvation. This idol of blue sapphire is
very ancient. It is worshipped everyday by Suras, the leaders among
whom are Brahm, Rudra and Indra.

This divine garland is put (on the idol) by Devas in the course of
their worship. It never fades, nor is it devoid of its fragrance. Even
when many days have passed, this garland is still like this. This gar-
land has originated from the earth.

66. I have destroyed all my sins by eating the divine presents and
offerings as well as the Nirmialya, O king. Don’t you notice that I have
a superhuman splendour?

=== PAGE 55 ===

50 Skanda Purana

67. Even if it is swallowed once, hunger, thirst and weakness never
harass one. The unseen can be inferred by means of what is seen.

68-69. O king, both worldly pleasures and salvation are present there
simultaneously. Old age, ailment, grief and other miseries have no
place there. It is the place where the Lord of the universe is directly
present. The Lord has a delightful, beaming face. His eyes resemble
petals of a full-blown blue lotus. He bestows immortality and salvation
on those who resort to him.

CHAPTER TEN
Dialogue Between Narada and Indradyumna

Indradyumna said:

1, Ever since your birth, O excellent Brahmana, you have never
been there. How did you come to know of the divine information (visit
of gods etc.) in Purusottama?

Vidyapati said:

2. There I stood in the evening after approaching the Lord. At that
time a cool wind of divine fragrance blew there.

3. Aconfused noise rose up and was heard from the sky. Gradually
it turned out to be a meaningful sound in the form of letters such as
‘*Go, proceed ahead”.

4-9a. In the vicinity of Vaikuntha (i.e. Visnu), the assemblage (of
Devas) took place, O king, after the mountain had been covered with
a shower of flowers by the heavenly beings.

There was an unprecedented sound of lutes, flutes, Mrdanga drums
and clapping of hands marking time in music. It got mixed with divine
songs.,

A thousand presents and offerings were made by the Devas for the
propitiation of the Supreme Lord. None of them had ever been visible
to men before. :

The Devas who could be known only by their hands (i.e. only the
hands were seen) duly worshipped the Lord. They delighted the Slayer

=== PAGE 56 ===

IL.ii.10.9b-25a 51

of Madhu by means of eulogies along with shouts of ‘‘Be victorious”.
Then they (gods) returned to heaven in the same way as they came
from it.

After they had departed, my Sabara friend Visvavasu gave me the
divine food offerings and this garland.

9b- 18a. It is invaluable. It never fades. It bestows prosperity, king-
ship and happiness. It dispels misfortunes, sins and evil spirits. As it
is befitting (to you), it has been brought by me.

Listen to the situation of the excellent holy spot of Visnu. Unpre-
cedented skill in workmanship is evident in this pleasing form. It cannot
be (adequately) described by a person born on this earth. It has been
seen because of your good fortune and manliness. I shall describe it.

This holy spot has the Nila mountain as its chief centre. All round
it is overspread with forests. It is well-known that its extent is five
KroSas (i.e.5 x 3=15Kms.). It is on the shore of the Tirtharaja (the
ocean) there. It is covered with golden sands.

On the peak of the mountain, there is a large, lofty Banyan tree that
is destined to be there for the period of a Kalpa. It extends to three
Kilometers. It is devoid of fruits and flowers but is brilliant with sprouts.
When the sun moves, its shade does not move.

To the west of it is the Kunda named Rohina. From the surface of
water it is adorned with a flight of steps of blue stone. All the four
sides outside it there are paved with crystals. It is very charming and
is filled with waters that dispel masses of sins.

In the middle of the eastern platform, in the cool shade of the holy
fig tree, there is the Lord holding the discus and the iron club made
of blue sapphire-gems.

18b-25a. (The idol) measures eighty-one Angulas (about 2 metres)
and is stationed on a golden lotus.

The region of his forehead surpassed the beauty of the crescent
moon of the eighth lunar day. His eyes (as if) attempt to censure (deni-
grate) the splendour of a pair of smiling blue lotuses. He dispels the
three types of ever increasing distresses by means of the nectar-rayed
moon of his face. He appears very splendid with his nostrils which are
like a shining flower of gingelly plant.

Though his body is made of stone, excellent smile bathes his lips.
The chin along with the jawbone appears exceedingly charming on
account of the cheeks beaming with laughter.

The two corners of the mouth have an unprecedented setup. Dimples
are formed in the cheeks due to laughter. The chin and the splendid

=== PAGE 57 ===

52 Skanda Purina

corners of the mouth are held as models for such (heavenly) artisans
as Vi§vakarman and others by the Lord.

On either of his ears there is an ear-ring shaped like Makara (croco-
dile). The face in between these two ear-rings laughs at (i.e. surpasses)
the full moon in between Jupiter and Venus (i.e. with these planets on
either side).

Through his neck that increases the beauty of his neck ornament, he
gives those who look at it, the suspicion that the conch with right-
handed curls has given birth to pearls. .

25b-30. His shoulders are thick and large. He has four long arms
stretching as far as the knees. The region of the chest of the Lord
sparkles with white spotless necklaces. There he holds the fourteen
worlds reflected in his divine Kaustubha gem.

He is handsome with a small hair line entering the depressed navel
as though it were a deep pool. He renders the necklace immovable by
the waist having three folds of skin above the navel.

With the waistband studded with jewels and having small bells
suspended along with the pearl necklace the buttocks of the Lord shine
like leafy cups of beauty of all the worlds.

The pair of pillar-like calves, rendered splendid by means of the
pearl necklace hanging down as far as the loins and the yellow robes,
supports the auspicious festoons of salvation.

The two feet of the Lord shine on account of the circular and sym-
metrical knees, the gem-set anklets as well as the garland extending
to the forepart of the feet.

31-36. (Defective text) The Lord is adorned with necklaces, brace-
lets, armlets, crown etc. Lord KeSava wields the discus, the lotus, the
iron mace and the conch which are the products of perfect knowledge,
Cosmic Ego, Supreme majesty and Sabda-brahman (Vedas or Omkara
or verbal expression of Supreme Knowledge). He illuminates all the
cardinal points. Thus he is installed on the Nila mountain.

By devoutly bowing down to him and seeing him one is liberated
from the bondage of the physical body.

Laksmi who occupies his left side is embraced by the Lord holding
a lotus in his hand. She is engaged in playing on the lute with her eyes
fixed to the face of the Lord. She is the abode of all beauty and is
adorned with all ornaments.

I saw those two, the parents of the universe, stationed on the moun-
tain. They are silent. With their smiling eyes they bless all those who
view them. As they bless all Jiving beings, I thought them to be alive.

=== PAGE 58 ===

IL.ti.10.37-53 53

Sesa with his many hoods forming an umbrella is stationed behind
them.

37. In front (the Discus) SudarSana was seen assuming an embodied
form. Behind him I saw Garuda stationed with palms joined in rev-
erence.

38. Having seen directly that Lord of Sri, of wonderful form and
features like this, my mind runs back to that place as though dragged
with ropes.

39. Only that man who has acquired excellent Karmas in the course
of many thousands of births and has all of them ripened simultaneously,
sees the Lord.

40. No man is competent to have the vision of Purusottama of this
nature even by means of holy baths in Tirthas, austerities, charitable
gifts, sacrifices to gods and other holy rites.

41. Those who meditate upon Visnu abiding in the holy place of
Purusottama, whose form is dark-complexioned and who resembles the
sky free from impurities (like clouds etc.) get their bonds cut. They
(then) enter the city of Visnu, after attaining which no one feels any
grief.

42. If the different kinds of benefits of a man’s Karmas brought
about by all the eighteen lores are concentrated together, they can
come up to a hundredth part (of the bliss) of the vision of Visnu.

43. What more needs to be spoken in this matter, O king? Such is
the greatness of the ground of that holy place that whatever be the
extent of things coveted by a man’s mind, he will! acquire all of them
and even more, if he merely bows down to the Lord of the Nila mountain.

44. Only he by whom the Lord of the Nila mountain has been seen
is a donor, performer of sacrifices, speaker of truth, one of pious and
righteous conduct—he is the most excellent one in all good qualities
and all births.

45. O king, this greatness has been known by me from those atten-
dants of Madhava, the Lord of the universe, who are present there.

46. In this context the ancient (yet) well known ancedote of the
primordial creation coming down by tradition has been heard by me.
It is only after that I have come here.

47. At your behest I went there and visited Sri Purusottama. (Every-
thing) has been reported to you. Do whatever you desire to do now.

Indradyumna said:
48-53. I dm satisfied (and feel my objects accomplished) on hearing

=== PAGE 59 ===

54 Skanda Purana

about the Lord’s form that dispels sins, from you whose words are
trustworthy. O holy Lord, due to my contact with the divine Nirmdlya
my sins acquired in the course of many births have been destroyed.
Now I have become a person desiring the vision of the Lord of Sri. I
shall whole-heartedly go there along with the flourishing kingdom. I
shall make residence there and build cities and forts.

In order to propitiate the Enemy of Mura I shall perform a horse-
sacrifice. Everyday I will worship Srinatha (Visnu) with a hundred
presents and offerings. I shall propitiate the Sire of the universe by
means of holy rites, fasts and other pious observances.

When the Lord will be eulogized by me thus with faithful devotion,
the omnipresent Lord Narayana who is merciful and considerate to-
wards the wretched will shower with nectarine words me who have
become distressed.

54-58. Narada who is (ever) curious to survey the worlds came there.
On seeing that sage, the son of Brahmi, the foremost among the fol-
lowers of Visnu, coming, the king then hoped that his purpose would
be realised.

He got up promptly and received him with the formalities of offering
Padya (water to wash the feet), Arghya (materials of worship) and
Acamaniya (water for formal sipping). With palms joined in reverence
he spoke to the sage who was seated in an excellent seat the following
words:

Indradyumna said:

Today my Yajjias , charitable gifts, study of the Vedas and penance
have become fruitful, since the alter ego of Brahma has come to my
abode.

O sage, even though I am satisfied with your blessing in the form
of a visit, what behest of yours shall I carry out for pleasing you? What
is the purpose for which my abode has been sanctified by you?

Jaimini said:

59. On hearing the words of the king which were tender and full of
devotion and humility, the son of Brahma spoke to the king smilingly:
Narada said:

60. O Indradyumna, the most excellent one among kings, Devas,

=== PAGE 60 ===

IL. ii. 10.61-74 55

Siddhas and sages along with Brahma have become pleased with the
mass of your flawless qualities.

61. Each of your good qualities is well-founded and makes you worthy
enough to remain in the abode of Brahmi. They severally qualify you
for it and are desirable ones.

62. I got down (to the earth) to see Nara residing in the hermitage
of BadarikaSrama. At the time of meditation of him your endeavour
like this has become known.

63-64a. O king, your endeavour is excellent, whereby your mind has
been of such a (devotional) nature. O king, devotion unto Madhava, the
Lord of the world, whose abode is in a cave of mountain Nila, is engen-
dered by practice (of devotion) in a thousand births.

64b-65. By propitiating the Lord of the universe Brahma of great
intelligence created this universe and attained the position of grand-
father. As you are born in his lineage, it is proper that your devotion
should be such (intense).

66-67a. The devotion to Visnu, the benefit of which is the accom-
plishment of the four major goals of life, is the result of no small
austerity.

The beginningless primordial Nescience (Avidya) which greatly
heightens the five kinds of troubles, is firmly rooted (in man). The only
remedy to annihilate (it) is devotion to Visnu.

67b-69a. Devotion to Visnu alone is the bestower of happiness on
men who wander in the forest of worldly existence which is full of
thorns in the form of miseries at every step.

To those who are sinking without support in the ocean of worldly
existence where the Dvandvas (mutually opposite pairs) rise up like a
violent storm and which is difficult to cross, devotion to Visnu is pro-
claimed (in scriptures) as a boat.

69b-74. By resorting solely to the devotion to Visnu, (which is like)
a mother of exalted magnificence, good people are contented in their
minds. They never grieve over (anything).

To those noble souls who are exceedingly delighted by drinking the
nectar of devotion to Visnu, attainment of the region of Brahm is only
a small benefit.

O king, the great mass of sins of living beings is of three types. In
the great forest fire of devotion to Visnu it is burnt like locusts.

Pray4ga, Ganga and other important Tirthas, austerities, ASvamedha
(i.e. horse-sacrifice), the most excellent one among all sacrifices, great
charitable gifts, observance of holy rites, fasts etc. even in thousands—

=== PAGE 61 ===

56 Skanda Purana

if all these are gathered together and multiplied by crores and crores,
that will not be equal to, it is proclaimed, a thousandth part of devotion
to Visnu.
Jaimini said:

75-76. On hearing about the greatness of devotion to Visnu as ex-
plained by the Brahminical sage, the king became desirous of knowing
the special nature of devotion to Visnu The king endowed with (the

knowledge of) the use of means of hospitality, spoke these words to
Narada :

Indradyumna said:

77. The greatness of devotion to Visnu has been excellently des-
cribed (by you), O great sage. A desire to know its form and nature has
been in my heart for a long time.

78. Describe the characteristic of Bhakti (Devotion), O eminent
Vaisnava (follower of Visnu). In the whole of the earth there can be
no one else who will explain it. This is known to me.

Narada said:

79, What has been asked by you, O king, is perfectly sound. I shall
recount to you the real characteristics of excellent devotion. You are
the most excellent one of all persons eligible (to hear about) Bhakti.

80. This should never be spoken to an undeserving person, a blind
one, an internally impure one. It is being recounted by me, O sinless
one.

81. Listen to it attentively, O king. Listen to the eternal Bhakti in
general and Bhakti to Visnu in particular.!

82. ‘He (Visnu) alone is the giver of absolute happiness and the
breaker of the series of miseries.’ If any one thinks thus and resorts to
him (the Lord), it is called Bhakt, It is of three types according to
three Gunas and (that which transcends these Gunas and is thus) attributeless
(Nirguna) is considered to be the fourth one.

83. The devotion of those who are overpowered by lust and anger
and who do not see any other means shall be the Bhakti of Tamasa
variety, O king. It is conducive to the acquisition (of what they desire)
as well as magical powers.

‘1. VV 81-96 give an exposition of Bhakti.

=== PAGE 62 ===

Iii. 10.84-96 S7

84. The devotion that is resorted to for gaining extraordinary fame
or overpowering a rival or incidentally for enjoyment in the other worlds
is known as the Bhakti of Rdjasa variety.

85-86a. The devotion is of the Sattvika variety when it is pursued
by one who knows the transitoriness of the worldly objects of pleasure
and the comparative permanence of those of the other world and who,
without giving up the (religious) duties prescribed for one’s own caste
and stage in life, resorts to devotion only for the sake of self-realiza-
tion.

86b-90. ‘The Lord of the universe himself (is identical with) this
universe. There is no other cause (of this universe). I am not different
from him. He does not abide separately from me. He is devoid of
external attributes and adjuncts. He should be realized through an abun-
dance of love.’ This form of Bhakti is very difficult to attain. It is
conducive to salvation. It is called Advaita (non-dualistic) devotion.

Devotees go to the abode of Brahman by means of Sattviki Bhakti,
to the world of Sakra (heaven) through the Rajasi Bhakti. After enjoy-
ing the pleasures (of the earth) the devotees of the Tamasi Bhakti go
to the world of Pitrs. They return to Bhirloka (Earth) and adopt a
Bhakti other than the previous one. The devotee of Tamasa variety
adopts devotion of the Rajasa variety; and one of the Rajasa type adopts
the Sattvika variety. The devotee of Sattvika type attains liberation
after non-dualistic contemplation.

91-96. By resorting to any one of these the devotee should go to
the path of salvation gradually.

To a person devoid of devotion to Visnu ali the holy rites ordained
by the Srutis and Smrtis: the rites of atonement etc., pilgrimage to
Tirthas, Krcchra and other forms of penance, nobility of birth, skill in
arts etc. are just like a worldly ornament. The only result thereof is
pain and strain to the body as in the case of the infidelity of an adul-
teress.

Even if he is devoid of noble birth and traditional course of conduct,
a person of steady devotion who has controlled the sense-organs, is
worthy of being praised by the people of all worlds. But not so in the
case of a person who possesses eighteen lores but is devoid of devotion,
O excellent king. The same holds good in the case of a man of a good
caste and holy rites.

Bhakti unto Visnu is not engendered in a man of very little fortune.
By acquiring Bhakti unto Visnu with great effort, one has his objects
achieved’and he becomes blessed. He does not perish (spiritually).

=== PAGE 63 ===

58 Skanda Purana

That through which one knows the Lord of the universe is glorified
as Vidya ( learning). That holy rite (Karma) which delights the Lord
is destructive of inauspiciousness.

97-99'. A man of steadfast holy rites possessing these two (i.e. Vidya
and Karma) is called a devotee of Visnu. By the dust of his feet the
whole universe including the mobile and immobile beings, is sancti-
fied. He is competent to create, sustain and annihilate as he pleases.
How insignificant then are the simple desires of worldly prosperity or
heaven etc.!

There is no difference between these two, viz. Vasudeva and his
devotee. | shall tell you the characteristics of those who are devotees
of Visnu.

100-106a. They have calm minds. They are gentle towards all. They
have conquered lust and the sense-organs. Mentally, verbally or physi-
cally they never desire to harass others. Their minds always melt with
pity. They are averse to stealing and inflicting violence. Towards the
good qualities of others they are favourably disposed. In activities for
the sake of others they rejoice. They are refined and cultured with good
conduct. Other’s festivities are their own festivities. Without jealousy
and rivalry (towards anyone) they see Vasudeva abiding in all living
beings. They are sympathetic with the wretched ones forever. They
wish for other people’s welfare very much. In the lavish presents and
worship of kings they take as much interest as in fondling own sons.

They are afraid of external things (objects of pleasure etc.) as if of
cobras. They have for Hari as much love as hundred crores of times
the love for sensual objects entertained by persons lacking in discrimi-
nation.

They worship Sankara and others with a sense of perpetual duty and
they meditate upon them as on Visnu and treat the Manes like forms
of Visnu.

106b-110. They do not see anyone as different from Visnu, nor do
they see Visnu as being separate from other things. There is separate-
ness in the individual form but there is no separateness in the collec-
tive form.

They think thus: ‘O Lord of the universe, I am your servant and you
are mine. We are not separate. Since the Lord is the immanent soul

1. VV 97 onwards describe Vaisnavas and their characteristics and the con-
trasts with non-Vaisnavas.

=== PAGE 64 ===

11.ii.10.111-118 59

stationed in the heart of everyone, there is no one other than you as
the served or the server.’

With this feeling of devotion, they attentively bow down to and
always glorify Hari whose lotus-like feet are worthy of being saluted
by the Lotus-born Lord (Brahma). They consider worldly-minded per-
sons as insignificant as blades of grass.

They are clever in rendering help to others always in all the worlds.
They consider other people’s welfare as their own. If others are af-
flicted, they are kind and compassionate to them. Vaisnavas are in-
deed famous as persons with auspicious minds.

111. Vaisnavas are reputed to have the same attitude towards all
these: a piece of stone, other men’s wealth or a lump of clay; other
men’s wives or Salmali trees with sharp thorns all over them; friends,
enemies, brothers and kinsmen.

112. Vaisnavas are famous as having pleasant faces on account of
their numerous good qualities. They are ready to cover the weak and
vulnerable points of others. They bestow ultimate hapniness (on every-
one). Their minds always dwell on the Lord. They speak sweet words.

113. Vaisnavas consider the auspicious names of the Slayer of Karhsa
as destructive of sins. They repeat them with clear and sweet tones.
They repeatedly say, ‘‘Be victorious, be victorious”. They are well
known to be negligent of worldly wealth as useless.

114. Vaisnavas are noted for their minds being fixed on the lotus-
like pair of feet of Hari. Their intellects are apathetic (towards worldly
affairs). They have the same appearance in happiness as well as in
misery. They are clever in showing reverence to Hari in their own
minds.

115. Vaisnavas have their (limbs such as) shoulders, arms marked
with (Visnu’s) discus, mace, lotus, conch. They wear as armour the
dust particles taken from the feet of Visnu after bowing down to Him.
Such Vaisnavas are victorious.

116. Vaisnavas are victorious. They are beautiful with the requisite
ornaments and forms through the exceedingly fragrant basil leaf, gar-
land and sandal paste taken from the limb of the Conqueror of Mura
in order to woo Mukti (salvation) as it were.

117. Vaisnavas are victorious with false prestige and pride dropped
from their pure minds; they are calm with Aharhkara (egotism) perish-
ing quickly; they have destroyed their griefs by worshipping Narahari
(Man-Lion), the trustworthy kinsman of Devas.

118. The"auspicious conduct and characteristics of those who have

=== PAGE 65 ===

60 Skanda Purana

continuous devotion to the Lord have been spoken to you by us. By
being listened to these will dispel the impurity of men acquired in the
course of a very long time.

119. Wealth is never sought. Nor an antidote against a pain arising
in the body. O mind, J shall give you only this, viz. the glorification
of the name (of the Lord) in light and soft words and the worship
thereof.

120. (As opposed to these) A vaisnavas (‘non-devotees of Visnu’) hate
auspicious conduct of (other) men. They themselves indulge in evil
conduct and evil thoughts in the minds. They are undisturbed even if
great misfortune befalls them. They take delight in sexual enjoyment.

121. Those A vaisnavas are inebriated. They do not resort to the Lord
even for a moment, although he is the cause of supreme happiness and
is present in the lotus of the heart. They always cover up the names
of Hari by means of aimless, worthless and futile network of words.

122. They are always covetous of other men’s young wives and wealth.
They are miserly and always think of filling up their bellies. They
invariably think (enviously?) of the greatness of others. Indeed those
devoid of devotion to Visnu are human brutes.

123. They are always attached to the company of ignoble persons.
They are hideous and highly awful. They assai] and hurt others vio-
lently. They are not inclined to remember the feet of Narahari. These
dirty men are to be shunned from a great distance.

CHAPTER ELEVEN
Dialogue Between Narada and Indradyumna (Continued)

Jaimini said:
1. On hearing about the excellent devotion to the Lord from Narada,

the son of Brahmi, thus, Indradyumna became highly pleased and spoke
to him:

Indradyumna said:

2. Learned men have taught me that association with saintly people
is destructive of the ailment of worldly existence. O holy Lord, that
has happened to me just now.

=== PAGE 66 ===

IL.ii.11.3-16 61

3. Visnu, the Supreme Soul, greater than the greatest, has been
directly visualized by you. Who else can be a better saintly person than
you? And you have come to my abode.

4. By your presence, O holy Lord, my darkness of ignorance has
been dispelled. Therefore, my mind prompts me to worship Nilamadhava.

5-6. Wandering over all the worlds you know the whole of the uni-
verse. Therefore, let us get into the chariot and visit Nilamadhava, the
splendid ornament unto the holy spot named Purusottama. Many have
told me that there are many Tirthas there. If I know them directly from
your words, they will be fruitful to me.

Narada said:

7. Well, I shall show you the holy place and the Tirthas present
in that sacred place. I shall point out Sakti-Sarnbhus! and tell you
about the greatness of the holy place.

8. You will directly see the Lord of Devas who bestows his own
self on the devotee. You will see him quickly as he will be in fourfold
form in order to bless you.

9-10. By visiting him a man becomes a worthy receptacle of devotion.

After concluding their dialogue thus, both of them became pleased
and carried out their daily routine of duties. As an auspicious time
favourable to the departure, they fixed the fifth day in the bright half
of the lunar month Jyestha, which happened to be a Wednesday. During
the night the king and Narada slept in the same place.

11-16. Then, when the day dawned clearly, Indradyumna, the excel-
lent king, made the following proclamation for the entire kingdom to
set out for Niladri along with kinsmen and armies and their assets:

“*It has been decided that all of us will stay there for the whole of
our life. Everyone will continue the same work for livelihood as has
been allotted to him here. Let the kings proceed along with their women,
ministers and retinue, together with chariots, elephants, horses, foot-
soldiers and treasury. Let them be fully equipped and ready. Let the
Brahmanas go there along with their sacrificial fires. Let the mer-
chants and traders proceed with their utensils, wares and merchandise.
(The following shall proceed:) Those who are experts in politics and

1. Sakti-Sarnbhus: The various Sakti-goddesses and Siva-lingas installed in the
Purusottama Keetra.

=== PAGE 67 ===

62 Skanda Purina

statecraft; experts in (the maintenance of) royal highways; astrologers;
astronomers; experts in dances; persons well conversant with admin-
istrative work and polity;

17-23. those who are experts in dancing, singing and four types of
musical instruments; those who are very clever in the excellent sci-
ence of medicine for treating elephants, horses and human beings; those
who have practical experience in the eighteen Vidy4s and ancillary
subjects; those who have excellence in magic and allied arts; highway
robbers; adventurous thieves; those who knock away things even as the
victim stands and stares; those who maintain themselves by narrating
strange and wonderful tales: those who specially speak agreeably; pane-
gyrists; bards; those who maintain themselves by means of sacred treatises;
those who give relief from pain; gamblers; harlots; courtesans; pimps,
lechers (lecherous persons); husbandmen; those who breed cows, sheep,
goats, camels and mules; those who keep birds; fowlers; those who
keep monkeys, tigers, and panthers; snake-charmers; cowherds; hunt-
ers; barbarians of various tribes and all others born in the Malava land
who obey my commands. Let them all proceed to their abode on the
Nila mountain with their respective assets. Let them be ready to build
their own houses”.

24. The king who waited impatiently for the time of the journey,
commanded thus. Thereafter he joined Narada and spoke these words
to the astrologer:

25-30. ‘‘O astrologer, you have already fixed up the auspicious hour.
Whatever is required at the moment in the opinion of the priest, bring
all those auspicious articles readily.”

O excellent Brahmanas, on being commanded by him that astrologer
brought all the required auspicious articles with the assistance of the
priest. In the meantime that saintly king sat on his divine throne.

At the outset, the sacred rite of ablution for the sake of (a safe)
journey was conducted by the Brahmanas. Separate ablutions were per-
formed repeating the different Siiktas' (hymns), viz. Sri Sdkta, Vahni
Sakta, Varuna Sikta, Pavamanya Sikta and Abdhi Sikta. All of them
are contributory to increased auspiciousness. The waters of the differ-
ent Tirthas were used. Medicinal herbs and all types of sweet scents
were used separately. After the ablution the water was wiped off by

1. These are various Siktas pertaining to deities Sri, Agni, Varuna, Pavamina
and the Sea.

=== PAGE 68 ===

-TLii.11.31-44 63

a silk cloth. With his brilliant body the king shone like smokeless fire.
31-35. The king wore a white cloth. He performed the rite of Acamana.
Then he wore the Pavitra of Darbha grass. He worshipped the groups
of Manes called Nandimukhas in accordance with the injunctions. He
performed the Homas by repeating Jaya and Réstrabhyt hymns, and
then the Ganahomas were performed scrupulously. Sankhas (conchs)
were blown; sweet perfumes spread everywhere. He performed the circum-
ambulation of the holy fire that appeared white in colour without any
smoke. The flame of the fire curled to the right side. Thereby it ap-
peared to grant directly victory to the king who sought victory.

In order to destroy the vicious influence of Planets and to increase
well-being, the king was served with the Grahakuthbha (water pot conse-
crated to the Planets) at the end of the sacrifice unto the nine Planets.

The Mantras mentioned in the astrological treatises were repeated
in the manner urged by the astrologer.

Thereafter, the auspicious embellishment and dressing rite was
begun.

36-42. The silk cloths covered his body like an armour. The (white?)
turban was splendid and brilliant with gem-set crown. The ears were
adorned with the ring-shaped ear-ornaments (A vatamsas) and gem-set
Kundalas (varieties of ear-rings and ornaments). The excellent king
wore a neck-ornament of great value and a Hara embellished with a
central gem. Then he put on shoulderlets, armlets and rings. He wore
round his waist three (fine) gold wires twisted into one waistband and
touching the folds of skin above the navel. Then he wore an excellent
girdle well set with different kinds of precious stones and having fes-
toon-like clusters of pearls along with golden tinkling bells. He fas-
tened very valuable anklets round his feet. in the mirror held in front
of him, he saw his reflection as a well (dressed and) ornamented one.

He remembered Lord Sridhara, the slayer of Madhu, Visnu, the abode
of auspiciousness and the cause of glorious happiness, as by remem-
bering him sins though multitudinous, perish. He sat facing East on a
golden pedestal for the sake of auspicious decorations.

43. At the outset the king wore a garland of seasonal flowers with
bright colours and sweet scent after it had been consecrated with Mantras
by his own priest.

44. Then he (touched) clay, lamp, fruit, Dirva grass, curds and Gorocané
(i.e. a bright yellow pigment) after all of them had been sanctified by
Mantras. Then he was given (the ceremonious) protection by means of
(protective¥ white mustard. '

=== PAGE 69 ===

64 Skanda Purina

45. The king then looked at himself (reflected) in the ghee prepared
from cow milk. The lion-like king then looked at the reflection in the
mirror consecrated by Mantras.

46. Good prospects were wished by the singing of Vedic hymns and
loud chanting of Santi (propitiatory) Mantras.'

He was accorded protection while proceeding along the path by
means of Pathisikta and Yajur Mantras.

47. The king was filled with heroism and fortitude through the aus-
picious verses of Purdnas. His valour was revealed by the bards and
heralds through panegyrics.

48. Within his lotus-like heart the king meditated upon the Garuda-
emblemed Lord who, accompanied by Satyabhamd, took away the
heavenly P&rijata tree. Then he took (the first) step with his right foot.

49. After circumambulating Sage Narada who was standing in front,
the king went up to the central main door guarded by cane-bearing
attendants.

50-51. (As required in royal formalities) the attendants showed him
the path. He proceeded with the family sacred Fire (Agnihotra) taken
ahead (by the priests). There he saw to his right the Brahmanas, stand-
ing ready reciting the Mangalya Sikta (hymn for auspiciousness). They
were brilliant in appearance and wore white silk clothes. They threw
fried grains and corn in front of the king along with flowers repeating
words of blessings for his welfare.

52. The courtesans stood on the left side busily holding and waving
the chowries. They wore shining, gorgeous costumes and bright orna-
ments. With smiling lotus-like faces they (appeared) exceedingly splendid.

53. O excellent Brahmanas, the king was devout and humble. He
honoured Brahmanas with garments, ornaments, garlands, sweet scents
and unguents.

54. With the faith that Brahmanas were the Lord Himself, he made
those Brahmanas delighted by (thus) honouring them.

55. With the permission of the king the minister gave suitable presents
of cash, white doves, swans, a white horse and a white elephant to the
courtesans, the bards as well as to the indigent helpless people.

1. Santi Mantras are propitiatory Mantras like (1) 4 no bhadrah (RV 1.89.
1-10), (2) svasti na indra (RV 1.89.6-10), (3) Sam na indraégni (RV VI1.35.1-11)
and others. They are used in Santi-rites on different occasions to avert evil and
to pray for good.

=== PAGE 70 ===

TL.ii.11.56-70 65

56. The king then (intently) looked at the auspicious pitcher filled
with water and kept beneath an arch of the stems (with leaves) of
plantain tree—the pitcher embellished with mango-sprouts, garlands of
white flowers and fruit. He viewed many other auspicious things also.
A white umbrella was held above his head to ward off the heat of the
sun.
57-58. He heard many musical instruments played, mixed with the
sounds of hundreds of conch-shells blown simultaneously. Similarly
the king heard auspicious songs and shouts of ‘‘Be victorious”

Then he entered the palace to see Nrsimha.

59-63. By remembering that Lord a man becomes recipient of all
auspiciousness. Seeing that Lord Nrhari from a distance, the Lord seated
on a divine throne, he (the king) prostrated (in front of him) with the
eight limbs touching the ground. With the words of the Upanisads he
propitiated the Lord. He made obeisance to Durga who stood on his
right side—Durga who liberates (devotees) from all adversities, looks
(at the devotees) compassionately. He paid obeisance to the Goddess
just near her feet.

Then the priest took off the auspicious garland from the ido! of the
Lord and put it round the neck (of the king) and applied sweet scents
on his body. He joyously performed the Nirdjana rite (i.e. ceremonious
waving of the lights) to the king and covered the head of the king (with
a turban?).

The excellent king then circumambulated once again the two dei-
ties and placed them in the palanquin. They were kept ahead and he
started (on his journey).

64-65a. He came out and saw at the external gate the chariot kept
ready. Ten horses with the speed of wind had been yoked to it. The king
circumambulated the chariot and got into it along with Narada.

65b-66a. Various kinds of drums, viz. Dhakka, Mrdanga, Nihs4na,
Bheri, Panava and Gomukha were sounded. The musical instruments
Madhuri and Carcari were played. Thousands of conch-shells were blown.

66b-68. There were crores of chariots belonging to the vassal kings.
They were kept in rows and rows all round the chariot of Indradyumna.
They were equipped with various kinds of weapons. They were adorned
with flags and banners. The flag posts were tall. They were fitted with
strings of bells made of gold and silver. There wre mirrors too attached
to them. They were equipped with various mechanical devices. They
had pleasing and majestic rumbling sounds.

69-70. The sounds of the infantry, the horses with the speed of wind

=== PAGE 71 ===

66 Skanda Puriga

and the elephants (were heard). The rumbling sounds of the chariots
were mixed with the sounds of the marching of the foot-soldiers, the
trumpeting of the elephants and the neighing of the horses. The sounds
of the musical instruments too mingled with these. All these were
heard by people like sounds of oceans at the time of the close of
Yuga. '

71. At that same moment the citizens too started equipped with
their own requisites along with horses, donkeys, camels and porters.

72. In that tumultuous confusion when the whole nation had set out,
swings, palanquins, ponies etc. were seen (proceeding ahead) in rows
and rows.

73-76. Hundreds of members of inner apartments of the kings set out
from the place. They were surrounded by eunuchs and guarded by of-
ficials and great armies. They rode in different kinds of vehicles.

The Yajvans (‘sacrificial priests’) started with their wives after
placing the Agnihotra (sacrificial) fires and materials in the Samya
vessels in different groups and carrying them in carts.

Bundles of books, utensils for the worship of deities, sacrificial
twigs, Darbha grass, pots and pitchers, and the materials for Homa—
all these they made other Brahmanas to carry by means of other carts
and vehicles.

77-81a. The vassal kings, ministers, servants, priests, Rtviks, the
king’s administrative officials, slaves, those who had been employed
in various kinds of services—all these set out with their belongings
gathered together. Others went ahead. Those who had been employed
in the treasuries took with them the entire treasure (cash etc.) and
hastened ahead. The persons who attended upon the king on different
occasions, gardeners and others, merchants and traders—all these toak
with them their respective merchandise and proceeded forth at the
behest of the king. Excellent artisans and craftsmen with their guilds
started along with the residents of cities, hamlets and rural parts. They
had with them all the necessary implements for the practice of their
professions or trades.

81b-84. On hearing the sounds of the drums, Bheris, Patahas and
Mrdangas beaten at the time of the journey of King Indradyumna, that
pervaded all the cardinal points, all the people staying in rural out-
skirts became excited. They obeyed the commands of the king and
started towards Nila mountain.

Everyone went along the direct path most suitable to him. At the
behest of the king they did not seek the main highway on account of

=== PAGE 72 ===

IL.ii.11.85-97 67

haste. They went along the difficult path leading to Nila mountain.

85-91. The eminent King Indradyumna, surrounded by residents of
the whole city and the four army divisions, who were extremely de-
lighted, shone in his chariot that was in the centre of the series of
chariots proceeding ahead in a line of kings. The saintly king had the
paraphernalia similar to that of Sakra.

His mind was pleased with the auspicious activities of the ladies
of the city, their songs of welcome and good wishes and their showerings
of flowers and fried grains—everything increasing the grandeur of the

“auspicious rite.

He joyously went ahead in the chariot to which horses having the
speed of gusts of wind had been yoked, along the dustless path on the
surface of the ground that had been levelled as though in quadrangles,
and that was very cool under the shade of clouds raised by favourable
winds. The way was shown to the king by those persons who had trav-
elled through various lands and who knew thoroughly the ins and outs
of the forests.

He went on observing the lands and territories as well as the forest
regions on either side of the pathway. He was delighted and his plea-
sure was evident in his eyes. He reached the shrine of Carcika! (God-
dess Durga) that marked the boundary of UtkaladeSa and was on their
way. The deity was decorated with a garland of skulls.

92. The king got out of the chariot at Narada’s behest. With great
humility he bowed down to her with the eight limbs touching the ground
and with great delight in his mind he eulogized her.

Indradyumna said:

93-97. Obeisance to you, O Goddess, O dispeller of all miseries and
adversities. You are glorified through eulogies by Brahma, Visnu, Siva
and others. You are the cause of all the worlds. O primordial Goddess,
O supreme deity, be pleased. O Siva, without you this universe cannot
have any power (or endure) even for a monent. The accomplishment of
all undertakings in the mortal world and all auspiciousness is the result
of propitiating your feet, O eternal Goddess, and not otherwise. O su-
preme deity, you are the Sakti (power) of Visnu, the Lord of mobile

1. Now this goddess is worshipped at Banki in the Cuttack District of Orissa.
The Purana believes the earth as consisting of eighteen continents instead of the
usual seven Gvipas.

=== PAGE 73 ===

68 Skanda Purana

and immobile beings. It is through this Sakti that the Lord creates,
protects and annihilates the universe. O Goddess, bless me so that with
my own eyes I shall see the Lord residing in the Nila mountain, the
sire of mobile and immobile beings.

Jaimini said:

98-105. After eulogizing the Goddess as per advice of Narada, the
king got into the chariot quickly like the Sun climbing the Udaya mountain.
Then he started quickly.

(Later on) when his vehicles (horses) became tired, the king halted
the army on the banks of the great river Citrotpala (modern Mahanadi).
It was a famous region on account of the caves abounding in minerals.
The forest was not at all thick there.

With the intention of performing the requisite rites of the late af-
ternoon, the king entered the bathing Ghat along with his priest after
it had been searched thoroughly and found to be devoid of poisonous
thorns. The Lord of the subjects took his bath, performed the Tarpana
rites for Devas and Pitrs and duly worshipped Visnu.

Thereafter, the king honoured the vassal kings and the ministers and
other officers by providing them with seats, resting places etc. Then
the glorious king entered the inner apartment along with Narada and
with a delighted mind partook of his food as tasty and juicy as nectar.

When the sun set, the king concluded his evening rites quickly. As
the moon rose, the king sat in the middle of the assembly of his sub-
jects and vassal kings.

106. There in that assembly the king shone with all the character-
istics of an emperor like the autumnal moon with the full disc in the
middle of the luminaries.

107. The poets recited verses describing his fame as pure as nec-
tar. Musicians of sweet and excellent voice sang well-composed songs
of praise.

108. Thereafter, the courtesans who were proud of their beauty,
youth and graceful charms danced in front (of them) keeping the per-
fectly correct musical timing, keynote and the proper gesticulations
and movements of the body.

109. By means of poetical and prose compositions full of figures
of speech and imagery and wonderful groupings of words, the bards and
heralds eulogized him whose form and features were the most splendid
and perfect in the world.

=== PAGE 74 ===

Wii.11.110-124 69

110. Thereafter the king honoured the prominent Vaisnavas seated
in the assembly with sweet scents, garlands and betel leaves which
were well-approved and splendid in appearance.

111-112. At the bidding of the king many (vassal) kings had occu-
pied their seats comfortably. King Indradyumna honoured hundreds of
them befittingly with those articles which kings deserved.

Then in order to hear the story of the Lord that is destructive of all
sins, the king respectfully requested Narada, a favourite of the Lord,
and the most excellent one among sages, who was comfortably seated
on a throne he deserved:

Indradyumna said:

113-116. O holy lord, O abode of the Vedas and Vedangas, O be-
loved one of the Lord, you alone know the life story of Visnu with the
vision of knowledge. If you are kind and considerate towards me, O
sage, wash my heart with the nectar of the story of Hari as it has
become very dirty with mud (sins, ignorance).

While the discourse between the sage and the king thus got mingled
with dialogues like these, the doorkeeper, a servant of the Lord of
Utkala, entered and reported to the king: ‘‘O Lord, the king of Utkala
stands near the entrance. He is accompanied by his chief (ministers,
officers etc.). He is waiting with presents (in his hands) and wishes to
see the lotus-like feet of Your Highness.”

117-120. When the saintly king was informed thus by the doorkeeper,
he became agitated. O Brahmanas, he had been hearing about the holy
spot of Sripurusottama. Since that holy spot was an ornament to his
land, he was eager to listen to what he had to convey. So the king told
the gatekeeper: ‘‘Without delay usher in the glorious king of Odhra
land. Indeed, he is devoid of all impurities (sins) by having propitiated
Visnu on Nila mountain. By seeing him all of us shall get our sins
destroyed.”

On hearing his words the doorkeeper immediately ushered the king
(of Utkala) into the assembly of King Indradyumna.

121-124. Immediately the king of Odhra entered along with his
ministers, followers of Visnu. He bowed down to the venerable pair of
feet of Indradyumna with great respect.

The great king (Indradyumna) lifted him up and honoured that Vaisnava
by placing him in his own seat. Then he humbly spoke these words:

=== PAGE 75 ===

70 Skanda Purana

‘‘O king, O Lord of Odhra, Are you happy and well in every respect?
I hope the Lord whose abode is on the summit of Nila mountain is
victorious and your pure intellect is fixed on the lotus-like feet of the
Lord. You are equal-minded towards all living beings. I hope your mind
is devoted to Hari”.

125. On hearing his words, the overlord of Odhra became extremely
delighted and surprised. With palms joined in reverence he spoke these
words full of humility:

126. ‘*O Lord, by your blessings I am happy in every respect. How
will darkness prevail when the Sun blazes?

127. By the contact of your natural good qualities all the (other)
kings have been won over by you. The Earth is blessed with you as her
Lord like Amaravati with Indra.

128. While you rule over the earth, Dharma (Virtue) is always four-
footed. (The words) ‘committing forbidden act’ can be heard of only
in the Vedas, O king.

129. Various qualities of statesmanship and perfection in adminis-
tration that abide in you, O Lord, serve severally as models to the
(other) kings.

‘130. Even this much of your empire is inaccessible (to others), O
most excellent king. The whole earth consisting of eighteen islands
(being under your rule) is comparable to a single house.

131. You are fond of all living beings. If Brahma had not created
you, how could people get rid of grief when their sons and kinsmen
died?

132. The Sruti says that ordinary kings are parts of Visnu. You are
the Lord himself. Who else is a mine of good qualities like you?

133-137. Nila mountain is on the shore of the Southern Sea. It is
surrounded by forests. It is not frequented by ordinary common people.
It is there that the deity is present.

Now, it is heard that a storm has scattered sands over the Deity. As
a result of it, there is famine, death, pestilence etc. in my kingdom too.
Since you have come, there will be welfare all around in my case.”

When the king of Utkala concluded his speech thus, O excellent
Brahmanas, king (Indradyumna) honoured him duly and sent him off to
take rest. ~

With great dejection he looked at Narada and said: ‘‘O sage, what
is this? I begin to doubt that everything for which I had endeavoured
has become futile.” As he said this, Narada who is a knower of all the
three times, spoke to him:

=== PAGE 76 ===

TL.ii.11.138-151 71

138. ‘*You should not be astonished at this. The most excellent one
among Vaisnavas, you are very fortunate. Indeed the desire of Vaisnavas
never goes unfulfilled.

139. You will certainly see Narayana who is free from ailments—
Narayana the primordial deity, who is the cause of all the worlds and
has adopted human form.

140-141. For the sake of blessing you he will incarnate on the earth.
The entire universe consisting of mobile and immobile beings is under
the control of Visnu. He is not under the control of anyone. He is the
supreme soul, the eternal one. The Lord can be won over only by means
of devotion. He is affectionate to his devotees.

142. Itis his Mayda whereby everything beginning with Brahma and
ending with an insect is well protected. How can he, O king, be de-
pendent on others, except devout people?

143-144. The root cause of virtue, wealth, love and salvation is
devotion to Visnu. That alone is the means of knowing him. Withoyt
it there is no other way. Visnu is really one, but he takes many forms
by means of his Maya. There is no source of happiness except that
great soul.

145. There are other deities such as Siva, Durga and others. They
are engaged in various Karmas. When worshipped, they grant what is
desired. They too are dependent on Visnu.

146. That Lord is the immanent soul. He is stationed in the hearts
of Devas too. They grant benefits only as much as he directs.

147. O great king, you too are a Vaisnava. You are in the fifth
generation from the Lotus-born Lord. You are a master of the eighteen
Vidyas (lores). You strictly adhere to good conduct.

148. The earth has been protected by you with justice. You are
especially a worshipper of Brahmanas. You will certainly see Visnu
in the holy spot by means of your physical eye.

149. In this matter Brahm too has employed me, O king. When the
excellent holy spot is reached, I will tell you everything.

150. Now the night is about to reach the third Yama (period of 3
hours). Command the (vassal) kings now to go back to their respective
apartments.

151. You too should go to the inner apartment and have a sound
sleep.”

=== PAGE 77 ===

72 Skanda Purana
CHAPTER TWELVE
Description of the Holy Place Ekamravana (BhuvaneSvara)*

Jaimini said:

1. | When this was said by the son of Brahma, king Indradyumna,
after listening to the words of the sage, pondered with a delighted mind
upon them with deep comprehension, and thought that his efforts had
borne fruit:

2. ‘What a great fortune was acquired in the course of many
births! The grandfather of all the worlds is actively participating in my
enterprise.

3-4a. He has deputed his son, a living-liberated soul, to assist me.
The fulfilment of the tasks of persons conforms to the type of assis-
tance they receive—this old teaching is heard in all assemblies.’

4b-6a. Thinking thus the king dispersed those members of the as-
sembly. Then, O Brahmanas, he grasped the hand of the sage and entered
the inner apartment. After duly honouring him, the king spent the remaining
part of the night along with him, in the same couch, engaged in mutual
conversation.

6b-7. When the day dawned clearly, he concluded the daily routine
of religious duties, worshipped the Lord of the universe and crossed
Mahanadi. The path was shown by the overlord of the land of Odhra
who went ahead.

8-10. Accompanied by his army he started towards the holy place
Ekamravanaka (modern Bhuvane§vara).

After going a short distance he reached the river named Gandhavaha'!
of rapid currents and cool waters.

While he hurriedly crossed the river the king heard from a great
distance, the sounds of various drums and musical instruments such as
Mrdanga, Muraja, Kahala, Carcari and _ conchshell. The sound was
produced at the time of the forenoon worship of Kotilinge$vara.’ It
spread everywhere in the great forest.

* Vide Brahma Pur4na, Ch. 39. It gives a more detailed and beautiful descrip-
tion of Ekaémra Ksetra from a Saivite point of view.

1. Gandhavaha is the Gandhavatl (modern Gangua) at present flowing in
BhuvaneSvara, It is considered as a sacred river.

2. Kofilifgegvara is a famous temple at Bhuvanesvara.

=== PAGE 78 ===

IL.ii.12.11-23 73

11-13. The king thought that it was (from the shrine) of the Lord
residing on Nila mountain. With great pleasure he enquired of Narada:
**Whence is this sound coming, O great sage? Has (the shrine of) the
great Lord residing on the summit of Nila mountain been reached? It
is at the time of his worship that this tumultuous sound is heard. Or,
O sage, is there any other deity nearby?” On being asked thus by the
king the eminent sage replied:

14-17. ‘‘O king, highly inaccessible is the holy spot. It is kept concealed
by Visnu. That there is the Lord there, is not known to any man.

You are the most excellent one among lucky people. It is due to
your good fortune that the Lord was with great difficulty seen by your
priest who has controlled all his sense-organs.

O excellent king, you are equipped with armies having six divisions.
Hence, O king, I have begun to suspect that you have undertaken an
adventure in a big way.

Nila mountain is in the third Yojana (i.e. 3x 12 Kms.). This is the
holy spot of the Lord of Gauri named Ekamrakavana. Not far off, O
king, is the place where, being afraid, he sought refuge.”!

Indradyumna said:

18-20,. Why was the Lord of Gauri (Siva) frightened? With whom
did he seek refuge?

Why was the Lord who had burned the terrible three Puras (cities
of Asuras) formerly by means of a single arrow, frightened? This is
very much amazing and I wish to hear about this rare (event).

Bhava is the protector of those who are afraid of worldly existence
(bhava). He is extremely sacred. Why was he frightened? Who is powerful
enough to conquer (him)?

Narada said:

21-23. In this connection, O king, I shall tell you an ancient legend.
Lord Nilalohita was won over by Gauri previously by means of pen-
ance. He was under the vow of celibacy. On being afflicted with the
arrows of the god of Love, he gave up that vow. He married Gauri on

1. A Vaisnavite twist to show the inferiority of Siva to Visnu. The fight
between Siva and Visnu for one King of Kasi (KAsiraja) and the subsequent defeat
of Siva and his praise of Visnu and Siva’s departure from Varanasi to Ekamra
Vana (vv 50-79)— all this is invented to show Visnu’s superiority.

=== PAGE 79 ===

74 Skanda Purana

the Himalaya mountain and sported with that beautiful lady proud of
her youthfulness, O king. In the realm of her father he enjoyed all the
pleasures desired by Devas (too).

24-30. Once the chaste lady was coming out of her apartment along
with (some) noble ladies. She was then gently and smilingly addressed
with these words by her mother:

‘*O noble lady, for the sake of a brideroom a great penance was
performed by you in the dense forest. But, O lady of excellent coun-
tenance, an old brideroom of unknown parentage and unknown qualities
has been acquired by you.

You never leave his presence in day or at night, though he is of such
a nature. What is his special excellence, dear girl? Let it be men-
tioned. What is the return of your husband’s favour? You get your clothes
and ornaments from me. You stay in my house. O gentle lady; you have
been staying here for a long time. You are fondled by your father. You
enjoy all your pleasures in your father’s house.

We have heard that all the girls in the three worlds go away from
their father’s house after marriage. They are adorned by their husband
and they stay in their husband’s house.

I am a mind-born daughter of the Manes. I came from the world of
the Manes, O highly fortunate lady. I was married to Himadri.

O lady of roving eyes, you have been spoken thus only jocularly and
not out of anger. This should not be mentioned to the Son-in-law. He
is considered equal to Visnu.”

Narada said:

31. On hearing these words uttered by her mother, she was deeply
pained by the censure of her husband. Though her lips were throbbing
with anger, she did not utter a single word.

32. She approached her husband. Though she did not disclose the
(actual) words of her mother, she reported lovingly a few harsh words
briefly (spoken about him).

33-34. ‘‘O Lord, this is not proper for one to stay in one’s own
father-in-law’s house even in the case of the lowliest of men. How can
it be otherwise in the case of yours, the sire of the three worlds. Hence
I do not like, O Lord, that we should stay here. It is not befitting (to
us). Are there no other places proper for you to settle down?”

35. On being told thus by Siva the Bull-emblemed Lord got on the
back of his Bull along with her and hurriedly went to the central land
(i.e. land between Himalaya and Vindhya).

=== PAGE 80 ===

Hii. 12.36-50 75

36-41a. He crossed all the Tirthas and went beyond the great sacred
place Prayaga, and on the northern bank of Ganga that flows into the
Eastern Ocean, he built the city named Varanasi! for Gauri’s resi-
dence. It is a beautiful city extending to five Krosas (15Kms).

It is splendid with excellent Mansions. It has hundreds of palatial
buildings and numerous gardens and parks. There are many Tirthas
there and it is full of people of different kinds. This splendid city had
been built by ViSvakarma at the behest of Dhirjati (Siva). It dispels
sins by means of holy and cool waves of Ganga.

There in the middle of that city which was rendered splendid by
means of golden ramparts and Mansions, which was perfectly built
with gemset columns and which fulfilled all wishes and ambitions,
Pagupati sported with her like the Slayer of Madhu (Visnu) with Sri.

41b-43. That city is never left by Visvanatha (Siva). So it is well
known by the name Avimukti. It bestows salvation on men. Formerly,
O overlord of men, it was resorted to by persons who were afraid of
the worldly existence. Gauri stayed there along with her husband who
adorned her in an excellent manner. O king, she did not remember even
her mother and father.

44. When many Yugas passed like this, the Lord installed a crore
of his Lingas there and went to Kailasa mountain.

45-48. O king, many kings ruled over that city. Formerly in Dvapara
Yuga, there was a king there (commonly) called Kasiraja. By means
of severe penance he propitiated Lord Sambhu with this aim in his
mind: ‘I will excel in war Acyuta (Krsna), the conqueror of kings, the
chief of whom is Jarasandha.’

The Pinika-bearing Lord (Siva) who was propitiated, granted him
that boon: ‘‘O suppressor of enemies, you will conquer the Slayer of
Karhsa in battle. For your sake I shall fight seated on my Bull, along
with (my attendants) Pramathas.”

49. After securing a boon like this that madly insolent king who
(boasted of his) heroism, challenged the Lord (Krsna), wielder of the
conch and the discus, for a fight.

50. That Lord (Krsna) who is the immanent soul (of all), knew the
incident of that sort, and sent his Discus for killing Kasiraja.

1. SkP euphemistically gives the credit of building Varanasi to Siva. As a
matter of fact, he usurped this capital city of Divodisa through Nikurhbha (vide
BdP 2.3.6731-58).

=== PAGE 81 ===

76 Skanda Purana

51-57. The infuriated Discus that was very fierce in appearance, had
the refulgence of a thousand suns, It knew the power of the mind of
Visnu. It cut off the head of KaSiraja and burned to ash his army as
well as that city.

On seeing that extremely violent action Pasupati( Siva) became
furious. Surrounded by his Ganas and seated on his Bull, the Pinaka-
bearing Lord rushed at it. Then Sarhbhu looked at the Sudarsana Discus
at the outset and discharged his PaSupata missile in front of it, like
an ominous calamity.

Formerly Sarhbhu had secured a boon from Visnu who had been
pleased by his devotion: ‘‘On being remembered by you I shall invigo-
rate your missile. But if you go against me, it will become lustreless
(and ineffective).”

When this Pasupata missile which was (usually) terrible, became
futile and when Varanasi was burned, the Bull-bannered Lord became
afraid.

Then he eulogized the Primordial Purusottama, the cause of all the
worlds.

Mahadeva prayed:

58. O Narayana, obeisance to you, the highest abode, O Supreme
Soul, O one greater than the greatest, O Lord possessing the properties
of existence, knowledge and bliss, O blemishless one!

59. O-cause of the universe, O Lord performing the acts of cre-
ation etc. by means of the different Gunas, O Lord concealed by your
own M§ayi, O self-luminous one, obeisance to you.

60. You are neither within nor without. You are without as well
as within. You are far off as well as quite near. You are both heavy
and light. You are firm. You are minute as well as very massive.
Obeisance to you.

61. O matchless one, obeisance to that Lord in the form of Kala
(Time), the graceful charm of whose sideglance creates crores of Four-
faced Lords (Brahmas) and a Parardha of mine.

62. Obeisance to that Lord, the soul of the universe, whose body
is beyond measurement, and each one of whose hair supports a number
of Cosmic Eggs.

63. O Lord, in accordance with your own measurement of time
you cause the origin and dissolution (birth and death) of Brahma and
also mark out the periods of Manvantara etc. Obeisance to you.

64. Ihave been created out of Taméguna, O Lord. I am ignorant

=== PAGE 82 ===

IL.11.12.65-77 77

of your power. Hence forgive my offence. Save me. I have sought refuge
in you.

65. When (the Lord) who bumed down the Tripuras eulogized thus,
Adhoksaja (Visnu) manifested himself after casting off the form of the
Discus.

66-68. His face (indicated that he was) delighted. The glorious Lord
held the conch, the discus and the iron club. He was seated on Garuda
as if on a lotus seat. He was adorned with a garland of sylvan flowers.
He looked brilliant with necklaces, ear-rings, shoulderlets, crown and
other ornaments. Laksmi was seated on his left lap. Satyabhama! was
on the right side. His body was as lustrous as a black cloud. Though
he was an ocean of mercy, he spoke to the husband of Girija (who was)
frightened, as if he was angry with him.

Sri Bhagavan said:

69. How has such an evil-mindedness beset you at this time? O
Sarhbhu, for the sake of an insect of a (i.e. an insignificant) king, you
have come to fight with me!

70-77. How many examples of my power have not been known to
you, O Dhirjati (Siva). It is true that your Pagupata missile cannot be
vanquished by Suras and Asuras. The Discus is a form of my anger. It
cannot spare even you. Excepting you, who will wander in the world
after disregarding me? By performing several austerities formerly you
have acquired much strength as a form of mine from my body? Now
if you wish to sport about with Gauri here for a long time, if you wish
that this city of Varanasi should stay for a long time (do as follows).

On the shore of the Southern Sea there is a holy spot well known
after my name, viz. Sripurusottama. It is adorned by Nila mountain. It
extends to ten Yojanas (i.e. 10 x 12=120 Kms.) up to Viraja Mandala
(modern Yajpur). The holy spot is gradually holier till the river Citrotpala.
The region beyond that as far as the Southern Sea is more and more
excellent (sacred) step by step. Nila mountain is a bestower of salva-
tion. There (my idol) is made of blue sapphire gems. I am stationed
there in four bodies (i.e. Jagannatha, Balabhadra, Subhadra and Sudar$ana).
To the north of it is the forest named Ekamraka. O annihilator of Tripuras,
stay there fearlessly along with Parvati.

1. The author regards Visnu and Krsna as identical and brings in Satyabham&
as Visnu‘s censort along with Laksmi.

=== PAGE 83 ===

78 Skanda Purana

78. There you will be crowned as the king of a crore of Lingas'
at my bidding by the Self-born Lord, the creator of all the worlds.

79. This Tirtha Manikarnika consists of all Tirthas. Cast off your
Aharmk4ra (ego, pride) here and proceed along with all your followers.

Narada said:

80. On being told thus by Vasudeva the Three-eyed Lord bent
down his head. With palms joined in reverence he spoke to the Slayer
of Madhu:

Mahadeva said:

81. O Lord of Devas, O Lord of the universe, O Lord, O dispeller
of the agony of those who bow down (to you), carrying out your behest
will be the cause of my welfare, O Lord of the worlds.

82. On account of my stupidity, O Lord, I had been arrogant. There,
O Lord, your own blessing is the cause of my fickleness.

83. Since you command me, O Lord of Devas, to proceed to Purusottama,
I shall carry out your behest reverently and proceed to the auspicious
holy place that bestows salvation.

84-85a. Do a favour to me and promise that you alone will protect
and sustain my sacred region Purusottama. Protect it so that it will
never perish hereafter.

85b-86. Thus this sacred place has been established formerly by
Mahadeva after duly worshipping Lord Purusottama accompanied by
Balarama and Sri. Here the Lord of Uma has been installed by Brahma.

87-88. We shall go there and view the destroyer of Puras, the Lord
of the Daughter of the Mountain, the Lord who like the sun dispels all
the dense internal darkness.

Since this holy place of Sarhbhu is completely destructive of Tamas,
it grants welfare. Since it washes off Rajoguna. it is well known as
Viraja Mandala.

89-91. Since Sattvaguna prevails, Purusottama is well known as the
bestower of salvation. Whatever other salvation-yielding holy spots
there are and heard of by you, O great king, they all bestow liberation
here itself. This holy spot, O great king, cannot produce faith in those
whose minds are defiled by misdeeds and sins. This is the secret of
the Discus-bearing Lord.

1. This explains the epithet of Kotilitgesvara.

=== PAGE 84 ===

IL.ii.12.92-103 79
Jaimini said:

92-93. On hearing the words of Narada the king became delighted
in his mind. With his eyes beaming and dilated due to surprise, he
spoke to the tiger among sages:

‘*O Brahmana, the highly sanctifying holy spot has been properly
described to me. It is the place where Umapati (Siva) is present and
Purusottama is the protector. Even if the route ‘is circuitous, we shall

certainly go there because this is the right means for the accomplish-
ment of our desired objective.”

Jaimini said:

94. Thereafter, O Brahmanas, the sage and the king along with the
army reached the holy spot named Ekamravana at midday.

95. The king took his holy bath in Bindu Tirtha and worshipped
Purusottama installed on the bank in accordance with the injunctions.
Then he went to the great temple of Koti§vara.

96-100. At the entrance, the king duly performed the rite of Acamana
(i.e. ceremonious sipping of water) and as he took pleasure (in it he)
gifted numerous excellent horses, elephants, gems, garments, ornaments
and wealth to Brahmanas, since he was engaged in Sattvika form of
piety.

After taking the holy bath, he worshipped TribhuvaneSa' (Lord of
the three worlds) Linga (modern Lingaraja at Bhuvanefvara) and de-
rived matchless pleasure as he saw the identity of the Lord with Visnu.
He eulogized and bowed down to the Lord with devotion. He sang
songs of devotion and played on the Vina.

With palms joined in reverence he sought to propitiate the Lord
with his mind exclusively directed towards him. He stood there medi-
tating on the Bull-bannered Lord.

Then the Three-eyed Lord ParameSvara became pleased, O Brahmanas.
With each syllable of every word distinctly expressed the Lord spoke
to the king directly:

Kotilinge$a said:

101-103. O great king Indradyumna, a Vaisnava like you is very rate
on the earth. Your desire will be perfectly realized after some time.

1. Ekémrg Pur&na and other sources state that TribhuvaneSvara (Lihgardaja)
was worshipped as Hari-hara (a synthesis of Vaisnavism and Saivism).

=== PAGE 85 ===

80 Skanda Purana

After saying this Sarhbhu vanished in the very presence of the king.
Then he said to Narada: ‘‘O highly fortunate one, carry out what has
been commanded by the Self-born Lord along with a horse-sacrifice in
that holy spot Sri Purusottama which is the body of Visnu.

104. The interior altar (antar-vedi) is highly meritorious. It is like
the heart of Visnu. I have been installed in eight forms for the sake
of protecting it.

105. I, Nilakantha, have been established at the tip of the conch-
like' (holy-spot) along with Durgé. O eminent Brahmana. Take this
king to that place.

106. Now Hari with the blue sapphire body has vanished, At my
bidding build the shrine of Sri Narasirhha there.

107-108. There in our presence let the excellent king perform a
thousand horse-sacrifices. At the end of those (sacrifices), O excellent
Brahmana, show him that wonderful tree devoid of blemishes and having
the form of Brahman. ViSvakarma will carve four statues therefrom.

109-112a. At the time of their installation Brahma himself will
come so that this king shall get rid of his sins by worshipping Hari by
means of horse-sacrifices. Let him go on continuously worshipping Hari
for a thousand years. At one end thereof he will see (the Lord) who is
the support of all the worlds and destroyer of all sins. On those who
visit him the Lord-with-wooden-form will bestow salvation. Neither
Brahmi nor you nor | shall know his deeds. He will be pleased only
by devoutly carrying out his commands.”

112b-113. Narada bowed down to Mahadeva, the sire of the universe.
With palms joined in reverence he said: ‘‘(I shall carry out) what has
been commanded by you, O Lord. Brahmi too has directed me to carry
it out in this manner. Brahm and you, O Lord, are not different from
the Supreme Soul.

114-115. The fortune of this king (is really great). The blessings of
you three cannot be even mentally conceived. This Lord, the sanctifier
of all living beings, is one whose greatness cannot be even thought of.
By his association even the vicious ones can cross the ocean of worldly
existence.

116. By how much devotion the Lord is pleased, is beyond the reach
of the intellect. By repeating the Vedic passages and other activities
people continue to strive for it for a long time. But even an insignifi-
cant person attains salvation effortlessly.

1. Purusottama Ksetra is regarded as conch-like in shape.

=== PAGE 86 ===

TL.it.12.117-129 81

117-120. The cowherdesses who maintained themselves by (selling)
milk and milk products, who spent their days either within the house
or wandering about in the forests and who sustained themselves through
the forest produces, attained liberation through the enjoyment of love
sports.

Sisupala who always hated and fought with him attained salvation
(even) in the middle of the assembly hall. The hunter pierced the heart
(of Krsna ?) and attained the goal very difficult to be attained.

Formerly a hunch-backed maiden dragged him to her house by his
clothes and enjoyed herself with him whereas the celestial damsels
who meditate upon him do not get him at all.

Formerly the Lord granted salvation to a Candala who was very far
off but not to a Brahmana who was well-versed in the Vedas, who was
close (to him) and was a great devotee.

121-128. By means of his Maya the Lord may deceive you as well
as Brahma. Many persons beginning with Gautama still remain in the
bondage of physical bodies, suffering from much misery while perform-
ing austerities. They cling to their vow of celibacy and they stay till
the end of the Kalpa. His acts cannot be comprehended or expressed
by saying ‘It is like this, it is like that’.

It is not possible to delineate the conduct of this highly intelligent
one even by much effort or in the course of a long time.

Many means have been recommended in the scriptural texts for the
sake of liberation in the case of learned men. Many of them do worship
(by sacrifice). But the most excellent means of all is the residence in
(the holy place) Purusottama which is certainly conducive to attain
Sdyujya with the Lord like an excellent companion. That means of
attaining this Lord capable of wielding Maya is invariably connected
(with the residence there). The place where Hari placed himself and
where he fixed his residence shall become universally known due to
the association with Indradyumna. Hence allow me, O Lord of Devas.
I shall take this king along with his army to the land at the foot of the
mountain and establish him there. I shall then initiate him in the act
of the great sacrifice (i.e. horse-sacrifice). Thereafter, O Bull-emblemed
Lord, I shall come near your lotus-like feet.”

Jaimini said:
129. Saying ‘'So be it”, the Lord vanished. The sage drove in the
chariot of the king to the excellent holy spot.

=== PAGE 87 ===

82 Skanda Purana

130-133. The second day the king reached KapoteSa.' Its length and
breadth are the same. It is full of ponds of water and trees. In the
eastern boundary was BilveSa who was stationed on the seashore. His
minister indicated that the place was suitable for encamping the army.
The excellent king encamped the army in their befitting places. He
bowed down to Bilvesvara’ and Kapote$a and worshipped them. Accom-
panied by Narada the intelligent king got into the chariot. Mentally
and verbally, thinking and glorifying Visnu, the resident of Nila moun-
tain, O Brahmana, he went to the presence of Hari.

CHAPTER THIRTEEN
The Greatness of Kapote§a and Bilvesvara*

The sages enquired:

1. It behoves you to recount to us why this site of Kapotesa became
famous, O great sage. Who Kapota was and who was the Lord, O great
sage?

Jaimini replied:

2. Formerly KuSasthali became inhospitable for habitation of
creatures because it was fully overgrown with KuSa grass having keen
edges and thorns.

3-4. It was devoid of trees. It had no water-reservoirs. It was like
an abode of Pisacas (ghosts). Formerly no Deva other than the Lord
(Visnu) was worshipped. A desire to compete with (Visnu) and a feel-
ing of rivalry arose in Dhirjati (Siva) who thought, ‘Let me too be
worshipped’. Thinking thus he turned his mind to the devotion of the
same Visnu.

5-8. ‘I shall propitiate Hari by resorting to a very great penance,
staying in a place devoid of all objects. | shall have no personal pos-
sessions. What is it that I should speak to the Lord of Rama? What

1. KapoteSa temple is now situated at Candanapura at the bifurcation of the
rivers Bhargavi and Mittlini (on Kathapola Nadi).

2. The temple of Bilvesa is on the eastern side of Puri.

“Kapotesa is at Chandanpur (Puri) and BilveSa on the seashore to the east of
Gundica4 house. ‘

=== PAGE 88 ===

ILii.13.9-22 83

can be the eulogy for Saradapati(?)? What else can give satisfaction
to the deity who is the lord of the whole universe? Hence no external
thing can be of any use to him. Therefore, | shall adopt Antaryéga
(‘Internal sacrifice’ i.e. Matrka Nyasa etc.) with a pure mind. I shall
propitiate Hari, the sire of mobile and immobile beings, the Lord who
offers his own soul unto the devotees. By his grace I shall be worthy
of being worshipped by all.’

9-10. Thinking thus in his mind, he went to the holy spot KuSasthali.
He performed a very severe penance near Nila mountain. MaheSsvara
avoided all Dvandvas (i.e. pairs of opposites e.g. heat-cold, pleasure-
pain). He took in only air. Eight-formed' though he was, the Lord was
reduced to the size of a dove.

11. The delighted Lord granted him supremacy, so that he became
equal (to Visnu) in respect of worship, reverence etc.

12. By the power of his penance that holy spot became one com-
parable to Vrndavana, the forest near Gokula. Its interior was rendered
splendid by lakes, ponds, reservoirs and rivers.

13. It was full of different kinds of trees and creepers (laden) with
fruits and flowers of all seasons. It was resonant with the humming
sounds of bees inebriated with honey.

14-15. It was full of different kinds of flocks of birds. It was a
comfortable place of resort for all creatures. Since by means of his
penance Siva became (small) like a dove, he came to be called Kapotesvara’
at the behest of Mur4ri (Visnu). It is at his bidding that the Three-eyed
Lord always stays here along with Mrdani (Parvati).

16. Those who worship, eulogize and bow down to Kapote§a shall
get rid of ail their sins and attain Purusottama.

17-22. Henceforth I shall narrate the greatness of BilveSa, O Brahmanas.

Formerly Daityas who were the residents of Patala pierced through
the surface of the earth and began to harass Bhirloka. They used to
devour people.

When the Lord incarnated as the son of Devaki in order to reduce
the burden on the earth, and protected the earth along with the Yadavas
and the Pandavas, he once came to that spot.

1. The following are the eight forms of Siva: (The special name of that form
is given in the btacket) |. Earth (Sarva); 2. Water (Bhava); 3. Fire (Rudra);
4. Wind (Ugra); 5. Ether (Bhima); 6. The sacrificer i.e. Yajamana (Pasupati);
7. The Moon (Mahideva); 8. The Sun (Ina).

2. The above is an explanatory legend to support the derivation of the name
Kapotesvara,

=== PAGE 89 ===

84 Skanda Purana

He took his bath in the water of the Tirtharaja (the ocean) and paid
obeisance to Nila Madhava from a great distance mentally. Then he
came to the entrance (of the abode of) Daityas.

He found that the underground passage was awful and impenetrable
for human beings. He deluded the worlds with wrong notions (?) and
desirous of spreading (the idea of) the venerability of Siva, he took up
a fruit of a Bilva tree and invoked the Three-eyed Lord there. After
worshipping the Destroyer of the Puras, Stikrsna eulogized him.

Sri Bhagavan prayed:

23. Obeisance to you, O Lord beyond the three Gunas, O Lord who
divides the three Gunas, O Lord, embodiment of the three Vedas, O
Lord beyond the three (Vedas). Obeisance to the knower of the three
divisions of time (viz. Past, Present and Future).

24. To the Lord with the Moon, the Sun and Fire as eyes, obei-
sance to the excellent Atman favourable to Brahmanas. Salute to you,
the storehouse of eightfold prosperity, to the eight-formed Lord.

25. Obeisance to the Lord devoid of Tamas, the Lord whose form
is beyond darkness, who is immutable and is destructive of darkness
and who dispels the darkness of ignorance.

26. After eulogizing his own Atman by means of his own Atman,
the Lord saw that the passage had become easily penetrable by his
favour. !

27-29a. Through that passage the Lord went to Patala along with his
army. There he slew the Daityas who were fierce and powerful and
removed the burden (of the earth).

He then came back to the same place. There the Lord worshipped
the Bull-emblemed Lord. Desirous of establishing Siva there in order
to block the passage, the highly intelligent Gadadhara (Krsna), the
Lord who can be won over by devotion, said thus:

29b-33. ‘‘O Dhiirjati (Siva), stay here in the place preventing Asuras
from coming out. Who else, O Sambhu, is competent to destroy the
army of Raksasas?”

After establishing Mahadeva he returned to Dvaraka. Since then
BilveSa became famous on the earth.

O Brahmanas, that Bilveéa is the first creator of the prominent sacred
place. By visiting that immutable Lord uf Mrdani, the Lord who de-
stroys sins, one shall derive all the desired results. One shall surmount
adversity very difficult to cross.

=== PAGE 90 ===

IL.ii.14.1-10 85

The greatness of KapoteSa and BilveSvara has been recounted to
you, O sages. Henceforth, what else do you wish to hear?

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

Narada Consoles Indradyumna and Urges Him to Perform
Horse-sacrifices

The sages asked:

1. | When they got into the chariot and proceeded ahead, where
did Narada and the king go? What did they do? Describe it to us, O
great sage.

Jaimini said:

2. Along with Vidy4apati, the younger brother of the priest, they
came near the boundary of the holy place of Nilakantha.

3-4. There appeared bad omens on the way. The left eye and the
left arm of the king who was going ahead, began to throb and tremble
frequently. On seeing them the tiger among kings became dejected. He
asked the sage who was a storehouse of all knowledge, the reason
thereof.

5-7. ‘‘My empire is unassailed. This excellent holy spot has been
reached. Our pilgrimage to Madhava is conducive to auspiciousness.
What ominous thing can happen to me today? O sage, tell me truth-
fully. My left eye throbs and the left arm trembles frequently.”

On hearing it Narada spoke indicating the future task and telling the
king the words of welfare and happiness uttered by the Lotus-born Lord.

Narada said:

8-10. O king, do not get dejected. Generally all auspicicus things
are impeded by obstacles. When the abstacles are removed, O king,
everything shall be splendid in the case of fortunate persons. It is true
that you are an emperor. This holy spot is verily the physical body of
Visnu. But the deity for whom you have undertaken this pilgrimage has
vanished. It was covered up with golden sands in the evening on the
day next'to that when this Brahmana Vidyapati visited it. The deity

=== PAGE 91 ===

86 Skanda Purana

has gone to his abode in Patala and has become very difficult of access
in the human world.”

Jaimini said:

11. On hearing this dreadful utterance that was as bad as the fall
of the thunderbolt, the king fell on the ground unconscious, O excellent
Brahmanas.

12. Onseeing him fallen thus all the friendly assistants and comrades
with the priest as their leader rushed towards him crying out ‘‘Alas!
Alas!”

13. They frequently sprinkled on his face cold water mixed with
camphor. They smeared all his body with sandal paste, agallochum and
camphor.

14-15. They quickly fanned him with chowries and fans. Narada too
became bewildered. Performing the yogic process of Dharana (‘Reten-
tion’) he saved the life of the king knowing that the future good lay
therein. After a long time the king regained consciousness by their
excellent efforts.

16-19. He got up and fell down at the feet of Narada, O Brahmanas
(and said): ‘‘What sin have I committed in a previous birth? It is
certainly on account of its ripening that this terrible misery has be-
fallen. O great sage, even in dream no offence has been committed by
me mentally, physically or verbally against Brahmanas and cows. O
tiger among sages, no holy rite, whether Nitya, Naimittika or Kamya,
prescribed for kings has been omitted by me. O great sage, no insult
has been perpetrated by me towards deities, guests, servants, manes,
dependents and kinsmen.

20-24. There are fifty (possible) offences against Visnu, O leading
Vaisnava; all of them have been avoided by me like huge, furious
serpents.

What lucky (and meritorious) act has been done by that younger
brother of my priest? He has been able to see Lord Nilamadhava with
the physical eye.

What for did you cause the loss of the kingdom deliberately, even
when you knew about this? How is that this was not declared at the
time when we set out on the journey?

Why was the abode of Brahmanas well-versed in the Vedas uprooted
by me? Why were the lands excellently maintained for a long time
abandoned by these people? Ever since the inception of their families
the subjects had pursued certain vocations for their livelihood. For my

=== PAGE 92 ===

I1.11.14.25-41 87

sake they have (now) abandoned them. How will they maintain them-
selves now?

25. If I do not see Hari, | will put an end to my life. This is my
resolve, O Brahmana. If I die what will be of the subjects?

26. O sage, you are always kind. You advise me as regards the
auspicious and inauspicious. Take my son to Malava and crown him
there.

27-29. Let him protect the land with justice. Let not these subjects
be subjected to grief. Let all those kings who have come here at my
behest return and carry out the directions of my son. | will remain in
this holy spot contemplating on Nilamadhava, | will observe a fast
unto death and make the remaining part of my life fruitful.”

Jaimini said:

30. As King Indradyumna was lamenting thus, the son of Brahma
made him rise up. Consoling him with kind and gentle words he spoke
thus:

Narada satd:

31-35. O king, you are at the head of learned men. You are a Vaisnava
and an ocean of courage. How is it that you do not realize that (spiri-
tual) welfare is always attended with obstacles?

This is the greatest good of man that can be acquired only in the
course of a hundred births, that one can see with his physical eye the
Club-bearing Lord in physical form.

Hari’s sportive activity is unrestrained. By whom can it be under-
stood completely? Though I am a living-liberated soul, O king, I do not
go beyond his Lila (sportive activity).

I am a staunch devotee. I stay near the Lord. Still have I not been
deceived by him many times? Even by many hundreds of births one
cannot resist his Maya. This endless Maya of his cannot be compre-
hended even by the Lotus-born Lord who occupies the lotus coming out
of the navel (of the Lord), even though he is in the habit of eulogizing
him always.

36. The nature of the master of Maya has been spoken to you thus,
O king. Now I shall tell you especially that you are the most excellent
one among fortunate persons.

37-41. All the three forms of his are inclined to bless you.

The cregtor of the mobile and immobile beings (god Brahma), the

=== PAGE 93 ===

88 Skanda Purana

grandfather himself of all the worlds told me thus: ‘‘You do go quickly
near Indradyumna. He will go to Nila mountain desirous of seeing
Nilamadhava. After being requested by Yama the Lord has vanished.
He must not grieve over it. This (disappearance) cannot be made oth-
erwise. That king, the fifth one in my line, should be spoken to in my
words (i.e. conveyed my message) that for his sake I will propitiate
Purusottama, the Supreme Soul, and will bring him from Sveta island!
at the end of the thousandth horse-sacrifice. Let that king Indradyumna
worship Visnu by means of a thousand horse-sacrifices and stay now
in the holy spot of Sri Purusottama.

42-45. At the end, he will see with his (physical) eye Lord Visnu
of wooden form. That incarnation of Hari will become famous through
him. At that time the bodies (i.e. idols) of Visnu are to be certainly
installed by me.

Formerly Lord Hari of bejewelled idol had been in four different
forms. The king’s priest had seen the Lord and informed the king directly.

The Lord of divine wooden form will incarnate in four forms. Hence,
O leading king, do not be grieved. Your desire will certainly be fruit-
ful. There is no doubt about it. Stay here without any worry.”

Jaimini said:
46. Thus, O Brahmanas, Narada consoled the king and restored his
confidence. Thereafter he spoke to him once again.

Narada said:

47. Accompanied by Durga the Blue-throated Lord (Siva) is present
at the tip of the excellent holy spot having the form of a conch-shell.?
We shall go there. That is a flat land suitable for horse-sacrifice.

48. In it we shall build a very good structure that will stay firm
for a thousand years, for the purpose of the horse-sacrifice. By visiting
the Nrsirnha idol of the Lord residing on Nila mountain we shall make
our life contented and blessed.

49. At the end of the sacrifice we shall, for the purpose of destroy-
ing all obstacles and for increasing the benefit, install an idol worthy
of being worshipped by you always.

50. Through excellent sages we shall begin the excellent sacri-

‘1. Svetadvipa: The abode of Visnu. It is supposed to be in the Milk Ocean.
2. Sankha-Ksetra: Purusottama Ksetra is conceived to be conch-shaped.

=== PAGE 94 ===

IL.11.15.1-9 89

fice in a suitable manner. Delaying is not conducive to welfare. Such
is the advice of Brahmi.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

Indradyumna’s Grief Dispelled: Manifestation of
Four-formed Visnu
Jaimimi said:

1-2. Then those Brahmanas left the excellent chariot and walked
on foot along with their followers. They approached Nilakantha joy-
ously. After worshipping Mahadeva and bowing down to Sridurga they
started climbing Nila mountain! with the senses under perfect control.

3. It was overgrown with different kinds of trees and creepers
and full of various types of birds. Rugged rocks prevented free passage
therein. There was a halo round the mountain.

4. The huge rocks that were tossed about (on the mountain) were
hovered around by humming bees causing a confusion of sounds. The
waves and waters of the Southern Sea came as far as the ridge of this
mountain.

5. | It was beyond human imagination and always impenetrable
due to the presence of huge serpents. The interior of the mountain was
extremely terrible on account of the trumpeting sounds of elephants in
their rut.

6. It was always infested with beasts of prey. They never knew
an attack (by human beings) with weapons. Many herds of deer moved
all around fearlessly.

7. They (i.e. the Brahmanas) were desirous of entering it, but
could not see the path leading into it. But due to Na&rada’s presence
they came to know the top of the mountain.

8. They reached the place where the Lord is present in the form
of the divine lion beneath the black aloewood tree, dispelling the fear

of all adversities.
9, Onseeing that Lord crores of the sins of Brahmana-slaughter

1. Purfnit descriptions are to be cautiously accepted. For example: Svarnadri
in Ek&mra.Ksetra is regarded as the site of Lingarfja temple but actually there
is no hill there at all. So is the case here.

=== PAGE 95 ===

90 Skanda Purana

incurred by men perish. The Lord has a huge open mouth with terrible
teeth and tawny-coloured dishevelled manes.

10. He looked fierce with three eyes. The body of the Daitya is
kept on his thighs in a supine position. With his claws as frightful as

‘thunderbolt the Lord is (depicted as) tearing the chest of the demon.

11. He has pink lustre with blazing (v.1. lolling) tongue. The Lord
bursts into a thunderous laughter. In his arms the conch and the discus
were shining. The coronet and the crown dazzled brilliantly.

12. Sparks of fire emit from his eyes, frightening all the quarters.
His lotus-like feet have gone deep down into the earth as he has stamped
on the ground with great force.

13. Viewing the primordial idol of Hari in the presence of Narada
they looked at the Lord without fear. Free from ailments they bowed
down to him from a distance.

14. On seeing the Lord Indradyumna began to believe the words
of Narada. With steady confidence in the future task he said to the
great sage:

15. ‘‘I am contented (as I have almost fulfilled my task), O great
sage; you are the greatest storehouse of knowledge. This Nrsimha is
very difficult to be propitiated. He is frightful even to look at.

16. He should be worshipped well by people like you. He should
be worshipped from a distance by people like me. I am contented and
blessed merely by viewing him. All my sins have been destroyed.

17-19. Since you are nearby, O sage, we stand here fearlessly. The
Lord has an excessively terrible form. How can he be propitiated by
people deficient in vigour and power? He is excessively frightening in
the act of tearing up the king of Daityas, the lord of the three worlds.

Where is that place in which the blue sapphire form of the ocean
of mercy had stood originally, O excellent sage, and which bestows
salvation by mere sight? Show me that (place) which I consider as the
bestower of salvation, O eminent Brahmana.”

20. ‘Thus requested Narada pointed out to him the sacred place
where the Lord stood covered with golden sands.

21. ‘‘See this Nyagrodha (Banyan) tree, O king. Its girth is one
Yojana and its height is two Yojanas. It will stand till the end of the
Kalpa. It bestows salvation on men.

22. One is liberated from the shackles of sins by coming under the
shade of the tree. A man who gives up his life at the root of this tree,
shall attain salvation.

23. Even by seeing the sinless Narayana in the form of the Nyagrodha

=== PAGE 96 ===

IL.1i.15.24-37 91

tree a man becomes sinless. Then what to say if he worships and
eulogizes?

24. It was to the west of the root of this (tree) and to the north
of Nrsirhha, O king, that Madhava, the Lord, stood in four different
forms.

25-26. He will manifest here once again to bless you. Visnu has his
own abode in the Sveta island which is the land of enjoyment of plea-
sures. Similarly this is known as his own abode in Jarhbiidvipa which
is the land of holy rites. Since it is a very great secret, its revelation
is not approved of.

27. Only one who is eligible to be liberated knows this place, O
king. It cannot be believed by (ordinary) men and by vicious people in
particular.

28. Another idol of Visnu which was installed here by the citi-
zens, O king, is also a bestower of salvation. What doubt can there be
then in the case of an idol installed by the Self-born Lord (Brahma)?

29. (Manifestation) and vanishing of the Lord of the universe has
a purpose behind it. He incarnates in different forms in different Yugas
for the sake of blessing the good and pious people.

30. The Lord takes the forms of fish, tortoise etc. When the pur-
pose is served the great Lord vanishes.

31-32. The ocean of kindness is stationed here permanently without
any reason. Just as Lord Visnu incarnates elsewhere from the Sveta
island, so also stationed here the Lord manifests himself mercifully in
places like Dvaraka, Kafici, Puskara etc. like sprouts from the roots of
(mother) tree.

33. Incarnations in the different lands, holy spots, Tirthas and shrines
are (his) partial incarnations. Let there be no doubt in you about it, O
king.

34. gana (Siva) does not forsake this holy spot even for a moment
as he does not leave off his own sphere (land). There will be another
manifestation, O king, known by you.”

35. After saying this, Narada, the noble soul, pointed out the exact
spot. There Indradyumna prostrated himself with eight limbs (touching
the ground).

36. Thinking that the Lord was present there personally, he began
to eulogize:

Indradyumna prayed:
37. O Lord of Devas, O Lord of the worlds, O destroyer of the

=== PAGE 97 ===

92 Skanda Purana

agony of those who bow down (to you), save me, O lotus-eyed Lord.
I have fallen into the ocean of worldly existence.

38. You are the only great Lord capable of destroying the mass
of miseries. Only worthless, insignificant persons serve worthless and
insignificant (deities) with a desire to get a small measure of happi-
ness and comfort.

39. (I pray to you to destroy) the heap of my great sins of three
kinds (accumulated) since very early tines without a beginning, which
cannot be annihilated and which goes on increasing in the course of
different births.

40-41a. You are the bestower of salvation on men who see you directly.
What of those who are prompted with the feelings of devotion? (They
will certainly be liberated.) Those are fools who aver that you who are
a storehouse of mercy, are subject to Karma. They do not know that
Karma itself has been directed by you.

41b-42. What sins were not committed by the Brahmana Ajamila!
who had neglected everything prescribed for the people of different
castes and stages of life? O Lord, he too was liberated by uttering your
name. Merely by remembering (you) he was released from those (ser-
vants of Yama) with nooses in their hands.

43-44a. All the means of viewing you, O Lord of Devas, have been
glorified. Indeed, when you are seen, all the doubts lurking in the heart
are dispelled.

When one is free from doubts, certainly all sins and merits disap-

44b-45. Bless me, O Lord. I am wretched and I seek refuge in you
alone.

Even as I was within the womb, all my future events were decided
by you. Let my life pass on with them. I beg you only for this.

46. Formerly your idol was stationed here and it has bestowed
liberation on even a being of low order. Let me.see that form with this
mortal eye. I have no other aim in view.

47, After eulogizing the Slayer of Madhu thus with palms joined
in reverence, the king bowed down again and lay prostrated on the
ground with tears in his eyes.

48. Thereafter an ethereal voice with gentle and clear tone ut-
tered as follows, from the middle of the sky, even as Indradyumna
stood listening:

1. For'the story of Ajimila vide BhP VI.1.21-68.

=== PAGE 98 ===

11.i1.15.49—IL ii. 16.6 93

49. ‘Do not be worried, O king. I shall come within the range of
your vision. Carry out the direction of Brahma as mentioned by Narada.”

50. On hearing that divine utterance as well as what had been
spoken by Narada before, the king gained conviction that the horse-
sacrifice must be performed. He decided to do what was pleasing to
th Lord.

51-52. With words choked with tears of joy, he spoke to Narada
again: ‘‘O sage, what has been commanded by you at the instaiice of
Brahmi, the four-faced Lord, has been approved by this unembodied
voice. There is no difference between Brahma and Visnu, the Lord of
the worlds.

53. Indeed you are the son of the Lotus-born Lord. Your words are
the words of the Lord. Hence it should be performed because it is
conducive to welfare.”

CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Installation of the Idol of Nrsimha

Jaimini said:

1. Onseeing that the king was cheerful in his mind believing in
(the efficacy of) the great sacrifice, Narada, the delighter of the worlds,
spoke to him with great pleasure:

2. ‘Devas lend a helping hand in the enterprises of meritorious
ones. An example thereof is you yourself, as you have the assistance
of the Four-faced Lord (Brahma).

3-4a. Therefore come on. Let us go there to the presence of Nilakantha.
In front of him, O king, I shall install Nrsithha, the destroyer of all
Riksasas, the dispeller of all obstacles. The idol shall be facing the
West.

4b-5a. The Lord has vanished, but this Nrsirnha is visible. The sacrifice
in his presence shall yield excellent fruit.

5b-6. You go ahead quickly and get a palace built there. On my
remembering (him) the son of Visvakarman will come there and build
the West-facing Mansion rapidly.

=== PAGE 99 ===

94 Skanda Purana

7-8. To the south of Nilakantha, a hundred Bows’ length away (i.e.
400 Hastas or about 100 Metres), there is a pretty old huge sandal tree.
The land to the west of it shall be the requisite site (for sacrifice), O
king. There you do perform a thousand horse-sacrifices.

9-10. You go. I shall stay here for five days and propitiate this
divine lion of infinite form of fiery nature. In the return Worship, in the
idol, J shall instal] the Lord along with vital breath, sense-organs and
mind. Just as one lights a lamp from another lamp, so also (I shall
infuse the new idol with the power of the old one) and I shall bring
the idol of splendid form.”

11. On hearing these words of Narada the excellent king hurriedly
went near the sandal tree.

12-13a. There he saw the son of the Celestial Architect, who had
come at the bidding of Narada. He stood there assuming human form
with the necessary implements.

13b-14. On seeing the king desirous of building a shrine, he spoke
to him with palms joined in reverence: *‘O lord, 1 am conversant with
the Science of Architecture. I shall build a temple of Narasimha with
splendid features.” O Brahmanas, the king replied to him laughingly.

Indradyumna said:

15-17. You are no ordinary architect. You are an expounder of the
Science of Architecture. This has been spoken by Narada himself. You
are the extremely reputed son of Tvastr.

In this tenantless big forest there was no human habitation before.
O Architect, we have come only today; how can we have contacts with
architects? You alone can be the architect (of the temple) of Visnu of
unmeasured refulgence. You always meditate upon him. You strictly
abide by his behest.

18. The sage by whom you have been remembered, will himself
come here in a couple of days taking the idol of Narasirhha with him.

19. Therefore, build a palatial temple of Narasirhha along with
the rampart walls, ornamental gateways etc. It should be a splendid
structure facing the West.

20. The king honoured him duly and engaged him in the work of
construction. By spending a great deal of money he engaged a number
_of séfvants for collecting stones.

21. Thanks to the greatness of the celestial architect, O Brahmanas,

=== PAGE 100 ===

IL.1i.16.22-37 95

the excellent Mansion-like shrine was complete on the fourth day, though
(ordinarily) it could have been accomplished only after a long time.

22-24. When the day dawned clear, the king concluded his daily
round of holy rites. Accompanied by his followers he took with him the
requisite materials for the installation. While he awaited the arrival
of Narada, presently (mixed) sounds were heard in the sky, viz. those
of conchshells, Mrdanga drums, Muraja drums. auspicious songs and
instruments of music, the sounds of bells, the trumpeting of elephants
and shouts of ‘‘Be victorious, be victorious”.

25-31. On hearing them Indradyumna and other kings, Brahmanas
well-versed in the Vedas and thousands of Vaisnavas stood surprised.
While they were thinking like ‘These sounds have risen without any
(visible) source. No doubt it is a mysterious phenomenon,’ a wind blew
from the South. There were showers of flowers with great fragrance
accompanied by the humming sounds of bees. O Brahmanas, they were
drenched with the waters of Ganga.

Immediately after this, Narada, the son of Brahma, came with the
idol of Narasimha, which had been made by Visvakarman. It had a halo
around it. It was highly delightful. It was embellished with many kinds
of gems and decorative features. It had divine garlands and robes. Divine
scents and unguents had been smeared upon it. It was very beautiful.
The holy rite of infusing Prana (vital airs) had been completed herein.
It was rendered splendid by celestial women with diamond-studded
chowries in their hands. The idol was kept in an excellent Vimdadna
(a decorated carriage, or palanquin) created by the power of penance.

32-37. On seeing the idol, all the kings and the followers of the
kings became greatly pleased. ‘The Lord had vanished. Has he been
brought back by Narada?’ thought all those delighted souls. They praised
the sage too. On carefully observing the form of Narasimha that was
near them, they thought that it was a replica of the earlier idol of
Nrsimha. With delighted mind the king stood up in honour thereof. He
circumambulated Hari and bent down his head so as to touch the ground.
At the behest of the king the sage furnished the palace of splendid
characteristics with all the requisites befitting the faithful devotion
and affluence (of the king). The idol of the Lord of Devas along with
Dhara (Earth) and Rama (Laksm1) was installed on a gem-set altar in
an auspicious hour. The idol was infused with Yogic power.

In the company of Vaisnava Brahmanas, the kings and the intelligent
Narada King Indradyumna eulogized it with secret Upanisad Mantras,
Smrti Texts, eulogies, and passages from scriptures with great joy.

=== PAGE 101 ===

96 Skanda Purana

Indradyumna said:

38-39. O Lord, possessing single, multiple, gross, subtle and minute
forms, O Lord beyond the firmament, O Lord with a single form of the
firmament, O Lord with the shape of the sky, O pervading one, O Lord
stationed in the sky, O Lord mounted on the firmament, O Lord with
the sky for the tresses, O Lord with a lotus for womb! O Divine Lion,
save me from the ocean of misery. O Lord having the combined splendour
of many crores of suns coming out (together), O Lord who are always
near at hand and yet stationed far away, O Lord who are neither away
nor close by, O Lord with the states of Bodhya (i.e. that which should
be known) and Bodha (i.e. knowledge)!

40. You are both comprehensible and incomprehensible. You can
be realised through knowledge, yet you cannot be so realized. You are
beyond Maya. You can be measured, comprehended through inference;
you are the cause of everything. You are the maker of everything. You
are the knower, protector and annihilator (of all things). O Witness of
the universe, obeisance to you!

41-42. (We know) you are the sole cause of the destruction of misery,
and not merely the cause; you are born ahead in order to dispel doubts.
O Lord with fiery form, (O Lord) with knowledge as form; O light! O
Lord, the source of the collection of Stoma sacrifices; O cause of
creation! Grant me the excellent perpetual devotion unto your lotus-
like feet, the devotion which is the source of the four Purusarthas.
There are persons who are perpetually engaged in the rites etc. laid
down in Srutis and Smrtis but are bound within the ocean of worldly
existence. They stay here in a wretched condition.

43-45. I seek refuge in you, the Lord with infinite number of feet,'
hands, eyes and ears, whose garments are the quarters, whose excellent
ear-rings are the Sun and the Moon, who have an excellent necklace
made of the clusters of stars, who have the wonderfully divine form of
Nrsitha (Man-Lion) and who fulfil the desires of devotees.

I bow down to the Lord whose lotus-like feet bloom by the light of
the gems of the crown of Brahmé; on the ground of the extremity of
the pair of whose lotus-like feet his (Brahma’s) head which is evolved
out of the five elements, rolls, and which divine feet the women of the
king of Suras bear on their heads.

46. I bow down to that fierce divine lion who-destroys the mass
of sins of those who resort to his feet—the lion who is an ocean of

1. Purfnic echo of the PurusasOkta (RV X.90).